





| The Library :


of the


School of Theology
at Claremont


1325 North College Avenue _
Claremont, CA 91711

















THE PREACHER’S
COMPLETE HOMILETIC


COMMENTARY


ON THE


BOOK OF JEREMIAH


THE PREACHER’S
COMPLETE HOMILETIC


COMMENTARY


ON THE


OLD TESTAMENT


ON AN ORIGINAL PLAN


WITH CRITICAL AND EXPLANATORY NOTES,
INDEXES, ETC., ETC.


By VARIOUS AUTHORS


In Twenty-One Volumes —





FUNK &© WAGNALLS COMPANY
NEW YORK AND LONDON


oe


fe) | A HOMILETFIC
COMMENTARY


ON THE BOOK OF


JEREMIAH


CONTAINING


EXEGESIS


Supply Expository Notes to each Chapter on Chronology, Contemporaneous
History, National Affairs, Geography, Manners and
Customs, Literary Criticisms, Etc.


\ HOMILETICS


Consisting of over Eight Hundred (mostly original) Outlines
and Breviates on the Sections, Topics, or
Verses of each Chapter


ILLUSTRATIONS
Furnishing Side-lights on the Homiletic Themes


BY THE
REV. W. H. JELLIE


Author of ‘‘Crowds of the Bible,’’ etc.





FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY
NEW YORK AND LONDON


Printed in the Unitea States





PREFACK,


ee


Mawy of the choicest hours of the past five years have veen devoted to tne
vroduction of this Homiletic Commentary on Jeremiah.

Judging from the surprisingly few sermons or outlines on.texts in Jere-
miah with whch our search through homiletic literature ‘for: aid an compiling
his volume was rewarded, it would seem that this inspired book has been te
most preachers an untraversed, or at best an wnfrequented, path. Owing t
this notable scarcity of material, the task of preparing thir Commentary has
been proportionately greater ; for there has been but slight opportunity, in this
respect, “to boast in another man’s line of things made ready to our hand”
(2 Cor. x. 16).

Notwithstanding this paucity of resources, this volume will be found to
contain, im brief or fuller form, about eight hundred and fifty outlines for
sermons. And, that it may be understood to what extent this Commentary
as a creation rather than a compilation of homilies on Jeremiah, it may be
added, that of these eight hundred and fifty outlines, it has been our personal
part of the labour to construct no fewer than four hundred and seventy
homiletic plans upon texts in Jeremiah, which appear, so far as literature
affords evidence, to have been hitherto left by preachers unused.

Thus, in addition to nearly five hundred original outlines, this volume
contains over three hundred which have either been condensed from printed
sermons by renowned preachers, or supplied by ministers whose aid was
sought in order to bring variety into the “ Commentary.” The sources of help
include the Rev, Andrew Fuller, Dr. Chalmers, James Sherman, C. H.
Spurgeon, T. B. Power, M.A.. W. Hay M. H. Artken, Robert Hail, W. H.
Murray M'Cheyne, Samuel Martin, J. Kennedy, M.A., D.D., Bishop Reginald
Heber, Dean Alford, Dr. Jabez Burns, Charles Simeon, M.A., Dr. Guthrie,
“A, K. H. B.,” John Foster, Archbishop Tillotson, Payson, T. Gordon, B.D.,
Dr. South, Job Orton, D.D., Edward Dorr Grigin, D.D., Henry Ward Beecher,
Stephen H. Tyng, De Wit Talmage, President Davies, Albert Barnes, 8,
Baker, D.D., E. Jarman, W. Whale, S. Thodey, J. Farren, W. Forsyth,
Matthew Henry, Hannam’s “ Pulpit Assistant,” “The Homilist,” Brooks’
“ Plans,” and Origen’s “ Homilies.” Where no name is found at the foot of
an outline, tt indicates that the work ts original,

Reference to the Comments, which are interwoven with the outlines, will
show that the most apt and helpful suggestions which English and foreign
scholarship has afforded respecting the meaning of verses have been intro-


PREFACE.





duced ; and the sowrce of the comment, tf borrowed, is in all cases acknow-
ledged.

It may be hoped, without immodesty, that many a student and preacher
may find encouragement and stimulus from this “ Commentary” to preach
more freely from themes in this suggestive and admonitory “ book of prophecy ;”
for, indeed, many of the messages of Jeremiah—faithful, pensive, rousing
are scarcely less suited to our age than to his own.

In the production of the volume one hope and aim has ruled—that every
text in Jeremiah on which st scemed possible that a sermon could be based
should be forced to gwe up its richest meaning and most practical hints ; so
that no preacher shall turn to the homilies in this “Commentary” for help on
any verse in Jeremiah without finding here valuable aids to thought and
sermon preparation.

The Critical and Exegetical Notes heading the chapters are intended to
supply all needful information for the satisfactory exposition, during public
reading, of each chapter. The Sectional treatment of whole paragraphs may
help to a broader survey of the main themes contained in cach prophetic mes-
sage than can be gained by isolating every verse. The Homilies and Outlines
on successive verses will offer hints for sermons on every single text which
appeared to hold a homiletic theme. The Noticeable Topics which follow this
verse-by-verse treatment of cach chapter supply more lengthened outlines on
texts of special significance. The Addenda Section to each chapter supplies
“ Illustrations and Suggestive Eatracts” likely to be useful in illwminating
or enforcing texts to which they apply.

The threefold index will render reference to any topic prompt and easy.

In sending out this volume to fellow-workers in the broad fields of Chris-
tian ministry and Scripture-teaching, the prayer 1s in our heart that the
Divine “ Lord of His servants” may condescend to use even this product of
eur patient studies as one channel along which to answer the ery addressed
at times by all wearied or perplexed workers to Him :—


“ Lord, give me light to do Thy work,
For only, Lord, from Thee
Oan come the light by which these eyes
The work of Truth can sea.”


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY


ON


JEREMIAH.


ee
INTRODUCTORY.
Mf


PERSONAL CAREER OF THE PROPHET.


i Parentage and calling. Hilkiah, his father, was a priest of the house of
Dhamar (Keil), (1 Kings ii 26), of Phinehas (Wordsworth), (1 Chron. vi 18),
residing in the sacerdotal city Anathoth (now called Anata), situate within easy
distance of Jerusalem, “about three Roman miles north” (Jerome).

(a.) Hts birth was an incident of great domestic joy (xx. 15). (6.) Called to the
prophetic office, according to Lange and Bishop Wordsworth, n.o. 627 ; Keil and
Dr. William Smith use the more recently established chronology, and give the date
as B.0. 629 ; but the “Speakers Commentary” points out that the discovery of the
Assyrian cuneiform inscriptions bearing upon the Assyrian period of Jewish history
shows an entirely altered series of dates, which fix the year of Jeremiah’s call, “ the
thirteenth of Josiah,” as Bc. 608. (c.) Quite young when designated to his sacred
work, “a child” (Jer. i. 6). (d.) His mission was defined as both destructive and
constructive (i. 10); should be devoted to Judah yet extend to other nations,
(¢.) He was located at Jerusalem (ii. 2), yet travelled through the provinces (xi. 6),
and frequented his native town in fulfilment of his prophetic ministry. (f.) His
work was to follow up Josiah’s outward national reformation by calling Judah to
true repentance an‘ renewal of heart and life. But the crisis in which he lived
involved him in all the political tumults and disasters which gathered upon his
nation.

IL Temperament and character. Instinctively tender and retiring, shrinking
from public life and political prominence (ix. 2), keenly sensitive to misinterpre-
tation and injustice, sympathetic with his uation’s sorrows, affected even to suffering
by the criminality he witnessed and denounced, yet, with a patriotism glowing and
inflexible, clinging to his doomed nation and land to the last (xl. 4-6). So peace-
ful was his nature that antagonism dismayed him (xx. 8, 9); even at times inclin-
ing him to suppress the eeverer portions of his Divine message (xxvi. 2). Never-
theless, amid all the hardships and sufferings of his work, hr became evermore
unremitting in his diligence, unswerving in his fidelity, and intrepid in the discharge
of his prophetic functions—alike before kings and nobles, priests and populace
“ More of a John than a Peter.”—Lange. ‘‘He was no second Elijah,” —Hengsten-

. “The most sympathetic of the prophets.”—Gregory Nazianz, “ A kind of
feminine tenderness and susceptibility."—Maurice. ‘“ But his weakness, timidity,
and impatience belong to the earlier stage of his career. As his sufferings became
more intense he received more pers, gained fresh courage, and derived inspiration
from difficulty and danger ”—


HUMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


TI. Scenes of his prophetic work Called to his office in the thirteenth year of
Josiah, he immediately delivered his first prophecy in Jerusalem (ii. 2). In the eight-
eenth of Josiah the Book of the Law was found, and the king, eager for prophetic
counsel, sent his state representatives to Huldah the prophetess. Jeremiah must there-
fore have been absent from Jerusalem, or he would have been sought; but as “ the
king’s business required haste,” and as Huldah was resideut at Jerusalem, she waa
consulted. Yet Jeremiah was not far distant, for his second prophecy was now
delivered before the assembly which the king summoned (2 Chron. xxxiv. 29).
Most probably he resided at Anathoth during the first five years, retiring thither
immediately he had uttered his first prophecy in the hearing of Jerusalem. Being
near, he could quickly appear on the scene when the Book of the Law was found;
and he then came with his second message (iii. 6). His naturally timid and retiring
disposition might have rendered necessary that royal summons ere he would appear
in Jerusalem again. For during that residence of five years at Anathoth he endured
no little abuse and misjudgment from the “men of Anathoth” (xi. 21), making him
reluctant, unless constrained, to resume his prophetic functions.

After these five years at Anathoth, he seems to have received God’s command te
travel through “the cities of Judah” (xi. 6), and, returning on his way through
Anathoth, his townsmen, exasperated by his bold reproofs of their guilt, conspired
against his life (xi. 21).

From this time he dwelt in Jerusalem, during a period of thirty-five or thirty-
six years proclaiming the word of the Lord in the temple (xxvi. 1 6q.), in the
gates of the city (xvii. 19), in prison (xxxii. 2), in the king’s house (xxii. 1, xxxvii.
17), in the potier’s house (xviii. 1), and the valley of Hinnom (xix. 2), until the
Uhaldean captivity led him away to Egypt.

In Egypt he spent the concluding years of his prophetic life.

IV. Treatment he received from his nation. For twenty-two years during
Jossah’s reign, and under his royal protection, his mission was free from special
hardship, excepting the Anathoth antagonism. Jehoahaz seems to have allowed
him to prophesy unopposed, but heeded him not. Throughout the eleven years of
Jehoiakim's reign he was maltreated and imperilled (xxvi.) The next king,
Jehoiakin, received his admonitory denunciations without resentment or molesta-
tion. Indignity and abuse reached their culmination under Zedekiah, With
implacable hostility the princes and priests persecuted him (xxxviii. 4), and the
king could not restrain them. He was imprisoned on a fictitious charge (xxxvii,
11 «q.), “endured all sorts of torments and tortures” (Josephus), nor regained his
liberty during the entire period, eleven years, of Zedekiah’s reign. Ultimately, it
is believed, he fell a martyr at the hands of his own countrymen in Egypt.

V. Length of his official ministry.

a, It began when he was very young, ‘‘a child” (i. 6). The word 133, “a boy,”
is used for infant (Exod. ii. 2), and also of Joseph when he was seventeen years old
(comp. Gen, xxxvii. 2 with xli, 12). Maurice accepts the word as denoting “ almost
a child ;” “ young enough to make the most literal sense of the text reasonable.”
Lange suggests twenty years ; Thornley Smsth eighteen to twenty ; Bagster fourteen,
se also the Rabbins,

b. It continued among his people before the Captiutiy for forty and a half yeare
(i. 2, 3) ; t.¢, under Josiah eighteen years, Jehoahaz three months, Jehoiakim eleven
years, Jehoiakin three months, and Zedekiah eleven years.

c, It was carried on tn Egypt, first at Tahpanhes (xliii. 8), and “ten years later
Pathros (xliv. 1), in Upper Egypt, where, at a festival of the Moabitish goddess,
Astarte, Jeremiah for the Jast time raised his prophetic voice in warning and
rebuke.” —Lange. It is certain that he lived some years in Egypt, till about B.o.
580 (Dr. Smith), 570 (Lange), His labours therefore must have extended over
fifty years, thus showing that

d, His prophetic ministry was prolonged till he was about probably over

3





4


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH, / ~











seventy years of age [Lange computes it as seventy-seven]. According to Jerome,
Tertullian, and Pseudo-Epiphanius, he was stoned to death at Tahpanhes (Daphne
of Egypt) ; and his sepulchre used to be pointed out near Cairo.

VI. Contemporaneous prophets. Nahum (cir. B.c. 625, onwards). Zephaniah
“in the days of Josiah” (Zeph. i. 1; from Bo. 642-611). Huldah, also in
Josiah’s time (2 Kings xxii. 14). Habakkuk, probably about the twelfth or
thirteenth year of Josiah (cir. B.c. 630, Dr. Smith: Lange suggests Jehoiakim’s
reign). Daniel, carried to Babylon “in the third year of Jehoiakim” (Dan. i.
1, B.c. 604). Urijah, during Jehoiakim’s reign (B.c. 608-597), and slain by the
King (Jer, xxvi. 20-23), Hzekiel, “in the fifth year of King Jehoiakin’s captivity ”
(Ezek. i. 2; B.o. 595).


IL
STRUCTURE AND SCOPE OF HIS PROPHECIES,


IL Leading topics. (a.) His prophetic programme was simple; its central
theme, the coming supremacy of the Chaldean nation: and this at a time when
nothing was feared from Babylon, and Nebuchadnezzar was unknown, when Egypt
was ascendant and Pharaoh-necho the terror of Judah. He foretold the overthrow
of the Jewish nation by this power from “the North ;” defined the term of the
Chaldean ascendancy and Judah’s captivity, and predicted the emancipation of
Judah and restoration of Jerusalem when the seventy years had expired. (b.) The
design of his prophecies was threefold :

a. To forewarn the Jews of impending doom on account of national pollution
and apostasy.

8. To tnvite them to repentance, promising immediate Divine forgiveness and
ultimate redemption from Babylon.

To assure the godly among them by predictions of Messiah’s gracious
advent, and the spiritual blessings incident to His reign.

Il. Literary style. The book is an admixture of prosaic narrative of events, and
poetic utterances of prophecy. While his style in the narrative parts may some-
times appear unpolished [“rusticior,” Jerome], the poetic portions are often distin-
guished by an eloquence at once vigorous and sublime. His writings throughout
are characterised by a reiteration of imagery and phrase, and a ruggedness of form
natural to impassioned sorrow and indignant remonstrance. Though there are
marks of “negligence in diction” (Ket/), and while “not disregarding art altv-
gether, he has far less polish than Isaiah” (Lange); yet “ his thought is ever rich,
and his speech incisive and clear” (Keel) ; whilst “of all the prophets his genius
is the most poetical ” (Umbriet).

III. Composition and compilation. His prophetic utterances were first com-
mitted to writing at the command of Jehovah “in the fourth year of Jehoiakim”
(xxxvi. 1), for the purpose of their being read in the Temple by Baruch the scribe
at the approaching national fast. The king, incensed by their contents, destroyed
the roll. They were immediately rewritten; Jeremiah dictating them afresh
to Baruch, with important additions (xxxvi. 32). Other portions, subsequeut to
this date (4th of Jehoiakim—11th of Zedekiah, over eighteen years) were written
at different intervals in separate parts (xxx. 2, xxix. 1, li. 60). The entire book,
therefore, includes the roll written by Baruch, the various fragments penned by
Jeremiah, with subsequent additions by the prophet, either while he lingered in
Palestine under Gedaliah, or while in Egypt among his exiled people. The com-
plete prophecies would speak with accumulated emphasis to the heedless captives of
the steadfastness of God’s word and the consequences of disregarding His voice.

IV. Order and arrangement. (a.) Chronologically the book is in disorder ane
confusion: ¢g., xxi. and xxiv. 8-10, belong to Zedekiah’s time, the latest king ;
while xxii. 11, 12, refer to Jehoahaz, the second king; and xxv. deals with J ae


SOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAG,








the third king. Distinct prophecies are mingled together regardless of date of
delivery. (6.) Topically, there is arrangement: the book divides itself into two
sections according to the reference of the prophecies. ‘ Thus, i. to xlv. relate to the
prophet’s own country; xlvi. to li. to foreign nations; while lii is a historic
account of the captivity appended after the whole book, i—li, was put together,
and the inscription, i. 1-3, written. This might have been the latest act of Jeremiah
himself.

V. Genuineness and canonicity. (a.) The prophet’s individuality is so impressed
on his writings as to disarm suspicion of their authenticity. ‘His prophecies are
his autobiography.”— Wordsworth. The expression, attitude, and cvlouring of the
whole book (#wald) show the same author. [For critical comparison of the dis-
crepancies between the LXX. and Hebrew text, see Keil, Lange, Henderson, and Dr.
Smith.] (6.) The canonicity is vindicated by New Testatment allusions to Jeremiah
and his writings (Matt. ii. 17, xvi. 14, Heb. viii. 8-12), and by the list of canonical
books in Melito, Origen, Jerome, and the Talmud. Ecclesiasticus (xlix. 7) quotes
Jer. i. 10, and Philo affirms that the prophet was an “ oracle,”

VIL. Verification of the prophecies.

a. During Jeremiah’s life, his predictions were fulfilled in—

(a) The captivity of Jehoiakin and his queen-mother (xxii. 24-26 ; ef. 2 Kinga
xxiv. 12).

(8) The death of Hananiah, the deceitful prophet, at the time foretold (xxviii.
15-17).

(vy) The inglorious end and shameful burial of Jehoiakim (xxii. 18, 19,
xxxvi. 30).

6) The fate of Zedekiah (xxxii. 2,3; cf 2 Chron. xxxvi. 19, and Jer. lii. 11).

a The invasion of Judah by the king of Babylon, and Jewish captivity (xx.
4, &c.).

(¢) The rifling of the temple by Nebuchadnezzar (xxvii. 19-232),

n) The destruction of Jerusalem by fire (xxi. 10, xxxii. 29, xxxvii. 8-10),

‘ The Chaldean subjugation of Egypt (xliii. 10-12, xliv. 29, 30); and
supremacy over surrounding nations (xxvii. 1-8).

b. After the prophet’s decease :

(a) The termination of the Babylonish captivity after seventy yeurs (xxv, 113
age Dan. ix. 2).

The return of the Jews .o their own country (xxix. 10-14).

i The downfall and desolation of Babylon, and date of the event (xxv. 12).
8) The advent of Messiah (xxiii. 3-8, xxxi, 31-34, xxxiii. 6-9, 1. 4, 5).

Those prophecies, seen by exiled Judah fulfilled in their most literal form, effected
a complete revolution in the esteem with which Jeremiah became cherished. His
predictions of their deliverance and restoration, and his promises of Messiah, upheld
their most patriotic and ardent hopes; and he, whom they had molested as the
herald of their national doom, became revered as the evangel of their redemption.
Legends gathered around his name investing him with an ideal glory. The Jews
who returned from their captivity regarded him as “¢ sgopyrns,” even in the sense
and as the fulfilment of Deut. xviii. 18, and believed he would reappear as the fore-
runner of Messiah—a belief which survived the interval, and of which we have
traces in New Testament times (Matt. xvi. 14; John i 21. wi 14, vii. 40),





HOMILBTIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAR. OmAP. L
a earn emptor


CHAPTER L


Ontricat axp Exxoeticat Norzs.—1. Chronology, Ver. 1-8, penned cir. Bo. 578; ver. 4
eq. B.O. 629. But the recently discovered Assyrian chronology would make the date of the
“thirteenth of Josiah” to be B.o. 608.

2. Cotemporary Scriptures. 2 Kings xxii. 1, 2; 2 Chron. xxxiv. 1-7, Books of Habakkuk
and Zephaniah,

8. Historic Facts, Judah tributary to Assur-Banipal, king of Assyria; yet the kingdom at
rest ; for her northern foe, Assyria, had ceased invasions since Sennacherib’s overthrow (2 Kings
xix. 35, 36, B.0. 710); and her southern foe, Egypt, was engrossed and disabled from aggression
by intestine wars. Josiah had reigned thirteen years; began religious reformation of Judah
B.O. 634; was vigorously prosecuting it when Jeremiah began his prophetic ministry, B.o. 629
(or, according to Assyrian chronology, 3.0. 608).

4. Ootemporary History. General outline: International ascendancy had been temporarily
with Assyria (cir. 680-640) during the reigns of Esar-Haddon and Assur-Banipal : Saracus saw
its overthrow. Judah was tributary to Assyria when Josiah reigned. During the thirty-one
years of Saracus, Assyrian power was being undermined by the defectivz of its chief province,
Babylonia, over which Nabopolassar was appointed governor by Saracus, and this at a time when
Egypt was consolidating its power under Psammeticus (n.c. 664), and thus menacing Assyria,
The Median empire was founded in the sixth year of Josiah’s reign (B.0. 633), by Cyaxares,
the Ahasuerus of Dan, ix.1. Four years after Jeremiah began hie mission (3.0. 625), Baby-
lonia, under Nabopolassar, rose in revolt against Assyria, aided by Cyaxares with his Median
forces, took Nineveh, and thereby overthrew the Assyrian domination, and with it the empire,
on whose ruins rose the Babylonian empire, Nabopolassar its king. To him Judah's tributary
dependence was now transferred. Egypt, under Psammeticus’ successor, Pharaoh-Necho, then
rose againat Babylonia, and, by victorious war at Charchemish, claimed a short-lived interna-
tional ascendancy. [Josiah succeeded by Jehoahas.] This defeat was soon redressed by Nebu-
chadnezzar, son and successor to Nabopolassar, in a decisive conquest over Egypt at Charche-
mish, whereupon he became monarch of the all-powerful Chaldean dynasty. Judah, having
been subject to Egypt, was then reduced to vassalage under Chaldean supremacy.

5. Geographical References, Ver. 1. “ Anathoth, in land of Benjamin” (cf. 1 Chron. vi.
60). Situate on or near the great road from the north to Jerusalem (Dr. Smith); = Anftz,
1} hour distant N.N.E. of Jerusalem (Robinson). Remains existing of walls and strong founda-
tions. “A poor village of only about twenty houses,”—Dr. Porter. Ver. 15. “ Families of the
kingdoms of the North ;” denoting the “numerous tribes or smaller nations of which the king-
_ doms forming the Babylonian empire were composed.” This description is itself a prophecy
of the compound elements, the admixture of petty nationalities, which would constitute the
(then non-existing, but destined to become) ascendant Chaldean dynasty.

6. Personal Allusions, Ver. 1. “Jeremiah,” see Introduction, p. 1. “ Hilkiah,” idem., also
Literary Criticisms below. Ver. 2. “Amon, king of Judah,” son and succeasor of Manasseh,
reigned two years, n.0. 642-640, killed in a conspiracy (2 Obron. xxxiii. 21-24). “Josiah,” a
most religious king (2 Kings xxiii. 25). Ascended throne in eighth year, awoke to religious
life and divine claims in sixteenth year (2 Chron. xxxiv. 3, B.o. 634), commenced reformation
of Judah in twentieth year (3.0. 630), restored Temple services, re-established worship of
Jehovah, and cleansed the land of flagrant vice and idolatry. Book of the Law found during
Temple restoration. Reigned thirty-one years; during the latter eighteen years Jeremiah pro-
phesied in Jerusalem. Fell in war at Megiddo when resisting Pharaoh-Necho, king of Egypt,
in his advance upon Assyria (B.o. 610). Ewald conjectures that Psalm lix. was composed by
Josiah during a siege of Jerusalem by Scythians. “Jehoiakim” (see infra), “He was an im-
pious man, and impure in his course of life.’—Josephus. The nation, fearing his despotic
character, passed him by, and elected Josiah’s second son, Jehoahaz, as king. But Pharaoh-
Necho, returning after three months from Assyria (war at Charchemish), deposed Jehoahag
and enthroned Jehoiakim as dependent king. Reigned eleven years; slain by Nebuchadnezgar,
the then all-conquering monarch of Chaldea (B.0. 599).  “ Zedekiah” (see infra) followed
Jehoiachin, son of Jehoiakim, he reigning only three months and ten days. He was the youngest
son of Josiah, name Mattaniah; placed on throne by Nebuchadnezzar as his vassal, who named
him Zedekiah. “A despiser of justice and duty.”—Josephus. ‘‘ Not so much bad at heart as
weak in wilL”—Dr. Smith. fy eleventh year of his reign, his Chaldean master ravaged
Jerusalem, put out the king’s eyes, and carried him, with the nation, into Babylonian
captivity (B.C. 588). i

7, Natural History. Ver. 11. “ Rod of an almond-tree.” Lus (39), the wild tree (Gen. xxx.
87); shaked (Tpw) the cultivated, here mentioned : so suggests Rosenmiller. Earliest tree to


bloom ; in January (Kitto). Resembles peach-tree in leaves and blossoms ; bears white flower
allusion made in Eccles. xii. 5) ; and almonds, which ‘‘in the warm southern latitude mature
March ”’ (Pazton).
8. Manners and Customs. Ver. 13.“ A seething pot,” a large caldron used for cooking pur-
poses (2 Kings iv. 38; Ezek. xxiv. 3-5) Ver. 15. ‘‘ Set his throne at the entering ag gate.”


OHAP, L HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; JEREMIAH.





Inside tbe gates of Oriental cities wide covered streets or squares were and are found: these
were—({a.) places of concourse (Neh. viii. 1) ; (b.) of merchandise (2 Kings vii. 1) ; (¢.) of judicial
administration (Deut. xvi. 18, xvii. 2, xxv. 7; Amos v. 10, 12, 15); (d.) of royal judgment (2
Sam. xix. 8, xv. 2) ;(e.) of court councils (1 Kings xxii. 10 sg.). Possessing the gate implied
dominion (Gen. xx. 17 ; Isa. xxiv. 12). These words were literally fulfilled; see Jer. xxxix. 8,
[Refer to ‘‘Land and Book,” pp. 26-28. ]

9. Literary Criticisms. Ver. 1-3. “‘ Words of Jeremiah,” &o. The title to the entire
book; not merely to Baruch’s roll, which ends with Jehoiakim’s reign (ch. xxxvi. 12). Yet
Henderson suggests Baruch’s authorship. Méchaelis thinks Jeremiah prefixed them to the
whole collection of his prophecies ere he gave them to his captive countrymen to carry with
them to Babylon. But Zange remarks that the book contains prophecies of later date than
Zedekiah (ch. xl-xliv.), and supposes Jeremiah carried on the writing, under Gedaliah, or in
Egypt. Ver. 1. ‘‘ Hilkiah of the priests.” Clement Alex., Jerome, Eichhorn, Umbriet, and
others, think him the high priest of that name (2 Kings xxii. 4); but Henderson, Words-
worth, Keil, &c., object, for the name was a common one; and the high priest waa limited to
the line of Eleazar and the house Phineas, not Abiathar ; and the high priest would live af
Jerusalem, not Anathoth; moreover, he would have been “designated by the appellative


730 Wi, the high priest, or at least W577, the priest, by way of eminence ;” instead
‘‘of the priests at Anathoth.” Yet Lange thinks ‘‘it is possible, but cannot be proved,” he was
Hilkiah who found the “ Book of the Law;” while the ‘‘Speaker’s Commentary ” affirms that be-
yond a doubt he was the high priest. Ver. 4. ‘Then the word ;” rather And or Now; a conjunc-
tion, not adv. of time. Ver. 5. ‘‘ Sanctijfied thee.” Henderson, ‘‘ separated from a common to
special purpose; ” Keil, ‘‘ consecrated ;” but Gesenius points to this passage as illustrating the
Piel significance of wp, **to declare any one holy.” Ver. 6. ‘‘I cannot speak, for I ama
child.” Sharpe translates, ‘‘ I know not how to speak, for I ama youth” Keil, “I know not
how to speak, for I am too young” (1 Kings iii 7). The Rabbins understood by )32 a boy
in his fourteenth year. Ver. 11. “A rod of an almond-tree.” Three interpretations of TW ;


for here is a noticeable paronomasia; ‘‘I see” Tw ; “Thou hast well seen, for I will Tpw,”
&c. Jerome, “a watchful twig ;” a twig whose eyes are open, whose buds have burst; denot-
ing God would be “watchful” over His word; it should not fail. Keil, ‘‘a wakeful rod,”
suggestive of alacrity, haste; for God would quickly perform His word (E. V., ‘‘I will hasten
my word,” &c.). So also Henderson, rendering TPH to be awake, vigilant ; so called because
the almond-tree wakes earlier than all other trees from the sleep of winter ; meaning therefore
‘¢ God’s determination to execute with all promptitude His threatened judgments.” Kimchi,
Lange, Schmidt, and others, render the words “an almond-tree staf ;’’ the reverse of leafy
and blossoming ; stripped, “a threatening rod of castigation ;” urging that an instrument of
chastisement is required by the context. “I see a wakeful rod; for I will be swift (alert) te
strike,” The event shall follow quick upon the prediction, Ver. 13. ‘‘ Face toward north.”
Keil, ‘‘it looketh hither from the north ;” the direction whence would come the ‘‘evil;” and
being “blown ” (7752), will boil over, pouring its contents upon Judah. Among Araba a
steaming pot figures war is preparing, Ver. 14. ‘‘ Out of thenorth,” &c. Not from south—vis,
from Egypt, whence disaster was dreaded; but from Chaldea, which as yet showed no menace.
All armies marching from the Euphrates towards Palestine entered the land from the
north ; thus explaining the geographical discrepancy ; Chaldea being on the east, not north,
Ver. 17. “‘ Be not dismayed, lest I dismay thee.” Another paronomasia An, first in Niphil,
then in Hiphil. ‘‘The Niphil signifies broken in spirit by terror and anxiety ; the Hiphil, te
throw into terror and angutsh.”—Keil. If Jeremiah appeared before his adversaries in terror,
then he will have cause to be terrified for them. Sharpe translates, ‘‘Be not affrighted at their


faces, lest I afright thee before their faces,” for the repetition of the verb Ann is followed in
zach case by Di35, with prefix af and ¢ to or before respectively.


HOMILIES 4ND OUTLINES UPON SECTIONS OF CHAPTER L


Section 1-8. God’s messenger to rebellious Judah,
4-10. The prophet’s call, consecration, and commission,
»» 11-16. Premonitory visions.
»> 19-19. Fearleas performance of perilous service.


Ver. 1-3. Theme: Gop’s Mressencer To REBELLIOUS JUDAH,


Introduction. Jeremiah’s ministry would prove lengthy and chequered. Fos
forty years in Jerusalem he would sustain the arduous duties of his office, amid the
successive reigns of five kings, under each of whom the nation sank to lower stages

6


a a a ATER RN NE





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR. Omar. b


of decrepitude and vassalage, until at length the ruthless Chaldean forces swept
down upon the apostate and impenitent people, and wrought the captivity of Judah.
the demolition of Jerusalem, and the desolation of the sacred land,

__That so prolonged a period intervened illustrates the Divine forbearance (Ps.
cili, 8 ; 2 Pet. iii. 9) ; that God grants lengthened respite, and opportunity to re-
pent and escape, ere He rises to punish. Through “so long a time” He spake
unto them by His prophet, if so they would forsake tranagression and turn aside
the judgments impending.

Yet, however long the interval of respite, the threatened calamities will surely
come (2 Pet. iii. 10) ; and they came “in the eleventh year of Zedekiah, in the carry-
ing away Jerusalem captive” (ver. 3),

I Godly parentage recognised and honoured. “Jeremiah, son of Hilkiah of
the priest,” &ec.

Besides Jeremiah (and Nathan, 1 Kings iv. 5, Tholuck), the prophet Ezekiel
(i. 3; ¢f. Josephus, Ant. x. 5, 1), and most probably Zechariah (i 1, Kéhler), were
of sacerdotal origin.—Zange.

1, Sacred ancestry Divinely selected. Jeremiah was to be “sanctified” for
God’s services even “before birth” (ver. 5): it was appropriate that his parenta
should be holy to the Lord. So John the’ Baptist (Luke i. 13) and Timothy
(2 Tim. i. 5). This messenger of Jehovah had existence in the Divine mind before
he was conceived (ver. 4); and his birth into the world was an incident of Divine
arrangement. God appreciates, recognises, and honours religious ancestry. Samuel's
dignity, which so greatly honoured Hannah, the reward of her piety and prayers
(1 Sam. i. 27, 28; ii 1). Solomon also (1 Kings ii. 1-4 sg.) ; Hsther (ii. 5-7, 17) ;
and, in a special sense, the Child Jesus (Matt. i. 18, 23; Luke i. 28, 30). Godly
parents are not lost sight of by God; and their offspring are objects of His special
regard. (See Addenda, “ Parentage.”)

2. The child’s birth a home joy (xx. 10): “Making him very glad.” Possibly -
the child was a gift tm answer to prayer, and hence the great joy ; as with Hannah.
Surely his birth was anticipated by prayer, and followed by dedication, as an ex-
pression of gladness and gratitude. It was unsuspecting joy, for they knew not
to what eminent office, and to what a career of suffering, their son was born. How
is a child’s life overshadgwed by ignorance and mystery !

3. Honour to the household through the child. Hilkiah had been unknown to
history and Christendom but for his son! Who would have heard of the widow
Anthusa but for her son Chrysostom? Or of devout Monica but for her son
Augustine # Or of the household of the Wesleys but for the boys John and
Charles? A child may bring dignity and undying fame to his family and to his
birthplace. For Anathoth is thereby raised from obscurity. As is Stratford-on-
Avon and Olney, &c. The son may take higher office than his parents (cf. ver. 1,
5) ; “prophet” more than a “ priest.” Loftier honour to stand and speak for God
among men than to appear for men before God. Heredttary social status is not
regarded by God (1 Sam. ii. 8).

Il. Social seclusion invaded by Divine requirements. The messenger of God
_was born; in due time God would demand him. Boyhood spent in studious and
reverent pursuits, His scriptural knowledge gained during those years; his pro-
. pheciea show accurate acquaintance with the law. At length, to the quiet home
at Anathoth, God came, to seek for Himself a prophet.

(a.) God can seek out whom He chooses ; and (b.) speak to whom He selects: “Te
whom the word of the Lord came,” é&c. (ver. 2).

1. A communication from God works wondrous changes in him who receives t
It wrought such changes-—

a. In Jeremiah himseif ; a new creature that moment ; no longer a mere Anathoth
boy ; awoke to a new consciousness, new visions, new trusts.

b. In hés relation to others; belonged to Hilkiah before, now to God ; ca


omar. L HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : JEREMIAR.








thing which was not his own, “word of the Lord;” not, therefore, to be kept for
himself, not to be silenced; he must speak what he had heard; others must know
(1 Sam. iii, 17; 1 John. i 3),

e. In hés life’s worth and work, Until now he was nothing beyond his own
home, now of worth to all Judah; his work had began, and it was a ministry fos
his nation. Communication from God implies commission for God (Acts iv.
18, 20).

2. Our natural inclinations may not interfere with God’s claims. To Jeremiah
secluston and irresponssiiléty would have been far more congenial than publicity,
with all its hazards and solicitudes (ix. 2); but God cannot be restricted by our pre-
ferences, nor determined by our sense of aptitude and qualification (ver. 6). If so,
the “natural man” would dominate over spiritual laws and God’s demands. Self
must be subordinate when God calls. “Lord, I will follow Thee ; but let me first,”
&c. Christ would hear of no evasions or inclinations.

3. God’s messengers cannot tarry in seclusion. So Anathoth had to be left
(ii, 2). There is an outside world which must see and hear those who love and
serve the Lord. No timidity can justify seclusion; open witness for Christ is
needed. The times were evil for Jeremiah, the sufferings entatled severe; but he
boldly spoke for God (Acts iv. 29).

II. Speech tor God the outcome of inspiration from God (ver. 1) ‘“ The
words of Jeremiah.” Yet his firat outcry was, “ J cannot speak” (ver. 6). Never-
theless, we have in this book speeches enough to disprove his own plea. The
explanation lies in ver. 2, “ 7’o whom the word of the Lord came.”

1. Natural destitution of gifts, no disqualification for service. He found
“words” (ver. 1). Seexx.9. Moses (Exod. iv. 10). When duty for God presses
upon us, our tnsuffictency falls out of the question. What ample assurance, what
inexhaustible resources, what provision against our own poverty, dwell in 2 Cor.
ix. 8,

2. Husnan speech the channel of Divine communications. ‘The words of Jere
miah ;"” yet they but expressed and conveyed “the word of the Lord.” Angels
brought the Law (Heb. ii, 2); but all God’s messages have come through human
speech ; even “ The WokpD” (John i. 1-14) was made incarnate that Man might
apeak to man (cf. Heb, i. 1, 2, ii. 3, 4).

3. The personal characteristics of inspired messages. Though it was “the word
of the Lord ;” these communications were “ words of Jeremiah ;” his personality,
temperament, experiences, style of thought, modes of expression, are all stamped
upon these Divine messages. Inspiration does not obliterate, scarcely subordinates
individuality. Hence the graceful variety and naturalness of the Scriptures ; their
humanness as well as Divinity; and the manifold unity of the whole. God employs
the man, his own true self, “ sanctifies” him (ver. 5), “moves him by the Holy
Ghost” (2 Pet. i 21); but does not do violence to his natural gifts and qualities
of character. In our work for Him whose we are, all our faculties are needed ;
Christ asks our every talent, our whole true self.

IV. God’s messenger witnessing amid national convulsions and overthrows
(ver. 2,3). Jeremiah came to Judah at an eventful crisis and prophesied amid ap-
palling events. But—

1. Hts mission was originated to meet the crisis. To help Josiah in his work of -
reformation ; to resist Jehoiakim in his reckless impiety ; to remonstrate with
Zedekiah in his weakness and folly ; and to show his captive nation their sim and
their Savtour. God’s servants ave called to their mission at the right hour. He
does not allow any age to be destitute of a messenger from Him. There may
ee be heard a voice for God. whatever the aspect of the times, Alas! (Isa
L 3, 4).

2. However circumstances may vary, God's prophe must do his work. Friendly
or hostile ; Josiah king or Jehoiakim ; when Judah is reforming, or hastening bach

8


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. omar. i








—_


to abomination, whether men heed or oppose. Times of calamity afford special
opportunities for God’s voice to be heard. When kings fall, and foes are at the
gates, and the kingdom is endangered, then God should be heeded. Judah was a
Theocracy—God’s nation ; and with every epoch and change He sent directions,
warnings, denunciations, promises, according to the hour. This is the work of
every preacher, every Christian ; to address himself to the hour; to make God’s
Word heard amid confusion, degeneracy, disobedience: to “warn the people,” lest
their blood be upon him.

3. No calamity befalling man places him beyond the Divine message. Josiah’s
death was an evil incident to Judah ; the kingdom was doomed from that hour.
But God remained, and He would have spoken hopefully to the bereft nation had
they hearkened. Nevertheless, though they despised His Word, it came still to
Jeremiah for Judah; when at peace, or amid war; before the Captivity and after ;
in their own land and in Egypt. Nothing befalls us but God observes; and He
sends some “word” for us suited to the time. Wherever we are, amid privileges
or tn exile from all joys, still He sends messages of mercy and promise. Man is
never beyond the need of God’s message, nor beyond its reach, nor beyond the
sonsequences which follow on reception or rejection ; “ life unto life ” to the observant
and obedient, but “death unto death” to those who will not heed the call to
repentance and salvation. ‘‘ Hear, and your soul shall live.”


Ver. 4-10. Theme: Toe Proruzr’s Catt, ConszcRaTION, AND CoMMIRsION.


The Divine call involves—

I. With respect to him who ts called :

a, The duty, to discharge the commis-
sion without fear of man, and without
regard to hts own weakness.

b. The privilege, being assured of
Divine protection and atd, and certain

success in the work,

II. With respect to those to whom he
és commissioned :

a. The urgency of their believing
obedience.

6. The certainty of the Divine message
being fulfilled ; no doubt of their realis-
ing the threatentngs or promises addreased
to them.

ZINDENDORF from Lange.


Call and consecration. The inves-
titure of Jeremiah with the prophetic
office is effected in four distinct acts :

L The call of Jehovah, 4-8. This
was not the product of a reflective mus-
tng, nor the result of an inward impulse,
but a supernatural Divine revelation, an
inspiration, a voice from withous,

IL His Divine consecration, 9, 10.
He felt the hand of the Lord touch
him: “a palpable pledge of His sup-
port.” Touching his mouth meant en-
dowment. Equipment and quaiification
for God’s work must be from God. “ For
the man God has chosen before his birth


to a special office in His kingdom He
equips with the gifts and graces needed
for the exercise of his functions,”

IIL Stgns which unveil his mission.
These he “saw in spirit.” God inter-
preted them to him as confirmatory
tokens of his Divine commission ; they
are a surety of the Divine promise : (a.)
Of the speedy and certain fulfilment of
the word of God proclaimed by him ;
and (b.) the contents of his preaching, dis-
aster and ruin which the North will
pour out on Judah.

IV. Supernatural assurances of help.
Jeremiah is charged to addreas himself
stoutly to his duties, to discharge them
fearlessly, and is assured of powerful
Divine assistance. “ Only by unshaken
conjidence in the power of the Word he
preaches in the name of the Lord will
he be able to accomplish anything.”
God will furnish strength, will make
him valiant and impregnable,

Condensed and arranged from Kev.


Commission of the Prophet. In al)
eases it applies equally as with Jeremiah—

I. As to the work tn the vineyard o/
the Lord:

1, It must be performed by men
whom He prepares and senda.

2. It is a work both dificult and dan

9


CHAP. 5.





3. Yet it is rich in successes an
rewards,

IL. As to the office to which the Lord
appoints :

1. It is for the purpose of accom-
plishing His will

2. It needs the means which the
Lord Himself provides,

NAEGELSBACH in Lange.


Provision for the Church.

L The Lord never allows His Church
to lack the strength which time and place
demand. He does not seek this, or wait
for it: He makes it (ver. 18).

Il. He chooses to Himself despised and
inefficient agents for His service. Now
He selects one who to himself and to
others appears too young; as else-
where He chose what was foolish, weak,
and base in the sight of the world (1
Cor. i. 19-29 ; Matt. xi 25; John. vii
48 ; Jamesii. 5). “ It is not always the
greybeard who is wanted.”—Forster.

IIL When God gives office He give.
also understanding. (a.) It would be pre-
sumptuous to begin a great work in one’s
own strength. (0.) It is natural in view
of a great and difficult task that one
should be afraid. (c.) But it would be
wrong if, from any pusillanimous despon-
dency or love of ease, one should take no
heed to an evident call of God.

IV. Zt devolves upon God to protect
the cause of His servant. Since (a.) It
is not our cause, but Hia; and (3.) we
do not undertake it in our own strength,
but in obedience to His command.

V. To bear a Divine office ensures
Divine succour. When the office is
received from the Lord, and is conducted
according to His purpose and in His
spirit, there the Lord Himselfis present

' with weapons of defence and offence.

VL God’s Word ts mighty, however
weak Hts messenger.

a. It may be in the mouth of the
humblest of His servants.

b. It is nevertheless a hammer which
breaks the rock in pieces,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; JEREMIAx


« And no rock is too hard orhigh for &
Arranged from NAgGELSBAOH
in Lange.


Jxermuian’s Mission,


Some aaints have been consecrated
from the womb, The Baptist was;
Jeremiah was (ver. 5). The time came
for calling Jeremiah out to his work
(ver. 4, &c.). His age uncertain, but
he wag evidently in the morning of life.
God’s call was clear, precise, peremptory,
Look—

L At his objection, as here given.
Not unreasonable; for his age—

1, Would indicate inexperience. 2
Insufficient knowledge. 3. Modest dif
fidence. Yet, 4. His age and defecta
time would remedy.

IL How God overrules his objection.

1. He refers to his pre-ordination,
“ Knew, sanctified, ordained ” (ver. 5),

2. He refers to his commission. “ Go
to all that I shall,” é&c. (ver. 7).

3. He was to speak God’s words,
Did not require his own knowledge.

4. He pledged His Divine presence
(ver. 8). Shield, help, deliverer.

5. Then there waa supernatural com-
munication (ver. 9).

IL Important lessons suggested.

1. God, and not man, arranges the
affairs of His moral kingdom. He
plans as to the work and the agency, &,

2. God qualifies the instruments He
employs.

3. God often selects His agents not
as men would do. Men the mature, He
the young; learned, illiterate ; the re-
spectable, the poor.

4. God gives His own message to
His messengers. ‘‘ My worda.”

5. The ministry of God’s servants is
mighty for good or evil (ver. 10). How
great the results; portentous ; solemn!
Jonah, the Baptist, Jesus, the Apostles,

a, Let us listen when God speaks.

b. Obey when He commands

« Trust when He promises.

Rev. J. Bunya, D.D., LLD


Ver. 11-16. heme: Premonrrory Visions.
Introduction. Jeremiah glides, almost imperceptibly to himself, from being a


hearer into the office of a seer.


He had listened only as yet (ver. 4-10), now he is


asked to penetrate and gaze. It is a preparatory and initiative incident ; his first
10


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. Guar, %








exertion of the prophetic faculty of seeing visions. God is thereby gently leading
him on towards the prophetic office. Without realising that he is undergoing his
first lesson, he passes through it. God allures him, surprises him, indeed, into the
exercise of the perceptive powers needful for his mission; and He thus renders
self-evident Jeremiah’s aptitude for the work. So that when he answered the
Divine inquiry, “ What seest thou?” God could respond, “Thou hast well seen ;”
thus virtually saying to him, You already prove your power of spiritual discern-
ment, your possession of the prophetic insight (Addenda to chap. i. 11).

In this cautious manner, dealing so tenderly with Jeremiah’s misgivings and sense
of inability, God leads him on, It is the second stage in the process of his
induction. First he hears that he is selected to this mission, Now a proof is
unwittingly supplied by Jeremiah to himself that God has not erred in entrusting
him with the prophet’s office ; for he shows immediate ability to discern the sym-
bolic force and teaching of things.

I. Truths pictured in symbols. ‘What seest thou?” And his eye rested on
the blossoming bough of an almond-tree. ‘“ What seest thou?” And he perceived
a boiling pot, whose contents ran over from the north. Each thing seen held a
truth ; and a truth which ran through all Jeremiah’s after history and work.

1. Helpfulness of objective signs. Better for God to show Jeremiah these truths
than to merely say them. Signs are impressive; they are remembered; they fix
their teaching on the understanding.

The childlike temperament of man is always assumed by God; He teaches him
by pictures; not tells him abstract truths. All Bible revelation is a series of
pictures, an array of symbols which hold truths. We have very little direct teach-
ing compared with picture-teaching in the Scriptures, All the Temple, its services
and incidents, were symbols. All Christ’s miracles were truths acted out tn inct-
dent ; parables in action.

2, The eye an avenue of instruction. When Pharaoh and the magicians saw
Aaron’s rod effect mightier results than their rods could work, they needed not a
word to convince them of the supreme power of Aaron’s God. It was convincing
argument ; the lesson was trenchant and decisive. Jeremiah never lost the lessons
of these wstons ; he knew that events would follow quickly upon his prediction (ver.
12, “hasten ”); and that calamity would come upon Judah from the north (ver. 14,
15). Our Lord knew the value of lessons seen ; hence He continually appealed
to His hearers to look at things around and heed their teaching: ‘‘ Behold the fowls
of the air,” dc. (Matt. vi. 25). ‘ Behold a sower,” d&e, (xiii. 3). “ Behold my
hands, and feel that it is I” (Luke xxiv. 39). This Divine plan with the prophets,
and Christ’s plan with His apostles and the multitudes, supplies the model for
effectively teaching sacred truths.

3. Hidden meaning in things. The almond bough, the seething pot, were for
signs ; and Jeremiah saw their significance. Some persons see nothing; “have
eyes but see not ;” blind with a blank literalism. Everything is merely what it is.
They have no imagination, no perceptive power, no spiritual vision.

* The primrose on the river's brim
A yellow primrose was to him,
And it was nothing more.”—Peter Bell.

Yet, to discerning eyes, all things hold hidden truths, a Divine suggestiveness.
The world is full of parables, in which sacred teachings are portrayed, and iz
which the enlightened soul perceives some counsel or promise from God. ;

To a few even the Bible is nothing more than a printed book, sealed and silent,
with no revelation for them. ‘The veil is upon their heart.” Yea, the gracious
Jesus, “ fairest among ten thousand, and altogether lovely,” has to them “no beauty
that they should desire Him.”

This barren materialism closes the universe around a man like the grim walls of
& vrigon. 1"


~


OmAP. & HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAR.





of ee





6 Two worlds are ours : ‘tis ouly Sin
Forbids us to deacry
The mystic heaven and earth within,
Plain as the sea and sky.”

How different this from the thoughts: breathed in Keble’s hymn, “There is a
book who runs may read!” go full of enlightened discernment of the sacred side
of natural objects, If we see “the deep things of God,” it is because of grace; and
we have reason to s2ay—

‘* Thou, who hast given me eyes to see
And love this sight so fair,
Give me a heart to find out Thee,
And read Thee everywhere.—See Addenda to chap. 1., “ Visions.”

IL The Prophet's initiation.

He was not ushered suddenly into the dazzling splendours of prophetic visions,
making heaviest demands on spiritual insight ; the firat step was simple, the grada-
tions gradual.

1. The learner tested. ‘“ What seest thou?” Exert your own perceptive powers;
try how far they will carry you towards truth. It is wise to educe a learner's
powers. So Jeremiah looked out jirst upon nature. Would he see anything!
Among all the arboreous growths, would anything suggestive strike him} Trees were
all black in winter's death ; no fertility, no vitality ; barrenness, somnolence every-
where! But lo! one solitary twig among the trees bears blossom , it is an early fulfil-
ment of God's word, which pledged the spring: he calls it “the wakeful tree,” quick
to bloom, hastening tnto activity with earliest dawn of spring. And God commended
his vision, for he had “seen well,” or aright.

He then turns towards the Rabitations of men. activity is everywhere ; on the
open hearth steams the caldron ; many things are happening which would engross
the idle gazer; does anything stand out specially on Jeremiah’s vision? One ob-
ject arrests him, and he sees that only, all else is excluded ; it has a significance to
his mind—a pot boiling over in a certain direction, He observes every minute par-
ticular. It makes evident his faculty of suggestive discernment.

There stands a Cross on Calvary. Men pass by. “It is nothing to them ;” but
“ What seest thou?” All depends on your discernment, Is it merely a symbol of
suffering, or of salvation t

2. Progressive stages of instruction. The first vision was easier far than the second,
The almond bough was the only living thing within his gaze. Noticeable, there-
fore, by contrast with surrounding death ; readtly discernible. Having passed that
test, the second demand comes. This “seething pot” was only one of many
noticeable things ; not conspicuous ; it required more effort on his part to detect
the suggestive object.

But more. The truth taught by the sign was harder to bear. The first simply
taught that God would early perform His word ; the second indicated mixed ele-
ments in the pot, boiling over, with its face from the north, meaning that mingled
nations which would constitute the Northern scourge, which would overflow its
boundaries and pour calamities on Judah. Thus our Lord gaye to His disciples
teachings “as they were able to bear” them, holding back the weightier truths till
they had learned the simpler.

God has more to show us of Divine purposes, more great and marvellous
truths ; but He leads on as we are fitted to discern them. The Israelites under
Sinai heard once God’s voice, then entreated that it might never speak again;
but Moses, who, reverently regarded, went up to the heights, saw visions of
resplendent glory, and talked face to face with God. Our power to recetve visions
is the only limit to larger revelations.

3. Personal preparation. The visions Jeremiah would eventually behold would
be full of awfulness and dark with threatenings. God showed him an outline first,
that he micht be prepared to meet the wider portrayal of things to come.

13





i Pasha st a ed


Er Beer re a ee ramivaba


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. owaP. L





His mind received the germ of truth, and he hed been exercised in prophetic
perception, His eyes had now been Divinely opened. He most conclusively
showed his aptitude for sacred communications. He could “see well.” This apti-
tude was not at first manifest; but the visions had taught him his qualifications
and mission. He was to be a seer, a “ prophet,” It is, then, right to remark that,
If God calls us to use powers in His service which we do not think we possess, (a.) Be
assured that we have them : (6.) He will teach us to use them: (¢.) They will be suf-
ficient for our work ; (d.) They will grow into vigour by further use, Reflections:

1. God never errs in calling us to service for Him; He will qualify us.

2. Cultivate a discerning eye of signs God puts before us,

3. Simplest things may hold sublime teachings. Christ’s parables were simple,
but they contained truths of eternal value to the world.

Ill. The messages taught by the visions. 1. That his prophetic word would
be followed quickly by the event (ver. 12). Some prophecies pointed to distant yeara ;
but these were nigh. Therefore his mission was urgent; the judgments gathered
thick and fast. Comp. Jonah, his preaching to Nineveh. Analogy: Our testi-
mony of the nearing hour of death; the “accepted time” hastening away; the
Spirit grieved, ready to depart ‘‘ Zo-day, if ye will hear His voice,” &c.

2. That an unexpected foe was gathering his forces for their destruction. They
dreaded Egypt; but the Chaldean dynasty would soon gather together the “ families


of the kingdoms,” and become a scourge to Judah.
a. Where we look not for calamity it may come (ver. 14).
6. God prepares retribution for transgressors (ver. 15),
e. Apostasy from Him cannot go unpunished (ver. 16). (See Addenda to chap.


i, “ Out of the North.”)


Such was the prophet’s announcement !


The Gospel admonitions and denuncia-


tions are equally appalling. May they who hear them ‘flee from the wrath to


come.”


For in Christ “we have redemption through His blood, even the forgive-


ness of sins, according to the riches of His grace ” (Eph. i. 7).


Ver. 17-19.


Jehovah's “charge” to His servant.

Paul’s charge to Timothy is empha
tic and vigorous (2 Tim, iv. 1-5),
pointing out the hazards and difficulties
of his ministry, the forms of hostility
which would assail his word, and en-
couraging him to assurance, diligence,
and fidelity.

But this is a charge from the Almighty
God Himself to His prophet, who had
shown much reluctance and trembling.
(See Addenda to ch.i., “J cannot speak.”)

IL. Attitude must be valiant, ver. 17.

1. Not craven: “Stand,” or “arise.”

2. Not apologetic: “ Speak.”

3. Not awed by men: “Be not dis-
mayed.”

4. Not forgetful Whom you serve:
“Lest I confound thee.”

II. Strength shall be invincible, ver. 18,

1. God had made him impregnable;
“ J make thee,” &c.

2. His work would be “ against” all
ranks of the people.


Theme: FRaRrLess PERFORMANCE OF PERILOUS SERVICE.


3. He would be assailed, as a “de
fenced city” is besieged, ver. 19,
“Fight against thee.”

IIL. Hostility would be impotent. -

An “iron pillar” which could not be
overthrown ; “brazen walls” which fire
could not consume.

Judah would be overthrown, and Jeru-
salem burned; but not God’s prophet :
for

1. A Divine promise of safety is
given: “ They shall not prevail.”

2. The Divine Presence would be
around him: “For I am with thee,”

3. The Divine Power would be ex-
erted for him: ‘To deliver thee.”


A prophet’s work.

L The Divinely-called prophet becomes
& sacrifice and instrument for God.

1. He regards only God’s will and
command.

2, Must do and proclaim what the
Lord bids him do and ene


OBAP.





3. Must expose himself to consequent
hostility.

4. Must meet antagonism with fear-
leesness of man and faith in God.

Il. The wrong and results of sin must
be proclaimed to all, heedless of their
station, ver. 18.

1, The anger of God against sin will
certainly overtake them.

2, The preacher must set forth these
facts: sin, and God’s consequent dis-
pleasure.

3. This must be declared to the whole
people; “ All the land.”

4, Equally before governors as sub-
jects ; the high as well as the low.

IIL A teacher, in view of gross cor-
ruption, must not proceed softly.

1. Vigorously overthrowing wrong,
ver. 10.

2. Having by the Law destroyed the
kingdom of Satan in the hearts of
men ;

3. He must seek to “build up” the
kingdom of Christ therein by the Gos-
pel.

IV. Resentment may be the only re-
turn men make for fatthful work for
God.

1. Kings and subjects equally hate a
reprover.

2. Sense of its justice makes reproof
more exasperating.

3. Yet God’s witness must fearlessly
tell the whole truth.

4. In courageous service God will
protect His messenger.

Enlarged and evolved from
StaRkeE in Lange.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.





Servants of God.

I. Their duty.

a. Always to have their loins girded,
ver, 17.

6. To proclaim without fear of man
whatever the Lord commands,

Il. Their privilege.

a. Mighty through the power of God.

b. Unyielding to any power on earth,

Ill. The Lord’s requirements of Hts
servants,

a. To be always ready for His ser-
vice: “ Gird loins.”

6. To accomplish what is bidden with-
out delay: ‘Arise and speak.”

IV. The Lord’s promise to His servants,

a. That He will be with them.

6. That no earthly power shall con-
quer them.

NaEGELSBACH, in Lange,


God’s witness.

I. He must be quick: “Arise,” and
lose no time.

IL He must be busy: “Speak unto
them,” in season, out of season.

III. He must be bold: “Be not dis-
mayed.”

IV. He must be faithful ; for

1, He must speak all that he is
charged with. Forget nothing, conceal
nothing.

2. He must speak to ell that he is
charged against.

a, Because he has reason to fear the
wrath of God if he should be false.

b. Because he has zo reason to fear
the wrath of man if he is faithful.

Matturew Henry.


HOMILETIC TREATMENT OF SUCCESSIVE OR SELECTED VERSES
IN CHAPTER I.


Ver. 1. “ The word of Jeremiah.” A
revival of prophecy marked this epoch.
Long silent under Manasseh and Amon,
it now was heard again (see Intro. i. 6).

The name “ Jeremiah” means either
“ Jehovah throws down” (Hengstenberg
and Lange, deriving the name from
“ Ramah”), indicating that God would
overthrow by him His foes: or “ Jeho-
wah exalts” (Speaker’s Commentary, from
word “Ram,” high), denoting that none
should cast down him whom God up-
holds.

14


But the name was borne by others of
no significant character, exalted office,
or special mission. (1 Chron. v, 24,
xii, 4, 10, 13; 2% Kings xxiii. 31;
Neh. x. 3, xii. 1; Jer. xxxv. 3.) It is
not our name makes us great; the
mission we fulfil and the grace God
bestows, these make our lives of worth.

I. The voice of prophecy heard
among men. He was entrusted with
‘“‘words” to speak to Judah and the
nations.

1. The wecessity for Divinely - sent


_





words, Nation was ignorant (Book of
Law lost); indifferent (to conscience,
memory, Divine claims) ; tnsensible (not
believing in or preparing against loom-
ing peril). Certainly desirable some
voice should appeal for God and truth.

2. The mission of Divinely-sent words.
To arouse the people to repentance, to
true prety (not merely the “form of
godliness”), and to escape by national
humiliation “the wrath to come” (chap.
xxxvi. 3).

3. The results of Divinely-sent words,
Effect of Jeremiah’s preaching on Judah
would be either (a.) To lead back the heart
to God, and so prove a “savour of life
unto life ;” or (6.) to increase their hard-
ness of heart, their responsibility, guilt,
and doom ; “a savour of death unto
death.”

Divine words, by a Divinely-inspired
speaker, cannot be heard without re-
sults, saving or hardening, on hearers.

So when Christ spoke: John xv. 22,
ix. 41, “Take heed how ye hear.”

Il. The messages of prophecy
brought to men.

Before a prophet it is natural to ask,
What words he comes to utter? (Acts
xvii. 18-20, x. 33.)

1. The tsdings which the “ words” con-


wey.

a. Of mingled import. Not all de-
nunciatory, Dark though Judah’s
criminality, God did not send only
words of wrath and menace, but pitiful,
pleading, promising also.

6. Suggested by man’s spiritual case.
Our state, mood, actions, call forth
specific “ words.” God’s messages meet
man in every circumstance and con-
dition. We turn from the vile in silent
loathing, refuse words with those who
wrong us; but God speaks to all.

¢. Foretelling doom and redemption.
Doom from “the North ;” redemption
by the “Lord our Righteousness.”
Temporal ruin to Judah ; but a darker
destiny for those who reject the salva-
tion of Christ. ‘lemporal restoration,
and a Messiah incarnate in Palestine, to
Judah ; but a spiritual return to God,
and possession of Heavenly Land, for
those who rest in Jesus. “ With Him
in paradise,”


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR.


OHAP, L.





2. The calling which the Prophet
fulfils.

a. He utters what he receives from
God. Is not a philosopher, to evolve
truths; but a@ prophet, to accept a
message and utter it. His are not,
therefore, earth-born speeches, not of
human wisdom or human _ wishes.
Preachers are to “tell what seen and
heard ” (Luke vii. 22).

b. Announces truths with a grieving
heart. Sorrowing over the sin he has
to denounce, and the doom he has to
pronounce. Not angry with the people
(Num. xx. 10); “not desiring the
woeful day” (Jer. xvii. 16); but with
tearful pity (chap. ix. 1), as with Paul
(Phil. iii, 18).

ce. Suffering at the hands of those he
warns. (John iii. 20, x. 31, 39;
Gal. iv. 16.) The preacher of right
eousness is a living denunciation of those
who love sin and disobey God. So,
too, is every Christian whose charac-
ter and actions speak out for the
Lord against human indifference and
iniquity ; therefore he ig maligned and
maltreated.

3. The hearers to whom the words
apply. To Judah first, aa being his
own nation, ‘“‘ Beginning at Jerusalem,”
For there is a patriotism of Divine
service (comp. Rom. ix. 1-3, x. 1).

But also “ to the nations,” ver. 4. The
world needs the “words.” “Go ye into
all the world, and preach the Gospel to
every creature.”

Ver. 2. “To whom the word of the
Lord came tn the days of Josiah.”

Theme: THE PRoPHET’S TIMELY ARB-
RIVAL.

Jerusalem and Judah had already
heard the Divine sentence of overthrow
from former prophets ; now the time was
near; and as the interval diminished,
God raised up this earnest, pleading
witness under the third king before the
Captivity.

I. God discerns the spiritual neces-
sities of the age.

He had given Josiah as king; but
more was required.

1. The royal reformation, The king,
alone in his pious zeal, was dving all a
king could; rectifying the a Sue


GHar. £


instituting religious observances, stem-_


ming crime, establishing Jehovah’s wor-
ship. But notwithstanding all, there
remained still :

2. The nation’s degeneracy. The
king’s work could not reach the nation’s
heart, could not renew Judah, and
recall the people to spiritual allegiance
to Jehovah. All was external thus
far. There was needed, and therefore
sent;

3. The sacred call. It was Jeremiah’s
work to plead for God, speak to the
heart of Judah, allure the nation’s trust
and love. This inner work remained to
be done. And the prophet came upon
the scene to supply the lack which the
king’s work made more evident.

Ii. God sends companionship in
holy and arduous work.

Jeremiah came to the aid of Josiah.
“At first no man stood by him.” But
lonely service will weary the most heroic
heart. Christ sent His disciples ‘‘two
and two.” All sacred ministry asks
helpful companionship.

1. It supplemented the royal deficiency.
Not only

a, The impotence of the king, who
could not attempt the persuasive minis-
try, the spiritual pleading with the
people, needful to awaken their sym-
pathetic response to his reforming plans ;
but

b. The ignorance of the king. The
Scriptures were lost; Josiah did not
snow the Law and Covenants until after
he had reigned eighteen years, when the
Book was found. A child of guilty
Amon, brought up in a corrupt court,
he could have received no religions
instruction, Jeremiah supplied this
lack, as Aaron supplemented Moses’ de-
ficiency.

2. It sanctioned the royal work,
Jeremiah’s timely arrival would :

a. Show the king God’s approval of
his designs ; and

6. Impress the nation with the
argency and need of a complete return
to God.

III. God supplies effective helps to
conversion.

Could He have done more to aid
Jadab to return to Him than by giving

16


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIA.


$e


so devotedly religious a king, and uc
pathetically patriotte @ prophet t

1. Guilt and irreligion were cow
demned and discouraged. Both king
and prophet expressed Divine disap-
proval of wrong. None were left in
doubt whether to “call good evil or evil
good.” Sinners cannot plead tgnorance
or unconsciousness, of sin.

2. Calls and opportunities were offered
to newness of life. Oh, how theysurround
ws/ The Gospel, the Cross, the Spirit,
our instructors, all plead with us, Jere-
miah’s ministry was an interval of hope
to Judah. We have “an accepted time,
a day of salvation.”

3. Neglect of God was left without
justification or excuse. They would not
hearken (Heb. x. 26-29). ‘‘ How shall
we escape if we neglect so great salva-
tion?”

Ver. 2, 3. Theme: THE CHANGEFUL
INCIDENTS OF A LIFE’S WORK.

Life is full of changes, reverses, and
uncertainties, (See Addenda to chap. i.,
** Changes.”) .

L His mission began tm auspicious
times,

All encouraging and helpful to the
prophet’s mission. King friendly to his
work; nation aroused by royal activities ;
Temple services re-established ; Book of
Law soon found.

IL. Hits office continued amid regal
changes.

1. The various character of kings,
Each unlike the other. Royal goodness
not hereditary. (See Critical Notes, 5,
above.)

2. The royal attitude towards the
prophet. What an influence, in further-
ing or retarding the servants of God,
the throne exerts !

3. The overthrow of royal opponents.
Each crowned head that lifted itself -
against God’s purpose and the prophet’s
mission was bowed to ignominious
shame (Ps. ii. 2-4),

Ill. His prophecies closed amid na-
tional calamity. Destruction and exile,

1. His warnings fulfilled upon the
disobedient.

2. His messages followed the captives,
He still was with them, and spoke for
God among them in Egypt.


HOMILETIOC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


<


OBB,


eae aE ES NS


8. His promises lighted up their
exile, pointing them on to Restoration
and to Christ,

Thus:

i. We cannot perceive the end of a
thing from tts beginning. A career
began amid national reformation, closed
amid utter overthrow and ruin. What
reverses enter life! How may promises
perish amid disaster |

ii. God hides the sterner duty from
us at the outset. Strength and courage
and faith must grow, or Jonahs would
always flee from life’s severer ordeals
and tasks. ‘He tempers the wind to
the shorn lamb,” does not lay upon us
more than we can bear.

iii, Sacred work must be done regard-
less of surroundings, It is not for the
Lord’s servants to “faint in the day of
adversity.” Kings may menace, perils
may arise: but

“* Where duty calls or danger,
Be never wanting there.”
Painful as are the mutations around us—
and they were to Jeremiah—still we
must be loyal in our duty to God, and
responsive to sacred claims.

iv. Our mission ta to act the part the
hour demands. Help the good Josiah ;
withstand the rebellious Jehoiakim ;
chide and correct the compromising
Zedekiah ; go with the captives into
their affliction. Suit our work for Christ
to the characters around us, and to the
circumstances in which we find them.
Human life is not stereotyped ; Chris-
tian work must be versatile.

v. Every crisis finds the dutiful servant
sufficient and sustained. For God is able
to make him stand ; yea, and he shall be
holden up. So this prophet found. So
all who are the Lord’s (2 Cor. ii. 14).

Ver. 5. Foreknowledge and predes-
tination.

God’s address here is unequivocal and
emphatic, Two antagonistic opinions
held: 1. Divine purposes are absolute
with man, and include the determina-
tion by God of man’s will and life. 2.
Divine purposes are conditional on man ;
they foresee and accord with man’s own
determination.

Certainly Jeremiah’s will had to be
subordinated ; but it was a free subor-

B


dination. There was no violation of his
liberty of action; God gently conquered _
his reluctance and rectified his fears.
This Divine work upon him gave hin
liberty, set him free from enthralling
misgivings and dreadful apprehensions ;
raised him into assurance and reliance
on Jehovah; his subjugation was his
“translation from the bondage of cor-
ruption into the glorious liberty of the
children of God.”

I. Facts affirmed.

1. The unborn child foreknown of God.
“‘ Before I formed, I knew thee.” The
Divine idea antedates the Divine act
(Ps, exxxix. 16). Yet this assertion of
mere foreknowledge is not all which
the Hebrew word “knew” implies,
“Verbum cognitionis verbum favoris
est.” It is to be taken in the sense of
having a regard for; I approved of thee.
‘“‘T know him (Abraham), that he will
command his children,” &c. (Gen. xviii.
19; comp. Ps. 1,6; Nahum 1, 7. See
cognate N. T. word, Matt. vii. 23).
“Those who know (revere and cherish)
Thy name,” &c. (Ps, ix. 10; comp.
Hos. viii, 2).

2. A life predestinated to God’s service.
“Before birth I sanctified thee.” Not
from (after) birth, but from before birth.
We may understand the word “sanc-
tified ” as meaning (with Henderson and
Lange) set apart to sacred service; they
contending that primarily the word
‘does not mean to be pure or holy;
that God had cleansed Jeremiah from
the pollution of original sin, or had re-
generated him by His Spirit; but that
He had separated him in His eternal
counsel to his appointed work.” So
Samson (Judges xiii. 5); Isaiah (xlix. 1);
John the Baptist (Luke i: 15); Paul
(Gal. i. 15). Others claim that the
primary significance is to be pure, clean
(Speaker's Commentary); and here,
therefore, “I made thee holy,” and
“so to dedicate to holy purposes”
(comp. 2 Sam. viii. 11). Keil observes
and infers that “ God has predetermined
before our birth what is to be our calling
on earth, and He has accordingly so t-
fluenced our origin and growth in the
womb as to prepare us for what we are
to become and to ina i &o


OfAP, &.


Three interpretations: (a.) Hternal separ-
ation to God's service.
sanctification prior to birth; personal
purity. (c.) Control over the life prior to
birth so as to effect individual adaptation
for the sacred services he would have to
fulfil.

The last is preferable, He whom God
foreknows is born with a Divinely secured
aptitude for Divine work. (See Addenda
to chap. i., ‘‘ Yore-ordination.”)

3. God’s prophet a Divine production,
“TI ordained,”—t.e., “appointed” or
“gave.” A prophet is a Divine benefac-
tion ; he is born as a boon ; his ministry
is a gracious bestowment. Thus:

a. Gifted witnesses of God are gifts to
the age from God (comp. Eph. iv. 11, 12).
How melancholy if the Divine Father
sent forth no messenger to an erring
world! “All gone out of the way, none
seeketh after God ;”—yet God leaves men
to their own wilfulness, unchecked, unin-
formed, uninvited! Dreadful if always
true—‘I looked, but there was none to
help, and I wondered that there was no
intercessor.” But comp, Jer. xi. 7, vii. 25.

6. Their presence among men a testi-
mony of God, and their voice a testi-
mony from God. A prophet is a proof
that God is: his endowments and mis-
sion are supernatural: and his attesta-
tions are miraculous: and his word
speaks from God ; inspired, authorita-
tive. “‘He that heareth you, heareth Me,”
Such are the assertions of this verse,

II. Truths evolved.

1. Events of time do but unfold pro-
jects of eternity. Occurrences on earth,
as if the veil is thrown aside, show
Divine arrangements till then hidden.
God is planning ; time is unrolling His
plans, “bringing hidden devices to pass.”
God is interested therefore in all inci-
dents ; they lie within His anticipation,
“ My Father worketh hitherto.”

2. Opportune incidents are Divinely
regulated events. It was opportune that
Jeremiah came just at that juncture of
Judah’s history, while Josiah was en-
deavouring to reform the nation, and
ere the foe was at the gates. Was it
merely fortuitous, a coincidence? Or
rather, “‘ He worketh all things after the
counsel of His own will.”

18


(6.) Absolute ~


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.


3. A child’s birth and occupation work
out God's purposes. There is a provi-
dence therefore over our entrance into
life. Yes, and the fitfulness of child-
hood, wilfulness of youth, the risk and
uncertainty of opening manhood (as we
see them), only screen the movements
of a Hand which controls all, directing
the life into appointed paths. We work
into and work out Divine intents,

4, Messages from God awast the ad-
vent of a herald. God had much to say
to Judah, even while Josiah worked on
alone ; but Jeremiah’s hour was not yet.
Startling to think of solemn messages
laid up in heaven, kept sealed, until a
babe is born at Anathoth, and nourished
into youth. But the word of the Lord
comes by the appointed herald at the
needed hour. ‘QO Lord, send by whom
Thou wilt send,”

Thus, therefore, a man pleading for
God is God’s pleading with man.

Query. Is the Divine foreknowledge
and predestination true only of earth's
greatest sons, and God's special witnesses #
In a sense true of all men. “ Known
unto God are all His works, from the
beginning of the world.” ‘‘A man’s
goings are of the Lord.” Each should
realise his place in God’s plans, and ask,
“ Lord, what wilt Thou have me to do $"

** Stand up! thou art as true a man

As moves the human mass among }
As much a part of the great plan


That with creation’s dawn began,
As any of the throng.


*¢ The great! what better they than thee f
As theirs, is not thy will as free f
Has God with equal favours thee
Neglected to endow?


‘¢ With these, and passions under ban,
True faith, and holy trust in God,
Thou art the peer of any man !
Look up, then, that thy little span
Of life may be well trod.”
Ver. 6. The pleadings of fear.
Literally, “Alas/ my Lord Jehovah /®
There is no resistance on Jeremiah’s
part, but he shrinks back alarmed. So
at the vision of the cherubim, Isaiah
cried, “ Woe is me!” and Ezekiel “sat
astonished seven days.” Jeremiah’s
gentle and tender spirit submits, but
with a cry of pain” (Speaker's Com
mentary). ‘I cannot speak,” &e. The


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.


Targum paraphrases this correctly, “7
cannot prophesy ”—i.e., I have not tne
powers of oratory necessary for success.
The prophets of Israel were the national
preachers in religious matters, and their
orators in political. The reluctance ex-
hibited by God’s servants (Exod. iv. 10,
vi. 12, 30 ; Jonah i. 3) to accept the call
shows that they did not assume the
office under the impulse of self-deceiv
ing fanaticism,

I. Weakness is the channel of Divine
effictency. God works by weak things
(1 Cor. i. 26-29); for they most magnify
God (Ps. viii. 2),

Il. Conscious disqualification the
preparation for noblest achievements.
Equipped with nothing of self, there
was room for God’s grace to clothe him.
He became mighty because he felt him-
self nothing.

A prophet’s qualification is not apti-
tude for uttering Divine discourses
or foreseeing calamities, but speaking
words given him with all assurance, and
as an ambassador. (Addenda to chap. i.,
“Tama child,” and “I cannot speak.”)

Iil. Terror in the presence of re-
sponsibility.

a, Overwhelmed with vastness, “ Ah,
Lord God !”

6, Timidity shrinks appalled. “ Ah!”

c. Inexperience dreads duty. Achsld
to speak /

d. Incapacity urged. “I cannot speak.”

e. Youth’s natural misgivings, “I am
a child.”


Ver. 5-7. Theme: FEARS AND COM-
FORTS IN PROSPECT OF LABOUR FoR Gop.


Here is a young man trembling on


the threshold of a life of arduous ser-


vice. Here is the Master equipping him
for the service, dissipating his fears and
assuring his heart.

The scene is a common one. Trem-
bling fingers ever gird on the armour.
Nor is it wonderful. Think of magni-
tude of the undertaking, feebleness of
instrument, deadly hostility of foe. God’s
Davids always had to meet the world’s
Goliaths with nothing but slingand stone,

I. The fear of God’s servants in


prospect of labour,
1. He feels hts weakness, “A child.”





CHAP. L





a, Having no influence. Men will
listen to those of riper yeara, Speakers
who can appeal to public services
rendered, and to old and tried friends,
thus secure attention, Jeremiah had
no such advantages.

6. Having no experience. How can
a “child” find the clue to intricacies of
human heart? How successfuliy com-
bat sophistries of man 4

e. Being unstable. “A child” is
easily influenced, soon afraid. While
seeking to deliver others, himself may
be ensnared,

2. He feels his ignorance. How speak
of themes which exhaust vocabulary of
angels? How little know of Thy word
and ways, or of deplorable and dreadful
condition of men!

Every preacher should feel this. Think
of the surpassing excellencies of Jesus;
and we but beggars outside the city
gate, who yet have to tell of the Majesty
dwelling amidst splendours of palace!
We only know in part ; have seen but
glimpses of the King. True, we know
enough to bless ourselves, but not enough
to do Him the honour He deserves.

How little we know of man. Each
different from his fellow; exposed to
specific temptations and sorrows.

3. He feels his unworthiness.
ebild,” undistinguished, unknown.

4, He dreads the enmity of man.
Though “a child ” he knows the hostility
of man to truth. Not unnatural to
dread world’s malice, ‘Crucified to-
gether with Christ,” is no mere poetic
fancy. We have fellowship with His
shame, scourging, darkness, distress.
Men drove rough iron into the Master’s
hands, will not bind ours with silken
cords; placed on His head crown of
thorns, will not place on ours crown of
roses ; gave Him vinegar, not us wine;
pierced His side, will not merely menace
ours !

II. The comforts of God’s servants
in prospect of labour.

If our fears be many, our consola-
tions abound.

1. The assurance they are called to the
work. “I ordained thee a prophet.”
Despite his ignorance, unworthiness, and


: 19


“A


Gil4P, L.





2. The knowledge of the purpose of
God. “Thou shalt go to whom I
send thee,” Some find here reason for
inactivity ; they say, ‘‘ He will save His
elect,” and then fold their arms. But
God’s purpose is not only that Israel
shall be saved, but that Jeremiah
should “ go.” It contemplates the means
as well as end,

Rejoice at the knowledge that it is
part of Divine plan to wse we.

3. The promise of the presence of God.
“T am with thee,” &c. (ver. 8). We
have not to carry out His purpose with-
out His help. This promise a sovereign
antidote for every fear. Was he weak?
The Almighty was near. Ignorant ?
The “wisdom” was at hand. Un-
worthy? The Lord of glory stood by
him


4. The fact that the message was from
God. ‘“ Whatsoever I command thee,
thou shalt speak.” We have not to
guess our theme; we have the mind of
Christ. The teacher sent from God may
and must be dogmatic.—“ Items and
Twigs.”

Ver. 8. He had never occupied any
public station or performed any public
duty. “You need not fear their faces
—the thing that timid young men are
most wont to fear. Think only that
the Lord is with you, and let his presence
be your joy and strength.”

1, His ministry would lead him before
high and mighty personages. |

2, His messages would arouse the
malignity of haughty potentates.

Not easy to confront such men, to
condemn them, to incur their hatred, to
denounce their designs, Fear of man must
retire before fealty to God.


Ver. 9,10. Theme: Incapactry D1-
‘ VINELY RECTIFIED.


There is a special feature in Jeremiah’s
preparation and equipment—no human
presence came upon the scene to render
aid, as with Saul of Tarsus (Acts ix. 17) ;
nor even angelic interposition, as with
Joshua (Zech. iii, 4, 5); nay, nor yet
exalted seraphim, 28 with Isaiah (vi. 6, 7)
—it was a direct act of JEHovan Al
ready there had been (ver. 8)—

L Courage inspired. For God ve

20


‘Something was accomplished.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; JEREMIAH.





quires valour, and a dauntless faith
These he called into exercise,

IL Ability conferred (ver. 9).

1. The act: stretching forth of the
Divine hand = exertion of Divine power,
There
was more than an exertion, an emanation
of power.

2. The touch: it indicated Divine
energy communicated. It had passed
into him whom the Hand touched, like
electric fluid into a receiver.

3. The localisation of power: the
“mouth,” Jeremiah’s power was to
be in speech ; not in physical vigour,
nor even mental force, but in uttering
God-given “ words.” The local incapa-
city rectified.

III. Communication tntrusted. “T
have put my words in thy mouth.” This
was a tangible pledge of inspiration.
God committed His messages into Jere-
miah’s charge. Henceforth he would
not speak of himself, but “as the Spirit
gave him utterance.”

It was a real, not imaginary occur
rence ; & positive contact of Deity with
the now divinely-endowed prophet, and
it imparted to him his sacred commission,

IV. Installation completed (ver. 10).

1. The dividing line of his life, “This
day.” A mere Anathoth youth until
that day; henceforth God’s prophet.
“ All things become new,”

2. His exalted mission. ‘Set over,”
&c. God’s deputy: placed as overseer,
above kings and nations, to supervise
and control events. For bis word would
work more potently than royal designs
or strife of armies (Jer. xxiii. 29). The
issue showed this (comp. Acts v. 38,


39).

‘. Work defined. ‘‘To root out,” &.
He had the highest authority (comp.
Mark i. 22). He moved amid magnates
doing Heaven’s behests, foreshadowing
the Lord’s mission (John v. 2). God’s
Word has much to overthrow and demo-
lish—in nations, in human habits, in
secret affections and thoughts, All
forms of sin must fall before its con-
demnations (Heb. iv. 12, 13). On the
scene of ruin it then begins “to budld
and plont” (comp. Eph. iii, 20-22,
i 10)


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR,


OHAP, I.





Such is the work every man of God
has to do. Taking the sword of the
Spirit, he is to exterminate and slay all
hostility to God; and then to rear on
the ruins of sin a “holy temple unto
the Lord.” “ Our sufficiency is of God.”

Ver. 9. Theme: TH# ToucH or Gop,
“The Lord touched my mouth.”

Query. Was the act objective, or only
subjective; an actual occurrence, or
an impression on the inner conscious-
ness ¢

“The Lord cannot literally have put
His words into the prophet’s mouth ;
He can only have given him the charism
of which the words were the necessary
result.” — Lange.

“ Attactus oris signum est notans effi-
caciam spiritus sancti, quippe qui digitus
Dei sit, aperiens labia ministrorum verbi”
(Pa, li, 13, 14, 17; Luke xxi. 15),—
Forster.

A purely subjective transaction, “as
the moment when the presentiment first
flashed clearly through the soul of Jere-
miah that his prophetic calling was of
Divine appointment.” — Lwald.

“A physical and literal incident ;”
and that “the Son of God, in pre-inti-
mation of His blessed incarnation, ap-
peared to Jeremiah in a human form.”
—Starke.

“The hand is the instrument of
making and doing; the touching of
Jeremiah’s mouth by the hand of God
is consequently an emblematic token
that God frames in his mouth what he
is to speak. It is a tangible pledge of
Survevers, inspiratio, embodiment of that
influence exercised on the human spirit
by means of which holy men of God
speak, being moved by the Holy Ghost.
The act is a real occurrence, taking place
not indeed in the earthly, corporeal
sphere, but experienced in spirit, and of
the nature of ecstasy.” — Kewl.

“An appropriate symbolic act... .
The touching of the lips of Isaiah with
a live coal (chap. vi. 7), and the giving
of a book to Ezekiel to eat (chap. ii.
8-10), were similarly symbolical of pro-
phetic qualification, and implied a gift
of inspiration (comp. Dan. x. 16). In
all these instances the actions occurred
im supernatural vision.”— Henderson.








“The symbol of the bestowal of divine
grace and help, by which that want of
eloquence, which the prophet had pleaded
as a disqualification, was removed ; and
distinctly was an external act, impress-
ing itself objectively upon his conscious-
ness, though in what manner it is im-
possible for us to tell.”—Speaker’s
Com.

I, The varied consequences of the
Divine touch.


Old Testament.


1, Expiation (Isa, vi. 6),

2. Inspiration (Jer. i, 9; comp. Esek.
ii, 8-10; Isa. li, 16; comp. Acts ii,
3).

3. Impartation of strength (Dan. x.
16).
New Testament,


Bleas.ing infants (Luke xviii. 15),

Removing organic defects (Mark vii.
32, viii. 22).

Curing diseases (Matt. viii. 2, 15).
ne the prostrate (Mark ix.
27).
Awaking the dead (Luke vii. ne
Reviving the overwhelmed soul (Rev.
i 17),

Infer :

l. That the hand of power and re-
newal is the same in the Old and New
Testaments, ‘My Father worketh hither-
to, and 1 work.”

2. That ail remedial changes in man
are Divine. “He that sat upon the
throne said, Behold, I make all things
new ” (Rev. xxi. 5). “ We are His work-
manship ” (Eph. ii. 10).

II Human need of the transforming
touch of God.

1. These varied incidents denote man’s
varted ailments and afflictions.

a, Incompetent for Divine work (Isaiah,
Jeremiah, Daniel).

6. Suffering from physical malforma-
tions and maladies,

c. Bowed down before visions of glory
(John on Patmos).

2. The gracious issues of the Divine
touch reveal the suitability and sufficiency
of grace in God.

Power unlimited is in His hand. The
everlasting hills tremble and smoke if

21


O@4P. I.


He touch them. “Right hand of the
Lord doeth valiantly.” He never stretch-
ed forth His hand to work on frail
humanity without (a.) immediate results,
no delay in the remedy ; nor without (0.)
approprtate results, the very effect de-
sired ensued ; nor without (c.) beneficent
results; in all cases ‘‘ He put His hands
upon them and blessed them.” Con-
tact with Christ is life-giving, healthful,
saving,

Ver. 10. Theme:
SUBVERTER OF KINGDOMS.
thee over the nations,” d&ec.

The strict and literal import of words
here used assign to the Divine teacher
a sway above sceptres, a power mightier
than potentates, a spiritual domination
over dynasties and temporal kings.

As he stands before God he is a mere
servant, a trembling child; but as he
stands in God’s stead among men, he is
above rulera and princes, installed as
vicegerent, swaying the destinies of
kingdoms.

This title (Pakeed) is given only to
those invested with high authority—
Egyptian officers (Gen. xli. 34), Abime-
lech’s viceroy (Judges ix. 28), the high-
priest’s deputy (2 Chron. xxiv. 11), the
Levitical representative (Neh. xi. *Y
chief governor in Temple (Jer. xx. 1).
Jeremiah was God’s highest officer, su-
preme above monarchs and nations.

IL His official supremacy and super-
vision. ‘I have set thee over,” d&c.

1. Empowered with a sway superior
to kings; for their sway was soon
broken, their word frustrated ; but his
endured and was accomplished, For
there was a Power behind his word, and
therefore power sz his word.

They thought to defeat Jeremiah’s in-
fluence by imprisoning him; but his
sway wenton. “ The word of God was not
bound ;” it still worked towards fulfil-
ment. Every living servant of God is
thus endowed with a sway and a dignity
above potentates. A chained prisoner
could say to “King Agrippa” and
“noble Festus,” “I would to God ye
were both almost and altogether such as
I am/”

2. Intrusted with the destiny of king-
doms. ‘He was to have his eye upon

22


THE PROPHET A
“T have set


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAR.


the conduct of nations, and to utter pre-


“dictions of prosperity or adversity ac-


cordingly.” — Henderson. What was
effected in accordance with, is spoken of
as a consequence of, his word. This
mode of speech also indicates the cer-
tainty of the events he announced : they
would follow as effects of the cause,
The prophet’s word would thus deter
mine the fate of nations (comp. Ezek.
xliii.3; Jer. xxv. 15-17 sq.; Hos. vi. 5).

II. The irresistible activity of his
word.

In this case the spiritual was ascen-
dant over temporal authority. Divine
speech is more stable than sceptres ;
words are mightier than swords. ‘“ His
words were at the same time deeds, real
exhibitions of power.”—Lange. ‘‘ The
word of God in His prophets has power
to dowhat it says will be done.”— Words-
worth, ‘With the words of the Lord
he is to destroy and to build up peoples
and kingdoms. The Word of God isa
power that carries out His will, and
accomplishes that whereto He sends it
(Isa. lv. 10 sg.). Against this power
nothing earthly can stand.”— Keel.

“ At first we should say, ‘Such words
can never be applied in their literal im-
port to any seer or teacher : they belong
to the warrior and the conqueror. We
must explain them by a figure of speech
—he who discourses of the fall of king-
doms is represented as himself the over-
thrower of them.’ I do not think that
either the analogy of language or the
facts of the case justify that method of
interpretation. If the prophet only
talked of what was happening or what
was to happen, no poetical licence could
permit us to confound him with the
subverters of thrones and societies. But
have we yet to learn that a great teacher
or reformer, though he may never take
@ sword into his hand, does that which
swords cannot do; that swordsmen, in
fact, only carry out upon the surface
that which he is doing underground 4
The uprooting of the thoughts and prin-
ciples in which acts originate, the plant-
ing the seeds of life which are hereafter
to bring forth fruits that all will recog-
nise. are his functions. If he has re-
ceived any inspiration, any vital power


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY ; JEREMIAR,





at all, it must be one which enables him
to produce a movement at the very
heart of human life and society, in a
region of which the ordinary statesman
knows nothing.”— Maurice.

This power would be used for the
most part destructively ; the overthrow-
ing being expressed by four different
similes ; yet also constructively, though
to a lesser extent—only two words de-
scribing this part of his mission. The
first is accomplished by prophesying
Divine judgment ; the second, by pro-
mising Divine mercy.

See the power of prophecy (Ezek.
xxxvii. 7-10), and of the Living Worp
(Rev. ii, 16, xix. 15; Isa. xi, 4).

Ver. 15. Theme: Wak THE STROKE
oF Gop.

“T will call,”=Z am calling. The
present tense of Hebrew indicates judg-
ment has begun; the Almighty has
risen up to decisive action; a Voice
which will be obeyed is calling for the
long-delayed retribution; Jehovah is
summoning His hosts to the war. (See
Addenda to chap. i., “ War.”)

I. Divine punishment by human
agency. “I will call,” &c.

This fact is the basis of text. What
man does, he does in obedience to a Force
higher than himself. God uses him.

1. Miraculous forms of justice are
needless.

God has them, and used them (2
Kings vi. 15-17, xix. 35),

But the armies of nations are His, to
do with as He wills. So also affliction,
accident, reverses of fortune, mental
and physical disasters. Even crafty
and covetous men, who can wreck strong
fortresses of wealth and position, God
can use,

2. Common incidents of calamity are
not the less supernatural. If God em-
ploys them, though His hand be not
seen, they are supernatural. He now
avoids the extraordinary methods of old
times, and works by the ordinary.

II. Jehovah’s forces of retribution.
“All the families of the kingdoms,” &c. =
Nebuchadnezzar’s motley combination
which made up the Chaldean army
comp. Isa. xiii. 4, 5).

1. Armies assemble at His bidding.


CHAP, i.





<n ne


Nebuchadnezzar or Cyrus may lead
their war-hosts to the siege, but God
reigns over rulers ; the “ King of kings”
doeth “according to His will among the
armies of heaven and inhabitants of
earth.” All wars have behind them a
Divine use.

2. National overthrow testifies to na-
tional sin. So in Judah’s case. Guilt
is the occasion of all catastrophes. His-
tory shows this so with nations (see
Nineveh, Babylon, Jerusalem; and re-
cently Paris). Haxperience reveals the
same law at work among men.

III. Military counsels fulfil God’s
commands.

‘ They shall set every one his
throne,” é&c.; indicating a tribunal of
judgment, a council of war concerning
the fate of Jerusalem. The decision
would be as God had determined (comp.
Critical Notes, above, 8).

1. Over decisions of court the “ Judge
of all the earth” presides. This still
true concerning senates, chambers, par-
liaments, See the fact as relating to our
Lord (Acta iv. 27, 28, ii. 23; Isa, xiv.
24-27).

2. Over the plots of armies the “ Lord
of hosts” sways rule. Their stratagems
He oft defeated; their designs He
sometimes prospered. (See “ Scripture
batiles.”) This equally true of plots of
wicked against righteous, and of hellish
foes (Ps. xxxvii. 12, 13; Ezek. xxxv.
10; Rev. xx. 9).

IV. Foes sweep down on those whom
God abandons. “ Hvery one his throne
against Jerusalem.”

1. The protection of Providence with-
drawn, they invite the spoilers. ‘‘ Where _
the carcase is, there the eagles will
gather together.”

2. The restraint of Providence with-
drawn, the spoilers hasten to the prey.
Just as serpents in the wilderness rushed
into camp as soon as God’s restraining
care was forfeited.

a. Unkept by God, our life is hourly
imperilled. How different this from Ps
xci. 1-7,

b. Around those Divinely forsaken the
hosts of evil quickly assemble.

e. Left to our enemies ensures utter rain.
As with Judah (2 Thess. ii. real

2


GHAP, I.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





Ver. 16. “J will utter my judgments,”
&c. This phrase, “to speak or pronounce
judgment,” is properly to have a lawsuit
‘with one, an expression peculiar to
Jeremiah (cf. iv. 12, xii. 1, xxxix. 5),
is equivalent to pleading with a person
(ef. xii. 1 with ii 35; Ezek. xx. 35),
and signifies not only remonstrating
against wrong-doing, but also the pass-
ing of condemnation, and so includes
trial and sentencing.—Keil.

“To pronounce a judgment or judi-
cial sentence upon any one. Jehovah
threatened the Jews with punishment
on account of their rebellious conduct ;
He now declares He will carry His
threatenings into effect by means of their
enemies, who would sit in judgment and
inflict the calamities upon them they
merited. The sentences delivered by
the foreign princes would be in effect
the judgments of God. He would em-
ploy them as His instruments in carrying
them into execution.” — Henderson.

“ By the capture of Jerusalem God as
judge pronounces solemn condemnation
upon her.”—Speaker’s Com.

“Viewed in one light, war is the
boiling caldron of human passion, upset
by hazard, and bringing only ruin in its
course ; in the other, it is God sitting in
judgment, with the kings of the earth
as His assessors, solemnly pronouncing
judgment upon the guilty.”—Jdem.

Through these idolatrous enemies of
God’s people Jehovah would execute
His judgments.


Theme: UNoonscious DIVINE AGENTS.


I. Divine control over the workings of
the human will.

Il. The ungodly may unknowingly
further God's designs. So Joseph’s
brethren who sold him. So Israel’s
enemies in the wilderness,

III. Reckless hostility may but obey
His behests, ‘The wrath of man shall
praise Him.” Indulging their idolatrous
hatred, they wrecked the Temple and
the city of God, and thus chastised
Judah as God designed; and fulfilled
prophecy, thus confirming revelation for
after-time.

IV. Man in his most impious moods
te stl a subject of Divine government.

34


The godless cannot repel the Almighty
from their lives; He may work by theis
very impiety, and compel them blindly
to obey Him,

V. To be tn the hands of God for Hts
use in our rebellion, forewarns our being
in His hands for our just requital. As
Egypt (Jer. xlvi. 13); as Chaldea (Jer.
1, 1-3, 9, 10).

Ver. 17. I. G@od’s method of holding
judgment. Brings nations before Jeru-
salem, and lets them determine the fate
of the city. Their resolves respecting
Jerusalem would express God’s thought
and plan.

IL God’s chastisements are based upon
deserts. ‘‘ Judgments touching their
wickedness,” &c. They would suffer
nothing they had not merited. Judicial
sentence, righteous, deserved.

Ver. 17. Theme: Heroism 1n Gop’s
SERVICE. “Gird up thy loins, stand
and speak,” &e.

Girding the loins = resolute prepara-
tion for the performance of duty. A
metaphor : the Orientals, who wore long
robes, bound them up with a girdle ere
attempted work or started on journey
(comp. 2 Kings iv. 29; Job xxxviii. 3;
Luke xii. 35; Eph. vi 14). God here
summons Jeremiah to

(a.) Earnest exertion ; (6.) firm pur-
pose; (c.) ready alacrity ; (d.) cheerful
hope, not despairing that good might
ensue from his ministry.

He is further reminded that

(a.) Fear is a snare and dishonour.
(o.). God is greater than the greatest,
therefore should His servants bear them-
selves with assurance. (c.) Cowardice
will entail confusion and contempt,
“With what measure ye mete, it shall
be measured to you again.” (Addenda
to chap. i., “‘ Courage before kings.”)

L God will be served by courageous,
not by craven souls.

A ministry of “ whispering humble-
ness” is puerile and revolting. The age
wants men. Men appreciate manly for-
titude. God is dishonoured by a fawn-
ing ambassador, Lion-hearted preachera
wanted.

IL God’s work requires resolute
preparation and purpose.

‘*Gird and stand,’ = Equip thyself,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAR,





and with a stalwart heart preach My
words to the land.

1. It is a determined work, “Whether
they will hear or forbear.”

2. It is a denouncing work. “Speak
to them all that I command,” “against
kings,” &c., ver. 18.

3. It is a destructive work.
out, pull down,” &., ver. 10.

4. It is a Divine work.
stead and name, speak.
cient 3”

TIL God’s servants must confront
all menaces with a dauntless faith in
Him.

1, As one bearing awful tidings,
which must not be trifled with. “Stand
and speak all I command thee.”

2. Asa messenger who will himself be
condemned if he fail in his charge.
Warn the people; with earnestness, and


“To root


In God's
‘Who suffi-


OHAP. i,





all-conquering importunity, “lest their
blood be required at thy hand” (Ezek.
xxxiii.). ‘“ Necessity is laid upon me;
yea, woe,” &. (1 Cor. ix. 36, 17),

3. With unabashed fortitude, remem-
bering for Whom he speaks. “I command
thee:” “be not dismayed at their
faces.” For who is man, even : the
mightiest, when God is in our thought ¢
What can man do to silence us, when
we bethink of the eternal issues at stake,
and the urgency of redemption ?

Ver. 18 and 19 suggest further

IV. God’s witness assured of invin.
cible strength

1, The hostile array, ver. 18.
sie Their malevolent treatment, ver.

3. His impregnable strength, ver. 18,

4, His Almighty fortress, ver. 19, “I
am with thee,”


OUTLINES ON NOTICEABLE TOPICS AND TEXTS.


Ver. 5.
formed thee.”


Topte; Taz Driving Formation or a Human Lire Test; “J


This rectifies the scientific idea of natural development ; asserts an Active Cause
working for definite ends in the instance of an individual ; that God has some-
thing to do with our formation and our career.

It also explains the startling individuality of character and work which is often
apparent, and which cannot be accounted for by parentage and circumstances ;
children do not reproduce their ancestry always; grand departures from the rule


have given the ages their greatest and most useful men.


afirm that


Hence it is right to


I. Individuality of character and life is a specific creation of God.


1. Our natural qualities are not accidents of human progeniture.
to chap. i., “ Divine formation of a life.”)


(See Addenda


2. Our religious disposition is not determined by domestic culture-—eg., Manas-
seh was the wicked son of good Hezekiah, Josiah the good son of wicked Amon.
3. Our personality is a factor in society which God authorises and employs.
Zirgo, a. The sacredness of our individuality.
6. God’s interest in each life, and our use of life.
ec. Our place in Divine regard. His readiness to befriend and bless. His


desire for our piety and salvation.


He who made us, made us for


Himself, for His glory and our weal.
IL The Divine purposes forecast the issues of human birth. ;
1. Our existence argues that there is a place for us in the world; awaiting us,


suited to us, needing us.


2. Our being in the world is itself an incentive to the faithful use of life.


3. Our special aptitudes denote and designate our calling. God gives us our
distinctive powers. His purpose for us is that we use ourselves, and in the most
useful way, and that we make earthly existence a pathway to eternal blessednesa
and reward. i


GaaP. 1, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.





IIL. A mission on earth is predetermined to the man of God. “TI ordained
thee a prophet.”

God does not ordain the careers of evil men, Men are free to resist and reverse
God’s plans for them. They are not helpless slaves of Divine decrees.

1. For the Divine servant there awaits a Divine service. “Lord, what wilt
Thou have me to do?”

2. A life of religious usefulness works out God’s plans. Zrgo, His plans are
beneficent. He who uses life to bless others, and brings wanderers back to God,
does what God desires and designs,

3. No career of godly activity can be fruitless or unrewarded. For it effects
what God arranged. And “God is not unrighteous to forget your work,” &c.

IV. Equipment for sacred duties is the effect of Divine grace. “I sanctified
thee.”

Catholic theologians argue that Jeremiah was born without original sin. Neuman
interprets the statement as that the Holy Spirit was communicated to him before
birth. Hoffman, Henderson, Lange, d&c., regard the word as denoting the sacred
designation of his life.

1. The importance of a good life, both to God and man. The life we live does
affect Him who formed us, and its influence on others may be vast and imperish-
able. What majestic work one life may do for God!

2. A life wrecked and wasted by sin is a calamiy. It arrests the aim of God’s
grace ; it adds some force to the rule of evil; it deprives a man of his birthright ;
it is a melancholy perversion and an irremediable catastrophe. Even if the soul is
saved at the last, the life cs lost.

3. Divine grace avails for the salvation and sanctification of each one. Jere-
miah, like Paul, only illustrates the fulness of redemption, the abounding grace of
God for others (1 Tim. i. 16).


Ver. 7. Topic: Tot Human Ovurory Smencep. Text; “The Lord said unto
me, Say not /”


This outcry was born of shrinking, lowliness, apprehension. It indicated a lack
of fortitude and faith. If allowed to rule, it would have arrested God’s plans, and
eae Judah of one of her noblest prophets, and of a warning ministry urgently
needed.

I. The human heart is prone to speak out against God.

1. In self-assertion. (a.) Sometimes pride objects to God’s commands and plans;
“T dislike this kind of service, this mode of salvation, It levels me!” (6.) Or
self-rmll utters itself: ‘I cannot bow, cannot acquiesce, cannot think it right. My
will, not Thine, be done!”

2. In self-eacusing. (a.) Cowardice tremblingly pleads: “I cannot take up that
eross. I should make shipwreck of faith. I am not fit to serve.” (0.) Indifference
answers with subtle voice: “Sacrifice is not required of all, God cannot have
given pleasures merely to deny them. It is not urgent that I seek the Lord, or do
His bidding.” (c.) Graceless humility urges its plea: “I am unworthy. I am not
qualified. Surely God doesn’t mean or want me!”

Il. Heaven’s claims override all human reluctance.

1. God has rightful authority over His creatures. “Thou, Belshazzar, hast not
humbled thine heart, but hast lifted up thyself against the Lord of heaven ; and the
God in whose hand thy breath is, and whose are all thy ways, hast thou not glori-
fied” (Dan. v. 22, 23). ‘Ye call me Master and Lord, and ye say well, for so I
am!” (John xiii, 13).

2. Man’s true attitude is unhesttating acquiescence. ‘ Who art thou that repliest
against thy Maker?”

3. Divine prescrence never errs in demands. It is folly, therefore, and presump-
tion for Sy to question. He dees uot mistake the man or the appointment, He


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR, OmaP, %





Zaha to service or salvation the wrong person (John vi. 45 and 37; Rey.
xxii. 17).

III. God silences altercation, and summons to obedience. “ Say not!” “Thou
shalt go; thou shalt speak.”

With unquestioning promptitude we should reply to His call, * Speak, Lord, for
Thy servant heareth.” His work is solemn, urgent, all-constraining,

1. Our will and faculties subordinated to God. Even as Abraham “ obeyed, not
tnowing whither ke went.” Do not raise a difficulty in the way of God’s plans.
If He wants to use you, let Him; if to save you, let Him; if to honour you, let
Him. “It is the Lord; let Him do what seemeth Him good !”

2. Our lives expended in service for God. Times of sore hardship may make us
falter ; ready again to speak out against God. “Then I said, I will not make men-
tion of Him, nor speak any more in His name,” é&c. (xx. 8,9). But our sole course
is to ‘endure to the end.”

3. Our entire self completely abandoned to God. No word of excuse (Luke ix.
57-end, xiv. 18). No looking back. No reservation (Luke xviii. 28). For “ye
are not your own.” Calvin’s motto on his crest was, “I give Thee all; I keep back
nothing for myself.” (See Addenda to chap. i, “ Obedtence.”)


Ver. 10. Topic: CHarce To Pastors: THEIR WORK DEFINED. Text: “ See I
have this day set thee over nations and over kingdoms to root out, and to pull down,
and to destroy, and to throw down, to butld, and to plant.”


Differences between the prophet’s and pastor's office: his an extraordinary,
yours ordinary: his was to be exercised over nations and kingdoms, yours over a
church and congregation.

Yet, even in his case, there was no civil power: he was no pope: nor was he in-
vested with the authority of a modern bishop: no secular sway ; he pulled down
and built up prophetically. Though you have no such power as this, given by
extraordinary inspiration, yet in the way of declaring God’s word, “ whosesoever
sins you remit, they are remitted, and whosesoever sins you retain, they are re-
tained.”

Your labour is less, yet the nature of your work is the same; and the same
spirit of faithfulness is required over a few things as over many.

Your work is divided into two parts :

1. To discourage evil, “root out, pull down, destroy, and throw down.”

2. To encourage good, “ build and plant.”

The imagery is of two kinds: that of a house, and that of a garden.

1. The Church se God’s house, God’s building, and you are appointed to “labour
together with God,” to pull down, destroy, and throw down the rubbish, and then
to build upon a new and good foundation. ee

2. The Church ts also God's garden, and you are appointed to work in it, kee;
it in order, root out weeds, plant and cultivate the godly fruit.

I. Inquire what are the evils against which you must contend, and the
methods you are to adopt in this opposition. , :

1. By your public ministry root out errors in doctrine. Respecting God. His
character, His ways with men, His law, both in precepts and penalty. Respecting
Christ: defend His dignity, maintain His atonement. Respecting your people :
such as self-righteousness and presumptuous hope. Pull down also the vain expec-
tations of sinners. :

2. By leading the Church, in the exercise of faithful discipline, root out evil-doers,
Churches, formerly respectable and prosperous, are decaying for want of discipline,
Some pervert the parable of wheat and tares as excuse for negligence ; but the
field is the world, not the Church. ei

3. ers ere eee 00 oe Perpones af conecios and


OMAR, 2, HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


correction. There are cases which you could not touch in the pulpit without irr
tating ; others which do not fall under church censure, which should come within
the cognisance of the pastor. This is difficult ; consequently some have declined
it, pleading it would offend and damage the cause. Leave results with Christ.
Yet all may be done without offence: mingle counsel and encouragement with cen-
sure, as did Paul with the Corinthians.

It. What is that good which you are to encourage: what the work denoted by
building and planting ?

In general, encourage and impart just sentiments. Encourage and cultivate holy
tempers and dispositions. A company of modest, humble, upright, diligent, holy
people evidences “a good minister.” But more particularly—

1. As a Builder.

1. Be sure you lay a right foundation. Christ is the foundation: of God’s lay-
ing, of apostles’ and prophets’; and you must lay Him as the foundation of faith
and holiness.

2. See that your materiale be fitly framed together (Eph. ii. 21): implying
that

a. They be hewed and squared. What could a company of proud, prejudiced
professors do together with the godly ? These sins must be cut off.

6. They be formed by the same rule. Whatever variety, in some respects there
must be uniformity: similarity of views; hearts renewed after image of Christ ;
for “ what fellowship,” &c. (2 Cor. vi. 14-18),

c. Every one be put tn the situation for which he ts formed. Some have splendid
gifts, stones in front of building, for ornament and strength. Others have more
private excellences, affectionate in counsel, grave in deportment., Every gift should
be disposed of as that it shall be of greatest use to the whole. Offices filled by
men because of their property, perverts this law.

3. So frame the whole as that tt may be a fit habitation for God. It must be
God’s house, not yours, Because of Nebuchadnezzar’s vanity, “This is the house
IT have built!” All buildings are with a view to habitation. Build so that God
may take up His abode with you.

2 Asa Planter.

1. Sow “wholly a right seed.”

2. Give attention to the plants as you see them grow.

3. Cultivate them by every means.

4. ‘Pray that they may be watered by the Holy Spirit.

a, While pulling down or building, rooting out or planting, in God’s house and
vineyard, do not overlook your own. Personal religion is of utmost importance to a
minister.

b. Consider that you are ‘a labourer together with God.” He that employs you
will reward you— Rev. Andrew Fuller.


Ver. 19. Topic: OppostTion. Text: “ And they shall fight against thee,” de.


Every servant of God sure to meet opposition. In proportion as we are faithful
to God expect to be assailed by man. Doctrines, habits, and acts of true servanta
of God antagonistic’ to maxims and tastes of world : they are protests against what
sinners love. Success in God’s service fills them with alarm: “these men turn
world upside down ;” and would expel us from every paradise of pleasure, cut off
every supply of gratification, and abandon us to a life of melancholy.

L The vehemence of our foes. “Fight against thee.”

Not fight against principle so much as persons. Aim to wound the saint more
than refute his doctrine.

1. Formerly this virulence was manifested in revolting cruelties ; lit fires of
a crowded prisons with sufferers for conscience’ sake; drove thousands


a a ae | Se ae ee


_ of Jehu (1 Chron. xii. 3),


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR.


GHP, &


es


living,


: '
into exile ; even disturbed ashes of pious dead to emphasise their execrations of the


2. Now opposition resorts to more secret, though not less deadly means. Seeks to
prison coufidence and joys; impede progress, disturb peace, destroy spirituality.
The angel of tolerance and specious doctrine is seen, not the foul enemy: but


the same implacable heart of hate prompts hostility.


of time, though methods vary,
IL The certainty of our security.


“They shall fight” to end


“They shall not prevail.”


Saints may be weary, maimed, fearful, but cannot be ultimately defeated. False
professors will fall a prey : indeed they tempt the tempter ; but true men are sure
of victory. Jssue has ever been, “‘ We are more than conquerora.”


YI The source of our confidence.
This assures


“T am with thee, to deliver thee.”


1. The abiding presence of the Lord. Near to observe our behaviour, hear our


entreaties, stimulate our hearts,


2. The constant manifestation of the power of the Lord.


“To deliver ;” &¢., such


help shall be vouchsafed that every one of Hia soldiers shall “work out his own


salvation.”


Word of caution: Let us be careful that our enemies are the enemies of truth ;
that our strict adherence to Divine commandments is the sole occasion of their


hostility.


If we suffer, let it be for the kingdom of heaven’s aake, or we shall not inherit


the benediction.


It is possible to fight for God, and yet not be fighting with God, nor with
Divinely-appointed means: in which case defeat is neither wonderful nor un-


deserved.—" Sermon Framework.”


ADDENDA TO CHAPTER I: ILLUSTRATIONS 4ND SUGGESTIVE EXTRACTS.


Ver. 1. “ Anathoth.” A poor village
of some twenty houses, built among
white rocks and white ruins, on a bare,
grey mountain side. No trees, no ver-
dure, no richness, no grandeur, no
beauty: amid mountain solitudes and
rocky dells, he (Jeremiah) mourned and
wept over the foreseen calamities of his
beloved country. . . One can trace
in nearly all the images and illustrations
with which his writings abound, the
influence of those wild scenes amid
which he passed his boyhood. Moun-
tains, rocks, wild beasts, shepherds, are
again andagainintroduced.—Dr. Porter’s
“Syria’s Holy Places.”

Hither to his “fields” Abiathar was
banished by Solomon after the failure of
his attempt to put Adonijah on the
throne (1 Kings ii 26). This was the
native place of Abiezer, one of David's
thirty captains (2 Sam. xxiii. 27), and
The “men
of Anathoth” returned from the cap-
tivity with Zerubbabel (Ezra ii, 23 ;


Neh. vii. 27). . . . The cultivation
of the priests survives in tilled fields of
grain, with figs and olives, . . The
quarries still supply Jerusalem with
building-stone.—Dr. Smith's Dictionary.
Mean as the place is now, it was then a
walled town, and its ruins still afford some
traces of ita ancient importance.—Kitto.
“Son of Hilkiah.” Parentage. A
young minister, when about to be ov-
dained, stated that at one period of his
life he was nearly an infidel. ‘‘ But,”
said he, “there was one argument in
favour of Christianity which I could
never refute—the consistent conduct of
my father.”
Richard Cecil, from contemplating
his mother’s holy character and inward
peace, was persuaded of the Faith, and
led to cousecrate his life to most success-
ful devotion to the Redeemer.
Plato, seeing a child do mischie£
went and corrected the father for it.
Ver. 2, 3. Mutations of life. When
one sea floweth, another ebbeth. Whea
29


OBAP. I.


—


one star riseth, another setteth, When
light is in Goshen, darkness is in Egypt.
‘When Mordecai groweth into favour,
Haman groweth out of favour. When
Benjamin beginneth, Rachel endeth.
Thus we are rising or setting, getting or
spending, winning or losing, growing or
fading, until we arrive at heaven or
hell.— Henry Smith.

Predestination. “If Jeremiah had
fancied he was a prophet because there
was in him a certain aptitude for
uttering Divine discourses and foreseeing
calamities, who can tell the weariness
and loathing he would have felt for his
task when it led to no seeming resulta,
except the dislike of all against or for
whom it was exercised,—still more when
the powers and graces which were
supposed to be the qualification for it
became consciously feeble. Nothing
but a witness, the more sure for being
secret, ‘thou wast marked and sealed
for this function before thou hadst done
good or evil ; all thy powers are endow-
ments to fit thee for fulfilling thy voca-
tion, but do not constitute it; . . . it
may produce nothing but pain to thy-
self and to those who are brought with-
in thy influence ; . still the words
must be spoken, the acts must be done ;
for they are not thy words or thy acts; ’—
nothing but such a persuasion, written
and rewritten in a man’s heart, could
sustain him against the conflicts, out-
ward and inward, which pursue the
true prophet.” —Maurice’s “ Prophets and
Kings.”

Ver. 5. Divine formation of a life.

Fore-ordination. “ Propheta nascitur
non fit. A man is not educated unto
a prophet, but originally formed for the
office. Samuel declared a message from
God to Eli when he was a little child.
Note, God can, when He pleases, make
children prophets, and ordain strength
‘out of the mouths of babes and suck-
lings."— WU. Henry.

Chaldren do not always reproduce their
parents.

Origen had Christian parents, but
Clement of Alex., and Justin Martyr
were born and trained amid heathenism ;
rising like stars out of night. St.
Francis of Assisi, again, had parents

30


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH,


who were gross, brutal, and sordid;
whereas he himself became one of the
loveliest, holiest, and most self-abnegat-
ing of men which Christendom has
known. Erasmus, also, the eminent
Christian scholar, had a parentage whose
history was one of sorrow, shame, and
monastic bigotry ; yet he rose to great
usefulness and honour in the Church,
Parentage does not always determine
the character and career of the child.

Ver. 6. “Lama child.” Lowliness of
mind. “Self-distrust is the first proof
we give of having obtained a knowledge
of ourselves.”—Zimmerman, St. Augus-
tine being asked, What is the first thing
in religion? replied, Humility; and
what is the second? Humility: and
what the third? Humility. ‘ Humility
is the truest abstinence in the world.
It is abstinence from self-love and self-
conceit, the hardest and severest abati-
nence.” “‘ Humility leads to the highest
distinction, because it leads to self-
improvement.”—Sir B. Brodie. “We
must be little children in our own sight,
in order to be _ prophets,’—Bishop
Wordsworth. God dwells with the
humble,


“The saint that wears heaven’s brightest
crown

In deepest adoration bends ;

The weight of glory bows him down

The most when most his soul ascends 3

Nearest the throne itself must be

The footstool of humility.”

——MOonTGgOMERY,

“T cannot speak,”

“Eloquence—a plague upon the
word when we are.talking of Jesus and
of souls !—has no gift or benediction.” —
F. W. Faber.

“The sign-posts that point the way
by the side of the road, never have a
quotation of poetry upon them, or sen-
tences from Isocrates or Sophocles,
There is just the word, and that is
enough.”—C.. H. Spurgeon.

Having heard Massillon preach at
Versailles, Louis XIV. said to him,
‘Father, when I hear others preach, I
am very well pleased with them; when
I hear you, 1 am dissatisfied with my-
self ?”

“ Even the world honours consistency
and courage, and the plainest speaker


ee ee ae


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





will have, in general, the most hearers.
The only part by which a bull can be


safely taken is the horns.” —Power,


Ver. 7. Obedience.
ss nae yourself to God, and you shall


God fiz ats the battles of a will resigned,”
—BisHor Kex.


‘We can have no idea what we should
be able to do if we were completely lost
in accord with God; if we sought no
will but His; if not a word of our
mouths, not a beat of our hearts, not a
thought of our minds, not a movement
of our souls or bodies but were turned to
Him obediently, in the spirit of Samuel,
‘Speak, Lord, for Thy servant heareth.’
There have been men who have shown
what @ man can do—a Luther, a Calvin,
a St. Paul, a Moses—these men have
shown what a man can do when he only
seeks to obey the will of God.”—A.
Monod.

“Blessed is that simplicity which
leaveth the difficult paths of dispute,
and goeth on in the plain and sure
path of God’s commandments.” — Thomas
a Kempis.

Ver. 11. “ What seest thou?” “ Pro-
phets have need of good eyes ; and those
that see well shall be commended, and
not only those that speak well.”—.
Henry,


“ Almond-tree.” The rods which the


princes of Israel bore were almond rods,


at once the ensign of their office, and
the emblem of the vigilance which be-
came them as leaders of God’s chosen
people (Num. xvii. 6-8). Aaron’s rod,
that blossomed and yielded nuts, was
an almond bough. The almond-tree has
always been regarded by the Jews with
reverence. Its fruit was among the
presents which Jacob charged his sons
to take with them on their second visit
to Egypt (Gen. xliii. 11); and the orna-
ments of the golden candlesticks were
made after the pattern of almonds (Exod.
xxv. 33); and even to this day the
modern English Jews on their great
feast-days carry a bough of flowering
almond to the synagogue. An allusion
is mado in Eccles. xii 5, to the white
or silver hair which, ere one is well
aware, covers the head of old age.


OHAP. i,





** The hope, in dreams, of a happier hour,
That alights on misery’ brow,
Springs out of the silvery almond flower,
That blooms on a leafless bough.”


Ver. 11. Vistons. Refer to Kebel’s
hymn for Septuagesima Sunday.


——‘‘ Earth is crammed with heaven,

And every common bush on fire with God,

But only he who sees takes off his shoes.”
—Unxyown.


** And this our life, exempt from public


unt,
Finds tongues in trees, books in the running
brooks,
Sermons in stones, and good in everything.”
—‘* As You Like It,” SHAKESPEARE.


Ver. 14. “Out of the North.” “The
swelling waters of a flood are a usual type
of an overwhelming calamity (Ps. Ixix.
1, 2), and especially of a hostile inva
sion (Isa. viii. 7, 8); but this is a flood
of scalding waters, whose very touch is
death. The caldron represents the great
military empires upon the Euphrates. . .
The tide of passion and carnage is sure
finally to pour itself upon Judea. The
caldron looks ominously towards Jeru-
salem, but it has not yet overturned ;
and if Judah repent, God may make it
exhaust its fury upon itself [Nineveh
and Babylon being in conflict], or a
defeat instead of victory at Charchemish
may alter the whole tide of events.
But if Judah remain impenitent, it must
become the prey of whosoever conquers
in the plains of Mesopotamia,”—
Speaker's Com.

Ver. 15. War.

‘6 ?°T'was man himeelf
pe Death into the world; and man him-
86.


Gave keenness to his darts, quickened his pace,
And multiplied destructions on mankind,


** One murder made a villain [Cain],
Millions a hero [warrior]. Princes were pri-
vileged
To kill, and numbers sanctified the crime.
Ah! why will kings forget that they are men,
And men that they are brethren?”


“ Still monarchs dream


Of universal empire growing up
From universal ruin.” —Porrxvs,


Ver. 17, 18. “Be not dismayed.”
Courage before kings.


Seid the Roman Emperor to Chrysoe
31


OwAP. L


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





tom, ‘‘T will bantsh thee.” “Thou canst
not,” was his answer, “for the world is
my Father's house.” “Then will I kill
thee.” ‘That is not in thy power, for
my life is hid with Christ in God.” ‘TI
will deprive thee of all thou possesseat,”
‘““Nay, for my treasure is in heaven, and
my riches are within me.” ‘But I sill
exile thee, that thou shalt not have a
friend or companion left.” “Neither
canst thou do that; for my Friend is
Ke who will never leave me, and from
whom none can severme. I defy thee,
- prvud emperor; thou canst domenoharm
at all!”—From “Crowds of the Buble.”
When Polycarp was brought before
the pro-consul, this officer addressed
him; “ Renounce Christ and I will re-





lease you!” Polycarp answered,
“‘Highty and six years have I served
Him, and He hath done me no wrong;
and how can I speak evil of my King,
my Saviour?” The pro-consul replied,
“T have wild beasts; to these I will
cast you, if you change not your mind.”
But he boldly rejoined, “Thou seemest not
to know what I am ; hear me freely pro-
fessing it to thee—I am a Christian.”

** And how can man die better than facing

fearful odds,


For the ashes of his fathers, and the temple
of his gods,” —MaoavLayY.


‘* He holds no parley with unmanly fears ;
Where duty bids he confidently steers,
Faces a thousand dangers at her call,

And trusting in his God, surmounts them


all.” —CowPrzr.


OHAPTER IL


Critica snp Eixrautioat Norss.—1. Chronology. Most probably in thirteenth Josiah, quickly
after his call. Dr, Dahler (Stratsbourg) would interpose chapters iv., v., vi.; deferring this chapter
till after them. But Hitsig sees in chap. ii. and iii, (where they think this discourse ends)
all the characteristics of an inaugural prophetic, deliverance ; for ‘‘ in its finished completeness it
gives the impression of a first uttered outpouring of the heart, in which are set forth, without
restraint, Jehovah's list of grievances against Israel.”” We may safely regard this as Jeremiah’s
earliest public utterance ; its place must be within the thirteenth and eighteenth years of Josiah,

2. Cotemporary Scriptures, as in chap. i.

8. Historic Facts. Josiah engaged in his religious reformation of Judah. Auspicious advent
of this discourse : for it was calculated to (a.) Animate the king and nation in rectifying dese-
crations and apostasy; and (6.) arrest the policy of the Egyptian party in Jerusalem who were
urging alliance with that power (ver. 18).

4, Cotemporary History. Egypt rising into dominance under Psammeticus. In Jerusalem
this event was hailed with satisfacti-n, as a counterpoise to Assyrian tyranny. Nineveh’s down-
fall was approaching. This growth sf Egyptian, and decay of Assyrian, power led statesmen in
Judea to covet the friendship of Egypt (ver. 16, 18, 36). In consequence of Jeremiah’s pro-
test, it seems probable that Josiah’s course became changed; he turned from hope in Egypt, and
then rose in fatal resistance. See Critical Notes, chap.i., Personal allusions, 6. ‘‘ Josiah.” The
exact juncture of this chapter therefore seems to be when the king and counsellors of state were
contemplating a protective alliance with Egypt.

5. Geographical References. Ver. 2 and 6. ‘“‘ Wilderness,” ‘‘land of deserts and pits,”
&c. ‘‘A more frightful desert it had hardly been our lot to behold, The mountains
beyond presented a most hideous aspect; precipices and naked conical peaks of chalky
and gravelly formation, rising one upon another, without a sign of life or vegetation.”
—Dr. Robinson. ‘‘The whole country is made up of arid and barren plains, intersected
by rocky mountains, amid the precipices of which are depths and caverns of the most
horrid gloom.”—Henderson. Ver.7. “<A plentiful country ;” lit. a Carmel land; a beauti-
tul garden like Carmel (comp. Isaiah xxxiii. 9, xxxv. 2). The name used metaphori-
cally, and as an adjective, also in Isaiah x. 18, xvi. 10, xxxvii. 24. Ver. 10. ‘‘ Toles of Chittim:”
originally the name of the inhabitants of Cyprus; Phoenician colonists, who founded Citium
on §.E. coast. Greeks called them Kittaei. The Seventy render Kittim by xyrio, Ketii or
Cetii. They extended commerce to all the islands and maritime coasts of the Mediterranean ;
to all which inclusively the name “Isles of Chittim” became od grass These Chitteans are
here made to represent the peoples on the West. “ Kedar” (son of Ishmael, Gen. xxv. 13). The
Kedarenee were a pastoral people inhabiting the Arabian desert ; but the name became extended
to the Bedouins generally, who occupied the regions east of Palestine.—Henderson. Kedar
thus represents the Kast. Ver. 16. ‘*‘ Noph,” called by Greeks Memphis, a few miles south of
Cairo; the capital of Egypt in the time of the patriarchs, Pharaoh, and the Exodus, Situate
just at that point of the Delta where the Nile separates into streams. As the residence of the
court of the Pharaohs, it was the scene of Joseph's varying fortunes: chief seat of Egyptian
literature and idolatrous worship: temple of Apis there, the most splendid erection in Egypt
the pyramids stood close by—the sepulchres of the kings. ‘‘ Tahapanes,” in Greek Tdgvy,

$2


a ee ee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH, GHAP, Ii





the first Egyptian town on crossing the border from Palestine, about sixteen miles south
of the flourishing seaport Pelusium, and on the margin of the Lake Mensala, thus enjoying
facilities of traffic with the Mediterranean and the Red Sea, One of the palaces of the Pharaohs
stood there (Jer. xliii. 9). Being one of the most influential cities of Egypt, it and the capital
stood for the country and the government itself. Ver. 18. “Sihor,” a Hebrew word =“ the black,”
meaning the Nie, whose appearance is turbid when loaded with alluvial matter, and whose
deposit is black soil. ‘‘ The rwer” (of Assyria) means the Euphrates. Ver, 23. ‘‘Thy way in
the valley :” a definite locality is designated ; the vale of Hinnom. This runs along the south
side of Mount Zion, and was infamous for the celebration of the horrid rites of Moloch (chap.
vii, 31, xxxii. 35).

6. Natural History. Ver. 15. “The young lions roared upon him,” &. Never roars but
when in sight of prey or when striking it down. Roar = signal of attack and consequent
destruction (Isa, xxxi. 4; Amos iii. 4). Entire regions are sometimes depopulated by his
tury (Jer. iv. 7). These are mystical lions; but the valour of a eonquering tyrant and the
rage of a savage lion work like effecta, Ver. 21. “A noble vine, a degenerate plant.” Noble,
properly reddish ; a Sorek vine, producing red wine (Prov. xxiii. 31); a symbol of perpetual
blessedness and bounty (Gen. xlix. 11). But Israel had become degenerate branches; not
‘*plant,” but sproute or suckers ; evil outgrowths of a good stock, like Deut. xxxii. 32. The
noble vine of Palestine (Num. xiii. 23) yields clusters weighing ten or twelve pounds, and the
grapes are like plums. Ver, 22. ‘‘ Nitre, soap.” Nitre is the natrom of Egypt, a mineral
alkali found in the Nile valley after the water has evaporated. Soap, or potash, Borith, is a vege-
tat.e alkali obtained from the ashes of plants. These were the most powerful detergents known
(Speaker's Com.). Ver. 28. “Swift dromedary.” i132, a young female, which has never


yet had afoal. ‘‘ Dromedary ” is famed for amazing speed. Arabs affirm it will get over as
much ground in one day as will take one of their best horses ten days. Hence used to carry
despatches in haste (Esther viii. 10). Ver. 24. ‘* Wild aes, snuffeth up the wind.” The Onager,
cf the mule kind (Henderson) : “ accustomed to the desert,” =wild, reckless, ungoverned, obedient
to nothing but desire: “‘snuffeth up the wind,” ¢.¢., scenteth the male. Extremely ewift, of
slender form and animated gait. Mr. Morier, alluding to its peculiar cry with its nose (Jer.
xiv. 6, ii. 24), says, “In crossing the desert we gave chase to two wild asses, which had go
much the speed of our horses, that when they had got to some distance they stood still and
looked behind at us, snorting loudly with their noses in the air” (Journey through Persia, quoted
by Dr. Paxton)

7. Manners and Customs. Ver. 3. ‘‘ Férst-fruits of His increase ;” God's consecrated
portion of the harvest (Exod. xxiii. 19). Ver. 13. ‘‘Hewed cisterns.” Tanks for rain-
water, common in Kast in cities and along roads; wells are scarce. These cisterns become
dilapidated, cracked; and in consequence the rain which falls, or water poured into them, sinks
into the earth and becomes lost. ‘‘The Hebrews give the name living water to that which
welled from a fountain, and flowed along, as if possessing the property of life.” —Henderzon.
Ver. 20, ‘‘ Upon every high hill,” &. Spots chosen for idolatries and the worship of nature
(Deut. xii. 2; 1 Kings xiv. 23; Ezek. vi. 18). Ver. 32. “Ornaments and attére.” Oriental
females wear profusion of decorations, rings, jewels, bracelets, &c. (cf. Isa. lxi. 10): ‘‘ attire”
here means girdle, sash, worn across the breasts (Rev. i. 13), often beautifully embroidered ; an
object of great pride to the wearer. Ver, 87. ‘‘ Hands upon thine head ;” the natural attitude
of mourning (2 Sam. xiii, 19). “ With hands clasped upon the head, Israel would retrace her
steps, disgraced and discarded.”——Speaker’s Com.

8. Literary Criticisms. Ver. 2. “Go, ery tn cars of Jerusalem;” a form of address im-
plying hia absence from the city. When he dwelt there the address assumed an altered form
(chap. xvii, 19, xxxv. 18). “I remember thee,”"=of thee, to thy credit, for thy sake. “3!


with 2 means to remember to one’s account that it may stand him in good stead after-
wards. Of. Neh, xiii. 22, 31; Ps. xeviii. 3."—Kedl, ‘‘ Kindness of thy youth;” either Mine
to thee, or thine to Me: God’s generous regard and lavish privileges for Israel, or Israel’s
ardour and devotion to the Lord. The latter is ,referable. Ver. 8. ‘‘ Was holiness.”
Lange renders it “a Sanctuary.” Keil favours this: ‘‘ Israel was so shielded by Him,
as His sanctuary, that whoever touched it must pay the penalty” (Ps. cxiv. 2). But
Bishop Hall, Henderson, and Speaker's Com.=an offering consecrated ; Sharpe, “holy unto the
Lord” (éf. Exod, xix. 6, with Lev. xx. 24, Deut. vii. 6). Ver. 4. ‘‘ Families of the house of
Terael ;” not Judah only, but all Israel inclusively, though ten tribes were dispersed; not
merely the few members of those tribes still in Jerusalem, but an ideal audience, the whole
nation. Ver. 12 ‘‘Be horribly afraid, be ye very desolate ;”’ lit., shudder and be withered
away (Lange). An evident paronomasia—D°DW NOW,  Impassioned personification: ‘‘ Be
horrified ; be exceedingly aghast” at the monstrous spectacle. °)IT, to be parched up, de-


rived of: vital force ; devastated. ‘‘ Places devastated have such an unsightly look.” — Maurer,

“ They have forsaken me,” lét., Mu have they forsaken ; force in the initial pronoun, raising into

prominence Him whom they have thus wronged. Ver. 16. ‘‘ Broken the crown of thy head,” =

will feed down the crown (Henderson); depasture the crown (Lange); feed ge crowR
G 3


OHAP. IL HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





(Keil). TY"), to cat up by grazing (Micah v. 5). Gesenius, ‘They devour the crown of the


TY ~ :

head.” “The hair of the head being held in high estimation by the Hebrews, baldness was
regarded as ignominious and humbling” (cf. chap. xlvii. 5, xlvili, 37). This fulfilled beth in
the sense of depopulating the land and draining the resourcee of the nation by taxation. ‘‘ Shave
thee bald,” points to extreme devastation and mi cf. Jer. xliv. 12). Wer. 17. “ Hast thou
not procured this?” &c., t.e., Hath not thy forsaki ovah procured this to thyself? ‘* Led
thee by the way;” query, in what way? A distant historic way, in Arabian wilderness? (So
Speaker's Com. and Keil.) But this would affirm that their fathers’ sin in the desert originated
the criminality which would eventuate in Judah's ruin. But Kimchi, Hitzig, Henderson=the
right way, the way of holiness; not through the wilderness merely, but the course of moral
training under the Mosaic dispensation. Ver. 18. ‘‘ Zo drink the waters,” i.e. to draw from
these sources, Egypt or Assyria, power and reinvigoration. Ver. 20. *‘ I have broken :” many
authorities reject the Masoretic punctuation, which makes the verb first peraon, and read “ Thow
hast broken.” If the A.V. stands, it=God’s emancipation of Israel from Egyptian bondage. If
“¢hou hast broken” be substituted, it= Israel’s rebellion against God's rule. “ Thou wanderest,”
&e. ; stretchest thyself. “Under every leafy tree thou layest thyself down as a harlot”
(Speaker’s Com.), indicating her ready prostration before bjects of idolatrous worship. Ver. 22.
“Thine tniqutty is marked ;” is a stain, is ingrained; (e., a filthy blot which no acids, or
devices, or remedies can purge. Ver. 23. “ Traversing der ways,’ =rambling in her courses ;
‘* running in all directions in quest of a male.”’—Henderson. Ver. 24. “ Snuffeth up the wind
at her pleasure ;” a symptom of excited passions (Lange). “‘ In her occasion,” &c., = as for her
heat, who can repel it? (Henderson). Keil, ‘‘ That in her lust panteth for air; her heat, who
can restrain it?’’ ‘*‘ All that seek her,” &c.: she will not hide from them, herself too ready to
be found. ‘“‘ In her month ;” at the pairing season.. Ver. 25. “‘ Withhold thy foot,” &c. Cease
this wearing and feverish rushing after idols; for only wounded feet and a dry thirst will ensue.
“No longer undertake fruitless journeys to places of idolatrous worship, which wore out their
shoes, injured their feet, and entailed extreme thirst.” —Henderson. ‘‘ God, the true Husband,
exhorts Israel not to run barefoot, and with parched throat, like a shameless adulteress, after
strangers.”—Speaker’s Com. Ver. 29. “Wherefore will ye plead ?” = Why do ye, or to what purpose
will ye, contend against Me? Their propensity to complain against God (see Exod. xvii. 2, 3,
7; chap. v. 19, xiii. 22, xvi. 10), Ver. 30, ‘* They received,” t.¢., they accepted no correction,
Ver, 31. ‘* We are lords.’ “V),=to ramble about in an unbridled manner; they had thrown
off the reins, and wandered at will after idolatrous gratification (Hos. xi. 12). Wer. 33. “ Taught
the wicked ones thy ways ;” either taught idolatrous nations new idolatries, or taught thy ways
wickedness, 4.¢., trained thyself to habits of atrocity. Ver. 84. ‘‘ Not found i by secret search.”
Henderson, =“' by deep search, #.¢., atrocities have not been perpetrated in subterraneous cavern,
as too horrible to bear the light of day, but openly in the valley of Hinnom, within the sacred
precincts of the Temple, and about Jerusalem.” “But upon ail these,”=upon all thy skirts,
Speaker’s Com. gives a wholly new interpretation, =thou didst not find them (the poor innocents)
breaking into thy house, i.c., they had committed no erime justifying violence, ‘‘ By secret
search, ’ = digging, i.c., dixging through the walls of a house for the purpose of breaking into it,
(Lange renders the words, in the place of burglary.) “ But upon all these,""= because of all this,
ic., thou killedst the poor innocents, not for any crime, but because of this thy lust for idolatry.
Ver. 87. “Go forth from him,” from thence ; ‘not prosper in them,” have no success with them.
Hastening to Egypt in hope of succour and strength, at a time when Nineveh is tottering be-
fore the armies of Cyaxares and Nabopolassar, thou shalt return repelled and forlorn,


HOMILETIC TREATMENT OF SECTIONS OF CHAPTER Ii.


Section 1-3. Beautiful retrospect—reciprocation of love,
4-8, Lamentable changes—violated faith.
9-18. Facts for amazement—reckless apostasies.
14-19. Looming disasters—outward results of impiety.
20-29. Baseness of idolatry—reflex degradations of impiety,
80-37. Affecting expostulations—incorrigible impenitence,


Ver. 1-3. Prmry a ReEcrProcaTion oF LovE.


By Israel’s “youth” is meant-the period spent in Egypt and of the exodus
thence (Hos. xi, 1, ii, 15). From the exodus till Sinai’s covenant constitutes the
season of plighted affection and betrothal (Exod. xix. 4-8), The bridal relation-
ship was consummated there, and God was a Husband unto Israel from that hour
(cf. Keil and Hend.). God emphatically calls Himself “the husband of her
youth” (Joel i, 8), ao tender, full of fond memories, sacred and intimate, was the
union.


34


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. OHAP. n








}

Query, whether here is meant Istael’s love to God, or God’s to Israel ? Chrysostom
originated the latter explanation; many still contend for it.—Graf,, Rosenm.,
Venema, &c. But the accumulated decisions of interpreters favour the former.
“The kindness (or grace) of thy youth,” and “thy going after Me in the wilder-
ness,” can refer only to the bride. © who can think of the bride’s love without
instantly reverting to the higher, grander, vaster love of the Bridegroom? (See
Literary Criticisms above, ver. 2.)

L Love’s origin and alliance. In the case of

i Jehovah's love for Israel, it led to (1.) Perception of excellenctes: “the grace
of thy youth ;” for although there was little to admire in Israel when in Egyptian
bondage, or when released—a wild horde in the desert—God saw graces, appreciated
“kindness ;” for love is quick to perceive and admire. (2.) Covenant of attachment:
“espousals ;” the Lord drew Israel into plighted alliance; He must claim her all
for Himself as His beloved, (3.) Leading her forth into a new world and a new
hfe: “after Me in the wilderness ;” a different but better scene than Egyptian
degradation ; life spent in the society of her Bridegroom ; “all things become new.”

ii. Israel's love for the Lord was (1.) Ardent: it was her “first love;” glowing,
joyous, full of graces and kindness (cf. Exod. xxxv. 20-29). (2.) Single: she
asked no paramour then, sought no “other lord,”—God was all-sufficient. ‘‘ They
saw no man save Jesus only/” (3.) Unhesitating: she ready to go anywhere
“after” Him; even into “wilderness.” His will was her law, her bliss. ‘‘ Lord,
I am ready to go with Thee, both into prison and to death” (Luke xxii. 33),
“Let us go also that we may die with Him” (John xi. 16). Such is the attitude
of “first love.” (See Addenda to chap. ii., “ Love of thine espousals.”)

II. Love’s outgrowth and manifestation.

i, God’s love was (1.) Redeeming: from Egypt, from enemies, from perils, from
wilderness, (2.) Disciplinary: educating her and preparing her for higher posi-
tion, nobler advantages, larger enjoyments and privileges. (3.) Hnduring: through
forty years in desert. (4.) Unwearied: never alienated or exhausted by all Israel’s
forgetfulness and failings.

ii. Israel’s love was (1.) Human, therefore variable and perishable. (2.) Yet
trustful, surrendering herself and her future to God. (3.) Responsive, going
after Him, carrying out His precepts, though with many defects and even occa-
sional disobedience. (4.) Grateful; for a religious regard and reverence charac-
terised Israel’s early career. Alas! she was sometimes also querulous.

III. Love’s honours and blessedness,

Its object must be beautified and enriched ; love ever acts thus.

i. The Divine affection for Israel took delight in lavishing beauty and dignity
upon tts object. (1.) It robed Israel with sanctity (“ Israel” was holiness) ; invested
her with national distinction and privileges. (2.) It constituted Israel God’s abode,
(See Literary Criticisms, chap. ii. ver. 3). (3.) It secured to Israel Divine over-
shadowing (‘“ All that devour, . . . evil shall come upon them”).

ii. Israel's affectionate allegiance found expression. (1.) Her “ jirst-fruits” were
yielded to God: this was the gift of her most prized possessions ; it avowed that
God was first in her thoughts, and first to receive the acknowledgment of her
grateful love. (2.) Her history witnessed for God, made Jehovah known to sur-
rounding nations; His character, mighty acts, supreme deity. (3.) Her worshu
was a sweet savour to the Lord: the Tabernacle services, the altar sacrifices, the gifts
and offerings of the people, all were precious to Him—an oblation of love (Pa.
Ixxvi. 1, 2, Ixxxviii., xlviii.).

Truly a beautiful retrospect. Piety flowing forth in love for God, in faith that
worketh by love, in zealous attachment and lavish offerings and loyal devotion.
God “remembers” it with delight. It is the garden of Eden, luxuriant and lovely,
before sin’s devastation blighted the fair sceme. Alas! that on the sacred blessed-
ness and beauty of “first love” could come so withering a blight!


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : JEREMIAG.,





Ver. 4-8. Lamenrashe Caanges—Vionatep Farrn.
(Bee Addenda, chap. ii. ver. 6: “ Netther said they, Where ts the Lord #”)


The “love of youth” might be referred either to Jehovah or Israel ; for early
affection was reciprocal. But there can be no double reference of this dark fact—
vows broken, love false, loyalty abandoned. God is incapable of inconstancy
(James i. 17). It is only in man to deteriorate, to forget (what God “remembers,”
ver. 2) the “ first love” (Rev. ii. 4, 5).

There should be a reason for all our courses of conduct; we could ordinarily
justify our proceedings, in commerce, politics, &c. It should be so in spiritual as
in temporal affairs. God here reviews Israel’s career, sets sins in array, calls hes
to justify her conduct, summons her to account, Foreshadows this: “ Every one
must give account to God.”

i, A startling contrast (ver. 5) between God’s fidelity and their in-fidelity,
ti. An unanswerable challenge. Their conduct was without reason. iii, An appal-
ling charge. Asked not after God (ver. 6, 8), despoiled God’s heritage (ver. 7),
violated duty and knowledge (ver. 8). The guilt of backsliding stands out in vivid
portrayal here, (Addenda, ver. 10, 11, “‘/dolatry.”) Thus is shown:

I. That apostasy from God is wholly unjustifiable.

The question of its guiltiness remains in abeyance till the appalling tnjustice of
it is proved (ver. 5). “ What iniquity,” &c, The word 71, dvel, stands opposed te


PIS, tsedek, righteousness ; and means perversity, wrongfulness; the contrary of
good faith and truthful deed—injustice therefore: Ergo, their action was wr
fustifiable,

1. Could they adduce any provocations to apostasy? Had Jehovah fatled to do
what they might expect of Him? Had He done aught they could complain of? In
any way had He been unkind, unfaithful, unjust? If so, they might justify theis
having “removed far from Him” (ver. 5), Let men charge God with wrong done
to them individually if they can, and so prove their neglect and hostility reasonable
and right. Against all complaints shall be set the grand facts of God’s love, verity,
and abounding grace.

2. Had they derived any advantages from apostasy? “Walked after vanity”
(ver. 5); “after things that do not profit” (ver. 8). To lose the good and pursue
an evil is a double loss, a twofold calamity. Losing God is a frightful loss ; but
losing Him means the surrender of all and failure of everything. A man hanging
over a chasm lets go his only hold—a piece of projecting rock, to grasp shadows
thrown across the perpendicular sides of the chasm: he clutches at vanity, and falla
headlong to ruin, See Mark viii. 36, 37. Interrogate men as to the substantial
“gains of godliness.” The world will yield us at last nought but a grave; but
“when heart and flesh fail, God will be the strength of my heart, and my portion
‘or ever.”

Il. That apostasy is felt by God to be a gross injustice.

It is unreasonable in itself, and equally undeserved by God. It is impossible to
miss the fact that God felt their conduct. He does not regard it impassively ; it
occasions grief and calls forth sadness. Man’s conduct affects God.

1. Heartless ingratitude for favours (ver. 6). Did not heed them ; felt no sense
of obligation for them ; acted as if none nad ever been shown them. Flagrant, in-
sensate, graceless ingratitude, (a.) They owed to God all their deliverances: trom
Egypt (Micah vi. 4) ; oppression of Pharaohs (Exod. iii. 7) ; from pathless and inhos-
pitable deserts ; “land of pits,” full of rents and fissures, and deep, waterless valleys,
parched and unfruitful, of deadiy terrors and dangers; of “shadow of death” (s0
Sheol is named, Job x. 21), utterly solitary, offering neither path nor abode for
travellers, Instead of this heartless insensibility, we should say with David, ‘Bless

%


hee


ea:


SN a aR a ee


HoMmrLETIC COMMENTAn?L ; JEREMIAR. GHAP, Ii.





the Lord,” dc. (Ps. ciii. 1-4). (8.) They had received from God all their bleestngs
(ver. 7). They were nothing, had nothing, never gained anything by themselves
or for themselves. “What hast thou which thou hast not received?” We are
indebted to God for “all things richly to enjoy ;” and for redemption, sanctifica-
tion, and heavenly hope. “How much owest thou unto my Lord 4”

2. Base abuse of favours. Never asked after the Giver (ver. 6, 8): pros-
tituted their possessions to vile idolatrous uses (ver. 7), and handed God’s “ inheri-
tance” over to traitorous rival deities (ver. 7). rightful desecration. Comp.
Rom. vi. 1; Heb. vi. 7, 8, x. 26-29.

3. Glaring dishonour to God, who had put His glory in their charge. Selected to
show forth the praises of the Lord amid the nations, to be “holiness unto Him ;”
they had “ defiled” and “made an abomination ” (ver. 7) of sacred things. Can thia
be less than a gross injustice? Is not all sin a flagrant insult to God, a virulent
er on the very purpose of our existence, a return of hate for wondrous
love %

Ill. That apostasy is an offence of greatest criminality.

There may be an unconscious decline from religion, unintentioned. This bad,
yet not defiant and designed. But

1. Consider who they were who were guilty of tt (ver. 8). “ Priests:” Chrysostom
remarks, “See, the evil springs from the head.” Had they done their duty, the
apostasy had never become national. Their sin was heedlessness of their work.
“They said not, Where is the Lord?” “ They that handle the law,” = exponents
of the Scriptures: the preachers of those days ignored God—“knew Him not.”
“The pastors,” t.e., shepherds, temporal rulers, civil magistrates (Targum renders it
kings), these disobeyed and disregarded Jehovah’s will. ‘The prophets, who
should have listened to no voice, nor conveyed any message save Jehovah’s, con-
sulted Baal, chose an alien deity and a false inspiration (cf Luke xii. 45-48).
What is our case? Can we shelter ourselves by the plea of ignorance ?

2. Also their apostasy was deliberate and determined. Positive act: “ defiled,”
dc. (ver. 7). Negative act: “Neither said ; knew not” (ver. 8).

3, And equally insensate and insolent. Turned persistently and flauntingly from
God, and “ walked after vanity.” The Hebrew idiom, “things that do not profit”
(ver, 8), means things baleful and pernicious (Speaker's Com.). Heed 1 Sam. xii.
20, 21. Hitzig points out a climax in the guilt: the ministers of Temple worship
took no heed of God; the teachers of the law passed deliberately by the truths
they knew; the civil powers actively disobeyed the law; the prophets deserted
God entirely for a lying spirit. It is an evil and a bitter thing to sin against the
Lord. What a fall from what Israel was! Begin to sin, and where will it end ?





Ver. 9-13. Facts ror AMAZEMENT—RECKLESS DESERTION OF THE
Fount or LIrs.


Comments : :

The fidelity of Jehovah had been presented in contrast with Israel’s inconstancy
fver. 5) ; now the fidelity of the heathen is adduced, for they never “ change their
gods” (ver. 11), although they are “no gods.” How astounding, therefore, is
Israel’s guilt !

Though they might “consider diligently” (ver. 10), they would find no parallel.
Yet they might justly desert gods who “do not profit” (ver. 11); whereas, God’s
“people” had abandoned that which was “ their glory,” without hesitation of
eemorse.

“HID, glory, is the glory in which the invisible God manifested His majesty
in the world and amidst His people. God had shown His glory to the Israelites in
glorious deeds of His omnipotence and grace, like those mentioned in oy 5 and


OWAP. II. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH,





8. The Baals, on the other hand, are nothings, phantoms without a being, that
bring no help or profit to their worshippers.” —Kedl.

“Though the worship of the one true God is a nation’s greatest glory, yet it is
irksome because it puts a constraint on human passions doubly. For, first, it
requires obedience to a law revealed from above; and, secondly, it endeavours to
raise men to something higher than the mere level of human nature. Hence a
true religion awakens an antagonism in man's heart, as naturally as a false religion
pleases and soothes it.”— Speaker's Com.

“« Be astonished, O ye heavens.” ‘The greatness of the crime can be estimated
by none so well as the over-arching heavens, which can behold and compare all that
takes place.”—Lange.

“ These strongest terms in the language show how intensely amazed all the holy
in heaven are at the monstrous folly of human sinning. That when men might
have the infinite God for their friend, they choose to have Him their enemy ; might
have Him their exhaustless portion of unmeasured and eternal good, they spurn Him
away, and set themselves to the fruitless task of making some ruinous substitute :
this is beyond measure amazing! Verily, sin is the mockery of human reason | ”—
Cowles,

“The heathen are guilty of but one sin, idolatry: the covenant people commit
two, in that they abandon the true God to serve idols.”—Speaker’s Com. ‘The sin
is twofold : (1.) They do not obey the Lord; (2.) They will labour tooth and nail,
if only they may not obey Him.”—Zinzendorf.

“ Forsake the fountain,” &e. ‘ His people, who have the true religion, have the
fountain: they can (1.) obtain water without difficulty ; (2.) as much as they
want. But they substitute means which are (1.) difficult ; (2.) new; (3.) insuf-
ficient ; (4.) deceptive ; (5.) rejected on trial. Hence come the works of super-
erogation, the many ceremonies, ecclesiastical regulations, which are unquestionably
twice as dificult as to follow the Saviour ; and they have no promise for this life or
the life to come.” —Zinzendorf.

““What can quench the thirst of the soul? (1.) It cannot be quenched by
drawing from the broken cisterns of earthly good. [Though the hewn cisterns
please us better; and the cistern-water of this world is more to our taste than the
living water, the living God and His Word.—Hochstetter.] (2.) It can be quenched
only by drawing from the fountain of life, from which the soul originally sprang,
even from God.”—WNaegelsb. :

‘“‘ The dead gods have no life and can dispense no life; just as wells with rents
or fissures hold no water [and can yield none]. But living water, z.e., that origin-
ates and nourishes life, is a significant figure for God, with whom is the fountain of
life, z.e., from whose Spirit all life comes. If man forsakes the living God, he
passes, in spite of himself, into the service of dead, unreal gods. For, created by
God and for God, he cannot live without Gud.”—Xeil. Hence the labour to sub-
stitute the loss.


Ver, 14-19, Loommua DisasteRs—Tue ExTerRNaL Resvuut or Imprery.


Not only is it God’s ordinance, but an inevitable and spontaneous law, that evil
deeds work evil issues. To trifle with fire ensures burning ; to desert friends in-
volves desertion in turn ; to wound Christ inflicts wounds on conscience ; to turn
from Him as those who “know Him not” (ver. 8), will issue in the doom “TI
know you not, depart !” (Luke xiii. 27). :

I. God’s free son in unnatural slavery through sin (ver. 4). The answer to
the inquiries in an emphatic negation. Israel is Jehovah’s first-born (Exod. iv. 22);
how is it he has become a spoil? Fallen into the hands of oppressors.

1. Not born to slavery, as a serf of the soil or a child of enslaved parents,
Liberty, spiritual freedom from tyranny, the birthright of man. We are none of


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. CHAP, I,


EE





as born to thraldom to any spiritual adversary. If become slaves, because “ sold
ear birthright.”

2. Not allowed to perish in bondage. Ensnared in Egypt, the foe had them in
his power, and bitterly oppressed them. Even as the “devil led us captive at his
will” after we had yielded to his rule. But God redeemed Israel 3 us also,

3. Yet enslaved again by the spoiler, through wilful desertion of God, and
“the last state worse than the first” (Matt. xii, 25).

II. Furious adversaries lurking for Israel (ver. 15, 16). Quick to rush down
upon the prey who strays from safety. ‘ Night and day, beasts of prey, lurking, are
devouring.” (See Critical Notes, chap. ii. ; Natural History, ver. 15.)

1. Hneous of God’s heritage (ver. 15); for it is a heritage to be coveted (ver, 7).
“These two nations shall be mine,” &c. (Ezek. xxxv. 10).

2. Tharsting for destruction. ‘‘ Your adversary walketh about seeking whom he
may devour” (1 Peter v. 8).

3. Implacable in their fury (ver. 15, 16), (See Natural History on ver. 15, and
Literary Criticisms on ver. 16.) The devil “ hath great wrath” (Rev. xii. 12).

III. When God is lost false remedies are sought (ver. 18). The previous verse
shows why and how God was lost by Israel.

1. Startling ; that Israel, once redeemed by God from Egypt, should be deserting
God for Egypt ! (2 Peter ii. 19-22).

2. Admonitory ; for Israel was not confident of Egypt’s sufficiency; the night-hag
of doubt was on her heart; so she provided an alternative should Egypt fail—
Assyria. Not satisfied or sure. Wicked have no assurance, no peace.

3. Israel’s substitutes for God. These rivers (ver. 18) were to compensate the
loss of “the fountain of living waters” Israel had forsaken. The Nile was the
life-giving artery of Egypt; to drink the waters of Sihor therefore meant to
procure for herself the resources of life which Egypt possessed. So with Assyria.
For what do men forsake God ¢ (ver. 11).

IV. Sinners are the occasion of their own overthrow (ver. 17-19). The
confederacies they entered intc were the agencies of their desolation (Prov. i. 31 ;
Isa. ili. 9).

1. The, invite the enemy by abandoning God. He was their defence ; awed and
restrained their foes. But like lions they crouch (ver. 15), ready to spring upon
the prey which wandered exposed and unprotected. Sinners court destruction,
tempt the tempter.

2. They evoke God’s judgments. Though Divine punishments slumber—for God
does not desire the death of a sinner, and is slow to anger—they awake at impious
provocation (Rom. i, 18; Eph. v. 6).

3. They necessitate the penalties of apostasy. God has menaced all disobedience
and defiance with dire penalties. ‘ Now consider this,” &c. (Ps. 1. 22).

Application (ver. 19): “Know therefore and see,” ae, at last comprehend,
“that it is an evil thing and bitter,’ &c. Evil now and bitter hereafter. For
“ at last it biteth like a serpent and stingeth like an adder” (Prov. viii. 36). A
gospe! counterpoise (see Rom. v. 20, 21).


Ver, 20-29. Reriex DeGcrapations oF IDOLATRY.


Disasters come upon the impious from without, but the whole inward, personal,
spiritual debasement which idolatry effected in the apostate was the greater
calamity. Prostitution of the soul before idols, a more awful disaster than any
external degradation. ‘“O Israel! thou hast destroyed thyself,” the God-given
nature, a wreck! Sin works a twofold doom—debasement and destructiox. (For
explanation of words and similes, see Cruiea! Notes on chap. ii. above.) -

“ The sinful corruptions of humanity—(i.) Are not original (ver. 21) oe But


GHAR, IL | HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


ee


very deep (ver. 22); (iii.) They cannot-be denied away (ver. 23, 24), nor removed
by external means” (ver. 22, 25).—Waegelsb. in Lange. '

‘“‘ How ruinous a course it is to trust in a creature! (i.) On account of his
weakness he disgracefully leaves us in the hour of our need (ver. 26, 27). (ii.)
We thus insult God and lose His help (ver. 28).”—Jdem.

L From immemorial antiquity Israel had broken the yoke of the Divine law laid
upon her, and torn asunder the bands of decency and order which God’s com-
mands and ordinances put on her (ver. 20). “ Bands” are not the cords of love
with which God drew Israel (Hos, xi. 4), but the commands of God designed to
keep her within the bounds of purity and from riot in idolatry. These broken
(Jer. xxxi. 18 ; Hos. iv. 16).

Il. In this shameless prostitution to false gods Israel shows her utter corruption
(ver. 21); in her very nature as much as in her conduct,

Ul. From the defilement of her sins, not even the most powerful means of purifying
could cleanse her (ver. 22). (See Isa. i. 18; Pas. li. 4, 9.)

IV. Her degradation is the more deep in that she denies her base condition (ver. 23).
Though openly practising idolatry, she is blinded in self-righteousness. Her con-
duct is like irrational animals, yielding to sexual cravings. With unbridled desire
she abandons herself to idolatrous lust (ver. 24). ‘

V. The summons to self-restraint defiantly resisted. Advice is fruitless, for I love
the aliens (ver. 25),

VL Disgrace and desertion in the evil hour will eventually follow Israel's sin
(ver. 26-28). Shame and confusion will ensue from the frustration of her hopes
in false gods, And then to the living God whom she has long deserted she will
make appeals in vain.

VIL God will send transgressors, who seek Him in their panic, back to the gods for
whom they rejected Him (ver. 28, 29). Israel had gods enough (ver. 28); ought
therefore to be satisfied and secure! Trouble will test Israel’s hopes, and the
worth of her idols, God will not accept any pleading (ver. 29), or regard “ conten-
tion” from those who tgnored and deserted Him in their “day of salvation.”"—
Arranged from Keil,


Ver. 30-37. Arrzotina ExpostuLaTiIoNs—INCORRIGIBLE [MPENITENUB


When man quarrels with God, the fault is always un the side of man (Pa
li. 6). For

i God chastises us, but we do not obey (ver. 30).

2. He bestows on us vast blessings, yet we do not adhere to Him (ver. 31).

3. He makes us partakers of the highest glory, yet we reject it with disdain
(ver. 32).— Waegsb.

An unjust imputation repelled by Jehovah (ver. 31). To an ingenuous mind
' God never appears so irresistible as when He addresses His creatures in the lan-
guage of tender expostulation. Christians treat God as a wilderness—

1. When they are reluctant to serve Him.

2, When they seek their happiness in the world [away from God}. The ground
of complaint is in them, not in Him.—Payson.

Who is it thus vindicates His own character? Jehovah Himself. Answer the
ehallenge given and the charge brought against you.

I His appeal in answer to charges brought against Him

[For ver. 29 shows Israel chiding (not pleading) with God.]

1. Was He to the Jews a wilderness or a land of darkness? Rescued them from
wilderness (ver. 6). Himself met their every want, and gave them full and peaceful
possession of the promised land (Deut. xxxii. 10-14; Neh. ix. 21-25).

2. Has He tw Hts conduct to us deserved any such humiliating imputation? We

40


ae a NT iced aw ee la


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY : JEREMIAR. GmaP, H





passing through wilderness: lacked ye anything? “No good thing withhold.”
Given Son, Spirit ; shown kindness and care. Charges against His liberality alto-
gether false (Isa. v. 3, 4).


Il. God ts vindicated ; but hear His charge against you. He complains, and


justly, of—


1. The flagrancy of man’s rebellion. Tsrael,= “ We are lords,” d&e. (ver. 31).
You also affected independence. Satan’stemptation. “Ye shall be as gods” (Gen


iii. 5).


Independence is the very essence of the Fall (Rev. iii. 17). Shown our


selves proud, daring, impious, self-sufficient rebels.


2. The contemptuousness of man’s neglect.
We have forgotten—(a.) Our obligations to Him. (b.) Our depen


His mercies.


“Forgotten Him” (ver. $2) after al


dence on Him. (c.) The great account we have to give Him. By our engrossing
attention to trifles (ver. 32) we “ provoke God to jealousy.”
(a.) Refrain from vindwating yourselves (ver. 35); Hos. v. 5; Isa, xxviii. 5.


Ponder the assertion (Prov. xxviii. 13).


(8.) Humble yourselves for your guilt. Then be encouraged, for God’s goodness
was Israel’s hope (Deut. vii. 7, 8), and His love and mercy avail you (Isa i 18).


—Rev. C. Simeon, M.A.


HOMILIES AND OUTLINES ON SELECTED VERSES OF CHAPTER II.


Ver. 2. Theme: AN UNFORGOTTEN
past. Text: “I remember thee.”


As we advance in life—

1. We may, as Israel did, leave the
best things we once possessed tn the rear.
We may acquire more outward sub-
stance ; Israel did (ver. 7); may amass
more, yet we may lose our early sweet-
ness of character, ardour of piety, sanc-
tity of conscience. And

2. We commonly do lose all recollec-
tion of those better days. We allow
them to die from thought; perhaps
helplessly so: it may be we prefer it
should. There is a pang in memories
of days when we were better, though
we had less.

L The unfading memory of God.
“J remember.”

Not only as a necessity that a mind
which is infinite should be incapable of


forgetting, but as a voluntary and tnten-


tioned act.

1. Our habits are forgetful. The
past glides from us, will it or not.
Much of the good which the past held,
and of the good we did, fades from re-
collection; and alas! much of the evil
becomes lost to memory. Each wave of
time rolling in upon the shore oblite-
rates the former wave. What oblitera-
tions occur in life! What erasures
from memos; !


2. Yet no part of our life és lost.
Gone from us, and from our recalling,
but not from God. Nothing we have
been or done fades from the mind of
Jehovah. All things lie in His im-
perishable thoughts. “God is not un-
righteous to forget” either the good or
evil which the past contains; else how
could He judge our years, and recom.
pense our life?

3. He remembers our life tn tts relt-
gious aspects. For that is the only
cognisance God takes of our existence.
Though He cares for us and ministers te
us temporally, as to Israel (ver. 6, 7),
He regards our life in its spiritual bear-
ings, estimates its religious qualities,
looks for the moral and sacred elements,
not the mere material accidents of
human existence. We may think much
of our affairs ; God, of our condition;
we, of our circumstances and expert
ences; God, of the state the soul is in
and the aspects of our life religiously
What does God think of our past?

It. The memory of God lingers
fondly over what is good in our life.

There are persons with keen recollec-
tions of ankindly and condemnatory in-
cidents ; their memories are storehouses
of corruptions. Morally, they have bad
memories, The morbid remember all
that is evil of themselves; the malig:
nant, all that is evil of api 2


OH4P, IE,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





1. The Divine memory is benignant
(ver. 2). “I remember thee,” is liter-
ally to thy account. God keeps the
good of our life in thought:

a, For tts own sake. He loves every-
thing good. Too precious, and alas!
too scarce, to be allowed to slip from
thought.

6. For our sake. He loves us for the
good ; it makes us dearer to Him; it is
His seal upon us, “His image and
superscription ” (1 Tim. ii 19).

2. The good of our life may all lie in
the past. It did with Israel. The time
of “youth” was the best time. Alas!
“her goodness was as the morning
cloud and the early dew, which goeth
away.” Had God limited His attention
to the present state of the nation, what
a changed order of things! (ver. 11-13).
Oh, sad that so full a blossoming should
issue in such barrenness and dearth.
“Our youth” is too often the purest
and brightest era of our life. Let the
mature compare themselves now with
themselves then. Nothing sordid,
grasping, subtle, withered, defiled ; but
manhood and womanhood, how deter-
iorated and devastated! Let the aged
review the promise of youth.


‘* Heaven lies about us in our infancy!

Shades of the prison-house begin to close
Upon the growing boy;

But he beholds the light, and whence it flows;
He sees it in his joy:

The youth, who daily farther from the east

Must travel, still is Nature’s priest,

And by the vision splendid
Is on his way attended:

At length the man perceives it die away,

And fade into the light of common day.”

— WoRDSWORTH.


If, therefore, God is to remember sin-
cere goodness, He must look to our
early years. How generous and gra-
cious He who seeks not our sins, but our
few poor, short-lived virtues!

III. The memory of God lingers over
the good of our life for our advantage.

1. Not that a past religious life can
exonerate present sinfulness, It did not
Israel ; nor can it deliver any soul from
the consequences of degeneracy (Ezek.
xxxiii, 12, &.).

2. Yet tt allures the Divine tenderness
and grace (Mark x. 20, 21).

42


3. And God does not lightly esteem
the fact of our former relationship of
love with Himself. He loves still,
though we may have declined. He
yearns over the child though a prodigal,
and would fain reinstate him in His
grace. God is specially pathetic and
pleading with those who have formerly
been His. He cannot reconcile Him-
self to their alienation and loss,

4. If any return to their first love,
He will remember to thetr account all
the zeal and attachment they formerly
showed.

How encouraging this to spiritual de-
linquents! “Come, and let us returp
to the Lord,” &c. (Hos. vi. 1-4).

Ver. 2, 3. “Every important histo
rical appearance has its paradise or
golden age, as now with Israel (ver. 2,
3). It is thus with humanity in gene-
ral, with the Christian Church (Acts. ii.
41—iv. 37), with the Reformation, so
also with indimdual Churches (Gal. iv
14) and with individual Christians.
This period of first nuptial love does
not, however, usually continue long
(Rev. ii. 4).

I. The joyous period of first love.

1. In experience extremely precious,

2. In duration relatively brief.

3. In effect a source of everlasting
blessing.

II. The nuptial state of Christ's Chureh
tn its stages.

1. The first stage, love.

2. The second stage, alienation. (Ad-
denda to chap. ii. 2.)

3. The third stage, return.

III. The covenant of Christ with His
Church.

1. Its ground, election.

2. Its condition, faith.

3. Its promise, the Church an inde-
structible sanctuary.— WVaeg. in Lange.


Ver. 1-13. Theme: The evil nature
of that sin which is committed after our
conversion to God.


Four things observable which aggra-
vate the offence :

I. Committed in violation of solemn
vows and covenant engagements.

Conversion is a marriage, wherein
Christ resigns Himself, with all He is


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.








and has, to us; and we resign our-
selves, with all we are and have, to
Christ. “Thy vows, O God, are upon
me.”

The love we then bore to Him =the
love of our espousals. At that time we
took Christ’s cause for our cause, His
people for ours, His will for our law,
His glory for our end, and Himself for
our portion. Did we love Him two well
then? If prince espouse poor outcast,
give himself and all he has to her, only
requiring her heart in return, shall she
refuse him that, grow first dissatisfied,
and go after other lovers? “O my
soul! thou hast said unto the Lord,
Thou art my Lord.”

ll. Departures from God have been
without any provocation whatever on His
part (ver, 5),

This question ought to open every
spring of sensibility and self-abhorrence.

1. Was He wanting in forbearance
when we were in rebellion ?

2. Did He aet unfeelingly when we
were ruined, in that He gave His own
Son to die for us?

3. Has He been a hard Master since
we entered His service? Himself ever
a wilderness to us, or ebedtence a barren
path }

4. Has He been a churlish Father to
us? Ever refuse us free access, or
give us a stone ?

5. When we have returned to Him
with our whole heart, has He not al-
ways been ready to receive us, and bury
all in forgetfulness? (Dan. ix. 7).

III. Sins after conversion show pecultar
and horrible ingratitude (ver. 6-8). God
has not done the self-same thing for us
as for Israel ; but

1. He has given, not Egypt or
Ethiopia for our ransom, but His own


2. Has redeemed us, not from Egyp-
tian thraldom, but “from the power of
darkness, and translated us into the
kingdom of His dear Son.”

3. We never supported by miracles
in lonesome deserts of Arabia, but
“having obtained help of God, we
continue.”

4, Did not possess Canaan, but “ God
hath provided some better things for us.”


O#AP, Ti.





Our blessings abundantly transcend
theirs, and lay us under far greater
obligations. To have slighted and dis.
honoured a God of such love as this is
indeed the greater sin.

IV. Such departures from God are
expressive of the most extreme and singular
folly (ver. 9-13).

We should so judge of a people who
removed their tents from an overflowing
fountain and settled in a parched desert,
there to trust to hewed cisterns.

1. It is an exchange, and a foolish
one ; of liberty for drudgery, peace for
remorse, joyfulness for anguish, abund-
ance for penury and misery.

2. It is singular folly (ver. 10, 11).
Israel, the only people in the world
having a God worth cleaving to, must be
the only people desiring a change. The
people of the only true God alone prove
untrue !

This not more extreme and singular
than owr folly when we shun God and
fly for happiness to sensual and carnal
gratification, —Andrew Fuller.


Ver. 5. Theme: HEAVEN'S APPEAL
TO THE SINNER.


I. The sinner is Divinely described.
“They are gone far from Me, and have
walked after vanity.”

1. Sin ts departure from God. Aliena-
tion of sympathy and soul.

2. Sin ts a progress of vanity. ‘An
idol is nothing in the world” (1 Cor.
viii 4). Everything about a sinner’s
life is vain. Sin is going from the real
to the unreal.

(1.) The pleasures he seeks are un-
satisfactory ; all empty, and cutside him.

(2.) The honours he aspires to are
unreal; neither enrich nor ennoble the
soul,

IL. The sinner is Divinely challenged.
“What iniquity found in Me?”

1. Implies that if iniquity were found
in God, there would be some justification

for apostasy on the sinner’s part.

2. That the discovery of such imsguity
ts an absolute impossibility. There are
three revelations of God, and each
shows Him of absolute perfection.

(1.) Nature. Reflected in the uni
verse, God is perfect. ;

4


OHAP, KZ





(2.) Biography of Christ. Perfect
grace, perfect truth,

(3.) The moral soul. They declare
God is perfect. All men feel bound to
love Him; indicates innate belief in
His perfection.

No being in the universe can find
iniquity in God. Could hell find it,
its agony would be mitigated, if not
removed.—Homalist.

Comments :

Ver. 8. Since priests, pastors, and
prophets, who have been regularly in-
ducted into office, may be deceivers, it is
necessary to try the spirits according to
the criterion given in 1 John iv. 1, ag.
— Lange.

Ver. 9. Their ancestors, themselves,
and their descendants, constitute a
unity—(1.) In moral guilt. (2.) In per-
sistent backsliding. Ergo, (3). In con-
sequent penalty.

Ver. 11. “ Changed their glory.” (See
Addenda to chap. ii, 11.) ‘“ Gods no
gods.”

1. Israel had no glory, dignity, or
renown of her own (Deut. vii. 7).

2. She had derived from Jehovah all
the glory she ever possessed (Deut. iv.
32-38).

3. God Himself was Israel's crown of
glory and beauty (Ps. evi. 20; Rom. i
23).

re The Shekinah, shining upon and
filling with splendour the sanctuary, was
the glorious symbol of God’s presence with
Israel (1 Kings viii. 11 ; of. Rom. ix. 4).

5. Idolatry endeavoured to materialise
that ethereal symbol of God; golden calf
(Exod, xxxii, 2-5), glittering, brilliant !

6. The substitution of profitless idols
for Jehovah surrendered all Israel's glory,
and left her baser than when God found
her (Deut. xxviii, 15-29).


Ver. 12, 13. Theme: Two astouND-
ING Evits. (See Literary Criticisms,
ver. 12.)


To forsake God does not mean de-
parture from His presence nor escape
from His rule, but moral alienation of
eoul.

I. The force of human freedom.

Mightiest rivers cannot break from
their source, nor greatest planets from

44


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAB,





their centre, but man can from centre
and fountain of his being,

1. This freedom ts a matter of personal
consciousness, This is the invincible
and ultimate argument re human respon-
sibility; men feel they are uncoerced
and free.

2. This freedom invests human exie-
tence with transcendent «importance,
Makes them members of the great moral
empire of the universe.

II. The enormity of human wicked-
ness.

1. What ingratitude. 2. What injus
tice. 3. What tmprtety.

Itt. The egregiousness of human
folly :

1. In withdrawing from the satisfying
to toil for the unsatisfying.

2. In withdrawing from the abundant
to tcil for the scanty, Well may the
heavens be “amazed and horrified” at
the freedom, iniquity, and folly which
they witness every age and every day,
developed in the history of our race.—
Homuilist.

Comments :

Ver. 14. Hichhorn thinks the prophet
here proposes to Judah, as yet spared,
the case of Israel (the captive ten tribes),
as @ warning of what they might expect
if they confided in Egypt: “ Was Israel
of meaner birth than Judah? Nay;
yet if Israel fell before Assyria, could
Judah hope a better fate from Egypt!”
But the two parts of the nation are not
separated in the prophet’s thought and
address (cf. ver. 13, 18, 36).

It is an inquiry ; How comes it that
the nation which is not a slave by
birth, being “ Jehovah’s son, His first-
born” (Exod. iv. 22), is to suffer the
miseries of slavery ?

Speaker’s Com., however, renders it:
If Israel is a slave, he is home-born, and
hence held in respect (Gen. xiv. 14),
may expect kindness as well as protec-
tion. Cannot Jehovah guard His own
household? How happens it that a
member of so powerful a family is
spoiled? Next verse gives the reason;
Israel is a runaway slave, deserted the
family to which he belonged ; hence his
trouble and misery. By leaving his


master’s nouse he bas exposed himself


=_—


~~ —_-
\e





ee ee eae ES ae


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY ;: JEREMIAH,





to the beasts of prey in the wilderness
(ver. 15).


Theme: ISRAEL'S SLAVERY AN EMBLEM


‘OF THE UNIVERSAL HUMAN SLAVERY


OF SIN.


1. In both it is not original. 2. Is
self-incurred. 3. Is severely punished.
4. The punishment is the means of
salvation (since it shows sin is ruin-
ous, and godliness is life and peace).—
Naegelsbach.

Ver. 16. “If God wishes to chastise
His people, He usually employs the
ungodly for this purpose (Deut. xxviii.
49, 50); and it often happens that
injury and destruction come upon the
ungodly from those from whom they
have promised themselves the greatest
help.”—Starke, (See Literary Critr
cisms, ver. 16.)


Ver. 1f. Theme: RecHLESS DESER-
TION OF THE RIGHT WAY.


Suggests a retrospect. Look well
over your life and mark your career ;
the points at which you forsook God.
Suggests also a calamity. How are
your present misery and terror to be
accounted for? Examples: Youth with
wasted constitution. Merchant suddenly
bankrupt. “ Brought it all on himself.”
Man is too ready to blame others,
emphatically God, for his misfortunes.
Text finds the cause of our personal,


social, and sptritual disasters nearer


home.

I. There is a gracious way wherein
Jehovah leads.

Through Arabian desert went with
Israel. But a way of life is meant.

1. This may not approve itself to the
unregenerate,

2. Yet it is a path of pleasantness
and holy joy to the godly.

3. Along it the footsteps of God, the
preaence of Emmanuel, are realised and
enjoyed.

4, Attended by the Lord Himself
he pilgrim traverses this living way,
which leads away from bondage into
blessed privilege and eternal rest.
(See Addenda to chap. ii. 17.)

How blessed, and safe, and favoured
that life which has Jesus ever with it





all the way; the life which is ordered
80 as to please Him, and never lead Him
to depart, a loyal career of piety and love:

Ii. Man betrays a fatal refractori-
ness, and deserts the gracious way.
Youth, though trained in “ wisdom’s
ways,” forsakes them for sin. Even re-
ligious persons turn aside from the Lord
and wander. Hence:

l. The criminality of those who desert
God. “The Lord thy God.”

2. The circumstances under which re-
fractoriness asserts itself. “‘ When He led
thee.” Not when God seemed distant
or angry.

3. The course which this refractori-
ness pursued. ‘‘ Thou hast forsaken the
Lord.” Not fell back in the way be-
cause it was difficult to follow; but an
entire and wilful leaving the path for
another.

III. Sinners accomplish their own
overthrow by their wilful impiety.
‘Thou hast procured this for thyself.”
(See Literary Criticisms, ver. 17.)

1, The way led from evil to good (ver.
6, 7).

2. Outside the way perils and foes
lurked for “ prey ” (ver. 15).

3. Leaving the way forfeited God's
guidance and protection.

4. The end of transgression is doom
(Matt. vii. 13).

Ruin is entasled, not sent; doom is
the natural issue of evil; the guilty
perish as the inevitable outcome of
wrong. They had, therefore, to “ bear
their own iniquity,” and to blame them-
selves for their woes (Ezek, xxxiii. 11).


Ver. 19.
ISHMENT.
I. In the dealings of God with good
men.
1. Neglect secret devotion, and God
will refuse His blessing on other means


Theme: SIN ITS OWN PUN-


-of grace.


2. Indulge sceret sin, and God will
bring that sin into open light and con-
demnation.

3. Idolise created good, God will take
from us our idol, or make it a plague
to us.

4. Act with faithlessness to others,
God will permit us to suffer ge the


GHAP. I.


HOMILETIO CUMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





treachery of others ; as Jacob’s subtlety


with Esau came back in Laban’s treat-
ment of him.

5. Undutifulness to parents punished
by the defiance of our own children.

6. Indifference as to home piety
returned upon us in the irreligion of
those in the home. Eli’s sons.

IL In the dealings of God with wicked
men.

1. Those who resent religious per-
suasions and strive to stifle conviction
are deprived of godly parents and
friends, and left to a fatal peace.

2. Those who repel the Gospel because
of its humiliating truths are allowed to
“believe a lie and be damned, because
they have pleasure in unrighteous-
ness.”

3. In death and judgment, the punish-
mert of the sinner will reflect his sin.
He who had said to Christ, “‘ Depart, I
desire not the knowledge of Thy ways,”
will hear his own word again, “DE-
PART!*

The essence of misery in that world

will consist in recollection, Then will
“our wickedness reprove us.”
_ Application: How dreadful a thing
sin is in all its operations! He who
indulges in it kindles a fire that will
burn himself. “Be sure your sin will
find you out.”

There is no radical cure but contri-
tion and the Cross.—A. Fuller.

i. The nature of sin: forsaking the
Lord as our -G'od.

ii, The cause of sin:
fear is not in us.

iii, The malignity of sin: it ¢s an evil
and bitter thing.

iv. The fatal consequences of sin:
forsaking the Lord = without God.

v. The use and application of all this:
repent of thy sin.—-M. Henry.

Ver. 20. I. The sacred yoke of God.
(See Addenda to chap. ii. 20, “ Yoke.”)

1. The Lord’s yoke is easy (Matt.
xi. 29); yet

2. It seems intolerable to our flesh ;
nevertheless

3. Heartrending sacrifices and suffer-
ings are the substitutes we procure for
ourselves in its stead, Children given
to Moloch, and infliction of self-torture

46


because His





(1 Kings xviii. 28). This, rather thaz
renounce carnal freedom and bow to the
chastisement of the Spirit.

II. Zhe sacred yoke refused. The
endeavour to cast that yoke off:

1. An ancient one. The angels’ re
volt ; man’s fall; Israel’s apostasy.

2. A ruinous one. For (a.) It de
prives us of true freedom ; and (6.) It
renders us the servants of powers hostile
to God and destructive to ourselves.—
Arranged from LANGE.


Ver. 22. Theme: FUTILE sELF-
OLEANSING. (See Critical Notes, Natu-
ral History, ver. 22; and Addenda to
chap. ii. 22, “ Iniquity ts marked.”)

I. Sinners make vigorous efforts at
external cleansing.

1. Driven thereto by remorse or ap-
prehension.

2. Under a powerful impulse towards
improvement ; or

3. As a compromise with conscience ;
balancing inward evil by outward good.

IL Approved and promising means
may be adopted. As here:

1. Rationalism prescribes its ‘‘nitre”
of culture and respectability.

2. Sacerdotalism recommends ita
“soap” of confession, penance, gifts te
the Church, vows of chastity, &.

3. Self-righteousness urges more
“washing,” tithes and phylacteries, and
prayers ; that “‘the outside of the cup
and the platter” may be clean; ‘for
the Pharisees wash oft.”

III. All this without any true ap-
preciation of holiness. For that would
denote loathing of sin and of self, which
God accepts, and is the beginning of re-
demption.

1. Israel was not resolved on purify-
ing herself. There was much ado about
reformation, cleansing Temple, because
Josiah was resolute; but she still loved
sin (ver. 25).

2. The outward effort ts impotent when
without heart. There may be ostenta
tious vigour, but it is the tnward long-
ing and purpose which give effect to ac-
tion. “The Lord looketh not on out
ward appearance, but searcheth the
heart.”

3. Cleansing without holiness is self


SS ae


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


———


GaP. BH.





deception and abhorrent. It is the
devil’s piety, a whited wall, a delusion
to man, and detestable to God (Luke
xvi. 15).

IV, Therefore the guilt remains
deep and immovable.

1. For the sin itself is not superficial,
but inherent.

2. Superficial cleansing does
touch the seat of evil.
heart proceeds evil,” &c.

3. Till sin is loathed it cannot be re-
moved. It is incarcerated within us,
protected against remedies.

4, It thus lies under God’s eye an in-
delible stain.

Let the “soul abhor ttself, and repent
in dust and ashes ;” and lo! there stands
ready a Saviour, “the propitiation for
our sins,’ “mighty to save ;” who, if
the sinner will but cry to Him, “Lord,
save, I perish !” will answer, “ Thy sins,
which are many, are all forgiven thee!”
“Though your sins be as scarlet,” &.
(Isa. i. 18).


Ver. 23. Theme: WHAT HAST THOU
pone? Text: “See thy way in the
valley ; know what thou hast done.”


God undertakes to expostulate with
His people. He finds them priding
themselves on, and surrounding them-
selves with, an edifice of self-righteous-
ness, a refuge of lies.

How does God confute this self-
righteousness! By simply pointing to
bare fact. The prophet takes Israel up
to the summit of the hill, and points


not
“For out of the


down to the valley of Jehoshaphat, to


the sight of all those idolatrous em-
blems and monuments scattered pro-
fusely there. God lays hold of Israel,
as it were, and says, “ How canst thou
say, I am not polluted? See thy way,”
&c. Those stones cry out against thee,
those smouldering fires down there,
through which your children passed,
are indications of the guilt which has
brought darkness and judgment down
upon the nation.

T challenge you to take a general new
of your past life. ‘See thy way ; know
what thou hast done.”

1. Look at your life tm the light of
God’s Divine purpose. God sent you





into the world with a noble destiny ;
to reflect His glory and scatter heavenly
blessings. He gave thee a body to be a
temple of the Holy Ghost: what hast
thou done? Desecrated that sacred shrine.
Gave thee an intelligence to know Him;
but He has not been in thy thoughts: a
heart to glow with Divine love; but it
only glows under the blighting breath
of sin,

2. In the light of your social position,
and the circumstances by which you have
been surrounded. God has given some
position, wealth, business: what done
with it? God asks it, but you return
Nabal’s answer (1 Sam. xxv. 11).

3. In the light of the responsibtlities of
the domestic relationship. God has made
you a member of a family. Parents,
negligent of souls of your children, con-
cerned more for their social prospects,
is prayer ever heard among your chil-
dren? What hast thou done? Trained
thy children for hell,

4, In the light of your relationship to
the best and tenderest of fathers. What
done to your Father in heaven? Pro-
digal son. That is how God’s mercy is
treated ; waste Divinely-given substance
in selfishness and sin. What hast thou
done? Turned thy back on thy Father's
love, spurned His offers of mercy, and
deafened thine ear against His call.

5. In the light of the tender dealings
of the Holy Spirit of God. You can
remember in childhood and youth how
that Spirit strove with you. In those
early days there was, at times, a
strange overshadowing, a Voice that
seemed to say, “‘Come!” It was the
Holy Spirit who longed to win you
What hast thou done to that Holy
Spirit of God? “Ye do always resist
the Holy Ghost.”

6. In the light of your relationships
with Him, who, because He loved you,
was content to hang as your substitute
upon the cross of shame. I plead for
Him. I hold Him up crucified before
you. What hast thou done to that blood
of His? Infatuated Jews cried, ‘ His
blovud be on us and our children!” and
it fell as showers of judgment. “Is it
nothing to you, all ye that pass by?”
Have you taken home to hae the


a





message, “The blood of Jesus Christ
cleanseth from all sin;” and looked
up with eyes of gratitude to your
Saviour’s face, and said, “O my
Saviour ! Thy blood was shed for me, for
me, for me?” — Aitken,


Ver. 24. Theme: SEuF-virpicaTiIna
SINNERS REPROVED.


Circumstances under which we sin
aggravates the guilt. Mercies received
by us; resolutions they have prompted ;
degree of our degeneration; all are
marked by God. But one evil tran-
ascends all others, a self-justifying spirit ;
this is pre-eminently offensive to the
Divine Majesty.

I. The self-vindicating ways of sin-
ners.

It might be supposed that, when
men’s iniquities are so visible, they
would fall under the accusation and
humble themselves before God. In-
stead, they justify themselves against
the charge: some

1. In a way of direct denial ; as Cain
(Gen. iv. 9, and text).

2. In a way of vain excuse; as Saul
(1 Sam. xv. 13-15).

3. In a way of hypocritical palliation ;
as Adam and Eve (Gen. iii, 11-13),

II. God substantiates His charge
against His offending people.

However we may justify ourselves,
God will set before us the things that
we have done (Ps, lL. 21):

1. By an appeal to fact. “See thy
way in the valley; know what thou hast
done.” Not discovered by “secret
search” (ver. 34); it is done without
concealment. So, look at your whole
lives, one continued scene of rebellion
against God. All your very religion a
shadow, full of shameful unreality and
slips. What palliations can exonerate}

2. By a most apt comparison. (See
Critical Notes, Natural History, Literary
Criticisms, above ; also Addenda, ver. 23.)
Dromedary and wild ass, when seeking
their mate, are so bent upon attainment
of their desire, that efforts to catch them
are vain; no one will weary himeelf
with so fruitless a labour. But when
their time of pregnancy has advanced they
fall comparatively an easy prey to the

An


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





pursuer. So to little purpose that you
are followed with invitations and en-
treaties: you “will not hear voice of
charmer, charm he never so wisely.”

Application: There 1a a time when we
may hope to prevail over sinners. “ In
her month” (ver. 24). Happy if yon
have become “ weary and heavy laden ”
with your sins, and will be led back te
God. “Only acknowledge thine ini-
quity” (iii, 13). Come burdened to
Jesus, and He will “give you rest”
(1 John i. 8, 9).— Simeon.

Ver. 25. Comments.

Schmidt interprets the words “ With-
hold thy foot,” &c., as being led barefoot
away into captivity, the penalty of
apostasy. Hiteg thinks the reference is
to penances performed barefoot to idols,
and the thirst the result of vociferous in-
vocations. Htchhorn regards it as re-
ferring to idolatrous acts, viewed as those
of a lewd person, who both exposes her-
self and cries out for paramours. Um-
briet, = God entreats Israel as His bride
to refrain from rushing like an adultress,
barefoot, and with parched throat, after
strangers.

The natural meaning: Abstain from
incontinence (idolatry); do not s0
shamelessly pursue lovers, nor thirst
after sexual intercourse. (See Literary
Criticisms on ver. 28.)

“ There is no hope,” &e. “The plea
of despair is not half honest ; it is taken
up as an apology for rushing madly and
headlong into sin.” —Covwles.

Ver. 26. If “kings and princes” are
authorised to determine a nation’s reli-
gion, and “ priests and prophets” to lord
it over individual conscience and judg-
ment, why, then, this people was not to
blame. Piety, if left to their imperious
care,-would soon fall into a lamentable
plight. Let each man be his own
“king” and “ priest” religiously ; “be
fully persuaded in his own mind,” and
act as he knows God requirea.—(See
Addenda to chap. ii. ver. 26, “ Kings and
priests.”’)

Ver. 27. “Trouble” is a fine self
revealer, and a faithful witness for God
Pleasure and prosperity act on men as opi
ates, lull and befool them ; but affliction
and trouble are quick reatoratives ; they





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH,


—eeEe——eEeEeEeEE——— eae


bring men to their senses. (See Ad-
denda to chap. ii. ver. 27, “ Trouble.”)

Ver. 28. 1. Shame is the only gain of
impiety ; it eventually covers us with
confusion.

2. Subterfuges for God will be an
encumbrance and a torture to us when
we find out our stupidity and their use-
lessness.

3. We shall want a helper to “arise
and save” in the evil times which are
coming. May our hope not make us
ashamed !

4. Necessity teaches men to pray ; but
it is a desperate thing to be calling upon
“vanities” in the day of our dismay.

5. God may send back pleaders to
their cherished delusions, Then will
they know themselves as “having no
hope, and without God in the world.”

Ver. 30. “In vain have I smitten you.”
God deals two different strokes, one for
grace, another for justice ; to save, or to
afflict; to convert, or to make sinners
know their crime.

The smiting was by God’s prophets,
whose words are the “rod of His
mouth,” and fall with different effects on
men, according as they “hear or for
bear,” proving a “ savour of life” to some,
and “of death” to others.

This smiting by the prophets with
‘the sword of the Spirit ” was answered
by their smiting the prophets with the
material sword of slaughtering revenge
(1 Kings xviii. 13; Neb. ix. 26; Matt.
xxiii. 37). (See Literary Criticisms,
ver. 30.)

1. To accept chasttsement, sent by
word or deed, is a sign of wisdom (Prov.
vill. 10; of. Heb. xii. 9).

2. To profit by tt requires that we
enter into the Divine purpose and re-
spond (Heb. xii. 5, 10). (See Addenda
to chap. ii. ver. 30, “ Correction.”)

Ver. 31. ‘“‘Where God bestows most
benefits, there He receives the least grati-
tude.”—Forster. God is “a desert” to
none. This is true—l. Jn reference to all
men (comp. Matt. v. 45). (a.) He regards
their bodily wants. (6.) He provides for
and seeks their spiritual good. 2. He was
always a fruitful land %o Israel. (a.)
When He blessed them and punished
the heathen, (b,) When He blessed the

D


OMAP. Ii.





heathen and punished them. (¢.) Even
when He allowed the Church of Christ
to pass from the Jews to the heathen,—
From Homilies on Jeremiah, by Jerome,
quoted in Lange.

What an attitude of graceless defiance
and antagonism this for man to assume !
1. We refuse the Divine control com-
pletely. ‘We are lords,” ¢.¢., ramble
unrestrained. 2. We are determined
never to return to the Lord. ‘We will
come no more unto Thee,” It is an idle
boast. (1.) Mone can escape God's con-
trol (cf. Acts xvii. 28; Heb. ix. 27)
(2.) Hvery soul must come back to God
(Rom. xiv. 10-12). Who then shall
stand before Him? (See Literary Cri-
ticisms, ver. 31.

Ver. 32. (See Critical Notes, Manners
and Customs, ver. 32.)

1, The world’s trifles are esteemed
more than God’s graces.

2. Adornment of the person engrosses
more time and thought than enriching -
the soul. :

3. God receives worse treatment
from frivolous worldlings than their
paltry trinkets. They preserve and prize
them; but “God is not in all their
thoughts.”

Ver. 33. Fine irony. How good thou
makest thy way / = amendest (cf. chap. vii.
3, 5), in order to gain love. To succeed
in wickedness, to live immorally, necessi-
tates no little study, self-accommodation,
and effort. Evil costs more pains than
godliness, and requites with penalties.

Ver. 35. ‘‘Obstinate impenitence. (1.) It
is blind to its own guilt. (2.) Blas-
phemes God by accusing Him of unjust
anger. (3.) Will not escape just punish-
ment.”—Naeg. in Lange.

i. Self-justification. ii. Delusive hope.
iii. Divine testing. iv, Certain refuta-
tion.

Ver. 36, 37. Fear, defeat, failure.

I. Fearful lest her confidences should
fail, the soul anxiously multiplies human
reliances ; “‘gaddest about so much to
change her way;” to make sure of
Egypt when Assyria seems declining.

IL. Dishonoured by this desertion of
Him for other “confidences,” God will
defeat her human hopes. ‘The Lord
hath rejected thy confidences ‘ vas


Omar. i, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIA.








ee — ————


them); “thou shalt not prosper in ing failureand shame. “Thou shalt ge

them.” forth from him” (from thence), ‘thine
III. All contrivances to prevent herself hands upon thine head.” (See Critical

being left desolate issue in overwhelm- Notes, Manners and Customs, ver. 37.)


NOTICEABLE TOPICS IN CHAPTER II.


Topic: Eagty Prety tHe Beauty or Youru. Test: “I remember the kindness
of thy youth” (ver. 2).


Introduction. The sacred grace of bygone days made Israel lovely in God’s remem-
brance. The religious earnestness of the young ruler secured for him this—“ Jesus
looking upon him, loved him.” Young lives consecrated tothe Lord are sure of Heaven’s
approval and blessing. (See Addenda, chap. ii. ver. 2, “ Ptety the beauty of youth.”)

I. A picture of a beautiful youth.

A portrait hangs on your wall; you say, ‘“‘A lovely face!” But something
more beautiful and valuable than “‘ good looks.” What? The character, virtues,
life. God would not estimate by Jooks, appearance. He wants “the ornament of
a meek and quiet spirit.” See what Scripture says about appearance as compared
with the inward spiritual qualities (1 Pet. iii, 4). Israel’s youth had not been
vitiated by sin; it was given up to God in its freshness and beauty. Shall yours
be? God says of it that it was—l. Full of kindness (to Him). 2. Secretly loving
and clinging.  Espousals: went after me.” Jesus asks each, “ Zovest thou me?”
* Follow me.’

II. An eye that fondly gazes on it.

What loving eyes, of mother, father, look often on that Bet on the wall! ~s
remember thee.” God could not draw His gaze off from that picture of Israel’s
early piety. Oh, how God lingers with eyes of tender regard over each youthful
life, specially over those who are early His! “TI love them that love Me, and those
who seek Me early shall find Me.” 1. God had Himself formed and graced this
youth with beauty. He was a Father to Israel, and all her loveliness was derived
from Him. So all our goodness is His gracious work. 2. God cherished Israel as
being peculiarly precious (Deut. vii. 6-8). Oh, what hopes a father entertains aber
his child ; what dove he lavishes !

TI. A special desire to preserve it.

Nothing, no one, must be allowed to injure that much-prized portrait. So God
laid penalties against all who should touch or damage Israel (ver. 3). For—l.
There was no equal in the world. Ali the world was idolatrous, but ‘“ Israel was holi-
ness.” Think what it must be for an only child to be lost. God does not want to
lose you, a.é., your youth, your piety. He asks that your religion be preserved. It
is an incomparably precious jewel. Your character is the best thing about you;
that gone, you are nothing to God. 2. It could not be replaced. Youth once gone
never can be recalled. Youthful piety cannot be recalled once lost. You may
return to God later in life, but the best part of you would then be wanting. A
flower with its leaves falling off is not so beautiful as the opening bud.

IV. A dreadful peril threatening it.

Precious things always seem most in danger. A portrait not valued would never
get damaged ; but that one precious thing, why, everything seems to threaten it,
There are dreadful perils menacing a godly youth. 1. Offensive enemies (ver. 3,
“ offend”) 2. Mumerous enemies (“all that devour”). 3. Destructive enemies
(“devour”). Remember him who “seeketh whom he may devour” (1 Pet, v. 16;
of. Matt, xviii. 6, 7). Think how Israel was spoiled (ver. 14). We need the
preserving care of Jesus, He can «ceep us in safety, and guard our souls from the
spoiler (1 Tim. i, 12).

50





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIA, CHAP. fi


Topic: Distrust oF Gop IssvING IN Deszetion. Text: “ My people have for-
saken Me, and hewed out cisterns” (ver. 13).


“Faith and unfaith can ne’er be equal powers;
Unfaith in aught is want of faith in all.”


Let distrust begin, it will widen into alienation. It may be small at outset, a
“little pitted speck” in the ripe fruit of our faith, a mere doubt of God’s promises ;
but the leak has sprung, the fire has started, the poison has entered the blood.
The “speck” spread, “rotted inward,” and “slowly mouldered all.” This is the
principle of the text, the growth of unfaith, the ultimate issues of distrust of God.

Not applicable to those who have never loved and trusted God; but to “My
people,” who had experienced enough to ensure their fearless love. We have
known fuller demonstration of Divine sufficiency and grace in Jesus in our per-
sonal redemption and adoption. In us “perfect love should cast out fear.” Yet
doubt has been cherished, and has issued in desertion.

IL A fact for amazement: God was theirs, yet they deserted Him. “ Be
astonished, saith the Lord.” It is a cry of amazement from God. “O ye
heavens!” peopled with myriads of holy ones, did ye ever know such a wrong
done to your faithful and gracious King? Silence your songs; “be horribly
afraid ;” for what may not ensue, now that “ My people” can act thus ?

1. There ts overflowing plenitude in God. “ Fountain ;” spontaneously, from
indwelling resources, giving forth streams: “living water;” unceasing, never
stagnant, always fresh and refreshing: “living waters ;” many streams, diverse and
multiplied, suiting every taste, slaking every thirst.

2. It is God's purpose that we should find our all in Him. (a.) Human thirst is
God’s work in us, (d.) Thirsts are implanted within us to lead us to God for
supply. (c.) We may therefore be satisfied fully, and can be satisfied alone in Him.
Did our faith never falter, “we might ask what we will and it should be done.”
Sad that we have let “unfaith ” come in; and, in our want of faith, have sought
to provide substitutes should God fail!

I. An effort of compensation : Having forsaken God, they constructed for
themselves laboured contrivances, Withdrawal of faith from God does not better
us, but beggars us; not set us at rest, but drives us to wearying toils. Having
lost our good in God, we wander piteously, crying, ‘‘ Who will show us any good ?”
See how this works:

1. I become perplexed. God bids, “If lack wisdom, ask of God.” Instead of
going to Fountain, “ committing my way and trusting in Him,” I seek counsellors ;
but they do not agree, and perplex me the more. ‘‘ They hold no water.”

2. I am in grief ; heart aches for consolation. I might “lean on Jesus’ bosom ;”
but hard thoughts drive me to avoid Him. I seek human words of comfort, and
they fall on my ear—vapid, succourless. ‘ Miserable comforters are ye all!”
“ They hold no water.”

3. The Church droops; numbers minish, agencies fail. We must get a more
earnest pastor, more effective preacher, make our services more attractive! So
popular preacher comes, sensational services are arranged, week-night entertain.
ments planned. But can these bring the “ Breath of the Lord”? “They hold
no water;” and the spiritual life of the Church is parched and perishing still.

4. When persons lose vital godliness, they often grow valiant sectarians and
doctrinal bigots—their tenets are their “ cisterns ;” or they substitute punctilious
observances for spontaneous piety.

(a.) Man has the power to construct promising appliances. (b.) He makes toil-
some efforts to satisfy his soul in dearth ; but thus saith the Lord, “ Wherefore
labour for that which satisfieth not? Hearken diligently unto Me.” A voice from


the Gospel age speaks, “ If any man thirst, cgme unto Me and drink !~
6}


cuan 1. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; JEREMIAH.





Til. A desolating failure: Man's toilsome devices prove of no avatl, “ Broken ;™
for God is not careful to preserve them (ver. 37). Better “ broken” than that we
should be sustained by delusions.

1. Men have left God for pleasure. Issue: “The worm, the canker, and the
grief are mine alone.”

2. For success. Issue: “ All vanity and vexation of spirit.”

3. Turned from Jesus to culture. Issue: “O wretched man that I am,” &,

4, From Bible to rationalism. Issue: ‘“ Leap in the dark.”

Content yourselves with God. We are not to be creators but recipients, Shut
door of your hearts on “unfaith.” Keep near Fountain. “ Ho, every one that
thirsteth, come ye to the waters!”


Topic; Gop No BARREN WILDERNESS. Text: “Have I been a wilderness unto
Israel, a land of darkness #” (ver. 31).


In the text there are three general parts considerable: a demand, an expostula-
tion, and an invitation.

I. Ademand. “ Have I been a wilderness,” dc.

i. It hath the force of a remonstrance or protestation, 4¢., I have not been sa
Not a “ wilderness,” which is an expression of unprofitableness; not “a land of
darkness,” which = uncomfortableness. Theme: That God’s people do not serve
Him in vain and for no profit ; neither are they losers by their servings of Him,
This is evident from daily experience and observation ; and it is founded upon
God’s royalty, nobleness, and magnificence, Men are wrongly opinionated respect-
ing God, and the reasons are:

1. Because God is pleased sometimes to suspend and delay the expressions of
His goodness to them.

2. Because God does not always reward them in that way and kind as they
desire and expect from Him.

ii. It hath the force of a remembrance or seasonable intimation, ¢.e., I have been
the contrary, I have in reality been a paradise. It is an ironical inquiry suggest-
ing the very reverse, intimating God’s great goodness and overflowing bounty.
Theme: That God takes care of His Church, and provides all things necessary—
means of illumination and instruction, means of fructification and increase. His
providence works wonderfully for it, keeping it from enemies, preserving it from
dangers and destruction.

The more God does for any people, the more He expects from them. Their
thankfulness is to be answerable to His mercies, and their obedtence to their thank-
fulness.

iii. It hath the force of a reproach or implicit exprobration, ¢.¢. Israel hath
rather been a wilderness fo Me/ And so it represents to us the unfruitfulness of
God’s people. Three things aggravate this unfruitfulness ;

(1.) The mercies which they enjoy. (2.) The means (of improvement ; advantages)
they partake of. (3.) The expectations which are upon them ; for God had occasien
to expect fruitful returns, It is a sad thing to be under the upbraidings of the
Almighty, for there is certain to be occasion for it when He reproaches,

iv. It hath the force of an appeal or provocation to them, ¢.¢., let Israel speak
what they know of Me. God here submits Himself to the judgment of their con-
sciences. He challenges them to say the worst of Him. This is grounded upon
His own innocency. Thus He justifies all His dispensations with His people; for
if they consider, they must acknowledge that His ways are equal and theirs
unequal (Ezek. xxviii. 29). In His goodness to His whole Church in general, and
to our own persons in particular, God has approved Himself to our consciences by
manifold expressions.

I. An expostulation. ‘‘ Wherefore say My people, We are lords, we will coms
no more unto Thee t”


“


q
;
|
|


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. Czar. i.


—


L The charge ; it is twofold:

1. Their assertion ; “we are lords,” whereby they hold forth their own greatnesa,
self-sufficiency, and independence. When men will be their own masters, and de
what they will without control, God suffers them to be so, and gives them up ta
liberty. But this is the greatest misery in this world; for with our nature
corrupted by sin we need One better than ourselves to guide and restrain us,

2. Their resolution ; “we will come no more,” &c., which is a twofold sin—(a.)
The denial of their address. This refusal to come showed disrespect, want of due
affection for God; for when men come not at God, it is a sign they do not love
Him nor regard Him as they should: ingratitude; for they had received so many
kindnesses from God, that His mercies should have provoked attendance upon
Him: stubbornness ; resisted even God’s call and persuasion. Ahasuerus took ill
Vashti’s refusal to come when commanded. Yet God has invited us often by the
ministry, Providence, and Spirit. (6.) The discontinuance of address, ‘‘no more
come,” which denotes their self-sufficiency and their apostasy. ‘ We are lords,” and
ean shift for ourselves.

ii. The censure, “wherefore ?” which signifies that

1. It was without reason ; they had no eause at all for it; God had given them
neither occasion or provocation.

2. It was against reason. Consider their relation—“ My people.” What an
unnatural thing for them to refuse to come near God! And their tndebtedness ;
kindness is a strong engagement ; love constrains response; yet here it was all
restrained and reversed.

Il. An invitation. ‘“O ye generation, see ye the word of the Lord!”

By “generation” he meant the people of the time. There is a reflection in the
phrase upon the sinfulness and wretchedness of the age, as if to say, Into what a
time aud age are we fallen! Here then consider:

Unto what this generation is invited. “To see the Word of the Lord,” tc,
mind it and attend to it. They had heard the Word often, but it had done no
good ; now called to “see” it.

The weightiness and seriousness of it in its twofold bearing—1. As it respects
God’s own justification, “‘ Have I been a wilderness #” and 2. As it respects Jsrae/’s
condemnation, ‘“‘ Wherefore say My people,” &e.

What improvement have we in this generation made of our favours? Have we
shown faithfulness and fruttfulness? God has been no “ wilderness” to us: have
we to Him? No “darkness,” for the light of truth and the Gospel shines around
us: have we “walked in the light”? Have we waxed proud and self-confident,
saying, “We are lords”? &c. Certainly the abominations which in these days
abound speak loudly against us. If so, it is most unreasonable. And God calls
us to repentance and amendment of life—T. Horton, D.D., London, a.p. 1678.





ADDENDA TO CHAPTER II. ILLUSTRATIONS AND SUGGESTIVE EXTRACTS.
Ver. 2. “ Love of thine espousale:” its Il-requited :—


Divine origin :— “A mighty pain to love it is,
And ‘tis a pain that pain to miss;
‘Yes, love indeed is light from heaven, But of all pains, the greatest
A spark of that immortal fire It is to love, and love in vain.”
With angels arate by a given, —COoWLEY.
' ‘To lift from earth our low desire, Sey
Devotion wafts the mind above, “I remember thy youth. ‘The Te-
But heaven itself descends in love 3 trospect on youth is too often like look-
A feeling from the Godhead caught, ing back on what was a fair and promis-


To wean from self each sordid thoughts ing country, but is now desolated by
ee as cond tho oak” an overwhelming torrent. Or it is like
—Brzos. visiting the grave of a friend whom we


53


sare


have injured, and are precluded by his
death from the possibility of making
him an atonement.”—.J. Foster.

Prety the beauty of youth.

“What is beauty? Not the show

Of shapely form and features, No!
These are but flowers
That have their dated hours

To breathe their momentary sweets, then go.
*Tis the atainless soul within
That outshines the fairest skin.”

—Sin A. Hoyt,

“‘ Naturalists inform us that Oriental
pearls are generated of the morning dew.
That field is full of the richest corn
which is cleansed of its noxious weeds
in the spring. Jesus was carried in
triumph upon 2 colt, the foal of an ass.”
—Secker.

Ver. 6. “‘ Neither said they, Where ts
the Lord that brought us from Egypt.”
Ingratitude. “Philip, King of Mace-
donia, caused a soldier of his, that had
offered unkindness to one that had
kindly entertained him, to be branded
in the forehead with these two words:
Hospes tngratus. Unthankfulness is a
monster in nature, a solecism in manners,
a parodox in divinity, a parching wind
te dry up the fountain of further favour.”
—Trapp. The Dead Sea drinks in the
Jordan, and is never the sweeter; and
the ocean cil rivers, and is never the
fresher ; thus, we take all God’s mercies
with insensibility.

Ver. 10, 11. “ Natton changed their
gods.” Idolatry. ‘‘We perceive, as
much from the words of the prophet as
from the history, that this idolatry has
now become deep and radical. The
state of mind latent in them is. . . the
utter incapacity for acknowledging a
God not appealing to the senses, which
Jeremiah discovers in his contempo-
raries. He boldly sets up the faith of
the heathen as a lesson to the Israelites,”
—‘* Kings and Prophets ;” Maurice.

‘A long course of sin was needed so
to deaden and blind the heart of man
as to make idolatry possible. Age after
age gave in its contribution, ... 80
that, besides the original sin of each
man, there was a sinful tradition of
mankind. . . . Every generation be-
queathed to the next a further measure
of declension from God.”—Dr Manning.

54


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR.





Ver. 11. “ Gods which are yet no gods.”
At Buhapurum, a child about eight
years old, educated in Christian faith,
was ridiculed on that account by some
heathen persons older than himself,
“Show us your God,” said they. “1
cannot do that,” answered the child,
“but I can soon show you yours.” Tak-
ing a stone, and daubing it with some
resemblance to a human face, he placed
it upon the ground, and pushing it
towards them with his foot, “ There,” he
said, “is such a god as you worship.” —
“Dictionary of Illustrations ;” Dickenson.

Ver. 17. “ He led thee by the way.”
The blessed pilgrimage. ‘Faith is the
rod with which he cleaves Red Seas of
difficulty ; and God’s Word is a pillar of
guiding light amid the rocks of a sandy
wilderness ; and Sabbaths are wells of
water ; and Ordinances are beautiful and
shady palm-trees; and Prayer brings
down manna every morning; and the
sight of the Cross heals the bite of fiery
serpents; and Hope is a spy going be-
forehand to bring back the clusters of
Eshcol; and God’s presence is, at the
last, as the ark in the midst of the
river; and the pilgrim passes dry-shod
into ‘the land that floweth with milk
and honey.’ ”—J, Stoughton.

Ver. 19. “ Thine own wickedness shall
correct thee and reprove thee.” Sin its own
punishment. “Look for the man who
has practised a vice so long that he
curses it and clings to it; that he pur-
sues it because he feels a great law of
his nature driving him on towards it,
but, reaching it, knows it will gnaw his
heart and tear his vitals, and make him
roll himself in the dust with anguish.” —
Sidney Smith.

When Nicephorus Phocas had built a
strong wall about his palace for his own
security in the night-time, he heard a
voice crying to him, “O Emperor!
though thou build thy walls as high
as the clouds, yet, if sin be within, it
will overthrow all!”

Ver. 20. “ Yoke.” The yoke was laid
upon the neck of the beast, and fastened
with thongs to it and to the plough-
beam. It thus symbolised slavery or
severe rule (as Egyptian), while break-
ing it suggested weleome deliverance.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH,


GaP. Ul.





Breaking the yoke equally represents the
rejection of authority, as in this verse,
and chap. v. 5.

Ver. 22. “ Thine iniquity is marked.”
Let a blot lie a while on a pure sheet of
white satin paper; try to remove it.
Erasure may ultimately rid the sheet of
that ‘‘one dark spot,” but the paper ts
imjured, the satin gloss is gone, and if
you try to write on the place again, the
lines smear. Sin effects permanent in-
jury, cannot be removed by most careful
efforts ; the “mark” remains when all
is done. Holiness is not mere clean-
ness; it has no mark of injury. It is
pure light ; the concentration of all the
prismatic colours into unity.

Ver, 23. “Swift dromedary.” ‘The
camels of the Bible are of two kinds, the
difference being the result simply of
breeding and training. The first kind,
used as a beast of burden, will carry from
500 to 1000 pounds twenty-four miles
a day. The second, used to convey in-
telligence, will travel upwards of 100
miles in twenty-four hours; this kind
is called the dromedary.”——“ Topics for
Teachers ;” Gray.

Ver. 26. “Kings and priests.” No hw-
man authorities to dictate our religion.
One of the ancient fathers replied to
a clamorous disputant who shouted
“ Hear me, hear me,” “I will neither





hear thee, nor do thou hear me, but let
us both hear Christ.”—Dictionary of
Illustrations.

Ver. 27. “In the time of their trouble,”
&c. The armies of Media and Lydia were
in violent conflict on the 30th September,
B.C. 610 (while Josiah was occupied in
reforming Judah), when suddenly, to
them, occurred an eclipse of the sun,
known as Thales’ eclipse, It over-
whelmed both armies with such terror
that they gave up the contest, and peace
was negotiated and settled in the camp.
Happy if the eclipse of trouble, suddenly
coming upon us when we are at war
against God, should lead us to cease @
life of antagonism, and sue for peace.

Ver. 30, “In vain have I smitten your
children, ... correction.” Mr. Cecil ob-
served in the Botanical Gardens a pome-
granate-tree cut almost through near
the root, and asked the gardener for the
reason. He explained that the tree
used to shoot so strong as to bear only
leaves; but now that it was nearly cut
through, it began to bear fruit well.
Alas! that affliction on man should be
profitless, when nature accepts it and
turns it to account.


‘‘The good are better made by ill,
As odours crushed are sweeter still.”
— ROGERS,





OHAPLER TL


CriricaL axp Exxcrticat Norss.—1. Chronology. Exact date of chapter uncertain. It
naturally divides itself at ver. 5, although Dahler, Umbriet, and Neuman contend for the


unity of the chapter as a single prophecy.


reasoning (ver. 1, 8), but the inscription to ve


inscription to ver. 1 ie unwarranted.


Doubtless there is a continuity of imagery and
r.6 isa difficulty, and their transference of that
“The Targum,” Vulgate, Jerome, Rosenmiiller, Words-


worth, and Henderson regard ver. 1-5 as a separate and complete prophecy, and plead that
the abrupt commencement “to say” or ‘“‘gaying” (ver. 1) is not without parallel (Judges


xvi. 2), and indicates a Divine message.


But Luther, Kimchi, Maurer, Hitzig, Starke, Keil,


and ‘‘ Speaker’s Commentary ” connect ver. 1-5 with chap. ii. as a completion of that prophecy,
and read thus: ‘‘ The Lord hath rejected thy confidences,” &c. (ii. 37), “ saying, If a man,” &,


(iii. 1), This is preferable.


Ver. 6 onwards to vi. 80 gives a lengthy prophecy, forming either one prolonged addreas
(Hend.) or a condensation into one uniform whole of a series of addresses (Ketl) delivered during


Josiah’s reign.


Date of ver. 1-5, the 13th of Josiah ; date of ver. 6 sq., 17th of Josiah (Maurer) ; before the
18th, the year of "Josiah’s great reformation (Hend.) ; after the 18th (Bagster, Blayney, &.).
M. Henry gives the date B.0. 620, tc. the 2lat year of Josiah.

2. Cotemporary Scriptures. With iii. 6 to vi. ee) agree 2 Chron, xxxiv.—xxxv. 18 ; Zeph.
L-iii. ; 2 Kings xxii- xxiii. 25; Nahum and Habakkuk.


8. Historic Facts, Josiah, personally
een of the nation; returns to
e


ourneying through Judah and Israel, continues his
erusalem in hie 18th year, immediately repairs the


mple for the restoration of Jehovah’s worship therein. Judah’s ostentatious return to


Jehovah a solemn mockery (ver. 10).


Comp. B. p. 61, “ Actual State of Judah.”)


4, Cotemporary History. During Soa six years, Nabopolassar rebels against pr king of


omar, Iii, HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY : JEREMIAH,


ae





Assyria, becomes king of Babylon, and thus founds the Babylonian empire. arares
(Ahasuerus, Dan. ix. 5 succeeds Phraortes on the Median throne, and begins to make Media a
great power (B.0. 625). Psammeticus continues to reign over Egypt at Nineveh.

5. decgrannical References. Ver.12. “ Towards the north,” i.¢., to Mesopotamia, Assyria,
Media, where the captive ten tribes were located by Tiglath-Pilesar (Bo. 740; cf. 2 Kings xv.
29, xvi. 7-9; Amos i. 4, 5), and Shalmanegar, or rather Sargon, his son (for Assyrian monus
ments show that Shalmanezar died during the siege of Samaria, and that Sargon carried Israel
captive), eir. B.c. 720; ef. 2 Kings xvii. 6, xviii. 9-11. (Comp. A.p. 60, “ Facts re Outcast Isracl.”)

6. Natural History. Ver. 38. ‘‘ Latter rain,” i.¢., the vernal rain, which fell about April,
perfecting the harvest; the ‘‘ former” rain came early in November, preparing the earth for
cultivation, (Comp. C. p. 62, ‘* The Land Withered by Drought.’’)

7. Manners and Customs. Ver. 1, 8. “ Divorce.” The law found in Deut, xxiv. 1-4. The
‘*pill”” was a legal document ; it guaranteed legal cognisance of, and justifiable reasons for, the
husband’s deed. Ver. 2. ‘‘ The Arabian in the wilderness.” The Bedouin lurking and eager for
plunder; thus did Israel look out for idolatry aa for booty.

8. Literary Oriticisms. Ver. 1. ‘‘ Yet return again to Me.” “Targum,” Jerome, and A. VY.


regard aw) as the imperative. Keil renders it as interrogative, “ Wouldst thou return
to me?” as being forbidden. “ Speaker's Commentary” takes the verb as an infinitive ;
“ And to return to me!” that is, And thinkest thou to return to Me/ ‘* Israel could no more
take her place as wife.” Henderson says it is the infinitive absolute, and as such may be used
as an imperative. Lange gives as the sense, “ Although, in accordance with legal regulations,
I ought not to receive you, yet I say, Return to me.” Certainly ver. 14, 20, 22, and iv. 1,
bear out ’s sense of the words. (See on ver. 14 below.)

Ver. 5. ‘* Rehold thou hast spoken,” t.e., fairly, used devout speeches to Jehovah ; but actions
have contradicted words; ‘‘and hast done evil as thou couldst,” é.¢., without self-restraint.
Noyes, “ doest evil with all thy might.” Calvin, ‘‘ with incorrigible persistency.”

Ver. 7. ‘‘ Her treacherous sister” should be rendered, “and Treacherous, her sister,’ as being
her appellative. Falsehood, Faithless—not an adjective, but Judah’s name.


Ver. 9. “ Lightness,” as if p were the infinitive of 2P, levity. It is rather derived from
Dip a ory, noise ; the tumult of her idolatrous revelries, Some take it as the ery which rose


to heaven against her; but it is here said to ‘‘ hawe defiled the land ;’’ therefore “ her riotous
orgies’ is the more correct.

Ver. 12. ‘‘ Turn, thou backsliding ;” lit., “turn thou that hast turned.” Note the paronomasia
TM2WD MW, ‘¢ Not cause mine anger to fall.” Lange, “aot lower my face against you.”
Keil, 4 not look darkly upon.” Hend., ‘‘not eontiaue to frown.”

Ver. 14. “Jam married unto you” V2. Hitsig, Umbrict, I will be your lord, master ;
~uggestive of severe domination. Hengstenberg, Lange, Keil, “your husband ;” for Jehovah
had been, and would ever be, that to Israel. Kimchi, Rosenmilller, De Wette, Gesenius, Hender-
son contend for the signification, loathing, disdain: “I have rejected you,” since both here and
xxxi 32 is taught that God had abandoned Israel in consequence of her stubborn apostasy.
Tks A. V. is consistent with the prevailing language of this chapter (see above on ver. 1).
Jerome translates, ‘‘ quia ego vir vester.”

Ver. 16. “ Neither shall that be done any more,” t.¢., the Ark being lost, no effort would be
made to replace it. ‘‘ Neither shall it be made any more.” (Comp. D. p. 62, “ The Ark Lost.”)

Ver. 19. ‘‘ But I said, How,” &c. ; not ‘‘ but,” as if it were a difficulty ; and “how shall 1.”
The sentence need not be taken interrogatively, but How glortously will I: with what honours!
“© Of the hosts of nations ; lit., beauty of beauties : MRI 28, not ‘‘ hosts.” The Hebrew
idiom means a heritage of the ehtef beauty of nations.—Speaker’s Com.

Ver. 21. ‘‘ For they have perverted ;” rather “because” supplying the reason of their weep-
ing, the burden of their grief.

Ver. 23. “‘ Truly in vain from the hicts,” &&. Umbriet, ‘‘ Verily a lie is from the hills, tumult
of the mountains.” Lange, ‘‘ As certainly as the hills are false, ar= mountains an empty
sound.” eid, ‘Truly the sound from the hills, from the mountaine. * hecome falsehood.”
“The Targum ” gives as the sense, Delusive and profitless ware our ido.«srous observances upon
the heights. The word fot is rendered the “noise of revelry” 2 Amos v. 33 ; and here=m
“the noisy gatherings for idle worship on the hill-tops.”—Speaker’s Com.

Ver. 24. ‘‘ Shame,” nvam; lit., the ahame, ¢.e., Baal ; comp. chap. xi. 18, where the word
MwA is rendered “ that shameful thing, even altars to Baal” (cf, Hos, ix. 10). Geseniue=“ an
idol which deceives the hope of the worshippers, and puts them to shame.” Calmet says :—
“The Hebrews, instead of pronouncing the name of Baal, of which they had a dread, used in
ita place the name ‘ Bosheth’—shame, confusion. Thus: Mephi-Bosheth, for rap peta

er. 25. ‘* We lée down,” 4¢., prostrate ourselves in abasement, abashed at memory of
our disgraceful deeds,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH. CHAP, IZ,





HOMILIES AND OUTLINES ON SKOTIONS OF CHAPTER IIL


Section 1-5. The verdict of law and the appeal of love.

yy _ 6-11. Ierael’s divorce : its lessons lost upon Judah.

»9 12-14. Israel invited to renew her marriage by repentance.

yy 15-20. Restoration to lost spiritual privileges open to both Israel and Judah,
» 21-25. Their penitential return to the Lord their God,


Ver. 1-5. Tue Verpicr or Law anp THE APPEAL or LOVER


Judah, by her idolatry, had broken her marriage vows to God. Her consequent
rejection has not been declared by Jeremiah, but ver. 1 implies it. She is
spiritually divorced from her Husband. God has “put away His wife.” A
solemn truth : sin breaks off our relationship with God. The sinner may have
“many lovers” (ver. 1), but he is ‘ without God ;” how will he do, then, on whom
call, in calamity, death, judgment? “Return” is indeed desirable, if it may be.
Can the guilty one “ go in unto the King, which is not according to law” ? (Esther
iv. 16).

IL Legal prohibition (ver. 1; cf. Deut. xxiv. 4). A man may not again marry
his divorced wife after she has united herself with another. 1. There are legal
penalties to sin. 2. The apostate from God is divorced from Him. 3. It is con-
trary to law for the guilty to find grace. “The soul that sinneth, s¢ shall die.”
That is law; no more return to God; but having gone away voluntarily, to “go
away” compulsorily and eternally (Matt. xxv. 46).

IL Condemnatory facts (ver. 2, 3). Declares: 1. Her unlimited abandonment
to guilt (ver. 2). 2. Her shameless effrontery and persistency (ver. 3). Our sins
are (1.) not imaginary, but positive ; (2.) not difficult to find, but glaring; (3.) not
mere indiscretions, but appalling; (4.) not few, but multitudinous. And our
apostasy from God has made us (1.) insensible to affliction (“showers withheld ”) ;
(2.) hardened in shamelessness. “ Sin is not a conjugal, but an adulterous relation.”

III. Oonjugal relationship recalled (ver. 4). “My Father, Thou wast the
Husband of my youth” (cf. Prov. ii. 17 ; see also Jer. iii 20). 1. God reminds
her of what she was in her youth. How have we deteriorated and fallen! 2,
God laments her present life of falsity. Backsliding grieves the Lord. 3, God
would awaken her from insensibility to penitent reflections. 4. God shows Him-
self still a loyal, loving Husband. He does not drive the backslider or the sinner
away, but mourns, “ How can I give thee up?” (chap. ii, 2). Yea, He still calls to
faithless Judah, “ Return to Me” (iii. 1).

IV. Desperate trifling with God (ver. 5). 1. Judah responds with fair words,
‘Will he reserve,” &c., is Judah’s soliloquy upon hearing God’s appeal (ver. 4). The
prophet chides her, “ Behold, thou hast spoken!” Such is thine answer to God’s
patient and pleading remonstrance. The language shows—(1.) Conscious demerit,
“anger ;” (2.) dread of punishment ; (3.) belief in mercy: that He will not keep
it to the end. But there is no cry of repentance and self-abhorrence. Have we
only thus spoken? or not rather Job xlii, 6% 2. Judah persisted in foul deeds.
Although “thou hast spoken” thus, yet “thou hast done evil persistently.” To
deprecate the continuance of Divine displeasure, and yet by our conduct to “ pro-
voke the Holy One of Israel to anger,” is the most solemn trifling. How deplorable
the state of a soul which sins on unrestrained by conscience or fear of God’s wrath
(ver. 5); and more, unmoved by the pathos of love (ver. 4).


Ver, 6-11. Iszaxw’s Drvorog: rrs Lessons Lost UPON JUDAH.


The kingdom of Israel had been destroyed, and the ten tribes driven into exile
as the Divine punishment of idolatry and apostasy. This fact was daily evident
to Judah ; Israel cast off from God, abandoned to captivity for her criminal

o


4


CHAP, In, HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR.





impiety. What effect would this produce upon “ her sister Judah ”*—restrain her #
Keep her watchful, loyal? Alas! (ver. 10, 11).

L Though both were guilty, there was a distinction and a difference of
criminality in their respective sins. 1. Zhe distsnction. Israel’s sin was apostasy
(ver. 6). Judah’s sin was treachery (ver. 7). Apostasy, t.e., utter desertion of
God, is contrasted with falsehood, ¢.e., criminal hypocrisy, dissimulation, a show of
piety covering the vilest impiety. 2. The degree. Judah had the warning of
Israel’s example and ruin. Yet (1.) Israel abandoned herself to impiety (ver. 6),
and Judah, instead of avoiding her sin, did the same. She “saw it” (ver. 7), yet,
with open eyes, knowing the doom, she trod the same course ; (2.) Israel had gone
into exile for her iniquity ; yet Judah despised the warning. She “feared not”
(ver. 8); (3.) Israel refused to return at God’s call (ver. 7), but Judah professedly
did respond, yet played a false part (ver. 10). Feigned a piety she inwardly
loathed (Gal. vi. 7).

Il. Hypocrisy calls forth severer reproaches from God than apostasy (ver. 11).
Judah had knowledge, “saw” (ver. 7), yet cared nothing, “feared not” (ver. 8),
and mocked God (ver. 10). Whereas Israel acted blindly, madly, wickedly, but
without deliberation or design. 1. Hypocrisy is deliberate, not merely impetuous.
2. Flauntingly insolent, not merely indifferent. 3. Trifling and pretentious, not
madly blind. The pharisee worse than the publican ; traitor worse than the rebel.
A deeper depravity of heart underlies the sin. A greater provocation to God is
furnished by the sin. To delude man by a mock piety is bad, but to attempt to
pass a counterfeit repentance on God is daringly blasphemous. (Comp. the
Saviour’s “anger” and awful “woes” against the pretentious, hypocritical
pharisees, Mark iii. 5, and Matt. xxiii.)


Ver. 12-14. Israzu InviteD to RENEW HER MARRIAGE BY REPENTANCE.


‘‘ Backsliding :” a metaphor taken from oxen which refuse to draw in the yoke
put upon them (Hos. iv. 16).

i. God sends messages of mercy and not of judgment (ver. 12). Well might He
have cast them off utterly. But He delighteth in mercy, and “ willeth not the
death of the sinner.” By many prophets did He thus invite them to, return (2
Chron. xxxvi. 15); they even “‘ wearied Him” with their obstinacy (Isa. xliii, 24),

ii. God requires that they humble themselve: before Hum (ver. 13). This indis-
pensable. Not consistent with His honour that He should receive them while they
hardened themselves against Him. To compensate for their wickedness was impos-
sible, but must confess it, and bumble themselves on account of it.

ili. God urges the most affecting considerations in order to prevail upon them.
1. The merciful disposition He felt towards them (ver. 12). 2. The relation under
which He still regarded them (ver. 14). 3, The benefits which He was still ready
to confer upon them (ver. 14 8g.).—F rom Simeon.


Ver. 15-20. Restoration to Lost Sprrirvuant Prrivizeces OPEN TO BOTH
IsRAEL AND JUDAH.


Conditional on true repentance (ver. 13), God pictures a bright future for His
erring people.

i. Suffering a common exile (ver. 18) in “the land of the north ;” Israel in
Assyria, Judah in Babylonia ; because of faithlessness (ver. 20).

ii. Duration of their banishment limited (ver. 16, 18). “In those days ”—God
foresees the dawn. “Seasons are in His power” (Acts i. 7).

iii, Simultaneous return from emile (ver. 18). “Come together.” Israel went
into captivity 100 years before Judah. Redemption simultaneous,

iv. Restoration to the lost inheritance (ver. 18 ; comp. Amos ix. 15). Laid waste
by conquerors, yet the land was sacred; kept for them by God. for them ta
reoccupy (Luke xxi. 24)

5a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. CHAP, tii.





v. Enriched with national prosperity (ver. 16). ‘ Multiplied and increased im


the fand.” This is frequently portrayed (see xxiii. 3; Ezek. xxxvi. 11).


vi. Blessed with spiritual privileges (ver. 16, 17). Transcending the value of the


4 ark and the Shekinah in the Temple.


vii. Sacred relationship again realised (ver. 19). “Thou shalt call me, My


_ Father.” ‘The veil upon their heart removed : light and love!


t.


a
i


viii. Hevolt no more possible. “ Neither shall any more walk after evil heart”


(ver. 17). “Not turn from Me” (ver. 19). Loyal: God all in all.


ix. Ruled by wise governors (ver. 15). Civil rulers, who will reign righteously,


foster righteousness, and encourage the people to piety.


x. Glorified in the esteem of the world (ver. 17). Attracting the heathen (ver.


19). “A goodly heritage of the hosts of the nations.” Admired and envied
_ through¢ut the world.


“ That this prophecy was fulfilled by the return under Zerubbabel and Ezra is
opposed by the fact—(i) That not even the whole of Judah, while but a few of
Israel, then returned ; (i1.) That not even Judah had then returned to the Lord, still
less were the heathen converted (ver. 17). Its fulfilment by the founding of the °
Christian Church is contradicted by the fact—(i) That the reunion of Judah and


Israel had not taken place (Israel being still lost) ; (ii.) That Israel in general has
_ rgected the Lord, and refused to enter the Christian Church; (iii.) That though


the heathen are being drawn to the Lord and the Jerusalem that is above (Gal. iv.
26), yet this has not taken place in such a measure or manner as to fulfil ver. 17,
which predicts the conversion of all nations, and the removal of their hardness of
heart. We must, therefore, still wait for the complete fulfilment of this prophecy.”
—Naeg. in Lange.

“The fulfilment is accomplished gradually. It begins with the end of the Baby-
lonian exile, in so far as at tkat time individual members of the ten tribes may
have returned into the land or their fathers. It is continued in Messianic times
during the lives of the apostles, by the reception, on the part of the Israelites, of
the salvation that had appeared in Christ. It is carried on throughout the whole
history of the Church, and attains its completion in the final conversion of Israel.”
—Keil,


Ver. 21-25. Tuer PeniTtEntTIAL RETURN TO THE LorD THEIR Gop.


In prophetic prevision Jeremiah beholds his nation, broken-hearted for sin,
veeking Jehovah with tears, contrition, and shame. The revelries of idolatry are
silenced on the heights, and cries of poignant grief sound loud throughout the
scene. A nation weeps for her sin: exiles come home with supplications; God’s
people are restored to their long-lost rest. Here is fulfilled the condition of the
sinner’s forgiveness and acceptance (ver. 13). Their case proves—

I. That privileged people may so sin as to necessitate bitterest repentance.
Israel and Judah had all sacred persuasions to spiritual fidelity (Rom. ix. 4, 5). We
may stand amid religious surroundings and helps, yet may equally fall (Rom. xi.
20). See the sin of this people: 1. Erring from the right way (ver. 21) ; “ per-
verted their way:” began with inconsistent conduct ; turning aside. 2. Neglect of
God (ver. 21) ; “ forgotten the Lord :” advanced from error and inconsistency into
habitual disregard of God; practical irreligion. 3. Posttive resistance and dis-
obedience (ver. 25); “sinned against the Lord:” no longer negative, but wilful,
intentional antagonism. 4. Defiance of Divine remonstrance and appeals (ver. 25) ;
“not obeyed His voice:” though He called, they refused ; despised His prophets,
message, warnings: they would not allow God a hearing. This had become a
settled state of things (ver. 25); “we and our fathers, from our youth even unto
this day.” What a warning that we “take heed lest we fall”! None but may
repeat their sins,

TU. That most criminal revolt from God may terminate in epee return


GAP. TL, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





(ver. 21). If these might, who may not? 1. There is hope for the gutlttest. 2
Those longest tn sin may awake to loathe it. 3. True repentance is possible to
backsliders. 4. The end of life is not too late for return. ‘‘ After so long a time,”
Israel “arose and came to the Father.” ‘“ At evening time light.” Let none close the
door of hope, of opportunity, of mercy, on others or on themselves. God keeps it open
to the last, and for the worst. (Addenda to chap. iii., ver. 25, “ ven wnto this day.”)

II. That an evil course of life wastes and debases those who follow it
(ver. 24, 25). (Addenda to chap. iii., “ Shame,” and “ Sin debases.”) 1. Sinnera
are despoiled of self-respect ; “shame.” 2. Sinning is an expensive luxury; “de
voured the labour, flocks and herds.” 3. Sinful parents cannot hold back eves
their own children from destruction; “sons and daughters.” Moloch asks them.
Society demands the children of godless parents ; and how can they restrain them
from sacrificing to pleasure, vanity, vice? 4. Sin lays low all its followers in
abasement and confusion (ver. 25). Well if it does this ere too late. But the guilty
well see themselves vile and foolish ; the day must come.

IV. That a voice of gracious expostulation pleads with the guilty to return
(ver. 22). 1. God’s call pursues men when they desert Him. 2. A Divine plead-
ing is heard in every heart. 3. Even the vilest are conscious that a pitying Father
awaits their return. 4, Man’s duty is to act on that thought; “return.” 5.
There is “ healing” for every wrong in God’s graciousness, 6. Appropriate address
from the penitent; “we come to Thee;” for God calls men to Himself, not to
ceremonies, and self-improvement, and human remedies. 7 All-sufficiency and
perfect welcome assured ; “for Thou art the Lord,” therefore “nothing too hard ;”
“the Lord our God,” therefore He is ready to greet and receive them.

V. That hopes of salvation are found to be delusive until the soul rests in
God (ver. 23).

1. False hopes: in strong things, “hills and mountains ;” in numerous objects,
“multitude,” = the many gods and scenes of idolatry.

2. True hope: “truly in the Lord,” &c. ‘‘Look unto Me, and be ye saved, for
I am God, and there is none else” (Isa. xlv. 22); “neither is there salvation in
any other: for there is none other name under heaven given among men where-
by we must be saved” (Acts iv. 12),


HISTORIC EVENTS INDICATED IN CHAPTER II1.


A. Facts connected with the career of outcast Israel (ver. 12, 14, 18). (See
Addenda to chap. iii., “ The lost Ten Tribes.”)

i, Outcast, yet not lost (ver. 12). God knew where they were. Denationalised
and exiled ; yet God directed a message to them in “the north.” (See Geographical
reference on ver. 12 above.) Since the first captivity by Tiglath-pilesar, 115 years
had passed, and nearly 100 since Sargon (son of Shalmanezar) swept the land
clean of Israelites, and bore them away into the northern provinces of Assyria
(2 Kings xvii. 18, 23). Thus outcast, they were to lose all connection with
Jehovah, and all recognition of their former history. This was easy ; for their
habitual idolatry would lead them into speedy surrender of all relics of their
religious distinction ; and, as their numbers were not vast, they would not long pre-
Berve any national distinctness, but become absorbed amid the admixture of peoples
which the Assyrian conquests gathered together in the north. But though long lost
to themselves, they were not lost to God. He knew where to address them. And
He will know where to seek them when the time of their return shall arrive (Isa, xi.
11, 18 ; of. ver. 18).

ii, Banished, yet still beloved (ver. 14). “I am married unto you.” God re
spects and preserves His relationship to Israel unchanged, although she had been
banished a hundred years, and was fading from national existence. This sanctions
Paul’s assertion, ‘God hath not cast away His people” (Rom. xi. 1, 2). And

Ge


a


é


HOMILEs1C COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. CHAP. II,


—_——.


this unchanging relationship and imperishable love are asserted by God in terms
of the most unequivocal and solemn character (Jer. xxxi. 27). .
iii, Destined to local and spiritual restoration. ‘I will take you one of a city
and two of a family, and I will bring you to Zion” (ver. 14). “In those days the
house of Judah shall walk to the house of Israel, and they shall come together out
of the land of the north,” &. (ver. 18). This promise cannot be limited to the
return from exile under the edict of Cyrus. The two kingdoms, Judah and Israel,
have not yet “come together,” nor have they yet used the language of ver. 22.
Nor has Israel learned to ery “‘My Father!” (ver. 19). Their joint restoration
and conversion to God are therefore yet future (¢f, Ezek. xxxvii 16 to end). God
will keep and fulfil His covenant promises.


B. The actual state of Judah under the eye of God (ver. 4, 10), The
words ‘‘ from this time,” mark the epoch as special. Judah hath “‘ turned unto Me
feignedly,” asserts a national show of repentance. For this incident, Judah pro-
fessedly repentant before Jehovah, we must turn to 2 Chron. xxxv. 1-19, the
national celebration of the passover, which succeeded Josiah’s reforms, and
asserted Judah’s restoration to the Lord. That this chapter coincides with that
incident is confirmed by the reference to the ark, both in the arrangements for that
passover (2 Chron. xxxv. 3), and in this prophecy (iii. 16). Yet, notwithstanding
the great parade of national repentance, God declares it to be unreal (ver. 10).

Theme: Reformation no guarantee of religion. A ritual piety not necessarily real
piety. (Addenda to chap. iii., ver. 10, “Ritual” and “Feignedly.”) In Judah’s case it
was the result of authority and policy. Josiah ordered it : not spontaneous ; therefore
not sincere. The king had cleansed the land, and brought the nation to yield a for-
mal homage to Jehovah : the prophet proclaimed it utterly corrupt and hypocritical.

I. External reform may be unattended by spiritual regeneration. Ostensible
repentance, external rectitude, these co-existed with a heart withheld from God.
Judah had not cried, “‘ My Father,” &. (ver. 4).

1. Zo rectify evil habits does not prove inward renewal. “ Garnished sepulchres ”
may contain “all uncleanness.”

2. A revival of ritual may not result from revival of religion. The passover
observed with ostentatious care was a mockery. Aisthetic ritual cannot argue
religious affections, sanctified lives: decorated altars may not imply devotional
worshippers. As well urge that “hewed cisterns” guarantee pure and “ living
water.” Pharisaism in general may be but another name for falsity,

II. The distinctive province of the king and the prophet in the realm of
religion. As far as the king went, all was right. He could do no more: effected
complete revolution in religious habits of Judah, rectified abuses of Temple, re-
established true religion.

1. Royalty can dictate the forms and mode of religion. History often shown this,
What then? Are people thereby made religious? Would another “ Act of Uni-
formity ” ensure piety throughout England? Can the king rule conscience, sway
hearts ?

2. Human effort pauses where true religion only begins. God commences with the
“heart” (ver. 10). Man’s work must stop there: he can carry reform no further
than “ making clean the outside of the cup-and platter.” Hence God sent the
prophet to work where the king could not, to arouse the nation’s inward and
spiritual response to the royal reform: to appeal to Judah “from that time,” so
propitious for a real repentance, “to cry unto Him, My Father.”

TIL Reformation without spiritual renewal may prove a perilous delusion.
It may quiet and lull. Possibly Judah felt herself religious, having done so much
that was pious) Reformed sinners are not easily won to repentance. They fortify
themselves in a self-satisfied pride. 1. Owtward piety may co-exist with inward
nn, A compromise: but loathsome to God, who “looketh not on a a al


GmaP. TE HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.








2. Outward piety ts more readily accepted than repentance, It costs no self-humilia-
tions and heart-conflicts ; no “ crucifixion of the affections and lusts ;” no abase-
ment before God. 3. Outward piety ts evanescent and worthless. The king’s work
was effective: the people responded : Judah became religious. But what ensued ?
Revulsion when the king died. Nation rushed back to idolatry and vice so soon
as the outward restraint was gone. ‘Test such a piety, and it dies, Take the king
away who smiled on it, remove the advantages of such a religion, and the thing is
gone! Therefore God was still angry with Judah, and doom was not averted,


©. The land withered by drought because of sin (ver. 3). “Therefore the
showers withholden, no latter rain.”

Clearly affirmed that fertility of the land dependent on conduct of the people
(cf. chap. ix. 12, 13; Lev. xxvi. 19, 20; Deut. xxviii. 23, 24). The “latter rain”
was formerly essential to the beauty and fruitfulness of the country: these have
been permanently withdrawn ; hence the sterility of the land as it now lies, so
markedly in contrast with the ancient accounts of its teeming productiveness and
delightful richness. Usually this is accounted for by the reduced population and
neglect of culture. They may be the effect rather than the cause: cultivation
discouraged and population minished in consequence of a disadvantageous change
in the climate and seasons. Observe that rain and consequent fertility were promised
conditionally (see Deut. xi. 13-15); the people’s faithfuiness was therefore essential
to their being enjoyed and retained; that gone, these have ceased. This a ques-
tion of fact, certified by competent authority. The physical condition of the
climate, the seasons, and the soil have been tested with a view to agriculture. Grass
seed, carried from England and sown there, would perish the very first summer.
The harvest is marred and impoverished because of drought. Vegetables cannot
keep alive ; flowers cannot blow and yield theirsweets. The land has lost, what it
must formerly have enjoyed, “the latter rain.” God has, as it were, turned the key
upon the refreshing and fructifying bounties of the skies. He has commanded the
clouds that they rain not as formerly upon the inheritance of His disobedient
people. Only in this way can be explained the present state of the heights, which
were once mountains clothed with grass, but have become bare rocks. The grass
must have perished under the hot sun, which now burns from April to November,
the soil become loose and pulverised, unable to resist the high winds of the sum-
mer and the floods of winter. This, repeated year after year, would soon lay bare
the rocks. All this ts to be remedied ; promises portray the land again fruitful,
the mountains rich with produce. It will require no miracle to do this; only the
restoration of “the rain in its due season.” (Cf. Kitto’s sible Z]lustrations on this
text.) The temporary withholding of all the rains for three and a half years
during Elijah’s ministry (1 Kings xvii. 1; Luke iv. 25) has become permanent as
respects the vernal rain ; sin being the occasion in each case,


D. The Ark lost in the Babylonian Captivity (ver. 16). (Comp. Literary
Criticisms on ver. 16.)

Manasseh removed the ark from its place in the Temple to make way for the
“carved image” which, in his reckless idolatry, he reared in the holy place (2
Chron. xxxiii. 7). This explains its reinstatement by Josiah (2 Chron. xxxv. 3),
In all probability this ark was carried away or destroyed by Nebuchadnezzar (2
Esdras x. 21, 22); for it disappeared together with the two tables of stone it con-
tained at the Babylonish captivity, when the Temple was plundered and destroyed,
Jewish authorities all are agreed that it was never restored, or replaced in the second
Temple, The Jews think it will be restored when Messiah appears, but this verse
dissipates the delusion.

62


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH,


+








HOMILIES ON SELECTSD VERSES IN CHAPTER ITI.


Ver. 4. Them: Gop’s TENDER Ex-
_ POSTULATION WITH THE YOUNG.

I. The particulars of the proposal.

1. That you should make God your

“Father.” Not merely call Him so,
_ but that you become His children. By
disobedience you have put yourself out
of His family, like the prodigal. How
can you become His children? (Gal. iii
26; Johni. 12). By faith we are made
one with Christ, and admitted into “ the
household of God” (see Gal. iv. 6).
_ 2. That you should choose God for
- the “Guide of your youth,” This im-
plies that you regard His authority, fol-
low His will, comply with His direc
tions: these are made known to us:

a. By His Word. ‘‘Lamp to our
feet,” &c.: reveals Christ as “the Way.
Truth,” &. ‘ Follow me.”

6. By His Spirit. Enlightens and
directs our conscience, influences our
hearts and desires. “Grieve not the
Holy Spirit of God.”

3. That you do these things without
delay. ‘‘ From this time.” A sad pro-
pensity to answer with Felix, “Go thy
way for this time,” &c. But God ecoun-
sels that no time is so favourable as
the present. ‘To-day, if hear His
voice.”

I. The motives for compliance.

1. The grace and condescension of
the proposal. ‘‘ What manner of love!”
(1 Jobn iii, 1). Can you refuse to be
drawn by these “cords of love”?

2. The reasonableness of such a pro-
ceeding. Your own interests urge your
compliance. Where find a Father like
God? Numberless evils from which He
alone can save you. No other Guide can
conduct through intricate paths to eter-
nal rest.

3. The seasonableness of the proposal.
Opportunities lost are gone for ever.
Present time is your own. “Now is
accepted time.” “ Wilt thou not from
this time cry,” &. ?

“From this time:” perhaps this is a
special date with you: of affliction, delt-
verance, rejoicing. Perhaps conscious
now of a secret desire to give yourself
up to God.—Rev. Ed. Cooper, “ Prac
tical Sermons,” 1816.


Theme: YOuTH’S GRACIOUS HOUR;
Gop’s TIMELY CALL.

Enticements and appeals fall around
the young. “Take me as your guide |”
cries Pleasure, Society, Gain, Sin in
gay form, Vice with smooth lips
Around none so many calls; mature
and aged heard same voices in their
youth, but silent now to them. Weth-
in none 80 many cravings : as young life
unfolds expectation awakes, curiosity
impels ; hence snares surround and se-
ducers are alert. Falls a voice from
heaven on the young: text. (Addenda
to chap. iii., ver. 4, “ The guide of my
youth.”)

I. Youth’s reckless wanderings.
“ From this tume cry to Me.” Had not
done so hitherto: other voices heeded and
followed: Vanity ; Fancy ; Indulgence ;
Avarice ; Scepticism. How few young
have made God their Guide! Tread
“broad road to destruction.”

II. Youth’s eminent value. Young
life more coveted than mature. Splen-
did triumph for Satan when ruins a
young character / What a history a
young man or woman may mark out;
may go through the years like angel of
light ; ora firebrand. God values young
life. ‘Remember Creator in days of
youth.” What a salvation ts effected
when young soul is gathered into
grace!

IQ. Youth’s urgentneed. ‘‘Guide”

1. Way of life is beset with dangers.
Evil examples; evil counsellors. “Com-
pass sea and land to make proselyte.”

2. Young are themselves readily
deceived. Through their own wayward
propensities and inexperience. Hence
easily fall into temptation. Certainly
ill adapted to hold the rudder of their
own life, and steer amid the hidden
rocks,

IV. Youth’s precious opportunity.
“From this time; my youth.” Young
life most easily guided. Call the moun-
tain wanderer back ere he fall! Young
—1l, Not yet fettered in the captivity
of habit. 2. Not enthralled by settled
companionships of life. 3. Not lost
the sacred influences of early teaching,
4. Not yet insensible to Divine influ.

63


CHAP. Iii,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAAR.





ences, 5. Not forfeited opportunity of
grace. “ From this time cry.”

V. Youth’s happy resolution.
Father, Thou art my Guide.”

The resolve indicates: 1. Discrimina-
tion ; 2. Decision ; 3. Distinction ; for
he will “come out from among them,
be separate,” &c.

Who now ready with the cry? Be
resolved. ‘‘Be not like dumb driven
cattle.” “ Choose ye this day.”


“My


Ver. 5. Theme: THE SINNER’S DES-
PERATE DEPRAVITY. ‘“‘ Behold thou hast
spoken and done evil as thou couldst.”


Men are as depraved as they can
possibly be in present circumstances,
Charge made by the infinitely Holy
One against every member of the
human family. Substantiated by con-
sidering :

I, That God, in. His providence, has
surrounded the sinner with many circum-
stances operating powerfully to modify
human character.

1. Education. 2. Human law has a
similar effect. 3. The law of God, 4.
The troublesome supervision of consci-
ence, 5. The whole Gospel, interfering
with the sinful pleasures and follies of
men. 6. All the Gospel institutions.
7. The desire in man for heaven, 8.
The fear of hell. 9. The expectation of
judgment. 10. Public sentiment. 11.
The domestic affections. These are
all so many golden chains, restraining
the sinner from wrong. Ought to
thank God for these modifying circum-
stances. A man’s state is hopeful in
proportion as he is held by these moral
bonds.

IL. By these circumstances every sin-
ner ts actually restrained in his wicked-
ness, and held back im his downward
eareer. In proof of which, observe:

1. Men are uneasy under these cir-
cumstances, which shows them to be
restraints. 2. Men are constantly try-
ing to alter their circumstances. 3.
When men succeed in altering their cir-
cumstances in any of these respects, they
usually show out a worse character. 4,
When these restraints are all removed,
men are uniformly far more wicked than
if they had not been imposed.

64


Ill. That every sinner does make the
attempt, and succeeds, as far as God wil.
let him, to sunder these ligatures that
would hold him fast to reason, hope, and
heaven. Trace his steps, and see how he
breaks over and breaks through the re-
straints of—1l. Education; 2. Human
laws ; 3. God’s laws; 4. Supervision
of conscience; 5. Institutions of the
Gospel ; 6. Thoughts of heaven and fear
of hell; 7. Public sentiment; 8. Do-
mestic affections.

Such is the obstinacy, rebelliousness,
ingratitude of the sinner. Must he not
then be “born again,” have new heart
and right spirit, or never enter king-
dom of God!—‘ Preacher's Trea-
aury.”


Comments: Ver.
gutltier sister.


6-10. Judah the


The two kingdoms are described as
sisters in iniquity. In Ezekiel (xxiii, 4)
the same metaphor is applied to the two
metropolises of those kingdoms, Sama-
ria and Jerusalem: “ Aholah and Aho-
libah.” (Addenda to chap. iii., ver. 7,
“ Falsity.”)

Israel is stigmatised as Apostasy and
Judah as Falsity: but the heavier sin is
laid to Judah’s account. Her crimin-
ality is marked as having three stages ; (1)
she “saw” Israel’s sin, yet repeated it her-
self ; (2) she “feared not” the penalties
with which she beheld Israel punished ;
and (3) she “ feigned” a piety when her
practices were impious. Hence she is
called “ Falsity :” and her threefold sin
is most solemnly emphasised.

“She sinned against greater convic-
tions.”— W. Lowth.

“‘ Aliorum tormenta aliorum remedia
sunt.” —Jerome.

“Though the reform of Josiah was
only a pseudo-revival, it furnishes us
with the means of judging how deep a
genuine revival ought to go. Mark ix.
43-48.”—Lange.

This external renovation of Judah,
which swept the land of abuses, was un-
comprising and severe. Yet was not
enough. God was not content. How
then will they do who profess and be-
lieve themselves Christians, whose
lives are not self-denying and pure{


_ God requires “truth in the inward


»”
parts,


and thoroughness in religious
conduct.


“No fellowship between


light and darkness ;” no accommodat-


ing our piety to convenience, circum-
stances, aud sinful ease.
Ver. 10. “Judah hath not turned to


me with her whole heart, but feignedly,”
te, in falsehood.


i, False repentance.


1. Its ground—
servile fear.


2. Its effect—external re-


form.
ii, True repentance. 1. Its ground—
love to God. 2. Its effect—honest


fruits of sanctification.—Lange.


Ver, 11. Theme: Comparative Cri-
MINALITY.


This subject may not be used for self-
preference and self-complacency, or in-
calculable injury may ensue (2 Cor. x.
12). Both had sinned grievously:
Israel more openly; Judah in a more
covert way. God declared Judah’s cri-
minality exceeded that of Israel. Let
me

I. State this decision of the Lord.

Israel, from the time they became a
distinct nation, cast off God; therefore
given into Assyrian captivity and di-
vorced by God.

Judah had retained the worship of
God, but revelled in idolatry at the same
time, and paid divine honours to idols
(Zeph. i. 5).

Because of their apparent superiority,
Judah would scarcely own her relation-
ship to Israel (Ezek. xxxiii. 24).

Though their sins were ostensibly less,
they were committed with tenfold aggra-
vations ; for their advantages had been
greater, larger number of prophets sent
them, enjoyed stated ordinances, pre-
sence of God was in their midst (in
Temple).

Despising and abusing all these, their
guilt was greater.

We argue that any religion is better
than none; that the appearance of re-
gard for God is better than avowed con-
tempt. God pronounces other: the
form without the power of godliness is
more offensive than entire impiety.
Therefore text.

IL. Confirm this decision of the Lord.

B


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


OHAP. It,





Specious insincerity is worse than
open profaneness, because

1, It argues a deeper depravity ol
heart. Sin is committed against con-
science, against the motions of God’s
Spirit within.

2. It casts more dishonour upon God.
A sinner openly casts off God’s yoke;
but the hypocrite professedly says, “1
am God’s servant, know my duty and
perform it!” It degrades holiness,
the name of God is blasphemed, and
the way of truth is evil spoken of.

3. It does more extensive injury to
man. His example encourages sinners
in sin, and gives the ungodly a reason
to contemn true Christians as being
“righteous over-much.” He thus
offends God’s people, and casts a stum-
bling-block before the guilty, Address:

(1.) Those who are careless about relt-
gwon. You justify yourselves on the
ground that you are not hypocrites and
make no profession. Yet think of the
judgments which fell on Zsrael.

(2.) Those who profess religion. God
will have “ your whole heart ;” no feign.
edness, Christ said to Laodicea, “]
would thou wert cold or hot,” &. Be
not “lukewarm,” but wholly the Lord’s
—Rev. C. Simeon, M.A.

Comments :

Ver. 11. To what reflections should
the declaration of Scripture give rise,
that the Divine judgment 1s determined
by the comparison of men with each
other? 1. We should reflect that it is
impossible for us to institute this com-
parison with perfect justice ourselves,
2. We should therefore draw from com-
parison with others occasion neither for
despair nor false comfort. 3. Weshould
rather allow this comparison to be a
motive to severe self-discipline.

Vers. 12, 13. God’s call to repentance,
1. Its ground (I am merciful). 2. Its
object (to obtain grace), 3. Its condi:
tion (acknowledge thy sin).—Lange,
(Addenda to chap, iii. ver. 13, “ Acknow
ledge thy sin.”)


Ver. 13. Theme: TAKING SIDE WITH
GoD AGAINST OURSELVES AND OUR
SIN. “Only acknowledge thine iniquity.”


Just as the publican, abhorrent with


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





himself, and ashamed of long resistance of
God, bowed in abasement and confession.
Holding out against God no longer ;
hiding sin from God—refusing to own
it—no longer. Return to God might
be through misery—not regret for the
sin which caused it; or from policy—
desiring escape from evils and gain of
benefits, without heart-grief or spiritual
surrender.

I. What God asks of the sinner.

“ Acknowledge ;” which means—l.
Capitulation of his pride; realises him-
self vile, 2. Conétrition within his heart ;
laments and upbraids his folly and re-
bellion. 3. Confession upon his lips ;
all covered with shame, coming back
prodigal-like, publican-like to God.
“ Acknowledge ;” “ Jf we confess our
sin, God will forgive,” &.

II. What God arrays before the
sinner.

“ Only acknowledge that,” &e.

1. Spiritual relationship violated.
“ Transgressed against the Lord thy
God.” It is the sin of faithlessness ;
not of one who never knew the Lord.

2. Spiritual prostitution practised.
“Scattered thy ways to strangers.”

3. Spiritual independence asserted.
“Hast not obeyed;” resented God’s
control.

These three aspects of sin, as God
regards it, show the course of evil to
be an outrage, debasing, defiant against
all law and all love.

IIL What God assures to the sin-
ner. Elsewhere in His Word are given
precious assurances to the soul who
confesses sin (Luke xviii. 14; 1 John
i 9).

Here ;

1. Reception to His unalienated love
(ver, 14.) “Iam married.” Israel’s dis-
loyalty had not estranged Him. God
keeps the door wide open for the
wanderer.

2. Reinstatement in the covenant privi-
leges of Zion (ver. 14). Her wandering
had surrendered all—far off, in oppres-
sion ; but “ made nigh,” brought again
“to Zion.” (Addenda on ver. 13, “ de-
knowledge tnrquity.”)

Ver. 14. To BacKsLipERs.

God, the loving Husband. Sin, spiri-

68


tual adultery. He hates “ putting
away,” and invites return (ver. 1).

I. The nature of backsliding. It is
going back—1l. Easily ; 2. Gradually ;
3. Silently.

Backsliding is generally preceded by
—l. Pride (Prov. xvi. 18); 2. Vain
confidence (Matt. xxvi. 33); 3. Negli-
gence (Matt. xxvi. 58).

A man may be—

1. Enticed by sinful pleasures (2
Sam. xi.).

2. Led back by sinful companions
(1 Kings xi.).

3. Driven back by sinful fears (Matt.
xxvi. 69-74).

II. The misery of backsliding.

1. Heavy losses. (1.) His self-respect.
(2.) Tender conscience. (3.) Sweetest
enjoyments. (4.) Brightest hopes.

2. Severe disappointment. His holy
expectations are lost (of what he might
have been, and done for Christ, and
the after rewards).

3. Terrible disgrace. (1.) Before the
world, as a hypocrite. (2.) Before the
Church, as “ the thief” (Jer. ii. 12). (3.)
Before God (Ps. li. 3-9).

ITI. The remedy for backsliding.
“ Return,” d&e.

1. Immediately. (1.) Delay makes your
case worse. (2.) God is willing to par-
don. (3.) The Church is waiting to re-
ceive you.

2. Humbly. (1.) Confessing sin, (2.)
Abhorring sin (Hos. xiv. 8). (3.) For-
saking sin.

3. Believingly. Remember—(1.) The
love of your espousals, (2.) The in-
dividuality of your relationship. _(3.)
The love of your Husband, (4.) Your
own duty.— The Study.

Comments: Ver. 14.

On “TZ will take you one of a city,”
&c., Dr. Blayney remarks: “ This pas-
sage relates to their call into the Chris-
tian Church, into which they were
brought, not all at a time, nor in a
national capacity, but severally as in-
dividuals, here and there one” (cf. Isa.
xxvii. 12).

On “JZ am married to you,” the
Rev. F. D. Maurice, M.A., writes:
“These words affirm that a mysterious
boad, which no sin of theirs had been able


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





to break, united even those tribes which
were gone into captivity to the God of
Abraham ; that He was still holding in-
tercourse with them (ver. 12), and seek-
ing to bring their hearts back to Him-
self.”— Prophets and Kings.

“God keeps His covenant, which
men have broken by their sins, as strictly
and securely as though they had never
broken it.”—Starke.

Ver. 15. “ Pastors ;” refer to notes
on ii. 8. Not military usurpers, such
as Israel had herself preferred (Hos
viii. 4), but men “after God’s heart”
(1 Sam. xiii. 4).

“The evangelical pastorate—i ts
standard; ‘after My heart,’ ii. Its
«ask; to feed them with doctrine and
wisdom.”— Lange.


Ver. 16,17. Theme: A Bricur anpD
Burssep Visiox. ‘It shall come to
pass in those days.”


It was an outlook beyond the Cap-
tivity ; beyond even the return which
Cyrus granted,—the prophet’s eye saw
a glory which excelled the gladness of
that event: the Messianic age. “ 7’hose
days” point definitely to Christ’s advent
and kingdom (cf. chap, xxxiii. 14-16).

In a lower and lesser sense these pre-
dicted events may have been verified
in the return from Babylonian captivity,
but were fulfilled in Christ.

I. The spiritual kingdom: a vision
of joyous prosperity (ver. 16.) “ Multi-
plied and increased in the land.” The
“little flock” shall have and “ possess
the kingdom.” “Little one become a
thousand,” d&c.


‘6 Far and wide, though all unknowing,
Pants for Thee each mortal breast ;
Human tears for Thee are flowing,
Human hearts in Thee would rest.
Saviour ! lo, the isles are waiting,
Stretched the hand and atrained the

sight.” —A. C. Coxs:


The realisation of the world’s hope is
in the kingdom of Jesus.

If. The spiritual kingdom : symbols
and external forms abandoned.

“ They shall say no more The Ark of
the covenant,” d&c. (ver. 16). The Ark
was but a shadow of Christ—in Him
dwelt the law; on Him rested the She-


OMAP, Ii





kinah, The real displaces and abrogates
the sign; and hearts no more rest in
signs when the real has come. Who
would longer bend over a portrait of a
child, when lo! the long-absent boy is
now returned and in the home? From
the picture the heart turns to embrace
the living one. (Addenda to chap. iii.
ver. 16, 17, “ Symbols.”)

II. The spiritual kingdom: loving
allegiance to the Lord.

Ver. 17. Gathering to and around ‘‘the
throne of the Lord” = binding themselves
loyally to Him ; the heart fixed on Him:
no God out Him: His “throne,” or
rule, drawing men into happy subjection
(cf. Matt. xi. 29, 30).

IV. The spiritual kingdom: inward
love manifested in holy life.

Ver. 17. “No more walk after evil
heart.” Loyally adhering to God, the
life shall be free from self-will and pur-
suit of selfish delights, walking in the
Saviour’s steps, following the Lord
fully. This Christian walk will be the
outward evidence of the inward allegi-
ance to God’s throne.

Comments:

Ver. 17. Not the Ark “shall be called
the throne of the Lord,” as formerly
it had been, but ‘“ Jerusalem,” 4.¢., the
Christian Church (Rev. xxi. 2; Gal. iv.
26; Zech. ii. 10, 11).—Speaker’s Com-
mentary.

The Ark had just been restored to its
place in the Temple with much solem-
nity and jubilant celebration by king,
and priests, and people. What a sub-
lime and far-reaching vision was this of
the prophet’s, which descried an age
when the Ark would be counted as no-
thing! And how much more glorious
that age!

“They will have the true Ark in
Christ. When the prophet says that the
Ark will no longer be remembered, and
yet Jerusalem will be called the throne
of the Lord (ver. 17), he means that the
whole Levitical economy—of which the
Ark was the centre and the key —would
pass away, and be succeeded and con-
summated in the presence and glory of
the Lord in His Church.”

“ Jerusalem” (the Church), will re-
ceive all nations into her bosom: where


OHAP. It,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





Christ is enthroned as king (Heb. xii,
22).— Wordsworth.


Ver, 16. Theme: CHRIST, THE TRUE
ARK OF THE COVENANT,


i, A most alarming and unwelcome
announcement. That the Ark would dis-
appear, and another not made. “It was
the most costly jewel of the people, the
central point of their whole existence,”
Overlaid with gold, overshadowed by
glory (Heb. ix. 4, 5), visible‘symbol of
Divine presence: borne by priests around
Jericho; national amaze when it was
taken by Philistines, joy when restored :
disasters befell nation in Saul’s days be-
cause Ark neglected ; prosperity under
David because honoured and a “resting-
place” provided; and, finally, the display
of Divine glory when Solomon trans-
ferred Ark to the Temple.

All this taught Israel that their safety
and prosperity were connected with Ark
of covenant. Called “Ark of God’s
strength” (2 Chron. vi. 41).

By some regarded with superstitious
awe rather than reverential fear; yet
by all as of incalculable value to the
nation.

ii. A bitter and irreconcilable loss.

1. Prophecy soon fulfilled. After de-
struction of Temple by Nebuchadnezzar,
the Ark was no more seen. Absent
from second Temple, which was built
soon after return from Babylon, This
a solemn and perpetual intimation to
them of the approaching removal of the
whole typical system.

2. Loss deeply lamented. These re-
turned Jews did not cease to remember
the Ark, but fondly hoped for its re-
storation. This prophecy, that an age
was nearing when the Ark “ would not
come to mind,” remained, therefore,
unfulfilled in them.

iii. A surpassing compensation pre-
dicted. The prophecy, that the Ark
would be no more remembered or sought,
implied a compensation which would far
exceed their loss; so that what they
once deplored as a privation, they would
rejoice and glory in as an unspeakable
gain.

1, The prediction must have seemed
incredible at the time; yet afterwards

68


proved consolatory. For in their loss of
the Ark, this prophecy assured them
God had better things in store.

2. How was the prediction fulfilled ?
In the appearing of Christ, the antitype
of the Ark, Himself “the brightness
of the Father’s glory,” God manifest in
the flesh.

iv. The realisation in Christ of all
the Ark symbolised.

1. The Divine nearness, 2. The
Deity bending mercifully over men: for
the mercy-seat was overshadowed. 3.
The helpful and healing grace of God.

1. Israelites who early became Chris-
tians, and enjoyed the presence of Christ
on earth, must have readily surrendered
and forgotten the Ark in the realisation
of Jesus and His tender grace.

2. Believers, though now not realising
Christ bodily among them, experience
His Spirit’s indwelling, revealing Christ
within. So that 1 Peter i. 8.

3. Contrite sinners can rejoice in
the tenderness, lowliness, and compas-
sion of Christ. None need any awful
visible token of the Divine nearness,

All can come with boldness to the
throne of grace: “ having boldness to
enter the holiest by the blood of Jesus.”

Arranged from Dr. Gordon’s “ Christ
as made known to the Ancient Church.”


Ver. 17. Toe Cuuron Caurist’s
THRONE. (Addenda to chap. iii. “Jerusa-
lem, God’s throne.”)


a, Jerusalem had been of old the


‘ throne of God: the symbol of God rested


on the Ark. Hence called the “ city of
the Great King.”

b. Jerusalem became the throne of
God as never before when Emmanuel
visited her. “Thou art the Son of God:
Thou the King of Israel.” Yet she re-
jected her King.

c. Christ by His death founded a
kingdom in which His Church has be-
come the true throne of God. This is
Zion, on which God hath set His King,
There He sways kingly power.

I In the converston of sinners the
kingly power and authority of Christ ts
manifested. Each case is a victory of
Christ over the “ enmity” of the carnal
mind and the resistance of hellish foes


2 emer


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; JEREMIAH.





OHAP, Iii.





Soul delivered “from power of Satan
unto God.”

Il. In maintaining His ascendancy
over the lives and affections of His con-
verts. “* Law in their members” at war
with Him. The world strives to wrest
them from His rule. Satan strives to
recover his lost power. But they are held
“in obedience to Christ,” and “kept
by the power of God unto salvation.”

Ill. In governing the world providen-
tially for His Church’s advantage. Christ
reigns as Mediator: “works all things
for our good” and His glory; and by,
and for, and from His Church He puts
forth His power, that shall subdue all
enemies under His feet. How does
Christ’s rule affect individual members
of His Church ?

1. To what extent can and may they
enjoy personally the presence of their
King? Sits enthroned in their heart
and affections individually.

2. Christ must hold unrivalled and
unlimited sway and sovereignty over
their lives. His kingship absolute:
their affections undivided: they habitu-
ally and entirely under the constrain-
ing influences of His love.

3. They will recognise that His care
extends to every individual believer,
sending expressions of His kindness and
love to each, and never—save in faith-
fulness—afflicting them.

In proportion as they are thus subject
unto Christ in everything do they enjoy
the liberty of the sons of God.—Jdem.

Vers. 18, 19. Theme; Division aNnD
REUNION.

As the separation of the kingdoms,
Israel and Judah, might indicate the


denominational divisions in Christen-


dom, so the reunion here promised may
suggest the method and basis of all true
union. This must rest on a double
negative and positive basis:

i, On the fundamental return of both
from the false ground on which they
have been standing (typified by the exit
of both tribes from the north country,
the land of captivity).

ii, On unreserved, sincere devotion to
the Lord, who is for both the only source
of life and truth (typified in the words,
“Thou shalt call me, My Father”),


ili. The result of this will be a condi-
tion of glorious prosperity in the Church
(typified in the first clause of ver. 19).—
Lange. (See Addenda to chap. iii, on
“* Denominationalism.”)


Ver. 19. Theme: THE TRUE SOURCE
OF SALVATION.


By Jeremiah God speaks as if at a
loss how to exercise towards them the
mercy He was inclined to bestow.

I. How the obstructions to the resto-
ration of the Jews shall be sur-
mounted.

l. God Himself presents to them the
formidable difficulty. Jews always had
been perverse. In wilderness: when in
promised land : till at length He gave up
ten tribes into hands of Assyria, and the
other two into hands of Chaldeans.
After restoration from Babylon, still as
rebellious: at last filled up the measure
of iniquity in the murder of their Messiah.
Now, though scattered 1900 years
over the earth, as obdurate as ever.
How restored to the favour of God? (1.)
Extent of their wickedness forbids
it. (2.) Honour of God forbids it. To
admit rebels to privileges encourages
rebellion. Appear an excess of genero-
sity subversive of all moral goverument.

2. These obstacles, though formidable,
shall be surmounted. God had expressed
His desire for their reconciliation.
“Wilt thou not cry, My Father?” (ver.
4). “Now He determines to effect it by
His almighty power. “Thou shalt
cry, My Father.” This will overcome
every obstacle. “If God will work,
who will let it?” Vain was the resist-
ance of Pharaoh, the sea, the wilderness,
the united nations. As God spake the
universe into existence, so will He form
the “new creation.”

II. How alone the difficulties in
the way of our salvation can ever
be overcome.

1. There are immense difficulties in
the way of our salvation. Our wicked-
ness equals or exceeds the Jews’. If
they “crucified the Lord of glory,”
have we not “crucified Him afresh”?
Jews of Christ’s day were more criminal
than Sodom, &c., because they had
greater light; but we have ve greater


GBaP. ik.


knowledge and advantages than even
they. Yet Heb. x. 29.

2. But these shall be overcome. If we
looked to ourselves, salvation hopeless ;
but are to look to Him. He will inter-
fere for us in a way of sovereign grace
and by the exercise of His almighty
power. (a.) His grace is His own, to
dispense as He will. Says, “ Thou shalt
cailme, My Father.” (6.) And His power
will perform it. ‘Thou shalt not turn
from me” (Isa. xlvi. 10).

i. To those who question the possi-
bility of their own salvation. God is able,

ii. To those who have entertained no
such fears. You think salvation easy ;
but only Christ’s blood could atone for
such sin as yours ; only the Divine Spirit
could renew your depraved heart.

iii, To those who profess to have
been brought into the family of God.
Obey and trust Him as your “ Father ;”
let nothing lead you to “turn away
from Him.”—Rev. C. Simeon, M.A.

Note: God does not (ver. 19) raise
difficulties into sight; it is not a cry of
amazement but of admiration, not a
contemplation of obstacles, physical,
moral, or spiritual, in the way of His
plans, but a joyous outlook on the
gracious purposes He cherishes; not an
allusion to the demerits and crimes of
Israel banished, but to the splendours,
blessedness, and exaltation of Israel, by
Divine grace restored. “ How will I put
thee?” (So all modern commentators.)

The words “Thou shalt call me, My
Father,” &c., do not furnish an answer
to a foregoing inquiry as to obstacles ;
they are a continuance of the strain of
admiring contenvplation.

Ver. 20. “ Surely as a wife treacher-
ously,” &c. The remembrance of Israel’s
past conduct rises unbidden in the
mind to cross, like a dark cloud, this
bright hope of Israel’s return to God,
of its consequent restoration to its place
as a child, and of its filial love to
Jehovah. The prophet brushes away
the passing doubt, and a vision of
penitent Israel opens before his gaze.

Ver. 21-25. Truk REPENTANOZ

1. It proceeds from the inmost heart ;
the weeping (ver. 21) and their shame
‘wer, 26) evince this.

zo


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; JEREMIAH,


2. It ws free from all dissimulation,
which might originate in a spirit of
compromise, or be prompted by alarm
at consequences of wickedness. Its
principle is sorrow at having grieved
God by the abuse of His love (see
ver, 21).

3. It is made known by the honest
Sruits of repentance; t.¢. apustasies
healed (ver. 22), detestation of evil
ver. 24), and yearning for the Lord
ee 25).

i, Its form: “weeping and supplica-
tions” (ver. 21). ii, ts subject: (a.)
Forgetting God and sinning against
Him (ver. 21, 25). (6.) The destruc-
tion resulting from sin’s deceptions (ver.
23 sq.). iii. Its object: salvation in God
(ver. 24).—Homily by Origen ; comp.
Lange.

Prayers and teara well become those
whose consciences tell them that they
have “ perverted their way ” (ver. 21).

1. They come devoting themselves to
God as theirs (ver. 22).

2. They come disclaiming all expecta-
tions of relief and succour but from
God only (ver. 23).

3. They come depending upon God
only as their (true and rightful) Lord
(ver. 23).

4. They come justifying God, judg-
ing themselves for their sin (ver. 24,
25).—M. Henry.

(See Addenda to chap. iii. ver. 24, 25,
“ Shame.”)

Ver. 25. Theme: PRosTRATE IN
ABASEMENT.


Guilt wastes the sinner’s substance
(ver. 24), as it did the younger son’s
when he rushed into prodigality.

But that is not the worst: it works
devastation of the soul; spoils the
character and dignity of the man.
How dreadful that God’s living “image”
on earth, God’s own nourished and be-
loved child, should thus “lie down in
shame !”

I. An awakened sinner’s self-ab-
horrent attitude.

1. Appalled at the heinousness of hia
sin.

2. Horrified at the indignity done to
God.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





8. Alarmed at the doom he has
merited.

4, Overwhelmed by the grace he has
experienced,

TZ. An adoring sinners lowly
approach to the Saviour.

1. To hide his whole past life in his
forgiveness and atonement, For all his
whole career “from youth even to this
day” plagues him. He must quench
the burning fire of his own memory in


OHAP. Il.








the “fountain opened for sin and un
cleanness,”

2. To draw all his hope for the
future from Christ. Having all along
“not obeyed,” his long-continued sinful-
ness has enslaved him; he cannot do the
good he would. He must be saved from
himself. “Lord, save me, or I perish.”
“Can the Ethiopian change his skin ?”
&c. (chap. xiii, 23), (Addenda to chap. iii,
ver. 25, “ We lie down in our shame.”)


ADDENDA TO CHAPTER Ill, ILLUSTRATIONS AND SUGGESTIVE EXTRACTS.


Ver. 3. “ Nolatter rain.” “Because
we obstruct God’s access to us, His
beneficence does not reach us. We
throw heaven and earth into confusion
by our sins) For were we in right
order as to our obedience to God,
doubtless all the elements would be
conformable. But as our lusts tumultate
against God, as we provoke Him by our
pride, perverseness, and obstinacy, it
must needs be that all things above and
below should be in disorder. This is
to be ascribed to our sins.” —Calvin.

Ver. 4. “The guide of my youth.”
Are we walking through life as directed
by our own mind and heart, or by the
Word, Spirit, and providence of God?
1. We are all travellers—(a.) as to time ;
from youth to age : (b.) as to place ; from
cradle to grave: (c.) as to circumstances ;
from wealth to poverty or the contrary :
(d.) as to mind ; from ignorance to know-
ledge: (e.) as to character ; improving or
otherwise : (f.) as to destiny ; to heaven
or hell 2, We need a guide who will
cheer, sustain, protect, direct us on our
way. God the only safe guide for the
youthful traveller (Ps, xxv. 9, xxxi, 3,
xxxii. 8; Isa. lviii. 11).

Ver. 7. “Treacherous Judah.”
Falsity ; hypocrisy.

**Satan was the firat


That practised falsehood under saintly show.”
—MILTOox.
“ An evil soul producing holy witness
Is like a villain with a smiling cheek,
A goodly apple rotten at the core,
Oh, what goodly outside falsehood hath !”
—SHAKESPEARR.


“The dial of our faces does not in-
fallibly show the time of day im our


hearts ; the humblest looks may enamel
the former, while unbounded pride
covers the latter. Unclean spirits may
inhabit the chamber when they look not
out at the window. A hypocrite may
be both the fairest and the foulest
creature in the world ; fairest outwardly
in the eyes of man, foulest inwardly in
the sight of God. Unclean swans
cover their black flesh with white
feathers.” —Secker.

Ver. 10. Huternal reform ; ritual.

“We make beautiful churches more
often than we do beautiful Christians.
We carve marbles, and rear fine propor-
tions in stone; we decorate walls and
altars; but these are only physical
representations, material symbols, while
the quality of beauty is in holiness.
The beauty of love in all its infinite
inflections, the beauty of justice and of
truth, these languish.’—Rev. H. W.
Beecher.

“We are not to judge a man by the
loudness of his profession, The one
determining question is not ‘Have you
a label outside?’ but ‘Have you the
grace of God in your heart ?’”—Dr.
Joseph Parker.

“ Feugnedly.” ‘It is possible for a
man to have a pulpit, and to have no
God; to have a Bible, and no Holy
Ghost.”—Jdem.

Ver. 12. The lost Ten Tribes. The
Beni-Rechab, sons of Rechab, still exist
as a distinct and easily distinguish-
able people, in number about 60,000.
They boast their descent from Rechab,
profess pure Judaism; all understand
Hebrew; live near Mecca—Comp.


Grey's “ Topics.”
9


CHAP. IL





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





There is a vast population in Afghan-
istan, of very evident Israelitish origin,
their customs, traditions and names
giving proof. The Jews of Bokhara
themselves suggest that the Ten Tribes
will be found in the vast interior of
China,

Sir W. Penn traces them in the
American Indians; others have re-
cognised them in the Nestorians of
Oroomiah, the Falashahs of Abyssinia.
In British India there are many indica-
tions of their presence ; eg., the Karens
of Burmah, distinct from the Burmese,
possessing traditions of the Fall, the
Flood, and the Divine anger against
their nation for worshipping idols.

Dr. Smith, however, remarks in his
“0, T. History,” that “The very wild-
ness of the speculations of those who
have sought them at the foot of the
Himalayas and on the coast of Malabar,
among the Nestorians of Abyssinia
and the Indians of North America,
proves sufficiently the hopelessness of
the attempt.”


‘Like the dew on the mountain (Hos. xiii. 12),
Like the foam on the river (x. 7),
Like the bubble on the fountain,
They are gone, and FOR EVER.”


Ver. 13. “Only acknowledge thine
iniquity.” ‘* Pardon can only be secured
by the consent of both parties. I may
have offended you. You may come to
me and say, ‘You have deeply grieved
me; but I forgive.’ I can snap my
fingers in your face and say, ‘Take your
forgiveness away; I don’t want to be
forgiven by you.’ Observe, therefore,
that you have not the power to forgive
me. You can forgive the crime, but
you cannot forgive the sinner. But if
I come to you and say, ‘I have injured
you; I see I must have given you pain ;
I did you wrong; I am sorry in my
heart,’ and you then say, ‘With my
heart I forgive you;’ then the transac-
tion is based on moral principles. It
is so with God. God cannot pass an
act of universal amnesty: He cannot
open all the prison-doors of the universe
and say to the criminals, ‘Come forth ;
I forgive you all’ But if they in their
condemned cells would but heave one

73


sigh of penitence, and utter one cry fos
God’s forgiving mercy, every bolt wonld
fall off, every lock fly back, and there
would be no prison in all the universe
of God.”—Parker.


Anoiznt Hymn, BY JoHN Marp.ey, 1562,
ON JER. iii, 12-25.


OQ Lord, turn not Thy face away
From them that lowly lie (ver. 25),

Lamenting sore their sinful life
With tears and bitter cry (ver. 21).


“Thy mercy-gates are open wide
To them that mourn for sin (ver. 18),
Oh, shut them not against us, Lord,
But let us enter in (ver. 12).


’


“We need not to confess our fault,
For surely Thou canst tell ;
What we have done and what we are
Thou knowest very well (ver. 20).


‘‘ Wherefore to beg, and to entreat,
With tears we come to Thee (ver. 21, 32}
As children that have done amiss
Fall at their father’s knee (ver, 19),
“Mercy, O Lord, mercy we seek,
This is the total sum ;
For mercy, Lord, is all our prayer,
Oh, let Thy mercy come” ! (ver. 22).


Ver. 16, 17. Symbols of the spiritual.
“The time is coming when _institu-
tionalism shall be lost in spirituality ;
for the seer said, ‘I saw no temple
therein.’ . . . Why should we have the
sign when we have the substance? for
He Himself is the Temple, and there
needeth no outward building, no outward
light. He is Temple, He is Light ;—
and when we stand before Him, all that
is material, visible, and most helpful by
the way, will be no longer necessary.”—
Parker.

“ Jerusalem, God’s throne.”


**Lord, Thou didst love Jerusalem,

Once she was all Thine own ;

Her love Thy fairest heritage,
Her power Thy glory’s throne 3

Till evil came and blighted
Thy long-loved olive-tree,

And Salem’s shrines were lighted
For other gods than Thee,


“Then sunk the star of Solyma,

Then passed her glory’s day,

Like heath that in the wilderness
The light wind blows away.

Silent and waste her bowers
Where once the mighty trod,

And sunk those guilty towers
Where Baal reigned as God.”

—Moozra


ert


od ie Ie


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.








Ver. 18. Denominationalism.

“*T do not want the walls of separa-
tion between different orders of Chris-
tians to be destroyed, but only lowered,
that we may shake hands a little easier
over them.”—Rowland Hill,

Vers, 24 and 25. “Shame,” cf. v. 3
“ refuseth to be ashamed.”

“Shame is a great restraint upon
sinners at first ; but that soon falls off;
and when men have once lost their
innocence, their modesty is not like to
be long troublesome to them. For im-
pudence comes on with vice, and grows
up with it. When men have the heart
to do a very bad thing, they seldom
want the face to bear it out.”—Tllotson.


’





OWaP Iv.





polluted the idolatrous altars in the land
by burning dead priests’ bones thereon
(2 Chron. xxxiv. 5); so do transgressors
against God degrade their spiritual
nature, and profane the altar within
their hearts which God intended for
His homage and resting-place.

“ Huen unto this day.” “As it is
never too soon to be goud, so it is never
too late to amend: I will, therefore,
neither neglect the time present, nor
despair of the time past. If I had
been sooner good, I might, perhaps,
have been better; if I am longer bad, i
shall, I am sure, be worse.” — Warwick's
“ Spare Minutes.”

“ We lie down in our shame.”


The legend says, that a sinner being
at confession, the devil appeared, saying
that he came to make restitution. Being
asked what he came to restore, he said,
“Shame: for it is shame that I have
stolen from this sinner to make him
shameless in sinning; and now I have
come to restore it to him, to make him
ashamed to confess his sins.” — Dictionary
of Illustration,

Ver. 25. Stn debases the soul. As
Josiah in God’s name desecrated and


*¢ Weary with my load of sin,
All diseased and faint within,
See me, Lord, Thy grace entreat,
See me prostrate at Thy feet;
Here before Thy cross I lie,
Here I live, or here I die.


“T have tried and tried in vain
Many ways to ease my pain;
Now all other hope is past,
Only this is left at last ;
Here before Thy cross I lie,
Here I live, or here I die.” —
Wave Rosinsog.


CHAPTER IV.


Critioan and Exxartioat Notrs.—Chronology of the chapter, Contemporary Scriptures, His-
toric Facts, Contemporary History as in cap. iii, 1. Geographical References. Ver 5. “ De-
fenced cities.” Some existed in Canaan before Israelites took possession (Numb. xiii. 28).
Solomon erected others :—Tadmor, Geger, Hazor, Bethlehem, Megiddo, &, (1 Kings im. 15-19).
But Jerusalem, fortified by David (2 Sam. v. 7, 9, 10), was the chief stronghold of the nation
(ver. 6). When Titus, later in history, besieged Jerusalem, he viewed with amazement, and
expressed his admiration of, its impregnable strength (see Josephus Wars, Book vi. ch. ix. § 1),
Ver. 11. ‘‘ High places in the wilderness ; ranges of bare hills by which the sandy deserts to the
east of Palestine are intersected (Hend.). Ver. 15. ‘‘ Dan and Mount Ephraim.” Dan, the most
northern landmark of Palestine, the border town, at the foot of Mount Lebanon, near source of
Jordan, Its original name, Laish (¢f. Joshua xviii. 7, xix. 47) ; captured by a detachment of the
tribe of Dan, who went thither to colonise, because the limited area assigned to the tribe was too
strait for them : these gave the name Dan to thetown. Mount Ephraim, a range of high lands,
rounded limestone hills, broken up by intersecting luxuriant valleys, running through the
territory allotted to the tribe of Ephraim : the name specially denoted the mountainous district
ranging from Ebal and Gerizim southward to Bethel, in length about twenty miles, Thus
Dan was the northern frontier of Palestine : Mount Ephraim, the northern boundary of Judea,
Their connection here denotes that scarcely would news that the enemy had appeared at Dan
(where the northern invaders would first show themselves) be published, ere the foe would, in
rapid raarch, have penetrated to the very centre of the Holy Land, and scaled the frontier of
Judea. Ver. 29. ‘‘ Climb up upon the rocks.” The fastnesses of mountainous rocks proved
secure asylums from hostile invaders ; where also, unable to resist them in the open field, the
Israelites made unconquerable resistance (Judges vi. 2, xx. 47, 1 Sam. xiii, 6, xiv. 4 8q., Isa. ii,

iii. 16).

Ms Natural titstory. Ver. 8. “ Fallow-ground :” land left untilled, not touched by plough or
sown with seed, for the Sabbatical year ; hence hard, needing to be “ broken up,” and overgrown
with thorns, which must be cleansed away. Ver. 11. ‘‘Dry wind:” the KE. wind which was


dry or withering (Ezek. xix. 12), or the Simoom, frequently mentioned in Old i ke


CHAP, IV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.








which blew from the Arabian desert, blasting vegetation and human life: “‘net to fan and
cleamse” the grain, but ravage and destroy. Ver.13. “ Clouds and whirlwind:” the Simoom
raises “‘ clouds ” of sand and dust, which whirl up and cover the sky : these are the “‘ chariota,” and
the hurricanes the ‘‘swift horses” suggested by the simile. “ Horses :” the Chaldean cavalry,
which were exceeding swift. “ Eagles:’’ Kenophon tells us that the Assyrian armies (ergo,
the Chaldean) bore the eagle with wings outspread as a military ensign upon their banners (¢f.
Hab. i. 8; Isa. viii. 8; Jer. xlviii. 40; Hos. viii. 1). So also the Persians, and the Romana
after them. In Leviticus xi. 18, the eagleis ranked among the unclean birds.

8. Manners and Oustoms. Ver. 6. “Set up the standard :” to rally the inhabitants of the


country around to the defenced cities for refuge from invaders. Vota military standard ( a)


but a signal (D3) a flag, some well-understood beacon to warn or summon the people. Ver.
13. ‘‘ Chariots: formed a marked feature of Nebuchadnezzar’s army (Haek. xxiii. 24, xxvi. 7).
Their invention has been attributed to Ericthonius of Athens, 8.0. 1486; but Scripture showa
that Egyptians used them earlier than that (Ex. xiv. 7; of. 2 Kings xviii. 24). Solomon im-
ported them from Egypt (1 Kings x. 28, 29). Ver. 16. ‘‘ Give oud their voice ag snst,” &e. :
the war-shout raised by armies when about to give battle. Instance in Judg. vii. 20. This was
the custom with Hebrews, who also sometimes sang a war song (2 Chron. xx. 21) immediately
before the attack. Greek armies did the same. Ver. 17. “ Keepers of a field.” Watch was
kept over pasturing flocks (Luke ii. 8) and over cultivated fields and plantations : these
“keepers” constructed, for shelter from sun by day and security by night, booths (Job xxvii. 18);
probably then, as now, a simple framework covered with branches of trees, and raised on four
poles. These fields were surrounded by keepers placed at given distances, one of whom raised
the cry on danger appearing which the others in turn took up, till echoing voices sounded
around the whole scene. ith these booths are compared the tents of besiegers, and their cry
over danger, with the war-shout of the foe. Ver. 20. ‘‘Zents:” the ordinary habitations
of Israelites (2 Sam. xviii, 17): not only did the nomads like the Rechabites live in them, but
the mass of the population engaged in pastoral pursuits (Speaker’s Com.). Ver. 30. ‘‘ Crime
son,” a rich shade of scarlet, a deeper dye: ‘‘ornamenis of gold,” rings in nose and eara,
anklets, embroidered girdles, &c. “ Rentest thy face with painting :” “face” should be “eyes.”
Among Eastern females then, and now, the custom prevailed of using a metallic ore, reduced
to an impalpable powder, sttbium, cohol, antimony, mixed into a paste with oil or vinegar, for
darkening the eyes. A smooth cylindrical piece of silver, ivory, or wood, shaped like a quill,
about two inches long, was dipped into the stibium, and drawn horizontally through between
the closed eyelids. This increased the lustre of the eyes, imparted a jetty blackness to the
edges of the lids, showing off the whiteness of the eyes to great advantage. Frequent use in-
jured the eyes, making them look as if ‘‘rent.’’ The eyebrows and outer angles of the eyea
were by this ‘‘ painting” artificially extended across the face, and the eyes apparently enlarged,
Large dark eyes are regarded as essential to Oriental beauty.


‘There with a tiring pin their eyebrows dys,
Till the full arch gives lustre to the eye
That, trembling, darts lascivious glances.”
—JUVENAL’S Satine II. 187-40.


Xenophon deseribes it as a custom among the Medes in the time of the elder Cyrus : se
great the antiquity and prevalence of this device of vanity. The earliest record of this custom
is in 2 Kings ix. 30, Jezebel,

4. Literary Criticisms. Ver. 1. “ Not remove:” ,Hend. Noyes and De Wette, “not be a
fugitive.” Lange, ‘‘then waver not.” But Keil, Ewald, Hitzig, and Speaker’s Com. regard the
words as a second condition, ‘‘and strayest, or wanderest not:” te, ‘if thou put away
abominations, and wanderest not, and swearest by Jehovah, then shall the nations,” &c. It
requires abandonment of idols, the end of wanderings, the oath of fidelity. Ver. 5. “Cry,
gather together ;” rather, make full, meaning “‘ery with full voice,” aloud. Ver. 6. “‘ Retire,
stay not.” Hend. ‘‘flee for refuge, stand not still.” Speaker’s Com. “‘ gather your goods to-
gether, linger not:” the same verb in Ex. ix. 19 used for removing property to a safe place.
Keil, “save yourselves by flight.” Sharpe, ‘‘ flee in haste, stay not.” “‘/ will bring.” 1am
bringing. Ver. 12. ‘A full wind:” i.¢., a stronger wind than that which comes to winnow :
“shall come unto me:” rather for me, as my instrument, to effect my purpose. Ver. 14.


“ Vain thoughts :” t.¢., tdolatrous, iniquitous thoughts, Ts sain of idolatry: ¢f: Hosea iv,
15, v. 8, and the Heb. of Amos v. 5, where Beth-e} (the house of Jehovah) is called Beth-aven
(the house of idolatry). Ver. 15. “ Publish affiction :” the same word as in ver. 14. NS here


meaning calamity: this use of the same word links together iniquity and calamity. Ver. 19.
‘* At my very heart:” translated as if the Hebrew words were idiomatic: but literally, “at the
walls of my heart,” Ver. 23. “Without form and woid:” the same phrase as in Gen. i. 2,


W2) wh, the ee chaos reproduced. Ver. 24. “Hills moved lightly:” rather,
vehement motion, 7 prey, the violent agitations of mountains during earthquake. Vez
74


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. OHAP. KV.














20. “The whole city:” should read, sither the whole land (Targum and L2x.), or every city


(Keil, Speaker's Com., &e). Ver. 30. “And when thou art spoiled,” &. Omit italics in A.V.
‘And thou spoiled,” 4.2, “ And thou, O spoiled one:” via. Jerusalem: addressed as @ woman
who decks herself in her best attire to attract lovers; although the masculine form ww
ia used : but Keil suggesta, “it is to be regarded as adverbial, and so is without inflection AD
Hend. suggests that DY, people, denoting the inhabitants, is to be understood. Ver. 31.


My soul 13 wearied because of murderers:” Keil, ‘‘sinketh powerless beneath murderers.”
Speaker's Com., “sinks exhausted before them.” Noyes, “I am dying of murderers,”


HOMILIES AND OUTLINES ON SECTIONS OF CHAPTER IV.


_ Bection 1-4. Return to God would recover favours for Israel, and avert doom from Judah,


» _5-18. Judah refusing to return, her doom is graphically portrayed.
» 19-26. Jeremiah beholds the beautiful land utterly devastated.
» 427-81. Abandoned to judgment, yet not consigned to destruction.


Vers. 1-4, Return To Gop RECOVERS FAVOURS, AND AVERTS DOOM.


Jehovah requires of the sinful more than return to good habits, or to religions
observances : they must obey the call “ Return to Mz!” Man must come back to
God Himself. It is possible: God desires it: and the Way we know.

I. Securing God’s acceptance must precede possession of God’s inheritance


“Tf thou wilt return [to thy inheritance in Canaan], O Israel, return unto Me,
_ saith the Lord.” Enemies cannot occupy God’s cherished possession. It is a gift


of grace, dependent on man’s loyalty and love. Sin forfeits all right to it;
surrenders even the occupancy (as Israel). 1. Reconciliation ts the pathway to privi-
leges. 2. Repentance is the door to reconciliation. 3. God’s favour ts the qualifi-
catson for Canaan,

II, Surrounding nations won to God by the event of Israel’s conversion.
This is portrayed in Scripture as—l. A great prophetic fact. Israel’s return will
inaugurate the millennial glory, the ingathering of the nations to Christ. The world
cannot become the Lord’s until this event is realised. ‘ All nations shall be blessed
in Him :” when He “the God of Israel doth wondrous things ” (cf. Ps, Ixxii. 17-19;
Rom. xi. 12-15). 2. A grand perennial principle. The same truth is constantly


_ working itself out in present experience: society is awakened to seek Christ in


seasons of revival of the Church ; circles of acquaintance are impressed religiously
by the conversion of one of their company ; homes are won to Jesus by the return
of a single member to the Lord. If true that “one sinner destroyeth much
good ;” equally true that one conversion effects wide and salutary results,

Ill. Gathering fury against sin may be arrested by true Repentance (ver. 3, 4),
Clearly it is affirmed that—l. Divine anger accumulates as human sin grows, Thus
prolonged guilt and excessive guilt “‘heaps up wrath against the day of wrath.”
Man feeds the fire, and heata its fury, by every act of sin. 2. Divine anger may
be appeased by sincere human contrition. “God is angry with the wicked,” but
only as long as they persist in wickedness, That ended, anger ceases, It is not
anger with the man apart from this evil quality ; it is the man plus his sin who
entails the displeasure, Sorrow in man’s heart at once quenches the fire of God’s
displeasure. Horrifying as had been Judah’s criminality, contrition would avert
its just retribution. Hence, the stnner’s escape ts conditional upon himself. Will
he deplore and desert his sin? God may desire to save, may provide salvation;
but nothing avails until sorrow awakes tn the soul of man. The yearning father
forbears to embrace his boy until he “ comes to himself” and returns.

IV. Impenitence will eventually be punished with woful destruction.
There are three aspects of God’s anger denoted: 1. It is frery; “like fire,” held
in restraint now, but to “come forth,” and burn with “fury” (Heb. xii. 29). 2.
1¢ ts unguenchable: t¢., when once God lets it loose ; it “ will burn al cae


CHAP. IV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAZ.





uench it” (Matt. iii, 12). 3. It is merited; “because of the evil of your doings.”
This will create in the sufferer’s heart “‘ the worm that dieth not,” and occasion the
“wailing and gnashing of teeth.” Comp. Ezek. xxxiii, 17-20.


Vera. 5-18. Jupan Impznrrent: Her Doom PortkAayED


Lange points out ‘‘ Three Emblems” under which the coming disasters are hire —
represented: First Emblem, the Laon (vers. 5-10): Second Emblem, the Z'empest
(vers. 11-13): Third Emblem, the Keepers (vers. 14-18). Modern German —
criticism has attempted to fix this prophecy on a Scythian, not Chaldean, invasion ;
which is affirmed, but wholly without historic proof, to have occurred in the 7th or
8th year of Josiah. It is the outcome of a rationalistic dislike of the supernatural
element in prophecy: hence these critics first fix on an imaginary event, and then —
proceed to show that the prophet’s words are mere “disguised descriptions of ©
historical events” already past, or menaces of events clearly within the sight of a
sagacious observer. [See Eichhorn, Ewald, Hitzig, Dahler, &c.] There is no his-
torical evidence of a Scythian invasion of Judea. Heroditus (i. 103-105) records
that the Scythians invaded Media, and dominated for 28 years over Asia: that
they came to Syrian Palestine, on their way against Egypt, and that Psammeticus,
king of Egypt, induced their withdrawal by giving them presents ; and that they
committed no violence beyond plundering the temple of Ascalon, There is
abundant proof against even this having occurred in Josiah’s reign. All the
description is minutely suggestive of the Chaldean invasion ; this was the Divinely-
employed agent of Judah’s overthrow. Her doom

i. Solemnly forewarned (vers. 5, 6) throughout the whole land; loudly and —
clearly ; measures of defence counselled ; haste and precautions advised,

ii. Appallingly real (vers. 7, 8, 18, 15, 16), whence (“ the north ;”) savage (ver
7); swift (13); approaching (15) ; for war (16 “ give out their voice”),

iii, Paralysing all resources of help and counsel (vers. 9, 10) ; surpassing all ex-
pectation ; rendering powerless all opposition ; refuting all false promises,

iv. Hffecting God’s purposes (vera. 11, 12). It would be in effect God's
“sentence ;” righteous therefore and irrevocable.

v. Bitierly retributive (vers. 17, 18), the fruit of her severing herself from God’s
favour and protection; the penalty of her sin ; bitter as death.

vi. Salvation yet possible (ver. 14). “Out of the heart are the issues of life.”
A cleansed heart would ensure salvation.


Vers. 19-26. A Movurxyot Vision: tak Hoty LAND UTTERLY DEVASTATED.


The insensate nation foresaw no calamity, feared no foe. Vivid as all was to
the prophet’s perception they dreamed on heedlessly ; sleeping amid iniquity
while sudden destruction sped towards them. He saw the sword, they mocked at
his warnings. So Noah in his generation: so every prophet: socur Divine Lord;
so the preacher of God to-day. His eye is open to nearing woe; but the people
mock, despise and reject, repudiate warning, and betake themselves, besotted and
blinded, to iniquity.

L The Seer’s anguish constrains him to speak (ver. 19). This throws light
on

i. The Seer’s sufferings. He feels what he foreseee: his whole nature is wrung
with grief at the vision which none but himself can perceive. The finer the man’s
nature, the keener his anguish. The clearer his penetrations, the more intense hia
sufferings. The nobler his patriotiem, the heavier lies the burden of his nation’s woe
upon his heart. The higher his piety, the more bitter his grief over all.

ii. The Seer’s mission. Inwardly constrained, he speaks out of a full and an
agonising heart; “I cannot hold my peace.” Divinely enlightened, he sees what

; 16


i


rf


is


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. CHAP. IV.








- is hid from the people, and ‘‘ cannot but speak the things he has seen and heard.”


Loving his people, he would fain shield them from the woe he forecasts, and


“snatch them as brands out of the burning.”


IL The miseries of the perishing become the prophet’s own (ver. 20, 21).


_ “ My tents spoiled!” &c. This suggests the true attitude of God’s messenger.


1, Identification of interests (Rom. xi. 1): himself bound up with them: suffer-


ing what they suffer. This is the real shepherding of the flock.


2. Intense sympathy of soul. He hears and sees all as if he were involved.


_ There is no proud distinguishing and justifying of himself. He and his people are
one. [Addenda ver. 19. Prophet's distress. |


1 Rejection of God’s messenger, the act of madness (ver. 22). No uncom-
mon incident. Every age rejects and ignores its benefactors, teachers, and saviours,
The more evidently these bear the seal and dignity of God’s messengers, the more


_ the world hates them.” ‘If it hated d/e,” says Jesus, “it will you.”


1. Surcrdal folly: “ My people is foolish, they have not known Me:” they


- frivolously ignored this man whom God had sent to speak to them.


2. Besotted blindness : “they are sottish children,” &c. Their intelligence, dis-
cernment, and religious education, all were darkened by sin (2 Cor. iv. 3, 4).

3. Spiritual perversity : “ wise to do evil,” not naturally witless ; “but to do
good they have no knowledge,” their religious nature brutalised.

IV. The horrifying vision of gathering calamity described (vers. 23-26). 1.


_ Appalling disorder and gloom (ver, 23); ¢.¢., the withdrawal of all peace and
_ privilege in which God has established Judah. 2. Terrifying overthrow (ver. 24) ;


t.¢., the casting down utterly and hopelessly of every natural stronghold in which


_ Judah had been wont to trust, and thought to flee. 3. All life perished (ver. 25) ;


t.e., none should escape; calamity would fall on every one. 4, Sacrilege and ruin
(ver. 26); nothing, however beautiful, cultured or revered, spared : lovely gardens,
noble and wealthy cities, all gone. Nothing left of all human trusts and treasures:
if, therefore, “‘ without God,” total loss (see Rev. vi. 12-17).


Vers. 27-31. ABANDONED TO JUDGMENT, YET NOT CoNSIGNED TO DESTRUCTION.


There is a reserve of mercy in all God’s strokes ; He softens the severity, keeps
open the door of hope, makes a “ way of escape.” Stars shine, though obscured,
through the stormiest night: and a promise may be heard even amid (God's
’reaviest denunciations (Gen. iii. 14, 15).

I. Merciless forces are under the Divine restraint (ver. 27). Though the
land should be desolated, yet “J will not make a full end.” The overthrow of
Judah by the Chaldeans was God’s work ; and the limitation of the Chaldean
policy of extermination was equally of the Lerd.

1. Their reckless implacability. Look at the Chaldean army, it promised little
restraint ; it menaced with heedless, merciless destruction. Nebuchadnezzar seems
to have organised iuto a consolidated army wild hordes of freebooters, mere relics
of those nations Assyria had overthrown and absorbed. These he gathered to-
gether, and with them swept the lands (2 Kings xxiv. 1, 2, of. Habak. i 5-12).
Little consideration or mercy from them !

2. There ts use even for them in God’s Providence. They are His scourge of re-
bellious Judah. So Habakkuk avers (i. 12) ; these very Chaldeans God “ ordained
them for judgment,” &c, He maketh the wrath of man to praise Him.

3. There is a limit to their power and fury. “ Yet will 1. not make a full end”
(Comp. iii, 14). The ten tribes are lost, withont national existence ; greater
nations than Judah disappear for ever—Nineveh, Babylon (Jer. li. 64), the
Assyrians, Greeks, Romans. But the Jews are not annihilated. ‘‘ Hitherto shalt
thou come and no further,” &c. God is mightier than mightiest forces ; bi at


OHAP. IV. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.





le when using merciless agencies ; while “the end of the Lord is very pitiful *
Jas. v. 11).

IL Divine plans lie behind all great events. The rise and fall of empires, the
downfall and enthronement of kings; all are according to the mind of Him who is
King of kings, and doeth according to His will among the inhabitan‘s of the earth.
Here is shown that God regulates—1. Even disasters: such as to make heaven and
earth mourn (ver. 28). 2. Hven victories of the wicked: He permits these to
triumph over the people whom God had once chosen; as Chaldeans over Judah
“the house of David.” 3. ven the punishment of God’e people : sore afflictions,
humiliations, and disasters which overtake us (ver. 29), 4. Aven the ruin of sin
ners. God allows it; purposes it; and ‘ will not repent:” so Judah was ruined !


III. Rebellion reduced to ultimate defeat and despair (ver. 30, 31).


deed to yield to God, yet yield it shall.


1. Hven in her overthrow Judah sought other helpers, not God (ver. 30).


Slow in-


She


sought by skilful and foolish appliances to win favour, to gain lovers, and so do —


without God, and avoid submission and repentance.


against God to the last.


Sinners will hold out


Yes, even in the hour of affliction, of disaster and death,


the ‘‘rebellious” will refuse to seek the Lord, or cry to the Crucified One to save,


2. She realised at length her absolute and completed misery (ver. 31).
daughter of Zion bewaileth herself,” dc.


“The
Observe : her grief and anguish is not


for her sin, but for “ herself ””—“ woe is me now!” for her misery ;, and also her


helpless, hopeless ruin: “my soul wearied because of murderers.”


Such are the


issues of rebellion : such the shame and woe to which the guilty are abandoned.
God has reserved to Judah a last hope (ver. 27) ; just so, He calls to us “after so


long a time.”


Heed ver. 14. [Addenda ver. 31.


Woe-stricken. |


HOMILIES AND COMMENTS ON VERSS3S OF CHAPTER IV.


Ver. 1. Theme: God GAINED OR
HEavEN Lost. “If thou wouldst re-
éurn [to thine inheritance, thou must
first] return unto Me.”

I. Phe alien outcast may return to
God. By conversion ; renewal of heart ;
prayer for pardon and _ acceptance ;
humble faith.

It. The far-off banished one may
find God. None too distant from Him
to pray, to be heard, to be assured of
acceptance, to be restored to the long
lost love and peace and bliss. Israel in
a strange country, removed from her
land and altars and temple, could never-
theless seek Him in spirit.

II. The returning soul shall be
brought home. When God is found,
the soul back again in His love, heaven
is sure to follow. God kept Canaan for
Israel, keeps it still empty awaiting her
return. Seek Him, not heaven ; He will
give that. Our sole concern is to find
the Father. “It is His good pleasure
to give us the kingdom.” “ Jesus said,
I am the way, &c.: no man cometh
unto the Father but by Me.”

78


Theme; SIN BANISHED, OR THE 80UL
BANISHED. “If put away abomina-
tions, thou shalt not remove;” t.e. (ag
some render it), no longer be a wanderer,
an outcast in a far-off land. (Addenda
ver. 1. Banished recalled.)

L Sin cannot dwell where God is
And God dwelt amid Israel when she
was “holiness” (ii, 3). Becoming
guilty she was banished; remaining
guilty she must keep afar from God,
Our guilt separates us necessarily from
Him (Isa. lix. 2). See instances of
conscious unworthiness (Isa. vi 5; Lk,
v. 8).

II. Sinners cannot possess God’s
heritage (cf 1. Cor. vi. 9, sg. Rev.
xxi, 27). Retaining sin in the heart
ensures exclusion: for it creates un/it-
ness, and would incur the frown of God
and the horror of the holy ones—thus
depriving heaven of all heavenliness to
the condemned soul. Any defilement,
even hidden, would destroy in the soul
the sense of Atmess for God’s glorious
heritage, and make his existence self-
condemned this would desolate heaven





er


soul.


HOOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


OuAP. IV,





of joy. Only “the pure in heart can


see God,”
TIL Sin may be separated from the
“Put away abomination” (ef.


Isa. i 18; Zech. iii, 4; xiii, 1, 2;
_ Matt. i 21; 1 Cor. vi. 11) Other

methods have been tried: but “ who
can bring a clean thing out of an un-


clean?” Jesus only. (Addenda ver.
1, Stn banished, or no heaven.)

IV. Sinners may then have a right
to the Divine presence.

1. A right to enter through the gates
(comp. Rev. xxii. 14), where the proper


a reading is, “ Blessed are they that have
_ washed their robes, that they may have


“To go no more out.”


right,” d&c.

2, Fitness to abide in God’s sight
(Rev. xiv. 4, 5).

3. Assured of endless rest therein.
“Thou shalt
not remove.” ‘And so shall they be
for ever with the Lord.”

Norts. If the words “thou shalt not
remove” be rendered as with Henderson,
“not be a fugitive,” (comp. Gen. iv.
12-14). i. The horrors of banishment ;
ii, The conditions on which that state may
be reversed, ‘ Put away,” &c.

Or if rendered, “then waver not”
(Lange & Wordsworth) t.¢., be steadfast
in thy repentance, or be prompt and
firm and thorough in thy conversion.
i, Sin cannot be put away partially: it
is dishonest, revolting to God, ii. Only
resolute and entire repentance will avasl
before God. He will accept us only
then.

Observe how God views idols: “ abo-
minations.” He would have everything
which interposes between the soul and
Himself ‘put out of His sight.” His
love of man is such that He cannot con-
sent to divided allegiance. His loathing
of sin is so intense that He cannot
allow it to remain under His eye.

Comments: Ver. 2. Concerning
Swearing By Oats. “And thou
shalt swear, the Lord liveth,” &c.

The A.V. makes this verse unin-
telligiblee The phrase, The Lord
liveth, is the regular form of the Jewish
oath, and means, not the thing sworn
to, but the thing sworn by—By the life
of Jehovah, But every nation swears by


the highest object of its worship (Deut,
x. 20, &c.), and the prophecy that
Egyptians should swear to Jehovah (Isa.
xix, 18), implied their conversion to the
true faith, Here, similarly, the oath is a
confession of faith in Jehovah, as the
true God. (Speaker's Com.)

To swear by Jehovah, means to bind
one’s self bya solemn profession toadhere
to His worship and service (comp. Deut.
vi. 13; x. 20; Isa. xix. 18 ; Amos, viii.
14). And the profession should be not
alone, or merely that of the lips, but
accompanied with uprightness of heart
and strictest rectitude of conduct.—
Henderson.

Thou shalt swear, not by thine tdols
{Amos. viii. 14; Zeph. i. 5), but by the
Lord ; not with vain oaths, but for such
causes, and with such conditions, as
constitute a righteous oath (Words-
worth). A good oath has always these
three concomitants—truth, judgment,
and justice. If these are wanting, an
oath becomes a perjury (Jerome).
[Addenda ver. 2. Zhou shalt swear.]

That we may not take God’s name
in vain, we must awear in:

1. “Truth :” commanded Lev. xix.
12; we must not swear falsely to per-
jure ourselves, in assertion, either tn
cognito, when we know, or in dubio,
when we know not, nor tn promission,
when either we resolve not to perform,
or do not perform.

2. “Justice ;” which requires that
we only swear in honestis et possibilibus,
in things honest and possible; for that
which is dishonest is not just, and an
impossible matter is not at all to be
sworn to. A thing impossible or dis-
honest is so, either from the very be-
ginning, or cometh to be so afterwards.
Thus Herod’s oath was unlawful both
in the making and the keeping of
it; for in keeping it he added two
other sins to that of rash swearing:
manslaughter and foolish superstition.
“When an evil thing is promised, cut
the thread:” as David did (1 Sam.
xxv, 22, 32).

3. “‘ Judgment:” which  requireth
three things of us. (a) That we take an
oath reverently, not rashly, Eccles. v. 2.
(B.) To take it as a holy thing, and there


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH,





CHAP. 5V.





fore not make it common. (y.) We must
account it a matter spiritual, and not
say, juran lingud, mentem injuratam
gero, I swore with my tongue, my mind
and intention were not sworn ; for God
will take that sense which the words
carry. God so understands an oath as
he who propounds it.— Bishop Andrewes.

Swearing by Jehovah involves the
acknowledgment of His deity. For no
one would swear by Him who was not
convinced that He is the witness of
truth and the avenger of falsehood. But
to swear by others robs God of His
glory and gives it to idols (isa, xiii, 8).
—Lange.


Theme; Isr’vvs RETURN sHALL
ALLURE THE GENTILES TO THE LorD.
If Israel repents, it will become the
means of making the Gentiles partakers
of the patriarchal promise (Gen. xxii.
18). Two great truths taught: i That
the Gentiles were to be members of the
Church of the Messiah ; ii. That Israel's
peculiar office was to be God’s mediator
in this great work. —Speaker’s Com.

i. If the heathen “ bless themselves”
in Jehovah, they are become partakers
of the salvation which comes from Him.
ii If this blessing comes to them in
consequence of Israel’s conversion, then
Israel is the channel of their salvation.
Israel’s apostasy has delayed this: Is-
rael’s conversion is necessary to the com-
pletion of the Divine plan of universal
redemption.—Comp. Keil.

When the long-deluded and spiritu-
ally-oppressed heathen come to “know
the only true God, and Jesus Christ
whom He has sent,” they will indeed
“bless themselves,’ for Christianity
blesses its possessor; but they will
“glory in Him,” for it is a worthy fact
for glorying that not vain idols are our
gods, but that Jehovah is ours,—ours
to trust, and claim, and love: that
Jesus has redeemed, loved, and acknow-
ledged us as His!

M. Henry says, If the scattered Is-
raelites will thus return to God,—i.
They shall be blessed themselves, for 80
ver. i, may read—brought back out of
captivity to their own land (Deut. iv.
29, xxx. 2), or, shall return to Me as their

80


rest even while in exile. ii They shall
be blessings to others; for their return ||
shall be a means of others turning to

Him who never knew Him; Israel
would influence the nations, among whom
scattered, to “ bless themselves in Him,”
t.¢., shall find their blessedness in Him,
shall join themselves to Him, and “shall
glory ” in the blessed change they have

made, |


Ver. 3. Theme: Sou~ AGRICULTURE,
“Break up your fallow ground, and sow
not among thorns.” Bi

Frequent Scripture use of imagery of
tillage as illustrative of soul-training.
Agriculture, perhaps the oldest, most
necessary, and best understood of all the
arts; also, most suggestive of the moral
culture of the human soul,

Three things essential to successful —
agriculture : ‘

I. Proper attention to the som
Analogy between the material soil and
the human soul in two respects: there
is—

1. Variety of condition. Christ speaks
of the “ wayside” soil, “stony places,”
“thorny ground,” and “good ground.”
Their counterpart in men.

2. Capability of improvement. Farmer
changes the character of the soil, bad
into good: pulverises stones, mollifies
the hard clay, burns weeds, &. So
hardened heart must be broken, thorny
cleansed. Unless hearts thus prepared
for truth, precious grain is wasted on
them, But can men alter soil of their
hearts? Yes: Commanded in text,
“ Break up,” &c.

II. Proper attention to the srzD. in |
its selection and its growth. Soil might
be good, yet if seed bad, harvest bad.

1. Care in selection of true spiritual
seed. It is the Gospel: (a.) perfeet in
itself ; (b.) fitted to grow in all climates ;
(c.) but it does not sow itself ; (d.) it is
the support of life.

2. Attention must be also paid to tts
growth. Carefully the farmer watches,
specially the first stages; uproots weeds,
scares off fowls of heaven. (Compare
Matt. xiii. 25 ; Hos. viii. 7.)

III. Proper attention to the skasom.
There “is a time to sow;” a season





‘


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. GHaP. Iv.





whee the earth has its fecund power,
and a time when it departs. And there
are seasons for spiritual culture: 1.
Youth. 2. The season of moral serious-
ness, when the heart has been softened.
Many try when faculties are shattered,
in old age, on dying beds. The time
comes when the heart cannot grow
- Christianity.

Con. ; Earnest in work of soul-tillage.
Why? (a.) The field is in a deplorable


his own power to prevent its direful
ravages, 3. Solemn forewarnings and
appeals are Divinely sent that the
wicked may escape. Compare text and
Nineveh’s conduct (Jonah iii. 5-10).
Ill. God’s fury will eventually
overtake the defiant transgressors.
Disobey God’s call to repent, abuse the
opportunity of escape, and “the fury
will come forth like fire.” 1. Historic


_ sing., to each man.
to personal contrition.


- my fury come forth.”


_ condition (Prov. xxiv. 31). (.) No work
_ will prove so remunerative., (c.) There is
_ no time to lose: “Go, work to-day in my
_ vineyard.” —Condensed from “Homilist.”


Comments :

“To the men of Judah ;” the word is
Every one is called
Repentance,
reformation, religion, is imperative with


each man singly: every one must pre-


pare his heart and come back himself to
God.

“ Break up fallow.” The seeds of
contrition must not be sown yet. Pre-
paration is essential; it must engage
anxious and watchful concern : not be
done offhand ; let it be attempted with
utmost painstaking and seriousness.
There must not be left one foul and
thorny sin in the heart; it must be
cleansed thoroughly. Only then will
the repentance be real and permanent,


_ end accepted by God.


Ver. 4. Theme: THE FIRE oF Gop’s
wrRaTH. ‘‘Lest my fury come forth like
fire, and burn,” &c,


Sin ignites the unquenchable fire.


- Impenitence invites it,


I. God’s fury is a terrible and a
consuming reality. Not a shadowy
menace, not a mere figure of speech,
not an extravagance of fancy, but an
appalling fact. The necessary counter-
part and consequence of insulted and
incensed love. It is a “jive,” it is a
“burning” fire; it is a“ furious” fire.
It must be a fearful thing to encounter
and endure!

II. God’s fury is restrained that
men may avert and escape it. ‘ Lest
1. God Himself
is slow to let loose the terrors of His
epger against sin. 2, Man has it in

¥


occurrences show this to be true (Gen.
xix. 24, 25; Lev. x. 2; Numb. xvi.
31-35). 2. Prophetic warnings point to
the same issues of sin (Matt. xi. 21-24,
xxv. 41; Heb. x. 26, 27).

IV. God’s fury once kindled can
never more be quenched. Fire is the
symbol of destruction. The declaration
that “none can quench rt,” implies hope
gone for ever,—ameliorations and escape
utterly lost,—irretrievably past. From
that burning there will be no Saviour to
snatch us as brands. Nothing can as-
suage its terrors,—none can quench its
flames, Christ’s redeeming work avails
now, not then.

V. God’s fury.is the inevitable conse-
quence of man’s iniquity. “God +,
love ;” and ‘‘ loves the world” (1 John iv.
16). The Divine displeasure is created
by man. God’s fury is the necessary tn-
dignation caused by sin. And it must
fall on the resolute sinner; for his sin
has reversed the love, and left only this
just anger. Alienated love means in-
curred wrath. Not that God wiils it so
(2 Pet. iii. 9); it is the issue of an in-
evitable law,—God’s love estranged by
guilt (for He cannot love where guilt is
cherished), leaves nothing but the in-
dignation against sin in the Divine
heart towards the relentless sinner.

When, therefore, at the last, the
sinner meets God, he calls forth, not
love—he has estranged that—but the
wrath he has kindled: “because of the
evil of his doings.” “Flee from the
wrath to come.” (Addenda, ver. 4,
“ Unquenchable fire.”)


Ver, 5-8. ALARM SOUNDED: FLEE
TO THE STRONGHOLDS. (Addenda, ver.
7, “ The lion.”)


L The enemy advances (ver. 7). The
lion is rousing himself; already he has
8)


CHAP. IV.


left his lair. He is a “destroyer.” He
comes to “desolate” and to “ devour”
(1 Pet. v. 8).

ii. Strongholds are accessible (ver. 5).
Leave the open country. Do not expose
yourselves to the spiritual foe. Fortify
yourselves in Divine securities, Mount
the watch-tower; ‘strengthen the
things that remain;” pray always; have
faith in God ; “resist the devil.”

iii. Zion the refuge from danger (ver.
6). It was the strongest and best forti-
fied of all the cities. Fugitives from
the world, from sin, from pursuing foes,
may hide themselves in Zion, The
Church is a place of defence, of security,
of peace: for God guards the walls, and
the King reigns within, (Addenda, ver.
6, “ Zion a refuge.”)

iv. The summons to safety (ver. 5,
6). This the preacher’s work. “ And
let him that heareth say, Come!”
Everywhere perils menace the souls of
men. 1. The wmportunity of the call
(ver, 5). 2. The snclusiveness of the
summons,—none excluded, All may
hear and hide themselves from evil. 3.
The way of safety clearly pointed out.
“Set up standard towards Zion ;” visible,
unmistakable, direct. 4. Urgent haste.
“ Retire, stay not.” “Now is the day
of salvation.” “Escape for thy life ;
tarry not in all the plain, flee to the
mountains, lest thou be consumed.”

v. Bitter wailing over rutin (ver. 8).
Their fortresses are useless if God be not
propitiated. In vain to hide from peril
if God be ignored. 1. Defences are de-
lusions unless Christ 1s our Saviour. 2.
Salvation ts tmpossible unless Divine
anger 18 averted by repentance. 3. Woful
the overthrow of the spoiler. 4. We may
“‘ turn back the Lord’s anger” by fleeing
to Christ (Isa. xii.).

Comments,

Ver. 9. i. Ruin surpasses all anticipa-
tion. The terror of the event paralyses all
with amaze and dismay. Is there no fore-
warring in this? Will the future over-
throw of transgressors be less appalling %

ii, Helpers are found helpless in the
day of calamity. The rulers and leaders
to whom the people looked prove their
impovency when their aid is most needed,
and their perpleaity when their devices

82


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





and resources should have been most
ready. ‘Cursed is the man that trust-
eth in man,” &c.

iii. Religious advisers whom God does
not warrant and ordain are seen to ba


mockers and delusions in the judgment, |


—“ priests and prophets.” The people
despised the true prophet,
messenger, and preferred their own
idolatrous priests and temporising
teachers. They “believed a lie,” and
“the storm shall sweep away the refuges
of lies.” Alas! this isstilldone(2 Tim. .
iv. 3, 4); and the dire result is ever the
same (2 Thess. ii. 10-12).


Ver. 10. Theme; GoD REPROACHED
AS THE AUTHOR OF MAN’S DELUSIONS.
“Ah, Lord God! surely Thou hast
greatly deceived this people, saying, Ye
shall have peace; whereas the sword
reacheth unto the soul.”


Frequently in Scripture the immedi-
ate cause and occasions of events are
overlooked, and occurrences are un-
hesitatingly traced to the Divine First
Cause. This is only m keeping with
bold Oriental modes of expression,
Thus God is said to have hardened Pha-
raoh’s heart (Exod. iv. 21, vii. 3, 13, ix.
12) ; yet it is as emphatically recorded
that Pharaoh himself hardened his own
heart (Exod. viii. 15, 32. ix. 34). So
concerning Christ’s crucifizvon (cf. Rom.
viii. 32 ; Acts ii. 23), and egually con-
cerning the delusions of Antichrist (cf.
ver. 11 with ver. 12 of 2 Thess. ii, ; their
own hostile minds predisposed them to
entertain delusions).

Inquire: By whom had (Cod said,
“Ye shall have peace?” Henderson
suggests, by the false prophets who had
prophesied, ‘‘ Peace, peace, when there
was no peace.” Supporting this view,
Keil appeals to the striking passages,
chap. xiv. 13, xxiii, 17, and explains
that God not only permitted these lying
spirits to appear and work, but ordained
and brought them forth for the hardening
of the people’s hearts ; as in Ahab’s case,
that he might perish for his ungodlinesa
(1 Kings xxii. 20-23). Most commen-
tators prefer this view. A;

Dr. Payne Smith (Speaker's Com-
mentary) prefers to refer the words of


God’s |





HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


—


OHAP, Iv.





"peace to real prophecies of future bless-
edness promised to the Jews, and
suggests that Jeremiah was perplexed
with the twofold (and seemingly con-
tradictory) aspects of prophecy, at times
bright with promises of glory and power,
at others dark with threatenings of
_ national humiliation; and could not
now reconcile the doom he now pro-
nounced with his own previous prophecy,
or with the predictions of his inspired
predecessors. Prophets did not under-
stand their own messages (1 Pet. i
10, 11).

Lange remarks, this is only the
opinion of the prophet (that God had
deceived the people), who here inter-
Tupts che discourse revealed to him by
the expression of his own subjective
view.


Theme:
PEACE.


WARNING AGAINST FALSE


It is—(i.) A lie, for men say there is
peace when the sword reaches even to the
soul, (ii.) A misfortune, for it will dis-
appoint the heart of those who cherish
it.—Naeg. in Lange.


Theme; SoRROW AKD SURPRISE AT
THE OUTBREAK OF WAR.


These words express deep disappoint-
ment at the frustration of a nation’s
hopes of peace, and at the mysterious-
ness of the Divine purposes. God can-
not lie nor deceive, but His purposes
go forward with a vastness of design and
comprehension as to surpass the grasp
of human calculation, thus deceiving
those who had prejudged them. We
find our wisdom to have been a phan-
tom, our prophetic discernment 4
delusion.

L Sadly, but truly, these words
point out the real nature of war.

“The sword reacheth,” &e.
wherever the consequences of war are
felt. 1. It sweeps away the young and
promising, cuts down the nation’s
bravest sons. 2. It discourages enter-
prise, and increases penury and want.
3. It blunts the moral feelings, deadens
the conscienve, and does violence to the
gentlest and noblest inspirations of


Christianity. 4. It depopulates and


So it is ,


os


desolates the scenes over which it
sweeps ; as Nineveh, Babylon, Carthage.

II. How should we as Christians and
patriots meet a time of war !

1. Implore God’s blessings on our
armies and our fleets, that they may be
instruments in His hands for His ends.
2. Let prayer be accompanied by deep
humiliation before God; for our sina,
and the sins of our age, bring war. 3.
Active and special benevolence should
awake ; for the calamities of the time
will call for special succour. 4. Let us
be found waiting God’s will, not de-
pressed by reverses, nor unduly elated
by victory; but humbling ourselves
under His mighty hand, that He may
exalt us in due time.—Part of Quebec
Sermon, by Henry Alford, B.D., a.v.
1854.

i. The delusive prophecy. Guilesome
voices speak flattery to sinners.

ii, The agonising discovery. “Sword
pierceth,” dc. Experience at length
disperses delusions.

iii, The reproach against God. Un-
founded ; for He has clearly menaced
evil with punishment. (Comp. ver. 18.)


Ver. 11-13. Theme: THE BLAST OF
THE ALMIGHTY.


Winds, God created (Amos iv. 13),
holds in His fist (Prov. xxx. 4), rideth
upon them (Ps. civ. 3), lets loose (Jer.
x. 13), Christ can quell (Matt. vili. 26 ;
xiv. 32). (Addenda, ver. 11, ‘‘ Blast of
the Almighty.”)

I. Winds can fulfil Divine behests.
“Stormy winds fulfilling His word”
(Ps. cxlviii. 8).

1. They travel where He directa.
“Towards the daughter of My people”
(ver. 11).

2. They awake to serve God’s designs.
“Shall come unto, te, for Me” (ver.
12).

5 They carry out His sentence upon


man. ‘Now, I will give sentence,”
&e. (ver. 12). Winds are God’s judicial
agents.


Tl. Winds are typical of human
agencies.

The simoom was a figure of the
mighty Babylonian conqueror. The
“clouds” (ver. 13), were Hee ;


OMAP. IV.





the “ whirlwind ” His cavalry; suggest-
ing that the Chaldean forces would be
numerous (as clouds), tnvincible (as
whirlwind), swift to overtake and seize
the prey (as eagles).

Winds typify human agencies, in that
they are :—

- 1. Variable; some ‘to fan and
cleanse,” others work “ woe and spoil.”

2. Wilful, yet controlled; “ blowing
where it listeth,” as men obey their own
impulses ; as Nebuchadnezzar did in
rising against Judea; yet obeying a
Higher law and will.

3. Powerful, yet easily restrained by
God. Mighty was this ‘full wind,”
yet Nebuchadnezzar (like Pilate) “could
have no power at all, except it were
given him from above.” (Comp. 2
_ Kings xix. 7, 35.)

Stand in awe of Him whom “ even
the winds obey.” Rejoice that “all
power” is intrusted to Jesus, over nature,
over men. Safe from harm, even amid
mightiest agencies, are those He keeps.
He is a refuge from wind, and all hostile
powers, Not befriended by Him, “‘ woe
anto us” (ver. 13).


Ver. 14. Theme: PURITY NECESSARY
TO SALVATION.


“‘ Wash heart,” &c. Apply primarily
to Jews, but equally to mankind
universally.

I The natural depravity of the
human heart. “Wash thine heart
from wickedness,” suggests the total
corruption of human nature.

1. This doctrine requires definttion.
Depravity of the heart includes—(a.)
The entire absence of the Divine image.
(0,) A natural aversion to God and god-
liness. (c.) A universal propensity or
disposition to evil.

2. This doctrine demands evidence.
Cannot be denied without violation of
conscience, contempt of reason, rejection
of Scripture. (a.) It is divinely revealed.
(b.) Practically exemplified. (c.) Deeply
lamented.

II. The spiritual purity which the
Lord requires. ‘“‘O Jerusalem, wash
thine heart from wickedness ; how long
vain thoughts,” &c.? Implies—

l. The possibility of obtaining purity

84


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.


aad


of heart. This appears—(a.) From the
design of redemption (Heb. ix. 13, 14)
(0.) The ability of the Saviour (John i
16; 1 Cor. i. 30). (¢.) The promises of
Scripture (Ezek. xxxvi. 26, 27 ; 1 Pet.
i 3,4). (d.) The experience of believers
(Rom, vi. 22; 1 John i. 7).

2. The important duty of seeking
purity of heart. This exhortation simply
inculcates an immediate and diligent
use of the means of grace necessary to
salvation (Ezek. xviii. 31). (a.) We
must repent of our sins (Isa, lv. 7;
Acts iii. 19). (6.) Believe in Jesus Christ
(Acts xxvi. 18; Heb. xii. 24). (c.) Give
ourselves unto prayer (Ps. li. 10; 1
Thess. v. 23). (d.) Seek the Lord with-
out delay. For “how long,” saith God,
“‘ghall thy vain,” wicked, unbelieving,
impenitent “thoughts lodge within
thee 1” (Isa. lv. 6; 2 Cor. vi. 2).

Ill. The absolute necessity of per-
sonal holiness. “That thou mayest be
saved.” “If I wash thee not, thou
hast no part with Me:” purity and sal-
vation go together.

1. Personal holiness is a necessary
property of religion. Not consist of—(a.)
Ceremonial observances (Gal. vi. 15).
(6.) But dwells in the heart, sanctifying
every power (1 Cor. vi. 19, 20; 1 Pet.
i. 15, 16). (c.) Without internal piety
and purity, profession of religion is
empty parade and profitless (Rom,
xiv. 7).

2. Personal holiness is a necessary
meetness for heaven. (a.) Reason assures
us that there must be agreement between
the faculty of enjoyment and the object
enjoyed, God is holy ; we must be to
enjoy His presence. (6.) Scripture as-
sures us that “ without holiness no man
can see the Lord” (Matt. v. 8; 1 Cor.
iv. 9, 10).

These reflections should, (i.) excite deep


_humility and self-abasement in us as


fallen sinners ; (ii.) promote an earnest
application to Jesus, whose “ blood
cleanseth from all sin,” — From
“ Sketches of Four Hundred Sermons.”


Theme: CHARACTERISTICS AND OOR-
RECTIVES OF VAIN THOUGHTS,


Vanity of thoughts may prevail in
persons who would be appalled at one


“Wormea


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


great substantial sin. Yet a month,
year, a life of vain thoughts! in a being
preparing for an eternity of seriousness
and thought! it is truly an awful ac-
count! yet with many, this stands for
little in comparison with some one or
two very wrong external actions,

Observe: What a mighty amount of
thinking there is in human spirits that
does not come under the censure of the
tect. ‘* Vain,” implies something trifl-
ing, insignificant, empty. 1. It does
not include wicked thoughts; impious,
malignant, evil schemings, &., these
are not trivial ; yet how much of this
order of thinking! A man’s thoughts
are within his own jurisdiction, and
may be concealed ; he need not be ex-
posed to censure and shame for them;
unless, therefore, he govern himself in the
fear of God, they will, in their mere
animal play, run to vanity, if not worse.
2. If the thoughts are left unrestrained
to commit folly, they will commit an
immensity of it. The thinking power
is never tired or exhausted in this
frivolity, Never stagnant pool was
more prolific of flies, nor the swarm
about it more wild and worthless.

I. Characteristics of vain thoughts,

i. Those thoughts are “vain” from
‘which we do not and cannot reap any
good. Survey thoughts—excluding the
noxious—and ask, Have they given
me anything worth having; made me
‘wiser ; cleared away any previous igno-
rance ; rectified any judgment; fixed
or forwarded any purpose ; or while ten
thousand ideas have passed through my
mind, might I as well have had none?
These passing visitants have occupied
his faculties and consumed his time ;
gone away and paid him nothing !

ii, Thoughts are “ vain” which can-
not associate in any agreement with use-
ful and valuable ones. If serious and
useful thoughts be admitted into a mind
filled with frivolities, they are resisted
and resented as intruders.

iii. Thoughts are “ vain” which have
to be kept out in order for the mind to
attend to any serious or good purpose.
Experienced this necessity and its dyf-
ficulty. Like a man sitting down to
study in a room filled with a moving,


CHAP, IV.





talking crowd. This mental mob has
forced its way in, baffled and mocked
you !

iv. Thoughts are “ vain” which dwell
largely and habitually on 1, ijfling things.
Sad propensity to allow mind to waste
itself on trifles; on personal display,
fashion and routine, amusements, bub-
‘bling incidents on the stream of society.
Would that some stern, alarming voice
might break in upon such thoughts with,
“What is all this to thee? hast thou
nothing else to think of before thou die
and appear before God 9”

v. Thoughts are “vain” which trifle
with tmportant ones. Great things may
be thought of idly as mere matters of
curiosity and speculation, or to throw
them into ludicrous and fanciful forma.

vi. Thoughts are “vain” which are
Jickle, not remaining with any continu-
ance on a subject. In this ungoverned
state, anything can divert thoughts:
without regulated connection, no rational
links, no leading to any ultimate ob-
ject. Nothing is avoided, repelled, or
selected,

vii. Thoughts are “vain” when the
mind has some specially favourite trifle,
some cherished idolised toy. Trifling
in all but its power to fascinate and
fasten itself upon a human soul! What
shall we call this enslavement of the
whole mind to some essentially worth-
less object of attention, but the magnet-
tsm of Satan /

viii, Thoughts are “vain” which
continually return to things justly claim-
ing a measure of attention when the
thinking of them can be of no advantage.
The mind wanders uselessly over the
same enumeration, comparison, calcula-
tion; when nothing can be more useless.

ix. ‘Thoughts are “ vain” when the
mind dwells on fancies of how things
might be or might have been, when the
reality of how they are is before us.

x. Thoughts are “vain” which men
indulge concerning notions and schem-
ings of worldly felscity.

Need of a corrective discipline ; that
we be earnest to have so pernicious an
evil rectified, that our thinking and im-
mortal spirits, which should be temples
of the Most High, may not hey de-


O@aP. Iv.


graded recesses of every vanity with
which the Spirit cannot dwell.

II. Correctives of vain thoughts.
Evidently they—1. Waste the activity of
the thinking principle ; 2. They put us
out of the relation we are placed in to
the highest objects and interests—to God,
Christ, eternity. 3. They unfit us for
matters of practical duty, making life’s
true work irksome.

Observe: The evil habits of vain
thinking is utterly unsuited to the con-
dition of an immortal spirit on earth, and
fatally at vartance with its high destiny.
It might suit a creature whose utmost
scope is to amuse away a few years on
earth, and then sink in the dust wholly
and for ever !

Conscious that this vanity of thought
is a besetting evil, we should earnestly
desire any corrective remedy. But this
vice of the mind is but a symptom of
general degeneracy, and cannot be reme-
died without the grand sources of our
thoughts—the passions and affections—
be in a rectified state. There are no
expedients which can avail indepen-
dently of resolute exertion,—no dexter-
ous device can cure this habitual pro-
pensity,—_no wand of enchantment can
wave off the infesting swarm. But, as
parts of a persevering discipline—

i. Have specified subjects of serious
wmterest to turn to when thought
reverts to these vanities : recollections of
a perilous situation, a dying scene, pro-
vidential interpositions, These memory
will furnish. Conscience offers subjects ;
what a man regards as his greatest sin,
&e.

ii, Make a sudden charge of guilt on
your mind when vain thoughts prevail.
Enforce the thought “ God sees.” This
will act as a lightning flash which arrests
levity.

iii Have recourse to the direct act of
devotion. How will they appear when
we confess and deplore them before
God

iv. Interrupt and stop them by the
question, What is just now my most press-
img duty’ Judgment and conscience
will then speak and chide tor neglect-
ing it.

v. Have recourse to some practical

86


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; JEREMIAR.





occupation, matter of business, or a visit
to some house of mourning.

vi. Constrain our habitual thinking te
go along with the thoughts of those whe
have thought the best, by reading the
most valuable books. How lamentable
the light reading of the age! Study
the Bible.

vii. Think to a certain purpose,—
towards a purposed end. What a num-
ber of things we need to aim at by a
course of thought !

viii, Reflect on how many things we
have to do with which “ vain thoughts”
interfere ; and also, what would have
been the result of good thoughts instead
of so many vain %

ix. Discipline of the thoughts greatly
depends on the company @ man keeps
(Proy. xiii. 20). Society can be found
or avoided in which every vanity of the
soul may be indulged or confirmed.

x. Ifthe complaint be urged that this
discipline involves much that is hard
and difficult, we answer, It is just as
hard as to do justice to a rational and
immortal spirit placed here a little while
by God for its improvement, and then to
go where God appoints. Hard, yet so
indispensable. How welcome, then, the
promises of the Spirit’s help,—the im-
vitations to pray/ We shall eagerly act
on them if we care for our spiritual
progress through this world, and our
appointment and employments in the
world to come. — Lectures by John
Foster, a.D. 1822. (Addenda, ver. 14,
“Vain thoughts.”)

Comments:

Ver. 15. “A voice declareth from
Dan,” &c, It is high time to set about
personal cleansing, and for abandoning
delusive thoughts, for already the
calamity is announced,—it swiftly ap-
proaches,—it scales the heights which
shelter Judah. (See Geographical
References.) ‘‘The messenger comes
from each successive place towards which
the foe approaches.” —Hitzig. (Addenda,
ver. 15, “Dan.”)

Ver. 16. The words should probably
read thus: “ Proclaim ye to the heathen,
Behold!” (Saint Jerome points out
that the heathen are hereby summoned
to witness the chastisement of Jeru-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


OnAaP, FV.





salem.) Thus they would learn that
the God of the Jews had ordained the
overthrow of His people; that it was
not the triumph of impious and idola-
trous forces against God and His people,
but that He had consigned Judah to
spoliation on account of her treachery
and neglect of Him. This would prove
a solemn warning to the nations around
(ver. 17), giving clearly the explanation
why God permitted Judah’s foes

triumph,


Ver. 18. The address reverts to Jerw-
salem ; against her Jeremiah had to pub-
lish (ver. 16) that watchers, besiegers,
were advancing ; it throws on Jerusalem
the whole blame of the calamities. Here
consider :


I. That sinners have the power of
awakening terrible furces of judgment.
“Thy way and doings have procured
these things ;” brought mighty armies,
—devastating powers! ‘Truly sin is a
dreadful and prodigious factor in human
history.

II. That sinners tnevitably entatl retri-
butive miseries. ‘ Unto thee.” Sin
awakes mighty forces—it can do that;
but sinners bring those forces of misery
agatnst themselves, and they cannot evade
them. The eagles will sweep down on
the carcass they scent. (Addenda, ver.
18, “Bitter at last.”)

III. That the penalties of stn are un-
utterubly distressing. “It is bitter”
(comp. ii. 19). ‘The wages of sin is
death.” The miseries of the seege and
captivity were but faint foreshadowings
of the woes consequent on rejecting
Christ and losing heaven.

IV. That the wound and woe of sin
reach to the very heart. Neither is super-
ficial nor evanescent, but the rottenness
and also the wretchedness goes to the
very core (ver. 10).


Ver, 19-21. Theme: <A 8EER’S
ANGUISH OVER THE SINNER’S DOOM.


Henderson and Dr. Payne Smith, op-
posing all other commentators, regard
these words as the outcry of the angutsh-
stricken nation. And truly the lost soul
may utter such an exclamation of terror
and grief in the hour of his judgment,





Yet the words are more naturally the
lament of the prophet.

L The occasion of these impassioned
outcries,

1. His grief was patriotic ; distressed
over the national calamities which were
coming upon his people and his land.

2. His grief was personal, for he felt
individually the shame and woe which
the people’s disloyalty to their God and
their faith were entailing. By identzfica-
tion of interest he felt himself inculpated
by their idolatries and vice; and by tn-
tensity of sympathy he felt the throes of
anguish and ruin which ensued.

3. His grief was pious, the religious
disasters looming over Zion filled him
with amaze and sorrow. Temple de-
famed and razed; Judah reduced to
captivity, land laid waste, sanctities of
his nation profaned ; and more, Jehovah
contemned by the victorious heathen,
who would scorn the God of the land
they subdued, and of the people they
oppressed,

IZ. The lessons of the prophets
distress. Moses’s distress over sinning
Israel as he descended Sinai, the Psalm-
ist’s deeply troubled state over trans-
gressors (Ps. cxix. 136, 158), our Lord’s
pitying tears at the sight of doomed
Jerusalem, Paul’s “ great heaviness and
continual sorrow of heart” for his kins-
men (Rom. ix. 2, 3), and Jeremiah’s
pathos of lamentation, encourage and
summon us to godly sorrow over the
guilty and the perishing,

1, There is enough of wrong around
us to evoke saddest emotions.

2. Philanthropy and compassion for
humanity should move us to deepest
sorrow.

3. Fellowship with Christ will make
us deplore the devastations of sin.

4, The keener our sense of right
and our love of God, the more intense


will be our repugnance towards,
and our distress over, scenes of ini-
quity.


5. Memory of our own redemption
will awake in us bitter regrets that
others remain sunken in wrong and
the woes of wrong.

6. Perception of the foul agency
which triumphs in human wore


OR AP. Iv.


will deepen our revulsion and horror,
It was the king of Babylon in Judah's
case — imperious, blasphemous, impla-
rable; it is the ‘‘ adversary the devil”
M our case now.

Hence: 1. The shamefulness of in-
difference towards others in peril. 2.
The inarticulate call to our commisera-
tion which comes from souls despoiled.
3. The urgency of faithful warning
and friendly help, though it cost us
suffering and sacrifices, as with Jeremiah.
4, The grandeur of Christ’s mission ;
His love and redemption. 5. The in-
spiration which lies in the fact that there
is hope of our doing good even to those
who hate us while we seek their wel-
fare.

They who feel for the woes of others,
and seek to redress them, cannot fail to
fulfil a ministry of amelioration, and
shall not miss the reward of loving ser-
vice and patient suffering (Matt. v. 12).


Ver. 22. Theme: JuDAuH’s DIVINELY-
SENT TEACHER IGNORED.


I. Teachers are valueless unless
men will be listeners. But “my
people are foolish.” Indifference to the
teachings of Jeremiah was suicidal,
wilful, shameful. So is the disregard of
the world.

IL Man’s heedless attitude frus-
trates God's messengers. They would
arouse men to their peril and point
them to escape and redemption, but
they put life and salvation from them,

Ili. The insensate spiritual con-
dition of transgressors. (a.) Blinded—-
“not known me,” whom God in mercy
sent. ‘Have no understanding” of
their peril, value of Divine messages,
urgency of seeking salvation. (6.) De-
based — mentally, “foolish ;” morally,
“ sottish ;” foolish heart darkened (Rom.
i. 21, 22). (¢.) Perverted—their spiri-
tual nature distorted, thrown into cala-
mitous confusion and contrariety ; wise
in evil, witless respecting good.

Hence easily deluded, wilfully igno-


rant, lamentably degenerate. (Comp.
John iii, 21.)

Ver. 23-26. A SOLEMNLY-8UGGES-
FIVE VIGION.


88


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; JEREMIAH.





The prophet sees bursting over Judah
a visitation which convulses the whole
world. In the vivid poetic language of
this picture, the mind is led back to
what earth was before creation, and led
forward to what earth will become at the
fudgment. It suggests that sin gathers
into the present the dreary desolatious of
the past and the terrible devastations of
the future.

I. Chaos reproduced. (Co ee ver,
23 with Gen. i, 2.) Thus—1l. Sin de-
faces scenes of he (comp. Gen. i,
31); alas! all again in chaos. 2. Sin
despoils the Spirit’s work ; He brooded
over and beautified earth (Gen. i. 2). 3.
Sin enwraps the world in gloom—shute
out light, God, hope, and happiness.

II. Judgment depicted. (Comp. ver.
24-26 with Rev. vi. 12-17.)

Jeremiah glances again into the awful
future, and—l. He beholds the material
world in wild convulsion (ver. 24, comp.
Rev. vi. 14). 2. Scenes of the living
changed into sepulchral solitude (ver.
25, comp. Ezek. xxxviii. 20). 3. The
works and memorials of man swept
away: plantations and cities (ver. 26,
comp. 2 Pet. iii. 10). 4. God’s presence
awakens a panic of terror (ver. 26, “at
the presence,” lit. from the face of Jehovah,
From the face of the heat of His nostril ,
comp. Rev. xx. 11, vi. 16, 17).

It is as if the final judgment of the
world had already arrived. Infer—1,
Retribution must not necessarily be de-
ferred till the distant judgment-day,
2. In a sinner’s downfall, the horrors of
the final judgment are all realised, 3. If
God be not propitiated, His presence
will terrify us whenever it appears—in
temporal calamities, hour of death, or
day of retribution. 4. Flee now to
God; not then from God. (Addenda,
ver. 26, “ Broken down at the presence of
God.”) Lowth remarks: ‘‘These par-
ticular judgments are an earnest of the
general judgment.”


Ver, 27-29. Lest it should be
thought the prophet has spoken only
under strong poetic feeling, an ex-
travagant imagination, there comes the
emphatic, “ Thus hath the Lord satd.”
It is not fancy, but solemn fact.


oe


y


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


OH4P. I¥.





L God’s irrevocable purpose (ver.
28). “TI have spoken ; not turn back.”
The day of redemption past,—probation
terminated, — escape impossible, — re-
pentance no avail.

Il. God’s avenging decision limited
by His mercy (ver. 27). “ Yet not make
full end.” This always attested of
Judah: the sword should not wholly
destroy. (Comp. Lev. xxvi. 44 ; Amos
ix. 8.)

iI. Earth clad in woful mourn-
ing (ver. 28). The heavens shrouded
in sombm, clouds in sympathy with
ova misery, (Comp. Rev. vi. 12,
i. 7.)

IV. Hiding-places sought: strong-
holds abandoned in despair. Their
refuges prove insufficient, insecure, as
will all human strongholds. When
these defenced “cities” fail, the recesses
of forests and mountains will be sought.
Implies: (a.) Great terror of the foe.
(6.) Deliverance will then be craved,
redemption sought too late. (c) No
evading the judgment; flight will not
ensure escape.

V. Melancholy desertion of happy
scenes (ver. 29). ‘Every city for-
saken,” é&c. Homes gone for ever.
Scenes of plenty and pleasure aban-
doned perforce. Families driven from
earth’s fond scenes into exile. So at
the judgment—but worse.

Ver. 30. SpoILED YET ADORNED.
Jerusalem simulates the beauty which
has been “spoiled ” in the vain hope of
attracting to her side the succour of
Egypt against Chaldea. (Addenda, ver.
80, “ Finery, Flattery.”)








1. Vain devices for covering misery.
“ Clothest with crimson,” “deckest with
ornaments of gold,” paintest thine eyes.
Real wealth never feels the necessity of
gaudy parade. True beauty never resorts
to artificial decorations, Implies con
scious deformity and penury.

ii. Adversity transforms flatterers into
foes. “Lovers seek thy life.” This
shows the character, the worth, the
treachery of ungodly confidences. Turn
from God to them in prosperity, they
will turn from or turn upon their dupes
in their evil day.

iii, Forlorn attempts to regain love
win loathing. “Despise thee.” Their
“love” was only for self-aggrandisement ;
it was sordid and selfish ; now nothing
can accrue to them from Jerusalem
she is contemned. Yes; and her despi-
cable efforts hypocritically to hide her
miserable plight create nausea and revul-
sion. Even the ungodly hate deceit,
loathe decorated deformity.

Ver. 31. The LXX., Syriac, Vulgate,
&c., take the participle as passive, and
render, My soul faints because of the
slain. Better as in A. V.; or, My soul
is overpowered before murderers.

““ Spreadeth her hands.” A pleading
gesture, expressing a prayer for protec-
tion : as she falls before assassins she
beseeches help,

“Woe ts me now/” Her full and
irremediable wretchedness is at last
realised by her; she cries out terrified
by her perils and pains. Yet not to God.
Therefore none befriends her, (Addenda
to chap. iv. ver. 31, “Woe-stricken.”)


NOTICEABLE TOPICS IN CHAPTER IV,


Ver.2. Topie: An ANcorENT Homity “On SwWeaRina.”


Text: “Thou shalt


swear, U'he Lord liveth,” ke.


I. The command. Did Christ countermand this? (Matt. v. 34). The Son
forbid in the Gospel what the Father bids in the law? Jerome says, “ Oaths were
permitted the Jews of policy, because they heard heathen swear by their gods.”
But the explanation which accords both commands is: God bids thee swear, so thy
oath be truthful and needful ; Christ forbids swearing which is truthless and needless,
Christ came not to destroy the law; He but forbids the gloss of the Pharisees, who
taught oaths were not perjury though false, so that they swore not by God’s self
directly, Yet also. Christ would have His followers’ tongues so true as by shall


OHAP, IV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





not need to swear. Holy men’s words are oaths. The abuse of swearing God
abominates, man abhors. But not everything that is abused by wicked men must
therefore not be used by sober men. Schismatics are they who have refused oaths ;
Essenes among Jews, Anabaptists among Christians. Bullinger saith, “ He is not
worthy the name of Christian who refuseth to swear by the name of Christ.” For,
what do I when I swear, but call on God to be either witness to my truth or
avenger of my falsehood? I therein confess the Lord to be my God,—I acknow.
ledge His truth, justice, and omniscience.

Precedents from Scripture :—Moses swore (Josh. xiv. 5). David often—to Saul.
to Jonathan. Abraham, Isaac, Jacob did—patriarchs before the law ; and Paul.
after the law and under the Gospel, swore. Christ used His “ Amen, amen ;” and
God “swore by His own self.” What He bid, He did.

Oaths, public, as between princes and before magistrates, and private, as between
man and man, are lawful, so the swearer take them with religious heart and ix
cause important. He takes God’s name in vain that swears when he needs not,
and “ God will not hold him guiltless.”

II. The form. God bade us “ swear ;” now He tells us how: “The Lord liveth!”
It is, then, impiety to swear by creatures; grand sacrilege to swear by anything but
God. The name of a strange god was not to be heard in the mouth of God’s
people (Exod. xxiii. 13). Saith the old man in Aristophanes, ‘‘ He but jests that
swears by Jupiter.” To swear by anything but God lessens the religion of an
oath. When the Jews swore by Baal, and the Gentiles by Jupiter, they thought
them gods, for they prayed and sacrificed to them; yet Baal was but a beast,
Jupiter but a man. God prevents all evasion by the name He here gives, “the
Lord ;” not any god the swearer would substitute,—as Papists swear by angels,
called in Scripture, ‘‘ Z/ohim,” and superstition worships them as gods. Many
forms are used by men of Scripture variable from this form, but in all the mean-
ing is, “The Lord liveth.”

III. Three particulars. “Jn truth.” Perjury is impious,—makes that which
is the sign, ensign, and seal of truth, the cloak of falsehood. It was death with the
Egyptians; St. Augustine would have it so with Christians too. “God will
destroy,” saith David, “all that speak lies.” What will He do to them that swear
lies? The Pope, Christ’s vicar, panders perjury! Swear promissorily fealty to
thy sovereign, the Pope will assoil thee; forswear assertorily anything to the
magistrate, the Pope will pardon thee. Faith is not to be kept with heretics,
Equivocation is even commended. How dare thou dally with God before whom
thou swearest? He is not mocked! An oath is a hedge to fence thy faith:
break it not ; thou betrayest thy truth: leap not over it; there is a pit behind it,
without bottom,—it is hell.

“In judgment.” Swear not upon guess only,—oaths must not be adventured
Some swear where no cause is, no gain is, no gainsayer is, but only of bad use,
Augustine saith, “The world hath many evil customs, but this of swearing is bad
above all that is bad.” It makes God’s holy name vile, and engenders perjury.
Philo saith, “ Oaths are no tenise balls to toss upon the tongue.”

“ In righteousness.” To any act against right or religion bind not thyself, let
not any bind thee. Oaths must not cross either piety towards God or charity to-
wards men. Such an oath was Herod’s: much better had he broken his oath
than slain a prophet. Bind not two sins together. It is sin to make it, not to
break it. Saint Jerome saith of unlawful oaths, “It is condemnation if thou break.
them; it is damnation if thou keep them.”—Condensed from Sermons by Rev,
Richard Clerke, D.D., one of the translators of the English Bible, preacher in
Canterbury Cathedral Dated a.p. 1637.


i


Wl SOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. GHaP Iv,











F }


Ver. 3. Topic: Unit Som, Prerarep ror roe Buxssiwa. Text: “ Break oop
your fallow ground.”






A call to vigorous preparation for spiritual blessing. Many are conscious of
earnest longing for salvation, more grace, spiritual renewal and revival ; but
_ “the desire of the slothful killeth him, for his hands refuse to labour.” A delusion
_ to rest with desire.

I. Hardening forces have been acting on the soil. “Break up:” hard, thee
fore. ‘“ Your fallow ground ;” seriously inquire to what this applies i you.
1. What ts the fallow ground within man? 1. The heediess mind. 2. The
¥ callous heart. 3. The seared conscience. 4. The irreverent soul. 5, The formal
_ Church : first love dead, flame extinct, sanctuary a garnished sepulchre. (Addenda,
ver. 3. “ Haliow ground.”)

_ 2. How has your ground become fallow? 1. By neglect: becomes hard itself ;
need do nothing. 2. Action of time: years find you harder. 3. The cold of in-
_ difference. 4. Rains and sun cake the soil; the Saviour’s action, the Spirit's
_ influence make the unyielding soul more alien,

__ Ii. Sowers can only work on lands which are prepared They are forced into
inactivity by the ground being fallow.

1. The sowers are Christ, the Spirit, the preacher, the worker for human salvation.
They can only sow the Gospel where they find the soil clean and ready. This ia
_ the husbandman’s command (Luke x. 10-12). Your stolid unconcern is an
effectual obstacle.

2. All spiritual agencies are thwarted by unpreparedness, Seed may be the best,
but useless on hard soil. Sun may shine, but not germinate. Rains fall, only to
_ wash the seed off. Best Christian appliances, services, sermons, é&c., no avail.

: 3. Therefore, where there is no readiness, the sacred blessings are withheld.
_ Christ did no mighty works because of unbelief.”

_ IZ. Sowing time is the season for gathering in the living seed. Do nothing
_ to anticipate the auspicious hour of grace, and it will come and find you unfit to
receive the Gospel, the salvation God would willingly give. Make ready for the
_ Lord.

1. There ts a special time of grace. 2. The season quickly passes by. 3. It
may come to usin vain. Jt was now with Jerusalem ; she was not ready to benefit by
it, Later on, when Jesus “ wept over the city,” she “knew not the day of her
visitation.” We may awake to righteousness too late, the sowing-time past, the
“convenient season ” gone.

IV. The plough must be driven through the sterile scil, Sowers are waiting,
seed is ready, season is here and passing (text). 1. Put the plough through your
indifference; rouse yourself into attention, 2. Through your indecision, “ How
long halt ye?” 3. Through your tnaction ; bestir yourself; read, pray, repent,
reform. 4, Through your habits of sin; weep for them, desert them ; listen to
chidings of conscience ; open heart to the Saviour who knocks. ‘“ Seek ye the Lord
while He may be found, call upon Him while near,” de.

All this will not make you spiritually renewed. Ploughing does not ensure the
harvest, yet it is preparation for it. It is your part; and God requires that

part of you, ‘He hath commanded all men everywhere to repent;” “ Break

up,” &e. It will not be done for you; it must be done by you. ‘“‘ Prove me now
herewith, and see if I will not open the windows of heaven,” dc.





eee


ete





2
A
ea














Se Ee ee


Ver. 14. opie: THe Vanrry or THouGcHtTs. (Ancient Homily.) Test:
“ How long shall thy vain thoughts lodge within thee #”


Heart compsred to house, to entertain and lodge guests ; into which, before
sonversion. all the light, wanton thoughts that post up and dewn in A world


OMAP, I¥, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.








have open access—lodgeth them; while they, like unruly gallants, revel day and —


night, and defile those rooms they lodge in. ‘“ How long?” whilst I, with my


Spirit, and Son, and train of graces, stand and knock, and cannot find admittance? —
Those vain guests must be turned out u. doors without warning; “the time past
must suffice.” Kept out they cannot always be; yet if they enter, “lodge” they ©
must not. ‘Let not the sun go down on your wrath,” or a worse guest may
enter; “neither give place to the devil.” Bad thoughts may pass as strangers


through a believer's heart, making a thoroughfare of it, but not a lodging-place.
I. What is meant by thoughts.


i. The tnternal acts of the mind; reasonings, resolutions, consultations, desires, —
cares, &c. 1. The thinking, meditating, musing power in man, which enables —
him to conceive, apprehend, fancy. 2. Thoughts which the mind frames within ©
itself (Prov. vi 14; James i 15; Isa. lix. 4-7). These differ from thoughts in- ©


jected and cast in, which are children of another’s begetting, and which do not


become ours unless we “lodge” them. 3. Thoughts which the mind in and by


itself begets and entertains.
ii, Let us see what vanity ts. 1. Unprofitableness (Eccles, i 2, 3). 2. Light-
ness (Ps. lxii, 9). 3. Folly (Prov. xii 11). 4. Inconstancy (Ps. cxliv. 4,


exlvi. 4). 5. Wicked and sinful (2 Chron. xiii. 7; Prov. xxiv. 9). Such quali- —


ties are linked to the word vanity. Vain thoughts are sins. 1. The law judgeth
them (Heb. iv. 12; 1 Cor. xiv. 25), and Christ rebukes them (Matt. ix. 4). 2,
They are capable of pardon, and unless pardoned we cannot be saved (Acts viii. 22),
3. They are to be repented of (Isa. lv. 7; 2 Cor. x. 4, 5). 4. They defile a man
(Matt. xv. 15-17). 5. They are abominable to the Lord (Prov. xv. 26). 6
They hinder and spoil all the good we should do (Isa. xxix. 16). Our thoughte
are the first motioners of all the evil in us.

If. The particulars wherein this vanity of the thinking, meditating power
of man consists.

i, In regard to thinking what ts good. 1. A want of ability to raise and extract
holy and useful considerations and thoughts from the occurrences and occasions
which surround us. (Comp. Ps. evii. 43 with Ps. xcii. 4-6.) 2. A loathness to
entertain holy thoughts. (Comp. Ps. cxix. 59 with Rom. i 28.) 3. The mind
will not long be intent on good thoughts. 4. If the mind doth think of good
things, it doth so unseasonably; intrudes on prayer and interrupts it (Prov.
xvi. 3).

ii. The readiness of the mind to think on evil and vain things. 1. This vanity
shows itself in foolishness (Mark vii. 22), which proves itself in the unsettlednesa
and independence of our thoughts. 2. On the other hand, if any strong lust or
passion be up, our thoughts are too fixed and intent. 3. A restless curtosity con-
cerning things not affecting us (1 Tim. vi. 4, 20, iv. 7; Prov. xv. 14). 4. Taking
thought to fulfil the lusts of our flesh (Rom. xiii, 14). 5. Representing, or
acting over, sins in our imagination (Jude 8).

Having discovered the vanity of your thoughts and estate thereby—l. Be
humbled for them (Isa. lv. 7). 2. Let ws make conscience of them for ever (Prov.
iv. 33), dreading the revelations of the judgment (1 Cor. iv. 5). After the judg-
ment men’s thoughts will prove their greatest executioners.

Il. Remedies against vain thoughts. (Addenda, ver. 2, “Thou shalt swear,” de.)

1. Get the heart furnished and enriched with a good stock of sanctified and
heavenly knowledge in spiritual truths (Matt. xiii. 35; Prov. vi. 22; Deut. vi
6, 7).

: th Endeavour to preserve and keep up lively, holy, and spiritual affections in
the heart (Mal. iii 16; Ps. cxix. 97).

3. Of all apprehensions else, get the heart possessed with deep and powerful
apprehensions of God’s holiness, majesty, omniscience, and omnipresence (Ps
exxxix, 1-13;.

$2


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIA. OMAP, IV.





_ 4. In the morning when thou awakest, as did David (Ps. cxix. 18), prevent the
_ vain thoughts the heart naturally engenders by filling it with thoughts of God.

__ 5. Have a watchful eye upon thy heart all day; though vain thoughts crowd in,
~ let them know that they pass not unseen. Vagrant thoughts will not make their
_ rendezvous where strict watch is kept. Complain of them; whip them if they will


pass in.
__ 6. Please not thy fancy too much with vanities and curious flights (Job xxxi.
13 Prov. iv. 25).

_ 1. Be diligent in thy calling (2 Thess. fii 11; 1 Tim. v. 18); only encumber
_ not the mind too much (Luke x, 41),

__ 8. In thy calling and all thy ways commit thy goings to the Lord (Prov. xvi.
_ 8). A few thoughts of faith would keep us from many thoughts of cares and fears.
_ When such waves toss and turmoil the heart, thoughts of faith bring calm and
_ Yest.—Condensation of a Homily by Rev. Thomas Goodwin, B.D. Dated a.p. 1638.


Ver. 19. Topic: Tax Propuer’s LAMENTATIONS OVER HIS PEopLe’s Doom.
(Anctent Homily.)


Jeremiah travails with the miseries and calamities of his people, and bemoans
_ them, to draw his people to the same affections and dispositions with himself.
_. The complaint or lamentation itself. We have three particulars—i. The
_ parts afected. Signify the soul and inward man, Gregory Myssen regards them
as “the intellectual and discursive faculty of the soul.” Because of: 1. The
secrecy of it, the mind and soul being inward and hidden. 2. Because the mind
receives and digests the thoughts. 3. The mind is the mother of thoughts, con-
ceiving and generating them. ii. The grief of those parts. “ Heart is pained,” &.,
_ both as to the kind (“ pained ”) and the ef‘cet of the grief (“ heart maketh noise in
- me”), From which infer: 1. God need not go far for the punishment of wicked
- men; He can do it from within themselves; punish a man with his own affections
_ and thoughts. 2, What good cause we have to regulate and control our affections,
avoid passion and excess of emotion, take care to be pacific, and enjoy a sabbatic
tranquillity in our spirits. iii. Zhe passage or vent. “I cannot hold my peace.”
Passion will make way, and force itself forth. It did here in: 1. The speech of
discovery ; for he cannot help revealing these workings of his own spirit. God’s
ministers find a necessity in themselves to discover their thoughts to their people

Jer. xx. 9; Job xxxiii. 18-20). Moreover, love constrains him hereunto (Acts xx.
20), that his weeping and mourning might be a forerunner of theirs: also the
consideration of his calling, as watchman and guide, urged him to give warnings of
sin and judgment. 2. The speech of lamentation: he must bewail and utter com-
plaint, his anguish was so great (as Job vii. 11).

II. The ground or occasion of his lamentation, “Because,” &c. i. The
tidings or report itself. ‘‘ Sound of trumpet, alarm of war.” This not literally in
amilitary case. 1. The trumpet of Providence. 2. The trumpet of the Word (Isa.
Iviii. 1), 3. The trumpet of vision, or extraordinary prophetical revelation. ii
The conveyance of it to the prophet. ‘Thou hast heard, O my soul.” 1. The soul
through the corporeal organ of hearing. 2. The soul immediately, as being that
which had communion with God. 3. The soul emphatically ; that is heard indeed
which is heard by the soul. Hence (a.) God’s excellency; He speaks, (0.) Man’s
duty: he hears, iii, The improvement or use he makes of tt. 1. Hts medttations
aroused his affections, (a.) This is the aim of a revelation. (6.) We should en-
deavour to bring revelations for others to our own spiritual advancement and
‘profit, 2. What these affections were which the tidings aroused. (a.) Anger at his
people’s obstinacy. (b.) Fear of the coming judgment (¢.) Grief at his people's
state and doom. Yet there was no such thing yet as war among them, neverthe-
less the certainty of d# pained him. To shut up all: 1. We sce how le a and


OBAP. IV.





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.


ministers should be affected in themselves by the threatenings and denunciations of |i


judgment.


2. We learn how all should be affected by Divine warnings.
dreadful in apprehension, what will it be in the infliction? 3. Let us endeavour to ||


If so


meet God by speedy and unfeigned repentance (Amos iv. 12).—Abstract of Sermon ||
by Rev. Thomas Horton, D.D. Dated a.v. 1679.


4SDDENDA TO OHAPTER IV. ILLUSTRATIONS AND SUGGESTIVE EXTRACTS, i|


Ver. 1. Sin banished, or no heaven.
The first physic to recover our souls is
not cordials, but corrosives ; not an im-
mediate stepping into heaven by a present
assurance, but mourning, lamentation,
and a bitter bewailing of our former
transgressions. With Mary Magdalene,
we must wash Christ’s feet with our
tears of sorrow before we may anoint
His head with the * oil of gladness.’ ”—
Browning.

A poor man told Rowland Hill that
the way to heaven comprised three steps:
“ Out of self, unto Christ, into heaven.”

When Ben’s master died, they told him
he had gone to heaven. Ben shook his
head. “I ’fraid massa no gone there.”
“But why, Ben?” ‘’Cos when massa
go North, or go journey to the Springs,
he talk about + long time, and get ready.
I never hear him talk about going to
heaven, never see him get ready to go
there.”

‘‘T know the way to heaven,” said a
little girl to her brother. “Do tell
me,” the boy answered. ‘Well, just
tommence going up, and keep on going
ap all the time, and you'll get there.
But, Johnny, you must not turn back.”


The banished recalled :-—-


* Driven from their home, their pathway lost,
’Mid clouds that came upon the world’s
fair morn,
By gloom and shadows crose’d,
Wandered a race forlorn,


* There sat One o’er heaven’s highest hall,
Who, in atringe charity, to exile went
These exiles to recall
To that, His heavenly tent.


* He gave Himeelf, their staff and stay,
To feeble knees, strength to the sinking


soul ;
He waa Himself the Way,
He was Himself the Goal.”
—From THE Latin.
Ver, 2. “Thou shalt swear,” cc.
“ Every time, whenever thou shalt find
thyself to have let slip an oath, punish
94


thyself for it by missing the next meal,” |
—Chrysostom.


‘6 Tt is great sin to swear unto a sin,
But greater sin to keep a sinful oath.
Who can be bound by any solemn vow
To do a murderous deed, to rob a man,
To reave the orphan of his patrimony,
To wring the widow from her custom’d rights
And have no other reason for this wrong,
But that he was bound by solemn oath?”
—SHakesPearE, 2 Henry VI. v. 1.


Ver. 3. “Fallow ground.” Tus
trates: 1. Culture of the Church (1 Cor,
iii. 9).
we leave the heart uncultivated the
harder to break up. If we do the till- —
ing, God will rain righteousness (Hos. x.
12). Break it up with thought, soften
it with repentance, plant it with truth, —
-——Topics for Teachers.

“Have you ever read the ‘ Ancient
Mariner?’ I dare say you thought it
one of the strangest imaginations ever
put together, especially that part where
the old mariner represents the corpses of
all the dead men rising up to man the
ship,—dead men pulling the ropes, dead
men steering, dead men spreading sails,
But I have lived to see that time : have
seen itdone. I have gone into churches
and have seen a dead man in the pulpit,
a dead man as a deacon, a dead man
holding the plate, and dead men sitting
to hear.” Spurgeon.

Ver. 4. Unquenchable fire. A finger
of lightning will write on the sky, ‘‘ For
ever |” and the thunder-peal echo among
the crags of death, “For ever!” O those
fire-bells will never stop ringing, because
the conflagration will never be done! (2
Thess. i 9.) It is not I, but God says it,

Sir Francis Newport, in his last mo-
ments, caught a glimpse of the eternal
world ; he looked into it before he en-
teredit. The last words he uttered were,
“Qk, the insufferable pangs of hell!”
The lost soul wil] cry, “I cannot stand


2. Of the heart. The longer —





OSA





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.





this ; is there no way out}” And the


echo will answer, “No way out for
ever!”—De Witt Talmage.

Ver. 6. Zion a refuge, “I wish they
were within the enclosure where the
boar out of the wood could not waste


them nor the wild beast of the field de-
-vour them.”—H, Ward Beecher,


Ver. 7. “The lion. Nebuchad-
nezzar, king of Babylon, whose monarchy
is represented by a lion (Dan. vii. 4).
He is called “ the destroyer of the Gen-
tiles,” or rather “nations ;” Judea and
all the neighbouring countries being
given up into his hands by God’s decree
(Jer. xxv. 9, xxvii, 6).—W. Lowth.

Ver. 11. Blast of the Almighty.
Thevenot mentions the death of 20,000
men who perished in one night by one
of those burning winds. Sir J. Chardin
describes this wind as making a great
hissing noise; that it appears red and
fiery, and kills those it strikes by stifling
them. Aaillet mentions its being felt
in the desert between Egypt and Mecca,
in part of which Israel wandered forty
years.

A party of travellers in the desert
were overtaken by the fierce simoom.
Like blinding snow driven by the winds
of March came the hot sand. Before
the simoom had reached its height, they
came suddenly upon a rude building of
stone, well protected with roof and
doors, which the hand of charity had
erected there forshelter. With joy they
rushed into it, closed the doors, and were
safe, (Comp. Isa. xxvi. 20, 21.)

Ver. 14. “Vain thoughts.” “If
the flow of a day’s mind-and-heart ex-
periences were written, it would be a
volume, and one’s life a Bodleian Lib-
rary ; but the ‘book of remembrance’
is yonder, and the life is daguerreotyped
on the sensitive pages of the future.”—
Beecher,

“ Tn hotter climates, the locusts swarm
so thickly in the air as sometimes to
hide from the traveller the light of the
sun, and cast a cold, dark shadow on his
pathway So it is in the world of mind:
swarms of vain thoughts are ever float-
ing over some minds, intercepting the
beams of truth from falling on the
heart, and thus keeping that heart


OHAF. IV.





barren of all virtue and goodness,”
Rev, R. Roberts.
‘* Tis not in things o’er thought to domineer:

Guard well thy thought ; our thoughts are

heard in heaven,” — Young,

Ver. 15. Dan. “In consequence of
a large portion of the canton of Dan
continuing in the possession of the
Philistines, it was found too small for
its population, and 600 Danites, with
their families, emigrated to the northern
extremity of Palestine, attacked Laish,
a Zidonian city near Lebanon, took pos-
session of it, and changed its name to
Dan. This place is notorious in sacred
history as the spot where Jeroboam
established his golden calves (1 Kings
xii, 29), and as the place which Nebu-
chadnezzar first seized on his invasion
of Canaan.”—Pazton’s “Sacred Geo-
graphy.”

Ver. 18. “ Bitter at heart.” On the
walls of one of the Egyptian temples is
said to be the inscription, “The impious
shall commit iniquity without recom- -
pense, but not without remorse.”

** Through many a clime ’tis mine to go,
With many a retrospection curst;

And all my solace is to know,

Whate’er betides, I’ve known the worst.

What is that worst? Nay! do not ask;

In pity from the search forbear.
Smile on; nor venture to unmask
Man’s heart, and view the hell’s that
there.” —BYRON.
*¢ "Tis very true, my grief lies all within;

And these external manners of lament

Are merely shadows of the unseen grief

That ovon with silence in the tortured

soul ;


There lies the substance.”
—SHAKESPEARE.


Ver. 19. Prophet’s distress. ‘ God’s
ministers must have their hearts fired,
not with passion, but with love. The
thunderbolt may crash, but the sun
melts. It is better to love as a pastor
than speak as an angel.”— Watson, a.v.
1649.

Ver. 26. “ Broken down at the pre
sence of the Lord.” ‘“ Oh, that you might
all be stirred by a dread of the Almighty !
I announce to you the judgment to
come; it shall break upon the earth,
that day of wonder and of terror, when
from the sea, and the mountain, and the
desert shall swarm the buried families

95





of the human kind, and the dead shall
stand before their God: no shelter for
the proud, no mask for the hypocrite,
no standing-place for the presumptuous.”
—Melvill.

Ver. 30. Finery: Flattery.


«‘ Ah! when the means are gone that buy this


praise,

The breath is gone whereof this praise is
made.

Feast-won, fast-lost; one cloud of winter
showe


TB;
These flies are couch’d.”--SHAKESPEARE.


‘© All that glitters is not gold ;
Gilded tombs do worms unfold.”—Jdem.


FOM:LETIC COMMENTARY: JERBMIAH.





io


of eternity. To see the poor soul that


now begins to wake out of its long ||
dream, at its entrance into the world of ||
realities, shrinking back into the body —
and crying, OI cannot, I dare not die/”


—Flavel.
“Qome home, wandering, tired, ||
grieved soul! Love where thy love ||


shall not be lost. Love Him that will —
not reject thee, nor deceive thee, nor re |
quite thee with injuries as the world —
doth. God will receive thee when the —


world doth cast thee off, if thou cast off


Ver. 31. Woestricken. “The world the world for Him! ”—Bazter.


CHAPTER V.


Caiticat anp Exrartioan Notrs.—l. Chronology of the chapter.


affords not a sadder sight than a poor ||
Christless soul shivering upon the brink |





The desoription here of


anblushing immorality and total disorganisation leads Kimchi and others to date this chapter |


after Josiah’s times; but it is not necessary ; ostentatious reform and superficial religion may
be synchronous with abandoned impiety and grossest corruption.
an interval of twelve years between the fourth and this chapter, two years after Josiah’s death,
but without argument or evidence.

2. Cotemporary Scriptures. 2 Chron. xxxv. 1-19; 2 Kings xxiii. 1-27; Zeph. i.-iii.; and,
probably, Nahum and Habakkuk.

8. National History and Cotemporary History, as chap. iii.

4. Geographical References in this chapter. Ver. 1. ‘‘ Broad places of Jerusalem,” open
spaces just within the gates of the city, places of concourse, the markets, &e. (See on chap. i,
15). Ver. 22. ‘ The sand for the bound of the sea.” Seas known to the sacred writers were—
1. Mediterranean, situate in the middle of the then known regions of the earth, separating the
three great continents Kurope, Asia, and Africa; 2320 miles by 1080 at extreme measurements,
6000 feet deep at Straits of Gibraltar, inhabited by over 440 different species of fish, called the
Great Sea (Num. xxxiv. 6, 7), Sea of the Philistines (Exod. xxiii, 31). On its shores were situate
the mightiest empires of the world, Assyrian, Persian, Grecian, Roman. Weatern boundary of
Palestine. 2. Red Sea, a huge gulf of the Indian Ocean, interposed between Egypt and
Arabia; 1400 miles by 150 ; area, about 180,000 square miles ; depth, about 6000 feet; divided
at northern end into Gulf of Suez, 190 miles by 20, and Gulf of Akabah, 112 by 15; between
these gulfa lies the peninsula of Sinai. 3. Dead Sea, inland sea; believed originally to have
been a huge basin in the channel which connected the Mediterranean and Red Sea ; situate south-
east of Palestine, 48 miles by 10 at extreme measurements, 300 square miles area, depth about
1300 feet, and the surface 1300 feet below level of the ocean. 4. Sea of Galilee, also called


Sea of Tiberias, north-east of Palestine, 700 feet below level of Mediterranean, 12 miles by 6,
depth about 700 feet.


‘* How pleasant to me is thy deep blue wave, O Sea of Galilee !
For the glorious One who came to save hath often stood by thee,”


5. Personal Allusions. Description of the Babylonians (ver. 15). ‘‘ Mighty nation,” called
G 23), the “hammer of the whole earth;” “ancient nation,” the empire waa founded bd’

imrod soon after the Flood (Gen. x. 8, 10, xi. 4,9), Isaiah suggests (xxiii. 18) that the
Chaldeans were a younger branch of that venerable stock, yet to earliest times their origin ig
traceable, when they were one of the Cushite tribes (Dr. W. Smith), a fact proved by the relics
of their language, which, as a dialect of Babylonia, was retained in use as the learned language
for scientific and religious literature (Dan. i. 4). Henderson states that originally they in-
habited the Carduchian Mountains and the northern parts of Mesopotamia, and afterwards
migrated into the Babylonian territory ; ‘‘ whose language” the Jews knew not, nor could un-
derstand, either because the Chaldee, though only a dialect of the Hebrew, was so different in
-{ta words and construction as to be foreign to a Jew, or (a8 Henderson suggests) because the

9


Matthew Henry boldly pute — :


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. CHAP, V.














rf a
_ people had retained their native Cushite tongue, probably the mother of the present Kurdish,
a language totally different from any of Semitic origin, in close affinity with ihe Persie.
6. Natura! History. Ver. 6. “Zion” (see notes on ii, 15, iv. 7). ‘* Wolf of the evenings :”
_ formerly abundant in Palestine, now aven occasionally : character and habits described Gen.
3 ix. 27. Inferior to lion in strength and to leopard in courage, yet if possible more rapa-
_ cious and fierce (especially in the evening) than either (Habak. i. 8); generally chooses as his
prey the weaker animals, lambs and kids; his depredations destructive in the extreme, for he
assails not only what his ravenous hunger craves, but every living thing he meets. He
a dwells alone, shunning even his own species, except for occasional combined attack.”
‘Leopard shall watch over cities :” predacious (Hos. xiii. 7); awift (Hab. i 8) ; ‘‘ has a ferocious
_ Sir, a restless eye, a cruel aapeot;” ia very nimble in his movements, swift and subtle,
_ gluttonous and rapacious, Homer says the leopard ean never be satisfied with prey (Paxton’s
_ “‘Natural History ”’).
‘Ver. 17. * Vines and Sig-trees.” ‘* Vines” (notes on ii, 21). ‘‘ Fig-trees:” very abundant
in Palestine (Deut. viii. 8) ; a single tree would produce 280 lbs. of figs.

Ver. 24. “‘ Former and latter rain” (see Critical Notes on iii. 3). “ Weeks of harvest :””
seven weeks which intervened between the feasts of Passover and Pentecost (Deut. xvi. 9).
Barley harvest began quickly after Passover ; wheat, which ripens later, was reaped just before
_ Pentecost, at which sheaves were offered (Exod. xxxiv. 22). Rain never fell during those weeks
- (1 Sam. xii. 17; Proy. xxiv. 1; Amos iv. 7). The regularity of weather and seasons was oon-
_ sequent upon a special Providence and covenant promises (Deut. xi. 11-14), The climate and
_ seasons are now very uncertain ; for the Providence has been alienated, and the covenant with-
| drawn because of sin (Deut. xi. 17).

7. Manners and Oustoms. Ver. 1. ‘‘ Kxecuteth judgment :” see Lit. Orit. below. Ver. 5.
“ Broken the yoke and burst the bonds” (see notes on ii. 20); implement of husbandry ; three


Hebrew words translated yoke, iD Mid, and diy: the last here, Vor. 10. “‘Walls


and battlements:” the old wall began on the north of Jerusalem at the tower called
Hippicus, and terminated at the west cloister of the Temple: its southern direction was over
the pool of Siloam to the eastern cloister of the Temple. Josephus says there were sixty towers
on this wall, The city was divided into the High Town onthe west, and the Low Town on the
east. When David acquired possession of both, he ‘‘ built the city round about, even from Millo
round about ” (2 Sam. v. 9) ; and ‘‘ Joab repaired the rest of the city ’’ (1 Chron. xi. 8), t¢., the
High Town ; connecting the two divisions of the city together, and surrounding the whole
with fortifications (Josephus Antiq. VII. iii. 2). These walls of David were strengthened and
_ elaborated by Solomon (1 Kings iii. 1, xi. 27). Josephus says that Solomon “ having repaired
the walls of Jerusalem, made them much greater and stronger than they were before”’ (Ant.
VIIL. ii. 1); and that ‘‘ the walls that encompassed Jerusalem might correspond to the dignity
of the city, he both repaired them and made them higher, and built great towers upon them”
(Ant. VIII. vi.1). Ver. 16. ‘‘ Quiver :” Layard’s ‘‘Monuments of Nineveh” represent the
enormous and powerful bows carried by the Assyrian warriors, The bowmen and cavalry
formed the main strength of Chaldean armies, ‘‘ Quiver” was the case in which each soldier
packed and carried his arrows, and was probably slung over the shoulder, Ver. 17. ‘‘ Jm-
_ poverish thy cities:” see Lit, Orit. below. Ver. 27. ‘‘ Cage full of birds: ‘‘cage,” 34 3,
rendered in Amos viii. 1, ‘‘ basket,” because made of wickerwork: in this birds were secured
by the fowler, and the door left open as a decoy to birda which were free, who no sooner
entered than the door fell,

8. Literary Criticism. Ver, 1. ‘‘ Executeth judgment :” lit. doing right ; no allusion here
to conduct of public judicial officers, but to general behaviour of men. “‘ Secketh the truth :”
not verbal, but practical truth ; ¢.¢., integrity, good-faith, truth im actions, Ver. 3. “Upon
the truth,” i.e., practical truth (aa in ver. 1); fidelity as opposed to falseness (ver. 2) Ver. 4.
“ Therefore :” too vigorous a rendering ; then, and. Ver, 6, ‘ Wolf of the evenings:” I),


evening; MIA VY, desert; the word here is a plural form MAT, The prevailing conclusions
of commentators derive this plural froza, may ; thus, wolf of the deserts ; but Gesenius gives


this plural from ayy, evening ; and De Wett, Hend., and Noyes retain wolf of the evenings.
Ver. 7. “ How shall I pardon?” more correctly, What reason, why should I, how can I}
“‘ Though I fed them to the full:” thirty-three of De Rossi’s MSS., the Sept., Vulg., Syriac,
Arabic, Tayum, and many expositors, ancient and medern, retain this reading from the word
YAWN); appealing to v, 28 and Deut. xxxii. 15; Hos. xiii, 6; Neh. ix. 25, aa parallels ;
where bountifulness of earthly enjoyments issued in apostasy. But the word should be
YAWN), and J made them swear: the preponderance of existing MSS. supports this pointing,
and most modern commentators prefer it ; t.¢., God made them pledge allegiance to Himself;
both originally at Sinai (Exod, xxiv. 7), and recently during Josiah’s reforms (2 Kings xxiii. 3;
@ Chron. xxxiv. 7 seg.). Ver. 8. ‘‘ Fed horses in the morning:” a difficulty with the word
rendered “in the morning.” This derives Daw from DY, to rise carly in the morning.
@ 97










Pe ty ee


N





Hitzig traces the word to "JWID, to draw; hence “draught horses.” Ewald, altering the


word to DPW, gives ‘lustful horses.” But the safer and most preferable derivation of the


word is from TIDW , the Hiphil particle ; to wander (Maurer, Keil, Umbriet, Speaker’s Com.),


“they rove about.” Ver. 10. “Walls and batilgments:” battlements is a false rendering °
tendrils, t.¢., of the vine (ii. 21) or branches (Isa. xviii. 5). The walls of the vineyard are to be
scaled, and while the stock of the vine is to be spared, all her tendrils are to be torn or hewn
off. Ver. 12. ‘Zt 7s not he,” ¢e., not God, who has spoken of judgments; therefore the
menaces were false, “wind” (ver. 13); or “ He ts not,” i.¢., there is no God to punish as ia
predicted (Ps. xiv. 1). Ver. 18. ‘* Thus shall ct be done unto them,” or, 8o be tt done ; may the
calamities they threaten come upon the prophets themselves, Ver. 15. ‘‘ A mighty nation:”
the word signifies perennial, as of an ever-flowing stream, or enduring, as rocks ; the same
word is used of both. ‘‘An ancient nation:” oriyD, from eternity, of immemorial
antiquity. Ver. 17. “Jmpoverish cities,” break in pieces, batter down: ‘‘with the sword,”
with weapons, or by force of arms. Ver. 28. ‘‘Yet they prosper,” rather, that they may prosper,
viz., the “fatherless.” Ver. 31. ‘‘ Rule by their means:” lit. at their hand ; Sep. and Vulg.
suggeat, “the priests applaud with their hands” the false prophecies of peace : the Syriac, “held
their hands,” 1.¢., strengthened and supported the false prophets. Rather, at or under thetr
hands; the priests rule as the false prophets direct.


HOMILIES 4ND OUTLINES ON SECTIONS OF CHAPTER V.


Section 1-9. A profligate people ripe for vengeance,
», 10-19. Forewarning despised, judgment prepared,
», 20-25. Solemn reasons for fearing God,
», 26-31. Spiritual criminality of most hideous form.


Ver. 1-9. A PRoFuiGATE PEorPLE RIPE FOR VENGEANCE.


The facts: not an upright or godly man could be found in Jerusalem (ver. 1, 2).
All were spiritually incorrigible and defiant (ver. 3). Excusing the poor in part,
because of their spiritual ignorance, it was yet found that the rich and learned
were insolently impious (ver. 4,5). All this necessitated direct punishment and
destruction (ver. 6). Cod could discover no ground for pardon or pity in their
case (ver. 7, 8). Vengeance must fall on them (ver. 9).

I. Lenient conditions of pardon (ver. 1). Find a good man, and I will pardon
the city! 1. Appalling corruption of society. Either: (1.) Though many esteemed
themseives good and prous, God saw ail to be vile. Or: (2.) If any were true and
righteous he dare not openly show his religion (Isa. lix. 14). 2. Hasy terms of
mercy. God asked “ten righteous” in Sodom: but would spare Jerusalem
for one/ (1.) How He loved and desired to spare the city. (2.) How slow to auger
and of great kindness.

Il. Blasphemous show of piety. Though utterly iniquitous, the profession of
religion had not been abandoned (ver. 2). 1. Jt gratified and quieted their
conscience. 2. But rt incensed the God of truth (Isa, xxix. 13; Prov. xii. 22).

III. Hardened resistance of God (ver. 3), Their gross irreligion was not be
cause God had not done all He could to restrain and correct them. Yet He whose
“ eyes are upon the truth ” saw only falsity, 1. God had afflicted them in mercy ;
but the “stroke” awakened no penitential response. 2. God had corrected them
with severity ; but they resisted the design of the Lord in thus “ consuming”
them. Instead: 3. They fortified themselves against God and His judgments,
And, 4. Deliberately refused to return to Him.

IV. Prevailing social corruption (ver. 4,5). 1. From the lowest grade to the
kighest society was godless. 2. Ignorance or knowledge altered not their case; “the
poor know not,” &c., but “the great have known the way of the Lord ;” yet from
the least to the greatest every one was evil (chap. vi. 13). The poor blindly
wander, but the rich are blasphemously wilful: but so it was, “all flesh had cor-
rupted its way.” What a catalogue of sins is here given! Ver. 1. Total ab

98





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH. CRAP, Vv.


¢








sence of integrity in public life; ver. 2, Hypocrisy in religion; ver. 3, Incor
rigible hardness of heart; ver. 4, Degradation of the poor; ver. 5, Debauchery
of the rich; ver. 7, 8, Shameless idolatry and frightful immorality. Surely
these had sunk to the “ depths of Satan.”

V. Righteous punishment threatened (ver. 6). 1. Jts nature definitely known
to God ; for He fixes positive consequences to sin; not merely gives the sinner up
to indefinite miseries, 2. [ts severity fully determined. For “every one,” there-
fore none shall elude it; “torn in pieces,” therefore none shall outbrave it. 3. Its
justice unquestionable ; “ because their transgressions,” &. God’s dealings even
with rebels are not arbitrary or extreme: He lets each transgressor mete out his
own niisery by the decision of merit.

VI. An insulted God avenged (ver. 9). 1. Can any challenge the justice #
What are “ these things” to which God makes appeal? (1.) God’s own children had
forsaken Him (ver. 7). (2.) Openly identified themselves with idols. (3.) Violated
His laws. (4.) Utterly polluted the homes and the city (ver. 7, 8). 2. Can any
suggest reasons of mercy? (1.) Should such vileness be tolerated # (ver. 7, 8). (2.)
Ought such falsity to be connived at? (ver. 1, 2). (3.) Can any Divine correction
avail? (ver. 3). (4.) Are there any who merit to be spared ? (ver. 1, 4, 5). (6.) Is the
judgment heavier than is deserved} (ver. 6). 3. Can any hope to evade God’s
vengeance? (1.) Not by subtle devices and deception (ver. 2, 3). (2.) Yet by pens-
tential pleading for pardon (ver. 1). (3.) Calvary ts our sole hope.


Ver. 10-19. Forrwarnina Drspiszep: JUDGMENT PREPARED, '


Multitudes are ruined by fancying that God will not be so strict to punish
iniquity as His Word forewarns (ver. 12). This was Satan’s first snare laid for
man (Gen. iii. 4); and men easily fall into it still. Sinners are ready to deny a
message to be from God which troubles them in, and would drive them from, their
sins (ver. 13).

L God disowns them (ver. 10). ‘They are not the Lord’s” (see Lit. Crit. on
“battlements”), te. such vile outgrowths from the stock of David God will not
regard as His people. 1. They acted deceitfully with God (ver. 11). 2. They
talked defiantly against God (ver. 12, 13), showing—(1.) An absence of reverence or
regard for God Himself,—“ it is not He,” rather “ He is not” (see Lit. Crit.) ; (2.)
Utter heedlessness of God’s Word,—mere “wind” (ver. 13) ; 3. They wickedly menaced
God’s messenger (ver. 13),—“ Thus shall it be done,” &c. This filled up the measure
of their iniquity (Matt. xxiii. 30-33). Thus had they ruthlessly broken every link
that united them with the Lord, and defaced every feature which identified them
with Him and His true people. ‘ Now, if any man have not the spirit of Christ,
he ts none of His” (Rom. viii. 9), ‘I never knew you: depart from Me, ye that
work iniquity ” (Matt. vii. 23).

II. God dooms them. Jehovah speaks, and there is a dreadful “wherefore”
determining His utterance ; it is a deliverance of Judah to wrath. 1. The threaten-
ings they derided shall devour them as fire (ver. 14), burn within their consciences
and memories,—the fire never to be quenched: an inward terror at the wrath of
God should consume them as wood, burning up their complacency, their fearless-
ness, their hopes, their delusions. 2. The foe they disregarded should waste and
ruin them, (1.) Protection and defences should fail; “walls” scaled (ver. 10),
“fenced cities” destroyed (ver. 17). (2.) A scowrging adversary should desolate
them ; God would bring it, for He commands nations to do His will (ver. 15).
(a.) Dreadful in itself (ver. 15); (6.) terrible in war (ver. 16) ; (c.) wasting the
country (ver. 17); (¢.) destroying the cities (ver. 17) ; (¢.) implacable in slaughter
ver. 6).
! III. God deserts them (ver. 19). As they had deserted Him. “ With what
measure ye mete,” &c. 1. Sinners dare to challenge the justice of an thew


OHAP. V. atOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.


overthrow (ver. 19, comp. Matt. xxv. 44). 2. God justifies His dealings with
transgressors (ver. 19); their punishment corresponds to their sin: having
“served strange gods” wilfully, they shall “serve strangers” compulsorily. Yet,
3. God limits the severity of their punishment (ver. 18), tor His promises must be
fulfilled to Judah, and His mercy must be illustrated before the world as well as
His justice ; and the enemy whom God employs to punish shali see that God gives
not the sceptre into his hand. God is the Supreme King ; His sceptre rules over
mighty nations (ver. 15), and is stretched over even the guiltiest sinners (ver. 18),
that their repentance might lead to their redemption.


Ver. 20-25. Sotzumn Reasons vor Frarina tHE Lorp.


First: Argument from God’s government of the sea (ver. 22, 23). Preliminary
remarks: 1. God, the author and governor of the sea, “placed sand for bound
of the sea.” 2. God binds the sea within limits of law, “by perpetual decree.”
3. God’s laws are permanent in their control. 4. God is ever present in His laws
and contrivances: “Tremble at My presence which placed the sand,” &. 65.
God’s presence in His all-pervading laws should have a restraining and reverencing
influence upon men: “ Fear ye not me? saith the Lord,” &c.

I. God’s government of the sea. 1. His government of the sea is suited to
impress man unth an tdea of infinite power, 2. To impress man with the idea of
consummate wisdom. 3. Of special goodness. Twofold : (a.) negatively, in check-
ing the threatening invasion of the sea ; (6.) affirmatively, in giving rain, &c. (ver.
24). Its obedience is a matter of necessity: waves may “toss themselves,” but
God absolutely controls. Its voice to man is, “ Fear Him, obey His commands,
willingly bend to His will, ere He crush thee.”

II. Man’s revolting tendencies. 1. God has prescribed the bounds of man’s
actions and thoughts by befitting laws. As the sea has “bounds,” so there are
limits to every finite being. 2. To overstep these limits ts rebellion against the
Great Lawgiver. 3. Man has revolted (ver. 23), differing in this from the sea.
(Nature protests and remonstrates against human lawlessness.) 4. Man can do
what the sea can not. (a.) man has “a heart,” the sea has not; a will-power ; (0.)
this power in man has been prostituted to evil: ‘rebellious heart.” Con.: 1.
God must govern heart and will by Heart and Will influences. 2. It is easier for
God to rule oceans than man, because “he has a rebellious heart.” 3. Man, as a
rebel, contrasts unfavourably with the material creation, and God notices it with
painful emotion: “ Fear ye not Me?” &.—Homultst.

Second: Argument from God's bestowment of the harvest (ver. 24, 25). The
history of Judah in Jeremiah’s time shows His dealings with a sinful and impeni-
tent nation, and offers awful warnings of the fate of such as resist His grace,
despise His long-suffering, and harden themselves against His loving correction,
1. What befell the Jews may befall any nation whose offences against God are
equally great and grievous, %. The sins which provoked the indignation of
Heaven may be learned. (a.) Idolatry and worship of false gods (ver. 19). (0.)
Habitual and impious perjury (ver. 2). (c.) Scandalous uncleanness (ver. 7).
(d.) Covetous and oppressive to the poor (ver. 26). (¢.) Destitute of a habitual
sense of God’s presence and power in the ordinary and natural dispensaticns of
His mercy and Providence (ver. 24).

I. Until the Gospel was communicated to the world, attentive observance of the
dispensation of Providence was the principal means whereby God’s Spirit drew the
Gentiles to Himself, and led them to piety and obedience. 1. It was the religion
of Nature. Paul attested this at Lystra (Acts xiv. 15-17), and urged it upon the
Romans (Rom. 1 19, 20). 2, From God’s works alone, His being, power, mercy,
may be fully and satisfactorily proved, even without the advantages of revelation :
they show design ; they attest a Creator, and an all-wise Author ; while “visible

100








HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR. OHAP, ¥.


are








things,” night and day, witness of the Most High, His greatness and His goodness,
All His works appeal to us: “Let us now fear the Lord.”

II. Although we enjoy the full light of the glorious Gospel, we can never too
closely keep in mind the fact that all things we see and enjoy are ordained by God.
1. We have less need than the heathen to learn about God from His outward and
visible works; yet, 2. We are beholden to His Providence for all essential natural
blessings. 3. Nothing in nature could reach maturity but for the fatherly care of
God. Thus learning our total dependence on God, three consequences will follow :
(1.) A perfect resignation to His will and trust in His mercy. He who has not
withheld His own Son from our spiritual necessity, will not deny us anything needful
to us. (2.) We must not pride ourselves in our worldly goods as if they were our
own, nor set our hearts upon them as if sure of keeping them for ever. (3.) As God
gives us all things, there is only one way of obtaining in this world whatever is
needful and good for us, #.¢., constantly make known our wants to Him in prayer.

IIL. From the natural events 2round us we may learn: 1. Diligence in our spiri-
tual concerns, that the Word of Life may ripen in our hearts. 2. Pray that the
Heavenly Sower will not pass us by in barrenness. 3, When observing the tender
blade, reflect on the weakness of our advance in piety, and entreat Him who tem-
pers all the elements to “work all things together for our good.” 4. When the
harvest hour is nigh, let us tink how short our time is, and pray that we may
not be found blasted or unfruitful— Arranged from Sermon by Bishop Reginald
Heber. Dated a.v, 1838.


Ver. 26-31. Sprerrvuat Crrminatity oF mosr Hiprovus Form.


Guilt has its climax: sinners see it not as a “ wonder and a horror” (ver. 30),
because they descend by gradual stages to the utmost depths of defilement, and
grow accustomed to the horrible distortion of the life and affections ; moreover, as
they sink into the loathsome depths, their perception becomes darkened, and sensi-
bilities grow sottish (ver. 21). Else sinners would be horrijied at themselves. But
the spectacle of man distorted and debased is a “ wonderful and a horrible thing”
to the good and to God ; “wonderful,” that man can sink to such depths, considering
what he was and might become ; “ horrzble,” that so fair a creature could become so
foul, that God’s people can be rendered so hideously the children of the devil.

I. The predacious cruelty of the wicked (ver. 26, 27). Devoid of honourable
feeling, they will wrong any one so as to advance themselves. 1. Malicious.
2. Cunning. 3. Treacherous. They who trust the wicked walk into swamps, follow
a ghastly shadow, tread the ways to hell.

I. The gains of guilt and oppression (ver. 27, 28). Men of no conscience or
restraints can prosper and aggrandise themselves more easily than the good; nor
wonder : earth is their heaven ; “‘in life they have their good things;” the god of
this world feeds their sensual souls ; but woe follows ali. 1. Society accords place
and power to the successful; “ become great.” 2. Wealth ts within the reach of the
scheming and extortionate; “waxen rich.” 3. Self-indulgence and luxury become
their rule; “ waxen fat, and shine.” 4. They may be pitied who are tn their power
(ver. 28); for avarice and oppression have rendered them heartless and selfish,
tiead to all sense of justice, or compassion for the suffering and injured.

IIL The horrifying extremes of sin. To what it will grow. 1. The social
Jeaders surpass all ordinary bounds of wickedness (ver. 28) ; t.¢., they cast off all
restraint ; “fear not God, nor regard men ;” use their power and wealth for grossest
tyranny and foulest immorality (ver. 8). 2. The religious leaders beguile the people
with impostures ; “ prophets and priests ” combine to decoy and destroy souls. Awful
when spiritual guides plot their people’s ruin! 3. The godless nation lucuriates in
delusions. Enjoy the deceptions ; abandon themselves to licentiousness and vile-
ness ; cast off Jehovah and make gods of their own gratifications and lusts. Sueh
a scene is only fit for the “ blackness of darkness,” io


OHAP. V.


ROMILETIVC COMMENTALY : JEREMIAH.


IV. The fearful issues of all. 1. There comes an “ end thereof” (ver. 31). %


Sinners would then gladly “do” anything to escape.
God Himself will comfort them: “visit them.” Vengeance


surely come (ver. 29).


3. The terrible reckoning will


will break forth on such transgressors. There will be bitterness and woe at “ the


end,” without amelioration or redemption.


HOMILIES AND COMMENTS ON VERSES OF CHAPTER V.


Ver. 1. Theme: A CITY SAVED FOR
ONE GOOD MAN.

There were good men at this time in
Jerusalem; king Josiah, Baruch the
scribe, Zephaniah the prophet; but the
righteous were driven into seclusion by
the public immorality and hostility, so
that in “the streets and broad places”
not one could be found. Mote: There
may be hely men praying and weeping
in secret, though none in the highways:
they may be forced to retreat from
places of power and publicity, yet “God
knoweth them that are His.” The pro-
phet appeals to the people to find one
good man among and of themselves.
(Addenda on ver. 1, “ Streets of Jerusa-
lem,” “ Seek a man.”)

Great truths suggested :-—

I. Doom suspended while a Saviour
is sought. God arrests the sword
while the search is everywhere diligently
prosecuted.

1. The high value of one good life:
in God’s esteem; in a nation’s ex-
perience. Evils are thereby averted
from many who neither appreciate nor
recognise their benefactor. “Ye are
the salt of the earth.” (Addenda, ver.
1, “ One true man would avert woe.”)

2. The saving mission of a holy man.
One man of prayer may call down
mercy on numbers: one zealous Chris-
tian may snatch hundreds as brands
from the burning. The lone missionary
among heathen. The earnest preacher
of Jesus among a congregation, The
diligent worker for Christ in society.

3. The sublime fulfilment of this in
Jesus. Then there was ‘ One Man” in
the city. We “can find a Man,” for
whose sake God “ will pardon.” But as
yet Christ had not come.

II Doom necessitated because no
Saviour could be found. There was
not one good man to hold the gap
against the foe. What a dreadful state

102


of society ; how utterly and hopelessly
corrupt. Equally true in God’s sight,
‘whose eyes are upon the truth ” (ver,
3), that “there is none righteous, no
not one.” Nowhere from among men
could a sinless saviour be found.

1. The Christless sinner’s verplesxity.
He can discover no Saviour. The
agonising devices of heathenism show
this. The terror of men who have
sought hope apart from the Gospel
attests the same fact. The plaintive
lament of the restless sowl, ‘Oh, that I
knew whereI might find Him /” confirms
the truth. There is “no man,” and
therefore “no pardon,” till Jesus is
found.

2. The perilous state of humanity.
The sword was unsheathed against
Jerusalem: wrath is declared against
all mankind, “ for that all have sinned.”
The cry appropriate to all is, ‘ Lord,
save, we perish /” Dire and awful is
the nearing doom (ver. 15, 16 ; comp.
Rom. ii. 9; Rev. ix. 14-17),

3. The effectual resources of God,
Not for Jerusalem, but for humanity,
God found a Saviour. She “ knew not
the day of her visitation ” (Isa. lix. 16,
17, 20 ; Job xxxiii 24), The very depths
of human sin, and absence of even one
true man among men, forms only the
dark background to throw out into
greater distinctness and beauty the
perfections of Jesus (Ps. xlv. 2; Heb.
vii. 26).

Comments : “The wicked world has
in the pious and believing a noble
treasure and defence.” Lange.

“See how ready God is to forgive,
how swift to show mercy. So pleasing
would it be to God to find any such,
that for their sakes He would pardon the
city ; if there were but ten righteous
men in Sodon, if but one of a thousand,
of ten thousand in Jerusalem, it should
be spared."—. Henry.








HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.


Soap, V.





Sodom could not be destroyed while
one righteous man was in it (Gen.
xix. 13, 16); and Zoar was spared by
the sole worth of that same one man


(ver. 20-22).


Ver. 2. Theme: Pious sPEECH
CLOAKING AN IMPIOUS SOUL.

Comments: “Though they make an
outward and fashionable profession of
the name of the Lord in worshipping
Him, in swearing by Him, yet it is but
in falsehood and hypocrisy.”—Bishop
flail.

“As the Lord liveth:” the common
form of oath among the Jews; yet this
sacred oath used only to deceive and
defraud.— Wogan.

“They swear falsely,” that is (1.)
They are not sincere in the profession
they make to God, but are false to Him.

2.) Though they appeal to no other

od, they make no conscience of calling
Jehovah to witnss toa lie. They do not
swear by idols, yet they forswear them-
selves; which is an affront to the God
of truth, as swearing by idols would have
been an affront to the only true God.—
MM. Henry,


Ver. 3. THE VIRTUE FOR WHICH Gop’s
EYES SEARCH. “Eyes upon truth:”
comp. Ps. li. 6 ; John iv. 23. Eyes upon
an object denote (i.) diligent inspection ;
nothing escapes ; (ii.) delicate percep-
tion ; the least is not lost to sight,
though but as a grain of mustard-seed ;
(iii.) destrous expectation ; 80 anxious to
find the grace He loves,

Naegelsbach renders the words:
“ Lord, thine eyes look for faith ;” and
remarks (a.) The Lord seeks it, for He
regards it, (b.) He sought by manifold
chastisements to bring the people to it,
but in vain. And asks, Why does God
impose faith as the only condition of
salvation # (i.) Because faith gives the
greatest glory to God. (ii) Because it is
at the same time the easiest and most
difficult exercise of the human heart.
For (a.) to believe, 4¢., to accept God’s
grace as a free gift, every one is, and
must be, able todo. (6.) He who can
do it has vanquished himself at the one
point, and won all.


“ God looks to the facth, the upright
purpose of the heart, and without it the
nominal fealty of an oath is an abomina-
tion.” —Speaker’s Com.


Ver. 3. Theme: Gop’s OHASTISE-
MENTS DESIGNED FOR MANS CONVER-
SION, ‘

Here is only a complaint of the mis-
improvement of afflictions, yet the right
use is indicated: they should have
“grieved” for their undutifulness to
God, and with relentings for sin they
should have “ received correction ;” sub-
mitted to the rod as to the chastisement
of a Father, without sullen murmuring
or fainting; their “‘ faces” should have
been flushed with ingenuous shame, and
washed with penitential tears: they
ought immediately to have “ returned
to God.” Hence ingenuous sorrow,
shame, and repentance, a submissive,
corrigible temper, and a sincere conver-
sion to God, are the designed ends of
the afflictions He sends upon impenitent
sinners,

The Gospel is preached, Holy Spirit
communicated, to arouse consciences.
When Word disregarded, conscience
slighted, Spirit resisted, then our Hea-
venly Father uses the rod; the one end
being that we turn to the Lord. In-
quire, What ts it to turn to the Lord ?

I. Turning to the Lord presupposes &
deep conviction that you have gone
astray, both from way of duty and of
safety. You will never leave your present
course till plainly see it leads you down
to chambers of death ; nor “ turn to the
Lord,” till realise that your interests
and duty render it urgent and necessary.

1. If God should open the eyes of the
unconverted, what astonishing and un-
suspected views would present them-
selves of your past course and present
condition! That all your highest inter-
ests have been neglected. 2. You would
see the exceeding sinfulness of sin. 3.
The purity and strictness of God’s law,
the equity and terror of its penalty. 4.
Your obligations to Him as your Creator,
Preserver, and Redeemer. Oh, that expe
rience may be your teacher of the reality
of these things |

Il. Turning to God supposes @ full

103


OHAP. VY.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR.





conviction of the necessity of immedi-
ate response. 1. Because if you die in
your present condition you will certainly
be lost. 2. Because you have no time
for delay. And, 3. It will wound your
heart to think this work has not been
done long ago. Dying men bear testi-
mony that the present hour is the most
fit season for turning to God.

IIL. Jf afflictions should prove the
means of turning you to God, they will
rouse you to most earnest persevering
endeavours that you may tmly find
Him. Pray without ceasing : “ Behold,
he prayeth!” Accustom yourselves to
solemn meditation ; hear and read God’s
Word. Seek the soczety of those who
know the Lord. These will promote
your conversion. Also, you will guard
against whatever would hinder it; shun
wicked courses ; moderate your pursuits
of the world; avoid evil company.
“With fear and trembling” the awak-
ened sinner would begin to “ work out
his salvation.”

IV. If affictions should turn you to
God, you would be made deeply sensible
of your tnability, that the Holy Spirit’s
grace was essential to your true con-
version. 1. Your endeavours avail to
avoid hindrances and seek helps. 2.
Yet your own heart is against you, and
the disease of sin is irrecoverable but by
Divine grace. Then the prayer will
arise, “Turn me and I shall be turned”
(Jer. xxxi. 18).

V. If ever you turn to the Lord, you
will realise that Christ is the only way
of access to God. You will come as
criminals upon the footing of grace, not
merit; will renounce all your right-
eousness ; @ broken-hearted rebel. Till
such, you have nothing to do with
Jesus.

VL Jf you are turned to God, you will
experience a great change in temper
and conduct. 1. Heart and mind will
take a new bias; thoughts and affections
towards God ; aspirations towards hea-
ven; Jesus dear to you; “all things
become new.” Turned to God and holi-
ness ; turned from sin and its pleasures,
Also, 2. Your practices will follow the
inward impulse and prineiple of reli-
gion.

104


VII. If turned to the Lord, your
mind will habitually retain that
turn. Your religion not a transient fit,
but permanent and persevering.

Application: Do you in your con-
sciences hope you have been converted
and turned to God? Does your case
answer to this description? But some
of you may have discovered yourselves as
unconverted. Are you willing to turn to
God with all your hearts? “Come,
and let us return to the Lord, for He
hath torn” &c. (Hos. vi. 1).—Rev. J.
Danes, A.M., President of College, New
Jersey, A.D. 1756.


Ver. 4. Theme: IGNORANCE MAY EX-
CUSE IRRELIGION,

I. Their sad disadvantages. 1.
“ Poor,” living in rudeness and ne-
glect, their existence absorbed in strug-
gles to live. 2. ‘“ Foolish,” ignorant
and erring from lack of training and
teaching. Their intellectual life wholly
neglected.

Il. Their spiritual deprivations. 1.
“ Know not the way of the Lord;” un-
taught as to the manner of life He re-
quires, the true religion He revealed. 2,
« Nor the judgment of their God ;” that
which He had pronounced right: for
false prophets confused and misled
them, and they followed as those who
were “blind.” A pitiful case: spiritual
dupes.

Ill. Their excusable deficiencies.
God does not reap where He has not
sown. ‘To whom little is given, of them
He asks little, He judges according to
what we have, not what we have not
(Numb, xii. 11). 1. God’s tender con-
sideration, 2. Discriminating commia
eration. (Addenda, ver. 4, “ Jgnorane’
and irreligion.”)

Comments :

i. Prevailing ignorance is the lament-
able cause of abounding impiety and ini-
quity. What can come from them that
sit in darkness but “ works of darkness” #

ii: This is commonly a reigning sin
among poor people. There are the
devil’s poor, as well as God’s, who
might “brow the way of the Lord”
without book-learning; but they are
“willingly ignorant."—M. Henry.





;
i
}
4
\
i
4
'


en


Bl


HOMILETIC COMMEN TARY: JEREMIAH,


OHAP. V.


ee eT


Ver, 5. Theme : KNOWLEDGE SHOULD
ENSURE PIETY.

It is a dramatic contrast. The pro-
phet assumes to imagine and expect
that their advantages would be accom-
panied with appropriate religious re-
sponses: superior socially, superior
spiritually. “The great;” te, the
wealthy and educated, removed beyond
blinding care for their daily wants;
“they have known,” possessed the ad-
vantages of education and religious know-
ledge. Yet these, instructed in the law,
and who ought to teach their inferiors
(Micah iii. 1), have violated every pre-
cept and been defiant of God. (i.) Abuse
of advantages. (ii.) Proportionate guilt.
ty Heavier condemnation (Luke xii.

“I will speak unto the great men.”
Zinzendorf remarks; “A preacher has
no more miserable and ignorant hearers
than the respectable. While they are
spelling their way back to the cross,
and are getting so far as to know how to


‘learn that we are saved alone by the


grace of the Lord Jesus; till we get
them so far as to understand that the
command of the New Testament is to
believe, and all that morality can lug
about for eighty years is gone with the
word, ‘Son, be of good courage, thy sins
are forgiven thee,’ the ignorant would
have been able to do it thrice. A teacher
greatly deceives himself if he seeks
among the respectable that comfort in
his office which he does not meet with
among the common people,”— Quoted
in Lange.


Ver. 4, 56. THE IGNORANCE OF
THE POOR AND THE INSOLENCE OF THE
GREAT.

I. The character of many of
the poor as here described. Seeing
them impudent in sin, and unre-
formed by the judgments of God,
Jeremiah says, “Surely these are the


. poor,” &e.


1. Thetr obstinacy in sin was owing
to their tgnorance—(l.) Of religion ;
“the way of the Lord.” (2.) Of God’s
providences; “the judgments of our
God.” Ignorance is stil? the source of
arror and sin. (a.) Men misapprenend


the nature of God, presume upon His
merey, (6.) Form vague and incorrect
views of the salvation of Christ ; ignore
that it is a “doctrine according to
godliness ” (Eph. iv. 18.)

2. Their ignorance was in great
measure occasioned by their poverty.
(a.) This deprived them of education ;
uninformed as to principles and religion.
(5.) All their thoughts and cares are
about their worldly wants, (c.) They
absent themselves from God’s house be-
cause of poor attire. (d.) They associate
with persons ltke-circumstanced and like-
minded, who encourage one another in
neglect of religion; and, (¢.) They
thereby lose all self-respect, sin im-
epgyclatl and “glory in their shame,”

et their ignorance was culpable; they
lived in a land of light, had more ad-
vantages than the rest of the world.
So with the poor in Britain, who yet
live in a most stupid and lamentable
ignorance as to God, their souls, and
eternity.

II. The character of the great as
here described. Not only men of
honourable birth, large fortunes and
considerable learning ; but those of easy
circumstances, educated, having capa-
city and leisure to learn Divine things.

l. They had a better knowledge of
religion than the poor. Their minds
cultured ; kept from learning the man-
ners of the vulgar; attained a general
knowledge of the world; had some
knowledge of religion—its theory ; they
could consequently enter into the pro-
phet’s reasoning and address,

2. They acted as bad as the poor, or
worse. Like headstrong, refractory oxen,
that struggle and break the yoke. Men
should submit to the restraints of reason
and conscience, to the authority and law
of God. But though light was in their
understandings, their wills were per-
verse and affections misplaced. They
would not submit to prophets’ reproofs,
offered violence to reason and conscience,
“broke the bands of the Lord asunder ”
(Ps. ii. 5).

3. Their conduct was chiefly owing to
their greatness. (a.) Lifted up with
pride, they resented admonition. (b.)
They think religion is only fog


OHA®. V.


the vulgar, not to bind those in rank,
(c.) Thay shrink from showing reverence
for God and being exact in religious
observances. (d.) Worldly things have
mischievous influence upon their hearts.
(e.) Flattered by others, they forget or but
formally pay homage to the Most High.
(7) They mind earthly things, neglect-
ing the culture and interests of the soul.

Christ met chief opposition from the
great, learned, and rich men,

Application: 1. Learn what is the most
important and profitable knowledge. 2.
The advantages of being placed in the
middle condition of life (Prov. xxx. 8). 3.
What an excellent charity it 1s to furnish
the poor with the means of knowledge.
Let “the poor” know that to be wil-
fully ignorant is an inexcusable crime.
And ‘the great” that they “have no
cloak for their sin,” if they allow their
wealth to fortify themselves against
God’s truth and calls. ‘The rich and
poor meet together” at death: “the
small and great” shall stand before the
bar of Christ in judgment.—Rev. Job
Orton, A.D. 1775, Abstract.


Ver. 7. Theme: IMPOSSIBILITY OF
PARDON.

Can it be? Is it in accordance with
Gods dealings with man? (Comp. Isa.
i. 18; Mic. vii. 18.)

I. Pardon is possible to chiefest
sinners.

Il. Yet only om the terms of repentance
and return to God.

IIL. But, by “forsaking Him,” men
forsake all possibility of salvation.

“When I fed them to the full,” &.
(See Literary Criticisms on verse; also
Addenda to chap. v., ver. 7.)


Ver. 9. Theme: AN OUTRAGED
AND AVENGING Gop. (See Literary
Criticisms on ver. 7, “I fed them to
the full,”)

God had bound them in oath to
allegiance; yet they violated ther
spiritual relationship by abandoning
themselves to idols; and, in following
the defiling indulgences of idolatrous
orgies, they had repudiated God’s laws
which they covenanted, at Sinai and
under Josiah’s reformation. to keep (Exod.

106


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.


xxiv. 3,7; 2 Kings xxiii. 3); and thus
violated the sanctity of social relationship.

lL. By evil deeds of men God ts out-
raged.

II. For evil deeds of men God will be
avenged, ‘The harlots’ houses” are
preferentially and metaphorically, if not
exclusively, idol temples; but the
charge glides from this religious sense,
viz., spiritual inconstancy to God, into
the physical sense, viz., carnal unclean-
ness among themselves ; for prostitution
formed part of idolatrous worship.


Ver. 10,
DESTROY.

How alien it is to the Divine heart
to destroy is clear from Ezek. xviii.
31, 32; John iit, 16. And Zion was
God’s beloved city, dear to His eye (Ps.
xlviii.). Yet, though slow to anger,
averse from destroying, and tender
towards Jerusalem, the edict goes forth.
God summons the foe to waste and
destroy the Holy City, and those who
dwelt therein.

I. The scene depicted. A vineyard
enclosed by walls (see Let. Crit. on
verse); the enemy scales them; his
swords ruthlessly cut off branches, shoots,
down to the very root-stem, but there
his destructive work ends. Its mean-
tng: Judah, a noble vine (ii, 21), but
its outgrowth had deteriorated, yielding
now only sour and poisonous grapes
(Deut. xxxiv. 32, 33). All these sinful
descendants of the stock of David should
perish, but the race must not become
extinct.

I The destruction commanded.
Judea is God’s vineyard (Isa. v. 1-7) ;
none could enter except He permitted,
But He calls the invader, and commis-
sions him to use his weapon freely.
What a lamentable case for that people!
Not only had God withdrawn His care—
a negative calamity, but He summoned
the enemy to destroy—a positive cala-
mity.

It. The reservation enjoined. The
wilful destroyer was not free: limits
were imposed. Our enemies are not
omnipotent. God’s will rules the issues
of war: His mercy limits the ravages of
justice. The Jews must not be exter


Theme: A COMMISSION TO


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





minated ; for the promise must stand
(Lev. xxvi. 44),

IV. The explanation furnished.
‘This overthrow, this abandonment of
God’s people to an imperious, impious
foe, is startling,—requires explanation :
given, “ They are not the Lord’s.” Yet
they were outgrowths of the stock of
David. 1. Ancestral privileges may be
forfeited. 2. Descendants do not always
retain the same piety which distinguished
their forefathers. 3. Consequently the
‘covenant of promise is annihilated.
Every man stands out singly responsible
to God ; he cannot escape the punish-
ment of his own sin by any ancestral
relationships, The children of best of
parents may come to ruin.


Ver. 11. (See chap. iii 20.) Though
Judah and Israel were at variance with


each other, they agreed in wronging the


- Lord,who had given them all the national
blessings, victories and honours they
ever knew. Israel had reaped the bitter
fruits: O that Judah would be fore-
warned! Otherwise, they would be
united in misery. Alike faithless, a like
fate.


Ver. 12, 13. Theme: ALIENATION,
‘THE ROAD To AtHEIsM. “ They have
belied the Lord,” ¢.¢., denied Him,
‘Hither: 1. Denied that God was such as
Jeremiah described, —a punisher of evil-
doers ; or, 2. Denied that the coming
disasters were tn any sense God’s doing,—
He has nothing to do with it, they come
apart from Him ; or, 3. Dented the ex-
istence of Jehovah as God, as their God,
_—repudiated Him, wanted to hear
nothing of or from Him.

I. Moral degeneracy produces mental
obscurity. Sin deadens the sensibility,
excludes God from thought, until prac-
tical indifference and defiance of Him
rule the life. Easy and natural, when
we dislike God, to ignore Him and revolt
from His claims.

II, Mental obscurity issues in spiri-
tual darkness. Conscience seared, past
feeling, desiring not the knowledge of
God’s ways, till “the fool says in his
heart, There is no God.” And “the
god of this world blinds the minds of
them that believe not.”


OBaP. ¥.


Theme: OBSTINATE UNBELIEF. i.
Its nature. It denies God, and there-
fore despises (a.) God’s Word, (b.) God’s
messengers, ii. Jts punishment. The
tables are turned. (a.) The unbeliever,
before fire, now becomes wood. (b.)
The Word of God, before regarded as
wood, becomes fire.—Naeg.

“The Word 1 not in them,” rather
speaker is not, &c. It is not a noun,
but a verb with the article instead of
the possessive pronoun ; so that literally
it means, And he who speaketh is not tn
them, 4.¢., there is no one who speaketh
in them,—what the prophets say has
no higher authority than themselves.—
Speaker's Com.


Ver. 14. Theme: Gop’s METHOD OF
CONFUTING UNBELIEF. (Addenda, ver.
14, “ My words shall devour them.”)

i. Withering the intellectual vanity im
the unbeliever: giving to His Word a
fiery penetrating power, consuming his
pride, confidence, and hopes. It may
be asa ‘“‘fire in his bones,” destroying
all peace, ravaging his conscience and
heart with burning terrors.

ii. Fulfilling His Word upon the un-
believer: he finds out its truth by ex-
periencing the doom it threatened : the
fire of Divine anger descends upon
bim.

Note: Unbelief must and will be con-
sumed with fire. Happy he in whom it
is consumed in this life by God’s Word ;
but, failing this, it will be consumed in
the life to come by God’s wrath. ‘‘The
wicked shall be turned into hell, and all
them that forget God.”


Ver. 15-17. Theme: WRATHFUL
AGENTS OF DESTRUCTION.

God can summon them : historteally
He has done 80; prophetically He will
This “day of salvation” «ntervenes.
“For God has not appointed us to
wrath, but to obtain salvation by our
Lord Jesus Christ.” Yet 2 Thess.
i. 7-10. In the past He used the
armies of earth; in the future He will
use the “armies of heaven.” “Mighty ”
were the Chaldeans (ver. 15): He will
come with “ mighty angels ” (comp. Rev.
x. 1, xwili 21; Ps. ciii. 20); agents

107


OHAP. ¥.





of Divine wrath (Rev. xvi, 1; 2 Thess.
iL 8; 2 Kings xx. 35).

I. Unmeasured resources of Divine
justice. Jews knew nothing of Chal-
deans (ver. 15); we cannot penetrate
the unknown realms, or measure the
might and terrors of God’s ministers
(Matt xxvi. 53).

If. Pitiable insecurity of trans-
gressors. They make “defences,” and
trust in them (ver. 17); but what can
shut away affliction, death, the judg-
ment?

Tl. Merciful interval of propitia-
tion. Why forewarned? That we
may ‘“‘flee from the wrath to come”
(Heb. vi. 18).


Ver. 18. Theme; A LIMIT TO JUST
JUDGMENTS. Light gleams beyond the
dreadful vision. Would that a word as
definite could anywhere be found to


encourage hope after the great judgment:


of the world! How contrasted with
this promise for Judah are the deliberate,
multiform, and emphasized threatenings
of the New Testament as to the eternal
fate of the rebel soul !


Ver. 19. Theme; Gop’s EXPLANA-
TION OF MAN’S SPIRITUAL MISERIES.
The bewildering inquiry is ever rising,
Why is humanity spiritually enslaved
and banished? Why under alien
tyranny? Why outlawed from the
promised land? God answers all:
Man makes his own misery ; seeks his
own enslavement ; forfeits his rightful
inheritance. And this, not because
God has made man subject to sin, but
despite God’s remedies for man’s re-
demption from sin. He forges his
own chains, and procures his own
banishment.

I. Wilful self-destruction.

1. Desertion of our only Saviour.
For God was Judah’s Saviour (Isa.
xlv. 21). Even as revealed in Jesus
and on Calvary, men “ despise the Lord
that bought them.”

2. Deliberate enslavement to alien gods.
Admitted ‘strange gods” to Jehovah’s
territory ; then “served them.” This
is voluntary slavery (Rom. vi. 16;
2 Pet. ii. 19). “Thou has destroyed
thyself.”

168


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


II. Retribution in kind. “ Answer ||
them, Like as,” &c. The penalty cor- ||
responds to the sin. 1. Forsaken. They ||
having “forsaken” God, would be |}
“forsaken ” by God ; left to the enemy ||
and to exile, 2. Serve strangers. They ||
had preferred strangers, foreign gods, ||
and voluntarily bowed to them ; they ||
should perforce serve strangers, foreign |
rulers, and know the bitterness of alien
tyranny. 3. In a land not theirs. They ||
had introduced these strange gods into |
a land which was not theirs, but
Jehovah’s ; they should be carried into a
land not theirs, slaves into captivity.

Serve the spiritual usurper, rejecting —
Christ, you shall be “led captive at his
will” into grievous ewile, “a land not
yours,” but “ prepared for the devil and _
his angels” (Deut. xxviii. 47, 48).


Ver. 21. Theme; INDIFFERENCE,
An evil ruinous to the soul : indifference —
to true and saving religion, How it
prevails! Text exhibits it. 4

I. What God has done to produce >
pious consideration. i

1. He has given powers of mind —
adapted to tt. ‘‘ Eyes,” to see, discern, —
read, &c. ‘“‘ Ears,” to hearken, messen- —
gers of truth. ‘“ Understanding,” to —
know, weigh, reflect, dc. :

2. He has given us the means to answer —
to these powers. His Word; His
servants; His providence, &. So
men are excuseless, ‘

3. His Holy Spirit to strive, convinee, —





II. The indifference men often >2x-
hibit. .
1. The indifference of some is total,
without any concern. Like stocks and

stones,

2. Others are considerate only of the —
eaternals of religion. They hear and
see and attend, &c., to the outward, and —
that only.

3. The consideration of some és only
to the intellectual parts of the truth A
mental study; philosophical attention: —
such as they give to literature.

4. The consideration of others ¢
occasional. Under very arousing dis-
courses, providences, sickness, bereave
ments, é&c,








i HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


OHAP. V.





III. The consequences of this in-

difference.
1. Lt  extreemly “ foolish.”
‘Insanity :
prudence.
_ 2. Detrimental to the soul. Makes it
“blind,” “ deaf ;” robbing it of spiritual
food and enjoyment ; degrading it.

3. Specially offensive to God,
tuated rebellion ; ingratitude.

4. Must end tn the soul’s ruin. Now
is the period of soul’s probation. No
moral fitness without devout considera-
tion.

Application, 1. Examine and test
yourselves, 2. Seek the quickening in-
fluences of the Divine Spirit. 3, Be
resolved and wise now, lest perish.—
Rev. Jabez Burns, D.D.

Ver. 20-24. Theme: PERSUASIVES
TO TH¥ FEAR OF Gop. The prophet
having reproved their sin and threatened
-God’s judgments, is sent on another
errand which he must “publish in
Judah,”—to persuade them to fear God.
This would be an effectual principle in
their reformation, as its absence ex-
plained their apostasy.

I. He complains of the shameful
stupidity of this people. 1. Ther
understandings were darkened. They
possessed intellectual faculties and

capacities, but did not employ and im-
prove them (ver. 21). Note: Wea
cannot judge men by the advantages
and opportunities they enjoy: sit in
darkness in land of light ; live in sin in
holy land; bad in best of places, 2.
Their wills were stubborn ; not submit
torules of Divine law (ver. 23). Observe,
The revolting heart is a rebellious one :
those who withdraw from their allegi-
ance to God do not stop there, but, by
siding with Satan, take up arms against
Him.

II. He ascribes this to the want of
the fear of God. 1. Their being with-
out understanding (ver. 21) he accounts
for by this absence of fear (ver. 22). If
you keep up awe of God, you would be
more observant of what He says. 2.
Their rebellion and revolt (ver. 23) he
explains likewise (ver. 24). They did
not encourage the “fear of the Lord,”
hence apostasy. Because we neglect to


Moral


opposite of wisdom and


Infa-


stir up our hearts to holy awe of God,
we are so apt to rebel,

Ili. He suggests some things proper
to possess us with a holy fear of God.

1. We must fear the Lord and His
greatness (ver. 22). Shall we not
“tremble at His presence,” be afraid of
affronting or trifling with Him who, in
nature and providence, gives such incon-
testable proofs of almighty power and
sovereign dominion? He keeps and
manages the sea! (1.) By this we see
His universal sovereignty ; therefore to
be had in reverence. (2.) This shows
how easily He could drown the world
again, by withdrawing His “ decree,”
therefore we lie continually at His
mercy, and should fear to make Him
ourenemy. (3.) Even the unruly waves
obey Him,—neither revolt nor rebel; why
then should our hearts? (ver. 23),

2. We must fear the Lord and His
goodness (Hos. iii, 5). We must “fear
the Lord our God” (ver. 24), z.¢, worship
Him, give Him glory, and keep our-
selves in His love, (1.) Because He is
always doing us good. (2.) Because
these blessings are consequent upon His
promise (Gen. viii 22). 3. Because we,
have such a necessary dependence upon
Him. The fruitful seasons rendered the
heathen inexcusable in their contempt of
Him (Acts xiv. 17), yet the Jews were
not wrought upon to fear Him, though
it appears how much it is our interest to
do so.—M. Henry. (Addenda, ver. 22,
“ Sand for bound of the sea.”)

On the fear of God. i. Motives from
without. 1.God’s displays of power(ver.
22,24). 2. God’s displays of grace. ii
Inner conditions. 1. That we open our
eyes and ears (ver. 21.) 2. That we
allow ourselves to be impelled by what we
see and hear (ver. 23).—Waeg. in Lange.
(Addenda, ver. 23, “ Revolting heart.”)

“Neither does God’s power move the
obdurate people to the fear of Him, nor
do the proofs of His love make any im-
pression.” —Keul,

“This is a glorious discovery of the
omnipotence and majesty of God. But
that men are 80 secure, and think rot of
Him who allows them to live so se rely,
this is indeed an insane business.”- 74a.
zendory, quoted in Lange. pe


GHAP. V.


“They had the power of perception,
and were responsible for the exercise of
it.”— Henderson.

“The sea, the mightiest of God’s
works, cannot prevail, cannot break
His laws, because God has not endowed
it with free-will. Man, physically im-
potent, can prevail, because, being made
in God’s image, he is free.”— Speaker’s
Com.

“The appeal to God’s care for man
(ver. 24), offers proof which addresses
itself chiefly to the thoughtful ; hence he
says, ‘in their heart.’ By the intelligent
study of God’s dealings, men perceive
that they are not merely acts of power,
but alse of love.”—ZJbid. (Addenda,
ver. 22, ‘Tremble ai my presence, which
made the sea.”)


Ver. 22-24. Theme; ADORATION OF
GoD IN NATURE.

This the end of all the privileges
with which Israel had been crowned
from one generation to anether! they
had a revolting and rebellious heart.
And as was the heart, so the life,—
revolted and gone from their God and
Father. There was to them no Lord of
heaven and earth to fear for His power
or love for His goodness, —

i. The more blessings they enjoyed, the
more thankful they should have been.
Yet it seems that the more gracious our
Heavenly Father, the more thoughtless
are His children; the more boundless
His love, the more resolute man’s in-
gratitude.

ii. Having rejected God spiritually,
He yet continued to manifest Himself
to them tn nature. They absolutely
refused Him as the object of soul-homage
and love ; would have xo God but idols,
no king but their own wild will Either
He must altogether hide Himself, or
reveal Himself no longer in grace, but
in nature.

iii, Gratitude to God for the fruits of
the seasons is a common ground on which
to argue effectually even with the dark-
est heathen. Thus Paul at Lystra (Acts
xiv. 15-17). No one except those who
“say in their hearts there is no God,”
doubt God’s gifts in nature’s bounties,

iv. The heathen are dented excuse for

110


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


thetr ignorance and idolatry, because of —
the marks of God’s love and power in
the world around them (Rom. i. 20,
21).

v. Yet the heathen, in outward forms
at least, surpassed Jews and Christians.
Though they “felt after God” rather
than reached Him, the great multitude
of the heathen never denied God in His
gifts. They made offerings and sacri-
fices in acknowledgment of harvest, and
saug thanksgivings to their gods. It
wanted but a little more knowledge for
them to join in David’s song (Ps, lxv.
9-13).

vi. There was, then, great sin on the
part of Israel when, even as natural
men, they ignored the mercies of God’s
ordinary providence, and were not soft-
ened and converted by His unmerited
goodness (ver. 24),

vii, A bounteous season ought to .
awaken love and thankfulness to God,
Yet this is not the feeling of all who
bear the name of Christ. Peculiar to
Christians to be ashamed of confessing
God as the Orderer and Giver of all
things. Where heathen and Mahometans
would have a manly pleasure, as a matter
of course, in acknowledging the heavenly
Giver, Christians falter.

viii. God is exceedingly jealous of the
honour due unto His name. He plagued
guilty and thankless nations. He may
do the same to us (Deut. xi. 13-17,
viii. 10-18). Bethink that this God
might call a man away in the midst of
his thanklessness and unbelief! What
measureless woe filled the heart of the
Son of God as He thought of the curse
upon sin and sinners,—self-condemned,
by the hardness of their hearts, to the
dwelling-place of the thankless and
wicked !

ix. The eye is blind to God in natural
wonders, and the ear deaf amid His
works, because the heart has not embraced
Him in the Gospel of His Son. We
refuse to bless the Creator because we
have no portion in the Redeemer. Come
to Him before you are removed from
the world of nature and of grace.—
Arranged from “ Sermons by Rev. J.
Garbett. (Addenda, ver. 24, ‘“ God, that
giveth rain.”)





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAR.


re ee


Ver. 26. Theme : WicKED PROFESSORS
THE BANE OF THE CHURCH.

Men as atrociously wicked might be
found among the people of Jehovah as
among the worst of the Gentiles. They
were guilty of overreaching and defraud-
ing one another, and thus their houses
were replenished with the gains of de-
ceit. Thus in every age: thus now.

The Church wm glory is pure, unde-
filed; not so on earth. No society of
Christians is endued with the spirit of
infallibility ; hence tares grow with
wheat.

I. God has a people on earth. “My
people ” (comp. Isa. lxiii. 7-9; Rom. ix.
23-26). 1. His creation (Isa. xliii. 21).
2. Called by Him, “from darkness to
light.” 3. Privileged people ; pardoned,
regenerated, adopted. (Comp. also
Rom. ii, 28, 29; Phil. iii. 3; 1 Pet. ii


9).

Mn In the Church there is an un-
happy admixture of “wicked men.”
This truth illustrated in Lord’s parables
—of ten virgins, tares and wheat, net
cast into sea.

God’s people are not sinless, yet not
allowedly “ wicked” (Job x. 7,15). A
real Christian is anxious to be right (Ps.
exxxix. 23). Yet among them “ wicked
men” are found. This applies—

1. To those religious establishments
whose constitution and discipline ofer
no restraints to the admission of such
characters. The gate is not strait, but
wide. Baptismal regeneration of infants
necessitates a lax admission to commu-
nion, &.

2. The description is applicable to
mere hearers of the Gospel. They are
among God’s people (Ezek. xxxiii. 31).
Gospel preached to them in vain; Holy
Ghost resisted ; neglect great salvation.
Is not this wicked ?

3. Applicable to those who have
entered the Church without real conver-
ston. “Walk according to the course
of this world, and are by nature children
of wrath.” Such in our religious assem-
blages. None in heaven.

(1.) Some professors are secretly wicked
(Tit. i 16; 1 Tim. v. 6). As Achan in
camp of Israel, Judas among the twelve,
Ananias at Jerusalem, Simon Magus in


Gear. V.


ee


Samaria, Jezebel at Thyatira: such in
all churches of saints.

(2.) Some professors are decewers ;
hypocrites impose on others, and also
on themselves, Say “The temple of
the Lord are we,” but are of the syna-
gogue of Satan (John viii. 54; Rev. ii.
ay 9):

4. Applicable to those wilfully tn-
active in the Church. They belie their
profession. Where is their zeal? d&c.

5. Applicable to those who interrupt
the peace and harmony of the Church.

Some have entered through the gate
of human excitement, of creature passton,
of filthy lucre, of ambition.

III. This mixture of the wicked
with the godly is a fact. ‘“ Are found,”
&c. By whom are they discovered ?

1. Frequently by themselves (1 John
ii. 19).

2. Persecution has, and so has tempta-
tion.

3. By Christians, to whom their un-
holy course, &c., is a grief.

4. They are found by God (Rev. iii.
18, 23). Odiousto Him, .

5. Some will not be found til? the day
of judgment (Matt. iii. 12, xiii, 28-30)

IV. The injurious influence of the
conduct of such professors.

1. They bring reproach upon religiop
(Rom. ii, 24).

2. The hearts of the godly are grieved
and their hands weakened (Josh. vii.
12, 25; 1 John ii. 7; Phil. iii. 18).

3. The Churchts in danger of being
injured by them (Hos. v. 3). A little
leaven will leaven the lump (1 Cor. v,
6-8; Gal. v. 9, 10).

4. It frequently prevents accessions to
the Church.

5. The gutlt of such persons is highly
aggravated, and their punishment will be
awful. Many stripes” (Isa. v. 5;
Hos. x. 1; Matt. xi. 21).

Application: 1. Self-examination.
“Lord, is it I?” 2. That may be a
true Church though disorderly persons
are found wm it. 3. How little is a mere
profession of religion to be trusted im or
boasted of, The goat, though folded
among the sheep, is a goat still, and must
finally be separated from the flock (Matt
xxv. 32, 33).—AHelps for the Pulpit.

111


oP, V.


HOMILETIC COMMENYUARY: JEREMIAR.








Ver. 26-29.
THE WICKED.

God retains His claim ; “ My people.”
Sees the snares (ver. 26) and miseries
(ver. 28) they endure. Estimates the
evil influences to which they are ex-
posed (ver. 26), and the calamities
wrought by the wicked (ver. 27).

I. Wickedness forces itself into
every society. The Church, the
home.

1. By hypocritical pretensions, 2.
For predacious ends. The “ wicked”
are active, deceptive, plotting.

Ii. Wickedness is intent on human
ruin (John viii. 41, 44)

1. Angry at goodness. 2. Reckless in
mischief. 3. Envious of happiness. 4.
Greedy of gain. Alas! “ men” are the
spoiler’s prey.

Itt. Wickedness can boast appalling
success (ver. 27).

1. Evil devices prosper. 2. Evil-
doers aggranaise themselves. Fill their
“ houses” with the gains of ungodliness :
alas! fill the abode of doom with de
coyed and destroyed souls.

IV. Wickedness thrives by utter
heartlessness (ver. 28 ; Isa. xxxii. 17).
Even “the tender mercies of the wicked
are cruel.” 1, The man who will wrong
God will not scruple to wrong his fel-
lows. 2. Mournful when the wicked
are in great power. 3. How contrasted
the treatwent of the poor and oppressed
by Christ (Ps, lxxii. 12-14), 4. What
need to pray and work that “the wick-
edness of the wicked may come to an
end.”

V. Wickedness ensures God’s sure
revenge (ver. 29), God will: 1. Avenge
His insulted honour. 2. His outraged
laws. 3. The suffering victims, 4.
The spoliation of His heritage. Oh,
the doom of him on whom lies the blood
of murdered souls! (Addenda, ver. 26,
“ They set a trap,” ver. 27, “Retribution
tn kind.”)


Theme; DEOEITS OF


Ver. 30, 31. A ORY OF WAENING IN
A PERIOD OF UNIVFBSAL APOSTASY.

i. The condition of the people is
shocking and abominable: for (a.) The
leaders of the people mislead them. (6.)
The people wish to. be misled. ii The

112


consequences correspond to the guilt
(comp ver. 25, 14, 16).—Waeg.

“ My people love to have tt so.” Tt is
a criterion of false teaching that it
lightens the yoke of God’s law, removes
His fear from the conscience, and leaves
man to his own nature ;‘and with this
man is only too ready to be content.—
Speaker's Com.

“The credulous confidence of the
ignorant has in all ages been at the
command of an interested priesthood.”
—Hend.

“Tt appeare clear from various parts
of the Oid Testament, that a great num-
ber of persons pretending to prophecy
aroze among the Hebrews, by whom the
exertious of the true prophets were
greatly counteracted, and the ruin of the
nation accelerated,”—Jbid,

“Like sought, like found. The
people wish to have false preachers, and
get them, and a blind man leads the
blind, until both fall into the ditch
(Luke vi. 39).”—Cramer. —

The fatal consequences. Consider :

i. What reckoning would be for their
wickedness (ver. 29), Sometimes mercy
rejoices against judgment ; How shall
I give thee up? Here judgment is
reasoning against mercy; Shall I not
visit? It denotes :

l. The certainty and necessity of
God’s judgments. Vengeance must
come,

2. The justice and equity of God’s
judgments. He appeals to the sinner’s
own conscience. Do not such guilty
abominations merit punishment.

ii, What was the direct tendency of
their wickedness (ver. 31), t.e.—

1. What a pitch of wickedness you
will come to at last! ‘ What will you
do?” What will this grow to? Worse
and worse,

2. What a ptt of destruction you will
come to at last! Nothing can be ex-
pected but a deluge of wrath from God.

Note: Those who walk in bad ways
would do well to consider the tendency
of them both to greater sin and utter
ruin.— HM. Henry.


Theme: THE DISMAL OUTLOOK.
Text: “ What will you do in the end








<0


ail


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.
a a eR NS WW a AS Sy





thereof?” A troublesome question,
ghastly in its subtle snggestiveness,
Lifts veil of imagination on dark out-
look. Vague horrors. There is some-
thing beyond the immediate present.
That beyond is solemn and dreadful
enough to dwarf the consideration of
the present. Man has a future, Life
goes on to stupendous issues. All
things verge to a crisis. “ What will
you do in the end thereof?”

I, That wicked courses come to an
“end.” The book of human history will
close. Angel swear, “ Time shall be no
more}” The Archangel’s trump will
sound. Every life must be reckoned.

1. The interval may be delusively
pleasant.

2. Men may dream away life in
heedlessness.

3. The inevitable close comes on.
Death. Judgment.


-IL The in “the end” wicked
courses are calamitous. Boat in the
current over the rapids, Spendthrift


comes to penury. Prodigality leads to
squandered health and “ husks,”


CHAP. ¥.


1. The terror of a defenceless soul.
“What do?”

2. The urgency of preparation.
“Do” something nov.

3. The value of a good hope. Need
to do nothing but hide in Christ. How
blessed to feel sure (2 Tim. i. 12),

TI. That in the calamitous “end”
the wicked will have no refuge or
plea. “ What will you do?” Having
‘neglected great salvation;” alienated
infinite love; despised and offended
Jesus ; lost your sole interval of escape 4

1. Utter dismay (Isa, ii, 19; Rev.
vi. 16).

2. Utterly defenceless, Deserted by
all human comforters; every false hope
gone; and the sinner’s Friend your
avenging Judge. Not a plea left you
to excuse or extenuate your guilt.

IV. That without a refuge or plea
“the end” of all is irremediable ruin
(ver. 29). (Addenda, ver. 31, “ What
do in the end ?”)

1. Use the auspicious present, 2. For-
sake evil and live. 3. Flee for refuge
to the hope set before you in the Gospel.


NOTICEABLE TOPICS IN OHAPTER V.


| ‘Topic: Hanvust Sermon. Test ; “ Neither say they in their heart, Let us now fear
the Lord: He reserveth unto us the appointed weeks of harvest” (ver. 24).


Three lamentable habits and attitudes of thought :


1. Readiness to see the worst side of God’s natural providences.
rain ;” untimely, insufficient, or excessive,


“ He giveth


2. Bowing the God of nature out of all active management of His own world.
A delusion to suppose weather, rains, and fine “ weeks of harvest” are regulated by


special providence.
&e.


God is above such affairs: so say not, “ Let us fear, Lord,”


3. Ignoring the fact that human conduet affects God’s providential dispensations


(ver. 25).
admonitory of the final.


I. The benignant order of natural providences.
but rain “reserved” during ‘“ weeks of harvest.”


There is a continual administration of judgment going on in this life,


“ Early rain,” and “ latter ;
Without ‘ early,” seed not


germinate ; if “latter” not come, grain dried and withered prematurely ; then


Fipening suns.


1, Hach aspect of nature is welcomed tn its season. God rolls the seasons round,


and every change is beneficent and congenial. Bes
lovely, youth winning, mature have grace, snowy age majestic.
“ Snow in harvest” not welcomed ; ruinous,
“Tn season.”


only welcomed in their season.
childishness in manhood, &c.


So in the ages of man: childhood
But these are
So


2. The certain revolution of the seasons. Every year appointed times come


round.


Cannot alter ; cannot hasten spring, nor delay winter.


So seasons of life,


(1.) Seasons cannot be hurried. Youth must bear its yoke, manhood its toils ;


Z


113


reaping and rest cannot be forestalled.


cannot be delayed. Winter refuses to pause.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.


“Race not to swift,” do. (2.) Seasons


Youth not long with the young -


age comes on; or, what is oftener than age, death.

Let not seasons pass unused, lest “ weeks of harvest” bring no ingathering.

I. An interval reserved for harvest ingathering. God kept these “ weeks “
from intrusion of unseasonable weather, and “ rain.’


l. The reaping season has a fixed duration ;


“weeks.” Soon gone. Squander


olden opportunity : “past!” ‘‘ What hands do, with might.” All gracious seasons
g PP Yi p » g gr


are brief.


Therefore reapers ply with industry.


Men, wise in worldly concerns,


take heed that fine opportunities not squandered. Right; God sends favourable


times, when, if equal to occasion, reap large gains.
Special opportunities of grace -


occasion in life,


Make most of every good
“Work while day.” Gather in


while you may, fruits of Spirit, bounties of Divine love, blessings of redemption.
2, The work of harvest ingathering. Fields laden, swept with scythe, crops


garnered. Some will complain, dissatisfied with results :

will be surprised at results of life, when ‘‘reap what sown.”
end or adverse judgment before God. Strange infatuation !
flesh ” and expect other than “ corruption.”


and ruined joys!


sixty, a hundred.”


so ever. Fear many
None expect a bad
Madness to “ sow to
Bitter the ingathering of lost hopes


But glad the ingathering of the Christian ; joyous the harvest.
3. The Divine law of multiplying. From handfuls come “ harvest.”
“ Heap up treasures,”
benignly and devoutly, “receive into everlasting habitations.”


“ Thirty,
Sow wind, reap whirlwind. Live
Same in quality,


but increased in quantity. Think on this immeasurable and eternal reaping of


the issues of life!


fear the Lord.”


Ingathering will come, for God hath “reserved weeks.”
III. Man’s becoming response to God’s gracious bestowments.


“ Let us now


1. Weth discerning adoration, let us receive God’s favours. “ Bless the Lord, and


forget not benefits.”


“ What render unto the Lord ?”


2. With diligent promptitude let us use the auspicious seasons God sends. Turn


‘‘ weeks” to account ;


spiritua. peace and joy.


3. With devoutest service let us show our “ fear of the Lord.”
God loves, but the harvest-fruits He requires.
‘““T beseech you by mercies of Lord, present your bodies living sacrifice,”


waste them not for “more convenient season,”
husbandman works eagerly to “fill his barns.”


Wise
Make your hearts garners of


The harvest-song
Lay on His altar life and love.
&co.—


Addenda, ver. 24, “‘ God recognised in the harvest.”
ecog


ADDENDA TO OHAPTER V. ILLUSTRATIONS AND SUGGESTIVE EXTRAOTS.


Ver. 1. “‘ Streets of Jerusalem.” In
ancient times the streets of Jerusalem
seemed to have names. (They have
none now.) Several are mentioned:
‘Hast Street” (2 Chron. xxix. 4),
“Street of the house of God” (Ezra x.
9), “ Water-gate Street” (Neh. viii. 1, 3),
“ Ephraim-Gate Street” (Neh. viii. 16),
‘Bakers’ Street” (Jer. xxxvii. 21).

The number of the “streets” was
great (Jer, xi. 13). Jeremiah makes
frequent allusion to the “streets of
Jerusalem” (Jer. v. 1; vii. 17, 34; ix.
21; xi. 6, 13; xiv. 16; xxxiii, 10;
xliv. 6,9, 21). He was distinctiveiy

114


the prophet of the thoroughfares ; and
this because the “broad places and
streets” were scenes of idolatry, altars
and idols being erected therein,

“Seek, uf ye can finda man.” Dioge-
nes, the cynic, having lighted a lamp,
ranged the streets peering about as if
searching for something. Being asked
what he looked for, he answered, “A
man;” or, as is usually recorded, “ An
honest man!” But the words in Laer-
tius are dvégwmov Cyr, “I seek a man.”
He sought not alone a man with honesty
and truth in his character, but a MAN in
whom all right and noble qualities were








a =


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR,





combined. He constantly reviled the
society of Greece with its lack of man-
hood.

“The host of Nola being bid to
summon the good men of the town to
appear before the Roman censor, gat him
to the churchyard, and there called at
the graves of the dead; for he knew
not where to call for a good man alive.”
—Trapp.

One true man would avert the coming
woe. “ Ghislerus reminds us of a story
which Pliny relates of King Demetrius,
who retired from the city of Rhodium
because he could not take it on its only
accessible side without destroying some
celebrated paintings of Protogenes.”—
Lange. This one man’s merits saved
the city.

‘* When the good man mends his armour,

And trims his helmet’s plume,
Wken the goodwife’s shuttle merrily

Goes flashing through the loom,
With weeping and with laughter

Still is the story told
How well Horatius kept the bridge,

In the brave days of old.”

—Lays of Ancient Rome.

Ver. 4. Ignorance and irreligion.
Ignorance of the price of pearls makes
the idiot slight them. Ignorance of the
worth of diamonds makes the fool choose
a pebble before them. Ignorance of the
satisfaction learning affords makes the
peasant despise it. So with religion.—
Anthony Horneck,

Ver. 7. “When I fed them to the full,”
&e. Fulness in good men often breeds
forgetfulness, and in bad men filthiness,
Gula vestibulum luxurie—gluttony is
the gallery that incontinency walketh
through. The Israelites ate and drank,
and rose up to play, sci., with their
Midianitish mistresses. Fulness of bread
made way to Sodom’s sin. Lunatics,
when the moon is declining and in the
wane, are sober enough ; but when full,
more wild and exorbitant.—Trapp.

Ver. 14. “ Wy words shall devour
them.” “Though men were hard as
rocks, the Word is a hammer which can
break them ; though as sharp as briers
and thorns, the Word is a fire which
can devour and torment them.”—Bishop
Reynolds.

An infidel said, “There is one thing


OHAP, %.





that mars all the pleasure of my life,”
“Indeed!” replied his friend; ‘“ what
is that?” He answered, “J am afraid
the Bible is true. If I could know for
certain that death is an eternal sleep, my
joy would be complete. But here is the
thorn that stings me, the sword that
pierces to my very soul: tf the Buble ws
true, I am lost for ever.”
Ver. 22. “Tremble at my presence,
which have made the sea ?”
‘© Thou glorious mirror, where the Almighty’s
form
Glasses itself in tempests ; in all time,
Calm or convulsed,—in breeze, or gale, or
storm,
Icing the pole, or in the torrid clime
Dark heaving, boundless, eternal, and
sublime—
The image of eternity, the throne
Of the Invisible,” —Bynrow.


** In contemplation of created things
By steps we may ascend to God.” —Muntox.


“Sand for the bound of the sea.”
Modern science has shown that the
resisting power of sand is enormous,
By the mechanical laws which govern
it, the shock of a blow is distributed
laterally, and produces little effect, An
egg buried a few inches deep in the
sand would not be broken by heavy
blows falling upon the surface, And so
a wave which would shatter rocks falls
powerless upon sand.—Dr. Payne Smith.

Ver. 23. “Hevolting heart.” The
forcible and true meaning of the word
“revolt” has become obscured. It
suggests affections which had been
drawn back from God through dislike of
His claims; then followed active resist-
ance,” rebellion.”

Ver. 24. God recognised in the har-
vest. Dr. Guthrie tells us, that as a
traveller in a lonely district drew near
to a cottage, he heard a man exclaiming,
‘‘ Thanks be to God for this and Christ !”
So earnest was the tone of the speaker,
that the traveller ventured to go in to
see what the gift was that called forth
such thanksgiving. It was but a crust
of bread, on which the poor occupant of
that cottage was about to make his mid-
day meal. To the devout old man a
crust and Christ was something to thank
God for. How much more it behovesa
us, when the valleys are covered with

115


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH,





corn, and when the fruits of the earth
are safely stored in the garner, to lift up
our hands and our hearts unto God, and
say, “Thanks be unto God for all this
and Christ !”—Zev. R. A. Bertram,

“God, that giveth rain.” The vast
reservoir of the ocean provided for the
supply of vapour ; the laws which cause
these vapours to rise and float in the air ;
the winds which waft them to the land ;
the attraction there exercised upon them
by trees, mountains, d&c.; the currents
of air moving in different directions,
which, by their differences of tempera-
ture cause the vapour to condense and
be deposited in drops; the laws of con-
gelation, which store up part of the win-
ter excess in the shape of snow and ice
upon the mountains for summer use;
the diversified strata of the earth, which
store up another portion, causing it in
some places to break forth in springs,
in others keeping it out of the reach of
evaporation, but available for man’s use
by the digging of wells: all these com-
plicated arrangements show such a
thoughtful care for the supply of one
of the first necessaries of human life,
that those capable of understanding
them ought to say in their hearts, “ Let
us fear the Lord.” —Speaker’s Com.

Ver. 26. “ They sect a trap ; they catch
men.”


“Proud Nimrod first the bloody chase be-
gan
A mighty hunter—and his prey was man.”
—Poprs.


Plans adopted for catching berds. 1.
Trap; the usual method (Job xviii. 9;





Eccles, ix. 12; Prov. vii. 23); made of
two parts—a net stretched over a frame,
@ stick supporting it, so placed as to
give way with the least touch (Amos iii.
5, “gin;” Ps. lxix. 22, “trap”). 2
Snare ; was acord (Job xviii. 10, ef. Ps.
xvill. 5, cxvi. 3, cxl. 5) so placed as
to catch a bird by the leg. 3. Decoy;
(Jer. v. 26, 27), a cage filled with birds,
the door being kept open by stick (or
cord), which suddenly closed on the en-
trance of any bird.

Hunting, with its snares, may remind
us of that mighty hunter, Satan, and
his devices. Decoys, snares for the un-
wary. Hence the duty of watchfulness,
“Tn vain the net is spread in the sight
of any bird” (Prov. i. 17).—J. Comper
Grey, “ Topics.”

Ver. 27. “ Retribution in kind.”
“They that will be rich fall into a
snare” (1 Tim. vi. 9). “Thou fool!
this night thy soul is required of
thee ; then whose shall those things be
which thou hast provided? So is he that
layeth up treasure for himself and is not
rich towards God” (Luke xii. 20, 21).

Ver. 31. “ What do tn the end?” On
that day, if all your unforgiven sins are
against you; if Jesus Christ, wounded
and driven back, is against you; if the
Holy Ghost is against you, with whom
you have striven ; if the offended Lord
God Almighty is against you; ah! com-
ing as you are, into that day, you must
perish. It will be too late to pray then.
Even the granite rocks will fall the
other way as you pray to them, “ Fall
on us,” &e.—TZalmage,





CHAPTER VL
Crrrican anp Exxertroat Norzs.—1. Chronological and Historical position of this chapter


the same. (Comp. notes on iii., iv., v.)

2. Geographical References.—Ver. 1, ‘‘ Tekoa ;” a small town of defence in Judah (2 Chron.
i. 6), six Roman miles from Bethlehem (Jerome), lies on the range of hills which stretch
from near Hebron eastward; about eleven miles due south of Jerusalem. Its ruins scarcely
cover five acres : they consist of walls of houses, broken columns, cisterns, &e. Birthplace of
Amos (vii. 14). Tekoites helped in rebuilding walls of Jerusalem after Captivity (Neh.
ii, 56, 27). Town now called Tekus. “ Beth-haccarem : ” means vineyard house; situate half-
way between Tekoa and Jerusalem, on a mountain, probably “ Herodium,” the site of Herod’a
rastle ; known now as Frank Mountain. Town had a ruler in Nehemiah’s time (Neh. iii, 14).
This verse indicates that it was used asa veacou station, Jerome, who wrote at Bethleh
aya, ‘Every one knows that Jerusalem is situated in tne tribe of Beniamin As for Tekoa, we

116


Aitges ets


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAE. CHAR. VL.


—_—





see every day with our own eyes that it is a little town upon a hill about twelve [Roman]
miles from Jerusalem. Between these is a.other village, called in the Hebrew and Syriao
tongues Bethacharma, which also is placed upon a hill” Ver. 20. ‘‘ Sheba:” the kingdom of
Sheba in Southern Arabia, embracing the greater part of the Yemen (Dr. W. Smith), Arabia
Felix ; or the chief city of Yemen, the principal province of Arabia (Kalisch). Arabic, Seba.
(Comp. Ezek. xxvii. 22.) The fribe and home of the Sabaens in Southern Arabia (Naeg.).
‘6 A far country :” India; ‘‘cane,” brought thence in the caravans, Ver. 22. ‘* Sides of the
earth ;” i.¢., most remote regions ; the scenes of their captivity ; and from whence they
would return (ch, xxxi. 8); Chaldea, therefore.

8. Personal Allusions.—Ver. 1. ‘‘ Children of Benjamin: Jeremish’s fellow-countrymen,
he being of that tribe, Anathoth being one of the cities of Benjamin. Originally the tribal
territory was bounded on the north by Ephraim, and south by the hills of Jerusalem; but the
limits were soon extended southward to the valley of Hinnom.

4. Natural History.—Ver. 20. ‘‘ Sweet cane:’”” probably the Calamus aromaticus, native of
Central India, remarkable for its fragrance (Dr. Royle) ; or it may be the lemon graas of India
and Arabia (Dr. W. Smith). The sweet cane, or calamus (Exod. xxx. 28), when dried and
pulverised, is richly fragrant (so Dioscorides informs us) ; while according to Strabo ite origin
must be traced to Sheba in Arabia. Pliny says it was common to India and Syria. The best
came from India.

5. Manners and Customs.—Ver. 1. ‘‘ Set up a sign of fire: when the enemy approached,
the besieged made their peril known and summoned assistance by raising a column of smoke
in the daytime, or piling a blazing fire in the night. Ora lighted torch was “lifted up” and
waved violently as a ‘‘sign” of pressing danger. Here it may mean, kindle a fire on the heights,
mountain tops. Ver. 4. ‘‘Go up at noon:’’ the noon was generally too hot for aught but
rest ; but the eagerness of the Chaldean army is such that they are alert evenat midday. Ver.
6. ‘* Hew trees and cast a mount :”’ the besiegera in all ancient sieges ruthlessly cut down the
trees around the city, and with them filled up ditches and constructed embankments. From
these “ mounts” they attacked the city (2 Sam. xx. 15; Jer. xxxii. 24). The Jews were em-
phatically forbidden to hew down fruit-bearing trees (Deut. xx. 19, 20). (See Addenda on ver.
6.) Ver. 9. ‘‘ Turn back thine hand :” the gleaner is to bring his hand back again along the
branches, and go carefully once more over the tendrils, lest any clusters escape : thus weuld
Nebuchadnezzar repeat his invasions till the land was swept clean of inhabitants. Ver. 17.
“ Watchmen :’’ sentinels (1 Sam. xiv. 16). The watchmen patrolled the city during the night
and called the hours. In times of alarm and danger, watchmen were posted ix towers over
the city’s gates (Isa. xxi. 8, lxii. 6). They were menaced with heaviest punishments if faith-
less to their trust (Ezek. xxxiii, 2-6). Metaphorically, this was the office of prophets (see refs.
above, and Hab. ii. 1). “Bow and spear:” for “ bow ” see notes on iv. 29, v.16, “ Spear:”
a javelin for hurling at the enemy ; or lance (ch. 1. 42), used by mounted soldiers, rushing upon
the enemy at full speed with lances levelled against their foe. Layard’s “ Mon. of Nin.” show
this the ordinary weapon of war used by the Babylonians. Ver. 26. “ Wallow thyself in ashes ;”’
to throw ashes upon the head, the symbol of intense grief (2 Sam. xiii, 19) ; but to “sit down
in them” (Job ii. 8) is a more desperate manifestation of misery and sorrow : to ‘* wallow in
ashes”’ indicates a grief wholly unbearable; a superlative figure of wretchedness. Ver. 27-30.
“4 towerand fortress to try,’ &c. (For correct rendering of words see Ltt. Cris. below.)
Metaphorical language taken from metallurgy; smelting and proving ore; ‘‘ brass,” ‘‘iron,”
“lead,” “silver.” In ancient times, ere the use of quicksilver was known, lad was employed
as a flux to assist the silver to melt; its action being so penetrating that it ran through other
metals, dissolving them, and gathering to itself the alloy, thus separating the precious metals
from dross. But in Judah’s case the smelter or assayer could obtain no pure silver at all; the
vefiner’s art in their case failed.

6. Literary Citicisms.—Ver. 1. ‘‘ Gather yourselves to fee:” same word as in iv. 6,
translated “retire :” see notes in loc. Hend., “Flee for refuge;” Keil and Lange, simply:
“‘flee;” Blayney, “Retire in a body.” ‘‘ Blow im Tekoa:” an alliteration, WPA MPN;
surely not a literary vanity, having no design beyond producing a parcnomasia (as Keil con-
ceives), but because Tekoa was the most southerly town where the fugitives would halt when
driven by alarm of war from Jerusalem. Ver. 2. ‘* Ihave likened,” de. In Hosea iv. 5, this word
is rendered “ destroy;” t.¢., reduced to silence by destroying. Keil, “I lay waste.” Speaker's
Com. retains “likened. ‘‘ Comely and delicate :” Speaker's Com. takes i1)) as in Isa Ixv. 10,


“fold;” Jer. xxiii. 8, ‘‘ folds ;” «¢., a pasture on which “ the shepherds ” (ver. 8.) have made
a temporary encampment; so that the verse stands in full, “To a pasturage, yea, a luxuriant,
have I likened the daughter of Zion.” With this interpretation ver. 3 naturally coincides.
Lange, “Thou art like the meadow, the tenderly cared for.” Sharpe, “ I will destroy the
comely and delicate daughter of Zion.” Ver. 3. “Jn his place ;” lit. ‘‘They shall pasture
each his hand ;” ¢.¢., what lies to hand, close beside him (2 Sam. xiv. 80). Ver. 4. “ Prepare
war :” sanctify war; %.e., prepare by religious inaugurations (¢f. Deut. xx. 2; Ezek. xxi. 21-
23; Iea. xiii. 3). “Woe unto us:” this is am outcry, not of the assailed but the assailing
armies, which lament being held back from attack till noon heat subsides (see Ace &e., on


CHAP, VI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.








verse above), that time sped faster than their designs; so eager were they to execute the over-
throw of Judea. Ver. 5. Gives the answer of the military commanders to this impatient out
ery of the Chaldean soldiery. Ver. 10. ‘‘ Word made unto them a@ reproach :”’ a mockery, the
theme of their ridicule and contempt. Ver. 14. “ Slightly: ” LXX.=“ making nothing of it;

triflingly, as but a frivolous matter ; as if there were nothing serious or dangerous. Ver,
15. ‘‘ Were they ashamed,” de. : not interrog. They were put to shame ; nevertheless they


are not ashamed. Ver. 16. “The good way:” Keil urges that Di cannot be accus


appended to, but is genit. dependent on J")"}; hence “ way of the good;” leads to the good,


to salvation; but he is alone in suggesting thie, Ver. 18. “ What is among them ;” or, what
happens in their midst, what befalls them. Vulg., “what great things I will do to them.”
Ver. 25. “Fear on every side:” Magor-Missabib (ch. xx. 3); an ever-recurring phrase in
Jeremiah’s preaching (xx. 10, xlvi. 5, xlix. 29). This text, so frequently reiterated, he took
from Ps. xxxi. 13; effectively expounded in his discourses, and certainly suited to his age.


Ver. 27. “Tower:” ina, from }IJ2, to search out, to prove, especially metals (Gesen.)
(comp. ix. 7 and Job xxiii. 10), whence the derived noun tna, a trier, assayer of metals,
“* Fortress:” WIAD, from $2, to cut off, cut out, dig out, used of mictala (TBA, ore of gold
and silver (Job ai. "04) ; the Peal as cut out or dugoutfrom mines), Although V¥I/3 is an


irregular form to be derived from this root, and might have as its origin V¥2, to fortify, yet the
re word seems to determine its connection with metallurgy. Hence Ewald, ‘‘a cutter of
ores,” ¢.¢., in orderto separate bad metal from good. ‘‘I have set thee an assayer and tester of ores.”

Ver. 28. Grievous revolters :” oa) "1D; paronomasia ; superlative form of sentence;
‘‘rebela of rebels” (Speaker’s Com.) ; ‘6 rebels of the rebellious” (Hitzig). Ver. 29. “ Bellows
are burned ;” WW, either Niphil of IT, to burn, or the root “W1J, to snort (cf. viii. 16),
t.e., blow furiously in the process of smelting the ore. Lange, Speakers Com., and Keil prefer
the former; the very bellows are burned with the intense heat of the fire. Hend., Rosen.,
Umbriet, &., the latter; the roaring noise occasioned by blowing the bellows. “ Wicked are


not plucked away ;” t.¢., separated ; the dross cannot be removed by all the smelter’s arta,
Nothing satisfactory results ; the ore is hopelessly and irremediably base.


HOMILIES ON SECTIONS OF CHAPTER VI,


Bection 1-9. A vision of retributive war.
»» 10-17. God’s messenger baffled and repudiated,
» 18-26. Bitter issues of impious effrontery.
», 27-30. A frustrated ministry of grace,


Ver. 1-9. A Viston or Rerrrvurive War.


As yet no invader had set foot on the land; the city apprehended no assault:
this forewarning cry (ver. 1) sounded, therefore, like a groundless alarm. But the
improbable quickly glides into the actual in common life, and emphatically so in
Divine providence. To ignore a warning cry is to invite the sword. God never
foreshadows evil too soon, never sends a seer with message of terror without the
danger being imminent, and always gives forewarning that the imperilled may
escape. (See Addenda to chap. vi. ver. 1, “ Set up a sign of fire.”)

L Vivid portrayal of imminent calamity. Clearly and forcibly delineated,
so that none could plead ignorance of danger. Nor can any now hide themselves
under the excuse that they knew not the calamities which menace sin. 1. Zion
offers a choice prize to the Soe (ver. 2,3). 2. The enemy is impatient to conquer
(ver. 4,5). 3. God commissions and commands the assault (ver. 4, 6), even as He
did the attack on Job (ii. 3-7), and on Paul (2 Cor. xii. 7); but in their case with
how different a design and result! 4. From the destroyer’s hand none would
escape (ver. 9). (See Manners and Customs, above on ver. 9.) Thus “the daughter
of Zion” would find the threatened evil not imaginary, or easily avoided. When
God commands vengeance on those who defy or despise Him, who shall “ stay
His hand?” Where escape be found? “ Behold, ye despisers, and wonder and
perish.”


118





‘AOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. CHAP. VI,


Il. Urgent appeals to seek safety in retreat. Hide ere calamity comes, not
delay until destruction overtakes. (a.) Their defenced city, Zion, though the strongest
fortress in the land, was condemned to overthrow; therefore “flee!” (ver. 1).
Equally, (b.) the strongholds of sinners will be overthrown ; by affliction, calamity,
ruthless changes which befall men in this life, and certainly by the final judgment :
forsake them ; “ flee for refuge to the hope set before you.”

1. They would need shelter themselves (ver. 1); though they might deem
Jerusalem secure, as sinners do their “refuge of lies,” God forewarned them
that they would want a more safe retreat; and He knew. 2. They should warn
and rally their neighbours (ver. 1), for they were involved in like doom, and
rian like salvation, 3. Timely wisdom might propitiate God and obtain mercy

ver. 8).

II. Pathetic denunciations of their hardened impiety. No appeals, how-
ever plaintive and powerful, could rouse this guilty people to fear the evil or
seek defence. 1. Delineation of appalling guilt. It was (a.) Everywhere prevalent ;
“wholly oppression” (ver. 6); every social grade lost to all except extortion and
worldly aggrandisement. (b.) Spontaneous and ceaseless (ver. 7), like a stream of
foul and poisonous waters which would not cease. 2. Announcement of consequent
doom. (a.) Attendant sufferings (ver. 7), “grief and wounds;” yet alas! these did not
dispose them to seek the Divine remedy, the one Physician, (b.) Abandonment by
God (ver. 8). Pitifully God pleads, and expostulates, and warns (ver. 8); but the
nation is unimpressionable ; “‘ desolation” therefore follows. How lamentable the
contrast in Zion’s condition! (ver. 3, comp. ver. 8). Sinners who despise God’s
warnings and mercy entail on themselves the saddest desolations.


Ver. 10-17. Gop’s MrssENGER BAFFLED AND REPUDIATED.


A heavy “ burden of the Lord” to carry ; it wearied the prophet’s spirit. Who
would not sorrow to “ prophesy evil” against his own people} Patriotism and
philanthropy alike shrink. Yet, when only by prophesying evil can the people be
sroused to realise their peril and “ flee,” both patriotism and philanthropy urge to
the sorrowful task. Then, even the meek and gentle Jesus must reiterate His
“ woes,” and the noble-hearted Paul must “with many tears” portray his nation’s
spiritual blindness and doom.

I. A prophet in despair for an audience (ver. 10). “‘ Zo whom shall I speak ?”
dc. None who either could or would “hear.” 1. Deaf; “ear uncircumcised ;”
closed with a foreskin ; a suggestive figure to Jews; shutting out the sound. 2,
Derisive (see Lit. Crit. on verse). 3. Depreciating ; “no delight in it ;” lost all
regard and desire for communications from God. Prophet found none heedful (Isa.
liii. 1).

II. A prophet irresistibly constrained to preach (ver. 11). Silence was not
optional or possible; speak he must, ‘ whether men would hear or forbear.” 1. A
mighty inspiration filled him. 2. His weakness compelled him to yield; he grew
“weary” with keeping silence and restraining the sorrowful message. 3. T'he whole
truth must be outpoured. 4. For it refers to all, and all must be forewarned. Mes-
sages for every one, all ages included, from “children” to “aged.” God's mes-
senger must utter the truths he brings.

III. A prophet bearing evil tidings (ver. 11, 12). Bethink 1. How unwilling
ss the gracious God to send them. 2. How dreadful is man’s rebellion which neces-
sitates them. 3. How beautifully the Gospel reverses them. 4. How, im every case,
timely repentance of sin averts them (cf. Jonah iii, 5).

IV. A prophet defeated by lying messengers (ver. 13-15). Forgery and falsehood
tread upon the heels of truth; the “enemy ” with “tares” follows the footsteps of
the “sower” who carries “‘ good seed.” “ Lying spirits” are ever in conflict with
prophets of trnth. 1. Willing dupes, The people were more prepared for the
“false” than for the “true” (ver. 13). Sordid hearts set on this er or fiat


CHAP, VI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





tery, care not for Divine communications. 2. Plausible teachera (ver. 14). They
abound; trifle with human wrong; “ heal slightly ;” their influenceis disastrous ; delude
sufferers, but not deliver them. 3. Shameless ungodliness (ver. 15). The effect of
resisting Divine messages and warnings is to harden sinners in their iniquity. Jere-
miah saw that his ministry was neutralised by the false teachings which abounded,
and by the impious indifference of the people.

V. A prophet treated with open repudiation (ver. 16, 17). Here is suggested,
1. A preacher's varied modes of appeal. (a.) He appealed to thetr judgment:
“Stand in ways and see;” examine whether the “old paths” are not safest and
happiest. (6.) To their self-Jove, their spiritual advantage: “Rest to your souls,”
(c.) To ther fears and apprehensions: ‘ Hearken to sound of trumpet ;” the threat-
enings of evil. 2. Zhe hostile attitude of sinners, (a.) They will not stir themselves
to action (ver. 16), either to test whether their way is good or leads to good, nor yet
to gain the “ rest of soul” which God offers and they truly need: “ We will not
walk therein.” (b.) They will not listen to the votce of sacred teachers (ver. 17) ;
they have no desire to learn their malady, to be healed thoroughly, to be guided
into the “ good way,” to gain the precious “rest” which Jesus gives; and they
fearlessly answer all appeals from God’s servants with “‘ We will not hearken.”


' Ver. 18-26. Birrzr Issuzs or Impious ErrRoNnTeRy,


Rejecters of God’s Word imprecate His wrath (ver. 19). Defiance of His warn-
ings and pleadings merits but brief forbearance. Insulted mercy interposes no
longer between the guilty and their doom. God has other resources at command
when His messages are despised. He would persuade to repentance ; but, that
failing, He can summon calamities and subdue those who revolt (ver. 22-26).
Yet is He “slow to anger,” and never calls for judgment till defiance is not alone
outspoken (ver. 16, 17), but incorrigible (ver. 28), Even then God treats their
case, not vengefully and imperiously, but judicially ; calls them to trial and judg-
ment, and appeals to the universe concerning the equity of His proceedings.

I. The court of witness (ver: 18,19). God calls upon “ the nations,” Gentiles ;
“the congregation,” probably counsellors of state; “ the earth,” 1.e., all humanity,
to observe His procedure with these Jewish criminals. It foreshadows another
judgment, to be conducted in the sight of the whole universe. How appalling the
event ! how solemnly does God conduct the sinner’s trial !

II. The offender arraigned. Who is the criminal? (ver. 19), “this people.”
God emphasises the identity : “thts people.” Not a people without a history, with-
out national distinction, without a noble ancestry, without religious advantages,
without inducements to piety. Every item relating to “this people” formed a
reason for faithful, loving allegiance with their God, and a protest against their sin,

TIl. The accusation against Judah (ver. 19). It was not so much practical
irreligion, though practices were evil and loathsome (ver. 13, 15); it was the
alienation of the intelligence and heart, expressed here as “‘ frust of their thoughts,”
‘‘ An evil heart of unbelief in departing from the living God.” This showed itself
in their effrontery,—meeting God’s pleadings with an unblushing refusal (ver. 16,
17): “ Paid no heed to My words, and My law have they spurned.” Insolent in-
difference to God.

IV. The mocking pretence of piety (ver. 20). They made a “ fair show” of
celigion, though their heart had revolted. ‘To obey is better than sacrifice, and
to hearken than the fat of rams.” God repudiates a religion of ritual ; “ He looketh
at the heart.” This blatant hypocrisy, keeping up a parade of loyalty to God
while their ‘thoughts ” were estranged and hostile, made them more criminal and
offensive. It amounted to a confession that they knew Jehovah deserved worship,
yet, “ knowing the Lord’s will, they did it not.”

V. The sentence of retribution (ver. 21). 1. The Author of calamity : “I will

120








3
q
:
3
:
1


2 A oe


r


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. OHAP. Vi,








lay,” &. 2. The form of calamity: “ stumbling-blocks,” t.¢., incursions of Baby-
lonians. 3. The distresses of calamity : “they shall fall,... shall perish.” 4. The
devastations of calamity : totality is implied in the enumeration of “fathers and
sons together, neighbour and friend.”

VI. The avenging scourge (ver. 22, 23). 1. Remote: “north, sides of
earth.” 2. Mighty: “great nation.” 3. Warlike: “ lay hold on bow,” &c. 4.
Barbarous : “cruel, no mercy.” 5. Ferocious: “voice roareth,” &. 6. Deter-
mined : “ride on horses, set in array as men for war,” é&c. Consider, therefore,
that a messenger with gracious words from God being rejected, emissaries with
avenging wrath from God will follow.

VII, The consternation of the condemned (ver. 24, 25). 1. The terror of
anticipation (ver. 24) suggests the sinner’s anguish of fear, dreading death, and
meeting the Judge, and enduring the dire sentence beyond. 2. Hiding from
destruction (ver. 25), even as in Rev. vi. 15 et seg.

VIII. The anguish of punishment (ver. 26). 1. Adject wretchedness: “ wallow
in ashes.” 2. Hxcruciating grief : “ most bitter lamentation.” 3. Melancholy loss :
“as for only son,” for “spoiler come upon us.” The loss of God’s love, the sacred
inheritance, inward peace, all comfort ; and the endurance of shame, misery, and
bitter oppression. “ There shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth.” Oh, that the
“ mourning ” were timely,—not after the ruin as a fruitless consequence, but before
the ruin as a preventative. For penitential tears might avert the doom. Weeping
for suffering brings no remedy, but weeping for sin ere judgment comes, prepares
the mourner to welcome the Saviour.


Ver, 27-30, A FRUSTRATED MinistRy or GRaocr,


(See Zt. Crit. on verses.) In language of metallurgy, God sets forth the
design of Jeremiah’s ministry in the midst of Judah, and the hopeless moral con-
dition of the nation ; for not even the most earnest efforts to call them back to true
religion could regenerate or restore a people so irremediably debased. (See Ad-
denda to chap. vi. 30, “ Reprobate silver.”)

L A tentative ministry (ver. 27). ‘An assayer and tester of metals.” God’s
preachers prove their hearers, test their real state, their thoughts and aims, their
spiritual attitude. Even as with our Lord (Matt. iii. 12); and the Word of God
(Heb. iv. 12, 13).

Il. Base material (ver. 28). Either (1.) their tgnoble quality ; mere “ copper
and iron,” not silver and gold ; or (2.) thesr obduracy ; hard and defiant. Described
as “revolters ;” 4.¢., they resist good: “walk with slanders ;” t.e., they deprecate
good ; “all corrupters;” t.¢, they mar and spoil whatever good they hear o1
find ; communicate their own badness to others,

IIL Unavailing remedies. 1. Intense zal effected nothing, Jeremiah’s
fervour, metaphorically suggested in the “bellows” which became burned by the very
fierceness of the heat produced, indicates the prophet’s self-consuming earnestness
to reform Judah. 2. Prolonged endeavours proved impotent. The smelter con-
tinued his toils and kept the heat at full glow till the very “lead was consumed.”
3. Hvil was inseparable. The founder’s work could not effect a separation of
Judah from her corruptions and idolatries (John iii. 19; Matt, xxiii. 37).

IV. Hopeless abandonment. 1. God despairs of them, gives over any further
effort to restore them to piety. 2. God surrenders them; as worthless: no longer
will He claim them, or own them. “ None of His,” is the sentence of their
irrevocable doom. They are “cast away.” All divine grace and forbearance
became lost upon them ; they frustrated every effort on God’s part for their good.
He came seeking fruit, yet found not. Regenerative aids were applied (Luke
xiii, 8) ; opportunity was patiently allowed for utilising advantages ; all failed, and
the tree was cut down, for it “cumbered the ground.” The lesson: “ Except
repent, likewise perish ” (Luke xiii, 5), a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.








self-sufficiency, and stand in his own


CHAP. VL
HOMILIES AND OUTLINES ON VERSES OF CHAPTER VI.
Ver. 1. Theme: IRonicau CALLS TO
BALVATION.


Impossible that the prophet could
encourage hope that they would escape
the foe by quitting Jerusalem—the for-
tress most capable of resisting the Chal-
dean army—and securing themselves in
Tekoa and Bethhaccerem. The call is
full of irony : Seek a secure refuge from
the advancing enemy, and evade God’s
threatened judgments if any method of
escape avail: none shall be found, de-
structions will be great. Let the soul
who is without Christ, defenceless
against death and judgment, see well
to his resources of safety when “ sudden
destruction cometh upon him.”

I. Mocking challenges. Having re-
fused God’s salvation, save yourselves |
Desert the Rock of Ages; shelter your-
selves in a more secure fortress, Re-
jecting Divine grace, take care of your
own spiritual interests. Apply to re-
jecters of Christ, self-righteous, fatalists,

1. Leave your impregnable fortress,
on whose strength you complacently
relied : “ Flee out of Jerusalem.” When
the peril and panic come, men will see


at once they must surrender their old


defences, their cherished delusions,
their refuted theories, their failing
hopes.

2. Find a safe retreat, if you can.
Tekoa is the remotest city of defence,
most distant from the foe who advances
from the north ; flee to that. Or, if you
deem a mountain height safer, hasten to
Bethhaccerem. Is there no sure refuge
for the soul which finds itself suddenly
driven forth from its complacent assur-
ances, its falling strongholds! “Oh
where can rest be found }”

3. Defend yourselves against assault.
“ Blow a trumpet ;” muster all your
forces of resistance.” Struggle with the
foe ere you yield: do not let death
easily vanquish you; wiil not courage
serve you in tliat emergency ? will not
your righteousness save you from the
charges of the foe? “ When the enemy
cometh in like a flood,” when Justice
calls the sinner to God’s bar, let him
summon to his aid all his resources of

122


integrity if he can.

4. Rally others to resistance of the
foe. “Set up sign,” &c Warn them
of peril, point them to safety ; for
none should limit his efforts to self-
salvation. Let those who can save
themselves lend aid also to others.
“‘ Each is his brother’s keeper ;” owes
duties of help and deliverance to those
in peril. Will they who are secure in
their own religious theories and refuges
“rescue the perishing,” and save him
that hath no helper? That is a poor
substitute for Christianity which leaves
a soul so impotent that it has no hope or
help to spare for others in danger. A
Christian is both saved himself, and he
can “save a soul from death” (Jas.
v. 20).

IL. Menacing realities. Man’s re
sources of salvation are mere fictions,
but the perils from which he needs
salvation are appalling facts.

1. Insecure defences. Zion would
become a retreat at the first (ch. iv. 6) ;
yet here the refugees and residents
within Jerusalem are forwarned that its
fortifications would not protect them.
The stoutest stronghold would fail. No
security in which the sinner intrenches
himself will prove a source of safety
when the “evil” comes. Our defences
cannot keep out sorrow, nor conscience,
nor terror of an outraged God, nor
death, nor the punishments of stn.

2. Invincible foes. Irresistible in their
force, and Divinely authorised in their
assault, certain therefore to conquer.
Ours is an unequal war with powers
mightier than we, a hopeless struggle
against the evils which God lets loose
upon those who refuse His salvation.
Confront them not; brave not rashly
the fearful issues. “A prudent man
foreseeth the evil, and hideth himself.”
“ Flee for refuge,” &.

3. Inevitable rum “A great
destruction.” “Great” in what
destroys: God’s nation; the human
soul ; precious hopes. “Great” in the
completeness of the overthrow: dire de-
vastation; irremediable ruin. For ne








—


Pa iy seer


ana


<1


PI Shr Ng rye om


HOMILETIC OOMMENTARY: JEREMIAH,





say of light illumes the profound gloom
of man’s final appalling overthrow.
“Seek ye the Lord ; seek righteousness,
seek meekness ; it may be ye shall be
hid in the day of the Lord’s anger.”


Ver. 2. Theme: DELICACY AND DE-
SIRABLENESS OF ZION.

(a.) As a possession of God’s people.
No spot so sacred, so restful, so longed
for, so beloved. Type of the Christian’s
home.

(.) As a prize for the spoiler. Every
nation coveted it, and fought for it,
Even as—if Milton be right—Satan
conspired to grasp the Eternal City of
light, and as sinners still crave to
secure it; for every man eyes the
splendid prize. ‘ Blessed are they that
have right to enter through the gates
into the city.” (cf. Rev. xxii. 14, 15).
Contemplate the :

I. Preeminent graces Divinely
lavisbed upon her. “Beautiful for
situation,” &c. Her temple the “ per-
fection of beauty.” The pride and
glory of Gud’s people. ‘Glorious
things are spoaen of thee, O city of
God.” Suggests the Celestial City,
the “realm and home” of Christ’s re-
deemed people (Rev. xxi.).

II. Honours and privileges enjoyed
within her.

To ‘ascend the hill of the Lord, and
stand within His holy place,” was the
rapturous dream of Jewish youths, the
holiest joy of devout Israelites. ‘“‘ Thither
the tribes go up.” With songs to Zion :
“ Lift up your heads, O ye gates,” de.
There realised “in Thy presence fulness
of joy.”

TIT. Sacred facts attested by her


history.

That “God will in very deed dwell
with man upon the earth ;” that He
has “‘ desired to dwell ” amid His people ;
that propitiation may be made before
Him, and offerings presented for His
acceptance ; that “streams make glad
the city of God,”


“Streams of mercy never ecasing ;”
that there may be blessed communica-


tion between ‘“ God who is in heaven,
and man upon the sarth ;” that “the


OHAP. Vi.


High Priest enters into the holy place for
us,” and we are free to seek God’s face,

IV. Glorious promises encircling
her future.

Nations shall gather there; Qod’a
light shine thence; millennial glories
centre there (Isa. ii. 2-4), And when
“the first earth shall have passed away ”
(Rev. xxi. 1), then the New Jerusalem
shall “ descend out of heaven from God,
having the glory of God,” and “the
nations of them which are saved shall
walk in the light of it;” while “the
glory and honour of the nations” shall
be accumulated within it.

Within that “holy city” only they
ean have a place “who are written
in the Lamb’s book of life.”

Note: The word “woman” is not
in the Hebrew text; some supply the
word pasturage:—I have likened the
daughter of Zion to an inviting and
luxuriant pasturage,

1. Where only the flock of God may
feed. 2. Where green pastures and still
waters abound. 3. Where the Good
Shepherd guards the sheep He “‘ knows,”
4. Wherein no “ ravening wolf” may in-
trude. 5. Where blessed rest of soul
may be enjoyed.

Ver. 3. Comments:

“ Shepherds,” t.¢. hostile let.ders;
“ with their flocks,” t.e., armies (ef. i. 15,
iv. 17, xlix. 20, 1. 45); “‘grtch their
tenis,” besiege ; “ feed every one in his
place,” consume all that is near him;
so abundant is the pasturage, the
treasures, that each one is satiated with
the booty he plunders. The Chaldean
princes with their armies would sack
Jerusalem, consuming and appropriating
all her rich possessions.


Ver. 4, 5. Theme: Impatreson To
POSSESS JERUSALEM,

The sentences arrange themselves
thus :

I. A royal proclamation of war.
This emanates from the palace at
Babylon: “Prepare ye war against
her.” Yet it originates with the King
of kings, whose will Nebuchadnezzar
works out. ‘“Prepare:” properly
sanctify war. Religious solemnities
always preceded war in ancient times,

123


GRAP. Vi.


This royal summons implied a set pur-
pose, due preparation, and prompt
action.

Christ calls His army to war against
“spiritual wickedness in high places ;”
and on their part there must be (a.)
get purpose ; (b.) religious preparation ;
(c.) prompt action.


“ Soldiers of Christ, arise !”


The King of kings calls His forces to
conflict (Eph. vi. 11 et seq.).

IL The eagerness of invading armies.
No sooner commissioned than they en-
courage each other to instant and con-
certed action. ‘Arise, and let us go
up at noon /”

(a.) Their impatience of conquest ;
would make assault at once,

(0.) Their indifference as to conve-
nience or comfort; ‘at noon,” though
the scorching sun usually led to suspen-
sion of hostility until the fierce heat was

one,

All this should have analogy in our
efforts to win the kingdom, delaying
not an hour, disregarding all thought of
‘‘q@ more convenient season.” ‘The
kingdom of heaven suffereth violence,
and the violent take it by force.”
“ Arise, and let us go up!”

II, A cry of restless disappoint-
ment, ‘Woe unto us, for the day
goeth away,” &c. (See Addenda to
chap. vi. 4, ‘ Propitious opportunities
lost.”)

(a.) Propitious hours for acquiring
conquest soon end. They set to the task
promptly, yet the “day went away ” all
too quickly ; “the shadows of evening”
fell upon them with their designs in-
complete. “ The night cometh/” “What
thou doest, do quickly.” Nevertheless,
the light fades too soon, our plans are
not accomplished so easily or so early as
we had thought. “ Redeem the time.”

(6.) Delay in conquest lamented as a
grievous loss. ‘Alas! for us.” They
feel themselves seriously to be losers by
even a temporary postponement of vic-
tory. And are we not sufferers, lamen-
tably losers, by the delay of spiritual
conquests ? Every hour which interposes
Getween us and the accomplishment of
owx aims, in seeking victory over sin

124


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAB.








and hostile forces, and in attempting te
possess ourselves of the Divine heritage,
is a painful loss, a personal calamity.
With alacrity let us besiege the king-
dom, losing not an hour.

IV. No obstacle should defer theiz
assault. ‘‘ Arise, let us go by night /”
Not even the darkness should stay their
zeal,

(a.) Their dauntless purpose ; nothing
deters or defeats them. ‘The king’s
business requires haste.” Determina-
tion despises difficulties.

(b.) The unfavourable season. How
many have their “night season,” all
dark and bewildering: yet keep on
vigorously, not suspending your efforts
to gain victory over evil, to seize the
prize, to secure the precious spoils of
the kingdom, Wrestle on, as did Jacob,
through the night.

(c.) Rewards encouraged their persis-
tence ; “ palaces.” These contained rare
treasures and vast wealth ; hence their
zeal, But who wins the “kingdom of
heaven” by determined assault gains
“ unsearchable riches ” and ‘‘ many mane
sions.” Arise! let us claim those pala
ces.


Ver. 6. Theme: SET APART FOR
JUDGMENT. “This is the city to be
visited,”

God points out Jerusalem to the in-
vaders ; their stroke must not miss its
true mark ; judgment shall not miscarry,
He leads forth the guilty one to her
merited doom ; He leads on His mini-
sters of justice to the right transgressor.
How terrifying this thought: a soul
branded, set apart, delivered over to
the “ due reward of sin” !

I. Individuality of the transgressor.
“This is the city.” Hach stands out
distinct in the Divine gaze. We are
not massed together in a general estimate
by God. “ Hvery one shall give account
of himself to God.” Each sinner dwells
alone in God’s thoughts, Therefore,
“though hand join in hand,” God does
not lose sight of the individuality of
each ; He discriminates. You are dis-
tinctively watched by the EYE which
never errs.


IL Definiteness of human sin. ‘“‘ She








er la


ae Ne





:
BS
ri
cay
ee
va 7
x
‘
‘
8,
7
-


HOMILEVIC COMMENTAR Y: JEREMIAR.,





OBAP, VE,





ls wholly oppression.” All sin is not
alike, either in nature or degree. The
“Judge of all” distinguishes; associ-
ates the special iniquity with the indivt-
dual transgressor. ‘ He sets our secret
em in the light of His countenance.”
Jerusalem is ‘‘ oppression ;” that is her
distinctive crime: she is “ wholly op-
pression ;” that marks the extent of her
criminality. Your sin is known to God ;
und “be sure your sin will find you
out.”

II. Public presentation of the
criminal. ‘‘ This is the city.” God
exposes her to view; of angels, that
they may know how “righteous are
His judgments;” of men, fellow-sin-
ners, that they may be warned, lest
they “come into like condemnation ;”
of foes, that their assault may be directed
to the right object ; for “ every one shall
bear his own iniquity.” The great judg-
ment of men will be public, and the
transgressor will be placed in the open
gaze of the universe.

IV. Deliberate consignment to pun-
ishment. “The city to be visited,”
punished. What! so fair a city, so
delicate (ver. 2), so long honoured by
God, “ the joy of the whole earth,” the
“city of the great King”! Ask you
ineredulously, Can a svul, so noble,
formed for God, long privileged with
sacred favours, be abandoned to foes?
Look for answer on Jerusalem, ravaged
and consumed with fire! Beauty only
intensified her loathsomeness when
linked to villany. Nobleness adds to
the horrors of degradation when it be-
comes prostituted to baseness. Shall
God spare Jerusalem, or us, because of
an historic dignity ? That fact increases
our guilt, for we abused our birthright,
sold it for a mess of pottage. “The
righteousness of the righteous shall not
deliver him in the day of his transgres-
sion” (Ezek. xxxiii, 12). ‘ Depart from
Me, all ye workers of iniquity.” “If
any man draw back, My soul shall have
no pleasure tn him” (Heb. x. 38).


Ver. 7. Theme: SPONTANEITY AND
SPOLIATIONS OF GUILT. ‘“ As a fountain
casteth out her waters,” dc.

Within ourselves is such a fountain,


From the fount of evil, even in chsld.
hood, flows such waters as disvbedience,
passion, falsehood, &e. In youth, they
flow more abundantly, “increase unto
more ungodliness ;” impurity, vanity,
wilfulness, outraging conscience, wrong-
ing Christ, &c, In maturity the streams
pour forth in steady, habitual wrong:
“All the imaginations of the heart are
only evil continually.” Such the case
of a depraved heart, into which no
purifying grace enters. Yet, as the
tree cast into the bitter waters made
them sweet (Exod. xv. 25),so Divine love
can make all the outgoings of the human
heart pure and good.

I. The exhaustless outflow of sin.

1. As something which is natural
to us; ‘“‘Casteth out her waters, her
wickedness.” Leave ourselves free, and
sin follows naturally.

2. As something which easily gratifies
itself: the waters flow forth spontan-
eously, without effort. We “enjoy the
pleasures of sin.” Wrong-doing is con-
genial, gratifying. ‘Out of the heart
proceed (easily and pleasurably) evil
thoughts,” &e.

3. As something which has a peren-
nial source. Its waters never pause.
The more we sin, the more copious our
capacity and versatile our resources of.
sinning. Guilt never runs dry. “As .
a fountain,” whose waters ceaselessly
flow, sin will not be restrained ; it will
find and force a way out.

4, As something which pour: ttself
out tn plenitude. Good and gracious
thoughts and deeds come forth even
from the best of us in feeble quantities ;
but the heart “ casts owt her wickedness”
in full flow: ‘‘ Out of the abundance of
the heart.” What copious streams of
evil flow forth from one sinner! What
magnitude of sins in one life, one day }
If they could be reckoned up! (See
Addenda to chap. vi. 7, “ Continwity
of sin.”)

II. The woful outrages of sin.
“ Violence and spoil,” &e.

The outflow of sin is pleasurable to
the sinner; it is gratifying as being
natural, It costs no effort or restraint,
But it works direful ravages on othera—
¢.g., drunkenness, libertinism, extortion

125


CHAP. Vi.





malice, &c., destroys homes, breaks hearts,
Like deadly blight across fair plantation,
or fire over golden harvest fields. Look
on the disease and death in the world,
all the bitter effects of sin,

1. The external wrongs done by sin,
“ Violence and spoil.”

2. The internal wounds suffered by the
sinner. ‘‘ Grief and wounds.”

Man estimates the external ravages of
sin above the internal miseries ; he eries
out because of “violence,” d&c.; he
laments the misfortunes, the “ spoil,”
which sin brings upon his life.

But God looks within. ‘‘ Before Me
continually is grief and wounds.” What
a spectacle of imward corruption does
the eye of God behold! Oh, the hidden
griefs of sinners! How dreadful the
spoliations of conscience, of affections,
of the godlike soul!

There avails for us the healing, re-
deeming grace of Jesus. He is “ac
quainted with grief,’ our grief; and
He can heal our “wounds,” for ‘ He
was wounded for our transgressions,
and with His stripes we are healed.”


Ver. 8. Theme: Gopv’s UNWILLING
SEPARATION FROM JupaH. “ Lest my
soul depart from thee.”

It implies God’s soul was knit to, fixed
upon His people. ‘ Depart,” is a strong-
ly expressive word ; be torn from thee.
“God was tenderly attached to the holy
city, had chosen to put His name there,
and nothing but the extreme wickedness
of its inhabitants could have moved Him
to withdraw His affection from it.”—
Henderson.

“ Note: 1. The God of mercy is loth
to depart even from a provoking people,
and is earnest with them by true repent-
ance and reformation to prevent things
from coming to that extremity. 2. Their
case is very miserable from whom God’s
soul is disjoined ; it intimates the loss
not only of outward blessings, but of
those comforts and favours which are
the more immediate and peculiar tokens
of His love and presence. 3. Those who
forsake God are certainly undone ; when
God’s soul departs from Jerusalem she
soon becomes desolate and uninhabited
(Matt. xxiii. 38)."—M. Henry.

126


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAL.


i, The infinite goodness and patiencs
of God towards a sinful people, and His
great unwillingness to bring ruin upon
them.

ii. The proper and effectual means of
preventing the misery and ruin of @ stn-
Sul people. “ Be thou instructed.”

iii, The miserable case and condition
of a people when God takes off His
affection from them.—T%llotson. (See
Addenda to chap. vi. 8, ‘‘ God’s with-
drawment from man,”)


Ver. 9. Comments :

The Jews are the grapes, too choice
to let any remain unplucked ; the Chal-
deans are the unsparing gleaners, intent
on thoroughly cleansing the vine of all
its valuable produce.

As the vintagers return again and
again to the vine so long as any clusters
ean be gathered, so would the Baby-
lonians renew their invasions till all
Judah was carried into captivity, and
the land left bare: ‘They shall
thoroughly glean,” &c.

This is QGod’s address to the Chal-
deans, “ Turn back thine hand,”. &. ;
and they literally obeyed the Divine
bidding (ef. lii. 28-30), (See Addenda
to chap. vi 9, “Glean Israel as a
wine.”)

Ver. 10. Theme; PREACHING REN-
DERED USELESS.

This is marvellous, that words from .
God could become void of effect. For
bethink :

1. That preaching is God’s chosen
method of awakening and conversion.

2. That preaching is the appropriate
and established agency by which the
Holy Spirit works in quickening human
souls.

3. That there is a conscience in man
upon which Divine messages act with
startling force.

4, That the Word of God is itself
quick and powerful.

5. That manifold Divine promises
guarantee the preacher against failure
when speaking for God. Yet text.

L A bearer of tidings from Heaven
finds none to whom to address them.
He stands like one who arrives with a
proclamation on the borders of an un-








HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: /EREMIAR,





inhabited desert, bewildered to discover
no hearers. What is he todo? The
case is no better when a preacher finds
hearers, but they refuse him a hearing,
or let him preach on without the slightest
heed. The prophet is:

1. In distress that none were prepared
to regard his “warnings ;” amazed at
their stolidity, defiant unconcern, im-
movable complacency, indifference to
peril, Men still obdurate and frivo-
lous.

2. In perplemity as to what course to
adopt to enlist thetr attention. He
could, of course, “speak and give
warning ;” but he wished so to do this
“that they may hear.” Always the
preachers perplexity, how to arouse
men’s serious heed to the things he
speaks. Without this responsive atten-
tion, the preacher warns to no purpose,
without hope of success. Paul tried all
resources (1 Cor. ix. 20-23). Yet
what solemn tidings Jeremiah brought !
What “glad tidings” the Christian
preacher brings ! (Isa. lii. 7-10).

Ii. Men who need these tidings
from Heaven are without capacity
for hearing Divine truths. Other
sounds can enter their ears, but not
sounds from Heaven. A whisper from
earth concerning “earthly things” is
instantly and eagerly heard, but the
thunder’s roar from the skies concerning
“heavenly things” finds them deaf to
sound. Why? “Their car ts un
circumcised,”

1. They do not want to hear; hearing
disquiets them.

2. They do not tntend to hear; have
resolved to hear nothing from God,
nothing against themselves or their
sins, Thus “they cannot hearken.”
Prejudice deafens men; unbelief
deafens; wilful «ignorance deafens
(comp. Gal. iii, 1). Hence men hear
from God and of Christ in vain. Yet
THEY NEED these tidings. Judah did,
so as to escape destruction which was
imminent. We need tidings from
Heaven, for they announce the only
salvation available, the Jesus our souls
want.

IIL. Divine messages repelled by
men with antipathy and scorn.





Note; The prophet’s ery of amaze:
ment and fear. ‘‘ Behold the word,”
&c. It fills him with alarm. To
trifle with words from Jehovah/ To
throw from us the saving truths of the
Gospel! How astounding man’s con-
duct in putting aside with heedlessness
the invaluable messages of Heaven !
(See Addenda to chap. wi. 10, “God's
Word ; no delight in 8.”)

1. God’s chiding words are resented as
a calumny, as an undeserved “re-
proach ;” they felt themselves aggrieved
and affronted by the remonstrances and
condemnations Jeremiah brought. What
blinding pride, what besotting vanity
this reveals! They determine not to
hearken to God’s Word because it
lashes their sins,

2. God’s pleading words are received
with contumely ; depreciated and derided
as being uncalled for. What had they
to fear? They saw no danger, recog-
nised no urgency in propitiating God.
“They have no delight in it,” means
they turn away with aversion, they
appreciate not the Divine mercy which
sends the “ Word ;” they believe not in
the necessity for such a message.
Hence they scorn. “ They would none
of my counsel; they despised all my
reproof ” (Prov. i. 30). Jerome remarks :
“Inability [they cannot hearken a
which proceeds from scorn and unbelie
is not exempted from punishment.”
God must rebuke such wilful insensi-
bility (comp. ver. 19).


Ver. 11-13. PreacHING MADE IN-
EVITABLE.

If men repudiate the preacher’s word
(see above on ver. 10), may he keep
silence? Silence ts impossible, he can-
not restrain himself; speech 1s iumpera-
tive, for God commands him to speak :
“ Pour it out.” God’s communications
to him must be communicated to men.
‘“‘We cannot but speak the things we
have seen and heard.” ‘Woe is unto
me if I preach not the Gospel.” Thus
utterance is necessitated ;

I. By the irresistible force of in-
ward Divine impulse. “Iam full of
the fury of the Lord ; I am weary with
holding in,”

137


GAP. Vi.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.





1. How unwilling to proclaim the evil
tidings! Sad task for God’s messenger.
“Tell you even weeping.”

2. How exhausting the burden of the
Lord! ‘ Wearies” the heart. Painful
to have to utter sad truths ; more pain-
ful to refrain.

“‘ God’s anger at the wickness of the
people 3ad been, as it were, poured into
Jeremiah’s heart, and he tried to re-
strain it in vain.”—Speaker’s Com.

This “ fury” was not Jeremiah’s
holy ardour, which was irrepressible in
him, but burning displeasure Divinely
awakened in him towards the insensate
nation, “The fury of the Lord,” which
did not refer to or reflect upon himself,
therefore must not be kept to himself,
but poured out.

If. By the necessity of society to
hear the Divine threatenings. 1.
Whether they wish to hear them or not.
2. Whether they regard and act upon
them or not. 3. Whether they profit by
their hearing, or, by abusing warning,
increase their condemnation. God (a.)
allows none to dwell im wnrorance ; He
“‘sets before us life and death ;” (6.)
leaves man without excuse ; if he despise
warning and perish, his blood is upon
his own head. But, whether as ‘life
unto life, or death unto death,” men
must hear.

III. By the inclusive application
of the solemn messages. They relate
to all ages and sexes. (See Addenda to
chap. vi. 11.)

l. The inclusive consequences of sin.
From “child” to “aged,” “man and
wife,” all had sinned,—all condemned.
“So death passed upon all, for that all
have sinned.” Disease of sin is upon


2. The comprehensive displeasure of
God. “Pour it out” (the fury of the
Lord), upon the children, young men,
parents, of ripe years, and very aged.
This anger of God is justified by ver.
13.

IV. By the terrible character of
the nearing woes (ver. 12).

1. The merciless severity of the tn-
vading foe. Less severe than “our
adversary the devil” (1 Pet. v. 8; Rev.
xii. 12; Luke xii. 5).

128


3. The clear and emphatic predictions
of these woes, (See Deut. xxviii. 30.)
Possessions greatly prized, “houses and
fields ;” treasures jealously guarded,
“wives.” Homes seized, afiections dis-
regarded, life’s dearest ties severed. So
in the “judgment to come,” sinners
will dose all they had, and be sundered
from all they love. Our woe, if un-
saved, is clearly foretold (Heb. x.
26-29).

3. The hand of God will accomplish
the sinner’s overthrow. “For 1 will
stretch out my hand,” &e. (cf. Heb.
x. 30, 31).

vV. By the appalling corruptions
which invoked the judgments (ver.
13). Against such sinfulness the
preacher must protest and pronounce,
Amid such a corrupted society, God’s
messenger can only utter woes. He has
no promise or pleading for men sunk
in wilful and defiant iniquity. (See
Addenda to chap. vi. 13, “ Covetous-
ness.”

“ Knowing the terrors of the Lord, we
persuade men.”


Ver. 14. Theme: HEALING OUR
WOUNDS SLIGHTLY. (See Addenda
to chap. vi. 14, “ Peace where no
peace.”)

Accommodating prophets, who taught
delusions, because corrupt hearers said,
“ Prophesy unto us smooth things; pro-
phesy deceits.” Thus lulled to sleep in
their sins, while heaviest judgments of
God impended. Lament such delusive
ministrations (Ezek. xiii 22; Deut.
xxix, 19,20). Yet men love to deceive
themselves, to silence convictions of con-
science. Show:

L What need we all have of heal-
ing. Sin has affected all the powers of
our souls, 1. Asserted in Scriptures. 2.
Confirmed by experience, But, as many
think themselves healed whilst in perish-
ing condition, show:

IL Who they are that heal their
wounds slightly. 1. They who rely on
the uncovenanted mercy of God, fatally
deceive their souls by expecting mercy
contrary to Gospel. 2. They who take
refuge in @ round of duties ; no attain-
ments can stand in the place of Christ











a


’


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.


OHAP. VL





(Phil. iii 9). 3. They who rest in a
faith that ts unproductwe of good works ;
but the faith that apprehends Christ
will “work by love,” and “ purify the
heart,” and “ overcome the world.”

II. How we may have them healed
effectually.

1. The Lord Jesus has provided a
remedy for sin (Isa. liii. 5). 2. That re-
medy applied by faith shall be effectual
for all who trust in it (Isa. i. 18).

Address: i. Those who feel not their
need of healing. Christianity is a remedy,
and presupposes a deep malady, which
nothing finite can heal. ii, Those who,
after having derived some benefits from
Christ, have relapsed into sin. If con-
tinue thus, ‘‘last end worse than first”
(Jer. iii. 12). iii, Those who are enjoy-
ang health in their souls, A man under
power of sin feels spiritual duties irk-
some ; but he whose “soul prospers,
and is in health,” finds the ways of God
full of delight,— Simeon.


Theme: EVILS OF FALSE SEOURITY.

Though people live thoughtlessly about
their souls, they generally satisfy them-
selves with some maxim of security : on
the strength of this they hush within
them every alarm of conscience. A large
class of such slender and sentimental
religionists, who profess reverence, main-
tain outward decencies, are visited with
occasional tender thoughts of its solemni-
ties, would be shocked at infidel opinion,
and have their minds comfortably made
up. Yet in their tranquillity there is
not a single ingredient of the Gospel,
“joy and peace in believing.”

This deceitful complacency needs salu-
tary alarm. How is it persons reach
this state of easy confidence ?

1. There is a disposition to acknow-
ledge, in a general way, that they are
_sinners, though also to palliate the
enormity of sin, and to gloss it over
with the gentle epithet of an infirmity.

2. Then to make all right, and secure,


and comfortable, the sentiment is che- .


rished that God is a merciful God, and
will overlook our infirmities.

A slight hurt needs but a slight
remedy; being but gently alarmed, &
gentle application avails to pacify.

I





I, This mercy, so slenderly spoken of
and vaguely trusted in, is not the mercy
which has been made the subject of an
actual offer from God to man. He hag
stepped forth to relieve us from the debt
of sin ; but He has taken His own way
of it (John iii. 36).

II. The evils of such a false confidence.
1. Jt casts an aspersion on the character
of God. Those who find their way to
comfort without any reference to Christ,
ignore God’s truth or His righteousness ;
His threatenings, purposes, the everlast- .
ing distinction between obedience and
sin, &c., become a meaningless parade.
2. It ts hostile to the cause of practical
righteousness, Though a man confess to
“infirmities,” he will smother all appre-
hensions, and regale his fancy with the
smile of an indulgent God. It tends to
obliterate all restraints, on the specious
plea of all-availing mercy, and leaves
every man to sin just as much as he
likes, Thus “peace, where there is no
peace,” spreads its deadly poison over
the face of society, and a sentiment of
deep and fatal tranquillity concerning
salvation and God’s demands on the
soul takes up its firm residence in a
world which sends up a cry of rebellion
against Him. This is a sore evil.—
Chalmers.


Ver, 15. Theme: SHAMELESSNESS IN
SIN THE CERTAIN FORERUNNER OF DE-
STRUCTION.

He who has thus sinned himself
past feeling, may be justly supposed to
have sinned himself past grace,

i. Hatraordinary guilt. ‘They had
committed abomination.”

ii. Their deportment under their guilt.
“They were not at all ashamed, neither
could they blush.”

iii. God’s high resentment of their
monstrous shameleseness, implied in the
vehement interrogation, “Were they
ashamed ?”

iv. The judgment consequent there-
upon, ‘Therefore shall they fall,” &.

I. Show what shame is, and its in-
fluence upon men’s manners.

1. By what ways men come to east
off shame, and grow impudent in sin.
1. By the commission of ae 2.


GHAP. Vi.


Custom in sinning. 3. Criminal ex-
ample of great persons. 4. General and
common practice. 5. To have been once
greatly and irrecoverably ashamed.

III. The several degrees of shame-
lessness in sin. 1. Showing respect to
sinful persons. 2. Defending sin. 3.
Glorying in it.

IV. Why it brings down judgment
and destruction upon the sinner. 1.
Because shamelessness in sin presupposes
a long course of sin. 2. Because of its
destructive influence upon the govern-
ment of the world.

V. What those judgments are by
which it procures the sinner’s destruc-
tion. Scripture supplies instances of
judgment on shameless sinners, 1. A
sudden and disastrous death : ¢.g., Zirari,
slain by sword of Phinehas, 2. War
and desolation: ¢g., Benjamites (Judges
xix., xx.). 3. Captivity: ¢g., Judah,
whom the prophet. here denounces.

Where there is no place for shame,
there can be “no place for repentance.”
Shamelessness means impenitence, and
impenitence, destruction.—R. South,
D.D.


Ver. 16. Theme: Tue Otp Parua,

L The denomination : “Old paths,”
t.e., way of obedience, worship, piety.
“Qld,” because: 1. Ordained from
eternity. 2. Herein all the saints have
walked. 3. Tried, and found pleasant
and profitable.

If. The description : “Good way.”
A path may be “old,” yet not “good ;”
this is both, When may a path be
ealled “good”? 1. When safe. 2.
Direct. 3. Frequented. 4. Pleasant.
5. Firm and passable.

II. The directions: “Stand, see,
ask, walk.” None can find this
path at random, none walk in it
ignorant of where they are. They who
seek this path should be: 1. Cautious
tn their observations. 2. Earnest in
their inquiries. 3. Prompt in entering
thereon.

IV. The destination : “ Ye shall find
rest to your souls.” 1. In the journey


many blessings of rest will be enjoyed, °


as contentment, satisfaction, cheerful-
ness, security. 2. Afterwards there will
130


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAR.


be fulness of rest: the path leads to
eternal repose, happiness, glory.

It is the path of faith; they who
tread it first journey to the cross; then,
leaning on arm of the Beloved, travel to
home of saints. Christ beckons to all
who inquire, and says, “I am the Way.”
—“ Sermon Framework.”


Theme ; THE GOOD OLD Way.

Whatever bears stamp of antiquity
upon it finds favourable reception ; in-
novations are distrusted. Inquire:

I. What is that old and good way ?
Not holiness alone, but, 1. A penitenteal
affiance in God, through Christ’s media-
tion (John xiv. 6). 2. A cheerful
obedience to Him: “Take my yoke,” &e,
(Matt. xi. 29). Both of these bear mark
of antiquity, from “ righteous Abel”
downwards. And they must be good,
for (a.) Appointed by God Himself,
(4.) Approved by all His saints. (c.)
Tend to the perfecting of our nature ;
and (d.) To the adornment of our religion,

IL, What is our duty respecting it ?
It becomes us, l. Z'o inquire after tt;
not presume we are right, but “stand
and see;” ask those whom God _ has
appointed as guides, search sacred
oracles, implore teaching of Holy Spirit,
2. To walk in tt. Knowledge useless
without practice. Come into tt, renoune-
ing every other: continue in it.

Tit. Encouragement given to us.
They who walk herein shall find: 1.
Rest in their way (Rom. v.1,2). “The
work of righteousness is peace,” d&e. 2,
Rest in their end. “ Rest remaining to
the people of God.”——-Hannum.


I, The way. This cannot be the way
of the wicked (Ps. xxxvi. 4). It is the
way of scriptural piety; the course of
faith and love, Called “a way,” because
leads to enjoyment of eternal life (Matt,
vii. 14); is the certain way to it (Rom.
ii 7), and the only way (Heb. xii. 14),

1. Calied the old way. Moses waa
actuated by fash (Heb. xi. 24-27) ; and
taught the way of love (Deut. vi. 4, 5),
Old as the days of Noah (Heb. xi. 7)
and Enoch (Gen. v. 24), Certainly fox
us as old as Caristianity (John xiv. 1,
xv. 12).

2. Called the good way, for those








IT Sn


AEN Spam ot


ee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





walking in it are good (Jas. iii, 17);
and do good—to their families (Deut.
v. 29), their country (Prov. xiv. 34), and
to the world (Matt. v. 13, 14). And
the way itself is good; in its origin
(Ps. cxliii. 10), and its tendency (Prov.
xix. 23).

Ii. God’s command.

1. “Stand ye in the ways and see.”
(1.) Some facts are here assumed; that
though but one good way, there are
many evil ways; that all men are walk-
ing in evil ways (Isa, liii. 6); that we
are naturally tgnorant of the good old
way (Jer. x. 23); yet we are capable of
discovering and walking in it. (2.) Some
duties are here enjoined: make an im-
mediate pause for purposes of examina-
tion; “stand” (Hag. i. 5); seriously
examine in what way you are walking ;
“gee” (2 Cor. xiii. 5); observe well the

of evil ways (Rom. vi. 21).

2. “ Ask for the old paths, where ts
the good way.” Inquire by searching
Scriptures (John v. 39); asking direction
of God (Jas. i. 5); associating with the
pious (Prov. xiii. 20).

3. “And walk therein.” (1.) Get
into it: not remain out of it, by delay
(Job xxii, 21, xxxvi 18); not stop
short of it, by resting in deficient at-
tainment, merely talking of, thinking
about, or desiring it (Matt. xi. 29;
Jchn xiv. 6). (2.) Keep in it: by
resisting temptation (1 Pet. v. 8, 9;
Luke xxi. 36), by improving in piety
(2 Cor. vii. 1).

III. The promise.
souls.”

1. The blessing promised. (1.) In
this world: from anguish of guilt (Isa.
xii. 5); from oppression of Satan (Matt.
xi. 28); from torturing fears (Ps. xxxiv.
4); from inward defilement (John xv.
2; 1 Cor. i. 9). (2.) Glorious rest in
heaven: from all temptation (Job iii. 17),
suffering (Rev. xxi. 4), danger (Matt.
vi. 20). Rest for your sowls; the con-
sciousness of enjoyment in this life (Rom.
viii. 1, 2), and after death (Rev. vii. 14,
17). “Rest” such as souls require:
eternal (Ps. xvi. 11).

2. Its certainty. ‘Ye shall find.”
Seek it as God requires you, and it is
certain, (1.) From His all-sufficiency


“ Rest for your


CHAP. Vi.





oe xiv. 22); His kindness (Isa. xlv,
9) ; His truth (1 Thess. v. 24),

Application : Falsehood of some ob-
jections to a course of piety—

1. “ That this strict religion is a new
way.” Nay ; sin is Satan’s novelty. 2.
“ That it 1s an injurious way; unfavour-
able to the interests of men.” Rather,
the good way, most beneficial (1 Tim.
iv, 8). 3. “That tt ts a melancholy
way.” No; peace through life (Luke
i, 78, 79), peace in death (Ps, xxxvii.
37), and rest for ever (Rev. xiv. 13).—
““ Sketches of Four Hundred Sermons.”


Theme; RXSOLUTE SPIRITUAL INAC-
TION. ‘‘ Walk therein; but they said,
We will not walk therein.”

It is more than an invitation from
God; an imperative demand.

I. The summons to spiritual exer-
tion. Ruin may ensue from mere sloth:
“neglect of salvation.” Need not be
active resistance, only inactive indiffer-
ence. “.Therefore he saith, Awake,
thou that sleepest, arise from the dead,”
&c. We are called to exertion—

1. To discover the right. . 2. To gain
the good. 3. To find the sacred rest.

Indolence is disastrous in stself and ~
issues, offensive to God, and prohibited
alike by the Gospel of Christ and the
cravings of our soul,

If. The necessity of personal effort.
Never yet did a soul glide passively and
insensibly into salvation, ‘from death
unto life.” 1. An erroneous and wander-
ing life ts one of actiity. “ We have
turned every one to his own way.” 2.
Our spiritual return demands both our
volition and endeavour ; repentance and
reformation must be done by us, cannot
be done for us, 3. Wo force from with-
out ourselves will set us right. God
commands, persuades, and calls ; Christ
invites and pleads; the Spirit strives;
but no power forces. We must “walk.”
Active, earnest concurrence.

Til. The defiance of godless inaction.
“We will not walk!” 1. No disposi-
tion to leave the evil ; prefer wrong ways.
2. No effort to find the good way: “Men
love darkness rather than light ;” “Ye
will not come unto Me that ye might
have life” 3. No ane of the.


OHAP. VI.


offered rest; enjoy rioting and pleasures


of sin, 4. No apprehension of the awful~


tssues: eternal unrest of soul. “No
peace to wicked,” “tribulation and
anguish,” &. (Rom, ii 9). “It is
high time to awake out of sleep.”
“* Strive to enter in at the straight gate,”
“ Let us lalour therefore to enter tnto
that rest” (Heb. iv. 11). (See Addenda
to chap. vi. 16, “ Rest for your souls,”)


Ver. 17. Theme; RECKLESS INAT-
TENTION TO WARNING.

“Watchmen,” used of sentinels (1 Sam.
xiv. 16), but metaphorically of prophets
(Isa. lii, 8; Ezek. iii. 17; Hab. ii. 1).
“ Sound of trumpet ” was the signal for
flight (see ver. 1; ef. Amos iii. 6).

I. Approaching calamity (ver 19).

1. Merited. 2. Devastating. 3. Long-
delayed. 4. Unrecognised. 5. Imminent.
Compare the nearing invasion by Baby-
lonish foes to the subtle yet terrible
spiritual disasters approaching the sinner,

IL Reiterated forewarnings. Not
one watchman, but many, through the
successive years of Judah’s (and our)
decline. 1. God’s reluctance. 2. Man's
opportunities. 3. None left unwarned.
4, All called to escape.

III. Rousing alarms. “Sound of
trumpet.” The case is too urgent for
gentle means, the peril too appalling!
1. Clearly heard by all. 2. Easy to
understand. 3. Startling calls from God.
4. Offers of propitious interval. Escape
possible, if men will but listen and hide.

IV. Deliberate inattention. ‘We
will not hearken. 1. Jncredulity:
“ Surely a false alarm.” 2. Insensibility :
“ We have nothing to fear ; deserve no
judgments.” 3. Wilful delusion : “ Have
uo desire or intention to be disturbed in
our sins.” 4, Ruinous infatuation :
meanwhile the northern foe speeds to-
wards his unsuspecting prey (ver. 22).
So likewise do death and doom hasten
to the Christless: and ‘how shail ye
escape if ye neglect so great salvation ?”


Ver. 18. Comments.

“ Hear, ye nations.” As the Jewish
Church refuses to hear God’s voice
speaking by the prophets, He now sum-
mons the Gentiles to witnees its con-
demnation.— Speaker's Com

132


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


“ And know, O congregation,” 4.6,
the few godly souls in the midst of
apostate Judah forming the “ congre-
gation of My people ;” or else the states-
men and counsellors of surrounding
nations, who are called to observe in
Judah’s overthrow that “ verily there is
a God that judgeth in the earth.”

“ What ts among them,” t.¢., what
deeds are committed by Judah, and what
punishments (righteous and inevitable)
are to be inflicted upon them.


Ver. 18-21. Theme: THE RIGHT
EOUS JUDGMENTS OF Gop.

i, They do not shun publicity, but
rather appeal to the moral sense of the
whole world. ii. They bring upon men
their merited recompense. iii. They can
be averted, not by outward worship, but
by honest submission to God’s Word (ver.
19, 20).—Lange.

Ver. 19. Comments.

“ Tlear, O earth.’ A decree 80 80
lemnly proclaimed can be of no light
importance ; and, therefore, the Fathers,
not without reason, understood it of the
rejection of the Jews from being the
Church.—Speaker’s Com.

God appeals to the whole world as to
the equity of His proceedings. Observe
what is doing among those of Judah and
Jerusalem; you hear of the desolations
brought upon them ; the earth rings with
it, trembles under it; you all wonder
that I should “bring evil upon this
people” that are in covenant with Me,
profess relation to Me, have worshipped
Me, and been highly favoured by Me. ©
“ Know,” then :

i, That tt 1s the natural product of
their devices. The “evil” is “ the fruit
of their thoughts.” They thought to
strengthen themselves by alliance with
foreigners, and by these forbiden alli-
ances shall they be overthrown.

ii, That tt is the just punishment of
their disobedience and rebellion: “because
they have not hearkened,” &c, They
would never have been ruzned thus by
the judgments of God’s hand if they had
not refused to be ruled by the judg-
ments of His mouth,—M. Henry.


Ver. 20. Theme: SUBSTITUTES FOR
PIBTY REPUDIATED.








”


ee eR ee


ee





a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


The text reads literally, “To what
purpose is this to me that incense com-
eth from Sheba,” &c. God wanted what
was nearer home, their faithful allegiance
and their heart’s love ; and what was of
greater value, “truth in theinward parts.”

Note that God repudiated this ritual
homage at a time when Josiah was en-
gaged on temple restoration ; thus em-
phatically refusing the most elaborate
and devoutly arranged ceremonialism as
a substitute for personal holiness and
practical piety.

L The resources of religious insin-
cerity. ‘‘Incense from Sheba; sweet
cane from a far country.”

1. Costly substitutes. 2. Foreign im-
portations. 3. Fragrant oferings. So
the modern innovations in Christian
sanctuaries: ritualism is costly, foreign
in its origin, and not a little fragrance
mingles with its sensational services, So
the theological vagaries of our age, the-
ories which cost the sacrifice of precious
truths, foreign speculations which in-
trude upon the simple Word of God,
fragrant to many who have lost all en-
joyment of the “ things of Christ.” Men
take great trouble to substitute the
true.

Il. The performance of superficial
worship.

1. The outward forms of religion may
be continued where inward homage has
perished ; “ burnt-offerings and sacri-
fices.” 2, Haternals are frequently mul-
tiplied as an extenuation of conscious
inward defalcations. 3. Outward hom-
age ts proper and pleasing to God as an
expression of heart allegiance: “show
faith by works.” 4. Mere external piety
ts a solemn mockery and a hollow pre-
tence: their altar offerings and personal
sacrifices were both a “lie unto God.”

Ill. The rejection of heartless piety.
“Not acceptable, nor sweet unto Me.”
Sacrifice and incense were asked by God
as suggestive of repentance, and an in-
centive to their faith in a Mediator ;
but they became an abomination and
outrage when used to cover and excuse
sin. 1. “ Accepiable” offerings necessi-
tate truth in the offerer. ‘To obey is
better than sacrifice.” 2. Sacrifices are
only ‘‘ aweet” as they express the heart's


OHAP. V3.


true love of God. “The sacrifices of
God are a broken spirit,” &c. He prizes
the oblations of contrition, affection, and
faith ; these are ‘in the sight of God
of great price.” Let all our sacrifices


‘bear to God “ the sweet savour of Christ,”


being offered in dependence on His
merits and mediation ; for ‘ with such
sacrifices God is well pleased.”


Ver. 21. Comments.

“ Stumbling-blocks.” The Babylonian
invaders (so Keil, Hend.), who would be
instruments of Judah’s utter overthrow,
eventuating in indiscriminate ruin. But
another meaning may be given; The
Jews having established themselves in
courses of insincerity towards God, would
sink into such general habits of tsin-
cerity among themselves (for the step is
natural from falsity with God to falsity
one with another), as to lead to utter
social hypocrisy, anarchy, recrimination,
antagonism, ruin. Every tie of family
and friendship severed by the prevailing
deceitfulness which wrecked all honour
and adltenated all affection. This is
indeed but the fulfilment of a natural
and moral law ; the ultimate overthrow
of deceivers, taken in their own nets ;
Haman hanged on the gallows he made
for Mordecai.

“‘ J will lay stumbling-blocks ; ” for it
is God’s punitive law which works this
infliction on the sinner of his own sin.
‘‘ With what measure ye mete, it shall
be measured to you again.”


Ver. 22-26.
supra.

1. How furious the foe (ver. 22, 23).
2. How terrifying their attitude (ver.
23). “Set in array,” &c. 3. How tn-
defensible and weak the assatled, “ Against
thee, O daughter of Zion.” “ Hide me,
O my Saviour, hide!” 4. How para-
lysed with apprehension (ver. 24). 5.
How encompassed by the merciless adver-
sary (ver. 25). To “flee” (ver. 1) is
now impossible. What a literal fore-
shadowing and exposition is here of
events at the “ day of the Lord”! (comp.
1 Thess. v. 2, 3). ‘‘Then sudden de-


See Homily on section,


struction cometh upon them, as travail


upon a woman with child; and they
shall not escape.” iss


CHAP, VL





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; JEREMIAH.





Ver. 26. Theme; A woFUL sPxO-


TACLE OF RUIN.

On the coming disasters the prophet’s
eye now gazed ; he foresaw it in all its
vivid details, and from his pallid lips
rose a wail of consternation, a ery of
anguish over Zion.

L A sight for patriotic anguish.
“O daughter of my people!” He loved
his nation, felt her woes, pitied her very
weakness, lamented the dreadful spolia-
tion at hand ; yet could not tnterpose or
save. How distressing this helpless
pity! A father watches his dearest
daughter agonise and die; but can do
nothing—only writhe and weep. A
patriot sees his nation wounded,
wronged ; yet is powerless to rescue or
avenge. A pastor beholds the tender
ones of his flock fall a prey to the de-
spoiler; cannot deliver, only deplore.
But Jesus saw humanity perishing ; with
infinite pity He sorrowed, and with in-
finite power He saved.

II. Judah abandoned to misery.
“@Qird with sackcloth, and wallow in
ashes.” Yet this was not 1epentant
anguish ; for she still loved the sins which
wrought her woe. Nor was it remedtal
anguish ; for now rescue and redemption
were for ever gone ; her day of hope had
passed. “The spoiler ts come /” 1, It
was permanent abandonment to misery.
“« Gird thee with sackcloth ;” not merely
clothe thee with it as if for a day only,
but fasten it to thee as thine unchange-
able attire ; for the woe will not be
transient.

2. It was extreme abandonment.
“Wallow thyself in ashes.” To cast
ashes upon the head showed deep grief ;
to sit dowr. in ashes, yet deeper distress 3
but to “wallow” in them expresses
unbearable anguish and intense self-
abhorrence. Oh, how dreadful this con-
dition for the tender and “delicate
daughter of Zion” ! (ver. 2) ; how fearful
the degradation and misery with which
a sinful career closes !

IIL The woful grief of despair.
“Make thee mourning, as for an only
son; most bitter lamentation.” Lit “a
lamentation of bitternesses” (plural): sug-
gesting the many and aggravated
occasions for her grief. 1. For her

134


———o


wilful carcer of rebellion agatnst her
patient God. 2. For the depths and
intensity of her iniquities. 3. For the
repudiation of her many opportuntties
of escape. 4. For the shameful and
excruciating ruin into which she has
fallen. 6. For the utter loss of all her
honour and happiness. 6. For the dis-
honours which her conduct and ruin cass
upon Jehovah's name. 7%. For the most
bitter thought that hope and redemption
were finally and irretrievably forfeited.
‘Qh, that thou hadst known, even thou,
in this thy day, the things which belong
unto thy peace! but now they are hid
from thine eyes” (Luke xix. 41-44).

IV. Merciless spoliation of the foe.
‘“‘ The spoiler shall suddenly come upon
thee.” Contrast Zion—“ the perfection
of beauty ” before Nebuchadnezzar laid
hand upon her; and the wild waste—
blackened with fire, temple and walls
demolished, and all her people carried
away—te which she was reduced. How
rightly called “‘ the spoiler” / Contrast
man—“ in image of God,” redeemed by
Jesus, visited by the Holy Spirit ; with
what he becomes when “earthly, sensual,
devilish ;” and when the soul is finally
surrendered to the arch-spoiler’s ruin.

Is there no hope? None was left for
Judah ; but for us it is written, “God
hath not appointed us to wrath, but to
obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus
Christ !”

Ver. 27. Comments.

“T have set thee for a tower ;” rather for
a prover or refiner of metals, (Comp. ix
7.) “I will melt them and try them ”
(same verb). The prophet was set by God
to be a touchstone to try the people, and
prove what manner of spirit they were
of. If they received his word, they were
sterling ore ; if not, they were reprobate
silver, mere dross. In a larger sense,
the Written Word, and also the Incar-
nate Word, are set for the trial of the
world, “that the thoughts of many
hearts may be revealed.” — Wordsworth,

“The power dwells in Christ’s word
generally to compel men to separation
and decision; for no one can remain
neutral towards Him long. He makes
manifest tbe real condition of the heart.”








sr ae ay


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR.


Ver. 28. This gives the issue of the
testing ; the moral character of the
people is hopelessly, irremediably bad ;
Jeremiah’s ministry had made that evi-
dent ; they were like brass and tron,
base and obdurate.

Ver. 29. ‘ Bellows,” the prophets :
“are burned,” consumed, worn out by
continual blowing. Prophecy has ex-
hausted all its fervour upon Judah.
Jeremiah’s heart, consumed by the in-
tensity and heat of divine inspiration,
can labour no longer.

“As the bellows of the refiner are
burnt in the midst of the fire, so the voice
of the prophet is silenced which said,
Turn ye to My law! And as the lead
which meltsin the fire, so the words of
the prophets who prophesy to them are
made of none effect, and the people are
not profited by the teaching of their
preacher, and do not repent of their
sins.”—Targum.

“The lead ts consumed of the fire.”
Anciently, instead of quicksilver, lead
was used for the liquefaction of silver,
so as to separate the base ingredients
from the precious metal. “ When gold-
smiths wish to purify the silver, they
add lead to it. When preachers would
try their hearers, they must apply the
law. The fire is God’s Word (Jer.
xxiii 29) ; the bellows, the Holy Spirit
in the mouth of the teacher ; the metal,
the hearers.” —Cramer.

“The wwked are not plucked away.”
“The bad are not separated,” i¢., the
base ingredients, the bad principles and
habits which prevail so much, and adhere
so closely, that all the endeavours and
pains of the refiner prove ineffectual, 80
that nothing remains but to throw them
aside as ¢ metal disallowed and cried
down (ver. 30) by authority, as counter-
feiting silver, but not capable of being
brought to the sterling standard.—Dr.
Blayney. (See Addenda to chap. vi.
27-30.)

i, God’s dealings aud messages are
designed to separate sinners from their
sins, ii, He wses all means to qualify sin-
ners for salvation ere He consigus them
to destruction. iii. God proclaums ‘hem
“reprobate” and “castaway” upon whim
the energies of His grace are spent tn var.


CHAP. VL





Ver. 29.
BURNED,

Prophets spoke in parables to excite
attention, to iluminate a doctrine, to
fix truthon thememory. ‘“ The bellows
are burned.” Words apply :

I. To the prophet himself He com-
plains that he spake with such pathos,
energy, force of heart, that he exhausted
himself without being able to melt the
people’s hearts ; so hard was the ore
that the bellows were burned before the
metal was melted; the prophet was ex-
hausted before the people were impressed.
So also with Noah, Isaiah, John the
Baptist, Jesus Himself, though “ never
man spake like that Man.” Nor since,
by apostles, confessors, zeal-consuming
preachers has the iron-hearted world
become melted; but they themselves
have suffered and perished amid their
work. ‘Bellows burned.”

1. It is the preacher's business to
continue labouring till he is worn out.
2. The Gospel he preaches is the in-
fallible test between the precious and
the vile.

I. To the afflictions which God
sends upon ungodly men. Sent to see if
they will melt in the furnace or not. But
where there is no grace in affliction the
afflictions are sooner exhausted than the
sinners heart is made to melt under the
heat caused thereby —e.g., Pharaoh, not
softened by all the plagues. Ahaz,
“when he was afflicted, he sinned yet
more and more.” Jerusalem, often
chastised, yet incorrigible. Sinners, upon
whom God’s judgments exert no melting
power.

II. To the chastisements which
God sends upon Hisown people. The
Great Refiner will have His gold pure,
and will utterly remove our tin. There
are unloving children, who will even
rebel till they draw down blows upon
themselves. Do not let it be said that
the bellows are used till they are worn
out before our afflictions melt us to re-
pentance and cause us to let go our sins,

IV. The time is coming when the
excitement of ungodly men will fad
them. Many activities are kept up
by outward energies inciting men. 1,
Excitement im pursuit of geeir Yet

135


Theme: THE BELLOWE





how little will the joys of wealth stimu-


late you in your last moments! 2.
Excitement in pursuing fame. Alas |
men burn away their lives for the ap-
probation of fellow-creatures; and these
fires will die down into darkness, 3.
Living for pleasure ; but satiety follows,
and the flame of joy goes out. 4.
Hypocrisy is with some their “ bellows ;”
but this feigned zeal and pretended piety
will end in black despair.

V. To those excitements which keep
alive the Christian's zeal. In certain
Churches we have seen great blazings of
enthusiasm, misnamed “ revivals,” mere
agitutions, Genuine revivals I love;
but these spurious things are fanaticism,
Why was it the fire soon went out? The
man who blew the bellows left the scene
of excitement, and darkness ensued,
Our earnestness is worthless which de


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


pends on sueh special ministrations. Js
the fire in our soul burning less vehemently
thanin years past? Our obligations to
live for Christ are the same; our Mas
ter’s claims on «ur love are as strong;
the objects for which we served God in
the past are as important. Should we
grow less heavenly the nearer we come
to the New Jerusalem? Of the true
excitements of a Christian’s zeal it can
never be said “ the bellows are burned ;”
but if zeal is flagging, some other motive
than a heavenly must have acted at
the first. ‘‘ Examine yourselves whether
ye be in the faith;” if not, no wonder
your piety declines.
* Let every flying hour confess
We bring Thy Gospel fresh renown ;


And when our lives and labours cease
May we possess the promised crown.”


—C. H. Spurgeon:





NOTICEABLE TOPICS IN CHAPTER VI.


Topic: DirFicuLti1es oF OLD AGE WITHOUT Reuiaion. Text: “ Woe unto us/ for
the day gocth away ; for the shadows of the evening are stretched out” (ver. 4).


A painful subject, but one to which it is necessary to call the attention of
procrastinating man: the difficuities and sorrows of old age without a vital
union with Christ and the comforts of His love.

L That period of life during which the Saviour grants to men the privileges of
the Gospel is known under the appellation of a day of grace; a day in which He
watts for the sinner’s repentance, and is peculiarly ready to aid his efforts,

The great object to attain during continuance of this “day” is reconciliation to
God. They who “ seek Him early” are promised they “shall find Him.” If man be
wise in the morning of that day of privilege, the way of return to God is filled with
encouragement. In old age this reconciliation is rendered painful and embarrassing
by this difficulty, ‘ Zhe day goeth away.” Period of grace almost come to a close.
The aged sinner must necessarily reflect on long duration of mercy passed unim-
proved. Every privilege of the Gospel brought individual responsibility; render
account therefor to holy God.

“ Day goeth away:” it has been enjoyed in the fulness of its privileges ; but since
unimproved, tended only to increase the guilt and danger of the soul. For fifty years
the Redeemer has called you, angels of mercy have watched for conversion, Divine
Providence crowned your way with loving-kindness and tender mercy. How hard
and dificult now to arouse your soul ; or, if aroused, how difficult to combat your
fears of being too late, of hope being lost through long delay !

IL Second difficulty to prevent the return of the aged sinner to Christ is, the short
period of grace now left to him. ‘The shadows of evening are stretched out.”

Many wasted years gone ; very few now rematn for the soul’s salvation. As life
passes away, the work to be done increases, yet time is diminished. Death now
stands at the door. Aged sinner is tempted to despair of escaping the ruin so close
upon him. Satan uses this difficulty which his own heart presents, and allures him
to quiet himself under the load of his sins: there is now no opportunity for any slow
work of grace.

136








HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIA, — OHAP. Vi.





Il. Third difficulty in the way of aged sinners arises from the increased hardness
of their hearts.

When young, conviction agitated their minds: solemn proclamation of Divine
truth awoke attention ; their eyes could weep under gospel preaching ; affections
could be attracted by hopes and promises ; often felt excited towards a life of holi-
ness and peace. Mow, no such feelings. Unmoved. This hardness of heart, the
necessary accompaniment of age, and of a long continuance in an unconverted state,
forms a serious difficulty to returning to God.

IV. Fourth difficulty, as hedging up the aged sinner’s return, is the pride of
character which attends the advanced periods of life.

Heart may be moved, conscience awakened, desire roused to lay down burden and
find peace ; but an asswmed dignity and coldness of manner, are drawn over a broken
and bleeding spirit, because the acknowledgment would be humiliating to the age and
station of the individual, Yet soul must humble himself, if find rest. Age furnishes
no exception ; rather requires deeper abasement. This acknowledgment of sin and
misery, to children, domestics, and friends—confession that all these years he has been
wrong, is painful and repulsive.

Your time is short, difficulties are many. Yet ‘nothing impossible with God.”
Immediately turn to Christ. Flee for refuge !—Rev. Stephen H. Tyng, Philadelphia.


Topic: THz Goop Way. Children’s Sermon, Text; “Ask for the
good way” (ver. 16).


A dream of children who went through gate, regardless of placard warning of
danger, because bright and smiling flowers grew among the tall grass) Went on
picking them; merry voices rang with glee; unconsciously went further into the
tangled wood, lost all knowledge of way out, and terrified to find among the thick
grass loathsome and poisonous snakes ; hurrying from them they slipped down over
hidden rocks into deep stagnant water, and lost. “ Turn ye from evil ways, for
why will ye die?” (See Isa, xxx. 31.) Keep in “the old paths,” where taught to
tread, though others invite.

I. Wrong ways are not so happy as they promise to be.

We do not deny that ways look inviting and “seem right,” even promise to prove
“ good,” but are evil and “end in death.” “ Pleasures of sin,” although “ wages of
sin is death.” Very inviting, or not so many go. Excursion train dashed off gaily ;
but line insecure, and dreadful disaster ensued: would so many have gone had they
known the way was dangerous? If you leave “old paths” because you think new
ways not disastrous and more enjoyable.

1. Inviting ways do not always prove “good.” Do not judge that to be best
which looks most attractive. Flowers not sweetest which are gayest. Nor fruit.
You find out the delusion by trying them. Yes; you say, ‘‘ We should luke to try
for ourselves the different ways, even those forbidden!” Rather prove for your-
selves than take the word of others, But on a bottle at home is a label “ Potson:”
will you take the word of others, or try for yourselves? On rocks a lighthouse,
warning ships of ruin: will any captain be so rash as try for himself, and steer ship
to death ? (Prov. xiv. 12.) Scenes of amusement, self-indulgences, courses of irreligion,
neglect of sanctuary and prayer: these invite you from “old paths ;” but remember
the degradation and misery of the prodigal son !

2. Your own way ts not always happiest or best (Prov. xiii. 15). We all like to


- have “ our own way.” Many of us did for years, but heard Voice of Mercy call


“Repent!” Remember that having their own way is just what the world of sinners
is doing / (Isa. liii. 6.) As silly sheep. Will you do as the doomed world? Why,
all home and Sabbath teaching is to warn you from that! (Comp. text with ver. 7.)
By doing this you “ grieve the Spirit,” set yourself against Christ, allow yourself to
be led captive by devil, and court doom. In Pilgrim's Progress, 4 slalom got out of


CHAP. VI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAL,











“Slough,” but, instead of going to “Wicket Gate,” turned aside and wandered
into terrors and troubles, But “ Evangelist” met him, and put him in right way
again. Who is Evangelist? Read Bible; obey text; hear Jesus, “J am the Way!”
“Follow Me!”

I. The good way is happier far than it looks.

False thought that Christian life means sadness, “all joy darkened.” Yet true
that Jesus says, “ Take up cross and come after Me.”

1, Why is not the Christian way all easy? Bird teaching young to fly, how dis-
tressed the young seem! She might have spared them, Would it have been
kindest ? No; better they should learn to soar, though not easy. So child learns
to walk ; youth to breast the stream ; boy brave the ordeals and trials of school,
Nobler men. Boy with every fancy gratified, no hardships or self-denials, becomes
selfish, self-willed, ruined. Crosses are rugged blessings.

2. Though not so attractive as other paths, the Christian way ts really best. Two
heaps of coins: new bright copper, old dull gold: yet the gold, though smaller and
duller, the best.

3. The Christian way brings rest to those who tread st. Walking through open
country, became lost amid different paths; worried and wearied; at length right,
and soon at “rest;” for knew it was the one right way, and led safe hime. Not
wait till home (heaven) before have “ rest.” Peace within now (Prov. xii. 28).

Think how many have gone that “ good way” to heaven! 3B.o. 612 Jeremiah
called it “old.” Now nearly a.p. 1900. Yet millions tread therein (Matt. vii
13, 14). Take your place with the Christian followers. ‘ Ways of pleasantness
and paths all peace.”


Topic ; Tak AnoixnT Parus. Text: “ Ask for the old paths” (ver. 16).


In Palestine paths are the only thoroughfares ; through indolence or selfishness
even these became obliterated ; then men who went from tribe to tribe were obliged
to thread their way through thickets and over rocks in the most inconvenient way.
Transition is easy from an outward physical path toa moral meaning: roads men walk
with their feet suggest the road men’s thoughts habitually walk in, the path in which
their feelings are accustomed to move, the way in which their conduct naturally
flows.

In this secondary sense use text to point out the necessity, in all who would
go right, of keeping upon the old ways, the ascertained ways, which, in the experi-
ence of mankind, have been proved beneficial. We are not to hold on to anything
as if it were the perfect form of thought, or the final form of principle ; but we are
to hold on to all those things which long and ripe experience had shown to be
beneficial until something more beneficial can be put in their place.

L Our boast of novelty, our glorying in our newness, as if we were in advance
of everybody and everything else, 1s a fanciful mistake. Our thoughts, and all the —
channels of our thoughts, are the result of the thought and experience of thousands
of years that are gone by. Political habits and customs, knowledge of right and
equity—these have been gradually unfolded through ages past. Combinations are
new, elements are old. We did not first dig up the precious gold, nor first unlock
the secrets of philosophy. Yet we congratulate ourselves that we do not belong to
the old, slowly-moving ages ; are proud of our progressiveness, and it is fashionable
to make it a matter of boasting.

II. The present time is noticeable for an extraordinary outbreak of activity
along new lines of thought and belief. Historic researches, disclosures of truths
of the past, scientific discoveries and prophecies, have set imagination on fire; and
men feel as though old things were passing away, and all becoming new. The
consequences are

(a.) Men are inclined to dowbt generally the social and moral results * past

138

















¥
i








HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. OHAP, WL








experience, to repudiate long accepted social maxims and customs. (b.) General
distrust is being thrown upon religious teachings ; not positive unbelief, but uncer-
tainty. And by shaking confidence in religion its real power is destroyed. 'Thua
thousands are abandoning old paths—old thoughts, usages, customs, habits, con-
victions, virtues. Tendency developed in this direction in art and literature.
Leading men in history and science are tending away from the old grounds of
Christianity. This is a fact of profound importance, and should command the
attention of those who believe Christianity to be of God.

III. Consider that there are certain great permanencies of thought, character,
and custom, especially necessary in our time. ote - (a.) That moral and social
progress can never be so rapid as physical developments. Men cannot be changed
in their principles, feelings, and inner life in the same ratio as external changes go
on. Progress is always fastest in the lowest stages. You can teach men to
accomplish great physical results, as in steam, telegraphy, &c.; but if you go
higher and teach them to be more just, merciful, and pure, the process is slower.
There is no proportion between the rapidity with which we develop in physical things
and the rapidity with which we develop in that part of our manhood which is
highest and divinest. (6.) There is danger in giving up any belief or custom which
has been entwined in our moral sense. Regard as sacred the first principles of truth.
What would be thought of a man who considered it necessary to perfection in
literature that he should despise the alphabet ? It was as necessary to Isaac Newton
when he was fifty as when he was five years of age. It goes on with a man all his life
long. It is not safe to remove even the imperfect things of man’s earlier life until
they are superseded by something higher. Better the Parsee should worship light
than by astronomical proofs to destroy his delusions, and so leave him with no
God. So with heathenism ; with those who slavishly bow their souls to authority
of the Church ; with votaries of Romish error,—it is not safe to take away a man’s
view because it is inaccurate, unless you give him a more accurate view. You
thereby destroy his faith, however faulty, and thus have destroyed the life that
was in him, and left him adesert. (c.) Jn the transition from a lower to a higher
form of belief there is peril. Dangerous to pass from one religion espoused in
youth, to another espoused in manhood. Many have sailed out of the harbour of
Popery, and been wrecked ere they reached the harbour of Protestantism. Thou-
sands have deserted the orthodoxy in which early taught, and never got into any
other religion at all, Hence, we are not to think it our duty in a headlong way
to change men’s belief simply because they are erroneous. As if changing from
one mode of belief to another was going to change the conscience, reason, moral
susceptibility, and character.

IV. The relinquishment of trust or of practice should always be from worse
to better. If a man has a poor way of looking at religion, care less to convince
him of his poverty than quietly to convince him of a better way. If you want a
traveller to have a better road, make that better road, and then he will need no argu-
ment to persuade him to walkin it. If you are teaching that one intellectual system
is better than another, and that one religious organisation, church, or creed, is better,
prove it by presenting better fruit than the other, and men will need little argument
beyond, ‘The first proof that a man holds a better system of religion than his
neighbour, should be in himself : the life will be the evidence, If a Church breeds
meekness, fortitude, love, courage, disinterestedness ; if it makes noble men—
uncrowned but undoubted princes—then it is a Church, a living epistle which will
convince men. What we want is not change, except for betterment.

V. All new truths, like new wines, must have a period of fermentation.
Daring leaders in science—I believe them to be men who are throwing out ore which,
when it is smelted and purified, is to be precious indeed. Germs of truth are in their
moral teaching. But, shall men abandon old beliefs, and take these germe of
truth that lie in the heavens like mere nebulous clouds ? eo


CHAP, Vi. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





(a.) All truths are at Jirst on probation ; must be scrutinised, persecuted, ran-
sacked, vindicated. We are not wise if we follow these new lights before knowing
what they are, their extent and practical application.

(b.) Guard against wild and unreasonable urgency in throwing of traditional
faiths and truths, for those you can discover for yourselves, Accept what other men
construct for you. This is a factor in civilisation. Yet when men come to
questions of religious belief they deem it unmanly that others should think for
them! Weare so related, by the laws of God, one to another, that no man can
think out everything for himself. Is it then wiser to plunge into the realm of
nothingness or the unknown, to give up your belief at once when its validity is
questioned ? or is it not wiser to hold on to the faith of your father and mother till
you can see something better still? It is wiser for man to abide by the truths
and laws of God till better ones can be substituted.

VI. We do well to look cautiously at new truths and those who advocate
them. There is a tendency to praise scientific men as though they were the only
persons who applied themselves to find out facts. But remember scientific men
are no better than other men ; no more likely to be right in spirit, just as likely to
be vain and arrogant. They are all human ; are to be absolute authorities for no-
body. There is a conceit, a dogmatism, a bigotry of science, as really aa there is of
religion. Application :

1. That all the tendencies which narrow the moral sense and enlarge the liberty of
the passions are dangerous. 2. All tendencies which increase self-conceit are to be
suspected and disowned, ‘‘ Seest thou a man wise in his own conceit? There is
more hope of a fool than of him.” 3, Those tendencies which extinguish in a man all
spiritual elements, such as arise from faith in God, in our spirituality and immor-
tality, must inevitably degrade our manhood. No heroism ever grows out of
abnegation of these great truths. 4. All tendencies which take away your hope of
and belief in another world, take away your motive for striving to reach a higher
life. Without this hope men will have a weary pilgrimage in a world of unbelief.

Make better paths if you will, but abandon not the old; and least of all abandon
that one which leads straight to Jerusalem. For along that way the ransomed of
the Lord shall return with songs unto Zion.—H. Ward Beecher.


ADDENDA TO OHAPTER VI. ILLUSTRATIONS AND SUGGESTIVE EXTRACTS,


Ver. 1. “Set up a sign of fire.” Propitious opportunities lost.








Fire signs are used as a telegraph in
some parte of the South Seas. A native
at Tanna, in giving me the news one
morning, said, “There will be a party
over from the island of Aneiteum to-
day or to-morrow.” ‘How do you
know?” “Because we saw a great
bonfire rising there last night.” The
natives of heathen islands are also in the
habit of kindling fires as a smoke signal
to attract the notice of a vessel which
may be off their shore. Sometimes,
when we are wondering whether there
are any natives among the dense bush
which we see from the ship, up goes a
eolumn of smoke and removes all doubt.”
—Turner’s ‘ Polynesia.”

Ver, 4. “Woe wnto us, for the day
foeth away.”

14¢


“ Opportunities are the golden spots of
time, like the pearl in the oyster-shell,
of much more value than the shell that
contains it. There is much time in a
shert opportunity.” —Flavel.

The proverb, “‘ Take time by the fore-
lock,” had its origin in the old pictures
of Father Time, who appeared as bald-
headed, excepting a lock of hair upon
his forehead. Our fathers were accus-
tomed to bury an hour-glass with the
dead, as a symbol of time and oppor.
tunity utterly past away.—J. G. Pi
kington.

Grotiws, the laborious scholar, had fos
his motto, “ Hora rust.” Seneca taught
that time was the only thing of which
it is a virtue to be covetous.

“Tn the city of Basle, Switzerland, it


:
:
;





PT PWT LANEY eT


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR.
a





was the custom to have all the clocks of
the city an hour ahead of time, for
the following reason: Once an enemy
was moving upon the city, and their
stratagem was to take the city at 12
o’clock ; but the cathedral clock, by mis-
take, struck 1 instead of 12, and so the
enemy thought that they were too late
to carry out the stratagem, and gave up
the assault, and the city was saved.” —
Talmage.

Ver. 6. “ Hew ye down trees.” The
importance of preserving fruit-bearing
trees from destruction in sieges [cf. Deut.
xx. 19, 20] is evident, when we remem-
ber how much larger a proportion of
man’s subsistence than in our climates
is, in the Kast, derived from fruit-bearing
trees. Among the Syro-Arabian nations,
their destruction is regarded as a sacri-
lege. It is related that in one of his
wars, Mohammed cut down the date-
trees of the Ben Nadi (a tribe of Jews
in Arabia); and, in order to justify this
act to his own indignant followers, he
had to produce a pretended revelation
sanctioning the deed: “This revelation
came down: What palm-trees ye cut
down, or left standing on their roots,
were so cut down or left by the will of
God, that He might disgrace the evil-
doers.” Plutarch says that similar regu-
lations restrained the Egyptians from
destroying fruit-trees. ther nations
were less scrupulous, as among them
the Assyrians (and, doubtless, the Baby-
lonians also); for, in at least one in-
stance, we have noticed a palm-tree
being cut down outside a besieged city.
Josephus expressly records the destruc-
tion of trees by the Romans, So com-
pletely has this prophecy been fulfilled,
that the neighbourhood of Jerusalem
has become entirely divested of trees in


the course of the successive sieges to


which the city has been exposed. When
the Crusaders under Godfrey commenced
their siege, no timber could be found for
the construction of their engines.—
Ritto.

Ver. 7. Continuity of sin. “If you
commit one sin, it is like the melting of
the lower glacier upon the Alps, the
others must follow in time. Set the
eoral insect at work, you cannot decree


OHAP. Vi,


where it shall stay its work. It will not
build its rock just as high as you please,
it will not stay until an island be
created.” — Spurgeon.

oe 8. “Lest my soul depart from
thee,”

God’s withdrawment from man.
“Think of God sending a famine upon
the soul, of minds pining and dying
because Divine messages have been with-
drawn! We know what the effect
would be if God were to withdraw the
dew, or to trouble the air with a plague,
or to avert the beams of the sun; the
garden would be a desert, the fruitful
field a sandy plain,-the wind.a bearer of
death, summer a stormy night, and life
itself a cruel variation of death: so
penetrating, so boundless is the influence
of God in nature. Is it conceivable
that the withdrawment of God’s influ-
ence would be less disastrous upon the
spirit of man $”—.Joseph Parker.

Ver. 9. “Glean Israel as a vine.”
“God has two kinds of vintage: one is
in grace, when He plucks His glorious
grapes, the fruit of good works, and
says, ‘ Destroy it not, for there is a bless-
ing with it ’ (Isa. lxv. 8). But where He
finds only poisonous berries (Isa. v. 2),
He employs other vintagers with iron
gloves, and presses them out in His
anger (Rev. xiv. 20), till neither stem
nor stalk is left.-—Cramer.

Ver. 10. “ God’s Word: no delight
in #t.” A wealthy gentleman. invited
his servants, on a festive occasion, into
his house to receive presents. ‘“‘ What
will you have?” said he, addressing the
groom, “this Bible, or a twenty-dollar
note?” “TI would take the Bible, sir,
but I cannot read ; so I think the money
will do me more good.” ‘And you §”
he asked the gardener. “There is ill-
ness at home, sir, and I sadly want the
money.” “You can read,” said the old
man, turning to the cook, ‘will you
have this Bible?” ‘I can read,” was
her reply, “‘but I never have time to
look into a book, and I need fresh gar-
ments most.” Last came the errand-
boy. ‘‘ My lad,” said his kind benefac-
tor, “‘ will you take these twenty dollars,
for you surely want new clothes, or
would you like the Bible?” pi Thank

l


CHAP. VL





you, sir, my mother has taught me that
the law of the Lord is better than thou-
sands of gold and silver, I will have the
good book, if you please.” As the boy
received the Bible and unclasped its
covers, a bright gold piece rolled on the
floor, Quickly turning its pages, he
found them interleaved with bank notes,
while his fellow-servants, discovering
the mistake of their worldly covetous-
uess, hastily departed in chagrin.—
Dictionary of Illustrations,

Ver. 11. “A classification of society.”
“(Qhildren, young men,” &c. Five
stages of human life are successively
marked out. The cheldren, with no
higher object in life than a game of play
in the streets (Zech. viii. 5). The youths,
in what in modern phrase we should call
their clubs, for such is the meaning of
the word rendered ‘“‘ assembly,” whether
they meet there for friendly converse
(Ps. lxxxix. 7), for merriment (Jer. xv.
17), or for that love of secret combina-
tion so natural at thedr age (Prov. xv.
22, cf. Ps. lv. 14). Next comes middle
age, represented by the “husband with
his wife.” Then the elder, the man who
has grown-up children (here called “the
aged”), but is strong and vigorous.
Lastly, the man whose “days are full,”
whose work is done, and who has but
one thing left—to die.—Speaker’s Com.

Ver. 13. “ Hvery one gwen to covet-
ousness.” As the dog in Atsop’s fable
lost the real fiesh for the shadow of it,
so the covetous man casts away the true
riches for the love of the shadowy.—
Adams,

Ver. 14. “ Peace, where there ts no
peace.” It is a lamentable fact that,
without any hireling shepherd to cry
“ Peace,” men will cry that for them-
selves. They need not the syren song
to entice them to the rocks of presump-
tion and rash confidence. There is a
tendency in their own hearts to put sweet
for bitter,—to think well of their evil
estate and foster themselves in proud con-
ceit. Let men alone, let no deluder seek
to deceive them, hush for ever every
false and tempting v>ice, they will them-
selves, impelled by their own pride, run
to an evil conceit, and make themselves
et ease, though God Himself is in arms

142


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.








against them. To be tormented on
account of sin is the path to peace, and
happy shall I be if I can hurl a firebrand
into your hearts,—Spurgcon.

Ver. 16. ‘Old path: good way.”
The case assumed is that of a traveller,
who, on his journey, finds himself at the
opening of many ways, and knows not
with any assurance which of them leads
by the safest and most direct road to
his resting-place. He seeks a most
ancient city, the way to which men have
traversed in all ages, That fresh foot-
path, through the flowery meadows—
that bridle-path round by the marshes—
this fresh cutting through the hills,—
these will not do for him: he must ask
for the old path. But there may be
more old paths than one. The brvad
and pleasant way that leadeth to de-
struction is as old as the straight road
that leadeth unto life, and far better
frequented. It is, therefore, necessary
to seek not only “ the old path,” but the
good way.” Although every old way
may not be good, the good way is cer-
tainly old; if, therefore, the traveller
finds and follows the way that is both
old and good, he is safe—he shall with-
out fail reach his home at last, and
‘find rest for his soul.”—Xitto,

Ver. 16. “ Rest for your souls.” St.
Augustine, after having given himself
to every form of pleasure and gratifi-
cation which the world provided, was
at length brought to repose in the
faith, and began his “Confessions” with
the words, ‘ Thou, O Lord, hast created
us for Thyself, and restless is our heart
until it finds rest in Thee.” Dryden
used to avow himself contented when
sitting under the statue of Shakespeare ;
and Buffon, the naturalist, spoke of the
happiness he felt when sitting at the
‘feet of Sir Isaac Newton ; but we know
Him who invites us to sit at His feet,
thus choosing, as Mary did, “the good
part,” and says, ‘“‘ Learn of me, and ye
shall find rest to your souls,”

Ver. 27-30. The prophet, in the
first figure, represents himself as a trier
of metals, who first takes the rough ore
in hand in order mineralogically to dis- .
tinguish its constituent parts. In the
second figure, the ore is exposed to fire.





ib





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR.


in order in that way to test its metallic
value (ver. 29). In what follows, he
makes use of a third figure: Israel is
here definitely presented as silver ore;
but in the smelting, it appears that the
silver is so mingled with the stone that
the production of clear, pure silver is
impossible.— NVaeg.





CHAP. Vii.





aspiration ; the flux, his earnestness in
preaching. But in vain does the fervour
of prophecy essay to melt the hearts of
the people. They are so utterly corrupt
that no particle even of pure metal can
be found in them, All the refiner’s art
is in vain. They have rejected all God’s
gifts and motives for their repentance,


Ver. 30. ‘‘ Reprobate silver.” This, and, therefore, Jehovah has rejected


then, is the end: “The Lord hath them as an alloy too utterly adulterate
rejected them.” The smelter is God’s to repay the refiners toila.— Speaker's
prophet, the bellows the breath of in- Com.


CHAPTER VIL


CriticaL ap Exxoxtican Norzs. 1. Chronology of the chapter. Keil regards chaps. vii.
to x. as later addresses, delivered during Josiah’s reign. Bagster places an interval of merely
two years between chaps, vi. and vii., dating this B.c. 610, two years before Josiah’s death.
The A.V. places it ten years after Jehoiakim became king. But Dahler, Graf, Naeg., Lange,
Hend., and Dr. Payne Smith identify this chapter with chap. xxvi. (ef. the corresponding
verses, vil, 2, 13, 14, with xxvi. 2, 5, 6 respectively), and, therefore, date chap. vii. “in the
beginning of the reign of Jehoiakim.” Yet identity of verses is not itself conclusive of chaptera
being synchronous, for the book abounds in repetitions of theme and language. Besides (as
Keil points out) there is no trace in this discourse, chap. vii.-x., of the hostility towards Jere-
miah which became so impetuous and implacable in Jehoiakim’s days (contrast this address
with chap. xxvi. 14, 15, sg.). However, this chapter depicts such idolatrous degradations as
agree more with the relapse under Jehoiakim than with the reforms of Josiah’s reign (see viii.
9, 18, 31).

Jehoiakim came to the throne B.o. 608. Assyrian chronology changes that date to B.c. 589.

2. Cotemporary Scriptures: 2 Kings xxiii. 34-37; 2 Chron. xxxvi. 4, 5; ef. Habak. i.
Ezekiel lived through the epoch of Josiah’s death, the abject dethronisation of Jehoahaz, and
Jehoiakim’s installation as king ; but his prophecies date after the first group of captives had
been carried into Babylon.

8. National History. s.c. 605 [Assyrian date, 586]. Josiah had fallen in battle with
Pharaoh Necho at Megiddo (2 Kings xxiii. 29, 30). Jehoahagz had reigned three months, and
now Jehoiakim was king—Pharaoh Necho having placed him on the throne of Judah as vassal
king, and laid the land under tribute to Egypt (2 Kings xxiii. 33, 85). During his wicked
and abject reign the nation hastened back to idolatry and vice.

4, Cotemporaneous History. Two years before Josiah’s death Nineveh was wrested from
Egypt by the combined assault of the Medes (under Cyaxares) and Babylonians (under Nabo-
polassar)—these two rising empires being intent on crushing the despotism of the Pharaohs,
Against this Babylonian usurper Pharaoh Necho marched B.0.608 ; and by successful war at Char-
chemish, recovered a temporary Evyptian ascendancy. This ascendancy terminated finally
in the foarth year of Jehoiakim, when Nebuchadnezzar led his father’s forces against Necho,
vanquished Egypt, and inaugurated the Chaldean dominion. (Cf. Critical Notes on chap. i.

5. Geographical References. Ver. 12. ‘‘ Shiloh,” situate north of Bethel, in tribe of Ben-
jamin (Judges xxi. 19), distinguished as being the first sacred resting-place of the ark, and
therefore the centre of the nation’s worship, Ark abode there for a period of cir. 300 yeara
(Fosh, xviii. 1; 1 Sam. iv. 3, 4). Scene of Samuel's call, and Eli’s judgeship. Must have
been a populous town then ; atill existed in the reign of Jeroboam I, (1 Kings xiv. 2); but in
Jeremiah’s time it had sunk to a mean village. Divine displeasure over idolatry led to ita
degradation from historic eminence. Dr Robinson traced its site in the Arabic Seilfin. Jerome
wrote, ‘* At Silo, where once was the tabernacle and ark of the Lord, there can scarcely be
pointed out the foundation of analtar.” Ver. 31. ‘‘ Valley of the Son of Hinnom,” skirting the
weatern base of Mount Zion, and meeting the valley of Jehosaphat ; a most picturesque scene,
with gardens, groves, and cool refreshing shade; regarded as the temple of Palestine.
Jerome says, *‘ The valley of Hinnom was watered by the springs of Siloam, and was pleasant
and well wooded ; and at this day delightful gardens are situate there” (ef. Personal References
below). “ The high places of Tophet” were artificial mounts on which sacrificial altars were
reared, on the heights on the south side of the valley, and facing Mount Zion.

6. Personal References. Ver. 15. “ Ephraim,” put for Israel, the ten tribes God had
“cast out.’”? Their having had the ark solong did not protect them from banishment; nor


143


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.








would Judah escape, though possessing the Temple (ver. 4), Ver. 18. Queen of Heaven—t.e.,
the moon. She was revered asa deity by Persians and Syrians. Her name n20, was &


t


fem. form of 725, Molech, or 720, Melech. In Babylonia her name was Molatta. She was


regarded as the wife of Molech or Baal, the king of heaven. The sun and moon were wor-
shipped thus as being the generative powers of nature. Ver. 81. “ Tophet,” perhaps a contemptu-
ous name given by Jeremiah to their god, Baal [see Literary Criticism on chap. iii. 24]; or
else not a proper name at all, the word “ Tophet” meaning merely a thing or place of abhor-
rence ; and any place where human sacrifices were offered was stigmatised as a Tophet, or place
of horro: (See Addenda to chap. v. 31, “ High Places of Tophet”). Ver 31. “Son of Hinnom,”
a uame without traceable personal identification. Mentioned in connection with the ‘‘ valley ”
so early as in Josh. xv. 8. Possibly he was some ancient or fabulous hero. The valley
called Vale Ben-Hinnom in the Old Testament, is sometimes in Heb. shortened into Ge-
Hinnom, DIT") ; is rendered by the LXX. Taleyoa; and hence the New Testament name


Gehenna. To end the idolatrous abominations practised there, Josiah had poured into the
valley the city’s refuse and corruption, to consume which perpetual fires were kept burning.
From the torturous fires of Molech, and the ever-burning fires to consume the loathsome
refuse cast into it, Gehenna became suggestive and figurative of the place of eternal torment.

7. Manners and Oustoms. Ver. 18. “ Make cakes to queen of heaven: probably specially
prepared for her worship, made round and flat like the disc of the moon, and burnt to her
honour, with added libations, Ver. 21. “ Burnt offerings” were wholly consumed upon the
altar fire; ‘“ saerdfices” were in part eaten by the offerers, This “ Hating the flesh ” was regarded
as a reconciliation meal, God and the offerer dividing and sharing the sacrifice. Ver. 29. Cut
off thine hatr:” the ancient sign of mourning (ef. Jobi. 20 ; Mic. i. 16), ‘* Lamentation on high

” (of. las. xv. 2; Judges xi. 37, 38). Wer. 80. “ Abominations in the house:” this
refers to what Manasseh had done (2 Kings xxi. 8-5), and of which sacrifice the people had
never repented, notwithstanding Josiah’s external reforms. Ver. 31. “ Burn sons and
daughters in the fire:” probably not burnt alive, but first slain (see Ezek. xvi. 21), Ver. 34.
“ Voice (or sound) of the bridegroom and bride:” an allusion to the musical procession with
which the bridal pair were accompanied through the streets; a custom atill, in many parts of
the East, among the Jews,

8 Literary Criticisms, Yer. 8. “I will cause you to dwell.” Hend. would give to the Piel
form of the verb a continuative force, ‘‘ I will still cause you to dwell:” for they were already
there ; and this is no promise of re-occupancy. Blayney and the Vulgate adopt, “I will dwell
with you.” Speaker's Oom., ‘‘I will let you dwell.” Ver. 4. “‘l'emple of the Lord are
these,” ¢.¢., the sacred buildings of the Temple (Hend.) Or, as the pronoun is masc., some
think the Jews themselves. But the Jews boasted in their material edifices, and were not
sufficiently spiritual to claim for themselves a personally indwelling God. Ver. 7. “* For ever
and ever,” lit. “to from eternity and unto eternity :” the strongest Heb, formula for perpetuity.
The antecedent may be either, I gave the land, or I will cause you to dwell. Ver. 9. “ Will ye
steal,” dc., a succession of infinitives. “ What! to steal, to murder,” &. Ver. 10. ‘‘ We are
delivered to do all,” &c., ¢.¢., by Temple attendances and observances “ We are secured ” against
evil consequences while we continue to sin; no harm will come to us. It expresses daring
self-justification, and blasphemous self-assurance. (Comp. Noticeable Topics, end of chap.
Sermon by Horton). Ver. 12. ‘‘Set My name at the first,” 4.¢., in the first period of the
Jewish commonwealth. (See above, Geographical References. “ Shiloh”). Ver. 18. ‘* Queen
of heaven,” margin of A. V. ‘‘ frame, or workmanship of heaven.” The Syriac and LXX a6
translate ; although in corresponding verses (chap xliv. 17, 18, 19), the LXX render the word
‘‘queen” 4 Baciiiwca rdv otpaydr. The Vulgate has ‘‘regina celt” in every instance. Ver.
22 ‘* For I spake not,” dc., if this be taken as a denial of their Divine institution, it must be
understood as stating that God imposed moral duties (ver. 23) at an earlier date than He
instituted the sacrificial code (ef. Hxod. xv. 26, xix. 5, with Deut, v.and vi). Oras @ repudiation
of their sacrifices it suggests their repulsiveness to God when alone, unattended with perfor-
mance of the higher obligations: ‘‘I spake not ” that sacrifices might be presented, while moral
duties were at the same time refused. The words may be rendered, ‘‘ I spake not to your fathers
for the sake of (A.V. ‘concerning’) burnt offerings,” &c., they were not the primary results
God sougn: ; He desired not sacrifices, but spiritual obedience. Ver. 24. ‘‘ Went backwards,”
lit. ‘‘ were backwarda,” i.¢., their facea turned from Me (Pa. Ixxviii. 57). Wer. 28. “ Truth”
(see criticisms on tue word, chap. ¥. 3). Ver. 29. “Cut hair,” VW), a déadem (2 Sam. i. 10),
The Nazarite’s hair so cailed (Numb. vi. 7, rendered ‘‘ consecration”) as being the symbol of
his consecration to God, eryo ef his royalty and dignity ; and hence, leaving the primary mean-
ing, the long, unshorn hair of a woman. This ‘‘diadem” she must ‘‘cast away,” for she is ne


pry Hocaecaias to God: she has violated her sanctity and forfeited her alliance witb
ehov


144








a a i a Oa





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; JEREMIAH. OHAP, VE,


HOMILBTIO OUTLINES ON SEOTIONS OF CHAPTER VI.


Verses 1-7. Righteous requirements and gracious promise.

8-15. Demoralising trust placed in external piety.
16-20. Indignity done to God in uniting His worship with idolatry.
21-28. Reliance on the value of outward religious service refuted.
29-34. Retribution for idolatrous abominations.


Ver. 1-7. Riagurrous REQUIREMENTs AND Gracious Promise


Jehoiakim, an irreligious king ; consequently the maintenance of divine worship
was not now, as when Josiah reigned, an object of public care and royal encourage-
ment. Probably this concourse in the temple assembled on a public fast-day.
Jeremiah commissioned to use the opportunity for making known God’s revulsion
from “‘a form of godliness, not having the power thereof.”

1. Hapress communication from Jehovah: “word which came to Jeremiah from
the Lord.” 2. Proclaimed in a solemn scene: “stand in the gate of the Lord’s
house.” 3, Addressed to a vast audience: “hear, all Judah.” 4. Relating to
professedly godly persons ; “ that enter in at these gates to worship the Lord.” 5.
Spoken with the weight and sanction of Highest Authority: not the outcome of his
own patriotic fervour, or pious solicitude, but “Thus saith the Lord of hosts, the
God of Israel.” 6. Summoning to thorough reformation. “amend,” de, (ver. 4).
7. Granting gracious permission and opportunity ; the door of hope not closed, the
day of grace prolonged.

I. In what Divinely approved piety consists. God leaves them in no uncer-
tainty as to what He demands of man: we deo not grope in darkness towards truth ;
are not left to conjectures and adventures. “This is the way, walk ye in it.”
“The wayfaring man, though a fool, shall not err therein.” Here is urged both a
refusal and a requirement.

1. Repudiation of superficial piety (ver. 2,4). Mere “entering” sanctuary,
formal “ worship,” pride in religious externals. ‘“ Not they who say unto Me,
Lord, Lord,” &c. (Addenda to chap, vii. 4, “ Ecclestasticism.”)

2. Delineation of essential righteousness (ver. 5, 6). Personal goodness, justice
and mercy to others, fidelity to God. Compare our Lord’s reply to question,
“‘ What do to inherit eternal life?” (Luke x. 27).

IL To what extent true reformation must be carried. “Thoroughly...
thoroughly ” (ver. 5). With resolution, with sincerity, with completeness. Note
what it embraces ; self, “ amend,” de ; others, “ execute judgment,” &. ; God, no
‘‘ other gods,”

1. Personal renewal: “ ways”—4.e., general principles and methods of life:
“ doings ”—1.¢., separate and minute deeds) Entire change of self. “ Neither
circumcision, &c., but a new creature.”

2. Uprightness of conduct: specially acting justly and mercifully. We are
“‘ created in Christ Jesus unto good works.”

3. Cessation from wrong ; and this wrong is of three forms—harming the weak,
“hurting” ourselves, and dishonouring God (ver. 6).

II. With what rewards godliness is encouraged. Civil and sacred privileges
ver. 7).

: 1, aess advantages. “In this place;” Jerusalem or temple; where holy
comforts and favours cluster, the meeting-place of God. ‘Godliness hath the
promise of the life which now is.”

2. Imperishable prospects, “This land for ever.” “ Begotten to a lively hope,
to an inheritance incorruptible, and fadeth not away.”

IV. To what disasters irreligion tends. The conditional promise implies a
possible reverse, dark and sad.

F 145


CHAP, VIL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





1. Loss of boasted heritages. Not “dwell in this place ;” the temple and city,
with all civil and religious advantages forfeited ; exiles.

2. Banishment from God Himself. “ Removed from land” into captivity. To
be cast out from where God dwelt, “ Zion,” equivalent to a Jew to being banished
from Him who dwelt in Zion. ‘ Depart from Me, ye cursed.” ‘ Punished with
everlasting destruction, from the presence of the Lord, and the glory of His power.”


Ver. 8-15. DemoraLisInc TRUST PLACED IN EXTERNAL PIETY.


A startling truism that evil simulates good. Satan himself takes the form of
“ angel of light” in order to cover his own hideousness and deceive others, Sinners
hide conscious wrong by pretentious righteousness. Two results:

1. Self-deception. A dangerous device to assume a mock piety. Deceivers come
to “deceive themselves.” Reflex action of insincerity: ‘believe a lie,” and thus
ignore danger while courting and hastening to destruction. Wicked taken in their
own net, fall into pit digged for others, are hung on gallows themselves prepared
for different use.

2. Self-degradation. Pretence of goodness blinds sinners to the revulsion and
awfulness of iniquity: “conscience seared.” Evil looks less heinous to sinners
themselves when clothed with the gard of pietism. Licence is thus given to
iniquity, and sin grows at once bolder, self-excusing, shameless, and runs un-
checked to vile excesses. Christ pronounced those men worst and most hopeless
who robed villainy with piety (Matt. xxiii, 25-33).

I. The attitude of devotional sincerity (ver. 10). 1. In right place: “ this
house.” 2. In right posture: “stand before Me.” ‘Ye outwardly appear
righteous unto men” (Matt. xxiii. 28). Judged of at that moment, all seemed
well, But what manner of men were they when away from God’s house? Life
has two sides: most men seem good when in holy scenes and on sacred occasions ;
what is their conduct elsewhere? Moreover, there may be vast difference in a
man’s outer and inner life; and God looks within; so that even when stand-
ing piously before Him they may be loathsome in His sight. Attitude is not
everything.

II. The subtlety of religious delusions. 1. False trusts: “in lying words”
(ver. 9), and “ this house wherein ye trust” (ver. 14). Ready to believe in smooth
words of lying prophets (v. 31), or to rest upon mere cant phrases (vii. 4), or to
tepose on religious eaternals (ver. 14). 2. Presumptuous assurance: ‘ We are
delivered” (ver. 10)—+.¢., having performed our religious observances in the
temple, we have atoned for past sins, and are free to start afresh. Romanists
assume the same licence: attend “mass,” and so leave all burdens behind, and
gain liberty for indulgences in sin. Protestants, too, who “attend the Sacrament”
and return to worldliness. They also who trust in penitent prayers, and excuse
themselves in wrong: “sin that grace may abound.” God hates every false way.

III. The degradations of spiritual falsity. The delusion that sin may be con-
tinued with impunity or easily escaped acts as an encouragement to every form of
wrong. Hypocrites, who make external ceremonies a kind of expiation, readily
fall into the seductions of sin, and follow the enticements of their own evil hearts,
To what depths did these sink! 1. Glaring immoralities (ver. 9). 2. Revolting
tdolatries (ver. 9). 3. Ecclesiastical profanities (ver. 11).

IV. The futility of sacred messages. ‘I spake unto you, rising up early,”
&e. (ver. 13). 1. Instructions and admonitions were not withheld: thus God did
His part to restrain and rectify them. 2. Invitations to true religion were sent 3
“T called you:” thus they were allured and entreated as well as warned. 3.
Indifference and insensibility marked their conduct: they were without disposition
to repent, without desire for holiness; so they trifled still by offering to God a
ceremonial piety, but refusing practical godliness. Note: The most potent and

146








HUMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. . OHAP. VI.





urgent messages from God are neutralised by the carnal security in which hypocrites
entrench themselves.

V. The overthrow of sinners and their subterfuges (ver. 14, 15). 1. Zeon
seemed a sceure possession. They “trusted” in it; relied upon the fact that God
had given it in covenant with their fathers; they deemed it inalienable and
imperishable (Ps. cxxxii. 14). Yet, being used for evil ends (ver. 11), and made
a delusive trust (ver. 4, 14), it had lost its worth in God’s sight, and should come
to ruin as Shiloh had done. Nothing retains its sacredness or its security when
prostituted to purposes of falsehood and impiety. 2. Judah believed herself safe
from banishment. David was of Judah; God had made special promises to this
royal tribe. Messiah was to come of it. Judah arrogated to herself a safety
Israel did not possess. But no privileges or promises screen the guilty from judg-
ment. God’s special plans never interfere with His common laws. Sinners are
condemned, wicked shall not escape; and these laws will not be suspended, even
though we seek to hide ourselves behind covenants and decrees.

Application: Delusion works demoralisation. Demoralisation ensures destruction.


Ver. 16-20. Inpianity To JEHOVAH IN UNITING His WorsHIP witTH IpoLaTRY.


‘Seest thou what they do?” (ver. 17). The sight was abhorrent to God. They
had professed to accept Him as their Lord, by standing before Him in His house
(ver. 10); but their conduct outside the temple, in the very “streets of Jerusalem,”
as well as throughout the “cities of Judah,” was flauntingly audacious and provoking,
Such hypocrisy was loathsome to God.

Compromises, combining God’s worship with idolatrous practises, incense Jehovah.
They dishonour Him, rob worship of all worth, render religion a mockery and
homage a vanity. By their compromises they wronged and provoked God ; for

1. They divided His glory, by raising idols to equality with Him. 2. They
degraded His glory, by lowering Him to equality with them. For by sharing,
worship between God and “ other gods,” they treated Him as worthy no more homage
than they.

I. Man’s astounding insolence towards Jehovah. Their idolatrous conduct
had as its motive malice ; and as its end, “that they might provoke God to anger”
(ver. 18). They aimed at that result. But, in so doing, men may ignite a fire they
would fain yet cannot quench. 1. The Divine anger is a solemn reality. 2. Man’s
conduct is capable of provokiug the anger of the Almighty! 3. Indignity to
God evokes indignation from God. Wonderful man’s power! Terrible this dire
abuse of it!

II. Outrages done to God revert on the sinner (ver. 19). Which means, Is it
Me they provoke; or will they not rather provoke themselves to wrath against
themselves, and to confusion and shame? 1. They injure themselves more than they
incense God. 2. They will bear the heavier consequences of their wickedness. God
is dishonoured and provoked thereby, but they ensure destruction to themselves and
“revelation of the righteous judgment of God.” Sinners will then be wrathful with
themselves ; “ gnashing of teeth :” and reap “ shame” for every dishonour they have
done to the Lord.

II. Pitiful intercession refused on their behalf (ver. 16). Jeremiah was com-
passionate, and ready to interpose with prayers: but, 1. God corrects the prophet's
mistaken charity. Piety before patriotism ; what is due to God before unthinking
intervention on the behalf of wrongdoers. Pity must not blindly interpose to
prevent justice. “Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?” 2. God directs
attention to their guilty deeds, ‘‘Seest thou,” &c. (ver. 17). Jehovah sees ; and He
fathoms the depths of malice which prompt men’s hostile actions.

IV. Anger provoked in God will be assuredly poured out (ver. 20). 1. Asa
deluge, in fulness and fury: “poured out.” 2. Falling upon the ae people :


OHAP, VIL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.


on the offenders themselves (“ man”), and their treasures (‘‘this place, on beasts,
trees, fruits”). 3. Unquenchable in tts ravaging work: for it will be a deluge sf
“ fire,” and will “burn” inextinguishably. ‘Who will dwell with the everlasting
burnings $” “Flee to the mountain, lest thou be consumed.”


Ver. 21-28. RELIANCE ON THE VALUE OF OuTWAED Retiatous SERVICE REFUTED.


Jeremiah swept this false security utterly from beneath them: their ceremonial
observances were worthless in themselves, except a8 an expression of spiritual homage
and loyalty, and were without Divine sanction, except as they were accompanied by
practical godliness. He appeals to the original covenant of God with them, and
affirms; i. That the moral code was primarily given ; the ceremonial laws followed
at a later date, and as a concession to their weakness, when, by the worship of the
golden calf, they had proved themselves unworthy of, and unfitted for, a pureiy
spiritual dispensation, ii. Zhat the moral code was of primary importance,
could readily dispense with sacrificial offerings if their practical obedience were
maintained ; but however lavish their sacrifices, all were repulsive if obedience was
withheld.

Henzy—“ See with what contempt (rod here speaks of their ceremonial service
(ver. 21). Go on in, and add to, your sacrifices, and ‘eat flesh,’ for that is all
the good you will obtain from them; no other benefit while you live in dis
obedience !

“T, He shows them that obedience was the only thing He required of them
(ver. 22, 23). He appeals to the original contract when they were first formed
into a people (Exod. xv, 26). The condition of their being God’s people was, ‘If
you will obey my voice indeed’ (Exod. xix. 5), Afterwards He gave them cere-
monial institutions, as trials of their obedience, and assistances to their repentance
and faith. The Levitical law begins thus, ‘If any man of you will bring an offer-
ing’ (Lev. i. 2. ii, 1), as if intended rather to regu/ate sacrifice than to require it.

“TI. He shows them that disobedience was the only thing which offended
Him. They broke God’s commandments in their conversation, while observing
them, in some instances, in their devotion (ver. 24, 25). 1. They set up their own
will in competition with God's. ‘ Hearkened not, nor inclined their ear’ to God’s
laws ; and made their own counsels their guide, and evil tmaginations became their
law. 2. If they began well, they did not proceed, but soon flew off: ‘went back-
ward,’ 3. When God sent messages to them by His prophets, they were still die
obedient (ver. 25). As deaf to the prophets as they were to the law (ver. 26). 4.
Their practice and character were still the same: worse, and not better, than their
fathers. (a.) Jeremiah can himself witness to their disobedience (ver. 27). (6.)
He must therefore own they deserved God’s displeasure and abandonment to de-
struction (ver. 28). Notorious for their obstinacy, incapable of receiving or uttering
‘truth :’ false both to God and man.”


Ver. 29-34. Rerrisution ror IpoLatrrous ABOMINATIONS,


“Cut off thine hair,” &c. (see Ltt. Crit. supra on ver. 29): both as a token of
extreme woe, and also of the loss of the consecrated character.

L A mournful occasion for bitterest grief (ver. 29). 1. Loss of holiness
entails loss of happiness. 2. Rejection by God and abandonment to His wrath
suggest alarming calamities. Spiritual, in that the soul loses her light, her
security, her comfort, her hope ; and temporal, in that protection, promises, bene-
factions, are all forfeited and alienated. A desolate case! Yet not loss of God
alone, but the positive woes of “ Hus wrath.” All good things withdrawn, all evil
things threatened.

IL A revolting spectacle of impious desecration (ver. 30,31) 1. /nsulted

148





Te) eas va


ta


a ee Se ee ee





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAB. OHAP. Vil.


God to His face in His own house by thetr abominations. A loathsome intrusion upon
and pollution of sacred scenes. Equally so when sin is cherished in our hearts
ae xiv. 4). 2. Practised the most heinous atrocities in their idolatrous homage
ver. 31). Deeds so dreadful as never to have “come into the mind” of God.
Man’s fertility in wicked inventions.

Ill. A terrible visitation of righteous judgments (ver. 32, 33). 1. Slaughterers
(of their own children) shall be visited with slaughter (from the Chaldeans) 2. The
scene of cruel death (ot helpless infants) shall be burdened with the dead ; the victims
of the avenging sword should be more than graves could inter. 3. Ravaging
beasts of prey would usurp the very spot where now living men assembled for idolatrous
ceremonies ; 80 complete would be the devastation of human life. “‘ Ge-Hinnom,”
a figure of hell. (See Personal Allusions, ver. 31, above.)

IV. A woful desolation of happy scenes (ver. 34). 1, All joy silenced in
the now cheerful strects. 2. All hife departed from now crowded cities, 3. All
beauty and fertility swept from the now luxuriant soil ; “the land desolate.” Music,
life, and fertility : these symbolise the sum of Divine favours: God’s choicest
benefactions. Their loss portrays illimitable woe, So utterly does sin reverse all
the bleasedness of life and the hopes of religion,


AUMILETIC OUTLINES ON SUCOESSIVE VERSES OF CHAPTER VII.


Ver. 1, 2. Preliminary Notes,
Though the people were rioting in
idolatry they yet visited God’s temple ;
and even came thither from “all Judah”
ver. 2): “all the cities of Judah”
xxvi. 2). This discourse must have
been delivered on a public feast-day or
fast-day, for on no ordinary occasion
would so representative an assembly be
convened. Probably it was an assembly
specially summoned ; the apathy and
alienation of the people being too settled
to allow of their coming together in such
vast numbers from distant “ cities,” un-
lesa called to Jerusalem by royal edict,
or impelled to come in consequence of
national calamities. The occasion was
well suited for a searching and solemn
appeal to the national conscience. Jere-
miah seems to have stood in the inner
gate, and faced the crowds as they
thronged in at the outer gates into the
open court. He detained them there
with his faithful discourse ere they
ed through “the gate,’ where he
Pimeelf stood, into the inner court,
where worship was performed and sac-
rifice offered. He thus stood between
them and further religious mockeries,
ealling them to pause, reflect, and
repent.


Ver. 2. Themes A COMMISSION TO
PREACH.


Certainly, this is not running without
being sent. Some mistake their avoca-
tion,—rush to a “ charge” which God
has not committed tothem. The result:
“Things without life, giving sound.”
Nothing higher than that; words, but
no “word,’—no definite message for
men from God. How different when
the speaker must testify the truth
Divinely intrusted to him! (Rom. x.
15). Jeremiah’s case is identical with
that of every true preacher (ver. 1).

I. The Divine regulation of the
preacher's work. 1. Zhe scene of the
preacher's labour: ‘stand in the gate,”
&c., definitely localised by God. 2. The
opportunity ; “ye that enter,” the very
hour fixed by God, as they were enter-
ing; an auspicious and appropriate
moment, 3. The audience: “all ye of
Judah,” and ye of Judah “ that enter ;”
extensive, yet limited ; for the Gospel
and truth are for all, yet only for those
who will hear. 4. The topic: “this
word,” definite and direct. Many
themes might fill our thoughts and our
speech, but God has something to say,
and “we cannot but speak the things,” &.
Note ss origin (ver. 1). (Addenda to
chap. vii., “ The Preacher.”)

Il. The preacher’s performance of
his Divine commission. Like Jere-
miah, who subordinated himself and his
powers to God’s requirements, he fulfils

149


OHAP. Vii,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; JEREMIAH.





his “charge.” 1. In literal obedience,
“Stands” where he is directed, speaks
what he is commanded, 2. With fear-
lees ardour, “Proclaimed;” not
cowardlily whispered it, nor humbly
apologised for it, 3. As Jehovah’s wit-
ness (ver. 3): an ambassador, a spokes-
man for God and in His name. It
makes obedience easy, though the duty
be onerous and dangerous, to realize
that there is a solemn Authority behind
as and our words.

III. The practical lessons of this
prophetic incident. (See Preliminary
Notes on ver. 1, above.) 1. Large
audiences present special opportunities;
and a preacher, like ‘‘ Wisdom, cries in
the chief places of concourse.” 2. Pro-
fessedly religious persons need the
preacher’s word. Simply because they
‘enter gates to worship ” does not show
them beyond error and without need of
earnest ministrations, 3. Before men
worship, they require solemn and special
warning ; need be summoned to pause
and know what worship God accepts
and demands (Phil. iii. 3). 4. God dis-
cerns the spurt, as well as the attitude,
of those who enter His temple for out-
ward worship. 5. He sends messages
according to the condition of the people:
warning for those in error, consolation
for the sad, calls for the weary, &ec.
Hence, hearers should seriously take heed
to what they hear ; for the message sug-
gests God’s estimate of them and their
needs.

Ver. 3. (See on ver. 5-7.) “ Your
ways,” = general lines of condnct, com-
mon habits, prevailing laws of feeling,
thought, and practice. “ Your doings,”
= the separate and individual acts which,
by frequency and repetition, form habits.
“T will cause you to dwell,” te. peace-
ably, protected from the spoiler and
from captivity. It promises nothing
new, but pledges the continuance of the
blessings long enjoyed (ver. 7). “In
this place,” primarily, the temple, as
the central joy and privilege of Israel ;
and, secondarily, “the land,” of which
the temple is the ornament and


glory.


Theme : SINNERS SUMMONED TO SELF-
150





IMPROVEMENT. “ Thus saith the Lord,
Amend your ways /”

Faulty conduct is to be rectified.
God asks practical righteousness ; cor-
recting the wrong of our life, culturing
the good and the godly.

Unwarrantable to teach that human
virtue and goodness are nothing to God,
are, indeed, repulsive to Him. “He
hath shown thee, O man, what is good :”
and both summons to attempt it, and
approves its attainment.

Equally unscriptural to teach that
God bids men desist from effort to rise
out of evil into a good and godly life
(Isa. lv. 6,7; Rom. viii 13). True,
no self-improvement can save a soul,
Jesus alone saves. But there is room
for the free action of a man to “cease
from evil and do good” both before and
after his conversion to Christ.

This Divine call

I. Marks out the prevailing faulti-
ness of an irreligious life. Both your
“ways and doings,” in large and small
matters, in principles and _ practices,
Yet, observe, here is no call to abandon
altogether their course of life, but to
alter it ; remedy the errors and mistakes
and blemishes. Ceremonialism not it-
self wrong and forbidden, but it should
be accompanied by practical righteous-
ness. 1, The direction of the life may
not be wholly wrong: not required to
reverse or abandon their ways, but
“amend them.” 2. Yet good deeds may
be performed in an evil manner; life, a
series of faults, in spirit and method,
3. So a life ostensibly good may be repul-
stve to God : so much so, as to threaten
the loss of God and the “holy city.”

II. Sanctions man’s resolute efforts
to rectify his faults. ‘“‘Amend.” So
far from repudiating man’s endeavour to
reform his wrongs, and acquire virtue
and goodness, God here calls to it,
Hence it is: 1. Possible toman, 2. Ap-

oved by God. 3. Incumbent on each.
(Mark x. 20, 21.)

II. Pledges God’s beneficent recog-
nition of man’s diligent reform. 1.
This implies a terrifying alternative:
that, neglecting the duty of rectifying
existing evils, God would outlaw them,
2. This covenants a gracious recompense :








of


HUM/ILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR.





that, “redeeming the time,” and living
“soberly, righteously, and godly in this
present world,” He would retain them
in His merciful favour, and give them a
perpetual heritage in Canaan. For this
end, “ the grace of God hath appeared ”
(Titus ii, 11-15); and Christ “gave
Himself for us ;” and to such rectitude
of life men are to be “exhorted with
ell authority,”


Ver. 4. Theme: SaNcTIMoNIOoUS 8ELF-
DELUSIONS.

When religious sincerity is absent
from the heart, all religious words upon
the lips, whether pious talk or sanctuary
exercises, are “lying words.’ Gene-
rally, too, when the heart’s religion is
false, the lip religion is more emphatic :
it utters itself with a threefold fervour.
Hollow things emit most sound. So
‘“‘ The temple of the Lord,” thrice over :
words must speak out lustily when the
consciousness bears no witness. Mighty
rivers flow in silence ; shallow streams
compensate for their poverty by making
more noise.

First, Concerning lying words.

I. They falsify God’s character:
implying that God would not destroy
His temple, though profaned; that He
connived at their criminality : their sins
would not lead the glory to depart, or
the sanctuary to be destroyed.

II. They delude men’s souls: allure
to false trusts, import a vain hope be-
tween a sinner and the punishment of
sin. “The temple” promised them a
guarantee against and an asylum from
ruin, thus encouraging presumption and
iniquity.

III. They pervert sacred things:
God’s house was abused,—became a
rendezvous of villainy, evil felt itself
secure there. God’s altar was perverted ;
instead of its sacrifices being regarded
as a surrender of sin, they were offered
to condone and license sin. God’s cove-
nants were misused, He had, indeed,
promised to dwell for ever in Zion, and
to give His people a lasting heritage and
resting-place there; but they ignored
the conditions of this promise, that they
should be a ‘‘ holy people,” and keep un-
stained His “ holy sanctuary.”


OHAP. VI,





Thus sinners allow themselves to
“continue in sin that grace may
abound ;” silence, rebukes of conscience
by boasting the cleansing blood of
Christ ; make the cross an asylum for
sin rather than a resting-place from
sin.

Second, Concerning trusting in lying
words.

The triple repetition of “the temple
of the Lord” may express the intense
feeling, the vigorous assurance, with
which this confidence in their safety,
because they had the sanctuary among
them, was cherished. The triple utter-
ance seems to denote intensity. (Comp.
also Isa. vi. 3; Jer. xxii. 29.) Or, the
repetition may suggest the frequency
with which this boast of possess-
ing God’s temple was heard among
them. Henry says, “It was the cant of
the times. If they heard an awakening
sermon, they lulled themselves asleep
again with this, ‘We cannot but do
well, for we have the temple of the Lord
among us.’ It is common for those who
are farthest from God to boast them-
selves most of their being near to the
church.”

Jeremiah’s remonstrance against this
delusive and sanctimonious cry suggests,
concerning the Jews—

I A preference for peaceful pro-
phesyings. Most probably this illusory
boast in having the temple was the
theme of false prophets, who prophesied
smooth things among them (comp. Mic,
iii, 11). The sentence looks like a quo-
tation from the teachings of one of these
deceitful leaders; which was speedily
caught up into popular currency, and
become the answering retort whenever
Jeremiah denounced the people or fore-
told the coming woes. They sought to
drown his serious words with this mock-
ing boast. They desired only to hear
what flattered them, even though it be-
guiled them.

II. A repose on false securities.
This audacious appeal to the temple
may be thus interpreted: “ The temple
of the Lord” in Jerusalem has been
consecrated as Hts abode, therefore,
enemies shall not conquer and capture
the city ; we are, therefore, safe within

151


CaP. VIL





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





its shelter. ‘ The temple of the Lord”
is the throne of //is glory ; and He will
not vacate His throne for heathen to
possess it ; an invincible stronghold have
we; we are, therefore, safe under its
strong protection. ‘“‘ The temple of the
Lord” has been given in covenant to His
people ; it cannot therefore be alienated.
God’s word may not fail ; we, therefore,
are safe in enjoyment of covenanted
blessings. Thus men aay still, “ We are
in the church!” ‘We have been bap-
tized!” “ Weare the elect!” Refuges
of lies.

TL A vaunting over external
sanctities. ‘‘ Men in all ages have
evinced a proneness to attribute to
external and ceremonial circumstances a
virtue which does not inhere in them ”
(Hend.). Because, forsooth, these Jews
presented themselves thrice a year in this
temple, they imagined they had done all
Jehovah required of them: He could
not withdraw His favour from such a
pious nation! Or, because within the
temple the sacrifices and ceremonies went
on continually, they were doing all
that was required by Him, and were
entitled to His gracious regard. Or,
because as a nation they maintained by
their contributions the temple fabrics
and ministries, they had purchased a
right to Divine care and blessings :
“These temple edifices were only kept
up at great cost ; how generous have we
been for God’s cause, how deserving
therefore are we” (comp. Zeph. iii. 11).
God accepts no substitute for personal
holiness. Punctilious outward observ-
ance, lavish and ceaseless sacrifices, free
bestowment of wealth, all are repudiated
when they are made the boast of the
proud and the excuse of impiety. (Ad-
denda to chap. vii. 4, ‘ Hcclestasts-
cism.”)


Ver. 5. Theme: Taorovcunsss. “If
ye will thoroughly amend, and thoroughly
execute judgment.”

Over against their self-delusive words
(ver. 4), Jeremiah places the indispens-
able requirements of Jehovah: not an
outward ceremonial piety, but a personal
religious life ; not a partial and evasive
obedience, but a righteousness ali-in-


16¢


clusive and _ practical, —“ thoroughly”
(Luke xi. 42). Only when temple
worship (ver. 2) is the expression of
sincere and sanctified hearts, and is
attended and attested by works of right-
eousness, is it accepted of God. He
asks that our whole life, equally in
sacred and secular scenes, “ towards
God and towards men,” be holiness unto
the Lord.

I. The largeness of the Divine out-
goings toward men justifies His demand
for thoroughness. He who asks “ tho-
roughness” should himself so act, or
there is inconsistency in the demand.
But certainly in the lavishment of God's
gifts, the beneficence of His dealings,
the wealth of His covenanted promises,
and His faultless fidelity in fulfilling
His word, He had done all things
“ thoroughly” for Judah.

In general, and with universal appli-
cation, it stands that: 1. There ts no
nis sete in God's works, or paucity
tn His provisions for human good.
Look out on nature, look into revela-
tion, ponder redemption, and all show
God’s works and ways for man to be
lavish, perfect, “thorough.” 2. There ts
no neglect by God of one side of human
need while attending to the other. He did
not overlook their temporal good while
working for their spiritual, nor wice
versa, Judah had been thus one-sided ;
but not God. Zrgo, as God’s ways
with men are characterised by thorough-
ness, He is justified in asking and en-
titled to receive thoroughness in man’s
response of obedience and love. (Ad-
denda to chap. vii. 5, “ Thoroughness.”)

Il. The sphere and action of
religion compasses our whole life
with thoroughness. There is no part
or phase of our life which escapes the
control of religion ; so that he who is
truly religious, responsive to the dictates
and demands of religion, is thoroughly
religious. Thus:

1. Jt claims and controls the whole of
our nature and faculties,

2. It asserts an empire over every act
of our life, “ whatsoever we do.”

3. It extends its sway to, and utiers
ts counsels wpon, all the relationships
and duties of society. (See ver. 5, 6.)


LO a ee an» ee ee ee


HOMILET/C COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH,








4. It reaches all along the path of our
lsfe, from birth into eternity. Religion
is thorough in its comprehensive rule
over, and directions for, the life of
man.

IIL The response which God re-
ceives from man should be dis-
tinguished by thoroughness. Where-
ever else man practises reservation, here
he should hold back no part of the
price. Our godliness should be thorough
if it is to be happy to ourselves or
honouring to God.

1. It ts the natural tesue of honest
acceptance of religion. The heart that
finds and resolves for Christ, and obeys
its own instinctive promptings, cannot
yield a mere partial response.

2. It ts the inevitable return of filial
gratitude. ‘How much owe I unto
my Lord?” “Ye are not your own;
body, soul and spirit are the Lord’s,”

3. It ts the essential law of prety.
God deserves all. ‘“ Love the Lord thy
God with all thine heart, &., and
neighbour as thyself.” He who re-
sponds rightly yields himself fully to
all the claims of God (Rom. xii. 1).

IV. The piety which refuses full
obedience to God is a lamentable vio-
lation of the sacred law of thorough-
ness. Christ says, “I would thou wert
cold or hot.” He loathes the “ luke-
warm.” He Himself held nothing back
from us; gave Himself, His life, His
redemption, His perfect virtue, all
for us ; “ what shall we render unto the
Lord?” Less than “ all for Christ” is
wholly undeserving.

1. Jt is a mean return for the grace we
have recewwved.

2. lt ts a worthless fulfilment of
religious obligations. God abhors a com-
promising piety, a divided heart.

3. It ts a discreditable exhibition of
godliness. Degrades piety in the eyes
of scoffers, and evokes swift rebuke.
(Comp. Acts v. 1-11.)


*¢ Thine am I by all ties;
But chiefly Thine,
That through Thy sacrifice,
Thou, Lord, art mine:
By Thine own cords of love, so sweetly wound
Around me, I to Thee am closely bound.”


Only in full dedication of our love to





OHAP, VIX.








God and life for men in Christ’s name,
can we approach the standard of godly
thoroughness,

Ver. 5, 6. Comments.

In thus particularising the evils they
must discard, the prophet (1.) émplies
that justice and equity were violated,
that cruelty and perfidiousness, fraud
and rapine, prevailed amongst them; and
(2.) enjoins upon them the observance of
the moral law as evidence of their
sincere repentance and loyalty to God.
He thus demanded “ fruits meet for
repentance,” which would make their
religion a practical reality, not a mere
lofty sentiment.

“ Shedding innocent blood” refers (1.)
To judicial murders (condemnation of
innocent persons). (2.) To violent —
attacks on prophets and godly men, as
in Manasseh’s case (2 Kings xxi. 16).”—
Keil, (Comp. chap. xxvi. 15, 23.)

“ Innocent blood” probably points
with indignant emphasis to the murder
and sacrifice of infants to Molech
(ver. 31.)


Ver. 7. Theme; THE EVERLASTING
INHERITANCE. “I gave to your fathers
for ever and ever.”

I. Its duration conditional God
covenants with men for an inalienable
heritage ; but the terms require that
they do not themselves alienate it by
unfaithfulness and apostasy.

II. Its forfeiture possible. Men’s
sins neutralise sacred covenants. Ne
standing in grace but our sin may over.
throw. We may lose our securest and
most boasted possessions.

IIf. Itscontinual enjoyment desired.
(1.) By God ; for He gave the inheritance
to them, and pleads with them to retain
it. (2.) By man ; for as the Jews valued
and hoped to keep their land, so we
desire to preserve for ourselves a place
in grace, and obtain an eternal home in
the promised land. But desire is not
sufficient ; obligations must be fulfilled.
“If ye amend, &c., then will I cause
you to dwell in this land,” &c. (Addenda
to chap. vii., “ Covenant.”)

Note the terms of their “ everlasting
possession” of Canaan, in the ortginal


158


OHAP. VIE





sovenant (Gen. xvii. 8): “I will be their
God.” But instead, “they walk after
other gods” (see ver. 6); hence the
covenant was broken, and the gift
reverted to its Donor,


Ver. 8. Theme; InsURIOUSNESS OF
FALSE THEORIES.

These “lying words” were either teach-
ings of delusive prophets, or their own
unwarantable arguments, (See on ver,
4, above.) They “cannot profit,” te.,
they tend to mischief,

Calvin remarks that their words of
falsehood turned to a contrary end what
God had instituted. Services performed
in the temple were designed to preserve
unity of faith among the whole people.
Sacrifices were intended to show the
people: 1. They deserved the death
which victims endured. 2. Hapiation
was only by blood, typical of the blood
of Jesus Christ. But there was no re-
pentance for sin, no true appropriation
of sacrificial merit — for they were
not led to holy faith ; nay, their cere-
monies licensed them to freer sin. Thus
they were “lying words,” when the
signs were separated from their end,

Dealing dishonestly with God brings
delusions upon ourselves ; and the
three steps are: 1. Wilful dishonesty,
2. Self-delusion. 3. Inevitable destrue-
tion.


Ver. 9, 10. Theme: DuTESTABLE
GUILT UNDER SANCTION OF RELIGION.


“ Will ye steal, murder, dc., and come
and stand before Me, and say, We are
delivered to do all these abominations?”

An outery of Divine revulsion and
indignation. In the presence of such
profanity even God stands appalled ;
and utters Himself in exclamations of
horror: “ What / to steal? to murder ?
éc. And yet come and stand before
Me in this house !”

1. What appalling criminality is here !
Surely such sins could only have been
perpetrated in some “ dark place of the
earth, full of the habitations of cruelty.”
But lo! in Jerusalem /—in the very
centre of sacred revelations and holy
privileges,

3. What treachery againat Jehovah

164


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY. JEREMIAH.





ishere! Surely the result of ignorance ;
“they knew not what they did;” for
had they known the right, they never
could have done such wrongs (ver. 10),
insulted God and polluted His house,
Alas ! they knew the right; but sinned
thus foully amid fullest light, and not-
withstanding the persuasions and pro-
tests of God’s prophet. Consider, with
amaze :

IL Into what revolting iniquities
godly men may relapse (ver. 9). Yes,
“godly men ;” for they belseved, and
boasted themselves such (ver. 10).

1. The glaring enormity of their sins.
Set forth in two trios: (a.) Violation of
civil laws and domestic  decencies :
“steal, murder, commit adultery ; ”
outraged the security of property, sacred-
ness of life, sanctity of homes. (0.)
Violation of sacred laws and Divine
obligations : ‘‘ swear falsely, incense to
Baal, walk after other gods.” “Swear
falsely” may mean perjury, or be an
allusion to former charges (comp. iv. 2,
v. 2), of swearing by false gods. Then
this second trio of crimes points to their
idolatrous oaths, idolatrous homage,
idolatrous service: “ swear, burn in-
cense, walk after.”

2. The special aggravation of their
guilt, They knew better; their guilt was
wilful, habitual, and persistent; their
sins were manifold; they committed
themselves to evil fearlessly, without
restraint, in open shamelessness; they
did not even shun the worst and most
horrible forms of sin—violence to pro-
perty, life, and virtue; they wronged
each other and then insulted God. (a.)
Rejection of God’s laws. (6.) Outrage
of social rights and happiness.  (c.)
Adoration presented to that abominable
thing, Baal. (d.) Substitution of un-
known deities in God’s stead ; thus they
deserted Jehovah notwithstanding all
they “knew” of His grace, miraculous
favours, and resplendent glories, and
sought out idols of whom they knew
nothing. Thereby they injured their
own selves, their happiness, peace, and
safety ; “to your own hurt” (ver. 6).
Wrong always avenges itself upon wrong
doers. (Comp. Heb. x. 26, sq.).

I. Unto what audacious effronteries


OTD


X


a NE ay:


Pa ae ae


e


HOMILETIU COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





and excuses hypocrisy may attain.
(Ver. 10; of. Ezek. xxiii. 39.)

1. Their detestable attitude of péety.
There was no piety in their hearts, yet
there they ‘‘stand” in their brazen
hypocrisy “before Me,” as though hav-
ing done nothing offensive, and having
no cause for confusion of face.

2. Their insolent pollution of holy
scenes, ‘In this house,” where such godly
kings and worshippers have done true
homage ; where your pious king Josiah
so recently restored religious services.
“ Which is called by My name,”—which
bears My name (Hitzig) ; on which my
glory rests (Keil). In the holy place
of the tabernacles of the Most High
these polluted hypocrites dared to
come !

3. Their blasphemous language of self-
extenuation, ‘‘ We are delivered,” &e. ;
t.e., by our temple sacrifices we have
atoned for our sins, and therefore are
tree to start afresh upon new courses of
wickedness (Speaker’s Com.) We are
discharged from our guilt ; now it shall
do us no hurt (Henry). We have
appeased God’s wrath by our offerings,
and turned aside all punishment for our
sins, now we may go on again in ‘doing
abominations.” Their standing before
God and service in the temple, were
put in substitution for the holy living
God required, and used as an excuse for
continuance in sin, and as a guarantee
against threatened punishment. (Addenda
km chap. vii, “ Insolent profanity.”)

{They thought themselves freed
from guilt when they had offered their
sacrifices, and at liberty again to be
immoral and idolatrous. We might
think such a state of infatuation im-
possible, but it has existed among
those calling themselves Christians, and
exists now. Gataker mentions a com-
maon saying among ignorant Papists,
‘We must sin to be shriven, and
shriven to sin.’ The turning of the
grace of God into lasciviousness is the
same thing.”—Zd. of Calvin.]}

Ver. 11. Theme: RoBBERY IN THE
SANCTUARY.

It was no mere conjecture, an ex-
aggerated supposition, ‘‘ Behold, even I


CHAP, VIL.








have seen it, saith the Lord.”
charge pojats to :

I. The robbery of the temple ser-
vices of their cleansing design. By
such miscreants as you are (ver. 9), con-
sorting here and coming here with the
design to secure immunity to sin and
impunity from punishment, ye rob My
temple of its true end, its services of
their significance and intention, and
make this house an asylum for malefac-
tors,—a robbers’ retreat. There they
comforted themselves in their iniquities,
acquired fresh assurance in sinning, and
used the place designed to terminate
sin, by expiating it on the altar and
extinguishing vt un the heart, as a shelter
for encouraging, licensing, and fortify-
ing themselves in iniquity.

II. The spoliation of its services
of their acceptableness to God. They
were fragrant and well-pleasing to Him
as expressions of penitence for sin and
the return of the soul in humility and
faith to Him; but abhorrent when, as
now, they were used superstitiously as
convenient external methods for quieting
the conscience and licensing crime.
Better that there be no temple and no
sacrifices, than that men should use
them so perversely. Thus they robbed
the services of all worth to God, and
made them an evil savour to Him.

III. The discredit cast upon Jeho
vah’s holiness and glory. ‘These vile
worshippers, encouraging their pro-
fanity in God’s very house, virtually
made God the patron of their enormi-
ties. So all who use Christianity as a
cloak for their sins, or as a convenient
expiation of daily evils, which are
neither repented of nor abandoned, make
Christ a minister of sin. Religion is
thereby travestied, and the holy Lord
degraded, — His character is contami-
nated. It was charged upon Christ,
“‘ Friend of publicans and sinners,” as
implying He Himself was no better
than those who gathered zzound Him,
ignoring the fact that Christ only be.
friended sinners in order to save them
from further sinning.

IV. The withholding from God of
His true deserts. ‘‘He desired not
sacrifice; the sacrifices of ie are 8


The


CaP, VIL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





broken heart and contrite spirit.” He
asked not ceremonial homage, but the
adoration of the reverent soul; not
altar-services, but life obedience, ‘ Will
a man rob God?” Yes: see Malachi
i. 7, 10, 13, 14, iii 8. So do all who
offer Him the mere “form of godliness ;”
hymns sung without heart, prayers of-
fered with spiritless routine, service
rendered without joyous love, gifts be-
stown without grace in the heart, pro-
fession made where there is no true
piety behind; the flippant cry, Lord,
Lord! but not doing the things that He
commands; the Olivet ‘“‘ Hosannah!”
followed by the Pretorium “ Crucify
Him!” the impulsive testimony, ‘I
will go with Thee to prison and judg-
ment,” ending in, “I know not the man.”
Heartless piety is a robbery of the best
and most prized offerings which the holy
God can receive.

V. The grief. and indignation of
God over such profanity. ‘Behold,
even I have seen it.” His eyes behold,
and His eyelids try the children of men,
The fair show in the flesh carries well
with men, but Jesus, when He found the
leafy tree fruitless, cursed it / ‘I hate
robbery for a burnt-offering.” (Ad-
denda to chap. vii., “ Sacrilege.”)

Note: The limestone ranges of Pales-
tine were full of inaccessible caves,
whither robbers sheltered themselves
securely from the penalties of their
violent deeds. In like manner, these
“robbers ” sought refuge in the sanc-
tuary from the consequences of guilt, but
were in no disposition to abandon their
evil ways; for they “loved the gains”
and indulgences “of unrighteousness,”
the ‘ pleasures of sin.”

“ Den of robbers ;” words adopted by
Christ in upbraiding the defilers of the
temple (Matt. xxi. 13), and suggesting
the parallel in the spiritual prostitution
and moral degradation of Jerusalem in
Jeremiah’s days and our Lord’s time.
The like evil state merited like condem-
nation, and led on to like disasters and
overthrow.


Ver. 12-14, Theme: VIOLATED SANO-
TUARIES DOOMED.


No place, however sacred, Shiloh or
156 .





Jerusalem, will be spared from over-
throw, when wickedness has desecrated
its sanctity. Jehovah Himself will
“overturn and overturn” where His
reign is impeded and His holiness im-
pugned by profanity. Nothing evil
shall escape, because, forsooth, it once
bore a better character. Shiloh, God’s
first resting-place, falls into disrepute
because of iniquity. Even “angels, who
kept not their first estate,” were outcast
from their former dignity and blessed-
ness. Israel, though ounce “ holiness to
the Lord ” (ii. 3), was banished into cap-
tivity. “The righteousness of the righte-
ous man shall not deliver him in the day
of his transgression” (Ezek. xxxiii, 12),
Violated sanctuaries are overthrown,

I A historic fact (ver. 12). 1.
Easily verified : “Go to Shiloh and see.”
2. Fully accounted for : ‘‘ On account of
the wickedness,” &c. 3. Gou’s own work:
“See what J did to it.” Where “I set
My name at the first,” there see My work
of desolation. For God will let no pro-
faned thing stand.

II. A present peril (ver. 13, 14).

1. No exemption because of special
favour. Shiloh was God’s “first”
resting-place; it had, therefore, the
tender charm of being His earliest abode,
and the honour of antiquity,

2. Like provocations evoke like conse-
quences (ver. 13). The evils which came
upon “my people Israel” will not be
evaded by Judah if Jerusalem is dese-
crated by ‘ abominations” as Shiloh
was by “ wickedness.”

3. No self-assurance of immunity will
avert the result, “This house wherein ye
trust” (ver. 14), and of whose security
ye boast (ver. 4), will perish notwith-
standing. Our confidence will be of no
avail.

It. A symbolic truth, Pass from
material fabrics to the larger application,
and—l, There are temples still which
bear God’s holy name,—not only sanc-
tuaries, but ecclesiastical systems and
sects, on which Christians pride them-
selves, and of which they boast (ver. 4).
And there are personal shrines, believing
hearts, where Christ has rested ; and
mauy, many are the Christian hearta
wherein His Spirit still dwells, as truly


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR,


as in the “house at Shiloh” and “temple
at Jerusalem” (2 Cor. vi. 16; Eph. ii
21, 22). 2. God’s indwelling presence
may be alienated and lost. Not a safe
theory that “once a Christian always a
Christian.” 3. Zo retain the Divine
presence we must maintain the “holiness
which becometh His house.” 4. There
are souls which have known the light and
love of God now desolated. Like ancient
Shiloh and beautiful Jerusalem, and the
graceful churches of Asia—forsaken : so
Judas and Demas, and those who have
“made shipwreck of faith and a good
conscience.” (See Heb. x. 38.) And
‘‘if any man defile the temple of God,
him shall God destroy ; for the temple of
God is holy, which temple ye are” (1
Cor. iii. 16, 17).


Ver. 13. Theme: Gonv’s EARNESTNESS
IM DEALING WITH SINNERS,

The earnestness and activity which
prophets exhibited in seeking to rouse
the nation to realise and avert the near-
ing destruction, God appropriates to
Himself : it was Jehovah Himself earnest
and active.
channels along which the Divine fervour
flowed. It was God who “rose early
and spake.” Shows


I. Deep solicitude. ‘Rising up


early, I spake, I called.” 1. Appre-
hensive of Judah’s danger. 2. Anxious
for Judah’s salvation, 3. Awake to


Judah’s help. God did not, does not,
wait till entreated to act for imperilled
sinners’ good: He “rises early,” ere
men realise peril, and “ seeks to save.”

II. Zealous effort. Solicitude does
not remain passive: rises and calls. 1.
God ts astir when eforts are made for
human weal; “Rising up.” 2. God works
at most auspicious hours; ‘‘ Early ;”
while opportunity is yet before the
sinner, and when his heart is most open
to sacred influences. 3. God Himself
speaks to man by those He sends: “I
spake.” He is too concerned individu-
ally in man’s welfare to stand apart from
endeavouring to rescue and help.

II. Incessant ministries. “Rising
up early and speaking,” a metaphor
for ceaseless vigilance and endeavour.
(Comp, xxv. 4, xxvi. 5, xxix. 19.)


His prophets were but


OBAP. VIL.


1. Abundantly. 2. Assiduously. 3. Con
tinwously.

IV. Pleading appeals. God’s mes-
sages were characterised by the same
qualities as His efforts; they were
earnest and fervent also. 1. Diérect in
their aim; “Spake to you.” 2. Diverse
in their tone: “I spake,” with quiet
solemnity ; “I called, with urgent im-
portunity.

V. Barren results. “Ye heard not,
ye answered not.” 1. Heedlessness of
the heavenly word, 2. Resistance of
Divine importunity. 3. Abuse of “the
abundant grace.” 4. Provocative of
merited wrath (ver. 14). When speak-
tng is fruitless, God acts ; “ Therefore
will I do,” &c.


‘* God is earnest, do not satay :
Thou may’st perish e’en to-day.”


Ver.
ALITIES.

How do Jehovah’s majesty and might
stand out upon our thought when
we see Him dealing thus with whole
nations! What magnitude! To Him
the “nations are but as a drop in the
bucket :” it awes and solemnises us to
see God lifting up an entire kingdom,
“Ephraim,” and “casting it out of
sight,” from their land and their God; and
now declaring He will do similarly with
Judah. Who will not fear before Him ¢

‘* All your brethren:” whose were the
covenants, and promises, and fathers, as
much as they are yours ; yet their sacred
ancestry and privileges afforded them no
protection.

“The whole seed of Exhraim:” t.e., the
ten tribes ; superior, therefore, in num-
bers, resources for defence, and power of
resistance. Yet all proved worthless
when God’s disfavour was incurred.
Profaned places and profane people God
abhors and will reject.

I There is comprehensive breadth
in God’s proceedings. Moves with
majestic tread, controls great nations
with His will, determines the fate of
empires with a word. Greater still :
He “loved the world,” and will judge
“ all peoples and nations.”

It. There is appalling magnitude in
God's overthrows. The whole ten tribes

157


15. Theme: RUINED NATION-


CHAP. VE.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JERHLMIAH.





outcast from Him: now Judah to be
swept away in contempt! For “ casting
out” is an act of contempt as well as
violence. What mighty empires are
wrecks! Great Babylon, Nineveh,
Rome, God stamped them into dust.

Ill. There is solemn forewarning in
God’s judgments. God proceeds uni-
formly in the administrations of His
justice. What He did to Israel for her
“ wickedness,” He will do also for Judah
if her cause of condemnation be equal
(ver. 14). The experiences of others
stand as an admonition and a warning.
Like sins incur like sentences (Luke xiii.
2-5).


Ver. 16. Theme:
PRAYER FORBIDDEN.

Jeremiah did sometimes check himself
in uttering direful prophecies, and be-
take himself to passionate and mournful
prayer ; stopped short, as it were, God’s
word of doom to man, and interposed
man’s word of pleading to God. (Comp.
xiv. 7-9, 19-22, xviii. 20.) What
preacher has not likewise interrupted
proclamation with invocation? Who,
that carries dark tidings, has not paused
first near God in the anguish of prayer?
Pity, patriotism, piety, all conspire often
to drive the prophet from his feet to his
knees (comp. 1 Sam. xii. 23.) (Addenda
to chap. vii, ‘‘ Intercessory prayer.”)

I. A specification of the varied as-
pects of prayer.

General petitions: “Pray.” Supple
catory entreaty (with loud voice and
pathos) : “Lift up cry.” Importunate
pleading ; “ Make intercession.”

[There are three things forbidden, Be
not an tntercessor (t.c., undertake not
their cause as one who mediates between
a judge and a criminal); nor a depreca-
tor of evils (1.¢., lamenting their woes,
and crying suppliantly fur mercy) ; nor
a solicitor of favours (1.¢., entreating Me
to deal graciously with them). Inter-
ceding mercy, lamenting evils, entreat-
ing favours.— Hd. of Calvin. |

Il. The power of earnest prayer
Divinely acknowledged. He bids
Jeremiah restrain it, refrain from it. It
would stand in God’s way as a barrier, a
hindrance. Thus with Moses (Exod.

15é


INTERCESSORY


xxxii. 10). “Let Me alone!” pleads
God. The Almighty is both restrained
and constrained by “the effectual fer-
vent prayer of a righteous man” (Num,
xi. 2, xiv. 13-20, xvi. 22).

I. Prevailing intercessory prayer
is dependent on conditions.

1. The state of the people must be re-
mediable. 2. The hour of hope must not
have been lost. When Moses prevailed
the people were but stepping into the
Theocracy; they sinned, but it was
through lack of training and knowledge,
Now they had known all inducements
to godliness, nothing more could be
done to keep them right; God had ex-
hausted His resources of persuasion upon
them. In this condition neither the in-
tercession of Moses, Samuel, or Jere
miah could avail for them (see chap. xv.
1). Their day of grace was gone. (See
also John v. 16.)

IV. No prayerful outcry may inter-
pose to stay God’s imperative justice,
And now their case demanded retribu-
tion, for every persuasive had been
abused. The Intercessor could plead,
“ Let be this year also!” and was heard,
because there were yet other remediable
processes availing ; “‘ Till I dig about it,”
&c. Butif after that it continued fruit-
less, “ Cut it down!” This was Judah’s


case,

“God here forbids prayer for them,
for they have sinned unto death, there-
fore, pray not for their life, the life of
their souls (1 John v. 16). See here:
1. That God’s prophets are praying men.
2. That God’s praying prophets have a
great interest in heaven, how little soever
they have on earth. 3. Itis an ill omen
to a people when God restrains the
spirits of His ministers and people from
praying for those condemned. 4. Those
that will not regard good ministers’
preaching cannot expect any benefit by
their praying. If you will not hear us
when we speak from God to you, God will
not hear us when we speak to Him for
you.” —Henry.


Ver. 17, 18. Theme:
APOSTASY.

Not hidden from gaze, but in open
streets, shameless! Though Jehovah's


UNABASHED





c
.


NEE + OS Snes, as a


Ea ald


PL nie


7)


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.
some A te a FS a Oe


temple rose in dignity before their eyes,
and even threw its colossal shadow
across the streets where they practised
their idolatries, they were not restrained,
“neither could they blush.”

I. Religious devotion the secret of
general and tireless activities. Though
erroneous, nevertheless it impels to ser-
vice and sacrifice as nothing else can do,
Much more should it inspire diligence
when true. All hands to the work.
And “both hands earnestly,” for much
to be done.

1. Hnltsts all ages and sexes. 2.
Incites each to appropriate effort. 3.
Combination in service effects speedy re-
sults and sure success.

II. Noble energies lavished upon
ignoble superstitions.

For what end was all this? Alas!
look out upon heathen scenes, where de-
votees squander years, treasures, life ;
and for what? Look also on votaries
of pleasure, pursuers of wealth, d&e. ;
the eager lives with which modern
cavilised society is full; for what end do
men live and labour?

Ill. Prostituted homage awakens
the indignation of God. For here it
was not done in ignorance, but wantonly
and wilfully.

1. Perversion of the true aim and de-
sign of man’s being. God made man for
Himself—a jealous God. 2. Ignores
God’s claim on human service, loyalty,
and love. He merited their trust and
devotion. 3, Hnslaves men’s soul in
ruinous vices. “QO Israel! destroyed
thyself.” 4. Provoking Heaven’s wrath
by despising His love. Deliberate design,
“that they may provoke,” &c. What
a reversion of our true relation to God,
and our expertence at His hand; for
“God hath not appointed us to wrath,
but to obtain salvation by our Lord
Jesus Christ!”

Ver. 19. Theme; REFLEX CONSE-
QUENCES OF SIN.

They harmed themselves more than
God (cf. Deut. xxxii, 16, 21; Job
xxxv. 6, 8; Prov. viii. 23): for

i. They forfeited present consolation
and assurance. “There is no place to
the wicked.”


OHaP. Vil.


ii. They entailed future confusion and
calamity. Shame would come, and with
it ruin.


Ver. 21. Theme: Sacriviogs oon-
TEMNED AND COUNTERMANDED.

“Put your burnt-oferings,” &e. I
will not accept them. Take away your
burnt-offerings which ye are about to
lay upon Mine altar as a whole burnt-
sacrifice to Me. I will have none of
them (comp. vi. 20); put them on your
own tables, and eat them yourselves,
They are not burnt-offerings, holy to
God, but are mere flesh, to be eaten by
men. So our Lord said to the Jews
concerning the temple, “Your house” (it
is no longer God’s, for ye have profaned
it by your sins, and therefore He has
forsaken it) “is left unto you desolate.”
— Wordsworth.


Ver. 22.
SACRIFICES,”

The apparent contradiction between
this statement and the fact that the
Mosaic institutes abound in sacrificial
enactments may be removed in two
ways :

i, That moral obligation was tncul-
cated upon the Hebrews before the sacrs-
Jicial code (cf. Exod. xv. 26, xix. 5),
Then follows the proclamation of the
moral code, amidst all the solemnities of
Sinai. Not till afterwards were regula-
tions given respecting sacrifices, which
properly belonged to the Levitical law.
Hence God reminds them here, * I spake
not in the day that I brought them out
of Egypt.”

ii. It is not unusual for the Hebrews
to express in absolute terms what ts to be
understood relatively and comparatively.
Thus “ to hate,” = to love less (Gen. xxix.
30, 31; Mal. i, 2, 3). According to
this idiom the meaning will be: That
ritual observances were regarded by God
as matters of secondary importance
(see Luke xiv. 26; Matt. x. 37; Hos.
vi. 6; 1 Sam. xv. 22); and that when
these are substituted for moral duties
and supreme love to Himself, God re-
torts with merited reprobation (comp.
Hend.).  Similariy our Lord states
negatively what was of inferior import

189


© T SPAKE NOT CONCERNING


OHAP, VO.





ance ; “‘ Labour not for the meat which
perisheth ; but for that which endur-
eth ” (John vi. 27).

Calvin thinks “Jeremiah seems to
speak too contemptibly of sacrifices ;
for they were seals of God’s grace, and
had been instituted to lead men to re-
pentance of sin, and to realise they
merited the death which the victim en-
dured. But it is true that God com-
manded nothing respecting mere sacri-
fices for their own sake ; it was never
His will to be served with mere external
rites; His design in instituting them
was to remind the Jews of their sin, and
also to show to them the way of recon-
ciliation.”

Venema suggests that there is a re-
pudiation of sacrifices as the basis of
God’s covenant with His people. Obedi-
ence and not sacrifice was the condition
of this sacred relationship. God did not
say, “If you sacrifice to Me, I will be
your God ;” but, “If you obey My
voice, I will be your God and you shall
be My people.”

Evidently the antithesis, “ Not con-
cerning sacrifice... . But this thing,
Obey /”—points to the basis and terms
of the Sinattie covenant, and what is
here affirmed is, that when that covenant
was made and entered into, obedience
was the supreme and essential factor in
that covenant. To withhold obedience,
therefore, and tosubstitute mere sacrifice,
was to withhold that on which the con-
tinuance of God’s covenant relationship
absolutely depended. In Amos vy. 25,
God reminds them that for forty years
He dispensed altogether with sacrifices,
ergo, they could not be of primary
importance.

Note: Hitzig, Graf, and others find
in this passage proof that Jeremiah was
ignorant of that part of the Pentateuch
which contains sacrificial enactments ;
“ that at his time nothing was known of
the legislation on sacrifice given by God
on Sinai.” This gives them an argu-
ment for denying that Moses was the
author of the middle books of the Pen-
tateuch, and for ascribing their author-
ship to Ezra. But this is manifestly a
“ wresting the Scriptures.” No canon
ef criticism can sustain euch an inter-

160


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





pretation of these words. They do not
deny the Divine authority of sacrifices,
but assign to them a subservient place.
(Addenda to chap. vii., “ Sacrifices.”)


Ver. 22, 23. Theme:
SUBSTITUTED FOR OBEDIENCE.

An external piety offered to God,
while righteousness and true holiness
are withheld.

I. Men are constantly adopting
expedients by which to evade obedi-
ence. Obedience entails self-conquest,
and daily service, and a surrendered life ;
sacrifice, on the contrary, is aoon offered,
and costs less. 1. An easier offering.
2. A shorter process. 3. A smaller sur-
render.

IL. God prefers an obedient life to
any sacrificial oblation.

Obedience is preferable to sacrifice :
1. As denoting a better spirit. 2.
As involving a fuller compliance. 3.
As containing a gentler law—not suffer-
ing, but service. ‘ For] desired mercy,
not sacrifice, and the knowledge of
God more than burnt-offerings.” ‘And
to love Him with all the understanding,
&¢c.,is more than all whole burnt-ofer-
ing and sacrifice. Jesus saw that he
answered discreetly, and said, Thou art
not far from the kingdom of God!”


Ver. 24. God had commanded them
Nee 23), “ Walk ye in all the way,”

c.; but instead, they “‘ walked in the
counsels and in the imaginations (pro-
perly, stubbornness) of their evil heart.”
(See on chap. iii. 17.) The result was:
they moved in a totally opposite direction
from that in which God designed. Note:
God’s way for us is not merely deserted,
but positively reversed, when we follow
our own way. (Comp. Isa. liii 6; Heb.
iii, 12.) To pursue our “counsels” we
have to turn our back upon both God
and His commands,

Theme; BACKWARD.

On going backward in regard to the
great matter of practical religion.

I. Illustrations of going backward
in regard to religion.

An advanced state of religious know-
ledge, of moral purity, of spiritual power
may be attained, from which men may ge
beckward. Ilustrations:


SacRivicgs


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


OMAP. VIR,





1. From the history of the Jewish
nation. Compare best days of Solomon,
when temple was dedicated, with these
when Jeremiah preached at gate. Na
tional mind darkened, conscience en-
feebled, heart hardened. People gone
backward in Divine knowledge, moral
rectitude, devout feeling (Isa. i. 3, 4,
21-23).

2. Churches may go backward—e.g.,
Galatia (Gal. iii, 1-3, v. 7, 8), Hphesus
(Rev. ii.’ 4), Sardis (Rev. iii. 1).

3. Indwidual life furnishes saddest
illustrations. (a.) Brought up in Chris-
tian home; go back into thoughtless-
ness, dissipation, and infidelity.  (b.)
Awakened by the power of truth, and
gained a place in the household of faith ;
go backward and “make shipwreck of
faith and good conscience. (c.) Trod
noblest heights of Christian service ; go
backward tostagnationandease. ‘“Demas
hath forsaken,” &c. (2, Tim. iv. 10).

II. Consider, for conviction and warn-
ing, some of the causes of this going
backward. Negatively: (1.) God never
causes a human being to go backward


from what is pure and good and true.


(2.) Nor must the charge be laid at the
door of men or of Satan. 1. The pre
mary cause of retrogression must be
sought in man himself, in his tnclina-
tton to the things which are behind ; in
spiritual feebleness. 2. The secondary
causes are temptations; the lusts, plea-
sures, and gains he desires to enjoy. 3.
His weakness in yselding results from
neglect of the means of strength, the
Word of God, prayer, means of instruc-
tion and grace.

III. Contemplate some consequences
of going backward in regard to religion.
Jewish history full of records of misery,
affliction, desolation, conquest, captivity,
which resulted from apostasy. But what
are the consequences of apostasy from
Christian profession and life? 1. The
displeasure of the great God (Heb. x. 38).
2. Such as turn back are liable to sink
into the very lowest depths of trreligion
(2 Pet. ii. 20-22). 3. Haperience of
deepest remorse and reproach of conscience.

(1.) Stand fast in the Lord. (2.)
Despair not, but return.—Kev. R. Ann,
“ Christian World Pulpit.”

L


Ver, 24-29. Theme; D1soBEDIENOR
To Gop’s Worp.

I. Its cause. 1. Not neglect on God's
part to make known His Word to men
(ver. 25). 2. Not the imperfect perform-
ance by the preacher of his duties (ver.
27); but, 3. The hardness of men’s
hearts ; who (a.) walk after their evil
imaginations and counsels (ver. 24);
(6.) do not hear or believe (ver. 28),
and do not wish to improve (ver. 26).

II. Its consequences. 1. Increasing
moral corruption (ver. 24, 26). 2.
Rejection on the part of God (ver. 29).
—WNaeg.





Ver. 25-28. Theme; SaD CHARAUTER-
ISTICS OF AN UNBELIEVING EPOCH.

i. Contempt of the preaching of the
Divine Word.

ii, Staff-neckedness in respect to the
visitations of Divine chastisements.

iii. Increase of wickedness in spite of
all the warnings of the past.—From
Lange.


Theme: A PEOPLE RIPE FOR DESTRUC-
Trion. When?

i. When it despises the visitations of
Divine grace (ver. 25).

ii. When it hardens ttself in unbelief
against God’s Word and voice (ver. 26,
27).

When in spite of Divine judg-
ments it departs the more into sin (ver.
26, 28).—IJdem.


Theme : ISRAEL A WARNING EXAMPLE
OF PREVAILING UNBELIEF.

Their example is admonitory to us in
our own times.

i. With respect to their ingratitude
for God’s gracious visitations,

ii, With respect to their opposstion tc
the true friends of the nation.

iii. With respect to their frivolity in
view of inevitable destruction.—Jdem.


Ver. 27. Theme: Gov’s FOREKNOW-
LEDGE OF THE SINNER’S REFUSAL OF HIs
Worn.

The infinitely perfect God knows all
things) Ignorance incompatible with
His originating and governing power.
This true not only of material things,
but of mind, thoughts, and actions of
all His intelligent and moral creatures.


CHAP. VII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIA.





So that all we freely do is known to
Him, and His government is adapted to
all such creatures, Jeremiah is to tell
Judah God’s will, make known His
Word ; yet it is added, “They will not
hearken.” We understand their condi-
tion as described ver. 23, 24; Ezek.
ii, 7. But there is a peculiarity in
telling them, and yet knowing they will
not regard,

I. Seek for instances illustrative of
text, where God knew His Word would
not be regarded, nor His messages
answered.

1. The original transgression of our
jirst parents. God’s Word clear, easy,
distinct ; yet He knew how they would
act ; saw hearts.

2. The old world. He saw rise of
evil and progress; yet Noah preached
120 years, built ark ; Spirit strove.

$. Pharaoh. Moses and Aaron are
sent, miracles wrought, God’s messages
proclaimed, demands enforced; yet He
knew Pharaoh would harden his heart
and sin to his destruction.

4, Jews as a nation. How prophets
and holy men went to them. John
also and Christ Yet God knew their
unbelief and cruelty. Christ referred to
this in His own ministry ; He declared
their obstinacy and ruin, So that text is
but one of many cases in Word of God.

II. How can this be explained and
defended? Unless God did know re-
sults such as described :

1. He would be imperfect; not the
all-wise, infallible God, and He could
not govern His world. But His perfect
knowledge of the future

2. Does not make Him the cause of
the rebellion He foretells. He does not
predestinate it, but foreknows it. Just
as He foreknew Noah’s sin, yet did not
make him drunk; murder of Abel, yet
did not impel Cain to the deed, &c.
The astronomer by calculation foreknows
every visible and invisible eclipse of the
year, but docs not produce them.

3. He never influences men to do wrong
because He foresees it (Acts ii. 23),
Though God designed His Son to be
@ Saviour, and hence a sacrifice, and
foresaw the conduct of the Jews, they
freely and wickedly crucified Him.

162


4. There are many ends to be attained
by God. By His speaking, though He
knows men will not hearken ;

(a.) God exhibits His true desire for
their salvation. He truly, earnestly
calls, (8.) He thereby treats men as
reasonable and responsible beings. (¢)
He thus leaves them without excuse.
“T called, but ye refused,” &ec.

Conclusion : (1.) Man’s free agency is
his glory. (2.) God’s infinite goodness
is undoubted. (3.) Our duty is most
manifest ; to hear, obey, believe. (4.)
Thus men will be finally inexcusable,
having had means employed for their
restoration to holiness and God.—J.
Burnes, D.D.

Comments.

“ But they will not hearken unto thee.”
Howbeit, speak—‘“ whether they will
hear, or whether they will forbear”—
for a testimony against them.—Trapp.

“Tt was a most grievous trial to the
prophet to know that his words would
pass away with the air and produce no
good, His mind must have been greatly
depressed ; for he doubtless laboured for
the good of his own nation. Yet his
sympathy and sorrow (for he loved his
nation and felt great grief in declaring
God’s coming judgments) did not pre-
vent him from executing in a bold man-
ner and with unshaken zeal what God
had committed to him, . . . God then
declares to his servant what would be
the issue, in order that he might not
cease to execute his office with in-
vincible courage, even if no fruit ap-
peared.” —Calwin.


Ver. 28. “ This ts a nation that obeyeth
not,’ &c. Rather, This is the nation.
“Tsrael occupies so unique a position
among all nations that for it to disobey
God is marvellous. (See Isa, i. 3; Jer.
ii. 11.)’—Speaker’s Com,

The prophet is not here bidden to
address the Jews, but to pronounce on
them a sentence, that the whole world
might know how base and detestable
had been their contumacy, and how
abominable their impiety.—Calwin.

“Truth is perished.” The ancient
versions and the Targum render 7TVOIN


(truth) by wisi, fides, faith or fidelity.


HOMILETIU COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


OHAP, Vil,





(See on chap. v. 3.) Their conduct was
utterly perfidious toward man as well as
God. ;

“Is cut off from their mouth”—i.e,
their language has become wholly in-
sincere, mere mockery, profession with-
out intention ; their lips flippantly used
Jehovah’s name, and could “swear by
Him” (chap. v. 2); but duplicity,
falsity, was their settled habit in speech
as in practice. No “truth” remained
in either their word or deed.

Ver. 29. Comments.

“ Cut off thine hair.” The word ren-
dered “hair” is nézer, and signifies a
crown. From it the Nazarites obtained
their name, for their hair was the badge
of their consecration to God, their crown
(Num. vi. 5,7). Cutting off this hair
was equivalent to abandonment of the
consecrated character. Her profanation
entailed the loss of her crown (comp.
Lam. v. 16); her dignity, as well as
her adornment and beauty (1 Cor. xi.
15) were forfeit.

Neumann would retain the literal in-
terpretation of the word, and regard the
command as implying the abandonment
by Judah of national dignity, the total
forfeiture of the crown, for her royalty,
the kingly office, was lost entirely to the
nation in the Babylonish captivity, never
again restored,

Ver. 29-34. Here is

L A loud call to weeping and
mourning (ver. 29). Jerusalem had
been—1. A joyous city; now she must
“take up lamentation.” 2. A conse-
crated city ; now she must “ cut off her
hair,” in token both of sorrow and
slavery ; she must be degraded, separa-
ted from God, as she had been separated
to Him. It is time for those who have
lost their holiness to lay aside their joy.

II. Just cause given for this great
lamentation.

1. The sin of Jerusalem appears here
very heinous (ver. 30). Two things
charged upon them in their idolatry:
(a.) They were very impudent in it
towards God, and set Him at defiance
(ver, 30). (.) They were very barbar-
ous in it towards their own cheldren (ver.
31). (Addenda to chap. vii. 31, “‘ High
places of Tophet.”)








2. The destruction of Jerusalem ap-
pears here very terrible. General misery
(ver. 29). Sin makes those the “ gene-
ration of God’s wrath” who had been
the generation of His love. He disowns
them. And He will give them up to
the terrors of their own guilt. (a)
Death shall triumph over them (ver. 32,
33). So great shall be the slaughter
that even the spacious valley of Tophet
shall not be able to contain the slain,
(b.) Joy shall depart from them (ver. 34).
God can soon mar the mirth of the
most jovial, and make it to cease ; which
is a reason why we should “ rejoice
with trembling” (with reverence). —
Henry.

Ver. 30. “ They have set their abomé-
nations in the house.” So do those now
that broach heresies in the Church.—
Trapp.


Ver. 31. Theme: SINFULNESS OP
WILI-WORSHIP, “ Which I commanded
them not.”


Hence it is justly concluded that
i, To add anything to God’s Word (as
of necessity to salvation), and to enforce
it as an article of saving faith; and
ii, To propose anything as an object of
worship which God has not authorised,
is hateful in His sight. Here, therefore,
is a solemn protest against the worship
of the Virgin Mary, the tnvocation of
saints and angels, and other like acts of
“ will-worship ” (Col. ii. 23), as prayers
for the dead. What is not “com-
manded” in Scripture is, therefore,
forbidden as an object of worship,—
Wordsworth.

“The purpose of God was to teach
His people both unto whom they should
offer sacrifice, and what sacrifice was to
be offered. To burn their sons in fire
unto Baal He did not command them; —
He spake no such thing, neither came tt
into His mind, therefore this they
ought not te have done. The prophet
chooses rather to charge them. with the
fault of making a law unto themselves,
than with the crime of transgressing a
flaw which God made. For when the
Lord hath once Himself precisely set
down a form of executing that wherein
we are to serve Him, the fault appeareth

163


OBAP. VIL.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; JEREMIA.





greater to do that which we are not, than
not to do that which we are, commanded.”
— Hooker, “Hecles. Pol.,” quoted in
Wordsworth.

On creating objects of superstitious
homage.

‘God here cuts off from men every
occasion fur evasions, since He condemns
by this one phrase, ‘I have not com-
manded them,’ whatever the Jews de-
vised. There is, then, no other argument
needed to condemn superstitions than
that they are not commanded by God;
for when men allow themselves to wor-
ship God according to their own fancies,
and attend not to His commands, they
pervert true religion. And if this prin-


ciple were adopted by the Papista, all
those fictitious modes of worship in
which they absurdly exercise themselves
would fall to the ground. When God
says that ‘ st never came into His mind,’
He suggests that men assume too much
wisdom when they devise what He
never required—nay, what He never
knew.”— Calvin.

Ver. 30-34.

i. Sacrilege (ver. 30), and il. Super-
stitions (ver. 31), would entail iii,
Slaughter (ver. 32, 33) and iv. Sorrow
(ver. 34) ; joy silenced, homes solitary,
and the land spoiled. “The wages of
sin is death.” (Addenda to chap. vii
32, “ Punishment.”)


NOTICEABLE TOPICS IN CHAPTER VII.
Topic: Tae Doorrine oF tae CxuRcH (ver. 3-7),
I. The Ohurch externally. Fulfils beneficent purposes, administers external


benefits. 1. What are her ministries ?


The Word, sacrament, &c.


2. How far


are her external ministries essential ? Romanism and Protestantism reply differently.
3. What reasons have we for guarding against danger? The Church may be over-


estimated (ver. 4).


II. The Church internally. Her true constitution and character are indicated.


1. It is essentially a community of saints and true believers (ver. 5-7).


2. Its


existence is manifested—(a.) In the holy walk of its members (ver. 3, 5, 6). (6.)
In the blessings of the Divine presence (ver. 3, 7).—Naeg.


Topic : ExTERNaL Eccirstastiorsm (ver. 8-15),


An earnest warning against mere outward adherence to, and trust in, church
ordinances and services, unaccompanied by practical piety and heart religion.


I. Its essence.


1. False confidence in church testimony (ver. 8). 2. Delusive


trust in the unconditional saving efficacy of sanctuary rites (ver. 10).


IL Its consequences. 1. Demoralisation (ver. 9,10). 2. Desecration of the
holy (ver. 11). 3. Destruction of the offenders (ver. 12-15).—Jdem.


Topic; Anusk oF Reticiow: Immoratrry JustTiFIED BY TEMPLE OBSERVANCES
(ver. 9, 10).


Nothing more usual among hypocrites than to mingle and confound in their
lives what is commendable and what is sinful—virtue and vice—palliating their
wickeduess with some pretences and appearance of goodness. Here they attended
upon the ordinances of the temple, and from them drew a licence to sinful courses,
crying, “ The temple of the Lord,” &c. (ver. 4).

I. Their abominable hypocrisy. Consisting in their profaneness, in “ theft,
murder,” &c, (ver. 9); and their formality, in “coming and standing before God
in His house.” These words may he taken in a sense

i, Absolutely and positively. This question, Will ye steal, &c., has included in
it an assertion, ye do so; and an accusation, for by God’s direction Jeremiah
charged upon this people their guilt in these respects. Regard this profaneness and
formality as meeting in the same persona, 1. Their consistency: they may go

164





he aaa


EE I NG


ER Riche a:


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH. OMAP, ViL
See ee ele te


together, it is possible. Men may “steal,” dc., and yet “come before God in His
house ;” and men may “stand before God,” é&e., and yet be guilty of such crimes.
The reason is, that bare external works of religion have no changing or improving
influence upon the heart. On the other side, corrupt affectuons, which tend to such
wicked practices, do not restrain men from external performance of religious duties,
It is no impediment to wrong-doing now and then to go to church ; yea, frequent-
ing ordinances may give licence to lust. 2. Their concomitancy ; they do go
together. No rare business for profane mei to be at the duties of religion. There
is double ground for it. (a.) To blind the eyes of men. (b.) To stop the mouth of
conscience. All this shows a sad and miserable condition, Its relevancy to Popery,
which encourages outward attendance upon ordinanees, yet lets loose “the lusts
which war against the soul.”

ii. Interrogatively and expostulatory. ‘Will ye steal,... and come and
stand,” &.? The Lord calls this people to an account for this admixture of pro-
faneness and formality. This expostulation has a double emphasis with it.

1. How can ye do so in regard of yourselves? How satisfy your minds and
consciences with such kind of doings} God appeals to their own judgment, can
ye think it fitting? This is the great unhappiness of hypocrites and formalists,
they are condemned of themselves. Their actions were éncongruous and repugnant.

2. How can ye do so in regard of Me? Can ye think to please Me by such
ways? The Lord thus not only argues with them, but reproves them. (a.) He
taxes them for their formality in that they thought to propitiate Him by their bare
external performances. He regutres external duties of religion ; their actions in
this respect were good, but their affections were bad (comp. Isa. xxix. 13; Matt.
xv. 8; Ezek. xxxiii. 31). This was odious in God’s sight, as a piece of sacrilege
—robbing God of His due ; of dissimulatton—pretends to worship, but denies God
the frame of his heart, although “ He desires truth in the inward parts ;” and it
is unprofitable—neither bettering the heart, nor restraining from evil practices.
(b.) He taxes them for their presumption, in that they durst approach Him in their
sinful indulgence (comp. Isa. i. 11, 12, lvi. 3; Ps. L 16,17; Lev. x. 3). Here
is an aggravation of their sinfulness ; for there is a trespassing upon God in His
majesty—to come before Him in such vile habits showed they did not much regard
Him ; and there is a suspicion of God in His wisdom—they think He will not see
or take notice of their vileness, and assay to flatter Him by some fair pretencea.
Also, here is an intimation of their greater danger. Will ye doit? Dare ye be
so bold? Do ye consider the hazard ye run? There are three sorts of judgments
which are commonly consequent upon such daringly guilty conduct: Spiritual—
become more hardened and confirmed, increase their corruptions ; Z’emporal—He
inflicts grievous calamity on sueh, of which Scripture supplies instances: ternal
—the vengeance of everlasting destruction ; “hypocrites have their portion in the
lake,” &c. The greater sin has always the greater danger.

I. Their notorious stupidity. ‘And say, We are delivered to do all these
abominations!” Different translations. The Septuagint (and Arabic) read the
words thus: We have withdrawn or abstained from all, &c., t.¢., they impudently
deny their manifest wickedness. The Syriac thus: Deliver us, because we have
abstained, &c.; more impudent still, not only to deny their notorious guilt, but also
plead innocency as meritorious of preservation. But there are other translations
specially to attend to, The Chaldee paraphrase (with which agrees the Geneva and
Old English translation) : ‘‘ We are delivered, though,” &c. The rendering of St.
Jerome and the Vulgate: ‘‘ We are delivered, because,” duc. The authorised English
version: “ We are delivered, that we may,” &c., %.¢., it is lawful to commit, &.

1. Their security and insensibleness of their present condition in regard of sin :
““ We are delivered, though we commit, &c. ; making their iniquities no hindrance
to their preservation, as in Isa. xxviii. 15. There is a various ground for this
carnal security: (a.) A false conceit in them of the mercy and wags of God


OHAP, VIL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAA.





(Ps. ix. 7). (6.) A freedom and preservation from judgment and punishment ad
the present. “ We are delivered, and therefore shall be” (Eccles. viii. 11). (e.)
Carnal refuges and reliances ; they think it impossible they will be punished ; and
the Lord in this expostulation, Do ye say so? implies, Ye are mistaken in
saying so,

2. Their stupidity ; according to the reading, “ We are delivered, because,” &e.
Thinking that not only shall they receive no hurt in their sins, but that they shall
have good for them ; that the more they abound in abominations, the more they
shall abound in deliverances (comp. Jer. xliv. 17). Our iniquities are advantageous
to us!

3. Their tneorrigibleness and persistency, or their ingratitude and perverse im-
provement of God’s deliverances and preservations of them: “ We are delivered to
commit them,” t.e., a8 an opportunity for the more free commission of them. As if
God had delivered them on purpose that they might “continue in siv.” This is
met by the remonstrance of the text: “ Will ye say so?” What a fearful thing is
this! Such a mood calls for heaviest judgments, for they are the worst of sinners:
means are perverted and mercy is abused ; they are not bettered by God’s spiritual
physic, and His “ goodness,” which should “lead to repentance,” is turned into an
occasion of wantonness. God will surely bring His dire woes on such, and make
them at last and effectually to know that they are not “delivered to commit all
these abominations.” 7h. Horton, D.D., a.p. 1678.


Topic: WHAT OAN CHILDREN Do FoR Gop? (Children’s Sermon): “ The children
gathered wood” (ver. 18).


A description here of honours which heathen pay to their gods. Though these
idols were such stupid things, every one works for them. Should not, therefore,
every one do work for our God? He is better than idols; and had done for us
great things; and for such a God you ought to work.

L God is setting up a kingdom in this world. A very glorious and gracious
kingdom: “righteousness, peace and joy in the Holy Ghost.” Righteousness—teaches
us to do justice ; peace—to love peace and pursue it ; joy—God makes all happy
who come into His kingdom.

II. God expects us all to work to set up this kingdom. Christ came to set it
up; ministers preach and labour for it; missionaries go to heathen ; all God’s
people aid. Every one has something to do; and God expects each should do it.

IiI. Children can do something to set up this kingdom. The children did
something when Christ rode into Jerusalem; “spread garments” and cried
“Hosanna!” 1. You can pray, that God would make you subjects of this
kingdom. 2. You can talk, speak to others about Jesus, pardon, God, heaven.
3. You can work ; give to missionary society, deny yourselves to send Bibles to
heathen.

IV. Children are always happy when trying to set up this kingdom. Why!
Because make others happy. Angels are happy because they are employed in
making others happy. God is happy, for He blesses every one. And, when we
act like God, we ourselves are happy.

V. God will never forget the labours of little children for Him. When
children wanted to come to Jesus, He noticed their disposition, and said,
‘Never prevent a child from coming to Me!” then took in arms and blessed.
When they sang in temple, He noticed their song, and said, “ Hearest thou what
these say?” Josiah was only eight years old when he became king ; and, because
he was a good boy, it is put down in the Book of God that he gave money to the
priests to build God’s house, and did everything in his power to serve God. God
loves everything done for Him by children, because it is a proof of their obedience
and love. May He give you His Holv Spirit aud bless you, make you willing to

16€


a


AOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. CHAP, VIL





labour for Christ now, that have His approval when you die, and dwell with Him
in heaven.— James Sherman, A.D. 1844.


Topic: SackED OVERTHROWS ; MONUMENTAL WARNINGS.
Shiloh” (ver. 12).


The world is full of historic overthrows: Nineveh, Babylon, Rome, Herculaneum ;
each with an admonitory lesson—that its peculiar guiltiness evokes Heaven’s curse.
But even holy edifices are among the ruins ; though sanctioned both by antiquity
and Divine authority. Sin shakes the strongest foundation, and the structure falls.
Confidence in the inalienable sacredness and therefore security of a place is a delu-
sion against which the ruins of holy scenes admonish us. Sacredness does give
security ; but if the former is lost, the latter is forfeit. Henry remarks:

L Shiloh was ruined, though it had God’s sanctuary in it, when by wicked-
ness it profaned that sanctuary. There God “set His name at the first” (Josh.
xviii. 1); but sin arose. Was it protected by its having the tabernacle? God
forsook it (Ps. Ixxviii. 60) ; and we read of the city afterwards only as a monument
of Divine vengeance upon holy places when they harbour wicked people. It is good
to consult precedents and make use of them. ‘‘ Remember Lot’s wife ;” remember
Shiloh, and seven Churches of Asia; and know that the ark and candlestick are
movable things (Rev. ii. 5; Matt. xxi. 43).

IL Shiloh’s fate would be Jerusalem’s doom, unless speedy and sincere repen-
tance prevent it not. 1. Jerusalem was as sinful as ever Shiloh was (ver. 13). 2.
Jerusalem should be as miserable az ever Shiloh was (ver. 14).

“ The tabernacle and the sanctuary at Shiloh have disappeared ; so also the temple
built by Solomon, and the Ark of the Covenant itself ; and even the temple re-erected
without the ark by Zerubbabel ; so too the temple of Herod. All the places con-
secrated by the presence of our Lord Jesus Christ and the ministry of His apostles
have been destroyed, and given up to the abomination of desolation: Jerusalem,
with the Mount of Olives and Ge:gotha, Bethlehem, Nazareth, the whole of
Palestine, Asia Minor and Greece, became Christian, and yet fell a prey to the
Crescent. All the less may Rome count on perpetuity, since the chair of Peter
rests not on Divine, but on arbitrary human institution.”—Naeg.


“ See what I did to


ADDENDA TO CHAP. VII.: ILLUSTRATIONS AND SUGGESTIVE EXTRACTS.


Ver. 4. ‘‘ Proclaim there this word.”
The preacher.


fanatics, the very name of the temple of
Jehovah as an all-sufficing talisman.”—
“cc 5 ”
«¢ He that negotiates between God and man, Si tanley, » “ Jewish Ch vurch, A if
‘As God’s ambassador, the grand concerns It is much easier to give oneself to
Of judgment and of mercy, should beware a church or a sect than to God.”—Top-
Of lightness in his speech, "Tis pitiful lady.
To wits ® grin when you should woo s “Men seem to think, Only let me
To break a jeat when pity should inspire get into the Church that has apostolicity,
Pathetic exhortation ; and address and catholicity, and orthodoxy!... An
The skittish fancies with facetious tales organised institution I believe in ; but
When sent with God’s commission to the +h. New Testament idea of a Church waa
@ moral society of those who had a com-


heart.” —CowWPER.
Ver. 4. “The temple of the Lord/” mon faith, hopeandlove. That Church
which is most positive about its apos-


Ecclesiasticism. “They clung with a icl )
desperate tenacity to the hope that the tolicity, that thinks there is no other


local sanctity of Jerusalem was a suffi-
cient safeguard against all calamities ;
and repeated, with that energy of itera-
tion which only belongs to Eastern


Church but itself in the world, is 8 mere

crustaceous, not a spiritual, Chureh. And

that Church which has the most aitars,

the most vestments, the most re
16


OHAP, VII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAE.





ties, the most things that appeal to the
lower nature of men, which has the most
physical embodiment, and _ therefore
occupies the largest space in men’s
sight, is farthest from the true spiritual
Church.”— Beecher.

Ver. 5. Thoroughness. “I have
tried for twenty years to be a half-way
Christian,” said a business man on whom
life’s cares pressed heavily, and over
whom worldly allurements were very
powerful, “and find it is impossible ;
we must be at one or the other extreme.
And as for myself, I am determined to
do my whole duty, and be a complete
Christian.”

A proud Indian chief became deeply
convicted of sin, and, trembling under a
sense of guilt, sought the missionary,
and proffered his belt of wampum to be
freed from his anguish of fear. ‘ No,”
said the missionary, “ Christ cannot
accept such a sacrifice.” The Indian
departed, but soon returned offering his
rifle and the skins he had taken in hunt-
ing. “No,” was the reply, “ Christ can-
not accept such a sacrifice.” Again the
Indian went away, but with a troubled
conscience once more returned, and
offered his wigwam, wife, child, every-
thing, for peace and pardon. “ No,”
was still the reply, “ Christ cannot ac-
cept such a sacrifice.” The chief seemed
oppressed with surprise for a moment ;
then, lifting up tearful eyes to heaven,
he feelingly cried out, ‘‘ Here, Lord, take
poor Indian too !”— Dictionary of Jllus-
trations.

‘‘ Place not thy amendment only in
increasing thy devotion, but in bettering
thy life. This is the damning hypocrisy
of this age, that it slights all good
morality and spends its zeal in matters
of ceremony, and a form of godliness
without the power of it.”—/uller.

Ver. 7. Covenant. “ God’s promises
are with a condition, which is as an oar
in a boat or stern of a ship, and turns
the promise another way.”—Trapp.

The two Rabbis. A little while after
the city of Jerusalem was destroyed,
two Jewish rabbis were walking over
its ruins. Both seemed affected at the
mournful sight, but one wept, the
other smiled. Turning to his companion,

168


the one asked, “ How can you smile now,
when you see our holy city laid low in
ruins $” “Nay,” replied the other, “let
me rather ask you, Why do you weep %”
“T weep,” said the first, “ because I be-
hold around me the fearful judgments of
the Almighty. Our beautiful city is no
more—our holy temple is laid waste—
our brethren, where are they now?”
“ All that,” replied the other, “is the
reason why I smile. I see, like you,
how sure God’s judgments are; but I
can learn how true must be His promises,
God hath said, ‘I will destroy Jerusa-
lem.’ I see He has; but He has also
said, ‘I will rebuild Jerusalem.’ Shall
I not believe His word ?”

Ver. 10. Insolent profanity. The
very heathen refused to admit any
polluted person to their religious
services, That saying of Aincas to
his father, when he came from the
war, is a clear proof: Tu genttor, &e.,
“Father, do you meddle with the
sacrifices ; but as for me, it is a sinful
thing to touch them till I have washed
myself in the fountain.” This was an
outward external rite amongst them for
cleansing themselves, These heathen
cirxd out to the people that came to
sacrifice, “ All you that are unclean and
profane, go far from these sacrifices.”
Not only the Word of God, but the very
light of nature taught them not to
meddle with holy things till they were
sanctified.—Caryl.

In the mystical sacrifices of Ceres,
profane persons were excluded, the


priest calling out, txa¢ txag Sorig GAsrpeg. |


**T venerate the man whose heart is warm,
Whose hands are pure, whose doctrines and
whose life,
Coincident, exhibit lucid proof
That he is honest in the sacred cause.”
—COWPER.


Ver. 11. Sacrilege. The spirit of
God will not have holy things profaned,
Belshazzar converted the consecrated
vessels of the temple into instruments of
luxury and intemperance. Herod pol-
luted the sepulchres of saints by a sacri-
legious search for treasures presumed to
be hidden there, and God made fire to
rise out of the earth and consume the
searchers. Antiochus ransacked the


”


ie i ili


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


OH AP. VEE.





temple of the Lord. Heliodorus emp-
tied the treasures of their consecrated
monies. Pompey defiled the Sabbath
and the sanctuary. Crassus robbed the
hcuse of God of 10,000 talents. But
inquire into the event of these inso-
lences, and we shall find that true then
of which later ages give many examples,
that ruin is the child of sacrilege, that
mischief setteth a period to the lives
and designs of profane men.— Bishop


Reynolds.


Ver. 16. Intercessory prayer.
Luther had boundless confidence in the
power and prevalency of prayer. “At
the time the Diet of Nuremberg was
held,” says Tholuck, “Luther was
earnestly praying in his own dwelling ;
and at the very hour when the edict
granting free toleration to all Protestants
was issued, he ran out of his house, cry-
ing out, ‘We have gained the victory !
Do you understand that ?’” On another
occasion, Melancthon was sinking into
death through severe illness, and Luther
entered hischamber. ‘ We cannot spare
you yet!” was Luther’s exclamation to
bis dying friend ; and then he threw
himself upon his knees in wrestling
prayer. Then, seizing Melancthon’s
hand, he said, “Be of good courage,
Philip: thou shalt not die!” After his
recovery, Melancthon wrote to Camera-
rius, “If Luther had not come to me, I
should certainly have died ; he recalled
me from the gates of the grave.”

‘* More things are wrought by prayer
Than this world dreams of. Wherefore, let
thy voice
Rise like a fountain for me night and day,”
&e. —Txnnyson’s “ Morte d’Arthur.’


Ver. 22. Sacrifices. Christ never
despised sacrifice, but relatively He
undervalued it. The idea of sacrifice
among the Jews had taken precedence
of humanity, justice, and right. (See
Matt. v. 23, 24.) What does it mean
but this, Do not think that sacrifice to
Gcd is the highest religious duty. Sacri-
fice depends for its value on preceding
moral qualities. A principle is higher
than the ordinance which you take to
exhibit that principle. The life of
religion in the soul is first in import-
ance: the instruments by whieh you


develop that life are of secondary con
sideration.—H. W. Beecher.

Ver. 23. Obedience. Some persons
would make religion to consist of little
else than a self-denying course of the
practice of virtue and obedience. They
make it a kind of house-of-correction
work. Butno! I love the service of
my God; like the bird, I fly on the
wings of obedience to His holy will.—
Chalmers.

Ver. 31. “High places of Tophet.”
In the parallel passages (xix. 5, xxxii.
35), Jeremiah substitutes the word
“ Baal,” thus identifying the two names.
Probably “‘ Tophet” was a contemptuous
name for “ Baal,” derived from J), to
spit out, an object, therefore, of loathing,
The word occurs in Job xvii. 6, and is
rendered “ tabret,” #.¢., “I was as a con-
temptuous thing.” And it is to be
noticed that in the consecutive verses
(Isa. xxx. 32, 33) the word occurs twice,
and is rendered “ tabret” and “ Tophet ”
respectively. Dr. W. Smith affirms
that “the Hebrew words are nearly
identical,” and hence concludes that
“‘Tophet was probably the king’s ‘music-
grove’ or garden, denoting originally
nothing evil or hateful.” But Ewald,
Hitsig, Gesenius, and others, appeal to
Isa. xxx. 33, ‘“‘Fire and much wood ; the
breath of the Lord, like a stream of
brimstone, doth kindle it,” in favour of
the meaning, place of burning, from
AN, to burn, This beautiful valley


Josiah “defiled” (2 Kings xxiii. 10),
pouring into it all the filth of the city,
till it became a foul and revolting scene,
Others suggest its significance to be “a
drum,” because that instrument was em
ployed to drown the cries of victims who
were “caused to pass through the fire.”
“To the worship of Molech a temple
was dedicated in the valley of Hinnom,
and infants sacrificed, to drown whose
cries, when the little innocents were
locked in the burning embraces of the
brazen image, a loud flourish of trum
pets and cymbals was constantly kept
up, whence the place was called Tophet.
Hezekiah and Manasseh, both slaves to
this revolting superstition, immolated
their sons to the savage divinity.”—
Paxton.
169


C@aP. VII.


Ver. 32. Punishment. The seed
holds in embryo the form into which,
by an inviolable law, it will develop ;
the full development will be but an
enlargement and likeness of the germ.
Sin is thus embryonic; our guilty deeds
will expand into results which will


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAB.





reflect in intensity their origin. What-
soever a man soweth, that shall he aleo
reap.”

“ Punishment is the recoil of crime ;
and the strength of the back-stroke is
in proportion to the original blow.”—
French.





CHAPTER VIIL


Crrtican anp Exeaxrioan Norzs.—Chronology and History, as in chap. vii. Observe, how.
ever, that a new section in this extended prophetic address commenced with ver.4, which
continues to chap. ix. 22.

1. Geographical Reference. Ver. 22. “G@ilead:” a mountainous region, bounded on the
west by Jordan, east by high plateau of Arabia, north by Bashan, south by valley of Heshbon ;
covering an area of cir. 60 miles by 20. The mountains of Gilead have an elevation of between
2000 and 3000 feet. The valleys of Gilead are richly wooded, presenting all the noble features
of forest scenery. The torrent-beds are filled with oleanders. The district so charmed the
Reubenites and Gadites that they asked it for their inheritance rather than pass ‘‘ over
Jordan” (Num. xxxii, 1-5).

2. Personal Allusions. Ver. 8. ‘‘ Scribes :” the Sopherim, students and interpreters of the
written law, who probably owed their elevation into a distinctly-recognised order to Shaphan
(2 Chron. xxxiv. 13, 15); their employ was to write out the law, classify its contents, enume-
rate its clauses and letters, with “every jot and tittle” (cf. ii. 8). Ver. 9. ‘‘ The wise men:”
specified also in chap. xviii. 18 as a distinct class ; but probably here used of those who prided
themselves on their knowledge, learned men of all orders of society (ef. ix. 23).

3. Natural History, Ver. 7. “Stork :” Chasidah, a name suggestive of piety and benevolence,
from TDIT, zeal, benignity ; specially careful for her young and her aged parents, makes her


nest on high (Ps. civ. 17), soars very loftily (‘‘in the heaven”), far above the range of human
vision, annually migrates as soon ag cold warns her of winter’s approach ; arrives in Palestine
about the middle of March, where it rests for about six weeks. “Turtle,” 1.¢., turtle-dove,
Thor: heralds the spring (Cant. ii. 12) with sweet voice (Cant. ii. 14), yet mournful tones
(Nah. ii. 9); its plumage rich (Ps. Ixviii. 18), nestles in rocks (Jer. xliii. 28), has eyes of
peculiar softness and lustre (Cant. i. 15, v. 12), migratory. ‘“ Crane :” Sus, means the swift,
also a bird of passage, very noisy, with a harsh note; in appearance resembling the stork.
“ Swallow :" here Agdr [the words Sus and Agur are used interchangeably in Scripture for
swallow and crane ; difficult, therefore, to fix the name on either]; the swallow prefers popu-
lous scenes, and builds her nest in dwellings of mankind; her note is quick and querulous
(Isa. xxxviii, 14), her migration is annual, Ver. 13. ‘‘ Grapes on the vine:” Anabim, cluster
ot grapes (Gen. xl. 10). (See notes on chap. ii, 21, vii 9.) “ Figs:” Tenim, three kinds in
Palestine—the early, the summer, and the winter fig; tree grows to vast dimensions, and
abounds throughout the land (Deut. viii. 8), (See notes on chap. v.17.) Ver. 14. ‘* Water of
gall,” i.e., poisonous water ; lit. water of the poisonous plant, UNV ND, Gesenius pronounces


it the poppy ; but Speaker’s Com. refers to the same word in Deut. xxxii. 82, where the further
description, ‘‘their grapes are grapes of gall,” necessitates the abandonment of the poppy,
which has no berries (“ grapes”); and concludes, ‘‘ probably it was the belladonna or night-
shade, to the berries of which the grapes of Israel were compared.” In Hos. x. 4, résh is ren-
dered “hemlock,” and in Job xx. 16, ‘‘ poison” of asps. The Targum renders it “the cup of
malediction.” Ver. 17. “Serpents, cockatrices,” i.e, serpents, even cockatrices, or vipers:
Tsiphoni, small but very venomous vipers, basilisks which cannot be charmed, Its name,
Tsiphont, given to it on account of its remarkable hissing ; its sting deadly (Prov. xxiii. 32,
where rendered “ adder”). So fatal is its wound, that natural historians assert that all other
serpents hurry away and hide themselves at its hiss, and that its very breath will blast plants
and poison the air, ‘“ This dreadfui snake is not a native of Canaan, but abounds in the miry
fields of Egypt” (Dr. Porter). Ver. 22, “ Balm in Gilead:” this balsam early mentioned in
Scripture (Gen. xxxvii. 25) as an article of commerce with Midianitish merchants, who carried
it to Egypt; sufficiently valued as to be among the presents sent by Jacob to Joseph (Gen.
xliii. 11), and possessed of acknowledged medicinal properties. It cannot be identified with
any particular tree. Pliny and Strabo attest the celebrated virtue of the opobalsamum or myro-
balanus ; but Bochart selects the resin drawn from the terebinth as the “balm” here alluded
to, There is now no treein Gilead which yields such balaam, but it may be found in Arabia and
170


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. OBA. VIEL








. A fragrant and medicinal balsam is used and sold among Turks which is obtained
from Mecca,

4 Manners and Customs, Ver. 1. ‘‘ They shall bring out the bones,” &c.: ornaments and
treasures were buried with the dead; the enemies, knowing this, would ransack the
sepulchres, and plunder the dead of their insignia and valuables. Refer to Josephus,
Antiq. vii. ch, 15, § 8, for account of Hyrcanus rifling the sepulchre of David, robbing it of
3000 talents ; and to Heredotus i. 187, for statement of like act of Darius with grave of Nito.
cris, A customary arrangement for crown, sceptre, and royal insignia to be interred with
kings ; nobles and the wealthy imitated this by burying other treasures and valuables, Ver. 8,
“« Pen of the scribes :”” the pen or etyle was of iron, pointed (ef. vii. 1), though this “iron pen,”
or graver of steel, was probably used only for tracing letters upon stone or metallic plates.
When tablets of wood covered with wax, skins, and parchments received the writing, a metal
stylus or a reed formed the ‘‘ pen.” Ver. 22. ‘‘ /s there no physician there?” The inquiry
suggests that practitioners in the medical art had established themselves in Gilead, who both
collected the “ balm,” and applied it to the suffering who resorted thither for healing.

5. Literary Criticism, Ver. 1. ‘‘ At that time :’” points back to chap. vii. 32, ‘‘ the days come.”
Ver. 4. ‘‘ Shall they fall... shall he turn?” More correctly, Shall men fall and not arise!
shall one turn, &c. } An appeal to the general experience and conduct of men—viz, that it ie
customary for men to arise after having fallen, &. Ver. 6. ‘* No man repented hem,” &c.: lt.
No man has pity upon his wickedness; the sinner would compassionate and commiuserate him-
self did he fully realise his sin and its consequences. Ver. 8. ‘‘ Certainly in vain made he tt,”
&c. Margin, “The false pen of the scribes worketh for falsehood.” Lange also, taking the
verb /TWY as emphatically to work, translates thus: ‘‘ Behold he has worked for a lie, t.e., has


done lying work ; the pen of the scribes has produced lies.” Keil and Speaker's Com. render the
words: ‘‘ Io! the lying pen of the scribes hath made it (the law of the Lord)into a lie.” The
Vulyate has, ‘‘ Verily, falsehood has the false pen of the scribe wrought.” Ver. 10-12. The
LXX. omits from the words, ‘‘ for every one from the least,” &c.,to the end of ver.12. They
are a repetition of words from chap. vi. 12-15. Jeremiah frequently quotes his former utter-
ances ; hence Hitzig’s suggestion that they are an interpolation is without force. Ver. 13. “And
the things that I have given them shall pass away from them: ” the old translators (Chald., Syr.,
Vulg.) render the passage, “ What I have given them they have trangressed.” Hwald sustains
this. The A.V. translation suggests the meaning, they should lose God’s beneficent gifts.
Umbriet, Venema, Keil, and Speaker's Com. render the words, ‘‘So J appoint unto them those


that shall pass over them:” wi, to appoint ; and 72, to overrun (cf. Isa. viii. 8). Hitzig and
Graf., “1 deliver them up to mem who pase over them.” Ver. 14, ‘‘ Be sient,” from MoT,
the Niphil form (WT), meaning to perish ; then “ put to silence,” from DID"}, Hiphil form
(DBW1), meaning to destroy ; hence, Jehovah hath decreed our ruin. Ver. 18, ‘When J would
comfort myself,” &c. : lit., “Oh, my comfort in the sorrow! my heart within me is faint;” an
outery of anguish. Noyes renders it, “Oh, where is consolation for my sorrow Vern 0;
“Behold the voice... because of them in a far country.” More correctly, “ Behold! the
sound of the ery of the daughter of my people from a distant land ;” her cry being, ‘Ig not the
Lord in Zion ?” &c., from which she is now an exile. To this question God returns the coanter-
question, ‘‘ Why have they provoked Me?” &c. Ver. 21. “Iam hurt,” am broken, t.e., in
heart. ‘‘J am black,” am in mourning (Keil) ; 1 go mourning (Speaker's Com.). Wer. 22. ‘‘ The


health,” &c. Why, then, has no bandage (of balsam) been laid upon my people? (So Keil,
Speaker’s Com.) But ‘‘ health” is the more uniform rendering of the word (cf. xxx. 17, xxxiii. 6).


Hend, remarks, ‘JIN, health, properly means length, from the circumstances of long lines
bandages being employed in binding up wounds,”


SOMILIES AND OUTLINES ON SECTIONS OF CHAPTER VIEI,


Section 1-8. The dead: their graves dishonoured.
4-12, The living; their unabashed iniquity.

»» 18-17. Maledictions: God’s messages of doom,
»» 18-22. Lamentations : the prophet’s dismay.


Ver. 1-3. Tuz Deap: Tur Graves DIsHONOURED,


This would be done by the Chaldean hordes in search for booty. Jeremiah,
however, suggests not the motive of this sacrilegious disturbance of the dead ; he
regards only the fact as the punitive judgment of an offended God. Even plunderers


may carry into effect the righteous displeasure and retribution of the ne


CHAP. VII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR.








“ At the time of the siege of Jerusalem, not only will they bury in Tophet (vii
32—34) till there be no more room, such will be the carnage; but they who bury
there will also open the graves of those who are buried, the kings and princes of
Judah, and expose them to public contumely and shame. Perhaps the corpse of
King Jehoiachim was then disinterred (xxii. 19).”— Wordsworth.

“Their dead bodies should lie unburied in the sight of these their deities (ver. 2),
whom these idolaters had worshipped while they were alive, and thought they could
never do enougi for, but who could do them no good either alive or dead.”——7'rapp.

“Tn their reckless search, the barbarians would never think of replacing the bones
which they had disturbed, but would leave them exposed to open gaze. The objecta
of idolatrous worship are here introduced with admirable effect, as unconcerned
spectators of the indignity offered to their former worshippers. The condition of
survivors (ver. 3) would be more pitiable than that of the dead.”—Henderson,

L The sanctuaries of the dead profaned (ver 1). What a conception does this
fact supply of the barbarity of the Chaldean hordes! Nothing sacred in their
esteem. War lets loose the worst passions of the best armies, but never did an
army equal in lawless badness this Babylonian host. Lust and greed drove them
on to ruthless violation of everything they met. (See Addenda to chap. viii. 1,
“ Graves disturbed.”)

II. The pitiless indifference of idol deities (ver. 2). How does this statement
set before these idolaters the worthlessness of their gods! In their most evil hour
their chosen deities will neither commiserate or help them. Suggestive of man’s
treatment from those he substitutes for the true and gracious Lord ; contemptuous
unconcern in his day of calamity.

III. The horror and anguish of survivors (ver. 3). There is something worse
than death; yea, than a dishonoured burial: life, when itself “evl;” when
“driven” away by God; when abandoned to “places” of exile, among foes and
scoffers and cruel despots. To live experiencing and enduring God’s vengeance is
the direst calamity man can bear (comp. Job iii. 21, 22; Rev. ix. 6). (Addenda to
chap. viii. 3, “ Death desired.”)





Ver. 4-12. THE Lrvixe : Tuer UNABASHED INIQUITY.


I. They would not attend to the dictates of reason (ver. 4,5). The most
careful traveller may miss his way; but then, as soon as he is aware of it, “will he
not return?” No man in his wits will go on in a way that he knows will never
bring him to his journey’s end: “why then has thts people slidden back with a
perpetual blacksliding #?” The nature of sin: it is—(1.) backsliding ; (2.) perpetual,
unless Divine grace prevent it; (3.) a cherished deceit; (4.) of which its dupes
refuse to be undeceived.

IL They would not attend to the dictates of conscience (ver 6). Observe:
1. What expectations there were from them, that they would bethink themselves: “I
bearkened and heard. (Comp. Job, xxxiii 27.) 2. How these expectations were
disappointed: “They spake not aright ;” and the only speaking “aright” would
have been in words of ‘repentance of wickedness ;” but this was refused. (a.)
They did not take even the first step towards repentance: “ None said, What have
Idone?” (4.) They were so far from repenting that they went on resolutely in
their sins: ‘‘ Every one turned to his course,” &c.

Ill. They would not attend to the dictates of Providence (ver. 7). Though
they are ‘“‘my people,” yet, 1. Zhey were heedless of God's dealings with them:
- © Know not the judgments of the Lord.” 2. The inferior creatures around them
showed more sagacity. (Addenda on ver. 7, “ Stork,” “Turtle,” &c.)

IV. They would not attend to the dictates of the written Word (ver. 8, 9).
Many enjoy abundance of the means of grace, but they do not answer the end of
their having them. These who are “ wise” yet do no better for their souls with their


f~


eae Ay aN nie
HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. OHaP. VIII.
i a Le CET


wisdom than they who pretended to none, will have reason to be “ashamed,” and
will be taken in their own snare. 1. He threatens the judgments of God agatnst
them (ver. 10). 2. He gives a reason for those judgments: they were greedy of
wealth, “ given to covetousness ;” they made no conscience of speaking truth, “every


one dealeth falsely ;” they flattered people in their sins (ver. 11); they were lost to


all sense of virtue and honour (ver. 12), “they could not blush.” Such as these
were ripe for ruin.— Henry.


Ver. 13-17. Matuprorions: Gov’s Mxssacus or Doom.


A succession of varied images and ideas; vine, stronghold, trouble, invasion,
serpents : Jeremiah’s quick transitions from figure to fact is characteristic. Also
observe the frequent change of speakers in this section: God speaks in ver. 13,
the people in ver. 14, 15; Jeremiah himself, ver. 16; Jehovah again, ver. 17; a
style indicative of the passion and intensity of the prophet. Both the varied
imagery and the interchange of speakers denotes the deep emotion under which
Jeremiah now speaks: the dreadful theme harrows his own spirit. Behind his
impetuous thoughts and words lay this great grief: ‘‘ How can I endure to see the
destruction of my people?” To announce “ glad tidings of good things” is a far
easier and happier task than to bear messages of wrath. Yet we must not say,
** Peace, peace, where there is no peace” (ver. 11); but tell fully what God bids.
A series of maledictions under varied images,

I. The vine: Fruitless things God will consume (ver. 13), ‘There are no
grapes,” &c. (not, there shall be). Fruitlessness is the reason why God will
“consume.” Xe translates ver. 13: “Away, away will I sweep them, saith
Jehovah: no grapes on the vine, and no figs on the fig-tree, and the leaf is
withered; so I appoint unto them those that shall pass over them.” And the
Speaker's Com. thus comments: “These intermediate clauses describe the
present state of the Jews, and not, as in the Authorised Version, the result of
God’s judgment. Judah is a vine which bears no fruit, a tree which makes even
no profession of life, for her leaf is dry.” Others regard the words as threatening
the Jews with the deprivation of the fruits of the earth ; but the former interpreta-
tion has fuller authority and significance.

IL. Strongholds: Defences cannot exclude the penalties of sin (ver. 14). The
people awake at length to the urgency of the case: would shelter themselves in
fortified cities ; yet withal they realise their sure destruction: “ Let us perish (be
silent) there.” Strong walls cannot exclude God’s judgments: “The Lord our
God hath decreed our destruction.” (See Ihterary Criticisms on ver. supra.) Sin
must eventuate in overthrow: ‘ Because we have sinned,” &c. Though they rally
one another to flee, yet they are conscious they cannot escape ; they are irremediably
lost. It is mournful abandonment to despair.

III Trouble: Sinners’ false hopes assuredly shattered (ver. 15). False
prophets had beguiled them to “look for peace ;” now they experience the utter
reverse: “no good,” for where can “good” be found when God is lost? ‘and
behold trouble,” properly “terror,” so overwhelming would the calamity prove.
Suggestive of the sinner’s anguish of dread—in death, in judgment.

IV. Invasion: Terrible forces of retributive justice (ver. 16). (See on chap.
iv. 15.) The border-line crossed by the foe. Health may be our border-line, or a
carnal confidence ; the enemy will pass that line, and then, oh our dismay! There
are “strong ones,” rushing cavalry, which scour the land ; no resisting their fury or
checking their impetuous speed, The result; “devoured.”

V. Serpents: Alleviation and avoidance of misery impossible (ver. 17): “not
be charmed,” and “they will bite you.” No incantation, devices, or persuasives
will disarm the attack of the foe ; the venomous bite will inevitably bring death.


Such is the issue of the “ Serpent’s” bite. No crafty measures will avert the miseries
173


OMAP. VIII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.








re follow upon sin: “ At last it biteth like a serpent, and stingeth like an
er.”


Ver. 18-22. Lamentations: THe PropHet’s Dismay.


As Jeremiah regards his people’s ruin, his heart is sorely oppressed with grief and
horror. (Addenda to chap. viii, 18, “ Bitter lamentations.”) He was wholly
anlike those fastidious philanthropists

“Who sigh for wretchedness, yet shun the wretched,
Nursing in some delicious solitude
Their dainty loves and slothful sympathies,”
—Cousrine, “‘ Religious Musings.”

I. A disastrous event (ver. 19). The invaders have carried the people into a
“far country.” (See Ltt. Crit. supra.) From the scene of their exile their bitter
laments come ringing upon the prophet’s troubled ear. Yet their complaining cry,
“Ts not the Lord in Zion?” is answered by God’s accusing inquiry concerning their
prolonged and provoking apostasy.

I. A grievous reflection (ver. 20). The day of hope and remedy is irretrievably
gone! This is the bitter outcry of the wretched exiles themselves. Sinners will
one day see and bewail their impiety and folly. (Addenda, chap. viii. 20, “‘ Oppor-
tunity lost.”)

I A stricken mourner (ver. 18, 21). He can lay hold on no comfort in his
sorrow ; calls after it as Jost, and his burdened heart is sick within him; while also
he himself suffers (ver. 21) the agonies which he witnesses his people bear. In
this Jeremiah was a type of Him who was “stricken and afflicted ;” for “surely
He hath borne our griefs.”

IV. A bewildered inquiry (ver. 22). (1.) A remedy eaisted; “balm.” (2.)
Skilled administrators of the remedy could be found: “ physicians there” (these
physicians were her priests and prophets, scribes and wise men ; comp. ver. 8-11);
yet she had suffered many things of many physicians, without being healed of any.
For there is but one True Physician for the maladies of sin, and to Him she had
not applied. ‘“ Why?” The prophet is staggered at Judah’s neglect of Him:
what is her reason? “ Neglect of the great salvation” is therefore unreasonable,
unjustifiable, astounding. For because of such neglect unutterable miseries and
grievous wounds remain, and must continually be borne. Verily, man’s wilful
repudiation of the Divine remedy is appalling, and he thereby “ wrongs his own
soul.”


HOMILETIO TREATMENT OF SELECTED VERSES IN CHAPTER VIII.


Ver. 1-3. Theme: THE DEAD Dis- that slain should be unburied, but here
AONOURED, YET DEATH DESIRED. (Ad- _ the graves of the buried are to be mali-


denda to chap. viii. 1, 3, “‘ Dead mo-
lested ; Death desired.”)

Note: Burial is an expression of our
hope of resurrection ; hence our common
reverence for places of sepulture, and
our horror at sacrilegious violation of
the grave.

“The dreadful desolation which the
Chaldean army would make in the land
would strangely alter the property of
death itself, and for the worse too :

“I. Death shall not now be, as it
always used to be, the repose of the
dead. Threatened in former chapter

174


ciously opened.

“TT. Death shall now be, what it
never used to be, the choice of the
living. And this, not in a believing
hope of happiness in the other life, but
in an utter despair of any ease in this
life.”—Henry.


Ver. 2. Theme: PHASES OF IDOLA-
TROUS HOMAGE.

“There is great force in the piled-up
verbs by which their worship of the
heavenly bodies is described.

“1, With ther hearts they ‘loved


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAB.


OHAP. Vix.





them. 2. With costly offerings they
‘served’ them. 3. Wath submissive fol-
lowing they ‘walked after’ them. 4.
Frequenting their temples, in order to
gain their favour, they ‘sought’ them.
5. Bowing down before them and pub-
licly honouring them, they ‘ worshipped’
them,

“Yet these gods, thus served with
heart and hand, do nothing whatever
for their worshippers, except to aid their
bones to decay. Hitzig well points out
how the prophet, beginning with the
heart (‘loved’), describes their worship
in the various stages of development, and
then contrasts its fulness with the
miserable reward which ensues,”—
Speaker's Com.

I. Progressive stages of idolatrous
Service.

II. Absolute entirety of idolatrous
self-subjection.

III. Pitiless abandonment by idols
of their votaries.

IV. Melancholy doom of idolatrous
victims.


Ver. 4. Theme: THAT MEN HABITU-
ALLY TRY TO RIGHT THEMSELVES.

When they fall, they are not so sense-
less as to lie there ; they can and they
do get up. When they err and lose
their way, they do not madly resolve to
accept their mistake and continue to go
wrong ; they refuse to proceed along a
road which leads they know not where,
but certainly where they do not wish to
go; and they retrace their steps.

Basil uses the text as a motive for re-
pentance,

Chrysostom finds in it an argument
that no sinner need despatr of repentance.

It suggests: i, Z'he sinner’s power to
help himself. ii. The stupidity of doing
nothing to better his case. iii. The
extent to which his self-help can attain.
iv. The common proneness of man to fall
and err. v. The necessity for direction,
that he may not continue to wander and
so be lost. vi. That God approves man’s
efforts to retrace his errors. vii, Grace
will certainly avatl for those who desire
to tread the right way.


Ver. 5.
SLIDING.


Theme ; PERPETUAL BACK-
(Addenda to chap. viii. 5.)


L The causes of backsliding.

1. Fear of man. 2. Intercourse with
worldly society. 3. Presumption, 4,
Secret sin. 5. Neglect of prayer.

It. The symptoms of backsliding.

1. Absence of pleasure in attending
to the secret exercises of religion. 2.
Irregular and unprofitable attendance on
public ordinances. 3. Unwillingness to
act or suffer for the honour of Christ.
4. Uncharitable feelings toward fellow-
Christians. 5. Indulgence in sins once
abandoned.

III. The forms of backsliding.

1, Declension into error. 2. Into
unbelief. 3. Into lukewarmness or
want of love. 4. Into prayerlessness,
5. Into immorality. 6. Into open re
jection of a Christian profession.

IV. The evils of backsliding.

1, Its evils to the backslider: (1.) It
diminishes his happiness. (2.) It arrests
his progress. (3.) It destroys his use-
fulness.

2. Its evils to others: (1.) It staggers
the anxious inquirer. (2.) Seduces the
weak Christian. (3.) Embarrasses all
the friends of religion. (4.) Supplies
materials to the mocker.

V. The cure of backsliding.

1. Let the backslider remember from
whence he has fallen. 2. Let him re-
flect on his guilt and danger. 3. Let
him return to God, from whom he has
wandered. 4, Let him live near Christ.
5. Let him forsake the sin into which
he has fallen. 6. Let him learn to de-
pend on the promised aid of the Holy
Spirit.— Brooks, “ Plans.”


Ver. 6. “Wat Have I Dong?”
(Addenda to chap. viii. 6, “Self
interrogation.” )

1. In reference to God. 2. To my
self. 3. To Christ. 4. To Christians,
5. To the unconverted.— Brooks.

“The thought expressed here is
best explained by what St. Paul says in
1 Cor. xi. 31: ‘For if we would judge
ourselves, we should not be judged. ’”—
Speaker's Com.


Ver. 6,7. Theme; Man ON EARTH.

Text leads us to look upon man on
earth in three aspects :

IL As the special anni Divine


O@aP. Vill,


attention. ‘I hearkened and heard,”
says God ; expressing deep interest. Two
things show His special interest in man
on earth :

(a.) The language He employs in the
Bible. “As I live, saith the Lord,” &e.
‘Lo, these three years I came seeking
fruit,” d&c.

(b.) The provision He has made in the
Bible. Why this special attention ?

i. We may imagine that man’s spiritual
snjirmitries on earth would draw towards
him the special notice of his Maker.
The diseased child attracts most parental
sympathy and attention. This world is
the invalid member of God’s family.

ii. We may imagine that man’s
eritical position on earth would draw
towards him, &c. Here, he has practi-
cally to decide his destiny.

iii, We may imagine that man’s
social influence on earth would draw, &c.
Who can tell the influence, for good or
evil, of one man on this earth? One
may send thousands to hell, or “turn
many to righteousness.”

IL As the probationary subject of
redemptive discipline.

Under this system three things are
required of him ;

1. Rectitude of language.
spake not aright,”
with moral truth,

2. Contrition of heart.


“ They


t.¢., In accordance


“No man


repented of his wickedness.” Repen-
tance is essential to his recovery.
3. Self-searching thought. ‘“ What


have I done?” in relation to my soul,
the universe, God? When prodigal
began to think he came to himself.

ItI. As the wicked abuser of the
system under which he lives.

In two ways, as here specified :

1. Reckless obstinacy. ‘‘ Every one
turned to his course.” And the way
of each was from God; as infidel ;
drunkard, &c. “ As the horse rusheth ”
(Job xxix.)

2. Unnatural ignorance. “ Yea, the
stork in the heaven knoweth,” aE (1.)
These creatures have remarkable instinets,
suitable to the external circumstances of
their nature. Sohave you. They have
instincts of perceswing coming changes,
and of adjusting themselves to those

176


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; JEREMIAH:





changes. (2.) These creatures invart-
ably render obedience to their instincts.
You do not. How unnatural /—Homilist
(Addenda to chap. viii, 7, “ Stork,”
&c.).

Ver. 8. “Lying pen of the scrobes,”


(of. “Personal Allusions,” on ver.
supra, and Addenda.)
Ver. 8, 9. Theme: INTELLEOTUAR


VANITY PERVERTING REVELATION.

“The law of the Lord is with us;”
that was the state of their case; but
what did they do with it, and what did
tt do for them? What we have is of
subordinate importance to the use we
make of it and the advantage it secures
to us. Men now have the Word of
God ; how do they treat it, what does
it profit them }

L Sources of sacred wisdom. ‘“‘ Law
of Lord is with us.” They “ knew the
Holy Scriptures, which are able to make
wise unto salvation.” The Jews, having
in there possession these sacred oracles,
might have attained to the “wisdom
which is from above,” and consequently
been the wisest people on earth, We
possess a revelation which “makes the
simple wise,” and teaches holiest and
most precious truth to man.

II. Perversion of the sources of
sacred wisdom. “ Pen of scribes made
it a lie.” (See Let. Crit. supra, on
ver.). By false interpretation, and
delusive application of the law. This
is the constant result of :

1. Wilful trifling with the Scriptures,
2. Intellectual conceit, which reverses
and mutilates Scripture language. 3,
Narrow bigotry, which will bend revela-
tion to its own shibboleth. 4. Blind
hosithty, which rebels against the plain
Word, and hence explains away literal,
teachings. 5. Dainty sentimentalism,
which softens and practically neutralises
distasteful teachings, strong anathemas,
and bold declarations.

Ill. Arrogant pretension to the
possession of sacred wisdom. ‘“ We
are wise ;” for no other reason than
that they had the Scriptures, and knew
the letter. ‘‘ The law of the Law is with
«s,” is a boast of more than outward
possession of it, but also of inward ac


eg


he al


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAR.


La. ne Re





quaintance with it, mastery of its con-
tents. Such a familiarity did not, does


- not, always engender reverence, or lead to


obedience. It fostered vanity of mind,
intellectual conceit, and became a snare.
These scribes rose, indeed, to be “ wise
above what is within.”

IV. Delusion resulting from the
arrogance of wisdom (ver. 9), Thus,
“‘ He taketh the wise in their own crafti-
ness.” God will refute such irreverent
and merely literary wisdom. Christ
thanked the Father that “from the wise
and prudent” He had “Asd” the pre-
cious truth. God denies real light to
the intellectually proud, as they exclude
themselves from a saving knowledge of
the truth. Lowliness and submissiveness
are qualifications for Divine enlighten-
ment,—“ revealed them unto babes,”

V. Befutation of man’s vaunted
wisdom. God asks, “ What wisdom is
in them?” With all thetr knowledge
and their satisfied vanity, they had prac-
tically ‘‘ rejected the word of the Lord.”
It is “he that doeth His will shall know
of the doctrine :” hence God repudiates
thew boast,—denounces them as inflated
fools, “ wise (only) in their own con-
ceits,” and predicts their coming shame.
Intellectual vanity easily leads to tam-
pering with and perverting God’s Word ;
and then the condemnation is inherited
with which the volume of the book
closes (Rev. xxii. 18, 19).

Comments :

Ver. 10-12. Almost identical with
chap. vi. 12-15; yet some distinctive
dissimilarities exist sufficient to refute
Hitzig’s suggestion that they are an in-
terpolation. The LXX. omit them.
Jeremiah, however, frequently repro-
duces his -figures and phrases: eg.
(comp. v. 15 with xiv. 19).

“To those that shall inherit them”
(ver. 10). “ Rather to those that shall
take possession of them, ¢.¢., to conquer-
ors who shall take them by force. To
“<«nherit” is to obtain legally, but the
verb here used is that applied to Ahab’s
seizure of Naboth’s vineyard (1 Kings
rxi. 15), to the subjugation of Palestine
by the Israelites (Lev. xx. 24), to the
Babylonian conquests (Isa, xiv. 21).”—
Speaker's Com,


GHAP, VI,


Ver. 13. Theme. THREATENING OF
COMING PUNISHMENT. 1. Severity of the
visitation.  (a.) Certain: “surely.”
(6.) Desolating : “consume.” (c.) Agonis-
ing: “consume.” ii, Reason of the visi-
tation. (a.) Fruitlessness: “no grapes,
no figs:”4.¢., there are none, (b.) Decay:
“leaf is withered.” In consequence of
barrenness Christ cursed the fig-tree.
iii, Selected agency of the visitation.
Read, “I appoint those who will pass
over them.” (a.) God regulates punish-
ment: “I appoint.” (b.) Unconscious
agents fulfilling His word: “ them that
shall pass over them.” Note: 1. God
has fixed and serious designs concerning
men, 2. He has Hts agents ready and
able to carry them out. 3. When we talk
of peace and safety, see no invader, sus-
pect no foe ; yea, while the enemy him-
self ts without plan of attack, the design
for our overthrow stands complete. 4.
Hence, the certainty that “the wicked
shall not go unpunished,” and the
urgency of our forsaking evil, and seek-
ing reconciliation with God,


Ver. 14, 15. Theme: DxErFtance
REDUCED TO DESPAIR.

Until now, Judah had resented God’s
warning and messages: had carried on
the war of resistance against His Word ;
entrenched in her carnal security and
insolent indifference, had refused to
repent or yield. This verse shows her
vaunted confidence gone; she must “ flee
to defenced cities:” and her proud spirit
broken; she must “be silent there.”
Yet the opening sentence, “ Why sit
still?” may be, not a panic cry, that her
peril is imminent, but a summons of her
dejected soul to self-help: one more
effort to keep above surrender and
despair.

I. A rallying-call to action and self-


defence. ‘“ Why sit still? Let us go
to defenced cities.” (See Homily on
iv. 5.)


Calvin remarks that these words show
“that they (as hypocrites are wont to
do) had recourse to expedtents, by which
they thought to protect themselves
against God’s wrath. They (hypocrites)
indeed feel their evils, and seek to apply
remedies; but they sop at ae neareat


GilaP. VIII.


reliefs, without seeking to pacify God,
and to return into favour with Him;
and think themselves to be safe if they
betake themselves to this or that hiding-
place.”

1. Self-chiding: “Why do we sit
still?” 2. Self-reléance: ‘‘ Assemble
yourselves, and let us enter.” 3. Self-
delusion : “ enter into the defenced cittes,
and let us besilent there.” Svlent there:
some render the words, rest there : DT,


to rest or be silent. Merely defend our-
selves in quiet, until the storm blow
over,

IL A despairing recognition of their
woful case. “ Let us be silent there ;
for the Lord our God hath put us to
silence, and given us water of gall to
drink.” Authority determines the word
“silent” to mean “perish,” lit. be
put to silence, from D7, All that


they can promise themselves, in fleeing
to fortified cities, is a little respite. 1.
Salvation ts beyond hope : the “ defenced
cities” will fall; they cannot expect,
therefore, to be saved, but only to put
off a little longer the inevitable ruin,
2. Destruction ts determined for them:
“ Jehovah hath put us to silence,” 4.e.,
hath decreed our destruction, and there
is now no escape. And “ hath given us
water of gall;” te., of poison. (See
“ Natural History” on verse.) This
simile suggests the bitter suffering in-
cident to their nearing ruin. Horsley
renders the words, “ And let us sit there
in despair, since the Lord our God hath
brought us to despair,” &e. For God
had at last reduced their defiance of
Him, and their self-confident indiffer-
ence, to utter despair. (Addenda, chap.
viii. 14, “ Defiance isswing in despair.”)

Til. A paralysing acknowledgment
of sin’s merited judgment. “The
Lord hath put us to silence, dic., because
we have sinned against the Lord.”
Suggests

1. God és against sin: He will not
condone it.

2. Sin hath entailed death, God
decrees destruction, and gives the poison-
ous cup to the sinner,—which is the
decree brought home to the tranagressor
against whose sim that decree has gone

178


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


forth, Flee where they might, they
would carry their impiety with them,
and, therefore, God’s decree against ini
quity would follow them into their forti-
Jications, and wrath Divine would fall
upon them there. There is no escaping
the sentence and doom which sin entails,
for there is no evading God, nor shutting
off from us the operation of His omnipre-
sent laws. Men will realise this at last.

IV. A melancholy confutation of
the sinner’s vain hopes (ver. 15),

1. Flattering expectations are easily
cherished. By (1.) The sinner’s own
foolish vanity. {33 By the false coun-
sellors to whom he listens. (See Notes
on chap. iv. 10, and also viii. 11.)

2. Hapertence scatters our false expec
tations. Man has the making of his
expectations; God of his expertences,
Our expectations are what we desire;
our experiences what we deserve.


Ver. 18. Theme: CoMFoRT IN 8OR-
row. I. Need of comfort. IL Attempt
to comfort ourselves. III. Such utempt
vicious and vain.—J. Farren. (Ad-
denda to chap. viii. 18, “ Butter lamen-
tations.”)


Ver. 19, 20. Theme: A BITTER ORY
FROM SCENES OF EXILE.

‘This verse should be translated
thus :—‘ Behold the voice of the cry for
help of the daughter of my people from
a distant land! Js not Jehovah in
Zion? Is not her King there? Why
have they provoked Me to anger with their
carved tmages, with foreign vanities ?’
The invaders have not merely wasted
the land (ver. 16), but carried the rem-
nant into captivity. The prophet seems
to hear their loud cry for help, but their
complaint, Js there no Jehovah tn Zion #
is met by God demanding of them the
reason why, instead of worshipping
Him, they have set up idols,” Speaker's
Com.

“‘ Because they have chosen the empty
idols from abroad (“ strange,” foreign
“ vanities”), Jehovah, the Almighty
God of Zion, has cast them out into a
far country amidst strange people.”—
Keil.

“The common cant was, Js not the





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





CHAP. VIL.





Lord in Zion? And will not Zion's
God protect Zion’s king and kingdom %
This outcry of theirs reflects upon God,
as if His power and promise were
broken or weakened; and, therefore,
He returns an answer to it immediately,
Why have they provoked Me? &c. They
have withdrawn from their allegiance to
Him, and so have thrown themselves
out of His protection.”—Zenry.

In the midst of their bitterness and
woe, they remember the God whom they
had forgotten in their prosperity ; but
this remembrance is not a gracious one,
—they do not remember Him to hum-
ble themselves before Him, but to bring
accusations against Him.

I. We have a cry: That is how the
prayer is described. 1. It had in it a
meaning: “the voice of their cry.”
2. The matter of the voice : “for them
that dwell in a far country ” [interpreting
the words as Zion’s agonising appeal to
God for those “afar-off,” like the pro-
digal “in a far country”). 3. Their
settled estrangement from God is implied,
“them that dwell in a far country.”
4. This prayer for those long estranged
is from God’s own people: “the cry of
the daughter of my people.”

IL. The question : “Is not the Lord
in Zion? is not her king in her?”
Surely, yes. Then if the Lord bein the
midst of Zion, i. Why do we pray as if
He were not? Rather pray, knowing
Him near to answer as by fire 2. Why
do you despond because of your weakness ?
God is all-sufficient. 3. Why those
great fears about the prosperity of the
Church ? The battle is the Lord’s: let
us go on and conquer.

Iti. Another question : “ Why have
they provoked Me?” &c. 1. Here isa
question for the Lord’s people. Itisa
very solemn thing when God is in His
Church, how that Church behaves
herself. 2. This text has a particular
voice to sinners. You have been saying,
God is amid His people ; how is it I
remain unblessed, unsaved? Because
of your ‘“‘ vanities,” your idols, your
sins.

IV. Another cry: “The harvest is
past,” &c. (ver. 20). We thought God
would keep us in the days of harvest ;


but the harvest is past, Wedreamed FH:
would chase away our enemies when th:
summer months had come; but the
summer ts ended, and still Chaldea ha»
her foot upon Judsh’s neck—=still we
drink the wormwood and the gall: we
are not saved,

What harvest, what summers (spiritu-
ally) we have had: ingathering of souls ,
yet you are not saved! Some in your
home converted, é&c., but you not saved.
The day is near when you will have to
cry in the sight of the approach of death,
“The harvest is past, &c., and J not
saved /” Yes, a day comes when, being
tn torments, you will cry those words!
We are looking for Christ's coming: and
then, seeing Him gather His harvest into
the sky, the cry again will rise, “ Harvest
past. we not saved /”—Spurgeon,


Ver. 20. Theme: THE LOST HARVEST.
“ Harvest ts past,” d&c.

Language descriptive of the awful
position of those who, having trifled
away gracious opportunities, are found
at close of life unforgiven and unre-
newed. Consider :

I. That the means and oppor-
tunities of securing salvation are
graciously afforded to men.

II. That these means and oppor-
tunities will soon pass away.

ItI. That when once past, they will
have disappeared for ever. Irretriev-
able despair !|—Sunday at Home.


Theme: THE UNAVAILING LAMENTA-
TION. Bethink:

I. That God has given you the gra-
cious seasons of summer and harvest.
1. The summer (a.) of life; (6.) of rea-
son; (c.) of opportunitie. 2. The
harvest (a.) of knowledge ; (0.) of privi-
leges; (¢) of blessings,

II. That these may pass away un-
improved. 1. Many do not think.
2. Wall not forsake their sins, 3, Wall
not believe. 4, Well procrasténate,

IIL That the regrets of such will
be awful and unavailing. 1. Some-
times their regrets are expressed in this
world. 2. They will surely be uttered tn
eternity. Regrets (1.) of intense agony,
of recollection, of self-condemnation ;

179


GazaP. VIt.





(2) regrets will be unavailing,—no space
or repentance, no ear for prayer, no
fountain, no cross! (3.) of black despair,
“harvest past,” d&.

1. None would choose this portion,
2. Who would risk it? 3. Who will
flee from it? Now is the “harvest,”
&e,.—Jabez Burns.


Theme; Li¥x’s SOLEMN OPPORTUNITY.

L What considerations involved.
1. The object: “harvest.” 2. he oppor-
tunity: “summer.” 3. The limitation:
“ past,” “ended.” 4. The neglect irre
parable: “ We not saved,”

IL To what circumstances applic-
able. 1. Neglect of decision for God.
2. Neglect of spiritual culture. 3.
Neglect of Christian service.

Ill. What lessons enforced. Im-
portance of—1l. Present opportunity.
3. Present dedication.—J. Farren.


Theme: CAUTIONS AND OCONSOLA-
TIONS.

Text may be accommodated so as to
admit of a general application, and be
interpreted in a spiritual sense. Then
this lamentation may be understood as
the

I Language of final and absolute
despair. That, having neglected means,
wasted opportunity, resisted Spirit,
“hated knowledge, and did not choose
the fear of the Lord,” now they have
no longer hope of mercy: nothing to
expect but judgment and misery/ Let
us dread the doom of the foolish
virgins.

Il. Language of deep and humbling
conviction. That, having abused their
only opportunity for seeking salvation,
for attending to “the one thing need-
ful,” for fulfilling the solemn object of
life, it is gone for ever; their day of
grace 18 over, they must therefore perish
without remedy! Awakened at last to
the interests of their souls, but awakened
too late. “ Redeem the time.”

TIL Language of distressing and
gloomy despondency. Such despond-
ency as the afflicted and tempted servants
of Jesus Christ sometimes experience :
their miinds clouded, peace gone, hope
perished, they take up vnrighteously

180


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


the melancholy ery of text: “ After all
we have thought and felt, we find we
have been deceiving ourselves, we have
not really known and loved the Lord,
our present gloom is proof against our
being His; we are undone; harvest is
past!” d&c. They are “in heaviness
through manifold temptations.”

Some have a well-assured hope that
their harvest is not passed, that they
aresaved! For they have fled to Christ
for refuge, have in themselves the wit-
ness of the Spirit. Remember, that for
these who have reasons for hope and joy,
the term of life is the “summer” in
which they must labour in the service,
and for the glory, of their Lord.—Rev.
Ed. Cooper, a.p. 1816.


Theme: NEGLECTED OPPORTUNITIES.

L There are certain seasons which
may be called the soul’s harvests.
1. Times of religious privilege. 2. Times
of special religious action. 3. Ina sense,
the whole of life is a harvest time, 4.
Now is emphatically a season of harvest.

Il, These seasons have their period
of close. 1. By national judgments,
2. By providential removal, 3. By the
withdrawing of the Holy Ghost. 4. By
death.

TI. That these seasons may pass
without due impression. 1. Proved
from the fact that many take no heed
concerning their souls at all. 2. Many
are convicted, but never converted, 3.
Exhort all to seek the Lord without
delay, for

IV. The remorse of those who allow
such seasons to pass without due im-
pression, will be—1. Fearful 2. Un-
availing.—A. F. Barfield, “ Christian
World Pulpit.”


Theme: SEASONS OF GRACE UNIM-
PROVED AND LOST.

Summer and harvest are proper seasons
of action; opportunities for armies to
take the field, subdue enemies, and bring
about deliverance of an oppressed people.
The winter that follows is aot a fit season
for action, An awful thing when favour-
able seasons for saving a people from
temporal enemies and calamities are lost ;
but infinitely more alarming to lose


mre fen


RR


Sa Ni a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JERBMIAR.





GHAP, VEL,





favourable seasons of saving their souls.
This is ground for deepest lamentation


- when forced to say, “ Harvest is past,”


&e. Consider:

L Favourable seasons, which we
should be careful to improve to the
salvation of our souls,

1. The summer days of youth, Hope-
ful season : God loves “ first ripe fruits :”
young prayers, young tears, young faith,
love, &c. (Eccles. xii. 1).

2. When persons enjoy lively means
and ordinances; when Christ crucified
is set before them with holy fervour and


3. When there is a noise and shaking
among the dry bones: work of convic-
tion and conversion is going forward, é&c.

4. When Satan’s power is restrained,
and churches have rest from evil: this is
a calm summer day.

5. When God ts visiting mankind with
alarming providences; then the inhabi-
tants of the earth should learn righteous-
ness,

IL Who may be satd to have lost their
summer days and favourable seasons of
grace? We cannot be positive as to any
while life remains, yet of some, sad
grounds to fear.

1. Those who have had the Spirit long
striving with them, but have resisted His
striving and repelled Him(Ezek. xxiv. 13).

2. Those who persist in sinful courses
and harden themselves against the re-
proofs of the Almighty (Prov. xxix. 1).

3. Those who sin presumptuously, sin
in the face of light, in hopes of repent-
ance and pardon (Num. xv. 30).

4. Those who are 80 determinately bent
om sin that God, their own consciences,
and God’s ministers cease to reprove
them (Exek. iii. 27, Hos. iv. 17).

5. Those who deliberately relapse into
sin after having been Divinely corrected
and aroused to resolutions (Isa. i 5).

6. Those who give themselves up to
commit sin with greediness, and glory in
it (Ephes, iv. 19, Phil. iii, 19).

7. Those who mock the offers of the

, and despise those who bring
them (2 Chron. xxxvi. 16). “ Harvest
is past,” d&c.

IIL The causes why men lose their

hopeful seasons.


<=


1. Unbelief ; did men believe God’s
Word, threatenings, and wrath to come,
they would improve their seasons of
grace, and flee to Christ.

2. Promise themselves time; leisure
to attend to work of salvation; regard
death and eternity as distant.

3. Indulge sloth; do not “ give all |
diligence” to the duties of religion,
public and private.

4. Love of carnal company and sensual
delights ; amid sinful pleasures they trifle
away their summer days.

Application :

(1.) How dreadful will be the end of
those who have lost all their opportunities
of salvation! Remembrance of them
will not ameliorate but embitter their
case,

(2.) Such characters act as tf devoid
of reason (Jer. viii. 7, Prov. vi. 8); worse
than the brutes that perish.

(3.) Let us endeavour to tmprove
Gospel seasons, the summer and har
vest for our souls, with greatest care.
—Hannum.

There is in this text

L The acknowledgment of oppor
tunity.

IL The confession of neglect.

Ii. The anticipation of doom.

J. W. W., from Lange. (Addenda to
chap. viii. ver. 20, “ Opportunity Lost.”)


Ver. 21. Comments ;

“ For the hurt of the daughter of my
people I am hurt.” The hopeless case
of the people and kingdom moves the
seer so deeply that he bursts forth with
the cry, “For the breaking of my people
I am broken” (the Hophil form = the
breaking of the heart). ‘Zam black:”
used of wearing mourning—in other
words, to be in mourning (cf. Ps, xxxv.
14, xxxviii. 7). “ Astonishment hath
taken hold:” horror hath taken hold
on me (vi. 24, Mic. iv. 9). Help is
nowhere to be found.— Keel.

‘‘Because of the breaking... I am
broken :” the words of the prophet,
whose heart ts crushed by the sad cry
of his countrymen.—Speaker’s Com.

“ Astonished ;” the astonishment with
which he was seized he no doubt sets
down as being the opposite of the

181


= ——


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAR.





people’s torpor and insensibility ; for
they had no fear for themselves.—
Calvin,

“JT am contemned for bewailing my
people’s misery, who neither feel nor
fear hurt.”—- Trapp.

*€ Observe here:

i How great his griefs were (ver. 21).
For their sin, and the miseries incurred
by it. It becomes us to lament the
miseries of our fellow-creatures, much
more to lay to heart the calamities of
our country, and especially of the Church
of God. Jeremiah had prophesied the
destruction of Jerusalem, yet he did not
rejowe im the proof of the truth of it by
its accomplishment, preferring the wel-
fare of his country before his own repu-
tation. If Jerusalem had repented and
been spared, he would have been far
from fretting, as Jonah did. Jeremiah
had many enemies in Judah and Jerusa-
lem, that hated, reproached, and _ perse-
cuted him; and in the judgments brought
upon them God reckoned with them for
it, and pleaded His prophet’s cause ; yet
he was far from rejoicing in it, so truly
did he forgive his enemies and desire that
God would forgive them.

ii, How small his hopes were (ver. 22),
No medicine proper for a sick and dying
kingdom ; no skilful, faithful hand to
apply the balm. He looks upon the
case to be depiorable and beyond relief.
The desolations made are irreparable,
and the disease has come to such a
height that there is no checking it,”—
Henry.

“Our connection with those who
hear us continually is so full, so intimate,
so tender, no one can understand it who
has not experienced it We get love,
we get somewhat from the heart which
was broken for its enemies, and which
could cry on the cross: Father, forgive
them, they know not what they do,”—
Zenzendorf.

Ver, 22. Theme: A CURE FOR
DISEASED SOULS.

J, That mankind universally are in
a diseased state.

he soul of man is meant, hence the
diseases are those of the soul, That
the distempers of the mind are com-
pared to wounds, disease, and sickness,

182


will appear from Ps. xxxviii. 5, ciii. 3;
Ezek. xxxiv. 4; Matt. ix. 12. Point
out some of these diseases ;

1. Atheism, infidelity, or unbelief of
Divine truths.

2. Ignorance of God and Gospel
truths, even among those who profess to
know Him (Hos. iv. 6). They may be
cured (Rev. iii. 17, 18).

3. Hardness of heart.
26 ; Phil. i. 6).

4, Earthly mindedness, Other plagues
kill their thousands, this kills its tens of
thousands, Pharaoh’s words are true of
them (Exod. xiv. 3). Yet there is help
for this (Col. iii. 12).

5. Aversion to spiritual duties. Many
would rather toil their bodies a whole
day than spend a quarter of an hour on
their knees in secret with God. (Mal.
i, 13). Relief for this (Ps, cx. 3; Isa.
xl, 31 ; Ezek. xxxvi. 27),

6. Hypocrisy and formality in God's
service (Isa. xxix. 13). This also may
be healed (Jer. xxxi. 33; Prov. iv. 18;
2 Cor. iv. 16).

7. Trusting to our own righteousness
(Rom. x. 10).

8. Indwelling corruption (Ps. lxv. 3 ;
Isa. lxiv. 6). Yet there is help for this
(Mic. vii. 19 ; Rom. vii. 24, 25).

9. Backshiding. This is a spiritual
consumption, yet may be cured (Deut,
xxx. 6 ; Hos, xiv. 4-6).

There are several symptoms which
seem to render our diseases almost
desperate and incurable.

a When the body is universally
affected, and with a complication of
diseases, the case is truly alarming: and
this is the state of the soul (Isa. i. 5, 6).
Still we may be recovered; David was
(Ps. ciii. 2, 3).

8. When diseases are of long continu-
ance (Pa. li. 5 ; Deut. xxviii. 59). Yet
the Lord can make dry bones live (Ezek,
xxxvii).

y. When all around consider their
case desperate, Often the case with
sinuers (Ezek. xxxvii 3, 11). Yet see
the promise (Jer. xxx. 17).

3. When its threatening symptoms are
not observed, 80 as to provide timely
remedies. Our case not unlike Israel's
(Isa. lvii. 17),


(Ezek. xxxvi.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.





CHAP. VITi,





«. When the patient becomes lethargic,
loses his senses, and cannot be awakened
(Isa xxvi. 11; xxix. 10). Still there
is hope (Jer. xxxiii. 6).

Ii. That there is a physician who
can cure all diseases.

God Himself (Exod, xv. 26). Our
cure is the work of the whole Trinity,
but especially of Jesus Christ (Luke iv.
18 ; Matt. ix. 12 13). In this office of
Healer, He was typified by the brazen
serpent (John iii 14); by the Sun of
Righteousness (Mal. iv. 2) ; by the Tree
of Lafe (Rev. xxii. 2). Being God-man,
He is nobly qualified: for

l. He 13 infinite in knowledge, and
understands all diseases, with the proper
remedies, so that He never can err (John
xxi. 17).

2. He has sovereign authority, and
almighty power, so that He can com-
mand diseases to obey (Matt. ix. 2).

3. He has infinite pity, ready to help
the distressed, even unasked, hence
represented as Good Samaritan (Luke
x. 33).

4. Hehas wonderful patience towards
the distressed ; bears with their ingrati-
tude, and works their perfect cure.

Ill. The remedy which He applies
to effect the cure.

It is His own blood. This is the true
“ Balm of Gilead ” (Isa. liii. 5), Scrip-
ture speaks of other means of healing,
subservient to the blood ;

l. The Spirit of God, with His gracious
operations on the soul (Gal. iii. 13, 14).

2. The word and ordinances of Christ ;
these are the “leaves of the Tree of Life,”
&ec. (Rev. xxi. 2; comp. Ps. cvii. 20).

3. Afflictions: making us mourn our
wounds, and apply for remedy (Isa. xxii.


9).
as Fatthful ministers. The Great

Physician sends them to dispense whole-
some doctrines (1 Tim. vi. 3; Tit. ii. 1).

5 Piows Christians help by ther
prayers (Jas. v. 15).

The Physician's method of apply-
img the remedy. He

a, Makes sinners sensible that they are
sick (Matt. ix. 12). This implies dis-
covery of the nature of sin, grief over
it (Ps. xxxviii. 6, 18), despair of healing
ourselves (Hos. xiv. 3) aud willingness





to submit to the Physician’s prescrip.
tions (Acts ix. 6).

B. Works faith in the soul, by His
Holy Spirit : 4.¢., persuades and en-
ables him to embrace Christ as his
Saviour, and apply the balm to his
wounded soul. Then danger is over
(John v. 24),

y. Accomplishes and perfects the cure
by the sanctifying influences of the
Spirit (Matt. v. 8).

IV. The reasons why so few are
healed, notwithstanding there is balm
in Gilead, and a physician there. Cause
in us: for

1. Many are ignorant of their disease,
and wilfully so.

2. Many are in love with their disease,
more than with their physician. God
may say of them (Ps. lii. 3).

3. Many neglect the season of healing
(Jer. viii, 20)

4, Many will not trust Christ wholly
for healing.

5. Many will not submst to the pre-
scriptions of Christ ; to self-examination,
repentance, godly sorrow, mortification ;
therefore are unhealed. To conclude:

a. Let those in a diseased state see
their danger, for it is great; if they
do not apply to this Physician, they
cannot be healed,

8. Balm of Gilead is freely offered in
the Gospel (Isa. xlv. 22 ; Ezek. xviii.
32).

7 Consider how long you have slighted
this balm already, Now improve your
day, like the people of Capernaum (Luke
iv. 40; 2 Cor. vi 2).

é. Those whom Christ has healed,
manifest their gratitude by living to His
glory.— Hannum.

(Addenda to chap. viii 22.
of Gilead.”)


“ Balm


Ver. 22. Theme ; REASONS FOR THE
IRRELIGION OF THE MASSES,

“Why health of my people not re-
covered ?”

Prophet referring to degeneracy and
misery of Jews. Ask same question
respecting the moral state of the masses
of our own nation. Necessary to look

L At our moral and evangelical]
resources.

183


OnAP. VIL





1. No country in the world in all
respects equal in privileges.

2. No age comparable to this: (a.)
Plenitude of God’s Word. (b.) Good
books. (¢.) Evangelical ministry. (d.)
Rich variety of social institutions ; for
Young Men; Temperance; City
Missions ; Open Air Services, &e.

Il. The fearfal evils which still
exist. Of these:

1. Avowed infidelity. Every form of
scepticism.

2. General neglect of Divine worship.

3. Prevailing crime.

4. Juvenile precocity and profligacy.

5. Overwhelming intemperance.

Il. The affecting inquiry pre
sented. ‘ Why then,” &.

Three classes of reasons : :

1. In the Church; (i.) Prevalence of
spiritual indifference. (ii.) Sectarian
contentions. (iii.) Fewness of workers.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





(iv.) Want of spiritual self-denial (v.)
Coldness in prayer. No sense of the
ruin of souls, (vi) Feeble faith; not
proving God.

2. Reasons in the persons themselves,
Feel they are separated from other
classes; neglected; despised on ac
count of their poverty, &c.

3. Reasons in the world. Seductive
temptations, dissipating scenes, especially
on Lord’s day. So Gospel is not heard
and believed. Souls lost. Sin un-
cured, Crowds perishing.

Application ;

1. We appeal to Church of Christ,
Great responsibility.

2. Sinners are inexcusable,
man must give account.

3. God’s mercy and grace are all-
sufficient.

4, The provisions of the Gospel are
freely published.— Rev. Jabes Burns.


Every :


NOTICEABLE TOPIOS IN OHAPTER VIII.
Topic ; InrTERROGATING OUR ConDUOCT. Text: “ What have I done?” (ver 6.)


How attentive God is to us and our actions! He sees His prodigals when yet
a great way off ; to Him there is music in our sigh, and beauty in a tear. In this
verse He represents Himself as looking upon man’s heart, and listening—if possibly
He may hear something good. And how amiable God is, that turns aside, with
grief in His heart, exclaiming, “I did listen, but no man spake aright,” &c. Never
do we have a desire towards God, or breathe a prayer to heaven, but God has been
watching and hearkening for it : it was but one tear on the cheek, yet the Father
noticed it as a hopeful sign ; but one throb went through the heart, yet He heeded
it as an omen that not quite hardened by sin. Text, “ What have I done %” calls for

I. Words of earnest persuasion, urging all, and especially the unconverted, to
ask this question, each for himself, and solemnly answer it. Few men like to take
the trouble to review their own lives, Like silly ostrich, when hard pressed by
hunters, bury their sight from real evils and danger. But remember

1. Searching yourself can do you no hurt. Little can be lost by taking stock.
You cannot be any worse for a little self-examination. 2. You may be a great deal
better for the process: for, if your affairs are all right with God, you may cheer and
comfort yourself ; but there are many probabilities that they are wrong ; so many
are deceived, and anything rather than self-delusion, 3. The time for self-exams-
nation is short: soon you will know the secret, death will rend off the mask.
t. Though you may deceive yourself, you cannot God. The everlasting Jehovah will
«rasp the balances of justice, put His law in one scale and the sinner in the other :
* Weighed and found wanting!”

Vartous excuses will arise to check this inquiry : you will plead you are members
vt churches, have often received the sacramental bread and wine. Easy thing in
this age to make profession of religion. Christ had one hypocrite in His twelve!
Rest on no profession. Neither put off this question because too busy to attend to
spiritual concerns. Know not how near death is to thee. May the Lord prepare
each for death and judgmceut by leading all to ask, “‘ What have I done?”

I. Words of assistance.in trying to answer the question.

184


=


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; JEREMIAH. CHAP, VIII,





1. To Christians : “What hast thou done?” You reply, “Nothing to save
myself; that was done forme. Nothing to make a righteousness for myself; Christ
said, It is finished! Nothing to merit heaven; Jesus did that for me before I waa
born!” Yes; but say, What hast thou done for Him? for His Church? for the
salvation of the world ? to promote thine own spiritual growth in grace f

2. To moralists : ‘‘ What hast thou done?” You answer, “ All I ought to have
done! You may tell me of sins, but I have done my duty: observed Sabbath,
said prayers, given to poor, dc. ; and if good works have any merit, I have done
a great deal!” True, ¢f any merit ; but very unfortunate that they have not, for
our good works, if we do them to save ourselves by them, are no better than our
sins. Christ will never go shares with you in the work of salvation. Your
morality is no help to you whatever as to eternal things.

3. To the worldly: “What done?” “It is very little I do amiss ; now and then
just a little mirth.” Stop; let us have the right name for that mirth, What do
you call it in any one elae? “ Drunkenness.” “TI have been a little loose in talk
sometimes!” Write it down, ‘“ Lascivious conversation.” Bometimes you have
been out on the Sabbath? “ Sabbath-breaking.” You may have quoted texts of
Scripture to make jokes of them, and used God’s namein foolish talk? “ Swearing.”
Did you ever adulterate in your trade$ “ Stealing.” Wished you could get your
neighbour's prosperity? ‘ Covetousness, which is idolatry.” Ever really prayed }
“ Prayerlessness.” Neglected God and Bible? “ Despising Him.” Few but will
feel these sins lie at their door. May the Spirit touch your consciences, and convinee
you of your sins |

4. To the unconverted: ‘What done?” By your sins you have destroyed your
soul, resisted the gospel, spurned Christ. Yes; and think what you have done to
your children; taught them the ways of spiritual ruin. To your compantons:
tempted some to take the first stray step into folly, indulgence, iniquity. Doth not
your heart quail within you because of self-ruin and ruin of others?

JIL Words of affectionate admonition to those who have had to answer the
question against themselves.

1. Solemn that the years roll on and yet you are unsaved. You, not altogether
hardened, yet “done” nothing to determine for Christ, and lay hold on eternity.
2. There will be a time when you will ask the question, but ¢& will be too late.
“On the death-bed?” No, not too late there; but when breath has gone out of
your body. After the suicide has taken the fatal leap, he may cry, “ What have I
done ¢” but too late! Some mocking spirit in mid-air echoes, “ Lost, lost, lost !”
In the dreadful judgment, too, the soul will ask that question, as the eye of the
Judge fixes itself upon him: He turns to your page in the book, but it has never
been blotted with His blood. If you only knew what they feel, and could see
what they endure, who have lost opportunity and lost themselves, you would, ere
too late, pause and ask, “ What have 1 done?” As immortal spirits, bound for
endless weal or woe, fly ye to Christ, seek for mercy at His hand, trust in Him, and
be saved.—Spurgeon. (Comp. Addenda to chap. viii. 6, “ Sel/-interrogation.”)


Topic: THe Ravaass or Sin: A Patsetio ReMonsTRANOE. Text: “Is there no
balm in Gilead # 4s there no physician there? Why, then, ts not the health
of the daughter of my people recovered #” (ver. 22).—(Addenda, “ Balm of
Gilead.”


“ Astonishment” (ver. 21) over ‘health not recovered” (ver. 22) is followed


‘by lament for ‘the slain” (ix. 1). (1.) Between the two there ts a distinction:


“health ” lacking, the soul diseased, impotent, suffering, prostrate, perishing, but

not “slain.” (2.) Between the two there ts a connexion’, let the disease go um

checked, unhealed, the plague not stayed, and the issue will be—the suffering

eietim of sin “slain.” That sad word “ slain” suggests the destroyers work done;
185


Guay, VIS. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





the ruin of the “daughter of my people” is complete. Therefore, the prophet
lifts his voice in the cry of anguish in which there sounds no strain of hope (ix. 1)
But, in this text, the case is less severe; the malady rages, but recovery is possible,
“health may be restored.” To such as have lost spiritual health, and all as yet
unsaved, come the hopeful tidings of “balm in Gilead and a physician there.”
Four topics :

I A malady. ‘Health not recovered :” needed “balm and physician.”

The malady which has devastated the health of humanity is sin. What is sin
but a disease of soul? Analogy:

1. In the manner of its development. Disease lies concealed in blood before
it assumes visible signs. Began in thought, grew into a desire, advanced into an
intention, issued in act.

2, In the rapidity of its progress. Bursts forth into fierce forms, whole system
inflamed. Malady quickly spreads through the whole nature, vitiating mind, cor-
rupting character, consuming goodness, till “‘ yield members to uncieanness, and
from iniquity unto iniquity.”

3. In its contagious influence. Springs from one to another, speeding and
spreading misery and death. Plague of London started from one person. So,
“by one man sin entered into world,” &c. Broke out in Eden, pervaded earth,
&e. i Evil communications corrupt good manners,” ‘One sinner destroyeth much
good,

4, In its fatal termination. Unless arrested, disease soon completes its ravages,
and victim sinks to the dead. And what the termination of sin? ‘ Wages of sin
is death.” ‘Every man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own lust and
enticed. Then when lust hath conceived it bringeth forth sin ; and sin, when it is
finished, bringeth forth death.”

I. Aremedy. ‘“ Balm in Gilead.” Remedy equal to the disease, for “ health”
might have been “ recovered.”

Gilead a mountain ; balsam trees flourished ; gum had medicinal properties,
highly valued and widely celebrated. Thus extracted; Incision with axe or spear;
issues a glutinous sap. Concerning its virtues, ancient botanists and physicians
eloquent in praise.

Led by analogy from Gilead to Calvary, from balsam-tree to Cross ; from issuing
sap to Blood ; from incision by axe to “ with spear pierced His side.” Concerning
its healing virtues, ten thousand times ten thousand tongues eloquent. “ Health
restored :” in heaven, never more sick !

1. Jt was highly precious, So valued that Pompey and Titus carried some back
with themto Rome. “ Precious blood of Christ.”

2. It had peculiar properties. Healing virtues in “balm” special to it,
“Makes wounded spirit whole, calms troubled breast.”

3. It was easily obtained, Readily flowed forth, ‘‘ Seek, and ye shall find.”
“ Whosoever call on name of Lord shall be saved.”

4. It was effectual in its operation. ‘“ Whole head may be sick,” &. Yet heal
ing virtue therein. “Though sins be as scarlet,” &.


“ Dear dying Lamb, Thy precious bleod
Shall never lose its power.”


TL A healer. There is “a physician there.” This a mame which Jesus
assumed ; “They that be whole need not a physician, but they that are sick, I
came not to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance.”

1. He ts acquainted with the nature of the disease. Knows the cause of its com-
mencement, mode of development, phases it assumes, issues to which it leads
Knows seat of disease, and how to assail it: ‘ Out of heart proceed evil thoughts,”
&o. Familiar with the malady and mode of treatment.

2, He is skilful in administering the remedy. Has had long experience and

186





HOMILBTIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR.


OHAP, VIik,





extensive practice. Every land, every age.


“He went about doing good, and


healing all manner of diseases and sickness among the people. (Comp. Rom. vil.


24, 25.)


3. He ts willing to afford relief. Never wearied, “waits to be gracious ;”
se desires not death of sinner, but that all come to repentance ;” chides with the
dying, “ Ye will not come unto me that ye might have life,” assures, I will in


ho wise cast out.”


4. His ability to heal ts widely attested.


In our midst; “ Ye are washed,” &e.


In heaven : ‘Great multitudes ; made white in blood of Lamb.”


IV. A remonstrance.
what the explanation ?


1. Some urge that they are not suffering from any malady.


“Why their health not recovered ?”


Many unhealed ;


Not deny existence


and ravages of sin as general truth, but repudiate charge of personal corruption,


infection, and peril.


Thus put “balm” and “physician 'from them. For that


is the issue ; if men are not fatally diseased, Christ came 1 ot for them ; they have


no place in His redemptive mission.


Because of this folly —ignoring their need of


the Divine remedy—“ health is not recovered.”
2. Others urge that they are not in a condition of seris ts danger. Admit per-
sonal sin, need remedy, but no occasion for alarm; they ‘ know not that they are


wretched, and poor, and miserable, and blind, and naked.”
“They hold fast deceit” (ver. J).


of this malady of sin.
self-flattery “‘ health is not recovered.”


Delusion is a symptom
And because of this


3. Others urge that they can secure healing at any tim. Dreadful procrastina-


tion |
salvation just when men determine.
Melancholy presumption.


Deliberate trifling with grace. Surely there is mo certainty of finding
Death waits not upon our convenience,
Yet because of it “health is m t recovered.”


4. Others urge that they are too near perishing for recov-ry. Write hard things


against themselves, (See ver. 20.)


Physician? Have any proved Him unable?


But what state surpasses the Almighty


“ Able to save to uttermost.”


Yet because of despair “ health is not recovered.”
Sorrow for misery, surprise at hesitancy, indignation over trifling, remonstrance
with despair—all are expressed in this plaintive interrogation, “ Why, then, is


not health recovered ?”
for all, for ‘sinners, even the chief.”
healing.”


There is “ balm,” a “ physician,” and, therefore, “health *
“He healed all them that had need of


ADDENDA TO OHAPTER VIII: ILLUSTRATIONS AND SUGGESTIVE EXTRA OTS.


Ver. 1. GRAVES DISTURBED: DEAD
MOLESTED. Dr. Pusey writes of this


sacrilege, that it was “a hatred carried


beyond the grave, a hatred which is a
sort of impotent grasping at eternal
vengeance, hatred which, having no
power to work any real vengeance, has
no object but to show its hatred.” (Note
on Amos ii. 1.)

“He (David) was buried by his son
Solomon in Jerusalem, with great mag-
nificence, and with all the other funeral
pomp which kings used to be buried
with ; moreover, he had great and im-
mense wealth buried with him, the vast-
ness of which may be easily conjectured
at hv what I now aay: for 1300 years


afterwards, Hyrcanus, the high priest,
when he was besieged by Antiochus, and
was desiious of giving him money to get
him to raise the siege, and draw off his
army, and having no other method of
eompassing the money, opened one room
of David’s sepulchre, and took out 3000
talents, and gave part of that sum to
Antiochus, and by this means caused the
siege to be raised. Nay, after him, and
that many years, Herod, the king, opened
another room, and took away a great
deal of money.”— Josephus, Amtig. bk.
vii. chap. xv. § 3.

“For extremity of despite also, dead
men’s bones have been digged up. Pope
Formosas was so dealt bina his owe

4,


OMAP, VIET.








HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; JEREM1AL.





tessor, Stephanus VI. ; and many of the
holy martyrs by their barbarous persecu-
tors.”— Trapp.

Ver. 3. DEATH DESIRED.


**To die,—to sleep,
No more ; and, by a sleep, to say we end
The heart-ache, and the thousand natural
shocks
That flesh is heir to,—’tis a consummation
Devontly to be wished,” —Shakespeare.


‘* Death | to the happy thou art terrible,
But how the wretched love to think of thee!
O thou true comforter, the friend of all
Who have no friend beside!”

—Southey.

‘¢ A sleep without dreams, after a rough day
Of toil, is what we covet most; and yet
How clay shrinks back from more quiescent


elay!” — Byron.
**Soon may this woe-worn apirit seek the
bourne
Where, lulled to slumber, grief forgets to
mourn.” —Campbell,
Ver. 5. PsrpervaL BACKSLIDING


“They fall deepest into hell who fall
backwards into hell.’”—Bunyan.

“Errare humanum est; perseverare
diabolicum.”—Trapp.

Ver. 6. SELF-INTERROGATION. “ What
have I done?” The Pythagoreans once
a day put this question to themselves.
It is reported of Sextus that every night
before he slept, he asked of his own
heart, “‘ What evil hast thou this day
amended # what vice hast thou shunned ?
what good hast thou done? in what part
art thou bettered?”

“As it is an evidence that those
tradesmen are embarrassed in their
estates who are afraid to look into their
books ; so it is plain that there is some-
thing wrong within, among all those
who are afraid to look within.”—Secker.

Thales, the Milesian philosopher,
flourished about a.M. 3330, and was co-
temporary with Josiah, king of Judah,
and Jeremiah, our prophet ; and he it
was who gave birth to the wise admoni-
tion which was the basis of his philoso-
phic teaching, “ Know thyself.” Cicero,
however, ascribes the maxim to Apollo
himself, “ because,” he says, “it hath
such weight of sense and wisdom in it
as appear too great to be attributed to
any man.” It was emblazoned in golden
letters over the door of the temple of
Apollo at Delphos,

188


Ver. 7, “ Stork.” The same indivi.
duals return to the same place year after
year.

*¢ The atork-assembly meets ; for many a day

Consulting deep and various, ere they take


Their arduous voyage through the liquid sky,
And now, their route designed, their leaders


chose,
Their tribes adjusted, cleaned their vigorous


wings,
. e . . im congregation full
The figured flight ascends, and riding high
The grial billows, mixes with the clouds.”
—Thomson,
“ Turtle.”
**¢ The dove let loose in eastern skies,
Returning fondly home,
Ne’er stoops to earth her wing, nor flies"
Where idle warblers roam.
But high she shoots, through air and light,
Above all low delay,
Where nothing earthly bounds her flight,
Nor shadow dims her way.”
—HMoore.


“Crane.” Homer (Iliad, iii. 2, 3)
alludes to the harsh sound of the crane
in her flight :

‘The Trojans indeed advanced, with both
clang and shout like birds,


Just in fact as is the noise of cranes in front
of the sky.”


“ Swallow.” Its instinct is more true
than man’s reason or faith.

‘* Bright bird of summer, what joys are thine!
Voice of the spring, if thy wings were mine,
My merry course should be with thee
To the orange grove and the banyan trees
For who would dwell in the wintry chill,
And the gloom and cares of this world of ill,
Ii he could borrow thy wings, and stray
In chase of the summer, with thee away?”

—Anon (See Gray’s “ Topies.”)

“Crane and swallow.” It is agreed
by all philologists that our translators in-
terchanged the words, and that in each
case it should be “ swallow and crane,”
not “crane and swallow.”  Soos, or sts,
rendered “swallow,” scarcely can mean
the swallow, for though a migrant it is
hardly so in Palestine as to justify these
words, “ the swallow observes the time of
sts coming.” But the difficulty was
solved, says Dr. Tristram, when we found
that soos is to the present day the ver-
nacular or provincial, though not the
classical, Arabic name of the swift; and
when we noted that, unlike the swallows,
the swifts return to Palestine en a sud


rae


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





den in one day, and cover the land in
countless myriads.— Sunday at Home.

Ver. 8. Sacrep wispom. Needed,
Varro, a Roman writer of the first cen-
tury B.C., states that in his day he had
been at the pains to collect the various
opinions on the question, “ What is the
true object of human life?”—in other
words, “‘ What is the supreme good?”
He had reckoned up as many as three
hundred and twenty different answers !
How needful is Divine revelation —
Biblical Treasury.

“ LYING PEN OF THE Scriszs.” The
mention of Scribes in this place is a
crucial point in the argument whether
or not the Pentateuch or Torah is the
old law-book of the Jews, or a fabrica-
tion which gradually grew up, but was
not received as authoritative until after
the return from captivity. It is not
until the time of Josiah that we find
Scribes mentioned, except as political
officers ; here they are students of the
Torah. But the Torah must have existed
in writing before there could have been
an order of men whose especial business
it was to study it; and therefore Ewald,
Hitzig, Graf, and others explain the
verse away by saying that perhaps the
Scribes were writers of books, and had
published colle-tions of false prophecies
written in imitation of the true. But
the Torah of Jehovah is mentioned in
this very verse, and the whole gist of
the passage is lost if what the Scribes
turned into a lie was anything except
that law, of which they had just boasted
that they were the possessors. 3
Jeremiah’s whole argument depends
upon the fact that there were in his days
men who claimed to be “ wise,” or rather
learned men, because of their study of
the Pentateuch, and is certainly incon-
sistent with the assumptions of the new
critics, that Jeremiah wrote the book of
Deuteronomy, and that Ezra wrote parts
of Exodus and the whole of Leviticus—
Speaker's Commentary.

Ver. 14. DEFIANCE ISSUING IN DES-
Parr. Francis Spira, an Italian apostate,
exclaimed on his deathbed, “ My sin is
greater than the mercy of God! I have
denied Christ voluntarily. I feel now that
He hardens me, and allows me no Lope /”


OHAP, Viti.


Hobbes, the infidel, before death, “J
am taking a fearful leap into the dark.”

Ver. 18. BirreR LAMENTATIONS for
others’ ruin. When our Redeemer
wept over the city that was to perish,
He considered it the more to be deplored
as it knew not itself its deplorable con-
dition. As many, therefore, as are set
on fire by the torch of love weep over
other men’s sins as if they were their
own, St. Augustine says, “ We mourn
over the sins of others, we suffer violence,
we are tormented in our minds.” St.
Chrysostom says that Moses was raised
above the people because he habitually
deplored the sins of others. ‘ He,” says
the same holy doctor, “who sorrows
for other men’s sins, has the tenderness
of an apostle, and is an imitator of that
blessed One who said, ‘ Who is weak,
aud Iam not weak? Who is offended,
and I burn not?’ "—F. W. Faber.

Ver. 20. “‘ Harvest 1s past.” Oppor-
TUNITY Lost. “The mill can’t grind
with the water that is lost.” Opportu-
nities are importunities. Col. iv. 3, ia
literally “ buying up the opportunity.”

One of the most ingenious tortures of
the Hohenslaufen family, in the height
of their despotic control, was that of a
cell which, at the prisoner’s first entrance,
presented an air of comfort and ease;
so that it was not till he had been a few
days confined that he observed the di-
mensions of his chamber beginning to
contract. Butthe discovery once made,
the fact became more appalling every
day. Slowly but terribly, the sides
drew closer, and the unhappy victim was
crushed to death, What an emblem
does this suggest of the sinner’s contract-
ing dey of grace! Oh, what would the
peor victim in such a cell have given to
see the door open, and hear a voice,
“Escape for thy life!” Would that
sinuers would escape as eagerly by the
door of grace !—Bowes’ “ Illustrative
Gatherings.”

“Many do with opportunities as
children do at the seashore; they fill
their little hands with sand, and then
let the grains fall through one by one
till all are gone.”—T7, Jones.

Ver. 22, Baum or Gitzap. Gilead,
where the balm was found, was on the

189


CHaP. Li


wilderness side of promised land; the
true Balm of Gilead—Jesus Christ—is
for our healing here, before we pass over
Jordan. Men travelled far to get it,
bought it at great price; but Jesus is
nigh to heal us, and restores us ‘ without
money and without price.” Merchants
conveyed the balm far and wide ; mission-
aries travel far to make the free gift.
The balsam tree had to be cut, pressed,
&c., to yield the balm; Christ was
“wounded” and “bruised” (Isa. liii.
5). The supply of balm almost ex-
hausted: Christ the same for ever.—
“ce Topics.”

Alexander the Great was dying of a
wound, which did not seem very dan-
gerous at first, but it baffled his physi-
cians, and was rapidly becoming mortal,
One night, nowever, it is said, he
dreamed that some one had brought him
a peculiar-looking plant, which, when
applied to the festering sore, had cleansed
and closed it. In the morning, when he
awoke, he described the plant ; and the
historian informs us that it was sought
for and found, and when applied to the
wound, the fiery pain subsided, and he
was speedily healed. Now your soul has
received @ deadly hurt; it has been
stung by the old serpent, the devil.
The wound gets worse. There is a ten-
der plant which is able to heal you—it
is the Balm of Gilead.—Dr. James
Hamilton.

Compared with the virture and pre-
ciousness of the redeeming grace of
Jesus, whose blood cleanses us from all
sia.


‘* Not balm, new bleeding from the wounded


tree
Nor biess’d Arabia with his spicy grove,
Such fragrance yields.” — Rowe.


So highly prized was the balsam that,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.


during the war of Titus against the Jews,
two fierce contests took place for the
balsam orchards of Jericho, the last of
which was to prevent the Jews from de-
stroying the trees, which they would
have done, in order that the trade might
not fall into the enemy’s hand.

Not a root nor a branch of the balsam-
tree is now to be found in all Palestine.

Twice was a balsam-tree exhibited in
triumph to the Romans in their streets.
The first time was B.o. 65, when Pom-
pey returned from his conquest, and
Judea became a Roman province ; and
the last time was after a lapse of 144
years, when the spoils of the temple of
Jerusalem were borne in triumph through
the imperial city, and, as a sign of the
subjection of the whole country, the
precious balm-tree was exhibited with
pride by. Vespasian.

Bruce saw the balsam-tree in Arabian
valleys. The most considerable gardens
of them is in a recess of the mountains,
between Mecca and Medina.

The balm of Gilead is a small ever-
green ; at five feet from the ground it
branches out something like an old
hawthorn ; bark is smooth, shining, of
a whitish grey colour, with brown
blotches ; leaves are of a bright green,
foliage is scanty and rugged. The
greatest quantity of balsam flows from
the wounded bark ; but there are three
kinds procured by art ; best is the opo-
balsam, expressed from the green berry ;
second, from the ripe nut or berry ; the
last is obtained by bruising and boiling
the young wood.—Seripture Herbal.

The balm of the soul is prayer, saith
the Chaldee paraphrast ; is repentance,
saith Jerome ; is Christ applied by faith,
say we. Sanguis medics est curatso
phrenetica.— Trapp.


CHAPTER IX.
Crirtcar axp Exxcetican Nores. For Chronology and History, see chap. vil.


1, Geographical References. Ver. 26. ‘‘ Egypt:


” git. on N.E. angle of Africas; @ vast


plain ; in general features it may be regarded as the valley of the Nile, by which river it is
nourished ; the country anciently divided into two great divisions, Upper and Lower Egypt;
subdivided inte smaller sections called Nomes, or provinces; now divided into Lower Egypt,
called Delta ee enclosed within the armas of the Nile, resembling a Greek A); stretching


about 8¢ miles inland from Mediterranean


190


- Comtead
south: Upper Egyyi, which reaches cir, 250 miles atili


t, extendizg ctr. 150 miles further
from the Mediterranean, where





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH, OHAP 1X.
Fe ee ee


the First Cataract forms its natura! boundary. Common Bible name of the land is Mizratm ,
ancient Egyptian name, inscribed in hieroglyphics, is KEM, Comtaina 115,200 square geological
miles. “‘ Hdom,” or Idumea: a district north of the peninsula of Sinai, itself bounded on the
north by Moab, “a narrow, mountainous tract (about 100 miles long by 20 broad), extending
alony the eastern side of the Arabah.”—Dr, W. Smith. “Ammon:” originally the ‘‘ children
of Ammon” located themselves, together with Moabites, west of the Jordan, the Jabbok (mid-
way between Sea of Galilee and Dead Sea) was anciently the northern border-line of their
territory, and the Arnon (which flows into the Dead Sea nearly opposite to Engedi) the southern
limit. In Jeremiah’s time they were in possession of the cities of Gad (south of the Arnon),
from which Tiglath-Pilesar had removed the Jews (Jer. xlix. 1-6), ‘* Moab,” occupied the
plain of the Jordan-valley on the eastern side of the Dead Sea; afterwards spread themselves
south of Judea towards Idumea, But the boundary lines of Ammon and Moab were continu-
ally shifting ; hence their localisation can only be indicated, not determined. ‘All that are
in the utmost corners, that dwell in the wilderness.” (See Lit, Crit. on these words, “utmost
corners,’ below). Arabian tribes who resided in the desert S.E. of Palestine.

2. Natural History. Ver. 11. “Dragons,” DIF ; evidently “dragons ” is a wrong inter-


pretation, for serpents do not invade ruined cities, and make ‘‘dens” amid the “ heaps;’’ the
jackal is meant, whose habit is to prowl amid rocky places and ruins; size about that of a fox,
but legs longer; colour, yellowish grey, with dark shades about the back ; voice, hideous, a
mingled bark and howl; generally jackals go in great troops (Maunder). Ver 15. ‘‘ Worm-


ssood,”” itI})) (La%inSh) ; several species in Palestine; Kitto specifies four: Artemisia nilotica,


fudaica, fruticosa, and cinerea ; all distinguished for intense bitterness, and probably not only
nauseous but hurtful (Deut. xxix. 18; Prov. v. 4; Amos y. 7, vi. 12). ‘‘ Water of gall.” See
Nat. Hist. on viii. 14, supra.

8. Manners and Customs. Ver. 2, “Jn the wilderness @ lodging place.” A caravanserai,
usually a large, square building (khan), erected in deserts and regions far removed from towns,
on the route of caravans, either at the public expense or by private charity; they are mere
shelters for the night, without furniture, comfort, or supplies, and generally filthy and abound
in vermin. Ver. 3. ‘‘ Bend their tongues like their bows,” properly, they tread their bow, 4.c.,
to string it—the bow being held by the foot while it is strung. Ver. 7. ‘I will melt and try
them :” (See notes on vi. 27). Simile of metal refining: “ smelting, in order to separate the
pure meta] from the ore, testing, to see if the metal is pure, or still mixed with alloy "—Speaker’s
Com. Ver. 17. ‘‘ Mourning women:” hired mourners, who, by frantic gestures, dreadful wail-
ings, and doleful ditties, both professed grief and incited it in beholdersa. It demanded some
skill to learn these shrieks, and gestures, and dirges, hence here described as ‘‘ cunning
women,” Jerome says the custom continued in Judea down to his days (Obit. a.p. 420). Lane
states that it still exists in Egypt (“ Modern Egyptians”); and Calmet, that the practice prevails
in most of the provinces of the Levant. Ver. 20. “ Teach your daughters wailing ;” see above,
ver. 17: the dead would be so numerous as to call for a much larger number of “‘ mourning
women” than at present were available; hence, train others in readiness for the appalling
erisig Ver. 22. “ The handful after the husbandman ;” ¢.¢., the bundle of corn which the reaper
cuts into his arm with a few strokes of his sickle,and which another who follows him “ gathers,”
to bind with several other such ‘‘ handfuls” into a sheaf. Ver. 25. “ Circumcised with the un-
circumcised ;” considerable difficulty among commentators ag to whether the prophet asserted
that circumcision was practised among the nations specified in ver. 26 ; among which “ Judah”
is classed in this respect. Lange contends this is meant, and appeals to authority of Herodotus,
who affirms that the practice existed both among the higher castes of Egyptians, and the Arabian
tribes—probably Kedarenes descended from Ishmael, who was circumcised by Abraham (Gen.
xvii. 23), and among whose descendants the rite still obtains, although the Koran nowhere
enjoins the rite: the Edomites accepted circumeision at the dictation of John Hyreanus, as the
alternative of vacating their country (Josephus, Antig. xiii. 9. §1). Lange urges that we must
accept the prophet’s words as affirming that these people specified did practise circumcision.
Yet he seems alone in this position, excepting that Jerome asserts that the rite did exist among
these nations. It seems simple to accept the general verdict that these people are not all
affirmed as circumcised, but that ‘‘ circumcised” and “ uncireumcised ”’ indiscriminately are
grouped together as forming the list of nations on whom God’s judgments would soon descend.

Literary Criticisms, Ver. 1. should be joined to chap. viii., it iso in Heb. Bibles. Ver. 8.
“ Not valiant for truth :” Lange, ‘not by truth do they prevail in the land.” Keil, “not
according to faithfulness do they manage in the land.” Speaker's Com., “neither do they rule
faithfully in the land.” Maurer, ‘they do not prevail by truth” (Ps. xii. 4). Ver. 8 “Asan


arrow shot out:” onw YT, a slaughtering arrow. “In heart he layeth his wais :” properly
inwardly he layeth his ambush: N= insidious scheming. Ver. 10. “ habitations of the
wilderness: ” ¢.¢., prairie, pasturage, encampment of the shepherds : the reference being prebably
to the wilderness of Judea, where cattie were pastured (cf. 1 Sam. xvii, 28). Ver. 19, ‘* Over


dwellinas have cast us eut:” *< dwellings” is not the nominative, but * they,” the ce whe


a


7b Eo HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAA.





have thrown down our dwellings (ef. 2 Kings-xxv. 9). Ver. 26. ‘‘ AU in the utmost corners ;”
Margin, ‘‘ Heb. cut off into corners, or, having the corners (of their hair) polled.” 8
Com., all who have the corners of their hair shorn, Hend., Cut as to the corner of the beard
(ef. Lev. xix. 27, xxi. 5), 2 custom the Jews were prohibited to imitate. The description
points to the Arabs, who ‘‘ dwell in the wilderness,” ;


HOMILETIC ARRANGEMENT OF THE ENTIRE CHAPTER IX,


*,* Sectional divisions of the chapter does violence to its structure and disorder; for its very
eonfusion of topics, the intermingling of solemn messages with passionate exclamations, ig
eharacteristic of vivid dread and poignant grief; of these the chapter is full. Sections might,
however, arranged thus:


Verses 1-8. Plaintive lamentations over sin,
> 9-16. God’s vindiecations of His judgments
»» 17-22. Vivid realization of calamities,
»>  %8-26, Vainglorious confidences corrected,


The scope and significance of the entire chapter may be thus stated : Jeremiah
presents to Judah:

1. A vivid portrayal of the direful disasters impending.

2. A justification of God’s judgments against sin.

By showing them how aiarming would be the punishment, he would have them
see how appalling was their sin, Their condition and conduct imprecated the
retribution. Noticeable that appeal is made to the wisdom, the serious thought of
his hearers, that they may “ understand ” (ver. 12) the equity of God’s proceedings
against them. Sinners would justify God’s punishments if they wisely considered
their case, demerits, and the provocations of their sins : “ We indeed justly, for we
receive the due reward of our sins.” ;

L Sorrowful consternation over calamities. Both the revolting cause of these
calamities (vers. 2-6) and their poignant severity (vers. 20-22) are carefully speci-
fied ; thus the bemoaning is intelligently and adequately justified.

1, Lhe prophet’s agony of grief (vers. 1, 2). Note the pathos of the reiteration,
“my people!” Humanity, philanthropy, patriotism, and religious feeling, all
summon us to bitter sorrow over—(1) the sufferings of our people ; (2) the slaughter
wrought by tyranny (especially the tyranny of Satan over the lives and souls of men ;
and the slaughter of virtue, happiness, and hope) ; (3) the stnfulness which under-
lies and explains all man’s woes. Characters wasted, lives degraded, hearta
pierced with anguish, souls ruined: a sad world; the gentle, generous heart
shudders amid these devastations, “ weeps for the slain.”

2. The people's realisation of their rutin (vers. 17-19). It came late, yet it
came: they awoke at last. God arrests the insensate nation with the appeal,
“‘Consider ye!” The verses delineate the people’s (1) sudden consternation ; (2)
overwhelming distress. i. Professional mourners would have abundant occasion for
wailing (ver. 17). ii The people would themselves be plunged into the agony of
sorrow (ver. 18). We cannot leave to others the bitter mourning, the pang in our
hearts will be too keen, iii. Zion would resound with cries of anguish and des-
peration (ver. 19). Sinners, though slow to recognise their dreadful state and
prospects, are sure to realise them (ver. 25), Because doom now tarries they make
merry while godly men weep ; but they will join the lamentations, though (alas !
if as here) only when too late, when ruin is upon them (ver. 19).

3. God summons the nation to grievous sorrow (ver. 20-22). 1. He supplies the
mourners with the national dirge (ver. 21), than which no more piteous a refrain
could be conceived, 2. He then portrays the awful disasters (ver. 22): death in
every home,—the slain covering the lands, childhood and youth perishing with the
“men.” Judgment comes on all, “for that all have sinned,” When God bids us
sorrow, it is time to “consider” and humble ourselves penitently before Him.
“Now He hath commanded men everywhere to repent.” A wide difference be-

19%





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH. CHAP. IX.
eee


tween this “ godly sorrow ” and the grief of despair and doom. Timely penitenes
may avert ultimate desperation. Predictions of disaster are intended as persua-
sives to the sorrow which averte woe.

II. Appalling corruption of the nation (ver. 2-6, 8).

1, As viewed by the prophet (ver. 2-6). He would fain hide himself from the
sickening and revolting spectacle of his people’s guiltiness (ver. 2). (a.) They were
foul and false (ver. 2); (b.) maliciously deceptive, “ tongues like bows ” (ver. 3) ;
(¢.) careless of public honour and faith, “ not valiant for truth” (see Lit. Crit. on
ver. supra); (d.) abandoned to iniquitous practices, “ proceed from evil to evil ;*
(e.) tgnore God in Hts own land, “know not Me, saith the Lord 3” (f.) soctal
confidence and integrity violated (ver. 4), utterly insincere, treacherous, and unjust
in their domestic and neighbourly intercourse ; (g.) their falsity was deliberate and
resolute (ver. 5), they actually trained themselves to lying, and defiantly refused to
speak or act truthfully; (h.) evtl-doing exhausted all their powers, “they weary
themselves,” &c., leaving them incapable of anything else.

2. As estimated by the Lord (ver. 6, 8). For His eyes are upon, and His eyelids
try, the children of men, Note: God marks what are the surroundings of His
servants ; “I know where thou dwellest” (Rev. ii. 13). Thine habitation is in
the midst of deceit.” Their case before God showed (1.) criminal falsity ; (2.) de-
termined repudiation of God in order to practise “deceit” (ver.:7); (3.) cruel
treachery (ver. 8). Observe; How severely God regards the violation of social
laws; wrong done by man to man, sins of the tongue, faithless conduct, scheming
selfishness. Yet, further, men fall away from God as their first stage of decline ;
it therefore argues their complete degradation when they become avowedly false te
their fellow-men,—indicates utter moral corruption, loss of every virtue and of all
worth.

3. Yet condoned by themselves (ver. 23-26). They neglected “loving-kindness,
judgment, and righteousness ” (ver. 24), despised what God “delighted in,” and
then gloried in their “ wisdom, might, and riches” (ver. 23), More: they relied
upon the value of a rite, “ circumcision” (ver. 25, 26), as a guarantee against
being abandoned by God and consigned to heathen conquest. 1. Our own resources
(“ wisdom, might, riches ”’) will not protect us from hostile invasion, God menaced
Judah with the Chaldean scourge because of their perfidious impiety, their neglect
of “loving-kindness, judgment, and righteousness ;” Judah instantly comforted
herself with looking at her resources of wisdom, might, and wealth. 2. Our
religious professions (reliance on the covenant of circumcision) afford no answer to
the denunciation against our sins, nor any excuse for them. Having violated
practical piety—“loving-kindness, judgment, righteousness, and knowing God ”—
their vaunted circumcision would not protect them from the doom: they were
** uncircumcised in heart.”

IlI. God’s vindication of His judgments. He does not leave it to His prophet
to “justify the ways of God with men:” Himself expounds the righteousness of
His proceedings.

1. The judgments delineated. The country devastated (ver. 10). Jerusalem
destroyed (ver. 11). Cities desolated (ver. 11). Life embittered (ver. 15). The
people banished and consumed in exile (ver. 16). Zion a scene of spoliation and
slaughter (ver. 19, 21), Fields strewn with the unburied slain (ver. 22), God
will not respect their covenant distinction (ver. 25, 26) in the impartial visitation
of retribution. (1.) God’s punishments are far-reaching, vast, majestic, even as are
His mercy and His grace. All His doings are on a scale of stupendous, awful
magnitude, ‘Marvellous are Thy works, O Lord.” “ Glorious in holiness, fearful
in praises, doing wonders.” (2.) God’s punishments are all-inclusive, beyond
evasion or escape,—leaving for those condemned no refuge.

2. The judgments imperative. Note: (1.) His searching purpose (ver. 7) ; (2.) His
pecessary severity (ver. 9) Judgments have a twofold purpose: (a.) en,

s


GAP. IX, HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


ean,





“melt and try them,” purify some in the fires of affliction: ‘“ when Thy judg.
ments are abroad in the earth, the inhabitants will learn righteousness.” This end
must be sought, for nothing milder than severe punishments affected them for
good, God asks, as if in perplexity, “ How shall Ido?” &c. Solicitous to secure
cheir spiritual improvement even by the calamities which impended. (6.) Aveng-
tng: for they who will not be reformed must be ruined.

3. The judgments vindicated. Jehovah calls upon the thoughtful to ponder and
declare “for what the land perisheth,” dc. (ver. 12). Then follows (1.) The
Divine indictment (ver. 13, 14): revolt against God’s law and service, abandonment
to self-indulgence and idolatry, (2.) The Divine sentence (ver. 15, 16). Observe:
Severity is whoily foreign to God’s designs and delight (ver. 24). He desires not
the death of a sinner, but delights in mercy; nevertheless, when all His “ loving-
kindness ” avails nothing with sinners, when they resist His grace and repudiate
salvation, there remains only this, ‘‘a certain fearful looking for of judgment and
fiery indignation, which shall devour the adversaries.” Yet “God hath not appointed
us to wrath, but to obtain salvation by our Lord Jesus Christ.”


HOMILIES AND OUTLINES ON SUCOESSIVE VERSES OF OHAPTER IX.


Ver. 1. Theme: ANGUIBH OF GRIEF
OVER SINNERS’ RUIN.

I. His vivid anticipation of coming
woes. Times were: now tranquil; no
ery of grief rang through the land. He
the sole weeper/ Like toa Greater, who
also was a Lone Weeper; ‘ Hosanas”
around Him, revelry in Jerusalem, none
dreamt of doom nearing: yet Jesus
“beheld the city and wept over it.”
(1.) Doom is not less real or near because
ignored by those who are doomed. (2.)
Eyes divinely opened foresee what is
hid from the godless.

Il. His passionate distress over
coming woes. This is natural to the
Christian patriot, the Christian pastor -
“T tell you even weeping” (Rom. ix. 2).
(1.) Sinners ought to be concerned for
themselves, (2.) Godliness creates true
generosity, ——the peril of others em-
bitters the soul.

III. His baffling helplessness before
coming woes. He can bemoan them:
would readily weep and ceaselessly weep
over His people’s ruin, but what could
avail? He could do nothing to avert
the terrible fate. (1.) None can by any
means redeem a brother. (2.) Sinners
thwart the agonising solicitude of the
godly by their own hardened indiffer-
ence, (3.) Each must deliver his own
soul by going himself to the Saviour;
pastors and prophets cannot deliver
them. They can “ weep,” but cannet
weve. Reflection: What a luxury of

194


joy there must be in possessing the power
to save/ Jesus has this joy—He only,
He obtained it on Calvary. In order to
possess it, “ He endured the cross,
despising the shame.” Yet earnest
servants of Christ will “enter into the
joy of their Lord,” inasmuch as they
have entered into His distress over
sinners, and longing to rescue them.

Comments: “It becomes us, while,
we are here in this vale of tears, to
conform to the temper of the climate,
and to sow in tears,... While we find
our hearts such fountains of sin, it is fit
that our eyes should be fountains of
tears."—Henry. ‘The meaning is, that
the destruction of the people would be
so monstrous and dreadful, that it could
not be sufficiently bewailed.... As he
saw that their hearts were inflexible,
and that a commior way of speaking
would be despised, he was constrained
to use such similes. Learn what vehe-
mence they ought to use whom God calls
to the same office of teaching.” —Calvin,
‘“ From the wish to be utterly dissolved
in tears because of the misfortunes of
his countrymen, the prophet passes
naturally to the wish to flee away from
the daily sight of those sins, which were
the real cause of their sufferings,”—
Speaker's Com.


Ver. 1, 2. Theme: GENUINE PHILAN-
THROPY,
Jeremiah a devout saint, true patriot,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


SmAP. IK.





faithful prophet, model philanthropist,
Early Church entertained so exalted an
idea of him, that they pictured him as
the very type of Him who was the most
perfect incarnation of Heaven’s tender-
ness and love. Many in this age who
are philanthropists for trade; impose on
the credulous; they are an offence to
genuine souls, and their lives a calumny
on the holy cause. Two aspects of
genuine philanthropy :

I Genuine philanthropy melting
with earnestness. ‘Oh, that head
waters,” &c, He had wept copiously, but
would weep more—“ Rivers of water”
— if thereby serve God and country,

1. Heart intensely earnest concerning
the temporal condition of men. Chaldean
army among them, sword staining the
country with blood, groans of the dying
and wails of the bereaved: “ The slain
of the daughter of my people.” This
distresses him ; weeps as patriot over
grief of his country. “O Jerusalem,
Jerusalem |”

2. Heart intensely earnest concerning
the moral condition of men, Their car-
nalities, idolatries, and crimes affect his
pious spirit more than physical sufferings
and political disasters. He knew sin
was the cause of all, that no salvation
without removal of sin. No true philan-
thropists who not chiefly concerned with
souls. ‘My heart’s desire,” d&c.: see
Paul (Rom. x. 1). ‘Rivers of water


. . . because keep not Thy law:” see
David (Ps. cxix. 136, xlii. 3). Why all
this earnestness about the soul? (1.)


Think of the soul tn relation to tts capa-
city of suffering and happiness. (2.) In
relation to the influences for good or evil
it ts capable of exerting. (3.) In relation
to its power of being a delight or a grief
to the heart of Infinite Love.

II. Genuine philanthropy sighing for
isolation. ‘Oh, that in wilderness,” &c.

1. This is the sigh of a spiritually
vexed soul. Like Lot in Sodom, the
hideous forms of sin every day “ vexed
his righteous soul.” Like David, when
“saw transgressors and was grieved.”
Like Paul at Athens, “spirit stirred” at
revolting iniquities which met him at
every turn. Natures spiritually refined
end ennobled recoil with inexpressible


————


disgust from vanities and crimes of theis
age.
‘* Far from the world, O Lord, I flee,
From strife and tumult far ;
From scenes where Satan wages stil)
His most successful war.”
—Cowrzs.


2. This sigh for isolation is the stgh
of disappointed love. He had worked
earnestly and with self-denial to improve
the spiritual condition of his country,
yet it grew worse, sank deeper in ini-
quities, Nothing is more saddening
to generous souls than the discovery of
indifference, ingratitude, and growing
vice in the very men they seek to bless.
Elijah felt it, and betook himself to a
cave ; David, and cried, “ Oh, that I had
wings as of a dove,” d&c.; Christ, and
said, ‘I have laboured in vain.”

There is danger of a corrupt age ex-
hausting the love of genuine philanthro-
pists. Instances of loving souls becoming
misanthropic through the ill-treatment of
those whom they endeavoured to serve.
A sublime fact that Christ’s philanthropy
survived the fiendish cruelty of the cross,
rose with Him from the sepulchre, and
despatched a message of mercy to His
most malignant enemies at Jerusalem.

Conclusion :

(1.) The wicariousness of genuine
philanthropy. It inspires the possessor
with the spirit that will prompt him to
sacrifice his very being for the good of
others, to weep himself away. “I
would that accursed from Christ for my
brethren.” All genuine philanthropy
bears the sins and sorrows of others.

(2.) The abuse of genuine philan-
thropy. How shamefully was the love
of Jeremiah requited by countrymen!
The greatest sin in universe is sin
against love.

(3.) The tmperfection of genuine
philanthropy. Like the best of every
thing human, love is not perfect here.
Disheartened, Jeremiah sought tsolatton.
At one time we hear him exclaim, “I will
not make mention of Him, nor speak
any more in His name.”— Homilist.

N.B.—C. H. Spurgeon used ver. 1 as
text for sermon on “INnp14’s ILLS aND
Enaiann’s Sorrows,” at the time of
the Sepoy mutiny, Reptomier Bigs ;


CaP, i,





“Some men sent into this world for
the purpose of being the world’s weepers.
Mankind must have their heroes to ex-
press their courage, their philanthro-
pists to live out mankind’s philanthropy,
their weepers to weep from cradle to
grave for the woes of others, If you
have tears, these hard times will compel
you to shed them now:

“TY. For persons actually slain : with
murder and bloodshed. Our spirits,
harrowed by the most fearful and unex-
pected cruelty, have felt the ties of kin-
dred very strongly when found our race
butchered in the East. England’s sol-
diers tortured ; England’s daughters dis-
honoured. Who can read the tale of
infamy without tears? Betake ourselves
in agonies of prayer to God that He will
interpose.

“TI. For those morally slain. Sin
aboundeth, and iniquity is still mighty.
Worse deaths than those inflicted by the
sword.

“1. Weep for the drunkenness of this
land. Thousands every year murdered
thereby. My soul might be an everlast-
ing Niobé, perpetually dropping showers
of tears, if it might know the doom and
destruction wrought by the demon of
drunkenness.

“2. Weep for the crime of debauch-
ery. ‘A shame even to speak of the
things done in secret.’ Harlots and
seducers.

“3. Men are falling by every sin, dis-
guised under the shape of pleasure.
Ominous theatre notice—‘ To the Pit!’

“Tn Jeremiah’s day Jerusalem was all
mirth. They laughed him to scorn.
So ye marvel I should weep for you/
But I foresee the future ; see you before
the Judge ; and the thought of your
destruction bids us yield to tears.
‘Wages of sin is death.’ We weep for
those who have had great privileges, but
have ueglected them; and who, having
had great privileges, if lost, must expect
greater punishment. ‘More tolerable
for Sodom and Gomorrah.’ Christians !
cease not weeping amid prayerful plead
ings for those tn your families, for your
neighbours, who are yet in the power of
sin.” —Spurgeon,

I. He abandons himself to serrow,

196


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


—


in consideration of the calamitous con-
dition of his people,

If. He abandons himself to solitude
in consideration of the scandalous char-
acter and conduct of his people.— Henry.
(Addenda to chap. ix. 1, “ Fountain of
tears ;” ver. 2, ‘“ Solitude.”)


Ver. 3. Theme: Fatsity: ITs
ORUELTY AND COWARDICE.

It has been wisely said that “ every
violation of truth is not only a sort of
suicide in the liar, but is a stab at the
health of human society.” Certainly
falsity is a two-edged sword ; it wounds
the deceiver equally with the deceived.
Heaven’s imprecations are upon, and
heaven’s gates exclude, “ all liars.”

Text contains :

IL Two affirmations: the positive
side of a sinner’s life.

Charges upon these people:

1. Perfidious words; speech prosti-
tuted to falsity. A grievous crime to
use words foully, to pervert speech.
Like poisoning a public spring. It is
the devil’s work ; “for he is a liar, and
the father of lies.” False words are
crafty (ver. 4), malicious (ver. 5), ruin-
ous (ver. 8).


‘Curse on the coward or perfidious tongue | ”
— Tomson,


“A lie should be trampled on and
extinguished wherever found. I am for
fumigating the atmosphere when 1
suspect that falsehood, like pestilence,
breathes around me.”—Carlyce.

“Dare to be true, nothing can need a lie ;


A fault which needs it most grows two
thereby.” —HERBERT.


2. Iniquitous deeds. A transgressor
may begin with abusing language, mis-
using words, speaking deceitfully, cover-
ing over his sins by fair speech ; but he
will soon advance from words to deeds.
Evil-speakers are always evil-doers, A
man who can speak foully can act basely,
George Whitfield would fasten his pocketa
when he heard any one speak ill; because
he who could speak wrong could act so ;
a liar can steal. As progression from
words to deeds is natural, so progression
from evil deeds to greater evils ia inevi-
table. “From iniquity unto iniquity.”


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.
ee


In the case of these people their ini-
quitous deeds were (a.) A violation of
mutual obligations between man and
man, each wronged the uther, in the
home, in neighbourly intercourse, in
commerce, dc. (6.) A violation of
Divine obligations ; each revolted from
the control and claims of God. These
two affirmations give the positive and
practical side of a sinner’s life,

Il. Two negations: the desolate
side of a sinner’s life.

There is much in a sinner which we
should desire to be without, viz., a lying
tongue, an evil life. But he lacks much
we should desire to have, “valour for
truth,” and “ knowledge of God.”

1. Faithless towards men, Social and
civil responsibilities contemned : “ Not
valiant for the truth,” te¢., not energetic
to maintain righteousness and fairness.
They let order, law, and duty fall into
neglect. “ Not faithful to their convic-
tions” (Hitzig). “Not faithful in their
behaviour towards their fellow-men”
(Kiel). Those who had power in their
bands did not use it faithfully for right-
eous ends. “Not fidelity in their
engagements with their fellow-men”
(Speaker's Com.). Christ’s parable of
unjust judge. “It is indeed proof of
impiety when men, trampling upon
faithfulness and equity, allow themselves
every kind of licentiousness” (Calvin).
Iniquitons persons are scarcely likely to
respect social and civil duties; right-
eousness may have “fallen among
thieves,” but they are content to “ pass
by on the other side,” intent on “ pro-
ceeding from evil to evil.”

2. Indifferent towards God. Sacred
realities and Divine claims ignored.
“ They know not Me, saith the Lord.”
They are wellingly ignorant of Him, and
they are necessarily ignorant of Him ;
for while they “desire not the know-
ledge of God’s ways,” they are also
“blinded by the god of this world,”
“walk in darkness,” benighted by their
sins. For guilt darkens the soul, dead-
ens the conscience, disables the mind,
degrades the life ; hence, “they know
not Me.”

Terrible negation! it means doom:
“Whom to know is life eternal.” He


OHAP. 1X


who shuts from himself the light of
God shuts against himself the gates of
light and life. ‘The pure in heart see
God.”


“ This above all, to thine own self be true;
And it must follow, as the night the day,
Thou canst not then be false to any man.”

—SHAKEZSPEARE,


See Scripture illustrations of falsity
and its issues: e¢g., Jacob, Gehazi,
Ananias, Truthfulness, like the light,
moves in direct lines ; and, like the sun’s
rays, which start from and return to their
source, so truthfulness is Divine in its
origin and essence, and returns home to
Him at last. But falsehood is as a
“wandering star,” destined to “the
blackness of darkness for ever.”

Ver. 4. Comments : “ Take ye heed,”
&c. In a state of such utter lawless-
ness, the bonds of mutual confidence are
necessarily relaxed, and suspicion takes
its place. The parallel passage in Micah
vil. 5, 6, shows that Jeremiah’s com-
plaint was not occasioned by his soreness
at personal ill-treatment, but was too
true a picture of the general faithlessness
which existed at Jerusalem. “ Hvery
brother will utierly supplant ;” an allu-
sion to the name of Jacob (Gen. xxv.
26, xxvii. 36; Hos, xii 3). It might
be rendered, Every brother is a thor-
ough Jacob.—Speaker’s Com.

‘Fratrum quoque gratia rara est.”—Ovin,

The words are very noticeable: 4py’
aipy. The verb Apy is derived from
the heel of the foot, and suggests the
effort to trip up another.

“Since this verb in Kal occurs be
sides oaly in Gen. xxvii. 36 and Hos.
xii. 4, both times of Jacob, it is certainly
probable that the prophet, speaking here
of the deceit practised by one brother te
another, had this early instance in view.”
—Lange.


Ver. 4. Theme: SLANDERING. “Every
neighbour will walk with slanders.”
(Comp. Notes on vi. 28.) (Addenda to
chap. ix. 4, “ Slander.”)

I. Unanimity in sowing mischief :
“Every neighbour.” Virulent treachery.

I. Activity in eee pepe

7


CHaP, Ik,





“Will walk,” travel about on this
nefarious business ; “ feet run to evil”
(Prov. i. 16).

QI. Malignity in neighbourly inter-
course. This is to use familiarity to
murder happiness. “ Poison of asps
under their lips.” “ Madmen, casting
firebrands, arrows, and death.” Such
society intolerable, perilous, destructive
of all honour and peace.

‘* The world with calumny abounds,

The whitest virtue slander wounds;


There are whose joy is, night and da
To talk a character away. ”


“ Eager, from rout to rout, they haste,
To blast the generous and the chaste,
And, hunting reputation down,
im their triumphs through the town.”
—Pors.


Ver. 5. Theme: SIN A VIOLENT
OUTRAGE ON SELF.

“They have taught their tongues to
speak lies:” they are artists at it
(Trapp); make a study of it. i They
are imgentous to sin, “ have taught their
tongues :” implying that through the
reluctances of natural conscience they
found it difficult to bring themselves to
it, but by degrees they have made
themselves masters of the art of lying.
ii. They are industrious to sin, “ weary
themselves to commit iniquity:” put a
force upon their conscience to bring
themselves to it, to tire out their con-
victions by offering them continual vio-
lence; are wearied with their sinful
pursuits, and yet not weary of them.
The service of sin is a perfect drudgery.
—Henry.

“ Weary themselves:” are at labori-
ous pains to act perversely.— Maurer.

Take the utmost pains to go crook-
edly.—Speaker’s Com.

Wrong-doing 18 an abuse of our
nature, A chemist finds it a vexing and
thankless attempt to fuse mutually
repellant substances, or to mix antago-
nistic gases. Sin never thoroughly
naturalises itself to man’s conscience and

aptitudes; all along there is a strife
' within as of conflicting forces. Hence
“‘the way of transgressors is hard ;” and
“the wicked are like a troubled sea; no
peace to the wicked.” This a benign
fact, testifies of man’s nobler calling

198


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH,





and destiny, and is an incentive within
us to “ cease to do evil and learn to do
well ;” it is, moreover, the preparation
in man for Christ’s redeeming and


reforming grace,


Ver. 6. Theme; Our LOOALISATION
MARKED BY THE OMNISOIENT EYE.”

I. That our dwelling-place is recog-
nised by God.

Il. That our social surroundings
attract the Divine observance.

III, That the peril and painfulness
of our situation is fully estimated by
Him.

IV. That the struggle i costs us to
live righteously is measured by God in
the light of the antagonism and snares
which endanger us.

V. That maintenance of a holy life
in unlikely scenes is the triumph of
godly’ heroism.

VI. That He who recognises our
danger will send adequate grace to help,
aud proportion ultimate rewards to our
courageous fidelity (Rev. ii 13).


** Where duty calls or danger,
Be never wanting there.”


Ver. 7. Theme: PUNISHMENT COR-
REOTIVE RATHER THAN RETRIBUTIVE.

I, God’s gracious design in our
calamities. “I will melt and try
them.” Even with a people so deti-
autly impious and utterly corrupt, and
even in such calamities as Chaldean
overthrow and captivity, God intends
good issues, seeks their reform rather
than their ruin. Blank punishment for
its own sake, justice merely avenging
itself on sinners, this is not God-like, not
possible. This, a sublime truth in all
ages, leads some to cherish the “larger
hope” of the purifying issues of punish-
ment even upon “ the lost,”—those who
enter eternity doomed! A dark and
solemn mystery.

II. God’s distress over the infatua-
tion of sinners. ‘ How shall I do for,”
&c. 1. That infatuation frustrates His
mercy. 2. It compels Him to harsh
dealings. 3, It moves Him to reluctant
anger. Milder processes were fruitless
tribulation must now be tried ; in their
anguish they may repent and return.





gue





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; JEREMIAH.


CHaP,. IX,





He will melt the hardness of His people
in the fire of affliction. Yes, and will
consume the evil thereby. The exclama-
tion, “How shall 1 do?” is not (as
Hitzig and Graf), What dreadful forms of
judgment shall I summon in vengeance t
Note: “How shall I -do jor the
daughter?” God still would find some
way of blessing her even when He
smites,

Til God’s necessary use of severe


judgments. “How shall I do for my
people?” te, “ What else can I do”
(Maurer). How otherwise can I deal


with her than to try her in the crucible
of suffering? “ A corruption so deeply
rooted and so widely extended can be
removed only by a process of entire melt-
ing, which will certainly be grievous, but
will also refine. The Lord here asks how
He should act if not as here indicated ?
There is nothing else remaining but to
do this” (Naeg.). 1. Calamity is God’s
last resort. 2. Sin must be severely
punished, ‘I will cast them into the
fiery crucible of sharp affliction. What
can J do less to them, though they are
‘My people,’ since they are so shame-
lessly, lawlessly wicked # An unruly
patient maketh a cruel physician; a
desperate disease must have a desper-
ate remedy” (Zrapp). Verily, it is
right to ask, “If judgment begin at the
house of God (as here, ‘My people’),
what shall the end be of them that obey
not the gospel of Christ?” In the
melting process, their “deceit ” (ver. 6)
would soon be consumed, and woful
the issue; nothing to resist the “ fiery
trial which is to try” them! Yet, may-
hap, “they themselves might be saved,
yet so as by fire” (1 Cor. iii. 15).

Ver. 8, 9. Ruinous conduct (tongue,
a deadly arrow,” d&ec.), followed by
avenging judgment. “ With what
measure ye mete, it shall be measured
to you again.” (See notes on chap. v.
9, 29.) (Addenda to chap. ix. 8,
“ Seductive speech.)

Ver. 10. An interruption by Jere-
miah of Jehovah’s address, for ver. 11
continues the Divine utterance of male-
dictions against this guilty people.
Amid God’s threats of coming woe, the
prophet interposes a piteous and em-


bittered wail over the threatened deso
lations of his country. (See Homily
on chap. iv. 23-26.) The verse is a
frightful yet truthful picture of an
invaded country wasted by hostile
forces.

“‘ Mountains,” not barren eminences,
but fruitful hills, with which Judea
abounded.

‘“ Habitations of the wilderness,”
pasture-lands lately occupied by nume-
rous herds, restful and bountiful scenes
where flocks fed in luxuriance and
peace ; now “burned up.” ‘The Chal-
deans would, as is usual in war, burn
up the forage and carry off the cattle.
And so utterly devastated would these
fair and flourishing scenes become, that
even the birds would take their flight from
a land so parched as no longer to furnish
them food.


Ver. 11. Theme: RuineD JERUSALEM.
(Addenda on ver. 11, “Jerusalem in
ruins.”) God proceeds with His decree
of desolating judgment. Not only shall
the country be burned, but the cities ;
yea, Jerusalem specially shall be over-
thrown and become “heaps.” Note:

i. The prophecy, how apparently ~
incredible! Jerusalem was at that
very time a well-fortified city, and filled
with valorous people ready to defend
it as well as to boast of it. Predicted
crises always seem incredible ; ¢.g., the
Jlood, the doom of mighty nations, the
coming judgment and overthrow of the
world,

ii. The prophet, how courageously
invincible! Standing there in Jerusalem
(vii. 2), he proclaimed what looked im-
possible, was certainly exasperating to hia
hearers, was equally shocking to his own
patriotic soul, und exposed him to no
small animosity and danger.

(a.) Improbable events very commonly
occur ; foolish, therefore, to screen our-
selves from danger by that futile de-
lusion.

(b.) Despising God’s threatenings does
not defeat them: they come upon mockers,
‘“‘ Behold, ye despisers, and wonder, and
perish !”

(c.) Divine heralds may convey tudings
which evoke tncredulity. Yet their part

199


OW AP. Xx,





fs to proclaim, let men act as they
will,

(d.) Intrepidity ts a seal and creden-
tial to a religious preacher. It asserts
his own assurance of High Authority for
his words. But for this, Jeremiah had
grown disheartened by indifference and
terrified by hostility. But, knowing in
Whose name he spake, he “ feared not
the wrath of the king” nor his malevo-
lent counsellors, but “with all boldness”
delivered the tidings of doom.


Ver. 12-16. Theme: Human VINDI-
CATION OF DIVINE VENGEANCE.

Words imply that the “wise” would
“understand” both the reason and the
justice of the coming judgments, “for
what the land perished,” ¢.¢., on account
of what provocations, and that the punish-
ment was equitable and merited.

I. Providence acts on manifestly
righteoas principles. Fools may not
recognise or receive this fact, but very
little “‘ wisdom ” will avail to vindicate
this.

1. Invariable laws regulate the Divine
dispensations tn every age. As with
Israel (vii. 12), so would it be with
Judah (vii, 15); and similarly with all
who act their course.

2. The tssues of human conduct are not
obscured from men. They stand out
vividly in the careers of men around us;
while history is also full of illustrations :
“Well with the righteous; ill with the
wicked.” There is no equivocation, no
uncertainty, no chance respecting these
things : every age shows the same.

II. Human intelligence can recognise
the justice of God’s ways.

1. By natural wisdom. “ Who is the
wise man that may understand this?”
Needed no supernatural revelation to
teach that desecration of holy scenes and
defiance of holy laws must entail disaster;
for unless so, there could be no God
judging righteously in the earth. No
one but can recognise that sin merits
and must bring punishment,

2. By enlightened wisdom, For in
their case they had “wisdom which is
from above,” and boasted themselves
“wise, for the law of the Lord 1s with
us” (viii. 8). We can open the Bible

200


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR.





and read the curses against and the con-
sequences of iniquity. Examine “My
LAW, which I have set before them” (ver.
13).

I Ample justification is furnished
for severest judgments. God Himself
gives the explanation (ver. 13,14). He
will allow to none the plea of ignorance.
“The wrath of God is revealed from
heaven against all unrighteousness and
ungodliness of men.”

1. How vividly our sins are arrayed
before the Lord. Minutely specified
by God: “ forsaken law,” “ not obeyed
voice,” “neither walked therein,” “walked
afterimagination,” “walked after Baalim.”
Our sins are “set in the light of His
countenance.”

2, How repugnant our sins are to the
holiness of God. The “land perished,”
and “ none to pass through it” (ver. 12),
shows how He will overthrow His
chosen habitation rather than connive
at guilt.

3. How provoking our sins are to the
mind of God. He is “angry with the
wicked.” Read that terrifying fact in
ver. 15, 16. “Of how much sorer
punishment worthy who trampled under
foot the Son of God ?”

IV. Direful maledictions forewarn
the guilty of their future.

1. This forewarning is a merciful fact
It offers time of escape. “ Kiss the Son,
lest He be angry, and ye perish.” “Flee
for refuge to the hope set before you.”

2. This forewarning ts an appalling
fact. ‘God hath spoken, and He will
perform His word.” (l.) Bitter experr
ences; ‘“‘wormwood.” (2.) Destructive
calamitres, “ water of gall.” (See Literary
Notes and Homilies on viii. 14.) (3.)
Banished to thew adversaries (comp,
Matt. xxv. 41). (4.) Hscape impossible,
either by flight or in far distance; “I
willsend a sword after them,” &c. When
the Lord God, whose eyes are in every
place, pursues, He will surely discover
and overtake.

Conclusion: The “ wise” should use
their wisdom to find redemption from
evidently nearing disasters. ‘‘'The pru-
dent man foreseeth the evil and hideth
himself.” 3. The wise should use their
wisdom to forwarn others to escape, “that


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.


CHAP. 1X.


a


he may declare it” (ver. 12), “ Know-
ing the terrors of the Lord, we persuade
wen,” Heedlessness is suicidal (Heb. ii.
3) 5 silence is criminal (Ezek, xxxiii, 8).


Ver. 17-22. Theme : THE BITTERNESS
AND BEMOANINGS OF DEATH. (Addenda
to chap. ix. 17, “ Mourning women ;”
ver. 21, “ Death.”)

“ The citizens of Zion are called upon
to give heed to the state of affairs now
in prospect, 1.¢., the judgment preparing,
and are to assemble mourning women
that they may strike up a dirge for the
dead.” — Keil.

Although the nation was now in no
dirge-like mood, but made light of the
woful predictions, yet God directs them
to arrange their doleful obsequies as
though death had already transpired.

I. The certainty of death’s approach.
Though they as yet saw not the grim
form, the spectre neared: the “ mourning
women” would have their melancholy
task (ver. 17).

IT. The speed of death’s advance (ver.
18). No time to waste in making pre-
parations : quick, ornotready. This ever
true: the intervalis brief; therefore “make
haste ;” for death treads upon our heels,
“ Weep,” also, for there is cause.

ITI. The ravages of death’s desola-
tions (ver. 19). “Spoiled,” <‘‘ con-
founded;” enforced desertion of cherished
scenes [“‘forsaken” implies voluntary
abandonment, but this was involuntary |,
driven from dwellings into homeless de-
spair. Analogy of death’s work on the
angodly : their resources in which boasted
“ snotled ;” false hopes “ confounded ,”
scenes where they fain would have tarried
“forsaken,” the “tabernacle ” they had
occupied left. For what? for where #
Alas ! “voice of wailing is heard” over
desolations, and despair attendant upon
death.

iV. The vastness of death’s spolia-
tion. ‘The harvest of death would be
so large that the number of trained
women would not suffice.”—Speaker’s
Com. Therefore ver. 20. The mothers
must therefore teach their daughters the
melancholy refrain. Note: young votces
(“daughters”) as well as old (“ye
women ”) will join in the dirge for the


dead ; for no age is sacred or screened
from death. Evidently from ver. 21
this is the reason why the daughters
should be taught the wailing cry: they
would soon have to lament the loss of
“children and young men.” Noue, old or
young, would be exempted from mourning.

V. The variety of death’s victims
(ver. 21, 22).

1. Enters all scenes; ‘ palaces,”
“streets” (ver. 21), “‘open fields” (ver.
22).

2. Desolates all social ranks: those
who dwell in “palaces” equally with
labourers in “ streets,” and shepherds in
** open field.”

3. Strikes down all ages ; ‘ children,”
‘young men,” “ men.”

VI. The irresistibleness of death’s
invasions.

1. Bolted doors cannot exclude him
rom our dwellings; he “comes up into
our window.”

2. Fortified palaces are no defence
from his assaults: ‘‘ enters palaces.”

3. The highways in the city he invades :
where children play, and young men
resort.

4. Lands groan with the burden of
the slain (ver. 22). So dreadful would
be the slaughter that the carcases would
be left unburied. But what a great
sepulchre earth is!

Note 1. It was the custom anciently
to give a fanciful interpretation to the
words “death is come up into our
windows —viz., the windows are the five
senses; and death “‘comes in” with the
pleasures admitted by these “‘ windows.”

Note 2. The degradation to which the
body ts reduced is suggested in ver. 22.
Just as the Chaldeans would lay all
their glory in the dust, and make their
beauty loathsome “as dung,” so does
death turn our comeliness into corruption.


Ver. 21. Theme: DEATH AN INVADING
ENEMY.

As an enemy:

I. He ts cruel. 1. He strikes at the
dearest objects of our affection. 2. He
robs us of our most useful men ; patriots,
philanthropists, preachers, &c. 3. He
drags us from the dearest things of
the heart: occupation, ae circlea,


GAP Ix.





cherished plans, &e. 4. He reduces our


bodies to the dust. Cruel death! Deaf
to the strongest and most piercing cries
of social life,

II. He ts unremitting. Never
sheathes his sword; never pauses in
march; not an hour that he does not
strike a thousand fatal strokes; as rest-
less as the sea; whoever idle, he is
active—in every man, in every family,
in every community, in every nation;
busy with all.

II. He ts subtle. Fights in ambush,
steals into the house, touches the food and
it becomes poison, breathes into the air
and it becomes pestiferous, lays his hand
on the heart and it is still. While
his victims speak of health, he instils
mortal disease; works through the
delicate dish and the sparkling wines.

IV. He ts resistless. Men through
ages have tried to resist him; every
effort and expedient has failed. ll
that science, art, wealth, and caution
could do failed. Granite castles and
royal bodyguards are powerless before
him. The mighty warrior drops his
sword and becomes dust in his presence.

V. He is ubiquitous. No spot on
earth where he is not at work. He is
in the waves of air, on billows of deep,
in valleys, on mountain, river, and
brook, forest and flowers; whole earth
is his dominion.

VI. He és conquerable. “The last
enemy shall be destroyed.” There
fs One who will swallow up death in
victory: Christ has conquered death.
1. In His own resurrection. 2. In His
power upon the minds of His disciples.
““Q death, where is thy sting ?”—
Homilist.

Ver. 20, 21. “To be used in times
when death snatches many away. i,
Who sends Him? ii Wherefore He is
sent? iiii How we may protect our-
selves against Him ?”—WNaeg. in Lange.


Ver. 22, 23. Theme; HUMAN GLORY-
ING CORRECTED, (Addenda on ver. 23,
“ Spurious glorying.”)

The prophet concludes his discourse
with a general moral reflection, the ob-
ject of which is to present the only means
of escape from such fearfully threatening

202


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH,


dangers—viz., a living and truly produe-
tive knowledge of the Lord.

I. The things in which they are not
to glory.

1. Those which to the natural man
seem most destrable, viz., wisdom,
strength (power), riches, (Comp. 1
Kings i. 13, with 2 Chron. ix. 22; Job
xii. 13.

2. Those in which these Jews im-
clined presumptuously to boast. Jere-
miah had censured their boast of external
carnal advantages. (Comp. vii. 4, 8,
10, 14, 24, 26, 28). They gloried on
their wisdom (viii. 8, 9); in their
strength ; yet lo! (ix. 1) “slain” in their
riches (ver. 26-28).

The “wisdom” in which they are not
to glory is not that called “ better than
strength” (Eccles. ix. 16), and which is
identical with that recommended in ver.
23, but worldly wisdom (Prov. iii. 5).
“ Strength,” is both physical strength
(Ps. cxlvii. 10; Job xxxix. 19), and
power (2 Kings x. 34, xx. 20).

II. Every man must have some-
thing in which to glory.

1. That which he esteems as his highest
blessing and honour. (Comp. Isa. li. 16 ;
1 Cor. i. 31 ; 2 Cor. x. 17).

2. God sets before us the best objects of
glorying, 1. “Me;” both “ under
stood,” and “known:” God is to be
known as “the only true God.” 2. The
qualities in which God delights; mercy,
or “‘ loving-kindness,” as opposed to their
vaunted “strength ;”. judgment and
righteousness,” as in distinction from
their oppression of the weak and dis
tressed (vii. 5, 6; Ps, cxlv. 17).—Ar-
ranged from Lange.





Theme: THE CHRISTIANS HIGHEST
AND TRUE GLORY.

It consists in: L Belteving in the Lord.
ii. Living tn the Lord. iii. Working
for the Lord. iv. Suffering for the
Lord's sake.—Lnuther, quoted in Lange.


Theme: THE TRUE KNOWLEDGE OF
Gop.

i. Ite nature; not dead science, but
living experience.

ii. Its frutt: (a.) The highest blessing
(mercy, justice, and righteousness ip








ee





Jesus Christ); (6.) The highest honour
(he who has it will not be put to shame,
as he who glories in the flesh).—Naeg.

i, The wisest and surest reasonings
in religion are grounded on the unques-
tionable perfections of the Divine nature
(e.g., belief in Divine Providence and
veracity).

ii. The nature of God is the true idea
and pattern of perfection and happiness,
—Abp. Tillotson, quoted in Lange.

* Paul says, ‘He that glorieth, let him
glory in the Lord’ (2 Cor. x. 17), and
Jesus, ‘This is life eternal, that they
might know Thee, and Jesus Christ,’ &.
(John xvii. 3). This is to glory, as
though one should say, ‘ God be praised,
I am right well and sound!’ To be
sound in the faith is to have the know-
ledge of Jesus Christ, to mazntain it, to
grow in it. To make a great noise of
good works as our own, is ridiculous.
For grace produces them, the power of
God dwelling in us. We do nothing,
and should do nothing if it were left to
us; but the work of God in us, that we
believe, is not to be passed over in
silence, moroseness, and ingratitude.
What a noise do humble saints in the
Revelation make of their grace, freedom,
priesthood, royal dignity, victory, re-
demption (chaps. iv., v., vii, xii, xiv.,
xvii., xix.), Oh, that the whole earth
were full of our glorying in the Lord!

‘Oh, that we were able, our songs so high to
raise,

That all the country round might echo with

His praise.’

Let your light so shine before men,
that they may see your good works and
glorify the Father in heaven.” —Zinzen-
dorf.

“Examples of the folly of glorying
(or trusting) in wisdom (Solomon), might
(Samson), riches (Ahab).”—Bp. Bull.

(Comp. Addenda on ver. 33, “ Spurt-
ous glorying.” )


Theme: A PROHIBITED AND A SANO-
TIONED GLORYING.

When Divine punishment for wrong-
doing comes upon a people, there is
proof made of the powerlessness of
wisdom, might, and wealth to do their
possessors any good. God refuses to


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH,


Gap, 1%


tolerate the conceit of knowledge,
strength, or wealth—His gifts ; instead
of glorying in the knowledge of His
being and character, in what “ He de-
lights.

I. The glorying which is prohibited
by God.

The tendency and temptation to self-
glorification over these things. For
“wisdom” is a great good, so also
“strength,” and “wealth ;” but each
being the gift of God, the Giver is to be
gloried in, not the gifts; otherwise the
glorying becomes the glorification of
self,

1. Glorying in wisdom ts the glorifica-
tson of self, therefore forbidden. The
mind that knows and the subjects
known are both from God. “ Know-
ledge,” possessed or contemplated apart
from God, ‘puffeth up;” and so en-
dangers. Scripture commends “ wis-
dom,” which glories not in itself, but in
God our Saviour. ‘“ Christ is the wis-
dom of God.” The law of Christian
submission and adoration is that which
we are called to follow.

2. Glorying in strength is forbidden as
self-glorification. Many animals far sur-
pass man in strength. The early his-
tory of man exhibits the consequences
of glorying in mere physical strength.
Giants performed astonishing feats of
valour ; but the ungigantic David made
manifest the weakness of mere bodily
bulk and strength. Need to be “strength-
ened with might by God’s Spirit in the
inner man.” Sickness corrects our glory-
ing in the forces of the flesh. History
shows God’s repudiations of this boast:
in destruction of Sennacherib’s army,
decline and fall of empires founded on
mere force, écc. Not self, but ‘ Christ
the power of God” must be our glory.

3. Glorying in wealth 1s forbidden as
self-glorification. The lust of posses-
sion strong in man. Sad to be behold
a spirit entombed in a mausoleum of gold
and silver.

II. The glorying which is Divinely
sanctioned. To glor- is an instinct in
man ; is right, therefore, where the ob-
ject is worthy of him. God here pre-
sents Himself, There is a gradation set
before us: God as the object he under

20


OHAP. Ix,





standing ; God as the object of know-
ledge; God as the object of glorying.

1. Understanding God. “There is a
spirit in man, and the inspiration of the
Almighty giveth him understanding.”
This common human faculty is a gracious
gift of God. Early education calls it
into exercise; events of life afford it
discipline ; profound spiritual verities
may be by tt examined. Man may under-
stand God! By Divine inspiration even
the uncultivated mind may be in com-
munion with Eternal Love.

2. Knowing God. This is more than
“understanding” Him. “Life eternal
to know Him and Jesus Christ whom
He has sent.” Our filial relation to
God in Christ is the true ground of our
knowledge of Him. Deeply blessed is
the knowledge of Christ, for it is the
knowledge of God incarnate. Eternity
will reveal new deeps of God’s eternal
love and being.

3. In the understanding and know-
ledge of God, the spirit of man glories,
and may glory for ever. God glories in
our glorying in Him. That which a
man glories in truly intimates his char-
acter. He who glories in music or art
continually occupies himself in tt, Thus
day and night the soul delights in Christ
Jesus,

Conclusion: Let us rightly estimate
our being and our possessions in Christ.
Because we are what we are, we are
forbidden to glory in anything beneath
our God.—Rev. W. R. Percival, from
“ Homilist.”

Comments: “ Wisdom” — political
sagacity ; as if 1¢ could rescue from the
impending calamities. “ Might ”—melt-
tary prowess. ‘‘ Riches”—accumulated
wealth ; none of which boasted resources,
nor all combined, would prove a means
of defence, and their confidence in them
would be a snare. Well would it be for
them to abandon hope in these futile
gloryings, and seek refuge and protec-
tion in God, which they might do by
obedient and reverent regard to those
duties in which He “ delights,”

“Understandeth me ”—theoretically ,
“knoweth me”—personally, experimen-
tally, and practically.

“ Loving-kindness”—God’s mercy is

204


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; JEREMIAH.





put in the forefront, since that alone
can save us from fleeing in fear from
His presence; “Judgment” towarda
the rebellious who will not submit;
“Righteousness,” His faithfulness to
His gracious promises, to all who take
refuge in His goodness and care. “In
the earth :” which contradicts the heart
less philosophy which teaches that God
does not interest Himself or interfere in
terrestrial affairs, (See Critical Com-
mentary.)

“This then is the prophet’s remedy
for the healing of the nation. It is the
true understanding and knowledge of
God, of which the first, ‘ wnderstand-
tng,” means the spiritual enlightenment of
the mind (1 Cor. ii. 13, 14); the other,
“knowledge,” the training of the heart
unto obedience (John viii. 31, 32). This
knowledge of God is further said to find
in Him three chief attributes: (1.)
“loving-kindness,” t.¢., readiness to show
grace and mercy; (2.) “judgment,” a
belief in which is declared (Heb. xi. 6)
to be essential to faith ; (3.) “ righteous-
ness,” which is essential to religion abso-
lutely. Unless men believe that God’s
dealings with them in life and death are
right and just, they can neither love nor
reverence Him.”— Speaker's Com.

“In these things I delight, saith the
Lord ;” %.e., both in deing them myself,
and in seeing them done by others (Mic.
vi. 8, vii. 18).


Ver. 25, 26. Theme: TRUE AND
FALSE ciRcUMCISION. “J will punish
all [omit words in italics here]—circwm-
cised with the uncircumcised.”

“The Jews gloried in their circum-
cision, ignoring the true circumcision of
the heart. (See Rom. ii. 25-29; Gal.
v. 6; Col. ii, 11, which are the best
comments on the passage.) Therefore
they are regarded as uncircumcised, and
will be punished with the enemies of
Israel and of God—Ammon and Moab,
Jeremiah does not raise the question as
to whether the Egyptians, &c., were alse
circumcised in the flesh, but combines
Judah with Egypt, Edom, &c., the bitter-
est enemies of God and His Church;
and tells them that they have made
themselves to be as the wncircumcised


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH,


err





among the nations by their apostasy
from God. Here is a solemn warning
to all that a mere formal observance of
religious ceremontes, without spiritual
holiness and dutiful obedience, is rejected
and loathed by God, as no better than
the abominations of idolatry ; and apos-
tates are reckoned as on a level with
heathen votaries of false deities.”—
Wordsworth.

“ Egypt is put first to degrade Judah,
who, though in privileges above the
Gentiles, by unfaithfulness sank below
them. Egypt, too, was the power in
which the Jews were so prone to trust,
and by whose instigation they, as well
as the other peoples specified, revolted
from Babylon.”—Critical Com.

“It is a common thing with Moses
and the prophets to call an unrenewed
heart ‘uncircumcision,’ and to say that
the people are ‘ uncircumcised in heart :’
for circumcision, while an evidence of
free salvation in Christ, initiated the
Jews into the worship and service of God,
and proved the necessity of a new life;
it was @ sign of repentance and faith.
When, therefore, the Jews presented
only the sign, they were justly derided
by Moses and the prophets; for they
seemed as though they sought to pacify
God with a thing of nought, without
regarding the end. The same is the
case when we boast of baptism, and are
destitute of repentance and faith; our
boasting is absurd and ridiculous ; for
the interior power is renovation, when
our old man is crucified in us, and we
rise again with Christ into newness of
life.” —C'alvin.

“A clear testimony that the holy
sacraments procure nothing for the
work’s sake, For the Jews were indeed
circumcised in the flesh, but this was to


OHAP. 15,








be a sign to them of righteonsness, that
they should be spiritually circumcised
in faith and good works. But since
such spiritual circumcision did not
follow, and they remained uncircum-
cised at heart, the other fieshly circum-
cision helped them not, but redounded
instead to their sin.”— Cramer,

Circumcision as a figure of the rela-
tion of man to God. i. The three stages of
circumcision—uncircumcised, outwardly
circumcised, truly circumcised, corre-
spond to the three stages of our being
without God, serving (tod outwardly,
serving God tn spirtt and in truth. ii.
As external circumcision, without that
of the heart, te equivalent to uncircum-
ctsion, 80 the outward service of God
without the inward is eguivalent to no
service at all.— Naeg.


Theme: SUPERFIOIAL PIETY A DELU-
BION.

I. External religious observances are
not necessarily accompanied by inter-
nal spiritual elevation. They do not
prove nor produce inward purity and
piety.

II. Without inward spiritual ele-
vation our external advantages aggra-
vate our impiety. They ought to
promote piety; they offer a pretence
of piety; they continually pronounce
against our impiety. :

tl Aggravating our impiety,
our abuse of external advantages
will ensure heavier condemnation.
“Punished with the uncircumcised ;”
classed with the godless; guiltter than
the godless; condemned to the keener woe
which such must feel, even though the
punishment itself be the same as that
borne by the godlegs (Luke xiii. 26~
28).


NOTICEABLE TOPICS AND TEXTS IN CHAPTER IX.


Topic: LAMENT FOR THE SLAIN DAUGHTERS OF SOCIETY.


Text: “Oh, that my head


were waters, and mine eyes a fountain of tears, that I might weep day and night
for the slain of the daughters of my people” (ver. 1).


It is a fastidious morality which leads the virtuous to banish the wretched crea-
tures of vice from thought, pity, effort. Wretchedness in any form should evoke
commiseration. Physical suffering summons our ameliorating arts; surely moral
degradation should not be passed by with stolidity or scorn! Guilty ones oft shed
tears for themselves ‘“‘for the misery which has come upon them,” and ae shown


OMAP, IK. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAR,





themselves grateful for the tears of the virtuous who have “ wept with them that
weep.” There is a winning force in tears, a saving force. A word of scorn, a
look of wrath, cast at a fallen being, drives the guilty one, maddened to shame,
agony, and indignation, into deeper crime.

I. A sight for tears. ‘‘ Weep for the slain,” &c. Over the moral and spiritual
prostitution of his people, the prophet bewailed. The fair comeliness, the sweet,
virginity, the chaste piety of the “‘ daughter of Zion” was destroyed.

1. Lt displayed the ravages of cruelty. “The slain.” A strong figure: God’s
fair daughters murdered!

(a.) Cruelty perpetrated : the “slain” speaks of slayers: and no language is too
strong with which to denounce those who devastate virtue, assassinate happiness,
ravage purity, and destroy character. The blood of victims cries out against them
to heaven, (0.) Cruelty suffered: the “slain”—the word implies agonies. He
mourns not the dead, who died in peace, but the murdered who perished by vio-
lence. Read the miserable case of the daughters of iniquity in the records of desperate
deeds, who, ‘mad from life’s history, glad to death’s mystery,” rush “ out of the
world.”

2. It shocked the feelings of patriotism. ‘Weep for the slain of the daughters of
my people.” He lacks true nobleness who lacks patriotism ; and patriotism will
urge lim in whom it lives to alleviate all wretchedness under which his own people
groan. We need more to feel that a brother's or sister’s misery is our own misery.
Thus Jesus “‘ bore our griefs,” &c.

Il. A cry of lament. “Oh, that my head were waters,” d&c. A bitter wail
bursting from an aching heart. Insensibility to the piteous condition of the fallen
declares against our own moral consciousness, Think of: 1. Homes which mourn
for «/aughters worse than dead, a silent shame breaking every tender heart! Think
of: 2. Hopes which are destroyed; children, which promised to be the light of age,
“slain.” And Christcan hopes destroyed also,—sows slain, “twice dead,”—dead to
happiness on earth, dead to happiness beyond,

Yet the cry of lament need not be a cry of despair. “Can these slain live?”
Yes; for them Jesus atoned on Calvary, for them there is a quickening Spirit, for them
room in heaven; Jesus spoke to a “ woman who was a sinner ;” saved her, loved
her, severely rebuke those who repelled her; said tenderly to her, “ Thy sins,
which are many, are forgiven ; faith hath saved thee, go in peace.” (a.) Banish not
the degraded from purposes of mercy. From Mary the Magdalene Jesus “cast out
seven devils.” (b.) Banish them not from hope. “ Jesus saves to the uttermost ;”
and tells the self-righteous that ‘ publicans and harlots shall go into the kingdom
of heaven before them.”

III. An appeal to pity. Oh, for tears, “that I might weep day and night.”

1. Our pity need not be dried up by the consideration that the guilty and fallen
merit censure. “Let him that is without sin first cast a stone.” “If Christ so
loved us—while we were yet sinners—we ought; also to love one another.” Being
ourselves “forgiven ten thousand talents,”—our delinquencies against Heaven, let
us not seize on a fellow-creature cruelly because society has been wronged to the ex-
tent of ‘‘five hundred pence.” None can wrong society as humanity has wronged
God. “Be merciful, as your Father in heaven is merciful.”


“Touch her not acornfully, Think of her mournfully, Tenderly, humanely.”


Let tears flow for “the slain,” as Jesus “wept over” Jerusalem, though it
merited curses, and soon would clamour for His blood. ‘“ Begin at Jerusalem ”
—take to the worst sinners, and take first to them, the blessed message of love.

2. Nor should our pity be transient. “ Day and night” let us “ weep for the
slain.” Our pity will soon be too /ate for many. Redeem the time, that “the
blessing of those ready to perish” may be won. ‘On some have compassion,
making a difference; and others save with fear, pulling them out of the fire,

306


AOMILETIC COMMENTALY; JEREMIAR. CHAP, 1%.





hating even the garments spotted by the flesh.” The ‘‘ Fountain opened for sin
and all uncleanness” is open still. ,


Topic: JEREMIAH: A LESSON FOR THE DISAPPOINTED. Text: “O that I had in


the wilderness a lodging place, that I might leave my people, for they be all
treacherous men” (ver. 2).


The prophets were ever ungratefully treated by the Israelites, themselves re-
sisted, their warnings neglected, their good services forgotten. Yet the earlier
prophets fared better than the later; for outward honour was paid them, as with
Moses and Samuel; while those who came in after times suffered maltreatment,
as Elijah, Micaiah, and Zechariah (Matt. xxiii. 35).

No prophet commenced labours with greater encouragements than Jeremiah. A
king reigned who was bringing back the times of the man after God’s own heart.
This devout and zealous king was, moreover, young. What might not therefore
be effected in the course of years? Bright fortunes seemed in store for the Church.

Schism, too, was at an end since Israel’s captivity. Kings of the house of
David again ruled over the whole land. Idolatry was destroyed by Josiah in all
the cities. Thus, at first sight, it seemed reasonable to anticipate further and per-
manent improvements.

I. Every one begins with being sanguine.

Jeremiah did. God’s servants entered on thoir office with more lively hopes
than their after fortunes warranted. Very soon the cheerful prospect was overcast
for Jeremiah, and he was left to labour in the dark.

Huldah’s message fixed the coming fortunes of Judah: she foretold the early
death of the good king, and a fierce destruction to the unworthy nation. This pro-
phecy came five years after Jeremiah entered office; so early in his course were
his hopes cut away.

Or the express word of God came to and undeceived him. Or the hardened state
of sim in which the nation lay destroyed his hopes. But so it was that his mind
sobered into the more blessed and noble temper, resignation.

II. Resignation a more blessed state of mind than sanguine hope—.e., hope
of present success.. Because:

1. It is a truer state of mind. 2. More consistent with our fallen state of being.
3. More improving to our hearts. 4. The grace for which the most eminent ser-
vants of God have been conspicuous.

a, To expect great effects from our religious exertions is natural and tnocent,
but arises from inexperience of the kind of work we have to do—to change the
heart and will of men.

b. Far nobler frame of mind to labour, not with hope of seeing fruit, but for
consceence’ cake, as matter of duty, and in faith, trusting good will be done though
we see it not,

c. The Bible shows that though God’s servants beyan with success, they ended
with disappointment. Not that God’s purposes or instruments fail, but because
the time for reaping és not here, but hereafter. ‘Thus: Moses began with leading
forth Israel in triumph; ended before journey finished and Canaan gained.
Samuel’s ministry wrought reformations ; ended in the people wilfully choosing a
king. lijah, after his successes, fled from Jezebel into the wilderness to mourn
his disappuintments, Jsaiah, after Hezekiah’s religious reign and miraculous
defeat of Sennacherib’s army, fell upon the evil days of Manasseh. Apostles show
the same order of experience; for after all the great works God enabled them to
do, see 2 Tim. iii. 13.

III. The vicissitude of feeling which this transition from hope to disap-
pointment produces.

Jeremiah’s trials during Josiah’s reign were considerable, but me ex-


\


OMAP. Lx, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.








perlenced persecution from every class of men: from the people (xviii. 18), men
of Anathoth (xi. 21), priests and prophets (xxvi. 16 8q.), chtef governor (xx. 2),
Zedekiah (xxxii. 3), consptrators (xxxvii. 14), Nebuchadnezzar (xxxix. 14) and an
Hthiopian were of the few persons who showed him any kindness. Such were his
trials,

And their effect upon his spirit? Affliction, fear, despondency, sometimes rest-
lessness, even impatience under his trials, find frequent expression in his writings
(v. 3, 30, 31; xii. 1-3; xv. 10-18; xx. 7-14). Such is the suecession and
tide of feelings which most persons undergo before their minds settle into the calm
of resignation.

IV. The issue of these changes and conflicts of feeling was resignation.

He comes to use language which expresses that chastened spirit and weaned heart
which is the termination of ail agitation and anxiety in religious minds,

He who at one time could not comfort himself, was sent to comfort a brother ;
and in comforting Baruch he speaks in that nobler temper of resignation which
takes the place of sanguine hope and harassing fear, and betokens calm and
clear-sighted faith and tmward peace (chap. xlv.) :—Seek not success; be not im-
patient ; fret not thyself; be content if, after all thy labours, thou dost but save
thyself, without seeing other fruit of them.

V. These truths apply not to the prophets only, but to all.

All live in @ world which promises well but does not fulfil All begin with
hope, and (apart from religious prospects) end with disappointment. Much dif-
ference in our respective trials, arising from difference of tempers and fortune.

1. Still it is in our nature to hope. to begin life thoughtlessly and joyously ; to
seek great things in one way or other; to have vague notions of good to come; to
love the world, believe its promises, and expect satisfaction and happiness from it.

2. And tt ts our lot, as life proceeds, to encounter disappointment. Exceptions
may seem to show themselves in the retired ranks of society and settled wealth.
Still all begin life with health and end tt amid sickness. Youth leaves even those
most favoured with fortunes, and they lament the days gone, remember them with
pleasure mingled with pain. For they have lost something they once had ; whereas
at the outset they anticipated something they had not.

VI. It is not religion which suggests this sad view of things, but ex-
perience.

It is the world’s doing. Though the Bible said nothing about the perishing
nature of all earthly pleasures, it is a fact from which we cannot escape.

1. Here tt is that God Himself offers us His aid: by His Word and His Church,
Left to ourselves we seek good from the world and cannot find it: in youth look
forward, and in age look back. Well that we be persuaded of these things be-
times, to gain wisdom and provide for evil days.

2. Seek we great things? We must seek them where and in the way they are
to be found, as He who came into the world to enable us to gain them has set
them before us. We must be willing to give up present hope for future enjoy-
ment.

3. We must be changed before we can receive our greatest good. Our nature is
not in a state to enjoy happiness, even if offered to us. We seek it, feel we need
it, but are not fitted for it. If we would gain true bliss, cease to seek it as an
end, postpone the prospect of enjoying it.

4, Learn to know ourselves, and have thoughts becoming ourselves. Impetuous
hope and undisciplined mirth ill become a sinner. Our guilt brought down the
Son of God from heaven to die upon the cross for us. Should we live in pleasure
here when the Gospel tells us of the Saviour’s life-long affliction and disappoint-
ment ?

5. Prepare for suffering and disappointment, which befit us as sinners and are
necessary for us as saints. Acceot affliction as a means of improving our hearts.

208


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH,





OHAP. Ik.








Look disappoinsment in the face; “taking the prophets as examples of suffering


and patience.”


Give not over your attempts to serve God, though you see nothing come of them.
Watch and pray, and obey your conacience, though you cannot perceive your progress


‘m holiness. Do the duties of your calling, though they are distasteful.


in the narrow way.


Persevere


Mourn that you may rejoice (Matt. v. 4). Take up the cross of Christ that you


may wear the crown.


Give your hearts to Him, and you will solve the difficulty


how Christians can be “ surrowful yet alway rejoicing.”


6. But you must begin in faith.


“Come unto Me, and I will give you rest.”


You cannot at first see where Christ is leading you, or how light will arise out of


darkness.


Must begin with pain, self-denial, refusing sin, mastering evil impulses,


enduring irreligious sneers for Christ’s sake, forcing your minds to prayer, keeping


thought of God before you daily.


The Holy Spir't will enable you to do this;


then “shall your light rise in obscurity,” &. (Isa. viii. 10, 11).—Abridged and
arranged from “ Plain Sermons,” by contributors to the “ Tracts for the Times.”


ADDENDA TO OHAPTER 1X.: ILLUSTRATIONS AND SUGGESTIVE EXTRACTS.


Ver. 1. “ Fountain of tears.”


‘¢ Like a pent-up flood, swoln to the height,
He poured his griefs into my breast with
tears,
sige as the manliest men in their crossed
ives
Are sometimes foreed to shed.”
—Joanna BaiLuiz,


*¢ Every one can master a grief but he that
has it,” —SHAKESPEARE,


Ver. 2. Solitude: “A lodging-place,
that I might leave my people.” ‘There
is no flight for him into quiet religious
contemplation; he cannot withdraw from
the circle of interests in which his country-
men are dwelling. He may pass hours
or months in solitude, but he will not be
away from the events which are befalling
them ; he will be more deeply occupied
with them; he will be contemplating
them with a closeness and intensity to
which the mere actors in them are
strangers. The poor young priest of
Anathoth can in no way sever himself
from the policy of nations and rulers:
Judea, Egypt, Chaldea, every tribe and
power of the earth must be about him
in his closet, must enter into his most
inward personal experiences and suffer-
ings.” — Maurice, “ Prophets and Kings.”

“Tt is this childlike tenderness (Jer.
i. 6) which adds force to the severity of
his denunciations, to the bitterness of
his grief. He was not one of those
stern characters which bear without re-
pining the necessary evils of life. He

(+)


who was to be hard as brass and strong
as iron, who had to look with unmoved
countenance on the downward descent
of his country, yet longed that his ‘head
were waters, and his eyes a fountain of
tears, that he might weep day and night
for the daughter of his people” He
whose task it was to run to and fro
through the streets of Jerusalem, like
the Grecian sage (v. 1, 2), to see if he
could find a single honest man—to live,
as it were, in the market-place as a
butt of scorn, alike from the religious
and the irreligious world—he was, by
his own nature and inclination, the
prophet of the desert, longing for a
‘lodge’ in some vast wilderness, that
he ‘might leave his people, and avoid
the sight of their crimes.” — Stanley,
“Jewish Church,” ii. 442.


‘¢ Oh, fer a lodge in some vast wilderness,
Some boundless contiguity of shade,
Where rumour of oppression and deceit,

Of unsuccessful or successful war,

Might never reach me more! My ear is
pained,

My soul is sick, with every day’s report

Of wrong and outrage with which earth is
filled.”—Cowrrr, “ Slavery.”


‘‘ Far hid from the pitiless plunderer’s view,
In the pathless depths of the parched Karroo;
And here, while the night-winds around me


aig
And the stars burn bright in the midnight


aky
Asl sit apart by the desert stone,
Like Elijah at Horeb’s cave alone,
‘A still amall voice’ comes through the


wild—
208


Omar. IX,


Like a father consoling his fretful child—

Which banishes bitterness, wrath, and fear,

Saying—‘ Man Is DisTaNtT, BUF GoD Is
WHR !|’”—PRINGLE.


Ver. 4. Slander.


‘¢ Malicious slander never would have leisure
To search, with prying eyes, for faults abroad,
If all, like me, considered their own hearts,
And wept the sorrows which they find at

home.”—Rowz.


** Slander, the foulest whelp of sin! The man
In whom this spirit entered was undone;
His tongue was set on fire of hell; his heart
Was black as death ; his legs were faint with

haste
To propagate the lie his soul had framed ;
His pillow was the peace of families
Destroyed, the sigh of innocence reproached,
Broken friendships, and the strife of brother-
hoods.” —PoLLox.


“ Against slander there is no defence.
Hell cannot boast so foul a fiend, nor
men deplore so foul a foe, It stabs
with a smile. It is a pestilence walking
in darkness, spreading contagion far and
wide, which the most wary traveller can-
not avoid. It is the heart-searching
dagger of the assassin. It is the poisoned
arrow whose wound is incurable. It is
as fatal as the sting of the most deadly
asp; murder is its employment, inno-
cence its prey, and ruin its sport.”—
Gray's “ Topics.”

Ver. 8. Seductive speech; like a poi-
soned arrow.

‘* The devil hath not, in all his quiver’s choice,


An arrow for the heart like a sweet voice.’
—Brron.


Ver. 11. Jerusalem in rusns.

“Every stone is a witness of God’s
revelation, and every ruin a monument
of his wrath.” —Pterottt.


*¢ Alas! we were warned, but we recked not
the warning,
Till our warriors grew weak in the day
of despair ;
And our glory was fied as the light cloud of
morning,
That gleams for 2 moment, and melts
into air.” —Da.z.


“ Her outcast tribes no longer come
To greet her as their hallowed home,
But sadly joy to lay their head
Beneath their foes’ insulting tread ;
To fall by her they could not gave,
Their glory once, and now their grave.”
—CHaARLOTIXx ELizaBETH,


Ver.17. “Mourning women.”


210


African


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH





tncident.—“ The mother of poor Touda,


~who heard that I wished to see him


once more, led me to the house where
the body was laid. The narrow space
of the room was crowded; about two
hundred women were sitting and stand-
ing around, singing mourning songs to
doleful and monotonous airs. As I
stood looking, the mother of Touda ap-
proached, She threw herself at the foot
of her dead son, and begged him to speak
to her once more. And then, when the
corpse did not answer, she uttered a
shriek, so long, so piercing, such a wail
of love and grief, that tears came into
my eyes. Poor African mother! she
was literally as one sorrowing without
hope ; for with them there is no hope
beyond the grave. ‘All is done,’ they
say, with inexpressible sadness of con-
viction that sometimes gave me the
heartache, As I left the hut, thinking
these things, the watling recommenced.
It would be kept up by the women, who
are the official mourners on these occa-
sions, till the corpse was buried.”—Du
Chaillu.

Ver. 21, Death.

“ What disarrays like death! It de
faces the fascination of the beautiful.
It breaks the lamp of the wise. It
withers the strength of the mighty. It
snatches the store of the rich. Kings
are stripped of trapping, trophy, trea-
sure; ‘their glory shall not descend after
them.’”—Dr. R. W. Hamilton.


‘** The glories of our blood and state
Are shadows, not substantial things}
There is no armour against fate;

Death lays his icy hand on kings.
Sceptre and crown
Must tumble down,

And in the dust be equal made

With the poor crooked scythe and spada


*¢ Some men with swords may reap the field,
And plant fresh laurels where they kill ;
But their strong nerves at last must yield ;

They tame but one another still,

Early or late,

They stoop to fate,
And must give up theirmurmuring breath,
When they, pale captives, creep to death,


“ The garlands wither on your brow:
Then boast no more your mighty deeds !
Upon Death’s purple altar now
See where the victor-victim bleeds |
Your heads must come
To the cold tomb:


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; JEREMIAH,





Only the actions of the just
Smell sweet and blossom in the dust,”
—SHIBLEY.


Death comes on with equal footatep

To the hall and hut;

Think you Death will tarry knocking
Where the door is shut ?

Jesus waiteth, waiteth, wasteth ;
But thy door is fast :

Gvieved, away the Saviour turneth !
Death breaks through at last.”

—Unxnown.


“T congratulate you and myself that
life is passing fast away. What a
superlatively grand and consoling idea
is that of death! Without this radiant
idea, this delightful morning star, indi-
cating that the luminary of eternity is
going to rise, life would, to my view,
darken into midnight melancholy. Oh,
the expectation of living here and living
thus always would be indeed a prospect
of overwhelming despair. But thanks
be to that fatal decree that dooms us
to die! thanks to that Gospel which
opens the vision of an endless life! and
thanks, above all, to that Saviour Friend
who has promised to conduct all the
faithful through the sacred trance of
death into scenes of Paradise and ever-
lasting delight.”—John Foster.

Ver, 23. Spurious glorying. Wisdom:
a bane or a blessing, according as it is
used. Water well directed will turn the
mighty mill, and thus spare wearisome
toils; but if it break through its banks,
it is a desolating and destructive thing.
Sails are an advantage to a ship which
steers aright ; but if wrongly directed,
the more sail she carries the worse for
her, since they hasten her to the ominous
rocks,


*« Knowledge and Wisdom, far from being
one,
Have ofttimes no connection.
dwells
Im heads replete with thoughts of other


Knowledge


men ;
Wisdom, in minda attentive to their own,”
—Cowren,


Omar. I,





Might: ‘‘ What illustration have we
of such glorying in the history of
Napoleon! At the head of his con-
gregated legions he made the world
stand in awe of him; but the scene
changes, till we see him gnawing his
heart away on a barren rock under the
equator.” — Pilkington.

“Our mightiest endeavours show us
that, after all, we are only beating our-
selves against the bars of a great cage.
Can your feet stand upon the flowing
river? Can you lay your finger upon
the lowest of all the stars that shine in
heaven. ‘We are hemmed in by the im-
passable,” —Parker.

Riches: Croesus, whose name is a
synonym for great wealth, was him-
self taken captive, stripped of all his
treasures, and in old age was supported
by the charity of Cyrus.

“* Tf thon art rich, thou art poor ;
For, like an ass whose back with ingots bows,


Thou bear’st thy heavy riches but a journey,
And Death unloads thee.”—SHAKESPEARE,


‘¢ To purchase heaven has gold the power?

Can gold remove the mortal hour?

In life, can love be bought with gold?

Are friendship’s pleasures to be sold ?

Cease then on trash thy hopes to bind,

Let nobler views engage thy mind,”

—JOHNSON.

“T have read of a man who had a
suit, and when his case was to be heard,
he applied himself to three friends to
see what they would do. One answered
he would bring him as far on hts journey
as he could; the second promised to go
with him to his journey’s end; the third
engaged to go with him before the judge
and speak for him, nor leave him till his
cause was determined. These three are
a man’s riches his friends and his graces,
His riches may not very long stay with
him ; his friends can go with him to the
grave, but must there leave him ; but his
graces will go with him before God,
never forsake him, but accompany him
to the grave and to glory.”—Brooks.


Cuar, X. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAR,





CHAPTER X.


Onrricat amp Exrerrican Norzs.—i, Chronology of the chapter. Section 1-16 has been
declared spurious (by De Wette, Movers, and Hitzig), its authenticity disputed, a late inter-
polation by either the pseudo-Isaiah (Movers) or by & Babylonian exile. Even Naegelsbach
affirms, ‘‘ Who was the author, and when and by whom” the section was written, ‘‘ cannot be
ascertained.” Two difficulties lead to this severance of the section from the book: 1. The
continuity of thought is abruptly broken by these verses ; 2. The topics treated therein belong
to the time of the exile. Graf, Keil, Hemderson, and Speaker's Com. contend for the
genuineness and authenticity of the section; and affirm that Jeremiah here views his people
“ proleptically as in captivity,” that he addreases them in exile, and places himself among them .
merely for the sake of argument (Hend.) ; that the train of thought in these sixteen verses
is but an enlargement of the truth in ix. 23, 24, and that the fragmentary disconnected form
of this chapter is, probably, owing to the fact “that only portions of the concluding part of
Jeremiah’s temple sermon were embodied in Baruch’s roll” (Speaker’s Com.). Thus Dr. Payne
Smith and Keil date this chapter as synchronous with chap. ix., a part of the same discourse,
Henderson isolates the chapter, but suggests no date. Dr, Dahler supposes it to be a separate
discourse, delivered in the fourth year of Jehoiakim, after the first capture by Nebuchadnezzar,
when the chiefs among the Jews were borne into Babylon—s.o. 605; Assyrian chronology, B.0.
586, This seems satisfactory : so we may venture with Bagster to separate this chapter from
the foregoing by an interval of three years. The section 17-25 is by some referred to the
eleventh year of Jehoiakim, the year of the king’s death at the hand of the Chaldean
monarch, Nebuchadnezzar.

2. National History ; see chap. vii. in loc. Judah’s experience of captivity began in the fourth
year of Jehoiakim, when Nebuchadnezzar, acting as Nabopolassar’s lieutenant, besieged
Jerusalem, and carried away, together with the spoils of the Temple, the youths of highest
rank in the land, ‘‘the principal persons in dignity, 3000 in number” (Josephus), among
whom were Daniel, Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego—cousins of Jehoiakim. A mournful
event; for in their losa the nation was deprived of well-nigh all the persons of piety and virtue
whose influence in court tended to restrain the reckless, godless king, and to befriend Jeremiah
in his sacred ministry of witness for righteousness and Jehovah. The solitary flower was
plucked ; the hope of Judah was now gone.

8. Contemporary History. Egypt retained international supremacy, and Judah was a vassal
kingdom under Necho, until the fourth year of Jehoiakim. In that year Nebuchadnezzar de-
feated Necho at Charchemish, and Judea, wrested from the Egyptian empire, became subject
to the now Babylonian domination.

4. Geographical References. Ver. 9. ‘‘ Tarshish,” probably Tarsessus, in south of Spain,
emporium of the Phosnicians, and mart for trade (¢f. Ezek. xxvii. 12). Heereen says that
Spain “was once the richest country in the world for silver,” and that “the silver mountains
were in thoge parts which the Phosnicians comprised under the name of Tarsessus or Tarshish.”
“ Uphaz,” thought to mean Ophir. Henderson suggests that a copyist may have changed the


original word 5), Ophir, into TDAN, Uphaz. But Dr. Payne Smith contends that “the


word is not to be regarded as an error for Ophir upon the authority of the Syriac; probably
Uphas was a place in the neighbourhood of the river Hyphasis, the Sanscrit name for which is


Vipcs.

B Natural History. Ver. 2. ‘‘ The signs of heaven,” Chaldean astrology, which professedly
gathered from the position of stars and celestial signs predictions as to the career and destinies
of nations and individuals. Ver. 5. ‘‘ Palm-tree,” formerly abundant in Judea (re-Jericho,
Deut. xxxiv. 2); grew to great height, often 60 to 100 feet; always “upright;” winde had no
power over its erect growth ; threw out from its crown feathery leaves, each from 4 to 8 feet
long, and from 40 to 80 in number; it lives about 200 years; yields dates, Ver. 9. ‘* Blue
and purple.” Both colours were purple, but the ‘‘blue” had a dark violet tinge, the
‘« purple” a light reddish hue; both were obtained from a secretion of shell-fish found on the
shores of the Mediterranean. Ver. 22. ‘‘ Den of dragons.” See on ix. 11.

6. Manners and Customs. Ver. 2. “ Dismayed at signs of heaven. . . . heathen are dismayed
at them.” Astrologers read the startling celestial phenomena, eclipses, comets, meteors, un-
usual conjunctions of the stars, as precursors of nearing calamities, and used them for working
upon the superstitious fears of the people. Ver. 9. “Stlver spread into plates.” Silver is so
malleable that it may be beaten out into 100,000th part of an inch thick; gold into 200,000th
part of aninch. Images for idolatrous worship were overlaid with the precious metal (Hab.
ii. 19). These ‘‘ plates” brought from Tarshish were “like those on which the sacred books of
the Singhalese are written to this day” (Dr. W. Smith). ‘‘ Blue and purple ts their clothing.”
Robes of these colours were worn by kings (Judges viii. 26; Matt. xxvii. 28), by the highest
civil and religious officers, and by the wealthy and luxurious (Luke xvi. 19). Ver. 20.
“¢ Tabernacle is spoiled, cords broken.” Tents were siill largely in use, emphatically so in the
pastoral districts, where the nomadic life was retained.

2


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAR. OHAP. X.








%. Literary Oriticisms, Ver. 2 ** Dismayed at signs of heaven.” The verb ex
; BVA: ; presses a
hension, dread ; not homage. Ver. 6. ‘There ia none like unto Thee,” t.e., no ome, a ipable


pegative, intensifying the denial ; PRD, no nothing ; the strongest form of negation. Ver. 7.


“To Thee doth it appertain ; MN’, from Ti), to be beautiful, decorous, suitable. “ Unto
Thee ig it (fear) due” (Naeg.). Ver. 8. ‘‘ The stock is a doctrine of vanities,” i.e., their doctrine,
that in which they are taught to trust, is wood. Keil: “The teaching of the vanities is wood.”
Speaker’s Com.: “The inatruction of idols is a piece of wood.” Lange: “ Vain instruc-
tion! It is wood!” Noyes: “ Most vain is their confidence ; it is wood.” Blayney ; “ The
very wood itself being a rebuker of vanities.” Henderson: ‘‘The tree itself is a reproof
of vanities.” Kwald: “The wood is mere vain teaching.” Ver. 10. “The true God.”
DN, truth, in contrast with ait, vanity (ver. 8). “Jehovah, God in truth.” Ver. 11.
“Thus shall ye say,” &c. This verse is in Chaldee, on which account some critics reject it as
a gloss (Venema, Ewald, Henderson); but Seb. Schmidt suggests that Jeremiah gave to the
Jews this retort to the Chaldeans, for use when exiled and taunted in Chaldea—“ Ut Judacis
suggerat, quomodo Chaldaeis (ad quos non nisi Ohaldaice logui poterant) paucis verbis responden-
dum sit.” Dr. Payne Smith thinks the verse “a proverbial saying, which Jeremiah inserts in
its popular form.” Ver. 14, ‘‘ Every man is brutish in his knowledge,” i.¢., without knowledge
every man is brutish (Keil, Henderson, Lange) ; or, as others render the words, every man is
rendered brutish by his skill, ¢.e., in idol-making (Jamieson, Fausset, &c.). Ver. 15. ‘‘The
work of errors,” s.¢., of mockeries ; the idols themselves deserving only derision and contempt,
or inflicting on their worshippers only delusion and ridicule. Ver. 17. ‘Thy wares,” ¢.e., thy
bundle, packages ; not goods for trading, but articles for use. “‘Inhabttant of the fortress,”
inhabitress of the siege. Ver. 18. “That they may jind it so.” Find what? The Syriac
supplies the word, “Me ”—“‘ that they may find Me.” But the Targum renders the word find,
‘feel ”—“ J will distress them with the rigours of @ siege that they may feel tt.’ (So Hitz,
Umbr., Naeg., Hend.).


HOMILETIO TREATMENT OF SEOTIONS OF CHAPTER &X.


Bection 1-16, Jehovah, the true and eternal God, contrasted with idols,
», 17-25. Judah’s mournful distress; prayer for Jehovah's mitigating mercy.


Section 1-17.—JeHovaH, THE TEUE AND EreRnaL Gop, ConTRASTED WITH IDoLs,


This appeal, addressed to “‘ house of Israel,” the whole covenant race. It may,
however, be (as in chap. iii. 12) a distinct address to the then scattered Israelites,
in exile already among “‘ the heathen ;” or an inclusive appeal to the entire nation ;
Judah soon to go tnto exile, and Israel already there.

L Superstitions and idolatries censured and contemned. “Learn not the
way of the heathen” (ver. 2); “for the customs of the people are vain” (ver. 3).

1. The casuistries of astrology censured (ver. 2). The creation of “the heavens”
is Jehovah’s handiwork (ver. 12), and His “signs” there must not be regarded
superstitiously, nor be associated with false deities, as is ‘“‘ the way of the heathen ;”
but be regarded with intelligent admiration, with adoring homage of Him whose
glory and goodness they reveal. (Addenda on ver. 2, “ Signs of heaven.”)

2. The vanities of idolatry contemned. Observe (1.) how these idols originate
(ver. 3, 4); (2.) Aow senseless and helpless they are when made (ver. 4, 5) ; (3.) how
little power they possess over men, either for “evil” or “ good” (ver. 5); (4.) how
ridiculous (ver. 8) they are, notwithstanding their gorgeous decoration (ver. 9) ; (5.)
how certainly they who make and trust in them will be put to deriston (ver. 14) ; (6.)
how prophecy foredooms them all (ver. 11, 15).

Il. Sublime representations of Jehovah's glory and Israel’s resources in
Him. “ Who would not fear Thee, O King of nations?” (ver. 7).

1. The majesty of Jehovah’s attributes. (1.) Hts incomparable greatness appeals
to universal reverence (ver. 6, 7). (2%.) Hts eternal glory and sway admonish
those who provoke Him (ver. 10). (3.) All creation asserts His grandeur and
illustrates His power (ver. 12, 13), Thus He is God of “the nations” (ver. 7), and
men of every nationality and in every iand should own and revere Him. More-
over, false deities shall “ perish” (ver. 111 but Jehovah ever liveth, “ on Riise and


OHAP. xX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; JEREMIAH.








living God, the everlasting King” (ver. 10) ; hence there is no hope of evading
Him. Yea, and the wide universe testifies of Him (ver. 12, 13), therefore He every-
where commands man’s recognition, even as everywhere He extends to man His
providential care. (Addenda on ver. 6, 10.)

2. The grandeur of Israel's heritage in God. To His chosen people the double
blessing avails: (1.) God ts thetr portion (ver. 16); “the portion of Jacob” is
“the Former of all things.” What wealth, therefore, they have in Jehovah !
“ My God shall supply all need according to His riches in glory.” (2.) Israel ts
God’s inheritance, chosen by Him as His peculiar treasure ; therefore, “all things
were theirs ”—covenants, promises, adoption! What could they want with other
and vain gods, having Him who was the Creator and Governor of the universe as
their own God, who claimed and loved them as “ the rod of His inheritance?” Had
they been satisfied with God, He would have satisfied their souls with His infinite
fulnegs,


Section 17-25. Jupan’s Movrnrut Distress: PRAYRR FOR JEHOVAH'S
Miriaatine MrEroy.


It would soon be Judah’s melancholy fate to go after Israel into captivity and
degradation. ‘Gather up ¢hy wares out of the land” (ver. 17). This had become
a stern necessity in consequence of Judah’s spiritual revolt, and God Himself would
secure its accomplishment : “ Behold I will sling out the inhabitants,” &c. (ver. 18).

I. The anguish of exiled Judah. “Woe is me for my hurt,” dec. (ver. 19).
Language either of pathetic bemoaning or of sullen repining. Suggests 1. Terrified
realisation of punishment : “Woeisme!” She had “looked for peace,” thought to
sin on with impunity, dreamed not that “sudden destruction” would come,
imagined herself secure in her ungodliness ; but “ behold bitterness!” Note the
aspect of her suffering: “hurt” something real, injurious, painful; not a mere
terror, but a keen pang. Such are God’s chastisements and punishments, 2.
Poignant experience of distress: “ wound grievous.” And a grievous wound is -
both a pain and a peril, dreadful to bear and threatening fatal issues. 3. Sullen
submission to calamity: ‘“‘ But I said,” when about to lament my lot, what good
will come of making ado? “ Truly this is a grief, and I must bear it!” Stoical
hardness: “I cannot remedy it, so I must bear it. Fretting will not alleviate it,
so I will keep silence!” How different this from penitence for the cause of the
misery, and pattent submission to consequences, which find solemn expression in,
“Tt is the Lord ; let Him do what seemeth Him good!” 4. Hopeless reconciliation
to misery: “I must bear it!” Not, “Come and let us return to the Lord, for He
hath smitten and He will heal us!” She will not seek Divine healing for her
‘‘ wounds ” (chap. viii. 21, 22), therefore she sees no hope in her anguish ; for being
“without God,” she is “‘ without hope in the world.”

IL The devastations of the Holy Land. The figure, ‘* eabernacle” (ver. 20),
suggests the idea of (1.) weakness and insecurity ; for though the Jews prided them-
selves in Jerusalem as’a strong and fortified city, it would prove as defenceless as
a tent. The “tabernacle spoiled and cords broken” suggest (2.) the total
dissolution and destruction of the Jewish state: the government had broken up, the
nationality had collapsed. Thus the lament declares, 1. The overthrow of the
theocracy : “ Tabernacle spoiled.” 2. The banishment of the people: ‘“ Children
gone forth,” d&c., either exiled or slain : “ they are not.” 3, The rulers are defeated:
“ pastors become brutish ; not prosper ; flocks scattered (ver. 21); they were impotent
to repair the ruined state: the explanation being, “they have not sought the
Lord ;” they ignored the fact that His hand was in this overthrow, and hence they
ignored the fact that to Him must they look for deliverance and redress. 4.
The enemy was triumphant: “To make the cities desolate, a den of dragons”
(ver. 22) : the Chaldean avarice would spare nothing. What direful ravages follow
in the train of sin |

214


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. CHAP,





Ii The prayer for Jehovah’s intervention. Though the suffering nation
repudiated God, there was one intercessor—Jeremiah—who cried to Jehovah for
mercy. Yes; and though the world ignores God now, still there is “ One Mediator
between God and man, the Man Christ Jesus ;” whose pleading voice goes up even
for the fruitless thing—‘“ Let be this year also!” Preaching had done little good,
so the prophet turns to prayer. Words addressed to God may be powerful when
words addressed to men are powerless, He will hear though they forbear. 1.
Acknowledgment of God’s supreme providence. Man’s designs are subordinate to
God’s purposes (ver. 23). We cannot have everything according to our own mind,
and here Jeremiah surrendered his desires to God’s will; he will not ask God to do
other than He deems best, sad though he is for his nation’s nearing ruin, Yet
also the prophet seems to imply that the army of Nebuchadnezzar will not be
allowed by God to do other than as He wills: enemies are not unrestrained ; God
worketh according to Hie will among armies and over men. 2. Appeal to Divine
pttifulness. The prophet identifies himself with his nation, and entreats that the
necessary punishment may be mercifully tempered and restrained. We deserve
“ correction,” need chastisement, but could not survive “anger.” 3, Imprecation
of God’s wrath upon Judah's oppressors ; for the Chaldeans, though used by God,
were malevolent, implacable, and impious, and merited punishment even while
carrying out God’s designs. God may permit oppression of His people, may even
use it to chasten them ; but oppressors, who deny God and work malicious projecta,
shall in their turn feel the crushing rebukes of a mightier Power (Ps. lxxv. 8).


HOMILIES AND COMMENTS ON SUCCESSIVE VERSES OF CHAPTER X.


Ver. 2. Theme: INFLEXIBLE GODLI-
ness. ‘‘ Learn not the way of the hea-
then.”

Cast among “ the heathen ” by exile,
Israel was not to accommcdate herself
to the religious or irreligious aspects
which there environed her.

“The way” means either their mode
of life or their customs tn worship.
The phrase is used in the New Testa-
ment as descriptive of the Christian
discipleship. ’H 6di¢—comp. Acts ix. 2,
xix. 9.

Suggested that—

I. Concession to the order of things
surrounding us is a specious tempta-
tion. Among “the heathen” do as they
do. 1. Convenient : for saves us from
the annoyances which self-assertion and
individuality provoke. 2. Advantage-
ous « for it appeases and gratifies others,
and lays some worldly gains within our
reach. 3. Pleasant ; there is a novelty
and a relaxation and an enjoyment in
this self-adaptation ; good for us to bend
a little.

II. Conformity to the dominant re-
ligion is not to be our ruling habit.
It may be needful to stand apart from
“the way ” which the state supports and


wealth fosters, Do “not learn ” it even.
have nought to do with it. There are
different forms of religion abroad ; and
more, there are antagonistic forms of re-
ligion. Are we to conform to any “way”
which favour and fortune patronises
simply because in that locality or country
we find it dominant? 1. Religion asks
unswerving allegiance of the soul. If
we are unstable, God’s covenant and
promises will not stand good for us.
2. God asks us to witness for Him
against false religions in irreligious
scenes and in irreligious times. The
dominant religion may be plausible, it
may be tmpertous ; but whether baited
with seductions, or armed with persecu-
tions, if it be not right, refuse compli-
ance, “ Learn not the way.”

III, Fidelity to conscience and to
God must be uncompromising. In all
scenes, under all circumstances, at all
times. A pliant godliness is: 1. Cow-
ardly : contrast with it Daniel, Shadrach,
Meshach, and Abednego. 2, Contemp-
tible; the ‘man of God” sinks down
into a mere time-serving hypocrite.
3. Condemned : for it not only degrades
the man himself, and dishonours God,
for hom he should be valiant and bold,

215


OWAP, x,


but it denies to Jehovah His due; for
He has rights in His people; they are
“‘ not their own, but bought with a price,
and hence should glorify Him in body
and spirit, which are His;” and His
people owe obligations to Him in return
for the revelation and the grace He has
bestowed on them. Hide not “light
under bushel ;” ‘“‘ Even in Sardis defile
not your garments;” “ Have no fellow-
ship with unfruitful works of darkness,
but rather reprove them.” (Comp. 2 Cor.
vi. 14-18.)

Illustrations of unyielding constancy :
Moses refused to be called son of Pha-
raoh’s daughter, and joined himself
valiantly with the despised Hebrews.
Daniel, who prayed, despite the royal
edict. Our Lord Himself, who repudi-
ated the religious habits and ideas which
prevailed. Paul, who “approved him-
self to God in much patience, in afflic-
tion, in distress, in stripes,” &c. (2 Cor.
vi. 4, sg.). Indeed, godliness has pro-
duced martyrs in every age whose sole
crime, civil or ecclesiastical, was, that
they would “not learn the way” which
those in power would have enforced.
(Comp. Heb. xi. 32. sg.) ‘Quit you
like men, be strong |”


Ver. 2. Theme; SUPERSTITIOUS TER
ROR aT THE MARVELS OF NATURE:
“Be not dismayed at the signs of
heaven.”

Eichorn supposes a reference to some
astronomical portent which was then
causing “dismay.”  Hitzig thinks these
“signs” were some alarming celestial
appearances intended as heralds of im-
pending judgment. Naegelsbach, how-
ever, believes the reference to the perma-
nent constellations and usual signs of the
firmament ; nothing extraordinary or
portentous. But Xiel and Dr. P. Smith
well argue that the word “ dismay ” sug-
gests, not adoration such as the heathen
might yield to ordinary celestial appear-
ances, but alarm and consternation, conse-
quent upon some unwonted phenomena.

Before such “ signs,” wonder but not
worship ; admire the heavens, but do not
adore ; ponder them intelligently, but do
not prostrate yourself before them idola-
trously.

216


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.


eer Gere


I. Ignorance and idolatry are alike
in this: they fall into superstitious
terror of natural things.

The crude and uninformed mind is
startled, bewildered, and appalled by
celestial phenomena. Nor by these alone;
terrestrial marvels equally awaken super-
stitious dismay. They drive the twno-
rant to terror, the tdolatrous to worship,
Eclipses or earthquakes, comets or tem-
pests, unusual constellations or calami-
ties, fill with consternation. This in-
dicates that :

1. The wonders of nature are very
majestic and solemn. Sufficient to ime
press men everywhere with the super
natural ; speaking to them of vast and
hidden realities.

3. The benighted mind of man te
Sruitful of fears. Sees terrors and por-
tents everywhere. And “fear hath
torment.” How much better the “ per-
fect love which casteth out fear,” which
assured reliance on God secures! Re-
ligion is the antidote of the miseries of
superstition.

TI. Sacred enlightenment reveals
God as above all nature’s wonders.
“The heathen are dismayed ;” but a
people knowing God should not be
dismayed. They adored celestial appear-
ances, bowed in terror before nature’s
marvels, because they knew not the
Great First Cause. Astrologers taught
that events depended on the stara which
were possessed with power; and Plato
thought them endued with spirit and
reason. (Addenda on ver. 2, “ Signe of
heaven.”)

1. The benefit of natural knowledge,
of physics, science, &c., which reveal to
us that nature is not a fitful, capricious
omnipotence, but is obedient to law,
regulated in all occurrences; that a
Supernatural Ruler controls and directe
all events.

2. The blessings of sacred revelation,
which opens the hidden world to us,
makes clear to us this fact that a Fathey
governs the universe, who loves man,
who asks man’s loving trust, not slavialk
terror,

3. The joyfulness of spiritual enlight-
enment, which goes beyond a sacref
knowledge, and dwells in personal enjoz


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR.


— ee eee HSE Se ES DAES engi Tel Sa


ment of God; not only as the Lord of
the universe, who “works all things
together for good,” but as the Father of
Jesus, who claims and cherishes us as
His children, which enables us to say,


“This awful God is ours /”


which sees Hts love tn Christ, and by that
light interprets all that occurs.

III. Possession of God’s favour en-
ables man intelligently to enjoy His
works. “The Lord speaketh unto you,
O house of Israel (ver. 1), Be not dis-
mayed,” &c. And theirs were the
covenants and promises, &c. They were
a people “ whose God is the Lord.”

1. Gods works call forth amazement
and admiration, even where intelli-
gence alone is possessed ; yet this is not
equal to the childlike gladness of the
Christian which revels amid the wealth
and loveliness of the ‘ Father’s house.”

2. In G@od’s works the Christian finds
sublime allustrations of God Himself.
Scientific men pause at the works ; the
Christian passes on to the Worker:
“through nature up to nature’s God.”
“ When I consider the heavens, the work
of Thy hands, the moon and stars, which
Thou hast ordained,” &c. They alone
truly enjoy nature who “ also joy in God
through our Lord Jesus Christ” (Rom.
v. 11). What beautiful and inspiring
aspects of God’s attributes do the glories
of nature supply to us! (Comp. Isa
xl. 25-31.)


Ver. 3-5. Theme: IDoL MANUFAC-
rukE. (Addenda on ver. 3.)

I. The original materials to which the
tdol owes tts existence. “A tree out of
the forest” (ver. 3). Only like other
trees, which still remain trees !

IL. The industrious toils to which the
tdol owes sts formation. “The work of
the workman” (ver. 3). Not divine in
its structure.

Ill. The formative instrument to
which the tdol owes its dignity. “The
axe.” No supernatural appliances or
aids came to its help ; merely a hatchet.

IV. The process of adornment to which
the idol owes its attractiveness. “They
deck it with silver,” dc. (ver. 4).

V. Theingenious arrangement by which


OHA4P. &.





the idol is invested with a decent posture
“‘They fasten it with nails and with ham
mers, that it move not” (ver. 4).

VL The clumsy workmanship whicb
dentes to the idol becoming stateliness
A god ought to be of fair and graceful
form, but it is “upright as a palm-tree”
(ver. 5); stiff, inelegant pillars. Many
commentators render the words thus:
‘They are like pillars in a cucumber
garden ;” 4.¢., the shapeless blocks set
up to scare away birds,

VIL The generous attentions to which
the sdol owes tts movements, ‘“ They
must needs be borne, for they cannot go.”
(Addenda on ver. 5.) So that all an
idol ts and does, it owes to man! It
could not make itself, it cannot help
itself.

Hence, 1. How degrading this for a
god! 2. How degrading thts for a
worshipper / Surely (ver. 3) “the cus-
toms of the people are vain.” What
need to lead the people to “turn from
dead idols to serve the living God!”
For as the idols cannot help themselves,
neither can they help their worshippers,
unable to speak or stir, to render them
any service. Without life or power.

VIII. The natural treatment which
the idol merits. “ Be not afraid of them ;
for they cannot do evil nor good.”
(Comp. Isa. xl. and xli, from which
doubtless Jeremiah drew his illustrations,
he being familiar with Isaiah’s writings.)

Ver. 6. Comments :

There cannot be two highest Beings,
or there would be none. In the idea of
the Absolute there is involved that of
uniqueness. Polytheism has therefore
no highest Being in the absolute sense.
Where, however, traces of such are
found, polytheism is about either to rise
to monotheism or to dissolve into pan-
theism.—LZange. (Addenda on ver. 10.)

“None like unto Thee, O Lord ;” none
of all the heroes which the heathen have
deified, the dead men of whom they
made dead images, and whom they
worshipped. Some were deified and
adored for their wisdom, but “ among
all the wise men of the nations” (ver. 7),
the greatest philosophers or statesmen,
as Apollo or Hermes, there is none like
Thee. Others were deified a adored

21


CHaP. &


for their dominion, but “in all their
yoyalty ” (so ver. 7 may read), among
all their kings, as Saturn and Jupiter,
there is none like unto Thee. What is
the glory of a man who invented a
useful art or founded a flourishing
kingdom, what the glory of the greatest
prince or potentate (and on such grounds
did the heathen deify men), compared
with the glory of the Creator of the
world {—Henry.


Ver. 7. Theme: JRHOVAH’S UNCHAL-
LENGEABLE CLAIM ON HUMAN REVEBR-
ENCE.

To worship any other than Him is an
infringement of His inalienable prero-
gative.

I. The universal scope of God’s
dominion. ‘“ King of nations ; ” not only
“ King of the Jews,” nor only “ King of
saints,” but all nations are within His
domain. Hence, therefore, not Israel
alone should yieldHim fealty and homage,
for the Lord of all should be worship-
ped and obeyed by all. He reigns over
all mankind (Ps. xxii. 28); all man-
kind should render loyal reverence to
Him. God’s sway is over each, as well
as all; over me, as well as over nations ;
and each must therefore for himself own
Him King.

II. The impressive manifestations of
Divine power. As “ King of nations,”
God’s “name is great” (ver. 6) ; it is a
lofty and imposing title. Does Jehovah
sustain by deeds this universal dominion 4
“Thy name is great in might” (ver. 6):
the King rules royally as far as His
name and domain extend. ‘“ Name
great in might,” means displaying itself
in acts of might. Great in renown,
God justifies His title by manifestations
of majesty and power. His footsteps
are on every scene, His hand doeth
wondrous things in every man’s experi-
ence and career: “‘ Marvellous are Thy
works, and that my sou/ knoweth right
well.” Therefore 7 should revere Him.

Il. The incomparable perfections
of God Himself. The possession of
glory and power does not always coin-
cide with personal worth and goodness.
But with Jehovah, “among all the wise
men, d&o. ;ver, 7), none like Thee.”

218


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREWIAR.,





Omit “ men ;” for “wise” includes gods
also, the authors of biter: oracles.
“Tn all their kingdoms,” properly, theis
royalty or kingship, none so royal as
Jehovah. (1.) Unapproachable wisdom.
(2.) Incomparable royalty. Contrast
the “wisdom” of pagan gods, even
their most clever oracles; and what are
they when set over against the benignant
wisdom of the Creator evident in all
His works, and the redeeming wisdom,
the wondrous graciousness of (od’s
plan, shown in the Gospel, in “ Christ
the wisdom of God.” Contrast the
royal dignity and nobleness of idols
with Him whose “glory the heavens
declare,” and whose highest manifesta-
tion of “glory is in the face of Jesus
Christ.” How blessed are we, having
Him as “our Lord and our God |”

IV. The solemn appropriateness of
human homage. ‘To Thee doth it
appertain.” (See Crit. Notes, supra.)
“Fear,” 4.e, trustful reverence, the
lowly homage of love. Not (1.) Terror ;
that is for the vanquished, for slaves.
(2.) Nor worship alone, rendering Him
the adoration, devotedness, and love
which the eminence of His perfections
demands. But (3.) Restful and happy
trust ; a “fear” which finds in Him all
occasions for our own happiness if we
do His will and please Him, yet which
recognises His power to consume the
disobedient—realising that life and
death are with Him. It is a happy
“fear” with those who are “hid with
Christ in God ;” but a deep dread of
His disfavour if by guilt we incur His
frown. (See ver. 10.)

There is an appropriateness and a
rightness in our loving reverence of
God ; it is the dutiful child resting in the
Father’s embrace, reverently contem-
plating His graciousness, and gratefully
adoring him in return. (Addenda on
ver. 6, “ None like Thee, O Lord,” and
“ Thy Name 1s great.”)

Ver. 8, 9. Comments:

“ They are altogether brutish. Brutish-
ness here does not refer to a vicious
state, but to the senseless stupidity of
savages, who know no better than to
adore a “tree.” “ Altogether brutish ;”
rather all alike: the “wise” (ver. 7)


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIA.,





and the “heathen” (ver. 2) equally on
a level with “brutes.” Note that in
Daniel and Revelations how often the
power which opposes and ignores God
is personified in a “ beast.” Man for-
feits his dignity, and even his humanity,
and sinks to the level of a “ brute,”
when he severs himself from God (Ps.
exv. 8).

“ Their stock ts a doctrine of vanity.”
(Cf. Lit. Crit., supra.) The idols are
vanity ; hence, also, their doctrine is
vanity. From such senseless gods what
could their worshippers learn? Zz
nthilo nihil fit. Thus Keil remarks,
“The heathen, with all their wise men,
are brutish, since their gods, from which
they should receive instruction, are
wood,”

“ Silver spread into plates,” &c. (Cf.
Geographical References, and Manners
and Customs, supra.)

“‘ However much the wood (“ stock”)
be decked out with silver, gold, and
purple raiment, it remains but the pro-
duct of men’s hands; by no such process
does the wood become a god.”—Keil.


Ver. 10. Theme: THE ONLY TRUE Gop.

Observe with what unity of assertion
the Scriptures, Old and New, affirm
this of Jehovah : He is “the true God ”
(text) ; “That they might know Thee,
the only true God” (John xvii, 3), &e.
(Addenda on ver. 10, “ The true God.”)

I. In contrast with the “vanity” of
tdols (ver. 3, 8, 15) Jehovah is
Truth. Not merely “true” in word
and deed, veracious and faithful, but
truth in essence, in Himself, as a quality
of His being. And also a God who is
no mere imaginary Being, but a sublime
reality. God is a vact. And being
real, He is essentially true. And because
in Himself true, He will deceive and dis-
appoint none who trust in and seek Him.
As He has revealed Himself, so He is;
no insincerity in Him, no misrepre-
sentation of Himself. That being so,
how cheering to turn to the revelation
He has made—to Moses as “ merciful
and gracious,” &c., and in Jesus as the
Friend and Father of man—and to know
all this is really so; “The Lord is the
‘ue God.”


CHAP, Z.


Il. In contrast with lifeless idols (ver.
5) Jehovah lives. He is “the liv-
ing God.” Not a mere impersonal all-
pervading Force; not a self-evolving
Law; but a Berna. And because He
lives, He has life in Himself, underived,
and is Himself the Fount of Life, dis-
pensing vitality to humanity. “ Who
only hath immortality.” “In whom we
live,” &c. ‘As the Father hath life
in Himself, so hath He given the Son
to have life in Himself.” “In Him
was life.” “Christ is our life.”

IIL In contrast with the temporary
duration of idols and idolatry (ver. 11,
15) Jehovah is eternal. Idols aze
but of yesterday, and they shall perish ;
but the Lord is “ everlasting,” and
therefore they who are His have an tm-
perishable Hope, a never-failing Refuge,
a deathless Friend. And the human soul
wants more than the transient. ‘ When
heart and flesh faileth, God is the
strength of my heart and my portion
for ever.” Here is the confidence of the
righteous: God will never fail them.
Here, too, is the terror of the dis-
obedient: they will never evade the
“everlasting God.” The like attribute
is assigned to Jesus (Heb. i. 12), and
He is “the same yesterday, to-day, and
for ever.”

IV. Jn contrast with the impotence of
tdols (ver. 5, “Cannot go; cannot do
evil nor good”) God is King. A
monarch so mighty that his wrath fills
“earth” with trembling ; so terrible that
“nations” fail at His anger. Men do
well to “fear” Him (ver. 7), and by
reverent homage to abide in Hia favour.
Alarming as is such a presentation of
God’s monarchical majesty, it is only
the manifestation suited to defiant sin-
ners. There is a gentler side of the
character of God: view it revealed in
“the Son, who was in the bosom of the
Father, and hath declared Him.” ‘ God
is love.” (Addenda on ver. 10, “ The
true Giod.”)


Ver. 11-13, Theme: AN APPEAL TO
Gop’s WoRKs.

A challenge seems suggested : judge
of the idols by their works. What have
they done $ (ver. 11, “‘ Not made heavens

219


Guar, x.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAQR,





and earth”). But estimate Jehovah by
His creative power (ver. 12), and by
His providential operations in nature
(ver. 13). It was in effect the like chal-
lenge to that of Elijah, “He who
answers by fire, let Him be God ”—de-
cide by the works. 80 Jesus asks,
“Believe Me for the very work’s
sake.” It was an old Greek saying,
‘Whoever thinks himself a god besides
the One God, let him make another
world.” (See Ps, xcvi. 5.) Contem-
plate—

L God as manifested in His original
work of creation. Three distinct acts
recorded (ver. 12)—“ made,” “ estab-
lished,” “‘ stretched out;” and three
distinct attributes marked—“ power,”
“wisdom,” “ discretion.”

1. God's formative power: ‘ Made the
earth by His power.” And consider
the size, the materials, the wealth and
beauty stored within the earth, and the
loveliness and variety with which He
has clothed it, setting man thereon
“over the works of His hands” What
a conception of God is supplied ! What
have ¢dols “ made” ¢

2. God’s ordering and controlling
wisdom. ‘ Established the world by His
wisdom.” Separating the waters from
the land, regulating the seasons, making
the habitable parts suitable for the living
creatures and serviceable for man, and,
amid all natural changes, securing the
world from convulsions which would
destroy life from the surface of the
world, or overthrow the healthful and
happy order which prevails. What have
the idols arranged for man’s daily
and enjoyment of unmolested safety in
the world ?

3. God’s benignantdiscretion: “Btretch-
ed out the heavens by His discretion.”
The “heavens” are full of proof of
intelligent design in themselves, and of
gracious consideration for God’s crea-
tures (Gen. i 18; Jer. xxxi. 35). But
“the gods have not made the heavens,”
d&c, (ver. 11).

Il. God as manifesting Himself in
His perpetual work of providence ;
controlling and caring for the world
He made (ver. 13).

1. All parts of the universe yield their

22¢


stores at His command. “The heavens™
their waters ; “the ends of the earth’
their vapours; the chambers of “ light-
ning” and the caves of the “ wind”
their ‘“‘treasures.” So that there
is no recess of nature, celestial or ter-
restrial, whereinto His controlling will
does not penetrate. Hence God’s pro-
vidence pervades all scenes, and He has
the universe under His control. But
idols are “fastened with nails” (ver.
4) to one spot, and have no power to
move from it, nor wield a sceptre over
any scene,

2. All forces of nature implicitly obey
His bidding. The thunder utters His
command: “uttereth His voice.” The
“waters in the heavens” hear, and ac-
cumulate in “a multitude.” The clouds,
“ vapours,” ascend in recognition of His
sway, for He “‘causeth” them to rise in
clouds from the ends of the earth, the
seas and rivers responding to His laws.
“ Lightnings” are His “ making,” and
also “rain.” And as for the “ winds,”
they only escape from their recesses as
“ He bringeth them forth.” <All forces
of nature are within His sway, and they
serve His will. (See Ps. cxlvii. 8, 15-
18). But what resources can idols com-
mand ¢

This is the argument of Natural
Religion—God’s pervading power and
goodness, manifest in His works, and
those works manifesting Him to man
(Rom. i. 19, 20), making an appeal to
man’s reverence, gratitude, and love
(Rom, i. 21, ii. 4).

But what are these utterances in the
heavens, and these voiceless wonders of
nature, and these startling accompani-
ments of storms as heralds and witnesses
of God, compared with the tenderer and
more solemn revelations of Him in
Christ? Not in the earthquake, tem-
pest, or fire did Elijah discern God, but
in “the still small voice.” And God’s
highest argument, His unchallengeable
claim to human reverence and love,
bases itself less on the wonders of His
works in the world areund man than on
the wonders of His grace within the
human soul. There He asserts His
supreme worth to man; it is His undis-
puted empire, His rightful throne.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR.


OBAP. &,





Ver. 14, 15. Theme: Rueruex 1n-
FLUENCE OF THE OBJECT OF WORSHIP
UPON THE WORSHIPPER.

Text means: His skill in making
idols, or his acquaintance with idols,
debases and brutalises him, deadens
the sensibilities of his nature, and
degrades the dignity of his manhood.
Thus :—

I. Acquaintance with false gods
debases men. “ Knowledge” in this
region renders men “ brutish.” Such is
the universal consequence of idolatry.
Heathenism shows how damaging to the
finest instincts and noblest virtues of
humanity idol-worship becomes. (Ad-
denda on ver. 14.)

This applies not alone to material
tdols, graven and fashioned by the
heathen, but to those heart idols which
the irreligious man, and even the worldly
Christian man, makes to himself. The
thing which he allows to usurp God’s
place in his soul, that is his idol, and
it will give a tone to his character and
career. Worship acts reflectively on the
worshipper.

II. Confidence in false gods deludes
mepv. The “founder is confounded by
the graven image.” Why? “ His molten
image is falsehood ”—a deception, with-
out spirit or “breath.” Idols are de-
lustons; they fulfil not our hopes; they
embitter our hearts by their “ falsehood.”
They are themselves “vanity” (ver. 15).
Their creation was a “work of errors,”
a profound and hollow mockery, and
covering with ridicule their votaries and
worshippers.

God prophesies their doom. “In the
time of their visitation they shall
perish ;” te, when God visits the idol-
worshippers, the idols shall be destroyed.
It was so when God visited these
idolatrous Jews in Babylon; He de-
stroyed their idols by Cyrus. So have
they perished everywhere when God has
“ visited” the deluded with better
knowledge. And as the Gospel spreads,
idols shall be cast down, and the en-
slaved soul find emancipation and
illumination in Christ.


Ver. 16. Theme: Gon’s COVENART
MERITAGE IN ISRAEL.


Notwithstanding Israel’s desertion of
Jehovah for idols, observe how they
are here spoken of as if still united and
inseparable. God continues to be “ the
portion of Jacob,” and “ Israel the in-
heritance ” of the Lord. This relation-
ship is not to be easily or lightly severed
or ignored. More; as Jehovah is “ not
like” idols, so neither ts Israel like
tdolaters; for they have this glorious
God as their portion—a crowning dis-
tinction that !

I. What a lavish estimate God
forms of Israel’s worth.

1. He prized Israel as Hts peculiar
possesston ; calls them His “ inheritance,”
something upon which He sets His
heart, cherishes jealously, prizes greatly.
(Comp. Eph. i. 17, 18, “‘ What the riches
of the glory of His inheritance in the
saints.”) It amazes us that God should
80 value His people.

2. He bestows Himself on Israel in
exchange for this ‘‘inheritance;” be-
comes in return “the portion of Jacob.”
This expresses how highly He esteems
His people; He holds back nothing in
order to secure their love and allegiance.
See this bestowing Himself fully illus-
trated and enacted in Christ, “ who
loved us, and gave Himself for us.”

Il. What a glorious supremacy
distinguishes Israel’s God.

1. By emphatic dissimilarity with
false gods: “ Not like them.” They are
themselves “ vanity ” (ver. 15), and they
delude their votaries (ver. 14).

2. By the sublimity of His works:
“The Former of all things.” Creation
reflects Him; the boundless universe
shows who God is.

3. By the dignity of His name;
“The Lord of Hosts ;” 1.¢., the hosts of
heaven, the nations of earth (ver. 7).
He is The Highest therefore; and the
highest is God, God alone.

Israel’s honour and happiness in poa-
sessing the one true God as a “ portion.”
With whom should this God be ex-
changed? “The Lord is the true God,
living God, everlasting King” (ver. 10).
What dignity the possession of such a
Deity imparts to Israel; what a firm
basis for fatth is supplied in having such
» God as He!

22





CHAP. x.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH,





IIL What an infinite inheritance
Israel has in Jehovah.

1. Consider the resources God has tn
Himself; “He is the Former of all
things.” The firmament shows His
glory, the earth is full of His riches;
all these things His hand made, What
cannot He do? What is beyond Him ¢
Is there anything He cannot perform or
produce, or procure for Israel, if necessity
demands it? Yet this outgoing of
Power in Creation is less an assurance
to us than the outgoing of Love in Re-
demption ; and “ He that spared not His
own Son, but freely delivered Him up
for us all, how shall He not also with
Him freely give us all things?”

2. Consider the forces God has at His
command: “The Lord of hosts is His
name.” (See Ps, ciii. 19-21.) ‘ Thinkest
thou that I cannot now pray to My
Father, and He shall presently give Me
more than twelve legion of angels”
(Matt. xxvi. 53). No man can number
the hosts of God. In part they were
shown to Elisha’s attendant (2 Kings
vi. 17); Daniel saw something of the
host (Dan. vii. 12); the Apocalypse
revealed the ‘‘armies of heaven ” more
fully (Rev. v.11). And “are they not all
ministering spirits, sent forth to minister
for them who shall be heirs of salva-
tion?” (Heb. i. 14).

God is Israel’s treasure, and all His
wealth is theirs: we are “ heirs of God,
and joint heirs with Jesus Christ.”
“ All things are yours, for ye are Christ’s,
and Christ is God’s,”


Ver. 17,18. Theme: IMMINENT EXILE.

A new section: discourse addressed
(not to Israel, as the foregoing, but) to
inhabitants of Jerusalem. Be in readi-
ness to start for captivity.

I. The situation of the people. She
ig an “inhabitress of the fortress” be-
steged. The time of this prophecy is
probably at the end of Jehoiakim’s
reign. Nebuchadnezzar is at the gates
of Jerusalem, the city assailed by Baby-
lonian forces ; but a brief interval and
the foe will be occupant of the citadel.

IL The issue of the siege. The
“fortress” will be vanquished. The
people are urged to use the short oppor-

222


tunity remaining for “gathering up their
packages” ready, thereby making what
preparation they can for their migration
as captives into “the north.” All resist-
ance is now impotent.

III. The sentence of Jehovah ‘I
will sling out the inhabitants.” God’s
hand was in their defeat and misfortunes.
It would be effected with violence:
“sling out,” properly “hurl out.” It
would be thorough: “at this time ”—
hitherto hostile invasions had ended with
plundering and imposition of tribute.
It would be painful: ‘distress them.”
It would have a definite purpose ; “that
they may find,” z.¢., feel, either their sin,
or “feel” after Me. (See Lit. Crit. on
verse.)

Ver. 19. (See “Noticeable Topics.”)


Theme; GREAT AFFLICTION AND SOR-
ROW OF HEART.

We may learn what it is to bow under
the mighty hand of God. It is

i, That a man recognise the suffering
as jus suffering ; 4.¢., (a.) as that which
he has himself prepared; (6.) as that
which is right for him, not too heavy
and not too light, but exactly corre
sponding to its beneficent purpose.

ii. That a man accept his suffering
willingly ; (a.) in patience ; (6.) in hope.
—Lange.

(Addenda on ver. 19, ‘Sore afflic-
tion.”)

“Some make this the lamentation of
the prophet for the calamities and
desolations of his country. In mourn-
ful times it becomes us to be of a
mournful spirit : “‘ Woe ts me/” But it
may be taken as the language of the
people speaking as a single person,
Some among them would thus bemoan
themselves, and all of them, at last,
would be forced to do it,

i. They lament that the affliction 4s
very great, very hard for them to bear
it, and more so because they had not
been used to trouble, and now did not
expect it. ‘‘ Woe is me for my hurt ;”
not for what I fear, but what I feel.
Not a slight hurt, but a “ wound,” and
a wound that is “grievous,”

ii, That there is no remedy but
patience. They cannot help themselves,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.





but must sit still and abide it. Theirs
is the language of sullen rather than of
gracious submission. It argues a want
of those good thoughts of God which we
should have even under our afflictions ;
saying not, God can do what He wills,
but “Let Him do as seemeth Him
good.”—M. Henry.
(Addenda on ver. 20.)


Ver. 20, Comments :

The Yargum paraphrases the verse
thus: “ My land is desolate, and all my
cities are plundered; my people are
gone into captivity, and are no longer
here.”

“The suffering was unmerited in so
far as the prophet and the godly amongst
the people were concerned, but it was
inevitable that he and they should take
it upon their shoulders along with the
rest.” —Graf.

“ Jerusalem laments that her tent is
plundered, the cords which kept it erect
rent asunder, and her children carried
into exile, and so are not—are dead
(Matt. ii, 18), either absolutely, or dead
to her in the remote land of their
captivity. They can aid the widowed
mother no longer in pitching her tent,
or in hanging up the curtains round
about it.”—Speaker’s Com.

“My children are gone forth
from me.” “The jealousy of the
Saviour & so strict, that He will have
His children directed to Him (Isa. xlv.
11); and the idea of the pastoral office
(see ver. 21) with which some good
teachers are infected—of regarding and
treating souls as thew souls, sheep as
their sheep, “children” as their children
—is in the highest degree opposed to His
will. Hence He often, for a just judg-
ment, does not allow their joy in souls to
last, but lets them see and conelude
more of their decline and less of their
success than there really is. For He
will not give His glory to another, and
the teachers are not Christ, but sent by
Him before Him.”—Zinzendorf.

Ver. 21. “The pastors are become
brutish,” &c. ‘As sheep must either
starve or be led to filthy and poisonous
pasture, if their shepherds are fools, who
do not know how to manage sheep; so


GilaP. KE,





is this much more the case in the
spiritual pastorate.”—Cramer.

“The cause of this calamity is that
the shepherds, we., the princes and
leaders of the people, are become
“brutish,” have “not sought Jehovah,”
te, have not sought wisdum and
guidance from the Lord. And so they
could not “deal wisely,” 2.¢., rule the
people with wisdom. “ Prosper” is
not here, have prosperity, but show wis-
dom, deal wisely, securing thus the
blessed results of wisdom.” — Keil.

“Therefore they shall not pros-
per.” Rather, have not governed wisely.
The verb has the sense of (1) acting
prudently, (2) being prosperous as the
necessary consequence. Here all the
versions take in the first sense. The
kings and rulers, having sunk to the
condition of barbarous and untutored
men, could not govern wisely, and so
“all their flocks,” literally, their
pasturing, that which they governed,
“are scattered.” —Speaker’s Com.

Ver, 22. “ Behold, a voice is heard!
it comes!” &c. “A last watch-call
and signal, which denotes that the enemy
so frequently announced is present.”—
Lange.

‘“‘ Already is heard the tremendous
din of a mighty host which approaches
from the north. The great commotion
is that of an army on the march, the
clattering of the weapons, the stamping
and neighing of the war-horses.”— Kedl.

“Bruit,” rumour of invasion. The
antithesis is between the voice of God in
His prophets, to which they paid no
heed, and the ery of the enemy, to which
they must attend.

“There is a contrast to be understood
between the voice of God, which had
constantly resounded in Judea, and the
tumultuous clamours of enemies. The
prophet declares that new teachers were
now come, who would address them in
another and unusual manner. ‘I have
spent my labour many years in vain.
I now turn you over to the Chaldeans;
they shall teach you.’”—Calvin.


Ver. 23. Theme: MAN’S CAREER UNDER
Gon’s ConTROL.
The Jews regarded thir as asserting
223


CHAP. X.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR.





that Webuchadnezxar could not do as he
lasted. God’s will ruled his action and
restrained his fury ; he came to the land
by Divine leading, he could deal with
the people only as God permitted. More
properly this declares that the Jews them-
selves had been relying on their own
counsels and devices for the national
safety and welfare, negotiating with
Assyria when danger was apprehended
from Egypt, and with Egypt or Babylon
when Assyria was dreaded; but the
national policy was futile, their hopes
and designs were of no avail. True of
us; our life and career are not wholly
in our keeping; our planning is often
frustrated; a Divine direction and de
termination overrule our movements.

L Oonscious liberty. ‘‘The way of
man;” his own way. He obeys only (so
far as he feels and knows) the impulses
of his own nature, the determinations of
his own judgment, the resolutions of his
own will.

II. Unconscious control. ‘The way
of man is not in himself.” His way is
in God’s power and God’s purpose.

III. Unsurrendered volition. “Man
that walketh.” As these Jews were doing,
in defiance of the prophet’s appeals and
God’s warnings. As Nebuchadnezzar
would walk in obedience to his lust of
empire. As we walk, “turning every
one of us to his own way.” Man in-
sists on his right of self-government.

IV. Insufficient discernment. “ Not
in man to direct his steps,” t.¢., he is (1)
bewildered in judgment, so that he often
does not know how to walk, what to do—
can act, but not foresee issues ; (2) sn-
constant in will, so that he changes his
course frequently in life, influenced by
his own caprice or by altered circum-
stances; (3) tneapable tn self-govern-
ment, for he finds a warfare raging
within him, “so that he cannot do the
things he would;” he cannot carry out
his own resolutions—weakness arrests
him; he is not the master of his own
nature—evil is there, passion vanquishes
his purposes, fear makes him cowardly,
indolence holds him in the snare of in-
difference or inaction.

V. Involuntary submission. “O
Lorp, it is not in man.” In whom

224





then? God holds the impulses of ovr
nature in His control. He has free
entrance into the secret chambers of our
affections and thoughts. His Spirit can
“ witness within us” and “ work within
us to will and to do of His good pleasure.”
He can alter the circumstances around us
which lead us to modify our plans. He
can lay inducements in our path. He can
check our course by affliction, &c. He can
help us to do otherwise impossible things.

Believers bow their wills to God as an
act of filial submission, but the grace
to do it was God-given. Sinners yteld
their love and faith to Christ, but the
persuasives thereto were Divine. Rebels
rise tn defiance against Him, but He
curbs their fury, uses their rage, and


“‘regtrains the remainder of their
wrath.” ‘* Hitherto shalt thow come and
no farther.”


(Addenda on ver. 23, “ God’s control
of man’s career.”)

Notes: Blayney, following the Syriac,
renders the verse, “ I know Jehovah,
that His way is not like that of men;
nor like a human being doth He proceed
to order His going.” It is inadmis
sible : IN should have preceded “ Jeho-
vah,” marking the objective case.

“He first acknowledges that man
cannot direct “ HIs Way,” his path in
life, himself ; dependent as it is only in
part upon his own will, and in part
upon the conduct of others, and every-
where upon God. There is an antithesie
between “man,” t.¢., any man, in the
first clause, and the word ‘‘man” in the
second clause, t.¢., man in his strength.
The strong man may fancy that at least
each single “sTEP” is under his own
control, even if his whole path, or “ way,”
be not; but God declares otherwise.
(Prov. xvi. 9).—Speaker's Com.


“Theme. Man PROPosES, GoD DI5-
Poszs. This is—i. A humbling of our
pride ii, A strong support of our
hope.” —Naeg.


Ver, 24. Theme: MERCIFUL CHA®
TISEMENT. ‘‘ Correct me not in anger,
lest Thou bring me to nothing,”

Israei had wished in his own strength
to walk in his own way, contrary to the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR.


OHAP, X.





qill of God (ver. 23). He now recog-
nises the sinfulness of this wilful rejec-
tion of God’s control, and submits to
the merited chastisement—be it even
national humiliation and exile; but,
while bowing to this, pleads for the
utmost possible mildness and forbear-
ance. This prophetic language sets
forth Israel’s future repentance and
restoration.

IL Surrender to gracious chastise-
ment. The soul recognises it as need-
ful, and bows resigned; and there is
no agony of dismay in the thought,
“Let me fall into the hands of the
Lord.” “O Lord, correct me.”

II. Shrinking from full retribution.
“Correct me, but with judgment.” With
mildness, in opposition with “ anger.”
The transgressor cannot bear the treat-
ment he deserves, and for which his
sins make demand. It would issue in
destruction. No soul could survive.
Hence the plea, “with judgment,” as
“knowing our frame and remembering
we are dust;” with moderation and
leniency.

Ill. Terror of God’s wrath. “ Not
tm anger.” For ‘(we are consumed in
Thy wrath.” The soul of man stands
in dismay before the thought of Omni-
potence wielding itself in anger! The
child of God trembles in the anticipation
of His displeasure. Suffering and even
calainity can be borne, but not a Father’s
wrath. That would give the keenest
pang to heaviest affliction; but the
stroke will not crush the heart if God
only corrects in mercy. Who will dare
provoke and brave the “wrath of Al-
mighty God”?

IV. Consequences of Divine severity.
“ Bring me to nothing.” Surely so; if
the rocks tremble and the earth smokes
at His “look,” if angela must veil them-
selves from His glory, how can frail man
other than perish at His rebuke, how
survive His anger ? Is this annihilation ?
Not in text ; but only “ diminish me,”
make me little (margin): te. reduce





Judah to an insignificant people. Cal-
vin, however, says, “The prophet takes
diminution here for demolition.” But
the history of the nation shows the
people not destroyed, but only diminished
and dishonoured. Such is the issue of
Divine displeasure.

Happy they who by prayer and pro-
pitiation (in Christ) avert the “anger ”
and find mercy. (Addenda on ver. 24,
“« Lentent correction.”


Ver, 25. Theme: Fury FoR THE
IMPIOUS OPPRESSOR. (Addenda on
ver. 25.)


i. Guilty of cruelty to God's people.
“Eaten up Jacob, devoured and con-
sumed him.”

ii, Gratifying thus their hatred to
true religwn. Not acting reverently,
as agents of God’s purpose, but im-
piously. “Know Thee not; call not
on Thy name.”

iii, Meriting therefore the fury they
have poured out on others. “‘ With
what measure ye mete,” &e. “He
that toucheth you, toucheth the apple
of Mine eye.” “Pour out Thy fury
upon the heathen.”

iv. Suffering the doom of enemies of
God. For the malicious deeds of the
Babylonians showed them impious, im-
placable, foes of Jehovah as well as His
people. They treated His holy Temple
and its sacred treasures with ruthless
scorn, and blasphemed His great name.
Hence, having insulted God, they
should suffer ‘His fury.” ‘So let
Thine enemies perish, O God.”

Note :—This verse is reproduced in Pas.
ixxix, 6, 7, which was written during the
exile, or at least after the Chaldeans had
destroyed Jerusalem.

‘Theme: How we should behave
under the chastisements of God. 1
Humbly submit to them as necessary and
wholesome means of improvement.
ii Be certain that they will not then
transgress those bounds, nor proceed to
our destruction.” —Laage.


omar. x. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.





NOTICEABLE TOPIOS IN CHAPTER X.


Topie: BEREAVED OF CHILDREN. Tat: “ My children are gone forth of me, and
they are aot ; there is none to stretch forth my tent any more” (ver. 20).


The cry of dread from aged Jacob, “If I be bereaved of my children, I am
bereaved ;” the anguish of Rachel’s lament, “ weeping for her children, refusing
to be comforted, because they were not ;” and this pathetic dirge of Zion, “ Woe
is me for my hurt! my wound is grievous: my children are not !”—all denote
this loss of children to be one of life’s heaviest yet commonest sorrows.

Danger when in trouble of thinking our case wholly and hopelessly dark: “All
things against me!” But see: “ Z'ruly this a grief /” Terrible indeed, yet only
one, standing alone amid ten thousand kindneses, and after long years of for-
bearance and grace. Bright days, sunny and happy, go on multiplying without
our heeding them ; suddenly one day of gloom and storm breaks the order; then
we properly say, “This is a dreary day, but we must not murmur.” And go the
years of life go by in peace and prosperity ; suddenly a grievous sorrow interrupts
the course of enjoyment ; shall we not say, ‘‘ Truly this is a grief, and I must bear
it ”—not sullenly but submissively,—“ remembering the years of the right hand of
the Most High”?

I. Desolating bereavement. “Children gone forth from me, and they are not.”
Then it is so that—

1. “ Children” may be taken away. They seem to belong to us; we
entwine our love around them, and rest hopes on them, as though none
could or should touch them. But they are not ours; “no power over spirit to
retain it.” Let parents heed it, and hold them from God, for God. They may not
live to inherit our worldly substance ; lead them early to know Christ, and ‘lay
hold on eternal life.” Let the young heed it: children may die: early seek and
serve the Lord ! ; - es

2. Home ts desolated by their loss. “Tabernacle spoiled, cords broken.” Seems
now that light of home is all darkened, flowers all withered, music all silenced.
Suggests for children and the young—your power to make home beautiful and
glad. Let your life there be a joy and perpetual blessing.

3. Hopes built upon our “children” may fail us. ‘There is none to stretch
tent,” dc. Naturally we look to them for our earthly future, to surround us with
comfort, ‘‘ set up curtains; ” to minister to and solace us in hoar years. This makes
their loss so sad: destroys our hopes, and leaves us helpless against years and
infirmities, Oh, how often warned against “making flesh our arm.” “ Put not
trust in man, whose breath is in his nostrils,” &c. God ts needful to us all, and
He not fail. Christ essential, and He ‘‘same yesterday, to-day, and for ever.”
Rest not on what is so fleeting: “ They are gone forth, and are not.” Our sweetest
earthly hopes may perish.

II. Bitterest grief. ‘‘ Woe is me for my hurt! my wound is grievous,”

1. The distress over tereavement finds outlet in lamentations. Natural to mourn:
“ Jesus wept.” Let the stricken spirit raise its bitter outcry, even as Rachel.
God does not forbid or despise tears. ‘In all your afflictions He is afflicted.”
Remember “ the Man of Sorrows, acquainted with grief.” He would bear your
sorrow, and open to you the sympathy and solace of His tender heart.

2. There was sore occasion for such grief. Calamity had befallen Zion. Look at
those words, “woe,” and “my hurt.” They tell that a sudden blow had fallem
heavily on her. All disastrous events fell suddenly ; we never prepared for them ;
strike us to the earth alarmed, “hurt; ” and we cry, “‘ Woe is me for my hurt!”
In such sudden sorrow we want the Saviour’s instant succour: “ Brother born for
adversity.” More: ‘“ My wound is grievous.” The stroke makes a “ wound ” not
to be quickly healed: “ grievous,” indicating the severity of the hurt, the depths of
the pang. “My children are not”—it means a lifelong wound. “My ‘abernacle

226


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. OHAP, K.
ae


is spoiled "—the Joy of earth can never be complete again. Not mock the stricken
with the assurance “ Time will heal.” No, “ the wound is grievous :” rather speak
of the restoration ; tell Zion of exiles’ return to her ; tell bereaved of nearing day,
when “no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying, nor pain, but former things are
passed away.”

Ii. Patient resignation. “But I said, Truly this is a grief, and I must bear
it.” First comes the wild outcry of “Woe!” succeeded by the hushed sob of
submission,

1. Lt was felt that the loss would not be alleviated by abandonment to grief. To
nurse our sorrow only leads to repining ; then life becomes “a waste, howling
wilderness.” Not yield to fruitless anguish, but seek grace to bear it with com-
posure, and to turn ourselves with all possible courage and heartiness to what
duties are around us, and to what comforts Heaven has preserved.

2. It was recognised as from the Lord, and therefore bowed to with submission.
Sudden, desolating, terrifying the calamity, but the hand of God was in the event.
Not easy to say, “Thy will be done!” “It is the Lord, let Him do,” &&. Yet
make the endeavour and say, “Truly a grief, and I must bear it!” God cannot
afilict willingly nor grieve the children of men.” Doubt not His love, His wisdom,
His grace. “Oh, rest in the Lord.” Draw near Him for comfort, and cast on
Him the burden of your loneliness and grief. “He hath torn, and He will heal
us; He hath smitten, and He will bind us up.” (Addenda on ver. 20, “ Bereaved
of children.”)


Topic: PRoGREsSION AND Drruction. Teat: “It ts not in man that walketh to
direct his steps” (ver. 23),


. Self-distrust the teaching of long discipline: the more tried and advanced the
believer, the more unreservedly will he say, with Solomon, 1 Kings iii. 7; and that
saying, as then, will ‘please the Lord.”

I. Natural action. ‘Man that walketh.” Man’s action in life complex, in-
volving two distinct parts, of which he has only one in himself—the power of
natural action.

1. Jts ease. It ia just the simple putting forth of the power of life; going on,
without thinking if right or wrong. Danger of forgetting a deficiency in this
part-progression; mistake a part for the whole. We think we can act aright,
simply because we have the power of action at all. It is as if ship could reach
the port just because she has undoubted capacities for sailing, though no helms-
Man or compass.

2. This mere power of natural action has a tendency to mislead. It makes a
man unrefiective. Proneness to slight the invisible, because it does not intrude
itself upon us, although the things of this life have inseparable association with
those hidden from sight in another world. Thus man’s “ walk” may do much as
regards this life, but alas! how little effect for the world beyond! Leads to a waste
of strength; for toil where nothing can be taken, and inaction where much might
be won. We often wonder there is so much failure where there is so much energy.
The value of pausing amid the bustle of action.

II. Needful direction. Direction is often the remedy for all this failure (Ps.
exix. 133 and 105). Once let us be persuaded we cannot guide ourselves, and we
would never willingly lose all the results of our labour by working at random.

1. Take care to go out of ourselves for direction. Shall not remedy the matter
by taking more thought. When we have done much in that way, it will only be
‘‘man that walketh” directing his own steps; doing it more carefully, but still


doing it himself. This going out of self may be humiliating.


2. The ulvantages of this going owt of self. ‘There will flow in upon us “ the


ant


cuaP. X HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: JEREMIAH,





wisdom from above ;” from the Father of lights. He will show us things in new
lights altogether, that see them in their entirety.

3, But we must yield ourselves to God to be ordered. Content to be led “ by
ways we know not.” Not troubling ourselves with continual questionings on the
subject, Trust Him to choose the road ; even though it seem to lead away from
the desired end. St, Augustine said, “I am a little child, but my Father is my
sufficient guardian.”

4. Ways are not really open because apparently so. Not because we can do this
thing or that, is it therefore right. Because of this error, we have often gone into
spheres where God is not, and where we should not have been.

5. Success before the world is not, therefore, a proof of our being right, nor of
success in our relationship towards God. Failure here, leaves our work but as
“wood, hay, stubble.” Danger of being too eager for success. So that what
appears success to us may not be so at all, and may be a prelude to heavy loss,

6. Learn not to put implicit confidence in energy or action. It is likely to mis-
lead ; it may make the “ man” prominent in us, and not God. And a very little
thing may put a sudden stop to it.

Conclusion: Bind together the two ideas of our own foolishness and God’s
wisdom. We never learn a depressing truth concerning ourselves without an
encouraging one concerning God. We are to be emptied out of ourselves to be
filled with Him. Under His guidance, our calm progress in “ ordered ways” will
lead in God’s own time to happy ends.—Abstract of “Breviates,” by P. B.
Power, M.A.


ADDENDA TO CHAPTER X.: ILLUSTRATIONS AND SUGGESTIVE BXTRA OTS,


Ver. 2. “The signs of heaven.”
Which the blind heathens feared and
deified, and none did more than the
Syrians, the Jews’ next neighbours.
Experience frequently confuteth those
vain astrvlogers that pretend to read
men’s fates and fortunes in the heavens,
as it did Abraham the Jew, who foretold
by the stars the coming of their Messiah
a.D. 1464; and Albumazar, a Moham-
medan wizard, who predicted an end of
the Christian religion a.p. 1460 at ut-
most. A great flood was foretold by
these diviners to fall out in the year
1524, cum planete comita in pisctbus
celebrarent. This caused the Prior of
St. Bartholomew, in London, wise-man-
like, to go and build him a house at
Harrow-on-the-Hill, for his better
security. Mulcasses, king of Tunis, a
great star-gazer, foreseeing by them, as
he said, the loss of his kingdom and life
together, left Africa that he might shun
that mischief ; but thereby he hastened
it, a.D. 1544. God suffereth sometimes
such fond predictions to fall out right
upon men for a just punishment of their
curiosity.— Trapp.

Ver. 3. Idol manufacture. In India,

228


it is computed, there are 30,000,000 of
idols. British Christians should re-
member the idolatry of their ancestors,
“In Scotland there was a temple of
Mars; in Cornwall, of Mercury; in
Bangor, of Minerva ; in Bath, of Apollo;
in Leicester, of Janus; in York, where
St. Peter’s now stands, the temple of
Bellona ; in London, on the site of St.
Paul’s Cathedral, the temple of Diana ;
and at Westminster, where the Abbey
rears its venerable pile, a temple of
Apollo."—Dr. Platfere.

Ver. 5. Idols “must needs be
borne.” Missionaries in India were
once proclaiming the glorious Gospel of
Jesus Christ, when one of the audience
cried, ‘‘ Jesus is the true God!” Others
caught the cry and reiterated it, till the
whole group burst into response. Then
they shouted “Come with us, and
pull down our temples, and cast our
gods down the hills.” They led the
way, and soon the helpless idol was
carried along—for though it had legs it
could not walk—to the brow of a neigh-
bouring hill, and flung contemptuously
over.


It is a fact and a sight to be met


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR.


Gwar. xX.


—_—_— eee


with any day in Madras and other large
European cities: a set of hired bearers
will carry one day on their shoulders a
hideous idol, ornamented with gold and
gems, and the next day the same hired
bearers will carry forth in state the
Virgin Mary.— Biblical Treasury.


Ver. 6. “ None LIKE Tuxxz, O Lorp.”
All things in the natural world symbolise
God, yet none of them speak of Him
but in broken and imperfect words.
High above all He sits, sublimer
than mountains, grander than storms,
sweeter than blossoms and tender fruits,
nobler than lords, truer than parents,
more loving than lovers. His feet tread
the lowest places of the earth, but His
head is above all glory, and everywhere
He is supreme.— Beecher.

“THY NAME IS GREAT IN MIGHT.”
A Jew entered a Persian temple, and
saw there the sacred fire. He said to
the priest, ‘‘ How do youworship fire?” —
“ Not the fire: it is to us an emblem of
the sun and of his animating light,”
said the priest. The Israelite continued,
“You dazzle the eye of the body, but
darken that of the mind ; in presenting
the terrestrial light you take away the
celestial.” The Persian asked, ‘“ How do
you name the Supreme Being ?”—“ We
call Him JEHOVAH ADONAT; that ia,
the Lord who was, who is, and shall be.”
—‘“ Your word is great and glorious,
but it is terrible,” said the Persian. A
Christian approaching, said, “ We call
Him, ‘‘ Abba, Father.” Then the Per-
sian and the Jew regarded each other
with surprise, and said, ‘‘ Your word is
the nearest and the heghest; but who
gives you courage to call the Eternal
thus ?”—‘“‘ The Father Himself,” said
the Christian, who then expounded to
them the plan of redemption.—Krum-
macher.


Ver. 10, “THE TRUE Gop.” “How
many Gods are there?” was once asked
of a boy. “ One.”—‘“ How do you know
there is only one ?”—“ Because there is
no room for more, for He fills heaven
and earth.”

The Egyptian hieroglyphic, represent-
ing God, was a winged globe and a
serpent coming out of it: the globe to


signify God’s eternity, the wings His
active power, and the serpent His
wisdom. — Bowes.

Two gentlemen were once disputing
on the divinity of Christ: one of them,
who argued against it, said, “ If it were
true, certainly it would have been ex-
pressed in more clear and unequivocal
terms.” “Well,” said the other, “ad-
mitting that you believed it, were you
authorised to teach it, and allowed to
use your own language, how would you
express the doctrine to make it indubit-
able ?”-—“T would say,” replied he,
“that Jesus Christ is the true God.”—
“You are very happy,” replied the
other, “in the choice of your words, for
you have happened to hit upon the very
words of inspiration ; for John, speaking
of the Son, says, ‘ This is raz TRUE Gop,
and eternal life.’ "— Walson.


Ver. 11-13. AN aPpEaL To Gop’s
WORKS.
** Who guides below and rulez above,
The great Disposer and the mighty King ;
Than He none greater, next Him none
That can be, is, or was:
Supreme, He singly fills the throne.”
Horacs.


An Arab, when one day asked, “ How
do you know there is a God?” turned
indignantly upon the questioner, and
replied, “How do I know whether a
man or a camel passed my tent last
night?” His own footprints in creation
and providence testify of Him.


Ver. 14. WoRsHIP OF IDOLS DEBASES
THE WORSHIPPER. The gods of Greece
and Rome had at least human features,
and modelled after the likeness of men ;
but among the millions of the gods of
India affecting the character of their
worshippers, there is not one which
represents a virtue, not one which is
not a monster of iniquity. Brahma is
acknowledged by the Hindoos them-
selves as too bad to be worshipped.
Their god, Shiva, is distinguished for
his revenge and malignity ; Krishna
bears a character of a notorious licentious
proffigate ; Juggernaut is represented by
an old idol without legs and arms, be-
cause the legs and arms of the god were
cut off by a sentence of the — for hia





incurable iniquity. What but impurity
and cruelty can be the result of a religion
which has such patrons in its god }—
Dietionary of Illustrations.

“Any opinion which tends to keep
out of sight the living and loving God,
whether it be to substitute for Him an
idol, or any occult agency, or a formal
creed, can be nothing better than the
portentous shadow projected from the
slavish darkness of an ignorant heart.”
—Hallam.


Ver. 19. Sore AFFLICTION.

As they lay copper in aquafortis be-
fore they begin to engrave it, so the
Lord usually prepares us by searching,
softening discipline of affliction for
making a deep, lasting impression upon
our hearts.—Wottidge.

There is as much difference between
the sufferings of the saints and those of
the ungodly as between the bandages
wherewith the tender surgeon binds his
patients and the cords with which an
executioner pinions a condemned male-
factor.—Arrowsmith.

One in affliction, when asked how he
bore it so well, replied, ‘‘ It lightens the
stroke to draw near to Him who handles
the rod.”


Ver. 20. BEREAVED OF CHILDREN.


*¢ Death lies on her, like an untimely frost
Upon the sweetest flower of all the field.”
SHAKSPEARE,

Bengel had twelve children, of whom
half died in infancy, He said, when
speaking of his loss, “ As little children
give their sweetmeats to their parents
to keep for them, so my pleasant things
are safer in God’s keeping than in that
of my own treacherous heart.”— Bowes.

Elliot said of the death of his chil-
dren, “I have had six children, and I
bless God they are all either in Christ
or with Christ, and my mind is now at
rest concerning them.”—Jbid,

“‘T cried, ‘Lord, spare my child!’
He did; but not as I meant. He
snatched it from danger, and took it to
His own home.”—Cecsl.

“See, father,” said a lad, “they are
knocking away the props from under
the bridge. What are they doing that
for? Won’t the bridge fall 1”—“ They

420





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





are knocking them away,” said the ~


father, “that the timbers may rest more
firmly upon the stone piers, which are
now finished.” God only takes away
our earthly helps that we may rest
firmly upon Him.

A lady in one day, during her hus-
band’s absence from home, lost both her
children by cholera. With a mother’s
anguish of heart she covered a sheet over
them, and awaited her husband’s return.
‘A Person lent me some jewels,” she
said when she met him, “and now he
wishes them again? What shall Ido?”
—‘ Return them, by all means,” said
her husband. Then she led the way,
and silently uncovered to him the forms
of his dear children.—Dvectionary of
Illustrations,


Ver. 23. Gop’s CoNTROL OF MAN'S
OAREER.


‘«The wish, which ages have not yet subdued
In man, to have no other master but his
mood,”—Byrron.


*¢ Our indiscretion sometimes serves us well
When our deep plots do pall: and that
should teach us
There’s a Divinity that shapes our ends,
Rough hew them how we will.”—SHaxkeE-
SPEARE.


‘* A wheel within a wheel’s the Scripture

notion,

And all those wheels traverse and cross in
motion,

All creatures serve it in their place; yet so

As thousands of them know not what they do:

At this or that their aim they do direct,

But neither this nor that is the effect.

Men are, like horses, set at every stage,

For Providence to ride from age to age;

Which, like a post, spurs on, and makea


them run

From stage to stage, until their journey’s
done H

Then takes a fresh: but they the business
know


No more than horses the post-letters do.

Yet though its work be now concealed from
sight

"Twill be a glorious piece when brought to
light.” —FLAVEL.


“ Certum est, nos veile, cum volumus,
sed ille facit, ut velimus bonum, de quo
dictum est, quod preeparatur voluntas a
Domino (Prov. viii. 35). Certum est,
non facere, cum facimus, sed ille facit,
ut faciamus preebendo vires efficacissimas
voiuntati, qui dixit ; faciam ut in justi





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.








ficationibus meis ambuletis et judicia
mea observetis (Ezek. xxxvi. 26, 27).”
—Augustine.


Ver. 24. Lenient correction. “Cor-
rection is not simply to be deprecated.
The prophet here cries, ‘Correct me ;’
David saith, ‘It was good for me ;’ Job
calleth God’s afflicting of us His magni-
fying of us (chap. viii. 17). Feri Dom-
tne, fert clementer ; ipse paratus sum,
saith Luther,—Smite, Lord, smite me,
but gently, and I am ready to bear it
patiently. King Alfred prayed God to
send him always some sickness, whereby
his body might be tamed, and he tha


CHAP. EL,





better disposed and affectioned towards
God.”—Trapp.


Ver. 25. Fury for the oppressor.
This is not a New Testament aspect of
God ; gracious towards Israel, tempering
affliction with mercy, but severe and
wrathful, with no restraining of anger,
towards the heathen. Rather, “Go ye
into all the world and preach the Gospel
to every creature.” “Pray for them
that despitefully use you.” Hence the
true piety of the Prayer-Book petition ;
“ That it may please Thee to forgive our
enemies, persecutors, and slanderers ; and
turn their hearts.”





CHAPTER XI,


CrrrtoaL ann Exerarticat Norzs.—1. Chronology of the Ohapter.—The “covenant ” sum-
marised in ver. 2-5 refers to the nation’s renewal of vows with Jehovah upon the Book of the
Law being discovered during Josiah’s reign. The prevalency of idolatry (ver. 13) seems to
point back to the public establishment of idol-worship under Manasseh. Both these allusions
favour an early date for this and chap. xii.—i.e., during Josiah’s reign, cir. B.0. 620. (So Keil
and Dr. Payne Smith.) Others (Maurer, Hitzig, Umbriet, and Graff) find in chap. xii, 14
(which is a continuation of this chap.) a reference to the ‘‘ neighbours” spoken of in 2 Kings
xxiv, 2. If this be so, the chapter must date at the end of Jehoiakim’s reign, cir. B.c. 600.
But the absence of ail explicit mention of the Chaldeans (Lange), shows this prophecy to have
been delivered before Nebuchadnezzar came against Jerusalem ; for, after the battle at Char-
chemish, Jeremiah invariably specifies the Chaldeans by name, Hence the chapter is assigned
to the first or second year of Jehoiakim, cir. B.c. 610. Probably Bleek is correct in assigning
ver. 1-17 to Josiah’s reign, and ver. 18—-xii. 17 to Jehoiakim’s reign.

2. Contemporary Scriptures.—2 Kings xxiii, 34-37; 2 Chron. xxxvi. 4, 5.

8. National Affairs.—Jehoiakim on the throne. Quick development of the nation’s apos-
tasy from Jehovah, and revulsion from Josiah’s reforms, led on by the impiety of the king.

4. Cotemporary History.—Egypt at this time (first or second year of Jehoiakim) enjoying
a short-lived ascendancy over the Babylonian domination. This international supremacy,
however, was speedily wrested from Pharaoh-Necho by Nebuchadnezzar in the fourth year
of Jehoiakim.

5. Geographical References.—Ver. 5. ‘(A land flowing with milk and honey ;” the euphemism
for the fertile and beautiful Land of Promise, ef. Exod. iii. 8, 17; Deut. vi. 8, &c. Ver. 23.
“* Anathoth.” See Crit. Notes and Geog. References on chap. i. 1, tn loc.

6. Personal Allusions.—Ver. 21. ‘‘ Men of Anathoth :” these would be the acquaintances of
Jeremiah in his youth, and even his relatives (xii. 6), It is on record that the “men of Ana-
thoth,” 128 in number, returned from exile with Zerubbabel (Ezra ii. 23; Neh. vii. 27;
1 Esdras v. 18).

7, Natural History.— Ver. 16. “ Green olive-tree, and of goodly fruit :” olive very common in
Judea ; of two kinds, the cultivated and the wild; the latter a mere bush, the former grows to
the average height of 25 feet, Its leaves are of a refreshing green hue, conspicuous in contrast
with the foliage of darker trees, An object of ‘‘beauty”’ (Hos. xiv. 6); an evergreen. Its
“fruit” ia at first green; in its early stage almost white, tinged with yellow; in its maturity,
a rich purple, almost black; rich to the taste. Particularly famed for the oil it so abundantly

ields.
4 8. Manners and Oustoms.—Ver. 4. ‘‘ The tron furnace :” metaphorical reference to Egypt;
a figure used by Moses (Deut. iv. 20). Ver. 19. “4s a lamb (see Lit. Crit. below) led to
the slaughter :” a tamed pet lamb, which afterwards had to be killed.

9. Literary Criticisms.—Ver. 2. “‘ Hear ye, and speak ye:” the plurals YIW and Onna,
indicate that not Jeremiah alone, but others in the nation, were, if not commissioned, yet urged
to pullish the ‘‘ covenant” (comp. 2 Kings xxiii. 2; 2 Chron. xxxiv, 80). Ver. fon So be #,


CHAP. XL AOMILETIC COMMENTARY ;: JEREMIAH.


O Lord,” mim TORN ; lit.“ Amen, Jehovah :” it waa the precise response which was sega
by the law (Dent. xxvii. 14-27), and was Jeremiah’s solemn assent, Ver. 6. ‘‘ Proclaim ;

NV, read aloud (Hitzig, Graff, Lange), as in 2 Kinga xxii. 8, 10, 16 ; but it means declare ag
used by Jeremiah, chap. ii. 2, iii. 12 (Keil). Ver. 8. “ The tmagination,” t.e., stubbornness (¢/. iii.


17). Ver. 13. “ That shameful thing... Baal.” See Lit. Crit. on chap. iii. 24. Ver. 15. ‘‘ What
hath my beloved todo?” &. The text is corrupt and obscure. The words, ‘with many,”


DA TT, is better disconneeted from the words, “wrought lewdness.” The LXX. read the
word as OY) 737, or (as Maurer, Graff, &c., suggest) D°D 17; é.¢., vows or prayers, and read,
Will vows and holy flesh (i.¢., sacrifices) take away thy sins? Retaining the word in the text as
it is, by Dat must be deri thy great_ones, princes; and then read: thy great ones, in
which thy earthly strength consists ; and thy sacrifices, on which depends thy religious sanctity,
shall pass away from thee (Speaker’ 8 Com. ). Keil renders the verse, ‘‘ What w ould My beloved
in My house ? they who practise guile? Shall vows and holy flesh remove thy calamity from
thee ? then mayest thou exult.” Blayney: ‘‘Shall vows and holy flesh be allowed to come from
thee? When thou art malignant, shalt thou then rejoice?” Dr. Payne Smith ; “ What hath


My beloved in My house, to practise guile there? The chiefs and the holy flesh shall pass aw ay
from thee, When thy evil (is done) then thou rejoicest.” Ver. 19. ‘‘ Like a lamb or an oz;


HN wld, te. a lamb domesticated. MN is an adjective, familiar, intimate, ‘‘a tame
lamb” tania The substantive FIN i is “oa,” so called as being tamed by familiar use. “ Let


us destroy the tree with the fruit: DM, ,Jruit ; prop. food, especially bread. The LXX. render
it éuBdrdwuer Edroy els roy Aprow avrov, let us cast wood into his bread, t.e., poisonous wood.
Targum ; ‘Let us cast deadly poison into his food.”’ Ver. 20. “ Let me see Thy vengeance upon
them :” TW is future, ‘‘ 7 shall see,” anticipating God’s vindication and interposition.


HOMILETICS ON SECTIONS OF CHAPTER Xi.


Section 1-8. Jehovah’s covenant.
»» 9-13. Idolatrous conspiracy.
», 1417. Mediation and sacrifice unaceeptable.
»» 18-23. Murderers in ambush.


Ver, 1-8. JzHovAn’s CoVENANT.


It was the one solemn compact which God made with Israel; never altered,
never superseded. By it this nation first became the Lord’s, and Jehovah pledged
Himself to be their God, On its being faithfully observed, Israel’s very existence
and distinction as a theocracy depended. Wonderful: it had for many years been
lost ; only found as by accident, during Josiah’s renovation of the temple. (See
Addenda, ver. 2, ‘‘ The lost book of the covenant found.”) Worse : it had been tgnored
by the whole nation ; they regarded not the sacred charter given on Sinai, and
revolted from Jehovah with indifference as to results. Yet has not humanity
equally “broken the covenant,” apostatised from God, and virtually cancelled the
solemn compact which united God in gracious relationship? ‘O Israel! thou hast
destroyed thyself.”

I. The terms of this Divine covenant. “Obey My voice,” &c. (ver. 4, 5).
1. Jt proposed a gracious relationship. “So shall ye be My people, and I will be
your God.” 2. Lt pledged a glorious inheritance. “To give a land flowing with
milk and honey.” 3. Jt depended on absoluie conditions. “ Obey, and do accord-
ing to ali which I command you.” (a.) The terms were unambiguous ; “ obey, and
do.” (0.) The response must be unhesitating and uncompromising ; “ all I com-
mand.” (c.) Jehovah alone was to be their Lawgiver and God ; “J will be your
God ”—“ do according to all J command,”

TI. The circumstances which emphasised this covenant. ‘ Which I com-
manded your fathers in the day,” &c. (ver. 4). 1. The national crisis when it was
made. This is noteworthy ; “in the day,” &c. When Israel was just escaping
from the oppressions and degradations which well-nigh denationalised the people,
This covenant was made “in the day” of their emancipation. 2. The méraculous

232


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. ouaP, XL











experience which immediately preceded it. This is equally remarkable, “T brought
them forth out of the land of Egypt.” 3. The miseries Srom which they were freed
lent special significance to this Divine act ; “the iron furnace.” In return for all
this, which should have ensured unfaltering loyalty and devoted gratitude, God
asked, ‘“‘Obey My voice.”

il. The importunity with which God instituted the covenant. “For I
earnestly protested,” &. (ver. 7). It denotes—l. The Divine earnestness and anxiety.
(4.) God fervently desired this relationship ; (6.) He ratified the covenant amid the
most solemn asseverations, “earnestly protested ;” (c.) He recognised the perils
which menaced it, for it was made with “your fathers ”—fickle, wavering men.
2. The fervent reiteration of the compact. “ Even unto this day ; rising up early
and protesting, saying, Obey my voice.” So that with “line upon line, precept
upon precept,” God encouraged them to fidelity and protested against disloyalty.

IV. The penalty attached to a breach of the covenant. It was made a con-
dition of blessings ; God should be their God, and Canaan their possession (ver. 5) :
but there was also appended a “ curse” if it were violated (ver. 3). ‘1. There is a
black alternative of every promise. 2. By the terrors of the Lord men are to be
urged to fidelity. Not alone allured by promises, but menaced by curses; for
Jehovah may not be trifled with by men. 3. The individual responsibility is
enforced. ‘ Every man ;” not the nation, but the person, he who sins, shall suffer.
4. There are ruinous penalties threatening the disobedient. The “curse” of the

V. The lengthened period through which God had urged this covenant. He
had not grown dissatisfied with it, nor had He allowed it to pass from His thoughts,
nor from Israel’s attention. From “the day that I brought your fathers out of
Egypt even unto this day” (ver. 7), 1. God reckons the years of our opportuntty.
2. He follows man during those years with persuasions and protests, ‘“ Rising
early,” &e. 3. Our criminality and responsibility will be tn proportion to the time
and the persuasives.

VI. The persistent violation of this covenant. “Yet they obeyed not,” &.
(ver. 8). 1. Practical defiance; “they obeyed not.” 2. Habitual indifference ;
“nor inclined their ear.” 3. Wilful disloyalty; “walked every one in the
imagination of their evil heart.”

VIL The Divine vindication of the violated covenant. “Therefore I will
bring upon them all the words of this covenant.” 1. Blessings promised for
obedience withdrawn. 2. Curses threatened for disloyalty performed. 3. God
Himself administers judgment. “It is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of the
living God.”


Ver. 9-18. Ipotarrovus ConsPiRaoy.


“ Jeremiah saw that many lived in open disobedience to God, but the Lord told
him the matter was worse than he thought of: ‘A conspiracy is found among
them,’ by Him whose eye is upon the hidden things of darkness. There is a com-
bination against God and religion, a dangerous design formed to overthrow God’s
government and bring in the counterfeit deities. A cursed conspiracy! Ob, that
there were not the like in our day !

“T. Observe, what the conspiracy was. They designed to overthrow Divine
revelation, and persuade the people not to heed the words of God: did all they
could to derogate from the authority of the Scriptures, to draw people to consult
other gods as their oracles and court them as their benefactors. Human reason
shall be their god, the light within their god, saints and angels their gods. derties
of other nations shall be theirs; thus, under several disguises, the confederacy
exists ‘against the Lord and against His Anointed.’

“TI Who were in the conspiracy. Not foreigners; but 1. ‘The a of


omar. x1. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





Jerusalem with the men of Judah ;’ city and country agree in this, however they
may differ in other things. 2. This generation with the foregoing generation ;
‘they are turned back to the iniquity of their forefathers,’ &c. (ver. 10); a con
Spiracy to carry on the war from age to age against religion, The house of Israel
began the revolt, but Judah soon came into the conspiracy. In Josiah’s time there
had been a reformation, but after his death the people returned to the idolatries
they had then renounced.

“TII. The chastening of the conspirators and the crushing of this conspiracy.
God would take severe methods for this; for none ever hardened his heart thus
against God and prospered. He that rolls this stone will find it return upon him.
‘Therefore I will bring evil upon them’ (ver. 11); the evil of punishment for the
evil of sin; and there is no remedy, no relief. 1. They cannot help themselves
(ver. 11). There is no fleeing from QGod’s justice. Evil pursues sinners and
entangles them in snares from which they cannot extricate themselves. 2. Their
God will not help them ; ‘they shall cry unto Me,’ d&ec. (ver. 11). 3. Thetr tdols
shall not help them (ver. 12). If the idols could have done any real kindness to
their worshippers, they would have done it for this people, who had renounced the
$rue God to embrace them, and had multiplied them ‘according to the number of
the cities of Judah and the streets of Jerusalem.’ But in their distress their many
gods and many altars should stand them in no stead,”— Henry.


Ver, 14-17. Mxepration anp Saocgirick UNACOEPTABLE,


These are and ever have been the sole resources of the sinful in seeking God. If
He will not permit mediation (ver. 14) for transgressors, nor accept sacrifices,
(“holy flesh,” ver. 15; see Lit. Crit. on ver.), then nought remains,

L Offerings beautiful in themselves: mediatorial prayer and holy sacrifices.

IL Offerers who might expect acceptance. 1. Jeremiah, who as a prophet
was also an acknowledged intercessor with God for the people, and withal a man
Divinely chosen and approved ; he would have offered prayers. 2. Judah, cherished
by God as “ His beloved” (ver. 15); once admired by God, “ called (alas! not calls)
thy name, a green olive-tree, fair, and of goodly fruit” (ver. 16); enstated by
God tn sacred possessions and privileges, “ planted thee” (ver. 17); she would have
offered “holy flesh.”

III. Offerings must represent those for whom they are made,

1. Prayer for others, that they may be spared and pardoned, avaz/s only when
they also pray for themselves. But Judah would not kneel before God for deliver-
ance from her sins ; she was prayerless, would continue so, until calamity befell her,
and would then only “cry in her trouble,” not bemoan her guilt. _

2. Saertyices to God require that the offerers are themselves dedicated to Him. To
give Him “holy flesh” while they lived in “ lewdness” (ver. 15) was a flagrant
mockery. Public worship is an insolence to Heaven when it covers private immo-
rality.

IV. Incongruous offerings refused by God. “Pray not thou for this people”
(ver. 14). ‘What hath My beloved to do in Mine house?” (ver. 15). 1. For
those who love sin no prayer can be heard. Even the Divine Intercessor could not
pray for the soul determined in guilt. 2. Those who live in sin defile God’s house
by thetr presence and His altar with their sacrifices. For such persons, who, “ when
doing evil, rejoice,” to offer aught to God is impious effrontery.

V. Mocking hypocrites doomed.

1. There will come to such pretenders a “time of trouble” (ver. 14); wrong will
not prove always pleasant.

2. Their former goodness will not protect them from the doom of apostates,
“Fair and goodly” they may have been ; and so really so as to be called by God
* His beloved ;” but the goodness of former years will not atone for the guilt of

234 - ;


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH. OHaP, XI,
se


the present, nor their experience of Divine love save them from the wrath their
perfidy has provoked (ver. 16).

3. Their enstatement in Divine favour can be reversed. “Planted” in Canaan,
intrusted with “Mine house,” Judah’s condition suggests the case of those within
the Church of Christ, once ostensibly (perhaps sincerely) God’s people, But “if
any man defile the temple of God, him will God destroy.”


Ver. 18-23. MurprrErs In AmBusH.


How many dangers beset us which we fail to recognise! Jeremiah had no per-
ception of his peril until “the Lord gave him knowledge of it” (ver. 18). An eye
more discerning than our own is upon the righteous; and it “neither slumbera
nor sleeps.” (Addenda on ver. 19.)

I. Malevolent designs against a witness for God. A life of godliness rebukes
the guilty ; and thus holy men incur their hate. Jeremiah incensed the men of
Anathoth unwittingly, unwillingly ; but “a good deed ina naughty world” dis-
turbs and distresses and provokes the wicked.

1. A concerted plot : “They devised devices against me.” 2. A merciless pur-
pose: “Let us destroy, ... cut him off from the land of the living,” é&e
3. An unsuspecting victim: “I was like a tame lamb” (see Lit. Crit.). 4. A vigt-
lant Watcher : “Thou showedst me their doings” (ver. 18).

I. A holy man’s secure defence amid foes (ver. 20).

1. Goodness rejoices in the consciousness of God's discernment. Though evil-doers
malign and plot, God “judgest righteously,” recognises the unsullied virtue of His
faithful servants (ver. 19). 2. Integrity relies confidently on Divine vindication.
“T shall see Thy vengeance” (see Lit. Crit. on verse). God would defeat their
designs. 3. Faith finds calm shelter in Jehovah's protection. ‘Unto Thee have I
revealed (confided) my cause.” (See 1 Pet. ii. 23.)

INI. Divine indignation towards the persecutors of His servants. He knowe
them and marks them out; “the men of Anathoth.” 1. The form in which their
hostility expressed itself (ver. 21): he must keep silence or be slain ; be faithless to
his mission or die at their hands. It showed hatred of God, from whose word they
recoiled. 2. The sentence of destruction which this evoked (ver. 22, 23), They
meant Jeremiah’s death; they themselves should cruelly perish, ‘ With what
Measure ye mete, it shall be measured to vou again.”


HOMILIES AND OUTLINES ON VERSES OF CHAPTER XI


Ver, 2-5. Theme: CovenanTED xxvii.). (Addenda, ver. 2, “Book of the
ALLIANCE. (Comp. Homily on section, covenant found.”) This discovery of the
supra.) law occurred five years after Jeremiah


The word came from the Lord “ to
Jeremiah ” (ver. 1), but to be imparted
to and reiterated by others—“ hear ye,
and speak ye” (ver. 2). Some think
these were other prophets ; some suggest
the priests of Anathoth,which might have
so exasperated them that they plotted
his destruction (ver. 19, 21), as the Po-
pish priests sought the life of Savonarola
because he incited them to do their duty.

This “ covenant:” alluding to the
Book of the Law, found by Hilkiah
during Josiah’s restoration of the Temple
(2 Kings xxii. 8.-xxiii. 25 ; comp. Deut.


was called to the prophetic office.
Observe: Though the book was lost,
the covenant should not have been
ignored, Their past history, their pre-
sent occupancy of Canaan, appealed to
them concerning their sacred relation-
ship and Jehovah’s claims.

I. God allies Himself with His people
by a method peculiarly solemn and
imposing. “ A covenant.” 1. The terms
defined. 2. Mutually binding, 3. In-
tended to endure. 4. The method most
impressive, 5. The responsibilities great
—great as are the benefits and bla

2





Il To this sacred compact God
exacts from His people unfaitering ad-
herence. They must “ obey the words ”
(ver. 3) as the condition on which
Jehovah “ may perform His oath”
(ver. 5). 1. God looks for their part to
be performed ; desires it, watches for it,
eagerly, paternally. 2, He claims that
their fidelity should be as full as His
own ; no vacillation, no compromise, no
departure, 3. Is wronged by their

erfidy ; wounded also,

IfI. Violation of the covenant for-
feits its blessings and ensures its
penalties. Cancels the agreement for
Divine benefactions, invokes instead
the Divine displeasure. The faithless
soul puts God’s favours aside and
invites the “curse.” So by repudiating
the salvation of Christ, the sinner im-
precates judgment. 1. God earnestly
desires to bless us: “ So shall ye be my
people” (ver. 4), “that I may perform
the oath,” &c. (ver. 5). 2. Man’s con-
science recognises the righteousness of
the covenant: ‘So be it, O Lord.” In
the human heart there is a response to
the justice of God in punishing the
’ faithless soul, as truly as in blessing the
obedient. Even in the last judgment
there will be heard the human acknow-
ledgment that “the Judge of all the
earth doeth right,”

Notes ; The obedience here agreed for
is not performance of the stern legal
statutes of the law, but fulfilment of the
benignant terms of a “covenant "—a
gracious and reciprocal covenant. The
“covenant” more naturally expresses
itself in “Thou shalt love: ” the law,
in, Thou shalt do.

The crime of slighting the alliance of
love is the greatest in itself and in ita
consequences. “If any man love not
the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be
anathema maranatha” (1 Cor. xvi. 22).
(Addenda, ver. 4, ‘‘ Covenant alliance
of love.”)

The Jews still occupied this goodly
land, and it was still affluent in natural
wealth: God had thus fulfilled His part
of the covenant, It remained now with
His people, by keeping the terms, to
decide whether this inheritance should
remain theirs.


236


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIA.


—


Ver. 6. Theme: JEHOVAH'S MESSAGM
WIDELY PUBLISHED.

Most probably (so Hend., Naég., and
Speaker’s Com.) Jeremiah, obeying this
Divine command, journeyed with Josiah
in his reforming tour through the land
(2 Kings xxiii. 15-20), everywhere rgad-
ing to the people the words of the
newly-found book. The word “ pro-
claim” has the meaning of read aloud.
(See Let. Crit. on verse.)

All through the land the covenaut is
to be heard. All over the earth the
Gospel is to be published ; not in “ cities
of Judah and streets of Jerusalem”
alone, but to “ali people.” ‘Go ye
into all the world, and preach the Gospel
to every creature.”

I That none may remain in sorrow-
ful ignorance, or have excuse for
neglect. The Light must shine into
darkness.

If. That all may feel the persua-
siveness of the earnest call. “ Faith
cometh by hearing: ” hearts are moved
by the heavenly appeal.

III. That every hearer may clearly
know the full plan of safety. ‘“ Hear
the words and do them.” (Comp. Rom,
ii 13; James i 22.) “Do them:”
Trapp remarks, “ Else ye hear to no
purpose ; as the salamander liveth in
the fire, and is not made hot by the fire ;
as the Ethiopian goeth black into the
bath, and as black he cometh forth.”
(Addenda, ver. 6, Poem by Trench.)


Ver. 7,8. Theme: EARNEST PER
SUASION RECKLESSLY DEFIED.

Observe 1. God Himself earnestly
pleads; “I.” 2. God persistently
pleads ; “in the day I brought them
out of Egypt, even unto this day,”
3. God fervently pleads, vehemently,
with pathos and power; “ protesting.”
4. God anxiously pleads; “rising up
early,” d&c., as one too concerned and
troubled to rest. (See on chap. vii. 13.
Addenda, ver. 7, ‘“ Rising early.”)

Yet, (1) Men oppose God in practice;
“obeyed not.” (2) Refuse God ther
attention; “nor incline their ear.” (3)
Pursue their own defiant course, “walked
every one in the imagination (“stubborn-
neas,” gee on chap. iii. 17) of their evil


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


OH4P. XL,


——— eee


Beart.” (4) Turn God's goodness into
tnevitable anger ; “ therefore will I bring
upon them,” &c. (See 2 Kings xvii. 13,
f)


Ver. 9, 10. Theme: DELIBERATE
COMBINATION AGAINST GoD.

The decisive course being’ now pur-
sued by king Josiah in exterminating
idolatry had led the opponents of the
king’s purpose into determined league
against his reformatory schemes; or
the general dislike which prevailed
among the people for this overthrow of
their cherished idolatry may be meant,
The consentaneous disapproval of the
nation is spoken of as being a precon-
certed opposition, a “ conspiracy.”

Note, that oppostttion to religious work,
and workers for Jehovah (Josiah the
king and Jeremiah the prophet), is in
truth a conspiracy agutnst God Himself.
So when Christ arrested Saul of Tarsus
with the challenge “ Why persecutest
thou Me?” (Addenda, ver. 9, “ Con-
spiracy against Glod.’’)

I. The darkness of the human heart.
Rebelled against the reformation ; rose
in resistance of the king’s work of puri-
fying the land. “ Love darkness rather
than light, because their deeds are evil.”
“ Heart desperately wicked.”

II. The antagonism of man towards
God. Any idol, any number of idols,
will men rear and serve, but not
Jehovah. ‘‘We will not have Thee,”
&c. ‘My people love to have it so”
(chap. v. 31).

II. The deliberate purpose to defeat
God’s work. Men combine to frustrate
the designs of the Almighty. They
determine to oppose those who would
evangelise the world. They meet the
progress of religion with combined and
deliberate assaults. Guilt is mplacable,
defiant, restless. It hates God and godli-
ness, They had “taken counsel together
against the Lord, and against His
Anointed” (Ps, ii 2, 3). Note, that
their idolatry was mot the issue of
ignorance—they would not exchange it
for Jehovah; nor was it the result of a
hasty impulse, but deliberate design
(Ps. Ixxxiii. 5); nor was the national
relapse into idolatry after Josiah’s death


the consequence of indifference, but of
Ay purpose, a “conspiracy” (ver.
IV. The confederacy for sin suffices
to prevail over mutual estrangement.
To oppose God and His kingdom men—
mutually antagonistic. —will ally them-
selves, (See ver. 10.) ‘The house of
Israel and the house of Judah,” the two
kingdoms which were in fierce hostility
one to another politically, became con-
spirators against the God whose good-
ness gave them national existence and
political power. Men can forswear their
own antagonisms, when impiety is in
the ascendant, in order to trample God’s
claims beneath their feet in scorn. But
“though hand join in hand, the wicked
shall not go unpunished.” “These (ten
kings) have one mind, and shall give
their power and strength unto the
beast ; these shall make war with the
Lamb, and the Lamb shall overcome
them,” d&ec. (Rev. xvii. 12-14).


Ver. 11-13. Theme; Tau ony OF TEE
GODLEss IN OALAMITY. (See Homily,
and Notes on chap. ii. 28, also on sec-
tions, chap. ii. 14-28.)

““Cry unto Me,” contrasted with “cry
unto the gods.” “I will not hearken
unto them ;” set over against “ they shall
not save them at all.” God also places
in juxtaposition Hts own power to afflict
—‘T will bring evil”—with the zdols’
powerlessness to help them. Note, too,
that the ‘“‘thing” for which the people
deserted God is “a shameful thing;” in
itself a degraded object, in its rites and
orgies loathsome, and certain to cover
with shame those who worship and trust
in it, With the one true God alienated,
and all false gods, however numerous
(ver. 13), proved to be worthless and
impotent, none to “hearken” or “save”
though they ‘‘ cry ”"—how desolate the
outlook of the impious when the day of
sore trouble and dismay arrives! ‘“ Seek
the Lord, seek righteousness, seek meek-
ness ; it may be ye shall be hid in the
day of the Lord’s anger.”


Ver. 14. Theme: THE PRAYER OF
MEDIATION SILENCED BY Gop.
For there is a climax . iniquity
37


OBaP. XI.


which renders pity misplaced, and
prayer a mockery; these must not
then intervene. (See on chap. vii, 16.)
Praying men are arrested in their very
prayers by the dreadful fact that the
guilty scorn to pray for themselves until
doom is upon them.

I. A bound is here set to prayer;
because there is a bound to possibility.

II. A warning is here given to the
prayerless: they must not reckon on
the successful prayers of others for them
so long as they refuse to pray for them-
selves.

III. A correction is here suggested
to the prayerful : when God’s purposes
are evidently fixed, do not attempt to
interpose; nor, when you have prayed
unwisely, and He therefore does not
answer, conclude that He is not the
Hearer of prayer. There is a time for
solemn silence and submission. (See
on chap. vii. 16.)


Ver, 15. Theme: THE UNWELCOME
SACRIFICE. (Addenda on verse.)

I. Offered by one whom God held
dear: “my beloved.” For God tenderly
cherishes even His sinning people.

II. Presented amid solemn sur-
roundings: ‘‘in Mine house.” The
scene was good, where God was ready
to meet the worshipper, and where
sacrifices were pleasant to Him,


III. Itself a proper and approved.


offering to God: “holy flesh.” Beauti-
ful and holy things God desires from us,

IV. Rendered abhorrent by the wor-
shippers guilt: “she hath wrought
lewdness;” and “when doing evil,
exulted.” God can have no pleasure in
pure things offered with defiled hands.
“Wash you, make you clean, put away
the evil of your doings,” &. (Isa. ik 11-
16). (See Lat. Crit. on verse.)


Ver. 16, 17. Theme: DeEstRUCTION
OF THE FAIR OLIVE-TREE.

A favourite and frequent figure for
God’s ancient people. Observe: 1. How
carefully Jehovah cherishes the remem-
brance of our early fidelity and spiritual
beauty: He had not lost the vision of
Judah’s former piety. 2. How clearly

238


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAG.





God delineates the mournful difference ;
fully recognises the degeneracy and decay
of that early goodliness. He is watch-
ful over our careers, and notes our pre
sent state as compared or contrasted
with our former years,

I The beautiful tree of God’s fos
tering. -

1. [ts fatr proportions were God's
own work, To His grace Judah owed
all her beauty. ‘‘The Lord called thy
name, A green olive,” &c. (ver. 16),
t.e., He made her what she was,

2. Its localisation in fruitful sotl was
an act of Divine planting. ‘The Lord
planted thee” (ver. 17). Observe: To
God’s grace, which made us what we
are, we must trace all our spiritual ad-
vantages; He hath wrought all our
works in us.

II. Goodly fruit grossly misused
All that this fair tree yielded was carried
away from Him who planted it, and
offered to Baal (ver. 17). 1. He who
planted the tree should gather the fruit ;
an unnatural alienation of human life,
2. A tree whose fruits are deteriorated
must be removed; evil growths must not
remain in God’s fair garden. Wicked-
ness forfeits privileges. “ Pronounced evil
against thee, for the evil done” (ver. 17).

IIL Destruction by fire of the de-
generate tree.

1. Calamity threatened : “The Lord
hath pronounced evil.” 2. Complete de-
vastation effected: “with the noise of a
great tumult,” &, (ver. 16), te, by the
fury of a thunderstorm and the fiery light-
ning, by which “ fire is kindled upon it,
and the branches are broken.”


Ver. 17. Theme; THE SINNEB’S SIN
HURTS HIMSELF. Text: ‘The evil which
they have done against themselves,”

i Intentionally against God: “To
provoke Me to anger.”

ii. Practically to their own injury.
Guilt rebound, returns upon the guilty.
(See Outlines on chap. vii. 19.)


Ver. 18-23. Theme; PERSECUTION
or Gop’s PropHET. (See Homily on
section, supra, Addenda on ver, 19,
“« Murderers tn ambush.”)

i Secret counsels revealed by Jehovah


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


OBAaP. XZ





has 19). The general “conspiracy”
eee ver. 9) of the nation against Je-
hovah was accompanied by a family
conspiracy against Jeremiah, his own
brethren being determined to take his
life. This cruel plot was revealed to
ay unsuspecting servant by God Him-
self,

“Although the human heart cannot
be fathomed (chap. xvii. 9), yet no-
thing can be hidden from God, and He
frequently reveals hidden counsels, so
that they are known and manifest, as in
the case of Absalom and Ahithophel
(Isa. viii. 10). Therefore do nothing
in secret, in the hope that it will remain
hidden, for the birds of the heaven carry
the voice, and the winged repeat it.
(Eccles, x. 20).”—Cramer.

iL Cruel treachery against a harmless
prophet (ver. 19). It was not that Jere-
miah wronged them, but the truth
troubled them. Criminals are wroth
against their captors. So Ahab against
Elijah (1 Kings xviii). Note: how
defenceless the godly leave themselves :
‘“‘as a lamb,” with no protection against
guile or malevolence; even as Christ
Himself: “As a Lamb before His
shearers.” God keeps His own while
they serve His will. Mark, also, how
typical was Jeremiah’s case: “like a
lamb brought to the slaughter ;” not
violent, as angry men are wont to be,
but gentle and submissive, free from
vindictiveness ; and also fulfilling his
work at the peril (in Christ’s case, at
the expense) of his life. .

“Tet us destroy the tree with the
fruit;” that is, the man, who is the
tree, and his teaching, which is the
fruit; thus ridding ourselves at once of
both causes of disturbance, the living pre-
sence of this witness against our sins,
and his incisive words of condemnation
and reproach,

“ Let us cut him of from the land of
the living.” Wordsworth remarks, “So
of Christ it is said by Isaiah (liii. 8).
All that happened to the prophet Jere-
miah, who was specially the suffering
prophet, was a foreshadowing of what
would happen to the Great Prophet of
whom Moses spoke, ‘the Man of Sor-
rows;’ and we read these narratives


concerning Jeremiah with comparatively
little advantage unless we see here a
prophetic adumbration of Christ.”
Jerome says, “ Almost all things that
the prophets did and suffered were figu-
rative of Christ ; and whatever was ful-
filled in Jeremiah was a prophecy con-
cerning the Lord Himself.

iii, Vengeance imprecated on foes (ver.
20). This wish for vengeance was not
personal, but ministerial ; not because of
wrong done him, but because they were
the determined and unscrupulous adver-
saries of God and His word. The note-
able difference between this appeal to
God against His foes and Christ’s
prayer for those who crucified Him,
“Father, forgive them,” and Stephen’s
“ Lord, lay not this sin to their charge,”
marks the wide distinction between the
old and new covenants ; the former was
grounded on righteousness, the latter on
love. Zinzendorf remarks, “The first
New Testament vengeance was executed
on the Cross, when an evil-doer, who
had mocked at Jesus, cringed on the cross
and asked for a gracious remembrance.”
Wordsworth: ‘‘Jeremiah, the human
type, fails in some things where Christ,
the Divine Antitype, excels.”

“Unto Thee have I revealed my
cause.” A teacher is advised to say
this if he can, ‘I have ceased to con-
cern myself about myself.” Luthes
says :—

*© Once I grasped too many things ;—

None stayed ; they all had wings,
But since I’ve weary grown,
And all away have thrown,
Not one from me has flown.


And do you ask, How can it be thus?
Because I’ve cast my all on Jesus.”


Messengers and servants who concern
themselves about their own injuries
must have bad masters.—Zinzendorf.

iv. The implacable malice of familiars
(ver. 21). “Where shall a man find
worse friendsthan athome? A prophet
is nowhere so little set by as in his own
country (Matt. xiii, 57).” — Trapp.
None were so bitter to Christ as His
fellow-townsmen (Luke iv. 24-29).
“That which the people of Anathoth
say here to Jeremiah, the people of this
world say everywhere and at all times

239


OaP. XI,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





to the preachers of the truth. (Comp.
2 Tim, iv. 3,4.) It is important, then,
to preach the word; to be instant in
season and out of season ; to reprove,
rebuke, exhort, with all long-suffering
and doctrine.”—WNaeg. in Lange. ‘It
appears from this passage that the holy
man had not only to contend with the
king and his courtiers, and the priests
who were at Jerusalem, but that when
he betook himself to a corner to live
quietly with his own people, he had even
there no friend, but that all persecuted
him as an enemy.”—Calvin.

v. God’s visitation on His people's foes
(ver, 22, 23). Henry comments thus:
“The sentence passed upon them for


their crime. God says, J will punish
them; let Me alone to deal with them.
I will. visit this upon them; so the
word is: will inquire into it and reckon
for it. ... They sought Jeremiah’s
life, therefore they shall dte. They
would destroy him, that hes name be no
more remembered , therefore shall there
be no remnant of them. And herein the
Lord is righteous,” Cramer; ‘“ When
the people will not endure the rod of
Christ’s mouth, with which He smites
the earth (Isa xi. 4), item, His rods
Beauty and Bands (Zech, xi. 7), God
sends one with the sword to preach, and
then we see what the smooth preachers
have effected (Isa. xxx. 10).”





NOTICEABLE TOPICS IN CHAPTER XI.


Topie: JostaH’s Discovery or THE Law. Text: “ Hear ye the words of this
covenant” (ver. 2).


Josiah, the last sovereign of David’s house (for his sons had not independent
rule), showed the zeal and prompt obedience of the son of Jesse, Character:
~ heart was tender” (2 Kings xxii. 19). Discovery of Moses’s law the great event
of his reign, 1. It shows that the Holy Scripture had for a long time been
neglected, and was practically lost. This Book of the Law was the five “ books of
Moses,” containing the original covenant between God and His people. Moses had
enforced the domestic study of these Scriptures (Deut. xi. 18-20), enjoined upon
each king that they be constantly read and recited (xvii. 19, 20), ordered that at
feast of tabernacles they be publicly read to the whole nation (xxxi. 7-13). 2. The
loss of the book and this negligence of God’s word resulted from the diversities
and depths of national apostasy. The nation did not want to hear the law which
testified against their multiplied transgressions, nor to listen to a condemnation of
the idols they had chosen. Nor wov'd the kings copy out the law for themselves
when finding that it was against the will of God that the nation should have
a king.

I. Josiah’s evil parentage explains his total ignorance of the law.

1, His parental alienation from God and His word. The last good king before
him was Hezekiah, who had been dead sixty or seventy years. His son Manasseh,
who succeeded him, was the most profane of all the line of David; he it was who
committed the inexpiable sins which sealed the sentence of Judah’s destruction.
He had set up idols in the temple, made his sons pass through the fire, dealt with
spirits and wizards, shed much innocent blood in Jerusalem, done wickedly above
all before him. On his return from Babylonian captivity, Manasseh attempted
reformation, but found it easier to seduce than to reclaim the people (2 Chron,
xxxiii. 15-25). Amon, who succeeded him, followed during his short reign the
first ways of his father, and “trespassed more and more,” till slain by his subjects,
Josiah was the son of this wicked king.

2. His own irreligious education. Brought up among very wicked men, in a
corrupt court, after an apostasy of more than half a century, far from God’s pro-
phets, in the midst of idols.

Il. Religion is not determined wholly by outward circumstances, Like
Manasseh, Josiah came to the throne in his boyhood. But Manasseh was the son
of pious Hezekiah ; Josiah, the son of wicked Amon. Thus religious life is not

242


s


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. CHAP. XL








“irae on parentage, but, under God, who gives grace, on the state of the
eart.

1. Lts early life of piety. Boyhood is not revealed to us, except that he came
to the throne when only eight. But scarcely was he old enough to think for him-
self and profess himself a servant of the true God, ere he chose that good part
which could not be taken from him. When but sixteen he began to seek after
tke God of David his father (2 Chron. xxxiv. 3). Blessed they who so seek, for
they shall find,

2. His disadvantages. He had not the aid of the revealed volume ; was
surrounded by diversities of idol-worship, sophistries of unbelief, seductions of
sinful pleasure. Every temptation to go wrong. Had he gone into a life of sin,
we might have made allowance ; not so bad as other kings, for he had not sinned
against light, as they had done. Yet he had enough light to show him how to go
right ; if, therefore, he had gone wrong, he would have sinned against what light
he had; not light so clear as Solomon or Joash had, yet still against his better
knowledge,

II. Every one has knowledge enough to be religious. Even the most un-
favoured, poorest, and most ignorant. Education does not make a man religious ;
nor is it an excuse for irreligion that he has not been educated to hia duty. It
only makes him less guilty than those taught ; but still he is guilty.

1. Scarcely any one in a Christicn land can be in more disadvantageous circum-
stances than Josiah ; nay, scarcely in a heathen country ; for idolatry was around
him, and his mind was unformed.

2. But he had that, which all men have, a natural sense of right and wrong ;
and he did not blunt it, He heard and obeyed a constraining Divine voice.
Though all the world had told him other, he would not believe he could sin without
offence or with impunity.

3. The same inward sense led him to choose, amid all the various worships
offered to his acceptance, the true one—the worship of the God of Israel (Pa.
exi. 10, cxix. 100.

4, His religious life was spontaneous. At sixteen he began to seek the God of
his fathers ; at twenty commenced his reformation—began of himself, Jeremiah
did not begin to prophecy till after Josiah commenced his work. So that the king
set about his pious task unaided by others.

IV. Thus following the biddings of his natural conscience, God gave him
clear light. He set out in his work of reformation not knowing whither he went.
But it is a rule of God’s providence, that those who act up to their light shall have
clearer. ‘‘To him that hath shall be given.” While engaged in his work of
restoring the temple, the Book of the Law was found.

1. His character here reveals itself in his conduct. Not inflated ; as some who,
though beginning humbly, become self-confident and proud. He still had “a
heart tender, and humbled himself before God.” Felt his own blindness and
weakness, and earnestly sought to know his duty better and practise it more
entirely. ‘Rent his clothes” (2 Kings xxii. 11), for he saw how incomplete his
reformation had been, how far more guilty the nation was than he had supposed,
and the fearful punishments overhanging them (Deut. xxx. 15, 19, xi. 26-28).
And there had been in part a fulfilment of those threats. Samaria, the ten
revolting tribes, Israel, had been carried away. Though he knew their sins had
wrought this, yet here he finds it threatened beforehand, and discovered that the
same punishment awaited his own people should they persist in sin.

2. He sought guidance of a Divine teacher. Sent to Huldah for counsel (2
Chron, xxxiv. 21, &c.).

V. His zealous and solicitous course of action in consequence of the Divine
message. Assembled all Judah at Jerusalem, publicly read the Book of Law, then
made all the people renew the covenant with the God of their fathers. Be more

Q


OMAP, XI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAZ.





exactly following the directions of the Lord, he carried on further reformations,
and after that celebrated the Passover.

1. Greater knowledge was followed by stricter obedience (2 aes xxiii, 22).

2. Waat he did he did with all his might (ibid. ver. 25).

Conclusion:

(a.) Observance of God’s will, however we learn it, ensures God’s favour, Learning
it from His Word in Scripture, as Christians do, or from His Word in our con-
sciences, as the heathen do ; it is by following it, in spite of seductions of the world
around us, that we please God (Acts x. 25),

(6.) If such is God’s mercy on all men who seek Him, what will be His grace to
Christians ? Far greater and more wonderful. Elected out of the world in Jesus
Christ our Saviour to a glory incomprehensible and eternal.—A bridged and
arranged from “ Plain Sermons,” by authors of “ Tracts for the Times.”


Topic: Sins ow Omission. Text ; “ Yet they obeyed not, nor inclined their ear”
(ver. 8).


God commisioned Jeremiah to bring solemn accusation against Judah ; he gives
the first place to their shortcomings in positive service, reminds them of what they
had not done, but ought to have done—constantly and persistently refused active
obedience to the righteous will of the Most High.

I. The great commonness of sins of omission: in the world, in our circle of
society, in our own hearts.

1. In a certain sense all offences against the law of God come under the head of
sins of omission. Every sin is a breach of the all-comprehensive law, ‘“ Thou shalt
love the Lord thy God with all thy heart, and thy neighbour as thyself.” How
multitudinous our omissions in respect to this command of Christ! Too often we
have had other gods beside Him. He deserved, having bought us with the blood
of His dear Son, to be served with all-consuming earnestness, He rightly claims
our best thoughts and utmost love; yet “ unprofitable servants.” So too in regard
so our “neighbour.” What sins of omission daily occur in our various relation-
ships—our neighbours, our children, our household.

2. Sins of omission are seen in all who neglect to perform the first and all-essential
Gospel command: “ Repent and be converted;” “ Repent and be baptised ;” “ Believe
on the Lord Jesus Christ,” Yet, though urged to repentance and to faith in Christ,
sin is not sorrowed for, faith in Christ not exercised. This true of dense masses
everywhere, and of many in God’s house who hear but not obey.

3. Sins of omission in religious duties. Multitudes neglect the outward worship
of God. But others show religious regard ; yet what omissions as to prayer; how
lax in devotion are the most of us! As tothe Bible: left unread! As to service:
talents wrapped up in napkin! Our omissions lie upon the horizon of memory
like masses of storm-clouds accumulating for a horrible tempest.

II. The cause of this excessive multiplicity of sins of omission.

1. The great cause lies in our evil hearts. Absence of clean heart and right
spirit is at the root: “ Ye must be born again.”

2. The conscience of man ts not well alive to sins of omission. While conscience
will chastise men for direct acts of wrong, not awake to sins of neglect.

3. These sins are multiplied through indolence, Men sleep on, awake not to
righteousness and the service of God. In the face of eternity, life, death, heaven,
and hell, multitudes are simply ruined because they neglect the great salvation, and
are absolutely too idle to concern themselves.

4. Ignorance. With many ignorance is wilful; have Bible, conscience; yet
sin against light and knowledge.

5. Men excuse themselves so readily about these sins of omission. A more con-
venient season is anticipated for repentance, faith, prayer. This postponement of
service is the perpetuation of rebellion.

242


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. OWAP. ZI,


6. Many neglect because of the prevalence of the like conduct. To omit to love
and serve the Lord is the custom. But enlightened conscience warns us that
custom is no excuse for sin : it will be no plea at the bar of God.

III. The sinfulness of sins of omission. They cannot be trivial, for

1. Consider what would be the consequences if God were to omit His mercies to
us for one moment! Suppose He should omit to supply breath or life for one
minute, or omit to restrain the axe of judgment for an hour! Suppose for a day
He should omit His natural blessings to the world ; the sun would forbear to shine,
life would forget to be, world perish. Suppose Jesus had left an omission in His plan
of salvation ; the whole would have failed, and humanity left without remedy or hope.

2. Reflect what an influence they would have upon an ordinary commonwealth.
If one person has a right to omit his duty, another has, and all have—watchman,
judge, merchant, husbandman ; society soon collapse, kingdom break to pieces.

3. Think how you would judge of omissions towards yourselves. In the case of
your servant, you instantly resent it. So in a soldier. Even in your child: to
neglect your command is regarded as equally criminal as to commit offence. Per-
haps you have given God all except loving Him ; outward worship and profession,
but not love. Consider this to be the case in your home, in your wife: omission of
love is a fatal lack, and so ir your love of God.

4. Consider what God thinks of omissions. Saul was ordered to kill the Amale-
kites—not one to escape: he saved Agag and best of the cattle; therefore the
Lord said, “I have put thee away from being king over Israel!” Ahab was com-
manded to kill Benhadad on account of great criminality: Ahab only captured him ;
therefore, ‘ Because thou hast let this man go, thy life shall be for his life!” Our
Lord cursed the fig-tree because no fruit! The man with one talent was condemned
because he neglected to use it. The Holy Spirit convinces of sins of omission,—
“ of sin, because they believe not on Me.”

IV. The result and punishment of sins of omission.

1. They will condemn us. “The king shall say, I was hungered and ye gave me
no meat,” &c. The absence of virtue rather than the presence of vice condemned
them. ‘ Without holiness no man shall see the Lord.” Though we know nothing
of salvation by works, yet the Baptist’s words echo loud, ‘‘ Now also the axe is
laid unto the root of the trees ; therefore, every tree which bringeth not forth good
fruit is hewn down and cast into the fire.”

2. If persevered in, they will effectually shut against us the possibilities of pardon,
“He that believeth not”—is there pardon, rescue for him? No; he “is con-
demned already, because he hath not believed on the Son of God.” Will the
mercy of God blot out sins unrepented of ? Nay; sins will cling to us as the
leprosy to the house of Gehazi. In the marriage feast in Gospel, many would not
come, and they perished because they would not come ; and one came but “ had
not on the wedding-garment,” and because of that omission, “ Bind him hand and
foot, and deliver him to the tormentors.” So if you have not—mark that point—
put on the righteousness of Christ by a living faith in Him, salvation will be
forfeit for ever.—C. H. Spurgeon.


ADDENDA TO OHAPTER XI. ILLUSTRATIONS AND SUGGESTIVE ZXTRAOTS.


Ver. 2. The lost book of the cove-
nant found. “The Temple during the


entire harmony. Suddenly, under the
accumulated rubbish or ruins of the


previous reign had fallen into a state of
neglect, such that, as in the time of
Joash, a complete restoration had become
necessary. On this occasion, however,
the king and the priesthood acted in


Temple (as it would seem), the High
Priest discovered a roll containing the
‘ Book of the Law.’

Whatever may have been the exact
nature of this document, Dye points,


CGHaP. XL


and two alone, are clear. First, it was
as complete a surprise as if the book
had never been known before. During
the troubles of the reign of Manasseh
there is no proof of its destruction,
while during the previous reigns there
is no proof of its existence. David,
Solomon, Asa, and Jehoshaphat had
lived in constant, and apparently uncon-
scious, violation of the ordinances which
came home with such force to Josiah.
It is possible that the book may have
now been first composed. It is possible
that it may have been a mere redis-
covery... . But, in either case, this
sudden appearance of the law amounted
almost to a new revelation.

“Secondly, whatever other portions of
the Pentateuch may have been included
in the roll, there can be little doubt
that the remarkable work to which the
Greek translators gave the name of ‘the
Second Law '(Deuteronomy)occupied the
chief place.” —Stanley’s ‘“JewishChurch.”

Ver. 4. The covenant an alliance
of love. ‘So shall ye be My people,”
&c. ‘Now, for the first time, the love
of God, as the chief ground of His
dealings with His people—the love to-
wards God as the ground of their service
to Him—the spiritual character and free
choice of that service (Dent. vi. 4-9,
vii. 6-11, &c.), were urged on the
nation with all the force of Divine and
human authority,” —Stanley, wid.

Ver. 6. Jehovah’s message widely
published. “ Proclaim all these words,”

“Tsay to thee, Do thou repeat


To the first man thou mayest meet,
In lane, highway, or open street,


That he and we and all men move
Under a canopy of love,
As broad as the blue sky above.


And ere thou leave him, say thou this
Yet one word more: They only miss
The winning of that final bliss


Who will not count it true that Love,
Blessing, not cursing, rules above,
And that in it we live and move,


And one thing further make him know:
That, to believe these things are so,
This firm faith never to iorego,


Despite of all that seems at strife
With blessing—all with curses rife ;—
That thés is blessing, this is life.”
R. C. TREexoat.
244


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





enn


Ver. 7. “ Rising early and protest-
ing ;” as Plutarch reporteth of the Per-
sian kings, that they had an officer to
call them up betimes, and to mind them
of their business—Trapp. Yet God
rose unsolicited, so eager and earnest was
He on His people’s behalf.

Ver. 9. Conspiracy against God,
Did you ever, on a hot afternoon, witness
the contest of innumerable worms over
a carrion carcass? Did you ever notice
the greediness, selfishness, and quarrel-
someness displayed by the actors in a
scene like that? And yet such a contest
is decent compared with the gigantic
contest that has been carried on for
thousands of years by the vermicular
human race; and God has looked upon
it, pondered over it, and carried it in
His heart ; and all this time He has not
ceased to pour out upon the world, in
rich abundance, the blessings of His
never-failing love.—Beecher.

Ver. 15. The unwelcome sacrifice.
He that offers in sacrifice, O Pamphilus !
a multitude of bulls and of goats, of
golden vestments or purple garments, of
figures of ivory or precious gems, and
imagines by this to conciliate the favour
of God, is grossly mistaken, and has no
solid understanding ; for he that would
sacrifice with success ought to be chaste
and charitable, no corrupter of virgins,
no adulterer, no robber or murderer for
the sake of lucre. God, who is near
thee, perpetually beholds thy actions.—
From the Greek.

Ver. 19. Murderers in ambush.
Between the priesthood and the propheta
there had hitherto been more or less of a
conflict ; but now that conflict was ex-
changed for a fatal union. “ A wonder-
ful and horrible thing was committed
in the land: the prophets prophesied
falsely, and the priests bore rule by their
means ;” and he (Jeremiah) who by each
of his callings [Stanley regards Jere-
miah as having been a priest before he
was called to become a prophet] was
naturally led to sympathise with both,
was the doomed antagonist of both—
victim of one cf the strongest passions,
the hatred of priests against a priest
who attacks his own order,—the hatred
of prophets against a prophet who ven-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; JEREMIAH. OHaP. SH.








tures to have a voice and @ will of his sacred history ‘was the saying literally
own. His own village of Anathoth, oc- fulfilled, ‘A prophet hath no honour in
cupied by members of the sacred tribe, his own birthplace” (Evry abrod wa-
was for him a nest of conspirators gids, Luke iv. 24).—Stanley.

against his life. Of him first in the





CHAPTER XIL


Crrticat axD Execeticat Norzs.—1l. Chronology of the chapter. See en chap. xi.,
Bleek’s theory ; for which there is a weight of argument. All commentators agree to connect
vers. 1-6 with the conclusion of the previous chapter. The following vers. 7-17, fall into
two strophes, 7-13, and 14-17. Hitzig and Graf regard vers, 7-18 as a lament over Judah’s
devasiation consequent upon Jehoiakim’s defection from Nebuchadnezzar in the eighth year
of his reign. And Eichhorn, Dahler, and others hold section 14-17 to be a distinct oracle,
belonging to the time of Zedekiah, or to the seventh or eighth year of Jehoiakim (¢.
Keil). The ‘‘evil neighbours” mentioned in ver. 14 are taken by many to be hordes of
Syrians, Moabites, Ammonites, Idumeans, and Philistines, by which the land was overrun,
and who, in their alliance to Chaldean supremacy, undertook a war of spoliation against
insurgent Judah in eighth year of Jehoiakim. Dr. Payne Smith and Keil preserve the chrono-
logical unity of the entire chapter, and contend that ver. 7-17 contain Jehovah’s answer to
Jeremiah’s complaint, 1-6. 2. Cotemporary Scriptures. 3. National Affairs. 4. Cotemporary
History : a8 in notes on chap. xi. See above, on “evil neighbours.”

5. Geographical References.—Ver. 5, “Swelling of Jordan:” lit, the pride ie Jordan.
Ewald, Umbreit, and A.V. interpret it as the rise and overflow of the river; but Keil, Payne
Smith, and Hend. as “the luxuriant thickets along its banks.” The river did overflow ita
lower banks in April and May, and fill the Ghor valley: this resulted from the melting of the
Winter's snow on Hermon and Lebanon. The expression is not inappropriate to such an in-
undation (cf. Job xxxviii. 11); but, as nothing is known of dangerous overflows of the
river, the comparison of the text, implying serious peril, is void of force or significance. On
the other hand, taking the reference to the marshy banks, overgrown with shrubs, trees, and
reeds, which were the natural haunts of lions, the comparison is most striking, Just as in the
reedy thickets of the Euphrates lions hid themselves, so in the rank vegetation which abounded
on the banks of Jordan, especially between the Sea of Tiberias and the Lake Merom,
affording shelter for wild boars, tizers, bears, and lions. Maundrell says the banks are in some

ts so wooded that the traveller cannot see the river at all until he has fought his way
through the tangled and lofty growths. How would the prophet do in the wooded haunts of
wild beasts? Ver. 14. ‘‘ Hl neighbours:” in 2 Kings xxiv. 2, are mentioned the Syrians,
Moabites, and Ammonites; and in Ps, exxxvii. the Edomites also. The Idumeans and
Philistines likewise joined themselves to the Chaldean power; and all these nations, being in
the vicinity of the Jews, made use of their opportunity for molesting Judah.

6. Natural History.—Ver. 9. “Speckled bird :” the interpretation of YII¥ OYiT is dis-
puted. Gesenius and the LXX. render it hyena ; thus “a ravenous beast, the hyena.” But
OY always elsewhere means bird of prey (ef. Isa. xlvi. 11, xviii. 6, &c.). The word YIQ¥


as an adjective is naturally derived from yay, to tinge or dye. By this parti-coloured or


speckled bird is probably meant a vulture. It is a familiar fact in natural history that birds,
and especially birds of prey, will unite in attacking an intruder whose appearance is distinctive
and peculiar. But birds of prey are not known thus to attack hysnas. Ver. 12. “High
places through the wilderness” (see notes on chap. iii. 2), t¢., “the bare-topped hills of the
desert.” “DI, is the name for such parts of the country as were suited only for rearing and


Tt = ©


pasturing cattle, like the eo-called wilderness of Judah to the west of the Dead Sea” (Keil).

1, Literary Oriticisms.—Ver. 1. “Let me talk with Thee of judgments :” rather, Yet will I speak
with Thee on a matter of right.—(Speaker’s Com.). “ Wherefore are all they happy that deal
very treacherously?” Rather, secure, tranquil, at ease ; who “deal faithlessly (Keil) ;
“ practise knavery” (Lange); “ prevaricate prevarications ” (Septuagint)—which is truer to the
Heb. 322 %TI3, Ver. 3. “Pull them out like sheep.” PDA, to tear, pull away with


violence: although, in Judges xx. 32, the gentler signifieance of to draw or lead is given.
Properly the sta implies foxes and violence. Ver. 4. ° He shalt not see our last end ;:” the
LXX. refer the seeing to God, thus : odx byera: 6 Geds dd0ds HuGr ; and Rosen., Ewald, and others
interpret the meaning as, God will pay no heed to our fate, so that we may act as we choose
anpunished! Graf refers “he shall not see” to J eremiah ; becanse “‘ they ” (the wicked, ver. 1)
intended to destroy him (Hitgzig) ; or because his threatenings against us wili not come to pass
(Keil). Henderson takes the word as smpersonad, snd renders them, ‘‘no one shall see our


OmaP. XII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.





end;” 4.¢., it shall not be realised, we shall not be destroyed. Ver. 5. “Contend with horses; ’
from the root TW, to burn ; Hith., to be eager, be hot, The Vulgate has given “ contend,”


Ver. 6. “ oe ave pate @ multitude after thee ;” NOD (here rendered ‘‘ m ultttude”) has been


given aa “in a troop,” “in a mass,” ‘‘ with a full voice :” the last is most correct (as in ch, iv.
5 ; see notes) ; loudly, lustily, vehemently : as being an adverb, “ After thee:” i.¢., behind
thee, The sentence suggests that they would follow the prophet with a clamorous hue and
cry. Ver. 9. ‘* Come to devour :" t.¢., Cause them to come, bring them. Ver, 11. “ They have
made % desolate:” the Heb. word is impersonal: One has set tt for a desolation ; or set tt


is an utter desolation. Wer. 14. “That touch the inheritance:” ¥3), to touch an enemy, to
attack (cf. Zech. ii 12). “<7 will pluck them out, . . . and pluck out the house of Judah :”’ a pro-


mise of two removals; the Kesthen from the land of Canaan, and the Jews from the land of
the heathen.


HOMILIES ON SECTIONS OF CHAPTER XII.


Section 1-6. Complaint that treachery prospers; admonitory warnings gives.
»  ¢-18. God’s faithless people abandoned to desolation.
» 14-17. Penalty for oppressors, mercy for penitents,


Ver. 1-6. CoMPLAINT THAT TREACHERY PROSPERS; ADMONITORY
WARNINGS GIVEN.


Affairs seemed to Jeremiah all discordant with God’s righteousness: he must
plead with Him respecting them. He speaks to God humbly yet honestly about
the difficulty he finds in interpreting God’s ways with men; letting the treacherous
prosper, allowing the godly to suffer. Learn how to go “boldly to the throne of
grace :” take all burdens, and open all our thoughts fully to God: “ casting all our
cares upon Him.”

I. A bewildered soul making complaint of wrong. For it seemed wrong to
the prophet. 1. Impiety enjoyed every luxury and advantage: “the wicked
prosper ;” the treacherous are “happy” or at ease (ver. 1). 2. God Himself
appeared to favour them. That was the blinding mystery: “ Thou hast planted
them ;” and they continue to “grow” and “bring forth fruit” (ver. 2), as if God
would allow nothing to harm them, It would have been different had there been
no God to execute justice and judgment in the earth. 3. Hypocrisy was employed
asa disguise. God was “near in their mouth, but far from their reins;” yet
surely the All-seeing One could detect the blasphemous fraud ; He would not be
deceived, and reward this religious pretence with prosperity as if it were sincere |
4, Godliness seemed left unvindicated. Jeremiah could not attempt to exalt his own
loyalty to God and love of truth against this prevalent hypocrisy ; yet “Thou,
O Lord, knowest me,” &c. (ver. 3.) Nevertheless, while God appeared to favour
the wicked, he, His servant, was left to suffer! 5. Indignation against transgressors
utters itself. ‘‘ Pull them out like sheep,” d&e. (ver. 3): the prophet’s incensed soul
rises into impatience, he adventures to appeal to Jehovah as to what should be
done to them. This seems daring, but observe that: 6. Holy patriotesm impelled
his remonstrance with God. ‘‘ How long shall the land mourn?” &c. (ver. 4): the
“wickedness” of these men was working havoc and ruin on his loved country ;
and while they revelled in iniquity they arrogated to themselves safety—‘ He
shall not see our last end” (see Literary Criticism on words). All this “vexed
his righteous soul.”

Il. A wearied sufferer admonished of heavier trials. No word of comfort
or explanation from God in return to this complaint: only prophecy of greater
ills. It indicates: 1. Z’hat evtl must be allowed to reach maturity ere God will
énterpose. These men would go on “from iniquity unto iniquity.” They
may evjoy immunity for awhile, but their measure is being filled up. Malignity
against God’s prophet was reaching more and more to the very heart of the nation
(ver. 6); then no word from God through him would receive the faintest regard ;
not a willing listener would be left : God held back the vindication of His prophet,
and His own righteousness, till the last hour of hope had beer abused,

246


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. CHAP. ¥IK





3. God's witnesses must not expect immunity from hardships, Fidelity entails
hostility, In every calling it is so. The more virulent the evil around, the more
fidelity is needed, yet the more will the faithful have to endure. Jeremiah’s trials
would enlarge (ver. 5), for the people’s wickedness was becoming more daring
(ver, 6), We must expect the penalties of godliness, must not shrink from
ordeals, “ Endure hardness as good soldiers of Jesus Christ.”

_ 3. Darker days are foretold so that preparation may be sought. That is the
lesaon of verse 5. The evils from which you suffer, and of which you now com-
plain, will grow more appalling: “ how wilt thou do?” Is there in you a timid
heart, a shrinking from the stern experiences incident to your holy work? More
need of grasping God firmly, trusting Him implicitly, leaving all issues with
Him, and drawing from Him “strength to be made perfect in your weakness,”


“We may boldly say, The Lord is my helper, I will not fear what man shall do
unto me.”


Ver. 7-13. Gon’s Farraiess Prorpte ABANDONED To DESOLATION.


Note here, that Jeremiah had complained to God of having suffered from the
hostility of his people and even his own family: now, in turn, Jehovah tells His
prophet that the nation had turned upon Him with an appalling malignity, as a
“lion roaring against Him ” (ver. 8). God had suffered more griefs and wrongs
from His people than had Jeremiah. The enmity showed by his “ house ” (ver. 6)
to Jeremiah was only a symbol of the enmity of God’s “ house” (ver. 7) to Him.
The sore penalty is, “I have given over the dearly beloved of my soul to her
enemies.”

iL The downfall of the nation was occasioned by no want of love on God’s
part for Judah. He may cherish a people still, may ‘love the world,” may
yearn towards the sinner, and yet God’s love may not avail to shield the wicked
from the consequences of guilt. Right cannot abdicate even to Love.

II. The abandonment of Judah to her foes was necessitated by her having
become herself God’s foe. Though He loved her, she set herself against Him as
@ roaring lion (ver. 8). One whom God loves may therefore unite with God’s
ae 1. In the attitude of defiance ; 2. In the experience of God’s displeasure
ver. 8).

III. The penalties of Divine abandonment are utterly desolating. As
God’s favour is life, so is His hatred death: Jerusalem’s punishment must
be severe as if inflicted by one who held her in abhorrence.. 1. Having ranked
herself with God’s foes, she ts given over to her enemies (ver. 7, 9). 2. Having
repudiated God’s minister (Jeremiah), alien “pastors” are called upon the sacred
land (ver. 10). 3. Desolation without pity (ver. 11), and devastation without
restraint (ver. 12), would ensue. 5. “The fierce anger of the Lord” would
reduce the people to dismay and shame; their crops a failure; their defences
against a siege, which had cost them “ pain” to contrive, would prove profitless ;
and their “revenues” in which they relied would purchase them no protection
from the devouring ‘‘ sword of the Lord.”


Ver. 14-17. Penatty ror Oppressors, Mrroy ror PENITENTS,


“The spoilers of the Lord’s heritage are also to be carried off out of their land :
but after they, like Judah, have been punished, the Lord will have pity on them,
and will bring them back one and all into their own land. And if the heathen,
who now seduce the people of God to idolatry, learn the ways of God’s people and
be converted to the Lord, they shall receive citizenship amongst God’s people, and
be built up amongst them; but if they will not do so, they shall be ae


OMAP, EEL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.








Thus will the Lord manifest Himself before the whole earth as righteous Judge,
and through judgment secure tho weal not only of Israel, but of the heathen
peoples too.”— Kel.

Here is a message of mercy blended with judgment to the nations bordering
upon the land of Judah, who had been, or would be, injurious to the peace of
God’s people. Obs.

I. To touch with unhallowed hand the heritage of God’s people is
criminal (ver. 14). 1. The godly are often closely pressed by ungodly neighbours,
2. God permits those whom we copy in wrong-doing to become our oppressors.
3. Yet He watches jealously over the possessions as well as the persons of His
people. 4. And will hold them guilty of sacrilege who touch Israel’s inheritance,
5, Their oppression shall return in kind upon themselves: “I will pluck them
out of their land.”

IL The compassion of Jehovah embraces peoples outside of His covenant
(ver. 15). God has uncovenanted mercies to bestow, even on such as (1) had
wronged His people—compare Saul of Tarsus ; (2) had: incurred Israel’s hate, as
these “evil neighbours” did: yet God is not implacable even to the enemies of His
people (Col. i. 21). 1. God’s judgments are ever tempered and followed by com-
passion. 2. His graciousness to wrong-doers designs to restore to them all which
their sinfulness forfeited. 3. The godly should cherish a comprehensive charity
as wide as God’s compassion.

It. Preparation for the experience of Divine mercy is essential. 1. God
discriminates and selects the objects of His compassion: not extended to all re
gardless of their state and conduct. 2. The sinner must make earnest efforts if he


would avert judgment and inherit the mercy (ver. 16).


3. With what sacred


favours God crowns the life that allies itself to Him: though “ not of Israel,” united


to Israel, “built in the midst of My people.”
judgment without alleviation (ver. 17).


4, But the rebellious shall receive
True equally for nations, families,


individuals: grace is offered ; abuse it, and only severity can ensue.


HOMILIES AND COMMENTS ON VERSES OF CHAPTER XI,


Ver. 1. Theme: Gon’s RIGHTEOUS-
NESS: ITS BAFFLING ANOMALIES.

This is the objection which unbelievers
urge against Providence in all ages, and
the difficulty which the godly often
feel. Since the Mosaic covenant re-
cognised the administrations of righteous-
ness in this life, many Old Testament
saints stumbled before the mysteries
(of. Job xii. 6, xxi. 7; Psalms xxxvii.
1, 35, lxxiii. 3; Malachi iii. 15).

I. The broad operations of Divine
righteousnesstrustfully acknowledged.
“‘ Righteous art Thou, O Lord.” A firm
conviction of the rectitude of God’s
character; ergo, of His proceedings,
despite anomalies. It is well that we
get on to this broad rock when per-
plexities, like riotous waves around,
make us afraid, and the spray blinds
oureyes. When hard thoughts of God’s
providence trouble us, rise up to this
wide truth—He is righteous, To con-

248


centrate our thoughts on a narrow line
of vision may mislead us: look over
the ages, the course of human history,
the laws which assert themselves in man’s
experience, the Divine rule over the
world, the vindication of His righteous-
ness on Calvary, the witness of a
righteous God in every conscience ; and
this broad view compels the acknow-
ledgment.

It. The particular administrations
of Divine righteousness anxiously
questioned. “ Wherefore doth the way
of the wicked prosper,” d&e. The
worldly comfort and success of these
Anathoth conspirators seemed to con-
fate God’s righteousness. (See on See-
tion of chapters, supra.) “It is a
common grievance to live and experience
that the ungodly are prosperous and the
godly are unfortunate” (Cramer). “A
difficulty to many wise and good men;


they see the designs and projects of


HOMILETIC OOMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





OHAP, Hii.





wicked people successful, their affairs
and concerns prosper. Hypocrites are
chiefly meant (as appears, ver. 2), who
dissemble in their good professions ”
(Henry). These “ dealt treacherously ”
not only with God’s servant, but with
Jehovah Himself. Yet they were pros-
perous and happy. £.g., Dionysius is
reported to have said that God favoured
the sacrilegious ; for he had sailed in
safety after having plundered temples and
perpetrated robberies, Wrong-doers seem
“in their lifetime to receive their good
things.” Sin looks the grand success.

IIL A fuller acquaintance with the
secrets of God’s righteousness solemnly
entreated. He would “plead with
God and talk with Him of judgments ;”
t.¢, reason the case, inquire into the
causes why the wicked are allowed to
succeed, or ask for a clearer vision of
the hidden workings of God’s providence,
to “see the end of the Lord.” We
have faulty sight; our gaze is clouded,
partial, dim; we have limited sight ;
our eye does not travel far enough ; we
cannot see afar off along the years; we
look at the near, at the present moment,
Watch, wait: God is working out of
our sight; His plans take in a longer
time than our impatience reckons.

“Can we conceive anything more
humane and gracious than our dear
Lord? We know beforehand that we
are wrong; we do not doubt that He
does all well, yet it oppresses us.
Straight to our Lord, the eternal and
living God, with all our ill-humour,
doubt, care, scruples! Pour out your
heart before Him.”—Zinzendorf.

God allows our expostulations, in-
deed, welcomes us to such pleading ; and
the soul who “talks with” God of the
perplexities and difficulties which beset
him, will find that “light is sown for
the righteous,” and that—


‘* God is His own interpreter,
And He will make it plain.”


Ver. 3. Theme: A RIGHTEOUS SOUL
PLEADING WITH THE RIGHTEOUS Gop.

L. Value of conscious integrity. It
enables the soul to go before the Lord
unabashed, boldly, with filial trust, as-
sured of acceptance.


IL Appeal to Divine omniscience.
The “ pure in heart” shrink not from
the searching light o: God’s eye. A
joy to the sincere that the All-seeing
knows his whole life and inmost
thoughts.

III. Oonsolations of holy innocence.
It flings off slander, is a shield from
conspirators, sustains the soul in per-
secution, and gives inward comfort
amid surrounding strife.

IV. Indignation against malevolent
wrong-doers. They seemed to hinder
and refute God’s providential righteous-
ness, and to cast discredit upon His
wise and beneficent rule, Let them
“reap what they have sown,” and thus
witness to God’s antipathy towards sin
and His friendship towards innocence.
A sufferer at the hands of sinners can
lawfully entertain such feelings; yet
the Gospel attitude towards persecutors
is—‘ Pray for (not against) them that
despitefully use you,” and leave God in
His own way to vindicate His righteous
providence, and show His approval of
His loyal servants,


Ver. 4. Theme: D1saSTERS CONSE-
QUENT UPON SIN.

“The land mourned,” indicating gene-
ral misery ; probably a drought (see xiv.
2, &c.). The cause of this was “ wicked-
ness,” 1%¢, wWwrong-doing, oppression,
rapine, violation of the rights of property
and sanctities of home ; criminal doings
which carried dismay and sorrow every-
where. “The wicked were in great
power.”

I. What miseries sinners inflict on
society. They can make a whole
“land mourn.” Think of the devasta-
tions wrought by habitual intemperance,
reckless speculations in commerce, cir-
culation of obscene literature, profana-
tion of religion, virulent assaults on
faith, allurements of the young to evil
courses of life, dsc. Homes are invaded
with evils worse than bereavement ;
society is infested with moral plagues
which destroy virtue and honour and
reciprocal faith ; churches are robbed of
the hopeful seekers after God. Sinners
are cruel destroyers; they ruin not
themselves alone.

249


CHAP. Xil.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR.





IL What outrages sinners commit
against Divine law. ‘‘ Wickedness”
interrupts the beneficent action of the
ordained laws of Heaven. Personal
happiness and social prosperity are the
natural issues of God’s laws. ‘ Wicked-
ness” outrages those laws, works against
them, breaks down the banks of flow-
ing, fertilising rivers, and lets in a
destructive inundation. Jeremiah re-
cognised that this “ wickedness” was
an offence to God, as being a defiance of
His kindly laws, as well as an outrage
on society. Nations and societies and
individuals secure their weal by respect-
ing the right and obeying the will of
God. Miseries—as now in Judah’s
experience—follow upon the violation
of God’s laws, which are ordained for
human good.

TI. What delusions sinners practise
upon themselves. “They said, He
shail not see our last end” (comp. Ltt.
Crit. on words). 1. God will not see,
&c. : that affirms the theory that Jehovah
does not notice and punish human sin,
2. Jeremiah will not see, dc. : the pro-
phet’s threatenings are vapid and untrue ;
punishment will not follow upon our
wickedness. 3. No one shall see (im-
personal): our safety is in no wise tm-
perilled by our sins; man’s conduct
does not affect God, provokes no retri-
butive Providence, nor influences human
experience and destiny, so we need
not be apprehensive of ill, And thus,
in every age, self-beguiled sinners say,
“Peace, peace, whereas sudden destruc-
tion cometh upon them.”

Note, that there is a “last end” to
the career of “ wickedness.”


Ver. 5. Theme: THRE BACKWARD
GLANCE OF SORROW, AND THE FORWARD
GLANCE OF FEAR. ‘Jf those hast run
with the footmen and they wearied thee,
how canst thou contend with horses? and
tf in land of peace, &e., how in swellings
of Jordan?”

A contrast instituted between a state
of comparative quiet and peace and
one of great commotion and trouble ;
and from the remembrance of the pro-
phet’s weariness amid auspicious cir
cumstances, the inquiry arises as to

250


results likely to follow when all is ad
verse and perilous. Applies to all who
have found themselves weak in lessex
trials, yet before whom rises the pro-
spect of greater.

I, Sad recollections.

A review of the past with its hum-
bling memories. 1. Weariness was ex-
perienced when conflicting difficulties
were insignificant. Merely “running
with footmen,” with whom our own
strength and perseverance might for-
sooth be matched. 2. Weariness was
felt when external circumstances were
favourable. “In the land of peace they
wearied thee.” Amid even life’s com-
forts experienced “ vexation of spirit.”
Even in youth “ fainted and grew weary,
and young men utterly fell.”

II. Anxious forebodings.

A glance at the future with painful
misgivings. 1. Trials would be more
overwhelming with circumstances less
propitious, ‘ Horses;” “swellings of
Jordan.” Larger and more ominous,
When storms lower, afflictions come,
friends are gone, age upon us, death
lays hand upon our heart, eternity
looms before our gaze, with God and
judgment-seat.—“ How wilt thou do?”

2. This severer ordeal may come at a
time when least expected. As came the
inroads of the Chaldean army: cavalry
“horses,” the “ swelling,” or pride, per-
haps the ions of Jordan. Heavy trou-
bles, dreadful losses, desolating bereave-
ments, the event of death—who can
anticipate them ? :

III. Refuge desirable.

The need of a Helper suggested by
the prospect. For the prophet would
be unequal to the emergency. He would
want God, His presence, succour, and
hiding. ‘So shall we, or how shall we
do? Seek Him as

1. A Refuge suited to every emergency ;
whether “contending with horses,” or “in
the swellings of Jordan.”

2. A Refuge accessible tn every ex-
tremity.

Having Him, we can say: “I am
persuaded that neither death nor life,
&c., can separate me from the love of


God which is in Christ Jesug our
Tord,”


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


CHAP, Hii,


LL


Theme: Tue sweiinas or Jonpan.

Jeremiah had become impatient with
his troubles. God says to him: “If
you cannot stand these small trials and
persecutions, what are you going to do
when the greater come?” In a very
practical way, ask

I. If it is such a difficult thing to
get along without the religion of Jesus
Christ when things are comparatively
smooth, what shall we do amid the
overpowering misfortunes and disas-
ters of life that may come upon us?

If troubles, slow as footmen, surpass
us, what do when they take the fect of
herses? If now submerged with sorrows
because we have not the religion of Jesus
to comfort us, what do we when stand
in death? A sad thing to see men, all
unhelped by God, going out to fight the
giants of trouble, no promise of mercy
to soothe the soul, no rock of refuge in
which to hide. How compete when the
swift coursers of trouble come up for the
race ?

We have all yielded to temptation ;
been surprised afterwards that so small
an inducement could have decoyed us
from the right. But, if overthrown by
amall sins through lack of the religion
of Jesus, how can we stand up against


great ones?


IL. The great tides of eternity will


rise about us, and amid the swellings
of Jordan we must all quit this life.
Our natural courage will not hold out
then. The first dash of Jordan’s waves
will swamp all natural resources for
ever. We feel how sad it is for a man
to attempt this life without religion ;
but how will he feel when the shadows of
the last hour gather about his pillow?
If the religion of Christ is so important
for us amid life’s troubles and tempta-
tions, and in the hour of death, how
much more important in the great eter-
nity! You will want Christ. When
the world is going away from your grasp,
and all the lights that shine about you
are going out, and friends around you
can do you no good, and you feel your
feet slipping from beneath you,—then
you will want Jesus to stand close by
you, and hold you up amid “the swell-
ines of Jordan.”— De Wstt Talmage.


Theme : Toe CHRIstTIah =» TRIUMPH.

One who had fought many battles,
and seldom, if ever, lost any, was asked
to what he attributed his retnarkable
success, He replied, “I owe it, under
God, to this, that I made it a rule never
to despise an enemy.” To what warfare
is this so applicable as to the Christian’s ¢
Those conflicts were best maintained
which we counted most hazardous,
Estimate your foes: “If run with foot
men and wearied, how contend with
horses?” The difficulty implied by this
proverb appears in this—

I. That man is less a match for
Satan now than when Satan, at their
first encounter, proved himself more
than a match for man.

Defeated in Eden, where can man now
hope for success? Overcome in our
state of innocence, what triumph can we
effect in our state of guilt? None apart
from Christ.

II. If we were overcome by sin ere
it had grown into strength, we are
now less able to resist it.

If we could not turn the stream near
its mountain-cradle, how shall we turn
the river that pours its flood into the
sea? Sin gains power ., time and
habit. Some things weaken and wear
away by use, but not the power of sin
All sinners, as well as “ seducers, wax
worse and worse.” Overcome by sin when
it was weak, how hope to resist it when
strong? By H%s grace alone, with whom
nothing is impossible: “I can do all
things through Christ who strengtheneth
me.” Thus can “they that are accus-
tomed to do evil learn to do well.”

If. How these contending forces are
to be overcome.

Renew the combat, never surrender;
“Hope in God.” Recall how Peter,
‘“‘wearied by the footmen,” nobly and
successfully “ contended with horses ”—a
coward before the maid in the judgment-
hall, yet bold before the judges, de-
claring he would not keep silence, but
would “obey God rather than man.”
God makes good His promises—“ My
grace is sufficient for thee ;” “one man
shall chase a thousand ;” “he that is
feeble among them shall be as David,
and David shall be as God.” we His

25


CHAR XT.





presence we may contend with greatest
difficulties ; and, clinging to Jesus, may
go down undaunted even into “the
swellings of Jordan.”-—“ Way to Life,”
Thomas Guthrie, DD.

Note: “The argument is a fortiori.
A proverbial phrase. The injuries done
thee by the men of Anathoth (‘foot-
men’) are small compared with those
which the men of Jerusalem (‘horse-
men’) are about to inflict on thee. If
the former ‘weary thee’ out, ‘how wilt
thou contend with’ the king, the court,
and the priests at Jerusalem? If in the
caitpaign country alone thou art secure,
how wilt thou do when thou fallest into
the wooded haunts of wild beasts ?”—
Critical Bible.

i. While we are in this world we
must expect troubles and difficulties.

ii. God’s usual method being to begin
with smaller trials, it is our wisdom to
expect greater than any we have yet
met with.

iii. It highly concerns us to prepare
for such trials, and to consider what we
should do in them.

iv. In order to our preparation for
further and greater trials, we are con-
cerned to approve ourselves well in
present smaller trials, to keep hold on
the promise, keep in our way, and, with
our eye on the prize, so run that we may
obtain.— Henry.


Ver. 6. Theme; TREACHERY CROUCH-
ING BEHIND FAIR WORDS. In the perilous
times nearing, Jeremiah’s own relatives
would raise the hue and cry after him,
or seek by “fair words” to allure him
from his mission.

I. Godliness may estrange family
relationships. ‘Even thy brethren,
&c., dealt treacherously.”

If. Guilesome words will assay to
decoy the faithful from his fidelity.
‘Speak fair words unto thee.”

III. Insidious speech from the un-
godly is not to be believed. It is like
the serpent’s voice to Eve. “Believe
them not!”

1V. Refusal to heed guilesome words
will provoke abusive raillery. ‘Cried
loudly after thee.” (See Lit. Crit. on
words. }

252


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JBREMIAH.


V. Treachery will attack the godly
from most covert scenes. In the very
“house of thy father,” and from thine
own “ brethren.”

VI. Ceaseless watchfulness and un
swerving constancymust be maintained.
“Watch and pray, lest ye enter into
temptation.” Pause not to heed any
“fair words,” even when loved ones of
the home softly and gently “speak”
them: heed God alone. “He that
loveth father, mother, brethren, d&c.,
more than Me, is not worthy of Me.”
* A man’s foes shall be they of his own
household.”

Note: ‘“ Hven thy brethren.” Abel
was slain by his own brother; Paul
suffered most from his own countrymen ;
Christ found no little depreciation at the
hands of those near akin.

“ They have called a multitude after
thee.” Trapp comments, “Or with fuli
mouth—Clamant post te pleno gutture—
as those did against Christ who cried,
‘ Crucify Him, crucify Him ;’ and those
against Paul, ‘ Away with such fellows
from the earth ;’ and those against the
primitive Christians, ‘Christianos ad
leones.’ ‘In Rhodanum, in Rhodanum,
cried many at Geneva against Farellus,
their faithful preacher, ‘Into the river
with him ;’ but God preserved him from
their fury, for the good of many other
cities after that converted by him.





Ver. 7. Theme: CHERISHED TREA
SURES CONSIGNED TO FOES,

God seems here to use most endearing
terms in order to mark the dreadful
desolation about to overtake Judah.
This heartless people boasted in the
thought that they were God’s “ heri-
tage,” His “dearly beloved;” yet,
instead of valuing their high estate in
grace, they presumed upon tt, trifled with
it, and even set themselves lion-like
(ver. 8) against their benignant spiritual
Benefactor. And their lofty distinction
24a people, which should have prompted
them to proportionate jealousy to remain
worthy of tt and act in harmony there-
with, led to spiritual pride and national
degeneracy. Observe:

I. How God lingers fondiy over thi,
objects of His gracious regard. As


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH,





if reluctant to think other than loving
thoughts of them: enumerates all that
was attractive, “house, heritage, be-
loved of My soul,” as if He would keep
the good and beautiful in His sight, and
thereby hide from Himself the loath-
some.

“ House” may mean Temple ; “hert-
tage,” the goodly land ; “ beloved,” the
people whom God had chosen and
cherished. Note how He—

1. Asserts His claim. “ Mine house,
mene heritage,” &e.

2. Keveals His love. Language in-
stinct with affection: “The dearly be-
loved of My soul.”

‘*Loved us notwithstanding all.”


3. Laments His loss. Theirs would
be the greater loss far ; God alienated,
themselves expatriated from their
country, &ec.; yet God grieves to lose
His children: “‘ How can I give thee up?”

II. How God necessarily withdraws
from those who violate their sacred
relationship.

l. He ww not first, but last in alien-
ating Himself. “Slow to anger, and of
great kindness.” Separation between
humanity and Jehovah began with
humanity: Adam’s sin. Separation
between the srdividual and God begins
with the individual :


“ Heaven lies about us in our infancy ;”


but wickedness banishes God as the life
advances. Separation between the
heart and God begins with the heart ;
doubts and hard thoughts admitted, or
‘iniquity is regarded in the heart,” and
hence the withdrawal of God. ‘ Your
sins have hid His face from you,” &c.
(Isa. lix. 2).

2. He cannot perpetuate a violated
relationship. It would be unrighteous
in itself, and injurious in its results.

3. He wholly abandons the faithless,
“TI have given—into the hand of her
enemies,” For there is no other alter-
native ; either in God’s love, or in the
grasp of foes.

II. How God permits those who
revolt from Him to suffer appropriate
penalties. The correlate fact to ‘‘ I have
forsaken,” is that Judah should be “ en
the hand of her enemies.” It was only


Oa. X11





by Jehovah keeping near that enemies
were kept afar.

1. They forfeit His providentia:
protection.

2. Enemies are alert to seize as
prey those whom God does not defend
and befriend.

3. Their own resources of security and
strength are futile.

4, A melancholy reversion of their
former estate of privilege. ‘The
dearly beloved ” of God in her enemies’
hand! Such repudiation of God’s love
has but one alternative: “delivered over
to Satan,” consigned to the foe of God
and man.


Another outline :

I. Pre-eminent spiritual distinction.
Raised into highest privilege, honour,
and blessedness,

II. False grounds of assurance.
Presumed upon her advantages, and
violated the conditions of retaining
them.

III. Glaring abuse of Divine graee.
Her enjoyment of God’s tender love
makes her faithlessness the more crim-
inal and abominable.

IV. Merited retribution. The
“dearly beloved” given over to those
who hated her, “ her enemies.” Even
worse: the loving Jehovah Himself
came to “‘hate His once cherished “ heri-
tage” (ver. 8).

How repugnant is sin to God! What
dire results ensue to determined and
defiant wrong-doers! The brighter the
light, the blacker the darkness of its
shadows ; 80 the more “ dearly beloved,”
the more terrible, the “ outer darkness ”
of being “hated” by the Lord !

Starke comments: The heart of a
believer is God’s most cherished abode,
but if man corrupt it with wilful sin,
God must forsake His house (Isa.
lix.-2).

Comments :

Ver. 8. “ Mine heritage ts unto me
as a lion in the forest.” One’s heritage
and patrimony is, we know, his delight.
God shows that He was in His own
heritage as though He was in @ vast and
wild forest, and the fields which ought
to have been His delight were become

253


GHAP, XIz,


SOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: JEKLMIAR,





places of the greatest horror, as though
a lion were roaring and raging. —Calvin,

Judah has not merely refused obedi-
ence, but shown itself intractable and
fierce like an untamed lion. It has
roared against God with open blas-
phemy.—Speaker’s Com.

The reason why Jehovah gives up His
people for a prey—it has behaved to
God like a lion, te, has opposed Him
fiercely like a furious beast. Therefore
He must withdraw His love.—Keil.

Ver. 9. The form of the verse is
interrogative: Js My heritage unto Me
as a speckled bird? Are birds of prey
round about her? As around a strange
bird—probably here a vulture—other
cation birds collect and cruelly abuse it,
so would Judah’s foes surround and de-
stroy her ; for God summons also “all
the beasts of the field” to “ devour”
her.


Ver. 10-13. Theme; COMPLETE DE-
VASTATION OF THE LAND.

God speaks of this utter desolation
of the land by the Chaldean army as a
thing done ; so near, so sure was it.

i, See with what a tender affection He
speaks of this land, notwithstanding the
sinfulness of it, in remembrance of His
covenant, and the tribute of honour and
glory He had formerly had from it. It
is ‘My vineyard, My portion, My plea-
sant portion” (ver. 10). Note, God
has a kindness and concern for His
Church, though there be much amiss
in it.

ii. See with what a tender compassion
He speaks of the desolations of this land.
“Many pastors have destroyed My vine-
yard,” without any consideration either
of the value of it or of My interest in it ;
they have with greatest tnsolence and
indignation “ trodden it under foot,”


and that which was a pleasant land.


they have made “a desolate wilderness.”
The destruction was universal: “ the
whole land is made desolate” (ver.
11). Itis made s0 by the sword of war ;
“the spoilers,” the Chaldean soldiers,
“have come through the plain upon all
high places” (ver. 12), made themselves
masters of all the natural fastnessee and
artificial fortresses. ‘No flesh shall
254


eS


have peace ;” all have corrupted thely
way—none shall have peace,

iii. See whence all this misery comes.
1. From the displeasure of God: it is
“the sword of the Lord that devours ”
(ver. 12). It was the “ fierce anger of
the Lord” (ver. 13), which kindled this
fire among them, and made their enemies
so furious. 2. It is their sin that has
made God their enemy. Though the
land ‘ mourneth unto Me,” pouring out
its complaint over desolation before
God, the inhabitants are so senseless and
stupid that “none of them lays it to
heart,” unaffected by God’s displeasure,
while the very ground they go upon
shames them,

iv. See how unable they shall be to
guard against st (ver.13). “ They have
sown wheat,” ¢.¢., have taken pains for
their own security, but “shall reap
thorns,” what shall prove grievous and
vexatious to them. Instead of helping
themselves, they shall but make them-
selves more uneasy. “Ashamed of
your revenues,” that they have depended
so much upon their preparations for
war; and their silver and gold shall
“not profit” them in the day of the
Lord’s anger.—Henry.


Ver. 11. Theme: Unpitiep Misery.
“The whole land ts made desolate, be-
cause no man layeth tt to heart.”

Applicable to any scene where evl
thrives, where rutin goes on unchecked,
where ignorance, sin, and oppression
work human wretchedness and over-
throw.

Applicable to any special national
vice ; intemperance, poisonous literature,
polluted pleasure ; by which homes are
wrecked, youth betrayed, the country
weakened, wasted, or degraded.

Applicable to the scenes of heathenism,
where benighted souls droop, where
“the habitations of cruelty” rear them-
selves, where outrages on homes and con-
science and life are enacted in the name
of idolatry.

I. National woes should move us to
patriotic sorrow. We ought to “lay ¢
to heart” when our “land mourneth.”

1. As being ourselves a part oy the
nation ;” identified with it, therefore,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


OHAP, Kil.


oe


in quick sympathy with what happens
to it, feeling its sorrows and wrongs to
be our own. “If one member suffers,
all the members suffer with it.”

2. As being intrusted with responsi-
bilities toward our nation. We each
share the benefits of the commonwealth,
its laws, its protection, its commercial
and social security, dc., therefore, we
should to our ability protect its interests,
rectify its wrongs, take part in its strug-
gles, enter deeply into its great woes
and warts.

3. As being solicitous for our nation’s
weal. Fired with the patriotic spirit,
glowing with a sense of power to help
and alleviate and bless; realising the
service we can render to men and to
God in a life of wise and benevolent
enterprise, however lowly and obscure,
or however public and imposing. What
ean be done for my people’s good 4

II. Torpid indifference surrenders
a land to spoilers. ‘These “spoilers ”
were intent on their end (ver. 12) ; they
would capture and desolate the land.
Spoilers are still active and plotting,
seeking the young, the gay, the ambi-
tious, the intellectually vain, aiming at
their moral, social, mental, and spiritual
overthrow.

1. Indifference as to the menacing evils
which were gathering. No foresight, no
apprehension. Some sleep unsuspecting
till the enemy is at the gate. ‘‘ We are
not ignorant of his devices.” “ Watch
and pray that ye enter not into tempta-
tion.”

2. Indifference as to the real cause of
prevailing misery—trreligion. Many
seek to remedy ills without recognising
the spring and source. Neglect of God
explains human woe. But, ignoring the
fact that impiety is at the root, they
bring superficial ameliorations,

3. Indifference as to the Divinely-sent
calls to reform. God appealed by His
prophet to the nation to turn again to
Him. Had they complied, the desola-
tion would have been averted ; but they
cared not to hear the sacred message.
So still the people sink into the power
of sin, pleasure, worldliness, atheism,
which bring desolations, because they
deswise God’s messages, repudiate the


Gospel of Christ, turn from the only
Saviour of .sinners, whose healing grace
remedies human woes, and rectifies all
the desolations sin has wrought.

III. Scenes of desolation summon
us to holy endeavour. “Lay it to
heart,” not as an idle sentiment, but an
inspiration to help.

l. Christianity commissions tts fol-
lowers to helpful work. It is the mean-
ing of the Saviour’s own example:
“Seek and save that which is lost.” It
is the teaching of the New Testament :
“Go and do likewise,” ¢.e., as did the
good Samaritan to the man who had
fallen among thieves, find your neigh-
bour in the first sufferer you meet
Christianity makes missionaries, philan-
thropists, patriots of its disciples.

2. Where the spoiler has desolated,
there the Christian must go. With a
heart pitying the fallen, the perishing,
and the blighted. ‘“ Into all the world.”
“To the help of the Lord against the
mighty.”


Ver. 14, Theme: A TRIPLE CONSOLA-
TION. Equally true of the Church of
Christ as of the kingdom of Judah.

L God is watching, and will punish
the adversaries of His people.

1. They environ her; “evil neigh-
bours.”

3. They molest her: “touch the in-
heritance ”—her truths, her sacred joys,

3. They invade her holy scenes: in-
trude upon sacred soil; her sanctuary,
to spoil its services; the privacy of
prayer, to mar the soul’s fellowship, &c.

4. Yet the Divine Friend of His
people observes our foes ; is “against”
them, and therefore on our part; and
will reguite the evil done to them that
are His.

If. God has purposes of grace for
His suffering people.

I. Even though their own wickedness
explains their being im the hand of foes.

2. Yet He will not abandon them to
their “ewl neighbours ;” for our foes
are not to be allowed the enjoyment of
their successes. God has no favour
towards His people’s enemies; they
shall be dispossessed of “the inherit-
ance which I have caused ee es to

255


Cap, Xi,


——


Inherit.” Though the guilty take our
peace from us, they shall not enjoy it;
“no peace to the wicked.” Though
they deprive us of our hopes, they
shall not inherit them: “having no
hope.”

3. God will reclaim His people to
Himself. “I will pluck out the house
of Judah from among them.” He did
this from the hands of Judah’s enemies,
restoring her to her heritage again ; and
“He will pluck out our feet from the
net,” deliver our souls from the spoiler,
and save Hie Church from the sophis-
tries of her foes (ver. 15).

III. God designs that even His
people’s enemies shall be converted
unto Him. It would eventuate in the
good of Judah’s “evil neighbours” for
her to be temporarily scattered into their
lands, and for those neighbours to
occupy Judah’s heritage.

1. It brought them into contact with
Divine realities ; gave them knowledge
of the religion of Judah. Those who
entered her land could “ walk about
Zion,” and learn something of the
worship of Jehovah and the sacred
oracles ; whereas those people among
whom Judah was dispersed could
“ diligently learn the ways of My people,
to swear by My name” (ver. 16). It
offered them opportuntty.

2. The results proved a blessing to the
heathen. Many were converted to the
Lord. So our Lord’s crucifixion, His
prayer for His enemies, availed to the
conquest of some who saw and heard.
The dispersion of the Early Church by
Saul led to the conversion of many
elsewhere. Foes are being won to-day
even while assailing truth and ill-using
Christ’s followers.

3. Converted enemies would then be-
come united with God's people: “Be
built in the midst of My people” (ver.
16); a place given to them within her
borders, and a share in her spiritual
privileges: Gentiles gathered into Israel;
sinners and even enemies drawn into
Christ’s Church. ‘He who persecuted
the Church in times past now preacheth
the faith which once he destroyed”
(Gal. i 23). (Addenda on verse.)


256





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; JEREMIAR.





Ver. 15. Theme: PROGRESSIVE AOTS
OF REDEMPTION.

The complete work of Divine grace
is not effected in one act; it distributes
itself into distinct parts, sometimes into
distant periods. As in the instance of
these Jews and their neighbours, so in
the experience of the sinner, God’s
redeeming work is accomplished by
progressive stages.

I. Rescue. “I have plucked them
out.” Divine deliverance—from wrong
scenes, alien countries; or “from the
horrible pit and miry clay;” or
“plucked as a brand from the burn-
ing ;” or “delivered from the bondage
of corruption ;” or “translated from the
power of darkness into the kingdom of
God’s dear Son.” In any aspect of the
experience, it is the initial incident in
the process of redemption—rescue.

IL Reconciliation. ‘I will return,
and have compassion on them.” The
coming back of the alienated God to the
rescued soul, Not in judgment, nor to
mark iniquity, nor to chide, but to cover
over the whole evil past with the fulness
of Divine “‘ compassion.” Blotting out
transgression, drawing the rescued one
near to the personal love of God in ex-
perience of renewed favour. ‘O Lord,
I will praise Thee; though Thou wast
angry with me, Thine anger is turned
away, and Thou comfortest me.” “God
was in Christ, reconciling the world unto
Himself, not imputing their trespasses
unto them.”

Ill. Restitution. “I will bring
them again, every man to his heritage,
and every man to his land.” What sin
had forfeited grace will restore. All
which we have lost by altenation from
God—peace, purity, happiness, holiness,
heaven, is restored by redemption. 1,
Individual restitution : “every man ;”
for God overlooks none, not even “the
least of all saints.” 2. Complete restitu-
tion: “ to his heritage,” the blessings to
which he was born; the comforts and
joys and privileges which would always
have remained man’s but for his self-
impoverishing sinfulness: ‘Father,
give me the portion of goods that falleth
to me.” Also, “to his land,” the home
and destiny for which his heart craves


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIad.,





And “our conversation is in heaven.”
“Every one of them shall appear in
Zion before God.”


Ver. 16.
THE CaURCH.

And tlese were mutually antagon-
istic. 1. Politically; “Judah,” and
“evil neighbours ;” a historic antipathy
estranged them, a national enmity sepa-
rated them. 2. Religiously: each re-
pudiated the other’s religion, and derided
their object or objects of worship. They
were determined, avowed, and implac-
able foes,

Is there any meeting-ylace of union,
any common centre of reconciliation for
such? Yes, in Christ ; in the Church of
Emmanuel. “ Other sheep I have, which
are not of this fold ; them also will J
bring, that there may be one fold and
one Shepherd.”

I. The standard of qualification. All
must “loaru the ways” of God’s peuple,
and “swear by Jehvval’s name,”

1. Renewal of life. “ Cast off the
works of darkness. and put on the
armour of light.” To “learn the ways”
of God’s people implies antipathy re-
moved, the mind and heart allured to
assent to a “newness of life,” and 80
full a reformation of conduct as to be-
come assimilated to God’s people—(a.)
In practical godliness; (b.) in homage
and service of the Lord. For “the
ways” of God’s people are these—
holy liviug and godly service.

2. Allegiance to the Lord. “Swear
by My name, the Lord liveth” (comp.
notes on chap. iv. 2). This means (a)
renunciation of other gods; (b) loyal
attachment to Jehovah; (c) open pro-
fession of religion.

II. The process of preparation.
“ Learn.”

1. By observation. Seeing what
Judah did. Men watch the righteous,
end feel the force of example. The
Christian life is as a “ light shining in
darkness ;” men “see their good works,”
are influenced by the piety of their
walk ; and antagonism dies as they ob-
serve their “ ways.”

2. By imitation, From the example
of the Jews among these “ neighbours ”

R


Theme: ALIENS UNITED IN





OHAP. Xi


there would be going out the continual
eall, “Come with us, we will do you
good ; for the Lord hath spoken good
concerning His people.” Also, persuasive
words of teaching and entreaty could be
spoken to those who were without, in-
viting them to join with God’s people.
And thus they would “learn the ways,”
and adopt them. Even as these
heathen had beforetime “taught Judah
to swear by Baal,” and thus allured
them from Jehovah.

Qualification is progressive: it is the
issue of learning. The alien becomes
transformed by a gradual process into a
“fellow-citizen of the saints and of the
household of God.”

Il. The realisation of union. “They
shall be built in the midst of My
people.” The stranger and the citizen
established in Zion. The foe of Christ
united to His followers in the Church.
“One in Christ Jesus.” “ Gathered
together in one.”

1. Alienations and distinctions are
annihilated there. A sacred sympathy
and a common heritage in God’s grace
obliterate all antipathies. Nationality
is lost in realisation of a heavenly citi-
genship: “there is neither Jew nor
Greek, circumcised nor uncircumcised,
barbarian, Scythian, bond or free, but
all are one in Christ Jesus,”

2. 4 common Divine relationship
unites all together. “Built in the
midst of My people,”—4.¢., tdentified
with and included among ‘‘ My people.”
“‘ All ye are brethren.” ‘One family,
we dwell in Him,” The Church of
Christ is on earth the meeting-place of
all, irrespective of nationality or social
gradation, who belong to the brotherhood
and household of faith.


Ver. 17. Theme: THE 188UE OF PER-
SISTENT ALIENATION,

God opened the door of reconciliation
to them: His people would have taught
them their “ways;” they might have
become partakers of all Judah’s privi-
leges, and found a place within Zion.
But repudiating all, nothing remained
but complete overthrow and destruction.
No place among God’s people means
outesst, abandoned, destroyed.

257


OwAP. XII,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMI An.


I. A defiant will. Not powerless
to “obey,” but determination “not” to
obey : deliberate resistance of Judah’s
persuasions, and rejection of Divine op-
portunity. Refused to “learn” or “obey.”

It An alarming penalty. The
issue of such defiance is made clear : no


equivocation. “I have set before you
life and death.”

IL A terrible punishment. “I
will utterly pluck up and destroy.”
‘Punished with everlasting destruction
from the presence of the Lord, and from
the glory of His power.”


ADDENDA TO CHAPTER XIl.: ILLUSTRATIONS AND SUGGESTIVE EXTRACTS.


Ver. 1. Talking with God. Never
shall we be lonely, never have to com-
plain of want of companionship, if we
acquire this blessed habit of talking
with God, There was an old Scotchman
sitting by his humble fire, and a visitor
asked him if he was not lonesome
sitting there all day, and he said, “ Nae,
nae; I just sit‘here-clacking wi’ Jesus.”
When we remember that “clacking”
is with the Scotch the word for friendly
talking, it will be seen there was no
irreverence in the old man’s words, but
something to be envied and admired.—
Power,

Many, with the best intentions, pro-
pounded that God is too great to attend
to our little things ; and all kindred theo-
ries have one point at least in common,
viz., the idea that close converse could not
be held with God, that He could not be
spoken to at all times by plain folk, in
a plain way, about things.—Jdem.

There is such a thing as talking with
God. It is said, in that venerable old
record, that “in the cool of the day
God walked in the garden, and called
to Adam.” I know one thing, that that
same habit has continued to this day,
for I have in the cool of the day, on the
hillside, 2 hundred times talked with
Him too. God is accustomed to come
down ; He makes Himself, by the power
of the Holy Ghost, a guest. There is
such a thing as communion with Christ,
as one speaketh to a friend face to face.
— Beecher.


*¢ When one that holds communion with the
skies
Has filled his urn where those pure waters
rise,
And once more mingles with us meaner
things,
"Tis e’en as if an angel shook his wings :
Immortal fragrance fills the circuit wide,
That tells us whence his treasures are
supplied,” —CowPEa
258


God’s judgments. The heavier the
cannon, with the more difficulty are
they drawn; but when arrived, they
recompense the slowness of their march
by the fierceness of their battery. The
longer the stone is in falling, the more
it will bruise and grind to powder.
There is a great treasure of wrath laid
up by the abuse of patience.—Charnock

Thy judgments, saith the prophet,
are sometimes secret, always just ; this
I am well assured of, though I thus
argue. Yet let me talk with thee of thy
judgments; let me take the humble
boldness so to do, that I'may be further
cleared and instructed by Thee. Where.
fore doth the way of the wicked prosper,
whilst better men suffer, as now the
wicked Anathothites do, whilst I go in
danger of my life by them? This ques-
tion hath exercised the wits and
molested the minds of many wise men,
both within and without the Church.
(See Job xxi. 7-13; Ps. xxxvii. 1,
Ixxiiii 1-12; Hab. i 4, 5.) Plato,
Cicero, Seneca, Epictetus, Claudian
against Ruffin, &c.— 7rapp.

Prosperity of the wicked. Satan
with ease puts fallacies upon us by his
golden baits, and then he leads us and
leaves us in a fool’s paradise. The
world hath by the glistering of her
pomp and preferment slain millions ;
as the serpent Scytale, which, when
she cannot overtake the fleeting pas-
sengers, doth with her beautiful colours
astonish and amaze them, so that they
have no power to pass away till she have
stung them to death. Adversity hath
slain her thousands, but prosperity her
ten thousand.— Brooks.

It is the bright day that brings
out the adder... . Too much sail is
dangerous. . . . A coat too richly em-
broidered only encumbers the wearer.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.
SS


» - « Too much sunshine weakens the
eyes,

Ver. 3. Gop’s KNOWLEDGE OF THE
HEART. There is a recent application of
electricity by which, under the influence
of its powerful light, the body can be
so illuminated as that the workings
beneath the akin can be seen. Lift up
the hand and it will appear almost
translucent, the bones and veins clearly
appearing. It is so in some sort with
God’s introspection of the human heart.
His eye, which shines brighter than the
sun, searches us and discovers us alto-
gether.— Pilkington.

Ver. 4, “He SHALL NOT 8EE OUR
LAST RND.” God shall not, and so they
deny His providence and prescience ;
or the prophet shall not, though now he
thunder out our punishment with so
great vehemence.— Trapp.

Mercury could not kill Argus till he
had cast him into a sleep, and with an
enchanted rod closed his eyes; and the
devil cannot hurt any man till he has
lulled him asleep in security.— Playter.

Ver. 5. “WHat WILT THOU Do!”
We should quit ourselves like men, and
not be perturbed by little rivulets ; for
if these sweep us away, what shall we
do when Jordan is swollen to the brim,
and we have to pass through that!
When one of the martyrs, whose name
is the somewhat singular one of Pom-
mely [Trapp gives it as William Cob-
berly,] was confined previous to his
burning, his wife was also taken up
upon the charge of heresy. The good
woman had resolved to die with her
husband, and she appeared, as far as
most people could judge, to be very
firm in her faith. But the jailor’s wife,
though she had no religion, took a
merciful view of the case as far as she
could do so, and thought, “I am afraid
this woman will never stand the test,
she will never brave death with her
husband; she has neither faith nor
strength to endure such a trial ;” and
therefore, one day calling her out of the
cell, she said to her, “ Lass, run to the
garden and fetch me the key that lies
there.” The poor woman ran willingly
enough ; she took the key up and it
burned her fingers, for the jailor’s wife


OHaP, Sit,








had made it red hot; she came back
crying with pain. “Ah, woman,” said
she, “if you cannot bear a little burn
in your hand, how will you bear to be
burnt in your whole body?” and this
brought her to recant the faith she had
professed. I apply the story thus: If
we cannot bear the trifling pangs which
come upon us in our ordinary circum-
stances, which are but as it were the
burning of our hands, wuat shall we do
when every pulse beats pain, and every
throb is an agony, and the whole tene-
ment begins to crumble about the
spirit that is so soon to be disturbed 1—
C. H. Spurgeon, comp. Trapp on verse.

““T have no hope in what I have
been or done,” said Dr. Doddridge on
his dying bed, “yet I am full of confi-
dence ; and this is my confidence: there
is hope set before me. I have fied, I
still fly, for refuge to that hope. In Him
I trust, in Him I have strong consola-
tion, and shall assuredly be accepted
in this Beloved of my soul.”

Ver. 14. Converted enemies. It is
recorded of a Chinese emperor, that, on
being apprised of his enemies having
raised an insurrection in one of the dis-
tant provinces, he said to the officers,
“Come, follow me, and we will quickly
destroy them.” He marched forward,
and the rebels submitted at his ap-
proach. All now thought that he
would take the most signal revenge, but
were surprised to see the captives
treated with mildness and humanity.
“How!” cried the first minister, “is
this the manner in which you carry out
your threat? Your royal word was
given that your enemies should be de-
stroyed, and behold you have pardoned
them all, and even caressed some of
them.” “I promised,” replied the
emperor, with a generous air, “to
destroy my enemies, I have fulfilled
my word ; for see, they are enemtes no
longer. I have made friends of them.”

Ver. 15. “Every man to his heri-
tage.” To the Church; for in every
nation he that feareth God and worketh
righteousness shall be accepted of Him,
shall have a child’s part, even the reward
ot inheritance.—Trapp.

Ver. 16. Union in the Chureh

259


OMAP. XII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.





i


When mankind depart from God, they Ver. 17. The issue of defiance.

lose the bond of unity and peace. They ,, bat we vesked net
are divided then into parties, which con- at irteidloag See

tend with and exterminate each other ; Till our warriors grew weak in the day
but when these have again united them- of despair, ‘

selves with the Lord, the unity of the Amd our glory was fled as the light of the


members is restored. Therefore, there Whist eatin’ for a moment, and melts
is liberty, equality, fraternity only in into air.” —Dan.


the Lord.—-Naegelsbach,





CHAPTER XIIL


Crrticat axp Exrerrioat Norzs.—1. Chronology of the Chapter, The reference in ver.
18 to the “queen” is regarded as determining the date of this chapter. Ewald, Hitzig,
Umbreit, Dahler, Hend., and Dr. Payne Smith agree in identifying her as Nehushta, the
queen-mother of Jehoiachin. For, although it is conjectural whether Jehoiachin (Jeconiah)
was eighteen years of age at his accession (see 2 Kings xxiv. 8) or only eight (comp. 2 Chron,
exxvi. 9), certainly his mother shared with him the responsibilities of royalty and of govern-
ment; and together the mother and son were dethroned: of which event this verse is peculiarly
descriptive. But Keil and Bleek incline to put the prophecy in Jehoiakim’s: reign, explaining
that the ‘‘queen,” his mother Zebuda, in common with all queen-mothers, would retain
prominence and power (comp. 1 Kings xv. 18; 2 Kings x. 13), and the mention of her does
not necessarily imply the king’s minority. The reason for preferring Jehoiakim’s reign to that
of his successor Jehoiachin, is that after the fourth year of Jehoiakim’s reign the northern fes is
uniformly definitely spoken of as the Chaldeans ; whereas in this chapter the allusion is inde-
terminate. But there is a general appropriateness in this whole chapter to Jehoiachin’s reign
vhick prevails to fix its date: t¢., B.c. 597; er, according to Assyrian chronology, 8.0. 579.

3. Gotemporary Scriptures, —2 Kings xxiv. 8-16; 2 Chron. xxxvi. 9, 10.

& Nation: Affairs,—Jehoiachin abandoned himself to flagrant ungodliness immediately
upon his accession ; and as promptly aeserted his revulsion from the now Chaldean domination,
“or ouly three months pass ere we find Nebuchadnezzar’s generals again besieging Jerusalem.
The power of resistance was gone; help from Egypt was no longer available after the defeat
at Charchemish, while also the harassing inroads of the ‘‘ evil neighbours” (see on chap. xii.
14) had kept the Jews in irretrievable subjection. Consequently, without offering more than
a show of resistance the king and queen-dowager surrendered themselves, and both they and
¢he princes, troops, artificers, and principal inhabitants of Jerusalem, together with Ezekiel the
prophet, were carried captive to Babylon (comp. 2 Kings xxiv. 14-16; Jer. lii. 28).

4. Cotemporary History.—Egypt prostrate under Chaldean aecendaney. Mebuchadnezsar
incited armed bands of the Moabites, Ammonites, &c., to frequent incursions of Judea, thus
Maintaining bis conquest, and keeping the Jews impotent and defenceless.

5. Geographical References.—Ver. 4. ‘‘ Huphrates:” here called Phrath ; most frequently
mentioned simply as ‘‘the river.” It was distinctively the river of Western Asia, rising in the
Armenian Mountains, flowing through the wildest districts of Armenia by a tortuous course
towards the Mediterranean, diverted by the ranges of Amanus and Lebanon, whence it moves
onward for above 1000 miles towards the Persian Gulf: its entire course being calculated at
1780 miles, 1200 miles of which is navigatle by boats, An annual inundation oecurs in May,
occasioned by the melting snows on the Armenian heights. Mentioned as one of the four rivera
of Eden (Gen ii. 14). See Zit, Crit. on verse, below. Wer 19. ‘“‘ Cities of the South :” Grotius
regards this as a reference to Egypt (comp. Isa, xxx. 6; Dan. xi. 5), indicating that no help
eould come to them from thence. More properly, the southern cities of Judah, which are
blockaded by the enemy: hence flight to the south is no longer possible (see on chap. vi. 1),

6. Personal Allusions.—Ver. 18. ‘‘ The king and the queen”: see supra, on Chronology of the
Chapter. Ver. 28. ‘‘ Ethiopian:” Heb. Cushtte : “ inhabitant of Abyssinia, or the African Cush ”
(Hend.), The Cushite of Arabia, whose colour would not be so swarthy in comparison with the
inhabitant of Palestine as to render the reference to “his skin” specially significant, could
searcely be here meant; but the Cushite of Africa, ¢.¢., the negro, would supply at once an
emphatic suggestion.

7. Natural History.—Ver. 23, ‘‘ The leopard his spote:” see on chap. v. 6, The ordinary
Hebrew word for leopard is VD), so called from being spotted. But in this verse the word ia


minanay, from the root 0, to be marked wlth stripes or lines, variegated: the striped


panther. As the Hebrews had no name for the tiger, this animal was probably comprised by
them under the same descriptive word. ,


260


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. GHAP, EN.


-__-Ooe








8. Manners and Customs.—Ver. 1. “ Linen girdle :” the common girdle, worn by both sexes
in the East, was of leather; the linen girdie was sometimes aabicca with othe silk, gold,
or silver thread, and studded with gems, fastened with a clasp of silver or gold. Ver. 11.

The girdle eleaveth to the loins of a man:” comp. Isa, v. 27, xi. 6 Ver. 12. ‘* Every bottle
shall be filled with wine :” various words rendered ‘“ bottle:” nod, chémeth, ob, chemah’, bakbuk’,
and nébel: by these two latter probably earthen vessels are denoted; nébel being rendered
(Lam. iv. 2) by ‘‘ pitchers ;” for evidently other bottles than those made of skin and leather
were in common use (Jer. Ia. 1); while also these ‘‘ bottles filled with wine” could be
e dashed one against another” (ver. 14). The word is more appropriately rendered jar, the

potter's vessel” of Isa. xxx. 14. Ver. 22. “‘ Skirts discovered, and heels made bare:” allusion
to ‘‘the long flowing robes ow is a train rather than a skirt) worn by ladies of rank”
(Speaker’s Com.). These robes would be violently upturned (ef. ver. 26): Hend, = ‘‘ thrown
up :” and the heels made bare, rather ill-used, roughly treated: Hend. =her sandals torn off
with violence: Chr. B, Michaelis=loading the feet with chains: Hitgig= affront done to the
person suggested by mention of the heels: Keil and Payne Smith=she would be driven forth
into exile barefoot, with violence and the rod. Cf. Nahum iii. 5. It describes ‘‘an ancient
mode of punishing prostitutes” (Hend.). Ver. 27. ‘‘ Neighings :” ef. notes on chap. v. 8. ‘‘On
the hills im the field ;” in the most conspicuous localities she had carried on an incestuous traffic
with idols, revelling in the shameless heathen orgies (¢f. Notes on chap. ii. 24, v. 7).

9. Literary Oriticisms.—Ver. 4. “ Fuphrates:” TJD, TheLXX.,Vulg., and other ancient


versions give Phrath as Euphrates, The word occurs in fifteen other places ; in twelve
instances the word river is prefixed ; in three it stands, as in this chapter, alone; and in al]
those cases Phrath means the Euphrates. But the word Phruth is here used (vers. 4-7) four
times, and not once is the word river added; and this difficulty, the LXX. met by supplying
werayéy, Bochart, Venema, Dathe, Hitzig, Henderson, and others prefer to take Phrath as an
abbreviation of Ephrath, MSR, the original name of Bethlehem. This rendering avoids the
difficulty of the fact that a journey of over 200 miles would have had to be taken twice by
Jeremiah if the Euphrates be meant ; whereas Bethlehom was distant but six miles. Ver. 18.
“The queen:” iVVIA, the great-lady; once applied to the queen-regnant (1 Kings xi. 19),
but usually means the queen-mother (Speaker’s Com.). ‘‘ As the Jewish kings generally mar-
Fied subjects and lived in polygamy, the king’s mother took precedence of his wives” (Hitzig).
“* Your principalities :” DD NWN TV, t.¢., the ornaments of your head, namely, your splendid
erown. Ver. 21. ‘‘to be captains, chief over thee:” Keil and Speaker’s Com. render the verse,
What wilt thou say, when (or if) He set over thee for head (for a head) those whom thou hast taught
to be thy bosom friends (hast accustomed to thee as thy familiar friends) The Jews had courted
the friendly alliance of the Chaldean king and princes; now they would become their tyrannical
rulers. The translation of the verse turns upon the meaning given to D'D?N, rendered in
A.V. ‘‘captains.” Luther, and after him Gesenius, Rosen., and Lange render it princes—
“Whom thou hast trained to be princes over thee:” this meaning is suatained in Gen. xxvi. 16,
Zech. ix. 7. But its more ordinary signification is familiar, friend (ef. Psa. lv. 14, Prov. xvi
28, Mic. vii. 5), It occurs in chap. xi. 19, tame, domesticated (see Notes im loc.). Ver. 25
“Trusted in falsehood :” ef. Notes on chap, x. 8. Ver. 27. “ Whew shall st once be?” —Lit
After how long yet! A conjectural outlook on the far distant purification of the now polluted
nation,


HOMILIES ON SEOTIONS OF CHAPTER XIII.


Wers. 1-11. An acted parable—the spoiled linen girdle.
sy 12-17. A parable in speech—intoxicating judgmenta
»» 18-27. An iniquitous nation openly degraded.


Vers. 1-11. An Actzep ParasLe—tTHE SPortep LINEW GIRDLE


Symbolic acts sometimes teach more impressively than eloquent words. A clean
linen girdle purchased and worn, but never washed: then carried away to the
Euphrates and buried for many days: finally disinterred, found to be marred, anc
pronounced worthless. Thus facts are portrayed to Jeremiah’s observers: Judal
girded into closest connection with Jehovah, yet her impurity was never removed :
in consequence she was to be carried to Babylon and lost among the heathen for a
long period: ultimately, when brought back, she is found “ profitable for nothing :”
“ For as the girdle cleaveth to the loins of a man, a0 have I caused to cleave unto Me
the whole house of Israel and the whole house of Judah, saith the ae Pe they


Om@aP. XII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARt : JEREMIAR,





might be unto Me for a people, and for a name, and for a praise, and for a glory;
but they would not hear.”

Norz.—Great contention among commentators whether this journey to Euph
rates was actual or merely mistonary. It is objected to the occurrence being literal,
that the Euphrates was nearly 250 miles distant, that two journeys would have
entailed long absence of the prophet from the scene of his urgent ministry.
Several scholars, to avoid this supposed difficulty, incline to the locality being not
Euphrates but Ephratha, as being near at hand (see Lit. Crit.), but this forfeits
the whole meaning of the buried girdle—God’s people localised and lost among
Babylonish scenes, Objections tu its being merely a visionary incident are,—l.
The extreme literalness of the statement, no pretext being left in the narrative for
an allegorical interpretation (see ver. 5). 2. The lengthy journey was a small
matter compared with the vast and vivid lessons thereby taught to Judah—that
she would be carried far away from her present scenes of privilege, and be lost in
distant exile. 3. Also Jeremiah’s visits to the scene of his nation’s approaching cap-
tivity would supply him with valuable information ready against the emergency,
and prove deeply impressive to his own spirit, and helpful to his ministry. Here
consider,

I. How closely Jehovah binds His chosen people to Himself. “As the
girdle cleaveth to the loins of a man” (ver. 11), &c. Though their banishment was
becoming imperative, yet God here testifies His attachment to them, and declares
He had, without any reserve, bound them intimately and lovingly to Himself:
they were “a people near unto Him” (Psa. cxlviii. 14).

II. The sacred character which His people bear in His esteem. ‘Get thee
a linen girdle” (ver. 1). A mistake to suppose it was to be “linen” because it was
to be worn as an inner garment next the skin; though that might be impressive of
the close union of His people with the Lord: but this peuvple—like a beautiful
girdle—was to be “ for a name, a praise, and a glory” (ver. 11), hence worn visibly
as the girdle worn by the wealthy and by the high priest—a thing of beauty. But
its being “‘linen” indicates that it was the sacerdotal girdle ; for God's people were
to Him “a kingdom of priests, a holy nation” (Exod. xix. 6). With this sacred
character He invested them ; for He designed they should be a pure, priestly, con-
secrated people. Even as are Christ’s redeemed ones (1 Pet. ii 5).

Il. A holy people are capable of proving an adornment to Jehovah. ‘“ That
they might be unto Me for a people, and for a name, and a praise, and a glory”
(ver. 11); even as the beautifully-wrought girdle, embroidered with silk and gold,
and decorated with gems, was to the wearer (1 Sam. xviii, 4; Dan. x. 5; Rev. i.
13, xv. 6), and as the “curious girdle of the ephod” (Exod. xxviii. 8) was a work
of exquisite grace. Note: God’s people are a choice and beautiful work (Eph. ii.
10), and are designed to adorn and glorify Him.

IV. Although so closely identified with God, impurity was contracted by
His people. “Put it not in water” (ver. 1). Necessarily, therefore, the girdle
became soiled; and from its defilement it was not cleansed. How truly descrip
tive of Israel and Judah! The longer they were God’s people the less pure they
became. Defilement was contracted, and their state became increasingly corrupt.
Pure as a “linen girdle” when first bound to God, they grew soiled, stained, filthy
with wear. Is this not too true of God’s people still {—the early days of their
betrothment were their best and holiest days (cf. ii. 2, 3).

V. Because of this impurity His people are carried away from holy scenes
into exile. “Arise, go to Euphrates, and hide it there in a hole of the rock”
(ver. 4). Canaan was chosen for the residence of a godly nation; Jerusalem was
the place of God’s glory—‘“ Holiness becometh Thine house, O God, for ever.” 1.
Defilement disqualifies us for sacred privileges. 2. Impurity separates God's people
from Him: the girdle was unclasped from the prophet’s loins, and laid aside in the
land of the heathen; for “your iniquities have separated,” &c. (Isa. lix. 2}

262


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. OHAP. XHI.








Defiled souls are, in God’s regard, placed among the heathen. All pride and self.
glorying are thereby put to shame (vers. 9, 10). The unclean shall not stand
before Him.

VI. Banishment from God is a pitiable experience for His people. ‘“ Behold
the girdle was marred, it was profitable for nothing.” Aflictions sometimes hal-
low the spirit ; but estrangement from God never brings good results. Iniquity in
“the redeemed of the Lord” degrades piety altogether and dishonours Jehovah,
A fallen Christian can never be any honour to his Master ; he may be recalled—aa
these banished ones were—but he is “marred, profitable for nothing.” He may
illustrate (tod’s fathomless grace in showing how poor and profitless a soul may be,
and yet be saved ; but he is of no use for the high purpose God had in redeeming
him, that he should be to Him for a name, and a praise, and a glory /


Tue Mystery or ELzorion.


Naegelsbach, on this section, remarks: “'The Lord has put on Israel as a girdle
for Hts cwn adornment and for Israel’s highest glory. This figure is unquestion-
ably one of the most precious which the Scripture employs to represent the mystery
of electum. Elsewhere Israel is called Jehovah’s inheritance (Deut. iv. 20, vii. 6),
His wife and His beloved bride (Hos. ii. 16, sqg.; Jer. ii. 2), His first-born son
(Exod. iv. 22), His servant (Isa. xli. 8), His flock (Jer. xiii. 17), His vineyard
(Isa. v. 7), Hia signet ring (Hag. ii. 23). Like the last emblem, the girdle also
denotes---

i, The closest intimacy. ii. Indispensable service. iii. A valuable ornament.

But great as ts the love which the Lord thus shows to Israel in calling them His
girdle, as great 1s the severity with which He declares that the honour thus received
will not save them from destruction.

Let every particular Christian Church mark this / However closely it may be
attached to the Lord, this saves it neither from, (1) Jnternal corruption, nor fro
(2) Haternal judgment (comp. Luke iii. 8, 9).”


Vers. 12-17. A Papasie in SpPeEcH—INToxicaTING JUDGMENTS.


“ Every bottle shall be filled with wine. . . . I will fill all the inhabitants of this
land .. . with drunkenness.” The figure is not understood by the people, they see
not its deeper significance (ver. 12); so it is explained by Jehovah, and then
appears terrible in import (vers. 13, 14).

I. The Divine parable ominous of misery and ruin. The nation, every man,
should be filled with the wine of God’s wrath, and in a drunken frenzy should
destroy one another. The Azghest in the realm—“kings;” the holiest in the
nation—“ priests and prophets ;” all classes of soctety—“ inhabitants ;” shall be-
come mutually destructive of the state and nation: the nation would become
factious and fanatical, and hurry on its own ruin.

1. A delirious nation; “ filled with drunkenness,” folly, and frenzy, like an in-
toxicated man, giddy, blustering, boastful, and violent.

2. A destructible nation: ‘every bottle ;” brittle vessels: with all their arrog-
ance. Easily destroyed ; ‘ vessels of wrath fitted to destruction.”

3. A demented nation: “proud” (ver. 15), “my soul shall weep for your
pride” (ver. 17); inflated with a voluble conceit, arrogant, even in their degrada-
tion and peril: incapable as a drunken man of defending himself, yet noisily boast-
fal and vain. ‘“ Whom God will destroy—He infatuates.”

4, A desolated nation; “dash them one against another:” the wild fury of
drunken frensy would drive the nation into hostile factions and ruinous agitations ;
civil contentions, mutually destructive, “ dashing one against another.”

Il. The prophet’s expostulation admonitory and pathetie, ‘Hear ye, and
give ear,” dsc. (vers, 15-17): they were heedless and reckless. a


BaP, XIL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.








1. He appeals to the high authority of his message : ‘the Lorp hath spoken.”
They had repudiated Jeremiah: now they had to do with Jehovah.

2. He caposes the secret of their hardened indifference: “be not proud.” The
cause of their contumacy was pride: just as humility is the spring of obedience,
pride is the motive to refractoriness, rebellion, and obstinate impiety.

3. He announces the remedy for their evil state: “ give glory to the Lord your
God.” Their apostacy and impenitence must be abandoned ; for by ceasing from the
iniquity that displeases and dishonours God (Josh. xvii. 19), they could “ give Him
glory.” Sin is an assault upon Jehovah’s glory; repentance and reconciliation
yield Him glory.

4, An alternative ts presented of plaintive misery: ‘ before He cause darkness,”
&c.—all their joys and comforts covered with gloom; “and your feet stumble upon
the dark mountains”—wandering bewildered amid terrors and perils: “ while ye
look for light, He turn it into the shadow of death ”—all hope be extinguished in
the dense death-shade of despair: “and make it grow darkness "—total spiritual
night, in which God and knowledge of Him are wholly lost ; “darkness covers
the earth, and gross darkness the people ” (Isa. Ix. 2).

5. A piteous bewailing over his wretched nation (ver. 17). (a.) For their se/f-
ruinous “ pride,” he would weep “in secret,” for very shame at their obdurate sin.
(0.) For their lamentable desolation his eyes would “ weep sore” in open grief, be-
cause of the woe of their captivity. He commiserated their misery, and felt
anguish for their ruin. Amid it all note—l. He still speaks to Judah of Jehovah
as “ your God” (ver..16); the Almighty Friend still availed them if they would
heed His word. 2. He still speaks of Judah as ‘‘the Lorp’s flock” (ver. 17),
claimed by Him, and cherished even though they were wilful and perverse. What
exhaustless pitifulness is there in Jehovah! “slow to anger and plenteous in
mercy.”


Tue EartHen PITcos ERs.


Naegelsbach suggests the following points :—

i. What they signify: proud, yet perishable things ; the world.

ii, What will be their fate: “dash them,” d&c. (ver. 14); “carried away
captives ” (ver. 17).

iii, What is the means of escaping thes fate: a humble attention to the Lord
(ver. 15) ; glorifying God by their repentance and return to Him (ver. 16).


Vers. 18-27. AN Inrquirous Nation OpenLy DEGRADED.


Te put his nation to the deepest blush for their sin, Jeremiah again compares
their conduct with Jehovah to the vile and graceless behaviour of an adulteress ; and
likens the shame, which would cover his people in consequence, to the open dis-
grace with which a prostitute was sometimes treated (see Manners and Customs,


supra).

1 Bopaity addressed in bold reproof and warning (vers. 18, 19). See Ad-
denda on ver. 18, the queen, and rebuking royalty). Upon them is threatened—i
The loss of their dignity and crown. ii. The capture of their cities and captivity of
their people. Observe:

1. God's judgments do not spare those in highest station. Jechoniah had sinned,
and by his royal example encouraged the licentiousness and ungodliness of the
nation, Therefore he and his queen-mother should be “ humbled ;” and are called
to “sit down,” as slaves on the ground (Isa. xlvii. 1). It is high treason against
the King of kings for royal personages to rebel against His rule and laws ; theirs
shall be the greater condemnation ; their station degraded, their crown forfetted.
“ Fallen is your crows.” A faithful witness for God may have to reprove kings
in His name,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAR. ONAP, Ei.








2. The conquest of their cities ts threatened as a retribution: “The crown falls
when the king loses country and kingship” (Keil). “‘ The cities uf the south” are
specified, not because the enemy had first possessed himself of the southern
extremity of the land (as Sennacherib did, advancing on the capital from the south,
2 Kings xviii. 13; xix. 8), but because they were the cities most distant from the
north-coming foe ; hence, when they were in his power, it implied the whole land
was conquered. Thus the prophet threatens against godless royalty, the degrada-
tion of their station, the forfeiture of their crown, the conquest of their country
the captivity of their people.

IL. Jerusalem summoned to witness the woes of capture. “Lift up your eyes,
and behold,” d&c, (ver. 20). The verb, Lijt up, is fem., and refers to Zion unde
stood. Upon Jerusalem is here threatened—

1. Depopulation. ‘“ Where is the flock?” Her streets are to be deserted, her
inhabitants carried afar. Or ‘she is asked where the cities, which once lay
grouped around her, like a goodly flock of sheep, are gone? The question im-
plies blame. It was the example of Jerusalem which had led the cities of Judah
into sin (Micah i. 5), and brought upon them an invading army ” (Speaker's Com.)

2. Foreign domination. (See Lit. Crit. on ver. 21.) What could Jerusalem say
when they, whom she had courted into power as allies, should assert their power as
conquerors? We call in ungodly resources of help when our sin forfeits God’a
protection ; these, our allies, will become our tyrants, ruling us with a sore and
unchallengeable despotism.

IIL Debasement of licentious Judah vividly portrayed.

1. Affected innocence silenced by a condemning charge (ver. 22, see Crit. Notes
on verse).

2. Hoy doom justified in that her iniquity transcended remedy (ver. 23). Nothing
ean alter and improve her state. Her habitual spiritual licentiousness had become
inveterate and incurable: expatriation therefore must ensue (ver. 24).

3. God associates Himself with her degradation and doom. She had despised
His grace; repudiated His calls; ignored Him for idols—“ falsehood ;” but she
should recognise Him in the judgments He had measured to her (ver. 26).

4. Disloyalty to her Lord punished with appropriate degradation (ver. 27; see
Crit. Notes). Openly put to shame. Her sin had been open: God would expose
her to open contempt (Lam. i, 8). Politically degraded.

5. Valeness depicted, cleansing despaired of (ver. 27 ; see Lat. Crit.). Jeremiah
counts it impossible that she will soon be cleansed ; her case seems hopeless. The
present generation cleaves immovable to wickednesa. Yet, in the far future, after
gore judgments, there may be reform! On the prophet’s despair there falls one
faint gleam of hope.


HOMILETIC OUTLINES AND COMMENTS ON VERSES OF OHAPTER XIII.


Ver. 1-11. Theme: Buriep GIFTs. V. In this men often fail. The his
I. God confers upon man innumer- tory of the Jew an illustration. Mer


able gifts of talent, privilege, oppor-
tunity, blessing. In the case of the Jew
especially great.

TI. These gifts are suited to our cir-
cumstances and requirements (Matt.
xxv. 15).

Til. These gifts are intended for our
good and God’s glory (ver. 11).

IV. The use to which we apply
them depends upon man’s wisdom and
will (vers. 10, 11; Matt. xxv. 24, 25).


fail through ignorance, sloth, negligence,
lust and impulsiveness, unfaithfulness,
pride, selfishness. Men bury their gifts
in these things.

VL Buried they are lost. 1. God
withdraws them (ver. 9 ; Matt. xxv. 29).
2. The power to use them departa
(2 Cor. ix. 6). 3. They rot and decay.
The grave is the house of decay (vex
8; Eccles. ix. 10).


265


CHAP. XI,





Learn—

1. That man is blessed with treasure
gifts capable of unlimited development.

2. That, by neglecting these, instead of
rising to be an angel, he sinks to bea fiend.

3. That we should guard them jea-
lously and cultivate them diligently.

—E, Jerman.

Ver. 2. Theme: SuGGESTIONS CON-
CERNING THE GIRDLE OF TRUTH.

I. We are responsible for the effort
to obtain the girdle of truth “I got
the girdle.”

I. We can get the girdle of truth
only by knowing the Word of the Lord.
“ According to the word of the Lord.”

Il. We must make appropriate use
of the girdle when it has been obtained.
“ Put it upon my loins.”

IV. We can expect further know-
ledge of God’s Word only by the use
of what wealready know (ver. 3). “The
word of the Lord.came unto me the
second time.”"—W. Whale.

Ver, 3. Theme: Gov’s WorD To MEN.

“he word of the Lord came unto
me the second time, saying.”

L Jehovah is always speaking to
man by one method or another. Crea-
tion, providence, revelation.

IL Some persons in all ages and
climes have heard His Word. In mys-
tery, in power, in mercy. Some have
heard it many times.

III. It is a moment of supreme im-
portance when any one soul becomes
conscious of hearing the voice of God.
Adam, Cain, Noah, Abraham, Moses,
Isaiah, Ezekiel, &c., d&c.

IV. The way in which a man treats
the Word of God will show—

1. His present spiritual condition.

2. His general course of conduct,

3. His probable future destiny.

—W. Whale.

Ver. 2-5. Theme: THE STANDARD
OF GODLY conDUcT. “Sol got a girdle
according to the word of the Lord. So
I went and hid it as the Lord commanded
me.” Letting God’s word rule and
regulate our life absolutely.

L The surrenders it involves. It
gives up the life into God’s hands, every
faculty and purpose submitted to Him,

266


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR,





yielded gladly to the requirements and
captivity of Christ.

1. The surrender of the will. letting
God rule ; doing what He bids, bowing
personal desires and plans to His pur-
poses. ‘‘Not my will, but Thine, be
done.” Unselfish obedience.

2. Surrender of the judgment; per-
plexing to Jeremiah to see why he must
wear this girdle, why go to Euphrates,
why hide the girdle there, &c. God’s
“ways are not our ways, nor His
thoughts,” &c. Ungquestioning obedience.

3. Surrender of ease: a toilsome jour-
ney of nearly 250 miles, twice taken.
Uncomplaining obedience.

4. Surrender of time: occupy weeks
in obeying these demands of God. Con-
science must stand aside. Ungrudging
obedience.

5. Surrender of self, of the life, of ald:
“Keep back no part of the price.”
“Speak, Lord, Thy servant heareth.”
“ Lord, what wilt Thou have me to do }”
Unreserved obedience. (See Addenda,
“ Perfect obedience.”)

Il. The satisfaction it inspires. The
yielding of self to God brings choice
and compensatory advantages.

1. It gives simplicity to our life. “The
eye is single.” No other lord rules.
God is everything to us. “One is our
Master, even Christ ”—not self, not cus-
tom, not the world, dc.

2. It gives decision to our life. Saves
us from “halting between two opinions :”
for the Lord is God and we follow Him.
Saves us from uncertainty : His word is
law. From delay: To hear Him is to
respond, From conflict of conviction :
we only need a call from Him: have
not to select or choose our way. Any-
where, if only He commanda,

3. It gives repose to our life. We
are not burdened with the responsibility
of life: we “are the Lord’s,” He guides
and plans and arranges for us We
“live exempt from care.” Our motto is,

“Lead Thou me on! One step’s enough for


me!”

4. It gives nobdlences to our life.
What a grovelling career they live who
obey themselves—fitful, earthly, restless,
Or the customs of soctety—slaves to the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH,





eaprice of fashion. Or the “ god of this
world” —“led captive by him.” But
Christ calls into a high and holy career:
godly and Godward. They who live
only to obey Him, unreservedly obe-
dient, He leads by still waters, into
pleasant heritages of rest, assurance, and
joy divine.

5. It gives sanctity to our life. He
who lives for God becomes more godly
and God-like. Wise in His wisdom,
strong in His strength, sufficient in His
sufficiency, true in His rightness, holy
in His holiness. He will guide by His
counsels, lead in the “good and right
way,” until the life rises to His blest
abode. “ Follow me!” is the Saviour’s
call; and the issue is, “‘ These are they
which follow the Lamb whithersoever
He goeth.”

Ver. 5. Theme: ASPEOTS OF PASTORAL
SERVICE. Jeremiah was to go to Eu-
phrates ; perhaps not solely to hide this
girdle: exiles were there, to whom he
might carry messages and comfort from
Jehovah ; Ezekiel and Daniel were there,
and with them he might hold helpful
converse.

i. His own toslsome obedience would
be a lesson to his disobedient nation,
inciting them to take pains even in order
to fulfil God’s commands.

ii, His resolute performance of this
mission would awaken in his people
attention to the significance of his con-
duct, and impress them with the lessons
designed.

I. Self-sacrificing obedience to God
enforces its lessons on others. Our
people will heed our consecrated lives,
though they may ignore our eloquent
words, A living sermon has vast power.

II. God’s chosen servants must yield
Him absolute subjection. What God
bids, they must do; where He sends,
they must go, Ministers of Christ must
be willing to accept His demands un-
questioningly and entirely ; to lay them-
selves out for any service which may be
for the good of their people ; to spend
and be spent in the Master’s service and
their nation’s weal.

Ver. 5, 6. Theme: Gop’s COMMAND-
MENTS.

i, Always wise and authoritative.


CHAP. EI,





ii, Often mysterious, and, to human
reason, apparently absurd.

iii, Can be heartily carried out only
by a true believer in the divine wisdom,
power, and love.

iv. May involve much effort, incon-
venience, and suffering. Journey from
Jerusalem to Euphrates must have beer
very trying.

v. Will effectually test the condition
of the soul. “If ye love Me, keep My
commandments.” “To obey is better
than sacrifice.” ‘I do alway those
things which please the Father.” ‘“ Leav-
ing us an example,” &c., &c. “Our
sufficiency is of God.”

Application: “ This is His command-
ment, that ye believe on His Son whom
He hath sent.” ‘‘ His commandments
are not grievous.”—W. Whale.

Ver. 7. Theme; THE INJURIOUSNESS
OF ESTRANGEMENT FROM Gop. ‘The
girdle was marred.”

I. The original sacredness and
beauty of the godly soul

1. “ Linen” indicates the sacerdotal
girdle: the soul was sacred in God’s
esteem.

2. “ Linen” suggests the purity of
the soul in its first love.

3. The “linen girdle” was curiously
and exquisitely wrought in choice colours
and precious gems ; betokening the beauty
and spiritual grace of the soul when first
allied to God.

4, The girdle clasped upon the pro-
phet denotes the close mutual attach-
ment between the soul and God in the
hour of first love ; and also the resolute
design of God to keep that soul bound
—‘‘ clasped” —to Himself.

II. The defiled soul separated from
the Lord. It necessarily became soiled
by being worn, yet linen will wash, and
it could, therefore, be cleansed,

1. The cleansing process was neglected,
“Put it not in water” (ver. 1). This
represents the criminality of Judah.
There was “ water,” easily found, ready
to hand: so is there Divine cleansing ;
“A Fountain open for sin and unclean-
ness:” but the defiled life is “not put
in water.”

2. A tainted thing must be removed
from God. Nothing mae the


G@laP. XI,


Holy One of Israel retain. “He can-
not look upon iniquity.” Certainly He
will not wear as an ornament a thing
defiled. So the tainted girdle was car-
ried away: ‘Take the girdle, and arise,
go to Euphrates” (ver. 4).

3. A fatthless soul is banished. Afar
from holy scenes, burted in a hole, as
unfit for any to see: for nothing is more
loathsome to God’s sight and man’s than
a spiritual apostate, a renegade Chris-
tian. It is put at a far distance from
God’s presence, buried from sight, lost
as an outcast thing, hidden among hea-
thenish scenes, as if belonging more to
them than to God.

Ill. The damaging effects of sepa-
ration from God. “ After many days”
(ver. 6). The girdle was sought and
brought back.

1. God does not forget and forsake
even the estranged soul. ‘“ Yet doth He
devise means whereby His banished be
not expelled from Him” (2Sam. xiv. 14).

2. The recovered soul 1s found griev-
ously damaged by his banishment. “The
girdle was marred;” the ship had
sprung a leak hopelessly; the rift was
in the lute silencing the harmony ; the
rot was at the heart. Never again would
the old joy in God, the old love and
geal, return. A faithless soul loses what
never again can be recovered. Child-
hood never comes back again !

3. From a reclaimed soul no profit
can accrue to God. Saved, indeed, but
no power left for service. A rescued
life, but impotent to recall others, or
commend the gospel. A disabled and
dispirited army the captain refuses to use
again on the field. The coward spirit
is never more trusted, God cannot
wear as a “ praise” (ver. 11) the girdle
which has lost its beauty. Only the
faithful and the pure can glorify Him.
“ Hold that fast which thou hast, that
no man take thy crown.” “No man
having put his hand to the plough, and
looking back, is fit for the kingdom of
God.” “ Profitable for nothing.” “ Salt
is good; but if the salt have lost its
savour, it is good for nothing, but to be
cast out and trodden under foot of men”
(Matt. v. 13).

Ver. 7. Comments - “ THE GIRDLE WAS

268


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.


ROTTED,” ‘This showed that the Jews
should in that country lie rotting, as it
were, in baseness, and servility, and
in together many years; so that God
might justly have left them there still
in misery, a8 @ man leaves his rotten
girdle to become dung.”—TZ'rapp.

“Many Days.” The length of time
was required to afford time for the gir
dle to become spoiled and unfit for use.
To that condition the Jews had been re-
duced by the corrupting idolatries of the
heathen. They had disqualified them-
selves for acting as witnesses for Jehovah;
as the only true God, and, like a cast-
away girdle, they were to be humbled
and rejected.”— Henderson,

“By the ‘many days’ are signified
the seventy years’ captivity.” —Speaker’s
Com.
Ver. 9. Theme: Gop’s sPOLIATION
OF PRESUMPTUOUS PRIDE. There may
be a reverent pride, based on gratitude
and joyous appreciation of God’s dis-
tinguishing mercies. There may also
be an arrogant pride—“ Stand off, I
am holier than thou!” Equally pos-
sible is a self-reliant pride—sufiicient
of ourselves: “Who is the Lord that
I should obey Him?” Likewise, the
pride of carnal assurance: fortitied in
self-esteem, satisfaction with one’s
own goodness and merits. But this
“Great pride of Jerusalem” was a
vaunting, boastful, arrogant pride; a
glorying in spiritual possessions and
privileges, which they were nevertheless
abusing —the pride of presumption:
and “the presumptuous soul do I hate.”

I, Spiritual presumption can only
assert itself where true piety has
declined. Piety is lowly. Loss of
solemn reverence makes room for arro-
gance. Then the soul presumes, vaunts
itself, makes even religion an occasion
for self-glorying. God’s grace becomes
the pedestal for self-exaltation.

I. Spiritual presumption is pecu-
liarly offensive to a God who loves
truth. Pride is a mocking pretence.
Of what have the best of men to be
proud? ‘What have we that we have
not rececved #” This pride assumes and
arrogates to ourselves the credit of what
God has given. His is the glory, not


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; JEREMIAH.


OHAP. Kil,





ant This wrongs Him, and boasts in
a lie.

OL Spiritual presumption leads to
the most heinous abuse of sacred privi-
leges. Holy trusts should make those
who possess them holier, ergo, hum-
bler, more grateful, and more devoted.
But pride reverses all this: the soul
dwarfs amidst surrounding magnificence ;
becomes degraded by the abuse of exalt-
ing privileges. This perverts and out-
rages the Divine endowments and
blessings.

IV. Spiritual presumption will as-
suredly court Jehovah’s withering
eontempt. Dig a hole and bury it! as
@ rotten, loathsome thing. ‘‘ Thus will
I mar the pride.” He poureth contempt
upon princes! God has resources, ap-
palling in their efficacy, for humbling
the arrogant and withering the proud.
Think what he did to these Jews! Cast
them as a filthy girdle into a “hole.”
We may well fear to court His contempt.
Bee what befel the proud Nebuchad-
nezzar—sank into a mere beast. Oh
how, in life’s end, will all our vanity
mock us, and our presumption turn
upon us with tortures! (See Addenda,
“ Pride Abased.”)

Ver. 10. Herein is shown to what
their “‘ pride” led them—

i. Disregard of Divine messages.

ii, Indulgence of their own wilful
inclinations.

iii, Enthronement of debasing idola-
tries: ergo, the dethronization of Jeho-
vah in their hearts and their worship.

Ver. 10. Theme: “Good FoR No-
THING.”

The most dutiful are unprofitable
servants, doing no more than their duty.
But how few could honestly declare of
themselves, ‘‘I have done all I eould.”
If the best are imperfect, what can be
said of the cold-hearted and indolent ?
Still worse, far worse, is the case of
those who are gone out of the way
(Rom. iii. 12), This verse symbolizes
God’s people in their idolatry and con-
sequent captivity. We proceed to—

I. Dwell upon a painful fact.
“They were His own, a peculiar people
to Him, a kingdom of priests who had
recess to Him above all other nations.”








To them were sent lawgivers, priesta,
psalmists, and prophets, To them were
committed the oracles of God. To
them were given a Divine directory and
method of worship. Yet were they
“ good for nothing.” All was done for
the vineyard which could be done, yet
it brought forth wild grapes.

II. Point out the cause of their
sad condition. They became an evil
people, as is shown in this verse, Dis-
obedient and hardhearted.

1. They refused to hear the word of
the Lord. (See notes on ver. 3.)

2. They followed the imagination of
their hearts, When a man will not hear
God, he has generally resolved to have
his own way. He puts fancy for faith,
and self for God.

3. They became tdolaters. Forsaking
the true they follow the false. Man
must worship, even it be but the fancy
of his own brain, or work of his own
hand. Man must serve, but often
chooses the wrong master. The value
of a man or & nation is in proportion to
the truth possessed, and the degree of
obedience rendered te it. The unfaith-
ful are good for nothing.

Il. Show what they might have
been as a people.

1. They might have been separated
from the nations as being peculiarly the
people of God.

2. They might have been before the
nations for the glory of Jehovah, as
opposed to idols. “For a name, and
for a praise,” &c.

3. They might have been among the
nations as examples and witnesses,
setting forth the beneficial influences
of true religion.

IV. Proclaim some universal truths.

l. Refusing to hear God’s word 4s
proof that the people are an evil people.

2. An evil people will substitute «a
false worship for that which is true.

3. A false worship will produce and
Foster an erroneous religious lefe.

4, A people walking according to the
imagination of their own hearts must be
useless to themselves, to the world, te
the Church, or to God.—W. Whale.

Ver. 10, 11. Theme: Gon’s GIRDLE
Not now shall we conclude that Israel

269


CaP, Xin,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAE.





and Judah were God’s girdle. They
formerly clave unto Him, but, at the
time referred to by the prophet, had
gone away to idols. Because of their
sin God sent them into captivity until
they were reduced to extreme weakness,

Observe—

I. That Israel and Judah clave
unto Jehovah as a girdle to the loins
of a man (ver. 11). Unto His person
for favour. Unto His word for direc-
tion and teaching. Unto His promise
for encouragement. Unto His worship
for devotion.

II. That Israel and Judah were
then a praise and glory to Jehovah
(ver, 11). A girdle of strength and
honour before the nations,

1. As opposed to the idolatries of
the world.

2, As expressing obedience to Divine
law.

3. As exhibiting the beneficial effects
of true religion.

Ifl. That Israel and Judah became
faithless and disobedient (ver. 10).

1. An evil people, refusing to hear
the Word.

2. A stubborn people, going their
own way.

3. A deluded people, in vain ima-
ginations,

4. An idolatrous people, like the
nations less favoured, going after other
gods to serve and worship them.

IV. That Israel and Judah becom-
ing faithless, became also weak and
worthless. Went from prominence to
obscurity. Went from freedom to cap-
tivity. Went, in general, from privilege
to punishment.—W. Whale.

Ver. 11. Theme; Gop’s GLORIOUS
PURPOSE FOR His PEOPLE.

Keeping still to the allegory of “ the
girdle,” there seems here a reference to
the holy girdle of Aaron (Exod. xxviii.
8), which, together with his sacred gar-
ments, should be “for a glory and a
beauty ” (ver. 2).

I. How determinediy Jehovah makes
them Hisown. The form of sentence
is intensitive: “‘I have caused to cleave
unto Me,” d&c.

1. By the mighty working of His grace
God united them to Himself. It was


an.
ae


His act, not theirs, “J caused ;” a de
termined act, “ caused :” @ constraint:
act, “caused to cleave.” (Comp. Eph.
i 19.)

2. Into living connection with His own
Person He bound them. Fastened them
on, as a girdle, to Himself. Not merely
drew them to believe in, or serve Him ;
but to a personal union. He was
Terael’s God.

IL What exalted aims He cherishes
on their behalf He designs for them
that they be established and known aa
His—

1. In covenant relationship: “for a
people.” Israel, His peculiar treasure.
« What are the riches of the glory of His
inheritance in the saints” (Eph. i 18).

2. As a witness of Him to the world:
“for a name.” He desired to be known
among the nations by the name, “The
God of Israel” (1 Chron. xvii. 24). He
purposed to win renown among the
peoples by His dealings with Israel and
Judah. ;

3. To rejoice in His goodness; “for a
praise.” They were to be glad in the
Lord, a joyous people, praising Him
for signal blessings, a psalm sounding
through the world, commending Him
to others by their joyous piety.

4. Contributing to Hts honour ; “ for
@ glory.” An ornament, a decoration,
—as was the beautiful girdle, studded
with gems, to the wearer. (Comp.
Ezek. xvi. 14.)

Alas! a disobedient heart, ‘“‘ they
would not hear,” changed and desolated
all! Sin robs God of all the happiness
and honour He would find in man, and
robs man of all the blessedness and
spiritual wealth he might realize in


God.

Ver. 12-14. Theme; THE WINE OF
THE WRATH OF Gop.

This symbol supplements the former
and teaches another part of needed
truth. It is less dramatic in its form,
but not less definite as a threatening of
judgment. If we notice the general
truths contained in the portion, there
can be no difficulty in applying them to
this or any other particular case.

Observe, then—

I. That every man is being fitted a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





vessel to honour or dishonour, to good
or evil.

Ii. That every man will ultimately
be filled to his utmost capacity by
good or evil, according to his spiritual
state.

IIL That the process of adaptation
fs being carried on by loyalty or dis-
obedience to truth and God.

IV. That where all are evil every
one will be injurious to the other.
This will make a hell. The reverse of
this is true also. Where all are good,
each one is a blessing to the other, This
goes far to make a heaven.

V. That God, who is love, has a
time for severity as well as a time
for mercy. “I will not pity,” &c.,
&e.

VI. That if God help not, none can
aid effectually. If God save not there
is no salvation in any other.— W. Whale.

Comments—

Ver. 12. “EVERY BOTTLE SHALL BE
FILLED WITH WINE.” “Every earthen
flagon (comp. xlviii. 12)—the inhabitants
of Jerusalem, her kings, her priests and
prophets, will be filled with the wine
of the intoxicating beverage of God’s
wrath (see xxv. 15; Isa. xxviii. 7, li.
17; Ezek. xxiii. 31; Ps. lx. 3, lxxv. 8),
given them as a punishment for the
pride, and cruelty, and impiety, which
they drank greedily as wine. (Comp.
Rev. xiv. 8, xviii. 3), where the Harlot
drinks the wine of her own fornication
and gives it to others, and intoxicates
herself and them with it (xvii. 2, xviii.
6); and, therefore, God gives her the
cup of His wrath, and she reels under
it.”— Wordsworth.

“Wine they loved well, and a great
vintage they now expected. They shall
have it, saith God; but of another
nature than they look for.”—T7rapp.

“They were like bottles ; though God
had indeed chosen them for an excellent
use, yet, forgetful of their frailty, they
had marred their own excellency, so
that they were no longer of any use,
except that God would inebriate them
with giddiness, and also with calamities,”
—Calvin.

“Do WE NOT CERTAINLY KNOW THAT
EVERY BOTTLE,” &.


OHaP. iii.








“An instance of sceptical mocking.”
— Wordsworth.

“This they seem to speak insolently
and jeeringly—g.d. You should tell us
some news !”—TZ'rapp.

“Then shall the hearers take this
prophecy in scorn, and say, What won-
ders are these thou tellest us? As if
we knew not that the use of bottles is
to be filled with wine.”— By, Hall.

Ver. 13. “THEN SHALT THOU say,
THUs salTfH THE Logp.” The very
solemn way in which the explanation
of the symbol is introduced is in striking
contrast with the frivolity of the people.
—Speaker’s Com.

“FILLED WITH DEUNKENNESS.” When
the wine is in, the wit and wisdom
and virtue are out. Like drunken men,
they shall be full of confusion in their
counsels, sick of all their enjoyments,
shall fall into a slumber, and be utterly
unable to help themselves ; like men whe
have drunk away their reason, they
shall be at the mercy, and expose them-
selves to the contempt of all about them.
And this shall be the condition, not of
some only among them (if any had been
sober they might have helped the rest),
but all, even kings, priests, prophets,
and inhabitants would be indulgent of
their lusts and deprived of their senses.
—Henry.

“Not with giddiness as of drunken
men staggering (Isa. xix. 14), but with
the impotence of men whose minds are
stricken with the wrath of God (Ps. ix.
3; Isa. lx. 17).”—Speaker’s Com.

“The Jews, without regard to rank,
office, or position, were all to be in-
volved in one common ruin,”—Hender-
son,

‘““EVEN THE KINGS THAT SIT UPON
Davip’s THRONE.” Four kings in suc-
cession were overthrown in the fall of
Jerusalem.

Ver. 14. “DassH ONE AGAINST
ANOTHER :” shattering them as vessels,
“Vessels of wrath, fitted for destruction.”

Civil war is hereby foreshadowed.—
Mitag,

Rather, a collision of parties in the
state, resulting in mutual confusion and
confutation.

“The Midianites (Judges me and

P]


CHAP. XIII,


the Philistines (1 Sam. xiv. 20), who
exterminated each other, were also seized
by a spirit of intoxication. If not in
this sense, yet in that of mutual hatred,
reciprocal oppression, and injury in
general.” —Naeg.

Ver. 15. Theme: ATTENTION To Gop’s
Worp. ‘Hear ye, and give ear;.. for
the Lord hath spoken.”

The Bible worthy of seention and
study as—{1) An ancient book, dealing
with the history of the human race—
(2) A book full of literary beauty—(3)
A book of great power and influence,
Here attention is claimed because it is
the Word of God.

L How should we attend toit? 1.
With reverence. 2. In faith. 3. Diligent-
ly, earnestly. 4. Intelligently. 5. Intend-
ing to be governed by it. 6. Prayerfully.

IL. There is here an implied neglect.
The exhortation, and especially the men-
tion of pride, impliesthis. Men neglect
the Bible, because—1l. They are filled
with other things. 2. They do not
kuow its worth. 3. They do not appre-
hend the bearing it may have on their
well-being. 4, They are not willing to
submit to its teachings.

Ill. Why should we attend? Our
text gives the paramount reason—God
has spoken. Consider—

1. The dignity and glory of the Lord.

2. His wisdom and knowledge.

3. His beneficence, interest, and love.

4. He speaks to us of matters in
which we have the deepest interest.

Learn— :

1. To read the Bible regularly. 2.
To treasure it in the heart. 3. To
honour it in your life.—Z. Jerman.

Theme: REVELATION.

Given at different times, and by
various methods, such as visions, dreams,
inspiration or rapture of soul, and direct
vocal communication. Its object, to re-
veal God, to instruct and guide man.
Here we have—

L The fact of revelation. “The Lord
hath spoken.”

UU. The authority of revelation.
“The Zord hath spoken.”

Itl. The appeal of revelation. “Hear
ye,” &c.

IV. The purpose of revelation. To

272


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAA.,





rebuke for sin. To save from judg-
ment. To make known the way of
mercy. To direct true souls into paths
of progress and happiness, To announce
Jehovah’s wrath against all wrong-
doing.— W. Whale.

Theme: PRIDE THE GREAT HIND-
RANCE TO THE RECEPTION oF Gop’s
Worp. “Hear ye, and give ear; be
not proud: for the Lord hath spoken.”

L. Pride will not seek the knowledge
of God.

1. Pride will not brook a rival.

2. Is unwilling to be taught.

3. Is unwilling to use the means of
knowledge.

4, Is unwilling to pray.

IL Pride will not seek the favour of
God.

TL Pride will not seek likeness to
God.

IV. Pride will not seek communion
with God.— Payson on Ps, x. 14.

“Both the symbols—girdle and ves-
sel—were of a nature very humiliating to
the national self-respect : but the prophet
warns them against letting any such
feeling interfere with the humble recep-
tion of the words of God.—Speaker’s
Com.

“Here is good counsel given, to
humble themselves under the mighty hand
of God. If they will harken and give
ear, this is that which God has to say
to them, Be not proud. This was one
of the sins for which God had a contro-
versy with them (ver. 9); let them mor-
tify and forsake this sin, and God will
let fall His controversy.

i. Be not proud when God speaks to
you by His prophets. Do not think
yourselves tuo good to be taught. Be
not (a) scornful, (b) wilful. Let not
your hearts rise against the word, nor
slight the messengers that bring it to you.

ii. Be not proud when God is coming
forth against you in His providence.
Be not (a) secure when He threatens ;
(b) impatient when He strikes. Pride is
at the bottom of both.

It is the great God who has spoken:
1. Whose authority is incontestable: 2.
Whose power is irresistible; therefore
how to what He says.”—(Comp. Henry.
See “ Noticeable Topics” on this verse.)


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


OMAP. X35,





Vers. 16, 17. Theme; ReEnpzERING
Gop GLORY BY REPENTANCE. (Giving
glory to God is opposed to being
proud; which is self-glory.

“ Jeremiah was as constant a preacher
of repentance as Paul, and after him
Augustine, were of the free grace of
God. The impenitent person robbeth
God of His right, the penitent man sar-
ett injuriam Deo trrogatam, seemeth to
make some kind of amends to God, whom
he had wronged, by restoring Him His
glory, which he had run away with,
whilst he putteth himself into the hands
of justice, in hope of mercy.”—Trapp.

“The phrase, to give glory to Jehovah,
when used in reference to such as had
incurred guilt, means to acknowledge
the justice of God in the infliction of
deserved punishment (Josh. vii. 19).”—
Hend.

“‘ How, indeed, can we ascribe glory
to God, except by acknowledging Him
to be the fountain of all wisdom, justice,
and power, and especially by trembling
at His sacred Word? Whosoever, then,
does not fear and reverence God, who-
soever does not believe His word, he
robs Him of His glory.”—Calvin.

IL Counsel “Give glory to the
Lord.”

1. Because the Lord’s glory is man’s
good.

2. Because in them that glory might
appear (ver. 11).

3. Because by them that glory might
be obscured.

Il. Warning. “ Before He cause dark-
ness,” &.

1. Fading light. No clear vision when
God is not glorified.

2. Stumbling feet. No power of pro-
gress unless for God’s glory.

3. Bewildering night. Captivity. All
lost.

IIL Pleading. “ Butif ye will nothear,
my soul shall weep,” &c.—His “ Lamen-
tations.”

1. It is the counsel of tender love.
For love’s sake.

2. It is the counsel of utter unselfish-
ness. ‘For Christ’s sake.” Rev. John
Farren.

See Wotticeable Topics on these verses.
Also Addenda on ver. 16, Repentance

8


glorifying God; and on ver. 17, La-
menting pride.

Ver. 16. Comments: “Hz cause
DARKNESS.” The night of affliction.
Light is the emblem of joy; and happy
tirges are expressed by bright and plea-
sant days; as, on the contrary, troubles
and calamities are represented by the
night and darkness, when everything
looks melancholy and dismal. — W.
Lowth.

“STUMBLE UPON THE DARK MOUN-
TaINS:” Before the time comes when
ye shall be forced to fly by night upon
the mountains for fear of your enemies.
—W. Lowth,

“Here is a double metaphor: Judah
is not walking upon the safe highway,
but upon dangerous mountains: and
already the dusk is closing around her.
While then the light still serves, let her
return unto her God.”—Speaker’s Com.

Ver. 16. Theme: WaNING LIGHT
FORESHADOWING UTMOST GLOOM.

God can darken all hope and joy.
Life’s gloom is admonitory. We should
seek the Lord when shadows gather, and
thus turn darkness into dawn.

I Total darkness will overtake
those who refuse God glory. It will
gather more thickly and intensely around
them, till it become dense. Note the
strengthening imagery: “ Cause dark-
ness” —“‘ shadow of death” — “ gross
darkness :” it indicates that the awful
gloom increases upon the godless soul,
ending in utter-most night. “To whom
is reserved the blackness of darkness for
ever.”

Il. Fading light, denoting the de-
cline of spiritual opportunity. Action
must be quick, for “ darkness” sets in,
Repent, “ give glory to God, before He
cause darkness,” ere His aaa
deepen upon you, and the gioom hides
all way of escape.

1, Attempts to escape will desperately
fatl. “ Your feet will stumble on dark
mountains.” The way of deliverance
would be hidden from their eyes, and
theirown efforts would only lead to misery
and defeat.

2. The shadows counsel speedy return
to God. Before the dread darknesa
environs us, it ir our ie seek

27


CHAP. XIII.


God, bow before Him in reconciliation,
aud glorify Him by submission.

III, Delusive hopes will perish in
the terrible gloom,

1, No light will return when once that
darkness falls on souls. Impenitent sin-
ners may “look for light ;” for amelio-
ration of woe, for escape from judgment,
but light will not come.

2. Deepest terrors will finally over-
whelm the godless, God will “turn it
into the shadow of death,” appalling
horror and despair: and “ make it
gross darkness,” which no ray of hope
or relief will pierce. Those who, when
the fourth vial was outpoured, “ repented
not to giwwe God glory,” were, with the
next vial, overwhelmed with “ darkness,”
and filled with agony (Rev. xvi. 9, 10).

The literal meaning of the metaphor
is that there was nigh at hand a most
dreadful vengeance, except the Jews in
time anticipated it, and submitted them-
selves to. God. “Seek righteousness,
seek meekness, it may be ye shall be
hid in the day of the Lord’s anger”
(Zeph. ii. 3).

(See Addenda on ver. 16. Stumble
upon the dark mountains).

Ver. 17. Theme: BITTER WEEPING
OVER HARDENED TRANSGRESSORS.

The burdened heart finds relief in tears,
And God is not unmindful of the grief of
holy commiseration, Such tearsare more
pleading and potent than prayers: they
express “ groanings which cannot be ut-
tered.” “ Thou wilt put all my tears into
Thy bottle”—precious are they to God,

I, Men’s wilfulness in sin occasions
heaviest sorrow to God’s messenger.
“ Tf ye will not hear it,” &c. Ministers
know something of the “terrors of the
Lord,” and the preciousness of souls,
and, therefore, feel bitterest grief over
the obstinate, who put salvation from
them. Christians ought to be keenly
affected by the guilt of others; and to
feel the prevailing rejection of God as a
personal distress.

II. Melancholy justification is sup-
plied for such holy grief. ,

1, Defiant pride, in repudiating God’s
word.

3. Desolating exile of God’s cherished
flock. Two distinct aspects: man’s

374


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMTARH.


hardened iniquity—a sad faet to vom
template ; God’s kingdom dishonoured—
for it was a discreditab‘e incident that
His flock should be carried away cap
tive. And over human guilt and God’s
sullied honour we have still sufficient
justification for grief. When our work
and word fail, we can still weep and
pray in private.

IXI. Sorrowful tears have a benig-
nant purpose to serve.

1. In prayerful retirement they may
be poured out before God, in plaintive
supplication for sinners. When preach-
ing effects no good, we can weep in secret
for the hardened ; and our tears shall be
& holy libation to God. “ My soul shall
weep in secret places for your pride.”

2. In open lamentation they may be
shed over sinners who will not weep for
themselves. Hearts may be touched by
a preacher's grief who would not feel
his words. They may plead with men
as well as with God. ‘‘ Mine eyes shall
weep sore, and run down with tears,
because the Lord’s flock is carried away
captive.” Would not that sight of the
broken-hearted prophet send a pang to
many an unreflective observer? Tears
may melt a feelingless heart, and holy
grief allure a prodigal to God. Weeping
ts the last resort of love. ‘When He
beheld the city, He wept over it, saying,
If thou hadst known !”

(See A:ddenda on ver. 17. Sorrovgful
tears.)

Theme: THE PATHOS OF AN EARNEST
soUL, Jeremiah was not a mere official
with a formal message, but a patriot,
and a devout lover of his fellow-men.
Looking into the text, we note—

L A fearful possibility. The Lord’s
flock captive.

IZ. A solitary hope.
hear the word of the Lord.

It. A faithful messenger.
miah speaking God’s word.

IV. A dreadful anticipation If
they will not hear.

V. A pathetic resolve. ‘“ If they will
not hear, my soul shall weep.”

AppLicaTion: 1. To ministers—that
they feel deep interest in the people, so
as to weep over them, &c.

2. To, people—that it is a question of


If they will


Jere-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


OHAP. XIti,





essential importance concerning which
God speaks. That their treatment of
the Divine Word will decide whether
the future shall be captivity or prosperity
and bliss.—W. Whale.

Vers. 18, 19. See homily on section,
supra.

“When the enemies are at the gate,
the plague in the city, and there is no
escape, while human help there is none,
then it is time when preachers may
speak to their princes who are in error ; at
other times they would be esteemed in-
solent.. . . Sometimes God’s witnesses
are clothed with anauthority which no one
understands, but all feel.”— Zinzendorf.

“They who are chosen to the office
of teaching cannot faithfully discharge
their duty except they boldly, and with
intrepid spirit, dare to reprove both
kings and queens; for the word of the
Lord is not to be restricted to the com-
mon people, or men in humble life. This
prophecy was, no doubt, very bitter to
the king as well as to the common
people; for the king and his mother
thought they could not possibly be de-

throned.”—Calvin.

Ver. 20. Theme: THE LOST FLOCK
DEMANDED OF THE FAITHLESS SHEPHERD.

God expects of those who were en-
trusted with the care of others due at-
tention to their responsibilities. And
God will require their flock at their
hands; that they should return to Him,
saying, “ Behold me, and the children
Thou hast given me!” or, as they to
whom talents were entrusted returned
to their Lord with the usury. Yes, and
He will hold them accountable for what
befalls the fiock: “their blood will I
require at thy hands.”

Amazed at the depopulation of the
surrounding cities, Jeremiah demands
of Jerusalem an explanation of the deso-
lations : or, demands of the State [for
the pronoun is fem.], an explanation of
the captivity and devastation of Judah.
‘‘ What does this mean, that the flock is
scattered which was entrusted to thee?”

I. Imminent perils jeopardise the
flefenceless flock.

1. Foes are visible: “Lift up your
eyes and behold them!” Adversaries
are clearly within sight, menacing the


safety and weal of society, the peace and
progress of the Church, the piety and
happiness of the family, the integrity and
honour of commerce, the healthful tone
and influence of diterature, the veracity
and authority of revealed truth and
Christian doctrine.

2. Foes are advancing : “ they come
from the north.” Heathenish forces
advance against our sacred inheritances
—would rob Israel of her possession of
Canaan ; invade our holy scenes, besiege
Jerusalem, and desecratethe Templewhere
God is worshipped, for no hallowed
scene awes them away ; assail our very
liberty—intend to conquer and capture
the people, to make souls their prey, and
carry captive the helpless, For mani-
festly the “flock” is defenceless, when
the rulers and shepherds “fear not God"
neither regard man.” As indeed are
our homes and liberties if they be not
environed by the covenant care of God.

II. Solemn responsibility charged
upon the heedless shepherds. ‘‘ Where
is the flock?” &e.

a. With which they had been put in
trust: “given unto thee.”

b. Which needed and merited faithful
care: “thy beautiful flock.”

ce. Of whose safety God will require
solemn account: ‘“ Where is the flock?”
This is applicable to—

1. Magisterial responsibility for the
wellbeing of their people. They must
protect their subjects from invading
evils, and care for the moral as well as
physical good of those they govern.

2. Parental responsibility for the
career of their children. Where are
they? Trained in “the good and right
way,” led after Jesus, guided into the
Church of Christ? Or wandering into
worldly scenes, amid snares and sophis-
tries? God will want to know “ where”
they are at the end of their life on
earth, when we appear before Him to
give account of our stewardship.

$. Ministerial responsibility for the
salvation of those they taught. Have
they watchfully tended the flock, been
faithful and dutiful shepherds? Where
are the souls to whom you ministered
the word of redemption, “over whom
the Holy Ghost made you nee

2


GHAP. XII.


When the Chief Shepherd shall appear,
He will require their souls of those who
were put in charge of the gospel. (See
Noticeable Topic on this verse.)

Ver. 21. Theme; WHAT WILT THOU
®AY WHEN HE SHALL PUNISH THEE.

Time coming when God would call
Jewish nation to awful account, God
das solemnly threatened the wicked with
punishment. When summoned to His
bar, “what wilt thou say?” What rea-
aon allege against justice of thy doom?

L Refleet on that change of. cir-
eumstances which will be favourable
to a correct judgment.

1. The infidelity which now blinds
your minds will then be removed. You
will see there is a God, your duty on
earth, your guilt in ignoring Him.

2. The mission of Christ will then be
understood. Then see the infinite evil
your sins wrought on Calvary.

3. The “opened books” will show re-
cord of all your sins,.God’s dealings with
you, &., making a “revelation of the
righteous judgment of God.”

4, Eternity will be laid open to your
view, the glories of heaven, the horrors
of doom.

5. The infinite and eternal interests
which God’s law was appointed to pro-
tect, and against which your sins waged
eternal war, will then stand displayed.

6. Sin will then be seen as tn raging
hostility to the whole creation; against
God, &.

7. Nothing will then divert attention,
or excite false hopes, or offer excuses.
Everything will then burst upon you
marked with eternity and infinity. Who
can describe the emotions of that day ?

I. Examine the several pleas which
may be supposed to offer themselves
then to thought.

1. Will you say that you meant no
evil? But it will appear how your sel-
fish heart opposed God, &c.

2. That your sins effected no sertous
result2? But they have wrought im-
measurable evils ; erucified Christ &e.,
and perhaps destroyed souls.

3. That eternal punishment 4s too
severe for temporary sins? The sin of
an hour can fix lasting misery. and must
fali on the culprit himeelf.

276


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


4. That your sins being fintte, de
not merit infinite punishment? You
sinned against an infinite God, therefore
your punishment should be infinite,
though it is finite in degree to comport
with your nature,

5. Will you plead, You are no woree
than others? There was no obligation
to do evil with the multitude. God's
law bound you individually.

6. Will you say, You had strong temp-
tations? They were sent to test your
obedience. They showed you loved
your idols more than God. Your de
pravity gave them power.

7. Will you say, Those wiser than you
betrayed you inin errors of doctrine?
You had the Word of God, the truth was
plainly written there.

8. Will you plead, You had good
desires and did good? In God’s account
you had no good desire, and did no
good act. This wsll appear against all
the unregenerate,

9. Will you say, You did not know
God? God was before you in His
works, and more gloriously in His Word.
Your ignorance arose from your un-
belief—“ He that believeth not shall
be damned.”

10. Will you say, The Holy Spirtt did
not strive? Had you heeded His voice
you would not have been in this con-
dition now.

11. Willyow say, Minssters and friends
did not warn you? Say not so, They
would have snatched you from destruc-
tion, but they could not.

12. Will you charge the blame on
God—say He gave you passions which
betray you? All false. He gave you no
passions to lead you astray. Self-love
changed all, and you alone are to blame,

13. Will you plead, You could not love
God, could not repent and believe, nor
change your heart? This is saying your
heart would yield to no motives; and
if God may not punish that, He can no
more exercise moral government.

14. Will you say, You were excluded
by God’s foreknowledge and decree? If
God foresaw you would reject the gospel,
did that compel you to do so, You
rejected it as freely as if it had not been
foreknown.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAR.





15. Well yow say, It is hard for a
creature to be brought into existence
without his own consent, and then to be
made eternally miserable? Who art
thou that repliest against God? If He
may not create intelligent beings, and
punish them when they sin, He has no
right to maintain moral government.

16. Will you say, Why did He suffer
me to sin? If the penalty of the law
was not executed, it would have been
annihilated, and the law turned into
advice. Could not infinite Wisdom
fadge as well as yout

17, Will you say, There iz no need of
euch severity, God could make the uns-
verse happy without your destruction?
Can you look through eternity, and
judge better than God? Or teach Him
what is best for public good} Aban-
don these charges, fall down at the feet
of Christ, and cast your soul on Him,
Coee, “for all things are ready.”
God, Christ, and the Holy Spirit are
ready. Areyouready? Come.—Anon.

Vers. 21, 22. Theme; Gov’s supe
MENT UPON THE FAITHLESS VINDI-
GATED.

I. The tyranny of usurpers is ex-
plained. Why are God’s people found
in a state of captivity—does it not im-
ply that He has failed to guard them?
No! “Thou hast taught them,” &.
By coquetting with foreigners, thou
hast given them advantages over thee,
which they have used for thy conquest.
(See Lnt. Crit. on verse.) If we court
the friendship of sinners, we lay our-
selves open to subjugation, and invite
them to seize the unwary prey. Heze-
kiah, by showing the ambassadors his
treasures, thus tempted the Babylonish
king to plunder.

II. The misery of the vanquished
is justified. “Shall not sorrow take
thee, as a woman in travail?” Poignant
will be the anguish; and not a reason
will the sufferers be able to adduce why
sorrows shall not take them. Sedf-con-
demnation, the consciousness of merited
misery, is “the worm that dieth not,
the fire that cannot be quenched.”

IlI. The afflictions of judgment
threatened. ‘ What wilt thou say when
He shall punish thee?” There is still


CHAP. 31.





an taterval of suspended judgment. But
the unsheathed sword will assuredly fall
on the impenitent.

IV. The questionings of self-vindi-
cation silenced. “And if thou say in
thine heart, Wherefore come these things
upon me?” There is reason to doubt
whether the sufferer will dare to ask
such a question, for he will know the
reason all too well: “sf thou say.”
Even if he venture on such a self-
answered inquiry, it will not dare utter
ttself, only rising in silence, as being
ashamed of being heard: “say in thine
heart.” Yet, should any ask for the
justification of the Divine afflictions,
here it is—“ For the greatness of thine
iniquity.”

V. The degradation of apostates is
depicted. ‘Thy skirts discovered, and
thy heels made bare.” (See Lit. Crit.
on verse). This public shame (see also
ver. 26) prefigures the confusion and
contempt which will be openly poured
upon all them that forget God and dis-
honour Him by their iniquitous disre-
gard of His claims and His grace,

Ver. 23. Theme: EscaPInc THE
THRALDOM OF EVIL HABITS,

I. The great difficulty of reforming
vicious habits. This difficulty of chang-
ing a bad course arises—

1. From the general nature of habits.

2. From the particular nature of bad
habits.

3. From the natural and judicial con-
sequences of the great progress and long
continuance of a bad course.

Ii, This difficulty is not desperate
There is some ground of hope and en
couragement.

1. There is left even in the worst of
men @ natural sense of the evil and un-
reasonableness of stn.

2. Very bad men, when they have
any thought of becoming better, are
apt to conceive some good hopes of God's
grace and mercy.

3. Who knows what man, thoroughly
roused and startled, may resolve to do?

4. The grace and assistance of God,
when sincerely sought, «s never to be
despaired of.— Tillotson.

Suggestions arranged from Lange—

1. A comfortless perspective Ate 23).


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; JEREMIAL.





hi, Yet with God nothing ts impossible
(Matt. xix. 26).

iii. Purtfication, though slow and suc-
cessive, can be effected. The conclusion
of ver. 27 shows this. In purification—

1. We obtain a point of support
without ourselves (Arehimedes).

2. And a new principle of life in
Christ Jesus. (See Addenda on verse
23, Inveterate Habits.)

Theme ; THE POWER OF EVIL HABITS,

We take notice of particular evil acts,
but are strangely insensible of an evil
principle operating within us. This
principle shows itself in daily habits.
Experience shows that our habits of sin
are not easily broken.

I. The power of sin, as inherent in
our nature.

1. It pervades all our faculties,
whether of mind or body. Understand-
ing blinded, will perverse, affections
earthly, conscience stupsfied, &c, (Rom.
iii, 12-15 ; vi. 13).

2. It finds in us nothing to counteract
tts influence. Neither reason nor con-
science perform their office in opposing
this evil principle. (See Rom. vii. 18.)

3. It receives aid from everything
around us. “All that is in the world,
lust of flesh, lust of eyes, and pride of
life,” are confederates, and solicit us to
sin.
4. It conceals its influence under
specious names. What will it not com-
mend under the idea of amusement, and
sanction as conviviality and good breed-
ing ?

IL Its power, as confirmed and aug-
mented by evil habit.

1. [ts odiousness is diminished. We
see to what lengths wicked men will
proceed when once the restraints of
conscience and remorse are broken
through ; glory in their shame (Phil.
iii. 18, 19).

2. Its power is strengthened. Man
may so accustom himself to anger, in-
temperance, impurity, or sloth, as to
become powerless to resist temptation
(2 Pet. 12 14; Prov. xxvi. 14; Matt.
xix, 24).

3. Its opportunities for exercise are
multiplied. Habits call around us per-
sons and temptations subservient to


are


their indulgence. Thus, “ sin most eaaily
besets them” (Prov. vii. 22, 23).

4. The powers whereby tt should be
resisted are destroyed. Conscience be-
comes “seared” (1 Tim. iv. 2); mind
hardened against fear (Heb. iii. 13).
Hence “wax worse and worse” (2 Tim.


iii, 13.)
5. Everything good ts by tt put at an
unapproachable distance. ‘ How shall


they do good?” &. If the “ putting
off of the old man” be so difficult, what
hope is there of “ putting on the new?”
(Eph. iv. 22-24). Learn—

a. Your need of converting grace.
“Must be born again.”

b. The difference between sin and
grace, as affected by our habits, Habits
of sin will augment of themselves; not
so with habits of grace, “ Let him that
thinketh he standeth take heed lest he
fall.” Yet the Lord is able to hold you
up, and “ His strength ts made perfect in
weakness.” —Simeon.

Theme: THE ALARMING POWER OF SIN.

This passage, like some others in the
sacred writings, is not to be interpreted
in the strictest sense; of the same de-
scription is the declaration of Christ,
“Tt is easier for a camel to go through
the eye of a needle than for a rich man
to enter into the kingdom of heaven.”
And yet such men are saved, though the
difficulties in the way of their salvation
are many and great. So, in some in-
stances, are men long accustomed to do
evil diverted from their courses of
iniquity. But this is not usual. It is
a truth which should affect the minds
of every class, that the long-continued
impenitence of men augments the diffi-
culties in the way of their salvation.

L The habits of men are strength-
ened and confirmed by indulgence.

II. The infiuence of this world, as
men advance in life, usually becomes
more perplexing, and a greater hin-
drance to their conversion.

III. As years increase men become
less interested in the subject of re-
ligion, and more obdurate and averse
to any alteration in their moral cha-
racter.

IV. The thought of multiplied and
long-continued transgression i« very


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY ; JEREMIAL.





apt to discourage all attempts at re-
pentance.

V. There is awful reason to appre-
hend that God will leave men of this
description to perish in their sins.

APPLICATION—

1. What ts the admonition which it
addresses to the aged?

2. Our subject addresses those who are
tn middle life.

3. It addresses the young.—Dr. D.
Spring.

Comments—

“Custom in sin is a very great hin-
drance to conversion from sin.”—Henry.

‘Learned men in our age do not
wisely refer to this passage, when they
seek to prove that there is no free-will
in man ; for it is not simply the nature
of man that is spoken of here, but the
habit that is contracted by long prac-
tice, Aristotle, a strong advocate of
free-will, confesses that it is not in man’s
power to do right, when he is so im-
mersed in his own vices as to have lost
a free choice (7, Z1b. Ethicon), and this
also is what experience proves.” —Calvin.

‘ Inveterate habits are justly regarded
as a second-nature ; but, being moral in
their character, instead of extenuating,
they aggravate the gutlt of those who
are the subjects of them. Strong,
therefore, as is the physical reference
here made, it can with no propriety be
employed in support of the physical
impossibility of moral reformation.”
— Henderson.

See Noticeable Topics on this verse.

Ver, 24. Comments—

“SoaTTer THEM:” “This was no small
aggravation of their misery that they
should be thus severed one from another.
So the persecutors of primitive times
relegated and confined the poor Chris-
tians to isles and mines, where they
could not have access one to another for
mutual comfort and support, as Cyprian
complaineth.”—Trapp.

Ver. 25. “THY LOT, THE PORTION OF
THY MEASURES:” The portion I have
measured out to thee (Job xx. 29; Ps.
xi. 6); as by line and measure I formerly
allotted thee an inheritance in Canaan.

“In FALSEHOOD:” de, in false gods


and foreign usurpers.





CHAP. XEg.





Ver. 26. Their punishment should
answer to their crime. In spiritual
harlotry with heathen gods they had
exposed themselves to others; God
would expose them to shame and igno-
miny before the eyes of heathen foes.

Ver. 27. Theme: JUDAH’S OLEANS-
ING—A FORLORN HOPE.

“ Wilt thou not be made clean? When
shall tt once be ?”

I. Purification deliberately refused.
* Not be made clean.” (See on ver. 1:
“ Put it not in water.”) As yet Judah
delighted in her defilement.

I. Purification extremely difficult.
“Shall it once be?” These words ex-
plain ver. 23. Repentance on the part
of Judah seemed to have become a
moral impossibility ; therefore cleansin
could not be effected. No cleansin:
where there is no penitence.

IL Purification remotely possible.
‘‘When shall it be?” In the far dis-
tant future the prospective possibility
opens to the Seer. It cannot yet, or
soon be. Nevertheless he cherishes the
distant hope. His patriotic love leads
him to this generous surmise. And his
knowledge of the patience and mercy of
Jehovah forbid him to despair.

Theme: AN AFFECTIONATE EXPOSTU-
LATION WITH JUDAH, “ Wilt thou not
be made clean ?”

“Though it was adjudged next to
impossible for them to be brought to do
good (ver. 23), yet while there is life
there is hope, and therefore still he
reasons with them to bring them to
repentance (ver. 27).

“i, He reasons with them concerning
the thing itself. ‘Wilt thou not be
made clean?’ Note, It is the great
eoncern of those who are polluted by
sin to be made clean by repentance and
faith and an universal reformation.
The reason why sinners are not made
clean is that they will not be made
clean; and therein they act unreason-
ably.

“ii, Concerning the time of tt. ‘When
shall it once be?’ Note,—It is an in-
stance of the wonderful grace of God,
that He desires the repentance and con-
version of sinners, and thinks the tume
tong ti!] they are brought to reient ; bus

279


G@aP. Xin,


it is an instance of the wonderful folly
of sinners that they put that off from
time to time which is of such absolute
necessity that, if it be not done some
time, they are undone for ever. They
do not say, they will never be cleansed,
but, not yet; they will defer it to a more
convenient season, but cannot tell us
‘when it shall once be,’”—Henry.

Theme: CLEANSING POSSIBLE, YET
REFUSED. ‘“ Woe unto thee, O Jeru-
salem! Wilt thou not be made clean?
When shall it once be?”

Every impenitent sinner is involved
in guilt and polluted with sin. God is
willing to pardon, if he repent and
believe the gospel. ‘The blood of
Jesus Christ His Son cleanseth us from
all sin.” It is implied—

I. That it is possible for creatures
involved in guilt and polluted with
sin to obtain both pardon and purity.
“Wilt thou not be made clean? When
shall it once be?”

God is able to cleanse us from sin.
Our own unwillingness greatly obstructs
it, yet it is possible to obtain it.

1. It is possible to have our guilt re-
moved, and to be delévered from the con-
sequences of sin.

2. It is possible for us to be delivered
from the pollution of sin.

IL It is supposed That many raise
objections against this cleansing and
the means appointed for it. “ Wilt
thou not be made clean?”

The unbelieving Jews objected to the
charge of guilt brought against them by
the prophet.

1. Some are willing to be delivered
from the consequences of sin, but not
from its power. Would willingly escape
hell, but care not to live a holy life ;
would accept a free and full salvation,
but are not ready to take up their cross
to follow Christ.

2. Some are willing to be cleansed
outwardly, but not inwardly. Many do
not object to leave off some of their
gross sins, but dislike what is internal
and spiritual.

3. Some are willing to be cleansed
partly, but not entirely. There are sins
they cannot give up.

4, Some raise objections to God’s ap-

280


HOMILETIOC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





pointed methods for cleansing sins. Ob
ject to the mediation of Christ as the
ground of their hope: would prefer to
do some good work for themselves.
Not willing to be pardoned and sancti-
fied in God’s appointed way.

5. Some who admit the importance of
being cleansed, object to being cleansed yet ;
“at once.” Religion is important, but
it is to be attended to at some future
time.

III. That those who object to be
cleansed render themselves liable to
Divine judgment. The words are in-
troduced with a Woe. ‘‘ Woe unto thee,
O Jerusalem!” Refusing pardon, they
deserve judgment for their impenitence,
So those under the gospel, who remain
impenitent and ungodly, are exposed to
the most awful judgment.

1. Those who refuse to apply to the
sacrifice of Christ have no way of mercy
left to them. ‘There is no other name
under heaven,” &e.

2. Those who are not cleansed from
sin must be excluded from heaven. “ Ex-
cept a man be born again he cannot see
the kingdom of God.”

3. There ts great danger tf you are
not cleansed yet, that you will remain
and perish in your corruption.—Anon.

Theme: MERCY’ APPEAL — “ WILt
THOU BB MADE OLEAN?” &e.

The favoured city under a ban—be
cause of uncleanness—Divine offer ot
help the only hope. Mercy’s appeal.

1. Mercy’s appeal ts fatthful, con-
vincing of sin, and commanding repent-
ance.

2. Mercy’s appeal ws humiliating
Jerusalem is unclean and unable to make
itself clean.
strength. Dependent on Divine love,

3. Mercy’s appeal ts helpful. God
has made provision for cleansing. He
is anxious to afford aid.

4, Mercy’s appeal is to the moral wish
of man. “ Wilt thou'” &c.

5. Mercy’s appeal is effectual when
man ts made willing to be clean.

Another method on same text—

L The great need of the soul,
cleansing.

Ii. The great helplessness of the
soul, caunot cleanse itself.


Ungodly and without


SS ee


a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. OHAP. EE.








Il The great grace of God. He V. The great work of the ministry
has provided for cleansing, and offers to 1. To bring home the feeling of guilt
cleanse, 2. To ask the question of the text.

IV. The great drawback on our 3. To direct to the cleansing fount
part. We do not naturally wish to be 4, To urge the importance of imme
clean, diate application —W. Whale.


NOTICEABLE TOPIOS IN CHAPTER XIII.
Topic: Ngarnuss to Gop DesrroyEp sy Sin. (Vers, 1-11).


The sacred writers use the incidents of life and the symbolism of nature te in-
culcate truth, Christ did the same. Reason of this—(1.) Difficult to secure man’s
attention. (2.) Difficult to effect a lodgment of the truth in the heart. We have
here a symbolic action, the burying, d&c., of the girdle, intended to represent the
nearness of the Jewish nation to God, and their alienation and destruction
through sin.


Subject: Neanwess to Gop Drsrroyep By SIN.


I. Nearness to God—1. These Jews were like a girdle bound upon the loins.
Should have entwined themselves around God. So nations may be near—(1) In
the great things that God had done for them. (2) In the covenant relation which
He had entered into with them. (8) In the privileges which He had conferred
upon them.

2. Man is near—(1) He is near by nature—created in God’s image. (2) He is
near to God’s heart. (3) He is near in God’s care over him. (4) He is near in
the privileges of liberty, religion, knowledge, discipline, warning. (5) In a posi-
tion to become eternally nearer by growing up into Christ. Entering into his
ei Entering into His palace above. (6) Brought near for God’s glory

ver. 11).

II. His nearness destroyed by sin.—1. Sin is the destroyer of nations as well
as individuals. The Jews destroyed by idolatry, lust, selfishness, pride.

2. As of nations so of individuals, sin will destroy them unless resisted and cast
forth. Man in Paradise, Antediluvian world, Ahab, Haman, Lot, and Solomon
almost.

8. This destruction is voluntary. The sinner is a suicide. (Ver 10, &c.).

4. God is represented as active in this destruction, ug.—(1) Not that God
deserts the sinner first. Pharaoh hardens his heart repeatedly before God is said
to harden it. (2) But, when the measure of sin is full, God removes restraints,
and sets in motion the agency of judgment.

5. This destruction will consist in—(1) Separation from God. (2) Utte
corruption and rottenness,

Learn :—1. The terrible power of sin, 2. To guard againat it as our chief enemy.
—L. Jerman.


Topic: Lire Lrssoxs—* Bz not Proup :” Children’s Sermon. (Ver. 15.)


The lily of the valley, growing in the shade, and concealing itself in its own
leaves, hints this same lesson. So does the nightingale, which “asks no witness
to her song.” Not need to describe pride, as if it were a new thing, or a rare curio-
sity, something which we must travel to ruins of Nineveh to find: as ancient as
Garden of Eden, and common as thorns and thistles. It is exceedingly deceitful,
escapes punishment by assuming a fictitious excellence, but in any form it is SIN!
And, it is enmity to God, sets up idols where He should reign, and breeds envies,
malice, &c.—things worthy of death. Its varieties are manifold: dwell on four of
the chief— ; pe


JHAP, XIU, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





I. There is race pride. Be thankful for good and pious ancestors: but what is
there to boast off Did we help to make them what they were; and are we as
good as they? Jews were race proud: “ We have Abraham to our father ;” “We
be the children of Abraham!” Not wrong to rejoice that our progenitors have
been noble and holy, but to be arrogant and supercilious on account of this, and
treat others disdainfully, is a ridiculous and detestable habit.

IL There is face pride. Lovely or ‘manly features are not to be despised.
Astonishing what favours they obtain, how many bolted doors they open. But if
they foster pride, beauty is no longer beauty; it is despicable vanity. Remember
how inferior outward appearance is to moral qualities, how empty it will leave you
disease despoils you of beauty; culture “the ornament of a meek and quiet
spirit.”

III. There is place pride. Your position in society, fine house, carriage, rich
dress, education, accomplishments—these do not render you better than those
whose station is lower; not wiser, nobler, holier. You received them from God,
‘‘without money and without price ;” be not haughty about them.

IV. There is grace pride. The worst sort of pride, pride in godliness! Mingles
with our prayers, praises, charities, repentance, and tears. We estimate our devo-
tidns or services, and think them satisfactory, congratulate ourselves on them: we
then offer incense to self instead of to God. Grace pride corrupts all grace.

“Be not proud” therefore, because—1l. We have nothing to be proud of: we are
poor, weak, dependent creatures, 2. Jt ss abhorrent to God: it shuts Him away.
“The proud He knoweth afar off.” ‘God resisteth the proud.” Fallen, depraved,
perishing beings, proud / 3. It ts so unlike Christ. Yet He was “altogether
lovely ;” knew everything, possessed everything, could do everything ; yet “meek
and lowly in heart.” 4. Jt ¢s rusnous. ‘ Pride goeth before destruction.” What
warnings do Saul, Nebuchadnezzar, and Herod offer! Watch against inducements
to pride: bravely struggle with and subdue it—Rev. James Bolton, in “ Family
Treasury.”


Topie: Gop GLORIFIED in THE Fatt ov Pripz. Teast: “ Be not proud; give
glory to the Lord your God. But tf ye will not hear, my soul shall weep in
secret places for your pride; and my eyes shall weep sore, and run down
with tears, because the Lord’s flock ts carried away captive” (vers, 15-17).


What a wonderful circumstance claims attention; the Everlasting God Himself
pleads for an audience! ‘“‘ Hear ye and give ear, for the Lord hath spoken!” He
tells of matters of vast importance ; and, if you listen, through eternity you will
thank God for having attended to His word.

I. Ask, What is it which stops people from hearing the voice of God? Text
points to one special obstacle which is the last we should have thought possible—
pride. When Jehovah condescends to speak to the heart of one so worthless, vouch-
safes to offer us counsel of most momentous concern, the thing which bars our door
against the entrance of Jesus, or deadens our ear to the sound of His voice, is this
accursed thing called “pride.” Varied aspects assumed by pride :—

1. One form of “ pride” is shame. Many kept from Christ because ashamed to
come and give themselves up to Him. For fear of the paltry scorn, the momen-
tary ridicule, the soul will risk eternity! You have to choose between shame now
and shame eternally. Yet what is there to be ashamed of, that you should be kept
from Christ? Rather there is cause for shame in being a sinner, impenitent, self-
condemned !

2. There is the “ pride” of respectability and social position. Hold apart from
religion, because in the one way all must go without distinction. Yet who would
not prefer the position of the vulgar beggar Lazarus to that of the respectable
citizen Dives? What can justify in a lost sinner any high and vain thoughts
of self?

282





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. OHAP, XI,





3. There is the “ pride” that conceals @ wound. God’s word has stricken the
heart ; healing and joy could be had if we humbly go to God, yet hide the grief and
unrest within, from man and Heaven! Let this pride be broken down, and con-
fession be made in the ears of your God.

4. There is the “pride” of self-righteousness. ‘Thank God, I am not like
other men!” What say when before the Throne—that you were too good to
accept the Gospel? Like the man without the wedding-garment, “you will be
speechless.” You might be clothed with the righteousness which is from God by
faith ; yet choosing your own, you are justly condemned!

Il. Human pride must effectually be broken down.

1. When pride ts humbled, and the man is crushed, then it is God speaks. And
what does He say? Might expect—“ Depart from Me, ye cursed!” Nay: “ Give
glory to the Lord your God.” Your God still, though turned your back upon Him,
grieved Him, “would none of His ways.” How make return for the wrong done,
years wasted, opportunities lost? ‘Give glory to the Lord your God!”

2. The contrite soul cannot realise its ability to glorify God. A child of sin and
sorrow, heart vile, sins crying out in reproach, all life a transgression, how can
such an one glorify God? Note: A sinner can in one sense glorify God mure than
the brightest angel before His thrane. From deepest woe He raises the soul to
highest bliss and holiness! And while “there is joy in the presence of God over
the sinner” repentant, the Most High is glorified in the achievement of wondrous
grace! Give this glory to your God; broken down, powerless, self despairing,
cast yourself on His salvation.

3. There is a desperate alternative; that “you will not hear.” By and by your
feet will “stumble on the dark mountains.” The day of disease will come; life
will grow dim; the thin grandeur of a fading world will begin to pass away; all
around the gloom will thicken, and on a dying world “gross derkness,” of un-
selieved despair, wiil cover you. Then the last moment comes; one terrified “look
for light,” but in vain; the soul is “carried away into captivity.”

Tears for lost Jerusalem! Tears for a lost soul! ‘ Mine eyes shall weep sore.”
—Aitken’s “ Misston Sermons.”


Topic: Gop’s oLaIM ON Parents. Teat: “ Where ts the flock that was given thee,
thy beautiful flock?” (ver. 20).


If kings are responsible for their subjects, teachers are for their scholars, parents
are for their children.

I. What is here shown us respecting the flock. “ The flock that was given
thee, thy beautiful flock.”

1. The flock ts not yours; not yours in proprietorship, but only yours in charge.
It is “the flock given thee.” Mighty kings and tyrants have regarded subjects as
their property: such have always wrought the ruin of their nation. The flock
belongs to God. Israel was His. Children are peculiarly and specially God’s.
Authority over them is God’s gift to parents; but He lias a claim prior to yours.
He continues His work of Creation in every child born. Its existence is wonderful.
Much more wonderful are its capacttves—physical, mental, social, spiritual !

2. Christ highly estimates the flock. “Thy beautiful flock.” ‘“ Whosoever shall
receive one such child in My name, receiveth Me.” Christian hospitality to a child
is homage to God. Teachers, parents, the children of your charge constitute the
flock that is given you; but you are not owners, only shepherds ; and the obliga-
tion of shepherds is on you.

II. The responsibility of parents to whom God has entrusted His flock.
The question will be put, sooner or later, ‘‘ Where is the flock given thee ?”

The great responsibility of parents is seen in this, that—

l. They had to impart religious ideas. At home the first principles are instilled ;
indeed. the child’s mind is there made acquainted with the germs of all nen

82





O@AP. EI, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.





forgiveness, righteousness, salvation, love human and Divine: all the ideas involved
in religion.

2. Parents represent to their children the character of the Invisible God. Jewish
kings substituted and were to represent the “ King of kings.” The Incarnate Jesus
revealed “the Father in heaven.” The gospel is a declaration of the Paternal
Love. The parental relationship, therefore, represents God to the little ones ; and
they get their first ideas of Him from what their parents are.

3. The inquiry “for the flock” will be addressed to parents. God will ask of
them “the beautiful flock” that made bright their homes. The time will come
when this inquiry will be addressed from the judgment throne to parents, And
among the gathered flocks in the “‘one fold” of heaven Christ will ask for yours.
Alas! some will pass childless into the gates of heaven ; bereaved not by death but
by sin: themselves saved, their children lost. How will their ears receive the
words, ‘‘ Enter into the joy of your Lord”? Others will themselves be arrested at
the throne; themselves rejected : and to them also will the inquiry come, “‘ Where
is thy flock?” Driven by thee into perdition—souls which were not thine, lambs
whom Jesus came to save |

III. The way in which this responsibility should be met. If you would pre-
pare to answer joyfully this question, set it before you as—

1. A distinct purpose. The wish for your children’s salvation is not enough.
Many good people are bad parents through lack of this purpose that their children
shall be saved ; a purpose registered in the sight of God over each child singly.

2. Intense devotion is necessary. Lukewarm piety will never enable a man to say
at the throne, “‘ Behold I and the children which God has given me!” To have
converting power over your own children you must love their souls, and hold them
fast for God.—Rev. Alden Davies, in “ Christian World Pulpit.”


Topi: Custom In Sin Exorzpina Danerrous. Text: “Can the Ethiopian
change his skin, or the leopard hig spots? then may ye also do good that are
accustomed to do evtl” (ver. 23).


The miserable condition of sin is here exhibited in two branches, its defilement
and its entanglement.

I. The defilement of sin. This is propounded from a double resemblance, the
blackness of the Hihiopian, and the spots of the leopard. It is a polluting and de-
forming thing; whether man be regarded as corporeal or spiritual. Let it be
beauty of the body, sin will cause loathsomeness ; or beauty of mind, sin will take
off the comeliness, and reduce it to coarseness and lust. Let men be what they
may, yet if defiled by sin, they are so far forth very unlovely. They may not see
their own ugliness, deformity, and filthiness in sin, as Ethiopians do not perceive
their own blackness, nor are sensible of it; nay, they count their blackness their
greatest beauty ; yet this does not make them a whit the comelier.

To open this defilement and deformity which is in sin the more, we may take
notice of four particulars :—

1. The inherence of sin. Like the blackness of the Ethiopian, and spots of
leopard. ‘Behold I was shapen in iniquity,” &c. (Ps, li. 5); “VW are by nature
children of wrath” (Eph. ii. 3); “The wicked are estranged jum the womb”
(Ps. lviii. 3). (1) This should humble and abase us in consideration of our own vile-
ness ; not lead us to excuse our sins. If sin were a thing which men fell into only
by chance, as something adventitious to them, some palliation might be found ; but
its being inbred and natural makes it the more abominable. Let us prosecute the
work of humility and deep contrition, being afflicted in soul on account of this
natural deformity. And (2) we see here what cause we have to desire that God would
thange our nature, and bestow a new nature upon us.

2. The monstrousness of sin. As we have seen it im its generation, so may we
look upon it in ite degeneration. (1) Jé alters a man’s country ; turns an Jeraclite

284


HOMILETIU COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH, CHAP. XE.
NE


into an “ Kthéopian,” and thus causes a degeneration there. (2) It also alters a
man’s nature; gives a man the quality and disposition even of the beasts, makes
him a “leopard,” and thus makes a degeneration there. See Ps xlix, 20, “I was
as a beast before Thee.” Thus does sin degenerate, debase, and put the sinner
below himself.

3. The multiplication of sin. It is various; expressed here by the “ leopard’s
spois.” Sin is a beast of divers colours and marks and spots, A large catwlogue
- in Gal. v. 19, where the works of the flesh are made manifest, There are not more
spots in a leopard than there are lusts in a corrupt heart.

4. The universality of sin. It is a deformity in all the parts, not one excepted: as is
the blackness of the Ethiopian and the spots of the leopard. Sin makes a man
universally sinful and polluted in every part and member of him (Isa. i. 5 ; Gen.
vi. 5). Ou the other side, good men are freed from these spots: ‘Thou art all fair,
my love, there is no spot in thee” (Cant. iv. 7); “Not having spot or wrinkle,”
&c. (Eph. v. 27). See also 2 Peter iii, 14; James i. 27 ; Jude 23.

Let us not look upon these things as mere metaphors, but as carrying a manifest
truth and reality in them ; believe them, and be affected by them, Let this carry
us so much the more closely to Christ, and cause us to admire God’s free grace in
Him, as the “ Propitiation for sin,” and “the Lamb of God which taketh away the
sin of the world.” The vileness of sin should make it loathsome to us, and love the
means appointed for our recovery from tt.

II. The entanglements of sin. Expressed in the unmovableness and un-
changeableness of it ; as “the Ethiopian cannot change his skin, or the leopard his
spots.”

: 1. The qualification [or condition] of the persons “accustomed to do evil.”
More correctly “taught to do evil.” Taught ve By doctrine and instruction. There
is a great deal of such teaching in the world (see Matt. v. 19; Tit. i, 11; Mark
vii. 7) ; and # great deal of ill-learning also follows thereupon ; people are here
quickly taught, so capable and appreciative are they (2 Tim. iv. 3, 4). Those who
are thus taught to do evil cannot do good; there is an impotency and indisposition
upon them to all good, and a proneness to all evil. Popery, Pelagianism, Anti-
nomianism, though they do not always break forth into actual enormities, yet have
that within them which teaches and leads to sin. (2) By pattern and example,
That which men see to be practised they soon and easily fall into. (3) By practice
and use “accustomed to do evil.” Use makes perfect. There is an art in wicked-
neas itself: ‘‘ wise to do evil.” Men are not expert and expedite at firat in such
. sins as swearing, drinking, gaming; but experience comes with use; then “they
drink in iniquity as water”—‘“ draw on iniquity as with cart-ropes ”—“ do evil
with both hands earnestly”—‘“turn to evil course as a horse rusheth to the
battle.”

2. The invincible necessity which follows upon custom in sin—they “cannot do
good.” As well attempt to make the Ethiopian white or remove spots from
leopard, which are expressions of labour tn vain, as to reduce an habituated sinner.
The invincible necessity and tyranny of accustomed sin shows itself (1) In an
tmpotency to good (Gal. v. 17). (2) A preeipitancy unto evil (Eccles. viii, 11).
The ground of this prevalency of custom is the fixedness of it; it being, as it
were, a second nature, which is sure and constant to its principle. Naturalia non
mutuntur ; those things which are natural are unchangeable. (a.) Take heed oj
having anything to do with sin at first. (6.) If any should fall into sin, do not
stay in it, but hasten out of it with speed (Rom, vi. 1). (¢.) Take heed of relapses,
and falling back to sin again (2 Pet. ii. 20). Evil custom reassumed and habits
returned to are specially dangerous.

But when ts sin come to a habit? Or how may it be discerned so to be? We
may know it by three considerations— ;

i, Frequency. When often and familiarly committed. "Eyyi¢ +d Be r@





—


@m@apP. Xin, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.








de, gays the philosopher: That which is often is next to that which is alwage,
and it very suddenly falls into it,

ii, Facility. When one is expedite in doing it. “He that is born of God doth
not commit sin;” 1.¢., does not make a trade of it; but with an unregenerate
heart it is far otherwise, he is prompt and ready at it.

ili [Felicity] complacency and delight in it. ‘‘ They count it pleasure to riot im
the daytime” (2 Pet. ii, 13; Ps, Ixii, 4). When wickedness has reached this
height in those corrupted with it, it proves very hard and difficult to wean them
from it : an invincible necessity lies upon the accustomed sinner.

Reflection. This seems a very UNCOMFORTABLE DOCTRINE, that an accustomed
sinner is unreclaimable, and seems to carry much disheartening and discouragement
in it. For are those inured to sin altcg:ther lost,—without hope of recovery %
This is to be understood, not absolutely and peremptorily, but with due limitation,
There is One who can reduce, reform, and reclaim an habituated offender. ‘ Who
can bring clean out of unclean?” ‘Not one ;” 1.¢., not one man. Comp. Matt,
xix. 26. The Lord, by converting grace, can make the most monstrous sinner a
good @hristian ; can change the skin of the Ethiopian, &c. Instances: Manasses,
Paul, jailor, Mary Magdalene. (See Isa. xi. 6, 7 ; Ps. Ixviii. 31; Acts viii. 27;
Ethiopian changed his skin.) The Lord is able. But we must take the words as
applicable to the sinner, thus—

1. He cannot do tt, i.e., of himself. An accustomed sinner cannot alter his own
heart or course (Jer. x. 23). It is not the question, Can the Ethiopian’s skin be
changed # but, Can he change it? (Comp. 2 Cor. iii. 5; Phil. ii. 13.) We can
nO more convert ourselves than create ourselves, no more give ourselves a spiritual
being than a natural, no more raise ourselves from the death of sin than from the
death of the grave.

2. He cannot do it, ¢.¢., easily. There is great difficulty in reclaiming one habitu-
ated in sin. (a.) Because Satan will be busy in presenting his temptatioas ;
(0.) Lust in the heart of man will struggle towards the enticement (Gal. v. 17) ;
(c.) Grace is oftentimes asleep, which should restrain and subdue sin.

Suggestions: 1. It is not enough for us to abstain from evil, we must also “ du
good” (see Ps, xxxiv. 14; Isa. xvi. 17; Rom. xii. 9). This meets your negative
Christians, merely inoffensive ; like Pharisee, “ no extortioner, no thief,” &c. But
what good do they do? 2. Sins of commission have sins of omission in them.
Doing what they should not, they neglect what they should do: for they forfedt
the opportunity, lose the ability, and alienate the proffered assistance (Ps. li. 11),
3. No man can do any good till his nature be first changed. We must become good
ourselves, “change skin,” then may good come from us. This is a fact confirmed
by observation (Matt. vii. 16), and by doctrine (Heb. xi. 6). Therefore should we
seek the regenerating of God’s Spirit.— Thomas Norton, D.D., a.D. 1678.


ADDENDA TO CHAPTER XIII.: ILLUSTRATIONS AND SUGGESTIVE EXTRACTS.


Ver. 1. THE UNWASHED GIRDLE.
“ Put it not in water,” t.¢., to wash or
whiten it; but take it as it is first
made, Ut sorditiem magis contrahat, to
show, say some, that the Jewish nation,
when first chosen, was black by sin and
nothing amiable. Or, “Put it not in
water,” 2.¢., keep it from being rotted,
as a type of God’s care of and kindness
to that people.—7'rapp.

Ver. 5. THE BURIED GIRDLE. “ God
has cast off His first people, the whole

286


house of Judah and of Jerusalem. ...
God has put us on as 8 girdle in their
stead. For He has not thrown away
the girdle and remained unadorned, but
has woven Himself another. This
girdle is the Church from the heathen.
lt should know that, as God spared not
the former, much more will He ne
spare tt when it sins and is not worthy
ot God’s loins.” —Origen.

Vers. 2,5. THE STANDARD OF GOODLY
conpuct. Perfect obedtence.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.





“I worship Thee, sweet Will of God!
And all Thy ways adore;
And every day I live, I seem
To love Thee more 2nd mora,


% When obstacles and trials seom
Like prison walls to be,
I do the little I can do
And leave the reat to Thee


*¢ ] know not what it is to doubt,
My heart is ever gay,—
I run no risks, for come what will
Thou always hast Thy way !


% J have no cares, O blessed will,
For all my cares are Thine ;
I live in triumph, Lord, for Thou
Hast made Thy triumph mine,”
—Faber.


Ver. 9. PRIDE aBASED. “There never
was a saint yet that grew proud of his
fine feathers but the Lord plucked them
out ; there never was an angel that had
pride in his heart but he lost his wings
and fell into Gehenna, as Satan and
those fallen angels did ; and there never
shall be a saint who indulges self-con-
ceit and spiritual pride but the Lord
will spoil his glories and trample his
honours in the mire.”—Spurgeon.

‘“¢ Pride thrust proud Nebuchadnezzar
out of men’s society, proud Saul out of
his kingdom, proud Adam out of Para-
dise, proud Haman out of court, proud
Lucifer out of heaven.”—Henry Smith.


*¢ Whose robe is white, but heart is black
with pride,

He for himself hell’s gate has opened wide,

For, weighed in God-the-All-sufficient’s
scale,

Not claims nor righteousness of man avail ;

But these are costly in His sight indeed—

Repentance, contrite shame, and sense of
need,” —Tr


‘Remember what thou wert before
thy birth—nothing ; what thou wert
for many years after—weakness ; what
in all thy life—a great sinner ; what in


all thy excellencies—a mere debtor to,


God, to thy parents, to the earth, and
to all creatures. Upon these or the like
meditations, if we dwell, we shall see
nothing more reasonable than to be
humble, and nothing more foolish than
tu be proud.”—Bishop Taylor.

“ Those boughs and branches of trees
which are most richly laden with fruit
bend downwards and hang lowest.”—


Dr. Gill,


*


OHAP. Xiu,





“ Lowliness is the base of every virtue :
And he who goes the lowest builds the


safest,
May God keep all His pity for the proud 1”
—Bailey,
Ver. 15. Br nor proup. “I have


read of Menecrates, a physician that
would needs be counted a god, and took
no other fee of his patients but their
vow to worship him. Dionysius Syra-
cusanus, hearing of this, invited him to
a banquet, and, to honour him according
to his desire, set before him nothing but
a censer of frankincense, with the smoke
whereof he was feasted till he starved,
while others fed on good meat.”—J.
Adams.

“ Diogenes, being at Olympia, saw at
that celebrated festival some young men
of Rhodes arrayed most magnificently
and exclaimed, ‘‘ This is pride!” After-
wards meeting with some Lacedw#mo-
nians in @ mean and sordid dress, he
saw the same vanity in another guise,
and said, “ And this is also pride !”

Ver. 16. REPENTANCE GLCRIFYING
Gop.


** On bended knees, replete with godly grief,
See where the mourner kneels to seek relief,
No ‘God I thank Thee!’ freezes on his

tongue

For works of merit that to him belong ;

Deep in his soul conviction’s ploughshare

rings,

And to the surface his corruption brings 3

He loathes himself, in lowest dust he liea,

And, all-abased, ‘Unclean, unclean!’ he

cries.

From his full heart pours forth the gush-

ing plea, :

‘God of the lost, be merciful to me!’

The light of life descends in heavenly rays,

And angels shout and sing, ‘ Behold, he

prays!” —W. Holmes.

“ Christ Jesus rejoices over those as
blessed who mourn over themselves as
cursed, ‘ Blessed are they that mourn,
for they shall be comforted.’ Out of
the subtlest water God can brew the
sweetest liquor. The skilful bee gathers
the best honey from the bitterest herb.
When the cloud has been dissolved into
a shower there presently follows a glori-
ous sunshine. The more a stone ia
wounded by the hand of an engraver, the
greater beauty is superinduced thereon.
By groans unutterable the Lord ushers
in joys unspeakable.” —Secker.

287


GHAP. XII.





Ver. 16. ““SrumBLe UPON THE DARK
‘MOUNTAINS :”


*‘Not Thou from us, O Lord! but we
Withdraw ourselves from Thee,


“When we are dark and dead,
And Thou art covered with a cloud
Hanging before Thee like a shroud,
So that our prayer can find no way,
Oh, teach us that we do not say,

‘Where is Thy brightness fled ?”


“But that we search and try
What in ourselves has wrought this blame,
For Thou remainest still the same ;
But earth’s own vapours earth may fill
With darkness and thick clouds, while still
The sun is in the sky.” —Trench.


“ Arise, and search thy heart—let nothing stay
thee ;
The fatal cause is there ;
This traitor in thy soul may else betray thee
To ruin and despair.


“Nor doubt, when thou with heart contrite
and lowl
Hast all thy sins confess’d,
Thy night shall pass away, and God the holy
Shall hear and give thee rest.” —Dewart.


Goethe’s dying exclamation was mourn-
fully significant—“ Open the shutter,
and let in more light!” Hobbes, the
infidel, before death, said, “‘I am taking
a fearful leap into the dark !”

Ver. 17. Lamentine pripe. Howard,
the noble philanthropist, was one day
visited by a German Count, governor of
Upper Austria, with his countess, in-
terested to see the man who had so
excited public attention. The Count
asked his opinion as to the state of the
prisons in his department. Mr. Howard
replied, “The worst in all Germany ;”
and advised that the Conntess should
visit the female prisoners, “I,” she said
haughtily, “I go into prisons!” and
hastily left his presence in anger.
Howard, indignant at her proud and
unfeeling disposition, followed her, and
said in earnest remonstrance, ‘‘ Madam,
remember you are a woman yourself, and
must soon, like the most miserable
prisoner in your dungeons, be enclosed
in a small space of that earth from
which you equally originated !”

Ver. 17. SORROWFUL TEARS.


‘¢ What gem hath dropp’d, and sparkles o'er
his chain ?
The tear most sacred—ahed for others’ pain,


288


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


———


That starts at once—bright, pure~-from
pity’s mine,
Already polished by the hand Divine,”
— Byron,
“The rose is fairest washed with morning dew,
And love is loveliest when embalmed in


tears,” —Scott.
‘Hide not thy tears, weep boldly—and be
proud


To give the flowing virtue manly way:

‘Tis Nature’s mark, to know an honest
heart by.

Shame on those breasts of stone that cannot
melt

In soft adoption of another’s sorrow.” —Ai.


Ver. 18. “Tue Quzzn.” The Hebrew
has no word to express “queen,” the
fem. of “king,” nor its equivalent dig-
nity. The word, gebirah, translated
queen, means “mistress” or “lady,”
and is used only twice of a king’s wife
(1 Kings xi. 19, wife of king of Egypt,
and 2 Kings x. 13, Jezebel, who was
not only wife but daughter of a king).
In two other places (Jer. xiii. 18 ; xxix.
2) it may be king’s mother, as it clearly
is in 1 Kings xv. 13; 2 Chron. xv. 16.

—Gray.

Ver. 18. RaBUKING RoyaLTy. When
Beza, in the behalf of the Reformed
Churches of France, made a speech at
Possiacum before the young king and
the queen-mother, he spake so effectually,
says Rivet, that a great cardinal who
heard it wished that either he had been
dumb that day, or that they had all
been deaf.

Ver. 23. InvETERATE HABITS. “ Bad
habits are very easily formed, but when
once formed they are like the course of
a mighty river. Some of the oldest
rivers in the world have the same place
in the map, and the same windings on
the face of the earth which they first
cut for themselves ; and that way they
have continued to follow through the suc-
cession of generations.” —./. A. Wallace.
“ When ut first from virtue’s path we stray,

How shrinks the feeble heart with sad

dismay!

More bold at length, by powerful habit led,

Careless and sear’d the dreary wild we tread;

Behold the gaping gulf of sin with scorn,


And plunging deep to endless death are
borne.” —J. Scott.


“Then the shepherds led the pilgrims
to » place where they saw one Fool, and


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


OHAP. XIV.





one Want-wit washing an Ethiopian,
with an intention to make him white;
but the more they washed him the
blacker he was. Then they asked the
shepherds what this should mean. So
they told them, saying, “ Thus it is with
the vile person: all means used to get
such an one a good name, shall in con-
clusion tend but to make him more
abominable. Thus it was with the
Pharisees, and so shall it be with all
hypocrites.— Bunyan.


“ Habitual evils change not on a sudden,
But many days must pass, and many sorrows;
Conscious remorse and anguish must be felt,
To curb desire, to break the stubborn will,
And work a second nature in the soul,
Ere Virtue can resume the place she lost.”
— Rowe.


“‘Said Diogenes, when he reproved an
ill man to no purpose, ‘ Athiopem abluo
us candidum reddam ;’ I do but wash a


blackamoor. And the like said Nasi-
anzen concerning Julian the Apostate,
It is said that the negroes paint the
devil white, as being a colour contrary
to their own, and which they less well
affect.” —Trapp.

‘Custom in sin takes away the sense
of it: and it looks for continual enter-
tainment where it hath once gotten a
haunt. Nothing so weak as water; yet
let much water (as sin, Satan, and
custom) be joined together, and nothing
stronger. It was not for nothing, there-
fore, that the Cretans, when. they would
curse their enemies with most bitter
execrations, wisned that they might
take delight in some or other evil cus-
tom, Modestoque voti genere efficacissi-
mum ultionts genus repervunt, saith the
historian (Val. Max.); by a modest kind
of wish they sufficiently avenged them-
selves.” —Jdem.


CHAPTER XIV.


CririoaL ann Exrcrricat Norss.—1. Chronology of the Chapter. This and chapter xv.
form one prophecy (although Lange, Keil, and others connect chapters xiv, to xvii., regarding
them as interwoven snd synchronous). From evidence of personal hardship towards Jeremiah
(xv. 10), most probably these prophecies were delivered during the early years of Jehoiakim’s
reign. (See on chapter vii.) Also for Contemporary Scriptures: National Affairs, Contempo-
raneous History, see chapter vii.

2, Natural History.—Ver. 1. ‘‘ Dearth:” batstsoreth, restraint, sc, of rain. Although
Palestine is a very fruitful land, famine naturally followed close upon failure of rain (1 Kings
xvii.; Josephus, Ant. xv. 9,1). See on chapter ii. ver. 16; and specially Historic Events, cf.
‘¢The Land withered by Drought,” p. 62. Ver. 2. ‘‘ Gates languish.” (See Addenda on
verse). Ver, 5. “The hind:” the female of the hart or stag: DAN, The Ayeleth is a


frequent Scripture figure suggesting gentleness (Prov. v. 19), fleetness and agility (Ps. xviii.
83; Hab. iii. 19), delicate modesty (Cant. ii. 7, iii. 5), and in this verse, maternal affection, she
being adduced as an extreme illustration of the effects of the famine on one of the most ardent
creatures. Ver. 6. “ Wild asses:” of. notes on ii, 24. ‘* Dragons:” ef. notes on ix. li. .

8. Manners and Customs,—Ver. 3. ‘‘ Nobles have sent their little ones to the waters:” i.e., to
the tanks for holding water; pits or cisterns. (See notes on ii. 13.) ‘‘ Covered their heads :
(See on ii. 37). Ver. 8. “ Wayfaring man that turneth aside to tarry for a night:” i.¢, that
pitcheth his tent to tarry: in recognition of the custom of travellers to carry their tent with
them, and in which they tarried for the night. Ver. 12. ‘‘ Aw oblation:” t.e., meat-offering
(cf, Lev. ii. 1); the minchah, which was not a sacrificial offering, but was usually offered aa
aupplementary thereto, and consisted of articles of food, or of oil.

4. Literary Oriticlems,—Ver. 1. ‘‘ Dearth:” occurring here in the plural, ningad :
restraints, it does not necesearily imply » numerical succession of dearths, but is used idiomati-
cally (a common form in the Heb.) for intenstty and continuance. Whatever has extension of
time or space is expressed by the Heb. pl. Ver. 2. ‘* Black unto the ground: “covered by
mourning even to the earth” (Naeg.); “they bow mourning towards the earth (Hend.).
Ver. 3. “Nobles sent their little ones:” the word rendered “little ones,’ WS, = to be

n, inferior, as well aa little ; and in this instance more correctly should be, their servants
sar te Vor. 4. “Ground és chapt:” lit, dismayed. Ver. 5. ‘No grass:” comp. with
ver. 6, ‘‘no grasa.” The two words are different, RUT (ver. 5), =green-grass ; wy, (ver, 6), =
under-shrubs, or bushes (Gen. i. 11,=herb). Ver. 8. ‘‘ Turneth aside to tarry for a night :’
ny i110); the simple meaning of iT) here rendered ‘‘turneth aside,” is to stretch owk

aig 389

®


omar. ZIV, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.








unfold, t.¢., to spread a tent: lit. to stretch (his tent) to pass the night. Ver. 9. “4 man
astonied :” a word wh.ich occurs only here, DTT; Syriac gives feeble, Vulgate, vagus; but
the LXX (either mistaking the word for DT, or changing it) render it by bxvdr, in desp
vr te
sleep ; but the word is by all critics traced to the Arabic dahama, to confound, take unawares,
stupify, strike dumb. Ver. 13. ‘‘ Give you assured peace:” lit, peace of truth, 7.¢, true,
durable peace. Ver. 14. ‘*A thing of nought:” 2 aX, “lil is probably a diminution of él,
God, and signifies a small idol made of the more precious metals (Isa, ii. 20, xix. 3). But as
the Jews habitually called idols vanity, falsehood, and the like, the word elil soon suggested &
derivation from the negative particle al, not : and there are two places where it has the secondary
meaning of worthlessness (Job xiii. 4; Zech. xi. 17). A.V. Idol shepherd. Elul (in text) may be
an oracle given by an £lil.’”—Dr. Payne Smith. Ver. 17. ‘* A very grievous blow :” ef. notes
on x. 19. Ver. 18, “ Behold them that are sick with famine :” lit. the sickness, or tortures of
famine, NOTA, torments. “#0 about into a land that they know not:” Hend.=‘‘ shall
migrate into a land which they know not ;” Naeg., ‘‘go into the country and know nothing ;”
Speaker’s Com., “ go about into a land and know not;” Rosen. Umbreit, ‘‘ wander about in the
land and know not what t de;” Graf. ‘‘shall go as beggars into a atrange land;” Hitsig.
‘they move into a land which they know not,”


HOMILIES ON SECTIONS OF CHAPTER XIV.


Sections 1-9. Pleading with God over a calamitous dearth,
»> 19-16. Jehovah’s refusal to allow intercession to prevail,
»» 17-22. A piteous lament for the nation’s woe.


Vers. 1-9. PLeapDING wiTH Gop OVER a CaLAMITOUS DeARTH.


The first verse is the title to the whole chapter: it does indeed all concern the
dearth, but much of it consists of the prophet’s prayers,—not unfitly said to be
“The word of the Lord which came to him ;” for every acceptable prayer God puts
into our hearts; our word that goes to Him is His word that comes to us.

I. The language of nature lamenting the calamity.

1. The people of the land were all in tears. ‘ Judah mourns ;” not for the sin
but for the trouble, not for the withholding of God’s favour but of rain. ‘The
gates languish,” those who pass through them, or assemble there are pale with want
and fear ‘They are black unto the ground;” as mourners, they sit on the
ground. “The cry of Jerusalem is gone up;” not the cry of their prayer but of
their complaint. j

2. The great men of the land felt the judgment. ‘The nobles sent,” &c. ; perhaps
having had to part with their servants through scarcity, they had to send their
own “children” (comp. 1 Kings xviii. 5, 6). Rather, their inferior officers. But
they “returned with their vessels empty.” Not “ashamed” for their sins but
unsuccess.

3. The hushandmen suffered most severely (ver. 4). The ground was so parched
and hard, nothing could be done. How dependent are husbandmen upon the
Divine providences |

4. The case even of the wild beasts was very pitiable (vers. 5,6). Man’s sins
bring judgments upon the earth which make even the inferior creatures groan.
“The hinds,” what have they done? Lovely and loving creatures ; yet they were
driven to act contrary to natural instincts. “The wild asses” cannot breathe in
the parched land, so climb to “highest places,” and there “ snuff up the wind like
dragons.”

IL The language of grace lamenting the iniquity, and complaining to God of
the calamity.

The people are not forward to pray, but the prophet prays for them, to excite
them to pray for themselves.

1. Sin is humbly confessed (ver. 7). Our sina are witnesses against us, and true
penitents see them as such: too numerous to be concealed, for they “are many :”
too heinous to be excused, for they are “ against Thee,”

290





AOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH, OWAP. XIV.








2. Mercy ts earnestly begged, ‘Though our iniquities testify against us, yet do
Thou it for Thy name’s sake” (ver. 7). Not particularising what, leaving that to
God. Our best pleas in prayer are fetched from the glory of God’s own name—
we have nothing to plead in ourselves, but everything in Him, Also, “ Leave ws
ee ” (ver. 9). We should dread and deprecate God’s departure more than every
oss.

3. Their relation to God ts most pathetically pleaded. Their interest in Him
and expectations from Him grounded thereon (vers. 8, 9).

(1.) They look upon Him as One they have reason to eapect should deliver them
tn distress. He pleads, “ Thou art the Hope of Israel ;” God had encouraged His
people to hope in Him. “ The Saviour thereof in time of truth,” since God is their
all-sufficient Saviour they ought to look to Him in their greatest straits. “ Thou
art in the midst of us,” we have the special tokens of Thy presence, temple, ark,
oracles. “‘ We are called by Thy name ;” therefore, what evils we are under reflect
dishonour upon Thee, as if Thou wert not able so relieve Thine own.

(2.) It, therefore, grieves them that He does not appear for their deliverance.
Because He will seem (a.) Unconcerned for His own people ; as “a stranger in the
land,” who does not interest himself in its interests ; “as a wayfaring man,” &e.,
instead of “ resting here for ever.” Though God never is, yet He sometimes seema
careless of His Church. Christ slept when His disciples were in a storm. (b.) Zn-
capable of giving them relief. (Comp. Num. xiv. 16.) “As a man astonied,” at
a loss what to do, or “asa mighty man” overpowered by others more mighty, and
therefore “cannot save.” Hither conception was an insult to the Divine perfec-
tions. It becomes us thus in prayer to be equally concerned for God’s glory.
(Comp. Henry. See also Noticeable Topics to chap. xiv. infra.)


Vers. 10-16. JeHovAn’s REFusaL TO ALLOW INTERCESSION TO PREVAIL


See Addenda on ver. 8, “Intercessory Prayer ;” and on ver. 12, “ Fasting
offensive.” Comp. Section chap. xi. 14-17; also on chap, vii. 16-20. |

I. The Lord’s answer to the prophet’s prayer.

1. He points to the backsliding of the people, for which He now punishes them
(ver. 10). In the “thus have they loved to wander” lies a backward reference :
not to the vain wanderings for water (ver. 3), nor to the restless movements of the
thirsty animals (ver. 5, 6), but to the substance of Jeremiah’s prayer, in which he
complained of God’s seeming alienation and indifference: thus, in like degree as
Jehovah has estranged Himself from His people (vers. 8, 9), have they estranged
themselves from their God. They loved to wander after strange gods, therefore
He punishes them (Hos. viii. 13).

2. He refuses the prophet’s prayer because He loathes the people's soulless fastings
and sacrifices (vers. 11, 12). They turn to Him in their need, but only in lip
service and formality ; their hearts are with their idols. By bringing sacrifices,
these hollow-hearted hypocrites thought to give ‘‘ pleasure” to God, and win His
leniency and mercy.

3. He specifies the means by which He will destroy this backsliding people.
Threefold: battle, famine, and pestilence, when their cities are besieged by the
nearing foe (cf. Lev. xxvi. 25, f.).

IL. The prophet renews his endeavours to entreat God's favour.

1. He lays stress on the fact that they had been deceived (ver. 13). He offera
the excuse for this people that the delusive forecastings of false prophets who
promised peace had confirmed them in their infatuation.

2. But they are not excused on that account ; for they gave credit to lies. (1)
God had not commissioned these prophets (ver. 14). The cumulation of these
words, “‘ lying vision,” &c., shows God’s indignation against the wicked practices
of these men. (2) Their easy and willing dupes are condemned to ee


CHAP. XIV. HIOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH,


———— SSS =


The lies of these false prophets flattered the sinful passions of the people, whe
therefore would not hear nor take to heart the word of the true prophets who
preached repentance and return to God.

3. Seducers should perish with those they seduced. They should perish “by
sword and famine” who affirmed these should not come upon the people. And
with the specification of the various classes of the people upon whom judgments
should fall, must be compared the account of their participation in idolatry (vii.
18).—Arranged from Keil.


Vers, 18-20. A Prrzovs Lament ror THE Narion’s Wor.


“Thou shalt say unto them this word;” but actually no word from God
follows. What then? Is there a message here lost from God’s book? Nay.
Jehovah bids His prophet utter his cries and prayers in the hearing of the hardened
nation and pour out his tears of grief; that his pain in contemplating Judah's
nearing ruin may touch and arouse them.

I. Doleful scenes. Depicted vividly by the prophet, whose shocked and
appalled gaze rests, by prevision, upon them.

1. Occasions for grief. The miseries the Chaldeans would inflict are all arrayed
under his eye: “ broken with a great breach, with a very grievous blow.” (See
Section, x. 17-25; and Homiltes on x. 19, 20.) “In the jield,” the slain ; “in
the city,” the starved,

2. Profuston of tears. For one he tenderly cherishee—“ the virgin daughter of
my people ;” and in: whose miseries he poignantly shares. ‘‘ Let mine eyes run
down with tears,” &. (See Homilies and Notes on ix. 1, and xiii. 17.)

II. Painful conjectures. He lifts his eyes from the scene of stricken Judah to
Judah’s God, and assays to interpret God’s reason,—the dreadful explanation that
lay behind tle appalling facts: ‘“ Hast thou utterly rejected?” dc. (ver. 19).

1. That God had abandoned His people. It seemed incredible. Paul asked in
equal amaze and shrinking, “ Hath God then cast away His people?” (Rom. xi. 1).
True, Judah merited such abandonment: but is the rejection final, hopeless :
“ utterly rejected” ?

2. That Zion should be “ loathed” by Him. The word means, to throw away as
worthless. And can Zion have become thus obnoxious to Jehovah? No yearning
pity left in the “soul” of Him who had said, “I remember for thy sake the kindness
of thy youth, and the love of thine espousals?” (See Notes and Homilies on
ii, 2, 3.

Ii. eee hopes. Here the prophet expresses the people’s delusive ex-
pectations : ‘‘ We looked for peace,” &c.

1. Flattering hopes. Easily and gladly cherished. Sinners are ready to believe
in coming good.

2. False hopes. Unfounded expectations bring bitter awakenings: the delusions
yield to desolations. (See Motes and Homilies on viii. 16.)

IV. Penitent confessions. This is language spoken for them which should
have been spoken by them (ver. 20).

1. Personal transgression. “Our wickedness ;” their own individual outrage of
righteousness, violation of covenants, provocations of Divine wrath. No evading
the directness of their criminality.

2. Perpetuated iniquity. “The iniquity of our fathers.” Not that they
acknowledged their ancestors’ sin, they might leave that; but we acknowledge our
wickedness, the iniquity of our fathers,” 4.¢., which is the repetition of their iniquity.

3. Inexcusable wickedness. ‘“Sinned against Thee/” Against a God so holy,
munificent, faithful. (See Addenda on ver. 20, “Sin acknowledged.”)

IV. Wrestling prayers. Jeremiah had been prohibited by God to pray (ver.
11), but he returns to his knees ij impassioned importunity and pathos.











ms


ee ee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.








O4aP. XIV.


1. He pleads that God will not alienate His heart from Judah. Afflict with
Thine hand if need be, but do not shut us from Thine heart: “do not abhor us.”


2. He appeals to the honour and fidelity of Jehovah.


The honour of His


name. “ For Thy name’s sake.” The honour of His temple; “the throne of Thy


glory,” preserve that from defamation and spoliation,


“break not Thy covenant with us.”


The honour of His promises :


Remember Thy word unto Thy servants, &c.


3. He casts all hope implicitly on God. No other object of worship availed for
their help: “ Are there any among the vanities of the Gentiles that can cause


rain ¢”
the heavens give showers ?”


No regard to Nature or heed of second causes would now suffice: “ Can
Nay, God “made all these things.”


Therefore, on


Him alone and trustfully they would wait (Zech. x. 1), And this was the en-
touragement of their trust ; not only in God’s power as Creator, but in this fact,


“Art not Thou He, O Lord our God ?”
who made both heaven and earth.”


“ Our help is in the name of the Lord,


HOMILIES AND COMMENTS ON VERSES OF CHAPTER XIV.


Ver. 1. “ Concerning the dearth :” see
Historic Events. Cf. The land with-
ered by drought, chap. iii. 3; and Notes
and Homily on ix. 12.

Ver. 3. Theme: VAIN SEARCH FOR
WATER.

For explanation of “pits and no
water,” see Notes, Manners and Cus-
toms, ch. ii. 13: and for General Com-
ments, see Section ii, 9-13. See also
Addenda on verse.

I. God’s vital drink: “water.” In
God’s hand to give or withhold.

1. Water, a physical necessity. Can-
not exist without it. A common com-
modity, despised as a drink by those of
vitiated taste, but nevertheless impera-
tive for all.

2. Water, a spiritual emblem. Water
of life=(a.) the Gospel of Jesus—“ If
any thirst, come to Me and drink :”
(b.) the sanctifying Spirit “be in you a
well of water:” (c.) the sacred refresh-
ings—Draw, water out of the wells of
salvation.” Without these none can
live. ‘Ho! every one that thirsteth,
come ye to the waters,”

II. Man’s urgent thirst. The
drought caused misery and mourning
everywhere: “Judah mourneth, gates
languish” (ver. 2). Suggests: what ap-
palling woe would ensue were the Gospel
withdrawn from man: the Spirit's sancte-
fying ministry recalled by Jesus; and
the “wells of salvation” closed against
the pilgrims to Zion !

1. Without drink man must perish
So spiritually.


2. Unless he drink soon he must die.
Therefore ‘‘the nobles” bestirred them-
selves; as once king Ahab and his lord
chamberlain Obadiah had to do (1 Kings
xviii. 5, 6): for all ranks of mankind
are dependent on water for life—must
drink or die.

IUI. Search utterly vain.
no water.”

1. Frustless efforts. “They came to
the pits, and returned with their vessels
empty.” So men who seek happiness,
and self-justification, and peace of spirit,
and eternal hopes, in dry pris.

2. Mocking sources. These “pits”
were the nation’s sole supplies—their
reservoirs. ‘* Broken cisterns which hold
no water.” (See on chap. ii, 13;
specially Noticeable Topics.)

3. Desolating shame. ‘‘ Returned,
ashamed, covered heads:” sign of very
great grief (2 Sam. xv. 30; xix. 4).
What shame and grief will cover souls
who return to their Lord, never having
found lwing water, at the great judg-
ment! And what anguish will over-
whelm those who, in the eternal world,
never have “a drop of water to cool their
tongues !”

(a.) When God withholds rain man’s
effort and hopes perish amid natural
drought.

(b.) When the era of grace closes,
water will nowhere, never be found for
man’s spiritual needs.

Ver. 3. Theme; CISTERNS AND THE
FOUNTAIN. ‘They came to the pits,
and found no water.”


“ Found


293


CHaP, XIV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





Jeremiah describes the anxiety of the
nobles for their own safety. They and
their families were in imminent peril.
The claims of nature were urgent and
the supply doubtful. In the hour of
their anguish, both children and ser-
vants were sent forth to see if perchance
any water might yet remain in the
natural hollows, or in the artificial dykes
and cisterns. Their effort was vain,
neither nature nor art responded to their
cry nor rewarded their effort. Failure
and disappointment made their hearts
sad, They covered their heads with
shame, confusion, and sorrow. It is a
struggle for life, and death appeared to
be gaining the victory. Their boasting
was hushed, their folly was made clear,
their sin was finding them out, as God
declared it would. They now realised
that it was a mournful and fatal error
in them to forsake the Fountain of
Living Waters.

[God is the Fountain. The arm of
flesh, the fancies of the human brain,
the energies of human life are not such
as to enable man to do without God.
Marn’s reason is a useful cistern, but
fails most when most required. God’s
word of promise is the fountain whence
flows our hope when reason’s efforts fail.
Creeds are cisterns holding for practical .
and ready use portions of knowledge,
but Christ is the Fountain in which all
the treasures of wisdom and knowledge
are to be found, and from whom alone
they are to be obtained. Science hews
out her hollows in the rock, explores the
cave, descends the valley, or scales the
mountain height if she may but satisfy
the thirst of man, but faith, knowing
that man thirsts for the living God,
listens for the voice of Him who says
“Come unto Me and drink.”

I. Cisterns are human, the Fountain
is Divine.

Human fancies, speculations, attatn-
ments, achievements, inventions, and works
are insufficient. The love of God, the
work of Christ, the fellowship of the
Spirit, the exercise of faith, these are
Divine, saving, comforting.

II. Cisterns are dependent, the
Fountain is self-sustaining.

Our thoughts and experiences depend

294


on many circumstances, but God revealed,
approachable, loved, obeyed, adored, is im
us an ever-springing well, &c.

III. Cisterns are superficial, the
Fountain deep.

Things earthly and human easily
dried up, or by constant demand ex-
hausted. Things Divine imperishable,
inexhaustible. God’s love, word, glory
The well is deep, The waterpot ia
small.

IV. Cisterns are fullest when least
needed, the Fountain always full

The Prodigal found it so. It was so
at the marriage in Cana. The wine
was exhausted, but Christ and His power
were then best displayed.

V. Cisterns are useful only as con-
nected with the fountain.

Solomon’s pools. Water-supply of
our large towns. Cisterns, when rightly
used, receive and cherish that which
flows from the fountain. A cistern in-
stead of, or apart from, a fountain is
the work of presumption and folly, of
unbelief and sin.

VI. Cisterns need to be kept in good
condition as well as being connected
with the fountain.

Broken cisterns can hold no water.
The means of grace, the throne of grace,
the obedience of faith, and all God’s
methods of communicating good should
be kept in proper repair, and constant
use, The wretched and selfish pursuits
of unbelief and sin are incapable of
holding any divine blessing.

VII. Come tothe Fountain. Christ
ts the Fountain. “If any man thirst let
him come unto Me and drink.” Come
and wash. Come and drink.

APPLICATION—

1. Avoid the follies of those who
forsake God.

2. Know that all earthly comforts
are insufficient and transient.

3. At the time of your deepest need
go not to pits, but to THE FOUN.
TAIN.—W. Whale.

Ver. 7. Theme: MAN FERISHES ; GoD
MUST WORK.

Jews in great distress by reason of
drought. Every temporal calamity was
viewed by them as a Divine judgment,
No rain, blighted country, cattle perisb.


=, 5h eg


°
ee en a eS





ee


HAOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR.


OHAP. XIV.


rr


tng, people languishing in gates, what
all this but proof of God’s displeasure ?

Close analogy between temporal and
sperttual: dearth on land = desolation
of soul; no gracious rain = no heavenly
blessing. This their case: through sin
alienated God; ver. 8, implying fel-
lowship, had ceased, God withdrawn.
While ver. 9 suggests that in their
distress God did not arise.

Desolate lot. Yet many cry, Why as
a Stranger to our souls? Why lost fel-
lowship with Thee? ‘Where is the
blessedness | knew?” O Lord, Saviour
of Israel, why as cannot save? Men
need salvation, from sin, perils, care,
The cry of perishing rises, “O Lord,
though our iniquities testify against us,
do Thou it for Thy name's sake.”

I. A trustful prayer: ‘‘O Lord, do
Thou it!” Whatever the prayer sought,
it is clear that the prophet knew—

1. God could answer it. If favour
lost, He could renew. Aid needed, God
could exert power. Their case could
not surpass Him. Hence asked ver. 9.
Knew God could “do it.” We know
“nothing is too hard for the Lord.”
Deep misery, extreme need, great ini-
quity, ready to perish; yet God can
do” all our case requires.

2. God alone could answer that prayer.
Appeal direct to “ Lord; do Thou it.”
(See ver. 22). Prophet learned the
vanity of every other trust, but God
was “Hope of Israel.” He was his
exclusive trust, to none other would he
seek. Misery great, yet if Lord not
relieve, none could. The Lord is our
only source of hope or help. Look not
elsewhere, though He seem to withhold.

Il A mournful confession: “Our
iniquities testify against us.” Sad that
prayer must ever open with this acknow-
ledgment !

1. Their evil condition. “ Iniquities,”
the guilt and curse of sin was on them.
Many in number; though they had re-
ceived warning, and might have shunned
them. “ Testified against them”—con-
science reproached; pursued by them.
Hearts cry out against us. Evil lives
rise up in witness against us, and call
for our condemnation,


2 Their wl desert. The prayer was


for God’s favour, but sins were against
them, menaced them. Mercy was asked,
but iniquities cried out for judgment.
‘My sins are ever before me;” “ Our
iniquities are gone up into the hea-
vens.”

3. Their stricken spirit. Prayer
offered with shame and contrition. No
extenuation, no excuses, Confession
ought thus to be made in a spirit of dee;
sorrow, and humble sense of demerit.
(See Addenda ver. 7, Contrite Prayer.)

III. A prevailing plea: “Do it, for
Thy name's sake.”

1. Recognises the total absence of any
claim to mercy. Could solicit nothing
for their sakes.

2. Forgoes all allusion to mitigating
circumstances. Nothing mentioned to
soften their criminality and propitiate
God. “Just as I am.”

3. Bases the hope of compassion on the
Name of God. His name was “The
Lord merciful and gracious,” &e, On
the ground that God’s name declares
Him forgiving and loving, ask forgive-
ness and love divine! ‘For Thy
name's sake, O Lord, pardon mine
iniquity, for it is great.” ‘If we con-
fess our sin, God is faithful and just
to forgive us our sin and to cleanse
us,” &c. In this Gospel dispensation
we have the great Name of Jesus,
“Saviour,” to plead; and ‘ whatever
ye shall ask the Mather, in my name, He
will give it.”

Theme: Gop’s NAME THE SINNER’S
PLEA.

The prophet, though forbidden to
pray (vii. 16 ; xi. 14, and ver. 11), could
not forbear, but urged his prayers with
all imaginable tenderness and compas-
sion, Though he could find no excuse
for Israel, he could find a plea in the
very character of God.

I. The sinner’s acknowledgment.

1. The prophet’s confession is precisely
such as befits the world at large. (Comp.
Hos. vii. 10; Ps. xxxvi. 1; Hos. v. 4,
5.
Pi With too great reason, also, may it
be adopted, even by the best of men. The
world are willing slaves of sin, whilst
the godly resist spiritual enemies. Yet
much amiss within them: sins of com-

295


GmaP, XIV.


= cee ann eee San een a


ee omission, and defect (Isa. lix.
12).

Il. The sinner’s plea. The request
is not specified, but seems to be for
restoration of God’s favour. This all
may ask, not for what is in us, but for
the sake of God’s honour, and the glory
of His name.

1. His plea is open to all. His exer-
cise of mercy is His highest glory (Deut.
ix. 5; Ezek. xx. 9, 14, 22). Even
when we have provoked God to anger,
we may approach Him with this plea
(see Josh. vii. 8, 9).

2. This plea shall never be urged in
vain. In Joshua's case it brought im-
mediate success (Josh. vii. 10, 11). So
with Moses (Exod. xxxii. 9-14). Surely
when we plead the name of Jesus!
(John xiv. 13, 14),

APPLICATION—

1. What should be the effect of sin
upon the soul? Conviction of sin should
not keep us from God, but bring us to
Him; “though our iniquities testify,”
&. (Comp. Ps. xxv. 11.) Sin is a
just ground for humiliation, but not for
discouragement.

2. What shall surely be effectual to
remove ut from the soul? Prayer: peni-
tential weeping ; humble and contrite
(Jer. iii, 12, 13, 25) fervent and perse-
vering (Dan. ix. 18, 19); offered in de-
pendence on God’s promised mercies in
Christ Jesus (Jer. xiv. 20, 21). God
has solemnly engaged not to cast out
one who comes to Him in His Son’s
name (Jno. vi. 37).—Simeon.

(See Noticeable Topic on ver. 8,tnfra).

Ver. 8. Theme. GoD sND TROUBLED
HUMANITY.

The troubles of Judah were over-
whelming at this period. Indicated in
preceding verses. Text is a patriotic
wail: “O Hope of Israel, the Saviour
thereof,” &e. We have to notice two
things—

I. What God always is to troubled
humanity.

1. He is “the Hope.” The Hope of
Israel. Men in trouble want hope.
Hope alone can buoy up amidst the
surging sea of sorrow. Of all true hope
God is the author. (1) He is the J»
spirer of true hope. He implanted the

296


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





instinct in the human soul. He ealls it
forth by trial, makes the spark blaze in
the dark night, (2) He is the Sustainer
of all true hope. Oftentimes the lamp
would go out did He not feed the wan-
ing flame, and shelter it from the gust.
(3) He is the Realiser of all true hope.
If ever the anticipated deliverance comes,
it comes from Him. The storm-tossed
mariner “He bringeth to the desired
haven.”

2. He is the Saviour. “The Saviour
thereof.” He has a claim to this title.
(1) The redemption system He has
given to the world attests this. The
Gospel is an infallible antidote for all
the sorrows of humanity. (2) The ex-
pertence of all who had attended to His
directions testifies this. It is no objec-
tion to this that men are not saved.
The physician may have an infallible
antidote, yet if the patient partake not
of it, of what value is it to him? He
alone can attest the full value of a
nautical chart who has sailed by it.
All the shipwrecks of those who neg-
lected it is no argument against its in-
fallibility. Every man that has adopted
God’s remedial scheme has been saved.
He is the Saviour of the world.

II. What God sometimes seems to
troubled humanity. “A stranger and
a wayfaring man in the land.” A
stranger in the land is one more or less
unacquainted with what is local and
uninterested in it. There are times
when God seems to be a “ stranger”
in these respects. He seems as if He
did not know what was going on ; or,
if He knew it, was absolutely in-
different. When does He appear as if
a stranger to the good ?

1, When Christlike enterprises are
frustrated. When great plans of social
philanthropy and evangelical propagan-
dism break down and disappoint the
hopes of piety, the good man is likely
to feel that God is “a stranger,” that
He is either ignorant of or indifferent
to what is going on.

2. When the mest useful men are cut
down tn the very zenith of ther lsfe.
When the statesman with a measure for
the liberties of a nation, an author with
a book for the mental quickening of a





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH,


GHAR. XIV,





whole people, a preacher with a power
to attract and interest listening thou-
sands, is struck down in a moment, the
good are likely to look on and cry out
to the great God, “ Why art Thou a
stranger in the land?”

3. When prosperity attends the wicked
and adversity the good. This has ever
been felt to be a trial, ‘ Wherefore do
the wicked become rich?” Asaph said,
“ My foot well nigh slipped, when,” &c.
Who that sees the wicked rising ts for-
tune and eminence, and the good sinking
to penury and want, does not often ex-
claim within himself, “Why art Thou
a stranger ?”

4, When enormous outrages are
rampant in society. Such as the cruci-
fixion of Christ, tremendous wars, &c.
At such seasons the good look up to
heaven and cry, “ Why art Thou a
stranger?” Why not interpose, break
the sword, and strike evil down t—
Homilist.

Vers. 7-9. Theme: JuREMIAH A
WRESTLER WITH THE LORD IN PRAYER,

In this he is a second Jacob who
was called ‘‘ Israel,”

I In what the Lord is strong
against the prophet. The sin of the
people. ‘“‘ Iniquities testify against us,”

II. In what the prophet is strong
against the Lord. The name of the
Lord. “Though iniquities testify against
us, do Thou it for Thy name’s sake.”

1. In itself: God’s name compels
Him to show He isnot a desperate hero,
@ giant who cannot save (ver. 9).

2. In that His name ts borne by
Israel: thus He is bound to show Him-
self as He who is tn Israel (not a
guest or a “stranger,” ver. 9), and
consequently the comforter and helper
of Israel—Heim and Hoffman, “ The
Major Prophets. (See Addenda on
ver. 8, “‘ Intercessory Prayer.”)

Theme: PRAYER HAS WITHIN ITSELF
ITS OWN REWARD.

The prayer of the prophet consists
of confession and petition :

L Confession. Thisfitly begins It
is the testimony of iniquity ; and that
this iniquity is against God Himself.
When we are to encounter any enemy
or difficulty, it is sin weakens us. Now


confession weakens i¢,—takes off the
power of accusation,

II. Petition. “For Thy name’s
sake.” This is the unfailing argument
which abides always the same and hath
always the same force. The children of
God are much beholden to their troubles
for clear experiences of themselves and
God. Though thou art not clear in
thy interest as a believer, yet plead thy
interest as a sinner, which thou art sure
of.—Letghton, quoted in Lange,

Comments—

In earnest and hearty prayer there is
a conflict between the spirit and the
jiesh. The flesh regards the greatness
of the sine (ver. 7), and conceives of
God as a severe Judge, who either will
not help further or cannot help (ver. 9).
The spirit, on the other hand, adheres
to the name of God (ver. 7), &¢., to His
promises ; apprehends God by faith as
his true comfort and aid, and depends
upon Him.—Cramer.

“Tdeo non vult Deus cito dare, ut
discas ardentius orare.”— A ugustine.

The name of God is the manifestation
of God’s being. From Moses’ time,
Jehovah has revealed Himself as the
Redeemer and Saviour of the children
of Israel and as God who is merciful
and gracious, d&c, (Ex. xxxiv. 6). As
such, He is besought to reveal Himself
now that they confess thetr backsliding
and sin, and seek His grace. Not for
the sake of His honours im the eyes of
the world, lest the heathen believe He
has no power to help (as Graf. holds),
for all reference to the heathen nations
is foreign to this connection ; but He is
entreated to help, not to belie the hope of
His people, because Israel sets its hope
on Him as Saviour in time of need (ver.
9). If by withholding rain He makes
His land and people to pine, then He
does not reveal Himself as the Lord
and owner of Judah, not as the God
that dwells amidst His people, but He
seems a stranger passing through the
land, who sets up his tent there only to
spend the night, who “feels no share
in the weal or woe of the dwellers
therein” (Httsig). . . . The pleader
makes further appeal to God’s almighty
power, It is impossible are ke can


GUAR. XIV.





let Himself look like a man at his wit’s
end, or as a nerveless warrior, as He
would seem if He should not give help
to His people in their present need. .
The passage closes with an appeal to the
relation of grace which Jehovah sustains
towards His people: “Yet art Thou in
our midst,” #.e., present to Thy people,
“Thy name is named upon us,” te.,
Thou hast revealed Thyself to us as God
of salvation: “‘ Lay us not down,” te,
let us not sink.—Keil,

“ Leave us not;” lit. lay us not
down. Jeremiah evidently had in mind
the magnificent words of Deut. xxxii.
11, 12.—Speaker’s Commentary. (See
Ne oticeable Top, * Triumphant Prayer,”
on vers, 7-9,

Vers. 8,9. Theme; Gov’s SEEMING
DISREGARD OF MAN. “O hope of Israel,
the Saviour thereof in time of trouble,
why shouldst Thou be as a stranger?”
&e.

A sore perplexity that God appears
to dwell so far off and so apart from
human affairs. Appalling crises come
and go, dreadful occurrences transpire
in the nation, in the church, in the
home, in individual life, and hearts are
dismayed and paralysed, yet God ap-
pears not in Providence nor manifests
Himself in grace. And this seeming
disregard compels to the cry, “O hope
of Israel,” d&c.

I. It contradicts God’s character
and name.

1. “ Hope.” A name implying that
Israel had learned to hope in Him
when all else failed. That ts the cha
racter God bears.

2. “Saviour.” He had saved, w:
THE Saviour: “ Beside Him there was
no Saviour.” And men believed him
to be so.

3. “ Mighty man.” “ Able to save to
the uttermost.” With great power He
redeemed Israel from Egyptian bond-
age. “Mighty to save.” All revela-
tion has declared God to be man’s
hope, man’s Saviour, man’s mighty
Redeemer ; and when God seems heed-
less, it covers His name with obscurity.

IL It baffles the godly soul To
Jeremiah it was painfully perplexing
that “the hope of Israel, and its

298


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.


Saviour,” aboula act towards His people
thus; as

1. “A stranger.” Indifferent, there-
fore, having no acquaintance or sym-
pathy with Israel, no knowledge of
their distresses or needs ; wholly uncon-
cerned in their forlorn and imperilled
state,

2. ‘A wayfaring man.” Inconstant,
therefore : passing through the land
instead of as of old, “Here will I
dwell, for I have desired it ;” alienated,
no longer attached to the Holy Land and
Temple; about to depart.

3. “A man that cannot save.” /m-
potent, therefore: the power of His arm
gone, the zeal of His heart expired.

When the godly see God thus in-
active for human weal and His people’s
rescue, faith trembles and the cry rises
from amid terrifying gloom.

Ii. It leaves man in a deplorable
case.

1. His condition ts distressing. It
is “a time of trouble,” and in such a
time, if “the Hope of Israel” forsake
and fail him, he has “no hope.”

2. His relief ts urgent. Without it
man will sink and perish amid “trouble,”
which means peril. If the “Saviour”
relieve him not, he has no helper, no
salvation.

3. His sole expectation is in God.
Man can turn nowhere else, These
people have no other “‘ hope” or ‘ Sa-
viour,” or “mighty man.” And, amid
sore troubles, no appeal rises but to
Him. If He be a “wayfaring man,”
and depart, doom rests on them !

IV. It arouses to wrestling prayer.
It drove Jeremiah to God in earnest
supplication : a good result.

1. Expostulating. ‘ Why shouldst
Thou be? why shouldst Thou be?” He
could not rest amid such contradictions,
He went “ with boldness to the throne
of grace,” and entreated God to arise
and help.

2. Protesting. “Yet Thou, O Lord,
art in the midst of us,” although Thou
art as a stranger and wayfaring man.
He puts God in mind of precious facts,
and bases firm arguments and appeals
thereon. ‘We are called by Thy name,”
help and save Thine own.


SRI PSD myth arm, ede inp CII Ve at


ee a eee eT


S>} tenctiipars med


cae


- “ we ata) Nicer ee eT
OO RE tm er tne ge te al allt Cee ce Es PE OE fi A Bie Ne ae ob emmy Re a ae eR RnR ie eae thn hana em ean atl





SOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


Omar. xI¥,


Nn rn ing age A


8. Entreating, “Leave us not!”
“Thou art in our midst; be not even
@s a wayfarer; abide with us!” He
would detain God. “1! will not let
Thee go!” ‘Constrain Him, saying,
Abide with us!” When thus entreated,
Jesus “went im to tarry with them.”
(See Addenda on ver. 8, “God's with
drawings.”)

Ver.9. Theme: A PRAYER FOR ALL
SEASONS, ‘Leave us not!”

God sometimes hides Himself fro
as, as a friend withdraws when slighted,
or a father when grieved.

I. Here is a prayer for all seasons,
There is “a time for everything,” but
every time is for this. This prayer
should rise in—

1. Times of joy. Need pillar of eloud
by day. Our prosperity will ruin us if
God be not with us. Ussziah fell ‘“‘ when
he was strong” (2 Chron. xxvi. 16).

2. Times of adversity. 3. Times of
labour. 4. Times of perplexity, &c.

IL Here ts a prayer for all saints.

1. All need to pray thus. For all
deserve to be abandoned.

2. All must pray thus. For all desire
eontinuances of His presence.

8. All will pray thus. For all know
the bitterness of soul consequent upon
His withdrawal.

Ill. Here ts @ prayer always an-
swered. If it come from sincere and
penitential hearts,

1. Always answered, for tt ts accord-
ing to His will. He delights to remain
with His own.

2. Always answered, for tt honours His
name, It implies that we know and prize
His presence.— Sermon Framework.

Ver. 10. Theme ; RECKLESS WANDER-
ERS REJECTED. ‘“‘ Thus have they loved
to wander ... the Lord doth not ac
cept them,” &c. [On the reference of
““thus have they,” &c., see Homily on
Section 10-16, supra.] ‘‘ Thus” means
just so. Rashi suggests, in addition to
those given in Section by Lange, that
the point of conparison is, ‘ For as de-
termined as I am to punish them, just
so they love to continue their offence.”
(See Addenda on ver. 10.)

I. A covenant peonle heedless ef
their privileges.


1. Having Jehovah as their God.
Their conception of what th:i: God was
to them is given in vers. 7-9.

2. Having bounteous blessings. In
their country, “a goodly land ;” their
social advantages, their spiritual dis-
tinctions,

3. Having assured prosperity and
peace, God had covenanted their secu-
rity against foes and enjoyment of un-
measured good.

Yet withal they depreciated their
eminent blessings.

IL A heedless people yielding to
inconstancy. ‘They loved to wander,”
&e.

1. There was within them a delight in
backsliding. A “love” of it. See Notes
on chap. ii, 23, 24, 25 ; ver. 31.

2. Upon their inclination to apostasy
they put no restraint. “They have not
refrained their feet.” We may have
wrong dispositions, may “love to wan-
der,” yet are called to control, and check,
and correct our wrong desires and de-
lights. But these surrendered them-
selves unrestrained, “followed the de
vices and desires of their own hearts.”

III. An inconstant people rejected
from God’s favour. ‘Therefore the
Lord doth not accept them.”

1. Even though the prophet pleaded
for them. As he did in vers, 7-9, as
an intercessor, yet God refused (ver.
11). (See Notes on chap. vii. 16;
xi. 14.)

2. Even though they themselves might
ery to Him (ver. 12). There is a time
when God’s mercy closes.

IV. A rejected people consigned to
sore distress.

1. Buried memories of sin will be re-
called against them. God “will remem
ber their iniquity,” which He would
have let remain in oblivion had they
sought Him opportunely. Oh, to find
all that God recollects against us arrayed
for our doom !

2. Due recompense of sin will be brought
upon them. He “ will visit their sins,”
Fain would He have made “ grace much
more to abound where sin abounded.”
But repudiation of His goodness brings
the inevitable stroke of anger : it is “ the
wrath of the Lamb.”

299


OMAP. XIV.





Ver. 11. See Notes and Homilies on
chap. vii. 16; xi. 14.

Ver. 12. See Notes and Homilies on
chap. ii. ver. 28; and Homilies on Sec-
tions 14-28 ; also Oudlines on chap. xi.
14, 14, 15.

Theme; FasTING RENDERED OFFEN-


sive. ‘‘ When they fast I will not hear
their cry; . . but I will consume
them,” &.


Hypocrites, void of all sincerity, yet
professed to be true worshippers of God,
and by external i 4 wished to prove
themselves to be so, They profaned
the name of God when they thus grossly
dissembled with Him.

I. Pious demeanour is not what God
desires, but faith.

1. God abominates a double and false
heart, and the greater the fervour hypo-
crites display in external rites, the more
they provoke Him.

2. Fasting is observed as giving inten-
sity to prayer. Reverted to when there
is danger, or when there.appears evidence
of God’s wrath, or when we are under
heavy affliction.

3. They who “ fast” professedly avow
that they deprecate God’s disfavour. It
is an acknowledgment of conscious guilt,
and a declaration of penitence.

4, But God values not outward ap-
pearance. He regards the faith of the
heart. Pretentious penitence must be
specially offensive to Him.

TIL Fasting is not in itself a religi-
ous duty, but a mere index to a humble
spirit.

1. What is intended by fasting? (a.)
That there may be greater alacrity in
prayer. (6.) That it may be an evidence
of humility in confessing sins. (c.) As
indicative of a purpose to subdue lust.

2. What ts fasting apart from these
intents? (a.) A frivolousexercise, (6.)
A profanation of God’s worship, (c.) It
provokes God’s wrath as being a super-
stition by which His worship is polluted.
Fastings are not only without benefit,
except when prayers are added, but they
incur Divine displeasure unless indicat-
ing a humble and reverent spirit.

ITI. No value is in fasting to merit
God’s favour.

Papists seek to pacify God by fasting

300


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ;: JEREMIAH,


as by a sort of satisfaction, deem ‘it @
work of merit and a kind of expiation.

Yet though hypocrites joined prayer
to their fasting they were rejected
(comp. Matt. xvii. 21; Mark ix. 29; 1
Cor. vii. 5). There was no sincerity in
their hearts, but only an outward ap-
pearance, a mere disguise.

But God regards the heart, and only
sincerity pleases Him.

IV. Mocking profanation was in-
tolerable, and should be punished. ‘I
will consume them,” dc,

1. God shows Himself armed with
various kinds of punishment : “sword,
famine, pestilence.”

2. He forewarns that they who had
provoked Him should surely suffer.
From the impending destructions none
could deliver himself.

3. God does not disregard or reject reli-
gious signs, but when what they signify
is separated from them, there is then an
intolerable profanation.— Arranged from
Calvin: see Commentary in loc. (See
Addenda on ver. 12, “ Fasting offenswe.”

Ver. 14. Theme; AssuURED PEACE,
“T will give you assured peace in this
place.”

Hitzig and Graf. render the sentence,
“‘T will give you peace and continuance,”
&c. ; Septuagint, “truth and peace ;”
Vulgate and Targum, “true peace ;”
Syriac, “peace and security ;” it
“peace of truth.” Real and lasting
peace, not delusive, not evanescent.

I. Human life wants it.

Sin robbed man of it. All sinned;
and wicked, like troubled sea, which
cannot rest. Oh, how man craves for
peace !

1. Uncertainty troubles our life,
Transient hours of repose come to us,
but tumult rushes in. No calculating
on restful days and years. Want “ as-
sured peace” in this uncertain world.

2. Delusions embitter our heart. We
have heeded false prophets, have “looked
for peace, and behold trouble.” Seems
no reliance on any promising thing.
Mocked at every turn. It is not gay
and fleeting enjoyments we need, but
something “ assured.”

3. Misgivings weary our souls, Are
we safe, saved? Is death nearing? Is








HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH,


God propitious? Have wea “right to
enter through the gates into the city ?”
“Tis a point I long to know,” &. The
soul asks certitude, not conjecture, nor
even hope, but ‘full assurance,” firm
anchorage, ‘‘a title clear,” “strong con-
solation,” “‘ the peace of God which shall
keep our hearts and minds.” The cry
of humanity is for “assured peace,”
which will not elude, will never be lost.


6¢Qh where can rest be found,
Rest for the weary soul?”


II. God alone can give it.
give you assured peace.”

1. Peace is not a human commodity,
but a Divine boon. Man cannot buy it
of man, he must beg it of God. Priests
cannot bestow it on penitents, sinners
must get it direct from heaven.

2. Peace comes only to divinely-pre-
pared hearts, It cannot dwell where
sin lurks, sin unrepented or unforgiven.
“ Being justified by faith, we have peace
with God.” ‘There is no condemna-
tion to them who are in Christ Jesus.”
“ In Me ye have peace.”

3. Peace ts specifically the Saviour’s
benefaction. For He only can remedy
the evils, and remove the impurities
which ruin man’s peace. “My peace I
give unto you—let not your hearts be
troubled.”

III. Lying voices offer it.
phecy lies.”

1. False prophets preach peace stsll.
In our churches promising it through
ceremonies, confession, righteous works,
&c. In pleasure’s scenes, assuring the
gay and frivolous of satisfaction, dc.

2. Begutled dupes are ensnared still.
Won by false promises souls follow.
But “ destruction and misery are in their
ways, and the way of peace have they not
known.”

3. Yet assured peace ts available still.
May be found by all. ‘“ Come unto me,
all ye that labour,” &c., “ Learn of me,
and ye shall find rest to your soul.”

Vers. 13-16. Theme: Rutnovus Pro-
PHESYINGS.

How lone the voice which bewails
the currency of religious frauds and
ecclesiastical deceits! None but Jere-
miah’s cry of lament over his beguiled


“T will


 Pro-


OHAP. XIV.


people rose to God. Lying prophets
were and are more in number than
the faithful witnesses and preachers of
truth, The world “believes a lie,”
because it loves not the truth: and,
upon this prevalent mood of self-decep-
tion and credulity, scheming priests and
plausible preachers are ready to trade,
saying, “‘ Peace, peace; where there is no
peace.”

L Delusive declarations. “Behold
the prophets say unto them, Ye shall
not see the sword, neither shall ye have
famine; but I will give you assured
peace in this place” (ver. 13).

1, This kind of preaching had early
and evil origin: “The serpent said, Ye
shall not surely die, but your eyes shall
be opened, &c.” (Gen. iii. 4, 5).

2. Modern reproductions are rife.
Priestly teaching of the saving value of
sacraments, &c. Broad theology which
minimises human sin and spiritual peril
A subtle Socinianism which denies man’s
fall or need of redemption. Annihi-
lationism, which destroys a hereafter for
the unchristian soul.

I. Repudiated preachers. ‘I sent
them not, neither have I commended
them, neither spake unto them” (ver. 14).

1. Pleasant preaching may be tn God's
esteem “lies.” The people liked it, but
Jehovah denounced it.

2. Plausible prophets do not always
have authority for their messages.
Because a preacher teaches what men
want to hear, and flock to learn, he does
not on that account possess Divine
warrant, Popularity is not a seal of
authority. Indeed the truth most unwel-
come, and the preacher most deserted,
may have the highest sanction. ‘ Who
hath believed our report,” &c. Jeremiah
was now deserted for these plausible
prophets: yet who preached Divine truth!

III. Deceptions disclosed. ‘‘ They
prophesy unto you a false vision, and
divination, and a thing of nought, and
the deceit of their hearts” (ver. 14).

Thus are these delusive teachings dis-
owned by God, they have no origin in
Him, neither in prayerful contemplation
of His Word, neither in any spiritual
ilumination ; they are traced to the dark
caverns of a@ deceitful heart. pa


OWAP. XIV,





lL. “ Visions and divinations” may
have a bad origin. A preacher may be
“clear” and “clever” in his presenta-
tion of doctrine, but his “visions” maybe
.“ false,” and his “divination” a “‘ deceit.”
Does he “ prophesy in My name f

2. It ts possible for the human “heart”
to suggest falsehood. Yes; the “heart”
may forge a “deceit,” and thus tmpose
upon the prophet himself ; and the fancy
or theory he has framed within himself
may so enamour him that he may come
to believe it true and authoritative,
Then he will in turn smpose upon heed-
less hearers, who desire “a thing of
nought” rather than the serious mes-
sage of God.

IV. Retributive ruin.

1. On deceivers (ver. 15). The very
evils from which they decoyed men’s
just fears should come upon themselves,
Forbearing to warn men of the coming
“sword” (see Ezek. xxxiii.), that sword
should smite the faithless watchman
himeelf.

2. On the deceived (ver. 16). Who
were willingly beguiled (comp. v. 31.
see supra, ver. 10). Men still “ turn
their ears from the truth, and are turned
into fables.” But they do not escape
the threatenings of the truth because
they “believe a lie.” Self-deception is
self-ruin.

Comments—

“ Although preachers lead their hearers
astray, yet the hearers are not thus ex-
cused. But when they allow themselves
to be led astray, the blind and those
who guide them fall together into the
ditch ” (Luke vi. 39).—Cramer.

“The false prophets are thus described
as deceiving the people in three ways—
(1) by asserting that they had seen a
vision ; (2) by using conjuring tricks ;
(3) by professing to consult these small
idols [Z/:l ; see Lit. Crit. on “ thing of
naught”]. in the same way that they
divined by the Teraphim (Comp. Zech.
x. 2, where these three modes of divina-
tion occur again, only the Teraphim takes
the place of the Elilim. Probably they
were much the same). All these three
methods the prophet declares to be the
deceit of their heart, t.¢., not self-deceit,
but a fraud suggested by their heart or

302


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





mind, ¢.e., a wilful and intentional fraud.”
—Speaker’s Com.

“To Hitzig it seems surprising that,
in describing the punishment which is
to fall on seducers and seduced, there
should not be severer judgment, in words
at least, levelled against the seducers as
being those involved in deeper guilt;
whereas the very contrary is the case in
the Hebrew text. But it was necessary
to set before the people the terrors of
this judgment in all their horror, in order
not to fail of effect.”— Keil.

Ver. 17. “ Let mine eyes run down —
with tears,” &c. See Homilies on Chaps.
ix. 1, xiii. 17, supra.

“The urgin daughter of my people,”
see on Chap. viii. 21, &c. In Oriental
households virgins are carefully secluded
and guarded ; so had God watched over
and protected Judah.

“ Broken with a great breach, with a
very grievous blow,” see on Chap. x. 19.

“Those cities are called ‘vtrgtns’
which never came into a conquerors
hands. In the same sense the prophet
here calls Jerusalem a ‘ virgin,’ because
she had been hitherto under God’s
immediate protection, and preserved by
Him from all attempts of her enemies
(Comp. Amos, v. 2). The dissolution of
a government or body politic, is called
a ‘breach, by way of allusion to the
breaking or disjointing of the limbs of a
human body (see Chap. viii. 21, Lam.
ii, 13).”—W. Lowth.

Ver. 18. Theme: THE WOES OF WAR.

I. Scenes on the field of battle.
“Tf I go forth into the field, then
behold the slain with the sword.”

II. Miseries within the besieged
city. ‘If I enter into the city, then
behold them that are sick with famine !”
Yes, and heart sick with grief over sons,
husbands, and fathers, slain.

III. Captives carried into alien
scenes. ‘ Yea, both the prophet and
the priest [even those, and therefore the
people, whom the conqueror would be
less likely to leave] go about into a land
that they know not.” “By the rivers
of Babylon we sat down, yea, we wept
when we remembered Zion.”

Note on “go about into a land that
they know mot.” These words are


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





variously rendesed (See Lit. Crit. on
verse), and variously interpreted. Graf
and Keil suggest for “go about” the
meaning “beg their way.” <A. V. in
margin gives “ make merchandise.” But
Rosenmiiller and Umbreit give the inter-
pretation that these prophets and priests
move to and fro, go over their own
desolated country (Judea) baffled and
bewildered and impotent ; “ they wander
about tt, the land, and know not what to
do.” But the simplest meaning is, they
go into exile in a strange land.

Ver. 19. Theme; PaTRioTiC PRAYERS
IRREPRESSIBLE.

See Addenda on ver. 19, “ Wrestling
prayers.” Jehovah had prohibited Jere-
miah’s intercession for His people (ver,
11); had wholly discouraged all propitia-
tion by His people (ver 12). What then?
nothing could be done by man for them,
nor aught by themselves for themselves,
It is in bold desperation that the prophet
now besieges God on the plea of His


gracious interest in, and covenant re-


lationship to, Judah. Can it be that
there is “no healing” even in Jehovah
for “the virgin daughter” on whom has
fallen “‘a very grievous blow” (ver. 17).
*,* For homiletic arrangement of
this and following verses, see section,
vers. 17-32, supra. Also Homily on
chap. viii. 15.
L Agonising inquiries addressed to
God. Is there no room for hope, no
place left for Judah and Zion within
Divine pity? Are we abandoned to our
miseries without any alleviation avail-
able ; smitien by Thee, yet “no healing”
procurable, none possible ?
Il. Desolated hopes arrayed before
God.
1. Our expectations misled us. Iil-
prepared for such a reverse of our hopes
and desires.
2. Our desolation amazesus. ‘ There
is no good ;” not one solace or respite
shows itself, blank misery. ‘‘ Behold
trouble!” It rises upon our gaze, and
we are terrified !
Iii. Astonishment expressed at the
everity of God.
"1, After so much grace from Ged.
Jedah cherished ; Zion long beloved.

2 After frequent healings hy Ged.


OHAP. XIV,





For oft He had smitten and then bound
up.
3. Now utterly loathed and abandoned.
Yet God can be severe. It will amaze
those who calculated upon His love, and
trifled with it.

Ver. 20. Theme: Stn ACKNOWLEDGED,

To a right acknowledgment of our
iniquity, and in order that sin may
be pardoned, there are required three
things—

L Contrition. Iniquity truly and
duly deplored. A poignant sense of the
evil of sin in itself, and our ewl state in
having committed sin. A real grief for
the wrong we have done God, and the
woe we have merited on ourselves,

IL Oonfession. Which should be
unfeigned, self-abhorrent, lamentable,
specific, unreserved. The heart should
utter itself in our words, and deep shame
should fill our souls as we prostrate our-
selves before the most Holy God.

III Conversion. Repentance should
issue in reformation, Forsaking the
sin we acknowledge and lament, we
should hereafter live a righteous, sober,
and godly life. “Bring forth fruits
meet for repentance.” Moved by grat+-
tude to God for being “ready to for-
give,” and constrained by love to the
Atoning Mediator by whose redemption
we may escape both guilt and its penalty,
our afterlife should be humble, obedient,
devoted, and holy. See Addenda on


ver. 20, “Sin acknowledged.” Comp.
Homily on chap. iii. 25.
Note.—The “and” is not in the


Hebrew, and corrupts the sense. Na-
tional sin is the sin of the “fathers”
perpetuated generation after generation
by the children. When thus successive
opportunities for repentance had been
rejected—for each generation had its
own probation—the nation is ripe for
chastisement.—Speaker’s Com.

Theme: DreaDING Gop’s ABHOR-
RENCE. “Do not abhor us, for Thy
name’s sake.”

The occasion of the prayer (vers. 2-6),
Prayer for removal of calamity (vers. 7-
9). Though visited with judgment and
threatened, the false prophets preached
peace (vers. 13, 14). The prophet, ha=
ver, continued to plead with God.

303


“, XIV.





L The petition.

1. These words imply that tt ts pos-
sible for creatures once the objects of
Divine favour to become the objects of
Divine displeasure.

2. The solicitude of the prophet indt-
cated how real and near those Divine
judgments were. He was commanded
not to pray that the threatened judg-
ment should not be inflicted, but was
assured the sword and famine should
overtake them (ver. 15). Where im-
piety and irreligion prevail among a
people favoured with religious advan-
tages, Divine abhorrence will certainly
express itself in punishment.

3. There ts nothing which godly men
more vehemently dread and deprecate
than that God should abhor and reject a
people once distinguished by His favour
and by religious privileges. Jeremiah
knew his people must be scattered, but
he dreaded nothing so much as their
being utterly cast off. Against this he
prayed, ‘‘ Do not abhor us, Lord, d&c.

II. The argument used as enforcing
his petition.

“Do not abhor us, for thy name's
sake.” This argument has been used
with the Most High before. When God
thinks to destroy the children of Israel,
Moses pleaded what God had done for
them (Exodus xxxii. 11-13). Joshua
also pleaded, “‘ What wilt Thou do for
Thy great Name{” (Josh. viii. 9).
“Should the Egyptians say,” &c. &.
This argument Jeremiah used to sup-
port his petition, God had made a
covenant with His servant Jacob—if,
then, Jacob had been abhorred so as to
be utterly cast off—how could that
economy be maintained? “‘ Remember,
break not Thy covenant with us, for
Thy name’s sake.”

God’s name is His character, including
all the glorious perfections that encom-
pass it, Some of the perfections, con-
sidered apart from others, would cause
only fear when our guilt as individuals
or the guilt of commuasties is realised.
If the prophet had dweit only upon the
holiness, justice, and power of God when
he considered the guilt of his country,
he would have had no encouragement
to pray; and if we dwelt only upon


aca


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


some attributes, we shall be more likely
to sink into despair than to be encour
aged with hope. But there are other
perfections in the divine attributes, such
as boundless mercy, unparalleled love,
infinite wisdom, and inviolable faithful-
ness,

This argument may be used in prayer
under personal distress, and under general
calamity either endured or apprehended.

1. Under personal distress, to be con-
sidered as coming from guilt or from
particular trouble, and in both cases can
the name of God furnish us with a suit-
able or a powerful argument in prayer.

(1.) We may use tt under a sense of
gutli, either when first convinced of sin
or when we may have wounded our
conscience. A life spent without the
fear of God, in open disaffection to and
rebellion against Him, calls for vengeance.
The glory of God requires that He
should resist such impiety and manifest
His displeasure against it. He might
justly abhor us and utterly reject us.
But His name affords usa plea. “God is.
Love,” He delighteth in mercy. He is
the Lord God merciful and gracious,
This is in perfect harmony with the
perfections of God.

2. The believer may adopt tt under
particular trouble and the tribulations
through which he may pass. The
covenant of grace affords encouragement
to use it. “If thy children forsake my
law,” &c. &c. “Do not abhor us.” If
Thou art pleased to chastise us, cast us
not off—let all Thy glorious perfections
of merey, pardon, wisdom, and faithful-
ness be displayed in supporting, sanctify-
ing, and in over-ruling all things for our
good. “ Do not abhor us, for Thy name's
sake,” &e.

(2.) This argument may be used by
the righteous under general calamities ;
calamities experienced or apprehended.

1. Under national trouble. Such
were the circumstances under which the
prophet presented the prayer. A dearth
was experienced—the swarm of the
Chaldeans was threatened. He prayed
that the sheep might not be abandoned.
“Do not abhor us.”

Under national calamity the name of
God affords encouragement for prayer.


HOMILETIC COUMENTARY: JEREMIAG,





The godly at such times, when they
can see that prevailing iniquity calls
for vengeance, though professing sub-
mission, yet find the name of God
a plea.

2. This plea may be used by the
godly when apprehensive of spiritual
judgments upon spiritual account,

There is nothing more offensive to
God than a lukewarm spirit. “I would
that thou wert either cold or hot,” dc.
Now where lukewarmness prevails, the
Spirit of God will be grieved and be
withdrawn ; the prayer is then most
important, “Do not abhor,” &c,
“Take not Thy Holy Spirit,” &c.

3. It 13 a plea that may be used in
reference to churches at large. How
much is there in Christendom to be
deplored! How much that is religious
only in name! How little Christian
charity among different denominations !
Though it is admitted that efforts are
made to do good by churches of different
denominations, and upon these efforts
God has smiled, yet these evils must
be offensive to Him who prayed that His
Church might be kept from the evil that
was in the world; and we may fear the
expression of Divine displeasure until
they are removed.

We learn from the subject that the pro-
per plea to be used in all our prayers ts
the name of God. His mercy and grace
displayed as harmonising with holiness
and justice through the mediation of
Jesus Christ. In our own name, as a
ground of righteousness, we can never
be accepted.

If God hears and answers prayer, tt
must be in a@ way that will be for His
glory. And though in some measure
His glory may require judgment, yet if
the prayer is offered in reliance upon
the mediation of Christ, the mercy and
faithfulness of God assure us of ac-
ceptance. “ Mercy and truth meet to-
gether—righteousness and peace,” &e.

And that prayer for others should be
incessant. “ The effectual fervent prayer
of the righteous man availeth much,.”—
Anon.

Ver. 21. Theme: Tak ULTIMATE
ARGUMENT WITH GoD FOR MERCY. See
Addenda on ver. 21. ‘‘ Do not disgrace

U


OBAP, XIV.


the throne of Thy glory.” Nothing may
be found to extenuate man’s spiritual
criminality, so heinous may be his sin,
as was Judah’s. Nothing acceptable or
propitiatory may exist in his self-morti-
fications and oblations (ver. 12). His
guilt and insincerity may even justify
God’s refusal of intercession on his be-
half (ver. 11). Yet there remain the
highest arguments still by which te
plead with God, viz, His Namu, His
Honour, and His Covenant.

L Explanation of the language.

1. God’s name. it was a pledge of
pardon (Exod. xxxiv. 6). But more,
God’s name was identified with Tis
people; hence what befell them would
reflect credit or discredit on God. If
Thou dost ‘abhor us,” Thy name as
“ the God of Israel” will be forfeit.

2. God’s honour: “ disgrace not the
throne of Thy glory.” Jerusalem, or
the Temple wherein God dwelt there
(chap. ili 17), was God’s glorious
throne: if He suffered it to fall into the
hands of heathen conquerors, it would
be disgraced, and God’s glory dis-
honoured.

3. God’s covenant: He had chosen
the race of Abraham, had pledged to
David a lasting throne, had promised
that Messiah should come of Judah.
Though they, the guilty people, merited
abhorrence, yet for the covenant’s sake,
spare them, that the Word of God may
stand.

IL Application of the argument.
Jeremiah turns from the people’s evil
state and deserts, and appeals to God’s
attributes.

1, That God’s name is a tower of
defence for the guiltiest. Not only may
“the righteous run into it and be safe,”
but sinners may plead it as a basis of
hope, a8 an argument for mercy (see
ver. 7). Though nothing else can be
found on which to rest prayer for Divine
pity, yet God, who is the “ Father of
mercies,” the ‘God of our salvation,”
and whom the only begotten Son has
declared as the “ God who so loved the
world,” may be entreated for His wame’s
sake to spare “sinners, even the chisf.”

9. That God's glory is involved in Hea
administration of mercy. oe would


OMAP. XIV.


“ disgrace His throne ” did He allow the
enemy to triumph and despoil His
temple. If Satan vanquishes the
Church, or wresta a sinner from the
grace of Christ, the High Majesty of
Heaven is dishonoured. True, we may
merit abandonment, as did profane
Jerusalem, yet “let not the enemy pre-
vail”—where sin abounds, grace shall
much more abound !

3. That God’s covenant outlives man’s
disloyalty. Man may violate his part
in that covenant: yet shall the Right-
eous and Gracious God therefore break
His word? No! Man’s falsity cannot
obliterate God’s graciousness) The in-
finitely pitiful Jehovah, who keepeth
covenants and never faileth, will still
remember His promises. He has as-
sured of ‘‘salvation even to the utter-
most,” pledged Himself “in nowise to
cast out ;” and on that covenant we may
ever rest, Calvin remarks, “‘ God did,
according to the common apprehension
of men, abolish the covenant by which
the Jews thought Him to be bound to
them; and yet He remained true ; for
His truth shone forth at length from
darkness, after the time of exile was
completed.” (See Noticeable Topic on
ver. 21. ‘‘ God’s covenant an argument
in prayer.”)

Ver. 22. Theme: THE LONE HOPE
OF MAN IN MISERY.

The misery was from the “ dearth”
(ver. 1-6); the dearth was consequent
upon Judah’s iniquity (ver. 7). And
that iniquity consisted largely in God’s
people turning from Him to “the
vanities of the Gentiles.”

I. To choose others for God is to
court hopeless misery. Not one of
these “‘ vanities of the Gentiles” could
alleviate the calamities which had come
upon them through their desertion of
Jehovah.


\


HOMILETIC VOMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.








1. Sin will entail appalling disaster.

2. In disaster we shall need help and
deliverance.

3. Deliverance cannot come from the
“vanities” for which we have surrendered
God.

Therefore we create for ourselves a
desolate future.

II No secondary causes can suffice
us in calamity. ‘‘ Showers” do indeed
fall from “the heavens,” but it is God
who “ gives” them.

1. Behind all sources of comfort Ged
dwells.

2. If He be alienated He drées up
these sources of comfort.

3. Hence to look to these sources and
ignore the Divine spring ts to ensure
mocking disappointment, (Comp. chaps.
ii, 12, 13, iii, 23.)

IIL God Himself is man’s true need.
Read the words—‘“ Art Thou not
Jehovah our God ¢”

1. Our one only Saviour (Isaiah xlv.
21-25).

2. The Creator of all the channels of
comfort. ‘Thou hast made all these
things”—the heavens with their showers,

3. The hope of man in the day of
hits distress,

For He who hath torn can heal; He
who hath impoverished with “ drought”
can replenish with luxury. Ye shall
receive of the Lord’s hand double for all
your sins.

IV. The attitude of a troubled soul.
“ Therefore we will wait upon Thee.”

1. Humbly: for sin lies at the root
of man’s distress.

2. Patiently : for after long rejection of
God we must “ wait ” His time for relief.

3. Trustfully: for grace will not be
denied any lowly suppliant; and faith
will win the blessing sought.

See Addenda on verse. Man's lone


hope.


NOTICEABLE TOPICS IN CHAPTER XIV.
Topic: CONCERNING THE DeEakrTH (vera, 1-9).


fee Addenda on ver. 1.


for the fast referred to in chap. xxxvi. 9.


The events here recorded most probably gave occasion


“ A more true description of an Oriental


drought in its leading circumstances and effects we have never yet seen.” We pro-
ceed to show from the words of the prophet the dire effects of the drought, and by
constant inference the folly of forsaking God,


306


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH. CHAP, XIV.








L The effects of drought upon inanimate creation.

1. The pits were empty. Some of these were natural hollows in the hard rocks
and in the caves where evaporation was less speedy. Others were dykes and
aisterns, the works of man. But neither nature nor art could afford supplies when
‘God dealt with them in His judgments.

2. The ground was chapt. Kitto says, “ After long drought in the East, particu-
larly where the soil is rich and hard, the ground splits into wide and deep fissures.”
These are earth’s wounds for man’s sin. Mute mouths crying to Heaven for pity.
The lips of earth suffering, waiting for a drop of water to relieve the torment of
an awful thirst.

3. There was no grass. The world is complex, man is complex,—God is
complex. In complex systems harmony is essential to life,—discord is ruin. The
shower can do nothing good without the sun. The sun can only scorch if the rain
fall not. Earth can produce no fruit unless both sun and shower combine te aid.
The sun cannot say to the dewdrop, “I have no need of thee,” &ec.

IL The effects of drought upon the animal creation.

1. The hind calved in the field and forsook it. The fact that the hind was in
the field proves that pasture had failed on the higher lands. It was not unusual
for the hind to drop her calf by reason of fright or grief (Ps, xxix. 9). The
maternal instinct in these creatures being strong, it was very unusual for vhem to
forsake their young, and can only be accounted for by the entire failure of the
mother to obtain food or drink.

2. The wild asses were in intense agony on account of hunger. These creatures
were capable of great endurance, and needed but little to sustain life. The language
of ver. 6 shows to what a desperate condition even such hardy creatures had been
reduced.

II. The effects of drought upon the human creation.

1. The husbandmen were ashamed. The earth they had cultivated had brought
forth no fruit, and they were unable to alter its condition. As they looked upon
“the hard, chapt, barren earth, they covered their heads in shame and grief.

2. The people generally were languishing. Ver. 2 shows that places of public
resort were scenes of sadness. Their drooping condition found expression in one
general cry of anguish.

8. The nobles were threatened with death through thirst, They sent servants and
ehildren in search of water, but they returned with empty pitchers.


*¢ The hot blood stands in each glassy eye 3
And, ‘ Water, O God!’ is the only cry.


“Their tongues are parched and rough, and cling to the roofs of their mouths ;
their lips are black and shrivelled, and their eyeballs red with heat, and sometimes
a iimness comes over them which makes them stagger with faintness. There is
not one in all that multitude who probably would not have given all he possessed
in the world, and parted even with a limb, . . . for one cool draught of water.” —
Kitto.
“ Twas thirst! "twas maddening thirst alone,

That wrung my spirit’s inmost groan.

Hunger is bitter, but the worst

Of human pange—the most accursed

Of want's fell scorpions—is THIEST.”—Cook,


IV. The effects of drought on the devout heart of Jeremiah.

1. He regarded st as a chastisement for sin. The sin of forsaking God and
trusting in idols who are unable to deliver. “We have sinned.” Our iniquities
testify against us. ;

2. He regarded God as their only hope. All hope in Israel was gone, and bis
enly plea waa—“ For Thy name’s sake.” pee


Wap, XIv. HOMILETIiC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAG.,








3. He sarnestly prayed for mercy. That God would abide with them and net
leave them That God would remove the trouble. His prayer was vain, since it
was unaccumpanied by the repentance of the people.

Application :

1. In forsaking God, they forsook the fountain.

2. Earth’s broken cisterns cannot be a substitute for the Divine.

3. Jesus said, “If any man thirst, let him come unto Me and drink.”

—W. Whale,


Topic: Gov’s WITHDEAWINGS FROM His PEOPLE, AND THEIR EXERCISE UNDER
THEM (ver. 8).


See Addenda, ver 8. God’s withdrawals. Prophet laments the grievous drought
and want of rain, as a token of God’s withdrawing His presence. He deprecates
God’s judgments, and especially that terrible one—God lost to His Church and
people: “ Why shouldst Thou be a stranger,” &. Consider—

I. When it may be said God withdraws, and behaves as a stranger to His
people.

1. When He withholds His wonted acts of kindness to them. Sees them in trouble
and comes not to their relief. Of this the Church complains (Isa. lxiii. 15), See
also complaint of Gideon (Judges vi. 13).

2. When He threatens to remove from them the signs and symbols of His pre-
sence—the Word and Sacraments ; when He permits their enemies to combine and
carry on their plans for that purpose (Lam. v. 9).

3. When, though continuing the ordinances and sacraments, the Lord renders them
profitless (Mal. ii. 2), When ministers are straitened in preaching and the people
in hearing, when all is cold and dead.

4. When the Divine providences are adverse. Outward mercies denied them,


temporal calamities allowed. So when Zion’s captivity was prolonged (Isa. °


xlix. 14).

5. When He denies them access to Himself. Breaks off His wonted correspon-
dence with them. They seek Him in private and public ordinances, but cannot
find Him. Job’s language is theirs (Job xxiii. 3). Also Jeremiah’s (Lam. iii. 8).

IL The reasons why the Lord deals thus with His people. Infinite goodness
cannot take delight in thus afflicting. There must be a cause. In general, sin is
the cause (Is. lix. 2). As— j

1. When they fall into gross sin and bring reproach upon religion (Isa. i. 13, 14).
Or, as David’s case (2 Sam. xii. 14; comp, Ps. li. 11).

2. When they become earthly minded. Prefer pleasure of sense (Isa. lvii. 17).
The Gergesenes preferred their swine to Christ; then He turned His back and
departed from their coast (Matt. vii. 28).

3. When they become slothful and formal in duty. Do not stir themselves up to
seek God’s face (Isa. lxiv. 7; Cant. iii. 1).

4. When they neglect or slight the Mediator, by whom we have access to God ;
either by not looking to Him for strength to perform our duties, or by making a
Saviour of our duties, and so putting them in the place of Christ.

5. When they sin under, or after, great afflictions. Though these were appointed
to reclaim them (Isa. lvii. 17).

6. When they do not cherish and entertain the influences of the Holy Spirit
(Cant. v. 2, 3, 6, 7).

7. When they grow hardened and impenitent under provocation. No due sense
of their own sins, nor of the sins of the land they lived in (Hos. v. 15).

III. When it may be said we are properly exercised under such a painfa)
dispensation.

308


ee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; JEREMIAH. OHAP. XI¥,








1. When we are truly sensible of our loss, and that our sin ts the cause of tt.
Mourn aiter te Lord, as Israel in the days of Samuel (1 Sam. vii. 2).

2. When we place all our happiness in God’s favour and presence. Every com-
fort regarded as esxzpéy without God, regarding Him as “the Hope of Israel,” and
our only desire (Ps. Ixxiii. 25).

3. When we sxgage all the powers of our souls to seek after God (Ps. cxix. 10),
For God takes particular notice of those who do (Jer. xxx. 21).

4. When we diligently embrace every opportunity for finding an absent God, and
use every appointed means (Cant. iii. 2).

5. When we wrestle with Him in prayer to return. Use every argument, as here
the prophet did. He pleads (a) The glory of His name: “for Thy name’s sake.”
(6) Their helpless state without Him: “Oh, the hope,” &c. (c) His former kindness
to them: “the Saviour in time of trouble.” (d) His power: “Why shouldst
Thou,” d&e, (ver. 9). (¢) The outward symbols of His presence: “Thou art in our
midst.” (f) The covenant relation: “we are called by Thy name.”

6. When we are not satisfied with the best means, unless we find God in them. David
was not content with the tabernacle, ark, sacrifices, passover ; but, in midst of all,
eried for God (Ps. lxxxiv. 2).

IV. Whence it is that the Lord, being az a stranger to His people, occasions
them so much concern.

1. Because of the incomparable happiness arising from the enjoyment of Hts
presence. All blessedness comes with His presence, and when He withdraws we
may cry out with Micah (Judges xviii. 24). ;

2. Because of the sad effects attending the loss of His presence. Great darkness
(Lam, iii, 2), much deadness (John xi. 21), disability for duty (Ps. Ixxxvii. 4,
xl. 12; John xv. 5), barrenness (John xv. 6), exposure to danger and enemies
(Numb. xiv. 9), distress when remembering former blessings (Ps. Ixxvii. 3), melan-
choly thoughts of death and judgment (Ps. xxiii. 4), the fear of being entirely
rejected (Ps. Ixxvii. 9, 10, cxix. 8).

Infer :

(1.) There are but few true seekers of God among us. Many are troubled for other
trifling losses, but few can say with David (Ps. xxx. 7).

(2.) The mésery of those who are far from God now, and may be deprived of Hts
presence for ever (Ps. Ixxiii. 27). Ungodly men desire not His presence (Job xxi.
14). Their choice will be their punishment (Matt. xxv. 41).

(3.) The sad case of those whom God forsakes, never to return agatn—as with

* Baul (1 Sam. xvi. 14). The Lord preserve us from this great woe, and grant us
enjoyment of His presence here and in heaven !—Hannum.,


Tope : TRIUMPHANT PRAYER (vers. 7-9).


Bee Addenda on ver. 8, “ Intercessory Prayer.” Expositors have differed as to
whether the drought which forms the basis of this prayer was a literal one, or is
the prophet’s way of putting the sore calamities that had fallen on Israel. But
throughout Scripture, the metaphor of the “rain that cometh down from heaven
and watereth the earth” is the symbol for God’s Divine gift of His Spirit ; and the
picture of “a dry and thirsty land where no water is” is the appropriate sign of
the soul and the Church void of the Divine presence,

I. The mysterious contradiction between the ideal of Israel and the actual
condition of things. Recur to the historical event upon which this text is based,
*The Lord thy God giveth thee a good land; a land full of brooks and water,
rivers and depths” (Deut. viii. 9); and the fulfilment is thie—a land full of
misery for want of the thing promised! So also, the ancient charter of Israel's
existence was that God should dwell in the midst of them: but things are as if


the perennial presence promised had been changed into visits, ee far


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIA.





between (ver. 8) Two ideas conveyed: the brief transitory visits, with long dreary
stretches of absence between them ; and the indtfference of the visitant, as a man
who pitches his tent for a night, caring little for the people among whom he
tarries the while. More: instead of the perpetual energy of the Divine aid
promised to Israel, it looks as if Thou art “a mighty man astonied,” &c.—a
Samson with his locks shorn.

The IDEAL was: Perpetual gifts, perpetual presence, perpetual energy.

The REALITY is: Parched places, fitful visitations, and a paralysis, as it would
appear, of all the ancient might. And what was God's ideal for us, His Church ?
“Lo, I am with you alway,” &. “Ye are the light of the world, salt of the
earth.” It sounds like irony rather than a promise! What tsthe Church? The
Church at home does not keep pace numerically with the increase of population,
while heathenism remains scarcely touched—all unconquered! ‘ Why shouldst
Thou be as a mighty man that cannot save ? ”

Il. Our low and evil condition should lead to earnest inguiry as to its
cause.

Prophet asks, ‘‘ Why shouldst Thou leave us?”

1. The reason is not tn any variableness of that unalterable, uniform, ever-present,
ever-full, Divine gift of God’s Spirit to His Church. We do not believe in an
arbitrary sovereignty. The great reservoir is always full. If there be any changes
in the fulness of our possession of the Divine Spirit, the fault ltes wholly within the
region of the mutable and the human, and not at all in the region of the perennial
and the Divine.

2. The reason is not tn the fatlure of adaptation tn God’s Word and ordinances
for the great work they had to do.

3. The fault lies here only : “ O LogpD, OUR INIQUITIES TESTIFY AGAINST U8,” &e
We have to prayerfully, patiently, and honestly search after this cause, and not to
look to possible variations and improvements in order and machinery, &c., but te
recognise this as being the one sole cause that hinders,—the slackness of our own
hold on Christ's hand, and the feeblencss and imperfection of our spiritual life
(ver. 7).

IIL This consciousness of our evil condition and knowledge of the cause
lead on to lowly penitence and confession. We err in being more ready,
when awakened to a sense of wrong, to originate new methods of work, to begin
with new zeal to gather in the outcasts into the fold ; instead of beginning with
ourselves, deepening our own Christian character, purifying our own hearts, and
getting more of the life of God into our own spirits. Begin with lowly abasement
at Hts footstool. Let us see that we are right in our own inmost hearts. To our
knees and to confessions! ‘‘Sanctify a fast, call a solemn assembly,” &c. (Joel
fi, 15-17).

IV. The triumphant confidence of believing prayer.

1. Look at the substance of his petition. ‘Do Thou it for Thy name’s sake:
leave us not.” He does not prescribe what should be done, nor ask that calamity
be taken away, but simply for the continual Divine presence and power.

2. Look at these pleas with God as grounds of confidence for ourselves. (a) The
name: all the ancient manifestations of Thy eharacter. Thy memorial with all
generations. (6) Israel's hope: the confidence ef the Church is fixed upon Thee;
and Thou who hast given us Thy name hast become our hope. (c) The perennial .
and essential relationship of God to Hts Church: we belong to Thee, and Thou
hast not ceased Thy care for us!

Lowly repentance should rise to the triumph of believing hope. The expecta-
tion is the precursor of the gift, and the prayer is the guarantee of the acceptance
(vers. 20-22) ; for with that prayer on our lips, be sure that the old answer will
come to us, “I will pour rivers of water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon
the dry ground.”—A. M‘Laren, B.A., “Christian World Pulpit.”


332


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH, CHAP, XIV.








Theme : Gop’s CovENANT AN ARGUMENT IN Prayer. Text: “Remember, break not
Thy covenant with us.”


Suggestions: A “covenant” between God and man can be only an accommo-
dating expression, since man cannot be regarded as properly qualified to make an
agreement with Jehovah, being essentially unreliable and impotent. Strictly
speaking, such a covenant is quite unconditional, and amounts to a promise (Gal. iii,
15 sg.), where imayysA‘a and d10.04xn are used almost as synonyms) or act of mere
favour (Ps, Ixxxix. 28, where IDM stands in parallelism with 72) on God's


part. Thus, the assurance given by God after the flood that a like judgment
should not be repeated, and that the recurrence of the seasons, and of day and
night, should not cease, is called a covenant (Gen. ix. ; Jer. xxxiii. 20). Generally,
however, the form of a covenant is maintained by the benefits which God engages
to bestow, being made by Him dependent upon the fulfilment of certain conditions
which He imposes on man. Thus, the covenant with Abraham was conditioned
by circumcision (Acts vii. 8), the omission of which was declared tantamount to a
breach of the covenant (Gen. xvii.) ; the covenant with the priesthood, by zeal for
God, His honour and service (Numb. xxv, 12,13; Mal. ii. 4,5); the covenant
of Sinai, by the observance of the ten commandments (Ex. xxxiv. 27, 28). This
last-mentioned covenant, which was renewed at different periods of Jewish history
(Deut, xxix. ; Josh. xxiv. ; 2 Chron. xv., xxiii, xxix., xxxiv. ; Ezra x. ; Neh. ix.,
x.) is one of the two principal covenants between God and man, distinguished as
Old and New (Jer. xxxi. 31-34; Heb. viii. 8-13). Compare Kitto.

L That God should make a covenant with man is an act of unmerited
grace.
Ne That man should fail to keep the covenant accords with all human

story.

III. That failure on man’s part justifies God in withdrawing His covenanted
goodness.

IV. Nevertheless, that a gracious covenant made by God, who knows our
waywardness, might stand though man proved faithless.

V. Therefore, that God may be entreated to keep His part in a covenant
even with a faithless people who have forfeited all right to His grace.


ADDENDA TO CHAPTER XV.: ILLUSTRATIONS AND SUGGESTIVE EXTRACTS.


Ver. 1. CoNCERNING THE DEARTH.
A terrible drought had fallen upon the
land ; and the prophet’s picture of it is,
if one might say so, like some of
Dante’s in its realism, its tenderness,
and in its terror. In the presence of a


powers and crushes the maternal in-
stincts. ‘“ Yea, the hind also calved in
the field, and forsook it, because there
was no grass.” And on every hill top,
where cooler air might be found, the
once untamable wild asses are standing


common calamity, all distinctions of
class have vanished, and the nobles send
their little ones to the water, and they
come back with empty vessels and
drooping heads, instead of with the
gladness that used to be heard in the
place of drawing of water. Far afield
the ploughmen are standing among the
cracked furrows gazing with despair at
the brown chapped earth, and out in
the field the very dumb creatures are
sharing in the common sorrow, and the
imperious loss of self-preservation over-


with open nostrils panting for air, their
filmy eyes failing them, gazing for the
rain that will not come.”—M‘Laren.
Ver. 2. “THE GATES THEREOF
LaNGuIsH.” “The gates of cities, be-
ing places of public resort, where courts
of justice were held, and other common
business transacted, seem here to be put
for the persons that meet there; as
when we say, ‘The court is in mourn-
ing,’ we mean the persons that attend
the court or the king’s palace. So in
this passage we are to apis that
3


GmAP, XIV.





all the persons who appear in public are
dejected, and put on black or mourning
on account of the national distresa.”—
Dr. Blayney.

“Or, that they look black and ghastly,
and cast themselves down upon the
ground out of grief and despair (comp.
viii. 21; xiii. 18).”—W. Louth.

“As the gates were the usual place
of concourse, the misery of the people
would there show itself most plainly.”
— Speaker's Com.

Ver. 3. “CaME TO THE PITS AND
FOUND NO WATER.” Jerusalem was
supplied with water by two lakes or
pools, called “the Upper Pool” and
“the Lower Pool” (see Isa. vii. 3,
xxii. 9), whence the water was con-
veyed into cisterns [here rendered
“pits”] for the use of the city.—
W. Louth,

Ver. 6. “SNUFFED UP THE WIND.”
“ Asses, in defect of water, can continue
long by drawing in the air; as Aristotle
likewise testifieth of the goats of Cepha-
lonia, that they drink not for divers
days together, but instead thereof gape
and suck in the fresh air.”—-Z'rapp.

Ver. 7. CoNTRITE PRAYER.

*¢ All powerful is the penitential sigh

Of true contrition. Like the placid wreaths

Of incense wafted from the righteous shrine,

Where Abel minister’d, to the blest seat

Of mercy, an accepted sacrifice,

Humiliation’s conscious plaint ascends.”

—AHayes,

Ver. 8, INTERCESSORY PRAYER.

** A good man’s prayers
Will from the deepest dungeon climb to
heaven’s height,
And bring a blessing down.”
—Joanna Baillie.
*¢ Temporal blessings Heaven doth often share
Unto the wicked, at the good man’s prayer.”
DOr aries
*¢ But that from us aught should ascend to
Heaven

So prevalent as to concern the mind

Of God high blest, or to incline His will,

Hard to belief may seem; yet this will

prayer.” —NMilton,

“ A BTEANGER IN THE LAND.” “ As
none but citizens in old time had any
political rights or privileges, a sojourner,
however long might be his stay, naturally
took little interest in the country where
not choice but necessity had made him
fix his dwelling.”-—Speaker’s Com.

312


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





Ver.9. Gop’s WITHDRAWALS FROM HI
PEOPLE. “God does not always frown,
lest we should be cast into despair; He
does not always smile, lest we should
be careless and presume.” — Owen.

“A father’s frowns are but the
gtaver countenance of love.”—Cowper.

“T know, as night and shadow are
good for flowers, and moonlight and
dews are better than continual sun, so
is Christ’s absence of special use, and it
hath some nourishing virtue in it, and
giveth sap to humility, and putteth an
edge on hunger, and furnishes a fair
occasion for faith to put forth her hand
and lay hold on what she seeth not,”—
Rutherford.

‘God sometimes hides Himself that
we may cling the closer to Him and
hang the faster upon Him. By with-
drawing from His people, He prevents
His people withdrawing from Him ; and
so by an affliction He prevents sin ; for
God to withdraw from me is but my
affliction, but for me to withdraw from
God, that is my sin; and, therefore, it
were better for me that God should
withdraw from me a thousand times
than that I should once withdraw from
God” (Heb. x. 38, 39).—Brooks.

Ver 10. “ THEY LOVE TO WANDER.”

** T have not kept Thy word,

And yet Thou biddest me to taste Thy loves
Shaming my faithless heart that ere could
rove
From Thee, O gracious Lord.


** Shame wraps my heart around
Like morning gloom upon the mountains
spread ;
Indignant memory, avenger dread,
Deepens each restless wound.”
—Thomas W. Webb


Ver. 12. FasTING oFFENSIVE.


** When thou a fast wouldst keep,
Make not thy homage cheap
By publishing its signs to every eyes
But let it be between
Thyself and the Unseen;
So shall it gain acceptance from on high.”
‘* Is this a fast—to keep
The larder lean, and clean
From fat of veals and sheep?
“*Ts it to quit the dish
Of flesh, yet still to fill
The platter high with fish f
**Ta it to fast an hour,
Or ragged go, or show
A downeast look and sour?





|


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


CHaP, XV.


a


**No! "tis a feat to dole

Thy sheaf of wheat, and meas

Unto the hungry soul.

it is to fast from strife,
From old debate, and hate—

To circumcise thy life.

To show a heart grief-rent;
To starve thy sin—not bin—

And that’s to keep thy Lent.”

—H


Ver. 13. “AssuRED PEACE.” Peace
is not a compromise with circumstances.
It is a Divine reality in the heart.
Righteousness is rest—holiness is peace
—rectitude with God, arising through
trust in the atonement of God the Son,
means tranquillity deep and unchanging
as the peace of God which passeth under-
standing |—Joseph Parker, D.D.

‘* Far, far away the roar of passion dieth,
And ae thoughts rise calm and peace-
uly;
And no pale storm, how fierce soe’er it flieth,
Disturbs that deeper rest, O Lord, in
Thee.” —H. B. Stowe.

Ver. 19. WRESTLING PRAYERS, “If
thy suit be not honest, never begin it:
if it be, never leave it.”—Trapp.

Ver. 20. SIN acKNOWLEDGED. ‘Many
people can mourn for a body from which
a@ soul is departed, but they cannot
mourn over a soul whom God has de-
serted. Alas! what is a spot in the face
to a stab in the heart? Inward diseases
are least visible and yet most fatal A
man may die of a plague though his
‘spots never appear.” —Secker.

CoNTRITION NECESSARY. “Take the
cold iron, and attempt to weld it, if
you can, into a certain shape. How
fruitless the effort! Lay it on the an-
vil, seize the blacksmith’s hammer with
all your might, let blow after blow fall
on it, and you shall have done nothing;
but put it in the fire, let it be softened
and made malleable, then lay it on the
anvil, and each stroke shall have a
mighty effect, so that you may mould
it into any shape you may desire. So
take your heart, not cold as it is, but


put it into the furnace ; let it be molten,
and after that it can be fashioned into
the image of Jesus Christ.” — Spurgeon.

Conversion. A Scotch lassie was
converted under the preaching of Whit-
field. She was asked if her heart were
changed, and replied, “Something, I
know, is changed ; it may be the world,
it may be my heart; there is a great
change somewhere, I am sure; for every-
thing is different from what it once
was.


“*T need a cleansing change within:
My life must once again begin;
New hope I need, and youth renewed,
And more than human fortitude ;
New faith, new love, and strength to cast
Away the fetters of the past.”


—Hartley Coleridge.

Ver. 21. “Do Not DISGRACE THE
THRONE OF THY GLORY.” The Romans
held the extinction of the vestal fire a
sign of the destruction of their city, be
the cause thereof what it will. We may
well think the same of the loss of God’s
ordinances, which therefore we must
deprecate, as here, with all our might ;
for as Bodin said well of obtaining, so
likewise of retaining, religion, Non dis-
putationibus sed rogationibus, &c.: the
business will be the better effected by
requests than by disputes. Pray, there.
fore, for the peace of Jerusalem, yea,
take no nay. Deus tpse qut nullis con-
tra se viribus superare potest, precibus
vincitur (Jerome). The invincible God
is overcome by the power of prayer.
—Trapp.

Ver. 22. Man’s Lone Hors. “Our
hope is not hung upon such an un-
twisted thread as ‘I imagine so,’ or ‘It
is likely ;’ but the cable, the strong rope
of our fastened anchor, is the oath and
promise of Him who is eternal verity :
our salvation is fastened with (God's
own hand and Christ’s own strength
to the strong stake of God’s unchauge
able nature.” —Rutherford,


CHAPTER XV.
Crrrroat awd Execrricat Norzs—For Chronology of the Chapter end Historical Facts, nee ou


chap. xiv. in loe.


, 1. Personal Allusions. Ver. 1. ‘* Moses and Samuel,” here mentioned as having been pre-


eminent and prevailing intercessors on behalf of their people.


Comp. Exod. xxxii. 11-14;


‘Wumb. xiv. 18-20. as to Moees; and 1 Sam. vii. 9; xii. 23, as to Samuel: confer alsu Pealm


313


CHAP, XV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.








xcix. as to both. Ver. 4. ‘‘ Manasseh, son of Hezekiah :” Hezekiah was a most devout and
religious king, whose piety throws into more heinous contrast the unrestrained guiltiness of
his impious son, Manasseh—the thirteenth king of Judah; reigned longer than any other
monarch of the Davidic line; born (probably) cir. B.o. 710; his mother, Hephsibah, daughter
of a citizen or prince of Jerusalem (2 Kings xxi), He succeeded to the throne at the age of
twelve; the event was the signal for complete moral and spiritual debasement of the whole
nation; every form of foreign idolatry was introduced—loathsome, sensuous, barbaric—even to
the Moloch fires (2 Kings xvi. 3; Isa. xxx. 33; Jer. vii. 31), while the worship of Jehovah
was repudiated, the holiness of the very sanctuary defiled (2 Chron, xxxiii, 4), God’s prophete
ruthlessly persecuted and slain (2 Kings xxi. 16), aad the Theocracy openly repudiated and
contemned. In the twenty-second year of his reign (according to a Jewish tradition), Kesar.
haddon, king of Assyria, invaded Israel, and carried Manasseh into Babylonian captivity, from
which he was released (probably, for Scripture is strangely silent respecting hia career) at the
death of this Assyrian monarch. He then returned to his land, and attempted a reformation
of his apostate .nd degraded nation and the restoration of Jehovah’s worship (2 Chron. xxxiii,
15, 16), but the impurity and impiety of the people were beyond recal. His name, notwith-
standing this repentance, was long held in abhorrence among the Jews.

2. Natural History. Ver. 3. ‘‘Dogs to tear, fowls of the heaven and beasts of the earth to
devour,” &c. ‘* Troops of hungry and semi-wild dogs wander about the fields and streets of
the cities, devouring dead bodies and other offal” (Dr. W. Smith). These dogs would tear,
mutilate, and partly devour the dead bodies (¢f. 2 Kings ix. 35, 37), and birds and beasts of
prey, vultures, jackals, and others, would make an end of such portions as the dogs left (Keil).
Ver. 9. ‘‘ Her sun ts gone down while st is yet day:” Dr. Payne Smith suggests that many con-
sider the reference here ‘‘to the battle of Megiddo, depicting the consternation of Jerusalem
at that event, If so, in the sun going down while tt was yet day, there will be a reference to the
eclipse on Sept. 30, 8.0. 610.” Thus Hitzig remarks that the prophet “refers to the battle of Me-
giddo, the more probably (2 Kings xxiii, 29) as the figure of the sun setting in bright daylight
might then be founded on the eclipse which took place in that valley Sept. 80, B.o. 610.”

8, Manners and Customs. Vor. 3, ‘J will appoint over them four kinds:”’ (appoint, same
word as in xiii, 21 TPS): just as God had set over Israel kings, priests, prophets, and judges


for the nation’s well-being, so now He placed the people under the jurisdiction of these four
destructive agencies (¢f. Ezek. xiv. 21). Ver. 7. ‘‘J will fan them with a fan in the gates of the
land:” allusion to the winnowing process by which the chaff is driven out of the windows of
the threshing-floor ; in such manner would this people (mere chaff) be driven out of the openings
and exits, ‘‘the gates of the land.” Ver. 10. “Lent on usury:” the Mosaic law interdicted
interest on loans to the poor (Exod, xxii. 25), and later on discriminated between foreigners and
Hebrews, permitting usury upon loans to foreigners, but repudiating it with their brethren
(Deut. xxiii. 19, 20). From this verse it appears that discredit was attached to any who lent on
usury even so late as in Jeremiah’s days, Yet there were departures from this law, and they
caused bitter ‘‘strife and contention ” between money-lender and debtor. Ver. 17, ‘‘ Sat not is
the assembly of the mockers:” couvivial gatherings ; meetings where, amid hilarity and festivity,
God was ignored and sacred things ridiculed. See notes on chap. wi. 11. ‘‘ J sat alone because
of Thy hand :” either because the prophetic power so possessed his soul as to draw him apart
from ordinary society and compel him to an isolated life (so Keil, Clarius, Vatablus, &.), or
‘* because of the faithful communication of his inspired messages he had been expelled from
society, and been made the object of their fierce indignation ” (Henderson).

4, Literary Criticisms. Ver. 1. ‘‘ Cast them out of My sight :” send them, or drive them,


from My presence ; lit., from before My face, MYO ; the form implies (supposititiously)


that the people were assembled before Jehovah within the Temple—they were to ‘‘go forth,”
leave the sacred precincts ; God would not be interceded for them. Ver. 3. “ four kinds ;”


FINDWIO, lit. families; agencies of destruction. Ver. 4. “Cause them to be removed:”
TIYU, from the root Yi, tossing, violent motion, maltreatment, quaking, terror. These


various shades of meaning supply different interpretations of the text: I will cause them to be
tossed violently hither and thither, abused, maltreated (Keil): I will give them up to agitation ;
they should have no rest, but be driven from place to place (Henderson): I will make them a
shuddering unto all kingdoms (Hitzig, Graf): cause them to be a terror (Payne Smith): a


horror (Lange). Wer. 5. ‘‘ Pity... bemoan.... go aside,” &c.: 21M, to feel sympathy;
“Xh3, to lament and deplore; “\jD, to turn out of the way—‘‘to ask how thou doest.”
piw, to salam, salute, inquire as to one’s health. No one will cherish the people with
sympathy, indeed no one will trouble themselves to inquire as to their good. Ver. 6. ‘‘ Thow
hast forsaken Me, saith the Lord:” TATTON IN FWD) FN; the word “forsaken ” is»
feeble rendering of W103, “thou hast cast Me out, abandoned Me.” And this emphatic re-
meee yi Jehovah on their part justifies God’s refusal to be interceded for them. Ver,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. OHAP. ZY.
eee


7. ** Gates of the land :” YOST, Ewald and Graf render it earth, and understand it that God
would winnow them through the extremities of the earth, remotest regions ; but Keil, Lange,
Henderson, retain “land:” God would drive them through the gates of their own land into
exile. Ver. 8. ‘‘ Ihave brought upon them against the mother,” &.: Henderson: “The words


wn. ON=Dy have been very differently construed. The LXX. ert yyrépa veasloxovs. Some
(Syriac, Arabic, C. B, Michaelis, and Ewald) compare the phrase 0°23 by DN, the mother
with her children, but the position of the preposition before and not after DN renders such


construction untenable, Others (Chaldean, Kimchi, J. D. Michaelis, Hitsig, Graf, and
Naegelsbach) take WHA DN to be in the construct state: the mother of the young man, or,
regarding the nouns as collectives, the mothere of the young men. Jarchi, Capellus, Castalio,
Dr. Dieu, Déderlein, Eichorn, and Dahler (and Reshi) consider DN, mother, to mean, the
metropolis (as 2 Sam. xx. 19).” Favouring this latter rendering, Henderson reads the words
thus: I have brought to them—against the mother (city)—a young spoiler (Nebuchadnezzar),
But with Jerome and Kimchi, &., both Keil and the Speaker's Comm. coincide, and translates:
I bave brought upon them, even upon the mother and the young man, spoiler, &.—t.e., no age
or wex will escape the spoiler. ‘J have caused him to fall upon it suddenly ;” rather, caused
pangs and terrors to fall upon her suddenly. Ver. 10. ‘‘ Hvery one doth curse me:” The
Hebrew words +3992 79D have been wrongly divided, and should be 13399) DNDD
The form p22 (lat pers.) is unusual, yet is found in 2 Sam. xxiii. 6. Ver. 11. “ Verily
i shall be well with thy remnant:” « various reading appears here: a different pointing
wholly changing the sense: IW may be pointed thus, FIIW, (the infinitive Kal from
TW to oppress), or qiw (from mW, to loose). The latter is preferable, and agrees with


the rendering given to the only other appearance of the verb in the Heb. Scriptures (Job xxxvii.
8; setteth the lightning loose). The reading of the words then is, Verily thy loosing shail be for
good ; or, Verily I have loosed thee for good. ‘‘ TAy remnant:” these words of course disap-
pear from the text, being included and lost in the above tranzlation of the sentence. ‘‘ Cause
the enemy to entreat thee well:” *I\YIDIT (from yab, to meet, make peace, cause to supplicate):
hence, I will cause the enemy to supplicate thee in the time of evil.

Ver. 12. ‘‘ Shall iron break:” ean iron (ordinary iron) break northern iron and brass? not
“ steel ;”’ or, can one break iron, ¢.¢., northern iron and brass? Ver. 14. “JZ will make thee to


pass with thine enemies:” for the form J) IYi7), Henderson and Dr. Payne Smith give

7 3 iar |
ATAVIN, I will cause thee to serve thine enemies: they make this change of the letter
(*T instead of 5) on the ground of numerous MSS., also from the authority of the parallel
passage, chap. xvii. 4. Wer. 15. ‘‘ Suffered rebuke:” reproach. Ver. 18, ‘‘ Patn incurable:”
very sick, TWAIN, malignant (comp, chap. xxx. 12; Mio. i. 9; Isa. xvii. 11). “ Wilt Thow
be?” = Art Thou become. “ A liar:” Jt3n, aa a deceitful (brook or stream). “And as waters
that fail:” as precarious water; the opposite of the perennial stream of Amos v. 24. Ver. 19.
“< Bring thee again,” &c., rather, I will eause thee again to stand before my face (see Lit. Crit.
on ver. 1, supra). This was an assurance to Jeremiah, that if he returned to his unquestioning
trust in God’s wisdom and ways, God would confirm him in his prophetic and vicegeral relation
to Himself. It was a gentle reproof of his impatient questionings, and a pledge of the renewal
of his sacred trust. ‘‘Thow shalt stand before me,” Luther renders, Thou shalt remain my
preacher,


HOMILETIO OUTLINES ON SECTIONS OF OHAPTER XV.


Gection 1-9. God’s decisive refusal of the prophet’s petitions,
»» 10-14. The consequent outcry of woe answered with Divine expostulations,
»» 15-21, Fretting lamentations silenced with promises.


Vers. 1-9. Gop’s Drorstvm RerusaL OF THE PROPHET’S PETITION.


L There may be a eriminality for which no intercession can be adequate.

1. Intercessors had prevatled even in cases of appalling guilt. When Moses and
Samuel interceded effectually, the condition of Israel was most iniquitous and pro-
vocative of Divine wrath ; yet they prevailed in prayer. Such “effectual fervent
prayers of righteous men avail much.” It would almost seem that mothing could
transcend the reach of mediatorial pleadings. 315


CHAP, XV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





2. Yet there ts a bound to the prevalency of intercession. Even Moses and
Samuel would now find their mediation fail. For (1) God could not be reconciled
to such a people. His “mind” was irremediably averted from them. (2) He had
trrevocably determined their banishment; could not endure or permit their remain-
ing within His sight. Persistent and defiant criminality can effectually alienate
ne “There is a sin which ts unto death; I do not say that he shall pray
or it.”

3. Nevertheless, in these times of grace, through Christ, 1t appears impossible to
exceed Divine clemency. What Moses and Samuel and Jeremiah could not do,
Jesus can/ “What the law (of Moses) could not do,’ &e, (Rom. viii. 3).
“ Wherefore He is able to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by Him,”
&c. (Heb. vii. 25).

I, Destructive agencies are in readiness for sinners abandoned to judgment.

1. A discriminating consignment to various forms of doom. All will not experi-
ence similar and equal judgment. A different form of punishment is allotted te
each. Yet this “going forth” is not merely to bantshment, but to execution
“These shall go away to everlasting destruction,”

2. Ruthless agencies of execution awatt their opportunity to destroy. So long as
God shielded this people and retained them “ before His face,” they were secure,
So long as we are shielded by His mercy, ruin cannot reach us, however we may
merit the ruin. But instantly God sent them “out of His sight,” away from
His befriending, lo! “death, the sword, famine, and captivity,” all rushed upon
them. Cast away from God’s presence, we shall find executioners vigilant.

3. Abandoned spiritual apostasy ts the unpardonable offence with God. (See
Personal Allusions on ver. 4, “ Manasseh.”) The horrifying indulgences, sacri-
ligeous debasements, foul practices, defiance and defilement of God’s holiness and
holy place: these were the people’s crimes under Manasseh. He did but let loose
their cherished apostasy. Himself vile, the nation rushed into and revelled in
vileness and villany. This is “the sin unto death.”

II. Flagrant wickedness ultimately alienates all commiseration or com-
passion.

1. Human pity ts estranged (ver. 5). No one will sympathise with their
misery, lament their ruin, or inquire for their condition.

2. Divine relenting is exhausted (ver. 6). God was “weary with repenting,” and
would now inexorably punish.

3. Justice effectually avenges impenttence. “They return not from their ways”
(ver. 7). That justifies their final and severe doom, (1) From thetr land driven
forth (ver. 7), (2) Thetr holy city desolated (ver. 8). (3) Death and doom
overtaking all, irrespective of sex or age (ver. 9, see Ltt. Crit. on verse).

Nore: “ Pity” is slow to die, even from the human heart; it survives, and
asserts itself even when all affection is dead. Far more slowly does God's pity die.
Yet heinous, determined, ostentatious, and persistent guilt will eventually destroy
all pity for the wicked. Then only terrible and implacable miseries can ensue,


Ver. 10-14. Taz Outory or Wor ANSWERED WITH EXPOSTULATIONS.


Seeing that he availed nothing by prayer, the prophet raised his lament. Into
his cry enter both personal disappointment and patriotic dismay.

I. He bemoans his troubled prophetic career, since it accomplished no
national good.

He repines over,: 1. His personal hardships. 2. Hts prophette calling and com.
mission, for these had been fruitfui of grief, suffering, and calumny. And
3. The hostility he encounters: “Every one doth curse me ;” his experiences are
as distressing as if he had himself been “a man of strife and contention,” and as if
his occupation had been that of the hated usurer! Observe how he gives promi-

31¢


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. CHaP, XV.
ee ean SNRSNPSNENISRSSnNOS 5 .


nence to the comfortless aspects of his career,—how he thrusts his own troubles
forward, almost ignoring the wisdom and benignity of the Divine purpose in com-
missioning him to prophetic duties. What were his sufferings and discomforts as
compared with the opportunities and persuasives to salvation God had sent to the
nation through him? He betrays :

i. Grief for apparent failure in his work and prayers. “He felt angry that he
effected less than he wished” (Calvin). All ministers could alike complain,

ii, Regret for the hardships his ministry had entailed. Sinners are apt to judge
end slander faithful preachers as contentious disturbers of their peace.

iii. Trouble for the trrevocable ruin of his nation. The hearts of his people
were unmoved, unchanged. And, his preachings and prayers notwithstanding,
Judah was doomed !

II. With mingled promises and threatenings God answers the prophet’s
complaint. Jehovah meets the outcry thus :—

1. He assures him of ameliorating mercies amid the coming distress (ver. 11).
He should be exempt from tke national woe, and be treated with forbearance.

2. Explains the prophets tmpotency in tntercession. His prayers are but as
“iron,” stout and determined indeed; yet God’s purpose to send Judah into
exile is inflexible as “northern iron and steel,” or, the Assyrian invasion cannot be
repelled now by your prayers (ver. 12).

3. Justifies the severe judgments He had determined upon Judah. Her prevalent
“sins ” (ver. 13) necessitated punishment.

4. Avows Himself moved to a fiery anger which should consume the hardened
nation. God was wroth, justly and resolutely angry ; and such righteous anger
could not be restrained, as if it were fitful, by even His prophet’s criea’ Personal
feeling must bow to Divine equity.


Ver. 15-21. Frertina LAMENTATIONS SILENCED WITH PRoMISES,


In the strophe (ver. 15-18), the prophet, though recognising that the fall of Judah
is inevitable, as shown in ver. 12-14, and that he cannot escape the hard lot of
having to predict the ruin of his country as a purpose absolutely determined, yet
offers unto God a last expostulation, and that in a tone of reproach, as if the
promises made in chap. i: 18 had not been fulfilled.

His words are full of meaning :

L He appeals to God the all-knowing (who was acquainted, therefore, with the
manner of his call, the promises made him, the hopes with which he had accepted
his office, his disappointment, his dangers, the opposition he had met with, and his
perseverance when in despair) to show that He remembered him by visiting him, t.e.,
by interfering in some marked manner in his behalf and punishing his persecutors,

To the prophet God’s long-suffering towards the wicked seemed to be the aban-
donment of himself to death, and justice itself required that one who was suffering
eontumely for God’s sake should be delivered.

IL He contrasts the joy with which he had aecepted his office (ver. 16), when
he received Gud’s words and “did eat them,” with—

III. The pr>sent revulsion of his feelings (ver. 17) : the intense “ indignation ”
with which he regarded the sins of the people, which were heinous in themselves,
grievoes offences against God, and involved the ruin of His Church, Then

IV. Prays for more evident help (ver. 19). It is the prayer of a man in bitter
grief, whose human nature cannot at present submit to the Divine will.

V. Laments that the delivery of God’s message availed nothing. His labours
were in vain, This made his “ pain perpetual,” &c, Nothing he did had in aught
changed the miserable state of things around him. Jeremiah had expected that,
called to so high an office, there would be perpetual interference of ee in


OMAP. XV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





his behalf, instead whereof, things seemed to take only their natural course. God
seemed “as a deceitful stream ” to him.

To all this God made a reply full of forbearance and graciousness, although
comfort is blended with rebuke,

IL Solemn conditions are specified. These were imperative to the prophet’s

Teinstatement in official dignity and service (ver. 19).

1. Personal “return.” Jeremiah had, as in chap. xii, questioned God’s
righteousness ; he is told he must “return,” must repent him of his doubts,
and think only of his duty.

2. Separation in himself of what was divine and holy from the dross of human
passion (Maurer) : let the “ precious ” metal be distinct from the “ vile,”

II. Gracious assurances are given.

1. The restoration of Jeremiah to the prophetic office; “I will cause thee again
to stand before me” (see Zt. Crit. on verse). To stand before a person means to
be his chief officer or viceregent, and is said of Elijah (1 Kings xvii. 1), and Elisha
(2 Kings iii, 14), as God’s prophets; of David as Saul’s minister (1 Sam, xvi. 21,
22), of Nebuzar-adan as commander-in-chief of Nebuchadnezzar’s arms (Jer. lil 12,
margin).

2. a should be again the organ by which God would speak; “Thou shalt be as
My mouth.” Here is supplied a principle for regulating the prophet’s conduct :—
‘‘ Let them return unto thee, but return not thou unto them:” concede not to the
people—a flattering prophet perishes with the people whom his soft speeches have
confirmed in their sin; but the truthful speaking of God’s Word saves both.

3. The original promises and covenant with Jeremiah are confirmed (ver. 20, 21).
This repeats God’s pledge given at Jeremiah’s original call (see chap. i. 18, is
adding the promise of deliverance from men of open violence—‘“ the terrible,”—


Arranged from Speaker's Com,


HOMILIES AND COMMENTS ON VERSES OF CHAPTER XV.


Ver. 1. Theme: THE LOATHSOME sess. He proclaims Himself to be, and
SOUL OUTOAST FROM Gop. ‘My mind would be known as, “The Lord merci-


could not be toward this people; cast
them out of My sight.”

Such is Jehovah’s answer to the
kneeling, weeping, pleading prophet.
Jeremiah, in his prayer, had asked, as
if it could never really be so, “‘ Hath
Thy soul loathed Zion?” (xiv. 19).
Now God affirms that the people had
become irrevocably loathsome to Him.

I. Loathing would seem impossible
to a God of beneficent love.

1. Sin, though repulsive, did not
alienate God’s love from the world. For
“ God commended His love towards us,
in that while we were yet sinners,
Christ died for the ungodly.”

2. However defiled and worthless the
sinner, there dwells abounding grace mm
Christ. None can exceed the virtue of
His atonement or the compass of His
pity, or the fulness of His Gospel calls,

3. It is the crowning glory of God
that He is merciful to our unrighteous

318


ful and gracious,” &.

4, Love delights to assert ttself
towards those in the lowest depths of
alienation. It seeks and saves the Jost.

5. Hatreme cases in the Gospel records
encourage hope for vilest sinners. The
crucified malefactor, who cast revilings
in Christ’s teeth ; Mary Magdalene, out
of whom was cast seven devils; Saul,
who breathed out threatenings and
slaughter, cc.

II. Loathing can only ensue where
love has been relentlessly outraged.
This was Judah’s case ; her conduct had
exhausted and exceeded all the resources
of Divine love.

1. Love may not neutralise the law
and action of rightness. It may inter-
pose and mitigate justice, but not
frustrate it. And where love effects no
change in the sinner, right must be
allowed to pursue its course and requite
the guilty cond uct.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAR.





CHAP. XV,





2. Wilful contempt of patient and
pitying love courts Divine aversion.
Such treatment of God’s gentleness and
patience arouses indignation. ‘“ Last of
all, He sent His Son, and Him they
slew /”

3. The superlative crime of the sinner
#s to outrage and alienate love. To
break daw is evil enough, but when love
interposes to shield the wrong-doer, for
him then to abuse Jove is to culminate
iniquity.

III. Loathing, when once incurred,
closes all hope of reconciliation. “My
mind cannot be towards this people.”

1. The very thoughts of God, as well
as His affections, tern irrevocably away
from such heinous transgressors,

2. No intercession can effect a reeal
of the Divine complacency. He cannot
look upon such sin.

3. While the horrible heartlessness of
men remains there can be no basis of
reconciliation. ‘‘ Intercession is power-
ful, and is not without fruit, when he
who prays and they for whom he prays
are of like spirit” (Cramer). But, with
relentless hostility in the human heart,
God can never turn compassionately
towards the sinner,

IV. Loathing having been right-
eously merited, the doom of banish-
ment follows. “Cast them oat of My
sight.”

1. No place tn the Divine mind entails
no place in the Divine presence. Having
forfeited God’s favour, the soul must
quit His abode.

2. No place in the Divine presence
entails irrevocable banishment. An out-
cast,— a castaway.” ‘These shall go
away.” ‘Oh, that they were wise, that
they understood these things, that they
would consider their latter end.”

Theme : INTERCESSORY PRAYER.

Prayer is both a duty and a privilege.
Scripture commands that those who
pray should not limit prayer to self:
‘Pray one for another.” Intercessions
are to be made for all men (1 Tim. ii.
1, 2). Jeremiah had prayed very
earnestly for his people. He was not
only unsuccessful, but was even for-
bidden to pray for them (xiv. ver. 11).
Moreover, he is informed that though


Moses and Samuel should both stand
before God, even they could not prevail.
This suggests to us that there are limits
to the duty and to the power of inter-
eessory prayer. Consider, then,

I. That intercessory prayer is an
exercise of great value.

1. As developing our love to man.
Interesting ourselves in his trials, seek-
ing to save him from his sins, This
love may be shown first to our nearest
friends, but it will, if true, take in man
as man. We are to pray even for
“them that despitefully use us.”

2. As carrying out the Divine pre
eepts. In the spirit of Christ, in the
fellowship of life. ‘ When ye pray say,
Our Father.” The model prayer is in
the plural, “our,” “us,” “we;” sot I,
my, me.

3. As following after noble examples.
Abraham, Moses, Samuel (1 Sam. vii.
9), Elijah, Jeremiah, Jesus, and all
good men who love the souls of their
fellows.

4, As obtaining great blessings for
others. Lot appears to have been saved
by. Abraham’s prayer. Israel often
spared because Moses or Samuel prayed
(Exod. xxxii. 11-14; Numb. xiv. 17-20;
1 Sam. vii. 9). The prayer of faith was
to save the sick, to obtain even salvation
(James v. 15; 1 John v. 16), &e.

Il. That intercessory prayer cap
be offered only by good men. “The
effectual fervent prayer of a righteous
man availeth much.”

1. He must not be under the sin
against which he prays. If it be a
prayer of sympathy for one in trouble,
this rule has no force. It is essential
that, as the priest of old time went in
first for himself then for the people,
so it should be also with intercessory
prayer.

2. Should know by expertence the
value of the blessing he craves for another.
Else how can he pray with the heart
and understanding.

3. He must be willing to foin effort
evith prayer. Otherwise his sympathy
and desire will be a mere pretence, a
thing of words, a mere worthless senti-
ment. God will not hear the prayers of
those who will do nothing pe pray, if


G@aP. XV.





they are able to do other things besides
to gain the object of their prayers.

Til. That intercessory prayer has
some limitations even when offered
by the best of men. Such as Jere-
miah, Moses, Samuel.

1. This is evident from Scripture.
Abraham could not prevail to save
Sodom, Peter would not pray for
Simon Magus; he must pray for him-
self. John in his First Epistle says,
“There is a sin unto death; I do not
say that he shall pray for it.” (See
other texts.)

2. This 1 evident from observation.
We have all known many prayers offered
for others which have been apparently
unanswered. Sometimes the faults are
in ourselves (see under II.), but some-
times we fail to find explanation.

3. Reason would lead to the same
conclusion. The best of men are but
men, They may at. times be more in-
fluenced by sorrowful sights than by
sinful acts. Personal feeling controls
them as it does others. Prayer is
powerful, but not all-powerful. God
will grant their requests if in so doing
He can be just and true to all—His
character and all His people.

IV. That intercessory prayer is a
grand distinction and provision of the
Gospel. We have

1. The best of intercessors (Heb. vii.
25). In office, in sympathy, in work,
in influence.

2. Praying for the best of blessings.
Salvation, preservation, comfort, glory
(John xvii. 24).

3. Taking up the case of every soul
that trusts Him. “ All that come unto
God by Him” (Heb. vii. 25).

4, Always successful in His tnterces-
ston. He will not take up any case
which would or could fail. He always
does those things which please the
Father. He is always heard (John xi.
42). His plea is irresistible,—tt satis-
fies law, tt magnifies grace, tt humbles
the sinner, it glorifies the Father, it con-
secrates life to good deeds.

Let the failure of others teach us to
fly for refuge to the only One whose in-
tercessions are unfailing. “We bave an
advocate with the Father, Jesua Christ,

326


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAB.


os


the righteous” (His prayer for Peter
Luke xxii. 31, 32).— W. Whale.

Ver. 2. Theme: INCREDULITY AT
Gop’ Messa@E OF Doom. “ If they shall
say unto thee ”—as they are likely to
do in a jeer and with scoffing incredulity
—‘‘ Whither shall we go forth?”

I. The seeming incredibility of the
doom pronounced.

1. Sinners cannot think their ruin
really imminent. They dream on de-
mented, revel in sin, blinded to its
enormity and their own peril.

2. Messages of doom seem to them
empty menaces, It was so when Noah
prophesied the Flood; so when the
angel threatened Sodom’s overthrow ;
so with the terrible predictions of our
Lord concerning Jerusalem’s destruction ;
and is so still when the “end of all
things” and the fiery judgment are
announced,

3. Dreadful calamtties start in the
mind a revulsion which produces tn-
credulity. A kind of blank bewilder-
ment results from the attempt to enter-
tain a terrifying announcement—
“Whither shall we go forth?” It is
simply incredible, impossible. So now,
in our own times, sinners answer the
announcement of the woes awaiting the
impenitent with a light indifference, a
jeering unbelief, It is not credible that
God will doom us, will dismiss us for
ever from salvation !

IL The ready incredulity of those
under doom.

Condemned souls would prefer not to
realise the sentence frue ; so find evasive
questions, endeavour to explain away
the menace as meaningless, and then
jeer contemptuously at the messenger
who prophesies evil against them. The
same process is rife to-day ; for cavillers
answer the preacher thus—There is no
doom to the unsaved: whither will the
ungodly be banished? Doom will not
be very distressing: it is impossible
that a soul should be for ever lost.

1. Man meets God's threatenings with
sncredulity.

2. God meets man’s incredulity with
specific affirmations, ‘Such as are for
death,” &c. There is a dreadful pre
cision in God’s dire messages: they





cannot well be explained away as para-
bolic images, as oriental and pictorial
figures, merely setting off in bold colours
a trifling occurrence. Such things as
are here arrayed in order to bring in-
credulity to its sober senses—death, the
sword, famine, captivity—are more than
imaginary forms of speech; they are
terrific facts, appallingly literal.

Note: Sinners would be wise to be-
lieve God means exactly what He
threatens. What madness to risk the
future on an evasive interpretation of
His menaces |
See Addenda; SconnFu INOREDULITY.


Theme: ScOFFING ANSWERED BY SAR-
oasM. The words may be so inter-
preted—

L. Derisive questionings: ‘‘ Whither
shall we go forth?” Perhaps you will
tell us a little more explicitly what our
doom is to be! Inform us, if you can,
where and to what we are to be driven.

II. Sarcastic directions. Would
you know more precisely to what God
will send you forth? Then hear: Each
to his allotted doom: one shall “ go
forth” to “death,” and he shall cer-
tainly meet it ; another to “ the sword,”
&e. The way will be made quite plain
to you, so plain that you will not be
likely to miss your appointed doom.
These evile you jeer at will be found
waiting for you in their appointed place.
Do not think there will be any pro-
bability of your missing them. All is
carefully and conveniently arranged for
you. (Comp. vers. 3, 4.)


Ver. 4. Comments—

I WILL CAUSE THEM TO BE REMOVED.

Blayney rightly observes that the
word rendered “to be removed,” in our
version, has no such meaning. The
verb means to move, agitate, disquiet,
but not to move from one place to
another. The noun as found here is
rendered “ vexation” in Isa, xxviii. 19,
and “trouble” in 2 Chron. xxix. 8.
The idea of removing is not given in
any of the versions, nor in the Zargum.
It is used in two places by Jeremiah,
chap. xxiv. 9; xxix. 18. In both places
“vexation, trouble, or disquietude”

T


would be the best rendering. The sen.
tence may be thus translated: And I
will render them a vexation to all the
kingdoms of the earth. Literally it is,
““T will give them for a vexation,” &c.
And so they became ; they were a trouble
and a disquietude wherever they were;
and hence they became, as it is said in
chap. xxix. 18, a curse, a hissing, and
@ reproach among all nations,

Venema gives this rendering: And I
will give them for a shaking to all the
kingdoms of the earth. Which he
understands to mean, that they would
be given to be shaken, agitated and dis-
quieted.— Ed. of Calvin.

The Jews were to have no rest, but
were to be driven from place to place at
the pleasure of their enemies. Ewald:
Spiel des Windes.—Hend.

Rather: I will cause them to be a
terror. So the Syriac and Rashi render,
Every one who hears of the calamity
that has befallen them will tremble.
The words are quoted from Deut. xxviii.
25.—Speaker’s Com.

“ BecCaAusE OF MANASSEH THE 80N
or Hezexran.” The sin upon which
this severe sentence is grounded—

i, It 1s in remembrance of a former
iniquity. It is “ because of Manasseh.”
What “he did in Jerusalem” we are
told (1 Kings xxiv. 3, 4). This is
brought into the account with the pre-
sent generation, to show that the guilt
of blood will light and lie somewhere
sooner or later, and that reprieves are
not pardons.

ii. Jt is in consideration of thetr pre-
sent impenitency. Their own sin is de-
scribed in vers. 6 and 7, There is mercy
for those who have turned aside, if they
will return; but what favour can they
expect who persist in their apostasy ?
—Henry.

“THE son OF HezextaH.” But alto-
gether degenerate. He was therefore
the worse, because he should have been
better ; and the worse again, because he
was author publice corruptele, a ring-
leader of rebellion to others, as was
Jeroboam.—Trapp.

God keeps an exact protocol (register)
of sins, and visits them to the third and
fourth generation.—Cramer.


$21


onAP. XV,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIA.





See what uncertain comforts children
are, and let us therefore rejoice in them
as though we rejoiced not.—Henry.

Qualis rex talts grex.—Férster.


Theme: AN ANOMALY IN THE LAW
OF TRANSMISSION. ‘Because of Ma-
nasseh, the son of Hezekiah.”

Notice that, 1. Grace was Not trans-
mitted from Hezekiah to Manasseh :
parental virtues do not necessarily re-
appear in the children. 2. Guelt was
transmitted from Manasseh to that gene-
ration : evil travels down, reappears
through successive years.

Explanation: The human heart is
not naturally eraraoured of godli-
ness, does not instinctively appreciate
and reciprocate good example ; but
“men love darkivess,” are quick to re-
spond to the sway and charm of a bad
example.

I. Eminent piety in the father does
not ensure godliness in the son. Social
life cannot guarantee what a child’s
future will be. Only God’s grace can
implant holiness.

1. Godliness 1s not hereditary. Pa-
rents cannot produce it in their children.
Neither is it transmitted involuntarily.

2. To see godliness at home does not
necessarily awaken others to love and
emulate tt. The example of holiness is
not omnipotent, neither is it sure to
charm others, The heart is not prone
to it.

II. Criminality is deepened when a
holy parental example is repudiated.

1. It was Manasseh’s duty, personally
and publicly, to follow Hezekiah’s ex-
ample. For the reforms Hezekiah had
effected were manifestly right in them-
selves, and beneficial to the nation, as
well as due to God, who had befriended
Judah.

2. It was an aggravation of his guilt
that he reversed all his father had done.
He owed it to fis father to respect the
work he had so laboriously wrought ;
and to his father’s God to preserve the
worship and sacred institutions he had
so zealously restored.

[ Notes :—

“The name of the pious father in-
tensifies the horror at the wickedness of

322





the son” (2 Kings xxi. 3),—Speaker’s
Com.

“We learn that they are worthy of a
heavier punishment, who have been reli-
giously brought up from their childhood,
and have afterwards degenerated ; who,
having had pious and godly parenta,
afterwards abandon themselves to every
wickedness, Hence a heavier judgment —
awaits those who depart from the
examples of godly fathers,”—Calvin.

“His relation to so good a father was
a great aggravation to his sin, so far
was it from being an excuse for it,”
—Henry. |

IIL Rueful consequences will over-
take a people who elect and follow a
guilty leader. Why does God threaten
vengeance on this generation for Manas-
seh’s sins $

1. His example did not justify them
in doing the same They could not
shelter themselves under the plea of
Manasseh’s leading.

2. Their continuance in guilt was wil-
Jul and determined. They reproduced
Manasseh’s crimes, but it was not be-
cause some force urged them on tn
voluntarily ; they did evil of their own
accord.

3. The people had a choice of examples
before them. Hezekiah had shown them
the way of godliness; Manasseh, the
way of sin. But they “loved dark-
ness rather than light, because their
deeds were evil.” There was in them
“an evil heart of unbelief in departing
from the living God.”

4. To follow evil leading will lead to
evil issues. ‘I will cause them to be
removed—to be a horror—among the


nations, because of Manasseh.” ‘“ Both
fall into the ditch,”

See Addenda: PaRENTAGE

Ver. 5. Comments—

Who will take pity . .. to wish thee


well? ‘From vers, 1-4, it follows with
absolute certainty that Jehovah will no
longer help, and that therefore Israel is
inevitably lost. No longer any escape |
If the Lord will not, who else will have
pity. on the people # (Isa. li. 19; Nah.
iii. 7.) Who, indeed, will even ok how
they are? The th ught seems to be


ee ee


PE re ee eee eS


a ee


PS ey





Fee a eee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH,





implied, that still less will any one do


aught for the welfare of the people, or
any longer intercede for them as the pro-
phet has done (xvi. 7 seg.) ””"—WNaeg.

“When God abandons us, we are
abandoned also by the holy angels and
all creatures, For as at court, when
two eyes are turned away the whole
court turns away; so when the Lord
turns away, all His hosts turn away
also.” —Cramer.

“The sinful people will be given up
to all the kingdoms of the earth to be
ill used, for no one will or can have
compassion on Jerusalem, since its rejec-
tion by God is a just punishment for its
rejection of the Lord (ver. 6). Have
pity and bemoan denote loving sympathy
with the fall of the unfortunate.—Keil.


Theme: Lost EVEN TO PITY. ‘Who
shall have pity upon thee, O Jerusalem %”

It is usual to pity the ignorant, the
unfortunate, the weak ; but the wilfully
evil, those who sin against the light of
knowledge and the manifestations of
love, must be blamed and, unless they
repent, condemned. In her sorrows
Jerusalem seemed an object of pity,
but there were none to show favour
unto her. The gods which she had
worshipped could render no help, and
the people at whose evil desire she had
compromised her honour now taunted
and derided her (Lam. ii. 15). Who
shall pity thee?

I, Thou hast had the oracles of God.
Thy case is not as the heathen who
have no knowledge, but as of those who
“love darkness rather than light.”

II. Thou hast had great religious
advantages. ‘The priesthood, sacrifices,
and mercy-seats. The Sabbaths, sacred
feasts, and gracious promises.

IIL Thou hast had a history of
Divine mercies. In Abraham, Isaac,
and Jacob. By Moses and Aaron,
Joshua and the Judges, Samuel, David,
and Solomon. At the Red Sea, at
Marah, at Elim, at Rephidim, at Horeb,
at Jordan, dc.

IV. Thou hast insulted and forsaken
thy best Friend. Thy choice has been
fatal to thee, for thou hast gone away
after the weak, worthless, and wicked.


OHAP, XV.


bere





V. He who pities thee most is com
pelled to punish thee. For His holi-
ness’ sake, and as a warning to others
(Matt. xxiii, 37, 39).

VI. All other pity is useless to thee,
It cannot deliver thee. It cannot take
away thy sin. Oh that thou wouldest
truly repent and turn unto the Lord,
then would He not only pity, but pardon
and prosper thee.—W. Whale,

See Addenda; Lost to Prry,


Ver. 6. Theme: JEHOVAH WEARY
WITH REPENTING.

These words do not accord with our
ideas of the Divine Being. We are
accustomed to the words, “ He fainteth
not, neither is weary,” and “ He is not
man that He should repent.” The word
“repent” evidently is not to be taken in its
ordinary sense as applied to men. So
far from the word “repent” indicating
change in God, it is the outworking of
His immutability. He ever regards sin
with abhorrence, and contrite hearts with
pity and grace ; if, therefore, the people
are hardened in sin, He sends a message
like that by Jonah to Nineveh, but if,
during the day of grace, the people
truly repent and cry for mercy, then, by
the same law of His being, He refrains
from carrying out His threatenings.
There is a real change in the people,
which alters the relationship in which
they stand towards God, but there is
only an apparent change in the Divine
dealing, To the impenitent, God is
unchangeably just. To the penitent, He
is unchangeably merciful. The fact that
God is “weary of repenting,” shows—

I. That God had often turned from
His threatenings, and dealt in mercy
with the people.

It. That the Divine mercy had been
frequently abused, and the people had
gone back again to their sins.

III. That not a change in His being,
but only a change of relationship, is
expressed by the ward “repent” (Jonah
iii. 10).

IV. That judgment is alien to God’s
heart, whereas mercy is His delight.
If He can, without weakening the force
of justice and encouraging sin, He will


magnify grace and save men
: 323


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH,





V. That when God is met with per-
sistent ingratitude, and men relapse
continually to sin, He must eventually
punish them, He is weary with re-
peuting, and will deal in judgment with
them.

VL That the operations of the
Divine mind can only be expressed
in human language with difficulty and
limitation.

VIL That we should be careful in
not trifling with or abusing the patient
longsuffering of God. “My Spirit
shall not always strive with man,”—
W. Whale

WEARY WITH REPENTING. “The
punishment due has been delayed into
weariness, and this seeming failure of
justice has made Judah withdraw far-
ther from God.”—-Dr. Payne Smith.

“This determination of the Lord will
not change, for He is weary of repenting.”
— Keil.

“ God is represented as a man whose
patience is at last quite tired out, it
being to no purpose to withdraw His
hand any longer from striking.” —Lowth.

Comments—

Ver. 7. “ The gates of the land mean
the places by which men enter or leave
it. As God winnows them, they are
driven out of the land through all its
outlets in every direction.” — Payne
Smith.

“The gates of the land mean the
extreme points at which an entrance or
an exit was effected. Jehovah threatens
to carry them thither, to be thence
scattered among the nations.” (Comp.
Nah, iii. 13.)—Henderson.

Ver. 8. ‘ Against the mother of the
young men,” &c. (See Lnt. Crit. on
ver. p. 315.) Most of the old com-
mentators regarded this as a reference
to the mother-city, Jerusalem. Arch-
bishop Secker suggested that “ the nation
in general is called the ‘ mother’ of each
Jewin particular,” citing Isa. 1. 1 and Hos.
ii, 2-5. But exact criticism brings out
the sense—against the mother of the young
man, the word rendered “ young man”
meaning @ picked warrior ; and suggest-
ing that even the vigorous woman who
kad borne a valorous warrior would fall
before the spoiler. Neither strength nor

324


<= Kanne


valour could deliver from him, Others
suggest, that both mother and son
would fall, neither age nor sex being
respected.


Ver. 8. Theme : SUDDEN SPOLIATIONS.

A spoiler at noonday: Henderson's
reading (see Litt. Crit.) “a young
spoiler,” leads him to adopt into his
comments a historic statement which
Josephus cites from Berosus, the Chaldean
historian, which reads thus: ‘ That
Nabopollassar, king of Babylon, hear-
ing that the provinces of Egypt, Coale-
Syria, and Phenice had revolted, and
being himself infirm from age, sent a
part of his forces under his son Nebu-
chadnezzar (%¢, Nebuchadnezzar IL),
then in the prime of youth, by whom
these provinces were again reduced.”
After defeating Pharaoh-Necho at Char-
chemish, he marched forward against
Jerusalem and captured it. The noon-
day attack, at an hour when military
operations were usually suspended, indi-
cated the restlessness of the spoiler—he
could not wait; and the wnewpected-
ness of the attack—at an hour when
none anticipated. So that these facte
stand out:

I. The Divinity which rules in
calamities. “J have brought upon
them:” “J have caused,” &c. (1.)
God works always. (2.) Disasters have
a meaning and a mission. (3.) The
law is being Divinely enforced that sin
brings misery.

IL The resources of Jehovah for
chastisement. God would have “the
young spoiler” ready when the hour of
judgment arrived. (1) He foreknows
history, (2) anticipates the careers of
nations, (3) provides for contingencies,
and (4) prepares His emissaries for the
work to be done.

Il. The startling aspects of mis-
fortune.

1. At an unlikely hour: “ noonday.”

2. By an tmpatient agent: eager,
restless, could not wait for the sultry
noon to pass.

3. With an impetuous force: ‘ sud-
denly,” like a lightning stroke; and
“fall upon,” as a crushing avalanche,
irresistible, overbearing all. Even the








HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JBREMIAR.





young warriors fell before the spoiler,
and the mother too.

(a.) Thus affliction comes, and health,
loved lives, are stricken,

(6.) Thus reverses befall, and home,
fortune, are shattered.

(c.) Thus conscience terrifies, and the
soul is filled with anguish for its guilt.

(d.) Thus death seizes ita victims, and
we lie cold; or “ widows” multiply, or
“young men ” fall, or ‘* mothers” weep
for the slain.

(e.) Thus the last day will come, and
the archangels’ cry will suddenly appal
the world.


Theme; Li¥k’s NOONTIDE.
spoiler at noonday.”

Sermon to the Young.

I. In the noontide of life we suspect
no nearing ills. The foe would not be
anticipated at “noonday.” The young
expect no perils,

IL In the noontide of life spoilers
conspire for our fall, The schemes
of the enemy are founded on our not
expecting him. He takes advantage.

III. In the noontide of life the
young have been destroyed. Think of
Byron. Yes, even the “ young warrior.”
“The young men do utterly fall.”

IV. In the noontide of life death
seizes its prey. No ageis spared. The
“spoiler” respects none. Youth may
lie.

V. In the noontide of life, God’s
tedeeming care is urgently needed.
Only as He befriends us are we safe
when the “spoiler” comes. Religion is
not merely for old age. Youth needs
God. Hid with Christ in Him, nought
can harm. “I fear no evil, for Thou art
with me.”

See Addenda: Larx’s Noontipe.


“The


Vers. 6-9. Theme: Gop FORSAKING
AND GOD FORSAKEN,

When the Spirit of the Lord came
upon Azariah, the son of Oded (2
Chron. xv. 1, 2), he was moved to
say unto Judah and Benjamin, “ The
Lord is with you, while ye be with
Him ; and if ye seek Him He will be
found of you, but sf ye forsake Him
He will forsake you.” These verses ra-


OHAP, xv,





markably verify that inspired utterance.
Here we meet—

L AGod forsaking people. They are
convicted by God Himself of a great
folly and sin: “Thou hast forsaken
Me.” In chap. ii, 13 the charge is
more complete. Creation is called upon
to express surprise at a folly so conspie
uous as that of forsaking the fount of
all good, and taking up with helpless
vanities.

“ Thou,”—who oughtest to have been
unto Me z loyal and loving people, tes
tifying of My power and grace, and
proving by separation from the nations
your preference for the living and true
God.

“ Hast forsaken,” — not simply for-
gotten, or disobeyed, but of deliberate
choice hast taken other gods, and disre-
garded Jehovah,

“ Me,” — who called Abraham and
made a covenant of lasting privileges
with him and his descendants, who
brought you out of Egypt, who led
you, fed you, protected you, and
gave to you the land in which you
dwell; and assured you, by wondrous
promises which yet await fulfilment,
of future good and greatness to you,
if you could but be faithful to Je-
hovah,

Il. A God-forsaken people. This
is the effect, man’s conduct the
cause. “If ye forsake Him, He will
forsake you.” When a people are for-
saken of God, they are—

1. Always retrograde. ‘Thou art
gone backward,” spiritually gone back
into Egypt. All who forsake God go
backward, always backward, and down-
ward. Unless they repent and obey
God, there is no way forward and
upward. Forward and upward is the
desire and movement of a true soul.

2. Always in danger of destruction,
‘Therefore will I destroy you.” There-
fore (t¢.), because you have gone back-
ward. It is the penalty of a backward
movement, It must come upon all who
forsake God. If we forsake the mercy,
we inherit the misery.

3. Always exposed to terrors and
disasters. Suggested by such words
as, ‘‘ bereave,”—“ widows,”—“ spoiler,”


325


OBaP. xv.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; JEREMIAH.





—‘“ terrors.” All caused by the God
they have forsaken.

4. Always drifting into languor,
premature decline, shame, and death (ver.
9). Such is the end of those who are
forsaken of God. No strength, no
courage, no progress, no real true life ;
but decline, captivity, and darkness.
“Turn ye, turn ye, for why will ye die,
O house of Israel ?”—W. Whale.


Comments—

Ver. 9. “ She that hath borne seven
languisheth.” Seven, being the perfect
number, signifies fulness: Jerusalem,
the mother-city, was once fully popu-
lated, now she is deserted! ‘ Formerly
she prided herself in her offspring”
(comp. 1 Sam, ii. 5), but now she is
‘ashamed and confounded” (Lam. i. 1).

“ She hath given up the ghost :” lit.,
She hath breathed out her life, as if in
laboured sighs: expiring in heavy heart-
breaths of grief. (Comp. Job xxxi.
39.)

“Her sun ts gone down while it was
yet day.” ‘The sun of her life sets
before the evening has been reached.”
(Comp. Amos viii. 9.)— Keel.

“The sun of her life, and the happi-
ness (comp. Mal. tii 20, Psa. lxxxiv.
12) which she had in her sons, is gone
down.”— Naeg.

Connecting these verses with the ill-
fated battle of Megiddo, and accepting
these words as descriptive, most com-
mentators regard them as depicting
the consternation of Jerusalem at that
disastrous event. If so, the going down
of the sun while tt was. yet day holds
an apt reference to the eclipse which
occurred on Sept. 30, B.c. 610.


Theme: LIFE PREMATURELY CLOSED,
Text: “Her sun is gone down while it
was yet day.” Specially applicable to a
useful Christian life cut off by death in
the midst of its years.

IL A lustrous life. She was our
“sun.” In the horizon of our home,
er our church, or our friendships, she
glowed, and with her radiant charac-
ter and gleaming ministries gladdened
all,


po


1. A conspicuous life: of worth, of
usefulness, of eminence.

2. A beneficent life: giving out good
and gladness to «thers.

3. An tlluminated life. For God
gave the sun its glory. All our ex-
cellences, all our power of usefulness,
are His gifts. ‘The heavens declare
the glory of God, and the firmament
showeth His handiwort.” Yes: and
“weare His workmanship.” ‘The Lord
gives grace and glory ‘


In A Iustrous life prematurely
darkened. ‘“ While yet day.”

1. The course of human life is not of
uniform duration.

2. The most benignant and beautiful
life may suddenly end. Though we be
robed with grace and living for Christ,
that does not assure to us length of
days.

3. When a beautiful life ends, preter-
natural gloom ensues. Some deaths
cause no bewailing. It is a tribute
to the worth of a life that it is so
missed and so lamented. ‘ Devout men
made lamentation over him.”


III. A lustrous life prematurely set
will again rise and shine. All lives
are not lustrous, yet all lives must set in
the grave. Death comes to all sooner
or later. Our lives differ in degree of
grace and glory. Our deaths therefore
differ. All will rise again, but not all
to shine. ‘Then shall the righteous
shine forth,” &.

1. Comfort in this thought. The
sun will again rise and shine. So will
the cherished life we mourn as having
“ gone down.”

2. Inspiration in this thought, Ra-
diant careers on earth will glow with
splendour hereafter. Therefore, “ Let
your light shine before men.” Live
beneficent lives.

3. Satisfaction in this thought. Life
is not a blunder; death is not a catas-
trophe. Sudden death is sudden blessed-
ness. ‘Blessed are the dead which die
in the Lord.” The soul whom Jesus
robes with beauty, and is thus beloved
and beneficent while on earth, does not
cease ita ministry. All the grace of





—
: =e


feo


aes


a





;


if


SE a A ee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH,


—_—_


Christ is not bestowed in vain. Death
spoils nothing, The life is hid from our
vision by the darkness into which it has
“gone down ;” but it shall rise again,
and shine in the light of God.

4. Warning in this thought. We
cannot calculate upon years. ‘This
night thy soul may be required of thee,”

See Addenda: Earty DEATH.


Ver. 15-9. Theme: BEAUTIFUL BUT
BRIEF. ‘“ Her sun is gone down while it
was yet day.”

The text is part of a gloomy description
of Israel’s decline. We take it from the


context and use it topically, as an appro- -


priate description of the end of a brief
but beautiful life. Of our friend it may
be said that—

I. Her life was like the sun in its
shining.

1. It was gloriously bright with faith
and joy.

2. It was blessedly useful in diffusing
light.

3. It was constantly comforting, by
its warmth of love, and hope.

4, It was Christianly generous, always
giving,

5. It was a centre of attraction, in the
house, in the class, in the social circle,
and in the church.

II. Her death was like the sun in
its setting.

1. Gradual. 2. Beautiful.

3. Peaceful. 4. To rise again,

III. Her sunset was early in the
day of life.

1. In the prime and beauty of being.

2. In the midst of work.

3. It seems unnatural, and suggests
questions.

4. It is an interposition of God in His
Providence, doubtless wise and loving.

5. It leads us from the creature to the
Creator.

6. It suggests that we be all ready,


always ready, “at such an hour as ye


think not.”-—W. Whale.


Vers. 15-9. Theme: PREMATURE
SUNSET.

An expressive metaphor. Not true
to nature, because the history so de-


ecribed was not natural, Both heaven


OHAP, XV





and earth were called upon to express
surprise (Isa. i, 2, 3). Unnatural
conduct leads to an unnatural end, the
wicked shall not live out half their days.
Sunset is one of the most beautiful
sights in nature, but a sudden, stormy
hiding of the sun at midday is cal-
culated to fill the beholder with distress.
Such is the metaphor. Let us con-
template it—

L In nature.

1. It would be wnnatural.

2. It would be injurtous to all life.

3. It would make us less confident, as
to the unerring regularsty of nature’s law.

IL In history. We see many cases
in which nations have fallen, not with
the decrepitude of age, but through early
and self-wrought ruin. The Old World,
Sodom, Nineveh, Babylon, &c., d&c. The
case of Jerusalem conspicuous (Matt.
xxiii. 37-39).

III. In individual life. The young
—the immoral—the unprincipled in
character generally. Obedience to God
gives a long day and beautiful sunset.

The text may be used topically for a
funeral sermon, in the case of a young
woman.— W, Whale.


Theme: THOUGHTS UPOK DEATH.
“She hath given up the ghost, her sun
is gone down while it was yet day.”

1. Death is a solemn event ; it is the
end of our probationary state, and the
beginning of a new and unchanging
state of being—and it is of frequent
occurrence,

2. No class can escape from the state
of death. The aged cannot live long,
and the young may be cut down tn the
noonday of life.

I. Death dissolves our connection
with the world.

1. Dissolves all natural relationship.

2. Ends dangers and perils.

8. Takes away the means of grace.

4. Closes our probationary state.

5. Discloses our eternal needs,

II. Death is the departure of the
soul to another state.

1. It does not sink into insensibility
as does the body. The soul lives.

2. Should death come now, how would
it find us ?

827


Gwar. Xv.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





Ill. Thechange atdeathis very great.

1. The mode of its occurrence is, to
us now, very mysterious,

2. It is an awful event to the ungodly
and impenitent.

IV. Though the event is certain, the
time is uncertain.

V. The solemnity of the event is
realised by all who think seriously
upon it.

VL Death will leave us in this
separate state until the last judgment.
Means of grace imust be improved ;
salvation of the soul must be secured
before the welfare of the body. Pre-
paration for death is necessary for all,
for all must die. ‘“ Prepare to meet thy
God.”—Old MS.


Vers. 11-14 considered together :

“The sense seems to be this—

i, The Lord does not vouchsafe to
give a direct answer to the prophet’s
complaints and murmurings concerning
his own condition and calling. By
this silence He administers a tacit
rebuke to Jeremiah for speaking in a
spirit of sullenness and discontent.

ii. He turns aside to Jerusalem, and
explains His dispensations towards her,
and thus by implication He replies to
Jeremiah. He says to her (ver. 11) J
will afflict thee for good, and will make
thine enemies to entreat thee.

This was fulfilled in the kind treat-
ment that the Hebrew captives received
from their conquerors, even Nebuchad-
nezzir in the ease of Daniel and the
three children; and of Belshazzar, and
of Cyrus, Darius, Ahasuerus, and Ar-
taxerxes in succession, after the days
of Nebuchadnezzar. Even the captive
king of Judah, Jehoiachin, was treated
kindly at Babylon by Evil-Merodach.

iii, The prophet answers, Can this
be true? Can iron break the northern
iron and steel? Can the Hebrew nation
have any power against the mighty
power of the northern realm of Chaldea ?

iv. No, answers the Lord, this will
be done by their own power. The iron
of Jerusalem will not break the iron and
steel of Babylon. On the contrary,
turning to Jerusalem, He says, J wild
give thy substance to the spotl for thy

328


. &e.


sins, and will make thee to pass into the
land which thou knowest not. But yet,
I who scatter thee for thy sins in My
wrath, will chasten thee for thy good
(ver. 11), Thus God always tempered
judgment with mercy in His dealings
with His people.”— Wordsworth.

[See also Sectional treatment, p. 316.]


Ver. 10. Theme: A TROUBLOUS
PREACHER TROUBLED. Alas/ a man of
strife.

‘‘ Even those who are not quiet and
peaceable, if they serve God faithfully,
are often made men of strife. We can
but follow peace; we have the making
only of one side of the bargain, and
therefore can but as much as in us lies
live peaceably.” Henry.

Jeremiah’s case suggests—

L Distraction over the results of a
faithful ministry. ‘I am for peace, but
they are for war.” It was not that he
strove with them, but they with him and
his work for God. Yet no one can rebuke
sinners without stirringantagonism. “Art
thou he that troubleth Israel?” ‘ These
men which turn the earth upside down are
come hither also!” ‘‘Have I become
your enemy because I tell you the truth?”

1. A fearful witness for God cannot
win popular favour.

2. Hostility to his work is sure to pain
the true preacher’s heart.

IL. Innocence of blame for the anta-
gonism aroused. Had Jeremiah been a
bad debtor, or disobeying creditor, they
could not have acted more virulently to-
wards him.

1. Hostility to a faithful preacher is
unreasonable and unjust. ‘Why, what
evil hath He done ?” asked Pilate of the
incensed crowd.

2. History repeats itself in the harsh
usage borne by God’s ministers. ‘‘ Which
of the prophets have ye not persecuted ?”
So with Rutherford, Wesley, Bunyan,
The natural man, at enmity with
God, will not be at peace with the man
of God who convinces him of his sin,
Fashion still scorns the faithful and
evangelical preacher. Public bodies are
at strife with religious societies and
Christian alliances which resist measures
for the desecration of the Lord’s day, &c.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


cn


See Addenda: ATrous.ep Ministry.

III. Despondent misapprehension of
a Divine mission. Jeremiah in a dole-
fal mood only saw the “ strife” he had
aroused. Moments when our best work
shows only ill resulta All workers for
Christ “ go forth weeping.” Good work
is often done with pain. We cannot see
all the blessed effects of godly service.
But “ woe is unto us, if we preach not.”
Courage and grace can alone prevent
us from “fainting in the day of adver-
sity,” and enable us to continue “ faithful
unto death.”

See Noticeable Topics: “MEN oF
Procrxss, Men or Srrire.”


Comments—

Ver. 11. The Lord said, Verily, &c.
Henderson renders the verse thus: “Je-
hovah saith, Have I not set thee free for
good? Have I not made the enemy take
thy part in the time of calamity and in the
time of distress?” Dr. Gotch (in Eyre &
Spottiswoode’s “Revised English Bible”)
translates: ‘‘ Verily, I set thee free for
thy good ; verily, I will cause the enemy
to make supplication to thee, in the
time of evil, and in the time of afflic-
tion.”

“The rendering of the A V., thy
remnant, gives an untrue sense. It
would mean all the rest of Jeremiah’s
days, which were by no means days of
happiness. Nor had he even at last a
period of tranquillity. But thy loosing
means thy being set free, thy deliverance,
and this sense is satisfactory.”— Payne
Smith.

“ Entreat thee well:” rather, suppli-
cate thee ; fulfilled in chaps. xxi. 1, 2;
xxxvii. 3; xhi. 2.

i. God’s despised prophet will be found
wseful. ‘‘In the time of evil, and in the
time of affliction.”

ii, Maledictions will give place to sup-
plications. ‘“ Affliction” wonderfully
changes the tone and temper of those
who once hated and resisted the mes-
senger of Heaven. The day of pride
will soon close,

iii. Divine protection overshadows His
faithful witnesses, Surrounded with
strife, yet Jehovah both guards and ulti-
mately vindicates His servants.


OHAP. XT.





Ver. 12. Theme: THE NORTHERN IRON
AND STEEL. ‘Shall iron break the
northern iron and the steel ?”

The Jews treated Jeremiah so harshly
and unjustly, that he feared they would
break his heart ; they smote him as with
an iron rod, and he felt like one crushed
beneath their unkindness.

God never did, and never will, place a
man in a trying position and then leave
him. If the rebellious seed of Israel
were iron, the Lord declared that His
prophet should be hardened by sustain-
ing grace into northern iron and steel,
If they beat upon him like hammers on
an anvil, he should be made of such
strong, enduring texture, that he should
be able to resist all their blows, Iron
in the olden times amongst the Israelites
was very coarsely manufactured, but the
best was the iron from the north. §o
bad was their iron generally, that an
admixture of brass, which amongst us
would be thought rather to deteriorate
the hardness, was regarded as an im-
provement ; so the Lord puts it, “Shall
iron—the common iron—break the most
firm and best-prepared iron ?”

This is a proverbial expression, appli-
cable to many other matters besides that
of the prophet and the Jews; it is clearly
meant to show that

IN ORDER TO ACHIEVE A PURPOSE
THERE MUST BE SUFFICIENT FORCE. The
weaker cannot overcome the stronger.
In a general clash the firmest will win.
You cannot cut granite with a pen-
knife, nor drill a hole in a rock with
an auger of silk. We shall apply this
proverb—

L To the people of God individually.
Shall any power be able to destroy the
saints? Weak as they are, they will
tread down the strength of their foes.
There is a force about them which can-
not be put down.

1. Many Christians are subjected
to great temptations and persecutions ,;
mocked, ridiculed, called by evil names.
Yersecuted one, will you deny the
faith? If so, you are not made of
the same stuff as the true disciple of
Jesus Christ; for when the grace of
God is in them, if the world be iron,
they are northern iron and aa Will

32


.CmaP, KV.





you shrink in the day of trial? Do
you mean to play the coward? “Shall
the iron break the northern iron and
steel?” Be strong. Quit you like men;
and, in the energy of the Holy Ghost,
endure as seeing Him who is iuvisible.

2. We are frequently called to serve
God amid great difficulties. Some of
you who go to the lodging-houses to
speak, who visit the alleys, &c., find
much annoyance and disappointment.
Will you say, there is no converting
these dark and obdurate souls? Is the
iron to break the northern iron and steel #
Are we to give way under difficulties ?
Look at Mont Cenis Tunnel, made
through one of the hardest rocks; with
& sharp tool, edged with diamond, they
have pierced the Alps. As St. Bernard
says: “Js thy work hard? set a harder
resolution against tt ; for there ts nothing
so hard that cannot be cut with something
harder still.”

3. To labour with ron-success, and to
wait, is hard work. It is a grand thing
for a Christian to continue patiently in
well-doing. He is a man who under
long-continued disappointment will not


* Bate a jot
Of heart er hope, but still bear up and steer
Right onward.”


The well-annealed steel within him
ere long breaks in shivers the common
iron which strikes him so severely. To
him to overcome by grace is glory
indeed.

See Addenda:
AGED.

II. Applicable to the cause of God in
the world—to the Ohurch. What
power, however like to iron, shall suffice
to break the kingdom of Jesus, which
is comparable to steel ?

1. We hear it said that Romanism
will again vanquish England; that the
Gospel light, which Latimer helped to
kindle, will be extinguished. Atrocious
nonsense, if not partial blasphemy. If
this thing were of men, it would come
to nought ; but if it be of God, who shall
overthrow it? As surely as the Lord
liveth the end of Romish Antiehrist will
come, and the long-expected cry shall
be heard, “ Babylon the great is fallen.”

330


Be not Discour-


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREM/AH.


2. Others foretell the triumph of
infidelity. Consider what these gloomy
forebodings mean? That the gates of
hell are to prevail against the Church;
that the pleasure of the Lord is not to
prosper in His hand, Who but a lying
spirit would thus lay low the faith and
eonfidence of God’s people? Infidelity
and Socinianism have ready tongues,
but every tongue that rises against the
Church in judgment He will condemn,
The Church can bear the blows of
Ritualism and Infidelity, and survive
them all, and be better for them too,
The iron will never break the northern
iron and steel.

See Addenda; Evin sHALL NoT PRE-
vaIL.

III. Apply the principle to the self-
righteous efforts which men make for
their own salvation. The iron will
never break the northern iron and
steel,

1. The bonds of guilt are not to be
snapped by a merely human power,
Habits of sin yield not to the raspings
of unregenerate resolves, All your
efforts apart from Jesus are utterly use-
less. He must bring liberty—you can-
not emancipate yourselves.

2. Yet that were an easy task com-
pared with a man renewing hts own
heart.

3. Do you think you can force your
way to heaven by ceremony? There is
no potency in baptism, confirmation,
outward ceremonies of man’s devising
or of God’s instituting, to deliver you
from the bonds which hold you. Come,
sinner, with thy fetters ; lay thy wrist at
the cross-foot, where Christ can break
the iron at once.

IV. Applicable to all persons who are
making self-reliant efforts for the good
of others. How are we driven to the
conclusion that it is “not by might nor
by power, but by the Spirit of God.”
Man’s heart is very hard ; it is like the
northern iron and steel.

1. Our preaching—we try to make it
forcible—how powerless it is of itself!
We plead, reason, seek goodly words,
&c., but the northern iron and steel
remain immovable. The cries and
tears of a Whitfield would not avail.








HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


JEREMIAH, OuaF. XV.





Though all the Apostles reasoned with
them, they would turn a deaf ear,

2. The best-adapted means cannot
succeed. A mother’s tears, as she spoke
to you of Jesus ; the pleadings of a grey-
headed father over you—no power to
change your heart! Zhe Gospel, though
put to you very tenderly by those you
love best, leaves you unsaved still!
You have been sick, near death, within
an inch of doom ; yet even the judgments
of God have not aroused you. But it is
not Ezekiel’s duty to make the dry bones
live: whether they live or not, it is his
duty to prophesy to them. Go on with
your work, but let a sense of your per-
sonal inability make you fall back upon
your God, Let it keep you from self-
reliant prayer or work, much more from
one self-confident sermon or address.
God will have us feel that the iron
cannot break the northern iron and
steel,

V. This text has a very solemn
application to all those who are rebels
against God. Fight against God, would
you! Measure your Adversary, I charge
you. The wax is about to wrestle with the
flame, the tow to contend with the fire.
“It is hard for thee to kick against
the pricks,” Cast down your weapons,
Come now, and ask for reconciliation ;
but oh, resist no longer, for the iron
cannot break the northern iron and steel.
—Rev. C. H. Spurgeon, Metropolitan
Tabernacle Pulpit, No. 993.


Comments—

Ver. 12. Shall tron break? &c. This
simile is variously interpreted Thus :—
“ By the iron is meant Jeremiah’s inter-
cession ; but this cannot alter the Divine
purpose to send Judah into exile, which is
firm as steel and brass. »__Payne Smith.

“Can trouble and affliction, though
hard as iron, break one who, like Jere-
miah, is firm as steel and brass?”—Rashs
and Umbrei.

“Not even iron, much less the Jews,
could resist the northern Colossus of the
Chaldean empire."—Zwald and Hen-
derson.

Others, by northern iron,—te., the
steel made by the Chalybes on the
Pontus.—understand the obduracy of


the Jews, which not even iron could
break.

“Can I, Jeremiah, even if I be iron,
break the obduracy of the people hard
as steel or brass }”—@raf.

The Targum regards “the iron” as
Pharaoh-Necho, and “the steel and
brass” as Nebuchadnezzar.

“Though there be great hardness in
you (Jews), can it yet break that which
is in the Assyrians? but ye are not
equal to them. The prophet’s design
was to divest the Jews of the false
confidence in which they boasted.”—
Calvin.

“God had made him (Jeremiah) an
‘iron pillar and a wall of brass,’ and He
asks, now, was it possible for his enemies
to destroy him whom God had thus
made ?”—John Owen.

[ Vide next verse. |

Ver. 13. “ For all thy sins, even in all
thy borders.” These words at once show
that it is not the prophet who is ad-
dressed in the verse preceding, but the
Jewish people.

“To the spoil without price,” t.e,,
“not making thee any compensation, but
inflicting these losses upon thee as a
punishment for thy sins." —Dr, Blayney.

“As God sells His people for nought,
t.¢., gives them up to their enemies
(comp. Isa. lii. 3, Ps, xliv. 13), 80 here He
threatens to deliver their treasures to
the enemy as a booty, and for nought.”
—Keil.

“Three things are said :-—

“i, That God would give Jugaie
treasures away for nothing. It is an
act of contempt, implying that He did
not value them.

“ii, The cause of this contempt ts
Judah's sins.

“iii, This is justified by the extent of
those sins, Judah had committed them
everywhere, throughout her whole land.”


—Dr, Payne Smith.


Ver. 15. Theme; THE DESIRE TO BE
REMEMBERED. “QO Lord, Thou know-
est ; remember me and visit me.”

Jeremiah desires many things; but
the thing he asks first, as including all
the rest, is that God would not let him
drop out of sight and aia ;


Gwar. XV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; JEREMIAH.





IL. The perpetually recurring phrase,
“God knows,” expresses a mood of
thought common to rational creatures.

A craving everywhere to be remem-
bered. From the lips of the dying,
from friends of whom we are taking our
farewell, fall the words, ‘“ Remember
me.” Those ambitious minds, not con-
tent that their memorial should be kept
in a few hearts, labour that their names
may be remembered by multitudes.
Oblivion appals us,

The moralist can easily show the
sanity of this desire, and the emptiness
of the end. What good will it do you,
he asks, to be remembered when you are
out amid Australian wilds, or on the
parched plains of India? what harm
would it do you to be forgot?

Enough for us that He who made us
so made us that, by the make of our
being, we desire to be kindly remembered.

II. This desire, then, is in our nature ;
and the prophet shows us the right
direction in which to train it.

Pointing us to the heaven above us,
he bids us seek to be remembered there !
The thought that such a prayer may be
offered to God, teaches us a great deal
of His kindliness, condescension, and
thoughtful care. You feel that you are
speaking to a Real Person in offering a
prayer like this—not to some vague,
undefined “ Great First Cause least un-
derstood,” but to a merciful Father in
heaven, who looks down upon His
child, and, “like as a father pitieth his
children, pitieth them that fear Him.”

It was while looking upon the kindly
human face oF Curist that the whole
heart's wish of the poor penitent thief
went out in the “ Lord, remember me !”

It was in special clearness of revela-
tion of God’s love that the Psalmist was
emboldened to say, “I am poor and
needy, yet the Lord thinketh upon me.”

III. Consider the encouraging view
of the Hearer of Prayer implied in the
words of the prophet’s petition.

The petition was an acceptable one,
and it was right that he offered it, ‘‘ Re-
member me,” said he, in his day of
sorrow, to God.

1. He was not staggered, as he drew
near in prayer, by intruding doubt

322





whether the Almighty would listen to
his poor words or consider his heart’s
desires. David, psalmist and king,
knew this dread ; ‘“ When I consider Thy
heavens, .. . what ts man that Thow
art mindful of him, or wisit him?”
Jeremiah almost repeats these ideas:
“Remember and wisit me.” What a
steady taith in God is in this prayer!
Coming like a little child to the great
Father, the little voice pleads, ‘ Do not
forget me /”

2. It is not presumption, but faith,
that speaks here. Be sure that when
your prayer is earnest and sincere, and
offered in simple faith in Christ the
Mediator, you never spoke words to
your nearest neighbour that he heard
more distinctly than the Almighty hears
that prayer. And you may press upon
Him all your small requests, and tell
out to Him all that concerns you, say-
ing, “O Lord, remeinber me and visit
me.”

3. Ponder for your comfort that
God “‘thinketh upon” you; that He
“knoweth your frame, and remembereth
that you are dust.”

IV. In such individuality of prayer
there is no selfishness. It is not the
wish to be distinguished and favoured
above other children of the family. It
is but the wish to be remembered even as
the others, It is but that when Christ,
the Great Intercessor, speaks to Almighty
God for Himself and His brethren of
mankind, saying, in the name of all,
“Our Father,” the poor sinner should
not be left out. So he puts forth a
trembling hand, lifts a feeble voice, and
cries, “‘ Bless me also ;” “Lord, remember
me,” &c.

V. Mark what simple trust in God’s
wisdom and kindness is implied in the
offering of such a petition.

1. Everything ts asked in that, It
was enough just to put one’s-self under
God’s eye, just to get God to think of
one at all. If God would but remember
us. He would see all our wants, and
be willing to give us all, The thief on
the cross felt that. Only “remember
me,” and all will be right.

2. Further it is assumed, that if
God remembers us it will be in lowe


a


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


CHAP, XV.


na


Remember how Joseph, in the dungeon,
asked the chief butler to think of him ;
and said how he desired to be thought
of, “and show kindness unto me,” &e.
But there is no need to specify how we
wish God would remember us.

3. Further. God’s remembrance ts
practical. He comes to our help. The
want remembered will be relieved,

4, Doubtless there is a season in the
history of the unconverted man in which
he can have no real desire that God
should remember him: he rather de-
sires to keep out of God’s sight and
remembrance. To be sure that every
word and deed is going down in “the
book of God’s remembrance” is the very
last thing the utterly ungodly man
would wish.

5. Yet the prayer expresses the first
reaching after God of the awakened soul.
“Remember me!” cried prophet, psal-
mist, penitent thief,

If we make it our desire and prayer
to be remembered by our Saviour and
God, we need not fear that we shall pass
from His recollection, Others we loved
may forget us. But amid all the care
of this universe, He will stoop down to
think of us—never forgotten by Him /
In our dark days and weak faith we may
be ready to think we have passed from
His thoughts. There is no such ex-
perience but believers have passed
through before us. Thousands of years
since owr doubts and fears were felt, and
God supplied the perfect answer. Lis-
ten to the ancient words of doubt, and
God’s blessed answer: “But Zion said,
The Lord hath forsaken me, and my
God hath forgotten me,”

“Cana woman forget hersucking child,
that she should not have compassion on
the son of her womb? Yea, they may for-
get, yet will I not forget thee.”—A. K.
H. B., condensed from “ Counsels and
Comfort,” &e.

See Addenda: On Bzina REMEM-
BERED.


Ver. 15. Theme: Prayer. ‘O Lord,
Thou knowest ; remember me and visit
me, and revenge me,” &c.

Jeremiah had prayed earnestly for
the people and without success. In


offering supplication for himself he
found favour with God. In his prayer
the pain and troubles of his life were
laid before God, and the questionings
of his heart were not kept back. Ob-
serve—


L. Divine knowledge is no hindrance
to prayer. ‘Thou knowest”: 1. My
character; 2. My condition; 3. My
need. Yet, though Thou knowest, yea,
because Thou knowest, I will pray to
Thee.


IL Divine condescension an encour-
agement to prayer.

1. Remember me.

2. Visit me.

3. Vandicate me.
only vindication.


Ill. Human need a stimulus to
prayer. He was poor, persecuted, and
in peril.

Where could he go for help?

He is driven to God by trouble, and
drawn by lovingkindness.

IV. The vicissitudes of life suggest
topics for prayer. Poverty, weakness,
want, affliction, persecution, temptation,
—the sins and sorrows of others. The
needs of the world, &c,

V. Conscious sincerity gives freedom
in prayer. “I have suffered for thy
sake,”

VI. The mediation of Christ gives
efficacy to our prayer. “I have not
joined in their sins” (ver. 10).—W.
Whale.


‘* Revenge” means


Ver. 16. Theme: Ensoyine Gop's
Worp. “Thy words were found, and I
did eat them . . . rejoicing.”

The people of God have always a re-
lief in prayer, in the worst circumstances,
Jonah cried out of the belly of hell,
“Yet will I look again.” David en-
couraged himself. Jesus, “being in an
agony, prayed.” Jeremiah, borne down
by the storms of the world, prayed,
“O Lord, thou knowest, remember, visit
me.” The disciples took up the body
of John, and went and told Jesus.

Remember, the best thing you can
do with your trouble is to take it te
Him. Sanctioned by highest autho-
rity: “Is any afflicted, let lim pray.”

333


CHP. xv.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.





Attested by experience: of all the millions
that tried it, not one but will say, “It
is good for me to draw nigh to God.”
Creatures cannot help when they would ;
will not when they can, but God both
can and will be “a present help.”

Jeremiah found it so, And he backs
his prayer by an important PLea. He
avouches the serenity of his character,
“Thy words were found ;” the reality
of his experience, “I did eat. them ;”
his past joys in religion, ‘they were the
rejoicing ;” the particular relationship
he bore to the God of grace, “I am
called by Thy name.”

Need not confine it to Jeremiah ;
apply it to self. Take it as a test
by which to try the reality of your


religion,
THE VIEWS IT AFFORDS OF PERSONAL
RELIGION. It implies—


I. A high valuation for this word.
It is prized as God’s word, and soucHT
under that character.

Love te the word of God is a sure
sign of a gracious heart. A neglected
Bible is a sign of a graceless heart.
How many read the books and writings
of men who never read the Book of God !
When God Himself turns author, some
will not give His works a reading ; but
Christians prize the word, and prove it
by searching into it (David, Ps, xix.)

Thy word. It partakes of the dwv-
nity of its Author, As Phidias, a self-
evidencing power.

It is adapted to the nature of tts sub-
ject ; suited to man. A Key fitted to un-
lock such a heart,

It has produced most astonishing effects.
Infancy andage. If the slightest agency
draws from the truth, the slightest agency
recovers. If Peter fell by a look, he
rose by a look.

1. Have you found this word

2. Has this word found you?

A poor sailor was cast away—lost his
all. The first half-crown he obtained, he
inguired where to make a purchase, of
what ?—that neglected book, a BIBLE.

“T have many books,” says Mr. New-
ton, “that I cannot sit down to read ;
they are indeed good and sound, but,
like halfpence, there goes a great quan-
tity to a little amount. There are silver


334


books aud a very few golden books, but
I have ove worth more than all, ealled
the Bible, and that is a book of bank-
notes,” Apply this test :

II. A personal experience of its
power. ‘I did eat it.”

This is different from speculation.
David does not say, Listen and hear,
but, “ Taste and see.” Apply to him for
yourself instead of relying on the autho-
rity of others, As in a case of disputed
relish, you determine not by testimony,
but by taste, In other words, it means
experience. Experience is knowledge
derived from experiment, in contradic
tion from theory.

We are apt to confound familiarity
with knowledge. Many are familiar
with all the truths and doctrines, but
have not the experience of the power of
one. Like Bunyan’s Talkative. Like
Balaam, who saw the visions of God
and was proud of what he saw—but no
experience,
and wrought miracles, but died despair-
ing. How worthless this knowledge |
To know the way, but never walk in it,
To know there is an ark, but never enter
it. To know Christ is a crucified and
almighty Saviour, but, like the dying
thief, never to apply to Him.

The knowledge of which you boast
will aggravate your doom. Like Uriah
with his fatal letter, place you in the
forefront of battle.

But religion is not only something to
be known, but something to be ex
perienced. Religion is the life of the
soul as the soul is the life of the body.
Truth is the sustenance of the moral
man. Divine truth must be incorporated
with the elements of the intellectual
nature or we perish, “ Except ye eat the
flesh.” Put test of experience. A sign
of spiritual decay, and the loss of spiri-
tual health, when this word is under-
valued, when men can spend days and
weeks without reading it.

When you come to the word, remem-
ber that Divine influence can alone make
it effectual. As you say grace before
meat, let your reading be preceded by
prayer. ‘I will be as dew.” How
sweet the fragrance after the dew!

Iti. A conscious participation of


Like Judas, who preached.


3
=





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





the happiness it produces. “ It was the
rejoicing of my heart.” How does it
promote joy ?

i, By the light tt imparts to the under-
standing. Truly, light is sweet. It
preserves us from dark uncertainty;
from the dubiety of suspense ; from the


-vacillation of doubt; from the fluctua-


tion of undetermined choice. It gives
decision to the judgment. It fully
occupies the mind upon the noblest
subject. It engages faculties and powers
in God’s service.

ii. By the reltef tt gives to the con-


science. In the hope of pardon and
acceptance. Sprinkled from an _ evil
conscience.


iii. By the exercise tt affords to the best
affections of the heart. Love to God is
a source of happiness ; love to man, a
source of happiness. The pleasures of
benevolence are genuine pleasures ; al-
lied to the happiness of God Himself.
He is the BLESsED God, the HaPPY God.
Happy in the diffusion of happiness ;
BLESSED in the impartation of blessed-
ness. “I will bless thee.” How! By
making thee a blessing. And taste the
joy of God. Misery of malevolent affec-
tions; happiness of kind ones. As de-
light springs from the play of good
feelings, so misery springs from the
play and interchange of bad ones. There
are virtues sweet to the taste of inner
man ; vices bitter and corroding to the
heart. Scowl of malice, the malignity
of revenge. Gall of bitterness.

iv. By the consolations and hopes under
sorrow. The paper is yet extant on
which martyr Smith recorded his ex-
perience. They gave him pen and ink
to sign a draft on the treasurer; he did
so, and in the corner put down these
figures, “1 Cor. iv. 8, 9.”

IV. A sense of consecration. “I
am called by Thy name.”

Improvement :

1. It reproves those who never seek.

2. Those who are content with know-
ledge without experience.

8. Those who are strangers to religious
peace and joy. If you eat, it will be joy.

4, Those who neither own God’s
bame, nor are owned of Him.—Samuel
Thodey, 1837.


OHaP, XV.


See Addenda -
Worp.


Engoyina Gon’s


Theme; Founp, EATEN, AND EN-
JOYED.

These words appear to be part of the
prophet’s prayer, and were given to ac-
count for the fact that he had suffered
rebuke, &c., from the people. It is the
only verse containing any pleasant re-
ference to Jeremiah’s experience, and
then it is in connection with God’s
word, and not with man’s dealings.
It is as if he said, ‘“‘In the midst of my
sufferings and sorrows, I came upon the
promises of God’s word; I seized upon
them with avidity; so great was my
need of comfort. I devoured them ;
and indeed my soul was comforted,
They led me to meditate upon my fel-
lowship with Jehovah, and to see that
even my sufferings were for His name’s
sake. The word was unto me ‘the joy
and rejoicing of mine heart."” Here
we observe—

IL That an important discovery
was made. ‘Thy words were found.”

1. Words are the representatives of
thought. They are of value for this
reason. Words have great power to
move men’s minds. How much have
they affected the destiny of nations, and
the development of great enterprises 4
Demosthenes, Cicero, Luther, Knox,
Whitfield, Brougham, &e.

2. Words derive much of their power
Jrom the mind which utters them. Truth
is truth come whence it may, but truth
may be spoken by most men without
having much power to do others good.
The stroke of a royal pen may mean
liberty or slavery, peace or war to mil-
lions. God’s words are a hammer, a fire,
a sword, a balm, a saving, sanctifying
power to men who receive and obey them.

3. That which ts found must previously
have existed. God’s words were found.
A grand discovery, not an invention.
Treasure is not made by man, but the
discoverer has much fame, and confers
upon the race great benefits. God’s
word exists whether men find it or not,
He who finds it is wise, rich, and happy.
It is the living word. Seek Him. Seek,
and ye shall find,

335


CHAP, XX,


IL That a peculiar method o! ap-
propriation was adopted. “I dii eat
them.”

1. Zt wumplies soul hunger. Caused
by stress of duty, and pressure of per-
secution, and multiplied sorrows.

2. It affirms that God’s words are soul
food. The soul may be starved, or may
feed on husks; but if the appetite be
right and rightly directed, only God
and His word will satisfy. (Ezek. iii,
1-3, Rev. x. 9, Ps. cxix. 103.) God's
word is wholesome, nourishing, savoury,
saving.

TIL That a delightful experience
was realised. “It was unto me the
joy and rejoicing of mine heart.” Joy
and rejoicing—

1. In what the word revealed of God.

2. In the way that revelation met his
utmost need. In work, in trouble, in
danger.

3. In the knowledge of salvation there
unfolded.

4, In the prospects to which the atten-
tion of God's servants was directed.

Note—

1. Jeremiah’s religion was a religion
of the word.

2, Jeremiah’s religion was a religion
of the heart.

3. Jeremiah’s religion was a religion
of rejoicing.

IV. That an emphatic public testi-
mony was given. “I am called by thy
name,” &c.

1. God's name was called upon him.
(See Margin.) As the saving power, and
source of hope and joy, the name of
Christ has been called upon us.

2. He was called by God's name. AS
a professor, a prophet, a servant, &c.
We are called by Christ’s name.

3. He was strengthened by God in all
his works. Jehovah was to him “The
Lord of hosts,” inspiring with courage,
leading to battle, giving the victory,
distributing rewards.

APPLICATION—

1. The word discovered—a treasure,

2. The word in the heart—a joy.

$3. The word on the lips—a mes
sage.

4. The word in the hand—a weapon.
—W. Whale.

336


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; JEREMIAH,





9


Theme: Gop’s WORD THE JOY OF THS
GODLY.

Bread is sweet to the hungry. Man,
when quickened by God, dues “ not live
by bread alone, but by every word,” é&c,
One of God’s children could say, “I
have esteemed the words of Thy mouth
more than my neces-ary food.” (Also
Ps, cxix. 72; xix. 10.)

i. BIBLE HISTORY, in its development
of THE PRINCIPLES OF DiviNE GovERN-
MENT, is to a man of God deeply in-
structive: “the joy and rejoicing of his
heart.”

ii. PRopHEoY, teaching us that THE
FUTURE IS KNOWN To THE Lorp, the
future of the Church, the world, and of
every child of man; and that nothing
unseen by us can arise to thwart His
designs, becomes a very fountain of de-
light to every good man: “the joy and
rejoicing of his heart.”

iii: The words of the Lord as EM-
BODIED IN Law, prohibiting nothing but
what the enlightened conscience con-
demns, and commanding nothing but
what that conscience approves, constrain
the righteous man to say, “Oh, how I
love Thy law!” Conformity to the
law is his earnest solicitude, and when
love is perfected this desire will be real-
ised, for “‘love is the fulfilling of the law.”

iv. But if the words of the Lord in
history, prophecy, and law are sweet,
sweeter still are His words as they sound
forth in the GospgeL or His Son. They
are “no cunningly-devised fables” to
the soul that has seen the adaptation of
the great doctrines of the Gospel to its
moral and spiritual needs.

Faith is a living upon the truths of
the Gospel: ‘‘Eating” them. Faith
makes both the truth, and Christ the
substance of the truth, precious. ‘ Unto
you which believe He is precivus,”—Rev,
D. Pledge, ‘‘Walks with the Prophet
Jeremiah.”

Theme: THE PROPHET ON HI8 WATCH-
TOWER.

L The discovery. God’s “ words,”

1. Sometimes hidden.

2. Yet expected.

3. And sought.

IL The treasure used.
them.”


“Did eat





HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


OMAP, EV.


SS


Made them his own. The taste both
bitter and sweet.
II. The result. “The joy and re-


joicing of mine heart.”

Joy ts} in knowing God’s will.

Joy (2) in seeing the working out of
God’s goodness.—S. Farren.


Theme; HIDDEN MANNA.

L A memorable discovery. “Thy
words were found.”

Many have heard God’s word for
years, yet have never found it. ‘Eyes
have they, but they see not; ears, but
hear not.” Oh that they had found the
“treasure hid in the field!”

What is meant by finding God’s words 4

1. A thing found has usually to be
sought for. Happy is he who reads or
hears the Scriptures, searching all the
while for the hidden spiritual sense. (See
Prov. ii 4, 5.)

2. To find God’s word means that
we have been made to understand them
(1 Cor. iii 14). The Bible is a dull
book till illuminated; a tantalising
riddle till you get the key ; but, the clue
once found, it absorbs our attention,
delights our intellect, and enriches our
heart.

3. Means to appropriate tt as belong-
ting to yourself. Reading a will is not in-
teresting till you find you havea part in it,

See Addenda: APPROPRIATING GoD’s
Worn.


Il. An eager reception. ‘I did eat
them.”
Not “I did hear them.” Herod heard


John gladly, yet became his murderer.
Not “I did learn them by heart.” Hun-
dreds have committed chapters to me-
mory, yet were wearied rather than
benefited. Not “I did repeat them,” as
a parrot repeats language it is taught.
“T did zat them.” What is meant by
eating them ?

1. An eager study. Greedy for the
truth. Some professors grow squeamish
and proudly delicate, My soul hungered
even to ravenousnesa to be fed upon the
bread of heaven.

2. Cheerful reception. My soul was
in love with the word.

3. An intense belief. Not questioning
it, but living upon it. The language

Y


means, besides, both the diligent treasur.
tng up of the truth, and the inward
digestion of the same. It is not the
hasty swallowing of the word which is
blessed to us, but a deliberate eating of
it. It then becomes dissolved and ab-
sorbed—a part of the eater’s very exist-
ence,

Til. The happy consequences. “Thy
word was unto me the joy and rejoicing
of my heart.”

1. Hold the truth én its entirety and
harmony, and then it will be joy to your
heart.

Jeremiah first speaks of God’s “ words,”
then he changes the number and speaks
of God’s “ word.” We are not only to
receive parts of the Gospel, but the whole
of #¢. That man’s heart is right with
God who can honestly say that ald the
testimonies of God are dear to him
There are threatenings, and precious pro-
mises; testimonies of Jesus. Receive
the whole of God’s word,

2. The word of God would have given
no joy had he not been obedient to tt.

3. Yet there are certain choice truths
in God's word, especially joy-giving : the
doctrine of election, to know that you
are called and predestinated ; and of the
immutability of divine love.

IV. A distinguishing title.
called by Thy name,” &e.

1. The name of the Lord of hosts
was reviled in Jeremiah’s day, yet he
felt it an honour to be associated with
the Lord in this contempt. Oh ye who
love the Lord Jesus, never shun the
scandal of tle cross!

2. Some do not count it a fair thing
to bear the name of the Most High. It
is a disgrace to any man that his Lord
should die for his soul on Calvary and
yet he be afraid to wear His livery. To
confess Christ is so easy a burden; it
involves so temporary a loss, and so real
a gain. Bow your willing back to His
cross, and go with Him without the
camp.—C. H. Spurgeon, Metropolitan
Tabernacle Pulpit, No. 980.

See Addenda: Ensoyine Gop’s Worp.


“Tam


Ver. 17. Theme: THE Is0L2TION RE
SULTING FROM CONSECRATION.
This describes the effects following
337


OHAP. XV.


upon his appropriating God’s words and
becoming His prophet.
ee Separation from the frivolities of

e.

1. Deserting the company of triflers.
“T sat not in the assembly of the
mockers,” or Jaughers. Formerly he had
joined their merry meetings ; he now re-
nounced them.

2. Restrained the levity of hts oton
nature. “Nor rejoiced;” te, did not
make merry. Even innocent mirth was
laid aside, and a gravity came upon
him according with his renewed state
and solemn mission. Just so. Paul
had ‘ great heaviness and continual sor-
row of heart” (Rom. ix. 2).

II. Isolation under sense of a Divine
trust. ‘I sat alone because of Thy
hand ;” +.¢., because of the impulse of
the prophetic spirit in him. (Comp. 1
Kings xviii, 46, Ezek. i. 3.)

1. Responsible duty leads us into tn-
evitable isolation. We cannot share it
with others. We are thereby separated
to a life of practical and conscious lone-
liness, having a “charge to keep,” in
which none can participate.

2. Consecration to God’s work singles
out and separates us; €.g., one who is
devoted to the ministry must live a life
separated from the common pursuits
. and habits of youth. He is devoted to
God.

3. Hupulsion from hilarious soctety fol-
lows avowal of religion. The “ laughers”
did not want him amongst them.

III. Oppression of spirit amid pre
vailing impiety. ‘“ Thou hast filled us
with indignation.” Calvin thus com-
ments on the word ‘“ indignation :”

“He had not been slightly moved, but
had been inflamed with zeal for God ;
for we cannot really execute the com-
mission given us unless we be filled with
indignation; that is, unless zeal for God
burns inwardly, for the prophetic office
requires such a fervour.”

1. Taught of God, the prophet sees
the great sinfulness of the people.

2. Recognises the offensiveness to Jeho-
vah, and awful heinousness of their sins.

8. Perceives the ruin thereby entatled
upon his nation and God’s Church,

A “seer” may well be stirred to “in-

338


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





dignation :” impetuous energy of thought
and feeling, grief over sin, impatience
to check the wrong which prevails, and
rescue souls from impending doom. All
God’s prophets and preachers’have had
this vision of iniquity around them, and,
like Paul at Athens, their spirit has been
“stirred” in them as they beheld the
rampant impiety which called them to
their earnest ministry for Christ and
souls,


Ver. 18. Theme: Gop APPEARS TO BE
A VAIN HOPE. “ Wilt Thou be altogether
unto me as a liar, and as waters that
fail?”

L Distressing experiences distort
oar views of God. Jeremiah’s condition
and feelings were peculiarly painful.

1. Great anguish; “ pain,” “ wound.”
Such words indicate severe suffering, lesa
physical than mental. Physical pain
will throw its dark cloud over the mind.
Melancholy is the result: melan- (black)
cholic. In times of heavy anguish the
mental state grows despondent, and its
power of discernment becomes warped.

2. Unalleviated distress: “ perpetual,”
“refuseth to be healed.” This unmiti-
gated trouble of mind and heart is indeed
bitter toendure. Veryrare. Yet many
of God’s children go through years of


disconsolate experiences, Wave upon
wave rolls over them. Il health,
disasters, bereavements, Or spiritual


atruggles—doubts, temptations, loss of
faith, &c. A spirit thus bowed and
sorely tested cannot easily think bright
thoughts of God. The disciples, in con-
sequence of the tempest and toils of one
wild night, thought Jesus only a ghost,
and “cried out for fear.”

3. Hopeless dejection. “My wound
incurable, refuseth to be healed.” He
sees no prospect of better things, and
abandons himself to despair. His labours
will all be in vain, his delivery of God's
messages will effect no good, and his
ministry will only bring more calumny
and abuse upon himself. A hard lot;
a black outlook. All the windows are
darkened. How can he, then, think
cheerfully of God ?

II. Distorted views of God render
religion a grave disappointment. What


ye Nee ae





i
¥
'
*

3
isa
=
t


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY; JEREMIAH.





comfort is left to a godly man if God
become to him “as a liar?”

1. All his sufficiency and safety were
te be drawn from God. So Jeremiah
felt. He was on a difficult and perilous
mission ; if God failed him, he was for-
lorn indeed. “He had expected that,
called to so high an office, there would
be a perpetual interference of Providence
in his behalf, instead whereof things
seemed to take their natural course”
(Payne Smith). “God had in a manner
deserted him for a time, had left him te
struggle with difficulties unforeseen and
unexpected” (Dr. Waterland). What
guarantee is left us if Jesus fail? Every
Christian would share Jeremiah’s sense
of desolation.

If ever a position occurred in which
we missed the succour of our Lord, we
should feel forlorn. We have no self-
sufficiency — Christ is all to us; no
power of self-protection —- He is our
Saviour and shield. Let it once be pos-
sible to say, “Thou hast fatled us,”
and assurance would wholly desert us;
we should be “of all men most miser-
able.”

2. All his happiness and hopes rested
tn God. He had left all to be His
prophet (ver. 19). He looked for solace,
befriending, serenity amid agitations,
gladness when mocked and abused ; for
all light and promise amid his hazardous
work—from the God he served Even
so has the Christian disciple to “ take ug
his cross daily and follow” Jesus. But
he is not unwilling. Has not Christ
said, “In the world ye shall have tribu-
lation, but in Me ye have peace;” “I
will not leave you comfortless: I wili
come to you;” “Ye shall see Me again,
and your joy shall no man take from
you”? Can He break His word of pro-
mise—become “as a liar”? Then all
happiness and hope is dead within the
believer’s heart.

Nete the figure: “ Asa liar, as waters
that fai!.” Calvin renders the words
thus: ‘‘ Thou wilt be to me as a decep-
tion of tnoonstant waters ;” or, “of un-
faithful waters,” ¢.¢., of such as flow not
continually; adding, “for faithful or
constant waters are those which never
fail; as the Latins call a fountain inex-


OHAP,. XV.





haustible whose spring never dries, so
the Hebrews call a fountain faithful or
constant which never fails either in
summer or in drought. On the con-
trary, they call waters unfaithful which
become dry; as when a well which has
no perennial veins is made dry by great
heat.” Wordsworth comments: “ The
stream of God’s favour, which had flowed
in a full current of love towards him,
seemed suddenly to have been dried
up, and he was left to perish with
thirst.”

The language suggests the deceptive
mirage. which mocks thirst with illu-
sory pictures of refreshing waters,

III. Disappointment in God can
never have a just warrant. ‘“ Walt
Thou be unto me as a liar?”

1. Despondency ts a faithless inter-
preter. It is as false as a crooked mirror
—it reflects beauty in hideous forma,

2. Impatience spoils our childhood
sweetness, It is asad failing to be hast-
ening conclusions about God and His
dealings. ‘‘ He that believeth should not
make haste.”

3. Fidelity +3 an essential characteris-
isc of God. Immutability is impressed
on Creation. “1 change not” is a truth
evident in the perennial action of ma-
jestic laws in nature ; and therefore the
universe endures, and “all things con-
tinue as they were from the creation of
the world.” In Hs love and relatton-
watps to us, “ with Him is neither varia-
blenses nor shadow of turning.” In
His words and promises, “not one good
thing He hath spoken shall fail to come
to vass.” Hopes cast upon Him “ shall
not make ashamed.” And to every soul
which cleaves to and trusts in Jesus—
as Redeemer, Friend, and King, for life
here and in eternity—He is “the same
yesterday, and to-day, and for ever.”


Ver. 19. Theme: A MINISTRY OF
DISCRIMINATION. “If thou take forth
the precious from the vile.”

God, in the freeness of His grace, ap-
portions the reward that He promises to
Jeremiah to the sense which He enter-
tains of the greatness and difficulty of
the work to which He had called him.
“ Thow shalt be as My mouth eis re-

33


GHAP. XV.


HOMILETIC OOMMENTARY. JEREMIAH.





presentative, My acknowledged and ac-
credited servant—here is the greatest
honour that could be conferred on any
man. “ Thou shalt take forth the pre-
ctous from the vile, and be to the people as
a fenced brazen wall”—here is one of
the. most difficult and arduous duties
that mortality can possibly sustain. The
talents of an angel, the zeal of a seraph,
if accompanied with the infirmities of
humanity, must sink under the task,
unless supported by Divine strength
and blessing. Well then may we ex-
claim, “ Who ts suffictent ?”

The difficulty of such a course as this,
that of making full proof of our minis-
try, can only be understood by him who
has tried it, and it certainly has not
diminished since Jeremiah’s time. For
though we have less outward persecu-
tion, it is equally difficult in all ages to
combat with the prejudices and enmity
of the carnal mind; difficult to pene-
trate the thick disguise of character—
difficult to maintain the sternest faith-
fulness accompanied with the purest
love—to pursue the Proteus forms of
ungodliness into their secret retreats,
and so effectually to separate between
the precious and the vile, as that we
may commend ourselves to every man’s
conscience in the sight of God. Our
Lord Himself who tried the experiment
knew its difficulty, and His last promise
was a promise to ministers: “ Lo, J am
with you;” and He has enabled us to
form an estimate of the greatness of the
work from the greatness of the reward,
for addressing the minister, the Angel
of Ephesus, He says, “ Be thow faithful
and I will give,” ce.


L What is supposed ?
IL What is required 1
IIL What is promised %


L What is supposed ?

1. The vast importance and responsibt-
lity of the work assigned to ministers
with a view to the welfare of their people.
“If thou separate between the precious
and the vile.” It is no common office,
no slight responsibility. The Gospel dis-
pensation is often spoken of es the
ministry of reconciliation ; but it is here
presented underanew char. cer, the minis-

340


try of discrimination. Christ is repre-
sented commonly as a Saviour, but He is
to be regarded as a witness and a judge
—for judgment am I come tnto the world.
Ministers are usually considered as
heralds of mercy, sons of consolation,
but they are also to be considered as
messengers of heavy tidings. Ours is an
office of edification, but it is an office of
separation too, a ministry of discrimina-
tion. We have to distinguish between
truth and truth, between character and
character, between holiness and sin ; and
to advocate the rightful claims and high
supremacy of heaven against the usurped
dominion of sin and hell. Ministers are
to take the precious from the vile; to
separate the wheat from the weeds; to
distinguish the dross from the gold ; to
guide their hands wittingly, as Jacob
did when he bestowed the blessing upon
the sons of Joseph; they are sometimes
to blow the silver trumpet of Jubilee,
and not unfrequently to sound the
trumpet of Alarm. “ A faithful ambas-
sador is health,” says Solomon. “ As an
earring of gold and an ornament of fine
gold, 80 18 @ wise reprover upon an obe-
dient ear.”

2. It is further supposed that there
are some essential distinctions between
right and wrong, between good and
evil, between truth and error, between
the base and the honourable of char-
acter, between the precious and the vile
These distinctions are real, not nominal ;
essential, not arbitrary ; they are regarded
so by God Himself. These distinctions
were originally imprinted on the mind
when man was created in God’s own
image; and the capacity of making
them still remains, as you see from the
clearness with which any man can judge
upon a subject of right and wrong where
his own conscience is not concerned, and
the zeal with which men reprobate that
which is villanous and dishonourable.

3. A standard of truth is supposed.
God has given us the rule of judgment.
We have a more sure word of prophecy,
and as the office of a judge is not to
make the law but to declare it, so the
office of a minister is not to burden the
ears of people with his own doubtful
speculations, but to declare the whole








ats


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; JEREMIAH.


counsel of God. To the law and to the
testimony, if they speak not according
to this rule they have no light. This is
the glass we hold up to show you the
true features of your character; this is
the lamp we exhibit to guide your foot-
ateps,— And as many as walk by this
rule, peace be on them and on the Israel
of God.”

4. It is further supposed in the text
that these characters are closely inter-
mingled, and that there is a great disin-
clination in mankind to have the truth
fully told them, and to be brought to
the decisive test, the final decision, The
tares and the wheat strangely grow to-
gether—the sheep and the goats both
are found in the same pasture—the pre-
cious and the vile have some points in
common, Cain and Abel both bring
their offering to the Lord; Jacob and
Esau both kneel for the blessing ; Elijah
and the priests of Baal openly build
their altars on Mount Carmel ; the five
foolish virgins as well as the five wise
ones go forth to meet the bridegroom ;
Judas and John both receive the pas-
sover in the supper-chamber. And we
know that men halt between two opi-
nions—they dwell on the borders of the
Land of Promise—they love to know
that an ark is provided, and even love
to watch the progress of the building,
but they obey not the summons, “ Come
thou with all thy house into the ark.”

5. One thing more is plainly sup-
posed, that it is of the utmost consequence
to both parties, that the separation
should be made—take forth the precious
from the vile, and the most advantageous
results will immediately accrue to each.
Is it not desirable to the children of
God to know that they are so—that
they are heirs according to the promise
—that they are precious in His sight and
honourable? Would it not strengthen
the weak hands and confirm the feeble
knees, and give them the oil of joy for
mourning, could we say to them beyond
contradiction, ‘Go thy way, eat thy
bread with joy and drink thy wine with
@ merry heart, for God now accepteth thy
works” ?

If the distinction be valuable to the


precious. it would be searcely less ad-


OHAP. XV





vantageous to the wile themselves, Te
be robbed of the cloak of a false pro-
fession would be no loss, for we know it
does them no honour and brings them
no peace, If they stood out in their
true colours to their own conscience
they could not suffer more, but they
might be more safe, You had better
meet the case at once, at its worst, and
say, Behold I am vile.

IL What is demanded of ministers
with a view to this solemn discrimina-
tion ?

The text plainly demands that every
effort should be used on their part to
remove the willing delusions of man-
kind, to disabuse their blinded under-
standings in reference to the great
things of God and Eternity and their
souls’ health. What, then, is necessary
so far as we are concerned in separat-
ing—

1, A plain and decisive exhibition of
the truth as tt is in Jesus. We are to
contend earnestly for the faith. We are,
as we have opportunity, to vindicate it
from the blasphemies of the infidel, the
perversions of the worldling, the mis-
takes of the Pharisee, and the corrup-
tions of the Antinomian. Whether men
will hear or whether they will forbear,
we must speak to them of the evil of
sin, of the danger of continuance in it,
and of the only way of escape from it.
We must show them the insufficiency of
the forms of godliness, the worthless-
ness of their own self-righteousness, the
necessity of a vital union to Christ, and
their positive obligations to that holi-
ness without which no man can see the
Lord.

2. A fearless application of Scripture
truth is necessary. To the careless and
thoughtless, the young man void of
understanding, trained in the ways of
religion, but a living plague to the circle
in which he moves, hardening in sin
and fast hardening against the reach of
conviction : Know that “ your judgment
now of a long time lingereth not, and
your damnation slumbereth not.” To the
apostate from a religious profession ;
“ See that ye refuse not him that speak-
eth.” To the self-satisfied formalist :
“ Strive to enter.” To cy young :

1


OHAP, XV,





“ Remember now,” d&c. To the aged:
“Hscape for thy life” To the pre-
cious: “Say ye to the righteous, It
shall be well with him.” To the vile:
“ Woe to the wicked, for + shall be il
with him.”

3. 7'o point ourselves and our hearers to
the only Agent who can make the word
effectual.

Itt. What is promised ? ‘“ Thou
shalt be as My mouth.” The accredited
and approved servant—to speak in
accordance with His will—be the organ
of His clemency—all his authenticated
messages crowned with success. None
of his words to fall to the ground.

Mighty and blessed such a ministry.
Surely the people among whom such a
Divinely effectual ministry is carried on,
would be drawn to the Saviour’s feet,
and souls would find grace and salvation
as on the Pentecostal morning.

“ Faithful ministers,” says Henry,
“are God’s mouth to us, and we are to
hear God speaking to us by them,”—
Samuel Thodey, a.D. 1823.


Comments—

Ver. 19. ‘If thow return, then will I
bring thee again,” &ec. “ There is in God’s
answer a mingling of comfort and re-
buke. Jf thou return—repent thee of
thy doubts and think only of thy duty,
then will I bring, &c. “I will cause thee
again to stand before Me.” To stand
before a person means to be his chief
officer or vicegerent, and is said of Elijah
{1 Kings xvii. 1) and Elisha (2 Kings
fii, 4) as God’s prophets, of David as
Saul’s minister (1 Sam. xvi. 21, 22), of
Solomon’s counsellors (1 Kings xii. 6),
and of Nebuzar-adan as commander-in-
chief of Nebuchadnezzar’s army (Jer. liii.
12, marg.)”—Dr. Payne Smith.

“ Tf thou take forth the precious from
the vile.” Jeremiah was to separate in
himself what was divine and holy from
the dross of human passion: So many
commentators, Discriminate between
good and bad men, or between the good
and bad in men: Other authorities
favour this rendering.

“ Let them return unto thee, but return
not thou unto them.” Rather, “ They sball
return unto thee, but thou shalt not.” de.

g4o


AOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


ry


‘A flattering prophet perishes with the
people whom his soft speeches have con-
firmed in their sin; but the truthfus
speaking of God’s word saves both,”—
Speaker's Com.

“Not surrender unpopular truths to
popular fallacies.”— Wordsworth,

“‘ Not concede to the vices of men nor
cherish their fancies, but constrain them
to undertake the yoke of God. The
truth of God ought not to bend to the
will of men; for God changes not,
neither does His word.”—Ca/lvin.


Vers, 19, 20. Theme: THE MINISTRY
OF THE WORD.

We have here God’s answer to the
prophet’s prayer. Jeremiah is not al-
lowed to retire from the work, either
because of its offensiveness to the people,
or because it grieved him to be a man
of strife among them. He is promised
divine assistance and protection in those
great undertakings to which he is ap-
pointed. Concerning the ministry of
the word, we are here reminded that it


L A ministry of divine authority.
“Thou shalt stand before Me.”

IL A ministry of divine revela-
tions. “ Thou shalt be as My mouth.”

III, A ministry of wise discrimina-
tion. “If thou take forth the precious
from the vile.”

IV. A ministry often opposed by
those to whom it is sent. ‘ And they
shall fight against thee.”

V. A ministry requiring much cou-
rage. ‘I will make thee. . . a fenced
and brazen wall.”

Vi A ministry which will be di-
vinely vindicated. ‘I am with thee,
to save thee, and to deliver thee, saith
the Lord.”

VII. A ministry which lifts up
Ohrist as the Saviour of men. ‘“ As
Moses lifted up,” &e. “TI, if I be lifted
up,” &c. “* We preach Christ crucified,”
&c,— W, Whale.


Ver. 20. Theme; IMPREGNABLE SE-
OURITY IN JEHOVAH’S SERVICE,

“Twill make thee a fenced brazen
wall,” &c. This is a repetition of the
promise sade by Jehovah to Jeremiah





i


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


GAP. XV.





at the outset of his prophetic career (ch.
i, 18, 19).. Jeremiah may confidently
rely on protection from on high, and
God-given fortitude, if he will maintain
fidelity in his messages and witness for
righteousness among a depraved and
hostile people.

God’s address of encouragement meets
the faltering prophet with definite pro-
mises and hopeful statements, and affirms
the four facts :—

I. Invincible courage supernaturally
supplied.

1. Its source. ‘I will make thee.”
No self-reliance, therefore; nor self-de-
spair.

2. Its scope. ‘‘ Unto this people.”
It must be shown, and shown in scenes
definitely indicated.

3. Zts stability. “A fenced brazen
wall.” Proof against all assaults ; in-
flexible, immovable.

*< Hic murus aheneus esto,
Nil conscire sibi, nulla, pallescere culp4,”
—RHorat. 1 Epis. i. 60.

II. Determined hostility from the
wicked.
thee,”

Not passive unconcern ; not airy in-
credulity; not frank and friendly re-
monstrance; but defiant antagonism,
and angry abuse.

1. Resistance of his messages.

2. Resentment against him personally.

3. Rebellion against the God he served.

Jeremiah must, therefore, lay himself
out for vigorous and valorous warfare ;
get rid of sentimental fears, and quit
himself like a stalwart warrior for God’s
cause and glory !

Ill. Supremacy guaranteed over
antagonists. ‘They shall not prevail
against thee.”

1. There would be actual encounter.
A struggle man to man, This is the
true idea of a faithful ministry.

2. There would be need of self-defence.
Assailants would intend to prevail
against the prophet; to defeat him in
argument; to destroy his faith in God ;
and to silence his messages amid derision.
Jeremiah would need to look to himself
and defend his own fidelity.

3. There would be a triumphant tssue.
Jeremiah should “ prevail.” Whom God


“They shall fight against


makes invincible He also makes victorious,
Not only successful defence against at-
tack, but supremacy over assailants,

IV. Personally guarded by Jehovah
Himself.

1. God’s personal protection. It isa
precious promise that “ He will give His
angels charge,” dc., also that “the eyes
of the Lord are over the righteous,” &.,
also that “as thy day is so shall thy
strength be.” But better far this—“I
will be with thee.”

2. God’s sure protection. “To save
thee ”—preservation from his enemies;
“to delwer thee”—rescue from the
wiles and assaults,

The idea of rescwe, should the prophet
become entangled by their sophistries or
captured by force, is more fully expressed
in ver. 21: “I will deliver thee out of
the hand of the wicked (malignant), and
I will redeem thee out of the hand (from
the grasp) of the terrible.” So that we
may boldly say, “The Lord is my helper, I
will not fear what man shall do unto me.”


Ver. 20. Theme: Gop’s AMBASSADOR
FORTIFIED. ‘‘I will make thee unto
this people a fenced brazen wall,” &ec.

I God’s qualification of an overseer
of His Church.

The metaphor of a call implies:

1. Courage,

2. Integrity (innocence, therefore).

3, Authority.

II. The opposition a church over-
seer will meet with.

“ They shall fight against thee: ”

1. By seditious preaching and pray-
ing.
°. By railing and libels.

3. By (possibly) open force.

IIL The issue and success of such
opposition.

“They shall not prevail.” —South.


Ver. 21. Theme: Gop’s PERFECT SAL-
vation. “And I will deliver and re-
deem thee.”

The prophet’s loneliness and the op-
position of the people burdened his
spirit. Jehovah's assurances must have
afforded precious consolations and con-
fidence to him. ‘The promised presenes
and interposing power of God. r

34


OMAP. XV.





I. Alarming perils. “The hand of
the wicked ; the hand of the terrible.”

Implying the moral quality which
distinguishes our spiritual foes, and the
fierce malignity with which thew plot
our ruin.

Perils to character, to peace, to security
in God, to the soul ctself.

IL A mighty Saviour.
liver ; I will redeem.”

Greater than our foes. Equal to all
exigencies. No one else can save; it
is His work. Employed in His service,
He will undertake our defence and de-
liverance. Saved by Him. Safe in Him,


“T will de


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR.


III. Complete redemption. “To de
liver; to redeem.”

Salvation bas various forms: from
perils of this world, from taint of sin,
from spiritual foes, from personal fears
and faults, from terror of death, &c.


Redemption by price; deliverance by


wer.

IV. Unfailing certainty. “Iwill ; I
will.”

Expresses determination, earnestness,
love, certainty.
“] will fear no evil, for Thow art with
me,”


NOTICEABLE TOPICS IN CHAPTER XY.
Topic: PRAYER FoR A Propte UNavarine, (Ver. 1),
Moses and Samuel held responsible offices, and were faithful to their trusts,


With their piety as men, and fidelity as servants, God was well pleased.


If any


two men could have prevailed with God on behalf of a rebellious people, these


could. But the conduct of the people had alienated His mind from them.
i. There may be complete alienation of God from sinful men.


not be towards this people.”


ii, There ts a limit to the Divine forbearance towards defiant souls,


Thus—
“My mind could


“He will


not always chide,” though He chides again and again; neither will He keep back


His anger for ever.


Cast them out of My sight.


Then no prayers, even from the


best of men and the most eminent servants of God, can arrest the judgment.


I. Manifestly the prayers of good men do avail much.


Instances prove that


it is an established law for prayers, by the Moses and Samuels who stand before


the Lord, to prevail,


II. While the power of prayer is obvious, there is no merit in prayer nor in him


who offers it.


1. Prayer supposes the absence of all claim, for what a man can claim he need


not pray for.


2. Prayer can only make its appeal to mercy, and mercy, being purely sovereign,


can heed or refuse the appeal according to its pleasure,


Had mercy refused every


prayer, justice would have received no violation.

III. God’s right to refuse to answer prayers is beyond all challenge.

1. His declaration : “ I will have mercy on whom I will have mercy,” &c., asserts
His right to withhold or bestow grace according to His sovereign will,

2. This right involves the right to hear or not to hear the prayers of suppliants,
be those suppliants Moses and Samuels, or publicans and sinners,

3. If God were under obligation to hear prayer and bestow mercy, mercy would
be no longer mercy, and grace would be no longer grace, Obligation is justice, and


not mercy ; duty, and not grace.


IV. All our appeals for mercy and grace must be based on the Atoning


Sacrifice.


1. Every act of mercy jlows to us through the righteousness of Christ, the only


channel of mercy from God to man.


2. Even when our appeals are based on the sacrifice of Christ, they must be left
to the sovereignty of Divine mercy to answer or not to answer.
3. If we rightly recognised this sovereignty of Divine mercy, our prayers would


344


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. OHAP. XV.





be more humbly presented and answers would kindle a loftier praise, exclaiming,
“ ai be God, who hath not turned away my prayer nor His mercy from
me |”

V. Prayer is music in the ears of God. The sounds of earnest prayer enter
into the ears of the Lord God of Sabaoth, and delight Him more than ten thousand
harpers harping with their harps The prayer of the penitent gives joy to all the
hosts of heaven, and the prayers of saints, our Moses’ and Samuels, give pleasure to
the gracious God even when—for wise and judicial reasons—He cannot grant their
requests. Whether answered or unanswered, “the prayer of the upright is His
delight.”— Arranged from “ Morning and Evening Walks with the Prophet Jeremiah.”


Topic: Men or Process, Mzn or Sreirz. (Ver. 10).


Jeremiah called of God to an essential but unpopular work. He is judged to ww
® fault-finding, quarrelsome person, whereas he is really a sympathetic friend.
They hear his outspoken denunciations against sin, and the utterance by him of
divine threatenings; but they do not hear his prayers for them, or know the
groanings of his spirit. He is misjudged. He is lonely. He would rather have
been born to a quiet life, and wishes God would have chosen some one else to the
prophetic work.

Jeremiah is typical of public men who have been the reformers of society, the
leaders of thought, and often the martyrs of some great movement. We may note
some reasons why such persons appear to be men of strife :—

I. Because of noncompliance with popular sins. Jeremiah asserted his freedom
from prevailing evils. Always some interested in doing wrong, and maintaining
evils among the people. Those who will not conform, especially such as speak
and labour against sin, are considered men of strife—Micaiah, Elijah, John Baptist,
Jesus, and many others.

IL Because they are in advance of the age. They look at all matters from a
more elevated standpoint, and seek to bring the people up to their level. Paul
was in advance of the craftsmen of Ephesus. Luther was in advance of the
church of Rome, as Wicliffe before him had been. Copernicus and Galileo, Huss
and Wesley, not to mention others in all departments, were pioneers of progress,
and were in advance of their fellows.

III. Because they were earnest and energetic men. Some can be indifferent ;
true souls cannot be. Cannot agree to Jeave things alone, and let every one go
his own way. Must bear testimony for God and truth. Many now would call
Noah, Elijah, Daniel, Jesus, Paul, visionaries, enthusiasts, madmen, as indeed
they often speak of those who have their spirit.

IV. Because all good work causes strife. vil has to be conquered, the devil
has to be cast out. No curse will peaceably give place to a blessing. In the heart,
aud in the world, it must be conflict, Christ came to give peace to the trustful
heart, but not to bring peace smmediately on earth. In Bethlehem, in Nazareth,
in Capernaum, in Jerusalem, He made conflict. Every great work has its stage of
martyrdom, its age of chivalry, before its triumph ;—its Egypt and wilderness
before its Canaan,—its manger, baptism, wilderness trial, Gethsemane, and cross,
before it sits on the throne waiting till its foes be made its footstool.

V. Because the field of battle is the path ofglory. ‘We must fightif we would
reign.” The promise is “ to him that overcometh.” Salvation is finally for “him that
endureth to the end.” he exhortation is not only to repent and believe, but to
“ fight the good fight of faith.” The provision is for the warrior ; he who would be
a saint, must be a soldier. The martyrs of one age are the heroes of the next.
Prophets, apostles, martyrs, missionaries, and reformers have all been men of war.
We honour them for the battles they fought and the victories they won. The
record of their lives appeals to us— ey:


G@haP xv. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR,


% Hark! ’tis a marshal sound,
To arms, ye saints, to arms,
Your foes are gathering round,
And peace has lost its charms,
Prepare the helmet, sword, and shield,
The trumpet calls you to the field.”


—W. Whale.
Topic; Tak Powzr or Resuxe. (Vers. 19, 20.)


“Tf thou take forth the precious from the vile, thou shalt be as My mouth ; and
I will make thee unto the people a fenced brazen wall,”

It is by the gracious word of Divine mercy that the hearts of men are to be
subdued,

The human mind is found to be influenced far more by hope and tenderness,
than by terror and rebuke,

I. The Christian ministry includes also an office of commination. If the
messengers of heaven, when among the outcasts of mankind, who, tr tgno-
rance of God, have gone astvay from virtue, speak much more of virtue than of
wrath ; when they stand among those who, being well informed im matters of
religion, use the grace of the Gospel to palliate their vices, the messages of wrath
must be most upon their lips.

II. The tendency of the Christian ministry is to move down from its remedial
functions to become an office of delectation.

1. Furnishing «intellectual entertainment; uttering, as matters of gorgeous
eloquence, the appalling verities of eternal justice. Nature forbids such an. in-
congruity, and the renovating Spirit refuses to yield the energy of His power to the
sway of a mere minister of public recreation.

2. Affording spiritual entertainment; by exhibiting the conceits and ingenuitiea
of mystic exposition ; by painting in high colours the honours and privileges of the
believer, and allowing professors of all sorts to appropriate the fulsome description ;
or by pealing out thunders of wrath against distant adversaries, rather than at the
impure, unjust, rapacious, and malicious who fill the pews around him. This latter _
direct method might turn the whole tide of his popularity !

IIL It behoves preachers to beware of the indurating effect of accustomed
phrases and forms of words. Such conventional phrases conceal from the mind
the ideas they should convey; hence preachers should continually endeavour to
break up the mental incrustations which are always spreading themselves over the
sensitive surface of the soul. This is most especially necessary in reference to
matters wherein the drowsy formalities of language tend directly to augment the
stupefying influence that belongs to all vicious indulgences. A mind, already
rendered callous by sensuality, receives every week a new, and again a new inseusi-
bility from the heavy monotonies of the pulpit.

IV. It is a pressing duty of the minister of religion to maintain, in vigour, the
spirit he needs as the reprover of sin and the guardian of virtue. It is easy to
teach the articles of belief, to illustrate the branches of Christian ethics, to proclaim
the Divine mercy, to meet and assuage the fears of the feeble and sorrows of the
afflicted. But to keep in full activity the power of rebuke, demands rare qualities.
It is fruitless to search aside for substitutes for these qualities, The preacher may
avail himself of abstract demonstration respecting the unalterable rigour of the
Divine government, to prove that the Supreme Ruler of the moral system can
never pass over transgression, but must needs exact the appointed penalty from
either the transgressor or his substitute. The erudite argument, for any substantial
effect it will produce, might as well have related to the planets,

Or he may adopt the devices of eloquence ; turning descriptive, pathetic, indignant.
Yet while the walls ring with these sounds of alarm, the covetous man continues
counting his gold, the eye of the vain and prurient is darting from object te
object of illicit attraction, &e

346


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIALZ. OHAP, .X¥,





——--——


But to speak efficaciously of the holiness and justice of the Almighty God, and
of its future consequences; to speak in modesty, tenderness, and power, of the
approaching doom of the impenitent, must be left to those whose spirits have had much
communion with the dread Majesty on high. On these topics ordinary preachers
are most at tault ; they are not themselves in spiritual fitness and equipment for
their duty ot rebuke and testimony of judgment.

V. There are three indispensable qualifications for the vigorous etercise of
the Christian minister for this power of rebuke.

1, Such a conwiction of the truth of Christianity as shall render him proof against
assaults from within and from without. The quarrel of the world with Christianity
comes to its issue upon the doctrine of future retribution, Meditating upon the
scenes ut joy which the Gospel spreads before us, we are not perplexed by discordant
doubss ; tor joy and hope are emotions indigenous to the human mind. But the
same law which makes joy and hope spontaneous, unsuspectingly impels us to
doubt when we set our foot upon the region which sin has replenished with terrors,
Fatal to his influence as a refuter of sin must be a lurking scepticism in the
preachers breast, The infection of his own doubts will pass into the heart of the
hearer, and will serve to harden each transgressor in his impenitence,

2. A resolute loyalty to the divine administration will be equally needful. It resta
itself upon the assurance, “Shall not the Judge of all the earth do right?” It
takes its force from genuine piety and affection to truth. It is the same spirit that
led thé royal poet to utter his persuasion, ‘“‘ I know, O Lord, that all Thy judgments
are right ;” and moved Paul with a similar force of healthy piety to exclaim, “ Yea,
let God be true, and every man a liar.” Such loyalty will break through the mazes
of much sophistry, will support the servant of God when assailed by more fallacies
than he can at the moment refute, and enable him to cleave under all obloquies
and embarrassments to what he inwardly and firmly knows must in the end prove
itself the better cause.

3. Not less necessary to the minister of truth is an unaffected and sensitive com-
passion towards his fellow-men, and a sompassion of that efficient kind which
nothing has ever produced but the Gospel. The servant of Heaven can effect his
commission only as he gains access to the human heart ; and there is no other path
of access but that of love, Men, rather than angels, are sent to preach repentance,
that the promulgation of n cy may always be heard in tones of tenderness and
humiliation. The end of « reproof is mercy. If there were no redemption at
hand, it were idle or cruel to: 'k of judgment.—Jsaac Taylor, Saturday Evening, xv





ADDENDA TO CHAPTER XYV.. ILLUSTRATIONS AND SUGGESTIVE EXTRACTS.


Ver. 1. INTERCESSORY PRAYER. “I Through the streets of the city immortal,


ought to study Christ as an intercessor.
He prayed most for Peter, who was most
to be tempted.” — ‘Cheyne.


“Sandalphon stands listening breathlems
To sounds that ascend from below ;—


“ From the spirits on earth that adore,
From the souls that entreat and implore
In the fervour and passion of prayer 3
From the hearta that are broken with losses,
And weary with dragging the crossea
Too heavy for mortals to bear,


* And he gathers the prayers as he standa,
And they change into flowers in his hands,
Into garlands of purple and red;
And beneath the great areh of the portal,


Is wafted the fragrance they shed.”
—“ Legend of the Angel of Prayer.”
—Long/fellow.
LiMITs TO PRAYER.


‘* If by prayer
Incegsant I eould hope to change the wil:
Of Him who all things can, I would not cease
To weary Him with my assiduous cries.
But prayer against His absolute decree
No more avails than breath against the wind,
Blows stifling back on him that breathesit forth:
Therefore to His great bidding I submit.”

—Hilton’s ‘‘ Paradise Lost.”


“What is the limit of our prayer’
This; ‘Not my will but Thine be done!’
Is that a limit? Why, that is glorious
liberty! Not my will but Thine,—not

347


@H4kR Xv.





a little will but a great will,—not my
thought but Thine,—not my love but
Thine’ Ts it a limit? It is the lark
rising irom its field-nest with the bound-
less liberty of the firmament. Truly we
do not limit ourselves when we exchange
the creature for the Creator.”— Joseph
Parker, D.D.

Ver. 2. ScoRNFUL INOREDULITY.
“ Rest thee well assured, O scorner! that
thy laughs cannot alter truth, thy jests
cannot avert thine inevitable doom,
Though in thy hardihood thou shouldst
make a league with death, and sign a
covenant with hell, yet swift justice shall
overtake thee, and strong vengeance
strike thee low. In vain dost thou jeer
and mock, for eternal verities are mightier
than thy sophistries; nor can thy smart
sayings alter the divine truth of a single
word of this volume of Revelation. Oh!
why dost thou quarrel with thy best friend,
and ill-treat thy only refuge ?” Spurgeon.

Ver, 4. Parentage, ‘The account
that begins to be incurred when parents
rejoice because a child is born to them,
is the most solemn account that ever is
incurred aside of one’s own individual
duty towards God. I do not mean that
all the misconduct and evil-endings of the
child are to come back upon the parent,
and that there is to be in the child no
free will, so that ne individual account
ean belong to him. For if a parent has
cleansed his skirts of his children, the
guilt of their sins will rest on their
heads, and not on his, But unless the
parent can show that the child’s miscon-
duct and wreck of eternity are not attri-
butable to any fault of his, the weight of
the child’s condemnation will be divided.”
—H. W. Beecher.

“The last thing forgotten in all the
recklessness of dissolute profligacy is the
prayer or hymn taught by a mother’s
lips or uttered at a father’s knee; and
where there seems to have been any
pains bestowed even by one parent to
train up a child aright, there is generally
more than ordinary ground for hope.”
—The Experience of a Prison Chaplain.


Ver. 5. Lost To prry.


*¢ None pities him that’s in the snare,
And, warned before, would not beware.”
—Herick.
348


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR.





Wer, 8. Lirz’s NooNTIDE
** O life, how pleasant is thy morning,
Young Fancy’s rays the hills adorning {°
Cold, pausing Caution’s lessons scorning,
We trisk away,
Like schoolboys at the expected warning,
To joy and play.” — Burns.


** Por ah! my heart, how very soon
The glittering dreams of youth are past;
And long before it reach its noon,
The sun of life is overcast.’”” —WMoore,
‘© What ia youth? A dancing billow,
Winds behind, and rocks before!”
— Wordsworth.
* Live, that thy young and glowing breast
Can think of death without a sigh,
And be assured that life is best
Which finds us least afraid to die.”
—Eliza Cook.


Ver. 9. Earty peats. ‘“ What is thie
voice to us!” says Bonar of the early
death of M‘Cheyne. “Only this much
we can clearly see, that nothing was
more fitted to leave his character and
example impressed on our remembrance
for ever than his early death. There
might be envy while he lived; there is
none now. ‘There might have been some
of the youthful attractiveness of his
graces lost had he lived many years;
this cannot be impaired now. It seems
as if the Lord had struck the flower from
the stem ere any of the colours had lost
their brigh' hues or any leaf its fra-
grance,”

It is re arkable yet mysterious how
many of .od’s choicest servants have
been rep ved so early. Look over this
list :—-H. Kirke White (at 21), Andrew
Gray (21), John Janeway (23), Patrick
Hamilton (24), R. M. M‘Cheyne (29),
Captain Hedley Vicars (29), David Brai-
nerd (30), H. W. Fox (80), Felix Neff
(31), J. H. Forsyth (32), H. Martyn
($2), Toplady (35), W, Archer Butler
35).


Ver. 10. A TROUBLED MINISTRY.
“Exposed to criticisms and _interfer-
ences of the vulgarest and coarsest kind.
One man will ask how it is that se
few additions are made to the Church?
Another will inquire how it is that the
collections have fallen off? A third will
profess to lament that the seats were
better let in former years. A fourth
will intimate that we must have preach-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


OHAP. KV.





ing which is abreast of the times. The
minister often listens to these things
with a justly angry spirit, oftener still
with a heavy or aching heart ; but what
ean he do? Shall he answer a fool
according to his folly? This is exactly
what the fool would like above every-
thing. Shall he restrain himself and
swallow his grief? He does so; but such
discipline often brings with it discourage-
ment and sadness,—sometimes almost
despair.” — Parker.

Ver. 12. BE NOT DISCOURAGED.
“Some of the greatest works that were
ever performed by Christian people were
not immediate in their resuita, You
know the story of the removal of old
St. Paul’s by Sir Christopher Wren. A
very massive piece of masonry had to be
broken down, and the task, by pick and
shovel, would have been a very tedious
one, so the great architect prepared a
battering-ram for its removal, and a
large number of workmen were directed
to strike with force against the wall with


the ram. After several hours of labour,


the wall, to all appearances, stood fast
and firm. Their many strokes had been
apparently lost, but the architect knew
that they were gradually communicating
motion to the wall, creating an agitation
throughout the whole of it, and that, by
and by, when they had continued long
enough, the entire mass would come
down beneath a single stroke, The
workmen, no doubt, attributed the re-
sult to the one crowning concussion,
but their master knew that their pre-
vious strokes had only culminated in
that one tremendous blow, and that all
the non-resultant work had been neces-
sary to prepare for the stroke which
achieved the purpose.” —C. H. Spurgeon.

EVIL SHALL Not PREVAlL.—“In the
dark ages the enemy thought he had
destroyed the Church, but life came into
the monk in his cell, and Luther shook
the world. The Church in England fell
into a deadly slumber in the days of
Whitfield and Wesley ; but she was not
dead, and therefore a time of awakening
came. The flame burned low, but the
heavenly fire still lingered among the
ashes, and only needed the Holy Spirit
to blow upon it, and cause a hallowed


conflagration. Six young men in Oxford
were found guilty of meeting to pray:
their offence was contagious, and soon
there sprang up hundreds glorying in
the same blessed crime. Earnest ser-
vants of the living God were forth-
coming, and no man knew whenee they
came ; like the buds and blossoms which
come forth at the bidding of spring, a
people made willing in the day of God’s
power came forward at once. Seeing
that there is life in the Church of God,
you can never calculate what will hap-
pen within its bounds to-morrow; for
life is an unaccountable thing, and
scorns the laws which bind the formal
and inanimate. The statues in St
Paul’s Cathedral stand fixed on their
pedestals, and the renowned dead in
Westminster Abbey never raise a riot;
but who can tell what the living may
next conceive or attempt? They burnt
the Gospel out in Spain, did they not?
And in the Low Countries they erased
the memory thereof. How is it now?
Has not Spain achieved her liberty at
a blow! Is not also Belgium free to
the preacher of the Word? Not even
Italy or Rome itself is safe against the
obnoxious heretic. Everywhere the
Gospel penetrates. Even the earth
helps the woman, and swallows up the
flood which the dragon casts out of his
mouth to drown the man-child : political
rulers restrain the violence of those who
otherwise would slay the saints in one
general massacre.”—C. H. Spurgeon.

Ver. 15. Om BEING REMEMBERED.
See Bonar's hymn, “ The Everlasting
Memorial.”
6¢T need not be missed if my life has been

bearing
(As its summer and autumn moved silently


on)

Its flower and its fruit: I shall still be
remembered—

Yea, but remembered by what I have done,”


Ver. 16. Engsoyine Gop’s Worp.
“What do I not owe to the Lord,”
writes Henry Martyn, “for permitting
me to take part in the translation of
His Word? Never did I see such won-
ders, and wisdom, and love in the
blessed Book, as since I have been
obliged to study every mer and


GHP. XVI.


it is a delightful reflection, that death
cannot deprive us of the pleasure of
studying its mysteries.”

Shortly before his death, Dr. Buchan-
nan, giving to a friend some details of
his laborious revisions of his Syriac Tes-
tament, suddenly stopped and burst into
tears. On recovering himself, he said,
“T am not ill, but I was completely
overcome with the recollection of the
delight which I have enjoyed in this
exercise. At first I was disposed to
shrink from the task as irksome, and ap-
prehended that I should find even the
Scriptures pall by the frequency of this
critical examination, But, so far from
it, every fresh perusal seemed to throw
fresh light on the Word of God, and to
convey additional joy and consolation to
my mind.”

APPROPRIATING Gop’s Worp. “ Have
you an ear to hear Gospel truth as the
voice of the Infinite God addressed to


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


your own soul? The Dutch farmers at
the Cape, at no very distant period, con-
sidered the Hottentots around them to
be little better than beasts, quite inca-
pable of anything beyond mere eating,
drinking, stealing, and lying. After our
missionaries had laboured among the
natives for a time, one of them was
found reading the Bible by the roadside,
The Dutchman inquired of him, ‘ What
book are you reading?’ ‘The Bible,’
‘The Bible! Why, that book was
never intended for you.’ ‘Indeed it
was,’ said the black man, ‘ for I see my
name here.’ ‘Your name! where?’
cried the farmer. ‘Show it to me.’
‘There,’ said the Hottentot, putting his ©
finger on the word ‘sinners.’ ‘That's
my name; I am a sinner, and Jesus
Christ came to save me.’ It were well,
indeed, if men would but read the Bible,
saying, ‘In this volume the great God
condeacends to speak to me.” —Spurgeon.





CHAPTER XVL


Crrricat amp Exrorrican Norns.—l. Chronology of the Chapter, Chapters xvi. and xvii,
form one prophecy. The taunt in chap. xvii. 15 shows that this message from God was deli-
vered before the capture of Jerusalem, which occurred at the close of Jehoiakim’s career,
Jehoiakim was slain in the eleventh year of his reign, «.¢., in common chronology, B.0. 597, or
in Assyrian chronology, B.o. 578. There are allusions in the prophecy which lead to the con-
clusion that it was delivered during this reign ; and we may eouecire it to be a few years
before its end.

2. Contemporary Scriptures; %. National Affairs; and 4. Contemporary History; cf. Notes
in chapters vii., x, and xi. & Geographical References—none. 6. Personal Allusions. -
none. 7. Natural History—none.

8. Manners and Customs.—Ver. 6. ‘‘ Nor cut themselves, nor make themselves bald for them.”
Among the Jews, as among almost all ancient nations, it was customary to lacerate themselves,
and to make bald a patch on the front of their heads, as signs of excessive grief, This had
been prohibited the Jews by Divine law (Lev. xix. 28; xxi. 5; Deut. xiv. i.), yet seemed atill
to be a common practice (chaps. vii. 29; xli. 5; Isa. xxii, 12; Ezek. vii. 18; Amos viii. 103
Micah i. 16). Ver. 7. “ Tear themselves” (see Marain)—“ Break bread :” the bereaved having
fasted for a while, their friends came and urged food upon them (2 Sam. i. 12; iii. 35; xii. 16,
17); food was also distributed to the mourners at the funeral (Ezek. xxiv. 17; Hons. ix. 4),
Ver. 16. “ Many fishers : many hunters.” Fishers were wont to use drag-neta, which swept the
waters and captured all the fish ; so hunters would surround a large space with beaters and neta,
and drive every creature forward into some enclosed spot for capture or destruction. ‘* Literally
understood, the ‘fishers’ are the main armies, who, in the towns and fortresses, capture the

ople in crowds as in a net; while the ‘hunters’ are the light-armed troops, who pursue the
ugitives over the whole country, and drive them out of their hiding-places with an eager plea-
sure as hunters track out their game (comp. Amos iv. 2; Hab. i. 15).”—Speaker’s Com.

9. Literary Criticisma.—Ver. 4. “Grievous deaths :” lit., deaths of diseases, te, deaths by
those manifold diseases which accompany war. The word D'N 20, here rendered grievous,

* my
is the same as occurs in chap. xiv. 18 [see Lit. Crit. im loc.], tortures of famine.
Ver. 5. “ House of mourning:” TVD FV2, In Amos vi. 7 (the only other occurrence


2
of this word in Scripture), MD is rendered banguet. Doubtless the root M1") means a loud


ory ; in this verse it is the shriek of grief; in Amos, the shout of jubilation. “Enter not inte
the heuse of shouting, The LXX. give the rendering, ‘‘Enter not into their bacchanalian
aasembly ”’ (Placov) ; Vulgate and Targum have feast ; Jerome, domus convivii.

350


aimee i


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. OHAR, XV1.








Ver. 7. “Neither shall tear for them:” DID is used interchangeably by Jeremiah fer


wp (Lam. iv. 4); here eliptically for on? Di, to break bread, jrangere,


Ver. 12. “ Imagination :" stubbornness (comp. iii. 17; ix. 11-15),

Ver. 13. “There shall ye serve other gods, where J will not,” &e. The form of the sentence ia
fronical ; there ye may serve other gods night and day, since I will show you no favour.

Ver. 14. ‘‘ Therefore, behold :” 15 should be rendered aevenicles not ‘‘ therefore,”
Blayney gives, After this,

Ver. 18. “And first :” MONI, Hendergon gays, is used adverbially, and gives it as pre-
viously, 1.¢., before God restores them, as stated in ver. 14. Venema agrees with this: And I will
first recompense doubly their iniquity ; ¢¢., before I restore them. Calvin, rendering the word
formerly—from the beginning, expiains thus: God would collect together all the iniquities which
had been Jong buried, so as to include fathers and children in the punishment thereof, J erome,
Hitzig, Ewald, Keil, and Umbriet accord with Henderson and Venema.

“ Carcases of their detestable things:” LXX. =Ovycpalos, “the dead bodies of their abomi-
nations ;” Vulgate, ‘‘the carrions of their idols;” Syriac, ‘the sacrifices of their idols;”
Blayney, “the vileness of their odious practices;” Keil, ‘‘the carcases of their detestables’—
which may refer either to ‘‘their lifeless and hateful idols” (Dr. Payne Smith), or “victims
offered to idols” (Rosenm. ),


HOMILETIC OUTLINES ON SEOTIONS OF CHAPTER XVI.


Bections 1-9. Impending national desolations warn from contracting social relationships,
y» 10-18. Apostasy punished with exile.
ve 14-21. Benignant promises of future restoration and conversion,


Vers. 1-9. ImpenbinG DzsoLaTions WAEN FRoM ConTRacTiING Sooran
RELATIONSHIPS.


Near calamities! With death and woe approaching, it was no time for social
alliances and family life. Happy they who were not parents, for they would be
spared anguish over offspring. Dark the day for those who had loved ones, for
destruction would seize those whom they cherished. They who were usually con-
doled with because of family loneliness would now be congratulated that they had
none to love, none therefore over whom to grieve,

i. Home life requires, in order to its enjoyment, inward serenity and external
security.

ii, Family relationships multiply our sorrows in times of adversity and experi-
ences of calamity.

iii, Without a prospect of affording happiness, marrvage and the creation of a
home are tnexcusable. (See Addenda: MaxRriaGr.)

Thus the topics of the section suggest :—

L Domestic alliances discouraged.—Ver. 2. With Jeremiah the case was
special, The impending disasters emphatically forbade him to entail on himself
domestic responsibilities and claims. If a man “ provide not for his own, and
specially for those of his own house, he hath denied the faith, and is worse than an
infidel.” And his very calling in such adverse and calamitous times would render
it impossible for him to fulfil a husband’s or a parent’s part.

1. We should have regard to the future in forming home relationships, and
estimate contingencies.

2. We should endeavour, by caution and frugality, to screen our loved ones from
impending distress.

3. We should realise how sertously the welfare and happiness of the entire house-
hold depends upon our conduct.

IL Family desolations depicted.—Vers. 3, 4. A piteous prospect! Whole
families destroyed (ver. 3), Agonising deaths shall overtake them (ver. 4). None
shall perform the offices of lamentation or sepulture (ver. 5).


The general lessons are these :—
351


CHAP, XVI. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





- —=


1. How wterly ey may be the calamities which shall despoil peaceful amd
pleasant homes !

3. How all the social respect and personal affection which prosperous times ensured
us may fail us in evil days!

3. How ruthless are the destructions of the enemy! Nothing spared; not beauti-
ful childhood, nor reverend age!

TIL Unmerited pity prohibited. —Vers. 5-8.

1. Appalling ruin naturally arouses ue to “lament and bemoan.”

2. Miseries entatled by sin should be discriminated from unprovoked calamities,

3. Amid the destruction of God’s enemies, His people must remember that He
doeth all things well, and not allow a sentimental pity to overrule their recognition
of righteous judgment.

4. God’s servants should shun any festive compantonshipe with those whose
iniquities invoke His anger (ver. 8).

IV. Divine justice explained.—Vers. 5and 9. The “grievous deaths” (ver, 4)
and the social desolations will not be accidental.

1. The impending woes will be God’s righteous visitation (ver. 9).

2. Forewarned by the prophet, the victims of nearing ruin paid no heed (ver. 10)

3. The withdrawal of God's mercy will expose them to the destroyer (ver. 5).
“T have taken away My peace from this people, saith the Lord.” His gracious
security had ensured their serenity even amid all their sins thus far; but the hour
of abandonment comes, and then “ destruction and misery are in their ways, and
the way of peace ” will be lost for ever.


Vers, 10-13. Apostasy PunisHED with Exe


L. Rebels affecting ignorance of their wrong.—Ver. 10.
IL Iniquity brought home to the transgressors.—Vers. 11, 12,
Il. Banishment the penalty of apostates.—Ver. 13.


Vers. 14-21, Benrenant Promises or Future ResroRaTIon AND CONVERSION.


The verses contain the following suggestions :—

IL. God’s former miraculous acts of grace recounted.—Ver. 14. That is the
background with which the following promise is brought into comparison.

Il. God’s former miraculous acts of grace surpassed.—Vers. 14, 15. Rescued
from a more powerful foe, and more hopeless dispersions.

Ill. Effective ministries of restoration depicted.—Ver. 16. (See preliminary
note under Manners and Customs on this verse.)

IV. Complete recovery of the scattered ones assured.—Ver. 16. None over
looked. Found in unlikely places. Brought from hiding-places safely home.

V. Omniscience fails not in minutest supervision—Ver. 17. Has seen their
“ iniquities ” in their own land. Wl see their “‘ ways” when scattered over all lands,
[Here, however, the word “ ways” refers not to the ways of flight, but their course
of action.

VL Bhs: chastisements to precede restoration.—Ver. 18. Grievous have
been their apostate deeds ; dishonouring God, and defying His holy land.

VII. Humanity returning to the true and living God.—Ver. 19. The prophet,
by experience, knew God. The nations would in the end discover their need of Him,
and seek the Lord.

VIII. Refuges of lies gladly renounced.—Vers. 19, 20. In ignorance ay
follow ‘‘vanities ;” often fall into the habits of their “ fathera.” Idolatry will
disprove itself (ver. 20).

IX. Jehovah realised as israel’s bleased hope.—Ver. 31.

352


AOMILLI/C COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





1. A grand crisis of Divine manifestation.


My hand and My might.”


2. A manifestation in which they shall recognise their God.
(Comp. Isa. xxv. 9.)


that My name is Jehovah.”
day, Lo, this is the Lord,” &e.


OHAP. KVi,


“T will this once cause them to know


“They shall know
“‘ And it shall be said im that


HOMILIES AND COMMENTS ON VERSES OF CHAPTER XVI.


Ver. 2. Theme ; JEREMIAH CALLED BY
ACTIONS TO ATTEST HIS PREDICTIONS.

1. He had complained that God’s word
through him seemed to farl, because ful-
filment was deferred (chap. xv. 18).

2. He is now commanded to show
his own faith in his messages by abstain-
ing from social alliances.

3. He would by such conduct confirm
hts words and awaken serious expectancy
among his people.

Actions preach where words are im-
potent. ‘For this I say, brethren, the
time is short; it remaineth that they
that have wives be as though they had
none ... for the fashion of this world
passeth away.”


Comments—

Jeremiah’s prohibition to marry has
this application: “Let it not be that
thy children charge thee as thou hast
charged thy mother, chap. xv. 10.”—
Naegelsbach.

And these meanings :

‘“‘ By remaining in a single state, Jere-
miah was to be a symbol of the then
future condition of his countrymen (comp.
Ezek. xxiv. 15-37).”— Henderson.

“Tt was to show that the people were
wholly given up to destruction; and
the nearing desolation and solitude of the
whole land. Celibacy ia not here com-
mended.”—Calvin.


Vers, 2-4. Theme: LiMITATIONS oF
MARRIAGE.

Generally speaking, ‘it is not good
for man to be alone.” God has made
woman to be his companion and help-
meet. Generally speaking also, “ chil-
dren are an heritage of the Lord” (Ps.
exxvii. 3-5.) But there are some ex-
ceptions to the rule, and great discretion
is needed even within the limits of the
divine precept, else man may not have
a helpmeet, nor will children be to him
a comfort. Marriage may become a

&


calamity to husband, wife, and children
under some circumstances. It is not
always necessary to show that a mar-
riage, or any other act, is unlawful, for,
though lawful, it may yet be inexpedi-
ent owing to the conditions of life, such
as sickness, poverty, or public calamity.
Let the peculiar circumstances passaway,
and then that which is lawful may not
be inexpedient.

I Marriage may be imexpedient
owing to a call to some peculiar work.
It would appear that others were not
forbidden to marry, but only the pro-
phet. He was commissioned to a hazar-
dous undertaking, and the cares of a
family would have brought considera-
tions which might not have been help-
ful to him in the work.

We can well imagine that Micaiah,
Jeremiah, Daniel, John Baptist, Paul,
and such like men, might find it best
to be free from the claims of a wife and
family. Of course they had to sacrifice
the comforts of home.

It would be difficult to imagine how
our Lord could have carried out His
work for us had He been married, and
that not because there was any reason
in Him why it would have been unlaw-
ful, but because He could not be entan-
gled by any secondary considerations.

Paul gives advice most difficult to
follow when he asks that those who
have wives be as though they had none.
This needs much grace and great wis-
dom to do aright.

Many workers for Christ, as mission-
aries, and those who have undertaken
difficult tasks, have denied themselves
the comforts of companionship, and the
luxuries of home, “ for His name’s sake.”
This is not monastic celibacy, but di-
vine singleness of eye and heart to one
all-absorbing pursuit.

II Marriage may be inexpedient
owing to some peculiar phase in a
nation’s history. Jerusalem was under

858


CHAP. XVi.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





divine threatening, and great calamities
were about to come upon her; it was
kindness to Jeremiah to advise and even
to command that he should not involve
others more than might be. So in times
of epidemic, famine, siege of cities, or
any great public misfortune, it may be
a duty to limit ourselves in any in-
dulgence or luxury, however lawful in
itself, or justifiable under other circum-
stances.

We recognise the mercy of God in
thus preventing much misery to any
offspring which might have resulted
from such a marriage. They would,
according to the text, have been born
to an inheritance of misery and ruin,
God’s servants desire for their children
a happy and useful life. There will be
enough of sorrow taking life even at
its best, but oh the grief of being born to
almost necessary and unavoidable ruin !

III. Marriage may be inexpedient
owing to some peculiar spiritual con-
ditions. It was from spiritual causes
that the troubles came upon Jerusalem.

It was for spiritual, as well as natural,
reasons that God gave the command to
Jeremiah.

Much of the sorrow of life arises from
disregard to spiritual conditions as quali-
fications for marriage, There is often
the marriage of the body when there is
no real union of the soul,

Such marriages are not only inex-
pedient, but unscriptural.

The consequences to children, to
society, and to the Church of Christ
are very serious indeed.

The Scripture gives great liberty, but

_it also prescribes some rule. We are
at liberty to be married to whom we
will “ only in the Lord.”

If we rightly understand the precept,
it indicates God’s desire for our comforts,
and His consequent direction as to the
only way it can be realised.

Marry only to those who love God.

Marry only when you can confer real
happiness on the object of your affection.

Marry only to those who will not im-
pede your spiritual progress, or hinder
your efforts to serve the Lord and Hts
Church. W. Whale.

See Addenda: MARRIAGE,

354


Comments—

Ver. 4. “ They shall dte of grievowa
deaths ; they shall not be lamented, neither
shall they be buried,” &e.

“Similarly in the plagues of Athens
and London, the greatness of the general
misery crushed out the gentler sympa-
thies of human nature.” (Comp. Thue
ii, 52.)—Dr. Payne Smith.


Ver. 5. Theme: SiN EXOLUDES FROM
SYMPATHY AND sORROW. “Enter not
into the house of mourning, neither
go to lament nor bemoan them; for
I have taken away My peace from this
people, saith the Lord, even lovingkind-
ness and mercies.”

Indicate how—

I. Sin brings heavy woes upon
transgressors.

1. The loss of God’s peace. “Taken
away My peace.” Therefore there is no
peace to the wicked.

2. The alienation of Providential fav-
ours. ‘Even lovingkindness and mer-
cies.” Godly lives are girded about by
heavenly ministries, and enriched witb
daily ‘‘ blessings of goodness.”

3. The accumulation of calamities and
sorrows. So that there is occasion te
“lament and bemoan.” All men have
trouble, are “born to trouble”; but the
godly ‘hides himself in the sacred place
of the Most High,” and finds ‘‘ Everlast-
ing arms underneath him ” in his day of
grief. But the wicked are comfortless
in their miseries. No ‘“consolations
wherewith God comforts us in any sor-
row ” alleviate the transgressor’s desola-
tions and distresses. Nor has the sinner
any heavenly outlook which brightens
his present gloom.

IL Sin, if prolonged, necessitates
Divine abandonment.

1. God ts slow in withdrawing His

. And indeed the Intercessor pleads,
“Let be this year also.”

2. Yet slighted patience leads to with-
drawal of peace. Trifling with God’s
“lovingkindness and mercies” compels
Him at last to “take away His peace”
and leave the soul to its terrora.

3. There are actual instances of such
Divine abandonment, This is not a
prediction, » menace; but a statement





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


GHAP, Xvi.





of fact - ‘Thus saith the Lord, J have
taken away,” &e. Any in the assembly :
old sinners, reckless and perverse youths |!
“Kiss the Son, lest He be angry and
ye perish from the way.”

III. Sin, when persistent, alienates
tenderness and pity.

1. Criminals can expect little com-
miser ation.

2. Condolence with sinners when suffer-
tng the consequences of their sins is an
error. It overlooks the righteousness
of punishment, °

3. Generally the craving of guilty per-
sons for sympathy amid their miseries
is attended by no contrition for their
iniquities which entailed such disasters
upon them.

Without contrition there can be no
conversion, and

Without conversion no consolation.


Ver. 9. Theme: GoDLESS MIRTH 8I-
LENCED. Steeped in guiltiness as were
these people, they yet were hilarious,
Their sins were allowed license. They
lived on in mirth as if there were no God,

See Addenda; Frivotous SINNING.

IL Sinful revelries.

1. Sinners sport with sin.
free to do as they listed.

2. Unlicensed self-indulgences are their
delight.

3. Conscience and God are silenced
amid thetr revelries.

4. Mad mirth heeds not God's frown,
Indifferent and even defiant.

5. To silence Divine denunciations
(as now through Jeremiah), sinners
plunge into yet more exciting self-in-
dulgences and gaieties. Oh, what a
scene of reeking vice and appalling blas-
phemy lies under the eye of Heaven !

It Nearing retribution. “I will
cause to cease in your days.”

1. Reckless mirth cannot arrest the
ratribution it ignores.

2. Godless revelries will not escape
God’s judgment. While revelry goes on
within, ‘“‘ behold the Judge standeth be-
fore the door.”

3. The term of tndulgence ts alarm-
ingly curtailed. “In your days,”
While the prophet lived the end of all
this impious conduct would come.


Live as if


W. Silenced rejoicings.
cause to cease,” d&c.

1. God will assuredly hush these im-
prous revelries.

2. Death will seal the lips of carousers
in silence.

3. Boon companions in sin will ex-
change hilarity for bitter lamentations,

4. Scenes of mirth will be deserted in
the day of calamity. They supply no
solace to crushed lives,

5. Troubles desolate the brightest
homes, and silence the sounds of gladness.

REFLECTIONS—

(a.) Joy may be pure ; and God would
have us joyful,

(b.) Pure joy has no sting, and is
enduring.

(c.) God will enrich the joys of the
good,

(d.) Trouble nor death can silence the
gladness of the godly.

(e.) Their earthly scenes of joy will be
by them exchanged for a land “ where
there is fulness of joy and pleasure for
evermore.”

(f.) Shun irreligious pleasures, and
you shall inherit the blessedness of a
life whose joys are Divine,


“T will


Ver. 10. Theme: SINNERS IN aLTER-
CATION witH Gop.

The messages of Jehovah produce
effect. Even rebels feel them. There
is in Heaven’s words something which
compels the most godless to notice them.
Indeed sinners are stirred to vindicate
themselves against God’s messages, and
rise in strife with His prophets.

Instances of altercation with the pro-
phets are numerous in the Scriptures
(comp. especially chaps. v. 19; Ezek. ii,
6—8, xxxiii. 17; Mal. iii. 13, &.)

I. Challenging the justice of God.
“ Wherefore,” d&c,

1. Willingly oblivious of their de-
merits.

2, Feigning innocency of great trane-
gressions.

3. Self-excusings.

4. Professing ignorance of having
done wrong.

IL. Surprise at the severity of God.
Their reply is virtually this :—

1. The evil threatened is out of all

355


- XVI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





reasonable proportion. ‘“ Wherefore hath
the Lord pronounced all this great
evil 1”

2. Such severity disproves His assured
graciousness. Did He not pledge Him-
self specially gracious to ws? Yet “all
this great evil against us /”

3. There has been no specific sin calling
down such vengeance. “ What is our
iniquity, and what is our sin,” &c.

II. Resistance of the condemna-
tions of God. For all springs from
this purpose.

l. They refuse to be convinced of sin.

2. They resent the charge of God’s
prophet.

3. They reject the call to contrition,

4. They affect religious feelings as a
cloak for all their guilt. Speak piously :
“What sin have we committed?” as
if they could not be wicked. Further:
What have we done “against the Lord
our God”? Oh, the hypocrisy, to dare
call Jehovah their God after such shame-
less apostasy ? Rather, “ Let the wicked
forsake his way, and the unrighteous man
his thoughts, and let him return unto
the Lord,” d&e.


Comments—

Ver. 10. “ When people are despe-
rately bad, and will not be told so, they
must be regarded as heathens and pub-
licans (Matt. xvii, 18; Tit. iii, 10;
1 Cor. v. 9).”—Cramer.

“If people are so hardened in their
sins as to expostulate with the prophet,
he is to show them that the severe sen-
tence passed upon them is the conse-
quence of idolatry, persisted in through
many generations till it has finally
deepened into natural apostasy.” —
Speaker's Com.


Ver. 11. God's reply. See Homilies
on chapters v, 19; vii. 25-28; xiii
21, 22.


Ver. 12. Theme: WorSE THAN YOUR
FATHERS.

The stream swells as it extends its
course, These men were guiltier be-
cause they had—

I. Fuller warning The fate of their

356


ancestors admonished them, giving em-
phasis to God’s threatenings.

IL. More restraints, God’s dealings
of mercy had been known for longer time,
and proved in more mantfold forms.
They had a history to keep, a name to
honour.

Il. Greater advantages. Their
Scriptures were laryer than those
their fathers possessed ; for they grew
as their history enlarged, and as succes-
sive prophets wrote and spake. Their
acquaintance with God and His will was
more clear. Their indebledness to His
grace was more evident.

IV. Heavier criminality.

Apostasy assumed most heinous forma,

Iniquity ran into revolting licenses.

Defiance of God’s messages and prophet was
more insolent.

Disregard of their national safety and honour
was more reckless.

(a.) Sin increases in volume and force
by an inevitable law of accumulation.

(6.) Actions take their moral charac-
ter from the inducements which prompt
them, or the restraints which check
them.

(c.) Guilt attains its climax when it
becomes insolently “ stubborn.”


Vers. 14, 15. Theme:
FUTURE OF ISRAEL,

Restoration from Egypt will be for-
gotten in contrast with the deliverance
from the North. Doubtless the return
from Babylon is primarily meant here,
but there yet awaits the ingathering
“from all lands,”

Note: This restoration is yet pro-
spective : so points to the coming glories
of God’s ancient people.

L Severer preliminary sufferings.

1, The bondage in the iron furnace
of Egypt would be easy and light con-
trasted with the despotism under which
they would groan in the North.

2. Instead of their being carried away
into one land, as in Egypt, they would
now be “ driven” through “ all lands ;”
separated, helpless, abandoned.

II. More astonishing preservation
in exile.

1. Dangers greater Inthe hands of
a more relentless despotism, The armies
of Nineveh and Babylon ground other


THE GREATER


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR.





nations they conquered and captured
into a confused mass, destroying their
individuality. In this captivity they
would uot be kept together, nor loca-
lised, but driven into widest dispersion,

2. Destruction more threatening. The
North meant their complete obliteration
as a people, and did all that could be
done to effect it. Egypt did not design
nor attempt this.

Itt. Grander supernatural redemp-
tion.

1. It should be recognised as God's
work of rescue. ‘The Lord liveth that
brought up the children of Israel.”

2. It should surpass their great hss-
toric delwerance from Egypt. All along
their career hitherto Jehovah had per-
petually reminded them that He was
their God that brought them out of
Egypt: see the frequency and varied
circumstances under which He recurred
to that fact. But it would henceforth
be forgotten in contrast with the coming
redemption.

IV. Richer revelation of Divine
grace.

1, Their greater sin did not lead God
to abandon them.

2. Renewed apostasy did not weary
God’s patience. :

3. Amid their exile He would jea-
lously guard and individually care for
them.

4. None should be lost in the glad
ingathering to their own land.


Vers. 16,17. Theme: Nets To CATCH
MEN.

They used trawl-nets in those days
for sweeping the waters of fish and the
country of game, (See note under Man-
aers and Customs for explanation.)

I. Imagery of invading captors.
This is the meaning of the figures here.

1. “ Fishers” express the ease with
which these invaders would capture
the prey. The Northern armies would
secure them with as little difficulty or
trouble as anglers gather fishes within
their trawl-nets,

2. “ Hunters” expreas the keenness and
rescluteness with which these Northern
invaders would pursue their prey ; neg-
lecting no hiding-place, penetrating into


OHAP. X¥i.


every retreat, and allowing small hope
of escape.

(a.) Tempters thus throw out nets for tha
unwary, and gather the simple into the
enclosures of pleasure and sin. “ We
are not ignorant of his devices.”

(6.) Disputers thus hunt the more valor-
ous souls, and seek to capture them with
doubts of the truths of religion, and con-
quer them by force of argument.

(c.) Various are the nets employed, for
the resources of those who would cap-
ture souls are multitudinous, yet adapted
to “catch men.” Flattery, indulgence,
companionships, books, worldly advan-
tages, to draw into sin ; or annoyance,
browbeating, calumny, argument, to
drive to despair and neglect of God.

(d.) Death drags its net to gather in
men, and it sweeps the sea of life effec
tually.

(e.) The angels of judgment will at the
end of the world gather souls in from
all lands, and not a sinner shall escape.

See Addenda: Huntina.

IL Imagery of redeeming agencies.

1. Of the recovery of scattered Israel
from the lands of the spotler.

Some expositors misapplied these
verses to that idea, and supposed God
was here predicting their ingathering.

Yet the words may without incon-
sistency be so applied. The figure of
fishing is so used by Ezekiel (xlvii. 9, 10).
And surely in Israel’s restoration they
will be graciously hunted wherever they
have been driven, and brought back
from heights and valleys, and even re-
pelling “holes of the rocks.” For Ged’s ,
“eyes are upon all their ways” (ver. 17)
in their dispersion.

2. Of the capture of souls for Christ.
“JT will make you fishers of men.”
“Being crafty, I caught you with

. enue

(a.) Gentle attractions of the Gospel.
Easily drawing souls into the kingdom.

(b.) Manifold yet adapted truths of
Scripture, winning men individually
into conviction and faith. The precious
promises, words of sacred comfort, con-
vincing truths, inspiring teaching of
God’s Word capture souls, and “sweetly
force them in” to the enclosure of Di
vine assurances,

357


CHAP, XVI.





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAR.





(e) The Holy Spirit’s work, of awaken-


Ing souls to their state and need, of
witness in consciences and hearts, and of
revealing Christ and the Gospel to men.

(d.) Weise ministrations of Gospel mes-
sengers. Preachers and teachers so pre-
sent Christ’s truth, so contend with
hearers’ doubts and hesitancy to “ per-
suade men,” that, being wise, they “ win
souls,” and so draw sinners and weary
lives to the Saviour.

Ill. Imagery of a grand ingathering.

1. Of the scattered sons of Israel to
restored Zion. From all lands shall they
come. It shall be “as life from the
dead” (Rom. xi. 15),

2. Of humanity drawn into the faith of
Christ. “ Other sheep I have, them also
will I bring,” &c. (John x. 16). ‘And
I, if I be lifted up from the earth, will
draw all men unto Me” (John xii. 32).

3. Of redeemed souls to thé glorious
heaven. ‘‘They shall come from the
east and west, north and south, and sit
down in the kingdom of God.” “ Re-
deemed out of every kindred and people
and tongue and nation.”


Ver, 17. Theme: OMNISCIENCE REGU-
LATES JUDGMENT. ‘“ For Mine eyes are
upon all their ways,” &c Ways means
career of conduct. God’s dispensations
are determined upon full knowledge and
examination of our doings.

I, Human life attracts the obser-
vant eye of God. “ Mine eyes are upon
all their ways.” This fact, that God
80 attentiwely and constantly watches us,
suggests—

1. The Divine interest in His creature
man,

2. Jehovah's solicitude for His people's
welfare.

3. His great distress on beholding their
fatthlessness.

4. His longing to wttness in them
loyalty and love.

II. Man’s iniquity is minutely
watched by Omniscience. “Neither
is their iniquity hid from Mine eyes.”
It so grieves Him, and is so amazing
after all He has done, that He cannot
withdraw His gaze.

1. Intquity has a beginning, and a
course of development.

358


2. The sinner’s path is beset with re
strictions or inducements.

3. Ungodliness varies in degree and
animus.

4. Much wrongdoing ts done secretly,
and guilt is often more in the heart than
in the act. But God’s eyes search out,
and His thoughts weigh the measure of
every act, or thought, or motive of sin.
Yea, our secret sins are set in the light
of His countenance, He understands
our thought afar off.

III. Divine chastisements are deter-
mined by men’s deeds. “Their ways
are not hid from My face, neither their
iniquities hid from Mine eyes.”

1. Caprice never moves God in His
dispensations of wrath.

2. Heaviest judgments cannot exceed
the sinner’s demerits.

3. Anguish derives tts keenest pang |
from the sufferer’s knowledge that he
righteously incurred tt.

4, None can hope for escape from pun-
ishment soequitably administered. ‘None
doeth good and sinneth not.” ‘ He will
appoint to every man according to his
deed.” ‘Every mouth shall be stopped,
and all become guilty before God.”

CoNcLUSION :—

1. ‘Who can expect to evade judgment #
“Tf Thou, Lord shouldst work iniquity,
O Lord, who shall stand ?”

2. Where can redemption be found?
If we cannot escape from judgment, can
we from the sin which necessitates it?
Yes ; Christ removes the sin, and thus
ransoms us from the judgment,

*«Cover my defenceless head
With the shadow of Thy wing.”

Ver. 18. Theme: REQUITING SINNERS
FOR THEIR WORK OF SPOLIATION. (See
Int. Crit. on this verse.)

We fail to recognise what wrong we
do God, what ravages our misconduct
works, when we sin.

I. Sin despoils what God prizes.
“ My land,” ‘‘ Mine inheritance,”

1. God has a right to all the pleasant
scenes which men wickedly use and pro-
stitute to their selfish and sinful enjoy-
ments. ‘The earth is the Lord’s,” &e.

2. Upon every life He has set His seal,
and justly requires that we preserve ita
sewers and affections inviolate. All we


a


ee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


OHAP. XVI,


ee


are, all our endowments and abilities He
entrusted us with.

3. When we withhold from God His
due, in love, loyalty, and service, we
“rob God.” He made us for His glory.

4. Every use of God’s fair world for
evil purposes is sacrilege. We do Him
awrong. We “defile His land.”

5. Such cruel misuse of our life and
the scenes we occupy must be as offensive
to God as it is criminal in itself. He
values us, loves us—‘“so loved us that
He gave His only-begotten Son” to
redeem us, and grieves over our aliena-
tion and prodigality: “wasting our sub-
stance in a far country,” degrading our
being, and dishonouring His handiwork.

IL. Sin’s spoliations will God reqnite.
“T will recompense their sin and their
iniquity double, because,” dc.

l. The punishment foretold is but
retribution for suns. It was so with
these Jews, it is so with us. Nothing
is threatened against the sinner but is
the ‘due reward of our deeds.” Having
defiled the land by their idolatry, they
shall be driven out of it. And “the
wicked,” having misused earth’s fair
scene, “shall be turned into hell.”

2. Dwine tnflictions have a twofold
severity. Yes; it may be thought that
God’s punishments are therefore eaces-
sive; that He not merely requites sin,
but goes beyond our deserts. St. Chry-
sostom here points out that ‘“ many,
taking these words literally, have been
troubled in mind, as though God did
not punish men according to their desert,
but more than their desert. But really
every punishment 18s twofold, for first,
there is the loss of the blessing which
would have followed upon obedience, and
secondly, the presence of actual misery.”
So also, as Vr. Payne Smith suggests,
sin ts twofold: there isthe leaving of God’s
will undone, and the actual wrongdoing.

Sinners lose God’s favour and incur
His wrath: “recompense double”

They lose the bliss of heaven and
inherit the woe of hell: “double.”

Yet nothing they lose and suffer can
equal the wrong which, by “ their ini-
quity and their sin,” they have done God /

(1.) They detiled His land with the
vileness of their detestable things, and


(2.) They filled His inheritance with
their abominations.

Thus did they pervert sacred scenea
to detestable purposes; render the holy
land offensive to Him whose inheritance
it was; and by their foul idolatry they
gave the glory of their service and wor-
ship to abominations. ‘Oh, do not the
abominable thing which I hate.”

See Addenda: Taz Evin or Six,


Ver. 19. Theme: THE GoopD MAN'S
STRENGTH, FORTRESS, AND REFUGE. “QO
Lord, my strength, and my fortress, and
my refuge in the day of affliction.”

I. The Infinite becomes the strength
of the finite. We may well ask how the
Eternal becomes the strength of the mor-
tal; God, the strength of a man? And
reply—

l. By the confidence reposed in Him.
Confidence in a leader is the very
strength of those who follow. Thus
Wellington was the strength of his army,
and Nelson of his navy. God’s people
have confidence in His wisdom, power,
love; hence “through God they do
valiantly, for He it is that treads down
their enemies under them.”

2. The valorous deeds effected by men
of God are marvellous. Paul’s list in
Hebrews xi, illustrates the triwmphs of
faith. And what is faith but confidence
in God? The triumphs of faith are the
wonderful achievements effected through
this confidence in God, so that God be-
comes the strength of men. Girded with
strength Divine they can each say, “ I
can do all things.”

3. The man whose strength is the Lord és
able to bear what would crush other men.
He who gave Samson strength to bearand
carry away massive gates, gives to His ser-
vants strength to bear weightiest troubles
and heaviest sufferings, See Paul’s recital
of his sufferings; yet he afterwards talks
of “these light afflictions,” de.

IL Yet the Lord gives to His people
protection. He is their “ fortress,”

This Divine fortress 1s tmpregnable.
“The gates of hell shall not prevail
against it,” Yet it may be asked, Have
not thousands of God’s saints been
slaughtered by persecutors? What is
the Book of Martyrs out a record of

359


OHAP. XVE.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR





God’s slain ones# True; but the
Divine fortress is for the protection of
souls, not of bodies, The exposure of
the body to peril on the one hand, and
the safety of the soul on the other, are
clearly indicated by our Lord’s words,
“Fear not them which kill the body,
but are not able to kill the soul.”

Itt. Further, He is “their Refuge
in the day of affliction.” In the evil
day we hasten to Him as soldiers to a
fortress when hotly pursued, or as vessels
to a harbour when the wind blows a
gale. When “tossed with tempest and
not comforted,” we have found the Lord
“a refuge from the storm and a covert
from the tempest.” And this refuge is
open still to every troubled saint and
every penitent sinner.—Rev. D. Pledge:
“ Walks with the Prophet Jeremiah.”


Vers. 19, 20. Theme: THE CONFESSION
OF THE GENTILES,  ‘‘ The Gentiles shall
come unto Thee from the euds of the
earth, and shall say, Surely our fathers
have inherited lies, vanity, and things
wherein there is no profit. Shall a man
make gods unto himself, and they are no
gods?”

The result of God’s judgments on the
Jews will be that both the Jews when
restored, and the Gentiles who have
witnessed those judgments, shall re-
nounce idolatry for the worship of
Jehovah (Fausset).

(Note: This prophecy in course of
fulfilment.)

L Their repentance. “Shall come.”
They had followed the devices of their
own hearts—its failure “ profited them
nothing.” ‘Trusting in gods made by
their own hands could not profit them ;
for, “ Shall a man make gods unto him-
self, and they are no gods?” a contra-
diction in terms. They repent of their
folly, and come to Jehovah—the only
true God

(a.) Repentance ts necessary to our
acceptance by God. A man must realise
the folly of his sin, and, turning from it
with his face toward God, must make
eonfession of his transgressions in order
to their remittance. ‘“ Repent, and be
baptized every one of you in the Name
of Jesus Christ for the remission of sina,

360


and ye shall receive the gift of the Holy
Ghost” (Acts ii. 38).

(6.) Must be with the heart. Sincere,
“‘ Our real existence in the sight of God
consists in the inner and not in the
outer life ” (Farrar).

IL. Their confession. “ Our fathera
have inherited lies and things wherein
there is no profit.” Idolatry in all its
forms; not only gods of wood and
stone, but all the idols of our own
heart, our own imagination—eg., the
love of riches. All idolatry must be
renounced, and a confession made unto
God that we have abandoned them.
The essential element of confession is
that it be spiritual and true. To a
right confession we must have—

(a.) A knowledge of our own hearts,
If this is possessed, the heart will be
laid open to God for its purification.
There is only one way of getting a heart
and mind pure, and that is by confes
sing to God its present impurities—im-
ploring Him to create in us a clean heart.

(0.) Faith mm God. In His willing.
ness to hear, in His power to do. Their
faith was strong; they acknowledge
that, apart from God, all is vanity and
lies, The world promises much, but
when those promises are chased and
caught, you have in your hand nothing
better than “‘ vanity and lies,”

It. Their acceptance. This we in-
fer, because “If we confess our sins,
He is faithful and just to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all un-
righteousness” (John i. 9). Wherever
the contrite heart is, there is the forgiv-
ing God. The Gentiles shall come—they
are coming, and by the power and attrac-
tion of the Cross. The Gospel has many
victories yet to achieve. The Saviour
said, “And I, if I be iifted up, shall draw
all men unto Me.”—Achilles Taylor. —


Vers. 19, 21. Theme: Missionary
SERMON,

The true knowledge of God:

L It is to be had in Christianity
(ver. 19).

IL It will also make its way to the
heathen. For

1. It is God’s will that they should
be instructed (ver. 21).


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAG.


2. They are ready to be instructed
(vers. 19, 20).


Comments —

Ver. 19. “ My strength and my for-
tress.” “‘Lit., my strength and my place
of strength—the one for attack, and the
other for defence.”—Speaker’s Com.

“The calling of the heathen is very
consolatory. For as children are re-
joiced at heart when they see that their
parents are greatly honoured and obtain
renown and praise in all lands, so do all
true children of God rejoice when they
see that God’s name is honoured and His
glory more widely extended.”—-Cramer.

Ver. 21. “I will this once cause them
to know.” ‘ As the Jews had chosen to
put their trust in such senseless things
as idols, of which the very heathen
will be ashamed (ver. 19), Jehovah will
teach them this once, z.¢., in a summary
manner once for all, by a punishment
which the nation shall never forget, that
there is a difference between Him and
idols."—Dr. Payne Smith.


OMAP. KVE


“ Tuts onog.” “ Whether we consider
the greatness of the national disgrace and
suffering caused by it, or its effect upon
the mind of the Jews, the burning of
Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar, followed
by the captivity of the people at Babylon,
stands out as the greatest manifestation
of God’s hand in all His dealings with
them, Neither in the times of the
Judges, nor in the persecution of An-
tiochus Epiphanes, was there anything
comparable to it. Only one other event
in their history is of equal magnitude—
the destruction of Jerusalem by Titus;
but that was the closing of their history
as the preparatory Church, and comes
therefore under a different category.” —
Dr. Payne Smith.

‘“T WILL CAUSE THEM TO KNow.” “No-
thing can be learned of God without God.
God instructs the people by Hismouthand
His hand, verbis et verberibus.” —Cramer.

“ Know that my name is THE LORD.”
“The fulfiller of His threatenings, as
well as the performer of His promises”


(Exod. vi. 3).—Lowth.


ADDENDA TO CHAPTER XVI.: ILLUSTRATIONS AND SUGGESTIVE EXTRACTS.


Ver. 2. MarniaGz.

“God is the best Maker of all mar-
riages.” —Shakespeare.

When the Rev. Philip Henry was
minister at Worthenbury, he sought the
hand of the only daughter of a wealthy
man. The father demurred, saying
that though Mr. Henry was an excellent
preacher and a gentleman, yet he did
not know from whence hecame. “True,”
said the daughter, “ but I know where
he is going, and I should like to go with
him.”

“‘ Marriage is a feast, where the grace
is sometimes better than the dinner.”—
Colton.

“We are really what we are rela-
tively."—P. Henry.


“ Let us no more contend, ner blame
Hach other, blam’d enough elsewhere; but
“strive,
in offices of love, how we may lighten
Zach other’s burden, in our share of woe.”
—Milton’s ‘‘ Paradise Low.”


Family Maxims: “ Let God’be first.”
“ Be happy and make happy.”


Ver. 9. FRIVOLOUS SINNING.


6¢ Fools make a inock of sin, will not believe

It carries such a danger in its sleeve.

‘How can it be?’ they say, ‘that such a
thing,

So full of sweetness, e’er should wear a
sting ?’

They know not that it is the very spell

Of sin, to make men laugh themselves to
hell.

Look to thyself then, deal with sin no
more,

Lest He that saves against thee shuts the
door.” — Bunyan.


Ver. 16. Huntine.

The original term for hunting occurs
in reference to the invasion of human
rights, in 1 Sam. xxiv. 12, Lam. iii. 15,
and Jer. xvi. 16. This usage affords a
ciae to Nimrod’s character, With the
band of lawless spirits his skill had
attracted, he proceeded from huating
beasts to oppressing man :—

4 Proud Nimrod first the mighty chase began;

A mighty hunter—and his prey re ae


Hunting, with its snares, may remind
361


CHAP, XVII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.





us of that mighty hunter Satan, and
nis devices—pitfalls, decoys, snares, d&ec.
—for the unwary. Hence the duty of
watchfulness : “ In vain is the net spread
ja the sight of any bird” (Prov. i. 17).
“Walk circumspectly, not as fools, but
as wise.” Satan is now the “ mighty
hunter” who hunts down sins, ignorance,
bad habits, &c, God helps us to escape
out of the machinations of “he wicked


We might illustrate the evil of sin
thus: Supposing I were going along
a street, and were to dash my hand


through a large pane of glass, what-


harm would I receive !—“ You would
be punished for breaking the glass,”—
Would that be all the harm I should
receive }—“ Your hand would be cut by
the glass.”—Yes; and so it is with sin.
If you break God’s laws, you shall be
punished for breaking them ; ana your


te exxiv. 6-8). Death isa¢ reat hunter
Ecc, ix. 12).—TZopies for Tt achers. soul is hurt by the very act of breaking
them.—J/. /nglis.

Ver, 18, THz EVIL OF six,





CHAPTER XVIL


Orerican awp Exzcrtioatn Norzs.—i. Chronology of the Ohapter, Vers. 1-18 continue
the prophecy of chap. xvi. A distinct break in the continuity of the book is noticeable at ver.
19. [Kezi seems alone in suggesting that this section “may very well be joined with the preceding
general reflections as to the springs of mischief and of well-being; inasmuch as it shows how
the way of safety appointed to the people lies in keeping the decalogue, as exemplified in one
of its fundamental precepts.” This is so far true, but is not sufficient to decide the connec.
tion with the antecedent prophecy when this section, vers. 19-27, stands out so manifestly
distinct and complete in itself.] At what date must this section, 19-27, be placed? Plainly,
before the guilty relapse under Jehoiakim; for the tone of the message is not condemna-
tory: Itis, as Dr. Payne Smith says, ‘‘ dissuasive of future neglect” rather than objurgatory
of past misconduct. Henderson suggests Josiah’s reign, ‘‘delivered in connection with and
shortly after his reformation.”  Hitzig assigns it to the period of Jeconiah, or that immediately
following Jehoiakim’s death. But Hichorn, Rosenmilller, Maurer, Naegelsbach, Payne Smith,
and Jamieson agree that its deliverance was at the outset of Jehoiakim’s reign, before he began
the evil course by which he undid the good effected by Josiah’s reformation. Its similarity to
ehap. xxii. 1-5 makes it probable that the two messages were contemporaneous, and this latter was
doubtless delivered in Jehoiakim’s reign also. Usher assigns vers. 1-18 to B.o. 605; and vers.
19-27 ton.o. 600. Hales: B.c, 601 and 599 respectively. (See Chronological Note of chap. vii.)

For 2. Contemporary Scriptures; 3. National Affairs; 4. Contemporaneous History, see
also Notes on chap. vii.

5. Geographical References. — Ver. 3. ‘‘ My mountain (Jerusalem) tn the field:” the
gurrounding country. Ver. 6. A salt land (see Deut. xxix. 23; comp. Job. xxxix. 6, Ps.
evii. 34). Salt regions suggest, as a figure, total want of the means of life. Ver. 19. “ Gate
of the children of the people :” described further as that “whereby the kings of Judah come
in :” most probably the Gate of David, now called the Joppa Gate. Denominated the People’s
Gate, as being the principle thoroughfare for the tribes coming from the south, south-west, and
gorth-west. Ver. 26. “Cities of Judah:” that part of the country bordering on Jerusalem,
** Land of Benjamin:” the northern province of Judah, and south of Ephraim. “ The plain :”
the low country between Joppa and Gaza (Josh. ix. 1, xii. 8, xv. 21, 33). The mountains:
the hill country of Judea (Josh. xv. 48 sq.) ‘* South:” southern district of Judah. ‘‘The
verse is interesting,” says Dr. Payne Smith, “as specifying the exact limits of the dominions
ef the Davidic kings, now confined to Judah and Benjamin. These two tribes are divided,
according to their physical conformation, into the Shefélah, or low country, lying between the
rjaountains and the Mediterranean ; the mountains, which formed the central region, extending
te the wilderness of Judah, on the Dead Sea; and the Negeb, or arid region, which lay to the
geuth of Judah.”

6 Personal Allusions.—Ver. 5. ‘Cursed be the man that trusteth in man.” Many com-
mentators find here reference to the perfidious sharacter and tyrannical conduct of Jehoiakim.
So also Maurer recognises in ver. 9 an allusion to Jehoiakim’s cupidity,

7, Natural History—Ver. 6. ‘‘ Heath im the desert:” YY is generally accepted as de-
geribing the juniper tree, which (says Henderson) is found in the vicinity of the Arabah, or the
@reat Valley to the south of the Dead Sea, and doubtless the same ‘“‘desert” which Jeremiah
here calla NIV ; the image, therefore, being a solitary juniper in an arid desert. Pliny saya


thai the ‘‘heath” was one of the plants excluded from religious uses, because it is neither sown
362


OOS





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH. O8aP. XVII.








nor planted, and has neither fruit mor seed. (See Lss. Crié. below on “Heath”, Wer. 11.
“* Partridge sitteth on eggs:” SP; the Arabs apply this name, Korea, to a bustard, It is not
true of the partridge that she stole the eggs of other birds and hatched them as her own; but
the ancients believed she did. Henderson eites in proof Eprpuan. Physiol. cap. ix. ; Isrp. Origg.
xii. 7, But Jamieson urges that ‘‘it is not needful to make Scripture allude to an exploded
notion as if it were true,” and therefore states that the name ‘‘ Korea,” from a root, éo call,
alluding to ite cry, is now applied to a bustard—heavy birds of slow flight, like the ostrich.

8. Manners and Customs.—Ver. 1. ‘‘ Pen of Iron:” (See Note on chap. viii. 8, under
Manners and Customs, Comp. Job xix, 24, Ps. xlv. 1, Isa. vidi. 1.) The iron stylus was used
only for writing or carving letters in a hard material, ‘‘ Potné af a diamond:” indicating the
very hardest substanee on which the graving was wrought. ‘' Upen the horns of your altars:”
the names of the goda, to whom sacrifices were devoted, were inscribed on the horns of the
altars (comp, Acts xvii, 28). Wer. 2. ‘* Altars and groves,” &c. (com. Note in loc. chap.
li. 20). Groves should be Asherahs, in all probability images of Astari:, the goddess of the
heavenly hosts, represented under the imagery of a ‘‘tree.” Ver. 8. High places :” on which
it was their custom to erect idolatrous altars. Ver,21. ‘‘ Bear no burden on the Sateath day :”
Probabilities are that the country people brought their agricultural produce into Jerusalem with
them when they came ostensibly to worship on the Sabbath ; and that the residents of Jerusalem
** carried forth burdens out of their houses” (ver. 22), #.e., took their wares to the city gates,
and bartered or exchanged with the villagers for their goods (comp. Neh. xiii. 15-22).


9. Literary Criticisms.—Vers, 1-4 are omitted by the LXX., and Bleek coincides in their .


omission; but all the other Greek versions and authorities retain the verses. Ver. 2.
“* Groves by the green trees :” instead of “by” read ‘“‘upon.” The sense seems te require
under; but the LXX. have éwi, Ver. 8. ‘‘ Thy high places for sin:” Text obscure here ;
Ewald recalls the similar phrase in chap. xv. 18, and renders, without price for thy sins. The
reading may however be, ‘‘I will give thy substance, all thy treasures, and thy high places to
the spoil on account of (for) sin throughout (committed throughout) all thy bordera.” Ver. 4.
“And thou, even thysdf :” 4A Lit., even with thyself, i.c., with thy bare life ; or (Henderson)
and through thee, by means of thine own wickedness; or (Jamieson) owing to thyself, by thy own
fault; or (Vulgate) and that with thyself, alone. Ver. 6. ‘‘ Heath:” (WY, The word in the
same form appears in Ps, cii. 17, destitute. Like a destitute man; and Speaker's Com. insists
that the verbs, he shall see (or fear), and shall tnhadit, plainly show that a man is here meant,
and nota plant. But surely the ‘‘heath”’ is not the nominative of these verba! Rather the
man (ver. 5) of whom ver. 6 recounts, ‘‘ He shall be izke the heath,” &c. There is in this
verse a contrast of the solitary pining juniper tree [see Natural History above] and ‘‘ the tree
planted by the waters” (ver. 8). Ver. 9. ‘‘ Deceitful:” apy, from APY, to lie in wait for,
trip, act ineidiously—the word from which Jacob took his name. ‘‘ Desperately wicked :”
wofully sick (ver. 16): WIN, incurable, malignant, desperate, Mentally sick, as in chap.
xv. 18, Ver. 11. ‘‘ Stéteth on eggs and hatcheth thm not:” Lit., gathereth young which she
hath not brought forth. Ver. 12. ‘A glorious high throne,” &e. Most probably this verse
should read on continuously with the next, thus; ‘‘ Zhou throne ef glory, on High from the
beginning ; thou place of our sanctuary, thou hope of Israel, the Lord/ So Ewald, Graf, Keil,
Payne Smith. Ver. 16. ‘‘ Not hastened :” i.e., sought to escape. ‘‘ From being @ pastor ;’
Hitzig and Graf : ‘from following lovingly after thee.” Umbreit reads: ‘I have not forced


_myself forward to follow Thee as a shepherd.” But Speaker's Com. gives, From being o


shepherd (see on. ii. 8, ruler) after thee; $.¢., aa one invested with authority by God to guide
and direct the political course of the nation. Nacgelsbach thinks Jeremiah means he waa
literally a pastor, a shepherd lad tending his flock when God called him, and pleads that
priests had pasture land (comp. Josh. xxi. and 1 Chron. vi.) intended expressly for the cattle
(Num. xxxv. 4), and Anathoth had its pasture (Josh. xxi. 18), But Henderson and Wordsworth
suggest : J have not hastened away, or backward, from being a shepherd. Wer. 21. ‘‘ Take heed
to yourselves :” in your souls, ¢e., conscientiously. Naegelsbach : ‘‘ Care with foresight for your
souls.” Ver, 25. This city shall remain for ever:” be inhabited ; not mere continuance,
but populousness,


HOMILETIC OUTLINES ON SECTIONS OF CHAPTER XVI,


Section 1-4. Judah’s guilt flagrantly manifest.
», 6-11, Spiritual corruption traced to its root-causea,
» 12-18, Safety and vindication sought in God.
» 19-27, Exhortation to hallow the Sabbath,


fection 1-4.—Jupan’s Gumt FLagrantiy ManNtrest.


The denial of having sinned against Jehovah (xvi. 10) must mean that the taet
of idolatry is by them denied. Against such a bold and shameless assertion, the


prophet rises here with visibly increasing indignation. He says that—
se


OBAP, XVII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.











L Judahb’s sin is forcibly certified, and, as it were, recorded in the archives,

1. In their own consciences ; in which the memory of their idolatrous abomine
tions is fixed like an ineffaceable brand. And—

2. Haternally, on the horns of the altars, where the blood of the slaughtered
children adheres as an equally ineffaceable memorial (ver. 1).

IL Judah’s sin is inerradicably remembered. While the two testimonies (in
their own consciences and on the horns of the altars) were deep and inextinguishable
to them, the actors present at their idolatrous barbarities, it was also true that—

1. Their children would never lose the tmpresston of that horrible cult which had
snatched so inany from their midst. The horror of the sight of those frightful
holocausts would remain unforgetable.

2. So deep was this impression, that the mere sight of green trees and high hills
was sufficient to refresh the revolting memory continually (ver. 2).

IfL Judah’s sin therefore would be severely punished. On the basis of the
facts thus certified, the prophet—

1. Repeats the announcement of the Divine punishments. These will consist in
(a) plunder of substance ; (0) desolation of the land, according to the analogy of
the year of release ; and (c) deportation into an unknown land (vers. 3, 4).

2. Bewarls the desolations which Judah must endure. A cry of grief escapes the
prophet’s lips as he describes the ravages with which Judah’s crimes will be
punished. “Oh my mountain in the field!” His patriotic soul bemoans the catas-
trophe which sin invokes, (Comp. Naegelsbach in Lange.)


The people had asked (xvi. 10), What cs our iniquity, and what is our sin?
Here we have a reply to their challenge,

IL. The indictment is fully proved. Both the fact and the fault. Their sin is
too plain to be denied, and too bad to be excused.

1. They cannot plead not guclty, for their sins are upon record in the book of
God’s omniscience and their own conscience ; nay, they are obvious to the eye and
abservation of the world (vers. 1, 2).

(a.) They are written before God, and in most legible and indelible characters,
and sealed among His treasures, never to be forgotten (Deut. xxxii. 34).

(b.) What ts so written will never be worn out by time. ‘ With a pen of iron,” de.
““Qraven in the rock for ever.” Sin is never forgotten till it is forgiven. It is
“ graven on the heart,” and though covered for a time, cannot be rubbed out, and
will be produced in evidence when the books shall be opened. If they will not
own the conviction of their consciences, then the horns of their altars will witness
against them. And their own “children” shall be witness against them: “they
remember the altars and the groves” to which their parents took them when they
were little (ver. 2).

2. They cannot plead that they repent, or are come toa better mind. For as
their guilt is undeniable, so their inclination to sin is invincible and incurable, In
this sense many understand vers. | and 2.

(a.) Their sin is deeply engraven in their hearts. It is inwrought into their very
natures ; and is as dear to them as that is of which we say, It is engraven on our
hearts !

(b.) They had pledged themselves to their idols ; bound themselves as “ with cords
to the horns of their altars ;” and given up their names to their idols,

(c.) They remember their cdolatries with affection. For ver. 3 may be rendered
thus: As they remember their children, so remember they their altars and their
groves—they are fond of them, and loth to part with them, as men with their
children.

IL The judgment is affirmed and the sentence ratified. Inasmuch as they
were thus wedded to their sins and will not part with them—

1. They shall be made to part with their treasures (ver. 3). Both the stores of

364


1OMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. OHAP, XVIL


the city and the products of the country will be seized by the Chaldeans, Justly
are men stripped of that with which they have served their idols, and made the
food and fuel of their lusts. What we make for « sin (ver. 3), God will make for
@ spoil.

2. They shall be made to part with their inherttance (ver. 4).

(a.) God owns t was ther “heritage,” and that He gave it them. It was an
aggravation of their folly in throwing themselves out of the possession of it.

(6.) Their discontinuance in occupancy of the land should give tt rest. The word
here used, discontinue, is the word used in the appointment (Ex. xxiii. 11) that
the land should rest one year in seven. They did nvt observe that law, and now
God would compel them to let it rest. But it should be no rest to them, for “ they
should serve their enemies in a land they knew not.”

Observe (i.) Sin works a discontinuance of owr comforts ; deprives us of the enjoy-
ment of that which God has given us.

Observe (ii.) A discontinuance of the possession is not a defeasance of the right.
It is intimated that upon their repentance they should recover possession again, —
M, Henry.


Section 5-11.—Sprrirvat Coravurrion Traced To rts RoorT-cavseEs.


All this outward perfidy and prostitution are but manifestations of inward and
spiritual apostasy. The whole affections and dispositions of the soul have gone
astray from God, and therefore their moral conduct has become degraded, and their
religious behaviour disloyal. This section delineates three radical defects, and to
each is attached its corresponding and appropriate judgment.

IL A perverse disposition.

1. Its action. It rests not in Jehovah, but regards flesh as its better confidence,
seeking in man the spring and supply of good (ver. 5).

2. Its judgment. The forlorn and deserted picture of ver. 6 supplies an idea of
the consequences of deserting God. This desolate result is further emphasised by
the contrast presented in vers, 7 and 8,

IL. Perfidiousness of heart. Total faithlessness, and illimitable trickery.

1. The depths of its deceptiveness human thought fails to reckon (ver. 9).

2. God’s reckoning and punishment will rest upon His complete knowledge of
the heart's wickedness (ver. 10).

IIL Impetuous avarice.—Ver il.

1. Jt cruelly acquires that for which it restlessly craves. Seizes ss its own the
treasures of others.

2. It forcibly relinquishes the spoil it has violently seized. Brief years are
threatened, and a fool’s end.


Section 12-18.—Sarury anp VINDICATION SoucuT In Gop.


Here the prophet turns from the corruption ot his people, saddened and sickened
at heart, to meditate on his God and his personal safety in Him. This was the
realisation of the Psalmist’s prayer: ‘‘ When my heart is overwhelmed, lead me to
the Rock that is higher than I.” Then there arise before his contemplation—

IL Majestic guarantees for the godly soul.—Vers. 12, 13. He apostrophises
God. [See Lit. Crit. on verse. }

1. He celebrates the power and glory of Ged. “Thou Throwe,” symbol of
royal power and supreme sway. “Throne cf Glory,” laxguage expressive of
highest majesty, surpassing all powers, most glerious im royalty, dominion, and
dignity.

3. The eternal excellency of God. ‘On high from the beginning.” Halted on
high, since loftiest glory is His ; yet also highest in excellency ; for who in grace
and glory can be compared to God? And “ from the beginning »—“ or ever Thoa

365


OHAP. XVIL. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


hadst formed the earth and the world,” or from the outset of Israel’s national exist.
ence, God has been supreme ; supreme in personal majesty, supreme as Israel’s Lord.

3. The devout soul’s hiding-place. ‘Thou place of our sanctuary ”—for security,
rest, reverence, and bliss,

4, Israels covenanted Hope. “O Jehovah!” name of God in which He is
pledged to His people. ‘The Hope of Israel ;” never having failed them through
all their past history. Their enduring Hope, notwithstanding all they have done to
alienate Thee. Their sole Hope, for, losing Thee, what have they left? Their fudure
Hope ; for after mournful desertion of Thee, they will return to the Lord as their
“ everlasting strength.”

5. The living spring of refreshing. “Fountain of living waters.” (See Notes
on chaps. ii. 13, ix. 1.)

Thereupon Jeremiah utters his assertion, that forsaking Him will eventuate in
shame while they live, and contemptuous oblivion as the end !

IZ. Fearless appropriation of Divine graciousness.—Vers. 14-18. Jeremiah
lays his claim to all that he knows God to be. Treasures of grace are valueless
s far as we are concerned, unless they become ours. The prophet appeals to
God for—

1. Present tranquillity and safety (ver. 14). This appeal for healing suggests the
troubled and aggrieved state of his spirit (Ps. vi. 3, xxx. 3). For salvation; that
his life was encompassed with perils—from scorners and unbelievers, who rejected
his word and his claim to prophetic mission. He bases his appeal on what God
was to him—“ my praise:” he had boasted in God, and had occasion to rejoice in
God ; and more, Jehovah had delighted him with favours, and distinguished him
with honours as His servant.

2. Official vindication. He waa ridiculed (ver. 15). He had been faithful (ver. 16).
God was his witness—“ Thou knowest ;” and that guaranteed that God would
make others know the verity of the words he had spoken in God’s name.

3. Future refuge. A “day of evil” was coming; full of “ terror” to evil-doers
(ver. 17). But in that evil time God would discriminate between the persecutora
and the persecuted, confounding them but sheltering the prophet ; and God would
fulfil His predictions in their complete destruction. Hefutation of his foes, refuge
for himself.

“ Double destruction ;” .¢., sharing in the national ruin which was impending,
and suffering for their sin in persecuting and deriding God’s messenger.


Section 19-27.—Exnortations to HaLLow THE SABBATH.


A sermon which the prophet received from the Lord, and was ordered to deliver
in the most solemn and public manner—proclaimed in all the places of concourse,
“the gates.” First at the court-gate, whereby “the kings of Judah” enter: let
them be told their duty first, and particularly this duty. Then also t all the gates
of Jerusalem, as being a matter of great and general concern.

L How the Sabbath is to be sanctified, and what is the law concerning it.

1. They must rest from their worldly employ. ‘Bear no burdens” into the
- elty, nor carry any out of their houses.

2. They must apply themselves to the proper business of the day. “ Hallow ye
the Sabbath-day,” dec. (ver. 22). Consecrate it to the service of God.

3. They must herein be very circumspect. ‘Take heed to yourselves ” (ver, 20).
Where God is jealous, we must be cautious.

4, They must observe the statute made and provided. This was no new imposi-
tion, but what “I commanded your fathers.”

II. How the Sabbath had been profaned—Ver. 23. Their fathers’ disobediencs
in this respect is mentioned to show—

1. That there needed a reformation in Sabbath conduct,

366


ae


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; JEREMIAH.


law


OHAP. XVII.


2, That God had a just controversy with them, for the long transgression of this


3. And because they disregarded this law with the intent to evade all instruction


on other commands,
decay.


Where Sabbaths are neglected, all religion sensibly goes to


Tit. With what blessings God would reward Sabbath sanctification. Though
their fathers had been guilty of its desecration, yet if (ver. 24) they would make


conscience of Sabbath sanctification—
1, The court shall flourish (ver. 25).


The honour of the government is the joy


of the kingdom ; and the support of religion would contribute greatly to both.


2. The city shall flourish (ver. 25).


‘This city shall remain for ever.”


What-


ever supports religion tends to establish the civil interests of a land,


3. The country shall flourish (ver. 26).


The cities of Judah and the land of


Benjamin shall be replenished with inhabitants, abounding in plenty and living
{n peace, which shall appear in the multitude and value of their offerings to God.
By this the flourishing of a country may be judged of : What does it for the honour


of God#
4. The church shall flourish (ver. 24).
go in the right channel.


“ Meat offerings,” dc.


Everything shall


V. With what judgments God would punish Sabbath profanation.—Ver. 27.


1. The enemy would besiege their city, ‘kindle a fire in the gates,”


And justly


shall those gates be fired that are not used to shut out sin, and to keep the people


in to an attendance on their duty.


2. The fire should destroy their palaces—where the princes and nobles dwell ;
who did not use their power and interest, as they ought to have done, to keep up


the honour of God’s Sabbaths.


3. The fire shall not be quenched, until it has laid the whole city in ruins,


Fulfilled by the army of the Chaldeans (chap. lii. 13).


The profanation of the


Sabbath is a sin for which God has often contended with a people by fire. —Comp.


4M. Henry.


HOMILIES AND COMMENTS ON VERSES OF CHAPTER XVII.


Ver. 1. Theme: SINS HOLD ON THE
reMosT MAN, “It is graven upon the
table of their heart.”

Suggestions :—

i Sin indelibly impresses ttself upon
sinners. Its mark is deep. Its influ-
ence is not superficial or evanescent, but
ineffaceable and perpetual.

ii, Sin had become tnwrought into their
affections. Worked into the very texture
of the heart.

iii. Hid in the deepest secrecy of their
being. The heart is a profound hiding-
place. It is the citadel and secret cham-
ber of the entire man.

iv. Jt cannot be ignored in their own
consciousness. Every movement—affec-
tion and action—of the heart would
make the presence therein of sin evident.
It would testify its presence by the
force of feeling.

v. Cannot be erased by ther own


efforts. If sin was ever to be removed,
“a new heart” must be given, And
only God can “create in us a clean
heart.”

See Addenda: INDELIBLE RECORDS
or SIN.


Theme : THE DEEP-SEATED CHARACTER
or sin. The hardness of Judah’s heart
is repeated in the stubbornness of bar-
barian, Roman, Greek, Scythian ; seen
indeed in ourselves.

L Answer the question, What is sin ?
Always hearing about it, from preacher ;
and reading about it, in every Scripture
page. What is it ?

Pharisee says: ‘It is eating with un-
washen hands,” &, But to break some
of the commandments, especially the
ecclesiastical commandments, of men,
may be virtuous, and indicate enlight-
enment !


367


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ;: JEREMIAH.





Stn ts the repudiation of our obliga-
tions to God. “Against Thee have I
sinned,”

IL How is the fixedness of sin
proved ?

1. Lt is in the very heart of man.
Deep ingrained.

2. They sinned in thetr very religion.
* On the horns of their altars.” Con-
verted men frequently prefer the form
of religion most gratifying to their tastes,
ears, and sight. Or they stain the horns
of God’s altars by their own righteousness,
by carelessness, by vain thoughts, by hypo-
crisy,—as Demas and Judas.

TIL What is the cause of this!
How did sin get such a firm footing in
humanity? The answer is—

1. We must never forget the Fall, We
are none of us as God made us)  “ We
are born in sin,” &,

2. Our habits of sin. Well may sin
be deeply engraven in the man who has
continued in his iniquity for twenty,
forty, perhaps seventy years. ‘“ Can the
Ethiopian change,” &. Use is second
nature.

3. Sin is a most clinging and defiling
thing. One license renders us easily en-
elaved.

4, The prince of the powers of dark-
ness alltes himself with sin. He will
never let the tinder lie idle for want of
sparks.

IV. What is the cure for all this ?
Can sin, thus ingrained, ever be got out ?
It must be got out ‘if we are ever to
enter heaven. Only done by super-
natural processes.

l. Christ Jesus does take away these
deeply-inscribed lines of sin from human
nature. It is part of the covenant of
grace and part of His Gospel that Jesus
can give to us hearts free from tendency
to sin.

2. And since the guiltiness of sin is
as permanent as sin itself, Jesus Christ
ts able to take our guilt away. ‘The
blood of Jesus Christ, His Son, cleanseth
us from all sin.” And the vilest sinner
may be “ made partakers of the Divine
nature, having escaped the corruption
which is in the world through lust,”—
Spurgeon: “ Metropolitan Pulpit,” Ne
812.

368





Ver. 2. Theme: OUR CHILDREN’S RE-
COLLECTION OF OUR SIN. ‘ Whilst their
children remember their altars,” &e.

Probably we here have—

i, An allusion to their sacrifice of
children to Molech.

ii, The horrors of such blood-stained
rites would be for ever engraven upon
the memory of any who were present to
witness them.

L Our evil deeds vividly impress
our children.

IL Fixed upon their memory, our
children may keep alive recollections
we fain would obliterate.

IiI. Parental sins will reappear in
our children’s lives. The horrid ghosts
of our old iniquities resuscitated !

IV. Remembrancers of old iniquities
crowd around our life. We may shun
suggestive scenes that bring up dark
memories, but our “ children remember
the groves,” dc, and will point them
out to us. We cannot clear the world
of these accusers.

V. Children may thus become wit-
nesses against us.

l. By their inability to forget what
we would gladly consign to oblivion ;

2. By their reproduction of our evil
habits, continuing the wicked ways they
learned from us ; and

3. Before God tn the last day of ac-
count, when we, and our children with
us, stand in the judgment.


Vers. 3, 4. See note in Geog. Refer-
ences ; also Int. Crit. on these verses ;
also Homilies and Comments on chap.
xv. 13, 14.

Comments—“‘ My mountain tn the
jield::” Jerusalem or Zion; called “ the
Rock of the plain” in chap. xxi. 13, and
“Mountain of Jehovah,” Micah iv. 2.

“ Being the place which Jehovah had
chosen as the residence of His visible
glory, He claims it as His; just as He
frequently calls it ‘My holy mountain’
(Isa. xi. 9, lvi. 7).”—Henderson.


Ver. 5. Theme : THE ACCURSED TRUST.
The Jews, in looking now to the
Assyrians and then to the Egyptians,
thought to gain sufficient defence against
God Himself. This false confidence was


HOMILBTIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


a hindrance to their relying on the favour
of God, and kept them from repentance.

I. Men are variously deceived while
trusting in men.

1, They begin with themselves. Every
one is inflated with vain confidence,
either in his own prudence, dexterity, or
power. There is no one, even the most
wretched, who does not trust in himseif
before he trusts in others; no one so
contemptible but that he swells with
some secret pride.

2. They take atds to themselves from
every quarter. This is the out-working
of what they deem their own prudence.
Yet their goings round are useless ; and
not only so, but they turn out to their
own destruction.

II. God derides the folly of such
delusive trust in men.

1. He declares that they who so trust
are “cursed.” This curse of God ought
to strike us with terror, for we hence
learn that God ts highly dtspleased with
all those who seek their own salvation in
the world and in creatures.

2. He charges such with estrangement
of heart from Himself. When confidence
is reposed in flesh, God is deprived of
His own honour. These two things can-
not be connected—confidence in flesh,
and reliance on God. When water is
blended with fire, both perish. To at-
¢empt to unite trust in man with trust
in God is like mixing heaven and earth
together. It is to confound the order of
nature, when men imagine that they have
teoo objects of trust, and ascribe half of
their salvation to God and half to them-
selves or to other men.

3. All are apostates and deserters from
God who fix their hope on men. True
in the present life; twofold a madness
in respect of eternal things,—Arranged
from Calvin.


Comments—

Ver. 5. “There is great occasion for
this cursed dependence on flesh, when
one, from the hope of good personal

rotection, gives up the work of the
tea to the powers of the earth. It is
true the Church is to have foster-parents
who are kings, but, nevertheless, neither
kings nor princes are its tutelar deities,

2A


CHAP. XVI





much less lords and commanders of the
Church ; but One is our Master, One our
Judge, One our King—the Crucified.”


—Zinzendorf.


Ver. 5-8. Theme: THE DUTY oF
TRUSTING IN Gop.

Every created being derives its exist-
ence and support from God. Yet man is
prone to depend on the creature rather
than on Him, Though constantly disap-
pointed, he still leans on an arm of flesh.
But such conduct is justly reprobated.

I. The characters that are con-
trasted.

(a.) Every man by nature trusts in
man, makes flesh his arm, and in his
heart departs from the Lord. We need
not go to heathens or infidels to find
persons of this description, We need
only search the records of our own con-
science. In temporal things we never
think of looking above the creature.
If they be prosperous, we trust in un-
certain riches, and take the glory to our-
selves. If adverse, we lean to our own
understanding and exertions, or rely for
succour on our friends, Jn spiritual
things we seek to establish a righteous-
ness of our own. We expect to repent
and serve God by our own strength,

(6.) The true Christian “ trusts in the
Lord, and makes the Lord his hope.”
He trusts in the Lord Jesus Christ as
the God of providence. He commits his
affairs to Him, expecting His promised
aid. He trusts also in Jesus as the
God of grace. He renounces all hope in
his own goodness or resolutions. These
marks afford a sure line of distinction
between the nominal and real Christian.
Nor is this difference between them of
trifling import.

I~ Their respective conditions.
Men’s eternal state will be fixed with per-
fect equity. The conditions of the charac-
ters before us are strongly contrasted :—

1. Simply: “ blessed,” d&ec. ; “cursed,”
&c. What can be more important than
these declarations? They are not the
dictates of enthusiasm, but the voice of
God. “Thus saith the Lord.” God
has given His Son to be our Saviour;
but while some confide in Him, others,
by not trusting in Him, By Him

6


OHAP. XVII,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH





How reasonable then is it that a curse
should attach to these and a blessing to
those! Such a difference in their condi-
tions seems the necessary result of their
own conduct. Let every one inquire
which of these conditions he has reason
to expect.

2. Figuratively : “heath in desert,”—
“tree planted by the waters.” To
mark the contrast more clearly, it is
further observed that both the blessing
and the curse shall be—

(a.) Abundant. The unbdeliever “ shall
be like the heath in the desert.” He
shall be left in a state of extreme barren-
ness and wretchedness; and this, too,
amidst all his boasted fulness (Job xx.
22). The beltever “shall be as a tree
planted by the waters,” d&c. He shall
be made flourishing and happy by rich
supplies of grace (Phil. iv. 9).

(b.) Unmixed. The unbeliever “shall
not see when good cometh.” He re-
ceives none of the heavenly dew that
falls around him. The belvever “shall not
see when heat cometh, but his leaf shall
be green, nor shall he be careful in the
year of drought.” He may experience
heat and drought, t¢, he shall, however,
not be injured, but benefited by them
(Heb. xii. 11).

(c.) Eternal, The unbeltever “ shall
inhabit the parched places in the wilder-
ness, in a salt land, and not inhabited.”
He shall be an outcast from God in the
regions of misery. The believer “shall
not cease from yielding fruit.” His
present enjoyments are the pledge and
earnest of eternal happiness,

Infer (1.) How glorious a person must
Christ be! If He were a mere creature,
it would be ruinous in the extreme to
trust in Him. (2.) How are we all con-
cerned to trust in Christ. God regards,
not merely our outward conduct, but
the frame of our hearts. On this our
present and everlasting happiness de-
pends. — Simeon.

See also NoTicgaBLe Topics.


Vers. 5, 6. Theme: THe HEATH IN THE
DESERT. ‘Thus saith the Lord, Cursed be
the man that trusteth in man,and maketh
flesh his arm, and whose heart departeth
from the Lord. For he shall be like the

370





heath in the desert, and shall not see
when good cometh ; but shall inhabit
the parched places in the wilderness, in
a salt land and not inhabited.”

The Jews had withdrawn dependence
from God, and trusted to themselves and
Egypt. They were delivered to the Baby-
lonians. To this the text refers prima-
rily. But it may apply to all,

Two definitions of a heath, A shrub
growing in barren places, and a sandy
barren plain of Arabia seldom rained
upon. These plains and the shrubs they
produce do not “see when good cometh.”
The trees of Canaan by the rivers are
refreshed by nightly dews. God’s vine-
yard is as a watered garden, and yields
the rose of Sharon and the lily of the
valley, but the wastes of Arabia, doomed
to barrenness, never “see when good
cometh.”

L Let us learn against whom this
curse is denounced, and trace resem-
blances between them and the heath, &«
They are those who disclaim dependence
on God—idolators, infidels, and the pro-
fane.

1. Those who do not realise their
dependence on God for all true happiness,
but think it lies in worldly gain. They
make no daily petition to God for it,
The prayerless, stupid, and worldly tn-
herit the curse in the text.

2. Those who trust in man and make
jlesh their arm, and neglect to fix all
dependence on Father, Son, and Holy
Spirit. They do not feel they are hope-
less and helpless, or they would cast
themselves upon Christ as the only
hope of sinners ; they are therefore under
the curse against those who trust in
man.

3. There ts yet another class under -
this curse. Some are in the Church;
some are not, Punctual perhaps on
ordinances, they depend upon a form
of godliness without the power, and,
excepting a little animal sympathy,
remain cold as ever. They are a
numerous class even in the Church of
Christ. ‘“ Five were wise, and five were
foolk. 9

IL How do these resemble the |
heath in the desert ?—the prayerless,
stupid, and worldly.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH,





CAP, XVII,





1. In barrenness and deformity. God
gave them powers to bear fruit, but He
comes year after year and finds nothing,
and worse—a crop of misshapen shrubs.


_ After so many benefits, they refuse to


serve Him.

2. They are like the heath tn being
desolate, forsaken, and unblest. No voice
of joy or song is heard on the heath,


_ while those who wait on God are re-


freshed like Eden. Those who are like
the heath in barrenness and deformity
shall resemble it in desolation and woe.

3, While the holy land ts refreshed
with dew from heaven, the desert remains
parched asbefore. This feature of resem-
blance exists at this time. Showers of
grace fall on some, but the barren sands
know not ‘‘ when good cometh.”

4, Showers falling on desert heath only
promote the growth of deformed shrubs ;
and the influence of heaven falling oa
this class calls forth a more fatal resist-
ance of the Holy Spirit.

5. The heath cannot be made fruitful,
and all God’s visitations fall unregarded
upon many.

6. It is plain that, while many obey
the Gospel call, others remain desolate and
uncheered by any heavenly influence.

7. Some of the awakened may say, “ I
cannot change my own heart; I do the
best I can”—Do you? even for a day?
Drop these excuses, and cry, “God be
merciful to me a sinner.”

8. Others resemble the heath tn defor-
mity and barrenness. They resort to sac-
raments, but yield no fruit, and so will
they remain till death.

APPLICATION—

(a.) I address those who cast of fear
and restrain prayer. Waste not out, I
pray you, your life, seeking independent
happiness. Return and seek happiness
in God alone, and become rich for eternity.

(6.) I warn you who are awakened.
Trust not in ministers or Christians.
Only Christ can give the mighty blessing,
Let Calvary’s Voice draw you to Him.

(c.) I speak to those who think they love
God better than father, mother, or life,
yet are chained to earth—these are the
most discouraging of all men. It is
easy to alarm the humble, but a task to
destroy false hopes.


(&) Let the dear loved children of
God receive the precious promises sue
ceeding the text: “ Blessed is the man
that trusteth in the Lord, and whose
ile the Lord ts.”—Hdward Griffin,

De


Ver. 7. Theme: Maxine Gop ovp
TRUST.

Man, sensible of his weakness, re-
quires for his happiness some object
without himself in which he can trust.
In what do men trust? God alone
furnishes an object adequate to the re-
quirements of our trust. All lesser ob-
jects are frail, variable, uncertain.

I. The soul’s right and only trust.

1. We owe it to the supremacy of
the divine nature.

2. Entire resignation to God’s wis-
dom and will.

3. Entire withdrawal of our trust
from all inferior things,

4. Sincere acceptance of Christ as
our Saviour.

5. Sincere effort to live a holy and
pious life.

IL The blessedness with which
godly trust is crowned. ‘This will be
seen in the following contrast of believer
and unbeliever. ;

1. The objects of the unbeliever’s
trust are uncertain and insignificant;
the believer’s, certain and glorious,

2. The one inadequate and perishing,
the other all-sufficient and abiding (1
Pet. i. 4).

3. The one bears burdened econ-
science and a character ill at ease, the
other enjoys peace and rest (Matt, xi.
28-30).

4, The one regards God as his foe,
and resembles the inferior objects of
his trust ; the other regards God as his
friend, enjoys His protection and fel-
lowship, and resembles Him,

Learn—

1. Not to be deluded by inferior
things.

2. Seek this blessing by submission
to God’s will in a crucified Saviour.—
£, Jerman.


Comsmnenta—
“ Blessed are those teachers, who have
a71


OBAP. XVII.





betaken themselves to His protection,


who once promised His Church that
even the gates of hell should not pre-
vail against it. Who has ever been
put to shame who trusted in Him ?”—
Zinzendoryf.


Ver. 8. Theme: VERDURE IN THR
MIDST OF DESOLATION. “He shall not
see when heat cometh.”

Nothing in nature more admirable
than the strange and unlikely circum-
stances in which we often see plants
and trees retaining their sap and ver-
dure, and manifesting the most luxuriant
fruitfulness. By a wonderful instinct
of their nature, they adapt themselves
each to their appointed place, and thus
continue to live and flourish abundantly
where another would perish in an hour.
No natural influence more fatal to vege-
table life than extreme drought; yet,
even that in some favoured instances
may prove innocuous. Some plants
and trees “do not see when heat cometh,
but their leaf is green,” &c.

This beautiful fact the prophet trans-
fers from the natural world to the
spiritual by way of illustration and ana-
logy. There, too, often verdure appears
in midst of desolation—life in midst of
death. True happiness and true holi-
ness depend, not on outward advantages,
but on inward state.

Let us consider further this interest-
ing and instructive phenomenon,

L The fact itself. Meets us every-
where in the natural world. So also in
the kingdom of grace, Spiritual health
depends not alone or mainly on our cir-
cumstances, but on the temper and state
of oursouls. In the cottage, the palace ;
in want, in affluence; in retirement, on
busy Exchange ; in youth, in age; in
health, in disease and sickness, God’s
Enochs have “walked with God.”
Every situation not equally favourable
to soul’s life, but none utterly unfavour-
able; ¢.g., Enoch, Noah, Abraham,
Joseph, Caleb, Samuel, Elijah, Jere-
miah, Daniel, Esther, and others, are
witnesses to this truth, Look, then,
within for source of weakness, decay,
low spiritual state.

IL The explanation.

372


The man


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAR.


ee


“trusteth in the Lord, and his hope
the Lord is,”

1. He lives in constant believing com-
munion with God.

2. He improves what advantages he
possesses, They may be few, but he
aspires after and improves them. If
Jesus is “ passing by,” he, like Zaccheus,
will be on the sycamore-tree,

3. He retains the good he receives,
Careful to retain the fruits of opportu-
nities after they are gone. Those who
make rich are not only they who get
much, but who keep what they get.

4. He sedulously improves and turns
to account the grace he has. The surest
way alike to confirm and to strengthen
any holy principle is to carry it into
action. Talents are increased by trad-
ing. The idle Christian is a feeble,
drooping, pining Christian,

Such is the secret of a holy, happy
walk with God, in any times and in the
worst times. Get truly planted by the
waters of salvation, and your roots
stretched out by the rivers of God.—
Rev. Islay Burns, Dundee: “ Family
Treasury,” 1859.


Comments—

“The Musorites changed the word
FEAR into ‘shall not see when the heat
cometh,’ in order to make it correspond
with ver. 6. But the change is not
merely unauthorised, but meaningless,
God’s people see the heat when it comes ;
they feel trouble as much as other
people, but they do not fear tt, because
they know—

‘i, That it is for their good, and

“ii, That God will give them strength
to bear it."—Dr, Payne Smith,

“The servants of God are planted,
as it were, in a moist soil, irrigated
continually by streams of water. The
prophet intimates that God's children are
not exempt from adversities: the ‘ heat
cometh,’ and they feel the heat of the
sun, being, like trees, exposed to it;
but moisture is supplied, and the juice
diffuses itself through all the branches.
Though they feel great heats as well as
the unbelieving, for this is common to
both, God’s children shall yet be kept safe :
there is a remedy for them—their root





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR.








cuir. xv.





has moisture. The word rendered ‘see’
INT, dag, means to fear and to be care-
ful ; also to grieve, and so some render
it here, /¢ will not grieve ; but the better
meaning is, It shall not be afraid of
heat.” —Calvin.


Ver. 9. Theme: THE FALSITY AND
FOULNESS OF MAN’S HEART,

The Bible reveals what man would
have failed to discern, that the heart is
the root of character, the seat of the
moral quality attaching to the thoughts
and actions of men, This truth, plainly
taught in Scripture, accords with reason,
and finds irrefutable proof in man’s
career. There are three aspects of the
heart here suggested :—

L Surpassing deceptiveness.
eeitful above all things.”

1. Its cruel delusions. It often prompts
aman to evil, promising joy and reward,
then leaves him befooled by his desires ;
allures him to follow passion, then
leaves him to the tortures of conscience ;
assures him of courage in difficult hours,
then, at the crisis, leaves him trembling
in fear, &c, It flatters ita dupes; isa
false syren.

2. Its religious frauds. Fosters hy-
pocrisy in the superficial, urges men to
assume a religious profession, and walk
as if God were being reverently served ;
and then, in secret, craves and impels
towards hidden vice and subtle indul-
gences, Flatters a man into a belief
in his own goodness when life is plea-
sant and easy ; and then, in death, mocks
and chides him for his sin.

3. [ts supreme falsity. ‘ Above all
things.” Above the desert mirage i—
Yes. Above gold?—Yes, Above plea-
sure ?—Yes, Above fickle beauty 1— Yer.
For the heart is the cause of all deceits ;
it supplies the fantasy in us which
makes the illusion possible.

IL Malignant guiltiness.
rately wicked.”

1. Its action in the region of common
life. To what detestable iniquities would
it impel men! Judge of this by con-
sidering the filthy, atrocious, idolatrous
customs and social habits which pre-
vailed in Oriental scenes. Where the
passions are left unrestrained by civi-


“De-


“ Despe-


lisation and religion, what a foul life ia
man’s! Nearer home: what revolting,
sensual, brutal careers men live amongst
us where neither fear of God nor regard
of man rule! What are the furious
schemes of the assassin, the usurper,
the traducer, the felon, the adulterer,
but illustrations of the heart’s unbridled
lusts! Out of the heart proceed evil
thoughts, murders,” &ec.

2. Its action tn the sphere of religion.

We expect of the heart that it responds
to love; but how does it respond to “the
great love wherewith God hath loved
us”? How does it keep outside its closed
doors Him who long has knocked there
in vain, yet “who first loved us”? And
after having avowedly, in discipleship of
Christ, given Him our heart, how does
“an evil heart of unbelief” lead us to
“depart from the living God,” and urge
us by fervent cravings to fall back into
sin !

ITI. Profound inserutableness. ‘““Who
can know it?” Having used the strongest
language to describe it, yet words fail tc
tell its depths of iniquity.

Looking on the loathsome sights of
vice, squalor, villany, and woe around
us, and asking, ‘“‘ Whence came these?”
Christ replies, ‘‘ Out of the heart.” The
heart’s wilfulness “brought death into
the world, and all our woe.” It still
can prompt brutal cruelty to requite
tender love; it still stirs the lascivious
to decoy innocence into ruin worse than
death, &e.

“Who can know” his own heart ?
We cry, “Is thy servant a dog that he
should do this thing?” yet we do it,
and worse far.

““ Who can know” the hearts of others ?

Is there a bound which the heart’s
impulses will not pass? Is there a
thought, at whose horribleness the mind
staggers, and of which we exclaim,
“ Surely, it could never be that a man is
eapable of it!” Yet greater enormities
are being wrought: cold-blooded, sinister,
vengeful, devilish! ‘Who can know
it?”

If this be so *-teween man and man,
oh, how shall we fathom the depths of
man’s great criminality to God—slaying
His Son; to Jeses—“crucifying Him

373


OHAP, XVI





afresh and putting Him to open shame ;”
to the Holy Spirit—* grieving the Holy
Spirit of God”!

(a.) Do you think this description exag-
gerated? But this is the deceitfulness
of your heart, flattering you that you
cannot be so bad, or are not so bad as
others.

(b.) Should not this urge you to self-
abasement before the Cross? Boasting no
more your self-righteousness, and hasten-
ing to the Fountain opened for sin and
uncleanness, crying, “Create in me a
clean heart,” &c.

See Addenda on vers. 9 and 10.
Fausiry or Heart, and Sgarcnine
THE Heart.


Theme: THE HEART'S DECEITFULNESS
TOWARDS ITSELF.

There is great deceit in the dealings
of men in the world, in their counsels
and contrivances, in their private and
public affairs, in their words and actings ;
the world is full of deceit and fraud.
But all this is nothing as compared
with the deceit in a man’s heart towards
himself (for that is the meaning of
the expression here), and not towards
others.

This deceitfulness of the heart, whereby
it is exceedingly advantaged in its har-
bourings of sin, lies chiefly in two things:
that—

L It abounds in contradictions, so
that it is not to be dealt with on any
constant rule.

The frame of the heart is ready to
contradict itself every moment. None
know what to expect of it. Facile now,
then obstinate ; open, then reserved ;
gentle, then revengeful.

This ensues from the disorder wrought
upon our facuities by stn. God created
all in perfect harmony. The mind’s
subjection to God was the spring of the
orderly and harmonious motion of the
soul, This being disturbed by sin, the
rest of the faculties move cross and con-
trary one to another; the will chooseth
not what the mind discovers good, the
affections delight not in what the will
chooseth, &c.

II. Its deceit lies in its full promisings
apon the first appearance of things.

374


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEKEMIAH,


Sometimes the affections are wrought
upon, and the whole heart appears in a
fair frame, and all promises well: sud-
denly all is reversed. Who can mention
the treacheries which lie in the heart of
man? Uncertain in what # doth ; false
in what tt promises,

1. Never let us think our work, ta
contending against indwelling sin, is
ended. The place of its habitation is
unsearchable, There are still new stra-
tagems and wiles to be dealt withal.
Many conquerors have been ruined by
their carelessness after a victory. David
was so. Many decline into sin in old
age: they gave over the task of mor-
tifying sin before their work was at an
end.

2. The fact that the heart is inconstant
calls for perpetual watchfulness. An
open enemy, that deals by violence only,
always gives some respite; but against
adversaries that deal by treachery nothing
but perpetual watchfulness will give secu-
rity. The heart hath a thousand deceits,
and if we are the least off in our wateh
we are sure to be surprised (Prov.
xxviii. 6).

3. Commit the whole matter therefore
to Him who searcheth the heart. Here
lies our safety, There is no deceit in
our hearts but He can disappoint it.
David takes this course (Ps. cxxxix.
8, 9, 10, 23).—Dr. John Owen.


Theme: THE DECEITFULNESS OF THE
BEART. ‘‘ The heart is deceitful above
all things” (Jer. xvii. 9).

L Men impose on themselves re-:
specting their own character. The
heart practises deception in regard to
its natural tendency and disposition.

1. Men do not attribute to themselves
the character given of the human heart in
the Bible. The Christian does,

2. Is tt not possible that your heart
deceives you? If the Bible be true, there
is no such native excellence of character
as you suppose that you possess. Mul-
titudes who once had the same view of
themselves have been convinced of their
error,

3. Nothing easier than self-deception,

I. Men deceive themselves in re
gard to their real attachments,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


OHAP, XVIl,





TIL. The heart is deceitful in regard
to its power of resisting temptation.

IV. In its promises of reformation
and amendment.

ImprovemMent—

1. There ts a danger of losing the soul.

2. You have a heart which is not to be
trusted.

3. Wake from all delusions to the
reality of your condition. — Albert
Barnes.


Theme: DECEITFULNESS OF MAN’S
HEART.

Nothing so mean as deceit. The text
calls attention to the deceitfulness of
our hearts.

L A difficult subject to deal with,
because—

1. The examination is made by the
guilty party into his own character.

2. Nothing more humiliating and
painful to man’s pride.

IL No deception like that of the
heart. The garden—the cornfield—the
mercantile speculation—the youth—may
promise well and deceive, but the heart
is deceitful above all.

1. It is the fountain of deceit.

2. Deceives its owner and best friends
often.

3. Its deceit is in a very large mea-
sure voluntary.

4, Its deceitfulness is insidious in its

‘owth,

5. Will be terrible in its consequences,
Its possessor is travelling in a dan-
gerous path, but fancies all well His
character is being fixed in evil. The
future must be terrible in the circum-
stances of its misery, and its disappoint-
ment and despair.

II. The examples of Scripture bear
this out. Old prophet, 1 Kings xiii.
11-18; Gehazi, 2 Kings v. 22-27;
Hazael, 2 Kings viii. 7-15 ; Ananias and
Sapphira, Acts v, 5-10.

IV. The heart deceives its possessor
continually. With regard to—

1. Its motives. 2 Its inclinations.
3. Its safety amidst temptations, 4. Ita
power of reformation.

Learn—

1. To distrust and watch it. 2. To trust
in Christ and His word.— Z. Jermaa.


Theme: THR HEARTS DECEPTIVE
NESS AND WICKEDNESS,

This truth is not difficult to illustrate
and prove. It requires no penetrating
genius to bring it up from the depths,
As illustrative of—

I. The heart’s deceptiveness, we
point—

i. To the mistakes into which tt falls
relative to religion. Scripture declares
it “the one thing needful”; the heart
deems it not needful at all, or only of
secondary consequence. Or, if it heeds
religion, it mistakes its forms for the
reality of Christianity.

ii, Further apparent én its pursuit of
pleasure. The Source of true happiness
is God; but the heart supposes that
pleasure must be found in things seen
and temporal, “A deceived heart has
turned them aside.”

iii. Still further seen in the fact, that
God has not left tt to be tts own guide.
A Law has been given for its conduct,
and a Gospel for its faith, while “line
upon line,” &c., has been added to guide
its commonest actions The ant wants
no guide, for its instincts are safe and
sufficient. But the heart’s tendencies
are wholly untrustworthy.

iv. Further proved by the declaration
of the Lord, that the heart must be re-
newed. The mariner when voyaging
never thinks of changing his compass,
knowing that the one he has is faithful
and true. But man’s heart is so wrong
that a new heart is demanded.

But the heart is not the only deceitful
thing in the world: other things are de-
ceitful, though NoT EQUALLY 80. ‘ The
heart is deceitful above all things.”

It surpasses all other things in two
particulars—

1. In tts extent.

2. In its fatality.

Other things may deceive a few men ,
this deceivesevery man. Otherthingsmay
so deceive as to ruin man’s temporal inte-
rests; this ruins man’s eternal interests.

IL The proof of the heart’s wicked-
ness is equally easy :

i. It is at enmity with God—the best
and most gracious of beings.

ii. Utterly opposed to the holy law of
God ; ignores its claims, &c.

375


CHAP. XVII.








iii, Sternly rejects the Gospel ; flings
aside God’s greatest Gift, and costliest
Sacrifice.

iv. Wilfully disregards the warnings
and threatenings of God.

v. Notwithstanding all the culture the
heart receives from education, preaching,
and literature, it brings forth nothing
bet the briers and thorns of unrighteous-
ness.
vi. Its desperate wickedness is further
seen in the fearful punishment with
which its wickedness will be visited.
The “ undying worm,” the “ unquench-
able fire.” Only greatest criminals are
punished with direst punishments,

1. As this truth rests upon Divine
testimony, to deny tt 1s to make God a
liar, and prove the heart's self-decetv-
ings.

2. How different ts the new heart from
the old! “ Blessed are the pure in heart,
for they shall see God.” —Rev. D. Pledge.


Theme: THE HEART INSORUTABLE,
“Who can know it?”

It is extremely difficult for sinners to
know their hearts.

I. What is implied in their know-
ing their own hearts?

It implies: 1. A knowledge of their
selfishness, 2. Of their desperate incur-
able wickedness. 3. Of their extreme
deceitfulness.

IL Why is it so extremely difficult
for them to know their own hearts ?

Because: 1. They are unwilling to
know them. 2. Because of the deceitful-
ness of sin. They love or hate, as they
appear friendly or unfriendly to their
cherished feelings,—(a) God, (6) Christ,
(c) good men, (d) the world, (e) their
own hearts, (jf) the means of grace, (g)
their convictions, (h) heaven.

Il. Application—

1. The only way to know the heart
is to inquire whether it loves God or
not.

2. Saints can more easily ascertain
their true characters than sinners can.

8. All changes of life are trials of the
heart.— Emmons.


See also NotickEaBLE Topics on the
Human Heart.
376


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





Ver. 10. Theme: Gop’s RULE oF
JUDGMENT. “I the Lord search the
heart, I try the reins, even to give every
man according to his ways, and accord-
ing to the fruit of his doings.”

None but God can explore the depths
of iniquity in the human heart. As He
will judge the world at the last day, He
must have access to the inmost recesses
of the soul, and be able to bring forth to
judgment all its hidden abominations.

Accordingly God is employed noticing
and recording everything, that He may
then reward “every man according to
his ways.” We here see—

I. The preparation God is making
for the future judgment. God is not
an unconcerned spectator of what is done
upon earth.

1. He continually marks the ways of

men.
(a.) All their actions He observes, ac-
cording to the principles from which
they proceed, and the ends for which
they are done.

(6.) Our words, also, and our very
thoughts (Ps. xi. 4, Prov. xvi. 2).

Hezekiah evinced the mixture of motives
and principles which lay behind actions
(2 Chron. xxxii. 31); and these need to
be analysed and distinguished. God
“‘ tries the reins,” as a philosopher assays
gold.

2. He records everything in the book of
His remembrance. ‘The thoughts as well
as the words of men (Mal. iii. 16). All
will be educed in the judgment (Job xiv.
17). Nothing escapes His attention;
certainly not any “ good thing” eludes
His sight (1 Kings xiv. 13).

IL The rule by which the judgment
shall be determined.

1. The sentence will be according te
every man’s works (Gal. vi. 7, 8; 2 Cor.
ix. 6).

2. foe. understood, this strongly
declares the equity of God's future judg-
ments. Everything that can affect the
quality of an action will be taken into
account.

Behold then—

i. What an awful prospect is here
opened to the ungodly !

ii, What an encouragement is here
afforded to the righteous !


HOMILHTIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH,





CHAP, XVEL





Moses looked to “ the recompense
of reward.” Paul anticipated “the far
more exceeding and eternal weight of
glory.” —Chas. Simeon.


Theme: Govd’s INTEREST IN MAN,
I. Respects “ Fruit ” in men’s lives,


II. Deals with men “according to~


Fruit.”
IIL. Where Fruit is to be found—(in
the heart).
IV. The Search for Fruit.—J, Farren.
See Addenda; SEARCHING THE HEART,


Comments—

Ver. 11. “As the partridge hath
gathered eggs which it laid not.” Epi-
phanius says: “The partridge is not
satisfied with the fruit of her own womb,
but steals the eggs of other birds and
carries them to her nest” (Phisiol. 9).

“This notion might easily be taken for
the great number of eggs which the part-
ridge lays. Another interpretation is
given by Hippolytus, who says that ‘ the
partridge calls to it the young belonging
to other broods, and gathers them under
its wings, but when they hear the cry of
the true parent they leave the false one.’
The general sense is that the covetous
man is as sure finally to reap only disap-
pointment as the partridge which piles up
eggs not of her own laying, and is unable
to hatch them.”-—Dr. Payne Smith.

“ As Jehoiakim is described by Jere-
miah as a covetous tyrant (chap. xxii. 17),
and as he died at the age of thirty-six,
he is supposed by some to be referred
to in these words,”—Jéd.


Ver. 11. Theme: WEALTH UNJUSTLY
ACQUIRED, Violence and fraud had been
reigning in Jerusalem.

I Unlawful means used to acquire
wealth may win success.

1. Opportunities to acquire money
tempt to oppression and fraud.

2. A temporary prosperity ts realised
in the possession of ill-gotten gains.

3. The rich toil to gather wealth, and
then sit brooding over it, like the part-
ridge ; but it never gives comfort or satis-
faction. They are always anxious and
uneasy ; for their sinful projects may mis-
cerry


¢


4, Treasures acquired by wrong me-
thods leave an wnqutet conscience. The
rich man may say, I am innocent (Hos,
xii. 8), but that only mocks his con-
science,

It, Wealth when acquired cannot
long be retained. “He shall leave them
in the midst of his days.”

1. God shall cut him off by some swur-
prising stroke (Luke xii. 19, 20),

2. Gathered riches cannot be taken into
eternity: “ He shall leave them.”

3. His impoverished death shows him
to be a miserable “ fool.” He was “not
rich towards God,” only had “ ill-gotten
gains,” and had to “leave” all in death ;
went into eternity “poor indeed ”—
“poor and miserable, and blind and
naked.”

IIL Parting with his wealth in
death is a great vexation to a worldly
man.

1. Jt naturally frets him to leave to
another, who may squander all, the
treasures he has wasted his life in ac-
cumulating.

2. Jt justly appals him to go into
God’s presence with nothing but the
memory of unjustly-accumulated gains,
“He shall be a@ fool:” the laughing-
stock of death.


Vers. 12 and 13.
OUTLINES ON SECTIONS.

Theme: Tae Caurcn oF THE LorD,

i, What it is in itself. Peace of sanc-
tuary ; throne of divine glory ; house of
Him who is Israel’s Hope.

ii, What it will be. It will ever
remain firm (Matt. xvi. 18).

hii, What they jind who forsake %.
Shame, oblivion, unsatisfied thirsts.—
Naegelsbach. ;


See Hominetio


Ver. 14. Theme: A CRY FOR HEALING
AND SAVING GRACE. “ Heal me, O
Lord,and I shall be healed,” de.

One great proof of the experience of
converting grace is the disposition to
vindicate God and condemn ourselvea
“That Thou might be justified,” &e.
Here Jeremiah justifies divine dispensa-
tions.

L That sin is the disease of the
goal, and is so felt. All its symptoms

377


CWaP. XVI.





are dreaded by the Christian. The
‘worldling does not fear nor dread them.
He is like a man in consumption, whose
case is seen and dreaded by all but him-
self. But the Christian dreads the evil
as well as punishment of sin. He knows
the plague of his own heart. All the
symptoms are dangerous. Sin like a
venomous disease,

There is the loss of res¢—* no peace.”

There is the depravation of taste—he
feedeth on ashes. Want of appetite.

There isthe loss of sight—but the
Christian prays, “Open Thou mine
eyes.”

There is the loss of hearing—the
wicked is like a deaf adder. But the
Christian says, “ The hearing ear and
seeing eye, the Lord hath made both.”

IL That Ohrist is the only physi-
cian, the Good Physician. Other phy-
siclans are prodigal of the patient’s
blood, and sparing of their own; but
Christ shed His own blood to save our
souls, “When justice calls for sinners’
blood, the Saviour shows His own.”

Never was the disease known yet that
mocked His skill. The blind, the dumb,
the maimed, the deaf, the very dead—
owned His power; and, behold, the Lord’s
arm is not shortened. There are seasons
in which nothing short of this conviction
of the infinite ability of Christ to pardon
and to save can bring peace to the mind.

i. Consider the infinite efficacy of
Christ's atonement, as showing God’s
readiness as well as ability to pardon.
What pledge of God’s delight in mercy
could He give like this, “ He spared not
his own Son” f

ii, Consider, has not God sneulcated
unlimited forgiveness on us? (Matt. xviii.
21; Luke xvii. 4.) If God requires for-
giveness of us without bounds, will not
He extend forgiveness without bounds?

iii, Consider the direct statements of
Scripture: “TI, even I, am He that blot-
teth out,” &. ; “All sins in depth of
sea,”

iv. From great instances of mercy.

Ii That prayer is our only refuge.
It is the appointed means. It has never
failed. Your desire for the benefit of
purity and pardon is a proof it shall be
extended. He will fulfil desire,

378


HIOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; JEREMIAH.





IV. That praise should be our truest
delight. “Thou art my praise.” Our
praises should be renewed, for past mer-
cies, with prayers for new ones,—Samuel
Thodey, a.v. 1841.


Theme: PRAYER FORSALVATION BASED
UPON PRAISE, ‘Heal me, O Lord, and
I shall be healed,” d&c.

L The blessings sought.

1. Health. What temporal blessing
greater. The health of the soul is the
highest form of health.

2. Salvation, (Explain the term.)

IL. How they are sought. By prayer.

1. Confession of need.

2. Seeking inright way ; of right source,

3. Sincerity of prayer, shown in use
of right means to preserve health and
obtain salvation.

IIL The ground of the prayer for
these blessings. “Thou art my praise.”

What does this mean but that he who
rightly offers this prayer is living in the
service of God, seeking to please Him, re-
joicing in His favour, acknowledging His
mercy (—“ The Hive,” vol. viii., 1875.


Theme: THE PENITENT’S PRAYER.
The words express—

IL An earnest desire for salvation.

IL He applies to Almighty God
for it.

III. Through the medium of prayer.

IV. With confidence that He will
be heard.—Dr. A. Thomson, of Edin-
burgh, from Lange.


Vers. 14,15. Theme: A PREAOCHER’S
ORY FOR HELP. He is tempted on account
of the truth.

ii The temptation (ver. 13).

ii, The demonstration of tnnocence
(ver. 16).

ili, The ery for help.

a.) Negative (vers. 17, 18).
ey) Positive (vers. 19).—Naegelsbach,


Comments—

Ver. 14. “Thou art my pratse.”
“ When a teacher confines himself to the
praise of the Cross, and lets all other
matters of praise go which might adorn
a theologian of these times, and adheres
immovably to this: ‘I am determined


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIA A.





not to know anything among you save
Jesus Christ and Him crucified ’—amid
all the shame of His Cross, He is vic-
torious over the rest.”—Zinzendorf.

Ver. 15. ‘ Where 18 the word of the
Lord ? let tt come now /” ‘This taunt
shows that this prophecy was written
before any signal fulfilment of Jeremiah’s
words had taken place, and prior therefore
to the capture of Jerusalem at the close
of Jehoiakim’s life."—Dr. Payne Smith.

Ver, 16, “ From being a pastor.” See
Zit. Crit. on this verse.

“ Desired the woful day:” te, the
day on which Jerusalem was to be de-
stroyed and the temple burnt. Though
these calamities would verify Jeremiah’s
word and wxdicate him against scorners,
yet his patriotic soul recoiled from the
nearing desolation of bis country and
ruin of his people.

Ver. 16. “That which I have preached
was right before Thee.” “It is not
difficult to know in these times what
is right before the Lord. There is His
Word; he who adheres to this strictly,
knows in this that he is right. In all
this it is the teacher’s chief maxim, not
to make use of the application without
need, but to make the truth so plain in
his discourses that the hearers must
necessarily make the application to them-
selves. ‘Thus saying, Thou reproachest
us also,’ said the lawyer (Luke xi. 45).
Others went away convicted in their
consciences.”-—Zinzendorf.


Ver. 17. Theme: THE SOUL'S HOPE
IN A TIME OF TERROR. “Be not a terror
unto me, Thou art my hope in the day
of evil.”

Jeremiah had forewarned. It was a
painful duty. He now looks forward
to the “woful day” with deep anxiety
for his people. And as one who sees
the storm pending, and looks around for
hiding-place, he draws near and appeals
to God, sure that amid the terrors of
the “day of evil” He would preserve his
soul,

Our case is sadly accordant with that
of Judah.

1. The heartless rebellion of Judah
did not exceed the iniquity of many of
ns who have trifled with grace.


OHAP. BVT.





2. The judgments pronounced were
not heavier than those standing against
the impenitent sinner who despises the
great salvation.

3. The mission of the preacher is still
to rush in among men “ whose hearts
have departed from the Lord,” and pro-
test, warn, and call to repentance,

4. And the consolations of the righteous
are as true as with the prophet; for he
knows God is his “ Hope” in tho day of
evil.

L A day comes when God will be
aterror, God would take from Judah
all this world’s “ heritage” they prized,
and all the spiritual benefits they failed
to profit by.

“ Days of evil "—

(a.) Come suddenly. Sweep down on
us like unexpected storms,

(0.) Find us desolate. “ While we
say, Peace, peace, sudden destruction
cometh upon us.” When our “ desola
tion cometh like a whirlwind,” it is then
too late to be seeking a sure refuge.

In these “ days of evil,” which come
on the soul of the guilty, we must
include—

1. The day of the sinner’s conviction
and anguish. When God arrests the
soul and confronts him with his guilt.
Oh, what agony! “ Woe is me, I am
undone!” God is a “ terror” to him,
“ Whither can I go from Thy presence 1”
“Depart from me, for I am a sinful
man, O Lord!”

2. The day when death calls the guilty
soul from earth, Comes “as a thief in
the night.” How terrible is the death
of the wicked! How the soul shudders
to be hurrying before God unreconciled,
unsaved |

3. The day when the spirits of men
will be arraigned for judgment. We
shall meet God! No exaggeration of
facts in the description of men “ calling
on mountains and rocks to hide” them,
God will be a “terror” to the guilty.
“Tt is a fearful thing to fall into the
hands of the living God.”

TL In the day of terror God may be
found our Hope. God is not neces
sarily a terror to the soul in the day of
calamity. ‘The righteous prophet knew
Ble would be his “ Hope.” Bis


CaaPp, XViL.


1. This ts the known character of God.
He is called “the Hope of Israel”
(ver. 13). See also xiv. 8. It is.on
this well understood character of God
that the exhortation is given, “ Let
Israel hope in the Lord, for with the
Lord is forgiveness: and He shall re-
deem Israel from all her iniquities.”
God is not willingly a “terror” to any
soul. Listen to His Name declared
amid Sinai. Read Gospel statement,
“God so loved the world.” Watch His
ways in providence: “ His tender mercies
over all His works.” When He becomes a
“terror,” it is through a dire neceasity.

2. He will become the Hope of every
soul who secks Him. Calls: “Turn ye
to the Stronghold, ye prisoners of hope ;”
bids us “lay hold on the hope set before
us.” ‘ We have a strong consolation who
have fled for refuge,” &c, Every soul
may find the same.

Observe here the way by which God
ts made a “terror” (ver. 13); and the
way by which He will become as our
“ Hope” (ver. 14).

3. The confident reliance and expecta-
téon of the belzever.

(a.) Bow unwavering the repose.
“ Thou art my hope.” David, “I will
fear no evil.”

(6.) How personal this appropriation |
“Thou art my hope.” (Comp. ver. 18.)

(c.) How single is the soul’s trust.
“Thouart.” God only: God Himself (Ps.
xei: 1, 2),

i, Unless this Hope ss curs before
terror comes, He will not be so in the
day of evil.

ii, As the day of evil ts uncertain and
may be near, we should promptly seek
the Lord (ver. 7). If “ without Christ,”
“no hope in the world.”

See Addenda; Tue Sovur’s Horr,

Theme: DIVINE WRATH AN OBJECT
OF FEAR.

Every believer can adopt the for-
mer of these expressions, but not the
latter. Why so? Words spoken in an
evil time—a time of corruption, cala-
mity, ruin, Jeremiah himself was in
great danger. How appropriate then.

Notice—L The petition, IL The ex-
pression of confidence.

380


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


JHREMIAA,


I. The petition. “Be not a terros
unto me.”

1. God’s majesty is in itself an object
of fear and dread (Heb. xii. 21, Isa. vi.
5, Hab. iii, 16, Hos, iii. 5),

2. Divine chastisements are to be
feared (Jer. x. 24, Ps. vi. 1, Job ix. 34).

3. God’s wrath is still more dreadful.

4, The prophet prays for support and
comfort in the time of trial.

IL The expression of confidence,
“Thou art my Hope in the day of evil.”

1. The grace exercised is hope.
Though troubled, he is not destroyed.
(2 Cor. iv. 8, &c. ; Rom. viii. 24).

(1.) God is the object of His people’s
hope (Ps. xxi, 5, Ixxviii. 5).

(2.) God is the end of their hope,
They need no more (Ps. xvi. 11, xvii
15).

4 Observe the time when this grace
is exercised : “ Day of evil.”

(1.) Sin and sorrow make every day
an evil day, still let us hope (Ps. lxii. 8,
lxxi. 14).

(2.) Yet thereare peculiar days of evil:
National calamity ; reverses in business ;
disappointments ; affliction ; old age (Ps.
Ixxiii. 26, 2 Tim. i, 12).

LEARN—

1. That hopes and fears are blended
together in the experience of the godly
(Ps. cxlvii. 11),

2. If God is sometimes a terror to His
own people, how much more to the
wicked ? (Deut. xxviii, 65-67).

From “ Short Discourses,” by 8, Bed-
dome,


Vers. 19 to end, on SaBBATH CONS
CRATION, see HomMILizs on SECTIONS.


Ver. 21. Theme: SaBBaTH BEST.
“Take heed to yourselves, and bear no
burden on the Sabbath-day.”

The Sabbath argument is easy to the
devout. Like exhorting a hungry man
to take refreshment, or a mother to love
her child, or the slave to enjoy freedom,


** Welcome, sweet day of rest,’”’ ete.


The early Christians called it the Day
of Light, and the Queen of Days. The
ancient Church had it in great venera-
tion. It was a hadge of their religion,





EN. ee ee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


for when asked, “ Keepest thou the Sab-
bath?” the answer was, “I am a Chris-
tian, and dare not omit the celebration
of the Lord’s day.”

L Motives for the observance of
the Sabbath. There should be rest of
body, with a view to the sanctity of the
soul; and such @ withdrawal from all
worldly and sinful pursuits as may con-
duce to our spiritual advancement, We
urge this—

1. From the Divine command. Twice
given by God himself in Eden, twice
inserted in the Decalogue, and twice
engraved on stone by God and given to
Moses.

2. From the nature and reason of the
case. Intended to give opportunity of
rest from toil ; to be a commemoration of
the wisdom, power, and goodness of
God in the creation of the universe; to
furnish encouragement to acquire holi-
ness and obtain salvation, The day is
needful for rest and devotion.

3. From the blessings necessary to
form a truly religious character. Ab-
sorbed by the business and vanities of
this world, the recollections of the other
world would be blotted out but for the
return of the Sabbath. In the absence
of our usual occupations, and in seasons
of leisure, conscience regains her empire,
and the mind is turned inwardly upon
itself, and the voice of God is heard.

4, From the consequences of disobeds-
ence to the claims of the day. Further
from God; hardened in worldliness ;
leit godless, and led Christless, to sink
into ever-increasing alienation from all
that is holy, and hopeful, and heavenly.

Ii Some of the burdens which
should be laid aside.

1. The burden of needless toil (Exod.
xxxi. 15). Surely the anointing of
Christ was commendable work, yet Mary
Magdalene waited till the Sabbath was
past (Luke xxiii. 57). God forbade
manna to be gathered on the Sabbath.


CHAP. XViL





2. The burden of wilful sin. Abstain
from amusements, convivial parties,
needless journeys, unprofitable conver
sations, &c.

3. The burden of anxious care. “ Cast
thy burden on the Lord.” Do it by faith
and prayer. Think—who cared for Noah
in deluge, for Moses in bulrushes, for
Daniel with lions, for Paul in storm ¢

4. The burden of desponding appre-
hensions for the future. Commit thy way
unto the Lord and trust in Him. Oh, rest
in the Lord, &c.—Samuel Thodey, a.B.
1845.


Bee Addenda: Sassaru Rzsr,


Theme: THE SABBATH AND THE Lorn’s
DAY.

L What they have in common. The
weekly holyday is in both cases—

1. A monument of the loving care of
our God.

(a.) For our body ; (0.) for our soul.

2. A right of God, which forms 8
holy obligation towards—

(a.) God, (6.) ourselves, (¢.) our neigh-

our.

Il. The differences which distin-
guish them.

1, The day of Jehovah is founded on
the creation of the perishable world ; the
day of the Lord is founded on the resur-
rection of Christ, as of a new, eternal
world.

2. The observance of the day of
Jehovah was only legal; i.e. (a) im-
posed by eaternal compulsion, (b) by
requirements to be fulfilled with owt-
ward ceremonies: the observance of
the day of the Lord is to be more and
more an evangelical one; +.¢. (a) a free,
(0) a spiritually free one, satisfying the
right as well as the obligation of per-
sonality.— Naegelsbach.


See also NoTICEABLE Topics : On the
Sabbath.


NOTICEABLE TOPICS IN CHAPTER XVII,


Topic: Tae BLESSED AND THE CURSED.


(Vers, 5-8.)


Great is the distinction between the godly and the ungodly (Ps. i. 6, vii. 11, xi. 5)


in their characters, in their practice, in their experience, in their end.


This distine-


tion will appear in the day of judgment (Matt, xxv. 34-41).


381


OHAF. XVII. HOMILETIC OOMMENTARY: JEREMIAA,





I. The characters here contrasted. Specially descriptive of the situation of
Judah at the time, Threatened with invasion, they trusted in Egypt as a rival
with Babylon ; or in their own strength—artificial fortifications (Ps. xlviii. 12, 18);
or in their individual accomplishments, as wise, rich, and powerful (Jer. ix. 23),

This may apply to us as a nation. We form alliances, raise armies and navies;
but i . us if we trust in them so that our heart departeth from the Lord! (Ps
xx. 6-8.

1. The character of the wicked ts stated (ver. 5).

(a.) The root of all ungodliness is perversion of heart from God, The sinner will
not have the Lord to reign over him. ‘The carnal mind is enmity against God.”

(b.) The wicked trust in human means for success and prosperity, and even for the
salvation of their souls. They rely on wisdom and skill; on riches (Prov. xviii. 11),
in their fortitude and heroism, to the pleasurable diversions invented ; to their actions
as meritorious for salvation.

Such procedure indicates: (1.) Zgnorance—of God, law, themselves as depraved ;
(2.) Contempt—of Providence, and Christ’s redemption ; (3.) Presumption.

2. The character of the rightcous is stated (ver. 7).

(a.) The righteous trust in the Lord from a conviction that vain ia the help of man.
They have a knowledge of the human heart that it is “‘ deceitful above all things,”
&c, Self-confidence is, therefore, also abandoned,

(6.) They trust in the God of salvation alone. They can say of Christ, “ He loved
me, and gave Himself for me,”

(c.) They trust Him when they cannot trace Him, know that He will do all things
well ; and God is their hope in all their troubles, difficulties, fears—in prospect of
death and eternity.

IL The conduct determining the blessing, t.e., whether we trust in man or in
the name of the Lord.

1. As we trust the wisdom of men, or the revealed will of God, we are under the
curse or the blessing. Some avowedly reject revelation, others admit only what
accords with their own reason: the Christian takes the Scriptures.

2. As to righteousness, the determining question is whether we trust the righte-
ousness of man, or the righteousness which is of God.

3. Though we trust tn the Saviour Himself, yet if we consider Him only asa
man, we incur the denunciation of the text. If Christ be only a man, to trust in
Him is to trust in an arm of flesh. If His Divinity be denied, there is no ground
for trust. (Comp. 1 Tim. i. 12, 1 John i. 9.)

IIL The consequences of the conduct of these contrasted characters.

1. As to those who trust in man. “ He shall be like the heath in the desert”
ver. 6).

(a.) peta He must remain destitute of God’s fertilising and refreshing
grace—unholy, fruitless, worthless.
b.) Wretchedness, ‘“ Heath in desert;” “inhabit parched places,”

(a) Loss of all good. ‘‘ Not see when good cometh.” It comes in a preached
Gospel, in offers of salvation, in affliction, in the testimony of conscience, in the
Spirit’s influence, but they sce t¢ not/ “Good” comes upon the Church in the dew
of heaven: “Great grace is upon them all;” upon belvevers even in their trials, and
even when Christ comes to judgment ; but the godless see it not, share it not,

2. As to the righteous. The result of trusting in the Lord is permanent fruitful-
ness (ver. 8). (Comp. Ps. i, 3, xcii, 13-15), Indicates—

(a.) Enjoyment. “A tree planted by the waters,” drawing in pleasure and
refreshment.

(b.) Growth, or prosperity—progress, The Christian flourishes, “grows in

ace,”

(e) Security. ‘He shall not ese (not fear) when heat cometh,” &. “He ia
kept by the power of God unto salvation,” dc.

382


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. CHAP. XVII.


p (4) Permanent beauty and fruitfulness, “ Her leaf shall be green, neither cease
yielding fruit.” Is there anything more beautiful than a Christian’s life—a Chris-
tian’s deeds—a Christian’s death—a Christian’s entrance into heaven Altered
from “ Helps for the Pulpit.”


Topic: DECEITFULNESS OF THE HuMAN Heart, (Ver. 9.)


Many have been the laboured panegyrics indulged, in the endeavour to establish
on a firm footing the dignity of human nature. One eminent preacher has not
scrupled to affirm—first, that men in general (if not every individual) are very
ee 3 secondly, that men in general are very virtuous; and thirdly, they are very

PPY

_A charitable person once discovered that there was no sinner in the world but
the devil. ‘ For,” was the argument, “he forces men to act as they do, therefore
they are not accountable. The blame lights on Satan.”

But whatever baptized or unbaptized infidels may say concerning the innocence
of mankind, He that made man, and best knows what He has made, gives a very
different account of him. He informs us “ that the heart of man ”—of every man
born into this world—‘ is desperately wicked,” and that it is “ deceitful above all
things,” so that we may well ask, “ Who can know it?”

Ae L ae wickedness of man’s heart. It is “desperately wicked.” In consider-

g this—

1. We have no need to refer to any particular sins, When Satan had once
transferred his own self-will and pride into the parents of mankind, together with
a new species of sin, love of the world, the loving the creature more than the
Creator, all manner of wickedness soon rushed in. The earth soon became a field
of blood. Injustice in ten thousand forms—hatred, envy, malice, blood-thirstiness,
falsehood—rode triumphant, till the Creator, looking down from heaven, would be
no more entreated for an incorrigible race, but swept them off the face of the earth.

2. God having created us gratuitously of His own mere mercy (for we could
merit nothing of Him before we had a being), has laid us under obligation to yield
Him our obedience.

3. From the devil, the spirit of independence, self-will, and pride, productive of
all ungodliness and unrighteousness, quickly infused themselves into the hearts of
our first parents in Paradise, and, through them, their posterity, alienating us from
God, making way for idolatry, atheism, &c.

4, Melancholy truth, that all mankind now “ have corrupted their ways before the
Lord,” unless when the Spirit of God has made the difference.

5. But if this be the case, how is it that every one is not conscious of it? For
this plain reason—because the heart is not only “ desperately wicked,” but “‘ deceit-
ful above all things.”

IL The deceitfulness of man’s heart.

1. It is “deceitful above all things,’—that is, in the highest degree, above all
that we can conceive. So deceitful that the generality of men are continually
deceiving both themselves and others. Imagining themselves to be abundantly
better than they are.

2. And if men thus deceive themselves, is it any wonder that they deceive
others also, and that we seldom find “an Israelite indeed in whom there is no

ile”?

No This is one of the sorts of desperate wickedness, whioh cleaves to the nature
of every man, proceeding from those fruitful roots—self-will, pride, and indepen-
dence of God.

4. Hence there ia in the heart of every child of man an inexhaustible fund of
ungodliness and unrighteousness, deeply and strongly rooted im the soul, that
nothing less than Almighty grace will care, ea


CHAP. XVI, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR.








5. There are exceptions as to the wickedness of man’s heart. ‘ He that is born
of God keepeth himself, and the wicked one toucheth him not.” His heart is
purified by faith, His wickedness is departed from him. “Old things are passed
away, all things (in him) are become new.”

Ti. Lessons—

1. “ He that trusteth in his own heart is a foo.” For who that is wise would
trust one whom he knows to be desperately wicked %

2. That when thou seest a man “ wise in his own conceit, there ia more hope of
a fool than of him.” For at what distance from wisdom must that man be whe
never suspected his want of it?

3. Wisdom of the caution, ‘ Let him that thinketh he standeth take heed lest
he fall.” How firmly soever he may stand, he has still a deceitful heart. In how
many instances has he been deceived already ?

4, Is it not wisdom for him that is now standing, continually to cry to God,
‘Search me, O Lord, and prove me: Let me not think of myself more highly
than I ought to think ; but let me always think soberly, according as Thou hast
given me the measure of faith ”t—John Wesley.


Topic: Tue CurisTtan Sapspate. “ Hallow ye the Sabbath day” (ver. 22),


The awful desecration of the Lord’s day which everywhere presents itself to our
view, in scenes of pleasure, business, and dissipation, is at once a foul blot upon
our national character, and a source of humiliation and sorrow to the sincere
Christian.

The Sabbath is an institution both of divine origin and permanent obligation,

I. The Sabbath, as a day appropriated to rest and religious duties, is an original
institution, coeval with the existence of man (See Gen. i. 31, and ii. 1-3.)
Thus the Sabbath dates its origin from the completion of creation, and was designed
to commemorate that great event. ‘This was the day God sanctified, setting it
apart from all the reét, It is an original institution, as ancient as the law of love
itself, and, like that law, is intended to remain in force until mortality is swallowed
up of life, until the earthly Sabbath gives place to the perpetual and uninterrupted
rest of the heavenly world. It is a remarkable fact, that in almost all nations men
have divided time into septenary periods, or periods of seven days. Josephus says
(Against Apion, book ii.) that “there is not a city of the Grecians, nor any of the
Barbarians, nor any nation whatsoever, whither our custom of resting on the seventh
day hath not come,”

Il. That the Sabbath, when re-enacted from Sinai, was not enjoined as a tem-
porary institution, but as a moral duty. The law of the Sabbath holds its place
among the moral precepts. (See Exod. xx. 8-11.) Engraven by the finger of
God on the tables of stone, and deposited in the ark of the covenant—all indica-
tive of its permanent character and obligation. As a moraf precept, it is an
original and universal duty, belonging to Gentile as well as Jew, to the Christian
dispensation as well as the Levitical economy. Not a Jewish ceremony, but a
moral duty, and as such cannot be set aside. Christ came not to destroy the law,
but to fulfil and honour it. Command repeated many times, is enjoined in text,
‘“ Hallow ye the Sabbath day.”

Ill. The Saviour has expressly taught that ‘the Sabbath was made FoR MAN ;”
and not for man in any particular nation or age, but without limitation for man;
and, therefore, it is of universal and perpetual obligation, “ And He said unto
them, The Sabbath was made for man, and not man for the Sabbath” (Mark ii. 27).
‘“‘ For man,” as a duty incumbent upon him; “ for man,” as a privilege conferred
upon him, Sabbath was made for all men without distinction, The Levitical law
was designed to be temporary in its duration. In its extent it was confined to the

384





pos


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH, OuAP, XVII,








Hebrew nation, and in its duration was limited to the Jewish dispensation. But
the Sabbath was not made merely for the Hebrew nation, but for man, without
distinction or restriction. And now the Levitical economy is abolished, it
continues a moral law binding upon the conscience of the Christian in all parts of
the world.

IV. Does the Christian ask what are the obligations of the Sabbath
upon him ?

(a.) Let your mind be established with a thorough conviction of the Divine
authority and obligation of the Sabbath, and let your sense of duty be based on
this conviction.

(6.) Let your example correspond with your profession, We profess to be God’s
people ; let us show it by our works. Our duty to God requires our observance of
the Sabbath as a part of our obedience.

(c.) In addition to our example, our influence must be employed to promote the
sanctity of the Sabbath. It is the Lord’s day. As Eusebius remarks, “ Before our
Lord’s death, it was always called the first day ; but now it was called the Lord’s


day.”
to keep it holy.— William Cooke, D.D.


To us it is, therefore, the Sabbath of the Lord our God, and it is our duty


ADDENDA TO CHAPTER XVII. ILLUSTRATIONS AND SUGGESTIVE EXTRAOTS.


Ver, 1. INDELIBLE RECORDS OF SIN.
“The great stone book of Nature reveals
many records of the past. In the red
saudstone there are found, in some
places, marks which are clearly the
impressions of showers of rain, and
these so perfect that it can even be de-
tected in which direction the shower
inclined, and from what quarter it pro-
ceeded; and this, ages ago. Even so
sin leaves its track behind it, and God
keeps a faithful record of all our sins,”
—Biblical Treasury.

“Tf you cut a gash in a man’s head,
you may heal it ; but you can never rub
out, nor wash out, nor cut out the scar.
It may witness against you in his corpse ;
still it may be covered by the coffin or
hidden in the grave; but then it is not
till decomposition shall take place that
it shall entirely disappear. But if you
smite a soul, the scar remains ; no coffin
or grave shall hide it; no revolution,
not even the upturning of the physical
universe, shall obliterate it; no fire,
not even the eternal fires of hell, shall
burn it out.”—Dr. Thomson.

Like as Queen Mary, when she died,
told those about her that the loss of
Calais had so impressed her, that ita
image would be found indelibly en-
graven on her heart.

Ver. 9. FaLsiry AND FOULNESS OF
THE HEART. “Iam more afraid of my
own heart than of the Pope and all his

2B


cardinals, I have within me the great
pope—self.”— Luther.

‘« All our actions take
Their hues from the complexion of the heart,
As landscapes their variety of light.”


‘* A goil which breeds
Or sweetest flowers or vilest weeds;
Flowers lovely as the morning’s light,
Weeds deadly ag the aeonite ;
Just as his heart is trained to bear
The poisonous weed or flow’ret fair.”


— Bowring.

“As soon as we are born and receive
the care of our parents, we engage in
all kinds of depravity ; so much, that
we seem to suck in error with our
nurse’s milk,”—Cucero.

The student should specially consult
“Secular Annotations on Scripture
Texts,” by Francis Jacox, second series,
p. 122. Or, “The Heart Inscrutably
Deceitful.”


Ver. 10. SEARCHING THE HEART.


‘¢ Who made the heart, ’tis He alone

Decidedly can try us;

He knows each chord—its various tone,
Each spring—its various bias ;

Then at the balance let’s be mute,
We never can adjust it ;

What's done we partly may compute,
But know not what's resiated.

—Burns.


Ver. 17, THe sovt’s mork. “Our
hope is not hung upon such an un-


twisted thread as ‘I imagine so,’ or,
385


CHAP, XVII


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; JEREMIAH.





‘It is likely ;’ but the cable, the strong
rope of our fastened anchor, is the oath
and promise of Him who is eternal
verity ; our salvation is fastened, with
God’s own hand and Christ's own
strength, to the strong stake of God’s
unchangeable nature.”—Rutherford,

“ Be not a terror to me.” Let me
have fair weather overhead, however
foul soever it be under foot.” Trapp.


“ Hope is the last thing that dies in man.”
— Diogenes.


Though at times my spirit fails me,
And the bitter teardrops fall ;
Though my lot is hard and lonely,
Yet I hope—I hope through all.”
—Mrs. Norton.


“With eyes turned upward, whenee her help
descends,
Hope waits expecting till the tempest ends.”
—Holmes.

Ver. 21. Sanpats rest, ‘Had not
Jeremiah expressly said, ‘Bear no bur-
den on the Sabbath day?” Yes; but
why? Because the Sabbath was an
ordinance of mercy intended to protect
the underlings and the oppressed from a


life of incessant toil; because it was
essential to save the serfs and labourers
of the nation from the over-measure of
labour which would have been exacted
of them in a nation afflicted with the
besetting sin of greed ; because the set-
ting apart of one day in seven for sacred
rest was of infinite value to the spiri-
tual life of all."— Farrar.

Captain Scoresby remarks, in his
“Voyage to Greenland,” on the good
effects of Sabbath-keeping on the health
and spirits of his men; ‘“ Thatif others
who did not so sedulously keep it gained
some benefits (as in fishing), we always
gained extra advantage over them in
course of the week. Independently of
the Divine blessing, 1 found the re
straint on the natural inclinations of
the men for pursuing the fishery at all
opportunities acted as an extra stimu-
lus on their exertions when next sent
after the whales. But our success, who
refrained, was so much greater than those
who indulged fishing, that there was not
a man in the ship who did not consider
it the effect of a Divine blessing.”


CHAPTER XVUL


CarricaL amp Exrcrtioat, Norzs.—i. Chronology of the Chapter.
reign (see Chronological Note on section 19-27 of previous chapter).


Early in Jehofakim’s
Probably about two years


later than that message respecting the Sabbath in chapter xxvii, 19-27, Naegelsbach suggests, be-
fore the fourth year of Jehoiakim, For 2, 3, and 4, see Notes at the head of previous chapter,

5, Geographical References.—Ver. 14. ‘‘ The snow of Lebanon which cometh from the rock
of the field.” Lebanon was called the white mountain, because of its perpetually snow-clad
heights—especially Hermon’s. The words should read : “ Will the snow of Lebanon cease from
the rock of the field? Hitzig suggests that the waters of Gihon in Jerusalem (the rock of the
field, of. xvii. 3, xxi. 13), which never were known to fail, were probably fed by the melting
snows of Lebanon. Henderson is, however, nearer the interpretation : he says, The rock of
the field is only a poetical expression for Lebanon itself ; the melting snows from which supplied
numerous perennial rivers. “ Shall the cold flowing waters that come from another place be
forsaken?” Read the words thus: “Shall the cool flowing rivers that come from afar be dried
up?” which is, doubtless, another form of the foregoing idea—the streams flowing from
Lebanon could not fail.

6. Personal Allasions.—{None) ; 7. Natural History.—(See Geographical References, supra.)

8. Natural Customs.—Ver. 8. ‘The potter's house, he wrought a work upon the wheels :”
‘The potter’s field” (Zech. xi. 13, Matt. xxvii. 10) lay just beyond the valley of Hinnom, south
of Jerusalem. wo wheels : the lower one he worked with his feet; this set the upper wheel
in motion. The lower wheel was probably stone, the upper was a flat disc of wood : on this the
potter placed the sae lab as it revolved, the potter shaped his work.

9. Literary Criti .—Ver. 8. A work on the wheels: dual: the two wheels. Ver. 7. At
what instant: ‘‘at what” in italics, Lit. once. YJ], adv. im the moment, forthwith: and
when repeated, as vers. 7 and 9. Now... again, Ver. & “J wilt repens.” I repent, so
algo in ver. 10. Ver. 12, ‘* And they said, There ts no hope:” Yet they are saying: the con-
secutive perfect form of a Heb. verb implies the continuance of the action. ‘‘ Do the imagima-
tion ;” practise the stubbornness. Ver. 14. “ Will @ man leave the snow of Lebanon?” (gee

386


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. CHAP. XVHE


Geographical Reference, supra) : lit., ‘‘ Doth the snow of Lebanon fail from—eease to flow from
—the rock of the field?” “Or shall the cool flowing streams that come from another place,”
ON, strange, foreign, i.e, whose sources are foreign (as 2 Kings xix. 24, so Hitzig, Kes,
and Payne Smith): but Ewald, Graf, and Bunsen suggest, that hurry along, from Vj}, to press,
urge, t.¢e., flowing through narrow gorges. But there is no sufficient proof that the word can
_have this latter meaning: the former is, therefore, better. Ver. 15. “Because My nad
Yet My people. ‘“ Vantty and they,” &c. (see Note in chap. ii. 80). ‘* Vain gods, and have
caused them to stumble.” “Jn their ways from the ancient paths,” &e. Or, “In their ways,
the everlasting paths; to walk in byeways, in a road not cast up.” Ver. 21. “ Pour out their
bleod by the force of the sword:” lit., ‘* Spill them into the hands of the sword” (of. Paa. lxiii.
10), &¢., cast them ont to slaughter, ‘‘ Pus to death:” rather, “slain of death.”





HOMILETIC OUTLINES ON SECTIONS OF CHAPTER XVIII.


Sections 1-10. The Potter’s work: symbolie of God’s Sovereign Power,
»» 11-18. The justice of threatened ruin vindicated.
» 19-23. Imprecatory prayer provoked by hostility to God’s messages,


Section 1-10. Tur Porrer’s Work: Symsou or Gopn’s Sovergicnry.


“T have used similitudes.” The end is a merciful one—to impress. Particularly
calcalated to impress. Consider—

L The right of the Divine sovereignty which is here claimed by Jehovah.
One of the claims most frequently urged in the Word of God—He claims from
mankind an acknowledgment of His power and right to do as He pleases in the
affairs of men and angels, Certainly He that formed the heavens and the earth,
the sea and the dry land, who made all the creatures with which they are peopled,
who by His power and His might sustains them, must possess both the power and
the right to regulate all their affairs and all their movements. None so fit as He
to govern—to choose our lot and to regulate our ways. His understanding is
infinite, His power is unlimited and wonderful, and His goodness equals them
both. The angels in heaven fully admit His sovereignty, and His right to
exercise it. But with men it is far otherwise. Observe—

1. This ts an attribute which every man naturally denies. Sin has thrown the
foundations of the earth out of course, and hence man refuses one of the most
reasonable of all claims, and one of the most important and necessary of the Divine
prerogatives, This attribute is denied—

(a.) In 80 many words. There are the infidel deniers of Providence, — and
there are the Pharisees who deny it in their creed.

(b.) There are still more who deny tt in practice. What does that man do who
neither courts His favour, nor fears His anger} What are you doing who at this
moment refuse to obey His voice in the great matter of salvation? Think of the
fallen angels—they denied it—they would not have the Lord to reign over then—
they would not bend to His authority and mild dominion—and they are crushed by
His vengeance. How will they face the Judge, when they wake up in the eternal
world, whose authority and whose sovereignty they have denied?

2. This ts the last attribute of God received even by Christians in their real creed.
There are but few Christians who deny the doctrine in so many words; but it ia
one thing to profess belief on any point, and another one to believe it practically.

Hence the Armenian scheme.

Hence the Antinomian—preaching to none but saints.

Hence our gloomy discontent in affliction.

Hence our frequent departures from the directions of the Word of God.

But notwithstanding all, no attribute is more evident in its exercise than this.
All creation proves it. All nature in her movements. All providence. Especially,
hence we proceed to consider—

II. The manner in which God is pleased to exercise His sovereignty towards
the children of men. The prophet, by Divine command, went down to the potter's
house, where he received instructions, &. pe


OAP, XVITI, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.





This is applicable to the grand and important things of eternity, and shows that
man in God’s hand is as clay in the hand of the potter, and that He has power over
them to mould them as He pleases, and that he actually exerts that power.
Observe —

1. He does what He pleases with the penitent. And this in every way according
to mercy ; yet does He act as a sovereign:

(a.) In the gift of repentance :

1. In giving it to whom He pleases.

2. In the means employed to bring them to repentance,

3. In rendering it effectual.

(6.) In pardoning their sins. “ At what instant,” &c. In that He pardons through
His Son—freely. All sins—past, present, and to eome; and is pleased to make
the pardon known. In heaven to his angels—they rejoice. To the believer on
earth, and to all the unwerse in the world to come. Are you penitents? Do you
desire to be such? ‘ Ask, and you shall receive,”

2 As to the impenttent. The purposes of heaven must stand. Barren and
contradietory are the opinions of mankind concerning the measures of God towards
this guilty world, but He pursues His own unceasing plan. Many deny that
these judgments will ever take place,—that denial will not alter the fact. It
will render them the more dreadful to the hardened infidel, because the denial
increases his guilt.

Though these words mention kingdoms, they are equally applicable to tn-
dividuals, And God has spoken good concerning you. Often have you
heard the Gospel. But if you are impenitent—these words point to you. He
will do as He pleases. You are at His merey. What have you to expect
reasonably? He threatens to punish. You are not certain of His mercy. You
must repent or perish. But you are tm the world of hope. Oh! then seek it
With such a prospect before me, my soul shudders for you, “knowing the terrors
of the Lord,” &c.—Nameless US. dated a.v. 1824.

See further: Noticeable Topics at end of chapter; also Addenda; “Gop’s
SovEREIan Power.”


Section 11-18. Tue Justice oF THREATENED RUIN VINDICATED.


I, God's purpose of evil avowed (ver. 11). “Iam framing evil against you.”
Evil was in God’s purposes,

II. An interval for reformation offered. ‘Return ye now, every one from his
evil.” Evil was in God’s purposes, because “evil” was every one’s way.

IIL Wilful iniquity repudiates the opportunities of grace (ver. 12). There
was “no hope,” but only because there was no compunction for sin, and a resolve
not to reform.

IV. Man’s reckless guilt justifies God’s anger. (vers. 13-17).

1. Sins against grace render our guilt more heinous than any which heathenism
ean furnish (ver. 13).

2. Desertion of God estranges refreshing comforts from the sinner (ver. 14).

3. Substitutes chosen instead of God mislead their dupes into desolation (ver. 15).

4. Misery entailed by wrreligion justly awakens amazement (ver. 16).

5. God deserts apostates in the day of their calamity (ver. 17).


Or thus:

I. God’s operations plainly tend towards the ruin of sinners. “ Behold I
frame evil,” &e. (ver. 11). Your conduct towards God shows you deserve tt ; His
dealings with you show that He designs tt.

Il. God’s warnings and threatenings are invitations to timely repentance.
“ Return ye now,” &, God may turn from the evil He purposes to do, if you turn
from the evil you persistently do.

388


ao Rave


r ~ ee ail wei :
sl ae ll Ng LA tne celts. eal OL el AL PLL LL ALA LOLI LOL LALLA, Te AI


~_ a


Ie ABO


HOMILETIC COMMENVARY : JEREMIAR., CaP. XVEEL








ITI. Man's obstinacy towards God closes the door of hope (ver. 12). Mercy

is conditional upon reformation; sinners resolve not to reform, and so court
despair and ruin. See Addenda, Despatr.
: IV. Immovable defiance of God is a fact of awful amazement. Defiant
smpenitence is a startling anomaly (ver. 13), a “very horrible thing” in itself,
being self-murder; entails the loss of all refreshing comforts (ver. 14); shows
amazing folly, ancient ways being deserted for byeways (ver. 15) ; awakens derision
(ver. 16) ; and brings disconsolate ruin (ver. 17).


Section 19-23. Imprecatory PrayeR PROVOKED By Hostinity To Gop’s
Merssaaxs.


All their virulence turned itself upon God’s prophet, whose righteous soul was
stirred to well-nigh ungovernable wrath against his persecutors who were flagrant
enemies of God and scoffers of His claims. Matthew Henry suggests the following
homiletic divisions :— ce

L See here what are the common methods of the persecutors. We may see
this in Jeremiah’s enemies (ver. 18).

1, They consulted together to be revenged upon him for what he had said, and
to silence him for the future,

2, They pretended a mighty zeal for the Church, which was endangered by his
preaching. They insinuated—

(a.) That Jeremiah could not be a true prophet, because neither commissioned
by the priests, nor did his predictions concur with other prophets.

(6.) That the matter of his prophecies could not be from God, because it reflected
upon the priests and prophets.

3. They agreed to do all they could to blast his reputation, “Smite him with
the tongue,”

4, To set others an example, they resolved not to heed anything he said; this
will show others to regard his utterance merely as “Aés words,” not God’s,

5. That they may etiectually silence him they determine upon his death
ver. 23).

: II. ue here what is the common relief of the persecuted. We may see this
in the course which Jeremiah took.

1. He referred himself and his cause to God’s cognisance (ver. 19). It isa
matter of comfort to faithful ministers that if men will not give “heed” to their
preaching, God will give heed to their praying.

2. He complains of their base ingratitude to him (ver. 20). To render good .
for good is human; evil for evil is brutish : good for evil is Christian ; but evil for
good is devilish. ;

(a.) See how great the evil was that they did against him: “digged a pit for
his soul.”

(b.) See how great the good was that he had done them: “I stood before
Thee to speak for them.”

3. He imprecates the judgments of God upon them; not from revengeful dis-
position, but from prophetical indignation against their horrid wickedness (vera
21-23).

(a) That their families might suffer famine,

(6.) That they might be cut off by the sword.

(c.) That the terrors and desolations of war might seize them suddenly (ver.
22
la) That they might be dealt with according to the desert of this inexcusable
sin: “forgive not their iniquity,” &.

e.) That God’s wrath against them might be their rnin: “Let them be over
thrown before Thee.” is


CHAP, XVIIL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH,





Note :—This was not written for our imitation. Jeremiah, by the impulse of
the spirit of prophecy, in the foresight of the ruin certain to come upon them,
might pray such prayers as we may not. If by this example we think to justify
ourselves in imprecations, we “ know not what manner of spirit we are of.” Christ
has taught us by His example to bless them that curse us, and pray for them that
despitefully use us. Yet this may teach us—

i, That those who have forfeited the benefit of the prayers of God’s propheta
for them, may expect to have their prayers against them.

ii, That persecution is a sin that fills the measure of a people’s iniquity very
fast, and will bring sure destruction upon them.

iii, Those who will not be won by the kindness of Ged and His prophets, will
sertainly at length feel the resentments of both.


HOMILIES AND COMMENTS ON VERSES OF CHAPTER XVIII.


Vers. 1-4. Theme: CLay IN THE POT- l. The marred vessel. This was not





TER’S HANDS.

Suggestions: A parabolic representa-
tion impresses the mind more power-
fully than simple statement or teaching.
God has greater power over men than
a potter over clay, for the potter is
not the creator of clay, as God is
of us.

I, The
worker.

1. God works. He does not arbitrarily
will and imperiously effect His purposes ;
but carefully works to realise them.
God is not imperious, not arbitrary ; not
a mere dominating Will, but a patient
Artificer, taking pains in His work.

2. God works for definite ends. He
has a design—to form a graceful vessel.
He does not make marred things by de-
sign; He purposes to make only what
is beautiful—‘‘ would have all men to
be saved.”

It. The pliable yet perverse mate-
rial It must not escape notice that—

1. The material is base, unclean, un-
sightly. And such is the vile material
from which God would make us into
vessels of honour unto sanctification.

2. The material swiftly changes form.
Easily takes new shape, for better or
worse.

3. The material works into wrong
shapes most perversely. Though the
Artificer works deftly and with good
instruments (“ wheels”), yet man is slow
to assume the “form and comeliness ”
God desires.

III. The various products of God’s
handiwork.

390


Almighty yet patient


through imperfect skill in the Potter, but
through resistance or non-consistency in
the clay. In either case it would noé
take or retain the shape the Worker de-
signed. “ Ye have received the grace of
God tn vain.”

2. The renewed endeavour. “ He
made it again.” Often, after renewed
operations of God’s grace, the once resis-
tant soul yields itself unto God, and
becomes “ created in Christ Jesus.”
Then the man is “ renewed in the spirit
of his mind.”

3. The perfected vessel. This perfec
tion is the result which ‘seemed good”
to the Potter, and for which He pa-
tiently worked. It is not that God forms
marred things or perfect things just as
it takes His caprice; no. Nothing
“seems good” to Him but the perfect
work.

And the perfected result “ seemed
good ” to Him. He was thereby pleased
and satisfied. Nothing less satisfies
God: “For this is the will of God, even
your sanctification.” ‘“ He saw that all
was very good” in creation. And in re-
demption, “ Ye are His workmanship,
created in Christ Jesus unto good works,
which God before ordained that ye shail
walk in them.” And the soul which
fully realises His aim is “ perfect before
Him in love.”

(a.) Consider the long patience and
careful efforts God extends towards us in
His gracious operations to form us ac-
cording to His will.

(b.) Consider the grace and comeliness
in us which alone satisfies Him.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


Ver. 6. Theme: Man’s CHANGEABLE
GONDITION.

A practical homily : Nothing is fixed
or certain in this world. As the clay
assumes variable shapes, and passes
through manifold vicissitudes, we re-
cognise—

L The multiform possibilities of
man. He may become a “ marred” or
perfected thing; a Judas or a Stephen ;
a Diotrephes or a John of Patmos |!

1. This in the region of social life,

2. Equally so in the realm of moral-
ity and intelligence,

3. Manifestly so in the kingdom of
grace.

IL The incertitude of worldly posi-
tion. As the wheel moves round, the
whole shape and fortune of the vessel
varies :

1. God can change our condition as
with a touch: can cast the eminent from
their elevation, can mould the imperfect
into gracetul forms (Psa. ecxiii. 7).

2. No life is beyond God’s formative
touch. Judah thought herself safe
against catastrophe, but God cast her
down. We depend wholly on God’s
good-will for what we are and have,

III. The consolation of being in
God's hands.

1. The tranquillity of faith is well
founded. ‘ He doeth according to His
will among the inhabitants of the earth”
—but ‘“ He doeth all things well ”—-and

- “ we know that all things work together
for good to them that love God.”

2. Our condition is secure through
the gratuitous goodness of God. And
being all of grace, it depends on His
grace that we remain in His love and
care. And none that trust in Him shall
be desolate.


See further: JVoticeable Topica, Tur
Porrer’s WORK.

See Addenda:
Power.”


“ Gon’s SOVEREIGN


Vers. 7-10. Theme : ConDITIONAL
COVENANTS.

L God’s providential dealings with
men are conditioned upon conduct.

1. There are penal laws which only
act as they are violated.


OHAP, XVII


2. There are beneficent comforts, for
enjoying which harmonious conduct is
Imperative.

IL The Scriptural covenants are
based upon human behaviour. Both
the Old and New Testaments are called
covenants: were created and given to
the world on specific terms,

1. Spiritually, our case is not fixed and
absolute. We may depart from our fidel-
ity, may refuse to comply with the
revealed terms on which God’s love and
salvation are made to depend.

2. The relationship the Scriptures set
forth is dependent upon our fidelity—
our compliance with Divine require-
ments.

III. Individual experience is accord-
ing to this conditional rule.

l. Specific promises may be forfeited,
and specific penalties incurred either in
this life, accordingly as we are obedient
or disobedient.

2. Our spiritual salvation is depen-
dent upon definite conditions, “ Repent
and believe the gospel.” ‘“ Believe on the
Lord Jesus Christ and thou shalt be
saved.”

3. All Christian gladness, progress,
and triumph rest upon similar terms
We have “ exceeding great and precious
promises,” all “ yea and amen in Christ
Jesus,” yet only ours as we “ hold fasi
the beginning of our confidence stead-
fast unto the end.”


Theme: COMFORT AND WARNING.
The threatenings and promises of God
are given only conditionally.

i. The comfort consists in this, that the
threatened calamities may be averted by
timely repentance,

ii, The warning in this, that the pro
mises may be annulled by apostasy.—
Naeg.


Theme: How wk SHOULD BE MOVED
BY Gopd’s JUDGMENTS AND GOODNESS.
That each should

i. Turn from his wickedness.

ii. Should reform his heart and life.
—Kapf, in Lange.


Ver. 11. Theme. Gop DEVISING YET
DEPLORING EVIL
391


OHAP. XVIII.





It was not moral evil, but physical,
national. Special to Judah and Jeru-
salem. Yet there is a truth for all:
‘*Is there evil in the city, and the Lord
hath not done it?”

The word “frame” is the same which,
as a noun, means ‘‘ potter.”

L An ominous interval — ruin is
preparing.

(a.) The evil is not yet shaped nor
ready to devastate.

(6.) Yet God is busily employed in
devising the destruction,

(c.) And certainly God will not work
without effect.

1. The opportunity of turning aside
the evil is with us.

2. That opportunity is of uncertain
duration.

3. Salvation may be found during
this interval.

II. A gracious interval—God is ap-
pealing.

1. While He works out His devices of
evil, He yet desires our good,

2. The devices of evil are inevitable
only in consequence of man’s impeni-
tence.

3. Prompt reformation would arrest
the impending doom.

4. God urges upon man the diligent
use of the auspicious hour—“ Return
ye now.’

Comp. Homiletie hints on chapter
vii. 3.


Ver. 12. Theme: THE UNBEASON-
ABLENESS OF DESParR. “ And they said,
There is no hope: but we will walk after
our own devices,” é&c.

The devil’s chief artifices are to pro-
duce either—

(a.) False security and presumption ;
or (6) despair.

L Despair is sinful.

In itself.

ts Because it is the parent of other
sins, as is seen in the cases of Cain,
Saul, and Judas.

IL Despair is dangerous.

(a.) It paralyses effort after escape or
reformation.

(6.) Allures to besotted unconeern.

(c.) Drives to recklessness in further
wrong-doing. Thus “ heaping up wrath.”

392


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





ItL Despair is groundless,

(a.) Because we still enjoy life and
the means of grace.

(8.) Because of the longsuffering char-
acter of God.

(c.) Because of the universality of the
scheme of redemption.

(d.) Because of the Person, character,
and invitations of Christ.

(e.) Because of the many instances of
final salvation.— Payson.


See Addenda: DEsPatIR.
See further: Mottceable Topics: Dus
PERATION DANGEROUS.


Ver. 13. Theme: “A VERY HORRIBLE
THING.” See Sectional Homily, chap.
ii, 9-13. ‘“ Facts for Amazement—


Reckless desertion of the Fount of Life.”

I It was the violation of all the
lessons of experience. After having
known so much of God and His grace,
and tasted so much of His goodness.
For in these experiences they trans-
cended every nation.

IL It was criminality surpassing
all heathen vices. ‘‘ Knew the Lord’s
will, yet did it not,”

1. Such ingratitude to God.

2. Such depreciation of precious
benefactions.

3. Such insolent disregard of the
Holy One of Israel (ver. 15).

Ill. It was folly of the most ap-
palling magnitude.

1. Deserting the cool and perennial
streams, which the pure and perpetual
snows of Lebanon fed.

2. Coquetting with delusive trifles:
“‘ burned incense to vanity ” (ver. 15).

All this is wicked, “very horrible,”
an outrage on human nature itself; a
violation of every law of righteousness ;
& course so tniquitowus as to ensure the
most “ horrible ” malediction and doom |


Ver. 15. Theme: DzsERTING ANCIENT?
PATHS.

i, THESE ANCIENT PaTHs—

1. Were appointed by the Divine law.

2. Had been walked in by all the
saints.

3. Were therefore the right way toe
their journey’s end





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


CaaP, XVI.





4. A safe way, being well tracked ;
and both easy to hit and easy to walk
in.

ii, THE BY-PATHS: ‘a way not cast
up.”
1. Not the highway, the king’s high-
way.

2, A dirty and rough way ; in which
they could but “stumble.”

3. An iniquitous way ; as is the way
of idolatry and all transgression,

4. A false way; full of falls and
ending fatally.—(Comp. Henry.)


See numerous Homilies on chap. vi.
16. Especially on “ Zhe old paths,”
by H. W. Beecher, whose sermon is on
the two texts, vi. 16, xxviii. 15.


Ver. 17. Theme - THE SINNER’S DOOM.
“T will show them the back and not
the face, in the day of their calamity.”

I. The cause of the evil threatened.
The punishment of sinners is not caused
by the Divine purpose alone, but in
conjunction with the commission of
sin. A sinner is the author of his own
miseries (Jer. ii. 17; iv. 18). The
children of Judah were guilty of

l. Rejecting the Divine government.
“‘ We will walk after our own devices,”
d&c. (ver. 12). Maultitudes regard their
own will as the rule of action, and live
without God in the world (Zech. vii.
5, 6, 11, 12).

2. Guilty of idolatry (ver. 15, comp.

Rom. i. 22, 23). Idolatry is the great
sin of the human heart, Man worships
his own person, his natural and acquired
talents, his wealth, his honours, the
creature, this evil world.
3. Rejecting the mercy of God. Pre-
vious to inflicting His wrath He offered
them mercy (see ver. 11). But they
repudiated it (ver. 12). So, “ we preach
Christ crucified,” beseech men, &e., but
“who hath believed our report 4”

4. Their conduct was characterised by
the greatest folly (vers, 13-15). Common-
sense taught men to value clear waters,
which, from the melted snows of Leba-
non, were purified by running through
the cavities of rocks, &c.; but Israel
had forsaken the infinitely glorious
Jehovah for worthless idols, And for


what do sinners now part with God
and holiness? Not for an equivalent,
but for what dazzles and vanishes.

5. Their conduct was a manifestation
of basest ingratitude. And so is the
conduct of every sinner.

II. The nature of the evil threa-
tened. God would abandon them.
The “light of His countenance” is the
joy of every soul, and of heaven; for
Him to show His back is woful.

1. God sometimes shows His back
in a way of mercy (Exod. xxxiii. ee
In compassion to our weakness “ He
holdeth back,” &c. (Job xxv. 9).

2. But this threat is expressive of
Divine wrath. (See Levit. xvii. 10, xx.
3; 1 Pet. iii 12. Comp. Job xxiii.
8; Ps. Ixxxiv. 14, xxii. 1.) For a mo-
ment only God hides Himself from His
people; but it here means the angry
abandonment of the wicked.

3. The wrath of God ws retributive,
Sinners turn their back upon God. He
will “show them the back in the day
of their calamity” (comp. Pa xviii, 26,
27; Jer. ii. 27, 28, xxxii. 33-35 ; Deut.
xxxi. 17, 18).

4. The language of the text implies
a final departure. ‘“ Ephraim is joined
to idols, let him alone ” (Hos. ix. 12).

III. The time when the evil shall
be inflicted. “In the day of their
calamity.”

Sometimes it may be seen tw the pre-
sent life (1 Sam. xxviii. 15; Matt. xxiii,
27).

i In the time of adversity. When
cold poverty is on them, where is God?

2. In sickness, The wicked have no
refuge in distress,

3. When deserted by their friends,
Cast off by friends, yet no God !

4, The time of old age. Grave opens,
yet without God near thee! |

5. A dying hour. “The wicked is
driven away in his wickedness,”

6. At the last day (Rev. vi. 16, 17).

Application +

(a.) Theawful state of the unconverted ;
enemies to God, and doomed to everlast-
ing destruction,

(b.) If we desire to be at peace with
God, the way is prepared. Reconeiled
through His Son.

393


CHAP. XVIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





(e) Blessed is the prospect of all true
Christians. In the day of calamity He
will show them His face. ‘I will never
leave thee.”— Helps for the Pulpit.


Ver. 17. Theme: THE SINNER’s DOOM.

So inveterate was the attachment of
the people of Israel to their idols, and
so incorrigible amidst national calamities,
that God at length determined, not only
to bring upon them the threatened cap-
tivity in Babylon, but to leave them in
the hands of their enemies without
pity or compassion, and, like a friend
aggrieved, would utterly forsake them
in the day of trouble. Consider—

L The evil threatened : “I will show
them the back and not the face.”

Here we may observe,

1. God sometimes shows His back in
a way of mercy, as in the case of Moses,
when He caused His goodness to pass
before him because he could not see His
face and live (Exod. xxxiii. 23).

2. The Lord here threatens to hide
His face. Note—His face is either the
most delightful or the most dreadful of
all objects. He has an angry and a
frowning face when sin is to be punished
(Lev. xvii. 10; xx. 3; 1 Pet. iii. 12);
and an approving smile and regard for
His people (Isa. lxvi. 2). To turn His
back upon His people—the Jews—in
indignation and wrath. The Lord may
hide Himself from His people, and be
wroth ; but towards the wicked it de-
notes His total abandonment of them to
deserved wrath and punishment—par-
ticularly when the Lord says “ He will
show them the back and not the face.”
It includes—

(a.) The withdrawment of that pro
widential care and protectton which was
to be the peculiar privilege of the people
of Israel (2 Chron. xvi. 9), and leaving
them exposed to every evil and danger.
Thus He dealt with the apostate Jewish
church: He broke down its wail that it
might be trodden under foot (Isa. v. 5).

(6.) A dtrect expression of His dis-
pleasure; as when we turn our back
upon those who have offended us. So
Christ once turned His back upon Peter,
because he was an offence to Him (Matt,
xvi. 23).

394


(c.) It intimates @ final departure ;
giving them up to walk in their own
way, and to follow their own counsel.
To be abandoned as incorrigible is the
sorest of all judgments: and “ woe unto
them when I depart from them, saith
the Lord” (Hosea ix. 12).

IL The time when the threatened
evil shall be inflicted: “In the day of
their calamity.”

There is a day of trouble coming upon
the wicked, an appointed day, a dark
and gloomy day. Alas, if God has to
turn His back, and leave the sinner to
his fate! Yet such will be the doom of
the finally impenitent.

1. A little of this may be seen amidst
the calamities of the present life. What
was the condition of Saul, when God
had departed from him (1 Sam. xxviii.)
Of Jerusalem, when He would return
to His temple no more (Matt, xxiii
37, 38).

2. What then will be the state of the
wicked tn the last day, when God shall
forever disown and forever forsake them !
That will indeed be the day of their
calamity: there is none like it, and all
entreaties will be in vain (Rev. vi 16,
17).

Lessons—

1. Let the unbeltever beware, and let
him well consider what he shall answer,
when the Lord cometh forth to punish
him (Jer. xiii. 21).

2. If a Christian finds himself for-
saken in the day of trouble, let it cause
great searchings of heart; and like Israel,
let him lament after the Lord (1 Sam:
vii. 2).

3. Let all remember there is still 4
refuge from the storms of life, and from
the wrath to come (Prov. xviii, 10).—
The Preacher.


Comments :

Ver. 18. “DxvIcEs AGAINST JERE-
miaH.” The effect of the foregoing pro-
phecy upon the Jews was—

i. A more hardened and desperate am-
tagonism to the prophet. “Smite him
with the tongue.” Carry malicious re-
ports of what he says to Jehoiakim, and
so stir his anger.


ii, A flattering self-satisfied repudta:





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; JEREMIAH.





tron of his messages, “ For the law shall
not perish,” d&ec. ; te, we do not need
this prophet, we have the authorised
“priest,” the “law” of Moses, “wise”
men to give us “counsel,” and “ pro-
phets” to declare “the word ”—not in-
deed the Jehovah Word, but “smooth
things” (Isa. xxx. 10).

Ver, 20. “EVIL RECOMPENSED FOR
GOOD.”

i, Fatthful warnings and rebukes
proved the prophet’s patriotiem. He re-
fused to flatter and delude. “ Faithful
the wounds of a friend.”

ii. Wilful love of wrong-doing rendered
them hostile to truth,
the righteous, and gnash upon him with
their teeth,”


Vers. 18-20. Theme: AUTHORITY AB-
BAYED AGAINST AUTHORITY. This ap-
peal to the “law and priest” as against
Jeremiah and his words, is used by
_Naegelsbach (in Lange) as the basis of a
homily on the anniversary of the Refor-
mation, Thus :—


“The wicked hate.


CHAP, XVI


“Opposition of the ofice which has
apparent authority to that which has
true authority.”

i. The basis of the opposition. The
assertion of the infallibility of the former
office,

ii. The mode of the opposition,

(a.) In not being willing to hear.

(6.) In the attempt to destroy the
latter by violence.

ili, The result of the opposition is nuga-
tory. For :—

(a.) The Lord hears the voice of the
oppressors, to judge them.

(0.) He gives heed to His servants to
protect them.


[This treatment of the text makes it
appropriate to all occasions when secular
or ecclesiastical power is invoked to sup-


" press the voluntary movements of Christen-


dom; or when the authority of antiquity
ts urged against any new development of
the Christian life, whether in individuals
or churebes,]


NOTICEABLZ ToPICS IH CHAPTER XVIIL
Topte -—TuE Porrer’s Work (vers. 1-6).


The prophet sees a man engaged in a task to which he is devoting all his
thoughts. The potter designs to make some clay into a vessel of a certain shape ;
the form or pattern is present to his mind, he is fully resolved that the material
with which he is working shall come forth in that form and no other.

But apparently it disappoints him. One piece of clay after another is “ marred
in his hands:” it takes a shape different from that whick he would give it; but
he goes on perseveringly till he has done the thing which he intended to do.

“OQ house of Israel, cannot I do with you as this potter? saith the Lord. Be
bold, as the clay is in the potter’s hands, so are ye in mine, O house of Israel.”

Commentators have no doubt what this means! God could do as He liked with
the clay ; He could destroy t if He pleased! But Jeremiah was sent to see what
the potter liked. And he saw he desired to make a vessel of a certain form, and for
that end he laboured. The analogy, if of any force or worth at all, must mean that—

L There is a form according to which God is seeking to mould men and
nations. He is not doing any single act arbitrarily, or without reference to a
purpose ; He is patiently and continually working for the accomplishment of this

urpose,
: 1. Men are throughout Scripture assumed to have wills, upon which no mere
blind mechanical power can operate, but upon which God, a living Person, is ope-
rating by gracious, mysterious, orderly processes, that He may make men in His
own likeness,

2. Here was the mystery of a people's repentance. If they acknowledged this
Will which was working upon them, yielded to it, and desired to be formed by it,
this was the conversion and inward change He was seeking to produce. Marvellous
that persons should see in this symbol nothing but av assertion of the nee


CHAP. XVIII, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.








of God, when the whole thought is the order of God’s proceedings with men te
produce this voluntary obedience !

I. The purpose which the potter cherished was at the last fully realised.
As the prophet gazed on the potter, he saw how one piece of clay after another
was marred, and yet how the thing he designed was at last done, the whole truth
of the symbol came upon him with an awful vision of what was preparing for his
land ; yet also, with a bright vision of what must ultimately follow the judgment.

1, The vessel must be made, not after some different type, but after the original
and perfect life which dwelt not in the dead matter, but in the living mind of Him
who waa shaping it.

2. If any particular race must be cast aside, it would not be wilfully, not in
rage, but after a series of gracious merciful experiments had been made upon it,
but because of a moral incapacity for understanding the grace of its Ruler, and
for exhibiting any qualities but those most opposed to His grace, most hateful
and destructive.

3. Thus the destruction which Jeremiah had foreseen to be approaching his laud
justified itself to his conscience and heart, He shrank from it through tenderness of
nature, through patriotism ; but he saw that one generation or another might have
to be broken that the end might be accomplished.

II. Here was the power which could reform individuals and society.

1. The strife of the clay with the Potter, the struggles of men against a Divine
Artificer not to be brought into their true, reasonable, healthy condition ; not to
be at peace with each other by being at peace with Him who had made them to
bear a common image, were working national and individual desolation. Hence,
therefore—

2. The threatened captivity and destruction would form a method of reforma-
tion ; God would bring life out cf death, This marring of the clay was a fearful
sight; but the patience, longsuffering, and final victory of the Potter was a
glorious one.

Take then this simple image of a living and righteous Being, working amidst the
changes of times, working upon human wills for a loving and gracious purpose, for
a purpose which has been realised, does it not give—

IV. An elucidation of facts which were left unexplained, and felt to be
inexplicable 7?

1. The fall of great nations; 2. The subjection of such portions of the
kingdom of Christ as Jerusalem, Constantinople, Alexandria, to the power of the
Crescent.

(a.) Are not these cities proofs that the clay is marred in the new, as it was in
the old time, when tt resists the will of the Artificer? And what is there in the clay
of Italy, Germany, France, England, to give it special exemption from the sentence
upon that which is unprofitable? It is written, “If He spared not the natural
branches, take heed lest He spare not thee.”

(b.) But we know that whatever happens to one generation or another, He wild
claim human clay and all natural things for Himself. God has said He will write
upon human hearts His own name and the name of the new Jerusalem, His holy
city.
ma And for each individual, in whom dwells the Spirit of Christ, it will be
realised that the body of humiliation will be made like to Christ’s glorious body by
that power whereby He is able to subdue all things unto Himself.—Contracted
from Maurice's Prophets and Kings.

Note: “ When through the clay not being of a proper consistency, or otherwise
not answering to the potter’s will, the vessel is spoilt, he does not throw it away,
but crushes it together, dashes it back upon the wheel, and begins his work afresh,
till the clay has taken the predetermined shape. So then, it was God’s purpose
that Judea should become the proper scene for the manifestation ef the Messiah,

296


—


aan














HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH, OHAP. XVIH.





and tts sons be fit to receive the Saviowr’s teachtng and carry the good tidings to all
lands. If, therefore, at any stage of the preparation, the Jewish nation took, in its
free will, such a course as would frustrate this purpose of Providence, it was crushed
by aflietion into an unresisting mass, in which the formative process forthwith began
again.” —Dr, Payne Smith.


Topic: Desperation DaNnaerovus (ver. 12).


Nothing more proves the perverseness of the human heart than its unsuitable
entertainment of the dealings of God with it; especially in His gracious excite-
ments and invitations to repentance, conversion, and turning to Himself; in that
these have oftentimes very little impression upon or prevalency with it. Nor only
so, but now and then it proves to be from henceforth the more confirmed and
settled in evil. This is the case here.

I A desperate conclusion. ‘“‘ There is no hope.”

No hope of ws, our lusts charm and master us. No hope in regard of thee and
thy ministry ; thou art not likely to do any good amongst us. No hope of favour
from Hum ; there is no probability of any mercy

i. In reference to themselves: despair as to their own amendment or reformation,
There are people desperate in this regard, because of —

1. An absolute in/tsposttion and averseness to all kind of good (Job xxi. 11). This
distemper hath sundry grounds and causes from which it proceeds :—

(a.) A neglect of religious duties and exercises, (6.) A persisting in some loose
course of life. (c.) A walking contrary to light. (d.) Worldliness and too deep
an implunging into secular affairs.

2. An absolute thraldom and subjection to ali kind of evil. And there are divers
grounds for this also. There are people who despair of ever conquering their lusts
because of—(a.) Spiritual laziness. (6.) Unbelief of God’s promises. (c.) Carnal
confidence. (d.) Indifference to the thing itself.

ii, In reference to Jeremiah and Ais ministry - despair as to the value of preaching
God’s messages amongst them. There are fortifications to this purpose, which
men raise to themselves, to hold out against the workings of the ministry. 1. Pride
and self-conceitedness, 2. Cavillings and wranglinys against the word of the
ministry (Acts xiii. 45). 3. Prosperity and outward welfare. It is because people
are so much hardened against the ministry, that, let the prophets say what they may,
they are resolved to do what they list, that there is no hupe.

iii. In reference to God Himself. They despair of the grace of God, and call it
in question :—l. From the suggestions of Satan. 2. From the infidelity which is
in their hearts. 3. From a measuring of God by themselves.

Such a frame of spirit as this is most dangerous and pernicious.

(a.) It is against ourselves, (a.) Our grace—obstructing it and uniting evil
thoughts and habits; and (.) our Comfort—opening the soul to horror and grief.

(B.) It is against God. Despair is the sin which opposes Him in His main
design in promulgating the Gospel, and denies ‘‘ the exceeding riches of His grace”
in Jesus Christ.

IL A peremptory resolution. ‘‘ But we will walk after our own devices,” &c.
Consider this determination—

i. Simply and absolutcly in itself, they declare that they will walk after their own
devices.

1. There is tmplied here: That the nature of man is very prone and subject to
« devices” —ewil devices.

2. There is here expressed; That there is in men an affection towards these
devices. Three things are here to be noticed— ,

(a.) Their obstinacy and perverseness: “We will walk” (comp. chap. ii. 25, and
viii. 6). (1.) This obstinacy and perverseness is grounded upon nue i pre-


OHAP. XVIII.


samption (Eccles. viii. 11).
them (Ephes. ii. 2).


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREM/AR.





(2.) It proceeds from the power which Satan has over
(3.) They are not persuaded of the truth of God’s Word.
(0.) Their conspiracy and combination:


“We will, every one,” &c. It was a


set plot and design’amongst them against the Lord and His prophet. All were
agreed ; and this makes the sin an aggravation, as being the more malignant.


(.) Their wilful transgression and sin against knowledge :


the imagination of his evil heart.”


“We will every one do


Not we will do what in our judgment we think


best ; but knowing their ways were evil, they determined on “ evil” still.
ii. Reflexively and derivatively. They said this—


1. Said it expressly in so many words: were not ashamed to say this.


So much


impudence is there upon men’s spirits as that they blush not to proclaim their


wickedness with open mouths,


3. They said it practically, in that which they did: persisting in their evil ways,


without amendment and reformation.


Those sins which were single before admonition come to be double afterwards,
and the judgment is so much the greater which waits upon them (John xv. 22).


—Rev. Thomas Horton, D.D., av. 1678


See Addenda; DEspParR.


ADDENDA TO CHAPTER XVIII.: ILLUSTRATIONS AND SUGGESTIVE EXTRACTS,


Ver 4. Gop’s 80VEREIGN POWER


‘*Repine not, nor reply 3
ifotes ote what Heaven ordaina with reason’s


Too pet the object is, the distance is too
high

The man who would resolve the work of fate,

May limit number and make crooked straight ;

Stop thy enquiry, then, and curb thy sense,

Nor let dust argue with Omnipotence.”


“‘ God’s patience is lasting, but it is
not everlasting.”——Anon.

See Dr. Thomson’s “The Land and
the Book ” on this passage.

Scripture reference to ‘‘the Potter :”
1 Chron. iv. 23; Isa, xli. 25, lxiv. 8;
Jer. xviii, 3, 4; Dan. ii 41; Zech. xi.
13; Matt. xxvii. 7-10; Rom. ix, 21.

Man compared to “clay” in Scrip-
ture; Isa lxiv. 8; Jer. xviii. 6.

Simeon says, in his Sermons on Rom.
viii, that there were three reasons why
he preached the doctrine of Election ;
not only because he found it in the
Scriptures, but because it laid the axe at
the root of (1) pride, (2) presumption,
and (3) despair.


Ver. 12. Drspatrr.
Francis Spira, an Italian apostate, died


in the most awful despair. On his
deathbed he exclaimed, “My sin is
greater than the mercy of God. I have


denied Christ voluntarily ; I feel that
He hardens me, and allows me ne


hope.”
** All hope ia lost

Of my reception into grace ; what worse }
For where no hope is left, is left no fear.
So farewell hope, and with hope farewell fear,
Farewell remorse, all good to me is lost:
Evil, be thou my good.”’—Satan’s Address ;

Milton’s ‘‘ Paradise Lost.”


“Dreadful is their doom, whom doubt has
driven

To censure fate and pious hope forego ;

Like yonder blasted boughs by lightning

riven,

Perfection, beauty, life, they never know,

But frown on all that pasa, a monument of

woe.” — Beattie,

*“ Despair is the offspring of laziness,
fear, and impatience ; it argues a defect
of spirit and resolution, and oftentimes
of honesty too. I would not despair
unless I saw my misfortune recorded in
the Book of Fate, and signed and sealed
by necessity.”-—Collter.


*


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAG. Chas, KI,





CHAPTER XIX.


Crrrtcan anp Exxertioan Notes.—See notes to preceding ch for Chronology, &e.
Vide also Introductory Notes to chap, xx. : ee - ue

Geographical Referencea—Ver. 2.  ‘‘ Valley of the Son of Hinnom,” ¢f. note on chap,
i. 31,“ The Hast gate,” margin the Sun gate, But the word is not definite ; MIOINN Wye.
Jerome, Keil, and Henderson suggest the Pottery gate as thetrue rendering from DN. The word
Harsuth oceurs nowhere else, and probably is derived from the fact that the refuse from
acighbouring pottery works lay about there. The Targum and Kimchi render it dung gate,
But the word areith occurs in the Talmud for potter's clay. The situation of the Pottery
gate cannot be determined, but plainly it opened into the Valley of Hinnom (Josh. xv. 8),
“<The potters there formed vessels for the use of the Temple, which was close by (ef. ver. 10-
14; chap. xviii. 2; Zech. xi, 18”).—Jamieson. Ver. 5. “ High places of Baal: ” of. chap.
vii. ey Ver. 11. “ Bury them im Tophet :” ef. Notes, Geographical and Personal, on chap,
vii. 31.

Personal Allusions.—Ver. 1. ‘‘ Ancients of the people and ancients of the priests.” The
Sanhedrim was composed of seventy-two elders, taken partly from the priests (2 Kings xix. 2)
and partly from the other tribes (Num. xi. 16; Josh. vii. 63 1 Kings viii. 1), and thus repre-
sented the nation, This great council presided over the ecelesiastical and civic affairs of the
whole people.

Manners and Customs—Ver. 5. ‘‘ Burn their sons with fore:” of. chap. vii. 831. Ver. 13
‘* Houses upon whose roofs they hawe burned incense.” On the flat roofs of Oriental houses
festivals were held (Judges xvi. 27), booths were erected at feasts (Neh. viii. 16), sacrifices
were offered to the sun and planets (2 Kings xxiii. 11, 12; Jer. xxxii. 29; Zeph. i. 5).

Literary Criticisms. —Ver. 1. ‘‘ A potter's earthen bottle.” The bottle was a flask with a long
narrow neck, and called Paps from the gurgling sound made when being emptied. Ver, 7.
“J will make void.” The word *I)ip3, is used playing upon the symbol-word Pap3 ; the root
of both worda being PP3, fo pour out. Vor. 8.—* Desolate”—an satopialaneute t+" Plapecs
thereof:” lit. blows: plague being here used because regarded as a ‘“‘ blow” direct from God's
hand. Ver. 11. “ And they shall bury them im Tophet,” &c.—these words, and to the end of
verse, are omitted in the Septuagint and by Hitzig, as interpolated from vii. 32. Ver. 13. ‘‘ De-
filed as the place, of Tophet:” lit. shall be the dejiled. The better rendering is (as Targum and
Speaker’s Oom.) shall be as the defiled Tophet : or lit,, shall be as the place Tophet, the defiled.


AHOMILETIC OUTLINE ON THE ENTIRE CHAPTER XIX.
Vers. 1-15.—A Symsonio Prorpurcy or Doom.


God bids His prophet attempt to impress this obdurate and heedless people
with another enacted symbol, which was derived again from the potter’s craft.
This time the symbol assumes a more alarming form.

1. The potter’s work ts here completed ; the vessel is in this instance formed ;
in chap. xviii. it was a vessel in the process of being moulded.

2. The destructive work <s here trremediable. In the former symbol the clay
was worked again and again till perfected ; here the vessel, being completed and
baked, is incapable of being reshaped, and is hopelessly shattered, destroyed, and
abandoned.

What are the different meanings of these two pottery symbols ?

1. The patient working upon the clay, crushing the ill-formed vessel, and skil-
fully remoulding it till a perfect vessel was obtained, symbolised the Divine process
of formation by which God was moulding a people whom He would not abandon till
His design in them was realised. .

2. The absolute shattering of the potter’s bottle now symbolises the complete
destruction of that generation of the Jewish people, as useless for God’s purposes
and contrary to His mind, This vessel, having been baked, could not be formed
anew, was beyond reformation, and so must be destroyed.

This prophetic enactment arranges itself into three stagee—


L The solemn exhibition of the doomed vessel. ;
39


OHAF, XIX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





1. The appropriate spectators. “‘ Ancients of the people and ancients of the
priests.” They represented the entire tribes, and so did the potter’s bottle: it
was a symbol of that existing generation, The vessel which was typically used
was not an unfinished piece of clay, but a bottle completed and duly hardened ;
and these “ ancients” represented a nation whose usages and temperament were
fixed and determined.

2. The scene of tts exhibition. ‘‘ The pottery gate” (see Geog. References, supra).
The place where refuse was cast. That gate, opening into the valley of Ben-
Hinnom, looked out upon the scene where this people had broken every law of God.
Loathsome memorials of the nation’s vile criminality lay before these “ ancients.”
It thus justified the doom about to be pronounced, God would break them in pieces.
Around their feet, moreover, as they stood “at the entry of the gate,” lay
shattered fragments of pottery; suggestive of the “ ew” (ver. 3) God would “ bring
upon this place” and people ; and the degradation also which impended.

3. The explanatory message of woe. (a) All classes were included in the coming
woe (ver. 3); (6) the doom would excite general amazement—* Ears tingle,”
(vers. 3, 8); (c) yet the justice thereof was manifest (vers, 4, 5); (d) and the ruin
would be absolutely desolating and complete (vers. 6-10).

IL The irremediable shattering of the vessel.

1. The violent method of tts destruction. (a.) Not by accident but by destgn at
was broken. God intended tt; man performed tt; and it was accomplished with
violence, (b.) It was completely shattered. So shall Jerusalem—people and city,
the entire generatiun—be broken to pieces; none, nothing spared. (¢,) The de-
struction was easily and trresisiibly effected. They would be powerless to avert
the ruin. All “the counsel of Judah and Jerusalem” (ver. 7) would have no
utility in striving to thwart God’s purpose on this “vessel of wrath fitted to
destruction.” (d.) No tngenwity could repair the ruin: “cannot be made whole
again.” How dreadful is God’s work when He destroys! ‘‘ None can stay His
hand, nor say unto Him, What doest Thou ?”

2. The suggestive scene of its destruction. Josiah had swept all the impurities
of the nation into the valley of Ben-Hinnom. It was a scene of desecration and
doom. The two things were connected—desecration and doom. And this people
had become a desecrated people; therefore should they fall in execrable scenes.
Loathsome as Tophet was, it would become more horrible still as “the valley of
slaughter” (ver. 6). The bearing of the case is this, sin explains man’s destruction:
Tophet testified against the nation’s violation of God's claims: Tophet would
witness violence upon the offenders: “they shall bury them in Tophet till there be
no place to bury them” (ver. 11).

Til. The reiteration of doom in the temple court.

1. Proclaim to a larger audience. “All the people” (ver. 14). In this
assembled the greatest crowd (2 Chron. xx. 5). Thus would the solemn predic-
tions, founded upon the symbolic action in Tophet, gain currency over the entire
country. None could therefore plead ignorance as an excuse. Nor can we. ‘The
doom of iniquity is known—“ there is no speech nor language where the voice is
not heard,”

2. Uttered within the very house of God. Where messages of grace had often
been delivered.’ But “ judgment must begin at the house of God.” Men must
not think to escape the denuyciation of sin in God’s house.

3. Pronounce upon all transgressors. It was not Jerusalem, “this city,” which
alone had sinned, but “all her towns.” Sinners would gladly pass over on to
others the crimes God denounces: but here all are included. For in every
instance there had been wilful refeection of God's Word : “they have hardened their
necks that they might not hear My words.” What need have we to pray to be
kept from like “hardness of heart and contempt for God’s Word and command.
ments !”

400


~~











HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR.





HOMILIES AND COMMENTS ON VERSES OF CHAPTER XIX.


Ver. 1. The “earthen botile” was a
humiliating symbol of

i, Their mean origin (Gen. iii, 19;
Isa. li. 1).

ii, Their frail existence (Deut. xxvi,
§ ; see Homélies on chap. xviii. 4, &c.).


Comments—

Ver. 3. “‘ O kings of Judah.” Spoken
in the plural, because the message (vers.
3-9) related not specially to the reign-
ing king, but to the whole royal house,
Noking of David’s line was henceforth to
sit upon the throne till He came whose
is the true kingdom (John xviii. 37).—
Speaker's Com.

Ver. 4. See Homaly on chap. xviii. 15.

Vers. 5, 6. These verses repeat chap.
vii. 31, 32. Vide Notes and Homilies.

Ver. 7. “ I will make void,” i.e, “1
will pour out” (see Lit. Crit. on verse).
Neumann suggests that Jeremiah car-
ried to Tophet the bottle full of water,
the Oriental symbol of life (Isa, xxxv.
6, xli. 18), and at these words emptied
# in the presence of the ancients.

Ver. 8. See chap. xviii. 16.

Ver. 9. A description of the siege,
(comp. xviii. 21). For the fulfilment see
Lamentations ii. 20, iv. 10.

Vers. 10-14. Theme; THE POTTER’S
VESSEL BROKEN IN TOPHET.

The scene of the people’s sin will also
be the scene of their punishment. In
the time of the good king Hezekiah,
Tophet was the place in which the
army of Sennacherib perished, when
Jerusalem was delivered in consequence
of the prayers and the faith of the
king. (See Isa. xxx. 33,xxxlii. 4, xxxvii.
36).

Ii place, signalised by the merciful
intervention of God in favour of Je-
rusalem, was afterwards polluted by


idolatry. (See chap. vii. 31, $2; 2
Kings xxiii. 10.)
I The earthen vessel broken in


Tophet. That vessel was typical of Jeru-
salem, which should thus be destroyed.

Its destruction in Tophet was accom-
panied by the declaration that the place
of their idolatry should be the scene of
their slaughter. The inhabitants of
Jerusalem would be slain by the Chal-
deans, and the scene of their idolatrous
worship be defiled by their carcases, for
there would be no sufficient place to
bury them. Comp. vii. 32.

IL, Judas Iscariot perished in the
potter’s field That traitor was typical
of the Jewish nation; symbolising its
rejection of Christ ; and the Psalmist in
his prophecies concerning Judas extends
them to the Jewish nation, typified by
him. (See Psa. lv. 7-22, cix. 8-31.)

The analogy between Judas and the
Jews was made more awful by the very
place in which he came to his miserable
end—the potter's field/ (Comp. Acts i
18, 19 with Matt. xxvii. 7 and Zech. xi,
12.) There is reason for thinking that
it was near Tophet, or the Valley of
Hinnom, which the prophet connects
with the potter’s house and the potter’s
gate (ver. 2). Both Judas and the
potter’s earthen vessel, equally types of
the Jews, were dashed to pieces [the
vessel by God’s command] in that place.

Here is subject for devout reflection
and solemn meditation.— Wordsworth.

Vers. 14, 15. “ Then came Jeremtah
from Tophet,” &e.

Here commences the record of an
incident which runs on connectedly with
chap. xxi., and should have formed part
of the chapter. For general explana-
tions of the facts see Introductory Notes
to chap. xxi.


CHAPTER XX.


Orrricat ano Exrertican, Norrs.—1. Chronology


of the Chapter, With chap xx. the


first section of this book closes. Probably this was Jeremiah’s last publie prophecy in
Jehoiakim’s reign, and formed the concluding entry in the “ roll ” which was read in part
before Jehoiakim, and which Jehoiakim ‘‘ ent with his penknife and cast into the fire ” (chap.


xxxvi. 23).


To that ‘‘roli,” which seems to have concluded with this emphatic prophecy as


to the Babylonian Captivity (cf. xx. 4 with xxxvi. 29), ‘‘many like words” were ‘added be
sides ” (xxxvi. 32); and these added words were the chapters following this twentieth,
about whose dates there is no uncertainty, for each prophecy beara a special Bae i ie oe


20


OMAP. XX. HOMIZLETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





the occasion and date of its utterance. This prophecy occurred at the end of the third os
beginning of the fourth year of Jeboiakim (see notes on chap. xviii.).

2. Contemporary Scriptures —The events came closely contiguous to the records in 2 Kings
xxiv. 1; 2 Chron. xxxvi. 6.

8. National Affairs, and 4 Contemporaneous History (comp. notes on chap, vii). The captura
of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar occurred early in the fourth year of Jeboiskin's reign,

5. Geographical References,— Ver. 2. “The high gate of Benjamin.” There was the City
gate of Benjamin on the city’s northern side, and towards the territory of Benjamin (ch. vii.
2, xxxvii. 13, xxxviii. 7); and there was the Temple zate of Benjamin, which is here described
—‘‘ which waa in [not by] the house of the Lord.” This latter was called the “‘ //igh gate”
because situate on an eminence, and to distinguish it from the gate in the city wall.

6. Personal Allusions.—Ver. 1. ‘‘ Pashur the son of Immer the priest.” Pashur the priest
was head of the sixteenth course of the priesta (1 Chron. xxiv. 14). Jmmer was one of the
original governors of the Sanctuary, of whom there were twenty-four, sixteen sons of Eleazar,
and eight sons of Ithamar (1 Chron. xxiv. 14). ‘* Pashur” waa chief governor, and from com-
parison of xxix. 25, 26, with lii. 24, it appears that the temple-governor occupied rank second
to that of the high priest ; was deputy high priest (cf. 2 Kings xxv. 18). Pashur was head of
the twenty-four ‘‘ guards” of the Temple, and had the right of apprehending any one com-
mitting what he thought an outrage within the precincts of the house of God; but the San-
hedrim alone had judicial power over those thus apprehended (comp. xxvi. 8, 10, 16). From
words in the sixth verse—‘* thou hast prophesied lies”—it im evident that Pashur assumed
prophetic functions ; and most probably Pashur’s ‘‘ jriends” (ver. 6) formed a party in the Jewieh
state who clamonred for alliance with Egypt in order to resist the arms of Assyria, and of
whom Pashur was the moving genius, indulging in sanguine predictions of security and suc-
cess (vide chap. xviii. 18, and v. 31). Ver. 5. ‘‘ King of Babylon.” Nabopalagsar was
now king of the Babylonians. (Vide preliminary note on Contemporary History to chap. 1)

7. No Natural History allusions in this chapter.

8. Manners and Customs.—Ver. 2, ‘* Smote Jeremiah and put him tn the stocks:” ‘‘ Smote”
—probably inflicting the legal ‘forty stripes save one.” ‘“* Stoeks””— Nggn?, an instrument
of torture, from ‘JDM, to twist or rack. The body was held in a crooked position, the neck,
hands, and feet were secured, and much pain was suffered. This cruel instrument is first
alluded to in 2 Chron, xvi. 10, and there rendered ‘‘ prison- house.”

9. Literary Oriticiams.—Ver. 3. ‘‘ Magor-missabib.” (Vide Lit, Orit. on chap. vi. 25.)
Pashur “WWE, a compound word; WH, and WM,—probably meaning, though derivation is
uncertain, ‘‘security (or prosperity, joy) around,” Jeremiah would be prone to play upon the
meaning of the name he changed: the new name meant “Terror on every side.” Jeremiah
uses this phrase in chap, vi. 25, xx. 3, 10, xlvi. 6, xlix. 29; Lam. ii, 22, i :

Ver. 5. ‘‘ Strength . . . labours:”  Stores—provisions laid up in their magazines and
granaries : and gains—fruite of industry, the Way a or wealth of the community.

Ver. 7. ‘* Hast deceived:’’ from nn. sed in Piel both in a good and bad sense; te

suade, rendered in ver. 10 ‘‘enticed.” He was unwilling to undertake the prophetic office
(chap. i. 7), but God had persuaded him with promises (i. 8, 17-19), which, however, Jeremiah
had misapprebended, God promised no immunity from abuse but that he should ‘* prevail.”

“* Daily:” all the day long.

Ver. 8. ‘‘ For since I , I cried out,” &c. ‘* For as often as I speak or ery, I must cry
concerning violence and ill-treatment.”—Lange. ‘‘ Whenever I speak, | must shout ; I muat
ery violence and spoil.” The two words “‘ cried, eried,” are not the same in the Hebrew : the
first means to complata, the second to call out, proclaim. ‘For as often as I speak I must
complain ; I call out violence and spoil.” —Speaker’s Com.

“ Word of the Lord was made:” ismade. ‘‘ Daily”—all the day long. f

Ver. 9. ‘Then I said...... But his word was.” Better: ‘‘ And when I say | wilh not, &c.—
name, then it becometh in my heart,” &c. ee

“T was weary with forbearing, and I could not stay.” I weary myself to held it in, but can-
not (vide chap. vi. 11). :

Ver. 10. Read the versethus, ‘For I hear the whispering (detraction, Henderson) of many,
fear on every side [Magor-missabib, again]; (saying) Report ye, and we will report him. — All
my familiars (Lit. the men ef my peace ; Keil, every man of my friendship] watch for my halting”
[my fall—Henderson]. Perhaps they say ‘‘he will be enticed,” &e.

Ver. 11. ‘‘ A mighty terrible one:” Rather, a formidable warrior.

‘* Ashamed, for they shall not prosper,” &c.: Rather, ashamed, because they have not acted
wisely ; with an everlasting reproach (disgrace) that shall never be forgotten. —

Wer. 12, ‘* Opened my cause ;” On Thee have I rolled my cause, commétted it (ef. xi, 20)


HOMILETIC OUTLINES ON SECTIONS OF CHAPTER XX.


Section 1-6. Persecution of the faithful prophet.
»» 7-18, Complaining prayer merging into godly confidence,


14-18, Ap extravagant dirge over an unhappy life.


9


402








5
4
E
|
t


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH. OmsP. Xz,





Section 1-6.—PersecuTion oF THE FAITHFUL PROPHET,

L Pashur’s unjust displeasure against Jeremiah.

1. The impropriety of tt. Pashur was a priest; and Jeremiah, being also of the
priestly order, should have been protected by him. Moreover, the priests of
Sages should have been prompt and gealous to second the work of a prophet of

ehovah,

2. The malignity of tt. “ A man’s foes are they of his own household.” Oom-
pare the action of Zedekiah (the false priest, 1 Kings xxii, 24) ; and of those foul
priests (Matt. xxvi. 67, 68). ‘The greatest malignity to God’s prophets was found
among those that professed sanctity and concern for God and His church.” Pashur
found his own sanguine prophecies hereby refuted, and was wroth. (See Per-
sonal Allusions.)

3. The illegality of st. ‘‘Smote him,” perhaps with the hand or staff of
2uthority, as afterwards Paul was smitten (Acts xxiii 2). But Pashur had no
tight to administer justice (see note on verse under Personal Allusions), But rules
of justice are set aside: “The enemies of piety would never allow themselves to
be governed by the laws of equity.”

4. The cruelty of st. ‘Put in stocks:” and thus confined through the night
into next day, exposed to public derision. “The best men have met with the
worst treatment. It may well rouse pious indignation to see such a man as Pashur
on the bench, and such a man as Jeremiah in the stocks! It is well that there is
another life after this, when persons and things will appear with another face.”

IL God’s just displeasure against Pashur. Jeremiah “ suffered and threatened
not ;” but when released, he canre with a special message from Jehovah.

1. Did Pashur aim to make himself easy, by silencing one who told him his
faults, and which endangered his reputation with the people? He shall not gain
his point, for

(a.) Though the prophet should be silent, his own consctence shall make him
uneasy. ‘‘ Magor-missabib.” God can make a sinner a “ terror to himself” (ver. 4).
Persons in deep melancholy also become a terror “ to all their friends” about them.

(.) His friends, in whom he put confidence and studied to oblige in persecuting
Jeremiah, shall all fasl him (ver. 4).

(c.) The issue shall show his terror to be not causeless, for Divine vengeance
awaited him (ver. 6). Let persecutors read the doom of Pashur and tremble ;
tremble to repentance before they be made to tremble to their ruin,

2. Did he aim to make the people easy by stopping Jeremiah’s warning pro-
phecies? It appears from ver. 6 that he set himself up as a prophet, and told
the people they should have peace. Yet the word of God will have its course,

a.) The country shall be ruined: “TI will give all Judah,” &c. (ver. 4).

The city shall be ruined (ver. 5). For the king of Babylon shall (1) seize
their military stores, “the strength of the city ;” (2) carry off their wares and
merchandise, “their labours ;” (3) plunder their fine houses of their “ precious
things ;” (4) rifle the exchequer, the jewels of the crown and “ all the treasures of
the kings of Judah.” In part taken from Matthew Henry.


See Addenda: PersxcuTion or Gop’s SERVANTS.


Section 7-13.—CompPiarsine PravER MERGING Into Gopiy ConFIDENCE.


There are two interpretations of this outburst of intense emotion—

1. It might have been the result of feelings wounded by the indignities of the
public smiting and a night spent in the stocks.

2. It was more probably the outcry of mental agony occasioned by the seeming
failure of his ministry to recal his nation from ungodliness and ruin.

It should be noticed that though Jeremiah bows before God crushed by distress of
spirit, he betrays nothing of this before the people, but stands before the multitude
with heroic valour, warning prince, priest, and people of the doom their sins invoked,


Oar, XX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


Fl GOED Pe a TE a een


L A painful misapprehension of his prophetic mission.

1. In reference to what God had done with him. He avows that Jehovah had

(a.) Persuaded him into His service by assurances which had failed. He mis
read God’s promise (chap. i. 8, 18).

(6.) Constrained him wholly against his will to a painful mission. His timid
nature shrank from hardship.

(c.) Exposed him to derision by deferring the fulfilment of his predictions,
Jeremiah was in too great haste for God to vindicate His word.

2. In reference to what he should do for God. He was tempted

(a.) Temporarily to hold back from further witness for God. Not “ mention
His name.”

(b.) Forcibly to suppress the prophetic spirit within him. But it proved a
“‘ burning fire within his bones.”

(c.) He even “‘ wearied ” himself with the silence he imposed upon himself: but
the word of God was mightier than his resolutions,

IL An alarming experience of abuse from his people.

1. Scornful defamation of his preaching (ver. 10). ‘They seem to have summed
up his preaching as being nothing but the reiteration of the words—“ MMagor-
missabib, i.¢., “ Fear on every side,” and derided him with it. He was a preacher
of fear! The same appears from ver. 8—“ Whenever I spake I proclaimed violence
and spoil.” And the people laughed at him as a persistent croaker—prophet of
evil. They whispered among themselves against him, “ Here is ‘ Fear-on-every-side ’
preaching again!”

2. Virulent conspiracy against his person. They resolve to “report” his words

.to the authorities and the king, and so bring him into odium and punishment.
Further, his “ familiars” joined in the conspiracy, and while feigning to be “men
of his peace,” yet sought occasion to betray him.

Til. A triumphant assurance of Divine protec tion.

1. That Jehovah would defend him with terrible mightiness (ver. 11). He knew
that the Lord was personally “with” him: on his side, to protect him, to make
his word good, to ultimately vindicate him against “defamation ” and “ derision,”
and to smite terror into his antagonists.

2. That his persecutors would be defeated with terrible disgrace. Their impotent
malice and crafty designs shall fail against Jeremiah; while their own overthrow
shall involve them in greatest shame and perpetual distress.

IV. A confident surrender of his cause to God.

1. His inmost heart was opened fully to Him (ver. 12).

(a.) God knew him thoroughly: saw all the thoughts and feelings which moved
within him ; could therefore judge him righteously.

(6.) To God he entrusted himself: rolled his cause on Him. He sought no vindi-
eation or help elsewhere.

(c.) God would right him with his traducers : “ Vengeance belongeth unto God.”

2. His grateful soul poured itself forth in praise to Him (ver. 13).

a.) It was the triumph of faith over fear. His complaints are all silenced and
turned into thanksgiving.

(b.) It rose from the realisation of experienced Providence : “ He hath delivered
the soul of the poor,” &. Memory came in to his aid; and hope rose like the
dawn upon the night-gloom of his despondency. ‘‘ Hope thou in God, for I shall
yet praise Him, who is the health of my countenance and my God.”


Section 14-18.—A Passtonatse DirGE ovVER AN UNHAPPY LIFE,


In this sudden transition of trust to despair we see a revelation of the inner
workings of Jeremiah’s heart, consequent upon the treatment he received from his
treacherous friends and cruel persecutors, and on the seeming failure of his pro
phecies and his own desertion by God whose prophet he was.

404


ave ae teed





oe ee ee


ee, ee ee ee


est <a Papin


ee heh, et iy Pa PARIS SD


et ae


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. CHAP, XX.


_~s








L It is not to be denied that we have here a passionate outbreak of human
‘nfirmity. But this display

1. Proves that there has been no reserve practised by the prophets ; and thus we
oh a portraiture of Jeremiah delineated in his true colours by his own hand, This
also

2. Inspires us with confidence in the truth of the narrative; and also excites our
pneetey with Jeremiah in his sufferings, which extorted such utterances from

im.

Note, that as it was with Job (iii, 3-26) so with Jeremiah—he was purified by
suffering. After the passionate utterances in this chapter we see no more evidence
of weakness or impatience in Jeremiah. On the contrary, the prophet, who now
was weak and desponding, afterwards strengthened and encouraged others (see
chap. xlvi. 1-5).

II. Here also, from these impatient ejaculations of Jeremiah, we have provi-


_ dentially clear proof that the theory of some Jewish interpreters 1s groundless, by


which Isaiah’s magnificent and mysterious prophecy concerning the Messiah
(chap. liii.) is made to refer to Jeremiah.

1, How could one who was compassed with infirmity and betrayed into sin (as
Jeremiah shows himself to have been) have been accepted—as these anti-Messianic
theorists would have us believe—as a vicarious atonement for the sins of the world ?

2. In his sufferings, Jeremiah was a signal type of Christ: especially in the cruel
and shameful usage he received from those to whom he preached, and whom he
would have delivered from ruin had they listened to his preaching. But in all
human types of Christ there are some blemishes which separate them immeasurably
from the Divine Antitype.

3. Christ always eacels where they most fail. Jeremiah fails in his impatience
under persecution, in repining against God, and in murmuring at his own condition.
There Christ excels, His meat was to do His Father’s will (John iv. 34) ; and, in
the immediate prospect of suffering, His language was, “‘ Now is the Son of Man
glorified, and God is glorified in Him” (John xiii, 31; comp. Heb. xii. 2).

III. Here we have evidence of the greater grace given after the Incarnation
than had ever been vouchsafed to those who lived before it.

Two of the greatest saints and sufferers, Job and Jeremiah—one the saint and
sufferer of the Patriarchal dispensation, the other the suffering prophet of the
Mosaic economy—are so perturbed by suffering that they curse the day of their
birth.

But (as Chrysostom observes in Hom. iv. on the patience of Job) the apostles of
Christ rejoiced in tribulation, and were thankful to God that they were counted
worthy to suffer for His name.—Arranged from Wordsworth.


HOMILIES AND COMMENTS ON VERSES OF CHAPTER XX.


are fortified im their self-confidence
by boastful conduct of fellow-trans-


Ver. 4. Theme: THe WicKED, TER-
RIFIED AND TrRRiryine. “ For thus


saith the Lord, Behold, I will make
thee a terror to thyself and to all
thy friends.”

I. A guilty man may enjoy con-
fidence, and imspire confidence in
others. This is evident here. Unless
80, it would not be needful for God to
act to change confidence into terror.

1. Sinners live on in casy but tran-
sient security.

2. The “ friends” of ungodly men


gressors.

It. A guilty man’s confidence may
be turned into terror and amaze.

1. God can do i, does do it, will do
it. He can make the most daring


‘sinner a terror to himself, and will find


s way to alarm him.

2. Conviction of sin arouses terror.
Example : John Bunyan. See also
his Christian before Sinai, in “ Pil
grim’s Progress.”

405


OHAP. XX,


3. Sudden peril of life or risk of
worldly gains startle him to agonising
apprehensions,

4. Death's darkness and eternity’s
nearness will certainly appal him.
“How wilt thou do in the swellings
of Jordan ?”

5. On the Judgment Day, what terror
will seize the guilty. “ Rocks fall on
us, and hide us,” &c.

Ti A guilty man’s terror will
alarm his friends.

l. A sinner whose hilarity and reck-
‘lessness have changed into alarm for
guilt and dread of doom, ts Ike an
apparition at the feast of worldly
souls. Banquo’s ghost. His tremblings
and terrors alarm them, communicating
fear to their souls.

2. A sinner’s deathbed has often filled
observers with awful fears for themselves.


See Addenda:
TERROR.


Comments—

“Wherein did his (Pashur’s) punish-
ment consist? Probably in this. He
was one of the leading men who, in
encouraging Jehoiakim to enter upon
that course which ended in the ruin of
Judah, had “ prophesied lies.” When,
then, he saw the dreadful slaughter of
his countrymen,—Jehoiakim put to
death, his young son dragged into cap-
tivity, and the land stripped of all that
was best—his conscience so condemned
him as the guilty cause of such great
misery, that in the agonies of remorse
he became a terror to himself and his


friends.” —Speaker’s Com.


THe WIiokEeD A


Ver. 7. Theme: Is Gop a DEortvER i

The word “deceived” should be
“enticed” or “ persuaded.” Comp. Gen.
ix. 27; Prov. xxv. 15; Hos, ii 14, in
which last text the word is rendered
“ allure.”
delude.

I. God has approved Himself to all


God can induce but never


His servants as a faithful Master. He


has never decoyed them ; never deserted
them.

IL Servants of God may deceive
themselves in His service by sanguine


expectations.
406


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


1. Jeremiah misapprehended God's
words of promise and assurance. The
words (chap. i. 10) were interpreted
by him in a flattering sensa He ex-
pected general homage to be paid him
as God’s messenger.

2. But he knew the condition of
prophetic work in all ages. All God’s
messengers before him had been per-
secuted, and he had no reason to look
for a better lot.

3. Further, God emphatically stated
that princes and priests would treat him
wl. “They shall fight against thee”
(chap. i. 19).

4. All Christian workers are dite
tinctly forewarned of the troubles they
will meet (John xvi. 1, 2).

IIL The persuasions of God over-
power our natural reluctance and
fears. ‘Thou wast stronger than I,
and hast prevailed.”

1. His pleas were refuted. He urged
that he was under age, and unequal to
the office. God took all reality out of
his arguments by assuring him that He
had “ sanctified ” him to this work, and
by equipping him for the task (chap. i. 9).

2. His temerity was overruled. He
was afraid of facing the authorities
and contending with them. But God
summoned him not to be “dismayed
at their faces,” and made him “a
defenced city,” de.

Even so out of weakness God makes
strong ‘the weak things of the world
to confound the mighty.” He is able
to make all grace abound. Thus He
surprises us by making us “able to
do exceeding abundantly above all we
think.” Yet He never deceives or
disappoints a soul.








Ver. 7. Theme: Mooxrne at THE
Preacher. “I am in derision daily,
every one mocketh me.”

Two forms of this irritating con-
tinually assailed him.

L Official ridicule.

1. They made jest of everything he
did and said, They treated him as if
he were a fool, good for nothing but
to make sport. Thus he was—

{a.) Continually,— “ daily,”
ally “all the day long,”


liter


|





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. :


OaP, XX.


EY


(b.) Universally, “ Every one mocks
me.”

“The greatest so far forget their own
gravity, and the meanest so far forget
mine.”

Thus our Lord on the Cross was
reviled both by priest and people.

2. His preaching was the special
object of their derision (ver. 8). That for
which they should have honoured and
respected him was the very thing for
which they reviled and reproached him.

It is sad to think that though
Divine Revelation be one of the great-
est blessings and honours ever bestowed
on the world, yet it has been very much
turned to the reproach of the most
zealous preachers and believers.

Two things they derided him for—

(a.) The manner of his preaching :
“Since he spake, he cried out.” He
was too vigorous and loud in his preach-
ing. Lively preachers are the scorn of
eareless unbelieving hearers.

(6.) The matter of his preaching: He
cried, “ Violence and spoil.” He re-
proved them for “violence and spoil”
toward one another, and for this they
ridiculed him as over-precise; and he
prophesied of “violence and spoil” as
the punishment of their sin, and for this
they reviled him as over-credulous.

IL Personal reproach. Not merely
did they laugh at his ministry, but they
acted a more spiteful part, and with
more subtlety.

1. They spread false reports of him
(ver. 10). They represented Jere-
miah as instilling “ fears on every side,”
so to make them uneasy under the
government, and disposed to rebellion.

Jeremiah, in his complaint, makes
ase of the same words that David (Pa
xxxi. 13) had used before him, that it
might be a comfort to him to think that
other good men had suffered like abuses
before him.

2. Flatterers watched his words for
an occasion of accusation against him
to the government. “My familiars
watched for my halting,” &c. Just as
the spies came to Christ feigning to
be just men (Luke xx. 20). They
hoped Jeremiah would be led on and
enticed to say something which they


might seize upon, and for which they
could secure his condemnation before
the king or Sanhedrim.

This malignant treachery found full-
est illustration in Jeremiah’s Divine
Antitype, Jesus Christ, against whom
they laid wait, and “suborned men”
for the purpose to “entangle Him in
His talk that they might accuse Him
to the governor” (Matt. xxii. 15).—
Comp. Wordsworth and Matthew Henry.


See Addenda: DeRzmwina THE
PREACHER.

Ver. 9. Theme: Tue Sout vNDER
DiscoURAGEMENT.


We behold here the struggle between
grace and corruption: or as Paul ex-
presses it, “the flesh lusting against
the Spirit, and the Spirit against the
flesh.” And when we see how awfully
an unhallowed temper prevailed over
this good man Jeremiah, we cannot
but exclaim: “Lord, what is man
that Thou art mindful of him,” &

In the conflict here expressed we
behold

L The effects of discouragement on
a pious soul.

1. In our labours for the good of
others, Ministers are apt to complain
that “‘they have laboured in vain and
spent their strength for nought;” and
under these feelings, either desert their
post, or lament that they have not been
more profitably employed.

Moses thus erred (Exod. v. 22, 23)
Joshua also after his entrance into
Canaan (Josh. vii. 7).

Parents likewise mourn over their
children, masters over their servants,
teachers over the poor they instruct,
&e.

2. In our exertions for ovr own
souls, Persons, when first “ enticed”
or “ persuaded” to embrace the Gospel,
fondly imagine that they will go for-
ward in the divine life with ease. Con-
flicts come, and slow progress is made,
Then they complain, “my way is hid
from the Lord,” &e. (Isa. xl. 27). Such
apprehension is most enervating.

IL The effect of piety on a dis-
couraged soul Jeremiah attempted
for a season to execute his rash deter:

407


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR.





mination, but could not persist, for the
word of God was like a burning fire in
his bones, so that he must declare it.

Thus will grace work in every soul
even under deepest discouragements.

1. To shame our querulous impatience.
When David had given vent to queru-
lousness, he corrected himself (Ps. lxxiii.
12-16, lxxvii. 7-10). We complain of
our non-success. Prophets and apostles
have done so before us. We should wait
(Heb. ii. 3).

2. To revive our languid hopes. Grace
will bring to our view God’s pro-
mises ; assure us that “ His arm is not
shortened,” dec,

3. To resuscitate our drooping ener-
ges. Jeremiah was “weary with for-
bearing,” even more than with execut-
ing his mission. And if grace have its
perfect work in us, so we shall be, Our
labours, both ministerial and personal, will
be renewed, God has said, ‘“ Be not
weary in well-doing, for in due season,”
&. And depending on His word, we
shall go forward, “steadfast and im-
movable, always abounding in the
work of the Lord.”

(a.) Eapect discouragements in every
part of your duty. They are God’s
appointed means for trying our faith
- and love, and for increasing every
divine grace in us.

(6.) Make them occastons for glorify-
tng God the more. If we have “ fight-
ings without and fears within,” we
must go the more earnestly to God,
and rely the more firmly on His pro-
mised aid. Instead of sinking under
discouragements, we must say: ‘ Who
art. thou, O great mountain? Before
Zerubbabel thou shalt become a plain.”
— Simeon,


Ver. 12. Theme: Gop THE HEaRr-
SrarcHer. See Homilies on chap. xi.
20, xxvii. 10.


Ver. 13. Theme: THz Sona opr
REDEMPTION.

Immediately he had “opened” or
committed “his cause” to God, he
could sing for joy.


I. Faith grasped a fact as yet in the -


future. Jeremiah’s outward circum-


408


stances were still disturbed and perilous,
But he now realises God’s sufficiency
and fidelity, even as before (ver. 7) he
had distrusted Him

Faith turned his tremblings into
triumphs.

So the soul when Christ’s sufficiency
and faithfulness are apprehended. “ Lo!
this is the Lord, we have waited for
Him, we will be glad and rejoice in
His salvation.”

Il. Joy filled his soul over God's
gracious rescue. His soul had been
“poor ;” poor in courage, poor in faith,
poor in grace.

“ Hyil-doere” had his soul in theirs
“ hand,”

But God had redeemed his soul from
destruction. ’
III. Songs of praise silenced sighs
of complaint. He found peace imme-
diately he could leave his cause in faith

to God.

Complaints are now exchanged for
thanksgiving, when once the soul knows
its Redeemer.

God’s loving-kindness and grace over-
whelms the soul with rejoicing.

We may appeal to every soul for
whom the redemption of Calvary has
been effectively wrought by Christ, and
which is offered to sinners “ without
money and without price ”—“ Sing unto
the Lord, praise ye the Lord.”


** QO for this love let rocks and hilla
Their lasting silence break,
And all harmonious human tongues,
Their Saviour’s praises speak.”


Vers, 14-18. Theme: ImMPREOa-
TIONS ON HIS BrrtH. Sce Sectional
treatment, supra.

The Rev. John Owen, in editing
Calvin’s Commentaries in this place,
remarks—

“The greatest difficulty in this
passage is is connection. That Jere-
miah should have cursed his birthday
is what can be accounted for as in the
case of Job. Nature, even in the best of
men, sometimes utters its voice. But how
he came to do this immediately after
having thanked God for his deliver-
ance seems singular. The explana-
tion of Calvin, that he relates what had


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; JEREMIAH,


passed in his mind, while he was con-
fined by Pashur, is plausible, and has
been adopted by Grotius, Henry, and
others, Scott acknowledges the transi-
tion to be very extraordinary, but
thinks that the Prophet describes what
had passed through his own mind, and
says that the experience of good men
proves that such sudden changes occur.
‘An experimental acquaintance with
our own hearts, he says, ‘and the
variations of our passions under sharp
trials, as encouraging or discouraging
thoughts occur to our minds, will best
enable us to understand it.’ This is
probably the right view of the subject,”

“i, The Prophet teaches us here
that he was not only opposed by
enemies, but also distressed inwardly
tx his mind, so that he was carried
away, contrary to reason and judg-
ment, by turbulent emotions which
even led him to give utterance to vile
blasphemies,

“ii, We may learn with what care





OHaP. XX.





ought every one of us to watch himself, lest
we be carried away by a violent feeling,
80 as to become intemperate and unruly,

“iii, Yet the origin of his zeal was
right. His complaint was not that he
was afflicted with disease, &c., but be-
cause all his labour was lost which he
spent for the well-being of his people,
and because he found the truth of God
loaded with calumnies and reproaches.
When he saw the ungedly thus inso-
lently resisting nim, and that all religion
was treated with ridicule, he felt deeply
moved,

“iv. Yet when we thus become weary
of life, with all the light and blessings of
God, it is because disdain reigns within
us, or that we cannot with resignation
bear reproaches, or that poverty is too
grievous for us, &e. Often it is not
that we (as with Jeremiah) are influ-
enced with zeal for God.”—Calvin.


On Ver. 15. See Introduction. Part
L— Parentage and Calling.”


NOTICBABLE TOPIO IN CHAPTER XX.
Topie : Existence REGRETTED. —“ Cursed be the day wherein I was born” (ver. 14).


Job and Jeremiah were alike in wishing they had never been born. They were
both men of sorrow. In the intensity of his grief Job exclaimed, “ Let the day
perish wherein I was born ;” and Jeremiah in equal mental anguish cries, “ Cursed
be the day,” &c, Certainly this was

L A preference alike irreligious and irrational.

1. Good men should not for a moment think that non-existence ts preferable to
life and being. They were both good men, children of God; and existence was
therefore a blessing to be prized, not an evil to be mourned over. Had they been
versed in the design and results of Divine dispensations, as was Paul, they would
have said, “ Our light afflictions, which are but for a moment,” &c. With such a
destiny before them, instead of cursing the day of birth, they would have blessed it
as the dawn of an eternal existence, to be hereafter crowned with a glory that
fadeth not away.

2. Ungodly men may with some degree of reason prefer non-existence : because
in trouble they have no Divine support, in death no good hope, in eternity no
expectation but the penalty of sin. Such men, when the sorrows of death encom-
‘pass them, or when ushered into the eternal world, have good reason to say,
“‘ Cursed be the day wherein I was born.”

IL. Non-existence is preferable to existence unless existence possess more
pleasure than pain.

1. If every ungodly man lived out threescore years and ten, and the whole was
spent in pleasure, yet, as that period is but momentary as compared with his
eternal existence, and as that existence ts to be one of pasa, he might curse the day
of his birth,

2. Existence, eternal existence ts a blessing to all unfallen ones, and also to such
fallen ones as are redeemed by the death of Christ. It requires no stretch of


ouaAP, XZ. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; JEREMIAR,








imagination to suppose that both Job and Jeremiah are now praising and blessing
God for that very day which in the time of their earthly sorrows they cursed.

3. But perpetuity of existence can be no blessing to the “angels who kept not
their first estate,” nor to those of the human race who by impenitence and unbelief
reject the great salvation, and bring upon themselves the double condemnation—
the. condemnation of the law and the condemnation of the gospel.

IIL Hell and heaven are two great teachers ; they teach lessons which are
not learnt on earth, and wonderfully alter men’s views of Divine dispensations and
revealed truths.

1. Hell teaches—the folly of wickedness, the full enormity of sin in the penalty
it has entailed, and leads all its victims amid the consequences of their depravity
to curse the day wherein they were born.

2. Heaven teaches—the wisdom of holiness, the full benefits of redemption in
the felicity it has secured, and leads. all the ransomed to bless the day of their
birth as the morn of their noontide of glory.

Here we “know in part” and can “ prophesy but in part.”
disclosures are made when the spirit is ushered into that world.

Having thus seen that there are in some cases reasons for cursing the day of
one’s birth, let it be remembered that

IV. God is not willing that any should have occasion for preferring non-
existence.

1. He has devised and carried out a costly plan by which the existence of fallen
ones might be made an eternal blessing. This plan was published in Eden, fore-
shadowed in type, proclaimed by prophets, and consummated in the death of Jesus
Christ. On the cross He announced “ It is finished.”

2. Hvery man who now wishes for a glorious existence has only to look to Jesus
and be saved. Myriads have looked, and a blessed immortality is their portion :
wayriads have refused to look, and a wretched immortality is their inheritance.

Life ts @ solemn thing. It has in it everlasting perpetuity; and so also has death,

*¢ It is not all of life to live,
Nor all of death to die.”

Life and death are only the seed-time: a harvest follows, that of bliss or woe.
Inspiration answers the inquiry, What harvest shall I reap? thus—‘ Be not
deceived, God is not mocked ; whatsoever a man soweth, that shall he also reap:
he that soweth to the flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption; he that soweth to
the Spirit shall of the Spirit reap life everlasting.”"—Arranged from Rev. D.
Pledge’s “ Morning and Evening Walks with Jeremiah.”


Fuller and wider


ADDENDA TO CHAPTER XX. ILLUSTRATIONS AND 8UGGESTIVE EXTRACTS.


Vers, 1-6. Prerszcurion or Gop’s (Contra Arian], But heretics are to


SERVANTS,

“ Smote Jeremtah:” with his fist, as
Zedekiah smote Micaiah (1 Kings xxii.
24), and as Bonner did Hawkes and
other martyrs, pulling off part of their
beards; or with @ staf as our Saviour
was struck (Matt. xxvi. 67); and as
that Popish bishop, degrading a martyr
minister, struck him so hard with
his crosier-staff as he was kneeling on
the stairs at St. Paul’s, that he fell
down backwards and broke his head.
Atqut lapidandt sunt heretict sacrarwm
literarum argumentis, saith Athanasius

410


stoned with Scripture arguments ;
and men may a good deal sooner be
cudgelled into a treaty than into a
tenet.

“ Put him in the stocks:” “As they
afterwards did Paul and Silas (Acts
xvi.) ; Clerinus the martyr, mentioned
in Cyprian’s epistles; Mr. Philpot in
the Bishop of London’s coal-house ; and
that good woman, who, suffering after- -
wards for the same cause, rejoiced much
that her leg was put in the same hole
of the stocks where Philpot’s leg had
lain before.”—Trapr


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH,





GuaP, TER,





* And when religious sects ran mad,
He held, in spite of all his learning,
What if a man’s belief is bad,
It will not be improved by burning.”
—Praed.


Ver. 4. THE WICKED A TERROR.

“Such terror befell Tullus Hostilius,
king of Rome, who had for his gods
Pavor and Pallor.  Dignissimus sane
gut decs suos semper haberet presentes,
saith Lactantius wittily ; t.¢., great pity
but this man should ever have had his
gods at hand, since he was so fond of
them. Our Richard IIL and Charles IX.
of France, a pair of bloody princes, were
Magor-missabibs in their generations,
as terrible at length to themselves as
they had been formerly to others; and
therefore could never endure to be
awakened in the night without musie or
some like diversion.”—Trapp.


“¢ Unnatural deeds
Do breed unnatural troubles : infected minds


To their deaf pillows will discharge their
posi Bhaleeneare,


** Here, here it lies; a lamp of lead by day 3
And in myshort, distracted, nightly slumbers,
The hag that rides my dreams.” —Dryden.


“He that hides a dark soul and foul thoughts,
Benighted walks under the mid-day sun;
Himeelf is his own dungeon.” —Afilton,


‘ Horror and doubt distract
His troubled thoughts, and from the bottom
stir
The hell within him ; for within him hell
He brings, and round about him; nor from
hell
One step, no more than from himeelf, can fly
By change of place.” — Byron.


Tiberius declared in the Senate that
he suffered death daily.


Ver. 7. DERIDING THE PREACHER,

See the Life ef John Wesley for in-
stances,

“The cynics said long ago of the
Megarians, ‘ Better be their horse, dog,
or pander than their teacher, for better
should he be regarded.’”—Trapp.

A modern rhyme puts the case thus—

*¢ Tickle the peo i

Tickle them LL : ap ey wale

Teach the people ; you'll ne’er grow rich,

But live like a beggar and die in a ditch.”


Ver. 14. JEREMIAH’s DISCOURAGE
MENT.

“What was the cause of this dis
couragement? He does not leave us im
the dark as to this: he tells us that he
‘heard the defaming of many '—‘ My
familiars watched for my halting,’ &«.
This was well suited to dismay a man
of Jeremiah’s temper; but he again
speedily comes back to his trust in God :
—‘ But the Lord is with me.’

“Tt is possible that on some occasion
Jeremiah had, under the influence of
such feelings as he so often expresses,
been tempted to soften or to suppress
some part of a message entrusted to him,
deeming it likely to excite that violent
antagonism which was grievous to his
peaceful temper. The man who had
confessedly purposed not to speak at
all, might think of withholding part of
the words he was commanded to speak,
This supposition would give added force
to the injunction, which on one occasion
he received :—‘ Speak all the words that
I command thee to speak unto them,
Diminish not a word.’ §8So here also he
found that there was no discretion left
to him.” —Kttto,


CHAPTER XXL


Crrticat anp Exrcrticat Norrs.—1. Ohronology of the Chapter.
Vide Notes, and especially Personal Allusions to chap. i.


feign.
589; Hales B.o. 587.
2. Contemporary Seri


Beginning of Zedeckiah’s
Usher dates the chapter BO,


—®2 Kings xxiv. 17—xxv. 2. Deniel had been prophesying at


pturea,
Babylon from the time of the first captivity of Judah under Jehojakim, and his book runs on


over to the reign of Zedekiah.


Ezekiel algo appears as a prophet (at Babylon) when he sat


among the captives by the river Chebar (Ezek. i. 1).


8. National


.—Jehoiaehin, son of Jehoiakim, was deposed by the Ohaldean king after


three months’ reign. Mattaniah (named by Nebuchadnezzar Zedekiah), the brother of Jehoiakim,


bad been placed on the throne by Nebuchadnessgar as his vassal.


Against this Chaldean power
£11


OMAP. XXI, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAB,








Gedekiah early revolted in favour of Egypt, then growing into a first-class power. Nebuchad.
nezzar thereupon sends invaders against Jerusalem ; and apprehending this attack, Zedekiak
sends the embassy to Jeremiah recorded in this chapter. ;

4, Contemporary History.—Pharaoh-Hophre reigned in Egypt : Nebuchadnezzar in Babylon :
Solow at Athens. At this time Jehoiachin (his other names were Jeconiah and Coniah), with
his queen-mother Nehushta, and the highest families of Judah, pined in captivity in Babylon,
It is not wonderful, therefore, that Zedekiah, led by his nobles, revolted against the Chaldean
power which now dominated from Babylon the centre of the Chaldean sway,

5. Geographical References. — Ver. 4. ‘‘ Babylon and Chaldeans.” Chaldea is properly
only the southerly division of Babylonia ; but the Chaldea over which Nebuchadnezzar was king
comprised the entire tract of country which lay between the Euphrates and the Tigris, and an
equal breadth of country on the Arabian desert side of the Euphrates capable of irrigation from
that river, and extending along the course of the Euphrates for over 400 miles, and measuring
in average breadth 100 miles, Ver.13. ‘' Valley and plain: ” Vide the note im oe. on chap.
xvii. 8. The valley means that which ran between Mount Zion and Mount Moriah ; and the
rock, Mount Zion itself.

6. Personal Allusions.—Ver. 1. ‘ Zedekiah:’’ Vide noteabove, under National Affairs, and
also Personal Allusions to chap. i. ‘‘ Pashur the son of Melchiah:” this was the fifth order of
the priesthood, and Pashur was the head of this order (1 Chron. xxiv. 9-14). [This is no¢ the
Pashur mentioned in previous chapter]. ‘‘ Zephaniah,” &., connected with the twenty-fourth
priestly family (1 Chron. xxiv. 18). This Zephaniah was afterwards put to death by Nebuchad-
nezzar at Riblah (Jer. lii. 24). Ver. 2. ‘‘ Nebuchadrezzar.” This is more nearly the Chaldean
spelling of his name than Nebuchadnezzar. He was the son of Nabopolassar, and led the army
against Egypt and conquered it at Charchemish. See further in Literary Criticisms below.
Ver. 4. ‘‘ Chaldeans.” Vide Geog. Ref., supra.

7, Natural History.—Ver. 14. ‘‘ Zhe forest thereof.” ‘‘ A city isa forest of houses.”—Keil,
A reference here to the dense mass of residences and edifices built of the cedar trees from
Lebanon (comp. Jer. xxii. 7 with lii. 13, and 2 Kings xxv. 9).

8, Manners and Customs.—Ver. 12. ‘‘ Execute judgment in the morning.” Kings sat in
judgment at this time of the day. (Comp. 2 Sam. iv. 5; Job xx. 27; Pasa. ci. 8). See Lt,
Orit. below.

9, Literary Criticisms.—Ver. 2. ‘‘ Nebuchadrezar:” a noticeable spelling : with 1 instead
of 3. Jeremiah uses this form twenty-six times; but the form with 3 ten times. Jeremiah
used the more correct Chaldean form of the name until current usage among the Jews settled
the spelling with the} instead of with the 1. The LXX. write the name thus, NaBovyodovdcop ;
and Berosus thus, NaBovyodovécopos; the recently discovered Assyrian cylinders thus, Nabw-
Rudurri-uzur. Professor Rawlinson interprets this last to mean Nebo protects the landmarks ;
and Schrader, Nebo, protect thou the crown, The name, interpreted from Persian roots, had
been supposed to mean, Nebo deorum princeps, or Nebo deus ignis.

Ver. 4. ‘I will assemble them,” &c. The antecedent of them is doubtful, whether “ weapons”
or ‘‘ Chaldeans ;” but the latter is the nearer and more probable antecedent.

Ver. 7. ‘‘ And such as are left:” Mk} ; the Vaw may be regarded as explicative—even such
agare left, namely, of the people.

Ver. 9. ‘* His life for a prey :” i.¢,, shall make his escape with it,

Ver. 12. ‘In the morning.” npa? Keil regards as a distributive adverb, every morning ;
while Henderson regards it as here used idiomatically, as in Psa. xc. 14, exliii. 8, where ps3


means early, soon, quickly: implying urgency; for the opportunity would quickly end,


SECTIONAL SUMMARY OF CHAPTER XXI.
Gon’s FINAL OFFER OF DELIVERANCE.


The siege of Jerusalem had begun, Zedekiah in alarm sent to ask of Jeremiah
respecting the event.

I. Times of distress drive men to seek God’s servants whom amid their
prosperity they despised.

1. Apprehensive of evil, they crave counsel and prayers (ver. 2). Zedekiah sent
two of the priests who were in highest office to ask Jeremiah’s interposition with
Jehovah! What a humbling of their arrogant disregard of this hitherto reviled

rophet !
: 2. Yet they crave counsels and prayers only to avert punishment (ver. 2). Their
sole desire was that Jeremiah’s prayers would prevail with God to thwart Nebu-
chadnezzar. There was no humiliation for the sin which brought this visitation oz
the nation,

See Addenda: SEEKING COUNSEL.

412


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


—





OHAP, Ext





I. Messages of wrath will meet those who refuse to seek God except in


times of distress,


1, Professors of religion may presume upon their outward privileges until God be
angered and wholly alienated. These priests, this king, and indeed the whole
nation, had so presumed upon their being God’s people; but their presumption


would now be checked (ver. 5).


2. Resources of self-reliance will be rendered powerless in the day of adversity


(ver. 4).


3. Overwhelming disaster shall avenge the iniquities which have long called for
Divine punishment. God had been slow to anger and of great kindness, but the
time for mercy was now irrecoverably past (vers. 6, 7).

The messenger of God has woful messages to declare against such as despise
His gracious warnings and weary out His longsuffering.

Til. A way of mercy is still opened to such as will regard Divine counsels,

The king and princes would not surrender to Nebuchadnezzar : they trusted
their own counsels, and would not heed God’s ; but some among the people might
be found ready to heed God’s word and thereby secure immunity from imminent ruin.

1. Even to the latest hour salvation ts offered (ver. 8); although the enemy was


at the very gates.


2. The way of life consists in trustfully submitting to God's directions (ver. 9).
It required prompt obedience, and the performance of a part which would be


humiliating and seemed painft


‘‘falleth to the Chaldeans,” whom they hated.


God leaves no sinner on earth without ‘a way of escape ;” but it depends on
his implicit surrender to His counsels whether he be saved. Happily now we may
find a more gracious salvation than was offered to those people.

IV. To those eminent in sin God sends special warnings of doom.

1. God recognises the circumstances which aggravate individual disobedience,
There was special heinousngss in the conduct of “the king of Judah” (ver. 11),
since he belonged to the “house of David” (ver. 12).

2. A final appeal is made to even greatest transgressors (ver. 12).

3. Yet God will show no further mercy when His warnings are rejected with self-


confident pride.


The reply of the king (ver. 13) virtually was, ““We have a


strong city,” we dwell in ‘‘the rock of the plain:” he boasted in his security.
Further, he despised the forces of destruction which were gathering—“ Who shall


come down against us? who shall enter into our habitation }”


But God was against


the king of Judah, and therefore no hope of safety was left.


HOMILIES AND COMMENTE ON VERSBS OF OHAPTER XXI.


Ver, 2. Theme: WILFUL INQUIRERS
SEEKING COUNSEL.

L In what mind they came.

1. Their own counsels were determined
and fixed ; so that they were not in a
teachable mood. This Pashur belonged
to the party who counselled that Nebu-
chadnezzar be resisted by force of arms,
for he endeavoured to persuade King
Zedekiah to put Jeremiah to death as a
traitor (chap, xxxviii, 1-4). Zepha-
niah likewise (from Nebuchadnezzar
having slain him at Riblah, chap. li.
24) was manifestly hostile to any sun
render to the Chaldean force. Thus
they came with predetermined opinions.


2. They declared what counsels they
wished to recewe. Asking Jeremiah to
“inguire of the Lord for them,” they
yet specified the kind of reply they ex-
pected to be returned—that Nebuchad-
nezzar “ may go up from us;” te, be
compelled to raise the siege, and so
give these inguirers the gratification
they sought.

This is not inquiry ; it is dsctation.
Such inquiry is insolent to God. All
supplication for Divine leading which is
prompted by predetermination and wil-
fulness is sel/f-delusive in the inquires
and offensive to Cod.

IL In what delusion they reposed.

413


CHAP. XXI,


“Tf so be that the Lord will deal
with us according to all His wondrous
works,” :

1. Thesr own demerits were conveniently
tgnored. It would almost seem that
they were unconscious of their flagrant
impiety and wickedness. Certainly
God’s actions towards them were not to
be regulated by righteousness, not to be
affected by their erying tniquitics, not to
be swayed by their defiance of Divine
pleadings and warnings, but only “ao-
cording to His wondrous works.”

2. Thetr exclusive request was for
miraculous interposition. Not that
God would exert His gracious power to
reform them; but that, leaving them
still in their sins, and unpunished for
their sins, He would exert His métra-
culous power to protect them. Panic
prayers, such as these, are rarely in-
spired by sincere contrition for sin, but
rather by sudden realisation of penalty.

Note :

i Sinners often have clear recolleo-
tion of God’s marvellous works. These
men had, At the prayer of Isaiah God
delivered Jerusalem when Sennacherib
besieged it (2 Chron. xxxii. 20-21).
And as they have clear recollections,
so often they have

ii, Strange expectations of like mer-
ciful interpositions on their own behalf.
Doubtless these messengers anticipated
for Jeremiah a similar answer to that
which Isaiah gave (Isa xxxvii. 6),
But

iii, God always keeps vivid recognition
of men’s sinful ways. And He makes
a difference accordingly. So that ‘ His
wondrous works” are not repeated to
men who deserved, not wondrous de-
liverances, but wondrous judgments,

See Addenda: SREKING CouUNsEL


Ver. 3. Theme: INTREPID DENUN-
oraTions. “Thus shall ye say to
Zedekiah.”

Since the days of Jehoiakim, under
whose reign Jeremiah betrayed much
fickleness, temerity, and repining; of
all which the previous chapter (xx.)
furnishes too ample proof—what a
change has come upon God’s servant |
How altered now is the tone of his

414


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAL.


address) Regard this reply as evi
dence of

I. Great personal courage. Note
the circumstances :

1. He is confronted with men of
highest state dignity. This embassy
was chosen from among the foremost
officers in the ranks of the priesthood,
so that Jeremiah had to address men of
pride and power.

2. He has to send a message direct
to the king. His words are ‘“‘to Zede-
kiah.” He is under special tempta-
tion therefore to be apprehensive of
royal disfavour, and concerned to be
conciliatory.

3. He is for the first time sought as
state-adviser, Never before had he
been recognised by king and princes
in this special manner as God’s vice-
gerent and oracle. They had _hereto-
fore “derided” him (xx. 7, 8). Now
he is treated with highest respect: an
embassy of marked importance is sent
him; he is consulted at a crucial
moment on a matter of vast serious-
ness—would he accept the flattery, and
prize the sweet gratification so highly,
as to lead him to mtld speech and even
partial suppression of his message $
(Compare xx. 9.) No: he spoke out
all God’s word, forcibly and fear-
lessly, and sent back these powerful
messengers to the king with burning
words of denunciation.

IL Grand prophetic confidence.

1. He 1 conscious of the Divinity of
his inspiration. Had he been in any
doubt that God’s Spirit moved him
as he spake, he would certainly have
spoken with more deference and some
equivocation. But his words are de
cisive and authoritative. He knew
that he had God’s word to utter. So
as truly do preachers of Divine truth.

Here, too, let it be noted that the
coming of this embassy to him was
“a silent testimony and tribute to his
inspiration” (Wordsworth). They ac-
cepted the fact as undoubted: and
came to ask God’s word at his lips.

2. He ts conjident of the certainty of
his prophecies The moment was cri-
tical, The Chaldeans were at the
walls, the city was besieged, the mes-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH,


sage was for that very hour. What he
said would be verified or refuted forth-
with, It was different when a pro-
phecy was being uttered which related
to distant days. Yet though a few
hours would suffice to prove or disprove
his words, Jeremiah spoke with emphasis
and confidence, He risks his credit as
a prophet on the assurance he sends back,
that if the king would promptly execute
judgment and justice, the besiegera
should be thwarted (ver. 12). We have
reason to believe that had Zedekiah
acted on Jeremiah’s counsel he would
have been saved from the Chaldeans as
Hezekiah was from the Assyrians,

Note:

i. This progress from temerity (chap.
i. 6) to courage was the progressively of
God’s promise of qualification for his
work. (See chap. i 17, 18.) It was
only progressively fulfilled, for often the
prophet showed a craven spirit (xx.
7-9); but now it was completely ful-
filled. So God’s words of promise will
find ultimate vindication in us.

ii, This development of courage and
confidence marks the perfection of hts
prophetic equipment, Jeremiah’s sorest
testing was at hand; in the travail and
calamities which accumulated, he would
need now the full confidence and fear-
less courage which here for the first time
he evinced. God knows the hour when
we need largest grace, and “as our day
is, so shall our strength be.”

See Addenda ; CouzacE


Ver. 8. Theme; A PITIABLE DI-
Lemma. “I have set before thee the
way of life and death.”

In this instance how different the cir-
cumstances amid which Jeremiah made
this appeal from those amid which Moses
used the same words! (Deut, xxx. 19.)
Here it is—

L Not a gracious contrast: “ Life
and death.”

It was a gracious contrast that Moses
proposed ; a choice between

1. A life blessed with Jehovah’s
favour ; or

2. A death in sin and the miseries
which follow disobedience.

But that propitious hour for the


GHAP. XXL





nation was gone for ever. The offer
could not be made on those beneficent
terms, ‘They had slighted the life”
(says Henry) “which would have
made them truly happy; to upbraid
them with which the prophet uses the
game expression.”

Note: The same offer may not mean
the same when it is renewed, after it has
once been rejected.

IL But a melancholy alternative.

Here the choice lay between two possi-
bilities well-nigh equally distressing.

1. A life only saved by deserting to
the enemy, and to be spent in wretched
and shameful captivity ; or

2. A death of famine, pestilence, and
the sword within their own city’s walls.

See Addenda: OPPORTUNITY.


Theme :
APPEAL

It ought to be possible for every mes-
senger of God to say among his people
that during his ministry he has _per-
sistently and faithfully “set before them
life and death.”

L This summarises the preacher's
work.

1. The alternative which God offers
to men through the preacher-—‘ life
and death.”

2. The fidelity which marks the
preacher's messages to men. “JS have
set before you” Not engayjog you
with speculative theories, byt, solemn
truths and revealed facts.

IL This indicates the hearer’ duty.

1. A free choice ts left to euch (Ezek,
xxxiii. 11).

2. A wise chotce ts possible with eack
(Prov. viii. 36 ; Luke x. 42).

’ IIL This narrows the sinners vut-
look.

1. There are but two posstbtlitces
before the soul: no third course.

9. There are great responsibilities
upon the soul (John xv. 22).

See further: NoriczssLg Tortios at
end of chapter.


Vers. 11, 12. Tame: CounsEL TO
A KING.

Because it was the king who sent the
message to him, he sends a particular
message to the Zivg. He advises the

j 415





A FarraFUuL MINISTER'S


OHAP, XAL





king and princes to reform, and to make
conscience of the duty from their place,
“ Execute judgment ta the morning ”"—
carefully, diligently, promptly. ‘ De-
liver him that is spoiled out of the hand
of the oppressor”—if you would be
delivered from the Chaldeans who dis-
tress you.

i This intimates that st was ther
neglect to do their duty which brought
all this desolation upon the people.
The “ evil of their-doings” kindled the
fire of God’s wrath.

ii, This directs them to take the right


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; JEREMULAR,


er, ee


direction for a national reformation,
The princes must begin and set the
people a good example. He reminds
them that they are of the “house of
David,” and therefore should tread in
his righteous steps.

iil, This gives them some encourage
ment to hope that there may yet be a
lengthening of their tranquillity (Deut.
iv, 27). Ii anything will recover their
state from the brink of ruin, this will.
—M. Henry.

See Addenda:
MENT.” -


“ EXEOUTE JUDG


NOTIOBABLE TOPIC IN OHAPTER XX1I.


Topic: Gop’s MESSAGE OF Lirz anp Deraru (ver. 8),


The conduct of God towards Israel is the model of His conduct towards us:
and the conduct of Israel towards God closely resembles the conduct of mankind in
all subsequent ages. Here is a glass in which we may see ourselves revealed.

When Nebuchadnezzar advanced to the siege, the state dignitaries urged Jeremiah
to inquire of God for.them what the result would be. He did sv. And this was the
answer—Life in submission to the Chaldeans: death by continuance in the city. The
result was—they despised the warning, they clung to their own devices—the city
was destroyed.

a.) Many learn religion’s worth amid threatening or actual calamities,
} Many prize the comfort of the prayers of God's people who never pray them-
selves.

IL. That it is God’s prerogative to mark the path in which He would have us
go for both worlds. God who knows our wants has provided for their supply.

He has “set before us life and death.”

1. In Hiswritten Word—i. By doctrinalstatements. ii. By warningsand invitations,

2. By Providence and merctes; examples and instances.

The way to heaven is faith and holiness, the way to hell is unbelief and sin,
Jesus says (Mark xvi. 16). John, bearing witness to the Divinity and Messiah-
ship of Christ, says (John iii, 36). Our Lord also declares concerning Himself in
terms too plain to be misunderstood (John xiv. 6).

It is evident that all who receive Christ by faith—in His atoning sacrifice and
sanctifying grace—are in the way of life: and all those who reject and disown
Him—refuse His salvation and disobey His commands—are in the way of death, —

IL That the path to life is clothed with many attractions.

Our Lord speaks of “the strait gate and narrow way,” and the “few that find
it.’ The difficulty arises not from the road itself, but from the nature of thoso
who walk in it, It is

1. A plain way. The way though narrow is plain—the way to the wicket gate
is straight as a line can make it. It is only difficult and perplexed to those who
are reluctant to renounce the burden of their sins and the corruptions of this evil
world, or would fain invent some method to reconcile the discordant claims of God
and mammon, earth and heaven. But though the first entrance may be difficult
to the awakened sinner, owing to the abounding evils of his heart, yet grace
enables him to overcome these deep workings of corruption and to pass by true
repentance and humble faith through the strait gate towards the blessed region of
eternal felicity.

Both of these paths have numerous travellere—but the broad way and the


4128


Ba~


TE Ce


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; JEREMIAH, OHAP. XXX.
= Sc eS


ges have had a fearful majority hitherto. Yet the votaries of religion have
not been few in reality, though few as compared with the world—and in every age
the number of these has increased, and willincrease, Of the path to heaven observe

2. That st is an old way and well trodden, “Stand ye in the old way, inquire
for the good paths.” From Abel’s time. ‘The way the holy prophets went.”

3. That w is a safe way: for though much contested it is yet divinely guarded :
“No lion shall be there.” “No weapon,” dc,

4. That it is a pleasant way. “Wisdom’s ways are ways of pleasantness.”
“The way of fife is above to the wise,” &c.

Ill. That we are daily advancing in one or other of these paths.

There can be amidst the diversities of the race but two broad divisions : wise
and foolish, wheat and tares.

God sees how you forget Him and your latter end, and how light you make of
everlasting things: how bold you are in sin, how fearless of His threatenings—
eareless of your souls—doing the work of infidels in your lives while the creed
of Christians is in your mouth. He sees the dreadful day near at hand when
your sorrows will begin. ‘‘ Behold the judge standeth.” Death will bring such an
argument in favour of truth and religion as you will never be able to answer,
and then you will be an unbeliever no longer. There is nothing but a slender
veil of flesh between thee and that amazing sight of God and eternity which will
silence your presumption for ever. But let us mark the contrast between the
righteous and the wicked in present life.

A worldly man is one that has his chief treasure upon earth, while God and
eternity are forgotten. Though he does not say that earth is better than heaven,
and sin than holiness, he acts as if he did ; and if he could have enough of earth
and time he would let go heaven, and never think of being removed thither—for a
holy God and a holy heaven have never been comprehended within the circle of
his joys. Whereas the Christian is one who has been converted from the error of
his ways—his mind has been enlightened to discern the evil of sin and the love
and loveliness of Christ, and is anxious to lay up his treasure and hopes in heaven,

A worldly man is one who neglects the great salvation, who never truly valued
the mystery of redemption, nor truly applied to the Physician of souls, nor thank-
fully entertained in his heart the great Redeemer ; and though he might not object
to be outwardly religious, he was never concerned to be inwardly renewed, neither
seeking to be delivered from the guilt and dominion of sin, nor to be conformed
to the image and likeness of God. Whereas the Christian, having been savingly
convinced of his undone state by sin, and apprehending the mercy of God in Christ,
thankfully entertains the glad tidings of redemption, flees to Christ for pardon and
salvation—desires to experience more the daily renewal of the Holy Spirit.

To which of these do you belong? Think thus;—I am a dying creature, on
the verge of an awful eternity ; heaven and hell are before me, and to one of
these states I am advancing every day as another day's journey, Ask, Whither am
I going? What reception shall I meet at last? What award does conscience now
make? Have I believed with the heart unto righteousness? Is the life I now live
in the flesh a life of faith? Will the course 1 am in do to die by ?

IV. That the doom of the impenitent will be aggravated by weighty consi-
derations,

l. Thut the path of life and death was clearly set before you, and rejected by
deliberate choice. It will be eternally true that Christ was set forth crucified, that
you were invited, summoned, and entreated in His name to be reconciled to God,
God Himself calls

2. From the solemn Providences and warnings you have abused.

3. From the vanity and worthlessness of pursuits for which salvation was rejected,

4. From the changeless cernity of the state to which you go.

—Samue Thodey, a.D. 1845,
2nd 417


OHAL. all,





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY:


JEREMIAL.





ADDENDA TO OHAPTER XXI,: ILLUSTRATIONS AND SUGGESTIVE EXTRACTS,


Ver. 2, SEEKING COUNSEL.

“Consult your friend on all things,
especially on those which respect your-
self. His counsel may then be neeful,
where your own self-love might impair
vour judgment.”— Seneca,

“Good counsels observed are chains
to grace.” —Fuller,

*« Mid pleasure plenty, and success,
Freely we take from Him who lenda:


We boas: the blessings we possess,
Yet scarcely thank the One who senda


** But let affliction pour ita smart,
How soon we quail beneath the rod !
With shattered pride, and prostrate heart,
We seek the ame sormorton. o 3
Eliza Cook,


Ver. 3. Courage

“ A minister without boldness is like
s smooth file, a knife without an edge,
a sentinel that is afraid to let off his
gun. If men will be.bold in sin, minis-
ters must be bold te reprove.”

—Gurnall,

Think of that Reformer, who, when
some one said to him, “The whole
world is against you,” calmly replied,
‘Then I am against the world.”

*¢ This is true courage, not the brutal force


Of vulgar heroes, but the firm resolve
Of virtue and of reason.”— Whitehead,


‘ True valour
Lies in the mind, the never- ee purpose,


Ver, 8. OpporTUNITY.

‘“‘The mill cannot grind with the
water that is past.”—-Proverd.

Herod—those who offered to follow
Christ (Luke ix. 57-62) — Felix—
Agrippa — Simon Magus — how many
characters seem to flash before our eyes
in Scripture as having been visited with
convictions and opportunities of grace,
but only, it has been said, “like ships,
which, when night is spread over the
eea, emerge for a moment from the
darkness as they cross the pathway of
the moonbeams, and then are lost in
utter gloom.”

Opportunities are importunities,


“ There is a tide in the affairs of men,
Which, taken at the flood, leads on to for-
tune ;
Omitted, all the voyage of their life
Is bound in shallows, and in miseries 3
And we must take the current when it serves,
Or lose our ventures,” kespeare.


Ver. 12. Exxcure JUDGMENT.
“What is justice? To give to every
man his own.”—Arvistotle.


*¢ It often falls in course of common life,
That right sometimes is overborne of
wrong ;
The avarice of power, or guile, or strife,
That weakens her, and makes her party
atrong,
But Justice, tho’ her doom she do prolong,





Nor owns the blind award o giddy fortune.” Yet at the last will make her own cause
— Thomson, rife. "Spenser.
CHAPTER XXIL


Carrroat agp Exrarricat Norrs.—1. Ohronology of os Chapter, Early in Jehoiakim’s
reign; contemporary with chap. xvii. See Notes. Smith places this propheey
prior to Jehoiakim’s manifestation of the violence of ie character by murdering Urijah
(chap. xxvi. 23), and thus synchronous with chap. xvii, 19-27. Its appeal to the house of
David is conditioned on the fact that the nation’s ruin might yet be averted. The chapter
divides itself into four ch’ ical sections. Wers. 1-9: Early in Jehoiakim’s reign. Vers
10-12: Immediately following the deposition and captivity of Jehkoahaz, Vers. 14-19:
Jehoiakim’s reign again; but towards the close of his wicked rule. Vers, 20-30 belong to
Jeconiah’s reign, for the reference (ver. 24) indicates him aa the then reigning king. Of. Pere
sonal Allustons below.

For 2, Contemporary Scriptures; 8 National Affairs; 4 Contemporaneous History, see
Notes on chaps. vii. and xvii.

5. Geographical References,—Ver. 6, ‘‘ Gilead ”—Vide note on viii. 22. ‘‘ Lebanon ”—
the loftiest height of Lebanon is about 10,000 feet above the level of the sea, Vide note on
xviii. 14 Ver. 20. “* Basham, and the passages:” ¢.¢., the route from Jerusalem to Babylon.
‘« Passages ” should be Abarim, a range of mountains south of Gilead, opposite Jericho. Those
mountains, Lebanon, Bashan, and Abarim, ee the course the captives would take.

6. Persona! Allusiona—Ver. 11. “* Shallum, the som of Josiah.” Sballum is the same as


418


HOMILETIG COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR, OBAP, XRii,





rt cee


Jehoahaz, Josiah’s second son. Although younger than Eliakim (afterwards called Jehoiakim),
she was yet raised to the throne by the acclaim of the people (2 Kings xxiii. 80-36), the righta
of primogeniture being disregarded owing to the evil character of Hliakim. (Comp. Personal
Allusions ehap. i.) Shallum reigned only three months: for Eliakim, indignant at this
usurpation, threw himself into the arms of the Egyptians; and Pharaoh-Necho deposed
Jehoahag and placed Jehoiakim (Hliakim) on the throne as tributary and dependent king.
Shallum was thereupon carried into Egypt, and from that time is heard of no more, (Comp.
2 Chron, xxxvi. 1-4; Ezek. xix, 3-4.)

Ver. 18, ‘‘ Jehowakim, son of Josiah:” see note above, also note to chap. i, (Comp. 2
Chron, xxxvi. 5, 6.) We have no record of his death ; but from this prophecy (repeated in
chap, xxxvi. 30) we may suppose that he died soon after he reached Babylon, died under his
chains, probably ‘‘ of pestilence or of a broken heart” (Payne Smith), and his body was
dragged away without any show of respect. It is just as probable that he was slain by
Nebuchadnezzar on his retreat to Babylon, and that his corpse was left unburied by the way-
side outside Jerusalem. Certainly, however, he perished miserably, and at the age of thirty-six.

Ver. 24. ‘‘Contah, son of Jehoiakim:” This was Jehotachin, He reigned only three months
and ten days. He was eighteen years of age (according to 2 Kings xxiv. 8) when crowned,
but only eight according to 2 Chron, xxxvi. 9—which is probably a corruption of the text.
He remained in Babylon a captive during thirty-six years, the lifetime of Nebuchadnezzar ;
but when Evil-Merodach succeeded Nebuchadnezzar he was considerately raised by that king
to some show of dignity and personal regard (2 Kings xxv. 27-30; Jer, lii. 81-34). Ezekiel
dated his prophecies by the year ‘“‘of king Jehoiachin’s captivity”? (Ezek. i. 2, viii. 1, xxiv. 1,
&c.) An exciting expectation prevailed among the Jews four years after Jeconiah’s removal to
Babylon (Jer. xxviii 4) that he would quickly return to power ; but this was probably a rumour
created by the sanguine hopes and conversation of the Jewish captives at Babylon.

Ver. 26. ‘* Thy mother thaé bare thee.” Nehushta; ace chronological note to chap. xiii.

7. Natural History—none,

8. Manners and Oustoma.—Ver. 10. “* Weep ye not for the dead,” &. An annual lamenta-
tion had been celebrated by the nation for good king Josiah (2 Chron. xxxv. 25). This custom
might now be used for one who needed the bemoaning more—his son Shallum,

Ver. 14. ‘' Ceiled with cedar and painted with vermilion.” Jehoiakim’s palace was gorgeously
adorned with ‘“‘cedara” of Lebanon, The ‘‘ vermilion” was not like ours, & Lilly tan of
red lead, but a compound of quicksilver and sulphur ; a preparation much valued by Orientals,

9. Literary Criticisms.—Ver. 7. “ / will prepare destroyers:” 1.¢., consecrate. (Vide note,
chap. vi. 4.)

Ver. 14. “* A wide house:” MND NZ, lit., a house of extensions: (comp. Numb. xiii, 82 ;
Isa. xlv. 14), where M)32 is rendered ‘‘stature"’—men of large proportions, ‘‘ A spacious
house,” ‘‘ Large chambers,” from MY}, to breathe: airy chambers,

“« And it is ceiled with cedars :” }\D; either roofing it with cedars (Payne Smith), or inlaying
it (Hitzig, Gra7., &e.)

Ver. 15. ‘* Closes: thyself in cedar.” Various reading. The LXX., Codex Alex.,and Ewald
give wiest with Ahaz: for Ahag did build the palace (1 Kings xxii, 89). But the literal render-
ing of received text is, viest in cedar-work,

Ver. 19. *‘ Beyond the gatecs”’—afar from.

Ver, 20. ‘The Passages.” See Geog. Ref. supra, Abarim, a range of mountains,

Ver, 28. “ O inhabitant of Lebanon :” inhabitress. ‘‘ How gracious shalt thou be :” how wilt
thou sigh (Hitzig, Ewald, Graf); how wilt thou groan (Lange, Payne Smith), be pitiable

Gesenius).
Ver. oF “* Desire toreturn :” lift up their goul to return. Our English equivalent is ‘‘aet
their heart upon.”

Ver, 28. ‘* A despised broken idol:” lit., piece of work, a vessel, a piece of common earthen:
ware in which the potter haa no interest.


HOMILETIC SURVEY OF CHAPTER XXII.
Theme: Tue ERRORS AND THE Doom oF JuDAH’s Kines.


The chapter separates itself into four prophetic messages, containing sentences of
judgment on Jehoahaz (Shallum), Jehoiakim, and Jeconiah, Chronological order
of events is disregarded in the grouping of these prophecies ; but stmiarity of
subject rules, Connecting chapter xxi, 1l—end with chap. xxii, the last four
kings of Judah are arraigned for judgment. Each is proved to have utterly Satled
in righteousness, and on each is pronounced the sorrowful denunciation which his
impiety invoked.

L An exhortation to righteous reforms. Addressed to Jehoiakim, probably
quickly after his accession to the throne, he is charged, in the name “ ; ehovah


omar, xx11, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.





(ver. 3)—himself, his ministers, and his people—to act aright, to administer justice,
and eschew all wrong. This appeal is emphasised with an encouraging promise of
prosperity upon obedience (ver. 4), and alarming warnings of desolation if disre-
garded (ver. 5-9).

It. A mournful instance of judgment. The prophet cites the fate of Shallum
(Jehoahaz), the predecessor of Jehoiakim, as confirmatory of Jehovah’s warnings.
On his accession Shallum assumed the name “ Jehoahaz,” meaning “ Jehovah sus-
tains,” but Jeremiah refuses to call him by that name, and writes him down in
irony as “ Shallum,” meaning “ retribution ”—which had verified its appropriateness
in the king’s fate—deposed after three months’ reign, and now a captive in Egypt,
never more to behold his native land. So soon may a king be dethroned; a0 hope-
lessly may an exile be banished (ver. 10-12).

See Addenda: WEnP NOT FOR THE DEAD,

IIL A rebuke of ambitious tyranny. Reverting to Jehoiakim (ver. 13), and
proceeding openly and indignantly to name him as the criminal (ver. 18), God
denounces him for his vainglory (ver. 14), his tnjustice (ver. 13), his covetousness
and cruelty (ver. 17). Against him the “woe” (ver. 13) is uttered; he is
derided for his false confidence (vers. 15, 16) in thinking that his throne is secured
by vaunting display of splendour rather than in righteous administration ; and his
miserable degradation is proclaimed (ver. 18, 19).

IV. A lamentation over Judah's ruim. Jeremiah 1. appeals to Jerusalem,
whom he personifies as a sorrowing woman, to ascend the mountains which over-
look the route her captives would take on being carried imto Babylon, and bewail
her calamity. 2. Threatens Jeconiah (here called Coniah as if in contempt) ;
who, although he was tdolised by his people (vers. 24-28), would nevertheless be
treated with violence (vers. 26-28), carried into exile (ver. 25), and with him would
end the royal honours of his house (ver. 30).


GENERAL TRUTHS SUGGESTED BY THE CHAPTER.
L Perpetuity and prosperity are conditional upon righteousness. This holds


good for nations and governments (ver. 4), cities (vers. 8, 9), individuals (vera, 11,


19, 30).

as at most effectual way to preserve the dignity of the government is to do the
duty of it."—Henry. ‘God does not spare even the authorities, for though He
has said that they are as ‘gods,’ yet when they do not rightly administer their
office they must die like men (Ps Ixxxii. 6). No cedarsare too high for God. No
splendours too mighty ; He can destroy all at once, and overturn, overturn, over-
turn” (Ezek. xxi. 27).—Cramer. Sin will be the ruin of the house of princes as
well as of meaner men. Even in this world God often makes it clear that He
destroys neither nations, cities, nor persons, except for sin ; and it will be made
clearer in the day of judgment.

IL Advantages and exaltation secure no exception from doom. “The house
of the kings of Judah” enjoyed historic dignity and the Divine benignity (ver. 6) :
Jerusalem also (addressed in vers. 20-23) had enjoyed “ prosperity” (ver. 21) and
material splendour (ver. 23); whereas Jeconiah had seemed peculiarly secure and
honoured (ver. 24). Yet that house of Judah became a desolation (ver. 5);
Jerusalem was dethroned (vers. 8, 9); and “confounded for her wickedness” (ver.
22); and Coniah was cut off from royalty (ver. 30).

“See how easily God’s judgments can ruin a nation, and how certainly sin will
do it."—Henry. How little is earthly grandeur to be depended upon, or flourish-
ing families to be rejoiced in! Notwithstanding the privileges of a man’s birth
(as with Coniah), if he make himself unworthy of honour, Gud will cast him off,
Yet “God never casts any off until they first cast Him off” (Henry on ver. 9).
Here, however, may be seen “how perverse and unjustifiable is the illusion that

420


HOMILETIOC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR.


CHAP, ZET.





God’s election is a surety against His anger, and a licence to any wilfulnesa"—


Naegelsbach.


Ii. Spoliation and punishment are varied according to individual sin


Numerous are the resources of Divine judgment.


every one with his weapons ” (ver. 7).
upon individual transgressors,


God “ prepares the destroyers,


And He determines the form of desolation
Shallum is doomed to perpetual bondage:


Jehoiakim is punished with an unlamented death and contemptible burial—a most


despicable end (vers. 18, 19).


Jeconiah, whom the nation had idolised and


cherished with “pleasure,” should become despised by his people (28), and be


written childless (ver. 30).


They expose themselves to fearful possibilities and perils who live in hostility
to God. No life is secure from calamity which is not “hid with Christ in God.”


HOMILIES AND COMMENTS ON VERSES OF CHAPTER XXII,


Vera. 1-5. Theme: THE CONDITIONS
OF CONTINUANCE IN PRIVILEGE,

Hereditary rights, royal prerogatives,
are valueless as guarantees of prolonged
existence and prosperity as a nation.
Righteousness alone protects and pre-
serves governments from overthrow and
peoples from extinction. Sowitha church:
it must be and do right, or Christ “ will
remove the candlestick,” &c. So with the
soul ; it must faithfully serve and loyally
follow Christ, or it forfeits grace.

This message to Jehovakim is similar
in import to that sent to Zedekiah (xxi.
11-14). See Homilies tn oe.

Matthew Henry's arrangement of this
section is—

i Orders given to Jeremiah to preach
before the king.

He is to go in person and demand the
king’s attention to a message from the
King of kings.

ii, Instructions given him what to preach.

1. He must tell them what was their
duty (ver. 3). (a.) Do all the good
they can with the power they have.
(6.) Do no hurt with it.

2. He must assure them that the faith-
ful discharge of their duty would advance
and secure their prosperity (ver. 4).

3. Likewise that the iniquity of their
family if persisted in would be the ruin
of their family, though it was a royal
family (ver. 5).

4. He must show how fatal their
wickedness would be to their kingdom
as well as to themselves—to Jerusalem
especially, the royal city (vers. 6-9).


Ver. 6. Theme: BEAUTY AND Ma-
JESTY DEGRADED,


L. Significant imagery. ‘Thou art
Gilead unto me, and the head of Lebanon.”

i, The meaning of these natural maa
phors. They suggest

1. Graceful fertility. “Gilead” was
the poetic symbol of this Dr. Payne
Smith notes that it is “extolled for its
aromatic plants (chap. viii, 22), its grassy
uplands where the goats feed (Song
Sol. iv. 1, vi. 5), and one district of it,
Bashan, for its sheep (Deut. xxxii. 14),
its noble breed of cattle (Ps. xxii. 12),
its general fertility (Isa. xxxiii 9), and
especially for its splendid oak forest.
(Isa. ii. 13; Zech. xi. 2).”

2. Surpassing magni “ Le-
banon” is the metaphor of this, I*
is the frequent figure for grandeur
“Tt is praised for its snows (chap
xviii. 14), its firs and cedars (Isa
xxxvii. 24), its waving forests (Pa,
Ixxii. 16), its wealth of springs (Song
Sol. iv. 15), its flowers (Nahum i. 4), anc
its sweet scents (Song Sol. iv. 11; Hos
xiv. 6, 7).”

ii. The reference of this metaphorica
address.

1. Primarily to theroyal houseof David.

2. By analogy to the “royal priest-
hood” of Christian belvevers, The
Church is in God’s esteem “ the perfec-
tion of beauty.”

3. By direct application to the indé-
widual Christian. ‘ Weare unto God a
sweet savour of Christ.” Every Christian
should combine in himself beauteous fer-
tility and incomparable majesty—noble-
ness of character and life.

IL Startling degradation. “Yet
surely I will make thee a wilderness,
cities which are not inhabited.”

421


G@aP. XXIE,











i. Its ineredibility necessitates that
God affirms ti with an oath, “Surely
I will.” Literally this is, “If I make
thee not,” dc,

l. The threatening creates an involun-
tary recoil. We reply to it—“ Surely
it can never be so!” The old Jews re-
volted from the idea that their royal
“house of David” could ever become
“a desolation” (ver. 5). We recoil
from the idea that on a Christian
church there could ever be inscribed
“Ichabod!” Or that @ godly soul, a
privileged disciple of Jesus, could ever
become a “‘cast-away.’ Yet God cor-
rects our “ Surely it cannot be” with
Hes * Surely I will!”

2. The threatening seems a total im-
posstbility. The Jews believed in the
perpetuity of the Davidic line and the
continuance of their national prosperity,
So we think of a church and of our
selves, But for the church see Lam.
i. 1, and Zeph. ii, 15; and for the
individual, 1 Cor. x. 12,


Vers, 8, 9. Comp, chaps, xviii, 15,
16; xix. 8


Ver. 10. Theme: DEATH PREFER-
ABLE TO LIFE. “ Weep not for the
dead, neither bemoan him; but weep
sore for him that goeth away,” &c,

Less reason for tears over Josiah, the
righteous father who is dead, than over
Jehoahag, the ungodly son, who, though
alive, is yet worse than dead, being
banished from all the blessings of life ;
and who goes away not as his father
to the land of rest and joy, but to cap-
tivity and dishonour,

L Death may prove a gracious goal.
It was to Josiah Mors janua vite.
“Death is the gate of. life” Of course
only to the godly. Blessed as life is
to the Christian, yet “‘to die ts gain.”
Here is a test which divides the ranks
of the living. To which of us would
death be an advantage—knowing as we
do what awaits souls “after death”?

1. Death terminates much that makes
bife so sad.

(1.) Personal sorrows : physical weak-
nesses, earthly deceits, life’s cares, strug-
gles with adversity, the risks and delu-

422


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY ;: JEREMIAH.








sions incident to all effort and enterprise
here, wearying toils,

(2.) Social troubles: misunderstand:
ings and misinterpretations, disappoint
ments and grievances, the anguish over
wayward children, the pangs over false
friendships and unrequited kindness:
desolating bereavements,

(3.) National distresses: 80 much
wounds our patriotism, and urges the
outcry, “‘O for a lodge in some vast
wilderness,” &c. (Jer. ix. 2).

(4.) Spiritual anxieties ; conflicts with
“besetting sins,” a wayward heart, the
world’s seductions, &c., grief over dis-
obedience to God, forgetfulness of
Divine love, &c.

“‘T would not livealway,” ‘I would
hasten my escape from the windy storm
and tempest.”

2, Death commences much that makes
life so glad.

(1.) Heaven won: “ to go no more
out.” ‘ Neither sorrow, nor crying,” dc,

(2.) Deity beheld in open vision.
“We shall see Him as He is,”

(3.) Harth’s mysteries solved, “ Now
we know in part, but then shall we
know,” &e.

(4.) Lost ones regained. ‘1 shall go
to her, but she shall not return to me.”

(5.) The perfect life attained. “I
shall be satisfied when I awake in Thy
likeness.”

IL Life may prove a grievous path.
It would to Shallum.

1. ts pleasures all desolated. Je
hoahaz would pine in captivity, Think
of

(1.) The invasions of disaster or death.
Remember what pestilence and accident
have done for once happy families.

(2.) Young lives early blighted : af-
flicted, crippled, &c.

(3.) Hearts ruthlessly broken; by fal-
sity of lovers, by desertion of relatives,
by disgraces brought upon homes through
recklessness or wickedness of fathers oF
soni,

(4.) Losses irretrievably suffered.
Change in fortune: children hurled
by reverses into penury, d&c.

2. Its possibilities all devastated,

(1.) Character or virtue wrecked. By
one criminal indulgence or act. confidence


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.





may be forfeited, the door of promotion
be closed, and honour exchanged for a
eareer of shame,

(2.) Powers suddenly smitten or
withered. The right hand may lose its
cunning, the mind its balance, d&c.

3. lts prospects all destroyed.

(1.) An irreligious career, life’s years
spent in practical ungodliness, destroys
the soul’s prospects. For sin darkens
the soul, and divorces it from all pre-
sent peace and gracious anticipations,
and «tmpenstence shuts out the soul
from the redemption of Christ and re-
conciliation with God.

(2.) An atheistic mtnd, the abandon-
ment of revelation, the rejection of the
Bible, the denial of God and spiritual
things: these cover the soul and its out-
look with a dense and desolating gloom,

Rather than such a life, “let me die
the death of the righteous, and let my
last end be like his,”


Theme: THE DEAD LESS MOURNED
THAN THE LIVING.

IL Evil times enforce this truth.
They are “taken away from the evil.”
When war or desolation come upon the
land, or disaster upon the home, we
think this,

IL Wicked careers emphasise the
truth. The diving Cain more o grief
than the dead Abel. We mourn less
for the ‘‘ dead” though we loved them
dearly, than for the living who violate a1]
our hopes, and fill us with griefand shame.

It. Divine revelation elucidates
the truth. For “blessed are the dead
which die in the Lord, they rest from
their labours,” &e. See Scriptures which
exhibit the future of the redeemed, as
contrasted with our lot on earth.

_ See Addenda: “ WEEP NoT FOR THE

DEAD.”

Note:

“ Dying saints,” says Henry, “may be
justly envied, while living sinners are
justly pitied. And so dismal perhaps
the prospects of the times may be, that
tears even for a Josiah, even for a
Jesus, must be restrained, that they
may be reserved for ourselves and our
children (Luke xxiii. 28).”


See . Further, Noticeable Topres:


CHAP, EEE,


“ Gerer FoR THOSE WHO HAVE GONB
AWAY TO WAR.”


Ver. 13. Theme: Rapacrry pp-
NOUNCED.

See Addenda - CoveTousNEss,

“ He who builds his house with other
people’s property, collects stones for his
grave.”—Cramer.

“ Sepulchri immemor struis domos.”—
Horat.

‘¢ Though impoverished by the tribute
imposed upon them by the king of Egypt
(2 Chron. xxxvi. 3), the inhabitants were
eruelly ground by Jehoiakim, whoscrupled
not at the adoption of any measures by
which he might be able to carry on the
building of a large and splendid palace.”
— Henderson.

Not only did Jehoiakim tax the
people (2 Kings xxiii. 25) for Pharaoh’s
tribute, but also took their forced Jabour
without pay for building a splendid
palace ; in violation of Lev. xix. 13;
Deut. xxiv. 14, 15.

“ God will repay in justice those who
will not in justice pay those whom they
employ.” —Henry.

“‘ Jehoiakim lived in splendour amid
the misery of the nation, amused himself
with building palaces when the whole
land was ground down by heavy taxa-
tion, and miserably perished at the age
of thirty-six, so little eared for that his
body was cast aside without burial.”—
Payne Smith.


Vers. 15, 16. Theme: Jenotaxiw’s
DEGENERACY FROM HIS FATHER’S
PIETY.

Jehoiakim’s character given (ver. 13
seg.) He a young prince, son of pious
father, degenerated; hence God sent
awful message in text by Jeremiah,
Woe denounced upon him for pride,
&e., when nation in distress (vers. 13,
14). Then God expostulates ; wicked-
ness aggravated and inexcusable, because
of bright example of piety and righteous
ness in his father (vers. 15, 16).

I God remembereth the piety and
usefulness of our ancestors, and «bser-
veth how far we resemble them (vers.
15, 16; contrast ver. 17).

1. God can farget nothing.

433


Past,


OHaP. XXH.


present, “all naked and open.” (1.)
Remembers piety of our fathers. As
Josiah, Kind remembrance of His
faithful servants after left this world:
“not unrighteous to forget,” &e, (2.)
Instructive to observe with how much
respect God mentions those who have
been upright before Him. Thus
“the righteous Lord loveth righteous-
ness;” treats good men as favourites.
(3.) This a great encouragement to be
religious: enjoy favour while here, and
our memory precious in His sight when
forgotten by survivors. (4.) Motive to
all, especially children of pious parents,
to reverence the memory of saints.

2. God takes notice how far we resemble
them. Charges Jehoiakim that trod not
in father’s steps. (1.) God makes just
estimates of our religious advantages
and our improvement of them. (2.)
Observes declension. (3.) Whether
our hearts be right as our father’s
were, ¢.g., Timothy (2 Tim. i 5), or
whether as Solomon (1 Kings xi. 4—
6). (4.) An incentive to utmost caution :
not cast off the entail of religion, lose
truest hereditary honours, involve Divine
displeasure.

IL Young persons often forsake the
religion of their fathers through pride
and love of elegance, pomp, and show
(ver. 15). Pride led him to covet splen-
dour and practise injustice.

‘This sin easily besets and ensnares the
young. They scorn their father’s lowli-
ness, Begin with extravagance greater
than where their wiser fathers ended.
(1.) It leads them to forsake their
father’s religious profession. Favours
and preferments of the world are not on
that side. Count their father’s religion
narrow, and abandon their principles.
(2.) Love of pomp and elegance lead to
the loss of the life and power of godliness.
Luxury and irreligion (ver. 13), prac
tices their fathers would have abhorred.
Go from bad to worse: as Jehoiakim,
oppressed Jeremiah and slew Uzziah
{Jer. xxvi. 21). Won an ill character
(Ezek. xix. 6, 7).

To the young: Set out in life
with moderate desires. Be content with
your rank. Strengthen religious dis-
positions. “Do justice and merey.”

424


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





Humility the brighest ornament; rel
gion the defence of the soul.

It. It is a great dishonour and re-
proach to any to forsake the good ways
of their fathers. Jehoiakim was over
twenty when Josiah died, God inti-
mates that his conduct was both dis-
honourable and inexcusable,

1. Religiously trained as he doubtless
was, his forsaking religion was a reproach,
The good example of our fathers aggra-
vates our guilt and shame. 2, Let young
persons consider the usefulness and
honour for which their parents were
eminent. Was it not “well with
them”? They were beloved and la-
mented (ver. 18) 3. Consider for
what it is that so many forsake the
good ways of their fathers. 4. Here
are terrible threatenings from God
against this wickedness (ver. 19, also
xxxvi. 30). Forsake religion of ances-
tors, it will be your shame. “If thou
forsake Him, He will cast thee off for
ever.”

IV. The way of religion is the way
of wisdom, honour, and happiness.

1. Wisdom. Jehoiakim thought him-
self wise in “ building,” &c. His father
was a good man and good king, and
“was not this to know Me?” (ver. 16);
Ps. cxi. 10; 1 Johni. 3,4. Rightknow-
ledge consists in being religious.

2. Honour. Josiah universally es
teemed (2 Chron, xxxv. 25). Luxury
and splendour do not secure honour
(Prov. iii. 3, 4).

3. Happiness, “Well with him”
(ver. 15); repeated (ver. 16). Over
against this the young prince is asked,
“Shalt thou reign because, &. 1” (ver.
15). Piety and righteousness a surer
foundation and defence,

Way to be happy is to be and do
good. While we do well, it will be
well with us (Ps, xxxiv. 12; 1 Tim
iv. 8

(Abstract of Sermon, by Rev. Job
Orton, Kidderminster, a.p. 1775).


Ver. 18. Theme: A PERVERSE 80N.
“Thus saith the Lord concerning Je
hoiakim the son of Josiah.”

That godly men should have ungodly
children is a problem hard to solve


OE ee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; JEREMIAH.


OHAP. XXIL





Josiah hed both a Shallum and a
Jehoiakim, both wicked men; David,
Absalom, a rebellious son ; Eli, Hophni
and Phineas, “both sons of Belial that
knew not the Lord.”

I Parental discipline and proper
training are suggested as lacking. Stress
ig laid on the proverb, ‘‘ Train up a child,”
fc. But this assumes without proof

1. That in these instances there waa
a lack of parental discipline and proper
training,

2. That piety in children is the na-
tural result of parental discipline and
proper training.

But what are the facts of the case ?

(a.) Piety is sometimes found in the
children of godless parents, where there
has been no religious training at all ;
whereas

(6.) Impiety will sometimes be seen
iu the children of godly parents, who
have striven to bring them up in the
fear of the Lord.

Such facts teach that youthful piety
is not the natural result of early train-
ing; and the mystery of the entire sub-
ject is left unsolved.

II. Religious education does not
always formareligious character. Reli-
gious habits may be formed without the
vital principle of religion possessing the
heart.

What is the reason why a child cannot
be trained to be a Christian ?

1. Because to become a Christian is to
have a new nature, a new life, which no
training can originate, Nothing can be
trained except what has life. None can


train a dead vine or dead tree, ‘Train-


ing supposes life.

2. No child has by nature religious
ife, but only mental and moral life ;
and a child can only be trained men-
tally to think, morally to act.

Ill It is God’s prerogative to
quicken our children to newness of life.

Parental duty it is to train children:
but equally their duty to pray that God
would impart the life of real religion,
that life without which a correct creed
and a cold morality leave the soul “ dead
in sins.” If parents see in their children
the germ of the new life, this is God's
handiwork, and the pledge for the chil-





dren of a life of grace and a glorious
destiny. —D. Pledge.

Ver. 19. Theme; AN IGNOMINIOUS
BURIAL.

The end of some men is very different
from what might have been expected,
considering their parentage, education,
and advantages.

Jehoiakim was the son of a king:
naturally suppose that he also would be
buried with the pageantry of a prince.

Also the son of a pious father: might
have hoped his death had been the death
of the righteous,

Sin bringsmen toanignominious end.

1. What a blighting thing ts sin/
Blasts every fond hope. When Je-
hoiakim was a youth he had fairest
earthly prospects; yet what degrada-
tion befel him !

2. A degraded burial ts not the worst
event. Funeral rites have been denied
to godly men and faithful witnesses for
Christ. But the burial of a man is of
little moment: that is not the end of
the man: Worse issues follow,

3. Burial affects not our future de-
sttny. Be he interred as a brute, or
amid the pomp of royalty, the destiny
of a man depends upon (fe, not upon
death and burial.

4, Piety exalts, while wickedness de-
bases men. Jehoiakim’s impiety set
him below beggars. Piety raises beg-
gars from the dunghill and sets them
among princes. Piety is God’s high-
road to heaven: impiety is Satan’s
high-road to perdition.—Ibid.

See Addenda : THE SINNER’s BURIAL.


Ver. 21. Theme: Reaarp ror Gop
DEADENED BY PROSPERITY.

The condition of life most coveted
may be most harmful—“ prosperity.”
Only by denials of our wishes are we
kept low at God’s feet. We can recall
events and experiences in which God
came to our souls and arrested them in
falling away from Him. Yet notwith-
standing all He has done, we are very
far from God.

If se far from Him despite all He has
done to keep us obedient, what would
have been our case had He never crossed
our wishes by afflictions and discipline!

425


GAP, XXTI.





We should be grateful that He has de-
solated owr “prosperity” and reclaimed
us from disloyalty to Him.

Judah’s case shows: A people suffered
to advance with a prosperity that became
fatal to their spiritual life.

It reflects the state of a church which
through “prosperity” declines from
spiritual fervour and zeal; of the saint,
who through “ prosperity” grows in-
different ; of the sinner, who through
“ prosperity ” becomes reckless of God’s
calls to submission and repentance. “I
spake to thee in thy prosperity,” &e.

L The voice of God is addressing
itself to the souls of men.

Effects prove the cause; and in the
sinner alarmed, the backslider arrested,
the church awakened, we see evidences
that God has spoken and made His
voice heard.

1. In what ways the voice of God
utters its appeals, Whatever speaks of
God to the soul is the agent of God.
“ Earthquakes, fire, or still small voice.”
Calamity, pestilence, death, losses ; con-
science, the Bible, the preacher, the
Spirit. God speaks thus in various voices
to the heart of man.

2. To what extent God is speaking to
men, To all. For there is a common call
as well as an effectual call (comp. ver.
29).

4 For what purpose God addresses
men. He warns against sin, ruinous
selfishness, absorption in the world, for-
getfulness of God, death and eternity.
He appeals to men to repent, be recon-
ciled, “ flee from wrath to come,” é&e.

IL Man’s attention to God's voice
is influenced by his circumstances.

“T. spake zn thy prosperity, and thou
saidst, J will not hear.” We take no
heed in the day of youth and health
and ease, But trouble is a good teacher.
“In their affliction they will seek Me
early.”

1. There ts going on in every heart a
struggle for ascendancy. Selfishness is
at war with conscience, sin with Christ,
In every heart there will be a supreme :
and if our pleasures or possessions ab-
sorb our affections, then the spiritual
must succumb.

2. What holds the heart supremely

426


-numerically prosperous church,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





subjugates all else. If any one ungodly
thing sways us, then God’s claims be
come ignored, And the law with us, as
with the universe, is advance. No
affection is stationary. It strengthens
or weakens, Thus, when any object
holds our affections before God, or in
opposition to God, the heart becomes
turned against God, and we repudiate
His voice.

IIL Prosperity in life deadens our
goul’s susceptibilities to Divine appeals,

1. “ Prosperity” 48 not in ttself an
ewd. The Bible honoursit. There may
be commercial prosperity, scetal pros-
perity, spiritual prosperity, cherch pros-
perity: and all may be good. May
God give you all these “ prosperities.”

2. But while in itself good, and
coveted as a good, “ prosperity” may
prove the soul’s snare. It may be bad
in its effect on us. What is full can
receive no addition; and if prosperity
fill our hearts, Christ has no place there.
Thus: commercial prosperity has made
many spiritually “‘ wretched and poor
and miserable.” “ Jeshurun waxed fat
and kicked.” Few can carry a full cup
with a steady hand, or bear the world
on their shoulders without bowing to
the earth.

Bo even spiritual prosperity may be.
get elation, self-security. The success.
ful Christian worker may be ready te
trumpet his successes, “ Come, see my
zeal for the Lord!” Paul found danger
“lest he should be exalted above mea-
sure by the abundance of revelations.”

There may be less of Christ in a
than
where there is “little strength:” lesa
of Christ in the prosperous soul than in
the heart desolate through darkness and
non-success, And hence “I dwell with
the humble and contrite.”

IV. Hindrances to our regarding
God’s voice He will remove.

Comp. vers. 5, also 8, 9.

1. What deadens our attention God
dooms. Be it pride, health, or energy,
eagerness after success, refuges of lies,
favours and privileges, He will remove
them far from us, or us from them.

2. God's voice must be heard. There
was a rich man, who was a “ fool” ; all


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.
—_———— eee





God's calls were disregarded. But God
made His voice heard at last—in terror
in scorn,

For if we refuse to hear through life,
death will come when that awful Voice
will drown all others, and in judgment
it will silence all appeals in its sentence
of doom.

See Addenda ; Prosperiry.


Theme: INFLUENCE OF PROSPERITY.

“T spake unto thee in thy prosperity,
and thou saidst, I will not hear.”

In heaven, the more abundantly God’s
bounties are dispensed, the more is He
loved andadored ; but on earth, the richer
His gifts, the more will He be neglected
and disobeyed. A striking proof of
our depravity, that constant prosperity
hardens, and is unfavourable to piety.

L That abundant earthly blessings
do tend to make the heart rebellious
towards God.

1. Scripture teachings are emphatic
on this matter. The Israelites were
warned (Deut. viii 12-14), A frequent
metaphor likens men to beasts luxuri-
antly fed (Hos, xiii. 6). Agur’s prayer
was prompted by distrust of himself
(Proverbs xxx. 8, 9).

2. Haperience confirms Scripture,
Dawid, the man after God’s heart, when
exalted became a polluted murderer.
Solomon, the wisest man, was trans-
formed into a besotted sensualist. Moses,
the meekest man, spoke contemptuously,
“Hear now, ye rebels, must we fetch
water,” &c. In these instances we see
that the highest human virtues and
holiest saints of God were unable to
withstand the influence of prosperity.
They could endure affliction and profit
thereby—as certain liquors ripen in the
shade, which under the noonday beams
turn to acidity and corruption.

Similar instances occur now. Many
a religious career, which began with
fervour and zeal, has been checked by
worldly prosperity and ended amid the
stupidity and sensuality of a worldling.

3. It is doubtful whether there ever
was a single instance of piety which
could pass uninjured through the ordeal
of unmingled prosperity. Tone of reli-
gion is lowered amid riches and honours.


OHAP. ZXIL.


Where simplicity and humility of spirit
are preserved amid prosperity, it is
owing to some hidden trouble, which
like the cord on the feet of the aspiring
bird keeps the proud spirit lowly and
abased.

IL If then, upon the highest reli-
gious characters worldly prosperity has
a hardening influence, what must be its
effect on those who have no religious
principle to counteract it, and who are
avowedly lovers of the world and its
pleasures ?

1. They will not heed the messages of
God. In the chamber of sickness and
among the afflicted there may be suc-
cess; but none among the children of
prosperity and nurslings of vanity.

2. Religion, with its sober realities, te
despised. Their heart is set upon the
world, wealth invites to its enjoyment.

3. Those favoured of fortune are the
most pitiable objects in the world. We
may not limit God’s grace, which can
bring the soul from amid unmingled
prosperity to bow in lowly subjection
before the sceptre of Jesus. Affliction
may bring down the soul, or it may
become surfeited with life’s good things,
and then God’s message will be heard ;
but those who are “full” and “laugh
now ” too often inherit only the Saviour’s
“ woes,”

IIL They who have worldly pros-
perity should be led to self-inquiry as
to its effect upon themselves.

1. In no country like our own are
there so many who have risen from small
beginnings to great estates and honours.
Has God “granted your requests but
sent leanness into your souls”? When
riches increased, have you set your heart
upon them? Are you the same simple-
hearted and sincere follower of Jesus as
when you began to lay the foundation
of your worldly exaltation? “ Remem-
ber from whence thou hast fallen.”

2. What a caution ts here to those whe
are seeking prosperity / Can you dis-
cover a means of preserving a lowly
spiritual mind amid prosperity 1 Unless
so, there is no alternative but that you
must suffer adversity to keep you
humble, or become worldly and spirit
tually hardened.

427


3. They who have become more in
disposed to hear the voice of God should
awake to their peril. Had you been
placed amid afflictions and deprivations,
it might have been better for your soul.
“The goodness of God should lead thee
to repentance ;” but it has had the op-
posite effect, and led to greater sin.
What depravity is here! Is not that a
brutish nature which is more rebellious
to its owner the richer the pasture he
provides? Is this the spirit of a reason-
able intelligent creature? Does not such
@ heart need @ change ?

4. Prosperous ones may well regard
their case with apprehension. The evil
days will come when they will say, “I
bave no pleasure inthem.” Spare your-
selves the blow by renouncing the world
for Christ. Is the sacrifice too great for
Him who gave His life for you 1—W.
H. Lewis, D.D., “ Sermons for the Chris-
tian Year,”


Theme : PROSPERITY BANEFUL,

Scripture uniformly teaches that dis-
tance from God is the greatest misery—
nearness to Him the greatest good.
Heli ia the extreme point of distance
from Him: Heaven is the perfection of
nearness and resemblance to Him. In
proportion as we are under the power of
religion, we are said to walk with God,
conforming ourselves to His will, plac-
ing ourselves beneath His eye, and re-
joicing in the proofs of His acceptance
and favour. In proportion as we are
‘destitute of religion, we are said to live
without God in the world—we neither
are solicitous for His glory, nor are
mindful of His friendship, nor are dis-
posed to listen to His voice. In afite-
tion we do not bow in holy resignation
to His will, in prosperity we do nut own
the hand from whence our mercies flow.
And this is the description of Israel :
“ I snake to thee in thy prosperity, but
thou wouldst not hear,”

The text is a charge brought against
the Jewish nation; and it is accom-
panied with a threat of the removal of
those mercies they had abused by a long
and mournful captivity. The same
charge is applicable to most men in a
greater or less degree.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


wos


L The exactness with which God
observes all that relates to human
character and conduct.

The text is the language of regret.
A father weeping over a child: a bene-
factor—a Saviour deploring “J spake
in prosperity.”

1. All our relative circumstances are im-
mediately before His eye; and He notices
with tender and faithful scrutiny the
various effects which His merciful dis-
pensations have upon the mind, In
riches and poverty, in prosperity and
adversity, in health and sickness, in joy
and sorrow, in youth and age: and He
traces with most minute inspection the
different effects produced with a view to
the development and progression of
moral character. Not with angry eye
merely, but with kind solicitude and
regard : as a father a child. ;

How different a thing is life in
human and Divine estimation, Man
thinks what shall [ eat. But God looks
to growth of piety and principle.

2. The circumstances of human life,
however produced, are undoubtedly under
the guidance of Providence, and therefore
subservient to a wise and perfect design.
Each man’s history isarranged and adapted
with utmost precision to the growth of
permanentcharacter. When the outlineis
fully sketched, when the discipline has
had its perfect operation, when the edu-
cation is completed not to our concep-
tions but to the eye of Deity, we no
longer continue here. The fruit being
set, the winds scatter the blossoms ; the
fruit being ripe, the sun loses its power ;
the fruit falling or being gathered, winter
is at hand.

God marks everything. “ This thy
manner from thy youth, Thou hast not
obeyed,” A faithful record is kept.

Il. The tendency of unsanctified
prosperity to render us insensible to
the claims of religion and separate us
still farther from God.

Prosperity and adversity
terms.

1. Uninterrupted comfort tends to
lessen our confidence tn God; to form
in the mind a feeling of self-confidence :
& security nothing can shake; so much
so that religion can make ne entrance


relative


ee


a


EL


a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





into the mind. It overcomes that feel-
ing of humility and dependence which
is the source of every virtue, and conse-
quently weakens the hold of principle,
aud aims directly at the foundation of
all religion.

2. Another fatal effect of it is to har-
den the heart. God would have every
temporal blessing raise the inquiry,
“ Lord, whatis man?” But wicked and
irreligious men are only concerned for
enjoyment, and for scope for their am-
bition. They feed and grovel like swine
beneath the oak, without looking up to
the boughs that bore the fruit or the
hand that shakes it down. Hence pros-
perity is but a bad nurse to virtue, a
nurse which is like to starve it in its in-
fancy and to spoil it in its growth, The
corrupt affection, which seemed dead and
chill under the winter of affliction, is
like the serpent warmed into life and
venom by the sun of prosperity.

3, Then comes pride. Hezekiah shows
his treasures. Nebuchadnezzar exclaims,
Is not this Babylon? Pride and pomp,
Then God is forgotten: prayer neglected.
If Jeshurun wax fat, ten to one he kicks
against Him who made him so.

4. Leaves a dulness and lethargy of
mind. All Divine threatenings, warn-
ings, promises unheeded.

ITt. Various ways in which God re-
bukes this tendency and humbles men.

God speaks to men in various ways,
and He distinctly marks the various
impressions produced upon the mind by
His communications He speaks to us
by His Word and ordinances, by the in-
structions we receive in religious educa-
tion, by the various dispensations of His
providence, by affliction, by mercies, all
are the voice of God to man. “ J spake,”

The externals of life undesirable.
“Give me neither poverty nor riches.”

Affliction—its design.

The care of the soul is “the one
thing needful.”

Immediately apply to Christ.

—Samuel Thodey, a.p. 1828


SERMON To THE YOUNG.
“ This has been thy manner from thy


youth” (ver. 21).
The habits formed in youth generally





meen





continue in future life. The early cus.
toms of Judah led on to the settled
condition of indifference to God’s calls
and counsels,

IL Mankind generally continue to
live according to the habits formed in
youth.

There are some exceptions, Youths
who were profligate have in after life
become godly, &c. By the period of
youth I mean from, say twelve to
twenty-five: this is the season when
habits are formed. And the words of
the text will apply to those

1. Whose life is given to the /useury
of pleasure.

2. Who pass the season of youth in
indulging tn gross vices, (a.) To the
Sabbath-breaker ; (6.) to the profane ;
(e) to the drunkard.

3. Equally relevant to vices of the
mind. (a.) Selfishness ; (b.) pride ; («)
malignity.

4. So also as regards their attitude
towards religion. (a) Those who pass
their youth in a merely formal regard
to the external duties of religion usually
become formalists. (6.) Those who
practise guile and deceit become hypo-
critical. (c¢.) Those who in youth slighe
the Gospel, in old age are seen to be un-
feeling and hardened. (d.) Those who
are sceptical frequently become confirmed
infidels.

Youth is generally the season when
a decision is made either in favour of
religion or against.

Ii. Custom in any course generally
issues in confirmed habits. “This
has been thy manner from thy youth.”

1, The commencement of a course in
life is often attended with a struggle
and with difficulties. When a young
person begins a sinful course, there is
the struggle against instruction, remon-
strances of conscience, &c. So also in
a religious career.

2. But contimuance tm a course ren-
ders habits congenial and easy. So
difficult then is it for those who have
accustomed themselves to pursue evil
ways to desist, that little hope is enter-
tained for a change. “Shall the Ethio-
pian change his skin?” &. ‘This has
been thy manner from thy youth.”

429


OSAP XX.


II. Solemn uses to which these
truths may be applied.

You are old enough now to decide
your future. You are now in the most
important season of your life. Accept

1. A few cautions.

(1.) Guard against slighting parental
instruction. (2.) Against slighting the
gospel. (3.) Against slighting the Sab-
bath, (4.) Avoid also ungodly com-
panions,

2. A few exhortations—founded upon
the fact that your future life may be
expected to correspond with the habits
formed in youth.

(1.) Accustom yourselves to consider
your accountability to God. ‘“‘ Remember
now thy Creator in the days of thy
youth ;” and think that for the sins
and habits of your youth He will re-
quire an account in the day of judg-
ment, (2.) Study the Sacred Book by
which your future should be dtrected,

(3.) Decide early in favour of religion,
This wi!l be the best security from the
evils to which you will surely be exposed.
It will equip you to be useful in life.
It will ensure your future happiness,
It will prepare you for death. There
is another world beyond the present,—
Old MS,


Vers. 20-23.
DESOLATIONS.

Judah and Jerusalem, spoken to as an
individual, appear in a threefold char-
acter.

i. Very haughty in the day of peace
and safety (ver. 21). It is common for
those who live at ease to live in con-
tempt of the Word of God. This is so
much the worse because it is habitual—
“thy manner from thy youth,”

ii. Very timorous at the alarms of
trouble (ver. 20). When “thy lovers,”
idols and foreign alliances, fail thee,
thou wilt ascend the mountains and ery
for help (ver. 20); but all tn vain (ver.
22).

iii, Very tame under the heavy and
lasting pressures of trouble (ver. 22).
“ Ashamed and confounded,” &. Many
will never be ashamed of their sins till
they are brought by them to their last
extremity. She was proud and self-

430


Theme:  UWastTENING


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR,





secure in her prosperity (ver. 33),
“made her nest in cedars: ” but in her
humiliation she will promise God to be
humble and amend her ways: “how
gracious wilt thou be,” &.—Henry.


Ver. 24. Theme: THE PUNISHMENT
OF THE IMPENITENT.

Such punishment is both—(a) inevit-
able: (6) justifiable

L Awful instances in which God
has verified this declaration.

1. The apostate angels. 2. Our first
parents. 3, Destruction of mankind by
the Flood. 4, The children of Israel.
5. Moses, David, the disobedient pro-
phet. 6. The death of Christ as man’s
substitute.

IL Reasons which support this de
claration.

1. Not a disposition to give pain:
nor 2 desire for revenge. 2. It is the
nature and tendency of sin to produce
misery.— Payson,


Theme: Wor To Conran.

Here, in this malediction, the pro-
phet describes Jehoiachin under three
similes :-—

L A signet plucked from God’s
hand. A signet was like the “great
seal” of England, the badge of office.
It meant the loss of kingship and royal
authority.

1. Plucked of by God Himself (ver. 24).
So that God by special action renounces
this godless king.

2. Handed over to the Chaldean tyrant
(ver. 25). Thus God puts him, entirely
separated from Himself, into the power
of Nebuchadnezzar; “ without God in
the world ”—given over to the foe !

Zerubbabel, God's servant, the nephew
of Jeconiah, was made by God “as a sig-
net ” (comp. Hag. ii. 23; see also Gen.
xli, 42; 1 Kings xxi, 8; Esther iii. 10,
viii. 2; Dan. vi. 17; 2 Tim. ii, 19;
Rev. vii. 3, ix. 4).

Jeconiah was a signet, but plucked
and cast away. After only three months’
reign, he was carried captive to Ba-
bylon.

Thus God can “ put down the mighty
from their seats, and exalt them of low
degree” (Luke i. 51-53).


Se a ee ee ee aE a ee ee ere


pe rere


ee ee ye


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





I A cherished idol despised (ver.
28). Coniah was once idolised by the
Jews ; and great things had been ex-
pected of him, Indeed it was hoped
he would frustrate the Chaldean power,
avert or bring back Judah from the Chal-
dean captivity, and thus falsify Jere-
miah’s sad prediction.

He had also been exalted by Jehovah
as king of God’s favoured and covenant
people.

Henry states these facts thus :

1. Time was when he was dignified,
almost deified. But now that he is
deposed, he is despised. ‘ What is
unjustly honoured will be justly con-
temned ; and rivals with God will be
the scorn of men.”

2. Time was when he was delighted in.
But now he is ‘a vessel in which is no
pleasure,” because either out of fashion
or unserviceable. Those whom God has
no pleasure in will some time or other be
so mortified that men willhaveno pleasure
in them (see Psa. xxi. 13; Hos. viii. 8).

Il. A king deprived of posterity
(ver. 30). Jeconiah was not literally
childless (comp. ver. 28: “his seed,” 1
Chron. iii. 17, 18 ; Matt. i 12) ; but was
to be “ written ” lineally childless, Mes-
siah was only lineally descended from
Jeconiah through Joseph, who though
His legal was not His real father. The
succession to the throne failed in his
line; nevertheless, the promise to David

Psa. Ixxxix. 30-37) was revived in
Zerubbabel, and consummated in Christ.

The king who succeeded Jeconiah
was his uncle Zedekiah, and with him
the Hebrew monarchy as a visible insti-
tution was destroyed.

See Addenda: WritTEN CHILDLESS,


Eusebius, the historian (Zecles. Hist.
iii, 20), says, “Jeconiah was the last
king of David’s line. His uncle indeed
actually reigned after him, but perished
with his sons long before Jeremiah’s
death (chap. lii, 10) In the legal
genealogies Salathiel (Heb, Shealtiel),
who was descended from David through
his son Nathan, is counted as his son,
but neither he nor Zerubbabel pros-
pered so as to sit on David's throne
And gradually their descendants be


CHa?. XSTL


came so insignificant as to be but *a
cut-down tree’ (Isa. xi. 1), and ‘a
dry ground’ (Isa. liii. 2). When from
this uncrowned lineage Christ had come,
and the growing strength of Christianity
had aroused the jealous fears of Domi-
tian, he caused a search to be made for
the descendants of David; but when
they were brought before him, they
proved to be such simple country people
that he despised them and let them go.”

1. From so proud an ancestor no
descendant of note ever rose upon the
notice of history.

2. Yet froma family so utterly fallen,
came the King of kings and Lord of
lords,


Ver. 29. Theme: MIsstoNaRY sER-
MON. GoD’s OALL TO THE WORLD.

Judah would not heed or believe God’s
message (ver. 19); so God appeals to
tho world to record His denunciations
and watch their fulfilment. The treble
repetition of “earth” emphasises the
appeal: it is therefore wrgent that earth
should hear God’s Word. The repetition
is also an intensitive form, and expresses
God’s earnestness in making this call to
“ earth.”

I The whole wide earth engages
God’s solicitude.

l. As Hits creative product. He
formed the world; and peopled it.

2. As His undivided possession. Satan
may deem himself ‘‘ god of this world,”
but it is only a temporary and delusive
occupancy. ‘The earth ts the Lord's
and the fulness thereof ; the world, and
they that dwell therein.” ‘“ All souls are
Mine.”

3. As the sphere of His benignant rule.
He works not locally, in limited terri-
tories, bounded by narrow geographical
lines: but over the wide world His
Providence works. As wide as the
light of His sun floods, &c., so is His
rule. ‘ He doeth according to His will
among the inhabitants of the world.”
“The nations are but as a drop in the
bucket,” &c. None overlooked. There
is not an isolated spot on earth where
God has not worked, adorning it with
life and beacty.

4, The whole round world is man's

431


CHaP. XXII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR., —





sphere of being. And “ His delights are
with the sons of men.” This is regard-
less of national divisions, “God hath
made of one blood all the nations for to
dwell upon the earth.”

5. God 1s intent om making the entire
globe the theatre of Hts most glorious
reign. “The uttermost parts of the
earth” are to share in His lory. “ All
men shall be blessed in Him, and all
nations call Him blessed.”

TI. To the whole wide earth God
addresses His messages.

1. Under Old Testament dispensations
there were world-wide communications
which overleaped the restrictions of
Judaism. The Jews would have kept
Jehovah to themselves, and all His re
velations, But many grand truths were
gathered into the Mosaie code, the
Jewish Scriptures, which were for all
people. The Sabbath was not for the
Jews alone, but a law for all nations
and all time. God's character declared
on Sinai was a revelation for every one.
His words of mercy to sinners, ‘Come,
let us reason together,” “Let the
wicked forsake his way,” dec., were
without any Jewish limitation, “In
every nation he that feareth God and
worketh righteousness is accepted of
Him” (Acts x. 34, 35).

2. Prior to the Gospel, God gathered
the whole world into His love, The
Gospel but expressed that love. “He


so loved that He gave His Son.” Glad
fact that the love of God is older than
the Incarnation. It is everlasting love
—universal love,

3. Jesus Christ proclaimed the unt-
versal religion. God’s message to sin-
mers, ‘Go ye into all the world and
preach the Gospel to every creature.”

4. In God’s revelations there 1s adapta-
tion to and provision for the whole earth.
Warnings: counsels: invitations : plead-
ings: promises.


** Buough for each, enough for all.”


TIL Over the whole wide earth His
Word is to be proclaimed.

1. By human lips. Jeremiah is the
speaker. Men who know the “ Word
of the Lord” must tell it.

2. With impassioned earnestness.
Pleading and appealing. “ O earth, earth,
earth!” Enthusiasm should impel us.

3. With restless urgency. ‘ Not hold-
ing our peace day or night, we that make
mention of the Lord.”

4, With dauntless persistency. Men
will not heed the first cry—then ery
again ; “O earth, earth, EARTH!”

5. With universal fulness. Tell a
Gospel which is “unto all people,” to
“all people;” till “every soul shall
know the joyful sound :” till ‘“ Chriat
is Lord indeed.”

See also Noticeable Topics: ‘‘ Gov’s
VOICE TO MAN.”


NOTICEABLE TOPICS IN CHAPTER XXII.


Topic: Wan THEME: GRIEF FOR THOSE WHO HAVE GONE away TO WaR,
(Ver. 10.)


For those who, as soldiers or seamen, have left thei: native country, there is
more occasion to mourn than for “ the quiet dead.”
Notice some of the Temprations, Triats, and Danexrs to which they


are exposed,


I Temptations to vice, which meet those who leave ivirtdous homes and


enter the camp or the ship of war.
prayers, dc.


They may have been the children of many
But away from home restraints—the scoffer’s jest, licentious induce-


ments, the gambling table, allure them from Bible-reading, Sabbath reverence,


&c., and they go down to graves of infamy and woe.


that


Of how many such is it true,


“ Doubly dying, they go down
To the viie dust from whence they sprang,
Unwept, unhonoured, and ungang.”


IL Exposure to sickness and death, when far removed from home and thos


a
4(2


Oe ee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH, CHAP, XEEHL








who love them. It may be “easy to die in battle” where the spirit is stirred
to a courageous madness, and


« Fame is there to tell who bleeds,
And Honour’s eye’s on daring deeds.”





But to waste away by sickness through exposure to drenching rains and deadly
climate, to be crushed or mangled by a blow, and left to rude attentions until
death ends all!

IIL Ponder the horrors of captivity to which battles expose soldiers and
sailors.) The crowded prison-cell, scanty food and drink, fiend-like foes, and suf-
ferings and cruelties inflicted on the conquered: from such horrors we turn
away in bitter indignation and anguish ; feeling and saying—

** O judgment ! thou hast fled to brutish beasta,
And men have lost their reason !”


{V. The horrors of the battle-field. Truly, “every battle of the warrior is
with confused noise, and garments rolled in blood.” The maimed and mangled
left to bleed and die! Or turn to naval battles, where are bursting shells, shat-
tered masts, gory decks, shrieks of anguish, and heaps of slain |

V. Brutalising effect of war on soldiers. What secret theft, open and
violent robbery, the outrages on virtue and humanity, now abandoned to the
heat of passion, to unbridled lust, &.

Such is war: cruel and relentless, with hands of violence and eyes of
flaming rage, with gory locks and crimson banners, &c. The rejoicing of nations
for victories won is mingled with the wail of the widow, the cry of the orphan,
the anguish of parents bereaved,

All this should constrain us to

1. Do all we can for the sptritual good of our army and navy. Succour
them with all bodily comforts amid the miseries of battle, but write them per-
sonal letters when we ean, and also send them messengers and ministers of
sacred truth,

2. Pray for them that God may restrain them from temptations and lead them
as good soldiers of the Cross to triumph over their spiritual foes. Thus, should
they die, we may hope they would gain the victor’s crown of life on high.

The more we do for the spiritual good of our national defenders the sooner
may we hope for enduring national peace, and for the coming years of universal
peace: when

* No more shall nation against nation rise,
Nor ardent warriors meet with hateful eyes,
Nor fields with gleaming steel be covered o’er,
The brazen trumpets kindle rage no more;
But useless lances into scythes shall bend,


And the broad falchion in the ploughshare end.”
Rev. Charles Rockwell, New York, 1864,


Topic: Gop’s Vorce To Man. “O earth, hear the word of the Lord” (ver. 29).


The Bible is the Word of God, and every man is interested in its contents. It
is God’s own message to His own world—a message transparent with light and
warm with love. It brings, as we believe, its own evidence of its truth, the
credentials of its Divine original in every page—for the best argument in favour
of the Bible is the Book itself—in the grandeur of its doctrines, in the purity of
ita precepts, in the richness of its promises ; in the faithfulness of its warnings,
and above all in its complete adaptation to the state and condition of guilty man ;
revealing as it does an atoning sacrifice and s sanctifying Spirit, a sacrifice worthy
of God to accept, and equal to the salvation of a fallen world, The evidences of
this religion, sustained as they have been by MIRACLE and bv ae been

28 j


OMAP. XXII. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR.





sufficient to satisfy the keenest inquiry of the wisest and best of men, and to guide


eountless myriads in their path to heaven, who, living, have owned its power, and
dying, have rejoiced in its grace. We may go round to all the varieties of this
world’s population and say, O earth, earth, earth, hear the Word of the Lord,
assured of finding a ready echo and response in every honest and penitent mind,
The great doctrine this text contains is the tmportance of listening to the Bible as
the voice of God. Hear the Word.

L Specify some respects in which we should hear God’s voice.

1. In the still small voice of heavenly mercy.

This threefold adjuration supposes great indifference, great reluctance on man’s
part to listen to God’s voice of merey. We might well ask, Are the inhabitants of
the world dead or deaf that God calls the cold and barren earth to listen to His
Word when man would not ?

The Gospel itself, though it proclaims peace on earth and goodwill to man, is
coldly regarded. How striking that announcement of the angels, ‘‘unto you ts
born a Saviour ;” to you MEN, not to US ANGELS. There was no olive branch in
their deluge: no brazen serpent in their rebellious camp: no city of refuge in all
their courts: no star of Bethlehem in their sky: no “ mighty to save” travailed in
the greatness of His strength on their behalf. When angels sinned, justice took its
own unfettered course; but when Adam fell, a Saviour was provided.

S¢ From heaven the sinning angels fell,
And wrath and vengeance chained them down;


‘But man, vile man, forsook his bliss,
And mercy lifts him to a crown.”


It is under this last best dispensation of heavenly truth and grace that we are
living. listen to the still small voice of eternal mercy.

2. In the loud thunder of God’s providential dispensation.

God calls attention to the overthrow of Judea and its monarchy. It is, there
fore, to the crash of falling thrones and of extinguished dynasties that God appeals,
to teach His people that sin is a great destroyer ; for wherever guilt reigns, the
pale angel of retribution is sure to follow. The Bible is the interpreter of Provi-
dence, and Providence is the best interpreter of the Bible. The Jews have a
saying, “ That God spake as truly to Israel by His ten plagues in Egypt, as He did
by Hus ten words on Sinat.” We are exhorted to hear the Rod and Him that
appointed it ; and we are sure that, sooner or later, they who will not hear His
voice in His Worp, must be made to feel the weight of His Ron.

3. In your personal and relative afflictions, God speaks and demands a hearing.

The various methods in which God meets with man and causes solemn warnings
to affect the heart, form a striking part of His procedure ; and every such appeal
rejected will constitute a fearful item in our last account. God has been no niggard
in His communications, and has studied economy in nothing so little as in the
impressions and convictions He conveys to the guilty conscience. Men are met,
day by day, in their business, in their families, in their public walks, in their
private retirements, in the exchange of merchandise, in the temple of religion, with
warning voices and monitions, of which God is the immediate author. In every
family affliction, in every sudden death, in every instance of wounded affection,
or disappointed ambition, or ruined hope, and in the overwhelming dismay created
by the prospect of poverty on the one hand, or by the removal from our side of
those upon whose right arm we leaned, God comes very near to us, and seems to
say in accents we cannot misunderstand, “ Vow J will be seen ; now I will make
Myself heard.” God speaks to us from the grave of a friend ; from the cradle
of a child; from the death of an enemy; and from the great changes and losses
always going on in the troubled theatre of human affairs, “ The Lord's voice erteth
unto the city,” in every variety of accent, “O earth, earth, earth, hear the Word of
the Lord.”

434


Nisceee em eay ae yl pn pa


eee


OS EES PN TRI API BLT eT





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. CHAP, XE.








It has often been remarked that in the time of the great plague in Florence,
im Venice, and in London, those who escaped became more dissipated and aban-
doned to evil than ever, acting upon the libertine sentiment, “ Let us eat and drink,
for to-morrow we die.” Affliction where it does not soften, only hardens the more.

4. In the ample promises and encowragements addressed to returning penitents,

To humble the sinner and to exalt the Saviour is the leading design of the
whole Record, but it is the death of the sin and not the death of the soul that God
contemplates. Truly the case of the long-hardened sinner is mournful and
hazardous, but it is not either remediless or desperate, seeing that there is a great
sacrifice provided for sin, and an all-sufficient Saviour revealed in the Gospel.

Yet think not that repentance and faith, important as they are in the order of
means, can be in any sense the meritorious conditions of salvation. This were to
put those things in Christ’s stead, which are only the stepping-stones in our way
to Him. It is not the virtue of our believing, but the merit of Him in whom we
believe that avails for acceptance and pardon.

Nor is it to the strength of our faith merely that the promise is made, but to
the reality of it, The weak hand of a child may hold that precious pearl which
worlds want wealth to buy; and faith which is as a grain of mustard-seed has
power to remove mountains.

Come, upon the strength of His own invitation: or let urgent and desperate
necessity be your warrant, for you must perish if you stay away. Let the accept-
ance-which others have found induce you to come; for their experience is your
encouragement, Let the wonders of His redemptive work urge your footsteps
towards His throne. Return to Me, for I have redeemed thee. Livery leaf of His
Book bas a voice to say RETURN. All the threatenings and all the promises say
RETUEN ; all His judgments and all His mercies say RETURN. The whole intelli-
gent universe would seem to have but one voice. Voices from heaven and voices
from hell say RETURN. If the redemption of the soul be precious, RETURN. If the
terrors of hell be awful, if the joys of heaven be attractive, RETURN. ‘“O earth,
earth, earth, hear the Word of the Lord.”

IL Enumerate some reasons why the whole earth is interested in these
communications.

i, Because the Gospel shows the only plan of salvation.

ii, Because the progressive improvement and advancement of the race is connected
with this message.

Christian nations have been distinguished by intelligence. The spirit of science
rests solely with them : in dark ages it burnt in secret. Since the Reformation the pro-
gression of knowledge has been constant. In the East the mind has lost somewhat
of its capacity and power. In the West, under the auspices of Christianity, men
appear to have attained a vigour in intellectual exertions, An impregnable barrier
is fixed against the return of general ignorance and barbarism.

iii, Because the success of missionary work shows the practicability of diffusing tt.

iv. Because the signs of the times are in direct accord with the promises of God.

—Samuel Thodey.


ADDENDA TO CHAPTER XXII. ILLUSTRATIONS AND SUGGESTIVE EXTRACTS,


weep for Jehoiakim, for he died at once,
a death common to mortals, but should


Ver. 10. WEEP NoT FoR THE DEAD.
“Weep not for the dead,” te. of Je-


hoiakim, who died on the road when
taken captive.

““ Weep for him that goeth away,” t.6.,
Jehoiachin, who was a prisoner thirty-
seven years, and ultimately died in
captivity.

The prophet says they should not


weep for Jehoiachin, because he lingered
in wretchedness and dishonour, and neveg
returned to his beloved country.

So enlarging on the evils of the Cap-
tivity, he would not have them weep for
the warriors of the house of David who
had died in honourable conflicts, and whe

435


OHAP. XXII,


had slept in sepulchres of their ances-


tors, but for those who had been taken ~


captive, and died away from home,

The ancients in the Gemara say,
“Weep not for the dead”—that is
smmoderately: three days are allowed
for weeping ; on the seventh the obse-
quies are performed ; after which they
dress not showily, but shave and anoint.
“But weep for him that goeth ”—that
is, childless. Our sages apply this
moral, that in our feelings we should
combine nature with Scripture; mean-
ing, feel as mortals, but with modera-
tion as Israelites, to whom it was for-
bidden to indulge in the excesses of the
heathen, and who might hope to meet at
the resurrection of the dead.

The ancients apply it to Abram and
Esau (Gen, xxv. 34). Esau coming in,
saw Jacob eooking lentiles — asking
why? ‘“ For their grandfather, Abram,”
said Jacob, “it being food for mourn-
ers.” Esau said, “ Is it possible that
upright man was included in the pain of
death? Then there is no reward nor
resurrection,” and he resolved to sell his
birthright as useless benefit. Weep not
for dead, t¢., Abram; but for him that
goeth, .¢., Esau, who went and despised
his primogeniture. Conciliator: By BR.
M. Ben Isragt (#. H. Linto.)

Vide Kitto’s Daily Readings : “ [satan
AND THE PRopHEts,” on this verse,


Ver. 13. Coverousnsss. “Some men
are so covetous, as if they were to live
for ever ; and others so profuse, as if
they were to die the next moment.”—
Aristotle.

“The covetous man lives as if the
world were made altogether for him,
and not he for the world, to take in
everything and part with nothing.”—
South.

“The covetous man pines in plenty,
like Tantalus up to the chin in water
and yet thirsty.”—Adama.

BUILDETH BY UNRIGHTEOUSNESS. Such
injurious and therefore accursed builders
were the pyramid-makers in Egypt
Tarquinius Priscus, Caligula, Nero, Pho-
eas, who is said to have heard this voice
of heaven—“ Though thou shouldst
erect thine edifice as high as heaven,

436


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.





yet sin that lieth at the fcundation will
soon overturn all,” Bernard inveigheth
against some in his time who did with
great care and cost (erigere muros, neglt-
gere moros) build high manors, but not
amend their manners.—Trapp.

Ver. 19. “ Buriat or aN ass.” He
who had such a stately house in Jeru-
salem should not have a grave to house
his carcase in, Our Richard IIL, for
his exactions to maintain a great court
and favourites, lost his kingdom, was
starved to death at Pomfret Castle, and
searee afforded eommon burial. King
Stephen was interred in Faversham
monastery, but since, his body, for the
gain of the lead wherein it was cof-
fined, was cast into the river. Let
great ones so live as that they meet not
in the end with the death of a dog, the
burial of an ass, and the epitaph of an
ox, such as Aristotle calleth that of
Sardanapalus—‘ raitr’ txw Bpayer neal
spuBpresa,” &o.—Trapp.

Tax Sinwer’s Burial
* Wrapt in a Christless shroud,
He sleeps a Christless sleep 3


Above him the eternal cloud,
Beneath, the fiery deep.


Laid in a Christless tomb,
There bound with felon-chaim,

He waits the terrors of his d
The judgment and the pain,


© Christless shroud, how eold
How dark, O Christless tomb!

O grief that never can grow old?
O endless, hopeless doom.


O Christless sleep, how sad !
What waking shalt thou know?
For thee no star, no dawning glad,
Only the lasting woe!


To rocks and hills in vain
5 ay ee ppeinoers call;
ay of wrath, and death, and pais,
The lost soul’s funeral !


© Christlesa soul, awake,
Ere thy last sleep begin !

© Christ, the sleeper’sa slumbers break;
Burat Thou the bands of sin.”


s


Ver. 21. Prosprniry. “It is the
bright day that brings ont the adder.”
“Too much sail is dangerous,”—Con-
mon Proverbs.

‘No sooner does the warm aspeet of





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





GHAR, XREHi,


CC


good fortune shine, than all the plans of
virtue, raised like a beautiful frostwork
in the winter of adversity, thaw and
disappear.” — Warburton.

“Prosperity is the blessing of the
Old Testament.” [How many eminent
sainta from being poor grew rich, as
Abraham, Jacob, Joseph, David, Daniel.]
“ Adversity is the blessing of the New
Testament.” [As we see in Peter,
James, John, Paul,” &c.|.—Lord Bacon,

“What shall I come to, father,” said
& young man, “if I go on prospering in
this way?” “To the grave,” replied the
father.

“Men are usually best when worst,
and worst when best; like the snake
which being frozen lieth quiet and still,
but waxing warm, stirreth and stingeth.
It is as hard to bear prosperity as to drink
much wine and not be giddy. In rest
we contract rust.” —7'rapp.


** Who feels no ills
Should therefore fear them; and, when fore
tune smiles,
Be doubly cautious, lest destruction come
Remorseless on him, and he fall unpitied.”
—Sophocles.


“ More ships in calms on a deceitful coast,
Or unseen rocks, than im high storms, are
lost.” —Denham,


** Behold, Sir Balham, now a man of spirit,
Ascribes his gettings to his parts and merit ;
What late he called a blessing, now was wit,
And God’s good Providence a lucky hit,
ee ehange their titles as their manners

ne


His counting house employed the Sabbath


morn :

Seldom at church (’twas sueh a busy life),

But duly sent his family and wife.”—Pope,

Ver. 30. WrirTEN CHILDLESS. “ As
to succession in the royal dignity as well
as to success in his reign. This God
would have to be written—put upon
public record for the use of posterity.
Our chronicles tell us of John Dudley,
that great Duke of Northumberland in
King Edward VL’s days, who endea-
voured by all means to engrand his
posterity, reaching at the crown also,
which cost him his head ; that though
he had six sons, all men, all married,
yet none of them left any issue behind
them. ‘Be wise now, therefore, O ye
kings; serve the Lord with fear,’”—
Trapp.





CHAPTER XXIIL


Crrmcan amp Exeqeticar Nores.—1l. Chronology of the Chapter.—The chapter is an
spilogue to the denunciations of the three kings in chap. xxii, It must have been written and
proclaimed about the beginning of Zedekiah’s reign, for a warning to him, from the examples
of his predecessors, of the consequences of unrighteousness, Cy. notes on chap. xxi, 11-14.

2, Contemporary Scriptures.—2 Kings xxiv. 17-19; 2 Chron. xxxvi. 10-12. Oomp., Jer,
hii, 1-3.

For 8. National Affairs, and 4, Contemporaneous History. See notes on chap. xxi. 11-14,

5. Geographical References.—Ver.13. ‘‘ Samaria.” here alluded to as the territory of the
ten tribes of Israel, in contrast with ‘‘ Jerusalem’ (ver. 14), the territory of Ephraim and Judah,
Ver. 14. ‘‘ Sodom and Gomorrah:” two cities ‘of the plain,” standing elose together, in or
near the vale of Siddim (Gen. x, 19, xiii. 10); overthrown B.o. 2064, for their atrocious
wickedness (Gen. xviii. 20; Rom. ix. 29). Their doom ia held up asa warning te the children of
Israel (Deut. xxix. 23), and forms a standing illustration of abandoned iniquity (Deut. xxxii. 32 3
Isa. i. 9, 10 ;) and in this verse. Josephus states that the Dead Sea now fills the valley in which
these “ cities of the plain” stood (Ant. i. 9), but elsewhere affirms (War, iv. 8, 4) that the site
of Sodom was not submerged, but remains a burnt and charred scene, Pilgrims to Palestine
formerly saw, or thought they saw, ruins of towns at the bottom of the Dead Sea, not far from
the shore,

6. Personal Allusions.—Ver. 5. ‘‘ David.” Comp. Homily on ver. 24 of chap. xxii. for the
fineal royal connection with David.

7. Natural History.—Ver. 5. ‘‘ Branch.” This word Tsemach occurs also in chap. xxxili. 15;
Zech. iii. 8, vi. 12, and denotes a springing or budding plant—“a sprout.” Dr. Payne Smith
remarks: ‘‘ A tree has many branches, and these can be pruned away without killing the tree,
but the sprout is that in which the root springs up and grows, and which, if it be destroyed,
makes the root perish also, For its use, see Gen. xix. 25; Isa. Ixi. 11, in both which places it
springs directly out of the ground; also Kuck. xvi. 7, xvii. 9; Hos. viii, 7, where it ia translated
either bud or spring.” ist


OHAP. XXII HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; JEREMIAH,


—.


Ver. 15. ‘* Wormwood and gall :” ef, notes on chaps. ix. 15, and viii. 14

Ver, 28. ‘‘ Chaff and wheat:” ¢f. Homily on verse infra.

8. Manners and Customs.—Ver. 25. “J have dreamed, I have dreamed ;" Professional
“dreamers ” early appeared (see Deut. xiii, 1), for superstitious people in all ages have giver
ready credulity to these false visionists.

9, Literary Criticisms.—Ver. 5. “‘A King shall reign and prosper.” Rather, ‘‘He shall
reign as king and prosper;” as contrasted with chap. xxii. 30.

Ver. 6, ‘* Zlis name whereby He shall be called, Taz Lorp our Rieutsovsyess.” “ He shall
be called” is more properly ‘‘he shall call him:” i.e., either “God shall,” &¢., or “he shall ”—
each shall. Several MSS., however, read, INP! plural, “they shall call him,” instead of
twp singular. ‘‘Taz Lorp our Rigurzousness :” Jehovah T'sidkenu. Criticism has
attempted to make ‘‘Jehovah” the nominative of ‘shall eall,”—‘‘ Jehovah shall call him,
“our Righteousness:” thus destroying the compound name, and depriving the Messiah of the
title of Deity: but Henderson affirms, and in this is sustained by the consensus and weight of
modern scholarship, that ‘‘to make MP the nominative of the verb (shall call) is to contradict
all Hebrew usage, according to which the name given, and not the person who gives the name,
immediately follows the verb.

Ver. 15. “ Profaneness gone forth”°—profanation, desecration,

Ver, 17. ‘* Imagination ”—atubbornness.

Ver. 19. ‘‘ Behold, a whirlwind,” &c. The verse should read, Behold, a tempest (storm wind)
ef Jehovah! Fury is gone forth (or, even hot anger is gone forth); and a whirlwind (S¥iNND "WD,
a tornado, whirling storm) shal! be hurled (or burst) upon the head of the wicked.

Ver. 29. ‘‘ Is not My word like asa fire?” The presence of the word M3, thus, in this sen-
tence gives rise to the suggestion that formerly it was M3, strength or power. The Targum
reads : ‘‘ Are not all My words strong like fire?” Probably this suggested the word in Heb. iv,
12, “ quick and powerful.” ;

Ver. 81. “ That use their tongues and say, He saith,” Not n\n’ DN), satth Jehovah, but only
DN), “saith,”

Ver. 83. “ What burden!” The LXX, divide the words RWO"ND"NY, What burden? into
only two sections, thus, NWOT ANS, Ve are the burden ; and with this reading, which is more
rational, the following words accord: “ Ye are the burden, and I will cast you away, saith the
Lord.” ‘ Forsaken you,” should be, refused you, thrown you off.





HOMILIES CN SECTIONS OF CHAPTER XXIII.


Sections 1-8. Judah's restoration under Jehovah Tsidkenu,
» 9-40. False provhes and national levity denounced.


Section, verses 1-8. Jupan’s RESTORATION UNDER JEHOVAH TSIDEKENU,


Through the dark clouds gathering over Jerusalem there broke occasionally gleams
of sunshine. The judgments which the prophet foretold were so terrible, and the
ruin awaiting Judah so overwhelming, that Jeremiah and the small remnant of the
true Israel remaining might have abandoned all hope.

But God relieved their despondency by the promise that, notwithstanding the
judgments and calamities, He would again visit and redeem His people.

I. The prediction assumes that all the calamities which the prophet foretold
would overtake Judah These calamities threatened the kingdom, and also the
very house of David: for the expression, “I will raise unto David a righteous
Branch,” conveys the idea of a tender sprout springing from the root of a tree cut
down or seemingly dead.

IL Yet the prediction assured them that the promise would certainly be ful-
filled. The positive fulfilment of the threatening would encourage the hope in the
sure realisation of the promise, and give them encouragement amid the calamities.

IIL There is here an obvious contrast between this promised King and all
who ever held David’s throne. He was to be righteous, to reign, to act wisely,
How different from all kings before Him! Their impiety and folly had entailed
ruin upon the people,

IV. The description of their future King could not fail to astonishthem I¢
began by comparing Him to a bud, or tender shoot, from a tree cut down, and

432 ;


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. OHAP, XXHL








ended by ascribing to Him the great and fearful name of Jenovan! It must have
awakened their admiration, reverence, confidence: for—

1, His being the offspring of David assured them of His tenderest sympathy in
the well-being of Israel and Judah; and—

2. His being Jehovah gave still stronger assurance that nothing was too difficult
to accomplish, and nothing would be left undone. And—

3. They were assured that His righteousness, power, and wisdom would be made
evailable for securing the peace and prosperity of His people, as He was to be their
Righteousness.

V. This promise has been fulfilled, and its hidden meaning unfolded. To
God’s ancient people obseurity must have hidden the true character of their king,
The prophets themselves diligently sought a “ private interpretation” of their own
predictions, The Church at large was im mystery. But to ws the mystery is
all revealed.

VL The great principle on which the whole scheme of redemption rests is
here stated. “ Righteousness.”

1. It is only on the ground of perfect righteousness that God can accept and
approve an intelligent creature,

2. Yet a sinner’s restoration to righteousness was impracticable by and of him-
eelf. He fell under the power as well as condemnation of sin.

3. The two conditions of man’s deliverance were, punishment due to sin already
eommitted must be borne, and perfect compliance with the demand of the law must
be rendered. Man was wholly incompetent.

4. The manifold wisdom of God is seen in His provision of what seemed impos-
sible—wperfect righteousness. “He shall be called Jehovah our righteousness.”
—Robert Gordon, D.D., F.RS&.C. — “Christ as made known to the Ancient
Church,


Here is—

L A word of terror to the negligent shepherds (vers. 1, 2). The day is at
fand when God would reckon with them concerning the trust committed to them.

1. They were not owners of the sheep. God calls them “the sheep of My

ture.”

2. They had neglected the sheep. “Scattered the flock,” &e.

3. They would be visited with vengeance. They would not “ visit” the sheep ;
God would “ visit” upon them the evil of their doings. See Addenda: NEGLIGENT
Pastors.

I. A word of comfort to the neglected sheep.

1. The dispersed people should be gathered happily into their own land, and under
good government (vers. 3, 4).

2. Messiah, the good Shepherd of the sheep, would be raised up to bless and be the
glory of His people Israel (vera. 5, 6).

3. This great salvation should far outshine Israel's deliverance from Egypt

vers, 7, 8).
( IIL An illustrious description of the promised Messiah.

1. Christ is here spoken of as the Branch from David. Mean in appearance ;
His beginnings small; His rise seemingly out of the earth, but growing to be
green, to be great, and to be loaded with fruits.

2. He is here spoken of as the Church's King. He shall reign on the throne of
His father David, and he shall prosper, and not, as the degenerate kings had done,
go back in their affairs. He shall set up a kingdom in the world, which shall be
victorious over all opposition. And in those days of Christ’s government, “Judah
shall be saved,” &c. When He reigns uppermost in the soul, the soul dwells at


ease,
3. He is here spoken of as The Lord our Righteousness. (1.) Who rae — He


OwaP. XXII, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





#. As God, ‘Jehovah ;” denoting His eternity and self-existence. As Medéater,

“our Righteousness.” All our righteousness has its being from Him; and we ars ©

made the righteousness of Godin Him. (2.) The profession and declaration of this,

“This is the name by which,” &c. Not only shall He be so, but He shall be known

to be so. God shall call Him by this name: and Israel shall so call Him:

oa every true believer shall know and call upon Him by that name.—Matthew
enry.


Section, verses 9-40,—Fazse Proruets, anp tHe National Lavrsy
DENOUNCED,


Jeremiah’s deep distress under the necessity of declaring the dreadful woes~
which God bade him utter (ver. 9).

L Delusive prophesyings.

1. Criminal teachers (vers. 13, 14). Their wicked teachings had led to apostasy
in Samaria, and ¢frontery in Jerusalem,

2. Deluded hearers (vers. 16, 17). They “hearkened” readily ; were rendered
“vain ;” grew to “despise” God; and still expected “peace.”

8. A demoralised nation (vers. 10, 11). Abandoned to wileness of conduct; to
profanity of speech ; perversity of life (“ course evil”); and resolute deflance (“their
force is not right”).

4. God’s revulsion at such scenes (vera. 18, 14). The conduct of the Baal-priests
in Samaria stirred God’s contempt ; but the vile corruptions of the Jerusalem priests
aroused His loathing and wrath.

5. God’s remonstrance with the nation (ver. 16) Though men mislead, God
interposes with earnest appeals and honest counsels,

6. God’s charge against the prophets (vera. 18, 21,22) They had neglected “ the
counsel of the Lord”; had spoken without a commission ; and therefore misled God's

le.
er. Sin’s cruel seductions (ver. 12). God gives them over to strong delusions ; to
inherit the miseries of their perversity.

8. Fierce anger against transgressors (vers. 19, 20). Afighty forces of destruction;
working furious disaster upon the wrong-doers ; allowing of no escape.

9. Bitter woes against the prophets (ver. 15). Inward bitterness: enforced
bitterness : God would fill them with the pangs of woe.

Note :

i, False teachers will taste the full “ bitterness” of their wicked delusions,

ii, Wilful sinners shall be “driven on” in the slippery ways they prefer.

iii, No teachings which lead men to sin can have the sanction of God.

IL Frivolous dreamers.

1. False pretenders to Divine communications (vers. 25-27). These dreamy
surmisings are (1.) Traced to their origin (“the deceit of their own heart”); and
(3.) Their baneful purpose is exposed (“they think to cause My people to forget
My name,” &c.).

2. A bold distinction between God's messages and such deceits (vers, 2%, 29). The
“dream” beguiles to delusions; the “word” burns all conceits and breaks all false
confidences.

3. An all-observing Hye (vers. 23, 24). Deceivers are watched. Men cannot
see through their fallacies, but God can. None deceive Him.

4. Stern denunciations of lying prophets, (1.) Their sinful practices ; they “steal
God’s words” from true prophets and pervert or misapply them; they simulate
a Divine authority for their false words, saying “ He saith ;” and they lead God’s
people “to err by their lightness.” (2.) God's severe remonatrance ; “ i am against
the prophets,” and the “dreamers ;” He would requite them for their deceptions
and for the consequent errors of the people.

440


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH,


OHAP, EXIT


a gd esl aN rN Se Se


Note :


i. Promises of peace from men who lead us astray from God are mere * chaf’”


which the wind shall drive away.


ii, The “‘ faithfulness” of God’s Word distinguishes tt from the delusions of human


teachings.


Til. Profane jesting. This charge is thrown upon the whole nation (vers. 33,
34). They so treated the messages of God’s true prophet.

1. Retorting with banter and levity. Taking up Jeremiah’s solemn words with
derision, and tossing them about as if it all were a jest.


2. Trifiing with messages from God (vers. 35, 36


Chafing one another with


being bearers of God’s “burden ;” and “perverting” Jehovah's “ words.”

3. Rejected by Jehovah with contempt (vers. 39, 40). God had forbidden this
levity (ver. 38); and now would “cast off” the nation as a grievous and loath-
_ ome burden (ver. 39), and leave them to the “lasting shame” they so richly de-


served (ver. 40).
Note:


i Jesting with God's Word indicates the most daring impiety.
ii, Such lightness and profanity will prove a wofal burden to the sinner and


his everlasting reproach.


HOMILIES AND COMMENTS ON VERSES OF CHAPTER XXIII.


Vers. 1-4. Theme: Farrourss Pas-
TORS: FAITHFUL SHEPHERDS.

IL Woful neglect of the flock of
God.

1. On whom God charges this faith-
lessness. These “ pastors” were the
secular rulers, the unrighteous kings,
mentioned in chap. xxii, Jehoahaz,
Jehoiakim, and Jeconiah. Note, the
responsibility of civil rulers to God ; for
“By Me kings reign,” &c. Hence argue:
the obligations of all iw power, whether
that power be royal, civil, ecclesiastical,
or pastoral, to rule and work for the
highest good and the spiritual advantage
of the people.

2. For what God threatens these
shepherds, The flock was ‘destroyed ;”
&e., it was no longer “the flock of God,”
for the nation was a wilful and wicked
herd of goats; its pastoral simplicity
had been ruined. And the flock was
“ scattered ;” driven away from fidelity
to God; equally from His nutritious
pasturage; and literally from the fold
they should have occupied, the land they
should have continued to inhabit (ver.
$). Negligent Shepherds harm the
people temporally and spiritually ; de-
spoil them of the choicest blessings of
this life—their spiritual comforts and
heavenly hopes.

3. With what j God would
zisit such faithlessness. ‘ Woe be to


the pastors.” “TI will visit upon you
the evil of your doings.” With what
measure ye mete it shall be measured
to you again. The ruin of the flock
would be requited by the ruin of the
shepherds, (See Ezekiel xxxiii.)

IL Benignant promise of faithful
pastors,

Note that the words “pastors” and
“shepherds” are different translations
of the same Hebrew word (réim).

1. To that nation this was fulfilled in
the raising up of religious and righteous
rulers, Zerubbabel, Ezra, Nehemiah, anil
the Maccabees, who were not heredi-
tary kings of the seed of David, bus
men raised up by God to govern His
flock.

2. To the spiritual Israel this was
fulfilled in the orders and ordinances af
the Christian Church, No more have
we the tyranny of secular kings within
the Church; but Christ Himself is
King. No longer have we the impiety
of priests and Pharisees within the
Church (as in the Jewish Synagogue) ;
for the apostles of Christ began a line
of earnest teachers and preachers who
minister within the sanctuary : faithful
pastors who love and tend “the flock
of God over which the Holy Ghost has
made them overseers.”

3. To every soul within the Saviour’s
fold these assurances are ine veri-


CRAP, XXII


fied : “they shall fear no more, nor be
dismayed, neither shall they be lacking,
saith the Lord” (ver. 4): for believers
in Christ have Him for Shepherd (Pa.
xxiv); and He both guards His fold
from harm, and nourishes the souls of
His flock. :

“ Fear no more:” it pledges a sense
of security. Such is the luxury of
Christian restfulness within the fold of
and under the rule of Jesus our Lord.
Safe in Christ.

“Nor be dismayed:” it guarantees
protection from such neglect and ex-
posure as a flock, faithlessly shepherded,
would suffer. Saved by Christ.

“ Neither shall they be lacking :” this
means, not one sheep shall be missing,
This is therefore a prophecy of Judah’s
restoration from Babylon; yet its ful-
ness of significance can only be realised
in the final restoration of both “ Judah”
and “Israel” (comp. ver. 6) out of all
countries—a prophecy never yet accom-
plished. While spiritually it fore-
shadows the gathering together of all
Christ's redeemed, under the One Shep-
herd of the sheep.

See Addenda: NEGLIGENT PASTORS.


”?


Ver. 5. Theme - THE KINGDOM OF THE
MEssIaz.

The prophetic writings are replete
with appropriate and sublime descrip-
tions of the personal appearing, redeem-
ing works, and mediatorial offices of the
promised Messiah, The text describes
the Redeemer’s character, as assuming
human nature and establishing His
kingdom of grace; and directs our
attention to the following important
truths :

I. The person of the Messiah
* Behold the days come,” &. In these
words we may observe three things rela-
tive to the coming Messiah :—

1. Hts human incarnation “A
Branch.” This term is often used by
the prophets to represent Christ's
assumption of our nature as “the seed
of the woman,” according to the Divine
promise (Gen. iii. 15). To accomplish
this and similar promises, the Lord
declares in the text, “ Behold the days
eome that I will raise unto David a

442


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


righteous branch.” The Father loved
the world, promised, and actually “ sent
His Son in the likeness of sinful flesh,
that we might live through Him.” Thus,
the Lord “raised” in the royal house
and lineage of David “a Branch ;” as
it is written, “ There shall come forth a
rod out of the stem of Jesse, and a
branch shall grow out of His roots.”
The scheme of redemption rendered it
necessary for Christ to “take on Him
the seed of Abraham,” that He might
suffer and die for our sins (Heb. ii. 10,
17

: Hie personal perfection, “A
righteous branch.” In His essential
nature as God, Jesus Christ was in-
finitely pure, holy, just, and good. And
in His human nature as man He was
perfectly righteous and sinless) Had
not Christ been sinless, He could not
have atoned for our sins.

3. His sovereign character. A King
shall reign.” The Jews were taught to
expect their Messiah as an illustrious
Prince and prosperous monarch. But,
in general, they mistook the precise
meaning of the prophets, and expected
Him as a temporal, and not as a
spiritual, sovereign, He possessed
every qualification requisite for the
dignity of His character. He is in-
finite in wisdom, righteousness, power,
and goodness. He is not only a
Prophet to instruct, a Priest to atone,
but also a King to rule and save Hia
people. ;

II. The nature of His kingdom
“A King shall reign and _ prosper,”
&c. The empire of Christ is of a com-
plex character, and comprehends His
vast dominion over all things, as the
Creator and Preserver of mankind, and
as the Redeemer and Saviour of them
that believe. In this extended view
the Messiah possesses :—

1. A universal kingdom. His pre-
sence fills all space, and His power is
unlimited. He reigns in His pro-
vidence over all His creatures, and is
“the King of kings, and Lord of lorda”
He is the sovereign proprietor of all
things, and sways His sceptre both in
heaven and in earth. All things are
dependent on His power, and subject


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAG.





CHAP. ZEiiZ.





to His control, ‘ who is over all, God
blessed for ever.”

2. A mediatorial kingdom. This
refers to Christ’s official character, as
the “mediator between God and man.”
When Christ engaged in the cause of
our redemption, He founded a kingdom
of mediation for the redemption of
mankind, The Saviour reigns as the
conqueror of all our enemies as “the
Prince of Peace and the King of Zion,”
in His redeeming and mediatorial
eharacter (Phil. ii. 5-11).

3. A spiritual kingdom. The king-
dom which Christ established in the
work of redemption is designed in its
personal influence to destroy sin, that
“ grace might reign through righteous-
ness unto eternal life.’ Our Lord
declares the kingdom of God is within
you. It is an eternal empire of grace,
producing righteousness, peace, and
“joy in the Holy Ghost.”

4. A celestial kingdom. Heaven is
often denominated a kingdom, and is
the promised inheritance of the Lord’s
faithful people (Luke xii. 32). The
kingdom of grace here prepares and
leads to the kingdom of glory hereafter.
Christ waits to receive and welcome
His followers into His everlasting king-
dom, that they may participate His
glory, dwell in His presence, and reign
with Him for ever.

IIL The character of His reign.
“ A king shall reign and prosper,” &c.

1. Christ's reign is legitimate. He is
no impostor. He reigns by rational and
eternal right as Sovereign of the uni-
verse; and a8 mediator He reigns in
the kingdom of grace by Divine
appointment, authority, and sanction.
The kingdom of Christ is founded on
principles of sownd reason, and there-
fore all rational beings ought to submit
to His government.

2. Christ's reign is righteous. He is
a merciful and gracious Sovereign, and
though He “executes judgment and
justice in the earth,” it is in mercy
and Jove to mankind.

3. Christ's reign is prosperous. What-
ever opposition His kingdom meets with,
“ He shail prosper.” Ali the schemes He
adopts, and the means He employs, are


devised by infinite wisdom and accom
panied by omnzpotent energy ; and there
fore His reign must succeed. His per-
fections, declarations, promises, gospel,
and Spirit, secure the prosperity of His
cause (Heb. i. 8; Dan. it 44; John
xvi. 8).

4. Christ's reign is everlasting. All
other kings are mortal, and there-
fore die and leave their dignities to
their successors, All temporal king-
dorms rise and fall, and will ultimately
perish in the wreck of worlds; but
Christ is the “ King eternal and im-
mortal, and His kingdom is an everlast-
ing kingdom, and His dominion is from
generation to generation.”

To improve the subject, consider:
The dignity of Christ's person and
character, the folly and misery of His
enemies, and the duty and happiness of
His subjects. —Sketches of Sermons.


Thene: THE NATURE AND PHOB-
PERITY OF MEssIAH’S REIGN.

Christ is described in His distinct
and dissimilar parts of His character by
“eremiah: “A branch,” to denote His
human nature and origin: “ the right-
cous branch,” to denote His essential
righteousness in Himself, and the source
of righteousness to believers: and their
* King,” to direct attention to His
spiritual dominion.

L The character of Christ. There
are three things we look for in a king:

1. Supreme power (Ephes. i 21 ;
Rom. ix. 5).

2. Legislative authority. Christ’s
right to legislate, as being proprietor of
all (John i. 10; Col. i. 16) and redeemer
of all ; for He “ bought us with a price.”

3. Righteous administration. There
must be wisdom, or the monarch’s reign
would be one of folly ; fustece, or tolerate
licentiousness; mercy, or be despotic
(Matt. xii. 20).

IL The nature of Christ’s reign.

1. Spiritual. Seat of His govern-
ment is in the human spirit (Luke
xvii. 20; Rom. xiv. 17).

2. Hquitable. Prohibits all evil, ea-
joins all good (Heb, i 8).

3. Benevolent, Alexanders and Cessars
were “warriors with confused noise and

443


CHAP, XXII.


garments rolled in biood ;” but Christ
(Isa, xlii. 2),
4. Perpetual. Earthly kingdoms
may rise and fall (Isa. ix. 7; Heb, i. 8).
‘IUI. The prosperity with which His
reign shall be attended. To prosper
as king, implies :

1. To have an increase of willing
subjects,

2. To have adequate provision for
supply of ali their wants,

3. To secure their real happiness
(Psa. Ixxii. 7-8).

4. To subjugate or destroy His
enemies (Isa. lx, 12),

Observe :

1, If Christ shall reign and prosper,
how great is the folly of being His
adversaries |

2. This subject should inspire the
Christian with joy and gratitude (Acts
xv. 3; Rev. xix. 6, 7).

3. We should do our utmost to ex-
tend the Redeemer’s triumphs.—From

Sketches of Four Hundred Sermons.








Ver. 6. Theme: A BRIGHT ERA FOR
MANKIND. “In His days Judah shall
be saved and Israel shall dwell safely.”

Eagerly we scan those prophecies
which open a_ gracious future for
humanity. Especially when our Lord
Jesus is predicted as being the author
of that blissful change. For it is so
desirable both for human good and the
Saviour’s glory.

(a.) The present prevailing irreligion,
with ali the force of a dark contrast,
makes the outlook alluring to contem-
plate.

(6.) The slow progress of evangelisa-
tion gives zest to the anticipation of
the grand success which shall come “ in
those days” through the direct inter-
position of Heaven.

Has THIS PROPHECY BEEN FULFILLED?
Does it allude to the spiritual salvation of
the spiritual Judah as the result of gospel
preaching in this Christian era? Or,
to the final gathering together of Jews
into their own land? Or, to the
millenntal day when the spiritual Israel
will be made triumphant over all the
forces of evil, and reign im peace and
safety on the earth !

hae


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAL.


I, An age anticipated which shall
belong to Christ. Called “ His days,”

1. Have those days been realised im
the Christian era? Certainly Christianity
in some sense has fulfilled this prediction,
It is an era when, not Moses, but Christ
gives the impress to, and dwells supreme
in, the dispensation. Jesus is now “ the
Lord our Righteousness.” And if we
may interpret ‘‘Judah and Israel”
epiritually, then He has “ saved us,”

But the ancient people of God are
here literally meant. And they have
not as yet come to call Jesus “the
Lord our Righteousness ;” they do not
“dwell safely,” for they are wanderers
upon theearth. The promise tn ver. 8
has not yet been fulfilled even in @
spiritual sense; Israel has not been all
won to Christ,

2. Those days have yet to dawn. For
when they come Israel shall acknow-
ledge Christ,

(a.) There may be an actual fulfil-
ment of this promise for the tribes of
Judah and Israel. And who would not
welcome it? for they have been a sad
people long afflicted. Yet even more
because of the promises which attend
the time of their restoration (Rom. xi.
11, 12, 15, 25, 26).

(6.) But the allusion may be to the
millennial age ; when (ver. 5) the “ King
shall reign.” We cannot say these are
the days of Christ ; for the devil rules
@ wider dominion! But “the kingdom
of this world shall become the kingdom
of our God and of His Christ.” For
this grand future pray, work, and hope.

II. The days of Christ’s ascendancy
shall be distinguished by the enjoy-
ments of salvation.

(a.) Oppression and destruction marked
the days of despotic monarchies—the
Pharaohs, Nebuchadnezzar, Frederick
the Great, Bonaparte.

(b.) Safety has not hitherto been the
experience of the Jewish nation. Every
age finds them a wronged and outraged
people. But when Messiah comes they
will be molested no more.

(c.) Neither has Israel, spiritually
consitered, dwelt safely. The souls of
Christ’s people are always imperilled
and assaiied by the forces of evil.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.








1. What do “safety and salvation”
here mean $—If the Hebrew interpreta-
tion be correct, it means deliverance from
the nations, and possession of their own
country, where they would dwell in
peace. If the spiritual interpretation
be correct, it means, Christ’s followers
ransomed from the enemy, piety victorious
over sin, earth won for Christ. Then
the foe disturbs our peace no more,
threatens our safety no more, either by
insinuating doubt, planning temptation,
or chilling love. What days those!
when all will be blessed in Jesus;
when all shall know the Lord, &«,
and the Church shall be happy in
Jesus’ favour, free from the dread of ills !

2. In the individual believer these
promises are already fulfilled. He is
“saved,” and “dwells safely” in
Christ. But that personal bliss is the
possession of few now. “Christ’s
days” shall spread it far and wide—
to Jew and Gentile.

JIL For the coming of Christ’s days
we may well with eagerness yearn.

1. Vhey are desirable. What ajoyous
outlook! Ended our “sowing precious
seed with tears,” our grief over the
desolations of sin, our shame for the
scorn and rejection of Christ, our strug-
gles with evil around.

2. We live amid danger now.
Therefore anxiety and watchfulness :
therefore peace is disturbed and joy
marred, Then shall we realise rest
and delight. “How long, O Lord,
how long?” Not long, if we speed the
time by diligent work—for the conver-
sion of the heathen and the salvation
of those who are near, Not long, if we
speed the time by earnest prayer. “Thy
kingdom come.”
no rest till He arise and make Jerusa-
lem a praise in the earth.”


Ver. 6. Theme: “Tue Lorp ovR
RIGHTEOUSNESS.” We may view this as—

I, An announcement of an impor-
tant truth.

1. The Lord is our righteousness
inasmuch as the purpose and plan of
justifying sinners originated with Him.

2. Inasmuch as He Himself has
alone procured righteousness for ua


Let us “give Him
g


3 Inasmuch as it is through His
grace and by His free donation that we
receive righteousness,

I. An utterance of personal belief
and confidence.

The language of faith, hope, joy,
gratitude.

TL A directory to the spiritual
inquirer.

Anxious sinners wish to know the
way of acceptance with God. The text
is a brief but satisfactory answer.—
Dr. W. Lindsay-Alexander (of Edin-
burgh), “ The Hive.”


Theme > CHRI#T’s SUPREME NAME,

Redemption by a crucified Redeemer
ia the capital theme of Divine revela-
tion. It is completely interwoven with
the golden network of the prophetic
page—for to Him give all the prophets
witness—whilst the evangelists echo
and re-echo the exhaustless theme.

The Gospel is not known as a system
of promises simply, though these are
exceedingly great and precious ; not as
a system of morals, though its morality
is of the highest kind; nor as a system
of legislation simply, though it contains
the code of God’s moral government ;
but it is pre-eminently known as a
system of reconciliation.

This doctrine forms the key to the
Christian system. To this one work
all dispensations point. This all saert
Jices illustrate. This all promises em.
body. This all Providence is bowed to
subserve. This all heaven stoops to wit-
ness. This all Aed/ resists and opposes.
This all bad men revile or neglect. This
all good men venerate and love. Surely
shall one say, In the Lord Jehovah have
Z righteousness and strength. ‘“‘ Ths ts
the name by which He shall be called,” ete,

It is common with the prophets te
console the Jews under their calamities
with the prospect of Messiah’s approach,
as a proof that if the Church was to be
preserved till His coming, it should not
be destroyed in its present exigency.
Here the transit is easy from the corrupt
pastors that destroyed Israel to the true
Shepherd who should redeem it. He
was to be the descendant of theix


shepherd-king, i
¢


CHAP. XXIXL


1. Exhibit the delightful character
ander which Christ is portrayed.

2. Specify some of the circumstances
that put an emphasis and value upon
the redemption He has achieved.

L Exhibit the delightful character
under which Christ is here pre-
sented. The Lord is our righteous-
ness,

Every title which Christ bears opens
a source of consolation to His people.
They are so many beautiful notices of
Himself, and shadow forth blessings.

i. In His essential dignity. “The
Lord.” Jehovah. Incommunicableness,

We are thus led up before the springs
of Time. ‘‘ His goings forth have been
of old from everlasting.” Before the
dayspring knew its place, All things
were derived from Him; He was before
all things were; He shall be when they
cease to exist. The message to the
seven churches begins with, “ Grace,
mercy, peace, from Him THAT 18, and
Was, and is to coME, the Almighty:”
and He who there speaks says, “ J am
Alpha and Omega.” The JEHovanH of
the Old Testament is the Lorn of the
New: the seed of David ; over all God.

All the evidence concurs in this, that
the Redeemer of the world was to be
Divine as well as human. This was
necessary that He might transact our
salvation on equal terms, and that the
virtue of His offering might be avail-
able and efficacious on our behalf. Take
away His humantty, and He would
have no sacrifice to offer: take away
His diwmnity, and His sacrifice would
have no inherent merit. The doctrines
of Christ’s merit and of Christ’s Divinity
are inseparable, for if the one be re-
moved, the other must fall, of course ;
and with them the whole fabric of our
redemption,

ii. His mediatorial office. “Our right-
eousness.” So important is this that
our Lord takes His name from it, It
is the title by which He loves to be
distinguished, and all who would speak
to His honour must make mention
of His righteousness, It was no un-
usual thing for the warriors, princes,
and great men of antiquity to take
their names from the countries con-

446


FIOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH,





quered, or the exploits they had
achieved, As Scipio from his con-
quest of Africa, and Coriolanus from
his over the Cortolt. So Christ from
redemption. In the name of Jesus the
whole Gospel lies hid.

The necessity for this scheme of
substitution arose out of human de-
pravity, and the inflexible rectitude of
the Divine government. It was neces-
sary that as we had lost our righteous-
ness it should be restored in Christ.
“ Die He, or justice must.” To fulfil
the high condition Jesus interposed,
Here was glory for our meanness,
suffering for our ransom. J¢ was
exacted,

Here we see the grand reality to
which all the shadows of the Jewish
law pointed. “ Jt became Him,” ete.

ii, In the spiritual relation in which
He stands to His people—intended in
the term “ our righteousness.”

A spiritual union is presupposed
between us and Him, of which faith is
the connecting link—in consequence
of which the penalty we incurred is
borne by Him, and the righteousness
He wrought out on Calvary is applied
to us The inheritance was to be
redeemed by the Gost or near kinsman.
“ Both He that sanctifieth,” etc.

Rest not till you can rest in Christ,
as made of God to you wisdom, right-
eousness, sanctification, and redemp-
tion, It is the personal experience
and the personal application of Christ’s
benefits which we need, “J know
whom I have believed.” “i know my
Redeemer.”

IL Specify some considerations
which put an emphasis and value
upon redemption, and heighten our
sense of its importance.

i. The work of redemption has en-
nobled our nature and shed a lustre
over the annals of our world. He took
not on Him the nature of angels—laid
not hold on them. Those first-born
sons of immortality were left in their
sins. No “mighty to save” appeared
for them. No ark in their deluge: ne
refuge city in their land: no brazen
serpent in their camp: no star of
Bethlehem in their sky !


HOMILELIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH,


sn


Christ ennobles all with which He
comes in contact. The very place is
memorable. “Zhou Bethlehem Ephrata,”
The times are memorable. Jesus fills an
era of His own. “In His pays Judah
saved.” We date from His death—we
memorialise His death— show forth
the Lord's death.”

ii. It eclipses and throws into the shade
the greatest of the Divine works. ‘No
more say the Lord liveth, who brought
Israel from Egypt.” Babylon was to
eclipse the deliverance from Egypt—
and Calvary that of Babylon.

iii, [t enhances the value of temporal
blessings following in tts train. “Judah
shall be saved ”—when God is known as
her righteousness.

iv. lt forms a permanent bond of
union among subjects of grace. “Judah
and Israel.”

Finally, judge of the grandeur of the
work by the doom denounced against
those who despise and reject it. ‘“ Be
hold, ye despisers, and wonder and
perish.” ‘Of how much sorer punish-
ment,” &c,—S. Thodey, a.p. 1838.


Vers. 5-6. Theme: THe CHRISTIAN
CREED SUMMARISED.

The ancient fathers agreed that this
prophecy was not fulfilled on the re-
turn of the Jews under Zerubbabel, but
is accomplished by the restoration of
all true Israelites in Christ.

I. The manhood of the Messiah is
here declared, ‘JI will raise unto
David a righteous branch” (comp. Isa.
xis).

IL. Christ’s royal majesty and judi-
cial authority are prophetically an-
nounced, “And a King shall reigu and
prosper, and shall execute judgment
and justice in the earth.”

IIL His saving power and love as
our Redeemer are also affirmed. “ In
His days Judah shall be saved and
Israel shall dwell safely,”

IV. Here is a clear assertion that He
who has been pre-announced as Very
Man of the seed of David, and as an
Eternal King and Righteous Judge,
and as a mighty Saviour and Deliverer,
is also the Lorp, Jenovan, Very God,
and, being Very God as well as Very


-


G@aP, XX


Man, is Our RicurrousnEss,— Bishop
Wordsworth.


Theme; CHRIST'S RIGHT TO THIS NAME
VINDICATED.

To speak of a person as “ THE
Lorp Ovr RIGHTNEOUSNESS,” and to
say that Hts name was to be called
JEHOVAH, would be very dangerous
unless His name really was Je
hovah,

L According to the whole teach-
ing of the Christian Scripture, it can-
rot be predicated of Jehovah,
regarded as a name of God the
Father, that He is “our righteous
ness.” On the contrary, the Father
is our righteous Lawgiver and Judge,
and we are liable to Him for the
punishment of our sins.

IL We may safely predicate
“our righteousness” of Christ, who
is here called “the Lord our righteous-
ness.”

For the Apostle has expressly taught
us that “ Christ is made unto us right-
eousness” (1 Cor. i, 30). As Man He
was able to suffer for us: as God He
is able to reconcile the Father to us.

Not only, therefore, may Christ “ our
righteousness ” be called JEHOVAH, but
by being also called “ ouR RIGHTEOUS-
wess” he is thereby distinguished from
God the Father, and becomes our
Jehovah and our righteousness: the
God-Man consecrated to man’s redemp-
tion.—Comp. Bishop Pearson on this
text, Art. ii, p. 148.


Themes “ JEHOVA Justit14 NosTRa.”

This name is compounded of these
three words—all of them essential :
and it makes a “‘ threefold cord which
cannot be broken ;” which, except it
be entire, and have all three, it loseth
the virtue, it worketh nothing,

i “Jenova.” Why that must be
a part of this name, David shows (Ps.
Ixxi, 16), because only His righteous-
ness is worth remembering ; and no
other is fit to be mentioned. For our
own “righteousness” is odious (Isa.
lxiv. 6, and Phil. iv. 8).

ii, Justitia. Why “righteousness”
rather than “ salvation” or “peace ”#

447


CHAP. XXIIL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR.


i ET,


Because salvation and peace are the
fruits which grow on “ Righteousness ”
as the “ Branch” (Isa. xxxiii. 7).

iii, JEHOVA Justitia. Why is
“Jehovah” here associated with
“righteousness” rather than with some
other attribute, as of “power” or
“mercy”? Because it is “God with
us” (Isa. vii, 10), chiefly in this pro-
perty of righteousness as above all
other Divine properties.

David calls Him Jehova misericordia
(Ps. lix. 17), and true it is that mercy is
ours. But justice is against us; and
except “justice” also be made “ ours,”
all is not as it should be. But if jus
tice—that tn God which only ts against
us—might be made for us, then are we
safe. Therefore, all our thought is
how we may get “mercy to triumph
over justice” (Jas. ii, 13), or how we
may get them to meet and be friends
(Ps. Ixxxv. 10). Hence, therefore,
neither Jehova potentia nor Jehova
misericordia are enough, but it must
be Jehova justitia.

iv. Nostra. Without this “ Jeho-
vah” alone doth not concern us, while
“Jehovah justitia” is wholly against
us, But if He be not alone “righteous-
ness,” but owrs too, we have our desires.
Verily this possessive word of applica-
tion is all in all.— Bishop Andrewes
(Works, vol. v. Sermon 5). See further
Noticeable Topics.


Vers. 7, 8. Repeated from chap. xvi.
14, 15. See Homily in loc. But see
Noticeable Topics below: “THe Loer
TEN TRIBES.”


Ver. 9. Theme: HoRRoR OVER FAITH:
LESS PROPHETS. The Prophet seems
“ beside himself for God” as Paul was ;
@ mad enthusiast ; “like a man whom
wine hath overcome.” He had suffi-
cient cause.

L. Intense grief over false teachers,
6 Mine heart within me is broken be-
cause of the prophets.” 1. Their
wickedness in teaching delusions. This
incensed his pious soul 2. Their
ruinous misleading of the nation. This
disturbed his patréotic spirit,

IL Profound terror over approach-


or)
‘ro


ing disasters. ‘‘ All my bones shake,
I am like a drunken man.” For, 1.
He himself clearly tnew the disasters
which false prophets sought to obscure


and hide. 2. He vividly apprehended |


the agontes into which his nation would
speedily be plunged, See Addenda:
NEGLIGENT PASTORS,

III. Deepest awe over God’s ter-
ribleness. ‘‘ Because of the Lord and
the words of His holiness.” 1. He
knew with whom these prophets were
trifling. ‘ And knowing the terrors of
the Lord, we persuade men.” 2. He
realised the compulsion of God’s holy
words. God never threatened willingly ;
but when necessity led Him to pro-
nounce doom, it was appalling to think
of what it meant.


Vers. 10-12. Theme: Gov’s WRATH
OVER NATIONAL VICES. Here isa cata-
logue of criminalities, together with
their penalties.

L Outrages by man against God.
Sin has manifold names and shapes, all
offensive. Here is a specification of
some especially odious,

1. Jmmorality. “ Land full of adul-
terers.” Literal: for fornication was
the common attendant of idolatry.
And this by “ prophets,” and by the
people throughout the land, who were
encouraged thereto by the example of
their leaders, Spiritual adultery also ;
Israel had forsaken her Husband for
idols (Jer. iii. 8-10, 20).

2. Foul speech, “ swearing.” Margin,
cursing. [This interpretation can only
be given by licence, for the text most
probably means, because of the curse (of
God) the land mourneth}, Yet Hosea
(iv. 2, 3) warrants the use of the text as
it stands in the E.V. God hears and
hates blasphemous language.

3. Persistent wrongdoing.
course is evil, and their force is not
right.” 1. The current of their life is
bad. Low public tastes and manners,
2. The intention of their life is dis
honourable ; they use their personal
powers (“‘force”) and civil powers and
ecclesiastical powers, not for rectitude,
but deceit and oppression and impiety.

4. Sacrilege. 1. Religious officera


“ Their


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





were themselves “ profane” (ver 11).
2. Holy scenes were degraded by “ wicked-
mess.”

Ii. Disasters from God upon man.
Sin has manifold penalties and punish-
ments ; here is an enumeration of some
especially disastrous,

1. Pleasures all desolated, “ Pleasant
places of the wilderness are dried up”
(ver. 10). For it should be recognised
that men occupy a ‘‘ wilderness.” Earth
is not naturally fruitful of luxury and
pleasure. All its “‘ pleasant places” are
God’s gifts, specially provided for us.
Therefore He can easily turn its plea-
sures into drought, and He will do so if
we abuse His grace. Then life becomes
® blank waste, and the heart is left
without comfort.

2. False ways made fatal. God
will allow them to pursue “ their way”
(ver. 12); give them up to their heart’s
desire; not arresting them, simply
let them alone to become befooled,
besotted, benighted. ‘In the darkness”
they should not be shown their peril so
as to become alarmed, and certainly
should not find escape, but slide down
into the blackness of darkness for ever.

3. Forces of evil should seize them. Sin
when indulged in the heart and habits
assumes a tyrannical despotism, and
* drives on” the sinner (ver. 12). Once
sin merely pleaded and decoyed, now it
forces and masters the soul ; and the sin-
ner shall “ fall”-—where? “ Theres,”
&¢., into the depths of woe, which end
the “slippery ways of darkness.”

4. God Himself will visit sinners with
evil (ver. 12). Though God delays the
judgment, yet, (1.) There comes a time of
judgment, “even the year of their visi-
tation, saith the Lord.” (2.) Then God
will Himself bring evil uponthem. ‘It
is a fearful thing to fall into the hands
of the living God.” “Turn ye from
your evil ways, fur why will ye die?”
—Comp. Homily on chap. xi. 25.


Vers. 13, 14. Theme: CoMPARATIVE
sINFULNEFSs, “ Folly in the prophets
of Samaria, ... in the prophets of
Jerusalem an horrible thing.”

L Sins are not regarded by God as
of equal magnitude.

Ze


OHAP. XX


1, Some evils are mistake. “ Folly,*
and they cause to err.”

2. Others are malignant.
thing,” “ wickedness.”

IT Sins take their colour and
degree from circumstances.

1. The location of our life affects the
moral qualities of conduct. The same
acts done “in Samaria” had less wrong
in them than when done “in Jeru-
salem,” because there was more religious
light in Jerusalem,

2. Guilt is guiltiest when done in the
face of God. It was stupidity when
done “2m Baal,” in connection with
Baal. It was absolutely “ horrible”
when done in the Temple in Jerusalem,
the seat of God’s Holy Throne and
Shekinah glory. Thus “exalted unto
heaven,” they should be “thrust down
to hell.”

D1. Sins involve all wrong-doers in
pitiable distress.

1. Though proportioned to the degree
of guiltiness, yet the lightest punishment
of sin must be appalling. The “ few
stripes” involve banishment from God
and heaven, for “the unclean shall not
dwell therein.”

2. The heaviest woes of sin are terrt-
Sying to contemplate. “ They are all of
them unto me as Sodom, and the in-
habitants thereof as Gomorrah.” QOver-
whelmed with ruin, and destroyed with
“ fire and brimstone.”


“ Horrible


Ver. 14. Theme: STRENGTHENING
THE HANDS OF THE WICKED. ‘“ J have
seen also tn the prophets of Jerusalem an
horrible thing. They strengthen the hands
of evil-doers, that none doth return from
his wickedness,”

IL Ali sin is horrible in its nature.
It is contrary to the character and will
of an Infinite Being—a Being of
glorious purity, supreme authority, and
almighty power; a Being who cannot
be tempted with evil, nor even look on
iniquity, &.

IZ To strengthen the hands and
hinder the repentance of sinners is
to oppose the great plan of the Divine
government.

IIL It tends to the misery of man-
kind, and is the reverse of that bene

449


CHAP. XXIII,


volence which ought to govern us in
all our conduct.

IV. It is to operate with that evil
spirit who works in the children of
disobedience.

V. It is a horrible thing, because
we thus become partakers of their
sins, ;

VI. It is directly contrary to God’s
commands, and marked with His
peculiar abhorrence.

Application :-—

To teachers of religion; to Chris-
tians in general ; to heads of families;
to the young. It is also horrible to
be strengthened in evil-doing. — Dr.
Lathrop.


Ver. 16. Theme : PREACHERS TESTED
BY THEIR HEARERS.

L False preaching may be dis-
covered.

1. It is here desertbed. ‘A vision
of their own heart,” do. ; entertain with
fanciful theories.

2. It may be detected. ‘“ They make
you vain ;” deceive with false hopes. In
ver. 17 their preaching is further de-
scribed.

(a.) To despisers of God peace is
promised,

(b.) To wilful sinners immunity is
assured.

Il Hearers must refuse wrong
teaching. The Church, and not her
ministers, is the pillar and ground of
the truth.

l. The exercise of the right of “ try-
ing the spirits whether they be of God”
has tts perils and difficulties. Ignorant,
misguided, and narrow-minded men
may make a preacher “an offender for
a word.” Timid souls may take quick
alarm. Impatient listeners may judge
in haste and without ample reasons,

2. Yet the non-exercise of this right ts
@ grave misdemeanour on the part of the
Church. God commands hearers to
“take heed how they hear,” and to
“try the spirits,” &c. Not to do so
indicates spiritual inertia, intellectual
indifference, and neglect of highest
trusts. It exposes the Church to the
grossest misleading, and leaves the
pulpit to reckless adventurers,

450


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAAH.





TIL God’s truth is perceivable by
the common people. Rome and arro-
gaut priests would have us believe that
hearers are to receive what is taught
them, being incapable of judging their
teachers.

1. The doctrine of the Law was suffi-
cient to guide Judah concerning the
teachings of prophets. “He who ran
might read,” if he sought to know.

2. Certainly, therefore, the doctrines
of the Gospel are plain to men’s under-
standing. ‘God hath revealed them
unto us by His Spirit.”

LEssons—

1. Seek to know God’s truth by per
sonal study.

2. Suffer no authority to usurp your
own judgment.

3. Challenge any teacher who speaks
not according to God’s Word.

4, Take alarm at the preacher’s mea-
sages which continually quiet the con-
science and lull the heart,

5. Encourage and strengthen the
earnest and outspoken preacher who
may seem to “become men’s enemy
because he tells them the truth.”

6. Make no truce with the sins which
an honest preacher must denounce,


Ver. 20. Theme ; Gon’'s ANGER UNDER-
STOOD AT LAST.

I. Because sinners will not duly
consider their wickedness, therefore
they misunderstand God’s displeasure.

1. God sees our sin in its most awful
aspects. “This abominable thing that
T hate.”

2. Sin blinds the judgment of sinners
to ita heinousness,

3. Divine anger is rightly fierce te-
wards conduct which would ruin the
order and happiness of the whole intel-
ligent and moral world.

4, Men not understanding what sin
is, and what it would despoil, think God
harsh in His denunciations, and its penal-
ties unduly severe,

IL Because sinners defy the fore-
warning of God’s anger, therefore it
will overwhelm them at the last.

1. God may defer the infliction, yet
it cannot be delayed for ever.

2% Men may defy the threateningy


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.








yet cannot thwart the thoughts of the
Lord.

3. The full purposes of God upon
wrong-doers will be ultimately “ per-


- formed.”


4. When God begins with punish-
ment, His anger will not stay till it
execute fullest vengeance.

iT. When sinners feel the final woes
their sins deserve, they will then awake
to their just deserts.

1. With this nation it was so; Jeru-
salem was destroyed, and the exiles,
taught by the sore adversity of capti-
vity, saw then how their stn brought
woes on themselves and ruin on their
country.

2. Even tn this world God makes
sinners realise that their guilt is the
cause of their misery of heart and life.
As in perilous illness, or sudden cala-
mity.

3. But it is tn the future that the
ungodly will learn their full iniquity,
and justify the ways of God with them.


Ver. 22, Theme: THR sEORET OF A
SUCCESSFUL MINISTRY. The true pro-
phet will be characterised by no tnde-
cent haste (ver. 21) in assuming his
office ; but when commissioned, will
fatthfully perform tts duties.

I. God’s messenger — whence he
gains his message. ‘Stood in My
counsel,” The Hebrew word “ coun-
sel” \s6d) means a confidential meeting
of private friends, In Pua. xxv. 14 it
is rendered the secret, t.¢., confidential
fellowship.

1. The preacher in private converse
with God.

2. Coming from that hidden fellow-
ship with a message to men.

3. Solemnity and grandeur of the
office,

4. The majestic force of conviction
thus sustaining the preacher while de-
livering his message.

IL God’s messenger — what he
preachesto men. “Caused My people
to hear My words,”

1. Divine truths gained from God’s
mouth (ver. 16).

2. Messages which foster no delu-
sions (ver. 17).


OHAP, XXII.


3. Human theories ( “ visions,” ver.
16) kept in abeyance that only God’s
‘* words” may gain heed.

4. God’s utterances preached with the
fervour which “ causes” the “people
to hear.”

IIL God’s messenger—what effects
crown a true ministry.

1. What is the Divine preacher's
supreme aim? “To turn men from
their evil way,” &c.

2. What are the Divine teacher’s
best credentials? That his preaching
does accomplish this result. “Then
they should have turned them,” &c.

3. What are the Divine preacher's
richest rewards? Not worldly favour
or power, but sinners turned from the
error of their ways; souls won for Christ,
his “ crown of rejoicing.”


Ver. 23. Theme: Gop’s NEARNESS
EVERYWHERE,

Sinners, amid iniquitous doings, often
resort to atheistical subterfuges. ‘* God
seeth us not.” Needful, therefore, that
they be confronted with the very first
principles of religion—God’s omnipre-
sence and omniscience. National reli-
gion affirms these attributes of Deity.
Revelation confirms and enlarges the
doctrine. God everywhere: seeing all,
near all.

L All space is pervaded by God
Himself. ‘He is at hand:” but
equally He is “afar off.” Near us on
earth, as He is near those in heaven.

1. Near us tn personal
God “stands before the door.”
passes our path,” &e.

2. Near us in mésnute perception.
“ His eyes behold,” &. “ Run to and
fro.”

8. Near us in mighty power. “ Doing
according to His will among the inha-
bitants of the earth,” as well as amid
the “armies of heaven.” “No place
can either include Him or exclude Him.”
(Henry.)

IL All actions are performed in
God’s fall gaze.

1. The thought of secrecy is a delusion,
We live. move, think, act in the full
blaze of the searching light of omnt
science,

451


§¢ Com.


2. The deeds of human life are
Divinely scanned. He reads them
through and through — motive and
method, all keenly and completely
discerned,

3 The judgments of God are based
upon perfect knowledge of facts, This
is consolatory to the righteous—who
are often misrepresented and maligned.
This is admonitory to the irreligious—
who will be destitute of all hope of
excuse or covert in the day of decision.

4, Such universal knowledge, from
personal supervision of the universe,
throughout all time, is both necessary
to a proper idea of a God—the world’s
Ruler, Sustainer, and Judge ; and it is
& guarantee of rectetude in the adminis-
tration of Divine providence now aud of
Divine rewards and punishment here-
after. He will depend on no secondary
source of knowledge of us—not even
on the reports of angel ministers: “ all
things are naked and open unto the
eyes of Him with whom we have to do,”

Itt. All scenes are equally favour-
able to revelations of God.

1. In heaven, where He seems locally
“near,” pure and redeemed souls may
look upon Him, and glory in His cloud-
less presence.

2. On earth, though clouds and
darkness hide Him, and we think of
God as “ afar off,” He can yet make
Himself known to our souls.

3. Even in hell, the scene of banish-
ment from Him, God may—certainly
He can—show Himself to outcast souls
whose desire it will be to “ hide them-
selves from the face of Him that sitteth
upon the throne, and from the wrath
of the Lamb.”—See Addenda : Gon’s
OMNIPRESENCE.


Vers. 23-24. Theme: THE ALL
PEESENT Gop.

Always present and everywhere pre-
sent. Three interrogations are here
submitted: but not to imply a ques-
tion or doubt as to the facts interro-
gated, but to emphasise the truths
brought thereby upon attention,

ii The sublime fact of God’s omni-
presence is affirmed (ver. 23); God ts
near at hand, and 1s present afar off.

452


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH,





fi, The co-ordinate truth of God's
omniscience (ver. 24). There are ne
secret places to God.

iii, The spirituality of God — His
immaterial. essence is likewise affirmed:
—for He fills the universe, “ heaven and
earth ;” the Great Spirit present every-
where.

I. Verily this omnipresent Spiri-.
tual Being is worthy of human wor-
ship. If we had to search out whom to
adore and obey, who san compare with
God.

1. Such attributes constrain ow
homage.

2. Such greatness impresses on us
the thought that «# ts well that we be
reconciled to One so majestic and
mighty.

3. Such a God, everywhere near, it
is easy to worship and wise to trust,
He can know all things on our behalf
and do all we need,

IL Equally clear it is that any
lower object of worship is an ¢ «ror.

1. /dolatry is reprehensible. It ele-
vates inferiors (even if idols oad any
real existence) into ascendancy. It
wrongs God; it gives Hie glory to
another ; and it angers Him.

2. Divided affections are inconsistent
with true homage. We can have but
one God. He will not be placed on a
level with another object of regard.
‘“* Beside Me is none else.”

IIL The loftiest reve.ence and
truest loyalty become us in relation
to a God so glorious, f

1. What thoughts and feelings can be
too elevated as we think of Him.

2. What devotion can exceed His


- claims.


3. What a privilege to be permitted
to hide our life in such a God! “Hid
with Christ in God.”

IV. Security and peace are assured
to the godly soul in the fact of the
Divine omnipresence.

1, God will guard him from the
lurking forces and subtleties of sin.
“Can any hide,” dc. God sees His
saints in all scenes and circumstances,
and will keep them safely.

2. God will be ever near him; his
solace and sufficiency. He is at hand


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.








to cherish, to guide—in life and death ;
till the redeemed soul reaches Him in
heaven.


Vers, 28, 29. Theme: Fipruiry xx-
QUIRED IN MINISTERS.

“ He that hath My word, let him speak
My word faithfully. What is the chaff
to the wheat? saith the Lord.”

No order is more influential on society
than ministers, The old prophets, if
faithful to their God, diffused incaleul-
able blessings through the land; if
false, hardened the people in their
wickedness. Ministers to-day produce
like effects,

L A solemn injunction to all who
bear the office of the ministry.

The Word of God is put into our
hands, and a dispensation is committed
to us to preach it. This office we must
execute “faithfully ;” we must speak
the Word—

1. Unreservedly, without concealment
Acts xx. 20, 27). Our odject must be
oe xi, 30) our manner (2 Cor, iv,
2); and our motto (2 Cor. ii, 17).

2. Impartially, without respect of
persons. All idea of pleasing men
must be abandoned (Gal. i. 10). We
must follow the fidelity of Paul (1 Thess.
ii 3-6), using “great plainness of
speech” (2 Cor. iii, 12, 13).

3. Boldly, without fear, The pro
phets were so enjoined to speak (Jer.
i, 8, 17; Ezek. ii. 6, 7). We must
expect hatred (John iii. 19, 20): but
our answer to opponents must be (Acts
iv. 19, 20): and we must account
suffering in this work our glory (Acts
v. 41; Philip. ii 17, 18).

This injunction is further enforced
by—

"TL A solemn appeal to the whole
world.

1. Jo our judgment. “What is the
chaff?” &c. Of what use were the
assertions of false prophets? They
only deceived the people to their ruin,
Contrast with thia the labours of Moses,
David, Elijah, Paul So the true
- minister (1 Tim. iv. 16; James v. 20).
God declares the good effect of faithful
teaching (see ver. 23).


2. Yo our experience, God’s Word,


GHAP, XXifi,


if faithfully declared, is “quick and
powerful” (Heb, iv. 12), Let any who
has observed its effects say whether it
is not “like fire,” which dissolves the
hardest metal, and “like a hammer,”
dc. Illustrate by Nineveh (Jonah iii.
4-10), and the scene at Pentecost
(Acts ii, 37, d&c.) Verily, “it is mighty
through God” (2 Cor. x. 4, 5).

There are cogent reasons for minis-
terial fidelity. False doctrines save no
man; but a simple preaching of “Christ
crucified is the power of God unto
salvation” (1 Cor. 1, 23, 24; Rom, i
16). Many are thereby “turned to
God from idols,” &. (1 Thess. i 5, 9,
10).

i Let me now discharge my duty to
you. To me is committed the Word of
God for you, and woe is unto me if I
preach it not with all fidelity (1 Cor.
ix. 16, 17; Ezek. xxxiii. 6-8),

ii. Let me call on you to make u due
improvement of my testimony. Pray;
seek God's blessing on the word
preached, that it may prove to you
“a savour of life unto life,” and not of
“death unto death.” It is He who
can make the “fire” burn, and the
“hammer” so mighty that no rock
can withstand its force, —C. Simeon.


Ver. 28. Theme: THe CHAFF AXD
THE WHEAT,

““What is the chaff to the wheat?
saith the Lord.”

We may regard this question as
suggestive of the superiority of the real
to the superficial, and of the substance
to the shadow, d&c.

L There are those who make more
of the ritual and ceremonial in religion
than they do of the spirit and power.
But, “ What is the chaff to the wheat?
saith the Lord.” :

Il. There are those who make more
of the speculative, theoretical, mys-
terious, and mystical in religion, than
of the plain, practical, experimental,
and useful, But, ‘‘ What is the chaff?” -
&c.

UI. There are those who make more
of the name, profession, and show of
godliness than they do of godliness
itself. But, “ What is the chaff?” &.

a52





BOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; JEREMIAB.





IV. There are those who attach more
importance to words, style, manner,
appearance, and persons in preaching,
than they do to the truth of Scripture,
But, “ What is the chaff to the wheat ?
saith the Lord.”——Lay Preacher.


Ver, 28. Theme: Lying coMMUNICA-
TIONS AND Gop’s TRUTH.

“What is the chaff to the wheat #”

Jehovah had contrasted the godleas
inventions of false teachers with the
truth of His own assertions, and hav-
ing desired that each message might be
stated as each deserved (ver. 28), pro-
ceeds to compare the lying communi-
cations of men with the true sayings of
God.

In the corrupt heart within us there
exists and labours so perverse and de-
structive a tendency to prefer the chaf
to the wheat, as to incur the peril of
choosing the false rather than the true
Therefore the attempt is here made to
expose some of these misapprehensions,

I. What are worldly maxims com-
pared with the Word of God, but as
the chaff to the wheat? ‘The whole
world lieth under the power of the
“ father of lies.”

1. Regard the conduct of men of the
world, and by what maxim are they
governed? to what authority do they
bow? Of Him who created, sustains,
redeemed them, or of Atm who deceived
our first parents, and has ever since been
spreading snares for their posterity 4

2. What lessons does the world teach
its desciples? To be lovers of pleasure
more than the lovers of God; to wor-
ship the creature more than the Creator ;
to spend the precious season of mercy
in laying up deceitful treasure for self ;
to say to the ensnared soul, “ Soul, take
thine ease,” de. ; or, “Let us eat and
drink, for to-morrow we die.” Does not
the world stigmatise all true religion,
the privileges of Christian life, &c., as
dreams of enthusiasm and inventions of
hypocrisy ; and a zealous pursuit of “the
one thing needful” as the miserable
error of “ being righteous overmuch }”

“ But what is the chaff to the wheat #”
-——the authority of the world compared
with that of the Supreme Lord and

454


King ; the ridicule of the world with
the indignation of God; the present
judgment of men with the decisions of
the Book which shall be opened at the
last day ; the world’s standard of mor-
ality with Christ’s requirement of a new
birth 3

There are vain dreamers (ver. 26).
Suffer them not to mislead you from an
atoning Saviour, &c. ‘‘ Love not the
world,” &c. : but heed the faithful teach-
ings of the Word of God which liveth
and abideth for ever.

Ii. What is the value of that legal
righteousness in which carnal man de-
lights, compared with the righteousness
of Christ Jesus, as a ground of justifica-
tion with God? “ The carnal man is
st enmity with God.” He may deem
himself, “as touching the righteousness
of the law, blameless,” and ask, “ What
lack I yet?” But this delusion results
from ignorance of the sptérituality of the
Divine law. Let the Spirit’s illumina-
tion come to him, and he will see hime
self no longer “rich, increased with
goods, and in need of nothing; but
wretched, miserable,” dc,

The terrors of the law will sweep away
all refuges of lies in which the sinner has
sheltered himself, and drive bim to the
righteousness of Jesus Christ. Hepen-
tance for sin will not form that wedding
garment which fits for a seat at the mar-
riage supper of the Lamb. Nor is it
by “works of righteousness which we
have dune” that we are accepted with
God. Christ alone is ‘made unto us
wisdom, righteousness,” &c. “In Him
must all the seed of Israel be justified.”

“ What is the chaff to the wheat?”
Who that knows himself to be a sinner,
who knows anything of the self-sufficient
salvation of Jesus, would hesitate a mo-
ment between leaning on the broken reed
of his own goodness, and coming ia faith
to Christ Jesus ?

DL What is the happiness of the
worldling compared with that of a
child of God, but as chaff to the wheat 1
“There be many which say, Who will
show us any good,” &ec.

1. An eager desire after happiness is
implanted in us ail.

2 Men pursue phantoms of enjoyment





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.











as children might attempt to grasp a
rainbow which has allured them,

3. But while all creature-joys elude,
“ godliness 1s profitable,’ &c. The be-
liever has a “ joy which no man taketh
from him.” “Say ye to the righteous
that it shall be well with him.”

IV. What are the present pleasures
of sin compared with the glories of
heaven ?

1. This glad prospect sinners have
forfeited for the mocking indulgeuces of
life. “Thou hast had thy good things.”

2. Christ Himself will effectually
forbid heaven's joye to Chrisiless souls.
“His fan is in His hand, and He will
thoroughly purge,” &e.

Has a deceived heart turned you
aside? Oh, seek the Spirit’s illumins-
tion that ye may escape the delusion of
earthly vanities and find rest in the
Divine love now, and a part in the in-
heritance with the saints in light—
Partly taken from an old and namelese
HS.


Vers. 28-29. Theme: SyMBoLs oF
Gon’s Worp.

“ Wheat—Fire-—-Hammer.”

I. In its own essential properties
God’s Word is thus manifold.

1. A vital and vitalising substance;
“ Wheat.” (a.) Life trheres in it. (6.)
It nourishes life in the eater.

2. A refining and devouring element :
“ Fire.” (a.) It imparts warmth. (6.)
It purges from impurities, from dross.
(c.) It consumes rubbish,

3. A subduing and destroying force :
“Hammer.” (a.) Beating down ali re-
sistance in the regenerate heart. (b.)
Crushing and destroying the hard and
defiant life.

II. In its changeful aspects and
revelations God’s Word assumes these
diversities. It comes in various forms
to mankind,

1. Corn covered with husk The
Divine truth covered with the human
exterior. ‘‘ We have this treasure in
earthen vessels.” Also the God-given
message and doctrine mingled with the
“ chaff” of human theories and inter-
pretations.

2. Fire wm its vartous forms and


OHAP. XXIM.


degrees. Attractive, as the domestic
fire which draws us around its genial
glow. Beneficial, as the warmth to a
chilled traveller, d&e. Terrible, as the
fiery furnace to those it would consume.

3. A Hammer applied to different uses
and with different force. Fastening “a
nail in a sure place,” t.¢.,enforcing Divine
truth upon the conscience. “ Breaking
in pieces the rocky vessel,” «.¢,, crushing
the alien and antagonistic heart.

IZ. In the ministries it effects,
God’s Word needs to be thus diverse.

1, Men, to whom God’s Word is
addressed, are tn such utterly dissimilar
conditions. (a.) Some need “ wheat”
—nourishment; food to sustain the
Divine life within them, Men are as sods
of various conditions, into which the
wheat-grain is cast by the sower. (b.)
Others are as metal—* gold and silver,”
which need refining; or as “ wood,
hay, stuble,” only fit to be burned. (c.)
Others are as the rock—either requiring
the stroke of affxction to disclose their
hidden treasures and graces ; or as
destined to the stroke of destruction,
being valueless for any good end.

2. Men, to whom God’s Word is
addressed, must respond to tts mantfold
purposes. For God’s Word is to be
utilised in all its various forms —
“wheat, fire, hammer.” (a.) Cleanse
the corn of the chaff, and eat the pre
cious wheat. (b.) Welcome its purt/ying
mission, and live in its warm glow. (c.)
Submit to tis strokes, and become com-
pliant to its powerful appeala.

Observe :

i. God’s Word can be refused os
“wheat,” but cannot be evaded as “ fire,”
nor resisted as “a hammer.”

ii If we recetve not the life tt can
bring as food, we must feel its con-
suming and destroying force.


Theme: Gopv’s WoRD AND MAN'S
WORD.

i The former ts life and power
(wheat, fire, hammer) ; the latter pre
tence and weakness (dream, straw).

ii. The two are not to be mixed with
each other. Why (add) the chaff to the
wheat? This rendering is admissible.
—Lange.

455


GUAP. XXUL


This shows,

i. The vanity of all human «magina-
tions in religion, (a.) What do they
afford to man? (6.) How much do
they hinder!

ii he energy of spiritual truth,
Let us entreat God that our estimate
may be practical. —Cecul.


Vers, 30-32. Theme: Gop THE ANPA-
GONI6T OF FALSE TEACHERS. “ Be-
kold” stands in front of each of the
three declarations ; it commands notice;
the subject is serious,

“I am against ;” God in opposition
to their wicked work, to their banefaul
influence, and to their very persons.

L God repudiates stolen teachings.
They were plagiarists (ver. 30). (1.)
They stole the words they uttered from
Gou’s true prophets: (2.) They stole
away the Divine meaning from those
words by their perverse rendering : and
(3.) They stole one another's fictitious
messages, thus reiterating and propagat-
ing lies,

IL God denounces spurious mes-
sages. Having no message from God,
the second class used the solemn for-
mula by which Jehovah confirmed the
validity of His messages through His
own prophets; but in using it they
misused tt; only employing the form
“Saith,” instead of ‘‘ Jehovah saith.”
(1.) Yet this gave emphasis to their
delusive inventions: and hypocrites
glibly revel in such free use of solemn
asseverations, (2.) They thereby de-
ceived their hearers into the belief that
God said what they uttered. So with
all who preach human fancies and theo-
ries instead of the Divine Word.

III God contemns lying frivolities.
(1.) They acted a solemn part with
shameful levity. (2.) They caused the
people to err by their spurious teach-
ings.

Notice here :

i. What is a teacher's qualification
for his work. ‘That God should “send ”
and “command ” him.

ii. What is the test by which to try a

456





HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





preaching. If it “ profit not,” it has me
Divine origin or authority.


Vers, 33-40. Theme: THE BURDER
OF THE LORD ON TRIFLERS.

“ Burden” (Massa) means hear
oracle, prophetic discourse, and there
is a play on this double sense of the
Hebrew.

L Men’s scoffing inquiry, “ What is
the burden of the Lord?” (ver. 33).

1. How they estimated God's message,
Another “ burden ”—oppressive oracle.
So are all God’s messages and demands
to those “who stumble at the Word,
being disobedient.” And so will always
be God’s prohibitions and threatenings to
those who love their sins and rebel
against reproof,

2. How they reviled God’s messenger.
A mere burden-bearer, Not a messenger
of good tidings—not even an ambassador
from God—not greeted with respect as
one who authoritatively taught them
their duty. No! he only brought them
troublesome words, tidings of disaster:
and they taunted him therewith (comp.
chap. xx. 8-10 ; see also Mal. i. 1).

IL God’s derisive answers. You
ask, “What burden?” “ Ye are the
burden” (see Jnt. Crit. supra on ver.
33). And for you the burden shall
be this :

1. God will cast you of as being a
“burden” to Him. Or, since My word
is burdensome in your eyes, you shall
have no more of tt, and that will be a
far worse “burden” to you—deserted
by God and denied His prophetic
word |

2. God will deal seriously with those
triflers (ver. 34). They used God’s
word in derision, but it would prove
dreadfully literal in its fulfilment.
Whosoever shall in mockery call the
Lord’s word # “ burden,” shall be visited
in wrath.

3. God will turn His messages which
were intended to prove blessings tnte
burdens, which shall press heavily oa
every man.

On ver. 40 comp. chap, xx. 1L


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH. CHAP, XXIiL














NOTICEABLE TOPICS IN CHAPTER XXIII.
Topic: Jesus, oun Lorp AND RicuTeousngss. (VER. 6.)


Christians believe these words fulfilled in Jesus; Jews look for One to come.
All acknowledge they refer to the Messiah: and we may form a judgment from
this description as to what religious system they are suited best, that of the Jew,
the Unitarian, or the Christian.

1. The Christ, or Messiah, of raz Jew. They believe a man of admirable wisdom
will be born, descended from Royal family of David, shall go round the world to
where Israelites are now in banishment, and persuade or compel Gentile rulers to
let His people return to their native land. There, having rebuilt Temple, and
re-established ancient worship, they will be exposed to envy of nations, who will
invade and make war upon their country; but, at last, delivered from all their
troubles under the anointed Prince, all the world shall become Jews like themselves,
and send every year gifts and sacrifices to Temple of Jerusalem.

ii, The Messiah of the Unirartans, Already come; Jesus of Nazareth the
Saviour, foretold by ancient prophecy. But, when Christ came, He was nothing
more than a man; born (so many argue), not of a virgin, but of Joseph and Mary
his wife ; sent by God to preach to mankind a holy life, and that all men hereafter
should be raised from the dead, and be rewarded according to their works.

iii, The Messiah of Cunistians, Jesus; formed as man, but God Himself,
eternally one with Father ; came from heaven, preached righteousness and resurrec-
tion, but these only subordinate ends ; by His obedience, merits, and atonement by
blood to take off from the world that curse under which, since Adam, it had been.

Examine meaning of language in text.

I. This prophecy is fulfilled to the Jews, who expect tn their Christ an earthly
monarch, and to Christians, who believe that Christ is a Divine and heavenly
monarch. Jews suppose Christ will be man like ourselves, prophet like Moses,
but also a mighty conqueror and king. Christians believe that Christ from all
eternity has been, together with the Father and Holy Ghost, the Creator and
Governor of the world; that He now sitteth in human form at right hand of
Father’s glory ; will be Judge of world at last. But to Unitarians, with whom
Christ was a mere prophet, having no power to rule world, no privilege of doing good
to His Church, how can this prophecy be fulfilled in Christ# On earth, and in
human nature, He was very unlike a “king ;” and if He were nothing beyond man,
‘these words are inapplicable to Him.

IL This prophecy points out the salvation Christ would effect. “In His
days, saith the Lord, Judah shall be saved.” Jews and Christians have reasons,
though different, for applying prophecy to Messiah. They suppose He will save
them from worldly troubles ; we believe that He saves all who trust in Him from
burthen of sins and wrath of God. But with what salvation do Unitarians
accredit Christ? They answer: By bringing a more perfect moral law, He taught
us to avoid sin, and thus saved us from sin; that by teaching resurrection and
rising Himself, He saved us from fear of death ; that by abolishing law of Moses,
He saved us from burdensome ceremonies. In answer: Morality was equally
enforced under Old Testament; resurrection believed in; and Christ did not
destroy and abolish the law.

Ii This prophecy gives a Divine title to the Messiah: “The Lord our
Righteousness.” Both Jews and Unitarians must be perplexed, since neither
allow the Saviour foretold was to be other than mortal man. But the word
Lord” is in Hebrew JenovaH. Accordingly, we accept this as proof that the
Messiah must not only be man but God. This is not refuted by the attempt to
show from chapter xxiii, 16, that it is not the Saviour who should bear this awful
name, but Judah. for that text should read, ‘‘ He, who calleth pny: is tho

45


C@aP, XXIfil. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; JEREMIAH.








Lord our righteousness ;” and also, in this present verse, both Judah and Israel are
united in blessing by Messiah ; so that, if Judah be meant by this title, Israel must
also; and the word should be, not “He shall be called,” but “ they shall be.”
Turn it as we may, this passage remains unconquerable by those who deny Jesus
to be Gop and Lorn; for it is allowed He is Messiah, and Messiah is no other
than JeHovag.

IV. This prophecy further gives to Christ the title of “Our righteousness.”
Jews and heretics cannot explain this away ; they deny that the blood of Christ is
a sacrifice, or satisfaction, for the sins of the world; that we are justified by His
death. Yet here, the Man, Messiah, is not only JEHovaH, but in His own Person
He is “our righteousness,” But how can man or God become the righteousness of
sinful creatures, unless He suffer in their stead the punishment of their sin, and in
their stead obey and fulfil the law? How can He make another being righteous,
except by proving him innocent of faults, or obeying the laws on behalf of the
offender, bearing the faults on Himself, and suffering his punishment? Hence it is
by the imputed merits, obedience, and death of Christ that we are cleansed from
sin and made righteous in the sight of God.

We are herein called to acknowledge in Christ a mighty God and most merciful
Saviour : Advocate, pleading on our behalf His own merits ; High Priest, who offered
up His own life for us; Lamb, whose blood washed us clean, Let us by every
action and affection show our faith, love, and thankfulness, Remember that Christ
is our righteousness alone ; no merit in us ; and in Him is the sinner’s hope.—Con-
densed and arranged from BisHOP REGINALD HiBze, a.D. 1838,


Topic: Toe Recovery or THE TEN Lost TRIBES FROM THE NorTH CouNTRY.
(Ver. 8.)


Israel, or the Ten Lost Tribes, were carried captive into Assyria in 725 B.o.
Their captivity was complete in number and time—to this day they have not
returned. The captivity of Judah in 588 was partial in number and time; they
returned and remained until finally scattered about the year 70 a.p. Now they
are all in exile, but they are to return again to their own land. And as surely as
the Jews now say, “The Lord liveth which brought up His people out of Egypt,”
so will they by and by say, “ The Lord liveth which brought up His people out of the
North country, and from all the countries whither He had driven them.”

I. This is, and has been, the expectation of the Ohurch for ages) From
earliest centuries this has been a prevailing idea. Six years after the destruction
of Jerusalem, as foretold by the prophets and the Saviour, a child was born who in
his life was to confront this idea in prophecy. Hadrian, the Roman Emperor,
born in 76 a.p., died in 138. He hated, with a deadly hatred, the Jews and the
Christians. What of the city of Jerusalem was standing in his day he destroyed,
and built a new city on the old site and called it after himself, Elia Capitolina, Then
he forbade Jew or Christian, under penalty of death, to enter the same, declaring
that he would show them the weakness of their hope and falsity of their prophets,

Again, there was born in Constantinople another child, Nov. 17, a.p. 331,
who died June 26, a.p. 363, named Flavius Claudius Julinus, surnamed Julian the
Apostate. He said that he would make God a liar and prophecy false, for he
would gather the Jews and build the Temple. Some of the Jews he did gather,
and he began to build the Temple, but God was against him by earthquake and
by balls of fire out of the ground, so he ceased to fight against God. Even
England has sought to bring back Israel before the time. Three successive times
she has conquered Palestine, and given it over to the Turks for keeping. Nay, for
a time the whole Christian world sought to force Providence in this matter. You
have read of the wonderful crusades; no less than eight of them, from 1095 te
1272; the time was not yet, but it will come.


458


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. OMAP, XXIT,





IL Let us remember there is a God—a God who has a purpose and design
both for His people and this land of Palestine, Hear Him speak: “The land
shall not be sold for ever, for the land is Mine, for ye are strangers and sojourners
with Me” (Lev. xxv. 23).

1, Men write, talk, and speculate, but they leave out the Divine quantity in their
calculations, It is this that has confused the nations and the press. The science
of algebra has been passed by, or this quantity could have been found. There is
in nature a force, or something, which science names Catalysis, It is the name for
the presence of some force or power that acts on other things, rendering precision
in the chemical laboratory many times impossible. How much this catalytic
power is in any compound or combination it is difficult to tell. It is a Divine
quantity. It is present in the analysis, but not in the synthesis. The physiolo-
gist meets it everywhere, but the anatomist nowhere, Science can pull to pieces,
but cannot put things together the same, for this catalytic power escapes.

2. Nations, kings, rulers, and governments forget that the earth is the Lord's.
They think they can part it as they like, but they cannot. This Divine force or
quantity enters and vitiates their conclusion, Listen to Jehovah: ‘“‘ Remember
the days of old, consider the years of many generations; ask thy father and he
will show thee; thy elders and they will tell thee. When the Most High divided
to the nations their inheritance, when He separated the sons of Adam, He set the
bounds of the people according to the number of the children of Israel” (Deut.
xxii. 7, 8; comp. also Isa. xliv, 7, and Acts xvii. 26).

IL But when will Israel and Judah return, and how? That they have to
return some time, surely all will agree, The time of the end we believe to be near—

Ist. By the general expectation.

2d. By the grand revelations and teaching of the Great Pyramid, this pillar and
witness spoken of by Isaiah xix. 19, In this remarkable structure the year 1882
is very significantly deroted. Many great facts in Israel’s history have been
incorporated in this building and have come to pass; so for Israel something is in
reserve for 1882—perhaps it is the great deliverance spoken of in the text. This
year is also the wonderful prophetic year. The “time and times and dividing of
time ” makes 1260 years, which, added to the first year of Mahomet, is equal to
our 622, which added makes 1882.

3d. By the Church witness. For the Gospel was to be preached as a witness
unto all nations before Israel are gathered. This sign is now complete. But how will
this great deliverance be brought about—in God’s own way, as from the Egyptians #
The overthrow and destruction of Turkey may be the preparatory cause. The Jews
now feel specially moved, for at their late council in New York they had letters
missive from Berlin, Paris, London, on how best to promote the return of those Jews
who desire to return to Palestine.—Joseph Wild, D.D., Brooklyn, a.D. 1878.


ADDENDA TO CHAPTER XXIII. ; ILLUSTRATIONS AND SUGGESTIVE EXTRACTS.


Ver. 1. NEGLIGENT PASTORS. By action and by word; and round him


d
“Probably many who are called Gos- ny, goen from his lips expecting know:


pel ministers are more chargeable with
concealing truths than affirming direct
error; with not properly building the
house than wilfully pulling it down.”—
Dr. Witherspoon.

“ Unfaithfulness is to undo our own
souls as well as our people’s,”——Bridges.


‘‘ But the unfaithful priest, what tongue
Enough shall execrate ! F : A

By solemn, awful ceremony, he

Waa set apart to speak the truth entire,


ledge.


They stood, for he had sworn, in face of God
And man, to deal sincerely with their souls ;
To preach the Gospel for the Gospel’s sake.


Most yuilty, villainous, dishonest man !
Wolf in the clothing of the gentle lamb!
Dark traitor in Messiah’s holy camp !
Leper in saintly garb! assassin masked
In virtue’s robe! Vile hypocrite, accursed 3
I strive in vain to set bis evil forth.”
— Pollock,
459


CHAP, XXIV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





Ver. 23. Gop’s OMNIPRESENCE.

During the American war a British
officer, walking out at sunrising, ob-
served an old man with his arm upraised
as if in adoration. The officer inter-
fered with rude disregard, and demanded
what he was about. The old native
replied, “I am worshipping the Great
Spirit.” The officer asked derisively,
“Where is He?” To which taunt the


old man replied, “‘ Soldier, where ts He
not +] ”

The question was once asked of a
little boy, “ How many gods are there ¢”
“One,” ke replied. “How do you
know there is only one?” He answered,
“Because there is no room for any


more ; for the One God fills heaven and
earth,”








CHAPTER XXIV.


CrrrioaL axp Exraetioan Norrs. Vide previous chapter. Cf. 2 Kings xxiv, 10-12,

Natural History. ‘‘ Baskets of Figs:” Vide Natural History notes on chaps. v. 17, viii. 18.
The ‘‘ first ripe” figs (ver. 2), called here bikkurah (cf. Isa. xxviii. 4; Mic. vii. 1; Hos, ix. 10),
denotes the early or spring fig; and ia still called boccore in Mauritania, and in Spanish alba-
cora. The usual time for gathering figs is August; the early fig gathered in June is a rarity
and delicacy. It is easily shaken off the tree (Nahum iii. 12), The ‘‘very baa figs” (ver. 2)
were probably sycamore figs; which, unless punctured as they ripen, turn acrid, and ‘‘ cannot be


eaten” (ver. 3); or, they may have been decayed figs. ‘‘ Baskets of figs” used to be offered as
firstfruits in the Temple.


HOMILETIC SUMMARY OF CHAPTER XXIV.
Tur Baskets or Fics: aA PARABLE AND «a PROPHECY,


Notes :—i. Those who are amid calamity do not necessarily deserve worse than those
who temporarily escape,

ii, Those who temporarily escape calamity may be destined to far heavier
chastisements,

ili, Among those whom disaster overtakes there may be eminently good men.
Daniel and Ezekiel were among the first captives !

iv. Self-elation over tmmunity from adversity will only invoke more hum-
bling providences. Probably those who remained behind thought
themselves better than those who had gone into captivity ; but
heavier judgments came in due time upon these boasters.

y. Adversities may have a beneficent design and beneficent influence (vera
5-8).

L A nation rent asunder—yet arrayed beneath God’s eye.

1. Separated by ordinance of God’s providence. God had permitted the captivity ;
and He had reserved the part which remained behind.

(a.) In respect of location they were widely separated. Babylon lay far off from
Jerusalem.

(b.) In respect of outward advantages they were widely dissimilar.
residents. Yet both were equally

2. Present under the eye of God’s omniscience, One part was captive in Babylon
(ver. 1); the other part remained in Canaan (ver. 8); but both baskets of figs were
“ set before the Temple of the Lord.” [The word Y} implies that they were
appointed to this place before God’s Temple.] Thus the exiles in Babylon were
equally present to God’s eye as those at Jerusalem. Hqually under His eye : those
afar as those near ; those amed adversity as those amid advantages.

(a.) Wherever we are we dwell under the Divine notice. We cannot go beyond
His ken. None are forgotten by God. Those “afar off” were still “set before”
Him.

(b.) Amid our adversities we do not lose the Divine Fatherhood. Even though
“sept out of this place into the land of the Chaldeans” (ver. 4), yet God declares,

460


Exiles and


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JHREMIAH. OHAP, XXIV,





eee


ion S acknowledge them,” and “T will set Mine eyes upon them for good"
ver, 5). .

IL A suggestive comparison—indicating vast moral dissimilarities. Two
baskets of figs: in the one were “ very good figs;” in the other “ very naughty
figs "—“‘ the good figs, very good ; and the evil, very evil.”

l. Their experiences seemed to reverse this estimate, It surprises us to find that
those carried away captive were accounted “good,” while those escaping the
miseries of exile are pronounced “very bad.” Here is teaching that we judge not
character by circumstances ; that we do not deem those who most suffer to be the
greatest sinners, “Judge not according to the outward appearance;” “ jud
nothing before the time ;” “I have seen the wecked in great power,” &c. The facta
were that the exes were the noblest and best of the nation ,; those left at home were
the refuse.

2. Their separation was for a providential purpose. Those of the nation whe
were of any worth at all were called out and sent away into safe keeping, even
though into exile, And there they were in good keeping. Although it seemed
worse to be in captivity than to dwell at home, they were really better off in
Chaldea. Their removal to Babylon saved them from the calamities which befel
the rest of the nation, “ Whom God loveth He chasteneth.”

3. Thewr distinctive qualities was emphatically marked. “ Very good—very bad.”
Doubtless those who remained at home flattered themselves with being better than
those who were exiled, and more pleasing to God than those who suffered captivity.
They showed themselves ‘‘ very bad” by their pride of heart, by not profiting from
the salutary warning of the calamity which had come upon their fellow-countrymen,
by not repenting of their own evils and amending their ungodly lives. The exiles
showed themselves “good” by signs of regeneration under the discipline of cap-
tivity. God Himself esteemed them more favourably (ver. 5), and saw in them
higher excellences and more hopeful qualities than the rest possessed. ‘ God looketh
not on the outward appearance, but at the heart.”

IIL A contrasted destiny-——according with their merit and conduct. The good
figs were a delicacy (see Natural History note supra); the bad were obnoxtous—
* eould not be eaten.” There wasa reverse destiny for them. God gave this vision
and prophecy to Jeremiah: (a) Zo cheer the disconsvlate captives with a hope of
future good ; (b) To check the vaunting of the heartless residents by menaces of their
empending doom.

1. The gracious destiny of the exiles. (1.) They should be carefully preserved
(ver. 5). (2.) They were favourably regarded, and would be “acknowledged” by
God (ver. 4). (3.) Their banishment was for their good (ver. 5), (4.) Their
miraculous rescue was pledged them (ver. 6). (5.) Spiritual regeneration should crown
ali other and temporal benefits (ver. 7). Thus ‘‘ God will devise means whereby His
banished ones shall return unto Him.”

2. The hopeless desolation of the disobedient. They had refused to act on God's
counsel (chap. xvi. 8, 9); and now boasted of their prudence in remaining in the
city; probably, too, they talked scornfully of the captives. But these people
should (1.) Be driven asunder over the earth (ver. 9); whereas the Babylonish
captives were altogether in one scene; companions and confederated. (2.) Their
calamities would work ill to them—not regenerating them, as the others, but
hardening and alienating them the more (ver. 9), (3.) They would be subjected to
contempt and ridicule (ver. 9). (4.) No hope or possibility of restoration would
be granted them (ver. 10). Whereas their exiled fellow-countrymen were being
preserved for better times, they were but reserved for greater woes. Neither those
who were carried into Egypt with Jehoahaz (ver. 8), nor those who should flee
thither, would share in the blessings promised to the Chaldean exiles, “‘ According
to their deeds, accordingly He will repay” (Isa. lix, 19). God’s ee

%


CRAP. XXIV.








HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR.





of chastisement or punishment are regulated by what He discerns are our disposk


tions and possibilities,


See Addenda ;:


CHASTENED, YET NOT ABANDONED.


Lange supplies the following homiletic summary of the chapter -—=


Goop anp Bap Fies—Emsiems or Humantry,


Humanity in its twofold aspect : well-pleasing or displeasing to God,
L The prisoners and broken-hearted are, like the good figs, well-pleasing to
God. For (1) They know the Lord, and turn to Him; (2) He is their God, and


they are His people.


IL Those who dwell proudly and securely are, like the bad figs, displeasing to
God. For (1) They live on im foolish blindness; (2) They challenge the judgment


of God.


HOMILIES AND COMMENTS ON VERSES OF CHAPTER XXIV,


Ver. 2. Theme: DELICIOUS AND RE-
PUISIVE FRUIT. “One basket had very
good figs, even like the figs that are first
ripe; and the other basket had very
naughty figs, which could not be eaten,
they were so bad.”

See Natural History note above, on
the varieties of figs and their ripening
periods,

Analogy: Men show varieties in
temperament and character, more re-
markable than the varieties among figs,
and more numerous. And among men
the ripening matures at different periods:
some being early ripe—children and
youth; others reaching maturity only
tn the autumn years of life; others
only in the winter of age. But the
differences among men may be summed
up thus: good and bad. Two classes
only. Gradations there are in each class,
but the absolute qualities are only two,

I Growth under common condi-
tions. These figs were all Palestine
figs.

1. Their original stock was the same.
All were “figs ;” and grew on trees
which were identical in genus. So all
men, whatever their nationality or in-
dividuality or parentage, spring from
the one stock—humanity; and buma-
nity invested with its qualities and
possibilities by God.

2. Their advantages were the same.
The same sos/—Canaan; under same
fructifying influences — religious in-
fluences, Divine teachings, prophetic
counsels and warnings, &e; guarded

462


by the same care—God watched over
both : He the Gardener.

II. Maturing under gracious in-
fluences. Both the “good” and “bad”
reached maturity and ripeness. They
could not resist these influences working
that result.

1. Maturing influences which com-
pelled development. Probably people
dislike their true character being forced
to decision and fruition; they would
rather remain neutral. But the “figs”
could not escape nor resist the action of
earth, air,andsun, This Jewish nation
could not escape nor resist the influences
of prophetic teaching and providential
discipline. On the two sections of the
people there had acted developing in-
fluences; exile had benefited the cap-
tives ; whereas exemption from captivity
had hardened those who remained in
Judah. So on all men providence, reli-
gion, grace, and God’s Spirit are acting;
compelling the development and mani-
festation of their temper and character.

2. Maturing influences which tested
their true nature. The figs ripened into
“good figs” and “naughty figs.” The
maturing processes do not change the
nature of the thing fructified, but only
bring it to complete development, So
Jeremiah’s prophecies and God’s pro-
vidential dealings did not make them
“good” or “naughty,” but tested their
tendency. Thus life’s incidents and
Gospel preaching test ws: prove our
spirit ; try the state and inclinations of
our hearts.





HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





III. Resulting in the completest
contrast. ‘“ Very good figs, even the
figs first ripe ”—a delicious fruit ; “very
naughty figs, which could not be eaten,
80 bad ”—rotten or repulsive fruit.

1. Wholly dissimilar in quality and
character. The exiles became humble,
repentant, reformed. The resident Jews
became insolent, self-secure, defiant. The
former became a delicacy “as the first
ripe figs ;” the latter obnoxious, “ could
not be eaten.” “Good” and “ bad.”
What is our moral quality or spiritual
character? Godly or ungodly ; sacred
or sinful; with Christ or against Him ;
redeemed or reprobate ?

2, God dealt with them according to
their state. Not according to their name;
both fruits were “figs ;” and both sections
of the nation were “ Jews.” But accord-
ing to their nature and quality : “ good”
or “naughty.” The “good ”—God “ will
acknowledge” (ver. 5), and make better
(ver. 7). The “bad ”’—He would reject
(ver. 9) and destroy (ver. 10). The exiles
became ripe for God’s mercy ; the resi-
dents became rotten and repulsive—fit
for nothing but rejection.


Ver. 7. Theme: Know1ne Gop WITH
THE HEART. ‘‘ And J will give them an
heart to know Me.”

- God has often kind and gracious pur-

poses towards men when they least ima-
gine it. ‘Truly God is good to Israel.”
We are very imperfect judges of the cha-
racter and design of Divine dispensations.
‘No man knoweth good or evil from all
that is before him.” The good figs, mean-
ing the best and most spiritual part of
the nation, were sent to Babylon for their
good ; and the bad figs, the most corrupt
among the Jews, were kept in Jerusalem
that they might ripen toruin. Those who
remained in Jerusalem no doubt thought
that they were special objects of Divine
favour, and that they who were sent
first to Babylon were the objects of God’s
displeasure : but the reverse was the fact.
This may teach us not te be rash and
hasty in our conclusions ; not to judge
before the time ; and not to convert cala-
mities into judgments (Luke xiii, 1-5).

L The eminent blessing promised—
s heart to know and love God.


OHaAP. XXIV,





i, It is tnestimably precious—* to
know Him ”—know Him as their God.
All knowledge is valuable ; but Divine
knowledge supremely so, By this is
meant not a speculative knowledge,
which the devils have in greater perfec.
tion than ourselves, and remain devils
still; but a spiritual, experimental, and
soul-satisfying knowledge of God. It
includes a knowledge of Him in His
revealed character, in His condesceniling
grace, in His covenant relations, in His
providential government, and in the spe-
cial communion with the souls of His
redeemed children. ‘The Lord, the Lord
God, merciful and gractous”-—gracious
in making His promises ; faithful in ful-
filling them. God known in the heart
is, in effect, to have the Bible opened, the
Law opened, the Gospel opened, Christ
opened, heaven opened, the covenant of
grace opened, and the blessings and im-
munities of the spiritual life laid opened
and revealed, But without this—with-
out Christ and the knowledge and love
of God shed abroad in the heart, our
religion is a mere name—like a husk
without the kernel, like a casket without
the jewel, like a body without the inform-
ing spirit.

ii, It ts God’s special gift. “I will
give.” He claims it; He only is com-
petent; He delights to give it. This is
not a natural attainment, but a Divine
communication and bestowment. All
knowledge is essentially from God, for
He teacheth the husbandman discretion,
and taught Aholiab and Bezaleel how
to accomplish the carved work for the
tabernacle—but this spiritual knowledge
is pre-eminently from Him.

iii. This is often a gradual attainment:
begun in conversion, carried on in the suc-
cessive developments of the Christian life.
He who impresses Divine truths upon
the mind, at first, in conversion, opens
them more fully afterwards—shows their
importance, harmony, consistency, and
power ; removes doubts and jealousies
and suspicions concerning them, and
renders them vitally influential upon the
soul, “ Then shall we know, tf we follow
on to know, His going forth 1s prepared
as the morning.”

One beam of light breaking in from

463


CHAP. XXIV.





the Spirit of God does more towards
confirming and establishing the mind in
the truths of religion, than a thousand
arguments of the most subtle disputers,
or a thousand sermons of the most elo-
quent preachers. Hence we read of “ the
demonstration of the Spirit.”

iv. [t 1s greatly facilitated by sanctified
afflictions, The good figs must be re-
moved to Babylon, to attain a higher
knowledge of God, and a greater ripeness
of grace. The school of the Cross 1s the
school of light. In captivity it is given
them. Afflictions were the means of it.

IL The means of its attainment.

i. Plead the promise in prayer. Oh,
how much need have we to wait and
pray for its accomplishment in our own
experience! Some are weak in know-
ledge; slow in capacity, like the dis-
ciples, who, though they had so good a
Master, were but dull scholars. “Some
have not the knowledge of God: I speak
this to your shame.” Like the Hebrews,
chap. v.12. ‘“ We must open our mouth
to God in prayer, that He may open our
eyes. ‘ Open Thou mine eyes.” “ Lord,
that I may recewe my sight.” “* Show
us the Father, and tt sufficeth ws.”

iii Honour the methods of Divine
instruction » ordinances, providences.

iii. Walk by the light of the truth you
know. If you have any saving and
spiritual knowledge, be thankful, be
humble. Do not abuse the light, but
improve it. Live under the power of
the truth as it isin Jesus. Resign your-
self to its transforming power. Give
this knowledge room to work, that it
may have free course and be glorified in

ou.
4 iv. Guard against all the obstructions
to this knowledge: against sloth, against
worldliness, against easily-besetting sins,
‘Ye did run well, who hath hindered
you?” Some men know much, but to
little purpose. Their hearts are too
strong for their light. This makes them
more skilful hypocrites. These make
rents and divisions in the Church. They
employ the light they have to do the
devil’s work.


464


HOMILETH) COMMiNTARY: JERAUIAR,


II. The uses to which this know-
ledge is subservient.

i. Zo our happiness; free from doubt.

ii. Zo our holiness: alienate us from
the world and evil.

lii, Zo our usefulness: makes us bold
for God, a centre of light; emboldens
us to act and suffer.—Samuel T'hodey.
a.D. 1856.

See Addenda: CHag™SNED, YET NOX
ABANDONED.


Theme: AN ENLIGHTENED HEABT I8
Gon’s GIFT.

“Since He affirms that He would give
them a heart to understand, we hence
learn—

i, That men are by nature blind; and
also that, when they are blinded by the
devil, they cannot return to the right
way.

iii That men cannot be otherwise
capable of light than by having God to
Wluminate them by His Spirit.

This passage also shows—

iii. That until the sinner bows before
God’s tribunal and owns Him to be the
Judge, he will never be touched with
the feeling of true repentance.”—Calvin,


Commenis—

“He who willingly and readily resigns
himself to the will of God [as the
exiles did] even to the cross, may escape
misfortunes. But he who opposes
himself to the hand of God [as the
residents in Jerusalem], cannot escape.”
—Cramer.

“The captives are dearest to God.
By the first greater affliction He prepares
their souls for repentance and radical
conversion, so that He has in them again
His people and inheritance. Oh the
gracious God, that He allows those who
on account of sin must be so deeply
degraded and rendered slaves, even in
such humliation, to be His people / The
captives are forgiven their opposition to
God. . . . God will show them what
His love can do; they shall return, and
in true nearness to God be His true
Israel.” —Dtedrich.





ete a rain er


Se ee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR. @@aP. XEIV.


as








NOTICEABLE TOPICS IN CHAPTER XXI¥*,


Topic: JEREMIAN’s Vision or Figs. Reflections on some of the characteristics of
the age we live in. (Vers. 1-3.)


It is not difficult to see the force and application of this homely but sententious
little allegory. Jeremiah lived in those days of declension and disaster in which
the threatened invasion of Judea by the king of Babylon actually took place.
Those who were “carried away” comprised the best of the population with regard
to intelligence, religious feeling, and patriotism. Their sorrows and afflictions
humbled them, so that they repented of their idolatries and obtained mercy of the
Lord, They also found favour with their conquerors, and not a few of them rose
to high and influential positions in the court and kingdom of Babylon. The Jews
who remained at home with Zedekiah “and his princes” revolted against God
more and more, Their heart was proud and unhumbled. Year after year they
sunk deeper into misery, profanity, and vice. They not only provoked the Divine
anger increasingly, but awakened the fierce disdain and hatred of their Chaldean
masters, so that at length they were so wasted and ravaged by pestilence, battle,
poverty, and exile as to be utterly consumed from off the land which God had given
to them and to their fathers (see vers, 8-13). These were the evil figs, so evil that
they could not be eaten. The figs ought to have been good, but were not. All the
figs were figs of the same season—say an unusually hot and dry one—suiting the
trees in certain localities pre-eminently well, whereas in other localities the trees
were blighted and withered, and the figs which grew upon them, dry, dusty, taste
less, and worm-eaten.

We are thus led to think of 4 SEASON FOR FRUIT, PECULIARLY INTENSE AND
ARDENT, causing it to come to pass that good fruit turns out remarkably good, and
bad fruit remarkably bad. The point suggested by Jeremiah’s vision is, That there
occur periods or special circumstances in the religious life of nations, which tend to
develop and force the maturation of character with unusual energy and astonishing
rapulity. In such times you do not find people merely good or bad, but the good
are very good, and the evil very evil. Such a crisis it was with the Jews at the
time when Jeremiah prophesied.

We live, at present, in a kind of hothouse atmosphere, which has the effect
of rapidly developing, as well as mightily intensifying, all the moral and religious
elements which go to constitute personal character. Must not the good be very
good, and the evil very evsl ?

Suggest some of the circumstances and influences which invest the times we live
in with this interesting peculiarity, and point out a few of the instances and illus-
trations of the effect thereby produced.

I. Certain peculiarities of our times and position may be noted.

1. This is an age of extraordinary intellectual and social activity. It is an age
of many books and much reading ; of fearless inquiry and frequent discovery, &,
It requires a great effort to keep the mind calm, to allay the frenzy of excited feel-
ing, to check the extravagances of new-found liberty, and hold fast to the sober
requirements of sound principle and acknowledged truth.

2. Another thing to be noticed is the very full and clear religious light which we
enjoy. Compare it with any period since the Apostolic age; the Bible was never
more closely and deeply studied than now ; never were its great cardinal doctrines
so fully established or so generally acknowledged among all sections of the Church ;
the Gospel was never preached to so many nations as now, and at no period were
there in Great Britain so many preachers of evangelical truth as now. It would
seem well-nigh impossible for any man to remain in ignoranee of the things of God,
the claims of Jesus, and the way of salvation.

3. There is also a corresponding increase of activity in the Church. pris no

2@


CHaP, XXIV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





age has ever surpassed our own in visible earnestness, in pecuniary liberality, or
in the excitement and emulation of real Christian work.


What do all these things necessitate on our part individually? Truly potent,


and stimulating agencies are in operation, calculated to arouse us to repentance and
godly solicitude, and then to prompt and goad us on to vigorous Christian life
‘and action. What bold, what tirm, what fruitful Christians we must become if we
enter fully into “the spirit of the times,” considered as engaged on the side of
Christ and His Gospel! But if we refuse to do so, if we set ourselves to resist
these powerful influences, how strenuous must that resistance be! how determined
and resolute and how self-conscious that action of the will which still fights against
God and clings to worldliness and sin! It seems impossible for us to be half-
hearted, undecided, only negatively good or bad. Truly we must take sides openly,
one way or the other. We cannot stand neutral: we must declare ourselves boldly
and actively either for Christ or against Him. Behold the two baskets of figs; the
good figs must be very good, and the evil figs very evil.

IL Facts are in harmony with these reasonings. LIlustrations abound on
every side. In this earnest age you find earnest men both for good and evil.

1. Was ever war conducted on so fearful a scale as we have lately witnessed it?

2. In our day, we have also seen such specimens of commercial roguery and
robbery, conceived on 80 magnificent a scale, and executed under so clever and
admirable a cloak of hypocrisy, as no previous age has ever presented to the world.
Never, assuredly, in any land—Sodom and Gomorrah unexcepted—have baser
things been done than have been discovered in our land, and in our own time.

3. On the other hand, look at the men who stand foremost in the van of religion
and philanthropy. These are God’s heroes ; worthy of comparison with the spiritual
heroes of ancient times, in regard to all that is noble in faith, self-denying in zeal,
munificent in giving, or abundant in labours. These are among the good figs,
which by God’s grace are very good: and to the production of such instances of
exalted and matured piety the present times are not in the least unfavourable.

4, One might speak of books as well as men. We defy any age to show such
noble and masterly treatises as are now written by men of sanctified learning and
genius, either in exposition of the Scriptures, or in vindication of their contents,
Here again the good figs are very good, even as the evil figs are very evil

5. Then there are public institutions and societies to be looked at. There are all
manner of good institutions set on foot, it is true, but so are there, also, all manner
of evil institutions established and seen to be flourishing. The kingdom of Satan
is as active and roused up to new exertions as is the kingdom of Christ. Enormous
sums of money are spent in the cause of religion ; but far, far greater sums are
forthcoming to support folly and wickedness, to build temples of mammon-worship
and of pleasure, and to uphold the reign of sensuality and impiety.

IIL. One or two practical lessons ask our attention. We live in stirring times,
in which the forces, both of good and evil, like the arts of material warfare, are
developing unvrecedented resources, and putting forth unheard-of and most gigantic
energies ; times in which prodigies abound, both of wickedness and of goodness;
times in which the “good” figs are very good, and the “naughty ” figs very bad.
It is no small matter to live in England in this nineteenth century. A hotter,
more crowded, or more excited moral battle-field was never known in the history of
the world. Therefore—

1. Let no man’s trumpet give an uncertain sound; nor let any one think that
he can remain a neutral or uninterested spectator of the conflict. What a heavy
responsibility rests upon those who live in such a century as this! The religious
and moral influences which bear upon ws are mighty beyond all that has gone
before us.

2. This is no time for trifling. Let us seek to be good, and do good and then,
behold what glorious possibilities belong to us of being pre-emtnently holy, blest,

466





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. Guar, xxiv.











and useful! Ought we not to seek this higher growth in grace? Should we not
desire to be, among the lowly, the most humble; among the spotless, the most
pure ; among the active, the most toilsome; among the meek, the most patient ;
and among the kind, the most charitable? Let us be “instant” in prayer; and,
like Abraham, ‘“ strong in faith, giving glory to God.” Surely this is a worthy and
noble ambition ; not merely to be a Christian, but a Christian of the highest order.

3. Hach may ; do great things for God. His talent may be small ; but how much
may he make of it! What means of knowledge, what incentives to zeal, what faci-
lities for usefulness are within every one’s reach! None need be idle or half
employed. Now, if ever, may the “good figs” be “very good,” even as the
“naughty figs” are very “bad.” Now, if ever, does the saying of Zechariah apply
to God’s Church : “ And he that is feeble among them at that day shall be as David;
and the house of David shall be as God, as the angel of the Lord before them.”
Let us never forget that he who would have God on his side, must take care himself
to be always on the side of God.—Rew. 7, @. Horton (Wolverhampton), in “ Chrie-
tian World Pulpit” (summarised).


ADDENDA.TO CHAPTER XXIV.: ILLUSTRATIONS AND SUGGESTIVE
EXTRACTS.


Ver. 1. CHASTENED, BUT NOT ABAN-


DONED.
Three facts should be here noted :—
The exiles were remembered by God,
as this vision shows, Also, they were
graciously esteemed by Him—better figs
than those who remained at home.
Further, God intended good to them.
So that when we seem outcast from
happiness and hope, God may be only
chastening us for our profit, or keeping
us away from besotting “« prosperity ”
(chap. xxii. 21), in order that we may
be prepared for spiritual elevation (chap.
xxiv. 7).
“ After the storm, a calm ;
After the bruise, a balm ;


For the ill brings good in the Lord’s own time,
And the sigh becomes a psalm.


“ After the drought, the dew ;
After the cloud, the blue;
For the sky will smile in the sun’s good time,
And the earth grow glad and new.”
—HMrs.


Trapp remarks that “Jeconiah was
a wicked prince, and therefore written
childless, Howbeit, because by the ad-
vice of the prophet Jeremiah he sub-
mitted to Nebuchadnezzar, he and his
company are here comforted, and pro-
nounced more happy, however it might
seem otherwise, than those that con-
tinued still in the land ; and this, say the
Hebrews (Rabar, Hugo, Lyra), was not
obscurely set forth aiso by those two


baskets of figs, whereof that which waa
worst showed best, and the other showed
worst till they came to be tasted.”

“ Winter brings blessings, so the ehill
Of dark adversity ;—from its cold grasp
The soul revives reanimate,—more strong,
And better armed.”—F, A. Mackay.

Winter will kill vermin which the
summer of success and comfort is apt to
produce and nourish.

“ Adversity has the effect of eliciting
talents which, in prosperous circum-
stances, would have lain dormant.”—
Horace.

“ All-pitying Heaven,
Severe in mercy, chastening in its love,
Oft-times in dark and awful visitation
Doth interpose, and leads the wanderer baek
To the straight path, to be for ever after
A firm, undaunted, onward-bearing traveller,
Strong i in humility, who swerves ne more,”

—Joanna Baillie.

(Comp. Addenda to chap. xxii., Pros
PERITY.)

“T have read of a fountain that at
noonday is cold, and at midnight it

ws warm. So many a precious soul
is cold Godward and Heavenward is
prosperity, and grows warm in the mid-
night of adversity.” Brooks.

Ver. 7, ‘THY SHALL BE My PEOPLE.”

“This falling out of lovers shall but
be a renewing of love betwixt us. God
must sometimes whip His people to
duty, and gather them from evil, as well
as entice them.”—Trapp.


OWAP, XX¥. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMTAR,





CHAPTER XXV.


Carrioa, amp Exxarttoan Norses.—l. Chronology of the Chapter: “ Fourth year @
Fehoiakim” (ver. 1). It is stated the third year in Dan, i, 1; but Hales (*‘ Sacred Chron.”
shows that Jehoiakim was made king by Pharaoh Necho of Egypt in July B.o, 607 ; whereas
Nebuchadnezzar mounted the throne January 21, Bo. 604: and thus Nebuchadnezzar’s jiret
year included parts of both the thérd and fourth of Jehoiakim. In the Chaldean cylinders
[placing all chronology back by twenty-two years] these dates are mc. 590 for Jehoiakim’s
accession, and Bo. 586 fur Nebuchadnezzar’s. Cf, notes in loc. to chapters vii. and x. Thia
shapter formed part of Jehoiakim’s roll (cf. chap. xxxvi. 29).

2. Contemporary Scriptures.—Dan. i.; Jer. xxxvi.; 2 Kings xxiv. 1, 2; 2 Chron, xxxvi.


3. National Affairs.—C/, notes tn loc. to chapters vii. and x. This date formed a momentous
crisis in the history of the kingdom of Judah. Nebuchadnezgar, having defeated Pharaoh
Necho at Charchemish, came, in pursuit of the Egyptian fugitives, to Judah ; took Jerusalem,
made Jehoiakim vassal-king, and carried the best life of the nation away into Babylon—thua
beginning the eer years’ Babylonian captivity, which Jeremiah in verse 11 foretella. For
twenty-three years Jeremiah had now been God’s prophet in Judah, calling his nation to
repentance and reformation. Jeremiah was, during this ‘“‘fourth year of Jehoiakim,” amid
his most energetic labours, persuading Jehoiakim from reliance upon Egypt, and counselling,
both as a matter of policy and of religious duty, allegiance with Babylon. This ineensed the
king against Jeremiah, and led him angrily to burn the roll.

4. Contemporaneous History.—Nabopolassar, king of Babylon, being old and decrepit,
entrusted to hia son, Nebuchadnezzar, the war against Pharaoh Necho, who had penetrated te
the very Hupbrates in lust of empire. He won supremacy over his Egyptian rival by a vies
torious and decisive war at Charchemish. Cf. notes in loc., chapters vii. and x. ‘‘ The mingled
people: Tonian and Carian settlers in Egypt, to whom Psammetichus had given territory.

5. Geographical References.—Ver. 20. ‘‘Us:” lying between Egypt and the states of the
Mediterranean, north of Arabia-Petrea, between the sea and Idumea, (Wot the Uz of Jobi. 1.)
In this geographical survey, after reference to Pharaoh of Egypt, first we have mentioned ‘* the
races of Arabia and Philistia that bordered on Egypt to the east and west (ver. 20); then the
Edomites, Moabites, and Ammonites to the east (ver. 21) ; the Phosnicians, with their colonies,
to the west (ver. 22); next the Arabian tribes of the desert, extending eastward from Palestine
to the Euphrates (vera. 23, 24); then the Elamites and Medes in the distant east (ver. 25);
the near and distant kings of the North; and last of all the king of Babylon (ver. 26).”—Kiel,
Ver. 20. ‘‘ Azaah:” t.e., Gaza. ‘“‘ The remnant of Ashdod:” this is one of those pregnant
sentences which none but a contemporary writer could have used. Psammetichus, after a siege
of twenty-nine years, had captured and destroyed Ashdod, excepting only a feeble remnant
(Herod. ii. 157).—Payne Smith. [Gath is not mentioned, for it was destroyed in the same war.]
Ver. 22. ‘‘ The isles:”’ properly the coastland (sing.), or the maritime regions of the Mediter-
ranean, where the Phosnicians had planted colonies. Ver. 23. ‘‘ Dedan:” North Arabia (Gen.
xxy. 3,4). ‘‘Tema and Bus:” tribes north of Arabia (Job xxxii, 2). ‘‘ AW that are im the
utmost corners :” see note on chapter ix. 26. The tribe of Kedar. Ver. 24. ‘‘ Mingled people
that dwell in the desert:” tribes of Cushite origin, such as Kenites. By intermarriage these
tribes had become of mixed blood. Ver, 25. ‘‘Zimri:” unmentioned elsewhere. Zimran was
the eldest son of Abraham by Keturah (Gen. xxv. 2). This was probably a district east of
the Arabian desert towards Persia. Ptolemy mentions a Zabra between Mecea and Medina.
“Elam :”? west of Persia, but used in Scripture for Persia generally. Ver. 26. ‘‘Sheshach”
(cf. chap. li. 41), Babylon. See Let. Crit. on word below.

6. Personal Allusions.—Ver. 1. ‘‘ Jehoiakim and Josiah :” see notes on chapter i. ‘‘ Nebu-
chadrezzar :”’ notes on chapter xxi. 2. Ver. 8. ‘‘ Amon king of Judah:” son of Manasseh,
fifteenth king of Judah, and father of Josiah. For his character see Zeph. i. 4; iii. 3, 4, 11.

7. Natural History.—Ver. 34. ‘‘ Principal of the jlock”’ (also in ver. 35): means the best
and fattest of the sheep. Ver. 88, ‘‘ Forsaken his covert as the lion:”’ t.¢., ventures forth in
quest of prey.

8. Manners and Customs.—Ver. 10. ‘‘ Voice of mirth, and of the bride :” of. notes én loc. on
chapter vii. 34, xvi. 9. ‘‘ Sound of the millstones, and the light of the candle: ” t.e., the day’s indus-
tries, and the evening social fellowships after the day’s toils are over, See Addenda on ver. 10,
Ver. 15. ‘‘ Take the wine-cup:” the metaphor of an intoxicating cup is commonly used in
Scripture to denote affliction or misery. Cf. Isa. li, 17-22; Jer. xlix. 12; li. 7; Lam. iv. 21,
&c. Ver. 30. ‘‘ Give a shout, as they that tread the grapes :” as the vintagers trampled the grapes
they raised a loud song or cry. hake

9. Literary Criticisms.—General remark : the text of this chapter is disfigured by numerous
interpolations, some of which are absent from the Septuagint. Thus, from ver. 9 disappear
the words, ‘‘ saith the Lord, and Nebuchadreszar the king of Babylon, My servant.” In ver. 11,
instead of “‘ shall serve the king of Babylon,” the Septuagint reada, “‘ serve among the nations.”


468


ee ee


erg ea PSN es


a


_


ee ee ee ee ee eee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; JEREMIAH. CHAP KKV.
i


From ver. 12 are omitted the worda, ‘the king of Bubylon” and “and the land of the ORal-
deans.” From ver. 13 are omitted the clogs ‘which Jeremiah hath prophesied againet wil the
mations.” In ver. 26, ‘‘and the king of Sheshach shall drink after them” are left out ta the
Septuagint. All these interpolations were doubtless inserted by a copyist from the later
prophecies of Jeremiah, chapters l. and li,

Ver. 26. ‘‘ Sheshach:” this is a cypher form of the word Babylon, and is done thus :—The
alphabet letters are reversed in order, and instead of the proper letter of the word being used,
its number from the beginning of the alphabet is counted, and then the same number-letter
reckoned from the end of the alphabet is inserted in its place. Thus, 3 is the second letter
from the beginning; so & is the second letter from the end of the alphabet ; and $ is the
twelfth from the beginning, while 5 ia the twe/fth from the end. Babylon is.in Hebrew, BaBeL ;
but, instead, the letters are siterodiate SHrSHaCH. This is the Cabalisticsystem. Michaelis,
however, explains the term as meaning ‘‘ brazen-gated” (ef. Isa. xlv. 2); others suggest *‘ house
of o prince ;” Glassius argues that it comes from the Babylonian goddess Sach, by reduplication
of the first letter. From this goddess Misael’s name waa altered to Me-shach. Further, the term
Shace was applied to a Babylonish festival alluded to in chap. li. 39, 57; Isa. xxi. 5. It was
during this feast that Cyrus took Babylon (Herod. i.). Thus Jeremiah mystically deneted the
time of its capture by thia term.

Ver. 30. ‘‘Mightily roar upon his habitation.” FQ means both habitation and pastures ;


and the text better reads, ‘roar mightily over his pasturage.”
Ver. 87. “‘ Peaceable habitations.” Here, as in ver. 30, habitation should be pasture,





HOMILETIC SURVEY OF CHAPTER XXYV.
THE MANIFOLD JUDGMENTS oF Gop.


The chapter distributes itself into sections thus :—Judah’s captivity =
3-11); Babylon’s fall (vers. 12-14); The wine-cup of fury for the nations (vers,
15-29) ; Tribulations throughout the world (vers. 30-38).

Glancing over the whole chapter, we are impressed with the theme of the Divine
dispensations of judgment in relation to individuals, nations, and the whole world,
Lange suggests the following: We can speak of —

I. The judicial acts of God according to the conditions of their manifesta-
tions. They are—

l. Required by the sins of men en 5-6).

2. Deferred by the love of God (vers. 5-6).

3. Driven to accomplishment by the impenitence of mankind (ver. 7, seq.).

IL The judicial acts of God according to the stages of their manifestation.

1. This applies to current preliminary judgments, (1.) In the life of individuals,
(2.) In the life of nations. God judges continually here below, both single individuals
and entire nations (vers, 9-29).

2. It applies to the final judgment. (1.) In so far as it has already begun (vers,
9-11, 29; 1 Pet. iv. 17; Matt. xxiv.). The theocracy in its outer relations is
already judged ; in this sense the universal “judgment has begun at the house of
God.” (2.) In so far as it is stsld future. Single empires have already been
destroyed, as well as single men ; but the judgment of the world as a whole ia still
impending (vers. 30, seq.).

Til. The judicial acts of God differently represented in the Old and New
Testaments.

1. In the Old Testament they are—(1.) Represented in figures (vers. 30, 31, seg.
38). (2.) Limited to the earth (vers. 30, 33). : ;

In the New Testament they are represented—(1.) In their full super-terrestrial
reality. (2.) As extended over heaven and earth. (Comp., in contrast to this
passage, Matt. xxv.; 1 Cor. xv.; 1 Thess. iv. ; 2 Pet. iii.).

IV. The judicial acts of God differently felt according to the inward conditions
of men.

1. As destruction on the part of the godless (ver. 7, seq.)


2. As deliverance on the part of the pious (vers. 11, 12). ia


CHAP. XXV. HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR.











TOPIOAL SURVEY OF CHAPTER XXV. HOMILETICALLY ARRANGED,
Topic: PROPHETS AND THEIR Misston, (Vers, 1-7, 13, 15, 30.)


“The word of the Lord hath come unto me, and I have spoken unto you, rising early
and speaking ; but ye have not hearkened. And the Lord hath sent unto you
all H1s servants the prophets, rising early and sending them” (vers. 3, 4).


This is the first place in the book where Jeremiah speaks of himself as “ the
prophet” (ver. 2). He here records the term of his labours (ver. 3), and alludes
to the changes which had come upon his nation curing his mission among them.

IL A survey of prophetic work.

1. His vast and manifold audience (ver. 2). 2, The lengthened period of his
ministry (ver. 3). Nineteen years under Josiah, three months under Jehoahaz, four
years under Jehoiakim,

IL A testimony to prophetic fervour.

1. His own persevering activity (ver. 2: ‘‘For three and twenty years, rising
early and speaking”). 2. A succession of Divine messengers (ver. 3), so that the
messages and expostulations of prophets were never silenced.

I. A statement of prophetic authority.

1. He prophesied only because commissioned by God. “The word of the Lord
came,” &c. (ver. 3). Comp. also verses 15 and 30. 2. The prophets were divinely
constrained to their work and witness (ver. 4).

IV. A summary of prophetic teaching.

1. A call to reformation (ver. 5). 2. A promise of a goodly heritage (ver.
5). 3. A warning against impiety (ver. 6). 4. An exhibition of the consequences
of sin: “do you hurt” (ver. 6); “ provoke Me to anger” (ver. 7). 5. Predictions
of judgment (vers. 15, 30).

V. An indication of the variety characterising prophetic labours.

1. Preaching (vers, 1-7), 2. Writing (ver. 13). 3. Visiting (ver. 15). 4 De
nouncing (ver. 30).

VL A protest against prophetic rejection.

1. The people had persistently refused to hear prophetic messages (vers. 8, 4, 8),
2. They had shown no inclination towards the messages God sent (ver. 4). Comp
Addenda on ver. 4: “ Jehovah hath sent to you all the prophets.”

His had not been an easy ministry ; comp, xv. 15-21; xx. 14-18. But he was
now firmly established as a prophet, and had become “unto the people a fenced
brazen wall” (comp. i 18; vi. 27; xv. 20). But, alas ! how little had his nation
benefited! Repudiating such a messenger of God, and for so long, their sin waa
the greater, and their doom righteously severe.


Topic; NEBUCHADREZZAR, Gop’s SzRvanr. (Ver. 9.)


The bestowment of this title by Jehovah is both rare and significant. It is given
in the Old Testament Scriptures emphatically to three persons: first to Moses
(Deut. xxxiv. 5 ; Josh. i. 2), as the Leader and Lawgiver of his people ; to Nebuchad-
rezzar (Jer. xxv. 9; xxvii. 6; xliii. 10), as the Punisher, yet Preserver, of Judah;
and to Mrsstau (Isa. lii. 13; liii. 11), as the Redeemer and King of Israel. Note:
Cyrus is called by a similar name (Isa, xliv. 28 and xlv. 1), as the Liberator and
Restorer of the exiled people. See Addenda, ver. 9: “ Nebuchadrezear, My servant,”

1. A discredited and astonishing appointment. Facts seemed to refute the
idea that Nebuchadnezzar was to be commissioned and empowered to conquer the
nations and possess the heritage of Israel. Egypt had been the Great Power.
Pharaoh Necho it was who had slain Josiah, and had established his authority
between Egypt and the Euphrates (2 Kings xxiv. 7). And now Nineveh was

470


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAQZ. Guar, xxv.








eaptured by him, the Assyrian empire had fallen, and Nabopolassar, king of Babylon,
was infirm and old. Jehoiakim, their own king, was a vassal of Pharaoh, All
these facts seemed to declare that Egypt under Pharaoh, and not Babylon under
Nebuchadnezzar, was destined to be the supreme arbiter and ruler of nationa

But—l. God purposed otherwise; and “none can stay His hand, or say unto
Him, What doest thou }”

2. God was preparing another, who was merely a young military leader, and was
hitherto unknown—Nebuchadnezzar, “Things despised God hath chosen; and
things which are not, to bring to nought things which are, that no flesh should glory
in His presence.” That very year in which Nabopolassar died, Nebuchadnezzar, his
son, succeeded to the throne, and began a series of brilliant victories which raised
him to the highest position among the potentates of the earth,

IZ An unchallengeable temporary supremacy. To this person, whom God
would “send for and take,” should be given victory over Egyptian arms (at Char-
chemish), dominion over the mighty realm of Egypt, over the destinies of God’s own
people, and over all neighbouring nations, Verse 9 declares that (1) God will
gather together all the northern nations ; (2) place them under Nebuchadnezzar as
sovereign and general ; (3) bring them against Judah.

The period of this ascendancy is definitely limited; but it is equally definitely
determined ; nothing can prolong, nor can shorten it,

1. God's omnipotence decides national and individual ascendancy. “He raiseth
up one, and putteth down another.” Powerful nations are weak indeed in His all-
powerful hands ; while weakest forces can be made “ mighty through God.”

2. God's omnipotence ts thus to be honoured in human affairs, Because Nebuchad-
nezzar failed to revere God’s power as higher than his own, and indeed the source
of his own, therefore he was degraded. (See Dan, iv. 22, 25, 29-37; also Dan. v.
18-23.)

II. A minister of God’s righteous judgments (vers. 9, 11),

1. Specially employed by Jehovah for punishing wrong. Guilt in Judah and the
nations had to be scourged, and God used him for this,

2. Unconsciously employed by Jehovah for ends he did not appreciate, Himself
no worshipper of Jehovah, no willing “servant” of the Divine Master, he yet did
God’s behest effectually. “He maketh the wrath of man to praise Him ;” “ Men
are Thy hand.”

IV. A guardian of the covenant nation.

1. Judah was to be chastised for its idolatry, yet preserved from destruction.
Captivity effected both ends.

2. Judah was to fulfil Divine prophectes and vindicate God's faithfulness to Hts
covenants before the world. Prophecy had for ages threatened captivity as the
penalty of idolatry ; therefore it came. Yet prophecy had as emphatically guar-
anteed that God’s people should be restored to and repossess their land ; therefore
their exile was made safe to them, and really preserved them intact as a nation,
while it also disciplined their heart and prepared them for return to Canaan.

God has His own methods of effecting His plana ; yet His plans cannot fail. By
ways and agencies we should not select He works our “ good ” (chap, xxiv. 6). Over
all the powers and projects of man He sways, and does according to His will
among the inhabitants of the earth.

(a.) Itis well to be reconciled to so great a God. (b.) We are safe tn the covenant
care of 80 faithful a God, (c.) It is hopeless to resist the purposes of s0 omnipotent a
God,


Topic: Suvemty Years’ Capriviry. (Vers. 11, 12.)


Rationalistic criticism is, of course, offended by this specification beforehand of
the term of Babylon’s ascendancy and of the Jewish captivity. The period “ seventy
years” must have been interpolated after the captivity was over and the time

471


GBAP. EXV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





known! says Hitzig. “Such coincidence of history with prophecy would be a
surprising accident,” says Httzig again, Graf thinks that the prediction of
Rabylon’s destruction, at the very time when it is described as a power divinely
commissioned to execute judgment, is somewhat wnsuitable and improbable.

To this the reply may be: 1. As the Babylonish ascendancy began with the
year of this prophecy, the fourth of Jehoiakim’s reign, this was a sustable time for
predicting the term of tts continuance. 2. As God’s judgments on the nations were
now being passed before the prophet’s vision, beginning with Jerusalem and com-
prehending all the earth, Babylon could not reasonably be omitted. 3. Since the
future of Judah in captivity was so bound up with the future of Babylon, the pre
diction of the term of exile was naturally accompanted with this prediction of Baby-
lon’s fall, 4. Inasmuch also as the Jewish captivity now began, it was needful—in
order to save the exiles from despair, to encourage their submission to expatriation,
to sustain their faith in God, and thus to keep alive a religious life in their souls—
to show beforehand the limit of the term of discipline.

I. The historic reckoning of this period. These “seventy years” began with
“the fourth year of Jehoiakim and the first of Nebuchadrezgar” (ver. 1), when he
first captured Jerusalem, t.¢., BC. 606. They end with the capture of Babylon
in the first year of Cyrus, and the restoration of the Jews, B.o, 536 (Ezra i. 1).
About the filling up of those years in Babylonish history there seems some slight
difficulty. Nebuchadnezzar reigned forty-four years ; his son Evil-Merodach, two
years ; Neriglissar, who murdered Evil-Merodach (the Nergal-Sharezer mentioned in
chapter xxxix. 3-13), Nebuchadnezzar’s son-in-law, four years; his infant son,
Laborosoarchad, nine months, he being then murdered ; Nabonedus, seventeen
years. To these sixty-seven years and nine months may, however, be added the
aecessary interval until the Jews were really in repossession of their country,
which may fully account for the literal ‘seventy years,”

IL The theocratic purpose of this captivity.

1. Zhe assignment of His people to captivity was intended by God—(a) to punish
their apostasy from Him ; (b) to restore their fidelity to Him , (c) to enlighten them
concerning the true and only God, in distinction from the revolting forms of idolatry
and the consequent degradations they would witness in Babylon (chap. xxiv. 5-7).

2. The limitation of the term of His people’s captivity was intended by God—(a)
to declare that the committal of Judah to Nebuchadnezzar was not an abdication of
His claim to them and control over their destiny ; (6) to vindicate His power over
the mighty monarchy of Nebuchadnezzar, His ‘‘ servant,” whom He had exalted to
carry out the Divine plans ; (c) to foster the hope of restoration i the hearts of
His people, and thus dispose them to accept the chastisement and renew their faith
tn Jehovah. They would only “hang their harps on the willows,” not cast them
away in despair.

III. The supernatural] termination of Babylon’s power.

1. The empire rose and ended within the predetermined period cof “seventy
years.” A short-lived wonder; and apparently called tnto eaxrstence only for the
temporary expatriation, and therefore preservation, of Judah. Within the term of
Judah’s exile, Babylon rose and fell, Babylonia and the captivity were synchro-
nous: commenced simultaneously, closed simultaneously, This suggests the vast
smportance Judah assumed in Glod’s esteem. For her He created Babylon! Nebuchad-
nezzar was “ His servant ” to punish and preserve her.

2. The precision with which God limited Babylon’s ascendancy sublimely vindi-
sates God’s supremacy as the Governor of nations. “The mighty monarchy of Chaldea
was under the control of the God of Israel, and He who made it flow like a stormy
ocean, and overwhelm the nations with its flood, could say to its proud waves,
Hitherto shalt thou go, and no farther.”— Wordsworth.

3. The predicted overthrow of Babylon was a judgment by God upon the lust
of empire. Although the Chaldeans were a Divine instrument for punishing the


AT.








wwreaty alt.


Aa 5 a alle waa


ee net


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAN. OMAR x20.





Jews, they knew it not, but merely gratified their cruel passions and impious greed
of power, thereby contracting guilt which in its turn called for punishment (ver,
12). Under Cyrus’ command the allied Medes and Persians, after a long and diffi-
eult siege, captured Babylon, 8.0. 538 ; and Darius the Mede assumed the throne.
“The empire of Babylon,” says Dr. Payne Smith, ‘‘ was practically the work of one
man. After Nebuchadnezzar’s death it continued for a few years, during which its
history is a series of murders and usurpations, and then it fell for ever, and its
ruins form its only lasting memorial. Contrast with this the promise to Judah in
chap. iv. 27.”


Topie: Propaxcy Vinproarep in Basyton’s Fatt, “ And I will bring upon that
land all My words which I have pronounced against it” (ver. 13).


The fall of Babylon proves the truth of prophecy, and prophecy proved attests the
Divine inspiration of prophets, Isaiah and Jeremiah predicted events which be-
fell mighty empires ; they must, therefore, have been moved by the Omniscient
Spirit. Man himself “ knoweth not what a day may bring forth ;” how shall he
foresee the fate of cities and destiny of nations, and at a time when nothing could
indicate such events? Consider—

I God minutely declared His prophetic purpose against Babylon. ‘My
words which I have pronounced against it.”

1. He pronounced the destruction of Babylon by the Medes and Perstans
(Isa, xxi. 2; Jer. li 11). History fulfilled this; for under the command of
Cyrus, who was announced a hundred years before he was born, Babylon was
besieged by the united forces of the Medes and Persians.

2. God declared that the river of Babylon should be dried up (Isa xliv. 27;
Jer. i. 38). This river was two furlongs broad, and more than twelve feet deep ;
and was thought to be a surer fortification than the city’s massive walls. Prophecy
was strikingly fulfilled ; for Cyrus turned the course of the Euphrates and drained
the channel, so that his soldiers crossed and entered the city.

3. Further, Jehovah proclaimed that Babylon should become a desolation. So
complete should this desolation be that the Arabian would not be able even to
pitch his tent on the site (Isa. xiii. 20). All this came to pass. One part of the
country was overflowed by the river which Cyrus diverted, making the land a
boggy marsh, which became so overrun with serpents and venomous creatures that
not even the wild Arab could dwell near it.

Comparing history with prophecy, in every minute particular God’s “ words
which He pronounced against ” Babylon are seen to be startlingly verified.

IL When God denounces a city or nation, His decision is not arbitrary, but
is justified by some foreseen fact. He foresees Babylon’s idolatry, iniquity, and
impious pride, and therefore determined its destruction. Hence this overthrow
was not the result of caprice or arbitrariness on God’s part; but sin was the
eause of Babylon’s fall. Sin saps the foundation of cities and empires.

IIL When, because of iniquity, God determines the destruction of a city or
empire, nothing can save it. If ever a city appeared impregnable, it was Babylon.
Its walls, says one writer, “‘ were above 300 feet high, 87 feet broad, and 48 miles
in compass.” In addition, the river Euphrates appeared an insuperable barrier to
an enemy entering the city. Yet, notwithstanding its mighty wall with its hundred
gates of solid brass, notwithstanding its wide and deep river, Babylon was taken,
according to the word of the Lord.

Men talk of impregnability—the impregnability of walls, forts, and bulwark.
But only what God defends is impregnable, and nothing can stand when God
determines its fall. Babylon, Nineveh, Tyre and Sidon, all illustrate this—the
power of God to fulfil His counsel. ‘Hath He said, and shall He not do


ol
ras 473


CMAP. XXV, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; JEREMIAQ.





IV. The fidelity of God, in the execution of His threatened judgments, is
presumptive proof that He will fulfil all His gracious promises. Hath
He more delight in punishing the wicked than in blessing the righteous? Nay ;
He is “slow to anger,” but He is also “not slack concerning His promises.”
Sure in the fulfilment of His threatenings, certainly “all His promises are Yea
and Amen.”

V. Divine threatenings have tn some cases been recalled, but there are no
instances where Divine promises have not been fulfilled. The sins which
incurred the threatenings have been repented of, as with Nineveh, and so the
stroke has been turned aside. But all God’s promises spring from His grace
and love. And, while man’s sin may cease, and so the judgment be escaped,
God’s “‘ love never faileth,” therefore the promises can never be recalled. Promises
may be delayed, but Divine love and faithfulness are guarantees that what He has
prom He will assuredly perform.—Arranged from Rev. D. Pledge’s “Walks with

eremiah.”


Topic: Tas Wing-cup oF Wratn. (Vers. 15-29.)


A bold image, and not infrequently used by the sacred writers (comp. Pa Ixxv. 8,
Isa. li. 22, Lam. iv. 21, Rev. xvi. 19, &c.). Dr. Adam Clarke points out that Plato
has a similar idea: ‘ Suppose,” says Plato, ‘God had given to men a medicating
potion inducing fear, so that the more any one should drink of it, so much the
more miserable he should find himself at every draught, and become fearful of
everything both present and future; and, at last, though the most courageous of
men, should become totally possessed by fear” (De Leg. i., near the end). Homer
also (Iliad xxiv. 527-533) places two vessels at the disposal of Jupiter, one of
good, the other of evil, in which potions are ready for men to drink :—


“«Two urns by Jove’s high throne have ever stood ;
The source of evil ene, and one of good ;
From thence the cup of mortal man he fille,
Blessings to these, to those distributes ills 3
To most he mingles both ; the wretch decreed
To taste the bad unmixed, is cursed indeed ;
Pursued by wrongs, by meagre famine driven,
He wanders outcast both of earth and heaven.”— Pope,


Henry, in general, suggests the following :—“ The cup in the vision is to be
sword in the accomplishment of it (ver. 16). (1.) The just anger of God sends His
judgment (ver. 15 ; comp. Job xxi. 20, Rev. xiv. 10). The wrath of God in this
world is but a “cup,” contrasted with the full streams of it hereafter. (2.) By
human hands the judgment was to be executed. Jeremiah enforces the cup (ver.
17) ; Nebuchadnezzar wields the sword. (3.) On whom the judgment should fall :
all the nations within the verge of Israel’s acquaintance. (4.) The certainty and
srresistibleness of the coming judgment (vers. 28, 29). They will not only be loath
to take the cup, but will refuse to believe the judgment will ever come ; but God
will see to it that they drink it.” Suggestions :—

(i) There is a God who judges in the earth, to whom all nations are accountable,
and by whose judgments they must abide,

(ii.) God can easily bring to ruin the greatest nations—the most numerous,
powerful, and secure.

(iii.) Those who have maltreated God’s people will be certainly reckoned with
for their deeds. The year of recompense will come on all who have vexed and
afflicted Israel.

(iv.) The predictions of God’s prophets will in due time assuredly be accomplished.
Isaiah had long before this prophesied of these nations (chap. xiii, &c.), and now
at length these predictions will have complete fulfilling.

474


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAB. CHAP, XX¥.











(¥.) Those who are ambitious of power and dominion commonly become the plagues
of their generation. Nebuchadnezzar was so proud of his might that he became
lost to the sense of right,

(v1.) The greatest pomp and power of this world are of very uncertain continuance.
Before Nebuchaduezzar’s greater force kings themselves must yield and heeome
captives, (See Addenda on verse 15: Tue WiNnE-cuP oF Fury.)


Topic: “SuEsHacn:” Banyton REVERSED; BaByLon’s Fare, (Ver. 26.)


L The term “Sheshach” was a disguised name for magnificent Babylon

1. There was a prudential reason at this crisis for concealment of the reference of
this prediction. This prophecy of Babylon’s overthrow was one sure to become
known to the Chaldeans, and then might have incensed them against the captives,
The mention of “the king of Babylon” and “the land of the Chaldeans” in verse
12, was doubtless a later insertion into the text, and has no place in the Septuagint
(See Lit Crit., supra.) But this hidden reference would not be understood by the
captors, though well known in its reference by the captives, Cinsequently there
was no severity shown in Chaldea, either to Jeremiah (chap. xxxix. 11), nor those
of his nation who favoured surrender to Chaldea rather than to Egypt.

2. There was much ingenuity shown tn the literary method of concealment. (See
Itt. Crit., supra, on the tnverted letters which are here used for Babel.) Also (and
we may accept the further ides), since Shace waa the name of the festival which
would be held at the very hour of Babylon's overthrow, the name would indicate
to the exiles not only the etty’s fall, but the actual season of the year when the
event should tranapire. Yet the Chaldeans themselves would decipher no meaning
in this mysterious term. Nevertheless this dexterous use of the peculiarly Chaldean
syllable “‘ Shach” (as in Me-shach), would suffice to connect the name with the city
in the hour of its fall, when the prediction was pointed out by the Hebrews to their
Babylonish captors.

Il. The term “Sheshach” became a significant watchword among the Jewish
exiles,

1. [ts meaning was to them a gracious prophecy. Among the exiles it became a
pledge of deliverance. It counselled patience, animated hope, and sustained faith.
It led them to refuse to “sing the Lord’s songs in a strange land,” yet to preserve
their silenced and suspended harps for future use, It disarmed all inducements
to fall into Chaldean idolatry, for it reminded them that as their Jerusalem had
fallen because of her apostasy to idols, so would Babylon: for Jehovah was a
jealous God, and His glory He would not give to others.

2. Its suggestiveness informed them of the sssues of the final siege. When the
Medes and Persians arrived at the walls of Babylon and laid siege, the Chaldeans
were proudly scornful of their demands to surrender, and trusted to the strength
of their walls, the splendour of their fortifications, the resources of their city, and
contemned the daring foe! But Judah “knew the time of her visitation,” and
“‘ Sheshach” became the watchword which sufficed to interpret the meaning of the
siege and forecast the issues thereof. When Cyrus was at the gates of Babylon,
the festival Shace was being held, and both king and people had abandoned them-
selves to idolatrous carousala While they besotted themselves, the exiles, on the
other hand, would eagerly scan “the signs of the times,” praying to the God of
Israel for the fulfilment of their ardent hopes, that the “ set time to favour Zion
might come,” and “ Sheshach” would be whispered among them as indicating their
confidence as to the nearness of the end. (See Addenda on verse 26: Tox Kina
oF SHESHACH SHALL DRINK.)

Ill. The term “Sheshach,” then, held a definite prediction of the city’s fall.

1. In the inversion of the letters (“ Sheshach” for “ Babel”) there was segnified
the inverted fortunes of the city. It would come to pass that the est: Babel


O@AP, XxV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





would be reversed ; all its glory should be changed, and its lofty name be covered
with discredit.

2. This final overthrow of the conqueror and captor was required in order to
wndicate God's righteousness, ‘If Judah was to be punished, and Chaldea be
invested with universal empire, was it,” asks Dr. Payne Smith, “ because the
Chaldeans were more approved by God in religion and morals than the Jews? No.
They were simply God’s scourge, made fit to be so by the vigour of one man;
and at his death punishment will befall them also for their own sins ; and in little
more than twenty years after Nebuchadnezzar’s death, their empire will cease for
ever, They existed only to do the base office of an executioner, and, that done, they
will be laid aside,”


Topic: Gov’s ConTROVERSY WitH Humanity. ‘A noise shall come even to the
ends of the earth, for the Lord hath a controversy with the nations, He will
plead with all flesh; He will give them that are wicked to the sword, saith the
Lord” (ver. 31).


Universal disturbance is predicted. It would come in this instance through the
military aggressions and devastations of Nebuchadnezzar, who would march over
the nations in irresistible conquests. But behind Nebuchadnezzar’s armies Jehovah
would stand, vindicating the laws which those nations had violated, and punishing
the wicked with the sword, (See Addenda on verses 28 and 29.)

(i.) In world-wide commotions we must recognise the direct action of the Lord God.
‘When judgments are abroad” there is evidence that God has arisen to “shake
terribly the earth ” (Isa. ii. 19). j

(a.) These universal commotions occur not by haphazard. (b.) Natural agencies
[as now Nebuchadnezzar’s armies] are supernatural instrumentalities. (c.) There is
@ purpose and a providence in such vast and solemn commotions. (d.) Reverently
yield to these “ pleadings” of God whenever they occur.

(iL) Great crises occur when God places humantty tn arraignment. He may send
out war over the earth, or pestilence, or fruitless seasons, or paralysis of industries;
but in human history there do periodically oceur such grave epochs when God mani-
festly enters into controversy with His creatures,

(a.) Wrong, which is in the world, seems at definite periods to culminate, Ini-
quity gets into the ascendant everywhere, and requires a mighty shaking and shat-
tering to be cast down again into shame and defeat. (b.) God calls humanity to
answer for tts wrongdoing. He has His own manifold ways of doing this—war,
disaster, &c. (c.) Judgments sweep over the earth in stern protestations. Calami-
ties are God’s proclamations of displeasure.

A controversy implies that wrong exists which God will have set right.

L There is just cause why God should come into controversy with humanity.

1. He has given us natural revelation, yet we have misused it (Rom. i 17-20).

2. He has made Himself and His will known in human history, yet we have
ignored Him (Prov. i. 24, 25).

3. He has sent His messengers to the world, yet we have repudiated them (comp,
ver. 4 with Matt. xxi. 35, &c.; xxiii. 34, to the end).

4. He sought to reconcile humanity to Himself, yet we have refused His grace
(comp. 2 Cor. v. 19 with Heb, il. 3, x. 28).

I. Human history has been interrupted by epochs in which God has pleaded
with all flesh.

1. Recall to thought the black dates which have become marked on all national
records. Nota nation has been without them ; times of awful solemnity and sorrow.

2. Grave crises have also come upon many nations simultaneously. International
calamities and wars and plagues, by which countries and peoples have been plunged
into common distress aud amaze

47&


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





CHAP. XXKV.


3. Over the whole habitable world great controversies have gone forth from God.
What was the ancient Flood, what the first preaching of the Cross, what the Re-
formation, what those modern evangelistic and revival movements, but occasions


when God “ pleaded with all flesh”?


pues A delinquent world will assuredly be brought to judgment by Jehovah.
1. It is an eternal law and necessity that wickedness shall be rebuked and


punished (comp. 2 Pet. ii. 4~6).


2. It is predetermined that the lives of men shall be brought before the throne of


God for judgment (Acts xvii. 31).


Application.—(a.) God now “ pleads” with us for our reconciliation and salva-
tion. (6.) His “controversy ” will be the more dreadful with us if, by rejecting His
grace, we compel Him to “plead” with usin Judgment. (See Addenda on verse 30.)


ADDENDA TO OHAPTER XXYV.:


Ver. 1. “THE FOURTH YEAR OF
JEHOIAKIM.” This date was the turn-
ing-point in Oriental history. The
armies of Egypt and Babylon met in
deadly and decisive battle at Charche-
mish, and God gave the ascendancy to
Nebuchadnezzar. Immediately after
this battle, and probably before Nebu-
chadnezzar and his victorious army ap-
peared in Palestine, Jeremiah delivered
this prophecy, which foretells the great-
ness of the Babylonish empire, mentions
the countries over which it is to extend,
and the exact term of its duration.
During this year Jeremiah had, in vain,
been seeking, with the wisdom of a states-
man and the fervour of a patriot, to
detach Jehoiakim from Egypt and induce
him to accept Nebuchadneszzar’s supre-
macy. This led Jehoiakim—a year later
—both to burn the prophet’s roll (comp.
chap. xxxvi. 32), to endeavour to slay
the prophet (thid. 26), and thereby to
silence all further Divine messages to
him, till, at the close of his reign, the
Chaldeans were marching upon Jerusa-
lem.—Comp. Speaker's Commentary.


Ver. 4. “JEHOVAH HATH SENT TO
you AaLt His pRopPHETS.” God is a
long-suffering God, who desireth not the
death of a sinner ; therefore He gives
the first world one hundred and twenty
years’ time for repentance (Gen. vi. 3).
Lot preaches to Sodom and Gomorrah
more than twenty-five years (Gen. xiii.
13, xxix. 14). Christ preaches repent-
ance three and a half years, and the
Apostles forty years, before the destruc-
tion of Jerusalem. But dost thou not


NOTES AND ILLUSTRATIONS.


know that the goodness of God leadeth
thee to repentance !—Cramer.


Ver, 5. “TURN YE BEVERY ONE FROM
HIS EVIL Way.” Each must separately
repent and turn from his own sin, None
is excepted, lest they should think their
own guilt extenuated because the evil is
general.—Jamteson.


Ver. 9. ‘“ NEBUCHADNEZZAR, My SER-
vant.” This title, so remarkable in the
Old Testament as the especial epithet,
first of Moses, and then of the Messiah,
is thrice given to Nebuchadnezzar, and
marks the greatness of the commission
intrusted to him.—Payne Smith.

The Jews boasted that they were the
servants of Jehovah. Yet a heathen
king is here called God’s servant, as
being more Hts servant than they were,
and as serving God in destroying them /


Ver. 10. “Sounp oF THE MILI-
stonns.” As a household morning
employment, all the mills of a town
would be heard together, since the cus-
tom was for only enough corn for the
day’s need to be ground at atime. The
labour was severe,

“LIGHT OF THE CANDLE,” t¢., night-
light. These are so common in use in
the East that the poorest burn candles
all through the night.

Payne Smith suggest beautifully that
the “sound of the millstones” was the
sign of the preparation of the daily meal,
and that the “light of the candle ” was
the sign of the assembling of the family
after the labours of the day were over.

477


Ver. 15. THE WINE-OUP oF FURY. A
“cup” is often in Scripture put for
affliction, and “ wine” for extreme con-
fusion and wrath. Here the figure
indicates stupifying judgments (comp.
chapa, xlix. 12,1i. 7.) We need not sup-
pose, with Michaelis, that Jeremiah
actually offered a wine-cup to the
ambassadors of the nations assembled
at Jerusalem, ‘“ Make them drink,” t.e.,
by denunciations of their sins and pre-
diction of their doom.


Ver. 26. “THE KING or SHESHACH
SHALL DRINK.” “ Belshazzar, the bez-
fling king of Babylon, whilst he is
quaffing in the vessels of God’s house
to the honour of Shat (Shesac, td est
poculum letitie aut vanitatis, vel seri-
cum tuum), the Babylonian goddess,
whence those feast days were called
canta mutgas, being like the Roman
Saturnalia. Antichrist also, who hath
troubled all the kingdoms of the earth,
shall himself perish, together with his
Babylon the great, which hath made the
nations drunk with the wine of her
fornications.”—T app.


Ver, 28. “YE SHALL CERTAINLY
DRINK.” No effort of theirs to escape
the destruction will avail.

“Tf they either do not believe thy
threatenings, or else disregard them, as
thinking themselves sufficiently pro-
vided against hostile invasion, you shall
let them know that the judgments de-
nounced against them are God’s irre-
versible decree.” — Zowth.

“The destruction of the heathen
nations was fixed and certain. Of this
they might be assured by the fact that
the Jews, who were Jehovah’s peculiar
people, were not spared.” — Henderson.


Ver. 29. “I BEGIN TO BRING EVIL
ON THE CITY WHICH IS CALLED BY My
NaME.” “If God spares not the city
in which He has chosen a temple for
Himself, and designed His name to be
invoked, hew can He spare aliens to
whom He has never made any promise,
as He regarded them as atrangers? Jf,
then, the green tree 18 consumed, how can
the dry remain safe? This is the in-

478


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH,








port of the passage. The Apostle uses
the same argument in other words ; for
after having said that judgment would
begin at God’s house, he immediately
shows how dreadful the vengeance of
God would be upon His open enemies (1
Pet. iv. 17)... . It is better for us
that God should begin with us, as at
length the wicked shall in their turn
be destroyed ; and that we should endure
temporal evils, that God may at length
raise us up to the enjoyment of His
paternal favour, And for this reason
Paul also says that it is a demonstration
of the just judgment of God when the
faithful are exposed to many evils (2
Thess. i. 4, 5).”—Calvsn.


Ver. 30. “Tux Lorp sHALL ROAR”
In highly poetic language the judgment
of the Gentiles is described. Jehovah
has risen like a lion from his covert,
and at His roaring the whole world is
filled with terror and confusion. Sheep
and shepherds roll on the ground in con-
sternation, but cannot escape; for, like
a storm-wind, judgment stalks abroad,
and the slain of the land cover the
ground from one end of the earth unto
the other, and lie unwept and without
burial.— Payne Smith.

The roar was first to go forth over
Judea, wherein were “the sheep of His
pasture” (Ps. c, 3), and thence into
heathen lands.

“HE WILL MIGHTILY RoaR.” Pliny
reporteth of the lioness, that she bringeth
forth her whelps dead, and so they re-
main for the space of three days, until
the lion, coming near to the den where
they lay, lifteth up his voice and
roareth so fiercely that they presently
revive and rise. The “ Lion of the tribe
of Judah ” will roar to like purpose at
the last day ; and doth afore, when He
pleaseth, roar terribly upon His enemies,
to their utter amazement (Joel iii. 16;
Amos i, 2, iii. 8).-—Trapp.

“The strict judgment of God sounds
much stronger and clearer than we can
bear. Hence the six hundred thousand
men were so terrified when they heard
the voice of God, that they said, ‘ Let
not God speak with us lest we die’
(Exod. xx. 19). It is well that we do not


HOM/ILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


OHAP, XXVL





refuse to hear, or stop our ears against
the sweet sound of God’s voice in the
sacred office of the preacher, because we
can have it (Ps. xcv. 8); or the time
will come when we shall be obliged to
hear its awful roaring, which God for-
bid. For when the lion roars, who shall
not be afraid ? (Amos iii. 8.)”—Oramer.


Ver, 37. Theme: PEACEABLE HABITA-
TIONS OVERTHROWN. ‘‘The peaceable
habitations are cut down, because of
the fierce anger of the Lord.”

L Wrath destroys the peacefulness
of any habitation into which it enters,


be it (a) a home; (b) the heart; (c) a
church.

iL Divine displeasure, if provoked,
will drive us into homeless desolation.
(a.) All refuges will fail to shelter us,
(b.) Pleasant scenes are wrecked if God be
angry. (c.) “ Peaceable habitations” re-
quire, for their very existence, that we be
“at peace with God.”

If. Peace and safety are possible
to those who live in God’s love. All
others will be homeless in the evil day.
But sudden destruction shall not come
upon them. Their souls shall dwell in
peace, always secure and at rest.





CHAPTER XXVL


Crrricat and Execeticat Norrs.—l. Chronology of the Chapter. About three years earlier
than the prophecy of preceding chapter. Cf chapter vii. with this, and it is evident that they
are synchronous. Evidently this narrative records the dangers to which Jeremiah exposed
himself by the delivery of that faithful protest against his nation’s iniquity. Jehoiakim had
just ascended the throne, and forthwith inaugurated a course of public apostasy which called
forth from Jeremiah this pungent and fearless remonstrance. Naturally enough it greatly
incensed the ‘‘ priests and the prophets” (ver. 8); though the ‘‘ princes” spoke out boldly for
his defence (ver. 16); and through the interposition of Ahikam, Jeremiah escaped violence
(ver. 24). Cf. critical notes to chapter vii.

For—2, Contemporary Scriptures; 3, National Affairs; and 4. Contemporaneons History,
Gf. chap. vii., in doe.

5. Geographical References,—Ver. 6. ‘‘Shioh ;” ef: note, chap. vii. 12, in loc. Ver.10. “The
entry of the new gate:” 4.e., the gate originally erected by Jotham (2 Kings xv. 85), ‘‘the higher
gate,” and now recently restored. The Targum reads, the new gate. Ver. 20. “ Kirjath-jeartm;:”
cir. nine miles north west of Jerusalem, where the ark rested after the destruction of Shiloh,
on its return from Philistia.

6. Personal Allusions.—Ver. 18. ‘‘ Micah the Morasthite:” ef. Micah i. 1, and iii. 12.
The text here is M51, Michayah ; the full form of his name meaning, Who is like Jah? But
many MSS. omit the Yod, and read simply, MD, Micah. His native village, Moresheth [Heb.
Morashti], near Elutheropolis, in Philistia (Jerome). He was contemporary with Isaiah in
Judah, and with Amos and Hosea in Israel.

Ver. 20. ‘‘ Urijah the son of Shemaiah:” nothing more is known of Urijah than is here
recorded.

Ver. 22. ‘ Elnathan the son of Achbor:” Achbor was one of the princes sent to Huldah by
Josiah (2 Kings xxii. 12). Hlnathan was father of Nehushta, the mother of King Jehoiachin,
therefore Jehoiakim’s father-in-law.

Ver. 24. ‘‘ Ahikam the son of Shaphan:” one of Josiah’s messengers to Huldah after the
discovery of the copy of the law in the Temple by Hilkiah the priest (2 Kings xxii. 12-14),
Hiikiah made known the discovery to Shaphan the scribe, most probably this Shaphan. Ahikam
was father to Gemariah, who lent Jeremiah his room for the public reading of the prophet’s
roll; and of Gedaliah, whom Nebuchadnezzar afterwards made governor of the land (chap.
xxxix. 14), indicating that the attachment of the father, Ahikam, to Jeremiah was inherited by
his sons.

7. Manners and Customs.—Ver. 2. ‘‘ Stand tn the gate of the Lord’s house:” see Homiletiec
Outlines, preliminary note, p. 149. “Unto all the cities of Judah which come to worship” at one
of the three great yearly festivals, perhaps that of ‘Tabernacles, which was the greatest. _

Ver. 9. ‘‘ All the people were gathered together against Jeremiah :’’ pro rly “unto Jeremiah,”
forming themselves into a court or congregation to take part in his trial. Ver. 23. “ Graves of
the sons of the people:’’ see chap, xvii. 19: “common people.” Some have thought the Jews
had a cemetery for the prophets separate from that of the people. The place of burisl for the
common people was in the Kidron valley.

8. Literary Criticisms.—Ver. 19. ‘‘ Besoughé the Lord,” lit. Boothed by prayer the face of


the Lord. ‘2B°N¥ nbn, Stroke the faee [Keil]. Cf. Exod. xxxii. 11. re
6


@H4P, XXV1. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





General topic of the chapter: “So PErsEcureD THEY THE PROPHETS.”


This present life ia often one of severity and suffering to God’s servants, Yet it
is astonishing to find earnest and holy men persecuted and slain for no offence
other than that of calling she wicked to desert their sins and care for their spiritual
good! We may well ask, “Why, what evil hath he done” For ‘a good work”
surely men should not rise in hostility to a man of God. Wrong may deserve
punishment ; but too often right is persecuted and wrong is condoned. Se perverse
is the human heart.

L Prevalent sin called for faithful rebuke. There was enough wrongdoing
and corruption in Zion to constrain a godly soul to vehement protestation. God
sent the prophet to remonstrate,

1. The rebuke of a prophet, therefore, should be accepted as an appeal from God
(vers, 2-5).

2. Such faithful rebukes are designed to avert heavy and threatening judgments
(vers, 6, 12, 13).

I. Paithfol rebuke aroused violent resentment. In Jeremiah’s protest there
was no element of provocation. His message was delivered in no rancorous and
vexing words, yet it awoke resentment.

1. Sinners love thetr sins too well to desire disturbance, even though such disturb-
ance is essential to their salvation (vers. 7-9).

2. Warnings of impending doom created violent hostility to God’s messenger (vers,
10, 11). Angry men must have a victim on whom to expend their hatred. In-
censed at God’s message, they would avenge themselves on His innocent messenger !
This explains persecution. Men cling to their sins, and hate the prophet, as Ahab
did Elijah, whose faithful words—“ trouble Israel ”—disturb them in their evil ways.

IIL Violent resentment faced with courageous fidelity. The prophet did not
quail before their violence. ‘The righteous is bold as a lion.” Yet withal there
was no corresponding violence; rather “in meekness he instructed those that
opposed ” (2 Tim. ii. 25),

1. He used the hour of his arraignment for one more appeal to his erring
persecutors (vers. 12, 13).

2. He resigned himself to the consequences of his fidelity, knowing that God
would reguite their deeds (vers, 14, 15).

Even so, when our Lord “ suffered, He threatened not; but committed Himself
to Him who judgeth righteously.” ‘‘ Vengeance is Mine.”

IV. Godly fidelity incurring persecution and death. Jeremiah’s renewed
appeal proved effective with the “princes” (ver. 16) and “elders” (ver. 17), and
won him their protection, Yet—

1. Fidelsty tmperiiled Jeremtah’s lnfe (ver. 24); and he would have lost it but
for Ahikam’s befriending. Faithful work is always done amid peril. Men become
our enemies when we tell them the truth. So Jeremiah found it. Micah was a
rare exception (vera. 18, 19).

2. Fidelity cost Urijah his life (vers. 20-23). Such unrighteous and iniquitous
deeds against God’s servants assuredly will be punished, ‘ The dead shall be
raised;” and then, confronted by those they have killed, the wicked shall be
judged. There is a judgment to come. Men may silence God’s messengers in
death now, but God will be heard in the day of judgment.


HOMILIES AND COMMENTS ON VERSES OF CHAPTER XXVI1.


Vers. 1 and 2. See Homily on chap. Neither preacher nor prophet is the

wil 1, 2. author of what he teaches, If his “ com-

mands” are his own, they should never

Ver. 2. Theme: PREACH THE WHOLE be uttered; for he has no right to speak

grurH. “ Diminish not a word,” aught which God has sof eommanded,
480


ae al arn


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


——————— oS





and no permission to silence aught which
God has commanded. ‘“ Speak all the
words that I command thee to speak
unto them; diminish not a word.”

I. Inspired commands are the out-
come of Divine Wisdom and human
necessity. Much in Scripture we do
not care to hear, or do not think wise
to teach. Doctrines over which critics
stumble, Some severe doctrines do not
seem concordant with the gospel of
love, &c. But—

1. God’s wisdom frames the messages,
That ought to check our solicitude for
the integrity of Revelation. Critics
should learn that “the foolishness of
God is wiser than men.”

2. Man’s necessity calls forth the
message. God sees our case, our need,
our sins, our perils, and sends the com-
mands which are suitable.

Hence every word of God is important
and imperative.

II. Preachers have no liberty of
silence or selection. If any haste to
preach without a Divine commission,
God will put them to silence. But if
God has sent a prophet or preacher, He
must “speak all,” &., and “not diminish
@ word.”

1. God’s messenger may sot silence
Divine commands,

2. God’s messenger may not select
Divine commands, He has no liberty
allowed to forbear speaking; neither
has he liberty allowed to choose and
discriminate between the commands,
taking out one from among the rest,
aud speaking only such as he deems fit
and right. He has to “declare ali the
counsel of God.”

IIL God’s messages may not be
minimised either in quantity or em-
phasis. “ Diminish not a word.”

A preacher may indeed go through
all the commands, and yet by frequent
reiteration of a few may give them a
prominence which overshadows the rest,
and thus “ diminishing” those he over-
shadows,

Or, he may preach some with more
emphasis and eloquence than others,
thereby “ diminishing” the others,

1. This may be through prejudice or
preference. Then he makes his own


OHAP, XXVL


limited mental bias the test of the com.
parative value and importance of re-
vealed truths |

2. He may do this through mistaken
solicitude or sentimental charity. There
are preachers who cannot allow them-
selves to speak the stern teachings of
Scripture ; because (in their poor fancy)
they disagree with the tender love of
God, and the sweet grace of the Gospel
of Christ ; because, also, they wound the
gentle hearts of their hearers, and make
appeal to fears in men rather than filial
trust and love.

3. He may do this for fear or favour
of men. Then he prostrates God’s truth
before the time-serving spirit which seeks
to “please men.” This is sacrilegious !
But we may not suppress nor soften any
teaching or command for fear of giving
offence ; neither may we set forth coldly
and indirectly what can only by forcible
statement do good.

God says: “Speak all”... “ dimt-
nish not a word.” Compare Deut. iv. 2,
xii, 32; Prov. xxx. 6; Acts xx. 27; 2
Cor. ii. 17, iv. 2; Rev. xxii, 19,

See Addenda: PREACH THE WHOLE
TRUTH.


Vers. 3-6. Compare Homily on chap.
xviii 7-10. Theme: ConprTionaL
CovENANTS.


Ver. 6. ‘‘ THIS HOUSE LIKE SHILOH.”
Comp. Homily on chap. vii. 12-14,
“ Violated sanctuaries doomed.”


Ver. 8. “THOU SHALT SURELY DIE.”
The charge against Jeremiah was that of
uttering falsehood in Jehovah’s name,
an act punishable with death (Deut,
xviii. 20). The tumult against him
was raised by the priests and false pro-
phets.


Ver. 11. “Spake THE PRIESTS AND
THE PROPHETS UNTO THE PRINCES.” Jere-
miah was both a priest and a prophet, and
should therefore have received generous
treatment at the hands of “priests and
prophets ;” but ‘‘a man’s foes are they
of his own household,” while “jealousy
is as cruel as the grave.”

The “princes” were members of the


2a 481


CHAP. XXVI.


king’s household, and formed part of the
Council of State. Jeremiah is careful
to discriminate here, and to record that
he received acts of kindness from the
“princes” and also from the “elders”
(ver. 17), who were rulers of the whole
land. In like manner Luke discrimi-
nates between the generous conduct of
Gamaliel and the injustice of other
members of the Sanhedrim (Acta v. 34).


Vers. 12-15. Theme: How To ANSWER
CavILLERS aND AccuseRs. The prophet
was arraigned before the highest tri-
bunal, charged with a political offence—
he had “ prophesied against this city.”
Here it will be noticeable that our Lord
was similarly indicted before Pilate.
See how Jeremiah bore himself in this
scene of great excitement and irritation,

I. His unfaltering assurance of a
Divine commission. Cavil though they
might against his message, and threaten
him with death for delivering it, yet—

1. He knew that God had sent him to
them with this message. “The Lord sent,”
é&c. (ver. 12); “ Of a truth the Lord hath
sent me,” &c. (ver. 15).

2. He knew that his prophecy had been
faithfully delwered. He had uttered
nought in malice, nor suppressed aught
through timidity ; but “all the words
ye have heard ” (ver. 12) were literally
God’s words through him to them.
Thus he was sustained by—

(a.) Assured authority from Jehovah.

(o.) Conscious integrity in his work.

IL His importunate earnestness in
pleading with his accusers. Having thus
far vindicated himself, Jeremiah now—

1. Seizes the opportunity to plead with
his hearers (ver. 13). It might be his
final chance of a direct appeal to his
sinning nation, What ardour of reli-
gious feeling ! what godly patriotism is
thus manifested |

2. Fearlessly exhorts his audience to re-
pentance and reformation, He was ar-
raigned because he had charged their
sins upon them. Yet now even, before
this angry assembly, he appeals again to
them to desert their sins, and thus avert
God’s displeasure. ‘‘ Reform your life,
and hearken to the voice of the Lord,
and it will be better for you.” “You do

482


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.





not wish me to thunder away at you;


reform, then, and I can let it alone.”—


(Zinzendorf.)

III. His grand resignation to the
consequences of fidelity. His faithful
pleading might incense them the more ;
yet— |

1. He is ready to de rather than keep
silence (ver, 14).

2. He dare not let any concern for self
hinder him in his witness. “ As for me”
—as if what became of him were wholly
unimportant in the presence of his
nation’s perila It equals Paul’s martyr.
like spirit: “I am ready to die also
at Jerusalem ;” “I could wish myself
accursed for my brethren.” Note—

(a.) His splendid indifference to life
and policy. It argues possession of
highest religious assurance, conscious
safety in God, and blessed hopes of a
future world.

(6.) His all-absorbing eagerness for
his people, Self cannot have a thought
when his people are nearing destruction.
Such all-consuming seal naturally im
presses and conquers hearts. It did so
here (ver. 16).

IV. His solemn warnings against
criminal conduct (ver. 15).

1. Knowing God was with him in his
work, he realised then that Jehovah would
avenge any violence done to him.

2. Knowing that he was innocent of
any crime, having only faithfully dis-
charged a Divine commission, he re-
minded them that on them would fall the
curse of his blovd.

Note: Men do not escape the punish-
ment of sin by silencing God’s preacher,
or by getting rid of the obnoxious wit-
ness against their sins, They double the
crime by such conduct.

There was a yearning pathos in Jere-
miah’s warning: no anger, no menacing ;
but “knowing the terror of the Lord,
he persuaded men.” Thus may cavillera
be silenced and adversaries won. i


See Addenda : FEARLESSNESS.


On “ AMEND YouR Ways,” see Homily
on chap. vii. 3.


Ver, 16. ‘‘ THIg MAN IS NOT WORTHY
co Din.” Jeremiah’s address secured—


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; JEREMIAH.





OHAP. XXVI.





(i.) THRE CONVICTION: for they re-
cognised that he had “spoken to them
in the name of the Lord.” Instead of
convicting Jeremiah, ‘the princes and
people” unanimously convicted the
“ priests and prophets” of falsely charg-
ing him.

(ii.) His own acguittaL ‘This man
is not worthy of death.” Instead of
condemning Jeremiah, they sent him
forth from the tribunal freed from all
charges.

Matthew Henry here reflects thus—

“ And are they willing to own that
he did indeed speak to them ‘in the
name of the Lord,’ and that that Lord
was their God? Why then did they
not amend their ways and doings, and
take the method he prescribed to pre-
vent the ruin of their country? (Matt.
xxi. 25.) Note: It is a pity that those
who are so far convinced of the Divine
original of gospel preaching as to pro-
tect it from the malice of others, do not
submit to the power and influence of it
themselves.”


Vers. 17-19. Theme: A PRECEDENT
JUSTIFYING THE PROPHETS ACQUITTAL.
Certain elders arose and put the
audience in mind of a former case, as
is usual with us in going to judgment ;
for the wisdom of our predecessors is a
direction to us,

(i.) Was it thought strange that Jere-
miah prophesied against this city and
the temple? Micah did so before him,
even in the reign of Hezekiah, that
reign of reformation, (See Micah iii.
12.

. this it appears that a man may be,
as Micah was, a true prophet of the
Lord, and yet may prophesy the de-
struction of Zion. When we threaten
secure sinners with the taking the Spirit
of God and the kingdom of heaven away
from them, and declining Churches with
the removal of the candlestick, we say
no more than what has many a time been
said before, and what we have the
warrant of God’s Word to say.

(ii.) Was tt thought fit hy the princes to
fustify Jeremiah in what he had done?
It was what Hezekiah had done in like
cane,


(a.) Was Micah impeached for his pro-
phecy? No; the king and nation took
the warning he gave them,

(0.) Hezekiah got good by the preach.
ing, and therefore certainly could do no
harm to the preacher.

(c.) It is good to deter ourselves from
sin, by the consideration of the mischief
we shall incur thereby. “‘ Thus might we
procure great evil against our souls.”
Comp. Matthew Henry.


Vers. 20-23. Theme: Unisan’s PEr-
SECUTION AND DeatH. Doubtless this
Urijah came some time after Jeremiah ;
this incident is added to the foregoing
to show the ferocity of Jehoiakim
against faithful prophets.

Note: Urijah re-uttered Jeremiah’s
words (ver. 20); he “prophesied,” &c.,
‘‘ according to the words of Jeremiah ;”
and this repetition determined the king
to silence the prophets at any cost.

L Guilty men hate to hear Divine
denunciations. Jehoiakim grew un-
controllably violent when Jeremiah’s
words were repeated (ver. 20).

II. Earnest preachers of God fulfil
their work amid dangers (ver. 21).
They expose their lives to the violence
of those they denounce. He who pro-
claims against men’s sins provokes their
antagonism, “Genuine ministers of
God have no favour to expect from
those who are His enemies.”—(Clark.)

Til. The courage which defies perils
is not always possessed by even faith-
ful witnesses of God. Urijah fled to
Egypt (ver. 21). Jeremiah did not flee,
and was spared; Urijah hastened to
protect himself, and was slain. Our
running and anxiety are of no use. It
is better to act faithfully and fearleasly,
risking the result.

IV. Angry men, incensed against
God’s witness, will take great trouble
to avenge themselves (ver. 22). Comp.
Ahab’s efforts to find Elijah,

V. Death and degradation may
prove the earthly penalty of godly
work (ver. 23). It was so with the
Christian martyrs; and is now sometimes
the penalty of missionary devotion.
But such sufferers for truth and right
eousness are canonised in God’s martyr

433


OHAP. XXVI.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





dlogy, and “ great is their reward in
heaven.”


See Addenda: PrrsxcurTion.


Ver, 24. Theme ; Heroic FRIENDSHIP,
On “Ahikam” see Personal References
at head of chapter.

Note 1. Since Ahikam’s son, Geda-
liah, showed attention to the prophet,
and another son of the same name was
afterwards made governor of the land by
the Chaldeans (chap. xxxix. 14), we
may suppose this family agreed with
Jeremiah’s political policy and counsels,

Note 2. The son’s friendship for the
prophet was the result of the father’s
(Ahikam’s) attachment. Good parents
hand down a patrimony of generous
sympathy to their children, which
provokes them to “love and good
works.” Thus the good deeds of the
father reappeared in his sons.

I. Valorous allegiance with a per-
secuted prophet. ‘The hand of Ahikam
was with Jeremiah.” This friendship
was—

1. Open and avowed: it was well
known in the land that Ahikam be-
friended Jeremiah. Obadiah (1 Kings
xviii.) secreted his friendship.

2. Influential. For Ahikam had
sufficient influence at court and in the
country to counter-check Jehoiakim’s
malicious designs against the prophet.
God’s servants have not been without
powerful friends.


8. Resolute. He resisted the clamous
of “the people.’ Thus he faced king
and country fearlessly as Jeremiah’s
friend. All this showed—(a) great
heroism ; (b) noble piety; (c) fearless
jidelity. Such friendship’ is not fre-
quent, but it is worthy highest praise,

II. Valuable attachment to God’s
servant, Ahikam’s friendship proved
specially helpful to Jeremiah.

1. Lt asserted itself in a perilous hour,
He who flees in adversity is not a true
friend. ;

2. It prevailed against popular cla-
mour. It is not easy to become un-
popular for our friends. But Christ’s
servants have to face popular contumely
for His sake ; and many disciples have
had to brave public scorn and hate for
their attachment to Christ’s followers.

3. It preserved to the nation tts truest
benefactor. Had the people put Jere-
miah to death, they would have slain
the man who gave wisest counsels, and
proved at last its noblest leader. We
impoverish and harm ourselves by anta-
gonism to God’s messengers. So, in
withstanding the people’s clamour,
Ahikam acted as the nation’s friend,
as well as Jeremiah’s champion.

Application.—Matthew Henry sug:
gests that God can ratse up great men
to protect good men; and this should
encourage us amid the dangers incident
to duty.


ADDENDA TO CHAPTER XXVI.: ILLUSTRATIONS AND 8UGGESTIVE EXTRACTS.


Ver. 2. PREACH THE WHOLE TRUTH.
“ Luther, of whom Richter has said that
‘his words were half battles,’ when he
first began to preach, suffered unheard
agony. ‘O Dr. Staupitz, Dr. Stau-
pitz!’ said he to the Vicar General of his
order, ‘I caunot do it, I shall die in
three months; indeed I cannot do it.’
Dr. Staupitz replied, ‘ Well, Sir Martin,
if you must die, you must ; preach, man,
preach; and then live or die as it
happens.’ So Luther preached, and
lived; and he became one great whirl-
wird of energy to work without resting
in this world.” —Spurgeon,

“An iron key is better than one
made of gold sf s¢ will better open the

484


door, for that is all the use of a key.”—
Augustine.

“The words of a preacher ought
purgere non palpare, to prick the heart,
not smooth and coax.”—Jerome.

Somerfield, just before his death,
speaking of his recovery, said, “Oh, if
I might be raised again! How I could
preach / I could preach as I never
preached before. I have taken a look
into eternity /”


Vers. 12-15. FzarLessness. “ What
can I fear?” asked Chrysostom before
the Pro-consul, “ Willit be death? but
you know that ‘Christ is my life,’ and
that I shall gain hy death. Will it be


ee ee


ee ee eee.


son ae vn ham


en oe


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


GHAaP. XXVIL


a ea EE I aR aE age LD SS TESTED


ezve? but ‘the earth with all its fulness
is the Lord’s,’ Will it be the Joss of
wealth? but ‘we brought nothing into
this world, and we can carry nothing
out.’ Thus, all the terrors of the world
are contemptible in my eyes, and I
smile at all its good things. Poverty I
do not fear; riches I do not sigh for;
from death I do not shrink; and life I
do not desire except for the progress of
your souls,”


Vers, 20-23, Pzrsecution. Seeing
a Christian woman go cheerfully to
prison, an observer said to her, ‘Oh,
you have not yet tasted of the bitter-
ness of death.” She as cheerfully re-
plied, “No, nor ever shall; for Christ
hath promised that those who keep His
sayings shall not see death.”


Ver. 24. Nosur FrienpsHr.


‘* Great souls by instinct to each other turn,
Demand allegiance, and in friendship burn,”
—ADDISON,


‘* Friendship hath a power
To soothe affliction in her darkest hour.”
—H. Kirxr WHITER.


** Deliberate in all things with thy friend.

But, since friends grow not thick on every
bough,

Nor every friend unrotten at the core,

First on thy friend deliberate with thyself ;

Pause, ponder, sift ; not eager in the choice,

Nor jealous of the chosen ; fixing, fix;

Judge before friendship, then confide till]
death.

Well for thy friend, but nobler far for thee:

How gallant danger for earth’s highest
prize !

A friend is worth all hazards we can run.”

—Youne.





CHAPTER XXVIL


Carrica, awp Exscrtioan Nores.—1. Chronology of the Chapter.—‘*Beginning of the
reign of Jehoiakim.” ‘There is authority for reading ‘‘ Zedekiah” instead of “ Jehoiakim.”
Henderson substitutes ‘ Zedekiah,” and appeals to chap. xxviii. 1, to the statements in vers,
3 and 12 of this chap. xxvii., to the reading of one of Kennicott’s MSS., and to the authority
of the Syriac and Arabic versions, Further, Lowth, Blayney, Michaelis, Rosenmiiiler, Dahler,
Maurer, Umbriet, Ewald, Payne Smith, &c., sustain this change of names. The allusion in
ver, 12 indicates that Zedekiah is the king meant, for both sections of the chapter are
synchronous in time and identical in meaning. Probably the reading in the E, V. may have
originated from ehap. xxvi. 1. Calvin, however, takes the text as it stands, and sugvests that
Jeremiah kept this prophecy long secreted in his bosom ere he uttered it. If the true reading
is “ Zedekiah,” then ‘‘the fourth year” of chap. xxviii. 1, agrees with ‘‘in the beginning of the
reign” of chap. xxvii. 1, on the theory that, as Zedekiah’s reign lasted eleven years, it was early
in his reign when the prophecy was proclaimed : wide chronological notes to chap. xxi.

For—2. Contemporary Scriptures; 3. National Affairs; and 4. Contemporary History,
vide chap. xxi. tn loe,

& Personal Allusions.—Ver. 3. ‘‘ Zcdekiah”’: vide notes to chap. 1 tm loc. Ver. 20,
** Jeconiah:” vide chap. xxii. 24. Ver. 7, “‘ His son, and his son’s son.” Nebuchadnezzar had
four successors, Evil-Merodach his son; Neriglissar the husband of Nebuchadnegzar’s
daughter ; Laborogoarchad the son of Neriglissar ; and Naboned the son of Evil-Merodach. The
intermediate two successors are passed over in this propheey, and only the direct descendants,
“ his son and son’s son,” are recognised.

6. Manners and Customs.—Ver. 9. ‘‘ Prophets, diviners, dreamers, enchanters, sorcerers :”’
vide on chap, xxiii, 25, These were all sources of prognostication current among the heathen
who implicitly rested in such superstitions. 5

7. Literary Criticisms.—Ver. 1. The entire verse is absent from the LXX. Ver. 2. ‘* Bonds
and yokes,” MWD are the two wooden prongs or poles of the “yoke,” which were fastened
together by ‘‘bonda,” MINDID,

Ver. 9. The word ‘“enchanters” is by some interpreters derived from BY, cloud : cloud.
makers or storm-raisers ; and by others from }*Y, eye, gazera at the atars and other means of

i ens of futurity.
sari Th. * Serve one . till #2’? The same Hebrew root signifies both “serve” and ‘‘ till,
ex cultivate. Serve ye the king of Babylon, and the land will serve you (Calvin).


OBAP. XXvVIL, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ;: JEREMIA.





ei | ens peel


TOPICAL SURVEY OF THE CHAPTER.


Doubtless the five kings (ver. 3) had sent ambassadors to Jerusalem to consult
with Zedekiah about entering into a defensive covenant against the threatening and
alarming Babylonish power. Jeremiah has to meet these messengers with plain
and emphatic statements as to the sure course of events.

I. A summons to submit to the inevitable ascendancy of Babylon.

Those “bonds and yokes” would have to be worn (ver. 2). And what God
said to these five kings He said afterwards specifically also to Zedekiah (ver. 12).

i The inentable fact. Nebuchadnezzar must be supreme, however these kings
might think to resist the decree.

1. Because God was the King of kings. The Almighty, who made “the earth
and man and beast,” had decisively “‘ given” dominion over them all to the one
monarch they dreaded (ver. 5). And “none shall stay His hand, or say unto Him,
What doest Thou 4”

2. Because Nebuchadnezzar was serving the will of the Supreme King. Un-
consciously doing this, yet none the less doing it He was God’s “servant”
(ver. 6).. There was a purpose in God’s mind, and He had chosen the Babylonish
king to fulfil it.

3. Because a defined pertod had been set for this ascendancy. The “very time of
his land” was clearly fixed in the Divine mind ; its beginning and its end (ver. 7).
Compare Topic: “ Seventy Years’ Captivity,” chap. xxv. 11, 12, infra, p. 471.

ii, The results of resistance. See ver, 8.

1. Resistance of God’s purpose would be marked by God. He would carefully
note ‘the nation and the kingdom which will not serve the same Nebuchad-
nezzar.” God was watching. He keeps His eye on the conduct of kings. The
Supreme Ruler “looks down from heaven upon the earth to see if any will under-
stand.” Having made known His will to these kings, He will observe their action;
for resistance of God’s purpose is disobedience against Him. —.

2. Severe punishment from God Himself would follow their disobedience. He
had other agencies at His command besides the armies of Babylon, and would let
loose on those who conspired against Nebuchadnezzar “‘ the sword, the famine, and
the pestilence ;” and the destruction these should effect should be more complete,
“until I have consumed them.”

‘Be wise now, therefore, O ye kings; be instructed, ye judges of the earth:
serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling ” (Ps. ii, 10, 11).

Il. Warnings against the delusive flatteries of false counsellors,

Evil teachers would not be idle at this crisis: they moved among the people
boastful of a higher wisdom and a finer patriotism. Their object was to throw
discredit on Jeremiah and lead the nation into a policy of resistance of Babylon.

1. Flattery assumes many forms: prophecy, divination, dreams, enchantments,
sorcery (ver. 9), It adopts any aspect which may beguile the heart. ‘“ Evil
reducers” are fertile in resources,

2. Flatterers appeal to human vantty. Nothing could more foster the natural
arrogance than this statement: ‘ Ye shall not serve the king of Babylon.” Those
who would lead us to disobey God’s word always come with announcement that
no penalties shall follow. ‘The serpent said, Ye shall not surely die” (Gen. iii. 4).

But God here points out—

a. The direful results to the people of their accepting these flattering counsels
(vers. 10, 15).

b. The merciful ameliorations which should attend their regarding God’s coun-
sels (vers. 11, 17).

IIL Promises of preservation and restoration conditional on a wise sub
mission.

Although Jeremiah held ont no delusive hope of speedy restoration, but con

486


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. CHAP. XXVII

Se a
fronted the false prophets’ lying words with condemnation (vers. 16, 17),
Naa he gives cheering assurances to the people if they would hear God’s
word,

1. The inevitable conquest would not be disastrous, The “city” would not “be
ee sek ” (ver. 17), and captives with sacred treasures would be safe in Babylon
ver, 22).

2. The cherished symbols of their religion would be preserved. For God would
keep them from destruction even in Babylon (vers, 19-22). ‘ Both priests and


people set store by these relics of a bygone magnificence” (Payne Smith).


3. The captivity should terminate in their Divinely effected restoration.


“ Until


the day that J wistt them, saith the Lord; then will I bring them up and restore


them to this place” (ver. 22),


COMMENTS AND OUTLINES ON CHAPTER XXVIII.


Vers, 2, 3. YOKES FOR THE CONFEDE-
BATE KINGS.

Notes: The symbol was appropriate,
inasmuch as their intention was to form
@ league to cast off from themselves the
“yoke” of Babylon.

Jeremiah must actually have worn his
yoke in public as a symbol of subjection
to the king of Babylon, for Hananiah
took the yoke from the prophet’s neck
and broke it (chap. xxviii. 10,11). Con-
sequently we must infer that the bonds
and yokes were literally given to these
“ messengers” for their royal masters,

These “ yokes” were, in this instance
(says Henderson), the collars placed on
the necks of slaves to which chains were
attached.

Jeremiah’s task demanded much moral
courage and steaujast faith in God ; for
his act would seem an insult to these
foreign ambassadors, and a provocation
to his own countrymen, who were 80
nopeful of resisting Nebuchadnezzar’s
aggression by this conspiracy.

Note—

i Unpopular tasks may have to be
performed by Glod’s servants.
ii, A blow struck at pride may save
men from great disasters,
hii, Faithful servants of God may have
to imperil themselves in averting
perils from others. Jeremiah had
to bear the anger his mission in-
curred in endeavouring to rescue
these confederating kings from
their ruinous policy.


Wer. 5. Theme: Gop tHe SUPREME
Lorp or Kings


I. God’s all-commanding power is set
tn contrast with the confederated power
of these puny kings. Their combination
would be futile to alter events which He
had ordained.

II. God’s supreme lordship is af-
firmed as explaining the temporary as-
cendancy determined for the Babylonish
monarch, It was not for his merits, but
for Jehovah’s purposes.

III. God’s government of men is
regulated by moral avms and is designed
for the vindication of righteous laws. He
was now employing Nebuchadnezzar to
chastise pride and apostasy.

M. Henry remarks here: “ The things
of the world are not the best things, for
God often gives the largest share of them
to bad men, that are rivals with Him
and rebels against Him. Dominion is
not founded tn grace. Those who have
not any colourable title to eternal happi-
ness may yet have a justifiable title to
their temporal good things.”


Ver. 5. Theme: MEETNESS BEFORE
Gop.

“And have given it unto whom it
seemed meet unto Me.” A principle
rules the universe—the absolute sove-
reignty of God. Evils come of acknow-
ledging this in theory but not in prac-
tice; much loss of stability—repining—
way wardness—disobedience, &c.

L God is the proprietor of all. He
tells all the kings that He made all the
lands and gave them all to one, because
“it seemeth meet to Him.”

1. Man’s forgetfulness of this in daily
life. We live among things, all of which

48


OHAP, XXVIL


have an Owner higher than ourselves !
We do not trace the Father in the gifts
He surrounds us with.

2. The harmony of man’s being re-
quires a sense of dependence. He is not
happy till he realise dependence on God,
Use possessions as God’s: this gives
pleasure in their use.

3. Depression results from stopping
short of God. We are satisfied with
nothing till we see God in it.

IL Wisdom and sovereignty go to-
gether. ‘‘ Unto whom it seemed meet
unto Me.”

1. No comfort to know we live under
an absolute Sovereign. Sovereignty
might be deleterious to us, But every
course of action He determines on is so
determined because of tts true goodness:
it is not arbitrary, but the purpose of
deliberate wisdom.

2. God gives according to seeming Jit-
wess. Our acting on this principle often
proves a mistake. We err. But God
sees deeper than what seems.

IL The unerring mind of God: ¢e.,
concerning “the meetness of things.”
The thought of it should lead us to—

1. Cultsvate an adoring spirit. Avoid
what the natural spirit in us would
prompt to, viz., criticism and probable
discontent. Cherish the song of Moses
and the Lamb—“ Just and true are Thy
ways, Thou King of saints.”

2. Rest on Him in simple beltef. With
an unveiled intelligence sometimes, and
sometimes in darkest nights. We are
hidden in clefts of a rock when He
passes by. If we want to see the rea-
sons, or to reconcile God’s ways with
our notions, we shall remain troubled to
the end.

3. There is immense comfort for us in
reposing tn God’s law of “ meetness.” It
takes you behind all fogs and mistakes,
Jesus Himself went there: “ Even s0,
Father, for so it seemeth good in Thy
sight.” It assures us that right prin-
ciples are at work. It affirms that He
can do for us, and give to us, and keep
from us, as He knows best for us.

4. The effect of contemplating this
“ meetness” will be submission, grounded
on the consciousness that there is no
injustice being done us by God. And

488


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.


we shall submit (a) from a wise conscious-
ness of the uselessness of contending with
the mind of God ; for what seems right
to Him cannot be changed. We shall
come to submit, too, (b) from the con-
sciousness that all things are being
arranged on deeper principles than we
can investigate, We shall quiet repin-
ings by the thought that my Father sees
meet, and therefore I leave the why of
it: there will be resignation.

5. So with permitted evil.

6. Equally so with the existence of
some mystertes—possibly everlasting.

7. The satisfaction of the heart which
recognises “meetness.” For so “the
peace of God which passeth all under-
standing shall keep our hearts and
minds,”
wilt.”—Constructed and condensed from
« Breviates” by Rev. P. B. Power, M.A.


Ver. 5. Theme: THe SoVEREIGNTY
or Gop.

“‘T have made the earth, the man and
the beast that are upon the ground, by
My great power and by My outstretched
arm, and have given tt unto whom tt
seemed meet unto Me.”

Divine declaration of a well-attested
fact, t.¢., the supreme power of God
and the impotency of man: e.g., Sen-
nacherib (2 Kings xix. 35-37), “who
had the night before been gathering up
his strength like a proud tower to dash
himself against the towers of Zion.
When the morning dawns his 180,000
men are still there, with sword and spear
and helmet and streaming banner ; but
these banners wave over a silent camp,
the trumpet lies beside silent lips—it is
a camp of death, Sword and spear are
still intact, but the arms that wielded
them are impotent. The destroying
angel has descended at midnight and
converted the Assyrian camp into a
sepulchre!” Also, ¢g., destruction of
Spanish Armada as if by miracle.

I. God as Creator. ‘I have made
the earth,” &c,, His prerogative to rule,
to govern, and to direct.

Directing all the operations of nature
to their proper end. All things hang
on His will and are dependent upon
Him. The starry hosts of heaven de





“Not as I will, but as Thou ~








HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


CHAP. XxViZ.


Se hE OS ps ee RE ye ee nee RSLS eae oe eS


pending upon Him for their course, as
well as the meanest moss or lichen on
the wall for its growth. Not only every
flower, but every portion of it—its
petals, its colour, its form, its odour—
are distinct witnesses to an all-wise,
beneficent Creator.

Ii. As Creator of all, He is the
Father of all.

Hence as Father, He ruleth with
authority. And this authority is ab-
solute. All men do not accept this.
Sin, bold and impudent, with clenched
fist, defies the Almighty, and with blas-
phemy from depraved souls defy Him.
The FoLLy of it. God “‘breaketh down,”
&c. (Job xii. 14), as an absolute Sove-
reign; man’s part is to bow to His un-
changeable decrees. Pompey boasted
that with one stamp of his foot he could
rouse all Italy to arms; but God by
one word of His mouth can summon
the inhabitants of heaven, earth, and the
undiscovered worlds to His aid, or bring
new creatures into being to do His will.

TIL God, as a Father, ruleth also in
love. ‘“ Likeasa father pitieth his chil-
dren, even so doth the Lord pity them
that fear Him.” God’s love to His people
is from everlasting to everlasting.

ManirestatTions of His love abound
in the experiences of all. It is peren-
nial, permanent, and complete, provid-
ing not only for bodily and physical
requirements, but giving to the soul that
which satisfies its intensest yearnings
and highest aspirations. He held back
not His Son. “ Herein is love, not that
we loved God, but that He loved us, and
sent His Son to be the propitiation for
our sins.” The cross of Christ—the
noonday of everlasting love, the meri-
dian splendour of eternal mercy.—A.
Taylor.


Ver. 9. HEATHEN AUGURIES.

“ The enumeration of the multifarious
means and methods for forecasting the
future is designed to show the multitude
of delusive schemes for supplying the
lack of true and real divine inspiration.”
—Keil.


Ver. 12. SUBMISSION TO THE DES-
TINED CONQUEROR,


Dean Stanley suggests that Jeremiah’s
counsel of Zedekiah and Jerusalem to
submit to Nebuchadnezzar was, on his
part, an act of political prudence to be
imitated by Statesmen and Ecclesiastics,
who may be wise in making large con-
cessions of national rights in times of
public emergency.

But Bishop Wordsworth urges that
Jeremiah’s conduct in giving these direc-
tions was a religious duty on his part,
since God had revealed to him that the
nation was given into the hands of Nebu-
chadnezzar, “ His servant,” on account
of their sins, and they must submit to
him as the minister and viceregent of
God.

M. Henry remarks: “ Many might
have prevented destroying providences
by humbling themselves under humbling
providences. It is better to take up a
light cross in our way than pull a heavier
one on our heads.”


Ver. 14. THE PROPHECY OF LIES.
Comp. Notes, &c., on chap. xiv. 14.

Comments—

“The devil often makes God’s Name
(ver. 15) the plea for lies (Matt. iv. 6;
vii. 22, 23), the test by which to know
false prophets.”—Jamieson.

‘“‘ As many wilfully put on nooses and
wish to be deceived, we ought to notice
what the prophet says here, that it is
our duty to distinguish the true from
the false. . . . We see how sedulously
and prudently we ought to take heed
lest the devil should fascinate us by his
charms, especially when the name of God
is pretended. ... Yet it is a grievous
trial, and much to be feared, when im-
postors creep in and boast that they are
true legitimate prophets.”—Calvin.

“Tt is one sign of our depraved
natures that we are more ready to be-
lieve lies than the truth. For when
Jeremiah and his colleagues preached,
no one believed. But no sooner did
the false prophets come and open their
mouths, than all their discourses must be
spoken directly from heaven (Ps. |xxii.
9). #.g., our mother Eve: what God
said was of no account, but what the
serpent said was something purely ex
cellent.” —Cramer.

439


CHAP, XXVIII,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


SG,


Ver. 18. Theme: PROPHECY TESTED
BY PRAYER. “If they be prophets, and
af the word of the Lord be with them, let
them now make intercession to the Lord
of Hosts,” &c.

A scathing test! “Jf,” “af.” Yes,
there were two uncertainties; but both
would be settled effectually by their
attempting the task of intercession with
God. If they made the effort to open
their lips to God, it would certainly
seal up their lips to men; for liars
dare not pray for the success of their
lies.

L Preaching is easier than praying.
In some sense this is so even in truthful
prophesying. For—

1. The hearer is less searching. Man
is our listener in prophesying and preach-
ing, but in prayer we speak to God/
When, therefore, we address the ear of
God, our words falter if we be insin-
cere; and we feel ourselves to be under
an Eye which reads us through and
through. This is not so when we only
address men, who may be deceived.

2. The act is less daring. There is
awfulness in an address by a sinner to
God; whereas, oh the blasphemy of
consciously speaking a Ile direct to
Him! Who would not shrink with
terror? But a man, though sinful—


ah! though a deceiver—will not so
hesitate to speak to men.

IL True preaching will be accom-
panied by intercession. No prophet
of God will fail in pleading with God.

1. Soltcitude for those to whom he


prophesies will impel him also to prayer


on their behalf.

2. Success as a preacher depends on
earnestness in prayer.

God’s messengers will be much with
Him as intercessors.

IIL The twofold direction of a
preacher’s words.

1. Words from God to men. For
“if they be prophets,” and it is equally
so with preachers, “ the word of the Lord
will be with them.” They have some-
thing to say from God to their fellows,

2. Words to God for men, “Let
them make intercession to the Lord.”

Note—

1. Being put in trust with a word from
God makes us humble, dependent, and
therefore prayerful,

2. Confidence in our message being
true renders us fervent in pleading for
its fulfilment.

3. Insincerity would not dare adven-
ture before God with intercessions for
His seal to our words, or the success of
our prophesying,


CHAPTER XXVIIL


CriticaL axD ExrcrtioaL Notzs.—For Chronology of the Chapter, &., vide preceding


chapter. The words (ver. 1). ‘‘ In the beginning of the reign,” and immediately described as
‘Sin the fe year,” accords with the common mode of reckoning by dividing a term into
two halves. And as Zedekiah reigned eleven years, this date was in the first half—at ‘‘ the


heginning” therefore.

Personal Allusions. —Ver. 1. ‘‘Hananiah the son of Azur.” Nothing known of him ; but being
*¢of Gibeon,” one of the cities of the priests, he was most probably of the order.

Geographical Reference.—Ver. 1. ‘‘ Gibeon.” A priestly city (Josh. xxi. 17 ; 1 Kingsiii. 4),
now called El-Jib, and situate about 40 stadia north-west of Jerusalem.

Manners and Customs.—Ver. 10. ‘‘ Hananiah took the yoke from off the prophet Jeremiah’s
neck :’’ vide notes on chap. ii. 20; v. 5.

Literary Criticisms.—Ver. 5. ‘‘ Jeremiah.” Notice that the name appears throughout this
chapter in its abbreviated form, AMD}, instead of D7, Marked specially as “Jeremiah the
prophet,” in order more strongly to mark the distinction between him as the true prophet of
God in contrast with ‘* Hananiah the prophet.”

Ver. 8. ‘‘Zvil.” Some MSS, give the reading I}), famine, instead of MY, calamity, evil.


HOMILETIC SURVEY OF THE CHAPTER,


Lyine Propsecy DisTINGUISHED FROM TRUE.


Both Hananiah and Jeremiah are styled prophets. Men are not distinguishea
from each other, as false or true, by a difference of titles, but by a difference of
49)


nN ee


eee


a


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH, OHaP, XXVIII,





deeds ; and it is the responsibility of hearers to “ try the spirits” and choose
between the counterfeit aud the true,

The efrontery and offensiveness of Hananiah in selecting such a scene, and when
surrounded by such hearers (ver. 1), for a display of his psewdo-prophetic mission in
opposition to Jeremiah (for he “ spake unto me,” it was a kind of personal attack
on Jeremiah), is in remarkable contrast with Jeremizh’s meekness (vers. 6-9).

I. General characteristics of false messages. Hananiah illustrates the
ministry of lies by which arrogant teachers delude the people.

1. Dine authority vs blasphemously assumed, Hananiah prefixes to his words
the most solemn formula by which inspiration is claimed. Rome equally dares to
speak in the Name of God. Lying teachers always fortify their theories by an
imposiug seriousness and confidence which tends to deceive the simple.

2. False messayes are usually pleasant to their hearers (vers. 2-4). Possibly
Hananiah may have fostered this pleasant prospect within himself until he imagined
its truth, “Deceiving and being deceived.” Bad men, and they who neglect
salvation, who wish good as the issue of a life of evil, find it possible to persuade
themselves that good cometh. And false prophets are always at hand to quiet
fear and lull apprehension.

3. Hutreme emphasis 1s needed to make doubtful messages seem really true (vers,
10, 11). A lie needs strong language to make it sound like truth, Hananiah had to
act with startling boldness in order to keep up his delusion, Deceivers are driven to
great daring, in word and deed, in order to encourage the credulity they entice.

4, Defeat ultimately covers the false prophet with shame. The lying words fail
in fulfilment (vers. 8, 9); and the righteous judgment of God asserts itself in
their personal destruction (vers, 15-17).

IL Distinguishing features of true prophecy. Jeremiah represents here the
faithful teacher of Divine oracles and salutary truths.

1. The people's present good is tenderly desired. Even though the pleasant mes-
sages are false, he would gladly say, “Amen, the Lord do so,” to all words of
hope. The prophet of God may not be able to predict good, yet he would fain
do so if he dared ; for he wishes only the well-being even of those against whom he
witnesses in God’s name. (Comp. chap. viii. 21.)

2. Yet, no delusion can be permitted. He may not say, “ Peace, peace, when
there is no peace.” And he is too fully convinced of the falsity of alluring hopes
to sanction them (vers, 7-9). If houses are being reared on sands, he must foretell
the destroying storm.

3. God’s own message, however unwelcome, must be proclaimed (vers, 12-14); even
though it tell of “ yokes of iron” and tyrannical despotism. To soften down God’s
terrible messages into “smooth things ” is a crime against fidelity to God and duty
to man.

4, Liars must be refuted by the messenger of truth (ver. 15). This is no task to
be coveted, and it requires courage ; but false leaders have to be “ withstood to the
face,” and told frankly that they lie! Paul thus withstood Peter, and Luther thus
withstood the Pope and his emissaries, and honest believers have ever since had
like services to perform. Deceivers must be met in personal confutation and their
heresies demolished.

5. Vindication is on the side of truth (ver. 17). Jeremiah thus received another
Divine assurance of his mission, and an additional encouragement to prosecute his
work with confidence and boldness as the prophet of Jehovah.


COMMENTS AND HOMILETIC OUTLINES ON CHAPTER XXVIII.


Ver. 3. Within two full years. Pro- federacy being formed would within that
bably this period was fixed by Hananiah time defeat Nebuchadnezzar.


in the belief that the international con- ey


OHAP, XXVITE.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. r





Ver 1l. Theme: SELF IN SERVICE.

“And the prophet Jeremiah went his
way.”
_ This, compared with xxvi. 14, leads
to tue same truth ; laying aside of “ self”
in God’s service when called upon to
give testimony for Him, Hananiah
takes the yoke, breaks it, thus discredits
Jeremiah’s prophecy in the presence of
the people, yet all we read is—‘ Jeremiah
went his way.” Left it to God to vindi-
cate His own honour; which He soon
did very terribly,

So before the princes (in xxvi.) he
tells out uncompromisingly all the truth,
though he knew he did it at the peril
of his life. He was not insensible to
suffering, still himself—he was nothing.
He tells them that if they slay him they
will bring innocent blood upon them, and
there leaves the matter, This sugge sts—

L The complete abnegation of self
in service.

1, There is a period in the Christian
life when the existence of “self” ts
unsuspected. Then we mistake its ener-
gies for those of the spiritual life. We
may carry on the Lord’s work without
suspicion as to the principle on which
we carry it on,

2. Further on, there occurs a partial
detection of “self.” The Spirit of God
has led us onward in our education,
partly purified our mental vision, raised
our standard, made us watchful, dis-
trustful of “self.”

3. It is a more advanced stage when
we see “self” enough to dread it greatly ;
see it to be ever intrusive, substituting
mean and low motives.

4, Yet higher, when we have attained
to such knowledge of “self” that we
war with it and repress tt, yet know
that we shall never be wholly done with
it till heavenly life be gained.

II. See the workings of “self” in
service. The wrong workiugs of “ self.”
Much we do may be froin mere natural
feeling ; nothing of God in it; and work
that seems earnest and true may be the
gratification of natural energy. Allowing
s¢ self ” thus to influence us, we shall be
subject to its disturbing influences—

1. Self-love will be easily wounded by
the opposition which meets us.

492


2. Our judgment will be warped by
personal feeling and our self-interests
being imported,

3. “Self” will drive us too a
shall not know when “ to go our eo :
we shall be for seeing more than he
case requires; for passing beyond testi-
mony for God to testimony for our-
selves; wanting to secure our own
honour and importance.

We cannot separate ourselves from our
service; what we are will tell on it,


Failure in service is generally the conse- —


quence of failure in “ self.” And “self”
can gratify itself upon what was ori-
ginally God’s: because His message i
rejected we look upon the case as if we
were rejected, and then lose sight of the
grievous injury done to God in the
apparent one done to us!

All denominational rancour comes of
the wrong operation of “self” in service,
It leads to the confounding persons with
principles, And our imperfections bring
the cause of God into disrepute, |

DOL The expulsion of “self” from
gervice.

1. How To BE DONE? This is a work
of degrees.

(1.) By enlightenment of the Holy
Ghost ; showing a man himself, and
where ‘self ” works ill results,

(2.) By sympathy with Christ. This
will make “ self” fall out of prominence,

(3.) By learning our own insignificance.
We have inflated thoughts of our own
self-importance,

(4.) We need realisation that we are
simply instruments ; persons to be used,
We sometimes act as if all were by us
and for us; the cause and object of all.

2. Happy results will flor.

(1.) We shall leave things without
undue pushing. Do what is needful, and
then have faith in truth that it will act
by its own weight. Truth put in front,
we shall retire avoiding undue promi-
nence of ourselves, which often offends
men and mars our work,

2. We shall leave our sayings and
doings for God to fructify. Much has
to be left before they will fructify ; left
to themselves and to God, As with the
sower, seeds spring up “he knoweth not
how.”





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


OHAP, XXVIH.





(3.) Restlessness of self is thus quieted ;
we wait the order of events, not grasping
an unripened harvest,

(4.) We must not think God’s affairs
suffrr because we have tu “ go our way.”
Wien we have gone, He remains. Often
the consciousness of having borne testi-
mony is all we can attain to; all we can
do; all we are required to do: we may
go our way.”

IV. “Self” has a right place in
Service.

1. Our energies and faculties were
“gwen to us for use. Jesua could assert
Himself; as in the Temple when He
drove out the money-changers, Jeremiah
returned, when his “‘ yoke of wood “ was
broken, with a “ yoke of tron.”

_ 2. Yet, in all the energy which cireum-

stances may require, the action of mere
human feeling need not be seen. That
which is truly for God will commend
itself as such, Consecrated “‘self,” taught
by the Holy Ghost, will show that there
is a time for every purpose under heaven ;
a time to keep silence as well as to
speak, a time to act and testify, and
also a time “to go our way.”—Con-
structed and condensed from “ Breviates,”
by Rev. P. B. Power, M.A.


Ver. 13. Theme: Tux Two Yoxes.
“ Thus saith the Lord, Thow hast broken
the yokes of wood, but thou shalt make
for them yokes of tron.”

Jeremiah taught by symbols: hid his
mantle in the earth, broke earthen pot,
&c, The preacher to-day would evoke
harsh criticism if he ventured on any
such symbolic action.

Opposition of false prophets assailed
him. Always so. If there be a Christ,
there will arise an Antichrist; if a Simon
Peter, there will arise a Simon Magus ;
if a Luther, an Eckius. Yet the gates
of hell shall not prevail against the
Gospel, mighty though the sophistries of
opponents be,

L Men must wear some yoke. In
every stage of life—childhood, youth,
manhood ; and in every statton of life—
servants, masters, d&c,

1. God has made and sustains us,
and asks that we submit to His will.

2. With our passions and propen-


sities, if we break the yoke it is meet
we should wear, and do not serve
God, we at once bend our necks to
another yoke and serve slavishly our
own selves,

II. Christ’s yoke is an easy one to
wear. Only as a “yoke of wood.”

1. The yoke of Christ is a right one.
Serve Jesus Christ, and it is found that
the Christian law is perfection itself.

2. The yoke of Christ is framed in
our interest. To believe in Christ is
the highest wisdom : to repent of sin is
the most delightful necessity ; to follow
after holiness is the most blissful pur-
suit ; to become a servant of Christ is
to be made a king and priest unto God.
His is a blessed life,

3. Christ’s yoke is not exacting. He
in His grace, always gives us of His
bounty when He asks of us our duty.
A sinner must believe ; it is his own act ;
the Holy Spirit never believes for ary-
body, yet the Holy Spirit gives the
faith which the man exercises towards
God. He must repent; yet Christ is
exalted to “ give repentance.”

4, It is an easy yoke. Never did a
man wear it but he always loved to
wear it. The life of a Christian is not
chafed and galled by vexatious prohibi-
tions. Though the duties of holiness
are irksome to men who are not holy,
grace makes the heart rejoice in it. See
Addenda: ‘Curist’s YoKE Easy.”

5. The bright example of Christ makes
the yoke pleasani to bear. He Himself
has carried the very yoke we bear, and
we have blessed fellowship with Him
in this. See Addenda: “ Curist’s Ex-
AMPLE.”

6. All who have borne Christ’s yoke
have had grace given equal to the weight
of the burden. Never heard a com-
plaint of aged Christian against Christ
or against His yoke. Wolsey regretted
that he had not “ served God with half
the zeal he had served his king,” but
none has ever bewailed the zeal with
which he followed Christ !

7. Christians who have borne this
yoke always desire to get their children
into it, They long that their sons also
may serve the Lord, Often men say,
“T do not want my sons to follow my

493


CHAP, XXVIII





trade, it is wearying, its pay is small,”
&e.

TiI. Those who refuse Christ’s easy
yuke will have to wear a worse one,
“Yokes of iron.”

Adam wore an easy yoke in Paradise:
he broke it, and himself and his posterity
had to wear “ron yokes” ever since.

i, Turning from the right road, from
the cry of rectitude, because it threatens
shame or loss, will entail vaster after
losses.

2. Backsliders, by putting off the yoke
of Christianity, have not improved their
condition,

3. They who refuse the Bible and
follow tradition. Do these perverts of
the true Christian religion get an easier
yoke? No; there are penances and
mortifications, &e,

4, The self-righteous who attempt to
work their own way to heaven. Self-
righteousness is an iron yoke indeed,

5. Unbelievers, who will not believe
the simple revelation of God, presently
find themselves committed to systematic
misbeliefs, which distract reason, op-
press the heart, and trammel the con-
science.

6. Lovers of pleasure. Pleasure often
means lust, and gaiety means crime ;
and self-indulgence brings beggary and
degradation.

In the last tremendous day of Christ’s
coming to judgment, the Christian’s yoke
will be as a chain of gold about his neck;
but sin, pleasure, will be as an iron yoke,
a burden of enslaving woe.—C. dH.
Spurgeon.


Ver. 15. Theme: Taust PLACED IN
Lizs. “The Lord hath not sent thee;
but thou makest this people to trust
in a lie.”

I. Vastness of individual influence.
“Thou makest this people,” &. For
good or ill,

IL Dastardly cruelty of deception.
Like the leading of unsuspecting children
along a flowery path to a precipice.
“ Makest them trust in a lie /”

IIL Perilous readiness to rely on
fair words. Not merely to lésten, or to
find pleasure in hearing, but to “ trust.”
Man is stupidly incautious. The syren’s

494


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.


ee ee ee


song charms him, so he trusts her lead
ing, gves after her even to death !

IV. Appalling arrogance of falsity.
“The Lord hath not sent thee, yet,” &c.
Without any Divine commission, never-
theless Hananiah assumed the airs and
wielded the influence of a messenger of
God.

V. Conflict of falsehood with truth.
“Thou makest them trust in a le,
though the Lord hath not sent thee.”

1. It was war against the true word
of God.

2. It was successful conflict with truth-
ful teaching.

3. It illustrates the lying ministry
which has been in all ages active.

4. It shows the hindrances amid
which God’s messengers work.


Ver. 16. Theme: THE SoLtemn Wakn-
Ina. ‘ This year thou shalt die,”

That we must die is certain, but the
hour is hid. Yet, if some prophet could
open to us the Divine decrees, it is quite
possible une or other of us wonld see
this sentence.

L Possibility of this event. This
year we may die.

1. For our life is the greatest uncer-
tainty in the world (James iv. 13, 14).

2. Because thousands have died the
last year (Eccles. iii. 2, “a time to die”),

3. Thousands will certainly die this
year, and we may be of the number.

4, Though we be young; for the
regions of the dead are crowded with
those who have died in youth,

5. Though we have not finished our
education.

6. Though we be in health and
vigour.

7. Though we be full of business,

8. Though we be not prepared for it.

9. Though we deliberately delay pre-
paration.,

10. Though we be unwilling to admit
the thought.

11. Though we may strongly hope
the contrary.

12. Though we promise ourselves
many years of pleasure (Luke xii. 19, 20).

TL Important consequences should
we die this year.

1. If we die unpardoned, unrenewed,


a a ee


ee en ee ere


ncaa


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; JEREMIAH.


OH4P. XXVIIL


eee eee ee he ee ee os


we should be for ever cut off from the
pleasures of this present life.

2. We shall have no pleasures to
substitute for those we lose.

3. All our hopes, as to the present
life, will for ever perish,

4. We shall be deprived for ever of
all the means of salvation (Eccles. ix. 10).

5. All our hopes of heaven will
eternally vanish (Prov. xi. 7).

To conclude—

i, How awful the thought of dying if
we are yet in our sins! Let us use the
interval for salvation.

iii How pleasing the thought, and
how happy the consequences, if we are
believers in Christ, that eternal redemp-
tion is so near !—Hannam.

Theme: On THE New YEaR. “ This
year thou shalt die.”

The unexpected death of this false
prephet is an instance of the extra-
ordinary interposition of the Almighty.
But the event holds lessons of universal
extent and application—

i. That it is “in God we live and
move and have our being.”

ii, That the period of death of each
individual is known to and appointed
by Him.

Observe—

I. This sentence is doubtless expres-
sive of the decision of God concerning
many this year.

1. The page of history affords no
record of a single year in which death
desisted from his work of destruction, or
the insatiable grave said, “It is enough.”
More than twenty millions die every year.

2. The last year of many ts now com-
menced, The aged, bowed down with
the weight of years, &c. In the mert-
dian of life, though bound to earth by
tenderest associations, Thousands in
the very morning of life, though hearts
beat high with hope, &c.


3. Various are the means by which
God’s design will be executed; through
the failure of vature; sickness ; acci-
dents ; after protracted illness; sud-
denly and without warning; retire at
night to rest but called into eternity
before morning ; or leave their homes in
the morning never more to return alive.

IL No individual can be certain
that this does not express God’s decision
concerning himself.

1. Utterly impossible for us to know
who are, or who are not, included in
God’s appointments,

2. The circumstances of some render
it most probable that this year will be
their last—the old, the infirm, &c.

3. Doubtless, those who think least
of death, and confidently reckon on
future years, will find this sentence
fulfilled.

IIL. It is the duty and interest of
all to use wisely the gracious hours
they enjoy.

1. A solemn question arises: What
4s tt to die? Not merely to csase from
cheering scenes of earth, &c., but to
pass from this state of being into the
immediate presence of our Maker and
Judge to “give account” (2 Cor v. 10).
It is to be rewarded (Rev. vii. 14) or
doomed (Mark ix 49).

2. Surely it is the duty of each to
ask, Am I prepared to die? The word
of God declares that “‘except ye repent,”
&c. (Luke xiii. 3) ; “that he who belteveth
not,” &. (Mark xvi. 16) ; that “ without
holiness,” &c. (Heb, xxii, 14); that
“ except born of the Spirit,” &c. (John
iii. 5). Let each ask, Am I thus pre-
pared ?

3. Let this year be commenced with
earnest preparation. Never can a more
favourable opportunity present jtsel{—.
J, Bunter, a.p. 1828.

See Addenda: Tue AVERAGE
LIFE.


ADDENDA TO CHAP. XXVIII_: ILLUSTRATIONS AND SUGGESTIVE EXTRACTS.


Ver. 13. CHRIst’s YOKE EASY. Queen
Elizabeth carried the crown in the pro-
cession of her sister Mary at the coro-
nation, and she remarked that 7 was
very heavy ; but some one standing hy


told her it would not be heavy when
she had to wear tt herself. So the
precepts which some men do but carry
in their hands seem very heavy ; but
when a man comes to know Christ and


495


CHAP. XXIX.


to love Him, those very precepts become
light and easy.—Spurgeon.

A man shall carry a bucket of water
on his head and be very tired of the
burden; but the same man when he
dives into the sea shall have thousands
of buckets on his head without per-
ceiving their weight, because he is in
the element and it entirely surrounds
him. The duties of holiness are very
irksome to men who are not in the
element of holiness; but when once
those men are cast into the element of
grace, then they bear ten times more and
feel no weight, but are refreshed thereby
with joy unspeakable.—Spurgeon.

CuRIsT’s EXAMPLE. Have you never
read in Grecian story how the Grecian
soldiers on their long marches grew
exceedingly weary, and wished that
the war were closed, they felt so
dispirited ? But there was a man whom
they almost adored as a god—Alexander
himself, and they saw him always shar-
ing their toil. If the road was rough,
the monarch walked with them ; if they
were short of water, Alexander woald
share their thirst. At the sight of him
every man grew strong. Oh! it is
grand to the believer to feel that, if
there be a trial or a difficulty in the
Christian life, Christ has borne it, and
Christ is with us bearing it still.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ;: JEREMIAH.





Ver. 16. Tae AVERAGE OF LiFE. “ The
average of life has altered. If a man
now lives a hundred years, we go miles
to see him. There is but one apple
where there were five blossoms. The
sexton rings the bell merrily at first ; at
last he tolls it.

“Men in these days undergo suffer-
ing, and great wear and tear of brain
and physical powers. Not one of the
hundreds of the brainworkers use any
moderation. Of printers, few ever live
to fifty. The watchmaker shortens his
own life as he measures the hours and
minutes for others. The chemist breathes
in death. The shoemaker wears out his
life at the last. The foundryman breathes
in filings. The muller breathes in dust
as he toils at the grist. The mason digs
his own grave with his trowel. What
you do, do quickly ; “‘ for this year thou
shalt die."—T. De Witt Talmage, D.D.,
a.D. 1872.


The past is a dream,
The future a breath,
The present a gleam
From birth unto death.—Orienéal.


** Men should strive to live well, not to live
long.” —Larl of Stirling.
“Then let us fill
This little interval, this pause of life,
With all the virtues we can crowd into it.”





CHAPTER XXIX.


Cririoan axp Exrcetroat Nores.—1l, Chronology of the Chapter.—This letter and its
transmission are usually dated the fourth year of Zedekiah’s reign (because of chap. xxviii. 1),
but ver. 2 of this chapter rather points to a somewhat earlier date, possibly the first or second
year of Zedekiah ; for Zedekiah himself had to go in his fourth year (chap, li, 59), and it is
probable therefore that this embassy was a year or two earlier.

2. Contemporary Scriptures.—2 Chron. xxxvi. 14-21; Ezek. xvii, 11-21.

8, National Affairs.—An embassy sent from Zedekiah to the king of Babylon, Its object
unknown ; but not unlikely to carry the tribute he was under bond to pay Nebuchadnezzar
(2 Chron. xxxvi. 18), and possibly to delude him by renewed pledges of obedience when he wag
couspiring, with the kings of other nations, to rebel against him (chap. xxvii. 8),

4, Contemporaneous History.—See notes on chap. xxi.

5. Personal Allusions.—Ver. 3. ‘‘ Hlasah,.’’ Most probably brother of Ahikam (see note
ehap. xxvi. 24), and would consequently be favourably received at the Chaldean court. Ver. 4.
“ Gemariah the son of Hilkiah.” Hilkiah was the priest who found the law in the house of the
Lord and showed it to Shaphan the scribe, who showed it to Josiah the king (2 Kings xxii. 8).
Different person from the Gemariah of Jer. xxxvi. 25, Ver. 21. ‘‘ Ahab, son of Kolaiah, and
Zedekiah, son of Maaseiah.” Two false prophets who traded upon the wishes and credulity of the
Babylonian captives, provoking them to revolt against Nebuchadnezzar, and were therefore
cast into the ‘‘ burning fiery furnace” (comp. Dan. iii. 6). Ver. 24. ‘‘ Shemaiah the Nehelamite.”
This Shemaiah would seem to have been the leader of these false prophets at Babylon, for he
wrote the letter in their name against Jeremiah, Ver. 25. ‘‘ Zephaniah the son of Maasciah”
(see on xxi. 1). He was the “second priest,” the pakéd, deputy “in the stead of Jehoiada the

496


et


es.


nae


Sal tea ities 8,


HOMILETIOC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. OHAP, XXIK.
SSSR ca a ge aN = eine a EE ee Oe
riest ” (ver. 26), and in this office he controlled the civil force which guarded the Temple.
er. 26, ‘ Jehoiada the priest.” Supposed by some to be the same conspicuous and influential
Jehoiada of king Joash’s reign (2 Kings xi. 15 ; 2 Chron. xxiii. 16) ; but as both Jehoiada and


Zephaniah are in this verse called “ officers in the house of the Lord,” t.¢., pakids, deputy highe
priests, the supposition falls.

6. Geographical References,—Ver, 24. “ The Nehclamite,” 4. é. belonging to the village of
Nehlam. A place of similar name existed somewhere between the Jordan and the EKuphratea
(comp. 2 Sam x. 16, 17); called there the *‘ Helam” or Chelam, and here Ne-chelam.

7, Literary Criticisms.—Ver. 2. ‘* The queen.” Nehushta, the queen-mother (comp. xii, 18).
Ver. 11. ‘An expected end.” MINK, lit., last, i.e., issue or future—“a future anda hope.”


Ver. 12. “* Ye shall go and pray unto Me.” Probably a Hebrew idiom for repeated and frequent
prayer (Michaelis); but better, going tothe place of prayer. Ver. 17. ‘‘ Like vile Jigs.” The
adjective comes from “WY, to shudder. Ver. 18. “ Deliver them to be removed :” vide note on
chap. xv. 4, p, 314. Though a different word from ‘“ vile,” shuddering, there is a play on the
sense of that word in the word rendered “removed” (ver. 18), “make them a shuddering.”


Ver. 22. A curse, nddp. Another ringing on the form of words. This “curse,” kelalah,
should be associated with the conduct of ‘the son of Kolaiah” (ver. 21), mdip, whom Nebu-


chadnezazar ‘‘ roasted” nbp, kalam, in the fire. Wer. 24. “ Nehelamite:” in margin, dreamer; but


this is an error, for the word (vide Geographical.Reference above) is a name of a place,
dase 5 closely resembles the word Chalam, “dreamer,” which Jeremiah so often usea
see ver, 8).


HOMILIES AND OUTLINES ON CHAPTER XXIX.
A Revo.turionary Epocns.


Zedekiah’s was certainly an uneasy throne. At home the people were restless,
the priests and princes eager to revolt. And in Babylon (to whose monarch he
was tributary, and whither the flower of the Jewish nation had already been
carried) the Chaldees were probably irritated, as the Romans were in later times,
at the determination of the Jews never to submit quietly to a foreign rule ; while,
also, there was the same ferment among the Jews in Babylon as there was among
those in Jerusalem, To quell this ferment among the exiles, he sent letters assuring
them that the captivity would continue for seventy years, and urging them to
settle down calmly and wisely, to make themselves homes, and give themselves to
industry and commerce, His words found acceptance there, but the false prophets
in Jerusalem did their utmost to thwart Jeremiah’s aim, and to atir among the
exiles resistance to his influence.


Ver. 1. Theme: Messaces To Exiues. is to them a source of permanent en-
“Now these are the words of the letter couragement,
Jeremiah sent from Jerusalem to the God looks after His afflicted and scat-
residue of the elders which were carried tered servants. He moved the Apostles
away captives.” James and Peter to write Epistles to

This was a letter from Jeremiah to the twelve tribes scattered abroad. John,
the captives and exiles, far from Jeru- when banished from Ephesus to Patmos,
salem their happy home. They were was favoured with high revelations from
then what we are now, strangers and God. During the seventy years’ cap-
pilgrims—exiles; and the directions tivity, Daniel was raised up to be a
given to them may be fitly applied by living consolation to the exiles; and
us, The captives would find very real here Jeremiah is directed to write a
consolations in this letter from the pro- letter to them by express commana of
phet whom God inspired to write it. God. This proves to us that in the

I. The very fact that a message was severest ways of justice God does not
gent to them under an express Divine forget His own children, but has in
appointment was consolatory. And _ reserve ample consolations for them,
this may teach us that, wherever God’s when they lie under the common judg
children are scattered, the written word ment.

aX 497


OHAP, XXIX,


A man would have thought that these
were driven away from God’s care
when they were driven out from the
sanctuary, but Ezekiel tells a different
tale (Ezek. xi. 16): “J will be a little
sanctuary in all countries whither they
come.” They at Jerusalem, it seems, had
the Temple, but without God; they at
Babylon shall have God, but without
the Temple, He applies seasonable
comforts under discouraging provi-
dences, and is bent upon making up
His jewels though they seem scattered
and lost. God gives a command to
Moab: “ Let Mine outcasts dwell with
thee, Moab.”

II. The particular Providence of
God, appearing on their behalf under
all their calamities, was a source of
consolation.

He is the Lord of Hosts, of all the
armies above and below, and yet is the
God of Israel ; and though He permits
their captivity, He does not break His
relation to them—their covenant-God
still, though under a cloud.

He assumes the active agency tn their
dispersion. “I have caused them to be
carried away.” Their sins were the pro
eurtng cause of their dispersion ; Nebu-
chadnezzar was the tnstrumental cause,
but God Himself was the efficient and
disposing cause. ‘“‘Is there evil tn the
city and I have not done st?” He
asserts the strictness of His justice,
visiting the sins of His own people upon
them. Certainly it must be a great sin
which induces a loving father to cast
his child out of doors, But sin is a
great scatterer, and is always followed
by a driving away and a casting out.
It drove the angels from heaven, Adam
from Paradise, Cain from the boundaries
of the visible Church, and the children
of Israel from their much-loved dwellings
in Zion. Your houses will be weary of
you when you dishonour God in them,
and you may live to be driven from
those comforts which you abuse to
excess,

Yet the fact of God’s being the agent
in their dispersion is referred to as a
ground of consolation ; since it reconciles
us to our troubles to see the hand of
God in them, and to trace an all-gracious

498





-dumb because Thou didst tt.”


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.


&“ IT was
“ He that
scattered Israel shall gather him.”

III. The promise of the stability
and security of their social and do
mestic interests was given. They
were promised “peace in the peace of
Babylon,” and were forbidden to plot and
intrigue against its political interests,
They were not to be known as agitators,
or ringleaders of revolt, but as peaceful
citizens. And it isa fact that they were
treated more like colonists than captives:
‘“* He made them pitied of those who car-
ried them captive.” If they were to “pray
for the peace” of Babylon, much more
should we for the welfare of our own
country.

The permanence and maintenance of
their domestic interests were provided
for. ‘* Build ye houses and plant gar-
dens ; take wives for your sons, that ye
may be increased and not diminished.”
This is just contrary to God’s command
to Jeremiah (xvi. 3) in Jerusalem, be
cause then the country was on the eve
of convulsion, but now they were in-
formed of a long captivity. Had God
given the hope of speedy return, their
minds would have been unsettled and
uneasy ; they would have applied to no
business, taken no comfort; but they
were given to calculate on long absence
from home.

Scripture deals honestly by us. It
tells us that through much tribulation
we enter the kingdom. “In every place
the Spirit testifies that bonds and im-
prisonments await us.” It tells us where
comfort cannot be found, and where our
peace is securely laid up: “Jn Me ye
shall have peace.”

IV. The prospect of a certain and
favourable issue to their trials.

“ Thoughts of peace and not of evil”
(ver. 11).—S. Thodey, a.p. 1834.


and merciful design in them.


Ver. 2. JEcontAR’s Captivity, Ne-
buchadnezzar, in the first half of hig
reign (B.0. 606-562), repeatedly invaded
Judea, besieged Jerusalem, carried away
the inhabitants to Babylon, and de-
stroyed the city and Temple. Two
distinct deportations are mentioned in
2 Kings xxiv. 14 (including 10,000


e


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.


persons), xxxv. 11; one in 2 Chron,
xxxvi. 20; three in Jer. lii, 28-30 (in-


cluding 4600 persons); and one in ~


Dan. i. 3. The two principal deporta-
tions were—

i, That which took place B.o, 598,
when Jehoiachim, with all the nobles,
soldiers, and artificers were carried away ;
and

ii, That which followed the destruc-
tion of the Temple and the capture of
Zedekiah, Bc. 588.—“ Captivities of the
Jews” (Dr. Smith).


Ver. 7. Theme: CuRistian Patriot-
tsm. “And seek the peace of the city
whither I have caused you to be carried
away captives, and pray unto the Lord
for it ; for in the peace thereof shall ye
have peace.”

The case of these people does not
exactly correspond with ours, but the
difference should heighten our obliga-
tions. Ought we not to seek the good
of our native land—the land of our
fathers’ sepulchres—the land where we
are protected by mild and wholesome
laws, where civil and religious freedom
are enjoyed in a higher degree than in
any other country in Europe; a land
where God has been known for many
centuries as a refuge; a land where
there are greater opportunities for pro-
pagating the Gospel, at home and abroad,
than in any other land under heaven #

I. Inquire into the duty of religious
people towards their country. “ Seek
the peace of the city.” The word “peace”
here means prosperity in general.

We should therefore seek our nation’s
welfare. Then—

1. We shall do nothing, and join in
nothing, that tends to disturb tts peace or
hinder its welfare ; ¢.g., conspiracies, in-
flammatory speeches, sow discontent and
disaffection, depreciate those who govern
in a way so as to bring government into
contempt,

2. Do everything in our power to pro-
raote its welfare ; ¢.g., a cheerful obedience
to the laws, respect for those who frame
and execute tliem, ready co-operation in
beneficent measures,

3. That we pray the Lord on its behalf.
Though banished from their Temple,





OHAP, XXIX.





these exiles had access to their God.
Ail our dependence, as a nation, is upon
God ; and therefore we should importune
Him, Further, there is a load of guilt
upon our country, and we sbould there-
fore supplicate mercy on its behalf.

II. The motives by which these
duties are enforced.

1. The interests of individuals and
families are closely connected with those
of a country.

2. Our interests as Christians are
interwoven with the well-being of our
country. What our advantages are we
should know to our grief were we once
to lose them.

3. Should the young be called upon
to take up arms for our country’s de-
fence, every one of us, parent, wife, or
friend, will (if we can pray for anything)
importune the Lord of hosts to cover
their heads in the day of. battle-—Rev,
Andrew Fuller (delivered at Kettering,
in 1803, at a time of threatened inva-
sion).


Theme: THE BEST CHRISTIANS THR
BEST CITIZENS.

I They know that the prosperity of
the whole is their own prosperity. They
do not, therefore, selfishly seek their
own advantage,

II. They actually labour with all
diligence for the furtherance of the
common good.

IIL They employ for this end the
power of Christian prayer.— Naegelsbach.


Theme: Tax Dutizs or CuRistIANs
TO THEIR CoUNTRY.

IL What are the things absolutely
necessary to the security and pros-
perity, the true glory and happiness, of
our country 4

1. The true honour of a nation, like
that of the individual, lies in character.
President Quincy affirms: ‘ Human
happiness has no perfect security but
freedom; freedom, none but virtue;
virtue, none but knowledge; neither
freedom nor virtue has any vigour or
immortal hope except in the principles
of the Christian faith and in the sane-
tions of the Christian religion.”

2. The security and prosperity of cur

499


CHAP, XXIX,


nation are inseparably associated with
the advancement of religion among the
people.

IL What are the best means for
securing those things which are essential
to our country’s highest welfare ¢

1. General diffusion of education,
“Education is a better safeguard of
liberty than a standing army.”

2. Equally essential that the people
be virtuous. Knowledge is power, but
unsanctified power is power for evil.

3. The general distribution of the
Bible. The Bible is the great instru-
ment for enlightening the conscience and
purifying the heart.

4. Preaching the Gospel. Our nature
is a wreck, a chaos, which the cross of
Christ alone can adjust.

5. Prayer. See 2 Chron. vii 13,
14; Ps. cvi. 23; Exod. xxxii. 10, dio.
John Knox, the great Scottish reformer,
prayed—“ Give me Scotland, or else I
die.” Queen Mary said she feared his
prayers more than an army of 10,000
men! (See Addenda: PRAYER FOR ONE'S
own CountrRY.)

IIL What arguments may enforce
the duties of personal and combined
activity in seeking the highest good of
our land ?

1. Because our own individual good is
intimately connected with its general
happiness and prosperity, ‘For in the
peace thereof ye shall have peace.”

2. We shall thereby recommend the
religion we profess.

3. The work of supplying our land
with the preached Gospel and with
religious institutions is the most wn-
portant work to which Christians can
devote their energies. — Rev. Samuel
Baker, D.D., Philadelphia, 1864.


Vers. 8, 9. DEcErvine PropHets. See
on chap. xiv. 14; xxiii. 21; xxvii. 14,
15.


Vers. 10-14. Theme: Gzacious
Purposes oF Grizvous PUNISHMENTS.
In the text four things :—The certain
punishment of sin. The certain fulfil-
ment of God’s gracious purposes, The
certain issue of sanctified afflictions,

500


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.





The certain acceptance of fervent devo-


“tions.


L The certain punishment of sin
“ After seventy years be accomplished
in Babylon I will visit you.” But
seventy years must be accomplished. And
mark, this threatening was fulfilied to-
wards the most pious of God’s people
among the Jews, as well as the most
impious. ‘One event happeneth to all.”
“* The soul that sinneth,” &c.

The blood of Christ, applied by faith,
delivers from the curse of sin hereafter,
but the consequences of sin are often
bitterly felt by God’s people here. It is
the law of Divine dispensations that sin
should bring sorrow; and it is the
tendency of Divine grace to make sn


appear exceeding sinful. Job and David '


and Hezekiah and Peter, even though
through rich grace their sins were for-
given and their hopes were restored,
found that it was “an evil thing and
bitter to ain against God;” and in the
text the pious Jews equally with their
irreligious countrymen endured captivity
in Babylon seventy years.

As the shadow follows the body, so
does anguish attend upon sin. We may
advance towards sin with pleasure in our
eye, but when we return it is with sorrow
and repentance in our heart.

IL The certain fulfilment of God’s
gracious purposes. “I will visit and
perform My good word. For I know
the thoughts,” &c. The “‘ good word”
was the word of promise of deliverance
from captivity, and the coming and reign
of Christ. ;

It is the mercy of the penitent sinner,
it is the comfort of the humblest believer,
that God is as true to His promises as
to His threatenings—as faithful to the
declarations of the covenant of His grace
as He is to the sentence of His holy
law—as ready to listen to the voice of
the blood of sprinkling as He was to
listen to the voice of the blood of Abel,
God will perform His good word to the
humblest spirit that has sought and
found rest at the foot of the cross. No
sin will be our ruin which leads us te
Christ for salvation, It is His own
language. “J, even I, am He,” and
“Come now, and let us reason.”


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR,





“I know the thoughts — thoughts of
peace.” God often thinks thoughts of
peace, when we suppose He thinks
thoughts of evil He occupies Himself
in merciful thoughts concerning their
spiritual peace of mind now and their
eternal peace hereafter.

The issue is to give you “an expected
end”? —a very desirable one, “ The
Lord will perfect that which concerneth;”
“ But the God of all grace,” &c.

APPLY IT To Curist, the expected
Messiah, in whom all God’s thoughts of
peace concerning His people issue. He
is the Alpla and Omega, the beginning
and the end of allthings. Of all things
in creation; “for all things were made
by and for Him.” All things in Serip-
wre: prophecies, promises, types, cere-
monies, sacrifices, “the end of the law.”
Salvation by Christ now and happiness
with Christ hereafter is the end of all
God’s gracious purposes and designs—
the end of the covenant of grace—the
end of God’s providential dispensations
—and the end of the totls and conflicts
of the Christian life. It is an end, an
issue, contemplated by faith, and warted
for by believers; “‘an expected end,”
“recewving the end of your faith,” &e.
And it is freely bestowed—thankfully
received—as a grace-gift. “ By grace
yes” “I will perform My good word ;”
‘* Heaven and earth may pass away,” &e.

IIL The certain issue of sanctified
afflictions (ver. 12). ‘Then shall ye
call and go and pray, and I will hearken.”
We cannot have a better proof of sano-
tified afflictions than when a spirit of
prayer is poured out—when we are
brought to our knees — taught the
futility of broken dependencies—taught
to find our happiness and all in God.
Distrust of ourselves—dependence on
Christ—confidence in God—bumility in
His presence—submission to His will—
and a delight in communion with Him
—these mark growth in grace.

IV. The certain acceptance of fer-
vent prayer. ‘Seek and find Me...
whole heart” (ver. 13). True of for-
giveness of sin—support in trouble—
deliverance, We must be earnest and
fervent, or shall have but a cold answer.
He that asks with a doubting mind and





CHAP, XXIxX,


a


wavering lazy desire, begs for nothing
but to be denied. God gives His people
what they ask, or better. We beg for
removal of present sadness — but He
gives that which makes us able to bear
twenty sadnesses, a cheerful spirit, peace-
ful conscience, joy in God, the antepast
of eternal rejoicings in His kingdom.
Remember how great a God you go
to, how great a need you have, how
great a thing you pray for.—&. Thodey,
A.D. 1827,


Ver. 11, Theme: Gop’s Gracious
THOUGHTS.

Near disasters clearly realised (ver.
10); yet future good confidently antici-
pated. As God would be in their cala-
mities, for He will punish sin, so He
designed their deliverance, for “ He will
not always chide, neither keep His anger
for ever.”

IL The Lord has “thoughts” con-
cerning His people. Yes! “Thoughts
of peace and not of evil” ‘ How
precious also are Thy thoughis/” True:
for “‘as the heavens are high above the
earth, so are Thy thoughts above our
thoughts,” &c. 80 then—

i. The Most High bows to the things
done upon the earth. Yes, and further:
He forms intentions respecting them.
And specially: He attentively regards
mankind to divide between Hts people
and their adversaries ; discerns between
our struggles, alarms, prayers, tears, do.,
and the scorn and oppression of those
hostile to us.

ii, He thinks about us! Is not in-
different, but intently concerned ; our
case occupies His thoughts, Benevolent
people will gwe to the poor, but not
think about the pleader. But God takes
us up into His “thoughts.” “I am
poor and needy, yet the Lord thinketh
apon me /”

1. God has “thoughts” of our present
condition. ‘‘ Remembers us in our low
estate.”

2. “Thoughts,” too, of our coming
calamities (ver. 10). “In the world ye
shall have tribulation,” &c.

3. But “thoughts” also of our future
deliverance and happiness.

Il. The Lord’s thoughts will be

501


et


HAP. XXIX.





Wrought out into accomplishment.
These thoughts of God were—

a. Unrecognised by His people's foes.
They act as if we were friendless. God
is not in their thoughts.

b. Unhindered by the world’s designs.
What foes intend against us, and may
do, does not alter nor impede God’s
designs.

1. God’s “thoughts” were not known
to us till we were enlightened, His mes-
sengers taught, but ‘we would not hear.”

2. How then should aliens know the
thoughts of God? Even “the servant
knoweth not what his lord doeth ;” how
should foes? “The natural man under-
standeth not the things of the Spirit of
God,” &c.

It. Adversaries know not against
what Divine “thoughts” and in-
tentions they strive. When they
would tnjure us; “He that toucheth
you toucheth the apple of His eye.”
Often they conspire against us; but “if
this thing be not of God it cannot
stand.” Gladly would hostile powers
condemn us; but “who is he that
condemneth? Christ hath died, yea,
rather is risen again; who is even at
the right hand of God.”

Remember how “Satan stood at God’s
right hand to resist” Joshua, and the
Lord answered, “ The Lord rebuke thee,
Satan,” d&c.

Think of Balaam, whom Balak would
have to curse Israel: ‘ How can I curse
whom God hath blessed?”

1. Lt cannot be done. Adversaries
intend ruin ; but God has preceded thetr
malice by His gracious designs / Human
passion cannot reverse the Divine pur-

se.

2. God's “thoughts” shall stand. He
thinks of us with love; and “I am
persuaded nothing shall separate us from
the love of God,” &. He intends our
redemption: and “whom He called,
them justified, glorified.” He means,
we shall have a glad future: and
‘Because I live ye shall live also.”


Hints: Tooucuts or Prace. We
must wait for their realisation ; for the
Lord delays this, but does not forget
‘t, —Naegelsbach.

502


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH


“ Whereupon is our hope of peace
based ?

1. Objectively upon this, that the
Lord Himself has thoughts of peace con-
cerning us,

2. Subjectively on this, that we (a)
call upon and seek the Lord with all our
hearts, (6) patiently wait for a time of
hearing.” — Nacgelsbach.

“The moral malady of man is two-
fold: at one time vain conjidence, then,
when that is disappointed, despair. Se
the Jews first laughed at God’s threats,
confident that they should speedily
return ; then, when cast down from that
confidence, they sank into inconsolable
despondency.”—Jamteson.


Ver. 12. “ Ye shali go and pray unto
Me, and I will hearken unto you.”
Fulfilled Dan. ix. 3, &. When God
designs mercy, He puts it into the
hearts of His people to pray for the
mercy designed. When such a spirit
of prayer is poured out it is a sure sign
of coming blessings.


Ver. 13. Theme: Goop NEWS FoR TRUE
Scexers, Some lament they have
been seeking God for months, but are
still unable to praise Him, But always
conclude that if a particular promise of
God does not turn out true to you, there
is something in you to hinder it.

I. The quality required in every
true seeker. It is wholeheartedness :
‘Search for Me with all your heart.” In
order to this there must be

1. An undivided object in the seeker’s
mind. ‘Ye shall seek Me and find Me
when ye shall search for Me,” &c. Yes;
“Oh that I knew where I might find
Him!” Shake off all attention to self.
No reservation must be made for the
gratification of pride.

2. “ With all thy heart” means with
the entire faculties of our being. Rouse
thy understanding. Use memory aud con-
science. Bring thy will into the effort.

3. It mainly signifies aroused energy.
Getting out of that dull, sluggish, in.
different spirit which is so common;
being resolute, importunate.

II. The reasons for this whole
keartedness being required—-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


CHAP, XXIX,





1. In every other pursuit, where the
object is at al. worthy of a man’s efforts,
wholeheartedness is required.

2. The danger from which we need
to escape is so great that the utmost
earnestness is none too much.

3. Look, moreover, at the greatness
of the mercy thou art seeking.

4. Everybody else is in earnest : Satan,
to ruin thee ; Christ, to save thee, &c.

5. Youhave been wholehearted enough
én the ways of sin.

6. How can there be anything trwe
about your seeking if it be not whole-
nearted 4

7. That which you seek, if you obtain
tt, 1s a wholehearted thing.

8. The believer's obedience is whole-
nearted (Ps. cxix. 69).

III. Hindrances to a wholehearted
eearch.

1. Presumption. “ Because God wants
as saved, we need not make much effort.”
Or, “Salvation is so simple, any day
will do to attend to it,” &ec.,

2. Remaining self-confident. They
think there is at least a little good about
themselves.

3. Despair. Some do not believe
you can be forgiven, &e.

4, The conduct of Christian professors.

—C. H. Spurgeon, a.D. 1876.


Compare Homilies on chap. xxiv. 7.


Ver. 14. GaTHERING THE EXILES
HomE. See on chap. iv. 1; xxiii. 3;
xxiv. 5.

Vers, 15-19. Comp. xxiv. 8-10;
xvii. 13, d&c.

Ver. 22. ‘“ Whom Nebuchadnezzar


roasted in the fire.”

Daniel’s record of the punishment
threatened against all who refused to
“ worship the image Nebuchadnezzar the
king set up,” is that “ whoso falleth not
down and worshippeth shall the same
hour be cast into the midst of the burn-
ing fiery furnace ” (Dan. iii. 6).


_ “Here was the warrant for that iniqui-
tous barbarity—the burning of heretics,
It originated in Babylon. ‘The Lord
make thee like Zedekiah and like Ahab,
whom the king of Babylon roasted in
the fire.’ It is, at least, impressive to
recall how Rome used this same hate-
ful and hellish weapon of vengeance,
and that too fer the same godless pur-
pose, namely, to subject the souls of men
to her idolatry, burning as_ heretics
those who refused to worship her image ;
thus emphatically identifying herself
with the ‘ Babylon’ whose cruelty and
sins the Apocalypse portrays, and
against whom the most solemn curses
of Heaven are pronounced.”—Crowds
of the Bible (pp. 55, 56), by Rev. W. H.
Jeliie.


Ver. 24, seg. JEREMIAH’S SECOND
LETTER TO THE EXILES, The messen-
gers (ver. 3) of the first letter brought
back a strong protest from the false
prophet Shemaiah directed to Zepha
niah, condemnatory of Jeremiah for
pronouncing the captivity “long” (ver.
28), and reproving the authorities for
their supineness in not apprehending
him, urging Zephaniah to put him “ in
prison and in the stocks ” (ver. 27).

Zephaniah, instead of lending him-
self to be the instrument of their rage,
showed the letter to Jeremiah (ver. 29).

Whereupon Jeremiah again wrote the
exiles, “the word of the Lord,” in which
Shemaiah was denounced as—

1. Falsely assuming to be Jehovah's
prophet (ver. 31).

2. Misleading the credulous hopes of
the exiles, “causing them to trust in a
lie.” For which crime there is pro-
phesied—

1. Punishment from God upon himself
and his seed,

2. Complete extinction of his family
line, ‘“ because he hath taught rebellion
against the Lord.” See on chap xxviil,
16.


ADDENDA TO CHAP. XXIX.: ILLUSTRATIONS AND SUGGESTIVE EXTRACTS.


Ver. 7. PRAYER FOR ONE'S OWN
country. John Knox used to be in
such agony for the deliverance of his
con»trv that he could not sleep. He


had a place in his garden where he used

to go to pray. One night he and

several friends were praying together,

and, as they prayed, Knox spoke, declar-
503


OHAP. XXX,


—


ing that deliverance had come. He


explained that he could not tell what ~


had happened, but he felt sure that in
some way their prayers had _ been
answered, And the next news informed
them that their enemy, Mary Queen of
Scotland, was dead.

At one time during the Lutheran re-
formation, soon after the conference of
Augsburg in 1530, when the Reformer’s
cause looked mournful, Melancthon, with
Luther and other divines, met to con-
sult about the situation; and, after
spending some time in prayer to God,
Melancthon was suddenly called out of
the room, from which he retired heavily
depressed. While absent he saw several
elders of the reformed churches with
their parishioners and families; and
many, young and old, were in prayer
for the triumph of their cause. He





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


inquired, ‘“ What now has happened to
you, Philip, that you are become so
cheerful?” ‘Oh, sirs;” replicd Melan
cthon, “let us not be discouraged, for 1
have seen our noble protectors, and such
as, I will venture to say, will prove
invincible against every foe.” “ And
pray,” returned Luther, thrilling with
surprise and pleasure, “ who and where
are these powerful heroes?” “Oh,”
said Melancthon, “they are the wives of
our parishioners and their little children,
whose prayers I have just witnessed—
prayers which I am satisfied our God
will hear; for as our Heavenly Father
and the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ
has never despised our supplications, we
have reason to trust that He will not in
the present alarming crisis.” The event
proved that Melancthon was not mis-
taken, God heard their prayera—Coz’s





re-entered the room with a joyous coun- “ Ltfe of Melancthon.”
tenance, which astonished Luther, who
CHAPTER XXX.


Carrican anp Execettoat Notrs.—Chronology of the Chapter.—Though without a date,
yet the probability is that it was ‘‘ «written in a book” (see ver. 2) in the tenth year of Zedekiah;
and that this date [given at the head of chap. xxxii.] applies to the four chapters, xxx. to xxxiii,
inclusive. But it is open to dispute whether the prophecies contained in chapters xxx, and
xxxi. were not delivered at a considerably earlier date. Naegelsbach dates these two chapters
as “the oldest part of the whole book” of Jeremiah; and, carefully comparing their subject.
matter with the prophecies of chapters iii—vi., declares that their correspondence, “both in
general and in particular,” fixes them as belonging to “the same period ;”’ specially pointing
out that the absence of all mention of the Chaldeans, and the use of the early indefinite phrase,
“the north country” (xxxi. 8), “is a sure sign of its composition before the fourth year of
Jehoiakim.” Vide Chronological Notes on chaps. iii. and vii. Also same references for
Contemporary Scriptures, National Affairs, and Contemporary History.

Literary Criticisms.—Ver. 5. “ For thus saith the Lord ;” rather, “ Surely thus,” &. “Of
fear and not of peace ;” of “fear and no peace.” :

Vers. 10, 11. “ ‘ore fear thou not,” to end of ver. 11, are omitted by the LXX., Hitzig,
Movers, and Kuenen, and regarded as an interpolation from chap. xlvi. 27, 28.

Ver, 11. “Correct thee in measure :” “in justice,” vide x. 24.

Ver. 13. “ Bound up: healing medicines.” The verse, more correctly punctuated and ren-
dered, may read thus; “ None undertakes thy case to heal thee ; for binding thy wounds, healing-
plaister thou hast none.” ’

Ver. 15. “ Thine affliction:” thy breach. “For the multitude,” &¢. ; rather, “ Because of
the greatness of thine iniquity, use thy sins are innumerable,” &c. ;

Ver. 18. “Her own heap :” 2A, devation, mound, specially of ruins; it may refer to the city
heap of ruins. ‘‘And the palace shall remain :” rather, “be inhabited.” “After the manner
thereof ;” t.e.. with suitable splendour. }

Ver. 21. “And their nobles shall be of themselves.” An important alteration necessary. Both
WIN and 2WD refer to one person, and is here described as “their Glorious One” and “their
Ruler.” Further, He is “to draw near and approach unto Me;” a phrase distinctively used of
one in the priestly office (Exod. xix. 22; Lev. xxi. 21). Yet more, it is asked as in wonder,
“ Who is this that engaged his heart to approach unto Me?” and should read, “ Who is He that
hath pledged His heart,” &. ; 4.¢., that hath risked His life in the daring approach ; for death
sealed that action (Numb. viii. 19). The combination of these qualities—“ Glorious One and
Ruler,” priestly approach to God ; and of His very life in His seal for His people ;~-al!
this ‘points to none other than the Person and ministry of THE MussiaH.


504


— Eee ee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.


—-





OHAP. xxx,








SURVEY OF CHAPTERS XXX. AND XXXI.


THE Guorious Futurs or THE Peopie or ISRAEL at THE END or Days,


I, Genera THEME, xxxi. 3.


Il. Taz Dewiverance or Entire Ispac., xxx. 4-22,
1. The great day of judgment for the world and deliverance of Israel,


soo asl


2. The turn of affairs: Jevovah for the chastised against the chastisers,


xxx ols.


3. The consummation of salvation, xxx. 18-22,
TL Tse Spzcrat DistrisutTion or SALVATION TO THE TWO DIVISIONS OF THR


Nation, xxxi. 1-22.
A. Ephraim’s share—


1. The decree of restoration, xxxi. 1-6,
2. The execution, xxxi, 7-14,
3. The threefold turn, xxxi. 15-22,


B. Judah’s share—


The blessing of the sanctuary, xxxi. 23-26.
IV. Tar Entize Renewat, xxxi. 27-40,


1. The new life, xxxi. 27-30.


2. The new covenant, xxxi. 31-40,


—WNaegelsbach in Lange,


HOMILIES AND OUTLINES ON CHAPTER XXX.


Ver, 2. Theme: Gov’s Mzssack Im
Writing. “ Write thee all the words
which I have spoken to thee in a book.”
This was in distinction from messages
tm speech—oral prophecy.

L Written words travel farther
than spoken. Absent ones—Israel scat-
tered abroad—were to receive tt ; as well
as Judah, who was within the hearing
of Jeremiah’s voice. The prophecy could
not reach them unless copies were distri-
buted in the different countries wherein
they were dispersed.

IL Written words are preserved
better than spoken.

1. In their exactness. Not a jot or
tittle falls. But memory might let
some items fail if left unwritten.

2. In their entirety. Hearers only
gather half, or fractions, of a message.

3. In their significance. Words of
vast meaning require to be studied to
see all their suggestiveness ; and for this
the “ book ” is best.

II. Written werds fulfil a more
enduring ministry than spoken. These
“ words” were—

1. For every nation and age: having
a spiritual purport and universal value.

2. And they would, if written, prove
a monument to prophetec veracity. This


would strengthen the faith and assure
the hearts of God’s people in every
emergency.

IV. Written words fill a sphere
which spoken cannot reach.

1. They go into privacy, for medita-
tion.

2. Into scenes of banishment and
affliction and sorrow, for comfort.

3. Into despised and neglected scenes,
where none would expect to find inte
rested hearers, carrying light and hope
to the abandoned and despairing.

As the people went into exile, they
could carry these words of Jeremiah
with them to be their consolation and
strength amid coming distress and trial


Ver. 3. Theme: Exites Restorep.
Comp. on chap, xvi. 15, &c., and xxiv. 6.
Specially see Sectional Treatment of chap.
iii pp. 58 to 60 supra. Also see on iv, 31


Vers. 5,6. Theme: CoNsTERNATION
or THE GuiLTy, Comp.Sectional Homily
on vi. 18-26, pp. 120, 121, and on vi.
22-26, p. 133, Also Homily on chap.
xxii. 20-23, Hastentng Desolations.


Ver. 7. Theme: Tue Great Day.
“Alas! for that day is great, so that none
505


CHAP. XXX,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





is like it.”. The day of judgment for the
world; “none like it.” For it will be—

L. A day of anxiety and terror for all
the world.

II. A day of deliverance from distress
for the children of God.

III. A day of realisation of all the
happiness set in prospect before us.—
Naegelsbach.


Ver. 7. Theme; DELIVERANCE FROM
Troupe. “It is even the time of
Jacob’s trouble; but he shall be saved
out of it.”

Bacon has magnificently remarked of
3ome of the PRropHxciEs of Scripture
that they have “springing and germt-
nant accomplishment, throughout many
ages, though. the height or fulness of
them may refer to some one age,” This
is true of many of the prophecies con-
cerning the Jews; for though many
of them were fulfilled in their ancient
captivities, they still continue to be
fulfilled in their present dispersion.

But what is true of the prophecies is
eminently true of the proMIsEs of Scrip-
ture—they have a springing and germi-
nant accomplishment, They are framed
with such an exquisite knowledge of
human nature, and so accurately accord
with the principles of the Divine govern-
ment, which are the same in every age,
that they are adapted to all the circum-
stances in which Christians can be
placed, and receive a distinct fulfilment
in the history of each individual believer,
Thus, “instead of the fathers are the
children.” As the troubles of God’s
people are similar, so the supports they
enjoy are similar—they are identical—
and the deliverances of one age form the
hope and consolation of all “ Jt is
even the time,” &e.

I. It is a part of God’s merciful dis-
pensations that they endure trouble.

II. It is equally so that they should
be supported in and delivered from it.

I, It is a part of God’s merciful dis-
pensations that they should be called
to endure trial. Like their Lord, they
must expect to be made acquainted
with grief ; and like Jacob, in the text,
they must expect to have their time of
trouble.

50€


It is a part of God’s dispensation ;
for “trouble does not spring from the
dust.” Js there evil in the city and the
Lord hath not done it? And it is a
part of God’s merciful dispensation,
however oppositely it may appear to us3
“ for He doth not afflict willingly.”

Every season of life, and every period
of the Christian’s life, has its trouble.

1. The time of conversion is a time of
Jacob’s trouble. He goes forth weeping,
Sorrow for sin is real sorrow ; doubts
of his acceptance and fears of his rejec-
tion often fill him with dejection and
alarm, and he says, “OA, that I knew,” &e,
But there is a balm for his sorrow, there
is a remedy for his grief: “ He shall
be saved out of it,” by looking to the
cross. “ Yea, he wept; he found Him
ix Bethel.”

2. The time of spiritual dejection, and
darkness, and disconsolation, is a time
of Jacob’s trouble. This is sometimes
produced by consciousness of sin, with-
out sufficient apprehension of the power
and willingness of Christ to save, some-
times by dzstrust, sometimes by neglect
of duties, sometimes by a constitutional
tendency to gloom and despondency ;
but, from whatever cause arising, it is
often difficult to bear. David found it
so when he said, ‘‘ Hath God forgotten ?”
&c. ; and Hezekiah when he said, “ Z
shall go softly all my years;” and Daniel
when he ate no pleasant bread ; and
Jonah when he said, “‘Z am cast out.”
yet, “he shall be saved out of it;” “JZ
have seen his ways and will heal ;” “ He
that walketh in darkness,” &c.

3. The time of worldly perplemities
and disappointments—cares, anxieties,
vexations, reproaches, are the Christian’s
lot here ; losses in business, domestic
grievances, straitened circumstances,
actual poverty, are the means which
God employs to teach the Christian this
is not his rest, to draw off his mind
from the vanity of life, and to teach him
that his final hope must be in God.
What was true of Israel is true of us:
“God led them by the right way.” We
know it was not the shortest way, nor
the smoothest, but it was the right way.
And God leads His people still in those
paths best adapted to try character, to


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


Sa a a —— eS RS





develop principle, to promote sanctity
ef spirit and spirituality of mind, “ By
these things,” says Hezekiah, “men live,
and wm all these things are the life.”
Every one has his trial fitted to his state
of mind.

(a.) Some have a resolute, independ-
ent, self-willed spirit. God suffers them
to be wounded with reproach, to suffer
with the scourge of tongues, and chastens
them with the rod of men; or they
are wasted with disease and visited
with strong pain.

(o.) Some are ambitious, and aspiring,
and sanguine, and given to enterprise ;
but as they climb, so they fall, God
unravels their schemes, breaks up their
plots and purposes, advances them to
poverty, and feeds them with the bread
of tears, Why all this? Was it to ruin
them? No; but to save them from ruin,

(c.) Others fix their affections too
deeply upon the creature, upon the
smile of friends, the love of parents,
the endearments of family connections,
God removes these to bring them nearer
to Himself. They are afflicted in the
creature, and the time of their trouble
is the time in which they witness the
sorrows of those they love.

4. The time of death is the time of
Jacob’s trouble,

IL Whatever their calamity, they
shall be supported in it, carried
through it, delivered from it. They
have always a Resource ; the Arm that
apholds the universe upholds them ; the
Wisdom that ordains the trial guides
and guards them through it, The irre-
ligious has no refuge, no tower, but
“the name of the Lord ts,” &c. Every
creature hath a retiring-place: the
conies the rocks, the lion his den; the
foxes have holes and the birds nests,
‘but the wicked no hiding-place.

God is your friend. His character is
your hope ; His promises your security ;
His heaviest chastisements are your en-
souragements,

1. What He has said to others He says
to you: “ Fear not, Abram,” “I am
God all-sufficient ;” “I will not leave.”

2. What He has done for others He
will do for you.

%. What He has already done for you


CHAP. XXX,


and yours should warrant hope: “de
livered in six troubles”—Rev. &
Thodey, a.D. 1824.


On verse 7. For semilar themes, see
on chap. xvii, 17, “ The Soul’s Hope in
the Time of Terror ;” and chap. xxiii. 6,
“A Bright Era for Mankind.”

Comments—

The partial deliverance at the downfall
of Babylon prefigures the final and
complete deliverance of [srael, literal and
spiritual, at the downfall of mystical
Babylon (Rev. xviii. 19).—Jamieson.

The day of restoration is contrasted
with the day of destruction. ‘In that
day” the yoke of Babylon, which Jere-
miah had symbolised by his own act, at
God’s command (xxviii. 2-12), will be
broken from the neck of Judah ; and this
phrase, ‘that day,” doubtless, is to be
extended, ina larger sense, to the day of
Christ’s coming, when all Israel would
be delivered from a worse yoke than
that of Babylon. Comp. Isa x 37;
Ezek. xxxiv. 27.— Wordsworth.


Vers.8, 9. Theme: SLAVERY EXCHANGED
vor Service. ‘“ Strangers shall no more
hold him in servitude (Henderson’s
rendering), but they shall serve the Lord
their God and David their king, whom I
will raise up unto them.”

I. Tyranny rules over men with
grievous severity. “Yoke” and “bonds”
are symbols of despotic oppression.

1. National and political despotism , ita
iron-handed andiron-hearted government,

2. Ecclesiastical and smritual despo-
tism ; its usurpation of all natural relation-
ships, social ties, and religious liberties,

Note.—The shameful selfishness which
prompts despotism, ‘ serve themselves of
him ;” for greed of power, delight in
securing abject submission, spoliation
of possessions, &c., are the lust of all
tyrants over the lives or souls of men.

‘IL Liberty unbridled will prove no
special advantage even to its possessor.
“Tf all ‘ yokes” are gone and “ bonds”
broken from men, without any healtliful
control being substituted, men would
become furious, victims of their own
passions and self-will,

1. Liberty fromtyranny is av ne

50


OHAP. XEX.








only when the control of God és subs(itited


and accepted in its stead, ey., * They


ehall serve the Lord their God,” kc.

2. This subjection to God ws betier and
cafer than all human government and
sale. It is a guarantee of good when
«tod becomes our Governor, to rule us
and care for our safety.

II. Divine rule is exercised through
the kingship of Christ. ‘Serve the
»ord their God and David their king.”

1. God will not govern otherwise than by
dis Son. Rejecting Him as “ king,”—
lim whom God has set over us, and
iby whom God would have us governed—
we shall be rejected by God. It is not
God’s intention to rule us directly,
without the mediation of His Son, We
must therefore obey Christ, and thus
serve God.

2. It 1s in the sway of Jesus that this
promise is fulfilled. David was dead
when Jeremiah wrote, he never lived
again to rule, yet God promised to per-
wetuate David’s throne; but no king
«ver rose subsequent to this prophecy to
vale the nation. Zerubbabel only held
& fleeting and precarious dignity ; and
ealy Christ has realised aud fulfilled
this promise. But Jesus does rule—“ the
Xing of saints’—and blessed are they
that serve Him.

IV. All our gracious liberty in
Qhrist must be traced to God. “Whom
© will raise up unto them.”

1. We must rejoice in Christ’s king-
ahip as God’s gift of grace to us.

2. Christ, and all blessings which flow
to us in Him, must be viewed as the
wutfiow of God's great goodness to us.
~'God so loved the world that He gave
sis only-begotten Son.”


Ver. 10. Theme: Recovery or Lost
FyRAEL. See Homilies indicated under
ver, 3 of this chapter; also see Topic,
stecovery of the Lost Ten Tribes, chap.
Xxxiil. 8, on pp. 458, 459.

On “ He shall return, and be in rest,
and be quiet,” see Homily on chap, xxiii.
4.


Ver. 11. Theme: Nations OBLITE-
242ep; IsrarL Presrveb. “A full endof
ai Pations, yet not 4 full end of thee.”
508


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


he a


We have here ocular proof of »ro
phecy accomplished in an instance with.
out parallel. It was repeatedly foretold,
both in the Old and New Testaineuts,
that, for the rejection and murder of
their Messiah, the Jews should be dis
persed into ail the countries; yet that
they should not be lost and swallowed
up among their conquerors, but should
still subsist, to latest times, a distinct
people. By Jeremiah God declared “ Ha
would make an end of all nations,” theis
oppressors, “but He would not make
an end of them.” It cannot be said
this prediction was written since the
event; and certainly an occurrence more
singular, or improbable, could not have
been predicted, In the course of luman
affairs, who hath heard such a thing]
Yet so it is. The mighty monarchies of
Assyria, Persia, Greece, and Rome are
vanished like the shadows of the evening,
or the phantoms of the night. Theis
places know them no more. Nothing
remains of them but their names, Whilst
this little despised people, strangely secure,
without a friend or protector, amidst the
wreck of empires, oppressed, persecuted,
harassed always, by edict and execu-
tioners, by murders and massacres, have
outlived the very ruins of them all, ‘ Ex-
cept ye see signs and wonders ye will
not believe.” Behold, then, a sign and
wonder : the acccauplishment of prophecy
is a standing miracle. Contemplate the
sight as it deserves, and be not faithless
but believing.— Bishop Horne.

“Not MAKE A FULL END OF THEE,”
See on chap. iv. 27; v. 18.

Also for Theme» Leniznt Corrzc-
tion: “I will correct thee in measure,”
&c. See chap. x. 24.


Vers. 12-15. Theme: FattHuess
Heaters aND VaIn RemMeEpties.

“ Bruise incurable,” see viii. 22 ; alse
xvii. 9.

““ Wound ts grievous, see x. 19; xiv:
Li sexvals.

“ No healing,” see vi. 14; viii. 11;
xv. 18.

“ All thy lovers have forgotter thee,”
see iii, 1 ; iv. 30; xxii. 20, 22; xxvii.


“ Thy sins are increased,” vee V. 4,


On—


a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


—_————.


L Helpless : “Incurable;” “ wounds
Zrievous,” ver. 12,

II. Hopeless : “ None to plead;” “no
healing medicines,” ver. 13.

Il. Deserted by man: ‘“‘ Lovers have
forgotten thee ; seek thee not,” ver. 14,

IV. Smitten by God: ‘ Wounded
thee ;” ‘“‘ chastised thee,” ver. 14.

V. Justly suffering: “ For the mul-
titude of thine iniquity ; because thy
sins are increased,” ver, 14,

VI. Rejected outcries: “‘ Why criest
thou,” &e., ver. 15.

VIL Sins’ woes: “ Because sins—i
have done these things unto thee,”

VIII. Remedy implied: Cease sins
and escape their doom,


Ver. 13. Theme:
ornEs, “Thou hast no healing medi-
cines.” Doctors abound who undertake
the cure of souls; but they heal not
their maiadies. “Ye are physicians of
no value,”

IL There are healing medicines
adapted to heal all the maladies of the
sin-stricken soul. Though “thou hast
them not,” yet such there are!

1. They are found in Christ. “ Wis-
dom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption,”

2. There are none besides. Though
professed spiritual healers offer other
remedies, they have ‘no healing medi-
cines,” if they offer aught else but what
the Gospel offers.

Il. There are cruel delusions prac-
tised. By priests and ministers of the
sanctuary, who flatter themselves that
they have effected a cure, and deceive
their patients, ‘They have healed the
hurt of the daughter of My people
slightly, saying, Peace, peace, when there
ig no peace.” Who are these !—

1. Teachers of the confessional abo-
minations,

2. Teachers of the baptismal regenera-
tion fallacies,

3. Those who administer the Lord’s
Supper to the dying as a means of peace
with God.

4, Preachers of self-reliance and self-
righteousness for salvation.

It is one thing to deaden a pain,

nother to heal a wound |


Heratina Mepr-





OMAF. IX.


ee


III. For mourners over sin there is
efficient healing, On no other truth
can there be explained—

1. The angels’ joy over penitent
sinners.

2. The Saviour’s gladness in reclaim-
ing the guilty,

3. The remonstrances of Scripture over
the unhealed (chap. viii. 22),

4. The assurance of the blessedness
following true sorrow. ‘Blessed are
they that weep, for they shall be com-
forted,”


Ver. 16. Theme: Ir Gonv’s Proprz
SUFFER, 8HALL His Fors Escapr !
“ Therefore all that devour thee shall
be devoured ; and all thine adversaries,
every one of them, shall go into cap
tivity,” dc.

L Though evil men seem now to pre
vail against Israel, their day of woe is
coming.

IL Though God may use our adver-
saries for our chastisement because we sin,
they shall bear the iniquity and punish-
ment of their deeds.

IIL Though for a while the judgment
of God spares the wicked while afflicting
the righteous, yet the very afflictions of
His people are a prophecy and gua-
rantee that the heavier woes pro-
nounced against the guilty will in due
time fall on them.

IV. Though mercy rules the afflictions
of God’s people, softening their sorrows,
and working all for their good, judgment
without mercy shall sweep down on
“every one” of God’s and His people’s
adversaries.

V. Though from the “devourer,” the
“captiity,” and the “spoil,” there will
be sure escape for banished Israel, yet
from the doom coming upon ‘the foes
of God and Israel there shall be no
alleviation or escape.


Ver. 19. Theme: How Gop Recarps
THE TREATMENT SHOWN TO THE JEWS.
“This is Zion, whom no man seeketh
after.”

Was man justified in despising them,
because they were under chastisements
from an offended God? Though the Jews
were the authors of their own misery,

bOg


CHAP. XXX.


the contempt poured upon them by their
adversaries He will punish, =

L What ts the treatment almost
aniversally shown to the Jewish
people ? The historic view of the con-
duct of different nations specially since
their dispersion by the Romans.

Cruelties inflicted upon them by
different potentates of Europe, not ex-
cepting those of our own country. Cite,
in example, the clamour raised through-
out our land against the Act for removing
Jewish disabilities. Nor is this cic
intolerance all: their religious interests
are disregarded and neglected.

The serious fact is, not that we per-
secute them, or even neglect them, but
this—the self-vindication which we cherish
im the midst of this neglect, and the
eageness with which we catch at any-
thing by which we may justify that
neglect.

Il. The light in which such conduct
is viewed by God. This contempt of
others leads Him here to declare, by way
of recompense, that He would restore to
His favour the people so contemned.

1. Mark the tnhumanity of it. Jews,
no less than ourselves, have immortal
souls ; yet we make no effort for their
salvation! Note Deut. xxiii. 3, 4.
Yet we hold from them the Bread of
Life, &c.

2. The tnjustice of it. Gospel to be
preached to “every creature,” beginning
at Jerusalem (see Rom. xi. 30,31). We
are debtors to them (Rom. xv. 26, 27).

3. The ingratitude of it. Jews—the
Apostles—laboured for Gentiles ; should
not we, in return, for them? (Phil. ii,
17, 18.)

4. The imprety of it. Christ became
“a curse” for us; surely it is our reason-
able service to do all we can for His
glory. Alas! Ezek. xxxiv. 6.

I. The explanation of this sinful
negligence towards the Jews.

1. Ignorance of the prophetic writings
which so generally prevails,

2. Indifference to all spiritual interests
which prevails—even about your own
souls, Too many of us have never
ecught salvation for ourselves; how, then,
be concerned for others?— Bev. C.
Sssveon, ILA.

510


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; JEREMIAH.





‘See Comments, &., on chap. xv, 4, 5,


Theme + Heatine PRomtsep.

i. Statement of our case: “ The whole
head 2s sick, and the whole heart faint;
there is no soundness in us,” dc, (Isa,
i. 5).

i. Prayer of the consciously sick:
“Lord, be merciful unto me, heal my
soul, for I have sinned against ‘lhee”
(Ps. xli. 4).

iii, Promise from God: “I will restore
health unto thee, and I will heal thee of
thy wounds” (Jer. xxx. 17).

Believe in your sickness, Believe in
the Divine Physician. Believe in Hts pro
mise, and pray.


Vers. 18-20. Zion REPROPLED, See
on chap. xvii. 25, 26.


Ver. 21. Theme: IsRazt’s own GLo-
Bious Kina. See Lit. Crit. on verse.

The words should read: “And his
Glorious One shall spring from himself
[Israel]; and his Ruler shall go forth from
his midst ; and I will cause Him to draw
near, and He shall approach unto Mz;
for Who is this that hath pledged His
heart to draw near unto Me?”

1. This verse emphatically repudiates
a foreign and alien kingship ; for, after
the return from exile, Israel’s Glorious
Ruler is to be a native Prince springing
“from the midst” of the people them-
selves.

2. Next, Jehovah will cause Him to
draw near, t.¢e., to Himself; in like
sacred access to that exclusively per-
mitted to consecrated priests in the ful-
filment of their solemn office. So that
He is to fulfil a Sacred Office as well as
to possess personal Royalty.

3. Then, He pledges His very life in
approaching God, t.e., He wili carry
His life, His “heart,” into the effort of
mediation with God. And Messiah alone
has made His life responsible as a
Surety (Heb. vii. 22, ix. 11-15), in order
to gain access, not only for Himself, but
for us to God. “ Heart” is here put
for “life,” in order to express the
courage, the intense purpose required, to
undertake so tremendous a suretyship.
This question therefore implies admira-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH,


tion, astonishment at One being found
ready and co.., “ent for the task.

L lu origin: sdte7siah’s humanity,
and His affiliation wivu us.

He springs from ‘‘ our midst ;” is a
native, born of us and amongst us,

Il. In Person: Messiah’s dignity,
end His superiority over us.

He is indeed of Israel, but fa. *xan-
ascends man in His own natural 1.2-esty.
He is Israel’s “‘ Glorious One.” Stanuu.>
alone in His dignity ; the Crown of hu-
manity ; the “ One” who is “ Glorious.”

Ili. In office: Messiah’s royalt,,
nid His priesthood for us.

He is our “ Ruler;” and He “ draws
near ” God as a priest.

IV. sx suretyship ; Messiah’s self-ae-
votion ; his approach to God for us.

And who but He; who, in natwe
Divine, “thought it not robbery to be
equal with God,” yet made Himself of
uo reputation, could possess “the heart”
—of courage, consecration, and love—
w approach God as man’s Representative
ana Redeemer f


Comments—

iowth says: “The Hebrew wd
in the singular number, and ‘‘ar-
ally signifies their ‘‘ Mighty O1:” a
title given to God Himself (Ps. xeiil.
4), and toa mighty Angel (Isa, x 34),
yTobably the Worp, or Son of God.
He shall have near attendunce upon Me
(‘I will cause Him to draw ear’) ; for I
will make Him a Priest to Me as well
as a King, according to the prophecy
concerning the Messiah (Ps. ex. 4). ‘ Yor
who is this,’ &c.,—who is there bnt the
Messiah that is so entirely devoted to
My service? See Ps xl. 8; John iv.
34, xiv. 31.”

Henderson remarks : “ Who this illus-
trious Governor is, has been disputed.
Michaelis and Scholz think it may have
been John Hyrcanus; Grotius and
others, Zerubbabel. But with neither
of these will the predicates properly
agree, That the person spoken of was
to be a priest is generally allowed ; but
though Hyrcanus was hereditarily high-
priest and ruler, yet there was nothing
ao peculiar about him or his office to
~all for the declaration that he should


ow


OHaP. EX.


‘approach unto’ Jehovah ; for this all
his predecessors had done in the way
which he did ; or to warrant the pointed
and emphatic interrogatory, ‘ But who ts
he?’ Se. The question is put as some-
thing altogerter unique Such an ap-
proach had never vee: msde before.”
Diedrich (in Lange, . “This Church
of God will own a Prince ‘from tts
midst’—Jesus, of our flesh and blood
through the Virgin Mary. And He
‘approaches God’ as no other can; for
He is God’s image, God’s Son; and at
she same time the perfect, holy in all
His sufferings, the only obedient Son of
man. ‘This King is Mediator and Re-
conciler with God; He is also High-
Priest, and fulfilled all righteousness,
as was necessary for our propitiation.
What glory to have such a King, who


brings us nigh to God! And this 4%
our glory.”
Ver. 21. Theme: ENGAGING THE


Heart in Rexiciaus Service. “ For
whe ig this that .ugaged his heart to
spproach unto Me, saith the Lord?”

The promises of God in times past
become the encouragement of the Church
in times to come.

Because these promises are ratified in
Christ. ‘Yea, and Amen.”

Because the dispensations of God
proceed upon fixed and settled prin-
ciples.

‘The promises here respect recovery
from Babyion.

‘The immediate reference of the text
may be to NEHEMIAH.


I. The nature of religion described.

U. The motives that it suggested.

L Theo gature and requisites of re-
Igion described.

* Engaging the heart towards God.”
Without this all profession is false and
all worship vain.

It supposes the free choice of God’s
service, and a full and heartfelt con-
secration to it. God’s service chosex—

i. Deliberately, without rashnesa. “a
the Lord be God, serve Him ;” “ £2 tx
me and my ouse, we will serve thy
Lord ;” “ CHoosE ye this day.”

God will not accept a ‘sind ‘aits

Sik


CHAP. XXX,





Aaron was to light the lamps before he
offered incense. Solomon first pre
scribes, ‘* Know thou the God of thy
fathers,” and then adds, ‘Serve Him.”
God made the heart that He might
dwell in it,

ii. Sincerely, without hypocrisy. Serve
Him with a perfect heart; because you
choose such a Master as is at once the
Heart-Maker and the Heart-Searcher.
Now therefore, as Joshua tells Israel,
“ Fear the Lord, and serve Him in sin-
cerity and truth.” As if he had said,
If you intend to serve Him, you must
serve Him in uprightness, or you do not
serve Him at all God requires good
aims as well as good actions; and He
abhors that service, though ever so
costly, if the aim of him who serves
Him be not good. This is the differ-
ence between the service of God and of
man. Mau ¢an but see the outside, and
can only puuish outward disobedience
and defects but God unveils motive.
“ God is a spirit.”

iii, Cheerfully, without constraint.
Serve the Lord with ‘“ gladness,” A
bad omen when the victim struggled
at the altar. God loves a cheerful giver
and s cheerful worshipper (2 Chron.
xv. 14).

iv. Constantly, without end. In ali
things, in all places; in private as in
public ; in all ¢¢mes, prosperity and ad-
versity, life and death; and with all
faculties. As the Dutch minister said
to Ccolampadius, Let God speak, and
though we had six hundred necks, yet we
will make them all stoop tn obedience to
Him.

IL Motives to inéyice thiz choice
of God's service.

i. From God’s rightful cicim to st.
God made man to serve Him and to
seek his own happiness in God’s ser-
vice; his own honowr in God’s glory.
We are His workmanship, and it be-
comes us to improve our gifts and capa-
sities to Him from whom we receive
fyem, as all rivers return to the ocean
rhence they come. As Aulius Fulvius
said to his son, when he found him in
_ conspiracy with Catiline, You were not
born Jar Caitline, but for your country
(Nin eyo te Catilinee genus, sed patric”),

Ji2





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY > :SREMIAH,


So Ged says, [ did not give thee soul and
body to serve the world and sin, but to
serve Me withal,

Consider the infinite excellences which
reside in God, as a motive to His service.
The lustre of His perfections fills heaven
and earth,

Consider the rich mercies you re
ceive. So many mercies, so many mo-
tives. In creation, in providence, in
redemption, We are therefore “ de-
livered out of the hand of our enemies,
that we should serve Him without fear.”
God makes the deliverance from Egypt
a motive for keeping the ten command:
ments: “J am the Lord thy God, who
brought thee out of the land of Egypt,
therefore thou shalt keep holy the Sab-
bath.” Much more may we argue from
redemption : “ Ye are not your own.”

“ Render to Cesar the things that are
Casar’s, and to God the things that are
God’s.” If service be not due, do not
give it Him; be if it be, it is sacrilege
to withhold it.

ii, From Hts gracious acceptance oF
st. “Who is willing?” He speaks
with wonder and delight, shewing
that God notices all hearts. There
is no service any man does or desires
to do, but God marks and registers
it. God noticed Abraham’s willing-
ness to offer Isazeé Christ noticed
every circumstance wa«zaected with
Mary’s ancixting Tis bead and washing
His feet. God holas no the obedience of
Job to Satan ; “‘ Hast thou considered ?”

iii. From happiness consequent upon
tt. “ His service perfect freedom,” “A
day in Thy courta” “ Ethiopian went
his way,” dc. God’s service is a type of
heaven. We have communion with the
“ God of all consolation”—with the
Spirit, the Comforter.

God alone can fill the heart. In His
service you have encouraging promises,
examples, providences, experiences, pros-
pects,

iv. From consequences of not serving
Him (vers. 23, 24).

iL Hints of direction.

i. To those who have engaged thei
hearts to God. Walk worthy.

Study to attain a temper of miné
more and more spiritual.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


OHAP. XXX.


PS TS Re Se ee rE OE


: 4trictly guard the avenues of the
imward man.

Bear yourself as the inhabitant of a
better country,

Comprehend the entire frame of that
holy rectitude in which the image of
God consists,

Converse with the Word of God,
Occupy your thoughts with God.

“ Delight thyself in Him.”

iil. To those who have not. Take care
you do not carry the controversy into
another world,

By how much nature revolts, by so
much seek grace,


Ver, 22. “ Ye shall be My people, and
Z will be your God.” Comp. chap. xxiv. 7.

Vers. 23, 24. “ The whirlwind of the
Lord.” Comp. chap, xxiii. 19, 29, and
Exv. 32.


Ver. 24. Theme: CoNsIDERATION.
In the latter days ye shall consider it.”

After denouncing the Lord’s judgments
upon a people laden with iniquity, and
looking beyond to a time of restoration
and peace, Jeremiah rebukes their present
carelessness and indifference by assuring
them that, in that better time to come,
they will look back with very different
feelings upon their present conduct as a
nation.

L There comes a closing period of a
course of action or conduct, when it can
all be looked back upon, and the effects
are seen and the results experienced,

The great practical point is to urge
upon us—

1. The necessity of closely examining
our own heart and life, with especial
reference to the light in which they will
appear even to ourselves hereafter. For

2. The crisis will arrive when we
shall reap that which we have sown ; or,
above all, when we shall come to cast one
long look behind, as our feet totter on
the borders of the grave.

II. It may seem difficult thus, by due
consideration, to realise at one time of
life, or at one station in the course of
action, the point of view which seems to
belong to another. But the attainment
is not difficult.

1 It is, in fact, easy to those who wish


Jor it and strive for tt.
trae point of view.

2. Our case would be hard if the
Lord had not provided for our guidance
énto all truth, not only of doctrine, but of
life and conduct, at every period of our
course,

3. We have tn the Scriptures @ sure
and certain light unto our path ; and he
who has been careful to store his mine
with its holy teachings, will never be at
a loss to decide upon his conduet, or
upon any course of conduct he contem
plates,

4, Ifa man hears these words, whether,
at the time, he heeds them or not, re-
ceives them ornot, they fatl not to judge
him in his own consciousness (John xii
48), not only at the last day, but in
his “latter days ””—those great days of
decision.

IIT. Such a standard of invincible
truth should be erected in the mind,
constraining man to become his own
judge, and enabling him to decide
between the accusings and excusings of
his conscience.

1, Therefore, minds should be filled
wutth a knowledge of Scripture, even
though, at the time, those minds enter-
tain no adequate impression of its saving
power.

%. The mind, earnestly desirous of
realising this most true latter-end view
of things, may obtain them through the
gentle teachings of the Divine Spirit, who
has never yet denied them to any who
sought them in singleness of heart.

IV. With these essential and sure
guides to wise consideration, we are
without excuse if we neglect the duty,
and brutal if we despise the privilege.

1. Who is there, looking back, but can
discern grievous stains, fearful short-
comings, distressing faithlessness—dis-
honouring to Christ, defiling to his own
soul, and burdensome to his conscience—
and eompelled to exclaim, ‘Oh, that I
had considered, that I had given one
thought to God and the l»*ser end be-
fore I took this busucn on my soul !”

2. The longer this habit of ‘any,
sideration” is pustponed, th. more bur
densome tt becomes. There is monk m
a heart-searching retrogpee, uver the


It is simply the


2 513


OHAP, XXXL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.





earliest and most innocent period of life,  ‘* Lost days of youth! Oh, holy days, —
to awaken compunction and regret ; but When joy was blest with prayer and praise=


if the wholesome check, which the habit ree har ee
Seana 5 ’


of considering the latter end imposes, Trembled at every venial stain,

be not found in good time, the blacken- And shrunk from sin as now from pain.

ing horror of the later and more ad- Oh, not that even in that hour

vanced period makes that early time Of early reason’s dawning power,

seem bright in the comparison, and gives My soul Noebare. om Ehonen@ oF sin 5

birth Ho feelings which have found ex- That neae first saris floin youtle offense
pression in such words as these— Bear the bright hue of innocence.”


—Kito,





CHAPTER XXXI.


Critica ap Execetican Nores.— Vide on chap. xxx. These two chapters form an unbroken
penne, ‘¢a triumphal hymn of Israel’s salvation.” The former chapter pledges the recovery
rom captivity of both ‘‘ Israel and Judah 3” this addresses ‘‘all the families of Israel,” then dis
tinctively the ten tribes ; and finally returns with separate assurances to Judah, then to Israel and
Judah together.

Geographical References.—Ver. 15. ‘* Voice heard in Ramah,” a city of Benjamin, near
where Rachel, the mother of Joseph and Benjamin, was buried. Ver. 38. “ Hill Gareb, to
Goath.” ‘‘Gareb” means the Ail of lepers, and must have been outside the old walls of Zion,
towards the south-west. “ The tower of Hanameel” was at the north-east corner of Jerusalem.
Of “ Goath” nothing is known; the Targum translates it cow-pool. Wer. 40. “ Valley of the
dead bodies,” &c.: t.¢., the valley of Ben-hinnom, :

Personal Allusion.—Ver. 15. “‘ Rahel weeping for her children.” As the mother of Benjamin,
Ephraim, and Manasseh, Rachel is here regarded figuratively as weeping for the scattered ten
tribes of Israel

Natural History.—Ver. 5. “Vines upon the mountains of Samaria.” The mountainsof Samaria
produced specially good vines; see Judges ix. 27. Ver. 12. “ For wheat, and wine, and oi,”
&ec,: suggestive of the fertility and richness of the land of Canaan. Ver. 29. “ Haten a sowr
grape.” A proverb; see Ezek. xviii, 2,

Manners and Customs.—Ver. 4. “ Adorned with tabrets.” Usual for the women to go forth
with timbrels and dancing in times of public joy and festivity (Exod. xv. 20; Judges xi. 34,
&c.). Ver. 19. “ Smote upon my thigh:” an action indicating extreme astonishment and sorrow
(Ezek. xxi. 12). It is represented as having this significance by several classic authors.
Ver. 24. “Husbandmen and they that go forth with flocks.” Referring to the pastoral life of
their ancestors, when every one was literally a ‘‘ husbandman” and ‘‘shepherd ” in consequenee
of the allotment of land which he was forbidden to alienate, They should return to a similar
pastoral life of simplicity and security.

Literary Criticisms.—Ver. 2. ‘‘ The people left of the sword.” This description points, not
back to Israel in the wilderness of Sinai, for it would not describe their condition then, for they
were not then ‘‘a people left of the sword ;” but to Israel in captivity, after ‘‘ the sword ” of those
who now carried them captive had ceased its destructive work. How then interpret “‘ found grace
in the wilderness”? what “ wilderness”? Their Babylonish captivity may well be described as a
wilderness condition. Or the allusion may be to the desert lying between Assyria and Palestine,
And 8¥ may be taken as a prophetic future, And the words, “ When I went to cause him
to rest,” do not really point to past time; for the verb, Hon, is the infinitive absolute, lit,
a-going. It has, however, the force of an imperative : Leé me go; or, ‘I will go to cause Israel
to rest,”

Ver. 3. ‘‘ Of old.” Henderson urges that pina expresses here distance of time not of
place; but most commentators prefer the latter: “from afar.” See xxx. 10. To a Jews
thoughts, God’s dwelling was in Zion ; and hence, when His mercy reached them in Assyriag
exile, it came from atar (2 Chron. vi. 20, 38). s :

“* With loving-kindness have I drawn thee.” WD is rendered as prolonged, continued (Pate
xxxvi. 11, cix. 12); “I have prolonged loving-kindness to the.” But Hitzig, Fuerst, an€é
Naegelsbach prefer rendering it respitea : ‘‘ in loving-kindness have I respited thee.”

Ver. 5. ‘‘ Hat them as common things :” rather, ‘‘ shall freely enjoy the fruit; no injunctiog
weing placed upon the enjoyment. See Lev. xix. 25; Deut. xx. 6,

Ver. 7. “Shout among the chief,” dc. : rather, ‘‘ shout because of the chief of the nations”
o>, Lerael. ;


514


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH,


OHAP, XXXE


ee eeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeeseaoeseasasasasaeaean


Ver. 8. ‘* A great company shall return thither :” no, hither. Not to exile, but to Palestine.
Ver. 18. “A bullock unaccustomed :” lit., an untrained calf.


Ver. 22. ‘°A woman shall compass a man.”
Umbreit, &¢., The female shall protect the strong man.


Variously rendered. Dr. Payne, Dr. Wette,
Ewaid, ‘‘ The woman shall be changed


into a man.” Waegelsbach, “The woman shall turn the man,” becoming the stronger of the
two. Wordsworth, with the Fathers, see in these words a hint of the miraculous conception of
Christ. But Henderson gives the sense that Jehovah would make the feeblest of them [tle woman]
more than a match for the most powerful of their foes.


HOMILFES AND OUTLINES ON CHAPTER XXX3i,


Ver. 1. Theme: THE Gop or FamiI.izs.
“ At the same teme will I be the God of all
the famalies of Israel.”

There is one solid Rock on which the
hope and happiness of the moral uni-
verse may rest amidst all the vicissitudes
of time ; and that whatever dark appear-
ances may surround the interests of the
Church, like clouds which obscure the
face of the heavens, the sun shall yet shine
forth again with unquenched lustre and
unabated strength. ‘‘ Zhe mountains may
depart, the hills must be removed, but
God’s loving-kindness never shall depart,
the covenant of His peace can never be
broken.”

To this topic Jeremiah had recourse
in the troublous times in which he lived,
when he was called to deplore the fallen
greatnessof the Church, andto witness the
dissolution and the breaking up of the
Jewish state and monarchy. He looks
back upon what God did for His Church
in the captivity of Egypt, as the pledge
and pattern of what He will do for it
in the captivity of Babylon (vers, 2, 3).
So David teaches us to argue from the
same principles when he says, “ Oh, how
greatis Thy goodness which Thou hast laid
up for them that fear Thee, which Thou
hast wrought for them that fear Thee.”

What is laid up in God’s promises, and
what is /aid out for them in God’s pro-
vidences, form an equal ground of
encouragement and hope. _ Paul in like
manner ascends up before the springs of
time : ‘‘ Blessed be the God and Father,
who hath blessed us with all spiritual
blessings, according as He has chosen us
tn Him before the foundation of the world
that we should be holy.”

I. Some of the truths which this
promise implies.

II. Some of the encouragements it
presents.

III. Some of the duties it involves,


I. Some of the truths which this
promise implies. ‘I will be the God
of all the families of Israel.” Not of
the two tribes only, Judah and Benja-
min, the royal tribes, but the ten tribes,
Not of the house of Aaron only, and the
families of Levi, but of all their families ;
not only of their state in general, but
their particular families,

1. A deep interest in their welfare,
That God takes a deep interest in
family religion, and delights to see the
succession of piety kept up in the
dwelling-places of the righteous, is evi-
dent both by the tenor of His promises
and by the train of His dispensations.
No sight is more pleasing to man than
that of a well-ordered family, The
safety and well-being of a country must
necessarily depend upon the moral train-
ing of the families of which it is com-
posed. No less important is it to the
well-being of the Church. Families are
the nurseries of the Church. God there-
fore, in determining upon the stability
of the Church, looks with watchful and
tender eye upon the prosperity of
families,

God delights to speak of Himself as
standing in a domestic relation: ‘ Like
asa father.” The image most frequently
used: “If ye being evil . . . your hea-
venly Father,” &c.

2. He calls your children His children.
He makes distinguishing promises to
them. The very first promise was made
to Eve’s offspring. The covenant with
Abraham incorporated his children’s
name as well as his own: “J will bea
God to thee and thy seed after thee.” He
promises to David, “Instead of tie
fathers, the children ;” to Isaiah, “ Thos
ts the covenant I make with thee: I will
pour out My Spirit on thy seed.”

3. Remember that Jesus Himself be-
came a little child. He rose, not like

515


GHAP, XXXI.


HOMILETIV COMMENTARY ; JEREMIAR,





Adam, in the fulness and meridian of His
strength, but passed through the inter-
mediate states of infancy and childhood,
When the wise men came from afar
“they saw the young Child and Mary
His mother.” He did this that He might
consecrate the state of infancy as well
as the state of manhood; and assure
parents that He can sympathise with the
weakness and infirmities of childhood
and youth, as well as those of riper years,
He was a lover of children (Mark x.
13-16 ; Matt. xviii, 3-14).

4. Do not omit to remark what a
gracious aspect all this has upon the
salvation of infants; and what com-
fort it affords those who have lost
their offspring, that they are gathered to
the fold of the Good Shepherd. In God’s
world there is no waste of existence,
“ Millions of infant souls compose the
family above.” David said, in reference
to the loss of his child, “I shall go to
him, but he shall not return to me,”
And if he reasoned thus under the dark-
ness of that dispensation, surely our
faith need not be less strong under the
brightness of this, “Jf that which was
done away was glorious, much more that
which remaineth is rather glorious.”

II. This promise encourages Chris-
tian parents in their endeavours to train
their offspring in the nurture and admo-
nition of the Lord.

Great duties devolve upon you ; great
anxieties perpetually occur in connection
with your own responsibility ; and great
consolations are furnished in the Word of
God. j

1. No greater inducement can be fur-
nished to avail yourselves of all means
for their religious improvement than the
thought that God sympathises with you
both in the affections you cherish
and in the difficulties with which you
are surrounded. If it be true that God
takes so deep an interest in the progress
of religion in families—is concerned
for the salvation of the young—if it be
true that He builds up HisChurchchiefly
from the families of His people, then it
follows that great duties devulve on
parents and heads of families, and it be-
comes them to seek the grace and bless-
ing of God.

516


2. These promises should be earnestly
pleaded in prayer, should encourage
watchful effort. They are not given as
& premium to indolence, but as an in-
ducement to the faithful discharge of
known duty.

3. God has made the love of parents
to their children proverbially strong ; for
moral objects, that their interests for both
worlds may ve secured. There never was
a Christian parent, touched with the
love of God, who was not anxious for his
children, anxious to lead them to the
Saviour he loved and the heaven he
sought; anxious that they who are
partakers of all their hopes on earth
should be partakers of all their joys
in heaven,

4, Education is the great care with
which you are entrusted. If negligent,
ou you as well as them the reproach and
misery will fall. You may be regardless
of your son’s morals, but you may live
and die miserable from his want of
them.

Think of the happiness of meeting
them in a future world. Guide them
to Christ. Endear the Bible, and the
Sabbath, and the Saviour to them.

Remember the temptations they are
exposed to, and how many fall into the
snares of the wicked.

TiI. Some of the duties this promise
involves—

1, Prayer for early conversion of chil-
dren.

.2. Training of families in godliness
and faith.

3. Public dedication of our children
by baptism, to God,

4. Recognition of God’s laws, and
providence, and honour in all family
plans.

5. Consecration by young persons of
themselves to God.

6. Maintain domestic worship around
the family altar.

7. Let families, in their entirety,
come together to God’s sanctuary, and be
united in the fellowship of the Christian
Church.


See Homilies on chap, iii, 18.


Ver. 2. Theme: “SpareD THROUGH


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; JEREMIAR.


_ er —


OHAP. XXXL





Grace, “The people left of the sword
found grace in the wilderness.”

L Spared, though others perished.

Many were cut off for their iniquities ;
some by the Amalekites (Exod, xvii. 8),
some by the hands of their brethren
(Exod. xxxii. 28).

The destroyed around us witness to
our like deserts.

II. Spared through sovereign grace.

1. Zo Gou’s praise. ‘The living,
the living, they shall praise Thee, as we
do this day.”

2. Witnessing to His compassion and
patience.

Til. Spared to inherit favours.

1. Conducted by Him into the pro
mised land of rest.

2, Spared to enjoy all the fulness of
sovenanted privilege,

3. Blessed with prolonged realisation
of Divine goodness and bounty.


See Homilies on chap. ii, 2%


Ver. 3. Theme:
SavaTIon.

A condensed view of the origin, pro-
gress, and consummation of man’s salva-
tion.

I, The feeling with which God regards
each of His people: ‘I have loved
thee.”

IL The kind of love with which.God
has regarded His people: “ Everlasting
love.”

III. The visible operation and effect
of this love: “‘ I have drawn thee.”

a.) A change of position or state.
te} A change accomplished by God:
“ J have drawn thee.”

(c.) A change not accomplished with-
out resistance: “ Drawn,”

IV. The means which God employs
in drawing His people: ‘ Loving-kind-
ness.” —Lrev. James Stewart, Aberdeen,


1862.


Proarrss or Maws


See Addenda: Evreriastine LoveE.


Theme: DRAWN WITH EVERLASTING
Love.

God has often “appeared” to man.
In His visible creatuon He reveals Him-
self, lavishing the wealth, garniture, and


beauty of nature upon a sinful race. In
His daily providences He appears to
man; fresh fountains of mercy spring
up at my feet. But especially God
appears in the mystery of grace ani
redemption, showing the fulness of His
mercy in Christ Jesus,

Thus, in Creation we discern the print
of His footsteps; in Providence we
behold the operations of His gracious
hand ; but in Redemption we are allowed
to see the very movements and purposes
of His all-gracious heart.

L View this love of God in its far-
reaching compass and largeness. “O/
old,” as to time; but more correctly
“from afar,” as to place. God’s love
reaches out to the exiles far removed
Srom Zion.

1. To the banished ones—captive and
exiled—removed “ afar,”

2. To those estranged—spiritually at
@ distance, “alienated from the life of
God,” wilfully “ afar.”

3. To men everywhere. Gathers in
all with a world-wide embrace.

IL View this love of God in its
absolute directness and inalienable
purpose. ‘‘ Yea, I have loved thee.”

1. Its posttiveness. ‘ Yea, I have.”
Not equivocal, and conjectural, or condi-
tional.

2. Its intensity, I have loved.”
Great-hearted affection.

3. Its personality. ‘I have loved
thee.” “The Lord kroweth them that
are His.”

4, Its conscious reality. God Himself
felt and realised that He had loved Israel.
It was a conscious passion to God Him-
self. He yearns with strong ardour over
the objects of His great affection.

TIL View this love of God in its cease-
less constancy. ‘ With everlasting
love.”

1. In retrospect it is “ everlasting.”
Not recent, but vastly remote in its
origin.

2. In covenant fidelity it is “ ever-
lasting.” Not vacillating, not insecure
as was theirs /

3. Amid their changeful history it is
“everlasting.” Whether they were in
Zion, or “afar” in exile; whether they
a8 a nation maintained His worship, ot


517


CHAP. XXXL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; JEREMIAH,





became “lost” to their own identity and
to their holy religion, He loved and
would cherish them still.

4. Throughout all future ages it is
“everlasting.” God’s nature is not “vari-
able ;” “the thoughts of His heart are
to all generations,”

IV. View this love of God in its
gracious action and powerful attrac-
tiveness. “ Therefore with loving-kind-
ness have I drawn thee.”

1. Hence, with God begins the work of
alluring souls into reconciliation. It is
not the sinner who commences; God’s
grace “draws” him, and thus he is
“ made willing,” “ made nigh,”

2. The force which draws the soul is
“love.” As all the coin of the kingdom
bears the image of the sovereign, go all
the blessings of salvation bear the stamp
of love. ‘‘ With loving-kindness have I
drawn thee.”

3. When the heart rests in God’s
love, it finds its own. love for Him to be
the result of and response to His love for
us. “We love Him because He first
loved us.”

4, All drawings of God should be
yielded to with gratitude, wonder, alac-
rity, and joy.


Note—

(a.) This is a MosT TOUCHING AND
SUBLIME ASSURANCE. When we look
at ourselves we wonder that God can
love us at all. And if His love had to
be caused by anything in us, He could
never find occasion for His love. But
the love which God has for us comes not
from us to Him, but from Him to us,
He loves us, not because we are lovable,
but because He ts loving.

(0.) This “everlasting love” is A MosT
STUPENDOUS THOUGHT TO GRASP. Before
we had any objective existence ; before
we stood out as individuals of the
human race, He loved us, The moment
we were born into the world, that
moment we began to live in the love of
God.

The ray of light from a star has been
running down the measureless path of
space long, long centurres before earth
was peopled by man; but before the
wave (which made the starlight shine in

518


the heavens) was started in the ethe
by the pulsations from that distant star,
God was loving me. Oh, that vast eternity
of love!

If that love was from everlasting,
shall it not be ¢o everlasting? Yes,

(c.) There is A PROPHETIC SWEXP OP
HOPE IN THIS Fact. Can that end whick
had no beginning? Shall we fear that
a fountain which flows perennially and
freely can at some far-off age run dry?
Ages have not exhausted it. It is ‘ ever-
lasting love.” Surely this both wéne
and shall hold our love to God.


$6 Infinite Goodness ! Thou art dear
To Thy poor creature’s heart ;

It blesses Thee that hou art God,

That Thou art what Thou art.”


Theme: Everiastine Love
I. Sovereign in tts character,
IL. Costly in tts manifestation,
IIL Glorious in its results.


Ver. 6. Theme: THe WatTOHMEN’s
Catt. ‘There shall be a day that the
watchmen upon Mount Ephraim shall
cry, ‘‘ Arise ye, and let us go up to Zion
unto the Lord our God.”

L God’s heralds. ‘“ Watchmen,” sta
tioned on eminences (not on one mountain
only, but the whole mountainous region
of the ten tribes), see the auspicious hour,
call to the alien and ewile tribes. Type
of the preacher of the Gospel :—(1.)
Elevated above the people; (2.) Dis
cerns their gracious opportunity; (3.)
Summons the wanderers and outcasts
home.

II. Reunion in Zion. The ten tribes
are here called to go up to the annual
feasts at Jerusalem, and there join with
the tribes of Judah in keeping the ap-
pointed festivals of Zion, The schism
between the twelve tribes was healed.

1. Those who were estranged one from
the other become united in fraternity
and fellowship in Zion. See Isa, xi.
13.

2. The sacred festivities and privs-
leges of the Church of Christ cast all
human divisions and differences tnto
oblivion. Many members, but one body.
Many nations, but one kingdom. The
world gets back to unity again, away


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; JEREMIA 4.





from its feuds and strifes, when it gets
into and becomes the Church.

Ill. God sought. “Unto the Lord
our God.”

1. From whom we formerly revolted.
Now again “our God;” accepted, de-
sired, and sought,

2. In whom we again unite.
Lord ;” none but He.
“God all in all.”
Jesus.”

Note—

Cowles remarks: ‘‘ God’s grace loves
to triumph over the most inveterate pre-
judices. No words could represent a
greater or more benign change in national
feeling than these: Samaria saying,
through her spiritual watchmen, Let us
go up to Zion to worship, for our God
is there.”


“ The
No rival deity ;
* All one in Christ


Vers. 7-9. Theme: RESTORATION OF
THE Jews, God’s command that the
males of all the twelve tribes should go
up thrice a year to worship the Lord at
Jerusalem.

We may conjecture what such a con-
course will take place, in due season,
from every quarter of the world.

In reference to the resturation of the
Jews, we have here—

L Acommand to us. God enjoins
us—

1. To take an tnterest in the welfare
of His people. “Sing with gladness for
Jacob,” &c. We ought to keep in view
God’s gracious designs respecting them,
so as to have our hearts filled with joy
in the contemplation of the blessings
awaiting them. ,

2. To express that interest tn every
suitable way. “ Publish it” to Jew and
Gentile alike : “praise ye” God for it,
and in fervent prayer seek God on
their behaif. Say, “O Lord, save Thy
peuple,” &e.

IL A promise to them. This pro-
mise includes—

1. Their restoration to God (ver. 8),
however distant they are from Him,
or however discouraging their circum-
stances, ‘A great company shall re-
turn thither.”

2. The manner tn which tt shall be
efected (ver. 9). “ With weeping,” &e.,


OHAP. XXXI.





as in Zech. xii. 10. Under gracious
Divine leading : “I will cause them to
walk by rivers,” &c. He will guide
them by His counsel, strengthen them
by His grace, and comfort them by His
Spirit, till He bring them in safety te
His glory.

3. The pledge that tt shall be surely
accomplished. “For I am a Father to
Israel,” dc, When Moses urged Pharaoh
to liberate Israel, he enforced his request
by the plea that they were “ God’s jirst-
born.” In this light He still regards
them, and will prove Himself their
“Father ” (ver. 37, with Isa. liv. 9, 10).

Application—

1. Look well to it that yeu are your-
selves restored to God.

2. Endeavour to help forward the
restoration of others.—C. Simeon, M.A.


Ver. 9. Theme: Pivermms To ZIon.
“They shall come with weeping,” d&c.

The text unites the dispensation of
God to His people with the affections
which they cherish towards God. It
refers to the deliverance of the Church
from the captivity of Babylon, and to
the feelings which they cherished on
their return ; and the same principles are
developed in the experience of all who
are born of God and bound for glory.
Zion’s pilgrims are distinguished—

L By the various emotions which
they cherish, ‘Come with weeping.”

IL By the safe-conduct under which
they journey: “I will lead them.”

III. By the high alliance they are
permitted to claim. “I am a father.”

IV. By the prosperous issue of their
eventful pilgrimage. “Sing in Zion.”


L The various emotions which they
cannot but cherish. “‘ Weeping and sup-
plication” not unmixed with joy. The
return from Babylon was a season of joy
and congratulation, yet productive of
mixed feeling—they came with weeping
and supplication, Great events in life
often produce opposite emotions. The
moment of transition is a critical one
—calls up many recollections of the
past, many anticipations of the future.
The prisoner has been known to sigh at
leaving his dungeon ; the a tremblea

19


OMAP. XXXE.


at the altar; the prince receives the
crown not without emotion; the Chris-
tian takes upon him the vows of God
under mingled impressions, Tears and
prayers do well together. There is no
entrance into the path of life but
thron.b the valley of weeping; and
repentance characterises the Christian
all his journey through. Tertullian said
of himself that he was born to nothing
but repentance. It was the saying of a
godly minister that, of he were to die in
the pulpit, he should like to die preaching
repentance ; and if out of the pulpit, he
would wish to die practising repentance,
This is always needful, and especially
when we go to seal a covenant with
God, or to seek the witness of the
Spirit with ours) When did Jacob find
God in Bethel but when he wept and
made supplication?! When did Mary
meet with Christ but when she sought
Him sorrowing? When did angels
minister to Christ but after strong cry-
ing and tears in the garden? Behold
the print of the footsteps of all the
cloud of witnesses in this road. ‘“ They
come.”

They weep and pray underthe—1. Con-
sciousness of their sins. Unprofitable.

2. The remembrance of their captivity.
Remembering affliction and misery.

3. The difficulties of their course. A
rough journey, many impediments,

3. The sorrows of those with whom they
are associated. Sympathy.

5. The mourning over those they have
left behind in Babylon. It was only a
remnant, two tribes at most came from
Babylon. They were attached to Baby-
lon, had many connections, and filled
important posts there, and Zion in her
ruins was forgotten. The Christian is
not careless of the state of bis relations
and friends yet strangers to God. Bun-
yan makes it a heavy part of Christian’s
sorrow that he could not persuade his
wife and children to travel with him.

It is to mourners that. promises are
made: ‘‘ Come unto Me.” The influences
of the Spirit are quite as likely to pro-
duce contrition as joy.

IL The safe-conduct under which
they journey. “I,” says God, “ will
lead them ;” or they would never attain

520


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH,


$<


their journey’s end. “Tevill gather them,”
or they would never be collected. “J
will cause them to walk ;” or they would
never have the inclination. God brings
us into the way of truth, God protects
us in it, God furnishes us with adequate
support, and God brings us to the termi-
nation of our career in peace. We may
doubt as to the reality of our religion,
but if we are conscious of possessing it
we cannot doubt to whom we owe it
“« Who hath saved us.”

The guidance of mortal spirits into
the paths of holiness and to the perfec-
tion of heavenly rest has been a favourite
object with God from the beginning,
He teaches “to walk tm a strait way”
— preserves from falling—going back—
“keeps feet.”

“ By the rivers of water” —not with-
out refreshment—not without happiness
—not without a constant sense of obli-
gation, It denotes both refreshment
and supply, and these are granted where
least expected, and to those who could
not perform the journey without guid-
ance and assistance not their own—“ the
blind and lame,” Grace triumphs over
all obstacles,

IiL The high alliance they are per-
mitted to claim “I am a father.”
This wandering band, outcasts to the
world, may call the Sovereign of the
universe a Friend and Father, This title
indicates the richness of God’s conde-
scension and the Principle whence salva-
vation flows,

IV. The happyissue of their eventful
pilgrimage. ‘‘ Height of Zion ” (ver. 12).

“‘Come to Zion.” 1. Blissful. 2. Rest-
ful. 3. Fruitful.

A pplication—

1. Strangers to prayer and penitence
are not on the pati to heaven.

2. Those who trust their own re
sources may expect to wander, to faint,
or to falL—S. Thodey, 1825.


See Addenda: Tears or PENITENCE ;
and also Homilies on chap. iii, 21, 22.


Vers. 10-14. 7’heme: Gop’s Procta-
MATION OF GRAND Purposks FoR His
PrEoptx. Jehovah would have the nations
know—


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


a


i. How He guards His people with
fostering care. Though He chastises
them — “scattered them” —yet He
cherishes and fosters them with watch-
ful care and purposes of restoration ;
and will suffer no harm or loss to
them, for He “shepherds” them con-
stantly.

Il. How mightily He has wrought
for His people’s redemption.

Ver. 11. “ With outstretched arm,”
“travailing in the greatness of His
strength, mighty to save,”

1. Past rescues. These have proved
God’s almightiness and all-sufficiency.

2. Pledge of future redemption. No
foe can “stay His hand.”

IL. How luxuriant are the blessings
with which He will crown and enrich
their future (ver. 12).

1. Religious and ecclesiastical privi-
leges. ‘To the heights of Zion.”

2. Divine beneficence. “To the good-
ness of the Lord.”

3. Abounding fulness of enjoyment,
“Sing ;” “for wheat,” &.

4, Sadness lost tn blessedness, “ Their
soul as a watered garden ;” and sorrow
no more at all.

IV. How all-inclusive shall be these
sacred delights of the Church.

1. Hvery sew and age shall have full
share of holy bliss (ver. 13).

2. Priests and people alike “satisfied”
with the ‘“ goodness” of the Lord (ver.
14). “ Both he that soweth and they that
reap shall rejoice together.”


Ver. 12. Theme: Tue FUTURE oF
Betrevers. ‘And their soul shall be
as a watered garden ; and they shall not
sorrow any more.” What is to be the
future of the true Israel of God ?

L One of spiritual faultlessness and
perfection. Beautiful as a “ garden ;”
fertile, well graced, rich in fragrance
and fruit.

IL One of boundless resources. Of


joy, for they shall sorrow no more. Of


satisfaction, for no inward lack shall
give them distress, Of rest, amid the
blessedness of happy employ.

III. One of vast possessions. So
that their “soul” is filled with the
treasnyas of apiritual good; filled as a





OHAy ¥XEL





“ garden” stored with choicest blossoms,
fragrant with richest perfume.


Ver, 12, Theme» Sout Ferriuiry.
“Their soul shall be as a watered
garden.”

This was really fulfilled in the Jews,
who returned to Jerusalem after the
miseries they had suffered in Babylon;
many of whom (see Ezra and Nehemiah’»
records) were men of eminent piety an¢
geal for God. Having rebuilt the Temp,
and thus opened “the wells of saly~
tion,” they drew thence the waters *
consolation and spiritual life,

But in the Gospel times we see them
words fulfilled in every pious soul when
in a flourishing and prosperous state,
LL Thoughts suggested by a comparison
of a pious soul with a garden.

1. A garden is a spot of ground upon
which extraordinary cultivation is em-
ployed. Thus the souls of believers are
“the garden of the Lord ”—the objects
of His peculiar care and cultivation (Isa.
v. 1, 2).

2. A garden is generally stored with
productions of either a useful or orna-
mental order. So from the soul springs
up every Christian virtue and heavenly
grace which is either pleasing to’ God
or useful to man (Isa, xli. 19, 20; lv.
13).

; A garden does not arrive at tts full
perfection and glory at once. The Chris-
tian’s course is progressive,

II. Consider those Divine influencey
by which this spiritual garden ‘.
watered.

1. The influences of the Spirit of God
are imparted to every real Christian,
and produce effects that resemble those
which warm and refreshing showers pro-
duce upon a garden (Isa, lxiv. 3). It
these are withheld, how does the garder
droop! Itis the office of the Holy Spirit
to “shed the love of God abroad in our
hearts,” &e.

2. These influences are enjoyed anc
conveyed to the soul by the means of God’:
Word and ordinances (Isa. lv. 10, 11.
It is in the exercise of reading and
hearing God’s Word, and in prayer, that
the communications of God’s Spirit ar
enjoyed,

52)


CHAP. XXXI.





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: sSREMIAR.


TIL Mark how this hazpy state and
those enriching influences are to be
desired by every soul.

1. ‘Till we attain these, we are in a
desolate, wild condition (Heb. vi. 8).

2. It is only by attaining this state
that we can arrive at true happiness
either here or hereafter (Heb, vi. 7).

3. Unless we are in this state we
cannot glorify God, nor be useful to our
fellow-creatures, as we ought. When
we are “fruitful in every good word
and work,” God is pleased with us,
&e.

Learn: The need we have datly to ask
for Divine influences.—Rev. J. Sewell,
Thaxted, a.p. 1842.


Ver. 13. Theme: Gop our Com-
FoRTER. “And I will turn their mourn-
ing into joy, and will comfort them and
make them rejoice from their sorrow.”

In Greenland, when a stranger knocks
at the door, he asks, Is God tm this
house? And if they answer “Yes,” he
enters.

Let me knock at the door of your
hearts and inquire, Js God tn this house ?
Are you frequent at His throne? Do
you love and belong to Christ? Are you
living in the daily exercise of faith and
tepentance? Do you sorrow for sin?
$re you aspiring to heaven? Ifso, you
sre the persons to whom this promise is
made.

I The particular character which
God here assumes. The Comforter. I
€ will comfort them.”

Not only after it but “from” it. Their
joy takes a lustre from previous sorrow,
as the brightness of morning from the
darkness of night.

1. This is a much-meeded office, for
there are many mourners. The voice of
weeping is often heard in our land.
Our earth teems with mourners who
are seeking a sad asylum from the
yorrows of life in the darkness and
silenue of the grave.

Many mourners here. Some under
the afflictions of life; some under the
disappointment of their hopes of happi-
ness from the world; some under the
baseness of deceitful friendship ; some
under the loss of near aud dear connec-

522


——— ~_


tions ; some under the straits and difu
culties of a trying path ; and some under
the burden of sin,

Spiritual sorrows are specially referred
to in the text, “ They shali come with
weeping.” The Christian life begina
with sorrow, ends with joy. Some
“‘ sorrow after a godly sort:” over evil
habits ; weakness of faith; decline of
hope.

2. This ws an office to which God only
ts equal, As when the sun is set none
but God can cause it to rise again ; sa
when hope is lost and comfort gone,
none but God can restore it. Hence
David prays, “ Restore to me the joy,”
&c. Jeremiah could not do it. He
could only speak the comfort to others
which God spake to him; but God can
convey the consolation direct to the
heart.

God speaks of Himself as “the Hope
of Israel and the Consolation thereof.”
Jesus is described as ‘‘the Consolation
of Israel.” The Holy Spirit is “ another
Comforter.” Thus all the Persons in the
Godhead conspire in this most needed
and most delightful work.

God only can do it, because He only
knows what the trial is—how heavily it
presses—and how to apply to the bur-
dened spirit the needed relief,

All creatures might shrink from the
task and say, ‘Am I tn Gods stead ?”

3. This 1s an office which God delights
to exercise. “He delighteth in mercy.”
It is His nature and property always to
have mercy. It is not more natural for
the sun to shine, or for the fountain to
pour forth its streams, than for God to
show compassion. He is “the Father
of mercies,” “the God of all consolation.”
“As one whom his mother comforteth,” dsc,

4. It is an office in which the Father
of mercies has had large experience, All
the tears wiped from human faces have
been removed by His hand. All the
hopes awakened in penitent bosoms have
been inspired by His mercy.

IL Some of the methods He employs
for this purpose. The instrumentality
is various, the Agency is One. Sometimes
by friends, sometimes ministers, some-
times ordinances, sometimes by strangers,
sometimes by enemies. But God is t*-


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


a


—-.





Bource of all these streams. He “ mates
us rejoice from sorrow.”

1. By the application to the mind of the
sense of pardon and acceptance by Christ.
Thus, by Nathan, He restored to David
the joy of His salvation; “The Lord
hath put away thy sin.” Thus, by Isaiah,
He comforted Hezekiah. Thus, by
Ananias, He comforted Paul.

In various ways He enlarges our per-
ception of the fulness and freeness of
redeeming love, shows us His covenant,
teaches us out of His law, enables us to
apply the promises. ‘ My thoughts are
not your thoughts.”

2. By the teaching and influence of
His Spirit. We read of the “ comfort of
the Holy Ghost ;” and we cannot doubt
that that blessed Agent has direct access
to the human mind, in stirring us up
to prayer, in strengthening holy pur-
poses and resolutions, in giving efficacy
to religious ordinances and especially to
the Word received and preached.

3. By the agency of His providence,
in removing afflictions when their end
is answered—as in bringing Israel out of
Egypt and back from Babylon. So He
can turn again our captivity, raise up
friends, make our path straight, disperse
the clouds,

4, By translating the soul from earth
to heaven.

III. The course of conduct we should
pursue.

1. Seek consolation by prayer.

2. Avoid whatever tends to bring the
spirit to bondage.

3. Be comforting.

4. Cherish hope—happy thoughts.

Seek to be acquainted with higher
rules of self-denial, and charity, and mor-
tification of sin, than you have yet
known. Beg of God to teach you what
you know not of the spirituality of the
law and exactness of the rule.


Ver. 14. Theme: Tue SarTisFYING
Nature oF Gon’s Goopness. “ And
My people shall be satisfied with My goods
ness, saith the Lord.”

Our subject contains a striking predic-
tion of the ingathering of the Jews, and
the joyous events which should distin-
guish theoccasion. Among the rest this is


OHAP XXX.


one, that ‘they should be satisfied,” &.
The text is capable of a general applica-
tion, and belongs equally to all the
household of faith and family of God,
Let us, then, consider—

I. The character. “My people.”
God’s people were not always such.
“‘ Thave made you a people,” &c, Once
afar off, aliens, &c. They became God’s
people by the attractive power of the
Gospel, by the influence of the grace and
Spirit of God, by faith in the Lord Jesus
Christ. They repented of sin, and fled
by faith to the hope set before men in
the Gospel. Many are the distinguish-
ing features of God’s people.

1. They are separated from the world,
Not “of the world,” “Come out,” &e,
Thus, too, they are united to His Church,
“We will go with you,” &, ‘This
people,” &c. They profess, and confess
Christ before men,

2. They reflect the image of the
Saviour ; are “partakers of His nature
and spirit ; and hence are likeminded
with Christ, renewed into His holy and
blessed likeness.

3. They are obedient to Christ's
authority. ‘“ As His sheep,” &c. As
His pupils, &c. They follow Christ,
and hear His commandments to do
them. They call Him Lord, and do
the things, &c. ‘ Whoso doeth the
will of My Father.”

II. The declaration.
satisfied,” &c. Sin began by dissatis-
faction, This is one of the constant
exhibitions of evil in the world. The
general inquiry is, ‘Who will show,”
&c. The soul in the midst of the
riches, honours, pleasures, &c., is still
unsatisfied ; formed for an infinite good,
God alone can meet its desires; but
God is holy and just, and the soul
trembles and flees. God’s goodness,
then, comes down to the capacities, &.,
of the soul. The soul is satisfied with—

I. God’s goodness in the dispensatrons
of His grace. God’s love in Jesus Christ,
infinite and overflowing. The soul is
melted by it, constrained, subdued,
saved ; exclaims with rapture, ‘‘ Who
loved me,” &e.

2. God’s goodness in the arrangements
of His Providence, This is a cou

52


‘Shall be


OHAP, XXXI,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEKEMIAL,





nected with the other. We are first
reconciled, and then admire His doings,
works, and ways. It is the same good-
ness in both providence and grace. It
never fails nor changes, It is always
“‘ goodness,” in adversity as well as
prosperity, in sickness and health, in
sorrow and joy. It is always rich, free,
and adapted.

3. God’s goodness in the consummation
of glory. ‘‘I shall be satisfied when I
awake with Thy likeness.”

Application.—1. Are we the char-
acters# 2. Have we the satisfaction ?
3. It is our privilege.—J. Burns, D.D.


Ver. 15. Theme: RacweE’s LaMEN-
tation. ‘A voice was heard in Ra-
mah, lamentation and bitter weeping:
Rahel weeping for her children, and
refused to be comforted for her children,
because they were not.”

L A poetic figure representative of the
woes of the exiled tribes of Israel
Jeremiah, foreseeing the coming cap-
tivity of bis people and destruction of
their national life, vividly and dramati-
cally represeuts Rachel (as if stirred from
her grave by the tearing of her children
from their natal soil) weeping for her
offspring about to be slain by the Chal-
dean sword. As the mother of Benja-
min, Ephraim, and Manasseh, she is
alluded to as if to her belonged all the
ten tribes.

1. A mother’s grief over her slaugh-
tered sons.

2. Exile from Zion and God is an
evil as dreadful as if they were slain.
“They were not /” (chap. ix. 1).

3. A mother’s heart has no room for
‘comfort ” when her children are perish-
ing from life—and from the living God.

IL A prophetic vision of the massacre
of the Bethlehem children at the
Saviour’s birth, Its primary fulfilment
was the murder of Rachel’s children by
the Chaldeans. Its typical significance
received realisation in Herod’s slaughter
of the Innocents (Matt. ii. 17, 18).

1. The inhumanity of man brings
destruction on innocent victims and
anguish upon tender hearts.

9. In God's foreseetng gaze, all tials
of outrage on those He loves (Jsraed and

524





children) are kept tn fatthful record.
“Whoso toucheth them toucheth the
apple of His eye.”

3. Out of events, woeful and cruel,
purposes of good are dwinely evolved,
Rachel’s children were carried into
exile, yet God wrought redemption for
His captive people. Bethlehem children
were slaughtered by Herod, yet the
Divine Babe was at hand, to become
the Redeemer of humanity, and to fold
all childhood life within His arms and
raise children into eminencein His earthly
and heavenly kingdom.


Vers. 16, 17. Theme: CoNnsoLaTIons
AND Hopzs. ‘Refrain thy voice from
weeping: there is hope in thine end.”

Two points in this connection : Rachel
weeping for her sons, and Ephraim weep
ing for his sins ; and to both classes the
voice of sympathy and commiseration is
addressed.

The history refers to the captivity.
Rachel was the common mother of
Benjamin and Ephraim — Benjamin
representing here the two tribes of
Judah and Benjamin, which were
united into one under the house of
David; and Ephraim the ten tribes,
commonly called Israel. Rachel’s tomb
was in Ramah, confines of both, on the
border of Judah or Benjamin—on the
border of Ephraim or Israel.

By a beautiful figure, the sorrows of
the captivity are described as raising
Rachel out of her grave to weep for the
desolations of her sons. At Ramah
Nebuzaradan called a council of war,
and brought before him the captives, It
seems to have been the first halting-place
in the journey to Babylon. Jeremiah was
present and witnessed the grief of the
mothers of Israel; and, with the eye
and imagination of a poet, calls Rachel
from her grave to join the general grief,
and ministers to them support and
consolation by the promise of their
return. And as their grief (parent-like)
was more for their children than them-
selves, so the promise particularly
respects ther restoration and return,
“ Thy children shall come again,” if you
do not ; just as though the fathers fell
in the wilderness, the children entered


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


CHAP. XXXL





Canaan.
posterity.”

L. The consolations which the Gospel
affords in this world.

II. The hopes which it furnishes for
a better.

IL The consolations which the
Gospel affords in this world

1. Jt ts a world of weeping, of dis-
appointment, vicissitude, and _ trial ;
and afflictions are sent by God, not
from severity and harshness, but to
produce results nothing else could, It
is the death of the sin, and not the
death of the soul, God contemplates,

2. The Gospel only furnishes con-
solation. The world cannot. All the
sounds of sympathy and tenderness
come from another world. The only
available consolation must bear this
inscription, “ Thus satth the Lord.”
I said, Rachel was described as weeping
for her sons, and Ephraim for his sins;
these two constitute the great divisions
of the sorrows of life: worldly, spiritual.

i. Under worldly calamity, the Gospel
provides consolation. Losses, crosses.

1. The God that sends the trial sends
the support with it, and often propor-
tions the consolation to the distress.
When He sends Rachel into captivity
He gives her a promise to carry in her
bosom.

2. The doctrine of God’s providence
is a greater support, and especially
when we view the system of Providence
as part of the plan of grace.

3. The promises of grace afford con-
solation, and show how minutely ob-
servaut of the interests of His children
God is.

4, The Christian is assured that there
shall be no more suffering of any kind
under the Divine government than is
absolutely necessary to the well-being
of His people. “He doth not afflict,”
etc, While to the eye of bystanders the
sufferer seems to have reached the
extremity, an unseen Hand assuages the
grief with unsuspected mitigations.

ii. Under spiritual distress. The
sorrow for sin. “I have heard Eph-
raim,” &c. No one else heard him or
would have noticed him. But God did.
Kovhraim felt himself unobserved and


“There is hope in thy


alone. The sin that was heaviest upon
his heart was the non-improvement of
God’s afflictive dispensations. We are
first turned, and then repent.

Under these apprehensions the Gospel
brings relief, by leading us to Christ,
the sin-atoning Lamb. ‘“ Behold the
Lamb ;” “ Who is a God like,” &c. The
Gospel proclaims pardon, reveals a full
and ample relief.

Il. The hopes the Gospel furnishes
of a better life. “There is hope in
thine end.” As Israel was delivered
from their captivity, so we shall be from
ours. “The ransomed shall return.”
The Gospel ministers largely to hope. It
tells us the hour of conflict is succeeded
by eternity of triumph, Here we are
in a state of exile and bondage... .
Heaven is complete deliverance—

i. From the captivity of sin. Hers
we are often in bondage to the power
of evil; there, sin shall have no more
dominion. A state of perfect holiness
and perfect love.

ii. From the captivity of Satan.
Wicked are led captive. Christians
are exposed to his temptutions; feel
the mark of chain and fetter. Christ
conquered Satan for us on the cross,
shall dispossess him finally at death.

iii. From the captivity of sorrow. All
tears wiped away.

iv. From the captivity of death.— Anon.


Ver. 18. Theme: Discitpuine. “I
surely heard Ephraim bemoaning him-
self thus: Thou hast chastised mnie,
and I was chastised. as a bullock un-
accustomed to the yoe; turn Thou
me, and I shall be turned: for Thou
art the Lord my God.”

There are chastisements in life which
cannot be classed amongst great afflic-
tions, There are little checks, daily dis-
appointments, irritations, defeats, and
annoyances—shadows which chequer
what else would be a sunny way—things
which themselves cannot be treated with
dignity, yet they tease and wear the
heart.

L Human life is established upon
a disciplinary basis. There isa “yoke”
everywhere—in sin, in repentance, in
grace, No one can have everything

525


CHAP. XXXL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





just as he wants it.. Man is made to
feel that there is somebody in the world
besides himself. He conceives a plan,
and is laughed at for his pains; he tells
his dream, and men suspect his vanity;
he points out his high tower, and whilst
his finger is lifted the mocking wind
hurls the boasted masonry to the ground.
So we are jostled, pulled back, and mor-
tified. We are made to feel that our
very life is a vapour, and that every
respiration is but a compromise with
death. We should ask ourselves the
meaning of these things, Discipline
touches the whole scheme: boy at
school, going from home, bodily afflic-
tion, oversights and miscalculations,
losses, d&c.

IL The value of discipline depends
upon its right acceptance. We may
become desperate under it: ‘as a bul-
lock unaccustomed to the yoke.” Men
may mourn, complain, rebel; they start
arguments against God; they justify
themselves ; they become lost in second-
ary agencies and incomplete details.

Then there isa better way. “Ephraim
bemoaned himself,” repented before God,
and said, “‘Turn Thou me, and I shall
be turned.” In this state of mind see—
(1.) Self-renunciation. (2.) Devout and
joyful confidence in God’s sovereignty
and graciousness,

Application—

1. There is a yoke in sin, ‘ The way
of transgressors is hard.”

2. There is a yoke in goodness. It
ie often difficult to be upright, noble,
holy.

3. God helps the true yoke-bearer :
“ My yoke is easy.” We must bear a
yoke ; say, shall it be the bad yoke, or
the yoke of Jesus Christ!—Dr. Joseph
Parker (“ Pulpit Notes”).


Ver. 18. Theme: On CHAsTISEMENT
BESULTING IN PENITENCE.

L These words contain an acknow-
ledgment. “Thou hast chastised me,”
&e.

1. This expression we conceive to
denote the inefficacy of former correc-
tions.

2. Though corrections are calculated
to produce amendment, though such is

526


their tendency and design, it is evident,
from observation and experience, they
often fail in accomplishing the effect.

3. Ephraim is here represented as
reflecting upon tt, (Proximate causes of
the inefficacy of correction by itself).

4. Inattention to the hand of God,
and, as a natural consequence, their
neglecting to pass from the contemplation
of their sufferings to their sins, Religion
begins with consideration.

5. In the serious purpose of a religious
life, formed under afflictive dispensations,
too many depend entirely upon resolu-
tions formed in their own strength.

To such purposes may be applied the
beautiful image of Nahum: “And as
the great grasshoppers, which camp in
the hedges in the cold day, but when
the sun ariseth they flee away, and their
place is not known.”

I The prayer. ‘Turn thou me.”
This may be enforced by such arguments
as these—

1. The plea of necessity. There is no
other resource.

2. To entreat God to turn is not to
ask an impossibility. The residue of the
Spirit is with Him.

3. It is worthy of His tnterposttion.
The turning of the heart is a fit occasion
on which Omnipotence may act.

4. The plea may be enforced by
precedents. It implies no departure
from His known methods.

5. We may force t by a reference to
the Divine mercy.—Robert Hall.


Ver, 18. Theme: Epurarm BEMoan-
ine Hiwsetr. Heathen described
their fabled deity, Jove, as sitting
far aloft, regardless of the common
affairs of this lower world. Not such
is Jehovah: “I have surely heard
Ephraim !”

Conceive the nearness of God to every
mourning soul, He is the greatest of
Comforters, and also the most approach-
able. “He will regard the prayer of
the destitute, and not despise their
prayer.” See here—

Zi A sinner bemoaning himself.

1. He was bowed down with a pecu-
liar grief. Not as Rachel “for her
children ;” for nothing outside of him-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; JEREMIAH,


Ce ee ee ee


self, but “bemoaning himself.” Inward
sorrow, true repentance,

2. Such godly sorrow is well-founded
sorrow. Over guilt, outrage on God's
goodness and grace, dc.

3. This sorrow is humble sorrow.
Not excusing himself, or flattering him-
self, or making new resolutions ; but
“bemoaning himself.” Self-abhorrence,
““T have sinned !”

4, A thoughtful sorrow, For Ephraim
reviews his past life: “Thou hast chas-
tised me.” What came of it? “I was
chastised,” and that was all! See,
hence, that affliction, providences, &c.,
will not save your soul ; you need effec-
tual grace.

5. A hopeless, yet a hopeful, sorrow.
Ephraim says, Lord, it is useless to
chastise me, I only get worse ; but do
Thou turn me, and I shall be turned.”

Then think of —

IL The Lord observing him. Some


hide yourselves when pricked in
your consciences. But the Lord finds
you out. Mothers! how quickly you


find out, even in the night, if your child
is ill.

1. God heard all Ephraim had to
say. It may be but a stammering
ery ; but broken prayers are the best
prayers.

2. God delights in the broken heart
and contrite spirit. ‘I have surely
heard Ephraim bemoaning himself.” If
He should not hear the music of heaven,
He certainly would hear the prayers o
penitents.

3. Our God is full of compassion.
He gave Ephraim what he asked. ‘“ Ye
shall not seek His face in vain.”

ItI. The Lord working in His effec-
tual grace.

1. The only turning in the world that
is saving and divine, is the turning of the
heart.

2. The Lord’s way of turning men
varies in each case—

(1.) A distinct sight of wrath to come
stops a sinner.

(2.) Or the awakened conscience is
led to see the real nature of sin.

(3.) The grand turning-point is @
sight of Christ on the cross.

(4.) One of the most blessed ways by


OHAP. XXXL,





which God makes a sinner turn is,
He manifests His everlasting love to
him.
(a.) Are you bemoaning yourself ?
(6.) Breathe the prayer, “Turn me, O
Lord.”—-C. H. Spurgeon, 1867.


Ver, 18. Theme: True Rupenranon
“I surely heard Ephraim,” &c.

I. What feeling it expresses on the
part of the returning penitent.

1. Mark the depth and intensity of
his penitential emotions,

2. His total absence of all attempts at
self-justification.

3. The promptitude and decision with
which he acts up to his own convictions
(ver. 19).

4. His concern to surrender himself to
those Divine influences to which he
already owed so much: “Turn Thou
me.”

IL What illustrations it exhibite
of God’s revealed character. It accorda
with other Scriptures: “I, even I, am
He that blotteth out,” dc. ; “As I live,
I have no pleasure,” &e,

1. The essential and inherent com-
passion of the Divine nature.

2. His knowledge of the constitution
of the human mind : attracted by kind-
ness ; repelled by severity.

3. His minute and condescending re-
gard to the growth and progress of re-
ligious emotion. ‘I have heard.”

4. His infinite readiness to receive
and pardon the returning sinner.

5. He reinstates the penitent in
those privileges which sin had _for-
feited.


Vers. 18-20. Theme: A PENITENT’S
REFLEcTIONs AND Gop’s ReFLections
ovER Him.

A wide difference between ostentation
and true piety. The sincere penitent de-
sires privacy. God here declares how
acceptable is such repentance.

L The reflections of a true penitent
over himself.

1. The beginning of his repentance.
He—

(1.) Reflects on hie tncorrigiblenes
tn the ways of sin.


627


oHAP. XXKL





(2.) Pleads with God to turn
convert his soul. :

2. The progress of his repentance,

(1.) He reflects upon the advancing
distress of his soul. Amazed—“ smote
on thigh ;” then “ ashamed ;” then
“even confounded.”

(2.) But he gives the glory of hts ad-
vancement to God alone. It all resulted
from the fact that “ I was turned.”

IL The reflections of God over a
true penitent. The penitent finds no
words too severe against himself ; but—

1. God accounts no honour too great
for such a person. He owns him to be
“a dear and pleasant child.”

2. He expresses His compassionate re-
gard for him. “My bowels are troubled
for him.”

3. He grants him all he himself could
desire. ‘‘I will surely have mercy upon
him, saith the Lord.”

Can God testify of us as of Ephraim !
If not, we must expect shame and con-
fusion (Matt. xiii. 49,50). If He can,
happiness will be ours here and _here-
after (Ps. exxvi. 6, 6). — Claude’s
Simeon.


Vers. 18-20. Theme: THz STUBBORN
Srnner Supmitrine Himse.Fr ro Gop.

I. A description of the feelings and
conduct of an obstinate, impenitent
sinner while smarting under the rod
of affliction. He is rebellious — till
subdued,

Il. The new views and feelings pro-
duced by affliction through Divine
grace.

(a.) Convinced of guilt and sinful-
ness; (6) praying; (¢) reflecting on the
effects of Divine grace in his conver-
sion,

III. A correcting and compassionate
God watching the results, &.

(a.) As a tender Father, mindful of
His penitent child; (.) Listening to
his complaints and petitions ; (c) de-
claring His determiuativa to pardon.—
Payson.


See Addenda: Conression.
With vers. 18, 19, comp. Hemilies


en chap. iii, 21-265.
oak


AOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; JEREMIAL.


Notes on vers, 18-20.

iL “THOU HAST CHASTISED MK, AND I
WAS OHASTISED.” In the first clause
the chastisement itself is meant; in the
second, the beneficial effects of it—in
teaching the penitent true wisdom.

ii, “AS A BULLOCK UNACCUSTOMED ”
(of. “stiffuecked ” Acts vii. 51; Exod.
xxxii. 9), an image from refractory oxen,
Before my chastisement J needed the
severe correction I received, as much as
an untamed bullock needs the goad
(of. Acts ix. 5, where the same figure
is used of Saul before he wes con-
verted).

iii “ TURN THOU ME, AND I SHALL
BE TURNED ;” by Thy converting Spirit
(Lam. v. 21).

But why does Ephraim pray for con-
version, seeing that he is already con-
verted? Because we are converted by
progressive steps, and need the same
power of God to carry forward, as to
originate, our conversion (John vi. 44,
65; cf. Isa. xxvii. 3; 1 Pet. i 5; Phil,
i, 6).

iv. “ArreR THAT I was TURNED I
REPENTED.” Repentance in the full
sense follows, not precedes, our being
turned to God by God (Zech. xii. 10).
Repentance is the tear that flows from
the eye of faith turned to Jesus. Him-
self gives it; we give it not of ourselves,
but must come to Him for it (Acts v.
31).

é “Arter I was INsTRucTED, I
SMOTE UPON MY THIGH.” Made to learn
by chastisement. God’s Spirit often
works through the corrections of His
providence. ‘‘Smote,” d&c. (Ezek. xxi,
12): a token of remorse, shame, and
grief because of past sin.

vi. “1 DID BEAR THE REPROACH OF
My youTH.” The punishments I bore
were the just punishments of my
scandalous wantonness against God in
my youth; alluding to the idols set up
at Dan and Bethel immediately after
the ten tribes revolted from Judah. His
sense of shame shows he no longer de
lights in his sin.—Jamieson.


Ver. 20. Theme: Gon’s ‘TENDER
Memory oF THE Sinnen. “Is Eph
eaiin My dear son] is he a vleasant


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


OHAP. XXXI,





ehild? For since I spake against him,
I do earnestly remember him still.
Therefore my bowels are troubled for
him: I will surely have mercy upon
him, saith the Lord.”

See Homily on chap. ii, 2: “An
Unrorcotren Past,” pp. 41, 42, and
Noticeable Topic, Eanty Piety Tae
Beauty or Yours, p. 50.

These questions—“ Is Ephraim,” &c.
—imply that a negative reply might
naturally follow. Oh! who could have
imagined that, after all this undutiful-
ness, the Father could still regard him
as a ‘‘ pleasant child” 4

L Our sin is enough to estrange the
heart of God from us.

IL Yet the Divine heart is tena-
cious of its cherished child, “How
can I give thee up?” ‘I do earnestly
remember him still.”

IIL Human alienation from God is
not oblivion with God. Ephraim might
be indifferent to the God he had revolted
from and wronged: “ God not in all his
thoughts ;” but God could not forget-—
**T do earnestly remember.” God cannot
bury in forgetfulness the child He lovss,
He “so loved the world,” &c.

IV. Infinite grace is intent upon
the recovery of the alien child.

1. “ My bowels are troubled.” God’s
restless yearning for his return,

2. “I do earnestly remember.”
“While he was yet @ great way off
the father saw him.”

3. “I will surely have mercy.” Quick
to relent the moment he repents. God
is in no doubt as to how He will receive
the sinner, ‘The father ran, and had
eompassion upon him, and kissed him.”


Ver. 21. Theme: SHEWING EXILES
tHE Way Home, “Set up way-marks,”

Keep the lights burning. Lift up the
eross! Preach the Gospel still. Declare
the precious promises.

L “ Way-marks” would be needed.
For they should return from exile.

It isa prophecy. Souls who go astray
may return ; many shall,

IL “ Way-marks” would be helpful.
For their long banishment might obii-
terate the path and obliterate their re-
membrance. For leng absence from God


2b


does make the way of right dificwlt to
Jind.
IIL “ Way-marks ” would be remem-
brancers, testimonies that God promised
their return; for, seeing these “ way-
marks,” they would recall His promises
and rejoice in His faithfulness and grace.


Ver, 21. Theme: A Ricutiy DirzoreD
Purrosr. “Set thine heart toward the
highway.”

I There is but one way back to
God. “Iam the Way, the truth, and
the life; no man cometh to the Father
but by Me.”

IL Misleading paths decoy the steps
astray. ‘‘ There is a way that seemeth
right unto a man,” &.; ways of self:
reform, sacramental efficacy, &c.

TL A heart intent upon the way
marked out for our return to God.

Determined to tread it. Resolute to
walk in none other. Earnest to be found
therein quickly.


Ver. 22. Theme: A NEW- CREATED
Wonprr: THE Mrracutous Concep-
TION OF CuHristT. ‘The Lord hath
created a new thing in the earth: a
woman shall compass a man.”

For other interpretations of the words,
see Lit. Crit. supra.

The words naturally and easily read
thus :—Why longer “ go about” looking
everywhere, anywhere for helpers, as if
crying, ‘‘ Who will show us any good #”
leaning on any helpful contingencies
which may perchance offer themselves ?
Stay your hopes on Jehovah; for He
has not exhausted His wonderful re-
sources for Israel and humanity. A
new era approaches—of grace in Christ
Jesus. A new creation shall mark that
era—the Incarnation of Christ; when
the Virgin Woman shall compass a
Man, and give birth to “ the Man Christ
Jesus.”

The ancient Jews acknowledged this
interpretation, and applied the words
determinately to the Messiah.

Augustine and most of the Christian
fathers regarded the verse as predicting
the event of the Virgin Mary compassing
Christ in her womb.

i, The event was to be WHOLLY UNPRE-

629


OBAP. ZXXI1.


CEDENTED. “ A new thing in the earth,”
and a special Divine “creation.” Thus
Mary “ was found with child of the Holy
Ghost” (Matt. i, 18-20). It was an
event out of the ordinary course of
nature.

li, PROPHECY HARMONISED with the
fact described. The first evangelical
promise described Christ as “the Seed
of the woman,” not of man. So Isa. vii.
14, “ A Virgin shall conceive.”

iii, There 18 a SPECIFIC PERSONALITY
tn the words, “A woman—a man.”
Both distinct ; not any “woman,” not
an ordinary “man;” but definite, so-
litary. The Hebrew rendered here
“woman” means an individual, and is
not the word for ‘‘ woman” collectively
and in plurality. So the Hebrew ren-
dered ‘“‘man” is properly “mighty MAN,”
the Geber ; and Christ is called in Iga. ix.
6, Hi Gibbér. (See also the word in
Deut. x. 17; Zech. xiii 7; and cf. Ps.
xlv. 3.)

iv. The LOOALISATION OF THE EVENT
helps this interpretation. “ A new thing
in the earth,” literally, in “the land,”
viz., of Judah, where Christ’s conception
occurred (cf. Luke i. 39, 41).

v. An occult allusion to the SLaveH-
TER OF THE INNOCENTS IN BETHLEHEM
associates this prediction with the In-
carnation. See on ver. 14,

vi. Such a Messianic promise more
fully explains the LONGING OF THE
EXILES TO RETURN TO THEIR LAND,
because Emmanuel should be born
there.

vii. The prophet’s wiston is through
all these verses DIRECTED ON TO THE
GosPEL AGE, when “the new covenant”
(ver. 29 seg.) shall dawn upon the world,
of which the Zncarnate Christ should be
the “ Alpha and the Omega.”


Vers. 23, 24.
chap. iii. 17, 18.


Comp. Homily on


Ver. 25. “ Satiated the weary soul.”
Comp. ver. 14.


Ver. 26. Theme: SwExEt Visions oF
Human Goop. ‘My sleep was sweet
unto me.” “ My sleep”—my prophetic
dream. It was a rare experience with


530


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


Jeremiah to have visions so “ sweet ;”
for usually his messages concerning “ the
Divine intent” were pensive and sad.

i. Happy outlooks for a woestricken
world are sweetest to the Divine seer.

ii. There are gleams of day glory break-
ing the grim night of the world’s distress.

iii, It ss in God’s purposes of grace,
as distinct from man’s conduct of sinful-
ness, that these glad visions of good are
possible,


Vers. 29, 30. Theme: Eatina Sour
Grapes: PersonaL RESPONSIBILITY.

Popular sentiments, though crystallised
into proverbs, may be misleading, There-
fore “ prove all things,” &c. Both Exze-
kiel and Jeremiah mention this as a
proverb in currency, See, with ver. 29,
Ezek. xviiii. 2-4.

A law on Sinai that Qod would “ visit
the sins of the fathers upon their chil-
dren.”

In distinction from the old covenant,
@ new dispensation was coming in which
INDIVIDUAL RESPONSIBILITY should pre-
vail as the law.

L Facts in the Divine economy and
procedure warranting this prevailing
sentiment. “The fathers have eaten
a sour grape, and the children’s teeth are
set on edge.”

1. Man’s inherited misery through
Adam's fall (Rom, v. 12-14, 18, 19).

2. Great calamities were allowed to
engulf the children in the ruin merited
only by the fathers.

The Deluge; overthrow of Sodom and
Gomorrah ; destruction of “ families”
of Corah, Dathan, and Abiram, together
with themselves. So, for David’s sin in
numbering the people, 70,000 of his
subjects were slain, himself spared. Ma-
nasseh (2 Kings xxiii. 26, 27; xxiv. 3, 4),
On the Jewish nation too (Matt. xxiii,
34).

5 In civil and soctal relations the
conduct of governors and parents casts
its results on the children.

IL. A spirit of sinful repining which
cast blame upon God. The Jews in-
tended to—

1, Haonerate themselves for their mis-
fortunes, They implied that for ne sin
of their own were they suffering.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.


ee


& [Reflect on the wisdom and justice of
God. But surely God punishes us less
than our iniquities deserve (Ezra ix. 18).
Even the dost souls must own God just
(Rev. xvi. 7). And the day of retribu-
tion will prove itself to be “ a revelation
of the righteous judgment of God”
(Rom. ii. 5).

Til A new era announced of indi-
vidual responsibility and judgment.

1. God declares what shall be His
settled rule of procedure (ver. 30).
(1.) National and all-embracing judg-
ments shall cease. (2.) Hach soul shall
stan! on tts own merits and bear its own
responsibility,

2. This law of individuality is to be
verified—(1.) In this life (Gal. vi. 5);
(2.) In the future world (Gal. vi. 7, 8).

IV. The awful burden of inevitable
personal guil%.

1. Every man must give account of
himself, and meet his just condemnation.
For—

2. There is none who can stand before
God without sin. And

8. Every sinner shall die his due
death (ver. 30).

4, Can there be found no Sin-Bearer ?
Yes verily ; Christ died “the Just for
the unjust ” (1 Peter iii. 18) ; was “ made
sin for us” (2 Cor. v. 21). And so we
lose our individual curse in the atone-
ment and substitution of Calvary.


Vers. 31-34. Theme: Satvation
TAKEN INTO Gop’s own Hanns. “ Be-
hold, the days come, saith the Lord, that
I will make a new covenant with the
house cf Israel, and with the house of
Judah ; not according to the covenant
that I made with their fathers, in ths
day that I took them by the hand, to
bring them out of the land of Egypt,
which my covenant they brake; though I
was a husband unto them, saith the
Lord; but this shall be the covenant
that I will make with the house of Israel:
After those days, saith the Lord, I will
put My law in their inward parts, and
write it in their hearts ; and will be their
God, and they shall be My people. And
they shall teach no more every wan his
neighbour, and every man his brother,
saying, Know the Lord : for they shall all


OHAP, XXXI,


know Me, from the least of them untae
the greatest of them, saith the Lord ; for
I will forgive their iniquity, and I will
remember their sin no more.”

It is useful to contemplate the duties
devolving on us as agents, and the hopes
arising from the agency of God. Our
text refers to the latter. The old cove-
nant was made with the Hebrews at
Sinai, the covenant of grace under
types ; not an absolute but aconditional -
covenant, and inthis it resembled the
law. As a consequence, it is added,
“which covenant they brake.” But it
pleased God to promise a new covenant,
In this He shows His own agency on
the heart, and takes salvation into His
own hands to accomplish it Himself:
“They shall be My people and I will be
their God.” Had a covenant of works
been held out offering salvation upon
perfect obedience, or a covenant offering
pardon to man unassisted, none would
have been saved. Both were tried, in
Eden and at Sinai. The covenant made
with Abraham still exista) Let us show—

I. According to the plan of grace re-
vealed in the Gospel, GoD HAS TAKEN THE
Work oF SatvaTion into His owy
Hanps.

Il. Tuis Lays THE ONLY Founpa-
TION FOR Hopz.

I. According to plan of grace in
Gospel, God has taken the work of
salvation into His own hands. The
great design ortginated in the mind of
God, it was His own choice and purpose,
induced by a regard for His own glory
and compassion for a sinful world. He
organised the plan alone. Eternal ages
before man was, the covenant of redemp-
tion between the Sacred Persons was
formed, and all circumstances relating te
the salvation of the world were settled.
Man was then made, and fell; when an
intimation of the purpose was made
to him, Jesus Christ came in due time
to put away sin by the sacrifice of Him-
self. He rose from the dead for our
justification, All this was done by God
independently of His creatures. The
Holy Spirit was sent out to subdue ar
many as the Father had given Christ
Through human instrumentality the
world was enlightened by the Saas

5


CHAP. XXXI.





of the Word. The creation, care, support,
and enlargement of the Christian Church
was undertaken by the Trinity. In like
manner God takes the salvation of every
believer indwidually into His own hands.

IL, That God has taken the work of
delivering His own people into [His own
hands, is the only foundation of human
hope. This doctrine is sweet to the
Christian, but opposed by the proud ;
for had not God contrived and execnted
this plan, no provision could have
been made for the salvation of man ; and,
beset as he is from without and within,
he can only find help from the God of
his salvation.

1. The Christian who feels his own
weakness, and discerns the power of his
enemies, resorts to this truth as the only
ground for hope. ‘‘ The salvation of the
righteous is of the Lord,” and they feel
that God can shield them from every
enemy.

2. Those who would rather trust them-
selves than God, reject this truth; while
the only encouragement for Christians to
“ work out their own salvation ” is that
“God worketh tn them.”

3. This doctrine also affords encourage-
ment to the Church generally. While
looking upon the many who know not
God, we can be sustained by nothing
but the trust that the work of saving
men is God’s work alone. In commend-
ing our loved ones to God, we feel peace in
the knowledge that “ God has taken their
salvation into His own hands.” Ministers
of God’s people, be content to leave
their salvation there ; it is His work and
His cause. Pious and trembling ones,
dwell upon this truth to your comfort ;
and to the unrenewed I would say,
remember you arein God’s hands, Return
unto the Lord, for He will have mercy
upon you, and to our God, for He will
abundantly pardon.— Ancient VS.


Ver. 32. *‘ Which covenant they brake,
although I was a husband unto them.”
Comp. Homily on chap. iii 14.

Ver. 33. The new covenant, Comp.
Homily on chap. iii. 16.


Ver. 32. Theme: Is tae Ord Cove-
want ApBanponeD! “ Not according
532


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





to the covenant that I mafle with their
fathers.”

I. The covenant God made at the
first with His people is not contra
dicted and destroyed by the new.

1, God had not changed His purpose,
as if he had forgotten His faithfulness,
The first covenant with Abraham was
inviolable,

2. The law was a confirmation of, and
based upon, that covenant, Consequently,
God can make no new law inconsistent
with the old.

3. Christians, under the new covenant,
are partakers of that old and original
Abrahamic covenant, are called “chil-
aren of Abraham ;” will be “ gathered
into Abraham’s bosom;” and_ shall
“come from the east and west,” &.,
Sand sit down with Abraham,” &c.

These considerations show that God
never abrogated the covenant made with
Abraham and confirmed by and to Moses,

II. In what sense God has made a
“new covenant” with His people.
Here premising that—

1. The substance, or doctrine, remaina
the same ; for God in the Gospel brings
forward nothing but what the law con-
tains. But—

2. In the form, or expression of the
doctrine, all is new. Thus Christ, as
substitute; Holy Spirit’s renewing grace ;
and the whole method of teaching men
God’s will: these are new.

(a.) Thus, God made a new covenant
when He accomplished through His Son
what had been foreshadowed forth under
the law.

(0.) Further, it was a new thing that
God, by the regeneration of the Holy
Spirit, made the covenant, not only
strike the ear, but penetrate the heart.

(c.) The outward mode of teaching is
also new ; for, comparing the law with
the Gospel, we find that God speaks to
us openly now, as it were face to face
(2 Cor. iii. 13) ; for the veil is removed,
and God in the face of Christ presents
Himself to be seen by us.— Arranged
from Calvin,


Ver. 33. Theme: “My Law In THER
Harts.”
No longer a Sinaitic code of morals,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


OHAP, XXXI,


a


external to man and enforced upon him ;
but an inner force, an inspiration of
love, constraining the soul into sweet
consent. The sermon on the mount is
the old Mosaic law—but transfigured
by love; speaking to the very heart of
snan in tones of mighty tenderness,

L If God’s commandments are to
sway the whole being of a man, they
must move the inmost affections.

1. “Laws,” which only speak to the
ear, and demand an unwilling attention,
can affect men but feebly. But the
voice of God is powerful in a soul when
it finds its way inward to the affections,
and speaks in tunes which stir the
keenest and strongest emotions,

2. The ‘‘new covenant” laws are
voices of love from God, full of infinite
tenderness and grace, and go deeper
into the soul than commandments; they
are more penetrating than a mothers
words. God speaks to the heart in the
Gospel.

3. These laws of love—‘ Thou shalt
love the Lord,” &e. ; for “God is love”
—which constitute the Gospel covenant,
do rule the soul from within by the
impulses and affections which they
awaken. “ We love Him, because He
first loved us.” His laws are impressed
upon our very hearts.

IL If man’s obedience to God is to
be complete—the obedience of a willing
soul, glad to obey—the inmost affec-
tions must move him thereto.

1. ‘ Duty” is cold and hard as an
inspiration to conduct. It awakens no
enthusiasm, no delight, no eager volition
in the soul. It enforces itself upon us,
not awakens response within us.

2. But “laws” (interpreted and em-
phasised as they are in the life of Jesus
—calling us to obedience for love of Him,
and inspired with grandeur as they are
in the cross of Christ—declaring the
infinite importance to the sinner that
he should not séx, but should obey and
live)—laws of God thus enforced cast
their pathos upon the heart of even the
disobedient and stir to response.

3. The affections won by Christ’s
personally obedient example and substi-
tutionary death for man’s disobedience,
prompt the soul to willing anxious con-


cern to do the will of God with fervour
and delight. His laws are obeyed from
the heart.

IIL Hence, love awakened within
@ soul is a grander force and a surer
guarantee of full obedience to law than
the sense of duty however majestically
enforced,

1, The cross raised on Calvary is
therefore a grander motive than the
tables of stone given on Sinai.

2. Humanity can be drawn into alle-
gtance to God more effectually and surely
by the allurements of love than by the
demands and threatenings of law.

3. The new covenant, therefore, super
sedes the reign of penalty, with its appeals
to duty and fear, by the reign of grace,
in which the heart is won to glad obedi-
ence, inspired by gratitude and love,


Ver. 34. Theme: Untversat Know-
LEDGE OF THE Lorp. “And they shall
teach no more every man his neighbour,
and every man his brother, saying, Know
the Lord; for they shall all know Me,
from the least of them unto the greatest
of them, saith the Lord.”

1. Its primary application is to the en-
lightenment of Israel. They shall know
Christ as the Lord (Isa. liv. 13).

2. Its secondary reference is to all
believers, who come to see Christ for
themselves as their Saviour, Lord, and
God (John vi. 45 ; 1 Cor. ii, 10; 1 John
ii, 2, 20).

3. Its widest meaning is the éngather-
ing of all people to the ‘one faith” (Ps.
ii 8).

I. By a Divine plan of instruction
men shall be taught

1. It is slow and feeble work this
winning men by man’s teaching.

2. Not that the office of teaching will
cease under the Gospel dispensation.

3. But the Divine Spirit will become
the world’s Teacher, showing Christ to
men.

4, And a purer light will by that
Spirit shine in upon the human con-
science, revealing to the sinner more
clearly his state, his need, and the
remedy of the cross.

IL With an all-embracing inclusive
ness men shall be taught. me

5


CBAP. XXXL


1. National barriers and distinctions
shall no longer limit the spread of true
celigion, The Gospel shall be “ unto
al people.”

2. Social and educational divisions
shall be utterly disregarded in the Divine
diffusion of light. ‘Things despised”
will be equally blessed with Divine light
~‘the least of them” as “things
mighty ”—‘‘the greatest of them.” For
“God is no respecter of persons.”

3. Childhood shall gather under the
lustre of Christian knowledge as much
as maturity; for Christ shall enfold
the lambs, and the “little ones” shall
be in “the kingdom of heaven ”—“ the
least of them.”

IM. Into a clearer knowledge of
God men shall be led. ‘All shall
know Me.”

1. Sinav’s revelations and Prophecy’s
dim teachings fatled to reveal God fully
to the soul. They were but faint gleam-
ings (Exod, xxxiii, 23).

2. The Person of Christ—His life,
teachings, character, and death—unvetls
God clearly to man (John i. 18).

3. By the Spirc’s illumination a
familiar, happy, and satisfactory realisa-
tion of God ts brought to each believing
sowl (1 John ii. 27),


Vers. 35-37. Theme: Gon’s Guar
ANTEE To His Cuurcw. In prophecy
we see the purposes of God unfolded,
and, comparing past and passing events,
see God so ordering every incident
for the fulfilment of His purposes.
Note—

i. With what majesty and glory the
Almighty describes Himself /

ii, With what solemnity He enforces
His declarations, equivalent even to
oaths !

iii, And all this in order to assure
His people of His exhaustless and ina-
lienable mercy !

I. Contemplate the grandeur of these
assurances of Jehovah to His people.

1. In their historic reference to Israel
lsterally.

(1.) Their imperishable security ; they
shall always be under His care. So
that, while other nations have become
obliterated, they shall never be. Though

534


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH,





their sins provoked Him to utterly cast
them off, they should be restored to His
Javour as of old.

(2.) God’s infinite resources on their
behalf. “The Lord, which giveth the
sun,” &c. ; the almightiness of Jehovah ;
“the Lord of Hosts is His name.”

(3.) The inviolability of God’s covenant
with them. If impossibilities can be,
“the heavens be measured,” &c., then
this impossibility may happen, that God
would sever His people from Himself,
the people He betrothed in an everlast-
ing covenant !

Note :—History confirms these ancremt
assurances of God to Israel. During
their captivity in Babylon the nation
kept its nationality intact, and were
restored to Canaan. And even now,
though for 1800 years Israel and Judah
are scattered, God preserves them “a
peculiar people ;” and signs are not
wanting that the “lost” ten tribes are
still in distinct existence,

They are stil “ beloved for the fathers’
sake ;” and God’s “gifts and calling
are without repentance ” (Isa. liv. 7-10).

2. In their iarger application to the
Church of God spiritually.

(1.) Guarded by the unfailing care of
the Lord. “The gates of hell shall not
prevail;” “ Not one of them shall be
lost.”

(2.) All the guarantees of Deity are
pledged to its security. ‘‘My Father
who gave them to Me is greater thay
all, and none shall pluck them out om
My Father’s hand: I and My Father
are one!”

(3.) With inviolable fidelity Christ’s
people are bound to Him, Not a jotor
tittle of His word shall fail: “ Heaven
and earth shall pass away, but My word
shall not pass away.” “Lo, I am with
you alway, even to the end of the
world.”

IL Ponder the value of these assur-
ances of Jehovah to His people. To
Israel indeed literally belongs these
‘“‘ covenants and promises ;” yet Chris-
tians have a joint heritage in them ; for
Paul assures us that “ God, willing more
abundantly to show wnto the heirs of
promise the immutability of His counsel,
eoutirmed it by ap oath; that by two


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


OHAP. XXXtI.





immutable things, in which it was im-
possible for God to lie, we might have a
strong consolation, who have fled for
refuge to lay hold on the hope set before
us” (Heb. vi. 17, 18).

1. By whom, then, may these assur-
ances be appropriated? ‘ All the pro-
mises of God are in Christ, Yea; and
tn Him, Amen, unto the glory of God by
us.” Only those who are “tn Christ”
themselves can “ inherit the promises ”
which are assured in Him.

2. For what purposes should these
assurances be appropriated? For our
enduring consolation amid all distresses,
persecutions, &c. (Rom. viii. 35-39) ;
yet not for delusive self-security and pre-
sumption, Unless we keep ourselves dis-
tenct from the world, as do the Jews as
a nation, but distinct for our piety (2
Cor, vi. 17; James i. 27), we forfeit all
part in the assurance that God will keep
us perpetually before Him as His people.

3. In what spirit, then, should these
assurances be appropriated? With fazth
in God’s word (John xiv. 1); with joyous
hope (Rom. v. 2); with lowly watchful-
ness (Rom. xi. 20).

Compare with the above Simeon’s Out-
lsne, on which this is based.


Vers. 38, 39. Theme: THE REBUILD-
ING OF JERUSALEM, BOTH LITERALLY AND
SPIRITUALLY.

Wordsworth here points out—

L The ctty ts here said to be built to
the Lord (ver. 38). It is dedicated to
Him. The Church (xvgiaxy) is the
house of the Lord. It is called by
His name, consecrated to His glory
and service. Its name is Jehovah
Shammah, “The Lord is there” (Ezek.
xlviii. 35).

IL ‘Taken in its literal sense, this
prophecy foretels that Jerusalem shall
be rebuilt in all its extent, from the
tower of Hanameel, on the north-east
(see Neh. iii. 1; xii. 39) to the gate of
the corner, on the north-west (2 Kings
xiv. 13; 2 Chron. xxvi. 9). Comp.
Zech. xiv. 10. This was effected by
Nehemiah.

Ill But this was figurative of the

veater rebuilding, when Jesus Christ
Guilt up the ruins of our fallen nature,





and raised up the walls of the spiritual
Jerusalem, His universal Church.

1. The names Hanameel and Gate of
the Corner have a symbolical sense, suited
to this fulfilment. “ Hanameel” = gra-
crously given by God, ‘The building of
the spiritual Jerusalem (so Jerome sug-
gests) begins with the free grace of God
(Titus ii. 11-14; iii, 4-8), and extends
to the gate of the Corner, Christ being
the elect ‘‘ Corner-stone ;” for He is the
“Corner” in which the walls of both
peoples—Jew and Gentile—meet in one,
cemented together in Him (Ps. cxviii.
22; Isa xxviii, 16; Matt. xxi. 42;
1 Peter iii 6).

2. Similarly the names “hill @ared
and Goath” have a symbolical signi-
ficance. These names are nowhere found
in Scripture, and have no actual localisa-
tion ; the reason, therefore, for the choice
of such names is that we should not look
to the letter but to the spirit [!] Mystical
names were thus sometimes used by pro-
phets (Cant. ii 17, vi 12; Jer. xxv. 26;
Ezek. xxxix. 11, &.)

But “ Gareb” means a leper, and
leprosy was a type of six ; while “ Goath”
is supposed by some to be the same as
Golgotha or Calvary. Leprosy ts the ban
of death ; but Christ by death “ abolished
death,” whereas on Calvary was opened
“the fountain for stm,” and so sin and
death found a remedy in Christ.

Thus the Christian Church, which has
its origin and centre in Zion, extends tts
walls with a living and gracious energy
to enfold the hill Gareb, and even Goath
itself.

IV. Further, in ver. 40, it is affirmed
that ‘‘the whole valley of the dead bodies”
—the loathsome and idolatrous valley
of Hinnom, aud even “ all the tields unto
the brook Kidron”—to which all the
abominations of idolatry were brought
and burned (2 Kings xxxii. 4-6), 1.¢., all
things most unclean by nature and by
human corruption, will be purged from
all impurity, and cleansed by the blood
of Christ and the outpouring of the
Spirit of holiness in the Christian
Church, and so be made “holy unto the
Lord” (Zech. xiv. 20, 31; Joel iii, 17;
Isa. lii. 1, dc.)

This has been fulfilled, and is in

53h


OMAP XXX¥,


course of fulfilment in the transforma-
tion of heathen basilicas and temples (as
the Pantheon of Romeand the Parthenon
of Theseus at Athens) into Christian
Churches, and the conversion of heathen
cities and nations unto Christ. The
cross of Christ stands in the Colosseum,
where Christian martyrs were formerly
cast to the lions; and it surmounts the
obelisks of Egypt ; and human nature,
once the stronghold of Satan, has now
become the shrine of Deity by the incar-
nation of the Son of God,— Wordsworth’s
Commentary.

Note.—Dr. Payne Smith remarks:
“The main point in Jeremiah’s descrip-
tion of the New Jerusalem is not its
great extent, though it would have
covered somewhat more space than the
old city, and much more than Nehe-
miah included within his walls, but
that it took in and consecrated spots
which previously had been unclean. If
we compare this with Zech. ii. 4, the
conclusion seems evident that Jeremiah’s
words are to be spiritually understood.
His city is one that renders what was


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAA,


——=—


before unclean ‘holy unto Jehovah.’
(Comp. with this John’s New Jerusalem,
especially Rev, xxi 27.)”


Ver. 40. THE PERPETUITY OF THE
SPIRITUAL JERUSALEM. “It shall not
be plucked up nor thrown down any
more for ever.”

Caluin comments: “ The promise of
perpetual favour is added ; for it would
not be sufficient to have God’s mercy
promised us fora short time. The ety
indeed was again destroyed by Titus,
and at length wholly demolished by
Adrian; but God gave some taste of
His favour, in the external aspect of the
city, till Christ came; but after Christ
was manifested, the heavenly Jerusalem
became the object to be sought, and
then all types and shadows ceased.

“This promise pledges the perpetuity
of the Church ; for though God may per-
mit it to be terribly shaken, and Satan
and all the world may daily threaten its
ruin, yet the Lord will preserve it to
the end, so that it shall never perish.”


4DDENDA TO CHAP, XXXI.: ILLUSTRATIONS AND SUGGESTIVE EXTRACTS,


Ver. 3. Everuastinc Love A
father, whose affluence was considerable,
mourned over a reckless son, whose
misconduct brought shame upon himself
and family, From home the prodigal
went into another country, and for years
he was lost to his relatives. A chance
occurring, he sent by a friend this
message, should he meet his boy,
“ Your father loves you still.” The
bearer sought him long and in vain, At
last he saw him enter a house of vice,
and called him; and there, at a late
hour of evening, he delivered this
message. The dissolute gambler's heart
was touched. The thought that his
father still loved him, and wished to
forgive him, broke the spell of Satan.
He abandoned his profligacy and re-
turned to his father. Oh! the power of
such & message of inalienable love from


God!


‘© Gould we with ink the ocean fill,
Were the whole world of parchment mads,
536


Were every single grags a quill,
And every man a scribe by trades
To write the love
Of God above
Would drain the ocean dry,
Nor could the scroll
Contain the whole,
Though stretched from earth to aky.”


“Not as the world loves doth God
love. They love to-day and hate to-
morrow, wearing their friends like
flowers, which we may behold in their
bosoms whilst they are fresh and sweet,
but soon they wither and then are laid
aside. Whereas,the love of God to His
people is everlasting, and He wears them
as a signet upon His right hand, which
He will never part with.”— White.


Ver. 9. Tears or PxeniteNcRK, A
saint’s tears are better than a sinner’s
triumphs. Bernard saith, Lachryma
pententium sunt wvinum angelorum:
“The tears of penitents are the wine of
angels.” —Secker.


HOMILETIC COMMENYARY ; JEREMIAH,


OHAP. XXXM,





Ver. 18, Conrzssion: “ Bemoaning
himself.” If I am working beside a
man, and I see that he tries to shirk
his work upon me, I am angry with
him, But if he says to me, “TI am ill
and cannot work,” then the thought


you can”—the very confession disarms
us, and we think better of him than we
did before. Therefore it is that God so
exhorts us to confess our sins to Him,
—H. Ward Beecher.


** All-powerful is the penitential sigh


comes to me at once, ‘‘ You shall not
work ; I will help you.” And so, if a
man says to us, “I know I did wrong,
but Iam weak; blame me as little as
you can, but help me out as much as


Of true contrition; like the placid wreatn
Of incense, wafted from the righteous shrine
Where Abel ministered, to the blest seat
Of Mercy, an accepted sacrifice,
Humiliation’s conscious plaint ascends.”

— Hayes.





CHAPTER XXXIL


Cairtoat awD ExecrtioaL Nores.—1. Chronology of the Chapter.—" Tenth year of Zede-
kiah king of Judah, and eighteenth of Nebuchadnezzar” (ver. 1). Cf. note on chronology of
chap, xxv. : “this eighteenth year of Nebuchadnezzar” was about B.o, 5853 or. according te
the Chaldean cylinders, B.o. 564.

2. Contemporary Scriptures.—Chaps. xxxix., xl., lii. 4, 5, &. ; 1 Kings xxv.; 2 Chron.
xxxvi. 17, scg. ; Ezek. xxiv.

8. National Affairs.—The siege of Jerusalem began in the tenth month of the ninth year of
Zedekiah’s reign, and was now going on; but, on the approach of Pharaoh’s army from Egypt,
the siege was temporarily raised (chap. xxxvii. 5). Jeremiah made an attempt to leave the city
during this erisis (xxxvii. 18), and was arrested, being afterwards kept prisoner till the siege
was over. Many in Jerusalem hoped that Egypt would prevail over the Chaldean power; but
Jeremiah declared that the Chaldeans must be supreme; and, as being distrusted for his anti-
Egyptian prophecies, was kept in the prison of the king’s house.

4. Contemporaneous History.—The Chaldeans besieged Jerusalem the year preceding the
date of this chapter. For a brief while this siege was interrupted by the arrival at Jerusalem of
the succour of the Evyptian forces, then resumed with increased vigour. This Egyptian army
was led by Pharaoh-Hophra (see chap. xliv. 30), the Apries of Herodotus (ii. 116, iv. 159). He
was an ally of Zedekiah against ‘‘ Nebuchadnezzar the king of Babylon” (vers. 2, 8) ; we learn
this from Ezekiel xvii. 15, but the alliance was fruitless, and this attack upon Nebuchadnegzar’s
besieging army ended in either the withdrawal of the Egyptian forces or their defeat by the
Chaldeans.

5. Geographical References.—Ver. 7. ‘‘ Anathoth ;” and Ver. 8. ‘‘Anathoth im the country of
Benjamin :” ¢f. Geographical References on chap. i. It was a sacerdotal city, and so had 1000
cubits of suburban fields outside the walls attached to it (Num. xxxv. 4, 5). These fields might
not be sold out of the Levitical tribe (xxv. 84). Ver. 35. ‘‘ High places of Baal in the valley of
Hinnom :” ef. notes on chaps. vii. 31, xxix. 5. :

6. Personal Allusions.—Ver. 7. ‘‘ Hanameel the son of Shallum thine uncle.” Jeremiah’s

first cousin ; nothing more known of him. Ver. 12. ‘‘ Baruch the son of Neriah.” Jeremiah’s
amanuensis and agent (xxxvi. 4, &c.). ; :
' 7, Manners and Customs,—Ver. 7. “The right of redemption is thine.” On the failure of
the owner it fell to the next of kin to redeem it (Lev. xxv. 25; Ruth iv. 8-6). Ver. 9.
“< Weighed him the money,” &c. Coined money was not then in use, therefore “ weighed” as in
the days of Abraham (Gen. xxiii. 16). The “seven shekels and ten of silver” (as it literally
reads)=£2, 2a, 6d. of our money ; but its purchasing value may be estimated by remembering
that David bought Araunah’s threshing floor, oxen, and implements, for “fifty shekels ;” while
‘thirty shekels of silver”? purchased the potter’s field (Matt. xxvii. 7). Ver. 11. ‘‘ The
evidence of the purchase, both that which was sealed according to the law and custom, and that which
was open.” So that there was one purchase-deed duly sealed and closed up—the legal document,
and a copy for “open” reference. Ver. 24. ‘‘ The mounts are come unto the city;” mounds ef
earth, batteries, or breastworks for the besieging army, behind which they employed their
engines. Ver. 29. “ Upon the roof aphid dete apes to Baal ;” ef. chap. xix. 18. Ver. 38,
sé the back and not the face:” ef. on chap. 11. 27.

Cake Criticisms. i 10. ‘‘ I subscribed the evidence :”” Heb. I wrote (the facta of the
purchase) in the deed. Ver. 25. “ For the eity is,” &c. ; rather, “ Whereas the city,” &c. Ver. 40.
“ 4 covenant with them to do them good.” Omit comma after “not turn away from them, and
read on, ‘‘not turn away from them to do them good ;”’ #.e. never cease fee


CHAP. XXII,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMI4 B,





SUBJECT OF CHAPTER XXX’


A Pakazoilo Purcuase, signifying and predicting Israel’s sure repossession of the
land from which they were to be for a time exiled,


i. The account of the transaction ; executed with publicity, and the trust-deed care-


fully preserved (vers. 1-15),


ii, Jeremiah’s confession of misgivings, notwithstanding his assuring purchase (vera.


16-25),


iii, God’s explanation of the course of events, and promises of the certain restoration


of Israel (vers. 26-44),


HOMILIES AND OUTLINES ON CHAPTER XXXII.


Ver. 2. JEREMIAH IMPRISONED,

He was there “in the tenth year of
Zedekiah ” (ver. 1); but was put there
in the ninth year of Zedekiah. The
facts uccurred thus: As a punishment
for foretelling the capture of the city
by Nebuchadnezzar, Jeremiah was put
into the king’s prison (xxxiv. 1-7).
At the interruption of the siege by
Pharaoh-Hophra, Jeremiah was about to
depart the city for Benjamin, when he
was cast into the “dungeon;” but he
obtained leave to be removed again into
the court of the prison (xxxvii. 12-21).
On the second advance of the Chal-
deans to the siege, Jeremiah, from the
king’s prison, urged the Jews to save
themselves by submission to Nebuchad-
nezzar (xxxviii, 2, 3); and, in conse-
quence of this, the princes instigated
the king to have him cast into a miry
dungeon (xxxviii, 4-6). Again he was
removed to the court prison at the inter-
cession of Ebed-melech the Ethiopian
(xxxviii. 7-13), where he remained till
the capture of the city (xxxviii. 28), when
he was liberated (xxxix. 11; xl 1), &e.


Ver. 3. Theme: Opposition To Gop’s
MessENGER. See similar topic in chap.
xxvi. ¥; with Homilies,


Vers. 4, 5. ZxepDEKIAH’s PUNISH-
MENT. “ //ts eyes shall behold his (Ne-
buchadnezzar’s) eyes.”

Adroitly Jeremiah keeps back the
calamity which is here half suggested.
Ezekiel declares (prophesying at the same
time, but en Babylon among the captives
of the same event) that Zedekiah should
be brought to Babylon, but should “not
ree it” (Ezek. xii, 13), The explanatim
‘8 given by Jeremiah (xxxix. 6, 7°.

538


Ver. 5. Gop’s AMELIORATING MEROY
to Zepexiau. “ Until I visit him,
saith the Lord.”

Jerome points out that these words are
enigmatical, for “ visitation means both
consolation and puntshment.”

Already the prophet had hidden the
harder fate which should so soon befall
the king; for “it is not the business of
prophecy necessarily to aggravate human
suffering ” (Dr. Payne Smith),

And in chap, xxxiv. 4, 5, we find
some warrant for the hope that the blind
king, in his exile, was not treated
with severity by his captors; whereas he
was held in honour by the Jewish exiles,
who paid tenderest homage to him at
his death and burial.


Ver. 5. Theme: A Prepicrep De.
yeat. “ Though ye fight with the Chal-
deans, ye shall not prosper.”

i. The will of the Lord decides all
battles. It matters not however great
the army, disciplined the troops, valiant
the men, heroic the officers, skilful the
commander ; nor though the navy be
powerful, her ships ironclad, her guns
of greatest calibre, &c. If God says,
‘Ye shall not prosper,” neither power
of the army nor prowess of the navy will
command success and secure victory.
‘The great, the mighty God, the Lord
of Hosts” (ver. 18), can so derange the
best-arranged plans that the battle shall
not be to the strong. He giveth the
victory to whomsoever He please.

ii, As with nations so with men.
Though they “rise up early and sit up
late,” if Ged says, “Ye shall not pros
per,” failure shall follow every effort
and scheme. Nothing can set aside the
decisions of His will.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


L What are, then, the conditions of
success in life’s undertakings? Philo-
sophers would reply, that the means be
adapted to the end, that there be wisdom
and skill in using those means, and that
provision be made for all contingencies.

This would probably ensure success
were there no presiding Power, whose
interposition may frustrate all human
purposes,

This Power existing, it is evident that
success depends, not simply on well-
adapted plans, but on the will of God.

Everything then, from a military cam-
paign to a prosperous journey, depends
on God’s will “Though ye fight ye
shall not prosper.” ‘Making request,
if I may have a prosperous journey by
the will of God.”

IL God’s will should be consulted,
and His blessing sought, in all our
undertakings, “In everything, by prayer
and supplication,” d&c.

1, There is no request which man can
make to God but He can answer tt.
“Nothing is too hard for the Lord”
(ver.27). Indeed nothing ts hard, nothing
ts difficult. With Him it is as easy to
crush an empire as a moth, &. His
power knows no limit.

2. While the power of God is un-
limited, His power is regulated by His
will, “ Whatever He pleaseth that doeth
He.” His will is the dictate of His
infallible wisdom. No caprice; no arbi-
trary determinations,

TIL Amid failure of human plans,
God is working all things with wisdom
and for a beneficent purpose. If “in
wisdom He made” all things, in equal
wisdom He governs all.

1. Though in ways mysterious to us,
yet He works wisely. Men who love
God may “fight with the Chaldeans”
and lose the battle; may be “diligent in
business,” yet unsuccessful; yet, though
all things seem against them, God is mak-
ing all things promote their real welfare.
’ All things work together for good,” &c.

2. Nor forget that out of darkness
God can bring forth light ; out of chaos,
order; out of evil, good. In the midst
of our darkness and confusion we may
* hang our harps upon the willows ;” but
when we see all—in eternity, we put on


OHAP, XXXL





immortality, we shall shout, “Victory
through the blood of the Lamb !”—
Arranged from “ Walks with the Prophet
Jeremiah,” by Rev. D, Pledge.


See Addenda: Heir rrom Gop.


Ver. 8. Theme; PRESCIENCE SEALED
BY Lxpertenoz, “Then I knew that
this was the word of the Lord.”

Did Jeremiah distrust the Divine votce
within him beforehand ?

L The prophetic inspiration did not
always co-exist with personal conviction
in the prophet himself, The two were
essentially distinct.

Prophets did not always understand
their own prophecies. ‘No prophecy
was of private interpretation.”

Messengers from God carried tidings
which seemed often to them tneredible,
The prophecy of repossession of their
land seemed incredible to Jeremiah (see
vers. 24, 25).

IL Divine assurances may be accepted
by ua without strong and vivid realisa-
tion of their certainty. We take them
as “the word of the Lord,” and in some
vague sense hold them to be true, and
that they wili prove themselves true.

But we do not “know” them to be
“the word of the Lord :” there lacks in
xs firm apprehension of them, as the very
utterance of God who is true and faithful,

So that God’s words may be accepted
without our perfect and rejoicing confi-
dence in their being fulfilled.

TIL Our human weakness and suscepti
bilities confuse, at times, the clear re
cognition of a Divine message to ua
Jeremiah’s wishes or reluctance in this
matter of purchasing the field tended to
confuse the sense of God’s word in him.
Our feelings and desires, our reluctance or
eagerness, does much to make us unduly
eager to interpret our wishes as a tense
of God’s word in us, or to interpret cur
disinclinations as being God’s word in us,

The apprehension of the tnutilit, of
any course of conduct leads us to mistrust
the word of God in us. It seemed
eminently useless to Jeremiah to pur
chase that field. He was nearly sixty
yeais of age, and the captivity was to be
for seventy years, how could he ever


539


CHAP, XXXII,





reoccupy the field he purchased? Much
that we feel God wishes us to do seems
to us useless, Our judgment, as well as
our disinclination, may cloud the Divine
word in us,

IV. When the confirmation of God’s
Word comes to us in its actual fulfil-
ment, conviction is complete. And
“the word of the Lord ” does literally
windicate itself. ‘‘ Behold Hanameel
shall come unto thee” (ver. 7); “So
Hanameel came to me” (ver. 8).

Such fulfilments are the common ex-
perience of all God’s servants. Not pro-
phets alone. ‘Not one good thing of all
which the Lord hath spoken hath failed.”

Yet faith should not watt for such
verification. ‘* Because thou hast seen
Me, thou hast believed ; blessed are they
which have not seen and yet have be-
lieved.” See Isa. L 10,


Ver.9. And I bought the field.” Florus,
the Roman historian, records that during
the days when Rome was being besieged
by Hannibal, the very ground on
which he was encamped was put up for
sale at Rome, and found a purchaser ;
thereby indicating the strong confidence
of the ultimate issue of the siege which
animated the Roman people.


Ver. 16. Theme: PRAYER THE SOLACE
oF 4 PERPLEXED Soun. Jeremiah obeys
God’s command: purchases the land
which seems so useless, parting with
money which—in the emergencies of @
siege—seemed so invaluable, In a mis-
giving mood, he carries his perplexity
to God’s throne, and in prayer seeks
rest of mind and soul, Conviction in
him was at strife with God’s command.

I. The soul in prayer rises to majes-
tic thoughts of God (vers. 17-19).

His almightiness (17); gracrowsness
(18); raghteousness (19). Such thoughts
prove like clear shinings from heaven on
our dimness and doubt,

IL The soul wm prayer gathers up
memories of God’s wondrous deeds.
Oh, how the recollection of His mercies
and deliverances flood the soul while we
kneel! (vers. 20-22).

Ill. The soul in prayer realises the
appalling unworthiness of man conse-

540


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


quent upon his sin (ver. 23). It is
when near the throne, and looking up
into the Divine face, seeing visions of
God’s great love and redeeming mercy,
that we feel man’s criminality, and cry
for ourselves, ‘‘] am a man of unclean
lips, for I have seen the King the Lord
of Hosts.”

IV. The soul in prayer ventures to
lay all its misgivings upon God.
‘Behold the mount!” (ver. 24). The
difficulties of tnterpreting God’s dealings,
and of faith in God’s words. The
soul grows strong and confident when
near Him, feels it may and must lay all
its fears, and wonderments, and troubles
upon a God so tender and wise.

Jeremiah could not reconcile God’s
prophecies, through himself, that He
would destroy the land, with this com
mand to him to purchase soil as if it
were a sure and inalienable possession.

V. The soul in prayer finds relief in
the freest and fullest unburdening of
itself before the Lord. There is no
reserve. Tells God it cannot see the
consistency of His own action/ ‘Behold
Thou seest it” (ver. 24) ; the rwin Thou
declarest should come is at hand; yet
“Thou hast said, Buy thee the field !”


And that is the occasion of human .


anxiety, when God does not seem to us
consistent with Himself. Thus Abraham,
when called to offer Isaac, in whom the
promises centred, And even our Lord,
though the beloved Son, cried, “ My
God, My God, why hast Thou forsaken
Me?”

Then, in the mystery the soul learns
resignation ; and in resignation it enters
into rest.

See Addenda: Sotack or PRAYER.


‘6 Forone thing only, Lord, dear Lord, I plead—
Lead me aright,
Though strength should falter, and though
heart should bleed,
Through Peace to Light.


I do not ask, O Lord, that Thou shouldst
ed


Full radiance here :
Give but « ray of peace, that I may treaa
Without a fear,


I de not ask my cross to understand,
My way to see ;

Better in darkness just to feel Thy hand,
And follow Thee.


i i i i i i i


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAR.


OHAP, XZRIL





Joy is like restless day ; but Peace Divine
Like quiet night }

Lead me, O Lord, till perfect day shall shine,
Through Peace to Light,


N.B.—With this outline should be
connected the outline on ver. 27: Gop’s
Repty, &c.

Vote. —M. Henry observes : Prayer ts
the salve of every sore, and points out that
“before Jeremiah went to prayer he de-
livered the deeds that concerned his new
purchase to Baruch, which may intimate
to us that when we are going to worship
God we should get our minds as clear as
may be from the cares and encumbrances
of the world.”


Ou ver. 17, see Noticeable Topics at
end of chapter; CREaTION—awn ARrcvu-
MENT FoR F'alTH.


Ver. 17. A BEWILDERED Sout. See
Sectional Homilies on chap. xii, 1-6,
p. 246, and on ver. 1, p. 248.


Vers. 17-25. Theme: Divine Pro-
MISES OUR BEsT CONSOLATION IN EVERY
AFFLICTION.

i. There are promises of Divine help
for every kind of distress in human life.

ii, These promises often sound very
wonderful (24, 25).

iii, Their E siaets on the part of
God is guaranteed by the perfection of
the Divine nature (17-19).

iv. Their fulfilment is, on our part,
conditioned by faith.—Naegelsbach.


Ver. 19. Theme: THe GREATNESS OF
Gop’s WispoM AND THE ABUNDANOE OF
His Powrr. Proved from His nature:
“Great in counsel and mighty in work,” &.

I. God has the power of making the
deepest affliction of His children pro-
duce their highest happiness.

IL The contrivances of tyrants to op-
press the Church procure its establish-
ment.

IIL The triumphs of Satan turn to
the destruction of his empire.—Saurin,


tn Lange.
Ver. 19. Theme: Gop’s Eyres upon


woe Patus or Mun, “ For Thine eyes
are open upon all the ways of the soma








of men.” This serious and important
fact dass

L Shake us and awake us from our
security. What.if some of our “ways”
are sinful, and such as the Lord must
disapprove ?

IL Humble us if we are under the
discipline of God’s Spirit. For though
avowedly being “led by the Spirit of
God,” we may yet be turning to our
own self-made courses, and may not
have allowed a fixed and sure heart to
be imparted to us.

TIL Comfort and encourage us when
we are led in dark and difficult paths.
For we often are: and are led by Him
whose eyes are ‘“‘ open,” though our eyes
are dim.—J. M. Mueller, in Lange.


See Homily on chap. xvii. 10: Gon’s
RULE oF JUDGMENT.


Vers. 20, 21. Gop’s WonpERS im
gHE Past. See Homilies on chap, xi.
7, xxx. 18.

Ver. 22. Covenanten Birssines,


See Homily on chap. xi, sec. 1-8, p
232, and on ver. 1, p, 234.


Ver. 27. Theme:
PERPLEXED SovuL.

L He confirms the pleader’s faith
in Himself. “J am,” d&ec. (ver. 27).
Therefore thy foes (vers. 28, 29) work
My will, and nothing exceeds My power
to fulfil my promises of Israel’s repos-
session of the land (ver, 37).

Ii. He explains the occasion of His
just displeasure. “ This city hath been
to Me as a provocation of Mine anger,”
&c. (ver. 31). Observe that God re
iterates the words, “provoke Me to
anger,” five times (vers. 29, 30, 31, 32,
37).

IIL He protests against the abuse
of His graciousness (ver. 33).

IV. He affirms the grand purposes
of mercy He cherishes (vers. 37-41).
Here, therefore, note—

i. It is in strengthening the soul’s
trust in God’s all-sufficiency for zl] ocea-
sions that He allays fear (ver. 27).

ii, It is in vindicating the righteous.
ness of His displeasure that He silences
our murmurings (ver. 31),


Gop’s Reriy To A


541


CHAP, XXXII


tii, It is in reminding us of grace ex-_
tended to us in vain that He teaches us
how patient and longsuffering His nature
ts (ver. 33), .

iv. It is in enspiring clear hopes of a
merciful issue out of distress that He
ends our questionings and leads us into
loving trust (vers. 37-41).


Ver. 27. Theme: Gov’s AcoounrT OF
Hiusetr. This is God’s account of
Himself—

L “Iam:” Individuality.

IL “I am the Lord:” Dominion,
majesty, dc.

IIL “The God of all flesh:” Uni-
versality ; condescension ;—not only
the God of mighty spirits, but the God
of infirm and dying flesh.

IV. ‘Is anything too hard for Me!”
Distrust rebuked, prayer encouraged,
completeness guaranteed—completeness
of council, and completeness of execution.

Application: Every word of this is a
terror to evil-doers. Every word of it
is inspiration to the true and noble.——
City Temple.


On ver. 29. JERUSALEM’s RUINS, see
chap. xxi. 10.

On ver. 30. Evit Donk rrom Yours,
see Homilies on chap. ii. 7; iii 25 ; vil.
22-26 ; xxii, 21.

On ver. 33. TURNING THE Back oN
Gop, see Homilies on chap. ii. 27; vi.
24 ; and on Gop’s EarNEstNEss IN DEAL-
ING WITH Sinners, “ Rising up early,”
&c., see Homily on chap. vii. 13.

On ver, 34. ‘*‘ ABOMINATIONS IN MINE
Hovss,” see Homily, “ Violated Sanctu-
artes Doomed,” chap. vii, 12-14.

On ver. 37. IsRAEL GATHERED AGAIN,
see Homilies on chap. xxiii. 3-6, &.


Vers. 37-40. Theme: THe Future
CoNnVERSION OF THE JEWS.

I. What blessings God has in re
serve for His chosen people.

1. A restoration to their own land
(ver. 37).

2 A renewed acknowledgment of
their relation to Him (ver. 38).


543


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JBREMIAL.





3. A-spirit of piety poured out upon
them (ver. 39).

IL What security they have for the
final possession of these blessings.

1. The veracity of God (ver. 40).

2. The power of God. “TI will not
turn away from them to do them good ”
(ver. 40).

Learn to realise these glorious expec-
tations, to labour for the desolate and
outcast children of Israel.—Charles
Simeon.


On ver. 38. ‘“‘My Props,” see on
chap. xxiv. 7; xxx. 22.

On ver. 39. A Heart Given sy Gon,
see Homily on chap. xxiv. 7.

On ver. 40. A CHanGeLess Cove
MANT, see on chap. xxxi. 31, 33.

On. ver. 41. Compare xxxi. 28


Theme: I8RARL’s RESTORATION
WHOLLY ENGAGING Gop. “ Assuredly
with My whole heart and with My whole
soul.” i

I. God’s purposes of grace move His
own nature to deepest sympathy. He
is not coldly occupred in calculating up-
on them, but fervently moved by them.
His “ whole heart and soul” is stirred.
“© God so loved,”

II. God’s oversight of His people
engages His most earnest and tender
solicitude. He is no indifferent spec-
tator of their career. His ‘‘ whole heart
and soul ” are in their welfare.

III. God’s glorious designs animate
Him with unceasing delight. He
“rejoices over them to do them good—
with His whole heart,” &c. Hence

1. The Church’s joy, in times of great
and God-given blessedness, is faint as
compared with God’s delight.

2. The soul’s gratitude for restoration
to the favours sin forfeited is only a
reflection of the joy God feels in his
redemption.

3. The bless of the ransomed in heaven
is a prospect which fills the “ whole heart
and the whole soul” of God Himself
with sympathetic delight.


LOMILETIC COMMENTARY; JEREMIA II. OHAP. XXXUL








NOTICEABLE TOPIC IN CHAPTER XXXIU.


Popic: CReation—an ARGUMENT For Fairy. Text: “ Ah, Lord God! behold,
Thou hast made the heaven and the earth by Thy great power and stretched-
out arm, and there ts nothing too hard for l'hee” (ver. 17).


When Jeremiah came into his chamber alone, it is possible that he began to
question himself as to what he had been doing, and troubled thoughts rolled over
his mind :—“T have been purchasing a useless possession,” said he. See how he
refuses to indulge the thought. He gets as far as saying, ‘Ah, Lord God!” as if
he were about to utter some unbelieving or rebellious sentence, but he stops himself,
“Thou canst make this plot of ground of use to me; Thoa canst rid this land of
these oppressors ; ‘hou canst make me yet sit under my vine and my fig-tree in the
heritage which I have bought ; for Thou didst make the heavens and the earth, and
there is nothing too hard for Thee.” This gave a majesty to the early saints, that
they dared to do at God’s command things which were unaccountable to sense,
and which reason would condemn. They consulted not with flesh and blood; but
whether it is a Noah who is to build a ship on dry land, an Abraham who is to |
offer up his only son, or a Moses who is to despise the treasures of Egypt, or a
Joshua who is to besiege Jericho seven days, using no weapons but the blasta
of rams’ horns,—they all act upon God’s command; they act contrary to all the
dictates of carnal reason ; and God, even the Lord God, gives them a rich reward
as the result of their obedient faith. I would to God we had in the religion of
these modern times a more potent infusion of this heroic faith in God. When
Edward Irving preached that memorable sermon concerning the missionary, who
he thought was bound to go forth without purse or scrip, and trusting in his God
alone, to preach the Word, a howl went up to heaven against the man as a fanatic.
They said he was visionary, unpractical, mad, and all because he dared to preach a
sermon full of faith in God. If once again we could, like the world, be hanged
upon nothing but the simple power and providence of God, I am sure we should
find it a blessed and a safe way of living, glorious to God, and honourable to our-
selves.

It is my business to conduct you to Jeremiah’s place of confidence. Seeing that
his case is hopeless, knowing that man can do nothing at all for him, the prophet
resorts at once to the God that created the heaven and the earth, and he exclaims,
“Nothing is too hard for Thee.” Use the text to stimulate the evangelist; to
encourage the inquirer ; and to comfort the beltever.

L To stimulate the evangelist. And who is the evangelist? Every man
and woman who has tasted that the Lord is gracious. There should be no dumb
tongue in all our host; we should have no idle hand in the harvest field here,
here is your encouragement; the work is God’s, and your success is in the hand
of Him who made the heaven and the earth. Let me refresh your memory with
the old story of creation :—

1. Remember that the world was created from nothing. You have often said,
“Mine is a very hard task, for I address myself to men in whom I see nothing
hopeful. I batter against a granite conscience, but it is not moved ; I thunder
forth the law, but the dead and callous heart has not been stirred ; I talk of the
love of Christ, but the eye is not suffused with tears ; I point to hell, but no terror
follows ; and to heaven, but no holy desire is kindled! there is nothing in man that
encourages me in my work, and I am ready to give it over.” Come back with me
to the world’s creation, Of what did God make the world? Was there any sub-
stance ready to His hand out of which to mould this round globe? Naught was
there anywhere, and yet He spake and it was done ; He commanded, and it stood
fast. The ease of the sinner ts a parallel one. You say there is sa in the


oaP, XXXIL AOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


sinuer, Ay, then, there is room here for a re-creating work; for the Eterna) God
to come, and with His outstretched arm>to create a new heart and a right spirit,
and put His grace where there was none before. If you had to convert the sinner,
then, indeed, your task were as hopeless as to create new orbs out of nothing; but
He who hath created all this marvellous earth, and had nothing to begin with, can
give life, and fear, and hope, and faith, and love, where there were no heavenly
ingredients upon which He might work.

2. But you have none to help you or go forth in your work with you. When
God made the world—and the same God is with thee—He worked alone. ‘‘ With
whom took He counsel, and who instructed Him?” No archangel bowed his head
aud offered advice to the Most High, for the archangel himself is but a creature,
Cherubim and seraphim might sing when the work was over, but help in the work
they could not. Look ye to the heavens above or to the deeps beneath, where see
ye the impress of any hand but God’s, and that hand a solitary one? Roll thee,
then, thy burden on thy God if thou be alone, for alone with Him thou hast the
best of company. With Him thou shalt prevail though all men forsake thee,


“ When He makes bare His arm,
What shall His work withstand ?
When He His people’s cause defends,
Who, who shall stay His hand?”


Let not this, then, trouble thee; that thou art alone, “Ah, Lord God! behold,
Thou hast made the heaven and the earth by Thy great power and stretched-out
arm, and there is nothing too hard for Thee.”

3. But you reply, “ My sorrow lieth not so much in that I am alone, as in the
melancholy fact that I am very conscious, of my own weakness, and of my want of
adaptation for my peculiar work. I am not sufficient for these things; but rather
I feel like Jonah, that I would flee inté Tarshish, that I might escape from the
burden of the Lord against this Nineveh.” Ay, but cast thy thoughts back again
upon creation. The Eternal needed no instruments in ereation. What tools did
God use when He made the heavens and the earth! Had He ought beside His
own hand? Are not the heavens the works of His fingers, and the sun and the
moon His handiwork? Se¢e, then, if God can work without instruments in the
creation of @ world, He can surely work with a poor and a mean instrument in the
conversion of a sinner. If the Lord take in His hand but a smooth stone out of
the current, yet when He hurleth it from His sling, it shall pierce even a giant’s
brow. He saveth not by man’s strength, nor by human learning, and eloquence,
and talent. It is Hts strength, and not the strength or weakness of the instruments
to which we must look. Therefore say, with Paul, “I glory in infirmities, that
the power of God may rest on me;” and let this be thy song—“ We have this
treasure in earthen vessels, that the excellency of the power may be of God, and
not of us.” ‘ Ah, Lord God! behold, Thou hast made the heaven and the earth by
Thy great power and stretched-out arm ; and there is nothing too hard for Thee ;”
Thou canst do wonders even by the meanest instrument.

4. Dost thou still complain, and say—* Alas! it is little I can say! When I
speak, I can but utter a few plain words—true and earnest, but not mighty. I have
no power to plead with souls with the tears and the seraphic zeal of a Whitfield.
{ can only tell the tale of mercy simply, and leave it there.” Well, and did not
God create all things by His naked word? Was there any eloquence when God
spake, and it was done? “ Let there be light,” and there was light. At this day,
is not the Gospel in itself the rod of Jehovah’s strength? Is it not the power of
God unto salvation to every one that believeth? And doth not Paul constantly
insist upon it, that itis not with wisdom of words, nor with fineness of speech, lest
the excellency of the power should not be of God, but of man ; and lest man’s faith
should stand in the wisdom of man, and not.in the power of the Most High?

644


ee


eee


at Sean


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAZ. OHAP. XXXII,


——





5. Another pleads, “ You are not aware of the darkness of the district in which
I labour. I toil among a benighted, unintelligent, ignorant people. I cannot
expect to see fruit there, toil as I may.” Ah! brother, and while you talk so you
never will see any fruit, for God giveth not great things to unbelieving men. But
for the encouragement of thy faith, let me remind thee that it is the God that made
the heavens and the earth on whom thou hast to lean, and what is that which was
written of old? ‘ The earth was without form and void, and darkness was upon the
face of the deep.” How dense that darkness was ; that primeval darkness which had
never been stirred by a single ray of light ; that dense, thick, sevenfold Egyptian
darkness that had never known a sun or moon, and had never been pierced by
light of star! And dost thou think the darkness of thy hearers is thicker than
this ancient darkness of the everlasting night? °

6. Further, and still to press the same argument. ‘‘ Ay,” saith one, “ but the
men among whom I labour are 80 confused in their notions, they put darkness for
light and light for darkness ; their moral sense is blunted ; if I try to teach them,
their ears are dull of hearing and their hearts are given to slumber. Besides, they
are full of vain janglings and oppose themselves to the truth ; I endure much con-
tradiction of sinners, and they will not receive the truth in the love of it.” Ay,
then, I bid thee go back to the old creation that thou mayest be comforted concern-
ing the new. Did not the Holy Spirit brood with shadowing wings over the earth
when tt was chaos? Did He not bring out order from confusion? Then the earth
stood out all fair and glittering, for God had done it; disorder yielded to law ;
darkness gave place to light; chaos turned to glorious order in His sight. The
game marvels can be wrought in your case,

7. “Ah,” say you, ‘they are all so dead, so dead!” Ay, and remember how
the waters brought forth life abundantly ; and how the earth brought forth the
creeping thing, and the cattle after its kind; and how, at last, man was made out
of the very dust of the earth, Oh, God can readily give life to the dead nature of
evil men; thou hast but to rely on Him, the quickening influence shall descend,
and thou shalt live,

8. See how fair and glorious this earth is now/ Well might the morning stars
sing together, and the sons of God shout for joy! And dost thou think that
God cannot make as fair a heart in man, and make it bud and blossom, and teem
with hallowed life? Thinkest thou that Christ cannot make the angels sing even
a nobler song of joy over a soul that is washed in blood and a spirit robed in
white that shall praise God and the Lamb for ever?

IL To encourage the inquirer. Many really desirous to be saved are full of
doubts, and difficulties, and questionings.

Remember that the question about your salvation is not whether you can save
yourself, for that is answered in a thundering negative from God’s throne— You
cannot / “By the works of the law shall no flesh living be justified.” The
question is—Can God save you? Can God save you? That isthe question. Your
unbelief will suggest the difficulty that—

1. Your mind és so dark, “I cannot see Christ,” says one ; “I feel benighted ;
it is all darkness, thick as night with me.” Yes, but then there is the question,
Can God roll this night away? And the answer comes, He who said, “ Let there
be light,” and there was light, can certainly repeat the miracle.

2. Another of your doubts will arise from the fact that you feel so weak, You
cannot do what you would. You would leave sin, but still fall into it; would lay
hold on Christ, but cannot, Then comes the question, Can God do it And wa
answer, He who made the heavens and the earth without a helper, can certainly
save thee when thou canst not help thyself. :

No part of the world helped tts own creation. No mountain uplifted its own
head ; no star appointed its own path of brightness. No flower can say, “I
created my own loveliness ;” no eagle r% cuts the air can say, “I ae my

M


OUAP. Xxx. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; JEREMIAH.








soaring wing and my piercing eye.” God hath made them all; and so, sinner,
troubled because of thine impotency, He wanteth no power in thee. “He giveth
power to the faint, and to them that have no might He increaseth strength.”
Rest thou upon God in Christ, and cast thyself on Him, and He will do it all
(See Addenda: Human InaBILity.)

3. “Ay,” sayest thou again, “but I am in such an awful state of mind ; there
is such a confusion within me; I cannot tell what is the matter with me; I know
not what I am; I cannot understand myself.” » Was not the world just so of old,
and did not all the beauty of all lands rise out of this dire confusion? Cannot
God, then, do this for thee, and give thee a peace that passeth all understanding f
Trust thou in Christ, despite it all, for He can hush the hurricane to slumber and
lay the storm to sleep.

4, There is more hope in thy case than there was in the creation of the world,
for in the creation there was nothing done beforehand. The plan was drawn, ne
doubt, but no material was provided ; no stores laid in to effect the purpose. But
in thy case the work is done already, beforehand. On the bloody tree Christ has
carried sin ; in the grave He has vanquished death ; in resurrection He has rent for
ever the bonds of the grave; in ascension He has opened heaven to all believers ;
and in His intercession He is pleading still for them that trust Him. ‘It is
finished,” remember, so that it is easier to save thee than to make a world, for the
world had naught prepared for it.

5. Yet again, God has doue something more in thee than there was done before He
made the world, Emptiness did not cry “O God! create me.” Darkness could
not pray, ““O Lord! give me light.” Confusion could not ery, “O God ! ordain
me into order.” But see what He has done for you! He has taught you to cry,
‘“* Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me.” He has
made you plead, “ Lighten my darkness, O Lord, lest I sleep the sleep of death.”
He has taught you to say, “I have gone astray, like a lost sheep; seek Thy servant.”
See, friend, the grass cannot pray for dew, and yet it falls; and shall you cry for it
and God withhold it? The thirsty earth hath no voice to ask for showers, and yet
they descend ; and will God let you cry and not answer yout—you! made in His
own image, will He let you cry and not hear you, when He has Himself said, “ Aa
I live, saith the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of him that dieth, but
would rather that he should turn unto Me and live” #

6. It was tn God’s power to make the world or not, just as He pleased. No
promise bound Him; no covenant made it imperative upon Him that His arm
should be outstretched. Sinner, the Lord is not bound to save thee except from —
His own promise, and that promise is, “ He that calleth upon the zame of the Lerd
shall be saved.” He cannot withhold saving thee if thou callest upon Him.

7. It is certain that there is more room in your case for God to glorify Himself
than there was in the making of the world, In making the world He glorified His
wisdom and He magnified His power, but He could not show His mercy. He could
have no mercy upon floods and mountains, upon cattle and flying fowl There was
kindness, but no mercy, for they had not sinned, Now, here in your case, there ia
room for every attribute of God, for His loving-kindness, His faithfulness, His truth,
His power, His grace.

IIL To comfort believers. You are greatly troubled are you? It is a common
lot with us all. And you have nothing on earth to trust to now, and are going to
be cast on your God alonef Happy trouble that drives thee to thy Father |
Blessed storm that wrecks thee on the Rock of ages! Glorious billow that washes
thee upon this heavenly shore! And now thou hast nothing but thy God to trust
to, what art thou going to do? To fret? Oh, do not thus dishonour thy Lord!
Show the world that thy God is worth ten thousand worlds to thee. Show rich
men how rich thou art in thy poverty when the Lord God is thy helper. Show
the strong man how strong thou art in thy weakness when underneath thee are the

546


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. CHAP, XXXII,
eee


everlasting arms. Now, now is thy time to glorify God. There was no room for
courage before, but now there is space for feats of faith and valiant exploits. Be
strong and very courageous, and the Lord thy God shall certainly, as surely as He
built the heavens and the earth, glorify Himself in thy weakness, and magnify His
might in the midst of thy distress. The Lord help us to lean wholly on Him, and
never on ourselves, and let His name be had in remembrance while the earth
endureth. Amen.— Condensed Jrom Sermon by C. H. Spurgeon, a.p. 1862.





ADDENDA TO CHAP. XXXII: ILLUSTRATIONS AND SUGGESTIVE EXTRACTS,


_. Herp From Gop. “His heart began to boil with un
Philip Henry thus wrote upon a_ belief and carnal reasonings ; he there-
studying day: “I forgot when I began fore setteth himself to pray down those
explicitly and expressly to crave help distempers, As a man may sleep out
from God, and the chariot-wheels drove his drunkenness, so he may pray away


accordingly.” his perturbation.” —Trapp.

“ Angels know the happiness of power ;
we, the happiness of weakness.” —Lady Human Inapiuiry.
Powerscourt. “TI would, but can’t repent,


Though | endeavour oft 3
Thia stony heart can ne’er relent,
Till Jesus makes it soft.


I would, but cannot love,
Though woo’d by love Divine
No arguments have power to move
A soul so base as mine.


Ver. 16. Sotace or PRAYER.


“Thy love, O Lord, restores me
From sighs and tears to praise;
And deep my soul adores Thee,
Nor thinks of time or place ;
I ask no more, in good or ill,


But union with Thy holy will I would, but cannot rest
"Tis that which mikes my treasure, I eine ee best,


"Tis that which brings my gains


Converting woe to pleasure, Yeh mermar et eu


And reaping joy from pain, Oh, could I but believe /
Oh, ’tis enough, whate’er befal Then all would easy be;
To know that God ia All in all. I would, but cannot—Lord, relieve 3
—HMadame Guyon. My help must come from Thee!”





CHAPTER XXXIIL


CrITIcaL aND ExrerticaL Norxs.—This chapter is in date and subject essentially linked to
chapter xxxii. For Notes, therefore, see previous chapter.
_ Literary Criticisms.—Ver. 3. ‘‘Miaury THINes :” altering 3 into '3, making the word
MY), the better statement, ‘‘hidden things which thou knowest not,” is gained, and this
is probably the correct reading. Or retaining the word M}W¥2 unaltered, which means


fortified, it may be understood as émpenetrable things, inaccessible things, and hence ‘‘ secre
things which thou knowest not.”’

Ver. 4. ‘‘ HOUSES WHIOH ARE THROWN DOWN BY THE MOUNTS:” or against the mounts; for
in sieges the enemy, as he encroached upon the city, pulled down houses as materials for his
inner fortifications. ‘‘ AND BY THE SWORD ;” rather axes, so rendered in Isa. xxii. 10.

Ver. 5. ‘‘ THEY COME TO FicHT.” The only nominative seems ‘‘the houses” of ver. 4. But
this is meaningless ; so that for “they” we must-read ‘‘the Jews.” Probably the ending of
ver. 4 might be joined to the beginning of ver. 5, and read thus: ‘‘ And by the sword they

the Jews understood, or “the kings of Judah” mentioned in ver. 4] come to fight with the
haldeans,’

Ver. 6. “J will bring rr health and cure,” i.e. the city; ‘‘and will cure THEM,” te. the people,
Lit. ‘1 will place upon it a bandage (chap. viii. 22, xxx. 17) and healing :” a healing bandage.

Ver. 16. ‘* She shall be called raz Lorp ovr Ricutrousnuss.” For explanation of this
feminine reference of Megsiah’s name, see Critical Note, following Homilies on the verse.

Vers. 14-26. This section is entirely omitted in the LXX., hence some of the German critica,
such as Michaelis, Hitzig, and Movers (opposed, however, by Graf and Ewald), nave treated this
section oa an addition by a later writer, the constantly imagined second Izaiah, :

54


CRAP, XXXITL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.





SURVEY OF CHAPTER XXXIII,
L While Jerusalem’s ruin is actually occurring, its “ houses” being demolished by the Chaldean


engines of war (ver. 4),


II. God promises tts rebuilding (ver. 6), so as to become ‘‘a name of joy” (ver. 9); and


assures to is inhabitants future


prosperity and peace (vers, 9-14).


III. In Messiah’s advent (ver. 15) shall Israel’s future blessedness (ver. 16) be culminated ; and
IV. In the perpetuity of Christ’s spiritual reign (vers. 17-26) the sacred privileges “covenanted ”’
to Israel shall be ceaselessly and universally enjoyed.


HOMILIES AND OUTLINES ON CHAPTER XXXII.


Vers, 1-9. Theme: A Divine Mxs-
SAGE SENT INTO A Prison. There are
four or five most fertile suggestions
which arise from these verses—

_ LA true child of God and an
honoured prophet in disgrace and
affliction (ver. 1).

Jeremiah’s affliction came wpon him
because of his fidelity to God,

Let not the child of God think that
his sorrows are always because of his
sins. ‘In the world ye shall have
tribulation,” dec.

I. Though despised of man, the pro-
phet was honoured of God (vers. 1, 2).

l. To receive communications from
the Divine mind is the highest honour.

2. He whom God honours and owns as
His child need not fear what man can do.

III. Divine consolation to an
afflicted servant (ver. 3).

1. The most precious of all privileges,
that of prayer; “Call unto Me.”

2. The most marvellous of all assur-
ances: “ And I will answer thee.”

3. The most encouraging of all pro-
mises: “I will... . show thee great
and mighty things.”

IV. The adversity and prosperity
of nations are under the control of
God (vers. 4-7).

1. It ts impossible properly to construe
the history of a nation without reference
to the moral government of God.

2, National prosperity or adversity
has always been in the line of national
virtue or vice.

V. The essential conditions of na-
tional as well as individual healing
(vers. 8, 9).

1. Jt ts essential that God come to do
the work. ‘I will cleanse,” &e.

9. It ts essential that God work upon
our moral natures. “I will cleanse them
from all their intgustty.”

548


3. It ts essential that God work upon our
moral natures by the assurance of the for-
giveness of sin. “I will pardon all,” d&e,

4, This moral and spiritual cleansing
and pardon are essential for the apprecta-
téon of the Divine goodness: ‘“ And they
shall fear,” dc.

5. This spiritual healing shall manifest
forth the glory of God: “It shall be to
Me a name,” &c.—Rev, D. C. Hughes.


Ver. 3. Theme: PRaYER By Gop’s
AFFLICTED SERVANT ENCOURAGED BY
Gracious AssuraNcEs. ‘Call unto
Me and I will answer thee, and show
thee great and mighty things which thou
knowest not.”

The most eminent men have been
found in the school of affliction : David,
Jeremiah, &c.

L The privilege encouraged, “ Call
unto Me.”

II. The season specified, “ While in
the court of the prison,”

IIL The assurance given, “I will
answer thee.”

L The privilege encouraged, “Call un-
toMe.” The importance of this appears—

1. From the gracious condescension that
enjoins tt. God says, “ Call unto Me,”
not for His own sake, but for ours.
Not so much the injunction of duty, as
the revelation of privilege.

God would have the intercourse be-
tween earth and heaven continually kept
up and renewed, because of the benefit
that accrues to the Church from this
exercise. If we had no sins to be par-
doned, no wants to be supplied, enemies
to be subdued ; if we were as sinless as
the first Adam and as all-sufficient as
the Second, it would still be our highest
duty and‘privilege to “ call upon God,”
and to keep up an unbroken intercourse
between earth and heaven.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


CHAP. XXXIII.





2. From the examples that encourage
& The conduct of our Lord, who,
though He received not the Spirit by
measure, but held the worlds of nature
and of grace at His own command, yet
continued all night in prayer to God.
He knew prayer prospers all, and He
would undertake nothing without prayer.
When about to enter upon His public
Ministry by baptism, we are told, As
Jesus “was praying the heavens opened,
and the Holy Ghost descended on Him,
with this voice, Thou art My beloved
Son.” When He would commission and
send forth His disciples to preach His
Gospel, He first sets His disciples pray-
ing, “Pray ye the Lord of the harvest ;”
and He Himself went out into a
mountain to pray (Matt. ix. 38; Luke
vi. 12), And when He was to engage
in His last encounter with the prince
of this world, “He prayed the more
earnestly, with strong cryings and tears,
to Him that was able to save Him from
death, and was heard in that He feared,”
so that He won the field, though, like
Sampson, be lost His life—the spoils of
which glorious victory the Church shall
divide and enjoy to all eternity.

3. From the endless misery that must
ensue without it. If Paul says, “ Pray
without ceasing,” what must be the
danger of those who never pray? A
prayerless heart may be considered as a
defenceless citadel lying open and ex-
posed to every foe. Whereas the heart
of one truly devout is like a castle in
which the Lord dwells, and which is
garrisoned with the Divine presence.

II, The suitableness of prayer in
times of trial ; for it was ‘ while he was
yet shut up in the court of the prison.”

He who bore the burden of our sins
is ready to bear the burden of our
sorrows. Care is a burden; but that
may be cast on God.

Though shut out from communion
with men, he was not shut out from
communion with God.

Prayer is the privilege of all times.
We need it in prosperity to prevent our
table from becoming our trap and our
snare; but it is our special relief in
adversity. James says, “Js any afflicted?
let him pray.” Men have great need





for prayer, then, when trial abounds,
when temptations multiply, and when
the energies of the mind are unequal
to the vicissitudes of life. We should
pray for support under them, for im-
provement by them, and for delwerance
Jrom them,

1. For support under them.

Paul, when he was buffeted by Satan,
besought the Lord thrice, and obtained
the relief he most needed, “‘ A/y grace
shall be sufficient for thee.”

Moses promised the Israelites, “ 7'he
eéernal God is thy Refuge,” &c.

2. For improvement by them, that
they may now, or afterwards, “ yield the
peaceable fruit of righteousness to them
that are exercised thereby.”

Affliction is often an instrument of
improvement, but it requires grace to
make it so; and prayer is the appointed
means of drawing down the blessing.

Some are hardened by afiliction and
separated farther from God; some are
softened by affliction and thus made
more like Him, These, “by the sadness
of the countenance, find the heart made
better.” ‘This, however, does not arise
from the necessary and independent
nature of adversity, bnt from the kindly
and sanctifying infiuence of the Holy
Spirit of God. Pharaoh hardened him-
self more and more under the plagues of
Egypt till He was finally given over to
a reprobate mind. Job was made more
humble and holy by his calamities be-
cause God was with him through them.

Pray for gracious influences under
humbling trials,

3. For deliverance from them.

Jeremiah did not die in the prison,
but was brought out of it. He always
remembered the Divine communion he
enjoyed there,

Itt. The promise annexed—

l. Of a gracious audience.
answer thee.”

God always hears, though He does
not instantly answer. He heard and
answered Jeremiah, though He did not ©
immediately release him from the dua

eon,

We often think that our prayers are
not heard because they are not answered
in the time and the way that we should

549


“T will


CHAP. IXXIL,


prefer and expect. Yet the prayer is


really answered if there be a gradual~


preparation of events for our benefit, and
a gradual preparation of our hearts and
minds to bear and do God’s holy will.
If we pray against unbelief, the prayer
is answered if our faith is silently
strengthened. If we pray for patience,
the prayer is answered if we are kept
from sinking into despair under the
trouble. If we pray for holiness, the
prayer is answered when we are enabled
to “resist even to bloud, striving against
sin.” If we pray for delwwerance from
trouble, the prayer is answered by God’s
raising up friends who may support and
comfort us, and finally be the means of
our security and our rescue,

2. Of special Divine tllumination. “TI
will show thee great and mighty things,
which thou knowest not.” Hidden things.

The school of the cross 1s the school of
light. God shows His people great
and mighty things concerning Himself,
“the secret of the Lord ;” concerning
the interests of the Church ; concerning
the kingdom of Christ (vers. 14-16).—
S. Thodey, 1849.


Ver. 3. Theme: PRAYER ENCOURAGED,
Such words must have been as a gleam
of light shining through the bars of the
prophet’s dungeon.

L The invitation to prayer. ‘Call
upon Me.”

1. Whence came the invitation? ‘The
word of the Lord came” (ver. 1), His
voice it is we hear inviting us, “ The
Lord” (ver. 2). How should every ear
be attentive when Jehovah speaks and
bids His creatures “call,” &c. !

2. Zo whom does He address these
words? A lonely prophet, in his soli-
tary dungeon. And it is to all who are
‘prisoners of hope” this invitation is
given.

3. Observe the single Object of our
worship. “Call upon Me.” Vain is all
other refuge, insufficient all other sources
of consolation.

4, But when may we call on God?
There is no limit as to time, or cércum-
stance, or state of mind we are in.

5. The manner in which we should
prey. “‘Call upon” denotes earnest-

550


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


ness, fervency, perseverance, If our
petitions breathe the spirit of earnest
supplication, if they are the language of
want, sorrow, sin, or of devout adora-
tion and thanksgiving, they are equally
acceptable.

6. He who asks us to pray has pro
mised His grace to teach us how to pray
(Rom. viii. 26).

IL Exceeding precious encourage
ments annexed to the invitation.

1. The promise is as general and un-
limited as the invitation. “I will answer
thee.” Nothing said as to the mode,
tsme, or place.

(a.) Sometimes ‘before they call,”
&c, (Isa. xlv. 24), as in Acts xii. 5.

(6.) Sometimes He “‘ makes as though
He heard not,” though they knock.
Temporary denial adds zeal to the sup-
pliant, and sweetens the blessing when
it is vouchsafed,

(c.) Sometimes in a manner wholly
diferent from our sspectations. Thus
Paul “besought the Lord thrice” for
the thorn to be removed, but God an-
swered by making “grace sufficient.”
We ask deliverance from trials, &., but
God opens only ‘‘a way of escape that
we may be able to bear it.” We pray
for spirituality, to be weaned from the
world, and ‘‘ He takes away the desire
of our eyes with a stroke.”

2. But the assurances here go beyond
simple answer to prayer. “TI will show
thee great and mighty things,” &c. Some
of these are enumerated in the follow-
ing verses, and clearly point to spiritual
blessings and to Christ Himself.

1. Healing from the wounds of the
enemy (ver. 6). He is the great Phy-
sician.

2. Inberty from the bondage of sin
(ver. 7).

3. Entire purification and justification
(ver. 8).

4. The wonders of redeeming graces
and love (ver. 14), dc.

Notably is promised here sTiLL
FURTHER AND FULLER REVELATION,
AND DEEPER EXPERIENCE OF DIVINE
tHincs. “I will show thee,” &c.

(a.) So that, whatever has been al-
ready enjoyed, there are more glorious
ana delightful things to be attained


a


HOMILEZIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.


OnaAP. XXXIIL





(John i 50). New wonders shall meet
the eye of faith; more “ abundant
peace” (ver. 6) shall fill the heart, &.

(0.) If it is not so—and alas! many
believers decline, in their experience and
privilege, instead of advancing, crying,
“Oh that it were with me as in times
past !”—it is because they do not maintain
earnest prayer. ‘Call upon Me, and I
will show,” &ec.

(c.) How many great and gracious
things the Lord 1s wating to reveal to
us/ Blessed they who “go from strength
to strength,” who “follow on to know
the Lord.”

Let us all examine ourselves—

i. Not to “call upon God” is to for-
feit the name of Christian. The Apostle
uses the descriptive phrase of belcevers,
as “those who in every place call upon
the name of the Lord.” To live with-
out prayer is to live without Christ and
without hope.

ii. Let those who profess to cultivate
the duty of prayer consider well the
character of thetr devotions. The prayers
of many are lamentably cold, formal,
and unbelieving. Hence these blessings
here assured are so rarely enjoyed,.—
Anonymous MS., dated a.p. 1836.


Ver. 3. Theme: THe GoLpEN Key op
PrayER. God’s people have always in
their worst conditions found out the
best of their God.

Rutherford has a quaint saying, that
“when he was cast into the cellars of
effliction, he always remembered that the
great King kept His wine there, and he
at once searched for the wine-bottles and
drank ‘ wines on the lees well refined.’”

Those who dive into the sea of afflic-
tion bring up rare pearls.

L Prayer commanded.

1. This is great condescension. So
great is the infatuation of man on the
one hand, which makes him need a com-
mand to be merciful to his own soul,
and so marvellous the condescension of
God on the other that He issues a com-
mand of love,

2. Our hearts 90 despond over our
unfitness and guilt, that but for the
command we might fear to approach.

3. It is remarkable how much more


frequently God calls us to Him in Scrip
ture than we find there our sinfuluess
denounced !

4. Nor by the commands of the Bible
alone are we summened to prayer, but
by the motions of His Holy Spirit.

IL An answer promised.

1. God’s very nature, as revealed in
Jesus Christ, assures us that He will
accept us in prayer.

2. Our own experience leads us to
believe that God will answer prayer ; ¢.g.,
the conversion of many a child has been
an answer to parents’ pleadings with
God.

3. Yet God does not always give the
thing we ask.

Lord Bolingbroke said to the Countess
of Hnntingdon, “TI cannot understand,
your tadyship, how you can make out
earnest prayer to be consistent with
submission to the Divine will.”

My lord,” she said, “that is a matter
of no difficulty. If I were a courtier of
some generous king, and he gave me per-
mission to ask any favour I pleased of
him, I should be sure to put it thus:
‘Will your majesty be graciously pleased
to grant me such and such a favour;
but at the same time, though I much
desire it, if it would in any way detract
from your majesty’s honour, or if in
your majesty’s Judgment it should seem
better that I did not have this favour, I
shall be quite as cor tent to go without
it as to receive it.” So you see I might
earnestly offer a petition, and yet might
submissively leave it with the king.”

TIL Encouragement to faith “I
will show,” d&e.

1. Promised to God’s prophet, this
specially applies to every teacher. The
best way for a teacher or learner in
Divine truth to reach the “ deeper things
of God” 1s to be much in prayer. How did
Daniel jind out Nebuchadnezzar’s dream #
Set himself to prayer. When John saw
the book was sealed, “he wet much,”
and those tears were his liquid prayers ;
then ‘‘the Lion of the tribe of Judah
opened the book.”

Luther says, ‘ Bene orare est bene
studuisse”—To have prayed well is to
have studied well.

2. The saint may expect to discover

551


CHAP XXXII.


deeper expertence and to know more of
the higher spiritual life, by being much
in prayer ; eg., Jacob wrestling for the
blessing and name.

3. It is certainly true of the sufferer
under trial; if he waits on God he
shall have greater deliverance than he
ever dreamed of (Lament. iii. 57).

4, Here is encouragement for the
worker, We know not how much capa-
city for usefulness there is in us. More
prayer will show us more power.

5. This should cheer us tn intercession
for others. ‘The Lord turned the cap-
tivity of Job when he prayed for his
friends.”

6. Some are seekers for your own
conversion. Pray, and see if God will
not “show you great and mighty
things.” —C., H. Spurgeon, a.p. 1865.


Ver, 3. Theme: Tauras GREAT AND
Micuty. We know but in part. With-
out Divine teaching we should have
known nothing essentially “ great.” Sup-
pose God had taught us nothing by
revelation or inspiration, we should have
known nothing which relates to our
highest interests.

I. By His Word God has already
shown us great and mighty things which
we knew not and could not have known:
incarnation, redemption, regeneration,
resurrection, and man’s final destiny.

IL Yet though these great and mighty
things are known, they have not been
“shown” to men in their reality and
supreme importance.

But when God, who brought light out
of darkness, shines into the dark mind,
that mind sces “the great and mighty ”
truths, The Spirtt’s teaching differs
from the teaching of revelation in this
—giving to the mind a due appreciation
of the truths revealed.

IIL Scientific truths are what they
are whether man understands them or
not ; but, til enstructed, men understand
not their value. So the truths of re-
velation are what they are; but, till
men are enlightened by the Divine
Spirit, they are not understood in their
essential greatness and importance.

The Spirit “ takes the things of Christ
and reveals them” unto us—such things

85%


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; JEREMIAH.


as ‘eye hath not seen, nor ear heard,”
&e.

IV. In value, importance, and results
they infinitely transcend all other
things.

What have the “ great and mighty”
truths of science and philosophy done
for the world or for man, compared with
the greater and mightier truths of the
Gospel? Have they answered the ques-
tion, “ What must I do to be saved 9”
healed a broken heart ; led men to con-
tentment with their lot; taught them
how to live or die?

V. Yet, there are greater and
mightier truths to be known, even by
us who have sat at Jesus’ feet and learned
of Him. There are yet “deep things
of God” which are to us unknown. If
there are mysteries which “angels desire
to look into ;” so there are things our
feeble minds cannot comprehend and
our partially sanctified hearts cannot
understand.

VI. The deeper our consciousness of
this fact, the greater will be our desire
for more light. To obtain which there
must be fervent, earnest prayer. “Call
upon Me,” &c.

And also a holy walking with God.
“He gives to the man that is good in
His sight, wisdom, and knowledge, and
joy.”

Thus, to the prayerful and holy,
God makes revelations of “great and
mighty things,” of which men of greater
talent and higher culture are left in
ignorance. ‘‘ Father, I thank Thee that
Thou hast hid these things from the wise
and prudent, and hast revealed them unte
babes.”

VIL That ts a poor philosophy which
leaves men unacquainted with those
“great and mighty things” essential
to their eternal welfare; which leaves
them to grope on in darkness through
life’s pathway, and then to die and
perish in their sins,

That is the true philosophy which
“brings life and immortality to light,”
and then leads the soul on to the full
realisation of bliss when the shadows
of time have passed away.

Does any man lack this wiedom?
* Let him ask of God,” &c.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH,





Many mistake mere knowledge for this
* wisdom which ts from above.” Learn-
ing may prevail, knowledge may abound,
wit may be common, but


“ Wisdom is rare, Lorenso.”
But it belongs to them who are “taught


of God,” and “learn of Jesus.”—Rev. D.
Pledge, “ Walks with Jeremiah.”


Ver. 6. Theme: THE GosPeL a Sune
Remepy. A promise to the unhappy
nation of the Jews of blessings yet in
store for them. Let us apply the pas-
sage for our own edification—as con-
taining a beautiful representation of the
Lord’s dealings with the souls whom He
redeems. Three stages of His gracious
operations as the Great Physician—

I He visits His poor patients
with an all-sufficient remedy in His
hand.

II. Applies that remedy. Not only
“brought near,” but applied.

IIL Confers great blessings in con-
gequence on the healed ones. ‘‘ Abund-
ance of peace and truth.”

(1.) Privileges of the redeemed sinner:
“peace” with God; “truth” of His
grace, His covenant, His promises.

(2.) Character acquired by the re-
deemed sinner in consequence of his
faith : a peaceful spirit ; walking in the
truth. “An Israelite in whom is no
guile.”

Have you sought healing ? — Re.
Arthur Roberts, M.A., “ Village Ser-


mons,” vol. ii


Vers. 6-9. Theme; IsRart InGa-
THERED—A MATTER oF IMPORTANCE TO
Gop amp Man. “TI will cause the cap-
tivity of Israel and Judah to return,”
&e.

This passage has never yet been ful-
filled ; not only because the ten tribes of
Israel have not been combined with Judah,
but because the effects here announced of
that event were never produced by their
return from Babylon; for the nattons of
the earth have never been made to “ fear
and tremble” by reason of the goodness
and prosperity of the Jewish nation.

L The event predicted. God pro-
mises them here—


OHAP. XXXIEi,
——


1. A discovery of His will. In their
whole civil and ecclesiastical condition
they are “sick,” &. (Isa. i. 6, 6). But
God will “restore health,” &c. They are
in “blindness” and “ignorance,” but
God will “reveal unto them abundance
of peace and truth,”

2. A manifestation of His favour.
“ Will build them as at the first ” (ver. 7,
also in ver. 11). All shall be renewed
to them with tenfold advantage (chap.
xxx. 18, 20).

3. A communication of His grace.
Sins cleansed (ver. 8) ; iniquities cast to
oblivion (Micah vii. 19 ; Jer. 1. 20); re
newed natures (Ezek. xxxvi. 24-27).

IL The vast importance of this
event. If we contemplate only the happi-
ness of that people, the temporal, spiritual,
and eternal happiness of those living and
those yet to live, how important the
event here predicted! But, limiting
attention to the text, mark—

1, The interest God Himself has im it.
Tt shall be to Me a name of joy,” &e.
(ver. 9). Comp. also Isa. Ixv, 18, 195.
Zeph. iii. 17 ; and Isa, lxii. 4, 5.

It will also greatly honour God. He
is glorified in His works of creation ; but
how much more when “all the nations of
the earth shall hear” (ver. 9) of God’s
recovery of His people—it shall be “a
praise and an honour.” Comp. Isa, |x,
20, 21; lxi. 1-3 ; lxii. 3.

2. The interest of the whole world
involved in tt. At this wonderful sight
will “all the nations of the earth feay
and tremble.” At their rescue from Egypt,
a somewhat similar effect was produced
(Exod. xv. 15, 16); and the like terror
shall be created then (Micah vii. 15-
17).

ae others will regard the event with
a grateful awe, “ will fear and tremble
for all the goodness and prosperity that
God hath procured unto His people.”

Indeed this shall incite beholders to
conviction and faith (Zech. viii. 23).
To this Paul alludes: ‘If the fall,”
&c., ‘what shall the receiving of them
be but lsfe from the dead?” (Rom. xi.
12,15.)—Chas, Simeon, M.A., a.p. 1828.


On vers. 10, 11. DxsoLaTIon og
doy ; Joy Resrorep ; see Homilies, &e,
553


G@aP, XXXum,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





on chap. vii. $4; xvii 9; xxv. 10,11;
and also xvii 26,

“ Praise the Lord of Hosts; for the
Lord is good; for His mercy endureth
for ever.”

It was the customary form of litur-
gical thanksgiving (Ps. cvi. 1; 2 Chron.
v. 13; vii. 3, 6).

They were actually used by the Jews
at their restoration (Ezra iii. 11).


On vers, 12,13. Imagery of Shep-
herds and their Flocks, see on chap.
xxxi. 24.


On the words in ver. 13, “ The
frocks pass again UNDER THE HANDS OF
Him THAT TELLETH THEM,” see Milton’s
line in L’ Allegro—

s¢ While the ploughman, near at hand,

Whistles o’er the furrowed land ;
And the milkmaid singeth blithe;
And the mower whets his acythe ;
And every shepherd tells his tale
Under the hawthorn in the dale—”


de., counts the number of the sheep
he has in charge, so the Good Shep-
herd ‘ calleth all His sheep by name”
(John x. 3). And in 3 John 14, the
Apostle says, “‘ Greet the friends by
name.”


On ver. 14. “ The good thing I
have promised ;” see chap. xxiii, 5 ;
xxix. 10,


Ver. 15. Theme: THe BRANOH OF
Riegutrousness. This verse is the
exact repetition of chap. xxiii. 5. See
Homilies on that verse, pp. 442, 443,
444: “ The Kingdom of the Messiah ;”
“The Nature and Prosperity of Messiah’s
Retgn.”


Ver. 16. Theme: A Briaut Era
rok Manreinp. “In His days Judah
shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell
safely.”

Same words in chap. xxiii 6. See
Homily there.


Theme: THe Lorp ovr Riautzous-
ness. See Homily on chap. xxiii. 6;
also, “ Christ's Supreme Name,” “The
Christian Creed Summarised ;” and

$54


“extend !


.


“Jehovah Justitia Nostra,” pp. 444-
448,

See specially sermon on Sections 1-8
of chap. xxiii

JupAH’8 RESTORATION UNDER JE-
HOVAH TSIDKENU, pp. 438, 439, by
Robert Gordon, D.D., and Woticeable
Topic: Jesus ourR LorD anpD RIGHT-
KOUSNESS, by Bishop Reginald Heber,
pp. 458, 459,


Vers, 14-16. Theme: Jesus CHRIST
as KING.

L From what a noble royal stock
did He proceed! Ratsed by God; de-
ascended from David; both by His Deity
and His humanity heir to the throne.

IL How well has he exercised His
rule! ‘With judgment and righteous-
ness.” He Himself is “ The Lord our
Richteousness.”

III. How widely does His dominion
From Jerusalem to the ends
of the earth.

IV. How safely does His people
dwell! Kept by Him in security and
peace.—Waumann, in Lange.


Ver. 16. Theme: Tue Lorp our
Rieutgousness. Deep-wounding—from
views of Christ pierced by our sins,
precedes deep peace—from views of His
righteousness. Originally spoken to
Judah and Israel.

L It ts the sight of a Divine righteous-
ness. Jehovah has made the atone
ment.

IL Jt t a living righteousness.
Jehovah is the righteousness. A living
One gives it. He is exalted to give tt
He comes to you with the offer of it.

IIL /¢ ts an appropriated righteous-
ness. “Our.” It would not give me
peace to see the whole world clothed in
Christ, if J were not/ No delight to
me except I am sitting under His shade
myself—under the rock.

The joy of Paul was, “Christ ia
made unto us wisdom, righteousness,”
&ec.; of Thomas, “ My Lord and my
God!”

APPLICATION—

1, The rest of a believer consists in
knowing that Jehovah is his righteous


ness,


ry


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


<—e—<—————————— ESE


2. The folly of those who rest in
secking is evident— ever learning, yet
never coming,” &.

3. We see the misery of unbelievers.
There is a glorious Divine righteousness
that would make the blackest tair.

It will be your eternal torment, that
eo glorious a righteousness was offered
you, and you died without it.-—R&.
Murray M‘Cheyne, 1844.


Critican Nore (ver.16). ‘Sux shall
be called The Lord our Righteousness.”
In xxiii. 6, the name, “Tae Lorp our
RIGHTEOUSNESS,” is given to Christ ;
(t is “the name whereby He shall be
called.” In this verse the name is given
to her, 2, i.e, to Jerusalem,

Henderson alters Ap to Ma not un-
common masculine form in the Hebrew;
and reads the verse “ whereby He shall
be called” (as in chap. xxiii. 6). And
the Syriac and Targum point nd as
* masculine; the Vulgate also has
¢ eum. ”»

But Wordsworth, retaining the femi-
nine, comments thus: “This is to be
explained by the union of the Church
with Christ (see Rom. xii. 4, 5; 1 Cor.
x. 17, xii. 12; Ephes. i 22, iv. 12,
15, 16, 25, vi. 23, 30; Col. i. 18, 24);
so that what belongs to Him is com-
municated to her. (So Calvin and others.)
Thus, by virtue of her mystical union
with Christ, and by the importation of
His merits and the infusion of His
Spirit, the name of the Church may be
said to be ‘The Lord our Righteous-
ness ;’ she hides herself in Him, and is
seen by God as in Him; she is clothed
with Christ the Sun of Righteousness (see
Rev. xii. 1), and is accepted in the
Beloved (Ephes, i. 6).”

Dr. Payne Smith says: The name “is
here given to Jerusalem, t.¢, to the
Church, because it is her business
mediately to work on earth that righteous-
ness which Christ works absolutely.
The Church justifies men only because
its ordinances bring men to Christ.”
Comp. Eph. i. 23.

Jamieson remarks: “Jerusalem is
called by the same name as Messiah,
by virtue of the mystical oneness


CHAP. XXKiiZ





between her (as the literal representative
of the spiritual Church), and her Lord
and Husband, Thus, whatever belongs
to the Head belongs also to the members
(Ephes. v. 30, 32). Hence the Church
is called ‘Christ’ (Rom. xvi. 7; 1 Cor,
xii. 12). The Church hereby professes
to draw all her righteousness from
Christ (Isa, xlv. 24, 25). It is for the
sake of Jerusalem, literal and spiritual,
that God the Father gave this name
(Jehovah Tsi:/kenu) to Christ.”


Vers. 17,18. Theme; PERPETUITY OF
Davin’s REIGN AND oF THE LEVITIOAL
PrizstHoop. The literal sense of these
words is, that there shali be an abso-
lute perpetuity of the Davidic and
Levitical succession. These words ac-
cord with 2 Sam. vii 16; 1 Kings
ii, 4; Pa. Ixxxix. 4, 29, 36; Num.
xxv. 12. But—

L Historic events refuted the literal
interpretation.

1, Asto David. No lineal descendant
of David occupied the Jewish throne
after Zedekiah, ‘‘ the Asmongan princes
being of the tribe of Levi, while Herod
was not a Jew at all but an Idumean.”
— Henderson.

2. As to the Lewitical priesthood.
Although after the captivity the Levitical
priesthood attained great power for a
time, indeed until the destruction of
Jerusalem by Titus, yet since then it
has absolutely ceased.

Il. Prophecy itself foretold their
literal cessation. Iudeed Jeremiah
himself thus announced their failure—

1. As to the Davidie kingdom (Jer.
xxii, 30, xxx. 21).

2. As to the Levitical priesthood (Jer.
iii, 16, xxxi. 33).

IIL. Their literal fulfilment cannot be
associated with the future restoration
of the Jews to Palestine. The Davidic
reign and Levitical priesthood cannot
then be restored. For—

1. Their genealogical tables have been
irrecoverably lost.

2. Nothing short of a miracle would
be required to distinguish then between
who are descendants of David and who
those of Levi.—Henderson.

IV. New Testament teaching declares


C444


SS


HAP, XXXII,


the absolute supercession and substitu-
tion of the spiritual jour the literal
royalty and priesthood. Its teachings
are that—

1. No king of the family of David
shall reign but the Messiah; and the
seat of Ilis government is not an earthly,
but a heavenly throne (Luke i. 32, 33).

2. The Levitical services have been
for ever abrogated by the unchanging and
unceasing priesthood of Christ (Heb. vii.
12-28).

V. What explanations remove the
seeming error of these predictions ?

1. The Davidic kingship and Levitical
priesthood are symbols, which represented
to the Jew all that was most dear to his
heart in the state of things under which
he lived—/is national existence and free-
dom from foreign oppression (which was
‘bound up in the thought of David’s
perpetual kingdom), and his religious
privileges and hopes (associated insepar-
ably with the perpetuity of the Levitical
ministries). Their restoration was there-
fore synonymous with the restoration of
his national and spiritual life. But
neither was so restored as to exist per-
manently. Buti that was given instead
of which both were types: the CHURCH,
whose Head is the true Prophet, Priest,
and King.— Dr. Payne Smith.

2. The spiritual interpretation: its
application to the Mxssr1aH in His regal
and sacerdotal offices. The throne of
David is the spiritual throne, which, as
his descendant, Messiah is to fill for
ever (Isa. ix. 6; Luke i. 32, 33). And
as David’s reign is thus carried forward
spiritually, so the Levites may be said
never to “want a man” to present
sacrifices, inasmuch as “the man Christ
Jesus” “ever liveth” to present the
merits of His own sacrifice.—Henderson.

3. These pledges of perpetuity find
their fulfilment in the royalty and prvest-
hood of all Christian souls; called a
“royal priesthood” (1 Pet. ii. 5-9) ;
“kings and priests unto God” (Rev. i.
6 ; v. 10) ; “ priests of God and of Christ,
who shall reign” (Rev. xx. 6).—Heng-
stenburg.

4, Interpreting the promised per-
petuity of the Levitical priesthood, Bishop
Wordsworth, following Lowth, urges that

556


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





the ministry of the Christian Church is
the complete realisation of all that was
done in the offices of the high priests,
the priests, and the Levites in the Taber-
nacle and the Temple. So that the
promise here that the Levites will never
want a man to stand before God to
execute priestly functions, is a declara-
tion that “there shall never fail a succes-
ston of men set apart to God’s service to
perform the publie offices of religion.”
Accordingly, Paul proves the rights and
privileges belonging to the ministers of
the Gospel from the prerogatives given to
the Jewish priesthood (1 Cor. ix. 13,
14). And Trapp interprets it as mean- ~
ing “the continuance oy an evangelical


‘ministry in the Church to the world’s end”


(Matt. xxviii. 20; Eph. iv. 11-13).

5. In proof that these predictions
were to have no mere Jewish fulfilment,
but point to a dispensation in which
national distinctions disappear amid
spiritual qualifications and experiences,
we have the definite promise that Gentdes
are to become priests and Levites. For
in the call of the Gentiles there shall
be some among them ordained to be
ministers in. Christs Church: “1 will
also take of them for priests and for
Levites” (Isa, Ixvi. 21; see also lvi. 7,
lxi. 6; Mal. i, 11, iii, 3).


Vers. 20-22. Theme: Great Pro-
MISES GRANDLY GUARANTEED. “The
unchangeableness of God’s laws in nature
is the pledge that His promises in grace
are equally unmutable."—Dr. Payne
Smith,

“The richest promises are confirmed
by the strongest assurances.”—Cowles.

“ God has hitherto kept promise with
nights and days that one shall succeed
the other ; and will He not keep touch
with His people ? ”—Trapp.


Vers, 24-26. Theme: SPEAKING
ConTEMPTUOUSLY OF Gop’s PEOPLE.

These “‘ two families” are either Israel
and Judah ; or else “the seed of Jacob”
(ver. 26) to whom the birthright was
given, and the seed of “ David” (ver. 26)
to whom the promise was subsequently
confirmed, that of him the Messiah
should spring.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


——.


Who were they who spake thus of
God’s people? Hither the Chaldeans
without the walls, or the unbelieving
Jews within.

L The utterance of defiance and scorn
if from the Chaldeans. They spoke con-
temptuously of the Hebrews as being
abandoned by their God. Implying on
the part of Israel’s foes—

1. ZLaultation over the rejection of
God’s people from His care and favour.
** Aha, so would we have it!”

2. Hxecration, expressing their pur-
pose to destroy them. “If it had not
been that the Lord was on our side,
when men rose up against us, then had
they swallowed us up quick.”

3. Contempt. They despised them
. as a forlorn, friendless, feeble folk. So
Sennacherib: “ What do these feeble
Jews?”

IL The utterance of desolate de-
spair by the Jews themselves. They
spoke depreciatingly of themselves and
their prospects. Implying on Israel’s
part that they were—

1. Paralysed by nearing disaster.
The Uhaldeans were encroaching on the
city ; capture was inevitable,

2, Abandonment of all hope in God.
He had, as they supposed, now rejected
Joudah, as already He had Israel.

3. Depreciation of themselves in their
relation to God as His covenant people,





OHAP, XXXIV,








judging that their national existence
was now well-nigh closed.

Notes—

DiepricH comments: “In the first
instance they would mot be warned ;
now they will not be comforted. The
true prophet, however, announces death
to sinners according to the law, but
rie ae grace for renovation and for
ife,

Despair is blasphemy. God’s king-
dom stands and will be perfected, but
the faint-hearted will not enter it.

God answers, So long as heaven and
earth are preserved by Me, it is for the
sake of My kingdom, and asa pledge that
it will not fail, Israel, or, what is the
same thing, David’s seed, shall be a
royal seed, and the captivity which the
people must now endure is transient.
It is impossible, however, for the worldly
to understand this, who perish in carnal
repose a8 though no God could punish
them ; and, again, tn affliction are su
despondent as though there were no God
to help them any more.”

Henry remarks: “Deep security
commonly ends in deep despair; whereas
those that keep up a holy fear at all times
have a good hope to support them in
the worst of times.”

“This is (ver. 26) a complex pro
mise,” says Trapp, “and better than
money which answereth all things.”


CHAPTER XXXIV.


Currtvcz any Exrertican Notzs:—1. Chronology of the Chapter. Section I., vers. 1-7,
ia in subject connected with chap. xxxii. 1-5. These verses, however, seem slightly to antedate
that chapter, for observe the words (ver. 2), ‘“Go and speak to Zedekiah,” implying that Jere-
miah had not yet been imprisoned ; whereas in xxxii. 2, Jeremiah is ‘‘shut up in the court of the
prison.”” This section must date at the very beginning of the Chaldean invasion, and follows
closely upon the records in chap. xxi. (see notes im loc). Further observe, in ver. 7, that Lachtsh
and Azekah—strong cities of defence—were as yet not captured by the Chaldeans; and these
(urges Dr. Payne Smith), lying in the plain towards Egypt, must be taken before the Chaldecs
could march upon Jerusalem, as otherwise an Egyptian army might collect under their cover
and fall upon the Chaldeans, Zedekiah was, therefore, at this time in a position for making
good terms with Nebuchadnezzar. Thus the date is early in the 9th year of Zedekiah’s reign—
the date when the Chaldean army,approached Jerusalem, Section II., vers. 8—-end, shows that the
bondservants were released as the siege drew imminent; but when—ém the summer of the same
year—the Chaldeans were drawn agide temporally from the siege by the arrival of the Egyptian
army to the rescue of the Jews (ver. 21), their mastera at once foreed the liberated slaves back
again into their service. ‘

2. National Affairs.—See above on Chronology of - Jeremiah had informed
Zedekiah, through his messenger, of the approaching Chaldean siege (see on chap. xxi.) ; the
siege is now begun, and Jeremiah goes to him in person and appeals to him to submit (vers. 2,
8). Before, however, the Chaldeans had taken the fortified cities of the plain Cee ey were


#a YP, XXXIV, HOMILETIC OOMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





still warring against them, ver. 7), and henee at the very commencement of the siege of
Jerusalem, the king ‘“‘ made a covenant with all the people” to liberate their servants, hoping
to inspire these servants with patriotic attachment to defend the city against the Chaldean army.


But, immediately the Egyptian army appeared, these servants were forced back again into
bondage.


3. Contemporary History.—See on chap. xxi. and xxxii.; also compare chap. xxxvil.
0.


4. Geographical References.—Ver. 7. “‘Lachish and Azekah." See 2 Chron. xi. 5-9,
Both in the lowlands of Judah, to the south-west of Jerusalem. “ Lachish ” was a strong defensive
town (Josh. x. 31-83), afterwards fortified and garrisoned by Rehoboam; it lay between
Pheenecia and Evypt; reoccupied by the Jews after their captivity (Neh. xl. 30); its exact
site not known. “ Azekah”’ (see 1 Sam. xvii. 1; and Josh. x. 10,11). Also situate in the plain
towards Egypt from Jerusalem, but its present site is not known.

5. Manners and Customs.—Vers. 8, 9. ‘* Proclaim liberty unto man-servant and maid-servant.”
According to Jewish laws a Hebrew bondservant, having served for six years, had to be set tree
on the seventh (Exod. xxi. 2; Deut. xv. 12). The last year of Zedekiah’s reign was the Sab-
batical year (Vide supra, National Affairs). Ver. 5. ‘‘ Burn odours for thee :”’ spices burned
upon piles of faggots customary at royal funerals (2 Chron. xvi. 14; xxi. 19).

Ver. 18. ‘‘ Cut the calf in twain and passed between the parts.” it was customary, on entering
into a covenant, for the contracting parties to slay and divide an animal, and pass between the
parts, indicating their deserving and readiness to be so treated if they violated the contract
(Gen. xv. 10-17).


6. Literary Criticisms.—Ver. 1. “ Kingdoms of the earth of His dominion.” No art. before
TPS, and li. ‘all the kingdoms of land the inion of his hand,” i.e. land subject to his
hand.

Ver. 5. ‘* With the burnings of thy fathers.” Many MSS. have MIDWYDA, according to the
burnings, not AS, with.

Ver. 17. “ Will make you to be removed,” &. ; “for a removing” (Margin), “for a horror”
(Naegelabach), ‘‘give you up to agitation” (Henderson). Vide note on chap. xxix. 18


TOPICAL SURVEY OF CHAPTER XXXIV.


Section 1-7. Zedekiah’s opportunity and its alternative issue.
n 8-22. The people’s perfidy and punishment.


Topics: Vers. 8-11. Hypocritical repentance distinguished from true conversion,
Vers. 15,16. Vetolation of the law of liberty.


Vers. 1-7. OPPORTUNITY AND Irs [ssuUEs.


The statements in these verses, that Zedekiah should ‘die in peace” and be
honoured with royal obsequies, seem at variance with history. Explanation—

I. Inevitable events, Verses 2 and 3 are declared as trrevocable facts.
Zedekiat: «as Nebuchadnezzar’s vassal, sworn to obedience and allegiance to the
king of Babylon. Instead of fidelity to Babylon he had courted Egyptian succour,
and conspired with petty neighbouring kings (xxvii. 2, 3) against Nebuchadnezzar.
Incensed at this conspiracy, the king of Babylon was now besieging Jerusalem.
Zedekiah must now face his royal master. From this there was no escape. And
verse 3 specifies the inevitable incidents: 1. Capture; 2. Brought face to face with
the conqucror, 3. Carried into Babylon.

II. Mitigating assurances. Verses 4 and 5 offer an alleviating picture: 1.
Life spared of a violent end; 2. Royal honours at death; 3. Reverent lamentations
of his nation in exile.

OL Opportunity and its alternative issues. For so must we regard these
verses. The “ mitigating assurances” are not pledged absolutely but conditionally.

}. The final opportunity offered. “Go speak to Zedekiah” (vers, 2, 3). This
message left him in no doubt as to the result of the Chaldean siege, although the
Egyptians came to the succour of Jerusalem. This absolute message of what should
befal the city and the king ought to have shown Zedekiah the wisdom of propitiat-
ing Nebuchadnezzar by his voluntary submission and surrender of the city.

2. Conditional ameliorations promised. For in this sense we must read verses
4 and 5. The condition on which these ameliorations are pledged is this: ‘“ Yet

558


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. CHAP, XXXIV,


ersesfeysn








hear the word of the Lord, O Zedekiah ;” it is an appeaé to “heed” the message ;
and means, bow to God’s purposes, submit to the Babylonian yoke, for God so
designs it shall be.

The ameliorations promised are these: Obey and submit, and thy life shall be
epared, thou shalt die tn peace at Jerusalem, and be buried with royal honours in
the sepulchre of thy fathers ; for, doubtless, Nebuchadnezzar would have preserved
“edekiah as his reigning vassal had he been still submissive to Babylon.

IV. The historic sequel. Zedekiah refused his opportunity, was taken face to
face with Nebuchadnezzar ; ‘his eyes beheld the eyes of the king of Babylon ;”
and then his sons and nobles were slain before him; following this harrowing
spectacle, he himself was deprived of sight; he was dragged to Babylon tn chains,
and there cast into prison where he languished till his death (chap. lii, 10, 11).
Comp. Homily on chap. xxxii. 1-5.


Vers. 8-22. PERFIDY anp PUNISHMENT,


Zedekiah summoned his people to a general release of the bondservants of
Jerusalem. This act was according to—

L Covenant obligations (vers. 13-15). A Levitical law enacted that owners
of slaves of Hebrew bloud should set them free after six years’ service (Exod.
xxi. 2). Later, this law was extended to females (Deut. xv. 12). Parents could
sell their children into this limited slavery, which was no more than a modern
apprenticeship (Exod, xxi. 7 ; Neh. v. 5), and the poor could go sell themselves,
It was a contract of service, absolutely restricted in duration.

On no plea could owners of slaves refuse the liberty which was their divine
right at the end of their period of service, And God had enacted that, at the close
of the contracted term, masters should send their slaves away generously provided
with necessaries and comforts (Deut. xv. 14), This contract arrangement made—

1. Servants faithful. 2. Masters considerate. 3. Class relationships mutually
helpful and safe.

IL Prudential observance. The king, disobedient to God’s messages through
Jeremiah, would not be likely now to act from any religious or conscientious motive
in his covenant with the people to proclaim liberty (vers. 8, 9). His policy was to
bind the freedmen to the defence of the besieged city.

Albeit, “‘ the people who entered into the covenant” (ver. 10) may have responded
under a sense of danger, for the enemy was near their gates; and may even have
risen to something of patriotic enthusiasm; but the motive was not religious.
There was no reverence for God in their act, neither magnanimity to their slaves.

1. Good acts may have bad motives, 2. A godless heart ts not likely to prompt
noble purposes.

IIL Execrable perfidy. Scarcely had the slaves been set free than the Egyptian
forces appeared against the Chaldean besiegers and drew Nebuchadnezzar for
awhile off from the siege (ver. 21). late with mad joy, the masters at once
forced back their servants into renewed bondage, thus violating all faith and out-
raging every instinct of generosity (vers. 10, 11, and 16).

1. Jo break faith with man ts villanous tn itself. 2. It engenders worst
feelings in those who are wronged. 3. It invokes the dire displeasure of God ; for
“‘ with what measure ye mete it shall be measured to you again.”

IV. Paralle) punishment (vers. 17-25). Ye were “ brought out of the house
of boundmen” in Egypt ; why destroy the bridge for others over which you passed
yourselves ?

1. God’s awful liberation of wrong-doers. “ Behold, I proclaim a liberty for you”
(ver. 17): abandon you as your Guardian and Lord.

2 Sinners’ appalling doom. “1 will make you to be removed” (ver. 17); 6.6,


“to be a horror” (sea Lit. Crit.)
559


OHAP. XXXIV, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





————_


Then follow definite declarations of misery: national disaster (vers. 19, 20) ;
royal degradation and woe (ver. 21); ruin on the land (ver. 22). Having deceived
their slaves with a vain hope of liberty, so they now deceived themselves, in thinking
themselves saved from the Chaldeans because they had temporarily withdrawn,
God will “ liberate” them from all further connection with Him, to pass under the
terrible bondage of other taskmasters. The breakers of covenants with God will be
cut in pieces, as the calf between whose parts they passed. Doom swiftly came.
“T will repay, saith the Lord !”


Vers. 8-11. Hyroorttican RerPentaNoE DISTINGUISHED FROM TRUE
CoNVERSION.


{, The occasion may be the same in both ; &¢., external distress (comp. ¢g. Isa,
xxviii. 19; 1 Cor. xi. 32; Titus ii, 12).

ii, The inward disposition entirely differa, In false penitence the mind and
heart remain unchanged ; in true conversion man turns inwardly with pain and
sorrow from evil and to God.

iii. The duration is the test of its character. False penitence lasts as long as
the outward need; true repentance is a permanent condition of the heart ; an@,
notwithstanding single backslidings, advances to a more complete subjugation of
the old self. —Naegelsbach,

Hypocrites, when they show repentance, do it—

i. Not from faith, but from fear of distress and danger, in which they are at the
time.

ii, They do not cease all disobedience to God, but only make some ethical reforms,
as here in observing the jubilee year, as if there were no other reforms to be made.

iii, They specially select such lines of conduct as are ostentatious ; as will attract
public attention and win regard; as in this act of manumission of the slaves,
which would loose the rabble, make a great noise and show.

iv. Meanwhile there are none, or few thoughts of faith, love, fear of God, hope,
and thanksgiving.

v. Such penitence does not last long, but as soon as the distress finds a hole the
devotion goes with it.—Cramer.

“As Zedekiah and the inhabitants of Jerusalem, on finding themselves besieged,
set at liberty their Hebrew servants, and pretended they would observe the law of
God; but afterwards, imagining they had nothing to fear, changed their minds,
and made slaves of their brethren ; thus sinners pretend to humble themselves,
and seem disposed to repentance, while they are threatened and the danger is near ;
but as soon as their fears are over, they break their promises and return to their
sins Jeremiah’s reproaches and threatenings of the Jews for their impious and
unjust proceedings show that a repentance and a reformation which is but of short
duration, instead of pacifying God, only provokes Him the more ; and that those
who violate His covenant and their own promises shall not escape the punishment
which their infidelity and hypocrisy deserve.”—Ostervald.


‘¢ Like the detested tribe “* Hypocrisy, detest her as we may
Of ancient Pharisees, beneath the mask (And no man’s hatred ever wronged her yet),
Of clamorous piety, what numbers veil May claim this merit still: that she admits
Contaminated, vicious hearts! How many The worth of that she mimics with such care,
In the devoted temple of their God, And thus gives virture indirect applause.”
With hypocritic eye, from which the tear — Cowper.


Of penitential anguish seems to flow, :
Pour forth their vows, and by affected zeal © ‘* No man’s condition is so base as his,


Pre-eminent devotion boast; while vice None more accursed than he; for man esteema
Within the guilty breast rankles unseen !” Him hateful ’cause he seems not what he is ;
— Hayes. Go¢ hates him ’cause he is not what he

seems,” —Quarles,


56e


oe


ee ee ee ee a


oe


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR. _ GHAP, XXXIV,





VIOLATION OF THE Law or Lizerry.


“ Ye had done right in My sight, in proclaiming liberty every man to his weighbour;
but ye turned and polluted My name” (vers. 15, 16).


Cicero, when commending humanity and kindness towards servants, urged, Let
them not be treated as slaves, but as those who are hired (Of. i.)

These Jews, in neglecting the legal manumission of their servants, and holding
them in unjust bondage, in vain complained of oppression by the Chaldeans of
Assyrians ; for they themselves were acting the tyrant’s part. But we recoil from
enduring the sufferings we inflict, Here observe that God—

L Recalls their history and experience (ver. 13). Hence for—

1. Their own freedom from tyranny they were indebted to God’s gratuitous
mercy and mighty power.

2. Their experience of such Divinely secured liberty should have led them to
cherish the freedom of their dependants, It was God’s will that they whom He
had redeemed should retain the blessings of freedom ; and, that a memorial might
exist amongst them, of both their own bondage and emancipation, He covenanted
with them that servitude should be temporary.

IL Reproves the national neglect of His law.

1. They knew this Divine law, yet held back liberty from their bondservants
(vers. 14,18). Note how our Lord condemns such disobedience (Luke xii. 4).

2. Though they had at length set their bondmen free, it was not im voluntary
recognition of God’s established law, but in obedience to an edict of Zedekiah,
Qbserve the word in ver. 10, “they obeyed ”—reluctantly, but perforce. Where
God’s word is clearly made known, there is no excuse for neglecting it (Isa. xlv.
19). But its neglect is consequent upon our “‘hearkening not, nor inclining our
ear” (ver. 14).

Ill. Commends their present observance of the covenant. ‘“ Ye were now (lit.,
to-day) turned, and had done right” (ver. 15).

1. Though reformation came tardily, yet God approved tt when effected. “ Jo-
day,” after so long a time; yet ye “ turned.”

2, Right deeds are pleasing to God, per se, apart from the motives of their doers.
He approves fidelity and righteousness wherever He sees them, even though He
who searcheth the heart sees there is no love of righteousness there. Jewels are
precious things even though worn by the vulgar. But God commended their
temporary repentance and reformation only to show how detestable was their
falsity in doing insincerely what they did, and returning s0 quickly to iniquitous
oppression.

TV. Denounces their base hypocrisy of heart. ‘“ Ye made a covenant before
Me in the house” &. (ver. 15).

1. Their after conduct only exhibited thar falsity in making the “ covenant.”
Their intentions went not with their vows made before God, All they did there-
fore, in His house, was a pretence ; they acted a lie before God. They trifled
with God !

9. To use the solemnities of religion insincerely is gutlttest profanation, “Ye
polluted My name” (ver. 16). It was evident that they were lost to all sanctity
of feeling and shame for their baseness and wrong, that they could thus abuse an
oath mae before God, taking “ God’s name” in vain, and defile Gcd’s temple, by
acting a lie within its solemn precincts,

Notes— i

1. Their promptitude in manumitting their slaves was generously commended bg
@od ; but by doing this in bad faith they treated God with mockery. :

9. It is an intolerable profanation of God’s name when thus falsely appealed to,

‘it is perjury allied to sacrilege. ot pe


Guar. XXXV, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.





3. Rebellion against God becomes even more base when a pretence ts made
obedience and reform, as these men perfidiously acted in giving liberty to their
slaves. and then forcing them into subjection so soon afterwards,

4. Lo this perjury aud profanity was added inhumanity ; for they “ brought
them into subjection” (ver, 16), the word meaning to employ force, It was an
act of unbridled tyranny. And “he shall have justice without mercy that showeth
no mercy.”


CHAPTER XXXvV.


Carrican aNp Execrtioat Nores.—1. Chronology of the Chapter. Seventeen years earlier
than the preceding narrative of the manumission of the slaves; about the fourth year of
Jehoiakim’s reign. From ver. 11 we find that these Rechabites were driven from the desert-
scenes they inhabited into Jerusalem for shelter, consequent upon the conquests of Nebuchad-
negzzar. These conquests began with the victory at Charchemish ; and at the end of the same year
as that decisive battle against Egypt, he invaded Judea, in order to quell Jehoiakim’s revolt
(comp. 2 Kings xxiv. 1, 2). Cf. Notes on chaps. vii. and xx.

2. National Affairs, The defeat of the Egyptians at Charchemish had produced on all
surrounding nations a sense of insecurity. These Rechabites, apprehensive of peril, took
refuge within Jerusalem, pitching their black tents on the open spaces inside the city’s walla,—
g remarkable and admonitory sight !

8. Personal Allusions. Ver. 2. See tnfra on ‘‘ Rechabites.” Ver. 8. ‘‘Jaazaniah:” un-
known except from this reference. ‘‘ Son of Jeremiah:” not the prophet Jeremiah ; it was a
frequent name. ‘‘ Habaziniah :” apparently, from the form of this allusion to him, the chief
of the Rechabites at this time. Ver. 4. ‘‘ Hanan:” being called here ‘‘a man of God,” leads
some to connect him with Hanani (2 Chron. xvi. 7, xix. 2). “‘Jgdaliah:” the Hebrew form,
Yigdalyahu, is more commonly contracted into Gedaliah. Ver. 6. “ Jonadab, son of Rechab,”
belonged to the Kenites (1 Chron. ii. 55), the Arabian tribe which entered Canaan with the
Israelites. He was an Arab chief, and created a semi-Jewish religious sect, which we here find
in existence nearly three hundred years after.

4, Manners and Customs. Vers. 6,7. ‘“ Drink no wine,” &c. See infra on “ Rechabites.”

5. Literary Criticism. Ver. 2. ‘‘ The house of the Rechabites :” not the diwelling -Aoues, far
they had none, they lived in tents; but ‘‘ house” in the sense of family.


TOPICAL SURVEY OF CHAPTER XXXV.
THE RecHasires’ Vow or ABSTINENCE.


“ Give them wine to drink” (ver. 2); “ We will drink no wine” (ver. 6).


For nearly three centuries these descendants of Jehonadab had abstained from
intoxicants, God sent Jeremiah with a test of fidelity to their vow ; not a command
to violate it. They avowed their unfaltering purpose to stand faithful to their
habit and pledge of abstinence.

Halitual abstinence from intoxicants may be urged therefore as—

IL Founded on precedent. Reverence for their ancestor kept them loyal for
so long a period. Such an example has tts influence; awakening respect for him
who sets it ; urging the duty of imitation upon others.

IL Approved by utility. Had drinking wine been permitted, it would have
entailed the culture of the vine, and that would require settled residence. But
Jonadab wished to maintain among his followers the purer morality and manlier
habits of the desert, as contrasted with the laxity and effeminacy of city life.
Abstinence would keep them independent of decoys to lucury, and out of the reach
of city allurements and influences,

IIL Desirable for safety. Character is safer if abstinence is practised.
Simplicity of life is less open to contamination if the company of wine-drinkers is
shunned. Mental perceptions and moral obligations are less likely to be obscured
and obliterated in abstainers, as this chapter emphatically proves,

See Addenda: ABSTINENCE.

562


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. CHAP. XXXv.








THe Reowasirrs’ Constancy.


“ Jonadab the son of Rechab, our father, commanded us” (ver. 6). “ We have obeyed
and done according to all that Jonadab our father commanded us” (ver. 10).


L Obedience to man and disobedience to God contrasted (vers. 12-15).

1. For three hundred years (cf. 2 Kings x. 15) the sons of Rechab implicitly
obeyed the injunction of their father Jonadab.

(1.) Obedience to this injunction required great self-denial, singularity of con-
duct, and many privations.

(2.) Notwithstanding these requirements, the sons of Rechab are the most
illustrious examples of filial obedience the world has ever known.

2. The Jewish nation, called the children of God, have never continued for one
hundred consecutive years obedient to their Father in heaven.
coe ot because God had not given them plain and earnest injunctions

ver. 15).

(2.) Not because they could not obey (ver. 16, loc. cit.)

3. This contrast ts a sad one, and is true in our day.

IIL God sets His seal of approval on filial obedience (vers. 16-1 9).

1. The surest and mightiest agency we have for the establishment of righteousness
on the earth ts filial obedience to that which ts good.

2. The reflexive power of filial obedience ts a mighty force in the establishment
of true character.

Til. The peculiar injunction of Jonadab in respect to total abstinence from
intoxicants is worthy the careful study of parents and statesmen, as well as
that of the Church of Christ (Jer. xxxv. 6).

1. Can anything short of total abstinence ensure our youth and nation from
drunkenness and all tts fearful consequences ?

2. Can there be any valid argument offered against this form of self-denial #

3. Would not the domestic, social, and national benefits accruing from total abstt
nence amply repay every Christian parent and patriot for tts practice #

—ReEv, D. C. Hugues

See Addenda: PeRMANENCE OF THE RECHABITES.


Vers. 18, 19. OsxpreNce To TRADITIONS oF ANCESTORS,


Rechabites originally Kenites (Judges i. 16; 1 Chron. ii. 55). Attached to
Moses by a near and dear connection (Exod. ii. 21) ; and, agreeing with Israelites
in worship of Jehovah, the Kenites followed them to Canaan, where they dwelt
peacefully. God cared for their safety (1 Sam. xv. 6); and hundreds of years
after we find them still a distinct people, held up by God as example to Jews for
their attachment to customs of ancestors, and honoured by Him with gracious and
remarkable promise of perpetual endurance of their family.

Told little of Jonadab, though in honour of him the Kenites changed their
name to Rechabites (comp. this chapter with 2 Kings x.) Evidently a man of
high character and popularity, for Jehu paid him extraordinary respect and atten-
tion ; and we may guess, from the manner in which Jehu commends his own zeal,
that he had been remarkable, in those evil and irreligious times, for fidelity to
God, notwithstanding the threats and enticements of Ahab and Jezebel, and the
bad example of Israelitish nation. Great influence over his clan ; for two hundred
years after his death we find them here observing his injunctions. God contrasta
this with Jews’ indifference to ordinances of Divine authority. We cannot fix on
any clan of the Kenites in whom this promise has been fulfilled ; yet doubtless,
though having forgotten their own ancestry, they are divinely aaa among


OHAP. XXXV, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





the wandering tribes of those wildernesses where Rechabites dwelt. From this
example may be inferred—

I. How well-pleasing in God’s sight is obedience to parental authority,
respectful attention to the discipline and traditions of former times, when these
are recommended to us by the example and authority of good and honourable
ancestors. (1.) Where the institutions of society are preserved, the permanence
of the society is greatly secured. (2.) God here gives promise of perpetuity.
(3.) The specific reason given (ver. 18), because they adhered to the rules of their
ancestors, Yet these rules were not divinely imperative ; they related to things
strictly indifferent, abstain from wine and live in tents, Hence, God regards with
no common approbation adherence to customs and traditions of forefathers (Prov.
xxi. 24

There are, however, [imitations to this rule—

1. The precept or custom, if it be not good in itself, must at least be a matter
of indifference. What at first was evil cannot become good by lapse of time. No
precedent can make lawful what God has forbidden.

2, If this ordinance, though in itself harmless, should produce any breach of
God’s laws ; if it should, in time, become so applied as to become mischievous, the
commandment of God must not be made of none effect by our tradition. Where two
authors are at variance, God must be heard, not man (Matt. xv. 5,6; Mark vii.
11-13). The custom, in order to be binding, must be lawful.

3. It must proceed from competent and authoritative persons. Jonadab waa
probably a chieftain, but his regulations had continued for two hundred years; this
origin and antiquity gave force to his rules, But the rules of human wisdom, and
those absolutely and universally binding, given by God Himself, must be distin-
guished, Must not “teach as doctrines the commandments of men.” Thus the
Rechabites did not violate God’s moral code, as though inferior in importance to
the laws of their society ; and, though a breach of those laws in their community
could be punished with expulsion, they did not count others accursed who enjoyed
moderately indulgences they forbade, Jeremiah drank wine before them. yet they
treated him with respect and deference.

4, There may be cases of necessity for the repeal or suspension of such human
and ceremonial customs or laws. Thus here they fled to houses for protection from
Assyrian invaders (ver. 11). So our Saviour “ profaned” the ceremonial rules
about the Sabbath (Matt. xii 7). But for no ends must God’s laws be violated,
however good we deem them, The Ruler of heaven and earth has ne need of our
insolent and impious interference.

IL With these restrictions, obedience to existing laws and institutions is pleasing
to God, and here received a very marked approbation. Hence—

1. The falsehood of their opinion who think that laws merely human have no
sanction except in the puntshments they inflict, _

2. A caution tn times of change, when novelties are sought with frantic eager-
ness. ‘Taught reverence for ancient precedent.

Fondness for change is displeasing to God; for—(1.) It is a symptom and stimulus
to a lightness of mind unfriendly both to happiness and piety. (2.) New customs,
or systematic departure from ancient habits, arise almost always from vanity, or
something worse. (3.) Where a rule is harmless, it is almost always advantageous ;
increases our habits of obedience, and therefore not without inherent grace.

Hence it is necessary to obey, not only for wrath but also for conscience’ sake ;
the wisest of men exhorts us not to meddle with those who are given to change,
Jeremiah commands us not to exchange old ways for new ones ; and a Divine blessing
rests on those who reverence ancestral institutions.

IIL [f human regulations are observed, though burdensome, can we reflect with.
out shame on our continued disobedience to Divine commands? (vers. 13, 14.)
Deep contrition and alarm shall awake within us, We need God’s forgiveness for

564


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH, GHAP. XXXV,








former provocations; and that He may not call on us in vain hereafter, we need
hearts subdued by the searching graces of His Holy Spirit, through the merits and
mediation of our Saviour.—Condensed and arranged from Bishop Reginald Heber,
A.D. 1835.

See “.ddenda; OBEprENcE To ANCESTORS,


Toe REWARDS OF OBEDIENCE


“The words of Jonadab, the son of Rechab, that he commanded his sons not to drink
wine, are performed ; for unto this day they drink none, but obey their father’s
commandment : notunthstanding I have spoken unto you, rising early and
speaking ; but ye hearkened not unto me” (ver. 14).


The historical circumstances first demand attention,

The family of the Rechabites were descendants of Jethro, father-in-law of Moses ;
eame into Canaan with the Israelites, and settled in southern part of Judea; were
worshippers of the true God, but did not conform to Jewish rites. It has ever
been deemed a great difficulty in political economy to maintain “an empire within
an empire ;” but this little tribe solved the problem ; for it preserved an indepen-
dent existence among the Israelites for nearly one thousand years, and, though
neither acknowledging their worship nor their laws, was suffered to remain undis-
turbed by ambition or religious persecution.

They accomplished this result thus :—About five hundred years after their settle-
ment in Canaan, lived that Jonadab, a very distinguished man among his people;
is said to have assisted Jehu in rooting out idolatry from Israel. He saw that his
people were but a handful among a more powerful people, and likely soon to ba
swallowed up by their neighbours, and he hit upon a happy method of preserving
their independent existence, 1. He enjoined them “not to drink wine;” this
was to save them from luxury and intemperance, which would prey upon them from
within, and make them ripe for destruction. 2. Also commanded them “ not to
till the ground, nor to have any houses, nor to dwell in cities ;” this was in order
that they might have no riches to tempt others to make war upon them; and thus,
to use his own words, “they might live many days in the land wherein they were
strangers.” Luxury and wealth are the bane of nations, and by keeping his tribe
a simple, pastoral people, pure in their habits, and destitute of property, he
accomplished his wishes for them.

L Notice the obedience of the Rechabites, contrasted with the disobeds
ence of Israel to God. An ancestor of that family, dead nearly three hundred
years, had issued his commands, and they were still obeyed; but the living
God had spoken repeatedly to Israel, by His prophets, yet they would
not hear. The commands of Jonadab, too, were very arbitrary. There
could be no sin in cultivating the fields, or in living in houses, whatever
moral worth there may have been in the precept to drink no wine; but
still, because Jonadab commanded it, they obeyed. Compelled by necessity to
disobey him on this occasion; for when the Chaldeans invaded the land, they
were obliged to go and dwell in Jerusalem for protection. And here occurred
the trial of their obedience by Jeremiah. He called the family together,
and set wine before them, inviting them to drink, not tempting them to break
their pledge, but knowing that they would keep it, and meaning thereby to reprove
the Israelites. They refused the wine, and pleaded the command of Jonadab as .
their excuse. How pointed was then the rebuke of the prophet! Jonadab was
obeyed. But the Israelites—who had reasonable, not arbitrary, laws from God,
not from a frail mortal ; from the diving God, who had loaded them with benefits,
and could still reward them ; not from a dead ancestor who had done little for them,
and could do nothing more—had rebelled against their Maker, and would not
hearken unto Him. ae


CHAP. XXXY. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.


The complaint of God has still an application.

it is a fact, that among sinners, any and every law, precept, or tradition, of mere
human authority, is better obeyed than the laws of God Himself. No matter who
speaks, if he has gained credit among his fellowmen; no matter how absurd the
law or usage, if it has been sanctioned by custom or a good name, there is obedi-
ence such as God cannot win, ‘I am come in My Father's name,” said our Lord,
“and ye receive Me not; if another shall come in his own name, him ye will
receive,”

See, in a few instances, how this has been verified. Mahomet arose, a sensualist,
an adulterer, a breaker of treaties, and a robber, and issued his commands, which
for centuries have been religiously obeyed. At the cry of the muezzin, and the
hour of prayer, every follower of his, whether in the desert, on board the ship, in
the city, or the field, suspends his labour, his pleasures, and even his griefs, and
casts himself upon his knees in prayer. No scoffing looks of those of another creed
can make him forego this, no distance from home leads him to forget it; but
whether he be in gay Paris or his own Stamboul, he omits not his ablutions or
devotions, But the blessed Jesus, pure, peaceful, and glorious, speaks, and even
those who acknowledge Him as Lord over all, and own the goodness of His com-
mands, can listen to such words as, “ This do in remembrance of Me,” and obey
them not.

The founder of some monkish order, again, has enjoined upon all his fraternity
ertain rules and austerities, and he is obeyed. Day after day, and year after year,
the same tedious round of ceremonies is gone through with, as though salvation
depended upon it, and the deluded ones will rise at the midnight hour to inflict
aripes upon themselves or to offer prayer. But Christ may enjoin the reasonable
duty of praying to our Father in spirit and in truth, and multitudes can suffer days
and years to pass, and pray not.

The commander of the order of Jesuits can place his inferior priests in any
country of the world, and whether the mandate be to act as father-confessor in
some palace, or to penetrate to China or Paraguay, there is no more resistance nor
apparent regard for the sacrifices to be made than in the machinery which is moved
by mechanic power. Christ commands His disciples to ‘ go preach the Gospel to
every creature,” but only here and there one goes forth. The Rechabites of
modern times, and Sons of Temperance, may institute a vow of temperance, and it
is kept; or command one of their number to minister to the sick, and it is done ; or
provide well for their poor ; but Christ says that “no drunkard shall enter heaven,”
and enjoins charity to the sick and the destitute, while many heed Him not,

Caution -—1. Because religion is less powerful than something else to enforce
obedience, we are not to think less of its truth. Said an infidel, “ Temperance
societies are better than Christianity, because they can produce reforms which
your boasted religion has failed to achieve.” But temperance societies were origi-
nated by Christians, and have achieved the good they have done through Christian
influence,

2. The lack of power to compel obedience does not prove the lack of right to
claim ut. Heathenism is not better than Christianity, because it can speak and be
so literally obeyed; nor Popery than Protestantism, because the commands of
pope or priest are received with a more implicit deference ; nor Mahometanism
better than our faith, because its followers so strictly heed the false prophet’s pre-
cepts. When God speaks there is always a reason why His commands are dis-
obeyed—Men speak and are obeyed, because they do not command an utter re-
nunciation of sin, they only enjoin some external duty or moral obedience which
may leave the heart to sin in other matters as it pleases; while God demands
holiness in evervthing, and, therefore, fails of receiving obedience, What a proof
have we hence of the necessity of a new heart! What a motive te pray for such
a change -


566


al a a a en le eee


a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; JEREMIAR, CHAP. XxxV.


II. The rewards of obedience, That family of Rechabites remained an inde
pendent community for about one thousand years, that is, during all the time that
the Israelites continued in their land. God promised, as reward for their filial piety,
temperance, and contempt of luxury, “that Jonadab, the son of Rechab, should
not want a man to stand before him for ever.”

Modern travellers, moreover, state that the Rechabites are still in existence.
Mr. Wolf, the famous Jewish missionary, asserts this as his belief. ‘‘ And another
traveller who visited a tract to the south of Judea, which has been unexplored for
centuries, met there a native who claimed to be a Rechabite, and when an Arabic
Bible was shown to him, turned to this chapter and read from it the description of
his people, and said that it was still true of them, and that they still kept the
precepts of Jonadab their father. Over three thousand years have passed away
since that family of the Kenites came with Israel into Canaan, and for two thousand
years no traces of them were preserved ; but now, after so long a lapse of time,
recent discoveries have brought them to light, retaining their name, and glorying
in their independence, Though surrounded by Mahometan Arabs, they conform
to the law of Moses, yet maintaining that they are not Israelites; and are much
hated by the Mussulman.” This account was given by a traveller so late as 1832,
and is confirmed by English residents at Mocha, and from other sources,

Note.—We have sre one of the most extraordinary accomplishments of prophecy
on record. A littic andful of people, not larger than one of our Indian tribes,
has kept upon the same spot for about one hundred generations, while all the neigh-
bouring nations have undergone change and dissolution,

No doubt every promise of God’s Word is as abundantly fulfilled. We may not
always be able to trace out their literal accomplishment as strikingly as in this
case, but we never could prove one promise in all the Bible false; and the more
light we have the more abundantly do we see that all have been “yea and amen.”
Let us rest upon God’s Word. Exceeding great and precious promises are given
to us in the sacred book. They are like good notes from a prompt paymaster,
falling due at different times.

And all the precious promises of eternity shall yet be realised by God’s people:
about “the golden city,” and “the harpers with their harps,” and “ the innumerable
eompany of saints and angels,” and “the glory of God filling the temple.” The
unchangeable faithfulness of God to His declarations is a most delightful theme to
a Christian. It is the rock on which he rests. God has promised ; he believes.

Happy the man who has these precious promises for his own, and can use them
and rely upon them !—Rev. W. H. Lewis, D.D., Brooklyn, 1871.


OUTLINES ON VERSES OF CHAPTER XXXYV.


Ver. 4. Theme: ‘A Man or Gop.”

Between a man of God in the Old
Testament and a Christian in the New,
no difference ; convertible terms: alike
in all that relates to moral character
and religious faith. Called ‘a man of
God” because he is God’s workman-
ship: He made him what he is, “ By
the grace of God I am what I am.”

He is the noblest of God’s works ; the
highest type of man.

L He is the holiest of men.

1. Every holy thing under heaven
he admires: holy Bible, holy Sabbath,
Sanctuary, Supper, éc.


2. Every holy duty he loves: prayer,
praise, &e.

3. His love of holy men is notice-
able: the “holy brethren” of whatever
Church.

IL He is the wisest of men.

1. His wisdom is seen in the prov
ston he makes for his everlasting future,

2. He is prepared for all the con-
tingencies of time: for storms, he has
anchorage; for temptations, ‘the whole
armour of God,” &e.

IIL He is the best of men.

1. He has been “created after the
image of Him who created him”

567


SWAP. XKXV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.





And he is the best who is most God-


like.

2. He is best adapted to promote the
glory of God.

IV. He is the richest of men.

1. His wealth is of the highest kind:
spiritual riches,

2. His wealth he can never lose:
durable riches.

V. He is the most honoured of men.

1. To him belongs the honour of
sonship.

2. Of priesthood.

3. Of datly converse with God.

4. Of being clothed with the garments
of salvation.

VL He has the fairest prospects of
all men.

1. Of an “abundant entrance into the
everlasting kingdom of our Lord Jesus
Christ.”

2. Of a deathless, felicitous existence,

8. Of association with the purest,
noblest, highest of beings.

4. Of “an tnheritance tncorruptible,
undefiled,” &c.

Who would not wish to be “a man
of God” t— Rev. D. Pledge, “ Walks
with the Prophet Jeremiah.”

Note. — Trapp observes that this
“man of God” was a priest and prophet,
or teacher of the people. So in the
New Testament others are called God’s
children, His servants, and His people ;
but ministers only are called “ God’s
men” (1 Tim. vi. 11; 2 Tim. iii, 17).


Ver. 15. Theme: Gop’s EARNESTNESS
in DEALING with Suxnzrs, “ Rising
up early,” &c.

See Homily on chap. vii. 13.


Ver. 15. Theme: SrinnERs ADMO-
NISHED TO RETURN TO Gop. “ Return
ye now every man from his evil way, and
amend your doings; and go not after
other gods to serve them, and ye shall
dwell in the land which I have given
to you and to your fathers.”

The Israelites were a rebellious people ;
but He “ sent His servants the prophets,
rising up early,” &. God desires not
the death of a sinner. To save men
from present and eternal ruin, He
appointed Christ as the Mediator. He

568


~





has sent His servants to proclaim this
mercy, and to invite sinners to return
to the enjoyment of His favour. And
what is the design of the Gospel ministry
now? Itis “to turn men from dark-
ness to light, and from the power of
Satan to God,” &c. (Acts xxvi. 18).

I. What the exhortation presup-
poses.

1. That there has been a departewre
from God. “Return ye.”

2. This departure ts universal. “Every
man.” “ For all have sinned,” &e, (Rom
iii. 10, 19-23).

3. This departure ts flagrantly wicked,
“Evil way.” (a) Evil in its nature;
(6) evil in its tnfiuence,; (c) evil in its
consequences.

IL To what reforms the exhorta-
tion points. “‘ Return ye,” &c.

1. Deep conviction of the ewil and
dangerous nature of a wicked career.

2. Contrition of heart, and confession
of sin to God.

3. The renunciation of every evil way.

4. Supreme love and loyalty to God,

ItL Compliance with this request
is urgent. “Return ye now,” because—

1. Life is short and uncertain.

2. Sin ts hardening and deceitful.

3. You will escape the greatest evils
and realise the most exalted pleasures.

4, The longer you delay the less pro-
bability there +s that you will ever return.

5. The present is the only time im
which we are authorised to tell you you
can be saved.

IV. The happy result of returning
to God. ‘Ye shall dwell in the land.”


1. The land. The Israelites entered .


Canaan. But Canaan a faint type of
heaven to which believers are called.

2. It will be the residence of God's
people. ‘Ye shall dwell” there in ful-
ness of joy, and at God’s right hand.
Your “sun shall no more go down.”

—Helps for the Pulptt.


Ver. 15. Theme: Sinners SuMMONED
to SELF-IMPROVEMENT. ‘Amend your
doings.”

See Homily on chap, vii. 3.


Ver. 16. Theme: Truz OBEDIENCE
SHown In THE Contrrastep Conpuc¥


eT ee





re


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR.


CHAP. XXXV.





of Israel and the Rechabites, ‘ But this
people hath not hearkened unto Me.”

The Rechabites’ obedience to their
ancestor's command is in ttself praise-
worthy and exemplary. It is perfectly
accordant with the Fourth Command-
ment,

Were the Rechabites equally con-
scientious in their observance of the
DivinE commands? Would not a custom
contrary to the Divine command have
been retained with equal tenacity on the
authority of their chief %

Stil—

L The Rechabites put Israel to shame,
in so far as they obey the command of
their earthly ancestor, while the latter
does not obey the Lord’s command.

IL The obedience of the Rechabites
to the command of their earthly ancestor

is, however, no pledge of their obedience
to the commands of God.

III. Obedience to God’s commands is
guaranteed only among the spiritual
Israel, t.¢., among those who by the
Holy. Spirit have become members of a
higher order of nature, in which the
will of God is written in the hearts of
all, and has consequently become the
innermost principle of life,

Or thus—

L In respect to legal obedience, the


Jews are surpassed by the Rechabitea
Note the difference between Israel and
the Rechabites in this respect.

II. The obedience of the Rechabites
to their ancestor does not guarantee
obedience to God. Note the equality of
Israel and the Rechabites in this respect.

TIL Only spiritual Israel bears in
itself the guarantee of obedience to God.
Note the higher status of the spiritual
Israel over the Rechabites. — Comp.
Naegelsbach in Lange.


Ver. 19. Theme: PERMANENCE OF
THE ReouaBites. “Of so great a price
in the sight of God is the virtue of filial
duty and obedience, that it seldom fails
of its reward even in this world. The
law which enjoined it had a promise of
long life attached to it (Exod. xx. 12);
and it is distinguished by the Apostle
as ‘the first commandment with pro-
mise’ (Ephes. vi. 2).

“ And by this history of the Recha-
bites we may learn that the surest way
to entail a blessing on our children, and
to perpetuate our names and families in
a@ numerous and virtuous issue, is to
reverence and obey our own parents,”—
Wogan.

See Addenda: PERMANENCE OF THE
RECHABITES.


ADDENDA TO CHAP, XXXV.: ILLUSTRATIONS AND SUGGESTIVE EXTRAOTS.


OBEDIENCE TO ANCESTORS. M7 xaAos
apivesy svccyria roig bs0rg,wargs xa) SidaoxdArw.
—Aris. Rhe. ‘It is not good for a man
to dissent from the gods, from his father,
and from his teacher.”

We read of a king of Poland who
carried the picture of his father in a
plate of gold about his neck; and when he
was entering upon any great business he
would kiss the picture and say, “God grant
I may observe my father’s charge, and
do nothing unworthy of him.”—Trapp.

Absalom’s pillar (2 Sam. xviii. 18) is
still standing, according to Sandys; and
the Turks, whenever they pass, throw &
stone at it, in token of their horror at
his unnatural conduct against his father.

ABSTINENCE.

4 Against diseases here the strongest fence


Is the defensive virtue Abstinence.”
—R, Herrick.


*¢ Though I look old, yet I am young and lusty;
For in my youth I never did appl
Hot and rebellious liquors in my blood.”
— espeare.


* Thou sparkling bowl! thou sparkling bowl!
Though lips of bards thy brim may presa,
And eyes of beauty o’er thee roll,
And songs and dance thy power confess—
I will not touch thee ; for there clings
A scorpion to thy side that stings.”
—J. P


Diodorus tells us that the Nabathwans, .
for the preservation of their wandering
habits and therefore of their (berty,
forbade any one ‘either to sow corn, or
plant fruit-trees, or drink wine, or build
a house.”

PERMANENCE OF THE RECHABITES,
Information on this remarkable fact may
be obtained from Dr. Wolf'’s “ Journal
of his Travels in Yemen and Mesopo-
tamia,” pp. 388, 389; and eee


OHAP. XXXVI,





ii. pp. 298-300; and Pusey on “Daniel,”
p. 268.
trations, Evening Series, ‘‘ Isaiah and
the Prophets,” will be found most
helpful informatien on the “ Modern
Rechabites.”

Dr. Wolff's account is this :—At
Jalovha, in Mesopotamia, a Rechabite
was pointed out to him. “TI saw one
standing before me dressed and wild like
an Arab, the bridle of his horse holding
in his hand. I showed him the Bible
in Hebrew and Arabic: be read both
languages, and was rejoiced to see the
Bible ; he was not acquainted with the
New Testament. After having pro-
claimed to him the tidings of salvation,
and made him a present of the Hebrew
and Arabic Bibles and Testaments, I
asked him—

“«“ Whose descendant are you ?’

“ Mousa (that was his name), with a


In Kitto’s Daily Bible Tllus-—


KOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIA





os


loud voice, ‘Come, I show to you ;’ and
then he began to read Jeremiah xxxv,
5-11.

“* Wolff. ‘ Where do you reside ?’

“ Mousa (recurring to Gen. x. 27).
‘ At Hadoram, now called Samar by the
Arab ; at Usal, now called Sanaa by
the Arabs ; and (Gen. x. 30) at Mesha,
now called Mecca, in the deserts around
those places. We drink no wine, and
plant no vineyard, and sow no seed, and
live in tents, as Jonadab our father
commanded us. Hobab was our father
too. Come to us: you will find still
60,000 in number; and you see thus
prophecy has been fulfilled. ‘Therefore,
thus saith the Lord, Jonadab, the son of
Rechab, shall not want a man to stand
before Me for ever.’”

“And saying this, Mousa mounted his
horse, and fled away, and left behind
him a host of evidence of Sacred Writ.”


CHAPTER XXXVL ki
Crrrtcat anp Exrcerrica: Nores.—1l. Chronology of the Chapter.—‘‘ Fourth of Jehoiakim.”


Bee Note on chap. xxv,


3. National Affairs.—Jehoiakim was at that time vaasal of Pharoah-Necho; but Nebuchad.
nezzar invaded Jerusalem, carried off a few prisoners and some of the Temple treasures (Dan,
i. 1, 2), and compelled Jeheiakim to become Ats vassal, thus subjugating the nation to Babylon


instead of Egypt.


This was a sore pang and degradation to Jehoiakim ; and when Jeremiah
provhesied (ver. 29) that “the king of Babylon would again come to destroy the land


and make man


and beast cease from tt,” the king’s wrath became ungovernable.

In this critical condition of the nation, invasion begun, conquest sure, and captivity imminent,
it became urgent that Jeremiah should collect all his prophecies—covering a period of twenty-
three years—into “a book” (ver. 2), for their preservation as a witness of God’s pleadings


and warnings with the nation,
December.


This writing was completed in “the ninth month:” our


For Contemporaneous Scriptures and Contemporaneous History, vide Notes in loc. on


chap. xxv.


8 Manners and Customs.—Ver. 2. “ Take thee a roll of a book and write,”
‘* Proclaimed a fast.”


of parchment skins. Ver. 9.


It was a roll
The ordinary fast was in the seventh


month (Ley. xvi. 29) ; but this was “the ninth month” (ver. 9), and was therefore an extra and


special fast.


of Jerusalem by the


Keil thinks this fast was to commemorate by a national humiliation the capture
ns the previous year.
A separate portion of the palace specially used in the colder seagon (Amos iii. 15).


Ver. 22. “ The king sat in the winter-house.”
‘A fire on


the hearth,” lit. “the fire-pan burning before him ;” in the middle of the floor was a brasier


in which the fire—charcoal—burned.


4@ Personal Allusions,—Ver. 4. “ Baruch” (see on chap. xxxii. 12):
not the Gemariah of chap. xxix. 8, but brother of Ahikam (xxvi. 24).


Ver. 10. “ Gemariah :”
Ver. 11. “ Michaiah:”


grandson of “‘ Shapham,” of whom see 2 Kings xxii. 3. Ver. 12. ‘‘ Elishama:” a court prince,
perhaps the same as mentioned xli. 1, 2 Kings xxv. 25. “Hinathan:” already had acted as


an evil agent of the king’s (xxvi. 22, 23).


“* Hananiah,” the false prophet (xxviii. 10-17).


Ver. 14. “ Jehudi :” doubtless of a good family from his ancestry being so carefully recited ; but


his office ig unknown.


king} But Jehoiakim had then no grown-up gon,


“ Seraiah,” &c., courtiers or princes,


Ver. 26. “Jerahmeel the son of Hammelech :” query, the son of the


Yet he might have been one of royal blood.


8. Literary Criticisms.—Ver. 7. “It may be they will present their supplication before the
Lord.” The words 737A nbp) mean to allow a petition to be laid at the feet of a superior:
lig. ‘‘it may be their supplication will fall before Jehovab.” Ver, 18. ‘* He pronounced all thes

570


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAQL.


CHAP. XXEVL


cee ee


words,” &c.
dictation. ‘‘Jnk:” the only occurrence of the word,
Wack. Ver. 28,


reed for writing.


YB NIP, definitely—he recited from his mouth; not, read from a book: oral


"5, ink, may come from WW, to be


“ Cus ib with the penknife ;” te, the ecribe’s knife with which he trimmed his


Note.—Chapters xxxvi.-xliv. form a Historio REcorp oy Events (gathered up
into a volume by express Divine command), ranging from the fourth year of
Jehovakim to the close of Jeremiah’s ministry. These records divide themselves


thus—


A. Chaps. xxxvi.-xxxviil. Events preceding the Chaldean capture of Jerusalem,


B. Chapters xxxix.—xliv.


Events succeeding that capture,





Sussect or Cuaprer xxxvi.—Jeremiah’s prophecies—
1. Committed to writing by Baruch (vera, 1-8).
2. Rehearsed to all the people (vers, 9, 10).
8. Read to the princes (vers. 11-19).
4. Read in part to Jehoiakim, then burnt by the king (vera, 20-36),
§. Jehoiakim’s heavy denunciation (vers. 27-31).
6. The second roll—prophecies rewritten (ver. 32)


\


HOMILIES AND OUTLINES ON OHAPTER XXXVI.


Vers. 2, 3. Theme: REVELATION IN
Wairtina. “ Take thee a roll of a book,
and write therein all the words that I
have spoken unto thee against Israel,
and against Judah, and against all the
nations, from the day I spake unto thee,
from the days of Josiah, even unto this
day. It may be that the house of
Judah will hear all the evil that I pur-
pose to do unto them ; that they may
return every man from his evil way, that
I may forgive their iniquity and their
ain.”

Ours is a documentary religion; and
it is a great advantage to have the
principles of our faith in a defined and
a written form. The prophets pen suc-
ceeded his breath.

An abstract of Jeremiah’s preaching
for twenty-three years was thus recorded.
Baruch was to read it. It excited a great
sensation. The princes conveyed it to
the king: it was read in his presence:
he took his penknife, cut it in pieces,
cast it in the fire, But another was
written with this awful addition: Say
to Jehoiakim (vers. 30, 31).

Upon this account remark—

L The Divine authority of the book.
“This word came to Jeremiah,”

1. It bears evident marks and indi-


cations of having come from God. Oura
is a documentary religion—more sure
than miracle—“a more sure word of
prophecy.” Jf ye believe not Moses,”
&e.


2. The time and the manner in which
this word comes to a people. It is dis-
tinctly marked by God Himself as a
great crisis in their religious history,
God dates from this event. Good men
date from it too,

3. The Book can never leave us as it
Jinds us,

IL The gracious design of the Scrip-
tures. To bring us to faith, to re
pentance and reconciliation to God (vers,
3-7) ; not to condemn, but to save. It
is to show us our danger and our refuge,
Full of Christ.

IIL The settled hostility it excites
(vers, 22,23). Men of corrupt minds love
not the truth, Popery hatesit. Many
false Protestants dislike it too. They
who do not take the penknife to destroy
it, employ their pens to pervert and
extinguish it,

IV. The righteous retribution its
rejection incurs (vers. 29-31). The
Gospel has a condemnation of its own
as well as the law.

Comp, also Homily on ole: 2.

5


CHAP, XXXVI





Ver. 2. Theme: “Litera Soripta
Manet.” The object of the writing was
not alone that the word written might
remain, but also to collect all the single
lightning ‘strokes into one grand prophe-
tic tempest.

The written word was of special use—

i. Zo contemporaries, For it rendered
possible—(1.) Continued study ; (2.)
quiet contemplation ; (3.) careful com-
parison.

ii, Zo posterity, (1.) The mouth
speaks only to those present ; the pen to
the absent, (2.) The mouth speaks only
to present hours and times; the pen to
centuries future.

Comp. Exod, xxxiv. 27 ; Deut.x. 4, 5,
xvii. 18; Isa. xxx. 8; Hab. ii. 2.

—Naegelsbach and Cramer.


Also: The blessings of the written
word.

i, That which it has tn common with
the spoken word. Preparation of the
heart for the reception of salvation
(ver. ).

ii, That which it has in distincttonfrom
the spoken word. (a) It is present for
every one; (b) it is present at every
time and every place; (c) it is present
in all its parts (for comparison).

—Naegelsbach.


See Addenda: REVELATION IN WRIT-
ING.


Ver. 3. Theme: “It May Br.” “Jt
may be that the house of Judah will hear
all the evil which I purpose to do unto
them ; that they may return every man
from his evil way; that I may forgive
their iniquity and their sin.”

Jeremiah’s ministry may be regarded
as typical of God’s dealings with man
in all ages, ‘It may be.”

I This word shows us the heart of
God. Words are the servants of things.
Language is imperfect, butit is the chief
interpreter of thought. What has been
said of man, may be said, with reverence,
of God: “Out of the abundance of the
heart the mouth speaketh.” When God
says, “ It may be,” we must not imagine
that there is anything like doubt or
ignorance with Him, It is said that He

572


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





speaks as a nan to men. How wonder-
ful that He should thus condescend te
our weakness and necessities! He not
only employs human agents, but humav
speech, to reveal His will tous. Diff
culties may be easily raised as to the
form of speech here, but there can be
no question as to its spirit. The words
breathe love, and not’ hate. God ia
indeed displeased because of sin, but
He longs to show mercy to the sinner.
His heart yearns over His rebellious
children, as the father over his prodigal
son, Judgment is His strange work.
Mercy is His delight. He welcomes
the penitent. He blesses the obedient,
All His counsels and warnings, His
promises and threatenings, are for good.
Mark the words of Moses (Deut. v. 29-
33, xxxii. 44-47) ; of the prophets (Isa.
i. 18-20; Jer. viii, 7-11 ; Ezek. xii. 3,
xviii, 31; Hosea xi. 1-8); of Jesus
Christ (John iii, 16, 17; Luke xix. 10,
41, 42). And so it is still. What John
said of his Gospel may be said of the
whole Bible, and indeed of all God’s
dealings with us in grace—‘ These are
written, that ye might believe that Jesus
is the Christ, the Son of God, and that
believing ye might have life through His
name.”

IL This word reveals the grand
possibilities of human life. Looking
on waste moorland, we may say, this will
soon be reclaimed. That soldier stand-
ing in the ranks, beside thousands more,
may yet rise to high command. ‘That
speaker, who has failed in his first effort,
may yet lead the House of Commons,
That child, over whose cradle his mother
bends in fond anxiety, may ye% hold a
foremost place among men, He who
was the joy of his mother’s youth may
be the pride and the stay of her old
age. These and sich like possibilities
lie hid in the future. As yet, all is
uncertain ; we can only say, “It may
be.” But can there be such uncertainty
with God# No. To His infinite mind,
all the possibilities of time, and space,
and circumstance, are not matters of
doubt, but of certainty (Isa, xlvi. 9-11).
Yet here, as often, He speaks as if it
were otherwise. For our sakes He puts
aside the must be of the Divine and the


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


CHAP. XXXVL





absolute, for the may be of the human
and the contingent. His dealings with
Israel are spoken of as an experiment,
The gracious purpose is plain, but the
result is hidden. It depends upon causes
not yet in full operation. It will be
manifested in due time, in the free act-
ings and choices of men, So it is with
the ministry of gracein every age. Men
are put upon trial (Deut. viii. 2;
Luke ii, 34). Mark the grand possi-
bilities.

1. Harnest attention (ver. 3). This
is absolutely necessary. God’s Word is
truth. If He threatens, it is because
there is just cause. His laws must be
upheld. Wrath must come to the utter-
most on the impenitent. If men con-
sidered this, surely it would awaken a
holy fear of God’s judgments. The tale
of what God purposes to do to the sinner
may well make the ears of every one
that heareth it to tingle (1 Sam. iii. 11).
“Tt is a fearful thing to fall into the
hands of the living God.”

2. Penitential prayer (ver. 7). “It
may be they will present their supplica-
tion before the Lord, and will return
every one from his evil way.” God can-
not change. It is the sinner who must
retrace his steps. He has forsaken God,
and turned to his own evil way, and he
is bound and besought to return, Prayer
is the first step to a true amendment of
life. It is when we look upon God as
He has revealed Himself in Christ that
we are melted to penitence, and that the
ery of hope rises from our hearts (Isa.
xxvii. 4, 5, lv. 6, 7).

3. Moral reconciliation, The hind-
rances to peace are not with God, but
with us. Mark the touching words,
“that I may forgive.” God pities the
sinner, but He cannot deal with him, in
the way of absolution, till he has come
to himself and is in earnest about salva-
tion. God is willing to give, but the
sinner may not have the heart to receive,
On the other hand, when there is a real
turning from sin unto God, how quick
is the response! how complete and joyous
the reconciliation! (Luke xv. 20-24 ;
John i, 59.)

IIL This word holds out encourage-
ment to all true workers for Christ.


Hope is the spring of all activity. What
we deem impossible we do not attempt
Reason forbids. But what we know to
be both possible and good, we can strive
for with all our strength. Duty is ours,
results belong to God. For three-and-
twenty years Jeremiah had laboured in
Judah. His work seemed in vain. But
he must not cease. The mercy of God
is great. Another effort must be made.
New methods must be tried. The Word
must be written, and brought to bear in
all its force upon the people, the princes,
and the king. “It may be they will
hear.” The command given to Jere-
miah and Baruch, is just the same in
substance as that which was afterwards
given to the apostles and ministers of
Jesus Christ (Matt. xxviii, 19, 20; Acts
v. 20, xviii. 9,10). ‘It may be,” im-
plies faith, and love, and hope, It holds
out encouragement to prayer (David, 2
Sam, xii 22); to holy endeavour (Paul,
Phil. iii, 8-14, iv. 13); to benevolent and
missionary enterprise (Eccles, ix. 1-6 ;
Rom. i. 16). In all that is for good,
friend helping friend, parents training
their children, Christian men and women
labouring for the advancement of the
Gospel, we may say as Jonathan did to
his armour-bearer, when summoning him
to a deed of high courage and daring,
“Come: it may be the Lord will work
for us” (1 Sam. xiv. 6). Nay, we may
do more. We may say to ourselves, as
Haggai to Zerubbabel, and to Joshua,
and to all the people of the land, “ Be
strong and work, for I am with you,
saith the Lord of Hosts” (Haggai ii
4, 5). Our labour shall not be in vain
in the Lord. For the humblest worker,
as well as for the great Master Himself,
the word is true, “ He shall see of the
travail of his soul and shall be satisfied.”
—Rev. W. Forsyth, from “ Homiletse
Quarterly.”


Ver. 7. Theme: AN OPEN Door oF
Horr. “It may be they will present
their supplication before the Lord, and
will return every one from his evil way ;
for great is the anger and the fury that
the Lord hath pronounced against this
people.”

L Menacing doom.

573


CHAP, XXXVL





lL. Definite in tts direction, “ Against-
this people.”


3. Terrible in tts character. “ Great
is the anger and the fury.”
3. Ominoue as to its origin. “That


the Lord hath pronounced.”

4. Positive as to tts announcement.
“ Hath pronounced.”

IL Possible escape. *‘It may be.”

1. Doom tarries till all conditional
exigences are expended. God _ holds
back the stroke till every possibility of
averting it is exhausted. He is “slow
to anger.”

2. Sinners have the power of urresting
their own doom. Though it has been
“pronounced” against them. As Nine-
veh,

3. Threatenings of God are designed
to act as appeals to men to avert them.
They are stern voices of love. His men-
aces are severe, and will eventually be
fulfilled if not averted ; but He makes
them severe in order to arouse us to
seek reconciliation and escape.

TIL Conditions of deliverance.

1, Not hard to comply with.

2. Not beyond the absolute necessities
of the case. They are—

(a) Penitential prayer.
their supplication.”

(6) Individual reformation. “ Return
every one from his evil way.”

Note. —This was urged “ upon the fast-
ing day” (ver. 6). So that fasting was
not enough of itself (see Isa. lviii, 3, 5;
Zech. v. 5, 7). And this appeal followed
the reading of the roll (ver. 6). Thus read-
sng Scripture and self-mortiication should
be added to penitence and reformation.
All which, tn this Gospel age, become sum-
med up in—(a) ‘‘ Search the Scriptures,
for they testify of Me;” (6) Take up thy
eross daily and follow Me;” (c) “Re-
pentance towards God ;” and (d) “ Lay-
ing aside every weight and the sin
that doth so easily beset us, let us run,
looking unto Jesus /”


“ Present


Vers. 11 and 13. Theme : THE HEARER
BRCOMES A PREACHER. “ When Micha-
iah had heard out of the book all the
words of the Lord, he went down to the
king’shouse. . and declared unto [the
princes] all the words he had heard,”

574


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





I. A hearer’s responsibility. To
carry tidings to absent ones. “Let him
that heareth say, Come.” If the Lord’s
words are good for him, they are also
good for others.

IL A hearer’s opportunity. He
can reach an audience from which the
preacher is excluded. Family circles,
oficial circles [as in this case] may be
brought to hear God’s truth by one per-
son reciting what he has heard.

I. A hearer’s prompt anxiety.
What he heard was urgent, was ominous.
Others were entailed in the messages of
God’s Word. It was not right for him
to be silent. The doom or salvation of
others depended on his telling what he
had heard. Forthwith he went, and
JSaithfully he recited the facts of warn-
ing and counsel from God.

(1.) He became thus a herald from
God to his friends,

(2.) He opened the way for Jeremiah’s
roll to be read in their hearing (ver. 15).

(3.) He brought them under very
solemn convictions (ver. 16).

(4.) He won for God’s servants ixflu-
ential friends, who protected them from
the anger of the king (vers. 19, 25),


‘¢Can we whose souls are lighted
With wisdom from on high,
Can we, to men benighted,
The light of life deny ”


Ver. 20. Theme: Reapine Gon’s
Worp to a Kina. These princes
showed a gracious mind toward Baruch
and Jeremiah; for they did not
force Baruch into the angry king’s
presence,

Yet they showed also a timtd and
half-hearted sympathy, for if they thought
the “words of the Lord” urgent and
important, why did they not boldly go
in to the king and plead with him te
heed the message 4

Had they been true patriots, and loyai
to God's truth, they would have acted a
more emphatic part than they did.

But they secured this: the king heard
God’s word.

L Aninvoluntary hearer. They seem
all together to have gone in and recited
what they had heard (ver. 20). Jehoiakim
was thus taken by surprise—stormed in


ee ee ee ee


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





his unsuspecting ease. Often God sends
messages to and against us—

1. Without our wishing to have them.

2. Without our power to prevent them.

3. In a manner wholly unexpected,

IL. An inquisitive hearer. The frag-
mentary recital of ‘‘the words of the
Lord” by the princes excited him to
desire to hear from the roll itself. So
(ver. 21)—

1. There may be an inquisitiveness
born of doubt. Jehoiakim may have
questioned whether they repeated the
words correctly.

2. Or an inquisitiveness prompted by
anxiety. He may have felt disturbed
by what he heard, and wished to know
the matter more fully.

3. Or an inquisitiveness ouickened by
hope. Possibly these princes stated only
the dark side of things: if he heard more
it might be less menacing,

4, Or an inquisitiveness actuated by
scorn. So far from his being alarmed
by the eager words of the princes, he
was quite ready to hear more—let him
hear it all: it mattered not to him }

IIL An infuriated hearer. There
“burned before him a fire” (ver. 22) ;
and it but represented the fury which
burned within him.

1. He burned with mad tmpatience.
Btopped the reading: could not sit out
the reading: heard only “three or four
leaves” (ver. 23).

2. He burned with tmpotent rage.
Became violent: paid no heed to the
“‘intercessions ” (ver. 25) of the three
princes : wanted Jeremiah apprehended
(ver. 26): issued a mandate then and
there to Baruch that the prophet should
be “ taken.”

3. He burned with silly revenge. He
would destroy “the roll;” so “cut it
with a penknife ”—venting his malice on
the innocent parchment! and then cast
the roll into the fire, gratifying his
ridiculous animosity by watching its
consumption ! (ver. 23.)

See Addenda: INFURIATED HEARERS,

Note—

1, Fires can consume books, but they
cannot consume truths /

2. God’s enemies who make fires may
one day feed them/ “The jire shall try


OHAP. XXXVE,





every man’s work.” ‘“ He will burn up
the chaff with unquenchable fire.”
See Addenda: Burnina Bisuizs,


Ver. 23. Theme: Tum RECKLESS
PENENIFE. ‘When Jehudt had read
three or four leaves, he cut ct with a pen-
knife.”

We look in upon a room in Jeru-
salem. Two men there: Jeremiah,
walking the floor, agitated, in the spirit
of prophecy. Baruch, writing out the
scathing words of the Almighty against
the city.

It is winter. Jehoiakim sits in “ winter
house.” Silence among his lords, princes,
while the parchment is read. Every eye
is fixed ; king frowns, cheeks burn;
foot comes down with thundering indig-
nation; seizes penknife, and lashes it
into the parchments.

Was the book destroyed? Did the
king escape? In a little while Jehoia-
kim’s dead body is hurled forth to
blacken in the sun, “buried with the
burial of an ass,” while Baruch again
writes the terrible prophecy which Jere-
miah anew dictates,

It would take more penknives than
cutler ever sharpened to hew into per-
manent destruction the Word of God.
Yet that Oriental scene has been often
pepeated : there are thousands of Jehoia-
kims who cut the Word of God with their
penknives.

L The first to be mentioned is the
man who receives a part of the Bible,
but cuts out portions and rejects
them.

But the genutneness of the entire Bible
is established, and there may be no
cutting out of books against which
cavillers rail. If any part of the Old
Testament had been uninspired, Christ
would have said, “Search the Scrip-
tures, except the book of—Jonah or
Esther.” And with all the Christian
world watching, and our enemies also,
you might as well attempt to insert an
entire canto in Milton’s Paradise Lost
as a fresh page into the New Testament.

A man dies ; people assemble to hear
the Will read. One interrupts: “I
reject that passage.” But they must
take the will as a whole, or not at all,

575


tne


CHAP. XXXVL





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





Remove one orb from this constellation
of Bible books that revolve in splendour
about Jesus, the central Sun, and heaven
itself would weep at the catastrophe.

IL He who runs his knife through
the Bible from Genesis to Revelation
and rejects everything.

The hostility in the “ winter house”
exists yet. Enemies of this Book have
tried to marshal on theiz side chemist’s
laboratory, astronomer’s telescope, geo-
logist’s pry, mineralogist’s hammer, &,
With the black hulk of their priestcraft
they have tried to run down this Gospel
ship speeding on errands of salvation.

Men strike their knife through this
Book because they say that—

1. The light of natere ts sufficient.
Have the fire-worshippers of India, the
Borneoian cannibal, &c., found it so?
The pagodas of superstition, the infanti-
cides of the Ganges, the gory wheels of
Juggernaut, declare it is not sufficient.
A star is beautiful, but it pours no light
on the midnight of a sinful soul.
“What must I do to be saved!”
Sweltering nations have knelt at the
foot of the Himalayan mountains for
ages asking the question ; but the moun-
tain made no response. The cry has
gone round the world, but the stars
were dumb, and the Alps were silent,
&e,

2. That the Book ¢s eruel and in-
decent. But show one man made cruel
or obscene by the Bible. Thousands
have been lifted by it out of their sin.

$. That it is so full of unexplained
mysteries. What! will you believe only
in what can beexplained? Gravitation ?
Your finger nails; how do they grow!
I would know that the heights and
depths of God’s truth were not very
great if I could, with my finite mind,
read everything,

4. An infidel strikes his penknife
through the Bible because, he says, tf t¢
were God's Book, the whole world would
have it. He pleads that if God had
anything to say to the world, He could
not say it to only a small part of the
race. But how is it God gives oranges
and bananas to only a small part of our
race? There are millions who have
never seen an orange or a banana! If

§75


“.





all the human race had the same climate,
harvests, health, advantages, then, by
analogy, you might argue God should
give the Bible, if at all, to the whole
world.

5. Objectors cut the Bible because
they urge that other books have in them
great value and beauty. True: Confucius
taught kindness to enemies ; the Shaster
has great affluence of beauty; the Veda
of the Brahmins has ennobling senti-
ments; but what is proved thereby t—
that after searching all lands, and ages,
and literature, there has been found but
a portion of the wisdom and beauty
which God’s Book contains! Let Vol-
taire come on with his acute philosophy,
and Hume with his scholarship, and
Gibbon with his one-siced statements,
and Hobbes with his subtlety ; and the
band of mountain shepherds and Galilee |
fishermen will beat all back with the
ery of “ Victory, through our Lord Jesus
Christ !”

Il. No better proof of the Divinity
of this Book can be desired than that it
has withstood this mighty and con-
tinuous attack, and come down to us
without a chapter effaced, a miracle
injured, or a promise scarred,

No other book has passed through
such hostility. Yet this Book to-day
is foremost. In Phdosophy, it is
honoured above the works of Descartes,
Bacon, Aristotle, and Socrates. In Hzs-
tory, it wins more respect than Hero-
dotus, Thucydides, and Xenophon. In
Poetry, it outshines the Jiad and
Odessey, the Inferno and Paradise Lost.
It has been published in more than two
hundred languages; the earth quakes
with the quick revolutions of its printing-


One verse of this Book above the
throne of tyranny, and it shall fall;
above the temples of superstition, and
they shall crumble; above the wilder-
ness, and it shall bloom as the Garden
of the Lord. Thou Prince of Books, we
hail thee to thy coronation ! the wheeling
earth thy chariot ! the bending sky thy
triumphal arch ! the great heavens thy
star-studded banner |

1. We have, then, maxy reasons fos
belicving the Bridle.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH,


OHAP, XXXVL





2. Raise the Book higher tm your
estimation.

3. Take +t to your heart, your house.
Though you seem to get along very well
without the Bible in your prosperity,
there will come a time when your only
consolation will be this blessed Gospel.

A blind girl had been in the habit of
reading the Bible with raised letters ;
by an accident her fingers lost their
sensitiveness. In her sorrow, she raised
the Book to her lips, to kiss it a fare-
well. As she did so she felt the letters
with her lipsp—‘‘ The Gospel according
to Mark.” “Thank God!” she ex-
claimed, “‘ I can read my Bible with my
lips!”

Oh, in our last hour, when the world
goes from our grasp, press this precious
Gospel to our lips, that, in the dying
kiss, we may taste its sweet promises.
—De Witt Talmage, 1870.


Ver. 23. Theme : LaBonious SERVICE
Wastep. ‘All the roll was consumed
tn the fire.”

I. A vast and toilsome task.

i It occupied a considerable time
tn preparation: doubtless “the nine
months,” at least, of the fifth year of
Jehoiakim (ver. 9).

ii. And it was undertaken at God's
command (ver. 2).

iii, It had an urgent and solemn aim
tm view (ver. 3).

iv. It was performed with anxious
Jfidelity (ver. 4).

v. It occupied the energies of two
devoted and gifted servants of Jehovah
(vers. 4, 17, 18).

Il. Destroyed in a moment’s caprice.

i. Within a few hours of its completion.
Its reading before the people, princes,
and king was all on the same day; and
then it was destroyed.

ii. Utterly destroying the entire pro-
duct of devoted toil. Not a vestige,
not a leaf remaining.

iii, Apparently rendering all the
labour fruitless, There on the fire
smouldered the ashes of destroyed toil.
“Strength spent for nought.”

IIL Yet effecting its full Divine
purpose.

i Mighty consequences result from


20


moments. A lightning flash lasts but a
second, yet it fells a forest, shivers a
rock, blasts an edifice, scorches a life into
instant death.

This roll was read, and though, but
once heard, it yet conveyed its message,
and wrought its diferent results: on th¢
people (ver. 7), on the princes (ver. 16),
on the king (ver. 23).

ii, Man’s wanton act of destruction
is included in God’s arrangements. He
intended it as a test for the king, and it
revealed to both people and princes (who
had been solemnised by the reading)
that the king was hopelessly defiant and
merited the destruction so soon to follow.

iii. Hence godly work should be done
and left with God. We may well be
satisfied with the consciousness that we
have carried out His bidding. If foes
seem to render our obedtence useless, that
is God’s matter, not ours. Sometimes
best results follow the apparent ruin of
our labours. It makes the way clear
for God to follow on with His judgments
(ver. 31).

IV. Ruined work should inspire to
renewed service. ‘Then took Jere-
miah another roll” (ver. 32),

i. Go over again the path of obedience,
even though with bleeding feet.

ii, Lose not fatth in God though the
toil seem monotonous.

iii. The recompleted service shall have
something added. ‘‘ Many like words,”
For all work done over again becomes
both enlarged and improved; and its
disciplinary effect upon the worker may
prove not the least of the advantageous
results of the reattempted service. For
the heart will learn to be pattent im
Divine employ, and submissive to the
Providential conditions (of failure or
success) amid which work for Him is
fulfilled.

Paul said, “‘ I have learned both how
to be abased and how to abound.”


Ver. 24. Theme: HaRDENED HEARERS.
“ Vet they were not afrasd, nor rent ther
garments ;” that is, the king and his
attendant princes. Jeremiah records
this with amazement, sorrow, and alarm.

L Contrast the solemn fear of
Josiah, this kine’s father (2 Kings xxii,
577


CHAP, XXXVL


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH,





11, 19). The difference in their acts
and their end. Jehoiakim’s guilt was
aggravated by reason of his good father’s
example.

IL Ponder the stolidity which
habitual disobedience produces, This
defiant effrontery in the king was the
climax of long rejection of God’s mes-
sages. This smmovable indifference in
his princes was the result of the king’s
example and influence.

I. Beware of hearing God’s mes-
gages with heedlessness,

1. Begins with tnattentton.

2. Progresses into wilful disobedtence.

3. Culminates in hardened indiffer-
ence.

IV. Receive God’s word with a
ehastened seriousness of spirit.

1. Warnings from God should produce
alarm. “ Afraid.”

2. Convictions of sin should lead to re-
pentance. “ Rend garments,”

3. Divine threatenings should urge to
seek hiding in Christ.

Lote.—The guilt of indifference. It
shows—(a.) contempt of God; (b.)
recklessness of soul; (c.) hardness of
heart.


Ver. 31. Theme: THREATENED Pun-
IsHMENT. ‘And I will punish him,
azd his seed, and his servants, for their
iniquity.” A current sentiment that God
is too merciful to punish. This shows—

i. A misconception of the character of
God.

ii, A wilful ignorance of the facts of
history.

iii, Forgetfulness of the suffering conds-
tion of this present evil world. For, was
not Adam driven from Eden? Did not
the deluge sweep the ungodly from the
earth? Were not Sodom and Gomorrah
overthrown Has Qod never sent
famine, pestilence, &c., to punish the
sins of the people? Has He not so
constituted the human mind as that
transgression entails misery? No error
could be more irrational and unscriptural.
Yet it is—

IL Pleaded that punishment is in-
consistent with mercy. Because “God
is love” and merciful, He cannot and
will not punish.

678


But—1. Punishment, instead of being
destructive of mercy, ts itself merciful.
To let transgressors go would foster
evil and spread ruin.

2. Hence God could not be merciful
did He not punish.

Il. Yet no sin in human history has
been committed with impunity.

1. Every transgression and disobe-
dience has received or wilt receive a just
recompense of reward,

2. How then, if sinners must be
punished, can they be pardoned and
saved? Christ “was wounded for our
transgressions.”

3. Had the saved been saved without
their sins being borne by their Surety,
law in that case had been tgnored, and
Justice slain on the altar of Mercy.

III. Since justice and mercy are
altke attributes of God, He can never
be other than both just and merci-
fal.

1. In the economy of redemption they
exist in friendly alliance.

2. They are never separated either in
the Dwine nature or the Divine govern-
ment.

IV. In all God’s judgments on
rebellious Israel there were both justice
and mercy. Justice towards them that
fell, mercy towards those spared. ‘‘ Be-
hold the goodness and severity of God,”
&e.

V. However obscured, sti/i mercy
always tempers justice 7m God’s ad-
ministrations. Difficult to discern mercy
tn the deluge, yet it arrested aboundings
of iniquity and acted beneficially on the
new world.

In some cases mercy 48 more con-
spicuous than justice, Yet Heaven is not
all mercy unmixed with justice: in the
redeemed we see the mercy of God; but
in the Redeemer, with His scars, we see
the justice. And Hell is not all justice
unmixed with mercy: in the suffering
there we see the justice of God, but
in the effect of their doom on others
(and other worlds) we may see the
mercy.

VL The conduct of some transgressors
leads to justice being allowed to take
its course untempered by mercy. £.9.,
tha fallen angeis. So with impenitent


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY ; JEREMIAH.


CHAP, XXKVE,





and unbelieving men. Yet while Mercy
does not intervene with such, it is
merciful to others that such should be
punished; as it is merciful now to
society to banish great criminals from
their midst.

In God’s dealings with our fallen
world, “grace reigns, through righteous-
ness,” in relation to all who believe ;
whereas justice reigns in harmony with
mercy, in reference to those who “neglect


the great salvation.”—Rev. D. Pledge,
“ Walks with Jeremiah.”


Ver. 32. Theme: “ANoTHER Rout,”
wits “ ADDED WorDs.”
L God’s judgments against sin.
II. Man’s attempt to evade them,
III. How Divine condemnations re-
appear.
IV. How they reappear with addi-
ttons.—Rev. John Farren.


ADDENDA TO CHAP. XXXVI. : ILLUSTRATIONS AND SUGGESTIVE EXTRACTS,


REVELATION IN Writina. “This
is the first recorded instance of the
formation of a Canonical Book, and of
the special purpose of its formation.
‘The Book’ now, as often afterwards,
was to be the death-blow of the old regal,
aristocratic, sacerdotal exclustveness, as
represented in Jehoiakim. The ‘Scribe,’
now first rising into importance in the
form of Baruch, to supply the defects of
the living Prophet, was as the printing-
press, in far later ages, supplying the
defects of both Prophet and Scribe, and
handing on the word of truth, which
else might irretrievably have perished.”
—Stanley, “ Jewish Church,” ii. 456.

The British and Foreign Bible Society
have during the last fifty years spread,
mainly among English readers, about
fifty million copies of God’s Word;
and from their press siz copies are now
issued every minute of the day (of ten
hours), or 3600 daily ; and this at a
price enabling the poorest to possess a
Bible.

And the Scriptures have been circu-
lated now in almost every tongue and
dialect under heaven, and are being cir-
culated in every country.


s¢ Within this ample volume lies
The mystery of mysteries :
Happiest they of human race
To whom their God has given grace
To read, to fear, to hope, to pray,
To lift the latch and force the way;
And better had they ne’er been born,
That read to doubt, or read to pen
—Ncots.


InForiaTep HearErs, Vespasian is
said to have been patientissimus vert
(Quintilian), “very patient of truth ;”
so was the good Josiah. But Jehoiakim


“was more like Tiberius, that tiger who
tore with his teeth what displeased him ;


‘or like Vitellius the tyrant, of whom


Tacitus saith “that his ears were of
that temper that he could hear no
counsel, though never so _ profitable,
unless it were pleasant, and did suit with
his humours (Lib, iii. Hist.) —Trapp,
Burnina Bisies. See article in


“Secular Annotations on Scripture
Texts,” Second Series, by Francis
Jacox, pp. 180-189, on “ Baruch’s


Burnt Book.”

Jehoiakim is the first we read of that
ever offered to burn the Bible. An-
tiochus, indeed, did the like afterwards,
and Diocletian the tyrant, and later the
Pope. A bad confederacy !

Dean Stanley, in his “Jewish Church,”
vol. ii, pp. 455, 456, says, “ Three or four
columns exhausted the royal patience.
He seized a knife, such as Eastern scribes
wear for the sake of erasures, cut the
parchment into strips, and threw it into
the brazier till it was burnt to ashes,
Those who had heard from their fathers
of the effect produced on Josiah by the
recital of the warnings of Deuteronomy
might well be startled at the contrast,
None of those well-known signs of
astonishment and grief were seen;
neither king nor attendants rent their
clothes. It was an outrage long remem-
bered. Baruch, in his hiding-places,
was overwhelmed (ver. 15) with despair
at this failure of his mission. But
Jeremiah had now ceased to waver.
He bade his timid disciple take up the
pen, and record once more the terrible
message... . But the Divine Oracle
could not be destroyed in the destruction
of tts outward framework, : was the

579


OHAP. XXXVI,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; JEREMIAH.





new form of the vision of the ‘ bush
burning, but not consumed :’ a sacred
book, the form in which Divine truths





the fourth or of the sixteenth ceutury, yet
multiplied by that very cause; springing
from the flames to do their work, living


were now first beginning to be known,
burnt as sacred books have been burnt
again and again, in the persecutions of


in the voice and life of men, even when
their outward letter seemed to be lost.”





CHAPTER XXXVII.


Curricat amp Exxcrricat Norrs.—1. Chronology of the Chapter. In the tenth and eleventh
year of Zedekiah. Later than chap, xxi., for that embassy was sent when Nebuchadnezzar
was marching against Jerusalem ; this, during the crisis when the Egyptian army came and
temporarily drew off Nebuchadnezzar’s from the siege (ver. 5). In notes on chap, xxxiv. will
be seen the mood of the nation at this moment. But as the interval passed, while the armies
of Egypt and Chaldea struggled together outside of the city, Zedekiah waa moved to solicit the
prophet’s intercession with God for his people.

For other notes cf. on chaps. xxi. and xxxiv.

2. Literary Criticisms. Ver. 10. ‘‘ Wounded men:” men thrust through. Ver. 12. ‘‘ To
separate himself thence in the midst of his people.” The Syriac, “To divide thence a share with
the people ;”” Vulgate, ‘‘'T'o divide thence a possession in the sight of the citizens ;” Targum,
‘To divide an inheritance he had there with the people ;” Septuagint, ‘‘ To purchase thence.”
Kimchi, Rosenmiiller, Dahler, and others construe the meaning thus: Jeremiah slipped away,
&c. (as in A.V. margin). But P2M, to be smooth, in its form here, means to make smooth or


divide: hence Henderson, ‘‘that he might take his portion thence among the people;” and
Naegelsbach, ‘‘ that he might divide his inheritance.” ‘
Ver. 15. ‘‘ Into the dungeons and into the cabins.” Some interpret nv"rii, curved posts or


stocks; but the word rather describes arched vaults. ‘* Dungeon” is lit. house of a cistern.
Great excavations existed under the palace and temple at Jerusalem, as reservoirs for water.


SEOTIONAL DIVISION OF CHAPTER XXX VII,
Vers. 1-10. Prayzrs AskKED, BUT IN VAIN.


i, A disobedient hearer (ver. 1), though warned by sad example (ver. 2), asking
the prophet’s prayers (ver. 3) in an hour of distress (ver. 5).

ii, A self-willed suppliant (ver. 7) answered with a message of judgment (vers.
7, 8) and words of solemn admonition (vers. 9, 10).


Vers. 11-15. A Pruprent Us or OpporTUNITY Maticiousty THWARTED.


i, A judicious effort. The prophet’s intention was wise (ver. 12); the brief
tnterval was auspicious (ver. 11). See Lit. Crit. supra.

ii, A false charge. Maliciously made (ver. 13) ; emphatically repudiated (ver.
14) ; eagerly believed (ver. 14).

iii, A foul injustice. Angry antagonists (ver. 14); abusive treatment; wa
warrantable imprisonment.


Vers. 16-21. WRonNGFUL SUFFERINGS ALLEVIATED.


i Royal leniency. Waited for patiently (ver. 16); exercised more from per-
sonal anxiety than righteous regret (ver. 17).

ii Troubled inquiry. Sought secretly, eagerly, tremblingly (ver. 17); answered
emphatically (ver. 17).

iii, Righteous expostulation.
ing delusive teachers (ver. 19).

iv. Sufferings ameliorated, The pathetic pleadings of distress (ver, 20); the
royal exercise of compassion (ver. 21).

580


Against personal wrong (ver. 18); against Aeed-


ee


a ae
eS


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


CHAP, XXXV,


HOMILETIC OUTLINES ON CHAPTER XXXVI1.


Ver. 3. Theme: A BAD MAN AsKING
4 Goop Man’s Prayers.

I. What led to this bad man needing
this good man’s prayers ?

1. Neglect of the warning of example
(ver. 2). All the woes which came upon
Jechoniah and his people afforded Zede-
kiah no effectual admonition of the
miseries which follow disobedience.

2. Imminent perils were gathering
(ver. 5.) He sought Jeremiah’s counsel
once before (chap. xxi.), when the king
of Babylon’s army first approached ; and
now asked his prayers when his hopes
and fears struggled within him as the
Egyptians and Chaldeans warred out-
side the city’s walls. He was in anxiety ;
and it is then that bad people come
for the sympathy and help of the
godly.

I, What mood was this bad man in
while asking the good man’s prayers?

1. He cared not to hear the Lord’s
messages and commands (comp. Pharaoh,
Exod. viii. 28, 29).

2. He dared not to intercede the Lord
himself (comp. Exod. x. 16, 17).

3. And he craved not the Lord Him-
self but only His help.

IIL What facts are suggested by bad
men asking a good man’s prayers

1. It is urgent for every man to have
@ way open by which to reach God in
prayer. Even bad men, prayerless men,
will come to need this ; and the moment
will be urgent in their history: in
trouble, in death,

2. Intercessory prayers for others have
power with God. Scripture instances—
Moses, Elijah, &c. Even evil persons
seem to know this, and cherish the
thought, and use the prayers of others
in their own extremity. Wicked people,
sn alarm, will ask such prayers.

3. Prayers in which God Himself ts
rejected from the soul, and merely His
help selfishly and sordidly asked, are an
affront to Jehovah. Jeremiah would not
carry such prayers before the Throne.

4. Sinners defeat the prayers of good
men by their own wicked lives, They
war against the pleadings of the godly.

5. Bad mez dare not venture before


God themselves, and therefore seek the
intercession of the good.  Penitents,
though sinners, have sought God, for in
their penitence they cease to be included
among bad persons: their hearts are in
grief for their sin. There is a Way to
God for even the guilty, and the Way is
open always: it is through Jesus; for
‘“‘if any man sin we have an Advocate
with the Father,” and none shall seek
His intercession in vain. .
See Addenda: Usgiuss Prayers


Ver. 9. Theme: Deceptive Hore.
“Thus satth the Lord, Deceive not your-
selves,” &c.

I. Delusive helps rise in our despair.
They are the will-o’-wisps on the swamp
decoying the lost traveller into deeper
misery.

1. Misery makes us ready to be de-
ceived. We hunger then for any faint
hope of help. The desert travellers,
expiring with thirst, see the mirage: it
is an illusion of their fevered vision.
A shipwrecked crew sight a vessel, but
it is the creation of their mad imagina-
tion. In the hour of worldly misfortune
we seize the frailest promise of relief.
Sinners dying in their sins call for the
minister, the sacrament—grasp at any
help; will take man’s lying words,
“Peace, peace!” while they are still
unforgiven by God, unreconciled through
Christ.

2. Delusions come upon all who turn
from God. These Jews trusted and
sought help from the Egyptians, and
would not heed God’s messages through
Jeremiah that the Chaldean power
should scatter the forces of Pharaoh.
No! they turned from God, and trusted
in Egypt.

At a crisis when the Chaldean army
was besieging the city, the army of
Pharaoh came to their succour.

Yes; and lying comforters will appear
to souls who reject God. The athetst,
assuring them there is no future, no
judgment to come, no penalty for sin,
The sacramentartan or sacerdotalist, with
their false theories of the efficacy of the

581


OHAP. XXXVIL





Church’s sacraments, and the priestly
functions of confessors and clergymen,
The moralist, who will urge that, though
religion has been neglected, the Spirit
“ grieved,” Christ ‘‘ passed by,” yet ‘he
can’t be wrong whose life ts im the
right.”

God sometimes gives disubedient souls
over to their delusions, so that they
“believe a lie.” They resolutely reject
Him, and He says to all awakening
agencies of grace, ‘He has turned to
idols, let them alone/”

IL Deceptive hopes leave us in
deeper distress. The darkness is more
blinding for the momentary flash of
light. The silence is more ghostly for
the swiftly-gone voice of pity.

By Pharaoh-Hophra’s approach, Nebu-
chadnezzar’s army was temporarily drawn
off from the siege of Jerusalem, but ver. 9;
see vers, 7, 8.

1. They bring a temporary delight.
The city went into jubilation at the
sight of the Egyptian banners. A man
in mental wretchedness rushes into ex-
hilarating company and indulgences ;
and lo! he laughs the laughter of fools.
Conscience smitten with the pangs of
conviction seeks the opiate of a thrilling
book, and soul-misery is forgotten in the
enchantment of exciting fiction.

Souls consetously needing a Saviour
attend the routine of Ritualism, and get
lulled into something of quietude; or
betake themselves to self-righteous
efforts, and gather a new pleasure from
these adopted refurmatory habits.

2. They fail to fulfil their promises.
The tower of Babel did not lift its
builders up to heaven! The inflated
boastings of Goliath did not fulfil the
proud hopes of the Philistines. The
army of Egypt did mot effect the de-
liverance of the city from Nebuchad-
nezzir’s siege.

Then follows a melancholy dis-
illusionising. No misery can exceed that
of being, for a brief respite, raised up
from the black depths of despair only
to be cast down again into profounder
deeps.

And “the hope of the hypocrite shall
perish.” Indeed, every hope which re-
jects God shall mock the soul with its

58%


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.








a


falsity. In death or in eternity. The
storia shall beat upon the house reared
on sand, and great shall be its fall. Oh,
“deceive not yourselves ;” literally, your
souls, There is “a Hope sure and
steadfast :” Christ is our Hope.

3. They defeat not the purposes of
Ged. Deceptive hopes are powerless to
avert facts. It is as if attempting to
arrest Omnipotence with a spider’s web.
God intended Nebuchadnezzur’s victory,
yet the Jews cherished the hope of
Pharaoh’s triumph. But God is ruling
human events. He has a will mightier
than our destres. ‘The Chaldeans shall
not depart.”

a. Nor will the horrors of death
“depart” from the dying sinner.

b. Nor will the terrors of judgment be
evaded by those who despise God and
reject His grace in Jesus.

ce. Nor will the purposes of God yield
to our schemings, for “He doeth ac
cording to His will among the armies of
heaven and the inhabitants of the earth,”
and “none shall stay His hand.”

d. Nor will the Divine terms of salva-
tion be altered for man’s caprice, or any
other means of securing God’s mercy be
accepted. For “there is none other
name under heaven given among men
whereby we must be saved.”

Therefore, “ deceive not yourselves,”


Ver. 12. Theme: SkeKinc Retire
MENT. ‘Then Jeremiah went forth out
of Jerusalem, to go into the land of
Benjamin, to separate himself thence in
the midst of the people.” Various in-
terpretations of his reason and purpose—

L His wearied heart craved
quietude amid family scenes, Ben-
jamin was his birthplace. He was
tired with the tumult and antagonism
of the city, for he saw that he spent
himself in fruitless labours. So, worn
out with weariness, burdened at heart
over the refractoriness and harduess of
those among whom he had laboured so
long and in vain, he sought retirement
and rest.

Perhaps, too, he might there find his
people more ready to heed his messages,
and, by repentance, to avert the Divine
judgments.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





CHAP, XXXVIL





1. Labours abundant justify God’s
servants in seeking temporary repose.
Come ye apart and rest awhile.”

2. From scenes of official life the
human yearnings turn to the tenderer
associations of home.

IL In despair of further usefulness
in the city, he sought more congenial
surroundings. We know how he shrank
from the prophet’s ministry in Jerusalem
(see on chap. xii, 5). His experience
there had been very adverse and dts-
appointing. The luxurious dream of a
rural ministry allured him. And now,
that evidently his work at Jerusalem
had failed, he seized the opportunity
‘for retiring to Anathoth.

1. Service in forefront scenes becomes
very harassing and exhausting,

2. Failure in work naturally impels
the worker to ask an altered sphere of
ministry,

IIL Disasters gathering on the
nation impelled him to concern for
personal safety. The siege would bring
ruin and famine. Now was the favour-
able moment to quit Jerusalem and
hide from the miseries which were immi-
nent.

1. Family interests claimed hus at-
tention. He was needed in Benjamin
for some division of the family in-
heritance, which the siege rendered
desirable (see Lit. Crit.)

2. In times of common trouble we
strongly covet the surroundings of
family affection.


Ver. 14. Theme: False CHARGES.
“Then said Jeremiah, It is false; I fall
not away to the Chaldeans.”

False charges, false witnesses, false
words, false pretences, have been so
common in this deceitful world, that no
marvel David said in his haste, ‘“ All
men are liars.”

But there are tovers of truth in the
world, who scorn a lie; disciples of
Him who said, “I am the Truth.”

IL When wrongly charged it is
right te falsify the accusation. To be
silent under a false charge is tacitly to
admit its truth. All such untruths
should be indignantly refuted. In this
we have warrant not only from Jere-


miah’s example, but also in our Lord
aud His apostles,

But while it is sad to see good men
falsely accused—

IL. Jt is sadder to see men so depraved
as to be guilty of knowingly bringing
false accusation. Better be the accused
than the false accuser; the slave than
the slave-owner.


‘* Dear as freedom is, and in my heart’s

Just estimation, prized above all price,

Ihad much rather be myself the slave

And wear the bonds than fasten them on

him.”
—Cowrer.

IIL Christianity distinguishes itz
disciples with geauineness and truth.
Yet none have had grosser charges
laid against them. The apostles were
charged with encouraging sin that grace
might abound. The early Christians
were charged with fostering sedition and
““tnrning the world upside down.” The
Protestant martyrs were charged with
“ heresy.”

IV. Current errors need to be con-
fronted with the cry, “ Jt ts false /”

1. Ecclesiastical theories of apostolic
succession, of baptismal regeneration,
of transubstantiation, of the sinner’s
annihilation, of universal restoration, of
the Universal Fatherhood of God—Soci-
nian in its origin and tendency. ‘To
the law and the testimony,” and so test
Church politics, creeds, rites, and
customs,

2. Errors are being disseminated by
the press which should impel us to
“search the Scriptures daily, to see if
these things are so.” And wherever we
meet an unscriptural theory, let us
boldly cry, “It is false!”

Time will ensure the triumph of
truth, ‘The greatest friend of truth
is Time.”—Condensed and arranged
from “Walks with Jeremiah,” by Rev.
D. Pledge.


Ver. 15. Theme: INJUSTICE TO THE
gust. Though prepared to defend and
exculpate himself, he was not allowed to
explain or plead.

L Disqualified judges “ were wroth,”

1. Anger renders men incapable of
judgment.

583


OWAP, XXXVII,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


SS SS ES ee ee ee eee


2. Prejudice proves fatal to adminis-
tration of justice.

3.. Hatred gives no place to rectitude
or humanity.

II. Unproved accusations.

1. dale cares not to wait for justifi-
cation.

2. Wicked men allow passion to hurry
them on to indulge their wrath,

3. Innocence has no hope of fair treat-
ment from guilty men.

III. Lawless cruelty. “Smote him.”

1, Pity for God’s servants is absent
from the hearts of those who hate
God.

2. Violence, regardless of righteous-
ness, has often been the cruel lot of the
godly.

3. Indignation against a faithful wit-
ness for God carries men to shameful
extremes and criminal brutality. “ For
the wicked hateth the righteous and
gnasheth upon him with his teeth.”

IV. Foul imprisonment.

1. It gratified them to hinder his
further witnessing against their iniquity.

2. In their revenge they added bar-
barity to indignity. “* The dungeon.”

3. Weary days spent in vileness and
darkness: “remained there many days.”

This was—

1, A heavy cross for a consciously
innocent man to bear.

2. Only the comforts of God's Spirit
could have sustained him amid this cruel
usage.

3. How light are our sufferings for
Christ compared with these!

See Addenda: InJusTick.


Ver. 17: Theme: A Szcoret INQUIRER.
“The king sent... and asked him
secretly in his house, Is there any word
from the Lord?”

I An inquirer, anxious. about a
Divine message.

1. Fearing lest it should be one of
doom.

2. Curious to learn, though unwilling
to obey, the word of the Lord.

3. Wishful that there might come a
“ word ” which would give sanction to
his own predetermined course,

TI. An inquirer, solicitous for his
own dignity.

584


1. Ashamed to openly show himself an
inquirer.

2. Contriing a secret interview, in
order to avoid inconvenience.

3. Devoid alike of courage and of
self-abasement.

TI. An inquirer, touched by a
sentiment of tenderness and mercy.
The king—

1. Relieved the prophet from his unjust
imprisonment.

2. Showed him consideration in bring-
ing him into his house,

3. Doubtless felt some compunction
for the wrong done to him, and some
conviction of his own wrong course of
action—this prompting his kindlier con- ©
duct.

IV. An inquirer answered by an
uncongenial word from God.

1. Denouncing his false hopes in
Egypt.

2. Foretelling hts personal overthrow.

Why such a message sent from God to
an inquirer ?

i. Because, though an inquirer, he
was determined upon a disobedient course
of action.

ii. Because, though an inquirer, he
was in no humble and contrite spirit.

iii. Because, though an inquirer, he
was time-serving and cowardly.

iv. Because, though an inquirer, he
ought not to have been an tnquirer at
all; for he had already heard enough
from God through Jeremiah, and ought
long ago to have ceased asking for “any
word” additional, and obeyed what God
had already said to him.


Ver. 19. Theme: DELUSIONS REFUTED.
“ Where are now your prophets which
prophesied unto you, saying, The king
of Babylon shall not come,” &c. ?

Not only had false prophets risen, but
both kings and people had shown eager-
ness to heed their misleading prophecies,
(See on xxviii. 14, p. 489; and xxviii
15, p. 494.)

L Men covet congenial teachers
“ Your prophets.”

1. A delusive wish to hear only plea
sant prophesyings.

2. A rash readiness to hear only plea
sant prophesyings.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





8. A fatal pronencss to believe the
prophesyings we covet.

IL Time is fatal to falsity. ‘‘ Where
now ?”

1. False words fascinate and gratify
for the moment.

2. Gilded hopes charm so long as they
endure.

3. Cherished delusions have an omi-
nously brief existence,

IIL Experience supplies the test of
truth.

1. Man wants safe, rather than mere
pleasant, teaching.

2. Deceitful words will, tn due time,
meet their certain refutation,

3. The day of adversity will shatter
all refuges of lies,

IV. God’s refutation of false hopes,
“The king of Babylon,” é&. But—


OHAP. XXXVIL,





1. The derided event is actually re-
alised. So Satan’s lie, “In the day.
» . ye shall not surely die,”

2. God will see that truth ts vindi-
cated against falsity.

3. Sinners will find that Goa’s mes-
sages, though reviled, turn out true.

V. Beguiled souls deserted by their
leaders, “ Where now are your pro-
phets?”

1. They who ruin others will wish to
shun their dupes in the day of calamity.

2. Baffled prophets hide from their own
shame in the hour of defeat,

2. Decewvers, and those they deceived,
must bear the doom of their delusions,
“All liars shall have their part in the
lake,” &c., as these wicked prophets had
to share the misery of Jerusalem’s ruin,

See Addenda: Fausrry,


ADDENDA TO CHAP. XXXVIII.: ILLUSTRATIONS 4ND SUGGESTIVE EXTRACTS.


VaLurLess Prayers. Scarcely any’


ministers, and many a Christian, but
ean recall instances of their prayers
being asked by persons who have been
prayerless themselves, One will suffice.
I went to see a woman in G——. She
was dying, but without a gleam of
hope.

“Oh, pray for me; I cannot, cannot
pray for myself, sir.”

“Indeed ; but why not for yourself?”

“My state is too hard ; I have known
all about religion since childhood, but
have insulted my conscience, rejected
God, resisted the Spirit, neglected Christ.
And oh, I dare not, I cannot speak to
Heaven now!”

All my pleading failed to awaken hope
in her, or to induce her to an effort to
pray. It seemed awful. No! She
should be thankful if I would pray for
her ; but she could not even frame in her
thoughts a petition ; prayer in her was


Although I did kneel and earnestly
plead for her, yet when I asked her if
she had joined in any one of my direct
and urgent cries, she answered—

‘‘No, I have no power to bring my
mind into any definite desire; Z have
killed prayer in my soul; I can’t now
speak a thought to God.”


His comrade too arose,
And with the outward forma
Of righteousnegs and prayer insulted God.”


—Southey.


“ We are told

How much the prayers of righteous men avail,
And yet ’tis strange how very few believe
Those blessed words, or act as were they true.
One reason of this incredulity
May be, that conscience whispers to their souls,
‘Notrighteous men are ye.’ And thus they think
That useless it would be to strive in prayer
For other’s good, when scarcely for themselves
They hope for mercy, Lukewarm hearts and

faint,
Lift up your feeble hands and bend the knee;
A Mightier than ye your guilt hath borne,
And for His gake, not yours, all prayer isheard,”’


—Lady Chatterton,


Ingustice, When Athens was ruled
by the thirty tyrants, Socrates the philo-
gopher was summoned to the Senate
House and ordered, together with others,
to seize one Sevon, a man of rank and
fortune, whom they determined to de-
stroy that they might possess his estate,
This commission Socrates flatly refused ;
and boldly replied, “TI will never willingly
assist in an unjust act.”

Cherides sharply replied, ‘‘ Dost thou
think, Socrates, to talk always in this
style, and not to suffer?”

“ Far from it,” he answered, “I expect

B85


OHAP, XXXVIIL. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





to suffer a thousand ills, but none so ing the painting at a distance, you would


great as to do unjustly.” think the friar to be in a praying atti-
P ) tude, for his hands are clasped together,

“ A wise man never goes the people’s way ; ’ : ty 8 BY
But as the planets still move contrary ‘ and held horizontally to his breast ; his
To the world’s motion, so doth he to opinion: eyes seem meekly closed like those of
ee mh examine - those ae ‘ the publican in the Gospel ; before him
thm Pen lies what looks like a book, over which


Deservedly or no? Come they deservedly ? prayerfully he bends as in devout medi-

They are no wrongs then, but punishmenta, tation, But take a nearer survey, and

If undeservediy, and he not guilty » the deception vanishes, The book is

The doer of them first should blush, not he, discovered to be a punch-bowl ; in the

onson. °

hands pressed together is a lemon whose

Farsiry. “The essence of alieisthe juice he is squeezing into the bowl; and

intention to deceive.” the half-closed eyes are for protection

A very capital painter in London ex- fromthe spurting juice, and not for prayer.

hibited a work of art representing a Get nearer liars and their falsity is
friar habited in his canonicala View- manifest.





CHAPTER XXXVIIL


CriticaL anpD Execeticat Nores.—Chronological Notes as on preceding chapter.
Personal Allusions. Ver. 1. ‘‘Shephatiah,” never elsewhere mentioned. ‘‘


possibly son of ‘‘ Pashur” the violent (chap. xx. 1-8). ‘‘ Jucal,” called Jehueal (xxxvii. 8)
* Pashur,” son of Malchiah, same as mentioned xxi. 1.


Ver. 6. ‘‘ Malchiah son of Hammelech” (see on xxxvi. 26).
Ver. 7. ‘‘ Ebed-melech the Ethiopian.” Mutilation to a Hebrew was forbidden by the Mosaie


law (Deut. xxiii. 1); and Ethiopians were not infrequently selected for service in the royal
harem (Dan, xi. 43).


Literary Criticisms. Ver. 1. ‘* Words Jeremiah had spoken:” was speaking. Ver. 4.
‘* For thus he weakeneth:” ¢.¢. since or because. Ver. 6. ‘‘ Into the dungeon :” lit. pit or
cistern (see note on xxxvii. 16). ‘‘ Sank in the mire :” 80 that it was a muddy pit. Subterranean
cisterns under the houses became miry pits when the water was exhausted from them. Ver. 10.
“ Thirty men.” Ewald, Hitzig, Graf, &., thinking prow, ‘‘ thirty,” too many, would read
MY, three: but this overlooks the resistance which the king’s counsellors might perchance
offer. Ver. 11. ‘* Old cast clouts and old rotten rags:” from IMD, to drag, rend ; therefore
here, shreds, tatters ; and next D'M9i, from n20, to rub away ; hence soft or smooth rags,
Ver. 15. ‘‘ Wilt thou not hearken?” The interrogation point is an error: ‘‘ Thow wilt not,” &.

Ver. 22. ‘‘ Those women shall say, Thy friends,” &c. This ‘‘saying”’ of the king’s women
is in the poetic form, making a distich—a jeering refrain—

‘¢ Thy friends have urged thee on, and have prevailed with thee :
Thy feet are sunk in the mire; they are turned away back!”

The words, ‘‘they are turned away back,” refer not to the king’s feet, but to the friends who,
having lured him on, desert him in his difficulties.

Ver. 28. “ He was there when Jerusalem was taken:”’ a confused sentence. Omit the italic
word ‘‘ there” from the verse ; and read, ‘‘ And # was when Jerusalem waa taken;”’ te. ‘* Jt


came to pass when Jerusalem was taken”’—then continue next chapter ; for these words should
stand at the head of chap. xxxix.


TOPICS OF CHAPTER XXXVIII.


Jeremiah’s slanderous enemies (vera. 1-4).
God’s prophet, a prisoner (ver. 6).
A gracious and courageous Ethiopian (vers. 7-13
Jeremiah’s experiences typical of Christ’s (vers. 1-13),
Obedience (ver. 20).
Sinners the cause of their own sufferings (vers, 17, 18).
Timidity (ver. 19).
Eauivocation (ver. 27),

586


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. OHAP. XXXVI,








Topic: JeReMian’s SLaNDEROUS ENnzMixs. (Vers. 1-4.)


Jeremiah was no arch-traitor, as these “ princes” would imply, but the truest
patriot in all the land, This he proved by his courage and faithfulness, in repeating
counsel which cost him so much malignity and persecution.

Certainly bis opponents regarded him as the most dangerous man among the
people, because he thwarted their counsels and designs ; just as Ahab accused Elijah
of troubling Israel (1 Kings xviii. 18) ; Azariab, Amos (Amos vii. 10) ; and the Jews,
Paul (Acts xvi. 20).

I. Calumny and slander assail even the best of men. “The worthiest
people are frequently attacked by slander, as we usually find it to be the best fruit
which birds peck at.”— Bacon.


“The world with calumny abounds,
The whitest virtue slander wounds ;
There are whose joy is, night and day,
To take a character away.
Eager from rout to rout they haste
To blast the generous and the chaste;
And, hunting reputation down,
Proclaim their triumph through the town.”—Poepe,


“ Soft buzzing slander: silky motha, that eat
An honest name.”—TZhomson.


“The tongue of the slanderer is a devouring fire, which tarnishes whatever it
touches ; which exercises its fury on the good grain, equally as on the chaff ; on the
sacred as on the profane; which, wherever it pleases, leaves only desolation and
ruin ; turns into vile ashes what only a moment before had appeared to us so
precious and brilliant ; acts with more violence than ever in the time when it was
apparently almost smothered up and extinct; which blackens when it cannot con-
sume, and sometimes sparkles and delights before it destroys.” Massillon,


“Virtue itself ’acapes not calumnious strokes.”—Shakespeare.


IL Calumny and slander base their attacks upon misrendered truths,
Jeremiah’s words were quoted asif proving him unpatriotic ; whereas his full words
are earnest with love and solicitude for his people (comp. xxi. 8, 9).

‘You cannot always take up a slander and detect the falsehood there; you
eannot evaporate the truth in the slow process of the crucible, and then show the
residuum of falsehood glittering and visible ; you cannot fasten upon any word or
sentence and say that it is calumny; for in order to constitute slander it is not
necessary that the word spoken should be false—half truths are often more calum-
nious than whole falsehoods.”—/. W. Robertson.

An old writer has said that we have two eyes and two ears, but only one
tongue, that we may see and hear twice as much as we say; but unhappily men
generally act the reverse ; for, alas! they say far more than they see or hear.


“Mingling trath with falsehood, sneers with smiles,
A thread of candour with a web of wiles.”— Byron.


III. Oalumny and slander inflict the most piteous wrongs (see ver. 6).
Against slander there is no defence. It stabs withasmile. It is poisoned
arrow whose wound is incurable,


“ Good name, in man and woman,
Is the immediate jewel of their souls.
Who steals my purse, steals trash ; ’tis something, nothing ;
*Twas mine, ’tis his, and has been slave to thousands
But he that filches from me my good name,
Robs me of that, which not enriches him,
And makes me poor indeed.” Shakespeare. 587


OHaP. XXXVITE HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR,





Note—
** Slander meets no regard from noble minds;
Only the base believe what the base only utter.” —Bellew,


Topic: Gov’s PRoPHET A Prisoner. “Then took they Jeremiah, and cast him
into the dungeon of Malchiah the son of Hammelech, that was im the court of
the prison: and they let down Jeremiah with cords. And in the dungeon
there was no water, but mire: so Jeremiah sunk in the mire” (Jer. xxxviii. 6).


A prophet in prison! An ambassador of the Most High God in bonds! Let
us trace the history of this great crime against the Majesty of Heaven.


Jeremiah’s prison experiences began twenty years before the taking of Jerusalem


by the king of Babylon. “ Pashur, who was governor of the house of the Lord,
heard that Jeremiah prophcsied these things, Then Pashur smote Jeremiah the
prophet, and put him in the stocks,” &. (xx. 1). And what things had Jeremiah
prophesied? Only those which the Lord commanded him, saying, “ Diminish not
a word.” He had denounced the innumerable abominations which prevailed in
the land, the oppressions which one class practised upon another, and the gross
idolatries, with all their attendant cruelties and sensualities; had foretold the
Divine judgments that were hastening to overwhelm the nation, and from which
there was now no escape.

When Nineveh was threatened with destruction by the stranger prophet, it
repented and humbled itself in sackcloth and ashes. But Jerusalem hardened
itself against the Divine voice, and the chief governor of its Temple seized the
prophet who had dared to foretell its doom, and “ smote him.”

L It was the governor of the Lord’s house that did this great wrong.

1. It was the chief priests of the Lord’s house that led the conspiracy against
the Master of prophets and apostles six hundred years later, and one of their officers
rudely struck the Divine captive with the palm of his hand. Jesus repelled the
wrong with calm dignity, saying, “If I have spoken evil, bear witness of the evil ;
but if well, why smitest thou Me?” But Jeremiah did not bear his trial with the
calmness and meekness which adorned the Master; for he addressed severe words
to his persecutor: ‘Thou Pashur . . . shall go into captivity,” &c. (xx. 6). But
having delivered his message, he breaks out into complaints which have no parallel
in the history of the good men of the Bible, except of Job in the hour of bitter
despair. “Cursed be the day in which I was born,” é&c. (xx. 14-18). All this
after his deliverance, and after saying, ‘‘Sing unto the Lord, praise ye the Lord;
for He hath delivered the soul of the poor from the hand of evil-doers.”

Many a servant of God has put the ancient prophet to shame. ‘TI found the
comforts of my God in the Fleet prison exceedingly, it being the first time of my
being a prisoner,” wrote a persecuted Englishman two centuries ago. Nor did the
strength of this good man depart from him when he stood in the pillory and had
his ears cut off by the hangman, “All the while I stood in the pillory I thought
myself to be in heaven, and in a state of glory and triumph, if any such state can
be on earth. I found these words of Peter verified on me in the pillory: ‘If ye
be reproached for the name of Christ, happy are ye; for the spirit of glory and of
God resteth upon you, which on their part is blasphemed, but on yours glorified.’”
Henry Burton is more of a prophet in the pillory than Jeremiah, and one wonders
at the Hebrew saint that he should sink into such a slough of despond.

- We must find the secret of it very much in his natural temperament. His was
a task which required the firmness of a rock and the boldness of a lion—charactera
which were certainly not constitutional with Jeremiah, But the Lord knew his
frame, and did not err in choosing him for His instrument; “Iam with thee to
deliver thee,” was His promise. And the vicissitudes of the prophet’s spirit are
to us a precious legacy of instruction and comfort,

58g


FHOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JBREMIAR. OHAP. XXXVIM.


—_—— =








On his release his warfare against the sins of the nation was continued as here
tofore (xx. 11, 12). In prolonged strains of Divine severity, mingled with pro-
mises of a return from Babylon, whither they were doomed to be carried into exile,
and with promises of still greater blessing at a more distant period, under the
reign of the Messiah, Jeremiah continued his expostulations with a degenerate
people, but amid intense suffering to his own tender spirit— Mine heart within
me is broken ; all my bones shake,” &c, (xxxiii. 9).

2. Later on we find the spiritual and the secular powers playing the parts which
they have often played in other ages and countries, the one persecuting the prophet,
the other protecting him ; the spiritual demanding his death, the secular, with more
regard to justice, covering him with the shield of his protection. The priests and

rophets, and all the people, took him and said, ‘‘Thou shalt surely die.” . .

hen said the princes and all the people unto the priests and prophets, “ This man
is not worthy to die; for he hath spoken to us in the name of the Lord” (xxvi,
7-16).

os secular ruler Pilate was more righteous than the spiritual rulers Annas and
Caiaphas. ‘‘ Behold I bring Him forth unto you, that ye may know that I find
no fault in Him.” But in this case the people took part with unrighteous priests,
and demanded that the innocent One should be crucified. In the case of Jeremiah,
the people at first joined his persecutors in demanding that he should die. But
the appeal to their reason and conscience won them to the side of justice, and they
joined the princes in saving the Lord’s servant out of the hands of his enemies.

The king of Babylon’s army besieged Jerusalem about fifteen years after the
first imprisonment of Jeremiah, and the prophet was instructed to say, “ Though
ye fight with the Chaldeans ye shall not prosper” (xxxii, 5). The king was now
the persecutor : ‘‘ Wherefore dost thou prophesy,” said Zedekiah, ‘and say, Thus
saith the Lord, Behold I will give this city into the hand of the king of Babylon ?”
(xxxii. 2), It was the old story. ‘“ Art thou he that troubleth Israel?” said the
wicked Ahab to the prophet Elijah. “TI trouble not Israel,” was the memorable
reply ; “but thou, and thy father’s house, in that ye have forsaken the Lord,
and thou hast followed Baalim.” Not the prophet, but the king, and such as the
king, was the cause of the dark cloud which now hung over the favoured city.

Il. The prison walls within which Jeremiah was shut up could not exclude
the presence and the voice of the Lord.

In his solitude he received assurances not only of the inevitable catastrophe
which should overwhelm the land, but of a certain recovery and restoration (xxxii.
26, 42), a message which Jeremiah found means of addressing to the king and to
the people. How and when he was released does not appear, but we find him soon
again sent back to his place of confinement. The Chaldeans retire from the siege
of the city for a time for fear of the Egyptian army, and Jeremiah tries to slip
away into the land of Benjamin. He is caught in the gate in the act of departure,
and charged with falling away to the Chaldeans. In vain he denies the charge ; he
must return to prison, and there he remains many days (xxxvii. 16).

The king, whose secret conscience assures him not only of Jeremiah’s innocence,
but of the gravity of the message with which he is charged of God, sends for him
and asks in private, “Is there any word from the Lord?” The prophet answers
promptly, “There is; for thou shalt be delivered into the hands of the king of
Babylon.”

Royal menace and royal clemency are alike impotent to sway the prophet from
the faithful discharge of his duty. But fain would he be saved from returning
to his prison-house. And one’s heart is moved by the earnestness with which he
remonstrated with the king (xxxvii. 20). The king was so far moved that he
ordered that Jeremiah should be committed not to the dungeon in Jonathan’s
house, but to the court of the prison, and that a piece of bread should be supplied
to him daily. Thus Jeremiah remained in the court of the prison ee 21).


OBAP. XXXVI, HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : JEREMIAR.














But the hostility of his enemies was not satisfied. The princes appealed to
the king (xxxviii. 4). The sovereign of Judah was weak as well as wicked, and
rehearsed the part of Herod, in relation to John the Baptist, centuries before
Herod’s time. “ Behold he is in your hand ; for the king is not he that can do
anything against you.” Then they took him, and not having courage to murder
him outmght, they put him into a dungeon where it was not possible that he should
live long (xxxviii. 6). But his faith did not fail him. Reciting his experiences
afterwards, he said, “I called upon the Lord out of the low dungeon. Thou
drewest near in the day that I called upon Thee: Thou saidst, Fear not” (Lam. iii.
55-57.) This blessed “ Fear not ”—how often has the Voice from the excellent
glory said to the hearts of sufferers and mourners, “ Fear not”! ‘ Fear not, for I
am with thee; be not dismayed, for I am thy God ; I will help thee.”

The heart of an Ethiopian is moved by the pitiful condition in which wicked
men have left the prophet, and he goes into the king’s presence and represents the
wrong that has been done and the danger in which the prophet is. The king grants
the Ethiopian’s request, and says, “Take from hence thirty men with thee, and
take up Jeremiah the prophet out of the dungeon before he die” (xxxviii. 10),
What a place that dungeon must have been! A deep pit, used as a cistern, per-
haps, during part of the year, but now dry, and with a quantity of mud at the
bottom, into which the prophet was so sunk that it required not only the strength
but the skill of the thirty men to drag him up !

Jeremiah, thus rescued from a cruel death, was not set at liberty, but remained
in the court of the prison until the city was taken by the army of Babylon.

IIL The Lord’s blessing was on the head of his deliverer, Ebed-melech,
the Ethiopian.

1. While Jeremiah was yet in prison there came a message from heaven to him,
saying, “ Go and speak to Ebed-melech the Ethiopian, and say unto him” (xxxix.
15-18).

The Ethiopian’s skin was not changed in the land of his bondage, but his heart
was, He found light shining in this deep night of Judaism, and was guided by
it to the everlasting and ever-loving God. And while the children of the kingdom
cast themselves out, this child of darkness and of the desert was brought in to
share the inheritance of the faithful. He “trusted” in the Lord.

2. The message of God to the Ethiopian rebukes the vain philosophy of man,
and is fraught with comfort to the obscure and despised of mankind. God is too
great to concern Himself with the affairs of individuals! He may hold in His
right hand the mighty suns of the great universe He has made, but what to Him
are the twinkling lights of cottage homes? He may rule kings and princes, but
what to Him are slaves and beggars? The philosophy which is capable of being
popularised into such questions as these must be vam. Mungo Park, faint and
perishing, observes a single tuft of grass in the waste African desert, when he
thought there was nothing left for him but to die, and his heart argued with the
rapidity of lightning, that the Creator of that tuft of grass could not be unobser-
vant of him, His child ; and strengthened by the thought he persevered and was
saved. And now Jehovah singled out an Ethiopian in the court of Zedekiah, and
sent to him a message of His divine and fatherly love. To God the small and the
great are alike (Isa. xl. 26, 29). If He telleth the number of the stars, and calleth
them by their names, He likewise gathereth together the outcasts of Israel; He
healeth the broken in heart and bindeth up their wounds (Ps. exlvii. 3, 4).

IV. Jeremiah’s after ministry.

Jeremiah was still in prison when the armies of Babylon took Jerusalem. He
was found in chains and carried with other captives on the way to Babylon, but
was released at Ramah, six miles from Jerusalem. Thus ended the prison life of
Jeremiah, but not his ministry.

1. How long the prophet was im prison it is difficult to determine—probably

590





HOMILETIC OOMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. OHAP, XXXVI,











for years. His first imprisonment so stunned him as for the moment to overthrow
faith and patience. But his later experience was more worthy of the man of God ;
and his grief was far less for himself than for the people whose day of grace was
coming to an end, The words (viii. 21 to ix. 1) may have been written in prison ;
if not, they were recalled there and oft recited by the bleeding heart of the sorrow-
ing prophet. The matter of the Lamentations which he wrote after the destruc-
tion of Jerusalem must have been his frequent meditation in the house of his
prison.

2. He was permitted even in his prison to exercise his ministry. The word of
the Lord was not bound. It came to him and went from him. Prison bars and
fetters could not separate him from his God, and happily it did not separate him
even from his people. Their conscience and their fears together made them listen
to the words which were given to him from God to speak to them.

It may be likewise that his imprisonment was cheered, for some time at least,
by the companionship of his faithful friend und amanuensis, Baruch. Tradition
says that Baruch was his fellow-prisoner when the prison door was opened by the
victorious arms of Babylon. The apostle Paul was comforted in his prison by the
coming of Titus. Baruch must have been as an angel of God to Jeremiah in his
solitude. Often would they commune together of the hour drawing nearer every
day, when sword and famine and pestilence should fill the streets and homes of
Jerusalem with horrors unutterable, and the thought of it was more than these
prisoners could bear. But their darkness was not unmingled. There was light
beyond,

“ Behold the days come, saith the Lord,” &e, (xxiii. 5-8, and xxxili, 14, 15).

The prophet and his fellow-prisoner could not understand these promises so
clearly and fully as we do now. But they saw enough in them to lighten their
burden and cheer their spirits) Through present gloom the eye of faith penetrated
into a glorious future.

3. Jeremiah must likewise have written some portion of his prophecies within
prison walls. The thirty-second, thirty-third, and thirty-fourth chapters were
doubtless written there, perhaps much besides—perhaps by the hand of the skilful
and faithful penman, Baruch,

Again are we reminded of the great apostle of the Gentiles, Four, at ‘east, of
the epistles which bear his name were written in his Roman prison. And many
books, which the world would not willingly let die, have been written in like
circumstances.

Who that has read the “ Pilgrim’s Progress” can forget its opening sentence —
“As I walked through the wilderness of this world, I lighted on a certain place
where was a den, and laid me down in that place to sleep ; and as I slept I dreamed
a dream.” The den wherein John Bunyan dreamed his immortal dream was Bedford
Jail, which was the good man’s home for twelve years. With his Bible and Foxe’s
“ Book of Martyrs” as his constant companions, he wrote his allegory, not witting
nor dreaming of its wonderful history in ages after his death. As the composition
advanced he read it, part by part, to his fellow-prisoners, to their no small amuse-
ment as well as instruction. But so doubtful was he of the value of his prison-
work, and so various were the counsels which he received on the subject of its
publication, that he did not put it into the printer’s hands for some years after his
liberation, To-day it is read in more languages of the earth, probably, than any
other book, except the Word of God.

Jeremiah is the first prison author that we know of. The last has not yet
written, For the conflict foretold when sin entered the world is not yet ended:
“Twill put enmity between thee (the serpent) and the woman, and between thy
seed and her seed,” And so long as this enmity lasts, and the conflict between
good and evil is waged on earth, we shall find battles fought and prisons built and
stakes erected. eo


OHAP. XXXVI, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.


Be it so, The words of Christ cannot be broken, “ Blessed are they which are
persecuted for righteousness’ sake, for theirs is the kingdom of heaven.” Let them
call upon their God out of their low dungeon, as did the Jewish prophet, and the
Divine voice which cheered his prison will cheer theirs, ‘Fear not.” It is
enough. It is enough. God says it. Martyrs, rejoice !—your God is with you.
If your night be long, He will not forsake you, If it end in the flames of
a cruel death, these flames will be as Elijah’s chariot to carry you from earth to
heaven.—Kev, John Kennedy, D.D., London; From “Christian World Pulpit,”
1872.


Topie: A Gracious amp Covracrous Erurorman, (Vers. 7-13.)


All the king’s counsellors were hostile to God’s prophet; “his foes were they
of his own household.” Ebed-melech the Ethiopian was a stranger, an alien; yet
he befriended this servant of Jehovah. So with the misused Jewish traveller:
the Levite and priest passed him by in his wounded and perishing state, but the
Samaritan pitied and helped him. Consider—

I. The graciousness of his spirit. He was—

1, Deeply affected by the miseries of God’s servant (ver. 7). To hear of what
was done troubled him. He had “a heart at leisure for itself to soothe and
sympathise,”

2. Impelled by pity to attempt his help (ver. 8). Not passive sympathy only;
he set himself to aid his deliverance. “A little help is worth a deal of pity.”

3. Saw the wickedness of the cruelty shown to Jeremiah (ver. 9). The inhumanity
was shocking to his kind nature; but the stm of it was equally evident, for abuse
of God’s messenger was defiance of God !

4, Dealt very tenderly with him in rescuing him (ver. 12). His gentleness is
touching. He realised how sick and weak the prophet must be through the horrors
of his imprisonment, and from being deprived of food. A tender heart makes the
hand gentle.

IL The courage of his conduct.

1. He was alone tn this act of pity. Others may have felt pity, but feared
to show it; he had the courage to avow his commiseration and sympathy with
Jeremiah

2. By his practical sympathy he openly condemned the cruelty and guiltiness of
the king’s courtsers. Thus braving their malevolence,

3. Fearless of all consequences, he even presses his appeal upon the king. Even
as Esther: “So will I go in unto the king; and if I perish, I perish.”

4. He bravely denounces the king’s own counsellors. Thus carrying judgment
against “those men” (mark its vehement scorn) into the king’s presence; and
thereby implying that the king was himeelf wrong in having such men about him,
and in conniving at their conduct.

5. He honoured Jeremiah as being the prophet of Jehovah. Others ridiculed
Jeremiah, refused to own him God’s messenger ; but Ebed-melech calls him “the
prophet” (ver. 9), and then insinuates the impiety of all, king and people, for
disregarding his messages.

III. The success of his intervention (ver. 10). This is remarkable; for the
king had only just before owned himself afraid to act against his ‘‘ princes,” and
helpless to check them (ver. 5). How explain the king's compliance ?

1. The right conduct of one man will start riaht convictions tn another, Zedekiah
gould not look at this brave Ethiopian, so courageously and fearlessly and touchingly
pleading for the prophet, without feeling coudemned for his own supineness and
cowardice ; and impelled to betcer purposes. Even a lowly man, acting in fear of
God, may awaken the conscience and move the heart of a king/ This encourages
the humblest to a fearless piety: it must work good resulta.

592 ;





é HOMELETIO COMMENTARY : JEREMIZH. OHAP. XXXVI

apse ee eee

2. Courageous conduct should be regulated by prudence. Armed with « thirty
men,” he arranged for Jeremiah’s rescue, The king saw he would need such a band
of helpers. But he knew himself that if Jeremiah was to be drawn up alive, the work
must be done tenderly ; so he provided himself with “old cast clouts,” which would
be needed to prevent injury to the prophet, for the force needed to draw him up
out of the mire would be great.

3. Befriending care followed his act of rescue (ver. 13). For only there would
the prophet be safe from the fury of the princes; and, providentially, he was there
within reach of the king, to give him counsel (ver. 14).

Here, then, is~-

i, Encouragement to good men to appear in a good cause and act vigorously for
God, notwithstanding they are alone and menaced by dangers and difficulties

ii, Moble deeds done by despised Ethiopians find record in God’s book, to assure
us that He honours whosoever fears Him. So it is recorded of Joseph of Arimathea,
that he went in boldly to Pilate to beg the body of Jesus,

iii, Though the Ethiopian cannot “change his skin,” his heart can be changed.
This man showed himself to be a true child of God. Such an instance as that of
the Candacian eunuch predicts the future when “ Ethiopia shall lift up her hands
anto God.”

See homily on chap. xxxix. 15-18: “A Lonzty Hrno or Farra.”


Topic: JzREMIAH’s Exprrizxors TyPicaL oF Curis?’s,


i. Sas with political treachery. Jeremiah (vers. 1-4); Jesus (Luke
xxiii. 1-5).

ii. Abandoned by the chief magistrate of the nation to hts malignant foes.
Jeremiah by the king (ver. 5); Jesus by Pilate (Luke xxiii, 24),

iii, The avful profounds of his sufferings suggestive of Christ's. Jeremiah
(ver. 6, “pit,” &c.) ; Christ’s (Ps. Ixix. 2,15). Jeremiah “sank in the mire,” up
to the neck, says Josephus, and so, “I sink in the mire” (Ps. xix. 2).

iv. Though rejected and maltreated by his own nation, yet cherished by a
Gentile alien. So Christ was believed in by Gentiles while Israel despised Him,
and Ethiopians were among the earliest converts (Acts ii. 10, 41; viii. 27-39).

v. In Jeremiah’s being raised up alive from the pit, we have Christ's resurrection
from the dead prefigured and portrayed.

vi. The Hthiopian’s plea to rescue Jeremiah reminds us of @ like act by Joseph of
Arimathea (see vers, 8, 9, and comp, Luke xxiii. 52),

Note.—It is remarked by Ambrose, “‘ Jeremiah was cast into the pit ; and no one
was found among the Jews to draw him out of the deep dungeon, But Ebed-
melech, the Ethiopian convert, he did it. Here is a beautiful figure. The Pro-
phetic Word was cast by the Jews into the mire; but we of the Gentiles, who were
formerly darkened, like Ethiopians, with stains of sin (comp. Jer. xiii. 23), and
were unfruitful, have raised up that Word out of the mire. As it is said by the
psalmist, ‘ Ethiopia shall stretch out her hands unto God’ (Ps. Ixviii. 31).”


Topic: Osepiznce. ‘“ Obey, I beseech thee, the voice of the Lord, when I speak unto
thee: so it shall be well with thee, and thy soul shall live” (ver. 20).


L Safety lies in obedience to the Divine Will. There is scarcely a loss
sustained by an intelligent creature, but may be traced to disobedience to the
Divine Will. Angels’ loss of heaven. Adam’s loss of Eden. Israelites who lost
their lives in the wilderness from Egypt to Canaan. Jews’ loss of their country in
captivity. Ananias and Sapphira who lost life. The captain who lost his ship through
not heeding Paul. Equally it is through disobeying the Divine Will that health is
lost, reputation is lost, the soul is lost.

ar 593


OHAP. XXKVIIL HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH,


IL Causes actuating to disobedience of the Divine Will

l. The first cause of the first act of disobedience is an insoluble mystery. God
alone understands the origin of sin. It is a mystery unfathomable that holy and
intelligent creatures, as “the angels that sinned,” should, wrthout being tempted,
fall into temptation.

2. The second act of disobedience, that of our first parents, is less mysterious :
the tempter, by lies and tnsinuations, allured them to disobedience, Fallen angels
had no tempter ; fallen men had.

3. Since the fall of angels and of our first parents two causes have operated
leading to unwersal disobedience—Satamie agency and man’s depravity. Hence the
mystery of sin lessens as we discover the causes leading thereto. Yet these causes
do not justify acts of disobedience,

DL Love is the one moving, prompting cause of all obedience.

Love prompts the angels to fulfil the Divine behests: ‘ They do His command-
ments, hearkening unto the voice of His word,”

Love prompts “the spirits of the just made perfect ;” they are “ ministers of
His, to do His pleasure.”

Love prompted the Apostles to obey the Divine commission, ‘ Go ye into all
the world ;” ‘The love of Christ constraineth us.”

Love prompted the martyrs to be “ faithful unto death.”

Of all forces there is none so great as the power of love. Law, with all its
penalties ; judgments, with all their terror; morality, with all its advantages ; are
feeble impulses to obedience compared with love. ‘‘ Love is strong as death.”

IV. Consider the pleasures of obedience to the Divine WilL

1. There is a present pleasure arising from the testimony and approbation of
conscience.

2. A reflective pleasure arising from the consciousness of having obeyed the
Divine Voice. Paul felt this, on review of life, when he said, “I have fought a good
fight,” dc. This was Christ’s pleasure: ‘I have glorified Thee on the earth,” &ec.

3. An anttcipatory pleasure ; looking for the Divine approval—“ Well dona,
good and faithful servant,” dc.

And as there is a threefold pleasure in obedience, so there is a threefold patm
in dtisobedtence—

1. Present; the pain of an accusing conscience. 2, Feflective ; the memory
of wasted life. 3. Anticipatory: dreading hearing the words, “I never knew
you; depart from Me,” é&c.

V. The importance of obedience of the Divine Will “It shall be well
unto thee.”

Let the sinner obey the votce of Jesus, and “it shall be well unto him;” not
die, but live,

Let the believer obey the voice of his Lord and Master, and he shall enjoy
Divine favour and live and reign with Him for ever.

“‘ Not every one that saith unto Me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom
of heaven; but he that doeth the will of My Father which is in heaven.”

Yet obedience will not save the soul. Obedience is no ground of merit nor
basis of hope. It avails nothing for a sinner’s justification; and yet, without
obedience, the soul will be cast away. Obedience is the sign of faith and mani-
festation of love.


Topie; SINNERS THE CAUSE OF THEIR OWN SurreRine. “If thou wilt not ge
forth . . . thou shalt not escape out of their hands” (vers, 17, 18; comp.
xxxix. 7: “ Moreover he put out Zedekiah’s eyes”).


Zedekiah illustrates the non-acceptance of chastisements. We may attribute
his sufferings (chap. xxxix. 7) to Nebuchadneagar’s cruelty. But they came from
594





HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : JEREMIAR. CHAP. XXXVIII.





bat


something underlying that. Nebuchadnezzar was not cruel to Zedekiah till Zede.
kiah had been cruel to himself. He brought it upon himself, compelled God to be
thus severe to him. He would not accept the less severe chastisement God had
prepared (ver. 17), God proves too strong for rebellious man.

The sure consequence of non-acceptance of chastisements ts increased sorrow.

I Chastisements announced (vers. 17, 18). Here consider—

l. The proper course of action when chastisement or discipline is announced.
God is speaking from the midst of clouds and darkness; go into the secret place
and see God Himself. It is His will that we should see Him; see that there is
One who works behind the chances and changes of life. The first thing is to
believe God is in it; not to lose time in groping about for Him in the darkness.

2. A common mistake as to the designs of sorrow and joy: that joy is intended
to draw us to God ; sorrow the reverse. This is our error.

3. The co-existence of trouble and alleviation. Along with chastisement God
promises circumstances of gracious dealing (ver. 17). We think of the trouble only,
and ask its removal, ignoring the alleviation which God places side by side
with it ;

What are the speakings to us of the word “ Moreover” (xxxix. 7) %

(1.) Bounded chastisements are not to be rejected.

2.) God’s omnipotence is to be realised.
3.) The sad effects of the rejection of God’s chastisements on memory—nothing
left to Zedekiah but bitter reflections,

(4.) Chastisements are always the lightest possible under the circumstances,

(5.) God’s terrible reverses of chastisements (chap. xlii. 6).

(6.) God’s care of His people under chastisements—He remembers mercy.

(7.) The “moreover” of what might have been; and some of the mercies
which are bestowed.

(8.) The need of keeping ourselves within the line of God’s action (2 Sam.
xxiv. 14). We may pass from the bounded line of God’s action to the unbounded
line of man’s! This is to go we know not whither.

(9.) We may always go into troubles with the certainty of alleviation. Try and
find how many lighteners to our trials are vouchsafed. God will never crush a man
except so far as he makes it downright necessary that he should be crushed.

II. Chastisements rejected. Not because he wished daringly to defy God ; but
because of personal humiliation and suffering (ver. 19). How powerful this motive
was is evident from his overcoming such tremendousconsiderations as those of ver. 18!

1. When God is appointing chastisement and we accept it, we may be sure tt 18
bounded. As with Job—‘“ Only not upon himself ;” “ only save his life.”

2. Enter trouble with the consciousness of limitation. He who refuses God’s
cross makes a heavier one for himself (vers. 21, 22).

3. God’s grace tn meeting our fears with assurances. ‘They shall not deliver

thee” (ver. 20). ‘‘ Obey the voice of the Lord, and it shall be well with thee,” &c.
ver, 20).
: QI. ee ie inflicted with increase (xxxix. 7). A terrible “more-
over” is this! Sightless henceforth; yet what a scene the last he witnessed !
Zedekiah refused to put himself into the hands of God; and now he “fell into the
hands of man.” It counsels—

1. Immediately chastisements come, go-to God. Thus, all the affliction needed
to reduce to obedience and to attention to God’s voice will not be inflicted.

2, Be not too curious tn examining a discipline. The good effects will be
revealed after endurance. Rie

3. By a too close inspection of our troubles and brooding over them, God will .
recede from our view ; the affliction wil] also assume an exaggerated importance.

4. Beware lest a dark dispensation so overwhelm you as to prevent your appre
ciating the alleviations. ie


OMAP. XXXVIIL. HOMILETIOC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR.





5. Tn all our trial let us consider not only what has been, but what is left. God
would have left Zedekiah a great deal if he had yielded. God is great in healing
as well as in inflicting wounds,

Heaven-made crosses are lighter than earth-made ones. The troubles which He
sends will always be less than what you bring.—Constructed and condensed from
* Breviates,” by Rev. P. B. Power, JL A.


Topic: Renewat or OPPoRTUNITY WITH ITs ALTERNATIVE Issuke


See on Section 1-7, chap. xxxiv. p. 558.


Topic: Timipity. “I am afraid” (ver. 19).


A craven king! Pitiable. His case explained thus: he knew his duty, but
disliked it; so was continually “halting between two opinions;” wishing to
know God's messages, yet reluctant to obey them, His mind was harassed
with divided attention; he was afraid of men, yet also troubled with a dread
of God. It is thus that “conscience doth make cowards” of compromising and
craven souls,

L Fear of men creates instability of character and conduct. Zedekiah knew
he did well to ask counsel of Jeremiah (ver. 14), yet feared to follow it (ver. 19).
Such timidity—

1. Paralyses the will; 2. Fosters duplicity; 3. Confuses the clear voice of
conscience ; 4. Enfeebles the power with which God’s word should sway the life.


‘« Fear is the tax that conscience pays to guilt.” —Sewell,


IL. Feur of men degrades the nobles! nature into servility. Here was a
monarch reduced to a miserable schemer, 2fraid to have his subjects know what
he did! Its natural fruits are—


1, Secret transactions (ver. 14); 3. Cringing cowardice (ver. 24); 3. Lying


subterfuges (vers, 25, 26).


‘* Cowards die many times before their deaths,
The valiant never taste of death but once.”—Shakespeare.

I. Fear of men entails inevitable derision and disaster. All Zedekiah’s
scheming to keep out of difficulties—the difficulties of honesty and piety—would only
lead to ills far more serious,

1. The scorn of observers. ‘The Jews will mock me” (ver. 19), and “ the
women” will make me their jeering song (ver. 22). 2. Desertion by false friends
(ver. 22, “They are turned away back”), 3. Dire judgments from God (ver. 23).

IV. Fear of men alienates God’s protection and favour. His selfish plottings
left him miserable alternatives. His life would be spared if he took one course
(ver. 17), although it would be spared only for suffering and degradation at the
hands of his conqueror ; whereas the other course would entail utter ruin (ver. 18).
To this dilemma had all his contrivances reduced him. And all our schemings in
which we entrench ourselves will end fatally. Honest obedience of God, regardless
of consequences and of human threatenings, will ensure us the Divine overshadowing ;
but this impiety and timidity will—

1. Leave us friendless in our extremity ; and 2. Deprive us of all Divine hiding
and succour when enemies prevail.

“Fear or guilt attends the deeds of darkness:
The virtuous breast ne’er knows it.”— Havard.

Hence-—(a.) Obey Giod’s voice ; for in His favour is life. ‘It shall be well unte
thee, and thy soul shall live” (ver. 20).

(6.) Trust not in friends whose attachment can be preserved only by disobeying
Divine counsels (ver. 19).


596





HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH. OHAP. XXXVIII.
LL


(c.) Shun duplicity ; it degrades to contemptible insincerity (ver. 25). ‘ The
fear of man worketh a snare.”


(d.) Lighteousness makes courageous. For in God’s friendship the soul becomes
confident. ‘The righteous is bold as a lion.”


Topic : Equivocation. “So they left off speaking with him; for the
matter was not perceived” (ver. 27),


The plain meaning of such words is that Jeremiah hoodwinked them. He did
not lie to them certainly ; but he did not tell the full truth, and left them with a
false impression. It comes very near to deception ; it was evasion, and certainly
was not an honest act. It seems an oblique lee.

I. By what prudential considerations has this act of equivocation been
extenuated? Let us hear the pleas of his defenders,

1. “It does not appear that he said what was untrue.”— Bishop Wordsworth.

2. “ No one is bound to reveal all he knows—to enemies who seek his life.”—
Bishop Wordsworth.

3. This reservation of part of the truth “was necessary to prevent an open
rupture between the king and his generals."—Dr. Payne Smith.

4, He did not tell them “ what they wanted to know” because “he was
ordered to be silent by one to whom obedience was due.”—Dr. Payne Smith.

5. “The princes were not questioning him in due course of law, but by a power
which they had usurped.”—Dr. Payne Smith.

6. “ Had the issue only concerned the prophet himself, it might have been his
duty to have spoken the whole truth ; but the princes had no right to question him
as to the king’s conduct."—Dr. Payne Smith.

Put these six pleas into common English, and they mean—

(a.) Suppression of part of the truth ts not a falsehood. But, on the contrary,
it most frequently is; for a half-truth is often the worst of lies,

(b.) Discretion should teach us to save our own skin rather than be frank and
fearless / But this is contemptible cowardice, and is opposed to our Lord’s words :
* He that will save his life shall lose it.”

(c.) Preserve good feeling between men, even though prevartcation be the only way
to effect it! But what had Jeremiah to do with “ preventing a rupture,” dc. ?
If peace is thus to be purchased at any price, then farewell to honesty and honour.

(d.) Obey a king’s command even when his order is contrary to strict truthful-
ness! But who is a king, forsooth, that he should regulate conduct in matters of
conscience? We should “ obey God rather than man.”

(c.) Throw dust in the eyes of enemies. Well, if “ all ts fair in love and war,”
this may pass ; but craftiness is not placed among the Christian virtues,

(7) It ts right to do for another what would be wrong if done for yourself. But
no! wrong can never be made right. If Jeremiah suppressed the truth for the
king’s sake, it was as much a piece of deception as if he had done it for himself.

TI. On what sacred principles should this act of equivocation be
condemned ? : oe

1. Fear of consequences should not sway conscience from its fidelity. “ Be just,
and fear not.” But fear now drove Jeremiah to equivocate (comp. Gen. xx. 2). _

2. Guileless speech should distinguish the godly character (Ps, xxxiv. 13). Chris-
tians should be “ children of light,” “ sincere and without offence.”

3. Honesty in God’s messengers ts imperative. A witneas for Jehovah should
certainly not accommodate himself to the convenience of a godless potentate.

4. Truth suffers in the hands of compromising men. It brings discredit upon
truth in general, if professedly holy men are discovered to tamper with it by
equivocation, Souls in whom God’s Light shines should never emit dim rays.


5. Our Saviour’s example was ever on the side of outspoken honesty iy before
5


CHAP, XXXIX, — HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ;: JEREMIAH,








adversaries. “If I have spoken evil, bear witness,” &.; “ Who did no siz,
eeither was guile found in His mouth.”

6. Life ws safe in God’s keeping, therefore we should never dissimulate for
the sake of our own safety (1 Peter ii. 21-23).


“The man of pure and simple heart
Through life disdains a double part 3
He never needs the screen of lies
His inward bosom to disguise.” —Gay,


® His words are bonds, his oaths are oracles ;
His love sincere, his thoughts immaculate ;
His tears, pure messengers sent froma his heart 3
His heart as far from fraud as heaven from earth.” —Shakespeare.


¢¢ Honesty, even by itself, though making many adversaries
Whom prudence might have get aside, or charity have softened,
Evermore will prosper at the last, and gain a man great honour.
Yet there are others that will truckle to a lie, selling honesty for interest,
And do they gain! They gain but loss; a little cash, with scorn.
Behold! sorrowful change wrought upon a fallen nature:
He hath lost his own esteem and other men’s respect,
For the buoyancy of upright faith, he is clothed in the heaviness of cringing ;
For plain truth, where none could err, he hath chosen tortuous paths 3
In lieu of his majesty of countenance, the timorous glances of servility 3
Instead of Freedom’s honest pride, the spirit of a alave,”—Tupper.


CHAPTER XXXIX.


Crarricat aND Exxcrtroan Norrs.—i, Chronology of the Chapter.—Cf/. notes és loc.
chap. xxxiv. The siege lasted just one year and six months, not reckoning the interval
during which the Chaldeans broke up to give battle to the army of Pharaoh,

2. Contemporary Scriptures.—Hzek. xii, 8-20, xvii. 11-21; 2 Kings xxv. 1-12; 2 Chron.
xxxvi. 11-21 ; Jeremiah lii. 4-11.

8 National Affairs.— Vide below on ‘‘ The thread of Events.”

4. Personal Allusions.—Vers. 3 and 13. A critical examination of Hitzig and others,
into these compound names, tends to reduce them to three (instead of, ag in ver. 8, six), thus:
(1). Nergal-Sharezer, the Samgar, or cup-bearer ; (2). Nebo-Sarsechim, the Rab-saris, or chief
of the eunuchs, or chamberlain ; (3). A second Nergal-Sharezer, the Rab-mag, or chief of the
magi. The LXX. read Nafovoayap, as a name linking together the terminal ‘‘ Nebo” and
*Sarsechim;” while other Greek manuscripts read NaBovoapoexiu. This Nebo-Sarsechim is called
in ver. 13 ‘‘ Nebushasban the Rab-saris.” The second ‘‘ Nergal Sharezer,” the Rab-mag, or
chief of the magicians, is known in history as Neriglissar, son-in-law of Nebuchadnezzar (sup-
posed by Dr. Payne Smith to have been his vicegerent during Nebuchadnezzar’s seven years’
madness: see Daniel), This Neriglissar seized the crown two years after Nebuchadnezzar’s
death, murdering Evil-merodach, the late king’s son. This man’s identification with the
‘* Rab-mag” named here arises from Neriglissar being called ‘‘ Rabu-emga” in the Assyrian
cuneiform inscriptions.

Ver. 9. ‘* Nebuzar-adan the captain of the guard, te. the Rab-tabbdchim, or chief of the
executioners, called in the Assyrian inscriptions, ‘* Nabu-sir-iddina,” i.e. “ Nebo hag given
offspring.”

Mer 14, “ Gedaliah the son of Ahikam.” Jeremiah’s steadfast and courageous friend, as hia
father “ Ahikam” had been before him (chap. xxvi. 24, vide note in loc), He was “a man
of a generous, genial nature, such as might have rallied the better spirits of his countrymen
round him, and taken the place of the fallen dynasty ” (Stanley).

&. Geographical Allusions.—Ver. 4. ‘‘ By the way of the king’s garden, by the gate betwiat
the two walls.” Jerusalem then consisted of an upper and lower city; the upper including
Mount Zion, with a strong fortress; the latter, to the north, was considerably lower, and more
easily accessible to the Chaldeans, The ‘‘ gate” from the upper city to the ‘‘king’s garden”
was appropriated exclusively to royalty, and ‘‘ stairs” led down from Mount Zion and the
palace to the king’s garden below (Nehem. iii. 15). There was a double wall south of Zion,
towards the plain of Jericho (wer. 5). He broke an opening through the wall in erder to escape
(wee Ezek. xii, 12).

598


nei Se Shoes ae anni rai


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAZ, OHAP, XXXIX.








Ver. 5. “ Riblak.” An ancient city on the northern boundary of Palestine, in the land of
Hamath, about six miles distant from Jerusalem, forty miles south of Hamath, on the great road
between Palestine and Babylon.


Literary Criticism.—Ver. 7. “ He put out Zedekiah’s eyes,” WY, Eaxcavated, dug out.
Ver. 14, “ That he should carry him home,” where, is uncertain, for M3 is indefinite. The
words are lit. ‘‘io take him out into the house.’ Not Gedaliah’s, or it would have read ‘* hés


house.” Either the Temple, therefore, or the king’s house ; and most naturally the latter—the
royal palace,


GENERAL SURVEY OF CHAPTER XXXIX,
Tux SIEGE oF JERUSALEM BY NEBUCHADNEZZAR.


L The thread of events as indicated in this chapter. For preliminary events
gee notes on chap. xxxiv.

1. Mebuchadnezzar’s army effected an entrance into the city of Jerusalem. It
was at midnight (ver. 4), The date is carefully given in ver. 2. The date answers
to our July. This was after av eighteen months’ siege, B.c. 587. At this time the
city was reduced to misery and starvation (Ezek. v. 12).

2. Nebuchadnezzar, who himself opened the siege in person (ver. 1), had retired
to Riblah, and was there at its close (vers. 3, 6; of. xxxviii. 17).

3. It was into the lower city, on the north side, that the Chaldeans forced an
entry (ver. 3), “the middle gate” being situate between the lower and the upper
eity.

4, Zedekiah, with his wives and children and royal guards, having their heads
muffled (Ezek. xii. 6, 12), jled on the entrance of the Chaldeans, by the gate south
of Jerusalem (ver. 4), breaking an opening in the wall to get out (Ezek. xii. 12),

5. Pursued by the Chaldeans and captured in the plains of Jericho, his troops
were “scattered from him” (chap. lii. 8); and Zedekiah and his family were
manacled, and thus marched to Riblah to confront the wrathful king of Babylon

ver. 5).

6. fcc for the violation of his oath of allegiance to Babylon (Ezek. xvii.
13-19; 2. Chron. xxxvi. 13), Zedekiah was first made to behold the slaughter of
his courtiers and family, and then his own eyes were put out, and he carried away
in chains to Babylon (vers, 6, 7). Thus were reconciled the two passages, Jer.
xxxii. 4, and Ezek. xii. 13.

7. A month elapsed, during which the Chaldean princes had probably gone to
Riblah to consult Nebuchadnezsar as to the fate of the city and inhabitants (chap.
lii, 10; 2 Kings xxv. 8), and then Vebuzar-adan came with royal orders to utterly
destroy the city (ver. 8), Fire consumes the city (chap. lii. 13) ; foul ravages were
committed upon the inhabitants (Lam. v. 11, 12); desecration was heaped upon
the dead (chap. vii. 32; viii. 3).

8. Among the hosts of captives carried off to Ramah (ver. 9) was Jeremiah (chap.
xl. 1). See below: IV. Kindness to the Lord’s Prophet.

II. Incidents of the siege. It began in January, Bo. 587, and continued till
July, B.o. 586.

1. The store of bread became gradually exhausted (chap. lii. 6), and the horrors
of starvation set in (Exek. v. 10, 16; Lam. ii, 20; iv. 4,5; v. 9, 10).

2. In their profanity and despair, the priests increased their flagrant tdolatries
within the very Temple of Jehovah (2 Chron. xxxvi. 14; see Ezek. viii. 7-ix.)

3. The midnight surprise (ver. 4), was a moment for fearful slaughter, The
sleeping city awoke in terror, and soon the streets flowed with the blood of the
slain (2 Chron. xxxvi.17; Lam.i 15). Princes were hung up by their hands on the
Temple walls (Lam. v. 12).

4, The treasures of the Temple were carried away as spoil (2 Kings xxv. 13-17;
Jer. lii, 17-22). Hip


OMAP. XEXXIX. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.











5. Pilgrims from surrounding nations came to wonder and bewail over the ruins
of the city (chap. xli. 5, 6), while savage heathen tribes exulted over Jerusalem’a
overthrow (Ps. Ixxix. 1; Ezek. xxv. 6, 8, 15; xxvi. 2).

III. Vengeance for a violated oath (vers. 5-7).

1. Faithless himself, he was abandoned by faithless friends—-

(1.) Deserters from the city carried tidings to the Chaldean army of Zedekiah’s
escape (Josephus, Antiq. x. 8, § 2).

(2.) His “ friends and captains” who fled with him abandoned him at the
appearance of the Chaldean soldiers (Ibid).

4. The wrath of the conquering king was justly severe. Brought before Nebuchad-
nezzar, he was first charged by him as a “ covenant-breaker,” and “reproached for
his ingratitude,” that he had “used the power he gave him against him who gave
it;” but, said Nebuchadnezzar, “God is great, who hateth this conduct of thine,
and hath brought thee under us” (Jd7d).

Then followed the horrors recorded in vers, 6,7, And in Babylon Zedekiah
was imprisoned till he died.

3. The execratton of God, through His prophets, fell upon him for his violated
oath ; from Jeremiah in Jerusalem (chap. xxxvii. 9, 10), and from the prophet
Ezekiel among those already carried captive to Babylon (Ezek. xvii. 16-20).

See homily on chap. xxxviii. 17, 18: “Sinners THE CAUSE OF THEIR OWN
SUFFERINGS.”

IV. Kindness shown to the Lord’s prophet (vers. 11-14).

1. Hits faithful witness against Zedekiah’s falsity and his nation’s perfidy had
become known tv Nebuchadnezzar, probably through the Jews carried captive to
Babylon with Jeconiah, and now again through deserters (chap. xxxviii. 19, and
ver. 9). Hence the king’s clemency.

2. Nebuchadnezzar’s chieftain, therefore, was charged specially to care for the
prophet amid the judgments to be dealt on the nation. -

3. A month after Zedekiah’s flight (see “Thread of Events,” 7, above),
Nebuchadnezzar found him in the prison where “he abode” (chap. xxxviii. 28) ;
who released him, and with the first mass of captives he was hurried on to
Ramah (chap. xl. 1).

4. At this point he was released (chap. xl. 4), and allowed to choose either a place
of high favour in the royal court at Babylon, or any spot in Palestine which he
might elect to dwell.

5. Nebuchadnezzar, in accordance with Jeremiah’s desire, placed the prophet in
Gedaliah’s charge (chap. -xxxix. 14, xl. 5); gave him “a reward ;” and the prophet
made his home in Mizpah (chap, xl. 6).

Patriotic to the last, this grand servant of God “had no mind to follow”
Nebuzar-adan to Babylon, “nor to dwell anywhere else, but would gladly live
in the ruins of his own country,” pleading that Nebuzar-adan would “set at
liberty his disciple Baruch, one of a very eminent family, and exceedingly skilful in
the language of his country” (Josephus, Antiq. x. 9, § 1).

On the release of Jeremiah, Wordsworth comments: “ The siege and capture of
Jerusalem by the Chaldeans were the cause of the liberation of Jeremiah. So it is
often in the history of the Church. The shocks of dynasties and overthrow of
thrones have often been overruled by God into occasions for the liberation and
free circulation of His Word. How much has the diffusion of the Holy Scriptures
been facilitated by God amid storms and revolution, as in Italy and Spain! How
much may the Church of God be extended and purified by His power and love
amid the coming conflicts and sufferings of the latter days!”


Note.—For descriptions of the events of the siege and capture of Jerusalem, see
Stanley’s “ Jewish Church,” ii. sect. xl. ; and Josephus, “ Antiquities of the Jews,”
book x. chap, viii

600


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH, OHAP, XXXIX.





Topic: A Loney Hero ov Farts. “ Go and speak to Ebed-melech the Ethiopian
- . . I will deliver thee . . . because thou hast put thy trust in Me, aaith
the Lord ” (vers, 15-18).


Comp. homily on chap. xxxviii; 7-13, also outline following this, “‘ The Believing
Ethiopian,”


The hour had come for the noble act of this Ethiopian to receive its due
reward : God would befriend him amid prevailing calamity and destruction.
L Alone in his heroism, he is singled out by God for special recompense


(vers. 17, 18).


1. Generous deeds arrest God’s attention. His hasardous interest in the perse-
cuted prophet was chronicled before Heaven. Nothing noble is overlooked by
God (Acts x. 4).

2. Kindnesses shown to God’s servants are especially valued by God. Those who
“receive a prophet in the name of a prophet shall receive a prophet’s reward”
(Matt. x. 41); for they thus further the prophet’s work, as “ fellow-helpers to the
trath ” (3 John 6-8).

3. His single-handed defence of the prophet made his valour the more worthy of
reward. It enhanced his service that it was done without the sympathy and
support of others, and in the teeth of their malice. See Paul’s words respecting
Onesiphorus (2 Tim. i. 16-18).

IL Human conduct is most approved by God when inspired by faith.
“ Thou hast put thy trust in Me.”

This religious element in his conduct does not make itself seen in his meri-
torious service to Jeremiah. All that we should gather as we watch his actions is,
that his humane heart moved him to seek the prophet’s release; although it is
clear that he regarded the cruelty of the princes as “evil” in itself, and especially
“evil” when done against “ the prophet” (chap. xxxviii. 9).

1. Amid prevailing unbelief, this Lthiopian revered the Lord. What a rebuke
on these Jews—God’s favoured people! Remember the words of Jesus, “I have
not found so great faith, no, not in Israel /”

2. His humanity to the prophet was prompted by devout feeling. He had the
Lord before him in rendering this noble service to His prophet. And this explains
his dauntless courage and earnest solicitude. ‘Ye did it unto Me” (Matt. xxv.
36 and 40).

3. Trust in God sustained him amid the perils he had to confront. Well he
knew that he could not act as the prophet’s friend without incurring hatred and
danger ; but “he trusted in the Lord that He would deliver him” (Ps. xxii. 8).
Trust in God was at the root of his defiance of the mighty men who were foes of
God and His servant. |

Note, therefore, Hbed-melech believed tn and trusted the Lord.

(a.) He held the word of the Lord which Jeremiah proclaimed against the city
to be true (ver. 16). ‘

(0.) He placed no hope on the means of succour or escape in which the king
and his courtiers trusted.

(c.) He withstood the cruelty of Jeremiah’s enemies as resistance of the Lord’s
purposes, ;

(d.) He placed his only hope on the power and graciousness of God Himself.

IIL In the hour of His servant’s alarm, God manifests His timely favour
(ver. 17). For here observe—

1. How this noble and daring man was now disturbed by alarm. “ Men of
whom thou art afraid/” Courageous though he had been when Jeremiah was
perishing, he yet realised impending danger, and trembled in fear. Whether these
‘men? of whom he was afraid were the princes of Zedekiah’s court, or the Chal-
deans who were besieging the city, is uncertain ; most naturally the latter, for the
mention of “the sword” connects his dread with the army. an


CHee CEXIX, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH,





2. How tenderly God comforts the souls of His faithful children (vers. 17, 18).
Quiets his fear with express and appropriate assurances.

3. How envious is their lot whom the Lord lovingly befriends/ In that
hour of Zion’s overthrow what avails it to Zedekiah that he was a king, or to the
princes that they were the mighty ones of that doomed kingdom? And what
harms it now that Ebed-melech was only a servant in the king’s household, and
hated by those in power$ The Lord was on his side ; and while king and nobles
suffered miserably for their ungodliness (vers. 6, 7), this Ethiopian was divinely


shielded from mischief (see Heb. xiii. 6; Ps. cxlvi. 5).
Observe—(i.) Faith may often be found in those we should least expect to be


believers.


“ There are last that be first,” dc.


(ii) Faith never ts allowed to pass unrewarded by God, who prizes a soul’s trust


beyond all else.


‘¢ Because he trusted in Me.”


THE BELIEVING ETHIOPIAN,


Connect chap, xxxvili. 7-13 with chap.
xxxix. 15-18.

Help for God’s servants arises from
directions little expected. Though not
one of Jeremiah’s fellow-countrymen

befriended him, a Cushite eunuch be-
eame his friend.

L Godliness in an unlikely person
“ Ethiopian.”

1. A prophet’s mintsiry may win
success where not expected.

2. Though hearers we naturally sup-
posed would regard our messages turn
aside, there are hearts opened to our
word.

3. Burted seed will, in tts right time,
spring up and reward the fatthful
worker for God.

IL Faith stirring the soul to
heroism.

1. Convinced that God’s servant suf-
fered wrongfully, he could not longer com-
coal his attachment.

2. Reckless of perils, he attempted the
prophet’s deliverance,

3. A lowly servant acting in defiance
of mighty courtters, and even rebuking
the cowardly king!

III. Religious life flowing out in
kindness.

1. How natural for a convert to love
his teacher.

2. Piety beautifully expressed — in
services of kindness.

3. Affection makes the soul solici-
tous and courageous; he could not rest:
pleaded with the king; hastened to
rescue. What a motive in life is godly
affection |

602


IV. Noble service signally re
warded.

1. A message of comfort sent to calm
his fears.

2. In the general ruin thts godly man
was saved. None escapes God’s care
who trust in Him.

3. No service for God is allowed to
pass unrequited. “A cup of cold
water given... shall in no wise lose its
reward.”

V. God’s pleasure in His servants’
welfare.

1. Ebed-melech’s generous help to
Jeremiah, by which Glod’s prophet was
saved from death, won for the Ethio-
pian special Divine favour. For God
was concerned that His prophet should
not suffer ; and He providentially pro-
vided deliverance through this alien
eunuch. For He “careth for” His
own.

2. Hence, also, God was concerned for
the Ethiopian’s comfort and safety. He
was a child of God ; and amid menacing
perils which filled him with fears, God
sent assurance of his preservation.

3. God loves Hts saints, and will as-
suredly work out their full redemption.

Note.—Cramer remarks : “ This pious
courtier had interceded for the prophet
with the king ; but the prophet had in
turn interceded for him with God the
Lord. Ebed-melech had drawn him
out of the pit, but Jeremiah draws him
by his prayer from the jaws of all
Chaldean war-vortices. Preachers do
their patrons more good than they get
from them.”


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; JER@MIAH.


Ver. 18. Theme: Trust.

L This trust in a Power Divine, and
in a Hand unseen, is regarded as fanati-
cism by scoffers and sceptics.

But against this David says, “It is
better to trust in the Lord than to put
confidence in man.” It is trust in the
Infinite, the Immutable, the Immortal.

II. Trust in the Lord calms aud
assures the soul in times of alarm and
distress. So that the believer says, “I
will trust and not be afraid.”

OI. Trust in God both pleases Him
and wins special manifestations of His
favour. “The Lord shall deliver him





GHaP. EL,





because he trusteth in Me.” God is
honoured by our trust, and He honours
them that honour Him.

IV. Trust in God for our welfare and
success does not supersede the neces-
sity of effort, nor the wisdom of prayer.
“Trust in the Lord at all times; pour
out your hearts before Him.” Gud
expects men to ask for grace.

Men of faith and prayer have Om-
nipotence on their side, and can confi.
dently say, ‘No weapon formed against
us shall prosper.” —“ Walks with Jere-
miah,” Rev. D. Pledge.


CHAPTER XL.


CuITICAL aND ExrcrticaL Norrs,—A purely historical chapter, of eventa following the city’s
ruin. It records the out-gleaming of a ray of hope upon the appalling gloom which had befallea
the land, in the appointment of Gedaliah ag its governor; and algo ite quick extinction in the
conspiracy of Ishmael, a prince of the royal family (chap. xl. 1).

Personal Allusions.—Ver. 5. ‘‘ Gedaliah”’ (vide note on chap. xxxix. 1


Ver. 8. ‘‘Zshmael, the son of Nethaniah.”


chiefs, who during the siege had fled across the Jordan.
with Baalis, king of Ammon (Josephus, Antig. x. 9, 2).


4).
The most conspicuous of a band of well-known


Here he had become closely leagued
Prompted by Baalis (ver. 14), and


eoveting Gedaliah’s place and power, he plotted Gedaliah’s assassination.


** Johanan


m:” Jewish chiefs and brothers.


Johanan warned Gedaliah of


Ishmael’s treachery, and subsequently pursued the assassin (chap. xli. 13, &c.)


Geographical References.—Ver. 6. ‘‘ Mizpah.
capital against the northern kingdom (chap. xli. 9; 2 Chron. xvi. 6).


” Asa had fortified it as an outpost of his
A ridge north-east of


Jerusalem, and immediately overlooking the city,


Ver. 8. ‘* The Netophathite.”


Netophah, a village near Bethlehem (1 Chron, ii. 54),


Literary Criticisms.—Ver. 5. “ Now while he was not yet gone back”—Ewald’s correctioa
of the Hebrew text, substituting IW for JW); “And as he yet answered nothing :” or,


‘¢ Before he made any reply ” (Henderson).


Ver. 10. ‘‘ To serve the Chaldeans,” DYIWD3


"2B “Thy, ‘to stand before the Thaldeans,” i.e


to act as their representative, to negotiate with them.


Ver. 14, “ Slay thee:” lit. “ strike thee in the


soul,” i.e, a deadly stroke


SECTIONS OF CHAPTER XL.


Section 1-6. Jeremiah’s release and patriotism.
7-16. Gedaliah’s elevation and peril.


Vers. 1-6. JEREMIAH’S RELEASE AND PATRIOTISM.
(See on previous chapter, “ Kindness shown to the Lord’s Prophet”)


Ver. 1. Theme: THe CHRISTIAN IN
THE TUMULT OF THE WORLD.

(i.) He is regarded externally like
others. Treated as a captive. Carried
wway with the exiles to Ramah. ;

(ii.) Watched over by God with especial
care. so that he is unharmed ; kindly


dealt with; his worth recognised and
rewarded.

(iii.) Directs all his efforts to the wel
fareof God’s kingdom. Hisconcern being
to preserve God’s honour, to vindicate
His righteousness, and to be useful to
to his own people.

603


OHAP. XL,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAZ.





From this patriotic purpose, neither
the violence nor the friendliness of the
world can turn him aside. (Comp.
Naegelsbach in Lange.)


Vers. 2, 3. Theme: Gop RECOGNISED
IN His Jupements. And this by a
heathen / Thus God makes the very
heathen testify for Him against His
rebellious people. Out of even great
and terrible calamities, such as Jeru-
salem’s overthrow, good is brought; this
heathen captain’s eyes are opened to
Divine truths.

Hts hopeful progress towards conver-
ston—

( (iL) He acknowledges Jehovah as God
ver, 2

(ii.) That the Lord foresees future
events (ver. 2),

(iii.) That it ts in His name that God's
servants speak (ver. 2), and pronounce
upon future events,

(iv.) He recognises the Divine Hand in
judgments (ver. 3). No claiming that
the Chaldeans had wrought the over-
throw; no! “The Lord,” &c.

(v.) Traces calamities to their cause: the
moral degeneracy and spiritual apostasy
of the people (ver. 3).

(vi.) Declares that disobedience to God
brings doom (ver. 3).


Ver. 4. Theme: Gov’s HippEN Hanp
In Human KINDNESS.

L Benefactors are God’s benefac-
tions. They come from Him, at the right
moment, to supply our pressing wants.

IL Unconscious agencies of Divine
kindness. This captain knew not that
he worked out God’s designs and admin-
estered God's mercies.

IIL God’s disguised Hand. He con-
ceals Himself in His works; there is “a
hiding of His power ”—

In Nature. Stored out of sight in
flowers, fruits, delights of creation.


In Providence. “Men are Thy hand,”
He works through them. For He uses
His creatures as channels of His help.

In Grace. Light and peace come
into human souls through human words;
from “sermons in stones, books in the
running brooks,” & Yet all grace is
God’s gift.


oe


“ Huery good gift and every perfect gift |


cometh down from the Father of lights.”

Vers. 5, 6. Theme. A Pareiorio
CHOICE.

L. Contrasted offers.

1. Of location. In Babylonia, honour
and comfort; in Judea, sadness and
privation,

2. Of service. In Babylonia, among
the noblest of his countrymen, and in
the favour of royalty; in Judea, amid
the poor and rabble.

IL A difficult choice.
faltering a moment (ver. 5).

1. A heart drawn in opposite diree-
tions ; in pity towards his exiled people,
in love for his dear but dtshonowred
land.

2. In perplexity concerning God's will.
Not easy to see where he could best serve
God; not clear as to God’s purpose.

DL A patriotic decision.

1. Thus he disproved his sympathy
with the Chaldeans, notwithstanding
his advice to his countrymen to surrender
to them. For his counsel had proceeded
from purest love to his fatherland.

2. Thus he proved his devotion to his
wif people, imitating Moses (Heb
xi.

: ae he kept alive God's word amid
a despondent remnant. In Babylon the
exiles had Ezekiel and Daniel; but had
he gone, these scattered remnants would
have been ‘“‘as sheep having no shep-
herd.”
his own things, but also on the things of
others.”


Hence his


Vers. 7-16. Gepatran’s ExatTaTion AND Perm.


L Integrity rewarded (ver. 5). His
faithfulness to Chaldea had arisen from
the consciousness that God willed it ao.
His obedience to duty won him human
confidence and high exaltation.

603


It. A renewal of hope (ver. 13).
Under Gedaliah’s wise administration
the desolation might have been in part re-
paired. God givesto the downcast agleam
of hope (vers, 9-11). It is well to make


In all this ‘‘he looked not om —


sia


eee ae





HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.





the best of our misfortunes, and wisely
accept the facts of Providence (ver. 10).

IIL Treachery in ambush.

1. Envy covets what it has no right
to claim.

2. A generous nature finds it difficult
to be suspicious (ver. 14).

3. It is a mystery in God’s Providence
that He suffers the righteous to act un-
wisely, and thus fall into the hands of
malignant and envious men(ver. 16). But
an explanation is indicated in Isa, lvii. 1.


Comments—

“Those who are of a pious disposition
cannot believe so much evil as is told of
people. But we must not trust too
much, for the world is full of falseness
(Wisdom xxxvii. 13). He who believes
too easily will be often deceived ; and
he who believes no one is also deceived.


CHAP. Xu,





Therefore is he the happy man who can
preserve the golden mean.”—Cramer.

“ Gedaliah seems to have been of our
Queen Elizabeth’s temper, who was heard
to declare that she could believe nothing
of her people which mothers could not
believe of their children.”—Trapp.

“Gedaliah thought that Ishmael durst
not attempt anything against him because
af the Babylonians, besides he knew
his own innocency ; and he believed in
Ishmael’s pretended familiarity with
him, which, he might think, other
captains envied. Sure it is that good
Gedaliah was too secure. ‘ Nam qui
omnia credit, e qui nihil credit, ex equo
peccat’ (Seneca). It is no less a fault to
believe nothing than to believe every-
thing. Reports are to be neither over-
heeded nor overslighted, especially when
life is concerned.” —T'rapp.


GENERAL Reriections: IsraEt’s MisFoRTUNES TYPICAL oy HumMAN Lire


This overthrow of the people has its analogies :—

L The deportation of the whole people in chains and fetters is a type of our
universal human misery, from which no one (not even Jeremiah) is free.

Il. The fate of Gedaliah and the journey to Egypt is a type of the insufficiency


of all human help.


Ill. As the Jews after Gedaliah’s murder, 30 men at all times find protection
and deliverance in the Lord alone.—WNaegelsbach.

“* Misfortune is like the waves of the sea: when one is broken another follows,
and the end of one trouble is the beginning of another.”—Cramer.


:


CHAPTER XLL


CriricaL anp Exreuricat, Notrs.—Chronology of the Chapter.—Only three montas after
Jerusalem was captured by the Chaldeans: ‘‘in the seventh month” (ver. 1, comp. chap.
uxxix. 2). See notes on two preceding chapters.

Personal Allusion. Ver. 1. ‘‘ Elishama.” Vide note, chap. xxxvi. 12, in loe.

Geographical References. Vers. 7 and 9. “ The pit:” properly cistern. “On the summit
of the hill was Asa’s fortress, with a deep well within a high enclosed courtyard, dug by him
for the security of the garrison” (Stanley), Asa’s reason for digging this cistern was, that when
the city should be besieged by the king of Israel there might be sufficient water for the
inhabitants. (See 1 Kings xv. 22.)

Ver. 12. “ The great waters that are in Gibeon.” Gibeon is about two miles north of Mizpah.
The D°3) OND, ‘great waters,” mean the vast pool and fountains which Robinson (Researches,


ii. 136) describes, about 120 feet by 100. (See 2 Sam. ii. 13.) ;

Ver. 17. “The habitation of Chimham:” lit. Geruth-Chimham, ie. the caravanserai
belonging to Chimham (2 Sam, xix. 37, 38). Johanan makes this his headquarters until he
eoald arrange his flight to Egypt.


SUBJECT OF CHAPTER XLI,
IsHmarr’s SANGUINARY CONSPIRACY.


Ver. 1. Theme: UmsusPiciousness.
“They did eat bread together in Mizpah.”


L Unsuspiciousness 1s indicative of &
frank and generous soul.
605


CHAP, XLL





1. Honest men are naturally trustful.
Themselves faithful, they do not sus-
pect, in seeming friends, perfidious con-
Bpirators | |

2. Kindly hearts entertain no dark
suspicions. ‘Charity thinketh xo evil”
(1 Cor. xiii, 5), It is painful to look
for a villain in him who dips his sop
with us in the same dish,

So far Gedaliah’s was a praiseworthy
simplicity,

Il. Unsuspictousness runs the risks of
jncaution.

1. Guileless minds cannot credit base
reports. Although warned (chap. xl. 14,
16), he could not believe it possible that
Ishmael plotted foul designs. Conscious
only of innocency and good purposes
himself, he found it impossible to believe
that wrong was intended him,

2. Indiscreet trust pays a_ severe
penalty. In this case, Gedaliah’s
virtue of unsuspiciousness became a
fault ; for in being injudiciously trust-
ful he both imperilled his own life and
exposed the pubive interests to disaster.

IIL Unsuspiciousness is apt to invite
calamity.

1. By neglecting lurking danger. It
was Gedaliah’s duty to have regarded the
information given hima (chap. xl. 14), and
arrested a villain whose plots threatened
the public weal.

2. By shrinking from exercising a
just severity. For the incapability of
suspicions is allied often with a weak
regard to justice; and hence a disinclina-
tion to punish wrong (chap. x]. 16).

3. By tolerating evident evils. And
here is the folly and blunder of habitual
unsuspiciousness : it well not see evils ;
it prefers to let them alone, hoping for
the best. And thus iniquities thrive
under the benign tolerance of an in-
genuous rule.

IV. Unsuspiciousness plays into the
hands of villany.

1. Villany ws a fact, existing and

‘ve in all human society, He who
ores it is wanting in prudence,

2. Villany plots deeds so foul that no
vigilance can be too alert to check its
purposes. By neglecting this wise suspi-
ciousness Gedaliah wronged Johanan
(ehap. xl. 16), imperilled the peace of the

606


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; JEREMTA.


people, and placed himself in the assas-
sin’s grasp (chap. xli. 1).

3. Villany shrinks not from outrage on
noblest souls. Surely it is the highest
crime (xliv. 2) thus to woo generous
confidence only to act the fiend! ‘One
may smile, and smile, and be a villain /”
The execrable character of such villany
Shakespeare describes—


‘6 My conscience hath a thousand several
tongues,
And every tongue brings in a several tale,
And every tale condemns me for a villain.”
—Richard IIT. v. %


Ver. 2. Theme: Hosritanitry Ovt.
RAGED. ‘“ Then arose Ishmael, .. .
and slew him /”

Murder is frightful enough in itself,
but the moment of the deed makes it
heinous in the extreme,

L Hospitality: the infamy of its
abuse. Ishmael polluted his hands
with innocent blood at the sacred
table of hospitality.

Universally and in all ages hospi-
tality has been cherished as sacred.

The ancient heathen nations regarded
it so, and its violation was counted by
them the greatest atrocity.

An oath given when at table and
afterwards broken called for summary
vengeance.

Among the Greeks existed a custom
of pledging lasting friendship in return
for hospitality. It was in this wise:
On a four-sided stone was written the
name of each guest; the stone, called
“ Tessara Hospitalis,” was then broken,
and each friend carried away the part
of the stone bearing the other’s name,
and it entitled the holder of the part
to ask protection and shelter from the
other whenever necessity arose.

See Percy Anecdotes, on ‘ Hospi-
tality,” for illustrations.

Il. Jealousy: outraging every in-
stinct of gratitude. Ishmael had been
treated with magnanimity by Gedaliah,
aud now was being entertained with
courtesy and kindness ; yet—

1. Ambition and envy prompted him
to violence. He was “of the royal
seed” (ver. 1), and could not endure
that Gedaliah should be in exaltation.





*
k


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; JEREMIAH.





“* Base envy withers at another's joy,
And hates that excellence it cannot reach.”
— Thomson's Seasons, 288.


* Jealousy is crue] as the grave.”
— Cant. viii. 6.


* Jealousy, the injured lover’s hell.”
— Milton's Paradise Lest.


‘* Fling away ambition:
By that sin fell the angels.”
—Shakespeare, Henry VITT., iii. 2.


2. Innocence was no shield against the
lust of jealousy. Gedaliah had done
Ishmael no wrong. Ishmael had not
been deposed from power. All Geda-
liah’s acts had been generous and trust-
ful, yet Ishmael could not endure the
sight of his supremacy,

Such outrage ou innocence refutes all
natural sentiments in the human heart,
and shows Ishmael to be an odious
monster. //orace speaks the natural
sentiment which we cherish towards
innocence—


‘¢ True, conscious honour is to feel no sin,
He's armed without who's innocent within ;
Be this thy screen, and this thy wall of

brass.” —Pope’s Horace.


But it was this conscious innocence which
made Gedaliah fearless and trustful,
and should have ensured his safety.


‘* If there be a crime
Of deeper dye than all the guilty train
Of human vices, ‘tis ingratitude.” — Brooke.


** Ingratitude is treason to mankind,”


Theme; GepaLiaH’s Fate an Ex-
AMPLE. “‘ T)lustrating what befalls even
the most noble in times of deep corrup-
tion :—

(i) They enjoy general confidence.

(ii.) They are incapable of attribut-
ing extreme wickedness to men,

(iii.) They become a sacrifice to their
confidence,

(iv.) They are therefore not in a
condition to stay the divine judgments.”
— Naegelsbach.

“ Judas’s kiss and Jacob’s brethren
are very common in the world, and take
after their grandfather Cain, who spake
kindly to Abel and yet had _blood-
thirsty thoughts (Gen. iv. 8). Yea,
they take sfter their father the devil,


OHAP. XLL





who is a murderous spirit (John viii,
14), and disguises himself as an angel
of light (2 Cor, xi, 14).”"—Cramer,

“Much treachery and cruelty hath
been exercised at feasts, Absalom slew
Amnon at a feast; so did Zimri, King
Elah; so did Alexander, Philotas,”—
Trapp.

Josephus suggests that Ishmael seized
the opportunity of slaughter when
Gedaliah and his guests were merry
with wine, and his words are: ‘‘ When
Gedaliak had feasted Ishmael, and those
that were with him, in a_ splendid
manner at his table, and had given
them presents, he became disordered in
drink, while he endeavoured to be very
merry with them ; and when Ishmael
saw him in this case, and that he was
drowned in his cups to the degree of
insensibility and fallen asleep, he rose
up on a sudden, with his ten friends, and
slew Gedaliah and those that were with
him at the feast.”—Andzg. x. 9, 4.


Ver. 3, “ Ishmael also slew the Chal-
deans and men of war.” This gives sup-
port to Kitto’s suggestion, that “he re-
garded Gedaliah with hatred, as one
who had stooped to hold office under
the destroyers of his country.”—Daily
Bib. Illus.


Ver. 6. Theme: A Trartor’s Trans.
“ Tshmael went forth weeping all along as
he went.”

I. Patriotic pilgrims (ver. 5). It was
now the season of the Feast of Taber
nacies, and these pilgrims journeyed to
Jerusalem—

1. Mourning ower the Temple's ruin.

2. Carrying their devout offerings, to
present them amid the scene of desola-
tion.

A piteous spectacle! Oh how their
souls grieved for the destruction of
“the house of the Lord”! They would
fain, amid the ruins, keep the observances
of the law, and mourn before the Lord
who had permitted this direful calamity
to overtake His sinning people. Their
aspects show them to be—

(a.) A penitential group ; (b.) bringing
their propitiatory offerings before God ;
(c.) touched with patriotic aor


OBAP, XLH,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





IL A blasphemous decoy.
mael went weeping.”

1. Pretending that he also bemoaned
the ruin of Zion.

2. Capturing them by his foul decett.

They were unsuspicious of his murder-
ous designs; and he intending to slay
thein lest they, discovering his deed to
Gedaliah, should rouse the country against
him before he had completed his usurpa-
tion, decoyed them to destruction.

What barbarity is here, thus to seize
defenceless strangers, and slay them with-
out the faintest provocation |

How does this illustrate the progress
of guilt ; having polluted his hands in
_ blood, Ishmael went on to even baser
effrontery and deeper villany.


“ Tgh-


Ver. 12. Theme: TREACHERY THWART-
ED, His design seems to have been to
carry them as slaves into Ammon.
The captives hailed their deliverer with
joy, and deserted at once to Johanan,
so that Ishmael returned, disgraced and
defeated, to the king of Ammon, whose
base purposes he attempted to serve.
Yet—

_ How great woe may one foul hand
work! How startling that no sorer
punishment overtook him /

Nevertheless, though guilty men escape
the immediate penalty of crime, their
prolonged life only prolongs their career
of wretchedness and terror, execrated
by righteous men, and haunted by ther
gutlty memories ; for in this way God


drags criminals daily before the tribuna!
of their own memory, and then lets them
live under the curse of their own com
science,


Vers. 16-18, Theme: MisTAKEN Pat-
RIOTISM. ‘‘Johanan departed to go
into Egypt.”

I. Courage ungoverned by godliness.

1. His energy for his people was
praiseworthy.

2. His valour wrought their deliver.
ance (ver. 16).

3. Yet his departure from God’s pur:
pose, in inclining towards Egypt (ver.
17), showed both unbelief and wilful-
ness.

IL Safety sought from a forbidden
alliance.

1. Though strictly denounced by
God’s messengers, yet he intended to
trust in Egypt.

2. Fear (of the Chaldeans) was allowed
to rule them instead of fatth (in God)
(ver. 18).

3. Turning from the straight path of
duty they were led to a tortuous and
destructive policy. ;

IIL Obedience to God proves the —
highest patriotism.

1. It wins more than noblest valour
can effect.

2. Righteousness is always safest ;
doing God’s will regardless of conse-
quences, untroubled by fears.

3. Simple faith in God’s word, regard-
less of our own fears, always issues best.


CHAPTER XLII.


Crrrtcat anp Exrcetioat Norzs.—Chronology as in previous chapter.


Observe: Jeremiah


and Baruch had been among the captives of Ishmael, whom Johanan rescued (chap, xliii. 6).
State of the Nation.—The preceding chapter reveals the baseness of the ‘‘ royal seed” and


the infatuation of the people’s latest leader. This chapter discloses the obstinacy of the people
“from the least to the greatest” in disobeying God’s purpose and in dissembling their prayers.
Thus, all God’s chastisements leaves them still a rebellious nation and justifies the severity of
His disciplinary punishments.

Personal Allusion.—Ver. 1. ‘‘ Jezaniah:” called ‘‘ Azariah” (chap. xliii. 2).

Literary Criticisms.—Vers. 2, 38. ‘‘Tam Logp ray Gop.” Some few authorities have
DN, “tour God.” But probably the form is correct, ‘‘The Lord thy God,” expressing the
people’s sense of Jeremiah’s peculiar relationship to Jehovah But when the prophet replies
(ver. 4), “The Lord your God,” as if to remind them that He had not cast them off, they
change the form of expression into ‘‘ The Lord our God” (ver. 6).

Ver. 12. ‘‘ J will show mercies unto that he,” &c., de. I will give wou compassion. or will
excite pity for you; 4.e, in the king of Babylon.

608








Vers, 2, 3. Theme: PerrPuexEp
Supetiants. “ That God may show us
the way wherein we may walk, and the
thing that we may de.”


If only these words had been sincere,


could their request have been better, or
their language more devout ?

(A.) Regarding the words as iF
SINCERE, they suggest—

I Inquirers anxiously seeking the
light.

I. Suppliants humbly craving God’s
favour.

IIL Baffled souls troubled to gain
clearer leading.

IV. Obedient children eager more
perfectly to do God’s will

(B.) Regarding the words a8 HYPO-
CRITICAL, they show—

I. Good words may be spoken by
false lips.

IL Wilful ingnirers mocking God
with a pretence of seeking guidance.

IIL Contumacious sinners assum-
ing the disguise of piety.

IV. While in the very path of
transgression (chap. xli. 17), rebels will
dissemble and ask God’s permission.


Ver. 4. Theme:
THEIR SIN.”

L Disobedience done without full know
ledge is a lesser crime than when
elearer light is asked and gained.
Had they gone to Egypt without seek-
ing God’s decision upon their course,
their rebellion would have been less
defiant and blasphemous.

1. The awful guilt of sinning against
light /

2. The baseness of asking light while
intending to defy tt.

IL Audacity reaches tts culmination
when rebellion ventures to trifle with
prayer. Plainly they used prayer
merely to get their own way, but deter-
mined to act as they wished should
God oppose them.

1. Hypocrisy flaunts tts pretences in
the very face of God.

3. Determined sinners sometimes use
religion to gain their own ends.


“No CLOAK FoR


2Q


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


CHAP. XLEE,





SUBJECT OF CHAPTER XLU.


WitruLness IN Prayer: Gop’s Gumance askep HYPpocrirvicaLty.


IL Judgment will be weighted by
the woe of slighted grace.

1, God may be sought in prayer;
their conduct proves they knew this,

2. Dwine guidance is granted to the
perplexed ; this also they knew, yet
trifled with it.

3. Abuse of God's goodness will pro-
voke the sternest justice; and darken
the soul’s doom.


Ver. 6. Theme: Axsso.uTe SusMis-
SION TO Gop’s DirxzcTion. Consider
the state of affairs: Jerusalem over-
thrown ; only “a few” people left in the
city; internal conspiracies: Gedaliah and
Ishmael; a “remnant” rescued from
Ishmael by Johanan; a despondent and
subdued people.

Now arose the question as to the next
movement: Should they remain in their
country amid disturbances, or go te
Egypt and place themselves under
foreign protection #

Life ts full of this asking, “ What
next?” From that day to this.

The words “To whom we send thee”
show that the people knew they had a
prophet among them whom they could
send to the Lord. But we have no one
whom we can commission to go to God
for us; we must go each one for our
selves,

Yet are we not less sure of a hearing;
for we have a “ Mediator between God
and man,” and ‘Him the Father heareth
always,”

I, God appealed to for direction in
difficult circumstances. This was of
old done by Israel as a nation habt-
tually ; they hearkened to God’s direc-
tion in their oracles. his is the tnstine-
tive act of a godly sow, Marks out
whether godly or not. Should use God
freely.

1. Can we as surely learn God's voice
now as when He spake by such direct
communication? It was so assuring to
have a personal hearing and answer.
Yet if God has given counsel for every
case, and given it once for all in His
written Word, we can refer to that. To
609


OBar. XLIH.





questioa that the Bible holds advice for
our personal and special wants, is to
doubt the wisdum of God who inspired
the word for all His people, for every
circumstance, for all time.

Besides which, prayer ts our privilege
freely to use, as well as the Scriptures,

Do ye not also send us, God's messen-
gers, to Him for a word from the Lord
for you? “Take heed how ye bear.”

Moreover, cannot God impress upon
our minds and hearts His will? By His
Holy Spirit ; by “ working within us to
will and do of His good pleasure.”

2. Jé it right to hazard ourselves when
we act from the persuasion that we are
doing God's will? ‘‘ Whether it be evil,
we will obey.”

But that inquiry means, Shall expe-
diency alone rule us, so that we only do
what seems advantageous to us and not
“evil”?

But if this were our guiding law,
would missionary pioneers go with the
Gospel where destruction threatened
them? Would needy men, for con-
science’ sake, stand aside from gain and
reward$ Would faithful disciples of
Jesus carry their cross and endure
suffering and toil in following Him?’
Would the Christian worker penetrate
into vile courts where fever raged 4
Would disciples expose themselves to
the ordeal of fierce mocking, &c. 4
Would the widow have surrendered
“all her living ”

Not expediency, therefore; but tm-
plicit obedience.

3. Can God really command what
seems adverse to our good? Yes; “good
or evtl;” ¢.¢., it may seem so to us.

Johanan thought that he and the rem-
nant would be safest in Egypt (ver. 14).
But God refused (ver. 19).

In asking God’s counsel they knew
beforehand He might refuse their wish.
Yet they promised to abide by His
counsel, “whether it be good or whether
it be evil.” For “ God’s thoughts are not
our thoughts, neither His ways our ways.”

Surely it is only to mock God to ask
Him to guide, and then only to obey when
we approve/ ‘Shall we receive good
at the hands of the Lord, and shall we
not also receive evil ?”


610


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAZ,


Co ae ee ee


I. Man’s resolve of unfaltering
obedience to the voice of the Lord
Nothing could be more unreserved than
this avowal: ‘ Whether it be good o
evil, we will obey the voice of the Lord,”
&e,

If He és “the Lord our God,” then
such complete trust is natural and
right.

1. Their acknowledgment of perpleatty
(ver. 3). They could not tell what was
best or wisest to do; so sought guidance,
Too often pride prevents our making
such an acknowledgment; and not only
when baffled by Jsfe’s perplexities, but
equally in spiritual quests. But we are
here reminded once again that “it 4%
not in man that walketh to direct has
steps.” We walk in darkness, stumbling;
but knowing not at what we stumble.
If we are thus incompetent to choose
and act alone in earthly affairs, how
much more in eternal matters! Baffled
concerning these trifling things, how
shall we direct our career towards
heaven? We cannot. Acknowledge
ignorance, therefore, and incompetency ;
and go to God.

2. Their belief tn the Divine wisdom.
However it may seem to us, “ good or
evil,” God knows best what we should
do ; go to Him and inquire, Even “the
foolishness of God is wiser” than man’s
wisdom. He is perfect in knowledge.
All His people believe this, Therefore
“sf any man lack wisdom, let him ask of
God,” &c. Pray more when perplexed
—in providence—in religion. God will
then teach you, and “show you the way
wherein,” dc, (ver. 3).

3. Their intention respecting the Lord's
answer. And here we are confronted
with an astonishing illustration of the in-
fluence of self-will; how blinding! (chap,
xliii, 2). Did they mean to abide by the
reply Jeremiah brought? They took an
oath that they would (ver. 5); but “ye
dissembled in your hearts,” &c, (ver. 20).
This is very awful. Oh! let us heed lest
we do the same, set aside the Divine
counsels by our wilfulness. Do we not
often pray for guidance, have we not
also vowed obedience, did we not pro-
fess to lay ourselves out for service ; and
somehow there came to us @ conviction


OT at Oe a pO ee Tae


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY . JEREMIAH.


CHaYy, EiH,


eee


of God’s will; but it was contrary to
our secret inclinations, so we beguiled
tt away/ Beware of “dissembling in
your hearts” when you deal with God!

“Good or evil.” Let us be honest in
our resolve. Ask God, meaning to obey ;
and obey as if we believe God had
taught us what to do. This is “ faith,
nothing doubting.”

III. Implicit obedience to God in-
volves our highest welfare. ‘That it
may be well with us, when we obey,” &e.
True, “‘ Godliness is great gain ;” always
for our good to obey.

1. God will befriend those who rely
upon Him (vers. 10,11). It is an old
truth, God preserveth His saints. We
are His, if we trust in Him; and He is
“for us.” “I have been young, and
now am old, yet have I not seen the
righteous forsaken” (Ps. xxxvii. 25).
“According to your faith be it done
unto you.”

2. He will deal most graciously with
those who obey Him (ver. 12). ‘Show
mercies ;” not only avert ill, but add
blessings, Yes, and more ; God would
dispose the heart of the king of Babylon
to their favour, “that he may have mercy
upon you and cause you to return to
your own land” (ver. 12), For “ when
@ man’s ways please the Lord, He maketh
even his enemies to be at peace with
him.”

3. He will gather His faithful people
together, and far exceed their prayers
and hopes in His dealings with them.
For God would effect their ultin.ate
restoration to their land, would raise
again about them all the old joys of
Jerusalem, and recover to them their
lost—national and spiritual—privileges,
This they desired ; but it was more than
they asked.

To an obedient child we not only
give what it requests, we draw the
child to our very heart, Thus doth
God. He will gather us into close and
tender relationship to Himself. Yes,
and in due season, to His land, where
foes shall no more invade, and we shal]
never more be separated from “the Lord
our God.” And in the spiritual blessings
with which He will enrich us until the
day of our “gathering together unto


Him,” we shall find that “it is wed!
with us when we obey the voice of the
Lord our God.”


Ver. 7. Theme; A DELAYED ANSWEB
TO PRAYER.

i, Revelation waited for; the prophet
would not speak till he had heard.

ii. Interval for deliberation ; that the
people might judge of their own willing-
ness to accept the message of God.

ili, Obedience tested; for true obedience
bows to God’s time, as well as to His
way and will.


Ver, 11. Theme: Gon’s REPENTANOR
“T repent Me of the evil that I have
done unto you.” God is said to repent
when He alters His outward methods of
dealing with men (Augustine).

“T am satisfied with the punishment
I have inflicted on you, if only you add
not a new offence” (Grotvus).


Ver. 14. Theme: Detusions or Dis-
OBEDIENCE.

I. A forbidden course.
into the land of Egypt.”

The reason for this prohibition was
that Egypt was wnfamous for idolatry,
full of the snares of luxury, doomed for
ats oppression of their ancestors, It was
a standing prohibition (Deut. xvii. 16).

IL Coveted advantages. ‘ Where
we shall see no war,” &c.

t. Sin always entices with delusive
promises. But Egypt’s troubles were
just setting in, and there would be only
war and woe till it was destroyed.

2. Sinners show their rebellion in dis-
believing God’s promises (vers, 10, 11).
as if He were a liar (1 John ver. 10).

III. Vain hopes.

1. Though they had deserved only evil.
they still dreamed of peace and prosperity.
So do transgressors still “ deceive their
own souls,”

2. Though they intended further trans-
gression, they boasted in the prospect of
eomfort. But “the ways of transgressors
are hard;” and “though hand join in
hand, they shail not go unpunished.”


To “go


Ver. 16. Theme: CALAMITY Pursvuine
TransoRessors. “The sword which ye
61]


OPAP. XLU,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH,





feared shall overtake you there; and the
famine whereof ye were afraid shall
follow close after you there in Egypt.”

i. Because sinners carry their own woe
with them wherever they go, even into
hell,

ii, Because God follows transgressors
wherever they go, and His being with
them makes their terror.

I. The very evils we think to escape
by sin, we bring the more surely upon
ourselves.

1. For the act of sinning renders
punishment certain.

2. Wrong courses
aright.

3. Adopting evil devices in order to
avert evil results ia the height of frenzy
and folly.

II. What our hearts most eagerly
determine often proves most fatal to us.

1. Because the heart is deceitful and
wicked, and to follow its devices and
desires lands us in rebellion against
God and neglect of our highest spiritual
good. ‘ Whoso trusteth his own heart
is a fool.”

2. Because sin blinds our perception of
good and magnifies the advantages of evil.

It reverses the telescope when looking
at good and minimises it; but it turns
the instrument in full focus on evil, and
vastly enlarges it. ‘The god of this
world blinds the minds of them that
believe not.”

3. Because the highest blessings we
receive come to us through self-denial and
suffering. Certainly not through indul-
gee! ‘Take up thy cross and follow
Me.” “ Stratt ts the gate that leadeth
unto life,”

iL. No hiding-place can be found
for escape from the penalties of wrong.

1. Not on earth, “If I take the
wings of the morning and fly to the


never can lead


uttermost parts of the earth.” See ver.
1%.

2. Not in death, “If I make my bed
in Hades.”


3. Not in eternity. For judgment
and doom meet the sinner there (Rev.


vi. 15-17. See ver. 18.)


Ver. 18. Theme: APPEAL TO Past?
Jupaments—a Warnine. “As Mine
612


anger and My fury hath been poured
forth upon the inhabitants of Jerusalem;
so shall My fury be poured forth upon
you.”

L Predicted doom fulfilled. For
what had occurred had been foretold
(chap. vii. 20; xviii. 16). God had
acted true to His word.

II. Repeated guilt threatened. The
arrows of the Lord are in quiver, ready!

IL Neglected warnings punished.
In vain all appeals (ver. 19); certain
therefore the doom (vers, 21, 22).


Ver. 20. Theme: HyYPocrisy OF
DEsiRING THE PRayzRS oF OTHERS.
Frequently persons desire their ministers’
prayers, yet are strangers to fear of God,
and negligent of duty. Place a false
and dangerous dependence on others’
prayers. ‘“‘Reranant” of the Jews left
from captivity entreated Jeremiah’s
prayers (ver. 2), and took oath to obey
voice of Lord (ver. 5). But they had
determined to go to Egypt, and asked
his prayers hypocritically. Text.

I. Consider on what principle desir-
ing the prayers of others is grounded.

1. A persuasion that it is owr duty to
pray one for another. (1.) This a dictate
of reason (Ezra vi. 10; 1 Mace. xii. 11),
(2.) Expressly required in the word of'
God (Jer. xxix. 7; 1 Tim. ii. 1; Jas. v.
16). Thus Samuel saith (1 Sam. xii.
23). (3.) The pious custom of good men.
Abraham for Sodom. Hezekiah sent
Isaiah to pray for him and his kingdom.
Christ prayed for disciples; Paul, in all
his epistles, for his friends.

2. Desiring the prayers of othera
supposeth that God hath often answered
intercessory prayers of good men. God
loves good men; they have an interest
in heaven ; others are favoured for their
sake (Gen. xx. 7; Job xlii, 8). Moses
prayed, and Amalek was vanquished,
fire in camp quenched, plague stayed,
destructive serpents removed, Miriam’s
leprosy healed, plagues taken from
Pharaoh ; God so influenced by his
prayers that He said, “ Let Me alone,”
&c, (Exod. xxxii 10), Hezekiah’s prayer
tor offenders (2 Chron. xxx. 20). Same
truth implied in inhibition of prayers
(Jer. vii. 16; xi. 14; xiv. 11; xxix. 7)





HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH,


OHAP, XEIi,





Peter delivered from prison (Acts xii. 5);
Paul rescued (2 Cor. i. 11). On this
principle the intercession of Christ is
founded ; “Father loveth Him,” &.,
“heareth Him always.”

3. It supposeth that it is very desir-
able, specially in some cases, to have the
prayers of others for us; that we reap
advantages. God heeds the pleadings
of those He loves. ‘There are special
circumstances when particularly desir-
able; physical prostration, when cannot
pray for ourselves ; perplexity or distress
of mind, as in Job xxxvii, 19; in cases
of great importance and difficulty, as
Jer. xlii. 3. Encouraged by Christ’s
promise (Matt. xviii. 19).

Il. When they who desire the prayers
of others may be said to dissemble in
their hearts.

1. When they desire them without
sincerity, through form and custom ;
when a mere compliment to the piety
of those they ask; when done under
pretence to humility ; when only desire
temporal blessings, averse to spiritual
(1 Kings xiii. 6; Acts viii, 24). So
also when public praise is returned for
deliverances (Isa. xxvi. 16); yet no
public glory for mercies (Luke xvii. 18).

2. When they will not pray for them-
selves ; practically live without God,
neglect public worship and secret devo-
tion, Imagine that ministers’ prayers
more acceptable than their own. Not
use proper means to obtain what they
ask: health, prosperity, eelf-conquest.

3. When they will not do what God
by His word and ministers requireth,
Jews promised (vers. 5, 6); yet were
resolutely determined on their course,
contrary to command of God. Pharaoh
(Exod. iv. 28). Men ask our prayers,
but will not part with their lusts, nor
practise duties as enjoined.

Ill. Show the hypocrisy and evil of
this conduct.

1. It is a high affront to the all-seeing
and holy God. It is mocking God (vers.
20, 22).

2. It is deceiving and grieving to those
friends whose prayers they desire, They
hope for the best; yet if discern in-
sincerity they will have no heart to pray


for you. In affliction, prayers sought ;
but neglect your intercessors and religion
in your prosperity.

3. Prayers offered for such persons
are aot likely to avail. Margin reads,
“You have used deceit against your
own souls.”

Servants in praying families, heed this.
Weak persons who look to godly persons’
prayers in their last moments (Prov.
xxviii. 9). Holy men’s prayers may
secure a temporary good (Jas. v. 15),
but ensure no lasting advantage; ao
salvation of the soul.

Application, —(1.) Learn with what
dispositions of mind we should desire the
prayers of others: in sincerity; con-
curring with them ; ready to obey God
(Ps. lxv, 2). (2.) That we should be
ready to pray one for another. Our
intercessions may bless; and we shall
be blessed in return (Ps. xxxv. 13), (3.)
It is particularly wicked to dissemble in
our hearts when we profess dependence
on the intercession of Christ. His inter-
cession not intended to supersede our
prayers (Rev. viii. 3; Heb, vii. 25). If
you neglect prayer, or pray formally, or
live in violation of His teachings, you
offer indignity to His holy character and
office of mediator.— Abstract of Sermon
by Rev. Job Orton, Kidderminster, a.D.
1775.


Vers. 21, 22. Theme: ADMONISHED
AND ABANDONED.

IL, Wilful self-deceit. They trted to
beguile themselves that they were acting
religiously, and were ready to listen to
God’s word, and were doing what was
pleasing to Him; while all the time they
were resolved to follow thetr own course,
yet hoped that God would give approval
to their rebellion.

Like instances of self-deceit, Numb.
xxii. 5,19; Matt. xxiii. 11; Luke xviii.
11; and 1 Tim, iv. 2.

IL Given over to delusions, All
further counsels, persuasions, prayers for
you are useless. You both “believe a
lie,” and “ will have none of My reproof.”
For such obstinacy there is no cure; you
must now be left to be “ filled with the
knowledge of your own devices.”


618


oHar, XLIN, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR.





CHAPTER XLIII.


Cees AND Exxcetican Norrs.—1. Chronology of the Chapter.. -Continuous with the
oreceding.

2. National Affairs.—The miserable ‘‘ remnant” (vers. 5, 6) left by Nebuchadnezzar, now
controlied by wilful men, were led away to Egypt, and reach Tabpanhes (ver. 7).

%. Contemporaneous History.—Probably, in Lgypt, at thia very time Pharaoh’s palace waa
in course of erection ; for the mention (ver. 9) of the “ brick-kiln” and “ clay ” [i.e. mortar]
‘‘at the entry of Pharaoh’s house” implies this, The deadly struggle between the Chaldeans,
under Nebuchadnezzar king of Babylon, and the Egyptians, under Pharaoh-Hophra, for
ascendency in the East, was now at its fiercest heat. In ver. 10 the iasue of the struggle is
predicted ; and Josephus states that on the fifth year after the overthrow of Jerusalem, Nebuchad-
nezzar, leaving the siege of Tyre, undertook his expedition to Egypt (Antig. X. ix. 7).

4 Geographical References.—Ver. 7. ‘‘ Into the land of Egypt to Tahpanhes,” vide note.
chap. ii. 16, in doc. This place, being on the frontier of Egypt towarde Palestine, they naturally
come to first.

Ver. 13. “ Beth-shemesh,” i.e. the house, or temple, of the Sun, known to us by its Greek
name ‘* Heliopolis,” and in Hebrew by ‘‘ On,” a very ancient city of Exypt. It is situate on
the east of the Nile, a few miles south of Memphis, wide note, chap, ii. 16, im loc. Ruins of
its celebrated Temple of the Sun, and an obelisk, nearly seventy feet high, covered with hiero-
glyphics, still remain to mark its site,

5. Manners and Customs.—‘‘ He shall spread his royal pavilion over them,” t.€. a canopy,
which, being very ornate with gilt and gorgeous work, is described as a glittering canopy.
Oriental monarchs have such an adorned parasol held over them for protection from the
gun’s rays. i

Literary Criticisms.—Ver. 10. The word rendered “ royal pavilion,” “WIDY is from "Be,
to be polished, shining, beautiful, :

Ver. 12. ‘‘J will kindle, and he shall burn them.” The change of persons seems abrupt
and ‘‘he shall kindle” seems better, The LXX., Syriac, and Vulgate so read; and the difference
is effected by a transposition [possibly a penman’s slip in the Hebrew] of the final letters, NY¥A
for *N¥-


SUBJECT OF CHAPTER XLII,


JZREMIAH CARRIED INTO EGyPt.


Vers, 1-6. Theme: WILFULNESS TAK-
ING ITS OWN CouRsE. See homilies on
preceding chapter. Ina wilful career—

I. Arrogance leads the way. All
the “ proud men” (ver. 2). Pride is the
pioneer of wilfulness; and wilfulness
leads on to rebellion against God.

IL Sinister unbelief comes to its
aid, Baruch, being the younger man,
naturally would protest more vehemently
against their departure for Egypt. This
the “ proud men” interpret as betraying
a preference for the Chaldeans, So they
fortify their own self-will, and charge
lies on God’s servants in their own
justification,

Notes.—Henry remarks: ‘ Those that
are resolved to contradict the great ends
of the ministry, are industrious to bring
a bad name upon it.” And Cramer:
‘‘ Observe the old diabolical trick ; when
preachers practise Gud’s word and their
office with zeal, the world understands
how to conflict it with another iiame and
call it personal interest.”


61¢


IIL Impious disobedience follows in
tts train. “So all . . . obeyed not the
voice of the Lord” (ver, 4), &e. Such
defiance is the natural and necessary out-
growth of wilfulness,

IV. Overpowering force completes its
designs (vers. 5, 6). No resisting its
violence. The good in a man is com-
pelled to yield as well as the ewl in
him; as here, Jeremiah and Baruch
were carried off with the people. For
when once Wilfulness becomes regnant,
it overpowers the less vehement forces
and bears all before it.


Ver. 2. Theme: Proup Men.

I. Proud men are distinguished for
their disbelief of the Divine testimony.

1. Some deny the record God has given
of creation, array geology against Moses,

2. Others disbelieve the record of
miracles, on the piea that God never
can depart from the great laws by which
He governs the universe, Yet itis now
a law that man comes into existence by


7
,


a rs





HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR.


———_-: nn eee


propagation, and as a babe; but it is
certain that rhe first man did not come
into being Ly propagation. Here, then,
is action by God apart from law ; and
if one instance stands, so may all super-
patural records,

3. Others disbelieve the record of
salvation by Jesus Christ, call Chris-
tlanity a myth; they will not bow to
the Crucified One ; will not admit their
guilt, d&e.

IZ. Proud men not only dishonour
God by disbelieving His testimony, and
thus pave the way to their own destruc
tion ; they are accessories to the ruin
of others.

1. Others endorse their scepticism,
imbibe their views, follow their example,
and thus perish through their misleading.

2. Pride has prompted kings and
potentates to all the sanguinary wars
that have desolated lands and homes.

III. Pride being so hateful to God,
He specially honours and approves
humility.

1. Humility was the garment tn
which Christ was arrayed when He
came into the world. “He took upon
Him the form of a servant.”

2. This adornment of Christ should
be the garment of Christians. ‘ Be
clothed with humility.”

3. Thus attired, proud men may de-
spise us. But though they occupy high
stations, “the lofty looks of man shall
be humbled, and the haughtiness of man
shall be brought low,” d&e.

4. But while God resisteth the proud,
He giveth grace to the humble. He
who inhabits eternity has promised to
dwell with the lowly. Thus attired,
good men will esteem us, angels will
look upon us with complacency, and
God will crown us with His richest
favour.— Walks with Jeremiah,” Rev.
D. Pledge.


Vers. 5-7. Theme: Lire’s Aim De-
peaTED. “So the captains took...
Jeremiah and Baruch . . . into the land
of Egupt.”

I. The ill most dreaded was even-
tually realised. Nothing could be more
bitter to Jeremiah than this being carried
at last to Egypt.


OHAP. XLIN,


1, Throughout his whole prophetic
career he had pleaded with his nation
against looking towards Egypt for any
befriending. It is the sum of his pro-
phetic ministry : “Go not into Egypt”
(ver. 2).

2. At the downfall of Jerusalem he
had chosen to stay with the “remnant”
in his own land, rather than go away
into Chaldea; prompted thereto by a
noble patriotism (chap. xl, 4-6).

3. The penalty of his faithful service
of his country comes now in the most
odious form it could assume, forced to
go to the country from which he most
instinctively recoils (vers. 6, 7).

Note.— How hard at times seems “the
srony of fate/” as the worldly call it;
but the ordering of Providence /


**Life’s hopes o’erturned, its projects crossed!”


IL Godly men entailed in the cala-
mities of impiety.

1. Their ministry for God and their
people cruelly resisted and repudiated
(ver. 2).

2. Their wise and self -sacrificing
career contemned amid the excitement
and passion of a popular caprice.

3. The very wrongs inflicted opon
them which they most dread.

Notes.—(1.) How painful in has old
age to be thus torn from the land he
had so loved and heroically served !

(2.) After all his righteous denun-
ciation of Egypt, and of his nation for
turning thitherwards, how bitter this
experience of being forced to go thither /

(3.) If he must go from his own land,
he had opportunity of goingamid honours,
and where he would have received kind.
mess (chap. xl 4), and where he could
have served God amid the worthier part
of his nation.

IIL Life’s painful frustrations.

1. Surely after such a faithful career
of service for God, Jeremiah deserved a
kindlier end than this!

2. It strangely baffles our faith when
all our hopes and aims, which we know
to be right, are thus defeated.

3. Certainly if life’s services were only
rewarded on earth, we should see most
grievous failures of justice,

4. A sorrowful career, such as Jere-


615


OmaP, XLIV.





maiah’s, closing in deepest shadows of
disappointment and defeat, surely predicts
® brighter world,


“To steel his melting heart,
To act the martyr’s sternest part;
To watch with firm, unshrinking eye
His darling visions as they die.
Too happy if, that dreadful day,
His life be given him for a prey.”
- (See Keble’s “Christian Year.”)


Vers. 7-13. Theme: FLEEING FROM
Gop’s Controt. “So they came into
the land of Egypt.”
L Allured thither by delusions (chap.
alii. 14).
IL Defiant of Jehovah’s counsels
(chap. xliii. 4).
IIL Choosing for themselves a refuge
egardless of God (ver. 7).
IV. Followed by the denunciations
f offended justice (vers. 8-10).
V. Overtaken at last by the foe
rom whom they fled (vers. 10-13).
Note.— The ways of the Lord”
core Lange) “are wonderful. Israel

ies from Nebuchadnezzar far away to
Egypt. But there they are not safe,
The Lord causes it to be proclaimed to
them that, at the entrance of the king’s
palace at Tahpanhes, Nebuchadnezzar’s
tent shall stand. Now, indeed, there is
a brick-kiln there, in the clay of which
Jeremiah is to place foundation-stones,
as it were, for the Chaldean king’s
palace. Thus the Lord lays the germs
of future events, and whatever He pre-
pares in secret He reveals in His own
time, to the glory of His wisdom, omni-
science, and omnipotence.”


Ver, 12. “ KinDLE a FIRE IN THE
Hovses oF THE Gops or Eaypt.” Egypt
was full of temples and idol-gods ; those
of wood the conquering army would
commit to the flames ; those of gold they
would carry away as spoil to Babylon.

This burning of temples and idols by
Nebuchadnezzar, and afterwards by the


616


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





Persian kings, was mercifully ordered by
God to wean the exiles there from their
idolatry into which they sank, and to
revive their faith in the God of Israel.

“ ARRAY HIMSELF WITH THE LAND
or Eeyrrt.” A bold figure, The king of
Babylon, from whom you expect to escape
by fleeing to Egypt, where you hope to
dwell securely and peacefully (chap. xlii.
11, 14), will come ; and with the same
ease as a shepherd wraps himself about
in his mantle, tn order to lay quietly down
in tt and take his rest, so will Nebuchad- .
rezzar possess himself of the land.

The Egyptians, according to the
Arabs, have a tradition that their land
was devastated by Nebuchadnezzar tn
consequence of their king having recewed
the Jews under his protection, and that it
lay desolate forty years,


PropHrcy FULFILLED.


Note.—I. This is definite prophecy
(vers. 10-13). Zhe name of the invader
is given; his work of spoliation is
described. God’s predictions are not
generalisations or conjectures; but ex
plictt fore-statements of events, This
prophecy by Jeremiah tn Egypt was
echoed (without collusion) by Hzekiel in
Babylon by the river Chebar (Ezek.
XxiX.—XxXXvii.)

IL Predictions literally accom-
plished. The hsstorian follows with
his pen long after the prophet has written
his predictions ; and in Josephus we have
impartial testimony. He writes: “Which
things came to pass accordingly ; for on
the fifth year after the destruction of
Jerusalem, which was the twenty-third
of the reign of Nebuchadnezzar, he made
an expedition into Ceele-Syria ;. . . and
fell upon Egypt, in order to overthrow
it; and he slew the king that them
reigned, and set up another; and he
took those Jews, that were there captives,
and led them away to Babylon ” (Antig
X. ix. 7).





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAR. CHAP. XLIV.





CHAPTER XLIV.


Crrrioat anp Execrticat Norzs.—1. Chronology of the Chapter.—A considerable interva)
must be placed between this chapter and the two preceding, which record their arrival in
Egypt; for we here find the fugitives coming together to Pathros from their different towns,
30 that we have to allow time for their dispersion through Egypt and settlement in widely
separated cities there. Yet the address of Jeremiah assumes that he speaks to the people of
the migration who have come into Egypt, and not toa later generation born in Egypt. Dr.
Payne Smith puts the incident only @ year after their arrival in Egypt, but this seems toc
early ; and it may be nearer the case to conjecture the date as being from five to ten years after
~ et eu Egypt, probably about 580 B.c., though Lange suggests 5108.0. See Introduc-
‘ion, p. Sk

2. Contemporaneous Scriptures.—£zekiel’s visions in Babylon are synchronous, See also
Psalm cxxxvii. Daniel also in Babylon (see chaps. iii., iv.) Obadiah also rises at this time in
prophecy, denouncing Edom for its exultation over Zion’s overthrow.

8 Geographical References.—Ver. 1. “ Migdol,” meaning ‘‘a tower,” a boundary eity
in the north of Egypt, now Magdolum, twelve miles from Pelusium. ‘‘ Zahpanhes,” note on
chap, xliii. 8, and ‘‘ Noph,” note on chap. ii. 16. Pathros, ¢.e. Upper Egypt (see Ezek. xxix. 14),

4. Personal Allusion.—Ver. 30. PoaraoH-Horura, vide Contemporaneous History, note to
chap. xxxi1. Hophra, known to the Greeks as Apries, succeeded Paammis, the successor to
Pharaoh-Necho, whom Nebuchadnezzar defeated at Charchemish. Vide '‘ Extermination of
Jewish Exiles in Egypt,” below, p. 620.

Ver. 19. ‘* The Queen of Heaven.” Vide note in Loe, vii. 18.

6. Literary Criticisms.—Ver. 9. ‘‘ The wickedness of your wives.” As the Hebrew suffix is
singular, "3, the LXX. alter the word and give ‘‘your princes.” But Henderson, Keil,
Naegelsbach, and others would retain the word as referring to the Jewish queens, who were abet-
tors of idolatry (1 Kings xl. 1-8, xv. 13), and take the singular suffix in a collective sense.

Ver. 10. ‘‘ Not humbled,” lit. “‘ broken ” (as Iga. xix. 10) or bruised ” (Isa. liii. 5).

Ver. 14. “ They have a desire to return,” i.e. are lifting up their souls to return to Judah.
Vide Literary Criticisms, xxii, 27.

Ver. 19. ‘‘ Zo worship her,” i.e. the Queen of Heaven. The Hiph. of I¥Y- In the Piel
form (Job x. 8) the word is rendered by the meaning to fashion, shape. The meaning is similar
here, to represent her ; the cakes being made in the form of a crescent to represent the moon.
86 Wethout our men,” de. our hus


SUBJECT OF OHAPTER XLIV.
JEwisH IpoLtatrRy IN Eq@yPt.


Occasion or THE IpoLaTROUS AssEMBLY. There had gathered together at
Pathros “a great multitude” of the Jews resident in Egypt.


ZL It was a public festival in honour of Astarte, the “‘ Queen of Heaven”
(ver. 17); and libations are being offered to her in accordance with a vow the
worshippers had made, “ Do whatsoever thing goeth forth out of our mouth,” This
is the usual phrase for a vow (Numb. xxx. 2,12; Judg. xi. 36). They had, there-
fore, bound themselves to this public homage of the queen of heaven, and were
now intent upon carrying out the special object which brought them together (see
ver. 25: “ Our vows that we have vowed,” &c.)

IL Jt was to an assembly of women that the prophet spake. For this “great
multitude” is literally a great kahal, or congregation gathered for a religious
purpose ; and “except for such a purpose Jewish manners would not allow the women
to be abroad in crowds” (Dr. Payne Smith). The women are now the speakers,
replying to Jeremiah’s protest (see ver. 19, “ without our men,” i.e., husbands).

IIL The men, however, though excluded from such an assembly, knew what
their wives and daughters were doing (ver. 15) Though they do not engage in
this service of homage to the Queen of Heaven, they sympathise with and favour it ;
for they have come with the women to Pathros, thus sanctioning the occasion of
their assembling.

IV. The festival observances consisted es es marys burnt upon an altar,

ibations poured out “unto her” (ver. , possibly before some image or
caer of Astarte, and cakes ams (either to be burnt or eaten) ee were


OHAP. XLIV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; JEREMIAH.





shaped like the crescent of the moon. Before this altar, and perhaps also image,
of the moon-goddess the women advanced and passed in regular procession, chanting
as they came, and reciting the benefits they had received from the hands of the
goddess they adored (ver. 17).

V. The infatuation of these idolatrous worshippers. This adoration of
Astarte was rife (ver. 17) when Josiah ascended the throne; its suppression by
Josiah was regarded with much secret ill-will, In Jehoiakim’s reign the people
hastened back to their idolatry (see note, National History, to chap. vii. p. 143;
and homily on Section 16-20, p. 147 ; also on vers. 17, 18, p. 158,159). Zedekiah
prohibited this form of worship during the miseries of his reign. The people now,
from amid Egyptian scenes, look back over the history of their national misfortunes
and ascribe them all to their neglect of this goddess (ver. 18).

VL. Specious excuses offered in extenuation of their apostasy. Several
pleas are urged :—1. Their vows must be fuljilled (ver. 17) ; and this pledge they dare
not violate, for that would entail the anger of Astarte, 2. Their tdolatry had the
sanction of national custom in the days gone by ; for their ancestors had practised it
generally and publicly with the sanction of their kings and princes (ver. 17). 3.
It had entailed no calamity (ver. 18); for they persist in ignoring their wickedness
(ver. 9) as the cause of their distresses, and now ascribe calamity to their neglect
of this goddess, 4. These female worshippers of Astarte had the authority and
protection of thetr husbands in their idolatry (ver. 19). Without the consent of
their husbands the vows of women are not binding (Numb. xxx. 7, 8); but as
“our men” support us in these obligations to Astarte, we, their wives and
daughters, are blameless and irreproachable. Thus they desire to shield themselves
under the complicity of others.


An InpicNant Protrest aGatnst Apostasy. Delivered amid the idol-scenes of
Egypt, and to the assembly of Jewish apostates,


L A bold and vehement expostulation. Jeremiah stops the procession of
the women, and the festival of Astarte, to pronounce against it in the name of God.
The prophet was undeterred by the violence he had endured at the hands of his nation,
who had dragged him away into Egypt, but fearlessly rebuked their apostasy from
God for the idolatries of Egypt (ver. 8). In this earnest remonstrance he declares
—(a.) that the existing desolation and ruin of Judea were the evil consequences of their
own past wickedness in apostatising from Jehovah (vers, 2-7); and (b.) that for them
to continue such tdolatries in Egypt would certainly entail destruction and ruin upom
themselves (vers. 8-14). If God had not spared “Jerusalem” (ver. 2), the holy
city, where He had made His name to dwell, and which He loved, will He, think
you, spare Egypt—a scene He loathes? (ver. 8). And he heaps maledictions upon
them—(a.) for their needless and voluntary and wilful departure into Egypt (ver. 8),
‘“‘ whither ye be gone to dwell ”—not carried by force as your brethren in Babylon ;
and now (6.) for their flagrant insult of Jehovah’s honour before the very eyes of
the heathen, “burning incense to other gods in the land of Egypt” (ver. 8). For
this their aggravating guilt, he declares their sure and terrible extermination
{vers. 11-14).

IL. Wilful refusal of the prophetic admonition. Here the men join the
women in loud and obstinate rejection of God’s word (vers. 15, 16). (a.) They
implicitly acknowledge that this solemn protest of the prophet ts Jehovah’s word
(ver. 16); (0.) but insist that the happiest days of their nation were associated with
Astarte’s worship (ver. 17): (¢.) that the favour of the Queen of Heaven guarantees
more advantages than the worship of Jehovah (vers. 18,19). It was thus a declara-
tion of—(1.) Absolute faith in other gods; Polytheism, therefore, (2.) Preference
for and a higher esteem of Astarte; which means abandonment of Jehovah as their
national God. (3.) Indifference to all Jehovah's displeasure and threatenings ;
they were better off, with His anger, in Astarte’s favour, for the Queen of Heaven


618


HUMILLETIC COMMENTARY ;: JEREMIAH. CHAP. XLIV,








pe ereeiy more benign, whereas Jehovah’s protection had been of little good
to them.

Iii, Refutation of popular fallacies and announcement of certain doom,
Taking up the facts of their national misery and final expatriation, Jeremiah shows
—(a.) That, though they played an idolatrous part in their own land, their idols had
not preserved them from national destruction ; for “ your land is a desolation,” é&e.
(ver. 22). (6.) That their deeds of flagrant apostasy went up before God as a memo-
rial and witness against them for their ingratitude and faithlessness (ver. 23) ; for
He had established and honoured them as a nation by giving them “ His law, His
statutes, and His testimonies” (ver. 23). (c.) That because of their “evil doings
and abominations” (ver. 22) God could no longer hold back the doom which at last
overwhelmed the land and the people (vers. 22, 23),

Then GoD ABANDONS THEM FoR EVER. (1.) They had allied themselves by vows
to an dol (ver. 25), and resolutely kept their vows of allegiance though God pleaded
with them (ver. 16). (2.) The Most High therefore divorces them from Himself
by solemn oath (ver. 26), and breaks His covenant with them as His people. (3.)
Declares that He will no longer extend His protection over them, but will be their
enemy (vers, 27, 28) ; and (4.) Gives them an ominous sign (in predicting the fate
of their Egyptian king) of the certainty that He will avenge on them the insult of
their open rejection of Him (vers, 29, 30), and which will convince them that #& ds
the hand of the God they have insulted which chastises them for their guilt


Tae Fina, Worp or Wor: JEREMIAH’s FAREWELL PROPHECY.


L A long and painful ministry, closing amid saddest circumstances. See
Introduction, V., Length of his Oficial Ministry, p. 2. Could any facts be wanting
to complete the melancholy surroundings? (a.) His pleadings and warninys against
a fatal national policy in trusting to Egypt, all unheeded. (b.) His nation van-
guished and scattered ; some in Babylon, others in Egypt. (¢.) Jerusalem destroyed,
Gou’s temple in ruins, the land given up to execration (ver. 22). (d.) Himself, an
old and forlorn prophet, amid aliens, and even more alien fellow-countrymen. (e.)
His people sunk into lower depths of iniquity than during his entire career; and
now at last absolutely repudiating Jehovah as the object of their worship and
obedience,

IL A brave and heroic career, shining out lustrously to the end. For over
fifty years he had been God’s messenger to this hardened people. He had suffered
much at their hands; yet, undaunted till the last, and now at so great an age,
between seventy and eighty years old, lifting up his voice in fearless protestation
and fervent pleadings amid the people whom he had sought to keep faithful to
God. His last outcry is full of grand prophetic power.

It A lifelong witness against sinners, ending amid signs of fruitlessness
and defeat. Not one feature of hope illumines the dense darkness and poignant
melancholy of this last sight of Jeremiah. Every view looks mournful and piteous.
(a.) No good seems to have resulted from all his earnest, prolonged, faithful, and
self-sacrificing work, (b.) No prospect opens as a relief to the desolate retrospect.
The sun sinks before him amid portending tempests of terror and woe. The
Chrestian tradition respecting his death is that he was stoned to death at Tahpanhen
by his own countrymen! Another tradition is that he escaped to Babylon. But
no star rises on the dark night. This chapter gives the farewell glance at the
hoary prophet ; and his last utterance is one of severest gloom.

Note.—In 2 Maccabees i, and ii., there is a most interesting story of Jeremiah
hiding the sacred fire, the tabernacle, the Ark of the Covenant, and the Altar of
incense in a cave in Mount Nebo previous to his leaving Judea, where, says the
record, they remain to this day. nor will be discovered until God collects Israel
together again. ;

§1


CHAP, XLIV. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH,





EXTERMINATION OF THE JEWISH EXILES IN Ecypt.


L Of their total extinction in Egypt they had been solemnly forewarned
(chap. xlii. 15-18), Their presence in Egypt, therefore, invited the punishment.

IL Their open abandonment of Jehovah now as their God added the fatal
element to their rebellion (vers, 16, 17).

III. God’s awful farewell to these guilty people ts taken under the solemnity
of an oath, as indicating its irrevocableness (ver, 26).
( IV. ane absolute extermination, Jehovah will see to tt that & ts effected
ver, 27).


Tae EXTERMINATION ACCOMPLISHED. Their asylum proved no shelter
from the pursuing vengeance of Nebuchadnezzar.


L The “sign” by which they should realise God's destructive judgments,
Pharaoh-Hophra, when defeated in battle by the Cyrenians, became regarded with
suspicion as having betrayed his native troops for selfish ends, and hence a revolt
arose. Amasis, whom Hophra sent to treat with these mutinous troops, himself
went over to the rebels, Hophra, gathering an army of foreign auxiliaries, now
fought against Amasis and the Egyptian troops, but was defeated and taken captive,
After treating him kindly for some years, Amasis, because the Egyptians regarded
this indulgence with ill-favour, surrendered Hophra to his enemies, by whom he
was strangled. He came to the throne a year before the Jewish migration to
Egypt, and continued king for eighteen years after, although his last ten years
were spent a prisoner in his palace at Sair. This civil war of Amasis with Hophra
opened the way for Nebuchadnezzar’s invasion of Egypt in the twenty-third year
of his reign.

Il. The total extermination of the Jewish refugees in Egypt. A thousand
years before God had led forth His people from Egypt with a mighty hand, and
planted them in Zion ; but Israel had failed of her mission; and now these most
arrant rebels shall utterly perish in this land of Egypt, where they boasted they
could find safe asylum (chap. xlii. 14), abandoned and disowned by God (chap. xliv.
26), exterminated by the rage of the king of Babylon, from whom they sought refuge
in Egypt, but who avenged himself upon them there with merciless wrath (ver. 12).


HOMILIES AND OUTLINES ON VERSES OF OHAPTER XLIV.


Vers, 2-13. Theme: Gon’s APPEAL
aGAInst Jupaw. In this wretched


doom which outraged mercy demanded
(vers. 6-13). Compare Naegelsbach.
Gop Hates SIN.


“remnant” the old root of disobedience
and unbelief remains still.

I. A mirror of the stubbora heart
of man.

1. Unceasingly warned. For cen-
turies (ver. 10).

2. Faithfully and stmpassionedly
warned (ver. 3). By words of thunder
and strokes of power. Think only of
Elijah, Elisha, Hosea, Isaiah, &c,

IL The judgment of just love exe-


cuted.
1. AW. reforming and redeeming
agencies failed. Judah hardened his


stubborn neck (vers. 5, 10).
2. Long-suffering love became exhausted,
and there remained nothing dat the
629


Ver. 4. Theme:
“Oh, do not the abominable thing
which I hate.”

God speaks these words of wickedness.
All sin is in principle tdolatry; the
sinner leaves the true God, and pays
homage to some idol.

He who searches the heart may see
now that there is some ‘abominable
thing” upon which you are intent—
planned during the week, resolved upon.
But the Almighty One stoops to be-
seech you, “Oh, do not,” &. Do not
pass this message of God on to another
fellow-hearer ; your sin is “the abomi-
nable thing.”

God hates sin ; 00 hates it in all ita


a ee es





13
We
!
we

4
Ay
is
iN,


ah a Ds


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.








forms—as a principle, an act, a course
of life, that it is an ‘abominable
thing.”

Why does He hate it? He hates no-
thing He has made. Many things you
dislike He does not dislike—the reptile,
&c. ; but the one thing He hates is a
thing He has not made; it is a thing
the creature has made, not the Creator.

I. Let us inquire what sin is,
Violation of God’s law (1 John iii 4).
Doing what God forbids ; or not doing
what He commands. To love, both God
and our neighbour, is the fulfilling of
the law (Matt. xxii. 36-40). Right con-
duct, without love, is therefore sin. He
hates it—

1. Because st ts contrary to His own
neture. “Holy is the Lord God.”

2. Because sin ts unnatural in His
creatures, It is no part of the human
constitution, but a foreign element.

3. Because stn transgresses holy, just,
and good laws. Not of some arbitrary
commandment.

4, Because tt defiles and injures the
entire human nature. It pollutes what
should be pure ; blasts and blights.

5. Because st makes men curses to
each other. What has changed children
into profligates, mothers into brutes,
fathers into beasts of prey? Do not
wonder God says, “I hate it.”

6. Because tt ignores, or rejects, the
Divine government. And no government
is so paternal, tender, and beneficent as
God’s.

7. Because wherever sin exrsts, except
tt ts checked by God's mercy, tt has the
dominion. A cruel tyrant !

8. Because where tt ts introduced
spreads, In every clime ; through every
race; through every grade of society ; a
deadly pestilence,

9, Because sin requires God to inflict
upon men, of every class and kind, that
which He assures us upon His oath He
has no pleasure in.

10. Because continuing in sin, while
hearing the Gospel, tramples under foot
the blood of Jesus.

IL Hear, then, God’s entreaty : “Do
it not !”

1. What are you going todo? Per
sist in itt? Think! Do you really mean


CHAP. XLIV.


to go on sinning in the face of suck
a message? With conscience smarting,
memory weighted, remorse springing up
in your soul like a tempest, with a fear-
ful looking-for of judgment, with your
miserable convictions and bitter tears,
your gloomy forebodings and knowledge
of penalties, are you determined to con- -
tinue f

2. Then there can be but little hope,
if this state of heart continue, concerning
you. You may live, with a seared con-
science, until you lay down on the bed
of death; and there perhaps all your
old fears will be awakened—when it is
too late! Then, as you sink down into
perdition, the millstone about your neck
will be “‘ the abominable thing which God
hates.”—Rev. Samuel Martin (West-
minster), 1858 a.p.


Ver. 4. Theme: Tuk ABOMINABLE Na-
TURE oF Sin. “ Howbeit I sent unto
you all My servants the prophets, rising
early and sending them, saying, Oh, do
not this abominable thing that I hate.”

No man can think his guilt too great.
We may confine our views to sin and
exclude mercy, but we cannot overrate
guilt. God long laboured in vain with
the Jews, and at length Nebuchadnezzar
carried the mass of them to Babylon
Jeremiah took the remnant to Egypt.
While there he spoke to them the words
of the text. The “abominable thing ”
was their idolatry; the same may be
said of all sin. Sin is the “abominable
thing” God hates. This appears—

L From the nature of things. Sin
is opposed to the wishes and designs of
God. ‘God is love,” and His object is
to raise all creatures to highest eternal
happiness. They must therefore have
the same love He possesses, and own
Him for their Head, His law being their
standard.

1. Sin sets up private taterest against
public good. The root of sin is self-love,
and out of it arise all evil passions that
hurry men and devils into evil against
Heaven. Sin is the transgression of the
law. And this being its nature, makes tt
the enemy of happiness. The Friend and
Guardian of the universe hates and must
punish sin. Love cued a


2. Sin opposes God in all good for His
creatures; it resists all His loving pur-
poses. That He does hate sin we see—

IL From His expressions of abhor-
rence.

1. In the penalty annexed to His law,
the eternal exclusion from good, and
eternal endurance of evil. This endless
evil is the measure of God’s hatred of
sin,

2. In His providential government.
When angels simed, not all God’s love
nor their dignity could save them. When
Adam and Eve sinned they were turned
out of Eden. The Flood swept the
world when it was filled with violence.
For sin Egypt was lashed with ten
plagues, and her king found a watery
grave. And when Israel sinned, God
brought upon them fiery serpents and
fire from heaven; the ground opened
and swallowed them up; and while they
possessed the promised land His provi-
dence was a constant remembrancer of
His hatred of sin. God’s anger against
sin destroyed Nineveh, Babylon, Tyre,
Edom, Moab, and the Philistines.

(a.) All human suffering and death
express God’s anger against sin. Sinners
will be punished according to their guilt.

(0.) What strength of that abhorrence
of sin ts uttered in the cry, ‘Oh, do not
this abominable thing,” &c. !

(c.) Yet one exhibition of God's anger
against sin is move amazing than the rest.
For us God spared not His own Son,
and will He then, O sinner, spare thee ¢

Who are sinners? ‘All have sinned,
and come short of the glory of God.”
And, moreover, all are under the entire
dominion of sin, ‘God saw that every
imagination of the thoughts of” man’s
“heart was only evil continually.” As
is the fountain, so are the streams
Words and actions of the natural man
are but sin.

III. Considering God’s abhorrence of
sin, how astonishing His long forbear-
ance, and how wonderful “ the love of
God which passeth kuewledge” !

1. We have cause for humility. Self-
importance and conscious worth are un-
becoming. How fearful would have been
our condition had not the Son of God
left His glory to save us! We needed a

622


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.


Divine Saviour. Let us hide ourselves
in His righteousness.

2. For sinners abhorred of God this is
our only remedy. For many years God
has pleaded, “Oh, do not this abominable
thing which I hate.” Do not re-enact
the rebellion of the Jews, Reimember
it is written, “ Because I called and ye
refused. I also will laugh at your cala-
mity, I will mock when your fear
cometh.” Seize the offered blessing
now, ere God says, “ Ye shall not see
My rest.”——Rev. Edward Grifin, D.D.


Theme: Sinners: A WARNING.
“ Have ye forgotten the wickedness,” &e,

I. Guilty careers offer a melancholy
admonition to others.

IL Examples of ruin should deter
us from sin.

III. Reckless indifference to the
careers and penalties of sinners shows
the most obdurate and hopeless im-
piety.

1. Beyond reformation (Prov. xxvii.
22).
2. Dead to all saving influences (Prov.
xxv, 20). .


Ver, 17. Theme; SELF-VINDICATING
Sinners. No one would perbaps justify
these peuple ; yet thousands will justefy
themselves /

L Criminal impiety.

1. Vhew voluntary engagements, Jo-
hanan had inclined to hide in Egypt
from Nebuchadnezzar, but sought God’s
direction ; pledying themselves, from the
least to the greatest, to obey His voice
(chap. xlii, 1-6). Instead of fulfilling
their engagements—

2. Ther deliberate violation of them.
God warned them (chap. xlii, 13-17) ;
but they charge Baruch with feigning this
message (chap. xiii. 1-4), and followed
their own course.

3. Ther self - vindicating effrontery.
The people betook themselves to idolatry
in Egypt. Being reproved, they boldly
asserted that Jehovah’s worship had
been profitless, and that the Queen of
Heaven had proved their benefactresa,
So they would worship her, whatever
God or His prophet might say (vers
17-19).


x


—o ee ee
Ic, a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; JEREMIAH.


———e


HL Modern repetitions.

1. The profane sinner. See his
engagements in baptism and confirma-
tion! Yet millions repudiate their en-
gagements, and vindicate their evil ways.

2. The self-righteous formalist. Hear
him joining in the liturgy asa “ penitent
sinner ;” yet tell him in private what a
sinner he is, what duties should follow
from penitence, how he should cleave
humbly to Jesus Christ, and he repudi-
ates it all.

3. The hypocritical professor. He
finds excuses for his sin, “turns the


. grace of God into lasciviousness,”


III. Certain issues. God told these
Jews, who defied His judgments, that they
should see whose words should stand, His
or theirs (ver. 28).

1. How did it fare with them ? (vers.
12-14, 29, 30.)

2. How shall it fare with you § (Luke
xix. 27.) Address—

(a.) Those who disregard our teste
mony. ‘Inthe day that God shall visit
for sin, ye shall be cast down and perish”
(vers. 15-17).

(6.) Those who tremble at the word of
God. That is the state of mind becom-
ing to every sinner (Isa. Ixvi. 2). Culti-
vate it, and then pay to God your vows.
—Charles Simeon, M.A., 1828.


Theme: THe ADVANTAGES OF IBRE-
tigion! “For then had we plenty of
bread, and were well, and saw no evil.”

No doubt there are times when the
wicked prosper. Because of this it is
too often thought that “godliness is
(not) profitable for the life which now
is,” &c. It was so with these idolaters
(vers, 17, 18). They argued that be-
cause they had more of this world’s
comforts when living in idolatry, that
therefore it was more advantageous than
the worship of the true God.

L Consider that God does not enter
into judgment with wrongdoers imme-
diately and forthwith, but reserves His
displeasure. Punishment does not follow
instantly upon transgression. Sinners
may “see no evil” at the time of sinning ;
yet God’s displeasure ts kindled by t,
and will one day burst upon them, Sin
never goes unpunished.


OHAP, XLIV,





IL God does not connive at sin be
cause He allows it to be committed at the
time with impunity. Though they en-
joyed abundance, and “‘ saw no evil” at
the time of their idolatry, yet now they
were smarting under the penalties. “ Be
cause ye burned incense, and because ye
sinned, therefore this evil happened unto
you as at this day.”

Even though no manifestation cf
Divine displeasure comes during the
commission of sin, God is assuredly dis-
pleased. And though during a course
of iniquity there is no lack of life’s good
things, yet iniquity is not profitable.
The day of recompense will come.

TIL As with these Jews it seemed
better for them, in a worldly sense, when
they lived in idolatry than when they
abandoned it, so it sometimes appears
to have been better with the sinner, in
a worldly sense, when he lived in sin
than when he became converted by God's
grace and professed Christianity. In
early Christian times the profession of
Christianity involved “ the loss of all
things,” but higher blessings more than
compensated these worldly sacrifices.
“No man hath left houses . . . for My
sake, but shai receive manifold more,”
&c. But though nothing was gained in
this life; suppose that ‘since we left
off” (ver. 18) our worldly and evil ways
we only suffered misfortunes, yet what
an ample compensation in the life to
come /


IV. But experience testifies that
more is gained by religion than lost.
If a Christian lose the favour of man,
he wins the favour of God; if he lose
the ‘‘ pleasures of sin,” he gains the joys
of salvation. Let not good men, how-
ever great their privations, look back on
their days of sin and Jament, “ Z’hen had
we plenty,” &., as if the former days
were better than these. Rather rejoice
that, “owever poor they be, they are
“ rich in faith, and heirs of a kingdom,”
that “all things are theirs, things pre-
sent and things to come.”


V. Gaze not with envious eyes oz
the prosperity of the wicked. O men
of God, look not back on the flesh-
pots of Egypt, or the rewards of sin

623


GBaP. XLV.





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH,





By a holy content and joy in God let it
be seen in you that—


* The hill of Zion yields
A thousand gacred sweets,
Before you reach the heavenly fields,
Or walk the golden streets,”


—“ Walks,” &e., Rev. D. Pledge.


Ver. 25. Theme: Kegpina UNHOLY
Vows.

L. Consctentiousness tn wrongdoing.
Must keep vows /

IL Defiance of solemn prohibition.
Idol worship !

III. Subtlety of self-delusion. Vows
are too solemn to be broken !

IV. Flattery of spiritual infatuation.
It is good for us to be faithful.

V. God’s law disobeyed in self-justr-
fcation. Though God forbids, we are
bound to ‘ fulfil with the hand” our
vows,

A Suprrstitious ReGarp Fuk Vows.
That they are inviolable, and should be
sacredly fulfilled. But—

i To cling to our vows when they are
evidently unwise or ungodly is criminal.

ii, To fulfil our rash vows in proof
that we are not fickle, is to add reckless
deeds to reckless words.

iii. To persist in our vows when shown
they break God's laws is defiant obstinacy ;
substituting constancy to our words for
obedience to God’s word.

iv. To retract wicked vows 18 the high-
est proof of wisdom and prety. Better
break our words than provoke God’s
wrath. Think of Herod’s vow, leading
to murder /

Ver. 25. Theme: Osstinacy. “ We
will surely perform our vows.”

L Resisting admonition (ver. 16).

Il. Blinded by false judgment (vers.
17, 18).

Ill. Wilful persistency (ver. 25).

IV. More obdurate as tt continues,


Ver. 26. Theme: FINALLY ABAN-
BONED BY Gop. “Since ye will not
hear Me speaking and warning, hear Me
swearing—‘ By my great name,” &e,
—Jamiceson.

“God will have the last word; the

624


prophets may be run down, but God
cannot,” — Henry.

This is the severest punishment, when
God takes away His holy name and word.

I In what it consists That the
Lord removes the candlestick of His
word from among His people; t.e., by
depriving them of the means of grace
He brings Himself into forgetfulness
amongst them.

IL On what it is founded. That
this people, on their part, have striven to
forget God.

IIL What is its effect? The people
given up to the powers of evil, for their -
complete destruction.—Waegelsbach.

Note, —“ The Jews, heretofore, amidst
all their idolatry, had retained the form
of appeal to the name of God and the
law, the distinctive glory of their nation ;
God will allow this no more (Exod. xx.
29): there shall be left none there to
profane His name thus any more.”—
Jamieson.


Ver. 29. Theme: ONE SINNER “A
Sten” To Many. in naming to this
audience the then powerful Egyptian
king, “ Hophra,” Jeremiah exposed him-
self to greatest hazards. For the audi-
ence he addressed were all hostile to the
prophet and his mission. Had any of
Jeremiah’s hearers reported this daring
utterance to the king himself, it would
have insured the prophet’s swift doom,
Yet God’s messenger dares to witness
even against powerful kings, unterrified
by danger, content to speak what God
speaks in him. God names “ Hophra”
in this prediction; for He deals with men
individually ; has the fate of each in
His hands; and “none shall stay His
hand.”

L “Assign” given as a premonition
of coming judgments.

1. Signs given before events were in-
tended to prepare the mind for events
hereafter, and to fortify against doubt,
Thus with Gideon’s fleece (Judg. vi.
36-40).

2. Signs placed én the future, and to
be waited for, were intended to keep
the mind expectant and trustful. Thus
with the sign to Moses (Exod. iii, 12),
the event convinced them that God’s


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





hand had wrought it, and called up their
gratitude to Him. -

3. This sign was thus prospective ;
buried for a time, but in due course it
would rise into realisation, and its value
would be—

(a.) In vindicating Jeremiah as being
truly God’s spokesman.

(0.) As proving that God’s Mighty
Hand was working.

(c.) As refuting their boasted trust in
the security of Kgypt.

(d.) As an announcement of the utter
ruin of this rebellious people of which
that sign was the forerunner.

II. A sign fulfilled guarantees ac-
complishment of the truth it fore
warned.

1. The event seemed unlikely of fulfil-
ment. For Apries (Pharaoh - Hophra)
now flourished in great prosperity and
power (so Herodotus records). Indeed
he vaunted impiously that “no God
has power to dethrone me.” But he
was defeated by the rebel Amasis, and
strangled by his own subjects. This
Hophra became (what he was after-
wards titled on Egyptian monuments)
“hated” by his own nation; and this
was only (according to Herodotus) sati-
ated by Amasis giving him up to the
people for a violent and degrading death.
Hophra’s death occurred eighteen ycars
after the burning of Jerusalem by the


CHAP, XLV.





Exiles,” p. 620.) Many of these Jews
would live to see this sign fulfilled.

2. The sign pledged the fate of these
exiles. They vaunted their safety, as
Hophra vaunted his power. They
deemed their shelter in Egypt impreg-
nable, and the shield of Pharaoh over
them a sure protection; but Hophra
should be “ given into the hand of them
that seek his life,” and so should they
also perish. His fall should announce
theirs,





Note :—

1. When God’s anger overtakes one
man, it pledges the equal certainty of
judgment on all who are alike guilty.

2. Fulfilled judgments in history, in
the destruction of cities (Egypt, Nineveh,
Jerusalem), and of nattons (Israel, éc.),
and of sndividuals (Nebuchadnezzar’s
madness, Zedekiah’s fate), are all wit-
nesses to the sure doom of sinners,

3. Hopeless deathbed scenes are &
warning against those whc neglect sal-
vation,

4, Fatal and sudden accidents ad-
monish those who reckon on years of
opportunity.

5. The visions of torment, in Christ's
parable of the rich man and in the Reve-
lation, warn us to “flee from the wrath
to come.”

“Except ye repent, ye shall all like-





Chaldeans, (See “ Hatermination of wise perish” (Luke xiii 1-6).


CHAPTER XLV.


CairioaL axp Execrrioan Notzs.—Chronology of the Chapter.—Immediately upon his
having written the roll which was afterwards read to, and destroyed by, Jehoiakim (vide notes on
chap. xxxvi.); eighteen years before Jerusalem was taken.

Literary Criticism.— Ver. 4. “‘ Even this whole land.” Perhaps PIN here may wisely be
rendered ‘‘ earth,” rather than limited to the “land” of Israel ; for Nebuchadnezzar’s invasions
and conquests were at that time disturbing, not Judea alone, but the known world (see chap.
xxv. 26). Albeit the force of the statement here is emphatic respecting Judea, that as the
whole country is under doom, no single individual should be selfishly craving his own aggran-
disement, but accept a share in the common distress.


SUBJECT OF UHAPTER XLV,
Barucw CorREcTED aND COMFORTED.


I, What can be gleaned respecting (0.) Faithful in his attachment as a

Baruch’s disposition and character # friend (chap, xxxii. 12; xxxvi. 4 et seq.)

(a.) A skilful scholar, and therefore (c.) Possessed of an ambitious tem-

selected by Jeremiah as his amanuensis perament (ver. 5), doubtless his noble

(Joseph., Antig. X. ix. 1). ; lineage (li. 59 ; Joseph., ai vi. 2;
RB ‘


OHAP. XLV.


Ix. 1), as the grandson of Maasiah, in
Josiah’s time (2 Chren, xxxiv. 8), ani-
mated him with hopes of high office in
the state; or his close association with
the prophet fostered the expectation of
becoming Jeremiah’s successor in the
prophetic calling.

(d.) These youthful aspirations (for
he was young at this period, eighteen
years before Jerusalem was captured),
when wisely corrected (as in ver. 5), did
not alienate his attachment to the pro-
phet, nor render him less zealous in
serving him.

(e.) Nevertheless he exhibits wounded
self-concern, which shows a lack of de-
voted patriotism and abandonment of
self for the nation’s spiritual good. His
words (ver. 3) “ Woe is me now /” indi-
cate this self-concern as unduly prominent,
especially at such a crisis,

Oriental tradition exhibits Baruch as
offended at being dented the guft of pro-
phecy ; of disappointment over the de-
struction of Jerusalem, and, with it, hes
hopes of honourable position; that there-
fore he apostatised from Judaism and
adopted the tenets of Zoroaster (Dr.
Payne Smith). This is not credible.

II. What is the burden here of Ba-
ruch’s discontent and complaint ?

(a.) An unpatriotic self-concern (comp.
(e.) above). As he writes out the gloomy
predictionsof Jeremiah he is overpowered
with a feeling of deep distress; but on
what account? That his city and people
were to experience such disaster? No!
but that he hemself was to suffer. “Woe
is me now, for the Lord hath added
grief,” dc,

(b.) An undevout repining against God
for His dealings with him (ver. 3). “The
Lord hath added grief,” &c. Rescued
from the perils of my first writing
(chap. xxxvi. 26), I am again involved in
asimilar peril. He lacks hardihood, and
a spirit of glad obedience.

(c.) An inconsolable despondency. “I
fainted in my sighing, and I find no
rest.” Instead of realising his privilege
of being allied with God’s prophet tn
God’s service, he murmurs, Instead of
hiding in God’s lowe and care amid
anticipated distressee, he despairs !

(d,) Impatience or distress over his

626


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; JEREMIAH.


nation’s sinfulness, which necessitates
these gloomy prophecies of ruin, But
it is not for him to be angry, but pitiful
and prayerful.

IIL What correction does God ad-
dress to this complaining and aspiring
youth }

(a.) Specifie information of God’s ab-
solute purpose of overthrow for Judah
(ver. 4). So that for him to—

1. Fret over Judah’s overthrow, is to
repine against God’s designs.

2. Deplore his own misfortunes, is to
reflect on God’s justice and wisdom in
allowing Asm to be involved in his na-
tion’s distresses.

3. Abandon all comfort, is to forget
that God, who punishes evil, can also
care for those He cherishes,

We must recognise and accept God's
law of justice. It behoves us to check
all repining at His judgments, “ Shall
not the Judge of all the earth do right 1”
“Tt is the Lord, let Him do what seem-
eth Him good.” “ Just and true are
Thy ways, O King of saints.” Far more
wise is this trust in God’s righteousness
than to repine against His laws as if He
were severe.

We must submit to the Divine retribu-
tions of wrong. God punishes sin ; shall
we lament it? Surely He must not let
“the wicked go unpunished.” And
when we see Him smite the guilty,
we, instead of exclaiming against it,
should bow in awe, and say, “I was
dumb, I opened not my mouth, because
Thou didst it.”

(6.) Positive prohibition of all ambitious
self-secking at such a crisis of the nation
(ver. 5).

The ‘‘ whole land” is under doom ; no
single individual should think to escape
his share of misfortune ; and certainly it
is not seemly to be intent upon earthly
prosperity amid prevailing calamities,
At such a crisis, when even the elect can
scarcely be saved (Matt. xxiv. 22), when
the very flower and dignity of the na-
tion’s youth (Daniel, Ezekiel, &c.) will
be carried into captivity, no man ought
to foster plans of private promotion and
prosperity.

It is tn cherishing ideas unduly lofty








HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





that men make reverses, when they come,
the more painful for them to bear.

The world’s frowns would not so much
disquict usif we did not so eagerly covet
its smiles,

How unseemly for God’s servants to
be buslding their hopes on mere earthly
success, when all is perishing and hasten-
ing to destruction !

IV. What word of consolation is
conveyed to this affrighted and discon-
solate soul ?

(a.) Exemption from the slaughtering
sword is guaranteed him. With death
and destruction imminent, with evil
coming “upon all flesh,” his “life”
should be secured to him, “ Life” is the
utmost which the most fortunate and
favoured can hope to have preserved to
him amid the general conflagration and
ruin.

(b.) Yet this shall only be secured by
spectal clemency ; as “a prey ;” a thing
snatched from danger, saved by prompt
energy ; as “a braud plucked from the
burning.”

Is it not a great distinction in a world
where “ death hath passed upon all men,
for that all have sinned,” to be assured
of salvation? Even though “saved
with fear, pulling them out of the fire.”
For this exemption from the common
doom is ours whom God loves; “there is,
therefore, now no condemnation to them
who are in Christ Jesus.”

How supremely satisfied and grateful
should we be if, though all earthly hopes
and honours perish, we are guaranteed
safety of soul/ “For I know whom I
have believed, and am persuaded that
He ts able to keep that which I have com-
mitted unto Him against that day.”

Comments.—“ There is not a word
here of praise for his steady attachment
to his master. However great might be
his personal services, God’s prophet had
no honeyed words of flattery for his
faithful minister, but only the bare and
unseductive message of truth. It tells
Baruch to give up his ambitious hopes,
and be content with escaping with his
life only.” —Dr. Payne Smith.

“Baruch did not act as secretary for hire
but for love. He esteemed it an honour
and a happiness that by his skill he could





OHAP. XLV,


serve the Lord, to whom he owed it.
Therefore a glorious reward is imparted
to him unsought, so that his name and
remembrance are immortalised in the
sacred record by an oracle addressed
specially to him. This honour is to be
esteemed still higher than the assurance,
that this wretched mortal life should
not be taken by violence before its
time.” —Naegelsbach.


Ver. 3. Theme : WoRLDLY PRosPEcts
SACRIFICED IN Gop’s SERVICE.

L Born to high social status, he shrank
from the disfavour which identifica
tion with God’s prophet brought upon
him. This association with Jeremiah
incurred the wrath of tbe king, the
princes, and the priests of Jerusalem ;
and thus he was shut out from all court
favours and honours.

IL An unpopular career, of fidelity to
God and His prophet, was certain to
entail great worldly losses. All the
avenues to the promotion and preferment
of which he had a reasonable expecta-
tion, and to which he aspired, he saw
closed by his call to the service of
God.

IIL Mis fatthful service of God placed
his life in jeopardy, and entailed ob-
loquy and persecution (chap, xxxvi. 26).
Here was a severe trial of faith, courage,
and seli-devotion to God.

IV. His clinging to mere worldly
honour was, however, a mistake, for God's
purpose was to destroy all national
dignity (ver. 4). What would it then
have advantaged him to have kept a
secular goal in sight? And “ what shall
it profit a man if he gain the whole
world and lose his own soul#” “ He
that will save his life shall lose it ; but
he that will lise his life for My sake
shall keep it to life eternal.”

Note.—i. It requires both courage
and self-devotion to witness for truth
in evil days,

ii. Love of the world is inconsonant
with a fearless and faithful service of
God.

iii. Earthly hopes must be surrendered
by those who join the open witnesses for
Christ,

iv. Every true f sllower of J nig must

62


4


OHAP. XLV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





“take up his cross,” and accept suffer-
ing and sacrifice as the earthly price of
the eternal gain.


Vers. 3, 4. Theme: Man’s Voice
MET BY Gop’s Voice. “Thou didst
say:;” ‘The Lord saith thus.”

Here we have two persons, Baruch
and God, presented in a manner highly
characteristic of each—Baruct: absorbed
only about himself; God terrible and
tender.

The chapter shows that the affairs of
individual children of God are of conse-
quence in His eyes; deems them worthy
of a revelation, of a personal contact
with the afflicted spirit, and of special
provision for it.

IL As to Baruch: God would show
him the evil in himself, before He
showed him the goodness there was in
God. “ Thou didst say.” It is God's
voice to man saying, “I know what is
in thee, as well as what is in Myself.”
God had “heard” what Baruch had
been saying, as He “ heard” the groan-
ings of the Israelites, the affliction of
Hagar, &c. (Ps. cvi. 44).

1. God’s hearing a reason for our
humility.

2. There are heart-voices as well as
lip-voices, As in Deut. vii. 17; viii. 17.
God’s ear is listening.

3. The murmuring and selfishness
of heart-talk (ver. 3). All comes out
when a heart fearlessly talks itself into
words. And God often hears such talk
from us— murmuring and impatient
words.

4, The prominence given to “‘ self” in
this talk. Not a word about the woes
coming on his country, or concerning
God’s honour; “1” is omnivorous, Self-
love will always discolour and distort our
views of God and everything.

5. The discontented thoughts of self-
love. They make us think we have not
been dealt with as liberally as we ought
to have been ; have been disciplined too
much. We think only of the afflictions
God has “ added,” not of His sustaining
and beneficial care, and of God’s purpose
and aim.

I. As to God; His heart does not
contract because He hears our hearts

628


——


repining. He is listening ; lets us talk
on ; not check us at once,

1. God taking notice of a sorrowful
heart.

2. His manifestation of the one-sided-
ness of our thoughts.

3. God addressing man én his per
sonality.

4. The decisiveness of God’s correcting
word,

5. Let us expect the actings of sove-
reignty in mercy. We must listen for
His “thus;” all must be Hus way as
regards the boon He confers.

6. His way may be strange, but will
surely be the right way.

7. He will save us, but not by a weak
change in His determination. He will
do as He says; perhaps exercising us by
vicissitudes, but watching over us with
personal care, that we may come forth
from our troubles taught of God, taught
about ourselves ; what there is tm our-
selves: “Thou didst say;” and what
there is tn God; “THe LorpD salTH
THUS.”—Arranged and condensed from
“ Breviates,” by Rev. P. B. Power, M.A.


Ver. 5. Theme: WoripLy ASPIRA-
tions: “ SEEKING GREAT THINGS.”

I. Great things have been secured
without seeking. And that indicates—

1, That God can confer great things
on whom He will, “It is in Thy hand
to make great” (1 Chron. xxix. 12),
ae David's confession (2 Sam. xxii.
36).

2. That the pathway to greatness tw
through lowliness to honour. Observe
Scripture instances: Moses left the
palace, yet became leader of Israel!
Solomon craved wisdom only, yet became
rich and exalted! David kept his
father’s sheep while his brothers hung
about Saul, yet was called up to be
Israel’s poet and king! Mary crept
behind Christ and anointed Hts feet, yet
her name and deed are published
“throughout the whole world.” Mar-
tyrs, who became “ the offscouring of the
world,” have become the glory of the
Church! Christians, despised by the
mighty, areto besharers of Christ’s throne!

Hence, when we, for Christ’s sake,
surrender the “great things” which


ie ae,


——


eS ee ee eee ee





;
7


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY. JEREMIAH,





CHAP, XLV?.





others seek, we are in the way of
gaining “greater things than these.”
“ Before honour is humility.”

II. “Great things” may be sought
worthily and even nobly. For it is to
be remembered—

1. That Scripture encourages a spirit
of aspiration. “Not slothful in busi-
ness.” “ Seest thou a man diligent in his
business, he shall stand before kings.”
To aspire is not a proof of impiety, nor
of worldly-mindedness.

2. God bestows great worldly power
and prosperity upon godly men. For
“fall things are yours, whether the
world,” &c. The high places of life are
to be coveted for the sway and power
for good they procure.

3. It is only when they are sought
for “self” and self-aggrandisement that
they are prohibited. For then they en-
snare and surfeit and debase the soul.

Ill. “Great things,” though they
allure, do not enrich, the soul

1. They are not happiest who are
highest. ‘‘ Uneasy lies the head that
wears the crown.” King compared with
boy swinging on a gate—“ Happier than
a king!”

2. Great things are not essential to
happiness.

3. They are always associated with
subtle and ceaseless temptations.

4. Often close the heart to higher tn-
fiuences and purer attractions.

5. Always prove transient and unsatis-
factory. “The fashion of this world
passeth away.” The heart is not rested,





comforted, satisfied by them while they
are possessed; and when they “ take
wings and fly away,” they leave “ vexa-
tion of spirit.”

IV. Greatest things are assured te
Christ’s servants.

1. Greater honours ; higher and more
lasting titles than earth can yield.
“ Heir of God,” &e. ; ‘‘ Kings and priests
to God.”

2. Greater treasures ; more satisfying
and elevating.

3. Greater privileges and blessings.

4. Greatest glory in the life to come,
“Sit with Me on My throne.”

Yet the Divine principle is this:
Through shame to glory. As Jesus,
through the Cross to the Throne: “Ought
not Christ to have suffered and entered
His glory?” As His followers: ‘“ If we
suffer with Him, we shall also be glorified
together.” Hence, seek right things for
ourselves, God shall give the “ great
things” to us |

See Addenda to chap. xli.: AMBITION.


Theme: Way GREAT Tuinas SHOULD
NOT BE SOUGHT FOR SELF.

i. Because self ought never to be our
ultimate object.

ii, Because great things thereby be
come objects of tdolatrous worship,

iii. Because to do so is to subordinate
the discharge of duty to their acquisition
and enjoyment.

iv. Because in doing so you will tm-
volve yourselves and others in much
positive suffering.—Rev. James Stewart.


CHAPTER XLVI


Critica, and ExecetioaL Notzs.—i, Chronology of the Chapter.—Firet Part: Vera.
1-12, in the fourth year of Jehoiakim; written at Jerusalem, immediately before the battle


of Charchemish.


This section forms a natural addendum to chap. xxv.


Vide notes there


on Chronology, National Affairs, and Contemporaneous History ; also on chaps. vii. and x.
Part: Vers. 18-28, is a prophecy uttered in “gypt after the migration of the remnant thither,


carrying Jeremiah with them, and should be connected with chap. xliii, 8-13.


It must have


preceded chap. xliv., which ¢s the final message of abandonment; for here in vers. 27, 28, a
message of comfort is sent, in which the old (and as yet disannulled) covenant-relationship is
still recognised and asserted. Vide notes on chaps. xliii. and xliv. See Mistoric Facts below.

2. Geographical References.—Ver. 2. “ By the river Euphrates in Charchemish.” ‘‘ Char:
chemish ” is usually identified with Cercusiwm, at the juncture of the Chebar with the Euphrates ;
but Professor Rawlinson disputes this localisation, and would place it considerably higher up
the river.

Ver. 8. “ As a flood, and his waters are moved like the rivers.” Yeor, ‘‘ flood,” is the Nas;
and ‘‘ his waters” are the branches of the Nile in Lower Egypt.

a29


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH,





ae


Ver. 9. “ Ethiopians, Libyans, and Lydians: Heb. Cush, Phut, and Ludim. “Cush,” the
Nubian negro; “ Phut,” the Libyans of Mauritania; and ‘‘ Ludim,” the Hamite Lydians of
North Africa, :

Ver. 14. ‘* Migdol, Noph, Tahpanhes.” Vide notes on chaps, ii. 14-16, and xliv. 1.

Ver. 18. ‘ Tabor” lifts itself from the plain of Esdraelon 1850 feet ; its height above the sea-
level being 1805 feet. “ Carmel” forms a bold promontory jutting out into the Mediterranean,

Ver, 25. ‘* Multitude of No;” rather Amon of No; called in Nahum iii. 8 (margin) No-
Amon. The sacred city of Thebes, capital of Upper Egypt. Comp. Ezek. xxx. 14-16. Jupiter:
Ammon had his famous temple there. Ammon was the supreme deity of the triad of Thebes.

8. Personal Allusion.—Ver. 2. ‘‘ Pharaoh-Necho king of Egypt,’ son and successor of
Psammeticus, and the sixth king of the twenty-sixth dynasty, It was he who, when going
against Charchemish, four years earlier, encountered king Josiah at Megiddo, and slew him, but
whose defeat by Nebuchadnezgar is here pronounced. In this battle he lost all the territory
which had been subject to the Pharaohs west of the Euphrates, and between it and the Nile.
He is famed ag having equipped a fleet of discovery from the Red Sea along the coast of Africa,
which doubled the Cape of Good Hope and returned to Egypt by the Mediterranean.

4, Natural History.—Ver. 8. “ Riseth like a food.” The Nile’s annual overflow at the
approach of the summer solstice.

Ver. 11. “ Gilead, and take balm.” Vide chap. viii. 22.

Ver. 20. “ A very fair heifer.” Her god was the bull Apis, and she is here called, as hia
spouse, the fair heifer.

Ver. 22. ‘* Voice shall go like a serpent,” hissing as a snake disturbed in its haunts by the
woodcutter.

Ver. 23. ‘‘ Grasshoppers.” Rendered ‘‘locust” (Exod. x. 4, 15; Judges i. 5). The
gryllus gregarius,

5. Manners and Customs.—Ver. 8. “ Order the buckler and shidd.” ‘‘ Buckler,” a small
round target carried on the left arm by the light infantry ; ‘‘ shield,” carried by the heavy-armed
troops and covering the whole body.

Ver. 4. “ Harness the horses,” the cavalry and charioteers. “ Brigandines,” cuirasses oF
coats of mail.

6. Literary Criticisms.—Ver. 5. ‘‘ Fear was round about.” The prophet’s old cry, Magor-
Missabib (see on chap. vi. 25).

Ver. 9. ‘* Come up, ye horses ;” or, “ Mount ye the horses.”

Ver. 11. “ Many medicines,” &¢. Comp. chap. xxx. 13, “ Healing-plaster hast thou none.”

Ver. 15. ‘* Why are thy valiant men swept away?” Lit. ‘‘why ts (singular) thy valiants.”
Evidently a corruption of the text. The LXX. read darl pvyer ard cov 6”"Amis; 6 poa’xos 6
ex\exros cov ove Euecvey: thus recognising in ‘‘the valiant,” or strong, Apis the bull. It is a
Scripture figure, ‘‘ strong bulls” (Ps. xxii. 12) ; and this Apis, the bull-shaped Egyptian idol, te
whom might was attributed by its worshippers, would be unable to stand before Jehovah. This
original reference to Apis as the strong one became corrupted by transcribers (who did not
understand its reference) into a plural noun, as if alluding to horses or heroes. Cambyses, in his
invasion of Egypt, destroyed the sacred bull.

Ver. 17. “ They did cry there, Pharaoh king of Egypt is but a noise.” The LXX. translate,
" Call ye the name of Pharaoh-Necho king of Egypt, Sam Esbir.’ The Syriac renders the words,
“ Disturber and passer of times;” and the Vulgate, “ Time hath brought tur.wlt.” All three
regard the last two words as a prophetic name for Necho. But {Ne is in the abstract destruc.
tion ; but in chap. xxv. 31, it is rendered “a noise ;” tumult, therefore, confusion, as associated
with destruction. So Pharaoh is to be surnamed “a noise’ or tumult.


HISTORIC FACTS REFERRED TO IN CHAPTER XLVI.


L The Egyptian power broken by Nebuchadnezzar (vers. 1-12).

1. Preliminary incidents. About four years before this decisive campaign,
Pharaoh-Necho had marched towards Charchemish. Josiah, king of Judah, has
hastened to Megiddo to intercept Pharaoh, and was there slain in battle. Necho
thereupon made Judea tributary, carried away to Egypt Josiah’s son Jehoahaas
(Shallum), and set up his brother Jehoiakim. This defeat of Judah laid Phosnicia
and Syria easily open to subjugation by Necho, who soon “established his own
dominion over the whole country between Egypt and the Euphrates ” (Rawlinson).
Meanwhile, two years after Josiah’s fall (see note, Contemporaneous History, to
chap. vii), and two years before this campaign at Charchemish, the Assyrian power
at Nineveh had been defeated by the Babylonians and Medes, Nebuchadnezzar
thereupon became the leader of this new Babylonian power, and came at length to
confront the proud Egyptian forces at Charchemish. é

2. The decisive battle. Taking this prophetic poem literally, we have here
630











SS


Se NE Oe a ar Ate Sa


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. OHAP, XLVL








described the struggle at Charchemish. First, the flower of Egypt’s army advances
(ver. 3), magnificently equipped (vers, 3,4). They are repulsed by Nebuchad-
uezzar’s forces (ver, 5) ; and with graphic and stirring language Jeremiah depicts the
sudden terror and amazement of the Egyptian hosts, long used to victory, at finding
the battle turning against them; then falling back and betaking themselves to
hasty flight (vers. 5, 6). But from this first repulse they rally ; and the whole land
of Egypt (ver. 8), together with its dependent nations and allies (ver. 9), seems to
rise up like a flood and rolls into the furious conflict, They march forth now in
assurance and pride; but this day of their fury and pomp is the appointed day of
Jehovah’s vengeance (ver. 10). Egypt is smitten with an incurable wound (ver.
11), and the cry of the smitten armies resounds through the lands (ver. 11).

II. Egypt invaded and vanquished by Babylon (vers. 13-26).

1. Intervening events. The new Babylonish empire (Chaldea) was now supreme.
Judah’s tributary dependence was now transferred to Nebuchadnezzar (see note,
Contemporaneous History, to chap. i.); this was in the fourth year of Jehoiakim
(see note, National Affairs, to chap. xxv.) Until the eleventh year of Zedekiah
this vassalage continued (chap. xxix. 2), when, in consequence of Zedekiah’s
falsity and the nation’s treachery, Nebuchadnezzar destroyed Jerusalem, carrying
the people captive to Babylon. The remnant of the poor who were left on the land
afterwards migrated into Egypt (chap. xliii.), where they lapsed into grossest idolatry
(chap. xliv.) In vain had the prophet Jeremiah there pleaded with his apostate
people ; therefore Jehovah withdrew His name from them (chap. xliv. 26), and
threatened their extermination when Egypt should be overthrown (chap. xliii. 9-13
of which the death of Pharaoh-Hophra should be the ominous sign (chap. xliv. 29,30)

2. The fatal invasion of Egypt. Nebuchadnezzar had been held back by his
siege of Tyre, which, though all the nations had been forced into subjection by his
irresistible armies, long withstood his attack. At length (585 B.c.), after thirteen
years’ siege, Tyre fell ; Nebuchadnezzar marched his army against Egypt. The
Egyptian power was now in its boastful zenith ; its cities were like a “ forest” (ver.
23), numbering a thousand and twenty. Yet the Egyptian army was devoid of
patriotism, for they were subjected races (see ver. 9) and mercenaries, thirty thou-
sand of whom Hophra hired from Asia Minor—Carians and Ionians (see Herodotus).
In this crisis these hirelings, instead of defending the country, resolve to
desert the Egyptian cause and return each to his native land (ver. 16). Egypt
thus sinks into impotent rage, like a serpent hissing in a thicket (vers. 19-23) ;
terrified by the force of the Babylonish assault into abject submission (vers. 24-26),
For forty years Egypt bore the yoke of Babylon, when, in the time of Cyrus, she
recovered her freedom, but not her glory ; for she has been in servile subjection to
foreign powers until this day (see Ezek. xxix. 11-15).

Ill. Egypt preserved from total extinction by the Chaldeans (ver. 26).
Forty years after the conquest of Egypt by Nebuchadnezzar, in which she was
despoiled of ali her glory and treasures (Ezek. xxix. 19), Cyrus won for Egypt her
emancipation, And through these long centuries, though Babylon has ceased to exist,
though mighty dynasties have become extinct, Egypt has continued as a monument
of God’s faithful word. Instead, however, of regaining her old force for aggression
and aggrandisement, her power is permanently broken (Ezek. xxix. 11-15). But
from that time she has been “inhabited ;” and to this day, in her humiliation, she
testifies to the might and justice of God—a warning to those who harm His people,
and an encouragement to those He promises to befriend.


°


HOMILIES AND OUTLINES ON CHAPTER XLVI.


Ver. 1. Theme: Gov’s Jupements Judah, His omniscience surveys the
UPON THE NaTIONs. nations. His omnipotence sways the

I. Jehovah’s sway is wide as the nations. He marks their history; He
universe. Not limited to Israel and works their destinies, ast


OHAP. XLVI.


Il. Jehovah’s wrath is against all
ungodliness. Angry with His own
apostate people. Equally angry against
iniquitous Egypt. The fate of Josiah
shall be avenged (see above, Historic
Facts). All nations who defy God’s
rule shall feel His rod. If He smite His
own people, let not His foes think to
escape /

IIL Jehovah’s justice pursues into
all lands. Let not Israel impiously
think to defy God by fleeing into Egypt;
nor to secure immunity by alliance with
the mighty.

Let not Israel despondently imagine
that the wicked will retain their proud
ascendancy over God’s people whom they
have subdued,





“ AGAINST THE GENTILES.” See
Homilies on chap. xxv., “ Zhe Manifold
Judgments of God” (p. 469); “The Wine-
cup of Wrath” (p. 474).


Vers. 3,4. Theme: Britt1ant Hopzs
Barrtep. ‘Order ye the buckler and
shield,” cc,

The satire of prophecy is very severe.
Thus the prophet summons the proud
Egyptians to the war against Nebuchad-
nezzar’s hosts, This rallying call is full
of bitterirony. Grand preparations only
to issue in tgnominious defeat.

IL. A mighty army well equipped
for war. It would almost seem that
victory was theirs before they engaged
in war.

1. Absorbing attention to our own
resources of strength shuts out all heed
of God and His designs. We trust in
armaments and forces, rest in outward
defences ; and thus tgnore God, and
alienate Him.

2. All our resources of strength are
but a deception and a snare when God
is against us. They delude us; and
allure on boastfully in the course of
defeat and destruction.

3. External splendour, being greatly
impressive and imposing, is often ima-
gined fo ensure prosperity. Men believe
in display ; and

4. Grow confident in the parade of
power and skill, But Goliath may fall

632


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


before a stone and sling. The loftinese
of men may be brought low,

IL A baffled army utterly van-
quished in war. It was a sight for
wonder, ‘ Wherefore have I seen,” &e.
(ver. 5). ‘‘ Wherefore ” is a particle ex-
pressive of surprise: “How?” “Why?”

1. Wondrous surprises do occur in
human experience, which reverse all our
boastings. Often in secular courses men
find events occur which shake them tiom
their confidences. Death- scenes have
shown the “ boastful lips put to stlence,”
&e.

2. Proud and resplendent forces are
startlingly overthrown ; vanquished con-
trary to all reckonings; as if a super
human Hand had to do with the issues
of our struggles and efforts. God reverses
the plans of the proud, and defeats the
hopes of the vainglorious.

3. Strongest forces will find themselves '
“beaten down” when they oppose the
will of Omnipotence. The Divine power
strikes down the mighty, and thereby—

(a.) Human arrogance ts chastised.

(b.) Divine righteousness ts satisfied
(ver. 10).


Ver. 5. Theme: Toe DisMaY oF
DEFEat.

I. Solid guarantees of success.
“ Mighty” (ver. 5); “Swift” (ver. 6).

1. Hopes are built on seeming securities,

2. With boastful confidence men attempt
their aims.

3. None, however opposed to God’s
purposes, allows himself to expect defeat ;
but makes his endeavours amid promises
of success,

II Guarantees of success over-
thrown.

1. Forces, whose resistance are un-
reckoned, may thwart our hopes.

2. Human resources of strength are
impotent when God ts opposed to our
success.

3. Pride and prowess will fall in the
day of God’s resistance.

4, Souls, deluded by vain boasting,
will meet an appalling defeat.

IIL Success overthrown followed by
dismay.

1. What amazement will overwhelm the
eteked in their doom !





HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


2. How helpless will the sinner be in
the moment of his overthrow.

3. How certain is the failure of all
earthly schemes, and especially of all
plans of salvation, which God disap-
proves.

4. Oh, the terror of an eternal defeat |


Ver. 11. Theme: HEALING vor
STRicKEN Ones. For Hoypt? Yes;
equally as for Israel (chap. viii. 22).

It is always right to recognise amongst
you as a congregation, the suffering.

ot in physical affliction merely, but
spiritual sufferers: sinners, backsliders,
Christians who have lost health,

The need of Christ’s ministry of
healing, and of the Christian ministry
of consolation, is still evident; and can
never cease while men suffer from the
wounds of sin.

L Healing urgently needed. What
has wounded Egypt #? Sin and strife.
What has wounded souls? The same,

1. Persevering search for remedies.
“Use many medicines,”

2. Frutless application of remedies.
“In vain use many,” &c. The world
offers ‘‘many medicines.” If conscience
is distressed, try pleasure, business,
ceremonialism. If the heart is wounded,
try exciting literature, diverting travels,
cheerful society, d&c.

But like the sufferer (Mark v. 26)
who spent her money on many physicians,
yet could be healed of none,

Il. Healing offered the stricken.

1. Seek the healing at the right place.
“Go up to Gilead.” Sinners, go to
Calvary.

2. Secure the right remedy. “Take
balm.” The blood of Christ for cleansing
the conscience ; the love of Christ for
calming the heart ; the grace of Christ
for clothing the soul.

See homilies on chap. xxx. 12-15:
“ Faithless Healers and Vain Remedies ;”
and “‘ Healing Medicines.”


Ver. 15. Theme: VaALouR DEFEATED.
“ Why are thy valiant men swept away ?
They stood not, because the Lord did drive
them.”

(i.) There is aN UNSEEN
G@RFATER than that visible.


PowzR


CHAP, XLVL





(ii.) When the unseen Power ¢s against
“ the valiants,’ VALOUR IS OF NO AVAIL

(iii.) It is GoD WHODECIDES VICTORIES,
and weakest armies may, therefore, take
the field against the strong.

L Since “power belongeth unto God,”
we should attempt no conflict without
first gaining Omnipotence on our side,
Enter, therefore, upon no enterprise
without God.

IL Valour is noble, and merits a
better issue than to be defeated.

They who are “ valiant for the truth,”
for rights civil and religious, &c,, deserve
success.

With “God for them” they shall go
on “conquering and to conquer.”

Yet reliance on our valour will repel -
God from our side, and insure that the
“valiant men are swept away.”

Ill. The overthrow of the valiant
carries its own admonition against
Godless confidence.

Mighty armies have fallen, because
they trusted in their equipments and
strategies Mighty men have fallen
before weaker forces—Samson, Goliath,
&e.

God is jealous, and will allow no
arrogance and boasting. He has threa-
tened the proud and wicked with over-
throw. “Pride goeth before destruc-
tion,” &.  Vectory will therefore be
denied to the valiant who tgnore God,
trusting in their own courage and
strength.

IV. Humility blended with valour
wins God’s mighty help.

1. Humility is better even than valour,
for it secures that which is infinitely
more important—“ God giveth grace to
the humble.”

2. Valour blended with humility has
wrought marvels, making men “ mighty
through God,” so that “one may chase a
thousand, and two may put ten thousand
to flight.”

3. Valour ts commanded in those who
stand up for Christ and His cause—
‘Quit ye like men, be strong ;” but the
uniform to be worn by every soldier of
the Cross is this: “Be clothed with
humility.”


Ver, 19. Theme: EXULTING OVER THB
633


CHAP. XLVILI HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


Ruin or Enemies, Jeremiah had reason justice—against the guilty, and to the
to loathe Hgypt, and it had been well godly,
had his people hated the land and its


inhabitants, “Come out from the midst Vers. 27, 28. Theme: Israr.’s Res-
of her, My people, and be not partakers ToraTIoN. (See notes and homilies on
of her plagues.” chap. xxx. 10, 11: “ Recovery of Lost


I. The overthrow of sinners contem- Israel,” and “ Nations Obliterated ; Is-
plated with a natural satisfaction. rael Preserved.”) “ Egypt's fall and
1. The Egyptians typify the foes of restoration have been foretold ; but the
God’s Church, prophet closes with a word of exhorta-
2. All the miseries and humiliations tion to the many erring Jews who dwelt
of life are associated with these spiritual there. With loving earnestness he—-
eneinies : like “the hard bondage” of L Reminds them of Israel’s hops,
Egypt before God redeemed His people. and of the promise of salvation to man-
3. Molestations and oppression had kind bound up with their national exia-
been experienced by Israel at the hands tence, Further, he calls back to ther
of these enemies. remembrance the prediction from which
4. The righteous see with satisfaction these two verses are taken (chap. xxx.),
that the wrongs they have suffered will and thereby
be requited. II. Assures them of Israel’s return
5, It is with equanimity and a sense from exile, and of the certain accomplish-
of right that the overthrow of our oppres- ment, by their means, of God’s purposes


sors is contemplated. of mercy to the whole human race.
II. The overthrow of sinners rejoiced Why, then, should they flee from their
in with righteous gladness. country and trust in a heathen power,


1. The law of recompense isa gracious instead of endeavouring to live in a man-
law; it windicates God’s justice and ner worthy of
power, and assures the righteous who III The noble destiny which was
suffer wrongfully that God will in due their true glory and ground of conft-
season reverse the tyranny of evil-doers. dence ?”— Dr. Payne Smith.

2. The honour of God, as much as the Note.—‘ When God turns things wp-
peace of the righteous, necessitates the side down, and takes care that neither
ultimate overthrow of the enemies of God root nor branch remains, Hts little flock


and His kingdom. must be preserved. The punishments
3. A godly soul therefore erults tm which redouud to the destruction of the
the merited defeat of evil; for— ungodly redound to the amelioration of


(a.) It insures the peace of the godly. the godly. or from these He takes the
(b.) It vindicates the faithfulness of eternal punishment, and turns even the

God. temporal punishment to their advantage;
(c.) It frustrates the purposes of evil. but the ungodly drink it to the dregs,”
(d.) It demonstrates the certainty of —Cramer.


CHAPTER XLVIL


OrrricaL axD Execrrican Notrs.—1. Chronology of the Chapter.—‘‘ Before that Pharaoh
smote Gaza” (ver. 1); but which Pharaoh? Pharaoh-Necho, on his return from defeating
Josiah at Megiddo (2 Chron. xxxv. 20), or Pharaoh-Hophra, on his return from the fruitless
effort to save Jerusalem from the Chaldeans (chap, xxxvil. 5, 7); or this same Pharaoh-Huphra
after his defeat at Carchemish (wide previous chapter, notes)? The probabilities favour
Pharaoh-Necho, and date the prophecy before the fourth year of Jehoiakim. Note, that just as
an enemy from the south (Egypt) is about to assail Philistia, the prophet predicts the seemingly
anlikely and remote fact that an enemy from the north (the Babylonians) should invade ana
gpoil them! Note further, that the country of the Philistines was overrun by the army of
Nebuchadnezzar during, or immaediately after, the siege of Tyre, while prosecuting his mareb
sowards Heypt.

634





tn


a a


ee


Oe St oa Ow ae


eS ee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; JEREMIAH.


COCO or = -


2, Geographical References (ver. 1). ‘* Philistines . .. Gaza.” Philistia bordered upon
Egypt, and Pharaoh-Necho seized this on his retreat (defeated by the Chaldeans) from Car-
chemish ; for Gaza was “the key to Egypt,” and his holding this would check the now
victorious Chaldeans from invading Egypt itself.

__ Ver. 4. ‘* Tyrus and Zidon.” Neighbours to Philistia, so that the Phoenicians of Tyre and
Sidon would naturaliy become “helpers” to the Philistines, making common cause againat the
invader, for tne overthrow of Philistia carried, as a consequence, the overthrow of Tyre and
Sidon also. “ The country of Caphtor :” perhaps Crete (so Gesenius), or Cyprus (so Kitto).
Others suggest Cappadocia ; and the city Caparorsa, situate between Palestine and Idumea, is


OHAP, XLVIVi.








pointed out as probable on account of being adjacent,


Ver. 5. “ Ashkelon . . . their valley.”


The ‘‘yalley” is the inland valley of Philistia as


distinguished from her maritime fortresses, Gaza and Askelon.


THE SworpD or THE Lorp upon PunmisttaA.


For ages long had the Philistines em-
bittered the lot of Israel. From the
times of Shamgar (Judges iii, 31), down
to those of Hezekiah (2 Kings xviii. 8),
they were both hostile and dangerous
neighbours. Now the day of retribution
had arrived, when Philistia’s hostility
should be punished. For “God is not
slack concerning His promise as some
men count slackness, but is long-suffer-
ing,” &ec.

I. The avenging sword—

1, Falls at lenyth, though long sheathed
(ver. 4). Compare Ps. xxxvii, 12, 13.

2. Is wielded by other hands than we
surmise (ver, 2). “The north” (see
note above to Chronology). God selects
His own agencies for punishing men.

Il. The smitten sufferers—

1. Paralysed with terror (ver. 3).
Solicitous for themselves to the forget-
ting of all natural affection.


when God’s sword smites, no confederacy
of defence can protect or shield,

3, Abject in grief and dismay (ver. 5).
“ Baldness” a sign of anguish; “ cué
thyself” the conduct of terrified despair.
When God smites, we feel His strokes,

IIL The appeal for mercy (ver. 6).

1. Though smitten for their sin, men
cry out against its punishment.

2. Though prayerless while sinning,
men appeal for pity when its chastise-
ments are upon them.

3. Though stubborn against God's
word, sinners cannot hold out long
under His “ sword.”

IV. The full measure of doom (ver.
7)


1. Appointed judgments will be effectu-
ally carried out.

2. No pleadings for mercy will stay
those judgments when they at last come
on the guilty,


2. Destitute of helpers (ver. 4). For


CHAPTER XLVIUI.


Crrrioat aND Exxcetican Notrs.—1, Chronology of the Chapter.—Naegelebach suggests,
with ample justification, that ‘‘ this prophecy certainly belongs to the time of Jehoiakim, and
before the fourth year, the Chaldeans and Nebuchadnezzar net being mentioned ;” and adds :
‘The form of the superscription favours its contemporaneousness with the first prophecy against
Egypt (xlvi. 1, 2).” Cf. notes on chap. xxv.

2. Contemporary Scriptures.—Cf. on chap, xxv. Here it is appropriate to point out that
this chapter is, to a remarkable degree, a compilation of extracts from other prophets, mainly from
Isaiah. Gesenius “depreciates this prophecy as a tasteless piece of patchwork” [Dr. Payne
Smith] from Isaiah; and adverse critics have challenged the wisdom and good taste of Jere-
miah’s work in thus putting together such a fragmentary collection of older inspired utterances
‘‘against Moab.” But Naegelsbach well states the case: “ Jeremiah’s object in this prophecy
was evidently to reanimate, as it were, the former declarations of similar purport, and com-
prise them together for the sake of a powerful total effect. From ver, 29 onwards there is a
constant, more or less free, use of older utterances.” Quotations taken from Isaiah xv. and
xvi, are numerous. Thus comp. Isaiah xv. 2-7 with vers. 87, 88, 34, 5, 36 ; Isa. xvi. 6-12,
with vers, 29-33, 36, 85; and Isa. xxiv. with vers. 43, 44. So, also, words and phrases, in
vers. 45, 24, and 41, seem to be appropriated from Amos ii, 2; and in vers. 26 and 42 from
Zephaniah ii. 8-10; and vers. 15, 46 from Numbers xxi. 28, 29, xxiv. 17. It should be noted
that Isaiah prophesies the devastation of Moab by the Assyrian king, Shalmaneser ; Jeremiah
cefers to its overthrow by the Chaldean king, Nebuchadnezzar. 635


oBaP. XLVI. HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH,








% National Affairs.—The historic record of 2 Kings xxiv. 2, shows that Moab had at that
time joined the Chaldeans in hostility to Judah.

4 Contemporaneous History.—Moab’s overthrow was effected by Nebuchadnezzar five years
after his destruction of Jerusalem, at the time when he also attacked Egypt (ef. notes on chap,
uliii., specially vers. 8-13) and Ammon (¢f. chap. xlix. 1-6), In Josephus, Antig., x. 9, § 7, we
have the record,

5. Geographical References.—Ver. 1. ‘‘ Nebo,” a mountain and town of Moab. “ Keria-
thaim,” a place of great antiquity, originally possessed by the Enim (Gen. xiv. 5), and after-
wards by the Moabites; placed by Eusebius ten miles west of Medeba. ‘‘ Misgab,” i.e. citadel,


not a proper name at all.


Ver. 2. ‘‘ Heshbon,” the chief city of Moab, situate midway between the rivers Arnon and
Jabbok ; it was an ancient and royal city. ‘* Madmen,” a town of which no information exists


Ver, 3. “ Horonaim:” the same as the city Avara mentioned by Ptolemy.


10; Isa. xv. 5. It lay in a plain.


See Nehem. ii,


Ver. 5. ‘‘ Luhith” lay on a height $ locality unknown.


Ver, 18. ‘* Dibon,” situate on the south bank of the Arnon,


The remains of the fortifiea-


tions of Dibon are still visible (Burckhardt’s 7'ravels).


Ver. 19. ‘* Aroer.”


On the north bank of the Arnon, a city of Ammon.


Ver, 20. ‘‘ Arnon. This river was the north boundary between Moab and Ammon. fee


Numb. xxi. 13.
Ver. 21. “ Holon.” Cf. Josh. xv. 51.


* Jahazah.” Cf. Numb. xxi. 23.


“« Mephaath.” Of.


Josh. xiii. 18; xxi. 37. Of these and following cities enumerated little or nothing is known.
Ver. 82. “Sea of Jazar.” Jazar lies in an upland valley, about fifteen miles north of Hesh-
bon. ‘ Sea” is very doubtful here ; probably a transeriber’s error.


6. Personal Allusion.—Ver. 7.


“* Chemosh,” the national god of Moab (Numb. xxi. 29).
His being led into captivity represents the total ruin of the nation he protected.


The literal


name here is ‘‘ Chemish,” and this is doubtless correet, as in the word ‘*‘ Carchemish,” te. the


fortress of Chemish,


7. Natural History.—Ver. 28. “‘ The dove that maketh her nest in the sides of the hole’s
mouth ;” lit. ‘‘ that resteth in the passages of the sides of the abyss.” Tristram saya, “ The wild
endersee


pigeon invariably selects . .
quotes the following classics :—


. deep ravines for its nesting and roosting places.”


Diyer Gore wédeuw
*H pd 6 ba! Ipnkos xoldny eloéwraro rérpyy.—Tliad, xxi, 498%
“ Qualis spelunca subito commota columba ~
Cui domus, et dulces latebrogo in pumice nidi,”—Afneid, v. 218.
8. Literary Criticisms.—Ver. 2. ‘‘ Im Heshbon they have devised:” a play upon words,
wwn—pawi7, ‘‘Heshbon ” means a place of devising or counsel. ‘‘ Thou shalt be cut down
(margin, brought to silence), 0 Madmen :” another play on words; “Madmen” means silence.


Ver. 7. “ Thy works,” i.e. fortifications.


tumultuous ones.”


Moab was renowned for them.
Ver, 45. “ Because of the force,” rather without force.
fugitives stand powerless under the shadow of Heshbon.”


“The
the head of the


A better translation is:
“The crown of


“Crown of the head” is here poetical for the loftiest elevation of Moab


and the Moabites, im reference to the roar and fury with which they give battle, are call


“sons af tumult.” .


BUBJECT OF CHAPTER XLVIIi.
Moas’s Doom.


Ver, 1. Theme: Sin THE PRECURSOR OF
Doom. “Because the destruction of the
Moabites is of no service to us except
for penitence, we must note well what
particular sins are specified, of which
they were guilty, and for which such
heavy punishments were heaped upon
them, viz. :—

I. Disdain, in that they gave no one
a good word, were unfriendly, and only
blustered and boasted with every one
(Ps. lii. 3).

II. Confidenee in their fortifications,

636


power, money, and riches (2 Chroa,
xxxii. 8 ; Isa. xl. 6).

IIL Security, as if all were pros
perous and peaceful, which was the sin
of their sister Sodom (Ezek. xvi. 49;
Zeph. ii. 9).

IV. Talking great things, and in-
dulging self-praise. But although Go-
liath was so mighty a fellow, he had
yet to bite the grass (1 Sam. xvii. 50).

V. Pride and arrogance. These
never do well, but act with violence
and injustice. By violence, injustice,





HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





and avarice, however, a kingdom passes
from one people to another.” —Cramer.


Theme: SINNERS ALIKEIN ALL AGES,
* How many are still like the Moabites ;
for how many are there who—

I. Depend on their power and vio-
lence, their fortified cities and buildings,
their riches, money, and property, and
set all their hope and confidence thereon !
How many are there who, when they
have been some time at peace,

It. Become secure, and anticipate
no further evil, thinking there is no
more trouble from the rising to the
setting of the sun! How many are
there who—

IIL Rely on their own strength,
and say, Let the enemy come, we are a
match for him! How many there are
who, when they surpass others in bodily
strength, or in mental gifts, or in per-
ishable goods,

IV. Become proud and abusive;
ridicule, despise, and treat badly their
inferiors, as if they had “ found such
among thieves,” as God the Lord here
says (ver 27)! And, although all good
and perfect gifts come from the Father
of lights, yet many will not acknowledge
this, but

V. Ascribe their advantages to their
own wisdom and skill, do not thank
God for them, and thus make themselves
the idol they serve.”— Bibl. Sunimarien,
Halle, 1848. From Lange.


Ver. 2. Theme: PratszE To MAN
Sizencep, ‘There shall be no more
praise of Moab.”

I Human praise is of short dura-
tion. Be it offered to nations or men,
it is like the trumpet strain, which
swells in loudness and then dies into
silence ; like the fragrance of a flower,
which, however sweet, soon passes
away.

IL Praise to men can scarcely be
given with justice. Why should praise
be given to a nation for its greatuess—
of wealth, intelligence, territory—when
that greatness is the result of the de-
velopment of natural resources, or of
administrative power, given to it of
God? And why should praise be


OHAP, XLYIT.





ascribed to a man of genius or benevo-
lence, when his genius is a Divine en-
dowment, and his benevolence a Divine
implantation ¢

Ill. Praise is due only to God
Shall we praise the Alps that they reach
unto the clouds, or the eagle that she
bears her young upon her wings and
covers them with her feathers? No!
The mighty Alps are what they are by
the creative power of God, and the noble
eagle is what she is by the instinct God
has given to her.

Mighty nations are but Alps of God’s
creation, and great men are ‘but eagles
of God’s endowing ; for “of Him and
through Him are all things, to whom
be glory for ever and ever.”

IV. Heaven-taught men never fail
to trace the favours their fellow-men
confer up to their Divine Source. Does
Joseph obtain favour of Pharaoh? It
is acknowledged that “the Lord gave
him favour” (Gen. xxxix. 21; xli. 52).
Is Daniel a favourite in the court of
Babylon? ‘God had brought Daniel
into favour and tender love,” é&c. (Dan.
i. 9). Is the Church at Corinth ear-
nestly cared for by Titus? Paul thanks
God for putting that “care into the
heart ” of Titus.

Every river has its source, the Avon
or Thames, the Niger or Nile, and so
has every blessing; and that source is
God !

V. Praise to man shall be silenced
that God may receive Hisdue. Often,
instead of ali blessings being traced to
God, they are in part traced to men;
and sometimes so largely to man as if
he were the greater benefactor of the
two.

But silence eventually shall come upon
all human praise.

VL God’s praise is the Christian’s
sweetest employ, and it shall be an
endless employ. ‘‘ There shall be no
more praise of Moab ;” but neither in
time or eternity will God’s praise cease.


“ Praise shall employ my noblest powers
While immortality endures !
Thy days of praise shall ne’er be past
While life or breath or being last.”


Death may silence the tongue, but it
637


cannot the soul; and in heaven it will
perpetuate God’s praises,


*“When this poor lisping, stammering tongue
Lies silent in the grave,
Then in a nobler, sweeter song,
I'll sing Thy power to gave.”


As He loved us from everlasting, so
shall our praise be éo everlasting. His
everlasting love will call forth our ever-
lasting song.—Arranged from Pledge’s
“ Walks with Jeremiah.”


Ver. 4. Theme: A Cry rrom LitTLE
Ones. “ Moab is destroyed ; her little
ones have caused a cry to be heard.”
Calamity comes upon all, young and old.
However innocent, however “ /itile,” none
escape.

IL Children suffer. “Cry,” as if tn
distress / Yes, even “little ones” share
in pain, grief, and calamity. (1.) Sad
to think of suffering children ; in hos-
pitals, at home. (2.) Sad, also, to think
of sorrowing children: little hearts
broken with grief; orphans, ill-used
ehildren, hungry children. (3.) Most
sad to think of sinning children. They
suffer most,—in their consciences now ;
and, if they die in their sins, they suffer
in doom! For—

Il. Children perish, ‘Cry” as they
fall under the destroyer’s hands. For
“ Moab ts destroyed,” and in the de-
struction the children are included.

1. Cruel people will even injure and
destroy “ little ones.” Think of Herod’s
soldiers slaying the infants of Bethle-
hem. There are evil men and women
who would destroy the innocence, the
purity, the affection, the truthfulness,
the happiness of children. They do it
with bad books, by teaching them to lte
and deceive, by tempting them to break
God’s day and His laws, And children
are perishing around us! (See Matt.
xviii. 6.)

2. Satan delights in destroying the
“little ones.” A “roaring lion seeking
whom he may devour.”

TIL Children pray. “Cry” as if in
prayer. Doubtless these “ little ones”
in Moab would cry out to the destroy-
ers, entreating them not to hurt or kill
them.

638





1. Children can pray.
to be heard.”

2. Children may pray in a wrong
direction: to their cruel destroyers, in-
stead of to God, their mighty Deliverer.

3. Children should pray ; for peril ia
hear, and Jesus waits to save those who
seek Him. ‘Call upon J/e in the day
of trouble, and I will hear thee.”


“ Cause a cry


Ver. 9. Theme: HasTENING TO
Esoarz. ‘“QGive wings unto Moab,
that it may flee and get away.”

I. Wherefore should a soul “make
haste” in seeking salvation?! Because—
1. The “spoiler” is alert (ver. 8).

2. None will be exempted (ver. 8).

3. No hiding-place will be secure
(ver. 6).

4. Moments wasted give opportunity
to the foe.

5. Lost opportunities never return.

IL From what should a soul so
earnestly speed its flight ?

1. From delights and possessions which
tt had hitherto cherished: “Thy works
and thy treasures” (ver. 7). ‘Love
not the world, neither the things that
are in the world.”

2. From every object of trust. ‘Thou
hast trusted in,” d&c. (ver. 7). They are
insufficient; and to cling to them will
work delusion and destruction.

3. From all false religious hopes.
“Chemosh and his priests” (ver. 7),
all shall fail Moab; as all religious
hopes, but Christ, shall fail the soul.

IIL How can a soul hasten its
escape from pursuing perils? ‘‘ Give
wings to Moab, that it may flee and get
away.” Corap. Ps. lv. 6.

1. Its own unaided powers will not
suffice to save the soul.

2. The “wings” a soul needs are
prayer, purpose, faith. For by these
it speeds its way to Christ,

3, Such supernatural endowments must
be “given,” the soul cannot assume them
at will, nor create them for the emer-
gency. God will give such “ wings,”
He gives the Holy Spirit; and the
Spirit stirs the soul to prayer, to pur-
pose, and to faith.

Blessed is that soul who “gets away”
from snares and pursuing foes, safely hid





a ee Pe ee Oe Nan eS eee bn eee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR.


aie st


CHAP. XLVUSE,





in Christ! ‘“ Flee” to the cross; “flee”
to the throne of grace; “flee” to your
Bibles; “flee” to the open heart of
Jesus,


Ver. 10. Theme: Doine Gon’s Work
Remissty, This utter devastation of
Moab was “the work of the Lord;”
and the instruments He would use
must do it thoroughly. Comp. Saul’s
sin as to Amalek (1 Sam. xv. 3, 9),
“3) Ahab’s as to Syria (1 Kings xx.
42

Notes.— The prophet pronounces ‘a
curse’ upon ministers of the Divine jus-
tice if, being sent to destroy Moab, they
are remiss in executing the sentence.”—
Dr. Payne Smith.

“The work of destroying Moab is
here mainly meant. But the text taketh
in all lawful employments; these are
God’s works, and must be done vigor-
ously, with all our might, in obedience
to God, and for His greatest glory. Not
soldiers only, that have a good cause,
and in a good calling must likewise take
a good courage, and do execution lustily ;
but magistrates also, who are keepers of
both tables of the law, must do right to
all without partiality. Ministers must
Jook to the ministry which they have
received from the Lord that they fulfil
it. Every man, in his particular place
and station, must be ‘not slothful tm
business, but fervent in spirit, serving
the Lord.’ In God’s immediate service
especially men must stir up themselves
to take hold of Him, minding the work,
and not doing it in a customary, formal
way. A very heathen [Aristides] could
say, ‘Iynavia in rebus divinis est nefaris’
—Dulness in Divine things is abomi-
nable. And Numa, king of the Romans,
made a law, that none should be careless
or cursory in the service of God, and
appointed an officer to cry oft to the
people at such a time, ‘ Hoc agite’—
Mind what you do, and do it to your
utmost. He that is ambitious of God’s
curse, let him do otherwise.”—Trapp.

Theme; DEOEITFULNESS IN GopD's
Service. Jeremy Taylor suggests—

(i.) He that serves God with the body,
without the soul, serves God deceitfully.

(ii.) He that serves God with the soul,


without the body, when both can be con.
joined, doth the work of God deceitfully.

(iii.) They are deceitful in the Lord's
work that reserveone faculty for sin, or one
sin for themselves, or one action to please
their appetite and many for religion.

(iv.) And they who think God suffi-
ciently served with abstaining from evil,
and converse not in the acquisition and
pursuit of holy charity and religion.—
Quoted in Lange.


Ver. 10. War Theme: Tue Cursz
oF Cowarpice. The God of peace
would have us “follow peace with all
men ;” and the Prince of peace has pro-
nounced, ‘Blessed are the peacemakers.”
But when the lusts of men are per-
petually embroiling the world with wars
and fightings ; when avarice and ambi-
tion would rob us of our prosperity ;
when they would enslave the free-born
mind by their usurpation and arbitrary
power; when they would tear from our
eager grasp Heaven’s highest blessing,
our religion—zwhat then 18 the will of
God? Must peace be maintained with
perfidious and cruel invaders, at the
expense of property, life, and religion ?
Ne; in such a time the Providence of
God calls, “Zo arms/” The sword is
then consecrated, and the art of war
becomes part of our religion.

The Moabites. against whom this pro-
phecy was denounced, were a trouble-
some and restless nation in the neigh-
bourhood of the Jews, who, though
often subdued by them, struggled to
recover their power, and renewed their
hostilities ; by this and other sins their
guilt rendered them ripe for execution.
The Babylonians were commissioned to
this work of vengeance, and they were
bound to execute the commission faith-
fully, under penalty of a curse,

The text is a declaration of the
righteous “curse” of God against a
dastardly refusal to engage in war when
it is our duty, or a deceitful, negligent
discharge of that duty after we have
engaged im it, This denunciation is
levelled, like the artillery of heaven,
against the coward, and against the
self-secking, as distinguished from the
patriotic soldier.

639


ait


OBAP. XLVIII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; JEREMIAH,





I Present a brief view of the cir-
cumstances which call us to war.
Barbarities and depredations of Indian
savages and French papists. Homes
demolished, and families fleeing in con-
sternation ; the dead lie mangled with
brutal wounds ; others have been dragged
away captives, made the slaves of im-
perious savages. Our frontiers have
been drenched with the blood of our
fellow-subjects, Our country bleeds
at a thousand veins, and without our
timeiy remedy the wound will prove
mortal.

Is it not, therefore, our duty in the
sight of God, a work to which He loudly
calls us, to take up arms for the defence
of our country? Certainly ; and “Cursed
is he who [without justifiable reasons]
keepeth his sword from blood,”

The man that can desert the cause of
his country in such an emergency, whose
blessings he has shared in times of peace,
and whose sympathy and aid he shares
in the day of distress, that cowardly,
ungrateful man deserves the curse of
hoth God and his country.

What greater evidence of tngratetude
ean be given than a supine neglect of
the blessings the land enjoys, and a
stupidly tame resignation of them into
rapacious hands? Love of country and
of religion calls us to action.

It. Show what is that deceitful per-
formance of the Lord’s work, or un-
reasonable Keeping back the sword
from blood, which exposes to His
curse. If soldiers should unman them-
selves with debauchery instead of risking
life for defence of country ; if they shun
instead of seeking out the enemy; if
they consult what is safest and easiest
for themselves and not for their country ;
when they prolong the war that they
may the longer live and riot at the
nation’s expense; when they do not
conscientiously exert all their power to
repel the enemy and protect the state ;
then they ‘“‘do the work of the Lord
deceitfully,” and His curse lights on
them as their heavy doom. Let sobriety,
public spirit, courage, fidelity, and good
discipline be maintained among you.

But, besides soldiers, you are sinners,
and candidates for eternity, We may

662


never meet more. You are concerned
to save your own souls as well as your
country. Surely immorality and de-
bauchery cannot better inspire soldiers
with fortitude against the fear of death
than prayer and a life of holiness. Such
courage must be a brutal stupidity or
ferocity, not the rational courage of a
man or a Christian.

If free from these vices, negative good-
ness t¢ not enough to prepare you for
death, You must experience Divine
grace; become humble penitents and
true believers in Jesus Christ; must
“live soberly, righteously, and godly
in this present evil world.” This is
religion, which will inspire and be-
friend in conflict, and sustain you in
death.

God grant you a safe return from the
struggle, crowned with the laurels of
victory.

But if the defence of owr country, in
which we can stay but a few years at
most, be so important a duty, then how
much more are we obliged to “seck a
better country, even a heavenly,” and
to carry on vigorous war against our
spiritual enemies who would rob us of
our heavenly inheritance! Therefore,
in the Name of “the Captain of our
salvation,” I invite you to enlist in the
spiritual warfare. ‘Take to you the
whole armour of God; quit you like
men; be strong.” And for encourage-
ment, remember, “ He that overcometh
shall inherit all things,” and enter a
kingdom which cannot be shaken or
assailed.—Preached to the Militta by
President Davies, a.p. 1758.


Vers. 10,11. Theme: Cannan Sxovu-
rity. “ Moab hath been at ease from
his youth, and he hath settled on his
lees, and hath not been emptied from
vessel to vessel, neither hath he gone
into captivity: therefore his taste re-
mained in him, and his scent is not
changed. Therefore, behold, the days
come, saith the Lord, that I will send
unto him wanderers, that shall cause
him to wander, and shall empty his
vessels, and break their bottles.”

For a considerable season Moab had
been free from the inroads of war and





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; JEREMIAH.





the terrors of pestilence ; had, therefore,
become so conceitedly secure, that the
Lord said, “We have heard the pride
of Moab,” d&c. (ver. 29). The people
became vain, hectoring, and boastful,
and mocked at their afflicted neighbours
the Israelites, manifesting ungenerous
joy in their sorrows (ver. 27). From
this pride sprang luxury and all those


other vices which find a convenient lair


in the repose of unbroken prosperity.
The warriors of Moab said, “ We are
mighty and strong men for the war ;”
as vainglorious sinners, they defied all
law and power; trusting in Chemosh,
they despised Jehovah, and magnified
themselves against the Lord. The pro-
phet compares that country to wine
which has been allowed to stand un-
stirred and unmoved: it settles on its
lees, grows strong, retains its aroma,
and gathers daily fresh body and spirit.
“But,” saith he, “the day shall come
when God shall shake this undisturbed
liquor, when He shall send wandering
bands of Chaldeans that shall waste the
country, so that the bottles shall be
broken and the vessels shall be emptied,
and the proud prosperity of Moab shall
end in utter desolation.” The unusual
repose of Moab had been the envy of
the people of Israel, but they might
well cease to envy when they under-
stood how suddenly it should be over-
thrown.

That continued prosperity breeds car-
nal security is proved by the instance of
Moab. In the first place, this 1s the
common mischief of ungodly men, in the
second place, this is the frequent danger
of the most godly.

L Carnal security is the common
mischief of the unconverted, the god-
less, the prayerless, the Christless.
Many have become like Moab, At
ease from your youth, not ‘ emptied
from vessel to vessel,” but settled upon
your lees, and therefore careless and
heedless,

1. This is 80 common among the un-


. godly, that the whole world was in this


condition immediately before the great
Deluge which destroyed the ancient race,
We read that “they married and were
given in marriage.” They did eat and





OHAP, XLVIII,


did drink, and were drunken even until
the day when Noah entered into the
ark, and the floods came and swept them
all away. The preacher of righteous-
ness for one hundred and twenty years
warned them that their sins were become
intolerable to Heaven, and that vengeance
would surely be taken upon their devices,
but they laughed the prophet to scorn.
The world is so little changed to-day,
that if the Lord Jesus Christ should
now come, as come He will, “in such
an hour as ye think not,” He would
find the mass of men still in the same
condition. ‘‘ As it was in the days of
Noe, so shall it be also in the days of
the Son of Man.” This is the abiding
state of the world which lieth in the
wicked one: settled on its lees, it is not
emptied from vessel to vessel, and there-
fore it dreams itself into presumptuous
peace.

2. But from the world at large to come
to particulars.

(1.) The bold offenders who are at ease
in open sin. They began life with ini-
quity, and have made terrible progress
in it. These men are not disturbed in
their sins; their conscience has been
seared as with a hot iron: things which
others would tremble at are to them a
jest; they make a mock at sin; they
play with burning coals of lust and
carry fire in their bosom, and boast that
they are not burned. These are they of
whom David said, “They are not in
trouble as other men,” dc, (Ps, Ixxiii.
57). Read yonder handwriting on the
wall, O despiser; and this is the inter-
pretation thereof; “Thou art weighed
in the balances and found wanting ; thy
joy shall soon.be taken from thee, and
thy life also, and what shalt thou do in
the day when the Lord requireth thy
soul }”

(2.) Men who give themselves wholly
up to the world’s business. Such men,
for instance, as one whom Christ called
“Fool.” You know the story: his
fields brought forth plenteously, &Xc.
He was a raiser of grain and a hoarder
of gold, and nothing more, This is the
end and object of the most of mankind.
Gain is the world’s summum bonum, the
chief of all mortal good, the main chance,


38 641


OHaP. XLVIIL


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


TE


the prime object, the barometer of
success in life, the one thing needful,
the heart’s delight. And yet, O world-
lings, Jesus Christ calls you fools.
“ Thou fool,” said He; and why? Be-
cause the man’s soul would be required
of him; and then whose would those
things be which he had gathered to-
gether ?

(3.) The man who forgets God and
lives in slothful ease. He is like the
man who deposited the napkin and the
talent in the earth, and was perfectly at
his ease—a fair picture, indeed, of many
who ought to be serving God; but they
think they have little ability, and there-
fore do not strive even to do what they
can, They are not openly sinful; they
are quiet, easy-going, good-tempered
souls, but the talent, where is it?
Buried! Alas! it will have a resurrec-
tion, and when it rises, all rusty from
that rotting napkin, what a witness will
it bear, and how will the Master say,
“Thou wicked and slothful servant!”
The charge of sloth was quite enough.
His doom was swift and terrible. It is
not enough to abstain from outward sin,
and so to be negatively moral; unless
you bring forth fruits unto righteousness,
you have not the life of God in you;
and however much you may be at ease,
there shall come a rough awakening to
your slumbers, and the shrill sound of
the archangel’s trumpet shall be to you
no other than the blast of the trumpet
of condemnation, because ye took your
ease when ye should have served your
God.

(4.) There are many in the professing
Christian Church who are in the same
state as Moab. At the table of com-
munion they sit with God’s people.
Their profession is a very comely one,
and their outward conduct exceedingly
honourable, yet they lack the inward
spiritual grace, They have the virgin’s
lamp, but they have no oil in the vessel
with their lamps ; and yet so comfortable
are these professors, that they slumber
and sleep. Let not presumption hold
you in its deadly embrace. Remember,
you may think yourself a believer, and
everybody else may think so too, and
you may fail to find out your error until


642


it is too late to rectify it, Be ye not,
O ye professors, like Moab, that had
settled upon his lees!

(5.) The mass of moral men who are
destitute of faith in Jesus, They hear
of the convictions and troubles of an
awakened conscience, and they inwardly
sneer at such fanaticism, and boast that
they never stooped to such feelings,
But those pangs, and throes, and toss-
ings of a wounded conscience are signs
of the dawn of spiritual life; it is by
such things as these that we are led to
put our trust in Jesus; and those who
have never felt them may well lament
before the Lord, and pray that they
may experience them—that they may
be brought soundly and safely out of
their self-righteousness, and led to rest
upon the finished work of the dear Re
deemer. Better to suffer a present dis-
turbance which will end in life, than
enjoy the ease which is itself a protrac-
ted death. God give you to be saved
through Jesus Christ !

IL Oarnal security is the frequent
danger of the most godly. A Christian
may fall into a state of carnal security,
in which he grows self-confident, insen-
sible, careless, inactive, and worldly. The
great disease of England is consumption,
but I suppose it would be difficult to
describe the causes and workings of
consumption and decline, The same
kind of disease is common among Chris-
tians. It is not that many Christians
fall into outward sin, and so on, but
throughout our Churches we have scores
who are in a spiritual consumption—
their powers are all feeble and decaying.
They have an unusually bright eye—
can see other people’s faults exceedingly
well—and sometimes they have a flush
on their cheeks which looks very like
burning zeal and eminent spiritual life,
but it is occasional and superficial. Vital
energy is at a low ebb: they do not
work for God like genuinely healthy
workmen ; the heart does not beat with
a throb moving the entire man; they
go slumbering on, in the right road it is
true, but loitering in it.

1. The rapid results of this consump-
tion are just these: A man in such a state
soon gives up communion with God


ae


a a
err


ee es








HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


CHAP. XLVIEL





His walk with God is broken and occa-
sional. His prayers very soon suffer.
By degrees his conversation ceases to be
earnest for Christ. And now, strange
to say, “The minister does not preach
as he used to do;” at least the back-
slider says so, ‘The reason is, that now
there is little savour about the Word to
him. Hymns which used to be delight-
ful for their melody now pall upon his
ears ; while the prayers in which he used
to join with so much fervency are very
flat to him now. Very much of this
sluggishness is brought on by long-con-
tinued respite from trouble,


“More the treacherous calm I dread
Than tempests rolling overhead.”


2. The great secret danger coming out
of all this is, that when a man reaches
the state of carnal security he is ready
for any evil. If the history of great
offenders could be traced, it would be
very much like this: they began well,
but they slackened by degrees, till at
last they were ripe for foul sin. Who
would think that David, the man after
God’s own heart, should come to be the
murderer of his friend Uriah, to rob him
of his wife? O David! art thou so near


‘to heaven and yet so near to hell? There


is a David in every one of our hearts,
and if we begin to backslide from God, we
do not know to what extent we may slip,

3. God's cure for this malady. His
usual way is by pouring our settled wine
from vessel to vessel. If we cannot bear
prosperity, the Lord will not continue it
to us. Have you never dreamed that
you were trying to walk and could not
You felt as though you could not move
a foot—some one was about to overtake
you who would do you serious mischief,
and you longed to run and could not stir
an inch, That is the state of mind in
which we get when we would but can-
not pray, when we would but cannot
repent, when we want to believe and
cannot, when we would give a world for
one single tear, would almost pawn our
souls to obtain a quiver of spiritual feel-
ing, but were insensible still :—


6 If aught is felt, ’tis only pain
To find ‘I cannot feel.’”


Do you ever sink into that petrified


condition? Can you be its victim and
yet be happy? Betake yourself to ear-
nest prayer. It will need God within
us to keep us from such a tremendous
peril.

See Addenda: TrouBLes REVIVE US.

4. What ought we to do if we are
prospering # If God is prospering us,
the way to prevent lethargy is—be very
grateful for the prosperity which you
are enjoying; do not pray for trouble
—you will have it quickly enough with-
out asking for it; be grateful fur your
prosperity, but make use of it. Do all
you possibly can for God while He pros-
pers you in business; try to live very
closely to Him. Watch the very first
symptoms of declining, and fly to Christ,
the Great Physician, He will give you
the balm of Gilead which will prevent
the mischief, and you may bear the heats
of prosperity as safely as the chill blasts
of adversity.

But if you have fallen into such a
state, the one cure 1s the Holy Spirit.
Go to the cross of Christ again. Chris-
tian, if you have fallen from your first
estate, go as you hope you went at first ;
go with your deadness, and sloth, and
lethargy, and put your trust in the pre-
cious blood, and ask the Lord Jesus to
fill you with the Spirit once again, that
you may be renewed, Try to get a due
estimate of your indebtedness to God’s
grace; try to see the danger of your
lethargy; think more of eternity and less
of time. Rend yourself away a little
from your worldly engagements, if pos-
sible; put away your fancied security,
and by strong crying and tears turn
again to your former state of nearness
to the living God.

Owing Thee so much, O Jesus! may
we love Thee much in return, and be
found faithful when Thou shalt come to
reward Thy people and to be glorified
in Thy saints) Amen.—C, H. Spurgeon,
A.D. 1867.


Ver, 11. Theme: INDIFFERENCE TO
Erornat Reautizs. “Moab hath been
at ease from his youth.”

L. True of men in the prime of life or
in the decay of old age. The hiyh-born,
cradled in luxury, &c. No concern as

643


OHAP. XLVI,





to things temporal or spiritual.
take thine ease,” dc.

Multitudes of men of business and
toilers in all grades of social life have
** been at ease from their youth” touch-
ing their eternal interests. Conscience
seared ; no heed of the momentous truths
of revelation.

IL Deplorable to see men “at ease”
in the condition in which sin has placed
them and the Gospel finds them. That
condition is one of guilt and condem-
nation. In this condition the Gospel
comes with declaration of free remission
of all their sins through faith in Jesus
Christ ; yet states that, rejecting Christ’s
grace, the soul must die !

Guilt and condemnation are, therefore,
sncreased when the Gospel is rejected ;
and yet men, despising salvation, are
“at ease,”

III. Apathy so serlous, so appalling,
calls for explanation. For men to be
easy under condemnation, surely it be-
speaks Satan’s influence exerted on mind
and heart (2 Cor. iv. 3, 4).

The explanation therefore of this ease
and indifference is supernatural “ dlind-
ness.” Danger seen or apprehended
destroys thoughtless ease and stoical
apathy. Nosooner is a soul enlightened
to its state and peril than the distressed
cry rises, “What must I do to be
saved?”

IV. Peace can be found only in Jesus,
It is a peace solid, substantial, and abid-
ing—the fruit of faith. Far differeut
from the stolidity of Moab. Yet this
divinely-given peace is not mere yutet-
ude. For the soul is aroused. active,
earnest.

V. Underthevery sound of the Gospel
souls “sit at ease.” Thecall isaddressed,
‘‘ Awake, thou that sleepest,” &., but
they remain in death-like torpor. The
warning, “ Flee from the wrath to come |”
is given, but they treat it as a false
alarm. The invitation is presented,
“Come unto Me,” but they turn aside.

God regards such with special anger :
** Woe to them that are at ease in Zion.”
They slight not the word of man, but
of God. ‘TI have called, but ye refused,”
&c, (Prov, i, 24, 26).

Careless souls, rouse from your torpor.


644


“Soul,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY ; JEREMIAE.


Why cry “Peace, peace! when there is
no peace”*— Pledges “ Walks with
Jeremiah,”


Comments.—Ver. 12. “I wILL SEND
UNTO HIM WANDERERS,’ &c., lit., ‘‘tcliers,
who shall tut him up and empty his
vessels,” t.¢., the Chaldeans, who would
remove Moab from his _ settlements,
“« Hus vessels” are the cities of Moab.
The “ broken bottles” or pitchers alludes
to smaller receptacles as well as the
larger vessels, and suggests the destruc-
tion of “everything that has contained
the wine of her political life, both small
and great.”—Dr. Payne Smith,


Ver. 13. “IsmakL Was ASHAMED OF
Berney.” Israel had trusted in the
calf-deity worshipped at Bethel (1 Kings
xii. 27, 29; Hos. x. 15; Amos iii. 14;
v. 5, 6; vii. 13), but Shalmanezer’s
conquest had put their trust to “ shame.”
Even so would Moab become “ ashamed ”
of Chemosh, their hope in his protection
being refuted.


Ver. 15. “His Cuoszn Youne Mzn
ARE GONE-DOWN TO THE SLAUGHTER,”
A text suitable for sermon on occasion
of CALAMITY BEFALLING Youne Men,
or upon the theme Sin’s DusTRuctTiva
ACTION UPON THE YOUNG.

I. How appalling are the ravages of
calamity or sin! ‘‘ Gone down to the
slaughter.”

II. How unsuspecting is youth of
perils and destruction! ‘‘ Young men
are gone down,” not dreaming of the dire
issue of their course.

IIL How pitiless is evil to the pre-
ciousness of youth! Slaughters even
*‘ chosen young men!” t.e., “the choice
ones of his young men.”

IV. How urgently should the young
regard the warnings of danger! It
was impossible for these “ young men”
to escape “slaughter” in going down to
face the invincible Chaldeans, ‘ Young
men” may deem themselves strong—
may scorn the perils which others see
tor them, and of which they warn them
—but the world is full of dangers te
youth !

Observe that this admonition of





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.





OHAP, XLVH,





coming doom to the reckless young men
is spoken by “the Kine whose name
is the Lorp of hosts.”


Ver. 16. “CaLAMITY 18 NEAR To
COME, AND AFFLICTION HASTETH FAST.”
“Near” to the prophet’s eye, although
twenty-three years elapsed between the
fourth year of Jehoiakim (when this
prophecy was uttered) and the fifth
year after Nebuchadnezzar’s conquest
of Jerusalem (when this prophecy was
fulfilled).

I. God’s warnings give time for pre-
paration.

II. Justice, though slow, yet surely
moves onward.

Ili. God’s hand lingers to deal the
fatal blow so long as there is possibility
of amendment.


Ver. 17. Theme: BEMOANING THE
Sinner’s Doom. “All human glory is
turned to shame, whether one glorify
himself, as (according to ver. 14) Moab
had done—to which the destruction of
all his warlike power stands in strong
contrast (ver. 15)—or good friends and
neighbours praise us; for these may
early and easily find occasion (ver. 16)
to turn their song of praise into a lamen-
tation.” —Naeg.

“ Bemoan”—not that Moab deserved
pity, but this mode of expression pic-
tures more vividly the grievousness of
Moab’s calamities.—Jamzeson.

“ Know his name”—peoples at a dis-
tance who had heard his name.

“ Strong staf’” — metaphorical of
Moab’s power, other nations having
been oppressed and terrified thereby
(Isa. ix. 4; xiv. 4, 5).

“ Beautiful rod”—the splendour of
the Moabite kingdom (Ps. cx. 2; Isa.
xiv. 29; Ezek, xix. 11, 12, 14).

IL Human greatness brought to ruin.
Fame reversed. Dignity humiliated.
Wealth lost. Influence forfeited. Virtue
squandered, Noble powers prostituted.
Fair promises of prety falsified. Precious
character degraded. Immortal soul lost.
Oh, the wrecks of human greatness!
Oh, the irretrievable loss of human
purity! Oh, the eternal doom of im-
penitent souls |


It A sinner’s ruin helplessly be
wailed.

1. Friends, near and afar, those
“about him,” and those “who know
his name,” intimate friends and more
remote acquaintances, can do nothing but
lament / Cannot help, yet can weep,

2. The ruin of a noble life is indeed
cause for bemoaning. Who can tell the
woe of the lost, the “weeping and
gnashing of teeth” !

III. Outward glory utterly deso-
lated.

1. Strength (“strong staff”) and
beauty (‘beautiful rod”) win men’s re-
cognition and praise.

2. Outward virtues (physical and ex-
trinsic) do not prove the possession of
intrinsic worth of character and spirit.

3. External virtues are valueless to
God without piety.

4. Men’s admiration and praise will
not save a soul,


Ver. 19. Theme: Tux Fate or oTHERS
4 WARNING To Us. “Stand by the way
and espy; ask him that fleeth and her
that escapeth, What is done ?”

The pillar of salt on the plains of
Sodom was a warning to tndividual
sinners. Buried Nineveh is a monu-
mental admonition to godless nations.
Wretched homes around us show the woe
consequent upon guilty indulgences. Hm-
bittered lives testify of the miseries of
iniquity, the delusion of the world’s
seductions, the falsity of sin’s pleasure,
that “it is an evil and a bitter thing to
sin against God.”

I, Admonitions are offered by the
@@zeers others pursue.

It. An observant eye will discern
the consequences of wrong.

Il. Miseries befalling others warp
us to shun the cause.

IV. God writes lessons upon the
lives men live that we may be wise.

V. Attention to human history
proves the woe of ungodliness.

VI Men need salvation from them-
selves—from their sims, which work
their ruin; from their self-glorying,
which shuts away the gracious help of
God and the saving power of Christ.

Stand in the “public way” and set

645


OBaP. XLVIGE.


what sermons the careers of men preach ;
“ask” individual sinners of the conse-
quences of their indulgences and their
impiety ; then beware! See Ps, i.


Ver. 27. Theme: DERISION oF Gon’s
PEoPpLE AVENGED. Moab had exulted
formerly over the calamity which befel
the ten tribes (2 Kings xvii. 6) under
the Assyrian Shalmanezer (Isa. xv. 6) ;
now Moab rejoices over the fall of
Judah under the Chaldean Nebuchad-
nezzar.

L God takes up His people’s cause
as His own. See Obad. x 13. He
feels what they endure.

IL Wrong charges against the godly
refuted by God Himself. Jehovah
demands the justification of Moab’s de-
rision. What had Israel done to deserve
it? Was he detected in nefarious con-
duct ? had he consorted with evil con-
spirators? ‘ Was Israel found among
thieves?” See Zech, iii. 2.

IIL Retribution comes back to evil-
doers in kind. “ Moab also shall be
in derision” (ver. 26). He in his
disaster shall be a derision to Israel.
Oh, when sinners are overthrown in
awful judgment at the end of the world,
how will the saints of God have cause to
chide and scorn them for their proud
contempt of those whom God loved!
See Moses’ song over the defeated host
of Pharaoh, Exod. xv. ; also Jsrael’s
exultation over Babel as “ Lucifer,”
Isa, xiv. 4-17; also the Church’s
rejoicing over Satan’s fall, Rev. xii
9-12; and the true Church of Christ
over the apostate Church of Rome, Rev,
xviii. 1-20.

Even so shall God have scorners in
derision when calamity overtakes them.
See Prov. i. 26-30, “I will laugh at
your calamity,” &e


Ver. 28. Theme: A Rook For SaFE
Hipine. “ Dwell tn the rock, and be
like the dove.”

Text part of prophecy concerning the
overthrow and desolation of Moab. Yet
she is warned to escape the impending
danger, and shelter herself in the moun-
tain fastnesses where the sword could


not reach them.
eae


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





ee,


I Admire the compassion God dis.
plays.

1. He warns before He smites.

2. He provides a shelter before the
storm bursts.

3. He shows solicitude for those who
disregard thetr own safety.

II. Accept the security God pro-
vides.

1. Distrust the safety which the world
offers. ‘‘ Leave the cities.”

2. Dream of no security away from
Christ. ‘ Dwell in the Rock.”

3. Hide in Him amid lowering storms,
“Come, my people, hide thyself as it
were for a little moment,” &., Isa,
xxvi. 20.

4. Fear no future crisis when safe
in Him, Not death, nor the glorious
return of Christ, &ec.

III. Avoid the sins God condemns,

1. Apathy and heedlessness, ‘ Moab
at ease from his youth” (ver. 11). Light
thoughts of sin. Careless of God’s warn-
ings.

2. Self-sufficiency and self-righteous-
ness. ‘‘ Heard of the pride of Moab,”
&c. (ver. 29).

3. Procrastination and delay. “Cala
mity is near” (ver. 16).

IV. Announce the tidings God de-
clares.

1. To those terrified by apprehensions,
Let them know there is a “ Rock” for
safe hiding.

2. To those beguiled by false securities,
Urge them to “leave the cities” which
they imagine safe,

3. To those loitering amid gathering
perils. It is wise to seek Christ at
once, and hide in Him.

4, To those unsteady in their religious
habits, “ Dwell in the Rock”—con-
stantly, contentedly ; and “be like the
dove that maketh her nest ”—“ Rest ia
the Lord.”


Ver. 28. Theme: FLEEING For RE
ruck. “Oh, ye that dwell in Moab,
leave the cities and dwell in the Rock,
and be like the dove that maketh her
nest by the side of the hole’s mouth.”

The uniformity of the principles of
Divine government in providence and
grace. it was an important part of





a a a a a le





a eee ee ee ee


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


the duty of the prophets to foretell the
overthrow of those kingdoms which
opposed the Church of God. It was a
source of consolation that the empires
that persecuted the Church should them-
selves be finally swept from earth, that
the way might be made smooth for the
coming of Christ— the glory of His
people Israel.”

This prophecy was fulfilled by Nebu-
chaduezzar, and the destruction of the
chief cities of Moab took place, as
Josephus says, five years after the over-
throw of Jerusalem by the Chaldeans,
That conqueror not only burnt the
Temple of God, but poured the tide of
his desolation and conquests over the
neighbour nations, and Moab among
the number. But when pursuing his
own gigantic and ambitious designs, he
little thought that he was accomplishing
prophecies of which he had never heard
—just as Herod and Pilate, in the
Crucifixion of Christ, only fulfilled
what “God’s own hand and counsel
before determined to be done.”

L The parties addressed. Learn
the compassion of God to the chief of
sinners. The inhabitants of Moab,
whose calamity is foretold with so
much compassion and tenderness; which
teaches us that God exercises a gracious
solicitude not only for friends but for
enemies. For Moab was not a neutral
state, but a hostile one—always in en-
mity and arms against the Church of
God, Their country closely bordered
upon the Holy Land.

But though such near neighbours and
closely allied in blood, the Moabites
were bitter enemies to the people of
God. When Israel came from Egypt,
Moab met them with no provision, and
refused them a passage through their
country. They hired Balaam to curse ;
they fought bloody battles with them ;
they held Israel in bondage in time of
the Judges eighteen years ; they rebelled
against Israel under Ahab ; they warred
against Judah under Jehoshaphat ; and
when the ten tribes were led into cap-
tivity by Sennacherib, they mocked their
miseries and danced for joy. ‘ Yor was
not Israel a derision to thee? was he
found among thieves? for since thou


OHAP, XLVI


spakest of him thou skippest for joy.”
Yet Israel mourns their overthrow, and
God here gives instruction and warning
for their guidance—that they should
escape the cities and enter the Rock.

1. Learn, then, that God warns before
He strikes, and follows the wicked with
warning upon warning and eutreaty
upon entreaty. Did He not forewarn
the men of the old world one hundred
and twenty years before the Deluge came
on? Did He not wait till the iniquity
of the Amorites was full before He
swept them away? Did He not raise
a long succession of prophets to foretell
the destruction of Jerusalem ? and is not
Moab here warned of the approaching
desolation? Was it not for rebellious
sinners that God gave His own Son to
die? Did not Jesus weep over Jeru-
salem? Is it not true that “ God willeth
not the death of a sinner”? Yet it is
over these warnings and hindrances you
pass on to destruction.

2, The loss of a stngle soul ts an
object a7 mourning to the Church of
God, as the conversion of one sinner
gives joy in heaven, What a harvest
is burnt upon the ground! What a
vintage is destroyed! ‘“O vine of Sib-
mah, I will weep for thee” (ver. 32).
Where are the tears fit to be wept?

IL The direction given. Heed the
dangers of false security, ‘ Leave the
cities and dwell in the Rock.”

In like manner God provides the
refuge we need in the Gospel He
guards us against the evils of a fancied
security ; and would have us forsake all
false refuges and enter the true. “4
man shall be a hiding-place from the
wind.” “By two immuialle things,”
&e., “we have strong consolation who
fled for refuge.”

This affords an argument for nope
and security to the righteous. If He
show so much care and sympathy for
enemies, how much more will He guard
and bless His friends? If He find food
for the raven, a shelter for the wild
dove, and the shadow of a great Rock
for guilty Moab, will He neglect His
own children in their calamities, and
leave them forsaken and _ shelterless
under the storms of life? Did He not

647


CHAP. XLVIT,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : JEREMIAR,





provide succour for Naomi in Moab
itself? Did not the angel supply Elijah
with food at Horeb? Was not David
preserved against the persecutions of
Saul? Were not Hagar and Ishmael
preserved for Abraham’s sake? Better
to be God’s outcasts than the world’s
favourites, A portion with God’s people
is better than the best portion of the
world, “ Their rock is not as our Rock,”
&e. (Deut. xxxii. 31).

The cities were of man’s building;
the Rock was of God’s providing ; and
David wisely said, “Zead me to the
Rock that is higher than I.”

This accords with all analogy. God
furnishes relief, and finds the means of
protection and shelter to all beings. No
creature but is furnished with means of
security and defence. He wings the
angel, guides the sparrow, directs the
young lion to its prey, and hears the
ravens when they cry.

The weakest creatures have often the
strongest shelters. The vine stays on
the elm; the ivy clings to the tower;
the worm hides itself in the sure and
firm-set earth; the dove flies to the
rock; and man seeks and finds his
refuge in God. In religion the ex-
tremes of being meet. Human weak-
ness and Divine strength; human folly
and Divine wisdom ; human insufficiency,
Divine all-sufficiency.

III. The faith and trust to be exer-
cised. ‘Be like the dove.” The doves
and wild pigeons in the East delight in
cool and inaccessible places. They build
their nests in cliffs and caverns over-
hanging fearful precipices, especially in
clefts of the rock where the adverturous
foot of man cannot tread. This is re-
ferred to by Homer, who tells us that,
when frighted by the fowler, or by birds
and beasts of prey, they are seen “ fly-
ing on the wings of fear to their hiding-
place in the rocks.” Voltaire says that
Solomon makes him better acquainted
with the customs of the East than
Homer himself does. “Oh, my dove,
jhat art in the clefts of the rock, in the
pecret places of the stairs ; let me see thy
countenance, let me hear thy voice: for
sweet is thy voice,”

We can scarcely have a more beauti-

648


ful description of the simple exercise of
faith and dependence than this image
supplies. Flying to the rock and rest-
ing there. The poor dove has no
weapons of defence. She does not
stay to fight with the vulture or con-
tend with the fowler, but, relying on
the swiftness of her wings, hastens to
the rock, assured that once there she
shall be safe,

Faith is the eye that discerns Christ,
the hand that grasps Christ, the wing
that flies to Christ.

The constancy of our trust and de-
pendence, ‘“ Dwell in the Rock.” It
is not her place of shelter merely, but
of permanent abode. “He that DWELLETH
tn the secret place.” ‘‘ That Christ may
DWELL.” ‘Arise, go to Bethel, and
DWELL there,”

IV. The infatuation to be deplored.

1. Pride and self-sufficiency. “We
have heard of the pride of Moab.”
Everybody had—mentioned six times
in this chapter. It is the distinction
of impious men to have a hard heart
under softening providences, and a proud
heart under humbling ones.

2. Beware of idolatry and creature
confidence (ver. 35).

3. Beware of procrastination and
delay ; of despairing of mercy.—Rew.
S. Thodey (1856).


Ver. 29. Theme: VaAUNTINGS OF
Privz. “We have heard of the pride
of Moab (he is exceeding proud),” &c.

L Pride is the trumpeter of its
own fame. ‘We have heard,” &c.
Proud people cannot rest unnoticed ;
they will ‘sound a trumpet before
themselves”—as did the Pharisees—
and make men know that they really
do exist, and are of great consequence
in the world.


‘¢ Pride is his own glass, his own trumpet, hia
own chronicle, ”—Shakespeare.


* What is pride? A whizzing rocket,
That would emulate a star.” — Wordsworth.


IL Pride has its grades of inflated
grandeur. “He is eareeding proud.”
There are higher heights of vanity, aa
there are lower depths of infamy.





HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


CHAP. XLVIIL


eee


‘s Whatever sort beside
You take in lieu, shun spiritual pride }
A pride there is of rank, a pride of birth,
A pride of learning, and a pride of purse;
A London pride—in short, there be on earth
A host of prides, some better and some worse3
But of all prides, since Lucifer attaint,
The proudest swells a self-elected saint,”
—Hood.


IIL, Pride manifests itself in nume-
rous varieties of form. ‘ Loftiness,
arrogancy, pride, haughtiness,” In man-
ner and bearing — conceited: “ lofti-
ness.” In imperious and unreasonable
exactions of attention and homage—
ostentatious: “arrogancy.” In habitual
estumates of self as compared with others
—inflated: “pride.” In feelings of in-
difference to and contempt for inferiors
—cruel; ‘ haughtiness.”

There is a pride of feeling, of speech,
of action; a pride of possessions, and a
subtler pride of profession [to be or to
have what is false]; a pride of goodness,
of greatness, and even of godliness.

IV. Pride has its seat in a haughty
heart. “The haughtiness of his heart.”
For “out of the heart proceedeth” every
deformity, If a man’s own heart could
settle the question of his personal im-
portance, each one of us would be too
big for the world.

When Severus, emperor of Rome,
found his end approaching, he cried
out, “I have been everything, and
everything is nothing!” Then ordering
the urn to be brought to him in which
his ashes were to be enclosed, he said,
* Little urn, thou shalt contain one for
whom the world was too little.”

But the “heart is deceitful ;” and
“ whoso trusteth to his own heart is a
fool.”


“ Of all the causes which conspire to blind
Man’s erring judgment and misguide the
mind,
What the weak head with strongest bias
rules
Is pride, the never-failing vice of fools.”
—Pope.
V. Pride provokes the scornful no-
tice of God.
“JT know his wrath” [or tnsolence],
“ saith the Lord.” And God hates prida
and hot arrogance. Because of pride
Nebuchaduezgar wes thrust from men’s


society, Saul was cast from his king
dom, Adam was driven from Paradise,
Haman was expelled from court, and
Lucifer hurled out of heaven.

VL Pride meets at length its de
gradation and defeat.

“ But it shall not be so; his lies shall
not effect it ;” 4.¢., all his brawlings are
emptiness and fallacies. God will bring
to nought the plans of arrogant Moab,
and lay his pride low in contempt.

“A proud heart and a lofty moun-
tain are never fruitful.” —@urnadl.

“As the first step heavenward is hu-
mility, so the first step hellward is pride
Pride counts the Gospel foolish, but the
Gospel always shows pride to be so,.”—
Mason.

‘* His heart is black with pride.
He for himself hell’s gate has opened wide,
For, weighed in God the All-Sufficient’s scale,
Not claims nor righteousness or men avail :
But these are costly in His sight indeed,—
Repentance, contrite shame, and sense of


need, — Oriental, tr. by Trench,


Jeremiah adds to Isaiah’s words de-
scriptive of Moab’s pride (comp. Isa.
xvi, 6) other terms, indicating that the
chastisement inflicted on Moab for his
former arrogance against Israel had not
lessened his pride; he was even more
“lofty and arrogant;” therefore now


_ his sentence of doom is weighted with


heavier penalties.


Comments.

Vers, 32, 33. “O vine of Stbmah,”
&e,

“So great was the general joy in-
spired by the vintage, that its cessation
was one of the punishments denounced
against Moab.”—Topics for Teachers.

“Their shouting shall be no shout-
ing:” for warriors shall tread down
Moab in the battle-field, and change the
joyous shoutings of vintners into the
agonised cry of alarm,

Ver. 40. “ He shall fly as an eagle,”
i.e, the Babylonian conqueror. Pointe
of analogy: —i. The rapidity with which
the eagle rushes on its prey. (See Hab.
i 8; 2 Sam. i 28; Lam. iv. 19.) ik.
Its peculiar habit of expanding tts wings
(see chap. xlix. 22), suggesting the
spreading out of the emer FO oe


OHAP. XLVIII,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





Ver, 42. “‘ Destroyed . . . because he
hath magnified himself.”

i. SELF-EXALTATION often impresses
beholders with its show of pomp, power,
and permanence.

ii. SELF-EXALTATION a@ainst Gop
provokes His swift indignation and ul-
timate overthrow.

ili, SELF-EXALTATION therefore is but
ANOTHER FORM OF SELF-DESTRUCTION.
They who “magnify themselves against
the Lord” do thereby seal their sure
doom, for they alienate God’s grace and
invoke God’s justice. (See Addenda:
SELF-ESTEEM. )


Ver. 45. “A fire shall come forth out
of Heshbon.” Not only will Ammon (of
which Heshbon was the capital) refuse
aid to Moab, but her ruin would start
from thence. Historically it occurred
that the Ammonites were conquered
before the Mosbites; and Nebuchad-
nezzar formed the plan of his campaign
against Moab in Heshbon (ver. 2). °


Jeremiah here fitly appropriates and usea
part of an old Mosaic triumphal poem
(Numb. xxi. 27), made on Sihon’s con-
quests over Moab. For Nebuchadnezzar
would issue “as a flame from the midst
of Sihon,” just as formerly the Amorites
had done.


Ver. 47. “ Yet will I bring again the
captivity of Moab.” Josephus records
how the Moabites were afterwards re-
stored to their country (Antiq., xiii. 13,
§ 5, 14, § 2, &c.), though never to their
former political importance.

Notes.—i. Moab is the sYMBOLIOAL
REPRESENTATIVE OF THOSE ENEMIES OF
Gop’s CxurcH who are characterised by
carnal strength, lustful passion, unholy
haughtiness, sensual and cruel violence.
— Wordsworth,

ii, Moab’s restoration typifies and
predicts GosPEL BLESSINGS, temporal
and spiritual, FOR THE GENTILES “ in
the latter daya.”


ADDENDA TO OHAP. XLVIII. : ILLUSTRATIONS AND SUGGESTIVE EXTRACTS.


Ver. 11. Troubles revive us. Staying
for awhile in the valley of Aosta, in
Northern Italy, we found the air to be
heavy, close, and humid with pestilential
exhalations, We were oppressed and
feverish—one’s life did not seem worth
a pin. We could not breathe freely, our
lungs had a sense of having a hundred
atmospheres piled upon them. Presently,
at midday, there came a thunder-clap,
attended by big drops of rain and a stiff
gale of wind, which grew into a perfect
tornado, tearing down the trees; then
followed what the poet calls “‘ sonorous
hail,” and then again the lightning flash,
and the thunder peal on peal echoing
along the Alps. But how delightful was
the effect! How we all went out upon
the verandah to look at the lightning
and enjoy the music of the thunder!
How cool the air and bracing! How
delightful to walk out in the cool even-
ing after the storm! Then you could
breathe and feel a joy in life. Full often
it is thus with the Christian after trouble,
He has grown to be careless, lethargic,
feverish, heavy, and ready to die, and

650


just then he has been assailed by trouble,
thundering threatenings have rolled from
God’s mouth, flashes of lightning have
darted from Providence: the property
vanished, the wife died, the children


‘ were buried, trouble followed trouble,


and then the man has turned to God,
and though his face was wet with tears
of repentance, yet he has felt his spirit
to be remarkably restored. When he
goes up to the house of God, it is far
more sweet to hear the Word than afore-
time. He could not pray before, but
now he leans his head on Jesus’ bosom
and pours out his soul in fellowship,
Eternity now exerts its heavenly attrac.
tions, and the man is saved from him
self. — Spurgeon.


Ver. 42. Self-esteem.


‘« Beware of too sublime a sense
Of your own worth and consequence,
The man who deems himself so great,
And his importance of such weight,
That all around, in all that’s dona
Must work and act for him alone,
Will learn in school of tribulation,
The folly of his expectation.”








5
%

x
=
a
*


HOMILETLU COMME


Shab wore


NLARY : JEREMIAL,


OHAP. ZLIZ.





CHAPTER XLIX.
Crrrical ann Exrerricat Nores.—1, Chronology of the Chapter.——The prophecies against


Ammon, Edom, Damascus, and Kedar.
but the section (vers. 34-39) against Elam has


Vers. 1-33 are synchronous with the previous chapter,


its own date given, ‘‘In the beginning of the


reign of Zedekiah ;”” therefore seven years later than those preceding it, and coinciding with


ehaps. xxvii. 1, xxviii. 1, which see.


2. Geographical References.—Ver. 1. “ Ammon.”
““Gad:” the country west of the Ammonites, between them and the Jordan.
** Rabbah :” the fortified metropolis of Ammon.


location is not known.


Ver. 7. ‘‘Epom :” their country stretched south of Judah.


Their country lay north of Moab.
Ver. 2.
Ver. 3. ‘‘4s;” an Ammonite city whosa


*‘ Teman :” Jerome places it


south of Idumea; Keil and Furst suggest N.E.of Edom. Ver. 8. Dedan: the name of an


Arabian tribe bordering on Idumea,


Ver. 18. ‘‘ Bozrah:” see Gen. xxxvi. 33 ; 1 Chron. i. 44.


Ver. 18. ‘* The neighbour cities” of Sodom and Gomorrah were Admah and Zeboim.
Ver. 23. “ Damascus:” Aram, called by us Syria, was divided into the northern part, of
which ‘“ Hamath” was the capital; and the territory south-east belonging to “ Damascus.”


6 Arpad :” a Syrian city.
Ver. 28. ‘‘ Kupar :”
Vide on chap. ii. 10,


; ‘* Hazor:” a country
Deserta.


a wide range of country between the Red Sea and the Euphrates,


contiguous to that of the Kedarenes—Arabia


Ver. 34, ‘‘ Enam:” The Elymais of the Greeks and Romans, forming part of the ancient
Susiana, on the west of Persia, separated from Chaldea by the Tigris.
8 Personal Allusions.—Ver. 1. Their king: properly Melcom (see marg.): the tutelary


idol (Zeph. i. 5).
Ver. 27. ‘‘ Palaces of Benhadad.”


and should not be identified with the Benhadad of 2 Kings xiii. 3; Amos i, 4.


xv. 18),


Jehovah was their true King; this Melehom or Moloch was a usurper-king.
*‘ Benhadad ” was a common name of several Syrian kings,


(Cf. 1 Kings


4, Literary Criticisms.—Ver. 4. ‘‘ Thy flowing valley :” or ‘‘ thy valley flows,” either with


abundance or with the blood of the slain.
fe. whose habit or experience, &c.
cup of His wrath.


Ver. 12. “ They whose judgment was not to drink :”
It was not God’s people’s usual experience to drink of the


Ver. 19. ‘* Against the habitation of the strong :” rather, to the ever-verdant pasturage ; for
{MS means duradleness, from 1), to be constant, perennial.


Ver. 23. “ Serrow on the sea :” Many MSS.


read ‘sorrow like the sea,” changing 3 for 33


and the corresponding passage in Isa. lvii. 20 reads ‘‘like the sea”—in which passage the sea


ig used for the agitations of men’s hearts,


Here it might mean, sorrow in the agitated hearts of


the Syrians, for all the versions read “én the sea” in this text.
Ver. 25. ‘‘ How is the city of praise not left?” rather, ‘‘ Would that the city of praize were


not abandoned!” So Graf.


HOMILIES ON


Note on ver. 1. “ Hath Israel no
sons #” When the Ammonites seized
Gad, on Israel’s being carried into cap-
tivity by the Assyrians, they acted as if
the country had no rightful heir, as if
the banished ones should never return
to claim their country.

Ver. 2. Theme: THE VANQUISHED
BRAISED INTO VICTORS.

L Scorners revel in Israel’s over-
throw. Seize on their treasures as
spoil. Exult in their hopeless defeat.
Profit by their temporary reverses.

IL The heritage of God’s people is
{nalienable. Foes may appropriate it
for a while, but Israel shall repossess
her lost heritage, and her foes shall be
abject.


amnascus was ‘‘ the city of praise” for its beauty.


VERSES OF CHAPTER XLIX,


III. Final triumph to the oppressed
Church.

1. They who despoil our peace shall
be overthrown.

2. They who arrogantly appropriate
the privileges exclusively belonging to the
godly shall be driven forth into desola-
tion,

3. They who make gain of our diffi-
culties and sorrows, which God permits
for our chastening and profit, shall feel
in due time the punishments of Heaven,

Or thus (as Naegelsbach suggests) :—

L The Church’s lament over lost
territory. Melcom’s possession of Is-
rael’s inheritance. Sonow Mohammed’s
possession of the territory of the Chris-
tian Church in Asia and Europe. And,

651


OHAP, XLIX,





in general, heathenism in possession of
lands and hearts which should be held
for Christ.

II. The Church’s hope of ultimate
repossession.

1, As to the overcoming of her oppo-
nents.

2. As to the reacquisition of the lost.


Ver. 7, Theme: Furiiry or HuMAN
WIsDom.

Note.

i. The people of Teman had an anctent
and remote fame for their wisdom (Gen.
xxxvi. 15; 1 Kings iv. 30; Job ii. 11.
Teman was the home of Eliphas). Cele-
brated for their skill in dark sayings
and proverbs.

ii, Hminent sagacity affords no secu-
rity against God's designs. “ Their
wisdom vanished.” Thus God puts to
shame those who trust to “their own


craftiness” (1 Cor. i. 19, 20).


Ver. 11. Theme: A FaTHER’s DYING
Consoxtations. “ Leave thy fatherless
children ; I will preserve them alive:
and let thy widows trust in me.”

L A most affecting situation is sup-
posed. “ Fatherless and widows.”

1. Desertton: their strong human
helper gone !

2. Bereavement: who supply the place?

3. Defencelessness : who will be their
safeguard ¢

4, Anguish of spirit: lonely, heart-
stricken, home desolated !

IL A most consoling promise an-
nexed.

1, Anexhortation precedes the promise.
“Leave,” &c An exhortation which
breathes into the dying man the spirit
of Resignation.

2. It is an exhortation to confidence.
As he is compelled to leave them another
FoweR springs up to protect those
dearer than life—confidence for himself
—confidence for his family.

3. The exhortation is full of Comfort.

The latter clause addressed not to the
dying man but to the widow—“ let thy
widows trust ”—it binds up the heart of
the desolate.

Ill. A most tender appeal is ad-
dressed. ‘ Let thy widows trust in Me.”

652


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR.


1. Trust the Divine Fazthfulness ;
2. the Divine Tenderness; 3. the Di-
vine Vigilance.

IV. A most gracious service is
guaranteed. “I will preserve,” &c.

1. Keep them from evil.

2. Supply their wants.

3. Carry them through life,

4. Receive them to glory.


Ver. 11. Theme: Comrort 1n Bu
REAVEMENT. “ Leave thy fatherless chil
dren, and let thy widows trust in me.”

We must always regard it as a grand
peculiarity of the religion that comes
from God that it brings relief and com-
fort under trials for which the world has
no balm, and throws light upon dispen- |
gations which would be otherwise clouded
with a hopeless and impenetrable gloom,
The religion of Jesus comes as a com-
forter when other oracles are silent;
comes as a star of promise and of hope
when every other lamp is extinguished ;
comes to breathe upon our ear its still
small voice of mercy, when we hear
nothing besides but the earthquake, and
the fire, and the great and strong wind ;
and clothes with a mantle of celestial
light the darkest appearances of this
lower world.

IL The mournful changes of human
life.

The text refers to the overthrow of
Edom, to the calamities of war, to the
domestic calamities produced by that
event, and brings in the father of a
family, about to leave his children for
ever to the hard mercies of the world,
Here are collected around you a sad
group of sufferers—a dying father,
mourning children, a widowed mother,
addressed by a pitying and gracious God,

1. Of these changes God proclaims
himself the Author: whether they come
by war, by invasion, by pestilence, by
famine, or by the ordinary progress of
human decay, the hand of God is to be
seen and acknowledged in them, “J
will bring the calamity of Heau upon
him—the time that I will visit him. I
have made Esau bare, he shall not be able
to hide himself, his seed ts spoiled, and
his brethren, and his neighbours, and he
¢s not.”








HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR,


OHAP. XLIX,


a


The worldling often views his calami-
ties as coming unbidden and unblest, as
contingent and casual, as evils which he
must either resolutely resist or sullenly
endure ; and the consequence is that he
either “despises the chastening of the
Lord, or faints when he is rebuked of
Him.” But the Christian views them as
coming from a Father's hand, for pur-
poses which he may not be able to
fathom, indeed, but which he certainly
knows to be sent in love. The Chris-
tian knows no such Deity as Chance or
Fate, and is at no loss to assign the
Author of the trial Afflictions fall
upon mankind in a manner too regular
for the agency of chance, but in 8 man-
ner not stated and regular enough to
have a blind Fatality for their author.
They are not only consiatent with God’s
love, but they actually flow from it.

This is the universal creed of the
Church of God. Amos says, “Can
there be evil in the city and the Lord
hath not done 4?” Naomi: “J went
out full, and the Lord hath brought me
home empty.” True, the famine was
the procuring cause, and the anxiety of
that period may have brought on diseases
which swept her husband and her two
sons into an untimely grave ; but she sees
the hand of God in all : “ The Almighty
hath afflicted me ; the Lord hath testified
against me.” What more uncertain than
a casual flight of the arrow in the battle-
field? But if a certain man drew a bow
at a venture, his hand was strengthened
by an Omnipotent Arm, and the arrow
directed by an unerring Eye. What we
term accident and casualty is in reality
Providence accomplishing deliberate de-
signs, but concealing its own interposi-
tion. What can be more’ trivial than
the fall of asparrow? But “not one of
these falls to the ground without your
Father.” And if a sparrow falls not
without God, certainly one of His own
children cannot. One is hurried away
by a burning fever, one by a lingering
consumption, one by some unforeseen
accident, one by pestilence, one by war.
But God says, “JZ will bring the cala-
mity of Esau upon him; the time that I
shall visit,” &c.

2. From the prospect of these changes


feeble human nature shrinks and ve
coils. Nes
Where is the father who does not
tremble at the idea of leaving bis chil-
dren orphans and his home desolate ?
Where are the children who do not dread
the thought of the hour when father and
mother shall be removed from their
embrace? Think of the picture drawn
in the text—the anxiety of a dying
father—the breaking-up of family ties
—the darkened chamber — the silent
home—the waking in the morning to a
bereaved and forsaken world—and you
bearing a weight of grief in your bosom,
in comparison with which a mountain
would be light.

Why do we refer to these points, but
to teach children to value the privileges
they possess in having parents to guide
and protect them, and to remind Chris-
tian parents of their high responsibilities
before it be too late. I can conceive
that death will make strange revelations.
The light of eternity which glares upon
a death-bed, and shows the value of
your own soul, may show you the value
of the souls of your children, and your
own responsibility to the God of the
families of the whole earth.

II. The compassion of a gracious
God. ‘Leave thy fatherless children.”

God sympathises with all the fears,
all the sorrows, and all the painful
emotions of the human bosom. His
POWER enables, His Love inclines, His
FAITHFULNESS pledges Him to your
guidance and direction. God, who has
made the parent’s heart what it is,
knows how to meet its awakened sus-
ceptibility and care. God, who sends
the calamity, knows how to send the
support with it.

The history of the Church tells out
wonderful instances of compassion to
parents and children. Look at the first
mission of an angel to a world ; was it
not to deserted and widowed Hagar
before the birth of her first child? and
was not the second visit of an angel to
Hagar and Ishmael when the Lord heard
the voice of the lad? Did not the angel
descend to wrestle with Jacob when
involved in trouble for his family, lest
Esau come and smite the mother with

653


CHAP. XLIZ,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH,





the children? Was it not to the widow
of Zarephath Elisha was sent? Was not
Clijah’s greatest miracle employed on
behalf of that pious mother mourning
for her only son? Was not the Lord
with Joseph when separated from his
father? with Moses when left to the
bulrushes? Look at our Lord’s miracles,

IIL The privilege of enlightened
faith. Let your widows trust.

1. Trust in the use of appointed means,

2. Trust when outward means appear
to fail.

3. When Providence appears to oppose
promises.

4, When death and eternity are at
hand.—Rev, S. Thodey, a.D. 1844.


Ver. 12. Theme: Toe Cup or Sur
FERING FOR GODLY AND GuILTy. See
Lit. Criticism on verse supra. If the
godly are made to drink it, shall the
ungodly escape? Will not Jehovah deal
judgment to His people’s foes ?

I. A fact for Wonder: God’s people
suffer punishment. “ Behold, they whose
judgment was not to drink of the cup
have assuredly drunken.”

1. It is not the ordinary experience of
God’s people “ to drink of the cup.”

2. Yet it has befallen Israel that he
has “assuredly drunken.” God’s people
are sometimes severely chastened.

3. The good among the people suffered
with the disobedient, For there were
many pious and righteous men in Israel
who zealously strove to keep the nation
from apostasy, as with Daniel, Ezekiel,
Jeremiah ; yet they were entailed in the
griefs of exile.

It. A fact full o7 Admonition: the
ungodly shall not escape punishment.

“ Art thou he that shall altogether go
unpunished? Thou shalt. not go un-
punished, but thou shalt surely drink
of it.”

1. How can the wicked expect to escape
when the people God loves are made to
suffer for their faults ?

2. The affections of the righteous are
purifying, but those of the guilty are
punsteve.

3 Surely it may be expected that
God will be lenient with and forgive His
sons sooner than aliens,


654


4. If the godly are banished from theiz
land and life’s privileges for their wrong,
shall not the “wicked be turned into
hell,” and be banished from all the
covenant favours of Heaven #

Note—

(a.) The cup of affliction is placed in
the hands of us all,

(b.) None can claim to be exempted
because of his covenant relationship,

(c.) The Christian’s natural enjoyment
of grace leads to surprise when the cup
is placed in his hands,

(d.) Yet the justice which will not
spare the beloved child forewarns the
rebel of certain punishment of wilful sin.


Ver. 16. Theme: FortTIFIED AGAINST
Gop’s PpowER. “ Thy terribleness hath
deceived thee, and the pride of thine
heart, O thou that dwellest in the clefts
of the rock,” &c.

L. Such startling boastfulness against
God can be accounted for only as result-
sng from remarkable delusions.

A soul must have become strangely
elevated in mood and defiance to be
capable of such arrogance, Men often
wish themselves protected from the reach
of God’s power; but few indeed ever
become so deluded as to believe and to
boast that they are so protected. What
explains it

l. Arrogance fostered by successes.
“‘ Thy terribleness hath deceived thee;
f.e., at first the fear inspired into others
by her power rendered her proudly con-
fident, as if none would dare to assail
her ; for success and sway over others
tend to foster this inflated sense of im-
portance and power. Beware of the
“deceiving” influence of success and
power |

2. Vanity, which fed ttself upon the
obsequious subjection of others, ‘*The
pride of thy heart.” And such vanity
grows as it is gratified.

3. Self-created resources of strength
and security. ‘‘Clefts of the rock—the
height of the hill.” Sinners build their
houses against the coming flood, and
think themselves safe in them.

IL It is a frequent affort of trrelé
gious men to fortify themselves against
the reach of God.





eS


ee a





EN SOS


ee





ge ee ee eR OW! Oe ee
; ~ Stes A a =


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


OHAP. XLIX,





1. Against the reverses of His provi-
dence. So they place their fortune in
safest securities, in various sure under-
takings, in order to have a guarantee
that, should one fail, they will be right
with the rest. Thus they plan that
“riches shall not take to themselves
wings and fly away.”

2. Against the afflictions of His hand.
They choose healthy localities for their
houses, with every sanitary appliance
for the security of health. They com-
mand ablest physicians in illness. They
seek the most salubriousand invigorating
climates for the different seasons of the
year. They command every luxury and
comfort for the ease and security of life.

3. Against the agencies of death, They
‘“ make their nest as high as the eagles.”
They climb up away from the grim
shadow—take great pains to elude the
last enemy.

4. Against the penalties of sin. Give
money in their wills to religious societies,
as a bribe to their consciences. Leave
wealth to Popish priests to pray their
souls out of purgatory. Fortify them-
selves in atheism or rationalistic theories,
to satisfy themselves that there is no
penalty for sin, or no hereafter.

Il. God’s mighty hand will be laid
upon even the proudest boaster.

1, Misfortunes pursue men in all their
yure retreats.

2. Death mounts over all “rocks,”
elimbs up into all “nests.”

3. Terror will seize and shatter the
confidence of every sinner in the day of
God’s righteous judgment.

4. There will be an awful “ bringing
down” of the lofty when the Almighty
puts forth His hand to destroy men’s
‘refuges of lies.” See Isa ii, 11-17 ;
Rev. vi. 15.

Note—There iz a cleft of a Rock in
which the soul may securely hide.


**Rock of Ages, cleft for me,
Let me hide myself in Thee!”


Ver. 19. “ Like a lion from the swelling
of Jordan.” See Homily on chap. xii.
5, and Notes on chap. iv. 7.


Ver. 23. Theme: Tux SEA: ITS Ra-
VaGES AND TRAGEDIES. “‘ They have


heard evil tidings: they are faint-hearted,
there ts sorrow on the sea; tt cannot be
quiet.”

I. The sea hag its stories of heart-
rending disaster.

II. The stories of the sea’s ravages
fill us with trembling and grief.

IIL The perils of the deep witness
to the awful power and presence of
God.

IV. How urgently should prayer
be made for and by those who tra-
verse the ocean.


‘* When through the torn saila the wild tem-
pest is streaming,

When o’er the dark wave the red lightning is
gleaming,

Nor hope lends a ray the poor seaman to
cherish,

We fly to our Saviour :—‘ Save, Lord, or we
perish |”


*©Q Jesus, once rocked on the breast of the


billow,
Aroused by the shriek of despair from Thy


pillow,

Now seated in glory, the mariner cherish,

Who cries in his anguish, ‘Save, Lord, or we
perish |’

‘¢ And oh, when the whirlwind of passion is
raging,

When sin in our hearta ita wild warfare is
waging,

Then send down Thy grace Thy redeemed to
cherish ;

Rebuke the destroyer :—‘Save, Lord, or we
perish !’”

—Heber.


V. The sea’s wildest tumult is
under the control of God. “It can-
not be quiet,” says this text: but once
over the furious sea, where terror-
stricken men dreaded death, Jesus sent
out His word—and “there was a great
ealm.” ‘Then are they glad because
they be quiet; so He bringeth them
to their desired haven” (Pa cvii,
28, 29).


Comments,

Ver. 27. “ Patace oy BENHADAD:”
whence so many cruelties against Israel
emanated: thus indicating the reason
for the overthrow of Damascus. God
traces guilt to its source /

Ver. 29. ‘Cry, FEAR I8 ON EVERY
sipE.” Jeremiah’s watchword again,
“ Magor-Missabib:” of. chap. xx. 3,

655


CHAP. L.





10; Ps. xxxi. 13. The mere “cry”
of the foe—“ Fear,” é&c., shall dis-
comfort the Kedarenes,


Ver. 31. “ARISE, GET YOU UP UNTO
THE WEALTHY NATION,” dc.

Notes—

ii They who possess worldly plenty
de not have all advantages on their side,
for their “wealth” courts the envy of
the covetous and the assaults of the
sporler,

ii, An casy self-security lays men open
to the invasions of trouble and loss,
Better to be secure in Christ, “ your
life hid with Christ in God,” than to
enjoy a fancied security in the wealth
and possessions of earth,


Ver. 34. “THE Worp or THz Lorp
aGaInsT Exam.” “In the cuneiform
inscriptions we find the Elamites in
perpetual war with Nineveh, with
whom they contested possession of the
country of Rasi (probably the country
mentioned in Ezek, xxxviii, 2, xxxix.
1), With Babylon, on the contrary,
they were on friendly terms, and they
appear perpetually as the allies of
Merodach-Baladan and his sons in
their struggles for independence. The
suggestion, therefore, of Ewald, that
they served as auxiliaries in the Chal-
dean army in the expedition which
ended in the fall of Jehoiakim and





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.





the deportation of Jeconiah and the
best of the land to Babylon, is not
improbable, though there is nothing to
justify us in laying to their charge
any extraordinary cruelty.”—Dr. Payne
Smith.

“ When the monarchy of Persia was
established under Cyrus, Elam was
blended into and formed a part of it;
but before that time they were two
distinct kingdoms. According to the
present prophecy, Elam is spoken of
as having actually becume a province
of the Babylonish empire (Dan. viii.
2); and Daniel appears to have pre-
sided over it, having Shushan for the
seat of his government.”—Dr. Blay-
ney.


Ver. 38 “I WILL SET MY THRONE
in Exam:” God would show Himself
the Ruling and Omnipotent King by
His judgments there.


Ver, 39. “In THE LATTER Days, I
will bring again the captivity of Elam.”
The full restoration belongs to Gospel
times: and “ Elamites” were among
the first who heard and accepted the
Gospel. Their presence at the Pente-
cost shows that the Elamites were still
preserved by the Divine Providence, and
were there among the representatives of
the Gentile world to whom the Evangel
of Christ was proclaimed.


CHAPTER L


Critical awp Exreretioa, Nots.—1. Chronology of the Chapter.—This and the following
ehapter constitute one prophecy against Babylon; and the date of its authorship is given in
chap. li. 59; ‘‘the fourth year of Zedekiah.” Jeremiah delivered this written prophecy to
Seriah, the king’s chamberlain and Baruch’s brother (cf. chap. xxxii. 12), who accompanied
Zedekiah the king te Babylon, probably at Nebuchadnezzar’s summons, for some imposing
state occasion : the prophet’s design being to send to the exiles there His message concerning
the overthrow of the Chaldean power and their return from captivity.

2. National Affairs.—Jeremiah was at this time dwelling in Jerusalem (ver. 5, lit.
“6 hitherwards,” not as in E.V., ‘‘ thitherwards,” the writer being in Jerusalem), yet he regarda
the city as already captured and in ruins (vers. 11, 15, 17, 28, &c.), while the exiles at. Babylon,
taught by their sorrows and misfortunes, are seeking their God in penitence (vers, 4-7). But
the expressions are all genera/, there are none of those minute touches which would certainly
have been found had the city and temple been actually destroyed (Dr. Payne Smith). The
exact position of affairs will be apparent by reference to Notes tm loc. to chap. xxix. Comp. also
Topic, “ Prophecy vindicated in Babylon’s Fall” (on chap, xxv. 18), p. 473.

3. Personal Allusions.—Ver. 2. ‘‘ Bel,” the principal deity of Babylon, and ** Mero-
dach” (which means in Syria, (ttle lord), another idol-god.

Literary Criticisms.—Ver. 5. ‘‘ Their faces thitherward:” but 739 uniformly mean.
hither ; they look “hither” from scenes of exile,


ced “a
ly





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH, cuaP. &





Ver. 9. “A mighty expert man.” The pointing of the word Savin, maschil, appears i
most of the authorities ; therefore is rendered expert ; but some editions read Dan, mashchil,
@ destroyer, or

Ver. 12. ‘* Your mother :” DQDN is the metropolis of the empire, Babylon.

Ver. 17. ‘* Devoured him . . . broken his bones.” Rather, “ The first, even the king of
Assyria, ate him (imagery of a lion being kept up), and this last, even Nebuchadnegzar, hath
picked his bones.” For Israel was so wasted by Assyria, that Nebuchadnezzar had but the bones


to pick.
Ver. 21. “ Marathaim.” Marg. ‘‘the rebels ;” but DIN is doubly rebellious it is a


dual form, intended as an intensitive, and conveys the sense of the very rebellious land,
* Pckod ” signifies visitation.
“er. 81. ‘*O thou most proud.” Lit, O Pride ; God calls Babylon by that name, fi",


SUBJECT OF CHAPTER L.
BaBYLONn’s PREDICTED OVERTHROW: IsRaEt’s SuRE REDEMPTION


Introductory consilerations—

i, Why was Babylon’s fall announced? That the exiles there might cherish
hope in their captivity and nurture fazth in Jehovah as still working out purposes
of mercy for His covenant people. Comp. “Zhe Theocratic Purpose of the Cap-
tity,” p. 472.

ii, What was the power which should effect Babylon’s overthrow? “ A nation
cometh up against her from the north” (ver. 3). The Median power, which
Cyrus successfully led against Babylon (see Topic, “ Sheshach,” ii. 2, p. 475). As
Judah’s overthrow by Babylon had always been predicted “from the north” (chap.
i. 14), now, in turn, Babylon’s overthrow is to be by a power “ from the north.” The
north is the region where the sun never shines, and emblematical, therefore, of
severity and gloom. The Medo-Persian empire was an aggregation of small
nationalities welded into unity by Cyaxares (B.o. 633),

iii. In what light 1s Babylon’s ruin to be regarded? Comp. “ The Supernatural
Termination of Babylon’s Power,” p. 472. Her work was done; and, as being a
graceless and arrogant power, God destroyed it when it had served the end for
which He created and prolonged it. For though Babylon worked out God’s
designs in Judah’s punishment, it was not done by her in recognition of Jehovah
and His will, but in vealent lust of empire, and in disregard of the sanctity of Zion’s
holy things.

iv. How would the exiles greet this prediction? Surely it would call them to the
repentance and re-allegiance to God which Jeremiah describes (vera. 4, 5), and
foster in them a patient waiting for the hour of their promised redemption, and
sestrain their souls from Babylon’s idolatries by fixing thetr expectation and trust
in Jehovah.

Observation.—The fate of Babylon is homiletically treated in chap. xxv. ; hence
in these two chapters the genera’ theme will be left, and only verses selected for
homilies,


HOMILIES ON VERSES IN CHAPTER L,


Ver. 4. Theme: Wrxrrina PILGRIMs.
“Going and weeping ; they shall go and
seek the Lord their God.”

i, Tue Return. “Going.” In part
fulfilled when some few of the ten tribes
of “Israel” joined Judah in a “ cove-
nant” with God at the restoration of
Judah to their own land (Neh. ix. 38,
x, 29). Its full accomplishment is yet


to come (chap. xxxi. 9; see Homilies on
“The Watchmen’s Call” and “Pilgrims
to Zion,” pp. 518, 519. Comp. also
Hos, i. 11; Zech, xii. 10). Its constant
fulfilment is realised in souls returning
to the Lord in prayer, penitence, and
faith.

ii, THz TEARFUL JOURNEY.


ing.”


“Weep-
With sorrow at the remembrance
657


CHAP, L.


of their sins and sufferings (Izra iii, 12,
13; Ps, exxvi. 5, 6). With gladness
at their restoration, after so long a
delay, and in a manner surpassing all
hope.

ii, Toe Diving Goat, “Seek the
Lord their God.” More a going back
in heart to Him, than a mere geogra-
phical return to their land. <A happier
goal that than to a ruined country ; for
the yoal of piety, “The Lord,” is a
better and more blessed one than the
goal of patriotiew—-a wasted country.
God is more to tue ransomed soul than
Zion !


Vers, 4,5. Theme: Sinners Retvurn-
ING TO Gop,

Kvident that the verses allude to the
return of the Jews from the Babylonish
captivity. But as they interestingly de-
scribe what is manifest in the return of
sinners to God, we will use them to
illustrate such a circumstance.

I. Penitents going in company. “In
those days the children of Israel shall
come, they and the children of Judah
together.”

There had been much dissension and
great enmity between these tribes from
the days of Rehoboam (see 1 Kings xii.);
but it had been foretold that they should
again unite, and here we behold them
coming “together.” Thus it is with
sinners in submitting to the teachings
of the Holy Ghost and yielding to
divine influence.

Whatever was the distance, whatever
the enmity existing between them be-
fore, now, as with one accord, they come
together to the house of God, to the
throne of grace, to the Saviour of man-
kind. See Eph. ii 13, 14.

IL Sinners returning with weep
‘ng. “Going and weeping.”

What an affecting sight! Whence
have they come? Why do they weep?
Whither are they going? They have
left the land of their captivity, where
they were aliens from God, servants to
idolaters, slaves to their enemies; they
have left the ways of sin, the company
of the wicked, the service of the devil.
Behold them going.

As they go they weep: not from regret

GAR





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





that they are leaving scenes and circum-
stances to which they have been so long
habituated, but rather because they re-
mained connected with them so long.
They are affected by a sense of God’s
goodness to them and by a conscious-
ness of their ingratitude towards God ;
they weep on account of their sins, and
the proof of their sincerity is manifest
in their movement ; for as they weep
they go, they leave their former sinful
situation, and they are going.

IZ. Souls returning to the Lord.
“To seek the Lord their God.”

The children of Israel and of Judah
had wandered from Jehovah, the true
God, the God of their fathers; they
had provoked the Holy One of Israel to
anger, especially by the folly and the
infamy of idolatrous practices, and God
had left them for a while captives in
the hands of tdolaters. But mixing
mercy with judgment, He remembered
them in their low estate; and here we
find them again seeking the Lord their
God,

Sinners may wander from God, but
misery, infamy, and ruin will be the
consequence ; they must return again to
God or perish. And they may return;
for oh! how kind are the words of the
Lord our God, of Jesus our Saviour, to
weeping returning sinners! ‘ Ye shall
seek me and find me when ye shall
search for me with your whole heart”
(Jer. xxix. 13).

IV. Seekers asking direction. ‘“‘They
ask the way to Zion with their faces
thitherward,”

Zion was the city of solemnities among
the Jews, and God was peculiarly pre-
sent there. But Zion means the Church,
and it is in His Church that God may
always be found. So Jesus our Saviour
promises, Agreeably to this, “ they
ask the way to Zion;” and as a proof
that this is not an idle inquiry, they
ask “with their faces thitherward.”
Their dispositions are turned toward
God and His people; their souls are
inclined to religion and its ways.

Thus disposed, they next resolve,
“Come and let us join ourselves to the
Lord in a perpetual covenant, that shall
not be forgotten.”


LEO, ae ane


Te ee





HOMILET IO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAE





They had been joined to idols, to sin, to
wickedness. But now they say, “ Come
let us join ourselves to the Lord.”

The way to join ourselves to the Lord
is, spiritually, by faith and by love;
outwardly, by connecting ourselves with
the Lord’s people—with those who wor-
ship God in spirit and rejoice in Christ
Jesus, and have no confidence in the
flesh.— Altered from “ Sketches of Ser-


mons.”


Ver. 5. Theme: Directions To In-
quirERs. “ They shall ask the way to
Zion, Come and let us join ourselves to
the Lord.” The evidences of a state of
grace are the same in all ages, The
thought of the numbers in heaven and
the numbers on the way to it may well
encourage us,

Text said of Israel in Babylon, but
said spiritually of seekers in every age.

Perhaps never a day since first pro-
mise in which there has not been some
inquirer to heaven.

“ We are compassed,” etc. It is always
instructive to mark the peculiar and
characteristic distinctions of the people
of God. Though there are some things
in which they differ, there are many in
which they agree. Unity without unt-
formity.

There may be circumstantial differ-
ences between Moses and Joshua, Paul
and John, Martha and Mary, Peter and
Nathaniel, but they yet possess a one
ness of character. All love Christ ;
love prayer; love the Word of God;
love the fellowship of the Gospel.
“ All drink into the same Spirit.”

Our text exhibits some of these, and
we shall set before you—

L Some of the marks and charac-
teristics of the pilgrims to Zion.


“ Arise, let us go up to Zion.” LHarnest-
ness, Union, Hffort.
1. By their earnest inquiry. “ They


inquire the way to Zion with their faces
thitherward,” Supposes Desire, [gnor-
ance, Docility, Resolution.

As when the bondage of Israel was
broken they began to turn homewards, so
when the soul is truly converted to God
it begins to turn heavenwards, “ Arise
ye,” etc.





CHAP, kL.





The soul truly awakened is no longer
content to sleep in sin, to linger upon the -
brink of perdition, to remain under the
sentence and condemnation of a broken
law, but determines to seek salvation and
escape the wrath tocome, “ J will arise.”

Paul inquires, ‘‘ What wouldst Thou
have metodo?” Peter inquires, “ Lord,
to whom shall we go but to Thee?” The
jailor inquires, ‘ What shall I do to be
saved?” Balak inquires, “ Wherewsthal
shall I come before the Lord?”

Depend upon it, it is a great era in
any man’s history when he feeds himself
wrong, becomes aware of his danger,
has strong convictions awakened, sees his
need of a Saviour, feels for the first
time the powers of the world to come,
and earnestly resolves to make the care
of his soul the first concern.

But it is of great consequence that he
should at once act upon his convictions,
These inquired with ‘“‘their faces di-
rected thitherward.” Not ask the way to
heaven and set their faces to the world ;
not set their faces to heaven and go on at
a venture without asking the way ; but in
all true converts there 1s both a sincere
desire to attain the end and a constant care
to keep the way. Guard against trifling
with convictions, Pray that they may
be deepened and confirmed, that you
may be enabled to act upon them, that
they may issue in sound conversion.

2. By their penttential regrets. “Going
and weeping.”

They weep that they have been in
bondage so long, that their best days
have been devoted to folly and sin, that
so few are found walking with them,
that the way is so rough, the difficulties
so great, and that they find so many
traces and footprints of returning feet—
of those who professed to set out on
pilgrimage, but whose hearts were not
right. The open enemies of the way do
not discourage so much as the false
friends of the way (Ps. lxxviii. 8-11).

Repentance awakens a godly sorrow
for sin past, a painful sense of sin pre-
sent, our remaining corruption, and a
holy jealousy and distrust of ourselves
for the future, \est, like Lot’s wife, we
look back, or, like Israel, in heart go
back (Pa li. 12),

659


CHAP.





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





3. By their mutual solicitude and
concern. ‘Come and let ws.” Roused
themselves, they long to rouse others.

Religion delights in unity and associa-
tion. It consecrates the social principle
by bringing it in aid of our own and
others’ piety. The charity of religion
when it begins at home does not end
there, One of the first indications of
piety is a concern for the salvation of
others (John 3. #1). “ Andrew first
findeth his own orother.” Like lighted
torches spread the flame.

He who can forego the communion of
saints will probably very soon be able
to resign communion with God.

4. By their solemn and determined
consecration to God. ‘“‘ Let us join our-
selves to the Lord in a perpetual cove-
nant.”

“My understanding shall be His to
know Him; my will His to choose
Him ; my afections His to love Him;
and all my active powers His to serve
and honour Him.”—Bishop Beveridge.
Williams of Kidderminster records :—
‘*T solemnly devoted and dedicated my-
self to Him who is the King of kings,
resolving by His grace to give a full
divorce to all manner of sins, and to
the utmost of my power to strive and
wrestle with all temptations to sin,
whether from without or within; to
avoid the society of vain and graceless
persons; to commend myself to God by
prayer at least twice a day ; to be careful
and constant in self-examination and
meditation; particularly to meditate on
the love of God in Christ, and of Christ in
willingly offering Himself a sacrifice for
poor sinners, and in sending the blessed
Spirit, whose strivings and quickening
motions I resolved, by the grace of God,
never to quench, I resolved to watch
narrowly against the wanderings and
strayings of my heart in any duty; to
make the glory of God and the salvation
of my soul my chief business and de-
sign; and to account the affairs of this
world but as diversions to me in my
way heavenward. I determined to call
myself to account for the actions of the
day, and frequently to write remarks
thereon. This was of excellent use to
keep me close to God and duty to

660


prevent sin; it helped me to redeem
precious time, making conscience of ris-
ing betimes for communion with God.”

IL Directions to those who are de-
sirous of walking in this way.

1. Solemnly consecrate yourself to God.
“Join yourselves to the Lord in a per-
petual covenant,” &e,

2. Carefully study the directions for
the way. “Thy Word is a lamp to
my feet.” Here your course is clearly
marked out all the way from the city
of destruction to the heights of Zion.

The uses of the Bible read and heard
are to convince of sin, to convert to Christ,
to confirm in grace, to conduct to glory.

As ever you would profit by a sermon
or a chapter, follow it with the tears of
repentance and the prayers of faith,
Remember that the Bible without its
Inspirer’s illumination is like a dial with.
out sunshine,

3. Keep close to your Guide. Jesus
says, ‘I am the way.” He is the Lion
of the tribe of Judah. Honour Christ
in His prophetical office as He whe
loosens the seals and opens the Book,
and throws light on the dispensations
of God, and guides and guards the
Church from earth to heaven,

Peter followed, but followed afar off.

4. Do not separate yourselves from
your godward companions.

5. Keep the end constantly tn view.—
S. Theodey, 1842.


Vers, 4,5. Theme: Youna Converts
STARTING ZIONWARD.

L God reconciled to them in grace
is the object of their inquiry.

IL Jt ts usual with inquirers to asso-
ciate with those who are like-minded
with themselves.

Ill. This inquiry after God and happr-
ness 1s frequently accompanied with
tears.

IV. Mount Zion is the place to
which they will repair for tnstruction
and comfort.

V. Devout and sincere inqutrers will
gladly avail themselves of the diree
tion and counsel of Christian ministers
and of other pilgrims who have made
some advance in the way to the celes-
tial city.











VI Young converts, having found
@od, to their unspeakable satisfaction,
will do well to “join themselves to the
Lord in a perpetual covenant that
shall not be forgotten.” —Rev, R. Frost,
Dunmow, 1833.

Note—

“The fall of Babylon is to be imme-
diately followed by the return of the
exiles homewards in tearful procession


because they go as penitents, and yet


with joy because their faces are towards
Zion. The cessation, moreover, of the
schisms between Israel and Judah is
one of the signs of the times of the
Messiah (Isa. xi. 12, 13), and symboli-
cally represents the gathering together of
all the discordant and warring empires
of the world under the peaceful sceptre
of the Church’s King.”— Speaker’s Com-
mentary.


Ver. 6. Theme: THE Bour’s REstTING-
PLACE, “They have forgotten their rest-
tng-place,”

The prophet speaks of the captivity of
Israel in language of plaintive and poetic
beauty: ‘“ My people have been lost
sheep; their shepherds have caused them
to go astray; they have turned them
away on the mountains: they have gone
from mountain to hill; they have for-
gotten their resting- place.” Jehovah
had now come to seek and save them,
and the first evidence that He is among
them is that they return penitent to
Him. As the lost child that has run
hither and thither in the crowded streets,
seeking in vain the parent from whom
she has wandered, crying herself sick in
the bitterness of her sorrow, does at the
sight of the mother coming to her relief
rush to her embrace, so the Jewish
nation rose repentingly to meet God
as He drew near, saying with earnest
and devout enthusiasm, ‘‘Come and
let us join ourselves unto the Lord in
a perpetual covenant that shall not
be forgotten” (ver. 5). To take the
text in a spiritual sense is not accom-
modation, but interpretation, for all
this was designed to present a striking
analogy to the case of the sinner and
his Saviour. Viewed in this light, the
text suggests—


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; JEREMIA,


GAP, &


I That the human soul needs a
resting-place.

This is true of the soul—

1. Jn innocence. As a creature he
could not but be dependent, Without
unquestioning trust in God, safety and
happiness were impossible to man even
before the Fall,

2. How much more true is this since
man has become a sinner/ To the sense
of dependence there is now added the
restlessness of a rebel, whose conscience
is carrying a load it cannot shake off,
whose intellect is revolving questions
it cannot solve, whose heart is crying
out for love that shall be worthy of its
acceptance, and for an object that shall
be worthy of its love. His nature is
utterly weary. The past is guilty, the
future is hopeless, aad so the present is
restless. Have you never sought to
hide yourself from God and from your-
self in business, pleasure, excitement,
because of a consciousness of guilt, even
as Adam attempted to hide himself
amid the trees? You become yourself
the spectre that haunts your heart, and
you carry yourself for ever with you.
Never, therefore, until yourself is
changed can you encer into an anfailing
resting-place.

Il. Jesus Christ is the resting-place
the soul needs.

The deliverance from the power of
sin and the effects of sin can alone
remove the soul’s distress. In Christ
we have—

1. Full redemption. He took upon
Himself our sins and redeemed us from
the curse of the law, so that “there is
no condemnation to them that are in
Him.” No anodynes of earth can give
the soul the rest that the blood of Christ
can. What the words of men could not
do the voice of Jesus has accomplished;
for when He has said, ‘‘Thy sins are
forgiven thee, go in peace,” the heavings
of the troubled heart have been stilled,
as of old the rolling waves of Galilee
subsided at His command.

&. In Him we also have regeneration.
“Tf any man be in Christ, he is a new
creature,” A new centre has been given
to his heart, a new aim to his life, a new
joy to his experience. In his heart

661


Omar. L.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH,





Christ has opened a fountain that
quenches his thirst for evermore.

3. He gives repose to the intellect.
Christ is “the truth.” Jesus Christ
alone brings to the soul the element of
certainty, and, worn out by vain flights,
it folds its weary wings and rests
with quiet thankfulness on this tree of
knowledge, which iz also the tree of
life.

4. He also gives repose to the affec-
tions of the soul. HKarthly objects prove
disappointing or fall away from us, or
are torn from us and leave the soul all
palpitating with agony, but no power
can separate from the love of God in
Christ Jesus. Earthly objects cannot
last through the soul’s immortality,
but Christ is the same yesterday,
to-day, and for ever, and the repose
that Christ brings is as everlasting as
Himself,

IIL The text implies that this resting-
place of the soul issometimes forgotten,
even by those who have known and
enjoyed it.

“My people have forgotten their
resting-place.” This place can be at-
tained even on earth by Christians.
Paul, amid the damp and darkness of
his prison, exclaimed, “I know whom
I have believed, and am persuaded He
is able to keep what I have committed
to Him against that day.” Eminent
Christians in all ages, &c, But a Chris-
tian may frequently have his peace in
Christ disturbed. At moments he may
be walking through darkness. Job was
a true man of God even when he was
crying out, “Oh, that I knew where I
might find Him!” True, a Christian
is not justified in being in this distressed
state of mind.

When does a Christian forget his
resting-place #

1. When he falls into perplexity,
doubting whether he is forgiven or
not.

2. When he depends upon merely
human and earthly resources.

3. When he loses his confidence in
the midst of affliction.

Are there those here who have never
known this resting-place? Let them
seek it now. Come to Christ—

662


“Take Him for what He is; oh, take Him all,
And look above.
Then shall thy tossing soul find anchorage
And steadfast peace ;
Thy love shall rest on His, thy weary doubta
For ever cease ;
Thy heart shall find in Him and in His grace
Its rest and bliss.”
—Rev. W. M. Taylor, D.D., New York.


Ver. 6.
Gop.

i. However unlike in all other
choices and courses of action, men
alarmingly concur in this, to neglect
religion, forsake the fountain of happi-
ness. ‘They have gone from mountain
to hill, they have forgotten their resting-
place.”

iii We find no exception to this
rule apart from individual cases in
which Divine grace has worked a dis-
tinction. As in Nature we never find
a stone ascend upwards or a river flow
backwards of its own accord, so in the
moral world we never sind men prefer-
ing eternity to time, holiness to sin, the
Creator to the creature of thetr own accord,

iii Wherever this wrong tendency
is found superseded by a supreme at-
tachment to heavenly things, we are sure
that this new bias owns a heavenly
agency.

These Jews in Babylon wandered
from hill to hill, from religion to re-
ligion, from comforter to comforter,
from one broken dependence to an-
other, but never by any chance wan-
dering back to God.

I. God is the proper rest of the
human spirit.

1. Every created life requires some
object of hope and trust.

2. The dire effect of human depra-
vity is to separate us from God, and to
prompt us to seek some other rest.

3. Actually to know and enjoy God
is the triumph of personal and experi-
mental religion.

IL A tendency to forget and for-
sake God lies at the root of all our
miseries.

It plunged Israel into captivity ; it
exposes us to ruin.

1, This is literally true of the whole
world of sinners. We have all “for
gotten our resting-place.”


Theme: ROAMING FROM





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


OnaP,





2. This is practically true of the
whole world of saints—the source of
sheir miseries. Not absolute forget-
fulness, but a practical one. What
makes us faint in calamity, quarrel
with Providence, murmur under dis-
appointments, betake ourselves to un-
worthy means to avoid calamity or ob-
tain relief, &c.

III. Satisfaction is sought in vain
while we desert God. “ Wander from
mountain to hill.”

1. Some concentrate happiness in
self.
2. Others seek satisfaction in their
worldly possessions and well-planned en-
terprises.

3. Others in their personal talents.

4, Others in their untarnished repu-
tation.

No matter what be the object of
idolatry, if God be “ forgotten” and
the proper “resting-place” forsaken, if
the care of their soul be neglected and
the cross of Christ unsought, “ destruc-
tion and misery are in their ways, and
the way of peace have they not known,”

(a.) There is criminality in this ne-
glect of God.

3 There is degradation in it,

(c.) There is ruin, disaster, in it,
sooner or later.

IV. God’s dispensations correct this
perverse tendency in man to roam from
Him.

1. The dispensations of His provt
dence,

2. The influence of His grace and


Spirit.


Comments—

Ver. 6. “My people hath been lost
sheep: their shepherds have caused them
to go astray.” See on chap. ii. 8, and
especially xxiii. 1 seg.


Ver. 7. “Their adversaries said, We
offend not, because they sinned against the
Lord.” “It is the worst condition into
which the Church of God can come
when the enemies who desolate it main-
tain they are in the right in doing so.
It is, however, a just Nemesis when
those who will not hear the regular
messengers of God must be told by the


extraordinary messengers of God what
they should have done.”——Naegelsbach.

Nebuzaradan urged the plea of this
verse (chap. xl. 2, 3; ef. Zech. xi. 5).
The Jews’ guilt was so palpable that
they were condemned even in the judg-
ment of heathens, They saw they had
apostatised from “the hope of their
fathers,” from the God whose faithful-
ness their fathers had experienced.


Ver. 14. “Against Babylon, for
she hath sinned against the Lord.” By
oppressing His people; for their cause
is His. Also by profaning His sacred
vessels (Dan. v. 2).


Ver. 17. Theme: THe SoarreRED
Sueep. “ Jsrael ts a scattered sheep ;
the lions hath driven him away.”

Sin made them victims of invading
conquerors. Text was fulfilled in the
captivity by Assyria. Language appro-
priate to every lost sinner.

L A wandering sheep is a very fit
emblem of a poor sinner. Entangled
in the briars of the wilderness, torn and
pierced by its thorns; the lions have
devoured us, &c. In plain language:
man’s heart, affections, powers of his
mind, all are alienated from God. A
wandering sheep is the emblem of —

1. Indigence, perplexity, and dtsap-
potntment.

2. Danger.

3. Helplessness.

4. An object of pity and anxious
solicitude. God pitied the sinner (John
iii, 16) ; His love is illustrated by Luke
xv. 3, &e.

I. Jesus Christ is the great Shep-
herd, who seeks and gathers into His
fold His wandering sheep. As such
He is frequently described (Ps. xxiii. 1;
Isa. xl. 11; John x. 11).

1. He knows they are in the wilderness,
He came “to seek and to save that
which is lost.” He finds them in a
ruined condition.

2. He pities them, and rescues them
from their enemies, He “takes the
prey from the mighty, and delivers the
lawful captive.”

3. He restoreth the sowl (Ps. xxiii.)
He came to give “life more abundantly ”

663


CHAP.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH,





(John x. 10, 11). For this purpose He
died, paid the price, &e,

iL How blessed is the present
state of the restored sheep! Loved,
redeemed, enfolded.

1. The fold of Christ is a secure
enclosure. The “Lord is round about
His people.” His perfections are on
every side for their security.

2. They are in suitable and congenial
society. Sheep associate not with other
animals. We “have fellowship one with
another,”

3. He will ever watch over them,
guide and defend them; for they are
precivus to Him. He will ‘never leave
nor forsake them:” be with them in the
valley of death, and then enfold them in
heaven,

IV. The restored sheep are amply
tended and nourished.

1, They ‘“‘go in and out and find
pasture.” But they are not always fed
on the same ordinance. The blessing is
not confined to one means of grace.

2. All the blessings of the new covenant
are for the nourishment of the soul.

3. The endearing character of Christ
should engage our confidence, as our
Shepherd. He is infinitely good, pro-
videntially kind, and graciously tender
to His people. His bounty supplies,
His wisdom orders, all things for us;
and His Gospel brings us every spiritual
enjoyment,

V. The sheep shall be eventually
removed from the fold below to that
in glory.

1. Here they have much enjoyment,
but it is often emperfect and interrupted,
Sin disquiets, the world disappoints,
ordinances only prove a blessing occa-
sionally.

2. The time is nearing when the flock
shall be all in one fold, eternally with
the Shepherd, \ed by Him into the ever-
verdant pastures.

(a.) Are you one of Christ's sheep }
As a wandering sinner, have you been
reclaimed %

(6.) Have you sensible enjoyment of
the provisions of the Gospel? Are they
to you green pastures, &e. }

(c.) If not identified with the flock of
Christ now, at the day of division you

664


will be severed from the redeemed of the
Lord (Matt. xxv. 31, d&c.)
—From “ Helps for the Pulpit.”


Ver. 20. Theme: Gop’s MeEroy To
His Prope, “Jn those days the int
quity of Israel shall be sought for, and
there shall be none; and the sins of
Judah, and they shall not be found: for
I will pardon them whom I reserve.”

God’s promises seem so “ exceeding
great” that we are tempted to limit
them by conditions. Men may indeed
deceive themselves as to their own per-
sonal interest tin them; but God ie
sovereign in His affluence.

This promise has been only tn part
accomplished ; for since the Jews’ return
from Babylon “their sins have been
found,” and visited, too, in wrathful
indignation for many hundreds of years.
At a period fast nearing, God’s elect
among them shall be restored to His
favour, &c.

L The extent of God’s mercy to His
chosen people.

1, They are constantly represented as
a remnant. Yet they are “a remnant
according to the election of grace”
(Rom. xi. 5).

2. For them, however, God designs the
richest mercy. A full and perfect remis-
ston of all sin (Isa. xxxviii. 17); and
to remember their sins no more for ever
(Jer. xxxi, 31-34; Heb. x 14-17).
God will henceforth view them as they
are in Christ, ‘‘ without spot or blemish ”
(Eph. v. 27).

IL The interest which the Jewish
nation has in this covenanted mercy.

1. They are the direct objects God has
in view in this promise. We do right
to apply these words to QGod’s elect
generally, but wrong to overlook their
primary purpose. This is emphatically
a pledge to the Jews.

2. So applied, the promise should fill
us with unutterable joy.

III. With what thoughts should we
contemplate this promised mercy ?

1. Amazement at the riches of God’s
grace,

2. Humiliation, loathing ourselves
for our iniquities against such a God.

3. Gratitude (Rom. xii. 1).





F
Z
i
‘
;


er eo


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; JEREMIAQ.





4. Afiiance. In all He has done He
gives us the pledge that He will never
suffer any one to “ separate us from the
love of God in Christ Jesus our Lord "—
Rev. Chas, Simeon, M.A., 1828.


Ver. 20. Theme: PLENTEOUS FoR-
GIVENEsS, “J will pardon them whom
I reserve.”

L In some cases pardon would be both
unrighteous and dangerous.

The law must be honoured and the
transgressor cease from the sin which
needs pardon,

IL The pardon God bestows ts sove-
reign in its exercise.

As pardon is an act of grace, not
merited, it must be sovereign ; bestowed
according to the good pleasure of His
will.

IL A universal offer of pardon ¢s
proclaimed in the Gospel.

On the ground of “repentance towards
God and faith towards our Lord Jesus
Christ.”

IV. While, therefore, God’s grace de-
signs the scheme of pardon through
Christ, the responsibility of securing
pardon rests on man.

However wicked, no man need despair
of obtaining it. ‘ Let him return unto
the Lord, and He will abundantly par-
don.”

How can we doubt this when He
pardoned a Manasseh, a Magdalene, a
Saul? ‘The blood of Jesus Christ
cleanseth from all sin.”——Rev. D. Pledge.
(See Addenda : SIN IN OBLIVION.)


Comments—

Ver. 24. “ I have laid a snare for thee,
O Babylon.” Cyrus turned the waters
of the Euphrates into a different channel,
and so entered Babylon by the dried-up
channel at night. Thus was the impreg-
nable city taken by a stratagem—“ Thou
wast not aware;” for one-half of the
city was in the enemy’s hands before the
other knew of it.


Ver. 34. Theme: Tuz STRENGTH OF
gHE Repreemer. ‘Their Redeemer is


strong.”
L These words suggest a difficulty.


ed


OBAP. ky





If He be strong, why does Israel so
often suffer beneath the hand of the
oppressor? If my father have bread,
why do I hunger }

1. God does not display His strength
at once, in order the more to glorify tt.
Lazarus dies, Jesus hastens not to
him until the third day. Why? We
had never known He could raise the
dead if He had displayed His power
always in healing the sick. Stephen
dies full of faith, triumphing. God
could have saved him from death, but
showed His power by sustaining him.

2. God does not at once display His
strength, &c., in order to make His
people lay hold of t. When did.Jonah,
Manasseh, &c., cry loudest? Was it
not when His arm seemed far from
helping them %

3. Another reason is that He hereby
chastens His people. There is no greater
punishment than God leaving us to our-
selves,

4. Hereby He instructs them. We
are taught that God’s strength will never
be exerted to make us secure in sin and
indolence.

5. Often He does not exert His
strength to liberate His people so that
He may show mercy to their oppressors.
He delayed to redeem Israel out of the
hand of Pharaoh that Moses might rea-
son with him.

II. These words convey a blessed
truth.

1. Consider the might of the enemy
from whom He delivers us. From the
power of Satan, the world, our evil
hearts.

2. Consider the completeness of the
deliverance. He saves both body and
soul, by His own arm, without the help
of another. ‘ His own arm hath gotten
Him the victory.”

8. Consider His strength upholds te
the very end all whom He hath redeemed.
He brings up from Egypt to the goodly
land. Was there one of all the host
He brought out of Egypt that was
forced back to captivity ?

Ill. These words smply a terrible
warning.

1. To all who oppress God's people.
He who blesses the giver of the cup of

665


CHAP. LL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAG.





cold water shall punish all those who
touch one of these little ones.

2. To all who reject His help, As
strong to slay as to make alive. Seek
His blessing. Flee to Israel’s strong
Redeemer, lest the plagues written in
the Book be experienced by you.

Say not, “I am willing to enjoy life
now and take the consequences of it
hereafter.” Say not, “If it be right, I
am willing to expiate my crimes.” That
is but hanging garlands on the sword that
must enter your soul—From ‘“‘ Stems
and Twigs.”





Comments—

Vers, 39, 40. BABYLON DESERTED OF
INHABITANTS. This utter extinction of
Babylon was not effected by one stroke,
but gradually. Cyrus took away ita
supremacy. Darius Hystaspes deprived
it, when it had rebelled against Persia,
of its fortifications. Seleucus Nicanor
removed its citizens and wealth to Se-
leucia, which he founded close by Baby-
lon. The Parthians removed all that
was left to Ctesiphon. Nothing but its
walls were left under the Roman Emperor
Adrian.


ADDENDA TO CHAPTER L.: ILLUSTRATIONS AND SUGGESTIVE EXTRACTS,


Ver. 5. Faces Zionward. Among
the old Romans there prevailed the
touching custom of holding the face of
every new-born infant towards the
heavens, signifying, by their presenting
its forehead to the stars, that it was
to look above the world into celestial
glories, It was a vain superstition ;
but Christianity dispels the fable, and
gives us a clear realisation of the Pagan


yearning. Young lives should be
turned with their faces heavenwards.

Ver. 20. Sin cast into oblivion.
Cicero said of Cesar, “ He forgiveth
nothing but injuries only.”


“ These evils I deserve,
Yet despair not of His final pardon,
Whose ear is ever open, and His eye
Gracious to readmit the mee "





CHAPTER LL


Crirican anp ExreetioaL Notrs.—For Chronological Notes, see foregoing chapter.
Geographical References.—Ver. 27. ‘‘ The kingdoms of Ararat, Minni, and Ashchenas,”


These nations of Western Asia are summoned to join the Medes in their attack on Babylon,
By “ Ararat” is meant the region of Upper or Major Armenia, in the vicinity of the mountain ;
by ‘‘ Minni,” Lower or Minor Armenia; and by ‘‘ Ashchenaz,” probably Asia Minor, in which
‘* Ascania ” stands.

Personal Allusions.—Ver. 59. ‘‘ Seraiah,” brother to Baruch (chap. xxxii, 12) and the
king’s chamberlain ; see below, Lit. Crit. on verse.

Literary Criticisms.—Ver. 1. ‘‘ A destroying wind :” possibly this should read ‘‘a destroy-
ing spirit,”’ 4.e., Cyrus.

Ver. 5. “Israel hath not been forsaken :” read, “Israel is not widowed nor Judah of hig
God.” ;

Ver. 10. “ The Lord hath brought forth our righteousness :” rather, righteousnesses, pl. MID TY,
t.¢., proofs that we are righteous,

Ver, 12. “ Upon the walls,” should be against the walls.

Ver. 23. “Z will also break in pieces :”” Henderson notes that 7&1, from 75), to scatter,
break, dash in pieces, designates the war-club anciently used by warriors for the purpose of
clearing away all with whom they came in contact.

Ver. 41. ‘*Sheshach :” vide Notes on chap. xxv. 26.

Ver. 50. ‘‘ Remember the Lord afar off:’’ t.e., from afar; from Chaldea, far distant from
Zion, God’s dwelling-place. :

Ver, 59. “A quiet prince,” MTAII7TWY, has been variously rendered. The Sept., dpyws
8cbpew, as if Seraiah were the distributor of the royal presents. The Vulg., ‘‘ prince of pro-


phecy.” Other renderings are, “chief of the caravan,” ‘‘lord chamberlain ;” but there ia
warrant for the rendering as the E.V, Comp. MAI-"U'R, a man of quietness, 1 Chron,
xuii. 9.


66£


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: JEREMIAH. CHAP, El,





SUBJECT OF OHAPTER LIi.: MYSTIO BABYLON; ROMANISM DOOMED,
General Survey: BaByton’s Doox; Mystic BaByton’s DzsrRvucrion.


i, The Median power, which Babylon formerly invited to unite with her for
Nineveh’s destruction, was made the instrument for her own overthrow. So in the
Apocalypse it is revealed that some of the kings who were once vassals of the
mystical Babylon will be the instruments in God’s hands for chastising her (Rev.


xvii. we

ii, Babylon’s colossal splendour formed no hindrance to God’s purposes of her
fall, for He opens wnlooked-for avenues along which His judgments may invade the
strongnolds of ew. The Huphrates of her power, which, with mystic Babylon, has
flowed on for so many centuries, and in which she has trusted as her defence, the
nom possumus of the Pontifical arrogance, may prove the cause of her destruction.
See Rev. xvi. 12. Nor shall all her vaunted majesty and glory save her in the
hour of invasion, when God’s emissaries of judgment flow in upon her.

iii, The suddenness of Babylon's capture (vers, 8, 41) may have equal
analogy. Ata time when she is most exultant, revelling in some imposing fes-
tival or carnival, as Babylon was feasting at the time of its invasion, elate with
pride, fearless of harm, provoking God by her sacrilege of sacred things, then the
fingers of a man’s hand shall write her downfall, and she shall be ensnared. See
Rev. xviii. 10, 17. ‘In one hour is thy judgment come !”

iv. As with Babylon so with Rome, her fall shall be total and final, leaving
her an absolute and hopeless ruin.

The walls of Babylon, of vast dimensions, 87 feet broad and 360 feet in height,
the palaces and vast architectures within (ver. 53), all suggested imperishable
strength ; as indeed the vast system of Romanism does to-day. But all her excel-
lency became a ruin (ver. 58), and ancient Babylon became a dreary wilderness,
unsightly “heaps” (ver. 37). Alexander the Great made efforts to rebuild Babylon,
and employed 2000 workmen for two months in clearing away the foundations of
the Temple of Belus, preparatory to his project: but he died in the midst of his
ambitious scheme, and it was abandoned. Nor shall Rome ever exalt her head
more when once the hand of doom lays her pride low. “It shall be found no
more at all” (Rev, xviii. 21).

v. Babylon’s ruin became the signal for Israel's releuse and redemption, The
faithful Jews in captivity there found liberty once more, and returned to rebuild
Jerusalem and restore the desolations of Zion, Even so shall the fall of Rome set
free the souls of men from the galling captivities of superstition, and the true Israel,
the Church of Christ, shall rise into honour, prosperity, and power (Rev. xix. 1-9).

vi. Israel was admonished and enjoined to flee from Babylon and “ deliver every
man his soul” (vers. 6 and 45); so from mystic Babylon the voice of inspiration
urges men fo separate themselves from her sins and escape her impending destruction.
“‘T heard a voice from heaven saying, Come out of her, my people, that ye be not
partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues” (Rev. xviii 4).


General Topic ; THe PREDICTED OVERTHROW OF BABYLON,


Probably no people were ever more luxurious and licentious than the Baby-
lonians at the time of their overthrow. Disgusting excesses marked the pleasures of
the table, and debauchery crowned the banquet. Profligacy especially character-
ised the female sex ; hence the image in Revelation of mystic Babylon as a vile
woman (xvii. 1, 2, 18, xix, 2, &c.), hurled from the seat of her effeminacy into total
misery and degradation, is used to represent Babylon’s doom.

L Prophecy literally vindicated. Almost every step in the fall of Babylon,
and its subsequent reverses, is the accomplishment of a prophecy. say


OHAP, Li, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAH.





1. The name of the victor, with his appointment by Providence to the work of
retribution, was given more than a century before his birth (Isa. xlv. 1-3).

2. The varied character of the besieging host which would be engaged in the assault
is minutely described. Not only the Medo-Persian army, but auxiliaries drawn
from the highlands of Armenia, the provinces of Asia Minor, and the great deserts
bordering on the Indian Caucasus (Jer. L 41, 42, li. 11, 27, 28).

3. Some leading cireumstances of the capture are also unequivocally pointed out.
(1.) The intemperate festivity of the population (Jer. li 57). (2.) The negligence of
the guards in charge of the portals of the river: “ gates not shut” (Isa. xlv. 1),
(3.) The remarkable operation upon the Huphrates (Isa. xliv. 27; Jer. 1. 38, li. 32,
36). (4.) The suddenness and surprise of the capture (Jer. 1. 24).

Nothing can be more exact that the correspondence between the futures of
Babylon and the language of prophecy. Its story, viewed in connection with the
previous announcement dictated by the Spirit of inspiration, is—

i. A bright evidence of the truth of the Holy Scripture and of the divinity
which breathes in its pages,

ii, A confirmation of the religious system revealed in God’s Word, from the
ane promise made to the first transgressor, to its perfect realisation in the Gospel
of Christ.

II. Sacred lessons emphatically enforced.
throw should be read—

1. By the believer.

(1.) With trembling awe, as an illustration of the divine anger against the sinful-
ness of man.

(2.) With grateful feelings also, as strengthening the conviction that the founda-
tions of his faith and hope are solid.

(3.) With assurance of the verity of God's promises, that, as He fulfilled the
words of awful retribution, so will He His promises of gracious deliverance: for
“light is sown for the righteous, and gladness for the upright in heart.”

2. By the enemies of God’s people—with the appalling thought that as Babylon,
the great oppressor of God’s ancient people, has been reduced to nothingness, so
certainly will all the persecuting enemies of the Church of Christ, of which that
people is the selected type, be brought to confusion.

3. By the sceptic and infidel. The whole case is abundantly admonitory to
such. Well would it be for them to compare the convincing evidences of the
religious system they reject with the difficulties and hollowness of their owt
theories ; to remember that if Chrestianity be true, tts truth 1s awful to those who
repudiate it; and to turn from their own delusive dogmas to receive the revelation
of the Bible, while yet an insulted but still merciful God is waiting to be gracious
to the chief of sinners through the mediation of the Son of His love.—Babylon
and Nineveh.


The records of Babylon’s over-


HOMILIES AND OOMMENTS ON CHAPTER LI.


Ver. 5. Theme: IsRAkL NOT ABAN-
DONED,

See Lit, Crit. on verse: “ Not
widowed,” not deserted by the Lord,
who is her Husband.

Comp. chap. iii v. 14; Homilies on
p. 60, “ Bamished yet still beloved ;” and
66, “ God a loving Husband,” et seq.


Ver. 6 Themes RoMANISM RE
NOUNCED.
668


“ Flee out of the midst of Babylon, and
deliver every man his soul: be not eut
off in her iniquity.”

L A doomed system entails the
doom of its votaries. As they who
will not leave a sinking vessel, sink
with her.

IL Identification with a false reli
gion is culpable in God’s regard. “Hes
iniquity” becomes the iniquity of each
individual adherent, and each will oe


a





|
|


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY; JEREMIAR,





“cut off” as being responsible for and
sharing her sins, Men cannot screen
themselves on the plea that they have
always been what they are, and there-
fore they should stay where they are.
“ Flee out,” &e.

Ill. The soul’s safety is jeopardised
by delusive systems. “Deliver every
man his soul.”

False beliefs are as fatal as no beliefs.
“‘ Refuges of es” will be destroyed, and
houses built on sand will fall.

IV. Prompt and earnest separation
from Babylon’s errors is enjoined. “Flse
out of the midst of Babylon.”

1. We have responsibilities towards
truth, and should flee from error.

2. We have duties to our souls, and
should separate ourselves from known
spiritual delusions and dangers.

3. We have clear forewarnings of
judgment, and should haste to escape
from the coming tribulation.

Note—

“A time may come when it is well
to separate one’s self. There may come
moments in the life of a Church when
it will be a duty to leave the community,
Such a moment is come when the com-
munity has become a Babylon. When
the soul can no longer find in the Church
the pure and divine bread of life, it is
well “to deliver the soul that it perish
not in the iniquity of the Church.”—
Article on Secis in Herzog, R.-Kne.


Ver. 7. Theme: Romm’s LUxuRI-
ANCOR,

‘ Babylon hath been a golden cup in
the Lord’s hand, that made all the earth
drunken.”

For the metaphor see Topic, chap.
xxv. 15 seg. ; “ The wine-cup of wrath”
(p. 474).
~ Compare for tdentification of Babylon
with Rome, Rev. xiv. 8; xvii. 4.

I. “A golden cup” dazzles and fascl-
nates the beholder. Men’s eyes are
bewitched and dazed by the glitter and
splendour of gold, by the gilded errors
of Rome, so that they do not inquire
what the “cup” contains, (So suggests
Origen.)

IL From “a golden cup” men may
drink maddening intoxicants. “The


nations have drunken of her wine : there-
fore the nations are mad.” This suggests
that the errors and blandishments of
Rome, her opulence and splendour, stu-
pefy men’s reason and conscience, as
“‘ wine ” does the inebriate.

IIL. In Rome’s golden chalice are de-
lusive and destructive drinks. “ Mark
well,” says Origen, “in the golden cup
of Babylon is the poison of idolatry, the
poison of false doctrines, which destroy
the souls of men. I have often seen
such a ‘golden cup’ in the fair speeches
of seductive eloquence, and when [ have
examined the various ingredients of the
golden chalice, I have recognised the cup
of Babylon.”

IV. From this “golden cup” the Lord
administers judgment to Rome's intoxi-
cated dupes. “* A golden cup in the hand
of the Lord.” Jehovah used ancient
Babylon to punish the godless nations
and apostate israel He now uses Rome
as an agency of judgment on faithless
souls. They who will not use their en-
dowments and opportunities aright, who
prostitute their reason, conscience, and
will. before the fascination of these
“golden” errors of Rome, who neglect
the sacred chalice of the Holy Bible and
prefer to drink from Rome’s cup of
errors, God uses Romanisam to punish
such: ‘Therefore God sends them a
strong delusion, that they may believe
a lie” (2 Thess, ii, 11).


Ver. 9. Theme: Ron's REJECTION
OF HEALING.

L Health-giving teaching, if received,
might have healed the errors of Rome.
This was offered Babylon; her remedy
lay in receiving God’s Word, urged upon
her by God’s prophets. So with mystical
Babylon: she has been offered instruc
tion and warning by Paul (2 Thess. ii.
2-9), by the Apocalypse (Rev. xiii—
xviii.) Protestantism has been attempt-
ing to heal Rome by the literature dif
fused and arguments addressed against
Bome’s errors, and by appeals to Scrip-
ture truth.

IL Besotted attachment to wrong
leads to the refusal of God's truth. Saving
doctrines are rejected when they would
saws from cherished errors and belowed

669


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAB,


sins and profitable lies. So still: light
shines in Christian teaching sufficient
to scatter the darkness. ‘But men
love darkness rather than light, because
their deeds are evil” Rome refuses
healing, rejects truth, because errors are
her traffic,

III. From the outraged heavens
doom hangs over deceitful and destruc-
tive Rome. “Her sins have reached
unto heaven” (Rev. xviii. 5). There-
fore ‘her judgment reacheth unto
heaven,” as if pressing upon God the
urgency of executing her overthrow.
And certainly God hath sent the fore-
warnings of Rome’s doom from the
heavens in His Word, and ere long the
thunders of His destructive wrath will
sweep down upon the Antichrist.


Ver. 10. Theme: IsRAEL JUSTIFIED
against Basyton. “The Lord hath
brought forth our righteousness.”

I. Punishment of sinners testifies of
the advantages of righteousness.

IL Overthrow of error testifies to the
veracity of divine truth, on which right-
eous souls lived by faith.

III. Defeat of God’s foes testifies to
the blessedness of His people, whom He
befriends.

IV. Deliverance of the righteous tes-
tifies that, though their adversaries may
for a while prevail, the injustice of evil-
doers and the goodness of God’s children
will ultimately be vindicated.

Therefore—

1. Wait patiently under endurance
of wrong. God will work your justi-
fication against evil-doers (Ps. xxxvii.
7).

a Believe in God’s watchfulness of
you tn the day of your oppression. He
marks your conduct during your “ cap-
tivity,” remembers to your account your
“righteousness,” and will “bring it forth”
in due season. “Then shall thy light
break forth as the morning” (Isa. lviii.


8).


Ver. 138. Theme: Rome's RESOURCES
DESOLATED. “O thou that dwellest
upon many waters, abundant in trea-
sures, thine end is come, and the measure
f thy covetousness.”

670


“Many waters.” Not only was Ba
bylon protected and nourished by the
mighty river Euphrates, but by mume-
rous canals and streams. These were
essential to her very existence—for
drink, food, health, transit, and safety.
Thus with Romanism, “ that sitteth
upon many waters” (Rev. xvii. 1); and
“‘the waters are peoples, and multitudes,
and nations, and tongues” (ver. 16).
These form the tributary streams to
nourish Rome by gifts, money, popular
sympathy.

“Abundant treasures.” The im-
mense booty of Nineveh, the plunder of
Jerasilem, the tributes which Syrian
and Pheenician cities furnished, the
fruitfulness of the Babylonian territory
itself. Comp, Rev. xviii. 12, 19.

“Her end come.” The words are,
“Thy end is come,” t.¢., the retribution
for (or limitation of the period of) thy
covetousnuess. Babylon’s day for spoil-
ing others and enriching herself closed.
So shall Rome’s (Rev. xviii.)


Vers. 15-19. Theme: AN APPEAL TO
Gop’s works.

See Homily on p, 219,
12-16, verbatim.


Ver. 25. Theme: Votoanic Rome.
“O destroying mountain.”

The imagery here is of a volcano,
whose burning lava “rolls down,” itself

‘a burnt mountain ;” lit., a mount of
eye

Such was Babylon under Nebuchad-
nezzar; its destructive energy was like
the fierce outbreak of volcanic fires, and
its rapid collapse was as a volcano whose
fires had burned themselves extinct.

Rome, which has raised ttself wp to
heaven in lofty assumption, which has
surrounded itself with bewitehing charms,
like the luxuriancies of nature that
abound in warm and fertile volcanic
regions, which has proudly domineered
like a lofty mountain over surrounding
lands, will also, like a volcano, bring
ruin on itself and on all it overshadows
by the fires which are ready to burst
forth in God’s time.

L A volcano impresses beholders with
its majestic beauty. So does Rome.


chap. x





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; JEREMIAR.


ee ee


IL A volcanic mountain wears the
appearance of enduring strength So
does Rome.

III. Near a volcano residents dwell
oblivious of perils. So with the adhe
rents of Rome.

IV. The absence of fiery portents in
a volcano is a sign to the wise of gather-
ing fury. So when Rome shows no
threatening signs she is most seductive,

VY. Within a volcano slumber ruin-
ous fires. And Rome will be both de-
stroyed herself and all who trust in her.

Note: The mystical Babylon will be
overthrown with fire: Rev. xvii. 16,
xviii, 8, 9, 18—“the smoke of her
burning.”


Vers, 30-33. BABYLON’s CAPTURE BY
Cyrvs.

For historic records comp, on chap.
xxv. pp. 473, 474.

Note: Prophets beforehand and his-
torians afterwards coincide in describing
the events,


Ver. 33. Theme: A COMING HAR-
vest. ‘ Yet a little while and the time
of the harvest shall come.”

The noble practice of Jewish antiquity
was that the harvest should never be
gathered in till the first ripe sheaf was
brought into the Temple of the Lord,
and presented as an acknowledgment to
the Lord of the harvest (Lev. ix. 14).
This was to connect the Giver with His
gifts, to associate our temporal mercies
with the sanctuary of religion, and to
hold communion with God in the enjoy-
ment of His favours.

Ought we not to be thankful to the
God of our mercies when we see a smil-
ing spring followed by a joyful harvest,
&c.? Always the practice of saints
(Ps. lxv.)

The very constancy of Nature banishes
our Creator from our thoughts. We
need to be told there is going on
everywhere around us a vast system
utterly independent of human wisdom ;
need to be reminded of invisible domi-
nion and concealed omnipotence.

Text points us to another harvest ;
and the plain doctrine is every man has
@ harvest of hix vom daily ripening, and





CHAP, Ei,





may be unexpectedly gathered in :—A
harvest of punishment for the ungodly
(from this our only refuge is the Cross
of Christ); of mercy to the penitent
(through Christ); of consolation to the
sorrowful ; of final blessedness to the
righteous.

L There is a harvest of punishment
for the ungodly. Prophecy against
Babylon, type of all sinners.

Life is the seedtime of an immortal
harvest. It is the scene of a mighty
preparation ; it is the first step of an
infinite series; it is the dawn of an
everlasting day. We are beginning to
be what we shall for ever be. In your
nature are united seortality and immor-
tality.

God has made a seedtime of iniquity
the certain forerunner of a harvest of
shame and punishment—partly present,
partly future. He has laid it down as
an unalterable maxim of His govern-
ment that what a man soweth he shall
reap. The law that regulates the return
of day and night and the renewal of
seedtime and harvest is not more sure
than that sin brings sorrow here or here-
after, These are things of every day’s
experience, A wild and wasteful youth
makes an unhappy and unrespected
manhood. He who neglects the culti-
vation of his mind and the formation
of his character when young can never
repair the damage afterwards ; just as if
the husbandmen let his seedtime pass
without sowing, the whole year is lost
to him beyond recovery. The same law
prevails in much higher matters, The
man that lives without Christ usually
dies without Him; and he who dies
without Christ perishes to all eternity
without Him. very day the sinner
carrses a brand to his own burning.

Inquire what seed you are sowing!
What a harvest you expect to reap!
“ The wages of sinis death.” “ The way
of transgressors ts hard.” And if it
be solemn now for sinners to eat the
fruit of their own ways, to be caught in
their own snare, and even on earth to
be pierced through with many sorrows—
what will it be in eternity, when “ right-
eousness shall be laid to the line and
judgment to the plummet,” when they

67%


OHaP, Li,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; JEREMIAH.





shall be resigned to the evil they have
chosen, and when God shall verify to the
wicked the anticipations of their own
remorse, and give them bread (the bread
of sorrow) to eat unto the full? We
tejoice in the return of harvest ; but
know you not that there is a harvest of
which God is the proprietor, angels are
the reapers, and the souls of men are to
be gathered in? Know you not that
the world is ripening for the harvest,
and you are ripening with it} Know
you not that that Savioar who was once
crucified on Calvary, and has been often
crucified by you, is about to ascend the
throne of judgment, and to “ send forth
His angels and gather out of His king-
dom all things that offend, and cast
them into the lake of fire?” Soon shall
thesignal be given, “ Thrust tn thy sickle.”

“ Yet a little while.” All your hope
hangs upon those.two short words—a
little while. What a revolution may be
accomplished! You may flee for refuge;
may exercise repentance and faith ; may
obtain salvation with eternal glory ; may
share the sanctifying influence of the
Spirit; may have the tide of damnation
rolled back; may have incorruptible
seed sown in your souls,

It is but “a Usttle while.” Oh, delay
not. Escape for life. Listen not to
tempter. Better Councillor asks your heed.

IL A harvest of mercy to the peni-
tent. “They that sow in tears,” &e.
All the provisions of the Gospel cove-
nant go to assure peace and pardon to
those who, renouncing self-dependence
and relying on the mercy of God in
Christ, place all their hope where God
placed ‘all their help.

But we are no strangers to the anxiety
of the penitent on this head. Our
fears are usually in proportion to our
hopes. You may be assaulted with
many temptations, the subject of many
apprehensions, doubtful whether your
sins are not too many and aggravated,
alarmed lest you should not have come
aright. “ Weare not ignorant of Satan’s
devices,” nor of the misgivings of the
burdened mind. But “strong consola-
tion” is promised to them that flee for
refuge. Prayers and tears and desires
for pardon and purity offered by faith

672


in Christ will produce a harvest nothing
else will The promise is sure: “ Him
that cometh.” ‘Ask and you shall.”

DL A harvest of consolation to the
sorrowful “Comfort ye.” “He that
goeth forth,” &c. Many afflictions are
the Christian’s portion. But God ‘gives
songs in the night.” And the time is
limited—the night is followed by morn-
ing. “Our light afflictions but for @
moment—far more.” God tempers and
mitigates trial, God fortifies the mind
under it, strengthening to bear that the
prospect of which would have over-
whelmed. Internal peace in outward
trial. Harvest now—hereafter. No
one of that palm-bearing company regrets
past trials (Rev. vii. 9-14).

IV. A harvest of final blessedness
to the righteous. ‘Be faithful unto
death,” &c.—S. Thodey, 1825.


Ver. 41.
475.


Ver, 45. Quirtine Basyton. See on
ver. 6,


Ver. 46. Theme: FoREWARNINGS OF
EVIL.

“Ye fear for the rumour that shall be
heard.”

The fall of Babylon was to be pre-
ceded by a state of disquiet, men’s minds
being unsettled partly by rumours of
the warlike preparations of the Medes
and of actual invasions, in repelling one
of which Neriglissar fell; partly by in-
testine feuds, in which Evil-Merodach
and Latorosoarchod was murdered. So
before the conquest of Jerusalem by the
Romans the Church had similar warn-
ings (Matt. xxiv. 6, 7).

L Opportunity precedes impending
fudgment.

IL God thus ameliorates the seve-
rity of grave crises.

II. Responsibility is thereby thrown
upon us to heed His warnings and utrlise
the interval of grace.

IV. Neglect of such interludes, dur-
ing which God stays the judgment, much
increases the anguish when the storm at
length bursts.

V. Spiritual wisdom in discerning


“SuesHacg.” Comp. p





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; JEREMIAH.





the propitious hour is given to and dés-
tinguishes those who are appointed to
salvation,

VI. Senselessness of danger amid
these forewarnings shows men to be
ripe for destruction.

These Babylonians laughed danger to
scorn on the very night when doom
fell upon them. ‘‘ Except ye repent, ye
shall all likewise perish.”


Ver. 48. Theme: Joy If HEAVEN
OVER BaBYLON’s FALL

L Songs of judgment upon the enemies
of Israel. See Exod. xv. 5 seg. ; Pa.
exviii. 12, 15, 16; Rev. xviii. 20.

IL Songs of deliverance for God’s
people redeemed. Comp. vers. 49, 50.

This is in effect the joy described in
Luke xv. 6, 7.

IIL Songs of celebration of God’s
promises fulfilled.

For the heavenly hosts surely watch
the accomplishment of Jehovah’s pledger
to His afflicted people, and hail the day
of their completion (Isa. xliii, 23).


Ver. 50. Theme: RevivED MEMORIES
OF SPIRITUAL PRIVILEGES. ‘ Remember
the Lord afar off, and let Jerusalem come
into your mind.”

This is an appeal to the Jews to turn
all their longings Zionward so soon as
Cyrus opens Babylon for them to escape.

L Sorrowing exiles of Zion cherish
tender memories of long-lost privi-
leges.

II. Freedom regained should be
promptly used for our glad return to
God.

III. Sacred heritages in God and
Zion await the ransomed of the Lord
on their return.


Or, Valedictory address to mission-
aries or emigrants.

Lange’s Commentary says—

“This text may be used at the send-
ing out of misstonartes or the departure
of emigrants. Occasion may be taken
to speak—

“1, Of THE GRACIOUS HELP AND DE-
LIVERANCE which the Lord hath hitherto
shown to the departing, ‘ Ye that have
escaped of the sword,’


20





“2. They may be ADMONISHED TO
FIDELITY in that distant land.

“(1.) In ‘remembering the Lord,’ t.e.,
ever remaining sincerely devoted to Him,
and trusting Him as the shield of our
salvation,

“(2.) In fatthfully serving Jerusalem,
i.e, the Church and cause of Christ,
with all their powers, keeping the pro-
gress of the kingdom of our Lord ever
near their hearts,”


Ver. 56. Theme: RRooMPENSES.
“The Lord God of recompenses shall
surely requite.”

L All history illustrates and estab-
lishes this fact,

Not an evil has been committed, not
a good has been done, but has been
followed with recompense. The sin of
Adam, of Cain, of Sodom, of the Antedi-.
luvians, all were recompensed.

Nor does good fail of reward. ‘ He
is not unmindful to forget your labour
of love.” Even the gift of a cup of
cold water is to be rewarded. Comp.
Matt. xxv. 35 seg.

Il. The requiting of men’s deeds often
Jinds illustration in the laws of our
physical and mental being.

God has so constituted us that ewil ts
productive of evil and good of good. By
the very laws of our nature the drunkard
is recompensed by loss of reason, the
libertine by loss of health, &c. ; so by
the same laws of our being the kind, the
compassionate, d&ec., are requited with
joy, peace, &c. ; a “‘ great recompense of
reward.”

These are the natural recompenses
which flow from the operation of Nature’s
laws apart from God’s judgments,

Ill. There still remains to be super-
added the judicial recompense, which
the Righteous Judge will administer.

“ He will render to every man accord-
ing to his deeds:” deeds of wickedness
by the frown of His anger and the sen-
tence, ‘Depart, ye cursed ;” deeds of
righteousness by the smile of His favour
and the welcomc, “ Come, ye blessed.”

IV. Yet notwithstanding this natural
and judicial recompense, men are not
deterred from evil nor constrained to
do good. ;
673


GaiaP. Li,


How astounding the depravity of the
human heart! ‘“ Desperately wicked”
indeed, when the fearful consequences
of evil and the blessed results of good,
here and hereafter, fail to influence the
heart.

V. From the ultimate consequences
of our deeds there can be no possible
escape. “The Lord God of recompenses
shall surely requite.” “Vengeance is
mine, I will repay, saith the Lord.”
“With the merciful Thou wilt show
Thyself merciful, with the upright man
Thou wilt show Thyself upright ; with
the pure Thou wilt show Thyself pure,
and with the froward Thou wilt show
Thyself froward,”

Compare “ Walks with Jeremiah.”—
Pledge.


Ver. 58.
BaByYLon,”

These walls were 85 English feet
in width (according to Herodotus),
32 feet (according to Strabo and
Q. Curtius). Their height was 335
feet (Herodotus), 235 (Pliny), 150
(Curtius), 75 (Strabo). But as there
was an outer and inner enclosure, they
may not all have been referring to the
same walls, or the outer wall may have
differed in height in different parts.
The entire length of the walls was
{according to lowest estimate) 41 miles,
and by other authorities is estimated
at 48, and by Herodotus at 60 miies in
extent.

Berosus says that triple walls en-
compassed the outer, and the same
number the inner city ; and that Cyrus
ordered the outer walls to be demo-
lished. A cylindrical inscription records
that Esar-haddon was the real builder
of the walls of Babylon, and that Ne-
buchadnezzar only completed them.

“HER HIGH GATES,” One hundred
in number, twenty-five on each of the
four sides of the square-built city. An
ancient inscription exists which says,
‘In the thresholds of the great gates I
inserted folding-doors of brass, with very
strong railings and gratings (?).”

Ver. 59. SeRAIAH CARRYING THE
PREDICTION OF DELIVERANCE TO THE
EXILES IN BABYLON.

674


“THE BROAD WALLS OF


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAR.


Zedekiah the king may have jour-
neyed voluntarily to Babylon in order
to obtain some favour from Nebuchad-
nezzar, or because he was summoned
to be present, as Nebuchadnezszar’s
vassal, .on some state occasion; or
Nebuchadnezzar might have distrusted
Zedekiah’s fidelity, and have demanded
an explanation of the presence of
those ambassadors who met that year
at Jerusalem from Moab, &ec. (chap.
xxvii. 3).

Jeremiah used the opportunity for
intrusting Seraiah, the king’s chief
attendant, with these predictions for the
exiles at Babylon. (He had already sent
them a letter full of affection and hope,
chap. xxix.)

As Zedekiah’s retinue paused each
night on the journey across the desert,
it is quite conjectural that Seraiah, hia
chief courier, may have read to the
king the contents of this prophetic
roll, ‘What an interesting subject for
conjecture (says Wordsworth) does this
view open upon us! How many
thoughts may have passed through the
mind of the king and of Seraiah his
chamberlain at the time! How many
conversations may they have had—or
certainly might they have had—con-
cerning the destiny of Jerusalem and of
Babylon, and concerning things in the
far-off future—the liberation and return
of the captives of Israel from Babylon
by the same road on which they were
travelling; and even with regard to
blessings more remote, which Jeremiah
had pre-announced — the graces and
glories of the Gospel of Christ !”


Ver. 63. THE PROPHETIO ROLL SUNK
Ix THE EUPHRATES

Not in order to destroy it, but as
symbolic of events to come, It signi-
fied that Babylon should be Itkewise
overwhelmed and sink from sight. It
foreshadowed the like fate of mystic
Babylon—Antichristian Rome (see Rev.
xviii, 21, “A mighty angel took up
a stone,” &e.) The reiteration of the
weird and pensive words—

“THEY SHALL BE WEARY,” is also
suggestive, They were the final words
Jeremiah’s prophecy contained (ver.


cael
era





I ON eT NE OE


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





CHAP Li,





58), and their reiteration as the roll
sank would pronounce (what the words


the Chaldeans, a worn-out power —a
fit requiem to accompany the symbolic


imply) the decayed energy and life of bucial of Babylon,


ADDENDA T0 CHAPTER LL:


HISTORICAL SUMMARY OF EVENTS IN


BABYLON ’S FALL.


“Tn his father’s absence Belshazzar
took the direction of affairs within the
city, and met and fovled for a consider-
able time all the assaults of the Persians,
He was young and inexperienced, but
he had the counsels of the queen-mother
to guide and support him, as well as
those of the various lords and officers
of the court. So well did he manage
the defence, that after awhile Cyrus
despaired ; and, as a last resource, ven-
tured on a stratagem in which it was
clear that either he must succeed or
perish.

“Withdrawing the greater part of
the army from the vicinity of the city,
and leaving behind him only certain
corps of observation, Cyrus marched
away up the course of the Euphrates
for a certain distance, and there pro-
ceeded to make a vigorous use of the
spade. His soldiers dug a channel or
channels from the Euphrates, by means
of which a great portion of its waters
could be drawn off, and hoped in this
way to render the natural course of the
river to be fordable.

“ When all was prepared, Cyrus deter-
mined to wait for the arrival of a certain
festival, during which the whole popula-
tion were wont to engage in drinking
and revelling, and then siiently, in the
dead of the night, to turn the water of
the river and make his attack. All
fell out as he hoped and wished. The
festival was even held with greater pomp
and splendour than usual, for Belshazzar,
with the natural insolence of youth, to
mark his contempt of the besieging
army, abandoned himself wholly to the
delights of the season, and himself en-
tertained a thousand lords in his palace.
Elsewhere the rest of the population
was occupied in feasting and dancing.
Drunken riot and mad excitement held
possession of the town, the siege was
forgotten ; ordinary precautions were
neglected. The non-closing of the river


gates must have been a neglect of this
kind. Had the sentries even kept proper
watch, the enemy’s approach must have
been perceived.

“Following the example of their
king, the Babylonians gave themselves
up for the night to orgies, in which reli-
gious frenzy and drunken excess formed
@ strange and revolting medley,

“Meanwhile, outside the city, tm
silence and darkness, the Persians watched
at two points where the Euphrates en-
tered and left the walls. Anxiously
they noted the gradual sinking of the
water in the river-bed; still more an-
xiously they watched to see if those
within the walls would observe the
suspicious circumstance and sound an
alarm through the town. Should such
an alarm be given, all their labours
would be lost. If, when they entered
the river-bed, they found the river walls
manned, and the river gates fast locked,
they would be indeed ‘caught in a
trap’ (Herod. i, 191). Enfiladed on
both sides by an enemy they could
neither see nor reach, they would be
overwhelmed and destroyed by his mis-
siles before they could succeed in making
their escape. But as they watched, no
sounds of alarm reached them, only a
confused noise of revel and riot, which
showed that the unhappy townsmen
were quite unconscious of the approach
of danger.

“At last shadowy forms began to
emerge from the obscurity of the river-
bed, and on the landing-places opposite
the river gates scattered clusters of men
grew into solid columns ; the undefended
gateways were seized, a war-shout was
raised, the alarm was taken and spread,
and swift runners started off to ‘show
the king of Babylon that his city was
taken at one end’ (Jer. li. 31). In the
darkness and confusion of the night
a, terrible massacre ensued (Xenophon,
Cyrop. vii. 5). The drunken revellers

675


OmaP. Lil,





eould make no resistance. The king,
paralysed with fear at the awful hand-
writing upon the wall, which, too late,
had warned him of his peril, could do
nothing even to check the progress of
the assailants, who carried all before
them everywhere. Bursting into the
palace, a band of Persians made their
way to the presence of the monarch and
slew him on the scene of his impious
revelry. Other bands carried fire and
sword through the town (Xenophon,
Cyrop. vii. 5) When morning came,
Cyrus found himself undisputed master
of the city, which, if it had not despised
his efforts, might with the greatest ease
have baffled them.”—Rodinson’s Ancient
Monarchies, vol. iii. p. 515.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.


~<—_


“The Persians came upon them un-
awares, and on account of the extent of
the city, as is said by those who dwelt
there, when the extremities of it were
taken, the Babylonians who dwelt in
the middle of it were not aware that
they were captured, but were dancing
at the time (for it happened to be a
festival), and were rejoicing, until they
perceived it in very deed.”—Herodotus,
i 191.

“Babylon was more like a nation than
a city, and it is said that when it was
taken, some of its inhabitants did xo¢
hear of the capture tll the third day.” —
Aristotle, Polit, iii a 1.





CHAPTER LIL


CurrioaL aNp Exzenrican Norzs.—This ehapter forms a historical appendix to the Book
ef Jeremiah. Its aurHonsHiP is conjectural, They who think Jeremiah penned it urge that
the closing words of chap. li., ‘‘Thus far the words of Jeremiah,” really ended the original
form of the book. Yet this chapter may have been a separate roll, penned earlier than chap.
li., and now added to the book as supplying additional details to those he gave in chap, xxxix.3
or, indeed, he may have written it, copying part of the Book of Kings (2 Kings xxiv. 18,
xxv. 21) asa historical preface to his Book of Lamentations, Others urge that the men of the
Great Synagogue took the ehapter from Kings and added it here. Others suggest Ezra. Probably
some unknown hand appended the account from Kings, adding to that aceount other items which
valuable documents in his possession supplied.

For Chronology of the Chapter and General Notes, vide chaps, xxxiv., xxxix. in loc,

The DaTES given in vers. 28-30 differ from those in other Scripture accounts, The jfireé

ion of Jews under Nebuchadnezzar is ascribed to ‘‘the year” of Nebuchadnezzar’s
reign ; but the numeral here must be the seventeenth, the ‘‘ ten” having dropped out of the
text; for the earliest deportation was in the eighth year of Nebuchadnezzar (2 Kings xxiv. 12),
and the captives were far more numerous than those here reckoned. Most probably the depor-
tations mentioned here are all connected with the final war with Zedekiah 3 and even then the
dates are ene year too early throughout. See in verses below.


SUBJECT OF THE OHAPTER: OAPTURE OF JERUSALEM.


See for homiletic arrangements of events, “The Stege of Jerusalem by Nebuchad-
nezsar,” pp. 599, 560, and chap, xxxix.


HOMILIES AND COMMENTS ON OHAPTER LIL


Vers. 1-11. Theme: THe caPriviry
or JUDAH.

L The immediate causes of the
captivity (vers. 1-4).

1. Moral. “He did that which was
evil in the eyes of the Lord.”

1.) This is the divine summing up
of Lam. i. 6.

(2.) The history of every nation and
of every individual proves that sin
against God as surely brings ruin as

676


that any physical cause produces its
legitimate effect.

(3.) This law in God’s moral universe
is an all-sufficient answer to the mate
rialist of any and every age. (a.) A
universe without a moral cause could
have no moral law. (b.) A class of
beings without a moral nature could not
be legitimate subjects of such a law.
(c.) But the law exists, and mankind
are subjects of it; therefore, &e. d&e,


— + «ee





ne ee ee Te ee


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH,


2. The political cause (ver. 3). “ Zede-
Ba resid agninn’ the king of Baby-
on.’

(1.) The invasion of Nebuchadnezsar
was politically just. (a.) Zedekiah ac-
cepted the throne of Judah from the
hands of Nebuchadnezzar as his vassal,
(6.) Every principle of good faith bound
Zedekiah to be true to his Babylonian
master. (c¢) To this course he was
advised by Jeremiah the prophet, nay,
commanded by God (Jer. xxvii. 12-14).
(d.) Zedekiah’s rebellion was no less
perfidious, in view of his relation to
Nebuchadnezzar, than was his disobe-
dience to God.

IL The terrible sufferings which
immediately preceded the captivity
(vers, 5-11).

1. The ctty was besieged for the space
of two years and a half.

(1.) This was a time of terrible suf-
fering (Lam. iv 4-10). (a.) The chil-
dren perished with hunger and thirst.
(b.) The dunghills were searched for
scraps of offal. (c.) Mothers cooked and
ate their own children, (d.) The com-
plexion of men grew black with famine.
(e.) What a type of the sufferings of all
who reject God !

2. At the end of the siege, when the
city was taken, the sufferings were stell
more terrible.

(1.) Zedekiah, who with his wives
apd sons, and men of war, fled from the


captured city, was overtaken in the


plain of Jericho, brought before Nebu-
chadnezzar, who ordered the sons of
Zedekiah to be slain before their father’s
eyes, and then Zedekiah’s own eyes to
be “dug out ;” and in this pitiable con-
dition he was taken to Babylon, cast


into prison, where in blindness and


wretchedness he languished till the day
of his death.

(2.) Thousands of the unfortunate
people were carried away captive to
Babylon, whose sufferings have never
been written. i

(3.) But over all this must be written
for the confusion or conviction of men:
“Righteous art Thou, O Jehovah, and
upright are Thy judgments!” (Ps, cxix,
137).

Practical Lessons—


CHaP, Li,








1. Nowhere are found mors striking
illustrations of the hardness and blind-
ness which impenitence produces than do
the kings of Judah and Israel furnish,

2. Nowhere are found more striking
illustrations of the mercy and forbear-
ance of Almighty God.

3. Nowhere are found more striking
illustrations of the divine truth, “He
that, being often reproved, hardeneth
his neck, shall suddenly be destroyed,
and that without remedy ” (Prov. xxix.
1).— Rev. D. C. Hughes.


Ver. 3. Theme: REBELLION AND VEN-
agance, ‘“ Through the anger of the
Lord tt came to pass . . . that Zedekiah
rebelled.”

ii ANGER IN Gop’s HEART against
His covenant, yet now apostate, people.

ii Gop’s ANGER IN action: “ Till
He had cast them out of His presence,”
Comp. 2 Kings xxiii. 26, 27.

iii, HUMAN AGENCIES OF PUNISH-
MENT. “It came to pass that Zedekiah
rebelled,” 1.¢, against Nebuchadnezzar ;
and that was the moving cause of Jeru-
salem’s destruction. God exerciscd no
restraint upon Zedekiah to prevent his
rebelling and thus involving Judah’s
overthrow,

iv, VENGEANCE THE REQUITAL OF
A VIOLATED OATH. He “rebelled,” not-
withstanding his sacred oath of fealty to
Nebuchadnezzar, and notwithstanding
all God’s commands, Comp. 2 Chron.
xxxvi. 13.

Thus we gee why God sometimes places
ungodly rulers over a country—to punish
tt for its sins with degradation and de-
struction,


Ver. 6. Theme: Famine. “The fam
mine was sore in the city,” &e.

L Bread is the gift of God.

1. In the first instance tt was the pro-
duct of His creative power, not as now,
the result of growth. This is obvious
The first grain of wheat could not have
proceeded from another grain: it was a
direct creation.

2. Its very growth ts the result of His
laws, Let them be suspended: no rain,
&c., and the sower might sow in vain.


677


OHaP, LiL


IL Bread, God’s gift, withheld as a
punishment of sins.

For judicial reasons, God sometimes
breaks the whole staff of bread and
sends famine into a city or throughout a
land, This either by successive failures
tn the crops or by permitting an invad-
ing army to invest and besiege a city.

The famine in Egypt in Joseph’s time
was occasioned by a seven years’ fatlure
un the crops; so the famine in Canaan
in Ahab’s reign resulted from a three
years and six months’ drought.

The famine in Jerusalem was caused
by a state of stege (vers. 4,5) So was
the scarcity in Paris during the reign of
Napoleon IIL, when William, king of
Prussia, besieged the city fiye months.

Thus He who gives bread can take it
away; and He does take it away when
a land like Egypt becomes tyrannical
and oppressive, and a city like Jerusalem
or Paris forgets God, lives in defiance of
His authority, and tramples under foot
divine and human laws,

IIL God visits guilty cities with sore
distress.

When cities fall into moral guilt and


depravity, thetr prosperity is desolated, .


their doom ts sealed. With expressions
of His anger He visited Jerusalem, with
famine first, and then with ruin (ver. 7).
Equally with proofs of displeasure He
visited France : famine in the city, Paris
desolated, the Emperor overturned, the
valiants of the army slain. Thus events
in a.D. 1870-71 reaffirm the meaning of
events in Jerusalem’s overthrow nearly
six hundred years before Christ.

Superficial observers may see in these
events only the hand of man ; but what
saith God! See Isa. lx. 12, Jer. v. 9, whe-
ther with war, or pestilence, or famine,
God deals with nations and men after
their sins.

IV. Famished cities on earth suggest
thoughts, as a glad contrast, of the
blessed city of God above, the heavenly
Jerusalem. Of its inhabitants it is de-
clared, “‘ They shall hunger no more,” &c.
Many of its residents did hunger when
here on earth, ¢.g., Paul (2 Cor, xi. 27).

No more assaults of foes, nor penalties
of sin, nor sufferings and deprivation,
will be known in the Holy City, the Jeru-


rQ


vo


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : JEREMIAR,


salem above.—Arranged from “ Walks
with Jeremiah.”

Comments—

Vers. 9-11. Nebuchadnezzar “Gave
JUDGMENT” upon Zedekiah. See on
chap, xxxix. 14; also xxxii 4, xxxiv. 3

Ver. 12. “In the tenth day of the
month.” Note in 2 Kings xxv. 8 it is
given as the seventh day. But the dif-
ferent preposition explains the difference
of dates. ‘“ He came wnto Jerusalem”
on the seventh, and “ iénio Jerusalem ”
on the tenth day; or he moved towards
Jerusalem on the “ seventh,” and entered
on the “ tenth” day.

Vers, 17-23. Spoils of the Temple
carried away, thus fulfilling the predio-
tion of chap, xxvii, 19-22.

The minute enumeration of these ar-
ticles and of their construction shows
how precious was the remembrance of
them to the godly Israelite, This height
ened the bitterness of their loss,

Ver. 24. CAPTURE OF THE PRIESTS.

“ As teachers are often to blame for
their behaviour that sin gets the upper
hand in a community, it is exceedingly
just when God brings such for an ex-
ample into great punitive judgment
(1 Sam, ii. 27-34).”—<Starke,

“The priests are caught and slain—

“1, Because they could not believe the
truth for themselves,

“2. Because they led others astray.

“3. Because they appealed to the
Temple of the Lord.

“4. Because they persecuted the true
prophets.

“5. Because they troubled the whole
Church of God.

“But he who troubleth shall bear
his judgment, whosoever he be (Gal. v.
10).”—Cramer, quoted in Lange.

Vers. 27-30. DEPORTATION OF CAP
TIVES.

“The present account of the deporta-
tion of captives by Nebuchadnezzar him
self (not by Nebuzar-adan) is subordi-
nate and supplemental to other narra
tives of those taken from Jerusalem at
other times. Two of the deportations
here mentioned are of the Jews, only
one was from Jerusalem itself. That
this is their true character is evident
from the smallness of the number here


—\ >


ee SN


I en Ser ea Oe ee


em Pee ee ee ee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; JEREMIAH.





apecified. The total of these three de-
eo is only 4600, whereas in 2

ings xxiv. 14-16 they who are carried
captive with Jehoiachin by Nebuchad-
nezzar, in the eighth year of his reign,
were 18,000 souls. How many were
carried away with Zedekiah by Nebu-
gar-adan when Jerusalem was burnt we
are not told, but probably a still larger
number.” — Wordsworth.

‘According to this account, Nebu-
chadnezzar, in his seventeenth (usually
called his eighteenth) year, while the
siege of Jerusalem was going on, selected
3023 Jews for deportation to Babylon.
In the next year, his eighteenth (ie,
nineteenth), upon the capture of Jeru-
salem, he selected 832 more, the small-
ness of the number evincing the des-
perate tenacity with which the Jews had
defended themselves during the year
and a half of the siege, and the havoc
made in them by famine, pestilence, and
the sword. We must bear in mind,
however, that Nebuchadnezzar had not
left more than 6000 or 7000 people in
Jerusalem under Zedekiah, and must
not exaggerate this fewness, Finally,
five years afterwards, Nebuchadnezzar
selected 745 more, not “from Jerusalem”
(as is said expressly of the 832), but
Jews simply, the occasion probably being
war with the Moabites, Ammonites, and
Edomites.

“ Another point often noticed is the
small number generally of the exiles car-
ried away compared with the 42,360
men who returned with Ezra (Ezra ii.
64, 65), leaving a large Jewish popula-
tion behind at Babylon. But if these
were mere supplementary deportations,
they show that a continual drain of
people from Judea was going on, and
thus help to solve the diffieulty.”—Dr.
Payne Smith.


Vers. 31-34. Theme. MxERoy To A
CAPTIVE KING.

These verses recount the deliverance
of Jehoiachin.

L It shows us that the Lord can
help us—

1. Out of great distress: grievous
imprisonment of thirty-seven years,

2. In a glorious manner.


GHAP. LIZ.





IL It admonishes us—

1. To steadfast patience,

2. To believing hope (Psalm xiii,)—
Naegelsbach.


Vers. 31-34. Theme: RELEASE TO
THE CAPTIVE, “ The king of Babylon
lifted up the head of Jehovachin, brought
him forth, spake kindly, set his throne,”
&e.

The obscure portions of the Word
of God are worthy of notice, like the
filings of gold which the artist preserves.
They often illustrate great principles,

IL The deliverance which the king
of Babylon accomplished for Jehoia-
chin.

1. Lt ts specially noticed, as an act, no
doubt, acceptable to God. God is the
Father of mercies, and He loves ex-
ercises so like His own. Many events
are unrecorded, but this has a conspi-
cuous place. It throws a lovely light
over the dark events of this chapter.

2. Jt 18 every way complete.

Nothing is left undone that could re-
lieve his sad captivity. Released from
prison; spoken kindly to; a seat of
honour given him among other princes ;
his prison garments changed; he con-
stantly is a guest at the king’s table;
a continual diet is given him ; the kind-
ness extends to the very close of life.

3. It ts worthy of practical tmita-
tion.

“ Pure religion and undefiled,” &e,
(Isa. viii.) “Inasmuch as ye did u
untome,” &c. “ If thine enemy hunger,”
&e. “ Remember them in bonds.” See
Isa. lviii. 67.

II. The greater deliverance which
Christ accomplishes. To rebels, to
traitors.

1. He emancipates us from the power
of sin,

Conversion is the opening of the
prison, “To open their eyes,” &.
“He is made of God to us redemp-
tion.”

2. He speaks tn accents of kindness
and compassion. Margin reads, ‘ Good
things with Him.” “The Spirit of the
Lord is upon me, to preach good tidings
to the weak,” d&e.

3. He clothes us with the robe of mercy.

679


OHAP. LIL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH,





“T will greatly rejoice in the Lord,” d&c.
Changed his prison garments (Zech. iii
3, 4).

4. He feeds us with the bread of life.

“Man did eat angels’ food.” He
thus nourishes us freely, daily, con-
stantly, to the very end.

5. He ewalts us to the throne of tmmor-
taltty.


On the career of Jechoniah, see
Personal Allusions, p. 419, ver. 24,
Contah, son of Jehoiachin ; also Theme,
“ Woe to Contah,” pp. 430, 431.

Notes—

‘No one should despair in misfortune,
for the right hand of the Highest can
change all (Psa. lvii. 10), and Christ
rules even in the midst of His enemies
(Ps. cx. 2).—Cramer.

St. Jerome reports, from an - ancient
tradition of the Jews, that Evil-Merodach,
having had the government of the Baby-
lonish empire during the distraction of
his father, used his power so ill, that as
soon as the old king came to himself he
put him in prison for it, where he con-
tracted a peculiar acquaintance with
Jehotachin, his fellow-prisoner; and
that this was the cause of the great
kindness he expressed towards him,
This elevation of the captive king was
evidently an act of grace by Evil-Mero-
dach on the occasion of his ascending
the throne, 561 B.a,

Lange asks here: “May not the
influence of Daniel and other highly
esteemed Jews at the Babylonian court
have operated in favour of the im-
prisoned king ?”

Wordsworth reflects thus: “The
change vouchsafed at Babylon by God’s
mercy even to Jehoiachin, after the
terrible maledictions denounced against
him (xxii. 24-30), and after a long
exile of thirty-seven years, was like a
message of mercy and comfort from God
Himself, and was a prelude and a pledge
of the ltberation and exaltation of the
Jewish nation when it had been humbled
and purified by the discipline of suffer.
ing, and of its return to its own land.
And it was like a joyful free annownce-
ment of that far more glorious future
restoration, which the prophets in the

680


Old and the apostles in the New Testa.
ment foretell—of Jsracl t Gop m
Curis.”


Ver. 32. Theme: Kixp worps. “ He
spake kindly unto him.”


After thirty-seven years of captivity,


during which had passed away the youth
and joyousness of King Jehoiachin, his
prison doors were opened, his prison
garments changed, and his throne exalted
among the vanquished kings in Babylon;
and yet we can well imagine that better
far than the earthly distinction thus
awarded him were the sunshine and com-
fort in his stricken heart when Evil-
Merodach, king of Babylon, “‘spake kindly
unto him,”


‘¢ A little word in kindness spoken,
A motion, or a tear,
Hath often healed the heart that’s broken,
And made a friend sincere,


“ A word—a look—hath crushed to earth
Full many a budding flower,
Which, had a smile but owned its birth,
Would bless life's darkest hour,


*¢ Then deem it not an idle thing
A pleasant word to speak ;
The face you wear, the thought you bring,
A heart may heal or break.” — Whittier,


L Kindness should be a natural in-
terchange between man and man.

The very word “kindness” comes
from the cognate word kinned, t.¢., or of
the same kin or race, acknowledging
or reminding us of the fact that all men
are brethren, all of the same blood, and
therefore all should act as brethren. All
who are of the same kindred should be
kind. The same analogy is found in
the word heomane, from human.


“ "Tis the first sanction Nature gave to man,

Eaeh other to assist in what they can,”

—Denham.

IL Small ministries of kindness
may readily find occasion.

Life affords but few opportunities of
doing great services for others, but there
is scarcely an hour of the day that does
not afford occasion of performing some
little, it may be unnoticed, kindnesa,

*¢ Beorn not the slightest word or deed,

Nor deem it void of power ;


There’s fruit in the wind-wafted seed,
Waiting its natal hour,


4
A
4


Se a


ipa a





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: JEREMIAH.





% & whispered word may touch the heart,
And bring it back to life ;
A look of love bid sin depart,
Or atill unholy strife.”


Il. Kindly words effect more than
pompous speech,

Loud talking, blustering pledges, os
tentatious promises, are less agreeable to
a man than honest though gentle worda
of affection, and win his heart less.

“Good words do more than hard
speeches, as the sunbeams without any
noise will make the traveller cast off his.
cloak, which all the blustering winds
could not do, but only make him bind
it the closer to him.”—Letghton.

“You can give me kind words if you
can do nothing else for me,” said a poor


woman to her district visitor, ‘‘and they


make my heart glad. You cannot think
how I look for the day of your coming,
that I may tell you all my trials. Ah!”
she added, “if only people thought a
little about the trials and troubles of
the poor, and the comfort and encourage-
ment of a few kind words, they would
not let them be so scarce.”

IV. How touching the power of
kind words on the suffering !

A compassionate visitor entered a
prison hospital, and conversed with one
of the most degraded and ignorant of
men anywhere to be found. As he
spoke kindly to him, the man drew tha


OH4P. LH,


bed-clothes over his head and sobbed
convulsively, As soon as he could
speak he said to the visitor, “Sir, you
are the first man that ever spoke a
kind word to me since I was born, and
I can’t stand it.”


*¢ If a soul thou wouldst redeem,
And lead a lost one back to God,
Wouldat thou a guardian angel seem
To one who long in guilt hath trod ?
Go kindly to him, take his hand,
With gentlest words, within thine own,
nd by his side a brother stand,
Till all *he demons thou dethrone,”


—HMra. Sawyer.





Thus closes this plaintive Book m
the Prophet Jeremiah, with a gleam of
light on the gloom of exile, with a record
of “ mercy rejoicing against judgment,”
of kindness shown to a long-suffering
captive, of God’s pity for the degraded
and dethroned king. So also may we
in life’s deepest and most prolonged
sufferings find gracious alleviation ; in
our dethronisation — which sin has
wrought—recover exaltation to spiritual
honour and privilege ; and in our earthly
life of exile from the “land very far
off,” enjoy the favour of the glorious
King, and be nourished with ‘“‘a con-
tinued diet” of sacred grace “given us
of the King, every day a pertion uatil
the day of our death.” Amen.


ve
mek"


re
aay








ALPHABETICAL INDEX


A PROPHET’s work ‘
Abandoned to judgment
Abandoned, Gud’s covenant
Abandoned by God
Abazsement, prostrate in
Abuse of religion , 5
Accursed trust .
Admonished and abandoned .
Adoration of God in nature .
Advantages of irreligion


es ete ie Fe 6


eoeese ee fF @


Affecting expostulationa, incorrigible im-


penitence . .


Affliction and sorrow of heart


Alienation the road to atheism


Aliens united in the Church.
Ancient paths .


Anomaly in the law of tranamiasion


Answer to prayer delayed
Ark lost
Attention to God’s word


BasyLon’s broad walls

Babylon's overthrow ,
Babylon’s fall, joy over
Backward


Backward glance of sorrow
Balm of Gilead .

Baruch corrected and comforted
Basket of figs . . .
Beautiful but brief A °
Believing Ethiopian , °
Bellows burned . ;


e s 674
657, 667, 675


Benignant promises of future restoration


** Be not proud” . .
Bereaved of children ,
Bereavement, comfort in


Best Christians, best citizens
Bitter issues of impious effrontery


Blast of the Almighty .
Blessed and cursed °
Branch of righteousness
Bright and blessed vision, a
Bright era for mankind
Brilliart hopes baffled .
Burden of
Buried gifts . . .


e Lord on triflers


oeeeeteteeeeeee


CaLL, consecration and Cente of


the prophet, .
Captive, release of .
Captive king, merey te
Captivea. devortatiaa of


e
.
e
c


Chursh’s lost territory
Circumcision, true and false
Cisterns and the Fountain
City saved for one good man
Clay in the potter’s hands
Cleansing refused , °
Comfort and warning .
Comfort in bereavement
Coming harvest .
Commission to destroy
Commission to preach ,
Comparative criminality
Comparative sinfulness


eeteetee°e


Complaining prayer merging into god]


confidence


Complaint that treachery prospers


Complete devastation of the land .


Conditional covenants ,


Conditions of continuance in privilege


Confession of the Gentiles .
Converts . .
Corrective punishment . . °
Consideration ° ° e
Consolation . ° e
Consolations and hopes” ‘
Consolations of a dying father
Constancy of Rechabites ,
Conversion of the Jews
Courageous Ethiopian .
Covenanted alliance .


e
| Creaticr an argument for faith


8
e
s
a
a
e


$83


——
?acE
+ 13 | Captivity of Judsh .,.
- 97 | Capture of Jerusalem , °
+ §32 | Capture of the priesta .
+ 624 | Carnal security . . °
+ 70 | Cautions and consolations ,
« 464 | Chaff and wheat , .
- 368 | Characteristics of an unbelieving epoch
« 613 | Charge to pastors.
« 10 | Chastened, but not abandoned
623 Chastisement resulting in penitence
Children, what they can do for God
« 40 | Children’s sermon, ‘‘ Good way”
. 222 | Christ the True Ark of the covenant
- 407 | Christ's supreme name :
257,658 | Christian creed summarised .
138 | Christian in the tumult of the world,
e 322 the ° e °
» 611 | Christian patriotism ° °
« 62 rneaene, Sabbath e °
° 272 tian’s highest 5
Christian's ra ame aa °


y


PAGE


4LPHABETICAL INDEX.


PAGE

Critical and exegetical notes, 5, 32, 55, 73, 96,
116, 143, 170, 190, 212, 231, 245, 260, 289,
313, 350, 362, 386, 399, 401, 411, 418, 437,
460, 468, 479, 484, 3 $0 504, 514, 537;
2o8 ae 62, 570, 580, 586, 598, 603, 605,
17, 625, 629, bea, 635, 65i, 656,


66,
Cry for Tote . i F A 4 Sky
Cry from scenes of exile . »  « 1978
Cry of the godless in calamity . 2 3237
Cup of suffering . . 4. ow, 654
Dearrn, the ; A A ‘ + 306
Death . A ; nee Say:
Death an invading enemy s ; 2 201
Death preferable to life A ¢ » 422
Deceptive hope , ; Fi . «581
Deep-seated character of ain ° » 367
Defeat predicted . - - 538
Defiance reduced to despair . ° » 477
Deliberate combination against God . 237
Delicacy and desirableness of Zion ata
Deliverance from trouble , . 2 500
Delusions of disobedience . ° » OI
Delusions refuted $84
Demoralising trust placed in external

piety ° ° 146


Deserting ancient ‘paths .
Desire to be remembered ,
Desolations hastening , °
Desperation dangerous .
Destruction of the fair olive-tree
Directions to enquirers . .
Dirge over an unhappy life .
Disasters consequent upon
Discipline . .
Diseased souls,
Dismal outlook .
Dismay of defeat . f
Divine formation of a human life, the
Divine message sent into a prison
Divine promises .


BY
Vo)


Divine wrath av object ‘of fear : 380
Doctrine of the Church * ° . 164
Drawn with everlasting love . a SET
Dreading God’s abhorrence . . 2 303
Duty of Christians to their sears. » 499
Duty of trusting in God - 369
Eak ty piety the beauty of youth . - 50


Earnest persuasion leaaly defied . 236
Election . + 263
Engaging the heart in religious service SII


Enquirers, directions te aks - 659
Ephraim bemoaning himself s. . 0,526
Equivocation » §97
Errors and doom of Judah's kings e 419
Escaping evil habits . e e » 277
Estrangement from God 4 » » 267
Everlasting inheritance ° ° e 15

Everlasting love . e e ® e 51

Evil of sin after conversion . ‘ rere)
Evils of false security . e - 129
Exhortations to hallow ‘the Sabbath - 366
Exiles in Babylon, letter to . e - 674
Existence regretted . ° rit


Extermination accomplished
684














2a
Facts for amazement, reckless desertion
of the Fount of life . ‘ : acy!
Faithful miniater’s appeal » 4l
Faithless healers, and vain remedies » 5
Faithless pastors ° ® . 2 » 444i
False charges . 2 » 583
False peace, warning egeinst ° » 82
False prophets. , « 440
False theories . ’ . 154
Falsity and foulness of man’s heart, 373
Falsity, its cruelty and cowardice » 196
Famine . ‘ - 677
Fate of others a warning tous 645
Fearless performance of perilous service 13
Fears and comforts in prospect of labour
with God . ; ‘ r Pe}
Fertility of the soul. : . 521
Fidelity required in ministers 453
Fire kindled in the houses of geds of
E gy pt . ° s e . 616
Fisding for refuge ° ° ’ - 646
Forgiveness plenteous , > . 1 665
Forewarninga of evil . ‘ ° > 672
Forewarning despised , ° ’ . 99
Fortified against God’s power . » 654
Fretting lamentations silenced with pro-
mises > : » 317
Fruit, delicious and repulzive : . 46a
Frustrated ministry of graee ‘ » 121
Fury for the impious oppressor , 3 225
Futile self-cleansing . C ° » 46
Futility of human wisdom , » + 652
Future of believers . . . « §21
GEDALIAH’s exaltation and peril , - 604
Gedaliah’s fate an example . : « 607
Genuine philanthropy . . . » 194
Girdle of truth . » 266
Glorying prohibited and sanctioned 203
God, all-present . . ° + 452
appearing as a vain hope ° . 339
—— devising, yet deploring evil , » 391
—— forsaking and God-forsaken , : 325
—— gained, or heaven lost . e a
—— of families, the . ° e » 535
—— our comforter : ° - 522
—~ recognised in judgments ° °
——— reproached . . - 82
——. the antagonist of false tenchers . 456
——, the heart-searcher e . . 408
———. the only true ry e e a 219
Godless mirth silenced . ° Fi 3 2
Godly conduct . a . °
Goa’> account of himself ; : is
e e ® ae
—— anger understood e 0  « 450
appeal against Judah, ». »« 620
—— call to the world . ° e » 431
—— chastisements ° e ° e 103
—— claim on parents . ; : wae
—— control shunned ,. ° - 616
—— contreversy with humanity ° . 476
—— covenant an argument in prayer . 311
—— covenant heritage in Israel . + 221
— decisive ie of the prophet’s
petition . 315
—— earnestness in n dealing with sinners 157


ALPHABETICAL INDEY.





God’s earnestness with sinners
—— eyes on the path of men
—— faithful people abandoned
foreknowledge ., °
girdle , °
glorious purpose for His peo
— gracious thoughts _,
—— guarantee to His church
—— hidden hand . :
—— interestin man . °
—_— indecent sree the faithless vindi-
cated :
—— judgments upon the nations - .
law in the heart . ° e
—mercy to His people , °











ne oo eae eee








—— message in writing .

—— message of life and death

—~— messenger baffled and repudiated
—— messenger to rebellious Judah .
Messenger opposed 4 °
method of confuting unbelief e











name the sinner’s plea . °
nearness everywhere ,
people suffer, shall His foes escape
proclamation of grand purposes .
prophet a prisoner . °
reply to a perplexed soul
—— righteousness, its baffling anomalies
—— rule of judgment . : . °
seeming disregard of man.
tender iheduinaes with the
young .
tender memory of the sinner’
—— unwilling seperation from Judah
voice to men .
— withdrawings from His "people
— witness .
word and man’s word >
word enjoyed
word the joy of the godly
work doue remiasly .
works appealed to :
— wrath over national vices
wrath, the fire of . :
Golden key of prayer .
Good man’s strength, fortress, en
Good news for true seekers . e
Good old way 5 . ° ° °
Gospel a sure remedy . °
Gracious purposes of grievous punish-
ments ° °















































eeeeseref eee e


Graves dishonoured . 5 e 5
Greater future of Israel 6 ° A
Grief over sinners’ ruin 5 5
Guilt under sanction of religion ° .


HanvVEst sermon . ’
Harvest, a coming .
Hastening to escape .
Healing for stricken ones
Healing medicines .
Healing wounds slightly .,
Hearer becomes a preacher, the
Hearers hardened f
Heart inscrutable . .
Heart’s deceitfulness towards iteelf
Heath in the desert . . .


®
e
e
‘


e®*2e
e ®* &®& @ @@ & 8B @


PAGE
568
541
247
161
269
270
501
534
604


377


128
574


37°


Heathen auguries .

Heaven’s appeal to the sinner
Hero of faith ¢ : «
Heroic friendship 5 ’
Hidden manna.

Holy tand ee devastated, the
Hope . . °
Hope of man in misery .

Hope of the soul in time of terror
Horror over faithless propheta  .
Hospitality outraged . °


©
*
e
°
e
»
a
®


Sule Ne) (el eRe ee, re: a
wm
“I
od


Human glorying corrected . . mh 654
Human heart deceitful . . 3
Humen outcry silenced, the . : 26


Human vindication of divine vengeance 200
Hypocrisy of gtd the prayers of
others . PY « e 6123
Hypocritical repentance oii ae arte 1 $00
IpoL manufacture F . ‘ . 217
Idolatrous conspiracy . . . « 233
Ignominious burial ° » 435
Ignorance may excuse irreligion . » 104
Imminent exile . . : . +. 222
Impending desolationa . 5 7 » 351
Impious soul cloaked in pious ere - 103


Impossibility of pardon : » 06


Imprecatory prayer provoked 389
Impregnable security in Jehovah's ‘service 342
Ineapacity divinely rectified . 20
Incredulity at God's message of doom . 320
Indifference , : » 108
Indifference to steel realities A 643
Indignity to Jehovah . . ° 147
Inflexible godliness ° e ry e 21§
Influence of pr ‘osperity . 5 ° » 427
Iniquitous nation openly a uaa . 264
Iniquity unabashed . . . %&I72
Injustice . 58

Intellectual vanity perverting revelation 17

Intercessory prayer ; + 169, 319
Intercessory prayer forbidden . . 8
Interrogating our conduct . . : a
Intoxicating judgments ° ° » 263
Intrepid denunciations . . e +414
Ironical calls to salvation , ° - 4122
Ishmael’s conspiracy . ° + 605
Igolation resulting from consecration - 337
Israel ingathered . : . e ° 553
Israel invited to renewed repentance . §

Israel justified against Babylon . - 670
Israel not abandoned . 668


Israel’s divorce, its lessons lost upon Judah 57

Israel’s own glorious King - 510

Israel’a restoration wholly engaging God 542

Israel’s return shall allure the Gentiles to
God


A : . 8
“Tt may be ” ° ° ° e . 572
JEconIaH’s captivity . ° ; 498
Jeconiah’s career and release ; . 680
Jehoiakim’s degeneracy + 423
Jehova Justitia Nostra . . ‘ « 447
Jehovah the true God . . . » 213
Jehovah weary with repenting . » 323
Jehovah’a “‘ charge” to his servant ele)
Jehovah’s claim on human ceverence . s18


685


ALPHABETICAL INDEX.





Jehovah's covenant .


« 232
Jehovah’s message widely published . 236
Jebovah’s refusal to allow intercession
to prevail . A 291
Jeremiah a wrestler with God in prayer 297
Jeremiah called te attest cere by
action . 353
Jeremiah carried into Egypt. 4 « 614
Jeremiah imprisoned , - 538
Jeremiah’s experience typieal of Christ. 93
—— final prophecy . ° e 619
—— mission e e 10
—— second letter to the exiles 5 e §03
— slanderous enemies . » « 597
—— vision of figs r) e ° e 465
Jerusalem, capture of . e e » 676
Jerusalem rebuilded . . © © 535
Jerusalem ruined . C C e e 199
Jesus Christ as King . ° ° « 554
Jesus, our Lord and Righteousness © 457
Jewish idolatry in Egypt . : . 617
Josiah’s discovery of the lew . e 240
Judah impenitent : nie 3
Judah’s divinely-sent teacher ignored .
Judah’s guilt flagrantly manifest . - 36
Judah’s mournful distress . ° . lq
Judah’s restoration . 2 438
Justice of threatened ruin vindicated . $38
Krxp words . ° ° ° » 680
Kingdom of the Messiah ° e e 442
Knowing God with the heart e 2 463
Knowledge of God. ° 2 202
Knowledge should ensure piety . 2 105
LaBORIOUS service wasted . ° + $77
Lament for tke aation’s woe + 292
Lament for the siain daughters of societ ety 205
Lamentable Se ety arene faith . 36
Lamentations ; e . 194
Lesson for the disappointed . e ° 207
Life prematurely closed , e 2 326
Life’s aim defeated . » o oo 615
Life’s noontide . : ® e 2 325
Life’s solemn opportunity , ‘ e 180
Limitations of marriage e ° e 353
Litera Scripta Manet . e ° e 572
Little one’s cry, the . ° . « 638
Loathsome soul outcast from God » 318
Localisation marked by God, our . - 198
Looming disastere—external results of
impiety ° . ° ° . . 38
Lord our righteousness . ° ° » 445
Lost even to pity 323
Lost flock demanded ef the faithless
shep herd . ° ° ° ° 275
Lost Pevcak: the. : : 170. 189
Lying prophecy distinguished from true 490
Maine God our trust . 371
Maledictions, God’s messages of doom - 173
Man of Ged . e ° e e ° 567
Man on earth ° ° + 175
Man perishes, God must work , . 204
Manifold judgments of God . ° . 469
Man’s career under God’s control. . 223
° ° 393


Man’s changeable condition .
GRE





Pace
Man's voice met by God’s voles . . 628
Mediation and sacrifice unaccepted » 2
Meetness before God . ° « 487
Men of progress, men of strife : » 345
Men try to right themselves , © 0 395
Merciful chastisement ,. ° « 224
Menace of prophecy brought te men,
° e e ° e I
Messages to oxiles ° ° e ° e}
Ministry of discrimination , e e« 339
Ministry of the word , e ° © 342
Misery unpitied . ° ° e « 254
Missionary sermon e ° ° e 360
Mistaken patriotism . ° ° e 608
Moab’s doom * abies fc hs \oteueer aenege
Moab’s restoration . ° e e 650
Mocking at the preacher . 2 406
Murderers in ambush , ° e 2 235
Mystic Babylon e e ° e ° 667
Nations obliterated 508
Nature and prosperity of Messiah’ . reign 443
Nature of ain : » 621
Nearness to God destroyed by sin. - 281
“abuchadnezzar God's servant . . 470
gto catch men : ° ° e 357
New created wonder . ° ° 2» §29
“No eloak for their sin ” ° ° Paes
OBEDIENOR, its rewards ° °
Obedience to traditions of ae Ha
Obstinate unbelief ° e e e 107
Old age without religion . ° 136
Old paths . ° » 130
Ouinisolanne regulates Judgment e » 358
On the new year . ° e 495
One ainner ‘‘a sign” to ‘many e « 624
Opportunities neglected . . .» 180
Opportunity and its issues . . . 558
Opposition . . « ».© oe .« 28
Outcast Israel e ° ° 60
Outcry of woe answered with a feat
tions . ° 316
Outward religious errics ° e ° 148
Past judgments appealed te, e « 612
Pastoral service . ° ° e 267
Pathos of an earnest soul a, | en) eereaza
Patriotic choice , é e 2» 604
Patriotic prayers irrepressible os, wemegO3
Penalty for oppressors . ° ° « 247
Penitent tears . e e $36
Penitential return to the Lawd eo «6 59
Penitent’s prayer . ° o Sep-eisen 4378
People ripe for destruction . » « I61
Perfidy and punishment , e « 559
*Perpetuity of David’sreign 5 GEE
Perpetuity of the spiritual Jerusalem. 536
Perplexed suppliants ? , 609
Persecution of God’s prophet . 238
Persecution of the faithful prophet . 403
Persistent alienation . - w25y7
Personal career of Jeremiah F I
Perverse son . 6 e A2h
Piety a reciprocation of love é se 34.
Pilgrims to Zion 2 . FSO
Pitiable dilemma . ° : a ats


ALPUABETICAL INDEX,
die Beal


Pleading with God over calamitous deer mr


Potter’s work " A 5 - 39

Power of evil habits , . . . 27

Power of rebuke . serpist ake 40
Power of sin Gy IS, ea RS
Praise to man silenced. «. «. 637
Prayer . > AKER
Prayer by God’s afflicted eervant ; - 548
Prayer encouraged x é 2 2 550
Prayer for a people unavailing . - 344
Prayer for all seasons . : - 299
Prayer for salvation based upon praiee 1379
Prayer holds its own reward . 207
Prayer of mediation silenced by God Ae e7/
Prayer the solace of a perplexed soul . 540


Prayers of a good man asked by a bad


man . S . 581
Preach the whole truth c - 480, ae
Preacher's cry for help . . . °
Preachers tested by their hearers , ° i os
Preaching made inevitable , . ee 27
Preaching rendered useless , e e 126
Premonitory visions e - 10
Prescience sealed by experience ° « 539
Presumptuous pee setrettne. (re 208
Pride . . 272
Profligate people ripe for vengeance, a » 98
Progress of man’s salvation , 5 - 5§17
Progression and direction . ° . 227
Prophecy of lies. . . «. » 489

_ Prophecy tested by prayer . e 490
Prophecy vindicated in Babylon's fall - 473
Prophet a subverter of kingdoms, the . 22
Prophets and their mission . ° 2» 470
Prophet's lamentation . 6 ao}:
Prophet's timely arrival, the ° ue
Prosperity baneful . ° ° oue42)
Protest against apostasy . » 618
Proud men , ° e - 614
Provision for the churches. ° » 10
Punishment of the impenitent , e 430
Punishment threatened ° e e 578
Purity necessary to salvation o « &
Purpose rightly directed . . e 529
Racuzt’s lamentations e e o 524
Rapacity denounced . . © 423
Reasors for fearing the Lord * 100
Reasons for irreligion of the masses » 183
Rebellion and vengeance 4 « 677
Reckless desertion of the right way » 45
Reckless inattention to warning . . 132
Reckless penknife : ° e © 575
Recompenses : . . ‘ 673
Recovery of the ten tribes 5 ° « 45
Redeemer, strength of , 9 - 2 665
Redemption, its progressive acta . e 256
Reflex consequences of sin . ° » 159
Reflex degradations of idolatry . e 39
Reflections of a penitent . e e 527
Regard for God , 5 e e © 425
Release of the captive . e ° » 679
Repentance glorifies God ° . 273
Resolute spiritual inaction . ° - 31
Restoration of the Jews . » . » 519
Restoration to lost wang privileges . =
Retirement sought ; . - §82


PAaGH
Retribution for idolatrous abominations 148
Return to God averts doom , : ons! SG


Revelation in writing . : cee
Revived memories of spiritual privileges 693
Rewards of obedience . : 4 - 565
Righteous judgments of God 132


Righteous requirements and gracious
promise .

Righteous soul pleading with God, a

Roaming from God


Robbery in the sanctuary . ° » 155
Romanism doomed ° ® . 667
Rome’s luxuriousness . ohit Vein Darron OOO
Rome’s rejection of healing . . . 669
Rome’s resources desolated , e . 670
Rome volcanic . - ° » 670
Ruin, a woful spectacle ‘of . e . 134
Ruin of enemies exulted over ° . 634
Ruined nationalities ., ° ° . 157
SappartH and the Lord’s day ° 383
Sacred overthrows . ° e 167
Sacrifices ° ° e ry 169
Sacrifices contemned A : Fi 159
Sacrilege . A 168


Safety and vindication sought in God
Salvation, The true source of ;
Sanctimonious self-delusions :
Satisfying nature of God’s goodness
Scoffing answered by sarcasm °
Sea, its ravages and tragedies e
Seasons of grace lost °
Secret inquirer :
Seer’s anguish over the sinner’s doom,
Self-improvement. ° .


FS


Selfin service , A 492
Self-vindicating sinners reproved : rt.)
Self-vindicative sinners . ° 622
Servants of God . ° ° e 14
Set apart for Ss aise e ° 124
Seventy years captivity ° ° 471
Shamelessness in sin . ° ° 129
Sheep scattered . ° . - 663
‘* Sheshach,” Babylon reversed + 475, 672
Showing exiles the way home > « 529
Siege of Jerusalem c ° e ° 599
Sin an outrage on self . ° » 198
Sin banished or the soul banished 5 ks
Sin dangerous . ° . 284
Sin excludes from sympathy. . ° © 354
Sinners alike in all ages : ° - 637
Sinners cause their own suffering . » 594
Sinner’s desperate depravity, the . - 64
Sinner’s doom ° > 393, 645


Sinners in altercation with Goa . » 355
Sinners returning to God 658
Sinners requited for their work of spolia-

tion . ° 358


Sinners summoned to self-improvement 568
Sin’s hold on the inmost man ° - 367
Sins of omission . : ° Py Sic aqa
Sin’s ravages ‘ ° e . « 185
Slandering . ° e 197
Slavery exchanged for corvice . + 507
Solemn warning . F * - 494
Soul agriculture . ; ; 80
Soul under discouragement 497


687


Pace
Soul's Resting Place . . « » 661
SovereigntyofGod . «+ « . 488
Spared through grace , =» ° + 517
Spiritual corruption . e © e 365
Spiritual criminality ° ° - Ior
Spoiled linen girdle, the » 261
Spontaneity and spoliations of guilt © 125
Strength of the Redeemer . - 665
Strengthening the hands of the wicked 449
Structure and scope of the prophecies . 3
Substitutes for piety repudiated . a 132
Superficial piety a delusion . 205
Superstitious terror at the marvels of
nature . 216
Stubborn sinner submitting himself to
God . ‘ e525
Submission to God’s direction 5 A des
Sudden spoliations . ° ° 324
Suffering for godly and guilty e . 654
Swearing . . ° 9
Sword of the Lord upon Philistia . « 635
Symbol of God’s sovereignty . « 387
Bymbolie prophecy of doom . ° * 399
Symbols of God’s word. e e « 455
Taxine side with God , e e e 65
Temple of the Lord . acts . 167
Thoroughness ° . - 152, 168
Pimidity we eecer: ere) eo er let 590
Traitor’s tears, a . , : - 607
Treachery crouching behind fair words. 252
Treachery thwarted . . . - 608
Treasures consigned to foes . e « 252
Treatment shown tothe Jews .« . 509
Triumphant prayer. ° e 309
Troublous preacher troubled. ° e 329
True repentanee . . e ° e 527
Trust placed in lies . ° ° e 494
Truths great and mighty . » 552
Two astounding evils , ° ° . 44
Two yokes . ° . * . « 493
Untmarts argument with God for mercy 30
Unabashed apostasy . . ° . 15
Unconscious divine agents . ° . 24
Unforgotten past,an . - 4!
Onifit soil prepared for the blessing « 98


Unholy vows kept °
Universal knowledge of the Lord 7
Unreasonableness of despair . °
Unwelcome sacrifice . ’


Urijah’s persecution and death


oe =a-59.5.6


Varin thoughts . . . ’
Vanity of thoughts . °
Vanquished raised into victors.
Vauntings of pride °

Verdict of law and the appeal of love, th
Verdure in the midst of desolation
Verification of the prophecies ’
Violated sanctuaries doomed F
Violation of the law of liberty .
Vision of retributive war . °
Voleanic Rome . . °


Wann light foreshadowing utmost gloom
War the stroke of fesse . a
War theme , e
Watchmen’ 8 calle 2 s ry
Wealthy nation . °
Weeping pilgrims °
Weeping over hardened transgressors
‘* What hast thou done ?”
“What wilt thou say when he shall
punish thee! ”
Why great things ‘tor self should not be
sought , .
Wicked a terror, the F
Wicked terrified and terrifying
Wilful inquirers seeking counsel
Will-worship, its sinfulness
Wine-cup of wrath A
Wine of the wrath of God
“* Woe to Coniah” °
Woes of war
Word of J eremiah, the .
Worldly aspirations .
Worldly prospects sacrificed in God’
service ,


Wrathful agents of destruction : ;


Yoxes for the confederate kings , .
Young converts starting Zionward °
Youth’s gracious hour , ’ ’ °


a aie


ANALYTICAL INDEX


AsanponED of God, 77, 121, 124, 247, 252,
253s 299, 308, 318, 325, 393, 304, 613, 619,


Abasement, 70.

Abstinence (See RECHABITES),

Adoration, 110.

Afflictions (See CHASTISEMENTS),

Age (See OLp Aaa).

Agents, divine, 23, 24, 77.

Agriculture, spiritual, 80, 91.

Alarm sounded to sinners, 81, 128 188, 128,
132, 200,

Ambition, 627, 628.

Ancestors (See REoHABITES),

Anger (See alao WkatB), 483, 677.

Apathy, 644.

Apostasy, 36, 43, 51, 158, 352, 365, 618.

Ark, 62, 68.

Arrogance (See Boastine and Prim).

Attention (See also INDIFFERENCE), 272.


486, 630, 657, 667, 669,


674, 675.
Backsliders, 66, 160, 175.
Baffling mysteries (See Mysteries # Lure).
Bereavement, 226, 652, 653.
Bible (See HEARERS, Worpb, and Warrrex
Worp).
Boasting, 202, 421, 637, 648, 654


<rwpee 473, 475;


CaLaMITY, 324, 422, 615.

Carnal security (See SrcuRITY).

pe, 62, 178, 352, 471, 497, 620, 676,
6


vf

ae igs 103, 135, 198, 225 358, 500,
526, 595, 654.

Children, 137, 166, 226, 241, 281, 322, 368,
423, 424, 428, 638.

Choice, the soul’s, 414, 415, 511, 604.

Christ (See HEAtina, Sin, CLEANSING, Sat-
VATION, RIGHTEOUSNESS, MESSIAB),.

Christian (See GopLy, Deatu, FRUITFULNESB),

Church, 111, 123, 257, 33% 357: 377s 5341 536,
555: O5t

Dity—citizenship, 102, 499.

Cleansing, 46, 84, 279, 280, 368,

Comparative sinfulness, 65, 449

Oomfort, 179, 522, 524, 626, 652,

Compassion, God’s, 653.

Complaining, 403, 408, 409.

Compromises, 215,

Confession, 65, 295, 303-

Consecration (See also SERVIC), 39%, $11.

2x


Consideration, §13.

Conversion, 103, 272, 303, 542, 560, 659,

Courage, ve ms 342, 345, 414, 592, 594, 601,
608, 633, 6

Covenant, Sri 232, 235, 312, 391, 532, 661.

Creation, 543

Creed, 447.


DankKNESS, 273.
Day of judgment, 276, 379 505.
Dearth, 290, 292, 306. [494-
Death, 174, 201, 226, a 326, 327, 422, 423,
Deception (Comp. also FaLsiry), 368, 406, 494.
581.
Defeat, 538, 615, 632, 633, 670.
Defiance of 120, 129, 147, 177, 299, §78.
Deliverance, 679.
Delusions, 83, 146, 151, 274, 301, 41
584, 611, 613, 654, 669. Toe
Derision (See Scorrine).
Desertion of God (See Reszorion), 662,
Despair, 178, 392, 397, 557-
Disappointment, 207, 407, 409, 628.
Discipline (See also CHASTISEMENTS), 525, °
Discouragement (see DisaPPOINTMENT).
Distress of the sinner, 134, 338.
Domestic (See Famiy).
Doom, 113, 124, 320, 388, 393, 394, 39% 573.
636, 665.
Dove, 647.
Dread af death, 290.


EARNEBTNESS, 157, 236, 274, 482, 563.
Ease (See APATHY).

Egypt, 614, 615, 616, 617, 620, 623, 63a
Enquirers, 257, 413, 502, pee 659.
Escape, Effort to, 131, 6

Estrangement from God 267.
Ethiopian, 590, §92.

Everlasting facts, 153, 517.

Example, 161, 612, 624, 645

Exile (See Captivity), 222.
Expostulations, God’s, with men, 6,


Farrs (Sce CrrxEp).

False trusts (See DxozPrion). &

Falsity, Human, 112, 252, 373, 374 375; 3
rae "49°, 559, 584, 596, 604, 606, 607, bos


Feecty 351, 515
Famine, Ca
Fasting, 300.


Fatherless, Dose: 6$3.
@89


ANALYTICAL INDEX.





Fear, 19, 26, 100, 109, 379, 596, 639, 655.
Fearing God, 100, 109.

Fidelity, 215, 249, 480.

Fleeing from God, 616,

Flocks, 275, 283, 441, 554, 663,
Foreknowledge, God’s, 17, 161.

—_——— prophetic, 538. (672.
Forewarnings, 99, 112, 167, 388, 392, 486, 612.
Forgiveness, 665.

Fountain (See WaTER).

Freedom, man’s, 44.

Friendship, 484.

Frivolity (See TRrrLine).

Fraitfulness, Christian, 372, 377, 462, §21.
Frustrations of life’s aims, 615.

Future glories of the righteous, 356, 521, 534,


542.


GenTILEs, 80, 360, 533.

Glorying, 202, 203, 645.

God, the hope of man (See Hors).

the true, 214, 219. .

Godly, 221, 262, 266, 279, 327, 365, 381, 453,
520, 567, 615, 654.

God’s abhorrence of sin, 621, 622.

—— account of Himself, 542.

—— anxiety over man, 176, 298, 620,

—— compassion, 653.








glory, 219.
—— goodness, 523.
—— love (See Love).


— mercy to His people, 664, 665.
reply to a perplexed soul, 541.
work on men, 25, 387, 390, 395, $37+
works in creation, 219, 670.
Gospel, §25, 553.

Gospel age, 444.

Government, divine, 24, 224.
Grace, exhausted, 323.

-—— spared through, 517.

Graves, I71.

Guidance, divine, 224, 226, 227.











Hapsirs, 277, 278, 284.

Harvest, 110, 113, 179, 189, 671, 677 (See
also DEARTH).

Healing, 128, 182, 185, 377, 378, 508, 509,
633, 669.

Hearers of God’s Word, 272, 333, 335, 415,
459; 573, 574, 577- .

Heart, 367, 373, 374 375» 379 463, 464, 511,
532, 649.

Heaven, 78, 153.

Heroism, 24, 592, 601, 619.

Hidling-places, 89, 612, 646, 661.

Holiness (See CLEANSING).

Homage to God, 218.

Honesty (See UNTRUTHFULNESS).

Hope, God our, 296, 298, 338, 379 548, 653.

Hopes, 151, 173) 379, 524, 573, 581, O11, 632.

Hospitality, ;

Human greatness ruined, 645.

Humility, 633.

Hypocrisy, 103, 111, 133, 164, 196, 238, 453,
560, 606, 609, 612.


[poLaTRY, 3 47% 174, 217, 221, E27, 623.
Ignorance, 104


ert





Impenitence, 40, 430, 623.
Incredulity (See UNBELIEF).


Indifference, 108, 131, 1 $2, F7Z» 299 412, 643
72: ,


Injustice, 583.

Insincerity (See HrPoorisY).

Insolence (See DeFiance),

Inspiration, 8.

Integrity (See FipEtrry).

Intercession, 158, 237, 291, 297, 363, ZIG. 318,
319, 344, 389, 581.


Israel lost, 60, 453.
30, 356, 444, 458, 518, 542,


Israel’s return,


553, 657, 664.


JEALOUSY, 606. 7

Jeremiah’s sufferings, 2, §38, §48, 593, 603,
614, 619. (See PaTRIoTIsM.)

Jerusalem, 163, 199, 535, 555» 59%

Jews, conversion of, 509, 519, §42.

Jordan, 250, 251.

Joy, 408, 553, 673.

Judah’s guilt and banishment, 65, 76, 264,
363, 419, 471, 620.

Judah’s restoration, 80, 438, 444, 518, 519, 676.

Justice and judgments of God, 200, 277, 358,
376, 379, 388, 469, 578, 604, 677.


KinpneEss, 680.


Kingdom, Christ’s, 67, 442, 443, 444, 510, 554
Knowing God, 202, 463, 533.


LaMERT, sinner’s, 179, 274, 313, 645.

Law, 57) 532.

Liberty, 507, 561.

Life’s changes, 652.

Life’s work, 16, 20, 25. (555
Lord our righteousness, 438, 445, 447, 457»
Love divine, 34, 57, §17-


Maw (See RENEWED).

Manna, 337

Marriage (See Famrty), 353.

Memory, 41, 331, 528, 673 (Comp. Past Lira),

Mercy, 305.

Messiah (See also LORD OUR RIGHTEOUSNESS),
442, 443, 457, 510.

Ministers, charges to, call of, 13, 16, 27, 343
414, 439, 448, 450, 451, 453, 481.

—— difficulties of their work, 15, 19, 328,
339 345, 346.

— distress over sinners, 87, 93, 328, 619.

—— rejected, 88, 119, 121, 126, 345, 395
404, 406, 480, 483, 578, 618.

responsibility of, 275, 340, 357, 440
4At, 456. « .

Miraculous conception of Christ, 529.

Mirth (See TRIFLING).

Misery, man’s, 306, 316.

Missionary themes, 360, 431, 433, 533, 67}

Morai wrecks, , 448.

Mysteries in life, 248.





Nationa topica, 23, 157, 292, 448, 460, 465,
473) 474, 476, 508, 631.
Nature, 110, 216, 219, 290, 306, 372,


543-
| Nearness to God, 28’, 451 (See Omm PRE.


SENCE).


ANALYTIOAL INDEX.
——————— SS


Nebuchadnesszar, 470, 503, 599, 630, 649.
Neglect, 172, 181, 242, 265, 325, 412, 672.
Neta, 357°


OatHB, 79, 89, 600.

Obedience, 26, 563, ee 567, 568, 593.

Obstinacy, nal 131, 6

Old age, 136.

Omission (See NEGLECT).

Omnipresence, 451, 452 (See NRARNEss).

Omniscience, 198, 3538.

prpoon ity; 104, 181, 273, 412, 415, 558,
572, 580, 644, 672.

Opposition, 28,

Outward glory desolated, 645.

Outward religion (See SupzEFicran and Pro-
FANITY).

Overthrow of enemies (See TRiumMPH).


PARENTAGE, 7, 241, 283, 322, 356, 42% 515.

Paths, the old, 130, 138, 416, 424.

Patriotism and philanthropy, 134, 195, 254,
303, 499, 600, 603, 604, 608.

Past life, 47.

Peace, 301, 664.

Penitence, 59, 303, 360, 378, 526, 527, 529.

Perplexity, 541 ; in prayer, 609.

Mca: 235, 238, 389, 403, 480, 483, 584,

8, 641


Physician (See HEALING).

Piety, 31, 145, 146.

Pilgrims to Zion, 519, 529, 657, 65%

Pity, 323.

Plea, the sirmer’s, 295, 305.

Pleaders with God, 297, 540, 541, 548

Poor, the, 104, 105.

Popular neglect of religion, 183.

Power, spiritual and divine, 329.

Prayer, 158, 237, 294, 297, 299, 303, 304, 309,
332, 333) 344 378, 389, 490, 541, 548, 550,
551, 581, 609, 6

Preaching, 126, a, 149, 328, 406, 481, 490,


573:
Presumption, 268, 650.
Predestination, 17, 25.
Pride, 268, 272, 281, 282, 614, 648, 649, 654.
Priesthood, 555. {591
Prison (See also PERSECUTION), 548, 584, 583,
Privilege, conditional, 420, 421, 430.
Profanity, 155, 321.
Spare God's, 24, 343, 359, 365, 4975 §16,
59 I.
Prosperity, 425, 427, 428.
Punishment (See RETRIBUTION).
Purity (See CLEANSING).


QUALIFICATION, 20, 23.


RacHEt’s lamentation, §24.

Rebellion, 677.

Rebuke, 346.

Rechabites, 562, 563, 565, 568, 569.

Recklessness, 299.

Recompenses, 673

Reconciliation, 256, 319.

Refuge (See Hupina-PLaogs).

Berets God, 51, 162, 172, 237, 2§7, 299,
325, 662,





Religion (See Prsty),

Remedy (See HEauina),

Remembrance (See MEMORY)»

Renewed, 391.

Repentance (See PENITENOR),

Rest to your soul, 131, 661.

Retirement, 582, 646.

Retribution, 108, 253, 276, 302, 358, 383,
559, 578, 646, 654, 673.

Return to God, 75, 78, 568, 658.

Revelation, 552, 571

Righteousness (See Lop OUB RIGHTEOUSNESS)

Rock, 646, 654.

Rome, 667, 669, 670,

Ruin, sinner’s, 645.


SappatH, 366, 380, 381,

Sacrifice, 160, ga pees

Salvation, 69, 343, we 457» 519, 531, 635.

Sanctuaries, 156, 167.

Scoffing, 321, 406, sae) 646, 65%.

Scriptures (See Worn),

oa 640, 647, 654, 656.
curity, 129, 151, 640, 647,

seltextibetion, Gre Ds cs

Self-excusings, 48, 154, 276, 622.

Self- -improvement, 150, 568.

Self-righteousness, 46, 48, 175.

ips 13, 19, 492, 507, 511, 577, 602, 627,

9

aha 120,

Shepherds (See Frocms).

Sin (See WICKEDNESss).

Sinners, 43, 45, 65, 79, 10%, 29§, 355, 381,
393, 568, 594, 622, 658.

Sin’s miseries and spoliations, 249, 267, 269,
284, 354, 364, 370, 425, 645,

Slander, 197, 556, 583, 587.

Sorrow (See TROUBLE).

Sovereignty, God’s, 387, 488

Speech, 103.

Stranger, God a, 308.

Strife, 345.

Strength, spiritual (See Powzar),

Sudden death (See Dzars).

Suffering, for godly and guilty, 654.

Superficial religion (See also Hypoortsy), 148,
152, 154, 164, 205, 238, 300, 453.

Superstitions, 164, 213, 216.

Surrender and submission to God, 266, 528,


609.
Swearing, 448.
Symbols, 11, 80, 387, 399, 421, 455 460


TaLENTS, 265.

Terror of the soul, 379, 380, 40%

Thirst (See WaTER).

Thoroughness, 154, 502

Thoughts, 85, QI, 501.

Touch, the Lord’s, 21.

Treachery (See dyeiae

Trifling, 323, 355) 4

Triumph, the ie 8, 251, 329, 342, 634,
651


Trouble, 22%, 296, 506, 643, 654.
are in God, 51, 295, 369, 370 371, 551, 602,
Truthe, great and mighty, 552. ,


ANALYTICAL INDEX.


—_———_— oo ee


Unpetier, 107, 320.
Unsuspiciousness, 605.
Untruthfulnesa, 597.


VALEDIOTORY ADDRESS, 673,
Victors (See Trrumpx).
Vindication of Israel, 670.
Visions, 11, 67, 76, 118, 530.
Volition, 124.

Vow, 42, 562, 624.


WANDERERS (See REsEcTING Gop).
War, 23, 83, 118, 123, 302, 432, 639
Warfare, Christian, 123.

Warnings (See ALarm, Exampues, and Fore-
WARNINGS).
Water, 293, 294. [660.
Way of salvation, 45: 130, 137, 417, 424, 529,

Wealth, 377, 425, 656.

Weariness (See ReTIREMENT).

Weeping pilgrims (See Pu.anims),
692





nS


habeas sy a 12, Fab 284, 354, 358, 264, 367

9, 020, 621,

Wilfviness, 108, 413, 609, 613, 614.

Winecup of wrath, 270, 474.

Wisdom, 176, 652, 672.

Word, God's, 266, 272, 333, 335» 34%) 438. 484
455, 574.

Words, 151, 252, 680,

Work for Christ (See Smrvicu).

Wounds, 128.

Wrath, God’s, 81, 107, #70, 380, 413, 450, 474.

Written word of God, 505, 571, 572, 575-


Yxuar, old and new year themes, 494, 495.

Yoke, 46, 493-

Youth, 50, 63, 240, 325, 326, 356, 368, 423,
424, 429, 644, 661.


ZEVEKIAH, 538, 594, 599.
Zion (See Ate pues ay Pricams, and
Qgunce), 122, 529.


ILLUSTRATIONS, EXTRACTS,


ABSTINENCE


Acknowledge thine: iniquity


Affliction
Almond-tree
Anathoth


Ancient hymn by John Mardley, on


fii. 12. A


Appropriating God’s word


Average of life .


BaOKSLIDING . e
Balm of Gilead .
Banished ones recalled
Be not discouraged
Bereaved of children
Bibles burnt . 9
Bitter at heart

Bitter lamentation.
Blast of the Almighty
Boldness in prayer.


Broken down at the “eens of God


*¢ Burial of an ass”
Buried girdle


CaLUMNY °


Chastened . °
Christ’s example .
Christ's yoke easy .
Confession .
Conspiracy against “God
Contrition necessary
Conversion , °
Correction .
Courage before kings
Povenant, the :
Covetousness . é


**Crane”


Cyrus’ capture of Babylon


Dan ° e °
Dark mountaing .
Death . ° e
Death desired e
Dearth, the ° ®
Defiance 5 °
Denominationalism
Deriding the preacheg
Despair . ‘ .


Discerning eyes


Barty death.
End, the . ®
Everlasting love .
Evil ofsim sz .


{


2
4


@eeeeneexxse @e eevee @


e
e
e


“eee @8@ © @e@ @ @ @ @


eeseese es eeeeevsese@®@


aee2ee%#e#e#eeseete


— ~}°-oe———
PAGE
569 | Evil sent . e ° e
72 | Evil shall not prevail . e
230
31 Faces Zionward 5 e .
29 | Fallow ground . e °
Ba er. False gods . e e °
« 72 | False peace , e e e
° 350 Falsity . ° ° e °
- 496 | Fasting offensive.  . °
Fearlessness . ° ° e
- 188 | Flattery . ° e e
- 189 | Fore-ordination , ° e
» 94 | Frivolous sinning . e °
« 349 Fulneas ° e e e
« 230 | Fury for the opprensor . °
« 579
° 95 ‘* Garis 22 ° e e °
- 189 | God giveth rain . °
« 95 | God Poeagilied in the harvest
+ 313 | God’s control of man’s career
e 95 | God’s omnipresence . e
7 436 God’s sovereign power . °
. God’s withdrawal from man,
God’s word enjo ° e
+ §87 | Graves disturbed. .
» 467
» 495 Hasits . ° ® °
» 495 | Harvest past e e rn
« 537 | Help from God , * e
» 244 | Heretics sane ° ° 0
» 313 saa “i ° ® e
. 313 ospita ty ° ® e °
- 55 | Human inability. . «
« 3 | Hunting . e e e
- 844 | Hypocrisy . e 8 «
« 436
. 188 | Iponarey ., boy yhen ta6
. 675 | Idol manufacture ° e
Ignorance and irreligion =»
- os Inoredulity ®
E Indelible LASEES, ot sin ’
e 3210 | Infuriated hearers 2 e
» 188 | Ingratitude . 3 ° e
+ 311 | Iniquity marked , .»
» 189 Injustice . e e e
« 73} Innocence , oe a
e 4! i Intercessory prayev 6 e
« 39
» 30 | Kuwpwords. ». 6 e
Kindness . ° ° e
; 48 Kings and priests ee
. It
e 536 | JEALOUSY . °
+ 362 | Jehoiakim’s fourth yeas


-~<0


eeeeeetees @& eer egeeee se BF, Oe Oh 8. .O 6 70 56) 9) ge


eeeeee#erfrters 8 @


POETRY.


PAGE


83k


ees eee
-—
-—
a


--&
ase
mow


SSS ke


Sy


+ 477


ILLUSTRATIONS, EXTRAOTS, POBTRY.





Jehovah's message widely published


Jeremiah’s discouragement ,
Jerusalem, God’s throne
Jerusalem in ruins ’


o


LENIENT correction
Limits in prayer .
Lion, the .

Lord shail roar, i
Lost book of the covenant
Lost ten tribes .
pi to pity °


POS ee


tects of ‘mind
Lying down in shame


MANHOOD ,
Man’s lone hope
Marriage .
Millstones .
Murderers in ambush
Mutations of life .


NEBUCHADNEZZAB
Negligent pastors
Noble friendship .
No latter rain “5
None like God .


OBEDIENOR , . e
Obedience to ancestors .
Oblivion, sin cast inte .
Old paths . ° °
Opportunities lost e


20 es) s


PaRENTAGE .
Peaceable habitations ° °
Peace assured

Permanence of the Rechabites
Persecution , 4 2
Piety the beauty of youth .
Pilgrimage . . . e
Prayer . ° e
Prayer for one’s own country
Predestination .
Pride abashed ,
Pride lamented .
Pride, spiritual .
Prophet's distreas
Prophets sent by Jehovah
Prosperity . e °


QueEsx, the. ° e


e


REFINER . e e
Remembered

Repentance glorifying Goa
Reprobate silver .

Rest

“§ Retribution in kind ”
Reveiation in writing
Revolting heart .
Riches . ° .
Ritual . : e


CLAREN


eeewesee S ae) '@ 1.0 | ¢ a ‘eo = « ©


eevsvee @ eoeerseeeseee ee ee


ceoeeeeeree &© @


SaBpaTH rest 4


Sacred wisdom . °
Sea e ° \ 8
Searching the heart ,
Self-esteem . e e
Self-interrogation 2
Shame . ° e e
Sign of fire ° 5 °
Signs of heaven . °
Sin acknowledged °


Sin banished, or no heavea


Sin debases the soul .
Sin, its continuity
Sin its own punishment
Sinner’s burial ° e
Slander ° °
Society e e
Solitude . e
Spurious glorying
“Stork” .

“ Stranger in the land if
Streets of Jerusalem .
«Swallow ” as
“ Swift dromedary
Symbols of the spiritual


TEARS . 6 . °
Tears of penitence e
Thou shalt swear .
‘¢Time of their trouble’ *
Trap . . °


Trees . °
Troubled ministry °
Troubles revive us e
True God . 3 e

0


True manhod .
‘‘Turn from evil ways
Turtle . . e


UNQUENCHABLE fire
Unwashed girdle .
Unwelcome sacrifice


Vain thoughts


Valueless prayers . e
Vine ° ° e °
Visions e e e
WANDERING. ° e
War ° ®
Weep not for the dead °
Whole truth e °
Wicked a terror . °
Wine-cup of fury.
Woe-stricken e °
Word, the . e °
Women, mourning
Works of God. e
Wrestling prayers °
Written childless e e
Yorz e e e e
Youth ° e e é


Zion arefuge co oe


444729


PHEOLOGY LISRARY


AOR
iON


T, CALIF


eeert*eereeeeeeetreet* tenet eeteeeeaee


eeaoeevpeeeenmreeceoereeeenteezreeeee


eee eweesrese


o-
~-
‘J e e e wn
1
aS
-


@eere se © ee © ®& @ @
17%)
>
oo


£ Re


eeee
wm
-)
wm


31a


eceeoeoeeeee
&
wm


437


5% 7!











<u)


WARS


a
é

















Bs


| FY
Foe ee
U/) — THEOLOGY LIBRARY
SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY
AT CLAREMONT
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA





6°) 92.









eS Ot Ne AN ih, CR MOONY MIN NOF EN  E
NU MM NM NEN EI NEE
DMM ME NEMESIS ADIN READ OO NNS
‘ MNN VS NV VEO EV VY ONO OS
VN NEN SEM VIE PAU NEA OW a
OO OMS MELDED SA ORO NN
OR OO MEV ALAS APE NIGAG ANF A UO AGNES
OW NEW SENT NEUES NEMA Re ONE AP APO ‘SG
Fe Oe Oy OO OOM Ara LU AL ARO ar NO ONS
RV OV OW SNP OOO NL MN A Ac PATO OES
FU OOO MOM MAEM AAT Ary ar ura a ue aU MN MW
A OV OO MEM MLA VAP NE AS Gr Oo na GR MAYS
MEO OO RMN NEAT AN WAST AMMO MSY A MAT
PU OO Oy IIE WANE EQNW Wr APRN OA OOOO
SESE MONEREVERN NEU MEAD NEW WAAPAT AEA QUANT NYMR SUM ATSE NENA NE NENE AP WEP PA AP AAW A RO
OO ALMA AST NW AWW SPP OMI NM
PAO A OO MV AAALV Ie An A OMICS
PIO COCO OY MOUNT MAES WAAR UNOS
SOOO SOY ENEMA Gr AP ADU Re ar ASN
MVNA NAL A ary






























VERN EVE Oe
PM Pe Ne ae
UNV VCE EY eee
VUE PO
MMM rr Rr ape
MIME APE ae ee
MEUM RV Pr OW rine
MM NOOSE NOE A AP Ar aa ee
VMN NYA OM AA A Par ae



























YOU MY YN eer ar te rie ae ananee Tee eee ON ON
PNA OO DAD AD AAR NA ENE RAO OI nO ane Matias :
POO SOI. IM NESE AL VEAE LATA NPA ANG AIR a ONS MOE EWE AE an rar
DONNER SEU SD WU aera








VY VV a an ir a) ae ’
FOOD OOO RAINE AT ATA Are NA WU HN LYNN. AENP APN MME SEN PAP PAP RE OO
SIRO OO OOO RO RONNIE ay AARC CaN VEU EVE PE oor
VV VE vt Be ON ONO OM LU NA ULM Rtn Aen NN MY MEM MEAS VN EMS MEMS PUP Peo ee
SOUS EVM UA SAP NE re AU PE Ne OOO ME AE AAEM AP DANO Ne OO A OT EET S
RR OOM ae A NM MONA HMM a ee ree rev
ROCIO UOC ONG ERLE AAS A A err
PO OO OT COON NO A NEM MACY SN MA WC
SO MANN. AEAE ALU AN OU UOMO MM MN AP ara Men ae ee
POU NA AUT AAG AUS ACY MAC A
PA OOO OY MOLY NEA MMA NA a OURS
VERVE OY Oe Oe SIMONE VAN SENEA SAA WAS
PV OI OO ONLI AE NEU WAH NAGS
SOOO NESENEV NEV API AP AN oe UF AW SUD
MYM SACV ALVES SA WP
SOOO NE VV AN Oe





VE VT op
MMMM MNES SE AP ap Wear ee na ag





wr
Coie
Vv eviews











CPST EL PE Toe oe
MOOSE ERS ep Peed
Pee Pee Ve
MV VV YEE CUT PERE Tree ES
VY OR respon ete
Pe ag ry
MCMC PAE Se ar AS ae LP ee
NOSE NSE NN AP AEA ME SD AP OP Be
OO SUM NOMEN SESE AAW DAP FAP APO De Ar AU OF ap par eR ag aay
MMA NEN SPP PE AE PAPAL EP AP a
MON MNO OV AE EP AP AP AE PAN a OP
NOOO VIN EAL NEST AP ST EAP AD SU AP AP AP
VM VV Vara Oe POO OOM VF ALA NES AT A POP NEE AP OR
vy RV ANON AMM M ML APA ANU A ARMM OL MIM
Se rr ONCE NEV. W-VNENF OLA a? GO ENO DUONG PO OO LYMAN ARAFAT AP Ap AP PPO NOS . NM MEY ACM ST  E PE PPS PPA PAPER
NOP AURA RONAN Aa OAR OPIN OOP NOLO ANON YOON rr We as ON MN EY DSTO SESE AEE OPP op ie ah ap ey
SOS LIE NALA AAU NO ONO MAL ALA AP SP PAE a Ne ap ey MO MSE
SOOO POO OJEVMALY Aan EDA ON Oy PO aM ARM An NE A SM NOM MM MR a LPI pee
PONENT OOOO ORE RIL RICANS NE AAAS APO OMEN Re OO Oe OO OM ALP AEA A Cea a A MO MEN ML OTS Pers
PO MIELE AANY WMS RAAT A ONS YM MSM ENE EAP AEE AP AE AAS OPP AE OP wore
WY AEVIEV N Py Oa MORO OM LM AL AP AT Ar PN ar ras NR LMS ae LEMME LET PSL PET ew
VMN eV Any POE OE LI LES N O T e P OT Ce ET NG ARIA a een he need
vv PS Nee ON OO MMR ROT Ae AN AY NIM IE AN PN SIN IM EIN LAS TEESE OTS
PO OOOO OMT OPN A AA ar he a a aM RIMM of AE NSIT ESA EES PL EEE PEGE
OMOEA AO Aan PAE A ON OM EMM MM SAM MALE AP NALA EO AO OG LE EL ETO TELE Pe Pope
’ VY VV ey NO Naa RAL Ae MMM MMM LN SMM ION DSN PP OE ES PT PPE
VV VA eh BO OOO NEO UL MM MMM AW Kr PET EP EM OPE OE ALPE OPE Pop op AP
SE VOU Oe IEE LINE OO PPO OO UU MILA ALM A AAP ALATA SP AP AI AP ar ARNE ASM NEE EP EPP EMD PEE
UOUSADY NEAT SAE QUA anna RENE RRS Toei ane Na RRM Lx OSI AR AE oe peor
: SRO OCU NENA ON RW OG OW OOOO PO Oe NOM TE PEM CD CE a iy
SANNA GANADO UATEUR TAN ROR TIO LOK tu OL OOO eLarOn MMM NIMES NEM PAP SDP Op op ee
OVS OM UN NR IE RV RNA OL vv ey POON OO NIL ILI AS DDE TPE EOE TE NED
NEEM NY DA Ngan POO OO NM MIS SIN IMM ESCO ES bP NP RP ee ghee
CORSON VIVRE VINEE A Nn An An PN NET OOO NM IIMA ETA LE EELS GST Cy
MONO ROS RONEN EAL EAE-ACI WU Qe ary WG AONUMA) EIRENE ENN LN MALI LALIT E CERES
HN MCV MALLY VEE Wan PO GY YY YAS AEN ESD AP PTS RED NN ES CNM TMP Por EF oe eg
MOONE ene SOOM NEYO NEV NIVEA Ahr WU AAR AMAA)
PAO ROM LAA SIENEAE Se AAU AOD An Ga OMS
DATA TA ATO TOTO PATS


OTE Pep F
LIPPER LT ILA ENDO TEES EP LE ETS
PO OO OY SM MAT AA AP A Ae OAD GAME NP APP N AES Pe epee LN LILI SILL IT OTE LER E OE PE ee
SOMO ey yy Sa OOOO IMM AM MA LM RAE NS NL TIE MCE ID LDL f
YOO wana: Be OOS RRA ALA an A OE RE PT Te ae ro
NOMEN EMSA WIV NEWA SNP Ar QM WAT ONS A OG MAA A ASF aU ED NON NN GT LM LAL PME ops
ERR MOO OU OOF EOC MA NMI IMM EN DFT FOOSE RP OED,
ADORNS EMNEVEVAEY VY NE Ur Naar QA FO SALA LAL A ON NO IML MCRL
OO ee OMOEA AL ANAA A AEA AA ANU EMMYS SON MMMM LOM ET Pee f
SLOAN NNN AACN ARAVA ON ANA CAUR RKO OXI UNO ad VV POTN SSO INA IN TPE Wr arp ent ge peg
An MONO ME MOLE NE NE NOVEM VENANE NCW QD WEG SOUND VMN ONE TONY NINA NES SOME AP PE OF POP Gan rp
MOU SO ONCM NEM VEE ACUAAET OV Aan a BAO NM MU AE MMM MINN MM AA MP a ag
f YOO ev eV Va AE UMM NALA AA AP APP A ee ANP RPL
BUN MNCS Vy OW NU ny aan OOM UY MOR NEY AAP A Oa AS TE MS
MON UMLYEVEVENL YENEAEV NEY Sr WU UNE OW ONO BR OO MR LY A NG RM MRM OM MPAA ‘
DRT RO HONORA LANA AON AU OK MLO OOOO Nard PTO MAIMED OME E SP a ae oP ee rae
SOO OMEN IE VII ARM Oe WAL NA Oe SMO ALIA CICA AT A A ar PO MY MA MMP OE Mo PF POR PoE. é
NOU VERO VANAENEAL VV INU AR AOU UU WONG PAA A NU AeA OO MOLALLA USP A A Aer ap ar rp NA AM ME SEM LE OTP roe Pe FOR pF
RESO OU NOUN NG SHO RE ON ROR er A CMMI M EM EEE OEE POOP OES ’
VAY VV Reectrroracesrtateeracteata eater ana a erecta aero enererer tracert tale eSeSCTR CN RLORR OM NOSE CASSELL A SAHA CSAC LEE AMA eee
MOOR UOMO TORU ALM A ny FN MAKE LMR RR NG NEg MES SIMO EPEAT POP FS
SIAL AINE ITN A ns f


FIM IS IM LEP OL OE TL OEE Fors
OM MOMMA IAL YP AP AP AP AAT AP AP AP ap MPa arn Gy IT EP pp ppg er
Re ar OA ANN NL MET LEM TD TC EE Retry
TN ENO PO EM EP ALE EMP OR AOR OP
Re ME LL PS NE EE LM SLel enero
YO MMSE MDE IO EME STR VCE MF or OP ORF
POS Oe NF EMS LLM DEM POPC PLR re
PO OO EN MM MAL EAD AP CP SE AT AP Gp PP pn an ooo als ea ee Ae
PN LLM SS ES PPPS PTD RDP Rpg
Pe AN MMOS OEM ATAPI NE ap Ar or orp rca ep arena ploy x
PO ON NMOL MNT RN a ere sep
* MOMMA ACAD AA AF AP Yo IM NIMES FS AER:
VN WAV vee


























































































































































reer ere re
" an aA ee eae ed rer re
SR eee eee rN MTN ET LN SOM AGS IMIDE LIT f 4 re ee
Rcarararaaieeranacarana ae aa ONT nea ICANT GU CR KN SAUER SI HN AAC AEA SARS CANA A Re eee ene rrr ewer
masharectasettcer erect et sh a sea ee eee uta ta ert ee SN OSES OLOGICAL ACA rrnerre
CNN A eR NSO RC Un RUG MAMI LL TN Ra agg ET en py
Raceeataracanasecararerncaraeacheenin neatxtrenir reat oan eat Se OUCH aM ER SLEL REALE O COLE RAR SCR RR ASAT eR eee
ve SOON OC NNO ee UN ANNE Mt EU RU OL eg ELC TL TA tr lgtel
SUSU OOO TON LAAN YAO MAMAS NOLS IMSS AOL TAL PAP ES on eG NR ED f
Rerarararaen aru eacaeacacatkcunehen a ai OTRRRT etc ARRAN Rae ROR SCHL Ate A ACRE AAL ORO aaa OO TE ge
Breransaatatrecarnaneacna aoa aeaea sexta sexes tata etter teN NOC SUI SERRE A CREECH AACS EEE ed
micscwraeererareea ara ese areeeateia areata seater ICE AERC SCO OR CSE ELLA LACIE ARAL LEL ARLE
mrestrerncnreruaurracactrsrseurna seucaea aerate recat tetera et eR CCR ACSEARLE SIERRA ACER LOM eR Pr ry
vy SRACa IAA NTO IONIAN SUNS Sri heh ALTA CICLO ANNA AA RAL AS OMY STE PT Eee Gr phen Boner ner
paterreatcertrrerrcauireruaeea sea ae ec exis ntscait ate eT eA SCO CNOA EASA COLE
meacerarnrecarecaarernnn srecarieaeseu uextusireren steerer re SAE Su ELON OLR SLE ACE AAA EAA SOM A A a
SOR UO OOS Se NN NN A A ANC ILI OLED LL op rg
AN ARTA Naar e Teena One O AREA HERRERA RUDE AMAA RRA
Darorharareneaeoa Nn MN oii Yecea eich AaIN COLTER RCL LOIRE SEMA ALLA
VV VV Nev Oy RN ar NM ALAA APL AT MMe eee ee sal hgh olal
BR RO OU UU OM OC LRH ELS ROL MAA COL NLT BT
Brother rene IRR NOTTS R RANE SOA TOLMAN MAR ALS
BAA Nhat eNO RUNCORN LEARNS ALAL SOR LLOR MOS MLA ARI ARRAS
NOt eta rn OSORIO RADA G NALA OTe Seda ed EMULE AR AA A ee A a
AE Oe NOU eM ALO RU Oar MN NC ALTA CAA Ore COCO Tt ey
MOC ee a OM aa an enna) LOPE eT ANT MLS LEIS SETA SLIT R LG le f
Be OOO CORO OAM CANA ARN A LAM TH MEM MO REN Ae AMA ae Al Me A oe
ROU AON TN EMR RM IL AM Prd OP NOB RAMA eae Le eee
OAACAta NN ata On Ae nN IO unex NNEC ARCACHON ARONA LOR LOR LARA ALOU AL Ade Ra RRA AAR Me ae ea ee
AANA NTI RIO EMILIO NAS CARMA AIROR ION aun SOIL rOL EAU Aaa CACM A re ee ae
ORISA ON Ot OAR DION ALLOA ALR ALAA RTE ICN SDN xOLIX OLIN CNOA RRA ALARA LLL EP Tre rir gt Kl gly
SUSE ON ON NNN AN MMM MY Array ara NA A Ae Ae ARM AA ee ee
OR NEM SOVALV VAAL APNE A AL AD Aaa Gna POM NST LINN MLD TT re ae Ppp
Narararatiraatn anc K ON tae OID OCALA aA OO RRO IONE ROR EURAIL LOA AERA Aa NA Ae
Ba ee OOOO mo Re MALO Sha NOG GLIA RK ALAM LOM Lan
RSMO NEN VM ALY VEU A an NG) OM I EM PL ST CL SL ese Ng peopl
Dratarararera arene erateenaenn rene rirne errant clan eee SUA HH LeN eae ANGLO M AAA SRSA
NOI OO
ROUEN CR








YEE oP


v
OOO ACM MEME RIV EAL AS AS AIS APU AP AEA AP aE AE AP AP aap


Pa MOO VALENCY MANA SAU We Ar a ar AGO
AON IEM YA AEACA NAA AP ANU A SI Ar AI a ANNAN
SOS OEM LUA WAT ALA: NAA AAU AP Or ah aan CY ME
SO Oa OU NONEALALSA AV NSA AU a a OM MM MV MEAL
DORA ARONA DUAR ATA RAUL OO DALLA

YO MOET AY Ur ae APA OP





LOO ors






vO
MIM IME AMEE OT SP oP OP NP OP AP


MT MMM MEME MOE SEPA If PE PAT A Pan CF
NEN MIM SOM IM SMM MED MOET ST MA APOE OD
Ap ehh MEE IP GET FOF or Pe








UA ee ee





















VT PT er rR ge eg popes
I IIIA TT Le ie gy
RAO en erex rea OUR AEG RACER SIN SPI SIR EOE RRL AML Lede
BOISE DAA UNSOR NO OUD Orde NAAR RH I UNH OLLI SUA RUN ALAA AUN SRR OL ALS
ROD ontieatrstadr enero datitror ach araraat enn geATA NCL une ORI EIR ctu M A ASLAM LOOSE EES

WN RRR OQ AN aU AONE MI MO RMN MA ML OD OLA Mae Arr rg
WI SOYA oes V VN EN OWE NE MEW ENO WY OO VLEET SEXO MEME AP ADAP SPARE AE ape op BNA ABAD ARN a A Ae A A a aA
Je YOO OA USN \ SSO EM REV AENEAN AP APA GU WAS A ar Maas AAG S PM MMMM IMM PEELS E DP PARP AE
UREA SOA OS IM ANY A MI A MRM MEM MIM OLD LAI
WVU SO ONY, MMV VNU VEY VV ry ANON SESE MEE MEMES EEE AP PP
Weta ty ele WCW ICI OUT TET VENUS ACY, ‘4
NOON VY


Vy rer
Pe MMM MAES AP PP IE ap np ana argent rely)


MM TS PTE ES TP ar or PEE

A Oa MSI MAEM Une aR er para rrp rn a ran pM pM ge |
A RONAN DUDES TRAN RUM Rea OT

wale tye yy UY, y MM NEV AV Me ry AP ap ae ap

Sea TO TONCTOTUIE ENOTES OUNCES SO









Oe.





Rn eee a
PETTITT CO EE UD
OM MMT NESE WME ENED AP SP ar ap uP og ar Yew nu
NO MLM area rar nrg oP nee MET MA COL AFIT
; SO NN MOL MeL aC ene DL RM A IO AAP FL
) BONN AR NNER TOK er recA OURAN RAN NR aM ML OAR a Oe
SY 2 ARN OTN ROS MR MME MRT et tat yy TN ete
. NODLAIAIAEAAAACA DONA TOCA UNOS ROOM CLE ALFORD Aa te DLL PT ree ppg le sr oar aaa
SE EEE EERE CY VRE OOOO MOUS FO Ao NOL MM OA ALMA lg SLOT TAT
NCAA AA RCRA TE ONE ta RDNA Re IDAR OA CATR RAIURMAO cERR aLELEAOLRAE de ALe AU
BN OOM AIA Ln Tr nel MAT LOCI ST ON AT Ce OPA Po
A Oa NaNO MRR een Ra NMG Mh tM Ur ar rar thi f
RAR DN A RATRUATE CACAO TO CATE OLIN NOL ERLOL ALAND aOR








<
.
4
<
<
2
2
©
is
<
*3


























SAS































ey pay
NOEL TE ETE RTL aE

SA OU AN LIM ME MARU WAP an We Ar ner Ree peyton OL LTA RE A a

, NOU MEN MVE SESE MEVE AT AY AA Toa ar AP AP AN a apa an eNer! LISELI EINES SF Ee oP
SOYA EAN SOSA AAU APA APs RD Ar AP i ang appa VPP CFR Sh roe pee aa
WU AYN: a MM MINNUM WEY NCW VEINS VW WA A ar aD Ua OL OM  E ee oe ea
SAAR AR ERAN RN eC UO Ne
FN TOOLS yy NADA MASAO OIA TORI ISCO EATERS
XY CUE RU EON TET WU NMTEN WYN TE NEU NEW Qn YY ACA Ar ae yu raat
WII
SWAN URAL CUTE Uy yy








NIVEA SEW WME AEN AP Be A





















ee ee
Ler a rel ti tI NI OY rrr rrr parry y

Vas tlt yl LLL I TIO Cnr ey AAA eh ikl Li
YORN. AD MRE de ee Ade ee ed hd se PA A ee ee ee oe
RE Oe MEE SI hy Lepage perl PO MN EIT IL ILIIDD TTP ey A A Ae ee ee ee
TA AERENE NPA ORE APAEAS PO a a EM MOU MALE We WIPE Lee vere Me TL SIL IL SLIT TOO LEPC EEMMEAM MEE AMAA eek hik
SO RIOD ATAU SY VVC NMOS VENI WAP SOE ME ALA gap VV . ELLE EEL TLL err rer rr ne ry TT Ee lll yy eye
MTT EA ye MICO rae eae pane LE CPUS RE RM ed ee het a it holo LL II ET TTY Pb yy vey
OTOL UTS. “ SOLO UN MT ar are are te an iF EA MAMA eA ALM ee ede

Wa fey Wee eet EEUU MOON EMU Nr arp PA PAP er

SSDNA ASSAD ERAASA DD AAPA VAN, ‘

Oy EE OSS,





mrver
Cl i lll MLL T EIT ey rep

yy ey f

ponents i 7 rere Ue A Ae a ee ee ths
WTI OY . ,


PARAS AA REAR MMS
Ween
Pe it eas ays Wily
PSDB, SERRA REA S


AOU ROE SNe





Ve ar ee we
SE ae








CL ESO OT rT OE Sev YP ry C4
REDE SEAL CMA M MAEM eee eee Le nade , fy!
PLETAL TTS GILLIS STEAL
LiKe NTL,


APY ener
ae ear





cre
LE EG oe
WN PEE NES SEE
WMV ATO Aor eine
