L,bc timvcv.$itv of Cbic 



rares 




xchange Duplicate 



-1 

v'J 




Narratiu? 



By 
Rev. W. T. STEAD 

Editor of 

Review of Reviews 
London 





otim* 

By Rev. 

G. CAMPBELL 

MORGAN 

Pastor 

Westminster Chapel 
London 




pignut 

NEW YORK 



CHICAGO 






R. STEAD'S graphic account 
of the great Welsh revival, 
herewith given, was first pub- 
lished in the magazine which he edits, 
and afterwards reprinted in pamphlet 
form. The few copies of the pamphlet 
which reached this country were eagerly 
sought and made a profound impression 
on all who read them. 

The account by Rev. G. Campbell 
Morgan was first printed in The 
Christian Common<wea.lth, London, and 
afterwards in The Congrega.iiona.list, 
Boston. 

The authors have kindly cabled us 
their permission to reprint these 

articles. We also have reprinted the 

Morgan article separately. 





'PRICE OF THIS 'PAMPHLET 

JO cents ; $1.00 per dozen 

$7.00 per 100, postpaid 

'PRICE OF THE MORGAN LEAFLET ALONE 

3 cents ; 25 cents per dozen 

$1.50 per 100 1 postpaid 







Sty? pilgrim pr^00 

BOSTON 










el so Keviva. 



A Narrative of Facts 

By W. T. STEAD 

j . ,, 

II 

The Revival : Its Power and Source 
By G. CAMPBELL MORGAN 

" Behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy." 



BOSTON 

Ube pilgrim press 

NEW YORK CHICAGO 







1 


luhltafjrc'a fat? 








"R, STEAD'S graphic account 
of the great Welsh revival, 
herewith given, was first pub- 
lished in the magazine which he edits, 
and afterwards reprinted in pamphlet 
form. The few copies of the pamphlet 
which reached this country were eagerly 
sought and made a profound impression 
on all who read them. 

The account by Rev. G. Campbell 
Morgan was first printed in The 
Christian Com.mon<wealth, London, and 
afterwards in The Congrega.iiona.list, 
Boston. 

The authors have kindly cabled us 
, their permission to reprint these 
articles. We also have reprinted the 
Morgan article separately. 




'PRICE OF THIS "PAMPHLET 

10 cents ; $1.00 per dozen 

$7.00 per 100, postpaid 

'PRICE OF THE MORGAN LEAFLET ALONE 

3 cents ; 25 cents per dozen 

$1.50 per 100 f postpaid 







t} fltlgrim flr00 

BOSTON 









The Wei 





I 

A Narrative of Facts 
By W. T. STEAD 

J n 

II 

The Revival : Its Power and Source 
By G. CAMPBELL MORGAN 

"Behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy." 



BOSTON 

Ube BMlarim press 

NEW YORK CHICAGO 



* " * * 



COPYRIGHT, 1905 
BY J. H. TEWKSBURY 



1 1 

,& . .-Jl_ 



Contents 

I 

A Narrative of Facts 



I. FROM THE AUTHOR TO THE READER . . 5 

II. THE NATIONAL SIGNIFICANCE OF REVIVALS . 15 

III. WHAT I SAW IN WALES 28 

IV. EVAN ROBERTS 48 

V. THE RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE REVIVAL . 65 

VI. WHAT OUGHT I TO Do ? . . . -74 

II 

The Revival : 

ITS POWER AND SOURCE . . . . -77 



I 

A Narrative of Facts 



The Welsh Revival 



CHAPTER I 
FROM THE AUTHOR TO THE READER 

THIS is the reason why this little book is written : 

I am a child of the revival of 1859-60. I have wit- 
nessed the revival in South Wales, and it is borne in upon 
me that I must testify as to what I have seen and know. 

I have been urged and entreated to speak in public on the 
subject. I have refused, although sorely tempted to com- 
ply. But though I am not physically strong enough to face 
the immense strain which public speaking always makes 
upon my nervous system, I cannot keep silent. Woe is me 
if I bear not my testimony, and bear it now ! For never is 
it so true as in times of revival that "Now is the accepted 
time ; now is the day of salvation." 

That is not a mere hackneyed text ; it is a somewhat awe- 
inspiring fact. A fact, not a theory. The importance of 
the psychological moment so much insisted upon by Bis- 
marck is as true in religion as in politics. It is the 
familiar truth, which all admit in other departments of 
life. 

" There is a tide in the affairs of men 

Which, taken at the flood, leads on to fortune. 
Omitted, all the voyage of their life 
Is bound in shallows, and in miseries." 



6 THE WELSH REVIVAL 

Let me preface my narrative, as is the custom in all 
meetings when the awakened soul cries for facts from the 
experience of living men rather than for things at second- 
hand, by stating briefly how I came to be able to speak 
with knowledge of the mysterious force operating upon 
the heart of men which is in action at times of re- 
vival. 

I first woke up to a sense of my own sinfulness when I 
was a child of eleven. I was a child of the manse. My 
father was an Independent minister, and both my parents 
were earnest, devoted evangelical Christians. Independents 
sixty years ago were more Calvinistic than are their present- 
day representatives, and a sense of the exceeding sinfulness 
of sin and of the grim reality of the wrath of God per- 
meated the atmosphere of our home. The higher the ideal 
of life and conduct to which we were taught to aspire, the 
more bitterly and constantly we were compelled to realize 
by every childish fault of selfishness or of temper how true 
it was that we had all sinned and come short of the glory of 
God. We were condemned by our own consciences. Even 
when we would do good, evil was present with us. How 
could we, with all our imperfections, our sins and our 
shortcomings, think without a shudder of the day when all 
secrets were revealed, and the soul, stripped bare of all 
wrappings and pretence, had to render account to its 
Maker for all the deeds that had been done in the body? 
It is the fashion of our day to regard such striving after 
the Ideal as morbid ; but although the phraseology may 
need revision, the essential truth remains the same. 

It is not surprising, then, that one night, at eleven years 
of age, when I went to bed, I was seized with an appalling 
sense of my own unworthiness, my own exceeding sinful- 
ness. God was so good, and I was so bad I deserved to 
be damned. I accepted as a postulate the infinite goodness 



FROM AUTHOR TO READER 7 

of God, and I knew only too well how often I had done 
the things I ought not to have done, and left undone 
the things I ought to have done, and that there was no 
strength in me. I sobbed and cried in the darkness with a 
vague sense of my own sin and of the terrible doom which 
awaited me. I had a passionate longing to escape from 
condemnation and be forgiven. At last my mother over- 
heard me, took me into her arms, and told me comforting 
things about the love of God, and how it was made mani- 
fest by Jesus Christ, who had suffered in our stead, to save 
us from condemnation and make us heirs of heaven. I 
have no remembrance of anything beyond the soothing ca- 
ress of my mother's words. When she left me the terror 
had gone ; and although I had not in any way experienced 
the change which is called conversion, I felt sufficiently 
tranquil to go to sleep. When I woke the memory of the 
previous night's alarm was but as the remembrance of a 
thunder-storm when it has passed. 

This was in the year 1860, when the revival which had 
begun in the United States of America in 1857 or 1858 
crossed the Atlantic, traversed the north of Ireland in 
1858, covered Wales in 1859, and then moved into 
England, where its influence was felt all through 1860 
and 1861. 

In July, 1 86 1, I was sent to a boarding-school for Con- 
gregational ministers' sons, to which some sons of laymen 
were also admitted, at Silcoates Hall, near Wakefield. 
There were about fifty of us boys, from ten years old to six- 
teen or seventeen. The tradition of the school in the fifties 
and in 1860 had not been distinctly religious. All of us 
came from Christian homes, but as a school it was very 
much like other schools. About a month after I entered 
Silcoates some of the lads started a prayer-meeting of their 
own in a summer-house in the garden. They asked me to 



8 THE WELSH REVIVAL 

join, and I went more out of curiosity, and to oblige my 
chum, than from any other motive. There were about half a 
dozen of us, perhaps more, none of us over fourteen. We 
read a chapter in the Bible, and we prayed. No master 
was present, nor was there any attempt made on the part of 
the masters to encourage the prayer-meeting. One master, 
indeed, was frankly contemptuous. The majority of the 
boys had nothing to do with " the prayer-meeting fellows." 
One or two of us were under deep conviction of sin, and we 
talked among ourselves, and read the Bible, and prayed. 
Suddenly, one day, after the prayer-meeting had been going 
on for a week or two, there seemed to be a sudden change 
in the atmosphere. How it came about no one ever knew. 
All that we did know was that there seemed to have de- 
scended from the sky, with the suddenness of a drenching 
thunder-shower, a spirit of intense, earnest seeking after God 
for the forgiveness of sins and consecration to his service. 
The summer-house was crowded with boys. A deputation 
waited upon the principal, and told him what was happen- 
ing. He was very sympathetic and helpful. Preparation 
class was dispensed with that night ; all the evening 
the prayer-meeting was kept going. There was no sing- 
ing, only Bible reading, a few brief words of exhortation, 
a confession of sin, and asking for prayers, and ever and 
anon a joyful acknowledgment of an assurance of forgive- 
ness. Those of us who could not find peace were taken out 
into the playground by one or two of their happier comrades, 
who labored with them to accept Christ. How well to this 
very day do I remember the solemn hush of that memorable 
day and night, in the course of which forty out of the fifty 
lads publicly professed conversion. Only half a dozen out 
of the whole school, and these exclusively of the oldest boys, 
held aloof from the movement, and were prayed for jointly 
and severally by name by their converted comrades. 



FROM AUTHOR TO READER 9 

I remember the way in which it came to me that my 
sins were forgiven, and that from being a rebel against 
God I was admitted into the family of the redeemed. 
I had no ecstasy. Alas ! my temperament is not subject 
to ecstasies. My friend, a lad of my own age, was 
walking by my side plying me diligently with texts, 
and appealing to me to believe only in Christ. As we 
walked and talked together it slowly seemed to dawn 
upon my mind that I had been saved all the time, and 
had never known it till just then saved not by any 
merit of my own, but because in some mysterious way, 
positively asserted in the New Testament, and verified by 
the experience of all the best human beings whom I knew or 
had heard of, the death of Christ had reconciled the world 
to God. He had borne my sins, therefore they were no 
longer on record against me. There was no condemnation 
for those who were in Christ Jesus. And who were "in 
Christ Jesus ' ' ? The whole human race, excepting those 
who thrust themselves out of his fold and would none of 
him. In short, it seemed to me that I had always inverted 
the position. Instead of thinking I had to do some strange 
spiritual act described as " coming to Jesus," when my sins 
would be forgiven and I should be adopted as a son of God, 
I came to see that Christ had already reconciled me to God, 
had forgiven my sins, thousands of years before they had 
been committed, and that I had just to accept the position 
in which he had graciously placed me. Of my own self 
I could have done nothing. I was a sinner, not only in the 
sight of God, but in my own inner consciousness. I had 
been made in the image of God, and had unmade myself 
into the image of a very ordinary, bad-tempered, selfish 
lad, not perhaps more bad-tempered or more selfish than 
other twelve-year-old lads, but a very ordinary sinner, not 
by any means the saint and the hero which I ought to have 



io THE WELSH REVIVAL 

been. I was a poor wretch, but God in his unspeakable 
love and mercy had blotted out my sins, and taken me into 
junior very junior partnership with himself. The terms 
were, on my side, that I had to do what he told me, and, on 
his side, that he would tell me quite clearly what he wanted 
me to do. And although I had no ecstasy, and was glad- 
dened by no heavenly vision, a sense of great peace and de- 
liverance settled upon me. 

I was seized with the longing to tell others of the dis- 
covery I had made that we were saved all the time if we 
only knew it, and that God was a great deal more anxious 
to take us into partnership than we were to accept so 
gracious an offer. Writing was a sore cross to me, &tat 12, 
but I wrote to rny parents and told them the good news. I 
wrote to my elder sister, urging her to be converted. We 
had prayer circles for the conversion of our unconverted 
comrades. In the fervor of my boyish zeal I decided to be 
a missionary, and applied myself all the more diligently to 
my lessons. About twenty of us joined the church as com- 
municants. Every night during the two years I was at 
Silcoates the prayer-meeting was kept up by the lads. Half 
an hour after tea, before preparation, was given to the 
prayer-meeting. But and this brings me to the point of 
all this confession of personal experience although the tone 
of the school was kept up at a high level, and although the 
prayer-meeting was kept going, and the solid fruits of the 
revival lasted all the time I was there, we never had an- 
other conversion after that strange outpouring of the Spirit 
which overwhelmed us all, unexpectant, at the beginning of 
the term. Those who were brought in during the revival 
week stood for the most part firm; those who stood out 
against the revival never came in afterward. Neither, so 
far as I remember, with perhaps one or two exceptions, did the 
new lads who entered school later on seek or find conversion. 



FROM AUTHOR TO READER n 

I am not setting forth the conception of the relation be- 
tween man and his Maker embodied in the foregoing narra- 
tive as if it were the truth of God to any other soul except- 
ing my own. And for those who deny both God and the 
soul, I am willing, for the sake of argument, to admit that 
the whole episode in my life was nothing more or less than 
the delusion of something that imagined itself to be a soul 
as to the reality of its relations with a nullity which it im- 
agined was its Creator. The truth or the falsehood of my 
notions is, in this immediate connection, quite immaterial. 
For what I am wanting to insist upon is, first, that these 
seasons of spiritual exaltation which we call revivals are 
realities to those who come under their influence, perma- 
nently affecting their whole future lives ; and, secondly, that 
they come like the wind and vanish as mysteriously, and 
that those who resist them may never again feel so potent a 
call to a higher life. 

It is this sense of the fact that the revival, when it comes, 
does not stop but passes on, which fills me with such a sense 
of the infinite importance of this present time, that I feel I 
must do what I can to bring to the knowledge of as many 
persons as I can reach, the glad tidings of great joy that a 
revival of religion is once more in our midst. 

The old story of the man who was gathering eggs from 
the face of a precipitous cliff always recurs to me at such 
seasons of opportunity. The man, clinging to a rope, had 
lowered himself from the overhanging edge of a beetling 
cliff, till he was opposite the ledge where the sea-birds laid 
their eggs. Owing to the extent to which the brow of the 
cliff overhung the sea, whose waves were dashing 200 feet 
below, the egg-gatherer found himself some ten feet distant 
from the ledge of the nests. By swaying to and fro, he was 
able to make himself swing as a pendulum outward and in- 
ward, until at last the extreme inward swing of the rope 



12 THE WELSH REVIVAL 

brought him to the ledge, onto which he sprang. As he 
did so he lost hold of the rope. There he stood for one 
awful moment midway between sea and sky. The rope, 
swinging outward after he had quitted his hold, was return- 
ing like a pendulum. It came, but not so far as to enable 
him to clutch it from where he stood. Outward it swung 
again, and he realized with agony that as each time it 
swayed to and fro it would be further and further off, until 
at last it would hang stationary far out of his reach. When 
the rope began slowly to swing inwards, he saw that the next 
time it would be out of his reach. Breathless, he waited 
until the rope was just about to pause before swinging back, 
then, knowing that it was now or never, he leaped into space, 
caught the rope, and was saved. Another second and he 
would have lost his chance. It is just so, it seems to me, 
with revivals. They come and they go, and if they are not 
utilized the opportunity goes by in some cases forever. 

For the churches the revival is like spring. The good 
seed sown then springs up and bears fruit, whereas ten 
times the quantity of seed sown in winter's frost or summer's 
heat would simply perish. But in these prefatory observa- 
tions I am not thinking of the churches so much as of the 
individual reader who does not believe, who is not con- 
verted, and who is only idly curious as to whether there is 
anything in "this revival business," or whether there is not. 
It is for them that I have told, for the first time in my life, 
the story of how a revival affected me, and what I know of 
it at first hand. And there is one other point upon which I 
think I may fairly claim to speak at first hand, and that is 
as to the effect of that experience at Silcoates in 1861 upon 
my own life. Whatever may be the objective reality of the 
altered relations which I then recognized as existing between 
my soul and its Maker, there is absolutely no question as to 
the abiding nature of the change it effected in my life. It is 



FROM AUTHOR TO READER 13 

forty-three years since that revival at school. The whole of 
my life during all these forty-three years has been influenced 
by the change which men call conversion which occurred 
with me when I was twelve. My views as to many things 
have naturally broadened much in these forty-three years, 
but that was the conscious starting-point of everything that 
there has been in my life of good or of service for my fellow 
creatures. It was my first conversion. Other spiritual 
experiences, involving a wider conception of the reality of 
God in man, a deeper sense of the need for self-surrender, I 
have had, and hope yet to have. But the fundamental 
change, the conscious recognition of the fact that I had been 
most graciously allotted a junior partnership with God Al- 
mighty in the great task of making this world a little bit 
more like heaven than it is to-day, came to me then. My 
life has been flawed with many failures, darkened with many 
sins, but the thing in it which was good, which has enabled 
me to resist temptations to which I would otherwise have 
succumbed, to bear burdens which would otherwise have 
crushed me with their weight, and which has kept the soul 
within me ever joyfully conscious that, despite all appear- 
ances to the contrary, this is God's world, and that he and I 
are fellow workers in the work of its renovation that potent 
thing, whatever you may call it, and however you may ex- 
plain it, came into my life then, and abides with me to this 
hour my one incentive and inspiration in this life; my 
sole hope for that which is to come. 

Therefore I hope my reader will understand how it is that 
I, being a child of the revival of 1858 to 1861, should hail 
with exceeding great joy the reappearance of the revival in 
1904. For as the mysterious outpouring of the blessing 
forty- three years ago has been of permanent help and strength 
and comfort to my own life ever since that time, so will this 
revival in Wales change, transform, inspire and glorify the 



i 4 THE WELSH REVIVAL 

lives of multitudes who at present know nothing and care 
nothing for the things that make for their own peace and 
the welfare of their fellow men. 

And the thought that haunts me and will not let me rest 
until I send out this little book is that if I do not write it, 
and write it now, you, my reader, may not hear the bugle 
call which is sounding in Wales ; the revival may pass by, 
and, too late, you may awake to discover that you have 
missed the gift of God which it bore for your soul. 



CHAPTER II 
THE NATIONAL SIGNIFICANCE OF REVIVALS 

Slowly the Bible of the race is writ, 

And 'not on paper leaves nor leaves of stone. 

Each age, each kindred adds a verse to it, 

Texts of despair or hope, of joy or moan ; 

While swings the sea, while mists the mountains shroud, 

While thunders' surges burst on cliffs of cloud, 

Still at the prophet's feet the nations sit. Lowell. 

ONE of these newly written verses is spelling itself out 
before our eyes in Wales. In order to understand its sig- 
nificance we need to look backward across some centuries to 
realize what vast issues may be in this upheaval among the 
Welsh country folk. 

The word revival is not to be found in the index to the 
latest edition of the " Encyclopsedia Britannica." Neither 
does it figure in the comprehensive index to Baring-Gould's 
" Lives of the Saints." Yet the Saints were great revival- 
ists, and the history of the progress of the world is largely 
made up of the record of successive revivals. The revival 
of religion has been the invariable precursor of social and 
political reform. This was very admirably put by the Rev. 
F. B. Meyer in his Presidential Address to the Ninth Na- 
tional Council of the Evangelical Free Churches at New- 
castle-on-Tyne in 1904. 

Every great revival of religion has issued in social and 
political reconstruction. In no history has the effect of the 
one upon the other been more carefully traced than in 
Green's "History of the English People." Take, for in- 

15 



16 THE WELSH REVIVAL 

stance, his account of the revival of the twelfth century. 
" At the close of Henry's reign," he says, " and throughout 
that of Stephen, England was stirred by the first of those 
great religious movements, which it was afterward to ex- 
perience in the preaching of the Friars, the Lollardism of 
Wycliffe, the Reformation, the Puritan enthusiasm, and the 
mission work of the Wesleys. Everywhere, in town and 
country, men banded themselves together for prayer ; 
hermits flocked to the woods ; noble and churl welcomed 
the austere Cistercians as they spread over the moors and 
forests of the North. A new spirit of devotion woke the 
slumbers of the religious houses, and penetrated alike to the 
homes of the noble and the trader. The power of this re- 
vival eventually became strong enough to wrest England 
from the chaos of feudal misrule after a long period of 
feudal anarchy, and laid the foundations of the Great 
Charta." We may go further, and assert that the move- 
ments which led to the abolition of the Slave Trade and the 
Corn Laws originated in the evangelistic efforts of Wesley 
and Whitefield. Even Mr. Benjamin Kidd, in his " Social 
Evolution," lays great stress on the religious foundations 
upon which civilization rests. He tells us that the intellect 
has always mistaken the nature of religious forces, and re- 
garded them as beneath its notice, though they had within 
them power to control the course of human development for 
hundreds and even thousands of years. Discussing the op- 
position of the educated classes in England to progress, he 
says : " The motive force behind the long list of progressive 
measures has not, to any appreciable extent, come from the 
educated classes it has come almost exclusively from the 
middle and lower classes, who have in turn acted, not under 
the stimulus of intellectual motives, but under the influence 
of their religious feelings." It is, therefore, on the authority 
of history and economics that we base our contention that 
society can only be saved through a great revival of re- 
ligion. 

There are certain phenomena which precede and which 
follow revivals of religion. The symptoms premonitory of 
a revival are the phenomena of death, corruption and decay. 



NATIONAL SIGNIFICANCE OF REVIVALS 17 

It is ever the darkest hour before the dawn. The nation 
always seems to be given over to the Evil One before the 
coming of the Son of Man. The decay of religious faith, 
the deadness of the churches, the atheism of the well-to-do, 
the brutality of the masses, all these, when at their worst, 
herald the approach of the revival. Things seem to get too 
bad to last. The reign of evil becomes intolerable. Then 
the soul of the nation awakes. 

That the familiar phenomena of the reign of sin are with 
us and abound, no serious observer will dispute. As a 
nation we have once more stooped to those depths of bloody 
mire in which from time to time Britain has wallowed. 
Drunkenness, gambling and gluttony, with others of the 
seven deadly sins, abound. Worldliness is universal. 
High ideals are eclipsed. Plain living and high thinking 
are at a discount. To see as in a mirror the vacuous mind 
of a generation which eschews serious thought you have 
only to read the popular newspapers and periodicals of the day. 

Life has become for the comfortable classes little better 
than a musical comedy. You look in vain for the strenuous, 
high-spirited youth who scorn delights and live laborious 
days in order to achieve something of good for their fellow 
men. To have a good time is the end-all and be-all of 
millions. Indolence, indifference and selfishness so domi- 
nate that even the healthy game of football has become little 
better than a modern substitute for the gladiatorial sports of 
ancient Rome the winter gambling-hell that replaces the 
summer race-course. Our young men do not play them- 
selves ; they look on while professionals play. 

In politics degradation shows itself chiefly in the indiffer- 
ence to bloodshed and the waste of the resources of our own 
people in making believe to be ready to slaughter our neigh- 
bors. As a condemnation alike of the morality and intellect 
of the nation, the army and navy expenditure of Britain 



1 8 THE WELSH REVIVAL 

for the last twelve years stands without a parallel. Here 
we have the very note of the decadence of our time. That 
way madness lies, and the supreme and crowning demon- 
stration of the criminal lunacy which has overtaken us is 
afforded by the proposal to tax the bread and sugar of the 
poor in order to meet the demands of insatiate Mars. 

If, therefore, a revival never comes until the nation has 
sunk into the slough of luxury and vice, and wallows in 
brutality and crime, then this precursory symptom is as- 
suredly net wanting in the present situation. It is interest- 
ing to turn over the pages of Green's " History of the 
English People," and to note how invariably the revival is 
preceded by a period of corruption and followed by a great 
advance in the direction of national progress. 

Take, for instance, what he tells us about the state of 
England on the eve of the second revival. The effect of the 
first revival had passed away by the middle of the thirteenth 
century. The second was brought about by the Franciscans 
and the Dominicans. 

Speaking of the coming of the Friars, Mr. Green 
says : 

The religious hold of the priesthood on the people was 
loosening day by day. . . . The disuse of preaching, 
the decline of the monastic orders into rich landowners, the 
non-residence and ignorance of the parish priests, robbed 
the clergy of their spiritual influence. The abuses of the 
times foiled even the energy of such men as Bishop Grosse- 
teste, of Lincoln. To bring the world back again within 
the pale of the Church was the aim of two religious orders 
which sprang suddenly into life in the opening of the 
thirteenth century. 

He then describes how the revival due to the Black 
Friars of St. Dominic and the Gray Friars of St. Francis 
swept in a great tide of popular enthusiasm over the land. 



NATIONAL SIGNIFICANCE OF REVIVALS 19 

They carried the gospel to the poor by the entire reversal 
of the older monasticism by seeking personal salvation in 
effort for the salvation of their fellow men. Their fervid 
appeal, coarse wit and familiar story brought religion into 
the fair and the market-place. They captured the Uni- 
versity of Oxford, and made it stand in the front line in 
its resistance to Papal exactions and its claim of English 
liberty. 

The classes in the towns on whom the influence of the 
Friars told most directly were the steady supporters of free- 
dom throughout the Barons' War. Adam Marsh was the 
closest friend and confidant both of Grosseteste and Earl 
Simon of Montfort. 



Thus, if the first revival preceded the signing of the 
Magna Charta, the second paved the way for the assembly 
of the first English Parliament. 

The third revival mentioned by Green was that of Wycliffe. 
The second revival had spent its force in a hundred years. 
The Church of the Middle Ages had, at the middle of the 
fourteenth century, sunk to its lowest point of spiritual 
decay. The clergy were worldly and corrupt, and para- 
lyzed by their own dissensions. The early enthusiasm of 
the Friars had died away, leaving a crowd of impudent 
mendicants behind. Then Wycliffe arose. He recalled 
the ideal of "the Kingdom of God" before the eyes of 
mankind, and established his order of " Simple Priests " or 
Poor Preachers, who, with coarse speech and russet dress, 
preached the gospel throughout the land with such success 
that the enemy declared in alarm that " every second man 
one meets is a Lollard." Wycliffe died, but the seed he 
had sowed sprang up and bore terrible fruit in the Peasant 
Revolt, which, although ultimately trampled out in blood- 



20 THE WELSH REVIVAL 

shed, was the first great warning given to the landlords of 
England that the serf not only had the rights of man, but 
was capable on occasion of asserting them, even by such 
extreme measures as the decapitation of an archbishop. 

The fourth revival was that which preceded the Reforma- 
tion. Tyndale, with his translation of the Bible, blew upon 
the smouldering embers of Lollardry and they burst into 
flame. The new Scriptures were disputed, rimed, sung, and 
jangled in every tavern and ale-house. From that revival of 
popular religion among the masses came by tortuous roads 
the triumph of Protestantism. 

After the Reformation and the Renaissance had achieved 
their culminating glory in the reign of Queen Elizabeth, a 
period of decadence and of corruption set in under the 
Stuarts. Under James I, Whitehall became an Augean 
stable of all -unclean ness, and a vicious Court assailed 
the liberties of England. Against this corruption in high 
places a fierce religious rebellion broke out amongst the 
serious English folk. The Puritan Revival of the first half 
of the seventeenth century had two notable offshoots. The 
first was the founding of New England by the men of the 
Mayflower ; the other was the founding of the English 
Commonwealth by the Ironsides of Cromwell. The great 
struggle of the seventeenth century was primarily religious, 
only secondarily political. As Green remarks, " There was 
one thing dearer in England than free speech in Parliament, 
than security for property, or even personal liberty, and that 
one thing was, in the phrase of the day, the Gospel." It 
was the religious revival that summoned Milton from litera- 
ture to politics. So long as the question between king and 
parliament was purely political, he shut himself up with his 
books and " calmly awaited the issue of the contest, which I 
trusted to the wise conduct of Providence and to the courage 
of the people." But when men began to demand the re- 



NATIONAL SIGNIFICANCE OF REVIVALS 21 

forming of the Church in accordance with the Word of God, 
Milton tells us in his " Second Defence of the People of 
England " : 

This awakened all my attention and my zeal. I saw 
that a way was opening for the establishment of real liberty, 
that the foundation was laying for the deliverance of man 
from the yoke of slavery and superstition, that the prin- 
ciples of religion, which were the first objects of our care, 
would exert a salutary influence on the manners and con- 
stitution of the republic : and as I had from my youth 
studied the distinction between religious and civil rights, I 
perceived that if I ever wished to be of use I ought at least 
not to be wanting to my country, to the Church, and to so 
many of my fellow-Christians in a crisis of so much 
danger. I therefore determined to relinquish the other 
pursuits in which I was engaged, and to transfer the whole 
force of my talents and industry to this one important sub- 
ject. 

Others besides Milton felt the imperious call of the re- 
ligious movement of his time. Nor did its impulse fail until 
the death of Oliver Cromwell opened the door to the rabble 
rout of the Restoration. 

Once more England plunged heavily toward the nether- 
most abyss, and once again a great revival of religion took 
place to save the soul of the nation from perdition. It was 
partly due to the relentless persecution of the Nonconformists, 
but it owed much also to the flaming zeal of the Quakers, 
who were the great revivalists of the second half of the 
seventeenth century. The government had at one time in 
horrible dungeons as many as four thousand of these ex- 
cellent men. Professor William James truly says of the 
Quaker religion that it "is something which it is impossible 
to overpraise." 

In a day of shams, it was a religion of veracity rooted 



22 THE WELSH REVIVAL 

in spiritual inwardness and a return to something more like 
the original Gospel truth than men had ever known in 
England. So far as our Christian sects to-day are evolving 
into liberality, they are simply reverting in essence to the 
position which Fox and the early Quakers so long ago 
assumed. 

The Quaker Revival had as its immediate political 
result the founding of Pennsylvania, and among its more 
remote and indirect effects the final expulsion of the Stuarts. 

Quakerism, tolerated, lost much of the savory salt that it 
possessed when it was kept up to the standard of the apostles 
by the sufferings of the martyrs. The reversion of the 
English people, especially of the highest and the lowest, to 
sheer paganism is one of the most constant phenomena of 
our history. After the Stuarts had vanished and the Prot- 
estant succession secured, the land relapsed into brutality 
and infidelity in the eighteenth century, as it had done in 
every century since the Conquest. 

Then came the seventh and best known revival of all 
under Wesley and Whitefield. Once again England had 
gone rotten at the head. " In the higher circles of society 
every one laughs," said Montesquieu on his visit to Eng- 
land, " if one talks of religion. Of the prominent statesmen 
of the time, the greater part were unbelievers in any form of 
Christianity, and distinguished for the grossness and im- 
morality of their lives." As at the top, so at the bottom. 
The masses were brutalized beyond belief. " In London, 
at one time, gin-shops invited every passer-by to get drunk 
for a penny, and dead drunk for twopence." But in the 
midst of this moral wilderness a religious revival sprang up 
which carried to the hearts of the people a fresh spirit of 
moral zeal, while it purified our literature and our manners. 
"A new philanthropy reformed our prisons, infused clem- 
ency and wisdom into our penal laws, abolished the slave 



NATIONAL SIGNIFICANCE OF REVIVALS 23 

trade, and gave the first impulse to popular education." 
The revival then was not without many features which 
caused the sinner to blaspheme. "Women fell down in 
convulsions ; strong men were smitten suddenly to the earth ; 
the preacher was interrupted by bursts of hysteric laughter 
or hysteric sobbing." Very foolish and absurd, no doubt, 
sniggered the superior persons of that day. But if Mr. 
Lecky and other observers may be believed, it was that fool- 
ishness of the Methodist revival that saved the children of 
these superior persons from having their heads sheared off 
by an outburst of revolutionary frenzy similar to that of the 
Reign of Terror. 

About the same time that Wesley was preaching in Eng- 
land a great revival broke out in Wales, of which one of 
the outward and visible signs most plainly perceptible 
among us to-day is the fact of the Welsh revolt against 
the Education Act. That the Liberal party commands to- 
day a solid majority among the Welsh members is the 
direct result of the revival of 1759, which is associated 
with the name of Howell Harris, a layman of the Church 
of England, who, while taking part in the Litany in his 
parish church, became suddenly filled with a fervent zeal, 
and went forth to preach the gospel to his fel]ow men. At 
first the movement was within the pale of the Church. Ten 
beneficed clergymen were among the revivalists of that 
day. What would have happened if the. Anglican au- 
thorities had possessed the wisdom of the serpent and had 
followed the example of the Church of Rome in utilizing 
the zeal of her enthusiasts to extend her own borders, who 
can say? But the problem never arose. The Anglican 
Church, true to its evil traditions, cast out the revivalists, 
and Welsh Nonconformity was born. Modern Wales is 
the direct product of the revival of the eighteenth cen- 
tury. 



24 THE WELSH REVIVAL 

As a leading Baptist minister said, writing on this sub- 
ject on November 



The Nonconformist bodies of Wales owe their origin to 
religious revivals, two to that of the seventeenth century 
and two to that of the eighteenth century. Wales has to 
thank her past revivals for the greater part of the energy 
exhibited in her national, political and social life. In the 
revivals with which the people of Wales have been blessed 
of God, his Spirit engraved upon the conscience of the 
nation the terribly solemn truths of existence and the things 
which belong unto her peace. This gave to her men of 
conviction and of courage, and taught her to aspire to all 
that is good and noble, and whatever her achievements are 
religiously and socially, they are due mainly to the stimulus 
received during periods of outpouring of the Spirit of 
God. 

In the nineteenth century the Tractarian Movement may 
be regarded by some as a revival. But it was neither pre- 
ceded by great apathy nor followed by vigorous political 
progress. The most notable revival of the century was 
that which broke out in the United States in the latter end of 
the fifties, and which spread in a few years over Ulster and 
Wales, and from thence made its way into England and 
Scotland. The revival seems to travel in the opposite 
direction to the sun. The great revival of 1740, under 
Jonathan Edwards in New England, preceded by many 
years the Welsh revival under Howell Harris and the 
English revival under Wesley and Whitefield. In like 
manner the revival that touched Wales in 1859 and 
England in the early sixties had its birth in 1857 or 1858 
across the Atlantic, where it was the direct precursor of the 
great civil war and the emancipation of the slaves. The 
revival of 1859 to 18.61 coincided with the closing years 
of Whig domination, and was followed very speedily by a 



NATIONAL SIGNIFICANCE OF REVIVALS 25 

great movement of popular reform. There was no direct 
connection between the establishment of household suffrage 
and the penitent forms and prayer-meetings of 1859 and 
1 86 1. Post hoc is not profiler hoc. But when reform fol- 
lows revival, the plain man may be pardoned if he sees 
some connection between the two other than mere coinci- 
dence. The coincidence, if it be such, is surely very re- 
markable. The record of revivals in English history runs 
thus : 

REVIVAL RESULT 

1 2th century The Cistercian Magna Charta 

1 3th " The Friars Parliamentary Government 

I4th " Wycliffe The Peasant Revolt 

1 6th " Tyndale The Reformation 

Puritanism The Fall of Despotism and the 

Founding of New England 

Quakerism The Revolution of 1688 and 

the Founding of Pennsylvania 

1 8th Methodist The Era of Reform 

1 9th " American The Era of Democracy 

20th " Welsh Who can say ? 

To the observer of the phenomena of national growth 
and the evolution of society these periodical revivals of 
religion are as marked a phenomenon in the history of 
England, possibly of other lands, as the processions of 
the seasons. To appreciate the prophetic significance of a 
religious revival does not necessarily involve any accept- 
ance of the truth of the religion. All that we have to 
recognize is that the history of human progress in this 
country has always followed a certain course, which in its 
main features is as invariable as the great changes which 
make up our year. Always there is the winter of corrup- 
tion, of luxury, of indolence, of vice, during which the 
nation seems to have forgotten God, and to have given it- 



26 THE WELSH REVIVAL 

self up to drunkenness, gambling, avarice, and impurity. 
Men's hearts fail them for fear, and the love of many grows 
cold. It is the season when, through most of the day, the 
sun withholds his beams, and a bitter frost chills all the 
nobler aspirations of the soul. Through such a period of 
eclipse we have been passing during the last few years. 
But as the rainbow in the ancient story stands eternal in the 
heavens as a proof that summer and winter, seed-time and 
harvest, shall fail not, so after such periods of black and 
bitter wintry reaction always comes the gracious spring-tide 
with healing in its wings. 

And, as we have seen, the outward and visible sign of 
the coming of spring in the history of the nation is a great 
revival of religious earnestness a sudden and wide-spread 
outburst of evangelistic fervor. We may dislike many of 
its manifestations, as we dislike the winds of March or the 
showers of April, but they occur in almost identical fashion 
century after century. The form changes. The preaching 
of the Friars was not exactly the same as the preaching of 
the Methodists. Wycliffe's Poor Preachers and the Early 
Friends differed both in dialect and in doctrine. But at 
bottom all the English revivals have been identical. One 
and all represent the springtime of faith in the heart of 
man, a sudden rediscovery that life is given him not to 
please his senses, but to serve his Maker, and that time is 
but the vestibule of eternity. The sense of the reality of 
an ever-living God within, around, above, beneath, in 
whom we live and move and have our being, and the re- 
lated sense of a never-dying soul, whose destiny throughout 
numberless eons of the future years will be influenced by 
the way in which each day of our mortal probation is spent 
these two great truths are rediscovered afresh by the Eng- 
lish people every century. The truths blossom in the 
national heart at these times of spiritual spring-tide as the 



NATIONAL SIGNIFICANCE OF REVIVALS 27 

hawthorn blossoms on the hedge in the merry month of 
May. 

That the revival time passes is true. So passes spring- 
tide with its flowers. But as spring is followed by summer, 
so the revival of religion in this country has ever been fol- 
lowed by the summer of reform and the harvest of garnered 
fruit. It is this which ought to make every thoughtful per- 
son of all creeds, or of no creed, watch with the keenest 
interest the symptoms which indicate the coming of a 
national revival. Until this nation goes to the penitent 
form, it never really pulls itself together for any serious 
work. 



CHAPTER III 
WHAT I SAW IN WALES 

THE first notice of the existence of the revival that ap- 
peared in the press was published on November 7, 1904. 
It was not until December 10 that I went down to Cardiff, and 
was joined there by the Rev. Thomas Law, the Organizing 
Secretary of the National Council, and Gipsy Smith, the 
evangelist, whom I had not seen since I bade him farewell 
at Cape Town. On Sunday we went over to the mining 
village of Mardy and attended three services at which Mr. 
Evan Roberts was present. I returned to Cardiff that even- 
ing and came on to London next morning. 

As I wrote out before leaving Cardiff my report for The 
Daily Chronicle ', where it appeared on December 13, was 
interviewed early on Tuesday morning for The Methodist 
Times of December 15, and wrote on Tuesday afternoon 
a report for The Christian World of December 15, I can- 
not do better than reprint here these first clear impressions 
of what I found going on in South Wales. I will quote the 
interview first because it brings out more abruptly and viv- 
idly what seems to me the supernatural side of the re- 
vival. 

Interview in " The Methodist Times," 

December i^th. 

"Well, Mr. Stead, you 've been to the revival. What do 
you think of it? " 

" Sir," said Mr. Stead, " the question is not what I think 
of it, but what it thinks of me, of you, and all the rest of us. 
For it is a very real thing, this revival : a live thing which 

28 



WHAr I SAW IN WALES 29 

seems to have a power and a grip which may get hold 
of a good many of us who at present are mere spec- 
tators." 

" Do you think it is on the march, then? " 

" A revival is something like a revolution. It is apt to be 
wonderfully catching. But you can never say. Look at 
the way the revolutionary tempest swept over Europe in 
1848. But since then revolutions have not spread much 
beyond the border of the state in which they break out. We 
may have become immune to revivals, gospel-hardened or 
totally indifferent. I do n't think so. But I would not like 
to prophesy." 

" But in South Wales the revival is moving ? " 

"It reminded me," said Mr. Stead, "of the effect which 
travelers say is produced on the desert by the winds which 
propel the sand-storms, beneath which whole caravans have 
been engulfed. The wind springs up, no one knows from 
whence. Its eddying gusts lick up the sands, and soon the 
whole desert is filled with moving columns of sand, swaying 
and dancing and whirling as if they were instinct with life. 
Woe be to the unprotected traveler whose path the sand- 
storm traverses." 

" Then do you feel that we are in the track of the 
storm? " 

" Can our people sing? That is the question to be an- 
swered before you can decide that. Hitherto the revival has 
not strayed beyond the track of the singing people. It has 
followed the line of song, not of preaching. It has sung its 
way from one end of South Wales to the other. But, then, 
the Welsh are a nation of singing birds." 

" You speak as if you dreaded the revival coming your 
way? " 

" No, that is not so. Dread is not the right word. Awe 
expresses my sentiment better. For you are in the presence 



3 o THE WELSH REVIVAL 

of the unknown. I tell you it is a live thing this revival, 
and if it gets hold of the people in London, for instance, it 
will make a pretty considerable shaking up." 
" But surely it will be all to the good ? " 
" Yes, for the good or for those who are all good. But 
what about those who are not good, or who, like the most of 
us, are a pretty mixed lot ? Henry Ward Beecher used to 
say that if God were to answer the Lord's Prayer and 
cause his will to be done in earth as it is in heaven, there 
were streets in New York which would be wrecked as if they 
had been struck by a tornado. Of course, it may be all to 
the good that we should be all shaken up, and tornadoes 
clear the air ; earthquakes are wholesome, but they are 
not particularly welcome to those who are at ease in Zion." 
"Sand-storms in the desert, tornadoes, earthquakes ! 
Really, Mr. Stead, your metaphors would imply that 
your experiences in South Wales have been pretty bad ?" 
"No," said Mr. Stead, "not bad at all. Do you re- 
member what the little Quaker child said, when the Scottish 
express rushed at full speed through the station on the plat- 
form on which he was standing ? * Were you not frightened, 
my boy? ' said his father. ' Oh, no,' said the little chap, 
'a. feeling of sweet peace stole into my mind.' I felt like 
that rather. But the thing is awesome. You do n't believe 
in ghosts ? " 

" Not much. I '11 believe them when I see one." 
"Well, you have read ghost stories, and can imagine 
what you would feel if you were alone at midnight in the 
haunted chamber of some old castle, and you heard slow 
and stealthy steps stealing along the corridor where the visit- 
ant from the other world was said to walk. If you go to 
South Wales and watch the revival you will feel pretty much 
like that. There is something there from the Other World. 
You cannot say whence it came or whither it is going, but 



WHAT I SAW IN WALES 31 

it moves and lives and reaches for you all the time. You 
see men and women go down in sobbing agony before your 
eyes as the invisible Hand clutches at their hearts. And 
you shudder. It 's pretty grim, I tell you. If you are 
afraid of strong emotions you 'd better give the revival a 
wide berth." 

" But is it all emotion? Is there no teaching? " 
' ' Precious little. Do you think that teaching is what 
people want in a revival ? These people, all the people in a 
land like ours, are taught to death, preached to insensibility. 
They all know the essential truths. They know that they 
are not living as they ought to live, and no amount of teach- 
ing will add anything to that conviction. To hear some 
people talk you would imagine that the best way to get a 
sluggard out of bed is to send a tract on astronomy showing 
him that according to the fixed and eternal law the sun will 
rise at a certain hour in the morning. The sluggard does 
not deny it. He is entirely convinced of it. But what he 
knows is that it is precious cold at sunrise on a winter's 
morning, and it is very snug and warm between the blankets. 
What the sluggard needs is to be well shaken, and in case of 
need to be pulled out of bed. ' Roused,' the revival calls 
it. And the revival is a rouser rather than a teacher. And 
that is why I think those churches which want to go on 
dozing in the ancient ways had better hold a special series 
of prayer-meetings that the revival may be prevented coming 
their way." 

" Then I take it that your net impressions were favorable? " 
" How could they be otherwise? Did I not feel the pull 
of that unseen Hand ? And have I not heard the glad out- 
burst of melody that hailed the confession of some who in 
very truth had found salvation? There is a wonderful 
spontaneity about it all, and so far its fruits have been good, 
and only good. ' ' 



32 THE WELSH REVIVAL 

"Will it last?" 

" Nothing lasts forever in this mutable world, and the 
revival will no more last than the blossom lasted in the field 
in springtime. But if the blossom had not come and gone, 
there would be no bread in the world to-day. And as it is 
with the bread which Mr. Chamberlain would tax, so it is 
with that other bread which is the harvest that will be gath- 
ered in long after this revival has taken its place in history. 
But if the analogy of all previous revivals holds good, this re- 
ligious awakening will be influencing for good the lives of 
numberless men and women who will be living and toiling 
and carrying on the work of this God's world of ours long 
after you and I have been gathered to our fathers. ' ' 



The report which I wrote for The Christian World was 
written for people inside the churches, who might naturally 
be supposed to be interested in the reality of the spiritual 
side of the revival. 

From "The Christian World," 

December i$th. 

Will the revival in South Wales be like a bonfire on 
ice or will it set the heather afire, kindling a blaze which 
no man can extinguish? The answer is that no one can 
prophesy confidently as to what the future may bring to us, 
excepting that it will always both disappoint and exceed 
our expectations. The revival in Wales will, in some places, 
be like a bonfire on ice, which speedily expires for lack of 
fuel, and yet in other places it may set the heather on fire 
and produce quite incalculable results. 

I cannot profess to have made any exhaustive study of 
the revival. Until last Saturday I had only followed it in 
the newspapers. But from Saturday night till Monday 



WHAT I SAW IN WALES 33 

morning I employed every available moment in observing 
it and in interviewing those who had been in it from the 
first. I was accompanied throughout the whole of my brief 
tour by two men who have had as much experience of mis- 
sion work of a revivalist nature as any one outside the Sal- 
vation Army. One of them, Gipsy Smith, had come over 
the same day as I did on the same errand. The other, the 
Rev. Thomas Law, Organizing Secretary of the Free Church 
Federation, has been in Wales for some time, and had ex- 
cellent opportunities of studying the question in various 
districts in South Wales. I think I am justified in saying 
that both Mr. Law and Gipsy Smith are absolutely at one 
with me in the conclusions which I embodied in my report 
to The Daily Chronicle of Tuesday. During my stay in 
Wales I had the advantage of hearing the opinions of Prin- 
cipal Edwards and of Commissioner Nicol, of the Salvation 
Army, and of several other ministers who have been actively 
engaged in Christian service in the districts where the re- 
vival has taken place. After my return I had a long con- 
sultation with Mr. Bramwell Booth, who knows the district 
well, and who had visited Cardiff on Saturday, where he 
met members of his staff from all parts of South Wales, for 
the express purpose of ascertaining on the spot what was 
the exact significance of the revival. I also saw the special 
emissary despatched by the Rev. F. B. Meyer for the pur- 
pose of spying out the land, and heard from him the impres- 
sion produced on his mind by what he had seen and heard. 
The reports in the two local newspapers, which occasionally 
fill five columns and always fill two or three, also supplied ad- 
ditional confirmatory evidence as to the grip which the move- 
ment has taken on the Welsh. I attended three protracted 
meetings on the Sunday, and I had an hour with Mr. Evan 
Roberts. I am careful to particularize all my sources of 
information in order that my readers may know exactly 



34 THE WELSH REVIVAL 

what data I have to go upon in drawing up this report for 
the readers of The Christian World. My own experience 
may be of the slightest, and my visit was wonderfully brief. 
But I think that I may claim that there are few Free Church- 
men in the United Kingdom who would not admit that I 
could not possibly have had more expert advisers or dispas- 
sionate witnesses than the persons whom I have named. 
Nor do I think that any one of them would demur in the 
least to any statement of fact or broad deduction from the 
facts which will be found in this article. Had time per- 
mitted I would have gladly submitted my report to each 
and all of them in proofs, nor do I think that they would 
have made any material alteration. 

This being so, I take it that the Christian churches in 
England may accept it as now being absolutely beyond all 
serious dispute that the revival in South Wales is a very 
real and a very genuine thing. That there may have been 
here and there instances of unwisdom and of extravagance 
is possible. They have been very few and unimportant. 
The Welsh are an emotional race, and they are apt to 
demonstrate their feelings more effusively than phlegmatic 
Saxons. But I certainly saw nothing of that kind that 
might not be paralleled in mission services in England. 
The fact is, there has been so little handle given to the 
enemy who ever is hungering for occasion to blaspheme, 
that the revival, so far, lacks that one great testimony in its 
favor which all good causes have in the furious abuse of 
those who may compendiously and picturesquely be de- 
scribed as the staff-officers of the devil. "Woe unto you, 
when all men shall speak well of you ! " was true of revivals 
as of anything else. The revival has, so far, had little of 
that cause for rejoicing that is supplied by persecution and 
abuse. The testimony in its favor is almost wearisomely 
monotonous. Magistrates and policemen, journalists and 



WHAr I SAW IN WALES 35 

employers of labor, Salvationists and ordained ministers, 
all say the same thing, to wit, that the revival is working 
mightily for good wherever it has broken out. 

Of course, the Doubting Thomases of the land will shake 
their sceptical heads, and, when convinced against their will 
that the revival is bearing good fruit, will ask whether it 
will last. To which I do not hesitate to reply that some of 
its fruits will last as long as the human soul endures. That 
a good deal of the seed which, having fallen on stony 
ground, has sprung up speedily will presently wither away 
is a matter of course. It was so when the Parable of the 
Sower was spoken ; it is so to-day. But the cavilers forget 
that it is a better thing for seed to spring up, even if it does 
wither, than for it never to spring up at all. Even if the 
farmer does not get the full corn in the ear, the green stalk 
with its succulent leaves will make capital fodder for his 
stock. Most of the seed sown at times when we hear of no 
showers of blessings to fertilize the soil never springs up at 
all. Little as the cavilers about the evanescent nature of 
revivals realize it, they are appealing to -one of the most 
antiquated notions of a narrow orthodoxy. Those who im- 
agine that the only object of the Christian gospel is to save 
a man's soul from the everlasting burnings may reasonably 
object that a revival is of no good if, after having roused 
the sinner, it does not keep him soundly saved until the 
hour and article of death. It is in that case very much like 
taking out an insurance policy and letting it lapse by for- 
getting to pay the premiums regularly till death. But there 
are very few who regard conversion as an insurance policy 
against hell-fire. Hence every single day or week or month 
or year is all to the good. It is, of course, best of all when 
a consecrated life is crowned by a triumphant death. But 
it is not a bad thing on the contrary, it is a very good 
thing to raise human lives to a higher moral level for a 



36 THE WELSH REVIVAL 

comparatively short period, even if after that time they all 
slide back. It is better to have lived well for a year than 
never to have been above the mire at all. As a matter of 
fact, most of the best men of the older generation in Wales 
to-day were brought in when quite youths in the great 
revival of 1859. 

So far as I could discover, the movement is in very good 
hands so far as it is in any hands at all save those of the 
invisible Spirit to which all the revivalists constantly appeal. 
Never was there a religious movement so little indebted to 
the guiding brain of its leaders. It seems to be going "on 
its own." '' There is no commanding human genius inspir- 
ing the advance. Ministers, each in his own church, 
open the meetings. But when once they are started they 
11 obey the Spirit.'*..- It reminds one of the Quakers in more 
ways than one. In the seventeenth century the Friends 
were the revivalists of the time. With the exception of the 
singing, they would feel themselves thoroughly at home in 
South Wales to-day. In most missions tune is everything. 
In South Wales the leading role is taken by the third Person 
of the Trinity. So jealous are they of quenching the Spirit 
that the Tory daily paper just think of it the organ of 
the Established Church and ease and order and all the rest 
of the conventions actually fumed and fretted because at 
one meeting some persons who were giving unbridled rein to 
their spiritual impulses, to the annoyance of the whole con- 
gregation, were asked to restrain their exuberance of their 
demonstrations ! If this thing goes on we shall see The 
Times and The Guardian reproving General Booth for 
endeavoring to repress the excesses of excitement at all- 
night meetings. 

I have said that the early Friends would be at home in 
the Welsh valleys with the exception of the singing. It is a 
great exception. For the special note of the revival is that 



WHAT I SAW IN WALES 37 

the gospel message is being sung rather than preached. 
And such singing ! The whole congregation sing as if 
they were making melody in their hearts to the Lord. The 
sermon is a poor thing compared with the psalm and hymn 
and spiritual song. The Welsh have hymns of their own, 
which were strange to me. I have no musical ear, but the 
rhythm and the cadence of some of these Welsh tunes linger 
in my memory as the murmur of the wave in the convolu- 
tions of the shell. There is one beginning with the Welsh 
equivalent for " Holy breezes," which was a great favorite ; 
and so is another which gives thanks to the all-merciful God 
for remembering us poor creatures who are as the dust 
of the earth. But most of them were the old familiar 
hymns of every mission service. Occasionally they sang 
"Lead, kindly Light," but much more frequently " Jesus, 
lover of my soul," "I need thee every hour," "Lord, I 
hear of showers of blessings," all in Welsh, of course, 
although very often, after singing the chorus over and over 
again in Welsh, they would sing it once or twice in English. 
Among the solos there was Mr. Sankey's "Ninety and 
nine," which, although turned out of the revised Methodist 
Hymn Book, is written on the hearts of the Welsh. " Jesus 
of Nazareth passes by " is another favorite solo. The only 
new song taken over from the Torrey and Alexander Mis- 
sion was sung over and over again : 

Tell mother I '11 be there 

In answer to her prayer, 
This message, blessed Saviour, to her bear. 

Tell mother I '11 be there, 

Heaven's joys with her to share, 
Oh, tell my darling mother I '11 be there. 

In the Gospel the Prodigal Son comes back to his father. 
It is perhaps an indication of the swing of the slow pendu- 



38 THE WELSH REVIVAL 

lum back to the days of the matriarchate that in Wales to- 
day the father takes a back seat. It is the mother who is 
always to the front. 

Nor is that the only welcome indication of the toppling of 
the hateful and unchristian ascendancy of the male. The 
old objection of many of the Welsh churches to the equal 
ministry of women has gone by the board. The Singing 
Sisters who surround Mr. Evan Roberts are as indispensable 
as Mr. Sankey was to Mr. Moody. Women pray, sing, 
testify and speak as freely as men no one daring to make 
them afraid. The Salvation Army has not labored in vain. 

There is no inquiry room, no penitent form. The 
wrestle with unbelief, the combat with the evil one for the 
soul of the convicted sinner, goes on in the midst of the 
people. It is all intensely dramatic ; sometimes unspeak- 
ably tragic ; at other times full of exultant triumph. Mr. 
Evan Roberts, toward the close of the meeting, asks all who 
from their hearts believe and confess their Saviour to rise. 
At the meetings at which I was present nearly everybody 
was standing. Then for the sitting remnant the storm of 
prayer rises to the mercy seat. When one after another 
rises to his feet, glad strains of jubilant song burst from the 
watching multitude. No one has a hymn-book; no one 
gives out a hymn. The congregation seems moved by a 
simultaneous impulse. It is all very wonderful, sometimes 
almost eery in its suggestiveness of the presence of Another 
whom no eye can see, but who moves on the wings of the 
wind. 

Who can say to what this thing may not grow ? Who 
can put bounds to the flood of awakened enthusiasm ? One 
thing is certain no one could wish to erect a barrier save 
those who do not love their fellow men. 



WHAT I SAW IN WALES 39 

The report which I wrote for The Daily Chronicle was 
written for the general public, who are comparatively indif- 
ferent to the spiritual side of the revival, but who regard its 
social and psychological aspects with a mild degree of 
interest. 

From " The Daily Chronicle " 

December igth. 

As springtime precedes summer, and seed-time harvest, 
so every great onward step in the social and political prog- 
ress of Great Britain has ever been preceded by a national 
revival of religion. The sequence is as unmistakable as it 
is invariable. It was as constant when England was Cath- 
olic as it has been since the Reformation. 

Hence it is not necessary to be evangelical, Christian, or 
even religious, to regard with keen interest every stirring of 
popular enthusiasm that takes the familiar form of a revival. 
Men may despise it, hate it, or fear it, but there is no mis- 
taking its significance. It is the precursor of progress, the 
herald of advance. It may be as evanescent as the blossom 
of the orchard, but without it there would be no fruit. 

The question, therefore, which I set out to South Wales 
to discuss with those who are in the midst of what is called 
The Welsh Revival was whether this popular stir and wide- 
spread awakening might be regarded as the forerunner of a 
great national nay, possibly of a still wider movement, 
which might bring in its wake social and political changes 
profoundly improving the condition of the human race. 

1 Nor would I like to venture to predict how long or how 
short a time it will be before that heading in its turn will 
have to give way to the simple title of "The Revival," 
which will be neither in the West alone, nor in the East, but 
which will spread over the whole land as the waters cover 
the face of the mighty deep. Of course, the signs of the 



40 THE WELSH REVIVAL 

times may be misleading, and that which seems most prob- 
able may never happen. But writing to-day in the midst of 
it all, I would say with all earnestness, " Look out ! " 

" The British Empire," as Admiral Fisher is never tired 
of repeating, "floats upon the British navy." But the 
British navy steams on Welsh coal. The driving force of 
all our battleships is hewn from the mines of these Welsh 
valleys by the men amongst whom this remarkable religious 
awakening has taken place. On Sunday morning, as the 
slow train crawled down the gloomy valleys for there was 
the mirk of coming snow in the air, and there was no sun in 
the sky I could not avoid the obvious and insistent sug- 
gestion of the thought that Welsh religious enthusiasm may 
be destined to impart as compelling an impulse to the 
churches of the world as Welsh coal supplies to its navies. 

Nor was the force of the suggestion weakened when, after 
attending three prolonged services at Mardy, a village of 
5,000 inhabitants, lying on the other side of Pontypridd, I 
found the flame of Welsh religious enthusiasm as smokeless 
as its coal. There are no advertisements, no brass bands, 
no posters, no huge tents. All the paraphernalia of the 
got-up job are conspicuous by their absence. 

Neither is there any organization, nor is there a director, 
at least none that is visible to the human eye. In the 
crowded chapels they even dispense with instrumental 
music. On Sunday night no note issued from the organ 
pipes. There was no need of instruments, for in and 
around and above and beneath surged the all-pervading 
thrill and throb of a multitude praying, and singing as they 
prayed. 

The vast congregations were as soberly sane, as orderly, 
and at least as reverent as any congregation I ever saw be- 
neath the dome of St. Paul's, when I used to go to hear 
Canon Liddon, the Chrysostom of the English pulpit. But 



WHAT I SAW IN WALES 41 

it was aflame with a passionate religious enthusiasm, the 
like of which I have never seen in St. Paul's. Tier above 
tier, from the crowded aisles to the loftiest gallery, sat or 
stood, as necessity dictated, eager hundreds of serious men 
and thoughtful women, their eyes riveted upon the plat- 
form or upon whatever other part of the building was the 
storm center of the meeting. 

There was absolutely nothing wild, violent, hysterical, 
unless it be hysterical for the laboring breast to heave with 
sobbing that cannot be repressed, and the throat to choke 
with emotion as a sense of the awful horror and shame of a 
wasted life suddenly bursts upon the soul. On all sides 
there was the solemn gladness of men and women upon 
whose eyes has dawned the splendor of a new day, the fore- 
taste of whose glories they are enjoying in the quickened 
sense of human fellowship and a keen, glad zest added to 
their own lives. 

The most thoroughgoing materialist who resolutely and 
forever rejects as inconceivable the existence of the soul in 
man, and to whom " the universe is but the infinite empty 
eye-socket of a dead God," could not fail to be impressed 
by the pathetic sincerity of these men ; nor, if he were just, 
could he refuse to recognize that out of their faith in the 
creed which he has rejected they have drawn, and are draw- 
ing, a motive power that makes for righteousness, and not 
only for righteousness, but for the joy of living, that he 
would be powerless to give them. 

Employers tell me that the quality of the work the miners 
are putting in has improved. Waste is less, men go to their 
daily toil with a new spirit of gladness in their labor. In 
the long, dim galleries of the mine, where once the hauliers 
swore at their ponies in Welshified English terms of blas- 
phemy, there is now but to be heard the haunting melody of 
the revival music. The pit ponies, like the American mules, 



42 THE WELSH REVIVAL 

having been driven by oaths and curses since they first bore 
the yoke, are being retrained to do their work without the 
incentive of profanity. 

There is less drinking, less idleness, less gambling. Men 
record with almost incredulous amazement how one foot- 
ball player after another has foresworn cards and drink and 
the gladiatorial games, and is living a sober and godly life, 
putting his energy into the revival. More wonderful still, 
and almost incredible to those who know how journalism 
lives and thrives upon gambling, and how Toryism is broad- 
based upon the drinking habits of the people, the Tory daily 
paper of South Wales has devoted its columns day after day 
to reporting and defending the movement which declares war 
to the death against both gambling and drink. 

How came this strange uplift of the earnestness of a whole 
community ? Who can say ? The wind bloweth where it 
listeth. Some tell you one thing, some another. All agree 
that it began some few months ago in Cardiganshire, eddied 
hither and thither, spreading like fire from valley to valley, 
until, as one observer said to me, "Wherever it came 
from, or however it began, all South Wales to-day is in a 
flame." 

One report says that the first outward and visible sign that 
there was a new power and spirit among the people was wit- 
nessed at a meeting in a country chapel in Cardiganshire. 
The preacher, after an earnest appeal to the unconverted, 
besought those of his hearers whose hearts were moved 
within them to testify before the congregation their decision 
to serve the Lord. A long and painful pause followed. 
Again came the solemn appeal. Again the embarrassing 
silence. 

But it was broken after a pause by the rising of a girl, a 
young Welsh woman, who with trembling accents spoke up 
and said, " If no one else will, then I must say that I do 



WHAT I SAW IN WALES 43 

love ray Lord Jesus Christ with all my heart." The ice 
was broken. One after another stood up and made public 
confessions with tears and thanksgiving. 

So it began. So it is going on. "If no one else, then I 
must." It is " Here am I : send me ! " This public self- 
consecration, this definite and decisive avowal of a determi- 
nation to put under their feet their dead past of vice and sin 
and indifference, and to reach out toward a higher ideal of 
human existence, is going on everywhere in South Wales. 
Nor, if we think of it sanely and look at it in the right per- 
spective, is there a nobler spectacle appealing more directly 
to the highest instincts of our nature to be seen in all the 
world to-day. 

At Mardy, where I spent Sunday, the miners are volun- 
tarily taxing themselves this year three-halfpence in the 
pound of their weekly wages to build an institute, public 
hall, library, and reading-room. By their express request 
the money is deducted from their wages on pay-day. They 
have created a library of 2,000 books, capitally selected and 
well used. They have about half-a-dozen chapels and 
churches, a cooperative society, and the usual appliances of 
civilization. They have every outward and visible sign of 
industrial prosperity. It is a mining village pure and 
simple, industrial democracy in its nakedest primitive form. 

In this village I attended three meetings on Sunday two 
and a half hours in the morning, two and a half hours in 
the afternoon, and two hours at night, when I had to leave 
to catch the train. At all these meetings the same kind of 
thing went on the same kind of congregations assembled, 
the same strained, intense emotion was manifest. Aisles 
were crowded. Pulpit stairs were packed, w\&mirabile. 
dictu ! two-thirds of the congregation were men, and at 
least one-half young men. 

"There," said one," is the hope and the glory of the 



44- THE WELSH REVIVAL 

movement." Here and there is a gray head. But the ma- 
jority of the congregation were stalwart young miners, who 
gave the meeting all the fervor and swing and enthusiasm 
of youth. The revival had been going on in Mardy for a 
fortnight. All the churches had been holding services every 
night with great results. At the Baptist church they had to 
report the addition of nearly fifty members, fifty were wait- 
ing for baptism, thirty-five backsliders had been re- 
claimed. 

In Mardy the fortnight's services had resulted in five hun- 
dred conversions. And this, be it noted, when each place 
of worship was going "on its own." Mr. Evan Roberts, 
the so-called boy preacher of the revival, and his singing 
sisterhood did not reach Mardy until the Sunday of my 
visit. 

I have called Evan Roberts the so-called boy preacher, 
because he is neither a boy nor a preacher. He is a tall, 
graceful, good-looking young man of twenty-six, with a 
pleading eye and a most winsome smile. If he is a boy, he 
is a six-foot boy, and six-footers are usually past their boy- 
hood. As he is not a boy, neither is he a preacher. He 
talks simply, unaffectedly, earnestly, now and then, but he 
makes no sermons, and preaching is emphatically not the 
note of this revival in the West. If it has been by the 
foolishness of preaching men have been saved heretofore, 
that agency seems as if it were destined to take a back seat 
in the present movement. 

The revival is borne along upon billowing waves of sacred 
song. It is to other revivals what the Italian opera is to the 
ordinary theater. It is the singing, not the preaching, that 
is the instrument which is most efficacious in striking the 
hearts of men. In this respect these services in the Welsh 
chapel reminded me strangely of the beautiful liturgical 
services of the Greek Church, notably in St. Isaac of St. 



WHAT I SAW IN WALES 45 

Petersburg on Easter morn, and in the receptions of the pil- 
grim at the Troitski Monastery, near Moscow. 

The most extraordinary thing about the meetings which I 
attended, was the extent to which they were absolutely with- 
out any human direction or leadership. " We must obey 
the Spirit," is the watchword of Evan Roberts, and he is as 
obedient as the humblest of his followers. The meetings 
open after any amount of preliminary singing, while the 
congregation is assembling by the reading of a chapter or 
a psalm. Then it is go-as-you-please for two hours or more. 

And the amazing thing is that it does go and does not 
get entangled in what might seem to be inevitable confusion. 
Three-fourths of the meeting consist of singing. No one 
uses a hymn-book. No one gives out a hymn. The last 
person to control the meeting in any way is Mr. Evan 
Roberts. People pray and sing, give testimony, exhort as 
the Spirit moves them. As a study of the psychology of 
crowds, I have seen nothing like it. You feel that the 
thousand or fifteen hundred persons before you have be- 
come merged into one myriad-headed but single-souled 
personality. 

You can watch what they call the influence of the power 
of the Spirit playing over the crowded congregation as an 
eddying wind plays over the surface of a pond. If any one 
carried away by his feelings prays too long, or if any one 
when speaking fails to touch the right note, some one it 
may be anybody commences to sing. For a moment there 
is a hesitation as if the meeting were in doubt as to its de- 
cision, whether to hear the speaker, or to continue to join in 
the prayer, or whether to sing. If it decides to hear and to 
pray, the singing dies away. If, on the other hand, as it 
usually happens, the people decide to sing, the chorus swells 
in volume until it drowns all other sound. 

A very remarkable instance of this abandonment of the 



46 THE WELSH REVIVAL 

meeting to the spontaneous impulse, not merely of those 
within the walls, but of those crowded outside, who were 
unable to get in, occurred on Sunday night. Twice the 
order of proceeding, if order it can be called, was altered by 
the crowd outside, who, being moved by some mysterious 
impulse, started a hymn on their own account, which was at 
once taken up by the congregation within. On one of these 
occasions Evan Roberts was addressing the meeting. He at 
once gave way, and the singing became general. 

The prayers are largely autobiographical, and some of 
them intensely dramatic. On one occasion an impassioned 
and moving appeal to the Deity was accompanied through- 
out by an exquisitely rendered hymn, sung by three of the 
Singing Sisters. It was like the undertone of the orchestra 
when some leading singer is holding the house. 

The Singing Sisters there are five of them, one, Mme. 
Morgan, who was a professional singer are as conspicuous 
figures in the movement as Evan Roberts himself. Some of 
their solos are wonders of dramatic and musical appeal. 
Nor is the effect lessened by the fact that the singers, like the 
speakers, sometimes break down in sobs and tears. The 
meeting always breaks out into a passionate and consoling 
song, until the soloist, having recovered her breath, rises 
from her knees and resumes her song. 

The praying and singing are both wonderful, but more 
impressive than either are' the breaks which occur when 
utterance can no more, and the sobbing in the silence mo- 
mentarily heard is drowned in a tempest of melody. No 
need for an organ. The assembly was its own organ as a 
thousand sorrowing or rejoicing hearts found expression in 
the sacred psalmody of their native hills. 

Repentance, open confession, intercessory prayer, and, 
above all else, this marvelous musical liturgy a liturgy un- 
written but heartfelt, a mighty chorus rising like the thunder 



WHAT I SAW IN WALES 47 

of the surge on a rock-bound shore, ever and anon broken 
by the flute-like note of the Singing Sisters, whose melody 
was as sweet and as spontaneous as the music of the throstle 
in the grove or the lark in the sky. And all this vast, 
quivering, throbbing, singing, praying, exultant multitude 
intensely conscious of the all-pervading influence of some 
invisible reality now for the first time moving palpable 
though not tangible in their midst. 

They called it the Spirit of God. Those who have not 
witnessed it may call it what they will ; I am inclined to 
agree with those on the spot. For man, being, according 
to the orthodox, evil, can do no good thing of himself, so, 
as Cardinal Manning used to say. " Wherever you behold a 
good thing, there you see the working of the Holy Ghost." 
And the revival, as I saw it, was emphatically a good thing. 



CHAPTER IV 
EVAN ROBERTS 

THE revival in South Wales is not the work of any one 
man or of any number of men, but the most conspicuous 
figure in this strange religious awakening is undoubtedly that 
of the young Welsh collier-student, Mr. Evan Roberts. 
Until last November no one had heard of him. To-day his 
name is on every tongue in Wales, and everywhere in all the 
land people are asking what manner of man this new evan- 
gelist may be. 

Mr. Evan Roberts is a tall, graceful young man of twenty- 
six, who, until last year, was at work as a collier in the 
Broadoak Colliery, Lough or, a Welsh village near which an 
express train was wrecked a few months ago, with great loss 
of life. He is the son of Methodist parents, and attended 
the Movrah Methodist Chapel in Loughor. Like many 
Welshmen, he is a poet, and contributed many fine verses 
to the Golofn Gymraag in The Cardiff Times under the 
name of " Bwlchydd." He was always of a pious dispo- 
sition, but according to his own account, although he was a 
church member and a worker in the Sunday-school, he was 
not a Christian until little more than fifteen months ago. 
His own words at Trecynon, on November i4th, were as 
follows : 

Some people had said he was a Methodist. He did not 
know what he was. Sectarianism melted in the fire of the 
Holy Spirit, and all men who believed became one happy 
family. For years he was a faithful member of the church, 

48 



EVAN ROBERTS 49 

a zealous worker, and a free giver. But he had recently 
discovered that he was not a Christian, and there were 
thousands like him. It was only since he had made that 
discovery that a new light had come into his life. That 
same light was shining upon all men if they would but open 
their eyes and their hearts. 

How did he make that discovery? Various accounts 
have been given of the awakening of Evan Roberts. Ac- 
cording to one account, he was present at an address 
delivered by the Rev. F. B. Meyer at a religious Conven- 
tion in August, 1903, when a pledge was given by several 
present, including Roberts, that they would spend a whole 
day every month praying for a revival. According to Mr. 
Roberts' own account, he seems to have been chiefly exer- 
cised in his devotions by a melancholy conviction of the 
failure of Christianity. He was then living at Loughor, 
working in the mine and spending his leisure in studying for 
the ministry. He used to take his Bible down the mine, 
and while at work would put it away in some convenient 
hole or nook near his working place, ready to his hand when 
he could snatch a moment or two to scan its beloved pages. 
A serious explosion occurred one day. The future Welsh 
revivalist escaped practically unhurt, but the leaves of his 
Bible were scorched by the fiery blast. 

It was during the latter months of his stay at Loughor, 
before he went to the preparatory school or college at New- 
castle Emlyn, that the light dawned upon him in the privacy 
of his own room. He seems to have been very fervent in 
prayer. A Mr. Davies, a Newport Baptist, is the authority 
for the statement that Roberts was turned out of his lodg- 
ings by his landlady, who thought that in his enthusiasm he 
was possessed or somewhat mad. He spent hours praying 
and preaching in his rooms, until the lady became afraid of 
him and asked him to leave. The following narrative I had 



50 THE WELSH REVIVAL 

from his own lips when I met him at tea on Sunday after- 
noon at Mardy. I asked him 

" Can you tell me how you began to take to this work? " 

" Oh, yes, that I will," said Mr. Roberts, " if you wish 
to hear of it. For a long, long time I was much troubled in 
my soul and my heart by thinking over the failure of Chris- 
tianity. Oh, it seemed such a failure such a failure and 
I prayed and prayed, but nothing seemed to give me any 
relief ! But one night, after I had been in great distress 
praying about this, I went to sleep, and at one o'clock in 
the morning suddenly I was waked up out of my sleep, and 
I found myself, with unspeakable joy and awe, in the very 
presence of Almighty God. And for the space of four 
hours I was privileged to speak face to face with him as a 
man speaks face to face with a friend. At five o'clock it 
seemed to me as if I again returned to earth." ' 

" Were you not dreaming ? " I asked. 

"No, I was wide awake. And it was not only that 
morning, but every morning for three or four months. Al- 
ways I enjoyed four hours of that wonderful communion with 
God. I cannot describe it. I felt it, and it seemed to 

1 Mr. J. Addington Symonds records a somewhat similar experience 
when under chloroform. He says : " I thought that I was near death, 
when suddenly my soul became aware of God, who was manifestly 
dealing with me, handling me, so to speak, in an intense personal 
present reality. I felt him streaming in like light upon me. I can- 
not describe the ecstasy I felt." \Vhen the effect of the anaesthetic 
faded, he longed for death, rather than to lose " that long dateless 
ecstasy of vision " in which he felt " the very God in all purity and 
tenderness and truth and absolute love." He adds: " The question 
remains, is it possible that the inner sense of reality which succeeded 
when my flesh was dead to impressions from without to the ordinary 
sense of physical relations was not a delusion but an actual experience ? 
Is it possible that I in that moment felt what some of the saints have 
said they always felt, the undemonstrable but irrefragable certainty of 
God ? " Sy mo-lids' s works, cited by James, p. 392. 

See also the experiences of Madame Guyon : " It seemed to me 
that God came at the precise time and woke me from sleep in order 
that I might enjoy him." Ib., p. 277. 



EF4N ROBERTS 51 

change all my nature, and I saw things in a different light, 
and I knew that God was going to work in the land, and not 
this land only, but in all the world. ' ' * 

"Excuse me," I said, "but, as an old interviewer, may 
I ask if, when the mystic ecstasy passed, you put on 
paper all that you remembered of these times of com- 
munion? " 

"No, I wrote nothing at all," 2 said Mr. Roberts. "It 
went on all the time until I had to go to Newcastle Emlyn 
to the college to prepare for the ministry. I dreaded to go, 
for fear I should lose these four hours with God every 
morning. But I had to go, and it happened as I feared. 
For a whole month he came no more, and I was in dark- 
ness. And my heart became as a stone. Even the sight 
of the cross brought no tears to my eyes. So it continued 
until, to my great joy, he returned to me, and I had again 

1 This mystic vision, which enables a man to comprehend the secret 
of God in the creation and ordering of the universe, was common to 
all the great saints, and also to one not usually classed as a saint, 
Walt Whitman. George Fox was so confident that the nature and 
virtues of all things had been opened to him by the Lord that he 
actually contemplated practising physic for the good of mankind. 
Ignatius Loyola, on the steps of the choir of the Dominican church, 
saw in a distinct manner the plan of Divine Wisdom in the creation 
of the world. St. Teresa says that it was granted to her one day to 
perceive in one instant how all things are seen and contained in God. 
Jacob Boehme, in one quarter of a day in trance, saw and knew the 
being of all things. Whitman wrote : 

" I mind how once we (my soul and I) lay, such a transparent sum- 
mer morning, 

Swiftly arose to spread around me the peace and knowledge 

That pass all the argument of the earth ; 

And I know that the hand of God is the promise of my own ; 

And I know that the Spirit of God is the brother of my own, 

And that all the men ever born are also my brothers, and the 
women my sisters and lovers, 

And that a kelson of the creation is love." Id., p. 396. 

2 Professor James writing on the mystical absorption of the Sufis 
into God says : " The incommunicableness of the transport is the 
key-note of all mysticism. Mystical truth exists for the individual who 
has the transport, but for no one else." Symond's -works, etc., p. 404. 



52 THE WELSH RE7IVAL 

the glorious communion. And he said I must go and 
speak to my people in my own village. But I did not go. 
I did not feel as if I could go to speak to my own people." 

"May I ask," I said, "if he of whom you speak ap- 
peared to you as Jesus Christ? " 

"No," said Mr. Roberts, "not so; it was the personal 
God, not as Jesus." 

" As God the Father Almighty? " I said. 

" Yes," said Mr. Roberts, " and the Holy Spirit." ' 

"Pardon me," I said, "but I interrupted you. Pray go 



on." 



"I did not go to my people, but I was troubled and ill at 
ease. And one Sunday, as I sat in the chapel, I could not 
fix my mind upon the service, for always before my eyes I 
saw, as in a vision, the schoolroom in my own village. 
And there, sitting in rows before me, I saw my old com- 
panions and all the young people, and I saw myself address- 
ing them. I shook my head impatiently, and strove to 
drive away this vision, but it always came back. And I 
heard a voice in my inward ear as plain as anything, say- 
ing, ' Go and speak to these people. ' And for a long time 
I would not. But the pressure became greater and greater, 
and I could hear nothing of the sermon. Then at last I 
could resist no longer, and I said, ' Well, Lord, if it is thy 
will, I will go. ' Then instantly the vision vanished, and 
the whole chapel became filled with light so dazzling 
that I could faintly see the minister in the pulpit, and 



1 George Fox used to converse with Jesus Christ ; but St. Teresa, 
like Evan Roberts, spoke with God. She says : " God establishes 
himself in the interior of the soul in such a way that when she returns 
to herself it is wholly impossible for her to doubt that she has been in 
God and God in her. This truth remained so strongly impressed on 
her that even though many years should pass without the condition re- 
turning, she can neither forget the favor she received nor doubt of the 
reality." Symoud's works, etc., p. 409. 



EVAN ROBERTS 53 

between him and me the glory as the light of the sun in 
heaven." 1 

"And then you went home ? " 

"No; I went to my tutor, and told him all things, and 
asked him if he believed that it was of God or of the 
devil ? And he said the devil does not put good thoughts 
into the mind. I must go and obey the heavenly vision. 
So I went back to my own village, and I saw my own 
minister, and him also I told. And he said that I might 
try and see what I could do, but that the ground was stony, 
and the task would be hard." 

"Did you find it so?" 

" I asked the young people to come together, for I wanted 
to talk to them. They came, and I stood up to talk to 
them, and, behold, it was even as I had seen it in the church 
at Newcastle Emlyn. The young people sat as I had seen 
them sitting, all together in rows before me, and I was speak- 
ing to them even as it had been shown to me. At first they 
did not seem inclined to listen ; but I went on, and at last 
the power of the Spirit came down, and six came out for 
Jesus. But I was not satisfied. <O Lord,' I said, 'give 
me six more I must have six more ! ' And we prayed to- 
gether. At last the seventh came, and then the eighth and 
the ninth together, and after a time the tenth, and then the 
eleventh, and last of all came the twelfth also. But no 
more. And they saw that the Lord had given me the sec- 
ond six, and they began to believe in the power of prayer." 

1 This, again, is one of the most familiar phenomena of ecstasy. 
Professor James says : " There is one form of sensory automatism 
which possibly deserves special notice on account of its frequency. I 
refer to hallucinatory or pseudo-hallucinatory luminous phenomena, 
photisms, to use the term of the psychologists. St. Paul's blinding 
heavenly vision seems to have been a phenomenon of this order. So 
does Constantine's cross in the sky. Colonel Gardner sees a blazing 
light. Finney says, ' A light perfectly ineffable shone in my soul.' " 
Symond's works, etc., p. 252. 



54 THE WELSH REVIVAL 

" Then after that you went on ? " 

" First I tried to speak to some other young people in an- 
other church, and asked them to come. But the news had 
gone out, and the old people said, ' May we not come too ? ' 
And I could not refuse them. So they came, and they 
kept on coming now here, now there, all the time, and I 
have never had time to go back to college." 

Not much chance, indeed, at present. Three meetings 
every day, lasting, with breaks for meals, from 10 A. M. 
till 12 p. M., and sometimes later, leave scant leisure for 
studying elsewhere than in the hearts and souls of men. If 
only his body will hold out, and his nervous system does not 
give way, he will have time to study hereafter. At present 
he has other work in hand. 

The story that is told in the papers pieces out Mr. 
Roberts' own narrative. According to the Rev. Seth 
Joshua, a mission from the New Quay Christian Endeavor 
Society came to Newcastle Emlyn, and it was at one of 
their meetings that Evan Roberts first showed his marvelous 
power in prayer. 

Whatever truth there may be in this link in the chain, 
there is no doubt that Mr. Evan Roberts began to preach 
and to pray at the Movrah Methodist Church in Loughor 
about the beginning of November. The most extraordinary 
results followed. The whole community was shaken. 
Meetings were kept up till half-past four, and then at six the 
villagers would be wakened by the tramp of the crowds go- 
ing to the early morning prayer-meetings. His energy 
seemed inexhaustible. In those early days,, said a writer in 
The South Wales Daily News (November i4th) : 

Roberts does not call his hearers to repentance, but 
speaks of having been called to fulfil the words of the 
prophet Joel: "Your old men shall dream dreams, your 
young men shall see visions." He tells the audience that he 



EVAN ROBERTS 55 

is speaking under the influence of the Holy Spirit, and he 
describes what he sees, and it strikes some of the congrega- 
tion that he is unfathoming unconsciously some of the mys- 
teries of the Book of Revelation. His words have a re- 
markable effect. He does not speak much, but invites the 
congregation to sing, or pray, or read the Scripture as the 
Spirit moves them. 

Mr. Roberts frequently describes visions that had ap- 
peared to him at prayer. For instance : 

He said that when he was before the throne of grace he 
saw appearing before him a key. He did not understand 
the meaning of this sign. Just then, however, three mem- 
bers of the congregation rose to their feet and said that they 
had been converted. " My vision is explained," said Mr. 
Roberts, ecstatically ; " it was the key by which God opened 
your hearts." 

On another occasion he reverted to his experiences at 
Newcastle Emlyn, and told them of another vision. He 
said (The South Wales Daily News, November 



It was a few Sundays ago at Newcastle Emlyn. For 
days he had been brooding over the apparent failure of 
modern Christian agencies; and he felt wounded in the 
spirit that the Church of God should so often be attacked. 
While in this Slough of Despond he walked in the garden. 
It was about 4 p. M. Suddenly, in the hedge on his left, he 
saw a face full of scorn, hatred and derision, and heard a 
laugh as of defiance. It was the prince of this world, who 
exulted in his despondency. Then there suddenly appeared 
another figure, gloriously arrayed in white, bearing in hand 
a flaming sword borne aloft. The sword fell athwart the 
first figure, and it instantly disappeared. He could not see 
the face of the sword-bearer. " Do you not see the moral ? " 
queried the missioner, with face beaming with delight. " Is 
it not that the Church of Christ is to be triumphant? " 



5& THE WELSH REFIV4L 

Significant glances passed between many people in the 
congregation. Visions ? What does the man mean ? He 
is speaking in parables. So far he has been a sane speaker, 
and with no trace about him of the fanatic. He cannot 

mean to convey that . But we are speedily undeceived. 

11 1 told the Rev. Evan Phillips of what I had seen, and he 
answered me that in the state of despondency I was in I 
might easily have imagined the vision. But " with strong 
emphasis "I know what I saw. It was a distinct vision. 
There was no mistake. And, full of the promise which that 
vision conveyed, I went to Loughor, and from Loughor to 
Aberdare, and from Aberdare to Pontycymmer. And what 
do I see? The promise literally fulfilled. The sword is 
descending on all hands, and Satan is put to flight. 
Amen." 



It has been said that Mr. Roberts never preaches. He 
does, however, or rather he did at the beginning of his 
career deliver long addresses, which were simple, direct 
Gospel appeals. Joyousness was the note of all his dis- 
course, the joyousness of a junior partner conscious that his 
Senior is with him and is entrusting him with a most respon- 
sible mission. 

He exclaimed once: "Oh, if you only saw Christ, you 
would love him ! How can I repay him for the privilege of 
going through Wales to proclaim his love?" 

At Pyle, November 21, speaking of the work that is be- 
ing done, Mr. Roberts joyously clapped his hands and 
shouted, "Aha, aha," but remarked that this sort of thing 
could not go on forever this fever-heat could not be kept 
going long; but let them keep it going as long as they 
could j let them keep it going with a swing (which he 
illustrated with a swing of his right arm), to raise the 
churches to a higher level, and then they could "settle 
down to business." At the end of November he gave it as 
his conviction that one hundred thousand souls would be 



EVAN ROBERTS 57 

won before the end of the revival in Wales. In December 
he said : "At one time I said I would be satisfied with one 
hundred thousand converts and then would be willing to die, 
but now I want the whole world." 

Again he says: "Isn't it all wonderful how the Spirit 
responds ? It is not me it is the Spirit, the Spirit." 

To describe the address that follows as a sermon would be a 
misnomer. He is buoyant, joyous, almost bubbling over 
with merriment. It is "the joy of Christ," he explains, 
"and you can laugh yes, laugh out of sheer joy at the 
throne of grace. ' ' 

Yet he always shrinks modestly from claiming any of the 
results that follow his mission ; sometimes he declines to let 
his movements be announced. "People must not rely upon 
me." This is his constant cry. " I have nothing for them. 
They must rely upon Him who alone can minister to their 
needs." 

When I talked with him, he said : 

"The movement is not of me, it is of God. I would not 
dare to try to direct it. Obey the Spirit, that is our word 
in everything. It is the Spirit alone which is leading us in 
our meetings and in all that is done." 

" You do not preach, or teach, or control the meetings? " 

"Why should I teach when the Spirit is teaching? 
What need have these people to be told that they are sin- 
ners? What they need is salvation. Do they not know it ? 
It is not knowledge that they lack, but decision action. 
And why should I control the meetings? The meetings 
control themselves, or rather the Spirit that is in them con- 
trols them." 

" You find the ministry of the Singing Sisters useful ? " 

" Most useful. They go with me wherever I go. I 
never part from them without feeling that something is 
absent if they are not there. The singing is very important, 



58 THE WELSH REVIVAL 

but not everything. No. The public confession is also im- 
portant more so than the speaking. True, I talk to them 
a little. But the meetings go of themselves." 

"Do you propose to go to England ? " 

"No. To North Wales next. They say North Wales is 
stony cold, but I believe the Holy Spirit will work there 
also. Oh, yes, God will move North Wales also." 

All his movements are governed by the answers he re- 
ceives to prayer. "Will you go to Cardiff? " they asked 
him. He paused, and then replied in the negative, the an- 
swer to his thought-prayer having been almost instantaneous. 
He usually speaks in Welsh, but he can speak English, 
although not with the beauty and polish of his native 
tongue. The newspapers publish translated scraps rather 
than reports of his remarks. Here are a few sentences : 

"Whilst sect was fighting against sect the devil was clap- 
ping his hands with glee, and encouraging the fight. Let 
all people be one, with one object the salvation of sinners. 
Men refused to accept the gospel and confess because, they 
said, of the gloom and uncertainty of the future. They 
looked to the future without having opened their eyes to the 
infinite glories of the present." 

"All must obey," he declares, " all must work. There 
is no room in the church for idlers. Are you an idler ? 
Then your place is outside." "Be as simple in your wor- 
shiping as possible, the simpler the better. There is no 
need to shout," he went on, "and no one need be ashamed 
to confess Christ." 

He dwells sometimes on the sufferings of Christ until he 
falls prone, sobs choking his utterance. While absolutely 
tolerant of all manifestations of the Spirit, he is stern to 
check any disorder. At Ferndale, where some persons had 
been disturbing the meeting by exuberant and unseemly 
noises, he said : " He who would walk with God must 



EVAN ROBERTS 59 

come to his house in a spirit of prayer, of humility, of awe. 
Joy is permissible in the house, but it must be sanctified joy. 
For think of the majesty of the Divine Person. Father 
yes, a Father truly, but we must be even as little children, 
in humility, remembering that we are sinners. We can, we 
are taught to entreat for the descent of the Spirit, but be- 
ware lest the entreaty becomes a rude, imperious command. 
If we truly walk with God, there can be no disorder, no 
indecency." 

On another occasion he pleaded for a Service of Silence, 
to convince the world that the power at work in those 
gatherings was the power of the Holy Spirit, not that of 
man. "Let us have five minutes of absolutely silent 
prayers " an effective reversion to the practice of the 
Society of Friends. 

His method of conducting a meeting is to allow it to con- 
duct itself. But he usually contrives to expound his four 
principles, and to summon his hearers to make public con- 
fession. 

The following is the best report which I have been able 
to piece together after a diligent study of all the papers 
published since the revival began. He addresses his audi- 
ence thus : 

Do you desire an outpouring of the Holy Spirit ? 
Very well. Four conditions must be observed. They 
are essential. 

(1) Is there any sin in your past life that you have 
not confessed to God ? On your knees at once. Your past 
must be at peace. 

(2) Is there anything in your life that is doubtful ? 
Anything you cannot decide whether it is good or evil? 
Away with it ! There must not be ! 

(3) Obey the Spirit. 

(4) Confess Christ publicly before men." 



60 THE WELSH REVIVAL 

After the meeting has gone on for some time Roberts 
proceeds to put his testing questions. I quote the descrip- 
tion given by The South Wales Daily News on December 
14: 

The missioner is now at work. He has three questions 
to put. He has been told, commanded, imperatively com- 
manded, to put the questions, and he dare not disobey. He 
could never sleep if he didn't put them. 

(1) " Will every member of a Christian Church stand 
up?" 

There is immediate response. Few, very few, are sit- 
ting. But a second later we are surprised by the announce- 
ment from the gallery that some are standing who are not 
members. " Come, friends," exclaims the missioner, " have 
the courage for once to show your side. You will be wel- 
come to come over to our side once you are truly ashamed 
of your own. Not until then. Let us have no hypocrisy." 

(2) "Will all those who love the Lord Jesus Christ 
stand up ? Now, please, be careful. Act conscientiously, 
lest God's judgment fall upon you. Those who truly love 
the Lord Jesus and they only." 

Again a great crowd responds, and to the query, " Do 
you really and truly love him?" there comes a loud, tri- 
umphant answer, " Yes." 

(3) "Now for the question which Christ put to Peter. 
It is now put to you individually. Do you love Jesus 
' more than these ' more than all things? " 

It 's a crucial moment the query is so startling and un- 
expected. There is a momentary hesitation, and then once 
more the congregation is on its feet, and there is a joyful, 
triumphant rendering of " Diadem." 

Bring forth the royal diaddm 
And crown him Lord of all. 

" You have made a great declaration you love him more 
than all things, all things. We shall presently see how sin- 
cere is the declaration. We shall see it in crowded attend- 
ances at prayer-meetings, at church-meetings. We shall see 



EVAN ROBERTS 61 

it in the daily study of God's own Book. We shall no 
longer hear the old excuse, ' No time to read the Bible. ' 
Have you time to eat ? The needs of the body are attended 
to, but, bobol anwyl, what of the sustenance of the soul that 
is so much more precious ? The soul ever thirsts for God. 
You must be in touch with God's Word every day, every 
day, were it only one verse." 

Have all obeyed the third command to stand up ? No, 
not all. A few are sitting. The test is too severe. " One 
has gone out," exclaims a voice in the gallery ; " he cannot 
stand it." 

" Bring him back, Lord, bring him back," prays a young 
fellow of nineteen near the door. " Do n't let thy judgment 
fall upon him. He has felt the Spirit moving he said so 
but he is fleeing. Bring him back." "He will come 
back, friend," the missioner assures us, " he will come back; 
the fact that he has run away is a proof that he will come 
back." 

The next question is one that gives relief 

(4) " All those who want to love the Lord Jesus, will 
they stand up ? " 

There is now not a single seat occupied. Members, 
non-members, sceptics, scoffers all, all are on their feet, 
and the silence that supervenes is oppressive. But the mis- 
sioner is all happiness and smiles. 

Presently we are singing that inspiring hymn of praise 

Duw mawr y rhyfeddodau maith 
Rhyfeddol yw pob rhan o'th waith, 

and we are reminded by the missioner that in that hymn we 
are addressing God himself, and that if we cannot sing with 
all our hearts we had better be silent, 

In the same issue the reporter publishes a special message 
given him by Mr. Roberts for the public. After emphatic- 
ally disclaiming any share in the religious upheaval, which 
he attributed solely to the Holy Spirit, Mr. Roberts said : 

" I will give you a message. I should like the people to 
believe. They wait for me. They should wait only for 



62 THE WELSH REFIF4L 

the Spirit. Some one said they are almost breaking their 
hearts for me to go. Will they almost break their hearts for 
the Holy Spirit ? Then it must come down. What does 
the Word say ? ' Ask and receive.' It is just that. ' Ask 
and ye shall receive.' That is the promise. Believe it. 
Don't wait for me. Some are talking of the share that this 
denomination or that has in the work. It is not denomina- 
tional. In Loughor we had all denominations Methodists, 
Churchmen, Congregationalists, Baptists, every one." 

" Give me a message distinct, plain, for the people, Mr. 
Roberts." 

He waited a minute or two before answering, and then 
said: 

" This is the message. Of course I had to pray for it. 
To ask for guidance how the prophecy of Joel is being ful- 
filled. There the Lord says, ' I will pour out my Spirit 
upon all flesh.' If that be so all flesh must be prepared to 
receive it. Note the four conditions : 

' ' First. The past must be clear : every sin confessed 
to God. Any wrong put upon any man must be made 
right. 

" Second. Everything doubtful must be removed once 
and for all out of our lives. 

" Third. Obedience prompt and implicit to the Holy 
Spirit. 

" Fourth. Public confession must be made of Christ. 

" These are the four conditions given. If every church 
will comply with these four conditions, then all will be made 
one. Once the Spirit comes down and takes possession of 
a man, he is made one with Christ and one with all men. 
All denominations are one. You know what Christ said, 
' I, if I be lifted up, will draw all men unto me. ' There it 
is. Christ is all in all." 

Mr. Roberts indulges in no invectives against anything 



EVAN ROBERTS 63 

or anybody. He does not even denounce the publican. 
At one meeting, on December 4th, he heard a young fellow 
declaring, "A week ago I was blind drunk; to-day I am 
free, and the craving is gone." " Aye, aye," exclaims the 
missioner, t( and there 's no need to preach against the 
drink ; but preach Christ, proclaim Christ unto the people : 
that is all-sufficient. ' ' 

The truth about Evan Roberts is that he is very psychic, 
with clairvoyance well developed and a strong visualizing 
gift. One peculiarity about him is that he has not yet 
found any watch that will keep time when it is carried in 
his pocket. Many of his visions are merely the vivid 
visualization of mental concepts, as, for instance, when he 
says : 

" When I go out to the garden I see the devil grinning at 
me, but I am not afraid of him ; I go into the house, and 
when I go out again to the back I see Jesus Christ smiling 
at me. Then I know all is well." 

This, again, is much the same thing : 

While listening to a sermon at Newcastle Emlyn once, 
he said, he received much more of the Spirit of the gospel 
from what he saw than from what he heard. The preacher 
was doing very well, was warming with his work, and 
sweating by the very energy of his delivery. And when he 
(Evan Roberts) saw the sweat on the preacher's brow he 
looked beyond and saw another vision : his Lord sweating 
the bloody sweat in the garden (and then, as Mr. Roberts 
thought of the "vision," he utterly broke down). 

The missioners go like the Friars of old, or like the 
Seventy in the gospel, without money and without scrip. 
As Sir A. Thomas said, the revival finances itself. There 
are no bills, no halls, no salaries. 



CHAPTER V 
THE RISE AND PROGRESS OF THE REVIVAL 

MR. GEORGE MEREDITH once remarked that one great 
secret of the triumph of Christianity over the paganism of 
imperial Rome was the astonishing discovery made by the 
Apostle Paul as to the value of women as religious teachers. 
Before his time women served in the sanctuary indeed, but 
as creatures of sense, for the degradation rather than as 
embodiments of souls capable of inspiring and uplifting the 
human race. Paul, it is true, when introducing so great an 
innovation, found it necessary, while addressing the Church 
of Corinth, to draw a very hard and fast line limiting the 
sphere of female activity ; and this limitation, which was 
local and temporary, being necessitated solely by the cor- 
ruption of sex morality in Corinth at that time, has been 
used, no doubt to the apostle's infinite chagrin, to limit the 
beneficent action of women in the ministry of the Church 
in other ages and in other climes. Christianity, however, 
is at last sloughing the Corinthian limitation and asserting 
the full freedom which Paul secured for women elsewhere. 
The Quakers began the good work. The Methodists did 
something in the same direction. It was reserved for the 
Salvation Army, the only religious organization founded by 
a husband and wife acting in absolute unity, to make the 
equality of the sexes a chief corner-stone. Now in South 
Wales we see the fruits of this devoted testimony. The 
Welsh, down to the time of the last revival, were in the 
bonds of the Corinthian limitation. Even in the sixties a 
lady lecturer on temperance was looked at askance in many 
parts of Wales. 

64 



PROGRESS OF THE REVIVAL 65 

Now all that has gone by the board. In the present 
revival women are everywhere to the fore, singing, testify- 
ing, praying and preaching. Dr. Henry Rees, who pro- 
tested publicly in 1866 against the ministry of women, 
appears to be dead, and his spirit has died with him. At 
last these good people have realized the great saying that as 
in Christ there is neither bond nor free, so there is neither 
male nor female. The change is so marked that it suggests 
the happy thought that as the revival of 1859 to 1861 led to 
the enfranchisement of the male householder, the present 
revival may be crowned by the recognition by the State of 
the full citizenship of women. 

Women came into this revival chiefly as singers, but they 
soon found that the ministry of sacred song needed to be 
supplemented by that of prayer and of exhortation. But 
even if they had done- nothing but sing, they would have 
had a leading part in this revival. For it is as Dr. Joseph 
Parry predicted, as long ago as 1891, that it would be a 
singing revival. 

How did it begin, this revival? Where was it nursed 
into being ? What influences nurtured it into the full ma- 
turity of its powers ? 

.For a long time past the Welsh Christians had been 
moved to pray specially for the quickening of religious life 
in their midst. The impulse appears to have been sporadic 
and spontaneous. In remote country hamlets, in mining 
villages buried in distant valleys, one man or one woman 
would have it laid upon his or her soul to pray that the 
Holy Spirit might be poured out upon the cause in which 
they were spiritually concerned. There does not seem to 
have been much organized effort. It was all individual, 
local, and strictly limited to the neighborhood. 

But prayer circles formed by devout persons who agree to 
unite together in prayer at a given hour every day have 



66 THE WELSH REVIVAL 

long been a recognized form of prevailing prayer. By these 
circles there are some thirty or forty thousand people now 
banded together to pray for a world- wide revival. 

All this was general. It was preparing the way. A great 
longing for revival was abroad in the land. The churches 
were conscious that there was something in the air. It was 
at New Quay, in Cardiganshire, that the spark appears to 
have first fired the charged train of religious emotion. 
Fortunately, we have from the Rev. Joseph Jenkins, the 
pastor of the Calvinistic church in which the revival first 
made its appearance, an authentic account of its beginning. 
The first person to be awakened was the pastor himself. He 
was a good man, a devoted Christian, and a faithful minis- 
ter; but, like Evan Roberts, he felt that there was still 
something lacking. It was before midsummer, 1903, that 
the conviction was borne in upon the good pastor's mind 
that the occasion had come for special services with greater 
freedom for testifying. It was his own quickened spiritual 
experience which sought the institution of these meetings as 
a means of giving expression to the life of the church. 

The meetings he had in view were to have no set form. 
They must be free, each to assume its own peculiar form 
spontaneously. Those present would be expected to pray, 
sing, read or speak, according to the impulse of the mo- 
ment. He longed to pour his spiritual experience into 
sympathetic ears. He found himself frequently in close 
communion with his heavenly Father, and seemed to be 
given everything necessary to efficient service. He related 
his experience in fear and trembling. He felt that he him- 
self must have been saved many years ago, although he had 
missed the joy which the knowledge of such a fact brings. 
He had no doubt that his efforts to preach Christ had been 
honest, and that he had done his best to obtain for himself 
also some of the benefits of his preaching. And yet he had 



PROGRESS OF THE REVIVAL 67 

never before understood the gospel as he understands it 
to-day the power of God unto present assurance of full 
salvation. 

Some time ago the preacher was speaking in November, 
and his sermon was reported in The South Wales Daily 
News of November i6th, and no more precise date is 
given the experience occurred which may be regarded as 
the first outward and visible sign of the revival. I give the 
story as it is reported. A " Seiat " appears to be a religious 
meeting for prayer : 

Some time ago he had returned from a journey, and 
found that a " Seiat " had been set aside in favor of a soiree 
to be held in the town. Somebody rose at one of the 
church meetings and asked why the " Seiat " was being set 
aside the soiree was not a sufficient reason. It was de- 
cided to hold a " Seiat," and in that meeting were seen and 
heard the first indications of the dayspring from on high 
that was surely dawning upon the church. A young girl 
prayed, and that prayer was the most wonderful and touch- 
ing he had ever heard. The response was immediate. All 
were lifted up into a high plane of spiritual experience. 
One of the older deacons, who was standing by the door, 
came forward. Hot tears were rolling down his face when 
he said, "It's all right, I know him. He is the Holy 
Spirit." 

The minister as he sat marveled at the signs of the new 
experience that he knew must be coming to the church. 
Nevertheless, his heart was not perfectly right before the 
Lord. A brother minister with whom he had spent a night 
had, in course of conversation upon religious matters, said 
to him very straightforwardly, " My friend, I am afraid you 
are backsliding ; there is something in your view of things, 
and in the cadences of your voice, that betokens serious 
backsliding in your spiritual life." It was too true, he ad- 



68 THE WELSH REVIVAL 

mitted and the charge went home. The conviction of its 
truth and of its guilt sank deep into his soul. A bosom 
friend Mr. Ceredig Evans to whom he told his expe- 
rience, wept and prayed with him, and promised to con- 
tinue at the throne of grace on his behalf. He was per- 
fectly convinced that the matter of his soul as between 
himself and God was not settled altogether in God's way. 
A Voice within him demanded work of him, demanded the 
fulfilment of his ministry. He was shown others with 
humbler talents, as he was told, yet with far better records 
of real work done in the Master's vineyard. His wife was 
present, and knew all his private experience in this matter 
how he prayed all night, and night after night continued 
to pray and read, until one night in his study, in the small 
hours of the morning, a vision of the cross arose filling his 
soul with joy and peace. 

Here again we have the vision. " In point of fact," says 
Professor James, " you will hardly find a religious leader of 
any kind in whose life there is no record of such things. 
St. Paul had his visions, his ecstasies, his gift of tongues. 
The whole array of Christian saints and heresiarchs, in- 
cluding the greatest, the Bernards, the Loyolas, the Luthers, 
the Foxes, the Wesleys, had these visions, voices, rapt con- 
ditions, guiding impressions, and openings. They had these 
things because they had exalted sensibility, and to such 
things persons of exalted sensibility are liable." 

Pastor Jenkins, having thus entered into a new and fuller re- 
lation with the Spirit, summoned his young people to the 
new kind of meetings which he saw were called for. They 
were well attended, and were conducted on the principle of 
leaving every one free to pray, sing, and speak, or sit silent 
as the Spirit moved him. 

One Sunday night he preached from the text, " This is 
the victory that overcometh the world, even our faith." 



PROGRESS OF THE REVIVAL 69 

He had preached before on some phases of that subject, but 
now he felt his very soul go out in his words, which God 
blessed immediately. That night a young girl came to his 
house to consult him concerning the salvation of her soul. 
She did not know how she should speak to him, and re- 
mained walking to and fro outside the house for some time. 
But she was intensely in earnest, and, courage coming, she 
entered the house. He advised her to receive Jesus as her 
Saviour, but that she must receive him as Lord as well as 
Saviour she must surrender all to him. She must pray 
until her soul allowed the matter to be settled on God's 
terms. She promised to follow his advice, and she did, for 
her soul was moved to its lowest depth. A Christian En- 
deavor meeting was coming, and he would then see how far 
they understood spiritual experience. He spoke, explaining 
it in the best way he could, and with all the force at his com- 
mand. Others followed with speeches, but he required of 
them expressions of spiritual experience pure and simple, 
and then it was that the young girl already referred to 
stood up, and with beaming face and thrilling voice said, 
"Oh, I love Jesus with all my heart." After this, spiritual 
history was made rapidly at the Christian Endeavor meet- 
ings, some revealing great depths of emotion, others mani- 
festing the keenest sense of spiritual relations. 

That public confession of her faith by the young girl 
who may be regarded as the first convert of the revival 
was followed by others. It was evident the revival had 
come. One Christian Endeavorer, who had prepared a pa- 
per to read on the existence of God, could not bring him- 
self to read it for the same reason that Professor James dis- 
misses the arguments of philosophy as a foundation for 
religion. He said that spiritually the meeting was far in ad- 
vance of his paper. The Christian Endeavorers had the 
proofs of his existence in their own hearts. There was no 



70 THE WELSH REVIVAL 

shadow of doubt of his existence. He was there amongst 
them then, transforming their very lives. In this way their 
meetings were started. From New Quay, which lies mid- 
way been Cardigan and Aberystwyth, the Christian Endeav- 
orers went out to hold meetings elsewhere. Among other 
places, they went to Newcastle Emlyn, where they met 
Evan Roberts. 

So far as I can fix it from the materials at my disposal, 
the public confession of the young girl which marks the 
beginning of the revival occurred in New Quay in Feb- 
ruary, 1904. 

It was in September that Evan Roberts prayed at the New 
Quay Christian Endeavorers' meeting and saw the visions 
which directed him to Loughor. It was in the beginning 
of November he began to hold the special services at 
Loughor, which attracted the attention of the press. After 
that the full reports of the proceedings in The Western 
Mail and The Cardiff Daily News spread the revival 
through the whole of South Wales. 

It is worthy of note that the great revival of 1859 also be- 
gan in Cardiganshire, although somewhat farther to the 
north than New Quay. The following notes as to the places 
visited by Mr. Evan Roberts will give those who know the 
district, but to no one else, some idea how the fire spread 
along the valleys of Wales. 

November i4th and i5th, Trecynon ; November i6th to 
1 8th, Pontycymmer ; November i9th, Bridgend, Pyle, Aber- 
gwynfi ; November 2oth, Abercynon ; November 21 st and 
22d, Mountain Ash; November 23d and 24th, Ynysybwl; 
November 25th, ill; November 26th, Cilfyngdd; Novem- 
ber 27th and 28th, Porth ; November 29th, Treorky ; De- 
cember 2d to 4th, Pentre; December 5th and 6th, Caer- 
philly; December yth, Senghenydd; December 8th to loth, 
Ferndale ; December nth, Mardy ; December i2th and 



PROGRESS OF THE REVIVAL 71 

Tylorstown; December i4th and i5th, Aberfan ; December 
i6th and i7th, Hafod (Pontypridd) ; December i8th, Ponty- 
pridd ; December ipth and 2oth, Clydach Vale; December 
2ist, Tonypandy; December 22d, Penygraig; December 
23d, Treherbert. 

"The supreme test of a revival," says the Rev. F. B. 
Meyer, "is the ethical result." As to this, the testimony 
of all on the spot is unanimous. Not merely are all the 
grosser vices reduced to vanishing point, but the subtler sins 
of unforgiving rancor, non-payment of debts, dishonest 
work are abated. In nothing is Mr. Evan Roberts clearer 
and more emphatic than in his insistence upon forgiveness 
of injuries, unless it be as to the duty of the payment of 
debts. "It's no use asking God to forgive you," he tells 
his hearers, " unless you have forgiven all your enemies 
every one. You will only be forgiven in the same measure 
as you forgive." Again he says: "How can there be, 
when there are family feuds and personal animosities, 
churches torn by little dissensions, members cold towards 
each other? If you are not prepared to forgive others it 
is no use going on your knees to-night to ask God to forgive 
your transgressions. I don't say don't do it ; please your- 
selves, of course ; but one thing is absolutely certain, God 
will not listen to you." 

The result has been excellent everywhere excellent. 

However we may explain it, the veriest sceptic must ad- 
mit that what the revivalist seeks to effect is of all things the 
most important object of human endeavor. No political or 
social change can be regarded as having any serious impor- 
tance, excepting so far as it tends to facilitate indirectly the 
achievement of the same result which the revivalist seeks di- 
rectly. The aim of all reformers is the regeneration of the 
individual. To make a bad man good, a cruel man merci- 
ful, a lazy man industrious, a drunkard sober, and to sub- 



72 THE WELSH REVIVAL 

stitute selfless struggle to help others for a selfish scramble to 
seize everything for oneself that in the aim-all, the be-all, 
and the end-all of all those who seek the improvement of so- 
ciety and the progress of the world. It makes no difference 
whether the reformer is called Blatchford or Liddon, Brad- 
laugh or Price Hughes, John Morley or General Booth, 
Frederic Harrison or the Archbishop of Canterbury, the 
President of the Free Thinkers' Congress or the Pope of 
Rome that is what they are all after that, and in the ul- 
timate, nothing but that. And when it comes to be looked 
at scientifically, who can deny that a great religious revival 
often succeeds in achieving the result which we all desire 
more rapidly, more decisively, and in a greater number of 
cases, than any other agency known to mankind? We 
may discount it as much as we like, but the facts are 
there. It is not necessary to credit the revival with all 
the results which it reveals, any more than we may credit a 
day's sunshine in spring with all the flowers it brings to 
birth. But it brings them out. So does a revival. And 
if there had been no revival, the latent sainthood of mul- 
titudes would never have been born, just as the flowers 
would never come out in May if there were no sun. 

It is often argued that revivalism is ephemeral. But as 
our brief historical retrospect shows, the fruits of revivals are 
among the most permanent things in history. 



CHAPTER VI 
WHAT OUGHT I TO DO? 

SPREAD the good news, and spread it now ! 

If you can do nothing else, send copies of this pamphlet 
to any relative, friend or other person whom you think may 
become interested in the subject. Speak to people about it. 
Write to your friends about it. 

If you belong to a church, try to get the members inter- 
ested in the revival. 

If you are a minister, preach about it, and ask your peo- 
ple to hold prayer-meetings on the subject. 

For if those who have seen most of the revival are right, 
there is a great blessing in this movement for each of us, 
and for all of us, if we but make the most of our present 
opportunity. 

What we have to do is to take time by the forelock and 
be ready to clutch the boon before the moment has passed. 
As a start, we might well begin each in our sphere by doing 
good turns to our enemies, wiping out the memories of old 
grudges, reconciling offended relatives, and forgiving others, 
even as we hope to be forgiven. 

God or no God, soul or no soul, this earth is made much 
more like hell than heaven by persisting in these grudges, 
jealousies, animosities, and unkind feelings one toward an- 
other. What a merry Christmas, what a glad New Year it 
would be if we could begin by being in charity with every- 
body, in love with every man, woman and child with whom 
we have a personal acquaintance ! 

Then when we have cast out from our own souls the evil 

73 



74 THE WELSH REVIVAL 

spirits of bitterness, rancor, unfriendliness, jealousy, and 
have forgiven all those who have injured us, or, a much 
harder task, whom we have injured, we shall be better pre- 
pared to receive the outpouring of the divine blessing which 
we all profess to desire. 

After the revival has come, as come it will if we but make 
room for it by ejecting hatred, malice and uncharitableness 
from our hearts, then a great duty will be laid upon the 
churches to supply fresh interests for the new converts, 
who have given up everything that filled their leisure. 
The Rev. Dr. Morris, of Treorky, and ex-president of the 
Baptist Union, told an interviewer of The South Wales Daily 
News that he at least is fully alive to the importance of this 
subject : 

"Do you know," he said, "this revival has thrown a 
tremendous responsibility upon the churches? Public- 
houses and football fields are being emptied of young men. 
What are the churches going to do with them? Unfortu- 
nately, we in Wales are lamentably deficient in provision 
for the development of the body, mind and spirit of a man. 
I agree absolutely with the leading articles in The South 
Wales Daily News, when they urge that Christianity should 
provide for the education and development of the whole of 
a man, and not merely a part of him. The churches have 
been brought face to face with a difficult problem. How 
shall we keep our young people, now that they have been 
induced to join the church ? In small places there is no 
attraction in the church ; no accommodation is attempted 
for their moral well-being." 

"What would you suggest as a means of meeting this 
contingency? " 

" My suggestion would be the provision of an institu- 
tional church. There should be young men's and young 
women's parlors, separate classrooms, lecture-rooms, muse- 
ums, and libraries. I would also advise the encouragement 
of physical culture of course, we must guard against ex- 
tremes but some means must be devised to hold our young 



WHAT OUGHT I TO DO 75 

people, otherwise a great part of the good effect of the re- 
vival will be lost." 

Upon this question possibly some hints may be gained 
from my Christmas story, "Here Am I : Send Me ! " 



The Revival: Its Power and Source 



The Revival: Its Power and Source 

By Rev. G. Campbell Morgan, D. D., London 

[We are permitted by Dr. Morgan, who controls the copyright, to 
condense into the following article a recent sermon by him to his peo- 
ple at Westminster Chapel, London, and published in the Christian 
Commonwealth. EDITORS.] 

IT was my holy privilege to come into the center of this 
wonderful work and movement. Arriving in the morning 
in the village, everything seemed quiet, and we wended our 
way to the place where a group of chapels stood. Oh, these 
chapels through Wales ! Thank God for them ! Every- 
thing was so quiet and orderly that we had to ask where the 
meeting was. A lad, pointing to a chapel, said, "In 
there." Not a single person outside. We made our way 
through the open door, and just managed to get inside, and 
found the chapel crowded from floor to ceiling with a great 
mass of people. 

THE THREE CHARACTERISTICS OF THE MEETINGS 

It was a meeting characterized by a perpetual series of 
interruptions and disorderliness. It was a meeting char- 
acterized by a great continuity and an absolute order. 
You say, "How do you reconcile these things?" I do 
not reconcile them. They are both there. If you put a 
man into the midst of one of these meetings who knows 
nothing of the language of the Spirit, and nothing of the 
life of the Spirit, one of two things will happen to him. 
He will either pass out saying, "These men are drunk," 
or he himself will be swept up by the fire into the kingdom 

79 



8o THE WELSH REVIVAL 

of God. If you put a man down who knows the language 
of the Spirit, he will be struck by this most peculiar thing. 
I have never seen anything like it in my life ; while a man 
praying is disturbed by the breaking out of song, there is no 
sense of disorder, and the prayer merges into song, and 
back into testimony, and back again into song for hour 
after hour, without guidance. These are the three occupa- 
tions singing, prayer, testimony. 

In the afternoon we were at another chapel, and another 
meeting, equally full, and this time Evan Roberts was pres- 
ent. He came into the meeting when it had been on for an 
hour and a half. He spoke, but his address if it could be 
called an address was punctuated perpetually by song and 
prayer and testimony. Evan Roberts works on that plan, 
never hindering any one. I venture to say that if that address 
Evan Roberts gave in broken fragments had been reported, 
the whole of it could have been read in six or seven min- 
utes. As the meeting went on, a man rose in the gallery 
and said, "So and So," naming some man, "has decided 
for Christ," and then in a moment the song began. They 
did not sing Songs of Praises, they sang Diolch Iddo, and 
the weirdness and beauty of it swept over the audience. It 
was a song of praise because that man was born again. 
There are no inquiry rooms, no penitent forms, but some 
worker announces, or an inquirer openly confesses Christ, 
the name is registered and the song breaks out, and they go 
back to testimony and prayer. 

In the evening I stood for three solid hours wedged so 
that I could not lift my hands at all. That which im- 
pressed me most was the congregation. I stood wedged, 
and I looked along the gallery of the chapel on my right, 
and there were three women, and the rest were men packed 
solidly in. If you could but for once have seen the men, 
evidently colliers, with the blue seam that told of their work 



ITS POWER AND SOURCE 81 

on their faces, clean and beautiful. Beautiful, did I say? 
Many of them lit with heaven's own light, radiant with the 
light that never was on sea and land. Great rough, mag- 
nificent, poetic men by nature, but the nature had slumbered 
long. To-day it is awakened, and I looked on many a 
face, and I knew that men did not see me, did not see 
Evan Roberts, but they saw the face of God and the 
eternities. I left that evening, after having been in the 
meeting three hours, at 10:30, and it swept on, packed as it 
was, until an early hour next morning, song and prayer and 
testimony and conversion and confession of sin by leading 
church-members publicly, and the putting of it away, and 
all the while no human leader, no one indicating the next 
thing to do, no one checking the spontaneous movement. 

THE MAN HIMSELF 

Evan Roberts is hardly more than a boy, simple and 
natural, no orator ; with nothing of the masterfulness that 
characterized such men as Wesley and Whitefield and 
Dwight Lyman Moody ; no leader of men. One of the most 
brilliant writers in one of our papers said of Evan Roberts, 
in a tone of sorrow, that he lacked the qualities of leader- 
ship, and the writer said if but some prophet did now arise 
he could sweep everything before him. God has not 
chosen that a prophet shall arise. It is quite true. Evan 
Roberts is no orator, no leader. What is he ? I mean now 
with regard to this great movement. He is the mouthpiece 
of the fact that there is no human guidance as to man or 
organization. The burden of what he says to the people is 
this : It is not man ; do not wait for me depend on God ; 
obey the Spirit. But whenever moved to do so, he speaks 
under the guidance of the Spirit. His work is not that of 
appealing to men so much as that of creating an atmosphere 



82 THE WELSH REVIVAL 

by calling men to follow the guidance of the Spirit in what- 
ever the Spirit shall say to them. 

God has set his hand upon the lad, beautiful in simplicity, 
ordained in his devotion, lacking all the qualities that we 
have looked for in preachers and prophets and leaders. He 
has put him in the forefront of this movement that the world 
may see that he does choose the things that are not to bring 
to naught the things that are, the weak things of the world 
to confound the things that are mighty ; a man who lacks all 
the essential qualities which we say make for greatness, in 
order that through him in simplicity and power he may 
move to victory. 

PECULIARITIES OF THE MOVEMENT 

/ There is no preaching, no order, no hymn books, no 
choirs, no organs, no collections and, finally, no adver- 
tising. I am not saying these things are wrong. I simply 
want you to see what God is doing. There were the 
organs, but silent ; the ministers, but among the rest 
of the people, rejoicing and prophesying with the rest, only 
there was no preaching. Everybody is preaching. No 
order, and yet it moves from day to day, week to week, 
county to county, with matchless precision, with the order 
of an attacking force. Mr. Stead was asked if he thought 
the revival would spread to London, and he said, " It de- 
pends upon whether you can sing." He was not so wide of 
the mark. When these Welshmen sing, they sing the words 
like men who believe them. They abandon themselves to 
their singing. We sing as though we thought it would not be 
respectable to be heard by the man next to us. No choir, 
did I say ? It was all choir. And hymns ! I stood and 
listened in wonder and amazement as that congregation on 
that night sang hymn after hymn, long hymns, sung through 
without hymn-books. ^ 



ITS POWER AND SOURCE 83 

The Sunday-school is having its harvest now. The 
family altar is having its harvest now. The teaching of 
hymns and the Bible among those Welsh hills and valleys 
is having its harvest now. No advertising. The whole 
thing advertises itself. You tell me the press is advertising 
it. They did not begin advertising until the thing caught 
fire and spread. One of the most remarkable things is the 
attitude of the Welsh press. I come across instance after 
instance of men converted by reading the story of the re- 
vival in The Western Mail 'and The South Wales Daily News. 

THE ORIGIN OF THE MOVEMENT 

In the name of God let us all cease trying to find it. At 
least let us cease trying to trace it to any one man or con- 
vention. You cannot trace it, and yet I will trace it to- 
night. Whence has it come ? All over Wales I am giving 
you roughly the result of the questioning of fifty or more 
persons at random in the week a praying remnant have 
been agonizing before God about the state of the beloved 
land, and it is through that the answer of fire has come. 
You tell me that the revival originates with Roberts. I tell 
you that Roberts is a product of the revival. You tell me 
that it began in an Endeavor meeting where a dear girl bore 
testimony. I tell you that was part of the result of a revival 
breaking out everywhere. If you and I could stand above 
Wales, looking at it, you would see fire breaking out here 
and there, and yonder, and somewhere else, without any 
collusion or prearrangement. It is a divine visitation in 
which God let me say this reverently in which God is 
saying to us : See what I can do without the things you are 
depending on ; see what I can do in answer to a praying 
people ; see what I can do through the simplest who are 
ready to fall in line and depend wholly and absolutely 
upon me. 



84 THE WELSH REVIVAL 

A CHURCH REVIVAL 

What is the character of this revival ? It is a church re- 
vival. I do not mean by that merely a revival among 
church members. It is that, but it is held in church build- 
ings. I have been saying for a long time that the revival 
which is to be permanent in the life of a nation must be as- 
sociated with the life of the churches. What I am looking 
for is that there shall come a revival breaking out in all our 
regular church life. The meetings are held in the chapels, 
all up and down the valleys, and it began among church- 
members, and when it touches the outside man it makes 
him into a church-member at once. I am tremendously 
suspicious of any mission or revival movement that treats 
with contempt the Church of Christ, and affects to despise 
the churches. Within five weeks twenty thousand have 
joined the churches. I think more than that have been con- 
verted, but the churches in Wales have enrolled during the 
last five weeks twenty thousand new members. It is a 
movement in the Church and of the Church, a movement in 
which the true functions and forces of the Church are being 
exercised and filled. 

STRIKING CASES OF PERSONAL INFLUENCE 

What effect is this work producing upon men ? First of 
all, it is turning Christians everywhere into evangelists. 
There is nothing more remarkable about it than that, I 
think. People you never expected to see doing this kind of 
thing are becoming definite personal workers. A friend of 
mine went to one of the meetings, and he walked down to 
the meeting with an old friend of his, a deacon of the Con- 
gregational church, a man whose piety no one doubted, a man 
who for long years had worked in the life of the church in 
some of its departments, but a man who never would think 



ITS POWER AND SOURCE 85 

of speaking to men about their souls, although he would not 
have objected to some one else doing it. As my friend 
walked down with the deacon, the deacon said to him : "I 
have eighteen young men in an athletic class of which I am 
president. I hope some of them will be in the meeting to- 
night. ' ' There was a new manifestation. This man had had 
that athletic class for years, and he had never hoped that 
any one of them would be in any meeting to be saved. 
Within fifteen minutes he left his seat by my friend and was 
seen talking to a young man down in front of him. Pres- 
ently this deacon rose and said, "Thank God for So and 
So," giving his name; "he has given his heart to Christ 
right here." In a moment or two he left him, and was with 
another young man. Before that meeting closed that dea- 
con had led every one of those eighteen young men to Jesus 
Christ, who never before thought of speaking to men about 
their souls. 

My own friend, with whom I stayed, who has always been 
reticent of speaking to men, told me how, sitting in his 
office, there surged upon him the great conviction that he 
ought to go and speak to another man with whom he had 
done business for long years. My friend suddenly put down 
his pen and left his office and went on 'Change, and there 
he saw the very man ; and going up to him, passing the 
time of day to him, the man said to him, " What do you 
think of this revival?" And my friend looked him 
squarely in the eye and said, " How is it with your own 
soul?" The man looked back at him and said, "Last 
night at twelve, for some unknown reason, I had to get 
out of bed and give myself to Jesus Christ, and I was 
hungering for some one to come and talk to me." Here is 
a man turned into an evangelist by supernatural means. If 
this is emotional, then God send us more of it ! Here is a 
cool, calculating, business ship owner, that I have known 



86 THE WELSH REVIVAL 

all my life, leaving his office to go on 'Change and ask a 
man about his soul. 

Down in one of the mines a collier was walking along, ! 

and he came, to his great surprise, to where one of the prin- * 

cipal officials in the mine was standing. The official said, \ 

"Jim, I have been waiting two hours here for you." 
"Have you, sir?" said Jim. "What do you want?" \ 

"I want to be saved, Jim." The man said, " Let us get i 

right down here ' ' ; and there in the mine the colliery I 

official, instructed by the collier, passed into the kingdom \ 

of God. When he got up he said, " Tell all the men, tell j 

everybody you meet, I am converted." ' 1 

The movement is characterized by the most remarkable j 

confession of sin confessions that must be costly. I heard fj 

some of them, men rising who have been members of the ; 

church and officers of the church, confessing hidden sin in i 

their heart, impurity committed and condoned, and seeking j 

prayer for its putting away. The whole movement is mar- \ 

velously characterized by a confession of Jesus Christ, testi- |j 

mony to his power, to his goodness, to his beneficence, and I 

testimony merging forevermore into outbursts of singing. 

This whole thing is of God ; it is a visitation in which he . 
is making men conscious of Himself, without any human 
agency. The revival is far more wide-spread than the fire 
zone. In this sense you may understand that the fire zone | 

is where the meetings are actually held, and where you feel I 

the flame that burns. But even when you come out of it, | 

and go into railway trains, or into a shop, a bank, anywhere, ; 

men everywhere are talking of God. Whether they obey or 
not is another matter. There are thousands not yielded to 
the constraint of God, but God has given Wales in these 
days a new conviction and consciousness of himself. That 
is the profound thing, the underlying truth. I 



FOR THE PROMOTION OF 




ttmupliam 



THE PRESBYTERIAN EVANGELISTIC 
COMMITTEE ORDERED 



10,000 



Cloth, 66 cents, postpaid 
'Paper, 45 cents 



\ 3,000 



STUDIES FOR PER- 
SONAL WORKERS by 
Howard Agnew Johnston. 
Studies covering the principal fea- 
tures of Personal Work. Adapted 
for Church and Young People's 
Classes, or for individual study* 



I 



Cloth, 75 cents, postpaid 
'Paper, 35 cents 



NDIVIDUAL WORK FOR 
INDIVIDUALS, by the late 
H. Clay Trumbull. Incidents 
of personal conversations in the 
experience of the author, -who was 
one of the most remarkable per- 
sonal workers of this generation* 



ISSUED BY 

THE INTERNATIONAL COMMITTEE OF YOUNG MEN'S 
CHRISTIAN ASSOCIATIONS 



We have special editions of each of the above works for 
use in the Evangelistic campaign. Order from 




ilgrim 



BRANCHES AT NEW YORK AND CHICAGO 



86 THE WELSH REVIVAL 

all my life, leaving his office to go on 'Change and ask a 
man about his soul. 

Down in one of the mines a collier was walking along, 
and he came, to his great surprise, to where one of the prin- 
cipal officials in the mine was standing. The official said, 
"Jim, I have been waiting two hours here for you." 
"Have you, sir?" said Jim. "What do you want?" 
"I want to be saved, Jim." The man said, " Let us get 
right down here ' ' ; and there in the mine the colliery 
official, instructed by the collier, passed into the kingdom 
of God. When he got up he said, " Tell all the men, tell 
everybody you meet, I am converted." " 

The movement is characterized by the most remarkable 
confession of sin confessions that must be costly. I heard 
some of them, men rising who have been members of the 
church and officers of the church, confessing hidden sin in 
their heart, impurity committed and condoned, and seeking 
prayer for its putting away. The whole movement is mar- 
velously characterized by a confession of Jesus Christ, testi- 
mony to his power, to his goodness, to his beneficence, and 
testimony merging forevermore into outbursts of singing. 

This whole thing is of God ; it is a visitation in which he 
is making men conscious of Himself, without any human 
agency. The revival is far more wide-spread than the fire 
zone. In this sense you may understand that the fire zone 
is where the meetings are actually held, and where you feel 
the flame that burns. But even when you come out of it, 
and go into railway trains, or into a shop, a bank, anywhere, 
men everywhere are talking of God. Whether they obey or 
not is another matter. There are thousands not yielded to 
the constraint of God, but God has given Wales in these 
days a new conviction and consciousness of himself. That 
is the profound thing, the underlying truth. 



FOR THE PROMOTION OF 





THE PRESBYTERIAN EVANGELISTIC 
COMMITTEE ORDERED 



10,000 



Cloihf 66 cents, postpaid 
'Paper, 45 cents 



13,000 



STUDIES FOR PER- 
SONAL WORKERS by 
Howard Agne<iv Johnston. 
Studies covering the principal fea- 
tures of Personal Work, Adapted 
for Church and Young People's 
Classes, or for individual study. 



I 



Cloth, 75 cents, postpaid 
"Paper, 35 cents 



NDIVIDUAL WORK FOR 
INDIVIDUALS, by the late 
H Clay TrumbulL Incidents 
of personal conversations in the 
experience of the author, -who -was 
one of the most remarkable per- 
sonal workers of this generation, 

* 



ISSUED BY 

THE INTERNATIONAL, COMMITTEE OF YOUNG MEN'S 
CHRISTIAN ASSOCIATIONS 



We have special editions of each of the above works for 
use in the Evangelistic campaign. Order from 




ilgrim 



* * 




BRANCHES AT NEW YORK AND CHICAGO 



cMarch l t 1905 





The Needed Religious 
Discipline for Youth 



AS SHOWN BY PSYCHOLOGICAL STUD- 
IES OF THE DEVELOPMENT OF THE 
CHILD INTO THE MAN ^J ^J ^? ^> ^? 



By Rev. Charles E. McKinley 



Pp. 265 

A VERY 



Price, $1.25 net 
TIMELY BOOK 




CONTENTS 

I An Introduction to Youth 

II The Drama of Youth 

III The Genesis of Christian Character 

IV Where Christian Nurture Fails 
V The Evangelism of Jesus 

VI Personal Adjustment 

VII A Graded Gospel 
VIII The School -of Worship 

IX Aims and Expectations , 

X Agencies and Methods 



NewYor, 




BOSTON 



Chicago 



3117 






i 

11 '345- 



-003- 



^m^^.; 



UNIVERSITY OF 
LIBRARY 



! ! 345 







