School of Theology at Claremont


% s ‘ .
atts .
: . .
AS we , BEES i aire
x . Sans ee
‘ EUSERSEI SOO tu Rata ‘ or
‘ ms .
REN . NANA Gt iS cS NS ew BAK br i
vrs * SORA AS ESAS Ie arora era
\ wy “ \ cara
Res ‘ . i es ries
Porous rea
er
é . ee i‘ ines DONC Oca esas
OO’ Deon erer arta: ‘ Ny
‘ if
. WEL ews
. +
eloren
* es . A NSS Facsacrars
. ere) b .
\ \ .


: 1320603













OY. \ ‘ SS AS
POOR Oia Ee RU SG Oy OO SSAA SSE,












RO.
BEE OOO
ERR ION Ue URL ERIE ON


MLE ERE,

















SEO IO,
SSUSSESLUCRP: SANTA SERN CORN
SY, SERNA OEE

SENSE SETHE SY Sa Ora 8 EAR



















































































, 7 LASS eae)
AMEE ee oie eae
7 EAN S TO? re.
aes reper ery veer
Cre ee eae

































prey tra rs ee AE Ae ree >
Woy pe OOt eat: highs eee vier
VEDIO LITV IS COG 9 PEEL LG peerpe rs =
AMR ee ee, C6AGG LVS AS SG a
PEELE TESTS GF POOL T TA OTIS Ce PIE AL ASG :
; AEP SI Ti ITNT PVT TI SLPS IGG .
, AMS EASE AA LE ELE LA LEMAR MAM AM Ed -
AEM MA ELAS TLE L EEE ELD EEL MELD ELLEN ALLELE
POO LETTER OTT TEP Ae GLH HIT TE OAT ITOIVSS Oo
LIE E LETT PASTS CHP A LLL LPI ATEN TLD LGR ONG GSAT v
; CELA EAS SILIG











ee OTOL LA LES

CLITA IT IMIS ALL GE PP EOG ee

OORT OOLT IVI TTT ET ELOY Oe aa Cre ly
OOP ATL I AGS LGTY rt tt re LG

TITEL OP LIR TTT LTTE STE Y TOTO OITA T EP EY err rey
CLARE EL OEE LE LOD LEH SAMS ERMA AEA ELLE

PLEA DEEL EEL hee Ah beh Rh Lib

AERA ELENA MAMA ede

OL OPI TAA AG SEG

Ces7 Crt ey


a ae
COT Orr rrr hey
OL MOL IIIL TORTI ED VY
eee ae
















rye
(Ag aaa,
Fer a










r
7 ery

LO a A he a AM es kt
LT II TTC TON rr Te err
rere ry DO dea i ad
a ae A ae dl de ee eo ae
LAL EL EELEEE LMAO EAM AL ded




















, ihe irr
Lt ry re rer
EME A Meee ets
Ce eI E EE
PAE ASAP ACMA NL EAA ees
LE TO re hy
AAS EAS MA Ae ees
OTL LTT Ee ee
















LES hl TO AIT rer ere
AE LO te Ae el A a LEE EL Mh lh LTC IIIT TE Tr Ce he yl AIL OCHO PE er
COMER EM SM ee ae A CR ee LL ME Ee ee di





The Library


of the
School of Theology
at Claremont


1325 North College Avenue
Claremont, CA 91711








THE PREACHER’S
COMPLETE HOMILETIC


COMMENTARY


BOOKS OF PSALMS


VOL. 1


THE PREACHER'S
COMPLETE HOMILETIC


COMMENTARY


ON THE


OLD TESTAMENT


ON AN ORIGINAL PLAN


WITH CRITICAL AND EXPLANATORY NOTES,
INDEXES, ETC., ETC.





By VARIOUS AUTHORS





In Tweniy-One Volumes





FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY
NEW YORK AND LONDON


SoA +
45 A HOMILETIC


'' COMMENTARY


ON THE BOOK OF


PSALMS


VOLS!


ON PSALMS I—XXV
By THE REV. W. L. WATKINSON


ON PSALMS XXVI—XXXV
By THE REV. W. FORSYTH, A.M.


ON PSALMS XXXVI-—-XXXVIII
By THE REV. JOSEPH S. EXELL


ON PSALMS XXXIX—LXXxVII
By THE REV. WILLIAM JONES





FUNK & WAGNALLS COMPANY
NEW YORK AND LONDON


Printed in the United States





HOMILETICG COMMENTARY


ON THE


PSALMS.


BY REV. W. L. WATKINSON.





=P 10


PSALM 1,


INTRODUCTION.


“This psalm seems to have been placed first in the collection, because from its general
character and subject, it formed a suitable introduction to the rest. It treats of the blessed-
ness of the righteous, and the misery of the wicked—topics which constantly recur in the
psalms, but it treats of them as if all experience pointed only in one direction. The moral
problem which in other psalms troubles the ancient poets of Israel, when they see the
evil prospering and the good oppressed, has here no place. The poet rests calmly in the
truth that it is well with the righteous. He is not vexed with those passionate questionings of
hieart which meet us in such psalms as the 37th and 73d. Hence we may probably conclude
that his lot was cast in happier and more peaceful times,”—Perowne,


Tue B.Lessep LIFE.
(Verses 1-3.)


Consider:

I. The secret of the blessed life.

“Blessed is the man that walketh not
in the counsel of the ungodly,” &c.
(ver. I.)

Wherever blessedness is to be found,
it is not in these directions. What a
direct contradiction is this first verse to
the world’s philosophy! To keep the
law may be safe, but it is to walk in
the common light of day; to follow
one’s own counsels is to dwell in the
purple light of pleasure. So argues the
natural man; and here the Psalmist
gives a flat denial to his argument. The
world is wrong; the Psalmist is right.
Blessed is the man who abstains from
ungodly policy, iniquitouseaction, scorn-
ful use of things divine and holy. Ac-
cording to a custom which is generally
recognised in Central Africa, whenever
a caravan mistakes its way, and is
obliged to retrace its steps and return


to a road from which it has deviated, a
bough is thrown across the wrong path,
and a furrow is scratched in the ground
by means of the feet, so that no succeed-
ing caravan may fall into the same
error. Thus the generations which
have gone astray have declared that the
ways of ungodliness and sin are ways
of bitterness and disappointment, and
they have left their emphatic andesor-
rowful testimonies as boughs and fur-
rows across these false ways, to admon-
ish us to seek another and a truer path.

But a merely negative goodness will
not ensure us true blessedness, therefore
the Psalmist proceeds to lay down the
grand secret of blessedness in profound
spiritual words. “But his delight is in
the law of the Lord.’ How truly pro-
found! How superior to the superficial
theories of happiness which human
moralists have from time to time put
forth! Whichcote truly says: “Duty


uf


PeaLN L


HOHMILBTIO COMMENTARY: PSALMB.


ES


and happiness are vital acts, and must
be put forth from vital principles.” The
vital principle is here declared. ‘‘ The
philosophers’ discourses of this subject
are but learned dotages. David saith
more to the point in this short psalm
than any or all of them put together;
they did but beat the bush. God hath
put the bird into our hands.”—Trapp.

The secret of bliss is the right attitude
of the soul to the truth of God.

1. A right relation of the wild to the
law of God. “But his will is in the
law of the Lord.” —Zuther. The bias of
the will is toward Divine truth. The
“ungodly” are self-willed, and walk after
their own ‘‘counsel;” the ‘“ blessed”
man consults the Divine will, and is
ever longing for the path of God’s com-
mandments, “The ‘will’ which is here
signified is that delight of heart, and
that certain pleasure, in the law, which
does not look at what the law promises,
nor at what it threatens, but at this
only, that ‘the law is holy, and just,
and good.’ Hence it is not only a love
of the law, but that loving delight in
the law which no prosperity, nor adver-
sity, nor the world, nor the prince of it,
can either take away or destroy ; for it
victoriously bursts its way through
poverty, evil report, the cross, death,
and hell, and in the midst of adver-
sities shines the brightest.” — Luther,
quoted by Spurgeon.

2. A right relation of the affections
to the law of God. “His delight.”
“The law is more than a mere rule,
after which the man is to frame his out-
ward life."—Perowne, It fills with ad-
miration and delight. But can the law
of God thus excite the affections and
rejoice the heart? Yes; for, as Festus
sings—

“ Law is love defined.”


The godly man beholds in the spiritual
law the declaration of the Divine nature,
which is essential love, and he delights
in that law after the inner man.

3. A right relation of the intelligence
to the law of God. “He meditates on
the law day and night* We must know
the law if we are to perceive its beauty
and appreciate its worth, and the more

2


we know of it, the greater shall be our
joy in it. Many skim the Bible as a
novel, when they should ponder it, and
master it, line by line, like a grammar.
He who is ignorant of the Divine law,
or misconceives it, cannot know true
freedom and blessedness ; but he whose
eyes are opened to the deep things of
the law, walks at liberty, and knows
peace unspeakable.

Let us not seek bliss in things of
time and sense, but iet us labour to
know the will of God, and to have our
hearts harmonised with that will, and
we shall find rest to our souls.

Consider :

Il. The picture of the blessed life.

‘““He shall be like a tree planted,”
&. (ver. 3.)

1. The securtty of this blessedness.
“Planted by the rivers of water.”
“ Planted” means firmly planted.
“ Rivers,” indicate unfailing refreshment
of spirit; the streams of Divine truth
and influence. Carnal joys flourish and
wither with changing circumstances, but
his joy abides whose life is rooted in
God. ‘His soul, watered by the
streams of Paradise, knows not the
parched season of the sunburnt heath.”
— Sutcliffe. “ By the side of the streams
in the East may be seen trees, at all
seasons covered with luxurious verdure,
blossoms, or fruit; whilst at a distance,
where no water is, may be seen dwarfish
and unhealthy trees, with scarcely a
leaf to shake in the winds of heaven.” —
Roberts, Thus, drinking supplies from
the living streams of God’s truth, our life
is ever strong and blessed, whilst we faint
and fade where no such water is.

2. The mantfestation of this blessed-
ness. The godly man is known by the
beneficence of hés life. ‘ Bringeth forth
his fruit in Ate season.” The truly
blessed life is a life of beneficence; and
if we delight in God’s law, it shall per
fect our individual character, fit us for
the sphere and season in which we live,
and make us a blessing to our genera-
tion. “As with a palm-tree, all that is
in it is profitable—leaves, wood, and
fruit—so also with the Christian, all that
he does is to redound to the honour of
the Divine name and the benefit of his


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMB,


FOAL L





neighbour.”—Starke, The godly man
is known by the beauty of his character,
“His leaf also shall not wither.’ As
the foliage of the tree is its beauty and
glory, so shall delight in the law of the
Lord give grace and majesty to the
character. In inner rectitude is the
secret of all true and high visible excel-
lence ; out of a heart right with God
epring all the poetry and utilities of
ife.

3. The perpetuity of this blessedness,
The tree by the watercourses abides in
bloom and fruition, and the joy and
glory which spring in the heart and life
of the lover of God’s Word are perennial
and permanent, Our scientific garden-
ers enthusiastically anticipate the day
when, through special culture, all our
roses will have evergreen foliage, bril-
liant and fragrant flowers, and the habit
of blooming for a greater part of the
year. He whose life is grounded in the
Divine truth and goodness, who draws
daily vitality from the river of God’s
pleasure, is an evergreen, and blooms all
the year long, all life long, and death
itself cannot blight his glory, or destroy
his joy.

4, The universality of this blessed-
ness, “And whatsoever he doeth shall


prosper.” “ He shall prosper in whatso-
ever hedoeth.”— Wordsworth. Deference
to the law of God secures universal pros-
perity. God’s blessing is on all the
handiwork of the godly, and directs it
to blessed and prosperous issues.

“Oh! the blessednesses” of the man
who delights in the law of the Lord.
As we long for the beatitudes, let us
put ourselves in God’s hands. “ Planted
by the river.” “This is properly used
of a transplanted tree. He is not left
to the efforts of nature, but taken be-
neath the gardener’s care, and placed in
a favourable soil.”"—Kay. ‘Man is
righteous, not by birth or nature, or
through his own power, skill, or activity,
but by the Divine agency, through the
means of grace which Divine mercy has
established for us, as a tree planted by
an abundant and flowing brook, if he,
like the tree, take up into his own lifs,


Srom the means afforded him by God,


that which is necessary to his life and
growth,”—Moll.

May God take us from the wilds of
nature, graft us into Christ, nourish us
by the influence of the Holy Spirit,
and thus shall we bear our fruit unto
holiness, and in the end everlasting
life.


Tos Programme OF Evi.
Psalm i. 1.


**A climax is to be noted here in the choice of expressions,
degrees of habit, in the verbs ‘walked,’ ‘stood,’ ‘sat;’ next, three degrees of evil


three
the


Thus we have,


eharacter, the ‘wicked,’ the ‘sinners,’ and the ‘mockers ;’ lastly, three degrees of openness
in the evil-doing, ‘counsel,’ ‘way,’ ‘seat,’ ”—Perowne.


We see here:

L The evil life in its inception

“Walketh in the counsel of the un-
godly.”

The word used in the original for
“ungodly” signifies the “loose man,
the man loose from God.”—Delitzsch.
We see here that ungodliness is the
source of all evil; ‘“‘ becoming loose to
God,” is the point of departure to posi-
tive and universal unrighteousness, This
great truth is often forgotten; and
where actual ain would be denounced,
ungodliness is often regarded with in-
dulgence, Indeed, that temper of mind
which is looge from God is by many


considered the most philosophic and
desirable condition of the mind; the
morality loose from God, the truest
morality; the science loose from God,
the wisest science; the character loose
from God, the most sound and noble
character. The Psalmist in this place
indicates the profound error of such
reasoning, Looseness from God, un-
godliness, is the original and fertile
source of all transgression, Enmity
with God is enmity with righteousness,
The Psalmist teaches this same doctrine
of the connection of atheism with trans-
gression in Psalm xiv. 1: “The fool
hath said in his heart, There is no
8


Peale B


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY : PSALMB.





God. They are corrupt, they have done
abominable works, there is none that
doeth good.” Beware of ungodly
thoughts! Beware of a morality not
built upon theology! Beware of an
evil heart of unbelief in departing from
the living God |

And this ungodliness seeks to fustify
ttself. “The counsel of the ungodly.”
Men are anxious that their opinions and
conduct should have the sanction of
reason, and so they seek to justify their
ungodliness to their understanding.
“No one sins without making some
excuse to himself for sinning. He is
obliged to do so; man is not like the
brute beasts; he has a Divine gift
within him which we call reason, and
which constrains him to give an account
to it for what he does. He cannot act
at random ; however he acts, he must
act by some kind of rule or some sort
of principle, else he is vexed and dis-
satisfied with himself. Not that he is
very particular whether he finds a good
reason or a bad, when he is very much
straitened for a reason, but a reason of
some sort he must have.”—Newman,
Reason is never used in a more unna-
tural, ignoble, hopeless task, than when
it is pressed into the service of atheism
and irreligion: but it is pressed into
such service, tortured and perverted,
until the godless theory of life is
“sicklied o’er with the pale cast of
thought,” and looks a very clever and
plausible thing, The maxims which
are used to justify a godless science and
a godless life are essentially stupid and
faise, yet how frequently they wear a
most philosophic air! Here, then, is
the beginning of evil—an irreligious,
ungodly way of thinking.

IL The evil life in its development.

1. “‘Standeth in the way of sinners.”
By “sinners” are intended those “who
pass their lives insin, especially coarse and
manifest sin.”—Delttzsch. ‘Open and
avowed offenders, habitual transgressors.”
—Kay. Here sinful thought has passed
Into conduct, action, life. We cannot
hold unbelieving theories with impunity.
Ideas rule men, ideas rule the world, and
ideas fundamentally false, as are those of
atheism, must soon work disaster, both


in individual and national life. He whe
in thought lingers on the forbidden
ground of scepticism, next takes his place
with actual offenders against the law,
Nothing is more evident than that loose
thinking and loose living go together.

2. “ Sitteth in the seat of the scornful.”
‘The scornful are the men who deride
the thought of religious obligation.”—
Kay. They delight in the company of
those who scoff at religion. This state,
and it is soon reached, argues the most
desperate wickedness. There is some-
thing so exalted in reverence, that some
commentators have expressed a senti-
ment of respect for Jacob, who buried
his false gods with tenderness ; but how
utterly dead to every noble quality is
the man who can blaspheme the true
God and His Word! Here the poison-
seed of unbelief has opened into the
full-blown flower of wickedness. ‘“ The
beginnings of sin are modest, the issues
of it are impudent.”— Whtchcote.

Il. The evil life in its consumma-
tion.

The man is blessed who walketh not
in the counsel of the ungodly ; it follows
that he is cursed who does follow un-
godly counsels and conduct. ‘Cursed
in his counsels, cursed in his actions,
cursed in his end."—Clarke. The far-
ther he goes, the further he is from
blessedness.

We are reminded in this verse:

1. Of the tnsinuating nature of sin.
It glides stealthily into the heart—
stealthily into the life.

2. Of the prolific nature of sin. One
sin leads to another sin; one sin leads
to a darker sin; one sin leads to many
sins, It is a travel ler’s tale which tells
that the Indian spiders weave webs so
strong that men are sometimes impri-
soned by them; but it is no fable that
from the gossamer threads of ungodly
thoughts, nd slender transgressions,
come at teagth dark convictions and
habits which held men in most cruel
bondage.

3. Of the accursed nature of sin. It
fills with misery ; it ends indeath. What
God curses withers away. Let us pray,
then, that we enter not into the path of
the wicked


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; PSALMS.


PSALM IL





REsvLts,
(Verses 4-6.)


L The destinies of men are various.

The godly flourish evermore: “The
ungodly are not so.” The pious and the
wicked are together in this world, but
the text indicates that a separation will
be effected. ‘They are like the chaff
which the wind driveth away.” “This
allusion describes the instability of the
principles of the ungodly, rather than of
their fortunes, Their want of principle
is opposed to the good man’s steady
meditation of Jehovah’s law, which is
the foundation of his prosperity. On
the other hand, because the ungodly
want this principle, therefore they shall
not stand in the judgment.”— Horsley.
The ungodly have instability of prin-
ciple, and therefore instability of fortune.
“Their glory shall not descend after
them.”

Il. The destinies of men are decided
by their moral character and conduct.

“Therefore the ungodly shall not
stand in the judgment.” ‘‘ Because they
are like chaff, without root below, with-
out fruit above, without spiritual vital-
ity ; therefore, on account of their inner
worthlessness and instability, they do
not stand.”—Delttesch. ‘‘ Although the
ungodly are in similar circumstances with
the righteous, yet they derive no profit
from this favourable circumstance. They
are spiritually dead and withered. That
which has matured in them has faded
prematurely ; for they have not appro-
priated to themselves the nourishment


of life, and they have not formed in
themselves the faculty for this appro-
priation, Without root and without
sap, they have not attained any vigour,
nor brought forth any fruit (Matt. xxi.
19). Thus they have ripened only for
destruction ; unsubstantial and worthless
as chaff, the sport of the wind until
scattered by the storm, they go to de-
struction, and leave no trace behind.” —
Moll, And the righteous stand because
they are righteous, Not chance, not
social rank, not birth, not intellectual
culture, not religious profession, not
Divine decrees, shall determine our des-
tiny, but our spirit and course of life.

Ill. The destinies of men are as
widely contrasted as their character.

The righteous bloom for ever in the
paradise of God ; the wicked are driven
away as chaff in the whirlwind of the
Divine anger. ‘‘ Whose fan is in His
hand, and He will throughly purge His
floor, and gather His wheat into the gar-
ner; but He will burn up the chaff with
unquenchable fire” (Matt. iii. 12). And
this teaching of the Scriptures coinmends
itself to reason. ‘‘ Nothing is more cre-
dible than that men’s states shall differ
as much as their spirits and tempers do
differ.” — Whichcote.

Blessed is the man whose will and life
are thoroughly identified with the Divine
law ; for the law shall stand for ever,
and none shall suffer loss who enjoy its
shelter |


PSALM IL


InTRODUOTIOR.


“ quite imposaible now to say what the event was which occasioned this poem. The
older ie utate referred it to David, and the attacks made upon him by the Philistines
(2 Sam. v.) But though the poem was occasioned by some national event, we must not confine
its application to that event, nor need we even suppose that the singer himself did not feel that
his words went beyond their first occasion, He begins to speak of an earthly king, and his
wars with the nations of the earth, but his words are too great to have all their meaning
exhausted in David, or Solomon, or Ahag, or any Jewish monarch, Or ever he is aware, the
local and the temporal are swallowed up in the universal and the eternal, The king who sits
on David’s throne haa become glorified and transfigured in the light of the promise. The picture
is half ideal, half actual. It conoerns itself with the present, but with that only so far as it is
typical of greater things to come, BE IRL cl Eo oN lame


PSALM 11.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; PSALMS





largest hopes, has taken the place of the visible and earthly king. The nations are not merely
those oper now mustering for the battle, but whatsoever opposeth and exalteth itself against


Jehovah and His Anointed.” —Perowne.


Tae Hoty War.


Whilst we ought to be careful, and
not fall into the mistake of the mystical
interpreters, who see the prefiguration of
the Messiah in almost every psalm, we
must not fall into the far greater error
of the rationalistic critics, who cannot
find predictions of the Messiah in any.
In nature, types are always thrown off
before the archetype appears; outline
sketches are given long before the ideal
is realised. And we are perfectly justi-
fied in finding in the character and his-
tory of David the rough outline and
prefiguration of the glorious ideal King,
whose reign is a reign of righteousness,
and whose kingdom cannot be moved,
In this psalm we have a vivid picture of
The revolt against Messiah.


Consider:
I. The extent of the revolt.
“Nations.” “Peoples.” ‘ Kings,”


Rulers ” (ver. 1, 2).

The reign and kingdom of Christ has
always encountered violent opposition,
The decree is, “‘ Rule Thou in the mtdst
of Thine enemies ;” and Christ has ever
had to contend with opposition to His
generous aims. He has encountered this
opposition—(1.) In all nations—Jew,
Roman, Greek. (2.) In all ranks.
“ Kings,” “peoples ;” monarchs, and
mobs have resisted the Christian faith,
and joined to crush it. (3.) In all gene
rations. Christ was rejected by His own
age (Acts iv. 27); and the pages of
Church history are crowded with the
records of a warfare that has never slept
since the Church was founded; and,
unless we misread the Apocalypse, fierce
aud bloody days are yet before the
Church of Christ.

I. The determination by which this
revolt is characterised.

It is (1.) Deliberate. ‘They take
counsel.” They “imagine,” te, devise,
They ponder in their heart, and bring
forth their strongest reasons and most
subtle schemes. (2.) Combined. “They
take counsel together.” Strange com-
binations have been, and still are being,

6


formed against Christ. (3.) Resolute
“ Set themselves.” ‘‘ Stand up against.”
—Prayer-Book, “The word used here is
the word used of Goliath taking up his
station to defy Israel.".—Kay. A most
resolute and defiant attitude. “One
would have expected that so great a
blessing to this world should have been
universally welcomed and embraced,
and that every sheaf should immediately
have bowed to that of the Messiah, and all
the crowns and sceptres on earth should
have been laid at His feet ; but it proves
quite contrary. Never were tlie notions
of any sect of philosophers, though
never so absurd, nor the power of any
prince or state, though never so tyran
nical, opposed with so much violence as
the doctrine and government of Christ.”
—M. Henry. “We will not have this
man to reign over us” (Luke xix. 14).

il. The secret cause of this revolt.

“Let us break their bands asunder,
and cast away their cords from us”
(ver. 3).

They rebel against the law of God in
Christ. The law of God, as declared in
Christ, is a law requiring great denials
and sacrifices to men, the foundations
of whose nature are out of course; and
for this reason it is distasteful to us, and
we reject it, ‘Doctrines would be
readily believed if they involved in
them no precepts ; and the Church may
be tolerated by the world if she will
only give up her discipline.”-— Horne.
The yoke of Christ is easy, and His
burden light to the penitent and en-
lightened heart ; but to the blind and
self-willed the law of Christ is as the
“bands” and “ cords” which the yoked
oxen are eager to cast off. Men may
give a score reasons for their hostility
to Christ, such as the incredibility of
miracles, the faults of Christians, &c.,
but the final reason for His rejection is
to be found in those laws of truth and
love and purity which regulate His
kingdom, and which are bright as gold
and soft as silk to the righteous, but


STOMILETIO COMMENTARY ; PBALMR


PeALM IZ,


a a a a re L


which are to the disobedient and lawless
hateful as the hangman’s noose.

IV. The vanity of this opposition to
Christ.

1. The unreasonableness of it. It is
vain in the sense of being unreasonable,
“ Why do the heathen rage?” This is
& question to which no satisfactory
answer can be given. Christ is the most
blessed King, and wherever He reigns
blessings abound. Why reject Him?
It is a vain, foolish act. To all His
enemies we ask, ‘“‘ What evil hath He
done?” Statesmen are against Him,
and yet they cannot shut their eyes to
the fact that His religion makes grand
nations ; philosophers are against Him,
and yet they cannot deny but that He
has lit up the intellectual sphere with a
most precious and benign light; moral-
ists are against Him, and yet they con-
fess His character to be unique and un-
approachable in its sublime beauty and
goodness, All sinners are against Him ;
and yet in their deepest heart they
know Him to be love, His law to be
right, His kingdom to be the kingdom
of heaven. To oppose Christ is madness,
blind passion, suicidal folly, for He is the
sinner’s friend, the Desire of the nations.

2. The wselessness of it. It is “vain”
in the sense of being useless, The
physical man might sooner hope to free
himself from the law of gravitation, than
the man moral expect to shake himself
loose from the law and dominion of
Christ, It is God’s declared will that
Christ shall reign, and that all things
shall be put under His fect (ver. 7, 8).
“The day of Christ’s coronation was the
day of His resurrection.” —Perowne. (Ver.
7.) By virtue of His atoning work He
has become the King of kings, and He
shall reign for ever and ever (Dan. vii.
9-14). God holds in contempt the
enemies of His Son (ver. 4). ‘ With
the rage and exertion of His enemies
the poet sets in beautiful contrast the
laughing quiet of his God, who can with
one word bring these proceedings to
naught.”—De Wette. And all the rage
of the unbelieving fails to destroy Mes-
siah’s kingdom. ‘The ungodly storm
and rage against the pious, excite all
their counsels against them. But all


this is as the stormy, swollen waves of
the sea, which rush along as if they
would break down the shore, but before
they reach the shore they quiet down
again, vanish in themselves, or break up
with a little foam upon the shore.”—
Luther, “The Church is oppressed but
not suppressed.” Molt. And God shall
at length cover all Christ’s enemies with
confusion and ruin (ver. 9). “ He shall
break them,” &c, Is not the Jewish
nation a signal illustration of this?
Nations and men who set themselves
against Christ perish, We see here
then the utter vanity of all attempts to
injure the throne of God’s Anointed
King,—Messiah,

The Psalmist concludes :

1. With an admonition. “Be wise
now,” &c. (ver. 10.) “ Be wise.” Let
the princes exalt Christ in their king-
doms, in their hearts; let all know
the folly and fruitlessness of resisting
Him. One of the Roman philosophers
remarked to the Emperor Adrian, “I
never dispute with a prince who has
twenty-four legions in his service.”
“ All power is given unto Christ,” and
this power is based on love and right-
eousness, and woe unto those who resist
the Saviour-King. When His wrath
blazes forth they “ perish from the way ”
(ver. 12). ‘ Whosoever shall fall on
this stone shall be broken; but on
whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind
him to powder” (Matt. xxi. 44). “It
shall grind him to powder,” meant a
destruction utter, and hopeless, and ever-
lasting, and without remedy. Ground
—ground to powder! Any life left in
that? any gathering up of that, and
making a man of it again? All the
humanity battered out of it, and the
life clean gone from it? Does not that
sound very much like everlasting de-
struction “from the presence of God
and from the glory of Hia power”!
Christ, silent now, will begin to speak ;
passive now, will begin to act. The
stone comes down, and the fall of it
will be awful! ‘I remember, away up
in a lonely Highland valley, where,
beneath a tall black cliff, all weather-
worn, and cracked, and seamed, there
lies at the foot, resting on ee greeu-


PSaLy W.


sward that creeps round its base, a huge
rock that has fallen from the face of
the precipice, A shepherd was passing
beneath it; and suddenly, when the
finger of God’s will touched it, and rent
it from its ancient bed in the everlast-
ing rock, it came down, leaping and
bounding from pinnacle to pinnacle—and
it fell; and the man that was beneath
it is there now! ‘Ground to powder.’
Ah, my brethren! that is not my illus-
tration—that is Christ’s, Therefore I
gay to you, since all that stand against
Him shall become as ‘the chaff of the
summer threshing-floor,’ and be swept
utterly away, make Him the foundation
on which you build; and when the
storm sweeps away every ‘refuge of
lies,’ you will be safe and serene,
builded upon the Rock of Ages.”—
Maclaren. “ Be wise now.” Fools do
that at last which wise men do at first.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY ; PSALMS,


2. With a diretion “Serve ths
Lord with fear, and rejoice with trem-
bling” (ver. 11). With fear, because of
His greatness and holineas ; with jog,
because His law is love, and His service
freedom.

3. With a persuasion. “Kiss the
Son,” &c. (ver. 12.) “Do Him hom-
age.” His wrath may kindle suddenly,
and if it does, we “perish from the
right way.”—Prayer-Book. “The power
of Christ will be manifested in all, by
the destruction either of sin or the
sinner.” — Horne. “ Blessed are all
they,” &e. “Only those who reject the
breath of love, feel the iron of justice.”
— Moll.

Let Him break the lsw of sin with a
rod of iron, let Him dash to pieces our
bad heart as a potter's vessel, but let
us put our trust in Him, and He shall
save our souls alive.


Tur Reien or CHRIST.
(Verses 6-12.)


We have here a description of Christ’s
mediatorial reign.

Observe :

I. Its sovereignty.

Ver. 6. Christ is here exalted above
all kings and nations, His throne is
set above all earthly thrones; on His
head are many crowns The supreme
power is in the hands of the Messiah.

IL Its authority.

Ver. 7. “1 will declan what God
has decreed.”—Horsley. “ The kings of
Iarael derived their authority from God;
they were appointed to execute His laws;
and being God’s vicegerents, they were
in their official capacity styled gods, or
sons of God.”— Phillips. So is Christ’s
administration of Divine authority, but
in a peculiar and pre-eminent sense. He
is not a son of God, but the Son of God.
And Christ was not made the Son of
God in the incarnation or in the resur-
rection, but He was in those great events


manifested as such. “ He was made of
the seed of David according to the flesh;
and deelared to be the Son of God with
power, according to the spirit of holi-
ness, by the resurrection from the dead”
(Rom i, 3, 4).

Christ is of Divine nature; His re
deeming work was Divine work; and
His mediatorial reign isof Divine author.
sty and force.

IIL Its universality.

Ver. 8. “His kingdom ruleth ove
all,” and aims to restore all,

IV. Its irresistibility.

Ver. 9. “The enemies of Christ sup-
pose that His sceptre is still a reed, as in
the time of His sufferings; but they
will be obliged to experience, some day,
to their greatest shame, the iron sceptre
in His hand.”—Moll.

V. Its graciousness.


Ver. 10, &c. its grand design is to
save and bless.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,
Reenter rerrnnertnnnnnennereerenseenenaeneniretnenene


PeaLM 1,





Awragonistio Forors,
(Veres 11.)


“Berve the Lord with fear, and re-
Joice with trembling.”

The scientist tells us that the laws of
nature are arranged on the principle of
antagonistic forces ; and it is somewhat
thus with the laws of the Christian life,

IL We describe the two states of
feeling to which the text refors,

1. “Serve the Lord with fear,”
There are two kinds of fear—servile and
filial, The latter is indicated here. A
noble sensitiveness, an anxious conscien-
tiousness, a salutary apprehensiveness,
“With trembling.” “With diffidence.
The thing meant is that sort of fear
which arises from a man’s diffidence of
his own strength and power.”—Horsley,
2. “And rejoice.” Be glad in the Lord,
and in His service. ‘ Take satisfaction,
joy, and glory to yourselves in becoming
His servants. But let it be a holy,
temperate joy, fearful of offence, not
heedless and presumptuous, verging on
the licentious kind.”—AHorsley. We
observe :

IZ These two states of feeling are
not incompatible.

Fear and joy are only apparently con-
tradictory. We often see in nature how
apparently contradictory materials and
forces blend. Oxygen and nitrogen
may be spoken of as contradictory
gases, bat they are really comple-
mentary, and, combined in due pro-
portions, make the sweet and vital
atmosphere. Attraction and repulsion
seem to be contradictory forces, but
are really complementary, and their
combined action preserves the universe
in harmonic movement. Forces, laws,
phenomena, which appear contradictory
are really complementary, and from
their combined action spring the glories
and melodies of creation. Thus is it in
Christian experience, States of feeling
which are apparently contradictory are
really correlative. Joy and sorrow,
weakness and strength, fear and com-
fort ; these different states of feeling are
often co-existent in the Christian heart,


III. These two states of feeling are
essential to the security and develop-
ment of the Christian life.

They not only may, but they ought
to exist together.

We ought to fear, Some Christians
are distressed because they feel this
emotion. They need not. Work out
your salvation with fear and trembling.”
The brighter the star the more it
trembles. As the needle trembles to
the pole, so should our soul tremble to
its God.

We ought to rejoice. Pliny tells us
of some strange tribes who dwelt in
caves because they were afraid of the
sunshine; we have known Christians
similarly afraid of sunshine, Be not
afraid of joy. Let Him lead you into
green pastures, ‘“‘ Rejoice in the Lord
always; and again I gay rejoice.”
“There must ever be a holy fear mixed
with the Christian’s joy. This ia a
sacred compound, yielding a sweet smell ;
and we must see to it that we burn no
other upon the altar. Fear without joy
is torment ; and joy without holy fear
would be presumption.” —Spurgeon.

There must be the two states of feel-
ing, and they must be duly balanced.
If we give too much place to fear, it
destroys the freedom, nobility, and
joyfulness of the soul; if we give too
much place to joy, it renders the soul
relaxed and light.

And these two states of feeling, com-
pleting and balancing each other, secure
the true development and perfection of the
soul, The laws of nature are arranged
on the principle of antagonistic forces,
and the constant struggle to maintain
the equilibrium fills creation with motion,
life, music, beauty, and fruitfulness. So
weakness and strength, joy and sor-
row, solicitude and comfort, hope and
fear, are the antagonistic forces of
the soul, and in the constant struggle
to secure the equilibrium, the moral
nature is being exercised, enlarged, and
perfected, “4





PRALM IL HOMIUCETIO COMMENTARY ; PSALMB,
PSALM TL
Mosonitms anp MaJorrries.
Introduction.
“The preceding psalm had set before us the utter vanity of all attempts to injure the


throne of God’s anointed King—Messiah. Th
life which stands as the typical instance of rebe


fore, of the working of Antichrist.”—Zay.


L The majority without God.

1. The greatness of the majority.
“ How are they increased.” ‘ Many are
they” (ver. 1). “Many there be”
(ver. 2). ‘Ten thousands of people,
that have set themselves” (ver. 6).
Nearly all Israel had deserted the king
(2 Sam. xv. 12), How often has good-
ness to find itself outvoted! How often
has the man of God to feel a sense of
solitude and desolation! Thus Christ,
Thus the Church has often been out-
numbered by its enemies, again and
again. A few holy men have had to
struggle against the weight of govern-
ments, the influence of the press, the
omnipotence of wealth, the organisation
of parties, the fury of mobs, and some-
times the power of the pulpit. And the
believer feels the air is full ef foes: his
adversaries are “legion.” He feels that
he is alone contending with dark hosts
of sins, doubts, fears, and sorrows,
“They set themselves round about.”
They swarm on every hand, and fix them-
selves in battle array. The odds were
overwhelmingly against the Psalmist ;
so are the odds overwhelmingly against
the Church of Christ, and against the
souls which trust in Christ.

2. The bitterness of the majority.
‘Many there be which say of my soul,
There is no help for him in God” (ver.
2). “He has offended God: and God,
who was his strength, has forsaken him.
God will no longer save him. He isa
reprobate."—Kay. “God as well as
man is against him ; his destruction is
certain ; prayer itself will be of no avail.”
—Perowne (2 Sam. xvi. 8). His ene-
mies breathe out cruelty. ‘The words
of the adversaries pronounce a judgment
upon his inmost life, or upon his per-
onal relationship to God.”—Delitzsch.
‘God,’ they cried, ‘has deserted him.’

10


resent psalm relates to that incident in David’s
Ton against God’s kingdom ;—as the type, there-


And the Psalmist knew that their re-
proach was not without seeming justifi-
cation. He knew that his own sin lay
at the bottom of this insurrection.
“ David had plunged himself into the
deepest abyss of wretchedness by his
adultery with Bathsheba. The rebellion
of Absalom belonged to the series of
dire calamities which began to come
upon him from that time. Plausible
reasons were not wanting for such words
as these which gave up his cause as
lost.”—Delitesch. Thus his enemies, as
well as his disconcerted friends, remember
his sin, and regard him as one cast away.
And this was the weak point of David
in dealing with the hosts of the enemy.
And it is with us. A sense of moral
blamelessness would enable us to con-
front boldly with the seraph Abdiel a
myriad enemies ; but “conscience makes
cowards of us all,” and we tremble in
the presence of numbers. Thus our
spiritual adversaries reproaeh us; there
ts no salvation for him tn God ; and the
consciousness of our faithlessness gives
& power and sting to their words which
penetrate our soul with bitterness, and
which might well drive us to despair.

IL The minority with God.

The Psalmist felt himself to be in a
minority of one, but with God. Mark:

1. His consciousness of safety (ver. 3).
“A shield about me, or around me, cover-
ing the whole body; not merely a part
of it, as ordinary shields do.”—Alew#-
ander. Alone with God the believer
feels profoundly safe. “If God be for
us,” do, ~

2. His refuge in prayer (ver. 4). The
Lord heard his cry of penitence and
supplication. It was in this cry that
the guilty, lonely man put himself right
with God. He is away from the sano
tuary, away from the ark ; but the voics


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY ; PSALMS.





of the solitary and sorrowful reaches
God anywhere. Alone with God, this
is the secret of the martyr’s strength.
If the world forsakes you, if men and
demons mock you, knock at Heaven’s
gate with cries, and groans, and tears,
and God shall receive and shelter you.

His sublime peacefulness (ver. 5,
6). “I laid me down and slept,” &e.
Many lie down who cannot sleep, but
he could lie down on a rough bed and
sleep. God’s hand was his pillow, and
his sleep was sweet. The peace of God
passeth understanding, and the wildest
storms of temptation and persecution
cannot disturb it. The Atlantic Ocean
is swept by fearful storms, and moun-
tainous billows traverse its surface, but
acientific men say it is so quiet down in
the depths that if you could stretch a
rope of sand from one side of the ocean
to the other, there is not disturbance
enough to dissolve it. So amid the
direst storms of life the believer's heart
is kept in perfect peace, a peace which
the world gives not, and which the
world does not take away.

4. His assurance of victory (ver. 7).
He looks upon victory as certain, as
indeed already accomplished He sees
his enemy “as a wild beast whose jaw
{s broken, and which is unable to devour
its prey.”—Kay. He feels assured that
God will rebuke the wrath of Shimei,
confound the counsel of Ahithophel,
frustrate the usurpation of Absalom,
and bring to nought the uprising of
Israel So, having put ourselves right
with God, although our enemies rage as
the waves of the sea, we may confidently
anticipate victory.

5. His generous temper (ver. 8). He


PRALM WK,





does not ask for vengeance, but blessing.
This verse “casts a bright light into the
very depths of his noble soul.”—wald.
He has been wronged; but as God has
forgiven him, so he forgives those who
have injured him. Too often when
minorities become majorities they exact
and tyrannise ; but when God exalts us
in the gate, our spirit should be forgiving
and tender.

Lessons :

1. Do not always trust in the verdicta
of majorities, “The longest sword, the
strongest lungs, the most voices, are
false measures of truth.”— Whtchcote.

2. Do not confide in majorities,
David was at one time most popular;
but how soon the people deserted him.
“ Mortality is but the stage of muta-
bility."—T7'rapp.

3. Do not fear to be in a minority
with God, “Everybody,” said Talley-
rand, “is cleverer than anybody.” ‘This
is fine worldly wisdom no doubt, but
God is wiser, stronger than all, and he
who is in a minority with God need not
fear. “He that is in you is greater
than he that is in the world.”

4, Remember that the majority will
be against you when God iss When
the people thought that God had for-
saken the king, they forsook him too.
Men often sell their conscience for a
majority, but know when God forsakes
you, the universe forsakes you.

5. The way to conquer majorities is
through penitence and prayer. Thus, in
great social and religious reforms, Luther,
Wilberforce. So in our spiritual life;
“One shall chase a thousand,” &e, And
thus shall the majority against the Chris-
tian Church be changed into a minority.


Mistaken VERDIOTS.
(Verses 2, 3.)


In the second verse have the
verdict of sense touching the Psalmist’s
character; in the third verse you have
the judgment of faith.

L The verdict of sense.

Ver. 2. The verdict of sense was that
the king was deserted of God. And
observe ;


1. This verdict was popular, “ Many
there be,” &c. It appeared thus to his
enemies, and it would seem as if many
of his friends shared the same opinion.
It was the verdict of the multitude.

2. It was plausible. It regarded the
king’s sin, The devil’s advocates would
not fail to keep the dark Cire of the


PALM FV.











fallen king before the eyes of the nation.
Would not God forsake such a sinner?
And then there were the circumstances
of the king. He appears fallen and
discrowned. Driven away from his
palace, and accompanied in exile by a
few trembling friends, ‘Surely God had
deserted the royal sinner,’ they said.

3. It was confident. “There is no
help,” &c. They felt sure that his
cause was utterly hopeless: God had
cut him off altogether.

IL The judgment of faith

Ver. 3. The voice of the people was
not the voice of God. The Psalmist
puts his personal consciousness over
against the anathemas of the people.
He knows God to be his shield, his
glory, and the restorer of his fortunes.

How often has this fact been repeated !
The verdict of men passed upon their
brother is one of capital condemnation,
and yet the condemned one has hope
in God. How often does the world
speak thus:—‘The chief of sinners
amongst men, ‘the woman that is a
sinner.’ How soon society regards these
as lost, hopeless! How often has a
corrupt Church spoken thus! The
Catholics kindled the stake, and con-
signed the souls of glorious saints to
the devil. Nay, is not the true Church
of Christ sometimes in danger of falling
into this mistake? Are we not ready
to give up some cases, some
perhaps, as impracticable? How is it
that we fall into this great mistake $

1. We take circumstances as the sign
of a man’s spiritual status and relation-
ship. The people did in Jerusalem ; we
do, and it is a great error. A man may
be poor, friendlesa, afflicted, reduced to


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALME,


saddest straits, and yet not be forsaken
of God.

2. We ignore the power of penitence.
Ver. 4. The Psalmist “cried unto the
Lord,” &c. The world knows a man’s
sins, when it does not know his deep
sorrow and burning tears.

3. We limit the mercy and grace of
God. God’s pity is greater than ours,
and the blood of Jesus makes the foulest
clean. “No help for him in God.”
Some sinners are so obtuse, defiant,
brutal, their wickedness so profound,
and chronic, and desperate, that we
practically despair of their salvation.
Yet, have not our brightest saints been
raised out of most abandoned and des-
perate sinners? The natural historian
tells us that the rich olive was once dry
and offensive, the luscious peach bitter,
the apple-tree full of thorns, the aro
matic rose a mere thorn, and the fields
of wavy gold but wild grasses. But
far more surprising transformations
have been wrought in the Church of
God. “Be not deceived: neither forni-
cators, nor idolaters, nor adulterers, nor
effeminate, nor unchaste, nor thieves,
nor covetous, nor drunkards, nor revilers,
nor extortioners, shall inherit the king-
dom of God. And such were some of
you: but ye are washed, but ye are sane
tified, but ye are justified in the name of
the Lord Jesus, and the Spirit of our
God” (1 Cor. vi. 9-11). We forget the
greatness of redeeming mercy and power.

Lessons :
sa Human judgments are not infal-


2. Despair not of the worst of men, -
3. Despair not of yourselves in life's
darkest moments,


PSALM IV.
Nieut THovucuts,
Introduction,


“The Psalmist prays God to deliver him from


t as from peat distresses (ver. ¥),


1. He assures the haters of his regal dignity that God bestowed it, and will certainl tech
it (ver. 8, 4). 2, 3. He exhorts them to quiet submission, righteousness, and trust in Ged ies


5, 6). 4,5. He contrasts his own satisfaction, sp
quietude of others, even in the midst of their enjoyments (ver. 7,8). 6, 7. He


ringing from auch trust, with the hopeless dis-


oses with


an exquisite proof of his tranquillity by falling ere as it were, before us, under the Divine


protection (ver, 9). 8. The third
an evening psalm.” —Alewander.


may


described as a morning, and this fourth a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.











Man arrratine to Gop.
(Verse 1.)


In the midst of trials and perils the
Pealmist seeketh audience with God.

Observe :

He first appeals to God. He does
not go to God when all human inven-
tions have been tried and failed, but his
first cry is to Heaven. It is a good
thing to take life’s questions to Him
“straightway.” Before you go to the
doctor, go to God ; before you go to
the lawyer, go to God ; before you go
to your friend, to your minister, go to
God. Go directly from your trouble,
with your trouble, to God. We often
suffer loss by keeping back our burdens,
Consult Heaven at first, and you will
feel after that that you have little to ask
from human counsellors and comforters.

I He appeals to the Divine right-
eousness.

“O God of my righteousness.” He
recognises the fact of God’s righteous-
ness. Man is unjust, the world often
seems to be full of injustice; but
David recognises the justice of the
Divine character and government, And
not only so, but he recognises his per-
sonal relation to the righteous God. “O
God of my righteousness.” “QO God!
who art righteous Thyself, and art the
patron of my righteousness, of my right-
eous cause, and of my righteous life.”
—Leighton. The Psalmist claims to be
righteous, but acknowledges God as the
author of his righteousness, “A cele-
brated heathen said, ‘I wrap myself up
in my own virtue.’ A true believer has
something infinitely better to wrap him-
self in. When Satan says, Thou hast
yielded to my suggestions ; when Con-
science says, Thou hast turned a deaf
ear to my admonitions; when the Law
of God says, Thou has broken me;
when the Gospel says, Thou hast ne-
glected me; when Justice says, Thou
hast insulted me; when Mercy says,
Thou hast slighted me; Faith can say,
All this is too true! but I wrap myself
up in the righteousness of Jesus Christ.”
—Toplady. God cannot hear our appeal


except we recognise His righteousness,


and except through His grace we are
righteous ourselves,

Il. He appeals to the Divine faith-
fulness.

“Thou hast enlarged me when J
was in distress.” The Psalmist had
truly a good memory. He did not for-
get God’s help and mercies in days past;
his memory was full of sun-pictures ;
and with faultless logic he inferred that
still God would deliver him. Our
memory is often bad, and we forget
God’s mercies; our reasoning is often
bad, and we argue from past deliver-
ances to future desertions and disasters,
May God mend our memories and our
logic! In the day of trouble and perse-
cution, remember how God has ever
stood by His people, and remember that
His faithfulness faileth not.

II. He appeals to the Divine mercy.

“Have mercy upon me.” However
just we way feel our cause to be, we have
always need to feel how much there ig
about us which needs to be forgiven,
and that we must crave help on the
ground of mercy, not demand it in the
name of justice.

Observe :

1. The blessedness of appealing to
God. How grand it is thus to open the
heart to God in dark and trying days!
“‘ The life of man upon earth is a war
fare; and it is much better, in the
midst of enemies and dangers, to be
acquainted with one fortress than with
many inns. He that knows how to
pray may be pressed, but cannot be
overwhelmed.”—Letghton. ‘ Hear me
when I call.” In the very hour and
article of trouble. The other day there
was a great storm, and the electric wires
were all broken, and messages could
not be transmitted; but the direst
storms interrupt not our intercourse
with Heaven; nay, then the lines of
communication act best, and we no
sooner cry than He answers.

Observe ;

2. The condstions of appealing to God.
It is the prerogative only of re Fhe: and


believing man, We must remember
the rectitude of God’s nature and rule.
‘“‘ David asks nothing inconsistent with
God’s holiness, and the same rule should
govern all our prayers.” —<Alexander.
And we must live in a right relation to


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMB.





eousness and grace are not opposed to
one another in God, but man must not
forget that he must enter into positive
and active relations with reference to
both of these attributes of God, if he
would obtain and retain righteousnesa,


the just and gracious God. “Right- peace, and joy.”—Moll,
ExrosTULATION.
(Verses 2-6.)


The Psalmist here addresses his ene-
mies.

I. He reminds them of the vanity
of their opposition to himself.

Ver. 2. ‘“*‘ How long wili ye turn my
glory into shame}”—+.¢., my personal and
official honour and character. ‘“ How
long will ye utter slanders against me, and
trail my honour in the dust ?”—Delitesch,
The Psalmist declares their conduct to
be vain, their hostility to be fruitless.

(1.) Because he was Divinely elected.
Ver. 3. ‘‘ How long will ye deem lightly
of my Divine election, which is the sole
cause of my occupying so high a dignity.”
—Kay. He felt that God had chosen
him, and had not rejected him.

(2.) Because he was Divinely protected.
“The Lord will hear when I call unto
Him ” (ver. 3). He is still my glory and
refuge.

1. There is warning here for the ene-
mies of Christ. David was a type of
the Messiah ; and Horne well observes :
“Tf the Israelitish monarch conceived
he had just cause to expvstulate with
his enemies for despising the royal
majesty with which Jehovah had in-
vested His anointed, of how much severer
reproof shall they be thought worthy
who blaspheme the essential ‘ glory’ of
King Messiah, which shines forth by
his Gospel in the Church? Thou, O
Christ, art everlasting truth; all is
‘vanity and falsehood,’ transient and fal-
lacious, but the love of Thee!” God
hath set forth Jesus Christ ; He hears
Him always; and he who contends
against the Lord Jesus fights against
God. How vain such a rebellion !

2. There 1s comfort here for the dis-
ciples of Christ. The “word here used,

14


‘godly,’ commonly denotes one wha
loves God.”—Kay. And there is great
comfort here for the lovers of God.
“The Lord hath set apart him that is
godly for Himself.” God knows those
who fear Him; He prizes them; He
watches over them with loving jealousy.
“What rare persons the godly are!
‘The righteous is more excellent than
his neighbour’ (Prov. xii. 26). As the
flower of the sun, as the wine of Leba-
non, as the sparkling upon Aaron’s breast-
plate, such is the orient splendour of a
person embellished with godliness, . . .
The godly are precious, therefore they
are set apart for God. We set apart
things that are precious ; the godly are
set apart as God’s peculiar treasure (Ps,
exxxv. 4); as His garden of delight
Cant. iv. 12); as His royal diadem
Isa, xliii. 3) ; the godly are the excel-
lent of the earth (Ps. xvi. 3); compar-
able to fine gold (Lam. iv. 2); double
refined (Zech. xiii. 9). They are the
glory of the creation (Isa. xlvi. 13)
Origen compares the saints to sapphires
and crystals. God calls them jewels
(Mal. iii. 17).”—Thomas Watson, quoted
by Spurgeon. And God will preserve
His jewels, We often read now-a-days
of great ‘jewel-robberies ;’ but if we will
be faithful to God, “none shall pluck
us out of His hand.” In the second
place the Psalmist

IL Exhorts his enemies to repent-
ance and amity.

Ver. 4, 5. Here the Psalmist rises to
a great height. He has forgotten him-
self and his apparent peril, and is soli-
citous only about his enemies. He is
anxious, but it is on their account;
they are in the greatest danger who are


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY. PSALM.





found fighting against God. Sublimely
self-forgetfui, he admonishes his adver.
saries. ‘He passes on to wise and
loving counsels,” —Perowne.

1. He exhorts them to solemn reflec-
tion. Ver. 4. “In your secret cham-
bers.” “ Let the still hours of the night
bring calmer and wiser thoughts with
them.”—Perowne. It isa good thing to
talk with ourselves in the silence of the
soul, in the secrecy of our chambers,
“ Unless a man takes himself sometimes
out of the world by retirement and self-
reflection, he will be in danger of losing
himself tn the world.” — Whiehcote. And
as 7'rapp quaintly says: “As it is a sign
that there are great distempers in that
family where husband and wife go divers





days together and speak not the one to
the other, so in that soul that flieth from
itself, and can go long without self-exa-
mination.”

2. He exhorts them to practical piety.
Ver. 5, “Sacrifices accompanied by up-
rightness of intention and innocency of
life."—Kay. “Fruits meet for repent-
ance.” All sacrifices wanting in sin-
cerity and righteousness are but provo-
cations of God.

It is the duty of all Christian people
thus to expostulate earnestly and affec-
tionately with the enemies of Christ.
Oh! that the enemies of the Church of
God would listen to His heralds, im-
prove the truce of God, and lay down
the weapons of rebellion.


Tue Curr Goon.
(Verses 6-8.)


IL The grand question.

“Who shall show us any good #” (ver.
6). 1. It is the universal question.
“There be many that say,” &c. Men
of all ranks, gifts, ages, are thus crying.
There is within them a strange void, a
great discontent ; they want something
which they have not. 2. It is a pas-
sionate, imperative question. “Who
shall?” Who can? With what rest-
less avidity men seek to find the grand
remedy for their profound discontent !
3. Is it not a despairing question ?
“ Who shall?” as if in mockery. There
is no such thing, seems to be implied.

“ Arts, superstition, arms, philosophy.

Have each in turn possessed, betrayed, and

mocked us ;”

and men lose faith in the chief good,
and cynically ask, Who shall declare
it? As in Noel Paton’s great picture,
the vast multitude is pursuing a sha-
dowy shape, which seems to promise
them ineffable satisfaction, but which
ever eludes their eager grasp.

IL The true answer.

“Lord, lift Thou up the light of Thy
countenance upon us” (ver. 6).

There is a true answer to this ques-
tion, and here we have it. The smile of
God is the essential good. Mark:

1. The spirituality of the supreme
blessing,


Here the world errs in imagining the
chief good to be natural, sensible. “ Who
shall show us any good?” “ Through
all their life, with an unstable pace, they
catch at flying forms of good ; and after
all their falls and their bruises, they cry
out again and again, Who will show us
any good And when they behold any
new species or shadow of it, they imme-
diately run to it."—Letghton. In oppo-
sition to this, the Psalmist avers that
the supreme blessing is the light of God’s
countenance. Observe :

(1.) Natural things will not atone for
the absence of God. Nothing will take
the place of God. Chemistry alleges
that it has discovered a means of pro-
ducing artificial sunlight. From natural
elements a flame is to be evolved which
shall equal in quality and intensity the
light emitted from the sun. Wonderful
things, no doubt, have come from the
brains of chemists, but it will be a long
time, nevertheless, before they make us
independent of the sun. It will be a
long time before “ artificial sunshine”
melts the snows of winter, paints the
flowers of summer, ripens the fruits of
autumn, shoots life through the swelling
year. So we may try to find in natural
things substitutes for the light of God’s
face, but they must all prove in vain.
Oh! cease your vain attempts to create


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALME.





light and joy out of merely worldly
elements ; look up, and in the light of
God’s countenance find the vital sun-
shine of the soul.

“‘ Mark what is good in the creatures
you behold, in the song of birds, in the
beauty of flowers, in the wealth of
metals, in the sweetness of meats ; these
are but rills proceeding from God, the
abounding Fount; all these utter the
things which are in God; for all crea-
tures are but voices manifesting Him.
Yet we must not rest in them. It has
happened that painters have pictured
fruit with such accuracy, that birds
have come out of the sky, thinking them
real, in order to feed upon them; but
finding them to be painted, and that
there is no food in them, they fly away
to seek their trae sustenance. The
Divine painter has traced with His
brush in His creatures the beauties
which live in Himself, and in them they
seem to live. Yet are they but figures,
not verities, for the fashion of this world
passeth away. Would you know how to
act, knowing that these are but pictures
and not realities $ Act as the bird, which,
finding no food in the painting, seeks
its real meat elsewhere. Mark this,
you will find in creation no true food,
no satiety, no repose; mark this and
fly away to your God. He is very good,
He is true food, in Him alone is repose.”
—John Osorius, 1558.

(2.) The blessing of God is the sweetness
of all natwral things. So far from
natural things atoning for the absence of
God, they have no power to satisfy
except by virtue of the Divine blessing.
“As with manna there fell a dew, so to
a good soul, together with corn and
wine there is a secret influence of God,
which the carnal heart is not acquainted
with.” — Trapp.

(3.) The blessing of God is enough
in the absence of all natural gifts and
<lesvastical privileges, Without natural
gifts. He can satisfy the soul directly
without the corn and wine at all. “He
is enough without the creature, but the
creature is not anything without Him.
It is, therefore, better to enjoy Him
without anything else, than to enjoy
everything else without Him, It is

16


better to be a wooden vessel filled with
wine than a golden one filled with
water.”—Secker, quoted by Spurgeon.
Without ecclesiastical agencies. David
was at a distance from the tabernacle,
and he had sent back the ark to
Jerusalem, but he felt that God put
joy into his heart all the same. He
and his friends rejoice, although cut off
from the Tabernacle, to feel God near
and precious, “We cannot now, it is
true, offer the sacrifices of victims before
the ark at Jerusalem, but we may offer
the sacrifice of the spirit We have
not access to the Urim and Thummim,
on the high priest’s breastplate in the
sanctuary; but God will lift up the
light of His countenance upon us. That
is the true Urim and Thummim. We
cannot now receive the benediction of
the priests, ‘The Lord bless thee, and
keep thee ;’ but the Lord Himself is
ever present with us to bless us, and He
lifts up the light of His countenance
upon us. There is our true good. There
is our genuine gladness.” — Wordsworth,
So, if God take away from us material
good, and deprive us, or permit us to be
deprived, of ecclesiastical ceremonies and
services, He can come into our soul and
fill it with sublime delights) Ah! God
sometimes takes away proprieties and
ceremonies that we may ise more
richly and fully the spiritual blessed-
ness which those agents sometimes veil
and limit.

2. The sufficiency of the supreme
blessing. “ More than in the time,”
&c. (ver. 7). ‘ David’s enemies have
at their command all earthly means of
support and enjoyment, He finds it dif-
ficult to collect supplies for himself and
his army, yet God has given him a better
joy than that of harvest or vintage.”—
Perowne. ‘The joy of godliness is in-
finitely greater than that of worldliness,
There is as much difference between
heavenly comforts and earthly, as be
tween a banquet that is eaten and one
that is painted on the wall.”— Watson,
quoted by Spurgeon. The delight of
the saint is—


“What nothing earthly gives or can destroy,
The soul’s calm sunshine and the heart-felt


joy.”—Porn.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


3. The fratts of this blessing :

(1.) The consciousness of peace. “I
will both lay me down and sleep” (ver.
8). “ At once, as soon as I lie down, I
sleep, not harassed by disturbing and
anxious thoughts.”—Phillips. In the
drama the sleepless king wonders that
sleep—





“‘ Upon the high and giddy mast
Seals up the ship-boy’s eyes, and rocks his
brains
In cradle of the rude imperious surge ;
And in the visitation of the winds,
Whe take the ruffian billows by the top,


PSALM V.





Curling their monstrous heads, and hanging


them
With desf’ning clamours in the slippery
clouds,
That, with the hurly, death iteelf awakes.
Canst thou, O partial sleep! give thy
repose
To the wet sea-boy in an hour so rude ?”
But in those storms of life which
are stronger, wilder than fiercest sea-
storm, “ God giveth His beloved sleep.”
(2.) The consciousness of safety, To
“dwell in safety.” “He needs no guards,
for he is guarded round about by Jeho-
vab, and kept in safety.” —Delitssch.


PSALM V.


InTRODUOTION,


* A morning prayer of David, appealing to God as his king, against whose sovereignty his


own enemies were really in rebellion.”—Kay.


‘*This psalm must have been composed at Jeru-


salem, since David had access to the house of God (see ver. 7) ; probably a short time before
the open revolt of Absalom, when the king was aware of the machinations of conspirators under
® bloodthirsty and treacherous chief (ver. 6). Like Psalm iii, it is a morning song (ver. 6).”


—Speaker's Commentary.


Morwnine PRAYER.
(Verses 1-4.)


We are taught here some great truths
concerning prayer.

L True prayer is personal

“ My words,” “ My meditation,” “My
ery,” “ My King,” “ My God.” David
was a king, yet was he his own chaplain.
We must pray for ourselves. A parent’s
prayer, 4 minister’s prayer, will not do
for us. No one can become deputy for
us before the throne of grace, And in
prayer we must realise our personal
relation to God. He is “ My Father,”
“ My King,” “ My God.”

II. True prayer is profound and pas-
sionate,

1. It begins with words. “ Give ear
to my words.” Many have an idea that
words are not necessary to prayer, that
the finest prayer does without words,
When Curran asked Grattan if he ever
prayed; “No,” said Grattan, “but I
have aspirations all the day long.”
There is a subtle danger here. True
prayer cannot indeed fully express it-
self, but it will labour to do so, If
our sense of need is real and intense,

B


we shall speak out in broken, burning
words. Robert Hall, in his private de-
votions prayed aloud, lest his prayers
should become vapid and wandering.
If there is no audible, verbal prayer,
the “aspirations” will become ever more
shadowy and vague. ‘‘ None of God’s
children are possessed with a dumb
devil,” —Spurgeon.

2. True prayer deepens into sighs.
“OQ Lord, consider my sighs.” ‘‘ Under-
stand my sighing.”—Horsley. ‘“Medi-
tation—moanings of that half-uttered
form to which deep feeling gives rise—
groanings,” as Rom, viii. 26, 27.—
Jamieson. If language could express
all we feel, ours could hardly be a true
prayer ; language breaks off into groan-
ings.

3. True prayer rises into ertes.
“Hearken unto the voice of my ery.”
It rises into a cry, and a cry has a voice
which pierces heaven. Prevailing prayer
comes from the profound of the bosom,
and is heard in the high places of tl:
firmament, “


7aALH V.


UI. True prayer is resolute.

“ For unto Thee will I pray.” “There
is a holy beldness here. God, as the
King of His people, could not deny them
His protection, and they asked no other.
For to Thee, and Thee only, will I pray.
As if he had said, it is in this capacity
that I invoke Thee, and I therefore must
be heard.” — Alexander.

IV. True prayer is obedient.

Ver. 3. “In the morning will I set
in order for Thee, and will look out.”—
Kay. David speaks of himself, ficur-
atively, as a ministering priest, setting
in order the altar wood and the morn-
ing sacrifice. Now the Levite acted ac-
cording to the law of God in presenting
the sacrifices, and they were accepted
only as they were so offered. In prayer
we must recognise the word and will of
God. Prayer is not, as some suppose,
a wild, arbitrary, lawless overriding of
Divine law; but, on the contrary, it pro-
foundly consults the mind of God; it


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALME.


regulates its petitions by the reveale&
will of God, and seeks to conform all
life to the purpose and plan of God.

V. True prayer is expectant.

“And will look up,” or look out.
“Took out expectantly for the thing
prayed for.”—Kay. Alexander says:
“The image presented is that of one
Jooking from a wall or tower in anxious
expectation of approaching succour.”
Horsley says: “I will watch for Thee
—1t.¢., watch for some usual signal of
God’s favour, some appearance in the
flame of the sacrifice, or a ray of the
Shekinah issuing from the sanctuary.”
Let us look for answers to our prayers.
When a man has lodged his prayers with
God he may look up, he ought to look
up, and God will not disappoint him.

Let us then each morning thus draw
nigh unto God. We cannot tell what a
day shall bring forth, but if we greet
the morning sun with prayer, we shall
see the setting sun with praise.


THe RELATION oF Gop To THE WICKED.
(Verses 4-6.)


It is a relationship of direct and
passionate antagonism. Observe the
gradations of the text.

IL God has no pleasure in wicked-
ness,

Ver. 4. The Psalmist seems to say,
There are such gods in other nations, gods
delighting in blood and lust; but Thou
dost not delight in iniquity. The gods
of Greece and Rome found pleasure in
licentiousness ; but, however Christianity
may be a ‘civilised heathenism,’ it sets
before us Deity in another light than
that.

More:

IL God does not tolerate wicked-
ness.

“Neither shall evil dwell with Thee.”
Many would teach us that God does
tolerate evil—that He employs it to
perfect man, to develop the universe.
No; He cannot dwell with it, cannot
tolerate it. Remember this in the
Church. History relates that Red-
wald, King of East Anglia, built a
church, at one end of which was an


altar for the sacrifice of the mass,
and at the other end an altar for sac
rifice to the old British idols. How
frequently the Church is in danger of
making analogous compromises, allow-
ing certain evils to exist within its
borders for the sake of gold, or popu-
larity, or peace. It must not be, or
God will not dwell with us. And we
must remember this in our personal life.
“ Rest assured, Christ will not live in
the parlour of our hearts if we entertain
the devil in the cellar of our thoughts,”
—Spurgeon. God does not folerate
wickedness. It is no part of His
pleasure, no part of His policy, that evil
should be found in the human heart or
in the world.

IML. God hates wickedness.

“Thou hatest all the workers of
iniquity” (ver. 5, 6). “The Lord
abhors the wicked.” He “ will destroy
them.” It is unspeakably repugnant to
Him, “God perfectly hateth wicked-
ness and wicked persons. God hateth
sin worse than He doth the devil ; for He


*?


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: PSALMS,


RLy UY,


—— Eee"


hateth the devil for sin’s sake, and not
sin for the devil’s sake.”—Trapp.

We see here the condemnation of
whatever speaks lightly or tolerantly of
sin. Of the philosophy which does—
the philosophy which pleads for evil as
necessary to effect God’s purposes ; as
one of our poets speaks of the devil—

“* Existing for some good,

By us not understood,”
Of the morality which does— the
morality which regards sin as an incon-


venience or impolicy, rather than as
damnable in its essence, Of the Chrie-
tiamity which does — Antinomianism ;
Roman Catholicism, with its division of
sin into venial and mortal; and that
general Christian experience which has
no burning hatred to evil.

In our personal life, in the Church, in
all departments of worldly action, we
must look upon foulness with horror, or
with horror God will look upon us.
“Ye that love the Lord hate evil.”


THe ReLatTion or Gop To THE Samts,
(Verses 7-12.)


“Throughout the psalm there breathes
@ strong feeling that God is pledged by
His very character as a righteous God
to defend and bless the righteous.”—
Perowne.

I. God is their Shepherd.

“Dead me, O Lord,” &. As a
shepherd leads his flock. ‘ Make Thy
way straight,” &. “Do not let me
choose my own way, but Thine; and do
Thou make Thy way level and manifest
before me.”-—— Wordsworth. Is God your
Shepherd? Are you following obedi-
ently in His way? Then you need fear
no pit or wolf.

IL God is their Shield.

In the 12th verse the Psalmist recog-
nises that God isa shield. In the 9th
and 10th verses we see the greatness
of the Psalmist’s peril. His enemies are
profoundly depraved. “Their inward
part is an abyss.” They are altogether


corrupt. And yet his enemies are most
plausible. ‘They flatter with their
tongue.” “TI have my doubts whether


‘flattery’ be the thing meant by the
Hebrew words. Is it not rather that
the persons in question, by plausible
arguments and an ensnaring eloquence,
contrived to set a fair appearance upon
mischievous maxims and _ pernicious
vractices? Libertines, in all ages, have
“ot wanted excuses for their riot 2"


debaucheries. The idolaters of an-
tiquity contrived to give an air of
mysterious sanctity to the idlest fables
and the foulest rites; and the philo-
sophical atheists of modern times throw
an air of wisdom over the most absurd
doctrines ard the most wicked prin-
ciples. Thus the words of the wicked
are fair while their practices are
abominable, and they promise well with
the worst intentions.’”—AHorsley. The
enemies of the Psalmist were vicious
and guileful, and he felt the need and
blessedness of God’s shield. So the
opposition which the saints have to over-
come is similar to that encountered by
David. Corrupt and plausible—such is
the world, such the devil, such the flesh.
God is our Shield, let us press close to
its shelter !

IIL God is their Song.

Ver. 11, 12. Enemies throng, but
the saints can sing.

1. It is the privilege of the saint to
rejoice, “ Rejoice.” “Shout for foy.”
“ Be joyful in Thee.”

2. It is the privilege of all saints thus
to rejoice, “Let all those who trust
in Thee rejoice.”

3. It is their blessed privilege alway:
to rejoice. “Let them ever shout f»
joy.”


RO4LN VL


an





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMS,





PSALM VL


INTRODUOTION.
“The first of the seven Penitential Psalms. It has been said that there is much of grief


in it, but nothing of penitence. This, however, is an error.


The teara shed by David over


Absalom (2 Sam. xviii. 83) came, we are sure, from the fountain of a penitent heart, He knew
well that Absalom’s rebellion was permitted by God as a penal consequence of his sin.”—Kay.


CHASTISEMENT.
(The whole Psalm.)


Observe :

I. The twofold character of the
Divine chastisements.

Ver. 1. “Only in love, not in wrath.”
—Kay. There is the chastisement of
anger, and the chastisement of grace;
the punttive and the loving chastise
ment. “ There is a chastisement which
proceeds from God’s love to the man as
being pardoned, and which is designed
to purify or to prove him; and a chas-
tisement which proceeds from God’s
wrath against the man, as striving ob-
stinately against, or as fallen away from,
favour, and which satisfies Divine jus-
tice.”— Delttzsch.

1. The one is measured, the other
overwhelming.

2. The one destroys, the other perfects.

3. The one is temporal, the other
eternal.

Consider :

II. The grounds of appeal to the
Divine clemency.

On what grounds can we entreat for
the milder chastisement? The Psalmist

1. Recognises the fustice of the suffer-
ings under which he bows. He sees
his sin, and feels it just that that sin
should be punished, ‘“ David does not
pray for the removal of the chastisement,
but of the chastisement tm wrath, or,
what is the same thing, of the judgment
proceeding from wrath.”—Delittssch. “I
indeed confess that I deserve nothing
but destruction; but because I could
not endure the severity of Thy judg-
ment, deal not with me after my de-
serts; yea, rather forgive the sins
whereby I have provoked Thine anger
against me.”—Caleia. God’s hand can
only cease when we are brought to ao
knowledge the justice of the stroke.

2. He is utterly broken down by his

a»


sufferings. All his ideas of pride and
power are gone, and he is broken
down in body and soul. (1.) In Aody.
“Have pity on me, O Lord, for I am
withered away. Drooping as a blighted
plant.”—Kay. ‘My bones are vexed.”
“The Hindoos, in extreme grief or joy,
declare: ‘Our bones are melted ;’ that
is, like boiling lead, they are completely
dissolved.” — Roberts, (2.) In soul.
“My soul is also sore vexed” (ver. 3).
“His soul is still more shaken than his
body. The affliction is therefore not a
merely bodily ailment, in which only a
timorous man loses heart. God’s love
is hidden from him, God’s wrath seems
as though it would wear him completely
away. Itisan affliction beyond all other
afflictions.” —Delitssch. “To the man of
God the bitterest drop in the cup of
trouble is the sense of the wrath of God
which he experiences in the chastisement
of God.”—Tholuck, “ Soul-trouble is
the very soul of trouble.”—Spurgeon.

If we despise the chastisements of
the Lord—that is, if we resent them,
and rise up defiantly against them—they
must continue punitive and destructive;
but if our strength, pride, self-will, are
utterly broken down, and we lie emptied
of self at God’s feet, then we may look
for the punitive chastisements of the
just God to change into the loving
chastisements of the Merciful One. A
“broken and contrite heart,” &c.

8. He appeals to the mercy of God
(ver. 4). ‘Oh, save me for Thy mercies’
sake.” He does not look upon himself
as an ill-used man, but knowing himself
as a great sinner, he casts himself on
the sovereign mercy of Heaven.

4. He desires to live to glorify God
(ver. 5). ‘‘ Men who sink down to the
grave unforgiven, unredeemed, they can-


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


PSALM Vi.


eee


net celebrate the glories of Thy mercy.”
—-Kay. In the midst of his sin and
sorrow a sincere and passionate desire
awakens in his soul for the honour and
praise of God. He passes beyond mere
selfishness into sympathy with the
Divine rights and glory. “The petition
has as its motive the fact that the
Divine interest itself is concerned in
the deliverance of the man who can
render thanks well-pleasing to (od,
only as living, and not as one lost in
death and swallowed up in Hades. Yet
this is only one side of the thought.
The other side is likewise brought into
view, namely, that the petitioner has at
heart to render thanks and praise to the
glory of God. The relation is therefore in
no respect a selfish one, in which the in-
terests of selfishness prevail, but a moral
and religious one.”— Moll,

5. He is overwhelmed with sorrow on
account of his sin (ver. 6, 7). “ My
eye is eaten away with grief; eaten
away, as by a moth fretting a garment.”
—Phillips. The great deeps of his
nature were broken up, and he would
have been drowned in overmuch sorrow
had it not been that hope bore him up
Godward, as the ark rose with the flood.
There is power indeed in true tears.
** As music upon the waters soundeth


SoRROW


farther and more harmoniously than
upon the land, so do prayers joined
with tears.”—T7rapp. “Even when the
gates of prayer are shut in heaven, those
of tears are open.”— Hebrew proverb.

It is when we plead as the Psalmist
here pleads, that God’s anger is softened,
and the chastisement of wrath is changed
into the discipline of grace. “Let us
pray, with our whole hearts, for mercy ;
and if the answer to our prayers be
tardy, because we have deeply trans-
gressed, let us knock; for to him that
knocketh it shall be opened when
prayers, groans, and tears beat at the
door,” — St. Cyprian.

IIL The Divine response to the
prayer of penitence.

Ver. 8, 9. “They that sow in tears,”
&c ‘The Psalmist always contenda
with the Lord before he dares to con-
tend with his foes.”"— Sutcliffe. But
having contended with the Lord, and
found forgiveness, he boldly challenges,
gloriously triumphs over, all his enemies.
When God has delivered him from his
sins, he feels that God will deliver him
from his enemies. So if God pardon
our sin, we need fear neither men nor
devils, They have power over us only
as long as our sins have hold of us, but
when God pardons our sins they must fly.


ror Sim.


(Verses 6, 7.)


L The necessity for such sorrow.

Some speak slightingly of repentance
and sorrow for sin, but such sorrow is
required from saints and sinners. It is
natural and evangelical. “In respect to
the Penitential Psalms, it is recorded of
St. Augustine that in his last sickness he
ordered these psalms to be inscribed in
a visible place on a wall of his chamber,
where he might fix his eyes and heart
upon them, and make their words his
own in the breathing out of his soul to
God.” — Wordsworth.

IL Mistakes concerning this sorrow.

Many true penitents perplex them-
selves touching this matter of sorrow
for sin. They think that they do not
feel enough, feel long enough, d&o., dic,

Let us be concerned ;


1. About the gwality of our sorrow,
not its quantity. “Showers be better
than dews, yet it is sufficient if God at
least hath bedewed our hearts, and hath
given us some sign of a penitent heart.
If we have not rivers of water to pour
forth with David, neither fountains flow-
ing with Mary Magdalene, nor asJ eremiah
desire to have a fountain in our head to
weep day and night, nor with Peter
weep bitterly ; yet if we lament that we
cannot lament, and mourn that we can-
not mourn : yea, if we have the smallest
sobs of sorrow and tears of compunction,
if they be true and not counterfeit, they
will make us acceptable to God ; for az
the woman with the bloody issue that
touched the hem of Christ's garment was
no leas welcome to Christ than Thomas

21


Peale Vi


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMB,





who put his fingers in the print of the
nails, 80 God looketh not at the quan-
tity, but the sincerity of our repentance.”
—Symson, quoted by Spurgeon.

2. About the reality, not the mant-
festation of our sorrow. “Some may
say, ‘ My constitution is such that I can-
not weep; I may as well go to squeeze
a rock as think to get atear.’ But if
thou canst not weep for sin, canst thou
grieve? Intellectual mourning is best ;
there may be sorrow where there are no
tears ;. the vessel may be full though it
wanta vent ; it is not so much the weep-
ing eye God respects as the broken
heart.”— Watson, quoted by Spurgeon.

3. About the sincerity of our sorrow,
not its duration. Some mourn long on
account of sin, but let us not doubt for-
giveness because it comes the sooner to us,

Til. The efficacy of this sorrow.

There is a “sorrow of the world
which worketh death,” and there is a
“ godly sorrow,” which is unto life and
salvation. “ Sin draws after it punish-
ment, and the judgment of an angry God
is terrible; but only the impenitent sin-
ner is lost, not the penitent. It is true,
in bitter, heartfelt grief over his sins he
experiences a sorrow, which not only
grieves the soul, but also withers the
body ; but he feels at the same time
that he is mightily drawn towards God


by this godly sorrow. He confesses his
guilt and the justice of the punishment
with which the holy God visits him,
and makes known that he is well aware
how richly he deserves the disfavour and
wrath of God, and how he has forfeited
his life with his sins.) But he perceives
in this very punishment that God is
still tnterested in him, and he himself
has still a longing after God. He can
still believe in grace, and therefore pray
Sor life; and in this consists the saving
change which takes place in his condi-
tion.”—Moll. There is a Mohammedan
legend respecting David, which says that
after the treachery of which he had been
guilty towards Uriah, the king was
seized with the bitterest remorse. For
forty days and forty nights he lay in
the dust and wept ; two rivulets gushed
from his eyes, and the weeping willow
and the incense-tree sprang up upon
the spot. Is there not a great truth
veiled in this wild fable? Whilst the
weeping willow stands as a sign of that
sorrow which bowed David's spirit to
the earth, does not the incense-tree
symbolise that faith and love of his
which trembled up to heaven? When
our sorrow for sin bows us down, let us
still look up, and offering God the in-
cense of a penitent, worshipping spirit,
He shall not turn away our prayer.


Toe Nigut or REPENrANcE.
(The whole Psalm.)


Night is sbout the Psalmist, and the
night about him is an emblem of the
night within him, He cannot sleep; all
the night he waters his couch with his
tears, The fact is, his sins have found
him out, and he walks in darkness and
in the shadow of death—the night of
repentance,

Let us observe :

L Its darkness,

There is darkness in the Psalmist’s
eoul, the felt absence of God. “ Return,
O Lord” (ver. 4). God is away, the
sun of the soul.

(1.) Darkness means misery. How
great the sorrow here pictured! “Weak.”
“Bones vexed,” “Soul also sore vexed.”

22


Sinner, be sure some day or other sin
will make your soul weep and bleed.
(2.) Darkness means guzlt and fear (ver,
1). Here the Psalmist feels his guilt,
and dreads the unknown terrors of God’a
wrath, (3.) Darkness means death. The
Psalmist here dreads lest he should sink
lower than the grave (ver. 5). He feels
that his sin has brought him to the verge
of everlasting destruction,

This is what sin brings us to. It
robs the soul of light, of life. It leaves
the sinner trembling within the shadowe
of hell,

IZ Its duration.

“‘O Lord, how long #” (ver. 3). How
swiftly time goes when we are living


id


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMA


PSALM VI,





joyfully! How long the hours, the
months of suffering and unhappiness!
Seven years are not long to a man with
health, innocence, and freedom; but
think of that period spent in a jail upon
a treadmill! So to a man who lives in
the love of God, the hours pass with
“down upon their feet ;” but how dreary
and leaden-footed are the hours to a
guilty soul! Sin takes all the glory
and joy out of life, and makes us “ curse
the day that we were born.” “The
pleasures of sin are but for a season ;”
the pangs and penalties of sin embitter
many days.

IIL Its spectres.

“ All mine enemies” (ver. 7). The
Psalmist felt circumvented by enemies,
and in his enemies he saw his sins, Men
commit sins, and pass on as if they were
to know those sins no more, but the day
comes when they all live again. “God
requireth that which is past,” and con-
science throws open the doors of memory,
and out rushes a crowd of spectres.
Little sins; old sins; quiet sins; for-
gotten sins ; whtte-washed sins; all come
from their graves. Ghosts of falsehoods ;
guilty recollections of envyings and
hatreds; soiled apparitions of dead
lusts; all return to accuse and condemn.
Be sure that some day or other your
sin will find you out; and a thousand
spectres will people the darkness, and
fill you with agony and fear.

IV. Its stara,

“Oh, save me for Thy mercies’ sake ”
(ver. 4). The Psalmist seizes upon the
idea of the Divine mercy, and out of
this grand truth springs the bright con-
stellations which cheer the penitent in
his night of sorrow, The penitent re-
members $





(1.) The mercifulness of the Divine
nature, There is that grand star which
arose out of the blackness of Sinai (Num.
xxxiv. 6, 7) He “is plenteous in
mercy.” “He delighteth in mercy.”
“ His tender mercy.” ‘“ Rich in mercy.”
“ Abundant mercy.” “ His mercy en-
dureth for ever.” Here are stars of light
for the weeping eyes of penitence. (2.)
The promises of the Divine mercy.
These are “more than the sands of
the sea-shore.” Grand promises on
every page of the Book! (3.) The acts
of the Divine mercy. God forgave
David, Noah, Saul, d&ec., &c. Which of
them did He not forgive?


‘¢ Millions of transgressors poor,
Thou hast for Jesus’ sake forgiven 3
Made them of Thy favour sure,
And snatched from hell to heaven.”


The Gospel of Jesus Christ is the
Gospel of mercy. When the sinner is
harassed by ghost and ghoul, he looks
towards the Gospel, and beholds great
stripes of stars, which, in the sinner’s
ear, utter forth a glorious voice of con-
solation and hope. “I had fainted
unless I had believed to see the goodnesa
of the Lord in the land of the living.”

V. Its sunrise.

Ver. 8,9. ‘‘Mark the sudden change,
as of sunrise upon night. Already the
prayer and the weeping have been heard.
Already faith has triumphed.”—Perowne,
“ Blessed are they that mourn, for they
shall be comforted.” ‘ Weeping may
endure for a night, but joy cometh in
the morning.” Sinner, watch for God
more than they that watch for the morn-
ing, and He shall rise upon you with
healing in His wings, and there shall be
to you “no more night,”


PSALM VIL


INTRODUOTIOR,


“From the matter of this psalm it appears that it was composed with reference to some
ealumny on the character of David; but commentators are not agreed as to when and by whom
this injury was inflicted. Perhaps the conduct of Doeg might give occasion to this poem, inas-
much as this man bad grossly misrepresented David to Saul, and insinuated that he was eon-


rs .


spiring against the life of hisking; whereas the very reverse of this statement was the truth.”
AdLepe


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: P8ALMB.





Tue Extrremiry anp ASYLUM OF THE SAINrs,
(Verses 1, 2.)


There ean be but little doubt that
this psalm was uttered by David when
he was slandered by the courtiers of
Saul, and when he was pursued by that
deluded monarch. The situation of
David is a picture of the situation in
which all saints often find themselves.

Consider :

I. Their extremity.

The Psalmist was like a partridge on
the mountains, “like a roe or gazelle
chased by the lions."—Perowne. So
are God’s people frequently tempted,
tried, borne down by various agents,
and shapes of evil. (1.) The enemies
of the righteous are multiplied. ‘All
them that persecute me” (ver. 1),
Some one has said, “If we have an
enemy we meet him everywhere.” This
is very true of our great enemy the
devil; we meet himeverywhere. ‘His
name is legion.” “There is a devil
in every berry of the grape,” said
Mahomet. Yes; and a devil in
everything else with which we have to
do. The diabolical creeps into every-
thing, and the righteous man is ever
menaced and endangered. In the flesh,
in the world, in things necessary,
things beautiful, things sacred, are
ambushed enemies, bending the bow,
and shooting privily at the righteous,
(2.) These enemies are malign, “ Lest
he tear my soul like a lion rending it
in pieces” (ver. 2), As a wild beast
would tear to pieces a lamb, so would


the devil afflict the soul. How bitterly
the devil hates the children of God!
How bitterly the world often persecutes
the saints! (3.) Those enemies are
resistless, “ While there is none to
deliver” (ver. 2). He could not deliver
himself, and he had no helper among
men. His enemies felt that they reigned
supreme and would crush him when
they pleased. So with our spiritual
foes. Policy, reason, pledges, d&c., what
are these but hirelings which flee in the
hour of trial, and the wolf catcheth the
sheep. A man measures himself in
vain with the powers of darkness ; these
powers soon vanquish flesh and blood.
No matter how strong the iron-clads of
human building, the devil’s artillery
soon sinks them.

IL. Their refuge.

“O Lord, my God, in Thee do I put
my trust” (ver. 1). “ With Thee have
I taken shelter.”—Horsley. (1.) The
securtty of this shelter. The Almighty
God. Better than walls of granite,
than gates of brass, than lines of steel :

“Sufficient is Thine arm alone,
And our defence is sure.”
‘God's assistance is the strongest, quick-
est, and surest help.”—Moll. (2.) The


condition of its enjoyment. (a) A per-
sonal relationship to God. “ My God.”
(6) A constant faith in God. “In Thee


do I trust.” “The door is closed to
prayer unless it is opened with the key
of trust.” Calvin.


Nor Quiury.
(Verses 3~10.)


The Psalmist, who #0 constantly ac-
knowledges and bitterly deplores his sin,
here puts in another plea. “He pro
tests passionately his innocence, his
soul surging with emotion as he thinks
how unjustly he has been assailed.”—
Perowne.

Concerning this plea, let us observe :

I We may plead “not guilty” of

24


some particular sin when we cannot
plead freedom from sin.

“Tf I have done this” (ver. 3). We
cannot plead freedom from sin (1 John
i. 8), but we may plead freedom from
particular faults with which we may be
charged (Job xxxi. 16). Let us glorify
the grace which has preserved us from
so many sins to which we are prone,


s?


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: PSALMS.


IL We may plead “not guilty ” bo-
fore men when we cannot thus plead
before God.

Job vindicated himself before his
friends, but in the presence of God
abased himself, and repented in sackcloth
and ashes, We may often most properly
assert our integrity before men, but
“concerning the law of our God,” it is
another thing.

III. We may plead “not guilty”
before God when we have rested in
the merits of Christ.

“The righteousness of faith before
God must be distinguished from right-
eousness and innocence of life before
man ; yet a true Christian must be able
to console himself with both.”—Starke.
“There is no condemnation to them that
are in Christ Jesus.” One of our legal
writers says: “So completely does a
pardon of treason or felony extinguish
the crime, that when granted to a man,
even after conviction or attainder, it
will enable him to have an action of
slander against another for calling him
traitor or felon; because the pardon
makes him as it were a new man, and
gives him a new capacity and credit.
In the eye of the law, the offender is
as innocent as if he had never com-
mitted the offence.” So completely does
the blood and righteousness of Christ
absolve us from sin.


* Bold shall I stand in that great day,
For who aught to my oharge shall lay f
Fully absolved through these I am,
From sin and fear, from guilt and shame.”


IV. When we ean justly plead “not
- guilty” before God or man, we may
rely on a triumphal acquittal.

Ver. 6-10. “Hitherto the Psalmist
has protested his innocence ; now, in the
full consciousness of that innocence, he
comes before the very judgment-seat of
God, and demands the fullest and most
public vindication. Then he sees as it
were in a vision the judgment set:
 ¢Thou hast commanded judgment,’
Next, that sentence may be pronounced
with due solemnity, he calls upon God
to gather the nations round Him, and
to seat Himself upon His judgment-
throne, Lastly, he prays God, as the


Judge of all nations, to judge himself.”
—Perowne.

We see here that God is the Judge of
all. The whole “congregation ;” all
nations, God can judge righteously.
Ver. 9. “The reins are the seat of the
emotions, just as the heart is the seat of
the thoughts and feelings. Reins and
heart lie naked before God.” —Delttssch.
God wil judge righteously. He will
condemn the guilty ; He will establish
the just.

Has our reputation been slandered ?
David feels bitterly the perfidious say-
ings of his foes, the injustice of their
accusations. The French proverb says,
“The tongue cuts deeper than the
lance;” and David felt it to be so.
Some men are said to labour under a
strange necessity, that whenever they
see a beautiful dress, they must throw
vitriol on it; and so wicked men feel,
and yield to, the devilish impulse of
aspersing noble characters and noble
names. Have we suffered from the
tongues of such? Or have our rights
been invaded? Have men unjustly
touched our position, our freedom, our
property? Nay, is our life taken
away by violent or unjust men? Let
us look confidently to the great assize,
God will vindicate the just, and tread
the proud oppressor in the dust. There
is a famous picture entitled “ Waiting
for the Verdict.” You may write that
over all graveyards—‘ Waiting for the
verdict.” We play our part, and go our
way, but for all God shall bring us into
judgment ; thesilent nations underground
wait the peal which shall call them to
receive the final verdict, and the Judge
of all the earth shall do right.

Observe :

1. The sense of innocence makes us
hopeful towards God. ‘‘ Beloved, if our
heart condemn us not, then have we
confidence towards God” (1 John iii.
21

4 The sense of innocence makes us
gentle towards men (ver. 9). “His
prayer is not directed against the indi-
vidual as such, but against the wicked-
ness that is in them. This psalm is the
key to all psalms which contain prayers
against one’s enemies,” —Deltizach.


35


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMB.





Gop as 4 Man or War.
(Verses 11-13.)


In these verses, God’s dealing with
the unrighteous is vividly portrayed.
We see God troubled by sin, and rising
up to take vengeance upon it; and these
verses are an epitome of the entire ac-
tion of God with sinners, He is angry
with them, and proceeds to bring them
to reason.

Mark :

I. The Divine admonition.

“God is angry with the wicked every
day” (ver. 11). Barnes says on this
passage: “Continually, constantly, al-
ways. This is designed to qualify the
previous expression, ‘angry.’ It is not
excitement. It is not temporary pas
sion, such as we see inmen. It is not
sudden emotion, soon to be succeeded
by a different feeling when the passion
passes off, It is the steady and uniform
attribute of His unchanging nature to
be always opposed to the wicked—to all
forms of sin; and in Him, in this respect,
there will be no change. The wicked
will find Him no more favourii|» to
their character and course of life to-
morrow than He is to-day—no more
beyond the grave than this side of the
tomb. What He is to-day, He will be
to-morrow and every day.” This is no
doubt true, but it is scarcely the truth
taught in the text. Many of the great
commentators agree that the sense of
these words is—God is patient with
sinners, and gives them daily warning
of His displeasure, and of the gathering
storm of His wrath. “If God will in
the end let His wrath break forth, He
will not do it without having previously
given threatenings thereof every day,
viz., to the ungodly (cf. Isa. lxvi. 14;
Mal. i. 4). He makes these feel His
anger beforehand in order to strike a
wholesome terror into them.”—Delitesch.
“God is not a Judge who punishes
daily, but who threatens daily; for if
God should punish us always, and as
often as we deserve it, the world would
no longer endure; therefore thou
shouldst know that God’s long-suffer-
ing invites thee to repentance.”—Moll.
“ Although He is not angry every day—

26


i.e, His anger is not breaking forth
upon every occasion—yet the season of
judgment will surely come.”—Horsley.
Thus God is constantly warning the
sinner. One of our philosophers speaks
of “the premonitory symptoms of Na-
ture’s displeasure.” So in the moral
world are there premonitory symptoms
of the Divine displeasure. Every day,
in the sinner’s conscience or body, in-
tellect or estate, does God make signs
of His gathering anger, so that the
wicked may forsake their wickedness
and escape the wrath to come.

Notice :

Ir. The Divine amnesty.

“Tf he turn” (ver. 12), “If he turn,’
there is forgiveness and life. Oh, most
important “if”! Jf he turn, all is well;
if he turn net, all is lost. Blessed op-
portunity |! the sinner may turn. And
all sinners have the ability to turn, for
God commands them all to turn, and
God does not command impossibilities,
God’s commands are promises; and when
He invites all to return to Him, He
strengthens all that they may do it.
“Do not think God has done anything
concerning thee before thou camest into
being whereby thou art determined
either to sin or misery. This is a false-
hood, and they that entertain such
thoughts live in a lie,"— Whichcote. O
sinner ! improve this truce of God.

III. The Divine arsenal

Ver. 12, 13. “He will whet His
sword,” dc. God is a man of war, and
here we get a glimpse into His armoury,
and behold the artillery with which He
wars on obstinate sinners.

1. Mark the variety of His weapons,
God’s armoury is full of weapons
“Sword,” “bow,” “arrows.” Storms,
diseases, plagues, famines, wars, earth-
quakes, terrors of conscience, secrets of
the prison-house we know not. God’s
armoury is full of awful weapons—
weapons which can destroy both body
and soul,

2. The readiness of His weapona
“He hath bent His bow and made it
ready” (ver. 12). “He ordaineth His


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


arrows” (ver. 13). Or, “He will put
His arrows in action.”——Horsley. ‘‘ The
wrath of God may be slow, but it is
always sure. In thoughtless security
man wantons and whiles away the pre-
cious hours; he knows not that every
transgression sets a fresh edge on the
sword, which is there continually whet-
ting for his destruction; nor considers
that he is the mark of an archer who
never errs, and who, at this very in-
stant, perhaps, has fitted to the string
that arrow which is to pierce his soul
with everlasting anguish.”— Horne. “The
sword of Heaven is not in haste to smite,
nor doth it linger.”

Observe, finally :

3. The deadly efficacy of His weapons.
“ Instruments of death.” “ He ordaineth
His arrows,” or, as some translate it,
“ His arrows He maketh fiery.” “ Arrows
wrapped round with some inflammable
material, which become ignited in their
passage through the air, and set on fire
whatever they light upon.”—Perowne.
“The whetting of the sword is but to
give a keener edge, that it may cut the
deeper. God is silent as long as the
sinner will let Him, but when the sword
is whet it is to cut, and when the bow
is bent it is to kill; and woe be to that
man who is the butt.”—Lecker, quoted
by Spurgeon. “ ‘If I whet My glittering
sword, and Mine hand take hold of judg-
ment, I will render vengeance to Mine
enemies’ (Deut. xxxii. 41). And where
will God whet His glittering sword?


PALE Vi.


Where are blades usually whetted ? Let
us look. Surely on a whirling, circular
stone. And on what stone will God
whet His sword? I reply, On that
stony heart of the sinner which is ever
revolving, never at rest. Watch the
grindstone a little while. See how it
plunges down into a trough of turbid,
foul, and muddy water. O stone, stone !
why rush down into this filth? Rise up!
rise up from this uncleanness, I put
my hand to it, I set the stone in motion.
How easily is it made to revolve! It
moves—it leaves that sink of filth—it
mounts upwards. In vain! It whirls
round, and with a rush seeks again its
bed of pollution. Heart of sinner, hard
and stony! why dost thou not emerge
from the corruption in which thou wal-
lowest? ‘I will emerge,’ thou repliest.
Why dost thou not leave thy enmities,
thy passions, thy shameful] uncleanness 4
‘J will leave them,’ is the answer. And
yet nothing comes of these fine promises,
Always on the move like the grindstone,
you never remove from the trough of
slime; always leaving sin, that with
fresh relish you may plunge into it
again. Know, you sinners who are so
full of good resolutions which come to
nought, so full of promises of amend-
ment which end in relapse, that it is on
whirling grindstones such as you that
the glittering sword of Divine vengeance
is whetted. ‘If I whet My glittering
sword, I will render vengeance to Mine
enemies,’ ”—Joseph de Barsva, 1600.


Tas Setr-PomisHine Nature or Sr.
(Verses 14-17.)


A somewhat different view of retri-
bution is here given to that given in
ver. 12,13. ‘There God is represented
as using against the sinner His own
peculiar weapons ; here He is represented
as beating and punishing His enemies
with their own weapons. “Evil shall
slay the wicked.”

L All sin is the digging of a pit.

Sin does not seek to rise by the step-
ping stones of lawful and noble endea-
your ; it knows of no eminence but by


lowering others. Ambition, with ite


throne-building, is yet a pit-digging.
It seeks to raise itself on the trampled
rights, and pleasures, and lives of others.
Lying is a pit-sinking for others. Lust
serves itself by ensnaring and debasing
others, Hnvying sickens at another's
joy, and seeks to secure itself by giving
others a fall. Covetousness is always
grave-digging, that it may inherit others’
wealth. Sin would sink the throne of
God, Sin knows not how to shine but
by darkening others, knows not how
to exalt itself but by Sie es othera,


PaaLM Vill.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





knows not how to feast itself but
by starving others, knows not how
to enrich itself but by spoiling others,
knows not how to save itself but by
damning others, Pit-digging is hard
work. The image of a travailing
woman, in the 14th verse, reminds us
that the development of evil is attended
with severest labour and keenest sor-
rows. It is infinitely harder work to
rise by violence, fraud, spoliation, than
by virtuous paths. It may be hard to
elimb the steep where Fame’s proud
temple shines afar; but the bitterest
toil is theirs who seek to rise by sink-
ing. Pit-digging is humiliating work ;
it is a perpetual stoop, It kills all the
nobility of a man; it is full of shame.


IL All sin sinks into the pit which
it digs.

The workman rises with his work,
and the workman sinks with his work.
He who digs a pit for another digs a
grave for himself. How often has the
truth of these verses, 15 and 16, been
seen by us! 1. Nature guarantees that
it shall be so. The sinning member
suffers ; the sinner suffers on the same
lines as he transgresses. 2. History
teems with illustrations of this truth.
In sacred and profane history we find a
thousand examples of men falling into
the pita they digged for others, 3. The
Scriptures assure us that this will be so
to the bitter end. ‘ Whatsoever a man
soweth, that shall he reap.”


ALPHA AND OMEGA.
(Fresr verse and the Last.)


The contrast between the opening
and the closing verse of this psalm is
instructive. It reminds us—

L That God’s equity may be ob-
scured in the beginning, but it shall be
vindicated in the end.

In the first verse, God’s righteous-
ness is hidden; the wicked triumph.
But in the last verse of the psalm all
is clear, and the Lord is praised “ae-
cording to His righteousness.” Wait!

IL That the sinners beginning


may be grand, but his end shall be
disaster.

In the opening of the psalm the
sinner is a lion, strong, proud, domi-
nant; but in the end of the psalm the
lion ig howling in a pit. Wait!

Ill. That the saints may have be-
ginnings of sorrow, but the end shall
be triumphant.

With the commencement of the psalm
David weeps and laments, but he ends
with a song, Wait!


PSALM VIII,
InTRODUOTION,


This isa of thanksgiving to God for the exaltation of man above all terrestria)
ereatures. It is quoted by the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews with reference to Christ s
but whether it is to be considered a prophecy, or whether it is quoted simply because it
describes by way of accommodation the character of our Lord, does not appear certain. The
most sober commentators have adopted the latter view, considering that the author of the
psalm intended simply to celebrate the glory of Jehovah, and the power and dignity He has
conferred on the human race. It is, however, they say, appropriately applied to our Lord by
way of illustration ; for this power and dignity did not obtain their full consummation till He
became invested with our nature, and was exalted ‘above all principality, and power, and


might, and dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this w but also in thas
which fe to come,’ "—-PAdllipe.” ae : -


THe Gosrz. or THE STaRs.
(Verse 1.)


We Mook led to consider :
L eation as deriving ita gl
from God. me

28


The Psalmist here looks upon creation,
not as God, not as independent of God,
but as a glass reflecting the glory of


és?


f


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY : PSALME





God. “ Thy heavens.” ‘ Who hast set
Thy glory” above or upon the heavens.
“ It here implies that the glory belonging
to the frame of nature is not inherent,
but derivative.’—Alexander. ‘‘ The
sense of God’s presence, of which the
Psalmist is so profoundly conscious in
his own spiritual life, is that which gives
its glory and its meaning to the natural
world. There is a vivid realisation of
that presence as of a presence which fills
the world. Nature is full of God;
nature is the theatre of His glory. All
admiration of nature in a rightly-tuned
heart is a confession of that glory. To
such a heart there can be no praise of
nature apart from the praise of God. All
things are ‘of Him, and through Him,
and to Him.’ Apart from Him, the
unwise is void and waste ; He gives it
its life and meaning.”—Perowne. ‘God
is the principle of beauty, both as author
of the physical world, and as father of
the intellectual and moral world. He
is the life, the light, the movement,
the ineffable grace of visible and finite
nature.”—Cousin. Let us remember
that the glory of creation is but the
reflected glory of Him who sits above
it. This as against atheism, panthetsm,
naturalism.

Consider:

II. Creation as revealing the glory
of God.


Fi The glory of God as seen in nature


1. Unspeakable. “ How excellent!”
No poet, no saint, can adequately speak
of it. It fills us with a wonder and joy
too deep for words. 2. Gracious. ‘How
excellent /” The earth, so far as its pri-
mitive and essential arrangements are
concerned, declares the loving God. The
glory of God is His goodness. 3. Uni-
versal, “Inall the earth.” Everywhere,
under the whole heavens, we see the
glory of God.


“ Known through the earth by thousand signa,
By thousands through the skies.”


“He whose eyes are open cannot want
an instructor, unless he wants a heart,”
—Charnock, quoted by Spurgeon.

Consider:

III. Creation as awakening admira-
tion and love in the children of
God. .

“O Lord, our Lord!” Unbelieving
men make nature to hide God, to put Him
far away ; but nature rejoices the saint
as he beholds in it the workmanship of
his Father. The sceptical philosopher
is reminded by nature of the Eternal,
the Infinite, the Absolute ; but the saint
responds—


“This glorious God is ours,
Our


, and our Friend.”


Tae Apo.ogetics oF CHILDHOOD.
(Verse 2.)


David speaks literally of children ;
and so our Lord Himself applies the
words (Matt. xxi. 16). ‘Even the
faith of a little child is bulwark enough
against the folly of men of corrupt
heart and perverted intellect. The
stars above, and the lips of the in-
fants below, show forth His praise.”—
Perowne.

The Psalmist has been looking at the
magnificence of the firmament, and he

- passes at once to children, little chil-
dren, But there is really no shock in
this, for children are, as they have been
justly and beautifully designated, “ little
majesties.”

Observe :


L The religious capacity of child.
hood.

This is indicated here. The young
children with their first breath ask for
God, and recognise Him in the glory of
the universe. The spirituality of child-
hood is frequently recognised in the
Old Testament; and in the New Testa-
ment Christ distinctly recognises the
spirituality of the child-nature. The
poet recognises in the child natural in-
nocence and grace; the painter, physl-
cal beauty ; the parent exalts the child
from @ sentiment of natural affection ;
but Christ gave children a conspicuous
place in His teaching and system, on the
ground of their spiritual aime The


PeALM VII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; PSALMS.





children recognised Christ when the
patriarchs of the nation failed to do so ;
they welcomed Him when their fathers
were cold and blind. Christianity is
peculiarly, as no other religion has ever
been, the religion of the children. Let
them have it. Give them “the truth
as it is in Jesus ;” do not be sceptical
about their conversion,

Observe :

II. The religious service of child-
hood.

“ That Thou mightest still the enemy
and the avenger.” “The instinctive
admiration of Thy works, even by the
youngest children, is a strong defence
against those who would question Thy
being or obscure Thy glory. The effect,
or rather the legitimate tendency of this
spontaneous testimony, is to silence
enemy and avenger, t.¢e., to stop the
mouths of all malignant railers against
God, whose cavils and sophisms are put
to shame by the instinctive recognition
of God’s being and His glory by the
youngest children.” —Alexander. How
often the simple speech of a little child
cleaves to the heart of a great subject,
and silences the gainsayer! ‘‘ Have we
never seen how a child, simple and near
to God, cuts asunder a web of sophistry
with a single direct question? How,
before its steady look and simple argu-
ment, some fashionable utterer of a con-
ventional falsehood has been abashed ?”
—Aobertson. And it is remarkable how
at great crises the children have become
defenders of Christ and His cause.
Notably, Matt. xxi. 16; and again
in the Reformation. When Melancthon
was greatly depressed about the fortunes
of the Reformation, one day he passed
a house in which he found some young
people praying for the Protestant cause.
Coming to Luther, he exclaimed triumph-
antly, ‘‘ We are saved : the children are
praying for us.” And again, in the
great revival of religion under Wesley
and Whitfield. When Whitfield was
preaching in New England, a certain
lady became a subject of grace and a
praying Christian, But she could in-
fluence none to pray with her but her
little daughter, about ten years of age,
This child was daily in her closet as a

30


witness of her cries and tears, and soon
became the subject of Divine grace,
The child, in a transport peculiar to
such blessed experience, said, “O
mother! if all the world knew this! I
wish I could tell everybody! Pray,
mother, let me tell all the neighbours,
that they may be happy, and love my
Saviour too!” “Ah! my dear child,
said the mother, “it would be useless ;
if you were to tell your experience, they
would call it a delusion.” “O mother!
I think they would believe me. I must
go at once to the shoemaker, and tell him;
he will believe me.” She ran over, and
found him at work in his shop. She
began telling him that he must die;
that he and she were sinners; but that
Christ had heard her mother’s prayers,
and forgiven all her sins, and that now
she was very happy. The shoemaker
was struck ; his tears flowed down like
rain; he threw aside his work, and so
earnestly cried for mercy as to alarm the
neighbourhood; and in a few months
from that time, about fifty people were
brought to the saving knowledge of
Christ. Whitfield, adverting to his
preaching in Moorfields, says, ‘‘I can-
not help adding, that several little boys
and girls who were fond of sitting round
me on the pulpit while I preached, and
handed to me people’s notes—though
they were often pelted with eggs, dirt,
&c., thrown at me—never once gave
way; but, on the contrary, every time
I was struck, turned up their little
weeping eyes, and seemed to wish they
could receive the blows for me. God
make them, in their growing years, great
and living martyrs for Him who, out
of the mouth of babes and sucklings,
perfects praise!” There is a feast cele.
brated at Naumburg called the “ Feast
of Cherries,” in which troops of children
parade the streets with green boughs
ornamented with cherries, to commemo-
rate a triumph obtained in the follow-
ing manner :—In 1432, the Huassites
threatened the city of Naumburg with
immediate destruction, when one of the
citizens proposed that all the children
in the city should be clad in mourning,
and sent as supplicants to the enemy,
Procopius Nasus, chief of the Hussites,


fF


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMS.





was so touched with this spectacle, that
he received the young supplicants, re-
galed them with fruits, and promised
them to spare the city. The children
returned crowned with leaves, holding
cherries, and crying “ Victory!” Thus
the children are often ambassadors for
God, and their words, prayers, tears,
often confound or melt “ the enemy and
the avenger.” Every house that has a


S84LM Vik,


child in it has a chaplain. Let us in
the Christian Church believe more in
the spiritual faculty of the children; let
us teach them spiritual truth; let us
believe in their conversion ; let us eco-
nomise their evangelic power. The
smaller magnets have proportionately
much the greater power; and the chil-
dren have a remarkable spiritual force
which the Church must not ignore


Tue Dienitry or Human Nature.
(Verses 3-9.)


We observe :

XY, The apparent weakness of human
nature.

“What is man?” “It describes man
from the side of his impotence, frailty,
and mortality.” — Deltech. “ Man.
The Hebrew word denotes man in his
weakness and frailty, as in the next
member, Son of man (son of Adam),
refers also to his earthly nature as
formed out of the ground.”— Perowne.
“ What is man? The first feeling is an
overpowering sense of man’s insignifi-
cance in presence of the vastness and
splendour, the mysterious depth, and
the exceeding glory of the heavens, as
geen at night.”—Perowne. Compare
the vastness of creation with the lsttle-
ness of man; the power of creation with
the feebleness of man; the duration of
creation with the fugitiveness of man.
“One generation goeth, and another
cometh, but the earth abideth for ever.”

IL The essential greatness of human
nature.

Ver, 5-9. “ Although man appears so
insignificant, yet, through God’s mar-
vellous condescension, how great is man,
little less than Divine in nature, and
lord of all creation.”—Perowne, This
greatnews is found :

1. In the quality of hés being. He is
a partaker of the Divine nature. A
“little lower than the angels.” It is
generally acknowledged that the A. V.
does not give the full sense of the
original of these words. “ ‘Thou madest
him only a little lower than Elohim ;’ 80
the original; and Hlohim is by some
rendered, as A. V., angels; but modern in-
terpreters, however, generally are in
favour of translating the words thus :—


‘Thou madest him little less than God.’”
— Wordsworth. ‘Thou hast made him
to want but little (or, to come short
but little) of God.”"—Perowne. ‘“ And
hast made him a little less than divine.”
—Delitzsch. ‘And madest him lack
but little of God."—Kay. Man only
appears insignificant. His rounded brow
speaks more than the arched sky, his
eyes shine out deeper things than stars,
and in his lips there is a music beyond
that of wind or wave. Less bright than
the sun, less bulky than the planet, less
abiding than the stars, he is greater
than them all! ‘Noble in reason, in-
finite in faculty, in action like an angel, in
apprehension like a god.” —Shakespeare.
The day was when the Church haa to
insist upon the depravity and degrada-
tion of human nature in opposition to
the philosophy which descanted on the
purity and dignity of human uature;
now, perhaps, it is the duty of the
Church to insist on the dignity of human
nature in opposition to the dishonouring
theories of modern science. The great-
ness of man is seen ;

2. In the extent of his dominion (ver.
6-8). ‘‘Man is a king, ana not a king
without territory ; the world around, with
the works of creative wisdom which fil)
it, is his kingdom.”—-Delitzsch. ‘‘ Ali,
everything, hast Thou put under his feet,
t.¢., subjected to his power.” —Alexander.
Earth, sea, sky (Gen. i. 26, 28, ix. 2).
Man is God’s vicegerent, and through
man God seeks to govern all things.
We ought to seek to exercise our regal
glory in the right spirit and to the
right end. “* All things under his feet’
teaches us: (1.) To trample upon earthly
things as base and bootiess, not to dote

3)


PSALM VII


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMB.


a nnn a ae aca


upon them with our hearts, nor grasp
them greedily with our hands. (2.) By
this posture of all things under man’s
foot God would teach him to use them
as a stirrup, for the raising of his heart
to those things above. A sanctified
fancy can make every creature a ladder
to heaven.” —T'rapp.

IIL The source of the greatness of
human nature.


Human NATURE IN THE


This psalm is frequently quoted in
the New Testament, and may be con-
sidered as an eminently Christian psalm,
It is often objected to Christianity that
it deals harshly with human nature, that
it ignores the dignity of our nature, &.
We submit, on the contrary, that the
Christian estimate of human nature
commends itself tc the common con-
science in the sight of God.

L Christianity recognises the in-
trinsic grandeur of human nature.

It asserts the spirituality, the infinity,
the immortality of man. He is made in
the image of God’s spirituality, infinity,
immortality. And Christianity gives
the crowning illustration of man’s mys-
terious greatness. The Psalmist, in the
4th verse, affirms that the glory of
man springs from the condescension
and visitations of God; but do we not
find the supreme illustration of this
verse in the fact that Deity, in Christ,
took upon itself our human nature?
Whilst scepticism is degrading human
nature, talking of its origin in the ape,
and its destination in the dust, Chris-
tianity crowns man with honour and
glory by declaring that God took upon
Himself our nature, and lived on the
earth as man with man. The incarna-
tion stands out as the crowning demon-
stration of the mysterious grandeur of
human nature, and as a lofty protest
against all those theories of sceptical
science which would. drag man down to
the level of the beasts which perish.

IL Christianity restores the lost
grandeur of human nature.

The Gospel denies that man, as we
find him to be, dishonoured and dis-
crowned, is as he ought to be; it says
he ought to be far otherwise, and it

32


It is because God “is mindful of
him.” All his glory and empire is de-
rived from God, and only continues
whilst God blesses him. God puts the
crown on our head ; let us, in the spirit
of ver. 9, lay that crown at His feet.
“Thus saith the Lord, Let not the wise
man glory in his wisdom,” &c. (Jer. ix.
23, 24).


Licut oF CHRISTIANITY.


seeks to put the lost sceptre into his
hand, to restore the fallen diadem to
his brow. It aims to restore:

1. Theglory of his character, (1.) Christ
becomes the pattern of life. He shows us
what we may be, what we ought to be,
How truly kingly is Christ! How
glorious is the human character as seen
in Him, arrayed in all the gold and
purple of sublimest graces! (2.) Christ
becomes the perfecter of life. He is the
power to make us as glorious as Himself.
“We all, with open face,” &. The
Gospel aims to restore us faultless before
the throne of God. It aims to restore:

2. The fulness of his dominion. This
has been lost. A mere scrap of man’s
sovereignty is left to him in his fallen
estate. Instead of ruling, man is ruled ;
instead of being a monarch, he is a slave,
He is the sport of elements he was born
to rule. But Christianity recognises
man’s right to rule, and seeks to fit him
once more to exercise that rule. (1.)
In this world. Whilst many of our
scientific men are denying that the chief
end of the earth is for man, Christianity
insists that it is so. “The world is
yours.” As the Gospel prevails, the
earth becomes more subjected to man.
With the prevalence of Christianity you
have the advancement of civilisation, of
science, of art, and thus the earth is
more and more made the property of
the human race, and subordinated to the
utility, and in a great measure to the
command of man. As man acquires his
kingly character in Christ, the world
returns to its allegiance to him. (2.) In
the spiritual and eternal world. “ The
centre of the New Testament conscious-
ness is Jesus, the restorer of that which
is lost, The dominion of the world lost


lia


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





to fallen man, and only retained by him
in a rained condition, is allotted to man-
kind, when redeemed by Him, in fuller
and more perfect reality. This dominion
is not yet in the actual possession of
mankind, but in the person of Jesus it
now sits enthroned at the right hand of
God. Everything is really put under
Him with just as little limitation as is
expressed in this psalm: not merely the
animal kingdom, not merely the world
itself, but the universe with all the
ruling powers in it, whether they be in
subjection or in hostility to God, yea,
even the power of death (1 Cor. xv. 27 ;


PSALM FZ.


of. Eiph. i 22)."—Delttzach. And Christ
is thus exalted on our behalf, to make
us sharers of His power and empire.

Only in Christ can man’s magnificent
destiny be realised. ‘‘ Man’s destiny as
depicted in this psalm is not, and cannot
be, accomplished out of Christ. He is
the true Lord of all. In Him man
reigns, in Him man shall yet be restored
to his rightful lordship, and shall really
and completely be in the new world of
redemption what now he is but very
imperfectly, God’s vicegerent, ruling a
subject creation in peace, and harmony,
and love.”—Perowne,





PSALM IX,


INTRODUCTION.


“6 & paalm of thanksgiving (ver. 1, 2) after a victory (ver. 8) over the heathen wrought by
Divine judgment (ver. 4-6), expressing confidence in His constant protection of the oppressed
(ver. 7-10); therefore the pious have to thank God (ver. 11, 12), and pray to Him in every


time of need (ver. 13, 14).


The judicial government of God causes the enemies finally to


perish, and saves the sufferers (ver. 15-18); therefore the prayer (ver. 19, 20), which shows the
dangerous position of the Psalmist and his people.” — Moll,


PRAISE.
(Verses 1-3.)


In the foregoing psalms we have had
much prayer, but here we have a sub-
lime burst of praise. The Psalmist’s
soul is filled with admiration and joy in
view of the Divine character and govern-
ment, and in glorious language he gives
utterance to the ecstasy of his soul.
There is something exceedingly sublime
in praise; when we bless God, with the
angels we take our part. One of our
old poets has some quaint, but fine lines,
“On Praise.”


“ Praise is devotion fit for mightie minds !

The diffring world’s agreeing sacrifice,

Where heay’n divided faiths united finda,
But pray’r in various discord upward flies,


“ For pray’r the ocean is, where diversly
Men steer their course, each to a sev'ral
coast ;
Where all our int’rests so discordant be,
That hal? beg winds by which the rest are
lost.


** By Penitence, when we ourselves forsake,
’Tis but in wise design on piteous heav'n;
In praise we nobly give, what God may take,
And are, without a beggar’s blush, forgiv’n.
0


** Tta utmost force, like powder’s, is unknown |
And though weak kings excess of praise
may fear,
Yet when ’tis here, like powder, dang’rous
grown,
Heav’n’s vault receives, what would the
palace tear.”


—Sim Wiutiam DavENANtT.


Let us notice, then, the thanksgiving
of the text ;

I. The minstrel.

“JT will praise Thee” (ver. 1) “I
will show forth Thy works.” All God’s
works praise Him, but man is to be the
leading singer in the great choir. The
Esthonians have a beautiful legend to
explain the origin of Song. The god of
song descended on the Domberg, on
which stands a sacred wood, and there
played and sang. All creatures were
invited to listen, and they each learnt
some fragment of .the celestial sound ;
the listening wood learnt its rustling,
the stream its roar; the wind caught
and learnt te re-echo the shrillest tones,
and the birds the prelude of the song.

33


PRALM TZ.





Man only grasped it all, and therefore
his song pierces into the depths of the
heart, and upwards to the dwellings of
the gods. As this legend pictures, man’s
song is the fullest and the deepest; and
whilst creation with her thousand voices
praises God, from man comes the music
which is sweetest to the throne of God.
And each of us ought to find a tongue to
bless God. “J will praise Thee.” “J
will be glad.” “JZ will sing praise.”
We must not leave the organist and
chorister to praise God for us, and our-
selves stand dumb images in the pews.
No proxy here. He has blessed me, and
I will glorify Him. Gratitude ought to
make musicians of us all.

Notice :

If. The harp.

“With my whole heart.” The heart
is the lyre wherewith to worship God.
No instrument of music is so wonderful
as this one—full of cunning pipes and
exquisite strings; and this is the true
harp to take into the closet, into the
sanctuary. Not lips merely. ‘“ The
heart is the instrument of praise, the
mouth only its organ.”—Hengstenberg.
True praise is an overflow of feeling ;
we thank God for His goodness, and, as
the French say, “‘ There is a tear in our
voice.” ‘ Making melody in our heart
unto the Lord.” “ With my whole heart.”
The harp has many strings—some longer,
others shorter, some of one tone and
colour, whilst the other chords are dif-
ferently tuned and coloured; and so
there are many strings in that living
harp with which we should praise God,
and every chord should be smitten in
His honour, Some of the cathedrals
on the Continent contain several organs ;
and so in our breast are reason, will,
imagination, sensibility, and we should
summon every faculty to glorify God.
Let us call upon all that is within us to
bless the holy name.

Notice :

III. The song.

1. The theme of it; or rather, per-
haps, we should say themes. “TI will
show forth all Thy marvellous works.”
I will praise Him for all His grace, gifta,
deliverances, consolations, promises, “If
we be willing to talk of His deeds, He

a4


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


will give us enough to talk about.”—
Power. They are “marvellous works.”
“ All the benefits received from God are
real wonders to the humble soul, for it
is an inconceivable grace that God the
Lerd should show so much mercy,
bodily and spiritual, with wonderful
wisdom and faithfulness to those who
are in the highest degree unworthy.” —
Starke.


‘© We take the blessing from above,
And wonder at the boundless love,”


And it is our duty to show these forth.
Tell what God has done for you. “Songs
without words,” the unspoken and un-
speakable joy and worship of the heart,
are acceptable before God ; but we must
utter the memory of His great good-
ness that the world may know and
believe. As one has said, “ Christian
experience will save the world.”

2. The joyfulness of it. “TI-will be
glad.” The knowledge of God’s love
thrills the soul. When the devil played
on our heart he brought out the dismal
wailing of a perpetual “ Dead March ;”
but if we yield our heart to God, it
shall utter forth an endless “ Hallelujah
Chorus ” of gladsomeness and triumph.

3. The object of it. “I will praise
Thee.” “Twill rejoice in Thee.” “JI will
joy and triumph in Thee, not merely in
Thy presence, or because of Thee, 7.¢.,
because of what Thou hast done, but
in communion with Thee, and because
of my personal interest in Thee.”—
Alexander, In prayer there is a re-
membrance of ourselves, but in praise
God fills our eye and our heart. As
the harp-string passes out of sight trem-
bling with music, so self is forgotten
when we joy in God.

4, The occasion of it (ver. 3). “ Be
cause my enemies are turned back, be-
cause they stumble and perish before Thy
countenance.” —Speaker’s Com. ‘“ The
Romans in their triumphs presented a
palm to Jupiter."—Trapp. So in each
blessing, victory, joy, let us afresh tune
our harps, and glorify the great source
of all blessings. More than this, in the
dark days let us take our harp from the
willow and glorify God, The legend
says that Orpheus was drowned, and it


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS.


ls because his lyre is in the flood that
the waters make such sweet music.
Certainly the harp of David is never
sweeter than when it sounds from a


flood of tears. “ We glory in tribula-
tion also. That is truly a new kind of
men, that live among the dead, and are
glad among the suffering.” —Luther.





Tae Divoxg GovERNMENT IN ITs RELATION TO THE NATIONS.
(Verses 4-9.)


L The Divine government is charac-
terised by equity.

Ver. 4. “Thou satest in the throne
judging right.” ‘He shall judge the
world in righteousness” (ver. 8). It
sometimes seems as if God acted towards
nations and men with a strange partial-
ity, but it is really not so; deep down
is the law of truth and righteousness,
and all God’s ways are equal. In the
4th verse the Psalmist says, ‘‘ Thou hast
passed sentence for me and done me
right.”—Horsley. And thus it shall be
with each nation, each individual. The
Scriptures assure us of this, Conscience
testifies to this, Although we see the
saint wronged, and the sinner triumphant
a thousand times, yet conscience per-
sistently testifies that justice will be
done.

IL The Divine government is vindi-
cated with severity.

Ver. 5, 6. “And cities, Thou, O
God, hast rooted out; their memorial,
even theirs is perished. What God
destroys cannot be restored, and their
cities are desolate for ever.”— Words-
worth. ‘They are perpetual ruins.”—
Perowne. “The Psalmist appears to be
speaking of the entire destruction of the
cities of the enemy, and he seems to
atate in this clause that they should be
completely desolated, so as to prevent
any re-establishment of them at a future
time; or so as to make it impossible for
the work of desolation to be carried any
further. Zhe memory of them has per-
shed.” — Phillips.

1. Observe, God’s government will
vindicate itself. Some one has said,
“That the Spanish laws are the best in
the world, but they are never acted
upon.” God’s laws are the best laws,
and, be sure, He will insist upon every
one of them. 2. God’s government
vindicates itself now. ‘God does not
postpone judgment and salvation ¢d/


the end of the world, although times of
trouble come for the pious, and days of
apparent victory for their enemies, He
already judges tn history individuals
and nations, so that all traces of them
are blotted out from the earth, and their
name is forgotten.” — Moll. Thrones
founded in unrighteousness fall, fortunes
are shipwrecked, cities perish, empires
and armies melt, Assyrian, Babylonian,
Persian, Grecian, Roman, Jewish—all
are illustrations. 3. God’s government
vindicates itself with awful severity.
God blots out the impenitent nation or
person. ‘The nations before Him are as
the drop of a bucket, and, as such, are
dried up in the hot light of His wrath,
when once He is angry.

Ill. The Divine government survives
all opposition.

Ver. 7. “The enemy has been utterly
annihilated, whilst Jehovah remains
King for ever.”— Perowne. ‘The se-
rene majesty of the eternal Judge is
contrasted with the struggles and over-
throw of evil men.”—Speaker’s Com. We
are reminded (Isa. vi. 1.), “In the year
that King Uzziah died, I saw also the
Lord sitting upon a throne, high and
lifted up, and His train filled the
temple.” Kings die, and their king-
doms perish, but God sitteth a King
for ever, and of His government there
shall be no end, ‘The kingdom of
Christ will survive all hostilities—polt-
tical, ecclesiastical, philosophical, per
sonal,

IV. The Divine government compre-
hends all nations, and shall bring them
all into judgment.

Ver. 8. “And He shall judge the
world in righteousness, He shall minis-
ter judgment to the peoples in upright-
ness.” He will apply to us in modern
times the same severe tests which He
appiied to the peoples of the past ; and
il, wren weighed in the balances, we are


found wanting, He shall blot out our
name from under the heavens, Let us
honour God in our age and nation, for
if we rule, and legislate, and serve in


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





His fear, our throne shall be estab-
lished ; and the way for God to dwell
in a nation is for every one to see that
God dwells in his heart,


Gop tHE Prorectonk AND AVENGER OF THE OPPRESSED.
(Verses 9-13.)


God has His eye on the strong and
unjust, and He will not fail to punish
them ; He has His eye on the weak and
faithful, and will vindicate their cause.
What a record of injustice is history |
How the true, good, noble, in every age,
have been wronged! Thousands are
still being similarly wronged. What is
the relation of God to these ?

I. He is their Protector.


Mark :
1. The A of this protection
(ver. 9) “The Lord will be a refuge.”


“Properly, as in the margin, a high
place, a fort on the summit of an inaco-
cessible rock, such as often afforded a
refuge to David in early days of exile.”
—Speaker's Com. What a power there is
in the grace of God to lift a man above
his trouble! The blessing of God comes
down on His tried and persecuted people,
and they feel at once they are sweetly
lodged in an inaccessible Rock. Violence
cannot overturn it ; Sorrow cannot get
a foothold in it; Fear cannot scale it ;
the devil can find no secret winding in
it by which he may reach the saints.
It is a rock of strength and safety,
and bleased are all those who claim its
shelter.

“ How happy are the little flock,


Who, safe beneath their guardian-rock,
In all commotions reat |


§ When war’s and tumult’s waves run high,

Unmoved above the storm they lie ;

They lodge in Jesus’ breast.”

2. The seasonableness of it (ver. 9).
“A refuge tm times of trouble, t.e., steeped
in trouble."—Kay. If it were a physical
presence, we might sometimes justly say,
* Lord, if thou hadst been here,” this
and that disaster would not have oc-
eurred ; but the spiritual presence is


ever with us. He is a help in the time
of trouble ; a present help, a very present
help. In South-Eastern India there is
a wild race which believes that all the
evil in the world is done whilst God is
sleeping; if He were not obliged to
sleep there would be no sickness, no
sorrow, no death. What a comfort to
feel that God’s eyes neither slumber nor
sleep, and that He is never far from any
one of us. God is the nearest to us
when we want Him the most.

3. The immutability of it. “Thou
hast not forsaken them that seek Thee”
(ver. 10). “ Hast never failed them
that xeek Thee.”—P. B. Version. And
He never will.

I. He is their Avenger.

Ver. 12. “ Like the Goél, the next of
kin, who was bound to avenge the murder
of his kinsman, so God cails the mur-
derer to account, requires satisfaction at
his hand.”—Perowne.

Let us learn :

1. Mot to oppress. It is a fearful
thing in anywise to wrong our brother.
The cry of the oppressed reaches God,
and God cannot rest on His throne
until that cry is avenged. Let us not
do anything against our brother’s rights,
freedom, property, conscience, happiness,
life, character. He “has no friend, kick
him.” But the weak man at your feet
has a Friend ; don’t kick him, help him
on his feet, and God shall bless you.

2. In oppression trust in God. “They
that know Thy name will put their trust
in Thee” (ver. 10). “Those knowing Thy
name, t.e,, those who are acquainted with
Thy power.” —PaAtllips, Such will trust
God. ‘They can do no otherwise that
savingly know God’s sweet attributes and
noble acts for His people,”"— Trapp.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





MALS TK.





Tae Personan REALISATION oF GENERAL TRUTHA,
(Verses 13, 14.)


The Psalmist has been dealing with
great principles, and regarding these in
their application to great nations and
long periods of time, when he interrupts
the general reflection by this personal
cry. These two verses are considered
to break the unity of the psalm. “They
disturb the unity of the psalm, and inter
fere awkwardly with its genera strain
of triumph.”—Delitzsch. But we must
remember that the Psalmist writes as a
man, not as an artist, and we have here
the instinctive, irrepressible ery of his
heart.

He recognises ;

I. His personal fault.

“Have mercy upon me, O Lord”
(ver. 13). Is there not here a recog-
nition of his own unworthiness, as well
as his own suffering? He asks for help,
but it is on the ground of mercy. So
should we ever in acknowledging the
corruption of human nature remember
the corruption of our own; and in de-
ploring the sin of the world take care to
deplore our own sin. How often we
forget this! The woman of Samaria was
versed in theological lore, and acknow-
ledged with freedom various great re-
ligious principles, but how strangely
she forgot her own personal situation!
In the presence of Sinai, of Calvary, of
an imperfect and guilty race, let us ery
before Heaven, “‘ God be merciful to me,
& sinner.”


IL His personal need.

“Consider my trouble” (ver. 13),
Whilst the Psalmist thought of the
general sorrow, he recalled before God
his own. Every heart knows tts own
bitterness, and it is our privilege to
make our case known to God. Every
one of us may go to God and cry,
‘‘Consider my trouble.” We cannot go
with every little ailment to the doctor,
nor with every little perplexity to the
lawyer, nor with every little trouble to
a friend; but we may go to God with all
our distresses, and He will give us audi-
ence and relief. He appeals to God as

ITI. His personal Helper.

“Thou that liftest me up” (ver. 13).
He has seen in God the world’s Judge
and Redeemer, and he now recognises
God as his God. Let us not stay short
of this personal relationship and plea.
Let us not lose ourselves in a crowd.
Let us be able to say, “O Lord, Thou
art my Lord, and my God, and my
Helper.” Finally, the Psalmist vows:

IV. His personal consecration.

Ver. 14. “That I may show forth,”
&c. In “the gates,” as the most public
place of concourse. It ought not only
to be, “ All the earth praises Thee,” but
also, “Bless the Lord, O my soul.”
Our voice, profession, gifts, service are
needed. J must praise God, acknow-
ledge Him, love Him, and seek to build
up His kingdom.


Toe ExrremMitizs OF THE SAINTS,
(Verses 13, 14.)


Observe :

L The depth of their distress.

“Thou that liftess me up from the
gates of death” (ver. 13). ‘From
_ desperate and deadly dangers, such as
threaten present destruction, and show
aman the grave even gaping for him.
David was oft at this pass; and God
delivered Paul from so great a death
\4 Cor, i 10), He commonly reserveth
His hand for a dead-lift, and resoueth


those who were even talking of their
graves.”"—Trapp. Believers are often


brought “very low.” Constitutional
infirmity; bodily sickness; worldly
trouble, spiritual conflicts; persecu-


tion ; these often depress and bewilder
the saints, and they are at their “‘ wits’
end.” .
IL. The fulness of their detiverance.
“In the gates of Jerusalem” (ver.


14) He brings His people from the
$7


POALM Ix.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMB.





gates of hell to the gates of glory.
“ There is a beautiful contrast between
‘the gates of death,’ in the preceding
verse, and ‘the gates of the daughter of
Bion,’ or the heavenly Jerusalem, in
this—the one leads down to the pit, the
other up to the Mount of God ; the one
opens into perpetual darkness, the other
into light eternal ; from the one pro-
ceeds nothing but what is evil, from the
other nothing but what is good ; infer-
nal spirits watch at the one, the other
are unbarred by the hands of angels.
What a blessing, then, is it to be snatched
from the former, and transported to the
latter."—Horne. 1. God has thus lifted
up His people in their conversion. They
were “snatched as brands from the
burning,” and placed in safety in the
Church, which is the “ gate of heaven.”
2. God does thus lift up His people in
their experience. When our sins, our
sorrows, our sufferings, our persecutors
have brought us very low, how God
interferes on our behalf, and turns the
shadow of death into the morning!
3. God will thus lift up His people from
death and the grave. He will trans-
figure their crown of thorns into amar-
anth ; change their corruptible into in-
corruption ; raise them from the dust
and worms to stars and angels |


** Millions of transgressors poor
Thou hast for Jesus’ sake forgiven ;
Made them of Thy favour sure,
And snatched from hell to heaven.”


Il. The expression of their grati-
tude.

“That I may show forth all Thy
praise,” &c, (ver. 14), “That I may
recount all Thy praise.” “This is one


important end for which he asks to be
delivered, namely, that God may have
the praise of his deliverance.” —A lexan-
der. Wewill praise Him on earth, and
surely no song in heaven shall be louder
and sweeter than ours,
“My soul, through my Redeemer’s care,
Saved from the second death I feel,


My eyes from tears of dark despair,
My feet from falling into hell.


“Wherefore to Him my feet shall run,
My eyes on His perfections gaze ;
My soul shall live for God alone;
And all within me shout His praise.”

Lessons :

1. In the darkest hours do not despair.
In the darkest hours of life, of death,
do not despair. At the gates of death,
believe, hope! ‘‘ There is nothing despe-
rate in the state of good men where there
is a right principle within them, and
God’s superintendency over them.”—
Whicheote. ‘‘ When the axe already
touches thy neck, still hope in God’s
saving grace.”—Talmud. From the
deepest pit we see the stars, 2. Jn the
darkest hours remember that the depth of
the shade prophesies the fulness of the
glory which ts to be revealed. As much
as you are brought low, so much shall
you be lifted up. From gates of death
you spring to beautiful gates of lofty
Christian life and worship; to pearly
gates, golden gates of heavenly rest
and victory. Men measure mountains
by their shadows ; and so from the sor-
rows of to-day we may argue somewhat
to the grandeurs which await us. But
even then we must remember that “ the
sufferings of the present time are not
worthy to be compared to the glory
which shall be revealed in us.”


RETRIBUTION,
(Verses 15-20.)


We are taught here:

I That the pit of human misery and
ruin is digged by man, not by God.

“The pit that they made” (ver. 15).
Yes; all the pits into which man falls
are self-digged. That is true of all the
pits on earth. God’s laws were all made
for man’s good and joy, but we create
misery for ourselves, What scenes of


misery there are on the earth—jails,
madhouses, penitentiaries, dc., dc. ; but
God did not design these places. In
the original arrangement of things our
perfection and pleasure alone were de-
signed ; but pride, appetite, folly, covet-
ousness, have dug the horrible pits from
whence coie up evermore sighs of misery


and despair, This is true of the pit of


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


——___


hell. God made Eden for us, the beau-
tiful earth, heaven beyond ; but we make
hell for ourselves. We build its prisons,
kindle its fires, forge its fetters, originate
its woe. As Dr. Griffin says, “God is
right, and man is wrong.”

II. That sin may be cleverly devised
and executed, but its frustration is
certain.

“The pit that they made, the net
which they hid.” How subtlely the
thing has been conceived and wrought!
Sin is often an attempt to overmatch
man, to take advantage of his igno-
rance, or weakness, or unwariness. It
is always an attempt to overmatch God.
It is dexterously done, so to break the
laws of God as to escape the threatened
penalty. But it does not succeed. The
sinner falls into the pit, is taken in the
snare. We think of cheating man, devil,
God ; but we shall only cheat ourselves.

III. That sin may long remain
unpunished, but its punishment is
certain.

“The Lord is known by the judg-
ment which He executeth” (ver. 16).
« Known 1s Jehovah, or has made Him-
self known. Justice has He done, or
judgment has He executed. God has
revealed Himself as present and attentive,
notwithstanding His apparent oblivion
and inaction, by doing justice on His
enemies, or rather by making them do
justice on themselves.” — Alexander.
God will arise to punish sinners ; and





PRALM KK.





the punishment shall be all the more
terrible for the delay. V. Hugo says
concerning the sea: “ Beware of the
gale that has been long delayed. It was
Angot who said that ‘the sea pays well
old debts,’” Sinner, beware of the wrath
long delayed ; justice pays well old debts,

IV. That the final punishment of
sin is overwhelming.

Ver. 17. “ Not the heathen, as such,
but all (of whatever race) who wilfully
forget and put away from them that
knowledge of Himself which God has
inscribed on men’s consciences,”—Kay.
““God’s righteousness shall be seen in
cutting off the wicked by a sudden and
premature end.”— Perowne.

Lessons :

1. The saints must trust in God (ver.
18). “The patient abiding of the meek”
shall not be in vain.—P. B, Version.

2. The ungodly must tremble at the
judgments of God (ver. 20). They are
“but men,” however proud and defiant
they may be. “Crowns leave their
wearers, but men, degrees of eminent
learning, make their owners not more
than men, valour and conquest cannot
elevate beyond the dead level of ‘ but
men ;’? and all the wealth of Crossus,
the wisdom of Solon, the power of
Alexander, the eloquence of Demos-
thenes, if added together, would leave
the possessor but @ man.”—Spurgeon.
And what can man do when God
awakes to judgment #


PSALM X.


INTRODUCTION.


«¢ This psalm seems to belong to the time of the Captivity, or the return of the captives. It
was probably made in reference to Sanballat, and the other enemies of the Jews. There is a


great similarity between this and the 12th, the 14th, the 35th, and the 63d.


In these, as Calmet


remarks, we find the same complaints, the same sentiments, and almost the same expressiens.”


—Dr. A. Clarke.


Sou. PrERPLexiry.
(Verses 1, 2.)


L The problem.

“Why standest Thou afar of, O Lord?”
&e., t.¢., “like an idle, passive specta-
tor, unconcerned at the misery which
he sees, but refuses to relieve.”—Pe-


rumne, ‘The wicked in his pride doth


persecute the poor.” “Through the
proud dealings of the wicked, their vie-
tims are placed in the fire or furnace of
affliction.”——Perowne. “Through the
pride of the wicked the afilicted man
burns.”—Moll, The soul is sorely


PSALM EL


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALM&,





puzsled with this painful problem, and
asks earnestly, Why is it thus? Let it
be observed, this is not—{1.) A presump-
twoue question. “The meaning is not
that of searching for the reason.”—
Moll. There is no disposition to know
the secret things which belong unto
the Lord. (2.) Not a murmuring ques-
tion. ‘In the anguish of external
trouble and internal affliction, the pious
may, with propriety, urge God to
hasten to their relief ; but although the
voice of their lamentation may resound,
yet it must not contain a complaint
against God, as if He improperly de-
layed, or as if He left the afflicted in
continual danger without reason, or as if
He had purposely shut His eyes and
ears against their need and prayers. In
the realisation of their weakness, they
must give themselves and their cause
entirely into the hands of God.”—Moll.
Neither is it, (3.) A despatring question.
“The good soul knows that God waiteth
to be gracious ; and as He seldom com-
eth at our time, so at His own (which is
ever the best) time, He never faileth,”
—Trapp. It is a lovers question ; it
is the cry of a righteous man, impatient
that justice should be done ; but it is
a question nevertheless which bespeaks
the deep sorrow and perplexity of the
religious soul, A little child cried in
the night, and the parent came to
correct it ; said the little thing, “‘ Whip
me, but don’t leave me.” Thus, the
bitterest trial of the saints is the con-
sciousness of God’s absence.

Ii The solution.

The explanation of the problem may
be found: 1. Partly in regard to our
personal discipline. (1.) It rebukes our


faults. In these hours of sorrow, we
remember our faults. (2.) It reminds us
of our personal helplessness. We never
know the preciousness of our friends
until we have lost them; and it seems
necessary that our greatest Friend should
withdraw His presence sometimes, so
that we may realise His preciousness
more fully, and know how helpless we
are without Him. (3.) It drives us
nearer to God. 2. Partly in respect to
the salvation of the wicked. God delays
to do justice that the wicked may have
space for repentance. It may be that
the wicked abuse these delays, put upon
them a wrong interpretation, but God
grants the longer delay, that the sinner
may turn and live. Thus, if the
righteous suffer because Heaven delays
its judgments, let them not complain.
Let them regard their sufferings on this
account as vicarious suffering, as identi-
fying them with their thorn-crowned
Master, who was bruised for our ini-
quities, and by whose stripes we are
healed. God is sublimely patient, bear-
ing with sinners, and suffering whilst
He bears ; let us imitate His long-suf-—
fering, and not complain at the delays
of justice, because such delays are in
the interests of mercy and salvation,
3. Certainly, in regard to the glory of
God. God will not dishonour Himself
by hiding Himself; when all things
are seen clearly, the Divine attributes
will shine all the brighter for these
obscurations. Each explained mystery
will be a crown on God’s head ; not one
of them a blot on God’s throne. The
throne at last will be “A great white
throne” (Rev. xv. 3, 4)


PractioaL ATHEISM.
(Verses 3-14.)


We have here a full-length portrait of
the practical atheist. The Psalmist is
not speaking of the theoretical atheist,
not of the man who ignores God with
his lips, but who ignores Him in his life.

Let us mark:

I. The nature of this atheism.

1. The atheism here spoken of ignores

40


God tn actual life (ver. 4). “God is
not in all his thoughts.” “Turre 1s
No Gop: not that he is literally an
atheist, but that the whole of his con
duct, all his purposes and schemes, are
carried on as if there were no God—in
a practical denial of His existence,”—
Perowne. ‘ David does not speak of the


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





words, but of the innermost thoughts,
of the wicked—their practical, it may be
half-conscious atheism.” — Speaker's Com.
How much of this secret atheism there
is in the world! How often in the
bed-chamber of the heart do men curse
the King! How continually do men
acknowledge God, and yet in their con-
duct deny Him! The Chinese acknow-
ledge no God in their creed, and yet
their houses and shops and streets are
full of idols. The reverse of this is seen
in Christendom ; our creed is full of
God, and then we shut Him out from
our shops, homes, hearts.

2. The atheism here spoken of ez-
eludes God from systems of thought.
“No God, is the whole of his philo-
sophy” (ver. 4).—Horsley. Such are
Intended as those who (1.) Acknowledge
that God is, but that He cannot be known,
putting God at a vast and inaccessible
distance ; (2.) Those who contend that
we cannot affirm or deny Glod’s extstence,
(3.) Those who deny a personal God.
“To deny the existence of a living, act-
ing, all-punishing (in one word, a per-
sonal) God, is equivalent to denying
the existence of any real and true God
whatever."—Hwald. Ver. 1l. “ The
thought of a personal God would dis-
turb the ungodly in his doings, he there-
fore prefers to deny His existence, and
thinks there is only fate, and fate is
blind, only an absolute, and it has no
eyes, only a notion, and that cannot in-
terfere in the affairs of men.” —Delitzsch.

We notice ;

Il. The history of this atheism.

This atheism is here shown to spring
from the pride and corruption of the
heart.


1. In the second verse the atheist is
shown to be personally corrupt.

2. Next, he glories in his corruption.
“For the wicked boasteth of his heart's
desire” (ver. 3). ‘He giveth praise to
his heart’s desire.”—Perowne. “To hia
 goul’s lust,”—Kay. ‘He blesses and
idolises himself ; he sings liallelujahs to
himself, and forgets God.”—— Wordsworth.
“This seems to be a description of the
last stage of corruption, in which men
openly defend or applaud their own
vices,” — Alexander,


PeALM EZ,


3. The wicked man not only glories
in his own shame, but has pleasure in
those who do stich things. “ He blesseth
the covetous.”

Out of this rampant wickedness comes
—(1.) The hatred of God. “ He abhorreth
the Lord.” When we have wronged
any one, the next thing is we hate them.
(2.) The ignoring of God (ver. 4).


“He is so wrapped up in his rapacious


propensities that he forsakes and alto-
gether despises God.”—Phillips. Here
we have the devil’s chain. Each several
link is manifest of that awful fetter with
which the devil binds his victims ere
he casts them into hell. Many of
our sceptics give atheism a very proud
lineage ; its ancestors are thought, logic,
love, and righteousness; God’s Word
declares atheism to be the monstrous
child’ of corruption. Yes; atheism
springs not from a clear head, but a
disordered heart; it is not the charac-
teristic of a pure and simple age, but
of a civilisation debauched with luxuries,
and mad with pride.

IML. The characteristics of it.

1. Pride (ver. 4). ‘‘ Through the
pride of his countenance.” “ The wicked
in the height of his scorn.”—Speaker’s
Com. Ver. 5. “ His ways are always vtc-
torious.”—Ewald. Job xii. 6. His ways
always prosper, and he is full of pride.
“ Thy judgments,” &. God’s judgments,
His punishments for sin, are so far out
of the sight of the wicked that he acts
as if they could never reach him.”—
Perowne. “ As for all his enemies,” dc.
He cares as little for man as he does for
God.

2. Presumption (ver. 6). “‘ In his
unbounded carnal security he lets his
wicked tongue have free course.”—
Delitzsch. “The idea of the wicked is
that they and their families would con-
tinue to be prosperous, that a permanent
foundation was laid for honour and suc-
cess, and for transmitting accumulated
wealth and honours down to far-distant
times.”— Barnes. For ever and ever
they shall flourish,

3. Practical and outrageous wickedness.
Blasphemy, falsehood, injustice, cruelty,
murder. When you have ignored God,
and denied His intervention in the affairs

41


P64LéM X&


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY ; PSALMB.





of men, you have opened the flood-gates
of iniquity.

IV. The doom of it.

Ver. 12, &c. God marks and punishes
this atheism, and what springs out of
it. In the llth verse the wicked say:
“God hath forgotten,” &c. But, says
the Psalmist in the 14th verse: “ Zhou
hast seen tt, to requite tt.” “There isa
time coming, he feels assured, when all


this disorder will be set right. God is
not the passive spectator of human affaire
which these men deem Him. He ‘con-
siders’ (ie, regards with interest and
sympathy) what is going on. The help-
less, therefore, may leave all to God.”
—Perowne. And woe unto the godless
(ver. 15, 16). “ Let the wicked and his
wickedness disappear, so that even when
sought for it cannot be found.” —Perowne.


Birack ARTs
(Verses 7-18.)


A missionary who recently returned
from Polynesia brought home with him
@ curious object called a soul-trap. This
consisted simply of a series of rings
twisted in cocoa-nut fibre. If a native
should commit a great offence, or have
the misfortune to offend a sorcerer, the
latter immediately proceeds to make a
new ring in his chain, so as to form a
trap to catch the poor man’s spirit.
Soon a bird or butterfly alights on the
ring, and the sorcerer asserts that the
soul of the culprit assuming this form
has passed into the trap. It is imme-
diately known throughout the tribe that
& certain man has lost his soul. As a
matter of fact, it invariably happens that
the soulless man shortly afterwards dies,
of course through sheer mental distress
at having had his soul thus entrapped.
We smile at such traps, but we are all
familiar with soul-traps of a far more
subtle and dangerous character. In the
verses before us the Psalmist vividly pic-
tures the crafty schemes of the wicked
in order to entrap their victims. They
seek by most subtle arts to entangle and
destroy.

L It is thus that selfish men set
traps for the young and inexperienced.

With lies and enticements the cove-
tous seek to entrap and destroy the
young. Soul-traps for the young! How
numerous they are! How cleverly con-
trived/ The utmost artifice and plausi-
bility. How successful they are (ver.
10). “Crouching down as low as pos-
sible, he lies on the watch, and the feeble
and defenceless fall into his strong ones,
te, claws.” — Delitzsch. How many
thus fall! Our cities are full of fallen
young men and women, We have thou-

42


sands of heartless men in society answer
ing to the vile robber pictured in these
verses. For the sake of gain and lust,
they set traps in which the health,
honour, happiness, and hope of the
youthful perish, The whole civilised
world was shocked the other day by the
discovery that, by means of an infernal
machine, a villain sent ships and their
crews to the bottom of the sea for the
sake of the insurance money ; but thou-
sands of atheistical, covetous men, for
the sake of gain, are ingeniously seeking
to sink the souls of the people in the
gulf of hell) May God save our young
people from their cruel schemes !

II, It is thus that the world con
trives traps for the godly.

The world does not like the godly,
and in various subtle methods it seeks
to worst them. Ithas traps for their
reputation. ‘His mouth is full of per-
jury and deceit.” He sets a net of
cunningly-devised speech, that he may
be able to bring their good name into
discredit. It has traps for their fortune.
It will “privily seek” to damage their
circumstances. It will adroitly circulate
reports, frame laws, to bring them into
financial trouble. It has traps for their
character. They know the natural weak-
nesses of a Christian, and they bait their
hook, set their net, accordingly. He is
short-tempered, and they contrive to put
in his way occasions of anger; he is
given to levity, and they provoke his
mirth ; he has strong appetites, and they
put drink to his lips; he is feeble in
faith, and they press him with scepti-
cisms. ‘The world hates the righteous,
and when it cannot injure them openly,
it will secretly. The devil is a wily


HOMILRTIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.
eee


destroyer, and his children imitate his
tactics, and seek “to murder the inno-
cent.”

IL. It is thus that Satan sets traps
for us all

He is the great bandit pictured in the
text; he is the great sorcerer whose
soul-traps beset us at every turn. What
a clever fowler is he! what a politic
huntsman! what a subtle angler! The
devil hides himself, he disguises his
movements, and in an evil hour men
are drawn “into the net.” Here he be-
trays by pleasure. Bates tells us of a
spider in South America which looks
like a blossom, and insects alighting on
it for sweetness find death. So the
great foe, under the aspect of pleasure,
betrays thousands, Here he betrays by
honour, One of the Roman Emperors
used to fish with a net of purple and
gold ; the devil has used this net largely,
and taken great prey. And by many
other devices does he destroy the unwary.
Beware! That was a clumsy soul-trap
in Polynesia, but the sorcerer of hell
has traps of strange power—of damning
efficacy. Beware of those soul-traps
made of flowers called pleasure; of
those purple-lined ones called greatness ;
of those gay-painted ones called fashion ;
of those scientific ones called philosophy;
of those jewelled ones called honour; of
those golden ones called wealth. “Satan
himself is transformed into an angel of
light.” The devil will lie, fawn, flatter,
and do this patiently for years to ruin
us,

1. Let the innocent put their trust in
God. “The afflicted committeth him-
self unto Thee ; Thou art the helper of
the fatherless” (ver. 14). Alas! for us
if we attempt to stand in our own
strength, and take our defence into our
own hands. “He that takes himself
out of God’s hands into his own, by
and by will not know what to do with
himself.”— Whichcote. And in our dark-
est hours of temptation and trial, we
-may have the fullest assurance that God
has not forgotten us, The wicked say:
“God will never see it” (ver. 11).
But the Psalmist replies: “Thou hast
seen it; for Thou beholdeth mischief
and spite to requite it with Thy hand”
{ver. 14). “The Psalmist means to


PRALy &,





say, so far from the assertion of the
wicked man being true, that God is
forgetful of the poor; He is, on the con-
trary, observant of their trouble and
vexation ; and in order not to forget
their calamities, He places a memorial
of them on His hands (see Isa. xlix.
26). J have engraven thee on the palms
of My hands ; which would be done for
the purpose of assisting the memory.”—
Phillips. God has not forgotten His
tried ones who look to Him ; He will not
forget them. “The Lord preserveth
the simple,”


“ As far from danger as from fear,
Whilst Love, Almighty Love, is near.”


2. Let the innocent walk circumspectly.
“‘ Lurking places,” “secret places,” “eyes
privily set,” “lieth in wait secretly.”
“'He croucheth.” “The image is that
of a beast of prey, a fox or a wolf, lying
upon the watch about the farm-yard in
the evening.” — Horsley, This great
enemy is ever on the watch for us in the
world. Ambushed often where least
expected. And in the Church. The
wolf prowls about Christ’s fold. Let
us (1.) Live in the spirit of watchfulness,
(2.) Let us be specially on our guard
against what promises unusual gain, or
liberty, or pleasure. The angler makes
his artificial fly as big, and fat, and
dazzling as he can, and the devil acts
thus with the bait which he dangles
before human souls. (3.) Let us keep as
far from danger as we possibly can.
They try sometimes how near they can
swim to the Niagara falls without going
over—it is not wise. God will keep us,
if we strive thus to keep ourselves.

3. Let any who are in the snare of the
devil look up to the Deliverer. It is beat
to keep out of Satan’s claws, but Christ
can deliver us from the paw of the lion
and the mouth of the bear. In the
devil’s trap, held by the iron teeth of
evil, stained with blood and tears, look
up, and Mercy’s hand shall liberate you,
and you shall sing: ‘‘ My soul has es-
caped as a bird out of the snare of the
fowler ; the snare is broken, and I have
escaped.”

4, Let the wicked be assured that God’s
eye 18 upon them, and that justice must
overtake them (ver. 15). “ cue the


POL Xi.





HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS.





Lord continues to spare them, therefore
they go on to provoke Him. As He
adds to their lives, so they add to their
lusts. Because justice seems to wink,
men suppose her blind; because she
delays punishment, they imagine she
denies to punish them; because she


does not always reprove them for thelr
sins, they suppose she always approves
of their sins. But let such know that
the silent arrow can destroy as well
as the roaring cannon. ‘Though the
patience of God be lasting, yet it is nob’
everlasting.” —Spurgeon,


PSALM XL


INTRODUCTION.


“The friends of David advise him in this psalm to flee unto the mountainous parts of the
land of Judah, in order to avoid the danger which was threatening him, should he remain in
the place where he was then residing. The psalm is written in the form of a dialogue, of which
the first three verses contain the advice of David’s friends, and the remaining portion his reply,
wherein he declares his unshaken confidence in God, and his conviction that the wicked will be
punished, and himself duly protected.” —Phillips,


Morat Courage.
(Verses 1-7.)


We have in this psalm a striking
illustration of Christian heroism. The
Psalmist is found in circumstances of
great moral perplexity and personal
danger, but he stands his ground trust-
ing in God.

We notice:

L. The severity of the trial.

David's timid counsellors bring before
him several pressing reasons why he
should despair of his cause, and retire
from the scene of conflict. They urge—
1. The desperate designs of his enemies,
“They bend their bow, and make ready
their arrow upon the string” (ver. 2).
They will take his life ; their thoughts
are thoughts of blood. 2. Their per-
jidious policy. ‘That they may privily
shoot at the upright in heart” (ver. 2).
They were prepared to resort to the
basest stratagems to compass his death,
3. Their successful action (ver. 3). “What
hath the righteous done?”—P. B. Ver-
sion. “The question in the last clause
of this verse implies that the righteous
have effected nothing in opposition to the
prevalent iniquity."—Alexander. “If
Saul, who is the vicegerent of God, has
cast aside his fear, and now regards
neither truth nor justice, a righteous
man has no security for his life. This
is at present thy case, therefore flee ;
they have utterly destroyed the founda-
tions of truth and equity; what can
righteousness now eflect 1” — Clarke.
The position here is, then. that righteous-

44.


ness has been unsuccessful, and the in-
ference is that righteousness will be
unsuccessful. “Thus wickedness seemed
to be getting the upper hand to such a
degree that the godly remnant (Isa. i. 9)
felt themselves tempted to flee, as Lot
was bidden to flee, from the city to the
mountain.”—Kay. ‘All is hopeless
disorder and confusion.”—Perowne. The
representatives of moral ideas were false,
the practice of righteousness ceased, the
very principles of law and order were
subverted, and there seemed no hope.

I. The constancy of the tried.

“In the Lord put I my trust” (ver.
1). “My feet are on the true rock,
why should I look elsewhere for safety ?”
—Perowne. ‘‘ How say ye to my soul,
Flee as a bird to your mountain? How
can ye say!”—Phillips. Dark as the
hour was, the Psalmist’s resolution was


unshaken. What were the sources of
this sublime courage? 1. The presence
of God.


“The Lord is in His holy
temple” (ver. 4). God may seem to
have deserted the earth, but He has not
2. The majesty of God. “The Lord’s
throne is in heaven” (ver. 4). Far above
all human or devilish. energy. The
supreme power is moral, 3. The know-
ledge of God. “ His eyes behold,” &e,
(ver. 4). ‘His is a fixed and pene-
trating look that sees into a thing to the
foundation of its inmost nature. The
mention of the eyelids is intentional,
When we observe a thing closely or


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PoAUM RI.





ponder over it, we draw the eyelids
together, in order that our vision may
be more concentrated and direct, and
become, as it were, one ray piercing
through the object. Thus are men
open to the all-seeing eyes, the all-
searching looks of Jahve, the just and
the unjust alike.”—Delitzsch. One of
the Greeks said : “ He is the best general
who knows the most of the affairs of the
enemy.” God knows His enemies, and
the enemies of His people—all their
secrets, subtleties, stratagems, and in
due time He shall confound them, 4.
The righteousness of God. God hates
wiekedness (ver. 5). ‘ A cordial hatred.”
—Alexander. “He hates the wicked
with all the energy of His perfectly and
essentially holy nature.”—Delitzsch,
Here the Psalmist rested; here we
may rest. Truth may fail in the Church,
righteousness in the State; the magis-
trate may cease to be just, the priest to
be good, the king to be honourable ;
but God liveth, the Wise, the Just, the
Good, and in Him we may rest.
Ill. The certainty of the triumph.
The wicked shall be destroyed with
awful terrors (ver. 6), but the righteous
shall triumph (ver. 7). ‘‘ The upright
shall behold His face.” “ His unveiled
countenance, no longer hidden behind
deeds of strange providential discipline
(xiii. 1), no longer making itself felt in
a few straggling rays ; but like ‘the sun
in a morning without clouds.’”—Kay.
1. All God's people may expect to be
thus tried. At one time or other our
faith, principle, hope, will be thus
severely tested, We must all be tried
by fire.


FoRLORN
(Verses


L The hopes of the saint often ap-

ear forlorn hopes.

The Psalmist trusted in God, but to
the timid and distrustful ones his hope
. was a wild, forlorn hope. A hoping
against hope. Thus the hopes of the
Christian often seem absurd in the eye
of sense and tue count of reason. 1. It
is thus sometimes in the troubles of life.
There are Egyptians behind, the sea
before, and the believer's expectations


2. Let us in such days beware of tha
temporising policy of faint-hearted men,
“Flee like a bird to the mountain.”
“The advice here given, and which he
repels, is that of timid and desponding
friends, who would persuade him that
all is lost, and that the highest wisdom
is to yield to circumstances, and to seek
safety, not in resistance, but in flight.
But in fact the voice which thus speaks
is the voice of the natural heart, of the
selfish, and therefore shortsighted and
cowardly instinct, which always asks
first, not what is right, but what is
safe. The advice may be well meant,
but it is unworthy. This is the victory
that overcometh the world, even our
faith. But it is often a sorer trial for
faith to have to withstand the pleadings
of well-meaning friends than to arm
itself against open enemies.”—Perowne.

3. Let us trust confidently in God, and
He shall make us to triumph. Torsten-
sohn, the great commander to whom
Gustavus Adolphus transmitted the pro-
secution of the Thirty Years’ War, was.
a man go shattered by disease that he
had to be carried at the head of his
forces in a litter. Yet no commander of
his age was so resistless and terrible in
his onset and so invariably victorious.
Schiller has expressed his leading maxim
in these words: he never counted his
enemies. Let us not count our enemies,
but trust our God, and we shall be more
than conquerors. “Flee as sparrows to
your mountain.”—Phillips. But, trust-
ing in God, the sparrow becomes an
eagle, mounting above the storm, and
delighting itself in the eternal sunshine
of the Father's face.


Hopks.

1-7.)

of deliverance seem most Utopian. 2
Amid abounding and triumphant wicked-
ness. As in this psalm. “‘ For the
foundations are being overthrown,’ say
the alarmed and timid ones. ‘ He is as
much in a minority now as he ever was,
Had he not better leave the field of
battle? Why struggle against (what
men call) the inevitable course of
events ?’?”—-Kay. 3. As to the entire
sanctyyication of character, H ye impos-


Paate EY.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





sible it seems that we should become
entirely holy, and love God with all our
heart! Will not the sky always recede
as we approach it? 4. Aé the grave,
How utterly improbable the grand hopes
of the saint !

I. Hopes which appear forlorn hopes
to the world have nevertheless strong
foundations.

The timid felt that the foundations
were being destroyed, all on which
a rational confidence could be founded
was giving way, and yet, as we see, the
Pgalmist’s hope had a basis strong and
deep. The foundations were gone. “It
is not said, if the roof be ruinous, or if
the side walls be shattered, but if the
foundations,” —Fuller, quoted by Spur-
geon. Nothing for sense or reason was
left. But there are foundations under


foundations, the eternal granite, and on
this David built (ver. 4, 5). The power
of God, the truth of God, the grace of
God, the unchangeableness of God ; here
was the everlasting rock on which David
rested his hopes. When the expecta-
tions of the saints seem most wild, yet
do they rest more securely than the
illared firmament.

III. The forlorn hopes of the saints
are destined to glorious realisation.

“Which hope maketh not ashamed.”
In deepest trouble He will deliver us,
opening in the valley of Achor a door of
salvation. Amid triumphant wickedness
He vindicates the just, shattering the
proud pottery with a rod of iron. He
makes us without spot or wrinkle. He
raises from the sepulchre to immortal
glory and honour,


Toe Taorios oF THE TEMPTED.
(Verse 1.)


In this psalm we see David stand
firm ; he will not accept the counsel of
his advisers to flee, but at another time
he seems to have followed this advice.

Observe :

I. There are times when we ought
to stand firm in the scenes of trial.

Such times are when—1. Such trials
come in our providential path. 2, When
our testimony for God ts specially needed.
3. When the cause of God imperatively
demands our presence, &c., &c.

II. There are times when we may
lawfully withdraw from such scenes.

1. When they do not seem to lie on our


providential path. 2. When our testé-
mony has been faithfully gwen. 3.
When God’s cause would seem to be best
served by our retirement, &e., kc.

Ill. The standards by which our
conduct should be regulated in the
changing scenes of life.

Consult :

1. The finger of God in Providence. 2.
The Word of God. 3. The Spirit.of God,
‘Oh, wouldst Thou, Lord, Thy servant guard,

*Gainst every known or secret foe ;

A mind for all assaults prepared,

A sober, vigilant mind bestow,

Ever apprised of danger nigh,

And when to fight, and when to fly.”


PSALM XIL


INTRODUOTION.


“ This, according to the title, is one of David’s psalms, but there is nothing in the clreum-
stances, so far as we know them, of his history which can lead us to associate the psalm with
any particular period. Thoiuck thinks it is aimed at persons by whom David was surrounded


in the court of Saul.
burden of the Psalmist’s complaint.


But it is not one or two prominent individuals whose conduct forms the
He is evidently smarting from the falseness and the


hypocrisy of the time. The defection which he deplores is a national defection. Like Elijah


in the desert, he feels himself alone, A taint has spread through society.


where, truth nowhere.” —Perowne,


Falsehood is every:


Dark AGES
(Verses 1-8.)


We observe:
L The golden age of a country
4%


may be a “dark age” in the estimate
of the saint.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY; PSALMS,


Paste ZU,





“The time of David, incomparably
the best age in the history of Israel,
and yet, viewed in the light of the
spirit of holiness, an age so radically
corrupt.” —Delitzsch. The age of David
was in many respects the “ golden age”
of Israel, then it was great in literature,
commerce, statesmanship, music, archi-
tecture, and arms. And yet David be-
moans it, and sighs amid all its splen-
dour. The true glory of a country is
moral, and where the moral element is
wanting, all other glories are dim,
David felt that whilst palaces, people,
chariots, gems, and gold, were on the
increase, pious, honest, true-hearted
men were on the decrease; nay, they
seemed in danger of disappearing alto-
gether, and he felt the gravity of the
situation. David lamented over Jerusa-
lem in the supreme hour of its material
and political greatness ; Paul overlooked
the museums, pictures, statues, palaces
of Athens, and “his spirit was stirred
in him when he saw the city wholly
given to idolatry ;” and when we survey
the magnificence of our country, we
must weep to think of the atheism, the
sin, the folly uf the people. Philosophers,
poets, commanders, artists, orators, states-
men, millionaires, do not make “a golden
age,” but the presence of many virtuous
and godly men, and where these are
wanting, colours, marbles, jewels, domes,
and plumes, are but dust and ashes. The
age that we call “golden,” Heaven may
call “‘ dark ;” the age that is written down
in human histories as supremely august
may be an age which angels record in
Heaven’s “ Book of Lamentations,”

We observe :

Il. The faults with which a splendid
civilisation may be chargeable.

Dr. John Brown says, ‘ ln observing
the advances of commerce, we shall find
that in its first stages it supplies mutual
necessities, prevents mutual wants, ex-
tends mutual knowledge, eradicates
mutual prejudice, and spreads mutual
humanity. In its middle and more ad-
vanced period, it provides conveniences,
increases numbers, gives birth to arts
and science, creates equal laws, diffuses

eneral plenty and general happiness.
it we view it in its third and highest


stage, we shall see it change its nature
and effects. It brings in superfluity
and vast wealth, begets avarice, gross
luxury, or effeminate refinement among
the higher ranks, together with general
loss of principle.” The Jewish natior
seemed to have entered on this latest
stage. David charges his age—1l. With
the lack of fatthfulness. ‘The faithful
fail” (ver. 1). Honest and true-hearted
men were not to be found, Is there
not a counterpart to this in our
day? The immorality of trade is con-
stantly deplored, and the strange lack of
conscientiousness inall classes of thecom-
munity. 2. With wntruthfulness (ver.
2). Insincerity and falsehood. ‘That
which the writer especially laments is
the prevailing untruthfulness.”— De-
litzsch. Is not this a feature of our
times? 3. Pride. “The tongue that
speaketh proud things” (ver. 3).
“Talking big.”—Horsley. When did
the tongue speak prouder things than
now? 4. Boasting (ver. 4). “They
declare themselves to be absolutely free,
and exalted above all authority,”
Delitzsch. Is not this pride, arrogance,
defiance, a characteristic of our day?
“The idea of the whole verse is, by our
own lips and our tongues we can ac-
complish what we will,”—Alexander.
And is not this the idea of this genera-
tion? ‘Our puissance is our own: our
own right hand shall teach us highest
deeds, by proof to try who is our equal,”
—Paradwe Lost. 5. And the fifth
verse seems to suggest that goodness ts
treated with contempt. Verses 6-8
“signify that at that time wickedness
was the way to preferment, and that
good men were the objects of persecu-
tion.”—Clarke, “It is the fault of all
high civilisations to think lightly of sin.”
—Arnold, And out of this scepticism,
pride, and sensuality, come crimes of
darkest complexion and largest propor-
tion, peculiar to advanced civilisations.
According to the height of the moun-
tain is the depth of the valley ; accord-
ing to the intensity of the light is the
depth of the shade; and according te
the wealth, freedom, learning, splendovr
of a nation, are its crimes exaggerated
and its vices crimson.
47


PRALH XT


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMEB,





III. Duty of the Ohristian patriot.

1. To ery mightily to God against the
prevailing wickedness. “ Help, Lord!”
(ver. 1). The effectual fervent prayer, &c,

2. To protest by word and act against
thés iniquity, as David did (ver. 3).


3. To rest tn days of triumphant
wickedness in the word and power of God
(ver. 5, 6).

4, To claim God's promise, and keep
himself unspotted from the world (ver.
7).


Tue CHARACTERISTIC OF A Divine REVELATION.
(Verse 6.)


We are taught here:

I The grand characteristic of a
Divine revelation.

““The words of the Lord are pure
words” (ver. 6). The words of men,
as the Psalmist has just been showing,
are mixed and impure, but God’s words
are free from all base elements. Jgno-
rance, prejudice, falsehood, passion, tn-
sincerity, impurity, debase the words of
men, but not God’s words, ‘‘ Every
word of God is pure.” ‘ His words are
true and righteous altogether.” The
words of men are the smoky fires of
earth ; “the words of God” are the
starry lights of heaven, pure and cloud-
less, and “ which never lead astray.”

We remark :

II. That the Scriptures which pro-
fess to be the words of the Lord have
been tested, and their divinity esta-
blished.

Where is this pure light} This Book
claims to contain the words of God ; its
pretensions have been tried, and it comes
forth as pure silver from the crucible.

1. It has been tried by criticism, its
contents discussed and analysed, the
genuineness, authenticity, canonicity, in-
spiration, of the various books discussed
again and again. What is the result?
Scores of critics—men most sincere,
acute, learned, honest—have tried these
pages, and approved them as the hand-
writing of God. And if you go to the
different schools of sceptical criticism,
each school will give you back some
portion of the Book as authentic and
Divine, and amongst them all you get
back pretty nearly the whole Book.

.2. It has been tried by science. Says
one of our great scientists : “Science has
established no results hostile to the evi-
dences of Revelation.” Neither the

48


stars nor the stones fight against it
Buckland, Sedgwick, Hugh Miller, the
greatest of modern geologists ; Brewster,
the most famous of modern astronomers ;
Faraday, the most illustrious of modern
chemists; these splendid names were
Christian; these master-spirits of the
scientific world loved this book, found
no fault with it, died resting upon it
their immortal hopes. There is not
much the matter with Revelation where
it touches Nature, or these masters would
have found it out,

3. It has been tried by experience.
Do the Scriptures accomplish what they
promise in respect to man’s condition
and necessities? Christ said to the
Jews, “If I do not the works of My
Father, believe Me not.” So we may
say of the Scriptures. (1.) They have
been tried in relation to man’s social
necessities. According to the sceptic,
the Bible is false in fact, false in philo-
sophy, false in morals, and it ought to
make society selfish, anarchical, barbaric,
But it does not. It does the very oppo-
site. Our civilisation has its roots in
the Bible ; and if you take the Bible to
@ pagan land, it changes everything
into purer and milder forms. It creates
everywhere the highest intelligence, the
largest liberty, the purest morality, the
truest progress. (2.) They have been
tried in relation to man’s moral and
spiritual necessities. It is just what we
need. It gives us that light, pardon,
liberty, purity, joy, for which we sigh.
The Scriptures appeal to the multitudes
whom it has saved from sin and misery,
and exclaims, as Christ did, “The works
that I do, they bear witness of Me.”
The Scriptures have been tried by suf-
fering men, guilty men, dying men,
unsophisticated men, men of loftiest


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY; PSALMS


PSALM XItz





gifts, and they have found it just what
they needed, all that they needed. “By
its fruits we know it.” Know it to be
no poison tree to destroy; no barren
tree to mock hungering men with leaves
and blossoms; but a tree of life, whose
fruits satisfy the longing soul, and whose
very leaves are for the healing of the
nations.


III. The consequent preciousness of
the Sacred Scriptures.

Precious as purified silver. Precious
in life, in death. We value what is tried.
In sickness, a tried medicine ; in trouble,
a tried friend; in bad weather, a tried
ship, a tried captain, a tried anchor.
Thank God! we have a tried religion.
The Bible never failed our glorious reli-


We observe finally ; gious ancestry, and it will never fail ua
PSALM XIIL
INTRODUCTION.
“In this paalm we see a servant of God, long and sorely tried by the perseoutions of unre-


lenting enemies, and, as it seems to himself, forgotten and forsaken of God, pouring out the
agony of his soul in prayer. It is a long and weary struggle, it is a daily and hourly martyrdom;
and wrestling with his despair, he can but cry (like the souls under the altar, Rev. vi. 10), ‘ How
long!’ And then calmer words of prayer rise to his lips (ver. 8, 4) ; and at last Faith asserts
her perfect victory (ver. 5). The rapid transition of feeling, from a depth of misery bordering
on despair, to hope, and even joy, is very remarkable. ”— Perowne.


Sout Eotuiprszs.
(Verses 1-6.)


We assert

L The nature of such eclipses.

Ver. 1,2. Rylands, commenting on
this psalm, regards it as exclusively
applicable to the Redeemer. “In addi-
tion to the sufferings which human
nature is exposed to, Messiah, during
His sojourn on earth, experienced a
peculiar calamity in the hiding of God’s
face from Him.” Then he goes on to
say, “God never hides His face from
the redeemed ;” and speaks of “ The ill
effect of the doctrine that God hides
His face from His people.” Now, it is
quite true that God never ceases to love
His children, but still the people of God
are sensible of eclipses of the soul, such
as the Psalmist describes in this psalm.
God has not really deserted His chil-
dren, but it often seems as if He had.
“Tt is true that God does not forget any
one, yet it may be that, to the human
spirit, it appears as if he were forgotten
by God, and that the Holy One had
vetled His countenance from him. Then
he feels at once that he is forsaken ly
God, and that he is weak with reference
to his enemies.”—Moll. And whilst
the Psalmist deplores the withdrawal of
the Divine face, he yet recognises, in
the same moment, that it is only a
seeming withdrawal. Philips renders

D


the passage, “ How long wilt thou be
apparently forgetful of my troubles, and
withhold from me Thy assistance }” And
Delitesch explains: ‘The dejected heart
thinks, God has forgotten me for ever;
but the Spirit, which thrusts away this
thought, changes it into a question
which sets upon it the mark of a mere
appearance, not a reality: How long
shall it seem as though Thou forgettest
me for ever? Faith holds fast the love
that is behind the wrath ; it sees in the
display of anger only a self-masking of
the loving countenance of the God of
love, and longs for the time when this
loving countenance shall be again un-
veiled to it.” Thus, although God never
really forsakes or neglects His people, it
often seems as if He had done so. In
providential matters, they fail to recog-
nise His hand; His consolations cease
in their spirit; and they are full of
darkness and bitterness. And yet, as at
midnight we know that the sun still
lives, aud will soon again shine on the
earth ; so in the saint’s deepest darkness,
his faith penetrates through the gloom,
and awaits the shining of God’s face.

Observe :

II. The cause of these eclipses.

1. Why does God thus appear to
desert Hts people at all? Why does He

- 49


PSALM X1UE,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





veil His hand and His face? The end
of God’s discipline with all His people
is to make them feel their absolute de-
pendence upon Himself, The aim of
an earthly parent is to render the child
independent, to teach it to live upon its
own resources, to go by itself, to be
sufficient in itself. God’s aim is the
opposite of this, to teach us that we are
nothing, and can do nothing in our-
selves, and that our sufficiency is of
Himself. These eclipses teach us:

(1.) That God is the source of happr-
ness (ver. 1). How deep the sorrow of
the Psalmist’s soul! When God hides
His face, we feel that the fountain of
life is stopped. No matter what may
be left, “sorrow is in our heart daily.”
There is a flower which fades imme-
diately a screen is interposed between it
and the sun; and let God’s face be
hidden from us, and the soul sickens as
a drooping flower.

(2.) That God is the source of wisdom.
“ How long shall I take counsel in my
soul?” ‘David represents himself as
meditating plan after plan.”—Speaker’s
Com. “He appears to be devising many
plans in vain, like an unsuccessful general
in an army.”— Wordsworth. ‘This strik-
ingly describes the helpless embarrass-
ment of the sufferer.” —Perowne. When
God hides His face, we know not what
to do, how to act. We soon feel that He
is the great Counsellor, and that we are
painfully perplexed without His light.

(3.) That God is the source of strength.
“* How long shall mine enemy be exalted
over me?” (ver. 2). David felt weak,
and altogether at the mercy of his
enemies. When the Spaniards had
beaten the Mexicans in a great battle,
the latter called in the assistance of their
priests. The priests, after some con-
sultation, said that the Spaniards were
children of the sun; that they derived
their strength from that luminary, and
when his beams were withdrawn, their
powers would also fail, They recom-
mended a night attack, therefore, as one
which afforded the best chance of
success, As these Spaniards were sup-
posed to draw their strength from the
orb of day, so really does the saint draw
his conquering strength from God; and

50


when he is deprived of the light of
God’s face his “ enemies prevail against
him.”

’ (4.) God is the source of life (ver. 3).
“ Sleep an eternalsleep.”—Speaker’s Com,
Without God we feel that we perish.
‘In Him we live, and move, and have
our being.” Great lessons are taught
us in life’s dark hours. During eclipses,
astronomers learn secrets of the heavens
which they cannot penetrate in days of
sunshine; and it is necessary sometimes
that God should hide His face, so that
we may see more clearly, and feel more
deeply, these great truths and principles.
“T know that, as night and shadows are
good for flowers, and moonlight and
dews are better than a continual sun, so
is Christ’s absence of special use, and
that it hath some nourishing virtue in it,
and giveth sap to humility, and putteth
an edge on hunger, and furnisheth a fair
field to faith to put forth itself, and to
exercise its fingers in gripping it seeth not
what.”— Rutherford, quoted by Spurgeon.

2. Why does God hide His face so
long ? “ How long,” four times repeated.
Is not the true answer, because we are
so slow to learn the great truths which
He designs to teach? We think that
we have learned truths when they are
not half-learned, and so God has to pro-
tract the eclipse. Zholuck well says:
“That the length of trouble is harder to
bear than the strength of it ;” but it is
only when long protracted that it leaves
behind it the greater treasures.

III. The duty of the saints in these
hours of darkness. Not discontent ;
not despair. :

1. Waitin faith. “O Lord my God”
(ver. 3), And there is faith throughout,
He is in perplexity and trouble, but not
in despair, In the dark he holds to
God.

2. Wait in prayer. Mark how the
Psalmist pleads (ver. 3). “It is well for
those who, although in the greatest
anxiety, are driven by the feeling that
they are abandoned by God to seek the
grace of God.”—Moll. “ Resolve never
to be dumb while God is deaf.”

3. Wait in hope (ver. 5, 6). Coleridge
said of himself, that he was an invete-
rate hoper. So should it be with all the


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS.


PSALM XII





people of God. Hope in God’s mercy,
and tune your harp for a song.

Believer, despair not; for if God
seems to have forsaken you, He is still
strengthening you. ‘As when the sun
is eclipsed, though the earth wants the
light thereof, yet not the influence
thereof ; so God’s supporting grace is


ever with His deserted.”—Trapp. And
when the trial is over, your soul shall
be deeper, brighter, more fruitful.


*“You have been wretched ; yet
The silver shower, whose reckless burden
weighs
Too heavily upon the lily’s head,
Oft leaves a saving moisture at its root,”
——WOoBRDSWoRTR.


THe CHEeQuEerReD LIFE.


(Verses


What changes we witness in the
Psalmist’s life and experience! This
psalm reflects as a mirror the changing
conditions of his soul and history. In
this little psalm David is seen as a fugi-
tive and a conqueror, as despairing and
triumphing, as weeping and singing,
And it is largely thus with all the
people of God.

Mark :

I. The vicissitudes of the outer life.

What contrasts of fortune you have
in the life of David! A shepherd, a
cing; a king, a fugitive; and strange
alternations of fortune throughout. Few
Jives present such marked contrasts as
that of the Hebrew king, yet most lives
know analogous variations. Our lives
play up and down the scale between
health and sickness, plenty and poverty,
popularity and neglect, activity and soli-
tude, fortune and disappointment.

II. The vicissitudes of the inner life.

In this psalm the writer passes from
despair to exultation, from doubt to as-
surance, from lamentation to praise ;
and so might as easily pass back again,
as indeed we see him do in other psalms,
How constant the changes of the mood
of the soul! We are ever changing
from bright to dark, from low to high,
from sweet to bitter, or the reverse.
How extreme these changes of thought
and feeling! We are conquerors, cap-
tives ; kings, worms ; strong as Samson,
reeds shaken with the wind ; singing at
heaven’s gate, weeping on ruin’s brink.


1-6.)


How rapid these changes! The Chris-
tian soul is a microcosm, in which you
may see in an hour hope, fear, joy, sor-
row. In Iceland, we are told, contra
dictory elements and phenomena are
strangely blended. Snow is often
blackened with asnes, ashes are white-
washed with snow; water flows under
the lava, and there freezes and forms
subterraneous glaciers. As in this
strange land fire and frost are thus fan-
tastically mingled, so in the Christian
soul do day and night, summer and
winter, snow and harvest, strangely mix
in perpetual flux,

III. The aim of this discipline.

To purify and perfect us. ‘‘ Emptied
from vessel to vesse!,” with each transi-
tion some of the dregs are to be removed,
so that at length the wine of our life
may run clear. The sharp and sudden
contrasts are necessary to perfect us in
the deep places of our nature. The
Arabs say of the palm-tree that it must
have “its feet in the water and its head
in the fire.” And so the soul needs
strong contrasts of experience to ripen it
in the things of God. The continual
variation of experience is necessary to
touch and perfect us on every side of
our manifold nature. As with a thou-
sand changes of sky, and wind, and
atmosphere God ripens the fruit of the
orchard, so with countless variations of
thought and emotion does God ripen
the Christian heart in His love and
likeness.


JEALOUS FOR Gop.
(Verses 3, 4.)


The doctrine is taught here that God’s
honour is bound up with the deliverance
of His people. David deprecated failure


in himself because God’a honour and

cause would suffer through it (ver. 4).

“ Moved from my steadfastness or firm-
51


PRALM XIV.





ness, when I am overcome. Hitherto
he had been able to hold out against
them, now he began to despair, and to
fear that they would accomplish their
object by overcoming and subduing him,
His ground of apprehension and of ap-
peal was, that by his being vanquished
the cause in which he was engaged
would suffer, and that the enemies of
religion would triumph.”— Barnes,

We learn here, then:

That God’s honour is bound up with
the conduct of His people.

This should teach :

1. The necessity of circumspection in
the saints. If we are moved, God’s
cause is injured and His name profaned.
“ And certainly it should be a powerful
motive to restrain us from transgression,
when we consider that as the conversion
of a sinner brings glory to God, and
eauses joy among the angels of heaven,
so the fall of a believer disgraces the
Gospel of Jesus, opens the mouths of the
adversaries, and would produce joy, if
such a thing could be, in hell itself.” —
Horne. “ Oh, what desolation is made by


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY; PSALMS,





the fall of a righteous soul! Itself covered
with darkness and desolation, infidels
filled with scoffing, the Church clad in
mourning, the Spirit of God grieved,
and Jesus crucified afresh, and put to
an open shame! O God! save the pious
reader from such wreck and ruin !”—
Clarke.

2. The strong ground of a believer's
confidence. God will not permit us to
be moved if we are faithful, for this
would dishonour Himself and His king-
dom. What a plea in prayer !

** Ah! suffer not my foe to boast

His victory o’er a child of Thine,


Nor let the proud Philistines’ host
In Satan’s hellish triumph join,


6 Will they not charge my fall on Thee?

Will they not dare my God to blame?
My God, forbid the blasphemy !

Be jealous for Thy glorious name!”

—WESLEY.
3. A warning to persecutors. Perse”
euting saints, they aim a blow at God-
“ As unskilful hunters shooting at wild
beasts do sometimes kill a man, so per-
secutors, shooting at saints, hit Christ,

reproach Him.”—Trapp.


PSALM XIV.
INTRODUCTION,


6 I does not appear upon what occasion David composed this pealm.


The revolt of Israel


in Absalom’s rebellion is by most writers pitched upon as the subject of it. But be this as it
may, the expressions are general, and evidently designed to extend beyond a private interpre-


tation.


And accordingly, the apostle (Rom. iii. 10, &c.) produces some passages from it to


evince the apostasy of both Jews and Gentiles from their King and their God, and to prove


them to be all under sin.


In this light, therefore, we are to consider it, as characterising the


principles and practices of those who oppose the Gospel of Christ in all ages.” — Horne.


THe ImmorRALitTy oF ATHEISM,
(Verses 1-3.)


L It is immoral in its principle.

It is the denial of the existence, an
ignoring of the rights, of the Absolute
and Eternal King. Sceptics often talk
of the rights of man ; but they end with
the essential immorality of denying the
crown rights of God. He made us; He
made the world, and all that is in it;
and to deny His existence and to ignore
His government is profoundest immor-
ality. ‘Sin, if unchecked, would go to
the extinction of all being, and of God
Himself. There is no doubt that all sin
designs deicide, All sin is directed
against Sonica being. It.is primarily

2


against God, inferentially against all
being. All transgression is ambitious,
and, if it could succeed, it would scale the
universe and dethrone its Monarch,.”—
Duncan. Atheism is the essence of in-
gratitude, injustice, lying, pride, hatred,
and selfishness.

IL It is immoral in its origin.

“They are corrupt.” It does not
spring from a pure and honest intellect,
which finds itself perplexed by a pro-
blem too great for it, but from a proud
and corrupt heart. ‘ Passion, not
reason, generates atheism. Sin suggesta
a dislike of Providence, and reason is


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


a


then marshalled to drive Him out of
our view.”—Lylands, “Their foolish
heart was darkened ” (Rom. i. 21), The
child recognises God, but, giving place
for long years to worldliness and sin,
the man sinks into practical atheism.
He lives so long without God in the
world, that at last he ventures to think
that there is no God. And so a nation
as it increases in wealth, and luxury, and
power, becomes self-sufficient ; and the
outcome of this is a general prevalence
of speculative and practical atheism.
We wrong God, and then we forget
Him; we forget Him, and then we
deny Him,

III. It is immoral in its consequences.

Sin leads to scepticism, and scepti-
eism to sin. With the denial of God we
lose the principle of moral life and
beauty. 1. Personally we become “ cor-
rupt.” Belief in God is the salt of
human nature, and when that has gone
the whole man rapidly corrupts, 2.
And our works become “ abominable.”
He who has smothered in his heart the
knowledge of God, has lost the vital
principle of health, beauty, life, and


Scripture signifying a wicked man; the
word signifies the extinction of life in
men, animals, and - plants; so the
word is taken Isaiah xl. 7, ‘The
flower fadeth ;’ a plant that hath lost
all that juice that made it lovely and
useful. So a fool is one that hath
lost his wisdom and right notion of
God and divine things, which were
communicated to man by creation ; one
dead in sin.” — Charnock. Atheism
cannot create a noble manhood. It
creates a fool. Religion and right rea-
son gone, natural principles extinct, what
can you have but a distorted and ignoble
humanity? Atheism cannot create a
noble nation. Without God, man rots;
without God, society rots, Atheism is
the greatest immorality. “Folly is a
term employed in Hebrew to signify the
greatest possible degree of guilt,”—
French. “ The Psalmist makes this pro-
minent as the very extreme and depth
of human depravity, that there can be
among men those who deny the existence
of a God.”—Delitzsch. It is the source
of all immoralities; and God will
punish it with great retribution (ver.


usefulness, “Zhe fool, is a term in 5).
THe BaNE AND THE ANTIDOTE
(Verses 1-7.)
Observe : —Delitzsch. ‘Total and universal cor-


L The corruption of the race,

Mark :

1, This corruption is untversal (ver. 2).
God is represented, in the history of
the Flood, as looking down from the
windows of heaven upon mankind to see
if there were any who sought Him.
And what is the result of this search ?
We have it in the 3d verse. ‘“ Every one
hath turned away; or, more emphati-
cally, the whole universe hath turned
away.”—Phillips. ‘The universality
of corruption is expressed in as strong
terms as possible; what the Psalmist
says applies primarily to Israel, his
immediate neighbours, but at the same
time to the heathen, as is self-evident.
What is lamented is neither the pseudo-
Israelitish corruption in particular, nor
that of the heathen, but the universal
corruption of man, which prevails not
leas in Israel than in the heathen world.”


ruption could not be more clearly ex-
pressed than by this accumulation of the
strongest terms, in which, as Luther
well observes, the Psalmist, not content
with saying all, adds together, and then
negatively, no not one. It is plain that
he had no limitation or exception in his
mind, but intended to describe the
natural condition of all men, in the
widest and most unrestricted sense,
The whole, not merely all the individuals
as such, but the entire race as a totality
or ideal person.”—Alexander. It is
true that in the 5th verse the Psalmist
speaks of “ the generation of the right-
eous,” but this is not to be regarded is
any limitation of his dark judgment of
the condition of man. ‘“ The recognition
of a righteous generation on earth does
not contradict the statement of the
total corruption of the children of
Adam, embracing all without exception.
53


PSALM XIV.


For the righteous generation consists
not of a little band of men who have
remained exempt from sin and its cor
ruption, whom God has somehow over-
looked, when He looked about, because
they stood in a corner, or because they
are not brought into consideration on
account of their small number in com-
parison with the awful corruption of the
masses. To this class belong rather
those men in the midst of the generation
of the children of Adam who have been
born again as children of God of incer-
ruptible seed, who by this change of
their inborn nature form a_ peculiar
class in the midst of the generation of
men, and afford the seed of regeneration
for the entire people."—Moll. The
Psalmist pictures all men everywhere
as corrupt, and thus the apostle inter-
prets him (Rom. iii. 10-12),

Mark :

2. This corruption is thorough. Not
only are all corrupt, but all are entirely
so. ‘They are altogether filthy.” The
nature is depraved. ‘They are cor-
rupt.”. The “heart,” the inmost per-
sonality, is corrupt, and thus all the
powers and faculties of the man are de-
filed. ‘The source of all his move-
ments, the affections and heart, are pol-
luted ; the waters are poisoned at the
spring.”—Rylands, The isfe is de-
praved. (1.) Many have done “ abomin-
able works.” “When men begin with
renouncing the Most High God, who
shall tell where they will end? Observe
the state of the world before the Flood,
as portrayed in Genesis vi. 12, and
remember that human nature is un-
changed. He who would see a terrible
photograph of the world without God
must read that most painful of all in-
spired Scriptures, the first chapter of
the Epistle to the Romans. Things
loathsome to God and man are sweet to
some palates.”—Spurgeon. (2.) And if
men have not done “ abominable works,”
there is “none that doeth good.” “Do
any object that, beyond the circle of
the righteous, there is much virtue to
be found, much civil righteousness,
much beautiful natural affection? The
natural virtues that still adorn the
world and claim the admiration of men

64


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





are vitated before God by this, that


there is no regard in them to His will”
—Binnie. They “come short of the
glory of God.”

3. This corruption is profound. It
is not a taint, but a deep disease. It is
deeply “corrupted,” %.¢., bacome put-
rid. It is a deep malignity of nature.
In Psalm viii, we have the picture
of the tdeal man, the original man, the
possible man; here, alas! we have @
sorrowful picture of the actual man.
The Bible recognises our intrinsic gran-
deur, it recognises our deep degradation.

Observe :

IL The Deliverer of the race,

Ver. 7. “Theprayeris, in asubordinate
sense, that God would raise up a reformer.
But the true and ultimate spirit of the
prayer is for the speedy advent of
Christ (Isa, lix. 20: Rom. xi. 26;
Jer. xiv. 8). To whom could the pro-
phets appeal in the time of trouble but
to the only Hope of Zion? (Ps. liii.).”
—Sutclife.

1. The world cannot be renewed by
philosophy. ‘Philosophy may adorn,
but it is impotent to regenerate human
nature.”—Lecky. 2. Nor by education,
The fault is in the heart, not the head;
it is moral, not intellectual. “The
word chosen by David in the lst verse,
nabal, fool, means imbecile, a vapid,
worn-out fool, one whose heart and un-
derstanding are degraded, incapable of
seeing truth. It is a word never used
of mere natural obtuseness, but of
spiritual corruption.”—Speaker’s Com.
3. Nor by institutions. No change of
external relations will bring true de
liverance. Politics, commerce, manners,
whatever springs from man, is itself im-
perfect and tainted ; and to attempt to
make a perfect man by human institu-
tions is like a man attempting to clean
his face with a dirty duster. 4. Nor is
there any restorative principle in human
nature. ‘‘ At last man will be healed,
for human nature has the power to
recover from its wounds by means of a
certain inward power.”—Goethe. This
is not true: there is no such power,
The hope of the world ts tn the Church
of Christ, Out of Zion comes the De-
liverer; out of the Christian Church come


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM XV.





those blessings which shall make society
pure and free. And oh! what joy shall
there be everywhere when Christ breaks


the tyranny of sin, and gives to the
world the freedom and pleasures of
righteousness |


CoNSOIENOK
(Verses 4-6.)


We have here:

IL Conscience informed.

“ Have all the workers of iniquity no
knowledge?” (ver. 4). ‘Have they no
conscience.” —Delitzsch. ‘“ Have they no
experience.” —Moll. Now it is quite true
that the workers of iniquity seem like
brute beasts, as if they had no common
sense, no conscience ; but they had these
gifts, and it is this fact which renders
their conduct so dark.

1. We sin against understanding.
Our reason protests against sin. 2. We
sin against conscience. Our moral sense
echoes the words and thunders of Sinai,
and protests against transgression. 3.
We sin against expertence. Our his-
tory shows how all that is desirable and
honourable lies in the path of obedience,
and how paths of transgression are paths
of misery and shame, This constitutes
the enormity of sin: we know our duty
to God and man. We have moral ideas
and sensibilities. Sin is not a mistake,
not a misfortune, but a crime.

II. Conscience asleep. 1. Asleep as
to men. “ Who eat up My people as
they eat bread ” (ver. 4). That is, they
commit the greatest excesses and in-
justice without the smallest compune-
tion. In wronging the weak, the good,
the poor, “ they think that they are not
doing anything more sinful,—indeed,
rather what is justifiable, irreproachable,


and lawful to them,-—than when they are
eating bread.”—Hengstenberg. ‘‘ The
light that is in them is darkness.” 2,
Asleep as to God. “ And call not upon
the Lord” (ver. 4). They have forgotten
God. Practically they say, “There is
no God.” Thus men stifle their moral
sense and live neither fearing God nor
regarding man.

III. Conscience aroused (ver. 5).
“When Jehovah thus bursts forth in
scorn, His word, which never fails in its
working, smites down these brutish
men, who are without knowledge and
conscience,” —Delitzsch. “ When God’s
long-suffering changes into wrath, terror
at His judgment seizes them, and they
tremble through and through.”—De-
litesch. ‘Suddenly, while they were in
complete security (liii. 6), terror lays
hold on them.”—Kay. As ver. 6 inti-
mates, the sceptical worldlings had
laughed at the piety of the meek. “ You
pour contempt on the poor man’s resolve,
because the Lord is his refuge, you must
needs deride this as arrant folly,—to
trust in an unseen God !”—Kay. But
they awake to find that “God is in the
generation of the righteous ;” all is true
that the righteous held, and the angry
God is ready to avenge Himself on the
proud sinner. Let us fly to the great
Deliverer of Zion. He can give the guilty
conscience peace, and wash away its stains.


PSALM XV.


INTRODUOTION.


‘¢ This psalm teaches the necessity of moral purity as a condition of the Divine protection.
It first propounds the question who shall be admitted to God’s household, and the privileges


of its inmates (ver. 1).


' positively again (ver. 4), and negatively (ver. 5).


This is answered positively (ver. 2), and negatively (ver. 3); then


The last clause of the last verse winds up by


declaring, that the character just described shall experience the protection tacitly referred to


in the first verse.””—Alezander.


Toe Psautm «¥ LIFE.


We observe:


L The question which the Psalmist


proposes.


“Lord, who shall abide in Thy
tabernacle 4” &c. (ver. 1). “ Who may
hope for acceptance as a worshipper

; 55


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY : P8ALMA.





of Jehovah!”—French. “Tabernacle
and hill together signify the earthly
residence of God. It is a figure for in-
timate communion with Jehovah, and
participation of His favour.” Alexander,

Who shall enjoy Thy communion,
Thy friendship, Thy protection? Who
shall commune with Thee on earth?
Who shall dwell with Thee in heaven ?

This is the grand question of life.
Who shall enjoy the Divine favour and
protection, now and for ever? surely
this is the question of first and supreme
importance! It is a question which
should be urged before God with a per-
sonal interest and anxiety. Not “are
there many that be saved ?” but, “ what
shall J do to inherit eternal life?”

We notice:

IL. The comprehensive answer which
is given to the great question.

Ver. 2-5. Admission to the Divine
presence and eternal joy does not turn:
(1.) On what is national. It is not the
privilege of Jew or Gentile, as such.
(2.) On what is physical. We do not
enter heaven on the ground of affliction.
Those before the throne came out of
great tribulation, but that was not the
reason of their glorification. (3.) On
what is social. Dives is not rejected
because he is rich; Lazarus is not ac-
cepted because heis poor. (4.) On what
is educational. Some of our philosophers
have lately ventured on the theory, that
if men achieve a certain mental develop-
ment, they will become immortal ; but
lacking this culture, they are doomed to
extinction at death. The grand test is
not educational, (5.) On what is eccle-
stastical, The whole point of this
psalm is directed against this idea.
Horsley heads the psalm: “ True god-
liness described as distinct from the
ritual,” “ With regard to that part of
the hierarchical theory which makes
membership in the visible Church
identical, for all practical purposes, with
membership in the Church invisible, it
is tacitly refuted in places without num-
ber. The true citizen of Zion is “the
man that walketh uprightly, and worketh
righteousness, and speaketh the truth
in his heart.” ‘He that hath clean
hands and a pure heart, who hath not

56


lifted up his soul unto vanity, nor sworn
deceitfully ; he shall receive the bless
ing from the Lord. This is the genera-
tion of them that seek Him.” There is
an all-important distinction between the
visible and invisible Church ; the true
Church and the professing Church, al-
though they are so closely connected
that the eye of man cannot draw a line
of separation between them, are by no
means coincident. “He is not a Jew
which is one outwardly ; neither is that
circumcision which is outward in the
flesh : but he is a Jew which is one in-
wardly ; and circumcision is that of the
heart, in the spirit, and not in the letter;
whose praise is not of men, but of God
(Rom. ii, 28, 29).”"—Binnte, But (6.)
The whole question of our acceptance
with God, and heirship of immortality,
turns on character. Holiness is the
grand requirement. “In the foregoing
psalm David had lifted up his eyes to
Zion, the hill of God, where the ark of
His presence was. He was mindful of
the holiness required of all who are ad-
mitted to its neighbourhood. How muck
more is this true of the heavenly Zion,
to which David raises his eyes and heart
from the earthly citadel.”— Wordsworth.
“‘ Without holiness no man shall see the
Lord.” The righteousness required by
God is—l. Perfect. “He that walketh
uprightly,” t.e., perfectly (ver. 2). ‘One
who walks uprightness, te, one whe
makes uprightness his way, his mode of
action.” —Delitzsch, The law of God
requires perfection of spirit and life.
God says to us all, as to Abram, “ Walk
thou before me, and be thou perfect.”
2. Practical. “ Worketh righteousness.”
“The piety delineated in the Psalter, al-
though it soars to heaven and its life is
hid in God, never omits the assiduous
cultivation of the lowly duties of every-
day morality, The Church has always
been infested with a sort of people whose
religion is all expended on the first table
of the laws; who, along with a great
show of contrition, and faith, and
spiritual joy, and delight in God’s wor-
ship, are ill-natured in the domestic
circle, censorious and unfriendly neigh-
bours, unsafe men to deal with in busi-
neas, The psalms do full justice to the


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY ; PBALMB,





law of God in this matter,

or may be the quarter whence

the antinomian perversion of the Goapel
may derive ite aliment, certainly it is
not from the songs of Zion, What w
fine portrait this 16th Psalm, for ex-
ample, draws of the godly man! He
loves God's tabernacle and holy bill ;~
hia heart is there, And when he goes
ont into the world, he does not leave his
re) behind, He shows the influence
of the fear of God in all he does, His
tongue utters no malice. He is 4 man
of his word. He will not make gain of
his neighbour's necessity; nor will he,
for any consideration, oppose the cause
of one whom he knows to be innocent.
These are the true fruits of faith un-
feigned. He that doch these things
shall never be moved.”—Linnic, “Thus,
in heart, in tongue, in actions, in hia
conduct aa 4 member of society, he is
alike free from reproach. Buch is the
figure of stainless honour drawn by the
on of Jewish poet. Christian chivalry
not dreamed of w brighter. We
have need often and seriously to ponder
i For it shows use that faith in God
and spotless integrity may not be
wandered ; that religion does not veil or
excuse petty dishonesties ; that love to
God is only then worthy the name when
it ia the life aud boud of every social


Waaia XY,


virtue. Hach line is, as it wore, «
touchstone to which we should bring
ourselves. To speak truth in the heart
—w take up no reproach against a
neighbour—would not the Christian man
be perfect of whom this could be saidt”—
Perome 3. Spiritual, “ Bpeaketh the
truth tm Mia heart” (ver. 2). “The
characterising of the outward walk and
action is followed in verse 2, by the
characterising of the inward nature,”—
Delitach, “ This speaking truth quali-
fies not merely what precedes, but the
whole description, as of one who sin-
cerely and internally, a4 well o# ont-
wardly, leads a blameless life by doing
right and speaking truth.” —Alesander.
Out of # true and spiritual heart spring
these practical graces. It will not do
to be merely moral, or only professedly
religious. “God only admitteth such
as are righteously religious, and religi-
ously righteous.”—Trapp. We must
show our faith by our works, and our
works must be spiritualised by our faith.
“Walk in the heaven of the promise,
but in the earth of the law; that in
respect of believing, this of obeying.”—
Luther.

How impossible it is to realise this
righteousness, #0 perfect, so profound,
so universal, except by virtue of the
grace and #trength of Jesus Christ |


EvanGcevicAL Morauiry.
(Versi 1-4.)


1. Its comprehensiveness (ver. 2).
“Walking,” the habitual course of
life must be right. “Working,” a)l the
action must be right. “ Speaking,”
all the conversation must be truth
and uprightness, The true Christian
secks to be free from evil habits, evil
acts, evil words, He is required here
to be free from insincerity, censorioas
new, pride, untruthfulness, covetous-
ness, injustice. In verse 2, he is re
quired to be blameless pereonally. In
verse 3, he must be a good newhhour.
In verse 4, a true friend, Standing
faithfally to the meritorious. In verses
4, 5, an honest merchont; he “ that
sweareth,” &c. Aman of his word. A
fost merchant “Usury.” Not taking


advantage of any man. In verse 5, an
upright magistrate. “ Nor taketh re-
ward,” &. Christian morality covers
the whole ground of character and life.
Feet, hands, heart, tongue, eyes, infin-
ence, money, social rank and power, all
are required by this pealm to be eon-
secrated and pure.

IL Ita loftiness. Coarse, gross sins
are not referred to here. It is assumed
that they must be laid aside. No forni-
cator, thief, drunkard, liar, murderer,
shail enter the kingdom of God. This
is taken aa 0 evident, that euch offences
are not named. But the standard iss
very exalted one. These various crimes
in more subtle forms are seized upon
and forbidden. We must uot only be

57


PeaLM XV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALHS,





free from gross sins, but walk perfectly ;
not only abstain from falsehood, but
speak the truth in our heart; not only
abstain from calumny, but from repeat-
ing reflective reports ; not only abstain
from perjury, but cherish a high sensi-
tiveness as to our promise; not only
abstain from tyranny and pride, but
cherish a deep humility; not only not
injure others, but esteem them better
than ourselves ; not only not steal, but
not take advantage of any one in the way
of trade; not only not murder, but love
our brother. All this, and much more
than this, is taught in the various words
and phrases of this psalm. Thus, in the
New Testament (1 Cor. xiii.), the apostle
does not speak of Christian love as pre-
serving from gross vices, but, far beyond
this, producing clusters of graces, rare,
lofty, delicate, divine.

How much superior is the morality
of the Gospel to mere good manners,


to a mere natural amiability, to a com-
mercial utilitarian morality !

IIL. Its inspiration (ver. 1). “ Lord,
who shall abide in Thy tabernacle ? whe
shall dwell in Thy holy hill?” The
recognition of God is its source and
strength, In God we find the grand ex-
ample of this holiness: from Him comes
the strength by which we attain supernal
goodness, A comprehensive, lofty mo-
rality, like that insisted upon in this
psalm, is altogether beyond the reach of
nature. It is only as we admire and love
God, and thirst to be like Him, and seek
a fitness for His eternal kingdom, that
we are able to reach the full, deep. tran-
scendant morality pictured in this psalm.

IV. Its recompense (ver. 5). “He
that doeth these things shall never be
moved.” “He stands fast, being upheld
by Jehovah, hidden in His fellowship ;
nothing from without, no misfortune,
can cause his overthrow.”— Delitzsch.


Toe Law oF THE LP.
(Verse 3.)


L The nature of slander. 1. The
origination of an evil report concerning
our neighbours. “ He that backbiteth
with his tongue.” 2. The circulation of
an evil report invented by others. ‘Nor
taketh up a reproach.” The “ calum-
niator takes up the lie, and circulates it.”
—Speaker’s Com. “The verb seems
strictly to denote the act of busy or
officious tale-bearing.”—Alexander. 3.
The dsstening to such a report. Giving
it the sanction of ourear, The original
may be translated “ endureth;” imply-
ing that it is a sin to endure or tolerate
tale-bearera. “The tale-bearer carrieth
the devil in his tongue ; the tale-hearer
in his ear.”—Trapp. We are not “to
do evil to our neighbour” in any wise.


Ii. The evil of slander. What
mighty unhappiness it causeth! 1. It
demoralises the slanderer. 2. It de-


moralises the person to whom the slan-
der is related. 3. It wrongs the party
slandered. ‘‘‘Show that man out!’ we
should say of a drunkard ; yet it is very
questionable if his unmannerly behaviour
will do us so much mischief as the tale-
bearer’s insinuating story. ‘Call for a
58


policeman |’ we say if we see a thief at
his business ; ought we to feel no indig-
nation when we hear a gossip at her
work? Mad dog! mad dog!! is a ter-
rible hue and cry, but there are few curs
whose bite is so dangerous as a busy-
body’s tongue. Fire! fire!! is an alarm-
ing note, but the tale-bearer’s tongue is
set on fire of hell, and those who indulge
it had better mend their manners, or
they may find that there is fire in hell
for unbridled tongues.” —Spurgeon.

III. The cure for slander. It isa
most difficult thing to rule the tongue,
and refrain from evil-speaking. There
is a story told of an illiterate old monk
named Pambos. Being unable to read,
he came to some one to be taught a
psalm. Having learnt the single verse,
“T said I will take heed to my ways,
that I offend not with my tongue,” he
went away, saying that was enough if it
were practically acquired. When asked
six months and again many years after,
why he did not come to learn another
verse, he answered that he had never
been able truly to master this. What is
the grand cure for all sins of the lip!


rad


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS, reall EVE.








He “speaketh the truth in his heart.”
“Tt is not falsehood and deceit that he
thinks and plans inwardly, but truth.’
—Delrtzsch, ‘‘ Whose heart-converse is’
truthful ;—who in that hidden council-
chamber of the soul holds no parley with
what is false."—Kay. The heart must
be changed, enlightened, exalted. Out
ef a pure fountain flows a pure stream.


‘* What ! never speak one evil word,
Or rash, or idle, or unkind !
Oh, how shall I, most gracious Lord,
This mark of true perfection find?


** Forgive, and make my nature whole ;
My inbred malady remove ;
To perfect health restore my soul,—
To perfect holiness and love,”


PSALM XVL


InTRODUOTION,


“The first clause contains in germ the thought of the entire psalm, namely, that the
pious man has always protection with God against all his enemies, From this assurance arises
the cry of prayer (ver. 1), whose form shows the experience of pressing danger, but immedi-
ately passes over into the confession of the way in which the Psalmist proposes to act in com.
sequence of his relation to God (ver. 2) and to His people (ver. 8). In ver. 4 the Psalmist
maintains himself against the worshippers of idols. In ver. 5, 6 we have a description of the
good chosen in God, and of the happiness allotted on account of this. It then turns, praising
Jehovah (ver. 7), to testify of the position of the Psalmist established in Him (ver. 8), and
rises from the assurance of this communion with God, not only to a jubilant declaration of
present Divine protection (ver. 9), but in prophetic inspiration to a prophetic promise of the
everlasting enjoyment of salvation (ver. 10, 11).’—Moll. “The psalm is appropriate to the
whole class of pious sufferers, of which Christ is the most illustrious representative. It is only
in Him, therefore, that some parts of it can be said to have received their highest and com-
plete fulfilment.”—Alezander.


FairH m Gop,
(Verses 1, 2.)


The Psalmist in a time of trial thus
expresses his confidence in God. This
faith in God is:

L Personal ‘ Preserve me, O God’
(ver. 1), “Thou art my Lord ” (ver. 2).
It was an individualising faith. Just as
Adam sought to hide himself amid the
trees of the garden, so do we imagine our-
selves hidden in the multitude. Let us
seek to realise our needful personality in
the sightof God. 1. Let us realise Him as
my Creator. Not as creating merely all
worlds and all nations, but as specially
forming me, and giving to me a singular
and independent spirit. Think not only
of the ocean of humanity as flowing from
His creative hand; but remember that
the dewdrop, I, Me, was the distinct
creation of His almighty power and
love. 2. As my Ruler. Philosophy has
-an utter contempt for individuals—it
concerns itself with masses, multitudes,
ages—God rules the universe. It must
contemplate all on the sublime scale.
We are often told that the danger of
society in these days is in centralisation ;


certainly the danger in our philosophy
is in aggregation. We are, in opposition
to this, to believe in God, as my Ruler
and my King. 3. As my Saviour. We
are not to look on the Gospel message
asa public proclamation on the street
wall, but as an autograph letter from
our clement King, addressed with our
name, and left by the postman at our


door. This faith in God is:
It. Absolute. “ Jn Thee do I trust”
(ver. 1).


1. He trusts in God only. In the
2d verse, he acknowledges God as His
sovereign Lord, ‘Thou art my Lord,”
‘“‘ My supreme Lord ;—who hast an ab-
solute right to all my services,’—Kay.
And in the 4th verse, he repndiates all
other gods, He rests his wiiole weight
on God, placing no expectations else-
where. “ God is recognised as the only
source of individual enjoyment.”—Alex-
ander. 2. He trusts in God for all
“ My goodness extendeth not to thee”
(ver. 2). “I have no good beyond
thee.” “ This is tbe one grand thought

59


FeaLN KVL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; P&8ALMS.





which stamps the psalm, ‘ Thou, O Lord,
art my portion, my help, my joy, my
all in all.’”—Perowne. What the
pagans vainly sought for in many gods,
the Psalmist found in One; what the
worldling vainly seeks for in many ob-
jects, the believer exults to find in the
favour of God,

This faith is:

I. Habitual. “Do I put my trust.”
Or, “For I have trusted in Thee,”
“This is no new or sudden act, but one
performed already. He not only trusts
in God at present, but has trusted Him be-
fore. The recognition of God was not
@ mere momentary act, but a habitual
affection of the mind.”— Alexander.
There is such a thing as crying to God
in a moment of trouble or danger, and
neglecting Him in days of peace. A
true faith is a constant faith, “I have
set the Lord always before me” (ver. 8).
1. God will honour faith like this in the
hour of danger. During the negro re-
bellion Mr, Francis Gardiner was travel-
ling from one town to another, in
Jamaica, in a gig. Some advised him
to take firearms to protect himself, and
he assented. He went a little way with
the firearms, but soon returned, saying,
“T am not comfortable with them :”
and once more went on his journey
without them. Soon he fell among a
party of negroes, who stopped his horse,
One said, “ He isa missionary ;” but the
others said, “No, he is a Government


THE PEERAGE


(Verse


Alexander translates this verse : “ As
to the saints who are in the land, they
are the nobles in whom is all my de-
light.” Thus the people of God are
designated as peers, a divine aristocracy.

We observe :

I. Their patent of nobility. By
what right are they called “nobles ” #
They are the children of the King.
They have been begotten again to a
Divine and immortal inheritance. And
this fact they reveal—1l. By the dignity
of their character. They show their
lofty birth by their purity and sub-
limity of character and conduct, Their


spy.” Then they said, “If he be a Go
vernment spy he will have firearms ; if s
missionary, he will have no arms.” He
was searched, and no firearms being
found upon him, the negroes, instead of
murdering him, led him safely on his
journey. We generally have too much
policy and too little faith, 2. Such
faith will be honoured in the hour of
trial. The world’s refuges fail just
when they are most needed, but they
who hide themselves in God shall not
be confounded. Dr. Livingstone tells
us of an African tree, ‘‘The Mopané-
tree is pretty to look at in the bright
sunshine of early morning, but the
leaves hang perpendicularly as the sun
rises high, and afford little or no shade
through the day.” True image of
worldly shelters and helpers! They
look promising enough in the bright
sunshine of the morning, in health,
wealth, popularity ; but, alas! when the
burning heat of trial and trouble come,
they fail, and the hot beams beat on our
naked head! The Psalmist here takes
God for his hiding-place, and he is safe
and singing. 3. Such faith will be
honoured in the hour of death, Jordan
is deeper or shallower “ according to our
faith in the King of the place.” David
has trusted in God, and, in presence of
death and the grave, he shouts like a
conqueror (ver. 9-11). If we emulate
his faith, we shall know his triumph,


oF HEavEN.
3.)


glory is not in purple, stars, and coro-
nets, but in splendid moral qualities,
“The excellent, properly the outwardly
illustrious ; the root-meaning is that
of glitter, splendour, &c. It containg
the idea of a moral as well as of a merely
outward glory.”—Perowne. 2. By the
elevation of their life. In all things
they seek to act from great motives, by
great principles, to great ends. One of
our earls was derided because, when he
was made kuight of the garter, he put
the garter on all his shovels, wheel-
bayrows, and pickaxes. But the moral
noble puts the sign of his estate on all


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


PaALM XVi





that he has, on all that he does, down
to the commonest and most trifling
things. In “that day shali there be
upon the bells of the horses, Holiness
unto the Lord; and the pots in the
Lord’s house shall be like the bowls
before the altar. Yea, every pot in
Jerusalem and in Judah shall be holi-
ness unto the Lord of hosts” (Zech.
xiv. 20,21). Thus are they real nobles,
“men of whom the world is not worthy.”
“Some think rich men to be excelent,
some think learned men to be excellent,
some count men in authority so to be;
but here we are taught that those men
are excellent who are sanctified by God’s
graces.” — Greenham. “The title of
‘His Excellency’ more properly be-
longs to the meanest saint than to the
greatest governor. The true aristocracy
are believers in Jesus. They are the
only Right Honourables, Stars and
garters are poor distinctions compared
with the graces of the Spirit.” Spurgeon.

Observe :

IL Their oath of fealty. ‘“O my
soul, thou hast said unto the Lord, Thou
art my Lord” (ver. 2). He recalls his
covenant with God, As the new-made
peer swears fidelity to his king, so have
the saints vowed to be the Lord’s. Let
us remember this: 1. In the hour of
danger to our comfort. We are God’s
sworn ones, and shall He not ever shel-
ter and save us? 2. In the hour of
temptation to our caution. When allure-
ments are held out to us to worldliness
and sin, remember, “‘O my soul, thou
hast said unto the Lord, Thou art my
Lord ;” “The vows of God are upon
us.” In the clearest, loftiest, most
solemn moments of iife, again and again
have we pledged ourselves to God; let
us not in a moment of excitement or
weakness forget the glorious oath. The
righteous man “‘sweareth to his own
hurt and changeth not;” surely we
shall change not wherein we have sworn
“o our eternal advantage.


“ High Heaven, that heard the solemn vow,
That vow renewed shall daily hear,
Till in life’s latest hour I bow,
And bless in death a bond so dear.”


Observe :


TL Their bond of unity. What is
the esprit de corps? (ver. 3). “The
meaning of this verse is, that the
Psalmist’s recognition of Jehovah as the
Lord, and as the only source of happi-
ness, is not peculiar to himself, but com-
mon to the whole body of the saints or
holy ones, in whose society he delighted.”
—Alexander, What is expressed here
“fis love to God and love to His saints.”
—Delitzsch. This is the spirit, the
bond of union.

1. Love to God. This is the grand
basis of their oneness, trust in God, love
to God. “ Where any two souls cry out
simultaneously, ‘ God be merciful to mea
sinner,’ the portion wall is broken down,
and they are bound together more firmly
by a sigh than by the loftiest formulas,
They but hinder real union prevailing
among us who are always haggling about
words and isolated expressions,”—
Biichsel. A common faith in God is the
innermost evangelical alliance.

2. Love to God’s people. ‘In whom
is all my delight” (ver. 3). ‘In God’s
land there are others who, like David,
cleave to God, and with these he claims
fellowship.”—Perowne. Where there is
a true love to God, there will be a living
delight in His people.

IV. Their uncompromising loyalty
(ver. 4). Their sorrows shall be multi-
plied, “ who wed themselves to another
god.”—Kay. “Not idols merely, but
any created object of supreme affection.”
—Alexander. The Psalmist declares
that he will not join in their impious
services, nor even name the names of
their divinities, He will have no com-
plicity with such whatever. ‘It was a
great consolation that, during his exile,
being much with heathens, he had re-
mained true to his God. He had not
lifted up his hand to Dagon while pro
tected in Philistia. He had not pro
nounced the name of an idol, which
Moses had forbidden the Jews to do, nor
had he attended the bloody altar of
Moloch. Come then to this school, all
ye lukewarm, ye degenerate souls, who
trim between the world and the Church.
It is of small moment to you to protract
the hour of returning from market, or
with whom you take the cheerful glass

61


PSALM Xvi,


Take care what you do: you may go 8
step too far.” —Sutciffe.

Observe :

V. Their grand inheritance (ver.
5, 6). “The idea is, that in the Lord
the Psalmist has all that he can wish or
hope for.”——Alexander. And it is a
secure and everlasting portion.


HOMILETIO COMMBNi ARY: PSALMS,


The old saying declares, “ Carry great
ensigns and you shall be great.” The
believer carries ‘great ensigns ”—a
great name, a great service, a great
king, a great future. May “all that
name the name of Christ depart from
iniquity.”


Tue INHERITANCE OF THE SAINTS,
(Verses 5, 6.)


L Their inheritance is Divine.

1. God Himself. “The Lord is the
portion of mine inheritance and of my
cup” (ver. 5), ‘There is an allusion,
probably, to the division of the land of
Canaan among the tribes, no part of
which was assigned to the tribe of Levi,
because, as was expressly declared,
Jehovah would be their portion or share
(Num. xviii. 20), and the gifts conse-
crated to Jehovah the provision for their
support. That which was true nation-
ally of Levi was true in its deepest
spiritual import of every believing
Israelite. ‘What must not he possess,’
says Savonarola, ‘who possesses the
Possessor of all#?’”—Perowne. “In
the text all Israel is viewed as a ‘ spiri-
tual .priesthood ;’ who, wholly devoted
to God, had Him for their everlasting
reward.”—Kay. 2. And God alone is
the portion of His people. They ask
for nothing beyond Him, Moll renders
the 2d verse of this Psalm ; ‘‘ My happi-
ness is not added to Thee. Nothing
that must be added to Thee makes me
happy, but Thou alone, giving exclusive
and full satisfaction, Compare the
analogous thought and expression, Ps,
Ixxiii. 25.” Yet, 3. The saints have
everything tn God. ‘The heritage or
portion thus described is God Himself,
but considered as including all desirable
possessions.”—Alexander, We have all
gifts in the Giver. The “lines have
fallen to me in pleasant places.” The
blessing of God makes all places bright
and happy; or, a8 some translate, in
pleasant things. ‘It signifies both
pleasant circumstances, and a pleasant
locality.” —Delitzsch. The blessing of
God imparts a profound charm and
significance to all our possessions, re-

62


lationships, circumstances. And finally.
the blessing of God makes all seasons
bright. In the 7th verse, the night
seasons are full of holy and happy com-
munings. God’s smile makes all seasons
bright, even the darkest. “If I say, The
darkness shall cover me, even the night
shall be light about me.” All places, all
things, all seasons, “all are yours.”

This inheritance :

IL Is secure. ‘Thou maintainest
my lot” (ver. 5). “Nor is this com-
parison unnecessary,” says Calvin, “ for
if often happens that the rightful owners
are thrust out from their own possession,
because there is none to defend them,
But God hath given Himself to us as
our inheritance in such wise that by
His aid we are ever maintained in the
enjoyment thereof.” David knew that
his earthly power and glory might be
torn away from him, but in God he
had a kingdom which could not be moved.
Thus in the 8th verse, ‘‘ I shall never be
moved,” ‘The gates of hell shall
never prevail; Christ, our Samson, hath
flung them off their hinges.” —T7'rapp.

It is:

III. Joyful (ver. 6). “I have a
goodly heritage.” ‘ Yea, my inheritance
is acceptable unto me, What had come
to him as his inheritance, he embraced
with the full approval of his judgment
and his affections.”"—Kay. It was just
what he wanted. Men of the world toil
for wealth, splendour, power, notoriety,
and having attained the object of their
ambition, grieve over it, as the disap-
pointed child grieves over the fingered
butterfly. But in the knowledge, love,
and service of God we realise a tzeasure
and joy congenial and satisfying to our
deepest nature,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





It is:

TV. Permanent (ver. 9-11). Here
the Psalmist exults in a glorious hope,
full of immortality. ‘“ David’s hope
rests on this conclusion: it is impossible
for the man who, in appropriating faith
and actual experience, calls God his own,
to fall into the hands of death.” —
Delitzsch. His life is hid with Christ
in God, and so far from death spoiling
him in any sense, it will but give him
fuller possession of his glorious inherit-
ance. How perishable all merely human
good! There is a wild Indian story
which tells of a girl falling in love with
a handsome young warrior, who was


PRALM KVL





however, really, but an image of snow.
Immediately after their marriage they
took a journey, and as the sun appeared
in the horizon the bridegroom melted
away. Man, falling in love with earthly
things, is wasting his affections upon an
image of snow: “The fashion of this
world passeth away.” But rich and
happy in the blessing of God, we are
rich and happy for evermore.


“ A house we call our own
Which cannot be o’erthrown :
In the general ruin sure,
Storms and earthquakes it defies;
Built immovably secure,
Built eternal in the skies.”


BrvuLan.
(Verses 9-11.)


The Psalmist is here on the moun-
tain top. He gains a bright view of the
glorious future, and is filled with rapture.
He is assured of life, resurrection, im-
mortality.

Observe :

I. The grandeur of his hope.

1. In the 10th verse, he exults to be-
lieve that he shall be altogether saved
from the power of death and the grave,
He believes that neither his nobler part,
his glory, nor yet his body, shall suffer
loss. God’s holy ones, God’s favourites,
shall not be forsaken ; their bodies not
abandoned to the tomb, their souls not
abandoned to the invisible world. But,
2. The Psalmist not only exults in being
delivered from the power of death, he
anticipates unknown glories (ver. 11).
Passing out of the shadow of death, he
will pass into the glorious light of God’s
unveiled face, There is a path of life
winding through the valley and shadow
of death, leading through the church-
yard, and leading right into the golden
goal. ‘The glory to be revealed” is
here indicated. (1.) Its fudness. ‘ Ful-
ness of joy.” “ Satiety, or rather satis-
faction, in its strengest sense.”— Alex-
ander, (2.) Its variety. ‘ Pleasures”
* The plural, joys, denotes not only rich-
ness, but variety.”—Alerander. Our
manifold nature will find all it needs when
it thus drinks at thertversof His pleasure.
(3.) Its perpetuity. “ For evermore.”


IL The ground of his hope A
certain writer has defined commentators
as, “The worthy folks that too often
write on books as men with diamonds
write on glass, obscuring light with
scratches.” But on this passage before
us we have the benefit of two inspired
commentators, St. Peter and St. Paul,
who quote this psalm in the 2d, 3d, and
13th chapters of the Acts of the Apostles,
They show that the Psalmist had the
Messiah in his illuminated eye when he
uttered these soaring words. These
words were true of David only in a very
limited sense; they found their full
realisation only in Him who was David's
Lord. We may regard David as exult-
ing in these lofty prospects on the ground
of his faith m the Messiah. Because
Christ should thus triumph, he knew his
triumph assured in Christ. ‘The hope
of his own immortality was based upon,
and bound up in, the life of Him who
was at once his Son and his Lord.
What was true of David in the lower
sense, was true in the fullest and highest
sense of Christ ; was only true of David,
because it was true of Christ; and is
oniy true of any of us in and through
Him, according to His own words, ‘ Be-
cause I live, ye shall live also,’”—
Perowne.

“The path of life,” is the work of
Christ. ‘ Thou wilt show me the path
of life.” The Guzde ia the presence of

63


PSALM XVIL HOMILETICO COMMENTARY : PSALMS.





Christ, The true Beulah is Calvary; of the ckies. ‘Yea, though I walk
from the shadow of the Cross we gain a through the valley and the shadow of
clear and confident vision of the glory death,” do.





PSALM XVIL


INTRODUCTION.


“David pours forth to God in this psalm an earnest prayer for deliverance from his in-
veterate enemies, who were bent on taking away his life. We find in it his opinion of the
character of his oppressors, who were obviously persons of consideration and influence, and
who were disposed to exercise all the power which their station enabled them to command, to
gratify their hatred and malice against him. He affirms his own innocence, and expresses his
full conviction that the time would come when the relative conditions of himself and his
opponents would be changed. Many persons think, and with some reason, that the psalm was
written on the occasion when Saul and his men pursued David in the wilderness of Engedi,.”—
Phillips.


Sare Srers on Dancerous Partus,
(Verses 4, 5.)


We are reminded here:

I. Ofour need of the Divine succour.
“Hold up my goings in Thy paths”
‘ver. 5). This is the language of one
who felt that he could not hold himself
up. Some in the pride of their heart
imagine that they can, in their own wit
and strength, face life and its difi-
culties Let us look at the path of
life, the path which leads to heaven, and
we shall see our need of a Divine
Helper. In our way through this world
to a better we must often encounter :

1. Steep paths. How pure, perfect,
high are the statutes of God! We are
born in the depths of sin and shame.
All that is truly great and truly good
lies far above us, as those white moun-
tains of Switzerland lie above the
traveller, their tops touching heaven.
Now, who can ascend the holy hill?
Can we, in our own strength, get so much
above ourselves, so much beyond our-
selves? Surely not. Without super-
human help we should soon grow faint
and weary in scaling these sublime
heights, and glide down, or fall down,
into sense and sin.

2. Rough paths. Life has its paths
of suffering, the paths that have to be
traversed with bleeding feet. Here
human nature often faints and falls,
Men strike against sick-beds, bereave-
ments, losses, persecutions, and lose all
energy, peace, hope. Our heart is often
“discouraged because of the way,” and


unless we have Divine strength, com-
fort, guidance, we must perish.

3. Dark paths. Weare often in most
perplexing circumstances, and it is very
easy for us to get wrong. ‘“‘ Ye have
not passed this way heretofore.” Our
path is often untried, strange, and
dangerous. We speak of taking a leap
in the dark. We are constantly doing
this, compelled to do it; life is a series
of leaps in the dark. If a Heavenly
Hand does not aid us, we must stumble
and fall.

4. Slippery paths. Days of youth,
when the blood is hot, and life free and
full; days of temptation, when a strange
illusive light brightens into beauty
things of death and darkness; days of
comfort, when there is nothing to stir
the soul, but everything to lull it; days
of prosperity, when riches and honours
increase: these are the times when we
stand on slippery paths, on enchanted
ground ; and unless God help us, we are
soon, as an old writer says, “on all
fours.” Alpine climbers say that the
icy peaks which sometimes they attempt
to climb are like “ the neck of a bottle,”
and it is hard work to keep from sliding
into the abyss, Life has paths similarly
slippery, and unless a Divine guide up-
hold us, our steps will slide.

“In Ps, xvi. 11 we read, ‘Thou wilt
show me the path of life;’ here the
psalm speaks of the paths of the de-
stroyer. The path of life is one; but


HOMILETIC OOMMENTARY: PSALMB.





PSALM XVEL





there are many paths of the destroyer.”
— Wordsworth. And Satan is per-
petually seeking to drive or to draw us
from the King’s highway into his
destructive paths. “The path of life
is like the vale of Siddim, slimy and
slippery, full of lime-pits and pit-falls,
springs and stumbling-blocks.”—T7rapp.
“ Hold wp my goings”—as a careful
driver holds up his horse when going
down hill, We have all sorts of paces,
both fast and slow, and the road is
never long of one sort, but with God to
hold up our goings, nothing in the pace
or in the road can cast down.”—Spur-
geon. “Lord, hold me up, that I may
hold out.”— Watson.

We are reminded :

IL Of the sufficiency of the Divine
succour. The Psalmist has no doubt
of his safety if only God will save him.
Thus, in another place: “‘ Hold Thou me
up, and I shall be safe” (Ps. cxix. 117).
There is no royal road to heaven, but
there is a royal Helper, and none can
perish who cling toHim. “ God is able
to make you stand” (Rom. xiv. 4).
There is a Catholic story which relates
that once a holy painter was painting on
the lofty ceiling of a church the image of
one of the apostles. Absorbed in his
work the artist stepped back to contem-
plate it, and stepped beyond the edge of
the scaffolding ; in a moment the figure
that he was painting started into life,
caught the falling artist, and set him
down safely by the altar. If we live in
the Church, and seek to glorify God,
whenever we take a dangerous step, or
stand in perilous slight, a Hand stronger
than that of Peter's, stronger than
Gabriel’s, shall preserve us, and keep us
in safety.

‘On every side He stands,
And for His Israel cares ;
And safe in His Almighty hands,
Their souls for ever beara.”
Learn :
1. That we are safe only whilst we


Sproat NzeEp,


rest in God, All other securities fos
good living are valid only whilst God
gives them efficacy. Promises, vows,
pledges, all are unreliable, except as
God gives them fixity and force. God’s
help is the key-stone of all prudential
measures. We must all try to take the
dying minister’s advice: ‘Stand up
for Christ, stand up in Christ.”

2. That it is the privilege of the
believer to be held up. Not only to be
picked up when we have fallen, but to
be held up, so that we may not fall.
The old poet sings—


‘‘That which makes us have no need
Of physic, that’s physic indeed.”

Preventing grace is the best physic

8. That we are preserved from fall-
ing by holding to God’s Word” (ver. 4).
‘“‘Whatever men in general may do or
say, I have but one guide and rule of
action, viz., Thy Word.”—Perowne, And
Kay renders (ver. 5). “ Because my
treadings held firm to Thy paths, my steps
have been unmoved.” “ By holding fast
my goings in Thy paths, or rather, tracks,
ruts of wheels, my footsteps have not been
moved. I owe my safety to the care
which I take to tread in Thy footsteps.”
Wordsworth. If we hold firmly by
God’s Word, that Word will preserve us
It shows us which are the false patha
“By the words of thy lips I have
marked the paths of the transgressor.”—
Wordsworth. It strengthens us to walk
in true paths. Its examples, its pro-
mises, the grace which is ever given in
the reading of it, energise us to walk in
the path of life which it indicates.

4. That the text gives no sanction to
carelessness and sloth. If God hold us
up we have something to do, we have
to hold to Him. To hold God’s hand
day by day is the supremest effort of the
soul, it means unceasing thought, prayer,
endeavour. God only saves those who
daily cling to Him in eighs, and prayers,
and teara.


SprcraL HELP,


(Verses 7-14.)


EK Special Need. “Bhow 7Zhy
marvellous lovingkindness” (ver. 7}
B


“Make Thy grace wonderful."— Mold,
“Exhibit Thy special mercies, Thou
65


PSALM EVEL.





who savest them that flee for refuge.”—
Kay. ‘ It has particular reference to ex-
traordinary favours, implying an unus-
ual necessity.” —Alexander. The Psalm-
ist was ina position of peculiar distress
and peril. Mark his trying position as
here depicted by himself.

1. The number of his enemies (ver.
9). They compassed him about. He
felt that he was hemmed in by them on
every side. 2. The character of his
enemies, They were deadly enemies
(ver. 9). As the 10th verse particularises,
they were proud, arrogant, unfeeling.
“Their heart is not a pulsating human
heart, but a lump of fat”-~—Molt. In-
sensible, obdurate, cruel. 3. ‘he strategy
of his enemies (vers. 11, 12). ‘‘ They
had fixed their eyes intently on the
Psalmist, with a purpose to prostrate
him to the ground, or completely over-
whelm him.”—WMoll, A greedy lion
lurking in secret places, expresses at
once, their ferocious disposition and
crafty action. It was then with the
Psalmist a time of special need. All
God’s people know such times. They
are often in deep waters, but sometimes
deep calleth unto deep; their sky is
often clouded, but sometimes it is
eclipsed ; they often pass through the
fire, but sometimes the furnace is heated
seven times hotter than it is wont to be
heated. Their trouble is sore, their trial
fiery. Their tribulation seems to go
beyond that of Christians in general ; it
certainly goes beyond any which they
have experienced in the past. They
have need of extraordinary help, mar-
vellous lovingkindnesses, special mercies,

II. Special Help. ‘“‘ Keep me as the
apple of the eye, hide me under the
shadow of Thy wings” (ver. 8). How
truly sublime these conceptions! In
the seasons of deepest distress we have


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS


the brightest visions of God’s love and
power to save. In times of deepest trial
we are: 1. The dearest to God, ‘‘ Keep
me as the apple of the eye.” This is a
symbol of that which is dearest to us,
How precious is the eye, how carefully
guarded by us! So we are never dearer
to God than when we want Him most.
The most suffering child in a family is
the best beloved; and so it is in God’s
family (Zech. ii 8) 2. The nearest to
God. ‘Hide me under the shadow of
Thy wings.” How near, how safe!
“The wings of a hen cover her brood
so that they cannot be seen by birds of
prey ; she covers them against rain and
storms ; she warms them and strengthens
them when they are cold and weak ; so
likewise does the Divine grace with His
children.”— Moll. Thus in times of
persecution and temptation ; of suffering
and trouble ; of weakness and fear, God
draws us all the closer to Himself, and
under those wings, whose golden feathers
are wisdom and power and love, we hide
in safety. 3. The happiest in God.
The eaglet hiding under the wing of the
parent bird is a figure of comfort as well
as safety. It is only as we realise deeper
experience of pain, and loss, and peril,
that we realise the deeper joys of the
Divine life. ‘For as the sufferings of
Christ abound in us, so our consolation
also aboundeth by Christ” (2 Cor. i. 5),
The brighter rainbow decks the darker
cloud; in mid-winter’s gloom the stars
burn brightest. God’s wing is as soft
as it is strong, and the sorrow that
drives us to the closer communion en-
sures us & deeper peace, a keener
blisa,


“When my sorrows most increase,
Let Thy strongest joys be given ¢
Jesus, come with my distress,
And agony is heaven | ”


SaNcTIFIED TRIAL,
(Perses 7-15.)


In these verses we have an illustration
of the purifying and ennobling influences
of sanctified trouble. We see that un-
sanctified prosperity degrades those who
enjoy it, whilst sanctified adversity lifts
up those who suffer it.


GS


I. Sanctified sorrow drives us nearer
God In the 7th and 8th verses this is
very apparent. “The hard usage of hig
enemies drove David into God’s blessed
bosom; as children misused abroad
run home to their parents.”—Trapo


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMS.


PSALM XVIL





Wronged by the world, buffeted by the
messengers of Satan, overtaken by the
storms of adversity, in closer fellowship
with God we find balm to our soul.
One day an aide-de-camp of the late
Emperor Nicholas of Russia threw him-
self at the monarch’s feet, and begged
from his sovereign permission to fight
a duel. The Emperor, who was a
staunch opponent of duelling, imme-
diately and emphatically refused.
“ But, sire, I am dishonoured ; I must
fight,” cried the disconsolate aide, The
Czar frowned, and asked him what he
meant. “I have been struck in the
face,” was the ready reply. ‘ Well,”
said the Emperor, ‘for all that, thou
shalt not fight ; but come—come with
me.” And, taking him by the arm, the
Emperor led him into the presence of
his court which was assembled in an
adjoining saloon, Then, in view of the
flower of his realm, the Emperor kissed
the cheek of the aide-de-camp which
had received the blow. ‘Go now,” he
exclaimed, “and be at peace; thy
affrout has been effaced.” Thus, when
we are wronged by men or devils, we
fly to our God, and the kiss of the King
of the universe more than atones for
the injury and dishonour that may have
been done us. The King’s love and
favour fill the wounded soul with strength
and gladness.

II. Sanctified sorrow conducts to a
higher spiritual life. We see this
specially in the 14th verse. The
Psalmist has been led to feel how much
superior is the Divine life to a worldly
life. He is led to a new and deeper
appreciation of a godly nature, and of all
the treasures it inherits. In the midst
of persecution and sorrow he realises a
more intense spirituality,’ A naturalist,
speaking of the swarms of insects which
torment cattle in tropical lands, shows
that the sufferings of the cattle issue
in their safety. ‘‘ Observe,” says this
writer, “ that the furious eagerness of the
winged insects, which seem to be the
wgents of death, is frequently a cause of


life. By an incessant persecution of the
sick flocks, enfeebled by hot damp airs,
they ensure their safety. Otherwise
they would remain stupidly resigned,
and hour after hour grow less capable
of motion, gloomier and more morbid in
the bonds of fever, until they could rise
no more. The inexorable spur knows,
however, the secret of putting them on
their legs ; though, with trembling limbs,
they take to flight, the insect never
quits them ; presses them, urges them,
and conducts them, bleeding, to the
wholesome regions of the dry lands and
the living waters, where their furious
guide abandons them, and returns to the
pestilent vapours, to its realm of death.”
Thus David’s enemies, like a swarm of
winged insects, drove him to loftier
heights of life. If he had been left to
a level life of care and prosperity he
might have fallen a victim to its relax-
ing influences, but persecutions and tri-
bulations drove him to the higher walks
of thought, and feeling, and life. Is it
not often thus with God’s peopls 1 They
are stung by many losses and sorrows ;
but these afflictions secure their salvation.
With trembling limbs, and _ bleeding
hearts, they take their flight from the
miasmatic plains of the carnal life, to
the tablelands of which God Himself
is sun and moon,

III. Sanctified sorrow awakens
longings for the heavenly and eternal
life (ver. 15). Here we see the Psalm-
ist loosened from earth by his troubles,
and looking forward to the heavenly
and immortal for the satisfaction of all
his longings. Such is the beauty of
Damascus that we are told Mahomet
feared, if he entered it, his heart would
be captivated by its loveliness, and he
would be unfitted for the celestial, so he
turned away from the gates of the
Syrian paradise. Amid scenes of
affluence and pleasure we may easily
forget our great inheritance ; but in
disappointment and affliction our heart
goes out after that Divine and heavenly
inheritance which fadeth not away.


PSALM XVIL





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; PSALMS.


Men or THE WOBLD.
“Men of the World” (Verse 14).


We will first consider :

I. The characters thus described.
“Men of the world “ observe :

1. Their portion. “Which have
their portion in this life.” “The word
here used for ‘world’ denotes the
transitory nature of the world as a
thing of time. Men of the world are
those who have made it their home,
and who, together with the world and
the lust thereof, are passing away.
Being thus worldly-minded, they have
their portion in life, t.¢. in the brief years
of their existence upon earth.” —Perowne.
“ Tife is by some understood to mean a
life of ease or pleasure ; but this is far
less natural than the obvious sense of
this life, this present state as distin-
guished from futurity.”—Alexander.
(1.) They live to the visible. The
“world.” Their pain and pleasure,
hope and fear, loss or gain, all have to
do with the senses and the worldly life.
(2.) They live to the present. Their
disposition is gross—their highest good
and happiness is in the purely
natural life, ‘ Worldliness consists in
these three things :—Attachment to the
Outward ; attachment to the Transitory ;
attachment to the Unreal: in oppo-
sition to love for the Inward, the
Eternal, the True.”—ARobertson. <A
man may not be an atheist, and yet be
a man of the world ; a man may not be
vicious, and yet be a man of the world ;
nay, @ man may be moral, amiable,
kind, and yet be a man of the world,
They love not God: “The friendship
of the world is enmity with God.” They
love the near and the low, not the dis-
tant and the high—they are deaf to the
injunction, “Set not your affections
upon things of the earth.” They look
at the things which are temporal. How
many there are with many good qualities,
but who at their best are never more
than men of the world !

2. Their prospertty. (1.) They have
enough for themselves. ‘Whose belly
thou fillest with Thy hid treasure.”
“To the eye of sense God seems some-

68


times to have reserved His choicest gifts
for the ungodly.”—Alexander. “ They
have more than heart could wish, their
eyes stand out with fatness” (Job. xxi.
7-15). (2.) They have enough for their
children. ‘“‘ They are full of children,”
&o. Margin, their children are full.
“The obvious signification is, that they
have enough for themselves and for
their children.”—-Barnes. They found
large and flourishing houses, The pros-
perity of the wicked need not excite any
particular surprise. (1.) They set their
whole heart on such prosperity. (2.)
They bend their whole strength to com-
pass their aim. (3.) They have no
moral scruples to stand in the way of
their progress. They live to the world,
and get it. Its wreaths theirs, its gold,
its purple, its dainties.

Observe :

IZ. The disadvantages of their lot.

The Psalmist in this place is not
envying “the men of this world;” but,
on the contrary, pities them.

1. The hand of God ts against them.
“From the wicked by Thy sword: from
men by Thy hand” (ver. 13, 14). Many
take worldly prosperity as a sign of
God’s favour, but it is no such sign.
God’s hand is against men of the world,
His sword is lifted against them, and
must smite erelong if they repent not.

2. They have a profound discontent.
A carnal content they have, but does
not the Psalmist intimate in the 15th
verse, that “true” satisfaction comes
only through righteousness? Yes, the
men of the world are full of precious
things—pleasures, honours, gold, and
silver—but their spirit is desolate and
unsatisfied. “Their portion is a lean
and hungry one at the best—one that
may fill the hand, but cannot fill the
soul.”— Binnee.

3. They soon part with their inherit
ance for ever. “This world.” “ This
life.” Whatever this world gives us it
soon takes back again, just as the hungry
ocean-waves suck back again the
glittering shells with which they first


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


POALM XVIL.





strewed the shore. And then? “For
all that is in the world, the lust of the
flesh, and the lust of the eyes, and the
pride of life, is not of the Father, but is


of the world. And the world passeth
away, and the lust thereof: but he that
doeth the will of God abideth for ever”
(1 John ii, 16, 17),


SATISFACTION,
(Verse 15.)
Satisfaction! What a magical word! as should satisfy the man.” — Johs
Oh! What is it? Where is it to be Howe.


found # Who shall teach us to realise
it? In this verse we have suggested to
us,

L. The nature of true satisfaction.

1. It is spirttual. The Psalmist
shows here that it is not external and
physical, but internal and spiritual. The
sensual men in the 14th verse, are not
satisfied men are not men seeking satis-
faction in aright direction. Notin mere
sensuality shall we ever find content.
You cannot satisfy the body with
thoughts, neither can you satisfy the
soul with meats. Not in social rank
and glory shall we prove satisfaction.
The ancient. star-worshippers affixed
mirrors to their breasts to bring near
to them the orbs they worshipped, but
the orbs themselves were far away in
the heavens, nevertheless; and titles,
purple, coronets, golden fortunes, crowns
of fame, are but mirrors also in which
you have the reflections of high and
glorious things—reflections, and nothing
more. Not in mere tntellectuality shall
we find content,—art, science, philoso-
phy. St. Augustine complains to God
of his friends offering him the books of
the philosophers ;—‘‘ And these were
the dishes in which they brought to me,
being hungry, the sun and the moon
instead of Thee.” True satisfaction is
not in the sphere of the senses, but of
the spirit.

2. Itis complete, The satisfaction of
the sensual in the 14th verse, is one-sided,
only regarding one section of the com-
plex nature. The Psalmist’s satisfaction
was all pervasive—the gratification of
his whole being—appetite, sensibility,
imagination, spirit, ‘ Zhetr’s, partial,
defective, such as would but gratify
their bestial part ; his, adequate, com-
plete, a happiness of proportion, such


3. It is full, “satisfied, fed to the full.”
—French, The whole nature blessed, and
fully blessed. “They hunger no more,
neither do they thirst any more.”

4, It is everlasting. The Psalmist
looks forward here to the great future,
and anticipates endless blessedness,
The perpetuity of the inheritance of
the worldly man referred to in verse 14,
is quite a mock immortality—he dies,
and his estate is soon dissipated ; but
the joy of a spiritualised and perfected
nature flows for evermore.

II. The source of true satisfaction.

1. The vision of God. “As for me—
in righteousness let me behold Thy
face.”—Perowne. The knowledge of God
—the perception of His goodness, wis-
dom, beauty. The secret of all our
discontents is our misapprehension of
the Divine nature, law, government,
purpose. If we could see the Throne,
and Him that sits thereupon, with
unclouded face—for really the cloud
is on our face, not on God’s—our soul
would be filled with ecstasy. To know
that God is all beauty, and His law all
love, and His government all wise, and
His kingdom and eternity all joy—to
know this, is overflowing and everlasting
gladness. To have a clear, full vision of
Jesus, Who is the brightness of the
Father’s glory, is the secret of satis-
faction. Observe, it is through right-
eousness that we gain this vision. “ In
righteousness let me behold Thy face.”
“ Blessed are the pure in heart, for they
shall see God.” 2. The ltkeness of God.
“When I awake with Thy likeness.”
“When Thy likeness is awakened.”—
Horsley. As we become pure we get
the clearer vision of God, and as we get
the clearer vision of God, the Divine
image is inwrought once more in our

69


PSALM SVII1.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY ; PSALMEB,





deepest nature. ‘We all with open
face beholding as in a glass the glory
of the Lord,” de. (2 Cor. ili. 18).


“ Unlike my God I cannot rest,
For sin is perfect misery :
But stamp Thine image on my breast,
Conform my hallowed suul to Thee.


“ Partaker of Thiws utmost grace,
My soul would then be satisfied ;
As Moses, wheu he saw Thy face,

And sank into Thine arms and died.”
(1.) This satisfaction may be largely at-
tained in this life. It is a grave error
to place this satisfaction wholly in the
future. In this life we may, through


the grace of Jesus, attain power ovey
sin, fix our heart singly upon God, and
attain thus to the vision of God, the
likeness of God, and all the joy of
which God is the fountain, Let us
seek a pure heart. (2.) This satisfaction
is fully attained in the life to come.
“‘ They shall see His face, and His name
shall be in their foreheads.” Here we
begin to awake in the likeness of God,
and as His image shines more clear in
our soul, our satisfaction becomes more
profound ; in heaven, that likeness shall
be complete—we shall see Him as He is,
and our joy shall be full.


PSALM XVIII.
INTRODUCTION.


“This magnificent triumphal hymn was composed by David in celebration of his deliver
ance from his enemies. But the sublimity of the figures used in it, and the consent of ancient
commentators, even Jewish as well as Christian, but, above all, the citations, made from it in
the New Testament, evince that the kingdom of Messiah is here pointed at under that of
David. It may thus be divided into five parts.


Part I. Consisting of the first three verses, is the proem of the song.
Part II. Celebrates miraculous deliverances from a atate of affliction and distress,
Part III]. Thanksgiving ; five verses, from the twentieth to the twenty-fourth,


second.


Part IV. Celebrates success in war ; eighteen verses, from the twenty-fifth to the forty-


Part V. The establishment of Messiah’s kingdom; eight verses, from the forty-third to the


Aftieth.”— Bishop Mant.


Tavuz Love
(Verse 1.)


This verse gives a picture of the human
heart in its sublimest mood. It is an
eloquent expression of the loftiest affec-
tion. The love of the Psalmist was
“true,” because,

L The object of it was right. “I
will love Thee.” Not, nature. Some ex-
pend the whole fund of their admiration
and delight on the works of God. They
admire creation, idealise it, idolise it.
They give a fanciful life to sun and
moon and stars, to the firmament, to
the earth, and then worship them.
This love inspires our naturalistic,
pantheistic poetry —a poetry sadly
popular. Not, humanity. We see many
lavish their affection on their friends,
and a certain philosophy tells us that
the noblest object of love is the human
race, ps Meare siuliegisees saa


and Comte in France, denying the love
of God, and then adoring in the most
extravagant fashion a couple of women.
We may easily fall into the same mis-
take—loving the creature more than the
Creator. There is, indeed, no sin in
loving, in fervently loving, such of our
fellows as may appear in our eyes to be
beautiful or noble; but that our love
should be confined to these is the fault
of faults, Not, self. How common is
self-idolatry! To be wholly occupied
with our own interests—ever burning
incense to our own greatness! How
many are their own divinities, living to
glorify, to serve, to worship themselves !
Not, the world. The Apostle says that
the love of the world is enmity witb
God. What is this love of the world
which is opposed to the love of the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM XVI,





Father? The setting of our affections
on the gifts of God—wealth, rank,
honours, learning. There are many
such. They are lovers of pleasure, for-
tune, fame, more than lovers of God.
They forget, or almost forget, the Giver
in the gift. God ts true object of
love. 1. He should be the first object.
The Psalmist begine with extolling God.
The first verse of every chapter in our
life should be: “I will love Thee,
O Lord, my strength.” 2. He is the
worthy object. To love creation, or its
gifts, is to love what is dead. Love is
only worthily placed on a living person.
To love the creatures, is to love what is
imperfect: when we love any person,
we love not so much the actual person,
but rather an ideal person. Their
merits, their charms, exist to a large
extent in our imagination. But God is
the all-perfect One ; all perfections exist
actually and absolutely in Him. 3. He
is the chief object. ‘‘ Thee” only Thee;
all other creatures or things in Thee.
“ Nothing must we love above God, or
so much as God, much less against God.”
—Trapp.

IL The measure of it was right.

1. It was a boundless love. The just
measure of love to God is a measureless
love. ‘I will love Thee.” “The word
signifies to love with the greatest in-
tensity.”"—Phillips, “ Affectionately do
I love Thee.”— Moll. “Fervently do I
love Thee, O Jehovah, my strength.”
—Perowne. The Psalmist loved God
from the depths of his heart ; loved Him
with a burning, boundless affection.
As one has said: “ Every river does the
most good whilst it keeps within its
banks, except the Nile, and that does
the most good when it overflows its
banks; so each human passion is best
kept within bounds, except love to God,
and that is best when it overflows, when


it is shed abroad.”
lasting love.


2. It was an ever
It overflowes both space
and time. “The future form, J wil
love, represents it as a permanent
affection, and expresses a fixed purpose.
“T not only love Thee now, but am
resolved to do ao for ever.” — Alexander.
“Nothing shall separate me from the
love of God,” &ec.


‘* What though my flesh and heart decay,
Thee shall I love in endleas day !”


III. The inspiration of it was right.
“O Lord, my strength.” The Psalmist’s
heart was touched by the love of
God. “The simple form of the verb
is here used to denote the reciprocal
affection of the inferior party.”—Alex-
ander. He had felt God’s love to him-
self, and in return He loved God.
“We love Him because He first loved
us.” A true love to God is something
more than a mere intellectual admira-
tion, something more than a moral
appreciation ; it is the offspring of
& consciously, indebted, and deeply-
moved heart. The idea of the mystics,
that we must love God simply for
His own sake, is not scriptural. We
love much because much has been for-
given us ; because great gifts have been
imparted to us; because great deliver-
ances have been wrought out for us.

Remember—the love of God is the
secret of strength andvictory. The love of
God gives us the victory over all inward
foes. Great is the purifying power of
this sublime affection, “ Faith which
worketh by love, and purifies the heart.”
“The love of God gives us the victory
over all outward foes” (Rom. viii. 35-39).
“So let all thine enemies perish, O
Lord ; but let them that love Him be
as the sun when he goeth forth in his
might” (Judges v. 31).


Diving SaLvation,
(Verses 2, 3.)


We observe:

I. The Psalmist’s confession (ver. 2).

He acknowledges, 1. That God was
hisdeliverer. “/ehovah is my stronghold,”
&ec. “ My God is my atrength,” &c. The


Psalmist does not impute his deliver.
ance from Saul and his other enemies,
to his own prowess, or to secondary
causes ; God was his help. There wae
@ power of supernatural Sorat David


(ee — ———


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





lifting him above the temptation to
idealise and deify aspects of nature.
The rocks and fortresses and strongholds
of the country, where many of David’s
exploits were performed, might have led
a less devout mind to forget God, and
ascribe its triumphs to its own prowess,
combined with geographical advantages.
Not so with David. His faith penetrated
secondary causes, and visible helps and
agencies only became the symbols of the
invisible. ‘Jehovah is my stronghold,”
&c. Let us give the glory of our
deliverances to God—not to self, or
nature, or chance. Let us give all the
glory to God. Not a word here about
geographical help, or human help, or
self-help, If we thus honour God, God
shall honour our faith, and save us in
all natural and spiritual perils. 2. God
was his perfect deliverer. Seven is the
number of perfection; and here we
have according to the reading of Perowne
seven metaphors crowded together set-
ting forth the perfection of God as the
Saviour of His people. ‘“‘ Jehovah (is)
my stronghold and my fortress, and my
deliverer, my God is my rock wherein I
find refuge, my shield and horn of my


salvation, my high tower.” God is a
perfect Saviour. ‘ Rocky” “shield ;”
“horn ;” indicate various forme of


defence and shelter, of immunity and
deliverance. (1.) God preserves His
people in the day of evil. He is a
garrison to them in the time of trial and
temptation, ‘Talk of the seven wonders
of the world! what are they but im-
perfect images of the magnificent bul-
warks which God raises about His
people }
‘On every side He stands,
And for His Israel cares ;
And safe in His Almighty hands

Their souls for ever bears.”
(2.) God delivers His people from the
power of evil, He is more than a de-
fender, He is a deliverer. He causes our
foes to raise the siege, and leave us un-
harassed and unharmed. (3.) God causes
His people to triwmph over the ene-
mies by whom they have been menaced.
“The horn of my salvation.” As the
“shield” stands for a weapon of defence,
so the ' horn” stands for a weapon oi

2





offence. “The horn is a symbol of


strength in attack.”—Perowne. God
not only shelters and delivers His
people, but He enables them to carry
the war into the enemies’ camp, and to
reap glorious spoils in the battle. God
not only saves His people, but ‘ Satan
is bruised under their feet ; He not only
delivers His Church from the wrath of
men and devils, but strengthens it to
overthrow the kingdom of darkness.
3. God was his personal deliverer. “My”
rock, “my” fortress, “my” desiverer.
The tried saint feels that he has a
personal and peculiar interest in God.
God’s manifestations of help and power
are so rich and multiform in their
character that they carry a separate
secret for every separate heart. Just
as there were rocks and strongholds
about Bethlehem and Engedi that
David’s eye had marked for many a
year, and that his own foot only knew
how to climb; so there are forms of
Divine help and blessing, as many and
as varied as God’s relations to individual
souls, and the secret paths to the attain-
ment of which lie within our individual
faith. Let us not be afraid of tribu-
lation, for it unites us all the more
intensely with God. Peril deepens ex-
perience and individualises the relations
in which we stand to God. But for the
years of danger in which his youth had
been spent, the Psalmist would never
have been able to realise all that power
of intense, believing, personal appropria-
tion, signified by the use of the posses-
sive pronoun, “My strength:” “My
fortress:” ‘“ My God.”

We observe :

IL The Psalmist’s resolution (ver.
3). “I will call upon the Lord,” &c.
Having shown that the Lord is worthy
to be praised and trusted, how natural
it is that this resolution should follow?
And yet, how often ia it the case that
we acknowledge the glorious perfections
of our God in our lips, and yet do not
follow up the acknowledgment with a
hearty practical confidence! Call upon
the Lord for help, and you praise Him
in so doing; call upon the Lord, so
shall you be saved from your enemies.
Some say that children, weak in every


eee,


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: PSALMS.





other respect, have such strong voices
that they may be able to cry aloud, and
thus secure help in times of danger ; the


children of God, weak and helpless


PSALM XVIIL


amid foes and perils, have a cry to
pierce the heavens and bring down
help. Cry! ery aloud! and God shall
save,


Dz Prorunpi,
(Verses 4-19.)


Consider :

L The Psalinist’s peril (ver. 4, 5).
‘The sorrows of death” (ver. 4).
“According to the reading of 2 Sam.
xxii. 5, ‘the breakers of death.’ The
metaphor is taken from those dangerous
waves which our mariners call white-
breakers.”—Horsley. “The floods of
angodliness made me afraid.” Perowne.
‘““The reference is here to wicked men,
whose number and violence are indicated
by the figure of torrents and overflowing
streams.”—Alexander. ‘The sorrows
of hell,” &c. (ver. 5). The bands of
the grave, the snares of death. ‘By
bands we are probably to understand
the cordage of a net, such as fowlers
spread for birds.”—Alexander. “ Death
is represented as a hunter with a cord
and net.”—Delitesch. Whichever way
the Psalmist turns there is dreadful
danger. Thus are we found in our sin-
ful estate. We are in the power of evil
Sin as a torrent carries us away; the
devil has entangled us in the meshes of
his net; there seems no way of escape
from the second death. When our eyes
are opened to our true situation we are
overwhelmed with horror. Thus do we
sometimes find ourselves in days of
trouble and persecution. We are com-
assed about with sorrow and darkness.

here seems to be no way of escape.

IL The Psalmist’s prayer (ver. 6).
1. Its fervency. “Called.” “Cried.”
2. Its singleness. “I called upon
Jehovah ; i.e, when I am in trouble I
call on Jehovah only, and make my
supplication to no other deliverer.”—

Phillips, 3. Its efficacy. ‘“ He heard
my voice out of His temple,” &c, “ Not
the temple, or tabernacle, on Mount
Zion, but the temple in heaven, where-
in God especially manifests His glory,
and where He is worshipped by the
heavenly hoste—a place which is both


temple and palace.”—Perowne. What
wonderful tenderness and oversight are
suggested by the answer that met the
Psalmist’s cry! The temple full of
music, but the cry of distress carries as
far as the angelic symphonies, and reaches
an all-sensitive ear; the temple full of
radiance and glory and beauty, but away
amidst the gloom of the under-world a
Divine eye sees the prostrate and strug-
gling form of a servant of God; God
hears the cry out of His very temple, and
leaves the very temple, as described in
the subsequent verses, for the help and
deliverance of His servant. The celestial
world is a world full of glory, music,
and joy; and yet, it is quick to
sympathise with a world of want and
sorrow. Do not restrain prayer because
of heaven’s distance ; not because of its
magnificence ; not because of its sanctity,
for it isa “temple,” a place of mercy and
reconciliation,

Iil The Psalmist’s preservation
(ver. 7-19). “It is true we find no ex-
press record of any incident in David’s
life of the kind recorded in 1 Sam. vii
10, but it must be some real experience,
which David here idealises.”—Delstzsch.

Observe :

1, The power of the Divine Helper
(ver. 7-9). “The earth shook and
trembled,” &c. Whilst God was a rock
and refuge to David, He was a power
that rocked the very mountains, to say
nothing of the frail fortresses of the
Psalmist’s foes, God is a wall of fire to
His people, but a consuming fire to His
enemies. 2, The swiftness of the Divine
Helper (ver. 10). ‘He rode upon a
cherub, and did dy,” &e. “He is a
present help in the time of trouble.”


“ Ere we ean offer our complaints,
Behold Him present with His aid.”


$. The mystery of the methods of the
&


73


¥O4LM XVOR,


Divine aid (ver. 11). “‘ He made dark-
ness His veil.”—Moll. “The word
rendered secret place—means properly a
hiding.”—Barnes, In strange ways
God saves His people. Be patient and
believing.


“God moves in a mysterious way,
His wonders to perform,” &c.


As the 12th verse intimates, it is not
all obscurity. “At the brightness that
was before Him the thick clouds were
scattered.” There were out-gleams. So
if we keep our eye on the Divine
government we shall often get glimpses
of the light and love by which it is per-
vaded. 4. The efficacy of the Divine
aid (ver. 13-18). God’s power utterly


NATURE AND THE


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





discomfited the foes of His people. In
the 7th verse “the earth shook and
trembled, the foundations also of the
hills moved;” in the 13th verse the
“heavens” shake, and pour down hail-
stones and fire. No wonder that the
wicked were “scattered” in dire con-
fusion. Let us not forget that thia
glorious power is pledged to the weakest
saint. Our enemies may be too strong
for us, but they are not too strong for
Him. 5. The fulness of the Divine
deliverance (ver. 19). God’s help never
stops at the mere point of deliverance.
God’s power never comes down to help
us out of our perils only ; it comes to
bring us to better things than we had
known heretofore.


SUPERNATURAL


(Verses 7-19.)


The Psalmist does something more
here than “‘idealise” nature, we think
that hesuggests some important thoughts
concerning the relation of nature to the
supernatural. Dr. Farrar in his “‘ Chap-
ters on Language” observes: ‘ What
Mr. Ruskin has called ‘the pathetic
fallacy,’ is the indomitable, desire to see
in nature, or at least to attribute to her,
a sympathy in our joys and sorrows,
hopes and fears. Hence, to the imagi-
nation of the Psalmist and prophet,
‘the hills clap their hands ;’ ‘the valleys
sing ;’ ‘the morning stars shout for joy ;’
‘the fir-trees howl,’ dc., &c. In modern
poets the same fancy recurs with con-
stant intensity, so that there is hardly a
single aspect of nature which has not
been made to express or to interpret
the thoughts and passions of mankind,
and hardly a single modern poem which
dves not illustrate this imaginative
power,” p. 214. But there is some-
thing far deeper than this in the relation
of God’s people to nature; they not
only see their experience mirrored in
nature, but have the assurance that
nature sympathises with them, and
ministers to them in a far more profound
sense. In that portion of the psalm
which is now before us, we see:

I. Nature as obedient to super-
natural power. We see God moving

74


heaven and earth. All forces doing
His bidding—the wind, the clouds, the
lightning, the thunder, the mountains,
the sea, The Psalmist in this song may
have “idealised” some of his experiences,
but his idealisation assumes the obedi-
ence of nature to the will of God. The
Scriptures constantly teach this, The
Old Testament is full of it, and the New.
Reason sanctions it. It is so natural to
think of the world being plastic to the
will of God, that when men cease to
believe in God being able to modify
nature they soon cease to believe in
Him at all. apertence confirms it.
There are few good men but who are
firmly persuaded that God has interfered
with the natural order on their behalf.
Science can prove nothing to the con-
trary. Science not only tells us of the
invariability of law, but she tells us with
equal emphasis of the modificability of
law ; and if the human will can modify
natural law, who shall set the limits of
the Divine interference with the natural
order ¢

We see :

Il. Nature as the executant of a
supernatural will. We see in this
psalm nature as an executant of the
Divine anger. How all the forces of
nature are here arrayed against the
wicked ! Nature is God’s minister to


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMA&





execute wrath upon them that do evil.
It seems sometimes as if nature were
against God, and for sin and sinners ;
but if we look further down we shall see
that nature is on the side of God and
righteousness. Let the wicked remem-
ber that the visible universe is God’s
vast arsenal, and when once He is angry
He can turn all the bright and beautiful
.things of nature into the swift ministers
of death and ruin. We see nature also as
an executant of the Divine grace. There
48 a dark side of nature for the enemies
of God—there is a bright side for the
friends of God. All this storm and
earthquake was in mercy to David.
Child of God, know nature to be thy
friend! We are too apt to look upon
nature as rigid and inexorable, and in
RO Way sensitive to the generous will of
Heaven. In our fear and suffering we
look out upon nature and think how
reckless she is of our sorrowful meods;
we aggravate our sufferings by deeming
nature unsympathetic, as we should
aggravate them by encountering the
face of afoe. Remember, if your purposes
and life are only in perfect accord with


PSALM KUIRZ


God, God is always with you to aid, and
the colossal and apparently immobile
forces of nature are fluttering like
threads of gossamer in delicate sym-
pathy with all His manifestations of
care and help and succour for you.

We see:

Ii. Nature ministering to super.
natural purpose. Not to material, but
to moral and spiritual ends. Remember
the higher ministry of nature. Nature
is really but a mass of means which God
uses for the salvation and sanctification
of His creatures. Heathen fables tell
us of nature being affected by great
military and political events, but God’s
Word shows us nature ministering to
great moral and religious ends, and this
is well worthy of credence. The inferior
universe serves the higher universe. We
may well believe that the sun was
darkened at man’s redemption; that
natural law and phenomena are con-
trolled with a view to man’s moral
education ; that ordinary laws and pro-
cesses are disturbed to secure man’s
immortal salvation,


Tor Bow mw Tox CLoup.


(Verses 16-20.)


The Psalmist in the preceding verses
has shown us the earth rent by earth-
quakes and the heavens blackened by
thunder-clouds, here we see the rainbow
span the horrible tempest—God’s pity
and aid to His afflicted servant. The
rainbow has various colours, and there
are several aspects of God’s government
towards His afflicted people shining out
brightly in this paragraph.

Notice :

L The supremacy of God’s govern-
ment. “He sent from above” (ver. 16).
All was shaken on the earth, all eclipsed
in the sky, but above the firmament
God sits in perfect repose. Above all

the storms and revolutions of earth God
reigns, and reigns with undisturbed
sovereignty. It is a mighty comfort to
the believer to be able to cry, amid wars
and tumults and eclipses: ‘ Hallelujah,


the Lord God omnipotent reigneth.”
Oh! that the people of God would look
in dark days in the right direction }
‘“‘ He sent from above.” We look to
society, or to self; to history, to
posterity ; to earth beneath us, to the
world around us; we look anywhere
instead of looking up. Await salvation
“from above.” In our dark days the
door of hope is a door which opens into
heaven ; let us knock at that door, and
wait the help which is never denied.
“God being enthroned on high, and
dwelling in the heavens, does not
separate Him from His servants on
earth ; it merely exhibits Him in His
exaltation above all the powers of the
world and the abyss; it no more pre-
vents Him from hearing the sighs and
supplications of the oppressed, than
from making known His presence, to
75


PSALM XVIII.





help in gracious condescension to the
needs of men.”—WMoll.

II. The discriminativeness of God’s
action. ‘ He took me, He drew me out
of many waters” (ver. 16). The fright-
ful storm which has just been pictured
sweeping the world seems as if it would
involve the guilty and the innocent in
one common ruin, but we are reminded
that it is not so, In the midst of these
appalling displays the Psalmist was safe.
The Hand that was hurling lightnings
and hailstones and coals of fire, was out-
stretched in the gentle task of helping
the imperilled good. When human
authority seeks to punish, it is frequently
undistinguishing, and strikes the inno-
cent with the guilty. And it often seems
as if the Divine authority were equally
undistinguishing. The great laws which
govern nature, society, and human life,
seem blind and indiscriminating ; but
let us be sure that it is not so, The
Lord knoweth them that are His.”
Fear God, and serve Him with all your
heart, and you shall know that there is
a law which discerns between the evil
and the good. “Thou shalt not be
afraid for the terror by night ; nor for
the arrow that flieth by day ; nor for the
pestilence that walkethyin darkness;
nor for the destruction that wasteth at
noonday. A thousand shall fali at thy
side, and ten thousand at thy right
hand ; but it shall not come nigh thee”
(Psalm xci. 5-8).

It. The tenderness of God’s
methods. “ He drew me out of many
waters.” “There is peculiar beauty in
the word translated draw, which is the
root of the name Moses, and occurs, be-
sides the place before us, only in the
explanation of that name recorded by


HOWILETIC COMMENTARY; PSALMS.





Himself" (Exod. if 10).—Alexander.
In this psalm God is seen surrounded
by awful terrors, but yet He deals with
His servant in great gentleness. He
has thunder, lightning, hailstones, fos
His foes—music, sunbeams, dewdropas,
for His people. ‘“ He drew me.” Softly,
tenderly, does God withdraw His
servants from scenes of peril.

IV. The effectiveness of God’s aid
(ver. 17, 18). The Psalmist was no
match for his foes, They were strong,
and they took advantage of his weaknesa.
“They fell upon me in the day of my
calamity.”—Moll. And in his various
wars David repeatedly sustained partial
defeats. But the Lord was his stay.
“They prevented me tn the day of my
calamity ; te, came on me suddenly,
unawares, when I was unprovided and
helpless, and must have destroyed me
had not God upheld and supported me
when I was in danger of perishing,
God was to the Psalmist for a staf to
support him. What the staff is to one
that is ready to fall, the means of recover-
ing and preserving him ; that was God
to David in the time of his extremity.”
—Dr. Chandler quo. by Spurgeon. Out
enemies may easily be too much for us,
but they cannot prevail against God.
Believer! rest in God. Extremity of
help will come in extremity of need ;
and when you are the weakest, God
shall glorify Himself the most by work-
ing out your uttermost salvation.

V. The bountifulness of God’s grace
(ver. 19). ‘He brought me forth toa
wide place.”—Phillips. If we are faith-
ful to God, our temptations and sorrows
are ever working out for us a more
perfect liberty, a higher being, a greater
weight of glory.


Toe Great SALVATION,
(Verse 16.)


There can be little doubt but that
David in this place is idealising some of
his own experiences; but that eye is very
dim which cannot perceive in the
Psalmist’s language something far beyond
r arenes of his own immediate


temporal danger and rescue. We have
not exhausted the meaning of this
magnificent hymn until we have seen in
it a foreshadowing of the world’s redemp-
tion in Jesus Christ.

Behold ;


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





L A great danger. What is that
danger? A world of sinners on the
brink of hell. The Psalmist pictures
himself surrounded by death and hell,
and altogether helpless in their grasp.
It is a picture of the world, considered
apart from the truth and mercy of God
in Jesus Christ. The race had fallen
under the power of sin, and the whole
earth was filled with wickedness and
wretchedness. Man could not help
himself, could not deliver himself from
the tyranny of the devil. And each
individual sinner feels that his sins have
brought him to the brink of the pit.
Floods of ungodliness are sweeping him
onward to the ocean of wrath. We are
perishing sinners,

Behold :

IL A Divine deliverer. ‘He sent
from above.” Down in a gulf of dark
despair we wretched sinners lay, when
God’s eye pitied us, and His right arm
brought salvation, There was no help
in us. Man has no resource within
himself to cope with the great tide of
sin and wrath. No help around us.
Society cannot save us. No man can
redeem his brother, or give to God a
ransom for him. There was no human
helper, no angelic helper, and so God
Himself becomes our helper. Guilty
man was like a broken ship in a storm,
no haven in view, no friendly sail bear-
ing down to his relief, no lighthouse
star to cheer, no life-boat on the wave,
when God marked his signals of distress,
and out of the opened heaven sent him
a Saviour, even Christ the Lord. “ He
sent from above.” He sent His Word.
The oracles of God. He sent His Son.
May we not say, “ He came from


above”# He sent His Spirit, God


has come down to the scene of woe, and
invites us to make Him our deliverer
Mark, 1. the strength of this Saviour
“He took me.” This expresses the
strength of His grasp. His right hand
doeth valiantly. If our soul is in His
hand, who shall tear us out of it?
Mark, 2. the tenderness of this Saviour.
“He drew me.” As humane men bend
over one who has been rescued from the
river, and apply warmth to the chilly
limbs, and chafe the livid hands, and
pour cordials into the lips, and keep
on hour after hour with their tender
ministries, until the closed eyes open,
and the pallid cheek is tinged with
crimson, and the silent lips break into
the music of speech; so Christ bends
lovingly over sinners plucked from
black depths, and by his longsuffering
and tenderness arouses and perfects in
them a Divine and immortal life,

Behold :

Ill. A complete redemption. “He
drew me out of many waters.” He
gives us redemption from sin, sorrow,
fear, death, hell, Christ is an ark to
save the world, and to save us all from
many sorrows, Noah’s ark floats on
the waters, but sts door was shut. A
thousand eager eyes of drowning men
might behold it, a thousand cries might
be addressed to it, but it gave no
response. For a while, men, women,
children might cling to it, only, however,
to be washed into the awful gulf. But
Christ is an ark, the door of which is
wide open, and every sinking despairing
soul may enter in and be saved. And
as the ark brought Noah in safety to
the new earth; so Christ shall bring
His people in safety “into a large
place.” He shall land them in heaven.


ULTIMATE REASONS.
(Verse 19.)


“He delivered ma, because He de-
Hghted in me,”

We inquire :

I. Why God delivers and honours
men? ‘Because He delighted in me.”
God’s regard to man does not spring, 1.
From the fact that He could not do


without us. He could do without
us. We are not necessary to Him.
“What shall a man profit God?” 2.
Neither is this regard explained by any
claim we might have on God, arising
from the fact that He is our Creator.
By a thousand wilful a ee we


PRALM XVINL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY. PSALMS.





have forfeited any such claim. One of
our writers insists: “If a created being
has no rights which his Creator is bound
to respect, there is an end to all moral
relations between them.” But who does
not feel] that through his sin and folly
he has lost all “rights,” and must cast
himself upon the mercy of God? 3.
Neither does God esteem any man on
the ground of any physical or intel-
lectual quality that he may possess.
The creature’s skill or force, the piercing
wit, the active limb, these are all too
mean delights for God. Apart from
moral excellences they have no charms
in Hiseyes. 4, Neither can this regard
be explained on the ground of any
arbitrary election. We are not to
imagine that God, for some inscrutable
reasons, delights in some and rejects
others. On what grounds, then, does
God delight in men? (1.) On the
ground of faith. This was the position
of the Psalmist. “In Thee have I
trusted.” If we honour God with our
confidence, He will honour us with His
protection. As we trust in God, we
make ourselves dear to God; as we
trust in Him, we have claims upon Him.


(2.) On the ground of moral character.
In ver. 20-27 the Psalmist shows why
God delighted in him. According to
our moral sincerity and circumspection
will God delight in us and bless us
“God deals with men according as He
sees their hearts to be towards Him.
Those who walk before Him in simplicity
and uprightness of heart may expect His
succour.”—Perowne. There is nothing
arbitrary or partial in God; He will
delight in us all, and enrich us with the
uttermost salvation, if we trust Him;
and prove tbe sincerity of our faith by
our obedience. We observe several

II. Practical lessons suggested by
this truth. 1. Let us not perplex our-
selves by imagining any favouritism in
God. Acceptance with God is on broad
grounds, equally open tous all, 2. Let
us remember that we cannot recommend
ourselves to Ged on any grounds of
nature. We are defaulters, and have
lost that moral beauty in which alone
God can delight. 3. It is only by
believing in God’s grace that we can
enjoy that grace. 4. It is only by
moral sincerity and earnestness that we
can retain that grace


Goop Tunes ror Goop PEorPLa
(Verses 20-27.)


In these verses the Psalmist shows
that the love of God for His people is
not a blind and unrighteous predilection,
but that the just and righteous God
loves righteousness. Observe here two
great canons of the Divinerule. First :

I. God deals with us as we deal
with Him. (Ver. 20-25.) “The truth,
which is here enunciated is, that God’s
conduct to man is the reflection of the
relation in which man has placed him-
self to God.”—Delutzsch. David does not
mean in these protestations to lay claim
to perfection and sinlessness, but he
asserts the sincerity of his desire to
please God, and the uprightness of his
conduct before God. “ David here, as
in the last psalm, asserts not his freedom
from sin, but the consciousness of his
own integrity.”—Perowne. And be-
cause he thus sought to recognise God,

(i


and glorify Him—God watched over
him, and blessed him. The destiny
which God prepares for a man is a
reflection of the man’s personal character.
As shadows and echoes represent their
originating substances and sounds ; so
in the discriminating character of God’s
judgments there is a complete response
to personal character. He who honours
God, is honoured by God. 1. Let us
remember that we cannot expect God’s
help except so far as we are pure in
purpose and life, 2. Let us observe
the loftiness of the standard of conduct
which we must observe if we are to
claim Divine patronage. ‘All His
judgments were before me” (ver, 22).
And they were constantly before Him,
“And I did not put away His statutes
from me” (ver. 22). We must not pick
and choose the statutes, but must


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





sbserve them all, even those which try
us the most; and observe them always,
even unto the end. Learn:

1. God deals with us as we deal
with one another. (Ver. 26.) “The
Psalmist, in this and following verses,
intimates that the plan of God’s pro-
vidential conduct to men, is to act
towards them as they act towards each
other. This is an undoubted principle
of His moral government, and ought to
soustitute a strong motive for the exer-
cise of all Christian virtues in the social
relations of life.”"—Phillips. Through-
out the Word of God this truth is
insisted upon. It is recognised in the
Lord’s Prayer: “Forgive us our
trespasses, a8 we forgive them that
trespass against us.” If we are harsh
to our brother, God shall exact from us ;
if we deceive our brother, God shall
permit us to be blinded by strong
delusions ; if we defraud our brother,
God shall spoil us; if we will not
forgive our brother, neither shall our


PSALM XVI,





Sened


heavenly Father forgive us. God
stands behind society, and marks our
integrity or faithlessness in all the social
relations of life, and deals with us
accordingly. Whatsoever a man sowa,
and wieresoever he sows, that shall he
reap. Let us, by the grace of God,
keep clean hands, and sow golden
seeds, and blessed shall the harvest be,
Lessons: 1. There can be no salvation
except through righteousness. On this
ground alone will God bless us on earth ;
on this ground only admit us to heaven
(Rom. ii, 6-9). 2. There can be no
righteousness except through grace,
David does not formally recognise here
this fact, but elsewhere he recognises it
fully, and here he assumes it. God’s
grace originates the lofty righteousness
here spoken of. It is a Divine right
eousness. God’s grace preserves this
righteousness. It keeps us “from our
iniquity.” God’s grace crowns this
righteousness, Giving to it vast re
wards,


Besettina Srxs,
(Verse 23.)


“T kept myself from mine iniquity.”


David certainly means here some
particular sin to which he was most
prone.

Observe ;


I. We are all the subjects of special
weaknesses and temptations. 1. Kach
nation has its besetting sin. Scientific
observers tell us that different races of
men have different kinds of weeds
following in their wake, so that a care-
ful observer can, in travelling, see at
once, by merely noticing the prevailing
weeds, whether Europeans or Asiatics,
Negroes or Indians, have dwelt at
certain places, So each nation has its
peculiar sin. 2. Each age has its be-
setting sin. In the history of morals
we find how various vices have prevailed
‘at various times. Now an age of
cruelty; now of intemperance; now of
superstition; now of scepticism. Has
not our own age its besetting sin? 3.
Each tndividwal has his besetting sin.
John Hunter held that two general


diseases cannot co-exist in the same
individual. It is somewhat this with
man morally. Usually a ma will be
under the influence of some me par-
ticular passion or temptation. All sins
are in us seminally, potentiall, sympa-
thetically, but in some one din.tion we
are specially in danger. This may arise
from our constitution. ‘ ds in the
natural man, though there be all the
faculties, yet some faculties are in some
more lively and vigorous than in others,
some are more witty, some are more
strong, some quick of sight, some have
a ready ear, and others a nimble tongue,
&c. So itis in the old man also; there is
all the power of sin in an unregenerate
man, but in some more dexterous one way
than another.” —Strong quo. by Spurgeon.
Or it may arise from our sttuatwn.
‘‘There are more temptations to some
sins than others, from the different pro-
fessions or courses of life men take upon
themselves. If they follow the court, I
need not tell you what temptations and
79


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY : PSALMB,





snares there are to divers sins, and what
danger there is of falling into them. If
they be listed in the camp, that tempts
them to rapine and violence, neglect of
God’s worship, and profaneness. If they
exercise trading and merchandise, they
meet with greater enticements to lying
and cozening, over-reaching and unjust
dealing ; and the mystery of some trades,
as bad men manage them, is a downright
‘mystery of iniquity.’ If husbandry, to
anxiety about the things of the world, a
distrust of God’s providence, or murmur-
ing againstit. Nay, I could wish in the
most sacred profession of all there might
be an exception made in this particular ;
but Paul tells us that even in his days
‘some preached Christ even of envy
and strife,’ some for filthy lucre only, as
well as some of good will.”—Dove quo.
by Spurgeon.

We proceed :

Il. To make several observations
touching this particular class of sins.
1, These besetting sins are to be con-
quered. We are sometimes ready to
apologise for these sins, We are ready
to regard them as hereditary, incurable.
The Scriptures do not regard any taint
of blood as ineradicable, any passion as
invincible, any temptation as insur-
mountable. The Old Testament says,
“JT kept myself from mine tniquity.”
The New Testament says, “ Lay aside
every weight and the sin which so easily
besets you.” To say that religion will
not strengthen us to master the easily
besetting sin, is to say that it fails
where, and when, we need salvation
most. 2. In the subduing of our be-
setting sin lies the great struggle of life.
Our love to God, our allegiance to Him,
is tested, not by ten commandments, but
rather by one or two of them. ‘Yvhe
question of our moral character is fought
out on some one question. If we con-
quer here, we conquer along the whole
line ; if we fail here, guilty in one point
we are guilty in all The great battle


with the Philistine host is decided by
single combat. Smiting this single sin
the day is ours, we put to flight the
army of the aliens. This sin beneath
our feet, and the crown is on our head.
3. We must estimate our character
according to our relation to the besetting
sin. We sometimes flatteringly estimate
our character by reckoning up the sins
to which we have no inclination. This
is a fatal miscalculation. Is it not a
maxim in mechanics, that a thing is no
stronger than its weakest part? Thia
is as true in morals as in mechanics.
When we seek to estimate our character
let us ask, how do we stand in regard te
our weak points? Are we gaining, or
losing ground there? Never mind the
strong points. If we perpetually fail in
one point let us remember that that is
the true index to our character, and that
a score of untried virtues will not atone
for the one virtue which fails whenever
it is put into the fire.

Observe finally :

The discipline by which the easily
besetting sin 1s to be subdued. 1. We
must seek the grace of God. It is im-
possible for us to cast aside these sins
in our own strength. We must “look
unto Jesus.” We are to be made perfect
by looking at Him, the perfection of
beauty, and ever claiming His power
and grace. 2. We must exert ourselves,
“TI kept myself from mine iniquity.”
“God, indeed, in our first conversion
works upon us as He did upon the earth,
or Adam’s body in paradise, before He
breathed a soul into it and made ita
living creature ; such a power as Christ
put forth on Lazarus in his grave, for
we are ‘dead in trespasses and sins ;’
but yet being living he must walk and
act of himself, the Lord will have us to
co-operate together with Him, for we
are built upon Christ, not as dead, but
as ‘living stonea,’”"—WStrong quo. by
Spurgeon.


Tue Ligut or Lirs.


(Verse 28.)


Here the Psalmist recognises God as,
% The source of his Light. “For
80


Thou givest light to my lamp; Jehovan,
my God, maketh my darkness to be


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PRALM XVITZ.





bright.”——Perowne. In 2 Sam. xxii. 29,
“Thou, O Jehovah, art my lamp.” In
days of deep perplexity, in the presence
of painful problems, God was his coun-
sellor. Blessed are those who seek
light in God! Take your candles to
Him, and He shall Jight them with a
shining lustre, Take your understand-
ing to Him, and He shall make it to
shed pure illuminations ; take your heart
to Him, and He shall make it burn with
heavenly brightness. Light your candles
at the radiant luminary of the Spirit,
the Word, the Throne.

IL The source of his joy. ‘“ Light
is often in Scripture expressive of joy
or comfort,” for “truly the light is
sweet, and a pleasant thing it is for the
eyes to behold the sun” (Eccles. xi. 7 ;
Ps. xcvii. 11; xcii. 4). By a natural
opposition, as light is expressive of joy
and comfort ; so is darkness, of sorrow
and misery, The Psalmist, however,
speaks in this place of artificial light,
a “candle” or ‘lamp ;” which has been
supposed to be illustrated by the custom
prevailing in Egypt, of never suffering
their houses to be without lights, but
burning amps even through the night,
so that the poorest people would rather
retrench part of their food than neglect
it.”—Bishop Mant. “ The lamps lighted
in the house is the image at once of
prosperity and continuance of life and
happiness.” —Perowne. Amid the dark-
ness which everywhere presses upon us,
God is the lamp of His people, the
source of their comfort and gladness.”
A lamp or candle in the house is a
common Hebrew figure for prosperity,
and its extinction for distress. See
Job xviii. 5,6; xxi. 17; Prov. xxiv.
20.”—Alexander. And when God de-
serts a man, all the light of life is gone.

IIL The source of his glory. David
himself was called the lamp of Israel


(1 Kings xi. 36, &c.) He was its light
and its glory. And God was David’s
light and glory. ‘“ David’s life and
dominion, as the covenant king, is the
lamp which God’s favour has lighted for
the well-being of Israel, and His power
will not allow this lamp (2 Sam. xxi.
17) to be quenched.”—Delatzsch. Bless-
ed are all those who find in God their
life and glory. They want nothing
more. He fills them with joy; He
crowns them with beauty and glory. 1.
God is a full Light. All other lighta
are partial and dim. HeisaSun; He
giveth grace and glory, &c. Fulness of
light, felicity, honour, in fellowship with
Him. He is everything. “The sun
shall be no more thy light by day;
neither for brightness shall the moon
give light unto thee; but the Lord shall
be unto thee an everlasting light, and
thy God thy glory” (Isa, lx. 19). 2.
God is a ¢rue Light. Nothing but the
pure white light. “God is light, and
in Him there is no darkness at all.”
The light He imparts never leads
astray ; the joy He gives has no sorrow
added to it; the honour and glory He
gives to His children has no abatement
or stain, they are altogether kings. 3.
God is a safe Light. Nothing can ex-
tinguish the central orb. And if we
put our trust in God, if we draw the
supplies of life from Him, nothing can
extinguish our joy and hope. We see
how David’s life and joy and glory were
often threatened with total extinction,
but the hand of God preserved him, the
very darkness of death was lit again into
day. 4. God is an everlasting light.
‘Thy sun shall no more go down,
neither shall thy moon withdraw itself :
for the Lord shall be thine everlasting
light, and the days of thy mourning shal
be ended” (Isa, lx. 20),


Fouii Conquest.
(Verses 29-34.)


In these verses wa have the Psalmist
axulting as “more than a conqueror.”
Observe :
L The fulness of his victory (ver.
¥


29). 1. He has vanquished a host
of enemies. A “troop.” 2. He has
utterly vanquished them. “ Through a
troop.” Divided them, broken them


81


PAALW XVIKL,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMS.





up, scattered them. 3. He has done it
easily, “I have rwn through a troop.”
I “leaped over a wall.” He did not
secretly undermine it, or painfully batter
it, or just succeed in scaling it, he leaped
over it. All enemies, all obstructions,
have been triumphantly vanquished.

II. The source of his victory (ver.
29-34). “By thee” (ver. 29). “In
thee, and tn my God, t.e., in intimate
union with Him and possession of Him,
a much stronger sense than that of mere
assistance (by thee), which, however, is
included."——Alexwander. 1. The Psalm-
ist trusted in God. He identified him-
self with God (ver. 30). He entertained
a lofty sense of God’s truth, and faith-
fulness, and power. 2. The Psalmist
trusted in God alone (ver. 31). God is
a rock, a ground of confidence that cannot
be shaken, and God alone is such a rock.
And 3. God gave him the victory. God
does all (ver. 32). ‘‘ Perfect, t.¢., ab-
solutely smooth, free from stumblings
and errors, leading straight forward to
a divine goal.”— Delttzsch. Strength in
both its beginning and continuance is of
God. He “‘girds” with strength at
the outset and maketh the whole “ way
perfect ” (ver. 33). God establishes his
feet. Enables him to stand where it
seemed impossible to find footing; to
scale heights which seemed utterly im-
practicable (ver. 34). God gave him
wisdom and prowess to defeat his foes.
“Tt is not the bow of brass which has
been David’s protection, but Jehovah’s
shield covered him; Jehovah’s right
hand held him up; Jehovah’s wonder-
ful condescension made him great;
Jehovah made room for him to stand,


and subdue those that rose up against
him.”— Perowne.

Lessons :

1. We shall gain the victory of life by
allying ourselves with God. All life is
a warfare to us, as it was to David,
and we shall achieve the victory only
in Divine strength. In the natural
world we see how feeble men are whilst
they use only their own strength, their
own eyes, hands, feet. It is when they
learn how to avail themselves of God’s
power that they accomplish marvels.
The human hand is feeble, but it uses
God’s power, and the dynamite rends
asunder the rocks, the steam drives the
mighty ship or thundering wheels of
mills, the electric spark tells our wishes
on the other side of the world. We are
slow, feeble, local, considered in our-
selves ; but when science has taught us
to avail ourselves of God’s power, we dare
winds and seas and mountains. So in
the moral world. We are feeble indeed
in ourselves, we cannot do the things
that we would; but when we listen to
revelation, and by thought, and faith,
and prayer, lay hold of God’s strength,
we can do all things. 2. If we aliy our-
selves with God’s strength, the victory of
life shall be most complete and brilliant.
We shall more than prevail. The “high
places” of Christian experience shall be
reached; the “high places” of the
world, the most difficult undertakings
of Christian zeal, shall be proudly com-
passed ; the “high places” of Christian
hope shall be climbed, and we shall
shout the song of victory on those table-
lands, of which God Himself is sun and
moon,


Gop's SHIELD.
(Verse 35.)


“Thou hast also given me the shield
of thy salvation.”

This ‘‘shield ” indicates :

I. The availableness of God’s help.
The fortress can only shelter within its
precincts, but the shield is with the
warrior wherever he may go. Whatever
may be our lot, however singular and
exposed, God is with us to uphold and

82


save. You may have to leave the
fortress of a sweet pure home, and go
into the midst of gay and worldly
society, the “shield” goes with yon;
you may have to leave the fortress of a
moral neighbourhood, to dwell amid the
tents of wickedness, the shield goes with
you; you are compelled to leave the
fortress of a Christian Church and dwel-


~~ MILETIO OOMMENTARY: PSALMS,


PSALM XVOL





where you are cut off from Christian
privileges and fellowship, the shield goes
with you; you are compelled to leave
the fortress of a Christian country to
dwell in heathenish lands, the shield
goes with you. In all places you may
realise God's aid. Your shield is ever
with you.

This shield indicates :

Ii The many-sidedness of God’s
protecting love. The great round
shield preserves the warrior from top to
toe. So the loving hand of God shelters
our whole personality, and all our
interests. Be sure that Satan would
seek to wound us in the eye, to darken
our understanding; in the heart, to
make us faint; in the knee, to injure
our devoutness; but God’s protecting
love shelters us altogether. Our happi-
ness, character, circumstances; in life,
in death, in eternity.

The shield indicates :

Ill. The invincibility of God’s
strength. It is the shield of “salva-
tion.” Whoever places himself in the
hands of God is safe, If we meet evil
in our own strength we shall be over-
eome, but confide in this Divine armour,
and you come out of life’s battle with-
out a scratch. Does Satan tempt you to
error? Confront him as the Saviour
did, with God’s Word ; let ‘ His truth
be thy shield and buckler.” Are you
tempted to sin? Be strong in the
truth, and love, and righteousness of


God, inwrought by the Holy Spirit inte
your soul. This shield quenches every
fiery dart.

Lessons :

1. Let the believer who has triumphed
in life’s battles give glory to his Shield.
David had escaped the insidious tempta-
tion to self-glory, and all his own
strength and prowess he humbly as-
cribed to God, Let us remember that
God helps us, not only outwardly by
His providence, but inwardly also by a
thousand untracked influences, therefore
all the praise is His. 2. Let the be-
liever ever hold fast that Shield. Never
be without it. Ever living in close
communion with God. Never have it
to look for. 3. Let those who have
been worsted in life’s conflicts learn
to put their trust in God. Baffled,
wounded, humbled, turn from your poor
broken self to the immortal love and
strength of a Divine Saviour.

**Q send me not away ! for I would drink,
E’en I, the weakest, at the fount of life;
Chide not my steps, that venture near the


brink,
Weary and fainting from the deadly strife,


** Went I not forth undaunted and alone,
Strong in the majesty of human might?
Lo! I return, all wounded and forlorn,
My dream of glory lost in shades of night.


‘¢ Was I not guided for the battle-field ?

Bore I not helm of pride and glittering
sword ! :
Behold the fragments of my broken shield,
And lend to me thy heavenly armour,

Lord!”


Divine GenTLENESS.


(Verse 35.)
“Thy gentleness hath made me _ tion; makes its possessor happy; it alone
great.” abides,
Notice : Notice :


I. The greatness of the good.
“Hath made me great.” David was
great politically, intellectually, but this
greatness must be understood as moral.
The Psalmist humbly, but exultingly,
recognises the fact that the grace of
God had ennobled his nature, crowned
him with spiritual glory and honour,
The end of religion is to make men
great. And moral greatness is true
greatness. It alone excites true admira-


IL The gracious discipline through
which this greatness is realised. ‘‘ Thy
gentleness hath made me great.” We
are discrowned kings, and through
gentleness God seeks to put the diadem
on our head again. Many believe only
in force and terror as restorative factors,
but if we look around we see on every
side the triumphs of gentleness. It is
so in nature, Power, amazing power is


on every hand, yet acting oe softly ;
8.


PSALM XVIII.





and because it acts so softly filling the
landscapes with beauty and fruitfulness,
Thus it isin art, Gentleness is every-
thing. And this it is in society. In
the physician, the parent, the tutor, you
see the grand results of gentleness,
God, the most powerful Being in the
universe, is also the most gentle, and
through gentleness seeks to raise his
fallen children to true and lasting great-
ness.

Mark this first :

1. In God’s dealing with us in our
sinful state. The aspect of God toa
guilty world is altogether kind and in-
viting. The aspect of the Divine Pro-
vidence. “He maketh his sun,” &c.
Of the Divine Truth. Great and gra-
cious promises to sinners are on every
page of God’s Word. Of the Divine
Spirit. The spirit of God is ever act-
ing in the dark heart of sinners—seek-
ing to inspire, to soften, to save. In-
finite love struggles with human perver-
sity, and so we see our way back again
to the skies. 2. God’s dealings with us
tn our penitential state. Our first ap-
proaches to God are usually full of
imperfection, and the best penitent
needs large indulgence. Our motives
imperfect ; our methods “faulty; our
faith feeble. Our tears are not pure;
our sackcloth equivocal. God grants us
this indulgence. We are often rough
with penitents; but at a thousand im-
perfections God winks, and through this
gentleness cheers on the penitent to
greater things, ‘A bruised reed,” &c.
3. God’s dealings with us in our ac-
cepted state. We see this (1.) Jn what
He accepts from us, Every Christian
man has the full and clear conviction that
he is never all that he ought to be—his
actual life is painfully below his ideal


HOUWILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





life. And yet we have the conviction
equally full and clear, that although we,
and our works, are far from perfection,
yet.God accepts us and them ; and it is
this truth which ever encourages us on-
wards to loftier attainments and experi-
ences. (2.) Jn what He does with us.
There is gentleness in all the discipline
of life. ‘“ He does nut permit us to be
tried above what we are able to bear.”

Our afflictions may often seem severe,
but they are the expression of the
Divine pitifulness. Indeed many com.
mentators translate the text: ‘“ Thy
afflictions have made me great,” “ Thy
humbling, thy chastening, thy disci-
plining.” — Phallips. “Even Thine
afflicting hand tendeth to make me
great."—F'rench, ‘Thy loving correc-
tion.” —Prayer Book. 4. God’s deal-
ing with us in our backsliding states.
How the Redeemer brought back back-
sliding Peter to repentance and life!
(Isa. liv. 7, 8.) Stnner, do not despise
this gentleness. You will not be driven
to heaven—will you be drawn? Be-
liever, economise all the fine influences


of life. ‘I will guide thee with mine
eye.” “T will be as the dew unto
Israel.” Improve all the delicate im-


pulses and attractions of the Divine
world which lies about you, and ever
acts upon you. Let us pray for greater
sensitiveness to the love of God; and
just as the silver moon, with its soft
charm, draws the ocean waters round the
globe, until they have glassed the stars
of every sky, and sung their anthems on
every shore ; 80 shall the good Spirit of
God master the wild elements of our
nature, and lead us on, and lead us out,
until we have seen all God’s glory, and
shown forth all His praise.


Toe Morarity or PRAYER,
(Verse 41.)


I. Prayer must be offered in a right
cause,

Prayer offered in a wrong cause can
never be availing. In the preceding
verses we see Providence helping a
righteous cause. The Psalmist’s rela-

84


tion to God was not a selfish contract
for help, as between the heathen and
his idol—the Psalmist sympathised with
God’s rights and designs. God scatters
many prayers in the air, because they
are offered in a purely se/jish cause.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMB,





Many prayers also are rejected because
offered in a wicked cause. “ Prayer is
so notable a weapon that even the
wicked will take to it in their fits of
desperation, Bad men have appealed
to God against God’s own servants, but
all in vain ; the kingdom of heaven is
not divided, and God never succours his
foes at the expense of his friends. There
are prayers to God which are no better
than blasphemy, which bring no com-
fortable reply, but rather provoke the
Lord to greater wrath.”— Spurgeon.

IL Prayer must be offered in a
right spirit.

1. The spirit of penttence. Sorrow
for past sins—but there was none of
that in these heathen. The spirit of
repentance is necessary to availing
prayer, and if that spirit is wanting, our
prayers are abomination. ‘“ When ye
spread forth your hands, I will hide
mine eyes from you; yea, when ye
make many prayers, I will not hear:
your hands are full of blood. Wash
you, make you clean; put away the
evil of your doings from before mine
eyes ; cease to do evil ; learn to do well.”
(Isa. i. 15, 16.) 2. The spirit of right-
eousness. “The cry extorted in terror,
and not coming from an upright heart
(ver. 24, &c.), is not heard. See op-
posite, ver. 6,”—Perowne. We must
live in the love and practice of good-
ness. ‘‘ The prayer of a righteous man
availeth much.” “Lifting up holy
hands.” Remember the morality of
prayer, and remember it in your daily
doings. You are either building up, or


POALN XVIEi,





cutting the sinews of your future
prayers, by your present conduct.
Righteousness is necessary to prayer—
not as a channel of merit for our
prayers up to God, but as a plane of
moral possibility in our lives down
which God’s answer can come back to
us. Let us be severe in the purity of
our thought and life, or we shall soon
have to utter the lament of the poet:


“ God sends me back my prayers, as a father
Returns unop’ed the letters of a son
Who hath dishonoured him.”


3. The spirit of confidence. The spirit
of these heathen was that of terror and
despair. ‘‘As nature prompteth men
in an extremity to look up for help;
but because it is but the prayer of the
flesh for ease, and not of the spirit for
grace, and a good use of calamities, and
not but in extreme despair of help else-
where, therefore God hears them not.
In Samuel it is, ‘They looked, but
there was none to save them;’ g.d. If
they could have made any other shift,
God should never have heard of them.”
—Trapp. Prayer must be the language
of confidence.

Til. Prayer must be offered at a
right time. They cried first to their
own gods, and when there was none to
answer, then they cried to Israel’s God.
They prayed too late. Men often do.
There is an accepted time in which God
will hear prayer, and it is our duty not
to let that time pass. (Prov. i, 24-33;
John viii, 21; Luke xvi. 24; Rev.
vi. 16.)


Vicorosy FoR CHRIST AND VICTORY IN CuRIst.
(Verses 37-50.)


We have here a picture,

I. Of Christ’s victory over His foes.

“This Psalm looks beyond David.
David and David’s rule over the na-
tions are but a type and image of
‘Christ, and of that spiritual kingdom
which He came to establish.” —Perowne.
We have suggested here, 1. The com-
pleteness of Christ's victory (ver. 37-42).
All Christ’s enemies are to be “ put un-
der His feet.” And all of them com-


pletely under His feet. Many teachers,
systems, institutions, which are proud
enough now in their opposition to
Christ, will be very low before Christ
has done with them. The victories of
the Church are perpetually stopping at
certain points, and complete and per-
manent triumph seems scarcely ever
attained. But let us not be discour-
aged ; Christ shall ride on till the last
foe has fallen, 2 The rapidity of
85


FeaL¥ XL


HOMILETIOC COMMENTARY: P8ALMA





Christ's march. Up to a certain point
David had to fight with varying for-
tune, but a time came when fightin

was no longer necessary ; & panic seize

the hearts of the foe, and they melted
away. Subsequent victories were won
by the moral influence of the first vic-
tories. May it not be thus with the
progress of Messiah’s kingdom? Slowly
has that kingdom seemed to prevail up
to now ; but, these preliminary struggles
won, may not the triumphs of the Gos-
pel be far more multiplied and swift?
Satan shall “ fall as lightning.” 3. The
universality of Christ's reign (ver. 43,
49). David ruling over Israel and
over the heathen tribes, was a fore-
shadowing of Christ exalted over all the
lands. Blessed are all those who sub
mit to Christ. His conquest means
freedom and life and glory to all who
accept it, Alas! for those who will
not have this man to rule over them.


Man or multitude, king or kingdom,
whatever sets itself against the truth as
it is in Jesus, must be broken.

Observe:

IL The saint’s victory in Christ.
We may weil see in David’s triumph
over his foes a picture of that spiritual
triumph which Christ ensures to all his
people. 1. Do not be content until all
your sins are overcome. 2. Until all
your sins are witerly vanquished. ‘ Beat
them small as the dust before the wind.”
8. Until you have destroyed them for
ever. Fight, until God crown you king
to all eternity. (1.) Fight in Christ. Be
sure of that. See that He girds you,
leads you, saves you. (2.) Pat forth all
personal effort. David did not leave
invisible powers to fight for him, but
threw himself also into the fight. (3.)


Give God the glory of every victory (ver.
49, 50).


PSALM XIX,


INTRODUCTION.


** This psalm instructa ita,meaders in the glory and goodness of God ; first, by directing their
zontemplation to the structure of the heavens, to the course of the sun, and to the kindly
influences of its light and heat upon the earth; secondly, by inviting their attention to the
revealed law, which is more especially adapted to impress them with a sense of God's superin-
tending care, and to increase their understanding and knowledge of the Divine power and will,
The psalm, therefore, divides itself into two parts; the first, extending to the 8th verse; and
the second, comprising the remainder.” — Phillips.


Natural THEOLOGY.
(Verses 1-7.)


The Psalmist here represents the
universe as a grand cathedral in which
the sun is the great preacher, ever de-
claring the glory of the Creator.

We notice:

I. The subject of the revelation.
“ The heavens declare the glory of God.”
“The contemplation of the glory of
nature must not lead to the deification
of nature; it should lead up beyond
the entire world, and beyond all the
heavens, to the knowledge of the glory
of God mirrored therein, and excite to
the adoration of the Almighty Creator
declaring Himself therein. The ex-

86


panse of the heavens which cannot at all
be surveyed by man, has yet received
its lumtts from Him who is alone Infinite
and Almighty. Even the sun, which is
worshipped by so many nations as the
king of heaven, receives the measure of
its motion, and the revolution of its
course from the same hand, whose govern-
ment and work disclose themselves in all
things as by the hand of a Master, whom
all His works praise.” —Moll, We must
not stop with nature, but see in her
forces and glories the signs of a Divine
existence and love. We must not survey
the heavens, as some do, in a coarse


£


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; PSALMS.


PALM ETE,





atilitarian spirit. The heavens reflect
the Divine glory in their own glory.
The colours in the heavens bear no dis-
coverable relation to the utilitarian ends
of light, they are a testimony to God's
own love of beauty ; incidental colours
dashed into the creation without any
direct bearing upon the known functions
fulfilled by light; dashed in to tell us
that God loves beauty, that He is full
of it, and that these things are His own
dim reflections, Nature declares the
wisdom, power, love, and faithfulness of
God. Some unbelieving men have
dared to find fault with the works of
God. One of these recently and blas-
phemously spoke of creation as a
“plundering contrivance.” But how
poor are the grandest works of man
when compared with the works of God!
When the disturbed fairies left the
palace they were building incomplete,
the legend tells us that no architects or
painters could be found to complete the
edifice, such was the wondrous beauty of
spiritual workmanship ; but if God had
left any portion of the universe incom-
plete, which of our critics would have
finished it? Ah! we cannot rival the
magnificent proportions, the exquisite


balancings, the splendid hues, the
perennial freshness and _ glory of
creation.

Ii. The characteristics of the
revelation. Mark 1. Its fulness.
“Uttereth speech.” “Pours forth
speech.”— Kay. It streams forth as


from an overflowing spring, is the sense
of the original. There are abundant
evidences of God’s power and glory.
2. Its constancy and perpetuity. The
heavens are declaring—always declaring.
“Day unto day,” de. “The idea of
perpetuity is here. The words of this
discourse of praise are carried forward
in an uninterrupted line of transmis-
sion.” —Delttasch. 3, Its variety. Day
and night, with their various phenomena.
4. Its silence. (Ver. 3.) Mark the un-
_ obtrusiveness of nature’s deeper teach-
ings. “ Their ‘voice is not heard,’ lit.
‘is inaudible.’ They have a language,
but not one that can be classed with any
of the dialects of earth. They have a
voice, but one that speaks not to the


ear, but to the devout and understand-
ing heart.”—Perowne. ‘The sense of
the whole passage is this : that although
the heavens are not endued with the
power of human speech, yet the instruc-
tion which they convey is not less de-
finite ; the lessons which they teach are
not, on that account, less clear and dis-
tinct to the intelligent and pious student
of nature. The number and stupendous
magnitude of the heavenly bodies ; the
sun which governs the day ; the moon
and stars, which render to man such
important service by night; the clouds
gathering water, which descends and re-
freshes the earth; the thunder and
lightning, and the elements ; all these
preach to us as intelligibly as if they ad-
dressed us in our own language ; and not
only to us, but to all nations ; the great-
ness and wisdom, the mercy and loving-
kindness of Jehovah.” —Phillips.


“The heavens articulately shine,
And speak their Architect Divine,”


If we will know God in nature, we
must have a seeing eye, and a hearing
ear. “‘ Holy silence itself is a speech,
provided there be the ear to hear it.”—
Tholuck. 5. Its universality (ver. 4-7).
“Their line,” &c, Their measuring line
extends to the confines of the earth.
The glorious sun declares the glory of
God all over the earth.

Ifl. The importance of this revela.
tion. Some Christians speak de-
preciatingly of nature, but it is a mis-
take, The Psalmist in this place declares
the harmony of creation with the moral
law. ‘The object of the psalm is not
to contrast the moral and material
revelations, but rather to identify their
author and their subject. The doc-
trinal sum of the whole composition
is, that the same God who reared the
frame of nature is the giver of a law,
and that this law is in all respects
worthy of its author.”—Alexander.
The first part of the psalm treats of
God in visible nature, the second, of
God in moral law ; and these two great
ideas are ever needed to balance each
other. If we think of God in nature
only, and forget God as revealed in
moral law, we glide into rage

8


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





The most perfectly organised and com-
manding form of pantheism the world
has ever seen (that of India), was grow-
ing up at the very moment David wrote,
from this one-sidedness of view: the
lights, the clouds, the winds of heaven,
all manifestations of God, were being
substituted for the moral essence of
God itself, and becoming separate gods.
On the other hail, contemplation of
God as revealed in moral law, and forget-
fulness of Him as revealed in nature, is
apt to produce a narrow, cramped, and
degenerate type of religion such as the
Jews presented in their darkest and most
exclusive moods. The two ideas will
always be needed, the one to counter-
poise the other; and David ever ex-
presses the wisest and most far-reaching
instincts of inspiration in putting them
side by side.

IV. The limitation of this revela-
tion.

As Lord Bacon says: ‘‘ The heavens
indeed tell of the glory of God, but not
of His will, according to which the poet
prays to be pardoned and sanctified.”
—Delitzsch. Lord Bacon’s “ Prayer -”
“‘T have delighted in the brightness of
Thy temple. Thy creatures have been
my books; but Thy Scriptures much
more. Ihave sought Thee in the courts,
fields, and gardens; I have found thee
in Thy temples.” Fallen man needs the
truth of God bringing home to him, with
@ clearness that nature cannot accom-


plish, And we need many truths of


which nature knows nothing. % Phere
is this great difference between God's
book of nature and His book of grace.
The one, splendid and glorious as its
Almighty Maker, was formed for man
in innocency, and is imperfectly adapted
to a fallen state ; the other is suited to
a corrupt nature, and, telling of mercy,
addresses itself to its wants, and speaks
with a Divine power which refuses to
be silenced or passed by.” —Ryland.

Lessons :

1. We need never fear that the true
religion of nature will lead us away
from God.

2. The believer in God alone appre-
hends the highest glory and significance
of nature. ‘None save a believer can
rightly meditate on the works of God.
Worldly men may, and do, understand
and admire the wonderful works of God;
the lover of science can truly estimate
the wisdom and the beauty which per-
vade all nature ; who else, indeed, can so
well do it? But unassisted, man rests
there ; his thoughts go no further. It
is ‘by faith that we understand that the
worlds were framed by the word of
God, so that things which are seen were
not made of things which do appear ;’
and thus the mind is led from nature up
to nature’s God.”— Ryland.

3. The believer finding deep joy in
the workmanship of God, finds full
satisfaction only in turning to that
moral law which is the revelation of
God’s nature.





THe Sout-Restrorme Powrr or Law.
(Verse 7.)


“‘ The law of the Lord is perfect, con-
verting the soul.” “The same Almighty
Hand which had given the sun his light-
giving, life-sustaining power in the
physical world, had provided life and
light also for the spiritual world.”—
Kay.

Mark:

I. The attribute of the law. It is
“perfect.” The law of God, the moral
law, as given in the whole of the Scrip-
tures, is perfect, t.¢., free from all defect
or blemish. It is spotless, 1. It is the
perfect transeript of the glory of God.

8&


It is the exact expression of God’s moral
nature. The earth is a reflection of
God’s metaphysical glory—it tells us
of His eternal power and Godhead ; but
the revelation of God’s will in moral
law is the revelation of His highest
nature and glory. As such a revelation
it is “perfect.” It is not mixed and
marred like the words of men; it isa
stainless mirror reflecting the sublime
holiness of the deity. It is the picture
of God drawn by His own hand. It is
“light, and in it is no darkness at all.”


2. It is the perfect theory of the good of


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


PSALM XIX.





man, “The divine law is called ‘ per-
fect,’ t.e., spotless and harmless, as being
absolutely well-meaning, and altogether
directed towards the wellbeing of man.”
—Delitzsch.

Through the disorder of our nature
we regard moral law as our great
enemy, as that which stands in the way
of our freedom and our joy, but really
it presents us with the grand secret of
living and immortal good.

II. The effect of the law. ‘“Con-
verting the soul.” Paul tells us in the
Romans how the law condemns, how it
threatens, how it kills. And this is the
effect of the law as considered in itself.
But we must remember that when the
Psalmist is speaking here of the law, he
comprehends in it the promises of God,
and regards it in connection with the
great system of sacrifices. The evangeli-
cal idea is included in the views of law
which he gives us in this psalm. “If
the law is separated from the hope of
forgiveness and the Spirit of Christ, it


is so far from the sweetness of honey,
that it rather kills poor souls by its
bitterness.” — Calvin. Thus under-
stood, the law “revives the soul.” 1.
It brings back the soul to God. “It
calls it back from its wanderings by
reminding it of its ingratitude, by setting
before it its high destiny, by bringing it
to its true Shepherd and Guardian,”—
Perowne. Having restored the soul to
God, 2. The law strengthens and per-
fects wu. The law harmonises, vivifies,
strengthens, rejoices, the whole moral
man. “It gives the same support to
the mind that food does to the body
when exhausted (Lam. i. 11. See also
Ps, xxiii. 3; Prov. xxv. 13),”— French.
“The word here translated ‘restoring’
is used of restoring from disorder and
decay (Ps. Ixxx. 19), from sorrow and
affliction (Ruth iv. 15), from death (1
Kings xvii. 21, 22)."—Kay. The per-
fect law makes those who receive it
faultless,


‘Tye LicgHt-Givinc Powzr or THe Law,
(Ver, iq 7.)


“The testimony of the Lord is
sure, making wise the simple.” Ob-
serve :

I The infallibility of the law.
“The testimony of the Lord is sure.”
“ Testimony, t.e. revealed will. Pro-
bably the two tables of the testemony,
containing the decalogue, are here
especially referred to."—French. But
we must understand the moral law as a
whole. This law is sure, or, true. It
is true, therefore, sure. “It is raised
above all doubt in its declarations, and
verifying itself in its threatenings and
promises.” —Delitzsch. We want a doc-
trine that is infallible ; speculative and
unverified teaching we feel to be un-
trustworthy and powerless. 1. We can-
not believe in the infallibility of the

‘Church, One Pope contradicts another ;
the same Pope is inconsistent with him-
self. Neither, 2. In the infallibility of
philosophers. The faith of one genera-
tion of thinkers is laughed at by the
next. Neither, 3. In the infallibility of


ourselves, of our personal opinions and
convictions arrived at outside revelation.
There is no infallible guide but the
moral law declared on Sinai and de-
veloped in Holy Writ. We must not
live according to the maxims of men,
neither must we make intuitions and in-
ward impressions our rule of action, but
prayerfully seek light on tke holy
oracles, and God will not permit us to
wander into false ways.

II. The subjects of its illumination.
“Making wise the simple” ‘The
simple, lit. ‘the open,’ not here ‘the
foolish’ as often in Proverbs, but he
who is ready to become a fool, that he
may be wise, who has the true child-
like spirit (Matt. xi. 25 ; 1 Cor. i. 27),
which best fits him to become a dis-
ciple in the school of God.”—Perowne.
1. We must feel our need of guidance.
2. We must be sincere and open in our
search for instruction. 3. We must be
fully prepared to obey the light as it is


given.
i)


PSALM XIX,


HOMILETIC COMMEN?PARY: PSALMS,





Tas Joy-crvina Power or tHE Law.
(Verse 8.)


“The statutes of the Lord are right,
rejoicing the heart.”


lf our moral life attain to complete- .


ness, we shall observe in it three stages
in relation to the law of God.

I. The period of rebellion against
the law.

In our original, natural state, we fret
against God’s commandments. There is
a twofold reason for this.

1. We rebel against the law because it
denies us certain grattfications which we
covet, Our irregular desires lead us to
covet what the law denies. But,

2. We rebel against the law chiefly
because it is the law. We dislike the
law because it is the will of another
asserting itself above our will. We
resent the law not only because it some-
times comes between our passion and its
gratification, but because of its dogmat-
ism. Our will shall be supreme; we
will be our own law. The “carnal
mind is enmity against God, for it is not
subject to the law of God, neither, in-
deed, can be.”

This is life’s first stage» Law is a
tyranny we resent. Next comes,

II. The period of submission to the
law.

We come to the conviction that it is
better to submit than to rebel; we cease
to be God's enemies, and become His
servants. We painfully keep the law,
but cannot be said to love it. There is
a constant friction. Then comes,

III. The period of joy in the law.

In ancient times laws were put into
verse, and there comes a period, if we
live rightly, when God’s laws become
poetry to us,—the statute becomes a
song. Holiness becomes beauty to the
eye, sweetness to the taste, music to the


ear. God's law, the grand expression of
God’s nature, becomes the great object of
our love and desire! “I delight to do
Thy will, O God.” Philosophers rejoice
in natural law,—they are never weary of
celebrating the glorious reign of law,
and to discover law and extol it, is con-
sidered the highest intellectual triumph.
But to admire the moral law, the law
which denies so much that we like, and
enjoins so much that we do not like,
this is, indeed, the triumph of life. If
the statutes of the Lord are to rejoice
our heart, (1.) We must know them
better. The more clearly we perceive
the nature ‘of the Divine law, the more
we approve of it, “Open Thou mine
eyes that I may see wonderful things
out of Thy law.” (2.) We must grow
in love. A growing love turns law into
music. What is painful to dry reason,
the heart makes light. (3.) We must
be obedient. Every act of obedience
makes the next act more easy, until at
last what was forced and painful becomes
instinctive and delightful

Lessons ;

1. In keeping the law of God, we find
true delight. ‘The statutes of the Lerd
are right.” How fatal such a severe,
inexorable, unyielding law to happiness!
No; to keep the law of God, which is
given in all its fulness in Jesus Christ,
is the secret of sublime coutent, Let
believers not rest until they realise this
high condition. We praise God because
He is good ; but not enough because He
is righteous, We obey the law because
it is safe; but do not sufficiently find
liberty and joy in it, 2. There is no
real satisfaction except in keeping the
statutes of God.


Tae Puriryine Power or THE Law.
(Verse 8.)


“The commandment of the Lord is
The idea


pure, enlightening the eyes.”
here ia that the spotless law imparts to
90


us its Divine quality, and thus fills the
soul with vision and joy. Inquire,
L How the law makes us pure? It


;


/ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM XIX.





does this—l. By setting before us a
pure ideal, It brings all heaven before
our eyes, and there is something im-
pulsive in the very spectacle of perfec-
tion. 2. By awakening in our soul
passionate desires for purity. 3. By
strengthening us to reach the highest
planes of life. Show,

II. How this purity is the source of
spiritual strength, joy, and vision. 1.
Strength. ‘ There is an allusion here to
the dimness of the eyes produced by
extreme weakness and approaching
death, recovery from which is figura-


tively represented as an enlightening
of the eyes.”"—Alexander. Sin and
corruption mean weakness, but the
truth of God in Christ brings to the
soul newness of life. Purity is another
word for power, 2. Joy. Dimness of
eyes means sorrow; enlightening the
eyes means the return of gladness,
Impurity means disorder and misery;
purity means harmony and brightness.
3. Viston. Our bewilderments spring
from our passions. Purity is vision,
“The pure in heart shall see God.”


THe ABSOLUTE PERFECTION OF THE LAW.
(Verses 9-11.)


Consider :

I. The incomparable excellence of
the law as considered in itself (ver. 9).
1. The purity of the law. “ The fear of
the Lord is clean.” The commandments
which teach the fear of the Lord are
without any admixture of error or un-
righteousness, ‘The judgments of the
Lord are true and righteous altogether.”
(1.) The moral law as contained in the
Scriptures contains no false principle of
conduct or action. (2.) The moral law
as given in the Scriptures is no lower
form of morality for an imperfect civilisa-
tion, but the absolute law for the highest
creatures and the highest worlds, (3.)
The moral law is not merely correct in
the main, but all and every of its special
requirements are just and righteous.
2. The stability of the law. “ Endur-
ing for ever.” It is changeless and
everlasting. The moral law continues.
The ceremonial law was abrogated—it
served its purpose, and ceased to be; civil
law is susceptible to continual modifica
tions ; natural law will be changed, for
the sun and sky and planets shall be
dissolved in fire ; but moral law abides
firm as the throne of God. “ Not one
jot or tittle of it shall perish.”

II. The incomparable excellence of
the law considered in its relation to
those who keep it. 1. Intedlectually
considered it is of supreme excellence.
‘More to be desired are they than gold,
yea, than much fine gold.” This seema


to point te the mental appreciation of
the truth. More than gold, than fine
gold, than much fine gold. They will
do that for us which gold cannot do, 2,
Emotionally it is. ‘Sweeter also than
honey and the honeycomb.” Experi-
mentally it is unutterably grateful, filling
the soul with sweetness. Sweeter than
honey and the droppings of the comb.
More grateful than all the pleasures of
sense, ‘‘ What wonder is it that this
converting, instructing, exhilarating, en-
lightening, eternal, true, and righteous
Word should be declared preferable to the
riches of eastern kings, and sweeter to the
soul of the pious believer than the sweet-
est thing we knowof is to the bodily taste?
How ready we are to acknowledge all
this! Yet the next hour, perhaps, we
part with the true riches to obtain the
earthly mammon, and barter away the
joys of the spirit for the gratification of
sense! Lord, give us affections towards
Thy Word in some measure proportion-
ate to its excellence ; for we can never
love too much what we can never admire
enough.”—Horne. Dr. Duncan said a
little before his death: “I wish I had
a little more personal faith. I think
with the Psalmist that these things are
more precious than gold, yea, than much
fine gold ; but I cannot go so well with
him in that, ‘they are sweeter also
than honey and the honeycomb,’ 1
stick at that; that has often been a
plague with me; the precious thinge
92


PSALM XIX.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


ET


were more as casketed jewels than as
meat and drink. They delight the in-
tellect ; but, oh! I wish I had a loving
heart! Igo mourning all the day for
want of it.” 3. Practically it is
(ver. 11). The twofold province of
revealed law. It is to preserve. It
admonisies, points out peril, and saves.
A miner’s safety-lamp was brought out
some time ago, which, besides serving
the purpose of an ordinary safety-lamp,
sounds a note of warning to the work-
men the moment the air around becomes
so charged with fire-damp as to be dan-
gerous or explosive. Thus the Word,
which is a lamp unto our feet, gives
a timely note of warning lest we fall
into temptation and sin. And in the


keeping of it there is great reward. It
is true that in the end it will bring
us great recompense. “The Hebrew
word signifies the last, ihe end of a thing ;
and thence it may signify reward, as the
congequence or result of an action.”—
Phillips. But this is nardly the truth
intended here. “ Jn the act of keeping
them—not merely as the consequence
of doing so.”—Kay. “Not only for
keeping, but in keeping of them. As
every flower hath its sweet smell, so
every good action hath its sweet reflee
tion upon the soul,”—Z'rapp.


‘¢ The work of righteousness is peace:
The great reward’s already given;
And all Thy servants, Lord, confess
Obedient love is present heaven,”


Szoret FAuLtTs
(Verse 12.)


Let us consider what these secret
faults are, and our duty in the recol-
lection of them:

I. The sins known to ourselves, but
not known to the world. There is a
certain portion of our life which is
sheltered from the popular gaze. There
is a certain privacy left us, so that God
may put us to the test as to how far we
are good because the world looks at us,
and how far we are good because He
looks at us. How have we acted here #
How acted when free from the criticisms
of society ? Is it not true that we are
often more pure before men than before
God? We put the best side of every-
thing to the world: but this is more true
of our characters than it is of anything
else. How carefully we veil our faults
from our neighbour! our schemes of
pride ! our unspoken anger! our fits of
envy! our greed of gold! our stained
imaginations! And thus it comes to
pass that good men think worse of them-
selves than society does, When, on a
certain festive occasion, Pestalozzi, the
German philanthropist, was presented
with a wreath, he put it gently away,
taying, “Crowns are not for me, but
for the innocent.” The best of men
have ever had the feeling that if the

9°


world knew them better it would praise
them less.

It. The sins known to the world,
but not to us. We see sins that the
world cannot see ; they see sins we do
not see. How often men are egregiously
mistaken concerning themselves and
their doings! And this applies, per-
haps, more to character than it does to
anythingelse. Individualsmoveamongst
us, in whose countenance, in whose eye,
we behold the evidence of a fatal dis-
ease, and yet they see it not; and thus
we often see in those with whom we
have to do evidences of moral disorder
and imperfection which they apprehend
not, or apprehend very imperfectly. We
may be very sure that our friends see
similar faults in us. The portrait our
friends paint of us is very different from
that rose-coloured picture we draw of
ourselves.

III The sins neither known to us,
nor to the world, but which are known
to God. There are deeps of evil in us
with which we have but the slightest
acquaintance. As Alexander Smith says,
“What strangers we are to ourselves,
In every man’s nature there is an in
terior unexplored as that of Africa, and
over thet region what wild beasts mas





roam.” “The perfection and spirituality
of God’s law render it almost impossible
for a fallen son of Adam ever te know
all the innumerable instances of his
transgresaing it, Add to which, that
false principles and inveterate pre
judices make us regard many things as
innocent, snd some things as laudable,
which, in the eye of heaven, are far
otherwise. Self-examination is a duty
which few practise as they ought to do:
and he who practises it best will always
have reason to conclude his particular
confessions with this genial petition,
‘Cleanse Thou me from secret faults,’ ”
—Horne. To society we wear a mask,
to ourselves a veil, but to God’s eye
neither mask nor veil, for our iniquities
are set before Him, our secret sins in
the light of His countenance. “ Neither
is there any creature that is not manifest
in His sight; but all things are naked
and open unto the eyes of Him with
whom we have to do.” Learn,

1. To recognise the reality and guilt
of our secret sinfulness. These secret
sins are real sins. ‘‘ These faults are of
daily and hourly incursion, involuntary
and unavoidable infirmities, yet are they
sins properly so called ; and we must
be cleansed from them by the merit and
Spirit of Christ..—TZrapp. “No one is
to plead as an excuse, or to justify them-
selves by the secrecy and delicacy of
many sins, the unfathomableness of the


human heart, the impossibility of » com-
plete knowledge of self and sin.” — Moll.
Our secret faults make ustweak. They
rob our character of beauty, as a flower
fades when a worm is at the root. They
are likely to become manifest faults. As
Bishop Hopkins says: “The least sin,
if let alone in the heart, will, like a
small speck in fruit, spread to a total
rottenness.” Our secret faults will con-
front us at the bar of God. “He shall
bring every thought into judgment, with
every secret thing.”

2. To seek forgiveness and cleansing
from this secret sinfulness. ‘“ Clear
thou me from hidden faults.” ‘The
word translated clear is borrowed from
the law, and means not so much to
cleanse by renovation of the heart, as to
acquit by a judicial sentence, (See
Exod. xxxiv. 7; Num. xiv. 18.) Such
an acquittal, in the case of sinners
against God, involves the idea of a free
forgiveness,” —Alexander. Let us seek
this forgiveness, but let us seek also the
cleansing grace. Ver. 14.

*¢ But who can all his errors tell,

Or count the thoughts by which he fell f
Omniscient God, to Thee alone

My sin’s infinity is known!

Do Thou my zecret faults efface,

And show forth all Thy cleansing grace,


Law goes further than our power of
introspection, and the cleansing power
must go deeper than our own insight.


Paxsumervovs Spi.
(Verse 13.)


Let us inquire :

I. What these sins are? De-
liberate, wilful, and high-handed sins,
“ Wilful, insolent ones.”—Kay. “ Di-
vines have distinguished sin into three
kinds ; called sina of ignorance, sins of
infirmity, and sins of presumption.
The will is supposed to concur more or
less in all, otherwise they could not be
sins ; but they have their names from
what is most prevailing and predomi-
nant in each. If there be more of ig-
norance than wilfulness in it, it is a sin
ef ignorance ; if there be more of infir-
mity than wilfulneas in it, it is a ein of


infirmity ; but if there be more of wil-
fulness than of either, or both the
former, it is then a wilful sin; and that
is what the text calls presumptuous sin.”
—Waterland. These are sins of scarlet
dye—sins evidently against reason, con-
science, society.

II. Out of what they arise? The
order observed by the Psalmist is most
instructive—first secret faults, then pre-
sumptuous sins. The latter arise out of
the former. We ignore our secret sins,
and they are uncared for, unrepented of,
unstriven against, and they develop into
bold and outrageous ain. ray ue watch


PisLM KX.


the first strayings of our heart from God
and righteousness, Not all at once do
men become open and _ high-handed
sinners, We observe :

II. The dark tyranny they exercise.
* Let them not have dominion over me.”
Dr, Phillips translates this: “ From the
proud, t.e., from tyrannical or haughty
governors. This is much better than to
render it by presumptuous sins.” But this
translation has not the sanction of the
great commentators, Alewander says:
“The Hebrew word properly denotes
proud men, but seems to be here ap-
plied to sins by a strong personification.”
“ Keep thy servant from presumptuous, or
wilful sin, literally, from proud, pre-
sumptuous, insolent ones, the tyrants of
the soul (Num. xv. 17-31); let them
not have dominion over me.”— Words-
worth, When sin comes to this pass it
is hard to be repented of. It is hard to
renounce. The soul is at the mercy of
sin. Like tyrannical governors oppres-
sing a captured city, so does sin triumph
and grind down the soul. It is com-
paratively easy to shake off faults whilst
yet incipient, private, and occasional ;
but they have become tyrants whose yoke
it is well nigh impossible to shake off
when they have developed into habitual,
open, shameless sins, The sinner, then,
is the slave of imperious lusta, Observe :


HOMILZTIO COMMENTARY: PSALM&





IV. The absolute sin in which they
culminate. ‘Then shall I be upright,
and [ shall be innocent from the great
transgression,” ‘The great apostasy.”
The idea is, that wilful sins extinguish
God’s Spirit within us. The unpardon-
able sin. Secret sins lead to open sin ;
and open sin indulged in, persevered in,
leads to the great transgression—the
quenching of the Spirit, and final apos-
tasy from God.

1. Let us beware of secret faults.

2. Let us beware of presumptuous
sins. There are no sins so dark and
awful but we are capable of them. Let
us watch and tremble lest we should
fall into those insolent, defiant sins
which provoke the mighty and glorious
Being who has set His glory above the
heavens.

3. Let us live in dependence upon
Divine aid. ‘Keep back thy servant.”
Cry mightily to God for preventing
grace,

4. Let us seek for entire sanctification
of spirit (ver. 14). It were vain, in-
deed, for a man to seek to purify his
own heart, but David sees in God his
Strength and Deliverer. Christ delivers
from sin ; His Spirit purifies the heart ;
and that Spirit preserves us with gar
ments unspotted from the world.


PSALM XX.


INTRODUCTION.


“This is evidently a liturgicai psalm, and was intended originally, it would seem, to be
sung on behalf of a king who was about to go forth to war against his enemies. As the king
stands within the sanctuary offering his sacrifice, the whole assembled crowd of worshippers in
the spacious courts lift up their voices in the prayer, that Jehovah would graciously accept
those sacrifices, and send him help and victory in the battle. The psalm has no doubt a
prophetical aspect, from the fact that the Jewish king was, by virtue of his office, a type of
Christ. Calvin is right in saying that inasmuch as this kingdom differed from all other king-
doms, because God had determined to govern and defend His people by the hand of David and
of his seed, therefore we ought to recognise, under the type of the temporal kingdom, that
better rule on which the joy and happiness of the Church depend.”—Perowne.


Tue Name OF JEHOVAH.
(Verses 1, 5, 7.)


1 The name of Jehovah a consola-
tion in trouble. ‘‘ The Lord hear thee
in the day of trouble; the name of tke
God of Jarob defend thee” (ver. 1).

24


No character or rank is exempt from
the ills of life. The highest dignity
cannot ‘guard off troubles; and crowns
especially are often lined with thorns


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS.


PRALM XX,





The history of David records many a
dark day and sorrowful night. It was
a day of distress with Jacob when he
fled from his brother Esau, and arrived
at Bethel a distracted wanderer (Gen.
xxxv. 3), Few plants, says an old
writer, have both the morning and the
evening sun; and an older than he has
said—Man is born to trouble. But in
the deepest, darkest, wildest distress
Jehovah is the retuge of His people;
and His name soothes the keenest
anguish, and lifts up the most de-
spairing.

**Thy mighty name salvation is,

And keeps my happy soul above ;


Comfort it brings, and power, and
And joy, and everlasting love.”


II. The name of Jehovah an in-
spiring battle-cry. ‘In the name of
our God we will set up our banners”
(ver. 5). Banners are a part of military
equipage, borne in times of war to
assemble, direct, distinguish, and in-
spirit, the soldiers. They have been
often used in religious ceremonies. It
is the practice of some people to erect
a banner in honour of their deity. In
a certain part of Thibet it is customary
for a priest to ascend a hill every
month, to set up a white flag, and
perform some religious ceremonies to
conciliate the favour of a dewta, or
invisible being, who is the presiding
genius of the place. The Hindoos
describe Siva the Supreme as having
a banner in the celestial world. Every
nation has its own expressive battle-
ery. “For hearth and home” was the
cry that found a deep and warm
response in the breast of the ancient
Roman; and, in modern times, the
Germans roused the enthusiasm and


bravery of every soldier by the cry of
“Fatherland!” But the militant Church
goes to war with the name of the Lord
of Hosts on her banners—a battle-cry
which inspires every heart with holy
courage, and binds it with the cincture
of a firm, unalterable purpose. It was
this that nerved the youthful David
with a giant’s prowess in his victorious
combat with Goliath (1 Sam. xvii. 45).

III. The name of Jehovah the
strength of the Militant Church.
“We will remember the name of the
Lord our God” (ver. 7). The world
trusts in the material —in_ rifles,
mitraileuse, turret-ships, and torpedoes;
but the Church is taught to trust in
the spiritual—the mysterious, invisible,
but almighty power of Jehovah. The
material fails; but the spiritual never.
Many a formidable and rarely-equipped
army has


“ Melted like snow in the glance of the Lord,”


while the feeble and despised champions
of the Church have stood forth in all
the honour and lustre of victory. When
the saint relies fully on Jehovah, and is
absorbed in His holy cause, he is sur-
rounded with an impenetrable defence.
Numa, being told that his enemies were
coming upon him as he was offering
sacrifice, thought it was sufficient for
his safety that he could say, I am
about the service of my God; and yet
how slow men are to put their trust in
that Name where alone all true com-
fort, the holiest courage, and the
mightiest strength are found! It is
easy, says Arnot, to persuade papists
to lean on priests and saints, on old
rags and painted pictures, on any idol ;
but it is hard to get a Protestant to
trust in the living God.


PRAYER A PREPARATION FOR CONFLIOT.


(Verses


L Prayer should have reference to
future emergencies. “The Lord hear
thee in the day of trouble” (ver. 1).
War is a time of trouble, both to king
and people; and considering the vicis-
situdes and sufferings of the battle-
field, it is wise to implore the aid of


1-5, 9.)


Heaven for seasons when earthly re-
sources may be exhausted. Prayer has
a prevenient power. To-day’s prayers
can help to-morrow’s; the congrega-
tion’s present prayers, the king’s future
prayers, Prayer may bring present
power that shall put the man’s heart
95


PBALM EX.


——


right, and keep it right, so that when
the hour of need shall come, the prayer
of his heart may be right prayer, and
be both heard and answered. ‘ Troubles
roar like thunder; but the believer's
voice will be heard above the storm.”
Il. Prayer invokes the invincible
protection of Jehovah. “The name
of the God of Jacob defend thee”
(ver. 1). By the name is signified the
whole revealed character of Jehovah.
He is called the Sod of Jacob, because
He manifested Himself as such, in a
fulness of deeds, to Jacob and to his
posterity. A heavenlier light is needed
to explain all the mystery and glory of
the Divine name, ‘There is power in
the histerical associations of the name
to help faith, as the pleading soul
recalls the scenes of Bethel, Peniel,
Padan-aram, Shechem, and Egypt. The
name of Jehovah is an inviolable pro-
tection. ‘ Defend thee”—exalt thee—
“to be upraised to a high and fortified
place, made safo.”"— Bythner. “ Set
thee up on high,” t.¢., “as in a fortress
where no enemy can do thee harm, or
on a rock at the foot of which the
waves fret and dash themselves in
impotent fury."—Perowne, The name
of God is a more secure retreat than
she spot defended by parks of artillery.
III. Prayer should be accompanied
with sacrifice. “Remember all thy
offerings, and accept thy burnt sacri-
fice” (ver. 3). It was customary in
ancient times for warriors to offer
sacrifice before going into battle; and
this was often done with most imposing
ceremony, and with lavish liberality.
‘‘Thy burnt sacrifice”—thy holocaust,
“a sacrifice of quadrupeds and birds,
which are raised altogether upon the
altar and burned: the Greek hecatomb
seems borrowed from this.” —Bythner.
“ Accept ””—graciously accept—literally,
make fat, in a declarative sense “ re-
gard as fat,” and so “receive as fat,”
é.¢., ‘as worthy to be offered, the fattest
of the fiock being chosen for sacrifice,”
—Perowne. “At the present day others
as well as David may use this psalm in
prayer, for as the person, the circum-
stances, th time and place, are all
different in tae new law, so likewise is





HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





the sacrifice; but one faith and one
spirit abide through all ages, and amid
all diversities of places, works, persons.
The external varies, the internal re-
mains ever the same.”—LZuther. The
individual relation to God is recognised
by personal offerings. The separate
application of the one sacrifice answers
to the separate sacrifices of old. The
one sacrifice must have its separate
acceptance for the separate individual.
Prayer to be efficacious must ever be
offered in the spirit of sacrifice.

IV. Prayer is urgent to secure a
specific answer to its petitions.

1. As they relate to special blessings.
“Grant thee according to thine own
heart, and. fulfil all thy counsel: the
Lord fulfil all thy petitions” (ver. 4, 5).
Prayer is offered for protection in time
of danger, for wisdom to adopt and
execute the best measures in the emer-
gencies of war, and for victory over the
enemy. Our desires and counsels are
completely dependent upon God for
their attainment, and ought to be
prayers. The more clearly we see our
peril, and the more pungently we feel
our need, the more fervently do we
wrestle for an answer to our petitions.
“Sometimes God doth not only grant
& man’s prayer, but fulfilleth his
counsel ; that is, in that very way, by
that very means, which his judgment
pitched upon his thoughts.”—7'rapp.

2. As they relate to their immediate
subject. “Save, Lord; let the king
hear us when we call” (ver. 9).
Rendered by the LXX., “O Lord,
save the king, and hear us when we
call upon Thee.” The king is the sub-
ject of prayer, that he may be blessed
with victory, and that he may be a
blessing to others) The ninth verse is
& summary of the whole psalm. The
wellbeing of a people is suspended on
the character and doings of the monarch,
Prayer should be offered for him con-
tinually that he may be guarded from
evil, that he may be wise, equitable,
and prosperous, Prayer must not be
intermitted even when confidence oi
Divine help has been inspired. Prayer
will still be necessary to sustain that
confidence in its trials, for the very


WOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





confidence is a contingent virtue, and,
perhaps, the more subject to risks of
deterioration, because it is an inspired
thing and not a thing of earth.

V. Answer to prayer is found
wherever the presence of Jehovah
is manifested. ‘Send thee help from
the sanctuary, and strengthen thee out
of Zion” (ver. 2). The Jews, whose
weakness found it so difficult a task
to look up to the Invisible God, were
favoured with a visible sanctuary on
Zion ; thither the devout Israelite di-
rected his prayer; thence he expected
help in the day of trouble. Christ is
now the sanctuary of His people; and
in their worshipping assemblies He is
wont to manifest His presence and
power. The greatest distress is experi-
enced when God is absent. His return
banishes our fears, and nerves us with


CoNFIDENCE IN JEHOVAH


PRALM KM.


superhuman bravery. “Men of the
world despise sanctuary help: but our
hearta have jearned to prize it beyond
all material aid. They seek help out
of the armoury, or the treasury, or the
buttery ; but we turn to the sanctuary.
Certain advertisers recommend a
strengthening plaster ; but nothing can
give such strength to the loins of a
saint as waiting upon God in the
assemblies of His people.”— Spurgeon.
God always puts honour upon His
appointed services. His help, when it
comes, will come by the way of the
sanctuary and out of Zion. The faith
to which that help is a response, wher-
ever exercised, was first begotten amid
the holy things of the sanctuary. The
help has the same stamp as the faith
that commands it, the stamp of the
sanctuary.


THe PuepGe or VIcTORY.


(Verses 5-8.)


L Confidence in Jehovah fills the
heart with gladness. ‘We will rejoice
in Thy salvation” (ver. 5). The people
are so assured of the help of God as to
break out in a song of anticipatory
triumph. Praise raises the moral tone
of an army, and it is on this that its
success largely depends. Jehoshaphat,
before entering into battle with the
vast armies of the Moabites and Am-
monites, appointed singers to praise the
Lord. He obtained an easy victory
(2 Chron, xx. 20-22). When Louis
XIII. of France had invested with his
army a city of the Huguenots, the
besieged assembled one evening on the
city wall and sang, with great sweet-
ness and solemnity, one of their
favourite psalms, The king was so
impressed with the whole scene and
with the spirit of the singers, that he
turned to Mazarin, his favourite general,
who was by his side, and quietly ob-
served, “We can do nothing with this
people.” The siege was raised; and
the persecuted Huguenots triumphed in
their Lord. God ought to be remem-
dered in our triumph as well as in our
need. We are sometimes so much

@


elated by the triumph as to forget the
help by which it has come.

IL Confidence in Jehovah inspires
with courage for the conflict. “In
the name of our God will we set up”—
wave—‘ our banners” (ver, 5). When
the army has confidence in its General
it unfurls its standard with resolute
defiance, enters upon the contest with a
stout, brave heart, and already antici-
pates the shouts of victory and the
triumphant procession, with banners
displayed. ‘“‘Great certainly is the
faith which hath such courage by re-
membering the name of the Lord.
Soldiers in our day are wont, when
they go into battle, to recall to mind
the brave exploits of their fathers, or
former victories, and the like, where-
with to warm and stir their hearts.
But let our princes remember the name
of God, wherein all salvation and vic-
tory do stand.”—Luther. ‘“ Confession
of Christ, as the only name whereby we
can be saved, is the banner which dis-
tinguishes His faithful people. Ob, that
this confession were more distinct, more
pure, more zealous, then would His
followers be more united, more bold,


more successful—terrible as an army
with banners.”—W. Wilson.

IIL Confidence in Jehovah secures
the exercise of His Almighty power.
“Now know I that the Lord saveth
His anointed: He will hear him from
Hia holy heaven with the saving strength
of His right hand” (ver. 6). Prayer
ought never to stop before it has brought
@ present sense of help. It is possible
to have an inspoken answer to our
prayers before the outward crisis to
which we are looking has come. ‘“‘ The
hope suddenly changes into certainty.
Now know I that Jehovah hath saved,
hath given the victory. The singer
speaks in the full assurance of faith
that the prayer is heard, and as if he
already saw the victory gained. The
prayer had been that God would hear
and send help from the earthly sanc-
tuary or Zion. Now, the answer is to
come from His holy heaven. For if
God then condescended to dwell in
visible glory among men, yet He would
- teach His people that He is not limited
by the bounds of time and space, He
is not like the gods of the heathen, the
god of one city or country. He sends
help out of Zion, but the heaven of
heavens cannot contain Him. Calvin
sees expressed in the earthly sanctuary
made by hands, the grace and con-
descension of God to His people; in
the heavenly, His infinite power, great-
ness, and majesty.”—Perowne. Faith,
says Quesnel, seems to put the Al-
mighty power of God into the hands
of man; whereas unbelief seems to tie
up even the hands of the Almighty.

IV. Confidence in Jehovah exposes
the inadequacy of the best human
contrivances. “Some trust in chariots
and some in horses: but we will re-
member the name of the Lord our
God” (ver. 7). The remark of a great
warrior, that Providence is always on
the side of the strongest battalion, may
be applauded as an evidence of military
penetration, but the sceptical aneer is


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: PSALMA,


none the less apparent in the sentiment.
According to the law, Israel was for-
bidden to maintain a standing army.
They were taught to trust in God, both
for defence and victory (Deut. xx. 2-4;
xxxii. 30), Some of the conquests of
the chosen people were gained by means
which contradicted and defied the
ordinary rules of warfare, and seemed
absurd to the believer in military skill
and prowess. Moral power was pitted
against the material, and won the day,
as it ever will. When the Israelites
depended more upon their armies than
their God, they suffered the most
humiliating defeats. ‘‘ The most dreaded
war-engine of David’s day was the war-
chariot, armed with scythes which
mowed men down like grass: this was
the boast and glory of the neighbouring
nations ; but the saints considered the
name of Jehovah to be a far better
defence.”
V. Confidence in Jehovah turns
apparent defeat into victory. ‘They
are brought down and fallen; but we
are risen and stand upright” (ver. 8).
The prophetic vision of faith already
sees the issue of the conflict. The
ranks of those who trust in chariots
and horses, who rely on material aid,
seem firm, impenetrable, defiant, and
the onset irresistible. But the people
of God, whose trust is in the unseen,
and who seem overwhelmed and put to
the worse, rise up triumphant, while
their enemies are brought down and
crushed—the instruments of war in
which they trusted helping to make
their ruin more complete. Faith has
surer wheels than pride; and prayer
will carry us where power must fall.
“Faith alone, which commits itself to
God, can sing the song of triumph
before the victory, and raise the shout
of joy before help has been obtained ;
for to faith all is permitted. It trusta
in God, and so really has what it
believes, because faith deceives not;


aa it believes, a0 ia it done.”— Lather.


y


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS, PGALM Sout





PSALM XXL
InTRODUCTION.


“he prayer which the Church offers up at the conclusion of the preeeding psalm now
issues in a hymn of praise, the result of a believing view of the glory which ia to follow, when
Messiah’s sufferings are ended, This is one of the beautiful songs of which we find many ix
Scripture, prepared by the Holy Spirit to awaken and enliven the hopes and expectations of
the Church while she waits for the Lord, and to give utterance to her joy at the time of His
arrival, The theme is Messiah’s exaltation and glory, and the time chosen for its delivery is
just the moment when darkness covered the earth, and all nature seemed about to die with ite
expiring Lord. Seripture deals largely in contrasts. It seems to be suitable to the human
mind to turn from one extreme to another. Man can endure any change, however violent and
contradictory, but a long continuance, a sameness either of joy vr sorrow, bas a debilitating and
depressing effect.” — Ryland.


Tue Joy oF THE HEAVENLY Aca
(Verses 1-17.)


YL This joy arose from a conscious-
ness of newly achieved victory. ‘In
Thy salvation how greatly shall He re
joice” (ver. 1).

1. This victory was achieved by super-
natural power, ‘‘In Thy strength, O
Lord” (ver. 1). The Man of sorrows, as
He entered into the stern conflict with
evil, knew full well the victory could
not be gained by the ordinary tactics of
military genius, or by the prowess of a
human arm. He relied on the strength
of Jehovah, and not in vain: He
emerged from the dark, fierce contest,
an exultant conqueror. How often do
we fail in the great battle of life by
being too self-reliant ; and in proportion
to our blind confidence in an arm of
flesh is the humiliation and misery of
our defeat! ‘Our weakness unstrings
our harps, but His strength tunes them
anew. If we cannot sing a note in
honour of our own strength, we can at
any rate rejoice in our omnipotent God.”
The salvation of humanity is a Divine
work, and will be to myriads the source
of ceaseless and ever-increasing joy.

2. This victory was granted in answer
to earnest prayer. ‘Thou hast given
Him His heart’s desire, and hast not
withholden the request of His lips”
(ver. 2). On the lonely shore, among the
silent hills or under the shadows of the
solitary garden, the Messiah poured out
His soul in earnest prayer for strength
to suffer and to prevail on behalf of His
people; and He was heard and mar-
vellousiy anawered. “ What is in the


well of the heart is sure to eome up in
the bucket of the lips; and those are
the only true prayers where the heart’s
desire is first, and the lips’ request
follows after. The requests of the
Saviour were not withheld. He was
and still is a prevailing pleader, Our
Advocate on high returns not empty
from the throne of grace.”—Spurgeon.
The agony of wrestling prayer is often
turned into the rapture of success. The
last psalm, says Perowne, was a litany
before the king went forth to battle. This
is apparently a Ze Deum on his return.

Ii. This joy was accelerated by pos-
sessing an affluence of Divine Blessing.

1. He was surrounded with evidences
of the Divine Beneficence. ‘Thou pre-
ventest Him with the blessings of good-
ness.” To prevent signifies to anticipate,
to go before. ‘Thou goest before Him
with the blessings of Thy goodness as &
pioneer, to make crooked ways straight
and rough places smooth ; or as one who
strews flowers in the path of another, to
render the way beautiful to the eye and
pleasant to the tread. God's gifts are
God’s love embodied and expressed.
And this greatly enhances the value of
our blessings—that they are cups as full
of God and of God’s kindness aa of hap-
piness and blessedness,”—S. Murtin.

2. He was invested with the smost
dlustrious dignity. ‘Thou settest a
crown of pure gold on His head. His
glory is great in Thy salvation ; honour
and majesty hast Thou laid upon Him”
(ver. 3,5). Jesus wore the thorn-crown,


@aLM ZXI.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





at now wears the glory-crown. It fa a
srown, indicating royal nature, imperial
power, deserved honour, glorious con-
quest, and Divine government. The
crown of pure yold has respect to His
exaltation at the right hand of God,
where He is crowned with glory and
honour; and this crown being of pure
gold denotes the purity, glory, solidity,
and perpetuity of His kingdom. The
diadems of earthly monarchs are liable
to be suddenly displaced; but this
crown is set upon the head of the Re-
deemer so firmly that no power can
remove it. ‘“ Honour and majesty ”—
as Parkhurst reads—splendour and
beauty—‘‘ hast Thou laid upon Him.”
As the wood of the tabernacle was
overlaid with pure gold, so is Jesus
covered with honourand glory.—Spur-
geon, in loco. ‘‘Were there ten thousand
millions of heavens created above these
highest heavens, and again as many
above them, and as many above them,
till angels were wearied with counting,
it were but too low a seat to fix the
princely throne of that Lord Jesus
above them all.”.—Rutherford.

3. He enjoyed the consciousness of
an imperishable life (ver. 4). ‘‘Hven
length of days for ever and ever.” The
lavish endowments of God often exceed
our greatest petitions and loftieat hopes,
Jesus, as man, asked for life, and He
was heard in that He feared. He was
raised from the dead, to die no more,
The power of God and all His moral
attributes secure the perpetuity of the
life of the risen and exalted Saviour.
He was endowed with length of days
for ever and ever—‘ the prolonged ages
of this world which the Church was to
have, and after them an eternity, world
without end.”

4. He became the source of endless
blessing to others. “ For Thou hast made
Him most blessed for ever” (ver. 6).
Messiah is the source whence all bless-
ings for time and for eternity shall be
derived. He is an overflowing well-
spring of blessing to others, a sun filling
the universe with light. In and through
Him all nations of the earth are blessed.
True blessedness is found, not in accumu-


lating pee not in the weary, tread-


mill circle of philosophic research, not
in travel and commune with Nature in
her varying moods: it is found only in
Christ, And yet men, in seeking for the
streams of bliss, wander from its source.

5. He exults in the Divine favour,
“Thou hast made Him exceeding glad
with Thy countenance” (ver. 6). “Though
this be metaphorically used for favour,
yet is the speech not all metaphor, and
that well-experienced Christians will
tell you. The countenance of God
makes the Prince of Heaven glad: how
ought we to seek it, and how careful
should we be lest we should provoke
Him by our sins to hide His face from
us! Our anticipations may cheerfully
fly forward to the hour when the joy of
our Lord shall be shed abroad on all
the saints, and the countenance of
Jehovah shine on all the blood-bought.”
— Spurgeon.

Ill This joy was intensified by the
assurance of the unshakeable per-
manency of is government.

1. The permanency of Messiah’s throne
és secured by the Divine mercy. ‘‘ Through
the mercy of the Most High He shall
not be moved” (ver. 7). He who is
Most High in every sense, engages all
His infinite perfections to maintain the
throne of grace upon which our King in
Zion reigns. He was not moved from
His purpose, nor én His sufferings, nor
by His enemies, nor shall He be moved
from the completion of His designs. It
is an encouraging evidence of the Divine
mercy that the throne of the Great Re-
deemer still exists among men. If
human malice and Satanic rage had not
been restrained by the Divine mercy,
that throne would have been overthrown
long ago.

2. The assurance of this permanency
is strengthened by Messiah’s confidence ix
God. “For the king trusteth in the
Lord” (ver. 7). He did not depend on
worldly armies or human skill and
stratagem ; but wholly in Jehovah, the
Lord of Hosta. “A holy confidence in
God is the true mother of victories.”
The joy and confidence of Christ our
King, is the ground of all our joy an¢
confidence, and the pledge of final com
quest over all our foes.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMA,


PSALM XX,





Cunist as rox Source or Burssinc ro ros Race
(Verse 6.)


L Is exalted to the hichest dignity.
He who was despised and rejected of
men, and who Himself despised and
rejected the affluence and honours of
the world, was lifted up on high and
clothed with majesty and glory. The
cross was exchanged for a throne, the
cast-off garment for a robe of peerless
lustre, comparative obscurity for undy-
ing fame, suffering for felicity, the
tibaldry of the mob for angelical ap
plause. The most forbidding and un-
likely appearances may disguise great
resources, The dry, knotty, leafless,
sapless vine seems past all recovery ;
but erelong it flourishes in verdant
beauty, and bends under the weight of
abundant fruitfulness. Christ was as a
root out of a dry ground—lowly and
unattractive in the beginning of His
earthly life; and it seemed very im-
probable that anything great could ever
come out of such humble and miserable
surroundings. But He is now exalted
to the highest dignity, and has become
the benefactor to the race: before His
glory all earthly splendour fades, and on
His bounty the life of all depends.

II. Is endowed with all power.
Whatever can minister to the happiness
and prestige of His people, Christ has
anlimited ability to bestow. “ All power
is given unto me in heaven and in
earth,” All the forces of the universe
are under His control. All created in-
telligences are obedient to His will.
He can transmute the instruments of
evil into agencies of good. He can
cripple and destroy the most formidable
opposition. He can deliver in the latest
emergency ; and turn despair into vic
tory. The soul that relies on Him can
never be confounded.


I. Is inexhaustible in supply.


“Thou hest made Him most blessed
for ever.” At all times, in all circum-
stances, His aid is suitable and suffi-
cient. The river that has flowed for
ages and borne afar its treasured
argosies, is not more certain in the per-
petual supply of its liquid current, than
is the vast stream of the Divine benefi-
cence that flows perennially from the
heavenly hills, burdened with the wealth
of blessing to every needy soul. The
fruit of the vintage may fail and the
gathering time may not come, the
earth may be shut up in hopeless bar-
renness, all human resources may be
cut off, but the fountain of Divine bless-
ing is never sealed, and its supplies con-
tinually abound. “Of His fulness have
all we received, and grace for grace.”

IV. Bejoiccs to communicate. It
was the saying of a certain generous
Spanish captain, “ There is no way of
enjoying one’s property like giving it
away.” It is a joy, a luxury to give,
The generosity of God knows no stint,
When a certain English monarch once
threw open his park and gardens to the
public, the royal gardener, finding it
troublesome, complained to his Majesty
that the visitors plucked the flowers
“What,” said the kind-hearted king,
“are my people fond of flowers? Then
plant some more!” So our heavenly
King, with lavish hand, scatters on our
daily pathway the flowers of blessing,
and, as fast as we can gather them, spite
of the grudging, churlish world, more
are supplied. ‘Not as the world giveth,
give I unto you.” The greater our
need, and the more urgent our cry for
help, the greater the rapture of our
Divine benefactor in supplying that
need, ‘The Lord rejoiced over you to
do you good” (Deut. xxviii. 63).


Tur Exposurz aND PUNISHMENT OF SIN.
(Verses 8, 9.)


L That the exposure of sin is in-
evitable. “Thine hand shall find out


all thine enemies.” Iniquity delights in


eee coe area 8 masterpeece. of
01





eunning. It may succeed in deluding
its victima, and for a time escape detec-
tion, But there is One to whom every
detail of the plot is fully known ; and
He grieves to see the toilsome ingenuity
of the wicked, and smiles at its utter im-
potency. Sin is often its own detective.
An unguarded word, a suspicious sign,
an unconscious oversight, will unmask
the most carefully disguised plans, and
lead to exposure and misery. It is the
theme of many a ballad, how the cranes
aided in the discovery of the assassins
of Ibycus, the poet. Recently, the
house of the Caliph of the Ben Oreazen
in Algeria, was entered by a band of
robbers, and a box containing 25,000
francs stolen. In their haste to escape,
the thieves left behind them an Arab
cake bearing a particular mark, which
one of the bakers of the town recognised
as the sign used by Ben Xerafas, it be-
ing the custom for each family in send-
ing their bread to the oven to mark it
so as to distinguish the loaves. The
police acted on the information, and,
descending on a certain hut, caught the
robbers asleep, with a portion of the
plunder still in their possession, A
simple Arab cake was the insignificant
agent of discovery and eXposure! If
the sinner does not betray himself, the
hand of God, which has power to tear
away every covering, will sooner or later
find him out,

Il That the exposure of sin will
extend to the inmost feelings of the
heart. “Thy right hand shall find out
those that hate Thee.” That sin is not
always the worst which is most apparent.
The bland, submissive countenance may
cover the most vile and malignant feel-
ings of the heart. The secret haters of
God only want the opportunity and the
power ; and they would outrival the
most notoriously wicked. The wilful
and obstinate sinner would, if it were
possible, bury Christ again within the
rock of his hardened heart, and seal the
stone that He might never rise. An
electric log has recently been con-
structed, which thrown overboard will
register the speed of the vessel through
the water. By a simple contrivance.


102


HOHMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS,


the captain, while sitting in his cabin,
can detect the dial movements of the
log in the depths of the sea, and ascer
tain his rate of sailing every quarter of
an hour. If it were possible, by any
method, to watch the operations of a
sinful heart, what a depth and rush of
wickedness would be discovered there !
And yet the day is coming when the
strong hand of God shall turn aside all
disguise and reveal iniquity in all its
loathsomeness and deformity. He
“shall bring every work into judgment,
with every secret thing, whether it be
good or whether it be evil.”

Ii. That the punishment of sin will
be terrible and complete.

1. It will be terrible. ‘Thou shalt
make them as a fiery oven in the time
of Thine anger” —Thy angry look. Since
the king is in the presence of Jehovah
(ver. 6), when He directs His face upon
His enemies, it exerts that destructive
power which is usually ascribed to tne
angry look of Jehovah. “However coldly
God now seems to look upon the enemies
of Christ, the more will His anger burn
against them in the future. God has
His limited time as well for His wrath
as for His grace.”—-Lange. The sins of
the impenitent wicked will supply fuel
to the fire of their sufferings, and per-
haps be used as the means of punishing
others—one class of sinners tormenting
another class. ‘Who can abide in the
fierceness of His anger?” (Nahum i. 6).

2. It will be complete. “The Lord
shall swallow them up in His wrath, and
the fire shall devour them.” The cer-
tainty of punishment for wrong-doing
is evident, not only from the declara-
tions of Scripture, but also from the
history of mankind. Nations are an ex-
ample—the Antediluvians, the Sodom-
ites, the Jews. Individuals are an
example—Korah, Dathan, Abiram, Saul,
and Judas, The hearts that will not
glow with holy gratitude and praise
shall burn with shame and infinite re-
morse, and the awful sentence, “ Depart,
ye cursed, into everlasting fire,” shall ba
but the echo of their own self-abhorring
consciences,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS,





PRALM KU.





Tue urren OverrHrxow or THE Ennmirs or Cuniet.


(Verses 8-13.)


4a God had already granted victory
and gone so far beyond the expectations
and hopes of those who had gone forth
to battle, the idea evidently suggested
by these verses is, that there will be
ultimately a complete victory over all
the foes of Messiah and of His people.
Note:

I. That the enemies of Christ are
full of malignity.

1. They are skilful tn plotting mis-
chief. “For they intended evil against
Thee: they imagined a mischievous
device” (ver. 11). They extended, or
stretched out evl—an idea derived from
stretching out or laying snares for the
purpose of entrapping wild beasts or
birds. The brain of the evil-doer is
continually racked, either in devising
new plans of mischief, or in counter-
acting the plans of others that threaten
to interfere with his own. It is hard
work to be wicked ; it involves anxious
thought, incessant activity, and sleep-
less vigilance. The fair goddess who
lured to the first transgression and
threw around it an irresistible charm,
is now transformed to a demon, and
tyrannises over its victim, forcing him
to do as a necessity what he began to
do as a pleasure. All wrong-doing
begins in the intention: there the most
malignant venom is secreted.

2. They are impotent in carrying out
their wicked designs. ‘ Which they are
not able to perform” (ver. 11). The
power of evil is limited, else virtue
would soon cease to exist, and the
throne of righteousness be overturned.
But sinners are not permitted to co all
that is in their power; much less are
they able to accomplish all they intend.
There is all the virulence of malice
_ aforethought, allthe barefaced evidence
of guilty intention; but there is the
lack of that which can alone give effi-
ciency and success to their villany—the
lack of power. They are not able to
perform. ‘The serpent may hiss, but
his head is broken; the lion may


the
but cannot


worry, but he cannot devour;
tempest may thunder,
strike.”

i. That the enemies of Christ will
be certainly detected and exposed.
“Thine hand shail find out all Thine
enemies : Thy right hand shall find out
those that hate Thee” (ver. 8). Not
only are the eyes of the Lord upon the
wicked, but His hand is in search of
them ; and as sure as His eyes see, so
certainly will His hand grasp all the
workers of iniquity. None can hide
from His gaze; none can escape from
the terrible grip of His right hand, It
is a fearful thing to fall into the hands
of the Living God—the offended and
avenging God! Rocks and mountains
will be no better shelter at last, than
fig-leaves were at first. The finding
out, says Spurgeon, relates not only to
the discovery of the hiding-places of the
haters of God, but to the touching of
them in their tenderest part, 80 as to
cause the severest suffering. When He
appears to judge the world hard hearts
will be subdued into terror and proud
spirits humbled into shame. He who
haa the key of human nature can touch
all its springs at His will, and find out
the means of bringing the utmost con-
fusion and terror upon those who afore-
time boastfully expressed their hatred
of Him.

Ii. That the enemies of Ohrist
will be stricken with dismay. ‘ There-
fore shalt Thou make them turn their
back when Thou shalt make ready Thine
arrows upon Thy strings against the face
of them” (ver. 12). “ Thou shalt cause
them to turn their backs and fly as if a
volley of arrows had been discharged in
their faces. God can in a moment
strike the most powerful and numerous
army, even in the moment of victory,
with panic; and then even the lame,
the army which they had nearly routed,
shall take the prey and divide the spoil.”
—A. Clarke. The idea. is that the Al-
mighty has set up His monte as a butt,

03


Cer Job. vii, 20, xvi. 12; Lam. iii.
2, 13). “The judgments of God are
called His arrows, being sharp, swift,
sure, and deadly. What a dreadful
situation, to be set as a mark and butt
at which these arrows are directed!
View Jerusalem encompassed by the
Roman armies without, and torn to
pieces by the animosity of desperate
and bloody factions within! No further
commentary is requisite upon this vers3.”
G. Horne.

IV. That the enemies of Christ will
be utterly overthrown.

1. Thetr overthrow will entail severe
suffering. ‘Thou shalt make them as
a fiery oven in the time of Thine anger:
the Lord shall swallow them up in His
wrath, and the fire shall devour them”
(ver. 9). The wicked shall be con-
sumed with the fire of Divine wrath,
like wood put into a furnace. The
wrath of God is often represented under
the image of fire, (See Deut. iv. 24,
xxxii, 22; Ps. xviii. 8; Matt. xiii, 42,
xviii. 8, xxv. 41; Markix. 44; 2 Thess,
i. 8.) The enemies of Christ shall not
only be cast into the furnace of fire;
but the Lord shall make them them-
selves as a fiery oven: they will be their
own tormentors. “Our pleasant vices
are made the whips to scourge us.” It
is said that a frown of Queen Elizabeth
killed Sir Christopher Hatton, the Lord
Chancellor of England. Who then
can stand before the frown and fierce
anger of the insulted Majesty of
Heaven 4

2. The overthrow will be complete.
“Their fruit shalt Thou destroy from
the earth, and their seed from among
the children of men” (ver. 10). That
which they prize the most, and which
has cost a life of toil and anxiety to
acquire, will perish. The ambitious
dream, the hoarded treasure, the coveted
honour, shall vanish as a fractured
bubble, Even their posterity—the chil-
dren who have imbibed their acrimony
and trod in their footsteps—shall pass
away, 80 that the race shall come to an
end, and their memory be forgotten.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY; PSALHS.


a rn cre a cr











The righteous shall he had in everlast-
ing remembrance ; but the name of the
wicked shall rot. The possessions of
the haters of Christ are a heritage of
woe.

V. That the overthrow of the
enemies of Christ will illustrate the
supreme power of Jehovah.

1. The supreme power of Jehovah ts
self-sustained. ‘“‘ Be Thou exalted Lord,
in Thine own strength” (ver. 13). Ha
alt Thyself, O Lord—Thy creatures can-
not exalt Thee. Lift Thyself up and
discomfit Thy foes by Thine own
strength! God’s right hand has often
given the victory to His followers,
though they struck not one blow in
their own defence. How little can the
strength of man avail when the Lord
raiseth up Himself to the battle. The
end of all conflict with evil will be the
eternal, unchallengeable exaltation of
Jehovah. While He watches over and
ensures the best interests of His people,
He preserves inviolate His own honour
and majesty.

2. The supremacy of Jehovah should
be joyfully celebrated. “So will we
sing and praise Thy power” (ver. 13).
“God is to receive praise in reference to
that attribute which He has exhibited
most in the defence or salvation of His
followers. One feels himself lost, con-
demned, on the brink of hell; he calls
for mercy, is heard and saved: mercy
therefore will be the chief subject of his
praise, and the burden of his song.
Another feels himself beset with power-
ful adversaries, with the weakest of
whom he is not able to cope; he cries
to the Almighty for strength; he is
heard and strengthened with strength
in his soul. He therefore will naturally
magnify the all-conquering power of the
Lord.”—-A. Clarke, Joy should always
flow in the channel of praise. The
leading thought in the whole psalm is,
that God will ultimately triumph over
all His enemies, and that this triumph
will be followed by universal rejoicing
ana praise, Haste, O haste, the happy
en,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


EE ees
oe


PSALM XE





PSALM XXIL


IntRopUcTION,


“The subject of thia psalm is the deliverance of a righteous sufferer from his enemies, and
the effect of this deliverance on others, It is so framed as to be applied without violence to
any cage belonging to the class described, yet so that it was fully verified only in Christ, the


Head and Representative of the class in question.


The immediate speaker in the psalm is an


ideal person, the righteous servant of Jehovah, but his words may, to a certain extent, be
Beoreteiaten by any suffering believer and by the whole suffering Church, as they have been


all ages,” —Alexander,


ForsaKEn.


4?

Ay Porsaken and Suffering, “Why
hast Thou forsaken me? Why art Thou
so far from helping me and from the
words of my roaring!” Suffering is
one of the mysteries of our complicated
human life. None are exempt. The
voice of anguish rises towards heaven
in a ceaseless wail. As there are
ecstasies of joy when the soul is exalted
into a state of inexpressible rapture, so
there are corresponding depressions
when the soul is plunged into a gulf
of darkness and despair. The bitterest
element in all suffering is the sense of
desertion, when the lonely victim is
drifting helplessly before the black,
pelting storm, without a hand to help,
a voice to cheer, or a light to guide!
Who can fathom the feelings of the
solitary sufferer of Golgotha indicated
in that thrilling aud mysterious cry—
“My God, my God, why hast Thou for-
saken Me!” It was “not the why of
impatience or despair, not the sinful
questioning of one whose heart rebels
against his chastening, but rather the
cry of a lost child who cannot under-
stand why his father has left him, and
who longs to see his father’s face again.
What these words were in the lips of
the Holy One of God, heart of man
may not conceive. For a moment in
that last agony the Perfect Man was
alone with the sin of the world.”—
Perowne.

- IL Forsaken but not prayerless.
“O my God, I cry in the daytime, but
Thou hearest not, and in the night season
and am not silent” (ver. 2). “Jt is as
if he said, I cannot understand this
darkness, It is not that I have for-


(Verses 1, 2.)


gotten Thee, Day and night I ery, ta
me there is no silence.”—Perowne.
Prayer is the great resource of the
troubled soul; and though deliverance
does not come immediately, prayer is
not abandoned. The more continuous
the misery the more intense and vocal
the prayer. Though the door refuse
to open for weeks and months, the
earnest suppliant knows he is before the
right door, that there is no other to
which he can go, and that erelong it
must open. ‘The greatest pain to the
troubled soul is not to be sure of the
hearing of his prayers, Whoever doves
not give up God, even when his trouble
of body and pain of soul has advanced
to the highest point, soon has the
experience that God has not forsaken
him.”—Lange. The solitude is not so
oppressive whose silence is broken by
the voice of prayer. Delay increases
the soul’s importunity, and importunity
will succeed (Luke xi. 8).

It. Forsaken but trusting. Dense
as may be the darkness and acute as
may be the anguish, the sufferer does
not lose his hold on God, It is still,
“ My God, my God.” The great test
and triumph of faith is witnessed in the
continuance of confidence, not only in
one who is absent, but in one whom we
are conscious has deserted us.

1, This trust was encouraged by con-
templating the holiness of the Divine
character. “ But Thou art holy, O ‘Thou
that inhabitest the praises of Israel”
(ver. 3). Throned above the myriad
praises of the congregation which thank
fully celebrate the many acts of Divine
deliverance and redemption. Ane holi-

105


PRALM £201,


neas of God is but another aspect of His
faithfulness and mercy. The more
vivid and extensive our conception of
sin, the more exalted and impressive
will be our view of the Divine holiness.
The Redeemer of the world drew His
mightiest consolation from a recollection
of the holiness of God, when, in His
hour of darkness and sorrow, He was
brought into close and lonely contact
with the enormity of human sin,
“While the holiness of God is in the
highest degree acknowledged and adored,
the afflicted speaker in this verse seems
to marvel how the holy God could for-
sake him, and be silent to his cries.
The argument is, Thou art holy, oh!
why is it Thou dost disregard Thy holy
One in His hour of sharpest anguish ?
We may not question the holiness of
God, but we may argue from it, and use
it as a plea in our petitions.”—Spurgeon,
“The expression, ‘Thou art holy,’ is a
corroding element which must by and


Tar LONELINESS





HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





by entirely consume the other, ‘Thou
hast forsaken me.”—Hengstenberg.

9. This trust was encouraged by re-
collecting the expertence of God’s people
in times of trouble. “Our fathers
trusted in Thee,” d&, (ver. 4,5). Thrice
“they trusted,” and only once “they
cried.” It was not that God could not
deliver those who trusted in Him: He
had done it for those of old time. He
who could deliver the sinful when they
cried to Him in faith, could much more
deliver the Sinless One who came to Him
in innocence. A genuine trust is always
succeeded by a signal deliverance. Man
is often disappointed and confounded
when trusting to human policy and
power; but never when trusting in God,

Lessons :—1. The lowest level of suf-
fering is reached when the soul ts con-
sciously forsaken of God. 2. Prayer ts
the most suitable exercise of the soul in the
most trying moments. 3. When the soul
can do nothing else tt can trust in God.


OF SUFFERING.


(Verses 6-18.)


I. Oppresses the soul with a sense
of personal unworthiness (ver. 6-8).

1. Vhis unworthiness is humbly ac-
knowledged. “TI am a worm and no
man; a reproach of men and despised
of the people” (ver. 6). The first step
in a downward career is to sink in the
estimation of others ; the next and more
fatal one is to sink in our own estima-
tion. Pungent and continued suffering
depresses the mind, and fills it with
gloomy and but half-comprehended
thoughts, and the sufferer is tempted to
depreciate himself and all his doings.
“Man is compared to a worm in Job
xxv. 6 on account of the nothingness of
his existence. The worm in the passage
before us, as in Isa, xli. 13, serves to
designate nothingness within nothing-
ness. The reproach and the contempt
are brought under our notice, not so
much in themselves, as in reference to
the ground on which they rest-—the deep
misery of the sufferer, whose condition is
such that it is reckoned by all men as
altogether desperate,” —Hengastenberg.

106


2. This sense of unworthiness renders
the soul more keenly sensitive to insult
and scorn, ‘All they that see me
laugh me to scorn,” d&e. (ver. 7, 8). It
is painful to endure the scornful ridicule
of our enemies when we are in health
and vigour, and able to repel and answer
it. But when all our powers are pros-
trate by affliction, and we are too help-
less to reply, the torture is overwhelming.
Still more cruel and unbearable is it
when the sufferers God is maligned
(ver. 8), “This is the most lacerating
kind of contempt. Because he loves
God more than himself, he would rather
encounter floods of derision Aimself, than
that one drop should fall on the name of
his God. The shaking of the head and
the opened mouth denote mocking de-
light."—Tholuck. Oh! how inexpres-
sibly keen must have been the sufferings
of the Sinless One as He listened to
the revilings of those who gloated over
His crucifixion! How often is it that
man despises what God holds in highest
esteem! If we would be true followers


BHOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





of Christ we must be content to bear
His reproach.

IL Throws the mind back upon the
thought of the Divine Oare from the
earliest period of life (ver. 9, 10),
He who protected and sustained us in
the helplessness and perils of infancy,
will not leave us to perish in the darkest
and loneliest extremity. Too little do
we think of the goodness of God which
brought us into being, provided for
every want, brightened the happy period
of youth, and led us to trust Him in
every emergency of life. Comfort may
be found in the hour of trial by refiect-
ing on the past mercies of God. The
more conscious we become of our own
impotency, the more tenaciously do we
cling to the Divine arm and the more
highly do we prize the smallest acts of
kindness and sympathy. “I began to
rail against Providence,” wrote the im-
priscned Armand Charratt with the
blood he had pricked from his arm,
“when a messenger of mercy came to
me in the form of an escaped canary-
bird down a chimney of the Bastille. I
kept the canary-bird, and for three
years I was no longer solitary.” ‘God
begins His care over us from the earliest
hour. We are dandled upon the knee
of mercy and cherished in the lap of
goodness; our cradle is canopied by
Divine love, and our first totterings are
guided by His care. He who was our
God when we left our mother, will be
with us till we return to mother-earth,
and will keep us from perishing in the
belly of hell. Faith finds weapons
everywhere.” —Spurgeon.

Til. Is embittered by the violence
and cruelty of relentless enemies.

1. They are violent. “ Many bulls
have compassed me; strong bulls of
Bashan have beset me round. They
gaped upon me with their mouths, as a
ravening and a roaring lion” (ver. 12,
13). The lonely sufferer is terrified by
the fierce opposition of his enemies, who,
like strong and ravenous beasts, threaten
him with horrible mutilation and de-
struction. The wild, ferocious out
breaks of the wicked are ever a source
of distress to the holy soul. One of the
bitterest elements in the sufferings of the


PSALM KZN,





world’s Redeemer was, that He had to
endure the contradiction of sinners
against Himself, The sorrows of the
good are met with the taunting, malicious
revelry of the wicked,

2. They are cruel. “For dogs have
compassed me: the assembly of the
wicked have enclosed me: they pierced
my hands and my feet” (ver. 16). The
enemies are still compared to savage
animals, but the figure is somewhat
different: “dogs” not only as fierce,
but as unclean. We must remember
that these dogs are the savage wild dogs
of the East (1 Kings xiv. 11; Ps. lix. 6.
14, 15).—Perowne. Jews and heathens
enclosed the solitary Sufferer of Calvary,
as dogs in their madness and fury close
in upon the hunted stag. They pierced
His hands with nails, that our souls
might not be pierced with judgments,
Sin is the most terrific instrument of
cruelty.

IV. Intensifies the sense of utter
helplessness and agony (vers. 11, 14,
15, 17, 18). It is impossible to find
words that will depict more graphically
a condition of complete exhaustion, dis-
tress, and despair, than those contained
in these verses. The lonely sufferer,
after referring to the cruelty of his
tormentors, passes on to speak of the
effects of their savage treatment upon
himself. He felt absolutely friendless
and alone :—‘“‘ There is none to help.”
As poured-out water dissolves on the
ground, so his strength is dissolved: he
is utterly spent. “I am poured out like
water.” His bones, the support of the
physical frame, are sundered and dis-
placed, involving unutterable agony.
‘“* All my bones are out of joint. I may
tell all my bones, they look and stare
upon me.” His courage fails him; the
brave heart can hold up no longer, but
sinks in despair, ‘‘My heart is like
wax; it is melted in the midst of my
bowels.” The sap of life is dried up
like the moisture out of a burnt-out
potsherd : his misery and fevered pain
exhausted his endurance and strength,
as a vessel of clay is dried and burnt
within a furnace, “My strength ia
dried up like a potsherd.” In conse
quence of excessive thirst and ec

ru


PaslLM XEIL


his tongue is sealed to his jaws ; and he
feels as one who has already entered the
grave, ‘“‘My tongue cleaveth to my
jaws, and Thou hast brought me into
the dust of death.” As a last act of
indignity, as though he were already
dead, his very clothes are stripped from
him and raffled as plunder among his
unpitying enemies. ‘They part my
garments among them, and cast lots
upon my vesture” (ver. 18). How all
these particulars were fulfilled in the


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





sufferings of the Son of God, is narrated
in the gospels with touching simplicity
and realistic power. The heaviest stroke
in all suffering is that which we must
bear alone. No loneliness is more
oppressive, more distressing, more in-
supportable than the loneliness of suffer-
ing.

ereen s—l. The weakness and vanity
of man. 2. The terrible consequences of
sin. 3. The only source of help in ex-
tremity is Divine,


A Partsetic Cry ror HELP.
(Verses 19-21.)


L That God is the unfailing source
of help in time of trouble. ‘Be not
Thou far from me, O Lord: O my
strength, haste Thee to help me” (ver.
19). Trouble is a blessing when it
drives us nearer to God. The fainting
victim turns away from his fierce
persecutors and from his own sufferings,
and fixes his eyes on God. ll earthly
help has its limits, but Divine help never
fails. If God be distant, the darkness
deepens and the sorrow too. But when
the strength of Israel hastens to the
rescue, the light of hope breaks in and
the anguish is assuaged. ‘From the
lowest depths God hears the piteous cry
of the helpless. “ Prayer is the weapon
with which the bars of the gates of
heaven are burst open.”

Ii That deliverance is implored
from imminent peril (ver. 20, 21).

1. From threatened death. “Deliver
my soul from the sword: my darling”
—my only one. ‘“ From the parallelism
=my soul, my life. The life is so
called, either because man has but one
life, or because it is the most precious
of all things."—-Perowne, This life was
exposed to destruction by the sword ; for
“the sword is an individualising designa-
tion of whatever is an instrument of
death.” The Lord can blunt the point
of the sharpest weapon ; and, at the last
moment, restore the stricken one who
eries to Him.

2. From the ferocity of the most pitiless
tormentors. “Save me—from the
power 7 ey dog—from the lion’s mouth


—from the horns of the unicorns.”
Luther observes—“The rage of the
furious devil is so great, that the prophet
does not consider it enough to have
represented it by a sharp sword, but
introduces further, for the same purpose,
the tearings of raging, furious dogs, the
mouth of the creedy and hungry lion,
which stands already open, and is ready
to devour, and the dreadfully fierce wrath
of the raging, terrible unicorn.” The
word unicorn is from a Hebrew verb
which signifies to elevate, and refers to an
animal “ having a high horn in its nose
or front, an untameable beast, which may
be slain, but cannot be taken alive. I»
is spoken of in Scripture in respect to ite
strength in Num. xxii., its untameable
ferocity Job. xxxix. 9, its height of
horn Ps, xcii. 11."—Bythner. The fury
of the most violent and dreaded enemy
is under the control of the sufferer’s God.
He who holds the winds in His fists,
whose whisper stills the angriest storm,
whose look smites the most formidable
hosts with paralysis, can dissipate, like
foam before the breeze, the violent anger
of our persecuting adversaries.

III. That the cry for help is em-
boldened by the recollection of past
deliverances. “For Thou hast heard
me” (ver, 21). None are so poor in
blessings, but there are some periods in
their past history in which they were
specially impressed with the saving
interposition of heaven, in answer to
prayer. The sous in its deepest distress
falls back upon such @ well-tested ex-


HOMILETIC COMMENTAR Y- PSALMS.


PSALM XXII.





perience, and gathersconfidence. From
this point we observe a marked change
in the condition of the sufferer. From
a state of abject wretchedness and
despair, he rises into the apparently
sudden enjoyment of a radiant hope,


and calm, restful assurance. Faith,
however feeble its grasp, if persevering,
is certain to triumph. The past is an
inspiration for the present, and a guide
for the future.


A Sone or DELrveraxon.
(Verses 22-31.)


At this point we detect a marked
thange in the tone and spirit of the
psalm. Light breaks in upon the for-
Yozn sufferer. Despair gives place to
hope ; and the prospect of speedy and
certain deliverance animates the soul
with gratitude and joy.

Observe :

L That this deliverance was cele-
brated by grateful praise.

1. The theme of praise is the Name
of the Great Deliverer, ‘I will declare
Tuy Namez unto my brethren.” The
Name of Jehovah is inclusive of all the
Divine perfections ; but that perfection
which is more immediately exercised in
effecting for us a great deliverance will
naturally be most prominent in our
song. The deliverance of the world’s
Redeemer from His unutterable suf-
ferings, and the consequent deliverance
of humanity from the power of sin,
called into play all the energies and
perfections of the Divine Nature, The
Divine Name, therefore, in all its depth
and expanse of meaning, is the subject
of highest adoration. To declare the
name of the Lord is to make known
what He has done.

2. The praise is offered publicly.
“Unto my brethren—in the midst of
the congregation—in the great congre-
gation—before them that fear Him”
(vers. 22, 25). Instead of the anxious
cry, which, in contrast with the praises
of Israel, previously sounded from the
mouth of the innocent and _ horribly
tortured victim, the song of praise of
' the delivered, is in future to resound
in the assembly of his brothers, and the
whole congregation is to hear, to their
own edification, the declaration of the
great and wonderful things that God has
done to this one who was so afflicted


and utterly lost. The sufferings of the
righteous are according to the Divine
purpose not only to be of advantage te
the present congregation but likewise to


the heathen throughout the entire
world.— Lange,
3. The praise is general. “All ye


the seed of Jacob, glorify Him” (ver.
23). All the true worshippers of
Jehovah are called upon to praise Him.
True praise is characterised by profound
reverence. ‘‘Ye that fear the Lord.”
“ Humble awe of God is so necessary a
preparation for praising Him that none
are fit to sing to His honour but such
as reverence His word. Holy fear
should always keep the key of thi
singing pew. Where Jesus leads the
tune none but holy lips may dare to
sing.”-—Spurgeon. True praise is ac
companied with substantial thank
offerings, “I will pay my vows before
them that fear Him” (ver. 25). The
faithful promiser, who, when in trouble
had vowed to offer certain sacrifices,
was accustomed, after deliverance, tc
invite the widow, the orphan, and the
poor to participate with him in thw
sacrificial meal (Deut. xii. 18, xvi. 11).
The grateful heart will praise God witl
a full-handed generosity, and delights t«
share its bounty and joy with others
The salvation of one adds to the hapy
ness of many (Luke xv. 10).

4. The praise recognises the specia(
character of the deliverance (ver. 24}.
God esteems what others despise. The
abject sufferer who sinks below the
nctice and help of man is never beyond
the reach and sympathy of God. The
recoilection of the horrors from which
we have been snatched, will give a
colouring to the expression of our
gratitude. The affliction of oe « flicted

0


Foal XT.


“The same word is used with Messianic
reference Isa. lili. 4, 7; Zech. ix. 9.
When he cried He heard. What a con-
trast to vers. 1, 2! Very remarkable
fs this confident acknowledgment of
God’s goodness in hearing prayer.”—
Perowne.

5. The praise will bring satisfaction
to the most needy. ‘The meek shall
eat and be satisfied,” d&e. (ver. 26). The
gratitude of the delivered sufferer and
the joy it occasions to others, are repre-
sented under the figure of a feast in
which the poorest participate. The
grateful and extended proclamation of
the merciful works of God, especially
as exhibited in the salvation of the
human race, will supply the spiritual
banquet for which millions crave, and
for lack of which they perish,

Ii. That this deliverance will be
the means of conferring blessing on
all mankind.

1. All nations will acknowledge the
supremacy of Jehovah. “ All the ends
of the world shall remember,” d&c. (vers.
27, 28). The heathen may have for-
gotten God, but they are not forgotten
by Him: they may have tgnored the
Divine rule, but they cannot destroy
it— He is the governor among the
nations.” The heathen who share in
the great salvation wrought out by the
suffering Messiah will gladly submit to
His lordship. “It is well to mark the
order of conversion as here set forth :—
They shall remember—this is reflection,
like the prodigal who came unto him-
self; and turn unio Jehovah—this is
repentance, like Manasseh who left his
idols; and shall worshiy—this is holy
service as Paul adored the Christ whom
once he abhorred.”—Spurgeon.

2. All ranks of men shall find happt-
ness in the worship of Jehovah (ver. 29).
Here the image of the banquet is
resumed, the feast is provided for all,
irrespective of national or personal
distinctions, “All they that be fat
upon the earth ”—the rich and mighty ;
‘all they that go down to the dust ”—
those who are so miserably starved and
poor that they are ready to perish, and
“cannot keep alive their own soul ”—


hoe


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS.





all shall sit down together at the same
divinely-furnished banquet. Here all
guests are poor, and God ia rich for all.
The Gospel shall win the homage of all
nations and all classes of men.

IIL That this deliverance will
vindicate the Divine Righteousness to
future ages (vers. 30, 31). ‘‘ His
Righteousness not only as manifested
in the deliverance of His righteous ser-
vant, but as manifested in all His great
work of salvation, both in the suffering
and in the exaltation of Christ, and also
in providing the feast for all who will
partake thereof. This hope of the
conversion of other nations to the faith
of God’s elect, was in an especial man-
ner characteristic of the period of the
return from the Babylonish captivity.
The prophecies of Zechariah are full of
it, and so are many of the Psalms which
probably date from that period.”
Perowne. The divine conduct in the
great work of Redemption will be con-
tinually celebrated. Posterity wil! per-
petuate the worship of Jehovah; each
succeeding generation will preserve and
disseminate the knowledge committed to
it by the generation preceding. The
seed of the righteous is indestructible
and ever fruitful. The true Church of
God can never perish. It is said that
the Baobab-tree—the largest known
tree in the world—though stripped of
its bark outside and hollowed to a large
cavity within its trunk, has the singular
power of exuding from its substance a
perfectly new bark, which lines voth
the inner and outer surfaces of the tree. -
So is it with the Church of God,
Though pierced and peeled and wounded
by the gleaming axes of malicious
enemies, it still lives and grows in
irresistible productiveness, affording
shelter to millions, and stretching its
life-giving and healing foliage over all
nations.

LESSONS :

1. Deliverance from pertl should be
gratefully acknowledged.

2. The world ts most indebted to those
who have suffered most for tts benefit.
Pak The influence of a good work never


PSALM XXIII.


INTRODUCTION.


“The king who had been the shepherd-boy, and had been taken from the quict sheep-
sotes to rule over Israel, sings this little psalm of Him who is the true Shepherd and King of
men. We do not know at what period of David’s life it waa written, but it sounds as if it '
were the work of his later years. There is a fulness of experience about it, and a tone of
subdued, quiet confidence which speaks of a heart mellowed by years, and of a faith made
sober by many atrial. A young man would not write so calmly, and a life which was just
Opening would not afford material for such a record of God’s guardianship in all changing
circumstances. If we think of the psalm aa the work of David's later years, is it not very
beautiful te see the old king looking back with such vivid and loving remembrance to his
childhood’s occupation, and bringing up again to memory in hia palace the green valleys, the
_ gentle streams, the dark glens where he had led his flocks in the old days ; very beautiful to

see him traversing all the stormy years of warfare and rebellion, of crime and sorrow, which
lay between, and finding in all God’s guardian presence and gracious guidance? There is
nothing difficult of understanding in the psalm. The train of thought is clear and obvious
The experiences which it details are common, the emotions it expresses simple and familiar.
The tears that have been dried, the fears that have been dissipated, by this old song; the love
and thankfulness which have found in them their best expression, prove the worth of its simple
words. It lives in moat our memories. The psalm falls into two halves, in both of which
the same general thought of God’s guardian care is presented, though under different illustra-
tions, and with some variety of detail. The first half sets Him forth as a Shepherd, and us as
the sheep of His pasture; the second gives Him as the Host, and us as the guests at His
table and the dwellers in His house,”—A. Maclaren.


Toe Divoxz SHEPHERD AND Ais FLocsg.
(Verses 1-4.)


L The Divine Shepherd supplies
every want. ‘‘The Lord is my shep-
herd, I shall not want” (ver. 1). The
shepherd is, literally, one who feeds.
It is an image that would be specially
suggestive to a nation of shepherds.
Most. beautifully does it symbolise the
character of Jehovah as the provider,
protector, guide, and unfailing com-
panion of His people. ‘lo appreciate
the force of the image, it is necessary
to understand the difference between
the modern shepherd and the Oriental
shepherd of olden times. “ Beneath
the burning skies and the clear starry
night of Palestine,” says Robertson,
“there grows up between the shepherd
and his flock a union of attachment and
tenderness. It is the country where,
at any moment, sheep are liable to be
swept away by some mountain torrent,
or carried off by hill-robbers, or torn by
wolves, At any moment their protector
may have to save them by personal
hazard. Alone in those vast solitudes,
with no human being near, the shep-
herd and the sheep feel a life in com-
mon. Differences disappear, the vaat


interval between the man and the brute:
the single point of union is felt strongly.
One is the love of the protector, the
other the love of the grateful life; and
so between livea so distant, there is
woven by night and day, by summer
suns and winter frosts, a living net-
work of sympathy.” Between the Good
Shepherd and His people there exist the
tenderest relations—on the one side of
unfathomable affection, on the other ef
calm unlimited confidence. “J shall
not want”—I want nothing. With
Jehovah for my shepherd and guardian,
whose hand rests on all the sources of
supply, I can lack no temporal or
spiritual good. When the holy John
Fletcher, of Madeley, was asked by
George IIL. if he would accept prefer-
ment in the Church as an acknowledg-
ment for an able and timely paper he
had written on American affairs, he
returned the respectful but character-
istic reply —“ Sire, [ want nothing, but
more grace.”

II. The Divine Shepherd affords
tranquillising rest to the weary. ‘‘ He
maketh me to lie down in green pas-

111


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





tures, and leadeth me beside the still
waters,” or, waters of rest (ver. 2). “It
is the hot noon-tide, and the desert lies
baking in the awful glare, and every
stone on the hills of Judea burns the
foot that touches it, But in that pant-
ing breathless hour, here is a little green
glen, with a quiet brooklet, and a moist
lush herbage all along its course, and
great stones that fling a black shadow
over the dewy grass at their base; and
there would the shepherd lead his flock,
while the ‘sunbeams, like swords,’ are
piercing everything beyond that hidden
covert, Sweet silence broods there.
The sheep feed and drink, and couch
in cool lairs till he calls them forth
again. So God leads His children.”—
Maclaren, With all the haste and
worry and toil of life, there is much of
quiet, pleasant restfulness, Seasons of
repose are necessary to recover and fit
the jaded worker for the ever-pressing
and imperative duties of active life.
The soul must rest peacefully in God’s
favour and in placid, hallowed commu-
nion with Him, in order to satisfy its
keenest hunger and slake its fiercest
thirst.

III. The Divine Shepherd prepares
the soul for the loftiest service. “He
restoreth my soul: He leadeth me in
the paths of righteousness for His
name's sake” (ver. 3.) The designed
result of rest aad refreshment is the
accession of new vigour to both mind
and body. The weeks spent in purpose-
less loitering on the shining sands of the
summer sea, or in rambling among the
huge, silent hills, or on the banks of the
brawling trout stream, with its tree-
shaded nooks, its rustling sedges and
glittering weirs, tend to refresh and
invigorate the whole man, and prepare
for the stern, tugging warfare of life
and for nobler enterprise. So is it in
the spiritual life. He restoreth my soul.
“‘When the soul grows sorrowful, He
revives it: when it is sinful, He sancti-
fies it: when it is weak, He strengthens
it:” when it wanders, He brings it
back. God blesses not simply to im-
part happiness ; but to fit the soul for
holier service and more extensive use-
fulness. He leadeth mein the paths of

113


righteousness, “Life is not a fold for
the sheep to lie down in, but a road for
them to walk on. We get blessings, not
to let them pass away like waste steam
puffed into empty air, but that we may
use them to drive the wheels of life.
The waters of happiness are not for a
luxurious bath where a man may lie,
till, like flax steeped too long, the very
fibre be rotted out of him; a quick
plunge will brace him, and he will come
out refreshed for work. Rest is to fit for
work, work is to sweeten rest. There is
nothing more evanescent in its nature
than a mere emotion, even though it be
that of joy in God, unless it be turned
into a spring of action for God. Such
emotions, like photographs, vanish from
the heart unless they be fixed. Work
for God is the way to fix them,” —
Maclaren.

IV. The Divine Shepherd provides
protection and consolation in the
darkest peril. “Yea, though I walk
through the valley of the shadow of
death, I will fear no evil, for Thou art
with me; Thy rod and Thy staff they
comfort me” (ver. 4). The soul fears
not to enter the “sunless gulfs” of
sorrow when assured of the supporting
presence and protecting care of the
Good Shepherd. The darkness of death
is but a shadow after all. The trusting
soul enters the gloomy gorge only to
emerge into the brighter day of immor-
tality. ‘Some evils may come; some
will probably come,—one at least is
sure to come. However bright may be
the path, somewhere on it, perhaps just
round that turning, ‘sits the shadow
feared of man.’ But to the Christian
heart there is the conviction that the
hand which guides us into the dark
valley, will guide us through it and up
out of it. Yes, strange as it may sound,
the presence of Him who sends the
sorrow is the best help to bear it. The
assurance that the hand which strikes is
the hand which binds up, makes the
stroke a blessing,—sucks the poison out
of the wound of sorrow, and turns the
rod which smites into the staff to lean
on.” When Dr. Guthrie, the celebrated
and eloquent Divine, felt himself tread-
ing the deep, dark valley, he exclaimed


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





PSALM XXiva,





“Death is mining away here, slowly
but surely, in the dark. Blessed


Lessons; 1. The sheep of Jehovah
are saved from poverty, 2. From wan


Jesus! what would I do now but for dering. 3, From uselessness, 4, Fren
These {*” fear. 5. From sorrow,
A Rorat Banquet.
(Verses 5, 6.)


The image is changed, but we have
substantially the same ideas as those
given in the earlier portion of the
psalm. There are, as before, the food,
the guardianship, the peril, the journey.
Jehovah is here regarded as a Bountiful
Host and His people as guests at His
banqueting table. The verses illustrate
certain striking features in the Royal
Banquet.

I. This banquet is provided in the
midst of conflict. ‘Thou preparest a
table before me in the presence of mine
enemies” (ver. 5). Life not only in-
volves work, but also conflict. Our
enemies are numerous, powerful and
cruel. The fight is fierce, prolonged
and exhausting. Yet, spread by in-
visible hands is the table in the wilder-
ness, in the presence of our grim-visaged
enemies who, while looking on, are
restrained by some irresistible spell from
harming. Unlike the soldier on the
battle-field, who, if he eats at all,
snatches a hasty meal and, wearied and
but half refreshed, hurries again to the
fight, the Christian warrior pauses to
rest and feast. There is no hurry, no
confusion, no fear, though the eyes of
his enemies flash upon him with vindic-
tive glare, the presence of the Divine
host is an impenetrable shield about
him. So is it ever in the progress of
spiritual life. There is always the
conflict, always the foe; always the
guardian, always the banquet.

II. This banquet is promotive of
abundant joy. ‘“ Thou anointest my
head with oil; my cup runneth over”
_ (ver. 5). The allusion is to the custom
in the East of anointing with oil on festal
occasions as a means of refreshment,
and as indicating prosperity and re-
joicing. The words also point out the
lavish outflow of the Divine beneficence,
aad the limitation of the human zapacity

B


which trembles with joy under the
overflowing current My cup runneth
over, “He had not only a fulness of
abundance, but of redundance. Those
that have this happiness must carry
their cup upright, and see that it over-
flows into their poor brethren’s emptier
vessels.” —T7'rapp. ‘Drink the cup of
gladness as men do when their foe is at
their side, looking askance over the rim,
and with one hand on the sword, ready,
aye ready, against treachery and sur-
prise. But the presence of the danger
should make the feast more enjoyable
too, by the moderation it enforces and
by the contrast it affords—as to sailors
on shore or soldiers in a truce. Joy
may grow on the very face of danger,
as a slender rose-bush flings its bright
sprays and fragrant blossoms over the
lip of a cataract.”—Maclaren.

IIL This banquet will satisfy al
the wants of a lifetime. “Surely, good-
ness and mercy shall follow me all the
days of my life” (ver. 6). Goodness and
mercy are the staple viands of the feast,
and give a flavour and virtue to all the
rest. Man needs goodness to supply
all his wants, and mercy to cancel all
his sins. The words are expressive of °
simple and unbounded confidence in
God as to every event in our earthly
future. “ Shall follow me all the days
of my life.” Through all its changes,
its shade and sunshine, its perils and
deliverances, its sorrows and joys, to ita
close. ‘‘ His enemies had pursued him
even to the presence of his host, hence-
forth grace and joy will pursue him and
load him with blessings.” New tokens
of His pity and love shall shine upon
us, before us, and behind us, on our
right hand and on our left, throughout
the whole of our earthly pilgrimag
The most indigent are rich indeed when
encompassed with the Divine loving

113


PSALM XEIV,


kindness, “What, all this, and Jesus,
too!” said a poor cottager, as she broke
a piece of bread and filled a glass with
cold water. ‘

IV. This banquet is the type and
pledge of the everlasting feast in the
heavenly banqueting hall “And I
will dwell in the house of the Lord for
ever” (ver. 6). Suggestive of the
closest intimacy with God and the cease-
less enjoyment of His favour. I will
dwell there, “where, without a veil,
irradiation from the Eternal Three shall
dart unutterable joys into my glorified
spirit, transformed into the image of
. the God whom I behold; and near His
throne, high and lifted up, where bright
angelic hosts, His train, fill the vast
temple with His glory. His love my
all-sufficient portion, and my happy
labour, everlasting praise.” In these
words, as if reluctant to dismiss the
thought, the psalmist returns to the
image of the Good Shepherd, who, at
length, conducts His flock to a place of
safety and undisturbed repose. “ The
sheep are led by many a way, some-


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY ; PSALMS,





times through sweet meadows, some:
times limping along sharp-flinted, dusty
highways, sometimes high up over
rough, rocky mountain-passes, sometimes
down through deep gorges, with no sun-
shine in their gloom ; but they are ever
being led to one place, and when the
hot day is over, they are gathered into |
one fold, and the sinking sun sees them
safe, where no wolf can come, nor any
robber climb up any more, but all shall
rest for ever under the shepherd’s eye.”
—Maclaren. Very quaint but ex-
pressive is the paraphrase on these two
verses by an old Elizabethan poet.
(Francis Davison)—


“Thou my board with messes large
Dost surcharge ;
My bowles full of wine Thou pow’rest,
And before myne enemies’
- Envious eies
Balme upon my head Thou show’reat,


Neither dures Thy bounteous grace
For a space ;
But it knowes nor bound nor measure,
So my daies to my life’s end
IT shall spend
In Thy courtes with heavenly pleasare,”


“ PSALM XXIV.


INTRODUCTION.


“ This grand choral hymn waa in all probability composed and sung om the occasion of the
removal of the ark from the house of Obed-Edom to the city of David, on Mount Zion (2 Sam,
vi.). It was a day of solemn gladness and triumph. No long period had elapsed since David
had wrested the stronghold of Zion from the last remnant of the hill-tribes of the Canaanites
which lingered in Palestine. Henceforth this mountain-city, deemed by its ancient inhabitanta
impregnable, was selected by the conqueror as the seat of the royal residence and the centre
of religious worship ; and thither, after having subdued his enemies, he determined to bring the
ark which, for nearly fifty years, had been left neglected at Kirjath-Jearim. It is difficult for
us to conceive the feelings, at once of the most exalted and ferveut patriotism, and of the
deepest religious enthusiasm, which would be awakened in the hearta of the people by such an
event, The king, and priests, and people, the elders of [erael, and the captains over thousands
(1 Chron. xv. 2), in solemn procesgion, and with all the accompaniments of music and song,
conducted the ark to its resting-plice on the holy mountain, It was then that this majestic
anthem rose to heaven, ‘Jehovah’s is the earth, and the fulness thereof; ’ and the gates of
that grey old fortress were bid to lift themselves up, as being too narrow to admit the King of
glory. The psalm consists of two principal divisions ; 1. The preparation for the entry of

ehovah into His holy mountain (ver. 1-6). II. The entry itself (ver. 2~10).””—Perowne,


THE DIVINE PROPRIETORSHIP OF THE WORLD.


(Verses 1, 2.)
I, The Divine provrietorship of the the Lord’s.”’ With all its forms of
world is absolute and all-inclusive beauty and magnificence, with all its
(ver. 1). The world belongs toGcd— ponderous forees and mystic laws, with


1. As to vis matter. ‘‘ The earth is all its wealth of mineral and hidder tree
114


V4


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


sures of earth, air, and ocean. Man has
conquered the earth by the power of the
sword, and claimed the right to dispose
of it in petty states and kingdoms; but
the earth does not belongto man. “He
is but a tenant at will,—a leaseholder
upon most precarious tenure, liable to
instantaneous ejectment. The great
Landowner and true Proprietor holds
His court above the clouds, and laughs
at the title-deeds of worms of the dust.
The fee-simple is not with the lord of
the manor, nor the freeholder, but with
the Creator.”—-Spurgeon. 2. As to tts
productiveness. “And the fulness there
of.” It is God who makes the soil fruit-
ful, the air vital and sustaining, and the
water in the great ocean-basin maintain
its just proportion to the land. Not
withstanding that population follows so
closely on the heels of production, there
is always enough for man and beast.
God fills the earth with plenty, and
keeps it full ‘ The earth is the Lord’s
and the fulness thereof,” are words in-
scribed on the front of the Royal Ex-
change, London, and on similar institu-
tions throughout the country. It is
‘fitting that the great centrea of the
world’s commerce should acknowledge
the Divine source and ownership of the
world’s wealth. 3, As to tts inhabitants,
“The world, and they that dwell there-
in.” The Jews claimed to be the sole
and peculiar possession of Jehovah, and
yet they were accustomed to sing words
like these! They are not the only peo
ple whose sentiments and conduct have
been beneath the nobler teachings of
their creed. Christianity has done brave
work in breaking down the exclusive-
ness of nations. Not one specially
favoured nation, but alJ nations belong
to the Lord. The rights and freedom
of manhood belong to every individual
member of the human family, whatever
his country, colour, or surroundings.
All living beings—the denizens of earth,
air, and sea—are the property of Jeho-
. vah. The Supreme Owner of all de
serves the obedience and homage of all,
The devout mind sees all things in God,
and God in all things.

IL The Divine proprietorship of the
world is based on the act of creation.


P84 LM XKIV.





“For He hath founded it upon the
seas” (ver. 2), ‘The reference is no
doubt to the account of creation in
Genesis, the dry land having emerged
from the water, and seeming to rest
upon it. Ne ama exxxvi, 6; Prov.
viii. 29). It would, however, be quite
out of place to suppose that in such
language we have the expression of any
theory, whether popular or scientific, as
to the structure of the earth’s surface.” —
Perowne, The human mind has wearied
itself in spinning theories about the
origin of the world, and in the historic
development of these theories, from time
to time, different schools of pseudo-
religious philosophy have prevailed—
modern thought being but a reproduc-
tion, in a new setting, of the ideas of
the ancient philosophers. Deism, repre-
senting one school of thinkers, suffers a
God to exist, but plunges Him into a
state of apathetic repose. Pantheism
confounds Him with the world. Mate-
rialism utterly denies Him, while, all
along the line of these theorists, we see
the world, the spirit of the world, the
life of the world, and the matter of the
world, are exalted and adored in suc-
cession, Proud, vain, puny man! He
is like a fly discussing the mechanism of
an elephant, or a wriggling annelid dis-
coursing on the vastness and glory of the
ocean, Augustine, in a splendid pass-
age of his “ Confessions,” describes the
true origin of creation as the work of
God: “TI asked the earth; it said, I am
not He; and all that therein is made the
same acknowledgment. I asked the sea
and the depths, and all that move and
live therein, and they answered, We are
not thy God ; seek higher. I asked the
winds, but the air with all its inhabitants
answered, | am not thy God. I asked the
heavens, the sun, the moon, the stars, and
they answered, Neither are we the God
whom thou seekest. And I said to all
things that surrounded me, Ye have told
me concerning my God, that ye are not
He; speak then to meof Him. And they
all cried with loud voices, He made us!”

Til. The Divine proprietorship of
the world is confirmed by the fact of
its preservation. ‘‘ And established it
upon the floods,” or, upon “6 atreaans


PSALM XXIV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


etl


doth He make it fast. The preservation
of the world is a perpetual miracle. It
requires the exercise of the same power
of God as that which first called it into
being. The area of the sea is three
times greater than that of the land.
But for the preserving care of God, the
waters of the ocean would inundate and
submerge the earth, and destroy all its
inhabitants. As much water is con-
tributed to the ocean by the rivers as
would make # new ocean every year, and
yet the sea is not augmented. The
preserving power of God has put into
yperation the law of evaporation, by


which the sea loses every day as much
moisture as it receives from tributary
streams. How insecure are the founda-
tions of the earth—resting on treacher-
ous and unstable water! If God were
to withdraw His hand fora moment, the
elemental forces of nature would anni-
hilate the world and they that dwell
therein. He who preserves the world
has an undisputed right to possess it.
Learn: 1. The folly of loving the
present world. 2. The audacity of Satan
tn claiming all the kingdoms of the world.
3. The duty and privilege of rendering joy


Sul worship to the great Proprietor of al!.


Tae Moray Firness or tHe True WorsHirrer.
(Verses 3-6.)


L That it is the privilege of the
true worshipper to approach near to
God (ver. 3). He ‘“‘ascends into the
bill of the Lord,” and “ stands in His
holy place.” “ His holy place is no less
than the very place and seat of glory.
And being such, you cannot imagine it
but hard to come by ; the very petty
glories of the world are so, ‘This is a
hall of glory, hard to climb, difficult to
ascend, craggy to pass ‘up, steep to
clamber, no plain campagnia to it ; the
broad easy way leads some whither else
(Matt. vii, 13); the way to this is
uarrow,—it is rough and troublesome.
But not only to ascend but stand there ;
to continue at so high a pitch, to be
constant in truth and piety, that will be
hard indeed, and bring more difficulties
to contest with."—Mark Frank. The
devout and sincere worshipper is ad-
mitted into the arena of the heavenly
temple, his spiritual vision is intensified,
ue becomes familiar with the deeper
truths of God, he catches glimpses of
unearthly glories, he is filled with the
ecstasy of unutterable emotions,

Ii. That the true worshipper must
possess a moral fitness (ver. 4). There
must be—1. Rectitude of conduct. “He
that hath clean hands.” The ceremoni-
ally unclean were not allowed to touch
the sacred things of the Temple, and
certainly the morally impure, whose
hands are defiled with wrong-doing, can-

118


not enter into hallowed fellowship wit!

God. ‘The conscience that is not up-
right in the practical common-place duties
of life cannot be sincere and blameless
in the solemn worship of God. 2.
Purity of heart. “And a pure heart.”
It is not enough for the outward life to
be consistent, the inward experience
must be holy. The inner life is every-
thing to us; if we are wrong there, we
are wrong everywhere and in everything.
There is a moral sympathy between the
worshipper and the worshipped, and the
tendency is to become increasingly like
the object of our adoration, The holy
God can accept nothing but what is the
offering of a holy heart. Hence the
perpetual need of the sanctifying merits
of the great Mediator: without His aid,
the best effort of the worshipper is im-
perfect and impure. 3. 7’ruthfulness of
thought and speech. “Who hath not
lifted up his soul unto vanity, nor sworn
deceitfully.” ‘ Unto vanity, 2.¢., either
(1.) the perishing things of earth (Job
xv. 31); or, (2.) falsehood (Job xxxi.
5), which signification passes over into
a wider one of moral evil in general
(cxix. 37); or, (3.) false gods, idols
(xxxi. 6). It may be taken here in the
widest sense of all that the human heart
puts in the place of God.”—Perowne.
Truthfulness in heart and lip is de-
manded. ‘God will have nothing to de
with liars except to cast them into the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMS.


PRALM XXIV.





fake of fire, Every liar is a child of the
devil, and will be sent home to his
father. A false declaration, a fraudulent
statement, a cooked account, a slander,
& lie,—all these may suit the assembly
of the ungodly, but are detested among
true saints: how could they have fellow-
ship with the God of truth, if they did
not hate every false way.”—Spurgecm.
IL That the true worshipper is
assured of the Divine benediction.
‘* He shall receive the blessing from the
Lord, and righteousness from the God
of His salvation” (ver. 5). ‘“‘Righteous-
ness, not in the New Testament sense of
justification but in the Old Testament
acceptation of inward and outward holi-
ness ; but still even this regarded as a
gift from the God of his salvation.”
The blessing of God rested on the
family of Obed-Edom while the ark
remained in the vicinity of his dwelling.
Blessings cluster around the sanctuary,
and the eager and earnest worshipper
gathers them there to his everlasting
enrichment. Many leave the sanctuary
in a poorer condition than when they
came, because of their moral inability to
appreciate and take in the offered good.
“ He filleth the hungry with good things,
but the rich He hath sent empty away.”
IV. That the true worshipper is
the representative of a distinctive


and privileged class. “This is the
generation of them that seek Him, that
seek Thy face, O Jacob” (ver. 6). In
all ages there have been seekers after
God; and all seekers who have pos-
sessed the moral qualities enumerated in
these verses are recognised as true wor-
shippers. ‘He who longs to see his
friend when he passes takes care to
clear the mist from the window, lest by
any means his friend should go by un-
observed.” Men spend years of study in
seeking the solution to a mathematical
problem, in perfecting a mechanical
instrument, or in verifying a scientific
discovery. A whole lifetime cannot be
better spent than in seeking after God.
Such seekers make the grandest dis-
coveries, and confer the greatest bless-
ings on the world, It is said that Jounw
WeExs3H, of Scotland, often leaped out of
his bed at midnight, wrapped a plaid
around him, and wrestled with the Lord
till the breaking of day. His preaching
was irresistible when he came to his pulpit
from these Penuels of pleading with his
God.


Lessons: 1. Divine help is necessary
to worship God acceptably. 2. Accept-
able worship ts productive of the greatest
blessings, 3. The outward life should be
in harmony with the deepest experiences
of the heart.


Toe TrromeHaAL Entry or THE Guorious Kine.
(Verses 7-10.)


“The festal procession has now reached
the gates of the city of Zion. The singers
go before, the minstrels follow after, and
in the midst of these is the ark, whose
name is cailed by the name of the Lord
of Hosts, that dwelleth between the
cherubim (2 Sam. vi. 2); so that the
entry of the ark is the entry of Jehovah
Himself into Zion (Numb. x. 35). By
a sublime figure the poet bids ‘the
everlasting gates’ of that grey old fort-
ress be lifted up; for the greatest and
- most glorious of all Kings is He who
now enters in, to claim it for Himself.”
—Perowne. But we cannot overlook
the prophetical and typical reference of
this magnificent psalm, as pointing to


that period when Christ as the King of
glory, after having gained access to all
hearts, in all nations, shall enter His
heavenly palace and take His seat on
that throne before which all the ran-
somed will bow and render everlasting
homage. The triumphal entry of the
glorious King.

I. Will be into a palace of enduring
splendour. ‘‘Ye everlasting doors”
(ver. 7,9). ‘Doors were often taken
from their hinges when Easterns would
show welcome to a guest, and some
doors were drawn up and down like a
portcullis, and may possibly have pro-
truded from the top: thus literally lift
ing up their heads.” But ne paaeery


POaLM XXIV





is highly poetical, and describes the vast,
expansive, and generous welcome with
which the conquering monarch is greeted
when entering His heavenly home, The
most gorgeous and strongly-built palace of
earth is doomed to crumble and perish ;
it may become the prison and the grave
of those who entered it flushed with
conquest and elate with joy. But the
heavenly temple knows no decay,—its
beauties are unfading, its doors are ever
open, its freedom untrammelled. ‘The
gates of it shall not be shut at all by
day ; for there shall be no night there”
(Rev. xxi. 25). “‘ Heaven’s gates are
called everlasting, because they shall en-
dure for ever, or because they be the
doors unto the life which is everlasting.”
—John Boys.

II. Will be in the character of a
mighty conqueror. ‘‘ The Lord strong
and mighty, the Lord mighty in battle”
(ver. 8). He has fought the grim, fierce
eonflict with evil and all the powers of
hell, and won a signal and complete
victory. And now He is welcomed as a
warrior, strong as God Himself,—as one
who was wounded, but whose scars are
healed ; as one who was dead, but is
alive again,—whose soul was once ex-
ceeding sorrowful even unte death, while
the aun was darkened and the rocks
were rent as if in sympathy with their
struggling and suffering Lord, but who
has conquered sorrow, and sin, and the
grave, and is entering into the coveted
joy He has so bravely won.

III. Will be attended by a brilliant
throng of celestial hosts. ‘“ The Lord
of hosts; He is the King of glory ” (ver.
10). Of all the triumphal processions
of antiquity, perhaps none exceeded in
pride and magnificence that of Aurelian,
in the city of Rome. The pomp was
opened by twenty elephants, four royal
tigers, and above two hundred of the
most curious animals from every climate
of the North, the East, aud the South.
The ambassadors from the most remote
parts of the earth, all remarkable by
their rich or singular dresses, displayed
the fame and power of the Roman
Emperor. The victories of Aurelian
were attestea by a long train of captives
who reluctantly attended his tnamph,

118


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





among whom was the beauteous figure
of Zenobia, the Syrian Queen, confined
by fettera of gold, and almost fainting
under the intolerable weight of jewels,
(Vide Gibvbon’s “Decline and Fall.”)
But infinitely, beyond all earthly com-
parison will be the grand triumphal
entry of the heavenly King into the ever-
lasting city! The hour is coming when,
in loud and rapturous strains, the gates
of heaven shall be bidden to enlarge
themselves, and the portals of eternity to
unfold ; and angels, principalities, and
powers, with the innumerable multitude
of the redeemed, shall attend the Divine
conqueror in His exultant entrance into
His rightful possession. Neither He
nor His ransomed ones shall struggle
more. The King of saints has con-
quered, and they in Him: they shal}
now share in His victory, His kingdom,
His glory, and in His eternity.

IV. Will be the occasion of inex-
pressible joy to the universe. Earth
is too narrow to hold the gladness ;
heaven is invoked to shareit. “Lift up
your heads, O ye gates; and be ye lift
up, ye everlasting doors, and the King
of glory shall come in.” The inquiry of
heaven, trembling with a rapture, whick
it strives in vain to suppress, as if the
anticipated response would be a too great
excess of joy, “Who is this King of
glory ?” is answered by the thundering
plaudits of innumerable voices, every
tone ringing with transport, “The Lord
of hosts, He is the King of glory!” It
is said that the battle between the
Romans and Carthaginians at Thrasy-
mene was fought amid such terrific noise
and fury created by the combatants,
that


“An earthquake reeled unheedingly away !


So the shout of joy that shall greet the
triumphant Monarch of the skies, shall
drown all other sounds, even the loudest
convulsions of nature, and shall fill the
heavenly welkin with everlasting echoes,


“Throw wide your portals, Oh ye heavenly
gates,
And let His raneomed train exulting pass!
Come forth! O Conqueror, iu Thy royal robes,
For Thou alone
Hast triumphed o'er Thy feea; and vow
Thou bear’at


f?
BROMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,








Lessons: 1. Evil will not always
dominate. 2. Strive, by conquering the
evil within thee, to gain a moral fitness to
participate in the triumph of the glorious
King. 3. Accept, believingly, the help of
the Divine conqueror.


Upon Thy vesture and Thy thigh the name
King of kings. Oome, then, and take
“ Thy throne,
or Thine it is by right, teo long usurped.
Thine is the higdnars all the power is
Thine
For ever; and to Thee—alone to Thee shall
endless praise


And everlasting glory be ascribed !”


PSALM XXV.
INTRODUCTION


** David is pictured in this psalm as in a faithful miniature. His holy trust, his many
conflicts, his great transgression, his bitter repentance, and his deep distressea are all
here ; so that we see the very heart of ‘the man after God’s own heart.’ It is evidently a
composition of David’s later days, for he mentions the sins of his youth, and, from ita
painful references to the craft and cruelty of his many foes, it will not be too speculative a
theory to refer it to the period when Absalom was heading the great rebellion against him.
This has been styled the second of the seven penitential psalms, It is the mark of a true
gaint that his sorrows remind him of his sins, and his sorrow for sin drives him to his God.”—
Spurgeon. ‘‘The psalm hardly admits of formal division. It is a prayer for instruction and
forgiveness. Its prevailing thought is that God is the teacher of the afflicted and the guide
the erring: and this is constantly repeated, either in the way of statement or of prayer.”—

crowns,


Iyvarm4size Topics ror PRAYER.
(Verses 1-7.)


L That all prayer should be ad-
dressed to Jehovah. ‘Unto Thee, O
Lord, do I lift up my soul” ver. 1. Do
I bear my soul. The bearing of the
soul to the Lord signifies the longing of
the heart after Him. When in distress,
the psalmist does not, like the ungodly,
draw his soul at one time in this direc-
tion, and at another time in that; does
not seek to catch now at this, now at
that ignis fatuus of human help; but
goes straight with all his desire to God,
and rests in His protection.”— Hengsten-
berg. The call to devotion in the early
church was sursum corda, up with
your hearts. Some lift up their hearts
to vanity, and idolise a creation of
man, or the soulless and unresponsive
forces of Nature, or an assumptious
gacerdotal subordinate. But the only
legitimate object of worship, to whom
prayer can be acceptably offered, is
God. ‘A carnal man can as little lift
up his heart in prayer as a mole
can fly. A David finds it a hard task,
since the best heart is lumpish, and
naturally beareth downwards, as the
poise of a clock, as the lead of a net.
Let vs therefore ‘lay aside every weight,


and the sin that doth so easily beset us,’
and pray to God to draw us up to Him-
self, as the loadstone doth the iron.”—
Trapp.

II. That prayer should be offered
that our enemies may have no ground
to taunt us with the failure of our
trust in God. “O my God, I trust in
Thee; let me not be ashamed, let not
mine enemies triumph over me” (ver. 2).
The enemies of religion cannot under-
stand the principle of faith, which
fastens on the unseen, and confidently
looks for the promised good. They
have faith in nothing but the demon-
strable, and frequently taunt the believer
with fanaticism, and prophesy the utter
failure of his expectations from God.
In a sensitive mind this is hard to bear,
and the more so, that the slightest sus-
picion is cast on the veracity and faith-
fulness of God. The best of men have
enemies: the determination to do the
right is quite enough to rouse the oppo
sition of some men; and the discomfor-
ture of God’s people would occasion
them the most malicious joy. 1. The
sincere believer will not suffer failure.
“None that wait on Thee shall be

119


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALM


ashamed” (ver. 3), The words em-
phatically express an eternal and
unchanging truth. When by prayer we
come near to God, by faith we rest upon
Him: and to him who prays and
believes all things are possible. He can
never be put to confusion who humbly
seeks Divine guidance; and the faith
whose grapnels are firmly fixed in the
Divine Righteousness can never be over-
turned. Trouble widens our sympathies.
Though the psalmist had burden enough
of his own, he felt for others in similar
circumstances, and rejoiced in the
assurance of theirtriumph. 2. Fazlure
és the fate of the perfidious, ‘Let them
be ashamed which transgress without
cause ” (ver. 3). They shall be ashamed
who are faithless without cause. He
who transgresses without cause is one
who acts treacherously towards God and
man. All who trust in their own crafti-
ness and act with wilful dishonesty and
perfidiousness shall be disappointed of
what they grasped at, and be covered
with everlasting shame. Shame shall
recoil upon the shameless perpetrator of
sin—the disloyal and faithless trans-
essor,

UI. That prayer should be offered
for Divine guidance. ry

1. In the ways of God, “Show me
Thy ways, O Lord ; teach me Thy paths.”
The ways of God are often dark, mys-
terious, circuitous, and painful to walk
in, but they are safe and lead to peace
and happiness. The pride and pre-
sumption of man often impel him to
shape out a way for himself; and it
often terminates in disaster and ruin.
(Prov. xiv. 12.) The ways of God are
always better than our own: it should
be our continual anxiety to become
acquainted with, and walk in, them.
“The ways and stairs of God are known
to no creature so well as to Himself;
therefore He can give us the best
instruction in them. It is not enough
to be taught of men; we must go to
school to God—that is, resign ourselves
obediently to the guidance and training
of His Holy Spirit.”—Starke.

2. In the truth of God. “Lead me
in Thy truth and teach me; for Thou
art the God of my salvation” (ver. 5).

120


The truth specially desired is that
which reveals salvation. The whole
plan of redemption, from its first dim
promise to its fullest development in
later times, is an imposing manifestation
of the truthfulness of Jehovah. The
way to know truth is to feel it;
experience is a test impossible to ignore,
All moral precepts are based on Divine
truths. To be well versed in the truth
of God, and to experience its power in
the government of life, will save us from
the fate of the faithless ones who are
put to shame.

3. Prayer must be persistent. “On
Thee do I wait all the day.” The more
we realise our dependence and need, the
more tenaciously do we cling to God.
Many rich blessings have been lost for
want of perseverance in prayer. Notto
persevere in prayer is to risk the loss of
all we ever gained. Patience is an
important element of success. “To
patient faith the prize is sure.”

IV. That prayer should be offered
for Divine mercy.

1. Divine mercy is unfailing. “Re-
member, O Lord, Thy tender mercies
and Thy lovingkindnesses ; for they
have been ever of old” (ver. 6). They
are from eternity. Mercy has ever been
an attribute of Jehovah ; and He cannot
be unlike Himself : He cannot deny His
character. If He were at any time to
cease revealing Himself to man as a
God of mercy, it would be tantamount
to His proving untrue to Himself. The
mercies and love of God are indeed
infinite and everlasting; but it needs
infinite mercy and everlasting love to
pardon our uncounted sins. The great-
est blessings of life are, like mercy, very
ancient—as light, air, water, and earth.
fruits. “ Divine love is an eternal foun.
tain that never leaves off running while
@ vessel is empty or capable of holding
more. It stands open to all comers.
therefore come; and if you have not
sufficient of your own, go and borrow
vessels, empty vessels not a few; pay
your debts out of it, and live on the rest
(2 Kings iv. 7) to eternity.”—Zlisha
Coles (1678).

2. Divine mercy ts invoked for th
pardon of sim “Remember not the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


sins of my youth, nor my transgressions ;
according to Thy mercy remember Thou
me, for Thy goodness’ sake, O Lord”
(ver. 7). How many would like to
return to the happy time of youth!
There is an exquisite pathos in those
lines of Goethe :—


“Give me, oh! give me back the days of
youth,


Poor, yet how rich !—my glad inheritance,
The inextinguishable love of truth,

While life’s realities were all romance,
Give me, oh! give youth's passions uncon-

fined,

The rush of joy that felt almost like pain,
Its hate, ita love, its own tumultuous mind ;

Give me my youth again!”


But it may not, it cannot be, We are
young but once. And oh! how much
of that past youth-time would we like
to live over again! How many of its
wild, mad, sinful actions could we wish
undone! How many are there of the
sins of our younger days we can our-


PSALM XXYV.


selves remember ; and, alas! how many
more which are now unknown to our-
selves, and forgotten by all but God!
“The world winks at the sins of young
men ; and yet they are none so little after
all : the bones of our youthful feastings at
Satan’s table will stick painfully in our
throats when we are old men. He who
presumes upon his youth is poisoning
his old age. How large a tear may wet
this page as some of us reflect upon the
past !”—Spurgeon. The recollection of
our transgressions shows the need of
mercy, and prompts the prayer for it.
lf we forget our sins, we shall never
appreciate the grace which provides for
their removal, The cry of the penitent
should be—O Lord, remember not my
gins, but remember me!

Lessons :—1l. A sinful soul ts never
tn want of atop for prayer. 2. The
soul finds tts true safety by trusting tn
God. 3. To hear and answer praya
are both acts of Divine mercy.


THe Hippren Ways or Gop Mane Pram,
(Verses 8-15.)


L That the character of God is
@ guarantee of infallible direction.
“Good and upright is the Lord. All
the paths of the Lord are mercy and
truth” (ver. 8,10). Because God is
good, therefore He will give His chil-
dren His Spirit for their direction ; and
because He is upright, it must of
necessity be a good and most certain
one.—Dtodatt. We value promises of
help according to the character of the
person who makes them. Ali the pro-
mises of God are based on His in-
finite perfections. There can never be
any real disagreement between the
nature and the actions of Jehovah: His
paths, like Himself, are mercy and truth.
“ Paths signify the tracks or ruts made
by the wheels of wagyons by often
passing over the same ground. Mercy

and truth are the paths in which God
constantly walks in reference to the
children of men ; and so frequently does
He show them mercy, and so frequently
does He fulfil His truth, that His paths
are easily discerned. How frequent,
how deeply indented, and how muita-


plied are those tracks to every famuy
and individual! Wherever we go, we
see that God’s mercy and truth have
been there by the deep tracks they have
left behind them.”—Clarke. ‘ These
paths—the ways in which He leads His
people—are mercy (loving-kindness), for
the salvation of men is the end thereof ;
and truth, for they give proof at every
step of the certainty of His promises.
Grace is their Alpha and truth their
Omega.”—Delitzsch, As coals feed the
fire, so the remembrance of the truths of
our faith should keep alive the flame of
our prayers.

Ii. The ways of God are made
known to the morally needy. These
are alluded to under varied phases of
character.

1. Sinners. “Therefore will He
teach sinners in the way” (ver. 8)—
those who have erred and strayed from
the way—those whose sias have
assumed gigantic proportions. “ Par-
don mine iniquity, for it is great” (ver.
11). Nothing is so blinding and mis-
leading as sin, and it is never 80

i121


PSALM XXYV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





dangerously deceptive as when it wears
the semblance of virtue, Naturalists
tell us that certain birds and insects
have the curious faculty of assuming a
likeness to the vegetation among which
they sport themselves—that the South
American heron can assume a perpen-
dicular position, so as to look exactly
like the reeds of its native district, that
the leaf-butterfly of Sumatra is readily
mistaken for one of the leaves among
which it alights, and that the walking-
stick insect of New Zealand can closely
resemble an upright twig. So sin has
the dangerous power of assuming a tone
and attitude of certain virtues. But
the Divine eye detects the fallacy, and
the Divine hand graciously guides into
the right way.

2. The humble. “The meek will He
guide in judgment, and the meek will
He teach His way” (ver. 9). Those
who are afflicted and distressed about
sin, who desire to be delivered from it
and led in the right way. The proud
despise instruction, and are left to the
hardness of their hearts. ‘‘ Pride and
anger have no place in the school of
Christ. The Master Himself is ‘meek
and lowly in heart ;’ much more, surely,
ought the scholars to be 80. He who
hath no sense of his ignorance can have
no desire or capability of knowledge,
human or Divine.”—@. Horne.

3. The perplexed. “For He shall
pluck my feet out of the net ” (ver. 15).
A time comes in the mental history of
most when the mind is harassed with
doubts, and is like a restless, fluttering
bird caught in the snare of the fowler.
Or, it may be, we are suddenly over-
taken with calamity and plunged into
the darkness of despair. At these times
God comes to our rescue, allays our
fears, and lifts us out of our entangle-
ments, The greatest distresses of life


are only temporary.
“T stoop

Into a dark tremendous sea of cloud.

It is but for a time: I press God’s lamp

Close to my breast: its splendours, soon or
late,

Will pierce the gloom: I shall emerge ere
long.”’ —BRownina.


III. That the deeper revelations of
God are reserved for morally good.
122


1. Por the obedient. “Unto such as
keep His covenant and His testimonies”
(ver. oe Obedience is the orgzn of
spiritual enlightenment (John vii. 17).
The ways and commandments of God
cannot be fairly and accurately judged
as simply apprehended by the under-


-standing. To see their Godlike beauty


and feel their holiest force, they must
be obeyed. ‘‘ Keepers of the covenant
shall be kept by the covenant ; those
who follow the Lord’s commands shall
find the Lord’s mercy following them.”
2. For the God-fearing. “The secret of
the Lord is with them that fear Him,
and He will show them His covenant”
(ver. 14). The great secret of all truth
is hid in God. He is Himself the em-
bodiment and ultimate end of truth, and
He alone can impart it, and He will
impart it only to them who fear Him.
“What man is he that feareth the Lord?
him shall He teach in the way that he
shall choose” (ver. 12). The God-fear-
ing are lowered in the depths of the
heavenly mysteries, and discover tha
unsearchable, ‘‘ Saints have the key of
heaven’s hieroglyphics; they can un
riddle celestial enigmas; they are initi-
ated into the fellowship of the skies ;
they have heard words which it is not
possible for them to repeat to their
fellows. He who does not know the
meaning of this verse (ver. 14), will
never learn it from a commentary: let
him look to the cross, for the secret lies
there.”—Spurgeon. 3. For the earnest
and persevering inquirer. “Mine eyes
are ever toward the Lord” (ver. 15).
The eyes of a fool are in the ends of the
earth, wandering over a thousand different
objects, but fastening on none, and learn-
ing nothing. But the humble and
patient inquirer carefully investigates
the minutest phenomena that promises
to lead to the interpretation of truth,
and conduct the mind up to the great
source of truth. There are some things
that need no inquiry about; they are
vile on the face of them; and every year
of our lives we grow more convinced
that it is wisest and best to fix our at-
tention on the beautiful and the good,
and dwell as little as possible on the
evil and the falea The eye thet turns


ROMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


PRALW Xx"


SS en Do


a inquiring gase towards God will
make the grandest discoveries and see
the most entrancing visions, The true
attitude of humble and reverential con-
fidence consists in directing the eyes of
the soul “ever toward the Lord.”

IV. That the revelation of the
hidden ways of God is morally satis-
fying. “His soul shall dwell at ease,
and his seed shall inherit the earth”
(ver. 13), The soul of the pious shall
pitch her tent and lodge in goodness
as in @ fruitful land,—shall reach her
home and possess it for ever. Moses
made the promise “to possess the land”
(to inherit the earth) in a literal sense
to his people (Deut. iv. 22, xl 5,
mxxvi. 6, 18); but since his days it has


been used to denote perfect peace, as 4p
apparent from Prov. ii. 21; Ps. xxxvii
8, 9.—Tholuck. The posterity of the
good are blessed, though the inherit-
ance they possess as the result of many
prayers is often abused. Parents should
not only pray for but with their children ;
and it will be strange indeed if those
prayers do not bear gracious fruit in
the future career of their offspring.
There is nothing so satisfying to the soul
as a sight of God.

Lessons :—l. Trust i God when
life is involved in darkness and mystery.
2. God only can reveal the secret of
happiness. 3. A moral fitness is neces-
itd to understand the hidden ways of

od.


TROUBLE AND THE Way Oot or rt.
(Verses 18-23.)


L That sin is the prolific source of
alltrouble. 1. A sense of personal sin ts
an intensified form of trouble (ver. 16-18).
The language of these three verses is
pathetically expressive of conscious sin.
“ Have mercy upon me, for I am desolate
and afflicted. The troubles of my heart
are enlarged: look upon mine afflic-
tion and my pain.” What words can
more graphically depict the sorrow, the
loneliness, the anguish, the utter wretch-
edness of a soul pressed down under the
burden of its sins! There is an insepar-
able connection between sin and sorrow;
and yet how slow men are to see it.
Only the soul smitten with a genuine
penitence understands the true nature of
gin, and the enormous evils of which it
is the cause. Often when the spirit is
most deeply troubled, when the pain is
sharpest, when our self-reproach is
bitterest, — then God is nearest to
strengthen and deliver. Our greatest
blessings have sprung out of the vortex
of our greatest troubles, 2. Trouble 1s
tnereased by the number and ferocity of
our enemies, “Consider mine enemies,
for they are many ; and they hate me
with a cruel hatred” (ver. 19). The
enemies of a good man multiply with
his misfortunes, and the more helpless


he is, the more furiously they assail him,


“No hate so cruel as that which is
unreasonable and unjust. A man can
forgive one who has injured him, but
one whom he has injured he hates im-
placably.” The madness of cruelty
raves the more violently when it feels
its impotency to inflict all the injury it
designs.

II. That trouble shall not be per-
mitted to overwhelm the good. “Oh,
keep my soul and deliver me: let me
not be ashamed, for I put my trust in
Thee. Let integrity and uprightness
preserve me, for I wait on Thee” (ver.
20,21). In this world of contradictions
and suffering, the best of men are not
free from trouble; but they have the
assurance of help which shall render
them invincible and exultant in the
fiercest trial. Their God-given virtues
form an impassable cordon around them,
and their faith in the unseen Protector
constitutes an all-encompassing shield.
The presence of Christ in trouble ban-
ishes fear. Alone, Dante feared to enter
the dismal Jnferno, but with Virgil, the
great and good, to guide his steps and
support his hand, he descended fear-
lessly into the abode of woe. So, rely-
ing on our own strength, we enter the
valley of darkness, and, beset with fears,
we find it the valley of sorrow and of

123


PSALM XXVI.


fe lar a eee «See Se


death. But, trusting the Almighty arm,
our dismay vanishes; we see it to be
only the valley of the shadow, and even
the shadow He has turned for us into
the morning. Our trust is founded on
the certainty of God’s righteousness ;
and though encompassed with floods
aud beaten with storms, it stands, for it
is founded on a rock. There is ever &
shelter for us in God, and our souls are
safe in His hands.

TI. That prayer to God is the in-
fallible method of deliverance from
the greatest trouble (ver. 22). Per-
sonal trouble deepens and widens our
sympathy for others. Observe, the cry
is not simply, “Oh, keep my soul, and
dehver me” (ver. 20); but the prayer
takes . more generous and comprehen-
sive swaep, “Redeem Israel, O God,
out of all kis troubles” (ver. 32). “If


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





Thou wilt not pity and help me, yet
spare Thy people who suffer for my sake
and in my sufferings.” —M. Pool. They
who have thus struggled with their own
doubts and sins, and by God’s grace
have conquered them, must ever feel
they have an interest in the conflicts of
the church militant. They who pray
for themselves are taught to pray for
others ; they, again and again, commend
their suffering brethren of the true
Israel to that Almighty Father and all-
gracious God who has deigned tc
deliver them from all their troubles.
True prayer is the precursor and levei
of redeeming power.

Lessons :—l. The cure of sin ts the
cure of trouble, 2. The potency 0/
prayer ts never so thoroughly tested ani
triumphantly vindicated as wm time
trowble.


PSALM XXVL


INTRODUCTION.


The date of this psalm is uncertain. {t is supposed by some to refer to the assassination
of Ishbosheth (2 Sam. iv. 5-\2); and by others to the rebellion of Absalom (2 Sam. xv.—xviii.);
but it is more probable that it was composed, like many others, in the dark time of Saul’s
persecution (1 Sam. xviii._xxiv.), ‘‘It has some points of resemblance, both in thought and
expression, to the last. Both oj with the same declaration of trust in God (xxv. 2; xxvi. 1);
in both there is the same prayer «at God would redeem (xxv. 22, xxvi. 11), and be graciou:
(xxv. 16, xxvi. 11) to His servants. ‘ther points of contact may be found in xxv. 21, xxvi. 11
and xxv. 5, xxvi 8, There is, however, this marked difference between the two, that there
are wanting in this psalm those touching confessions of sinfulness and pleadings for forgive-
ness which in the other are thrice repeated. Here is only the avowal of conscious uprightnesa,
—an avowal made as in the sight of the searcher of hearts, and deriving, no doubt, much of its
intensity and almost impassioned force from the desire on the part of the singer to declare hig


entire separation from and aversion to the vain and evil men by whom he was surrounded,”—
Perowne,


Tue Urriaht Man PLEADING FoR JUSTICE 8 THE CouRT or Heaven
(Verses 1-12.)


Calumny has been common in all


ages. Jesus Christ Himself was de-
famed, and His disciples are warned to
expect similar treatment from their ene-
mies (John xv. 20; Matt. v. 11). For
such as suffer thus, the example of
Dayid is rich in counsel and comfort.
In time of trouble, he turns to God for
redress and refuge. He appeals froma
world where ‘‘the foundations are out
of course” to a world where all is right-
eousness and peace, He appeals from
acé


man, whose judgments are false, to God,
who judgeth righteously.

In considering David’s appeal, mark—

I That it was made to the rigth
Judge (ver. 1). “Judge me, O Lord.”
He had been wronged. His enemies
had suspected and denounced him.
Even the very king, anointed to do
justly and to defend the oppressed, had
turned against him, and madly sought
his life (1 Sam. xxiv. 11). But, though
perplexed, he is not in despsir ; though





persecuted, he is not forsaken. He
appeals to God. “ Judge me, O Lord.”
Take up my cause, vindicate my cha
racter, deliver me from the machina-
tions and malice of my foes, This is
just like what he said to Saul at Engedi
(1 Sam. xxiv. 12), “The Lord judge
between me and thee” (ver. 15), “ The
Lord be judge, and see, and plead my
cause, and deliver me out of thine
hand.”

It is a solemn thing to stand before
an earthly judge, but it is a far more
solemn thing to come before the judg-
ment-seat of God. This is the court of
last resort. Here the Judge is person-
ally acquainted with all the facts and
circumstances of the case, and His judg-
ments are absolutely just and final (1
Sam. ii. 3).

IL It was presented in a proper
spirit.

1. Deep seriousness, He feels that
he is in the presence of the great Searcher
of hearts. His very life is at stake; but
there are two things which sustain him:
(1.) Conscious integrity. “ For I have
walked in mine integrity.” This is very
bold. It startles us to hear such words
from a sinful man. We are almost
ready to say, ‘‘Surely this is to err, and
to fall into pride and self-righteousness.”
But the words are no boast. They have
the ring of sincerity and truth. David
does not claim moral perfection, but up-
rightness of heart. He felt that he had
been true. In spite of sore provocations,
he had not returned evil for evil; though
coming short in many things, he had
honestly endeavoured to do justly, to
love mercy, and to walk humbly with
God. ‘“ Walked:” this implied earnest-
ness and definiteness of purpose, stead-
fast and delightsome progress in the
right. “Integrity” was the air in
which he had lived and moved. “ In-
nocency itself is no fence to the name,
though it is to the bosom, against the
darts of calumny.”—WM. Henry. (2.)
Confidence in God. “I have trusted
also in the Lord; therefore I shall not
slide.” There was everything in God to
inspire trust. He was infinitely just
and good. In His laws and govern-
ment He was wholly and eternally op-


posed to all evil. However it might be
amongst men, the Judge of all the earth
could not but do right’ David had
trusted in Him in the past, and he
would trust in Him for ever. Had he
been conscious of insincerity, he could
not have acted thus. Guile puts a bar
between the soul and God; whereas,
when there is no guile, there can be
frank and confiding approach, and un-
wavering confidence, What a comfort
ing thought that there is a God in
heaven who judgeth righteously !
Happy are those who trust in Him.

‘* True dignity abides with him alone

Who, in the silent hour of inward thought,

Can still suspect and still revere himself

In lowliness of heart.”—WoRDsWoRTH.

2. Readiness to submit to the mou
thorough snvestigation (ver. 2). “ Ha-
amine me, O Lord, and prove me.”
The reference here is to the methods by
which metals were tested (Ps. xii. 6,
Ixvi. 10). As gold and silver were tried
in the furnace, as Israel had been
tried in Egypt and the wilderness, so he
was ready to be tried (Deut. iv. 20,
viii. 2). “Try my reins and my
heart.” The “reins” may refer to the
lower, and the “heart” to the higher
passions of the soul. He thus craves
that not only the outward but the inner
man should be tested. He would hide
nothing. He desires to be perfectly
open, and to have all laid bare and
sifted to the very core of his being.
Whatever the Lord saw to be just, let
Him do. The deepest desire of his
heart was to be right. Let all dross of
self-deception and sin be purged away
in the fire of the Great Refiner, and let
the true and the good remain, “The
fining-pot is for silver and the furnace
for gold, but the Lord trieth the hearts”
(Prov. xvii. 3).

*¢ What lives by life that is not Thine,
I yield it to Thy righteous doom 3

What yet resists Thy law Divine,

O may Thy fire of love consume,”

3. Humble acquiescence in the result
(ver. 3). “ For Thy loving-kindness ts
before mine eyes, and I have walked in
Thy truth.” This implies that @od’s
love was the life of his heart. He un-
derstood and appreciated sy A loving:


PSALM XXVI.


tindness.” It was “before his eyes”
(cf. Deut. vi. 8). It was the object of
his constant meditation and delight.
When he thought thereon, he could not
but give thanks and take courage.
“ Perfect love casteth out fear” (1 John
iv. 18). God's will was the law of hts
life. That he might know and keep
God’s commandments was his continual
prayer. “J have walked in Thy truth.”
This had been his habit. It was upon
this principle that his life had been
regulated. Hence he felt no fear.
Whatever was brought to light, whether
to his praise or to his blame, could not
but be for his good. “Light is sown
for the righteous, and gladness for the
upright in heart” (Pa xcvii. 11).
“Every one that doeth evil hateth the
light, neither cometh to the light, lest
his deeds should be reproved; but he
that doeth truth cometh to the light
that his deeds may be made manifest
that they are wrought in God” (John
iii. 20, 21). Blessed are they whose
hearts are right with God. Let trials
come, let them be subjected to sore dis-
cipline and heavy judgments, still they
have peace within.
‘¢ Whate’er my God ordains is right,—
My light, my life is He.
He cannot will me aught but good—
I trust Him utterly ;
For well I know,
In joy or woe,
We yet shall see as sunlight clear,
How faithful was our Guardian here,”
IMI. Supported by ample evidence
1. Negatwe (ver. 4,5), The wicked
are here characterised as “vain per-
sons,” ‘ dissemblers,” ‘ evil - doers,”
These terms are terribly significant.
They are revelations of the heart.
They are proofs of a state of society
utterly alien and hostile to the life of
God. David, in vindication of him-
self, declares his entire separation from
all such people. He expresses his re-
pugnance to their society, A man is
known by the company he keeps. There
is a@ power, for good or for evil, in the
society we love. To be allied with the
good is a blessing and an honour, but
to be confederate with the bad is to be
doomed to infamy. David could appeal
ty his past life He had no relish for


ae
-~


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





the society of the bad. ‘“‘/ have not sat
with vain persons, neither will I go im
with dissemblers.” He expresses his
hatred of their character. His language
is very strong: “I have hated the con-
gregation of evil-doers.” It was not
that he hated them as men, but that he
hated their spirit and conduct—their
character. “To hate the person, the
existence, of any man, is wrong ; it is to
hate the workmanship of God. But to
hate the character of a bad man is right,
and even obligatory. God made the
person, man made the character; and 8
bad character is an offence to the
Almighty, and sn injury to the uni-
verse: therefore it is holy to hate it.”—
Dr. D. Thomas. 3. Positive (ver. 6-8).
““T will wash mine hands in wtnnocency :
so will I compass Thine altar, O Lord ;
that I may publish with the voice of
thanksgiving, and tell of all Thy won-
drous works. Lord, I have loved the
habitation of Thy house, and the place
where Thine honour dwelleth.” David
here declares his love for God’s house
and worship. Instead of consorting
with the wicked, his delight was with
the people of God. Mark his earnest
preparation (ver. 6), “J will wash,”
&c. The expression is figurative (cf.
Gen. xx. 5; Deut. xxi. 6; Matt. xxvii.
24). It is taken from Exod. xxx. 17-21,
where Aaron and his sons are com-
manded to wash their hands and thelr
feet before going into the tabernacle.
“ David, willing to express his coming
with a pure heart to pray to God, doth
it by this similitude of a priest, that. as
a priest washes his hands, and then
offers oblation, so had he constantly
joined purity and devotion together.” —
Hammond. Mark his devout attendance
upon ordinances (ver. 6, 7). “ So
will I compass,” &c, “The meaning is,
that he will go round and round the
altar, looking at it, looking at the blood
on its base, and the blood on each of the
four horns, towards north, south, east,
and west, and beholding the smoke of
the fire, and thinking of the sacrificial
victim that has died there,—all in the
way of joyful thanks for salvation pro-
vided for men.”—A. A. Bonar. Mark
his great delight in the public worship


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM XXVL





of God (ver. 8), “Lord, I have loved
the habitation of Thy house,” &. It
was the place where God’s glory dwelt,
where God made Himself known as
& just God and a Saviour. God’s
presence is the attraction and life of all
true worship. We should attend upon
Divine ordinances with diligence, pre-
paration, and prayer. If you come to
church fresh from the company of the
gay and the thoughtless, and with no real
seriousness of spirit, it is no wonder if
you are not benefited. But come with
humility, come with sincere love of
truth, come with hope in the boundless
mercy of God and the grace of Christ,
and you will not come in vain. In-
structed and refreshed, your grateful
song will be, ‘‘ This is none other but
the house of God, this is the gate of
heaven ” (Gen. xxviii. 17).

IV. Enforced by strong and im-
passioned arguments (ver. 9-11).
“ Gather not my soul with sinners, nor
my life with bloody men: in whose hands
4s mischief, and their right hand 1s full
of bribes. But as for me, I will walk
in mine integrity: redeem me, and be
merciful unto me.” He here prays that
God would judge him (ver. 1), te,
declare what he is by separating him
from the wicked. But, in fact, his
prayer is an argument, intensely earnest
and powerful. That he should be con-
demned with the wicked was—1. Con-
trary to the spirit of his past life.
“ Sinners,” ‘bloody men,” men whose
evil designs led to violence and crime,
and whose hands were “full of bribes”
to corrupt and to betray, surrounded
him. But though he could not alto
gether avoid them, he had always re-
garded them with aversion. Their
character was hateful to him, and he


abhorred their company as hell 2,
Revolting to his holtest aspirations and
hopes. He was unchanged in his pur-
pose, Truth was truth, and right was
right, whatever men said or did. He
was resolved to die as he had lived.
His heart was fixed. But he shrank
with horror from the doom of the
wicked. 3. Inconsistent with his faith
én God’s justice and mercy. ‘ Redeem
me, and be merciful unto me.” He is
far from pride and presumption. He
does not demand, but supplicates, His
exclusive dependence is upon God.
There was a moral impossibility in his
being forsaken, ‘“As there is a gathering:
time for the fruits of the earth, so there
is a gathering-time for men, Death is
the reaper. With his scythe he mows
down the generations, and Justice
gathers whom he mows,—some to
misery, some to bliss. Who would be
gathered with the sinners in the great
world of retribution ?”— Dr. D. Thomas.

V. Concludes with the expression
of the most undoubting assurance
(ver. 12). “My foot standeth in an
even place; in the congregations will I
bless the Lord.” ‘‘ His prayer has been
heard. He is safe, He stands on the
open tableland, where he has room to
move, and where his enemies cannot
hem him in, and therefore he fulfils the
resolve made before (ver. 7), and pub-
licly pours out his thanksgivings to
God.”—Perowne. Bunt the words of
the Psalmist may be understood as
looking further than this earth. They
not only imply present sure standing in
the love of God, but they breathe the
spirit of holy joy, in view of the serene
and blissful heights of heaven, where
there shall be no possibility of danger
or of falling any more,


A Gtorious PIcTURE
(Verse 3.)


L. The subject. “Thy loving-kind-
-gess.” Creation, providence, redemption.
What subject could be more noble
and attractive 4

IL The position, ‘Before mine
eyes.” Much depends on the placing
of a picture. The most excellent should


have the most honourable place. “ Be-
fore mine eyes.” Before the mind, the
conscience, the heart. To be studied
with adoring love and delight.

IIL The effect upon the be
holders. 1. Quickening. 2. Illumin-
ating. §$. Transforming. Sgt:

12


PSALM XXXVI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





strengthens, ennobles. “Beholding as
in a glass the glory of the Lord, we
are transformed into the same image.”’
What interest has this picture for us?


With what feelings do we regard it?
‘“‘We needs must love the highest when
we see it.’’—Tennyson.


Survey or RepEemprion WokkE.
(Verses 6, 7.)


3. Iv rs « FINISHED WORK.
IL It 3 & WONDROUS WORE.


IIL. Iv 1s AN INSPIRING WORK.
IV. Iv 1s a GOD-GLORIFYING WORE.


Love or Gop’s Housz
(Verse 8.)


What the Tabernacle and the Temple
were to the pious Jew, the house where
we worship God should be to us. It
should be dear because—

L Hallowed by the Divine pre-
sence (2 Chron. vi. 18; Acts vii. 49;
Exod. xxv. 21, 22; Matt. xviii. 20).

II. Oonsecrated to the holiest fel-
lowship. ‘The congregation.” More;
though physically shut in by the walls,
in spirit we enter into fellowship with
all God’s saints,

TL Devoted to the cause of right-


eousness and love. Not sectarianism,
but “the truth as in Jesus.” “We
preach Christ crucified.” Our ceaseless
prayer is “Thy kingdom come.”

IV. Endeared by the most sacred
associations. Here our fathers wor-
shipped. Here our hearts have often
been revived by the word of truth,
and regaled by the bread of life sent
down from heaven (Ps. lxxxvii. 2-5).

V. Suggestive of the noblest hopes
and inspirations (Matt. xxviii. 20; Heb
xii. 22-29 ; and Thess, iv. 13-18)


PrErpirion DREADFUL
(Verse 9.)


I. The good man is chiefly con-
cerned about his soul Many anxious
as to health, earthly comforts, the
security of their goods, &. But the
cry of the godly is “my soul.” Not in
selfishness. 1. The soul is the man.
2. The salvation of the soul is necessary
for the glory of God and the true ends
of our being. 3. The soul is in despe-
rate peril, and none but Christ can
save,

II. The good man knows that the
destiny of the soul is settled at
death, ‘Gather not my soul,” &c.
Death comes to all. “Gather” (cf. Gen.
xxv. 8, xxxv. 29, xlix. 29-33; Numb.
xx, 24, xxvii. 13. “Then shall the
dust return to the earth as it was, and
the spirit shall return unto God who gave
it” (Eccles. xii. 7). Judgment. Inferred
by reason. Foreboded by conscience.
Revealed by Scripture (Heb. ix. 27;
Acts xvii. 31; 2 Cor. v. 10).

Uy. vs good man recoils with

y |


horror from being associated in
destiny with the wicked. Why?
1. Because he abhors their character.
2. Their society. 3. Their doom. Evil
without restraint. Misery without re-
lief. Eternity without hope. Would
we shrink from the society of the false,
the impure, the revengeful, the slaves of
lust and selfishness, how much more
should we recoil from eternal fellow-
ship with these and such as these!

Ver. 9, 10. Social degeneracy. A
corrupt people makes a corrupt magis-
tracy.

Ver. 13. The connection between
private and public worship.


Ver. 12. Rectitude is an “even


place,” as contrasted with the crooked


paths of the false, the hard way. of
transgressors, the slippery places of the
world. ‘Certainly, it is heaven upon
earth to have a man’s mind move in
charity, rest in providence, and turn
npon the poles of truth.”— Bacon.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM XXVII.





Srxcerity wot Exoven,
(Verse 1.)


I¢ is a false and mistaken liberality to
say, “Tf a man be sincere, he is all right.”
Sincerity is necessary. Unless a man
is sincere, he cannot be truly religious,
But sincerity is not enough. A man
may be sincere in his opinions, and yet
be grievously in error. So it was with
Eli (1 Sam. i, 14) when he called
Hannah drunken. A man may be sin-
cere in his religious beliefs, even to


PSALM


zealotism, and yet be far off from true
godliness, So it was with Saul when
he made havoc of the Church, and did
things which he afterwards bitterly re
pented (Acts xxvi. 9,10). Sincerity im.
plies being true to conscience ; but con-
science is no safe guide by itself. It
needs to be cultivated and controlled
by the Spirit of God.


XXVII,


Inrropvuction.


This


has been referred by some to the period of David's waiting for the kingdom ;


by others, to the time of Absalom’s rebellion. Hengstenberg says: “ All attempts to find out
any occasion to which the psalm especially referred have failed, and from this failure; we


may infer either that David sy ame uttered the psalm from the soul oe the oppressed right-
reference to a particular occasion, eralised


eous man, or that, if he wrote
experience.”


gen own


THe FEARLESSNESS OF THE Goop.
(Verses 1-3.)


L Springs from personal faith in
God. “The Lord.” This name inspires
hope. Six times it is recited in the
first, and seven times in the second part
of the psalm. Jehovah is ever the object
of true faith.

1. Intelligent. The cry of the earnest
soul is, “Light.” To this God responds.
He reveals Himself in Christ. He gives
His word to quicken and enlighten the
soul, and to illumine its pathway up to
the gates of heaven (2 Cor. iv. 6; John
vill. 12; Ps. xviii, 28, xxxvi. 9, Ixxxiv.
11). David was called the “ Light of
Israel” (2 Sam. xxi. 17), but he himself
gives God the glory: “ The Lord is my
light.” In this word he anticipates the
great saying of the New Testament,
“God is light” (1 John i. 5).

2. Appropriating. “My” isa little
word, but of great significance. Only a
‘person can say, “My.” “My home,”
“My wife,” “ My child.” Faith is per-
sonal, It implies recognition of the
glory and preciousness of Jesus, and the
receiving and resting upon Him alone
for salvation. This faith is contrasted


bi


with the faith of devils (Jas, ii 19;
1 John v. 10-12). So also it differs
vitally from mere belief in historical
Christianity. It is one thing to say,
“God is light,” and another to say,
“God is my light.” It is one thing to
ery, “The Lord He is God” (1 Kings
xviii, 39), and an altogether different
thing to take hold of Christ for our-
selves, saying, “My Lord and my God”
(John xx. 28). Luther says the marrow
of the Gospels is in the pronouns “ my”
and “our.” Let us not be content till
we can say, “The Lord is my light.”
Such faith fills the heart with courage
and joy (Ps. xviii 1, 2, cxviii. 28; Song
vi. 3)


3. Soul-saving. “Salvation” implies
all that we need for our safety and good.
God not merely gtves salvation, but He
ts salvation. He that by faith has laid
hold of God has all covenant blessings
made sure to him. “The strength of
my life:” God is the stronghold in
which the believer’s life is safe (Prov.
xviii 10; 2 Cor. xii. 2). ‘My light,”
“ My salvation,” “ The amet, of my


PSALM XXVIL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





life.” Here is combined all that the
soul requires,—here, as from behind a
triple shield, she can “fight the good
fight,”—-here, as in an impregnable for-
tress, she can hoist the banner of the
cross and bid defiance to every foe.

II. Strengthened by the remem-
brance of past deliverances.

Memory can recall and re-live the
past. When rightly used, it is a helper
to faith, (Ver. 2) Here ts danger re-
called. David in imagination goes back
to some time of great peril. His ene-
mies pressed him sore. Strong and
fierce as wild beasts, they thirsted for
his blood (Job xix. 22; Zeph. iii. 3).
So believers can recall times when they
were in straita. God’s enemies are our
enemies. “It is a hopeful sign for us
when the wicked hate us : if our foes were
godly men, it would be a sore sorrow ;
but as for the wicked, their hatred is
better than their love.”—Spurgeon.

Here is deliverance recorded. David’s
enemies came up with haughty confi-
dence. They counted him their sure
prey ; but discomfiture, strange and un-
expected, befell them. “They stumbled
and fell.” These things rise up before
him with the freshness of yesterday. It
was the doing of the Teal and the
thought strengthens his heart. So it
was in the encounter with Goliath (1
Sam. xvii. 37). So it was at Ziklag
and at other times (1 Sam. xxx. 6; Ps,
Ixxvii. 10,11). Here is a lesson for us,
Confidence comes of experience. The
remedy we have proved we readily try
again, The friend we have found faith-
ful we trust to death. The commander
under whom we have conquered we
follow bravely to other fields. So
should we act as to God. ‘“ The Chris-
tian is rich in expertences, which he
wears as bracelets and keeps as his
richest jewels. He calls one Hbenezer,
‘Hitherto God hath helped ;’ another,


Naphtali, ‘1 have wrestled with God
and prevailed ;’ another, Gershom, ‘1
was a stranger ;’ another, Joseph, ‘God
will yet add more ;’ another, Pentel,
‘I have seen the face of God’ (1 Sam.
vii. 12; Gen. xxx. 8; Exod. ii, 22 ; Gen.
xxx. 24, xxxii. 30). I have been de-
livered from the lion, therefore from the
bear,—from the lion and the bear, there-
fore from the Phtlistine,—from the Philis-
tine, therefore from Saul,—from Saul,
therefore God will deliver me from every
evil work, and preserve me blameless to
His heavenly kingdom.”—J. Sheffield,

III. Sufficient for the greatest emer-
gencies. Imagination is a great painter.
Here David conjures up a terrible scene
(ver. 3), We see the mustering of the
forces, we see the proud array of the
army with tents and banners, we see
the shock and terrors of the battle, and
the strife, as if fora kingdom. And all
this pictures the danger of hts soul, Yet,
in such extremity, his eye flinches not
and his heart knows no fear. What
sustains him? Faith in God. “In
this will I be confident” (cf. Pa. iii. 6,
7). So with the saints. If enemies
oppose, they can say with Peter, “ We
must obey God ” (cf. Luther at Worms).
If dangers thicken, they can cry with
Paul, “ None of these things move me.”
What terror had Ahab for Micaiah, the
man who had seen God $ (1 Kings xxii
19). What cared Elisha for “the horses
and chariots” at Dothan, whose eyes
beheld the angels of God ranged in his
defence? (2 Kings vi. 15). So, what
are the hosts of darkness and all the
powers of the enemy to the Chris-
tian who can say, “The Lord is my
light and my salvation #” ‘ Whom shall
I fear?” The law? It is satisfied.
Satan? He is conquered. Afflictions?
They are sanctified. Death? It is
overcome. “If God be for us, who can
be against us?” (Rom. viii. $1).


Tae Sarnt’s REFvGE
(Verses 4-6.)


“In time of trouble.” It may be a
storm of conscience or of providence.


It may be perils from temptation or


130


from the malice of evil men. The soul
flies to God and finds shelter.
L Earnestly sought (ver. 4). 1


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


~— SS


What? “That 1 may dwell in the
house of the Lord.” Like the priests, he
wished to be wholly devoted to God.
Like the children of the family, he
desired to dwell constantly in his
Father’s house. Communion with God
was the life of his heart. Such free,
affectionate, ‘confiding intercourse with
God is greatly to be coveted, and should
be sought not as the privilege of special
seasons, but as a daily blessing; not as
the pleasure of an hour, but as a joy
for ever. 2. Why? “To behold the
beauty of the Lord.” Luther interprets
this of the services of the sanctuary.
Butit cannot be thus limited. ‘“ Beauty ”
is loveliness.. ‘ Beauty of the Lord ” is
the loveliness of the Lord, all that makes
Him an object of admiration and delight.
To sinners, the “ Beauty of the Lord” is
“His glory as it shines in the face of Jesus
Christ.” “To tngutre in His temple.”
The deepest instincts of the soul prompt
to inquiry. Truth is not born with us,
nor can it be obtained irrespective of our
own efforts. It must be sought for its
own sake. It must be wooed and won,
from love, before it can be enjoyed. All
right investigation, whether of God's
works or God’s Word, should be con-
ducted as under the eye of God. His
temple is wide as the universe. 3. How?
With concentration of heart. “One
thing.” With constancy of endeavour.
“That will I seek after.” When David
fled from Absalom, he left behind him
his house, his treasures, and all the
glory of his crown; but these things
were as nothing compared with the
worship of God (Ps. xiii. ; 2 Sam. xv.
25). It is only when we make God our
Alpha and Omega, the supreme object of
our delight and study, that we can hope
that He will reveal Himself tous, In
our day, there are manifold objects to
distract our attention. The claims of
the world are constant and oppressive.
There is the more need, therefore, for
watchfulness and prayer. ‘“ Unite my
‘heart to fear Thy name.”

Il. Graciously enjoyed (ver. 5). Here
there is the best shelter in the worst
danger. “Pavilion,” “tent,” “ rock,”

v. xxiii 42; 2 Sam. vi. 17; Ps.
fx, 14). This may express sovereign


PSALM KEVii.


love. It is all of God’s grace. Right
eous defence. The sinner does not hide
furtively, but is led by the hand of the
Prince. The deliverance is not the
mere act of power, but is wrought in
righteousness. God is a just God, and
a Saviour. The sinner flees to Christ,
not to hide from God, but to hide with
God (Gen. iii, 10; Ps. cxliii. 9). Jn
violable security. ‘Immutability, eter-
nity, and infinite power here come to
the aid of sovereignty and sacrifice. How
blessed is the standing of the man whom
God Himself sets on high above his
foes upon an impregnable rock, which
never can be stormed !”—Spurgeon. “He
shall set me up upon a rock.” There
may be a reminiscence here of the hour
when, from the top of the rock, David
reproached Abner for his remissness in
guarding Saul (1 Sam. xxvi. 5-16).
Rock Rimmon was but a poor retreat.
The fugitive may take hold of the horns
of the altar, and yet perish (1 Kings
ii. 29). The manslayer might reach the
city of refuge, and after all be con-
demned. But he that trusts in the Lord
shall never be moved. The attributes
of God, that were once arrayed against
the sinner, are now converted into a
canopy for his defence.

IIL Exultingly acknowledged (ver.
6). Here is a burst of dv.ight, like the
trumpets of jubilee (Numb, x. 10, xxix. 1).
“Sacrifices of shouting,” a stronger form
of expression than the usual ‘‘sacrifices of
thanksgiving,” and equivalent to “ sacri-
fices accompanied with the loud and glad
expression of thankfulness.” —Perowne,

Implies :

1. Manly confidence. “And now
shall my head be lifted up above mine
enemies round about me.” “Two things
make the head hang down—fear and
shame. Hope easeth the Christian’s
heart of both these, and so forbids him
to give any sign of a desponding mind
by a dejected countenance.”—W. Gur-
nall (of. Ps. cx. 7; Luke xxi. 28).
2. Devout gratitude. “ Therefore will
I offer in His tabernacle sacrifices of
joy.” This indicates the peace-offering,
which was expressive of fellowship with
God (Lev. iii, vii). Since the peril
was past, since the joy of alr was

13


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; PSALMS.








restored, he would praise God. 3. Hz-
ulting joy. “I will sing; yea, I will
sing praises unto the Lord.” “Sing and
celebrate.” The latter verb intimates
the accompaniment of instrumental


music in the worship of God. David
does not speak of jubilations in his
palace or feastings in his banqueting-
hall, but of songs of praise in the house
of God. :


PRAYER FoR A Time or NEED.
(Verses 7-12.)


There are lights and shadows in the
Christian life. We see this here. ‘“ The
*‘yiumphant strain of confidence now
gives way to one of sad and earnest
antreaty. Is it (as Calvin) that the
esalmist sought in the former part of
vhe psalm to comfort himself with the
review of God’s unfailing strength and
protection, that he might with the more
yeason utter his prayer for help? Or is
fy not rather, that even while he is thus
swengthening himself in his God, a
sudden blast of temptation sweeps over
his soul, freezing the current of his
life,—some fear lest he should be for-
saken, some thought of the craft and
malice of his enemies,—till now the
danger which threatens him is as pro-
minent an object as the salvation and
defence were before ?”—Perowne. This
prayer is characterised by—

I. Deep humility and earnestness
(ver.7). Here there is utter self-abandon-
ment. The Psalmist casts himself, sin-
ner as he is, upon the mercy of God,
His “cry” finds vent by the “ voice.”
This gives the more reality and force to
the prayer. The craving to be heard is
intense. How eagerly do we wait for
the reply from a friend to an important
letter! So should we watch for God’s
answer to our prayers, “Mercy” is the
hope of sinners and the joy of saints.

II. Christ-like trust in God’s word
(vet. 8). “The words, SEEK rE My FAcgE,
are the words of God, which the ser-
vant of God here, as it were, takes from
His mouth, that so laying them before
God, he may make hia appeal the more
irresistible. Thou hast said, Seek ye My
face. My heart makes these words its
own, and builds upon them its resolve.
It takes them up and repeats them,
‘Seek ye my face.” It first claims
thus thine own gracious words, O Lord,

132


and then its echo to those words ia, ‘ Thy
face, Lord, I will seek.’ Such is the
soul’s dialogue with itself when it would
comfort itself in God.”—Perowne. True
obedience is prompt, hearty, and unre-
served. Not truer is the answer of
chord to chord, not readier is the re-
sponse of the echo to the voice, than the
reply of the heart to the call of God.

III. Grateful recognition of God’s
favour (ver. 9), The face of God means
His favour (Ps. xxxi. 16, cxix. 58). To
hide the face indicates disapproval and
estrangement (Ps, lv. 1; Isa. liii. 3, lix. 2;
Jer. xxxiii. 5). To put away a servant
in wrath expresses the highest dissatis-
faction and displeasure. David felt
that to be thus treated by God would
be the most terrible calamity. Hence
his earnest prayer. He was God’s
servant, and he could not live without
the sunshine of His love. The remem-
brance of past joys and favours made
him the more bold. “ Thou hast been
my help.” One act of mercy engages
God to do another. Urgent pleading
rises to full confidence. ‘‘ Leave me not,
neither forsake me, O God of my salva-
tion.” God's people may learn here to
deprecate desertion, plead experience, ea-
pect deliverance,

IV. Steadfast reliance upon God’s
faithfulness amidst the failure of
earthly comforts (ver. 10). During the
persecution of Saul, David committed
his parents to the care of the king of
Moab (1 Sam. xxii. 3, 4). We do not
hear of them again. Sooner or later,
children and parents must be separated.
As there is no greater earthly comfort
than the love of father and mother, so
there is no greater earthly calamity than
their loss. (Moses, Exod, ii. 6-9; Ish-
mael, Gen. xxi.; Ps. lxxxviii. 8,19.) But
im euch a crisis, God will not fail (Isa.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





xlix. 15). We may rely upon God in
the greatest extremities (Pa. cxliii, 42;
Tim. iv. 10). Remember the words of
the Lord Jesus, “TI will not leave you
orphans ” (John xiv. 18),

V. Practical submission to God’s
will is the truest safety (ver. 11, 12).
From weakness within and trials with-
out, we are in constant danger of going
astray (Jer. x. 23). In dealing with
Absalom, David felt that he might err
on the side of mildness or of severity.
So at other times. God’s way is always
the best way. Here it is described,
commanded, and sought after. It is
right: “Thy way.” It is pleasant:
“Plain path.” It is safe. Here it is
not the will of the ungodly, but the
holy, loving will of God that is regnant
(ver. 12).

VI. Encouraging self-admonition to
hope in God for ever (ver. 13, 14). The
psalmist communes with himself, The
words are the broken utterance of deep
feeling (cf. Gen. xxxi. 42; Exod. xxxii,
32). Here we see the weakness of the


PSALM


soul. “Thad fainted.” Whenever we
lose sight of “the goodness of the
Lord,” we grow weak. Faith, hope,
and love, are ready to fail. The strength
of the soul. “Unless I had believed,”
—“a cordial made up of three sove-
reign ingredients—a hope to see, and to
see the goodness of God; and the good-
ness of God in the land of the living.” —
Sir R. Baker. “Look unto me and be
ye saved.” Inspired with new courage,
the believer consecrates himself afresh to
God. “There is no more dignified
species of worship to be found than
that of exemplifying our faith in the
omnipotence and wisdom of God, by
humble and joyous perseverance under
the greatest difficulties."——-T’holuck. The
great lesson of the psalm comes out
at the close, “ Was, I say, om the
Lord.”

‘¢ Devote yourself to God, and you will find

God fights the battles of a will resigned ;
Love Jesus! love will no base fear endure,


Love Jesus! and of conquest rest secure,”
—BisHor Kgrr.





XXVIIL


INTRODUOTION.


Hitszig and others have assigned this psalm to Jeremiah, but there does not seem to be any
sufficient reason for questioning the traditional title which gives it to David, It may have
been composed before he became king in Jerusalem, or at the time of Absalom’s rebellion. It
consists of two divisions. After earnestly entreating audience (ver. 1, 2), the psalmist prays
that he may not be confounded with the wicked in their just punishment (vers, 3-5). He
then gives thanks for anticipated deliverance, and ends with a catholic prayer for the blessing


of God upon all His people (vers, 6-9). There are points of resemblance between this psalm
ceding,


and the two pre


Toe Instincts or THE HEakr.


This psalm may be held to express
the deepest feelings of the heart.

I The sense of dependence upon
God (ver. 1). This “cry” is common.
It expresses dependence. It is founded
on the relation of the soul to God. The
creature cries to the Creator, the sub-
ject cries to the sovereign, the sinner
cries to the Saviour. In want and peril;
' when burdened with sorrow, and when
bowed to the dust under the sense of
sin and the fear of death, the soul in-
stinctively turns to God for relief.

“My Rock” (cf. Ps. xviii. 2, xxxi. 2,
xlii, 9). There is everything in God to


meet the needs of His people, If
they are weak, with Him is everlasting
strength. If all things “under the
sun” are liable to change, He is “the
same yesterday, to-day, and for ever.”
How sweet it is to say unto God “my
Rock.” This gives confidence in life
and in death, Said a dying saint (the
Rev. John Rees), “ Christ in His person,
Christ in the love of His heart, and
Christ in the power of His arm, is the
rock on which I rest; and now” (re-
clining his head gently on the pillow),
“ Death, strike.”

I. Oraving for paiee God.


PSALM XXVIIL


The more we love a friend, the more
strongly we seek his presence, and the
more deeply do we deplore his estrange-
ment and silence, .

Here, 1. God’s stlence ts deprecated as
the greatest evil. Many feel no concern
whether their prayers are heard or not,
Mere formalists. Not so the psalmist.
For God to be silent to him, was terrible,
It left him without resource and hope ;
it seemed the closing in upon him of
the “ blackness of darkness,” of the grave
or of hel. He shrinks from such a
doom, as“an unspeakable horror. Hence
his passionate cry, “ Be not silent to me,”
&e, (“the pit” cf. Ps. xxii. 29, xxx. 3,
Isa. xiv. 19, Ezek. xxvi. 20). 2. God's
fellowship sought as the greatest good (ver.
2). Humbly. The lifting up of the hands
is the symbolism of prayer (Ex. ix. 29, 1
Kings viii. 22). It expresses the desire
of the humble, the reaching forth of
the heart to God. arnestly. “The
earnestness of the cry is to be measured,
not only by the greatness of the peril
which is threatened, but by the faith
which cleaves to God, knowing that tn
Him only is there help.”—Perowne.
“When I cry,” that is now, at once,
while I am speaking. IJmportunately.
It is a matter of life and death. “ Sup-
plications.” This word, being in the
plural, shows the persistence and con-
stancy of the good in prayer. Through
faith tn the mercy of God. “ Holy
Oracle,” “This is the Holy of Holies,
where the mercy-seat stood ;” for the
“Oracle” is, in Hebrew, the spot where
Jehovah spoke to men, referring pro-
oably to His promise in Exodus xxv. 22,
“There will I meet thee, and commune
with thee."—Bonar. “To this, as the
depositary of the ark and the earthly re-
sidence of God, the ancient saints looked,
as we look now to Christ, in whom
the idea of the Mosaic sanctuary has
been realised.”— Alexander. “We stretch
out empty hands, for we are beggars;
we lift them up, for we seek heavenly
supplies ; we lift them towards the mercy-
seat of Jesus, for there our expectation
dwells.”—Spurgeon. God’s fellowship is
the life and joy of the soul. We want,
not so much what He gives, as Himself.

IL eee eae eternal justice

4


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





of God. This world is not left te
chance, or blind fate, or mere arbitrary
will. It is governed by a power that
maketh for righteousness, This has
been the faith of the good in all ages.


“ If this fail,
The pillared firmament is rottenness,
And earth’s base built on stubble.” — Milton,


Hence, there is room for prayer (vers.
8-5). First, deliverance is sought from
the doom of the wicked. ‘‘Draw me not
away,” t.¢., to destruction with them (Ex.
xxxii. 20; Job. xxiv. 22; Ps xxvi. 9).
“The wicked, the workers of iniquity,
and the deceivers, are three terms for
the unrighteous, referring to the heart,
the hand, and the tongue.”—Murphy.
The good man shrinks from such com-
pany. He appeals confidently to God,
not to confound the just with the un-
just. Next, Retribution ts craved (ver.
4). This implies their obstinate impeni-
tency. Reason, conscience, and revela-
tion proclaim that for such there can be
no escape. There may be delay, there
may be seeming inequality and failure,
but retribution must come in the end,
to the uttermost. The faith of the
psalmist rises to prophetic certainty.
There is nothing of mere human passion
and animosity. ‘The reason why God’s
judgments should overtake the wicked,
is not their malice against the psalmist,
but their disregard of the Most High,”—
Perowne,

IV. Gratitude for the Goodness of
God. Prayer leads to praise. The full
heart bursts into song. “Blessed be
the Lord!” For answered prayers (ver.
6). Perhaps the very thing asked was
granted, or something better given in-
stead. Answered prayers demand ac-
knowledgment. For assistance tn time
of need (ver. 7). “My strength,” in-
ternal. ‘My shield,” external The
former includes all needful grace to en-
lighten, renew, and sanctify. The latter
implies help and defence against every
foe. How complete is the security of
the people of God !

For assurance of hope. “The cer-
tainty that prayer is heard anticipates
visible fulfilment.” Perowne,
heart trusteth in Him.”


Ftd


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





from the “strength,” and wins the
“shield.” Twice over he says “my
heart,” not only showing the sincerity,
but the strength and intensity of his
gratitude. “With (lit. ‘out of’) my
song,” the song being, as it were, the
source and the occasion of his praise
(Ps. xxii. 25). “He who enjoys aught
without thanksgiving, is as though he
robbed God.”—Talmud.

V. Exulting Joy in the Saving
Strength of God (ver. 8). Every be.
liever is, like Paul, “a pattern.” What
God does for one, He is able to do for
all. The attention is fixed upon Him
as an Almighty and All-Merciful Sa
viour. “The Lord is their strength,”
te., of yonder ones, of such as possess
the character already described (¢f. Ps.
exix. 9-11, Isa. xxxiii. 2).

“He is the saving strength of His
anointed.” “First the people, then Him-
self their monarch, but not David the
man, but David the king as anointed of
God, and chosen to feed His people.”—
Perowne. Strength that is rightly used,
to help and not to oppress, to save and
not to destroy, commands admiration,
Here is the glory of the gospel. It is
the power of God unto salvation. Christ
came not to condemn the world, but
that the world through Him might be
saved. ‘Let the children of Zion be
joyful in their king,”


VI. Trust in the ultimate triumph
and blessedness of God’s people (ver.
9). “It is impossible not to see, in’
these tender loving words, ‘feed them,
and bear them,’ the heart of the Shep-
herd-King. Feed them, O Thou true
Shepherd of Israel (Ps. Ixxx. 1); bear
them, carry them in Thine arms (Isa
Ixili. 9, x. 11). Perhaps the reference
may be to Deut. i. 31, xxxii, 11.”—
Perowne.

Mark, as to the good.
character. ‘Thy people.”

2. Their privilege. “Thine inheri-
tance” (Deut. iv. 20; Eph. i. 16).

3. Their destiny. “Save” from sin.
“Bless” with the fruits of righteons-
ness. “ Feed” with the bread of life.
“Lift” with the arm of the Lord to
the dignity and blessedness of heaven.
This prayer breathes throughout the
most Catholic spirit. It is akin to that
of Paul (Eph. iii, 14-19),

This prayer expresses also the most
delightful confidence. It looks to the
future with hope. It sees a good time
coming, and is glad, with foretaste of
the joy. What an inspiration to all
who pray and work.

‘* Ah! when shall all men’s good

Be each man’s rule, and waiters peace

Lie like a shaft of light across the land,

And like a lane of beams athwart the sea,

Thro’ all the circle of the golden year.”

—Tennyoon.





l. Their


PSALM XXIxXx°


INTRODUCTION.


“This psalm is a magnificent description of a thunder-storm. Its mighty march from
north to south, the desolation and terror which it causes, the peal of thunder, the flash of the
lightning, even the gathering fury and lull of the elements, are vividly depicted. The psalm
consists of five parts: a prelude, the body of the poem in three divisions, and a conclusion.
The structure (‘first fully explained by Ewald’) of the whole is highly artificial, and elaborated
with a symmetry of which no more perfect specimen exists in Hebrew. But this evidently
artificial mode of composition is no check to the force and fire of the poet’s genius, which
kindles and glows, and sweeps along with all the freedom and majesty of the storm ; the whole
psalm being one continued strain of triumphant exultation. I. In the prelude, the singer lifta
our thoughts at once from earth to heaven, by calling on the angela, who stand around the
throne of God, to praise Him who manifests His glory in the thunder and lightning which He
sends upon the earth (vers. 1, 2). IJ. Then follows the description of the storm in the three


Ps. xviii. 13, Isa. xxx. 31). It is the symbol
of the Divine power and vengeance (1 Sam. ii





® Norz.—Thunder is extremely rare in


Palestine during summer, Hence the miracie Ae


wrought by Samuel at the time of wheat-harvest
must have made the greater impression on the
people (1 Sam. xii, 17, 18). Thunder is called

the voice of God” (¢f. Job xxxvii. 2; xl. 9,


10; vii. 10; 2 Sam. xxii. 14; Ex. ix. 28).

occasions when God has specially intimated

His presence, there have been accompaniments

of thunder (¢f. Sinai, Ex xix. ites Heb,
1


PSALM XXX,


strophes which constitute the main body of the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMS,


-


poem, These are so constructed, that the first


(vers. 3, 4) gives us the beginning of the storm, the low, faint muttering thunder in the dis-
tant heavens; the next (ver. 5-7) describes the storm at its height, when it crashes the cedars
and shakes the mountains; the last (vers. 8, 9) tells how it passes on over the plain-country to the


forest of Kadesh, where it dies away.


III, The conclusion consists, like the prelude, of two


verses, each of two members, And here we are beautifully reminded that Jehovah, whom the
angels praise, and who both rules and stills the elements in their wildest uproar, is the same
Jehovah who gives strength and peace to His people ” (vera, 10, 11),—Perowne,


(Verses 1-11.)


If Psalm viii. should be read at night,
when the sky is bright with stars, and
Psalm xix. by day, when the sun is high
in the heavens, this ought to be studied
during the gloom of the tempest, when
the thunder rolls, and the lightnings
flash, and the terrors of the Lord are on
every side. It is then we can best rea-
lise its grandeur and beauty, and feel
its power to bring us nearer God (vers.
1, 2), First, the psalmist would raise
us to the true stand-point, that side by
side with the angels, “the godlike ones,”
“the sons of the mighty,” and inspired
like them with holy love and joy, we
may sing Jehovah’s praise :

‘* Give unto the Lord, ye sons of the mighty,

Give unto the Lord glory and strength 3

Give unto the Lord the glory of His name,


Bow down to the Lord in the beauty of
holiness,”


“Tn the beauty of holiness.” This is
rendered in the margin of our Bibles,
“In His glorious sanctuary,” others
translate, “in holy attire,” “in the
vestments of the sanctuary,” “in the
beautiful robes of the priesthood.”
True holiness is of the soul. All things
outwardly beautiful are but types of the


xii. 18-24, also John xii. 29, and Rev. iv. 5,
viii, 5, &c.). The poeta of all lands make fre-
quent reference to the thunder, There is a
magnificent description of a thunder-storm in
Job xxxvi, 27-xxxvii. 1-5, which may be com-

ared with that in this psalm, schylus,

irgil, and Lucretius (book vi.) among the
ancients, and Milton, Klopstock, and others
among the moderns, have passages of great
sublimity and beauty, describing thunder-
storms. The following extracts are from
Zéschylus and Milton :


‘*1 feel in very deed
The firm earth rock ; the thunder’s deepening


roar
Rolls with redoubled rage; the bickering
flames
Flash thick; the eddying sands are whirl’d
on high;
Im dreadful opposition, the wild winds
136


beautiful in soul The meaning seems
to be that as in heaven, so on earth,
God should be worshipped in the beauty
of holiness. Stapding with the psal-
mist, as it were, on the heights of Zion,
let us watch the tempest, and let our
hearts answer as he calls us,

I. To hear the voice of God in the
thunder-storm (ver. 3). “The voica
of the Lord.” This was heard in the
garden (Gen. iii. 8) calling Adam; op
Mount Sinai (Deut. iv. 12, v. 22) pro
claiming the ten commandments ; by
the prophets (Isa. vi. 8, Jer. xxvi. 13)
announcing the invitations and warnings
of the gospel; and in the thunderings
with which the mountains tremble (1
Sam. vii. 10). The inspired writers see
a unity in things, and discern the voice
of God in the sounds of inanimate
nature, as well asin the articulate words
of human speech. In the present pas-
sage, the voice of the thunder is men-
tioned seven times (Rev. x. 3), which
points to its sacred nature, and heavenly
source,’—Murphy. Reason and reve-
lation agree in their teachings. The
cold scientist may see nothing in the
thunder-storm but law and force, and


Rend the vexed air; the boisterous billows


rise,
Confounding earth and sky, the impetuous


storm
’ Rolls all its terrible fury."—Trans. by Potter.


“ Kither tropic now
*Gan thunder, and both ends of heaven, the
clouds
From many a horrid rift abortive pour’d
Fierce rain, with lightning mix’d, water with
fire,
In ruin reconcil’d; nor slept the winds
Within their stony caves, but rush’d abroad
From the four hinges of the world, and fell
On the vex’d wilderness, whose tallest pines,
Though rooted deep as high, and sturdiest oaka,
Bow’d their stiff necks, laden with stormy
blasts,
Gr torn up sheer.”
—Paradise Regained, book iv.


4


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; PSALMS,


cn nn


the trembling savage may behold only
a dreadful power which he cannot com-
prehend ; but the Hebrew poet teaches
us to recognise the presence and work-
ing of Jehovah. What is Jaw, but His
will; what is force, but His strength ;
what are all the phenomena of na-
ture, but manifestations of His glory.
A voice implies a speaker, and inter-
prets to us his thought. Nature is
to us the voice of God, and interprets
to us His thoughts. We should think
of Him as present not only representa-
tively or influentially, but personally,
and speaking to us, as truly by His
works, as by His Word.

Ii. To adore the glory of God in the
thunder-storm (vers. 3-9). Realising
the presence of God, we are called to
behold His strength and glory as re
flected in the tempest. The description,
though artificial, is in the highest degree
vivid and powerful.

“ji, In the first strophe, we hear the
first yet distant sound of the thunder
in the words, ‘The voice of Jehovah is
upon the waters.’ In the next two
clauses, ‘The God of glory thundereth :
Jehovah is upon many waters,’ the long,
loud peal grows more distinct ; whilst in
ver. 4., again, it is pitched in a lower key,
as if telling us of a pause in the storm.

“ii, In the next strophe, we have again
(a) first, the renewed fury of the tem-
pest, as coming nearer yet, it falls on the
glory of Lebanon, and breaks her cedars
in its might. ‘The voice of Jehovah
breaketh the cedars,’ dc. (b) Next,
gathering, with a wilder intensity of
wrath, it bursts upon the mountain
peaks, foaring amid their rocks, and
shattering them ; and making the ever-
lasting hills themselves to tremble as if
with the throes of an earthquake, so
that ‘Lebanon and Sirion skip like
young buffaloes.” (c) Lastly, we hear
it sinking down in the line which de-
scribes the flashing of the forked light-
ning: ‘The voice of Jehovah cleaveth
the flames of fire’ (vers. 5-7).

“iii, Again, the same structure is ob-
servable. One long peal after another
has rolled and reverberated along the
sky, and now the storm, in its jubilant
strength, sweeps the whole land from


PSALM IX.


north to south. (a) Again, it is up im
its majesty: ‘The voice of Jehovah
maketh the wilderness to tremble.’ (6)
Again, its last fury is poured out upon
the wilderness of Kadesh. The very
hinds bow themselves in travail pangs,
and the forest is torn open and laid bare,
as the hurricane drives through it in its
path. (c) And again, the tempest is
stilled, but this time its voice is hushed
and lost for ever in the music and songs
of the heavenly host. ‘In His temple,
all that are therein cry Glory’ (vers. 8,
9).”—Perowne,

III. To confide in God as the Al-
mighty ruler of the thunder-storm
(vers. 10, 11). The tempest has fulfilled
its mission. The air seems purer, and
the sun shines with a more chastened
radiance. In the sweet tranquillity of
the scene, the psalmist speaks words of
instruction and comfort, He would
strengthen our faith and hope in God.
1. We are taught to confide in God
as an Almighty King. ‘‘Sitteth” in
the tranquillity of an upright and Al-
mighty Judge. ‘Upon the flood,” that
overwhelmed the old world, and rises
and surges for the final overthrow of the
wicked in a deluge, not of water, but of
fire (2 Pet. iii. 7-10). “Sitteth King,”
to defend the right and defeat the
wrong. “ Forever!” The dominion that
“has no beginning, knows no end.”—
Murphy.

2. As blessing Hts people with strength
and peace, “These are the two great
blessings of salvation, ‘His people,’
who are born of God, receive from Him
the inheritance of sons, and are for ever
distinguished from that wicked world
that rejects the offers of His grace, and
reaps the vengeance of everlasting de-
struction.”—Murphy. “Very beautiful
is the conclusion of the psalm. If, in
His heavenly temple above, all that are
therein ascribe ‘glory’ to God, upon
earth, too, He has manifested His glory.
He sat as king when He sent the flood
of water to destroy the earth. He sita
now, and for ever will sit, as king. As
then He saved the righteous man from
death, so now He watches over His

eople, for Jehovah is the God of Israel.
t was He who, when the storm waxed
137


PSALM XiXK.





atrong, gave it its strength; it was He
who, when it was hushed, spread over
earth, and sea, and sky, the sweet
Sabbath stillness of peace. And He
whose almighty power was seen in the
march of the tempest, whose voice was
heard in its wildest uproar, and whose
word stilled its fiercest war, shall He


Nature Gop


I Built by His hand (ver. 9), “I
asked the earth, and it said, ‘I am not
He,’ and all that is upon it made the
same confession. I asked the sun, and
the depths, and the creeping things that
have life, and they answered, ‘We are
not thy God; look thou above us.’ I
asked the breezes and the gales; and
the whole air with its inhabitants said
to me, ‘Anaximenes is in error, I am
not God.’ I asked the heaven, the sun,
the moon, the stars, ‘We too,’ said
they, ‘are not the God whom thou
seekest.’ And I said to all the creatures
that surround the doors of my fleshly
senses, ‘ Ye have said to me, of my God,
that ye are not He; tell me somewhat
of Him.” And with a great voice, they
exclaimed, ‘He made us.’”—Augustine
(Conf. 10, 6). “ Every house is builded
by some man, but he that built all
things is God” (Heb. iii. 4).

IL Hallowed by His presence,
Nature is not an empty framework—
a house without an inhabitant—a temple
without a God. “Thad rather believe
all the fables in the Legend, and the
Talmud, and the Alcoran, than that this
universal frame is without a mind.”—
Bacon. God is everywhere, and to the
eye of faith He is ever revealing more
and more of His glory. ‘“ How precious


are Thy thoughts to me, O Lord” (Pa





HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


not give both strength and peace? Yea,
Jehovah, who is strong and mighty,
will give His own strength to His
people. And He who is the Prince of
Peace, will bless His people with peace,
Thus the psalm begins, as Delitzch says,
with a gloria in excelsis, and ends with
& pax tn torris.”— Perowne,


’s TEMPLE.


exxxix. 17), He who cannot find God im
His works, is likely to miss Him in His
Word. He who does not regard earth
as sacred, is in danger of treating heaven


as profane.
‘Themen, -
Whom nature’s works can charm, with God
Himself
Hold converse ; grow familiar day by day
With his conceptions ; act upon His plan,
And form to His, the relish of their souls,”
II Oonsecrated to His worship
(ver. 9). This implies worshippers.
Though nature reveals God, what
boots it, if there were none to “ speak
of His glory.” The devout soul turns
to nature as to a temple.


“To that cathedral, boundless as our wonder,
Whose quenchless lamps, the sun and moon
supply ;
Its choir the winds and waves, its organ
thunder,
Its dome, the sky.
There amid solitude and shade I wander
TEreugs the green aisles ; and stretched upom
the s


Awed by the silence, reverently ponder
The ways of God.”
LEARN :
1. The sanctity of nature.
2. The holy uses of nature.
3. The subordination of nature to Christ
** Read nature, nature is a friend to truth,


Nature is Christian, preaches to mankind,
And bids dead matter aid ua in our Creed.”


— Young.


PSALM XXX


INTRODUCTION.
“This pealm was composed after recovery from a sickness which had very nearly proved


fatal, The singer begins with an inscription of
upon all who, like himself, had known the loving


erp to God for His great goodness, and cella


indness of Jehovah, to join him in his thanks-


giving. Thence he passes (ver. 6.) to a recital of his own experience, his pleading with God is


his affliction, and God’s answer to his prayer.


composed ‘‘at the dedication of the Louse.”


According to the inscription, the psalm was


But what house? Some would understand the


dedication of the spot on which the Temple afterwards stood, and which David purchased of


Aryaunah (2 Sam. xxiv.; 1 Chron. xxi),
138


Others conjecture that by “the dedication of the house,”


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMA&,





Peale WZ,








is meant a purification and reconsecration of David's palace which Absalom had defiled (2 Sam.
xx. 3). But, perhaps, if the inscription be trustworthy, it refers to the house which David
built in his new city of Zion, and the building of which he seems to have regarded as a pledge


ef the security and prosperity of his kingdom (2 Sam. v. 11, 12).


We must, however, still


suppose that he had suffered just before from a sickness, about which the history is silent” —


Perowne.


THOUGHTS ON RECOVERY FROM SICKNESS.


I God’s hand in sending sickness
(vers. 1-5). Sickness is common. No
house is exempt, no age safe from its
ravages. Sooner or later it comes to all.
But we err, if we think it a chance, or
the result of mere second causes. The
psalmist saw in it the hand of God.
“Thou hast lifted me up” (as a bucket
from a well, Ex. ii 16, 19). How
changed is sickness, when we recognise
that it is sent of God. He does not
act from caprice or passion. There is a
“need be” (1 Pet. i 6). It is in love,
and for our good, that He afflicts. As
Jesus took the blind man whom He
was about to heal “aside from the
multitude” (Mark vii. 33), so He takes
His people, in sickness, aside from the
din and bustle of the woxld, that in
quietness and in solitude, He may
speak to their hearts.

II. God’s mercy in alleviating
sickness (ver. 1). David felt that his
case might have been far worse. As
we learn from 1 Chron. xxi. 12, he
was offered his choice of three evils,—
war, famine, or pestilence. He shrank
from the first. His brave heart could
not bear the shame of being driven
before his foes. In his strait he left
the decision with God. “ Let me fall
now into the hands of the Lord, for
very great are His mercies.” Nor was
he disappointed, Though cast down,
he was not cast off; though visited
with sore affliction, “God had not
made his enemies to rejoice over him.”
There are alleviations in every sickness,
In wrath God remembers mercy. There
\s restraining mercy. “He stayeth His
rough wind in the day of His east wind ”
(Isa, xxvii. 8; ¢f. Ezra ix. 13; Mal. iii
17, There is upholding mercy. Not only
\s life spared, and the grave deprived of
its prey, but inward strength is given.
Faith is confirmed ; foes who watched
for falls and prophesied evil are disap-
pointed. There is comforting mercy.


Books are a great help; the love of
friends is a great solace. How differ-
ent to be watched by the kind eyes,
and to he ministered to by the gentle
hands of those who love us, than to
pine in solitude, or to be waited upon
by strangers and hirelings! But, above
all, there are the comforts of religion.
Baxter said, “I have pain, there is no
use arguing against sense; but I have
peace, J have peace/” Samuel Ruther-
ford said of Jesus, “‘ His sweet presence
eateth out the bitterness of sorrow.”
IIL God’s loving kindness in re-
storing from sickness. There are
many who have no sense of God’s mer-
cies. They may have stirrings of heart
and relentings so long as_ sickness
lasts, but when it is over they go back
to their old ways; they are little, if at
all, altered for the better by what they
have gone through. God is not in all
their thoughts. But it is different with
true believers, Their grateful cry is,
‘Thou hast healed me” (vers. 2, 3). Here
recovery from sickness is represented—
1. As granted tn answer to prayer. Mark
the earnestness and faith of the sup-
plicant. He cries to God as a child to
his father. He takes hold of God's
strength, and pleads with Him as his
covenant God. “QO Lord my God.”
Happy sickness that drives the soul to


Jesus !


2. As effected by sovereign love (ver.
3). It was the Lord’s doing. Thrice
does David say, “ Thou hast.” And it
was all of grace, and not for any de.
serving on his part. This thought
awakens the liveliest gratitude (Ps.


exvi. oF

3. As designed for the holiest ends
(vers. 4, 5). If he had been brought
back, as from the brink of the grave,
and his strength restored, it was that
he might consecrate himself anew to
God, and serve Him with greater love
and steadfastness (Pa. cxix. 67): “ Be

139


PRALM KXX.








fore I was afflicted I went astray ; but
now have I kept Thy word” (cf. Isa.
xxxvili. 17-19 ; Heb. xii. 7-11; 1 Pet.
v. 10).

Jeremy Taylor says that “God who
in mercy and wisdom governs the
world, would never have suffered so


A Sone To
(Verses


I The Singers. ‘ Yesaints of His.”
“ Beloved,” more literally, “who have
obtained mercy of Him.” — Perowne.
“ His gracious ones.” — Alexander.
“His pious ones."— Murphy. “ David
would not fill his choir with reprobates,
but with sanctified persons who could
sing from their hearts. He calls to
you, ye people of God, because ye are
saints; and if sinners are wickedly
silent, let your holiness constrain you
to sing. You are His saints, chosen,
blood-bought, called, and set apart for
God, sanctified on purpose that you
should offer the daily sacrifice of praise.”
— Spurgeon,

Il. The Song. Consider: —1. The
Theme (ver. 4). “ His holiness.” “ His
holy name,” literally, “ His holy memo-
rial,” with reference, no doubt, to the
passagein Ex, iii. 15: “This is My name
for ever, and this is My memorial to all
generations.” ‘“‘God’s name is His reve-
lation of Himself in all His various attri-
butes of love, wisdom, power, holiness,
truth, and righteousness. God’s memorial
is that great history of redemption which
was, 60 to speak, the setting up of a monu-
ment to His glory, on which all these
attributes were inscribed.”—Perowne.

2. The Spirit. Devoutness. ‘ Unto
the Lord.” Soctality. “Ye saints.”
Gratitude. “‘Give thanks.” Gratitude is
a free and joyous affection. It has been
well called the memory of the heart.

“Holy, holy, holy !’ is the song of
seraphim and cherubim; let us join
it, not dolefully, as though we trembled
at the holiness of God, but cheerfully,
as humbly rejoicing in it.”—, com,





HOMiLEVIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


—


many sadnesses, and have sent them
especially to the most virtuous and
the wisest men, but that He intends
they should be the seminary of thought,
the nursery of virtue, the exercise of
wisdom, the trial of patience, the ventur-
ing for a crown, and the gate of glory.”


THe Logp.
4, 5.)


3. The occasion (ver. 5., of. 1 Chron.
xxi. 15). The plague that followed the
sin of numbering the people had brought
David very low, but the voice that said
“Tt is enough,” lifted him and his up
again. The night of death, like that of
Egypt, had filled the land with weeping,
but the morning of mercy ushered in a
day of gratitude and joy for the forgiven
king and his people (ver. 5). “A
reason why God’s saints should praise
Him, because He manifests Himself to
them in love, not in wrath, or if in
wrath, but for a moment. Love rules
over all. The literal rendering of the
verse is: ‘For, in His anger is (but) a
moment, in His favour a life; in the
evening, weeping may come in to pase
the night ; but with the morning (there
is) a shout of joy.’ The parallelism is
carefully preserved in each member,
‘anger, favour ;? ‘a moment, a life ;’
‘evening, morning ;’ ‘weeping, joy.’
We must not repeat the verb ‘pass the
night’ with the second clause. Weep-
ing is described in the first under the
image of a wayfarer who comes in at
evening to lodge for the night. The
suddenness and surprise of gladness, on
the other hand, in the morning, are
beautifully represented by the simple
mT “p22, ‘at dawn, a shout of joy,’
withoutaverb. Just asthesun in Eastern
lands, withoutany long preludeo ftwilight
to announce his coming, leaps in, as it
were, m a moment, above the horizon, so
does the light of God’s love dispel in a
moment the long night and darkness of
sorrow. See the beautiful parallel (Isa.
liv. 7, 8)”.—Perowne.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY. PSALMS.





PSALM XXX,


a


Lixxs mv THe Onam or Lira
(Verses 6-12.)


I. Prosperity and presumption (ver.
6). The pronoun is emphatic. “ And
as forme.” ‘ There is a tacit opposi-
tion between the psalmist’s present and
his former experience. Now he had learnt
through the lesson of suffering to trust in
God. Before that suffering came, he had
begun to trust in himself. ‘I seemed
so strong, so secure, 1 began to think
within myself, I shall never be moved.’ ”
—Perowne. “ Prosperity,—the Hebrew
word includes the idea of prosperity, and
of that self-confidence which it produces.”
—Alexander (cf. Deut. viii. 11-18, xxxii.
15, Hos. xiii. 6, 2 Chron. xxxii. 25). In
itself ‘‘ prosperity” is not evil but good.
It is promised to the righteous (Ps. i. 3).
It is a token of God’s favour (Gen. xxvi.
12, 13). But it needs much faith and
humility to prevent its becoming a snare.
It often leads to pride, self-indulgence,
and forgetfulness of God. Thus what
is good is perverted to bad uses,

“In prosperity conscience is a pope
that gives dispensations to the heart.”—
Samuel Rutherford.

“When men are made spiritually
faint by dealing in and with the world,
Satan sets on them, as Amalek did on
the faint and weak of the people that
came out of Egypt.”—Owen.

‘< Little knows
Any, but God alone, to value right
The good before him, but perverts best things
To worst alone, or to their meanest use.”
—Milton.

IL Presumption and chastisement
(ver. 7). God’s love is shown in divers
ways. He treats His children accord-
ing to their special requirements, but
His endsare ever theaame. Prosperity,
when it leads to presumption, is a sore
evil. It needs sharp treatment. Speak-
ing is not enough (Jer. xxii. 2), An-
other method must be adopted. “Thou
didst hide Thy face.” There is no greater
affliction than this, The loss of health
and prosperity is bad, the estrangement
of friends is worse, but the withdrawal
of God, as if in anger, is worst of all.
The light of God’s face is salvation (Ps.


xliv. 3). Zion’s strength was nothing,
all the glory of Israel was gone if God
departed. No wonder the psalmist says
“I was troubled,” “ ‘agitated,’ ‘terri-
fied,’ ‘ perplexed.’ "Alexander.

Let us thank God for chastisement.
It is for our good. We presume upon
our health, and God sends sickness. We
presume upon our friends, and God
takes them from us. We presume upon
our reputation and worldly goods, and
God lets us be put to shame. We pre-
sume upon our frames and feelings in
religion, and God suffers us to be tried
with doubts and to walk in darkness, So
ix. many ways, God teaches us humility,
and shuts us up to Himself as the
supreme and abiding good.

“Certainly virtue is like precious
odours, most fragrant when they are in-
censed or crushed: for prosperity doth
best discover vice, but adversity doth
best discover virtue.”—Bacon,

III. Chastisement and prayer (vers.
8-10). ‘Is any among you afflicted, let
him pray.” The two things are naturally
connected,

Consider David’s prayer. 1. It is
earnest (ver. 8). “I cried unto the
Lord.” His whole soul went out in a
cry (cf. 1 Chron. xxi. 16, 17).

2. It ts argumentative (ver. 9). Like
Job, he reasons with the Almighty (Job
xxiii. 4, of. Isa, xxxiii. 18, 19). “What
profit is in my blood ;” in my death.
“Shall the dust praise Thee?” ‘To
thank God for His mercy, and to show
the truth of His grace, form the chief
end for which He leaves His people here
for a season. The dust cannot do this,
and the spirit is not here.”—Murphy.

3. It ts disinterested. Ue does not
seek prolonged life for his own sake, but
in order to serve and praise God. He
felt that his life would be more usefu!
than his death (cf. Phil. i. 23-25).

It is a blessed thing when chastisemeni
thus leads the soul to cast itself on God,
and to acquiesce in His will.

*¢ Wearer m to Thee, nearer to Thee,

Fea though abe a easy corer me.’


PSALM XXXL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : P&ALME.





IV. Prayer and deliverance (ver.
11). His prayer has been answered.
Here he acknowledges the greatness of
his deliverance.

1. Zé was the Lord’s doing. “Thou
hast,” dc. ‘‘Turned” (cf. John xvi. 20),
not “exchanged for,” but “turned into.”

2. It was complete. ‘Beating the
breast was a token of mourning. Danc-
ing was an expression of pious joy (2
Sam. vi. 14). So sackcloth was the
garb of mourning (1 Chron. xxi. 16).
‘Girded me with gladness.’ New gar-
ments are the wonted symbol of salva-
tion” (Isa. lxi, 3).—Murphy. “Call
upon Me in the day of trouble; I will
deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify Me”
(Ps. 1. 15).

V. Deliverance and praise (ver. 13).


“ The sackcloth of his humiliation Ged
had taken away off him, and had
clothed him with the garment of praise,
How should he do otherwise than praise
God for ever for His goodness.” —Per-
owne. “To the end that my glory may
sing praise to Thee.” The soul is the
noblest part, the glory of man, and
God’s deliverances are worthy of the
highest efforts of the soul, in gratitude
and praise. How often have God's
saints realised the truth of all these
things in their experience (Ps. ciii. 3,
cxvi. 1). When we bow our hearts to
God as our Father in Heaven, and say
Thy will be done, we can confidently
end with the triumphant song “ Thine
is the kingdom, and the power, and th
glory for ever.”


PSALM XXXL


INTRODUCTION.


A psalm, in which the psalmist rises by prayer, from trouble, to lively faith and hope in
God. The older interpreters founding on the use of the same word in vers. 2, 3 (Heb.), and
1 Sam, xxiii, 25, for the most part, refer the psalm to the time when David fled from Saul inte
the wilderness of Maon. Ewald, Hitzig, and others attribute it to Jeremiah, chiefly because
of its plaintive character, and from the fact that certain expressions found in this psalm are
also found in Jeremiah (ef. ver. 14. and Jer. xx. 10, and the recurrence of the phrase “ Fear on
every side,” Jer. vi. 25, xx. 8, xlvi. 5, xlix. 29, Lam. ii, 22). As to this, Tholuck says, ‘‘ That
the prophets used the psalms, and not the psalmist the prophets, may be inferred from the fondness
of Jeremiah to weave the sayings of the ancients into his compositions (¢f. Ps. i. 8, xxxiii. 7).
Perowne says, ‘‘ On other grounds there is no reason why the psalm should not be David’ It
breathes throughout his rare tenderness of apirit, as well as his faith and courage, The figures
of the stronghold and the rock so often repeated (vers. 2-4), are most suitable in his mouth
‘qf. Pa. xviii.), and eo are the expressions in ver. 8 and in ver, 21.”


PRAYER THE RESOURCE OF THE GODLY IN AFFLICTION,
(Verses 1-8.)


This prayer:

I. Springs from trust in God (vers.
1-3). 1. The Almighty Father. This is
the character in which God has revealed
Himself. He is infinitely just, and holy,
and merciful. His people are His chil-
dren, All of them are dear to Him,
but the weak and the sorrowful are the
special objects of His care. As a father
watches hia sick child, and bends to
listen to his feeblest cry, so “our Father in
heaven” bows down in pitying mercy to
His people when they are in trouble.
2. The everlasting refuge (ver. 1). “In
Thee have I found refuge.”—/ecrowne.

142


Various figures are employed to set forth.
the strength and impregnableness of this
refuge (ver. 2), “Strong Rock,” “ House
of Defence” (ver. 3). “ My rock and my
fortress” (cf. Ps. xviii. 2). The fitnesa
and force of these images must have
been deeply felt by David, who had so
often found safety from his enemies in
the caves and fastnesses of the rocks,
“The psalmist grounds his prayer ow
the fact that the Lord is in reality his
rock and. his fortress, because he knew
Him as such by the faith which God
never puts to shame.”—Hengstenberg.
“The psalmist prays ‘Be thou to me,’


-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM TEL


or rather, ‘Become to me, prove Thyself
to be my rock and house of defence ;
for I know that Thou, and Thou only,
art my refuge.’ This is the logic of the
heart, if not of the intellect; the logic,
it may be added, of every prayer of faith.”
—Perowne.
Ii. Implores the highest blessings.
1. Vindication of his hope (ver. 1).
«<Shamed, te, utterly confounded,
disappointed and frustrated in his hopes ”
(Ps. vi. 11, xxii. 5, xxv. 2, 20).—Alez-
ander. Such a fate would be terrible. It
would be dishonourable to God, as well as
to His servant. But God will never suffer
those who trust in Him to be put to
confusion. 2. Deliverance im righteous-
ness (ver. 2). “In Thy righteousness
set me at liberty.”—Perowne. He longed
for freedom; but he would not seek
even such a boon, save in a way that
was for the glory of God. “God is a
just God and a Saviour.” 3. Gurdance
in the way of holiness (ver. 3. of. Ps.
xxiii. 2,3). ‘The double word indicates
an urgent need—we require double direc-
tion, for we are fools, and the way is
rough. Lead me as a soldier, guide me
as a traveller! Lead me as a babe,
guide me as a man; lead me by Thy
hand, guide me by Thy Word. The
argument used is one which is fetched
from the armoury of free grace; not
for my own sake, but for Thy name's
sake, guide me.”—C. H. Spurgeon.
4. Protection to the end of life (vers. 4, 5).
The “net” refers to the craft and
malice of enemies. ‘There are dangers
known and unknown, there are foes who
face us openly, and there are foes who
plot and work in secret, Our daily
prayers should be, “Lead us not into
temptation, but deliver us from evil.”

III. Characterised by the noblest
emotions. 1. Humility. “ Bow down.”
2. Harnestness. “ Speedily.” 3, Asmra-





tion, “Be Thou my strong rock.”
4. Zeal for God’s glory. “For Thy
name’s sake.” 5, Self-surrender. “ Into
Thy hand I commend my spirit.” “My
spirit (wack) more than my soul or life
(Nephesh). It is not only fron. sickness
and death, but from sin and all ghostly
enemies, that the man of God should be
kept, and therefore he commends to God,
not his body or his bodily life alone,
but the life of his spirit, which is more
precious” (cf. Is, xxxviii. 16).—Perowne,
6. Unbounded trust, “Thou hast re-
deemed me, O Lord God of truth.”
Past deliverances are strong supports of
faith. What the Lord was, He is; what
He has done, He is able to do again,
yea, and much more, exceeding abund-
antly above all we can ask or think.
He is the mighty one who is ever true
to Himself and to His word. The
gods of the heathen are “ lying vanities,”
but Jehovah is worthy of the highest
trust.

IV. Followed by the grandest de
liverance (cf. 1 Sam. xxiii. 1-11), The
psalmist exults (vers. 7, 8) in the won-
drous redemption wrought out by God.
1. Sovereign mercy. “I will be glad
and rejoice in Thy mercy.” 2. Tender
sympathy. “Thou hast considered my
trouble.” There are different forms of
consideration (cf. Job i. 8; Ps, xxxi. 7,
xli 1). 3. Benign interposition (ver. 8).
4. Delightful freedom (ver. 8, of. Ps.iv.1
“Though the mariner sees not the pole-
star, yet the needle of the compass
which points to it tells him which way
he sails. Thus the heart that is touched
with the loadstone of divine love, trem-
bling with godly fear, and yet still looking
towards God by fixed believing, interprets
the fear by the love in the fear, and
tells the soul that its course is heaven-
ward—towards the haven of eternal


»_.. Leighton.


Tue Great DErPosr?.
(Verse 5.)


“ With these words, our Lord breathed
out His life (Luke xxiii. 46), as He had
before used words from another psalm
in His agony om the cross The firet


words were from a psalm (xxil.) which,

typically at least, foreshadowed His

sufferings ; whereas this is not in the

same way predictive But the Holy
143


PaaAL® YAEL





One of God, in that last hour of mortal
agony, close these words of one of His
servants to express the solemn surrender
of His life. And, in so doing, He gave
them a new interpretation, The Jewish
singer only meant by them that he put
himself and all his hopes into the hand
of God. Jesus meant by them, that by
His own act, of His own free will, He
gave up His spirit, and therefore His life,
to the Father. And they who have died
with their Lord, have died with the same
words on theirlips. These were the last
words of Polycarp, of Bernard, of Huss,
nf Jerome of Prague, of Luther, Me-


HOMILETiV COMMENTARY ; PSALME.


lancthon, and many others, ‘ Blessed
are they,’ says Luther, ‘who die not
only for the Lord, as martyrs,—not only
in the Lord, as all believera,—but like-
wise with the Lord, as breathing forth
their lives in these words, “Into Thy
hand I commend my spirit.”’” —
Perowne.

I. The soul survives the shock of
death.

IL The care of the soul is the
supreme concern in death.

Ifl The well-being of the soul, in
life and in death, consists in its dedi-
cation to Obrizt.


Tue Srory or A SUFFERER,
(Verses 9-18.)


L Mark the divine listener.
“O Lord” (Jehovah). Ten times does
David use this name of hope. Who is
like God, so kind, so patient, so sympa-
thising? He has infinitely more pity
than the most loving father (Ps. ciii.
13), infinitely more tenderness than the
most faithful mother (Is. lxvi. 13,
tlix. 15). The sorrows of countless
millions are being poured into His ear,
but He is never weary. He listens to
the tale of the humblest child, as if he
were the only object of His care.


* To Thee alone my sorrows shall appeal,
Hath earth a wound too hard for heaven te
heal.” —Quarles.


Ii. Ponder the sad complaint. Like
Hezekiah (2 Kings xix. 4), the psalmist
pours out his heart before the Lord.
We seem to hear his sobs and cries,
1. Consumed by grief (vers. 9, 10).
“Hye, soul, belly, the seats and means
of intelligence, will, and power.”—
Murphy. Body and mind were alike
exhausted. 2. Depressed by conscious
sin (ver. 10). His eye turned within
as well as without. His real trouble
was in his sin, “ Mine tniquity.” It
was his, his very own, for which he and
he only was responsible. So it is;
others may have tempted or taken part
in the transgression, but so far as it is our
act, it is owr property. What a burden
is ain! What a terrible plague is the

144


plague of a sinful heart. “QO wretched
man that I am, who shall deliver me ?”

3. Wounded by the cruel treatment
of his contemporaries. The reproach of
foes was bad, the distrust of acquaint-
ances was worse, but the alienation of
friends was worst of all. He com-
plains of the “slander of many.” The
tongues of not only Doeg, Nabal, and
the Ziphites, but of many more, were
let loose against him.


‘¢ Be thou as chaste ag ice, as puré as snow,
Thou shalt not escape calumny.”


“Its edge is sharper than the sword ;
whose tongue outvenoms all the worms
of Nile; whose breath rides on the
posting winds; and doth belie all cor-
ners of the world.”—Shakespeare.

4, Disheartened by the «unrelenting
malice of his enemies (ver. 18). ‘ Fear
was on every side.” Wherever he turned
he met a foe. One fell purpose inspired
them all. They were like the conspira-
tors against Paul, “who bound them-
selves with an oath that they would
neither eat nor drink till they had killed
him” (Acts xxiii, 21). Jeremiah, who
was also a “man of sorrows,” complains
in the same words: “ Fear was on every
side” (Jer. xx. 10) ; and once and again
he uses similar terms (Jer. vi. 25, xx.
3, 4, xlvi. 5, xlix. 29; Lam. ii. 22).

5. Utterly self - desponding. The
brightness of life was gone—his repute-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS


nr rr ee





tion and usefulness were ruined. He
seemed good for nothing, Forsaken
and forlorn, he was as a “‘ dead man out
of mind.” But for his trust in God, all
hope would be lost (¢f. Ps. xliii).

Tit. Rejoice with the relieved suf-
ferer (vers. 14-18). 1. Filial trust in
God (ver. 14). “Mighty strength of
faith when a man conscious of his
own sinfulness (ver. 10), and with a
world in arms against him, yea, for
saken of his own friends (ver. 11), can
still turn to God and say, ‘Thou art
my God.’”—Perowne.

2. Humble acquiescence in the Divine
will (ver. 15). ‘My mTrmxs, te, all
my life, with its ‘sundry and manifold
changes,’ its joys and sorrows, its hopes
and conflicts, are not the sport of chance,
or the creatures of a blind fate, but are


PRALM EXE


in Thy hand, ‘O Thou living, personal
Redeemer.’ ”——Perowne. Thus, to have
faith in God’s will and rule, is to enter
into rest. “ Providence is a soft pillow
for anxious heads, an anodyne for care,
@ grave for despair.”

3. Confident hope of a happy tessue te
all his troubles (vers. 16-18). His faith
rises to certainty. He anticipates the
time when the lips of lying should be
struck dumb, when his enemies should
be put to shame, or lie silent in the grave,
and when he himseif should rejoice in
the sunshine of Jehovah’s love (Num.
vi. 25).


* Oh ! there is never sorrow of heart
That shall lack a timely end,
If but to God we turn, and ask
Of Him to be our Friend.” — WerdewortA.


Bourirep ALIVE.
(Verse 12.)


Now and again accidents happen,
such as the falling of earth and the
closing up of mines, by which people
are buried alive, There are also horrible
tales of persons who, of design, have
suffered this cruel fate. David speaks
here of a sort of moral counterpart.
Driven into exile, and cut off from the
society of friends and the business of
life, he soon came to be as if forgotten.
He whose exploits had but lately been
the theme of song, and whose name was
on every lip, was now “as a dead man,
out of mind.” This has been the expe-
rience of many since, though the form
of the calamity has varied. People may
be buried alive—

L By the malice of enemies. There
may be such a persistent covering of
their names, with lies and slander, that
at last they are, like David, given up
to “contemptuous oblivion.” “ Public
envy is an ostracism.”—Bacon.

If. By the neglect of contempo-
raries. “Out of sight, out of mind.”
After Butler had preached his famous
sermons at the Rolls Chapel, he accepted
a country charge, where he lived in great
retirement. Years passed and he was
forgotten. A friend spoke to the Queen

K


about him, and she answered that she
thought he was dead, and appealed to
Archbishop Blackburne if it were not
so. His reply was, ‘“‘ No, madam, he is
not dead, but he ts buried.” This is the
way in which the world has treated
many of its greatest men.

Ill. By the lack of opportunities
for distinction. While every one has
his chance, so to speak, some have better
chances than others. Two persons may
have equal merits, but one rises high,
while the other remains to the last in
the same humble position, There are
latent talents that are never called forth,
—minds of high power that are never
developed. Gray sings of this in his
“Elegy in a Country Churchyard ” :—
“Perhaps in this neglected spot is laid

Some heart once pregnant with celestial fire ;

Hands that the rod of empire might have
sway'd,

Or wak’d to ecstasy the living lyre:

But knowledge to their eyes her ample page,

Rich the the apoils of time, did ne'er up-
roll’?

Chill pent repress’d their noble rage,

And frose the genial current of the soul.”


IV. By the failure of capacity for
usefulness. Changes take place. Po-
pularity may fade. Broken health os

145


PSALM XXXL


misfortune may necessitate retirement.
Men who once bulked large in the pub-
lic eye are lost sight of and forgotten.
Hence, when their death is published, it
comes as a surprise. It is said, We
thought they had been dead long ago.
They had been virtually burted alive years
before their death.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; PSALMS,





All these things prophesy of a here-
after. If we serve God truly, it matters
little whether we have praise of men or
not.. Our recordison high. In heaven
there will be a balm for every wound,
and redress for every wrong, and many
who are first shall be last, and who are
last shall be first.


THe Goopness or THE LORD,
(Verses 19-24.)


His well-grounded hope now brings
triumphant certainty, and this breaks
forth in glad acknowledgment of God’s
goodness to the righteous, and an ex-
hortation to all to wait on Him in un-
shaken confidence of heart. “Oh! how
great is Thy goodness.”

David’s exclamation leads us to con-
sider the goodness of God—

I. As a spectacle of surpassing
beauty. “How great!” Creation, pro-
vidence, redemption, reveal God’s good-
ness. More and more, in the course of
the ages, it is unfolded, and calls forth
wonder, love, and praise.


‘* My heart is awed within me, when I think
Of the great miracle that still goes on
In silence round me—the perpetual work
Of Thy creation, finish’d, yet penew'd
For ever.’ —Bryant.


** His are the mountains, and the valleys his,
And the resplendent rivers, —his t’ enjoy
With a propriety that none can feel;

But who with filial con fidence, inspired,
Can lift to heaven an unpresumptuous eye,
And smiling say, My Father made them all !
Are they not his by a peculiar right,

And by an emphasis of interest his,

Whose eyes they filled with tears of holy


JOY»

Whose heart with praises, and whose ex-
alted mind

With worthy thoughts of that unwearied


ove
That Paes and built, and still upholds a
worl
So clothed with beauty for rebellious man,”
—Oowper.


TZ. As a treasury of inexhaustible
wealth, “Thou hast laid up,” lit.
“hidden” (ef. xvii. 4, and “the hidden
manna,” Rev. ii. 17). “ This is the love
of God manifested to the soul in secret.”

146


—Perowne, “Layestup.” “ This inti-
mates that much of the Divine good-
ness was yet in store for him. This is
true of all God’s saints, if we include
the unending future.” Murphy. God’s
goodness is partly seen, and partly un-
seen. What is seen, may, aa it were,
be measured; but what is unseen, is
boundless. What is a river to. the
ocean! What is the landscape, that the
eye can reach, to the vast unseen realms
of the earth, What are the thousand
stars that crowd the winter sky, to the
millions upon millions that are hid in
the depths of space! So with the
goodness of God. The sons of Jacob
carried away their “ass loads” of the
finest of the wheat, but what were these
to the stores laid up in Egypt’s gran-
aries. The Queen of Sheba’s heart
fainted when she saw the treasures of
Solomon, for the half had not been told
her of his wisdom and his wealth; but
a greater than Solomon is here, whose
riches are unsearchable, and whose wis-
dom is past finding out. “The secret
of the Lord is with them that fear Him.”
“Eye hath not seen, nor ear heard,
neither hath entered into the heart of
man, the things which God hath pre-
pared for them that love Him.”

it As a work of infinite benefi-
eence. “Oh! how great is Thy good-
ness, which Thou hast wrought for them
that trust in Thee, before the sons of
men,” This refers to the open manifes-
tation of goodness, ‘Goodness is laid
up in the promise, wrought in the per-
formance, and that goodness which is
laid up, is wrought for them that trust
in God; and thus, as God’s faithfulnesa


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.
Ee


mngageth us to believe, so our faith, as
it were, engageth God’s faithfulness to
perform the promise."—W. Hardy.

Scripture, observation, and memory,
supply countless proofs of God’s kind-
ness. ‘‘ The earth is full of the goodness
of the Lord,”

What God hath wrought is set forth
in two divisions, 1, General (ver. 20).
“Thou protectest them in the hiding-
place of Thy presence from the factions
of men.” —Delitzeh. “The hiding-place
of Thy presence, or ‘of Thy counte-
nance ;’ elsewhere of God’s tabernacle
(xxvii. 5); or of His wings (Ixi. 5); or
of His shadow (xci. 1). But this is the
most striking figure of all : to be hidden
{n the light of God’s face, hidden in that
splendour where His power is hidden
(Hab. iii, 4). What an image at once
of safety and blessedness !”— Perowne.





2. Particular (ver. 21). David here
speaks of himself. Probably the refer-
ence is to God’s signal interposition in
his behalf at Ziklag (Delitsch),

(Ver. 22). “In my haste.” “ David
and his people wept, till they had no
more power to weep, for the burning of
Ziklag and the capture of their wives
and children (1 Sam. avede ‘T am
eut off’ This was a fatal blow, appar-
ently indicating the deep displeasure of
God, and His final departure from him.
“Yet Thou heardest.” David at length
encouraged himself in the Lord his
God, who heard his ery, and restored to
him all that he had lost.”—Murphg.


* Through every period of my life,
Thy goodness I’ll proclaim ;
And after death, in distant workda,
Resume the glorious theua.”


Two CouxsEts or Wispom.


Vers. 28, 24. David speaks here to
all to whom God has been gracious.

IL Love the Lord. This is the first
and great commandment, and finds an
echo in every true heart.

Reason says “ Love the Lord.” Who
is worthy of the heart but the Supremely
Good? ‘We needs must love the
highest, when we see it.” —Tennyson.

Gratitude says “Love the Lord,”
Consider not only what God is in Him-
self, but what He has done for His people.
‘* His saints.” They are His favoured
ones, loved, redeemed, and sanctified.
“We love Him because He first loved
uz” (1 John iv. 19).

Experience says “ Love the Lord.”
This is the voice that comes down from
the pious of every land and age, back to
the days of paradise. Nothing but good
comes from loving God. The more we
love Him, the higher we rise in dignity
and strength, The more we love Him,
the fitter we become for the duties and
trials of earth, and the meeter for the
inheritance of the saints in heaven,
“ Faith-keeping is Jehovah,” alike as to
_ His promises and His threatenings, alike
in His retributive providence towards His
people who trust in Him, and towards


the proud and the evfl-doers, who reject
His counsel and His love. “In His
favour is life,”

IL Be of good courage (ver. 24).
There are differences as to courage.
There is the courage of the flesh. This
is common to us with the lower animals.
See what Job says of the war-horse (Job
xxxix. 19), and Solomon of the lion (Prov.
xxx. 30). Most men when their blood is
up will do what are called brave deeds.

There is the courage of the mind.
This is higher. It implies resolution,
firmness, a capacity to gird one’s self for
deeds of daring and difficulty,

But noklest of all, is the eourage
of the soul. This implies a heart that
is right with God, and hence a heart
that is loyal to truth and to duty, a
heart that is continually being recruited
with new strength, and that is ready for
any fate. ‘Be of good courage,” ¢.e.,
be brave, firmly reliant on God, “and
He will strengthen your heart.” “Be
strong in purpose and desire, and He
will make you strong in fact.”—Alez-
ander. ‘‘ All ye that hope in the Lord.”
* The psalm ends as Psalm xxvii. Hope
and waiting are marks peculiarly of the
Oid Testament mona Is ts

14


PSALM XXX,


true, even in the New, one apostle
writes, ‘we are saved by hope.’ And
another gays, ‘It doth not yet appear
what we shall be,’ but he adds what no
believer in the days of types and shadows
could have said, ‘We know that when
He shall appear, we shall be like Him,
for we shall see Him as He is.’ Won-
derful is the hopeful trust of the saints


PSALM


HUMILETIU COMMENTARY ; P8ALMEB.





of old in God, when we remember that
they did not know Him as God mani-
fest in the flesh.” —Perowne.

“‘ Love the Lord,” ‘* Be of good cour-
age.” These two counsels are intimately
connected. Love and courage go to-
gether. What will not the mother dare
for love of her child, and the patriot for
the love of his country ?


XXXIL


INTRODUCTION,


“(This is the second of the seven penitential psalms, as they ave ealled, which, says
Selnecker, ‘St. Augustine used often to read with weeping heart and eyes, and which before
his death he had written on the wall over against his sick-bed, that he might exercise himself
therein, and find comfort therein in his sickness.’ St. Augustine’s own words, ‘ Intelligentia
prima, est ut te noris peccatorem,’ might stand as its motto. There can be little doubt that
this psalm was composed after Nathan came to David. Psalm li. was the confession of his sin
and the prayer for forgiveness. This psalm is the record of the confession made and the for-
giveness obtained, and the conscious blessedness of his position as a son restored to his Father's
house. There was a shelter for him there now,—‘ Thou art my hiding-place.’ There was joy
aud gladness on his return,—‘ Thou shalt compass me about with songs of deliverance.’ And
here he carries out the resolve of Psalm li. ‘Then will I teach transgressors Thy way, and
sinners shall be converted unto Thee.’ The instruction of the psalm may be summed up in
the words of Prov. xxviii. 18, or in those of 1 John i. 8, 9.”—Perowne.


Tue BLEssEDNESS OF THE FORGIVEN.
(Verses 1-7.)


I Declared as a doctrine (vers. 1, 2).
We are taught here—1. That sin ts the
real cause of all unhappiness. As Milton
grandly sings:

‘* Disproportioned ain
Jarred againat nature's chime, and with harsh
din
Broke the fair music that all creatures made
To their great God,”


2. That the removal of sintsthe gracious
act of God (Ex. xxxiv. 7; Isa, xiii, 25;
1 John i. 8, 9).
that it is here as in law, when “ many
words of like import and significance are
heaped up and put together to make the
deed and legal instrament more com-
plete and perfect.” The group of words
is the same as in Ex. xxxiv. 7 and Ps,
hi. 5,6. Though dark, they show the
better the brightness of God’s love
(Rom. iii 20,21). First, sin is branded
as “transgression,” te, revolt, open and
daring defection from God’s covenant

148


Ver. 1. Manton says


(Is. 1 2, xlii, 27; Jer. ii. 13; Amos iv,
4; cf. 1 Kings xii 19). In this form
sin is said to be forgiven, lit. “taken
away.” Like a burden, it is lifted off
the soul Like the sins laid on the
scape-goat, it is carried away into the
wilderness (cf. Lev. xvi, 21, John i. 29),
Next, sin is described as “a coming
short of the mark.” Righteousness is the
true end of man, and sin is the missing
of that end. This is not from mere
weakness, but is the result of moral ob-
liquity and wilfulness. In this form,
sin is said to be “covered.” It is put
out of sight, as by the blood sprinkled
over the mercy-seat (Ex. xxv. 21; Lev.
viii. 14, 15); and the sinner is treated
as if he had not sinned (Ps. lxxxv. 2;
Is. xxxviii. 17, xliv. 22; 1 John i. 7).
Lastly, sin is regarded as “ iniquity,"
a twisting and perversion of the will
from the right way,—wrong-doing which
not only includes guilt but punishment.


’ nd


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; PSALMS.





In this aspect sin is said not to be reck-
oned. The best comment here is in
the words of St. Paul (Rom. iv. 6):
“Even as David also describeth the
blessedness of the man unto whom God
imputeth righteousness, without works,
saying, ‘ Blessed are they whose iniquities
are forgiwen, and whose sins are covered.
Blessed i3 the man to whom the Lord will
not impute sin.’”

3. That the removal of sin ts wrought
by God tm such a@ way as to secure the
highest blessedness of man. ‘‘Oh! the
blessings, oh! the happiness of the
man!” Not only is guilt removed, but
the heart is renewed, ‘No guile,” no
falseness, either to himself or to God,
“The man whose transgression is for-
given, whose sin is hidden—God having
cast it as a millstone into the depths of
she sea,—whose iniquity and perversion
is not reckoned to his account, and
whose gutle—the deceitful and despe-
rately wicked heart—is annihilated,
being emptied of sin, and filled with
righteousness, is necessarily a happy
man.”—Adam Clarke. “What can be
heavy to that man who is eased of the
intolerable burden of sin? How ani-
mated was that saying of Luther,
‘Smite, Lord, smite, for Thou hast
absolved me from my sins !’” — Leighton,

II. Illustrated as a fact (vers. 3-5).
David here speaks of himself. “He
had long struggled with the sense of his
sin, had long been crushed to the earth
with his burden, because he would not
humble himself before God; but God
had given him again the heart of a child.
He had gone to his Father with the
penitent confession, ‘I have sinned ;’
geod, as in the parable, the Father’s
heart moved towards his prodigal son
when he was yet a long way off, so
David found that his Father was ready
to forgive. ‘I said, I will confess,’ and
‘Thou tookest away the guilt of my
sin.’”—Perowne.

1. First picture. The misery of the
man who criminally delays confession
(vers. 3,4). These striking words show
that the misery was great. Body and
soul suffered. The pain was exhausting,
and compelled loud and passionate com-
plaints. Constant. It lasted es long





as he kept silence. The struggle
with conscience was fearful, Neither
day nor night was there relief. It was
as if the fires of hell were already kin-
dled, consuming his strength, and drying
up the springs of his being. Irremedi-
able. There was no remedy, for the
misery was caused by his own sin, and
continued by his obstinate alienation
from God. Every effort that he made
to better himself, so long as he refused
to humble his heart before God by con-
feasion, only aggravated his pain. The
wrath of God abideth on the sinner till
he flies to Christ, “Thy hand was
heavy upon me.” “That hand which
when pressing is so heavy, when raising
is so sweet and powerful (Ps, xxxvii. 24),
and when scattering its blessings so full
and so ample (Ps. civ. 28, cxlv. 16).
He would not at first be humbled by the
confession of his iniquity, and therefore
he is humbled by the weight of the hand
of God. Oh! powerful hand! beyond
all comparison more grievous than any
other hand to press down, and more
powerful to raise up. He who suppresses
his sins without confessing them,


* Conceals an inward wound, and burns with
secret 2


Under the appearance of sparing, he is
indeed cruel to himself. It may per-
hapa occasion more present pain to draw
out the point of the weapon that sticks
in the flesh, but to neglect it will occa-
sion greater danger and more future
torment.”—Letghton.

2. Second picture. The blessedness
of the man who frankly confesses his
sins to God (ver. 5). Here is the
end of the struggle—confession, and so
forgiveness and peace.

Confession must be made to God.
“Unto Thee.” The sin is against Him.
To Him we must answer. He only can
forgive. We need neither priest nor
angel to mediate, God Himself “re-
cewweth sinners.”

Confeasion must be frank and full.
“T acknowledge my sin.” It is honour-
able to God and good for us that there
should be a complete unburdening of
the heart, There has been too much of
extenuating, excusing, and ayes Now,


PALM XXXI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





nothing should be kept back. Sin is
before the soul as it is beforeGod. The
hard, sullen “keeping silence” is at
end. There is now frank, open, inge-
nious confession.

What a blessed change! It is like
passing from darkness to open day. It
is like coming out from the concealment
and foulness of a dungeon to the pre-
sence of a merciful judge. And the
response is immediate (ver. 5). The
confession and the taking away are
simultaneous. “Oh! admirable cle-
mency. It requires nothing but that the
offender should plead guilty, and this,
not that it may more freely punish, but
more liberally forgive. He requires that
we should condemn ourselves, that so
He may absolve us.”—Leighton. “ Thow
forgavest.” “But that should not end
the matter. Because of the Lord’s
mercy, nay, rather all the more on that
very account, our sina should be still
remembered. So it was with David.
So it was with Paul, who, long after he
had obtained mercy, continued to be
exercised deeply about his sin, which was
ever before him. So let it be with you,
Oh, poor sinner! I call upon you, what-
ever and whosoever you are, to see yeur
sin now, to embrace ‘your Saviour
now. You have sin enough upon your
conscience now. Oonfess now. Believe
now. But I call upon you, believing now,
not lightly or hastily to dismiss the matter
from your thoughts. Ponder your sin.
Consider it in all its bearings. Be seeking
ever, as it is ever before you, to get deeper,
more searching, more humbling views of
its exceeding sinfulness. For it is thus,
and only thus, that by God’s grace,
under the teaching of the Holy Spirit,
you will be getting more and more of an
insight into God’s marvellous grace and
love, and proving more and more tho-
roughly the blessedness of a full as well
as a free forgiveness, of complete re-
conciliation, of perfect peace.”—Dr.
Candlish.

TI. Confirmed by the experience of
she godly of all ages (ver. 6). These
words suggest—l. The force of God’s
forgiving love. It holds out hope to the
chief of sinners, It inspires boldness in
coming to the throne of grace. If God

150


forgives our sin freely, what is there we
may not ask? (Rom. 1i. 4; John xii. 32).

2. The power of recorded examples of
forgiven sinners, Every forgiven sinner
is a witness for Christ. What others
preach as a doctrine, he proclaims as a
fact. Bartimeus could say, “I was
blind, but now I see.” How much more
powerful this testimony than the mere
report, “He giveth the blind their sight.”
So, what multitudes have been won to
Christ by the stories of the thief op
the cross, Zaccheus, and Saul of
Tarsus.

3. The security and peace of the godly
who have made Jehovah their refuge
(ver. 6). They have sought mercy in an
accepted time. There is a day of grace.
There is a time wherein God may be
found (Isa. lv. 6,7; Heb. iii.) Every
pang of conscience, every sorrow of heart,
every premonition of judgment, calls for
instant action. Delay may be fatal.
“Thy people shall be willing in the day
of Thy power.”

They have found a refuge adequate for
every emergency (ver. 7). When God's
judgments are let loose as a flood they
are safe. They are like Noah in the ark,
Israel in Goshen. The emphasis may be
laid on “him.” God’s love isa personal
love ; He cares for individuals, When
trials come they may touch the things
without, but not those within. They
may reach to the spoiling of goods and
the filching of reputation, and even to
the killing of the body, but they cannot
touch the immortal spirit. When the
tyrant Nicocreon ordered Anaxarchus to
be beaten to death in a mortar, the brave
answer was, ‘“ Beat and bray as thou
wilt, Anaxarchus thou canst not touch.”
If a heathen could speak thus how much
more a Christian !

They have secured delights which shall
surround them all their days (ver. 7),
“Compass me about,” «@¢, give me
abundant cause, turn where I may, to
praise Thee. Can this be the same man
who, erewhile, was so wretched? What
a wondrous change! Then the burden


of sin, now pardon ; then the grief of


eatrangement, now the joy of reconcilia-
tion ; then the misery of a heart torn
by conflicting passions and full of un-


fF


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS





PSALM XXXII,





rest, now the peace of God which passeth
all understanding ; then the terrors of
judgment and of hell, now the songs of


angels and the love of God for ever.
‘« Selah,’’ Fitly, indeed, may we be
called to pause and ponder.


MoLisHNEss,
(Verses 8-10.)


Mulishness is a hard, sullen, untract-
able spirit. It is held an offence among
men, how much more heinous must it be
when manifested towards God. Yet even
good men have erred in this way. David
speaks here from experience. He re
calls with shame the time when he had
in his pride “‘ kept silence,” and hardened
his heart against the Lord; and speaks
words of warning for othera. Perhaps
he had Solomon specially in view, but
his words have a wider reference, and
are fraught with instruction (“ maskil”)
for all ages. We may understand him
as speaking in the name of the Lord.

I. Mulishness thwarts the Divine
plan. God has a will concerning us,
He would have us to walk—l. Jn the
right way. 2. From conviction and
choice. Not of constraint, but willingly,
as the result of understanding. 3. Under
His own fatherly guidance and protection.
*“T will watch over thee with mine eye.”
“The guidance with the eye is a gentle
guidance. A look is enough, as opposed
to that bit and bridle, which the mulish
nature requires.”—Perowne. It is not
only “TI will instruct thee,” z.¢., make thee
to understand, and ‘Teach thee in the
way,” 1.¢., to find and keep the right
way, but also “J will guide thee with mine
eye.” ‘He will consider and consult
upon us, He will not leave us to con-
tingencies ; no, nor to His general provi-
dence, by which all creatures are in
His administration, but He will ponder
us, consider us, study us; and that with
His eye, which is the most sensible
organ and instrument, soonest feels if
anything be amiss, and so inclines Him
quickly to rectify us” This implies
“the constancy and perseverance of God’s
goodness towards us; to the end and in the
end He will guide us, Except the eye of
God can be put out, we cannot be put out
of His sight and his care.”—John Donne,


IL Mulishness debases the powers
of the soul “The mule is among
various nations a proverbial type of
stubborn persistency in evil, and we
find analogous allusions to the horse in
Jer. v. 8, viii. 6 The reason for
using a comparison with brutes, is in-
timated in the second clause, to wit,
that the debased trrationality of sin
might be distinctly brought into view.
The analogy is carried out, with no small
subtilty, by representing that what
seems to be the trappings or mere de-
coration of these brutes, is really
intended to coerce them, just as that
in which men pride themselves may be,
and if necessary will be, used by God
for their restraint and subjugation.
The common version of the last clause—
‘lest they come near unto thee,—would
be suitable enough in speaking of a
wild beast, but in reference to a mule or
horse, the words can only mean, because
they will not follow or obey thee of their
own accord, they must be constantly
coerced in the way both of compulsion
and constraint.”—Alewander. Degrad-
ing to—l. Reason. 2. Conscience, 3,
Affections. The man who stubbornly
refuses God’s instruction necessarily
sinks. He “loses the Divine property
of his first being.” He becomes like the
brutes with “lower pleasures, lower
pains.” Instead of being guided from
within, he is governed from without,
Instead of being ruled by reason and
through his affections, he is controlled
and compelled as by force. “ God never
goes about to rule any by fear, but those
who have first trampled upon love, and
are no longer subjects but rebels,”

III. Mulishness imperils the highest
interests of being. ‘To such as act in
this way—peace, true progress, fellow-
ship with God, the hope of a blessed
immortality are impossible, Then, “Be

151


PSALM XXX¥L


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





ye not ss the horse or as the mule.”
Be warned,—this temper is not only un-
amiable, but bad. It is contrary to
reason, contradicted by experience, con-
demned by revelation. Remember Cain,
Balaam, Saul, Jonah. We should
strive to rise instead of sink, we should
aspire to be like the noblest and the
best, who served God from love and
not from fear. ‘We may consider
mercies as the beamings of the Almighty’s
eye, when the light of His countenance
is lifted upon us; and that man as
guided by the eye, whom mercies attract
and attach to his Maker. But oh! let
us refuse to be guided by the eye, and
it will become needful that we be curbed
by the hand. If we abuse our mercies,
if we forget their Author, and yield Him


Sorrow AND Merroy


L The sorrows of the wicked (ver.
10). 1. Many. 2. Selfcaused. 3.
Inevitable. ‘‘ Wicked.” This is their
character, and their lot corresponds.
They refuse instruction. In pride and
obstinacy they persist in their own evil
thoughts and evil ways, and pierce them-
selves through with many sorrows,
And though God has provided a way of
pardon they reject it. This is their
damning sin, A rejected Saviour is


hell,
“He endures—
What does he not? From lusts opposing in
vain,
And self reproaching conscience, He foresees
The fatal issue to his health, fame, peace,
Fortune, and dignity ; the loss of all
That can ennoble man, and make frail life,
Short as it is, supportable, Still worse—
Far worse than all the plagues with which his
sing
Infect his happiest moments, he forebodea
Ages of hopeless misery.” —CowPER.


Ii. The mercy promise@ to the
righteous. Mark their—l. Character.
“Trusteth in the Lord.” 2 Their


not gratefully the homage of our affeo
tions, we do but oblige Him, by His
love for our souls, to apportion to us
disaster and trouble. Complain not,
then, that there is so much of sorrow in
your lot ; but consider rather how much
of it you may have wilfully brought
upon yourselves, Ah! if you would
account for many mercies that have
departed, if you would insure perman-
ence to those that are yet left, examine
how deficient you may hitherto have
been, and strive to be more diligent for
the future, in obeying an admonition
which implies that we should be guided
by the soft lustres of the eye, if our ob-
duracy did not render indispensable the
harsh constraints of the rein.” —Henry
Melville.


JUSTLY DISTRIBUTED.


blessedness. ‘‘ Mercy shall compass him
about.” “He shall be surrounded with
mercy, as one is by the air, or by the
sunlight.”— Barnes. “ Mercy” for soul
and body. “Mercy” on every side and
at every turn. “Mercy” amid all the
varied trials of life. “ Mercy” at death
and judgment, and for ever and ever.
“ Mark that text,” said Richard Atkins
to his grandson who was reading to him
this psalm, “I read it in my youth
and believed it, and now I read it in
my old age, and thank God, I know tt to
be true. Oh! it is a blessed thing in
the midst of the joys and sorrows of
the world to trust in the Lord.”

Think of the light thrown upon both
of these truths by the Word of God, the
experience of men, and especially by the
Cross of Christ. Let the sufferings and
death of Jesus show the evil of sin, and
the certain ruin of the ungodly. Let
the example and life of Jesus show the
blessedness of obedience, and the eternal
joy of all who trust in the Lord,


Joy mix THE Lorp CuHrRIstT.
(Verse 11.)


I. Because of the beauty of His
character. Everything meets in Him
152


that is perfect. He is supremely lovely


and lovesome.


tad


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





“ Yntellectual culture may make inde-
finite progress, the natural sciences may
puso forth their limits and gain in pro-
fundity and extent, the human mind
may expand as it will, but it will never
surpass the moral culture of Christianity
as seen in the Gospels,”—G@oethe.


** Only one life there is without a stain,
Accomplishing the Father’s perfect will,
With highest aim, yet never aimed in vain,
Attempting nought which must be tried

again:


Even all the thoughts of God it did fulfil,


** Perfect the sinieas beauty of His ways,
Perfect the wisdom of His faithful love;
Perfect the trust that walked with God

always,—
Perfect in suffering, perfect in the praise
Which still like incense rose to Heaven
above.


*¢ Oh ! fairer thou than sons of men! and yet
Not terrible Thy beauty. In sweet accord
All tender graces in Thy being met,

And of their fulness all Thy people get,
Still growing to the fulness of their Lord.”
—Watrter Smita.


II. Because of the splendour of His
achievements. His victories are moral,
He has vanquished sin and death. He
still goes forth “ conquering and to con-
quer.” Wherever truth prevails, and
righteousness is established, and im-
mortal souls are rescued from sin and
woe, and brought back to love and holi-
ness, there we behold the wo:ks of the
Son of God.

III. Because of the blessedness of
Hisreign. The call to “ rejoice” findsa
response in every true heart. It is obeyed,
not from constraint, but willingly ; not so


PSALM


Realm XXX.





much as a duty asa delight. It is the
irrepressible impulse of admiration, gra-
titude, and love, When the poet Car
pani asked his friend Haydn how it
happened that his church music was so
cheerful, the beautiful answer was, “I
cannot make it otherwise ; I write accord-
ing to the thoughts I feel. When I
think upon God, my heart is so full of
joy that the notes dance and leap, as it
were, from my pen; and since God has
given me a cheerful heart, it will be par-
doned me that I serve Him with a cheer-
ful spirit.” — Whitecross Anecdotes, “ Be-
yond the sea was a noble lady, on whose
house alway the sun shone on the day,
and on the night the moon. Of this
many men marvelled. At the last, the
fame of this came to the Bishop, a worthy
man, and he went for to see her, hoping
that she was of great penance in clothing,
or in meat, or in other things. And
when he came he saw her alway merry
and glad, The Bishop said, ‘ Dame, what
eat ye ?’ She answered, and said, ‘ Divers
meats, and delicate.’ Then he asked if
she used the hair (the haircloths). She
said, Nay. After this the Bishop mar-
velled. And when he had taken his
leave of the lady, and was gone his way,
he thought he would ask her more of
another thing, and went again to her,
and said, ‘Love ye not mickle Jesus
Christ?’ She said, ‘ Yes, J love Him,
Sor He is all my love, for when I think
of His sweetness I may not withhold my-
self for gladness and mii th.’”—Quoted
by Lord Lyndsay from “ Gesta Bo-
manorum.”


XXXIIL


INTRODUCTION.


“This psalm is s fit companion, but by no means the second half, of the preceding ons,


being distinct from it both in matter and form.
guch as flows from the calm pee, - bee

i he ti and from the pen of David. t
Bere cine It celebrates te praise of the God of providence and grace.


alphabetic psalms,


into two halves of eleven verses each. Between three verses of adoration at the


It indicates a more tranquil frame of mind,
with God. There is nothing against its
It consists of twenty-two verses, like the
It falls
beginning,


and three of devotion at the end, stand eight verses on the creative, and eight on the saving


Word of God.” —-Mure*


AGMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMB,





rn ee ree a


Tux Cuaracrer or Truc WoRsHIP,
(Verses 1-3.)


L The worship of God is the chief
joy of the good. ‘Ye righteous,” ye
who have the new heart, and so have
accepted the mercy of God, and are
accepted by Him.”"—Murphy. “ Re-
joice,” t.¢., exult, shout for joy. “The
Hebrew verb, according to etymologists,
originally means to dance for joy, and is
therefore @ very strong expression for
the liveliest exultation,”—Alewander.
Joy is the soul of worship.

II. The worship of God is the high-
est duty of the good. 1. It is agree-
able to their character. “The upright.”
“ Praise in the mouth of a ginner is like
an oracle in the lips of a fool : how un-
comely is it for him to praise God whose
whole life is a dishonour to Goud! ‘The
godly are only fit to be choristers in God’s
praise.”—Thomas Watson. 2. It is
agreeable to their obligations. “‘ Those
who have received from God a right
spirit and the forgiveness of sins, have
a twofold obligation to praise Him.”—
Murphy. 3. It is agreeable to their
circumstances. Placed inthe midst of
God’s works, and daily receiving fresh
proofs of His loving-kindness in provi-
dence and grace, the upright are always
in fitting circumstances for praise.

III The worship of God is the
neblest employment of the good
‘“‘ Praise the Lord with harp.” This is
the first time musical instruments are
referred to in the psalma, It is impos-
sible now to ascertain the precise form
of the “ harp,” and the “ psaltery,” and
the “lute of ten strings.” The chief
thing to notice is, that they were used


as accompaniments and supports to the
voice, as if the voice were too weak by
itself to utter the Divine praises, In-
struments of varied power and sweetness
were employed, so as to secure the
grandest effects, Ver. 3: “‘Sing urto
Him a new song,’ not here one which
has new marvels of God’s power and
grace for its theme, as in xl. 3, xcviii. 1
(cf. Rev. xiv. 3), but rather one which
springs freshly from a thankful and re
joicing heart,—one which seeks to put
an old theme to a new light.” — Perowne.
“ Play skilfully.” Do your best in play-
ing. ‘With a loud noise.” Music
should not only be correct in execution,
but joyous in spirit. The whole heart
should be thrown into it.

The worship of God in song combines
—l. Unity and vartzty. While there
may be both vocal and instrumental
music, there should be but one spirit.

2. Samenessand freshness. The same
old psalms and hymns and spiritual
songs may be sung, and yet there may
be the freshness of ever-new wonder,
love, and praise, while “new songs”
may evermore spring from the heart of
the revived Church,

3. Devotion and art. There is scope
for the highest efforts of genius in the
service of song. Music should be cul-
tivated. Religion and science should go


together. We should give our very best
to God.
4. Fellowship and individuality.


While the service is that of the congrega-
tion, every separate heart should take
part.


THe REASONABLENESS OF WORSHIP,
(Verses 4-22.)


“For” introduces the reasons for
praising God. The order of the thought
is sufficiently marked to admit of the
subject being treated under the heads of
creation, providence, and redemption.
God is to be worshipped, because—

154


I. He is the God of creation.

We are called to notice—1l. The moral
character of God (vers. 4, 5). Words
and works are the exponents of charac-
ter. The “word” is the idea, and the
“work” is the fact. The “word” ia


7 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM XXXIII.


seh





the promise, and the “work” is the
performance. It is by His words and
works that God reveals Himself. They
are the expression and embodiment of
His eternal purpose. And the great at-
tributes which are seen in beautiful har-
mony in all God’s words and works are
Righteousness and Goodness. “ He
loveth righteousness,” ¢.¢., it is His habit
and delight. ‘“ The earth is full of the
goodness of the Lord,” as conspicuously
as the heaven with stars, as completely
as the sea with watera, ‘Righteousness
and goodness” are, as it were, incarnated
in God’s words and works, to be the
study and delight of His people for ever.

2. The glory of creation. “From
the present proofs of God’s love in
the earth, the thoughts of the sacred
poet naturally goes back to the crea-
tion of all things, and as He had be-
fore declared what the ‘ word’ and the
‘work’ of Jehovah are in their essen-
tial characters (ver, 4), 80 now He de-
scribes further the operation of that
word, and the work which results there-
from.”—Perowne. Ver. 6, There is
allusion here to the history of Creation
in Genesis, First the mode, and then
the extent, of the Divine working are
described. ‘By the word of the Lord
were the heavens made.” ‘The word,”
“the creative mandate” (Gen. i. 1). “All
the host,” the universe of things in their
perfect order. This verse has special re-
ference to the work of the second day.
“Gathereth the waters.” The primary
allusion here is to the work of the third
day. The verse, however, expressez not
a finished act, but a continued process, dis-
playing its variations in the dividing of
the Red Sea and the Jordan. Vers. 8, 9.
The consequent obligation to worship
God, “Let all the earth fear the Lord.”
This carries on the thought to the second
act of the third day, by which the dry
land was clothed with vegetation, and the
way prepared for the creation of animals
and of man. The parallel of all the
earth is all the inhabitants of the habi-
_ table globe.—Murphy. ‘“ The heavens
and the sea are mentioned as the theatre
of God’s almighty power, as the earth
before, of His loving-kindness; and
thus the universe is summed up.”—


Perowne. The argument is that Jehovah
ig the omnipotent Creator, and that we
who are ail His creatures, should worship
Him with Holy reverence.

I. He is the God of providence.

“After speaking of God’s power in
creation, the psalmist goes on to speak
of His providence as ordering the world.”
—Perowne. The providence of God is
characterised as—1. All Wise (ver. 10).
He who created and sustains the uni-
verse, can overrule or frustrate the de-
signs of man, whether as individuals or
nations, according as He deems right.
We have a signal example of this in the
history of Babel.

There is a contrast here between “the
counsels” of men and the “counsel” of
the Lord. Men come and go, and their
thoughts are like the changing clouds,
but God moves on in His ordained
path, like the sun in the heavens, with
unswerving fidelity. The counsels of
men are like the edicts of arbitrary
kings, which come to nought; but Je.
hovah’s counsels are His eternal and
benign purpose, whieh He works out by
His almighty power, from generation to
generation. This holds true, not only
with regard to God’s providence in general,
but also with regard to His providence
in its special bearing on His people.
Hence the glad burst of praise (ver. 12),
“ Blessed is the nation whose God is
the Lord, and the people whom He hath
chosen for His own inheritance,”

2. All Seeing (vers. 13-15). “He
not only observes men’s doings, but
knows their hearts, as having created
them.”—Perowne. “From the place of
His dwelling” (ver. 14). This is a
coincidence with the Song of Moses
(Ex. xv. 17). This is His dwelling-
place above, of which earth is an adum-
bration. “Fashioneth their hearts alike”
(ver. 15). ‘ The principle of reason
in one heart is the identical with that
in every other. Hence the capacity of
mutual understanding and the certainty
of human knowledge, as far as the moral
reason retains its balance. ‘He con-
sidereth,’ not only understands, but ob-
serves with attention the conduct of His
responsible creatures, There is a philo-
sophy of human nature here.”-——Murphy.

155


PSALM XXXII.


8. All Mighty (vers. 16,17). “The
weakness and insufficiency of all human
power, however great, as before of all
human ieted/ect. ‘King and mighty man
and horse’ (z.¢., war-horse, as elsewhere,
‘ chariot and horse’) are selected as types
of earthly power in all its greatness.”—
— Perowne.

“‘ People of God, he means to say, let
not the world persuade you that the
throne, on which your king ia seated, is
an idle easy chair; no, He is seated on
a throne, on a judgment-seat, from the
lofty eminence of which proceed the
destinies of the world. People of God,
he means to say, firmly believe that all
things are either openly or in a hidden
manner subject to the influence of His
might; not only the works of men,
which are evidently so, since the issue
never rests with them, but also the secret
movings of their hearts, which God
can strike with blindness, and can
make foolish the understanding of the
prudent, and wise the heart of babes.
People of God, believe not in appear-
ances according to which kings conquer
by their might, and warriors triumph in
battle by the strength of their horses; it is
appearance only, for, as all earthly power
is borrowed from the Governor of the
world, He may withdraw it at any time,
and give it to whomsoever He pleases ;
so that all the victories on earth are won
by Hzs strength.” —Tholuck.

Til. The God of redemption (vers.
18-22). While mortal strength is vain
for defence and security, they who
fear the Lord and hope in His mercy
shali be safe under Jehovah’s eye, and
kept by His almighty “ power, through
faith unto salvation.” God is the only


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





true deliverer. His deliverance reaches
to the soul, and transcends all the perils
of time and all the powers of evil.
“ While such omnipotence terrifies those
who love not the Lord, it is rich in
consolation to those who hope in His
mercy. The whole people commit them-
selves to the Lord, rejoicing in Him and
trusting in His name.” — Tholuck,
“ Antigonus, king of Syria, being ready
to give battle near the Isle of Andreos,
sent out a squadron to watch the motions
of his enemies, and to descry their
strength; return was made that they
had more ships, and better manned, than
he had. ‘How,’ says Antigonus, ‘that
cannot be, for how many dost thou reckom
mé, intimating that the dignity jof a
general weighed down many others,
especially when poised with valour and
experience. And where is valour, where
is experience to be found, if not in God
He is the Lord of Hosts; with Him
alone is strength and power to deliver
Israel out of all her troubles, He may
do it, He can do it, He will doit. He
is wise in heart and mighty in strength,
besides Him there is no Saviour, no
Deliverer. He is a shield to the right-
eous, strength to the weak, a refage to
the oppressed.” —John Spencer.
‘*Dear dying Lamb! Thy precious blood
Shall never lose its power,
Till all the ransomed Church of God
Be saved, to sin no more,
E’er since, by faith, I saw the stream
Thy flowing wounds supply ;
Redeeming love has been my theme,
And shall be él I die.
Then in a nobler, sweeter song,
I'll sing Thy power to save ;
When this poor lisping stammering tongue
Lies silent in the grave.” — Cowper.


THREE Asprots oF Prery.
(Verses 20-22.)


i. Piety waiting on the Lord.
“Our soul waiteth for the Lord.” Wait-
Ing is an attitude of soul. It is holding
one’s self still till the accomplishment of
some expected event. It is, therefore,
patience and expectation united. “We
wait” for the day, that we may work.
We hon for the spring to sow and the

56


harvest to reap. But waiting 1s con-
sistent with action. It is not only test-
ing and disciplinary, but it implies

right use of means and opportunities,
working while ¢¢ ts day, and sowing and
reaping as the seasons of God come
round, True waiting implies faith in
God’s love. Heedfulness of His wil)


sft


HOMLATIC COMMENTARY; PSALMS,


FRALM XEAIV.





(Ps. cxxiii. $). Intense desire for His
blessing (Ps. cxxx. 6). Diligent use of
all the means of grace. And what en-
couragement we have here to wait
upon Him. “For He ts our help and
shield.”

II. Piety rejoicing in God. ‘Our
heart shall rejoice in Him.” This is not
merely rejoicing in God’s Word and
works, but rejoicing in Himself. This is
the highest attainment of piety. But this
joy is one of the fruits of faith. ‘“ Because
we have trusted in His holy name.”
The more we know of God’s grace in


Christ, the more shall our hearts exult
in Him.

Ill. Piety praying to God. “Let
Thy mercy, O Lord, be upon us, accord-
ing as we hope in Thee.” This prayer
is marked by humility, “Mercy” is
sought, mercy for the sinner, the mercy
of the Lord which bringeth salvation.
This prayer is also marked by faith.
It implies confidence in God’s grace and
in His promises, and in the reality of
His Spirit’s work in the heart. The
hope He begets He will not put to
shame (Matt. ix. 29),





PSALM XXXIV.


INTRODUCTION.


“This psalm is assigned by the superscription to the oceasion when David, persecuted by
Saul, fled to the Philistines, and being brought before Achish was driven away by him ag a
madman (1 Sam. xxi. 22, see Ps. 7). There ig no sufficient reason for rejecting the historical
validity of this statement. The psalms generally rise above the level of the particular occasion,
and dwell on general principles, and go it ia here, This psalm is eucharistic and didactic. It
is full of thankfulness to the Almighty Deliverer, who defends the penitent against the ungodly.
It is a lesson from experience for those who are tempted and afflicted. It is the second of the
alphabetic psalms (Ps. xxv.), the letter vaw being omitted, and a second pe added at the end.”—
Murphy. “This psalm was selected by the ancient Church to be a communion song (Cyrill.
Catech. Myst. v. 17); and from the expression, ‘Taste and see that the Lord is good,’ and
from ita evangelical strain, it was well adapted for this purpose.”—Murphy.


A Sone or Praisz.
(Verses 1-7.)


“Every day of a pious man’s life is
marked with the monuments and tokens
of the mercy of God, so that he has
every day to singa new song. But each
separate experience of that kind should fill
our heart to such a degree, as to furnish
the theme of gratitude and praise for the
entire period of our lives. Witha feeling
of this kind we see David celebrate the
deliverance he has just experienced.” —
Tholuck. We should praise God—

L For what He is in Himself.
“The Lord ‘Jehovah.’” “This is the
only name of God in the psalm, The
self-existent Creator is the great watch-
word of the intelligent creation.”—


Murphy. _ Contemplation of God’s cha
racter calls forth praise. This praise is,
1. Free “I will” It is from the


heart. Itiss life, not a form; a delight,
not a burden. 2. Constant. “At all
times ;” circumstances alter, but God
changes not. In adversity and in pros-
perity, in the dark hour of sorrow as
in the bright moments of joy, God
claims our praise. Continually,” the
lamps, the shew-bread, the daily sacrifice,
the priests ministering in the tabernacle
continually, were witnesses to the per-
petuity of spiritual worship (Ex. xxv.
30, xxvii, 20, xxix. 42). 3. Harulting.
“ Boast,” “ glory,” #.e., “to exult in the
possession and enjoyment of some ad-
mired and beloved object.”—A lexander.
Many glory in their strength, in their
riches, in their learning, in their religion.
God is the true object of glory. He alone
can satisfy and bless the soul bi ever
16


(Jer. ix. 23, 24). 4. Influential. “The
humble, #.¢, the poor and needy, or the
meek who bow their hearts to God.
The boastings of the worldly are an
offence. They have the bad odour of
selfishness. But the extolling of the
Lord is pleasant to the ear of His people,
and strikes a chord of sympathy in their
inmost hearts. As one touch of nature
makes the whole world kin, so one touch
of grace makes the whole Church kin.
As one songster in the morning wakens the
music of the grove, go one soul hymning
the praise of Jehovah calls forth the voices
of other kindred souls, till the Church
resounds with songs of praise (ver. 3).
5. Soctal. “O magnify the Lord with
me.” It is not that we can add to
God’s glory, He is infinite, eternal, and
unchangeable. Nothing we do can in-
crease or diminish His glory. But His
name may be said to grow in glory as it
is made known ; and His character to
stand higher in the sight of men, as He
becomes more and more the supreme
object of trust and love. “ Let us exalt
His name together.” Here is the place
for union and concert ; social worship
is the craving of the new heart, and the
outgrowth of the new life. In heaven it
finds its highest expression, and earth is
the likest heaven, where it most abounds,

II. For what He does for His
people (vers. 4-7). 1, Personal deliver-
ances (ver. 4). This may refer to God’s
rescue of David in the land of the Philis-
tines. He was then in great peril.
There were fears on every side. His
own conscience was not free, for in his
selfish care to save his life he had sinned
against truth and against God. But in
his straits he. sought the Lord. Sin
should not deter us from prayer. Rather
should the sense of sin make us pray
the more earnestly. We have an Advo-
eate with God the Father. There are
gifts even for the rebellious. Where
sin abounded grace hath much more
abounded, ‘He delivered me from all
my fears.” “To have delivered me
from all my troubles had been # great
favour, but a far greater to deliver me
from all my fears ; for where that would
have but freed me from present evil,
this secures me from evil to come, that

158


HOMILETIC OOMMENTARY: PSALMS.


rr et RE


now I enjoy not only tranquillity, but
security—a privilege only of the godly.
The wicked may be free from trouble,
but can they be free from fear? No;
God knows, though they be not in
trouble like other men, yet they live in
more fear than other men.”— Baker.

2. Brighter days for the afflicted,
“They looked,” viz, the afflicted men-
tioned in ver. 2; or it may only mean
generally, “men looked ;” others, t.e.,
besides myself, have in like manner
experienced God's lovingkindness.
‘““Were lightened,” #.¢., ‘were bright with
gladiiess because He heard them, re
flecting, as it were, the light of His
countenance” (cf. iv. 6). — Perowne.
Here is the look of the goul to God, and
the quick response of God, as when the
Israelites looked to the serpent of brass
and were healed (Numb. xxi. 9), and
sinners look on Him whom they pierced
(Zech. xii, 11), and their hearts are
melted to penitential sorrow. ‘ Light-
ened.” “This is the precise answer to
a look. The light of the truth, the
promise, and the countenance of God,
fill and illuminate the eyes of the soul.”
—Murphy. How often is this fulfilled.
Remember Gideon. Hence, instead of
the blush of shame, there is the bright-
ness of joy ; instead of the shudder of
fear, there is the song of victory. Each
one, as he remembers what God has
done, speaks as for himself. “ This
poor man cried, and the Lord heard.”

3. Divine guardianship for the godly
to the end. “The angel of the Lord.”
This remarkable phrase occurs only twice
in the psalms, here, and in the next
psalm. It denotes one who is at. the
same time the angel of Jehovah and
Jehovah Himself (Gen. xvi. 7; Ex.
xxiii. 20). ‘He is God manifest to man,
and mediating for man.”—Murphy.
“ Encampeth.” There may be reference
here to what Jacob said when the angels
met him (Gen. xxxii. 1, 2). “This is
God’s host, and he called the name of
that place Mahanaim” (two camps).
The angel host is under the headship of
Christ, and charged with the care of
His people. “ Are they not all minister-
ing spirits sent forth to minister to them
who shall be heirs of salvation !”


sf?


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,








THRex Virws or Re1iaion,
(Verses 8-10.)


L What religion is. Plainly it is
something belonging to the soul, not a
ritual, but a life. It is also something
persona], as between the soul and God,
and not any service which can be ren-
dered for us by priest or proxy. It is
suggested here that religion consists in
—1. Personal faith that God ts good.

2. Personal devotedness to God as good.

3. Personal communion with God as
good.

“ Religion in the understanding is the
knowledge of God (Hos. iv. 1); of His
will and commandments ; it is the know-
ledge of His ‘ mystery’ or secret counsel
revealed in Christ (Eph. i. 17). When
the Jewish law had been given, religion
was practically a ‘ walking in the law
of the Lord’ (Ps. cxix. 1 ; cf. Lukei. 6) ;
when the Christian revelation has been
made it is an ‘acknowledgment of the
truth which is after godliness’ (Tit.
L 1). But in this truth, in that law, it
seeks a Person; it is fundamentally the
maintenance of a real relation with the
Personal God, or with a Divine Person,
really incarnate in Jesus Christ. Ac-
cordingly religion, both Jewish and
Christian, is described as a covenant ;
it is a bond or understanding between
the nature, or the soul, and God, or still
more, from the point of view of a faith
which worketh by love, it is personal
communion with God (1 John i. 3).
Thus religious life is more than feeling,
than knowledge, than obedience to a
moral code. It is the sacred bond
freely accepted, generously, enthusiasti-
cally, persistently welcomed, whereby
the soul engages to make a continuous
expenditure of ita highest powers in
attaching itself to the personal source
and Object of its being.” — Canon
Lnddon.

II. What religion does. It is tho-
roughly practical. It is God’s power in
the soul, and worketh in every one to
bring us nearer and nearer to Himself.

1, Hetablishes right relations between
the soul and God. Right relations are


of great importance, It {is so among
men; much more with God. If the
relations of the soul to God are wrong,
all is wrong. If the relationa of the
soul to God are right, all will be right.
Now, in religion, “the heart is made
right with God.” There is “trust”
(ver. 8). There is reverential “fear”
(ver. 9). There is holy aspiration and
endeavour, the continual seeking of
God (ver. 10).

2. Hfects a moral transformation of
character (ver. 9). ‘Fear the Lord, ye
His saints.” “ This is the moral conse-
quence of becoming acquainted with
God and His goodness,” — Murphy.
Those who are in a right relation to
God, and who love and trust Him, are
not only “ His saints” in respect to
consecration, but they become more and
more “ His saints” as regards cha-
racter,

3. Ensures the highest blessedness of
being (ver.10). ‘ The younglionsarehere
the representatives of those who glory
in their own strength and resources.”-—
Murphy. The meaning is, “ that while
the most powerful and least scrupulous
of men may be reduced to want, the
people of God shall be abundantly and
constantly provided for,” —Alexander.
(Cf. Jobiv. 10, 11; Ps. lvii 4; Nahum
ii, 12-14; Ezek, xix. 2, xxxviii. 13;
Is. xl. 30, 31). ‘‘ They shall not want
any good.” .

I. What Religion deserves (ver.
10). This is the language of experi-
ence. It breathes faith, and hope, and
love. It is an appeal to the deepest
feelings of the heart. It implies that if
men would only make trial of religion
for themselves, they could not fail to be
convinced of its supreme excellence.

Religion deserves—1. Harnest study.
We are bound to investigate. That
only is truth to us which commends it-
self to our own conscience. Our faith
should stand, not in the wisdom of men,
but in the power of God. “Search
the Scriptures,” Remember how tha

159


Boreans were praised for their inde-
pendent and earnest examination of the
truth (Acts xvii. 11). Surely that which
is the most wondrous thing in the world,
and which concerns us all so nearly,
should be personally and profoundly
atudied.

2. Personal Trial, “Taste and see,”
Nothing is so convincing as experience.
Only by trial can we truly realise what
religion is and what it does, It is one
thing to hear honey called sweet, and
another thing to know that honey is
sweet, because we have tasted it for our-
selves, “He that believeth hath the
witness in himself” (cf. 1 John v. 10).

3. Hearty commendation. It is the
duty of every godly man to commend
religion to others. Loyalty to God and


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMB,





love to our brethren alike bind us to
this. We should be careful to give a
just representation, such as will attract
instead of repel. By our humility, our
patience, our love, our trust in God, and
our purity in the sight of men, we should
be true witnesses for our holy religion,
true preachers of Christ.

“O taste and see that God is good.”
This voice comes to us from nature,
sounds throughout the Scriptures, and
is echoed by the godly of all generations,
Let us take it up for ourselves. ‘“ The
inquiry of truth, which is the wooing
of it, the knowledge of truth, which
is the presence of it, and the belief of
truth, which is the enjoyment of it, is
the sovereign good of human nature.”
— Bacon,


Aw Apvuiiam SERwo.
(Verses 11-14.)


We may imagine that these words
formed the substance of an address on
some quiet Sabbath in the Cave of
Adullam.

Consider I. The Congregation.

We learn from 1 Sam. xxii. 1, 2, that
David fled from Achish to Adullam in
Judah. And “every one that was in
distress, and every one that was in debt,
and every one that was discontented,
gathered themselves unto him, and he
became a captain over them; and there
were with him about four hundred men.”
What a strange gathering! What di-
versities in age, and conduct, and experi-
ence! But they had much in common.
They were involved in the same cruel
fate, and animated with the same re-
solve, to stand by each other, and to
struggle to the uttermost for life and
liberty under their chosen leader.

IL The Preacher.

David was a man singularly fitted to
address such an audience. His manly
presence, his chivalrous nature, his ro-
mantic history, his fame as a soldier and
poet, his identification with the poor and
the oppressed, and with all that was no-
plest in his country’s history, and above
all, his simple faith, must have given him

160


an extraordinary position and power.
While his men felt that he was truly one
of themselves, they must have also felt
that he was raised above them, with a
higher character and destiny. He
seemed to them born to be a king of
men. With what rapt attention and
eager hopes would they hang upon his
lips.

“Children.” The word expresses
both authority and tenderness. As
Venema, in substance expounds, he might
have called them children, “ because he
was about to be their teacher, and they
his disciples ; and again, because they
were young men, in the flower of their
age, and as sons, would be the builders
up of his house; and still more, because
as their leader, to whose discipline and
command they were subject, he had a
right to address them as his children.”
—-O. H. S.

if. The Sermon.

1. The subject was supremely impor-
tant. “The fear of the Lord.” They
had common trials, attachments, and
hopes, but beyond these, they needed
religion—the fear of Jetovah—to unite
their hearts in the truest sense, and to
make them strong.


HOMILBTIO OOMMENTARY: PSALMS.


2. The treatment was singularly ap-
propriate and effective,

He invites their attention.
unto me.”

He addresses their understanding and
conscience. ‘I will teach you the fear
of the Lord.”

He appeals to their affections and
hopes. ‘‘ What man is he that desireth
life and loveth many days, that he may
see good }”

He demands the obedience of their
hearts and lives (vers. 13, 14). The
tongue must be kept from evil, and the
lips from guile. This could not be done
without the renewal of the heart, and
earnest personal effort. They had many
temptations, wrongs to exasperate them,
the prosperity of their enemies to make
them envious and revengeful, and the
hard struggle for existence to make their
life bitter. Some might say, they could
only succeed by fraud and violence, by


“ Hearken








are,


returning evil for evil. But not so. Let
them trust in God and do the right,
Let them keep themselves pure, and
be followers of peace, Only thus could
they enjoy the favour of God.

“Life is happiness; good days are
happy days. Happiness consists in en-
joying God’s favour. His favour is
life, His loving-kindness is better than
life, To have His eye resting compla-
cently on us, to be the objects of His
love and care, to have His ear open to
our prayers, to have Him, infinitely
powerful, wise, and good, always ready
to listen to our petitions, and supply
our need; this is life, this is happi-
ness. While, on the other hand, to
have His face set against us, to have
His countenance covered with frowns, to
have Him looking out at us as He did,
out of the pillar of cloud, on the Egyp-
tians struggling with the billows, this is
misery.” —Dr. J. Brown on lat Peter.


Gop anp His Proprr


(Verses 15-22.)


In the sight of God society is divided
into two classes, The principle of classi-
fication is not rank, weaith, learning, or
worldly power, but character. On the
one sice are the righteous, and on the
other the wicked. The difference be-
tween them is vital. They are utterly
opposed in their principles and conduct,
and God recognises this in His treatment
of them. It is the old, old story, ‘‘ The
wages of sin is death, but the gift of
God is eternal life through Jesus Christ.”
God’s people are—

I. The objects of His Fatherly re-
gard (ver. 15). “The eyes of the Lord
are upon the righteous, and His ears are
open unto their cry” The eyes and the
ears are the great sources of intelligence,
The terms as applied to God may imply
—1. Perfect knowledge. 2. Abiding
sympathy. 3. Gracious interposition.
As a father watches his child, and is
ever ready to act for its good, so our
heavenly Father deals with His people.
They are individually the objects of His
unceasing care. The awful contrast is

L


depicted in the condition of the wicked
(ver 16). God is against them, and
they are doomed to destruction,

II. The subjects of His holy dis-
cipline (vers. 17-21). They have trials
as well as joys. This world is to them
often a scene of suffering. But they are
not forsaken. Godiswiththem. They
have the sense of His love to cheer
them. ‘They have the promises of His
Word to comfort them, They have the
ministers of His providence ani Spirit
to chasten and to profit them. And
evermore the throne of grace is open to
them, to which they may com boldly
in the name of Jesus, “that they may
obtain mercy, and find grace to help in
time of need.”

The whole of God’s dealings with His
people are disciplinary. They are weak
and sinful, and God dealeth with them
as with children. He is training them
through suffering for glory. Affliction
leads to prayer, prayer leads to increased
faith, and increased faith to more of
love, and patience, and Br citne to


PSALM XXEV.


wider sympathies, and nobler aims, and
tolier joys. ‘The Lord is nigh unto
them that are of a broken heart.” What
a comforting word! The Lord is nigh
in all His tenderness and pity, in all His
power and grace, “Many are the afflic-
tions of the righteous, but the Lord de-
livereth them out of them all.”

Mark, again, the terrible contrast.
“ Evil shall slay the wicked, and they
that hate the righteous shall be deso-
late.” Afflictions are to them calamities
instead of chastisements. Under them
they grow worse instead of better.


PSALM


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


Whatever seemed to be good in them is
destroyed, and in the end they are left
alone and hopeless in their misery and
guilt.

III. The recipients of His redeem-
ing grace (ver. 22). From first to last
God’s purpose is to dothem good. And
all is of grace. The righteous did not
of themselves merit God’s love and His
deliverances. What He has done for
them in providence and in grace has been
done for them in and through Christ,
and unto the praise of the glory of His
name for ever and ever,


XXXV.


INTRODUCTION,


“ This psalm, if ft be ag the inscription tells us a psalm of David, must have been composed
either during his persecution by Saul or during the revolt of Absalom. It is usual to connect
it with his words in 1 Sam. xxiv. 15. Its peculiar feature is, that the enemies on whom the
poet imprecates the righteous judgments of God are men who had formerly been his friends,
men for whom he had prayed in their sorrow ‘ with a brother’s heart,’ and who now requited
his love with ungrateful hatred. Such an enemy Saul may have been; but we never find any
trace of bitterness in David’s feelings towards Saul. The generous enemy whose heart smote
him because he had cut off Saul’s skirt, and who always recognised in Saul the Lord’s anointed,
would never have called down the judgments of God upon his head. It seems to me, there-
fore, more probable, that the aiders and abettors of Absalom’s conspiracy, men like Ahithophel
and his associates, are aimed at in the poet's burning worda, But all this, and even the
authorship itself, must be matter of conjecture. The psaim falls into three principal divisions,
each of which closes with a thanksgiving.” —Perowne.


Wrote Psaum.


The views taken of the spirit and
purpose of this psalm vary greatly.
Some interpreters hold that there is re-
ference throughout to the Messiah.
Thus, A. A. Bonar writes, “‘ This is an
awful psalm. Let us read it as the
words of the Lord Jesua, and what do
we find? We find Him praying to the
Father for help, and then consenting to
the doom of His relentless, impenitent
foes; yea, rather pronouncing the doom
with His own lips, even as when He
shall say to the barren fig-tree, ‘ Cut it
down,’ and to those on the left hand,
‘Depart.’ It is in that spirit He says,
‘Let them be confounded’ (vers, 4-6).
This is their sentence uttered by the
lips of the Judge. It is not the wish of
one who is revengeful ; it is the utter-
ance of justice compelled by the state

162


of parties to speak in stern severity.
Our Lord Himself quotes ver. 19, ‘ They
hated me without a cause,’ in John xv.
25, on the last evening He spent with
His disciples before He suffered. For
then He found Himself in the very
situation go strikingly described in vers,
11, 12,—false witnesses rising up—men
rewarding His whole career of kindness
by spoiling His soul.” ;

Other interpreters strongly oppose
this opinion. Thus, Dr. David Thomas
calls the supposition that the psalm is
prophetical of the Messiah, “simple
blasphemy.” He says, “There is
nothing of the spirit of Christ in the
psalm ; it is eternally antagonistic to
the teachings of His Sermon on the
Mount, and to the tenor of His whole
life. This poem burne with vengeance


fF


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


a


from beginning to end.” As an ex-
ponent of the more general opinion,
Perowne may be quoted. “But how
are we to account for such prayers for
vengeance at all? Are these the mere
outbursts of passionate and unsanctified
feeling, or are they the legitimate ex-
pression of a righteous indignation 4
Are they to be excused as being animated
by ‘the spirit of Elias,’ a spirit not un-
holy, indeed, but far removed from the
meekness and gentleness of Christ? or
are they stereotyped forms in which the
spirit of Christian devotion may utter
itself? Are they Jewish only, or may
they be Christian alsot An unin-
structed fastidiousness, it is well known,
has made many persons recoil from read-
ing these psalms at all. Many have
found their lips falter when they have
been called to join in using them in the
congregation, and have either uttered
them with bated breath and doubting
heart, or have interpreted them in a
sense widely at variance with the letter.
Some have tried to reconcile them with
a more enlightened conscience by regard-
ing such words, not as the expression of
a wish, but as the utterance of a predic-
tion ; but the Hebrew optative, which
is distinct enough from the simple
future, absolutely forbids this expedient.
Others, again, would see in them ex-
pressions which may lawfully be used
in the soul's wrestling against spiritual
enemies. And, finally, some would de
fend them as utterances of righteous zeal
for God’s honour, and vemind us that if
we do not sympathise with such zeal, it
may be, not because our religion is more
pure, but because our hearts are colder.
Now, the real source of the difficulty
lies in our not observing and bearing in
mind the essential difference between
the Old Testament and the New. The
older dispensation was in every sense a
sterner one than thenew. The spirit of
Elias, though not an evil spirit, was not
the spirit of Christ (Luke ix. 55). And
through Him His disciples are made
partakers of the same spirit. But this
was not the spirit of the older economy.
The Jewish nation had been trained in a
sterner school, It had been steeled and
hardened by the discipline which had





PSALM XXKY,





pledged it to a war of extermination
with idolators, and however necessary
such a discipline might be, it would not
tend to foster the gentler virtues. It ia
conceivable how even a righteous man
under it, feeling it to be his bounden
duty to root out evil wherever he saw it,
and identifying, as he did, his own
enemies, with the enemies of Jehovah,
might use language which to us appears
unnecessarily vindictive. To men so
trained and taught, what we call “reli-
gious toleration” was a thing not only
wrong, but absolutely inconceivable.
It may be quite true that we find re-
venge forbidden as directly in the “ld
Testament as in the New, as, for inatauce,
in Lev, xix. 18. And it may be no less
true that we find instances of impreca-
tion in the New (cf. 2 Tim. iv. 14; Acts
xxiii. 3; and 1 Cor. xvi. 23). Buteven
these expressions are very different from
the varied, deliberate, carefully con-
structed, detailed anathemas of the
psalms. And our Lord’s denunciations,
to which Hengstenberg refers, are in no
way parallel. They are not curses upon
individuals, but, in fact, solemn utter-
ances of the great truth: “ Except ye
repent, ye shall all likewise perish.”
But, after all, whatever may be said of
particular passages, the general tone
which runs through the two covenants
is unquestiznably different. To deny
this is not to honour Moses, but to dis-
honour Ciirist (Matt. v. 43, xix. 8).
On the other hand, we must not forget
that these imprecations are not the pas -
sionate longing for personal revenge.-
The singer undoubtedly sees in his
enemies the enemies of God and His
Church, They that are not with Him
are against God. And because the zeal
of God’s house ever consumes him, he
prays that all the doers of iniquity may
be rooted out. The indignation, there-
fore, is righteous, though it may appear
to us wrongly directed, or excessive in
its utterance. Once more, the very fact
that a dark cloud hid God’s judgments
in the world to come from the view of
the Old Testament saints, may be alleged
in excuse of this their desire to see Him
take vengeance on His enemies here.
How deeply the problem of God's right
163


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMB.





eousness exercised their minds is abun-
dantly evident from numerous places in
the psalms. They longed to see that
righteousness manifested. . It could be
manifested, they thought, only in the
evident exaltation of the righteous, and
the evident destruction of the wicked,
here. Hence, with their eye always
fixed on temporal recompense, they could
even wish and pray for the destruction


of the ungodly. The awful things of
the world to come were to a great ex:
tent hid from their eyes. Could they
have seen them, then, surely, their
prayer would have been, not “Let the
angel of the Lord persecute them,” but
rather, with Him who hung on the cross,
“Father, forgive them, for they know
not what they do.”


I am troy SaLvarTiow.
(Verses 1-10.)


Revenge was alien to the spirit of
David, both as a man and as a prophet
of the Lord (1 Sam. xxiv. 9, Ps. vii.
3-5). It seems just, therefore, as it
certainly is more pleasant, to regard him
as speaking here, not from personal
animosity, but from a holy indignation
against evil and evil-doers. At first
sight, we might imagine that he had
particular individuals in view ; whether
he had or not, we cannot tell. It is
sufficient for us to take his vehement
cries for Divine judgment, as applicable
more to principles than persons. This
interpretation seems in accordance with
Paul’s use of Ps, v. 9, in his argument for
the corruption of human nature (Rom. iii.
13). It is also agreeable to our circum-
stances, as under the dispensation of the
gospel (Matt. v. 43-45, Rom. xii.1 9-21).

Vers. 1-10. The key-note of this
passage is found in ver. 3. “Say
unto my soul, J am thy salvation.”
This is confirmed by the form of the
thanksgiving in ver. 9. “And my
soul shall be joyful in the Lord, it shall
rejoice in His salvation.” Outward
deliverances are but types of inward
deliverances. The salvation of God
cannot be held as consummated short of
the eternal redemption of the soul.

I. Salvation is from God (vers, 1-3).
“O Lord.” ‘The name Jehovah, the
self-existent Creator, occurs eight times ;
Adonai, the rightful governor, three
times ; and Elohim, the everlasting Al-
mighty, twice in this psalm. These
names are in keeping with the tenor of the


psalm, as it speaks of mercy and of
164


judgment."—Murphy. “The mani-
festation of God’s saving and protecting
power is described in Scripture, under
various figures corresponding to the form
of the particular suffering or danger.
Against injustice He appears as an ad-
vocate or Judge (ver. 23), against vio-
lence as @ warrior (Deut. xxxii. 41, 42),
In this character the psalmist here en-
treats Him to appear, and for that end
to seize, grasp, or lay hold of his
weapons.”—Alexander. “Such figura-
tive representations of God tend to give
us a more vivid apprehension of His
powerful help.”—Tholuck. ‘Plead, O
Lord, with them that strive with me.”
This means, “Oppose my opposers,
devour my devourers, strive with my
strivers.” ‘Shield and buckler” were
weapons of defence, They may re-
present “the greater and the lesser
protections of providence.” “Draw out
the spear,” t.¢. for attack. “Stop the
way,” t.¢, encounter and thwart the
persecutor. “Say unto my soul, I am
thy salvation.” This appeal expresses
the faith and hope of the believer.
Nothing is so fitted to give courage as
the sense of Jehovah’s presence and love.
The cause of His people is His cause.
He identifies Himself with them.

Il. Salvation implies death to evil,
and life to good (vers. 4-8). ‘The
psalmist regards all men simply as they
stand with God, and therefore divides
them into those who accept His mercy,
and those who are at enmity with Him.
And his own enemies he regards solely
as the enemies of God; 20 long as they


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS.





continue in this frame of mind, he has
no prayers for them, but that they may
be disappointed in their ungodly designs.
Such a result is the only one likely to
bring them to a better mind. Plainly
he views them as incorrigible offenders,
who will never come to themselves but
by the rough handling of adversity, if
even by that. If they know anything of
God, and still defy Him, it is obvious
that nothing but the actual experience
that He cannot be defied will bring
them to repentance. And if that will
not do it, he looks upon them as repro-
bates."—_Murphy. Carrying out the
figure of Jehovah as a Man of War, the
psalmist depicts with terrific force the dis-
comfiture of His enemies. 1. Shameful
defeat (ver. 4), They are not only
arrested, but driven back in confusion.
All their malicious efforts are frustrated.
Their faces are covered with shame. So
it was in a gracious sense with Saul of
Tarsus, but, alas! it is seldom that defeat
implies repentance, 2. Headlong rout
(ver. 5). “Chaff” is the emblem of
vanity (Ps. i 4), as “the Wind” is the
emblem of judgment. In the previous
psalm (xxxiv. 7), the angel of the Lord
is represented as the angel of mercy,
here as the angel of judgment, presiding
over the storm that sweeps away God’s
enemies, There is a similar contrast
in the story of Peter’s deliverance and
Herod’s doom (Acts xii. 7). 3. Over-
whelming rum ee 6-8). The image
seems that of an army broken and
driven back in horrid rout, and confu-
sion worse confounded. With such
terrible scenes David as a soldier was
not unfamiliar, ‘Let their way be
dark and slippery.” Let it be dark, so
that they cannot see, and sleppery, 80
that they caunot find safe footing. How
terrible the fate of God’s enemies, with
no way of escape before, and the avenger
pressing hard behind, Ver. 7. “For
without cause have they hid for me their
net in a pit.” The reference is to the
artifices used for taking birds and beasts
of prey. ‘ Without cause,” “ wantonly,
gratuitously, unprovoked, and therefore
prompted by mere malice.”—Aleaander.
This is their condemnation. Ver. 8
indicates how the ruin of the wicked is


—=


self caused, and will come upon them at
last sudden and awful, as the crash of a
falling house.

IIL Salvation demands everlasting
gratitude and praise (vers. 9, 10),
‘Neither revenge nor any other form of
selfishness is the source of the soul’s joy,
but only the Lord and His salvation.
‘All my bones.’ This is the vehement
figure employed by a healthy and hearty
gratitude. ‘Lord, who is like Thee.’
This verse amplifies the thought of
the preceding one. ‘Delivering the
humble.’ There is a union of justice
and benevolence, which exhibits at the
same time the strength and the charm of
the moral government of God. The very
same act delivers the oppressed, and
defeats the oppressor.”"—Murphy. “He
would not be worthy of the name of man
who should look calmly on the tyrant,
the swindler, or the murderer, building
up his fortunes on the misery and
ruin of his fellowmen, and thwarting with
cold, determined malignity every effort
of the righteous and the benevolent to
improve their condition, As little would
he be worthy of the name of Christian,
who could survey unmoved the efforts
of unprincipled men, to hold the souls
of their fellows in eternal darkness, and
drag them back into the gulf of destruc-
tion, when others were helping them to
glory, honour, and immortality. The
first wish of the Christian for such
persons is, that their hearts may be
changed. He would fain save the
persons, and in the spirit of his forgiving
Master, he would welcome them to the
mercy and the blessedness he himself
has found. But come what may of
themselves, the only wish he can have
respecting their cause is, that it may
utterly perish. And if they cling to the
pernicious cause, in spite of every effort to
show them its wickedness; and to im-
press them with its doom, if the cause,
and the persons upholding it, become so
indissolubly blended that the one can-
not be destroyed without the other;
why, then, in spite of sickly sentimenta-
lism, it is the manly duty of God’s
servant to call for the destruction of
both ; and it is with a holy satisfaction
he is enabled to anticipate the fulfilment

165


POALM XXXV.


of his desire. No soft sympathy for
doomed individuals who, in their deter-
mined wickedness, have scorned every
warning, and resisted every appeal, shall
hinder the servant of God from rejoic-
ing when by their overthrow, millions
are freed from fetters, and are enabled
to set forward on a glorious career of


light, liberty, and joy."—W. @. Blatkie.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





God’s rescues not only call forth gratitude
of His people on earth, but awaken the
songs of heaven. As there is joy
amongst the angels over one sinner that
repenteth, so there are exulting alleluias
over the overthrow of God’s enemies,


and the final triumph of His kingdom
(Rev. xix. 1-3).


Evi. ror Goon.
(Verses 11-18.)


I. Innocence calumniated (ver 11).
“Unjust witnesses.”—Delitech. “ Un-
scrupulous witnesses.”——Perowne, These
were men accustomed to violence and
deceit. They wished to ruin David,
and as they could not accuse him truly,
they had no scruple in accusing him
falsely. They even endeavoured to
wring from him a confession of crimes,
which he had not only not committed,
but of which he had no knowledge,
“To please Saul, there were always
men to be found mean enough to im-
peach David.”—Spurgeon. Such things
are still done. m

II, Goodwill repaid with bereave-
ment (ver. i2). There was nothing but
kindness on David’s part, but his enemies
returned evil fur good (cf. Saul, 1 Sam.
xxiv, 17). They had no pity. Their
conduct wounded him deeply. “ Spoil-
ing of soul,” te, bereaving my soul,
“ David sent his parents to the king of
Moab for safety ; he was severed from
Michal his wife and from Jonathan his
friend, and he was estranged not only
from Saul, but from all his court.”—
Murphy. “Very touching are the words,
‘My soul ia bereaved,’ I am alone in
the world; I who have ever sought
to help the friendless and comfort the
afflicted, and who prayed so earnestly
for others, am forsaken of all,”—
Perowne.

MII. Brotherly kindness requited
with hatred (vers. 13, 14). “ The
general idea is, that he displayed the
deepest sympathy with their distresses,
This idea is expressed by figures bor-
rowed from the oriental mourning usages.

166


Sackcloth, fasting, and prayer, are par-
ticularly mentioned.”—A lexander.

“Yet I,” emphatic in contrast with
their selfishness,

“ Sackcloth,” the raiment of sympathy
and sorrow.

‘“‘ Fasting,” the idea of overpowering
compassion, ‘“ My prayer returned,”
“was again and again repeated on their
behalf. ‘In my bosom,’ in the silent
aspirations of my _ heart.”—Murphy.
“ As one that mourneth for his mother,
I went softly about in mourning attire.”
Delitech. The loss of a mother is held
in the East as the saddest of all bereave-
ments. ‘ How few professors in these
days have such bowels of compassion ;
aud yet under the Gospel there should
be far more tender love than under the
law. Had we more hearty love to man-
kind, and care for its innumerable ills,
we might be far more useful ; certainly
we should be infinitely more Christlike,
‘He prayeth best, who loveth best.’”—
Spurgeon. ;

IV. Misfortune met with derision
(ver. 15). “ But in mine adversity.”
Whether his affliction was in body or
outward condition, it was made the oc-
casion of scorn instead of comfort, and
that by the most abject. ‘“ At my halt-
ing, when I leaned to one side from the
upright posture of prosperity. When
they saw the first change in the counte-
nance of Saul towards him, their envy
was gratified,” —Murphy.

“When I limped, cripples mocked at
me, t.¢., those who were themselves con-
temptible treated me with contempt
‘1 did not know it.’ It was done be


f*


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMS.


hind my back, and while I was entirely
unsuspicious. ‘They rent or tore me’
by their slanders.”— Alexander.

V. Piety made the subject of ribal-
dry and scorn (ver. 16). The language
here is obscure. Perowne translates
“with them that are profane in their
outlandish mockings.” Delitzch, “ after
the manner of common parasites.” Alex-
ander, “with worthless mockers for
bread.” The reference seems to be to
hangers on at the tables of the rich (lit.
“‘cake-mockers”), who were wont for
hire or a “bit of bread” to play the
buffoon, and to make entertainment for
the guests. Piety would be a common
subject for their mockery. Thus it has
been often in the world. There have
been historians who have sneered at
things sacred. There have been novelists
who have ridiculed evangelical religion.
There have been poets who have prosti-
tuted their genius to make piety the sport
of fools. Even to this day there are men
s0 base, that to gratify their patrons, in
a word, “for a bit of bread,” they will


PSALM ZXXV





sell the truth, mock at purity, and cast
contempt on all that is holy and God.
like.

“Very forcibly might our Lord have
used the words of these verses! Let us
not forget to see the despised and re-
jected of men here painted to the life.
Calvary and the ribald crew around the
cross seem brought before our eyes.”—
Spurgeon.

Vers. 17, 18. “ The sufferer’s appeal
to the Lord.” ‘Lord.” Adonai, the
governor who is bound to administer
justice. “How long” (Ps. vi. 3-13).
This is the expostulation of the sufferer
under persecution. How often haa it
been uttered !

“From their destructions,” their de-
structive intents and endeavours. “ My
only one” (Ps. xxii. 20).

“Young lions” (Ps. xxxiv. 10), in
human shape. Ver. 18. “I will
thank.” Confess Thy name, especially
Thy goodness, ‘A mighty people.”
Mighty for their numbers, and their com-
munion with God.— Murphy.


Tue CavuseLess HarTss.


(Verses 19-28.)


L His character (vera. 19-22). He
ie described as false, “false enemies ;”
as spiteful, “ my haters without cause,”
ie, “out of sheer spite.”—Alexander.
(Ps. vii. 4; xxv. 3; of. John xv. 25),
As turbulent. “For they speak not
peace, but they devise words of deceit
against the quiet in the land,” te., “ the
land of promise, considered as the home
of God’s chosen people, who, as its
rightful proprietors, are characteristically
peaceful, and averse to all strife and
disorder.”—Alexander, He is further
described as adding tnsult to tmjury
(ver. 21). “The gaping mouth, insult-
ing laugh, and glaring eye, are the rude
indications of malice.’—Jfurphy. Thus
his enemies hated Daniel (Dan. vi. 4), thus
Haman hated Mordecai (Esther iii. 5, 6),
thus the ten brethren hated Joseph.
Every conscious malicious effort atreng-
thena the unholy passion. “ Whom we
hex« injured we are sure to hate,”


There is a fiendish joy in the discovery
of any fault which may afford some ex-
cuse for the conduct pursued (Micah
vii. 8).

In hating without a cause, they may
be said not merely to hate truth and
goodness, but to hate God Himself. It
ia the spirit of hell (¢f. John xv. 18-25;
1 Jobn ii. 9; iii. 15, iv. 20).

IL His righteous doom (vers. 22-26).
There is here a twofold and earnest
appeal to God for judgment. He is
regarded—1. Asa silent witness. “ Thou
hast looked on, O Lord, be not silent.”
Mine enemies “are not the only wit-
nesses of my distress, for Thou, Lord,
likewise seest, and hast long seen it.
Seeing it, therefore, be no longer silent.”
—Alexander.

9. Asan almighty friend. ‘“ O Lord,
be not far from me.” Le my shield and
helper. The sense of God's nearness
gives comfort and courage.


PRALM IXXV.





3. As a@ righteous judge (vers. 23,
24). “Do me justice, clear me from as-
persion, grant an attestation of my inno-
cence, in the exercise and exhibition of
Thine own essential rectitude, and in
accordance with that covenant relation
which exists between us; and thus in
the most effectual manner take away
from my malignant enemies all pretext
and occasion for exulting in my over-
throw, or otherwise triumphing at my
expense.” —Alezander.

Vers. 25, 26. The appeal to God is
renewed, showing the necessary result
of judgment in the confusion and dis-
grace of the wicked, and the exaltation
of the righteous.

“ Here is the eternal result of all the
laborious and crafty devices of the Lord’s


Toe Return


Ver. 13. This word is obscure.
Some understand it of posture (1 Kings
xviii. 42); others of inward prayer;
others of repeated prayer, and others of
ineffectual prayer. Perowne says, “I
prefer rendering, ‘And my prayer, may
wt return into mine own bosom.’ The
prayer I offered for them is a prayer I
might have offered for myself. So true a
prayer was it, su full of love, that I could
wish nothing more than that the blessings
I asked for them, should be vouchsafed
to me” (cf. Matt. x. 13; Luke x. 6).

Prayer may return in different ways,

I. Unheard. The priests of Baal
cried in vain, so with the hypocrite and
the formalist; so with the man who
prays from hate and not from love.

“ My words fly up, my thoughts remain below,
Words without thoughts never to heaven go.”
espeare.


Il. Unanswered. Not that God does
not hear, or hearing does not care, or


earing cannot help, but that for reasons
known to Himself, He withholds what is


FOMILETIC COMMENTARY. PSALMS.


enemies, God will make little of them,
though they magnified themselves. He
will shame them for shaming His people,
bring them into confusion for making
confusion, pull off their fine apparel, and
give them a beggarly suit of dishonour,
and turn all their rejoicing into weep-
ing, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth.
Truly the saints can afford to wait,”—
Spurgeon.

Vers. 27, 28. “The psalmist is as-
sured of a favourable answer to his ap-
peal, and therefore betakes himself to
thanksgiving. ‘ Let them shout and be
glad that delight in my righteousness,’
s.¢., that desires to see justice done to
me. He calls upon his friends, as well
as himself, to praise the Lord for the
justice of His government,”—Murphy.


oF PRAYER,


asked. Perhaps the time is not come
or the petitioner is not fit to receive the
blessing, or it may be better to refuse
than to grant the request. God gave
Israel a king when they wanted one, but
it was in His wrath (1. Sam. viii. 7-9) ;
Hos. xiii. 11). God refused to relieve
Paul from the thorn in the flesh, though
he besought Him thrice, but it was in
love. He gave him better than he asked
(2 Cor. xii. 9).

II. Bringing benedictions. Others,
and ourselves also, are benefited (Job.
xlii. 10). Intercessions not only binds
us more to God, but brings us nearer
our brethren. It is an antidote to sel-
ne and hate. It fills the heart with
ove.


“For what are men better than sheep or goata,
That nourish a blind life within the brain;
If, knowing God, they lift not hands of prayer,
Both for themselves, and those who call them
friend *
For so the whole round earth is every way
Bound by gold chains about the feet of God.”
—Tennyson,


BEHAVING AS A FRIEND.


Ver. 14. This implies—
1. Kind consideration. There are
differences, All depends on the spirit
168


(cf. Satan, Job £ 8, and God Ps, xxxi,
7). Mark the Priest, the Levite, and
the Samaritan (Luke x. 30-36),


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


PALM XXXVI.





IL Generous sympathy. Observa-
tion without sympathy is torture. But
how sweet is true sympathy. It is like
cold water to a thirsty soul. It is like
balm to a bleeding heart. It is the man
who sympathises that can help. Others
may be dull, but he is quick to see.
Others may stand by silent and power-
less, but he knows, as if by intuition,
how to speak a word in season. His
very presence is an inspiration (¢f Job
vi. 14; 1 Sam. xxiii. 16).

It. Self-denying service. Love is
the essence of friendship. Sacrifice is
the highest form of love (cf. John xv.
13; 1 John iii, 18; Rom. v. 8). -
Moravian missionary sold himself


slavery, that he might win the love and
trust of the slaves. The appeals of
others they might scorn, but their hearts
were opened to the man who had thus
proved himself their friend.

IV. Constancy in love and devotion
(Prov. xvii. 17 ; xxvii. 6; Ps. cxli 5).


“ Love is not love

Which alters when it alteration finds ;

Or bends with the remover to remove,

Ob no! it is an ever fixdd mark,
That looks on tempests, and is never shaken;
It is the star of every wandering bark,
Whose worth’s unknown, although his height

be taken,” —Shakespeare.


*¢ The noblest friendship ever shown,
The Saviour of the world makes known.”
—Cowper.


PSALM XXXVL


INTRODUCTION.


This psalm was written by David. From ver. 1-4 he describes the rebelliow: ;


sera. 5-9 he extols the various attributes of the Lord; and in vers. 10 and 11 he adi


the Lord in prayer.


Be:


Tue DistiIxcuisHine CHARACTERISTICS OF A WICKED LiFR,
(Verses 1-4.)


We have in these verses a graphic de-
lineation of a wicked life, in every way
true, yet abhorrent. The picture of
an ungodly man ought to be enough to
save Others from an imitation of his pro-
fane conduct.

I. A wicked life is characterised
by practical atheism. ‘There is no
fear of God before his eyes,”

Wicked men are virtually atheistic.
They do not in reality recognise the ex-
istence of the Supreme Being, and this
is evident from the feeling of their inner
nature, from their speech, and from
their methods of activity. They are
without God in the world. They may
recognise Him in the form of a creed,
but He has no real influence over them ;
they are entirely led by the impulse of
the moment, by the speculation of the
hour, or by the passion of the lower


nature, They are not influenced by
considerations that have reference to
God and His government of the uni-
verse. Prayer forms no part of their
lives. A wicked life is not consistent
with a true belief in the Divine exist-
ence.

It. A wicked life is characterised
by self-adulation. “For he flattereth
himself in his own eyes.”

Wicked men are generally guilty of
self-flattery, and in this way they en-
deavour to appease their conscience, and
approve their plans. Their lives are
sinful, and hence they have to cover
them with artificial flowers, and with
unreal decorations, They dare not ad-
mit the facts and experiences of their
own heart even to themselves. Self-
flattery is easy. It is common. It
sometimes has to serve instead HS flattery

1


PALM XXXVI.





from others. A wicked life has no cause
for self-flattery ; it may pride itself upon
its cunning, or upon its success, but that
will not alter its guilt, or avert the unerr-
ing sentence of infinite Justice.

III. A wicked life is characterised
by verbal profanity. “The words of
his mouth are iniquity and deceit.”

Wicked men are recognised by their
perverse and profane speech. They
hallow not the great name of God, nor
do they reverently allude to the solemn
realities of the moral life of the race.
But their language is not only profane,
it is also deceitful. It is characterised
by duplicity. It often gives a misrepre-
sentation of moral character, of events
and circumstances, and of the ordinary
things of life. Speech is a good index
to the soul.

IV. A wicked life is characterised
by un-wisdom. “He hath left off to
be wise and to do good.”

Wicked men are often gifted as far as
secular knowledge and wisdom are con-
cerned. But true wisdom cometh down


from above, and of this they are sadly


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMS,





deficient. Hence they lack the wisdom
that truly makes men wise. Sin is always
evidence of the greatest ignorance and
folly. The un-wisdom of a wicked life
is seen in the pleasure it seeks, in the
study it pursues, in the destiny it
selects, and in its hatred of philanthropy,

V. A wicked life is characterised
by cunning artifices. “He deviseth
mischief upon his bed.”

The wicked man deliberately plans
mischief. His late and early thoughts,
which ought to be concentrated on God
and His mercy, are fixed on schemes of
fraud and cunning. Wicked men are
generally cunning. For this they edu-
cate their faculties, and thus they hope
to enrich themselves, to malign their
neighbours, and to defeat the purposes
of the good. Thus it is not difficult to
know the ungodly man when we meet
him.

Lessons :—Il. That a wicked isfe is
hateful to God. 2%. That a wicked life
ts despicable to men. 3. That a wicked
life 1s injurtous to society. 4. That @
wicked life may be reformed by grace,


A Wevcomz:REVELATION oF THE CHARACTER oF Gop.


( Verses 5-12.)


The psalm commences with a descrip-
tion of the character of the wicked man,
and, by way of sublime contrast, gives
a glad revelation of the character of
God. There are grand contrasts in
nature; equally so in the inspired volume.
Here we have a striking one :—

I. The Divine Being is unspeakable
in mercy. “Thy mercy, O Lord, is in
the heavens.”

Mercy is a distinguishing attribute of
God. He delighteth in mercy, and has
ever proved this in His dealings with
the human race. This is evident in the
temporal gifts He bestows, in the spiri-
tual good He communicates, and in the
grand redemption He has provided for
the soul, whereby it can be made free
and pure, Nature speaks the mercy of
God, as with a thousand tongues, and
the Bible lends additional emphasis to

174)


her already loud voice. The greatest
sinner may experience the mercy of God
if he will only seek it prayerfully.

IL. The Divine Being is immutable
in rectitude. ‘‘Thy righteousness is
like the great mountaina,”

And thus, while mercy is an attribute
of God, rectitude may also be predicted
of Him. The Divine mercy proceeds
upon the principle of Divine equity.
The mountains are immutable, they are
firm, they are majestic, they are impos-
ing and beautiful; and so is the recti-
tude of God. It is ever the same to-
wards rich and poor; it is worthy the
admiration of the intelligent universe,
and under its shade men may safely re-
pose. The Divine rectitude should be
consoling to the good, and a terror to
those who await the unknown tribunss
of the futura.


¥


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PHALM KXXVI,





Il. That the Divine Being invites
the confidence of the soul, “ There-
fore the children of men put their trust
under the shadow of Thy wings.”

The mercy and rectitude of God, as
seen in the principle of His government
and in the preservation of the material
universe, awaken men to confidence in
Him. And God protects those who
put their trust in Him. The figure of
this verse is very beautiful and attrac-
tive. The soul of man can rest in God
by trusting in Him. Faith is moral
repose.

IV. That the Divine Being is the
source of all life. “For with Thee is
the fountain of life.”

God is the source of all life. The
angels derive their existence from Him.
Man lives in Him, All mental, moral,
and spiritual life is the gift of the
Eternal. Earth has no life to bestow ;
it is a grave, Life, full and free, is the


gift of the Infinite Being. We should
measure the gift by the Giver.

V. That the Divine Being is the
protection of the good from the arti-
fices of the wicked. “And let not the
hand of the wicked remove me.”

The wicked often seek to injure the
good by cunning artifice and sheer
strength : at such a time God is their
only protection and refuge. Hence we
have here a very glad and welcome re-
presentation of the Divine character :
full of mercy, firm in justice, inviting
the confidence of the soul, the source of
life, and the protection of the good.
What more can we require }

Lessons :—1l. We ought to be grateful
that God has given such a condescending
revelation of Himself. 2. We ought to
be consoled and strengthened by the
thought that such a revelation ts true to
human expertence. 3, Learn @ lesson


of trust in the Eternal God.


PSALM XXXVIL


INTRODUCTION.


This psalm was probably written by Davic in his old age, and contains his experience


{n reference to the providential dealings of God with men.


It acknowledges the transient pros-


perity of the wicked, but places in sublime contrast therewith the confidence and destiny of


the good, and proves elearly that the latter have little cause to envy the former.


It is folly to


envy & man because 2 ‘2 clothed in the garb of a king; he may, after all, be only a pauper in


- disguise.


THe TRANSIENT PRosPERITY OF THE WICKED UNwortTHY THE Envy oF
THE Goop.


(Verses 1, 2.)


I. That there is apparently much
in the prosperity of the wicked to ex-
cite the fretful envy of the good.

It cannot be denied that wicked men
sre often in great prosperity even while
the pious are poor and despised. They
are eminent in social position and for-
tunate in commercial speculation ; hence
they are surrounded by all that heart
could wish. This is a matter of his-
tory. It is also a matter of everyday
experience. In this life the wicked are
prosperous. They live for this life
alone, they are often cunning and sel-
fish ; hence it is not to be wondered at


that they succeed init. And they always
take good care to display their grandeur,
so that it may be universally seen and
admired. Hence they are the occasion
of perplexity to the good, and often of
desponding thoughts and envious feel-
ings. It is hard to understand how it
is that so many good things should fall
to the lot of characters so unworthy of
them, while the children of God are in
comparative need. At such a sight it
is difficult to realise that Heaven is
just in its providential dealings with
men. But this thought will come with
devotion (Ps. lxxiii. 16, oie


WeaLM XRXVIL


IZ That it is foolish to envy the
prosperity of the wicked, because it
is only of temporary duration.

It is impossible not to regard the
temporary prosperity of the wicked; the
good cannot be indifferent to it; it is
thrust upon their attention. But the
good are not obliged to envy it, or to
be ill-tempered at it. Their envy will
do no good. It will not alter things,
or make them better. This social con-
dition is permitted by Heaven. It must,
therefore, be accepted by the devout
mind as appropriate, as a token of the
beneficence of God in that He will per-
mit such distinguished mercy to attend
a wicked life. But the prosperity of
the wicked will only be transient, as
the beauty of the grass, or as the mo-
mentary bloom of the flower. And,
therefore, it is not worthy of envy, as it
is prosperity of the lowest kind, and
will soon wither in the grave ; whereas,
though the good may endure a long
period of want, yet it will only be asa
prelude to the eternal wealth and enjoy-
ment of heaven. Surely, then, they
have no need to envy the temporal pros-
perity of the wicked.

III. That it is sinful to envy the
prosperity of the wicked, because it
is contrary to the command of God.

The Bible clearly reveals the fact
that envy is a sinful passion, and that
it is the outcome of an impure heart,
A good man cannot indulge envy, or he
will soon be little better in moral char-
acter than those whose prosperity he
may contemplate. Envy is forbidden
by God. It is an unhallowed flame
within the soul. It hinders prayer. It
leads to oppression. It is contrary to


HOMILETIOC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





the example of Christ. Hence if good
men would keep their souls in harmony
with the law of God; if they would be
contented in spirit and happy in life,
they must not yield to the dire senti-
ment of envy.

IV. That it is injurious to envy
the prosperity of the wicked, because
it awakens the lower sentiments of
the soul

There is no lower passion of which
man is capable than that of envy. It
is a mean and unhappy companion. It
looks askance at every one it meets.
Tn its light a friend may be turned into
an enemy. And for a good man to
give himself up to it, would indeed be
to allow the lower feelings of his soul
to gain the mastery over all that is true
and magnanimous within him, A pure
soul cannot indulge envy.

V. That it is presumptuous to envy
the prosperity of the wicked, because
it is rebellion against the providence
of God.

God has a certain method of provi-
dence in the universe, and it ill becomes
good men to rebel against it. It is just.
It is disciplinary. It will ultimately be
adjusted to all the moral requirements
of the universe. The good should
therefore be patient, not fretful. They
can afford to wait. They have moral
prosperity, they need not therefore envy
secular pride. They must fall in with
the providence of God, even though at
times it may be of difficult interpretation.

Lessons :—1. Not to cultivate an en-
vious outlook upon the social conditions
of men. 2. To trust tn God during the
enigmas of the present, and watt the final
adjustment of all things.


Tue DisPosiITions AND BENEDICTIONS OF THE Goon,
(Verses 3-11.)


In the opening verses of this psalm
we are told of the dispositions which
should and should not characterise a
pious soul, It should not be fretful or
envious. It should be trustful. It
should be joyous, It should be meek.
These dispositions win the benediction
of Heaven. The blessings of the soul

172


are intimately allied to its moral disposi-
tions. Men find the world what they
make it by their own inner spirit.

IL The dispositions that should
characterise a godly life. 1. Zrust.
“Trust in the Lord.” If men would
avoid a fretful spirit, they should trust
in the Lord. Faith is the noblest dis-


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMB.





position of the soul, and is an antidote
for envy, It has an elevating influence
upon the moral character of those who
exercise it. The Lord is worthy of the
confidence of men, He is omnipotent,
and cannot fail. He is faithful, and
will never forsake, The good may there-
fore confide their life, temporal circum-
stances, their reputation, and the govern-
ment of the universe to Him, knowing
that He will order all for their ultimate
spiritual welfare. Trust not in man, not
even in yourself. Trust in God must
also be followed by appropriate effort ;
only they who “ do good” have any right
to expect Divine help.

2. Joy. ‘Delight thyself also in the
Lord.” Hence the joy of the good is
not carial and sinful, but spiritual and
pure. It is delight in the Supreme
Being, in His character and perfections,
in the noblest love, and in the highest
wisdom ; hence it is eminently real and
secure. In what better object can the
soul delight? In uncertainriches? In
fleeting pleasure? In dying friendship ?
The joy of the Lord is our strength both
in sorrow and in service. God delights
in the good, and what more reasonable
than that they should rejoice in Him.
The life of the Christian is one of holy
delight in the Eternal. Faith inspires


delight.
3. Devotion. “Commit thy way unto
the Lord.” The good are not to take


the sole guidance and responsibility of
their own life. They are to commit
their way, their sorrow, their moral im-
perfections, their mental perplexities,
their domestic cares, and their temporal
circumstances, entirely into the hands
of the Lord. They are to do this by
prayer, with faith, in delight. In this
consists true piety. Though the great
God has the vast concerns of the universe
to watch over, He is willing to direct
the individual life committed to His
care, Some men commit their way unto
reason ; some to impulse; and some to
passion. But God is the only true
guardian of the way of an immortal
soul.

4. Rest. ‘Rest in the Lord.” This
is the duty and privilege of the good.
This is not a world for much repose;


PALM XXXVEL


men are anxious and active ; they make
haste to be rich; they pursue pleasure
ardently ; they are tormented by care :
they are unrestful. But religion gives
moral quietude. It calms the soul. It
silences the voice of complaint. God is
the only true resting-place of the soul ;
but what a sweet rest is found in Him!
See, then, the accompaniments of faith,
joy, devotion, rest. Faith bears blessed
fruit.

5. Patience, “ Wait patiently.” The
good must be patient in suffering, in
service—under adverse circumstances,
when their reputation is maligned, and
when the mystery of life presses heavily
upon them, God is worth waiting for.
His time is the best. Men tarry for the
king. Time should not be considered
in waiting for the King of heaven. The
splendour of His advent will more than
compensate for the delay.

6. Meekness. ‘But the meek shall
inherit the earth.” The good should be
meek and contented with their lot, not
haughty, defiant, or restless, Hence we
see the dispositions which should charac-
terise a pious soul, and the benedictions
they attain, and the admiration they
win.

II. The benedictions that are be-
stowed upon a godly life. 1. Thata
godly life ts watched over by the beneficent
providence of God. ‘Thou shalt dwell
in the land, and verily thou shalt be
fed.” The Divine providence enables
the good to feel at home in this world,
even though they do not regard it as
their home. They dwell in the land
because it is the property of their Father
in heaven, and He gives them the right
to reside in it. Thus their temporal
and moral requirements will be met.
They will be fed with the bread that
perisheth, as also with the bread that
cometh down from heaven. Truth is
the sustenance of the soul, and it shall
never be lacking to the good.

2. That a godly life ts privileged by
the gratification of tts best desires. ‘‘ He
shall give thee the desires of thine heart.”
The desires of the good are the outcome
of their trust and delight in the Lord,
and therefore may safely be granted.
Man is a creature of desire. He often

173


PA4LM XEXKVE.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS.





lengs for that he can never attain. His
aspirations are often ambitious, and, if
realised, would prove injurious. But
the inclinations of the good are pure and
spiritual, they are in harmony with the
will of God and the welfare of the soul.
Religion alone can give true satisfaction
to human desire.

3. That a godly life shall be vindt
cated from the slander and calumny of
men, “ And He shall bring forth thy
righteousness as the light.” The good
are often maligned in this world by those
who envy the beauty of their characters
and the glory of their reputation. Some-
times this is the outcome of sheer malice,
and occasionally of wanton mischief.
But from the darkness of calumny God
will bring the good into the light of
day, when men shall see the untarnished
beauty of their characters, the injury
that has been done them, and the tender
solicitude of Heaven for the public vin-
dication of the pure,

4, That a godly life te enriched by
a tree ownership of the earth. “ But
the meek shall inherit the earth.” The
world is not inherited by the busy or by


those who are given to speculation, but
by the meek. They inherit it by their
contented spirit, and because they enjoy
it. It is the gift of their Father to
them, and they possess its title-deeds in
Christ. The meek are the true and
permanent inheritors of the soil ; they
will inherit the new heaven and the new
earth.

5. That a godly life shall experience
a sweet and affluent peace. ‘And shall
delight themselves in the abundance of
peace.” A godly life is generally cha-
racterised by peacefulness. It is at
peace with self, with God, and with the
universe. Its peace is affluent; it is a
delight ; it is divinely given to the pure.
“My peace I give unto you.” Weak
men are agitated by the storms of earth,
while good men know the peace of God
which passeth all understanding, and
anticipate a destiny of peace which shall
never be broken by sorrow or sin. ©

Lessons :—l. Jo cultivate the dtspo-
sitions of soul commended by God. 2. To
expect thebenedictions of Heaven promised
to a trustful sould.


Tus PLorrines oF THE WICKED AGAINST THE Goon.


(Ferses 12-15.)


That the wicked plot against the just
is matter of history, and also of every-
day experience. They envy the moral
character of the good, with the respect
it wins and the influence it wields. They
cannot interpret its inner meaning or
understand the secret of its modest
power. They are also rebuked by the
quiet dignity of the Christian character,
and hence, through sheer hatred, seek to
persecute and remove it out of their
sight. To this end they employ their
best genius and cunning, and await the
result with the utmost complacency,
little thinking that Heaven holds them
and their schemes in derision,

I. The plottings of the wicked
against $he good are wrathful. “And
gnasheth upon him with his teeth,”
The wicked show by their gestures the
rage they indulge against, and injury
they would inflict upon, the good if it

174


were in their power. They gnash with
their teeth, thus indicating their angry
but curbed rage. They have not the
ability or the opportunity to accomplish
the mischief their violent passion would
devise. Sinners are held in check by
the restraining providence of God, by
legal penalties, and often by the. sheer
force of public opinion, which favours
the welfare of the good. But if the
wicked cannot always execute their
plottings against the just, they do not
disguise their anger; they little think
how morally impotent and vulgar their
puny gnashing makes them appear.
They show that they are the creatures
of a passion they cannot vent.

Il. The plottings of the wicked
against the good are cruel. “The
wicked have drawn out the sword.”
They have drawn the weapon out of the
sheath and await the time to use it.


ff


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; PSALMS.


PRALM XXEVE,





They do not seek to overcome the just
by Scripture truth, by logical argument,
or by cultured means, but by the cruel
and deadly instrument of war. They
employ no half measures, as they vainly
imagine. They repose more confidence
{in the physical and material agency than
in the intellectual and the moral, In
seeking the injury of the good, they
would prefer a sword to any other in-
strumentality. They shrink not from
murder if their rage can only achieve its
malicious design. They are of the lowest
type of mind.

III. The plottings of the wicked
against the good are determined.
“ And have bent their bow.” They not
merely carry a sword, but also a bow; nor
would they refuse any other instrument
likely to accomplish their mischievous
design upon the good. They bend the
bow with all the determination of will
they can possibly summon. They take
steady aim that they may wound a vital
part. And thus the wicked, in their plot-
tings against the just, make use of all
the instrumentalities they can command,
exercise all the talents they possess, and
are strong in their determination to
achieve the end they contemplate.

IV. The plottings of the wicked
against the good are cowardly. ‘To
cast down the poor and needy.” The
wicked do not seek to engage in conflict
with the strong amongst the good, who


would be competent to expose and van-
quish their plottings, but with the poor
and needy. They attack the feeble who
are too meek in spirit to suspect their
mischief, or to defend themselves from
it ; they attack the poor who have not
wherewith to protect themselves from
the assaults of their imperious enemies.
Wicked men are generally cowardly,
They have not the courage of their rage,
or the valour of their determination.

VY. The plottings of the wicked
against the good are self-destructive,
“ Their sword shall enter into their own
heart.” The very weapon intended for
the destruction of the good, under the
mysterious but retributive arrangements
of Divine Providence, shall be employed
in the defeat of the wicked. The wicked
are often hung upon gallows built by
themselves. Their plottings are self-
destructive; they are vain; they are
useless; their bows sere broken; their
agencies are cut off; their plans are de-
feated ; they outwit themselves ; they
invite the derision and retribution of
heaven.

Lussons:—I. That «# ts fooltsh for
the wicked to plot against the good. 2
Such plottings are intelligible to the good,
being explained by the enmity of the
world to Christ. 3. Such plottings are
not to be feared, but are to be outlived by
trust in God.


Tue RIGHTEOUS AND HIS LITTLE BETTER THAN THE WICKED WITH
His Muog.


(Verse 16.)


It is a fact of everyday observation
that the righteous often have little,
while the ungodly have much, The
little may be better than the much.
This is the arithmetic of Heaven, not of
the world. Why is the little better!

I. Because it is honestly gained.
The little that a righteous man hath is
sure to be honestly gained. It will be
either the product of healthy labour, of
commendable skill, or of lawful inherit-
ance. This cannot always be said of the
riches of the wicked ; they are often got
by fraud, by cunning, from the orphan,


and the widow. The way in which
wealth is obtained has much to do with
its real value.

Ii. Because it may be safely re-
tained. The little that a righteous man
hath is far more likely to be safely re-
tained than are the riches of the wicked.
The former are careful in the use, prayer-
ful in the investment, and unselfish in
the gift of their little ; while the latter
are spendthrift, godless, and selfish in
the use of their much. Prayer and be-
nevolence are @ great preservative to
wealth.

178


PRALM XXXVI


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS.





II. Because it may be truly en-
joyed. The little of the righteous is
rightfully earned, and, therefore, may be
truly enjoyed ; whereas the much of the
wicked is often unjustly gained, and is,
therefore, associated with unhappy deeds,
with unwelcome memories, with self-
accusation, and with a fear of retribu-
tion. It cannot be truly enjoyed.

IV. Because it will be carefully
spent. It is just possible that the little
of the righteous will go farther than the
great riches of the wicked. The righte-
ous are careful but not miserly ; they
gather up the fragments that nothing
may be lost. The wicked are often
speculative, and lose more than they
win, They are spendthrift; they make
a boast of their prodigality; they are
well bled by flatterers and by sinful ac-
complices.


ConTRASTED
( Verses


We have in these verses a fine con-
trast between the wicked and the righte-
ous. It is drawn by unerring skill,
after minute observation, and is in keep-
ing with the general experience of man-
kind. The wicked and the good :—

I. They are contrasted in their
possessions. “A little that a righte-
ous man hath is better than the riches of
many wicked.” The wicked often have
greater property and wealth than the
good, but they are not content there-
with ; yea, they are even unrestful in
its possession, Whereas the righteous
have little, but, by the quietude of their
soul, their little becomes much, and is a
true enjoyment to them. Wicked men
are troubled by their much (Luke xii.
16). Good men are grateful for their
little (Ps. ciii., 2),

Ii. They are contrasted in their
strength. ‘ For the arms of the wicked
shall be broken: but the Lord up-
holdeth the righteous.” The arms are a
token of power and strength, and the
arms of the wicked shall be broken.
They shall be broken by the retributive
providence of God, and by the failure of
their own schemes. What a pitiable

176


V. Because it will be benevolently
used. The little of the righteous will
be given to the Lord ; to His cause on
the earth ; to His poor; and to institu-
tions worthy of help. Men lose nothing
by giving to the prophet of the Lord
(1 Kings xvii. 14; Prov. xi. 24). The
righteous gain by giving. The wicked
lose by withdrawing. A running stream
inherits the most territory.

VL Because it will be divinely
blessed. The righteous can justly ex-
pect the blessing of God upon their
vittle, because it is honestly gained and
it is benevolently used. The wicked
have no right to anticipate the benedic-
tion of Heaven upon their riches. No
man is rich without the blessing of God.

Lussons:—l. To be satisfied with
little. 2. To make little sufficient. 3.
To use little well.


CHARACTERS,

16-28.)

sight they present! Revengeful, yet
armless. Like Samson shorn of his


strength. The strength of the good
man does not consist in his arms, hence
there is no reference to them, but in the
inspiring energy of God. He is upheld
by the Lord, hence his superior power
and safety.

III. They are contrasted in their
perpetuity. “The Lord knoweth the
days of the upright ; and their inherit-
ance shall be for ever.” “But the
wicked shall perish.” The good are
known by God. He knows their present
estate and their future glory. He sees
their trials, and also the weight of glory
in reserve for them. He beholds the
sword unsheathed, and the bow bent
against them, but no weapon formed
against them can prosper. The times of
the good are in the hand of the Lord,
hence He will deliver them from special
calamities, and will feed them when
famine is prevalent. But the wicked
shall perish, — they have no defence
against their enemies, they have no
granary in Egypt to which they can flee
in the days of famine. They will perish


tgnobly, trreparably, and eernally.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALM&





This will be the end of their hatred,
cunning, and wealth.

:V. They are contrasted in their
integrity. “The wicked borroweth,
and payeth not again; but the righteous
showeth mercy and giveth.” Though
the wicked have great wealth, they ure
often under the necessity of borrowing
money, because they are prodigal. They
borrow to meet the demands of extrava-
gant habits, of sinful pleasures, and of
accomplices in vices. Sin is very ex-
pensive. It involves in hopeless debt,
and oftentimes to those against whom
the sword has been unsheathed. The
wicked pay not again. They are not
willing to reform their extravagant
habits, they are not willing to work, and
they are dishonest at heart, and so they
pay not their debts, even though they
violate their most sacred bonds, The
righteous lend to the wicked, they are
merciful and generous in spirit. Their
wealth was lent to them, and they are
willing to lend it again, and to receive
their usury from Him who ever rewards


FSALM XXXVH.


a beneficent deed. The plottings of the
wicked do not interrupt the benevolent
dispositions of the good. It is petter to
lend than to borrow.

V. They are contrasted in their pos-
terity. “Yet have I not seen the
righteous forsaken, nor his seed begging
bread. But the seed of the wicked shall
be cut off.” David had not seen the
seed of the righteous begging bread.
He was a king, and would not be likely
to meet with such poverty. Yet his ex-
perience was wide in the matter, and he
was competent to pass an opinion. The
children of good men are seen begging ;
but very seldom. This is the exception,
the rule is in harmony with the state-
ment of this verse. The children of the
wicked are cut off, they inherit from
their parents the seeds of destruction
(Prov. ili 33).

Lassons:—1. Which character is the
more inviting, the more prosperous, the
more enduringS 2. Which will you
cultivate f


Tue RIGHTEOUS
(Verses 29-34.)


The psalmist found congenial employ-
ment in writing about good men, and
their relation to God, to His govern-
ment, and to the world at large. He
delighted to show the Divine care for
the good, their excellencles of character,
the protection they enjoyed, and the
future they anticipated. The righteous:

I. The land he inherits. “The
righteous shall inherit the land, and
dwell therein for ever.” The righteous
inherit the earth, the world in which
they now are, tbey inherit it as the sons
of God through Christ, and, standing on
Calvary, all that they can see from that
hill is theirs, They will dwell eternally
in this world by the work they do, by
the influences they exert, by the inspira-
tion they impart, and by the silent testi-
mony they leave behind (Heb. xi. 4).

II. The wisdom he speaks. ‘The
mouth of the righteous speaketh wisdom,
and his tongue talketh of judgment.”
Good men are known by their speech,

M


they talk on good subjects, and talk on
them wisely. He converses about moral
questions, his tongue talketh of judg-
ment. He speaks not about the follies of
the age, he has no interest in the gossip
of the weak,—he prefers the deeper and
more solemn themes of life and destiny.
IIL The law he keeps. “The law
of his God is in his heart ; none of his
steps shall slide.” This is the secret of
his wise speech, Men who know God,
and who search His law, are furnished
with themes for noble conversation, and
are imbued with a true spirit of wisdom.
If men would read the Bible more, they
would talk more wisely. The good man
not merely reads the law, he not merely
knows it, but it is resident within him as
a vital and transformative principle (Ps.
exix. 11), Obedience to this law is ele-
vating, preserving, safe, and sanctifying.
It is the highest law, and obedience to
{t is the most influential and worthy.
IV. The safety he eee “ The


POALM XXEVIL.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS





wicked watcheth the righteous, and
seeketh to slay him. The Lord will not
leave him in his hand.” The righteous
are watched by deceptive and cruel men,
they are often unconscious of this peril.
But they have another watcher, even the
Lord who is their Sun and Shield. The
Divine Guardian is greater and more
vigilant than the human foe, Jesus was
watched by His enemies.

V. The condemnation he escapes.
“ Nor condemn him when he is judged.”
In this world the righteous are often
condemned, by secret slander, by cruel
hatred, by violent plots, by public
opinion, and even by the legal tribunals
of the land. But there comes a day
when their condemnation will be re-
versed, their shame will be removed,
their characters will be cleared, and in-
finite justice will receive them into its
eternal protection. The good can afford
to wait this time, and no doubt many
long for it to turn their darkness into
light, their sadness into joy. A false
sentence is now passed on moral good-


ness ; the future will reveal its injustice
The pure life only can escape condemns
tion, What a joy to escape the condem-
nation of God, not through our own
merit, but through the cross of Jesus.

VI. The exaltation he expects.
“Wait on the Lord and keep His way,
and He shall exalt thee to inherit the
land.” The good are to wait on the
Lord, because He may be long in coming
to them, because He is worth waiting
for, and because at His coming they will
realise all their long-cherished hopes.
The early watchers on the mountain
wait for the rising of the sun, and the
multitudes wait for the coming of the
king. So let the Christian wait for the
Lord. ‘The good must not only wait on
the Lord, but also keep His way. There
must be keeping as well as waiting, and
then there will be inheriting. Canaan
is the inheritance and the exaltation of
the pure.

Lessons :—l. Talk wisely.
diligently. 3. Walk carefully.
ticipate joyfully.


2. Obey
4. Ar-


Taz Temporary Prosperiry oF THE WICKED as CoNTRASTED WITH
THE PraceruL Destiny or THE Goon.


(Verses 35-37.)


The first verse contains the pith of
the entire psalm, “Fret not thyself
because of evil-doers, neither be thou
envious against the workers of iniquity.”
The following reasons are given as @
preventative of an envious spirit ; The
glory of the wicked is of brief duration
(ver. 2); the moral rectitude of the good
will be finally manifested (ver. 6); the
good are divinely protected from the
attacks of evil men (ver. 12-15) ; they
are divinely guided (ver. 23); they
are the true inheritors of the soil (ver.
29) ; their destiny is peaceful, Hence
the good have no need to envy the
wicked in their bright but transient
prosperity, especially when they con-
sider the future. Perhaps, when David
wrote this psalm, the image of Saul was
floating before his vision. Truly, in
reference to that monarch, he could say,
‘7 have seen the wicked,” dc,

178


IL That wicked men are often in
the possession of great power. “I
have seen the wicked in great power.”

l. They often have social distinction.
It very often happens that the wicked
are rich; they have a productive farm,
or a good business, which places at their
command the luxuries of life. Hence
they are surrounded by men of like
fortunes, and are largely courted by the
multitude beneath them. It is custom-
ary in these times to make wealth rather
than character the test of companion-
ship ; hence rich men are suns in the
firmament of our social life, they are
surrounded by attendant planets, and
stars, hoping to catch the rays of their
favour. They keep up appearances, they
give grand entertainments, they aid phi-
lanthropic institutions, and so gain social
popularity. Such men are dangerous.
They are, to these who circle near them,


f


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: PSALMS.





as the bright light to the moth: they
occasion moral ruin.

2. They often have national distinction.
They have gained influence in the local
circle in which they move, hence they are
elevated to a seat in the legislature ; or,
it may be, that they are clever as they are
wicked, and thus, by sheer intellect, gain
the pre-eminence of their fellows. They
make an invention, they write a book,
they win a battle, and society, not being
in an ideal state, is in danger of elevat-
ing genius rather than goodness, Again,
if they are not clever, they are cunning,
and we all know the power of fraud to
out-do honesty fora time. They flatter
the great men of the age, and so win
their help to fame. For even great men
are wonderfully open to flattery. But,
sometimes their plots are so deeply laid,
that even the good are duped by them.

3. The supremacy of the wicked is a
matter of history and expertence. “I
have seen,” &c. History is a record of
the wicked who have been in great power.
Human society exhibits the same fact.
Men of the highest genius, whose names
are household words, and whose works
will be read to the end of time, are illus-
trations of this statement. We think of
Byron ; and also of many kings who
have ascended our throne. This outlook
upon history and society may be per-
plexing, but the problem will one day
be solved, when it will appear that saints
were the true kings of the world, and
that ambitious sinners were its paupers.

4. In this supremacy the wicked ap-
pear strong and arrogant. “Spreading
himeelf,” &c. They imagine that their
foundation is secure, that the effects of
their wealth and genius upon the popular
mind will never die away; that their
amile will win, that their frown will
subdue their enemies. Their demeanour
is imperious, Their tones of voice are
emphatic. They forget that modesty
and humility would best serve their
end, They are like the swollen stream,
which spreadg itself throughout the land,
to show off its expansiveness, but cer-
tainly not its depth.

Il. That wicked men often expe-
rience unexpected reverses. 1. Severe
and complete. ‘Yet he passed away.”


Sometimes these men pass from the
highest pinnacle of wealth to abject
poverty, through speculation or panic ;
their true characters are unveiled, and
society discards them. No vestige is
left of their power.

2. Unlikely and unexpected. Such
reverses are not often anticipated. We
expect that wealth will protect from
them. The wicked are like the rider
through the desert, unexpectedly plun-
dered by some stern robber. At the
roots of the richest flower there may be
an insect eating away its life unseen.
The calm often breaks suddenly into
storm. The wicked aristocrat may soon
become the wicked pauper.

3. Minutely observed. “I sought
him.” Men of wealth are talked about
by everybody; their houses, clothes,
habits, are the staple theme of the
neighbourhood. “J sought him.” Men
come to the ruin to mock; to search to
see if there was anything left they
could plunder, and, no doubt, to weep.
Some would pity his fall. The world
soon hears of the destruction of its
powerful ones,

Ill. That while the wicked expe-
rience these reverses, the good are
happy in their life, and peaceful in
their futurity. ‘“‘ The end of that man
is peace.” 1. The good are a great con-
trast to the wicked just contemplated.
The character of the one is impure, that
of the other is holy; the circumstances
of the one are affluent, those of the other
may be needy; the destiny of the one
is ignominious, while that of the other
is happy. The contrast is not only
great, but happy. It is pleasant to turn
from the one to the other. Good men
are the charm of history and of life.
They are welcome as the shady nook
during the hot summer day. The con-
trast is solemn, Tothink of the wicked
in their power and ruin, and then of the
good in their peace and hope, must cer-
tainly evoke a feeling of regret that one
life should lack the beauty and safety
of the other.

2. The good are worthy of careful
note and imitation. “ Mark the perfect
man.” He is worthy of note. A per-
fect man / Are you mts Have


BALM XXXVI.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





you neve: seen one? True, they are
not often to be met with,—you should
therefore note him the more when you
do see him, If you go into a picture
gallery, and find a beautiful work of
art, you study it from every point of
view, its every feature and tint. So
with the flower in your garden. But
here is not a lifeless picture, a withering
flower, but an immortality,—therefore
let your study be deeper and truer.
Mark his moral bearing, his strict in-
tegrity, his untiring zeal, his gentle
spirit, his effort for the good of others,
But do not look at him merely to ad-
mire, but to imitate; not merely that
the natural instincts of your soul may
be pleased, but that your manhood may
catch the glory of his. Men always be-
come like the object they study. Moral
character is the highest kind of study If
you mark the perfect man you will see
that life does not always go easily with
him ; sometimes the night is dark and
rough, but he always has one star to
cheer and guide him on his journey.

3. The life of the good will ultimately


CC —


come to an end. “The end of that
man.” What a pity! We should like
their beautiful light to shine on in our
midst for ever. Good men are the
world’s jewels ; they are patterns of life ;
they are prayers ; they are inspirations.
We cannot spare them. But death is
rude, and takes them from us; they
gladly step into heaven. And thus are
plucked earth’s choicest flowers, to be
removed to the Eden above,

4. The departure of the good will be
peaceful in ets tssue, There may be the
pain of disease, but that only touches
the surface of the man. In the depths
of his soul there is celestial calm. Peace,
the end of life! How welcome after
the storm. ‘Come at last, has it ?” ex-
claims the dying saint. ‘* Peace!”
“My spirit has found its rest in the
home of the Eternal.” We are told
that Stephen fell asleep; God turned
the angry cries of the murderous mob
into the lullabies of a saintly repose.

WHICH WILL you HAVE? 1. Wick
edness and power; or, 2. Piety and
peace,


PSALM XXXVIIL


INTRODUCTION.


This is a pealm of David to call to remembrance his past life, and, no doubt, has especial
reference to his sin with Bathsheba. It calls up to the view of his memory the sins of the past,
the afflictions of the past, the enemies of the past, and the mercies of the past. It is well to
have times of remembrance in life, like milestones on the road, to remind of the journey we
have travelled, and to inspire us onward to the future. The past is not entirely to be for-
gotten; it is to be called up as evidence of our own depravity, of the Divine faithfulness, and as
a profitable moral reflection for the soul.


A Conscrenck AWAKENED BY A SENSE oF THE Divine CHASTISEMENT.
(Verses 1-22.)


I, That the Divine chastisement is
greatly afflictive to men. This ia
evident throughout the entire psalm ;
in fact, it would appear as though the
writer were unable to find similitude by
which to liken, or language in which to
express, his moral pain occasioned by
the Divine chastisement.

1. The Divine chastisement makes men
apprehensive of the wrath of God (ver. 1).
David, no doubt, felt that he justly
merited the Divine rebuke in its mood

180


of strong displeasure. He had sinned,
and sin always leads men to regard God
as offended. It changes the Divine
favour into disapprobation. The soul
is certain to view God through its own
moral experiences, and hence, accord-
ing to its consciousness of innocence or
guilt, He appears as a Father or as a
Judge, The Divine anger is the bit-
terest element in the sorrow of the


good. .
& The Divine chastisement ts keen ta


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM XXXVI


a ee


tts penetration into the soul of man (ver.
2). The Divine chastisements are keen,
swift, and penetrating as barbed arrows.
They are shot unseen ; they come unex-
pected ; they make little noise; they
are abiding in their injury. Thus it is
with those who are convinced of sin.
The arrow of the Holy Spirit penetrates
to their innermost soul, and causes ter-
rible pain of conscience. God’s arrows
always hit their mark, and are intended
to remind of the bitterness of sin.

3. The Divine chastisement makes men
morally loathsome to themselves (vers. 3
and 5). Here we see the view which an
awakened conscience takes of its moral
condition, When the soul is wounded
by sin it becomes offensive to its own
inner gaze. The sinner, when under
conviction by the Spirit of God, sees all
his life as one festering sore, and loathes
it with penitential grief.

4, The Divine chastisement leads men
to an overwhelming consciousness of sin
(ver. 4). A man, when under the re-
buke of God, feels himself to be over-
whelmed in the sea of his sins. There
is no human refuge for him. No light
reaches him. The number of man’s sins
are an index to the woe of the Divine
chastisements. If the sins were not
deep the rebuke would not be so loud.
Sin is a heavy burden, and if not cast
upon the Lord, will sink the sinner into
perdition.

5. The Divine chastisement leads men
into grievous unrest (vers. 3-8). The
Divine chastisement penetrates to the
inner being of man, even to the bones,
and causes unrest. The good in this
condition are like a ship in the storm.
There can be no quietude of soul where
there is sin, An awakened conscience
tan only obtain peace in Christ, who is
the Prince of peace.

6. The Divine chastisement divests life
of all human joy (ver. 10).

II. That the Divine chastisement
often tests the sincerity and worth of
human friendship. ‘My lovers and
my friends stand aloof from my sore,
and my kinsmen stand afar off (ver.
Th):

t The Divine chastisement tests the
sincerity of human friendship. Friends,


who are thick as eagles on a carcase
while the feast lasts, are scarce in that
neighbourhood when the repast is over,
When the devil divested Job of his
property, he also relieved him of his
imagined friends, When men are under-
going the Divine chastisement they are
generally left in loneliness. Then com-
panions fear lest they should share the
woe of their afflicted comrade. They
stand aghast at the reversed condition of
things, At such times relatives are false
to the natural affection they ought to
bear toward their brother in adversity.
Our Lord was forsaken by His disciples.
Only true friendship survives the test
of adversity.

2. The Divine chastisement generally
stimulates the cunning policy of the
wicked (ver. 12). And thus it often hap-
pens that in the hour of Divine chastise-
ment inward grief of soul is combined
with outward exigencies. When wicked
men see the good in trouble then they
consider it a favourable time for execut-
ing their hellish schemes. They are
unmerciful ; they are cowardly; their
strength is in stealth; they are mali-
cious; they are ever active ; they pro-
mote slander; they delight in lies. God
only can defeat their cunning devices.

3. The Divine chastisement leads men
to examine the moral tendency of their
lives (vers. 17, 18). Here the Psalmist
acknowledges the moral weakness of
his life, in that he is ready to halt in
despair. He also confesses his sin with-
out reservation of thought or language.
Thus the Divine chastisement revealed
him to himself in no pleasing light.
David reviews his life in its inner mean-
ing and in its public bearing, and inti-
mates that his enemies accuse him
falsely. Sorrow makes men review all
their social and moral relationships.

III. The Divine chastisements call
into requisition the self-restraint of
the good. “But I, as a deaf man,
heard not; and I was as a dumb man
that openeth not his mouth” (vers. 13,
14), David was silent, notwithstanding
the strong provocations of his enemies.
He probably knew that it would be but
little use to contend with them by words,
and that if he did, he would vai arouse


PRALM XXXIK.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMB,





them to fiercer anger. Hence he mani-
fests the wisdom of silence. It is gene-
rally wise to treat angry and slanderous
men with silence. Silence is the lan-
guage of dignified innocence. It is a
token of noble self-control. Man has
the ability to subdue his natural feelings
when they are unduly excited by cruel
enemies, Christ answered his accusers
not a word, It is the token of a strong
soul that it can bear slander and per-
secution in silence, only seeking the
Divine vindication and protection.

IV. That the Divine chastisements
awaken the repentant soul to impor-
tunate prayer. ‘“ Forsake me not, O
Lord. O my God, be not far from me.
Make haste to help me, O Lord my
salvation” (vers, 21, 22). Thus, if
David was silent toward men, he was


not silent toward God, and in troubk
it is far better to pray to God than to
talk to men. Prayer enables men to be
self-contained. David said that, if
Heaven forsook him, he would indeed be
friendless. The Divine Companionship
is the protection of the good from ail
the plottings of wicked men. Adverse
circumstances awaken men to earnest
prayer—to prayer which is soon trium-
phant in its experience of the salvation
of God.

Lessons :—1. How many are afflicted
by the chastisements of Heaven. 2. How
many are left compantoniess by the sor-
rows of life. 3. How many are drwen
to devotion by anguish of heart. 4. How
the mischief of the wicked may be turned
by God to the good of the prayerful.


PSALM XXXIX


INTRODUCTION.


Superscription.—‘ To the chief musician, to Jeduthun, a psalm of David.” Jeduthun wae
one of the leaders of the sacred music in the time of David (1 Chron. xvi. 41, 42; xxv. 6; 2
Chron. xxxv. 15). Jeduthun is also the title of one of the twenty-four musical choirs left
by David. As the psalm is addressed to the chief musician, it was obviously intended for use
in the public worship of the tabernacle. David is said to be the author of the psalm. The
articular occasion to which’it refers is unknown. But from the psalm itself, it is clear that
t was written in a time of doubt and trouble, when the psalmist’s thoughts were of such
a character that he eould not express them without injury to others and to the cause of God.
We have no means of determining what the particular trouble was from which David was
suffering. Matthew Henry suggests that ‘‘ perhaps it was the death of some dear friend or
relation that was the trial of his patience, and that suggested to him these meditations of mor-
tality ; and at the same time, it should seem too, he himself was weak and ill, and under some
prevailing distemper.” Hengstenberg thinks that the psalm was written “ when in hot persecu-
cution and violent conflict.” It is clear that the Psalmist was in affliction and trouble, and
his mind seems to have been sorely exercised as to the Divine dealings. He could not see the
wisdom, the benevolence, or the justice of some of the Divine arrangements. He had dark
and painful thoughts on the matter, which he dare not utter. And at length he is compelled
to seek relief in prayer. Homiletically we divide the psalm thua,—Silence in Trouble (vera,
1-85 Speech in Trouble (vers, 4-6) ; Supplication in Trouble (vers, 7-18).


Sinencz iN TROUBLE.
(Verses 1-3.)


We have here presented to our con-
sideration :—

I. Silence maintained in trouble.
“T said I will take heed to my ways,
that I sin not with my tongue,” de.
(vers. 1, 2).

1. God’s providential dealings, as seen
by us, sometimes occasion doubt and
trouble to good men. The Psalmist ap-

182


pears greatly perplexed as to the Di.
vine administration of human affairs,
He saw so much grief and pain in
life, apparently proceeding from the
hand of God, he was himself being
consumed by the blow of God’s hand,
and life itself was so short and vain,
that he could not see the benevolence of


the dealings of God with him. The


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY ; PSALMS.


PSALM EXER.





providence of God has occasioned much
perplexity and doubt in the minds of
good mer. Asaph was sorely tried at
one time by some of its problems (Ps.
Ixxiii.). We all have passed through
experiences which at the time seemed
utterly irreconcilable with the wisdom
and love of God, and unbelieving
and painful thoughts and feelings have
filled our mind and heart. At such
times we shall do well to remember that
we see only a very small portion of His
ways, and that small portion we see but
dimly. Moreover, bitter experiences
often lead to richest blessings.

2. The expression of such doubt and
trouble in the presence of the wicked ts to
be avoided as evil. By the utterance of
the sceptical and hard thoughts of God
which filled his mind, the Psalmist
would probably have confirmed the
wicked in their unbelief, and encouraged
them in their rebellion against God.
Asaph felt that if he spake of his men-
tal difficulties, and announced the dark
conclusions which suggested themselves
to him, he should thereby injure the
true children of God. “If I say I will
speak thus ; behold, I should offend the
generation of Thy children.” We are
not at liberty to express our doubts, if,
by so doing, we should give the wicked
an occasion to blaspheme the Holy One,
or if we should unsettle the faith of any
sincere believer in God.

3. The good man guards against thts
evil by maintaining silence. “I will
take heed to my ways, that I sin not
with my tongue,” &c. A soul resolutely
maintaining silence, lest by speech an-
other should be injured, is surely a
brave and beautiful sight. ‘What a
strange power,” says Emerson, “ there
is in stlence/ How many resolutions
are formed, how many sublime con-
quests effected, during that pause when
the lips are closed, and the soul secretly
feels the eye of her Maker upon her!
When some of those cutting, sharp,
blighting words have been spoken which
send the hot indignant blood to the face
and head, if those to whom they are ad-
dressed keep silence, ijook on with awe,
for a mighty work is going on within
them, and the spirit of evil, or their


guardian angel, is very near to them im
that hour. During that pause they have
made a step toward heaven or toward
hell, and an item has been scored in the
book which the day of judgment shall
see opened. They are the strong ones
of the earth, the mighty food for good
or evil, those who know how to keep
silence when it is a pain and a grief to
them ; those who give time to their own
souls to wax strong against temptation,
or to the powers of wrath to stamp upon
them their withering passage.” The
good man is ready to speak, when by his
speech he can help the faith of others.
He says, “ Come and hear, all ye that
fear God, and I will declare what He
hath done for my soul.” He is “ ready
always to give an answer to every man
that asketh him a reason of the hope
that is in him with meekness and fear.”
But if by his speech he should incur the
risk of imperilling the faith or peace of
a believing soul, or of hardening the
wicked in his wickedness, then he reso-
lutely keeps silent. The silence of the
Psalmist required effort. He put a
muzzle upon his mouth. It is a pity
that some of the weaklings, who so glibly
prate about their doubts, and parade
their so-called religious difficulties, would
not try to imitate the Psalmist in this
respect. But the Psalmist was a strong
man, while the majority of those who
exhibit their mental and religious diffi-
culties as a sign of a superior order of
mind, are the very reverse, The soul
that has agonised with real doubts on
the most vital and momentous questions
will be silent concerning such doubts, or
speak of them in such a manner and to
such auditors only as will at least de-
rive no harm from his speech.

II. Silence increasing trouble. We
adopt Hengstenberg’s rendering of the
second verse, “I grew dumb and was
still; I was silent, not for good, and my
pain was stirred.” He explains it thus,
“The Psalmist says he had indeed exe-
cuted his purpose, declared in the pre-
ceding verse, but that ill had thereby
accrued, The obstinate and constrained
silence, so far from producing good, had
rather made his pain rise to a frightful
magnitude,” All great eas require


FeAlLe XaXI





expression. They must have utterance,
or the over-taxed brain will reel into
madness, and the over-charged heart
will burst. Sometimes great emotions
find utterance in poetry, We have
many instances of this in these Psalms.
Prose is all too hard and cold for the
expression of intense emotions, The
grief-stricken spirit pours out its sorrows
in plaintive minor strains, and the jubi-
lant soul hymns its gladness in some
triumphant “ Gloria in excelsis,” or Jubt-
late. Yet words the most intensely
poetical in significance and arrangement
not unfrequently fail to express the
soul’s emotion. Very often great emo-
tions find utterance in tears. When
words fail to express our deep grief or
thrilling joy, tears often come to our
relief. ‘‘They are the safety-valves of
the heart, when too much pressure is
laid on.” ‘They speak more eloquently
than ten thousand tongues. They are
the messengers of overwhelming grief,
of deep contrition, and of unspeakable
love.”


** Sweet tears! the awful language eloquent
Of infinite affection, far too big
For words.” —POoLioxk.


Thus tears relieve the soul when sur-
charged with sorrow or o’erburdened by
some great joy. But great emotions
may always find relief in prayer. No
sorrow is too great or too sacred for us
to utter it to the ear of God. We may
speak our highest, holiest, joy to Him,
And the dark and agonising doubt,
which we dare not utter to any of our
fellow-men, we may tell to Him. He
understands our tears, interprets our


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





sighs, and knows the mysteries of our
awful souls; and His ear is ever open
tous. At His throne of grace we may
ever find relief in trouble, and grace to
help in time of need. For a time, the
Psalmist seems to have reserved his
trouble not only from man but from
God also. The emotions which dis-
tressed him found no utterance what-
ever, and so they became more intense
and painful. Had he taken his grief to
God, it would have been far otherwise
with him,

IIL Silence growing insupportable
in trouble. ‘ My heart was hot within
me, while I was musing,” &. The
Psalmist mused upon his own afflictions
and the prosperity of the wicked, and
the seeming contradictions in God’s
government of the world. By medita-
tion, he realised these things more fully
and intensely, until at length further
silence was an impossibility. The time
had come when he must speak. Upon
one occasion, Jeremiah said, ‘I will not
make mention of Him, nor speak any
more in His name. But it was in mine
heart as a burning fire, shut up in my
bones, and I was weary with forbearing,
and could not do it.” Such was the
state of the Psalmist at this time.

ConcLusion :—l. Let us be careful in
speaking our doubts and dark thoughta
to men. We are bound to see to it that
we neither shake the faith of the be-
liever, nor afford the wicked any cause
to blaspheme the Holy One. 2. Let us
communicate all our mental conflicts ana
troubles to God. By so doing we shall
be relieved ; and He will help us by His
grace and Spirit,


A Commenpasie ReEsoLtvrTiom.
(Verse 1.)


“T said I will take heed to my ways,
that I sin not with my tongue.”

We have here—

I. Agreat danger. We are in great
danger of sinning with our tongue,
There are several kinds of sinful speech
of which we are in danger.

1. Sceptical or irreligious speech. The
expression even of honest doubt should

184


be suppressed if it is likely to offend
any believer, or to harden the ungodly
in wickedness.

2. Careless speech. To talk in a
trifling spirit of sacred things, or te
speak lightly of matters which concern
the reputation and honour of another, is
to sin.


8. Untruthful speech. There is much


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


POALM XXEIE,





false speech without a directly uttered
lie. By keeping back part of the truth,
by colouring a narrative, &c., much evil
is done, “A lie has no legs, and cannot
stand ; but it has wings, and can fly far
and wide.”

4. Angry, passionate speech. When
we have lost our self-control, we are not
in a fit state to speak at all. In mo-
ments of passion men utter unjust and
bitter words, which rankle in the hearts
of those to whom they are addressed for
years, perhaps for ever. Remember,
““words once spoken can never be re-
called.”

5. Malicious speech. Let us see to it
that we never open our lips with the
deliberate intention of injuring any one.
Tale-bearers and slanderers are amongst
the most guilty of men, and the greatest
pests of society.


«* Slander ;
Whose edge is sharper than the sword; whose
tongue
Qutvenoms ail the worms of Nile; whose
breath
Rides on the posting winds, and doth belie
All corners of the world: kings, queens, and
states,
Maids, matrons,—nay, the secrets of the grave,
This viperous slander enters.” SHAKESPEARE,


The danger of uttering sinful speeches


arises from (1.) The facility of speech.
No organ of the body moves with greater
ease than the tongue. (2.) Zhe fact that
under provocation it 18 an outlet for pent-
up feeling. (3.) The many temptations to
speech, Loquacity is a weakness of the
age. With so much talking there must
be much that is positively evil, and yet
more that is worthless. “In the multi-
tude of words there wanteth not sin.”

IL A wise precaution. “I will
take heed to my ways,” &. The
Psalmist resolves to guard against this
evil. We need to exercise care as to—

1. What we speak. Let us speak only
the pure, the true, the kindly, the faith-
inspiring, &c. “Let your speech he
always with grace, seasoned with salt.”

2. When we speak. “A word spoken
in due season, how good is it |”

3. How we speak. Let us use those
words which most correctly and clearly
express our meaning. In our tones and
manner of speech let us avoid the objec-
tionable and evil.

Conoxusion :—Let us not only avoid
the evil, but let us also cultivate the
excellent in speech.

“« Apt words have power to ’suage
The tumults of a troubled mind,
And are as balm to festered wounds.”


— MILTON.


SPEEcH mn TROUBLE.
(Verses 4-6.)


The Psalmist in his speech reveals
his—

I. Desire to know the duration of
his life. ‘Lord, make me to know
mine end, and the measure of my days,
what it is ; that I may know how frail
I am.” Professor Alexander and De
Wette translate the last clause: “ When
J shall cease.” And Hengstenberg: “I
wish to know when I may cease.” The
Psalmist believed that—

1. His days were determined by God.
‘Man’s “days are determined, the num-
ber of his months are with Thee; Thou
hast appointed his bounds that he cannot
pass.” ‘Is there not an apppointed time
to man upon earth?” “All the days of
my appointed time will I wait, till my


change come.” §o the Psalmist believed
that the measure of his life was fixed, and
the number of his days determined by
the Lord.

2. He seeks to know when they will
come to an end. “Make me to know
mine end,” &c. At this time, the life of
David was one of trouble; apparently it
was full of sorrow, and he was anxious
to know when his suffering life would
terminate. But, whatever may be the
prevailing tone of our life, it is not a
wise thing to seek to know the times
and seasons of our future days.

3. He desires the termination of his
days. David seems to have longed in
this verse for his life to be brought to a
close. In his present troubled state it

186


FOALM XEXIK.


seems to him that the end of his suffer-
ings will come only with the end of his
life, and he is impatient for that end,
Job, in his sufferings, gives expression
repeatedly to the same feeling: “Oh,
that I might have my request ; and that
God would grant me the thing that I long
for! Even that it would please God to
destroy me,” &e. (Job vi. 8-11). The
Psalmist evidently knew that this im-
patience and this want of submission to
the Divine arrangements were evil.
Hence, for a time, and before men, he
had curbed their expression ; but now
he pours them out before God. Blessed
is he who, whether in suffering or in
rest, calmly leaves his life to God,
‘* My times are in Thy hand.”

II. Impression of the brevity of his
life. “Behold, Thou hast made my days
as an handbreadth ; and mine age is as
nothing before Thee.” The Psalmist
gives a double expression to his sense of
the brevity of his life. His days were
“as an handbreadth.” “The word is
used to denote anything very short or
brief. It is one of smallest natural
measures, as distinguished from the foot,
t.¢., the length of the foot ; and from the
cubit, ze. the length of the arm to the
elbow.” And, as compared with God’s,
his life shrunk, as it were, into nothing-
ness. ‘“‘ My life is as non-existence before
Thee.” How brief is life even at its
longest! “ Our days are few and short
indeed, compared with the eternity to
which they are conducting us—com-
pared with the work we have to do, for
ourselves, for our families, for our gene-
ration, for God — compared with the
talents committed to our trust, and the
improvement of those talents required at
our hands—compared with the innumer-
able obligations that press upon us, from
our station in life, our relations in life,
our opportunities of usefulness, and the
means which we have both of getting
and of doing good.” But, compared
with the eternal existence of God, our
life vanishes, As Matthew Henry says:
“All time is nothing to God’s eternity,
much less our share of time.” Know-
ing that life is so brief, yet so import-
ant, let us prize it, improve its oppor-
tunities, —niake the moat of it,

186


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMS.


II. Impression of the vanity of life

1. The vanity of human anwietics,
“Surely they are disquieted in vain.”
The restless strivings and exertions of
men seemed to the Psalmist to result in
no worthy issue. ‘Our disquietudes,”
says Matthew Henry, “are often ground-
less (we vex ourselves without any just
cause, and the occasions of our trouble
are often the creatures of our own
fancy and imagination), and they are
always fruitless; we disquiet ourselves
in vain, for we cannot, with all our dis-
quietment, alter the nature of things or
the counsel of God; things will be as
they are when we have disquieted our-
selves ever so much about them.”

2. The vanity of human acquisitions.
“He heapeth up riches and knoweth not
who shall gather them.” The word
riches is supplied by the translators.
Hengstenberg : “ He gathers and knows
not who will enjoy it.” The idea is
that it is vain to amass treasures know-
ing not what will become of them when
our brief tenure of life is at an end.
Many are the illustrations of this truth
which might be adduced. Here is one:
“M. Foscue, the French millionaire
miser, in order to make sure of his trea-
sures, dug a cave in his wine-cellar, so
large and deep that he could go down
with a ladder. At the entrance was a door
with a spring lock, which, on shutting,
would fasten of itself. After a time, he
was missing. Search was made for him,
but to no purpose. At last, his house
was sold. The purchaser, beginning to
rebuild it, discovered a door in this cellar,
and, going down, found him lying dead
on the ground, with a candlestick near
him; and, on searching farther, dis-
covered the vast wealth which he had
amassed. He went into the cave; and
the door, by some accident, shutting
after him, he perished for want of food.
He had eaten the candle, and gnawed
the flesh off both his arms. Thus died
this avaricious wretch in the midst of
the treasures he had heaped together.”
—Dictionary of Titus.

3. The vanity of man himself. “Every
man at his best estate is altogether
vanity.” This rendering is not correct.
Hengatenberg translates: “Only fos


yr HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





utter vanity was every man ordained.”
P.-B.—“ Verily, every man living is
altogether vanity.” Two ideas are ex-
pressed, (1.) that every man is vanity ;
(2.) that this is so because of the
Divine ordination, God has consti-
tuted every man vanity. The Psalmist
employs another figure to set forth the
vanity of man: “Surely every man
walketh in a vain show.” Hengsten-
berg: ‘“‘Only as an image walks man.”
To the poet man seemed an image rather
than a reality,—a mere walking phan-
tom, a thing having no power, no life in
itself, but only a mere shadow of life
and strength. Such was the gloomy
and one-sided view of life which filled
the Psalmist’s mind im this time of
trouble.

IV. Impatience of life. This is not
so much uttered in any word, or number
of words, as it breathes in the spirit of
all the words of our text. The Psalmist
was impatient of life by reason of its
shortness, its vanity, and its sufferings.
The same feeling finds outspoken and
strong utterance in the Book of Job:
‘* My soul chooseth strangling and death
rather than my life. I loathe it; I
would not live alway: let me alone, for
my days are vanity.” Such impatience
of life, if found in us in this Christian
age, would be both unwise and sinful.
It would be unwise, because of its ten-
dency to unfit us for bearing life’s burden
and performing life’s work. It would
be unwise, also, because it takes into
consideration only a small fragment of
our life. This is but “the bud of
being, the dim dawn, the twilight of our
day.” The hereafter must be taken into
account. It would be sinful, because of
the want of faith in God which it in-
volves, &c. But David, and the men of
his age, must be judged by the light
which they had, and not by that
which we have, much of which they
had not.

V. Want of clear and assured
knowledge of any life beyond the
present. Had he possessed such know-
ledge, he could not have spoken #0
strongly as to the utter vanity of man,
not only of his anxieties, and pursuits,
and acquisitions, but of man himself.





PSALM EXXIX,





In the view of the Psalmist, at the time
when he penned this psalm,


“ When death
Has quenched this finer flame that moves the


eart,
Beyond is all oblivion, as waste night
That knows no following dawn, where we

shall be
As we had never been : the present, then,
Is only ours,” — MALLE?,
“It is not to be overlooked,” says Heng-
stenberg, “that the psalm possesses
in part an Old Testament character.
While still there was no clear insight
into a future state of being, a long-
continued state of suffering must have
sunk very deep into the heart. ‘When
a man dies, will he live again?’ saya
Job ; ‘all the days of my war-service
will I wait, till my discharge come.’
With every day of his short and miser-
able existence was the space narrowing
for the display of the retributive justice
and grace of God ; and when the powers
of body and of soul began to fail, then
the disconsolate thought would press
upon him, that he would never come
to partake of the blessing which God
had promised to His people—it would
scarcely be possible to avoid sinking
into perplexity and despair. But this
special Old Testament character of the
psalm, far from depriving the psalm of
its edifying signification for us, rather
serves the purpose of enhancing it. The
declaration : ‘ My hope stands in Thee,’
which the Psalmist uttered in circum-
stances when it was against all reason to
hope, may well put us to shame, who
are easily brought into despair by light
and temporal afflictions, while we have
the prospect of an exceeding weight of
glory; and the more that he hoped,
while there was the less to hope for, so
much the more readily should our hope
be kindled by the light of his.” Con-
sidering how dim their revelation was,
as compared with ours, their faith in
God is a rebuke to us, because our faith
is not greater. If immortality had been
clearly revealed to the Psalmist, the tone
of this psalm would have been very
different.

Conctusion: 1. Learn the great
value of “The Book of Psalms.” In
these anciest poems we ea Te

i


FRaLa IXXIK.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





cords of the life of godly souls. We see
the sins and sorrows, the doubts and
fears, the conflicts, temporary defeats,
and glorious triumphs of these saints of
old; and we are warned, encouraged,
&c. Thank God for such a record of
the experience of godly men.

2. Learn the great value of Chris-
tiamty. How different does life appear
since Jesus Christ has lived, died, and
risen! He “hath abolished death, and


brought life and immortality to light
through the gospel.”

3. By the help of God let us endeavour
to live well and earnestly, “Think of
living!” says Thomas Carlyle. ‘ Thy
life, wert thou the ‘pitifulest of all the
sons of earth,’ is no idle dream, but a
solemn reality. It is thy own; 4¢ ts all
thou hast to front eternity with. Work,
then, even as He has done, and doeg, ‘ like
a star, unhasting, yet unresisting,’”


Man, a Watkine SHADOW.
(Verse 6.)


“ Surely, every man walketh in a vain
show.”

These words suggest two main ideas ;

I. Life is a journey. “ Every man
walketh.” This figure implies—

1. Motion. Life is never stationary.
Its wheels know no pause. We remain
not a day in the same position. The
traveller moves onward to fresh scenes,
&c. So in life, the events and circum-
stances of yesterday are behind us
to-day, and those of to-day will be
in the past to-morrow. Life's motion
is tncessant, The traveller, in his
journey, may pause to rest or to admire
the scenery through which he is passing,
but it is not so in the journey of life.
In this there is no pausing, not even for
a minute. Asleep or awake, active or
indolent, living wisely or living as a
fool, every man moves forward without
any pause, as though urged by a resist-
less hand. Life’s motion is incessantly
onward, The traveller, in his journey,
may retrace his steps; but, in the
journey of life, we cannot turn back a
single step. very day, we are “ going
the way whence we shall never return.”
A solemn consideration this. The wise
man will note it.

2. Destiny, and approach to it. The
traveller journeys with an end in view.
And life’s journey has an end. As
regards the body, we are travelling to
the grave; as regards the soul, to the
solemn retributions of eternity,—either
to heaven or to hell. And how rapidly
we advance to the solemn beurne of our
eas ! The eagle hastening to its

&


prey, the arrow speeding to its mark, the
clouds driving before the strong wind,
move not so swiftly as man’s life. How
solemn, then, is life! how important its
every moment and every action !

II. Life is a journey prosecuted


falsely. ‘ Every man walketh in a vain
show.”  Hengstenberg: “Only as an
image man walks.” What does this
mean? It does not mean that life is not


real. Life is not a vain show, not phan-
tasmal, but a most solemn reality. Nor
does it mean that man himself is unreal,
a vain show, an image. Man himself is
@ greater reality than the solid earth or
lustrous heavens. What, then, does it
mean? It means that man is not true
to himself ; that he is false to the reality
of his own being, false to the reality of
life also, Man shuns himself, and lives
amid unreality, amid vain shows. Prac-
tically, he ignores his own true being
and lives in the realm of fiction. This
implies that man is not in his normal
condition. He was not made for shams,
but for truth. But he half-consciously
realises the fact that he has lost the
blessedness of his being, and by his false
modes of seeking to regain it he shows
the derangement of his being and powers.
He seeks tt tn vain shows, tn excitement,
pleasure, wealth, fame, knowledge.
“What shadows we are, and what
shadows do we pursue,” said the great
Edmund Burke. Man sometimes pur-
sues these vain shows until he himself
becomes 8 mere image,—a living, acting,
gaudy simulacrum. Can we discover
the reason of this? Partly, at least, we


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,
ee ee


ad





may thus account for it. Man feels the
greatness of his own being, and cannot
interpret it; and he becomes perplexed,
burdened, He has impulses which urge
him to activity. He has also an in-
stinctive consciousness that his well-
being is to be found only in repose ;
and, prompted by these, he forms con-
fused designs for obtaining satisfaction,
by overcoming difficulties and thus gain-
ing repose. But he does not reach the
desired goal, because his course is false,
and false are his aims. He is ever
seeking, never finding. And deep at
the root of all this falsity, and disap
pointment, and unrest, is the sad fact
that his own being is not in harmony.
The cause of the disquiet, and falsity,
and vanity, is within him. Upon al!


SuPPLICATION


PSALM XXITX,


the unrest, and gaudy show, and baffled
hopes of men we may write, “Every
man walketh in a vain show.” And
upon the men themselves we may write,
“Only as an image man walks.” Only
in God can man be true and blessed;
and only through Christ can man rise
into union with God, Restored to God,
man is restored to himself, and is able
to live true to himself, to live not as
“an image,” but as a reality. He then
finds that true rest is found in the
harmonious activity of the powers of his
being in accordance with the will of
God. Living for God, and in God, “ life
is real, life is earnest.”

What is the character of your life
journey ?


m TRovBLa


(Verses 7-13.)


In this instance, we use the wora
supplication not in the signification of
petition or entreaty merely, but in its
broad signification as including request,
acknowledgment of dependence, thanks-
giving, prayer. So using it, the teach-
ing of this section may fitly be grouped
under the heading, “ Supplication tm
Trouble.”

Consider :

I. The confidence avowed. “And
now, Lord, what wait I for? my hope is
in Thee.”

1. Man’s need of hope. Low as the
Psalmist was sunk in misery, he had not
lost hope. ‘The miserable hath no
other medicine,” says Shakespeare, “ but
only hope.” ‘He that loses hope may
part with anything.”—Congreve. But
he that retains hope may rise from great
depths of misery to calm heights of joy.
When that star is quenched in the fir-
mament of the soul, the darkness is
untelieved and total, Judas lost hope,
and was undone, “,We are saved by
hope.”

2. Man’s only sufficient hope. “My
hope is in Thee.” The Psalmist has
eglready bewailed the vanity of man, and
of his pursuits. Man is an image par-
suing shadows. ‘There is no trust to be


reposed in him: to hope in him is to
invite disappointment. So the Psalmist
turns from human pursuits and posses-
sions, and from man himself, and fixes
his hopein God. Although he regarded
his troubles as coming from the hand of
God, and cried bitterly and complain-
ingly to Him, yet it was to Him that he
looked,—in Him that he trusted. God
may appear severe, and His ways my-
sterious and painful, yet there is no one
beside Him to whom we can look for
help, and in whom we can place our
trust in the great trials of life. And He
is all-sufficient in all things,

II. The submission expressed. “TI
was dumb, I opened not my meuth,
because Thou didst it.”

1. The submission. “I am dumb, I
open not my mouth.” The silence which
is spoken of here is very different from
that spoken of in verse 2. Then he was
silent lest by his murmurings against the
government of God he should cause the
wicked to blaspheme ; now he is silent
because he acquiesces in the arrange-
ments of that government. That was
the silence of rebellion, or at least of
bitter dissatisfaction and complaint;
this is the silence of trustful submission
to the will and ways ef Gon He sub

9


PaaLM XXX


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMB.


RR


mits himself to God, feeling no desire
now to complain of His providence,

9. The reason. ‘ Because Thou didst
it.’ The Psalmist looked upon his
afflictions and sorrows as produced by
God, and in that he found reasons for
patient acquiescence. How much more
should we! Knowing how wise and
loving, how tender and strong He is, let
as immediately check any rising com-
plaint with the consideration, “ It must
be well, for Thou hast done it.”

“It is Thy hand, my God ;
My sorrow comes from Thee :
I bow beneath Thy chastening rod,
*Tis love that bruises me,”—DagRBy.

IIL The petitions presented.

1. For the forgiveness of sin. ‘“ De-
liver me from all my transgressions ;
make me not the reproach of the fool-
ish.” These two clauses have a close
relation. That relation, as we under-
stand it, may be expressed thus :—The
afflictions of the Psalmist were regarded
by men as a proof that he was wicked :
on this account his enemies reproached
him ; if his sins were forgiven, his afflic-
tions would cease, so he thought; and
in this way the reproaches of the wicked
would be brought to an end. David
seems to have viewed his sins as the
cause of his sufferings and troubles. He
seeks forgiveness of sin before he asks
for removal of suffering. This is well
and wise. Would that all efforts for the
amelioration of human condition pro-
ceeded in this order! When moral evil
is no more, “natural evil” (so called)
will soon cease to be. When sin is not,
suffering will not long continue. When
the fountain is dry, the stream will
speedily cease to run.

2. For the removal of affliction. ‘‘ Re-
move Thy stroke away from me; I am
consumed by the blow of Thine hand,”
&c. (vers. 10, 11). He regarded (1.)
His afflictions as Divine correction, “Thy
stroke, . .. the blow of Thine hand....
When Thou with rebukes dost correct,”
&c. The sufferings of the people of
God are frequently God’s chastisement
by reason of their sins. When He cor-
rects us, it is because of our iniquity,
and in love to us. ‘‘ My son despise not
shou the chastening of the Lord, nor

190


faint when thou art rebuked of Him ; fea
whom the Lord loveth He chasteneth,”
&c. (Heb. xii 5-11). (2.) His afflio
tion was severe. “I am consumed by
the blow of Thine hand. ... Thou
makest his beauty to consume away like
a moth.” Margin: “That which is to
be desired in him to melt away.” Heng-
stenberg: “ Thou dost consume, as by a
moth, what he loves.” As the moth
consumes the most beautiful woollen
garment or the finest sable, so the
Psalmist says he was being consumed
away by the afflictions which had come
upon him,—his strength and vigour, his
cheerfulness, and courage, and beauty,
were passing away before the expressions
of the displeasure of God. Yet, severe
as these corrections were, God could
remove them. Low as he was reduced
by suffering, God could raise him up
again. For this he prays. He turns
for healing to the hand that wounded
him ; for lifting up to Him who had
brought him low.

3. For invigoration before death.
“O spare me, that I may recover
strength before I go hence, and be no
more.” Hengstenberg: ‘‘Leave off
from me, that I may be revived, before
I go away and be no more.” The first
member, literally : Look away from me,
that 1 may brighten up; g.d. turn away
from me Thy angry look, so that my
sorrowful one may be made cheerful.
“The idea,” says Barnes, “is that of
being cheered up ; of being strengthened
and invigorated before he should pass
away.” He desired to be invigorated
and comforted before he passed away
from this world for ever.

IV. The pleas urged. ‘Hear my
prayer, O Lord, and give ear unto my
cry ; hold not Thy peace at my tears,”
&., (ver. 12). The Psalmist pleads—

1. His sorrow. ‘Hold not Thy peace
at my tears.” “ Weeping, if unmurmur-
ing,” says Barnes, “is of the nature of
prayer, for God regards the sorrows of
the soul as He sees them. The weeping
penitent, the weeping sufferer, is one on
whom we may suppose God looks with
compassion, even though the sorrows of
the soul do not find words to give utter.
ance to them.” And, says John Arnd.


i HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: PSALMS,


WRAL Ei





“This is the effect of tears, when one
sees or hears any one weeping sadly, one
cannot well remain silent, as the Lord
Jesus said to the woman at Nain, ‘Weep
not ;’ and to Mary Magdalene, ‘ Woman,
why weepest Thou?’ This nature
teaches us. Now, if a man can scarcely
be silent to a person’s tears, how much
less the Lord God! Therefore, it is
said in Psalm lvi. that God numbers the
tears of believers, and in Isaiah xxv. that
He will wipe away all tears from our
eyes.” In thus pleading his sorrow, the
Psalmist appeals to the compassion of
God. ‘The Lord is very pitiful and of
tender mercy.”

2. His dependence. “For I am a
stranger with Thee,—a sojourner, as all
my fathers.” “A stranger and pilgrim
has nothing of his own, he is quite de-


pendent upon the goodness of those
with whom he lives, is everywhere on
the footing of a beggar.” By thus
pleading his dependence, the Psalmist
appeals to the faithfulness of God. Such
appeals are ever met by a full and gra-
cious response,

Conctusion :—There is still much
vanity, and gloom, and sorrow, in life.
There are times when our “ burden
seems greater than our strength can
bear,” and we are ready to cry out in
impatient complaint to God. But let
us take our burdens to Him. He will
interpret their meaning, and give us
strength to bear them. He is the un-
failing support in life’s troubles of all
who trust in Him. “Lord, my hope is
in Thee.”


Gop ArFiioTine, anp Man Svusmirrina,
(Verse 9.)


“I was dumb, I opened not my
mouth, because Thou didst it.”

I. God afflicting man. “ Thou didst
it.” This will apply—

1. To many temporal losses, e.g., those
occasioned by floods, storms, earth-
quakes, &ec.

2. To many bodily afflictions.

3. To the bereavements of death. “I
saw this verse engraved with great ap-
propriateness on a beautiful marble
monument that had been erected over a
grave where lay three children that had
been suddenly cut down by the scarlet
fever. What could be more suitable
in such a trial than such a text}
What could more strikingly express
the true feelings of Christian piety
—the calm submission of redeemed


souls—than the disposition of parents,
thus bereaved, to record such a senti-
ment over the grave of their children ?”
—Barnes.

IL Man submitting toGod “Iam
dumb, I open not my mouth, because
Thou didst it.” Submission to God
may be enforced by the following con-
siderations :

1. The folly of rebelling agatnst Him.

2. The perfection of His character.
He is perfect in wisdom, goodness, faith-
fulness. In accordance with these glori-
ous attributes, He governs the world.

3. The uses of suffering. Great are
the benefits of sanctified affliction.
“Thou didst it,” we say now in sub-
mission. ‘‘He hath done all things
well,” we shall soon exclaim in rapture.


PSALM XL


INTRODUCTION.
Superscription : “ To the Chief Musician, a Psalm of David.”


The


lm is addressed to ‘‘the Chief Musician,” that he might set it to music for use in


mblic worship. We have no means of determining on what occasion the psalm was written.
t does not come within our province to enter into the disputed question of the Messianic
character of the psalm. The different opinions which are held on this question are stated by
Barnes in loco, and by Professor Stuart in his ‘‘ Commentary on Hebrews” ee oT xx),


HIOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALM,





Both these writers advocate their own view at eonsiderable length. See also Hengstenberg’s
Introduction to this psalm. One thing, perhaps, we ought to say, viz., that on the th
adopted by Barnes, ‘‘ that the psalm had an original and exclusive reference to the Messiah,” it
seems to us impossible legitimately and satisfactorily to interpret it.

Homiletically, we shall view the psalm thus:—The Lord’s doings for His servant (vera
1-5); The servant's offering to his Lord (vers, 6-10); and, The servant’s prayer to his Lord


(vera. 11-17).


Tae Lorp’s Domes ror His Servant,
(Verses 1-5.)


In these verses, we have—

I A sad situation. The Psalmist
represents himself as having been in
“an horrible pit,” and in “ miry clay.”
The situation was one of

1. Darkness. “iD =a pit, a prison, a
dungeon, a grave, a deep well. It im-
plies darkness, The sun may be flood-
ing the world with his beams, but in the
pit all is midnight darkness. The figure
may be used to set forth a state of sin
or a state of deep sorrow. Both these
states are frequently represented in
Scripture by “darkness.” ‘The people
that walked in darkness have seen @
great light,” &c. ‘When I sit in
darkness, the Lord shall be a light unto
me.” To open their eyes, to turn them
from darkness to light,” &e ‘The
night is far spent, the day is at hand ;
let us, therefore, cast off the works of
darkness, and let us put om the armour
of light.” Ht al.

2. Distress. “ An horrible pit.” ‘The
word rendered horrible, BRU, means
properly notse, uproar, tumult, as of
waters: of a crowd of men; of war.
De Wette understands it here of a pit, a
cavern, or an abyss that roars and is
tumultuous ; taat is, that is impassable.
Perhaps this is the idea,—a cavern, deep
and dark, where the waters roar, and
which seems to be filled with horrors.”
— Barnes. Hengstenberg takes it to
mean, “a deep of raging waters,” “a
roaring deep.” In any case, the figure in-
dicates distress. The poet was not only
in darkness, but in misery also. Sin is
wretchedness, Sin is hell,

3. Helplessness. The Psalmist was iz
the “miry clay,” the “slimy mud,”
where there was no firm footing. He
was totally unable to do anything to
effect his own deliverance, for he was
“sinking in deep mire, and couid not

193


stand.” The unrenewed sinner is help-
less in effecting his own deliverance
from sin and its consequences. If
some strong arm do not come to his
rescue, he must continue to sink in the
miry clay until he is hopelessly lost.
Such is the sad situation of the sinner ;
his state is one of darkness, distress,
helplessness.

Ii. A great salvation. “I waited
patiently for the Lord, and He inclined
unto me, and heard my cry,” &. Of
this salvation the poet points out that
—l. Jt was granted in answer to prayer.
The Psalmist prayed. “He heard my
ery.” In his darkness, wretchedness,
and helplessness, David betook himself to
prayer ; and though the pit was deep—
“a roaring deep”—yet the Lord heard
his cry. From the deepest depth the
faintest whisper of true prayer will reach
to the throne of God, and receive audi-
ence of Him. The Psalmist waited. “I
waited patiently for the Lord.” Margin:
“In waiting I waited.” He continued
to wait for the interposition of God.
Many prayers are not answered because
the suppliant does not wait for the
answer—does not expect an answer.
David persevered in prayer; he waited
expecting the succour and salvation of
God. That salvation did not come
quickly ; but he patiently waited, be-
lieving, hoping, praying, expecting its
coming.

2. It was complete.
me up also out of,” &c. We have here
—(1) Deliverance. The Psalmist was
rescued from his wretched and perilous
state. God delivers both from sin and
misery all who sincerely seek Him.
(2) Elevation. “Set my feet upon a
rock,” far above the waters of the roar-
ing deep. God raises souls from dark-
ness into light, from deep despair into


“He brought


Pes


id _ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


pmalted hope, &e. (3) Hetablishment.
** Set my feet upon a rock,” where I may
find firm footing. “ Xstablished my
goings.” Made my steps firm. Our
Lord Jesus Christ is the rock on which
the sinner may securely stand. On Him
we may build our character, our hopes,
dsc. (4) Imvigoration. ‘“ Established
my goings.” The Divine life is not sta-
tionary, but progressive. God delivers
man from sin, and starts him on the
road to holiness and heaven, and invigo-
sates him to tread that road. ‘“ They
. go from strength to strength.” “We
follow on to know the Lord.” God bids
us “Go forward,” and gives us strength
to do so,

3. It was foy-iaspiring. “He hath
put a new song in my mouth, even
praise unto our God.” The Lord had
given a new occasion for praise, and by
filling the Psalmist’s heart with grateful
gladness, had given him the disposition
to offer fresh praises unto Him. Salva-
tion is a joyous, a blessed thing. It
tunes a man’s life to music, It fills
his heart with music, and the world
with beauty and song.

4. It was influential, “Many shall
see it and fear, and shall trust in the
Lord.” (1) God’s doings on behalf of
His people are manifest, ‘ Many shall
see.” When a man is converted the
change is visible in his life. (2) God’s
doings on behalf of His people command
reverence. ‘And fear.” The fear is
reverential. Not dread, but veneration.
(3) God’s doings on behalf of His people
encourage others to trust in Him. “And
shall trust in the Lord.” As men mark
‘the doings of God on behalf of His
people, they have such exhibitions of
His faithfulness and goodness and power
as lead them in faith to seek His salva-
tion. They see the workings of His
grace in their lives, and are led to seek
that grace for themselves. ‘“ They glori-
fied God in me.” Do our lives testify
to the power of Divine grace so that
men through us are led to trust in
Him

Ill. A hearty celebration.
Psalmist celebrates—

1. The blessedness of the man who
trusts in the Lord. (1) He rejects every

w


The


other object of confidence. “ He respecteth
not the proud, nor such as turn aside te
lies,” Literally : “he looks not to the
proud,” he does not expect help or blesa-
ing from them. Man, however strong
and proud, is not an adequate object
of confidence for any creature. He
is liable to err, and may be deceived,
and may be deceitful himself, and is
therefore not sufficient as an object of
trust. Neither as regards faithfulness
and truth, nor as regards ability and
strength, Is man an adequate object of
trust. (2) He places his sole confidence in
God, “Maketh the Lord his trust.” The —
Lord is ever mighty to save, and is faith-
ful amid all changes. We may safely
trust in Him, Trust in Him 4s blessed.
He who trusts in Him shall never be
put to shame, shall realise the most
blessed security, shall find his highest
expectations more than fulfilled, &c.

2. The wonderful doings of God for
man (ver. 5). Matthew Henry’s notes
on this verse are excellent. ‘ Many, O
Lord my God / are Thy wonderful works
which Thow hast done both for me and
others ; this is but one of many. Many
are the benefits with which we are daily
loaded, both by the providence and by
the grace of God. (1) They are Hes
works, not only the gifts of His bounty,
but the operations of His power. He
works for us, He works in us, and thus
He favours us with matter, not only for
thanks, but for praise. (2) They are
His wonderful works, the contrivance of
them admirable, His condescension to
us in bestowing them upon us admir
able; eternity itself will be short enough
to be spent in the admiration of them.
(3) All His wonderful works are the
product of His thoughts to us-ward. He
does all according to the counsel of His
own will (Eph. i. 11), the purposes of
His grace which He purposed in Him-
self (Eph. iii. 11), They are the pro
jects of infinite wisdom, the designs of
everlasting love (1 Cor. ii 7; Jer.
xxxi. 3), thoughts of good, and not of
evil (Jer. xxix. 11), His gifts and call-
ings will therefore be without repentance,
because they are not sudden resolves,
but the result of His thoughts, His


many thoughts, to > oy They


PoaLM Mi


are innumerable; they cannot be me-
thodised, or ‘reckoned up in order.’
There is an order in all God’s works,
but there are so many that present them-
selves to our view at once that we know
not where to begin nor which to name
next; the order of them and their natural
references and dependencies, and how the
links of the golden chain are joined, are
a mystery to us, and what we shall not
be able to account for till the veil be
rent and the mystery of God finished.
Nor can they be counted, not the very
heads of them, When we have said the
_™most we can of the wonders of Divine
love to us, we must conclude with an e¢


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





cetera—and such like, and adore the
depth, despairing to find the bottom.”

Conciusion.—l. Jo those who hawe
expertenced this great salvation. Praise
God in a new song, celebrate His glo-
rious deeds, trust Him unfalteringly and
fully, and let your life show forth His
praise, that “many may see, and fear,
and trust in the Lord.” 2. 7'o those
who are in the sad state of unrenewed
sinners. Your condition is indeed de-
plorable and dangerous. Do you realise
it as such? The Lord waits to rescue
you from it. Cry unto Him, wait .
patiently for Him, and He wili incline
His ear and save you,


Hore IN THE SADDEST SITUATION,


( Verses 1-3.)


If some parts of this psalm are more
applicable to the Messiah, other parts,
undoubtedly, are more applicable to
David. Of himself the Psalmist seems
here more immediately to be speaking.
Observe—

I. The situation he was in. This
was sad indeed.

1, He was fallen low—in a “ pit.”
How sunk in guilt and corruption is
man by nature !

2. He was besmeared, having stuck
fast in mire or clay. Sin renders our
whole persons the very reverse of come-
liness and beauty in the sight of God.

3. He was an outcast—in a “pit,”
without communion with society. Thus,
too, are al] naturally far off from God,
separated from His favour and protec-
tion.

4. He was mtserable—in ‘an hor-
rible pit.” Oh! what horrors our in-
iguities bring upon us.”

5. He was in great danger. In a
“pit” he could devise no way of escape,
so that, to human appearance, his case
was hopeless. And no less dangerous
is our condition, Ah! what dismal
forebodings we have.

If. The devout exercise of his mind.
Distressing as theconditionof David was,
it will be instructive to us if we consider
how he acted. 1. He betook himself to
prayer. This was a certain mean of

194


succeeding. It is the mean which God
expects every weary and heavy-laden
sinner to use. Nor can the wisdom of
such an appointment be doubted, as
constituting a test of our humility and
of our obedience.

2. He hoped tn Hts mercy. The
Lord, not immediately vouchsafing him
an answer, he became more and more
urgent, trusting ultimately to find accept-
ance. He waited for the Lord patiently.
Thus, then, it is good to wait, without
murmuring, for answers of peace, on
carrying our troubles to a throne of
grace.

IIL The deliverance he obtained.
God inclined His ear to Him and heard
his cry, and his deliverance was—
1. Elevating. Though before in a pit,
in the miry clay of which he found him- ©
self sinking yet further, he is now brought
up out of it; and not only so, but his
feet are set upon a rock. And all who
stand upon the Rock Christ Jesus are
exalted far above this world, and are
brought already to the confines of
glory.

2. Establishing, ‘Established my
goings.” Oh! the stability we have by
trusting in Christ, We may then defy
13) the powers of darkness (Matt. xvi,
18).

3. Joyous. “He hath put a new
song in my mouth,” &e. This ia surely


‘4 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





applicable to the believer, who, in fact,
bas not only cause to rejoice, but a dis-
position likewise to do so,

4. Encouraging. “ Many shall see,
and fear, and shall trust in the Lord.”
Yes, all may expect the same mercy as


PUaLM Kb,


David in a diligent use of the same
means, For this glorious example is
intended by God to give us hope, how-
ever low our state may be, He being
always able and always near to delives


us (Jonah ii, 2-6, et al.)—W. Sleigh,


Tue Servant’s Orrerine To Hs LORD,
(Verses 6-10.)


In this section we pass from the great
and gracious doings of God on behalf of
the Psalmist to the Psalmist’s expression
of his gratitude to God. What offering
will he present to his Lord? In what
way will he express his gratitude to
Him}

L By obedience to God (vers. 6-8).

1, He will not sacrifice material sacrt-
fices instead of obedience. “Sacrifice
and offering Thou didst not desire ;
burnt-offering and sin-offering hast Thou
not required.” ‘The four words em-
pore’ in this verse—sacrifice, offering,

urnt-offering, sin-offering—embrace all
the species of sacrifice and offerings
known among the Hebrews.”—Barnes.
“In what respect it is said here, that
God did not wish sacrifices, since He
had expressly commanded them, appears
from the contrast. Obedience, tbe
willing performance of the Divine
command, is set over against presenta-
tion of offerings. Offerings, therefore,
are rejected in so far as they form a
compensation for that, in so far as
they would in a manner satisfy, put
off God.”——Hengstenberg. Our outward
rervices, Offerings of prayer, praise, and
material gifts, are of no value in the
sight of God, unless they are the expres-
sion of the homage of the heart, and
are accompanied by obedience of life.
Vea 1 Sam. xv. 22, and Ps. li
6, 17.) On the latter passage Dr.
Parker says: “‘We have been led to
believe that God does desire sacrifice ;
that sacrifice is the basis of all atone-
ment, and that without sacrifice
approach to God is an impossibility.
Were we to pause at this verse (16),
however, and te accept the words in
their literal signification, we shouid
come to the conclusion that sacrifice


was entirely unnecessary as a condition
of communion with the Most High on
the part of sinful man. The next verse
explains the Psalmist’s meaning. He
says, ‘The sacrifices of God are a
broken spirit: a broken and a contrite
heart, O God, Thou wilt not despise.’
This shows that all sacrifice is worthless
which is not vitalised by the moral
element. Where the sacrifice represents
a broken spirit, where it sete forth the
operations of a contrite heart, it becomes
acceptable to God, and useful as a basis
of negotiation with Heaven. Where the
moral element is present, the physical
element will not be forgotten; this is
beautifully brought out in the last
expression in the psalm. ‘Then shalt
Thou be pleased with the sacrifices of
righteousness, &. From this it is
clear that though sacrifice in itself,
without the presence of spiritual feeling,
is absolutely worthless in the sight of
God, yet where the moral element ia
present in the form of a broken spirit
and a contrite heart, sacrifice will be
presented even in its material forma,
Thereby the penitent man expresses
his love, and fosters his faith, and
testifies his gratitude. Blessed be God,
in our case it is unnecessary that we
provide bullock or burnt-offering. The
one final sacrifice has been offered in the
person of our Lord and Saviour Jesus
Christ.”

2. He will render the obedience which
God requires, “Then I said: Lo, I
come, in the volume of the book it is
prescribed to me. To do Thy will, my
God, I delight, and Thy law is in my
inner part.”—(Hengstenberg’s trans.)
“The volume or roll-book, ia the Penta
teuch, which from the first was written
ou parchment, In the tiny of David,

95


PSALM ER


when no other sacred book existed,
every one would at once understand
what was meant by the roll-book.” As
confirming this interpretation comp.
Josh. i. 7; 1 Kings ii 3; and 2 Kings
xxii. 13. David was left in no un-
certainty as to what the will of God
was. In the Pentateuch God had made
known His will, and clearly unfolded
His requirements; and the Psalmist
resolves that he will obey that will

3. He will render that obedience
heartily. ‘I delight todo Thy will, O
my God; yea, Thy law is within my
heart.” On the law of God in the heart
of His people comp. Deut. vi. 6; Pa.
xxxvii. 31; Prov. vii. 1-3; and Isa. li.
7. “Where matters are as they should
be, there the law is not merely pre-
scribed, but inscribed.” ‘When the
law of God is written in our hearts, our
duty will be our delight.”

4, God had disposed him to render
that obedience. Such we take to be the
meaning of the words translated, “‘ Mine
ears hast Thou opened.” Margin:
“digged.” Hengstenberg: “ Ears hast
Thou dug through for me.” An in-
disposition to obey the will of God is
often expressed by the fact that the
ears are stopped: Zech. vii. 11; Pa.
lviii. 4,5; Prov. xxi, 13. The essen-
tial idea is, that this truth has been
communicated to him—that God pre-
ferred obedience to sacrifice; and that
he had been made attentive to that
truth, as if he had been before deaf, and
his ears had been opened.”-—Barnes.
Hengstenberg paraphrases the clause:
“Thou hast made me hearing, obedient.”
He says, “The LXX. have rendered the
words by stiua 8% xarneriow wor, but o
body hast Thou prepared for me; and
the author of the Epistle to the Hebrews
has adopted them, because the thought
is not altered by this translation. The
contrast there also is the presentation
of thanks through the whole life and
conduct, in opposition to single and
merely external offerings: Thou hast
given me a body, so that I willingly
serve Thee in the execution of Thy
will.” If we render hearty obedience
to the will of God, if obedience be
pleasurable to us, it ig because He has
196





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





“inclined our heart unto His testi-
monies.” This hearty, grateful obedience
the servant offers to his Lord.

Il. By publication of the perfectione
of God. “I have preached righteous-
ness in the great congregation,” &ec.,
(verses 9,10). Notice—

1. What tt is that he announces. (1)
Righteousness. “I have preached
righteousness in the great congregation,”
t.e., the righteousness which God pre-
scribes for man, and requires from him
“T have not hid Thy righteousness
within my heart,” ¢.¢., the righteousness
which God displays in His dealings with
man. “The Lord is righteous in all
His ways, and holy in all His works.”
(2) Faithfulness. “I have declared
Thy faithfulness; I have not concealed
Thy truth.” Amid all the mutations
of His universe, He changes not. What
He hath promised He will perform.
He is worthy of the supreme confidence
of all His creatures. (3) Lovingkind-
ness, “I have not concealed Thy
lovingkindness.” He had announced
God’s mercy towards sinners, His pity
towards the wretched, His goodness
to all. (4) Salvation. “I have de
clared Thy salvation.” He related the
deliverances which God had wrought
on behalf of His people. He told of
His gracious doings on his own behalf.

2. Where he makes his announcement.
“In the great congregation.” Barnes
objects: “It woula be difficult to see
how this could be applied to David
himself, or on what occasion of his life
this could be said of him.” But the
word translated ‘‘ preach” is not to be
understood in the limited sense in which
that word is now used, Fuerst, in his
Lexicon, gives as its meaning in this
place—“to announce, to relate, to tell
of.” Now David is conspicuous above
all the men of his age for having
announced in these immortal Psalms
the perfections of the character, and the
greatness and glory of the works of
God. And many of these Psalms, ag
the superscriptions show, were intended
for use “in the great congregation.”
So David “ preached,” ¢.¢., announced,
“righteousness in the great congrega-
tion,” &. He made known the glory


ro, _ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; PSALMS.





of the Divine Being, and of His works
and ways, in the most public manner,
and to the largest audience that he
could secure,

ConoLusion.—What a worthy offer-
Ing was this which David presented
to the Lord! The excellence of this
method of expressing his gratitude is
seen in this, that: 1. Jt reveals his
appreciation of the Giver as well as of
the Gift. He rejoiced not only in the
greatness of the benefits he had received,
but also in the goodness of the Bene-
factor. He celebrated not only the
gracious dealings of God with him, but
also the glory of God in His own
character and perfections. 2. I¢ was
calculated to confer great benefits on men.
He who imparts to man true ideas


PSALM BY,





of the Divine Being is rendering the
highest service to his race. David did
this in two ways: by celebrating the
character and doings of God in sacred
song, and by expressing the will of God
in a life heartily conformed thereto,
The manifestation of God in the life of
a good man is of unspeakable value to
our world,

For us also the Lord hath done great
things. What offering shall we make
Him in returnt We cannot do better
than imitate the Psalmist in this
respect.


Norz.—For an exposition of verses 6-10
au applied to the Messiah, see Barnes or
oe aes és loco, The exposition of
the latter is well arranged and suggestive
hemiletically,


Hes teat Kynows Gop wit, Conress Hr.
(Verse 10.)


I propose to speak of —

The necessary openness of a holy ex-

vence,; or, in other words, the tm-
possibility that the inward revelation of
God in the soul could be shut up in tt,
and rematn hid or unacknowledged,

I shall have in view especially two
classes of hearers that are widely dis-
tinguished one from the other: first,
the class who hide the grace of God in
their heart undesignedly, or by reason
of some undue modesty ; and, secondly,
the class who, pretending to have it, or
consciously having it not, take a plea
sure in throwing discredit on all the
appropriate expressions of it, such as
are made by the open testimony and
formal profession of Christ before men.

Where there is a true grace of ex-
perience in the heart, it ought to be,
must, and will be manifest.

1, A true inward experience or dis-
covery of God in the heart is itself an
impulse also of self-manifestation, as all
love and gratitude are, wants to speak
and declare itself, and will as naturally
do it, when it is born, as a child will
utter its first ery.

2. The change implied in ao true
Christian experience, or the revelation
vf God in the heart, is in ita very nature


the soul and root of an outward change
that is correspondent. It is the right-
eousness of God revealed within, to be
henceforth the actuating spring and
power of a righteous and devoted life.

3. If any one purposes beforehand,
in his religious endeavours, or in seek-
ing after God, to come into a secret
experience and keep it a secret, his
endeavour is plainly one that falsifiea
the very notion of Christian piety, and
if he succeeds, or seems to succeed, he
only practises a fraud in which he im-
poses on himself.

4. The grace of God in the heart,
unmanifested or kept secret, as many
propose that it shall be, even for their
whole life, will be certainly stifled and
extinguished. Nothing can live that is
not permitted to show the signs of life.
“Ti we deny Him, He also will deny
us.”

5. This is the express teaching of the
gospel, which everywhere and in every
possible way calls out the souls renewed
in Christ to live an open life of sacrifice
and duty, and so to witness a good con-
fession (Matt, xix. 21; Luke ix. 23, 26;
John xv. 16, 19, 20).

6. There is no shade of encourage.
ment given to this notion of salvatica

187


Peal XL,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY ; PSALMA,








by @ secret piety in any of the Scrip-
ture examples or teachings. The
nearest approach to such encourage-
ment anywhere given is that which is
afforded by the case of the two senators,
Joseph and Nicodemus (John iii. 1-21,
xix. 38). They were good as disciples
to bury Jesus, but not to save His life
or serve Him while living. The most
fragrant spices are those that honour
one’s life, and not the posthumous
odours that embalm His body (Matt. v.
14-16).

ConoLuston.—Notice: 1. The very
absurd pretence of those who congratu-
late themselves on having so much of
secret merit, which they even count the
more meritorious because they keep it
secret. It is not the righteousness of
God which they have hidden so care-
fully, but it is their own—which, after
all, is not hid, They do not break out
and confess the Lord, simply because
He is not in them.

2. The significance of the profession
of Christ, when and why, and with what





views it should be made. It should be
made, because where there is anything
to be professed it cannot but be made.
.. . There is no option here, save as all
duties are optional, and eternity hangs
on the option we make.

3. What value there may be in the
discoveries of Christian experience, and
the legitimate use they may have in
Christian society. Some of the best
and holiest impulses ever given to the
cause of God in men’s hearts are given
by testimonies of Christian experience
(Mal. iii. 16).

4, The true wisdom, in all these
matters of holy experience, is to act
naturally. If you seem to yourself to
have really passed from death unto life,
and to have come into God’s peace,
interpose no affectations of modesty, no
restrictions of mock-prudence, but in
true natural modesty and a sound
natural discretion testify the grace you
have received (Matt. x. 32, 33).—
H. Bushnell, D.D., from “The New
Life,” abridged.


Tux Smervant’s Prayer To HI8s Lorp.
(Verses 11-17.)


This prayer of the poet suggests the
following observations—

I. The most assured confidence in
God is not regarded by His servant as
a substitute for prayer. In the pre-
vious portion of the psalm, David has
expressed unshaken and unlimited con-
fidence in God, yet here we find him
confessing his sins, complaining of his
troubles, and seeking relief from God.
Thankfulness and trust are foundations
for prayer. Hengstenberg points out
that the relation of the “ withhold not
Thou Thy tender mercies” to the “I
have not refrained,” in ver. 9, suggests
‘the doctrine that the measure of the
further salvation proceeds according to
the measure of thankfulness for the ear-
lier.” And ‘the words ‘Let Thy loving-
kindness and Thy truth continually pre-
serve me’ point back to ‘I will not con-
ceal Thy lovingkindness and Thy truth,’
with which the Psalmist had closed his
promise of thanksgiving. That we will

198


not conceal God’s lovingkindness and
truth, is the sure means, but also the
indispensable condition of its further
manifestation in our experience,”
Thankfulness and trust, so far from
precluding the necessity of prayer, are
incentives and encouragements to its
exercise. The man of assured faith will
be a man of frequent prayer.
IL A true servant of God may f.
into many sins. ‘ Mine iniquities
have taken hold upon me,” &c. There
is great force in the expressions used by
the Psalmist in this verse. He seems
to have had a deep and painful impres-
sion of his sins. He makes mention of
1. Their number. ‘They are more
than the hairs of mine head.” When
we think of sins of infirmity and imper-
fection, and sins of omission, and secret
sins of thought and feeling, to the


awakened conscience they a
altogether innumerable. , aca
2. Their grasp. “Mine iniquities





sib


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS.


have taken hold upon me.” His sins
had seized him, arrested him, “as the
bailiff does the poor debtor.” Sin with
its dark memories ‘and in its dire con-
sequences frequently holds a man as
with an iron grip,

3. Their effect. “I am not able to
look up, ... my heart faileth me.”
“The idea here is not that he was
unable to look up, but that the calami-
ties which came upon him were so
heavy and severe as to make his sight
dim or deprive him of vision.”—Barnes,
Luther: “My sight gives way under
great sorrow.” Hengatenberg: “ The
heart is here not exactly the feeling,
spirit, but is rather considered as the
seat of the powers of life. ‘My strength
faileth me,’ in Ps. xxviii, 10, is
parallel.”

If this confession of sin and its
results seem exaggerated, let it be
remembered that an awakened and
sensitive conscience detects and grieves
for sins when the hardened conscience
would not discover any sin at all.

“That the Psalmist speaks here of
his numerous offences, and treats of his
suffering as the righteous punishment
of these, forms an irrefragable proof
against the direct Messianic exposition.”
—Hengstenberg.

III. If a true servant of God fall
into sin, the penalty of his sin will
surely come upon him. “ Innumerable
evils have compassed me about.” God's
laws, with the penalties annexed to
every breach of them, are universal in
their operation. They are not respecters
of persons. In the case of no one is
this more conspicuous than in the life
of David. His sin with Bathsheba and
his murder of Uriah, in their conse-
quences, never ceased to darken and
trouble his life even to its very close.
“‘Whoso ” (saint or sinner) “ breaketh
an hedge, a serpent shall bite him.”

IV. A servant of God suffering the
penalty of his sin may seek deliver-
ance from God. “ Be pleased, O Lord,
to deliver me; O Lord, make haste to
help me.” An essential condition of de-
liverance ts that he who seeks tt shall have
come to feel the hetnousness of the sin fer
which he suffers.


ol ny y OREM Pe ere, MIN AN DG PUP ait meme ee | Se Be iy
DT Ty ty ern eaagee oh


PEALM ZL.





Where the sinfulness of the sin is
deeply realised, the penalty has in great
part, at least, accomplished its end. But
when any one seeks to be rid of the suf-
fering without loathing the ain, it is clear
that in him suffering bas not yet accom-
plished its end. But in what way does
God deliver His people from the evils of
their sins f

1. By removing the gutlt and the con-
sciousness of it. That we have grieved @
holy and generous Father is the sorest
part of our suffering. God takes that
away by the assurance of forgiveness,

2. By removing the penalty. Some-
times in answer to prayer God sees fit
to remove or to mitigate the sufferings
which have come upon his people as the
result of their sins.

3. By tmparting grace and patience
to bear the penalty. If He remove not
the penalty, He will take the bitterness
out of it, and give us strength to bear it.

It is a great thing to be able to go to
Him and seek relief and deliverance.
The approach to Him in itself is help-
ful. And He will certainly grant to us
@n answer,—wise, gracious, and satis-
factory.

The Psalmist’s prayer for help is
marked by great urgency. ‘‘O Lord,
make haste to help me.” “ Make no
tarrying, O my God.” Great suffering
and a deep sense of need make us
earnest and urgent in prayer. They do
not utter themselves in long, rhetorical
petitions, but in brief, expressive, heaven-
reaching cries.

V. In his prayer the servant of God
has reference not to himself alone, but
to others also.

1. Here is a reference to his enemies,
“‘ Let them be ashamed and confounded
together that seek after my soul to
destroy it,” &c. (vers, 14, 15), The
enemies of the Psalmist seem to have
been many, and to have manifested
their animosity in different ways, Here
are—(1) The actwely hostile; “ them
that seek after my soul to destroy it.”
(2) The evil disposed ; “ them that wish
me evil.” (3) Zhe mockers; ‘them
that say unto me, Aha, Aha.” He
prays for the discomfiture of all these.
“There is no sin in the wish that the

199





wicked may not be successful in their
plans, and may not be suffered to injure
us.”.— Barnes,

3. Here is a reference to the godly.
“Let all those that seek Thee rejoice
and be glad in Thee; let such as love
Thy salvation say continually, ‘The
Lord be magnified.” There is a beauti-
ful connection between the character in-
dicated and the blessing sought. They
that seek the Lord shall find Him, and
finding Him shall rejoice and be glad in
Him. For the seeker the joy of becom-
ing the finder. They that love His sal-
vation shall realize it so fully as to be


 HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; PSALME.








filled with praise and to cry, “ The Lord
be magnified.” May they so continu
ously realise His saving grace as to have
cause for continually exalting and glori-
fying God.

VL The servant of God in his
deopest distress confides in the Lord
God. “Iam poor and needy; yet the
Lord thinketh upon me,” &c, (Hor an
exposition of this verse see the homi-
letic sketch on it given below.)

Conoiusion.—Amid both the sins
and the sufferings of life, let the ser
vants of God have recourse to Him in
prayer.


Tue Hou or Sm.
(Perse 12.)


A course of sin is @ course of lawless-
ness. Certain liberty may be enjoyed,
but penal consequences are sure to fol~
jow. “Innumerable evils have com-
passed me about.” Sin takes hold upon
the sinner by violence and force. Justice
arrests and brings him before the tribunal.

Sin takes hold upon men—

I Byits power. It overcomes them,
subdues them by habits, and keeps them
bound in captivity and degradation.
“His own iniquities shall take the
wicked himself, and he shall be holden
with the cords of his sins.”

IL By an accusing conscience. All
men have a couscience, speaking in atill-
nessa, or thundering in power—watching


and weighing all they do,—e monitor in
their bosom—a witness for God. “The
candle of the Lord searching all their
inward parts,”

Til. By its evil consequences. Fear,
shaine, and liability to punishment—the
curse and condemnation of a broken law.
The sinner carries within his bosom
a prediction, a foretaste of the judg-
ment to come. The terrors of hell get
hold upon him, and there is no deliver-
ance but in Christ. “ He Himself bare
our sins in his own body on the tree—
redeemed us from the curse of the law,
being made a curse for us.” He can
save from sin and its consequences,—J,
W. in “ The Study.”


May’s Nrep anp Gop’s THovaut.
(Verse 17.)


“JT am poor and needy, yet the Lord
thinketh upon me,”

We regard these words as the ex-
pression of a humble, trustful heart
under @ sense of need. We have
here,

I. An acknowledgment of human
need. “I am poor and needy,” In
the world there is much physical poverty
and need. That ia bad. Much mental
poverty: that is worse. Much epiritual
poverty: that is worst of all. Better
te be Lazarus at the gate than the rich

200


man in the palace. Some who are
spiritually impoverished are quite un-
conscious of it. They are paupers, yet
they imagine themselves millionaires,
They say that they are “rich and in-
creased with goods, and have need of
nothing; and know not that they are
wretched and miserable and poor and
blind and naked.” Most deplorable!

1. This need is an evidence of sin. A
loving Creator, having “ unsearchable
riches,” would not make His creatures


peor and needy. Some disarrangement


BOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM KLE.





of His order must have taken place.
Spiritual bankruptcy cannot be a re-
sult of the plans of the Infinite and all-
generous Spirit.

2. The consciousness of this need is a
condition of tts removal. When men
fall asleep in the frost and snow by
reason of cold, and become insensible
unto the cold, they sleep the sleep of
death. While they feel the cold they
will strive to preserve vital heat, and so
repel the cold. The sense of this poverty
is the first step to its removal. Until
we feel our hunger we shall never seek
the living bread.

3. The confession of this need ts well-
pleasing to God. It indicates a true
estimate of ourselves, and humility be-
fore God. When we think of our low
attainments, and those to which we are
called, how poor are we! When we
consider our mean acquisitions, and the
“‘unsearchable riches,” how poor are
we!

TI. An expression of confidence in
God. “The Lord thinketh upon me.”
There is something very cheering and
strengthening in this. I am lonely and
sad and weary; but I think of some
loving one, perhapr hundreds of miles
away, who is thinking kindly of me, and
I am refreshed, comforted, strengthened.

God thinks of me, of all men, of every
man. We think and speak of the par-
ticular and the general, of the individual
and the collective body. We cannot at
once think of many particulars, or of
many individuals, as such; so we think
of persons collectively, and of particulars
as classified. But the Infinite Mind has
no such limitations. Amid the millions
of creatures that depend upon His care


and are the recipients of His bounty, not
one escapes His notice. Superintend-
ing the universe, He also numbers the
very hairs of the head of every one of
His people.

“The Lord thinketh upon me.” He
cares for every individual; for thee, as
though in all His universe He had no
other to care for. “Ah! that may be
true,” say you, “of David, a king, and
sacred poet, and man highly favoured of
God; but does He so think of me, a
poor, low, unworthy one?” To doubt
it is to “limit the Holy One of Israel.”
“The Lord thinketh upon me ;” then,
He knows my need. He sees our exact
circumstances and condition, and con-
sequent need. He knows the precise
character of my poverty, and will re-
move it by communicating the precise
treasures which I lack.

“The Lord thinketh upon me;”
then, He will supply my need. His
thought is neither purposeless nor re-
sultless, His thoughts receive embodi-
ment. His thought of us indicates care
for us, and results in provision for us.
Wherever the sense of poverty and need
is, there may the assurance of the Divine
thought and care also be. If we are
hungering after Him, most assuredly He
is thinking of us individually.

Examples of His care for individuals
abound. Daniel in the lions’ den, Jo-
seph in prison, Peter in prison, and our
own experience.

In this thought of God of us and for
us we have:—l. What a solace in lone-
liness/ 2. What a comfort in the day
of sorrow/ 3. What an inspiration for
Christian work / 4. What an assurance
of victory in death |


PSALM XLL


INTRODUCTION.


This psalm, like the preceding one, is from the pen of David, and is addressed “ to the
chief musician,” for use in public religious services. It seems to have been composed with
reference to a period when the Psalmist was suffering from bodily sickness, and from the
malice of his enemies and the faithlessness and ingratitude of friends. ‘The kernel of our
psalm,” says Hengstenberg, “is contained in Psalm xxxv. 13, 14. The fundamental idea is
this, that he who is compassionate will receive compassion, that he who has the consciousness
of having wept with the weeping, may console himself with the assurance that his own weeping
shall be turned by God into laughing.” Homiletically we shall consider the psalm as setting
forth—-The bleaseduess of the compassionate (vers. 1-3); the complaint, prayer, and confidence


of the compassionate (vera. 4-12); aud the doxology (ver. 18). ma


PRALM XLL





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMS.





Tax BuessepNess or THE COMPASSIONATE,
(Verses 1-3.)


The blessings mentioned in these
verses are for the man “ that considereth
the poor.” By “the poor” in this place
we must understand the weak and feeble,
those who are in a depressed condition,
and need the sympathy and aid of others.
The word may be used in reference to
those who are in a low condition by
reason of poverty, bodily affliction, or
sorrow. ‘lhe consideration of which the
Psalmist speaks is a thoughtful sympathy
and help, “ the manifestations of a ten-
der fellow-feeling.” And the man who
extends this thoughtful sympathy and
help to the poor, the Psalmist pronounces
“blessed.” He is blessed with—

I. Divine deliverance. ‘The Lord
will deliver him in time of trouble.”
Margin: “in the day of evil.” Heng-
stenberg: “in the day of distress.”
“The day of evil” is a period with
which all men are more or less ac-
quainted. The present state is charac-
terised by affliction and trial, pain and
sorrow, disease and death. But “if
any be hidden in the day of the Lord’s
anger,” the compassionate shall. The
Lord will keep them in the day of dia-
tress, and will deliver them.

I. Divine preservation. ‘The Lord
will preserve him, and keep him alive.”
“This,” says Barnes, “ refers to a general,
not a wniversal rule in the Divine ad-
ministration, that acts of piety will be
partially rewarded on the earth ; or that
the Divine favour will be shown to those
who deal kindly with others.” When
the shafts of death fly quickly around
them, they shall be shielded by God.
He who manifests kindness and care for
the afflicted and sorrowful may expect,
when he is placed in similar circum-
stances, that God will interpose for his
preservation.

If. Divine blessing. ‘“ He shall be
blessed upon the earth.” Hengsten-
berg: “in the land.” “This is in ac-
cordance with the doctrine noticed above,
anc 80 often referred to in the psalms
and elsewhere, that the effect of religion

202


will be to promote happiness and pros-
perity in this life."—Barnes. “If it
may be for God’s glory, and the man’s
good, this temporal life shall be pre-
served, and evidences of God’s blessing
shall be seen upon him.”— Dickson.

IV. Divine reservation. ‘Thou wilt
not deliver him to the will of his ene
mies.” When attacked by foes the Lord
will defend the compassionate man, so
that they shall neither ensnare him by
their wiles, nor overpower him by their
might. “The most potent enemy we
have can have no power against us but
what is given him from above. The
good-will of a God that loves us is suffi-
cient to secure us from the ill-will of all
that hate us, men and devils; and that
good-will we may promise ourselves an
interest in, if we have considered the
poor and helped to relieve and rescue
them.”—M. Henry.

V. Divine support in affliction
“The Lord will strengthen him upon
the bed of languishing ; Thou wilt make
all his bed in his sickness.” God has
not promised His people “that they
shall never be sick, nor that they shall
not lie languishing, nor that their sick-
ness shall not be unto death; but He
has promised to enable them to bear
their affliction with patience, and cheer-
fully to wait the issue. The soul by
His grace shall be made to dwell at
ease when the body lies in pain.”—
M. Henry. On the second clause,
Hengstenberg says, ‘“‘‘ All his couch
dost Thou change in his sickness.’ The
couch stands here for the state of the
sick; God changes his couch of pain
and sickness into one of convalescence
and joy, and that entirely.” And M.
Henry, “That bed must needs be well
made which God Himself has the
making of.” When we are in affliction
it is no small comfort to remember that
we have kindly ministered to others in
like circumstances, And God Himself
will relieve and comfort those who have
so done in all their sufferings.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





Coxciusion: —1. Herd well the
prinaple which underlies our text, that

2 will deal with us as we do with
ohere. “With the merciful Thou wilt
show Thyself merciful,” &. (Ps. xviii.
25-27. “Blessed are the merciful ; for
they shall obtain mercy.” “ With what


PASLM ZL.


measure ye mete it sliall be measured
to you again,”

2. Cultwate a kind and considerate
spirtt toward the poor, the sorrowful, the
afflicted. By so doing, we tread in the
footsteps of our Lord and become
sharers in His joy.


Tuz CompLanit, Peayer, axp CoxFIDENCE OF THE COMPASSIONATE
(Verses 4-12.)


The relation of this section to the
preceding, as we understand it, is thus
stated by Hengstenberg: “The Psalm-
ist, who, with perfect right, could appro-
priate to himself the words, ‘ Blessed is
he who acts wisely towards the poor,’
goes on to mention, in two strophes,
that now it was the day of distress for
him, now the rage of his enemies was
boiling against him, now he was pros-
trated with pain, so that it was time for
him to receive the fulfilment of the
promise, He will deliver him,” &c.

I, The complaint of the compas-
sionate. David had shown himself
comnpassionate to the poor and needy,
yet now that the day of his distress has
come he has to complain bitterly of the
treatment he received from men. Here
is his complaint concerning

l. His enemies. He complains of
(1.) Thar malignity. “Mine enemies
speak evil of me, When shall he die,
aud his name perish?” It is scarcely
possible to imagine malignity more in-
tense than this. The malignity that
desires the death of another is terrible;
that which desires not only another’s
death, but also the blotting out of his
memory from amongst men is more
terrible; whilst that which desires these
things concerning a good man is most
terrible. Yet such was the malignity of
the enemies of the Psalmist. (2.) Ther
deet, “If he come to see me, he
speaketh vanity; his heart gathereth
iniquity to iteelf; when he goeth
abroad, he telleth it.” Here is the
most cruel hypocrisy. These enemies
visited the poet in his affliction under
the pretence of friendship and kindly
interest in his welfare, uttering empty
and hypocritical assurances of love and


sympathy. Their real object was to
gather materials for slandering him, to
discover something in his temper, or
speech, or condition, which they might
pervert to their own base ends. And
then they went abroad and published
their base and dastardly perversions,
“There is no fence against those whose
malice thus gathers iniquity.” (3.) Their
confederacy. “All that hate me whisper
together against me; against me do they
devise my burt.” Here are combina
tion and consultation with a view to the
injury of the poet. His enemies were
many, and they conspired to effect his
overthrow.  Whisperers and back-
biters are put together among the worst
of sinners (Rom. i. 29, 30). They
whispered that their plot against him
might not be discovered ani so de-
feated ; there is seldom whispering (we
say) but there is lying or some mischief
on foot.”—M. Henry. (4.) Their fiend-
th exultation, “An evil disease, say
they, cleaveth fast unto him, and now
that he lieth, he shall rise up no more.”
The first clause of this verse is not
easily interpreted. Our translation is
incorrect. Margin, as in the Hebrew:
“A thing,” or word, “of Belial.” Pro-
fessor Alexander: “A word of Belial is
poured upon him.” Hengstenberg says:
“The first member, literally: a matter
of mischief is poured upon him.” We
take it that “the matter of mischief,”
or “word of Belial,” is the diabolical
plan which the enemies of the Psalmist
had framed for effecting his ruin ; and
in the anticipated success of which they
fiendishly exulted. It was not without
reason that David complained of his
enemies.

2. Those whom he had regarded as his

203


FRALM XEZ.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


re


s. “Yea, mine own familiar
friend, in whom I trusted, which did eat
of my bread, hath lifted up his heel
against me.” “Mine own familiar
friend,” or “the man of my peace,” in-
dicates one who was associated with
David in the most peaceful and amicable
relations. ‘In whom I trusted,” points
to “ one who lived on a footing of confi-
dence with the Psalmist.” “ Who eats
my bread,” does not refer to one who had
been entertained as an occasional guest
by the Psalmist, but to one who was
supported by him as a member of his
family. “The participle points to
something continued.” Such an one,
the Psalmist complains, had “lifted up
his heel against” him, like a horse that
turns and kicks a kind master. Mat-
thew Henry, Hengstenberg, e¢ al., think
that the reference here is to Ahithophel
(2 Sam, xv. 12, 31). Well may David
complain in bitterness of soul of such
treatment. La Fontaine said: “Rare is
true love; true friendship is still rarer.”
“In trust,” said Queen Elizabeth,
“T have found treason.” “ Friends!”
said Socrates, “ there is no friend.”

Our Lord applied part of this verse
to Judas, the betrayer, John xiii. 8,
But it is significant that He omitted the
words, “Mine own familiar friend, in
whom I trusted.” The omission is (1.)
“An evidence against the direct Mes-
sianic interpretation” of the psalm.
(2.) It seems to show that Christ had
never regarded Judas as an intimate
and trusted friend.

II. The prayer of the compassionate.
The Psalmist here prays that the blessing
promised to those who consider the poor
may be granted unto him. He prays—

1. For mercy. In both the fourth
and the tenth verses he cries, ““O Lord,
be merciful unto me.” The request for
mercy implies a consciousness of un-
worthiness. It is also an appeal to the
disposition of God to pity the miserable,
and succour the distressed.

2. For restoration, ‘Heal my soul,
for I have sinned against Thee;...
and raise me up.” The Psalmist re-
eognises the intimate connection between
sin and suffering, He regarded his
ean “ @ consequence of his sins,


“Sin,” says Matthew Henry, “is the
sickness of the soul; pardoning mercy
heals it; renewing grace heals it; and
this spiritual healing we should be
more earnest for than for bodily
health.” The request, “and raise me
up,” looks back to the cruel boast of his
enemies, “and now that he lieth down
he shall rise up no more.” It is a
prayer that God would restore him to
health and prosperity, and so baffle the
wicked designs of his foes. The latter
part of the tenth verse is not, “in order
that I may requite them,” but, “so will
I requite them.” The words do not
necessarily involve a desire for indivi-
dual revenge on his enemies. They may
mean simply a desire for the vindication
of right and truth.

I. The confidence of the com-
passionate. The Psalmist expresses
his assurance of,—

1. The Divine favour. “By this I
know that Thou favourest me, because
mine enemy doth not triumph over
me.” The possession of the Divine
favour, and the defeat of his enemies,
are in his mind inseparably associated,
and he expresses a confident assurance
of both. ‘When we can discern the
favour of God in any mercy, personal or
public, that doubles it and sweetens it.”

2. The Divine support. ‘“ And as for
me, Thou upholdest me,” &. The
remarks of Matthew Herry on this
verse are excellent. “(1.) When at
any time we suffer in our reputation,
our chief concern should be about onr
integrity, and then we may cheerfully
leave it to God to secure our reputation,
David knows that, if he can but per-
severe in his integrity, he need not fear
his enemies’ triumphs over him. (2,
The best man in the world holds his
integrity no longer than God upholds
him in it; for by His grace we are
what we are; if we be left to ourselves,
we shall not only fall, but fall away.
(3.) It is & great comfort to us that,
however weak we are, God is able to
uphold us in our integrity, and will
do it if we commit the keeping of it
to Him. (4.) If the grace of God did
not take a constant care of us, we


should not be upheld in our integrity ;


rtd
HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS. PSALM XLIT


o





His eye is always upon us, else we Conciusion.—Let us cultivate and
should soon start aside from Him. (5.) pray for strong confidence in God.
Those whom God now upholds in their Then shall we be victorious over the
integrity He will set before His face for infirmities of the flesh, the weakness or
ever, and make happy in the vision and falseness of professed friends, and the


fruition of Himself. He that endures scheming malignity of enemies.
te the end shall be saved.” a


Doxoroay.
(Verse 13.)
This verse of praise marks the close the redeemed both in heaven and oa
of the first book of the psalms. earth.


L Blessing is ascribed to God as a IT. Blessing is ascribed to God
God holding relations with His people. eternally. “From everlasting and to
“The Lord God of Israel.” In the everlasting.” From the unbeginning
past He has conferred many blessings past to the unending future. What an
apon them. In the present they trust existence is that of God!

Him ; and He upholds and saves them. IIT. Blessing is ascribed to Him
He has promised to bless them with fervently. ‘Amen, and Amen.” The
eternal glory. “The Lord of hosts is repetition of the “‘ Amen” shows that
the God of Israel, even a God to the ascription of blessing is the intense
Israel.” “Blessed,” t.¢, praised, wish of the mind and heart. Many and


honoured, “be the Lord God.” forcible are the reasons which urge
1. God is supremely blessed in Him- all intelligent creatures thus to ascribe
self. ‘‘The ever blessed God.” blessing to God.


2. God ts blessed in His works, We, whom He has redeemed from
“ All Thy works shall praise Thee, O sin and hell, are under special obligation
God.” to praise and glorify Him. ‘‘ What shall

8. God ts blessed by all His intelligent I render unto the Lord?” && “ Bless
aad loyal creatures. By angels, and by the Lord, O my soul,” &e


PSALM XLII.


IntTRODUCTION.


scription: “‘Tothe Chief Musiciun, Maschil, for the sons of Korah.” Waschil, an
imatruction, a didactic poem. ; ;

“The sons of Korah,” descendants of Korah, were an important company of singers
(1 Chron. vi. 83; 2 Chron. xx. 19). Opinions differ as to whether this and ten or eleven
other psalms bearing the name of “the sons of Korah” were composed by them or for them,
The title may mean “ for the sons of Korah,” “ to the sons of Korah,” or “‘of the sons of Korah,”
Winer, Origen, Rosenmiiller, Hensler, Kichorn, De Wette, Olshausen, Hengstenberg, et al., hold
that the sons of Korah were the authors of these psalms. Hengstenberg regards the xlii. and
xliii. psalms as the composition of one of the sons of _Korah concerning the experience of
David ; the former is the author and the latter is the object of the pealm: “one of the sons
of Korah sang this psalm as from the soul of David,” The psalms which bear this title are
remarkable for beauty, sublimity, and intense feeling. ‘‘ As, however, the language of several
of these psalms—as the xlii. and xlviii., &c.—is manifestly meant to apply to David, it seems
much simpler to explain the title ‘for the sons of Korah,’ to mean that they were given to them
to sing in the temple services. If their style of music, vocal and instrumental, was of a more
sublime and lyric character than that of the sons of Merari or Gershon, and Heman had more
fire in his execution than Asaph and Jeduthun, it is perfectly natural that David should have
given his more poetic and elevated straina to Heman and his choir, and the simpler and quieter
pealms to the other choirs.”

Tag eed of the composition was probably the time of the rebellion of Absalom, when
David was forced into exile from his home and from the tabernacle of God. This and the
following psalm stand in very close relation to each other, and were probably composed on the
same occasion. 908


PSALM XLII,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





Homiletically, the paalm sets before us, A godly soul under a sense of absence from God
(vere. 1-5); and the deep depression and strong consolation of a godly soul (vers. 6-11).


A Gopty Sou. UNDER A SENSE OF ABSENCE FROM GOD,
(Verses 1-5.)


L The sorrow of a godly soul
‘‘ My tears have been my meat day and
night,” d&c. David here sets forth—

1. The cause of his sorrow. The
Psalmist was driven into exile, away
from home and from the tabernacle of
God. And in his trials he seems to have
temporarily lost the sense of the Divine
presence and favour. It was probably
the weight and bitterness of the trials
of the Psalmist at this time which led
to his inability to realise the gracious
presence of God. Under severe afilic-
tions, the soul is apt to feel itself for-
saken by God. This was the cause of
David’s sorrow. He felt himself de-
serted by God. “Sometimes God
teaches us effectually to know the work
of mercies by the want of them, and
whets our appetite for the means of
grace by cutting us short in those
means,”

2. The aggravation of his sorrow.
David’s sorrow was made ail the keener
by (1.) The reproaches of his enemies,
“‘They continually say unto me, Where
is thy God?” His enemies seem to
have reproached him with being for-
saken by God ; that, being exiled from
the tabernacle of God, he was exiled
also from God Himself ; that his mise-
ries were an evidence that he was aban-
doned by God. “ This,” says Robert-
son, “is ever the way in religious
perplexity : the unsympathising world
taunts or misunderstands. In spiritual
grief they ask, Why is he not like
others? In bereavement, they call your
deep sorrow unbelief. In misfortune,
they comfort you like Job’s friends by
calling it a visitation. Or, like the
barbarians at Melita, when the viper
fastened on Paul’s hand, no doubt they
call you an infidel, though your soul be
erying after God. Specially in that
dark and awful hour, when HE called
on God, ‘Eloi, Eloi,’ they said, ‘ Let be,
let us see whether Elias will come to

206


save Him.’ Now, this is sharp to bear.
It is easy to say Christian fortitude
should be superior to it. But in dark-
ness to have no sympathy,—when the
soul gropes for God, to have the hand
of man relax its grasp!” (2.) The
recoliection of past joys. ‘“ When I
remember these, I pour out my soul in
me,” dc. (ver. 4.) Here is worship.
David was a devout man. His delight
was in the worship of God. “ Lord, I
have loved the habitation of Thy house,
and the place where Thine honour
dwelleth.” Here is social worship. ‘I
had gone with the multitude, I went
with them to the house of God.” His
enjoyment of religious ordinances was
increased by uniting in them with
others. Here is joyous social worship.
“With the voice of joy and praise, with
& multitude that kept holy-day.” Their
religious assemblies were characterised
by devout gladness. Now, “the pain
of the Psalmist is increased, when he
brings into view his earlier blessedness,
and places it beside his present misery.”
His experience is like that described by
Tennyson,


** A sorrow’s crown of sorrow is remembering
happier things.”


3. The continuousness of his sorrow,
““My tears have been my meat day and
night, while they continually,” d&ec.
His grief was with him as a constant
companion. His sorrow knew no in-
termission, And the reproaches of his
enemies were ever ringing in his ears
and agonising his heart. This tear-
stained page from the sutobiography of
David, represents the sorrows of many a
godly soul to-day.

IL The desire of a godly soul “As
the hart panteth after the water brooks,
so panteth my soul after Thee, O God *
(vers, 1, 2). Notice—

1. The object of his desire. “God,...
the living God.” David’s great longing


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM XLIZ,


was not for restoration to his palace
and throne, or even to the tabernacle ;
it was for realisation of the presence of
God. It is quite true that “lamenting
after God is as sure an evidence that we
love Him as rejoicing in God.” But the
soul thus mourning His absence fails to
realise this, or, realising it, derives little
or no help from it. We are so consti-
tuted that we cannot rest out of God.
Now, consider the God the Psalmist
longed for. His God was a Person,
“Thee, QO God.” He was a living
Person. “The lwing God.” How
different from the heartless God
which science and philosophy offer to
men! a God which is but another
name for “law” and “order.” How
different also from the God of meta-
physical creeds and rigid theological
systems! In these, the Divine Being
is too often represented as cold, hard,
far remote from men, and having little
or no interest in the affairs of His
creatures, The God for whom the
Psalmist longed is very different. He is
a living Person who takes deep interest
in His creatures, who loves them and
seeks their love, who listens to their
prayers, and works for their salvation,
This is the God that anxious and bur-
dened men cry out for,—the God for
whom the Psalmist thirsted and whom
the Saviour revealed. To realise the
presence and favour of this living God
was the great object of desire to David.

2. The intensity of his desire. ‘As
the hart panteth after the water brooks,
so panteth my soul after Thee, O God.
My soul thirsteth,” &c. The word
translated “hart” is a common noun,
but, inasmuch as it is here joined with
a feminine verb, it must be taken as
denoting the hind or female deer.
“The Psalmist chose the hind,” says
Hengstenberg,” “chiefly because the
hind rather than the hart is suitable as
compared with the feminine soul, which
is like it in its weakness.” And Barnes:
“There ig an idea of tenderness in
the reference to the word hart here—
female deer, gazelle—which would not
strike us if the reference had been to
any other animal. These are so timid,
so gentle, so delicate in their structure,


so much the natural objects of love and
compassion, that our feelings are drawn
towurds them as to all other animals in
similar circumstances,” We are not to
think of the hunted hind, exhausted,
parched, and alarmed by pursuit, but of
the hind in time of prevailing drought
(compare Ps. Ixiii 1). ‘My soul
thirsteth for Thee in a dry and thirsty
land where no water is.’ The word
translated “ panteth ”—margin, “ bray-
eth ”—denotes eager desire. So the
Psalmist intensely longed for the
presence aud fellowship of God. His
desire “is very importunate: it is his
soul that pants, his soul that thirsta,
which denotes not only the sincerity,
but the strength of his desire.”

Ill. The hope of a godly soul.
“ Why art thou cast down, O my soul ?”
&c. (ver. 5). Calvin says: “ David re-
presents himself here to us as divided
into two parts. In so far as he rests
through faith in QGod’s promises, he
raises himself, equipped with the spirit
of an invincible valour, against the feel-
ings of the flesh, and at the same time
blames his weakness.” Hengstenbery :
“Tt is the spirit mighty in God which


here meets the trembling soul.” Con-
sider—
1. Whom he hoped in. “ Hope thou


in God.” He turned the eye of his soul
away from his painful circumstances,
from the ingratitudeand treachery of men,
from its own troubled mood, to God. He
is always the same, always gracious,
always strong to save. Hope in Him.

2. What he hoped for. ‘The help of
His countenance.” ‘The salvation of
His countenance.” ‘ Cause Thy face to
shine, and we shall be saved.” ‘“ Lord,
lift Thou up the light of Thy counte-
nance upon us.” “In His favour is life.”
The Psalmist hoped for complete de-
liverance and restoration by the favour
of God. This he designates, ‘“ the sal-
vation of His countenance.”

3. Whereon he grounded his hope.
“For I shall yet praise Him,” &e,
“The ground of his hope is his believ-
ing confidence that the Lord, who ia
always hie God, will by his deliverance
give him occasion for thanke.”—Heng-
stenberg.

BOT


PSALM ELM.


AOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


——— —<—— eames





Conctusion.—Here we have a re-
medy for despondency. Look up and
hope in God. Away from thine un-
happy cdreumatances, away from thy


cheerless prospects, away from thine
own troubled condition, look up and
hope in God; and thy moan shall be
changed into a grateful song,


Man Sreaxine to nis Sou
(Verse 5.)


We have in these words—

I. Self-remonstrance. “ Why art
thou east down, O my soul? and why
art thou disquieted in me?” “It is the
spirit mighty in God, which here meets
the trembling sow.” It is faith inter-
rogating feeling. We all have had some
experience of this duality in unity in
our own being. We know what it is for
the human soul to shrink and tremble
and suffer, while the spirit, nerved by
faith, is calm, fearless, and heroic. These
interrogations imply—

l. Great suffering of soul. ‘‘ Cast
down,” bowed down, deeply dejected.
*Disquieted,” anxious, agitated, troubled.
Godly souls sometimes pass through deep
waters.

2. Groundless suffering of soul, “Why
art thou cast down?” d&c. The interro-
gation implies that there was no suffi-
cient reason for this depression and
anxiety. The man who can call the Lord
his God can never have sufficient reason
to be so deeply troubled as David was.

IL. Self-exhortation. ‘Hope thou in
God.” “In God,” as contradistinguished,

1. From man. Man is not always
willing to aid us in the day of distress,
Even when he is willing, his power to
do so is very limited. Man is some-
times unreliable, false. Supposing this
psalm to have been written during the
rebellion of Absalom, or to refer to it,
David was having painful experiences
of the ingratitude and treachery of men,
notably in the cases of Absalom and
Ahithophel. “In God ;” not in man.


2. From circumstances, The circum-
stances and prospects of the poet were
very dark. Circumstances are some-
times as variable as April weather.
They are not to be relied on, “In
God; ” not in circumstances,

3. From ourselves. We are foolish,
weak, changeable. The moods of our
soul are influenced by almost countless
circumstances. To-day we are on Her-
mon; to-morrow we must enter Geth-
semane. “In God;” not in ourselves,
“In God ;” for He is (1) Hver gracious,
(2) All-sufficient. (3) Unchangeable.

Ii. Self-encouragement. “For I
shall yet praise Him,” &c.

l. The facts concerning salvation
which are here suggested. (1) That it
ts the result of the favour of God. “The
salvation of His countenance.” (See
preceding exposition of these words.)
(2) That t inspires the praise of man.
“For I shall yet praise Him.” The
salvation of God gives both matter for
praise and the disposition to praise,

2. The assurance of salvation. There
is no faltering or hesitation in the de-
claration of the Psalmist. The spirit is
triumphant in faith, though the soul is
dejected by suffering.

3. The ground of this assurance, The
Psalmist’s faith rests in the relation of
God to him, This is brought out in
the eleventh verse, which is an almost
exact repetition of this one. “My
God.” He who can so speak of God
may well be confident of full and
glorious salvation.


Tax Dezp Depression anD Strona ConsoLaTion or a Gopzy Sout.
(Verses 6-11.)


The Psalmist has addressed himself


turns to God and addresses Him on the


to his own soul, but has not obtained matter.


the victory over his troubles, Now he
208


IL The deep depression of a


HOMILETIC COMMENTARYL: PSALMS.
eee


godly soul “O my God, my soul is
cast down within me.” He sets before
us——


1. The greatness of his troubles. He
expresses this variously. (1) He de
elares his great dejection of soul, “ My
soul is cast down within me.” It was
sinking under the weight of its trials,
(2) He compares his troubles to an angry
flood. “Deep calleth unto deep at the
noise of Thy waterspouts,” é&e. Heng-
stenberg says: “The floods are the
roaring sea-billows of suffering and
pain. Flood calls to flood, one invites,
as it were, another to pour itself forth
on the Psalmist.” The waves of
anguish were beating pitilessly upon the
poet’s soul. (3) He compares his troubles
to the slaughter of his soul. “As with
a sword in my bones,” d&e Margin:
“As with a killing,” & Hengsten-
berg: “It is as a murder in my bones,”
&c. “The murder here is used figura-
tively for designating a deadly anguish
of soul ; the reproaches are to the soul
of the Psalmist what murder is to the
body. (Comp. Luke ii. 35.) ‘A sword
shall pierce through thine own soul
also.’ That the murder is represented
as having its seat in the bones of the
Psalmist, is designed to mark the pain
as going through the marrow and bones
wounding the heart.”

2. The causes of his trouble. Of
these he mentions two:—(1) Hts forced
exule from his home and from the taber-
nacle of the Lord. He was now far away
from home, in “the land of Jordan and
the Hermonites, and the hill Mizar,”
Jordan was the eastern boundary of
Canaan. Hermon, a mountain on the
north-eastern border of Palestine, having
three summits, for which reason prob-
ably it is spoken of here as “the
Hermonites” or Hermons, “ Mizar” is
probably the name of a small moun-
tain; but what mountain is now
unknown. But the point for us to
seize is this, the Psalmist ‘was now
driven to the utmost borders of the
land of Canaan, to shelter himself there
from the rage of his persecutors.” He
is far from home, far from the tabernacle
and worship of His God. (2) The
reproaches of his enemies, “Mine


2


PeaLM XLII,





enemies reproach me,” d&e. (See notes
on ver. 3.)

3. The relation of his trouble to God.
“Thy waterspouts, all Thy waves and
Thy billows.” He regarded his troubles
as in some sense coming from God.
God is either the originator or permitter
of all our troubles, “ Whatever waves
and billows of affliction go over us at
any time we must call them God’s waves
and His billows, that we may humble
ourselves under His mighty hand, and
may encourage ourselves to hope that
though we be threatened we shall not
be ruined; for the waves and billows
are under a Divine check.”——¥. Henry.

When we consider these things we
wonder not that the Psalmist was deeply
depressed.

It. The strong consolation of a
godly soul

1, In the remembrance of God. “O
my God, my soul is cast down within
me; therefore will I remember Thee.”
He recollected the great goodness and
the mighty acts of God, and was
comforted. “The way to forget the
sense of our miseries is to remember
the God of our mercies,”

2. In the assurance of God’s constant
mercy. “The Lord will command His
loving-kindness in the day-time,” &
The loving-kindness of God consista,
says Hengstenberg, “in the inward
consolations which are granted to the
Psalmist in the midst of his outward
misery, In and along with the favour
the song is also at the same time given,
For the person who is comforted through
God’s favour, is enabled to sing praise
to Him. Upon the song and out of it
follows the prayer.” “Believing ex-
pectation of mercy must not supersede,
but quicken, our prayers for it.” “ Day-
time” and “ night ” we understand, as in
ver. 3, a3 indicating continuance. The
assurance of the Psalmist is that God
would always show him His mercy.
Even in our greatest troubles there is
Divine mercy. “ The Psalmist called the
Lord the God of his life, because He
preserved and supported it, and must
awaken him out of the death to which
he seemed now appointed.”

3. UO ai som Ferme a al


PRALM XLII.


BROMILETIC COMMENTARY ; PSALMS,





“TY will ssy unto God my rock, Why
hast Thou forgotten me?” &c. Notice,
(1) His characterisation of God. ‘God,
my Rock ;” implying that God was his
strength, his defence, firm and immov-
able. (2) His expostulation with God.
“Why hast Thou forgotten me?” é&,
To bis suffering soul it seemed as though
God had forgotten him. But his spirit,
strong in faith, knew otherwise. The
inquiry, “ Why,” d&c., implies the con-
viction that God eould not possibly
even in appearance forget him much
longer, that soon his mourning must be
changed into rejoicing. Thus to have
access to God is no small consolation to
His people when they are tried.

4. In the assured anticipation of de-
liverance from trouble. ‘ Why art thou
cast down, O my soul?” &e. (See
notes and homiletic sxetch on ver. 5.)
This verse is a repetition of ver. 5, with


PSALM


this difference, instead of “ His counte-
nance” we have “ my countenance,” and
the words “and my God” are added at
the close. The idea is that when David
found salvation in God’s countenance or
favour, the clouds would pass away from
his own countenance, and it would be-
come radiant with gratitude and glad-
ness. ‘“ And my God” is a note of
triumph in response to the enemies who
had mockingly challenged him, “‘ Where
is thy God?” So the psalm closes with
notes of assured and complete victory.

Cono.usion.—1. Here ts instruction
for the depressed belvever. In your deep
dejection remember God, pray unto
Him, trust Him. In the land of the
Hermons He is as near to save thee as
in the sacred worship of the sanctuary.
2. Here +3 encouragement for the de
pressed beltever. ‘‘ Hope in God; for
thou shalt yet praise Him,” é&c.


>.C4 FES Gta


INTRODUCTION.


This psalm was composed by the same author as the preceding one, and has reference to the


game occasion.


It ia fitted to impart help and encouragement to the afflicted and desponding


in their troubles, The pious spirit of the author is clearly seen in the psalm.


Devout Lonainas.


The poet pours out his heart to God
in petitions, expostulations, and pro-
mises; but the prevailing tone of the
psalm is that of intense desire. He
longs

I. For vindication and deliverance.
“ Judge me, O God, and plead my cause
against an ungodly nation; O deliver
me” (vers. 1, 2). Notice—

l. The character of his enemies. “An
ungodly nation, ... the deceitful and
unjust man.” The word which is trans-
lated “ungodly” is in the margin more
correctly rendered “unmerciful.” Heng-
stenberg renders it “unloving.” It isa
word which may most fitly be applied
to the conduct of the Jewish nation at
the time of the rebellion of Absalom, to
which time the psalm most probably
refers. In the conduct of an immense
number of the people towards David,
there was no love, no mercy ; but dase


210


ingratitude, injustice, and cruelty.
“The deceitful and unjust man” may
have been said of many at the time
to which we suppose the psalm to refer,
and pre-eminently of Absalom and Ahi-
thophel (Comp. 2 Sam. xv., xvi., and
xvii.) The Psalmist was contending
against men who were cruel, treacher-
ous, and unjust.

2. The dejection of hts spirit. “Why
dost Thou cast me offf Why go I
mourning because of the oppression of
the enemy?” The entire tone of the
psalm forbids us to think that David
felt himself rejected of God. But his
circumstances at the time seemed in-
consistent with the guardianship of
God; and he, therefore, appeals te
Him on the matter. See notes on Pa
xlii. 9.

3. The nature of hes petition
“Judge me, O God, and plead my


s7


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM XLUI1.


rr cr


eause.” The enemies of the poet were
many and virulent. They persecuted
him and reproached him as a man for-
saken by God. And here he appeals to
God for vindication. He could honestly
and fearlessly appeal to the Lord to
judge between him and his enemies.
He had given no occasion to them for
the treatment he received from them.
And if God grant him deliverance from
them, that will be an unmistakable
evidence of the Divine judgment, a
clear vindication of the persecuted and
much-suffering poet. So he prays that
God would interpose and deliver him and
thus vindicate bim. For this he longs,

4, The strength of his plea. “For
Thou art the God of my strength.”
Hengstenberg: “ For Thou art my
guardian-God.” The Psalmist pleads
that he,was looking to God for strength
and protection ; that he was trusting in
the Lord. This plea is never urged
sincerely and earnestly but what it
avails with God.

II. For restoration to the tabernacle
of God. “O send out Thy light and
Thy truth; let them lead me,” de.
(vers. 3, 4). Notice—

1. He longs chtefiy for restoration to
the tabernacle of God. His great desire
is to be brought again unto God’s “ holy
hill and tabernacles.” “The centre of
all the Psajmist’s wishes is his return to
the sanctuary, because the exclusion
from that was, of all the marks of
the Divine displeasure under which he
suffered, the most palpable. In _ his
return to the sanctuary, he would find
a matter-of-fact justification, a pledge
of the return of God’s grace.— Hengsten-
berg. “ His heart is set,” says Matthew
Henry, “upon the holy hill and the
tabernacles, not upon his family com-
forts, his court preferments, or his
diversions; he could bear the want of
these, but he is impatient to see God’s
tabernacles again ; nothing so amiable
in his eyes as those,—thither he would
gladly be brought back.”

2. He looks for the realisation of hts
longings through the favour and fatth-
fulness of God. “QO send out Thy
light and Thy truth.” God’s light here
ia equivalent to His favour or mercy,


and His truth to His faithfulness. And
the Psalmist prays that through these
he may be led back to the enjoyment of
the privileges and blessings from which
he was at present so cruelly exiled,
Blessed is that man who, like David,
sets his hope firmly in the favour and
faithfulness of God. His hope shall
attain unto splendid fruition.

3. He promises to avati himself of the
opportunities of worship when he 1s
restored to the tabernacles of God.
“Then will I go unto the altar of God,”
&c. He will worship (1) With sacrifice.
“T will go unto the altar of God,” with
sacrifices for sin and offerings of grati-
tude. (2) With delight. ‘“ Unto God
my exceeding joy.” (See the sketch on
this verse.) (3) With praise. “Yea,
upon the harp will I praise Thee, O
God, my God.” Instrumental music
was largely used by the Hebrews in
their worship. ‘ David excelled at the
harp (1 Sam. xvi. 16-18), and with that
in which he excelled he would praise
God ; for God ia to be praised with the
best we have; it is fit He should be,
for He is the best.”.—M. Henry.

4, He encourages his soul to expect the
realisation of hrs longings. “ Why art
Thou cast down, O my soul}” d&e,
(ver. 5). (See homiletic sketch on ver.
5, and notes on vers. 5 and 11 of the
preceding psalm.)

ConoLusion.—In this psalm _ the
poet appears to us as a glorious example
of a man whose hope is steadily fixed in
God. Heroic was he in his trust in the
Lord. In the first verse, we see him
calmly trusting in the righteous judg-
ment of God ; in the second, he rests in
God as his strength ; in the third, he
looks expectantly to God for restoration
to his dearest privileges ; in the fourth,
he resolves to adore Him as his ex-
ceeding joy and his most treasured pos-
session ; in the fifth, he exults in con-
fident anticipation of the enjoyment of
all that he most deeply longed for ; and
all this at a time when circumstances
seemed all against him, and when to
the eye of sense his prospects were of
the darkest. Brave, trustful poet, we
cannot but admire thee! Let us alac
imitate him in this respect. v1

2


PRALM XLII,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS,


ee a see NN TE eT


Toe Avran or Gon.
(Verse 4.) .


“Then will I go unto the altar of
God, unto God my exceeding joy.”

The text opens to us two important
views.

I. The peculiar nature of that
worship which God has authorised.
It is going to the altar of our God. By
the altar only can God be approached.
Behold, then, the true character of ac-
ceptable worship.

1. There is tm tt a@ recognition of our
sin. There was no altar in Paradise.
When John beheld a vision of heaven,
he “saw no temple therein.” But in
the present state, in approaching God,
we go to His altar. The sacrifice of
Christ is made particularly prominent
in the Christian scheme to remind us
that we are sinful men, and cannot
draw near to God in our own name.

2. An acknowledgment of our just
liability to punishment. Worship is not
a claim of right, but a plea for mercy.
Sentence of death is denounced against
every transgressor of the law of God,
and in such a prayer as that of the pub-
lican its justice is acknowledged. The
ancient offerer of sacrifice acknowledged
this, and we do the same when we flee
to Christ’s atonement,

3. The true worship of God recognises
Him as propitious through an atonement
appointed by Himself. It was not an
altar of human device to which the
Psalmist resolved to go, but to the altar
of his God. The cross is “the altar of
God,” His Son is the victim; the pre-
cious blood of Christ is the accepted
atonement ; and coming to Him in faith,
our sin is purged and our persons are
accepted.

4, Vur worship being an approach to
the altar of God, we are assured of con-
stant access to Him. The priests had
their courses, that there might be no
intermission in the service, The fire of
the altar was never extinct. The altar
was always there to receive the sacrifice,
and the altar of incense was an emblem
of the acceptance of perpetual prayer.
The sacrifice of Christ needs never to be

212


repeated. It was offered “ once fou aiff,”
for “by one offering He hath for ever
perfected them that are sanctified.”
Our High Priest never dies, but ‘hath
obtained an unchangeable priesthood.”
Access to the throne of grace is ever
given, and our prayers are always
accepted,

If. The emphatic description which
is given us of the joy which resulta
from it. ‘To God my exceeding joy.”
“Blessed is the man whom Thou
choosest,” &c. ‘ How amiable are Thy
tabernacles, O Lord of hosts!”

Contemplate the sources of this joy,
that you may aspire after it.

1. We are placed in the presence of a
Being of infinite glory and perfection.
The joy in question supposes reconcilia-
tion with God, and when that is effected
all our intercourse with Him may be
adoring gratitude. We cannot approach
the sublime of nature, we cannot be
brought into the presence of an ele-
vated character, without a deeply im-
terested and joyous impression; but
here God reveals Himself to man. In-
finite beauty, glory, purity, and perfee-
tion says, “Come up to me in the holy
mount ;” and in answer to our prayer,
“T beseech Thee, show me Thy glory,”
He makes all His goodness pass before us,
David anticipated this joy (Ps. lxiii. 1, 2).

2. True worship enables us to appro-
priate this display of glory to ourselves.
There is an inexpressible emphasis in the
words “My God.” All His glory is ours.
Is He the everlasting God? Then, be-
cause He lives, I shall live also. Is His
fulness infinite? Then my supplies are
secure, ‘All my springs are in Thee.”
Is He omnipotent? Then, “if God be
for us, who can be against us?” And
whatever other perfections He has are
mine. Mine is His wisdom, His mercy,
and His love.

3. It is the joy of confidence. The
very reason why we seek God is the
want of confidence in everything beside,
and in Him we may confide absolutely.
God in Christ assures us of this The


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


PSALE ELIV,


i


philosopher tells me to span the hea-
vens. I am an atom, a nothing. I
look upon God incarnate, and all my
chilling calculations fly. Iam not un-
noticed among His works. He came to
this world, minify it as you may, to seek
and to save that which was lost. When
I go “to the altar of my God,” I see
that He is love. He that so loved me
can never be indifferent to me, and can
never forget ma,


4, The foy of renewed assurances of
His favour to ws. Doubts and fears
may oppress and chill, till we steadfastly
behold His beauty in the sanctuary, and
by renewed acts of faith obtain richer
manifestations of His love, when our
peace flows like ariver. Comp. Ps, xxiii.
16, 17, 28.

5. There ts the joy of hope The
tabernacle was an emblem of heaven.—


Richard Watson, abridged,


PSALM XLIV.


Iyrropvcriox.
tption.—* To the Chief Musician for the sons of Korah, Maschil.” fee Introduc-


Buperseri
tion to Psalm XLII.


We have no means of determining who was the author of the paslm. Nor are we able te


ascertain with certainty upon what occasion it was composed. The various speculations and

conjectures on the subject are not amongst the most satisfactory things with which we are

acquainted, Looking at the psalm from the homiletic standpoint, we have: a well-founded

ae (ver. 1-8); a painful experience (ver. 9-16); and an earnest appeal and prayer (ver,
—26,


A WELL-FOUNDED ASSURANCE,
(Verses 1-8.)


In the consideration of the Psalmist’s
confidence in God, founded upon His
former doings on behalf of His chosen
people, many points will arise which,
without any forced interpretation, will
illustrate His work for and in the soul
of the Christian believer, and which are
fitted to encourage our confidence in
Him. We have here— ;

L A commemoration of God’s for-
mer and glorious doings.

1. The nature of these doings. “Thou
didst drive out the heathen with Thy
hand, and plantedst them; Thou didst
afflict the people, and cast them out.”
The Psalmist here sets forth (1) The
expulsion of the Canaanites and the es-
tablishment of the Israelites im their
land. By the Divine power the original
inhabitants of Canaan were driven from
that country, and the chosen people
planted therein. The figure of planting
a nation or @ people is frequent in both
literature and conversation, We meet
with it in Exod. xv. 17 and Ps, lxxx, 8
The figure suggests the ideas of isfe,
growth, and fruitfulness, It is with a
view to these that we plant trees, (2)


The affliction of the Canaanttes, and the
growth of the Israelites. ‘Thou didst
afflict the people, and cast them out.”
Upon the heathens the Lord brought
calamities, while He blessed His own
people with increase in the land. The
words “cast them out,” or “spread
them abroad,” refer not to the Ca-
nasnites, but to the Israelites. God
had extended them like the branches of
a tree. We meet with the same idea in
Ps. Ixxx. 11. “It sent out its boughs
to the sea, and its branches to the river.”
Barnes says that “the parallelism here
clearly demands” this interpretation.
This view is adopted by Alexander,
Hengstenberg, Luther, De Wette, Tho-
luck, et al. Now, whether we view
this work in relation to the nation ex-
pelled or to the nation planted and in-
creased, it is a great work; and illus
trates His work in us. It is He that
casts out our spiritual foes, our inbred
sins; that plants us in the kingdom of
His grace; and that enables us to grow
in grace. The beginning and the pro-
gress of spiritual life are with Him.


2. The Author of these doings. “Work
213


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





Thou didst,” &c. (1) Negatively. “They
got not the land in possession by their
own sword, neither did their own arm
save them.” It was by neither their
might nor their courage that they dis-
possessed the Canaanites and took their
land. (2) Positively. ‘ But Thy right
hand, and Thine arm, and the light of
Thy countenance.” He favoured them
and fought for them, or they would
have fought in vain. How true is this
in spiritual life! The foes of our soul-
life laugh to scorn our unaided efforts
to conquer them. God alone has the
power to quicken us into spiritual life,
enable us to grow, and vanguish our
foes,

3. The reason of these doings. ‘ Be-
cause Thou hadst a favour unto them.”
The Israelites did not merit the glorious
doings of God on their behalf. We
discover little merit in them, but much
demerit, They owed all to God’s free
and sovereign favour, “ Not for thy
righteousness,” said Moses, “or for the
aprightness of thine heart, dost thou
go to possess their land; but for the
wickedness of these nations the Lord
thy God doth drive them out from be-
fore thee, and that He may perform the
word which the Lord sware unto thy
fathers, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob.
Understand, therefore, that the Lord
thy God giveth thee not this good land
to possess it for thy righteousness ; for
thou art a stiffnecked people.” God's
work in us, for our salvation, is entirely
due to His own free, unmerited, sove-
reign favour. “ By grace are ye saved.”

4, The obligation of every generation
to transmit to posterity an account of the
doings of God in their day. “ We have
heard with our ears, O God, our fathers
have told us,” dc. Generation after
generation had been thrilled with the
narration of God’s glorious deeds of
former times. ‘Those that went be
fore us told us what God did in their
days, we are bound to tell those that
come after us what He has done in our
days, and let them do the like justice
to those that shall succeed them; thus
shall one generation praise His works
to another, the fathers to the children
shall make known His truth.”

214


5. The obligation of every generation
to profit by the experiences of those who
have gone before.’ We are the “ heirs of
all the ages,” and ought to be wiser,
braver, holier than those who have gone
before us. History is charged with (1)
Admonttion as to the evil of sin, &.
(2) Encouragement to trust in God, to
serve humanity for Him, &. Are we
heeding its teachings?

II. A declaration of confidence
in God. (Ver. 4-8). This confidence
is set forth, and is worthy of imitation
in several respects.

1. In the ground on which their faith
rested. It rests on what He had done
for their fathers and for them in former
times. Out of what He has done, their
faith in what He will do grows. There
is implied here belief in His unchange-
ableness and faithfulness. He had ful-
filled His promises to their fathers ;
will He not fulfil them to them also}
He had done glorious things for their
fathers ; will He not do glorious things
for them also? Is He not The Immut-
able? God’s past doings in and for us
should encourage us to put strong con-
fidence in Him. We are “confident of
this very thing, that He which hath
begun a good work in you will perform
it until the day of Jesus Christ.”

2. In the relationship which He sus-
tained to them. ‘“ Thou art my King,
O God.” “They had taken God for
their sovereign Lord, had sworn alle-
giance to Him, and put themselves under
His protection.” He who as the King
of their fathers did put forth His power
and glory on their behalf, is appealed to
by the Psalmist and people as their
King in expectation of protection and
victory for them. As Hengstenberg
puts it, “As certainly as God is the
King of Israel—this His past deeds
plainly testify—so certainly must these
deeds again revive, must He also at the
present time dispense salvation to His
people.” If God is our King, we may
look for protection from Him.

3. In the petition which they present
to Him. ‘Command deliverances for
Jacob.” Notice here (1) The extent of
their desires. ‘ Deliverances.” Not
one; but as many as are needed for


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





PSALM XLI¥,





their complete salvation. (2) The great-
ness of their faith, “Command.”
Michaelis says: ‘ Because he had named
God his King, he makes use of a word
which points to kingly authority and
irresistible power.” He has but to
command it, and their salvation shall be
accomplished. He speaks, and it is
done, We are reminded of the centurion
and our Lord. ‘Speak the word only,
and my servant shail be healed.” Let
us honour God by a like faith in His
power to save.

4. In the renunciation of other objects
of trust. “1 will not trust in my bow,
neither shall my sword save me.” In
ver. 3 the Psalmist declares that it was
not their power or weapons that had
gaved them, but God alone, and in this
verse he announces their abandonment
of all confidence except that which is
fixed in God. In the spiritual life our
faith must be fixed in Christ alone for
all things, for pardon, power, purity,
victory, glory. From first to last we
have no Saviour but Jesus, and He is
all-sufficient.

5. In their assurance of wietory.
“Through Thee will we push down our
enemies ; through Thy name will we
tread them under that rise up against us.
. . . Thou savest us from our enemies,
and dost put to shame them that hate
us.” The idea of the 5th verse is that
of a conqueror with his foes completely
vanquished, and prostrated and power-
less before him. And the 7th verse
should be translated and interpreted not
in reference to their past but present


foes ; not to what God had done for
them, but what He would do for them.
They were confident of complete victory
through Him. In the Christian life
and conflict we may confidently anticipate ,
victory through our Lord. ‘The God
of peace shall bruise Satan under your
feet shortly.” “ We are more than con-
querors through Him that loved us.”

6. In their praise of God. “In God
we boast all the day long, and praise
Thy name for ever.” “ Boast” is not a
good rendering. Praise would express
the meaning. Or as Hengstenberg tran-
slates: “‘ God we extol continually, and
Thy name we praise for ever.” They
extolled Him as their God, their King,
in whom they confidently trusted for
salvation. They resolve to praise Him,
1) Continually. “ All the day long.”
ts Perpetually, “ For ever.”

Conotusion. Surely this  well-
founded assurance in God, rising out of
the recollection and celebration of His
glorious doings for His people in former
days, and exercised in the midst of such
dark and distressing circumstances, is a
thing to be emulated by us. Let every
Christian believer seek to tread the path
of life, perform its duties, bear its trials,
and fight its battles, singing,—


“ This God is the God we adore,
Our faithful, unchangeable Friend;
Whose love is as great as His power,
And knows neither measure nor end.
"Tis Jesus, the First and the Last,
Whose Spirit shall guide us safe home ;
We'll praise Him fer all that is past,
And trost Him for all that’s to come.”
—Hart.


A Paro. Experience
(Verses 9-16.)


We here come at once upon a complete
change of sentiment. In this and the
preceding section of the psalm we have
a double contrast. Here is a contrast
between the exultant confidence in God
expressed by the poet as the mouth-
piece of the people in the former section
and the sorrowful complaint of their
miseries in this section. Here also is
® contrast between what God had done


for them and for their fathers in time
past and what He was doing for them
now. Consider,—

L The miseries of which they com.
plain. Of these there are several.

1. Their rejection by God. “ But
Thou hast cast off, and put us to shame,
and goest not forth with our armies.”
The word translated “cast off” means
rejected, forsaken. We are not to sup

215


PRALM XLIV,





pose that the Psalmist believed that God
had utterly abandoned them. With the
previous section of the psalm in our
mind such a supposition is impossible,
But judging from their outward and
visible circumstances they seemed for-
saken by God. The usual tokens of
His favour and presence with them were
altogether wanting. One of these tokens
is here mentioned, “ Thou goest not
forth with our armies.” In former
times they went forth to war confident
of His presence with them, and returned
victorious, Now they go forth not
realising His presence, and return de-
feated and “put to shame.” (We will
not attempt to decide what battles and
other events in Jewish history are here
referred to. Such attempts as have been
made in this direction are of little worth.)

2. Their defeat ‘in batile and tts con-
sequent evils, ‘Thou makest us to turn
back from the enemy.” They had no
courage. They did not fight like brave
men. ‘They acted as mere mercenaries
of war and cowards, ‘“O Lord, what
shall I say, when Israel turneth their
backs before their enemies?” Defeat was
followed by—{1) Slaughter. “Thou
hast given us like sheep appointed for
meat.” Hengstenberg: ‘ Like sheep for
slaughter.” Margin: “As sheep of meat.”
M. Henry: ‘They make no more scruple
of killing an Israelite than of killing a
sheep ; nay, like the butcher, they make
a trade of it, they take a pleasure in it
as a hungry man in his meat.” (2)
Spotling. “They which hate us spoil
us for themselves.” “The enemies had
plundered according to their heart’s de-
sire, and without any effective restraint.”
(3) Captivity or Slavery, “Thou hast
scattered us among the heathen. Thou
sellest Thy people for nought, and dost
not increase Thy wealth by their price.”
We do not affirm that the people had
been literally taken captive into other
lands, or sold into slavery. But some
of the results of their defeat in battle
had been such that they may fitly be so
described. On ver. 12 Hengstenberg
says—“ The sense is: Thou hast given
Thy people into the power of their ene-
mies without trouble, without causing
the viciory even to be dearly bought,

216


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMS.


cones


as one who parts with a good for any price,
which he despises and hates, desiring
merely to get rid of it ; so that there is an
abbreviated comparison, Parallel is Jer.
xv. 13, ‘ thy substance and thy treasurea
will I give to the spoil without price.’”

3. The reproaches of their enemies.
“Thou makest us a reproach to our
neighbours,” dc., vers. 13, 14. Ac-
cording to ver. 13, the surrounding na-
tions treated them with contempt, as
a people forsaken by God, and power-
less to defend themselves against their
foes. UID, here translated “ byword,”
properly signifies a similitude, So
Hengstenberg translates it here, and
explains it thus: ‘‘ The misery of Israel
is so great, that people would figuratively
call a miserable man a Jew, just as liars
were called Cretans, wretched slaves,
Bardians, So far are the people from
being now ‘the blessed of the Lord,’ in
whom, according to the promise, all
the heathen are to be blessed.” The
“shaking of the head” means that their
enemies shook their heads at them in
scorn and derision.

4. Their own shame. “My confu-
sion is continually before me, and the
shame of my face hath covered me,” &c.,
vers, 15, 16. Notice here—({1) The
reason of this shame. “ For the voice of
him that reproacheth and blasphemeth ;
by reason of the enemy and avenger.”
The people were slandered, God was blas-
phemed, and their enemies were about
to wreak their vengeance upon them ;
therefore were they ashamed. (2) The
greatness of this shame. “The shame of
myfacehathcoveredme.” “Theshaming
is ascribed to the countenance, because
it always betrays itself, especially there.”
So great was the shame of the Psalmist,
who speaks in the name of the people,
that he represents himself as “ covered”
with blushes. (3) The incessancy of
this shame. “My confusion is con-
tinually before me.” There was no in-
termission from the sense of disgrace
which they felt. Such are the deep
miseries of which they complain to God.

II, The author of their miseries,
“Thou hast cast me off,” dc Six
times in as many verses they attribute
all their suffering and shame to Ged,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





He has done it all. Now a statement
of this kind needs to be weighed, and
its exact meaning ascertained before it
is accepted. We know that “ He doth
not afflict willingly, nor grieve the chil-
dren of men.” His great aim is to pro-
mote the well-being of His creatures,
To this end all His plans and workings
tend. That He should forsake His
people who trust in Him is inconceivable,
impossible. How, then, can He be said
to be the Author of their miseries? In
this way we understand it: “the meri-
torious cause” must have been in the
people. God never forsakes His people
unless they first forsake Him, There
must have been some important defec-
tion on their part in their relation to
God ere He would have allowed these
mniseries to come upon them. This
being the case we can understand how
the inflicting of the calamities was of
the Lord, Their enemies were but the
instruments by which their troubles
were effected ; and they could have had
no power against them unless, at the
least, it had been permitted them from
above. And that power would not have
been permitted them had there not
been some defection on the part of the
chosen people in their relation to God,
This, then, we take to be the meaning
of the Psalmist,— Thou hast done it by
withdrawing the light of Thy presence
and the shield of Thy protection.


Tit. The instruction which their °


miseries are fitted to afford. Three
lessons, at least, stand out prominently
here to which we shall do well to give
heed.

1. That God, in perfect consistency
with His faithfulness and love to Hts
people, may under certain circumstances


POALM XLIV.





withdraw from them the signs of His
presence and favour, and for a time ap-
parently abandon them to their enemies,
He may do so (1) 4s a chastisement for
their sins, “If his children forsake My
law, and walk not in My judgments, if
they break My statutes, and keep not
My commandments ; then will I visit
their transgression with the rod, and
their iniquity with stripes.” (2) For
the perfecting and showing forth of their
character. The case of Job is an ex-
ample of this.

2. That when the professed people of
God lose the signs of His presence and
Javour, they are held in contempt by the
world. Of this the Psalmist complains,
When Samson had proved unfaithful,
and forfeited the Divine favour, he
became an object of scoffing and ridicule
to those who had formerly trembled at
the mere mention of hisname. ‘If the
salt have lost his savour, it is thenceforth
good for nothing, but to be cast out, and
to be trodden under foot of men.” Here
is solemn warning for us.

3. That the people of God when bereft
of His presence and help, and suffering
at the hand of their enemies, do well to
carry their complaints to God Himself.
(1) Because the effort to draw near to
Him ts good and helpful. It relieves
the troubled heart, lessens the conscious
distance between Him and their soul,
&e. (2) Because He only is able to re
store the strength and joy which they have
lost. “Come, and let us return unto
the Lord ; for He hath torn, and He
will heal us; He hath smitten, and He
will bind us up. After two days will
He revive us; in the third day He will
raise us up, and we shall live in His
sight,”


An Earnest APPEAL AND PRAYER.
(Verses 17-26.)


L An earnest appeal. Vers. 17-22.

This appeal of the people to God is
based on the ground that they had not
apostatised from Him. In it there are
several prominent points. They assert
that they have—

1. Not broken His covenant. “We


have not forgotten Thee, neither have
we dealt falsely in Thy covenant.” By
this we understand the Psalmist to mean,
that there had been in the history of
the people no marked forgetfulness of
God, nor had there been any conapi-
cuous or prevalent departure oe the
21


PALM XLIV,





covenant which He made with their
fathers.

2. Not lapsed into idolatry. They
assert that they have not “ forgotten the
name of their God, or stretched out
their hands to a strange God.” The
stretching out of the hands is significant
of worship or prayer. ‘The force of this
verse is, that they have not apostatised
either by worshipping a strange god, or
forgetting the God of their fathers,

3. Not backslidden from God etther
tn heart or in life. “Our heart is not
turned buck, neither have our steps
declined from Thy way.” They had not
departed from Him in their heart. They
were still loyal to Him in their affections,
And in their goings they followed the
path which He had prescribed for them.

4. They appeal to the Omnascience of
God in proof of this. ‘‘Shall not God
search this out? for He knoweth the
secrets of the heart.” The “this” de-
notes the apostacy of which they had
protested that they were not guilty,
The force of the verse is, that if as a
nation there had been any considerable
departure from God, if in their hearts
they had apostatised from Him unto
idols, He would have known it, for He
knoweth all things, even the secrets of
the heart. Thus the verse is a very
solemn declaration that they had not
forsaken God,

5. As additional proof that their
miseries had not come upon them be-
cause of their departure from God, the
Psalmist says that they were suffering
severely and constantly because of their
attachment to Him. “For Thy sake
are we killed all the day long; we are
counted as sheep for the slaughter.”
The most conclusive proof that they
have not fallen away from God is, “ that
they are persecuted for the very sake
of God.” That which perplexed the
Psalmist was, that they should suffer so
severely although there had not been
any prevalent departure from God. Can
we reconcile this protestation of their
faithfulness with their miseries? Our
statement on
miseries” in the preceding homily ap-
pears irreconcileable with the statements
made by the poet in this appeal. Can

218


“the author of their


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


we explain this? and how! Matthew
Henry says: ‘‘ Though we cannot deny
but that we have dealt foolishly, yet we
have not dealt falsely in Thy covenant,
so as to cast Thee off and take to other
gods.” “ Tholuck accuses the Psalmiat
of a superficial view of sin (comp. on
the other hand the impressive reference
to the heart, vers. 18-21), whereby he
was led to charge God with breach of
fidelity, instead of seeking the blame in
the Church. The following remarks, it
is hoped, will remove the difficulty :-—
(1) When the Church here maintains
that she had not broken God’s covenant,
this manifestly refers only to fidelity in
the main, as to the chief matter, and
manifold smaller infidelities and weak-
nesses are not thereby excluded. These
smaller deviations justify the chastise-
ments of God, faithfulness in the main
excludes a total rejection. (2) When
the Church regards the suffering that
had come upon her as an anomaly, she
does so only in so far as this appears to
carry the aspect of continuance,—comp.
the words: ‘Cast us not off for ever,’
in ver. 23. The whole of the last
strophe shows, that the temptation will
be at an end the moment God has, in
point of fact, removed this appearance.
But this would not have been the case
if the suffering had formed in itself a
stone of stumbling for the Church. (3)
It is not to be overlooked, that we have


* here before us a didactic psalm. What


is declared in the form of history, forms
at the same time indirectly an impressive
admonition, (4) We must not expect
that every psalm shall fully exhibit all
particular points of truth, and so render
all misapprehension impossible. They
rather, on the contrary, require some-
what to be supplied.” —Hengstenberg.

Il An Earnest Prayer (vers. 23-
26). We have here—

1. Beliewing expostulations. “Awake,
why sleepest Thou, OQ Lord?” “ Why”
seems to imply the impossibility of any
reason being assigned for His sleep, and
the assurance that He will speedily
awake, “ Faith,” says David Dickson,
“doth not allow nor subscribe unto
carnal sense, but in presenting the ob-
jections thereof unto God, really refuteth


fr


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PeALM ELIV,





them, by avowing that such misregard-
ing of His own cause and servants, as
sense and temptation vented, is incon-
sistent with His nature, covenant, pro-
mises, and practices towards His people ;
for, ‘why sleepest Thou,’ is as much as,
it is not possible that Thou sleepest ;
and ‘ why’ here is not a word of quarrel-
ing, but a word of denying, that any
reason can be given for such a thought,
as God sleepeth.” ‘“ Wherefore hidest
Thou Thy face, and forgettest our afflic-
tion and oppression?” Sense says,
God is asleep and hath cast off His
people for ever. Faith replies, If so,
“why” is itso? Sense says, God hath
forgotten the affliction of His people.
Faith replies with a persistent ‘‘ Where-
fore ¢”

2. Urgent entreaties. “ Awake, arise,
cast us not off for ever. Arise for our
help, and redeem us for thy mercies’
sake.” This is a prayer that God, who
had seemed to take no interest in them,
would speedily evince an interest in them
and arise and save them. In ver. 12
they had complained that God had sold
them ; in ver. 26 they entreat Him to
redeem them. “If He sell us, it is not
any one else that can redeem us.”

3. Hffective pleas. (1) Their misery.
“For our soul is bowed down to the
dust ; our belly cleaveth unto the
earth.” The expression of the former
clause denotes great grief and fear, and
the figure of the latter clause extreme
prostration and affliction and inability
to assist themselves, (2) God’s mercy.
“Redeem us for Thy mercies’ sake,”
4.¢., in maintenance and _ illustration
of His character as a God of mercy.
Or, as the word is plural, ‘“ mercies,”
may it not mean for the sake of the
long line of mercies He had bestowed
upon them and their fathers? Let not
the long series of Thy mercies to Thy
people fail, and iet them not perish by
reason thereof. In any case, it is en


appeal to God on the ground of His
unmerited grace to save His afflicted
people.

ConoLUsion.—There are here some
practical points of great importance,
which we shall do well to ponder in
their relation to our own life,

l. The completeness of the Divine
scrutiny of human life. There is no
province of our life which escapes His
examination. ‘There is no flaw or sin,
however cleverly disguised, that will
escape detection when He searches us
(ver. 21).

2. The great support afforded by a
clear conscience in the time of affliction.
It was no small thing for the people
that in this the day of their distress
they were able to appeal to God as they
did (ver. 17-22). In his unparalleled
afflictions, Job received immeasurable
support and comfort from the posses-
sion of “a conscience void of offence
toward God and men” (Job xiii. 15).
And Shakespeare represents Wolsey as
thus sustained in the depth of his mis-
fortunes, and as saying of himeelf that
he was


*¢ Never so truly happy. ...
I know myself now; and I feel within me
A peace above all earthly dignities,
A still and quiet conscience,”


3. A grand inspiration and consolation
in the difficulties and disappointments of
Christian life and work, “For Thy
sake.” What is there that we cannot
dare, or do, or suffer for the sake of our
Lord, when we love Him supremely ?

4, In the whole of this section of
the Psalm we have a splendid example
of Faith fighting. Here it is attacking
doubt, repudiating the conclusions of
sense, scrutinising life and conduct, ex-
postulating and pleading with God.
Such faith must come out of conflict
victorious. Such faith may be ours.
Let us seek it,


PS4LM XL. HOXMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALME&.


2 SSS EO LE EE A RA A A LN SE RTA MTS


PSALM XLV.


IwTRODUCTIOR.


Superscription, —** To the Chief Musician upon Shoshannim, for the sons of Korah, Masshil,
A song of loves.”


“To the chief musician.” See notes on the title to Pa. xxxix. ‘‘ Upon Shoshannim ” “is a
musical direction to the leader of the Temple choir, and most probably indicates the melody


‘after’ or ‘in the manner of’ ( y, al,, A.V. upon’) which the Paalms were to be sung. As
‘Shoshannim’ literally signifies ‘ lilies,’ it has been suggested that the word denotes lily-shaped
instruments of music, perhaps cymbals, and this view appears to be adopted by De Wette (Die
Pealmen, p. 34). Hengstenberg gives to it an enigmatical interpretation, as indicating ‘ the
subject or subjects treated, as lilies figuratively for bride in Ps. xlv.; the delightful consola-
tions arid deliverances experienced in Ps. lxix., &.,’ which Dr. Davidson very truly characterises
as ‘a most improbable fancy.’ The LXX. and Vulgate have in both psalms trédp rap 4)\dei-
wIncopérwy and pro iis qui immutabuniur respectively, reading apparently Dw oY for
Daw oy - Ben Zeb regards it as an instrument of psalmody, and Junius and Tremellius,
after Kimchi, render it ‘hexachorda,’ an instrument with six strings, referring it to the root
shésh, ‘six,’ and this is approved by Eichorn in his edition of Simonis.”—W. Aldie Wright, i»
Smith's Dict. of the Bible,

Fuerst in his Lexicon says on «DAW, the name of a musical choir, Ps. xlv., lxix.,
lxxx., identical with Wray, Ps, lx. (which see).” On the latter word he says, ‘ Vy
ww (Ps. lx., for which Ps, lxxx. has Dawiw nv, » and also Daw alone) proper name
of one of the twenty-four music choirs (1 Chron, xxv.) left by David (Mf, Neh. xii. 31),
Ps, lx., so called from a master yaw (comp, the proper name Tow, 1 Chron, ii. 81, which
musical guild may have been stationed in JTY = OW TY (Josh. xv. 86).

“ For the sons of Korah.” See notes on the title to Ps, xlii.

“Maschil,” a didactic poem,

“A song of loves,” says Barnes, ‘‘ would properly denote a song devoted to love, or in cele.
bration of love; that is, in which love would 2 the main idea,”

The author of the psalm, and the occasion on which it was written, are both unknown.

The reader who desires to acquaint himself with the various opinions as to whom the
psalm refers or is applicable, we would refer to the “Introductions” to the psalm in the
commentaries of Barnes, Hengstenberg, e¢ al. For ourselves, we believe in its Messianic ap-
plication, “The forty-fifth psalm,” says Canon Liddon, ‘‘is a picture of the peaceful and
glorious union of the King Messiah with His mystical bride, the Church of redeemed humanity,
Messiah is introduced as a Divine King reigning among men. His form isof more than human
beauty; His lips overflow with grace; God has blessed Him for ever, and has anointed Him
with the oil of gladness above His fellows, But Messiah is also directly addressed as God; He
is seated upon an everlasting throne,” This psalm cannot “be adapted without exegetical
violence to the circumstances of Solomon, or of any other king of ancient Israel; and the New
Testament interprets the picture of the Royal Epithalamium of the one true King Messiah,”


Tax Prawe or ree Messian-Kina.
(Verses 1, 2.)


I. The reasons why He is praised. larity of this reduplicated form merely


1. Because of the beauty of His  consista in this, that it stands for 7p)
character. “Thou art fairer than the ssieire


Bi\idvem of sien: 2k TH ane e ee eed the second Yod not being the first radi-
translated, “Thou art fairer,” is a very cal repeated, but arising out of the third
unusual expression. This word, 5*D" (7); and 4"5? being put by the punc-


sra7?


according to Fuerst, is the 2d ‘person ‘ators after the analogy of Kal.”

eee ine of poche ibe pee Ae Hengstenberg gives the force of the

a pean ne word as, “Thou art beautifulness, for,

tifully formed, with YQ (more than) ‘Thou art perfectly beautiful. The

Ps, xlv. 3” (2 A. V.) “The irregu- beauty here, since it is described in
220


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALM.





what follows, as the ground of the
Divine blessing, cannot be simply out-
ward beauty, but only the expression
and image of spiritual perfection.”
The beauty of Christ’s character when
studied as it is presented to us by the
four evangelists is an exhaustless theme.
We can only indicate certain points and
leave them. Consider (1) His righte-
ousness as attested by unbelrevers. When
He demanded of His enemies, “ Which
of you convinceth me of sin?” they
were speechless, Pilate said, “I find
no fault in this man.” The Roman
centurion said, “Certainly this was a
righteous man.” (2) His association
with sinners without contracting the
slightest impurity. (3) His treatment
of personal enemies. He prayed for
those who crucified Him, “ Father, for-
give them, for they know not what they
do.” (4) Hts everburning hatred of sin,
and His quenchless lowe for sinners.
(5) His unreserved and hearty devotion
to the Supreme Will. (6) His Divine
self-sacrifice. We can only mention
these points out of many others. But,
if the reader desires to see the singular
and superhuman beauty of Christ’s cha-
racter most thoughtfully and eloquently
set forth, we refer him to the chapter
on “ The Character of Jesus forbids His
possible Classification with Men,” in
“Nature and the Supernatural,” by
H. Bushnell, D.D. Read the chapter,
and with deeper conviction and intenser
fervour, you will exclaim, “ Thou art
fairer than the children of men !”

2. Because of the excellency of His
speech. ‘‘Grace is poured into thy
lips.” “The grace which is here speci-
slly ascribed to the lips is manifestly
but a reflection of the loveliness of the
speech which streams from the lips.”
See this when he was a child talking
with the doctors in the temple: “ All
that heard Him were astonished at His
understanding and answers.” And
afterwards, when He taught in the syna-
gogue, the people ‘were astonished and
said, Whence hath this man _ this
wisdom?” When certain officers had
been sent by the chief priests and Phari-
sees to seize Him, they returned saying,
“Never man spake like this man.”


PSALM XLV.


—— ee


When He spake in the synagogue at
Nazareth, ‘all bare Him witness, and
wondered at the gracious words which
proceeded out of His mouth.” Recall
His words to the penitent, to the doubt-
ing, to the anxious, to the bereaved, de.
Think of His words concerning the
Father, &c. Truly, “Grace is poured
into Thy lips.”

3. Because of His constant enjoyment
of the Divine favour. “ Therefore, God
hath blessed Thee for ever.” Mysterious
is the union between the Father and
the Son. But we know it affords un-
speakable delight to the Father. ‘Mine
elect in whom My soul delighteth,”
“My beloved Son, in whom I am well


pleased.” Here, then, are the highest
reasons for praising the Messiah-
King.


II. The manner in which He is
praised,

1. Heartily. “My heart is inditing
a good matter.” Margin: ‘My heart
boileth, or bubbleth up.” Hengsten-
berg: “My heart boils with good
words.” He speaks not the coolly
calculated praise of the intellect, nor is
he about to produce some beautiful
work of poetic art merely, but to utter
the irrepressible emotions of admiration
and love. His heart is about to relieve
itself in praise. Hearty praise is the
only praise which God accepts.

2. Readily. ‘“‘My tongue is as the
pen of a ready writer.” The heart of
the poet is so filled with his theme
“that he has no need to seek for words ;
but they flow in upon him of themselves
and flow out again.” In the case of the
Psalmist, a full heart made a fluent
tongue.

III, The excellence of this praise.
“A good matter.” It is good—

1. Because of the excellence of the
person praised. It is fitting and right
that goodness should be reverenced,
that beauty should be admired, &c.
He is “ the chiefest among ten thousand,
. .. yea, He is altogether lovely.”

2. Because of the reflex influence of
the exercise upon the person offering
praise. By sincerely praising God we
become like Him in those features for
which, we praise Him The exercise #

221


FesLM ELV.


transforming. As we dwell with devout
admiration on His beauty we ourselves
become beautiful. The praise of the
supremely good is an important eon-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





dition of the true development of our
nature, and one of the chief elements
of human joy. In heaven the praise is
ceaseless,


Tux Mxssian as a Maszsrio ConQuEBOR,
(Verses 3-5.)


The Messiah is here represented as a
Hero going forth to battle. He whose
character is so beautiful, whose words
are so gracious, is also a man of war.
“The royal bridegroom,” says Matthew


Henry, “is a man of war, and His ,


nuptials do not excuse Him from the
field of battle; nay, they bring Him to
the field of battle, for He is to rescue
His spouse by dint of sword out of her
captivity, to conquer her, and to conquer
for her, and then to marry her.” It is
important to bear in mind that “the
imperatives have prophetic import.
The Psalmist calls upon the king to do
that, which He shall surely perform.”

I. The enterprise which He has
undertaken. He is here represented
as golug forth to subdue His enemies in
the world. Here are two points—

1. Christ has enemies tn the world.
“The carnal mind is enmity against
God.” The unrenewed man in _ his
heart and by his deeds, if not in words,
says, “ We will not have this man to
reign over ws.”

2. Christ 1s engaged ta the conquest of
His enemies in the world. He conquers
them by converting them into His
friends. He destroys rebela by making
them His loyal subjects. His great
work is the conversion and salvation of
souls,

Ii. The manner in which He goes
forth to this enterprise. “Gird Thy
sword upon Thy thigh, O Hero, with
Thy glory and Thy majesty.” The
“sword” of the Hero is the Word of
God. “The sword of the Spirit is the
Word of God,” “The Word of God is
quick and powerful, and sharper than
any two-edged sword,” &c. “By the
promises of that Word, and the grace
contained in those promises, souls are
made willing to submit to Jesus Christ
and eee His loyal subjects ; by the

23


threatenings of that Word, and the
judgments executed according to them,
those that stand out against Christ
will in due time be brought down and
ruined.” (Comp. Rev. xix. 15.) The
Hero goes forth also in His “ glory and
majesty.” ‘ He has a threefold glory.
His glory, as God, consists in a display
of the infinite perfections and excel-
lencies of His nature. Thia glory He
possessed with the Fathe: before the
world was. His glory, as man, consists
im the perfect holiness of His heart and
life. His glory, as God and man united
in one Person, the Mediator, consists in
His perfect fitness to perform all those
works which the office of Mediator
requires of Him, This is the glory in
which Christ appears, when He goes
forth to subdue sinners to Himself ; and
this, therefore, is the glory which is
meant in our text.” . . . He possesses
“everything which is necessary, either
to satisfy the justice and honour of
God, or to excite and justify the utmost
love, admiration, and confidence of man.
. . . He wished Him also to appear in
His majesty. The difference between
majesty and glory consists in this:
Glory is something which belongs to
either the person or the character of
a being; but majesty is more properly
an attribute of office, especially of the
regal office, This office Christ sustains,
He is exalted to be a Prince as well as
a Saviour; He is King of kings and
Lord of lords; and it is principally in
His character of a king, that He sub-
dues His enemies, and dispenses pardon,
The Psalmist, therefore, wished Him to
appear in this character, arrayed in all
His awful majesty, that while His glory
excited admiration, and delight, and
love, His majesty might produce re-
verential awe, and lead sinners to sub.
mission and obedience.” — Payson,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





Il The Reasons for which He goes
forth to this enterprise. ‘“ Because of
truth and meekness and righteousness.”
“Truth” as opposed to all lying or
fraud ; ‘‘ meekness ” as opposed to pride
and arrogance ; and “ righteousness ” as
opposed to all injustice. The King rides
forth to war in the cause of the truthful,
the meek, and the righteous. He wages
relentless war against falsehood, violence,
and injustice. His kingdom is founded
and extended neither by deceit, nor
arrogance, nor mere irresistible force,
His reign is the reign of truth, gentle
ness, and equity.

IV. The success which He achieves
in this enterprise. The Messiah is
represented as “ riding prosperously ” on
in His career. He advances successfully,
victoriously, ‘Thy right hand shall
teach Thee terrible things. Thine ar-
rows are sharp in the heart of the King’s
enemies ; whereby the people fall under
Thee.” With His right hand the Hero
achieves deeds which strike the world
with amazement and fear. On ver. 5
Barnes says: “ Literally, Thine arrows
are sharp—the people under Thee shall
fall—tin the heart of the enemies of the
King. The process of thought in the


PeALM XLV,





verse seems to be this: First, The arrows
are seen as sharp or penetrating. Second,
The people are seen falling as those
arrows are shot forth. Third, It is seen
that those who fall are the enemies of the
King, and that the arrows have pierced
the heart. . . . The reference here is to
the truth, and to the power of that truth
in penetrating the hearts of men.” The
arrows pierce some hearts with convic-
tion, and conversion follows, But the
incorrigibly impenitent will be pierced
with the sharp arrows of His wrath.

Conoiusion.—The ultimate success of
the Messiah's enterprise ts certain. 1.
The nature of His government secures tt.
Truth is stronger than error ; love than
hatred ; righteousness than injustice, d&c.
2. The march of events shows tt. Christ’s
ideas, principles, &c., are conquering the
world. 3. God guarantees tt. ‘I shall
give Thee the heathen for thine inheri-
tance,” &, ‘He must reign until He
hath put all enemies under His feet.”
Are we with Him or against Him?
Sinners, will you bow to the sceptre of
His grace, or resist Him until you are
smitten down by his terrible right hand ¢
Choose ye.


Tue Mrsatan’s Reian anv Jor.
(Verses 6-9.)


We pass from the contemplation of the
Messiah as a Hero to regard Him as a
King. Vers. 6 and 7 are quoted by the
author of the Epistle to the Hebrews
in proof of the fact that the Christ is
exalted by God above the angels. He
certainly regards the words in the Psalm
as applying originally to Christ. So
that we have excellent authority for
regarding the Psalm as Messianic.

I. The reign of the Megsiah. ‘“ Th
throne, O God, is for ever and ever,
se. The Psalmist here announces—

1. The righteousness of Its reign.
“ The sceptre of Thy kingdom is a right
sceptre.” “A sceptre of righteousness
is the sceptre of Thy kingdom” (Heb.
i. 8). Hengstenberg: “A sceptre of
equity is the sceptre of Thy kingdom.”
The laws and administration of the


Messiah’s empire are just. (1) Hts rule
over man as an individual ts right. All
His requirements are in harmony with
and tend to promote our wellbeing. In
keeping His commandments “ there is
great reward.” (2) Hts rule over man tm
his social relations ts right. What could
be more equitable or more wise than the
great rule laid down by our Lord for the
regulation of our conduct towards each
other, “ All things whatsoever ye would
that men should do to you, do ye even
so to them ; for this is the law and the
prophets”? (3) Hts rule over man tm
his relations to God tsright, He re-
quires us to obey, reverence, and love
God. Isit not reasonable and equitable
that the most excellent and gracious
Being should be loved ; that the most
holy and glorious Being should be reve-
&23


POALM XLV,


renced ; that our Creator, Sustainer,
and Sovereign should be obeyed? ‘The
law is holy, and the commandment is
holy and just and good.” His reign is
not only equitable, but benevolent.
Moreover, the Psalmist represents the
righteous administration of the Messiah’s
kingdom as proceeding from His own
habitual righteousness and love there-
unto. “ Thou hast loved righteousness
and hated iniquity.”

2. The perpetuity of His reign.
“Thy throne, O God, is for ever and
ever.” The righteousness of His domi-
nion and its perpetuity are closely related
to each other. It is eternal because it
is equitable. “Of the increase of His
government and peace there shall be no
end, upon the throne of David, and
upon His kingdom, to order it, and to
establish it with judgment and with
justice from henceforth even for ever.”
Earthly monarchs have to yield up
crown and sceptre at the bidding of
death ; but the Messiah-King ever lives,
Earthly dynasties pass away; but His
empire is ever increasing, and shall for
ever endure.

IL The joy of the Messiah. “ There-
fore, O God, Thy God hath anointed
Thee,” de.

1. His joy, which ts here expressed by
the anointing of the Father. Alford
says: “We must distinguish this
anointing from the tygisey adrav & debe
arsupoars cyl x. duvcwe of Acts x. 38,
and the ixgiosv us of Isa. lxi. 1. For it
is a consequent upon the righteous course
of the Son of God in His humanity, and
therefore belongs to His triumph, in
which He is exalted above His wéroyou,
Again, ‘the oil of gladness’ seems
rather to point to a festive and triumph-
ant than to an inaugurative unction.
We should therefore rather take the
allusion to be, as in Psalms xxiii. 5;
xcil, 10, to the custom of anointing
guests at feasts ; so that as the King in
the Psalm is anointed with the oil of
rejoicing above His fellows, because of
His having loved righteousness and
hated iniquity, so Christ in the jubilant
celebration of His finished course at His
exaltation in heaven is anointed with
the festive oil, waa rots uerdgoug abrod

234


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSA LMS.





. ‘Oil of rejoicing’ (oil indicative
of j joy, as it is of superabundance: e
Isa, lxi. 3) beyond thy fellows (i.e, in
the Psalm, other kings) . . . We must,
I think, take werdyoug (Heb. i. 9) as
representing other heavenly beings,
partakers in the same glorious and sir
less state with Himself, though not in
the strict sense His ‘fellows. .. .
Thus only can the figure of anointing at
a triumphant festival be carried out
consistently—that triumph having take,
place on the exaltation of the Redeemer
to the Father’s right hand and throne
when the whole of the heavenly com-
pany, His «rover in glory and joy, being
anointed with the oil of gladness, His
share and dignity was so much greater
than theirs.”

2. His joy, in His bride—the Church.
“Upon Thy right hand did stand the
queen in gold of Ophir.” The Church
is here and elsewhere in Scripture -re-
presented as the Bride of Christ. Con
cerning the Church, two things are here
indicated by the Psalmist. (1) Her
honourable position, “upon Thy right
hand.” ‘The place on the right hand
is tle place of honour.” In the affec-
tions of the Messiah the Church has the
place which the bride has in the affeo-
tions of her husband. “Christ loved
the Church, and gave Himself for it,”
&c. (Eph. v. 25-27). (2) Her glorious
dress. ‘The queen in gold of Ophir.”
The gold of Ophir was proverbial for its
fineness. The dress of the Church con-
sists of the graces of character ex-
emplified by her members. These are
marked by two prominent features.
Purity. Christians are “ arrayed in fine
linen clean and white; for the fine linen
is the righteousnesss of sainta.” Pre-
ctousness, We owe our redemption and
all our graces to “the precious blood of
Christ.” More precious than “ gold of
Ophir” are the virtues and graces of a
Christ-like soul.

3. His joy in the handmaids of Him-
self and His bride. “Whereby they
have made Thee glad. Kings’ daughters
are among Thy honourable women.”
The King was made glad by the dis-
tinguished persons who attended upon
Him and His consort. “The number


7


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


ing of kings’ daughters among His
honourable women, or maids of honour,
intimates that the kings whose daughters
they were, should be tributaries to Him,
and dependents on Him, and would
therefore think it a preferment to their
daughters to attend Him.” May we
not discover here a prophecy that every-
thing which is distinguished, exalted,
and beautiful shall become a handmaid
to the religion of Christ? Science shall
bring her discoveries and lay them at
the feet of Jesus, to be used for the pro-
motion of His cause, Architecture
shall put forth her noblest efforts in His
service. And poetry and music, paint-
ing and sculpture, shall consecrate them-
selves to Him. To a great extent this
is already true. One day it shall be
completely and universally true.

4. The greatness and diffusiveness of
His joy. ‘All Thy garments smell of
myrrh, and aloes, and cassia, out of the
ivory palaces.” Palaces whose chambers
were adorned and probably inlaid with








ivory seem to have been common
amongst princes and wealthy men.
Comp. 1 Kings xxii. 39; Song of Sol.
vii. 4; Amos iii 15, vi. 4. From such
palaces, the maids of honour and the
consort are represented as coming, to the
great joy of the King. The garments
smelling of myrrh, and aloes, and cassia,
seem to us to refer to the anointing,
which was so generous that His gar-
ments were impregnated with the
odours and diffused the choice perfumes
around,

Conciusion.—We have two most in-
spiring facts—l. The Messiah reigneth,
reigneth in righteousness, and shall
reign forever. 2. The Messiah rejoiceth,
in the Father’s delight in Him, in the
Church which He loves, and in the dis-
tinguished handmaids who wait upon
His cause. One day His joy will be
complete. He “shall be satisfied.” Be
it ours, however feebly, to the utmost of
our powers to extend His reign and
enhance His joy.


Toe CuurcH AND Her Lorn.
(Verses 10-17.)


In these verses we have—

I. Exhortation to the Ohurch.
“ Hearken, O daughter, and consider,
and incline thine ear,” &c. (vers. 10
and 11). ‘This is the language of the
Psalmist addressed to the Church, and
the Bride of the Messiah. She is ex-
horted—

1. Zo devote herself unreservedly to
Him. “Forget thine own people and
thy father’s house.” “The idea here is
that which we find so often enforced in
the New Testament, that they who be-
come the followers of the Saviour must
be willing to forsake all for Him, and to
identify themselves with Him and His
cause. The strongest earthly ties are
to be made subservient to a higher and
stronger tie, if we would become true
followers of the Saviour.” — Barnes.
“ He that loveth father or mother more
than Me is not worthy of Me, and he
that loveth son or daughter more than
Me is not worthy of Me” Christ
requires our supreme affection.

P


2. To reverence Him. “He is thy
Lord, and worship thou Him.” ‘Sarah
obeyed Abraham, calling him lord.”
“Let the wife see that she reverence
her husband.” “ Christ is the Head of
the Church. The Church is subject
unto Christ.” The Church must pay
Divine honours to her Lord; must sub-
mit to His authority, and worship Him
as God.

I. Encouragement to the Church
The Church is encouraged by the
Psalmist to expect, if she thus reverences
and devotes herself to her Lord, that—

1. The King shall delight tn her.
“So shall the King greatly desire thy
beauty.” The more we renounce all
sinful and selfish inclinations, that we
may please the Lord Christ, the more
acceptable shali we be found in His
sight, And not simply acceptable, but
pleasureable, ‘(The Lord taketh plea
sure in His people.” By supreme devo-
tion to Him we may gratify the heart of


Christ,—give Him joy.


3. Distinguished peoples shall honour
her. “ And the daughter of Tyre shall
be there with a gift; the rich among
the people shail intreat thy favour.”
“In the time of the Psalmist, Tyre was
probably the most wealthy and luxuri-
ous commercial town then existing ; and
it is referred to here as meaning that
persons of highest rank, and of the
greatest riches, and those who were sur-
rounded most by affluence and luxury,
would honour” the Church when faith-
ful to her Lord. Hengstenberg trans-
lates: ‘“‘So will the daughter Tyre im-
plore thee with gifts, the rich among
the people.” He says: “The object of
the earnest entreaty is reception into the
community of the people of God (comp.
Is. xliv. 5, Ps. xlvii, 9)... . Only
when the Church of God really occupies
the position of the Church of God, can
prayer be directed to her for reception
into her society. The Church exercises
a drawing power toward those that are
without, in exact proportion to her own
internal connection with the Lord. Her
surrender to the Lord forms the ground
of the heathen’s surrender to her.”
When the Church is thoroughly de-
voted to her Lord, the world will hon-
our her by seeking union with her. A
devoted Church would speedily result
in a converted world.

III. The glory of the Church. “The
King’s daughter is all glorious within,
her clothing is of wrought gold.” The
“within” is to be understood in a local
sense. The bride was glorious within
her father’s palace. The Church of
Christ is glorious when fully conse-
erated to Him. The glory of holiness
adorns her splendidly as a garment of
fine gold. Christ has given her His
own glory. ‘The glory which Thou
guvest me I have given them.” ‘ The
beauty of the Lord our God is upon”
her. The glory of the Church is in her
faith, hope, love, patience, righteous-
ness, holy zeal, &c. As these are ex-
pressed in her life, she honours God
and is honoured by man.

IV. The marriage celebration of the
Ohurch. ‘She shall be brought unto
the King in raiment of needlework,”
&e, (vers. 14,15). The figure is thas of

226


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





an Oriental marriage. These verses
speak of the procession of the bride
from the house of her father to that of
her husband. The figure probably pointa
to the reception of the redeemed Church
into heaven to be for “ever with the
Lord.” This reception is spoken of in
Rev. xix. 7, 8. Concerning this cele-
bration, the poet brings into view two
features—

1. Its splendour. The glory of the
bride, her clothing of wrought gold, her
raiment of needlework, and her brides-
maids are all indicative of this. ‘Christ
loved the Church, and gave Himself for
it; that He might sanctify and cleanse
it with the washing of water by the
word, that He might present it to Him-
self a glorious Church, not having spot,
or wrinkle, or any such thing; but that
it should be holy and without blemish.”

2. Its joyousnese. ‘‘ With gladness
and rejoicing,” &c. Great will be the
joy when the redeemed are received into
the full glories of heaven, How great
the joy of the bride! of the Bridegroom !
of the angels! of the Eternal Father !

V. The assurances given to the
Lord of the Ohurch. “Instead of
Thy fathers shall be Thy children,” &.
(ver. 16, 17) The Messiah-King is
here assured of—

1. A numerous offspring. The 16th
“verse rests upon the custom of wish-
ing to the married pair a numerous and
mighty offspring” (comp. Gen. xxiv. 60,
Ruth iv. 11, 12). Christ shall bring
“many sons unto glory.” ‘‘ Many shall
come from the east and the west, and
from the north and the south, and shall
sit down in the kingdom of God.”
‘Lo, a great multitude which no man
could number, of all nations,” &.

2. A distinguished offspring. ‘ Whom
Thou mayest make princes in all the
earth.” ‘The image here is derived,
undoubtedly, from the custom prevail-
ing among kings of assigning portions
of an empire as provinces to their sons”
(comp. 2 Sam. viii. 18, 2 Chron, xi, 23).
All who become subjects of the Messiah
are invested with sovereign authority,
They are “ made kings and priests unto
God and His Father.”


3. Perpetual praise. “I will make


rad


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS.


PSALM XLY





Thy name to be remembered in all
generations ; therefore shall the people
praise Thee for ever and ever.” ‘God
hath highly exalted Him, and given
Him a name which is above every
name,” do, The praise of the Messiah-


King will be eternal, and ever-increas
ing in fervour and depth and fulness,

Conciusion.—What is thy relation
to this glorious Being?! Trust Him,
love Him, loyally serve Him, and great
and endless will be thy blessedness,


ReEuicgious WorsuHip.
(Verse 11.)


“For He is thy Lord; and worship
thou Him.”

In the institution of worship we have
the encouraging declaration that God
may be sought, that God may be found.

Consider the nature, the reason, and
the importance of religious worship.

I. Its nature.

1. [ts internal principles. There must
be reverence; . . . not, indeed, terror,
but sacred awe. And as we are sinful
creatures, there must be that deep hu-
miliation which implies self-displacence
and abhorrence, . . . The very thought
of God, the recollection that we are in
His immediate presence, will prostrate
and humble us, if we worship Him
aright. Another principle of worship
for fallen man must be trust in atone
ment, Whatsoever things we ask in
prayer must be in the name of Christ,
believing in Him. There must be sud-
mission. For a rebel to worship is only
mockery. Another principle is love.
Gratitude for past mercies, . .. su-
preme affection, . . . delight in Divine
goodness, &ec.

2. Its external manifestations, And
here we have Acts, As prayer,—thanks-
giving,—commemoration, &c. Places.
The closet,—the family,—the church,—
the great assembly.

Il. The ground and reason of wor-
ship. “For He is thy Lord.”

1. This declares to us the Divine
greatness ; for the Lord of the Church is
Lord of all; and, if so, the highest views
are presented of His grandeur and glory.
. . . Sum up all the particulars of
creature-glory ; collect it into one mass ;
it is all from Him; and He who could
impart so much, has yet more in Him-
self. .. . If worship implies reverence
and sacred awe, surely this is He to
whom worship belongs.


2. As He is our Lord, He stands to
us in the relation of an absolute dominion,
We ourselves, our family, our country,
our world, are all under His sway. Our
life is given, supported, terminated by
Him. If worship implies prayer, we
see the reason for it in His boundless
dominion, His absolute lordship.

3. He is our Lord legislatively. As
He is holy and good, His will must reier
to a holy and felicitous course of action.
And in proportion to the wisdom, holi-
ness, and goodness of this, must He be
bound, by the perfection of His own
character, to guard His law, the expres-
sion of His will, from violation. This
He has done. The law is sanctioned
by the penalty of eternal death. Now
we have sinned against Him, and thus,
do we stand in relation to His law
and Himself, as guilty and con-
demned sinners, If, then, we have
offended our sovereign Lord; and if
worship implies penitence and confes-
sion, here is another reason why we
should worship.

4. But to the Church may it be
specially said, “ He «ts thy Lord.” The
true Church is a society arising from the
fact of actual reconciliation to God by
Christ Jesus, To this He stands in the
special relation of a gracious Sovereign.
And here we find another ground of the
worship of the Church. There is praise
to Him for His goodness,—trust in His
everlasting mercy,—the thankful recog-
nition of all His mighty and marvellous
interpositions, &e.

Ili. The importance of worship.

l. Wherever there ts true worship,
there the great fundamental truths of
religion are proclaimed before the world.
The true God is proclaimed. Faith tells
of the altar of the perfect Sacrifice, and
the smoke of His atonement te hes

22


PSALM XLVL





courts. Her services proclaim Christ to
be the true God, and eternal life, dc.

2. True Christian worship secures the
constant publication of the Word of God,
Does any one neglect that Word at
home? It is here sounded in his ears,
Or does he read without understanding
it? It is here explained and enforced,
&e.

3. In the public assemblies of the
Church, there ts the special presence of
God. “TI have seen Thee,” says Lord
Bacon, ‘in Thy works, and sought Thee
in Thy providences, but I have found
Thee in Thy temples.” Wherever two
or three meet together in the name of
Christ He is present with them.

4, Public worship both presents to us the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





most perfect type of heaven on earth and
furnishes an efficient preparation for t.

Conctusion.—l. Let us feel ¢$ our
duty to uphold His worship.

2. Let us know and feel the evil of a
careless, formal service. ‘‘ God is a
Spirit; and they that worship Him
must worship Him in spirit and im
truth.”

3. Let us be ourselves increasingly
spiritual tn worship, preserving the spirit
of devotion amidst all the engagements
and trials of life ; so shall we never be
denied the blessed privilege of access to
the throne of the heavenly grace ; and
in the manifested love of God, we shall
enjoy a heaven upon earth.—Rechard
Watson. Abridg


PSALM XLVL


INTRODUOTIOR.


Superscription.—* To the Chief Musician for the sons of Korah.” See Introduction to Psalm
xiii. “A song upon Alamssh.” Great uncertainty attaches to the meaning of “ Alamoth.”
Some are of opinion that it is the name of a musical instrument. Others that it is the name
of a melody. While Fuerst says it is the “ proper name of a musical choir, dwelling perhaps in


FND?Y, over whom was placed a M339 (director) Ps. xlvi.” The word occurs in 1 Chron. xv.
20, last clause, which, says Fuerst, “is to be understood with harps over the corps Alamoth
(to direct it) ; 33? to be applied as it stands in xv. 21.”


It is impossible to determine who the author of the psalm is, Nor are we able to say with
certainty upon what occasion it was composed. We think it very probable that it refers to the
threatened invasion of Jerusalem by Sennacherib, and the destruction of his army in the night
by the angel of the Lord. See 2 Kings xix. and Isa. xxxvi., xxxvii. Barnes points out that
“all the circumstances in that invasion—the tumultuous hosts summoned for the war (Isa,
Xxxvi. 2); the overthrow of numerous nations by their armies (Isa. xxxvi. 18-21); the
siege of Jerusalem itself (Isa, xxxvi. 2); the confidence of Hezekiah and his people in God
when the city was besieged (Isa, xxxvii. 14-20) ; and the final overthrow of the Assyrian host
by the angel of the Lord (Isa. xxxvii. 36) agree well with all the statements in the psalm.”


A TUMULTUOUS WORLD AND A TRANQUIL CHUROH.
(Verses 1-7.)


We have here— tribes of Judah and Benjamin by force. *


L A tumultuous World. The poet
gets before us a scene of wild commo-
tion. Kingdoms were shaking ; peoples
were roaring, the earth itself seemed
unstable, the sea was rolling in trouble
and breaking in thunder, and the firm
and lofty mountains seemed to tremble
with the breaking of the billows upon
their base. This would very fitly describe
the state of affairs at the time of the in-
vasions of Sennacherib. That monarch
has already taken “all the cities of the

228


Hezekiah has made considerable prepa-
rations for the defence of Jerusalem,
He has “strengthened the walls, added
to the fortifications, laid in great store
of arrows and other ammunition, deep-
ened the trenches, and cut off all the
waters which might have supplied the
besieging army.” In order to avert the
storm, Hezekiah submitted to Senna
cherib, and paid to him an enormous
tribute, for which he was obliged to
strip the gold from the walls and pillars


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





of the Temple, Sennacherib having pro-
mised that, if this tribute were paid, he
would depart in a friendly manner. And
then, although he departed to the con-
quest of Egypt, he perfidiously left
behind him a large force which marched
upon Jerusalem and demanded its un-
conditional surrender. Thus Senna
cherib, with his immense and apparently
irresistible army, was spreading commo-
tion and terror among the nations. The
tumult described by the Psalmist is a
picture of the commotions of the world
to-day. At this moment in Europe we
have the tumult of war, and the unrest
and anxiety of statesmen and nations as
to ‘the balance of power.” In politics at
home there are the strife and contention
of parties. In the commercial world
there are countless anxieties and fierce
competitions. Even the religious world
is not free from the noise of controversy
and the din of party strife. In every
realm of life there are unrest and tumult
to a greater or less extent. All things
here are in commotion. “ What nations
have passed away, like tracts of earth
carried into the midst of the sea! What
mighty empires, like mountains, have
sunk into the abyss! What an emblem
of earthly change and disquiet is the
ocean ! restless when most at rest ; and
affording no security, under its most
placid aspects, against the rushing storm
and the heaving surge. How much is
swept away already! and there are
still mountains of worldly pomp and
power which at this moment ‘shake
with the swelling thereof.’ ”

1. The tumult of the world ts an
evidence of the sin of the world. In
some instances it is a direct expression
of sin. In all cases it is a sign of sin.
The world is tumultuous because of the
guilt, the selfish ambitions, the evil pas-
sions, &c., of men. 2. The tumult of
the world will one day be removed. The
great mission of Christ is to put away
sin. In that mission He will certainly
succeed. When sin is put away all
strife and tumult will cease, ‘There is
a calm and peaceful realm where strife
and commotion are unknown, because
tin is unknown there,


IL A tranquil Church. Tho poet





sketches a scene of most delightful quiet.
He shows us “a valley over which the
winds sweep, and are not felt; along
which the river flows and is not troubled,


in which stands the city of God.” We
have here—
1. An assurance of security. “God


is our refuge and strength, a very
present help in trouble. Therefore will
not we fear,” &e ‘God is in the
midst of her; she shall not be moved.”
(1) The ground of this assurance. (a)
The presence of God. ‘God is in the
midst of her.” “The Lord of hosts is
with us.” God in the visible symbol of
His presence dwelt between the cheru-
bim in the holy of holies; The holy
city was His chosen abode, and He
would defend it. The Jews under Heze-
kiah were His people, and He would
protect them. The city or people which
is kept by God is inviolably secure.
The Church can never suffer real loss or
harm while she is able truthfully to say,
“The Lord of hosts is with us. God is
in the midst of us.” (6) The seasonable
help of God. “ God shall help her, and
that right early.” Margin: “ When
the morning appeareth.” Hengstenberg:
“God helps her at the break of morn-
ing.” “ Distress with the Lord’s people
can have only, as it were, a night’s quar-
ters. Whenever the morning breaks,
the Lord drives it from its resting-place,
and sends another, an abiding guest,
salvation. There is probably an allusion
to the overthrow of the Assyrians,
Then, in reality, did there stand but one
night between the highest pitch of dis-
tress and the most complete deliverance,
comp. Isa, xvii. 14: ‘And behold at
evening-tide trouble, before the morning
comes, itis no more’ (xxxvii. 36); ‘ And
they arose in the morning, and lo! they
were all dead corpses.’” (2) The vin-
dication of this assurance. (a) In the
character and resources of God. Char-
acter. He is “the God of Jacob,”—a
God in covenant with His people, a
faithful God; therefore it is wise to
trust Him. Resources, He is “the
Lord of hosts.” He rules the hosts of
the stare. The armies of heaven—the
angela—loyally follow His command,
And He has sovereign right and power
229


POL SLVR,





over all the hosts of men. ‘“‘ Hosts may
be against us, but we need not fear them
if the Lord of hosts be with us.” “ Fear
not; for they that be with us are more


than they that be with them.” (6) Jn
the mighty doings of God. “ He uttered
His voice, the earth melted.” Barnes


says: ‘‘ The very earth seemed to melt
or dissolve before Him. Everything
became still. The danger passed away
at His command, and the raging world
became calm.” Mark the ease with
which it is done. “ It shall not cost the
Lord any business to despatch the ene-
mies of His people; let Him show
Himself a little, let Him but say the
word, and they are gone; as snow before
the sun, or fat cast into the fire, so are
they consumed ; He uttered His voice,
the earth melted.”—Dickson.  Remark-
ably this is illustrated in the destruction
of the Assyrians,
‘* For the angel of death spread his wings on
the blast,
And breathed in the face of the foe as he


I}
Aud the eyes of the sleepers wax’d deadly
and chill,
And their hearts but once heaved, and for
ever grew atill,”
In the morning one hundred and eighty-
five thousand warriors lay dead upon the
plain. God had spoken; and Assyria
was utterly crushed, and Jerusalem was
delivered. So will it be with all the
enemies of the Church when God ariseth.
2. An assurance of Refreshment.
“There is a river the streams whereof
shall make glad the city of God.” This
figure was probably suggested by the
arrangements made by Hezekiah for


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


—


cutting off the water-supply frem the
invading army and securing the same
to Jerusalem. The refreshment and
gladness afforded by the Divine provi-
sions are set forth under the image of
this river. ‘ How fit an emblem is this
of the supplies with which God blesses
His Church! See it in the rich supply
of truth and grace. Here flows the
stream of heavenly truth, bright and
pure. It has widened as it has flowed ;
and it now sweeps with all the fulness
of the last and perfect revelation from
God. Grace to apply that revelation to
practical purposes is equally free. ‘If
any man lack wisdom, let him ask of
God, who giveth to all men liberally
and upbraideth not.’ See here the rich
supply of grace and blessing. Here the
penitent guilty are freely forgiven ; here
the corrupt and degenerate heart is
made new, &e. Life, love, and holinesa,
all are given. Life, supernatural vigour,
love, which connects our affections with
God and heaven ; and holiness, leading
to present fellowship with God, and
fitting us.for a blissful immortality.”—
Watson. Here in the Church the “ river”
of Divine grace flows deep and full, and
from it “streams” of blessing go forth
diffusing life and joy.
OoncLusion.—Let us seek this trust-
ful and conquering spirit, which, in the
midst of dangers and when confronted
by powerful foes, confidently sings,—
“God is our refuge and strength,” de.
Now, in the midst of the strife and
storm, let us be glad and rejoice in the
Lord, In due season victory and calm
rest shall be ours,


CONTEMPLATION OF THE Doras or Gop.
(Verses 8-11.)


The Psalmist here calls upon the
people to behold the marvellous doings
of God, which laid so firm a foundation
for confidence in His protection and
help.

I, The object contemplated. The
Poet calls to the contemplation of “ the
works of the Lord,” and indicates what
workshe particularly refers to. He speaks
of the “ desolations He hath made sm the


aon


earth.” Hengstenberg says: “The deao-
lation must have for its object those whe
had raised themselves against the people
of God, and threatened to swallow them
up.” And Matthew Henry: “The
destruction they designed to bring upon
the Church has been turned upon them-
selves. War is a tragedy which com-
monly destroys the stage it is acted
on.” What desolations were brought


fe


EOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


upon the Assyrians when the angel of
the Lord smote in their camp one hun-
dred and eighty-five thousand men !
“ He maketh wars to cease unto the end
of the earth.” “The means by which
God silences war to the end of the
earth,” says Hengstenberg, “is the over-
throw of the wild conquerors and tyr-
renical lords.” Barnes points out that
“the overthrow of the Assyrian army
would probably put an end to all the
wars then raging in the world. The
Assyrian empire was then the most
mighty on the globe ; it was engaged in
wide schemes of conquest; it had al-
ready overrun many of the smaller king-
doms of the world (Isa, xxxvii. 18-20) ;
and it hoped to complete its conquests,
and to secure the ascendancy over the
entire earth, by the subjugation of India
and Egypt. When the vast army of
that empire, engaged in such a purpose,
was overthrown, the consequence would
be, that the nations would be at rest, or
that there would be universal peace.”
“ He breaketh the bow, and cutteth the
spear tn sunder.” The enemies of the
Church were “rendered as incapable of
prosecuting their devastations, or even
of preserving what they had won, as if
their implements of war were destroyed.”
“He burneth the chariot im the fire.”
There may be a reference here “to a
eustom of collecting the spoils of war
into a heap and setting them on fire.
This was particularly done when the
victors were unable to remove them, or
so to secure them as to preclude all
danger of their being taken again and
used against themselves, This custom
is alluded to by Virgil, Ain. viii. 561,
562,


‘ Qualia eram, cum primam aciem Preeneste


sub ipsa,
Stravi, seutorumque incendi victor acervos.


The idea here is, that God had wholly
overthrown the foe, and had prevented
all danger of his returning again for pur-
poses of conquest.”— Barnes.

This termination of war and inaugura-
tion of universal peace is an earnest of


what He will one day do finally and for


?


PSALM XLV


ever. “They shall beat their swords
into plough-shares,” dc. (Isa. ii, 4, and
Mich. iv, 3), The Lord speed the day
when the war drum shall throb neo
longer, and the battle flags be for ever
furled.

If. The design of the contemplation.
There is some wise and worthy end
aimed at in thus calling upon men te
contemplate the doings of the Lord.
What is that end?

1. The warning of the enemies of the
Church. Let them behold these deso-
lations, and learn that if they oppose
God and His cause, however mighty
they may be, they will be broken “ in
pieces like a potter’s vessel.”

2. The encouragement of the Church.
Let the people of God look on His
doings on their behalf and sing with in.
creased force and fervour,—‘ The Lord
of hosts is with us, the God of Jacob is
our refuge.” (See remarks on ver. 7.}
Let them not fear the wrath and power
of any enemy ; for the Lord hath said,
‘* No weapon that is formed against thee
shall prosper.” In this way history is
an ever-growing aid to faith.

3. The instruction of all, The Lord
speaks; “ Be still, and know that I am
God, I will be exalted among the
heathen, I will be exalted in the earth.”
Let the world listen and cease from
war against the people of God, “ which,
as the foregoing fact shows, is a contest
of feeblencss against omnipotence, ruinous
to those who undertake it.” Tumultu-
ous world, ‘be still, and know that,”
&e. Let the Church listen and cease to
fear, for God will assuredly maintain
His own cause and honour. “ Be still,
anxiety and fear! ‘I will never leave
thee nor forsake thee,’ Be still, appre
hension! The whole world around may
be disquieted ; but I am God, and I
rule the whole. Be still, impatience !
I am God ; and the times and seasona
are in my power.” With such an
assurance as this from God Himself,
we may well unite in chanting, “ God ia
our refuge and strength, a very present
help in trouble : therefore, will not we
fear,” de.


23)


PSALM XLVI. HOMILETIOC COMMENTARY; PSALHE.


NW RE TT SS








PSALM XLVIL


InrRODUOCTION.


Superecription.—*To the Chief Musician, a psalm for the sons of Korah.” See Introduction
to Psalm xlii.

The author of the psalm, and the occasiou on which it was composed, are alike unknown.
It is a psalm of triumph, and presents indications of having been composed on the occasion of
some signal victory. Professor Alexander and Hengstenberg suggest that it was composed to
celebrate the victory of Jehoshaphat over the combined forces of the Moabites, Ammonites,
and Edomites (2 Chron. xx.), The suggestion seems to us very reasonable. Reasons such as
these are offered in support of it :—1. The manifestation of the hand of God in the victory, aa
it was obtained without any fighting on the part of the chosen people. 2. Special mention of
the Kohathites as having been present in the army (2 Chron. xx. 19), 3. A service of praise
to God was held in the valley before the departure of Jehoshaphat and his people (2 Chron,
xx. 26), which probably suggested ver. 5 of the psalm, “From that valley God made, as it
were, His ascent to heaven, after having achieved redemption for His people.”


ExsorratTion To Praisz Gop, BecausE OF His GOVERNMENT OF


tHE WORLD.


We have in the psalm—

I. Reasons why we should praise
God. The one great general reason
upon which the Psalmist bases his ap-
peal to men to praise God is that of
His reign over the earth. But he
brings forward particular reasons,

1. Because of His majesty and power.
“For the Lord most High is terrible.”
He is exalted infinitely above the
noblest created being. He is “ Most
High” over all, and should be rever-
enced by all. He had shown Himself
“terrible” in the destruction of the
enemies of His people; therefore, let all
who are not loyally subject unto Him
stand in awe of Him. ‘The justice and
power of God are “terrible ” to the ene-
mies of His Church.

2. Because of the universality of His
rule. “A great King over all the earth,
... God reigneth over the heathen.”
He reigns over all kings and princes.
He “bringeth the princes to nothing,
He maketh the judges of the earth as
vanity.” Over the affairs of the whole
universe God is supreme. The dark-
ness and evil He permits and curbs;
the light and goodness He enjoins and
originates, He has abandoned no
part of the earth, He “hath estab-
lished His throne in the heavens and
His kingdom ruleth over all.” All
things are being ordered and controlled
and overruled by Him for the accom-


232


plishment of His own wise and blessed
purposes. Even the hostility of sin and
sinners, and of the devil, He restrains
and overrules for the good of His
universe. Satan is but a vassal in the
great empire of the Lord our King.
Therefore let us praise Him.

3. Because under Hts government the
interests of His loyal subjects are specially
secured. We see this (1) Im the sub-
jugation of their enemies. ‘‘He shali
subdue the people under us, and the
nations under our feet.” The people of
God had just witnessed a striking proof
of this, Their foes had been utterly
defeated, and they had neither dis-
charged an arrow nor struck a blow;
nothing was left for them to do but to
gather the spoil. The words in which
the Psalmist sets forth the subjugation
by God of the enemies of His people
suggest two ideas, (a) The case with
which it is accomplished. “ He shall
subdue.” The word which is here tran-
slated “subdue” (72377) signifies to
speak, to command, to decree, &c. God
has but to utter His commands, and
His enemies are discomfited. (b) The
completeness with which it is accom-
plished. “Under us, ... under our
feet.” What an illustration we have of
this in the battle which this psalm is
supposed to celebrate! ‘When Judah
came toward the watch-tower in the
wilderness, they looked unto the multt


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALME.


Weare FEV,





tude, and, behold, they were dead bodies
fallen to the earth, and none escaped.”
(2) In the excellence of their_own por
tion. ‘‘ He shall choose our inheritance
for us, the excellency of Jacob whom
He loved.” God had given to them the
holy land as their portion. He selected
it for them. He enabled them to take
possession of it. He enabled them to
guard that possession; or, as in this
victory, He guarded it for them without
any effort on their part. The poet
speaks of this land as “the excellency
of Jacob,”-—literally, “the pride of
Jacob.” It was a land of which he
would have been proud, and in the
possession of which he might well have
gloried. It was “a good land, a land
of brooks of water, of fountains and
depths that spring out of valleys and
hills,” &. (Deut. viii. 7-9). God in
His government still haa special regard
to the interests of His loyal subjects.
“No weapon that is formed against
them shall prosper.” ‘“ Who is he that
will harm you, if ye be followers of that
which is good?” “We know that all
things work together for good to them
that love God.” “If God be for us,
who can be against us$” In this aspect
of His government we have a most
powerful reason for praising God and
His reign.

4. Because of the holiness of His
government. “God sitteth upon the
throne of His holiness.” God’s govern-
ment is (1) Holy in tts authority. He
has aright toreign. He is the greatest,
the most mighty, the best Being in the
universe. He created and sustains all
creatures; He is the Father of all His
intelligent creatures. On these grounds
the righteousness of His authority is
indefeasible. (2) Holy tn its aim. All
its laws are true and just, and are both
designed and fitted to abolish all false-
hood, error, and evil, and to establish
righteousness and truth in all places
firmly and for ever. The end of all
God’s dealings with our race has been
to bless us in turning us from darkness
unto light, and from sin unto holiness,
(3) Holy in tts results. In proportion
as men yield loyal obedience to the


eommands of God, holiness, pesca, and


joy are diffused in our world. Let all
men everywhere yield hearty obedience
to the Lord our King, and holiness
shall be universal, and the blessedness
of the race complete. Here, then, we
have an urgent incentive to praise God
because of His government,

5. Because of the success of His govern-
ment. “The princes of the people are
gathered together unto the people of the
God of Abraham ; for the shields of the
earth belong unto God; He is greatly
exalted.” We understand this as a
voluntary gathering of heathen princes,
that they may be received among the
people of the Lord. “All kings shall
fall down before Him; all nations shall
serve Him.” ‘He shall speak peace
unto the heathen; and His dominion
shall be from sea to sea, and from the
river to the ends of the earth.” The
government of the Lord shall not fail,
but succeed gloriously. He is the
rightful Sovereign of all the mighty
ones. That right shall be completely
established. All powers shall own His
supremacy. He shall be greatly exalted.
That which to the eye of the poet was
present as he closed this psalm shall
one day be fully and splendidly realised,
Here, then, we have another reason for
praising God for His government. It
shall succeed, and all men shall enjoy
its blessings. Some would limit the
‘all ye people” of the first verse to the
Jewish people. There is no need to do
that, for the time is hastening on when
all the people from all lands will gladly
respond to the exhortation of the Psalm-
ist, and praise God for His government
of the world.

IZ. Directions how we should praise
God.

1. Enthusiastically, ‘“O clap your
hands, all ye people; shout unto God
with the voice of triumph, God is
gone up with a shout, the Lord with the
sound of a trumpet. Sing praises,”
&c. In the fifth verse the poet repre-
sents God as having come down to earth
to aid His people in the war, and having
wrought salvation for them, returning
to heaven amid the enthusiastic rejoic-
ings of the people, There is perhaps a

erence to the thanksgiving on the

233


PRALM XLV,





field of battle, and the joy with which
Jehoshaphat and his people returned to
Jerusalem (2 Chron. xx. 26-28). Cer-
tainly this poetical statement, and the
exhortations of the Psalmist, urge us to
enthusiasm in the praise of our King
and God, The clapping of the hands
for joy, the shout of triumph, the blast of
the trumpet, and the voice of song, are
all called for by the poet in this celebra-
tion. Let not our praise of our Redeemer
and King be measured, cold, and heart-
less, but hearty, warm, and enthusiastic.
If we are rightly sensible of what He
has done for us, we shall feel that even
“ Eternity’s too short
To utter all His praise.”

2. Intelligently. ‘Sing ye praises
with understanding.” Margin : “ Every
one that hath understanding.” But
neither the textual nor the marginal
rendering expresses the meaning of the
Hebrew. The word is Dw, maschel.
“Sing a maschil.” Hengstenberg :
‘Sing a song with edification.” Their
praise of the King was to be intelligent
and instructive. ‘ Every song in praise
of God, on account of His glorious deeds,
contains a rich treasare of instruction
and improvement. Here the instruction


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; PSALMS.


which should be drawn out of the fore-
going deeds is expressly declared. It is
this, that God is King over the whole
earth, that He reigns over the heathen,
that these shall also some time own His
sovereignty.” St. Paul in like manneg
exhorts Christians to pray and “ sing
with the spirit, and with the under-
standing also,” that the Church might
be edified. If others are to be edified
by them, our praises must be intelligent.

Conciuston. — Are we praising or
rebelling against this government}
Consider, sinner, the wickedness of thy
rebellion. This government is perfectly
holy, and is exercised to bless men.
Rebellion against it is sin against all
that ia true and right and good in the
universe. Consider the madness of thy
rebellion. ‘ He is wise in heart, and
mighty in strength ; who hath hardened
himself against Him and hath pros-
pered$” “ He must reign till He hath
put all enemies under His feet.” You
must yield to be saved by His grace, or
be crushed by His power and wrath.
“Kiss the Son, lest He be angry,” &e
Cease your rebellion ; accept the mercy
of the King; serve Him as a loyal sub-
ject ; and unite in praising Him because
of His glorious government of the world,


Toe CHOICE OF OUR INHERITANCE.
(Verse 4.)


This verse presents to us three matters
for consideration.

I. Distrust of self. We would not
choose our own inheritance because of,

1. Our tgnorance. (1) We are toa
great extent ignorant of ourselves. Pos-
sibilities of both good and evil are latent
within us which God only knows. If
the choice of our lot were with us, we
might choose such an one as would tend
to crush the true and good in us, and
to quicken the evil into awful and ruin-
ous development. God alone thoroughly
understands our heart. (2) We are
ignorant of the future. We know not
what a day or an hour may bring forth.
Tho choice which amid the circumstances
of to-day seems wise and good, amid
those of to-morrow may seem evil and

234


painful, God alone thoroughly knows
what is before us in the future.

2. Our proneness to self-indulgence,
We are apt to choose the pleasant rather
than the painful, the bright rather than
the dark, &. And yet the dark and
painful may be good for us, and quite
essential to our wellbeing. We dare not
choose our own inheritance.

II. Trust in God. “He shall choose our
inheritance for us.” Committing freely
the choice to Him implies confidence,—

l. In His wisdom. “His under-
standing is infinite.” “The only wise
God.” He cannot err.

2. In His goodness. Unless assured
of this we could not thus commit the
choice of ourinheritanceto Him, ‘“ The
Lord is gracious,” do. (Ps, cxlv. 8, 9).


i


AOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





8. In Hts interest in us individually.
Before we can heartily trust God as to
the appointments of our life and lot we
must have a persuasion of His knowledge
of us and interest in us individually,
We have this. “He ealleth His own
sheep by name.” No act of kindness
rendered even “unto one of the least of
the brethren ” of our Lord is overlooked
by Him. He never loses sight of the
particular in the general, or of the
individual in the community. So we
trust in Him. “He shall choose,” &e,

iL Trust inGod rewarded. “The
excellency of Jacob whom He loved.”
He ehooses an inheritance for us such as


PHALM XLVOL,





Jacob might have been proud of and
rejoiced in. And He who chooses also
bestows the inheritance. What a precious
spiritual heritage is ours in the present !
pardon, purity, peace, sustaining and sane-
tifying grace! &c. And for temporal and
material things we have the assurance
that “no good will He withhold from”
ua. What a glorious heritage awaits us
in the future! He hath chosen for us
“an inheritance incorruptible, and un-
defiled, and that fadeth not away,” &ec,
And He will bestow it upon us.

Thankfully and gladly let us accept
in all things His wise and gracious
ordering of our life and affaixa,


PSALM XLVIIL
INTRODUCTIOR,


Superscription: ** A Song and Psalm.” ‘‘It is not easy,” says Barnes, “ to aceount for this
double appellation, or to distinguish between the meaning of these words, though provably the
real distinction is that the word Psalm refers to that to which it is applied, considered merely
as a poem or composition ; Song is applied with reference to ita being sung in public worship.”
“Tt embraced what was usually understood by the word Psalm, and it was intended also
specifically to be sung.”

“* For the sone of Korah.” See Introduction to Ps, xlii. The author of the psalm is un-
known. Professor Alexander, Hengstenberg, and others suppose that this psalm has reference
to the same event ag the previous one, a supposition which seems to us very probable. hey
suggest that that was sung on the field of battle (2 Chron, xx. 26), and this on the triumphant
return to Jerusalem and to the temple (2 Chron. xx. 28), Homiletically we regard the psalm
as presenting, A Striking Illnatration of the Glory of the Church (vers. 1-7) ; and an Instructive
Illustration of the Glory of the Church (vers. 8-14), Or we may express the subjecta thus, The
Glory of the Church aa manifested by God’s doings on her behalf ; and, The Improvement to
be made by the Church of God’s doings on her behalf,


A Sreizine Iuuvustrarion or THE GLORY OF THE CHURCE.
(Verses 1-7.)


The remarkable victory wrought on God.” His greatness He had displayed


behalf of Jehoshaphat and his people
leads the poet to celebrate the praises
of God and of the holy city which He
had protected. That holy city repre-
sents the Church of God. The poet
sets forth the glory of the Church in
three main aspects—

IL. As the city of God. ‘The city
of our God; .. . the city of the great
King.” Two characteristics are brought
forward to distinguish it as “the city
of God.”

1. God manifests His greatness and
glory there. ‘Great is the Lord, and
exceedingly glorious in the city of our


in overthrowing the mighty and com-
bined enemies of His people; and His
glory was manifested in the temple,
with its solemn and stately services, its
multitudes of devout worshippers, its
revelation of Himself in the law and
in the sacrifices, and especially in the
mysterious and ever-radiant Shekinah,
“The Lord hath chosen Zion, He hath
desired it for Hie habitation,” &. So,
in this Christian dispensation, it is in
the Church that the glory of God is
most clearly and brightly manifested.
I see much of His glory in nature.
“The heavens declare the glory of God,”
235


PRALM XLVI.


é&c. But I see more in the conversion
of sinners, in the spiritual education of
Christian believers, in the holy lives and
self-sacrificing labours of the followers
of Christ, & Christ is the highest
and fullest revelation of God; and He
specially dwells in the Church. ‘“ Where
two or three are gathered together in
My name,” &c.

2. It is hallowed by His presence.
“The mountain of His holiness.”
Pp. B. V.: “Upon His holy hill.”
Hengstenberg: ‘ Upon the holy moun-


tain.” Mount Zion was regarded as holy.


because the temple of God was built
upon it. It was hallowed by its sacred
uses and associations. The Church of
Christ is described by St. Paul as “an
holy temple” (Eph. ii. 21), Again, he
writes, “The temple of God is holy,
which temple yeare.” The glory of the
Church is in the realisation of the
presence of God in the hearts, and its
manifestation in the lives of its mem-
bers. The only glorious Church is the
God-inspired, Christ-like Church.

II. Asexalted beforemen ‘“‘Beau-
tiful for situation, the joy of the whole
earth is Mount Zion,” dc. (ver. 2).
“What is there,” says Dr. Thomson,
“or was there about Zion to justify the
high eulogium of the Psalmist? The
situation is, indeed, eminently adapted
to be the platform of a magnificent
citadel. Rising high above the deep
valley of Gihon and Hinnom on the
west and south, and the scarcely less
deep one of the Cheesemongers on the
east, it could only be assailed from the
north-west ; and then, ‘on the sides of
the north,’ it was magnificently beauti-
ful, and fortified by walls, towers, and
bulwarks, the wonder and terror of the
nations.” And Dean Stanley says:
“As in Judah no rival city ever rose
till the time of the Herods, the whole
splendour of the southern monarchy
was concentrated in Jerusalem, and
contributed to that magnificence which
has before been described as probably
excelling any sight of the kind within
the Holy Land.” “The joy of the
whole earth is Mount Zion.” “From
the time of Constantine to the present
day, aretaan has been applied to the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; PSALMS.





western hill, on which the city of
Jerusalem now stands, and in fact
always stood. Notwithstanding this,
seems equally certain that, up to the
time of the destruction of the city by
Titus, the name was applied exclusively
to the eastern hill, or that on which the
temple stood.” — Smith’s Dict. of the
Bible, art. Jerus. But we must not fix
our attention solely or even chiefly on
the material situation, As Hengsten-
berg says: “ The key for the exposition
of ver. 2 is found in the remark that
the Psalmist describes not the external
but the internal glory of Jerusalem,
views it not with fleshly eyes but with
the eye of faith,—speaks not as a
geographer but as a divine.” By
“the whole earth,” the Psalmist pro-
bably meant the whole land of Pales-
tine. By its celebrations of the worship
of God, by the great assemblies of the
people at the great religious feasts, and
by the recent victory over the foes of
Judah, Jerusalem was conspicuously
exalted before men. The Church of
Christ, when animated by the Spirit of
her Lord, and arrayed in the beauties of
holiness, is distinguished and honoured
before men. ‘‘ Ye are the light of the
world. A city that is set on an hill
cannot be hid. Let your light so
shine before men, that they may see
your good works, and glorify your
Father which is in heaven.” When the
Church reveals God to the world, the
whole earth has reagon to rejoice
because of her.

iL As victorious over enemies.
“For, lo, the kings were assembled,”
dc. (verses 4-7). Notice—

1. The gathering of the focs. The
kings which gathered themselves to-
gether against Jehoshaphat were those
of Ammon, Moab, and Mount Seir, and
perhaps others who are not specified,
They “were gathered together against
Jerusalem. They came into the imme-
diate neighbourhood of the city, into
the wilderness of Tekoa, which is
certainly not further than a journey of
three hours from Jerusalem, which
commands an extensive prospect, and in

icular of the environs of Jerusalem.”
foes are gathered against the





_ HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMS.


a





Charch of Christ to-day? Superstition,
in Roman Catholiciam, Sacramenta-
rianism, Ritualism, &c. Scepticism, which
is to a great extent the product of
superstition. Worlddiness, the insatiable
craving for increase of material wealth,
the slavish obedience to custom and
fashion as though they were of supreme
authority, de. Sensuous self-indulgence.
These and other foes are gathered
together against the Christian Church
of our day.

2. The dispersion of the foes. “They
passed by together. They saw, so they
marvelled,” &c. Consider (1) The
manner tm whch the dispersion was
effected. It was marked by (a) Sudden-
ness. “They passed by together.”
Hengstenberg: ‘‘They vanished alto-
gether.” They “hasted away.” Their
overthrow was so sudden that they, as it
were, vanishea from sight, (b) Alarm.
“Fear took told upon them there.”
Hengstenberg: ‘They saw, so they
were astonished, were frightened, fled
away ; Trembling took hold on them
there.” They came within sight of the
city; but, before they could strike a
blow, terror seized upon them, they
were filled with consternation.  (c)
Distress. “Pain as of a woman in
travail.” This comparison is used here,
as elsewhere in Scripture, to denote the
severest kind of pain. Julius Caesar
announced to the senate his victory
over Pharnaces in the following brief
despatch.—“ Vent, vidi, vici.” But the
general of the forces that had gathered
together against Jerusalem might well
have summed up the history of their
expedition thus.— Veni, widi, victus
sum.” (2) The agent by whom the dis-


PSALM XLVIM


persion was effected. “God is known
in her palaces for @ refuge. . . . Thou
breakest the ships of Tarshish with an
east wind.” God had scattered the
forces that had gathered together
against Jerusalem. Jehoshaphat and
his army struck not a single blow in the
warfare (2 Chron. xx. 22-24), The
breaking of the ships of Tarshish is
mentioned here as an illustration of
the almighty power of God. ‘The
occasion,” says Hengstenberg, “that
gave rise to this comparison is recorded
in 1 Kings xxii. 48; 2 Chron. xx. 36,
37. Jehoshaphat had united with
Ahaziah in getting ships of merchandise,
but the ships were wrecked. The
internal connection between the two
events was the greater, as in that
annihilation of the ships of Tarshish,
there was discerned, according to 2
Chron., a judgment of God.” So as
regards the enemies of His Church God
Himself will scatter them. The more
God is realised “in her palaces for a
refuge,” the more completely and
gloriously victorious will the Church
be over all her enemies, Superstition
and scepticism shall be conquered by
the truth of God. Worldliness and self-
indulgence shall be vanquished by the
cross of the Lord Jesus Christ.

Herein, then, is the true glory of the
Church. Not in her splendid edifices,
or social prestige, or immense endow-
ments, or gorgeous ritual, or eloquent
ministry. But in the manifest presence
of God in her midst,—manifest in holy
living, and self-denying working, in the
sublime victories of faith and love over
her foes, and in unfaltering loyalty to
her king and God.


Ax Insrevotrve ILLUSTRATION OF THE GLORY OF THE CHUROER.
(Verses 8-14.)


In these verses the Psalmist points
out the use and improvement which the
Church should make of the doings of
God on her behalf. Those doings not
only displayed the glory of the Church,
but were rich in instruction for the
Church. The Psalmist exhibits them,—

L As a confirmation of faith “As


we have heard, so have we seen in the
city of the Lord of hosts, in the city of
our God: God will establish it for
ever.” The event which they had wit-
nessed had vindicated their former trust
in God, and encouraged them to trust
Him for the future. But as for Jeru-
salem, her towers have long since fallen
237


PRALM XLVI,


HOMiLETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





to the ground, her bulwarks have been
overthrown, her palaces have crumbled
to dust, her holy and beautiful temple
has been utterly demolished. But these
things are only an apparent contradic-
tion of the assurance, ‘ God will estab-
lish it for ever.” “ The Jerusalem that
has been laid in ruins is not that which
the Psalmist means; it is only its life-
less corpse.” The Church of Christ is
founded upon the rock, “and the gates
of hell shall not prevail against it.”
Every additional illustration that we
have of the faithfulness of God, whether
to us individually or to the Church,
should encourage us to continued and
increased confidence in Him.

II. As an incentive to meditation
on the grace of God. ‘We have
thought of Thy loving-kindness, O God,
in the midst of Thy temple.” We have
here—

1. An excellent theme for meditation,
“Thy loving-kindness,” It had been
very fully manifested in the victory
which He had achieved for Judah. But
to us God has given still brighter dis-
plays thereof. God’s loving-kindness is
the source of all our blessings.

2. A suitable place for meditation.
“Tn the midst of Thy temple.” “It is
evident that the psalm was sung as a
song of thanks in the temple.” ‘When
we enjoy the benefit of public ordinances
undisturbed, when we meet in His
temple and there is none to make us
afraid, we should take occasion thence
to think of His loving-kindness.”—WM.
Henry. J is both our interest and our
duty to meditate upon God’s gracious
dealings with us. Gratitude urges us
to ponder every fresh proof of His good-
ness tous. And as it is necessary to
digest our food for it to nourish and
strengthen our bodies, so God’s mercies
must be spiritually digested by means
of meditation, if they are to prove
helpful to the spiritual life. By medi-
tation we realise their greatness and
their significance ; we feel our obligation
to God, and are encouraged to trust Him
by reason of them.

Il. As a stimulus to praise God.

1. Inthe Church. “Let Mount Zion
vejoice,” < (ver. 11). This i» + call

93





to all the cities of Judah to joyous
praise. The manifestation of the favour
of God should always rejoice the hearts
of His people.

2. Beyond the Church. ‘“ According
to Thy name, O God, so is Thy praise
unto the ends of the earth.” The idea
of the Psalmist seems to be that where-
ever the doings they were celebrating
were known, men would be so impressed
with the “name” or character of God
that they would praise Him. The best
commentary on the words of the Psalm-
ist is the result on the nations of the
victory achieved on behalf of Jehosha-
phat. ‘The fear of God was on all the
kingdoms of the countries when they
had heard that the Lord fought against
the enemies of Israel. So the realm of
Jehoshaphat was quiet, for his God
gave him rest round about” (1 Chron.
xx, 29, 30). It is noteworthy that in
the praise of God, both in the Church
and beyond the Church, the righteous-
ness of His doings is recognised. The
chosen people were “glad because of
His judgments.” And in His praise
among the nations it is observed that
His “right hand is full of righteous-
ness.” Just and true are all His ways,
All His doings are in complete accord
with eternal and immutable righteous-
ness.

IV. As a reason for considering the
security and beauty of the Ohurch.
“ Walk about Zion, and go round about
her,” &c. (vers. 12, 13).

l. The survey to which the Psalmist
exhorts the people. The “‘ towers” were
for observation and defence; the “ bul-
warks” were the outermost circumfer-
ence of the city, and in this place they
are in contrast to the palaces in the in-
terior. The exhortation of the Psalmist
is to a thorough survey of the city, that
the people may see how entirely free
from injury it was, and how capable of
resisting the attacks of foes,

2. The design of the survey. “ That
ye may tell it to the generation follow-
ing.” “One generation shall praise
Thy works to another, and shall declare
Thy mighty acts.” By this means the
generation following may be encouraged
to put their trust in the Lord. In this


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; PSALMS, PRALM XLIX,





way one generation may render valuable unto death.” Here are two reasons for
service to another. So the testimony to triumph in God.
the goodness and faithfulness of God 1. Hie relations to us personally.
grows more voluminous and convincing “Our God,.... our guide” He
with every generation, Let us survey guides us (a) by the counsels of His
the Church of Christ, and mark its word; (b) by the influences of His
beauty and security. “What precious Spirit ; (c) by His providential inter-
ordinances are its palaces, what precious positions ; (d) by special help in special
promises are its bulwarks” and towers! trials; (e) by shedding light upon our
Its foundations are immovably and path when in perplexity and doubt; and
eternaily secure. It is guarded by the (/) by support and direction when we
incessant vigilance and almighty power tread that dark and, to us, unknown way
of God, and need not fear the gates of which conducts to the grave,”— Barnes.
hell. Let us tell to the generation 2 His relations to us permanently.
following our impressions and experi- ‘For ever and ever; . . . unto death.”
ences of the Church of Christ, that they His love to us and care for us are con-
may be led heartily to seek citizenship stant and unchangeable. He will guide
therein. and protect us even to the last.

V. Asan encouragement to triumph Conciusion.—1. Let the citigens of
in God. “ This God is our God forever Zion rejoice in their privileges. 2, Let
and ever; He will be our guide even her enemics submit themselves to her King.


PSALM XLIX,
INTRODUCTION
intion.—** To the Ohicf Musician, a psalm for the sons of Korahk.” See Introduction
to Psalm xlii. Both the author of the psalm, and the occasion on which it was composed, are
unknown. “ This psalm,” says Matthew Henry, ‘‘is a sermon, and so is the next. In most of


the psalms we have the penman praying or praising ; in these we have him preaching ; and it
is our duty, in singing psalms, to teach and admonish ourselves and one another.” “The
psalm meets the temptation, which arises to the righteous from the prosperity of the wicked
(whose persecution it sete forth), with the very consolation which is presented for it throughout
the Old Testament, viz., that the issue divides between the righteous and the wicked, that the
glory and ascendancy of the latter are only temporary, that they end in terrors, while the
righteous is delivered by God.” —Hengstenberg.


Tuer PREACHER OF WISDOM.


(Verses 1-4.)


The Pealmist appears as a preacher portant announcements are made to call
discoursing of wisdom, and in these the whole world to listen (Deut. xxxii.
verses, which are introductory to the 2; Psa. Ll Mics 17 2). How *im-
main theme, he calls the attention of all portant is the message of the Gospel
men to what he is about to say. It was Preacher!
not of wisdom in general, but of wisdom 2. The universal applicability of the
in estimating the value of worldly wealth subject, The statements he was about
and honour, that he was about to speak. to make pertained not to one nation or

I. The preacher of wisdom ad- race only, but to all mankind. The
dresses himself to all peoples. ‘“ Hear gospel of Christ pertains to the whole
this, all people ; give ear, all ye inhabi- race of man. All men need the gospel.
tants of the world.” This summoning ‘The gospel is sent to all men, “Go ye
all men to attention implies— into all the world,” &.

1. The great importance of the subject. IL The preacher of wisdom ad-


It is commen in Scripture when im- dresses himself to all ote “* Both


POALM XLT.


low and high, rich and poor together.”
“What the Psalmist has delivered, serves
to the rich for warning, to the poor for
consolation.” The poor are in danger
from the inordinate desire of wealth,
and the rich from an inordinate delight
in it Let the poor neither fear nor
envy the rich ; let the rich neither trust
nor boast in their riches. The message
of the Christian preacher is to all classes,
The gospel is addressed to man as man,
without regard to any distinctions of
wealth or rank.

III. The preacher of wisdom duly
considers his subject. “The meditation
of my heart shall be of understanding.”
“The idea is,” says Barnes, “that he
had meditated on the subject, and that
he would now give utterance to the
result of his meditations,” And Matthew
Henry : “It was what he had himself
well digested. What his mouth spoke
was ‘the meditation of his heart ;’ it
was what God put into his mind, what
he had himself seriously considered, and
was fully apprised of the meaning of
and convinced of the truth of.” “TI
will incline mine ear to a parable,”
saith the Psalmist, implying clearly that
the wisdom he was about to ‘ communi-
cate is no self-sprung possession, but
one that has been acquired by him.”


2wD = similitude, parable, proverb.
Hengstenberg translates it here, “ simili-


tude.” And Fuerst; a “ sententious
poem.” “ The Psalmist will incline his
ear to it. This intimates—l. That he


was taught it by the Spirit of God and
did not speak of himself. Those that
undertake to teach others must first
learn themselves. 2. That he thought
himself nearly concerned in it, and was
resolved not to venture his own soul
upon that bottom which he dissuaded
others from venturing theirs upon. 3,
That he would not expect others should
attend to that which he himself did not
attend to as a matter of the greatest
importance. When God gives the
tongue of the learned He first wakens
the ear to hear as the learned.”—,
Henry. An unthoughtful ministry is a
great curse. Meditation, patient and
earnest thought, should ever precede the
speech of the preacher,
240


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


IV. The preacher of wisdom deals
with difficult questions. ‘‘ Dark say-
ings.” “iT = entwined, hence, (a)
cunning, trickery (Dan. viii. 23), te. dis-
simulation. (b) enigmas, riddles (Judg.
xiv. 12). (c) potnted, enigmatical speech
that surprises, a proverb (Prov. i. 6); a
parable (Ezek. xvii. 2); poesy (Ps. xlix.
5); oracle” (Num. xii. 8).— Puerst’s
Lexicon. It seems to us to mean in this
place something which was obscure, or
only imperfectly understood. Heng-
stenberg explains it thus: “riddle, a
discourse of difficult comprehension, of
deep sense.” There are “ dark sayings,”
difficult questions, in—1. The Scriptures,
in which there are “things hard to be
understood,” not a few. 2. The Pro-
vidence of God. “Thy way is in the
sea,” &c. ‘Clouds and darkness are
round about Him.” 3. Hvery human
life. “ Man’s soul is written all over
with dark sayings.” The preacher
deals with these ‘“‘ dark sayings ;” looks
into them, exhibits their uses, explains
their significance, endeavours to make
them clear and luminous.

V. The preacher of wisdom deals
with difficult questions poetically,
musically. ‘I will open my dark gay-
ing upon the harp.” He would speak
them in poetry, and attune them to
music. “The most sorrowful people have
known most and felt most the soul of
music. The expression of the sorrows
and aspirations of the soul in music
ministers to our reserve, while it also
flows forth in a stream, sad in itself
perhaps, yet productive of a divine cheer-
fulness. There is a mystery and a mean-
ing in music we can never either expound
or explore; and it is felt that those
natures, which are the greatest burden
and mystery to themselves, find most
the solace of song in the combinations
of all great sounds ; we have known this,
it is not always that in joyfulness of
heart we sing, The girl oppressed by
some great trial or loss, as she bends
over her needle, or goes about her
house-work, will sing; and while she
sings, finds unconsciously that her song
has been her medicine, and has given
to her relief. I have known a woman,
disappointed and forsaken, fiying to he:


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY PSALMS.


PSALM XLIX.





piano ; her fingers rushing over the keys
have given liberation to her spirit, and
the chords opened the sealed well of
tears, and the rains descended, and the
floods came. And something like this
is a very general experience. Hence
we have poetry for all cultured people,
and hymns for holy people; and do we
not know what it is to become happy
while we sing# Good it is sometimes


to utter the dark saying to the harp
rather than to others; it composes,
allays, and tranquillises the mind while
we utter it."— ZH. P. Hood.
Conciusion. Let us learn how to
deal with our dark sayings. Seek light
and help in worship. Devotion wil)
illuminate the mind. Intellectual diffi-
culties will vanish before the religious
fervour of a grateful and reverent heart


THE FOOLISH WAY OF WEALTHY WoORLDLINGS.
(Verses 5-15.)


L The characteristics of their way.
Their way is marked by—

l. “Trust in their wealth.” They
place confidence in their riches as the
source of all good to them, and the
means by which all their wants may be
supplied and all their desires gratified.
“How hard is it for them that trust in
riches to enter into the kingdom of
God.” “Charge them that are rich in
this world, that they be not high-
minded, nor trust in uncertain riches,
but in the living God who giveth us
richly all things to enjoy.”

2. Boasting in their wealth. ‘“‘ Boast
themselves in the multitude of their
riches.” They pride themselves in the
extent of their possessions. ‘“ Many
years ago Judge B, resided in New
Jersey. His family was considered the
most aristocratic in the town; and not
unfrequently some of its members would
give their acquaintances to understand
that this was their opinion also. On
a certain occasion a fishing-party was
made up among the ladies’ Mrs. Judge
B. was one of the number. While fish-
ing, the subject of losing property was
discussed. Mrs. B. paused a little, and
slipped a splendid gold ring from her
finger, and dropped it into the lake,
remarking as she did so, that it was
‘as impossible for them to become poor
as it was for her to recover that ring.’
The party returned to their homes, and
Mrs. B. gave her fish to the servants.
Not long after, the cook came into the
sitting-room and showed to Mra B. a
gold ring that she had taken from
one of tie fish, Zhe ring dropped into


the lake was recovered. Mrs. B., who
was so confident that she could never
become poor, died a pauper in Elizabeth-
town, Nova Scotia ; and her husband,
the judge, died a pauper also in an ad-
joining town.”—Dircet. of Illus.

3. Fancied power to retain wealth.
“Their inward thought is that their
houses shall continue for ever,” &c. (ver.
11). They calculated that they should
retain their possessions until death, and
then transmit them to their children.
There are few wealthy persons who
realise the uncertain tenure by which
they hold their possessions. The great
majority seem to regard themselves, not
as stewards, but as proprietors of their
possessions, and as able to retain or dis-
pose of them as they please.

Il. The folly of their way. ‘This
their way is their folly.” Their folly is
seen in—

1. Thetr inability to retain their
wealth, All men must die, “and leave
their wealth to others” (1) They
cannot continue with it, nor will it
serve to procure them a reprieve. (2)
They cannot carry it with them, but
must leave it behind them. (3) They
cannot foresee who will enjoy it when
they have left it; they must leave it to
others, but to whom they know not,
perhaps to a fool (Kccles. ii, 19), perhaps
to an enemy."—M. Henry. ‘‘ Riches,”
says Gataker, “though they have great
eagles’ wings, to fly away from us while
we are here in this world, yet have not
so much as little sparrows’ wings to fly
after us and follow us when we go
hence. We brought nothing into this

241


PSALM XLIX,


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: PSALMS.





world, neither shall we carry anything
hence.” Even before the rich man
passes away from this world, his riches
may pass away from him. A storm at
sea, a spark of fire, a flood, &c, may
transform him into a beggar. How
foolish, then, to trust and glory in
wealth !

2. The limitation of the power of
wealth. The wealthiest man has no
power (1) to turn aside the stroke of
death even from his dearest friend.
“None of them can by any means re-
deem his brother, nor give to God a
ransom for him.” The wealthiest of
men is unable to prolong by an hour
the life that is most dear to him.
“ ¢ Redeeming, he cannot redeem ;’ that
is, according to Hebrew usage, he can-
not possibly do it; it cannot be done.”
“What folly is it to trust to that, and
boast of that, which will not enable us
wo much as for one hour to respite the
execution of the sentence of death upon
a parent, a child, or a friend that is to
us as our own soul!” The wealthiest
man has no power (2) to turn aside the
stroke of death from himself. “ Wise
men die, likewise the fool and the
brutish person.” ‘No matter what
may be the character of the man of
wealth, whether wise or foolish, he must
certainly die. His wealth cannot save
him from the grave.” It is said that a
queen of England, knowing that her
death was at hand, cried, “‘ A million of
money for a moment of time,” and cried
in vain, (3) Wealth has no power to
favourably affect the condition of tts pos-
sessors after death. “‘ Like sheep they
are laid in the grave,” do. (ver. 14).
When death comes to them, all their
possessions and honours must be re-
linquished finally and for ever. Then
the superiority of the portion of the
upright will be apparent. All the
strength and beauty of wealthy world-
lings shall be consumed; but “the
righteous shall shine forth as the sun in
the kingdom of their Father.” He who,
when upon earth, was “clothed in purple
and fine linen, and fared sumptuously
every day,” couid not obtain so much
as a drop of cold water in hell. How
great, then, is the folly of putting our

242


trust in and making our boast of our
wealth! And yet, notice how continu-
ous this folly is. ‘‘This their way is
their folly ; yet their posterity approve
their sayings.” In this folly there is a
sad successiveness. The children tread
in the footsteps of their fathers. ‘‘ They
adopt their principles, and act on their
maxims; and, attaching the same im-
portance to wealth which they did, seek,
as they sought, to perpetuate their names
upon the earth.”

And now turning our attention from
the wealthy worldling to “the poor of
this world rich in faith, and heirs of the
kingdom which He hath promised to
them that love Him,” two remarks are
justified.

First: The godly man has no reason-
able cause to fear the power of the
wealthy worldling. ‘“ Wherefore should
I fear in the days of evil, when the
iniquity of my heels shall compass me
about?” It is difficult to get any
reasonable meaning out of the last
clause as it is rendered in our version.
We take it that the word here rendered
* heels ” — apy is from the verb apy,
and signifies a persecutor or lier-in-wait ;
and so we should translate, “ When the
iniquity of liers-in-wait compass me
about.” See Fuerst’s Lexicon. The
Psalmist was exposed to danger by
reason of the crafty designs of his
wealthy enemies ; but why should he
fear them. With all their wealth, how
powerless were they! What could they
do to him, they who were weak mortals
like himself? They were leaning on a
broken reed, and boasting in a shadow.
He had no reason to fear them; for his
trust was in the Lord Jehovah, in whom
is everlasting strength.

Second: The portion of the godly
man is far superior to that of the
wealthy worldling. ‘The upright shall
have dominion over them in the morn-
ing... . God will redeem my soul from
the power of the grave; for He shall
receive me.” The superiority of the
portion of the upright consists in this—

1. They shall not be held in Sheor.
God will rescue them from the power
of the grave. They shall arise to a life
of bleasedneas.


fF


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; PSALMS,





RGALM XLIX,





2. They shall be received by God.
God will receive His people into glory,
both soul and body, at the resurrection.
So shall they ever be with the Lord.

This superiority will soon be made
mantfest. “In the morning,” te in a
little time. The night will speedily
pass away, and “in the morning” the
vanity of the portion of wealthy world-
lings and the excellence of the portion


of the godly will be clearly mani-
fested.

Conotusion.—l, My rich brother,
“trust not in uncertain riches ;” but
use thy wealth wisely, and it shall prove
a blessing to thyself and to others. 2.
My poor brother, do thou neither envy
nor fear the power of wealthy world-
lings; but rejoice in thine own in-
alienable and blessed portion,


REDEMPTION,
(Verse 8.)


L The subject of redemption. To
acquire right views of the importance
of redemption as to ita subject, we may
glance at the powers, the affections,
and the duration of the soul.

1. Its powers. (1) Jt ts endowed
with the faculty of knowledge. Paul
tells us that knowledge is a feature of
the image of God. The object of
redemption is not mere matter, but an
intelligent being, the only being on this
earth capable of apprehending the
discoveries which God has made of
Himself. (2) Jt 8 endued with the
power of chotee. Man is a moral agent;
he acts under the influence of moral
motives; he is not the creature of
chance ; he is not willingly the prey of
accident ; he has the power, to a certain
extent, of controlling his circumstances.
He is, further, capable of knowing and
of loving God, and of becoming like God.

2. Its affections. The soul has lost
the image of God. The temple is in
ruins, and the Great Inhabitant gone.
It is utterly corrupt, polluted, debased,
at enmity against God. It is the prey
of every bad passion, of every polluting
affection ; consequently its tendency is


to misery ; and unless it be redeemed, it
will be miserable for ever.

3. Its duration. The soul of man
will live for ever, and through the eter-
nity of its existence, it must either be a
happy spirit before the throne of God,
or a hopeless. outcast from His heaven.

II. The price of its redemption.
How vast the price paid for the redemp-
tion of the soul! The precious blood of
Christ. Had the whole creation been
consumed in one mighty conflagration
as the price of redemption, it would have
been as nothing compared with this,
How prectous the price of redemption!
The Deity became enshrined in man-—
not changed into a man, but most mys-
teriously united to a man; the price of
redemption was His blood. This price
was given (1 John iii. 16; 1 Pet. i 18,
19).

re The period of its accomplish-
ment is limited. ‘It ceaseth for ever.”
How infinitely precious is time! It is
in time only that the redemption of the
soul can be ensured. The value of one
opportunity of hearing the Gospel is
unspeakably great.—M‘A., from Sketches

Sermona,


of


Men or THE WORLD WHO HAVE THEIZ PorTION ox THIS Lira,
(Verses 16-20.)


L Men who have their portion in
this life must resign it at death. We
have here—

1. Man possessing wealth and honour.
“Que is made ricb, the glory of his
house is increased.” By means of wealth


man is able to surround himself with all

the luxuries and ornaments produced by

nature and by man, “The rich have

many friends,” who fawn upon and

flatter them, and extol their state and

their doings, In these days many mer
243


PaALM XLIX.





speedily, from small beginnings, grow
rich and pompous, and fond of display.

2. Man rejoicing in wealth and honour.
“‘In his life he blessed His soul.” He
is like the rich man described by our
Lord, who said to his soul, “Soul, thou
hast much good laid up for many years ;
take thine ease, eat, drink, and be merry.
But God said unto him, Thou fool,” &&.
Oh, the awful degradation of manhood
when a man calls upon his soul to find
its chief good in material possessions !
In answer to the inquiry, “ Who will
show us any good?” such men are 80
far from saying, “ Lord, lift Thou up the
light of Thy countenance upon us,” that
they point you to their well-filled barns
or their vast estates. Yet it is true that
He aims too low who aims beneath the

skies,”

3. Man pratsed because of his wealth
and honour. ‘Man will praise thee
when thou doest well to thyself.” ‘This
is the sentiment of all the children of
this world, that those do best for them-
selves that do most for their bodies, by
heaping up riches, though, at the same
time, nothing is done for the soul, no-
thing for eternity.” Low-natured people
abound who court and fawn upon the
man of wealth. Mean sycophants are
ever ready obsequiously to flatter the
“men of the world, who have their
portion in this life.”

4. Man compelled to relinquish his
wealth and honour. ‘ When he dieth
he shall carry nothing away ; his glory
shall not descend after him.” “ For
we brought nothing into this world, and
it is certain that we can carry nothing
out.” To the man who elects to have
his portion in this life it may be said in
the future state, “Son, remember that
thou in thy lifetime receivedst thy good
things.” “What disarrays like death?
It defaces the fascination of tha beauti-
fal. It withers the strength of the
mighty. It snatches the store of the rich.
Kings are stripped of trapping, trophy,
treasure: ‘ Their glory shall not descend
after them.’”—R. W. Hamilton.

II. Men who have their portion in
this life when they depart hence are
gathered to their moral ancestors,
“He shall go to the generation of his

244


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





fathers; they suall never see licht.”’
They depart to their own place and their
own company. ‘ Under the generation
of the fathers,” says Hengstenberg, “ are
here to be understood, not so much the
corporeal ancestors of the ungodly, as
his predecessors in wickedness.” And
M. Henry: ‘His worldly wicked
fathers, whose sayings he approved, and
whose steps he trod in.” They dwell
in a dark and melancholy realm
“They shall never see light”—+.¢., they
shall never have the least glimpse of
any joy or comfort. They are banished
into the outer darkness,

III Men who have their portion
in this life degrade their being.
“Man that is in honour, and under-
standeth not, is like the beasts that
perish.” How unspeakable is the de-
gradation of a spiritual and immortal
being, created in God’s image and re
deemed by Christ’s blood, when he lives
for this life only, the life of the senses
merely! “‘ Many there are,” says Barnes,
“in exalted stations, who are surrounded
by all that wealth can give, yet who no
more admit the thought of a future
world into their hopes and plans than if
they had no other endowment than the
camel or the ox, and whose conduct in
this respect would not be changed if all
the higher endowments which constitute
the nature of man were withdrawn, anc
they were at once reduced to the con-
dition of a brute.” M. Henry: “It is
better to be a beast than to be a man
that makes himself like a beast.”

Conciusion: 1. To those who have
wealth, but not godliness, ‘ What shall
it profit a man, if he shali gain the
whole world, and lose his own soul?”
2. To those who have godliness, but not
wealth, “It is a temptation,” says
Dickson, “which shaketh the faith of
the godly sometimes, when they see the
flourishing prosperity of the wicked and
their own daily affliction; but this
should not move the godly, nor make
them suspect themselves to be in a
wrong course and the ungodly in a
better way: ‘be not thou afraid when
one is made rich.’” Your portion is in-
comparably superior to that of the most
wealthy and distinguished of those who


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS. PSALM K
a
have their portion in this life. “The of trouble. And the Lord shall help
end of the wicked shall be cut off. But them and deliver them ; He shall deliver


the salvation of the righteous is of the them from the wicked, and save them,
Lord; He is their strength in the time because they trust in Him.”


PSALM L


INTRODUOTION,


Superscription, ‘* A Psalm of Asaph.” Asaph was ‘a Levite, son of Berachiah, one of the
leaders of David’s choir (1 Chron. vi. 39). Psalms L and Ixxiii. to Ixxxiii. are attributed to
him, but probably all these, except 1., Ixxiii., and Ixxvii., are of later origin. He was in after
times celebrated as a Seer as well as a musical composer, and was put on a par with David
(2 Chron. xxix. 80; Neh. xii. 46). The office appears to have remained hereditary in hia
family, unless he was the founder of a school of poets and musical composers, who were called
after him ‘the sons of Asaph’” (1 Chron. xxv. 1; 2 Chron. xx. 143 Ezra ii, 41).—Smsth’s
Dict. of the Bible.

The occasion on which the psalm was composed is unknown. ‘The object of the psalm,’
says Barnes, “‘ seems to be to set forth the value and importance of spiritual religion as com-
pared with a mere religion of forms.”


A ScrEnE or JUDGMENT,
(Verses 1-6.)


In these verses we have a poetical
representation of the appearance of the
Most High to judge His people as to
their conduct in respect to His worship.
Though the judgment spoken of in this
psalm is a particular one, yet most of
the features of this scene are elsewhere
represented as characterising the general
and final judgment. We have here set
before us—

I. The Judge. “The mighty God,
even the Lord, hath spoken... . God
is Judge Himself.” Professor Alexander
translates: “The Almighty, God,
Jehovah, speaks;” and he points out
that Hi is not an adjective agreeing
with Elohim, but a substantive in
apposition with it. Hengstenberg takes
the same view, and says: “The heaping
up of names must fill the hypocrites
with terror, as these bring before their
eyes the majesty of Him whose judg-
ment they underlie. In the relation of
these designations there is a gradation.
Elohim is more than El, to which its
singular Eloah is equivalent. The plural
marks the fulness and the richness of
the Divine nature, Jehovah is the
highest name according to its deriva-
tion—it marks God as the only real
Being—and, according to the usage
also, which ascribes to Jehovah the


most glorious manifestations of God to
and in behalf of His people.” He who
summons the world to judgment has
the right to do so, and the power to
enforce His right. As Judge God is
perfect. ‘Two things are essential to a
just judgment.

1. Competent knowledge of the case to
be tried. In this respect God is perfect
as the Judge of man. He is fully
acquainted with (1) all spoken words
and overt actions; (2) all unuttered
thoughts and unwrought purposes ; (3)
all motives by which we have been
actuated ; and (4) all the circumstances
and influences, both good and evil, by
which we have been affected (Ps.
exxxix. 1-16).

2. Perfect justice in trying the case.
“Ts God unrighteous who taketh ven-
geance? God forbid: for how then
shall God judge the world?” “A God
of truth and without iniquity, just and
right is He.” His judgment-throne is
“a great white throne,” te, a throne
whose judgments are characterised by
perfect purity and righteousness, God
is the Judge ; and He is perfect in all


things.
II. The principles upon which
judgment will be administered. ‘Out


of Zion, the perfection of beauty, God
245


PeaLM L.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALME.





hath shined.” On “ Zion, the perfection
of beauty,” see remarks on Ps, xlviii
2. “The meaning here is, that the
great principles which are to determine
the destiny of mankind in the final
judgment are those which proceed from
Zion ; or those which are taught in the
religion of Zion ; they are those which are
inculcated through the Church of God.
God has there made known His law;
He has stated the principles on which
He governs, and on which He will judge
the world.”—Barres. To the Church
God has clearly revealed His will, and
made known the principles upon which
He will administer the final judgment.
(See Eccles. xii 14; Matt. xxv. 14-46,
Acts xvii. 31; Rom. xiv. 10, 12.; et ed.)

III. The certainty of the judgment.
“God shall come,” &. Here is no
peradventure, but an unmistakable
affirmation. Evidence is not wanting
of the certainty of future judgment.

1. Conscience foreshadows it. ‘The
consciousness of obligation,” says R. W.
Hamilton, ‘“‘would lead us to believe
that God would bring us into judg-
ment with Him.”

2. Moral government requires tt.
‘“‘Even-handed justice” is mot adminis-
tered hereand now. As Dr. R. W. Dale
points out, “the physical penalties of
certain forms of sin torture and destroy
an inhabitant of Fiji; while they are
alleviated and almost wholly averted by
the resources which science and wealth
place at the disposal of a European ;
one merchant who is guilty of gross
fraud escapes detection, while another
who is guilty of precisely the same crime
is accidentally discovered, and expiates
his offence by long years of disgrace and
misery ; a lad who has no friends is
ruined for life by a single act of folly
and sin, while another, who may have
been his confederate in wrong-doing, is
rescued by the energy and constancy of
human affection, recovers his reputation,
and after long years of prosperity and
honour leaves behind him a name
which his children are proud to bear.”
Many other inequalities of retribution
as administered in this life might be
pointed out, These demand a “judg-
ment to come.”


3. The word of God affirms tt. (See
passages cited above, ef al.) That last
great Assize is certain as the throne of
God.

IV. The terrible majesty of the
judge at His appearing. “A fire shall
devour before Him, and it shall be very
tempestuous round about Him.” ‘There
is doubtless a reference here to the
sublime and terror-inspiring phenomena
which accompanied the giving of the
law on Sinai (Exod, xix. 16, 18). In
the last judgment Christ the Judge will
come in “the clouds of heaven” and
with ‘flaming fire,” and attended by
“mighty angels” (Mark xiii, 26; 2
Thess. i. 7-10; Rev. i. 7). Such
descriptions are not designed simply to
represent God as clothed with appro-
priate majesty when appearing to judge
the world. The flaming fire, the stormy
tempest, the cloudy gloom, the flashings
of His glory, are emblematical of the
purity and the power and the consuming
wrath of the Judge. And they are in
keeping with the vast and important
transactions and results of the solemn
occasion, and the Divine dignity of the
Judge. Such an appearance should fill
the hearts of saints with holy fear, and
sinners with unutterable terror.

V. The persons to be judged.
“Judge His people. ... My saints,

. those that have made a covenant
with Me by sacrifice.” The people of
God are here represented as having
entered into a solemn covenant-relation
to Him. They have taken God to be
their God, and given themselves up to
Him and to His service, and the Jews
in doing this presented solemn sacrifices
to Him. The Christian covenants with
God through Christ the great sacrifice,
through whom alone we come to God.
The Jews were the professed people of
God,—His covenanted people (Exod.
xix. 3-9). But how often and how
sadly did they break the covenant !
“Tt is at first sight strange, that those,
whom the Lord will judge as trans
gressors of His covenant, should be
described as His saints. But the allu
sion to the height of their standing and
destiny 1s particularly fitted to cause
shame, on account of their present actual


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


condition.” Let not the professed people
of God deceive themselves by imagining
that if they sin God will not judge them
for it; for He certainly will do so. The
greater the privileges and profession of
any people, the more deserving of punish-
ment will they be found if they dis-
honour Ged and walk not in His statutes.
But at the last judgment all men, with-
out any exception whatever, must appear
and be judged (Rom. xiv. 10, 12; 2
Cor. v. 10; et al.)

VI. The witnesses of the judgment.
“He shall call to the heavens from
above, and to the earth, that He may
judge His people.” The universe is
called upon to be present as witness to
the solemn transactions of the judgment.
Such appeals to the heaven and earth
to witness, in Scripture, always indicate
the importance and solemnity of the
scenes and transactions to which they
are called. Thus Moses warned the
children of Israel of the danger of pro-
voking God to anger,—“TI call heaven
and earth to witness against you this
day, that ye shall soon utterly perish,”
dc. (Deut. iv. 26; see also Micah vi. 2.)


PALE


“ All His holy angels” will attend the
Judge, and witness the proceedings, and
testify to their righteousness.

VIL The righteousness of the
judgment. ‘And the heavens shall
declare His righteousness ; for God is
Judge Himself.” The perfections of
God, especially His holiness and know-
ledge, guarantee the righteousness of
His judgment, (See previous remarks
on the perfection of God as a Judge.)
The angelic witnesses of the judgment
will declare its justice, saying, “ True
and righteous are Hisjudgments.” The
redeemed will praise the generosity of
His dealings with them. The con-
sciences even of the condemned will
acknowledge the righteousness of their
doom. The whole universe will sub-
scribe to the justice of His judgments.

Conciusion. — 1. Here ts solemn
warning to the people of God. If you
depart from Him, He will summon you
to meet Him for judgment. 2. Here ts
a solemn inquiry for all, How shall we
meet Him in judgment? Only through
Christ Jesus can we do so (see Rom.
viii. 1, 33).


Tue ForMAL AND THE SPIRITUAL IN Divine SERVICE


(Verses 7-15.)


The poet represents the judgment of
the chosen people as commencing with
God’s address to them: ‘‘ Hear, O My
people, and I will speak,” &ce. He
testifies against them because of the
formality of their services ; and calls
upon them to offer to Him spiritual
sacrifices.

I. The worthlessness of merely
formal and material sacrifices in the
Divine service. ‘I will not reprove
thee for thy sacrifices or thy burnt-
offerings continually before Me. I will
take no bullock out of thy house, nor
he-goats out of thy folds.” Such sacri-
fices are shown to be worthless.

1. Because of the infinite resources of
God. ‘‘ For every beast of the forest is
mine,” &c. (vers. 10-12). He is the
absolute proprietor of all things. We
are but stewards of our possessions.
We hold them under Him and for Him.


“ What hast thou that thou didst not
receive ” from Him? ‘The devout and
godly soul recognises this fact, and
blesses God, as David did, because He
has given to us wherewith we may offer
to Him. “Blessed be Thou, Lord God
of Israel our father, for ever and ever.
Thine, O Lord, is the greatness,” &c.
(1 Chron, xxix. 10-16). Only of His
own can we give unto Him. This is
true of the man of temporal wealth, the
man of genius, the man of piety and
spiritual power, &c. Utterly worthless,
therefore, are all our offerings in His
sight, unless they are spiritually and
heartily given (Acts xvii. 25).

2. Because of the spirituality of God.
6 Will I eat the flesh of bulls, or drink
the blood of goats!” Did they sup
pose that the Infinite Spirit needed
meat and drink for His support as our
bodies do? Being a spirit, the mere

247





outward sacrifices could afford no satis-
faction to Him, “Among the heathen
the opinion prevailed that the gods ate
and drank what was offered to them in
sacrifice ; whereas the truth was, that
these things were consumed by the
priests who attended on heathen altars,
and conducted the devotions of heathen
temples, and who found that it con-
tributed much to their own support,
eand did much to secure the liberality of
the people, to keep up the impression
that what was thus offered was con-
sumed by the gods.” The Divine appeal
implies that they to whom it was ad-
dressed knew better. ‘ God is a Spirit :
and they that worship Him must
worship Him in spirit and in truth.”
Therefore, in His sight the mere mate-
rial offering was worthless. But let us
not suppose that God rejects all out-
ward offerings and sacrifices. He
rather requires them. It is quite clear
from the eighth verse, “that if the
outward sacrifices had not been offered,
this also would have been a ground of
complaint,” But when they are
offered as substitutes for the loving
reverence of the heart, and the loyal
obedience of the life, He rejects them as


abominations. When they are the
expressions of the soul’s prayerful
penitence or thankful praise, He
accepts them with delight. (See the


remarks on Ps, xl. 6.

Il. The worth of spiritual sacrifices
in the Divine service. “ Offer,” or
sacrifice, “unto God thanksgiving,” d&c.
(vers. 14, 15). The worth of spiritual
offerings is shown here in several re-
spects :

1. They are enjoined by God. He
commands us to present them unto
Him. Notice (1) The ground of this
requirement. ‘‘ Hear, O My people, and
I will speak: I am Qod, thy God.”
“On the one side, my people and Israel,
the people of God and of the covenant ;
on the other side God, the God of hea-
ven and of earth, thy God, who has


248


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


a





bound Israel to Himself by so many
benefits, has purchased his obedience
so dearly.”— Hengstenberg. He de-
mands the spiritual worship of His
people on the twofold ground of His
own Divine perfections and sovereignty,
and His covenant relation to them.
(2) The inclusiveness of this require-
ment. These spiritual offerings include
praise, payment of vows, and prayer.
“The giving of thanks,” says John
Arnd, “comprehends many virtues in
itself,—acknowledgment of God as the
fountain of all good; fear of God,
namely, the childlike fear which re-
ceives all benefits from God as the child
from the father: humility, confessing
that we have nothing of ourselves, but
obtain all from God,” &c. Hengsten-
berg translates: “Offer to God praise,
and THUS pay to the Highest thy vows.”
He explains: “ He only who has ren-
dered the substance of this thank-
offering, thanks, has truly paid his
vow.” Lives of penitence, prayer, grati-
tude, praise, affection, obedience, and
trust, constitute the acceptable sacrifices,

2. They secure His blessing. ‘The
whole fifteenth verse is of a promissory
nature. It announces the reward which
is appointed for the spiritual worship of
God. Whoever thanks God in the right
manner for deliverance obtained, may
console himself in the time of distress
with the assured hope of a new deliver-
ance.” —Hengstenberg.

3. They are a means which we
glorify God. “Thou shalt glorify Me.”
God is glorified not by our outward
professions or material offerings, but by
grateful and trustful hearts expressed in
holy and earnest lives,

ConoLusion.—Are we thus honour-
ing Him? Our material offerings and
formal services He will not accept un-
less we give Him our heart and life,
Be it ours, through the atonement of
Christ Jesus, and in imitation of His ex-
ample, to devote ourselves unreservedly
and for ever to God,


HOMILETIC OOMMENTARY ; PSALMS,





Peal 6.





Resource AND ComrorT InN TROUBLE.
(Verse 15.)


Notice—
L The period described. “The day
of trouble.” We are often called to


pass through trouble in the present
world. We sometimes are troubled
with opposition from the world (2 Tim.
iii, 12), sometimes with painful family
discord (Prov. xvii. 1), sometimes with
great bodily infirmities (Isa. xxxviii. 14,
15), sometimes with tmward confticts
(Rom, vii. 22-24), sometimes with per-
pleatties an business, sometimes with
worldly disappointments, sometimes with
the unfatthfulness of friends (2 Tim. iv.
10, 16), sometimes with the weight of
declining years, sometimes with siander-
ous reports (Ps. xli, 5-8), sometimes
with pecuniary losses, sometimes with
affictive bereavements (Ps. lxxxviii. 18),
and sometimes with tormenting fears (2
Cor. vii. 5).


It. The direction given, ® Call
upon Me.” We should do this—in the
language of deprecation (Ps. cxliii. 2);
in the language of petition (Ps. lxix. 14);
in the language of confession (Ps, li. 2,
1 John i. 9); in the language of hu-
mility (Gen, xviii. 27, xxxii. 10); and
in the language of submission (Matt.
xxvi. 42),

III. The consolation introduced.
“T will deliver thee.” This He will do
at the fittest tome, by the fittest tnstru-
ments, through the fittest mediums, and
in the fittest manner.

IV. The consequence anticipated.
“Thou shalt glorify Me.” In the
memory, by lively recollections of My
kindness ; in the conscience, by fearing
to prove ungrateful; in the affections,
by loving Me supremely ; in the life, by
devotedness to My service.—W. Sleigh.


Gop’s CHALLENGE TO ReLiaious Hypocrirss,
(Verses 16-23.)


We have here—

L Religious hypocrites proclaiming
God’s law. ‘‘ What hast thou to do
to declare My statutes, or that thou
shouldest take My covenant in thy
meuth?” It is a great evil when
private professors of religion are untrue
to their profession. In them hypocrisy
is an evil and pernicious thing. But
for hypocrites to declare and teach God’s
law to others, and set it at nought them-
selves, is an outrageous evil. He who
preaches the law to others should en-
deavour to keep the law himself. A
man who is not himself sincerely reli-
gious has no Divine authority to preach
the Word of God to others. Neither
has he the abslity to do so aright. To
represent the power and beauty of truth
and grace faithfully, we must know
their beauty and power for ourselves.
“Be ye clean that bear the vessels of
the Lord.” (See Rom. ii. 17-24.)

Il. Religious hypocrites despising
God’s Word. ‘ Thou batest instruction,


and castest My words behind thee.” A
teacher of others, yet unwilling to learn
himself. A preacher of the Word of
God to others, yet contemptuously dis-
regarding that Word himself. It is to
be feared that there are still teachers
of religion who themselves refuse to be
taught of God; and who, by neglecting
its study or disobeying its precepts, de-
spise the Word of God. Such persons
occupy and profane the sacred position
of religious teachers for the gratification
of their ambition, or for the emoluments
of the office, &c. But whatever may be
their motive, their sin is most heinous
and mischievous.

III. Religious hypocrites breaking
God’s laws. “When thou sawest a
thief, then thou consentedst with him,”
d&c. (vers, 18-20). These teachers of the
law are here charged by God with
breaking its seventh, eighth, and ninth
commandments. He accuses them of
adultery, theft, and false witness. They
approved the practices of thieves and

249


AHOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMS.





shared in their plunder, Adultery was
“very common among the Jews, for
even the Talmud accuses some of the
most celebrated Rabbis of this vice.”—
if, Stuart. The charge of evil speaking
is very strong. It was not an occasional
thing with them; they were addicted to
it. Mouth and tongue were devoted to
wickedness and deceit. ‘‘The expres-
sion in ver, 20, ‘thou sittest,’ is a de-
lineation to the life of babbling com-
panies.” In the enjoyment of social
intercourse they employed themselves
in backbiting and slandering. Even
the nearest relations were not exempt
from their venomous tongues. ‘Their
“brother,” their “own mother’s son,”
they would assail. “It is to be remem-
bered that where polygamy prevailed
there would be many children in the
same family who had the same father,
but not the same mother. The nearest
relationship, therefore, was where there
was the same mother as well as the
same father. To speak of a brother, in
the strictest sense, and as implying the
nearest relationship, it would be natural
to speak of one as having the same
mother.”— Barnes. Now these sins—
slander, even of the nearest relations,
adultery, and complicity with thieves—
are charged against not merely professors
of religion, but teachers of the law. The
effect of such sins in persons holding
such a position and making such a pro-
fession is most baneful. These effects
are—

1. Ruin to the hypocrites themselves.
(See 2 Pet. ii.)

2. Paralysis and corruption to the
Church.

3. Stumbling to the world.
2432 Pet. ii, 2.

IV. Religious hypocrites deceiving
themselves as to the Divine character
and conduct. “ These things thou hast
done, and I kept silence; thou thoughtest
that I was altogether such an one as thy-
self.” God had borne long with them
in their evil ways. His forbearance and
long-suffering were exercised with a view
to their repentance. But they misin-
terpreted His non-interference as an indi-
cation that He regarded sin even as they
did. Sinners take God’s silence for

250


(Rom. ii.


consent, and His patience with them as
palliation of their sins, and are thus
encouraged in evil. But great is their
mistake in this, ‘ Because sentence
against an evil work is not executed
speedily, therefore the heart of the sons
of men is fully set in them to do evil”
Yet it surely will be executed.

V. Religious hypocrites interrogated
by God. “ What hastthou todo todeclare
My statutes?” &c. (ver. 16). Thus God
challenges their right and title to pro-
claim His statutes. What right had
they to speak of His covenant when
they were constantly and flagrantly vio-
lating it? This challenge implies—

1. The inconsistency of their conduct.

2. The enormity of their conduct. .
They were profaning the most sacred
realities ; endangering the most precious
interests of human souls ; dishonouring
God.

3. The rejection by God of their pro-
fessional duties. He rejects with utter
abhorrence the professional services in
His cause of those whose hearts and lives
are profane and impure.

VI. Religious hypocrites convicted
of their sins. ‘I will reprove thee, and
set them in order before Mine eyes,”
The word translated “reprove” meana
to demonstrate against, reprove, rebuke,
chastise. We take it to mean here that
God would thoroughly convince them of
the charges which He brings against
them, by setting their sins in order
before their eyes. He would summon
their sins from the graves of the past to
rise and confront them, and so convince
them. “He declares,” says Calvin,
“that they will scon be drawn into
open light, that they shall be compelled
to see with their eyes the shameful deeds
which they had imagined they could
conceal from the eyes of God. For so
I understand the setting in order, that
God will lay before them in exact order
a full catalogue of their misdeeds, which
they must read and own, whether they
will or not.” Unless our sins are blotted
out by the blood of Christ, we must con-
front them all again to our utter con-
fusion.

VIL Religious hypocrites warned by
God. “Now consider this, ye that for


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMB,





get God, lest I tear you in pieces,” &e.
“It is the doom of hypocrites to be
eat asunder (Matt. xxiv. 51). Note,—
1. Forgetfulness of God is at the bottom
of all the wickedness of the wicked,
Those that know God, and yet do not
obey Him, do certainly forget Him.
2. Those that forget God forget them-
selves, and it will never be right with
them till they consider, and so recover
themselves. Consideration is the first
step towards conversion. 3. Those that
will not consider the warnings of God’s
Word will certainly be torn in pieces by
the execution of His wrath. 4. When
God comes to tear sinners in pieces,
there is no delivering them out of His
hand. They cannot deliver themselves,
nor can any friend they have in the
world deliver them.”—M. Henry.

VIII. All men instructed by God.
“Whoso offereth praise glorifieth Me,”
&c. (ver. 23). The first clause of this
verse is a compend of vers, 14 and
15. On the second, Matthew Henry
remarks; “1. It is not enough for us to
ofier praise, but we must withal order
our conversation aright. Thanksgiving


An AWFUL


Ver. 21. “Thou thoughtest that I
was altogether as thyself.”

There are certain features in which
we are like God. “God said, Let us
make man in our image, after our like-
ness.” There are certain features of
that likeness which sin has not destroyed.
Our reason remains, Our moral sense,
though injured, is not destroyed, &.
If we were not in some respects like
God, we could receive no revelation of
Him. But it is a sinful fallacy to sup-
pose that God is altogether like us. Let
us exhibit the fallaciousness and evil of
such a supposition.

I. Men are able to hide their sins
from each other, and the wicked act
as though they could hide them from
God. Wicked men do impose upon
their fellow-men by means of religious
professions and practices, The Jews
addressed in this psalm imagined that
their ritualistic observances would hide
from God the enormity of their moral





PRALH L,


is good, but thanksliving is better. 2
Those that would have their conversa-
tion right must take care and pains to
order it, to dispose it according to rule,
to understand their way and to direct it.
3. Those that take care of. their conver-
sation make sure their salvation. The
right ordering of the conversation is the
only way, and it is a sure way, to obtain
the great salvation.”

ConoLusion.—Let professors of reli-
gion, and especially ministers thereof,
examine themselves. To each of us
who are ministers or teachers our Lord
by His apostle says,—‘‘ Be thou an
example of the believers, in word, in
conversation, in charity, in spirit, in
faith, in purity.” Brethren, are we
such an example? If there be any
hypocrisy, any insincerity in us, let us
take warning, and repent, and be saved
while yet we may.

And let the sincere Christian, who
sacrifices unto God thanksgiving, and
orders his conversation aright, be en-
couraged, for his salvation is of the
Lord, and faileth not,


Fauwaoy,


conduct. They thought that they could
impose upon God by their religious
forms. This is what men are doing
now. If men realised the impossibility
of hiding anything from God, sin would
become an exceptional thing. And yet,
how preposterous it is to think to hide
anything from the All-Seeing! He
has “set our secret sins in the light of
His countenance.”

IT. Men are apt to lose all concern
for the insignificant when occupied
with the important, and the wicked
act as though this were the case with
God. The statesman dealing with na-
tional problems and influencing the
destinies of mighty empires may over.
look the beggar-child that stands at his
gate. The wicked argue, “ God is great
and occupied with concerns of unlimited
extent and unspeakable importance ; He
upholds the entire universe; do you
think He leaves these vast concerns to
notice the sins of one man? I can


PSALM L.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


a enn EEE


understand His punishing the sins of a
host of angels, or of a multitude of men,
or of a nation; but the failings of one
imperfect man He does not concern
Himself about.” How foolish! Great
and small are only the relative terms of
imperfect beings. To God nothing is
unimportant, &c,

III. Men become unmindful of an
offence in course of time, and the
wicked think that in this God is alto-
gether as they are. We are indifferent
now to an offence which we bitterly
resented some years ago when it was
offered to us. Time has wonderfully
toned down our feeling. But God never
forgets or becomes indifferent to any
sin. He knows the dark history of
every sin, sees all its awful relations and
bearings, and so He never becomes
indifferent as we do. Moreover, He
knows that sin must either be pardoned
or punished, and, therefore, His solici-
tude for the sinners good keeps the sin
ever before Him. We may grow in-
different to a wrong, but God never
can.

IV. Men regard sin with great leni-
ency, and the wicked imagine that God
does so. ‘Fools make a mock at sin.”
Society says of the profligate that he is
“somewhat gay,” or “a trifle fast.”
Philosophers speak of sin as “ misdirec-
tion,” or as a result of deficient educa-
tion, or unfavourable circumstances and
surroundings. These tolerant and false
views of sin men are prone to transfer to
God. But with Him sin is the “ abo-
minable thing which He hates.” He
has proclaimed His hatred of it in the
punishment of the angels who sinned,
in the destruction of the ungodly world
by the flood, in the overthrow of the
cities of the plain, &c. The sufferings
and death of Jesus His Son to put away
sin are God’s great protest against evil.
He is completely, unchangeably, eter-
nally opposed to it.

V. Men treat sin and sinners in a
very changeable manner, and the
wicked think that God will do sa


283


Man burns with anger against an offen-
der, and threatens stern punishment; but
the anger cools and the punishment is -
never inflicted. Or man threatens a
punishment which he cannot infliet.
Men are prone to think that God is as
they are in this respect. ‘“‘ Because sen-
tence against an evil work is not exe
cuted speedily,” &c. His threatenings,
they think, are designed to deter men
from evil; but if it is committed, He
will not arise to punish for it, But this
is a fatal mistake. He will fulfil His
threatenings against the impenitent.
Judgment is delayed, because in His
mercy God waits for the wicked to turn
penitently to Him. But if His for-
bearance do not result in their penitence,
His judgment will be the more terrible.
He will set their sins before them in all
their multiplicity and enormity, and the
sight will extinguish their hope, and call
upon Despair henceforth to be their
attendant angel.

Sin must be either cast behind God’s
back, or it will cast the sinner into hell.
There is forgiveness with God. He
delighteth in mercy. He abundantly
pardons. ‘The Son of Man hath power
on earth to forgive sins.” Seek Him
while He may be found.

Let us not imagine that God is alto
gether like unto usin His estimate of
evil and evil-doers; but let us seek to
view sin as He does, with implacable
hatred, and to resist it with relentless
vigour.

Others, imagining God to be like
themselves, conclude that He regards
sin with feelings of stormy passion and
sinful revenge. They do greatly err.
And others that He is partial in His


.redemptive purposes and sectarian in


His sympathies, They also err. His
love is far greater than the best of our
conceptions of it.

Let us not think that God is alto
gether like unto us, but endeavour,
through Jesus Christ, to become alto
gether like unto Him,


rad


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS, PSALM Lil,





PSALM LL


INTRODUCTION.


Tax superscription informs us both as to the author of the psalm, and the occasion of its com-
cengesg *“*To the Chief Musician, a Psalm of David, when Nathan the prophet came unte
im, after he had gone in to Bathsheba.” The contents of the psalm accord with the super-
en on both points. For the history of the paiuful circumstances, see 2 Sam. xi., and xii.
That the psalm is addressed “ To the Chief Musician,” shows that it was not merely a
private confession of the poet’s guilt to God, but a public expression of his penitence. Heng:
stenberg, quoting the Marburg Bible, says: ‘‘ ‘David wrote this psalm not for himself alone
to be used as a prayer, but for those also who had charge of the temple music, that he might
again edify, by his repentance, the people of God, whom he had offended by his sin; and till
then he had no rest in his bosom, as he confesses in Ps, xxxii, 2.’ This publicity in the con-
fession of the sin was quite as great a work of God’s grace in David, aa the depth of his know-
ledge in regard to it, Nature must have struggled hard against it. But the design of the
publicity he gives us in ver. 13. He would, through his repentance, lead others to the same,”


Tae Penrrent’s Psaum.


“ This psalm,” says Robertson, “ writ-
ten three thousand years ago, might
have been written yesterday : it describes
the vicissitudes of spiritual life in an
Englishman as truly as of a Jew. ‘ Not
of an age, but for all time.’” We have
here—

I, The Penitent’s Confession. Con-
fession is not a single act. It compre-
hends, at least, three things: (a.) A
right estimate of sin. The true peni-
tent regards sin not as mere misdirec-
tion, or the result of imperfect develop-
ment, but as the guilty violation of a holy
law. (8.) A right feeling in relation to
stn. The sincere penitent loathes sin,
and “grieves for having grieved his
God.” (y.) Right conduct in relation to
sin. He endeavours to forsake sin, and
to follow after holiness, The Psalmist
in his confession—

1. Recognises the evil cf sin. He re-
gards it (1). As an unrighteous thing.
“ Mine iniquity.” Sin is a reversal of
true moral relations and order. (2.)
As a breach of moral law. “ My trans-
gressions.” By his sins he had violated
the holy laws of the supreme and gra-
cious Sovereign. (3.) As a defiling
thing. He felt himself utterly polluted
by his sins, and asks again and again
for cleansing. Thus David recognises
the essential evil of sin, and its inju-
rious influence upon human life and


character. He does not attempt to pal-


eed


liate its wickedness ; but exhibits un-
mistakably its blackness, and deformity,
and blasting power.

2. Recognises the sin as his own, “ My
transgressions . . . mine iniquity...
my sin.” We are prone to try to shift
the responsibility of our sins from our-
selves to others. We blame the circum-
stances in which we were placed, or the
temptations by which we were assailed,
or the tendencies which we have in-
herited, or the training which we have
received. But of this we find nothing
in this penitential psalm. David feels
that the sin and guilt of his crimes were
his, and his only. “I acknowledge my
transgression,” &c. ‘I have sinned,”
&c. His sins appeared so aggravated to
him, that he could only express his feel-
ing in this respect by saying that he
was born in sin, As Robertson says,
“ He lays on himself the blame of a
tainted nature, instead of that of a single
fault: not a murder only, but of a mur-
derous nature. ‘Conceived in sin.’
From his first moments up till then, he
saw sin—sin—sin: nothing but sin.”
Bin and guilt cannot be transferred from
one to another. If I do evil, the guilt
is my own. “Every man shall bear
his own burden.” The Divinely-awak-
ened conscience ever feels this—con-
fesses this—says, “I acknowledge my
transgressions,”

3. Regards ein as hostile to God.

253


PALM Bd.


*« Against Thee, Thee only, have I sin-
ned,” &c. The Most High has no com-
plicity with evil, Sin is ever to Him
the ‘‘ abominable thing which He hates.”
He brings good out of evil, overrules
evil for the accomplishment of His glo-
rious purposes. Yet He is not the
author of evil, but its sworn and un-
compromising antagonist. His laws in
both the material and spiritual realms
are against it; His administration is
against it; His great redemption is
against it ; His essential nature is utterly
opposed to it. True penitence feels this,
and says, “ Against Thee, Thee only,
have I sinned.” David had sinned
grievously against human society; but
it was the fact that his offences were
wrongs against his God that chiefly im-
pressed and distressed him. ll sins
against man are sins against God alsv.
You cannot harm your fellow-man with-
out wronging God. “ Every blow strnck
against humanity is a blow struck against
God.” <A fact this pregnant witb so-
lemn suggestions. Thus the confession
of this royal penitent expresses the judg-
ments and emotions of the penitent
heart to day.


IL The penitent’s prayer. The
Psalmist prays for,—
1. Forgiveness of his sins. “Have


mercy upon me, O God,” &e. (ver. 1).
“ Hide Thy face from my sins, and blot
out ail mine iniquities.” Confession
and forgiveness are inseparably con-
nected (Ps. xxxii. 5; Luke xvii. 3, 4;
1 John i. 9). Confession is not the
efficient cause of forgiveness, but it is
its indispensable condition, It is “a
necessary basis of forgiveness.” The
figures here used to denote forgiveness
give clearness and prominence to the
idea of its completeness, ‘ Blot out my
transgressions, . . . blot out all mine
iniquities ;” as the account of a debt is
wiped away or cancelled by the creditor,
or as a cloud is dispelled by the beams
of the sun. “TI have blotted out, asa
thick cloud, thy transgressions, and, as a
cloud, thy sins.” ‘ Hide Thy face from
my sins ;” do not regard them; “ cast
all my sins behind Thy back ;” remem-
ber them against me no more for ever.
2. Cleansing and renewal of his spirit.
254


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY; P&ALMB,


“ Wish me throughly from mine iniquity,
and cleanse me from my sin. Purge me
with hyssop, and I shall be clean ; wash
me, and I shall be whiter than snow.
Create in me a clean heart, O God ; and
renew aright spirit within me.” ‘“ Mark
the thoroughness of this desire. Not
only must sin be blotted out, but the
sinner himself must be washed and
cleansed. There must not be merely a
change of state, but a change of nature.
Not only must the debt be forgiven, but
all disposition to contract further debt
must be eradicated. All true and last-
ing change must be made in the nature,
The het is the seat of all wrong.
Hence 3.0 prayer will avail that does not
come fiom the heart, and express the
deepest and holiest aspirations of the
soul, Such was David’s prayer.”—
Parker,

3. Restoration of the joy of salvation.
“Make me to hear joy and gladness.
Restore unto me the joy of Thy salva-
tion.” Here are three ideas (1.) The
experience of the salvation of God is
joyous. The joy of assured forgiveness,
of the Divine favour, of exalted hopes,
&c. (2.) By indulgence in sin man for-
feits this joy. David did so. (3.) By
sincere penitence and prayer those who
have lost this joy may regain it

4. Preservation from sin and ruin,
“Cast me not away from Thy presence ;
and take not Thy holy Spirit from me,
Uphold me with Thy free Spirit.”
David’s great fear was that God might
abandon him, might leave him to him-
self. To the penitent soul exile from
Gud would be the deepest misery. And
feeling his weakness and proneness to
fall into sin, the Psalmist entreats God
ti uphold and keep him. Such are the
niain points in this penitent’s prayer.
We shall do well to heed one feature of
it to which Robertson gives clear and
forcible expression. This prayer “is
oot the trembling of a craven spirit in
anticipation of torture, but the agonies
of a noble one in the horror of being
evil. . . . Do you fancy that men like
David, shuddering in sight of evil,
dreaded a material hell? I venture to
say, into true penitence the idea of
punishment never entera, If it did, it





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; PSALMS,


PSALM LL





would be almost a relief : but, oh !| those
moments in which a selfish act has
appeared more hideous than any pain
which the fancy of a Dante could devise !
when the idea of the strife of self-will
in battle with the loving will of God
prolonged for ever, has painted itself
to the imagination as the real Infinite
Hell! when self-concentration and the
extinction of love in the soul has been
felt as the real damnation of the Devil-
nature |”

Iii The penitent’s resolution.
David resolves that, when the joy of
salvation is restored to him—

1. He will seek the conversion of
sinners. ‘“ Then will I teach trans-
gressors Thy ways.” The forgiven
penitent will seek to lead others to the
source whence he has derived his bless-
ing, that they also may partake of it.
The ways of God which David would
teach transgressors are (1) The way
which He would have sinners pursue,—
the way of penitence. And (2) The
way which He pursues towards sinners,


——the way of rich and free forgiving ©


mercy. Now the converted man is
jitted to teach transgressors these ways.
He knows them ; for he has trodden the
one and experienced the other. He
alone is fitted to teach these ways. It
is essential that he who would teach
others the way of salvation knows that
way experimentally himself. He is also
impelled to teach transgressors these
ways. Gratitude urges him to do s0,
forbids him to be silent. He must tell
others of the blessings he has received,
and urge them to seek them for them-
selves, ‘We cannot but speak the
things which we have seen and heard.”
“Necessity is laid upon me; yea, woe
is unto me,” &e,

2. He will worship God. “My
tongue shall sing aloud of Thy right


eousness. ... My mouth shall show forth
Thy praise. For Thou desirest not
sacrifice,” dc. (See “ The Hom. Com.”
on Pg, xl. 6-8, and 1. 7-15.) (1.) The
one great sacrifice for sin has been
offered and accepted, and is gloriously
perfect (Heb. x. 1-18). (2.) Our sacri-
fice of praise, our thank-offerings of
gifts to the cause of God, are worthless
in His sight unless they proceed from
feelings of sincere devotion and grati-
tude. (3.) When the heart is moved by
penitence, and gratitude, and reverence,
it will offer itself in praise to God, and
in service in His cause. When the
heart is truly sacrificed to God, all other
possessions will be freely offered to
Him. On this point, the testimony of
ver. 19 is conclusive. David would not
content himself with offering the sacri-
fices prescribed by the ceremonial law,
but would offer himself to God in
humblest penitence and heartiest praise.
This self-sacrifice is the very soul of all
acceptable sacrifices. David anticipates,
as a result of his restoration, that—

3. The whole Church would pratee
God (vers. 18,19). He feared lest, by
reason of his sins, the Divine judg-
ments should fall upon the city and
kingdom, or the Divine favour be with-
drawn from them. No man stands
alone. The sin of one man may lead
to the injury or even to the ruin of
many others, David, therefore, im-
plores the manifestation of the Divine
favour in granting them security and
prosperity. And he promises that then
acceptable sacrifices—the costliest sacri-
fices offered by sincere worahippers—
shall be presented unto Him.


Nors—The exposition of this psalm might
be suitably divided into three discourses, —
one, on The Confession; another, on The
Petitions ; and the third, on The Resolutions
of the Penttent.


Aw InvIsPeNsABLE Prayer FOR EVERY Onz.
(Verse 2. “Cleanse me from my sin.”)


Consider—
L The need you have to offer this


prayer.
1. You cannot cleanse yourselves from


sin. The guilt of your sin you cannot
blot out. The pollution of your sin
you are equally unable to take away.

3. You cannot live happily ey you


POALM Li.


are cleansed from sin. Surely, as the
shadow follows the substance, sorrow
follows sin, and joy holiness.

3. You cannot die peacefully unless
you are cleansed from sin. “ The sting
of death is sin.”

4. You cannot be acquitted at the
Divine tribunal except you are cleansed
from sin. ‘We must all appear before
the judgment-seat of Christ,” &c.

5. You cannot be admitted nto
heaven without you are cleansed from
your sin. “ Without holiness no man
shall see the Lord.” ‘There shall in
no wise enter into it anything that
defileth,” &c.

6. You cannot escape hell unless you
are cleansed from your sin. There is
no world between heaven and hell
“The wicked shall be turned into hell,”
&e.
II. The requisites you must possess
to present this prayer successfully.

1. You must be alive to your sin.
Men must be convinced of sin, of
righteousness, and of judgment, before
they will be anxious to be saved. Where
guilt is not felt, pardon will not be
desired.

2. You must see that your sin has been
committed against God. Every evil deed
perpetrated is done against the Almighty.
This David felt.

3. You must take the blame of your
sin to yourselves, The common practice


THE CHIEF


Ver. 4. “Against Thee, Thee only,
have I sinned, and done this evil in Thy
sight.”

Since the crimes of the Psalmist were
of that class which are most directly
against society, and since he appears at
the time to have regarded them in that
very relation, what is the import of the
phrase, ‘‘ Against Thee, Thee only, have
I sinned”? The following is the only
possible solution. Notwithstanding the
deep sense of his crime, as viewed in its
social relation, he had such an over
whelming sense of its enormity as com-
mitted against God, that it threw into
comparative obscurity the injury to man.
This aoe therefore, dictated by


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: PSALMS.








is to attribute it to the tempter Adam
laid it on his wife, and Eve cast it on
the serpent. Like them we seek to
exculpate ourselves, But there must be
the impression that we are utterly in-
excusable, &,

4, You must be desirous to part with
your sin, Unwilling as men are to for-
sake their vicious course, they would
fain be quit of its dire consequences.
But he who will have his sin must have
its evils, The cause must be removed
before its effects can.

5. You must be sorry for your sin.
There is a fitness between contrition and
pardon ; but there is none between im-
penitence and remission. The penitent
are in a proper state to be forgiven;
the impenitent are not.

6. You must have faith in the cleans-
ing efficacy of Christ's blood. Requisite
as are the foregoing to your being in a
proper condition to ask or to have the
blessings spoken of, they cannot, if
relied on, secure it, as there is not the
slightest merit inthem. The only merit
on the ground of which we can be re-
deemed from all iniquity is in Christ,
and in Him alone. For Him to be
your redemption you must have faith in
His blood.

In conclusion, have you prevailingly
urged this petition ?— JouN SMITE.
Abridged from “The Congregational
Pulptt,”


EVIL oF Sma,


the Divine Spirit, must afford ample
authority for the following doctrine :—

The evil of sin consists chiefly in tts
being committed against God.

This doctrine does not, in the least
degree, invalidate the obligations of
mortals to each other; or diminish the
guilt of crimes viewed merely in their
social relation. The man who considers
the chief evil of sin to consist in a vio-
lation of Divine obligations, has as
strong a view of social obligations, as
he who overlooks all duty to God, and
makes human injury the only criterion
of guilt. That sin is an evil, so far as
it infringes on the rights and happiness
of fellow-mortals, is admitted iy all


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALM&





But the Word of God compels us to
believe, that the same transgressions are
an immensely greater evil considered as
offences against God. Should any one
ask, “Why is it a thousand-fold worse
for me to murder my neighbour than if
God had not forbidden it?” I answer,—

1. Because God ts your Maker. We
who are parents claim the right to com-
mand our children; and, when they
disobey, we place the main point of their
offending in simple disobedience. And
what is the aggravation of violating a
parent's authority, compared with that
of rebellion against the Eternal Father
of our spirits ?

2. God sustains ws. From the dawn
of our existence to this hour, He has
been mindful of us, with more than a
parent’s tender care. Amid countless
dangers, He has cast His shield about
us.

3. He has encompassed us with count-
less blessings. For us the rivers flow,
the oceans roll, the clouds distil, and
the seasons keep their appointed times.
His sun is made to light us by day—
His moon and stars by night. To shield
us from cold, He has provided raiment
—from heat, a shade—from storms, a
shelter.

4, He has prepared a heaven for our
eternal home. It is the abode of His
own infinite blessedness, the palace of
His glory, and the home of holy angela.

5. When we had forfeited this bright
heaven, and plunged ourselves tn guilt and
woe, God gave Hts own dear Son to re-
deem us. To achieve this work, it was
needful that the Saviour take upon
Himeelf the form of a servant, be made
under the law, pass a life of suffering
and scorn, and, finally, be crucified by
wicked hands. Yet to all this He sub-
mitted, not by constraint, but willingly—
—nay, joyfully.

6. God has given us a revelation com-
prising the knowledge and motives requt-
site for the attainment of this great sal-
vation. And how is this sacred volume
filled with entreaties to sinful man to
flee from the wrath to come, and lay
hold on the hope aet before him !

7. He bears long with us, as a race of
gutity beings, and as tndtviduals. Each

BR





spared sinner is a perfect demonstration
of the infinite goodness of God. And
the aged impenitent is as great a monu-
ment of the Divine forbearance as he is
of guilt. Reflect, then, that against
this same God you have committed
every sin that has polluted your life.
Under this conviction, if your conscience
be not dead, you cannot but exclaim
with the Psalmist, “‘ Against Thee, Thee
only, have I sinned,” &ec.

From the foregoing we may draw
the following inferences :—

1, The punishment denounced agatnat
the wicked is mantfestly just.

2. There ts not so great a difference
as men often tmagine between different
kinds of sin. I would not deny that
“some sins in themselves are more
heinous in the sight of God than others.”
Nor would I at all intimate an equality
of guilt among transgressors possessing
different degrees of light, or actuated by
different degrees of malignity. . . . But
we have seen that the chief evil of sin
consists in its violation 2f Divine obliga-
tion, Let no one, then, speak of small
sins—little offences—and assign as his
reason that he injures no one but him-
self,—that he does not infringe on the
rights of his fellow-men. It is idle and
delusive and impious to indulge in thus
comparing and extenuating our crimes
of rebellion against the infinite Sove-
reign. Each sin, thus viewed, is of
magnitude sufficient to sink a world.

3. The most upright man ts a great
sinner. Suppose him perfectly honest
—exculpate him from falsehood—and
say that he never injured the character
or feelings of any mortal. A human
tribunal would then acquit him. But
has he kept all God’s commandments /
&eo.


_4, We are taught by thts doctrine our
need of Christ's atonement. And the
glorious work is accomplished, and a
ready pardon offered, dc.

5. We see the nature of true convic
tion. It consists in seeing and feeling
the evil of sin as committed against
God. Fear of punishment is often mis-
taken for conviction; but it is really
not even a necessary part of it. Rea)
conviction does not cease at conversion,

267


PSALM LL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





but increases with our growth in grace
and knowledge of God. David, Isaiah,
and Paul appeared to feel it with in-
creasing emotion, and to loathe and


en


abhor themselves, and repent in dust
and ashes. — Ralph Emerson, A.M.
Abridged from “ The Preacher's Trea


eury.”


Davin’s Prayer.
‘(Verse 7.)


A sermon useful when {it goes with a
man to his closet, as well as affects him
for the present. Nathan’s to David.
Hyssop—alluding to the cleansing the
leper (Lev. xiv. 1-7). Or to the waters
of separation (Num. xix.) Observe :—

I. When God leads us to reflect on
our sins, we feel ourselves awfully
polluted. David in the text. (Job
xlii, 1-6; Ps. xxxviii. 4; Is. vi. 1-5,
lxiv. 6; Ezek. xx. 43; Luke xv. 17-19,
xviii. 13; Acts ii. 36, 37; Titus iii 3.)
O my soul! O my hearers! reflect.

II. The blood of Jesus Christ is even
more than a remedy for the foulest
iniquities. “ Whiter than snow ” (Rom.
v. 20, 21). How?

1. As it makes the penitent more ac-
ceptable to God, and more secure in His
favour than Adam in Paradise. (Luke
xv. 7, 22, 32; Rom. viii. 1, &e.; Eph.
i, 6, v. 27; Col. iii. 3, 4.)

2. As tt excites them to obey God tn
resisting temptation more than Adam.
(Gen. iii, 11-13, compared with Eph.
vi. 11-17, Rev. xii. 10, 11.)

3. As God will be more glorified in
recovering a fallen sinner, than tn mak-
ing man upright. As Redeemer than


as Creator. As the God 2f grace in the
Gospel than as Law-Giver. (Is. xliv.
22, 23; Luke ii, 10-14; 2 Cor. iik
7-11; 1 Pet. i 11, 12.)

4, As the happiness of the penttent
will be ultimately greater than that of
Adam in Paradise. (Rev. vii. 9, &c.)

IIL This remedy becomes effectual
by an application to our own case.
See text. As food—physic—clothing,
&c. Noah’s ark. The brazen serpent.
The cities of refuge.

IV. The application of this remedy
to ourselves is to be sought in prayer.
See text. (Ps. cvi. 4, 5, cxxx. 1-6;
Luke xviii. 13.)

V. Though God has pardoned the
penitent he can scarcely believe it,
and will be applying for pardon again
and again. Thus David in this psalm,
though Nathan had told him of God’s
forgiveness (2 Sam. xii. 13).

Usxs.—1. Alarm to sinners impent-
tent and unpardoned in thetr sins. 2.
Caution to the self-righteous. 3. Bless
God for the cleansing blood of Jesus,
and use it to God’s glory,—to your own
salvation,—F——r.


Davip’s Prayer anp Vow.
(Verses 10-13.)


There is an essential difference be-
tween the prayers offered up under the
influence of habit merely, and those
which are induced by a deep sense of
guilt, dependence, and want. When
David uttered the words before us, he
felt that he needed the grace and mercy
of his Maker,—consequently his re-
quests were simple, important, and
earnest. Perhaps there is no one here
that has fallen into sin such as that
which the Psalmist had committed—

258


still, there is no one but may offer up
his prayer with the greatest propriety.
I. Let us glance at the petitions
“Create tn me a clean heart, O God.”
The Psalmist felt that his heart was
defiled—that it was not in his power
to cleanse it—he therefore prayed that
God would perform the work. ‘ Renew
a right spirit within me.” These worda
refer to the temper of the mind. The
Psalmist knew that his was wrong ; and,
consequently prayed that God would re


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; PSALMS,





new @ right spirit within him, “If any
man have not the spirit of Christ, he is
none of His.” “Cast me not atoay from
Thy presence.” In the presence of God
is “fulness of joy:” therefore, to be
cast away from His presence is to be
deprived of happiness. “ Take not Thy
holy spirit from me.” The Spirit of
God “helpeth our infirmities:” there-
fore, to be deprived of the Spirit is to
be deprived of help. 'Che Holy Spirit
is our Comforter: therefore, to'be de-
prived of the Spirit is to be deprived
of comfort. ‘“ Restore wnto me the joy
of Thy salvation.” The knowledge of
salvation produces joy,—this joy the
Psalmist had experienced,-—it was not
his portion when he uttered these words,
—he therefore desired its restoration.


“Uphold me with Thy free spirit.”


PS4LM LL





Having experienced the sad conse-
quences of falling into sin, the Psalmist
here prays that when restored he might be
upheld, and prevented from falling again.

II. Notice the predicated results of
& gracious answer; or the connection
between piety and usefulness. ‘ Then
will I teach transgressors Thy way ;
and sinners shall be converted unto
Thee.” He that enjoys the blessings
of salvation, can speak on religious sub-
jects with more feeling, and, conse-
quently, with more effect than others.
This may remind Christians, and es-
pecially Christian ministers, that emi-
nent piety is exceedingly desirable, not
only on their own account, but also that
they may be qualified for extensive use-
fulness.—“ The Young Minister's Com-


panion.”


THE Joys or SALVATION.
(Verse 12.)


“ The joy of Thy salvation.”

It is God’s salvation. It is no dreamy
following of the upward instincts and
aspirations of the uature; no trying to
be just, pure, and good, aid then, if we
fail, and become selfish, sensual, and
devilish, forgetting the failure and try-
ing again, always trying, always hoping,
with a vague belief that though sin
always gets the better of us, there is
some good thing in us which, after all,
cannot be lost. Neither is it a vague
reliance ou God’s goodness and mercy,
a feeling that He is a Father, and can-
not, therefore, doom His children to
despair and death. ‘These dreams and
hopes are the salvations which men pro-
vide for theniselves; but they are not,
nor are they like, God’s salvation.

God’s salvation rests upon the know-
ledge of God Hiniself, as He has re-
vealed Himself—}{is name—His word
—His promises— His work; whereby,
not by our own dreams or hopes, but
by His declaration, ‘‘We have strong
consolation,” &c. It is one thing to feel
that He is a Father, and must be full of
love to His children; it is another thing
to hear Him say, “I am a Father; I
love as no human father can love, &.


(John fii. 16,17). It is one thing to
trust vaguely to God’s goodness for par-
don; it is another thing to hear Him
say, “Come now, and let us reason
together,” &c. ; and to follow His guid-


. ing finger till we behold “ the Lamb of


God,” &c. It is one thing to have our
hopes and instincts looking on towards
immortality, &c.; it is another thing to
see “life and immortality brought to
light by the Gospel,” to stand by the
unsealed tomb of Lazarus and hear such
awful words as these, “I am the resur-
rection, and the life:” d&c. (John xi.
25-44 ; xiv. 1-5; xx. 17).

The man who has received these truths
from God, these gifts of God, and knows
why and “whom he has believed,” is
the man in whom the joys of God’s sal-
vation abound. He has God’s salvation ;
his ground is the everlasting rock, the
Word of God. What are its joys?

I. The joy of a sufficient and final
answer to the self-upbraidings of a
guilty soul. The sense of guilt, the
dread of doom, must be disposed of,
before there can be any freedom, any
upright, manly activity, any pure and
lasting joy. The man who wakes up to
comprehend the breadth and the depth

259


PSALM LI,





of God’s law, stands self-condemned.
All refuges of lies have vanished, the
naked realities appear, and his sin
clouds over utterly the heaven of God’s
love. The sense of guilt torments him.
“O miserable man that I am, who shall
deliver me from the body of this death 1”
This question of the purging of guilt is
the fundamental question of all the re-
ligions of heathendom—of all simple,
untutored souls (Micah vi. 6-8), To
this questioning there is but one joyful
answer: “I thank God through Jesus
Christ our Lord,” &c, (Rom. vii. 25;
viii. 1-4, 33-39). The burden falls off ;
the darkness is chased by dawn.

II. The joy of a portion which satis-
fies the heart’s largest conceptions and
desires. ‘My soul panteth for God,
for the living God.” There is that in
man which the knowledge of the living
God only can satisfy, which, having
God, has all things in Him. We know
what it is to love the creature—to feel
that the love and communion of some
fond, fair idol would make the bliss of
earth, the bliss of eternity. He has the
joys of God’s salvation who has done
with idols—who loves only that which
has eternal beauty and fairness in the
creature, and finds that he has the very
substance of all that may be loved in
the Lord. The commerce between the
believing soul and Christ is the ravish-
ing sweetness of the present—the hope
of unclouded vision, of unbounded com-
munion, is the glorious treasure of the
future.

ItI. The joy of an answer to all the
difficulties and perplexities which be-
set the spirit and the intellect in their
progress. I do not say that the be-
lever, in full communion with Christ
and with the joys of His salvation, is
freed from the mental and the moral
eares which beset the path of a soul’s
progress. That joy—the joy of knowing
that doubt, darkness, and the anguish of
mental and moral conflict, are done with
for ever—we shall realise when we can
take up the song, “ For I am now ready
to be offered,” &c. (2 Tim. iv. 6-8).
We must win our creed by mental con-
flict, we must win our crown by moral
conflict ; but the joy of God’s salvation

260


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


is tasted by those who feel that ths
great central truths, at any rate, are
sure. “I know whom I have believed.”
I have found the centre ; to explore the
circumference may be matter of danger,
difficulty, suffering, but hope lights the
way, the sorrow can never darken into
despair. One thing is clear to me, let
what will be dark, “I know that my
Redeemer liveth.” . . . There is hope of
his knowing all things that is good to





-know, who has already the mind of Christ.


IV. The joy of having the key to all
the mysterious ways of Providence in
the world. God writes the record of His
Providential government in ciphers. We
know the cipher ; it is a blank to others.
To those who know God it is plain and
clear. To the soul well grounded in the
conviction, “ He doeth all things well,”
there is no mystery. This or that thing
may be difficult to understand ; but to
him who believes, the mystery, at any
rate, is dissipated—the full understand-
ing will come in time. How deadly is
the difficulty to those who have not
found the key in the love of God in
Christ, let these passages show: Job
xxiii 1-9, xi. 5-10; Is. xxxviii. 9-19.
But “ we know that all things work to-
gether for good,” &. And we believe
that God forsaketh not the world in all
its agonies and perils, for which the
Lerd Jesus died. We can even take
these sorrows, and make them into joys
(Rom. v. 3; 1 Pet. i 7).

V. The joy of victory over death.
It is an awful thing tu look upon the
face of the dead. Where is the spirit
which a moment since? &c. The most
dread moment of our experience is be-
fore us—every one of us|) We may
have mastered many agonies; we have
yet to wrestle with the agony of death.
Then the dearest must leave you; alone
you must then face your destiny. As
the dear forms of earth grow dim, a
grander, more beautiful, more glorious
form will come shining through tke
gloom (Ps, xxiii. 4; 1 Cor. xv. 55-58).
“Absent from the body, present with
the Lord.”

VL The joy of living union with
God, with Christ, with all living and
blessed beings, eternally. What is


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMS,


that world? What its speech, its habit,
the forms of its lifet We know not.
The veil hangs over all these (1 John
fii, 2,3). ““Weknow;” for He is there
—the God-man glorified; and the God-
man glorified, through trial, suffering,
and death, is the key to the life of
eternity. This “we know,” for we see
Jesus. We can wait to know more till
we see Him unveiled in heaven (1 Cor.
ii 9).

These are the joys of His salvation,


and now they are freely offered to you
by the Gospel—‘‘ Ho! every one that
thirsteth, come ye to the waters,” Take
in your hand now the riches that add no
sorrow, the joy that leaves no aftertaste
of pain; and let “the joy of the Lord
be your strength”—astrength for duty,
strength for making known to others
the joys of salvation God has given you
as your portion—J. Baldwin Brown,
B.A. Abridged from “ Aids to the De-
velopment of the Divine Life.”


Davin’s PRAYER.
(Verse 14.)


Notice—

I. To whom David goes when con-
viction of sin is brought home to his
conscience by the Holy Spirit through
the ministry of Nathan.

1. Man shuns and avoids his accuser.
It was God who had accused David of
his sin. Yet to God he goes with con-
fession of guilt and prayer for forgive-
ness. When God convinces of sin, turn
not away from Him, but, &o.

2. Man shuns and avoids his judge.
It was God who had condemned David
to suffer in his own family for unholy
inroad made on sacred family ties of
another. Yet to God he goes. When
God lays His hand upon us, let us not
turn away from Him who corrects (Heb,
xii, 10).

IL. The spirit and frame of mind in
which he approaches God.

1. As regards himself —with self-


abasement. ‘Deliver me from blood-
guiltiness.” Is he not too hard upon
himself? Had he actually slain Uriah?


He had slain him by sword of children
of Ammon (2 Sam. xii. 9), True peni-
tent feels he cannot be too hard upon
himself. Confesses sin in all its hein-
ousness.

2. As regards God—with hope in His
mercy. ‘ Deliverme ... O od, Thou
God of my salvation.” Were not God
the “ God of my salvation,” access with
favour would be for ever denied. But
He is ‘‘ the God of whom cometh salva-


tion.” And the God of my salvation
when I approach Him through Jesus
Christ,

It. The prayer of David. “De-
liver me,” &c. All of us must make
this prayer our own. The blood-guilti-
ness of David was on account of murder
of Uriah. Blood-guiltiness may be ours
in one or other of three ways

1. If condition not by grace changed,
miserable in blood-guiltiness, because
erucified Son of God.

2. If any of us stand condemned be-
fore God at last, miserable in blood-
guiltiness, because condemned sutcides,
Salvation offered will have been de-
spised. The Spirit resisted—Christ re-
jected.

3. At the last day shall have to
answer for others (Gen. iv. 9; Prov.
xxiv. 11, 12).

Is there not need that we say, with
David, “ Deliver me,” &c.

In last clause of text, pious resolve
for the future. Delivered from blood-
guiltiness, cannot we take up language
of Psalmist and say, “ And my mouth
shall sing,” &c.? Not our own, but
His. The answer of peace comes to us
in way of righteousness, Our theme of
praise and thanksgiving on earth, And
in heaven (Rev. v. 12). What shall I
render unto the Lord? (Rom. xii, 1),—
R. C. Billing, B.A. Abridged from
“ The Homiletite Quarterly.”


$61


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; PSALMS.





Tus Prosperity or Zion Sovuext.
(Verse 18.)


“Do good in Thy good pleasure unto
Zion.” Consider—

I. The importance of the object
sought. David prays for the prosperity
of Zion.

1. The Church ts exposed to many
dangers, and needs to be protected by an
almighty arm. David probably feared
that by his own sin he had brought
danger upon Zion; that God might
justly manifest His displeasure by giv-
ing her into the hand of her enemies,
or by withdrawing His favour from her,
The Church of Christ needs preservation
(1) from sectarian or denominational
strife; (2) from disunton and discord
in indindual churches; (3) from for-
mality ; (4) from prevalent errors.
Hence the importance of the prayer.

2. The Church ts imperfect, and tts
prosperity consists in tts improvement,
“Do good in Thy,” &. “Let Thy
work appear unto Thy servants,” &.
(Ps. xc. 16,17). The prosperity of the
Church is promoted—

(1) When there ts an increasing ad-
herence to those truths on which prims-
tive Christianity was established.

(2) When under the influence of these
truths, the citizens of Zion are persever-
ing tn holiness. “The path of the just
is as the shining light,” &e.

II. The grounds of encouragement
we have in seeking this object. We
might refer to some particulars suggested


by the words, “Thy good pleasure :”
¢.g., (%) that God is the Founder of His
Church; (8) He established it at the
greatest expense. Christ died to re-
deem it. (vy) In doing good to His
Church He is glorifying His Son, who
is “Head over all things to the Church ;”
(8) The purposes and promises of God
to the Church, But—

1. To pray for Zion ts a duty en-
joined by Dwine authority. “ Pray,”
said Christ, “hallowed be Thy name,”
&c. The security, improvement, and
success of. the Church depend upon
prayer.

2. God ts the hearer of prayer.

II. The manner in which we should
seek this object. We may lose bless-
ings through not seeking them aright.
“Ye have not, because ye ask not. Ye
ask, and receive not, because ye ask
amiss,”

1. We should ourselves be identified
with the Church. 2. We should feel a
deep interest tn tts welfare. 3. We
should be constant in prayer for tts
prosperity; should seek it in our closets,
in our families, &c. 4. We should untte
tn prayer for this object. 5. We should
present our prayers in faith 6. We
should be tmportunate and fervent tn
prayer for this object. Conclude by en-
deavouring to enforce this duty upon
Christians.—Abridged from an unpub
lished MS.


PBALM LIL


INTRODUCTION,


Superseription.—“ To the Chief Musician, Maschil, a Psalm of David, when Doog the
Edomite came and told Saul, and said unto him, David is come to the house of Ahimelech.”

“ To the Ohief Musician,” see on the title to Ps. xxxix.

“ Maschal,” an instruction, a didactic poem. “The didactic character of this Psalm,” says
Moll, “ which is brought inte prominence by the title, and its devotional aim, are especially
noticeable, from the fact that, with respect to its form, the invocation of God, which is peculiar
to prayers, lamentations, and hymns, is entirely absent ; with respect to its contenta, the mighty
man, who, according to ver. 7, is proud of his riches, is upbraided for his impudence, wicked-
ness, and falseness (vers. 1-4), the punishment of God, which will destroy him, is proclaimed
(ver. 5), the action of the righteous, whioh will be called forth thereby, is contrasted with it
(vers. 6, 7), and the lot and conduct of the pious Psalmist, corresponding with his trust in God’s
grace, is ey roe It is advisable to abide by the statements of the title, and refer to the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





informing of Doeg, the overseer of the royal asses (1 Sam. xxii. 9, egq.), in eonsequence of which
eighty-five priests were slaughtered, whilst David retained his courage, and expressed it te
Abiathar, who escaped to David from that blood-bath, the son of Ahimelech, that priest of
Nob, who had thoughtlessly given David, as the king’s son-in-law, the shew-bread, and the
sword of Goliath, which was ets behind the ephod in the sanctuary, and this had excited


the suspicion and vengeance of
the executioner of his bloody sentence.”


who no


w made Doeg, the informer of that act, likewise


Homiletically, the Psalm seta before us an impressive beacon (vera. 1-5), and the effect
upon the righteous of the judgment of God upon the wicked (vers. 6-9).


An rwprRessivE Beacon,
(Verses 1-5.)


We have here—

I. The moral portrait of a wicked
man. In this delineation of the moral
features of Doeg the Edomite, we see,—

1. Inventiveness in evil, “ Thy tongue
deviseth mischief.” The tongue uttered
the mischiefs which the heart devised.
He invented malicious speeches, and
framed skilfully evil designs, Baron
Huddlestone, on April 23, 1877, in sen-
tencing a prisoner to fifteen years’ penal
servitude, remarked, “That he was a
man of great talent, and, if he had
employed it in a proper manner, he
might have obtained a position of the
highest honour and respectability ; but
instead of this, he appeared to have de-
voted his mental strength against man-
kind,” Like him of whom the judge
spake, and like Doeg, there are many
who are subtle and inventive in evil
doing. Such deliberation in wickedness
involves the greatest guilt.

2. Looted mendacity. “Thou workeat
deceit ... thou lovest lying...
O deceitful tongue.” M. Henry: “It
may refer to the information which he
gave in against Ahimelech; for the
matter of fact was, in substance, true,
yet it was misrepresented, and false
colours were put upon it, and, therefore,
he might well be said to love lying, and
to have a deceitful tongue. He told
the truth, but not all the truth, as a
witness ought to do; had he told that
David made Ahimelech believe he was
then going upon Saul’s errand, the
kindness he showed him would have
appeared to be not only not traitorous
egainst Saul, but respectful to him. It
will not save us from the guilt of lying
to be able to say, ‘ There was some truth
in what we said,’ if we pervert it, and


make it appear otherwise than what it
was.” Beecher: ‘“ A lie always needs a
truth for a bandle to it, else the hand
would cut itself which sought to drive it
home upon another. The worst lies,
therefore, are those whose blade is false,
but whose handle is true.”

3. Cruel malignity. “Thy tongue
deviseth mischiefs like a sharp razor.
Thou lovest all devouring words.” Pe.
rowne: lit. “‘ Words of swallowing up.’
His words were wounding as a sharp
razor, and ruinous, as if they engulfed
those against whom they were directed.
“An untrue man is a moral murderer,
his tongue the deadly weapon, and his
neighbour the victim.”

4. Utter and terrible perversion of
character. ‘ Thou lovest evil more than
good, and lying rather than to speak
righteousness,” Moll: “The accused
not only loves evil more than good, but
he prefers evil to good, so that he loves
it tnstead of that which he should love,”
What terrible moral perversion does this
involve! He “ boasted himself in mis-
chief ;” he triumphed in that which was
his ignominy ; he exulted in falsehood
and cruelty. When sin is characterised
by so much deliberation and malignity,
when men love it, and make their boast
in it, who can estimate its criminality %

In this moral portrait of a wicked
man, have we not an impressive beacon
warning us away from sin? Look upon
it, and beware of falsehood, and all evil
speaking. ‘‘ Let your speech be alway
with grace, seasoned with salt.” Look
upon it, and, as you mark its unrelieved
and utter blackness, beware of the begin-
nings of evil, dc.

IL. Remonstrance with a wicked
man. ‘“ Why boastest Thou thyself in

363


PSALM EY.





mischief, O mighty man?” do. This
inquiry implies—

1. That his boasting was vain. The
folly of his boast appears from (1) the
nature of his deeds. “O mighty man,”
or, “O hero!” “can only be sarcastic,”
says Moll, In what he had done he
had exhibited no courage, no fortitude.
A veritable hero art thou, Doeg! for
thou didst first slander a noble man and
a priest, and then thou didst courageously
slay eighty-five unarmed priests, and
then, O paragon of heroism ! thou didst
slay “ women, children, and sucklings |”
O valiant Doeg! Boast on, thou mighty
man. The folly of his boast appears
from (2) the result of his deeds. In
his calculation of results Doeg had not
taken account of Gop. ‘ The goodness
of God endureth continually.” That is
a guarantee of the ultimate security and
well-being of the righteous, and of the
destruction of the wicked. M. Henry:
“ Thou thinkest with the mischief which
thou boastest of (so artfully contrived,
and so successfully carried on), to run
down and ruin the people of God; but
thou wilt find thyself mistaken: the
goodness of God endures continually for
their preservation, and then they need
not fear what man can do unto them.
The enemies in vain boast in their mis-
chief while we have God’s mercy to
poast in.” They who now boast in
their iniquities shall, ere long, be covered
with reproach and confusion of face,

2. That his boasting was wicked. He
was glorying in his shame. The deeds
he had done had heavily weighted him
with guilt; and, by glorying in them,
he was increasing the burden of his
criminality. To do evil is wrong; but
to boast of having done it is far more


HOMILETIO VOMMENTARY: PSALMS.





wrong. Let us heed this beacon. Sim
is folly ; but to boast of sin is the most
egregious folly, and indicates the most
deplorable moral depravity. Be rational,
be wise, and shun gin.

TIL The doom of a wicked man.
“God shall likewise destroy thee for
ever,” &c. Doeg is here threatened
with utter destruction, with irretriev-
able ruin.

1. The ruin is complete and trretriev-
able. He will destroy thee for ever,”
as walls are torn down to the ground,
never more to be rebuilt. He will for-
cibly remove “thee from thy dwelling-
place” for ever; and as a tree is torn
up from the roots and so destroyed, se
will He cut thee off out of the land of
the living. A terrible destruction awaits
the persistent workers of iniquity—the
destruction of all that makes life worth
having.

2. The rwin ts retributive. “ God
shall lekewise destroy thee,” &c. “ Like-
wise introduces the corresponding be-
haviour of another.” “ Destroyers shall
be destroyed.” ‘“ With what judgment
ye judge, ye shall be judged: and with
what measure ye mete, it shall be mea-
sured to you again” (Judg. i. 6, 7; Isa.
iii, 10, 11).

Mark well, then, this impressive bea-
con. See the enormity to which wicked-
ness may grow, and avoid the beginnings
of evil; the ¢rrationality of wickedness,
and walk in the ways of wisdom ; the
dread consummation to which wicked-
ness tends, and “abstain from all ap-
pearance of evil.” “ As righteousness
tendeth to life; so he that pursueth evil
pursueth it to his own death.” Jesus
Christ is the Almighty Saviour from
sin. Trust Him; obey Him; and live.


Tue Error upon THE RIGHTEOUS OF THE JUDGMENT oF GoD UProN
THE WICKED.


(Verses 6-9.)


I, The righteous behold the judg-
ment of God upon the wicked. “The
righteous also shall see.” The Psalmist
expresses his confidence that the right-
vous would live to see the ruin of the
wicked ; that they who saw their ain,

264


should also see God’s judgment on them
because of their sin. This idea is more
fully expressed by David in Ps. xxxvii
34-36. The godly man shall live to see
that a life of sin, however prosperous it
may seem to be, leads to the destruction


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY; PSALMS,


of those who pursue it. ‘ When the
wicked are cut off thou shalt see.” Even
in the present state we may see that the
issue of an upright life is blessed, and
that of a sinful life is ruinous.

It. They are awed by the judgments
of God upon the wicked. ‘The right-
eous also shall see, and fear.” This
fear is not slavish, but reverent. The
godly stand in holy awe in the presence
of the divine judgments, and fear lest
they should transgress the law of God,
and so expose themselves to their stroke.
The most hardened sinner cannot stand
before the judgments of the Almighty.
And, inasmuch as every man by sin has
merited His displeasure, we all have
need to humble ourselves at the foot-
stool of the Divine mercy. When the
righteous see the judgments of God, the
effect upon them is most salutary: they
fear Him, they shun sin, &c.

TI. They approve the judgment of
God upon the wicked. “The right-
eous shall laugh at him.” There is a
laughter because of the fall of the wicked
which is sinful (Job xxxi, 29; Prov. xxiv.
17, 18). There is also a laughter because
of the Divine judgments upon them which
is lawful and right, viz, the laughter of
joy, because of the triumph of the Divine
government. Moll: “If they laugh, it
is not a laughing in the joy of injuring,
in scorn and reproaching, but the bring-
ing into view the absurd inconsistency
in which the ungodly have become in-
volved by their abandonment of God.”
Barnes: “The idea here is not exulta-
tion in the sufferings of others, or joy
that calamity has come upon them, or
the gratification of selfish and revenge-
ful feeling that an enemy is deservedly
punished ; it is that of approbation that
punishment has come upon those who
deserve it, and joy that wickedness is
not allowed to triumph. This may be
entirely free from any malignant or any
revengeful feeling. It may even be
connected with the deepest pity, and
with the purest benevolence towards the
sufferers themselves.” “ Just and true
are Thy ways, Thou King of nations.”

IV. They areinstructed by the judg»
ment of God upon the wicked. “ Be-
hold the man that maketh not God his


FaalLy idk.





Jiao nee Tees ar LOE rene


strength,” &c, Perowne: “The words
in which the righteous express their
triumph, pointing, as it were, to the
fallen cppressor, and the lesson to be
learnt from his overthrow.” Here are
three lessons—

1. That to trust in wealth ts folly.
‘Behold the man that trusted in the
abundance of his riches.” It would
appear from this verse that Doeg was a
rich man, and had great faith in the
power of his wealth. Barnes: ‘He
had that spirit of arrogance and self-con-
fidence which springs from the conscious
possession of property where there is no
fear of God; and into all that he did he
carried the sense of his own importance
as derived from riches.” Comp. Pas.
xlix. 6; Prov. x. 15, xviii. 11.

2. That the strength of wickedness te
weakness. He “strengthened himeelf in
wickedness.” By subtle and evil de-
vices he endeavoured to establish him-
self, and fancied himself secure therein.
No deeds which he deemed would in-
crease his power, ever gave him pause
because of their wickedness. He who
builds his hopes upon wicked devices,
even though they be framed with the
utmost skill, builds upon sand. Utter
ruin is the destiny of the fabric which
he rears. Wickedness is weakness.
Lies must perish, Truth and right-
eousness alone are abiding and strong.

3. That God ts the only adequate sup-
port of human life. “The man made
not God his strength,” and his end was
destruction. A consideration of His
almighty power, infinite wisdom, un-
changing faithfulness, and essential
kindness, is calculated to inspire strong
confidence in the all-sufficiency of God
as the support of human life. And
there is no other adequate support.
Wealth, wisdom, rank, power, friend-
ship, &c., are insufficient. He who
leans upon any or upon all of them is
doomed to bitter disappointment and a
grievous fall. Such are the lessons
which the poet learned from the judg-
ment of God upon the wicked.

V. They flourish in the midst of the
judgment of God upon the wicked.
“ But I am like a green olive tree in tha
house of God,” do. Consider-—

265








l. The nature of this happy state.
The state of the Psalmist was charac-
terised by (1) Divine security. Barnes:
“A tree planted in the very courts of
the sanctuary would be regarded as
sacred, and would be safe as long as the
tabernacle itself was safe, for it would
be, as it were, directly under the Divine
protection. So David had been, not-
withstanding all the efforts of his
enemies to destroy him.” The righteous
are inviolably secure from any real harm,
for the Lord is their keeper (Ps. cxxv.
1, 2; Rom. viii. 31, 37). (2) Religious
privileges. David looked forward with
confidence and gladness to the termina-
tion of his exile and his return to the
sanctuary. To him the tabernacle and
the ordinances of worship were precious
and hallowed things, The people of
God find strength and joy in the means
of grace, while the wicked are over-
thrown by their own wickedness. (3)
Spiritual prosperity. In the Scriptures
a green tree is the emblem of prosperity
(Ps. i. 3, xcii, 12; Jer. xi 16). M.
Henry: “ Those that by faith and love
dwell in the house of God shall be like
green olive-trees there; the wicked are
said to flourish like a green bay-tree
(Ps. xxxvii. 35), which bears no useful
fruit, though it has abundance of large
leaves ; but the righteous flourish like a
green olive-tree, which is fat as well as
flourishing (Ps. xcii. 14), and with its
fatness honours God and man (Judg. ix.
9), deriving its root and fatness from
the good olive (Rom. xi. 17).” Not
withstanding the bitter opposition of the
wicked, the people of God shall grow in
grace, and bring forth the fruits of holy
living and useful working.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALHS.





‘¢ When wrath the wicked shall destrey,
They shall abide in peace aud joy
Who love Thy righteous laws.”


2. The condition of this happy state.
“‘T trust in the mercy of God for ever
and ever.” The Psalmist was well as-
sured of the constancy, the unchange-
ableness, and the perpetuity of the
mercy of God, and in that he trusted.
Faith in God is the condition of spiritual
safety and prosperity.

VI. They worship God because of His
judgment upon the wicked. “I will
praise Thee for ever because,” &c. The
judgments of God as viewed by the
righteous—

1. Incite to praise. “I will praise
Thee,” &c. They reveal the righteous-
ness of His administration ; His regard
for His people, &c.; and so enkindle
gratitude, reverence, d&c.

2. Inspire confidence. ‘“ And will
wait on Thy name.” Barnes: “ There
are two ideas essentially in the lan-
guage. (1) The expression of a sense of
dependence on God, as if the only ground
of trust was in Him. (3) A willingness
to await His interposition at all times;
a belief that, however long such inter-
position might be delayed, God would
interfere at the proper time to bring
deliverance; and a purpose calmly and
patiently to look to Him until the time
of deliverance should come” (Ps. xxvii.
14, xxxvii. 7, 9, 34; Is. xl. 31).

APPLIOATION.— 1. What ts our rela-
tion to the Divine judgments? 2. What
ts the ground of our confidence? Is it
wealth? or the power of cunning and
unscrupulous wickedness? or the Lord
God? 3. What ts the spirit and what
the condition of our life?


Tus Fouty or Trusting in RicHEs
(Verse 7.)


“ Behold the man that trusted in the
abundance of his riches.” We have
here—

I. A great mistake. To trust in
riches is to err greatly :

1. Because of the uncertainty of the
tenure of riches. “Labour not to be
rich; for riches certainly make them-

266


selves wings ; they fiy away as an eagle
toward heaven” (1 Tim. vi. 17). At
the farthest we must relinquish them at
death (Ps. xlix. 17 ; Eccles. v. 15).

2. Because of the limited power o
riches, Wealth can do much, but —
are many things which it cannot do. It
can buy books, but not intellectual


fad


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





power ; paintings, but not appreciative
taste ; service and sycophancy, but not
esteem and affection, &c. It cannot buy
pardon, peace, purity, &. It cannot
bribe death, &c.

3. Because of the utter inability of
riches to satisfy those who possess them,


IL A common mistake. The great
race of the age is for the acquisition
of wealth. If you ask what a man is
worth, people tell you how much money
he possesses. Manhood is sacrificed for
money. Riches are the deity of thou-
sands in Christian England.


He who has much wealth would fain IIL A ruinous mistake if persisted
have more. The cravings of the soulof in. ‘ What is a man profited, if he
man, created for truth, immortality, and shall gain the whole world, and lose his
Gou, cannot be satisfied with the bribes own soul?” “Thy money perish with
which wealth can offer. How mistaken thee.” (Comp, Luke zii. 15-321.)

then is he who trusts in wealth |


PSALM LIIL


INTRODUOTIOXN


According to the superscription this Psalm was composed by David and dedicated “To
th Chief Musician;” to be used in public worship under his direction, The term “ upos
Mahalath” is variously interpreted. In the Geneva version it is rendered, ‘‘To him that
excelleth on Mahalath;” which is explained in the margin to be ‘‘an instrument or kind of
note.” “This expresses the opinions of most commentators, Aben Ezra understands by it
the name of a melody to which the Psalm was sung. Calvin and J. H. Michaelis, among
others, regarded it as an instrument of music, or the commencement of a melody. Fuerst
explains Mahulath as the name of a musical corps dwelling at Abel-MMeholah, just as by Gittith
he understands the band of Levite minstrels at Gath Rimmon. On the other hand, the opinion
that Mahalath contains an enigmatical indication of the subject of the Psalm is adopted by
Hengstenberg to the exclusion of every other. He translates ‘on Mahalath’ by ‘on sickness,’
referring to the spiritual malady of the sons of men. A third theory is that of Delitzsch, who
considers Mahalath as indicating to the choir the manner in which the Psalm was to be sung,
and compares the modern terms mesto, andante mesto’”’ (Smith’s Dict. of the Bible). The term
“ Maschil” shows that the Psalm was designed to afford instruction.

This Psalm is almost exactly similar to Ps. xiv. The only difference which requires
notice here is between verses 5 and 6 of Ps. xiv. and verse 5 of this one.

“ There were they in great fear; for God is in the generation of the righteous. Ye have
shamed the counsel of the poor, because the Lord is his refuge” (xiv. 5, 6.)

“ There were they in great fear, where no fear was; for God hath scattered the bones of
him that encampeth against thee: thou hast put them to shame, because God hath despised
them.”

For the chief exposition we refer the reader to ‘‘ The Hom. Com.” on Pa. xiv. We add,
as supplementary to that, a few Homiletic suggestions.


Gop Insrgotineg Max,
(Verse 2.)


“The original word here— *\PU,’” that were good. He looked at all men ;
eays Barnes, “ conveys the idea of bend- He examined all their pretensions to
ing forward, and hence of an intense goodness, and He saw none who could
and anxious looking, as we bend forward be regarded ae exempt from the charge
when we wish to examine anything with 0f depravity.” The text suggests—
attention, or when we look out for one I. God’s profound interest in hnu-
who is expected to come. The ideais, manity. He bows Himself forward,
that God looked intently, or so as to and, with zeal and concern, examines
secure a close examination, upon the man’s moral state. Such is the form
children of men, for the express purpose in which important truths are repre-
of ascertaining whether there were any sented—this amongst others, ar the

26


FPAALM LIM,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





Most High is deeply interested in man’s
moral condition? Why is He so}

1. Because of the dignity of man’s
nature. To God nothing is unimport-
ant—nothing mean. But man is the
noblest of His creations in this world.
“God created man in His own image.”

2. Because of the peculiarity of man’s
moral condition. By disobedience man
entered into the dread knowledge of
evil, Unfallen angels are entirely holy.
Fallen angels are utterly depraved.
In human nature the battle between
good and evil is being waged.

3. Because of the cupabilities of man’s
nature. Man is capable of rising to the
highest or sinking to the lowest position
in the universe of God. It would be
passing strange if God were not deeply
interested in man. Nothing that con-
cerns thee, my brother, is unimportant
in the Divine estimation.

IL, God’s searching scrutiny of hu-
manity. The poet represents him as
earnestly examining “‘ the children of
men.” His is the scrutiny of—

1. An allseeing Being. Nothing can
be hidden from His all-searching eye
(Ps. cxxxix. 11-16; Ezek. xi. 5; Heb.
iv. 13).

2. An infinitely holy “Being. He
hates sin with awful and unappeasable
hatred. His dwelling, His ways, His
works, His essential nature, are all holy
(Isa, lvii. 15; Hab. i 12, 13; 1 John
i. 5; Rev. iv. 8).

3. An infinitely merciful Being. “A
God ready to pardon, gracious and mer-
ciful, slow to anger, and of great kind-
ness,” If there be in us any sincere
efforts after truth and righteousness, He
sees and approves them. In His judg-
ment of His creatures He makes allow-
ance for their weakness, for the force of
temptation, &c. He is not harsh, &c.
His holiness which leads Him to hate
sin leads Him also to seek the salvation
of the sinner. Such is the Being who
is ever earnestly observing man, examin-
ing man. How solemn and sacred should
our life be, since it is ever under His
inspection! What an snspiration and
encouragement does this inspection afford


268


to the godly / What a restraint it should
prove to the workers of iniquity / “ For
His eyes are upon the ways of man, and
He seeth all his goings. There is no
darkness, nor shadow of death, where
the workers of iniquity may hide them-
selves.”

II. The supreme concern of human-
ity. Why does God so earnestly exa-
mine man? “To see if there were any
that did understand, that did seek God.”
As these are the things which God de-
sires to discover in man, man’s great
concern should be to have and to exer-
cise them. We should seek—

1. Moral intelligence. ‘ Understand,”
or act prudently—the antithesis of the
foolin ver. 1. Not intellectual attain.
ment, but practical wisdom.

“ Knowledge and wisdom, far from being one,

Have ofttimes no connection. Knowledge

dwells

In heads replete with thoughts of other men;

Wizdom in minds attentive to their own,

Knowledge, a rude unprofitable mass,

The mere materials with which wisdom builds,

date and squared, and fitted to ita

piace,


Does but encumber whom it seems t’enrich.
Knowledge is proud that he has learn’d so


much ;
Wisdom is humble that he knows no more.”
— Cowper.

“The wisdom of the prudent is to
understand his way.”

2. Divine asptration. “Seek God.”
Hengstenberg: “To seek God, desig-
nates the desire of the heart after Him,
the longing directed towards Him.”
Where there is any true wisdom, or any
spiritual life, it will manifest itself in
seeking fellowship and union with God.
Only through the mediation of Jesus
Christ can this union be obtained. Our
well-being is impossible apart from
Him.

Conciusion.—1l. He who now serutt-
nises will one day fudge man. 2. His
judgment of man 1s infallible. He de-
liberately, patiently, and thoroughly
examines into every case before pro-
nouncing judgment. 3. He ts also the
merciful Saviour of men. 4. Our supreme
interest t3 to seck to know Him as owr
Saviour,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





PSALM Lr.





Tur SALvation oF THE CHURCH AND THE DESTRUCTION OF HER Exes
( Verses 5, 6.)


The poet here represents the destruc-
tion of the wicked—

L As utter andirreversible. “God
hath scattered the bones of thy be-
siegers.” The figure points to the
most complete and terrible destruction
of the enemies of the Church. Not
only is their power broken and their
forces dispersed, but they are slain,
and their bones, unburied, are scattered
upon the earth, Moll: “It was the
greatest disgrace that the bones which
had not been gathered and buried should
be scattered to become the prey of wild
beasts, or manure of the field” (Ps. cxli.
7; Jer. viii. 2, ix. 22, xvi. 4, xxv. 33;
Ezek. vi. 5). The wicked must either
submit themselves unto God, or suffer
irretrievable overthrow. If any one
will resist Him to the uttermost, by so
doing he will bring upon himself utter
destruction (Job ix. 4, xl 9

It. As effected by God. ‘God hath
scattered,” &c. Doubtless there is an
historical allusion here. Most probably
the allusion is to the destruction of the
vast and mighty host of Sennacherib
before Jerusalem. In one night one
hundred and eighty-five thousand Assy-
rians were slain by “the angel of the
Lord.” “TI will defend this city to save
it,” said the Lord, “for Mine own
sake, and for My servant David’s sake.”
There was no battle. He needed no
assistance. With the breath of his
nostrils he slew them. How insane for
any creature to battle against Him! He
ean crush the mightiest with a word, or
wither the most vigorous with one glance
of His eye!

III. As overtaking them when they
regarded themselves as quite secure.
“There were they in great fear where
no fear was.” It is incorrect to inter-
pret this as groundless alarm or unne-
cessary fear. The meaning is, that
when the enemies of the Israelites saw
no reason to be terrified, and felt them-
selves entirely safe, suddenly and utterly


contrary to their expectation, destrac-


tion overtook them. ‘“ A sound of ter-
rors is in his ears; in prosperity,” d&c.
(Job xv. 21). “When they shall say,
Peace and safety,” &c. (1 Thess. v. 3).
In opposition to God there can be no
safety, under any circumstances, In
alliance with Him there can be no real
peril, however threatening the aspect of
0) may be. (Comp. 2 Chron. xx.
1-30.

IV. As inflicted because of their
hostility to the people of God. The
enemy was utterly overthrown because
he was besieging the chosen people.
No one can attempt to injure even the
least of the people of God without cal-
ing forth His interposition.

l. He ts tn covenant relation with His
people, and 1s pledged to help them. He
is ever true to His covenant engage-
ments. ‘‘He abideth faithful; He can-
not deny Himself.”

2. Heis profoundly and tenderly inte-
rested in His people (Isa, xlix. 14-16 ;
Matt. xviii, 5, 6, xxv. 40,45; Acts ix.
4). From these portions of Scripture it
is quite clear that He identifies Himself
with them: what is done against them
He regards as done against Him ; what
is done for them, as done for Him, In
this we have—(1) An inspiring and
strengthening consideration for the
people of God. (2) Motive and en-
couragement to those who would aid
them. (3) Warning to those who would
injure them.

V. The destruction of the wicked
in former times as an encouragement
to the good to expect salvation from
present dangers. This we take to be the
connecting link between verses 5 and 6.
“Oh that the salvation of Israel were
come out of Zion,” &c. Notice—

1. The poetic view of salvation. It is
here represented as deliverance from
captivity. Captivity is a figure to re-
present restraint, misery, &c. “ Turning
the captivity” is a figure for the turning
of an unhappy condition into a restora-


tion to former prosperity. A state of
269


PRALM LIV.





sin is a state of bondage and misery.
The Lord Jesus introduces man to free-
dom and joy.

2. The grand source of salvation.
“Out of Zion,” &c., because there the
Lord was enthroned in the sanctuary as
in His habitation. The salvation of man
from the sins and sorrows of life can
come only from God. It is His to
“ proclaim liberty to the captives,” d&c.

3. The earnest desire of salvation.
“Oh that the salvation of Israel,” dc.
Our fervent desires are our true prayers.
Through all ages the prayers of true
hearts have been offered for the redemp-


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





universal in its extent, and enthusilastle
and reverent in its character. And
unto God shall all the glory be ascribed.

5. The encouragement to expect salva-
tion. Past deliverances inspire the poet
with confident hope of salvation from
present difficulties and dangers. God
is unchangeable. What He has done
in the past He is able to do in the pre-
sent. He is faithful. What He has
promised that will He perform. Every
new deliverance is an additional reason
for trusting Him. ‘ Because Thou hast
been my help, therefore in the shadow
of Thy wings will I rejoice.”


tion of the world from sin and misery.
4, The anticipated result of salvation.
“Jacob shall rejoice, Israel shall be
glad.” To the individual the realisa-
tion of salvation is a joyous experience.
And when its blessings shall be enjoyed
by all mankind, the exultation will be


“ His love in time past

Forbids me to think

He’ll leave me at last
In trouble to sink :

Each sweet Ebenezer
I have in review,

Confirms His good pleasure
To help me quite through.” —Newten.


PSALM LIV,


INTRODUCTION.


Superscription.—** To the Chief Musician on Neginoth.” There is very little doubt that
“ Neginoth” is ‘‘ the general term denoting all stringed instruments whatsoever, whether played
with the hand, like the harp and guitar, or witha plectrum. ‘The chief musician on Neginoth’
was therefore the conductor of that portion of the Temple-choir, who played upon the stringed
instruments.” —Smith’s Dict. of the Bible.

“ Maschil,” an instruction. Berleb, Bible—‘‘ We should learn from the example of David
that even in the greatest danger we should resort to no forbidden means, nor grow faint, but
ee upon the name of God, and commit to Him all our concerns ag to the Supreme

udge,

‘‘A Psalm of David, when the Ziphims,” &. The psalm was composed by David when the
Ziphites informed Saul that David concealed himself in their country, This occurred on two
occasions, 1 Sam. xxiii. 19; xxvi. 1. Probably the first of these is referred to here, as the
words of the superscription literally agree with the words of the Ziphites, as reported in 1 Sam.
xxiii, 19. The psalm, says Moll, “is plain and simple in form and contents. It expresses at
first a prayer to God for deliverance in a just cause from dreaded ungodly enemies (vers. 1-3),
It then expresses, in a lively manner, confidence in the Divine help and the punishment of His
enemies (vers. 4, 5); finally it concludes with the vow of thanksgiving for such acts of God in
confirmation of His name,”

Homiletically we regard the paalm as presenting to view The troubled life of a good man
vera, 1-8 ; and, The triumphant life of « good man, vers. 4-7.


A Guise or A Troustzep Lirsz.


(Verses 1-3.)


up against me.” The expression {s not
to be taken literally as denoting foreign-


Consider—
L The cause of the trouble. ‘For


strangers are risen up against me,” &c.
His distress arose from his enemies,
whom he here represents as—
i. Unnatural, “Strangers are risen
270


ers, “since the inhabitants of Ziph, a
town situated in the mountain wilder-
ness of Judah, a few miles south-east
of Hebron, were of the same race az


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY ; PSALMS.


David.” His own countrymen had be-
come as foreigners to him, had treated
him as an enemy. The Psalmist, like
St. Paul in an after age, was in “ perils
among false brethren.” Dickson: ‘ No
strangers are more strange than they
who cast off the bands of civility and
nature, whereby they were bound:
false countrymen, false brethren, false
friends, false alliance, are those of whom
men may expect least in their need,
for David findeth such men to be his
greatest enemies,”

2. Cruel. ‘‘Oppressors seek after
my soul.” As a-cruel tyrant, Saul was
seeking to compass the death of David.
Nothing less than the precious life
itself would satisfy the jealous and
malignant monarch.

3. Practically atheistic. ‘“ They have
not set God before them.” Arnd.:
“Not to have God before the eyes,
means to speak and act without dread,
whatever one pleases—nay, what is con-
trary tc God and His holy Word, as if
God did not see and hear it ; nor to be
afraid of God’s anger, or of His judg-
ment, and to have no remembrance of
God in the heart.” When men thus
ignore the Divine Being, can we wonder
that they trample under foot all ideas
of humanity and justice in their treat-
ment of their fellow-men? So we have
a glimpse of this troubled life. Exter-
nally the poet knew no safety or peace ;
he was hunted from place to place with
unrelenting cruelty, &. We, too,
know the meaning of trouble, and are
not unacquainted with false brethren
aud fierce enemies, &c.

II. The comfort in the trouble. The
Psalmist found relief and help in prayer
to God.

l. The object of his prayer. He
prayed for audsence and acceptance,


PSALM LIV.





“Hear my prayer, O God; give ear to
the words of my mouth.” But the
grand object of his prayer was deliver-
ance from his dangers, salvation from
his troubles. “Save me, O God, by
Thy name,” &c. David seems to have
been aware that the Ziphites had in-
formed Saul of his whereabout ; he felt
how perilous his position was; and he
appealed to God for protection and
deliverance,

2. The encouragement of his prayer.
This he drew from two sources, (1)
The Being to whom he prayed. (a) His
power to save. “Judge me by Thy
strength.” He will “show Himself
strong in the behalf of them whose
heart is perfect toward Him.” ‘Thou
hast a mighty arm ; strong is Thy hand,
high is Thy right hand.” (8) The per-
fections of His nature. ‘Save me, O
God, by Thy name,” Barnes: “ The
word ‘name’ here may include the per.
fections or attributes properly implied
in the name.” It implies all the bene-
volence, faithfulness, and power that
were needed to warrant the most san-
guine hope of salvation from Him. (2)
The righteousness of his cause. “ Judge
me.” These words indicate that David
was conscious of the righteousness of
his cause, If he obtained his rights in
the case, he would be triumphantly de-
livered. Arnd.: “From these words
we learn, if we would pray rightly, and
indeed would make a strong, powerful
prayer, we must have a good cause, so
that our conscience may not condemn
us, and render our prayer impotent.”

ConoLusion.—-Learn 1. What the
good may not expect in this life: exemp-
tion from troubie. 2. What the good
may expect tn this life: support and
comfort in trouble. Let us seek it im
prayer, as David did.


A Gumpse or a TrromPHANT Lira,
(Verses 4-7.)


The outward life of the Psalmist at
this time was characterised by constant
peril and trial ; but his inward life was
marked by peace and triumph. Con-
sider—


I. The nature of the triumphant
life. The poet brings into notice two
prominent features of this life—

1. Faith. Faith is the soul of all
heroisms, whether of patient endurance,

371


or brave, persistent performance. David
believed in (1) God. To him God was
not a myth or the mere article of a creed
to which he had assented; but the
grand Reality of being. His faith was
living and realising in its character.
He felt the presence of God with him,
we. (2) The righteousness of God’s
government. “‘He shall reward evil
unto mine enemies.” Notwithstanding
his present distresses, David was fully
persuaded of the righteousness of the
. Divine laws and administration. Ulti-
mately the apparent inequalities in
God’s gavernment of the world will all
be removed. Men will be retributed
necording to their character and con-
duct. (3) God’s interest in the indt-
vidual life of those who trust Him.
“Behold, God is mine Helper,” &c.
God is personally interested in every
one whose confidence is reposed in Him.
In his distressing wanderings, David
never passed beyond the Divine care.
In his extremest danger he was covered
by the shield of the Divine protection.
It was his faith in these things that
enabled him to live a triumphant life,
even in the midst of incessant persecu-
tions and perils. It is true of all men
and in all ages that LIFE CAN BECOME
VICTORIOUS ONLY THROUGH FalITH.
Faith enlarging the horizon of life,
realising the future and invisible, feel-
ing the presence of God, and resting in
His promises, transforms common men
into heroes (Heb, xi. 32-40).

2. Worship. ‘I will freely sacrifice
unto Thee,” &. Here we have (1)
The forms of worship. ‘Sacrifice,
. +. praise.” Forms are indispens-
able to us.) They express, and, by
expressing, often increase, religious
feeling, (2) The spirit of worship.
“Freely.” This is not to be inter-
preted as signifying either (a) Spiritual
as opposed to ceremonial offerings; or
(8) Voluntary sacrifices as contrasted
to those offered in fulfilment of vows ;





HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





but (y) Offerings brought with a ree
mind and a glad heart. Sacrifice an
praise, gifts and songs, are acceptable
unto God and helpful to man only in
the measure of their spontaneousness
and heartiness. Here is another thing
which contributed to the triumph of
the Psalmist,—he delighted in worship.
Worship calms, emboldens, strengthens
man. Faith and worship are of the
essential nature of a victorious life.

IL The conquering power of the
triumphant life.

l. Zt gives assurance of victory.
“Behold, God is mine helper,” d&ec.,
vers, 4, 5. The believer in Christ has
an unfailing assurance that, through
Him, he will vanquish all his enemies.

2. It enables tts possessor to realise
the deliverance, and to triumph even in
the midst of the trouble and conflict. “ He
hath delivered me out of all trouble,”
&c. The victorious spirit enables
David, even in the midst of his anxie-
ties and perils, to realise (1) Complete
deliverance from trouble ; and (2) Com-
plete triumph over his enemies, “ Mine
eye hath seen his desire upon mine
enemies.” Wordsworth: “The words
‘hts desire’ are not in the original, and
would be better omitted. What David
says is, that his eyes look calmly on his
enemies : he views them without alarm ;
for he feels that the shield of God’s
power and love is cast over him to pro-
tect him.”

Conoiusion.—Let us thankfully re-
joice in the victorious life. Even now,
while beset by troubles and confronted
by enemies, we triumph in and through
Jesus our Lord. ‘“ These things I have
spoken unto you, that in Me ye might
have peace,” &c. (John xvi. 33). “We
glory in tribulations also,” &c. (Rom.
v. 3-5). “In all these things we are
more than conquerors,” &c. (Rom. viii.
31-39). ‘Now thanks be unto God,
which always causeth us to triumph in
Christ.”


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; PSALMS,





PSALM LY,





Gop our HE.prsr.
(Verse 4.)


“Behold, God is mine helper.”

Man often stands in need of Divine
help. It is good and pleasant to enjoy
the help of our fellow-saints; but their
helpis limited, uncertain, and often value-
less. Not so God—He is possessed of
every qualification, so there never can
be failure with him. Notice—

I When God is the helper of His
people,

1. In the great crisis of their conver-
sion. He raiseth from the pit, delivers,
saves, duc.

2. In the troubles and afflictions of
life. These are many, varied, some
times severe, d&c. Job, the Apostles
(2 Cor. i. 8-10).

3. In the persis and conflicts of their
warfare (Ps. xxxvii. 14, 15 ; lx. 11,12;
exlvi. 5).


4. In their labours and totls tm His
kingdom (Ps. exxi. 1, 2).

5. In weakness, sickness, and death
(Ps. xxiii. 4 ; cxvi. 1-9).

I. What kind of a Helper is God.

1. Always near at hand. 2. Always


efficient and suffictent. 3. Perpetual
and everlasting.
Itt. The conclusions to which the


subject should lead us,

1. Personal knowledge and reliance
on God.

2. Unwavering fatth and hope.

3. Constant prayer and supplication.
He will be sought and inquired of.

4, Acknowledgment and praise,
“Bless the Lord at all times,” &«—
Jabez Burns, D.D.


PSALM LV.


INTRODUOTION.


Superseription.—“ Yo the Onief Musician on Neginoth.” See introduction to Pa. liv.
“ Maschil,” an instruction. Hengstenberg: “The Psalmist wishes to show how, in such a
situation of excitement, a peraon should conduct himself; how he should carry up what has
occasioned it to God, and compose himself to rest again through the consideration of God's love
and righteousness.”

Occasion.—We have no doubt that the psalm has an historical reference; but to what
occasion it refers cannot now be determined with certainty. Barnes: “Of all the known
events in the life of David, the supposition which regards the psalm as composed during the re-
bellion of Absalom, and at the special time when he learned that the man whom he trusted—
Ahithophel—was among the traitors, is the most probable, All the circumstances in the
psalm agree with his condition at that time, and the occasion was one in which the persecuted
and much-afflicted king would be likely to pour out the desires of his heart before Ged” (2
Sam. xv. 10-81).


A Ony rrom a Sout mv Disraess.
(Verses 1-8.)


This cry of the troubled Psalmist 2. Their wicked deeds. “ Because of


reveals—

L The cause of his distress. This
was the conduct of his enemies as set
forth in ver. 3—

1. Their evil speeches. “ Because of
the voice of the enemy.” At this time
David was assailed with reproaches,
slanders, and threats (2 Sam. xv. 3, 4).
(See “ The Hom. Oom.,” on Ps. xli. 5-9;
wiii, 2.)

8


the oppression of the wicked ; for they
cast iniquity upon me.” Hengstenberg
renders the last clause thus: “ for they
bend mischief over me.” And Conant:
“For they. cause mischief to impend .
over me.” Absalom and Ahithophel
and their followers were doing their ut-
most to take away both the kingdom
and the life of the poet-king. Their
evil doings were an intolerable burdan
378


PSALM LY.


to him, beneath which his heart fainted
and his strength failed.

3. Their deadly hatred. “In wrath
they hate me.” Hengstenberg: “ In
wrath they persecute me.” Conant:
“In anger they lay a snare for me.”
They had nursed their ambitious and
wicked schemes until their hearts were
full of deep and deadly hatred against
him who stood in the way and prevented
their attainment. “There was in their
enmity both the heat and violence of
anger, or sudden passion, and the impla-
cableness of hatred and rooted malice.”

II. The description of his distress.
The Psalmist represents himself as suf-
fering—

1. Great mental anxiety. This seems
to be the idea of the second clause of
ver, 2, “I mourn in my complaint,
and make a noise.” Moll: “TI reel to
and fro in my complaint and must
groan.” Conant: “I am restless in my
complaining and disquieted.” Perowne:
“ON from a verb, 9, which occurs


in three other passages, Gen. xxvii. 40;
Jer. ii, 31; Hos, xii. 1, Properly it


signifies to wander restlessly, especially .


as homeless, without fixed abode, &c.
Here it is used of the restless tossing to
and fro of the mind, filled with cares
and anxieties.” The mind of David
was at this time exercised by the most
auxious thought as to the measures he
should adopt, and the course he should
pursue for his own safety and the good
of his distracted realm.

2. Deep pain of heart.
is sore pained within me.” Moll: “‘ My
heart writhes within me.’ The trouble
is not merely an external one, it affects
his bowels, his vitals, his inmost soul.”
David was deeply wounded in the inner-
most and most sensitive part of his
nature. His own son whom he loved
was the head and origin of the rebellion,
“T have nourished and brought up chil-
dren, and they have rebelled against me.”
And his bosom friend whom he trusted,
Ahithophel, was chief counsellor of the
rebels, Well may his “heart writhe
within” him.

3. Overwhelming and unspeakable
dread. “The terrors of death are fallen
upon me. Fearfulness and trembling

274


“ My heart


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; PSALMS,





are come upon me, and horror hath
overwhelmed me.” Hengstenberg: “The
terrors of death seize the Psalmist, be
cause the enemies threaten his life.”
Barnes: “* Horror hath overwhelmed
me.’ Marg., as in Heb., ‘ covered me,’
That is, it had come upon him so as to
cover or envelop him entirely. The
shades of horror and despair spread all
around and above him, and all things
were filled with gloom. The word ren-
dered horror occurs only in three other
places ; Ezek. vii. 18, rendered (as here)
horror; Job xxi. 6, rendered trembling;
and Is, xxi. 4, rendered fearfulness. It
refers to that state when we are deeply
agitated with fear.” If we think of the
scenes and circumstances through which
David was passing, we shall see that
they were likely to occasion feelings so
deep and painful and dreadful, that
even the strong language here used does
not adequately express them. ‘ The
ingratitude and rebellion of a son,—the
fact of being driven away from his
throne,—the number of his enemies,—
the unexpected news that Ahithophel
was among them,—and the entire un-
certainty of the result, justified the use
of this strong languaze.”

Il. His desire in his distress.
“ And I said, Oh that I had wings like
a dove,” &. He desires to escape
quickly from the wrath and strife of
men to the peace and safety of Nature’s
retirements,—to get away from the
falsity and cruelty of human society
into the solitudes of true and kindly
Nature, Jeremiah: “Oh that I had in
the wilderness a lodging place of way-
faring men; that I might leave my
people and go from them! for they be
all adulterers, an assembly of treacher-
ous men.”
“ Oh for a lodge in some vast wilderness,

Some boundless contiguity of shade,

Where rumour of oppression and deceit,

Of unsuccessful or successful war,

Might never reach me more. My ear ia

pain’d,
My soul is sick with every day’s report
Of wrong and outrage with which earth is
fill’d.,”’—Cowper.

The Psalmist desired to depart (1)
quickly. “Wings like a dove” is a
figure of rap’ flight. “I would hasten


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM LY.





my escape.” (2) Completely. “I would
wander far off.” ‘I would make the
distance far by wandering.” He would
completely separate himself from the
strife and tumult of the city and human
society. (3) Permanently. “I would
flee away, and abide.” ‘ This is more
literal, and more in accordance with the
parallelism than the translation, ‘be at
rest, of the A. V.;” and is adopted by
Delitzsch, Hengstenberg, Hupfield, Moll,
@ al.

1. This desire was natural. There
was no feeling of revenge in it. He did
not sigh for the wings of a hawk to fly
upon the prey, but for those of the inno-
cent dove, to escape from the birds of
prey. Suffering as he was from men
whom he had loved and trusted, it was
natural that David should long to escape
from man to nature, and to have done
with the faithless and ungrateful.

2. This desire was mistaken. If he
had obtained his wish, the issue would
probably have been disappointing. Our
well-being and joy depend on our inner
condition, not on our outward circum-
stances. If the brain and heart be un-
quiet themselves, neither society nor so-
litude can give them rest. If the
peace of God be in the soul, the world’s
most tumultuous and trying scenes can-
not deprive us of it.

3. This desire was significant. To us
it clearly suggests that there is for man
a place as well aa a state of rest. The
longing of the heart for rest is prophetic
of a realm where peaceful souls dwell
amid peaceful circumstances. There is
a world into which sin and sorrow and
strife never enter; but it is not here,
Our rest, our home, is not here. “ Arise
ye and depart ; for this is not your rest,”
&e.

IV. His prayer in his distress.
“Give ear to my prayer, O God; and
hide not Thyself from my supplication,
Attend unto me, and hear me.” These
petitions involve a large measure of faith
w Ged.


1. In His accessibleness. David be-
lieved in the possibility and privilege of
man speaking unto his Maker. He re-
garded God as the hearer of prayer.

2. In Hts intreatibleness. “ Hide nw
Thyself,” &c. Arnd: “In great straits,
it seems as if God hides Himself from
us, a8 the prophet Jeremiah speaks in
chap. iii. of his Lamentations: ‘Thou
hast covered Thyself with a cloud, that
our prayer should not pass through.’
But our gracious God cannot hide Him-
self from our prayer; the prayer does
still press through the clouds and find
Him. God’s fatherly heart does not
permit Him to hear us cry and beg,
without turning to us, as a father when
he hears his children ery.” David re-
garded God as the answerer of prayer.

3. In His sufficiency. The Psalmist
was convinced that if God graciously
received his prayer and entertained his
case, it would be well with him not-
withstanding the malice and might and
multitude of his foes. ‘“ He is able to
do exceeding abundantly,” &e.

Conciusion. — Learn: 1. That the
best of men in this world are exposed to
severest trials, 2. That religion does not
make men insenstble to pain and grtef,
3. That religion provides for men an
all-sufficient resource in trial. Prayer
to a gracious, all-wise, and almighty
Friend. 4. That religion fatthfully
promises full and blessed satisfaction to
man’s craving for rest. (1) Here the
rest of faith, satisfied affections, &c.—
rest amidst trial, peace in conflict. (2)
Hereafter, in addition to this rest of
soul, complete rest from conflict, trial,
suffering, and sin.


“ There shall no tempests blow,

No scorching noontide heat 3
There shall be no more snow,

No weary wand’ring feet;
Slo we lift our trusting eyes

From the hills our fathers trod,
Bo the quiet of the skies

To the Sabbath of owr God.”

—~ Hemans.





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





Sap Scenes anp Pamru. Experiences.
(Verses 9-15.)


“ The tone of sadness and melancholy
now gives way to one of hot and pas-
sionate indignation;” and the poet
sketches the sad scenes which he had
witnessed in the city, and the painful
experiences through which he had passed.

I. Sore evils in the city. ‘I have
seen violence and strife in the city,” dzc.,
vers. 9-11.

l. The evils were manifold in form.
Here we have :—(1) Rebellion against
the civil power. “ Violence and strife
in the city.” (2) Extortion and fraud
in commerce. “ Deceit and guile de-
bee not from her streets.” Hengsten-

erg: “There depart not from its
market oppression and deceit.” Conant:
‘From her market-place depart not ex-
tortion and deceit.” The word which is
rendered “ streets” and “ markets” de-
notes “the large open spaces at the
gates of the oriental cities, where were
the markets, the courts of justice, and
general places of public concourse.”
Every phase of life seems to have be-
come depraved. ‘ Wickedness was in
the midst” of the city.

2. The evils were universal in extent.
They were “in the city” and going
“about it upon the walls;” they were
“in the midst thereof” and in the open
spaces before the gates, ‘The city was
wholly and utterly filled with wicked-
ness.”

3. The evils were continuous tn their
activities. ‘Day and night they go
about,” &. They “depart not,” do.
Wickedness was unwearied and incessant
in its doings.

4. The evils were painful in their re-
sults, ‘‘ Mischief and sorrow are in the
midst of it.” Conant: “Trouble and
sorrow are within her.” The whole city
in all its parts and at all times was full
of wickedness; and the result was dis-
tress and grief. Where wickedness


abounds, misery will not be wanting.


Sin is the fruitful parent of sorrow. It
is well that trouble does follow trans-
gression. We wonder not that David's


276


heart was stirred with grief and indig-
nation as he beheld the city so filled
with untiring wickedness and sore
anguish. No person of enlightened
piety can contemplate the sins and sor-
rows of a great city without emotions of
deep grief and earnest solicitude.

The poet also sketches some of his
own painful experiences.

IL Base treachery in friendship.
“For it was not an enemy that re
proached me,” d&c., vers. 12-14. We
see here :-—

1. Friendship enjoyed. The Psalmist
dwells upon this point with touching
minuteness. He shows us a friendship:
(1) Of great intimacy and trust. “A
man mine equal, my guide, and mine
acquaintance.” “ Mine equal.” “ Friend-
ship, according to the rule, ‘ binds only
equals,’ and these, wherever it actually
obtains, with peculiarly intimate bonds.”
“My guide.” “5x is here not guide,
but companion, associate, one joined in
intimate communion.” Barnes: “ The
phrase ‘ mine acquaintance’ is a feeble
expression, and does not convey the full
force of the original, which denotes a
more intimate friend than would be
suggested by the word ‘ acquaintance,’
It is language applied to one whom we
thoroughly know, and who knows us;
and this exists only in the case of very
intimate friends.” David had regarded
Ahithophel as such a friend. (2) In
holiest engagements, “‘ We walked unto
the house of God in company.” More
correctly: “We walked into the house
of God in the festal crowd.” They
united as dear friends in acts of sacred
worship to the one God. “The fellow-
ship of devotion entwines the hearts of
men with the most tender cords.” Such
friendships should triumph over death
itself. (3) Affording great pleasure.
“We took sweet counsel together.”
Literally : ‘“‘We sweetened counsel to-
gether.” Their familiar converse waa
mutually delightful In public and in
private, in religion and in politics, theiz


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





friendship had been most intimate and
eonfiding and pleasurable,

2. Friendship violated. (1)- By slan-
der. “It was not an enemy that re
proached me.” This trusted friend had
taken part with his detractors and ca-
lumniators (2 Sam. xv. 31). (2) By
base and cruel opposition. ‘“ Magnify
himself against me.” Conant: “ Hath
acted proudly against me.” The trea-
cherous man was seeking to accomplish
the downfall and ruin of David, that he
might thereby rise to greater distinction
and power. So the tender and holy
bonds of friendship, which should ever
be softer than gossamer, yet stronger
than cable, were utterly outraged.

3. Friendship injured and complain-
tng. David felt that he had been bit-
terly wronged, and very pathetically he
complains of the wrong. His complaint
suggests that the hostility of those we
counted friends, is—(1) More painful
than that of enemies. “It was not an
enemy that reproached me, then I could
have borne it.” Berleb. Bible: “ For
from such one would expect nothing
better, and might still find consolation
respecting it from one’s friends.” The
treachery of those whom we have taken
into our innermost confidence is one of
the most bitter of life’s experiences.
(2) More perilous than that of enemies,
“Then I would have hid myself from
him.” We can guard against the inju-
ries of an open, or of a suspected enemy ;
but who can guard against the injuries
of a secret, treacherous foe, whom we
regard and trust asafriend? (3) More
eriminal than that of enemies, Such
hostility outrages the tenderest and
holiest feelings, and violates the most
sacred obligations. Such were some of
the painful experiences of the poet at
this time. Alas, that thousands have
drank of the game bitter cup !

“Where you are liberal of your loves and
counsel

Be sure you be not leose; for those you

make frienda,

And give your hearts to, when they once

perceive

The least rub in your fortunes, fall away

Like water from ye, never found again,


But where they mean to sink ye.”
2017 Ce


PSALM LY





* And what is friendship but a nama,
A charm that lulls to sleep !
A shade that follows wealth or fame,
And leaves the wretch to weep !”


See “ The Hom. Com.,” on Ps, xii.


Tit. Earnest prayer in suffering.
David prays for—

l. The defeat of his enemies’ plans by
the division of their counsels. “ O Lord,
divide their tongues.” Alexander:
“Confound their speech, or make it
unintelligible, and, as a necessary con-
sequence, confound their counsela. There
is obvious reference to the confusion of
tongues at Babel (Gen. xi. 7-9), as a
great historical example of the way in
which God is accustomed and deter-
mined to defeat the purposes of wicked
men and execute His own.”

2. The sudden destruction of his ene-
mies, ‘Destroy, O Lord.” Hengsten-
berg: “ Devour, Lord.” The word
properly signifies, swallow up. “ Let
death seize upon them, let them go down
quick into hell.” Conant’s translation
is more accurate: “ Desolations are
upon them; they shall go down alive to
the under world.” There is a reference
here to thedestruction of Korah, Dathan,
and Abiram (Num. xvi. 33). David
prays that a similar destruction may
befall his enemies. And the reason
upon which his prayer is based is that
“ wickedness is in their dwellings, among
them.” Let them perish because of their
wickedness.

Conctusion.—1. Be careful in the
selection of friends and the formation of
friendships. 2. Prize true friends.


“The friends thou bast, and their adoption
tried.
Grapple them to thy soul with hooks of
ateel.”—Shakespeare,


‘A man that hath friends must show
himself friendly,” &c. 3. Yet confide
not too fully in any human friend; for
even the truest may fail us in life’s great
needs for lack of power to aid, &c. 4.
God alone is supremely trust-worthy.
He cannot fail either in faithfulness or
in power, &c.


277


PSALM LY,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; PSALMS,





A TriuMPHANT CoNnFIDENCB.
(Verses 16-23.)


In this portion of the Psalm the poet
expresses his assured hope of deliver-
ance from all his enemies and dangers,
Consider—

L The nature of hisconfidence. “As
for me, I will call upon God, and the
Lord shall save me,” dec.

1. His confidence was comprehensive.
He trusted that (1) God would destroy
his enemies. “‘ God shall hear and afflict
them.” Hengstenberg: “ God shall hear
and answer them.” He would hear the
angry voices of the wicked, and in judg-
ment Hs would give them a sharp
answer. “Thou, O God, shalt bring
them down to the pit of destruction,”
&c. “ The pit of destruction” is Sheol.
The idea is, that God would cut them
off even as the Psalmist had already
prayed Him to do. (2) God would
save him. He regards this salvation as
including («) Support and preservation
during his trials and dangers. “He
shall sustain thee, He shall never suffer
the righteous to be moved.” (8) De-
liverance from his trials and dangers.
“ The Lord shall saveme. . . He hath
delivered my soul in peace from the
battle that was against me.” He was
quite confident that God would deliver
him in safety from those who were
making war against him. This confi-
dence had brought peace to him in the
midst of danger, and he had an assured
hope of the restoration of outward
peace. This is a confidence which every
believer in the Lord may cherish as re-
gards his salvation from inward and
from outward enemies, If our trust is
in the Lord Jesus Christ our complete
triumph and our full salvation are glo-
riously certain.

2. His confidence was strong. There
is no trace of hesitation or doubt in the
declaration of the Psalmist. He speaks
with the clear accent of assured con-
viction. He is so certain of his deliver-
ance that he speaks of it as already
accomplished. ‘‘ He hath redeemed my
aoul in ene &o, He is as sure of

a


the victory as if it were already wom
Such confidence (1) honours God, (2)
imparts courage and strength, and (3)
insures a rich reward.

3. His confidence was intelligent. It
was neither ignorant nor presumptuous,
but intelligent and reverent. He does
not helplessly and unreasonably look to
God to save him by miracle; but re
cognises the fact that salvation is given
to us in the use of the means. He
mentions as means to his deliverance


—(1) Prayer. ‘As for me, I will
call upon God,” &c. He resolves to
pray frequently, ‘‘ Evening, and morn-


ing, and at noon, will I pray.” Moll:
“The three principal parts of the day,
usually observed as the special times of
prayer among the Orientals. Or it may,
perhaps, be a practical expression for
the whole day, equivalent to, at all
times, without ceasing.” He resolves
to pray fervently. “I will pray and
cry aloud.” Hengstenberg: “I will
meditate and cry aloud.” Conant: “I
will lament and sigh.” Moll: “ Com.
plain and groan.” The idea seems to
be that his feelings were deep and
strong, and that he would give to them
appropriate expression in prayer to God.
Deep emotions cannot be restrained in
their utterance within the limits of for-
mal and ordinary expressions. Such
were the emotions of the Psalmist. (2)
Trust. He regarded the continuance
of his confidence as essential to his sal-
vation. Hence he exhorts himself—
“Cast thy burden upon the Lord ;”
and he resolves, ‘‘I will trust in Thee,”
The continued exercise of faith is an
essential condition of calmness and
strength and conquest. And we know
from the history that, in grappling with
the rebellion of Absalom and the trea
chery of Ahithophel, David not only
prayed and trusted, but planned and
laboured also. To faith and prayer he
added thought and effort (2 Sam. xv.-
xviii). In all this the poet is an
example tous. Our confidence in God


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY. PSALMS.


should be intelligent. The faith which
is inculcated and encouraged in the
Bible, and which God has promised to
reward, is sublimely reasonable. It is
a discerning, strong, victorious thing.
And God has promised to crown the
exercise of it with His blessing.

Ii The grounds of his confidence.
The Psalmist shows to us that his faith
was based on—

1. The number of his enemies. “ For
there were many with me.” Moll:
“ The translation of the A. V. ‘with me’
is literal, but conveys a wrong meaning,
The Heb. preposition, like the English
with, has a double use, mutual action
may be co-operative or antagonistic.
Thus we say: fight with = against, to be
angry with == against. The meaning
here as determined by the context is
clearly against.” ‘The rebel army that
was waging war egainst David was a
numerous one (2 Sam. xv. 12 ; xvii. 11;
xviii. 7). David took encouragement
from this fact to expect the interposi-
tion of God for his salvation. When
our enemies are many and strong, then
God will interpose for us, if our cause
be righteous, and our trust reposed in
Him (2 Kings vi. 13-18; 2 Chron. xx.
12, 23-25).

2. The character of his enemies. They
were—(1) Jrreligtous. ‘ They fear not
God.” They lived in open disregard of
God. (2) Persistent in evil. “ They
have no changes.” The word nipron,


translated ‘‘ changes,” is used in Job x.
17 ; xiv. 14, in a military sense, signify-
ing discharges, relief-troops. Accord-
ingly Hengstenberg translates: “To
whom there is no discharge,” and inter-
prets it as signifying “ they who inces-
santly and constantly serve sin and fear
not God.” Or it may mean that there
was no change in their conduct. They
were not occasional, but persistent,
evil doers, Thus in the latter part of
ver. 19 we have a compendium of





Man’s BURDEN
Ver. 22. “Cast thy burden upon the
Lord, and He shall sustain thee.”


This verse is variously translated.
Margin: “Cast thy gift upon the Lord,”


PSALM LY,


ver. 9-11. (3) Treacherous, “ He
hath put forth his hands against such
as be at peace with him: he hath broken
his covenant. The words of his mouth
were smoother than butter, but war was
in his heart: his words were softer than
oil, yet were they drawn swords.” The
use of the singular points to some one
who was pre-eminent in treachery, ¢.g.,
Ahithophel. These verses are a com-
pendium of vers. 12-14. (4) Cruel,
The Psalmist speaks of them as “ bloody
and deceitful men.” Violent and cruel
were they in heart and in action. The
wickedness of his enemies is to David a
ground of assurance that God will de-
liver him from their base designs and
doings, While God is God He must be.
hostile to men of such character. He
must oppose and thwart their designs.
He must deliver His servants from them.

3. The ancient sovereignty of God.
“He that abideth of old.” Hengsten-
berg: “He who is throned of old.” Moll:
“ He that sitteth on the throne of old.”
(Comp. Ps. Ixxiv. 12; Hab. i.12.) The
deedg by which the Lord had manifested
His righteous sovereignty in past ages
encouraged the Psalmist to expect His
interposition for bis deliverance from
present perils, M. Henry: ‘“ Mortal
men, though ever so high and strong,
will easily be crushed by an eternal
God, and are a very unequal match for
Him.” Art: “Itisa great consola-
tion when one is in trouble and persecu-
tion to think how God still lives, and has
always proved Himself to be a gracious
God towards those who fear Him.”

Such, then, was the sure basis upon
which the triumphant confidence of the
distressed and imperilled poet-king
rested.

Conciusion. — See the conquering
power of faith in God, and exercise it.
Bee it in David. In Paul (2 Cor. iv.
8-18). ‘ This is the victory that over-
cometh the world, even our faith,”


AND SvUSTAINER.


&c. Hengstenberg: “Cast upon the

Lord thy salvation, and He shall take

care of thee,” &c. Gesenius: ‘ Cast

upon Jehovah what He hath given (or
279


BSALM LY.





leid upon) thee; that is, thy lot.”
Fuerst: “ Leave to God the lot, intrust
God with it. According to another
meaning of AF (to give up, to impose)
ay may signify a burden.” Moll:
“That which is laid upon thee.” Co-
nant; “ Cast thy burden on Jehovah,”
&e.

L Man is burdened. This fact is
too painfully obvious to require proof.
Physically many are burdened by severe
labours and sufferings, Mentally many
are burdened by anxieties, perplexities,
over-tasked brain, &c. Our social rela-
éions, which are frequently of much
benefit and blessing to us, are seldom
free from cares, sorrows, and distresses,
Even the religious life has its burdens
for man. Religion itself is not a bur
den; but, by becoming religious, a man
becomes sensible of burdens that he did
not feel before. The mysteries of the
Divine administration of human affairs,
the imperfection of our individual life,
the seeming abortiveness of much of our
effort for the good of ourselves and
others, seasons of spiritual darkness, &c.
—these are burdens. The fact that we
are burdened 4s significant.

1. It indicates that man ts not in
unison with the Divine order. God did
not create man with a load, did not
make him to be burdened, &c.

2. It indicates also the greatness of
human nature. We feel the burden, we
struggle against it, we bear up under it,
we strive to be rid of it. In this we
have a reminiscence of a free and blessed
past, and a pledge of a free and glorious
future. Our sense of the burden is an
augury of approaching release from it.

IL Man is exhorted to cast his
burden upon the Lord. We have a
strong tendency to strive to bear our
own burden even when we are almost
sinking beneath it. In itself this ten-
dency is good. It is the principle of
self-reliance leading us to attempt self-
help. But this tendency has become
corrupted by association with pride and
a false independence. Hence, when
man is being crushed by it, in imagined
self-sufficiency, he refuses to take his
burden to the Lord. Spiritual weak-
ness is ever boastful, while spiritual

380


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


strength is ever humble. We mistake
weakness for strength when we refuse
to cast our burden upon the Lord.
There are some who do not take their
burden to the Lord because their ideas
of Him are false, arising from a heart
alienated from Him. They say—“ God
does not care for man; we may suffer,
we may perish; but He does not care.
He is indifferent, even if He be not cruel
to us.” Estrangement from God ex-
plains this, David exhorts his soul to
cast ita burden upon the Lord, &c. “The
strong part of the soul speaks to the
weak.” Or he speaks as one of the
suffering righteous, and in their name.
So let the troubled children of God do
now. But how can we cast our burden
upon the Lord? By believing prayer.
Lay all at the foot of God’s throne:
tell Him all your troubles, even as a
child tells all its sorrows to its mother.
You know how the heart is relieved by
unfolding its burdens to a dear friend.
We can tell all to God—nothing is toe
secret, nothing too sacred.

II. Man is encouraged to cast his
burden upon the Lord by the assur-
ance of his support. “He shall sus
tain thee.” How?

1. By removing the burden. The
poverty that crushes, the mystery that
bewilders, the suffering that distresses,
in answer to prayer He sometimes re-
moves.

2. By disclosing the design of the
burden. When we know the reason of
our troubles, in many instances their
chief painfulness is gone, and we bow
reverently to the will of God.

3. By increasing our strength, so that
we shall not be crushed by its load, This
is, perhaps, His most frequent method
of relief. This the text distinctly pro-
mises, “He shall sustain thee.” “My
grace is sufficient for thee; for My
strength is made perfect in weakness,”

4, By unfolding to us a bright future.
The toil and burden will not continue
long: then rest and joy, &e.

ConcLusion.—The character of God,
the promises of His Word, and the expe-
rience of His people in all ages, unite in
encouraging us to trust the assurance, and
comply with the precept of the text,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY ; PSALMS,


POALa LS.





Preoerr ann PROMISE,
(Verse 22.)


L The duty enjoined “Cast thy
burden upon the Lord.” A person’s
burden is his trouble, his care, or what-
ever disturbs the peace of his mind.
There is no trouble in heaven ; there
was none in Eden; and believers in
Christ will be delivered from trouble
when they shall be delivered from sin
(Isa. xxxv. 10).

To have a refuge in trouble is a great
privilege. . . . God has made Himself
to be as a refuge through the mediation
of Jesus Christ (John xiv. 6; Eph. ii
18),. . . God is a suitable refuge: He
can sustain; He ean deliver; He is all-
sufficient, &c. . . . By precept, by pro-
mise, by the example of others, and the
deliverances which they have expe-
rienced, we are encouraged to “ cast
our burden upon the Lord.” We should
do so—

l. When oppressed with a sense of
sin and guilt.

2. Ln times of temptation.

3. In times of trouble. There are per-
sonal troubles, family troubles, troubles
from providential changes, ¢.g., Job’s,
and troubles from the wickedness of our
fellow-men, and the treachery of pro
fessed friends.

4. In seasons of affliction. “ Cast
thy burden upon the Lord.” Go to
Him as you would to your best friend,
and pour out your wants before Him.


IL The promises with which this
precept is enforced.

1. “He shall sustain thee.” This im-
plies that, if we make God our refuge,
(1) He will save us from despondency.
He will sustain us with hope. (2) He
will tmpart to us spiritual strength.
“ As thy days so shall thy strength be.”
(3) He will overrule all our trials and
afflictions for our good.

2. “ He shall never suffer the righteous
to be moved.” This promise applies to
those who make God their refuge, and
in all their trials pursue a course of holy
obedience. It implies—(1) That they
shall not be drawn aside by their trials
from the path of obedience. (2) That
they shall not be moved from the source
of their comfort. (3) Some read the
words, they shall not be moved for ever,
implying that they shall not be utterly
cast down.

APpPLicaTIon.—l. Learn the import-
ance of faith in the Divine promises,
2. In making God our refuge in our
troubles we must be in the path of duty.
3. The miserable condition of those who
have not God for their refuge. 4. The
privilege of having God for our refuge
shows the value and the importance of
religion. 5. How awful will be the end
of those who never make G'od their refuge/
—Abridged from an unpublished MS.


PSALM LVL


InNTRODUOTION.


Buperseription—To the Chief Musician upon Jonath-Elem-Rechokim.” The phrase
® Jonath-Elem-Rechokim” oceurs nowhere else in the Bible ; and Biblical critica are by no means
agreed as to its meaning. Gesenius renders it, “The silent dove among strangers.” W.A. Wright,
in Smith’s Dict. of the Bille: “A dumb dove of (in) distant places.” De Wette, “Dove of
the distant terebinths.” Aben Ezra regards it as merely indicating the modulation or the
rhythm of the Psalm,—‘ after the melody of the air which begins Jonath-Elem-Rechokim.”
Fuerst regards it as referring to ‘‘an old poem, after which the 56th Psalm was sung.” ‘‘In
the Biour to Mendelashon’s version of the Psalms, Jonath-Hlem-Rechokim is mentioned as a
mueical instrument which produced dull, mournful sounds.” Hengstenberg, Alexander, ¢ al.,
interpret the phrase as describing the unhappy condition of David during his exile from the
land of Israel, as ax innocent and uncomplaining sufferer among strangers. “ Michtam
7 0


David.” Margin: “A golden Psalm of David,” which is imterpreted os egaitying thas id


PSALM LVI.


Psalm was to David precious as fine gold.”
et al.: ** Writing.”
deep import.”


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; PSALMS,





Luther: ‘* A golden jewel.”
Hengstenberg:; “ A secret of David.”
W. A. Wright in Smith’s Dict. of the Bible, says, —‘‘ Beyond the general pro-


Gesenius, De Wetta,
He explains it as ‘‘a song with a


bability that itis a musical term, the origin of which is uncertain and the application lost,


nothing is known.”


The superscription also gives us the occasion of the composition of the Psalm. “ When the


Philistines took him in Gath,”
refers to the same occasion,


The history is contained in 1 Sam, xxi. 10, seq.


Ps. xxxiv.


The leading idea of the Psalm is that of confidence in God im time of danger, which finds


expression in the refrain, vers. 4 and 10, 11.


Tue Gopty Man anv HIS ENEMIES.
(Verses 1-7.)


These verses may suitably be regarded
as illustrating the life of a good man in
this world in relation to his enemies.
Consider—

I, The enemies of the godly man.
They are here represented as—


1. Hager. This seems to be the idea
of the clause which is incorrectly ren-
dered, “man would swallow me up.”
Moll renders it: ‘ Mortal man snorts
against me,” Hengstenberg: “ Man
snuffs after me.” The meaning is either
that his enemies panted after him as
animals greedy of their prey, or
snorted against him as animals en-
raged. The foes of the Psalmist were
hot and eager in their hostility against
him. The enemies of the godly now
are active and zealous, Satan and his
numerous allies amongst men display an
earnestness and enthusiasm worthy of a
good cause.

2. Numerous. “They be many that
fight against me.” David had many
enemies—Saul and his followers, and
Achish, the king of Gath, and his ser-
vants. The godly soul has many foes,—
the world, the flesh, and the devil—
enemies within his own breast, and
enemies without, in society, &c.

3. Constant. ‘Mine enemies would
daily,” &c. “Every day they wrest,”
&c. The enemies of the Poet were in-
cessant in their efforts to effect his over-
throw. Every day their hostility was
renewed, The enemies of the godly
manifest great unweariedness of effort,
Evil never rests. Its dread activities
are untiring.

4. Dishonest. ‘They wrest my
words.” They twisted, perverted, tor-
tured his words, so as to get from them

282


a meaning which he never intended,
and by which they might injure him,
Good men are exposed to the misrepre-
sentations and slanders of their foes,

5. Confederate, “They gather them-
selves together.” The enemies of David
combined against him. It seems some-
times in the history of the godly soul as
though the forces of evil were united
against it. All evil is one in this, that
it is directed against God and the in-


. terests of His kingdom and people,


6. Secret, “They hide themselves,”
&e. They were like foes lying in am-
bush, The designs of evil are crafty
and cunning. ‘The people of God have
to guard “against the wiles of the
devil.” “Satan himself is transformed
into an angel of light.” Hence the peril,
and the necessity for watchfulness,

7. Cruel, “They wait for my soul,”
The enemies of David sought to take
his life. Our spiritual enemies seek
not to deprive us of physical life, but
to ensnare and ruin our soul. “ Your
adversary the devil, as a roaring lion,
walketh about, seeking whom he may
devour.”

(a.) How foolish it ts to make light
of our spiritual enemies / and it may be
ruinous / (Eph. vi. 12).

(8.) How great ts the importance of
guardedness of spirit / (Eph. vi. 13-18).

(y.) How needful is the Divine pro-
tection / (Ps. cxxv. 2).

I. The prayer of the godly man
in the midst of his enemies. This con-
tains—

1. A comprehensive petition. “Be
merciful unto me, O God.” If the
Psalmist secured the exercise of the
Divine mercy on his behalf, he would


_HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


need nothing more. The active exer-
cise of the mercy of God toward us is a
guarantee of all needful good,—protec-
tion, guidance, support, ultimate victory,

2. A powerful plea is implied in this
petition. In asking for mercy the
Psalmist renounces all idea of merit in
himself, and looks to the riches of
Divine grace as the source and the
reason of blessing. We do well to plead
the unspeakable generosity of the Divine
disposition. ‘He delighteth in mercy.”

3. An earnest appeal to the Divine
fustice. ‘Shall they escape by iniquity?”
&c. We have here—({1) An expectation
involving extreme wickedness. The
enemies of the Psalmist were so de-
praved that they cherished the hope
that they should escape the just conse-
quences of their transgressions by their
own cunning and violence, lawlessness,
and treachery. (2) An assurance of the
rectitude of the Divine government.
The inquiry of the Psalmist implies his
firm belief that his foes would not
escape the Divine judgment by their
wickedness. ‘The sin of sinners will
never be their security.” ‘ Though
hand join in hand, the wicked shall not
be unpunished.” (3) A desire for the
exercise of the Divine judgment. “In
anger cast down the people, O God.”
David prays that God in judgment
would defeat the plans and destroy the
power of his enemies, who wickedly
sought his life. We do well to pray for
the overthrow of evil and the exercise
of the righteous judgment of God.


PSALM LVI.


WW. The confidence of the godly man
in the midst of his enemies.

1. Zé was reposed in the grandesi
object. “In God I have put my trusv.”
Pa. xxxii. 10; xxxvii. 39, 40; exxv.
1; Isa. xxvi. 3,4; Jer, xvii. 7, 8.

2. It was exercised in the most trying
season. “What time I am afraid, |
will trust in Thee.” Calvin: “ It seems,
indeed, as if fear and hope were feelings
too contrary the one to the other to
dwell in the same heart ; but experience
shows that hope there in fact really
reigns where some portion of the heart
is possessed by fear. For when the
mind is calm and tranquil, hope is not
exercised, yea rather is, as it were,
hushed to sleep; but then, and not till
then does she put forth all her strength,
when the mind has been cast down by
cares and she lifts it up, when it has
been saddened and disturbed and she
calms it, when it has been smitten with
fear and she sustains and props it.”

8. It produced the sublimest results.
(1) It raised him above the fear of man.
“T will not fear; what can flesh do
unto me?” Arnd: “He sets against
each other the mighty God, and im-
potent flesh, which is as grass and as
the flower of the field.” (2) It inspired
him with the praise of God. ‘In God
I will praise His word.” The Psalmist
extols God because of His gracious
word and its precious promises, Thus
by faith the godly man may triumph in
the midst of his enemies, and is sure of
complete victory over them ultimately.


Tres oF Fear, axp Trost m Gop.
(Verse 3.)


Consider,—

IL What is implied and included in
trusting in God.

1. A knowledge of God as accessible
through a Mediator, We have sinned,
and there is only one way in which the
guilty can approach the Most High,
and their prayer can be accepted by
Him. The blood of the great sacrifice
is the medium, and faith in Christ is
the enly method (John xiv. 6).

2. A full surrender of the soul to God


to be governed by His holy laws. God
claims the first place in our heart. His
requirements are binding, and His
authority must be regarded. It is vain
to say we are trusting in God if we
refuse subjection to His rightful do-
minion,

3. Acqutescence in the arrangements
of providence, and submission to His
will, Habitual discontent and mur-
muring is incompatible with a life oi
confidence in God. Losses, afflictions

283


FaALM LV.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





and bereavements are painful, but con-
fidence in God will lead us to bear them
with submission, and to say, “It is the
Lord, let Him do what seemeth Him
good.” :

IL The circumstances in which this
confidence is most needful and im-
portant. “ What time I am afraid,” &.
There are seasons in which fear will be
awakened ; in such seasons we should
trust in God. Fear may be excited—

1. By a sense of guilt. When the
sinner is convinced of the evil and
danger of sin he feels himself under the
curse of a broken law, and in danger of
everlasting misery. A sense of guilt
may be experienced after conversion.
When the conscience is wounded by
remorse nothing ean give it rest but the
application of the blood of Christ, and
the enjoyment of the mercy of God.
“ What time I am afraid,” &e.

3. In seasons of temptation. The
believer may be walking in darkness,
and may have no light, he may be
lamenting the hardness and carnality of
his own heart, he may be fearing apos-
tacy, d&c. In such seasons our best
tefuge is God. ;

3. In seasons of domestic trials.
Troubles to parents through the per-
verseness of children, as Jacob and David
had. Or trials by reason of affliction.

4. Under bereaving providences. These
are some of the heaviest trials which
are experienced. Unless we go to the
right refuge we shall be in danger of
sinking into darknesa,


5. Under personal afflictions. To the

ple of God these are not judgments,
but fatherly chastisements. The hand
that wounds can heal, d&c.

6. In the prospect of death Death
is an event the most serious and im-
portant, and the prospect of it has a
tendency to awaken fear. But ‘ What
time,” dc.

IIL The advantages which attend a
life of confidence in God.

1. It will be an evidence of religion.

2. It will bring with it peace and
satisfaction.

3. It will lead to support under the
trials of life. “‘My grace is sufficient
for thee,” &c.

4. It will lead to deliverance from
troubles, Through all his troubles the
believer shall be brought in safety, and
he shall stand and look back upon life
and view them all left behind him for
ever.

5. It will lead ws to account all our
troubles as blessings.


**B’en crosses from His sovereign hand
Are blessings in disguise.”


“ All things work together for good,”
&c.


6. It will lead to an eternity of happi-
ness, “There remaineth a rest for the
people of God.”

Conciusion.—Learn the importance
of trusting in God. It is essential te
our salvation.— Abridged from an um
published MS,


Toe Resorornsa EXrIue.
(Verses 8-13.)


In these verses David, an exile and
wanderer, bitterly persecuted, appears
as glad and triumphant by faith in God.
He rejoices—

I. In the minuteness of the Divine
knowledge and the tenderness of the
Divine regard.

1. The perfection of the Divine know-
ledge. “Thou tellest” (or numberest
“my wanderings.” David was at this
time an exile and wanderer, fleeing
ane opt ate because of the cease-


less and malicious persecutions of Saul.
Barnes (in loco) cites eight of these
wanderings; Rudinger counts fourteen.
All of them were counted by God. Not
one was omitted. Nor would any one
of them be forgotten ; for like his tears,
they were recorded in His book, Mal,
iii, 16.

2. The tenderness of the Divine re.
gard. ‘Put Thou my tears into Thy
bottle.” The persecutions which drove
David into exile and wandering caused


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALM&,


him to weep, but he was comforted by
the thought that God cared for him as
a friend who would gather and preserve
his tears. “It seems probable that
there is an allusion here to the custom
of collecting tears shed in a time of
calamity and sorrow, and preserving
them in a small bottle or lachrymatory,
as a memorial of the grief. The Ro-
mans had a custom, that in a time of
mourning—on a funeral occasion—a
friend went to one in sorrow, and wiped
away the tears from the eyes with a
piece of cloth, and squeezed the tears
into a small bottle, which was carefully
preserved as a memorial of friendship
and sorrow.” Perowne: “He knows
that each day of his wandering, each
nook in which he found shelter, each
step that he had taken, every artifice by
which he had baffled his foes,—all have
been numbered by his Heavenly Keeper,
Yea, no tear that he has shed, when his
eye has been raised to heaven in prayer,
has fallen to the ground. God he
prays to gather them all in His bottle,
and trusts that He will note them in His
book.” This confidence strengthened,
cheered, rejoiced the Poet. So also
Job: “But He knoweth the way that I
take,” &c. To the sincere believer in
God there is a rich fund of consolation
and encouragement in the Divine know-
ledge of us and regard for us.

II. In his assurance of deliverance
from his enemies. ‘“ When I cry, then
shall mine enemies turn back,” é&c.

1. The condition of deliverance,
“When I cry.” Believing prayer is a
sondition of the Divine interposition
for us. “I will yet for this be in
quired of by the house of Israel to do
it for them.”

2. The promptitude of deliverance,
“When I cry, then shall,” &. ‘It shall
come to pass, that before they call I
will answer; and while they are yet
speaking, I will hear.” (Comp. Dan. ix.
20-23.) Spurgeon : “ What irresistible
artillery is this which wins the battle as
soon as its report is heard!”

3. The assurance of deliverance. ‘‘This
I know.” Mark (1) the strength of this
assurance. He does not speak with a


perhaps or a peradventure, but confi-


PeALM LVL


dently saya, “I know.” (2) The
ground of this assurance, “For God is
for me.” “If God be for us, who can
be against us?” ‘The Lord is for me ;
I will not fear ; what can man do unto
me?”

IL In his triumphant confidence in
God. “In God will I praise His
word,” de. (vers. 10,11). See our notes
on ver. 4,

IV. In his delightful obligations to
God. “Thy vows are upon me, O
God,” &c. (vers. 12, 13). It is worthy
of distinct and careful observation that
to the Psalmist obligation to God was
@ privilege and pleasure—a thing to be
celebrated in glad song.

1. The nature of this obligation.
“Thy vows are upon me, O God; I will
render praises unto These.” Hengsten-
berg: “The vows consist of offerings.
To the kind, the vows, the Psalmist,
however, adds the species, thank-offer-
ings” David had vowed thank-offerings
to God, and he looks forward witb

leasure to the fulfilment of his vows.
holuck: “David thinks of songs of
praise whilst he still sings lamentations,
of vows of thanksgiving whilst yet
praying.”

2. The reason of this obligation. My
What God had done for him. “For
Thou hast delivered my soul from
death.” The Lord had delivered the
Psalmist from imminent danger and
from death again and again. The
shield of the Almighty Protector had
covered him, and the deadly darts of
his enemies were unable to injure
him, (2) What God would yet do for
him, “Wilt not Thou deliver my feet
from falling?” The Psalmist was con
fident that God would continue to
defend and sustain him. What He has
done may be safely taken as an assur-
ance of what He will do. (3) The
design of God’s doings for him. “That
I may walk before God in the light of
the living.” ‘The light of life” is in
contrast with the darkness of the realm
of death. To walk before the face of
God is to live in the enjoyment of His
favour and protection. For these rea-
sons David felt under binding and


bleased obligations to praise God. And
285


PSALM LVL.





by all these things his heart was glad-
dened though his outward circumstances
were so depressing and painful.
Appuioation.—If our trust is re
posed in God we may and ought to
apply this exposition to ourselves, Let
us be strengthened and encouraged,
however many and sore our trials, be-
cause—l, God's knowledge of us ts


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


minute and perfect. 2%. His regard for
us ts tender and unceasing. 3. He has
assured us of final and full salvation.
4. His past delwerances also warrant
our present confidence. 5. Faith in Him
should enable us to triumph even in the
most trying circumstances (Rom. v. 3-5 ;
viii. 31-39).





Tae KNow.Lepes or Gop a Comror?r ro His Prorrz
(Verse 8.)


The Psalmist refers to his removals
from place to place for safety——“ Thou
tellest my wanderings.” He desired
that God would pity him under his
sorrows—“ Put Thou my tears into
Thy bottle.” An allusion here to a
custom of the ancients.

I. That the pilgrimage of the right-
eous and the changes of life are num-
bered and written in the book of God’s
remembrance. ‘Thou tellest my wan-
derings,” &c.

1. The life of the righteous ts a
spiritual pilgrimage. It begins at con-
version ; it has its “‘ wanderings ;” some
of them sinful; all of them known to

2. The changes tn the life of the
righteous are numbered by the Lord, and
are tn the book of His remembrance, (1)
Many pass through changes in the
place of their residence. They are led
in a way that they know not and in
paths that they have not known. The
Lord telleth all these wanderings. (2)
Many are the changes of circumstances ;
¢.g., Job; David from his wanderings
to the throne.

IL. The sorrows of the righteous are
known to God, and David desired Him
to keep them in His mind. “ Put Thou
my tears into Thy bottle,” de,

1. The tears of pentients are put into
His bottle. God looks with compassion
upon the wanderer returning home, &o,

2. The tears of the righteous shed
over the remains of sin.

3. The tears of the righteous tn their
spiritual conflicts, oceasioned by sinful
lispositions, hardness of heart, d&e.

4. The tears caused by the trials of

286


life. “Like as a father pitieth his
children,” &c. All the afflictions and
sorrows of life are known unto God.
“The Lord is very pitiful and of tender
mercy.”

IIL God’s knowledge of His people
is a source of comfort to them.

1. That He knows the course they taks
in their sorrows is a comfort to them
(Job xxiii. 10). This comfort may be
taken (1) By the penitent at the foot of
the cross. ‘The sacrifices of God are
a broken spirit,” &c. (2) By the Chria-
tian whose daily prayer is that he may
be found in Christ. (3) By the believer
seeking the aid of the Holy Spirit in
the conflicts of life. (4) And by the
godly in all the changes and trials of
their pilgrimage.

2. Their views of God afford them
consolation in their sorrows. (1) The
Lord is their God, their Father, and
their friend. (2) The conduct of God
is governed by infinite wisdom and
goodness, (3) Many trials come from
the hand of God. “The Lord trieth
the righteous.” (4) The purposes of
God afford his people comfort. The
discipline may be painful, but its design
is their perfection. (5) They have
access to the throne of grace in all their
sorrows, “The eyes of the Lord are
upon the righteous, and His ears are
open to their cry.” (6) The promises
of God inspire them with confidence
and hope (2 Pet. i. 4; 2 Cor. i 20;
Isa. xxxv. 10).

Lrakn IN Conoxusion.—l. That
sorrows are a part of our present por-
tion. ‘“‘In the world ye have tribuia
tion.” 2. AU our sorrows are kaown


-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; PSALMS.
rp SEEING perce


wnto God. 3. In all our sorrows we
should trust in God (Nah. i. 7). 4. We
should keep on such terms with God as
will enable us to derive comfort from His
imjinite knowledge. 5. If God manifests


PSALM LVIL





such regard to His people in the changing
scenes of life, how tmportant ts tt to
enjoy the privilege / and to enjoy it we
must be the subjects of true religion.—
Abridged from an unpublished MS.


Tas Srarz or tHE GopLy m THis Wosp.
(Verse 13.)


We shall regard these words of the
Pealmist’s as setting forth the present
state of Christian believers, It is—

I A Divinely delivered state.
“Thou hast delivered my soul from
death.” The unrenewed soul is spiritu-
ally dead (Eph. ii, 15; iv. 18). Man
is delivered from death—l. Through
the mediation of Jesus. 2. By the in-
strumentality of redemptive truth. 8.
By the agency of the Holy Spirit. 4.
On condition of faith in the Lord Jesus
Christ (John iii. 36; v. 24).

Ti. A Divinely sustained state.
“Wilt not Thou deliver my feet from
falling?” Notice: 1. The danger tm-
plied. The renewed soul is in danger
of falling. Three things show this—(1)


ceptibility to temptation. (3) Some of
the best men have fallen. 2. The con-
Jicence tnvolved. That God is “able to
keep us from falling” (Jude 24). 3.
The encouragement afforded. “Thou hast
delivered. . Wilt Thou not,” d&e.
What He has done is an earnest of what
He will yet do (Phil. i. 6).

Til A Divinely approved state.
“That I may walk before God in the
light of the living.” This includes—1.
Life governed by God, Living as in His
sight. His will our rule of action, 2.
Infe well-pleasing to God. “To walk
before the face of God” is to live in the
enjoyment of His favour (Pa. iv. 6;
xxi. 6 ; lxxxix. 15). Such a life naturally
tends to fulness of joy in His immediate


The fact of temptation. (2) Our sus presence (Ps, xvi 11


PSALM LVIL


INTRODUOTION.


Buperscription.—** To the Chief Musician.” The chief musician was the director of the
musie in public worship. And the Psalms which were addressed to him were intended for use
in the Temple services. ‘‘ Al-taschith” = “destroy not.” According to some expositors, the
expression denotes the melody to which the Psalm was to be sung. The Psalm was to be sung
to the same tune as the song known as, “ Destroy not.” According to others it is a musical
expression, probably denoting the ve in which the Psalm was to be sung. And, ‘‘ according
to others, it must be a maxim, which the Psalmist at that time continually revolved in hia
heart, and must indicate the quintessence of the Psalm.” ‘* Michtam of David.” See Intro-
duction to Ps. lvi. ‘‘ When he fled from Saul im the cave.” Moll: “We cannot decide whether
the cave is the one mentioned in 1 Sam. xxi. as the cave of Adullam, or that situated by the
sheepcotes upon the Alpine heights of Engedi (1 Sam. xxiv.), These caves are numerous in
the limestone and chalk mountains, and are often of great extent, and are atill the hiding-


places of fugitives.”
A Sars Reruce m song Prem,
(Verses 1-6.)


Let us consider—

i. The extreme perils in a good
man’s life. David mentions three things
as causes of danger and trial to him at
this time


1. The bitter reproaches of his enemies.
“The reproach of him that would swal-
low meup.” ‘The rendering of Heng-
stenberg and Moll presents what we
regard as the true idea of this clause.

287


PSAALM LVIL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





“He reproaches that snufis after me.”
“He reproacheth who snorts at me.”
It is not that God would reproach the
enemies, but that the enemies reproached
the Psalmist. Calumny and slander
were freely plied by Saul and his party
at this time against David.

2. The fierce cruelty of his enemies.
‘My soul is among lions,” &e. ‘ The
enemies are lions, greedy of their prey,
but the teeth of these men-lions are
spears and arrows, and the tongues of
these men-lions are a sharp sword. As
the lion uses his teeth and tongue, these
children of men use their spears, arrows,
and swords to destroy their prey, having
the same greedy, lickerish natures as the
wild beasts.”—(C. A. Briggs.) Their
eagerness for the destruction of the Poet
isbrought into prominence. They snorted
at him as enraged wild beasts, or as
wild beasts greedy for their prey. We
know how eagerly and ferociously Saul
and his companions at this time sought
to kill David.

3. The subtle schemes of his encmies.
“They have prepared a net for my
steps,” dc. Not content with open
and fierce pursuit, they concocted deep
plans, hoping, by means of them, to
ensnare the Poet. They used fraud as
well as force against him. They left
no means unemployed by which they
thought they might effect his overthrow.
Such were the trials from which the
Psalmist was suffering, and the perils to
which he was exposed. The enemies
had so far succeeded that, in some mea-
sure, the spirit of the Psalmist drooped.
‘““They have bowed down my soul.”
He was not insensible to trial. He felt
the pressure of their persecutions. He
was aware of the dangers with which
they surrounded him,

II. The secure refuge from the
perils of a good man’s life. “In the
shadow of Thy wings will I make my
refuge.” The figure is very beautiful
and expressive. Perowne: “ This ex-
ceedingly striking image may have been
suggested by Deut. xxxii 11. (See
Ps, xvii. 8.) Still more tender is the
New Testament figure (Matt. xxiii. $7).
Perhaps there is nothing more remark-
able in the Psalms than this ever-recur-

388


ring expression of a tender person’!
affection on the part of the sacred poets
to God. There is no parallel to this in
the whole range of heathen literature.”
Delitzsch : “‘ The soft shading of God's
wings is the protection of His soft,
eweet love, and the shadow of His wings
is the refreshing, trusting comfort con-
nected with this protection. In this
shadow the Poet takes his refuge unti!
the ruinous danger which threatens him

by.” The image is suggestive
of affection, rest, shade, safety. The
Psalmist indicates—

1. The grownd of his trust in God.
(1) His supremacy. “TI ‘will ery unto
God Most High.” However great the
power and the multitude of our enemies,
they cannot injure us if we have made
the Most High our Refuge. ‘“ Now
that he takes in view the Most High, the
giants of the earth become changed inte
pitiful dwarfs.” Franke: “ When it is
clearly manifested to the heart of man
that God is the Most High, he fears
nothing, not even the devil and his
hosts of hell, but is confident and un-
terrified.” (2) His continuous activity
on his behalf. “God that performeth
all things for me.” Qr, “God who
accomplisheth for me.” ‘The Lord
will perfect that which concerneth me.”
“He who hath begun a good work in
you will perform it until the day of
Jesus Christ.” Hengatenberg: “ With
God the beginning furnishes a pledge
for the finishing, the word for the deed.”
(3) Hts kindness toward him. “God
shall send forth His mercy.” David
confided in the infinite and free favour
of God. (4) Hts fidelity. “And His
truth” The Psalmist had an unshaken
reliance on the faithfulness of God. He
knew that He would fulfil His promises,
and save those who trusted in Him.
“Heaven and earth shall pass away,
but My words shall not pass away.”
Surely here we have most firm and
ample ground for trusting in God. He
in whom all these perfections inhere
must be worthy of the fullest confidence
as a secure Refuge in the trials of life.

2. The expression of his trust in God,
“ Be merciful unto me, O God, be mer-
ciful unto me...I will ory unte


a


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





God Most High.” The trust expresses
itself here in prayer, Calvin: “He
makes the calling upon to follow the
confiding, for it cannot fail, but that
those who trust in God should direct
their prayer to Him.” In this brief
prayer there are three points worthy of
notice. (1) Jt reveals a just estimate
of the poet's own moral condition. He
pleads no merit of his own; he does not
urge his innocence, but asks for mercy,
(2) It honowrs God. By appealing to
the Divine mercy, David manifests an
exalted estimate of the kindness and
faithfulness of God ;—he honours Him
by his faith, &o. (3) It ts fervent,
The urgency of need and desire is indi-
eated by the repetition of the cry.

3. The greatness of his trust in God.
This is seen—({1) In his sense of Ade
own perfect security. “I lie among
them that are set on fire,” &c. In the
midst of his enemies he lay down to
rest calmly as on a soft couch in perfect
safety. Moll: “ It expresses not a com-
plaint of his dangerous situation, but
the resolution of trust in God, with
which he will lie down to sleep in the
midst of dangerous circumstances.”
Faith is triumphant over fear. (2) Jn
his supreme desire for the wnwersal


PSALM Lat.





God, above the heavens, Thy glory
above all the earth.” The grand wish
of the Psalmist, to which all other feel-
ings were subordinated, was that God
might be supremely and universally
glorified. The Psalmist loses sight of
his own peril, or rises quite superior to
it, in his fervent desire for the exaltation
of God. (3) In his assurance that the
wicked designs and doings of his enemies
would issue tn their own ruin. ‘ They
have digged a pit before me, into the
midst whereof they are fallen them-
selves.” “In the cave, when Saul
thought David should fall into his hands,
he fell into the hands of David, and
lay at his mercy.” ‘God beats the
enemies of His servants with their own
weapons.” (See “ The Hom. Com.” on
Ps, vii. 14-16.)

ConoLusion.—The application is ob-
vious, 1. Zo all, life ts more or less a
scene of trial. 2. Trial involves danger.
8. In trial, every man needs a refuge.
4, Various are the refuges resorted to
by men tn trial. 5. Only one Refuge
ts adequate and trustworthy. 6. To
that One all may haveaccess. 7. “ Trust
tn Him at all times; ye people, powr
out your heart before Him; God is a
Refuge for us.”


honour of God. “Be Thou exalted, O
A Lis or Conripence mv Gon,
(Verse 1.)
Consider— Jesus Christ. The atonement for sin


L The grounds on which a life of
eonfidence in God is encouraged His
holy Word affords the greatest encour-
agement unto His people to put their
trust in Him, The whole life of a be-
liever consists in trusting in God. The
very first exercise of religion is an act
of confidence in the mercy of God, &c.
The believer may take encouragement
so trust in God, from—

1. The relation which the Divine Being
sustains tohim. Heishis Father. “Like
as a father pitieth,” &c. A child trusts,
&c. He is his God. All His Divine
perfections are engaged on behalf of His
people.

2. The efficiency of the mediation of

2


which He has made, and the interces-
sion which He offers on our behalf are

rfect, and should encourage our trust
(Heb, iv. 14~16).

8. The promises of God. These are
suited to all our circumstances, &c.

4. The deliverances which He as
wrought for His people.

II. The nature of trust in God, and
the circumstances in which we should
trust Him.

1. The nature of trust in God. It
consists in relying upon the declarations
and promises of God, in believing the
truth of God, and in acting accordingly.
(1.) Trust in God can be exercised only
in connection with a proper Len to


FoaLM Lv.


the precepts of His Word ; without this,
reliance upon His promises would be
presumption, not the confidence of faith.
(2) To rely upon the Divine promises
whilst regarding the Divine precepts is
the proper exercise of confidence in
God,

2. The circumstances in which we
should trust in God. We should trust
in Him at all times and in all circum-
stances, but especially—(1) When op-
pressed with guilt. (2) In seasons of
temptation. (3) In seasons of per-
secution (2 Tim. iii. 12.) (4) Under
all the trials of life (Pa. 1. 15).

III. The advantages of a life of
confidence in God. Trust in God isa
duty enjoined by many precepts, and
enforced by many examples. It is also
a privilege of the greatest value (Pa.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


exlvi. 5.) A life of confidence in God
will be attended with—

1. Peace (Isa. xxvi. 3).

2. Security. The arm of Omnipo-
tence is engaged for the defence of those
who trust in God.

3. Support under trial.

4. Deliverance from troubles.

5. The sanctification of trials to our
good.

Conciusion.—1l. Jt ts manifestly our
wisdom to trust in God. 2. A life of con-
Jidence in God ts one of the best evidences
of true religion. If we would know
whether we are the subjects of religion,
let us inquire whither we go for refuge,
&e. 3. The believer has the prospect
of everlasiing rest in God, dsc. ‘‘ There
remaineth a rest for the people of God.”
—Abridged from an unpublished MS.


THE PRovipEnocz or Gop a Morrvs ro Prayer.
(Verse 2.)


The Psalmist felt himself and all his
affairs in the hands of Providence. He
knew that God performed all things for
him. From this view of providence he
took encouragement to make Him his
refuge. “I will ery unto God,” &e.
These words suggest the interesting and
important truth that the providence of
God presents us with a powerful motive
to prayer.

I. Endeavour to illustrate this
truth.

1. The providence of God ts closely
connected with His existence. If we
believe in His existence we cannot con-
sistently deny His providence.

2. The Sacred Volume teaches the
doctrine—(1) It represents all the affairs
of the universe as under the government
of God (Ps. xxxi. 15, ciii. 19; e¢ al),
(2) Its precepts which enforce the duty
of putting our trust in Him imply that
His providence is universal, and extends
to all our concerns (Prov. iii. 5, 6;
Matt. vi. 31-34; et al). (3) The his-
tory of the Church and of individual
believers, which it records, testifies to
the exercise of the Divine providence—
Jewish Church, Jacob, Joseph, Job,
David, Daniel.

390


3. The conduct of providence ts go
verned by the infinite perfections of God.
Wisdom, goodness, faithfulness, power.

4. We are at all times, and under all
circumstances, under the care of the
Divine providence. In infancy, youth,
&c. In prosperity, adversity, &c.

5. It ts important to realise the unt-
versality of the Divine providence, Such
realisation will lead us to commit our
ways unto Him, will afford peace, &e.

II. The circumstances in which it is
important to realise this truth, and
to make Goda refuge by prayer. It
is important to realise it continually ;
but especially—

1. In difficulties, These arise from
various causes.

2. In troubles from enemies. David
at this time.

3. In painful trials.

4. Prayer ought to be esteemed a pri-
wilege.

ITI. The advantages of a life of faith
and prayer are many and great.

1. We realise that some wise end ts
to be answered by trials.

2. Our trials are accounted as for owr
good.


fr


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM LVI,


Ca a ee


8. Support under trial and deliver-
ance from tt are granted in answer to
prayer.

4. A review of the conduct of provi-
dence may be profitable under peculiar
trials, David found it so, Every man
may study Divine providence to his
profit,


Coxotusion.—1. Bring all troubles
to the throne of grace. 2. Every deliver.
ance in answer to prayer should be ac
knowledged by praise. 3. Past provi-
dences afford encouragement to trust God
Jor the future. 4. The mysteries of pro-
vidence will be explained in a better state.
— Abridged from an unpublished MS.


EXEMPLARY PRAISE,
(Verses 7-11.)


The Psalmist’s praise of God ex-
pressed in these verses is worthy of
imitation in each and all of its main
features.

I. Inits Theme. “TI will sing and
give praise. For Thy mercy is great
unto the heavens, and Thy truth unto
the clouds.” Mercy and truth are the
Divine perfections which are most pro-
minent in God’s covenant relations with
His people. His mercy is the source of
all blessings to sinful men. And His
truth is an assurance that He will fulfil
His word, that He will perform His
promises. The poet represents these
perfections as infinite. Such is the
meaning of the figures which he em-
ploys. ‘ Great unto the heavens,” &c.
From the infinity of God’s mercy and
truth we infer—

1. That the blessings which flow from
them reach unto all men.

2. That they are worthy of the unre-
served confidence of all men.

II. In the spirit of its Offerer, The
poet manifests—

1. Strong confidence in God. ‘“ My
heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed,”
Perowne: ‘“ My heart is steadfast.”
Moll: “My heart is confident.” His
confidence in God was firm and abiding.
It enabled him to rise above all fear of
danger.

2. Fervent gratitude and reverent
admiration towards God. “I will sing
and vive praise.” His confidence was
religious. He was sensible of his obli-
gations to God, and gratefully praised
Him. He recognised the perfections of
God, and reverently adored Him. This
is the true spirit in which praise should
be offered to the Most High.


TL In its enthusiasm. This is
clearly seen in his resolution to praise
God—

1. With the noblest powers of his
being. “Awake up, my glory.” His
“glory” is his soul, with all its won-
drous faculties and capacities, as created
in the image of God. David summons
his noblest powers to the worship of
God. Soulless praise is worthless,
and even offensive in the sight of
God.

2. Wtth choice instrumental accom-

paniment, ‘ Awake, psaltery and harp.”
David would use the sweetest and most
musical aids in this hallowed exercise.
He seeks to give worthy expression to
the feelings of his soul in praise of so
glorious a Being.
' 3. With affectionate zeal. “TI myself
will awake early.” More correctly: “I
will awake the morning-dawn.” He
resolves to anticipate the morning-dawn
with his songs of praise, so great were
his zeal and love for the hallowed exer-
cise. To him the praise of God was the
purest pleasure, Surely this enthu-
siasm in the worship of God is worthy
the imitation of all.

IV. In its sphere. “I will praise
Thee, O Lord, among the people ; I will
sing unto Thee among the nations.”
He would celebrate the praise of God
to the widest possible extent. De-
litasch: “ His song of praise is not te
sound in a narrow space where it cam
scarcely be heard ; ne will appear, as an
evangelist of his deliverance and his
Deliverer, among the nations of the
world ; his calling extends beyond Israel ;
the experiences of his person are for the
benefit of humanity.” The praise of

291


84LM LVL


MOMILETIOC COMMENTARY : PSALMS,





God should be universal, as “‘ His mercy
and truth” are,

V. In the sense of its imperfection.
The Psalmist was conscious that his
song fell far below the merit and glory
of his theme; and he, therefore, prays,
“Be Thou exalted, O God, above the
heavens, Thy glory above all the earth.”
Our most reverent and most enthusiastic
praise is inadequate to so sublime and
glorious a theme,

** Weak is the effort of my heart,
And cold my warmest thought ;
But when I see Thee as Thou art,
V'll praise Thee as I ought.”
—Newton.


Concivsion.—l. Let us “not make
that narrow which God's love has made
wide—wide as the heavens” (ver. 10).
2. Let us, like the Psalmist, anticipates
the promised deliverances of God with our
praises. 3. Let us strive to make our
praise of God commensurate with His
mercy and truth. In this we shall never
succeed ; yet the effort will be pleasing
to Him and beneficial to us. “The
glory of the Lord should be praised
early and late, near and far, in heaven
and on earth,” and yet it would immea-
surably surpass our praise,


Decrpep Prery.
(Verse 7.)


Consider——

L The properties of a pious or godly
life.

l. True piety has its seat in the heart.
*‘ My heart is fixed.”

2. True piety springs from just views
of truth. The heart will not be fixed
until the great facts which lie at the
foundation of religion are known,
&e.

3. Decided prety may be traced to just
views of redemption and the greatness of
sts blessings.

4, Relief from the burden of guilt,
through the great sacrifice for sin, tends
to fix the heart, &e.

5. Piety is strengthened by religious
exercises,

6. Divine deliverances strengthen piety.
Answers to prayer promote firmness of
purpose to trust in God.

_1. Progress tn religion strengthens
prety.


II. The advantages of a life of de
cided piety. Decided piety—

1. Le attended with security.  Reli-
gious principles in the heart are a safe-
guard, &o.

2. Recommends religion (Matt. v. 16),


3. Zs attended with happiness. De-
liverance from guilt, fear, &c. Expe
rience of the joy of salvation, dc,

4, Inspires confidence in God.

5. Strengthens hope in God.

6. Inspires prawe to God. “I will
sing and give praise.”

ConoLusion.—Learn—1. The ém-


portance of the heart being right with God.
2. The importance of a correct acquatnt-
ance with the principles of religion. 3.
The importance of religious dectston.
Indesision is dangerous (Matt. 12.
aii — Abridged from an unpublished


PSALM LVIIL
INTRODUCTION.


Superseription. — “‘ To the Chief Musician, Al-taschith.” See Introduction to Ps, lvii.
“ Michtam of David.” See Introduction to Ps, lvi. Moll: “ This complaint respecting domestic
administrations of justice gushes forth from the Psalmist ix a threatening language, which is
almost okacure owing to bold and mingled figures of speech. It is like a torrent which plunges
over every hindrance, foaming and raging. We may certainly credit this original poet with a
richness of figures and changes in their use, as well as in the turns of language and of thought,
in accordance with particular circumstances and feeling. Yet we lack sufficient evidence to
show whether the composition occurred in the time of Saul, who was at the same time David’
judge onateneen: who endeavoured to hide the persecution under the appearance of a right:


ad


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,
Nt ttc


Ps4LM LVOL





sous judgment ; or in the time of Absalom, who made the administration of justice a meens of
stealing from David the hearts of the people, whilst he pretended to be eral?

It seems to us probable that this Psalm, like Psalms lvi., lvii., and lix., relates to the Sauline
persecutions, The similarity in the superscriptions and the character of the contents supports


this view.


Tre History or Human WIcKEDNESS.


In dealing with these wicked judges,
whom he addresses in the early portion
of the Psalm, David gives us a general
description of the origin, progress, and
destiny of human wickedness.

I. Wickedness in its root. “The
wicked are estranged from the womb,”
&c. An innate estrangement of the
heart from God is the root from which
the wickedness of men springs, The
doctrine of original sin rests on an awfal
fact. Moral qualities are transmissible.
We enter upon life with tendencies to
evil. In some natures these tendencies
are terrible in their activity and strength.
In this light David regards his enemies,
“The most lovely infant that is ushered
into being,” says Dr. Cumming, “has
within it by nature the germs of those
elements which feed the flames of hell,
and leaven its forlorn inmates with their
direst misery. It has in its own heart
the embryo of that Upas tree, which
distils upon humanity on earth, and on
humanity in hell, its death-drops; and
ao living are the seeds, and so congenial
is the soil, that, unless overborne by the
grace of the Holy Spirit and the appli-
ances of the Gospel, they will inevitably
spring up and flourish.”

II. Wickedness in its manifestation.

1. In the mal-administration of jfus-
tice (vera, 1, 2). The exact meaning of
these verses is somewhat obscure. The
rendering of the first clause of the first
verse in the A. V. is certainly incorrect,
Alexander translates : “‘ Are ye, indeed,
dumb, when ye should speak righteous-
ness?” Conant: ‘ ‘Do ye, of a truth,
in silence, speak righteousness?’ A
bitter sarcasm. Is it with silence that
ye perform the office of speech, dumb
when ye ought to speak, and declare
the right?” Perowne, on the latter
clause of ver. 2, remarks, ‘“ This is said
sarcastically. Ye pretend, indeed, to
hold the balance of justice, and nicely
to weigh out to each his just award, but


violence is the weight with which ye
adjust the scales.” Moll: “It is very
bad when those persons and magistrates,
who are appointed to administer justice,
instead of pronouncing judgment, are
silent, and are dumb to the prayers of
their subordinates and the earnest en-
treaties of their frends, not less than to
the demands of the law, honour, and
conscience. They then not only misuse
the scales of justice intrusted to them
in an irresponsible manner, to the in-
jury of their fellow-men, but they are
likewise hypocrites and liars, since they
violate justice at the very time that they
pretend to exercise it, and in this mani-
fest their serpent-like nature.” Here,
then, are three counts in the indictment
against these judges. (1) They were
silent when they ought to have declared
for righteousness. (2) Their hearts were
bent on wickedness. (3) Under the
pretence of justice they did evil. Thus
in the place of judgment there was
wickedness, and in the place of right-
eousness there was iniquity.

2. In falsehood. ‘“Speakinglies.” This
is a manifestation of wickedness from
which David suffered much, and which,
in various forms, has been widely pre-
valent in the whole history of human
wickedness.

3. In malice. “ Their poison is like
the poison of a serpent.” Their spirit
was malignant, and their utterances
were spiteful, cruel, and deadly.

III. Wickedness in its full develop-
ment. ‘ Like the deaf adder that stop-
peth her ear; which will not hearken
to the voice of charmers, charming never
so wisely.” It is not the adder which
stoppeth the ear, but the wicked. What
is already deaf by nature has no need
to stop its ear. We may read the clause,
“ As a deaf adder, he stoppeth his ear.”
By means of stopping their ears the
wicked make themselves like the deaf
adder. (On serpent charming, - “ The

29


PSALE LVL


HOMILETIC OOMMENTARY : PSALMS.





Land and the Book,” by Dr. Thomson,
p. 154, and Barnes and Lange, tn loco.)
As there are serpents which cannot be
charmed, so there are men who will
yield to no good influence, They har-
den themselves against the grace of God,
and close their ears against His Word,
and strengthen themselves in wicked-
ness, and so prepare themselves for a
terrible and inevitable ruin. It is not
simply that the tendency to evil with
which they were born has developed
itself, but it has developed itself un-
checked, and without any obstruction,
and the influences which have been
brought to bear upon them to lead them
to resist that development they have
resisted, and the aids which have been
offered to them to enable them to do so,
they have rejected. ‘Ye do always
resist the Holy Ghost.” In this way
that which at first was merely a ten-
dency to evil becomes an irresistible
despot. ‘ His own iniquities shall take
the wicked himself, and he shall be
holden with the cords of his sins.”
“Can the Ethiopian change his skin, or
the leopard his spots? then may ye also
do good that are accustomed to do evil.”
We see this stopping of the ears and
hardening of the heart in the disregard
of those who eagerly pursue wicked-
ness—

1. To the remonstrances and entreaties
of men, even of their best friends,

2. To the invitations of Divine merey,
and the warnings of Divine judgment.

3. To the Divine influence working tn
and through their own conscience. All
these they disregard. Saul is a con-
spicuous and terrible example of this.
Men wilfully close their eyes against the
light, and blindness supervenes; they
wilfully stop their ears against Divine
voices, and deafness results. ‘ Sin,
when it is finished, bringeth forth
death.”

IV. Wickedness in its consumma-
tion. ‘Break their teeth, O God, in
their mouth,” dc. (vers. 6-9). There
is,” says Perowne, “an abrupt change
in the image employed. As these
men are incorrigible in their wickedness,
as they cannot be tamed, the Psalmist
prays to God to destroy their power for

294


mischief ; but instead of continuing the
figure of the serpent charmer, who robs
the serpent of his poison, he suddenly
represents them as young lions, whose
teeth he would see broken that they
may no longer devour.” In this portion
of the Psalm we see the destination of
wickedness.

1. The power of the wicked shall be
destroyed. “ Break their teeth,” dc.
‘The young lions” are not the whelps,
but those who are youthful in vigour
and strength. God will break the power
of wickedness. “The arms of the
wicked shall be broken.”

2. The plans of the wicked shall be
defeated. ‘‘ When he bendeth,” &c. The
Hebrew here is difficult. Hengstenberg
translates: “He takes aim with his
arrows, as if they were cut in pieces.”
Conant: “He will fit his arrows, they
shall be as if severed.” The idea,
doubtless, is, that the arrows of the
wicked would be without effect as though
they had their points cut off. ‘“ The
Lord bringeth the counsel of the heathen
to nought,” &e.

3. The end of the wicked shall be fail-
wre and rein. (1) Here are the ideas
of wasting and fatlure as the end of the
wicked. ‘ Let them melt away as
waters which run continually, As a
snail which melteth,” &. (On the
metaphor of the snail, see Tristram’s
“Natural History of the Bible,” p. 295,
quoted in Lange.) Wickedness tends
to failure. Sin is truly a missing of
the mark. The life of the wicked shall
pass away like an abortion (Ps. xxxvii.
35, 36). (2). Here is the idea of dread
ruin as the end of the wicked. “ Before
your pots,” &. Another difficult verse.
A more correct translation would be,
“ Before your pots feel the thorn, whe-
ther fresh or burning; He will sweep it
away as with a tempest.” ‘ Whether
fresh or burning” we take as applying
to the thorns. Perowne: “The general
sense of this difficult verse seems to be
this: As a sudden whirlwind in the
desert sweeps away the thorns which
have been gathered for cooking almost
as soon as they have been set on fire,
and before the cauldron has grown hot,
so shall the wicked, and all their yet


ff


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: PSALMS.





Incomplete designs, be swept away by
the wrath of God.” The ruin of the
wicked is here represented as (a) sudden
(1 Thess. v. 3). (8) Irresistible, “as
with a whirlwind” (Prov. xiv. 332).
Such is the dread consummation to
which wickedness tends.

V. Wickedness as viewed in its
ultimate aspects. The consummation
of wickedness affords—

1. Satisfaction to the righteous. ‘The
righteous shall rejoice when he seeth
the vengeance,” &. Alexander: “To
bathe his steps in the blood of others is
to walk where their blood is flowing, to
tread the battlefield where they have
fallen, to gain a sanguinary triumph
over them, or rather, to partake in the
triumph of another.” The righteous
rejoice that wickedness does not triumph,
but is defeated, destroyed. ‘“ The Lord
reigneth.”

2. Convictionto menin general, ‘And
men will say, Verily, there is fruit for
the righteous,” &c. When the ultimate
espects of wickedness are seen men will


PSALM LIS.








be convinced that: the moral govern-
ment of the world is in the hands of a
righteous God. Even in the present
state of affairs events are frequently
conducted to such issues that men can-
not resist the conclusion that “there is a
God that judgeth in the earth,”
Conotusion.—l. Learn the danger of
following the bias of our nature apart
Jrom the grace of God. “ When we fol-
low our inborn nature we ruin ourselves
and others.” 2. Rejotce that the bias of
our nature to evil may be changed. By
the grace of God we may “ be renewed
in the spirit of our mind,” &c, (Eph. iv.
23, 24). 3, Let those who are pursuing
evil turn from tt to Jesus Christ and to
life ere tt reaches tts dread consumma-
tion (Isa, lv. 6, 7; Ezek. xxxiii. 11).
4, Learn to take a comprehensive view
of the divine dealings with men. By 80
doing we shall be likely correctly to
understand the ways of God. 5. Cul-
tivate a strong and constant faith in the
exercise and rectitude of the Divine ad-
ministration in human afasrs,


PSALM LIZ


INTRODUCTION,


iption.—** To the Chief Musician, Al-taschith.”
See Introduction to Pa, lvi.
The history here referred to is contained in 1 Sam, xix. 11-18.


‘ +7 9
“ Michtam of David.
house to kill him.”


Bee Introduction to Pu. Ivii.
“ When Saul sent, and they watched the
Moll:


“The contents and form of this Psalm do not lead us to limit that dangerous situation in


Gibeah to the one night before the flight which was rendered possible by Michal.


It is, par-


ticularly the recurring verses (vers. 6, 14), which deacribe repeated hostile waylaying, which


began with the evening.”


Both the nature of the contents and the style of the composition of the Psalm confirm the
statement of the superscription as to its authorship and occasion,


Tae Huntep Lirz AnD
( Verses


In this, as in several preceding Psalms,
complaint, prayer, and confidence are
the chief feelings which find expression.
Notice—

L The character and conduct of the
persecutors.

1. They were wicked. ‘ Workers of
iniquity.” The expression denotes great
activity in wickedness, and is justly
applied to Saul and his base agents.

8. They were cruel, ‘Bloody men.”


irs Divint GUARDIAN,
1-10.)


They sought the life of the Psalmist
though he had done them no wrong.
“They make a noise like a dog, and go
round about the city.” ‘ He compares
his enemies to those half-wild dogs,
which are the scavengers of the cities
of the East. They prowl about the
streets at night hunting for offal, and
hesitate not to prey upon the dead, and
even the feeble and helpless.” Bo fierce
and cruel were they. No figure is toe
2965





strong to represent the fierce cruelty of
Saul towards David.

3. They were secret. “ They lie in
wait for my soul,” They were subtle
and politic in their designs, and, as it
were, lay in ambush that they might
destroy his life (1 Sam, xix. 11).

4. They were strong. “The mighty
are gathered against me.” ‘It is not
mere strength,” says Barnes, “that ia
here referred to, but that kind of
strength or courage which can be em-
ployed in a desperate enterprise, and
which is fitted to accomplish any scheme
of wickedness, however daring or diffi-
eult.” Unscrupulous, bold, and strong
were the men whom Saul employed
against David at this time.

5. They were resolute and impetuous,
“They run and prepare themselves.”
Hengstenberg translates : “They run and
plant themselves firmly.” The terms
and the metaphor are military. David
compares his enemies to an attacking
host, which, having obtained a firm
footing on the walls of a beleaguered
city, is ready to rush over them, or
through the breaches made in them, into
the city. They were settled in purpose,
and were eager to execute that purpose.
“Their feet were swift to shed blood.”

6. They were slanderous. “ Behold,
they belch out with their mouth, swords
are in their lips.” Alexander: “ The
first verb is expressive of a constant
flow or gush. What it is that they thus
pour out, aithough not expressed, may
be readily gathered from the context,
namely, slanders and reproaches, The
swords tn their lips are significant of
sharp and cutting speeches. (See Ps. lv.
21, and comp. lii, 2). Arndt: “Just
as a naked sword inflicts wounds, so do
lies and calumnies cut in pieces innocent
hearts.”

7. They were practically atheistic.
“ For who, say they, doth hear?” They
were wholly destitute of the fear of
God. They acted as though there were
no God. (Comp. Ps, x. 11.)

Such were the foes by which the poet
was assailed on this occasion. They
were calculated to strike terror into a
brave heart.

IL The Prayer of the persecuted.

296


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY ; PSALMB,





“Deliver me from mine enemies,” &0,
Notice—

1. The requests presented. David en-
treats God—(1) Yor defence. ‘Defend
me from them that rise up against me.”
Margin: “Set me on high,” &e. He
seeks to be raised far above the reach of
his enemies, and above all fear of them.
The man who trusts in God “ shall
dwell on high; his place of defence
shall be the munitions of rocks.” (2)
For deliverance. ‘ Deliver me from mine
enemies, O my God. Deliver me from
the workers of iniquity ” &. The foes
were many, the danger was great; but
the Psalmist knew that God could
thwart their designs, and deliver him
from their hands. (3) For judgment
on his enemies. “Thou, therefore, O
Lord God of hosts,” &c. (ver. 5). On
“all the heathen.” Perowne says, “ The
nations, to an Israelite, would be the
embodiment of all that opposed itself te
God ; and in appealing to God to punish
them, he would, in fact, be appealing te
Him to punish all evil wherever mani-
fested. The special judgment would
follow from the universal, and be an in-
stance of it. . . . To the true Israelite,
the whole outer heathen world was a
world lying under the heavy wrath of
God, and to him the greater part of
Israel itself seemed corrupt and apos-
tate.” The Psalmist entreats God to
visit them in judgment. The perse-
eutors of the servants of God and the
enemies of His cause will certainly meet
with the punishment which they de
serve, unless they penitently turn from
their evil ways. When He arises for
the help of His people He will smite
their foes in His anger.

2. The pleas by which these requeas.
are urged. He pleads—{l) The might
and malice of his foes. In thie he found
a powerful reason why God should help
him. The greatness of our danger and
our need are strong arguments with
Him. (2) His own innocence. “ Not
for my transgression, nor for my sin, O
Lord. Without my fault,” &. David
had not in any way injured Saul, or any
of his enemies, So clear was he in this
respect, that he could appeal to the
great Searcher of hearts that he had,


HOMILETIU COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


Sr


neither in heart nor in action, wronged
Saul, or merited this treatment from
him. “There are two kinds of inno-
cence, one before God, the other before
men.” David was quite conscious of
the latter kind of innocence. However
great a sinner he was against God, he
knew he had not injured Saul even in
thought. When seeking deliverance
from God from such dangers this is a
powerful plea. (3). The might and
majesty of God. ‘Thou therefore, O
Lord God of hosts,” &. These names
are not empty formulas or poetical
figures. As ‘Lord God of hosts” all
forces bow to His command. He ean-
not be overmatched. The names and
titles add force to the argument. (4).
His personal relation to God. “Oh, my
God . . . the God of Israel.” Blessed
are they who, in their trials and perils,
can plead their personal relation to Him,
&e.

IIL The confidence of the perse-
cuted. The Psalmist was not dismayed
by reason of his enemies, but confident
in the all-sufficiency of his God.

1. In God as tnjinttely superior to his
enemies. “Thou, O Lord, shalt laugh
at them,” &c. It is for God a light
matter to confound their designs, d&e.
(Comp. Ps. ii. 4).

2. In God as his sure defence. “ Be-
cause of His strength will I wait upon
Thee ; for God is my defence.” Conant :
“ My strength, I will wait on Thee; for
God is my defence.” God is our high
place. In Him we are inviolably secure


Tar Diversz Destivizs or Men
(Verses


The Psalmist here prays for, or, as
some say, predicts, the infliction of the
judgment of God upon the wicked who
were persecuting him, and announces his
determination to celebrate the praise of
his protecting and delivering God.

L The destiny of the enemies of
the good. Their destiny is here set
forth in two aspects,

1. Life protracied in misery. “Slay
them not,” &c. Here are three elements
of misery. (1). Frustless wandertaga.


—far above the reach of the utmost
effort of our enemies,

3. In God as @ gracious and timely
Deliverer, “The God of my mercy
shall prevent me,” &c. Conant: “ God
with His loving-kindness will anticipate
me.” Moll: “My God will come to
meet me with His grace.” Spurgeon:
“How frequently have we met with
preventing mercy—the supply prepared
before the need occurred—the refuge
built before the danger arose. Far ahead
into the future the foreseeing grace of
heaven has projected itself, and fore- -
stalled every difficulty.” So David rose
triumphant over his trials and fears, &.

Conoivsion.—-What message has this
chapter from the history of the pious
Psalmist for us in our life to-day? 1.
The godly are still subject to sore trials,
sometimes to biticr persecutions, &c. 2.
Happy are they who, ta ther trials, are
conscious of thetr innocence. Suffering
is far more severe and intolerable when
it is the direct result of sin, and is
accompanied with a sense of guilt, than
when we are sustained by the conscious-
ness of our integrity. 3. More happy
are they who, in their trials and ls,
can look to God for defence and deliwer-
ance as @ God in covenant relations with
themselves. ‘Oh, my God... The God
of Israel.” In Him they have all-aufii-
ciency. ‘‘They that be with us are
more than they that be with them.”
“Greater is He that is in you than he
that is in the world.” “If God be for
us, who can be against us?”


MANIFESTING THE REIGN oF Gop.
11-17.)


“Scatter them by Thy power.” Heng-
stenberg: ‘‘ Make them wander up and
down through Thy power.” It is a
preyer that God would lead them astray,
so that they might fail of their object.
This verb is used of Cain (Gen. iv. 12),
and of Israel in the wilderness (Num.
xxxii. 13), The wicked do miss the
mark in life. They achieve no great
purposes. And, even when they are
able to carry their plans to a successful
issue, they find no ota in the


PSALM LIZ.





result. (2). Heavy affictions. ‘ Bring
them down, O Lord our shield.” God
will certainly humble and abase the
enemies of His people. Calvin: ‘He
wills that they should be thrown down
from their honourable position, be cast,
as it were, before one’s feet, so that they
may afford in their misery and disgrace
a standing spectacle of the Divine in-
dignation.” (3). Want of satisfaction.
“ And at evening let them return,” &c.,
vers. 14,15. Ver. 14 is a repetition of
ver. 6. The idea is, Let them come, and
prowl and howl in vain, and meet with
the mortifying disappointment which
they deserve. The marginal rendering
of ver. 15 is correct. ‘As for them,
they shall wander up and down for
food, if they be not satisfied, then they
will stay all night.” They shall wander
in search of food and find none, and
shall pass the night full of disgust and
pain from unsatisfied cravings. “It is
the image of a wretched existence in
hunger and pain.” Wickedness does
not satisfy its agents. The evil heart is
not restful. It is a stranger to satisfac-
tion and peace. ‘‘ The wicked are like
the troubled sea when it cannot rest,”
&c. The Psalmist prays that this die-
appointment and wretchedness may be-
fall his enemies, that they may thus
become monuments of the righteousness
of the Divine rule.

2, Life ending in ruin, “ Consume
them in wrath,” &c. Perowne: “ This
does not contradict the previous impre-
tation. He would have his enemies
destroyed at last, but only after they
had been, by a protracted, miserable
existence, a warning to men of God’s
righteous severity.” The idea and de-
tire of the Poet was, that God would
visit them with one judgment after an-
other, and ultimately bring them to
utter ruin. Wickedness, if persisted in,
must terminate in destruction. “Sin,
when it is finished, bringeth forth death.”

Let it be distinctly noted that the
destiny of the wicked ts directly connected
with their sin. “For the sin of their
mouth,” &e. On the sin of their mouth
we have remarked on ver. 7. The
destruction of the wicked is viewed as
the just consequence of their sin, The

298


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





slander, pride, and cruelty of the enemies
of David drew down upon them the
righteous judgments of heaven. Men
meeten themselves by wickedness for
ruin before God dooms them to it. A
man’s hell grows out of his own cha
racter and conduct.

Il. The destiny of the suffering
good. In the midst of his persecutions
and trials the Psalmist confidently anti-
cipates a life of devout and hearty praise.
Notice—

1. The object of his praise. “ Unto
Thee, O my strength, will I sing.” God
was the source of the strength of the
Psalmist. In Him he found all that
he needed, and to Him his praise waa
offered.

2. The reason of his pratee. “ For
Thou hast been my defence and refuge
in the day of my trouble. For God is
my defence, the God of my mercy.”
The rich grace of God toward us, and
His sure protection of us, are a most
sufficient reason for heartiest and grate
fullest praise.

3. The theme of hts praise, “T will
sing of Thy power; yea, I will sing
aloud of Thy mercy.” M. Henry :
‘Power, without mercy, is to be dreaded:
mercy, without power, is not what a
man can expect much benefit from ; but
God’s power by which He is able to
help us, and His mercy by which He ix
inclined to help us, will justly be the
everlasting praise of all the saints.”

4. The manner of his praise. (1.)
He would “sing.” Devout song is a
natural and becoming expression of gra-
titude and joy. (2.) He would “ sing
aloud.” In this way he would make
his boast in the Lord, and seek to en-
kindle the spirit of worship in others,
(3. ), He would “sing aloud tx the morn-
ing.” The morning is the emblem of
deliverance from trial, of prosperity and
of joy. Morning is the beautiful sym:
bol of the destiny of the righteous. God
will turn the darkness of their night of
suffering into the beautiful light of the
morning of gladness, (Comp. 2 Sam.
xxiii. 4; Job xi. 17; Pa. xc, 14, xcli. 2),
The wicked are advancing to the thick
darkness of a dread night; the righteous
to the unwaning light of a joyous day.


_ ROMILBTIO COMMENTARY: PSALMR,





IL The reign of God manifested
in these diverse destinies. The dark
destiny of the wicked, and the joyous
one of the good, are regarded by the
Psalmist as supplying evidence of the
tighteous government of God. “Let
them know that God ruleth in Jacob
unto the ends of the earth.” David
desired that it might be known among
the nations that God ruled over His
people—not the cruel and wicked Saul,
but the holy God. His feeling was
similar to that to which he gave expres-
sion as he encountered Goliath, “That
all the earth may know that there is a
God in Israel.” The design of God’s
judgments is to convince men that the
Lord reigneth. They aim not merely
at the punishment of the impenitent,
but at the warning of the wicked, the
confirmation of the faith of believers, and





Sound in the desire of the Psalmist com
cerning his enemses, in that he is not an
example to us. In him revenge cannot
be commendable. In us, in this Chris-
tian dispensation, it would be exceed-
ingly sinful.

2. Yet wickedness brings misery and
leads to ruin. It is well that it does,
It would be evil and unspeakably cala-
mitous were it otherwise. Every right-
minded and true-hearted man must
approve this,—rejoice in this. 8. So
righteousness tendeth to life and peace
and joy. He who by faith is interested
in the Divine power and mercy may
triumph even in the midst of his enemies,
‘Light is sown for the righteous,” deo.
4. Though appearances sometimes seem
tnconsistent with the supremacy of the
righteous government of God, yet he ever
ruleth, and in the end Hts government


the instruction of all men. shall be untversally acknowledged,
Conciusion.—1l. If there be revenge
Meprration aNp Praag
(Verses 16, 17.)


Consider—
_ .L The subjeet of the Psalmist’s
meditation.

1. He meditated upon the Divine
mercy. All the perfections of the Divine
nature are glorious and furnish matter
for delightful meditation. But it is
from His mercy that we draw our chief
consolation, encouragement, and hope.
Every good man has an experimental
knowledge of the mercy of God. In every
age God has exercised his mercy to men ;
but the gift of Christ is its grandest ex-
pression. To seek an interest in the
mercy of God is of the first importanee.

2. He contemplated God as his refuge
tn trouble. ‘Thou hast been my de
fence and refuge,” &c. To have a refuge
in time of trouble is desirable. ‘‘ Lord,
Thou hast been our dwelling-place in all
generations.” We have every encourage-
ment to put our trust in God. He is
represented as a “rock,” a “ fortress,”
a “high tower,” a “shield,” and a
“buckler.” God as a refuge—(1.) Is
near,—always at hand. (2.) Affords
the greatest security. (3.) Is suitable.


Our troubles differ, but He is a suitable
refuge in every trouble. (4.) David
proved God as his refuge, Saul had
laid plots to destroy him, but the Lord
had delivered him. We also have
obtained support and relief by trusting
in God.

8. He contemplated God as his strength
and confided tn His power, “TI will
sing of thy power. Unto Thee, O my
strength, will I sing.” In what respects
are we to consider God as the strength of
His people? (1.) He defends them from
danger by His power. (2.) He assists and
strengthens them for duty by His grace,

II. The influence of the Psalmist’s
meditation. It led him to praise
God, “TI will sing,” de.


1. Pratsing God 1s most reasonable.
2. Is a pleasant and delightful exer-
cise.


3. Should be a part of every day's
employment. Divine goodness is daily
manifested and should be daily ac
knowledged.

4, Will tend to prepare us to meet the
trials which may yet be before us.

299


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





5. Will tend to mecten ua for the
enjoyment of heaven.

6. Requires a suitable frame of mind.
True praise springs from gratitude; and
is promoted by a consideration of what


Conorusion.—1. How great are the
privileges of the people of God / 2. How
important seriously to consider whether
we are interested in these privileges.
3. Learn the importance of continuing


God is, what He has done for us, and


to make God our refuge in trouble.—
what he has promised to do for ua.


Abridged from an unpublished M8.


PSALM LZ


INTRODUCTION.


Buperscription.—® To the Chief Musician.” See Introduction to Ps. ivi. “ Upon Skushaw
eduth,” is probably a musical direction to the leader of the choir. In the superscription to
Psalms xlv., lxix., and lxxx., we have Shoshannim, the plural of Shushan. See Introduction
to Ps. xlv. ‘‘ Shushan-eduth” signifies ‘the lily of testimony,” and, possibly, contains the
firat words of some psalm to the melody of which this psalm was to be sung. ‘‘ Michtam
David.” See Introduction to Pa, ivi. ‘To teach.” Moll: “ As for the expression ‘to teach,’
there is nothing to decide whether it designates the psalm as designed for the instruction of
posterity, or whether it refers particularly to the design of bringing the unmanageable tribes to
recognise the Divine choice of David by teaching them that his government was pleasing to
God, or whether it states directly its purpose of being committed to memory by the people on
account of its national significance, as Deut. xxxi. 19, or whether it is to be explained by
2Sam. i. 18, and, accordingly, is to be regarded as a song of military exercise, which was to be
sung in connection with shooting with the bow.” “ When he strove with Aram-naharaim,”
Se. “ Aram-naharaim,” or Aram of the two rivers, is a name sometimes applied to Syria or
Mesepotamia. ‘‘ Aram-Zobah” is the name of a portion of Syria, which at this time formed a
separate kingdom. Its exact position and limits cannot now be determined, ‘“ The valley of
salt,” says Robinson, ‘‘can be nothing else than the district adjoining the Salt-Mountain, to the
south of the Dead Sea, which, in reality, formed the boundary between the ancient territories
of Judah and Edom.” The events referred to in the superscription are recorded in 2 Sam. viii,
and 1 Chron. xviii. This victory is here said to have been achieved by Joab; but in 2 Sam.
viii. 18, it is attributed to David; and, in 2 Chron, xviii, 12, Abishai is mentioned as the con-
queror. The explanation of Michaelis is admirable: ‘‘ David, as king, Joab, as commander-in-
chief, and Abishai, as sent by his brother on this particular expedition, defeated the enemy.”
There is a difference in the number mentioned as slain. Here, it is said to be twelve thousand 3
but in 2 Sam. viii. 18, and 1 Chron. xviii. 12, it is said to be eighteen thousand. The discre-
pancy may indicate that both numbers are mere estimates, or it may have arisen from a mistake
of a copyist, or, as seems to us most probable, it is accounted for in this way, that here the
veference is to one engagement, while the history refers to the entire campaign.


CompLaint, Prayer, AND ENCOURAGEMENT.
(Verses 1-4.)


It is probable that the lamentation Thou hast broken it; it shaketh ; Thou
and petitions of verses 1-3 are a record hast showed Thy people hard things;
of past experiences, not the utterance Thou hast made us to drink the wine
of present feelings, because the psalm of astonishment.” The reference is to
refers to a time when a considerable the severe injuries and “ losses which


measure of prosperity had been granted
to Israel. The Poet speaks in the psalm
not as an individual, but as the mouth-
piece of the whole people. In this first
strophe we have three homiletic points—

L Complaint. (Verses 1-3),

1. Great calamities are here com-
plained of. ‘Thou hast broken us ;
Thou hast made the earth to tremble:

306


Israel had formerly sustained in the
war against the Syrians, and especially
through the irruption of the Edomites,”
The figures employed by the Psalmist—
the trembling and rent land, the people
broken, and prostrate as though drunk
with strong wine—indicate the greatness
of the calamities, and the deep sense
of them realised by the people. The


sr


HOMILETIC OOMMENTARY: PSAL MB.


LE SR


Church of God upon earth is sometimes
visited with sore trials, and is called to
pass through fiery persecutions, which
cause bitter lamentation, &c.

2. These calamities are regarded as
signs of the Divine displeasure. “O
God, Thou hast cast us off, Thou hast
been displeased.” It seemed to them
in their distreases that God treated them
ss though they were loathsome and
offensive to Him, and as though He
were angry with them. Their miseries
and calamities are viewed as coming
from Him. When His people griev-
ously sin against Him, God withdraws
from them the shield of His protection,
and allows their enemies to triumph
over them.

3. The Divine displeasure is always
the result of human ain. Perowne;
“ When men will drink presumptuously
of the cup of their wickedness, God
forces it, as it were, into their hands,
till they have drained the very dregs as
the cup of His wrath.” He never casts
off man until man has first cast off Him.
Never forsakes a church until that church
has first forsaken Him.

Ii, Prayer. The Psalmist prays—

1. For the restoration of the Divine
favour, “O turn Thyself to us again ;”
4.e., be gracious to us again, restore to
us the signs of Thy favour and friend-
ship. When the favour of God is re-
stored to His people, their prosperity
and triumph will not be long delayed.
“In Thy favour our horn shall be ex-
alted.”

2. For the repair of their calamities.
“Heal the breaches thereof.” Repair
the disasters which have befallen Thy
people. Grant unto them their former
prosperity and power. Such is the
meaning of the petition. Moll: “Wars
are for nations what earthquakes are for
their lands; God sometimes visits men
with both, and then likewise strikes the
congregation with hard blows and shakes
them; but He heals again the breaches
and rents which arise thereby.” The
Church, in times of distress, should
always seek God in prayer. Prayer
imparts patience under trial, power to
grapple with difficulty, deliverance from
distress and calamity.


III. Encouragement. ‘Thou hast
given a banner,” &c. From an exami-
nation of the context, we conclude that
the “banner” is the promise of salva-
tion which God has given to Israel, and
“the truth” is the faithfulness and
trustworthiness of the promise. The
following are the chief points in this
verse as related to the main scope of the
Psalm.

1. God has given to His people most
glorious promises, What rich and splen-
did promises He gave to ancient Israel !
Victory over their enemies, salvation
from calamities, undisturbed possession
of Canaan, &c. What “exceeding great
and precious promises” He has given
to His spiritual Israel !

2. These promises are thoroughly re-
liable. ‘‘ Displayed because of the
truth.” “God is not a man, that He
should lie; neither the son of man, that
He should repent: hath He said, and
shall He not do? or hath He spoken,
and shall He not make it good 1”

8. Being so glorious and so reliable,
these promises should be conspicuously
exhibited, that men may trust in them.
The banner must “ be displayed.” These
promises of salvation are compared “ to
a highly exalted banner, which serves
as a signal to one lying prostrate in his
misery, to rise up.” To the people of
God in depression and distress, let us
exhibit the promises which He has given
to them.

4, The precious and faithful promises
of God should inspire His people with
hope and courage in the time of trial.
This we take to be the chief idea in this
verse, The promises encouraged Israel
in their distresses and calamities, And
in the present, to the people of God in
time of trial, they should impart hope,
and, in their prayers for relief, they
should strengthen their faith.

Cono.usion.—1. Let the people of
God beware of sin, for it ts the parent of
darkness, distress, &c. 2, Let the dis-
tressed seek Him in penitence and prayer,
de. 3. Let them be encouraged im
doing so by the exceeding great and
precious promises which He has given to
them.


801


PSALM LX,





HOMiILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMA.





Tae Grorzious Cox¥Lice.
(Verse 4.)


We have given above what we regard
as the meaning of this verse in its rela-
tion to the context. We purpose re-
garding it at present, as setting forth
certain features of the great conflict
with evil in which the people of God
are engaged. Notice—

I. The object of the conflict. Many
wars have been waged for mean, selfish,
ambitious, wicked objects. But here
is a banner given for a most worthy
object, “that it might be displayed
because of the truth.” The people of
God fight for the banishment of igno-
rance and the promotion of knowledge ;
for the overthrow of error and the en-
thronement of truth ; for the destruc-
tion of evil and the diffusion of goodness ;
for the utter defeat of the father of lies,
and the complete, universal, and per-
petual triumph of the King of truth.
Here is a holy war—a war against all
injustice, falsehood, error, oppression,
evil; and in favour of righteousness,
truth, kindness, holiness.

Il The character of the soldiers.
“Them that fear Thee.” They reverence
God; they obey Him, &e. Notice—

1. The expulsive power of this fear.
It expels all other fear. He who fears
God much will fear neither men nor
devils at all.

2, The impulsive power of this fear.
It inspires enthusiasm in the holy cause
—imparts courage in the conflict, &c.
Cromwell’s Ironsides were men who
feared God, and acted as ever in His
presence, ‘Their time before going to
battle was spent in prayer, and they went
into the fight singing psalms, Their
wathchword was, “The Lord of hosts is


with us ; the God of Jacob is our refuge.”
They were never defeated. The men to
do the work and fight the battles of the
Lord must be godly men—men who
fear Him.

Ul. The authority of the Oom-
mander. “Thou hast given a banner.”
God has given to His people the stand-
ard as of an army, that they might go
forth and fight His battles. He has
commissioned His people for this war,
and He commands them in it. In this
we have a guarantee of—

1. The rectitude of the conflict. He
would not send us forth in an unright-
eous cause, or with unrighteous weapons,
or in an unworthy manner. The object,
the weapons, and the methods of this
war are all righteous and honourable.

2. Support in the conflict. To every
soldier fighting beneath His banner, He
says, “‘Lo, I am with you alway, even
unto the end of the world.” He sup-
ports the workman in the vineyard, and
the warrior on the battle-plain.

3. Victory tn the conflict. The battle
may be long and arduous, but the issue
is certain victory to those who fight in
the cause of God. He who has given
us our banner will also give us the palm
of the victor.

Conciusion.—l. Under whose banner
are you fighting? “Who is on the
Lord’s side$” 2. Who will enlist under
the banner of the Cross? Christ, our
Leader, will receive loyal recruits. 3.
Courage, ye soldiers of Christ, for yow
shall gain the victory. Teacher, preacher,
&c., go on; for you shall surely win the
well-fought day.


Human PERFECTION.
(Verses 5-12.)


In these verses David rejoices in the
victories already achieved by Israel, and
in the possession of the promised land
so far as they had attained it, and rely-
ing on the promises of God, he looks

302


forward to complete victory and posses-
sion of the entire land. The promises
made to ancient Israel illustrate the
promises given to the Christian believer,
Canaan is a type of the spiritual inherit


fF


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALME.


PALM Li,





anee of the Christian. In this way we
see here an illustration of human per-
fection.

I. The nature of human perfection.
Here are three aspects of it.

1. Salvation from troubles. “That
Thy beloved may be delivered, save
with Thy right hand, and hearme... .
Give us help from trouble; for vain is
the help of man.” The troubles of
human life upon earth are many and
sometimes severe. But God saves His
people from them. He does so some-
times—(1) By removing the cause of the
trouble. Or (2) By giving grace to bear
the trouble (2 Cor. xii. 9). Or (3) By
revealing the meaning and uses of trouble
(2 Cor. iv. 10-18). (4) By sanctifying
trouble to promote the well-being of the
troubled (Rom. viii. 28). By the grace
of God, the Christian rises superior to
trouble, makes it minister to his spiri-
tual advancement, and shall soon pass
away from it for ever.

2. Victory over enemies, Israel had
to contend with Philistia, Moab, and
Edom ; but, in His holiness, God had
promised them complete victory over
every enemy. The Christian has to
fight against the world, the flesh, and
the devil—against evil in himself, and
in society ; but he has the promise of
more than victory (Rom. viii. 37, xvi.
20; Eph. vi. 10-13),

3. Possession of promised privileges,
God had promised to Israel the complete
and peaceful possession of Canaan. The
Psalmist looked forward to the realisa-
tion of that promise. Glorious are the
blessings promised to the Christian—
pardon, peace, holiness, fellowship with
God, heaven. Here are some of the
promised privileges (Ezek. xxxvi. 25-27;
2 Cor. iii. 18; 2 Pet. i 4; 1 Johni. 3,
iii, 2. Surely in these promises we have
the perfection of being. To have God’s
Spirit within us, and to walk in His
statutes; to be changed into the image
of the glory of the Lord; to be par-
takers of the Divine nature; to have
fellowship with the Father and with
His Son Jesus Christ ; to be the sons of
God, and to look forward to the vision
of God and likeness to Him—this is
buman perfection.


If. The attainment of human per.
fection. This is here set before us as—

1. Promised by God. ‘God hath
spoken in His holiness” Moll: “ It is
most appropriate to understand this pro-
mise, which refers to the duration of
the possession of~the promised land,
and the supremacy over neighbouring
nations, not of a special oracle given
through the Urim and Thummim of the
high-priest, or the answer just sought,
nor to limit it to the promise given to
David (2 Sam. vii. 9 8q.), and, as a figu-
rative reproduction of the same, but to
regard it a8 a free summary of the
ancient prophecies, especially those con-
tained in the Pentateuch.” God has pro-
mised clearly and repeatedly to the be-
liever the perfection of being and bless-
edness, He “hath spoken in His holi-
ness.” He has promised as a holy God,
One who is infinitely superior to deceit
and change, One who ig true, and who
ever fulfils His word. The Christian’s
hope of perfection rests upon that promise.

2. Promoted by prayer. The Psal-
mist prays for the fulfilment of the pro-
mise. In so doing—(1), he appeals to
the Divine strength. “Save with Thy
right hand,” With the right hand man
wields the sword, hurls the spear, effects
his tasks, &c. God has power to achieve
His purposes and fulfil His promises,
He is “mighty to save.” “He “is
able to do exceeding abundantly,” &.
(2). The Psalmist pleads the Divine re-
lationship, “Thy beloved.” God's
people are dear to Him as the apple of
His eye. He has loved them with an
everlasting love. This love is one of
the most effective pleas which they can
urge in their prayers to Him. (3). The
Psalmist pleads the vanity of human
help. ‘Give us help from trouble; for
vain is the help of man.” Man is un-
reliable because of the limitation of
his power, and because of his mutability.
In God is our hope. To Him we direct
our prayer. Prayer is a condition of
blessing.

3. Guaranteed by past triumphs and

esent possessions. ‘TIT will rejoice, I


pliant
will divide Shechem,” dc. (vers. 6—10).


Shechem on the west of Jordan, and
Succoth on the east; Gilead (including


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





the territory occupied by the tribes of
Gad and Reuben) and Manasseh on the
east, and Ephraim and Judah on the
west, are mentioned as representing the
whole land of Canaan, The powerful
tribe of Ephraim is spoken of as the
strength of the head, «e,, the great pro-
tector of the most vital interests of the
nation in time of war. Judah is named
as the lawgiver, probably in reference to
the ancient prediction, “ The sceptre
shall not depart from Judah,” &e. (Gen.
xlix. 10). Ephraim was the helmet,
and Judah the sceptre of the chosen
people. All the land of Canaan east
and west of the Jordan, which the Poet
thus brings into view, was subdued.
Moab also was conquered. ‘“ Moab is
my washpot,” is a phrase denoting that
the Moabites were completely reduced
to servitude to Israel (2 Sam. viii. 2).
But the victory of Israel was not com-
plete. Edom remained unsubdued. But
its subjugation is anticipated. “Upon
Edom will I east my shoe.” Moab, in
the preceding clause, is described as a
mean vessel, in which the feet are
washed, and now Edom is spoken of as
a servant of the lowest grade, to whom
the sandals are thrown, to _be removed
and cleaned. Or the figure of casting
the shoe may signify the placing of the
foot upon Edom in token of its com-
plete subjection. There is no doubt
that the idea is, that Edom should be
completely vanquished by and subjected
to Israel. Philistia is also described as
conquered, During the period of the
Judges the Philistines had severely
oppressed Israel ; but David com-
pletely conquered them (2 Sam.
viii. 1). ‘ The strong city” was the
rock-built and fortified city of Petra,
the capital of Idumea or Edom, From


the victories already achieved, David


was encouraged to believe that God
would lead him into Petra, and to com-
plete victory over the Idumeans. So in
our spiritual history, our past triumphs
and present attainments contribute to
our assurance of the full realisation of
the privileges which God has promised.
They do so in two ways. (1). Our past
achievements tend both to encourage and
to qualify ws for further achievements in
the future, (2). God’s goodness and fatth-
Sulness in the past are an assurance of
His blessing in the future. Thus every
temptation conquered is a prophecy of
the full and final victory. Every privi-
lege enjoyed is a pledge of the complete
possession of the “ inheritance incor-
ruptible and undefiled,” &.

4, Demanding strenuous effort.
“ Through God we shall do valiantly.”
We must “do valiantly” if we would
attain perfection. If we would gain the
victory we must fight manfully in the
battle, If we would wear the crown we
must patiently bear the cross. If we
would win the prize we must run the race
that is set before us diligently even to
the end (Luke xii. 24 ; 1 Cor. ix. 24-27;
Heb, xii. 1, 2).

5. Ascribed to God. “Through God
we shall do valiantly; for He shall
tread down our enemies.” He gives us
courage in battle, patience in trial,
strength in labour. Our salvation was
begun by Him, and He alone can per-
fect it. To Him be all the praise. ‘“ Not
unto us, not anto us, but unto Thy
name give glory,” &c.

God in Christ is the beginning and
the end, the commencement and the
crown, of human perfection, “For in
Him dwelleth all the fulness of the God-
head bodily. And ye are complete in
Him, which is the Head of all princi-
pality and power.”


PSALM LXI
INTRODUCTION


Supersoription.— To the Chief Musician.” See introduction to Ps. lvii.


Hebrew: Neginath.


** Upon Negtnah.”


“The LXX. and Vulg,, evidently read Neginoth in the plural, which occurs


in the title of five psalms, and is perhaps the true reading. Whether the word be singular or


plural, it is the general term by which all stringed instruments are described.”


“Of David.”


The contents of the psalm confirm the title as to its Davidic authorship. The psalm was
probably composed by David when he was in exile in consequence of the rebellion of Absslom


(2 Bam. xv.—xviii, especially xvii. 22),
304


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY : PSALMS.














Tas Cry or a TRousBLep Héait.
(Verses 1-4.)


We have here—

I. A painful experienes. “ From
the end of the earth will I ery unto
Thee, when my heart is overwhelmed.”
The experience of David included—

1. Distressing exile. ‘From the end
of the earth” is an expression denoting
8 painful sense of removal to a great
distance from the dwelling-place of God.
The country to the east of Jordan, into
which David had been compelled to
retreat, was not accounted the Lord’s
land properly. (Comp. Num. xxxii, 29 ;
Josh, xxii. 19). In this country the
Psalmist felt himself as it were banished
to the extremity of the earth, far from
the face of God. He was far from the
city that he loved most, from his home,
from his throne, and from the taber-
nacle of his God. To the godly soul
separation from the ordinances of wor-
ship is a sore trial.


2. Overwhelming sorrow. “When
my heart is overwhelmed.” Moll: ‘In
the covering of my heart.” The idea is


that his heart was enveloped with
trouble. Anxiety and grief wrapped
his soul as a garment. Terribly bitter
and painful were the experiences of the
Psalmist at this time. Our souls, too,
have known the bitterness and desola-
tion of great sorrows and severe trials,
Like David, there are times when we
are in anguish because of the feeling of
absence from God, and the rebellion of
our own children, and the ingratitude
and treachery of those we esteemed our
friends, &c,

Ii, A fervent prayer.
ery, O God,” &e.

l. The object of the prayer.
Psalmist seeks Divine audience. “ Hear
my cry, O God.” And Diwne con-
stderation, ‘Attend unto my prayer.”
But the chief object of his prayer was
Divine protection. “Lead me to the
rock that is higher than L” More cor-
rectly: ‘Lead me to a rock that is too
high for me ;” 4.¢., a rock so high that
he could not ascend it by his own
power, and which his enemies would

@


“Hear my


The


not be able to ascend. His own re
sources were inadequate to secure his
safety; so he seeks the protection of
God. The high rock is a frequent
figure for security. He who stands
upon it is far above the reach of his
enemies. Our Lord Jesus Christ is the
true Rock for human souls.

2, The self-distrust involved in this
prayer. “Lead me” is the cry of the
man who feels incompetent to direct his
own steps, or choose his own path.
“To a rock that is too high for me,”
indicates a sense of insufficiency and
the abandonment of self-dependence.,
If we are to be secure and blessed, we
must be led to ONE who is far above us
in wisdom, power, &c.

8. The personality of this prayer.
“Hear my cry, O God; attend unto
my prayer,” &. “Though all men
pray,” says Dr. Parker, “yet each man
has his own prayer. The heart has its
own way of telling its own tales, and
cannot be satisfied with paraphrase or
generalisation. It must tell all its sing,
and set forth in order its troubles, its
plagues, and its high desires; with
brokenness of speech, which is often the
most perfect of eloquence, it must recite
the number of ita failures, and tell of
all its groping and stumbling along the
path of life. No man will it accept as
a hired advocate ; no voice could do it
justice; it must utter my cry and my
prayer, and where it cannot find words
it will heave the sigh or the groan
which asks God to be His own inter-
preter. We may have great helps in
prayer, the spirit may accept the choicely
wise and tender words of other men;
yet there is a point at whieh the heart
breaks away to hold secret intercourse
with the Father and Saviour of men.”

This is indeed a fervent prayer—a
pathetic, urgent, earnest cry of the
human heart to God.

III. A cheering recollection. ‘Thou
hast been a shelter for me, a strong
tower from the enemy.” In former


Bence ecg beccl cn ce Fenny ©


POALM LXL


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS.





sure refuge, had preserved him safely
amid many and great dangers, &o. To
the thoughtful and devout heart life
abounds with memorials of. the Divine
goodness and faithfulness. ‘‘It is in-
expressibly important to keep the mind
up to a full realisation of all that God
has done in one’s personal history.
When a man’s own history goes for
nothing with him, he may be regarded
as having sunk below the level of a
man; but if he will watch how God has
developed his life, how wondrously He
has turned it, how gently He has with-
drawn it into ‘shelter’ when the storm
was coming, how graciously He has
placed it in the ‘strong tower’ when
sounds of war shook the air, he will be
moved from thankfulness to eloquence,
and will say to those who doubtfully
look on—‘In God is my salvation and
my glory;’” dc. Recollections such as
this of David’s should be cherished ;
because—

l. They impress ua with our obliga
tions to God.

2. They inspire us with hope in time
of trial, and courage in time of danger.

TV. An exemplary resolution, “I


will abide in Thy tabernacle for ever ;*
&c, The Psalmist’s recollection of past
mercies inspired him with confidence in
his present dangers. “Few of us would be
doubtful of the future if we would make
a right use of the past.” “ Experience
is the nurse of faith.” Trusting in God,
the Psalmist looks forward to a life of—

1, Perpetual worship. “I will abide
in Thy tabernacle for ever.” He has a
firm assurance that he will be restored
to his home and to the public worship
of God. It may be, perhaps, that he
looked forward to & home in heaven
with God for ever. A life of worship
is ennobling and blessed.

2. Hearty confidence. “I will trust
in the covert of Thy wings.” A very
tender and assuring figure, suggestive of
affection, security, rest. Such was the
full and hearty trust of the Psalmist in
God.

Conciusion.—Let us aspire and
strive after a life of confidence and
worship. Such a life will raise us above
the dread of dangers, will bring to us
rest and comfort in the midst of sore
trials, and will lead us to the taber-
nacle of God as our eternal home.


Tue SHELTERING Roox.


(Verse 2.)
L The season referred to. “When Of strength (Psa. Ixfi. 2, 6, 8). 2.
my heart is overwhelmed.” There rre Durability. ‘I am the Lord, I change
seasons in which the soul of the Curis- not.” ‘‘ Jesus Christ, the same yester-


tian is overwhelmed :—1. From a sense
of the Divine claims on our obedience
(Deut. vi. 5; Matt, xxii. 37). 2. From
the pressure of heavy trials (Psa. lv.
12-14). 3. From the keenness of temp-
tation. The very best of men are sub-
ject to temptation. Moses and David,
Daniel and Job. Yea, Christ Himself.
4. From the anticipations of future evils.

IL Whither the Psalmist desires to
be led. “To the rock that is higher
than L” The rock gives the idea—l.


day, and to-day, and for ever.”

IIL The grounds of the Psalmist’s
plea. “From the ends of the earth,”
&e. 1. This prayer is prompted by a
consciousness of need. 2. In this prayer
we have the true source of abtlity ad-
dressed. 3. In this prayer we see the
encouragement he derives from past ex-
perience. ‘For Thou hast been a shelter
for me, a strong tower from the enemy.”
—Gxo. Srockparz, in “The Pulgnt
Analyst.”


Toe CoNFIDENCE OF A TROUBLED Heart,
(Verses 5-8.)


We have here—
I. Confidence of safety and stability
in God. “Thou wilt prolong the king’s
306


life; his years as many generations,
He shall abide before God for ever,”
These expressions of confidence are


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PGSLM Lz,





variously interpreted. They are inter-
preted of (a) David himself—that God
would deliver him out of the danger in
which he was placed, would grant him
long life, and restore him to the throne
and the tabernacle without danger of
being driven into exile again. (@) Of
the dynasty of David. Hengstenberg:
“David speaks designedly of the days
of the king instead of his own days for
the purpose of showing that he con-
sidered the promise of eternal dominion
as relating not to himself personally,


but to his family—the royal family of '


David.” (y) Of the Messiah. “ David,
realising that he is the anointed of the
Lord, does not always distinguish be-
tween himself and the Messianic dy-
nasty, so that the latter thought fills up
as it were the background of his con-
sciousness, ”

We certainly have here an expression
of his assurance of his own safety and
stability. His occupancy of the throne
was imperilled. Absalom and the rebel
army sought to take even his life. But
he was confident that God would pre-
serve his life, and restore him to his
throne. ‘He shall abide before God
for ever,” may signify more than a con-
stant abode at Jerusalem in the enjoy-
ment of the ordinances of worship,
Barnes: “ His restoration to his home,
to his throne, and to the privileges of
the sanctuary, he may have regarded as
an emblem of his ultimate reception into
a peaceful heaven, and his mind may
have glanced rapidly from the one to
the other. On earth, after his restora-
tion, he would have no fear that he
would be banished again ; in heaven, of
which such a restoration might be re-
garded as an emblem, there would be
no change, no exile,”

Notwithstanding the subtlety and
malice and power of his enemies, the
spiritual interests of the godly man are
perfectly secured by Divine grace (John
x. 28, 29; Rom. viii. 31-39; 2 Tim.
i. 12). Every faithful disciple of the
Lord Jesus may through Him triumph
in the assurance of “a crown of: glory
that fadeth not away,” and of “an in-
heritance incorruptible and undefiled,”
&e.


IL Confidence arising out of past
experiences. “Thou, O God, hast heard
my vows; Thou hast given me the
heritage of those that fear Thy name.”

1. David had proved the efficacy of
prayer. His vows included petitions,
They were prayers accompanied with
solemn promises. Prayer was not a
mere theory or form with David, not a
spiritual gymnastic either. He knew
its reality and power and preciousness
by experience,

2. He had received the heritage of the
godly. “Thou hast given me the heri-
tage of those that fear Thy name.”
Perowne: “ Primarily this would be the
land of Canaan, and then it would in-
elude all blessings, temporal and
spiritual, which were in fact implied
and comprised in the possession of the
land.” Glorious is the heritage of those
who fear God now (Rom. viii. 16, 17).
It is clear, from both the experience of
the Psalmist and the statement of the
apostle, that the heritage of the godly
may include severe trials. It is a point
of great practical importance.

These past experiences were an en-
couragement to the Psalmist to trust
God.in his present dangers and trials.
“History is rightly used when it becomes
the guide of hope. Yesterday enriches
to-day. Ali the historic triumphs of
the Divine arm stimulate us in the
present battle.” What God has been
and done is an earnest of what He will
yet be and do. “‘ Because Thou hast
been my help, therefore in the shadow
of Thy wings will I rejoice.”

II. Confidence expressing itself in
prayer. ‘Oh, prepare mercy and truth
which may preserve him.”

1. He looks for preservation to God as
the covenant God. “Mercy and truth,”
loving-kindness and faithfulness, are the
attributes which the Psalmist is accus-
tomed to mention when he looks to
God as a Being in covenant relations
with His people. In His “mercy ” God
has entered into gracious engagements
with His people; and in His “ truth”
He will fulfil those engagements.

2. Hts confidence does not supersede,
but stemulate prayer. Presumption may
lead to neglect of prayer jee faith


PSALM LXIL,





quickens it. The attitude of true con-
fidence is that of the bent knee and
the uplifted eye.

IV. Confidence issuing in constant
praise. ‘So will I sing praise unto Thy
name for ever, that I may daily per-
form my vows.” As the result of bis
trial and prayer and assurance the
Psalmist looked forward to—

l. The ascripiton of pratse to God.
“His praising God was itself the per-
formance of his vows.” He felt and
acknowledged the binding force of the
vows which he had made to God. And


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


erm


2. The ascription of pratse to God
constantly. ‘‘Praise for ever, . .
daily perform my vows.” Praise to
God should not be an occasional exer-
cise, but a permanent element in the
spirit of our entire life. Gratitude, re-
verence, and trust should characterise us
at all times and under all circumstances,

Conciusion.—In the trials of life let
the Psalmist, in this exercise of strong
and devout confidence in God in the
time of his great trial, be to us both an
example and an encouragement. Be
encouraged to exercise trust in God,


their fulfilment he regarded not as a
daty merely, but as a joyous privilege.


and imitate the character of this
trust.


PSALM LXIL
INTRODUCTION.


Superscription.—** To the Chtef Musician.” See introduction to Psa. lvii, ‘‘ To Jeduthun.”
See introduction to Psa, xxxix, ‘* A Psalm of David.” “There are no historical statements or
decisive references to known events in the life of David,” says Moll ; “ yet the relationships with
Psa. xxxix. on the one side, and with Pea. iv. on the other, point to the time of his persecu-
sion by Absalom. This relation with Psalm xxxix. makes it desirable to translate the charac-
teristic JN which is repeated (vera. 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 9) not by, yea, surely ; but by, only... . In
order to allow the designed repetition of the same word to be clearly manifest in the translation,
it is better to retain the translation only as this is appropriate throughout. For the assertion,
that only with God is the soul entirely quieted (ver. 1), because God only is the rock (ver. 2),
upon which, when the singer is established, he can designate as vain (ver. 8) the attacks of
those who only desire to cast him down from his high place (ver. 4) ;—this assertion is at once
the foundation for the exhortation of his soul, to turn to God alone in confident submission
(ver. 5), because God only is the reliable helper (ver. 6). This repetition forms not only the
transition to the renewal of the appropriate personal confession (ver. 7), but likewise to the
exhortation of the people to constant trust in God (ver. 8), because men are only breath one and
all (ver. 9), the trust in temporal possessions, whether goods or powers, is vain (ver. 10); but
od has spoken the word, which has been frequently heard, and is valid once for all, that the
power is His (ver. 11). Therefore the petitioner, moved by the assurance of the government
of God, which recompenses justly, turns to the grace of God which is equally easential with
His power (ver. 12),” The psalm is divided into three strophes, each of four verses. Amyraldus
calls attention to a peculiar characteristic of this psalm, viz., that it does not contain any ex-
pression of ‘‘ fear or dejection, and there ia also no prayer in it, although on other occasions,
when in danger, he never omits to pray.” Thus the psalm is the utterance of “the full
assurance and perfection of faith.”
Homiletically we shall view the psalm as setting forth, The Tvixl, Triumph, and Eahortation


af


Tue Traian AND TrivmpH oy Farrs.
(Verses 1-7.)


L The trial of the good man’s faith. to thrust him from his elevation.” The
The trials of which the Poet speaks in “ excellency,” or “elevation,” points to
this psalm arose from the assaults of his the high station of David, and it is note-
enemies, Notice— worthy that the word to “cast down,”

1. Their design. They aimed at the or “ thrust from,” is used in 2 Sam. xv.
overthrow of the Psalmist, “They only 14, by David with reference to Ab-
consult to cast him down from hisex- salom. The enemies were envioue of
celleney.” Conant : “ They only consult David's dignity, and sought to defame

$08


HOMILETIO COMMENT«RY. PEALMS.





his reputation and to thrust him from
his throne. The enemies of the godly
seek to drag them down from their
spiritual elevation, to overthrow them,
by engaging them in sinful practices or
pursuits,

2. Thetr method. They endeavoured
to carry out their atrocious design—(1).
By wiolence. ‘ How long will ye ima-
gine mischief against a man?” &c, We
incline to the translation of Conant:
“ How long will ye rush upon a man,
will break him down, all of you, asa
wall inclined, as a fence that is thrust
down?”  Hengstenberg and Hupfield
translate 3), murder. But Ewald,
Delitzsch, Moll, Perowne, e¢ al., tran-
slate: to break down. The enemies of
the Psalmist were violent. They as-
saulted him by force. They rose in
arms against him to effect his overthrow
and to destroy him. There have been
times in the history of the Christian
Church when bonds and imprisonments,
fire and sword, have been used against
its members. (2). By deliberation.
“They consult.” They employed sub-
slety as well as strength to effect their
wicked designs. ‘“ Craft and power,”
says Starke, “are the weapons of the
ungodly ; if the one is not enough, they
seize the other, and not unfrequently
make their attacks with both at once.”
(3). By falsehood, ‘They delight in
lies ; they bless with their mouth, but
they curse inwardly.” These words are
literally true of Absalom. By means of
fair speeches, when his heart was false
and black, he “stole the hearts of the
men of Israel.” In falsehood they took
delight. ‘(A chief weapon which the
world has always employed in its bitter
contest with the Church, has been that
of lies.” The great leader of the
forces of wickedness is the great liar.
(John viii. 44.) Force, subtlety, false-
hood are all employed to promote the
triumph of evil.

3. Their cowardice in all this,
“ How long will ye rush upon a man,
will break him down, all of you?”
Mark the contrast—“ all” opposed to
“aman.” All against one |

Such was the trial of the Psalmist,
Will his faith in God bear the strain,








and enable him to rise superior to his
troubles? Will he issue from the trial
victor, or vanquished $ retaining his hold
on God, or drifting from Him ?

The trial of his faith is an illustration
of the trial of the faith of the godly now,
both in its design and in its method.

II. The triumph of the good man’s
faith. The victory of the Psalmist is
manifest,—

1. In his intense realisation of the
all-sufficiency of God (vers. 2, 5, 6, 7).
He trusted in God as the rock of his
strength, his salvation, his defence, his
refuge. Here are the ideas of abiding
and unchanging strength, a ‘rock ;”
secure shelter and protection, a “ refuge; ”
elevation above danger, a “ defence,” or
“high-place ;” and complete deliverance
Jrom trials and perils, “my salvation.”
Calvin: “The reason why he heaps
together so many names of God is, that
he may meet and throw back the
assaults of Satan, by, as it were, so
many shields.” Again: “ The epithets
which David applies to God, in re
ference to His power to uphold, are like
80 many pillars, by which he supports
his steadfastness.” Moll: ‘God can
screen believers against their enemies
with as many shields as He has names,”

2. In his reliance upom God alone.
The only, which is the characteristic
mark of the psalm, is used not less than
four times of the Psalmist’s trust in God
(vers. 1, 2, 5,6). Spurgeon: “ We can-
not too often hear the toll of that great
bell only ; let it ring the death-knell of
al] carnal reliances, and lead us to cast
ourselves on the bare arm of God.” In
himself alone God is more than suffi-
cient to meet all the needs of His people.

3. In hts assurance of safety and
stabslity. In ver. 2, he says, “I shall
not be greatly moved.” He might
be shaken; but would not be over-
thrown, He might be troubled; but
would not be distressed—he might be
perplexed; but would not be left in
despair, &c. And in ver. 6 he exclaima,
“‘T shall not be moved.” His confidence
increased as he sang this psalm of faith.
“ The more faith is acted the more active
it is, It grows by being exercised.”
How triumphant was the assurance of


309


Peal EX,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMB.





St. Paul as to the security of believers
in Christ Jesus ! om, viii. 31-39.)
4, In hes rest in God. “My soul
waiteth only upon God.” Margin:
“My soul is silent,” &. Conant: “ Only
in God is my soul quieted.” Hengsten-
berg: “ Only to God is my soul silent.”
The silence ‘denotes the opposite of
that state of tumultuous agitation which
prevails in the soul as long as it looks
anywhere else for help, when in great
trouble, than to God.” (Comp. Psa. xlii,
5, and xxii 2.) Barnes :—“ The feeling
is that which exists when we have
entrusted all to God; when, having


entire confidence in His power, His
goodness, His wisdom, His mercy, we
commit the whole case to Him as if it
were no longer our own. Such is the
calmness—the peace—the quiet—the
silence of the soul—when all is left with
God.” See on this point the beautiful
hymn in “ The Child’s Christian Year.”


‘© Lord, how happy should we be
If we could cast our care on Thee,” &c.


Here then we have faith triumphantly
resting in God. Such triumph may be
the portion of every godly soul. (Comp.
1 Pet. i. $ 9.)


Tar Exnorrtation or Fairs.
(Verses 812.)


The Psalmist having expressed his
own unfaltering confidence in God, pro-
ceeds in these verses to exhort all men
to exercise a similar trust in God. In
this exhortation let us consider—

I. Tne trust prohibive’. (Vers. 9
and 10.) The objects of trust which the
Psalmist prohibits are—

1. Man. “ Only vanity are men of
low degree,” &c. David regards both
common men and men of distinction as
alike unworthy of confidence :—

(1.) Because of their inability. ‘Only
vanity are men of low degree.” They
are empty, unsubstantial creatures—a
mere breath—utterly incapable of aiding
any one in the great needs of life. In
the ordinary and everyday trials of life
men can be sympathetic and helpful to
each other; but in its great and deep
and solemn experiences how powerless
are they to help each other! (2).
Because of their unfaithfulness. “Men
of high degree are a lie.” Men of exalted
rank are not to be regarded as the objects
of the soul’s trust. As an object of con-
fidence man may fail by reason of his
want of constancy as well as by his want
of power. Test men in this respect, and
you will find them either feeble, or false,
or both. “To be laid in the balance,
they are altogether lighter than vanity.”
Arndt; “If there were any one among
men, immortal, not liable to sin, or to
change, Shem it were impossible for any

310


one to overcome, but who was strong as
an‘angel, such a one might be something,
but inasmuch as every one is a man, a
sinner, mortal, weak, liable to sickness
and death, exposed to pain and terror,
like Pharaoh, even from the most insigni-
ficant animals, and liable to so many
miseries, that it is impossible to count
them, the conclusion must be a valid
one; ‘man is nothing.’” “ Thus saith
the Lord, Cursed be the man that
trusteth in man,” dc. (Jer. xvii. 5,
6.) :
2. Oppression. “Trust not in op-
pression.” Let no man hope to render
himself safe and strong by oppressing
others. The victories of the conqueror
may be reversed. The arm of the tyrant
may be broken. And then the oppressed
may arise and crush the oppressor. He
who thinks to “strengthen himself in
wickedness ” will, sooner or later, find
that in so doing he has made an utter
mistake. (Comp. Psa lit 7.)

3. Unlawfully acquired wealth. “ Be-
come not vain in robbery.” There are,
we fear, thousands in this nominally
Christian land who are trusting in
wealth which has been unrighteously
obtained. Men who have made their
fortunes by robbing their employes of
their fair wages, by adulterating their
goods or otherwise defrauding in busi-
ness, by ‘‘ sharp practice” in trade and
speculation, by deceptive advertise


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM LXII,


rr Se Nites art


ments, &c. ;—let not these men pride
themselves on their wealth. “ Treasures
of wickedness profit nothing.” ‘Go to
now, ye rich men, weep and howl for
your miseries that shall come upon
you ;” &c. (James v. i-4.)
4, Lawfully acquired wealth, “I
riches increase, set not your heart upon
them.” The word “increase,” or
“spring up,” is used as the antithesis of
“robbery,” to denote wealth obtained by
lawful means. Even such wealth is not
to be trusted in. See an outline on
es folly of Trusting in Riches (Psa. lit


None of these things constitute a true
ground of trust for man. Neither any
one of them nor all of them combined can
meet his deepest needs—the needs of
his awful soul. He who trusts in them
is doomed to disappointment, to misery,
and to ruin,

IL The trust prescribed. (Vers. 8,
11, 12.)

1. Its nature. The Psalmist repre-
sents this trust as comprising (1)
Abtding confidence tn God. ‘‘ Trust in
Him at all times.” ‘ We must havean
actual confidence in God,” says Matthew
Henry, “upon all occasions, trust in
Him upon every emergency, to guide us
when we are in doubt, to protect us when
we are in danger, to supply us when we
are in want, to strengthen us for every
good word and work.” “ At all times,”
even in the severest affliction, the ex-
tremest danger, d&c. (2) Unreserved
communication with God. ‘Pour out
your heart before Him.” Tell Him all
its griefs and fears, all its sins and
sorrows, all its hopes and desires. We
can thus pour out our heart unto God.
We cannot unto man ; not even to the
most trusted amongst men.

“ Not e’en the tenderest heart, and next

our own,

Knows half the reasons why we smile

and sigh,”
But unto God we can unfold our most
“secret throbbings,” He is wise, con-
siderate, merciful, &. We may thus
pour out our heart unto Him. He will
not repulse us; dut will kindly and
patiently listen to us, We should thus
pour out our heart unto Him, It is


our duty as well as our privilege to
fully unburden the heart to God. (3)
This trust is represented as an exercise
for all “ people.” Not simply the people
of Israel are meant by “ ye people,” but
all mankind. “ All shall be welcome to
trust in God, for Heis the confidence of
all the ends of the earth.”

2. Its ground. ‘“ God isa refuge for
us, ... God hath spoken once,” &c. (1)
God is the Almighty refuge of those who
trust in Him. ‘ God hath spoken once ;
twice have I heard this, that power
belongeth unto God.” The power of
God is a guarantee of His ability to
protect and save those who trust in
Him. This truth God had deeply im-
pressed upon the mind and heart
of the Psalmist. “God hath spoken
once; twice have I heard this,” &.
As he had marked God’s works in
creation David had heard this testimony
—“ Power is God’s.” He found the
same great truth in the written Word ;
and had witnessed confirmations of it in
Providence. He “is able to do ex-
ceeding abundantly,” &c, (2) God is the
gracious refuge of those who trust in
Him. Mere strength is not sufficient to
inspire confidence, It may awaken ap-
prehension and alarm. But God is as
kind as He is strong. “ Also unto Thee,
O Lord, belongeth mercy.” Perowne :
“ Power without love is brutality, and
love without power is weakness. Power
is the strong foundation of love, and love
is the beauty and the crown of power.”
(3) God is the righteous refuge of those
who trust in Him. ‘Thou renderest
to every man according to his works.”
He never does wrong to any of His
creatures. He is the vindicator of the
oppressed and injured, Here then we
have a broad, immovable, and eternal
ground for confidence in God.

ConcLusion.—How unspeakably im-
portant is the object of the soul’s trust |
“We may make unsuccessful specula-
tions in business, we may venture all we
have on some ruinous ‘enterprise, we
may even put our lives in jeopardy and
lose them ; still all may not be lost :—
the soul may be safe. But if we trust
the soul to something that will fail us
at the day of judgment, then the loss

311


PSALM LXU,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS.





will be tremendous and irreparable.”
‘“‘ Trust in Him at all times, ye people.”
Psa. cxxv. 1, 2; Jer. xviii 7, 8


“ Blessed are all they that put their trust
in Him.”


In what, or in whom, are we trusting?


Gop a ReErFuaGE,
(Ver. 8.)


“ God is a Refuge for us.”

I. Illustrate the interesting fact
here declared.

Consider—

1, The medium through which God ts
the refuge of His people. The godly
among the Israelites believed in the
promised Messiah, and to them God was
arefuge. It is through the work of
Christ and by faith in Him that God is
our refuge. Sin had created a breach
between God and us, That breach is
healed by the work of the Messiah.
Through His mediation we have access
to God.

2. The perfections of His nature which
qualify God to be the refuge of his
people. The power of God is engaged
on their behalf. To have an Almighty
friend for our refuge is an inestimable
privilege. Divine wisdom. All our
dangers and difficulties, all our enemies
and their designs, are known unto God ;
and He is able to guard ts from every
danger, to lead us through every
difficulty, and to frustrate the designs of
all our foes. Infinite goodness. God is
ready to afford His aid. Nahum 1-7.
Faithfulness. On His promises and
engagements we may safely rely. Ac
cesstbility. God is with us. Heisa
refuge ever near to us. IJmmutability.
Creatures may be fickle and change-
able, but God is unchangeable. Self-


existence and independence. Our best
earthly friends may die, &c. ; but God is
an ever-living friend. (Deut, xxxiii. 27.)

3. This interesting truth ts confirmed
by historical facts. In all ages God has
been the refuge of His people. The
preservation of the Church is an illus-
tration of this truth. It has been like
a bush burning with fire, yet not con-
sumed.

II. Consider the uses to which
the subject may be applied.

1. As connected with the events of
Providence. A wise and good and
righteous God governs human affairs.

2. Asa source of consolation and joy
to the Church. The aspect of things may
in many respects be such as to awaken
our fears; but “ God is a refuge for
us.”

3. Asacomfort to individual beltevers.
In losses, family trials, bereavements,
&c., “ God is a refuge for us.”

LeaRNn—1l. The importance of trust-
tng in God. In troubles, difficulties,
temptations, afflictions, and in death,
trust in Him as your refuge,

2. The importance of religion, If you
neglect religion you will have no refuge,
But if you believe the Gospel, God will
be your refuge. He will guide you by
His counsel, and afterward receive you to


SPT aston ha from an unpublished


THe Power or Gop.
(Verse 11.)


Though the truth of God’s power is
one of the most simple and elementary,
though it is one taught by reason and
nature as well as by revelation, it is one
which is thoroughly learnt only after
much Divine teaching and often many
painful experiences,

I, Produce some proofs that men
do not generally believe in the power
ef God.

312


1. In the fact of sin. By his every
sin the sinner proclaims his disbelief of
God’s power. He regards all His
declarations of it as so many vain-
glorious boastings. He cannot fulfil His
threatenings, &c. Vain imaginations
these.

2. In open and avowed infidelity.
Miracles are impossible; and as the
Gospel is full of miracles it must be re-


ad


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


FeALY LEivL.





jected. Though God may have power,
He has not omnipotent power.

3. In the trust which ts reposed tn
means altogether apart from God. Is it
not still true that oppression and
robbery and increased riches are re-
garded as means which will be all-
sufficient for the attainment of desired
ends? When success comes we worship
the instrument ; and when distress visits
us the last place which we think of, when
we are seeking help and deliverance, is
Jehovah’s footstool.

4. Distrust ts another proof of dis
belief in God’s power. All distrust im-
plies not only a doubt of His faithful-
hess, ora questioning of His omniscience,
but also a want of faith in His power.
Behold the Israelites, &c., (Num. xi, 4;
Psa. lxxviii. 19 ; Num. xiv. 1-4),

5. In the fear of man (Isa. li. 12, 13).
Faith in God’s power would overshadow
the fear of man.

6. One more proof ts furnished by
despair. If despair relates to temporal
things, the conclusion to which it has
come is, that things have gone too far;
&e. Or, if it relates to heavenly hopes,
it reasons on similar grounds. These
sins are too great for God to pardon ;
this torrent of corruption is too strong


for God to stem.... He may be
mighty to save, but not omnipotent to
save.

II. Offer some helps to faith in
God’s power.

1. That by which David encourages
his faith in Psa. cxxii ‘My help
cometh from the Lord which made
heaven and earth.” Is not He who made
heaven and earth sufficient unto you $

2. In the resurrection of Christ. His
tombstone was pressed down by the law,
sin, death, and hell, Of all the tasks
which His power ever had to overtake,
this was assuredly the greatest ; and if
He failed not here, where elsewhere is it
possible for Him to fail? Now we may
proclaim Him omnipotent to save.

3. The abiding of Hts grace in the
heart of man is a proof of the mighty
power of God.

4. And the continued extstence of the
Church of Christ is one continued
miracle, one living, present, impressive
proof of the mighty power of God.

Conciusion.—Believe in God's power
—(1) for the pardon of your sins. (2)
For grace to help in time of need. His
strength will be made perfect in your
weakness,—A. F. Douglas (Abridged

From The Christian World.)


PSALM LXIIL


InTRODUOCTIOXN


Buperseription.—“ A Psalm of David, when he was in the wilderness of Judah.” Hengsten-

: ‘The wilderness of Judah is the whole wilderness towards the east of the tribe of Judah,
bounded on the north by the tribe of Benjamin, stretching southward to the south-west end of
the Dead Sea, eastward to the Dead Sea and the Jordan, and westward to the mountains of
Judah. .... . This wilderness is not unfrequently designated simply The wilderness. In this
wilderness David was often found when flying from Saul. In the same wilderness also he took
refuge during the rebellion of Absalom. That he did so is self-evident, inasmuch as the road
from Jerusalem to the Jordan leads through it: it is, moreover, expressly asserted in more than
one passage in the Books of Samuel (2 Sam. xv. 23, 28; xvi. 2, 14; xvil. 16). We cannot refer
our psalm to the time of Saul, becausefmention is expressly made of a king in verse 11. On the
other hand, in favour of the time of Absalom; besides this reason we have a very marked


reference in ver. 1, ‘in a dry land, and is weary (ALY) without water,’ to 2 Sam. xvi. 14,


‘ And the king and all the people that were with him came weary (D°Dy) 5 and he reated
there.’ Comp. xvi. 2, according to which Ziba brought out, in the way, wine, ‘that such as
were faint in the wilderness might drink,’ with the word y Py in xvii. 2.”

M. Henry: ‘‘ As the sweetest of Paul’s epistles were those that bore date out of a prison,
so geome of the sweetest of David’s Psalms were those that were penned, as this was, in a wil-
derness,” Donne: ‘‘ The spirit and soul of the whole Book of Psalms is contracted into thia

m.” Perowne; “‘ This is unquestionably one of the most beautiful and touching psalms in
the whole Psalter.”

Homiletically, we see in this pealm, the thérst, the satisfaction, and the anticipation of the
godly sou.

$13





FeaLM LXAYL, HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,
Tue Tairst or THE Gopiy Souk
(Verses 1-4.)
Consider— “My soul thirsteth, my flesh pineth fos


L The nature of this thirst.

1. Jé is a thirst for God, “I seek
Thee; my soul thirsteth for Thee,” dsc,
In the second verse mention is made of
God’s “power and glory” as things
which the Psalmist desired to see, In
the A. V. the clauses of this verse are
needlessly transposed. The Hebrew is:
“Thus have I beheld Thee in the
sanctuary, to see Thy power and Thy
glory.” The power and the glory are
not the external pomp and splendour of
public worship; but the communica-
tions of Divine grace, as manifested in
the experience of the devout soul, The
Psalmist longs for such communion with
God as he had formerly enjoyed in the
sanctuary. The thirst is not merely for
the ordinances of religion, or for teach-
ing concerning God, or even for His
“power and glory ;” but for God Him-
self. The thirst of the soul of man
needs for its satisfaction that the soul
shall be brought into vital and sym-
pathetic relations with (1) A Person.
Creeds and ordinances cannot satisfy
the soul. (2) A living Person. Not
one whose work and life and love are
things of the past; but One who “is
able to save, because He ever liveth,”
dc. (3) A Divine Person. One who
is able satisfactorily to respond to its
deepest yearnings, to help it to realise
its loftiest aspirations, &c. One who
ever liveth, who changeth not, dc.
Only in God can the thirst of man’s
soul find satisfaction, (See on Pa, xii.
1, 2).

2. It ts an intense thirst, “I seek
Thee earnestly” (not “early,” as in the
A. V. The verb TOW is not to be re-
ferred to the noun "MW = the dawn.
It means to “seek zealously,” a “ solicit-
ous seeking”); “ my soul thirsteth for
Thee, my flesh longeth ” (Hengstenberg :
“fainteth ;” Moll: “ languisheth ”) “for
Thee.” Each of the verbs indicates in-
tense desire.

3. ae @ thirst of the entire man

14


Thee.” Soul and flesh are used to
denote the whole man by his two prin-
cipal parts. His whole being went out
after God in fervent desire.

IL The occasion of this thirst. “In
a dry and thirsty land where no water
is.”

1. These words are true literally.
The wilderness of Judah where David
was at this time, even in the neighbour- ©
hood of the Jordan, was a desert country
(2 Sam. xvi. 2, 14).

2. These words are true figuratively.
The desert was a picture of his condition.
An exile from his throne and home, and
from the sanctuary of the Lord. His
own son and his most trusted counsellor,
with a great host of his subjects, in
armed rebellion against him. The cir-
cumstances in which he was placed led
him to seek the Lord the more earnestly.
Sorrow and trial often drive us the more
closely to God. “When my _ blood
flows like wine,” says Beecher, “‘ when
all is ease and prosperity, when the sky
is blue, and birds sing, and flowers
blossom, and my life is an anthem mov.
ing in time and tune, then this world’s
joy and affection suffice. But when a
change comes, when I am weary and
disappointed, when the skies lower into
a sombre night, when there is no song
of bird, and the perfume of flowers is
but their dying breath, when all is sun-
setting and autumn, then I yearn for
Him who sits with the summer of love
in His soul, and feel that all earthly
affection is but a glow-worm light, com-
pared to that which blazes with such
effulgence in the heart of God.”


“Trials make the promise sweet,
Trials give new life to prayer,


III. The reason of this thirst. Why
did David thus yearn for God? Twe
reasons are suggested—

1. Because of his personal relation te
God. “Thou art my God.” Jehovah
was the God of the Poet, not only by
exeation, but by covenant; not only by


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY ; PSALMS,


PaALM LET,





virtue of His claims, but also by the
Poet’s choice and consecration. There
was a recognised and sacred relation
between them, because of which it was
right and appropriate that the Psalmist
should seek God. Blessed are we if,
‘when the woes of life o’ertake” us,
we can address ourselves to Him, saying,
“O God, Thou art my God.”

2. Because of his exalted estimation of
God. David says that he longs for God,
“Because Thy lovingkindness is better
than life.” We regard “life” here as
signifying more than mere existence;
for the statement of the Psalmist implies
that life is good; and that mere exist-
ence is not a boon is clear from Matt.
xxvi. 24, and Rev. ix.6. The Psalmist
regarded the lovingkindness of God as
better than a life of prosperity and
pleasure. Having God’s lovingkindness
in his troubled life in the wilderness of
Judah, David would esteem himself
more blessed than in a life of pleasure
in his palace at Jerusalem without it,

“Better than life itself, Thy love,

Dearer than all beside to me;


For whom have I in heaven above,
Or what on earth compared with Thee ?”


IV. The relation of this thirst to
the praise of God. “My lips shall
praise Thee. Thus will I bless Thee
while I live; I will lift up my hands in





Thy name.” The lifting up of the
hands was the attitude of worship, and
symbolised the lifting up of the heart,

1, In his sorrowful exile while thirst-
tng for God, the Psalmist praises Him
because of what He ts in Himself, what
He is to him, what He has done for him,
and what He has promised to do for him.
In the bitterest experiences of life the
devout heart will find matter and motive
for praising God.

2. In the delightful realisation of His
presence, which he now seeks and antict-
pates, he will praise Him yet more. The
prospects of the godly soul should in-
spire the most joyous songs.

3. Is his whole life he will pratss
Him. “TI will bless Thee while I liva”
The entire iife of the godly man should
be grateful, reverent, and songful.

“My days o jae shall ne’er be

While ‘ife Deemer. and ealapa
Or immortality endures.”


Conciusion.—How are you endea-
vouring to quench the thirat of your
soul? Avoid the delusive promizes of
satisfaction held out by the world. At
no earthly stream can you find the re-
freshing draught which you seek (Jer.
ii. 13). “Jesus cried, saying, If any
man thirst, let him come unto Mz and
drink,” &


Szxrxixe Gon
(Verse 1.)


L How should we seek God?

1. Intelligently. 2. Earnestly, &
Constantly. 4. Hopefully.

Il. Where should we seek Him ?

1. In the closet, 2. In His Word.
8. In the ordinances.

IIL When should we seek Him?


1. Early in life. 2 Im advance of
temporal things.
IV. Why should we seek Him ?
1. He is the soul’s life— “ God.”
2. His nature is communicative—“ My
"_W. W. Wythe.


Gop’s Power axp Giory Manirestep m THE Sancruaxy.
(Verse 2.)


In nothing is genuine piety more
strikingly manifested than in the esteem
for Divine ordinances. In the proper
use of the public means of grace, com-
munion with God is enjoyed, spirituality
of mind is promoted, é&c.


By the “glory” of God as displayed
in the sanctuary we understand the
glory of His character as developed in
the principles of His moral government
and in the method of redemption. The
patural perfections of oan mani-


PSALM LX,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMB,


me


fested in the works of nature; His
moral attributes are made known in
His Word.

By the “power” of God as mani-
fested in the sanctuary, we understand
the spiritual energy which renders His
Word effectual. Consider—

I. How God has manifested His
glory in the sanctuary. 1. In the
sanctuary He has made known the moral
excellences of His character—His holt
ness, mercy, wisdom, farthfulness. 2.
In the sanctuary His people are favoured
with communion with Him. This privi-
lege is enjoyed in meditation, praise,
and prayer.

II. How God has manifested His
power in the sanctuary. The means
designed for the conversion of sinners
and the edification of saints are admir-
ably adapted to the end for which they
are designed ; yet, through the depravity
of mankind, they are inefficient unless
accompanied with Divine influence.
Thus the power of God is seen in the
sanctuary—l. When sinners are con-
verted. 2. When belwevers are edified.

IL The pleasure which the Divine


manifestations have afforded the
people of God. In contemplating the
Divine character, in communing with
Him, and in witnessing displays of the
Divine power, great has been the plea
sure which they have enjoyed (Ps. xxvi.
8, and Ixxxiv.).

IV. The desirableness of being
favoured with the constant manifes-
tations of the Divine power and
glory. “My soul thirsteth for Thee,”
&c. If these things are so desirable,
how may we attain them? 1. Esteem
Divine ordinances, attend with delight
upon them, and pray that the blessing
of God may attend them. 2. Pray
Servently for the outpouring of the Holy .
Spirit. His agency is indispensable,
&e.

Conctiusion.—1l. How great ts the
criminality of those who neglect Divine
ordinances, 2. Those who negleet them
need not wonder tf they are not converted.
3. How great 1s the privilege of having @
place in the sanctuary of God. 4. What
will rt be to behold His power and glory
tn heaven /—(Abridged from an unpub-
lished MS.)


Tue LOVINGKINDNESS OF Gop BETTER THAN THE Lirz oF Max.
(Verse 3.)


“Thy lovingkindness is better than
life.”

These words imply—

L That life is good. This could
not be said of mere existence. Exist-
ence may be an evil—(1.) Because
of its miserableness, In his great suf-
ferings, Job felt his existence to be a
curse (Job. iii, Comp. Matt. xxvi. 24;
Rev. ix. 6). (2.) Because of its per-
niciousness. From the holy Word we
learn that there are certain beings in the
universe whose characters are utterly
depraved, whose aim in life is utterly
destructive, and whose influence is only
and continually malignant (John viii.
44; 1 Pet. v. 8). Their existence is
good neither for themselves nor for
others. It is a bane and blight in the
universe. According to the tone and
teaching of the Scriptures a life of misery
or & life of sin is not to be accounted life

316


at all, but only a form of death. David
thought of a life of peace at home, in
secure possession of the throne, and in
the enjoyment of Divine ordinances;
and he affirmed that the lovingkindness
of God was better than such a life, and
his statement clearly implies that life
itself when it is not blighted by sin or
sorrow is a good thing. It is so—

1. Because of ts great faculties. How
remarkable ave the powers of recollec-
tion, reflection, anticipation, ratiocina-
tion, imagination, affection, with which
human life is endowed! How great its
power of usefulness |

2. Because of tts great capactties.
How immense is man’s capacity for
enjoyment! The streams of delight
from which he drinks are countless and
inexhaustible. The whole endless future
is before him for the satisfaction and
development of his capacities, He was


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALA'S.


created in the image of the ever-blessed
God, and, therefore, capable of partici-
pating in His peace, joy, dc.

3. Because of its conditions and cér-
cumstances. The world in which at
present we spend our life is full of
interest, instruction, utility, beauty. It
is a great treasury, exhibition, school,
temple. Heaven, to which we look for
ward as the scene of our life in the
future, is of unspeakable glory, dc.
Truly life is good. But the Psalmist
states—

Il. That the lovingkindness of God
is better than life even at its best.
“Thy lovingkindness is better than
life.” It is so—

1. Because all that is good in life
flows from the lovingkindness of God.
The powers and capacities of human
life, and all that is pleasing and precious
in its circumstances and conditions, are
streams from the fountain of the Divine
lovingkindness. “ All my springs are
in Thee.” ‘ With Thee is the fountain
of life.” All that is true, useful, good,
and beautiful in the universe springs
from the infinite grace of God.

2. Because while much that ts good
and pleasant tm life ts transient and in-





PSALM LEZ,





termittent, the lovingkindness of God te
constant and abiding, In life joyous
hours are succeeded by sorrowful ones,
Like David, we pass from peace and
home and the sanctuary of God into the
exile and weariness of “the wilderness
of Judah.” Fairest prospects soon fade.
But the lovingkindness of God is eter-
nal, unchangeable, &. It is “that
good part which shall not be taken
away from” the man who trusts in God.

3. The lovingkindness of God sanctt
fees even the pains and trials of life, so
that by means of them life is enriched
and blest (Rom. v. 3-5; viii. 28;
2 Cor. iv. 17, 18; Jas. i, 2, 3, 12;
1 Pet. i. 6-9).

4. The lovingkindness of God is the
crown and glory of life. The enjoy-
ment of it makes life’s fairest scenes
more divinely beautiful ; its most
precious experiences more precious, It
ennobles the pleasures of life, it conse-
crates its friendships, it sanctifies its
successes, &c. It is the heaven of
the soul.

Conciusion.—1. What is the eha-
racter of your life ?

2. What ts your estimate of the Divine
lovingkindness ¥


Toe SavisFaction or tHe Gopiy Sov
(Verses 5-8.)


The Psalmist passes from thirst to
the assurance of satisfaction in God.
And in these verses we see the nature of
this satisfaction. He found satisfac
tion—

L In the provisions of God. “My
soul shall be satisfied as with marrow
and fatness.” The provisions of God
for the spiritual needs of men are
frequently represented in the Scriptures
as 8 sumptuous feast. David looked
forward confidently to the realisation of
spiritual satisfaction and delight,

1. The Divine provisions are spirt-
tual, ‘My soul shall be satisfied.”
Satisfied with delightful experiences,
exalted and blessed fellowship, ennobling
occupations, enrapturing prospects, d&c.
Pardon, communion with God, work for
God, hope of holiness and heaven, &c.


2. The Divine provisions are rich.
“Marrow and fatness.” The provisions
of the Gospel are like a “feast of fat
things, a feast of wines on the lees, of
fat things full of marrow, of wines on
the lees well refined.” Its blessings are
not only useful but delightful ; not only
healthful, but pleasant.

3. The Divine provisions are adwn-
dant. The Psalmist was assured of
satisfaction. “ My soul shall be satie
fied.” Whatever God gives He gives
abundantly. Pardon (Psa. cxxxvi. 5,
15; citi. 8; Isa. lv. 7); Redemption
(Ps, cxxx. 7). Grace (2 Cor. ix. 8).

IL In meditation on God. “I re-
member Thee upon my bed, and meditate
on Thee in the night watches.”

1. The nature of this exercise, ‘ Re
membes, . . . meditate,” Lavery ion





presented the doings and sayings of
God, and then the mind meditated
upon them, and upon Him, Meditation
is not mere reverie, but musing, or fixed
and continuous thought. One of the
most important mental exercises, es-
pecially in relation to spiritual life and
progress, And we fear that it is also a
most neglected exercise.

2. The subject of this exercise, “Re
member Thee, . meditate on
Thee.” The grandest, most glorious
subject that is possible. Meditation on
God is (1) Aumbling, inasmuch as it
reveals our feebleness, insignificance,
sinfulness. (2) Spiritualising, inasmuch
as it withdraws us from the material and
worldly into association with the spiri-
tual and Divine. (3) Transforming,
inasmuch as we become like unto those
with whom in thought and feeling we
dwell (2 Cor. iii. 18).

3. The season of this exercise. “On
my bed, in the night watches.” Night
is favourable to meditation on God and
spiritual things, (1) Because of its dark-
ness. Material things are then hidden
from our view and spiritual things ap-
pear with reality and vividness, (2)
Because of its stillness. The noise and
tumult of the day ill accord with medi-
tation on spiritual and Divine themes.
The quiet of the night harmonises with
and aids such meditation, Great are
the advantages of meditation like this,

It. In the protection of God, “ Be-
cause Thou hast been my help, there-
fore in the shadow of Thy wings will I
rejoice.”

1. This protection is well assured. It
is guaranteed both by God’s promise and
by man’s experience, “Because Thou
hast been my help, therefore,” &. 2.


This protection is perfect. ‘In the
shadow of Thy wings.” (See the
Hom. Com. on Psa, lvii. 1.) 3. This
protection is joyinsptring, ‘“ Will I


rejoice.” (See the outline below on this
verse.)

IV. In the sustentation of God.
“My soul followeth hard after Thee,


318


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMS.





Thy right hand upholdeth me.” In the
support of the godly soul two important
things are here brought into clear view :

1. Man’s trust. “My soul followeth
hard after Thee.” More correctly:
““¢My soul cleaveth to Thee.’ Heng-
stenberg: ‘“‘ My soul depends on Thee.’
In ver. 8, there are the mutual relations
between the believing soul and the Lord :
it depends on Him, and cleaves to Him,
like a bur to a coat, and He takes hold
of it, and holds it up with His powerful
right hand, so that it does not sink into
the abyss of destruction and despair.”
Our business is to depend upon God,
by faith to cleave to Him with the ut
most tenacity.

2. God’s power, “Thy right hand
upholdeth me.” The right hand is the
instrument of skill and strength. With
infinite wisdom and almighty power God
sustains the souls that trust in Him.
This “representation of the mutual affeo-
tion and reciprocal relation of God and
His servant” is both beautiful and
encouraging.

V. In the celebration of the praise
of God. ‘My mouth shall praise Thee
with joyful lips.” The satisfaction of his
soul the godly man seeks to express in
praise to God. David resolves to praise


God—


1. Vocally. “ My mouth shall praise.”
By so doing he would express the praise
of his own heart, and excite the hearts
and voices of others to praise God.

2. Joyfully. “With joyful lips.”
To David, praising God was pleasurable
employment. He viewed it not as a
duty, but as a delightful privilege.

Conciusion. — Here then is satis-
faction for the thirsting soul. In the
protection, provision, and support of
God, and by our meditation and trust
and praise of Him, our spiritual anxieties
may be calmed, our wants supplied, our
joy inspired, &. Tur thee, thou
thirsting soul, from the shallow and
muddy streams of earth to the clear and
deep river of heavenly grace ; and driniz,
and be for ever bleased (John iv. 18, (4).


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM LXE,





Tas ARGUMENT OF EXPERIENCE.
(Verse 7.)


These words speak alike of sorrow
and joy. We need help. We can ex-
perience joy. Thus read, the text is
true to life.

In commencing fresh eras in life the
Christian feels that there will be nothing
really new. The forms and dresses of
things will alter; but the pensive features
of sorrow and the open face of joy will
be there too. The servant of God has
an experience. God has been his
“refuge and strength.” What words,
then, can I select as the basis of an
argument from experience more appro-
priate than these—“ Because Thou hast
been mine help,” &c.

I. The rejoicing is reasonable.—
“ Because.” It is not founded on pro-
mise alone (though if that be God’s, never
will it be broken), but upon past ex-
perience. And upon this experience,
as it divides itself into thousandfold cir-
cumstances. Oh, what seasons there
have been! &.

II. The rejoicing is personal.—
“My help.” That does not exclude
others, Every soldier in the army lifts
up his answering Amen. Who can ex-
plain that strange mystery of indivi-
duality? At the heart of each of us
there are unspoken mysteries of soli-


tude, Even a child lives ina tiny world
of itsown..... “ My help.” “Tam
not alone. God is my help.”


Ill. The rejoicing is real. There
is joy. Something more than rest or
quiescent peace. The soul was made for
delight as well as for discipline and duty.
Nay, rather shall I not say, for gladness
tn discipline and duty 1 In Christ there
is a fountain of blessedness springing up
unto everlasting life. For us all to-day
there may be joy in the Saviour, the
joy of forgiveness through the redeeming
sacrifice of the crosa, the joy of a new
life which sanctifies suffering and
sweetens toil, the joy of immortal life
through the resurrection.

IV. The rejoicing is restful. There-
fore under the shadow of Thy wings.”


This is beautiful You and I can
make no such protection by machine-
made covering for our beds, as a bird
makes for its young. No! Rain and
snow cannot pierce those shadowing
wings! How roof-like their setting !
How softly the inner covering makes all
complete ; resistance in the feathers
without, down in the wings within.
Can anything better represent the idea
of security than this? of rest than this ?
of comfort than this ? for it is the bird’s
beating heart that is the warm glow of
the nest ; and it is God’s great heart of
love in Christ that is near to us—so
very near, taking our manhood up into
God, clothing Himself in our nature,
that He might succour and help us in
temptation as well asin grief... .

. ... The Psalmist had been medi-
tating. Quiet hours bring quiet
memories. He reminds us of the still
night, in which the memory is set free,
and unfolding its wings in the silence,
broods over the pilgrim way. Yea,
there—and there—and there, the word
of the Lord was tried, and the promise of
the Lord was tested, and the deliverance
of the Lord was vouchsafed, and lo,
there are memorial stones all along the
way! “Surely goodness and mercy
shell follow me,” &c. “Oh, give
thanks unto the Lord, for He is good,”
&e.

V. The rejoicing is prophetic. “ Will
I rejoice.” So we anticipate life's
future with entire and holy confidence.
What can that future bring with it that
our gracious Saviour cannot prepare us
for, and order for our good # (Rom. viii.
31-39).

This, then, is to be written on our
banners, ‘‘In the shadow of Thy wings
I will rejoice.” Change and trouble
must come tous all. But God’s right
hand will uphold us all. ‘“ Because
Thou hast been mine help,” &«.—W. M.
StatHaM (Abridged from The Christian
World Pulpit.)


$19


FALM Lui,





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALHB.


Tox ANTICIPATION or THE GODLY SouL
(Verses 9-11.)


The Poet here looks forward confi-

ently to the defeat and destruction of

s enemies, and to his own exaltation

ecause of his deliverance. The verses
present to us a triple contrast.

I. A contrast of character.

1. The malignant and mendactous,
The rebels were animated by a most
cruel and malicious feeling against the
king. They were as false as they were
malicious. They spake lies They de-
lighted in lies, (See on Psa. Ixii. 3, 4.)

2. The religious and truthful.
“Every one that sweareth by Him.”
M. Henry: “That is, by the blessed
name of God, and not by any idol
(Deut, vi. 13), and then it means all
good people, that make a eincere and
open profession of God’s name.” Swear-
ing by Him indicates truthfulness also.
They appeal to Him as the true God,
the God who delights in truth.

This great contrast of character still
exists amongst men in this world. The
false and the true, the good and the evil
are still here.

. A contrast of pursuit.

1. "The rebels sought the life of the king.
“They seek my soul.” Though the
words “ to destroy it” must be applied
to the rebels ; still it is true that they
sought to take the life of David. The
objects for which they were striving
were utterly cruel and base.

2. The king sought his own salvation
and God’s glory. They thirsted for the
life of another; he thirsted for God.
They looked forward to seizing his
throne and kingdom; he to grateful,
joyful, lifelong worship of God,

Of what character are our pursuits
Will they bear the searching scrutiny of
truth and honesty #

TL. A contrast of destiny. 1. The
mendacious shall be silenced, and the
truthful exalted.—‘ Every one that
sweareth by Him shall glory; but the
mouth of them that speak lies shall be


stopped.” Hypocrisies, shams, false-
$30


hoods, may live long, as life appears to
us; but they must perish; and they
who utter them will come to silence
and shame, Truth cannot perish, but
must grow and advance to splendid
triumph. The truth-seeker and the
truth-speaker will have abundant reason
for exultation.

2. The malignant shall be utterly and
ignomintously destroyed, and the religious
shall have cause for rejoicing, ‘‘ And
they to (their) destruction will they seek
my soul ; they shall go into the depths
of the earth. They shall be given over
to the power of the sword; a portion
for jackals shall they be.” The jackals
are the scavengers of the East. They
prey on dead bodies ; and assemble in
troops on battle-fields to feast on the
slain.

What a terrible fulfilment the worda
of the Poet had in the case of Absalom,
Ahithophel, and twenty thousand of the
rebels! In seeking the life of the king
they brought upon themselves dread
destruction. A fearful doom awaits all
persistent workers of iniquity. “Sin
when it is finished bringeth forth death.”
“ The wicked shall be turned into hell.”
“The wicked is driven away in his
wickedness.” They “shall be punished
with everlasting destruction,” dc.

“But the king shall rejoice in God.”
The destruction of the rebels was the
salvation of the king. And his rejoicing
by reason thereof was religious—“ in
God.” Those who truly trust in God
shall come forth from the trials and
conflicts of life “‘ more than conquerors ”
through Him.

ConcLusion.—How unspeakably im-
portant ts individual character/ Our
character expresses itself in our pursuits,
and determines our destiny. “As
righteousness tendeth to life ; so he that
pursueth evil pursueth it to his own
death.” Only through Christ can man
attain righteousness of character. What
ts your character ?


gt


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


ASS





PSALM LXIV.


ImrrRopvvocrrion.


“To the chief Musician:" see Introduction to Pa, lwil


*$A Psalm of


Pavid.” The structure and character of the psalm confirm the title as to ita Davidis authorship,
The allusions in the psalm are go general that they might have been used by the poet on many
occasions in his life; so that we are unable to determine the particular occasion of ite
composition. Homiletically we see in the psalm—


THE PRAYER AND PREDICTION oF THE Goop Man Conoernine
His Wickep ENEMIEs,


We have here—

I Prayer for preservation from
wicked enemies (vers. 1-6). Con-
sider—

1. The description of the enemies.
This the poet has given at some length.
(1.) Their character. “The wicked,
. the werkers of iniquity.” The
words indicate positive and unmistak-
able wickedness of character, and terrible
constancy and activity in evil doing.
(2.) Their object. It is clearly implied
in ver. 1 that they aimed at the life of
David. “ Preserve my life from fear of
the enemy.” They sought to kill him.
This was true of Saul and those who
aided him in his persecutions of David.
It was true also of Absalom and the
rebels. (3.) Their weapons. ‘ Who
whet their tongue like a sword,” &c.
Conant: “ Who have sharpened their
tongue like a sword, have fitted their
arrow—bitter speech, to shoot,” d&c.
Slander is the weapon of which David
makes mention here. It was not by
any means the only weapon used against
him, but it was one which evidently
caused him acute suffering. The figures
here used to set it forth we have met
with before. (See on Ps. lit 2; lvii. 4 ;
lix. 7; and, for that of the fixed arrows
lviii. 7.) (4.) Their method. This
included (a) Consptracy. ‘ The secret
counsel of the wicked, .. . they com-
mune of laying snares privily, .. .
both the inward thought of every one,
and the heart is deep.” In confidential
council they formed their secret plans
by which they hoped to effect their
wicked designs. They were deliberate,
secret, methodical (0.) Tumultuous-
ness. “ The insurrection of the workers
of iniquity.” Or, “The tumultuous

x


throng of evil doers.” The secret coun-
sel led to the exciting of the passions of
evil men against the Psalmist. (c.)
Secret and sudden attack. “ They shoot
in secret at the perfect” (or, upright) ;
“suddenly they shoot at bim and fear
not,” The Psalmist had not to meet
manly foes in fair encounter. Hie
enemies were like robbers or murderers
who waylay the defenceless traveller in
a secret place, and suddenly, when he
deems himself secure, make their attack
upon him. And in doing this they were
fearless, They were unseen of men;
and they regarded not God. They had
no fear of God, no dread of His judg-
ment. (d.) Persistent effort. ‘They
encourage themselves in an evil matter,”
&e. Hengstenberg: ‘ They strengthen
for themselves an evil plan.” Perowne:
“They take every means to secure their
object, follow it up resolutely.” (e.)
Inventiveness. “They search out ini-
quities,” dc. Conant: “They search
for iniquities ; we are ready (say they) ;
a device searched out!” They invented
or contrived iniquitous plans ; and when
they succeeded in so doing, they made
their boast of it.

This description of the enemies of the
Psalmist impresses us with two things:

First: Zhe terrible perversion and
depravation of their nature. How fear-
ful the misuse of the powers of thought,
invention, action, persistence |

Second: The alarming criminality of
their character and conduct. How
tremendous is their guilt !

2. The prayer of the Psalmist
“ Hear my voice, O God, in my prayer,”
&. (1.) Ite object, “Preserve my
life from fear of the enemy. Hide me
from the secret counsel of the wicked,”

321


PSALM LXIV.





&e. The Psalmist was conscious of his
exposedness to danger, and of his in-
ability to protect or deliver himself;
and he seeks the protection of the Most
High. He asks for preservation not
simply from peril, but from alarm or
terror. God can preserve in the midst
of the greatest dangers, and inspire the
soul with the most exultant confidence,
(2.) Its confidence. “Thou wilt hide
me from the secret counsel,” d&c.
Barnes: “There is both an implied
prayer that this might be done, and a
confident belief that it would be done.”
The prayer was not the cry of despair,
but the expression of trustful desire.

In the foregoing we have an tdlustra-
tion of the foes, and the resource of the
godly soul in danger. We have spiritual
enemies—the world, the flesh, and the
devil, They are aiming at the ruin of
our souls, They seek to accomplish
this by various means—by subtlety and
by strength, by persistent efforts and by
sharp and sudden attacks, d&c. We
have neither the skill nor the strength
successfully to cope with them. Our
need of Divine preservation and help is
great and constant. Our safety is in
believing prayer to God.

II. Prediction of the destruction
of wicke« enemies (vers. 7-10). The
Psalmist utters his confident expectation
that God would destroy his foes. In
so doing he mentiona—

1. The Author of their destruction.
“God shall shoot at them,” &c. Let
us not misunderstand or misuse the
word “author” here. The meritorious
cause of their destruction is in them-
selves. ‘O Israel, thou hast destroyed
thyself.” But in the administration of
His righteous government God visits
them with the judgments which their
sins have deserved. He smites them
justly with the punishment they have
merited.

2. Its instruments. “With an
arrow; suddenly shall they be wounded.
So they shall make their own tongue to
fall upon themselves.” “The arrow of
God here corresponds to the arrow of
the wicked in vers 3 and 4.” And
their tongue by which they sought to
injure others shall prove the instrument

322


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS.





of their own destruction. God destroys
the wicked with their own wea
(Comp. Ps. vii. 15, 16; ix. 15, 16.}

_ 3. Its manner. ‘Suddenly shall
they be wounded.” When they think
that they are about to succeed in their
evil plans, on what they deem the very
eve of their triumph, the Divine judg-
ment bursts upon them. (Comp. 1
Thess. v. 3.)

4. Its effect. (1.) Upon the com-
pantons of the wicked. “‘ All that see
them shall flee away,” so that they may
not be involved in their ruin (Num.
xvi. 34). (2.) Upon men in general,
(a.) It would lead to some knowledge
of the Divine government. “ They
shall -wisely consider of His doing.”
Both Hengstenberg and Moll render
this: “And understand His work.”
They shall see that the judgment is not
the result of chance or human agency ;
but the work of a just and Holy God.
(0.) It would inspire awe. ‘“ All men
shall fear.” Barnes: ‘“ Judgments,
punishments, wrath are adapted and
designed to make a deep impression on
mankind. On this principle, the final
punishment of the wicked will make a
deep and salutary impression on the
universe for ever.” (¢.) It would incite
to a declaration of the hand of God.
“ Men shall declare the work of God.”
“A man shall say, Verily there is a
reward for the righteous; verily He is
a God that judgeth in the earth.” (3.)
Upon the upright. ‘The righteous
shall be glad in the Lord,” &e. (a.)
It inspires their joy.” ‘‘Glad in the
Lord ;” because of the vindication of
the government of God, and the cer-
tainty of their own safety. (b.) It
increases their confidence. ‘Shall
trust in Him;” because His doings
furnish additional grounds and encour-
agements to confidence, (¢) It en-
kindles their triumph. “All the up-
right in heart shall glory.” Their soul
shall make its boast in the Lord. And
their joy and trust and triumph are all
religious—not vindictive, or revengeful,
or self-conceited; but religious—“in
the Lord.”

Conotusion.—1. Let the wicked take
warning, 2. Let the godly take on


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


couragement. Be not dismayed in the
struggles of the spiritual life. How-
ever many or mighty, however subtle or


skilful our enemies may be, we shall


PSALM LETH.


triumph over them. “Through God
we shall do valiantly; for He shall
tread down our enemies,”


Omniscizncse IGnorED,


(Verse 5.


I. This notion has great influence
upon the conduct of man.

It is worthy of consideration, as in-
dicating the nature of evil, that it finds
such a notion convenient and necessary.

Offenders against man retire to the
dark when they mean to perpetrate their
evil deeds, The murderer, the thief, &.
Concealment is the helpmeet of wrong.

Because they sometimes, perhaps
often, escape the most watchful human
eyes, they fancy it possible to escape
the eye of God.

They would have no interest whatever
in reaching this conclusion if they never
wished to do anything wrong. The
sinner persuades himself of two or three
things: he has gained his end; he has
escaped observation ; he has avoided the
punishment. It is not necessary that
all this be formulated. It is sufficient
if the mind accustoms itself to question
whether God sees. The sinner will
take advantage of a doubt.

II. This notion is utterly untruth-
ful and delusive. Whether our sinful
deeds are seen by man or not, there is
One to whom they are open as the day.
If there is a God at all, this must be so.
If you persuade yourself that God does
not see, you persuade yourself that
God is not. That part of the universe
which God does not know, has no God.
He who does not know everything is
limited ; therefore he is not God.

But you cannot see Him. When


“ They say, who shall see them #™)


you cannot see a man you infer that
he is not present, Because you cannot
see God you infer that He is not pre-
sent. Thus you require that which
would argue Him nothing more than a
man after all. The spirituality of the
Divine nature makes it possible for Him
to be everywhere and see everything.

IIL God has often in human ex-
periences, shown the delusiveness of
this notion, and the time is fixed for
the complete demonstration of its de-
lusiveness. 1. Character is often seen
through by man. We may be deceived
as to individual acts. But our view of
@ man’s general character is usually
correct. 2. Retribution often follows
man’s deeds in the present world. It
followed and overtook Joseph’s brethren,
Achan and Saul. 3. The future state
will show that God saw. At the judg-
ment day the books will be opened,
What is written there will prove that
sin was seen. Hell will be an ever-
lasting proof.

ConoLusion.—Sinner, God sees you :
has seen you all along. Be warned!
Christian, 1. Be encouraged and com-
forted by the thought that God sees,
He sees the good and their goodness.
2. Be more constantly influenced by
this thought. (1.) Let it restrain from
sin. (2.) Let it stimulate to holy
obedience and earnest work.—J. B&., in
The Pulpit Analyst.


Tue CHARACTER AND PRIVILEGES OF THE GODLY.
(Verse 10.)


We have here—

L <A description of character.
“The righteous, ... the upright in
heart.”

1. Righteousness of character. Not


merely correctness of external conduct,

but uprightness of heart—moral excel-

lence of principle and disposition and

tendency, But how is this to be at-

tained? “ There is none set no,
32


PSALM LEIV.


SOMILETIO OOMMENTARY : PSALMS.





not one.” Man is prone to sin, his
heart is prone to crooked ways, do,
In the sight of God, “all have sinned.”
But the sinful may be made righteous
by faith in the righteousness and love
of God manifested in Jesus Christ—or,
more correctly, by faith in Jesus Christ
as the Revealer of God and Saviour of
men. The godly in pre-Christian ages
attained unto righteousness through
faith, And for us to-day righteousness
of character is attainable only by faith in
the Lord Jesus Christ, (Rom. ifi, 20-
28.

y Righteousness of conduct. ‘ The
upright in heart” will be the upright
in action, ‘Every one that doeth
righteousness is born of Him... .
Let no man deceive you: he that doeth
righteousness is righteous.” But how
shall we acquire the strength to do this ?
We have it not in ourselves, “ To will
is present with me, but to perform that
which is good is not.” In the work,
and death, and life of our Lord we
have not simply an atonement, but an
inspiration also. Through Him we ob-
tain both pardon and power, both for-
giveness and “grace to help in time of
need.” ‘ When I am weak, then am I
strong.” “I can do allthings through
Christ which strengtheneth me.”

II. A declaration of privilege.
“The righteous shall be glad,” &o
Here are three privileges—

1. Joy. ‘‘Shall be glad in the
Lord.” Notice concerning this joy, (1.)
Its cause. (a.) Because of the vindica-
tion of the government of God. This
was a reason of the gladnesa spoken of
by the Psalmist. ‘‘ The Lord reigneth.”
The world is neither anarchic, nor
governed by the strongest temporal
power, nor by chance, nor by Satan ;
but by God. (8.) Because under His
government the interests of the right-
eous are secure. Those of the Psalmist
had seemed extremely imperilled ; but
God had overthrown the wicked, &c.
God governs the world #o as to secure
the safety and blessednese of His loyal
subjecte, He is on their side. (Bom.


viii, 31; 1 Pet. iii. a be (2.) Ite
character. ‘(Glad in the Lord.” The
rejoicing of the righteous is religious
It is not vindictive, or revengeful, or
self-confident. It proceeds from God
as its source, and it flows to Him as its
end. It originated in His doings; it
expresses itself in His praise. ‘In the
Lord” how abundant are the reasons
and how wide the scope for joy !

2. Trust. ‘And shall trust in Him.”
In the case of the Psalmist, God’s judg-
ment upon the wicked (1.) supplied
additional evidence of His trustworthi-
ness ; and (2.) was especially fitted to
encourage trust in Him in time of
darkness, trial, and peril. He had
watched the progress of the wicked
enemies of the Psalmist, and at the
moment when they seemed about to
leap into triumph, He had interposed.
His interposition carried irresistible ruin ~
to them, and complete salvation to His
people. What He had done He would
in like circumstances and conditions do
again, How great are our encourage-
ments to trust Him! His goodness and
wisdom and power, His purposes, pro-
mises and performances, all are charged
with incitements to confidence in Him /

3. Triumph. “Shall glory.” Every
man has some object in which he glories
or boasts. One glories in his wisdo
another in his might, another in his
riches, another in his honours. All
these are mistaken, &c. (Jer. ix. 23, 24),
‘He that glorieth, let him glory in the
Lord.” ‘My. soul shall make her
boast in the Lord.” He whose confi-
dence is reposed in God has the most
excellent reasons for exultation. He is
the greatest Being, the best Being. He
has pledged Himself to defend and save
those who trust in Him. He cannot
fail.

Conotusion.—l. The portion of the
righteous at tts worst ts immeasurably
supertor to that of the wicked at its best.
2. By prayer and fatth, by consecration
and cfort, let us scek to make that por

ours.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: P&ALMS.





PSALM LXV.


INTRODUOTIOCR.


ion.—" fo the Chief Musician.” See Introduction to Pa, lvil, “4 Poalm and
song of David.” Or, ‘‘A Psalm of David, a song.” See Introduction to Ps. xlviii. In the
Psalm itself there are evidences, which Hengstenberg points out, that it is the production of
David. The Psalm was probably composed us a psalm of thanksgiving for the bleasings of the
harvest; in anticipation of an approaching harvest, as Hengstenberg suggeats, or on the com-


pletion of harvest, as Hitzig suggests.


Homiletically the Psalmist seta forth, Aspects of Divine worship (vers. 1-4); Manifestations
of Divine power (vers. 5-8); and The Beneficent actsvity of God in Nature (vers. 9-13).


Asprots oF Dirvyove Worsar.
(Verses 1-4.)


We see here—

I. Worship in its source. “Blessed
is the man whom Thou choosest, and
causest to approach,” &c. God is the
Author of all true worship.

1 He grants the opportuntty of wor-
ship. The revelation of Himself in
Jesus Christ, the institution of religious
ordinances and of Christian ministries,
the fixing our lot in a land and age of
Christian privileges—these are all from
Him,

2. He insptres the disposition to wor-
ship. All reverent feeling, holy desire,
and devout aspiration in us, are the
result of the gracious influences of his
Holy Spirit. The cause—the efficient
reason—why any man worships his
Maker at all, is to be found in God
Himself. Whatever there is of good in
us, and whatever of good belongs to us,
proceeds from Him. “All my springs
are in Thee.” “Every good gift and
every perfect gift is from above,” dc.
The source of all true worship is God
Himself.

II. Worship in its object. “Praise
waiteth for Thee, O God,” &. As God
is the Author of all true worship, so He
is also its End. Worship is offered to
Him here—

1. As the Hearer of prayer. “O
Thou that hearest prayer.” How sub-
lime and beautiful and true is this ap-
pellation as addressed toGod! His ear
is ever open to the cries of the sinful,
the suffering, the sorrowful, the dying.
(See an outline on ver. 2, below.)

2. As the Pardoner of sin, “ Ini
quities prevail against me; our trans


gressions, Thou shalt purge them away.”
God is praised here because of His
goodness in the forgiveness of sin.
There are two points here, (1) The
greatness of human sin. The iniquities
of the Psalmist are represented as over-
powering him with a superior hostile
force. Man cannot contend with his
sins, He cannot answer for them, or
atone for them. “ Enter not into judg-
ment with Thy servant; for in Thy
sight shall no man living be justified.”
(2) The greatness of Divine forgweness.
“Thou shalt purge them away.” God
pardons the most heinous transgressions
(Isa. i. 18);—the most numerous trans-
gressions (Ps. ciii. 3; cxxx. 7; Isa. lv.
7); and He pardons them completely
Ps, ciii, 12; Isa xxxviii. 17; Mic. vii.
19).

3. As the Satisfier of the soul. “We
shall be satisfied with the goodness of
Thy house, even of Thy holy temple.”
Man has great needs. In addition to
forgiveness he requires cleansing, sup-
port, guidance, love, hope, &e. God
alone can supply these needs. The
goodness of His house all flows from
Him, Religious ministries and ordi-
nances are worthless apart from His
blessing. ‘With Thee is the fountain
of life,” &c. In God the soul finds
complete satisfaction and blessedness,
To God as the Hearer of prayer, the
Forgiver of sins, the Satisfier of souls,
human worship should be addressed.

III. Worship in its nature. It is
here represented as consisting in—

1. Subenission to the will of God.
“Praise waiteth for Thee, O God,” is

$35


PSALM LIV.


BOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS,





not a correct rendering. Conant trans-
lates: “To Thee belong submission,
praise, O God.” Hengstenberg: “ Thou
art praised in the silence, O God.”
Margin: ‘ Praise is silent for Thee, O
God.” Moll: “To Thee is silence
(resignation), praise,O God.” Resigna-
tion to the Divine will, the silence of
the heart before God, is a duty which
we owe to Him, and is worship of the
very highest character. To trust Him
in darkness and mystery, to bow loyally
to His will when its dispensations to
us are painful, to exclaim in the supreme
agony of life, “Though He slay me, yet
will I trust in Him,”—surely this is the
very highest worship that we can render
to Him.

2. Celebration of the pratse of God.
The Poet represents praise as belonging
to God; and it constitutes one of the
chief elements of worship. God is
praised by His people because of what
He has done and is ever doing for them,
because of what He is to them, and
because of what He is in Himself.

3. The fulfilment of our vows to God.
“Unto Thee shall the vow be per-
formed.” There seems to be two ideas
here: (1) Gratitude for benefits re-
ceived. God had blessed His people
by gracious doings for them and gener-
ous gifts to them, and they thankfully
remember these things, and recognise
their own obligation by reason of them.
(2) Faithfulness in keeping promises
which they had made. Formerly they
had uttered their vows, and now they
resolve to perform them. These, then,
are some of the elements of worship—
hearty submission to God’s will, celebra-
sion of His praise, and performance of
our vows to Him.

IV. Worship in its locality.. “In
Zion, .... in Thycourts,.... Thy
house, .... Thy holy temple” Zion


was the scene of special Divine mani
festation. It was authoritatively ap-
pointed the chief place for the worship
of Jehovah, “The Lord hath chosen
Zion, He hath desired it for His habita-
tion.” Our Lord Jesus Christ is now
the true Zion. Every one who worships
God, believing in Christ as the Divine
Mediator, will: find acceptance and
blessing in so doing. Through Him the
devout heart may worship God any-
where (John iv. 21-24).

V. Worship in its extent. “Unto
Thee shall all flesh come.” Here is a
declaration that—

1. The needy shall worship the All-
sufficient. The use of the word “ flesh ”
here to denote man, indicates his weak-
ness and need, Man is an entirely de-
pendent creature —frail, feeble, and
needy. God is the inexhaustible Foun-
tain of life, strength, and blessing: to
Him needy man shall come for supply.

2. All the needy shall worship the All-
sufficient. ‘‘Unto Thee shall adi flesh
come.” Hengstenberg: “God is rich
not only for a few, but for all: all to
whom the name of man belongs come to
Him, in order to draw from His inex-
haustible fountain.” (See the Outline
on ver. 2, below.)

VL Worship in its infinence
“Blessed is the man whom Thou
choosest,” &c, They are blessed inas-
much as their prayers are heard, their
sins are pardoned, and their souls are
satisfied in God. All the spiritual joys
and blessings of Divine grace are theirs,
“They shall be abundantly satisfied
with the fatness of Thy house; and
Thou shalt make them drink of the
river of Thy pleasures.” The worship
of God spiritualises and ennobles the
worshipper—transforms him into the
Divine image. Worship is heaven.


A Great Fact, Petvitece, aNp Prosrecr.
(Verses 2.)


We have in this verse—
I. A glorious fact. God hears prayer.
This fact may be proved—
1. From the nature of God A
326


Being of infinite intelligence must hear
every request that is made to Him. A
Being of infinite kindness must heas
with regard—with consideration and


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





PSALM LEXY,





favour. A Being, in whom infinite re-
sources are joined to infinite kindness,
must answer,

2. From the teachings of Scripture.
“Call upon Me in the day of trouble: I
will deliver thee,” &c. “ Ask, and it shall
be given you; seek, and ye shall find;
knock, and it shall be opened unto you;
for,” &c. “Men ought always to pray
and not to faint.” ‘‘ Whatsoever ye
shall ask the Father in My name, He
will give you. Ask, and ye shall re
ceive, that your joy may be full.” “The
effectual, fervent prayer of a righteous
man availeth much.”

3. From the experiences of believers.
Moses (Exod. xxxii. 11-14, 31-35;
Num. xi. 1-3); Elijah (1 Kings xvii.
17-244 xviii. 42-45); Elisha (2 Kings
iv. 28-36); the Psalmist’s (Ps. cxvi. 1,
2; etal.) ; Hezekiah (Isa. xxxviii. 1-8) ;
Daniel (Dan. ix. 20-23) ; the early Chris-
tians praying for Peter (Acts xii. 1-17) ;
innumerable instances since ; and thou-
sands of persons to-day.

IL A precious privilege.
come unto God in prayer.

1. It ts a great privilege to be per-
mitted to unburden our heart to a Being
of perfect wisdom and goodness and sym-
pathy. The heart’s highest, holiest joy,
aud its most secret and sacred sorrow,
we may tell with confidence to Him.
And the mere telling of such experiences
to such 4 Being will afford relief.

2. How much greater is the privilege
when that Being has power to aid and
bless. Such power has God. In per-
plexity, in want, in sorrow, in affliction,
in spiritual distress, &-., we may come


We may


to the all-kind and all-sufficient Friend.
“Tn everything by prayer and supplica-
tion with thanksgiving, let your requests
be made known unto God.”

Il. An inspirmg prospect. “Unto
Thee shall all flesh come,”

l. The weak and needy shall approach
unto the infinite Source of strength and
blessing. Man’s frailty and need are
indicated by the word “flesh.” Man is
weak and poor ; God is almighty and un-
searchable in riches ; to Him shall man
come, and be strengthened, blessed, &e.

2. All the weak and needy shall come
unto the infinite Source of strength and
blessing. “Unto Thee shall all flesh
come.” All the helpless and poor ehall
come to God with prayers and thanks-
givings. He is “the confidence of all
the ends of the earth, and of them that
are afar off upon the sea.” Our faith in
the approach of all men to God in prayer
rests upon considerations such as these:
(1) There is a correlation between God’s
resources and man’s needs; between
man’s dependence and God’s all-suf-
ficiency. (2) Divinely-appointed means
are in operation for bringing needy men
to the wealthy God. The ministries of
nature, providence, and the Gospel are
all designed and fitted to lead men to
the all-sufficiency of God. (3) The
Word of God announces the approach
of all men to the Hearer of prayer
(Pa. Ixxii. 8-17 ; Isa. xlv. 23, 24 ; Rom.
xiv. 11).

Conciusion.—1l. Appreciate this pri-
vilege. 2. Seek to extend tt to others,
Announce it to others. Persuade them
to avail themselves of #*


Tuz BiesszpNEss oF CoMMUMION WITH GoD.
(Verse 4.)


I Make a few explanatory remarks
on the several particulars implied and
expressed in the text.

1. The words imply that the publie
scans of grace ought to be viewed as a
distinguish. 1 privilege. ‘ Blessed is the
man whom Thou choosest,” &c.

2. In the public means of grace com-
munion with God may be enjoyed. “ And
causest t approach unto Thee,” &.


To approach unto God is to enjoy com-
munion with Him. We may approach
unto God: (1) by prayer through the
mediation of Jesus Christ; (2) with
sentiments of thanksgiving and praise ;
(3) in receiving instruction from His
Word ; and (4) under the most endear-
ing and interesting relations in the ordi-
nances which He has appointed—as
Father, &e, Do we know fit botacets


PSALM LXV,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


TD Un aE EI nnn RnRnnSiennenehenneemmeennneemenmmnicaia meaner


the blessedness of thus approaching unto
God 4

3. The house of God ts here repre-
sented as the habitation of His people.
“That he may dwell in Thy courts.”
The good man is not an occasional
visitor of the house of God, but a resi-
dent. The godly are diligent in their
attendance there; they embrace every
opportunity, &.

4. Special advantages which afford
rich pleasure and solid satisfaction are
expersenced by those who dwell in the
house of the Lord and enjoy communton
with Him. ‘‘ We shall be satisfied with
the goodness of Thy house, even of Thy
holy temple.” The satisfaction and
pleasure arise (1) from its being the
dwelling-place of God. He dwells there
as a king in his courts—as God in His


temple. (2) From the communications
of the Divine favour. They are satis-
fied with His goodness in the pardon of
sins, in the bestowment of eternal life,
&e.

II. Improve the subject with a few
reflections.

1. How great ts the value of religious
privileges.

2. How important ts it to improve cur
privileges.

3. How great are the advantages which
attend the improvement of the means of
grace,

4. How great is the sin of those whe
slight the means of grace.

5. How important tt ts that those who
have slighted the means of grace should
repent and reform.—Abridged from an
unpublished MS.


MAnIrEesTatTions OF DivinE PowzErR.
(Verses 5-8.)


Notice—

I. The sphere of the manifestations
of the Divine power. It is represented
by the Psalmist as manifested—

1. Zn nature (vers. 6, 7). We have
it here (1) Lstablishing the most stable
things. ‘‘Who by His strength setteth
fast the mountains, girded with power.”
The mountains are the most secure,
abiding, and unchangeable things in
nature. Generations come and go, but
the mountains remain. Cities arise and
flourish, decay, and pass away ; but the
mountains continue, and apparently
change not. Empires are founded and
fortified, assaulted and overthrown ; but
the ancient and firm-set mountains move
not and change not. The Almighty, as
a master workman girded with power,
firmly founded and securely keeps them.
Their stability is an abiding and impres-
sive witness to His omnipotence. (2)
Controlling the most restless and tumul-
tuous things. ‘Who stilleth the noise
of the seas, the noise of their waves,”
How restless is the sea! How fierce
and furious and terrible when it is agi-
tated by storm! But His voice can
curb it even in its wildest moods, can
reduce its mountainous billows to gentle

$28


undulations, can hush ite roaring thun-
ders into soft rippling cadences. (Comp.
Ps. cvii. 29; Matt. viii, 26.) Thus
nature is ever witnessing to the almighty
power of God.

2. In human society. ‘“ Who atilleth
the tumult of the peoples.” Perowne:
“The sea and nations are mentioned to-
gether, the one being so often used as
an image of the other.” Luther: “Like
as He stilled Pharaoh with all his people,
when he stormed and raged against
Israel, as if he would have devoured
them. In like manner as He stilled the
king of Assyria, when he roared and
raged against Jerusalem.” Barnes:
“This is perhaps a more striking and
wonderfnl exhibition of the power of
God than that of calming down the
waves of the ocean. In the one case, it
is the exertion of mere power on nature,
acting through its established laws, and
where there is no resistance of will; in
the other, it is power exerted over the
will ; power over agents, conscious that
they are free, and where the worst
passions meet and mingle and rage.”

The Psalmist indicates the continwoue
ness of these manifestations of the Divine
power. “Who setteth,.... Whe


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: PSALMS.





stilleth.” God is ever present and active
both in nature and in human society.
He is the Author and Superintendent
of all laws of nature, the Force of all
forces, dc.

II The significance of the manifes-
tations of the Divine power. ‘Thy
tokens.” These manifestations of the
power of God are regarded as indications
of His presence and activity. They are
signs and pledges of something more
than and beyond themselves ; they are
indications of the character and ability
of the mighty Worker. Thus the doings
of God in nature are significant of His
existence and presence, His power and
unchangeableness. His control of tu-
multuous peoples witnesses to His might
and majesty, His righteous sovereignty,
&c. Both nature and history, to the
thoughtful and reverent observer, are
most fruitful of wise suggestion as to
the works and ways of God.

Ill. The influence of the manifesta-
tions of the Divine power.

1. They inspire awe. ‘They are
afraid at Thy tokens,” The exhibitions
of the power and glory of God are fitted
to impress the mind and heart of men,
to awaken reverence and fear of One
who is so great in power, &c.

2. They inspire confidence. (Ver. 5.)
We have here, (1) Confidence for a
great blessing. “ By terrible things in
righteousness wilt Thou answer us,”
The word translated terrible contains
the idea of the wonderful and the sub-
lime. Reference is made in it to such
events as took place in Egypt previous
to the emancipation of Israel from bon-
dage—events fitted to impress men with
a deep sense of the power and greatness
and majesty of God. The Psalmist is
confident that by such events God would
answer the prayers of His people. To


RGALM LKV,
be aasured of sufficient anawers to our
prayers is confidence for a great blessing.
Such assurance would not be possible
except in a being of great power. Thus
God’s might is a basis of trust for man.
(2) Confidence in the highest Being.
Trust is here reposed in God as a Being
whose power is always exercised righte-
ously, and for the salvation of those who
trust in Him. “In righteousness Thou
wilt answer us, O God of our salvation.”
Mere power, however great, is inade-
quate to inspire confidence. It may
excite alarm. But the power of God is
ever righteous in aim, and beneficent in
operation. (3) Confidence in the widest
extent. ‘The confidence of all the
ends of the earth and of the sea afar
off,” denotes the dwellers on the most
distant coasts and islands, and the navi-
gators of the most distant seas. The
blessings of God are coextensive with
the wants of man. There is no other
being in the whole universe in whom
man may safely confide. The true and
only ground of trust for man is the
great and gracious God.

3. They inspire joy. ‘Thou makest
the outgoings of the morning and even-
ing to rejoice.” Moll: “The outgoings
of the morning and evening mean the
east and west as practical parallels of
the ends of the earth.” The manifesta-
tions of the righteous and beneficent
power of God are calculated to inspire
joy amongst all peoples everywhere.

ConcLusion.—We are living amid
the manifestations of the Divine power.
Do we heed their significance? Do we
hear and ponder their message? Are
the phenomena of the material world
revealing to us the realities of the
spiritual universe? Are they aiding us
to know God? to reverence, trust, and
rejoice in Him ¢


Tas Benzericent Aoctiviry or Gop m Narurn
(Verses 9-13.)


The Psalmist’s view of nature is not
that of the Atheist. He regards nature
as having been created, and as being
constantly sustained by God. Nor that
of the Positivist. He discovered in na-


ture not only law, and order, and force,

but the presence and activity of a Divine

Person—God. Nor that of the Pan-

theist. He offers praise to God as a

Person having an existence distinct from
329


PUALM LEV.


and independent of nature. He saw in
the world around him the personal pre-
sence and the beneficent activity of the
Supreme. And the beneficent activity of
God in nature he represents as being—

L Incessant. (Vers. 9-11.) The
activity of God in His works is cease-
less. This is manifest—

1. From the operations which are
ascribed to Him. He is said to prepare
the earth for the corn, and the corn for
man ; to bless the springing of the corn,
and to carry it onward in its progress to
maturity, until, in the abundance and
ripeness of autumn, the year is crowned
with His goodness,

2. From the forms of the verbs which
are used to describe those operations.
“Thou visitest, . . . waterest,. .. en-
richest, . . . preparest, . . . blessest,
. . » crownest,” &c. “The present
tenses are employed here to express that
this God does not in one year only, but
every year.” His operations in nature
are characterised by continuity. In all
ages and in all seasons He is at work
amidst His creations, He is ever active.
This is well expressed by Thomson in
his Hymn on the Seasons—

‘‘These, as they change, Almighty Father,

these

Are but the varied God. The rolling year

Is full of Thee, Forth in the pleasing Spring

Thy beauty walks, ‘hy tenderness and love.

Wide flush the fields; the softening air is

ans

Echo the mountains round; the forest
atniles,

And every sense and every heart is joy.

Then comes Thy glory in the Summer
months,

With light and heat refulgent. Then Thy
Li tal


r)

Shoots full perfection through the swelling
year:

And oft Thy voice in dreadful thunder


And oft at dawn, deep noon, or falling eve,

By brooks and grovea, in hollow-whispering
gales,

Thy bounty shines in Autumn unconfined,

And spreads a common feast for all that
lives,

In Winter awful Thou! with clouds and
storms

Around Thee thrown, tempest o’er tempest
rolled,

Majestic darkness ! On the whirlwind’s wing

Riding sublime, Thou bid’st the world adore,

And humblest nature with Thy northera
blast.’’


ZOMILETIO OOMMENTARY : PSALMS.


IL Omnipresent. The “ furrows” and
the “ridges” of the earth He waters
abundantly. He gives fertility and
beauty to ‘‘the pastures of the wilder-
ness;” He girds “the little hills” with
joy, and He enrobes the fruitful valleys
with corn or covers them with flocks.
There is no part of His universe in
which He is not present in His benefi-
cent activities. On mountain summits,
which are accessible to the gaze only of
the strong-winged eagles and the sub-
lime stars, He causes beauty to spring
forth. And in dense forests, into which
even the most adventurous of men have
not penetrated, He is at work producing
luxuriant and beautiful forms of vege-
tation and life. The omnipresence of
His beneficent activities may be used—

1. As a restraint from sin.

2. As an encouragement to constant
trust in Him.

3. As an incentive to reverence Him at
all times and in all places.

IiL Abundant. “Thou visitest the
earth and waterest it; Thou greatly
enrichest it with the river of God, which
is full of water; Thou waterest the
ridges thereof abundantly; Thy paths
drop fatness.” Thus with fulness of
expression the Psalmist represents the
abundance of the Divine beneficence in
nature. The psalm was probably writ
ten upon the occasion of a bounteous
harvest, or after a copious and much-
needed rain. But it is true at all times
that the beneficent activities of God are
on the largest and most generous scale,
We may see this ia the great fertility
of the earth when wisely and diligently
cultivated. How rich is the reward of
such cultivation! Scenes of fertility,
plenty, and beauty, like that sketched
by the Poet, are to be found in vast
numbers in our own land to-day. Both
in nature and in grace God bestows His
gifts with infinite munificence.

IV. Joy-inspiring. “The little hills
Fejoice on every side. The pastures are
clothed with flocks; the valleys also are
covered over with corn; they shout for
joy, they also sing.” Nature is here
represented ag singing for joy in ita
prosperity. The idea is both natural
and poetical, And to man the benefi-


te


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


Feats LEV,


et


vent activities of God in the material
creation should ever be a source of
grateful and reverent joy. The abun-
dant provision which He thus makes
for our needs should awaken our grati-
tude. The wide-spread diffusion of
beauty should enkindle our admiration.
And in all we should see and praise Him.

Conciusion.—Let us learn—l. 7'o
recognise the presence and power of God
in nature. 2. To pratse the goodness of
God tw nature. 3. To worship God as


A May


seen in nature. Let us tread the earth
asa temple alive with the presence and
radiant with the glory of God. 4. To
trust God as the God of nature. We
have His promise— While the earth
remaineth, seed time and harvest, and
cold and heat, and summer and winter,
and day and night, shall not cease.” He
will not fail to fulfil His promise. 5.
To regard His beneficence tn nature as
an illustration of the more precious
blessings of salvation.


Hominy,


(Verse 10. “Thou blessest the springing thereof.”)


Nature in all her moods and phases
Is always ministerial, if we will have it,
One may speak, for instance, of the
opening of the spring, as a kind of an-
nual Divine Sacrament, by attending
upon which with wise and meek surren-
der, the better man in us may be awak-
ened and stimulated. .... As Chriat
instituted the bread and wine, to be a
means of aiding His followers in their
remembrance of Him and their com-
munion with Him; so does the holy
Father give us every year the marvels
and minstrelsies of spring, to aid us in
growing fine and rising higher. He
blesses the general flushing and budding.
It is consecrated for us, to be an advan-
tage to us spiritually, if we will allow
it. We speak of our Sundays, our re-
ligious services, our daily tasks and
difficulties as means of grace; and the
vernal advent and encompassment is no
less really a means of grace, to be util-
ised to profit, or neglected to loss and
condemnation.

lL Who ts there who has not felt and
acknowledged the softening, expanding,
genialising influence of the spring ; tts
sweetening effect upon the mental mood
and temper? .... Only look at the
people’s faces, as they meet one another
by the way, some fine morning in the
first burst of spring! How full of good-
humour they are, how warmly they
salute, how disposed they seem to be
more generous and charitable than
usual! ... . You may explain it physio-
logically, I am quite aware; but then,


it is not lees God coming to you, in and
through physiological laws and processes,
with an opportunity of improvement,
with a tide to bear and lift you, if taken
at the flood, toward a permanently
better, a permanently sweeter and more
gracious spirit. It is a Divine means
of grace. What you have to do is, just
to seize the vernal feeling that has risen
in you, and cherish and go forth with it :
namely, by starting from the height of
it, under the impulse of it, with new
resolves and endeavours to cultivate the
genial and generous temper; and by
seeking to put it at once, before it fades,
into some corresponding deed. Now,
while it is upon you, go and give some-
thing to somebody's need; go and do
something for somebody’s good.

IL. Does not the present season tend
to excite in us, at times, strange, vague,
mystertous yearnings—yearnings amount-
ing often to pain? .... I recall vividly
a sketch I once saw—a slight but very
striking sketch—a lone evening shore,
with the sun slowly sinking into the sea,
and a woman sitting gazing at it from the
beach, her hands clasped round her
knees, a far-off, weary, wistful look in
her eyes, her face as the face of one who
listens for something that is urheard,
and longs for more than is seen. It was
as though the dying sun were drawing
her to himself ; as though presently she
must arise and seek him through the
waves, aching to find with him—she
knew not what—but the larger, the
brighter, the happier that seemed to be

83}





calling her. Now that is an fllustration
of what I mean; when nature lays her
hand upon us, and sets us dreamily
yearning, as she is especially apt to do
in her annual springing. .... You
feel pensive. There are strange stirrings
and pinings in your breast that you
hardly understand, The life in which
hitherto you have been content and
happy, seems poor and insipid and un-
satisfying. The money you have made,
the secular successes you have won,
seem less worth than they were; and
you reach home rather low-spirited,
oppressed with a vague sense of want,
a vague longing. What does it mean?
The grace of the season has somehow
swept the diviner depths in you, and
caused a sudden blind motion and
flutter there... .. Turn the feeling
before it dies into a prayer—a prayer
to be filled and satisfied from the Lord ;
@ prayer to be made willing to seek and
do in harmony with His will..... It
is an accepted time, a day of salvation ;
do not lose it.

III. Has not the loveliness of spring,
and the beautiful order which it expresses
and reveals, brought home to us now and


BOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALEE.


ee ee


again, by the force of contrast, the uglt-
nesses and disorders that abound im
man’s world, and constrained us to
ponder and bewasl them afresh? ....
Whenever the spring leads you to lament
thus, what is it but a fresh Divine call
to you to philanthropic labour and effort ;
a fresh Divine impression upon you of
humanity's sore needs and woes; that
you may be awakened to increased sym-
pathy with them, and urged to attempt
more towards their relief? Seek, then,
to waken and urge yourselves with it,
Do not allow the feeling to evaporate in
mere melancholy musings or pensive
poetry ; but let it bear you forth to
heartier and more earnest ministry ;
make it a means of stimulating your
benevolent activity. Go, with the tears
for the miseries and evils of man’s
world which the musical groves and the
fine order of nature may have started
in your eyes, to weep helpfully with
them that weep, and to stream with
renewed endeavour against the works of
the devil. Soshall the springing which
the Lord blesses be blessed indeed.—
S. A. Tipple. Abridged from The Day
of Rest.


Toe First SaspaTH mt THE New- YEAR.
(Verse 11. “Thou crownest the year with Thy goodness,”)


Let us, though it be generally and
rapidly, mark that goodness which has
crowned the year—

L As to our country. I love the
pious patriotism of the ancient Jews,
whose hearts hovered over Zion even in
her desolations and pronounced their
blessing upon all the lovers of Jerusa-
lem. Nor does justice, less than piety,
demand this recognition of our national
mercies, since there is not one of them
which is not, in some of its results, a
blessing to ourselves. .... Ours isa
country to which God has given one of
the mightiest empires ever swayed by
man ;—a country where, amidst much
of darkness, a brighter light of evan-
gelical truth is shining; where, in the
midst of awful vice, there is a higher
degree of public and private virtue than
in any other; a country whose civil and

382


religious institutions are, at once, the
light and admiration of a great part of
the world, &.

That such a state of things has been
continued, by the good providence of
God, through another year, is matter
of avant thanksgiving, é&e.

IL As to our families. I love to
mark the blessed effects of Christianity
upon families connected by blood, and,
as it were, identified in the same joys,
and sorrows, and interests of life... .
Such was the family at Bethany which
Jesus loved ; and many such are found,
I trust, among you. Remember your
family mercies. As to most of you,
how exempt have you been from any
but those ordinary cares and transient
visitations to which all are subject!
The circle of your family hearth is un-
broken, de.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





PSALM LEVI.





TTI. As to our personal experience.
I lose sight of your preservations from
bodily danger and death, &c. Subjects
these not to be forgotten by you, and
never to be remembered without grateful
devotion. But I merge them now in
the higher considerations suggested by
the spiritual blessings which have been
granted to you..... When consider-
ing spiritual blessings as the portion of
any man, we cannot but mount up to
that boundless, that mysterious good-
ness which humbled the eternal Word
to humanity, and spared Him not from
the sorrows of the cross, in order, so to
speak, to free itself from the restraints
of Divine justice, that it might recover
and bless mankind. . . . . What affect-
ing instances of goodness spring from
this! &.

Some during the past year have been,
for the first time, made the subjects of
the renewing grace of God; on you I
eall this day for special acknowledg-
ment. From what a depth of misery
and danger have you been plucked! &c.

I address others of you who have
longer known this grace in truth, and
to whom the experience of the past year
has been comforting and advancing.
And this you owe to the special good-
ness of God... .. Your light is light
from Him; your strength, strength from
Him. “By the grace of God I am what
Iam.” “Thou crownest the year with
Thy goodness.”

But do I awaken in any heart the
painful remembrance of religious bar-
renness and declension? God has not


dealt with you according to your un


falthfal dealings with Him, &c. Let
this recollection of the goodness of God
come to you, giving greater tenderness
to your sorrows, strength to your de
sires, and new life to your hopes. ‘ Re-
turn, ye backsliding children,” &c.

IV. As to the universal Ohurch.
True piety identifies us with the uni-
versal Church, How gladdened should
be our hearts if she has been, through
the grace of God, faithful to her high
calling, and has prospered in her work !

ConoLtupr—l. By addressing those
to whom st has been a year of special
affliction. You have had afflictions, but
you have likewise had mercies. Nor
has God visited you with all the suffer-
ing that you have deserved, and which,
therefore, He might have inflicted. And
what have been many of your troubles
but blessings in disguise?.... The
chastening was not joyous, but grievous ;
nevertheless, it has yielded to you the
peaceable fruits of righteousness. Can
you number no mercies among the
wants of the past year? Thank God,
then, and take courage,

2. I beseech you, brethren, by all these
mercies, that you present yourselves a
living sacrifice unto God. Renounce
every other authority, and submit to
Him (Pa. exviii. 27; exvi 8,9). Every
renewed mercy increases our obligations
to love and serve Him; and happy is
that man, who, under the full power of
joyous and grateful feeling, so surrenders
himself to God, as to live for no other
purpose than that of glorifying Him.—
Richard Watson. Abridged.


PSALM LXVL


InTRODUOTIORN.


—"“To the chief Musician.”


Su sat
. See Introduction to Ps, xlviii.


See Introduction to Pa. wi, “4 Peale or


Both the author and the occasion of the psalm are unknown.


Hengstenberg : ‘‘ The paal
tracted and severe trial.


It is divided into three great parts.


m is a song of thanksgiving of the Church of God, after AO


In the first, God is p


(1-7), on account of what He does to Israel a¢ all times, in the second (8-12), on ageount of what
He had just now done, and in the third (13. 20), the Church vows her gratitude. ” ‘
Homiletically we have in the psalm the following themes for meditation, Praise to God for


His mighty works (vers. 1-7); Praise for His great ke 1%
declaration


of @ grateful soul (vers, 18-20.


affliction (vers, 8-12); and The
338


BHOMILETIC COMMENTARY


. PSALMS





Paamwnme Gop ron His Mienry Worgs.
(Verses 1-7.)


Consider— '

L The reason of this praise. The
Psalmist calls upon all lands to praise
God because of His mighty and
majestic doings. And in so doing he
sets forth—

1. The nature of His works. With
mighty power God is ever engaged in
governing the nations of the world.
“ He ruleth by His power for ever,” dc.
Three features of His government are
here indicated by the poet. (1.) Jts
perfect knowledge. “His eyes behold
the nations.” Moll: “ His eyes keep
watch upon the nations,” The plans of
the enemies of Himself and of His
people are all known unto Him.
They can conceal nothing from Him ;
and His people in all their circum-
stances and all their needs are ever be-
fore Him. He has a clear and full
view of all things. (2.) Its subjugation
of enemies. In the second verse it is
said, “ How terrible art Thou in Thy
works! through the greatness of Thy
power shall Thine enemies submit them-
selves unto Thee ;” t.¢., yield a feigned
submission unto Him. By His great
power they would be compelled to make
a hollow and unwilling profession of
loyalty to Him. And in the sixth verse
there is a reference to the overthrow of
Pharaoh and his hosts in the Red Sea.
There are to-day those who submit to
God in loving loyalty, and those who
submit only outwardly and from slavish
fear. And if men will resist Him to
the utmost, then, like the tyrannical
monarch of Egypt, they will be crushed
by His power. (3.) Jts salvation of
His people. ‘‘He turned the sea into
dry land ; they went through the flood
m foot: there did we rejoice in Him.”
His power is exerted for the defence
and deliverance of those who put their
trust in Him; as was seen in the cross-
ing of the Red Sea, and the passage of
the Jordan. In His government the
interests of His loyal subjects are speci-
ally cared for. He is “ mighty to save ”
all who confide in Him, and to crush

334


incorrigible rebels, however numerous
or powerful they may be.

2. The constancy of His works. “ He
ruleth by His power for ever.” Heng-
stenberg: “The Psalmist refers to the
passage through the Red Sea and the
Jordan, but not as to transactions
which took place and were concluded at
a given period of time, but as happen-
ing really in every age. God’s guid-
ance of His people is a constant drying
up of the sea and of the Jordan, and
the joy over His mighty deeds is always
receiving new materials.” The exhorta-
tion, “Come and see the works of God,”
implies that these works are actually
present. His rule is continuous and
everlasting. Though He no _ longer
manifests His power in miraculous
deeds, that power is ever working for
the overthrow of evil, the salvation of
His people, and the extension of His


kingdom.


3. The influence of Hts works. The
mighty deeds of the Most High are
calculated, (1.) To excite awe. “How
terrible art Thou in Thy works! ...
He is terrible in His doing toward the
children of men!” His deeds reveal His
tremendous majesty, and are fitted to
inspire the mind with reverent fear.
(2.) To check rebellion against Him.
“Let not the rebellious exalt them-
selves.” What is the strength of the
mightiest when measured against His?
The sinner is battling against Omnipo-
tence. ‘‘ Hast thou an arm like God!
or canst thou thunder with a voice like
Him?” “Kiss the Son, lest He be
angry, and ye perish,” dc. (3.) To tn-
spire confidence in Him. The Psalmist
represents the mighty deeds of God as
a reason for praise, an incitement to
universal worship, and a cause for re-
joicing in Him. These things imply
trust in Him. His majestic works
quickened the souls of His people into
the exercise of a lively confidence in
Him. When we mark how righteously
and beneficently His almightiness is
exercised, we see that it is well fitted


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PRALME.


PALM LEVL





to quicken and strengthen our faith in
Him.

4. The necessity of observing His
works. ‘‘Come and see the works of
God.” It is only as the glorious deeds
of God are thoughtfully and reverently
regarded by us, that they will beneficially
affect our mind and heart. But when
they are attentively and devoutly con-
sidered, they will inspire trust and
gratitude, admiration and praise in us,
even as they did in the poet. Do we
thus consider the doings of God in His
government of the world to-day? Do
these doings enkindle our hearts into
vesolute trust and holy song? Surely
they are well fitted to do so, unless we
are in arms against Him.

II. The enthusiasm of this praise.
“ Make a joyful noise unto God, all ye
lands, Sing forth the honour of His
name; make His praise glorious.”
The praise for which the poet calls is to
be offered—

lL. Heartily.
unto God.”
The mere “shout” is worthless in the
sight of God. But when the shout is
the natural expression of the heart’s
zeal and fervour, it is acceptable to
Him. Languid praises are utterly in-
adequate tu celebrate His doings, and
are repugnant to Him.

2. Joyfully. ‘Make a joyful noise
anto God.” “Shout for joy.” To be
acceptable to God praise must be offered
not as a duty, but as a privilege. To
the devout heart praise is pleasure, wor-
ship is delight.

3. Openty. “Shout for joy unto
God; ... sing forth the honour of
His name,” &. We must celebrate the
praise of God openly, that men may see
that we are not ashamed of doing so,
and that they may be encouraged to
unite with us in the holy and joyous
exercise. When we think of what God


“ Make a joyful noise


“ Shout for joy to God.” ,


is ever doing for us, how enthusiastie
should our praise to Him be! When we
think of Jesus Christ and the blessings of
redemption, how fervent and rapturous
and ceaseless should be our songs!

Tift. The universality of this praise.
“‘ Make a joyful noise unto God, all ye
lands, . . . All the earth shall worship
Thee, and shall sing unto Thee ; they
shall sing to Thy name.” The poet
was confident that the heathen world
would be won from their idolatries and
atheism to the worship of the living
and true God. His prophetic announce-
ment is not yet fully accomplished.
But we are confident that it will be—

1. Because of the character and per-
fections of God. He is good to all men,
and His goodness is calculated to
awaken the gratitude of all. His cha-
racter is fitted to inspire the admira-
tion and adoration of all men. ‘‘ Who
is like unto Thee, O Lord, among the
gods? Who is like unto Thee, glorious
in holiness, fearful in praises, doing
wonders §”

2. Because of the history of His wor-
ship amongst men. The worship of
many heathen deities has passed away.
Men are casting their ‘‘idols which
they made to worship to the moles and
to the bats.” But the number of His
worshippers is ever increasing. His
empire over human souls grows con-
stantly and rapidly. Its past history is
prophetic of its full and final triumph.

3. Because of the predictions of Hts
Word. The Holy Book is clear and
triumphant in its declarations on this
point. (See Ps. xxii. 27, Ixxii. 8-19;
Isa. xlv. 23 ; Mal. i. 11; Luke xiii. 29 ;
Rom. xiv. 11; e¢ al.)

Conciusion.—Let this glorious pros-
pect—1. Incite us to toil for tts realisa-
tion. 2. Encourage us to pray for tts
realisation. 3. Stimulate ws to pratee
Him who has promised tts realisation.


Praising Gop ror His Great KiInpNESS if AFFLICTION,
(Verses 8-12.)


The Psalmist in these verses sets be-
fore us—

L A great affliction This affliction
Fen


1. Variously represented. The poet
uses a number of expressive figures to
set forth the distress through which the


people had passed. These figures re
335


FOAL LEVE.
present it as, (1.) Imprisoning. “Thou
broughtest us into the net.” Moll;


“Thou hast brought us into the en-
closure.” The idea is that of straitness,
confinement, The soul sometimes seems
surrounded with trouble, from which
there is no escape. (2.) Oppressing.
“ Thou laidst affliction upon our loins.”
Moll: “ Hast laid an oppressive bur
den on our loins.” Barnes: ‘“ The loins
are mentioned as the seat of strength
ces Deut. xxxiii, 11; 1 Kings xii.

0; Job xl. 16); and the idea ire is,
that He had put their strength to the
test: He had tried them to see how
much they could bear; He had made
the test effectual by applying it to the
part which was able to bear most. He
had tried them to the utmost.” (3.)
Degrading. ‘Thou hast caused men to
ride over our heads.” Hengstenberg:
“Thou didst let men ride upon our
head.” The head is mentioned as the
noblest part. And the idea is that the
sufferers had been not only vanquished,
but treated by their conquerors with
the utmost indignity and tyranny.
Their enemies had insulted them,
scorned them, degraded them. (4.)
Consuming. ‘‘We went through fire.”
The passing through fire indicates trial
which involves extreme danger. The
severest trials we speak of as “ fiery
trials.” (5.) Overwhelming. “We
went through water.” Barnes: “It
was as if they had been made to pass
through burning flames and raging
floods (comp. Isa. xliii. 2). Instead of
passing through the seas and rivers
when the waters had been turned back,
and when a dry and safe path was made
for them, as was the case with their
fathers (ver. 6), they had been compelled
to breast the flood itself.” This re-
presentation of the affliction of the
people shows that their distresses were
numerous, various, and severe. From
trials of one kind they passed, and then
had to encounter trials of another kind,
And some of these trials threatened to
destroy their very axistence. Their
experience in this respect is an illustra-
tion of the experience of some of the
people of God in all ages.

his severe affliction was—
$36


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


3. Permitted by God. “ Thow
broughtest us into the net; Thow laidst
affliction upon vur loins. Thou hast
caused,” &c. They recognised the hand
of God in their distresses. The strongest
and most daring enemy of the people of
God has no power but what is given
him from above. These afflictions
could not have befallen them without
the Divine permission. All sufferings
are either sent by God, or permitted by
Him. The realisation of this by the
unbeliever ts an aggravation of suffering ;
by the believer, a blessing in suffering.
“Tt is the Lord; let Him do what
seemeth Him good.” (See on Ps,
xxxix. 9.

IL Great Kindness in great afflic-
tion. The kindness of God as celebrated
by the Psalmist was manifest—

1. In preserving the affected.
‘Which holdeth our soul in life, and
suffereth not our feet to be moved.”
He had protected them amid the dan-
gers which threatened their life; and
He had not left their feet to totter or
stumble so as to cause them to fall
Their enemies failed to crush them, and
the fire to consume them, and the flood
to overwhelm them; because God de
fended them.

2. In the design of the afliction.
“Thou, O God, hast proved us; Thou
hast tried us as silver is tried.” The
design of their affliction was, (1.) The
testing of character. “As silver is
tried” in the fire, so God had tested
the reality of their faith, and hope, and
patience. “When God doth afflict
you,” says Caryl, “then He doth bring
you to the touchstone to see whether
you are good metal or no; He doth
bring you then to the furnace, to try
whether you be dross or gold, or what
you are. Affliction is the great dis-
coverer that unmasks us.... Some
will hold on with God as long as the
sun shineth, as long as it is fair weather ;
but if the storm arise, if troubles come,
whether personal or public, then they
pull in their heads, then they deny and
forsake God, then they draw back from
Him, and betray His truth ; what they,
such and such men! Trouble makes


the greatest trial; bring professors te


td


HOMILEBTIO COMMENTARY: P&SALME





the fire, and then they show their
metal.” So He tried Abraham and Job,
et al. (2.) The improving of character.
Silver is put into the smelting furnace
in order to remove its dross, Afflictions
are designed to purify and perfect the
character. (Comp. Isa. i. 25 ; xlviii. 10;
Zech. xiii. 19; Mal iii 3; Jas. i. 2, 3,
U2); °1, Pet... 7.)

3. In the tssue of the affliction.
“ Thou broughtest me out into a wealthy
place.” Margin: “ Moist.” Hengaten-
berg: “Thou didst lead us out to
affluence.” Conant: “Thou hast
brought us out to overflowing plenty.”
Moll: “Thou hast brought us out into
abundance.” Calvin: “The sum is,
although God at times may chastise
severely His own people, yet He always
gives them a happy and joyful issue.”
M. Henry: “God brings His people
into trouble that their comforts after-
wards may be the sweeter, and that
their affliction may thus yield the peace-
able fruit of righteousness, which will
make the poorest place in the world 8
wealthy place.” The troubles of the
people of God will be brought by Him
to the most blessed and glorious issue.

Ill. Praise for great kindness in
great affliction. ‘“O bless our God,
ye people, and make the voice of His


PRALM LXVI,


praise to be heard.” Three points are
here suggested —

1. Praise for general merctes does not
supersede the obligation of special praise
for special mercies. The poet in the
former strophe had called for enthusi-
astic praise to God for His regular and
constant activity for the benefit of His
people ; now he calls again for praise
for the special deliverance and blessing
which he commemorates.

2. Prawse for the great kindness of
God 1s all the more fervent and deltght-
Sul when we are assured of our personal
interest in Him. “O bless our God!”
Blessed indeed are they who can thus
regard Him. His mercies to them will
be doubly precious. Apd their praise
of Him will be specially hearty and
confiding and pleasurable.

3. The heart that ts fervent in His
praises will seek to engage others therein.
“O bless our God, ye people, and make
the voice of His praise to be heard.”
The grateful and fervent heart would
enlist multitudes in this service, and
sound His praise abroad on all sides.

Conctusion.—1. Let the afflicted
watt upon God tn patience and hope.
2. Let those delivered from affliction
pratsee Him with gratitude and glad
ness,


Tue DzouagaTION oF A GRATEFUL SoUL.
(Verses 13-20.)


“We have now,” says Perowne,
“the personal acknowledgment of God's
mercy, first, in the announcement on
the part of the Psalmist of the offerings
which he is about to bring, and which
he had vowed in his trouble; and then,
in the record of God’s dealings with his
soul, which had called forth his thank-
fulness.” We have here—

I. Help in trouble implored by
man. The poet is speaking of the time
‘‘ when he was in trouble,” and he says,
“T cried unto Him with my mouth,”
&c. From his statements we learn
that—

1. His prayer was presented im up-
rightness of heart. “If I regard ini-
quity in my heart, the Lord will not

¥


hear me.” The Psalmist was sincere in
his approaches to God. He did not
cherish sin in his heart while seeking
the help of God. The man who loves
sin will not obtain favourable answers
to his prayers. On this point the
Sacred Scriptures are most explicit,
(Job xxvii. 8, 9; Prov. xv. 29; xxviii
9; Isa. i, 15; lix. 1, 2; John ix. 31;
1 John iii. 21, 22.)

2. His prayer was offered with solemn
promises. The Psalmist says, “I will
pay Thee my vows, which my lips have
uttered, and my mouth hath spoken
when I was in trouble.’ Under the
pressure of great suffering he had
uttered solemn promises to God, It is
@ very common occurrence a mea

33


PGALM LEVZ.


are suffering some great affliction to
make vows of reformation of life, or, in
the case of the godly, of more thorough
consecration to God, if He will remove
the affliction.

3. His prayer was offered in confident
anticipation of a gracious answer, “TI
eried unto Him with my mouth, and He
was extolled with my tongue.” Heng-
stenberg: ‘‘ A song of praise was under
my tongue.” The meaning seems to be
that the poet was so confident of a
favourable response to his prayer that
he had in readiness a hymn of praise,
which he would sing as soon as the help
sought was obtained. He was “enabled
by faith and hope to give glory to Him
when he was seeking for mercy and
grace from Him, and to praise Him for
mercy in prospect though not yet in
possession.”

If. Help in trouble granted by God.
“Verily God hath heard me; He hath
attended to the voice of my prayer.”
The Psalmist had received from God a
favourable answer to his prayer. The
help which he had sought God granted
unto him. The answer to his prayer
may be regarded—

1. Asa proof of the uprightness of his
heart. A fundamental condition of ac-
ceptable prayer is that the soul shall be
sincere and free from secretly-cherished
sin, “Asitis a settled and universal
principle that God does not hear prayer
when there is in the heart a cherished
love and purpose of iniquity, so it fol-
lows that, if there is evidence that He
has heard our prayers, it is proof that He
has seen that our hearts are sincere, and
that we truly desire to forsake all forms
of sin.”

2. Asa result of his confidence tn God.
God always graciously hears and answers
the prayer of faith, If we honour God
ey confidently anticipating His blessing,
He will reward us by abundantly be-
stowing that blessing. In our dealings
with Him trustful anticipation of His
grace will ever lead to joyous celebra-
tion of His praise.

Til. Help in trouble recounted to
men. “Come and hear, all ye that fear
God, and I will declare what He hath
done for my soul.” Notice—


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


1. The invitation. “Come and hear;
and [I will declare.” It is natural for
the heart rejoicing in some great deliver-
ance granted, or some great blessing
bestowed, to tell to others its glad ex-
perience. Because (1) All great emo-
tions seek expression. Thus the for-
given sinner longs to declare his grati-
tude and gladness, and thus to honour
God. (2) All godly souls seek to lead
others into the possession of the privi-
leges and joys which they have received.
The genius of true religion is broad,
liberal, generous,

2. The audience. “All ye that fear
God.” Barnes: “All who are true
worshippers of God—the idea of fear or
reverence being put for worship in gene-
ral. The call is on all who truly loved
God to hear what He had done, in order
that He might be suitably honoured,
and that due praise might be given
Him.” The godly man’s experience of
the Divine mercy should be recounted
to a fitting audience. ,Many of the ex-
periences of the spiritual life are too
tender and sacred to be communicated
to any save sympathetic hearers.

3. The testimony. “What He hath
done for my soul.” Much that is called
‘“‘religious experience” and “ personal
testimony” is repulsively egotistic and
conceited—the narrative of the feelings
and doings of small and selfish souls,
too much given to morbid self-introspec-
tion. The world would be much the
better if it were rid of such stuff com-
pletely and for ever. The Psalmist
wishes to recount not what he has done,
but what God has done for him, Here
is a kind of testimony worth listening
to. “When you tell others of the guid-
ances of God respecting your soul, take
care lest some hypocrisy or self-love
creep in, and that the glory of God be
your only aim.”

IV. Heip in trouble acknowledged
to God. “TI will go into Thy house with
burnt offerings,” dc. (vers. 13-15, 20).
This acknowledgment was characterised
by—

1. Faithfulness. “TI will pay Thee
my vows, which my lips have uttered,”
dic. Note: (1) The frequency with
which vows are made in time of trouble.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM LEVI,





(2) The frequency with which they are
forgotten when the trouble is removed.
(3) The solemn obligation to fulfil them.
God does not forget them, but waits
their fulfilment. Both gratitude for the
removal of the affliction, and faithful-
ness to the promise made, bind us to
their fulfilment. The vows which he
made in the night of adversity the
Psalmist fulfils in the day of prosperity.

2. Comprehensiveness. “lt will go
into Thy house with burnt offerings ;
I will offer unto Thee burnt sacrifices
of fatlings, with the incense of rams; I
will offer bullocks, with goats. Blessed
be God which hath not turned away my
prayer, nor His mercy from me.” He
resolves to offer fat lambs and bullocks
with rams and goats, and to offer them
as burnt sacrifices to be wholly con-
sumed to the honour of God. He will
“present sacrifices in all the forms re-
quired in worship ; in all the forms that
will express gratitude to God, or that
will be an acknowledgment of depend-
ence and guilt; in all that would pro-
perly express homage to the Deity.”
And He presents the offering of praise
as well as of gifts. Both material and
spiritual sacrifices he presented unto God,


3. Heartiness. Hengstenberg: “The
full enumeration of the animals to be
offered in sacrifice, shows the zeal witn
which the thanks and the offerings are
given.” Renschel: “A noble thanks-
giving is due to a great benefit.” Great
mercies should be acknowledged in fer-
vent and hearty praise.


‘* King of glory, King of peace,
I will love Thee:
And that love may never cease,


I will move Thee,


Thou hast granted my request,
Thou hast heard me;

Thou didst note my working breast,
Thou hast spared me.


Wherefore with my utmost art
I will sing Thee,

And the cream of all my heart
I will bring Thee.

Though my sins against me eried,
Thou didst clear me;

And alone, when they replied,
Thou didst hear me,


Sev’n whole days, not one in seven,
I will praise Thee.

Ia my heart, though not in heaven,
I can raise Thee,

Small it is, in this poor sort
To enroll Thee:

Ev’n eternity is too short
To extol Thee.”—Geo. Herbert.


Toe Experience or aA Gopity Man.
(Verses 16-20.)


L The godly man is anxious to im-
part his experience to others. “‘ Come
and hear.”

1. His confession ts volunteered, not
enforced. There is nothing here to jus-
tify that spiritual inquisition which some
have sought to establish in the Romish
confessional, or its Anglican imitations.

2. Spiritual experiences should be told
at suitable times. ‘Come and hear.”
It is wrong to parade soul matters at
unseasonable times. Many have brought
religion into disrepute by preaching
when they ought to have simply and
unostentatiously practised its precepts.

3. Spiritual experience should be ad-
dressed to congenial hearers. “All ye
that fear God.” We should remember
thet spiritual things can be compre-
hended only by the spiritually-minded.


4. Spiritual experiences should be
strictly personal. ‘‘What He hath done
for my souL” In this matter we may
properly talk about ourselves without
egotism. Much that has obtained cur-
rency for “experience,” has been either
fiction, or religious scandal.

II. The godly man’s experience in-
cludes both penitence and praise.

1. He has to tell of sin mourned over.
“T cried unto Him.” This is just the
language that would describe the out-
burst of a penitent soul

2. He has to tell of trouble endured,
The trouble has been greater than he
could bear; it has been more than he
could fight against; hence he has eried
to One higher than he.

3. He has to tell of mercies received.
“He was extolled with my tongue,”

339


PeaLM LXVIL


BOMILETIO COMMENTARY ; PSALMB.


EE. SS ee ne ae


This He has done for my soul : I sinned,
and He forgave me; I was in trouble,
and He helped me. “This poor man
cried, and the Lord heard,” &e.

Ill. The godly man’s logic. “If I
regard iniquity,” d&c. The purport of
the Christian’s story is—not that he has
not sinned ; but that God has forgiven
the iniquity of his sin, and has given
him grace to overcome sin. ‘‘ Whoso-
ever is born of God sinneth not.” The
Christian’s argument is this ; If I cherish
sin in my heart, God will not hear my
prayer. But God has heard me. There-
fore it is clear that His grace has been
effective in my heart in subduing the
power of sin, The answered prayer is


PSALM


the proof that I have been enabled by
ce to overcome sin.

IV. The godly man’s experience
always culminates in a song of praise.
Even when he has most plainly estab-
lished his innocence, he ascribes the
glory to God, whose mercy has not been
withdrawn, and who still hears and
answers prayer. This closing song im-
plies three things—

1. That God's mercy 1s continuous ;
else iniquity would prevail, and be
cherished in the heart.

2. That God hears prayer unweartedly.

3. That the disposition to pray ts
also God’s gift.—" The Homiletec Quar-
terly.”


LXVIL


INTRODUCTION.


iption. “To the chief Musician :” see Introduction to Ps. Ivil.


gee Introduction to Pa. liv.


On Neginoth :"


‘6 4 Song or Psalm :” see Introduction to Ps, xlviii.


Neither the author of the psalm nor the occasion of its composition are known unto us.

The chief feature of the psalm is the intense desire of the Psalmist (who wrote the psalm
for the Temple service) for the universal worship of God. This is quite clear from the repeti-
tion of ver. 8. Twice in this brief poem he exclaims, “ Let the people praise Thee, QO God ;


let all the people praise Thee.”


Homiletically, we regard the psalm as setting forth—


Tur MIssioNaRY PRAYER OF THE CHURCH.


Consider—

IL. The great object of the missionary
prayer of the Church. In this psalm,
the Church seeks,

1. That God may be known by all
men. (1.) As to His way. “That Thy
way may be known upon earth.” The
way of God is His procedure towards
mankind ; “the principles and methods
of the Divine administration; the way
in which God rules mankind, and in
which He bestows His blessings on
men.” It seems to us that to under
stand this way aright we must view it
as comprising two aspects: the way of
the Divine requirement, or what He
demands from men ; and the way of the
Divine treatment, or what He does for
men. (2.) Asto His salvation. ‘Thy
saving health among all nations.” In-
atead 4 ne saving health,” we should


read, salvation, The Church prays that
the Divine salvation may be known by
all peoples—that all peoples may ex-
perience it. The heart that knows the
blessedness of personal religion will seek
to extend that experience to others,
There is a vital connection between these
two branches of knowledge. “If God
make known His way to us, and we
walk in it, He will show us His saving
health.” In the way of Divine require-
ment and the way of Divine treatment,
in God’s grace and his own obedience to
God, man finds salvation.

2. That God may be worshipped by
all men. “ Let the people praise Thee,
O God ; let all the people praise Thee.
O let the nations be glad and sing for
joy.” We have here(1.) Worship in its
object. “‘ Tet the people praise Thee, O
God.” It'is natural and right that the


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





kindest Being should be regarded with
gratitude, the best Being with reverence.
Both on account of what He és and of
what He does, God should be praised.
He is the only true object of worship.
(2.) Worship in its character. “O let
the nations be glad and sing for joy.”
The worship of God should be joyous,
Its fitting expressions are songs, not
groans ; declarations of confidence, not
the murmurs of discontent, (3.) Worship
in its extent. “Let all the people praise
Thee. O let the nations,” &c. It is a
prayer that all the Gentiles may be
brought to know and worship the Lord
God. (See on Ps, Ixvi 4.) Let us
clearly and firmly apprehend the untver-
sality of the aim of this prayer. How
grand this aim! A saved world joyously
worshipping the one living and true God!

II. The means by which the attain-
ment of this object is sought. These
means are various; but that which is
brought into prominence here is Prayer
for the gracious presence of God with
His Church. “God be merciful unto
us, and bless us, and cause His face to
shine upon us.” Margin: ‘ With us.”
Moll: “‘Among us.’ The expression
among or with us does not indicate the
nearness of the help but the accompany-
ing, or better, the guiding presence of
God.” There is a manifest reference to
the benediction of the High Priest
(Numb. vi. 24-26). To cause the face
to shine upon any one is to look upon
him with favour. It is a beautiful
representation of the Divine approval
and blessing. This blessing is sought
as a favour, not demanded as a right.
The Divine mercy, and not their own
merit, is the ground on which their
petition is urged. ‘God be merciful
unto us.” How profound is the phil-
osophy of this prayer! Superficially
the idea is: Bless us with guidance,
with prosperity, with outward and
visible tokens of Thy blessing, so that
the heathen, in the hope of sharing in
these favours, may be led to acknow-
ledge Thee. But there is a deeper and
more spiritual idea here: when the
Church is richly filled with the pres-
ence and blessing of her Divine Lord,
men will numerously and eagerly seek


PSALM LEVI


to know the way and salvation of God.
A living, active, holy Church would
speedily result in the conversion of the
world to God. What the Church most
pressingly needs for the accomplishment
of her great work is not more numerous
agencies, not new methods of evangeli-
sation, not increase of material wealth,
but a deeper and more abiding realisa-
tion of the presence and blessing of God
in her midst. Our successes in mis-
sionary enterprise, both at home and
abroad, are comparatively few and small
because we are spiritually feeble; we
are spiritually feeble because our reali-
sation of the presence of God with us
is so fluctuating and faint; and our
realisation of the presence of God with
us is faint and fluctuating because we
have not sought it with earnest pur;ose
and strong faith. “These,” says Guen-
ther, “are the true prophets and
teachers, upon whose countenance the
glance of the Divine light still remains.”
When that light shines clearly upon the
countenances of the members of the
Christian Church, the day will not be
far distant when “ail the people ” shall
praise God.

III. The confidence in which this
prayer is offered. Here are two
things—

1. The confidence expressed. ‘God,
even our own God, shall bless us. God
shall bless us ; and all the ends of the
earth shall fear Him.” The poet ex-
presses the assurance that the object
prayed for would be granted ; that God
would bless His own people, and that
so the world would be won to Him in
joyous worship.

2. The basis of this confidence. This
is twofold. (1) The relation of God to
men, and His work for men. “Thou
shalt judge the people righteously, and
govern the nations upon earth.” God
appears here as the righteous Sovereign
of men. The great principles of the
Divine government as seen in the his-
tory of the world are so righteous and
gracious that the heathen will joyously
give Him their allegiance. He also
appears here as the gracious Leader of
men. Margin: “And lead the nationa”
Hengstenberg: “And guidest.” Pe-

341


PSALM LXVIT,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





rowne: “The verb is the same as in Pa,
xxiii. 3, God being the great Shepherd
of all nations.” He guides in paths of
safety, prosperity, peace, and life. His
government and guidance are powerful
incentives to trust and worship Him.
(2) The blessing bestowed upon the
Church. The Hebrew verb in the first
clause of ver. 6 is in the past tense.
Conant: “‘The earth hath yielded her
increase.” Hengstenberg: ‘The land
gave its increase.” There is an obvious
reference to a recent harvest, Calvin
expresses what we hold as the meaning
and bearing of the clause; “As often
as God adorned that ancient people


with His benefits, He, at the same time,
shone upon the whole world with a
burning torch, so as to allure the
heathen to seek Him.” His blessings


‘to His Church encourage and strengthen


faith in the progress, and ultimately the
complete triumph of His cause and
kingdom. (For additional grounds of
confidence see on Pa, Ixvi. 4.)
ConcLusion.—The subject presents
to us a word of—1l, Hncouragement.
How glorious is the prospect! 2. In-
struction, How wise are the means for
realising it! 3. Hxhortation. Let us


Gop REALISED BY His Proritz


(Verse 6.)


“Our own God shall bless us.”

The heathen nations had their numer-
ous gods,—gods for every phase of na-
ture, for all seasons, and for all events.
But these gods were senseless idols,
puerile, contemptible, and valueless ; so
also were all those who trusted in them.
(See Ps. cxv.) But Jehovah was the
God of Israel, and as such the object of
their faith and hope, In Him they
trusted, to Him gave homage, and in
Him exulted, as in the text.

Observe—

IL The Divine Being, in the text—
“@Qop.” This Being was unknown to
the heathen, but He revealed Himself
to the holy patriarchs, and especially
to Abraham and Moses. Our God,

1. Is a Spirit, not material. Angels
are in a secondary sense spirits ; but it
is obvious that they have ethereal vest-
ments, and can manifest themselves,
and be seen by men; but not so God
(John iv. 24; 2 Cor. iii, 17; Col. i. 15;
Heb, xi. 27).

2. Self-ewistent. He, the Creator,
has no maker; from Himself and in
Himself,—absolutely underived; before
all things (Deut. iv. 35 ; Isa. xliv. 6).

3. Hternal. From eternity to eter-
nity,—-God. No beginning, nor capable
of any end of His existence (Isa. lvii,
15 ; Rom. i. 20).

4. Unchangeable; or, He would not

349


diligently use these means, ‘“ God ba
merciful unto us,” &.
be absolutely perfect ‘The same


yesterday, and to-day, and for ever.”
So in His essence, attributes, and pur-
poses ; of one eternal, unalterable mind
(Mal. iii. 6 ; Jas. i. 17).

5. Omnipotent,—of unlimited energy.
Able to do all things worthy of His
effectuating (Gen. xvii. 1; Rev. xix. 6).

6. Omnisctent,—knowing all things
accurately, distinctly, infallibly. And,
with these His natural attributes, pos-
sessing every moral perfection—wisdom,
holiness, goodness, truth, mercy, love.
Such is the Divine Being exhibited in
the text.

Il. His relationship to us. “Our
own God.” Not merely the God of the
universe, the only God, the God of the
seraphim and the holy angels, but
“our God.” The God—

1. Of our being. Our Maker, Father,
source of existence (Gen. ii. 7; Job
xxxiii. 4; Ps. cxxxix. 14; Isa. lvii, 6).

2. Our good Benefactor. Fountain
of all goodness, the Giver of every good
and perfect gift (Exod. xxxiv. 6; 1
Chron. xvi. 34; Ps. xxxiii. 5).

3. Our Divine Lord and Ruler. To
whom we are subject, and owe all
loyal obedience, and worship, and love
(2 Kings xix. 15; 2 Chron. xx. 6; Pa.
xcv. 3).

4. Our covenant God, who remem-
bered us in our low estate, and in infi-


Ci


' HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PRALM LEVIN


ge nenenneeeseenee


nite condescension and mercy entered
into gracious covenant relationship with
His Son for our redemption and resto-
ration to holiness and eternal life (2 Sam.
xxiii. 5 5 Jer. xxxi. 31; Heb. viii. 8).

5. Our gracious God, who has called
us and adopted us into His Divine
and heavenly family,

6. The God of our profession and
worship. Ours by obedience to His
call, and faith in His name, and avowal
of delight in His service.

7. Our God for ever and ever,—in
close, unbroken fellowship, and eternal
oneness and joy. God is ours con-
sciously by the indwelling of His Spirit,
and by our union with His only be-
gotten Son Jesus Christ.

Il. The blessed assurance of this
telationship,—“ shall bless us.”

1. With all the good we need.


3. With the rich treasures of His
grace.
4. With eternal life and glory.


A few words in conclusion—

1, These blessings are of His sovereign
bestowment.

2. Are laid up for us in His Son, our
Lord Jesus Christ, in whom all fulness
dwells.

3. Are realised by us as we ask and
believe.

4. Are absolutely certain, as based on
His own immutable word, ratified by
His solemn oath and sealed with the
precious blood of the Lord Jesus,

5. And are experienced by all His
saints in the dispensation of His grace
and love.

Yes; “God, our own God will bless
us.” Grateful acknowledgment and
entire consecration are His right and


2. With the evident tokens of His due. To our God be glory evermore.
favour. His Spirit, His presence, com- —Jabes Burna, D.D,
munion, ée,
PSALM LXVIIL
INTRODUCTION,
Supereeri .—" To the Chief Musician.” See Introduction to Pealm wif. *° A Pealm or
Song of Dard.” See Introduction to Psalm xlviii.


The Superscription does not mention the occasion on which the psalm was composed. On
this point various opinions have been held and advocated, Most of the older expositors, and
Steir and Barnes amongst the moderns, are ut opinion that it was composed for the removal of
the Ark from the house of Obed-edom to Mount Zion (2 Sam. vi.). The view of others is that
it was composed to celebrate the victorious termination of some war, when the Ark was brought
back to Zion. Throughout the psalm God is praised as the Lord of battle and of victory. Can
we ascertain what victory is here celebrated # For our guidance in this inquiry we have two
data. ‘‘ First, the psalm must have been composed at a time when the sanctuary of the Lord
was on Mount Zion (vers. 15, 16, 2, 35). The choice is thus very much narrowed. There
remain only two great victories, the Syrian-Edomite, and the Ammonitic-Syrian, Second, in
the war referred to in this psalm, the Ark of the Covenant must have been in the field, accord-
ing to vers, 1 and 24. It ia evident from 2 Sam, xi. 11, that this was the case in the Ammonitic
war. We may therefore with great probability conclude, that the psalm was composed after
the capture of Rabbah (2 Sam. xii. 26-31), which terminated that war, the most dangerous with
which David had todo. It was quite in accordance with David’s uaual manner to celebrate a
great religious festival at the close of auch a war.”—(Hengstenberg). Alexander, Moll, Tholuck,
et al., also take this view. The weight of evidence seems to us certainly in favour of it.

‘¢The fundamental thought is clear,” says Moll, ‘‘namely : The celebration of an entrance
of God into His sanctuary on Zion after a victory, and His rule over the world extending itself
from thence.” The development of this thought we shall endeavour to indicate as we proceed
with our homiletical treatment of the pealm.


Ture Vicrornious Marcu or THE Goon,


(Verses 1-10.)


The Psalm opens with a reference to nant in the journeyings of the Israelites
the watchword which was used at the (Num.x.35). God is entreated to arise
setting forward of the Ark of the Cove for the overthrow of His enemies and

343


PAALM LEVINE


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMB,








the salvation of His people. The people
are exhorted to praise God as the glori-
ous Leader of a victorious march through
the desert—One who protects and pro-
vides for, who saves and enriches His
people. There follows, in vers. 7-10,
an illustration of the gracious and glori-
ous guidance of God, as seen in the
history of Israel in the wilderness. We
regard this section of the psalm as an
illustration of The victorious march of
the good.

L The march of the good is opposed
by enemies. The enemies whom God
is invoked to arise against are the ene-
mies of Israel. The people of God in
all ages have been a militant people.
To day their enemies are numerous and
subtle and strong. They have to con-
tend against unbelief and superstition,
against carnality and worldliness, against
temptations from without, and evil ten-
dencies from within, Conflict is an
essential condition of spiritual life and
growth in our present state of being.
Our advancement in the Christian course
is disputed and opposed at every step
by our foes. Concerning these enemies
the Psalmist makes two things to stand
prominently forth—

l. They are depraved in character.
He speaks of them as “the wicked.”
How terrible is the wickedness of any
one who would deliberately tempt
another to evil, or seek to corrupt a
pure mind, or oppose the progress of a
godly soul!

2. They are hostile to the Most High.
They are “ His enemies,” they “ hate
Him.” Think of the appalling iniquity
and guilt of hating that Being who
is supremely righteous and kind and
beautiful! What a terrible perversion
of character such hatred indicates !
They who oppose the people of God are
accounted by Him as His enemies.

Ii. The march of the good is marked
by trials, The character of this jour-
ney is indicated in general here as a
march through a desert. Thus in ver.
4, instead of “Extol Him that rideth
upon the heavens,” we should have,
“ Make a way for Him who rideth for-
ward in the deserts,” or, “ Cast up a way
for Him that rides through the deserts,”

344


And in verse 7, “O God, when Thou
didst march through the wilderness,” or,
“through the desert.” There is much
in the circumstances and experiences of
the good in this world which is truly
illustrated by a pilgrimage in the desert.
But this general idea is expanded by the
Psalmist in vera. 5 and 6. We have
here—

1. The helpless and sorrowful. ‘The
fatherless . . . the widows.” These
expressions must not be restricted to
their literal meaning. They are used to
set forth those who have lost their pro-
tector and helper, and whose hearts are
sorrowful and sore.

2. The forsaken and lonely. “The
solitary” is intended to represent those
who are forsaken, and are destitute of
human friendship and help.

3. The enslaved. “Those which are
bound with chains,” represents not
simply those who are literally impri-
soned or enslaved, but those who are
bound by evil habits or associations, the
slaves of superstition and sin, the thralls
of fear, who cannot rise to the joy of
holy assurance in God.

These classes represent some of the
pilgrims in the march of the good in
our own day. Even amongst true and
godly souls there are weary feet and sad
and sorrowful hearts. ‘Faint, yet pur-
suing” is a true description of the con-
dition of thousands of travellers on the
heavenly road. From our pilgrim state
trial is inseparable. We are in the
desert. with its consuming heat, and
sandy wastes, and vast trackless ex-
panses, and prowling enemies.

Ill. The march of the good is led
on victoriously. Mark the glorious
Leader. “Let God arise. ... Him
w:.0 rideth forward through the deserta,
... Thou didst march through the
wilderness.” There is a reference to the
Ark of the Covenant, which victoriously
preceded the hosts of Israel. The Ark,
with the pillar of cloud by day, and of
fire by night resting upon it, was the
sign of the Divine presence. It was
also a type of Christ. He is the great
and glorious Leader of His people ; and
He leads them on from victory to vie
tory. Under His guidance they are—


r


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY : PSALMS.


PSALM LEVEL.


ee


1. Victorious over enemies, “Let God
arise, let His enemies be scattered,” &c.
Their victory is (1) Jrresistible. Their
foes are driven before them as smoke
before the wind. As wax has no power
to resist heat, but melts away under its
influence, so the enemies of the hosts of
God are unable to stand before Him.
When He leads His people to battle
their enemies flee powerless and panic
stricken. “Let God arise, as the sun
when he goes forth in his strength ; and
the children of darkness shall be scat-
tered, as the shadows of the evening flee
before the rising sun.” (2) Complete.
“ As smoke is driven away,” &c. Who
can recover the smoke-cloud which the
wind has scattered far and wide? “Let
the wicked perish at the presence of
God.” The omnipotence of God guar-
antees the destruction of His enemies,
and the triumph of His people. The
good have to contend with foes, but “in
all things they are more than conquerors
through Him that loved” and leads
them.

2. Victorious over difficulties and
trials, Are they marching through a
desert? Then God makes the desert as
a fruitful field with His own gifts from
heaven. “Thou, O God, didst send a
plentiful rain.” Alexander: “A rain
of free gifts.” Hengstenberg: “A rain
of gifts.” There is a reference “to the
provision made by God for His people,
in temporal matters, during their march-
ings through the wilderness—the manna,
the quails, the water out of the rock,”
&c. In this we have an illustration of
the all-sufficiency and freeness and
abundance of the provision which God
has made for His people. In things
temporal He will withhold no good from
them. In things spiritual He has pro-
vidsd for them “a feast of fat things.”
The provisions of Christianity are abun-
dant, free, rich, satisfying, and pleasant,
Are they helpless and sorrowful? Then
God, their Leader, is their mighty
Helper and their gracious Comforter.
“A Father of the fatherless, and a judge
of the widows, is God in His holy habi-
tation.” God has ever manifested great
regard for the widow and fatherless
(Exod. xxii, 32-24; Deut. x. 18; Psa.


exlvi, 7-9 ; Hos. xiv. 3). He interposes
for those who have no helper; He com-
forts the mourner. It is His greatest
glory that He is merciful to the penitent
transgressor, and compassionate to the
miserable. Are they faint and weary ?
Then God. refreshes them, “Thou
didst confirm Thine inheritance when
it was weary.” Hengstenberg: “ Thine
heritage, the weary one, Thou didst
strengthen it.” Conant: “ When faint-
ing, Thou Thyself hast raised it up.”
When the Israelites were worn out with
fatigue by reason of their journeyings
in the wilderness, He refreshed and
strengthened them. He sustains and
cheers His people in the most exhaust-
ing and trying circumstances of their
pilgrimage. ‘He giveth power to the
faint,” &c. (Isa. xl. 29-31). Are they
enslaved? He gives to them joyous
liberty. ‘He bringeth out those which
are bound with chains.” He delivers
from the slavery of evil habits, from the
tyranny of sin and Satan, from the
bondage of fear, &c. Under this glo-
rious Leader difficulties are vanquished
and made to contribute to the success
of the pilgrim host, trials are bravely
borne, and ultimately transformed into
blessings, and foes are utterly van-
quished. Triumphantly the great Cap-
tain of the good leads forward His
hosts.

IV. The march of the good is led
on to a glorious termination. The
journey of the Israelites ended at
Canaan. There “God made the soli-
tary to dwell at home.” In giving them
possession of that land; and in protect-
ing them therein against their enemies,
He manifested His kindness to them.
“Thy congregation hath dwelt therein:
Thou, O God, hast prepared of Thy
goodness for the poor.” “ Therein”
refers to the land of promise. Though
that land has not been expressly men-
tioned in the preceding verses, yet it
was prominently in the mind of the
Psalmist. The possession of it was the
grand end of the journey through the
wilderness. There they found rest, re-
freshment, provisions in abundance, &c.
How glorious is the end of the pilgrim-
age of the good! Rest from wanderings,

345


PSALM LXVIEE


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





from fears, from conflicts. The posses-
sion of purity, peace, joy, dc. Under
the guidance of our Lord our march will
end at home—our Father’s home.

Conctusion.—l. hts lead should
be earnestly sought. ‘ Let God arise,”
&c. Without it we shall “dwell in a
dry land.” Without it life will be vain,
fruitless, and will end in failure. But
under His guidance life will grow in
purity, power, and usefulness, and will
end in triumph and glory.

** Guide me, O Thou great Jehovah,” &e.


2. This lead should be heartily refoiced
in. “Let the righteous be glad,” de.
This rejoicing should be fervent. “ Let
them exceedingly rejoice,” or, “ exult
for gladness.” Great blessings should
enkindle great joys. It should be
religious, ‘Let them rejoice before
God.” Grateful and reverent should be
our gladness that we have such a
Leader. It should be uttered. “Sing
unto God,” &c. Sing, and so relieve
the full heart; sing, and so excite
others to do 80 also.


Tax Barren Lot or THE WICKED.
(Verse 6.)
“ The rebellious dwell in a dry land.”


Religion has been misrepresented as a
cheerless, gloomy, harsh thing. Our
text reverses this. It teaches that
irreligion is unsatisfying, that a life of
sin is a life of want and disappointment.
The children of Israel were being led
through the desert unto a land of corn
and wine, of milk and honey, &c. But
the rebellious are said to dwell in the
desert. The former pass through it to
a glorious inheritance the latter dwell
in it—their lot is barren, dreary, dis-
appointing, &e. A life of rebellion
against God is without satisfaction ; it
is cheerless, disappointed, wretched,
We see this:

I. In relation to the ordinary events
of this life. Health and sickness, gain
and loss, triumph and defeat, pleasure
and sorrow, are found more or less in
the life of every man. What is the
meaning of these things? What are
their uses 1 &c. The man who trusts in
God is in a condition for ascertaining
these things, and for making the best
use of life’s varying experiences, But
the opposite is true of “ the rebellious,”
The good man sees in his successes, and
in his health, &c., the blessing of a
gracious God. He is grateful for that
blessing; and is thus twice blessed.
He is blessed in his circumstances and
in his soul, in his hand and in his heart.
But “the rebellious” discover no trace
of the goodness of God in the successes

346


and pleasures of life. To them ne
spiritual blessing accrues from these
things. The highest ministry of these
things they entirely lose. The good
man derives profit from the dark and
trying experiences of life. He believes
that trial may be a blessing in diszuise,
that temporal loss may result in spiritual
enrichment, &e. So, by the blessing of
God, his greatest losses and crosses lead
to his greatest gains and joys. But it
is far otherwise with “the rebellious,”
To them trials and sorrows and losses
are unmixed evils, They rebel against
trials, and trials become more severe.
Temporal losses lead to bitterness of
spirit. They kick against the goads,
and so injure themselves. So far as
their spiritual relation to the circum-
stances of this life is concerned, “the
rebellious dwell in a dry land.”

Il. In relation to the great needs
of the soul Whether man recognises
and acknowledges it or not, it is true
that every man has great spiritual needs,
We need pardon, help in life’s toils and
trials, hope as to life’s future, &c. Our
being craves rest. And to obtain rest
we need truth for the intellect, righte-
ousness for the conscience, love for the
heart. The godly man finds rest in the
truth, righteousness, and love of God re-
vealed in Jesus Christ. The only way
to rest for man is through Christ (Matt,
xi. 28-30; John xiv. 6; Rom. v. 1).


Th


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSaLM LKVIG.


SSS


But how do ‘the rebellious” fare in this
respect? Let the Scriptures answer
(Isa. lvii. 20, 21; Jer. ii, 13; Luke xv.
14-17). Let human experience answer:
When Alexander the Great had subdued
all the nations of the earth, so far was
he from being satisfied with the conquest
of a world, that he wept because he had
not another world to conquer. The
world did not satisfy his soul’s cravings:
nor has it satisfied the needs of any
soul, All who have chosen the world
for their portion, and have had it, have
experienced the most bitter disappoint
ment. They have “ dwelt ina dry land.”

III. In relation to the great future.
“Tf a man die, shall he live again?”
“Man giveth up the ghost, and where
is he?” Is he anywhere? The multi-
tudes who once were upon this earth,
are they in being now? Whither and
to what are we hastening? The be


liever in Christ has a great and well-
grounded hope as to the future. “Our
Saviour Jesus Christ hath abolished
death,” &. “I am the resurrection
and the life,” &c. Tothe Christian the
future is radiant, beautiful, inviting.
But what is it to “the rebellious”?
Ah! what? It is shrouded in sable
gloom, as of a moonless, starless mid-
night. The darkness is unbroken, or
broken only by dread flashes of lurid
light. For “the rebellious” there is
“a certain fearful looking for of judg-
ment and fiery indignation,” &c.

Let “the rebellious” sue for pardon.
Let them loyally bow to the authority
of God, &. “Ye worldlings, who
wander joylessly through a godless
world, with weary feet and withered
hearts, seeking rest and finding none,
come to Jesus, and He will give you
rest,”


THe TrivmMPH or THE CHUROH.
(Verses 11-14.)


To interpret verses 13 and 14 is con-
fessedly a very difficult task. On ver.
13, Barnes says, “I confess that none
of these explanations of the passage
seem to me to be satisfactory, and that
I cannot understand it.” And Moll, at
the end of a long note on ver. 14, says,
“Since, however, there is no historical
statement here, but rather a prophetical
declaration, we are rather led to a figura-
tive mode of expression, whose sense,
however, is as obscure as its foundation
and occasion are unknown.” And in
Smith’s Dict. of the Bible, art. Salmon,
we read, “It is usually supposed that
this hill is mentioned in a verse of per-
haps the most difficult of all the Psalms ;
and this is probable though the passage
is peculiarly difficult, and the precise
allusion intended by the poet seems
hopelessly lost. . . . Unless the passage
is given up as corrupt, it seems more in
accordance with reason to admit that
there was some allusion present to the
poet’s mind, the key to which is now
lost ; and this ought not to surprise any
scholar who reflects how many allusions
there are in Greek poets—in Pindar, for


example, and .n Aristophanes—which
would be wholly unintelligible to us
now were it not for the notes of Greek
scholiasts. To these notes there is
nothing exactly analogous in Hebrew
literature; and in the absence of some
such assistance, it is unavoidable that
there should be several passages in the
Old Testament respecting the meaning
of which we must be content to remain
ignorant.”

We are quite unable to grapple suc-
cessfully with this difficulty. For the
various renderings and interpretations
of verses 13 and 14, let the reader see
the Commentaries of Barnes and Moll,
We suggest that this strophe may be
used to illustrate the triumph of the
Church over her enemies.

I In its source. “The Lord gave
the word.” The word is not simply the
announcement of the victory, but the
word of authority and power.

1. He gives the word of command.
The war against evil is Divinely autho-
rised. God Himself bids us do battle
with ignorance and vice, with unbelief
and superstition, with sin and ee

34


WHaLM LEVOE.


ZOMILETIC OOMMENTARY: PSALMS.





The crusade against evil is a holy
one,

2. He gives the word of promise. He
has granted unto us the assurance of
His constant presence.and help in the
warfare, and of ultimate victory. His
word removes all doubt as to the issue
of the conflict, (See Ps, ii, 8; lxxii. ;
Isa, xi, 9; 1 Cor. xv. 25; Heb. viii.
10, 11.) The triumph of the Church is
Divinely guaranteed,

3. He gives the word of power. “The
Almighty scattered kings,” He inspires
the heart of His soldiers with courage,
and nerves their arm with power (Pa
exliv. 1, 2), The Church will conquer
evil through the might of her Saviour
and Lord. ‘ We are more than con-
querors through Him that loved us.”
“The God of peace shall bruise Satan
under your feet shortly.”

Ii. In its completeness. Graphi-
cally the poet represents this He
shows it—

1. In the utter rout of the foes,
“Kings of armies did flee apace ;” or,
“The kings of the hosts fled, they fled.”
There have been times in the history of
the Christian Church when the powers
of evil have fled in dismay before her
faith and effort. These past victories
are foreshadowings of grander triumphs
yet to come, Darkness and evil are
destined to flee before the light and
love of God in His Church.

2. In the greatness of the spoil. “She
that tarried at home divided the spoil.”
M. Henry: “ Not only the men, the
soldiers that abode by the stuff, who
were, by a statute of distributions, to
share the prey (1 Sam. xxx. 24), but
even the women that tarried at home
had a share, which intimates the abund-
ance of spoil that should be taken.”
Hengstenberg: “The victory and the
spoil, which the Lord imparted to His
people, in the season of their childhood,
was a type of a far more glorious vic-
tory and a more precious spoil, Arnd.:
‘Is it not a valuable spoil that so many
thousands of men have been converted
from heathenism, among whom have
been so many glorious teachers and
lights of the Church, such as Justin,
ca Ambrose, not to apeak of

48


the innumerable martyrs, who were all
brought out of heathenism, and were
put to death because of their attach-
ment to the Christian faith,’” All the
wealth of the world—its silver and gold,
its power and beauty, its genius and
eloquence—shall one day be laid at the
feet of the Lord in joyful homage.

3. In the subsequent prosperity.
“Though ye have lien among the pots,
yet ye shall be as the wings of a dove
covered with silver, and her feathers
with yellow gold. When the Almighty
scattered kings ‘in it, it was white as
snow in Salmon.” Hengstenberg:
“ When ye rest between the boundaries,
ye are like the wings of doves covered
with silver, and their feathers with the
gleam of gold. When the Almighty
scatters kings in it, it snows on
Balmon.” He saya, “The 13U implies


peaceful rest, as at Num. xxiv. 9... .
The oOnaw signifies either sheepfolds or
boundaries, . . . At all events the term
denotes a state of peaceful rest. In this
condition the Israelites, to whom the
address is directed, are, taken figura-
tively, wings of the doves, &c., or they
are like doves, whose wings glitter with
silver and gold. The allusion is to the
play of colours on the wings of the dove
in sunshine, The real import is the
peaceful and, at the same time, splendid
condition enjoyed by Israel in the lap of
peace, .... The ‘snow’ is mentioned
here because it has the colour of purest
light (comp. Ps. li. 7; Isa. i. 18; Mark
ix. 3; Matt. xvii 2, xxviii. 3; Rev. i
14). Salmon is ‘a hill mentioned in
Judg. ix. 48, which was covered over
with great thick wood (even according
to that passage), so that it might be
called a dark forest, the black or dark
mountain,’ —Luther. There is no need
for supplying any mark of comparison
before Salmon : it is rather to be con-
sidered as used in a figurative sense for
the land, just as snow is a figurative
expression for the clear brightness of
prosperity.” According to this expost
tion these obscure verses give us two
ideas: (1) Rest. The triumph of the
Church will be so complete that it will
be followed by perfect and endless rest


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





(3) Prosperity. The age of warfare
ended, the Church will enter upon the
everlasting age of progress and beauty
and glory.

Til. In its celebration. ‘Great was
the company of those that published
it.” Conant; “The women that pub-
lish the glad tidings are a mighty host.
Hengstenberg: “ Of the female messen-
gers of victory there are a great host,”
Amongst the Israelites when the army
was ordered to war the women cheered
the soldiers onward with their songs.
And, when they returned victorious,
with songs and dances they celebrated
the victory. (Sce Exod. xv. 20, 21;


PHALM LEV,





1 Sam. xviii, 6, 7; e al.) And the
triumph of the Church of Christ shall
not fail of celebration. Those who have
fought and suffered, those who have
watched and prayed, a countless host
of faithful souls, shall join in the exult-
ant songs and festivities of the final
triumph. Glimpses of this celebration
we have in the Holy Word. But the
celebration itself, in its extent and en-
thusiasm, in its rapture and splendour,
shall far surpass our utmost expectation
and imagination. And to Jesus—
Leader, Saviour, and Sovereign—shall
be ascribed “glory and dominion for
ever and ever, Amen.”


Tue GLory or THe CHURCRA.
(Verses 15-18.)


We regard these verses as illustrating
the glory of the Church of God.

I. It consists in its being the dwell-
ing-place of God. Zion is here spoken
of as “the hill which God desireth to
dwell in.” The Most High dwells in
the Church as He does not in the world
(Matt. xviii. 20; John xiv. 22, 23), In
the Church He reveals His will, puts
forth His saving power, manifests the
glory of His grace, &c, (see notes on Ps,
xlviii. 1-3).

1. He dwells there of His own sovereign
choice. He “has chosen to dwell” in
Zion. “The Lord hath chosen Zion ;
He hath desired it for His habitation,
This is My rest for ever: here will I
dwell; for I have desired it.” Moll:
“ Sinai and Zion are mountains of God,
as Israel is the people of God, not on
sccount of natural advantages, but the
Pivine election of grace.” God dwells
in His Church because of His own
gracious and sovereign choice.

2. He dwells there permanently. “Yea,
the Lord will dwell in it for ever.” The
ark and the temple have long since passed
from Zion ; but in the Christian Church,
the spiritual Zion, God still dwells, and
will do so for ever. In this promise we
have a guarantee of the permanence of
the Church. “It is impossible,” says
Renschel, “that the Christian Church
should verish ; for God is not only a


guest in it, but He dwells therein for
ever as the host.” Not in wealthy en-
dowments, or worldly power, or impos-
ing edifices, or gorgeous ritual, or
eloquent ministers, does the glory of
the Church consist ; but in the gracious
presence of God in her midst.

I. It transcends the utmost glory
of the world. “ The hill of God is as
the hill of Bashan, an high hill as the
hill of Bashan. Why leap ye, ye high
hills? this is the hill which God desireth
to dwell in; yea, the Lord will dwell in
it for ever.” Bashan “extended from
the ‘border of Gilead’ on the south to
Mount Hermon on the north (Deut. iii.
8, 10, 14; Josh. xii. 5; 1 Chron, v.
23), and from the Arabah or Jordan
valley on the west to Salchah (Sulkhad)
and the border of the Geshurites and
the Maacathites on the east (Josh. xii.
3-5; Deut. iii, 10). This important
district was bestowed on the half tribe
of Manaaseh (Josh, xiii, 29-31) together
with ‘half Gilead.’” It was famous for
the oaks of its forests (Ezek, xxvii.
6), the wild cattle of its pastures (Ps.
xxii. 12), and the fertility and beauty
of its high downs and wide sweeping
plains (Jer. L 19; Amos iv. 1; Mic.
vii. 14). “The hill of Bashan is the
high snow-summit of Anti-Lebanon or
Hermon, the extreme limit of Bashan,
yes really belonging to it.” The moun

349


PSALM LEVEL


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMB.





tain of Hermon rises to a height of fully
10,000 feet. For conspicuousness and
elevation Mount Zion cannot be com-
pared with it. Hermon, the mountain
of Bashan, is used here as an emblem of
the powerful kingdoms of this world,
The hills of Bashan were inhabited for
the most part by heathen peoples who
were hostile to Israel, as is implied in
the inquiry, “Why leap ye, ye high
hills?” Conant: ‘Why watch ye
jealously, ye mountain peaks?” Moll:
“Why do ye look with envy, ye many-
peaked mountains?” ‘The reference
is to lurking, and so crafty and hostile,
or envious and jealous looking over at
them.” The mighty powers of the
neighbouring heathen world looked with
contempt and lurking hostility upon
Israel. And the poet challenges them
for the reason of this, and boldly claims
for Zion superior dignity and glory than
anything of which they could boast, in-
asmuch as it was selected as the dwell-
ing-place of God. The greatest temporal
advantages are poor when compared
with spiritual privileges such as those
which Israel enjoyed on Zion. Because
it is the dwelling-place of the Most High
the humble hill of Zion is exalted far
above all the mighty and majestic moun-
tains of earth. ‘It is much more hon-
ourable to be holy to God than to be
high and great in the world.” By rea-
son of its spiritual privileges the Church
of God outshines the most glorious
kingdoms of the world.

ITIL. Itis seen in its security. “The
chariots of God are twenty thousand,
thousands of angels: the Lord is among
them.” In the Hebrew there is no men-
tion of angels, Hengstenberg translates :
“The chariots of God are two myriads,
many thousands, the Lord is among
them.” And Conant: “The chariots of
God are myriadfold, thousands upon
thousands.” Notice—

1. The poetic representation of the
security of the Church. War chariots
were much used for attack and defence
by the most powerful nations, ‘“ The
main strength of the hostile armies, par-
ticularly the Syrian, in the war which
had just been brought to a termination
(comp. 2 Sam. viii 4; x 18), lay in

350


war-chariots.” So Mount Zion is repre-
sented as surrounded by a countless host
of these chariots. So Elisha, when the
king of Syria had “sent horses and
chariots and a great host” for to take
him, was protected ; for “the mountain
was full of horses and chariots of fire
round about” him. What are the
powers of worldly kingdoms to the
powers which do the Divine bidding?
“Thousand thousands minister unto
Him, and ten thousand times ten thou-
sand stand before Him.” The agents
which He employs to guard His Church
are countless in number and invincible
in power.

2. The secret of the security of the
Church. “The Lord is among them.”
His presence in their midst makes the
defending host fearless and triumphant.
The security of the Church is not in its
members, or wealth, or organisation, or
hosts of angelic defenders ; but in the
Lord Himself. “Yea, the Lord will
dwell in it for ever. .. . . The Lord is
among them,” is a guarantee of the com-
plete safety of His Church against all
the hostile designs and doings of evil
powers, ‘God is in the midst of her;
she shall not be moved.”

IV. It is seen in its sanctity. “As
in Sinai, in the holy place.” Or, leav-
ing out the words supplied by the trans-
lators: “Sinai, in the holy.” Heng-
stenberg: “Sinai is in the sanctuary.”
Moll: “‘A Sinai in sanctity.’ Zion
affords a sight as Sinai afforded it when
God in His appearance surrounded it
with holiness.” On Zion as on Sinai
God reveals the majesty of His glory;
and His presence consecrates and hal-
lows it. The glory of the Church is
manifested when she realises the pre-
sence of the Lord in her midst, and
reflects His glory in the character and
conduct of her members. When Chris
tians shine in the beauty of holiness, the
glory of the Church will be seen by all

V. It has been strikingly illus-
trated. “Thou hast ascended on high,
Thou hast led captivity captive, Thou
hast received gifts for men, yea, for the
rebellious also, that the Lord God might
dwell among them.” Barnes: “The
idea is, that God had descended or come


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


down from His dwelling-place in the
case referred to in the psalm, and that
having secured a victory by vanquishing
His foes, and having given deliverance
to His people, He had now returned, or
reascended to his seat.” We have in
the verse—

1. A great victory. This is clearly
implied in the words, “Thou hast led
captivity captive.” Primarily, this means
that God had achieved a complete vic-
tory in the war, and had captured the
captives of the enemies, and led them
away in triumph. As applied to the
Redeemer, it signifies that He triumphed
over His enemies, and rescued those
whom they had made captive, and bound
them to Himself as trophies of His
conquest, The Lord Jesus has van-
quished the hosts of hell, rescued my-
riads from the bondage of sin and Satan,
and bound them to Himself by the
chains of loving loyalty.

2. Precious spotls, ‘Thou hast re-
ceived gifts for men,” &c. Expositors
differ in the interpretation of this clause,
and that chiefly with reference to


DIN, which the A. V. renders: “ for
men.” Margin: “in the man.” Moll:
“Sof men.” Alford, Barnes, Conant,
Hengstenberg, Olshausen, et al.: “ among
men.” ‘“ Thou hast received gifts among
men, yea, among the rebellious.” The
Most High is represented by the Psalm-
ist as having taken precious spoils from
the enemy, and returning home to dis-
tribute them amongst his victorious
hosts and people. Even the most re-
fractory were compelled to pay tribute





PSALM LXVIE.





to this all-conquering Foe. The Lord
Jesus Christ having vanquished sin,
Satan, and death, bestows the richest
gifts upon all who submit themselves to
Him.

3. A glorious ascension. ‘‘ Thou hast
ascended on high.” Hengstenberg:
‘The ascending of God presupposes His
descending (comp. Eph. iv. 9). It
denotes His ascent to heaven, after He
had made Himself known on earth in
deeds of omnipotence and love, that He
may there manage the affairs of His
people (comp. at Ps. xlvii. 5).” This
ascension was symbolised by the en-
trance of the Ark into Zion. So our
Lord, when He had completed His work
on earth, ascended to “the right hand
of the Majesty on high,” to conduct the
cause of His people there,

4. The grand object. ‘“ That the Lord
God might dwell among them.” Or,
“That Jah God might dwell.” The
grand end of the victory of God on be-
half of His people was that He might
dwell amongst them as their heavenly
King. And the grand end of the re-
demptive work and warfare of the Lord
Jesus is that He might dwell amongst
men as the gracious Sovereign of their
being.

Conotusion.— 1. Let the Church
learn in what its true glory consists. 2.
Let it estimate truly the mean and tran-
stent glory of the world. 3, Let tt trust
tn God and triumph in its security. 4.
Let tt seek to realise His presence more
fully, and spread His triumphs more
widely.


Tae ASCENSION OF CHRIST.
(Verse 18.)


This passage is applied by the Apostle
Paul to the Lord Jesus Christ ; we may
therefore use it in the way of illustra-
tion of some things connected with the
exaltation of our Redeemer. Let us
notice—

I. The fact of His ascension.

1. He ascended in human nature. He
assumed that nature as our representa-
tive, and as our representative He has
entered into heavenly places. He took


our nature in its state of degradation,
but He has exalted it, and by His exal-
tation He has given us the pledge of
raising our nature from its state of
degradation.

2. He ascended to heaven. The place
of glory—of God, the Father of glory—
of angels—and of the spirita of just men
made perfect.

3. The circumstances of His ascension,
He ascended visthly; while He was in

351


PeaLM LEVEE,


BOMILETICO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





the act of blessing; having led out His
disciples as far as Bethany, He lifted up
His hands to bestow the parting bene-
diction, and then with uplifted hands,
and the word of blessing yet on His lips,
He was parted from them, He ascended
in glory ; a procession of “twenty thou-
sand chariots, even thousands of angels,”
accompanied Him in His upward course,
and as they drew near to the heavenly
city, the anthem, “ Lift up your heads,
O ye gates,” burst forth from the atten-
dant multitude, and amidst the rejoicing
of the glorious throng He entered and
sat down in the glory of His Father,

IL The triumphs with which it was
attended. “He led captivity captive,”
that is, He led a multitude of captives
captive, who had formerly been remark-
able for leading others captive. This
supposes—

1. Our Lord's conflict with His foes.
To conquer them He must first encoun-
ter them. Satan, sin, and death, were
the foes He had thus to encounter.

2. His conquest of them. He engaged
in the deadly conflict, and did not yield
till, “It is finished,” showed how it had
terminated. That was the shout of


triumph of Him who having trod the
winepress alone, had stained all His
raiment with the blood of His enemies.

3. Hts triumph over them. ‘‘ Having
spoiled principalities and powers, He
made a show of them openly ;” pro-
claiming, as He passed from the land of
His enemies, His conquest and victory.
“T that speak in righteousness, mighty
to save.”

II. The inestimable benefits sup-
plied by it. Let us look at them—

1. In their nature. Soon after His
ascension Christ bestowed various gifts
on the world. The gift of His Spirit
—to enlighten, to strengthen, to seal,
and perfect. \

2. In their objects. ‘‘For the re
bellious.” For the human race, re-
bellious in mind, in profession, in life—
for those who might justly have expected
the thunders of heaven’s wrath to burst
upon them.

3. In their design. “That the Lord
God might dwell among them.” The
Lord dwells among men by mercy, by
His manifold grace, in His eternal glory.
—H, in Sketches of Sermons.


Gop ovR SALVATION.
(Verses 19, 20.)


The Psalmist here celebrates the praise
of God, on the ground that He is the
salvation of His people. He is our
salvation—

I. In relation to life’s burdens.

1. Man ts burdened. This fact is
recognised in the nineteenth verse.
Omitting the words which have been
supplied by the translators, it reads,
“Blessed be the Lord, daily loadeth us,
the God of our salvation.” Moll trans-
lates : Blessed be the Lord day by day!
Are we burdened—He, God, is our
help.” And Hengstenberg: “ Praised
be the Lord every day, they lay burdens
on us, the Lord is our salvation.” We
are burdened with temporal anxieties,
with family solicitudes, with spiritual
trials and svorrows, and with the
mysteries and responsibilities of life.

2. Si As cca man to bear hes


burdens. He is “ the God of our salva-
tion.” “He, God, is our help.” He
helps us by His sympathy. He is
burdened in feeling with us. “In all
their affliction He was afflicted,” &. He
is “touched with the feeling of our
infirmities.” He helps us by tnstruction
as to the meaning and design of our
burdens, He helps us by snspiration.
He inspires the soul with patience—in-
creases its faith—imparts to it more
grace, so that the burden shall not prove
distressing.

I. In relation to life’s perils.
“Our God is the God of salvation.”
Hengstenberg: “God is to us a God of
deliverances.” The reference is to
deliverance from great dangers and
troubles,

1. The life of every man ts charac-
tertsed more or less by perils. There are


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALM.


PsaLM LXV.





visible and known dangers, and dangers
invisible and unknown to us; dangers
to our physical and temporal interests,
and to our spiritual and eternal in-
terests.

2. God delivers His people from these
perils, He does this (1.) By removing
the dangers, or rescuing His people from
them ; ¢.g., Peter from prison (Acts xii.
2-20). Or, (2.) by keeping them safely
in the midst of the dangers; e.g., Joseph
in Egypt, Daniel in the lions’ den, the
three Hebrew youths in the furnace of
fire. Or, (3.) by giving them the vio-
tory over the dangers; e¢g., Stephen
(Acts vii, 59, 60; and Paul (2 Tim.
iv. 6-8).

III. In relation to death. “ Unto
God the Lord belong the issues from
death.” Conant: “And to Jehovah
the Lord belong ways of escape from
death.” ‘The reference here,” says
Moll, “is to ways of deliverance by
which we may go forth free with respect
to death, or at the expense of death.”
But how does He thus deliver from
death #

1. By rescuing from imminent death.
When death is threatening and drawing


near He can arrest him in his progress,
or turn aside his stroke,

2. By delivering from the fear of
death. A great end of His incarnation
was “that through death He might
destroy him that had the power of
death, that is, the devil; and deliver
them who through fear of death, were
all their lifetime subject to bondage.”

3. By giving complete victory over
death. For all who believe in Him, He
takes away the sting from death;
makes death to them the messenger and
minister of life and blessedness ; and
will complete His glorious triumph by
the resurrection of the body. He has
“the keys of death and of Hades.” “O
death, where is thy sting?” &c.

Conciusion.—“ Blessed be the Lord
day by day.” The God of so great sal-
vation should receive the heartiest
praise. Such great deliverances be-
stowed upon us call for great gratitude
from us. Such constant deliverances
should call forth constant praise—“ day
by day.” The highest praise which we
can offer for past and present mercies is
to reverently trust Him for salvation in
the future.


A TxrripLE CHARACTER AND Destiny.
(Verses 21-23.)


The connection of this strophe with
the preceding is thus stated by Calvin:
‘‘ Because the Church, attacked on all
sides by strong and raging enemies, can
obtain nothing otherwise except by a
strong and powerful defence, the Psal-
mist brings in God armed with terrible
power, for the destruction of all the un-
godly. It is to be observed that all who
annoy the pious are called enemies of
God, so that we need not doubt that He
will interpose for our defence.” We
have in the text—

L A terrible character. “God
shall wound the head of His enemies,”
&ec. Here is—

1. Great enormity of wickedness.
“ His enemies.” How fearful are the
depravity and guilt involved in being an
enemy of God! It is to be an enemy of
a Being of perfect holiness, of infinite

&


kindness; to be an enemy of our best
Friend ; to trample under foot the most
tender and sacred and binding obliga-
tions. He who persecutes the people
of God is held by Him as an enemy to


Himself. ‘Saul, Saul, why persecutest
thou Me?”
2. Great sistence in wickedness.


“ One as goeth on still in his trespasses,”
Hengatenberg: “ Him that walks on im
his iniquities.” If a sinner turn in
penitence unto God, he will meet with a
gracious reception. God will pardon
his transgressions, &c. But here awful
perseverance in iniquity, dread progress
in sin, are indicated. Such persistence
in evil must lead to an appalling doom.

IL A terrible destiny. God will
bring fearful destruction upon those of
His enemies whe walk on in their


iguities.
rate 853


PSALM LAVIIL


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





1. This destruction 48 complete.
“God shall wound the head of His
enemies.” Barnes: ‘The idea is that
of complete destruction—as, if the head
is crushed, life becomes extinct.” (See
Gen. iii. 15; comp. Psa. cx. 6.) This
idea of utter and dread destruction is
expressed in the 23d verse also,
by the figure of a fearful slaughter.
Persistent wickedness must issue in
overwhelming ruin.

2. This destruction is unavoidable.
(1.) No one shall escape from it by
might. “God shall wound the hairy
scalp,” dc. ‘The hairy scalp,” says
Moll, “is best understood of a head
with luxuriant growth of hair, the sign
of the bloom of youth and power.” If
man persists in wickedness, his utmost
might shall be as utter weakness when
God ariseth in judgment. “Who may
stand in Thy sight when once Thou art
angry!” (2.) No one can escape from
it by flight. “The Lord said, I will
bring again from Bashan, | will bring
again from the depths of the sea.” Im-
properly, as it seems to us, the translators
of the A. V. have supplied “ my people”
in this verse, The reference is not to
Israel, but to the enemies of Israel.
The idea is that nonevof them shall
escape; that they shall find no refuge
from the judgment of God. If they
have hidden themselves in the mountain
forests of Bashan, God will bring them
forth and destroy them. Even if they


could take refuge in the sabysses of the
sea, God would bring them out from
thence. The same idea is expressed at
greater length by Amos the prophet:
“He that fleeth of them shall not flee
away, and he that escapeth of them
shall not be delivered. Though they
dig into hell, thence shall Mine hand
take them; though they climb up to
heaven, thence will I bring them down,”
&. (ix. 1-3). If the wicked will not
repent, but will persist in wickedness,
there is no possibility of escape from the
retributions of the Divine judgment.
With dread certainty penalty follows
transgression ; punishment succeeds sin ;
irresistible wrath shall seize and crush
the incorrigible workers of iniquity.

3. This destruction is solemnly de-
elared. ‘The Lord said, I will bring
again from Bashan,” &c. “‘ God is not
a man that He should lie; neither the
son of man, that He should repent:
hath He said, and shall He not do? or
hath He spoken, and shall He not
make it good?” The statements of
Scripture concerning the punishment of
the wicked are not rashly uttered threats,
but the calm declarations of the holy
and unchangeable God.

Let the wicked take warning, and
turn from his evil way. Let him seek
for mercy through Jesus Christ. “ Re
pent, and turn from all your transgres-
sions ; 80 iniquity shall not be your
ruin,”


A Gtortovs Prospzct.
(Verses 24-35.)


In setting forth this celebration of the
triumph of God and His people, and the
results arising therefrom, the words of
the Psalmist reach beyond the historical
occasion which gave rise to them; and
to us they seem to throb with the great
hope of the conversion of all the heathen
world to the God of Israel. There is a
clear prophetic ring in some of the
declarations of the poet. They unfold to
us a glorious prospect, Here is the
picture of a time—

I. When the Divine triumphs will
be extensively witnessed. “They

354


have seen Thy goings, O God,” &c.
Moll: “ They have seen Thy processions,
O God, the processions of my God, of
my King in holiness.” The reference
is to the triumphal procession in cele-
bration of victory. Men shall see the
triumphs of the Divine arm ; and shall
observe in them two things.

1. That they are holy. They have
all been achieved “in holiness.” We
adopt the same translation of WIp2
as we did in verse 17. As the agea


pass it will become increasingly manifest
that all the doings of God, the achieve.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


POALM LXVIII.





ments of His providential government
of the world, and the victories of His
grace in human souls, are wrought in
righteousness and truth and love. His
triumphs are those of truth over error,
of light over darkness, of justice over
oppression, of generosity over selfishness,

2. That they are the triumphs of the
God of the Church. ‘The processions
of my God, of my King.” On the oc-
casion for which the psalm was first
composed, it would be seen that the
God of Israel possessed Divine power
and used it on behalf of His people,
that Jehovah was God. And as the
victories of the Christ are multiplied, it
will become more and more clearly ap-
parent that they are the triumphs of the
God of the Church. He who is con-
quering the world in truth and right-
eousness and love is the God and King
of the Christian Church. The humbiest
believer may look up to Him, saying,
“My God, my King.” In a different
form we have a similar idea in verse 29:
“‘ Because of Thy temple eat Jerusalem
shall kings bring presents unto Thee.”
Men will mark His glorious appearances
as the God of Israel, and will bow in
homage to Him. The day is coming
when the triumphs of the King of grace
and God of the Church shall be more
widely and clearly seen and more care-
fully observed than ever hitherto.

II. When the Divine triumphs will
be joyously celebrated by His people
(Vers. 25-27.) This celebration will
be—

1. Hxrultant. “The singers went
before, the players on inetruments after,
in the midst were the damsels playing
with timbrels.” Men and maidens,
with voices and instruments of music,
and souls and bodies, shall unite to ex-
press the enthusiasm of joy. When the
predicted triumphs of the kingdom of
the Christ are accomplished the rejoicing
of men and of angels will be rapturous.

2. Comprehensive. “ Bless ye God
in the congregations, even the Lord, ye
of the fountain of Israel,” is an exhorta-
tion to all the descendants of Israel to
unite in celebrating the praise of God.
And in the following verse certain tribes
and peoples are specially mentioned.


“There is little Benjamin,” &o. But
why are these tribes selected from the
others for special mention $ Geographi-
cal considerations probably had some
thing to do with the selection; for
Benjamin and Judah were in the south,
and Zebulon and Naphtali in the north.
But a more important consideration is,
that these tribes had distinguished them-
selves in warfare and otherwise ‘‘ The
first judges belonged to the tribes men-
tioned, Othniel to Judah, Ehud to Ben-
jamin :” the first kings also, for Saul
was from Benjamin, and David from
Judah. And the bravery of Zebulon
and Naphtali was celebrated in the song
of Deborah and Barak (Judg. v. 18).
Benjamin is spoken of as “little” be-
cause it was among “the smallest of
the tribes of Israel” (1 Sam. ix. 21).
Benjamin is also spoken of as ‘‘ their
ruler,” or “‘ conqueror ;” $%.e., we think,
the conqueror of the enemies mentioned
previously, with reference to the victories
achieved by the Benjamites under Saul
(1 Sam. xiv. 47, 48). The Psalmist
further speaks of “the princes of Judah
and their council” as present in the
festal procession. Instead of ‘their
council” the margin has, ‘their com-
pany.” The word is (3) (with suf-
fix DMI, from DY] = to heap to-
gether, to collect, as stones), which
signifies here a throng or multitude. It
is suitably applied to the tribe of Judah
as one of the most numerous of the
tribes of Israel. So we have here the
idea of an immense and comprehensive
assembly at this exultant celebration.
Princes and people, high and low, per-
sons of all grades and classes, from all
the tribes of Israel, join in this trium-
phant procession, An illustration this
of the countless and comprehensive
multitude which shall unite to celebrate
the approaching triumph of Christ our
King. Persons “of all nations, and
kindreds, and people, and tongues,” and
stations, and ages, shall unite in cele-
brating His conquests and glories.

3. Religious. The spirit manifested
by the Psalmist is not proud, self-
sufficient, or vain-glorious ; but humble,
grateful, and trustful. (1.) Past sac


855


POALM LXV,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





cesses are attributed to God. “Thy
God hath commanded thy strength.”
The words are addressed to Israel, so
that the people may trace their triumphs
to their true source.” The God of Israel
is He that giveth strength and power unto
His people.” (2.) Future progress is
besought from God. “Strengthen, O
God, that which Thou hast wrought for
us.” The people of God are incapable
of accomplishing success in spiritual
labour, or triumph in spiritual conflict
of themselves. Apart from their Lord
the Christ, they can do nothing. And
when the great triumph to which the
Church looks forward is achieved, all the
wisdom, and power, and honour, and
glory of that triumph shall be ascribed
unto Him,

III, When heathen nations shall
submit themselves unto God (vers.
29-31). Two or three expressions here
require explanation. ‘Rebuke the
company of spearmen.” Margin: “ Re-
buke the beasts of the reeds.” Conant,
Hengstenberg, et al: “ Rebuke the beast
of the reeds.” Most likely the hippopota-
mus is here referred to, as the symbol


of Egypt, whose emblem is the reed


(Job xl, 21; Isa. xxxvi. 6). ‘The
multitude of the bulls,”..or, “the herd
of the strong ones,” is a figure used to
represent powerful kings or princes.
By “the calves of the people ” we under-
stand the subjects of these powerful
princes. Universal submission shall be
made to God. All peoples shall come,
bringing tribute unto Him. Egypt and
Ethiopia are mentioned not as the only
nations that submit unto Him, but as
representatives of the great heathen
world. All classes shall give in their
loyal allegiance unto Him—kings and
their subjects, princes and peasants,
nobles and plebeians. And when all are
subject unto Him, the lovers and insti-
gators of war shall be utterly dispersed.
He scattereth the people that delight
in war.” Under the reign of “the
Prince of Peace” war shall be completely
and for ever abolished. “He shall
judge among the nations, and shall re-
buke many people: and they shall beat
their swords into plowshares,” dc. (Isa.
it 4). hess the Psalmist foresaw and


prophetically announced. There were
times when heathen peoples brought
presents to the kings of the chosen
people in acknowledgment of the power
and glory of God (2 Chron. xxxii. 23),
Many nations of the world have now
given their allegiance to the one living
and true God. His kingdom is ever
growing in extent and power. And
ultimately the widest and beightest
visions of inspired Psalmists aad Pro-
phets shall be fully and splendidly
realized.

IV. When God shall be universally
praised. In vers. 32-35, the Psalmist
summons all the kingdoms of the earth
to sing praises unto God, on the grounds
of—

1. His sovereignty. “To Him that
rideth upon the heavens of heavens of
old.” His sovereignty is universal. He
rideth in the highest heavens, supreme
over all the kingdoms of the world.
“Jehovah hath established His throne
in the heavens, and His kingdom ruleth
over all.” Hie sovereignty is anctent.
“‘ Of old.” “God is my King of old.”
Therefore, let all men praise Him,

2. His omnipotence. “Lo, Hedoth send
out His voice, a mighty voice. Ascribe
ye strength unto God; His excellency
is over Israel, and His strength is in the
clouda” Delitzsch: “Give back to
Him in acknowledgment and praise the
omnipotence which He has and proves,
His glory rules over Israel as its defence
and confidence. His power, however,
embraces all created things, not only |
the earth, but also the highest region of
the heaven. The kingdom of grace re-
veals the majesty and glory of His
redemptive work (Eph. i. 6), the
kingdom of nature His all-prevalent
omnipotence.”

3. His majesty. ‘His excellency is
over Israel . . . O God, Thou art
terrible out of Thy holy places.” His
majesty and glory are over His people
for their guidance and protection. And
His manifestations of His holiness and
power are fitted to inspire all men with
awe. ‘ Wheresoever God showeth His
presence, whether in heaven, or in His
Church, in any place of the earth, there
and from thence He showeth Himself a


tel
HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALM& PSsLM LEXIE,


ar


dreadful God to such as fear Him not.” privilege of the people of God to spread
Therefore, let all the kingdoms of the abroad His kingdom and glory wherever
earth sing praises unto Him. they can. 2. This subject affords we
Conciusion.—l. This subject reminds encouragement. How glorious is the
ws of our duty. It isthe duty and the prospect! and how certain of realisation!
interest of rebels against God to submit God’s Word, and wisdom, and power,
themselves to Him. It isthe duty and all guarantee it “ Blessed be God |”


PSALM LXIX,


INTRODUCTION,


tom.—“ To the chief musician upon Shoshannim, a Psalm of David.”

“To the chief musician.” See the introduction to Ps. lvii, ‘* Upon Shoshannim. See the
fatroduction to Ps. xlv. ‘“‘A Psalm of David.” .The Davidie authorship of this Psalm is
strongly supported by its close resemblance to other Psalms which are ascribed to David.
Both in thought and language it is nearly related to Psalms vi, xxii, xxxi., xxxv., xxxviii.,
xl., and cix. Ewald: “Our Psalm manifests such a strong similarity, not in the least proceed-
ing from imitation, to Psalms xxxv., xxxviii., and xl., that it must have been composed by the
same author.” And Hitzig: ‘‘ The author of the xlth Psalm, whoever he was, must be identically
the same with the author of the lxixth.” And again: ‘‘The similarity between lxix. 32 and
xxii. 26, can only be explained by the assumption, that they have been the product of the
same mind.”

We are unable to determine on what occasion in the life of David the Psalm was eomposed,
Probably it belongs to the time of the rebellion of Absalom, With the exception of the 22d,
there is no Psalm which is so frequently quoted and applied to Jesus Christ in the New Testament
as this ene, But the quotations are not of such a character as to require us to adopt a direct
Messianic interpretation. They are, as Barnes points out, ‘‘of so general a character that they
do not seem to have been designed to refer exclusively to the Messiah, or even to have had
any original reference toHim. The language is such that it would accurately deseribe the events
to which it is applied; and the fact that the language is quoted in this manner in the New
Testament history does not prove that the Psalm had any original reference to the Messiah.”
A most formidable ojection against the direct Messianic exposition is found in the confession
of folly and guilt in ver. 5. Hengstenberg interprets the Psalm as referring not to any indi-
vidual sufferer, but to the ideal person of the suffering righteous man.

Homiletically we view the psalm as presenting to us, The ery of the righteous in extreme
suffering, vers. 1-21; The imperfection of the righteous in extreme suffering, vera, 22-28; and
The hope of the righteous in extreme suffering, vers. 29-86,


THe Cry or THE RiaHTeous m Extreme Surrerina.


(Verses 1-21.)


The burden of this cry is twofold. malice, ‘They hate me; they would


We have-—

L A cry of suffering. In this wail
of the Psalmist we discover—

1. The nature of his sufferings, He
represents them as arising from (1) The
persecution of his enemies. “They that
hate me without a cause are more than
the hairs of mine head: they that would
destroy me, being mine enemies wrong-
fully, are mighty: then I restored that
which I took not away.” We see here
(a) Their multitude. ‘They are more
than the hairs of mine head.” His foes
were an innumerable host. Countless
are the enemies of the good. (8) Their


destroy me.” They hated him so fiercely
that they sought his utter destruction.
“The devil was a murderer from the
beginning.” (7) Their might. “Mine
enemies are mighty.” The foes of David
were great in authority and power. The
righteous have to contend “against
principalities, against powers, against
the rulers of the darkness of this world,
against spiritual wickedness in high
places.” (8) Their injustice, They
hated him “without a cause ;” they
were his “enemies wrongfully.” The
Psalmist had done nothing to provoke
them to anger. They a ie him to


POALM LXIX,





give up his own possessions as though
he had no right to them, or had gotten
them by fraud or violence. Malice is
always unjust. It is better to suffer the
worst from unjust énemies than by
wrong-doing to give to any one reason
to be to us an enemy. Such were the
encmies who persecuted the Psalmist.
And the form of persecetion of which he
complains most is slander. “I have
borne reproach; shame hath covered
my face. .... I became a proverb”
(byword) “to them. They that sit in
the gate speak against me; and I was
the song of the drunkards... . Thou
hast known my reproach, and my shame,
and my dishonour, . . . Reproach hath
broken my heart.” David suffered
much from the wicked aspersions and
calumnies of his enemies, (See “ The
Hom. Com.” on Pa. xli. 5-9 ; xlii. 2, 10,
&c.) To an honourable man nothing is
more bitter and painful than reproach
and slander. At this time the Psalmist
was smarting severely beneath it. It
seemed to assail him in every form and
from every quarter. The men of busi-
ness and the magistrates, who assembled
in the gates, spake evil of him. And
the drunkard in his degrading revels
sang in derision of”him. Reproach,
shame, dishonour covered and crushed
him. And still the good are exposed
to the assaults of the slanderer. ‘‘ Virtue
itself ’scapes not calumnious strokes,”
** Be thou as chaste as ice, as pure as snow,
Thou shalt not escape coca al
— Shakespeare.


And still slander assumes many forms,
and has many methods; and of these
the most subtle are the most perilous,


**The hint malevolent, the look oblique,

The obvious satire, or implied dislike,

The sneer equivocal, the harsh reply,

And all the cruel language of the eye;

The artful injury, whose venomed dart

Scarce wounds the hearing, while it stabs
the heart;

The guarded phrase whose meaning kills,
yet told,

The list’ner wonders how you thought it
cold,” -—Hannakh More.


Such are some of the forms and methods

of slander. But the sufferings of the

Psalmist arose also from (2) The deser-

tion of his nearest relatwes, “I am
358


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.








become a stranger unto my bre

and an alien unto my mother’s children.”
The expression, “ my mother’s children,”
denotes the most intimate relationship.
Barnes: ‘“ In families where a man had
many wives, a8 was common among the
Hebrews, the nearest relationship would
be denoted by being of the same mother
rather than of the same father. The
idea of the Psalmist here, therefore, is,
that his nearest relatives treated him aa
if he were a stranger and a foreigner.”
(Com. Job xix. 13-19.) It is probable
that in the time of Saul David passed
through this painful experience. (Comp.
1 Sam. xvii, 28; Pa xxvii. 10; and
xxxvill. 11.) And still a man may be
forsaken by the nearest relatives and
friends because he follows truth and
righteousness ; or he may have to for-
sake them that he might cleave to Christ.
(See Matt. x. 34-39.) The Psalmist
was suffering also because of (3) The
Sfatlure of human sympathy. ‘I looked
for some to take pity, but there was
none; and for comforters, but I found
none.” Hengstenberg: “I wait for
sympathy, and there is none.” “The
word sympathy,” says Perowne, “has
nowhere been employed by our trans-
lators, but it exactly conveys the force
of the Hebrew word, inasmuch as it is
used of sympathy in joy as well as in
sorrow.” (See Job xlii 11; Jer. xv. 5;
xvi. 5; xlviii. 17.) No heart was moved
with compassion for the suffering poet.
He felt himself to be utterly forsaken
by mankind. Terrible was his sense of
desolation. Worse even than this did
men treat him. When he was hungry
and thirsty they mocked him by giving
him for food a bitter and poisonous
herb, and for drink vinegar. By this
figure the Psalmist expresses the addi-
tion and intensification of his already
severe sufferings. The inhumanity of
men towards him aggravates his misery,
The words of verses 20 and 21 might
have been used by “the Messiah upor
the cross, who bore the shame of an
ignominious death, the reproaches of
violating the law, and the slanders of
wicked enemies, who died broken-
hearted, with no one to pity, alone in
His shame and woe,” and to whom upon


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM LXE,





the cross was given sour wine with an
infusion of myrrh, and afterwards vine-
gar, when He had cried, “I thirst.”
Let no one place much dependence
upon human sympathy or support, or
bitter will be his disappointment. But
“there is a Friend that sticketh closer
than a brother.” ‘TI will be with thee;
I will not fail thee, nor forsake thee,”
Let us trust Him always and fully.

2. The severity of his sufferings. This
is seen in at least four things—(1) The
various figures by which they are ex-
pressed. ‘The waters are come in unto
my soul. I sink in deep mire, where
there is no standing: I am come into
deep waters, where the floods overflow
me.” (For remarks on the figures here
employed see “ The Hom. Com.” on Ps,
xl. 2; and xlii. 7.) In this psalm the
Poet represents the waters as “having
come even to his soul,” thereby placing
his very life in imminent peril, Trouble
was not only without him, but within
him. His soul was suffering. ‘‘ The
spirit of a man will sustain his infirmity ;
but a wounded spirit who can bear?”
The Psalmist also speaks of himself as
heart-broken. ‘ Reproach hath broken
my heart, and I am full of heaviness.”
Barnes: “ Distress may become so great
that life may sink under it, for many
die of what is called ‘a broken heart.’
Undeserved reproaches will be as likely
to produce this result on a sensitive
heart as any form of suffering ; and there
are thousands who are crushed to the
earth by such reproaches.” (2) The
extremity of his persl. The waters
having come even to his soul, his rapid
sinking in the mire of the depth, the
floods which are overwhelming him, and
his broken heart, all indicate the ex-
tremity of peril and need. If God do
not speedily interpose for him, his suf-
ferings will utterly crush him. If the
Divine help come not quickly, it will
come too late. (3) The long-continued
duration of his sufferings. “I am weary
of my crying; my throat is dried:
mine eyes fail while I wait for my God.”
He had called upon God so long and
earnestly that his strength was exhausted
and his throat was parched. He had
waited and watched for God so long


that his eyes were worn out and dim.
Hengstenberg: “The eyes fail: lose
their power of vision, when @ person
keeps them long on the stretch, fixed
upon a distant object, in hope of its
coming nearer, till the outlines become
better defined.” M. Henry: “ His
throat is dried, but his heart is not;
his eyes fail, but his faith does not.”
(4) The connection of his sufferings with
his religion. “Because for Thy sake I
have borne reproach,” d&., vers. 7-12.
He was reproached for his fidelity to
truth and to God. His interest in the
cause of God was deep and ardent.
“The zeal of Thine house hath eaten me
up.” The house of God is not the mere
temple; but “the temple, as the centre
of the whole Israelitish religion.” “ The
true and godly zeal,” says Bishop Jewell,
“eateth and devoureth up the heart,
even as the thing that is eaten is turned
into the substance of him that eateth it ;
and as iron, while it is burning hot, is
turned into the nature of the fire, so
great and so just is the grief that they
which have this zeal conceive when they
see God’s house spoiled, or His holy
name dishonoured.” Such was David’s
zeal for the cause and kingdom of God ;
and because of it he was ridiculed by
the drunkards, reviled by his enemies,
and forsaken by his nearest friends and
relatives. When he penitently mourned
with fasting and sackcloth on account of
sin, he was assailed with more bitter
reproaches and scorn and satire. All
this greatly aggravated his sufferings.
Moll: “It is better to suffer for God’s
cause than to be puntshed for sins, but
it is not easier.” Such were the suf-
ferings that called forth this sharp and
bitter cry from David. Let not the
good man think it strange if he is called
to experience severe suffering because of
his attachment to Christ and His cause.
In such sufferings we join the highest
fellowship, and receive the most tender
and strong support. (See 1 Peter iv.
12-16.)

II. A cry of supplication. In the
prayer of the Psalmist we have—

1. A confession. “QO God, Thou
knowest my foolishness, and my sins are
not hid from Thee.” Moll: “ How is it

359


POALM LEIS.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; PSALMS.





eonsistent that one should be persecuted
as tnnocent and yet punished as a sinner?”
Hengstenberg : “The words are to be
taken in their obvious sense, as an
acknowledgment of guilt on the part of
the Psalmist, which, according to the
just judgment of God, had brought upon
him the unjust persecution of his
enemies.” Barnes: “ Though conscious
of innocence in this case—though he felt
that his enemies hated him without
cause, yet he was not insensible to the
fact that he was a sinner, and he was
not unwilling to confess before God,
that, however conscious of uprightness
he might be in his dealings towards
men, yet towards God he was a sinful
man. From Him he deserved all that
had come upon him... . Trial never
comes to us from any quarter except as
founded on the fact that we are sinners ;
and even where there is entire innocence
towards our fellow-men, God may make
use of their passions to rebuke and
discipline us for our sins towards
Himself.”

2. Petitions. Of these there are
several, but the great object of them all
is expressed in the first line of the
Psalm—‘‘ Save me, O God.” He sup-
plicates — (1.) Complete delwerance.
“Deliver me out of the mire, and let
me not sink; let me be delivered from
them that hate me, and out of the deep
waters. Let not the water-flood over-
flow me, neither let the deep swallow
me up, and let not the pit shut her
mouth upon me.” Thus he seeks de-
liverance from all the perils and miseries
of which he had previously complained,
(2.) Speedy delwerance, “Hear me
speedily.” Margin: “ Make haste to
hear me.” Conant: “Make haste to
answer me.” The peril of his situation
was extreme. His need of salvation was
urgent. If the Divine interposition
were delayed, he felt that he should
perish. There are times when such
urgency cf entreaty is not only admis-
sible, but natural and commendable.
(3.) Representative deliverance, “ Let
none that wait on Thee, O Lord God of
hosts, be achamed for my sake; let not
those that seek Thee be confounded for
my sake, O God of Israel.” Hengsten-

30


-perfidiously without a cause.’


berg: “Comp, on Psa. xxv. 3, ‘Those
who wait on Thee shall not be ashamed,
those shall be put to shame who act
This
position would be annihilated were the
sufferer to be destroyed. For in him
as their representative, or in his case,
through his fate, all who wait on God
would at the same time be put to
shame.” Moll: “He may hope in
God’s favour and help the more confi-
dently as many of the pious look upon
him and his fate as typical and instruc-
tive. . . . All the pious are interested
in what concerns one of them.” If he
were left to perish the faith of the godly
would receive a terrible shock ; but if
he were delivered it would be confirmed
and invigorated.

3. Encouragements, The Psalmist
encourages himself in his prayer by
several inspiring considerations. (1.)
The knowledge of God. ‘Thou hast
known my reproach, and my shame, and
my dishonour ; mine adversaries are all
before Thee.” (a.) He knew the Psal-
mist—his distress, helplessness, ex-
tremity, need. Blessed be His name,
suffering and persecution can never
drive us beyond the region of His per
fect knowledge. (}.) He knew the ad-
versaries of the Psalmist—their multi.
tude, might, malice, machinations. In
circumstances like those of the Psalmist
reflection on the omniscience of God is
most comforting and faith-inspiring to
the godly. (2.) The power of God.
“Lord God of hosts,” The title indi
cates His omnipotence. He is the
sovereign of countless and invincible
armies, “They that be with us are
more than they that be with them.”
“If God be for us, who can be against
us$” (3.) The jideltty of God in His
relation to His people. “QO God of
Israel” He has engaged in solemn
covenant to succour and save His own
people. So David pleads, “Hear me
in the truth of Thy salvation.” The
promises of salvation which He has
made to those who wait upon Him are
charged with encouragement to His
people in time of trial. (4.) The merey
of God. His kindness is abundantly
calculated to quicken and strengthen


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





eonfidence in Him. The Psalmist makes
mention of (a.) Its excellence. ‘Thy
loving-kindness is good.” Perowne:
“* Good,’ #.¢., either sweet, comforting,
as in Ps, Ixiii, 3, or gracious, xenorés
(comp. Ps, cxix. 21).” His kindnesses
are loving kindnesses ; His mercies are
tender mercies. ‘“ How excellent is Thy
loving-kindness, O God!” (8) Its
abundance. Twice the poet pleads
“the multitude of God’s mercies. His


POALM L&IX,





mercy is rich and plenteous and free
M. Henry: ‘ There is mercy in God, a
multitude of mercies, all kinds of mercy,
inexhaustible mercy, mercy enough for
all, enough for each; and hence we
must take our encouragement in pray-
ing.” Moll: “ He who relies in prayer
upon the mercy and truth of God, has
the surest foundation for his salvation,
and the best pledges of the hearing of
hés prayer.”


THE Osszot, Szason, axD Hore or PRAYER,
(Verse 13.)


The godly man is not turned aside
from his prayers because of the re-
proaches and scoffs of men. Men re-
viled and ridiculed David because of his
religious exercises; but he was not
driven from them. “ But as for me,”
he says, “my prayer is unto Thee, O
Lord,” &c. ‘‘ Though we may be jeered
for well-doing, we must never be jeered
out of it.” By reason of the scoffings
of his enemies, the Psalmist is impelled
to seek help in prayer the more persist-
ently and earnestly. As persecution
and trials increase, the frequency and
fervour of our prayers should also in-
crease. Our text brings before us,

L The one true object of prayer.
“My prayer is unto Thee, O Lord.” It
is essential that the true object of the
prayers of men should be—

1. Infinite in intelligence. He must
be able to hear the whispers and per-
ceive the desires of all men everywhere.
Such intelligence has the Lord God.
(See Ps. cxxxix. 1-5; Ezek. xi. 5, e¢
al.) He hears prayer.

2. Approachable. Not far removed
from His creatures; but accessible to
every one of them. Not repulsive, but
attractive. Such is God as revealed in
Jesus Christ. (See John xiv. 6; Eph.
ii, 18, iii. 12.)

3. Entreatable. Man needs not only
to be heard, but to be answered also.
God can and does answer prayer.
Prayer has a real place and function in
the Divine economy. ‘I have asphere
in which,” says Dr. Robert Vaughan,
“T can use natural law so that good


shall come out of it, By an act of my
will, giving command to my muscular
skill and force, I can wrest a dagger
from the hand of an assassin, or can save
a drowning man from his apparent
doom. The things of this sort which I
can do are numberless; and am I thus
free to act in relation to these laws, and
has the Almighty no freedom to act in
His relation to them? Has He so con-
structed this great system that it has
become His tomb, in which He sleeps
the sleep of death, while man lays his
living hand upon law everywhere, and
makes it do his bidding? The instinct
of man through all lands and all time is
on the side of prayer, and that instinct
cannot be a falsehood—it must embody
a truth.” Prayer and answers to prayer
are great facts in the experience of godly
men, (See Ps. xxxiv. 17; Prov. xv.
29; Isa. lxv. 24; Mic. vii. 7 ; Matt. vii.
7-11 ; 1 John v. 14, 15.)

II. The season of prayer. “An
acceptable time.” Conant: “A time
of acceptance.” Moll: “A time of
good pleasure.” Hengstenberg: “A
time of grace.” He presented his prayer
to God at a favourable season.

1. When we suffer wrongfully is such
aseason. The Psalmist felt this at this
time. No time for prayer can be more
acceptable to God, than when we are
suffering persecution for righteousness’
sake.

2. When our need ts great and greatly
felt. M. Henry: “God will not drive
us from Him, though it is need that
drives us to Him ; nay, it is the more

361


PALM LXIX,





acceptable, because the misery and dis-
tress of God’s people make them so
much the more the objects of His pity:
it is seasonable for Him to help them
when all other helps fail, and they are
undone, and feel that they are undone,
if He do not help them.”

3. When our desire for spirstual
blessings ts intense. At such seasons
God is very near to us to enrich us with
the treasures of His grace. “ Blessed
are they which do hunger and thirst after
righteousness ; for they shall be filled.”

4, While the overtures of Divine grace
ave made tous. The time of acceptance
is that in which God makes His grace
known in the offer of His salvation.
‘‘Thus saith the Lord in an acceptable
time have I heard thee, and in a day of
salvation have I helped thee.” “'To
proclaim the acceptable year of the
Lord,” &c. ‘Behold, now is the ac-
cepted time,” &c. The time of accept-
ance may pass away, and be succeeded
by the time of rejection. “Then they
shall call upon Me, but I will not
answer; they shall seek Me early, but
they shall not find Me.” Therefore,


prayer.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





“seek ye the Lord while He may be
found, call ye upon Him while He is
near.”

Ill. The great encouragements in
““O God, in the multitude of
Thy mercy, hear me, in the truth of Thy
salvation.” The Psalmist here pleads—

1. The abounding mercy of Ged.
Our hope is in God’s mercy. (1.) Be-
cause we have no merit which we can
plead in prayer. (2.) Because of the
essential nature of mercy. Mercy is
that in God which disposes Him to save
the sinful aad succour the suffering.
“Mercy hath but its name from misery
and is no other thing than to lay
another’s misery to heart.” And (3.)
Because of the fulness of the mercy of ©





God. It is inexhaustible, infinite. He
‘is rich in mercy.”

2. The saving truth of God. “ Hear
me, in the truth of Thy salvation.” He


has promised salvation to all who trust
in Him. He is unchangeable. He will
fulfil His promises.

In our prayers to God let us hopefully
plead His rich mercy and firm truth,
and gracious answers shall be ours.


Toe ImpeRFECTION O THE RIGHTEOUS IN EXTREME SUFFERING.
(Verses 22-28.)


Let us hear what others have te say
concerning the terrible utterances o this
section of the psalm. Professor Alex-
ander says: ‘ The imprecations in this
verse (22), and those following it, are
revolting only when considered as the
expression of malignant selfishness. If
uttered by God they shock no reader's
sensibilities, nor should they when con-
sidered as the language of an ideal per-
gon, representing the whole class of
righteous sufferers, and particularly Him,
who though He prayed for His mur-
derers while dying (Luke xxiii, 34), had
before applied the words of this very
passage to the unbelieving Jews (Matt.
xxiii. 38), as Paul did afterwards Hearn
xi. 9, 10). The general doctrine of
providential retribution, far from being
confined to the Old Testament, is dis-
tinctly taught in many of our Saviour’s
parables, (See Matt. xxi, 41, xxii. 7,

362


uxiv, 61).”. And Professor Stuart ;
“Great difficulty is found in such pas-
sages by many minds, inasmuch as they
seem to be so opposed to the tenor of
those passages in the New Testament,
which require us ‘to love our enemies, to
bless those who curse us, to pray for
those who despitefully use and persecute
us.’ If indeed these passages in the
Psalms are to be viewed as the mere
utterance of private and personal wishes
and feelings, it would be utterly impos-
sible to reconcile them with the spirit
of the gospel. But is this so? Is
David, for example, when he utters such
things, to be viewed as doing it merely
in the way of giving utterance to his
own private personal wishes? It seems
to me not; but David, as king and
magistrate, might wish the punishment
of the seditious and rebellious; nay, it
would be an imperious duty for him te


rad


punish them. Now, was it lawful for
him to pray that the same thing might
be done, which it was his duty to do?
Could he not express desires of this
nature without the spirit of revenge?
Cannot we wish the robber and the
assassin to be apprehended and punished,
yea, with capital punishment, and this
without being actuated by a spirit of
vengeance and a thirst for blood? I
trust such wishes are not only consistent
with benevolence, but prompted by it.
If so, then it may be true that David
and other Psalmists had the like views
and feelings. And if this may be so, is
it not probable that it was so? Is not
the general character and spirit of their
writings a pledge for this?”

We do not regard these statements as
satisfactory. They certainly fail to re-
movs the difficulties which many reverent
and earnest students of the Sacred Scrip-
tures find in these dread imprecations,
Much more helpful, in our opinion, is
the statement of Canon Perowne quoted
on pp. 163 and 164 of this work.

Let us briefly consider—

I. The imprecations urged. We say
imprecations, not predictions ; because,
as Perowne points out, “the Hebrew
optative, which is distinct enough from
the simple future, absolutely forbids”
our regarding them as predictions,

1. That the pleasures of life may be-
come a curse to them. “ Let their table
become a snare to them ; and that which
should have been for their welfare, a
trap.” Conant: “And to the secure
for atrap.” Hengstenberg: “And their
peace, their fall.” They had given to
the Psalmist gall for his meat, and in
his thirst vinegar for his drink ; and he
now prays that their season of refresh-
ment, when they feel secure and look
for pleasure, iaay be made a snare and
a curse to them—“ that the blessings of
life may become fraught with death to”
them.

2. That they may be deprived of un-
derstanding and strength. “ Let their
eyes be darkened, that they see not;
and make their loins continually to
shake.” Perowne: “The darkening of
the eyes denotes weakness and perplexity,
as the enlightening of the eyes (see Ps.


-HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; PSALMB.


FGaLW LE,





xix. 8) denotes renewed vigour and
strength. Similarly the shaking of the
loins is expressive of terror and dismay
and feebleness (Nah. ii. 10; Dan. v. 6).
Or the first may mean the depriving of
reason and understanding ; the second,
the taking away of all strength for
action.”

3. That they and theirs should be
rooted out of the land. “Let their
habitation be desolate ; let none dwell
in their tents.” Let them and theirs
perish from the earth.

4, That they may be confirmed in stn,
‘‘ Add iniquity unto their iniquity ; and
let them not come into Thy righteous-
ness.” Perowne: “Let it all stand
against them in Thy book, one sin after
another, as committed, not being blotted
out, but only swelling the fearful
~eckoning.” (Comp, Jer. xviii. 23.)

5. That they may be excluded from
the kingdom and people of God. “ Let
them be blotted out of the book of the
living, and not be written with the
righteous.” Moll: ‘The reference is
to the book of God (Exod. xxxii. 32), in
which God Himself registers every one
(Ps. lxxxvii. 4-6), who is appointed to
life (Isa. iv. 3), and in this book (Dan.
xii. 1), as the citizens of Israel in the
genealogical tables” (Jer. xxii. 30 ; Ezek.
xiii. 9; comp. Luke x. 20; Phil. iv. 3;
Rev. iii, 5; xiii. 8; xvii. 8; xxi. 27).

6. That God would pour upon them
His severest wrath. “ Pour out Thine
indignation upon them, and let Thy
wrathful anger take hold of them.”

Such are the things that God is en-
treated to do to the wicked enemies of
the Psalmist.

IL The reason assigned. “For
they persecute him whom Thou hast
smitten ; and they talk to the grief of
those whom Thou hast wounded.”
Perowne: ‘The reason of the impreca-
tion is given, because of the unpitying
cruelty which delighted in adding to the
pain and affliction of one whom God had
already brought low—they tell as if they
counted one by one every blow that fell
upon him, every cry that he had uttered,
only to turn it into mocking” (comp.
Ps. lix. 12; lxiv. 5). They persecuted
when they should have rapes Some-


PSALM LEY.


A ae csi


what similar conduct greatly aggravated
the sufferings of Job. “ Have pity upon
me, have pity upon me; O ye, my friends;
for the hand of God hath touched me,
Why do ye persecute,me as Goi, and
are not satisfied with my flesh?”

This section of the Psalm impresses
us with,

First—The imperfection of the best
men. David was unquestionably one
of the best of men; but his life has
some foul stains upon it. And this
Psalm shows that he was not a perfect
man ; for he here, as Moll says, “ gets
into such a carnal excitement, that while
he does not contend with God or mur-
mur against Him, but on the contrary,
relies upon God, and calls upon Him,
yet in hungry zeal he calls down the
pewer of God to the judgment and ruin
of those enemies who ignore it. This
belongs to that folly and guilt, of which
the Psalmist is conscious, and is neither
to be extenuated nor recommended.
For there is a very great difference
between obligatory proclamation of the
Divine judgment, morally justifiable
assent to the unavoidable consequences
of this judgment and holy joy in the
victory of righteousness on the one side,
and passionate itmprecation, revengeful
cursing, and an evilly disposed suppli-
cation for Divine judgment in order to
the temporal ruin and everlasting de-
struction of certain persons, on the
other side. In the latter case, man does
not give over retribution to the all-wise
and holy God, but of his own will and
power interferes with the course of the
just government of God, yes, really
anticipates the final judgment. For this
reason it is at least a zeal for God
without knowledge, even when no re-
vengeful motives come into play, and no
personal interests are involved, but when
the reference is to such men as put
themselves in hostility to God and His
word, sacraments, house, glory, and con-
gregation. Even Jesus has not antici-
pated for individual cases the condem-
natory decisions of the final judgment,
but has merely proclaimed it as future,
and indeed with the pain of love, and in
connection with the purpose of His
coming not to destroy the souls of men,

364





HAIOMILETIC COMMENTARY PSALMS.





but to save them. Accordingly, He
venaured His disciples for wishing te
call down fire from heaven upon those
who refused to receive Him (Luke ix
53-55). .. . We have reason to exa-
mine ourselves earnestly, whether, in
our zeal for God, there is more wrath
against our enemies, than love to His
person and care for the glory of His
house.” In estimating these impre
catory utterances of David, we are bound
to remember the age in which they were
penned. But when every allowance
has been made it seems to us only too
painfully clear, that the spirit which
breathes in them is not good, but evil;
not commendable, but reprehensible. In
these terrible cursings of his enemies the '
Psalmist stands before us not as a pat-
tern, but as a beacon; his example in this
is not to be imitated, but shunned by us,

Second—The gradualness of the edu-
cation of mankind. God has revealed
His will and ways to men slowly, as
they have been able to receive the reve-
lation. It took long ages of teaching
and experience before men were able to
understand such precepts as, “Love
your enemies, bless them that curse
you,” &c. In the time of David men
were by no means prepared to receive
such teaching. In more than one way
“the law was our schoolmaster to bring
us to Christ.” Legislation such as
this—“ life for life, eye for eye, tooth
for tooth, hand for hand, foot for foot,
burning for burning, wound for wound,
atrife for strife,” had an important place
and work in educating humanity for
higher things. The Mosaic legislation
helped to prepare man for the Sermon
on the Mount. The Jewish Temple was
indispensable as a preparation for the
Christian Church.

Third—The truth of the Sacred Scrip-
tures. The fact that we find utterances
like these imprecations in the Bible, so
far from militating against its inspira-
tion, is to our mind rather an evidence
of such inspiration. Both in historie
record and religious poem it faithfully
sets forth the sayings and doings of
men. When Abraham, “the friend of
God,” manifests a strange want of faith
in Him, and is not strictly truthfal


fe


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMS,


Se SS


such failures are impartially recorded.
When David, “the man after God’s
own heart,” commits both adultery and
murder, the perpetration of these crimes
is set down against him, without any
attempt to extenuate his guilt. And
when the Hebrew religious poets mani-
fest improper feelings and utter impro-
per sentiments ; when they give expres-
sion to unworthy doubts and fears, or
to sinful anger and passionate revenge,
such passages are not pruned off the
poems, nor are the poems themselves
excluded from the volume, This ap-
pears to us am evidence of the truth and


PRALM LEME.





trustworthiness of the Bible. And so
in these ancient Psalms we have the
real utterances of holy men, setting
forth their joys and sorrows, their doubts
and confidences, their triumphs and
temporary defeats, their sinful passions
and holy aspirations, Such a book
meets a great need of the heart and life
of the religious man. And as a fact,
this Book of Psalms, giving utterance
to these various feelings of the religious
heart, has been for long ages and still is
one of the choicest and most helpful
treasures of all godly souls,


Tas Hore or tHe Rieutrrous mw Exrrene Surrerina.
(Verses 29-36.)


The Psalmist passes from terrible im-
precations to triumphant anticipations,
from passionate revenge to pious hope.
Notice—

I. The object of this hope, or what
it was that he hoped for.

1. As regards himself. “But I am
poor and sorrowful ; let Thy salvation,
O God, set me up on high.” He looks
in confidence to God for deliverance
from his afflicted and mournful condition,
and for exaltation to a condition of
safety above the reach of his enemies,
and the fury of the floods of trial. All
righteous sufferers shail certainly in due
time be delivered from all their sorrows,
&e.

2. As regards the Church, ‘ For God
will save Zion, and will build the cities
of Judah, that they may dwell there,
and have it in possession, The seed
also of His servants shall inherit it; and
they that love His name shall dwell
therein.” We regard Zion as an illus
tration of the Church of God. In his
great and assured hope, the Psalmist
announces (1) Jts preservation. “God
will save Zion.” The Church may be
threatened and opposed, but it shall not
be overcome; “the gates of hell shall
not prevail against it.” (2) Its pro-
gress. “And will build the cities of
Judah.” David looked forward to the
success and prosperity of the chosen


people The Church of God has s


glorious future—a future of prosperity
and increase in purity, possessions, power,
&c. Its past history, its present posi-
tion, and the Divine promises unite to
assure the Church of increasing pro-
gress, and of complete triumph ulti
mately. (3) Its perpetuity. “That
they may dwell there, and have it in
possession. The seed also,” &c. God
will protect His people from generation
to generation. Empires once powerful
have passed away; heathen religions
which once inspired the reverence oF
awakened the dread of countless multi-
tudes of souls, have perished from
amongst men; scientific and philoso
phical systems which for a long time
appeared to be indisputable and perma
nent, have departed for ever. But the
Church of God shall never pass away ;
for its life of truth and righteousness
and love is by its very nature imperish-
able and immortal.

II. The ground of this hope. The
Psalmist rests his assured expectation
of salvation on the fact that “the Lord
heareth the poor, and despiseth not his
prisoners.” ‘The poor” are those who
are in circumstances of distress and
want. The “ prisoneys” are either those
whom He has visited wish severe suffer-
ing, as in verse 26, or those who are
suffering for His sake, as in verse 7,
David doubtless includes himself as at


this time amongst the needy and the
365


PSALM LEX.





prisoners. God regards such sufferers
with pity, and sends them help when
they sry unto Him. A hope of salva-
tion which is based, as this is, on the
gracious regard of God for His afflicted
people shall surely be fulfilled in the
case of every righteous sufferer,

III. The influence of this hope.

1. Zé enables him to anticipate hés
own salvation, In the midst of his suf-
fering he looks forward to it with
assured and joyous confidence; and
resolves, as though it were already en-
joyed, * I will praise the name of God
with a song,” d&ec, Very great and
blessed is the power of such a hope.
** We are saved by hope.”

2. 11 impels him to summon the unt-
verse ta praise God. “Let the heaven
and earth praise Him, the seas, and
everything that moveth therein.” The
Psalmict feels his own utter insufficiency
worthily to set forth the praise of God,
and, therefore, he calls upon all things
everywhere, animate and inanimate, to
unite in the celebration.

IV. The anticipated result of the
fulfilment of this hope. This is two-
fold—

1. The Psalmist will worship God,
vers, 30 and 31. (1), With spiritual
offerings. ‘I will praise the name of
God with a song, and will magnify Him
with thanksgiving.” Barnes: “ As the
result of my deliverance, I will compose
& song or 3 psalm especially adapted to
the occasion, and fitted to express and
perpetuate my feelings, It was in such
circumstapces that a large part of the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; PSALMS,


=





psalms were composed ; and stwee others
besides the Psalmist are often in such
circumstances, the Book of Psalms be-
comes permanently useful in the Church.”
The worship resolved upon by the Psal-
mist is («) Joyful—“ praise, . . . with
asong.” (8) Grateful— with thanks-
giving.” (2) Such worship is more
acceptable to God than the most costly
material sacrifices. ‘This also shall
please the Lord better than ox or bul-
lock that hath horns and_ hoofs.”
Perowne: “The epithets are not merely
otiose. The first is mentioned in order
to mark that the animal was not under
three years old, and therefore of the
proper age according to the law; the
last as intimating that it belonged to
the class of clean four-footed animals,
parting the hoof (Lev. xi.); and the
meaning is, that the most perfect and
valuable of the sacrifices ordained by
the law was not to be compared to the
sacrifice of a grateful heart.” (See
“The Hom. Com.” on Pa. xl 6-8; L
7-15; li. 15-17.)

2. The pious will be encouraged.
‘The humble shall see this, and be glad ;
and your heart shall live that seek
God.” The exhibition of the power and
faithfulness and goodness of God in de-
livering His suffering servant, would
strengthen the faith, revive the courage,
and promote the joy of all godly souls.
The deliverance of one is an earnest of
the full salvation of all.

Let the suffering righteous seek for
and exercise s hope like this of the
Psalmist,


PSALM LXX.


INTRODUCTION,


Superscription.—“ To the chief musician, a psalm of David, to bring to remembrancs.”
“To the chief musician.” (See introduction to Psalm lvii.), “ Jo bring to remembrance.”


Barnes; “The Hebrew term used— “YD ,/ehazkir—means simply for bringing to remem:


brance, or for reminding. The meaning is, that it is a record for the purpose of reminding;
that is, of keeping up the remembrance of something which had occurred in his own experi-
ence, and which might be useful to himself or to others; the record of some valuable lessons
which had been learned from what he had experienced in the trials referred to.” Some are of
opinion that the expression indicates that the Psalm was used to remind the Psalmist and
others of the wants and circumstances to which it was applied. Others that, inasmuch as God
seemed to have forgotten them, the Psalm was intended to bring the Psalmist and people to
His remembrance,

The Sas is almost exactly similar to verses 18-17 of Psalm zl It seems as though if

«


He


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


Sc eaimsaaieemmeemmmmemsseeseees esse ee ee


had been taken from that Psalm and slightly altered to adapt it to some new occaston. “We
do not know what the occasion in either case was, but it would seem that in this instance
the Psalmist found, in the closing verses of the 40th Psalm, language whieh very nearly ex-
pressed what he felt on some particular occasion, and which might, by a slight change, be
applied to the use for which it was then desired.”

Hengstenberg regards this and the following Psalm as forming “ one pair, the 70th being like


an introduction to the 71st.”


PRAYER IN PERSECUTION.


We regard this Psalm as the prayer
of a good man suffering from persecu-
tion. Consider—

I. The circumstances and condition
of the suppliant. Of these he sets b
fore us three main features—

I. Fersecution (vers, 2 and 3). Here
are three forms of persecution. (1
Acitve and deadly hostility. “Them
that seek after my soul,” There were
those who were seeking to destroy the
life of the Psalmist. So implacable was
their enmity that nothing less than his
destruction could satisfy them. (2) De-
light in injury. ‘Them that desire my
hurt.” When loss or trouble, affliction
or calamity, came upon the Psalmist,
there were those who were glad because
of it. If they did not smite him them-
selves, they rejoiced when others did
so. If they did not do him evil, they
heartily wished it him. (3) Scoffing.
“Them that say, Aha, aha!” This is
the language of reproach and scorn. It
also expresses exultation over another,
and gratification at the calamities or
troubles that befall him. ’* The damage
of the godly is the delight of the wicked ;
and an enemy to the godly is he that
laughs and scorns at the misery of the
godly.” Christians have to meet with
persecution in our own day. The forms
of persecution change, but the perse-
cuting spirit remains unchanged from
the time of the Psalmist even until now.
‘* All that will live godly in Christ Jesus
shall suffer persecution.”

2. Affliction, “I am poor and needy.”
Conant: “I am afflicted and needy.”
It is the cry of one who was in distress
or suffering, and felt himself destitute
of all help and resource except in God.

3. Need. This is consequent upon
the persecution and afiliction, The peril
arising from his persecutions he needed
deliverance from. The stress and strain


of his affliction were so severe that he
needed help to enable him to endure
them, ‘‘ Poverty and necessity are very
good pleas in prayer to a God of infinite
mercy, who despises not the sighing cf
a contrite heart, who has pronounced a
blessing upon the poor in spirit, and
who fills the hungry with good things,”

II. The prayer of the suppliant.

1. The Being to whom it ts addressed,
“QO God,... Jehovah, ... my help
and my deliverer.” The Psalmist directa
his prayer to the Almighty and self-
existent One, who is swift to hear and
strong to save those who call upon Hira,
He mentions his personal interest in
this great Being. “My help and my
deliverer.” This confidence was based
upon, (1) The promises of God to His
people, (2) The former experiences of
the Psalmist. Again and again he had
found God to be “a very present help
in trouble.”

2. The objects which tt seeks to attain,
The Psalmist seeks (1) His own de-
liverance. ‘Make haste, O God, to
deliver me; make haste to help me, O
Lord.” Conant: “OQ God—to my
rescue, O Jehovah—to my help, make
haste.” That which he seeks for himself
all men require. Ultimate deliverance
from all trials and afflictions, and “ grace
to help in time of need,” are blessings
which each and all men should seek for
themselves. (2) The dtscomfiture of
his enemies. ‘Let them be ashamed
and confounded that seek after my soul,
let them be turned backward and put to
confusion that desire my hurt. Let
them be turned back for a reward of
their shame that say, Aha, aha!” These
expressions are of frequent occurrence
in the Psalms. They are used to set
forth the frustration and failure of the
hopes and projects of the wicked. The
number and variety of een 2

36


POALM LEX


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMS.


ee


“ ashamed, ... confounded, ... turned
backward,.. . put to confusion ”—are
intended to give intensity and force to
the idea. It is not only lawful but
commendable to pray that the designs
and hopes of wicked men might be
frustrated. (3) The prosperity of the
godly. ‘Let all those that seek Thee
rejoice and be glad in Thee; and let
such as love Thy salvation say continu-
ally, Let God be magnified.” The bles-
sedness of the true seeker after God is
to find Him, and in finding Him to
realize fulness of joy. The blessedness
of the lover of the salvation of God is to
enjoy it, and enjoying it to give God
glory. David prays for the frustration
of the hopes of the wicked, and for the
fruition of the hopes of the good.

3. The urgency with which wt ts
presented, “ Make haste to help me,


Ura@rncy


( Verees


“ Make haste to help me, O Lord....
Make haste unto me, O God;...0O
Lord, make no tarrying.”

The urgency of the Psalmist im-
plies—

I. A deep sense of present and im-
mediate need. This was awakened in
him by—

1. The extremity of the danger to
which he was exposed. His foes were
many and were eagerly seeking to
destroy his life. His afflictions were
severe. He felt that if he were not
speedily relieved he must perish.

2. The limitation of the resources at
his command. Personally he was not
able to cope with his enemies, or to bear
up under his distresses, He felt that any
help which he could expect from man
would prove insufficient for his great
and pressing requirements.

3. The conviction that adequate help
could be found only in God. The Psal-
mist evidently felt that the help of God
was the one thing that he required for
his support and galvation. If that help
were speedily given, all would be well

368


O Lord, .. . make haste unto me, O
God; .. . O Lord, make no tarrying.”
The Psalmist was so deeply conscious of
his own afiliction and peril and helpless-
ness, and of his entire dependence upon
the help of God, that he prays with al-
most passionate urgency for the im-
mediate interposition of God on his
behalf. He would constrain God to
appear for him at once. ‘“ He who can-
not wait for the help of God, will never
gain it; but he must pray for it and
may urge his circumstances in prayer.”
Urgency of need will be followed by
urgency of entreaty, and urgency of en-
treaty by speedy help. ‘ Though death,
or danger of it, were never so near, God
can come quickly and prevent it; and
prayer is a swift messenger, which in
the twinkling of an eye can go and re
turn with an answer from heaven.”


my PrRaveR


1 and 5.)


with him ; but if it were withheld, the
issue would be his utter overthrow or
his destruction—hence the urgency of
his prayer.

IL Apparent delay in answering
his prayer. There is never any real
delay in answering prayer ; but at times
God seems to us to disregard our cries
to Him. We cry with David, ‘“‘ How
long wilt Thou forget me, O Lord? for
ever?” &c. (Ps. xiii. 1-4). Or, with
Habakkuk, “O Lord, how long shall I
cry, and Thou wilt not hear?”

1. During what seems delay to us God
may be answering our prayer. He does
not always answer our prayers by grant-
ing our requests, the apparent
delay we are kept from sinking, our
enemies do not completely triumph over
us, we are graciously sustained. In
such cases the divine answer to our
prayers is not deliverance from trouble,
but support in trouble ; not the removal
of the thorn from the flesh, but, “ My
grace is sufficient for thee; for My
strength is made perfect in weakness”
(2 Coy, xii 7-9).


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMB,


FSal@t LXEY.





2. The seeming delay may be pro
ductive of richest blessing. (1.) It may
teach us the most tmportant lessons.
How eminently fitted to teach us the
true nature of prayer! Its grand aim
is not to induce God to do our will, but
to lead us to cheerfully acquiesce in His
will ; not the gratification of our desires,
but the perfection of our being. (2.)
It may develop the noblest attributes of
character. It may tntensify our desires.
‘“« Sometimes God seems to delay helping
His own people, that He may excite
such earnest desires as these ” which are
expressed in this psalm. Delay may
promote patience ; may teach and train
us to watt calmly and resolutely upon
God. “Prayer,” says Dr. Reynolds,
“however importunate, constant, and
fervent, must have its hours of rest, and
of the waiting for answer and fulfilment,
Like Elijah, we must look from the
height of Carmel over the great sea for
the little cloud which shall arise and
cover the sky, in answer to our prayer.
We must open our every faculty to receive
the Holy Ghost; we must wait with
earnest though patient expectation; we
must listen for the gentle knocking of
the mighty Stranger at the door of our
heart ; we must wait amid the discords
of the world and the swoop of the storm
through the wilderness, and when the
strong wind rends the mountains, and
the earthquake and the fire follow in
wild succession—for the still small


still wait patiently for Him.’” More
over, delay may develop trust, may train
us to confide in God in times of immi-
nent peril and deep distress. The seem-
ing delay may in many ways be far
better for us than a manifest and
immediate answer to our prayers, Hun-
tington: ‘‘One of our hardest lessons
is to find out the wisdom of our hin-
drances ; how we are to be put forward
and upward by being put back and put
down ; encouraged by being rebuked;
prospered by being baffled. . .. It
needs wakeful watchers, spiritual eye-
sight, to read that riddle of life, how
defeat helps progress ; how a compul-
sory standing still speeds us on; how
humiliation exalts;” and how what
seems to us the continued silence of God
may be the wise and gracious answer to
our prayers.

IIL Strong faith in the entreatable-
ness of God. It is abundantly clear
that the Psalmist did not regard God as
imprisoned and bound by the laws and


‘order of the universe which He created.


Nor did he regard Him as a Being who
cannot be moved by any urgency of
supplication. A great faith in God as
the hearer and answerer of prayer throbs
in these impassioned cries for His speedy
help. The instinct which finds utter
rance in such cries points to the reality
of prayer—to the fact that it has a real
ee and function in the universe of


voice—we must ‘ reat in the Lord, and


PSALM LXXL


InTRODUOTION.


‘This Psalm,” says Barnes, ‘‘is without a title. It is impossible to determine on what
occasion it was composed. There is some plausibility in the supposition that Ps, lxx. might
have been placed before it, or in connection with it, as a kind of introduction, or as indicating
the character of the Psalms among which it is found; but nothing of certainty can be ascer-
tained on this point. It evidently belongs to the class of Psalms which refer to the trials of
the righteous; but it was rather in view of past troubles than of those which were then exist-
ing. ‘Thereis no certain evidence that the Psalm waa composed by David. If so, it was when
he was advanced in life. There is, indeed, much in the Psalm which would be appropriate to
David—much which he might have written; but there is no way now of ascertaining with
certainty who was the author. ... . All that is known respecting the occasion on which the
Psalm was composed, whoever was the author, ia, that it was composed when old age was draw-
ing near, and in view of the trials and blessings of life, as considered from the contemplation
of its approaching close. ADs j ; H

“Tt is a Psalm of great value, as describing the feelings of a good man when he ia growing
old, and is an illustration of what there has been occasion so often to remark ir premarin

2A


PSALM LEXI. XOMILETIC COMMENTARY; PSALMS.


of the Book of Psalms, that the Bible fs adapted to all the conditions of human life. Ine
book professing to be a revelation from God, and in a world where old age, with ite trials, ita
infirmities, its recollections, and its hopes, must be so prominent in the actual state of things
existing, it would have been unaccountable if there had been nothing to illustrate the feelings
of those in advancing or advanced years—nothing to suggest the kind of reflections appropriate
to that period of life—nothing to cheer the heart of the aged man, and to inspire him with
hope—nothing to prompt him to recall the lessons of the past, and to make use of those les-
sons to prepare him for the future ; even ag, in a world so full of trial, it would have been
strange if there had been nothing to comfort the mind in affliction, and to enable men to
derive proper lessons from the experiences of life. This Psalm, therefore, is one of the most
valuable portions of the Bible to a certain class of mankind, and may be to any of the living,
as suggesting the proper reflections of a good man as the infirmities of age draw on, and as he
reviews the mercies and the trials of the past.” ‘

Homiletically we view the Psalm as presenting—Trust and prayer, vera. 1-3; The precious
recollections, present trials, and glorious resource of an aged saint, vera, 4-18; and The trium-
phant faith of an aged saint, vera. 14-24,








TRUST AND PRAYER.
(Verses 1-3.)


These verses, which form the intro- ment to save me.” Hengstenberg:


duction to the Psalm, are borrowed,
with slight changes, from Ps, xxxi. 1-3 ;
and as they have been expounded in
that place, our remarks on them will be
brief. We have here—

L The good man’s trust.
O Lord, do I put my trust.”
fides—

1. In a Dwine Person. “In Thee, O
Lord,” &c. Not in mere law, or order,
or fate, or force. ‘The things which
these terms set forth satisfy neither the
demands of the intellect nor the cravings
of the heart. They are cold, heartless
abstractions. We cannot confide in
them. But the Psalmist trusts in the
personal God—a Being of infinite power,
wisdom, righteousness, love, &c. In
Him both the intellect and the heart
may repose.

2. In a Divine Person sustaining
personal relations to Hts creatures.
“Thou art my rock and my fortress,”
The Most High is not far removed from
His creatures, or indifferent to their
needs and interests. He guards their
interests, supplies their needs, and
graciously cares for them individually.
He encourages every man to claim a
personal interest in Him, and in His
protection and provision. Without pre-
sumption we may say, “Thou art my
rock,” d&c.

3. In a Divine Person who has given
gracious assurances of salvation to His
people. “Thou hast given command-

370


“Tn Thee,
He con-


“Who hast ordained to help me.” God
has given many gracious and faithful
promises of salvation to all those who
trust in Him. Such, then, is the object
of the good man’s trust as presented to
us by the Psalmist.

II. The good man’s prayer. ‘“ Let
me never be put to confusion,” &c. He
supplicates—

1. Divine audience. “Incline Thine
ear unto me.” It is a request that God
would bestow upon him His gracious
attention. The lisping prayer of the
little child, the broken sob of the peni-
tent, the sigh of the sorely burdened
spirit, and the faint whisper of the
dying, each and all are heard by Him.
No uprising of holy desire or utterance
of need escapes His notice, or fails to
secure His regard.

2. Divine deliverance. “Deliver me
in Thy righteousness, and cause me to
escape, ... and save me.” He was
in great danger by reason of the malicious
schemes and enterprises of his enemies,
They were seeking his life, He looks
to God for deliveramce from their
subtlety and strength, feeling that He
was too righteous a Being to fail in
delivering one who trusted Him go fully,
seeing that He had promised salvation
to all who confide in Him. When
trusting in God we may plead His
righteousness for salvation.

3. Divine protection, “Be Thou my
strong habitation, whereunto I may


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





continually resort.” Hengstenberg : “ Be
to me a rock of salvation, to which I
may come continually.” This seems to
us a very comprehensive petition. He
asks that he may find in God (1) His
home. “My habitation.” God Him-
self is the true home of the soul. ‘Lord,
Thou hast been our dwelling-place in
all generations.” (2) His secure home,
“My strong habitation.” ‘A rock of
habitation.” A rock against which the
tumultuous waves of persecution shall
spend themselves in vain. He that
dwells in God has omnipotence for his
defence, (3) His secure home always
accessible. ‘‘Whereunto I may con-
tinually resort.” At all times and in
all circumstances we may take refuge in
God, feeling assured of protection and
welcome.





4. Divine vindication, “ Let me never
be put to confusion.” It is a prayer
that God would vindicate the confidence
which he had reposed in Him. If the
Psalmist failed to find salvation in God,
his highest hopes would be wrecked,
his most sacred and precious interests
would be lost; he would be covered
with confusion and shame. If it be
reposed in God, our confidence will never
become our confusion. “ Blessed are
all they that put their trust in Him,”

Conotusion.—Mark the relation be-
tween trust and prayer. There can be
no true prayer without faith, Prayer
is not the cry of despair, but the aspira-
tion or entreaty of hope. And wherever
there is genuine trust in God it will find
expression in prayer to him,


THE PRECIOUS RECOLLECTIONS, PRESENT TRIALS, AND GLORIOUS
Resource or aN Acep Sart,


(Verses 4-13.)


In this section of the Psalm three
things require notice :

I. The precious recollections of an
aged saint.

1. Of a life of trust in God. “Thou
art my trust from my youth.” From
his earliest years God had been the
object of his hope. The Psalmist does
not boast of this. He “ does not in the
least praise his own faith, but the grace
of God, which he had experienced from
his childhood.” We know that in early
life David exercised strong confidence in
God. Blessed are they whose old age is
soothed and brightened by memories of
early trust in God, and consecration to
Him.

9. Of a life sustained by God. “ By
Thee have I been holden up from the
womb; Thou art He that took me
out of my mother’s bowels.” On FDI


(Niph. of JD, to support, to lean)
Perowne says: ‘This is an expression
wonderfully descriptive of what faith
is, and of what God is to those who
trust in Him. He isa father who bears
them in His arms and carries them in
His bosom; they are as children who


Jean all their weight upon Him, and
find their sweetest rest in His support-
ing hand. This is the very idea of
faith, according to its Hebrew significa-
tion. When it is said in Gen. xv. 6,
that ‘Abraham believed God,’ it means
literally, ‘he leaned upon God.’” Look-
ing back upon his life the Psalmist
could say,

“‘Thy mercy heard my infant prayer,

Thy love, with all a mother’s care,
Sustained my childish days;
Thy goodness watched my ripening youth,
And formed my heart to love Thy truth,
And filled my lips with praise.”
— Grant.

David had recollections of the gentle
and strong hand of God supporting him
through all his life. His age was sus-
tained and cheered by memories of the
rich and constant goodness of God to
him. The stream of the Divine bless-
ing had never ceased to flow for his
refreshment and support. Whatever or
whosoever had disappointed him, God
had never failed him. Blessed are they
who ia old age have a retrospect like
unto this,

IL The present trials of re aged

37


PSALM LXXI.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


eee _—$_$_$_—$—_$$$_ $$$


gaint. Even the old age of the good is
not always exempt from trial. We are
never beyond the reach of the storm
while we are in this world. The old
age of David was darkened by trouble
by reason of the great sins which stain
and mar one period of his life. See
2 Sam. xii. 10,11. In his old age he
‘“‘was tried by great and sore troubles,
by debility of body (1 Kings i. 1-4),
and by the rebellion of Adonijah, his
son usurping his throne and endeavour-
ing to supplant Solomon (1 Kings i.
5-10), and by the treachery of Abiathar
and Joab” (1 Kings i. 18,19). The trials
which he mentions in this Psalm arose
from his enemies, He sets before us—

l. Their character. ‘‘The wicked,
the unrighteous and cruel man.” His
foes were unjust, malignant, and violent
men. Against foes of such a character
he might well appeal unto God.

2. Their aim, “They lay wait for
my soul.” They watched and waited
to take away his life; they sought
to destroy him. An illustration of the
spiritual foes of the good.

3. Their method. This comprised (1)


Slander. ‘‘ Mine enemies speak against
me;.. . saying, God hath forsaken
him.” The tongue of slander is never


tired. In one way or another it manages
to keep itself in constant employment.
Sometimes it drops honey and some-
times gall, It is bitter now, and then
sweet. It insinuates or assails directly
according to the circumstances. It will
hide a curse under a smooth word, and
administer poison in the phrase of love.
Like death it ‘loves a shining mark.’
And it is never so voluble and eloquent
as when it can blight the hopes of the
noble, soil the reputation of the pure,
and break down the character of the
brave and strong. And how much of
this vile work is done in one way and
another in society! . . . It is done to
the hurt and agony of many a soul. It
is done by a look sometimes, by the curl
of a lip, by the wink of an eye, by an
insinuation, a phrase of suspicion, by
the dexterous and malicious handling
of a rumour—in a thousand ways
are men and women stung by the
poisoned arrow shot from the devil’s
373


tongue of slander.” David suffered
most acutely and often from the calum-
nies of his enemies, See our remarks
on Ps. xli, 5-8; xlii. 3. (2) Subtlety.
“They take counsel together.” They
were combined and designing; and
endeavoured to form such plans and
adopt such methods as would enable
them with the greatest certainty to
accomplish their cruel and malicious
designs. They were crafty as well as
calumnious. (3) Violence. ‘ Persecute
and take him, for there is none to
deliver him.” They imagined that the
Psalmist was abandoned by God, that
his defence was withdrawn, and that
they might, therefore, pursue and seize
him. They employed force against him,
as well as subtlety and slander. The
good have their enemies now. These
enemies are malicious, cunning, and
strong. They aim at their spiritual
destruction. “Be sober, be vigilant,
because your adversary,” de.

III. The glorious resource of an
aged saint. The aged Psalmist, in his
trials, turned to the Lord God.

1. His confidence. ‘Thou art my
hope, O Lord God; Thou art my trust
from my youth... Thou art my
strong refuge.” His confidence was
(1) Of long continuance, From his
youth he had reposed his trust in God.
His faith amid the trials of old age
was sustained by a long, diversified,
and rich experience. Present confidence
was encouraged and strengthened by
past experience of great fulness and
preciousness. His confidence was (2)
Eaultant. “My praise is continually
of Thee. . . . Let my mouth be filled
with Thy praise and with thy honour all
the day.” His trust in God enabled him
to triumph over his enemies, Faith made
him songful even in the midst of his trials.

2. His prayer. (1) As regards his
enemies. ‘‘ Let them be confounded and
consumed that are adversaries to my
soul, let them be covered with reproach
and dishonour that seek my hurt.” Mus-
culus: “ His desire is, that they may be
confounded and fail, that they may be
covered with disgrace and shame. He
seeks nothing beyond the frustration of
their attempts, that they may begin to be


r


' HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


a


ashamed, and have no cause for boasting
that they came off victorious.” Caryl:
“Shame ariseth from utter disappoint-
ments. If hope deferred causeth shame,
then much more hope destroyed. When
a man sees his hopes quite cut off, so that
he can no way reach the thing he looked
for, shame takes hold of him strongly.”
Spurgeon: “How confounded must
Pharaoh have been when Israel mul-
tiplied, despite his endeavours to exter-
minate the race; and how consumed
with rage must the scribes and Pharisees
have become when they saw the Gospel
spreading from land to land by the very
means which they used for its destruc-
tion.” Satan and all the enemies of the
good shall be thus confounded. Their
designs shall be utterly defeated, &ec.
(2) As regards himself. He seeks for
(a) Deliwerance from his enemies. “ De-
liver me, O my God, out of the hand of
the wicked, out of the hand of the un-
righteous and cruel man.” He prays to
be rescued from the strong grip of his
wicked foes, (8) The continued pre-
sence and help of God. ‘‘ Cast me not
off in the time of old age; forsake me


not when my strength faileth,... O
God, be not far from me; O my
make haste for my help.” The kindness
and faithfulness of God to the Psalmist
in youth and maturity encourage him
to seek His presence and aid in the time
of old age and failing strength. ‘“ He
is a Master that is not wont to cast off
old servants.” David feels that if God
be near unto him all will be well with
him. ‘ Nearness to God is our con-
scious security. A child in the dark is
comforted by grasping its father’s hand.”

ConcLusion.—l. Let the young learn
the importance of early yiety. It is the
best preparation for the trials of declin-
ing years. 2. Let the aged, with fatling
faculties and growing infirmities, seck
help and comfort in God. “ Hearken
unto me, O house of Jacob, and all ye
the remnant of the house of Israel; ye
that have been borne by Me from the
birth, that have been carried from the
womb: And even to your old age, I am
the same ; and even to grey hairs, I will
carry you. I have made, and I will
bear ; I will carry, and will deliver
you.”


Tux Acrep Saint AND HIB Gop.
(Verse 7.)


Consider—

I. What the Psalmist said of him-
self. ‘I am as a wonder unto many.”
He was led to say this from the review
which he had taken of his own history.
The history of David was singular. He
had been raised from being a shepherd
to be the king of Israel. The deliver-
ances which had been wrought for him
showed that the hand of God had been
with him. And in his old age, having
reigned over the people for many years,
in reviewing his life, he said, ‘I am as
a wonder unto many.”

1. It ts proper to review past expe-
riences, (1) As to the methods of grace.
Every good man is the subject of grace,
and has been preserved in his course by
supplies of grace; and it is proper for
him to review what God has done for
him. (2) As to the conduct of Provwi-
dence. This is proper in every stage of
life, but especially in old age. Reflect


upon the many blessings which a kind
Providence has bestowed, the many de-
liverances which you have experienced,
&e.

2. It is profitable to review past expe-
riences. (1) It produces humtlity, be-
cause of the little improvement we have
made, &e. (2) It inspires gratitude,
because of many mercies, many kind in-
terpositions of Providence, &c, Bee Gen.
xxxii, 10; 2 Sam. vii. 18. (3) It en-
courages us to trust in God. ecting
upon the past had this effect upon David,
as we see in this Psalm (vers. 1, 14-24).

II. What the Psalmist said of his
God. “Thou art my strong refuge.”

1. The manner in which David speaks
of God. ‘Thou art my strong refuge.”
(1) If we think ot the perfections of
God we shall see that we may view Him
as a “strong refuge.” His power is
almighty ; His wisdom is infinite, to
guide, &c. He is always alee fatth-


PSALM LXXL


ful, unchangeable, &e, (2) His people
in all ages have found him to be their
“ strong refuge.”

2. In all circumstances His people
may make Him their. refuge. (1) In
troubles. These are different in their
kind with different persons. Some have
poverty, others losses, others family
trials, others bereavements, others un-
faithful friends, &c. But there is no
trouble but the believer may bring it to
his God. (2) In spiritual trials, eg.,
wounded conscience, Satanic tempta-
tions, painful conflicts, d&e. (3) In old
age. The increasing infirmities of old
age, the loss of many friends who cheered
and strengthened us in former years,
the certainty that the days of labour
and usefulness are drawing to a close,
render it of the greatest importance to
have God for our refuge. (4) In death


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





itself. When the powers of nature fail,
when the last enemy comes, God wilt
be the refuge of His people. “ Pre-
cious in the sight of the Lord is the
death of His saints.”

Conciusion.—1. How important to
live so as to enjoy the privilege of having
God for a refuge / If we are walking in
the way of holiness we shall enjoy this
privilege. 2. Zo enjoy thts privilege we
must exercise faith, In the trials of life
the promises of God are a source of
encouragement and comfort, but we can
enjoy the consolation which they afford
only by faith. 3. How great ts the im-
portance of true religion / If we neglect
religion we shall have our trials, but we —
shall have no adequate refuge. Seek
an interest in Christ, and the Lord will
be your God.— Abridged from an tem-
published MS.


THs Cry or THE AGED,
(Verse 9.)


This is the cry of trembling, tottering
age to man, as well as to God. Among
the very saddest of human experiences
is the decay which is the harbinger of
death. Decay is the first bitterness of
death. I believe that, at last, in the
act of dying the bitterness of death is
already past. There is a great physical
preparation for dying, when the moment
has at length come. The worn-out body,
weary with its long struggle, sinks at
last into the arms of death without a
tremor ; it is tired, it longs to be at rest,
It is the long struggle of the vital
power, while its vigour is still capable
of the effort, which is so hard to endure,
so sad to behold. The strong man
worsted, but yielding slowly, and fight-
ing every inch against the sure, inevi-
table progress of decay. The eye daily a
little dimmer, the limbs a little feebler,
&c. ... It is a dark, sad theme, the
sufferings and miseries of the long de-
cline. That God should suffer it must
have deep reasons, ... Consider—

I. The phenomena of human decay.
“The outer man decayeth.” At both
ends of life man is the most helpless and
the weakest of the creatures. For nearly

874


one-third of his pilgrimage, law and fact
hold man to be an infant, dependent on
elders, that is, cast upon the care and
guidance of his fellows; and if he lives
out his span, and fulfils the natural
course, he is certain of years of the same
dependence before his death. With this
grand difference, that the great moving
ing principle of the one ministry is
memory, the inspiration of the other is
hope, The aged have memory chiefly
to look to, the young have hope. Among
the finer spirits, the men and women of
high culture and Christian feeling, there
is a beautiful sacredness about the hoary
head which wins for it abundant care
and honour; but alas! for the old and
weary among the great mass of man-
kind, . .. Take infirmity in its best
condition, where it is regarded most re-
verently and handled most tenderly, and
there is a very sad side to it. How
much more when the surroundings are
hard and selfish, and the poor worn-out
pilgrim is made to see very plainly that
his life is a burden to those for whose
nurture the strength of it was spent;
and that declining strength will be but
the signal for new hardships, insults,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





and wrongs. When circumstance is all
that is happy, the thing remains—the
most painful of spectacles, the most
bitter of experiences—the strong frame
grown weak as an infant’s, and dropping
piecemeal to dust. The brain that was
once regal in power wandering wearily
after lost thoughts, and failing to grasp
them, looking forth from perplexed and
bewildered eyes with that look which is
so hard to meet without tears—the lock
of a mind conscious that it is losing the
power to hold its own. The lips bab-
bling idle, incoherent words, the hands
groping vaguely after familiar objects,
the limbs bending beneath the weight of
the shrivelled form whose lusty manhood
they bore so joyously about its work.
The eyes growing dim, as though a thick
veil were dropped over the creation ;
the cheerful and courageous spirit queru-
lous and suspicious ; all the noble moral
qualities, the self-denial, the wisdom, the
tenderness, the courage, the hope, that
rendered in their prime such noble mini-
stry to others, seeming to share the
body’s decay, and passing slowly under
utter eclipse. The mind, the soul, to
the eye dying with the body, becoming
puling, feeble, fretful as a child’s. It
is “a sair sight” to those who have to
watch it, a bitter experience to those
who have to pass through it.

II. The reasons of this law of physi-
eal decay as far as we can explore it.
Why should such a law reign in a world
which is under the wise rule of a merci-
ful and loving God?

1. To drive home the lessons which
God is ever seeking to teach us about sin.
Death as it reigns on earth is not transla-
tion—the calm passage of a spirit from
an inferior to a superior sphere. Nor is
it intended to look like translation. It
4s a curse which cin jas inflicted on the
world, It is the 1ev/.’s work. not God’s,
YJeath as we kt ow it new, shough it is
God’s judgment, is the carsed work ¢f
evil. And God intends that it sha}
look like it. There is no hiding of any
of its black features. Sin is corruption
of the spirit, paralysis of every faculty
of the being. God shows us the cor-
ruption, the paralysis of force, in the
phenowena of bodily decay. It is God's


PSALM LXER


solemn sermon upon sin. What you
see the devil do for a body, that believe
the devil is doing for a soul.

2. To develop the noblest qualities if
the human spirit by the ministries which
sickness, suffering, and decay call furth.
Abolish suffering and decay God will
net. He maintains it while this sinful
world endures, as His strong witness
against sin. But he seeks to make it
the sasion of a higher, richer blessing
than would be found even in its aboli-
tion. The stern law grows beautiful as
it calls forth tender and unselfish minis-
try. There is something higher and
more blessed than not to suffer. It is
to suffer surrounded by exquisite minis-
tries of love. . . . God has made us so
weak in birth and in death, because we
have men and women and not beasts
around us, And it is in caring for the
helpless, nursing the weak, tending the
sick, and bearing the burdens of the sad,
that men and women are to grow like


3. That He may strengthen faith and
hope tn immortality. Death is terrible
that life may be beautiful. The de-
stroyer is suffered to ravage that the
deliverer may be welcomed and blessed.
God's judgment is not unto death, but
unto life. But it is always through the
judgment, and not by escaping it or
turning it aside, that He saves. So
through death the great Captain of
deliverance destroyed death. . . . The
long weary decay of age, the declining
strength of which the Psalmist speaks
so touchingly, has but one alleviation,
the tender, devoted ministry of our loved
ones; it has but one consolation, the
hope of immortality. As we watch it,
as we suffer it, that hope becomes the
soul’s sheet anchor. When death wears
his ghastliest dress of terror, we cling
but the more closely to Him whe has
taught us to triumph—yea, to exult
ever death. Don’t moan like a trem-
bling dove when death has his grip on
you, after Hezekiah’s fashion. Lift up
your voice and sing a pan like Paul
inspired by Christ. “For which cause
we faint not; but though our natural
man perish,” &, (2 Cor. iv. 16—v. 4.)

Til The duties which spring out of

375


FRALM LEXI.





the facts and considerations on which
we have dwelt.

1. The tender care of the old and grey-
headed. God commits them to our
ministry. He makes us responsible for
their charge. If we will not joyfully
bear that burden, it is His counsel, His
charge, His gift which we despise. . . .
There is nothing so noble, nothing so
beautiful, as the ministry of vigour to
weakness, health to sickness, growth to
decay, youth to age. There is nothing
that God marks more earnestly, nothing
that will bear richer fruit in heaven.
Let the plea of grey hairs be all-power-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALM&.








ful. Bear brightly the mistrust, the
fretfulness, the dulness, Let the whisper
of the aged lips, and the sign of the aged
hand, be like royal commands to you.

2. Let us press home on the hearts
of the aged with double earnestness the
Gospel which brings to light ife and
tmmortality. Blot out thst Gospel, and
it is all pure agony and misery. Life is
a curse, death is a curse, all is a curse ;
and there is no hope. “But now is
Christ risen from the deac\,” &c, (1 Cor.
xv. 20-22, and 55-57 ; 2 Vor. iv. 17).—
J. Baldwin Brown, B.A. Abridged from
“The Christian World Pulpit.”


Tus TriumpHaNt Farrs or an AgeEp Sarr.
(Verses 14-24)


The tone of the Psalm changes re-
markably. For despondency and fear
we have cheerfulness and hope ; and the
hymn closes with an outburst of exult-
ant praise. Consider—

I. The prayer of faith (Vers. 17,
18.) Notice—

1. The blessing sought in the prayer.
“Now also when I am old and grey-
headed, O God, forsake me not.” Margin
— Unto old age and grey hairs.” A
correct rendering is—‘‘ And even to old
age and grey hairs, O God, forsake me
not.” The Psalmist seeks that the gra-
cious and helpful presence of God should
be continued unto him, to the very close
of a long life.

2. The ground from which the prayer
rises. ‘OQ God, Thou hast taught me
from my youth; and hitherto have I
declared Thy wondrous works.” In his
prayer the Psalmist is encouraged by
(1) God’s doings for him in the past.
From his youth God had instructed and
guided him. (2) His celebration of
those doings, He had made known to
others the wondrous doings of God on
his behalf.

3. The reason by which the prayer te
urged, “ Fursake me not, until I have
showed Thy strength unto this genera-
tion, and Thy power to every one that
is to come.” Margin—“ Thine arm,”
“The arm of the Lord is the symbol af
Bis executive power and works, (C.awp

376


Isa. lii, 10; lifi. 1; Ezek. iv. 7.) The
generation that has come up in the
place of his own generation, which is
passing away, first comes before his
mind, and then his vision deepens and
widens, taking in all the coming genera
tions to whom he would publish the
mighty deeds of God.” He sought for
the continuance of the Divine presence
and help that he might still be able to
edify his fellow-men and honour his
God. (See these verses more fully
treated in two sketches given ee
II. The anticipation of faith. The
Psalmist confidently looks forward to—
1. Complete deliverance from severe
trials, ‘Thou which hast showed me
great and sore troubles, shalt. quicken
me again, and shalt bring me up again
from the depths of the earth.” Conant;
“Thou, who hast made us see troubles
great and sore, wilt again revive us, and
from the abysses of the earth wilt bring
us up again.” Notice—(1) The best of
men may suffer severest trials. The
Psalmist represents himself and others
as dead and buried, or sinking in the
deep abysses of the earth. Their
troubles seemed overwhelming and ruin-
ous. (2) Good men in their trials must
recognis3 the hand of God. He had
caused ihem to see those great and
sore trials. No tral can befal us
without His permissive (3) Good men
i “belz trials maj” cherish an assexanes


id


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


FSALM LEEL


eer


of deliverance. He is able to bring even
the dead to life, and to raise from the
deepest and most dreadful abyss all
who call upon Him. He will not for-
sake those who trust in Him, The
trouble of the good shall pass away like
clouds, and leave their heavens serene
and beautiful.

2. The realisation of the Divine exal-
tation and comfort. ‘Thou shalt in-
crease my greatness, and comfort me on
every side.” Hengstenberg: “ And
shalt turn Thyself and comfort me.”
This is more than complete deliverance
from trial. It is the assurance that
through trial the people of God rise to
greater elevation and joy. “Sometimes
God makes His people’s troubles contri-
bute to the increase of their greatness,
and their sun shines the brighter for
having been under a cloud.” Through
much tribulation lies the path of the
good to greatness and glory. We must
bear the bitter suffering and fight the
stern battle; and, by the blessing of
God, the struggle and pain shall contri-
bute to our strength and joy. God
will “make us glad according to the
days wherein He has afflicted us, and
the years wherein we have seen evil.”
Such was the confident anticipation of
the Psalmist.

II. The resolution of faith. David
declares his purpose—

1. Zo continually hope in God. “ But
I will hope continually.” ‘“ Hope,” says
Dr. Punshon, “is @ marvellous inspira-
tion, which every heart confesses in
some season of extremest peril. It can
put nerve into the languid, and fleetness
into the feet of exhaustion. Let the
slim and feathery palm-grove be dimly
descried, though ever so remotely, and
the caravan will on, spite of the fatigue
of the traveller and the simoom’s blind-
ing, to where, by the fringy rootlets,
the desert waters flow. Let there glim-
mer one star through the murky waste
of night, and though the spars be shat-
tered, and the sails be riven, and the
hurricane howls for its prey, the brave
sailor will be lashed to the helm, and
see already, through the tempest’s break-
ing, calm waters and a spotless sky.
Oh! who is there, however hapless his


lot or forlorn his surroundings, who is
beyond the influence of this choicest of
earth’s comforters—this faithful friend
which survives the flight of riches, and the
wreck of reputation, and break of health,
and even the loss of dear and cherished
friends?” The Psalmist resolved that,
however painful his circumstances and
condition, sod wkateres the number
and péwe «sd malice oi his enemies,
he would aope in God. While God
lives, His people have every encourage-
ment to hope in Him.

2. To continually praise God. No-
tice—(1) The object of the Pealmist’s
praise. “I will praise Thee, O my
God—Thou Holy One of Israel.” Here
are four points—(a) The personality of
God, “Thee, O my God.” (8) The
unity of God. “One.” “The Lord our
God is one Lord.” (y) The perfection of
God. “Thou holy One.” Holiness in
man has been well defined as “the
symmetry of the soul ;” and by holiness
as attributed to God we understand the
summation of His perfections, (é) The
relation of God to His people. “O
my God, Thou Holy One of Israel.”
He is in covenant relations with His
people. All who trust in Him are
interested in Him and related to Him.
(2) The sudjects of His praise. These
are (a) The mighty deeds of God. “I
will goin the strength of the Lord God.”
Conant: “TI will come with the mighty
deeds of the Lord Jehovah.” Hengsten-
berg: “I will come with the deeds of
the Lord.” Alexander: “The com-
mon version—‘ | will go in the strength
of the Lord God,’ is at variance with
the usage both of the verb and noun, as
the former does not mean to go abso-
lutely, but either to enter or to come to
@ particular place, expressed or under-
stood. The ellipsis here may be sup-
plied from Psalm v. 7, and Ixvi. 13, in
both which places the same verb de-
notes the act of coming to God’s house
for the purpose of solemn praise, and in
the second passage cited is followed by
the same preposition, ‘I will come into
Thy house with burnt offerings,’ é.e., I
will bring them thither, This sense
agrees with the vow to praise God in the
two preceding verses, and with the pre

377


PSALM LEXI.


wise of commemoration in the other
clause of the verse. It also enables us
to give the noun its usual sense of God’s


exploits or mighty deeds” (see Ps, evi. .


2, and Deut. iii, 24). God had done
great things for the poet and the people,
he was confidently anticipating that He
would still achieve mighty and glorious
deeds for them, and he resolves to pub-
licly and thankfully celebrate these
exploits. (8) The righteousness of God.
‘““My mouth shall show forth Thy
righteousness, . . . I will make men-
tion of Thy righteousness, of Thine
only.” He speaks of the righteousness
of God’s doings. His deeds were as
just as they were mighty, as equitable
as they were wonderful. The Psalmist
resolves to praise the righteousness only
of God: not his own righteousness, or
strength, or skill, but the perfect righte-
ousness of the Lord his God. (y) The
salvation of God. “My mouth shall
show forth Thy salvation all the day ;
for I know not the numbers.” God's
great might is exerted for the salvation
of His people. His saving acts are in-
numerable. (Comp. Ps. xl. 5.) “God’s
righteousness and His salvation are here
joined together; let no man think to
put them asunder, or expect salvation
without righteousness.” This is an in-
exhaustible theme of praise to the godly
man, (8) The faithfulness of God. “1
will praise Thee, even Thy truth, O
my God.” By the “truth” we under-
stand especially the truth of the Divine
promises. “He is faithful that pro-
mised.” Such are the high and fruitful
topics which the poet resolved to cele-
brate. (3) The reason of his praise.
This is to a great extent contained in
the object and subjects of his praise.
He who is mighty, righteous, faithful,
and holy, and who works for the salva-
tion and exaltation and joy of his people,
is worthy of all praise. But the Psalmist
praises God because He delivers him
from sore distresses, and from the ene-
mies who sought to kill him. Faith
enables him to realise his salvation as
hoagh it were already wrought out for
lio, Hor they are confounded, for


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALHS.





they are brought unto shame, that seek
my hurt.” To the poet this is so cer-
tain that he speaks of it as a thing
already accomplished. He praises God
for it. His praise is the expression of
his gratitude. (4) The manner of hia

raise. He resolves to praise God. (a)
Publicly (ver. 16). “1 will come” into
Thy house “with the mighty deeds of
the Lord Jehovah; I will make men-
tion,” &c. In the publie congregation
the Psalmist would thankfully recount
the glorious deeds of God, and celebrate
His praise. (8) Songfully. “Unto
Thee will I sing.” (See remarks on Ps,
lix. 16.) (y) With instrumental accom-
paniment. “I will praise Thee with the .
psaltery ; unto Thee will I sing with
the harp,” (See remarks on Ps. lvii. 8.)
(5) The spirct of his praise. ‘My lips
shall greatly rejoice when I sing unto
Thee ; and my soul, which Thou hast
redeemed.” His praise was not formal
and cold, but warm and hearty; not
merely with his “lips,” but also with
his “soul.” His spirit was exultant.
To him worship was an inspiration and
joy. (6) The continuousness of his
praise. ‘My mouth shall ehow forth
Thy righteousness and Thy salvation all
the day. .... My tongue also shall
talk of Thy righteousness all the day
long.” True praise is not an occasional
act, but an abiding habitude; not the
service of the lips, but the spirit of the
life. He worships God truly who wor-
ships Him constantly.

Conctusion. — How wonderful and
divine is the power of true godliness!
It enables man to triumph over the
infirmities of declining years, the sharp
sorrows of life, and the bitter persecu-
tions of mighty and malignant foes. It
makes man victorious in the very midst
of his enemies. It lifts him in spirit
above the storm and the clouds into
serene and sunny regions. The true
Christian surveying the most adverse
circumstances and the most hostile forces
can shout in triumph, “‘in all these things
we are more than conquerors.” Is this
spirit—this trustful, victorious, Divine
spirit—oure $


ee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMS.


TT


An Otp Man’s Rerrosprcr.
(Verses 17, 18.)


L The Psalmist’s scholarship.
David was an instructed believer, and
more of the kind are needed. Converted
people should be learners. Some seem
to jump into salvation on a sudden; but
they who have not first learned should
have the sense not to teach. Ritualism
and scepticism would not have spread
had there been a wider diffusion of know-
ledge, for error and ignorance go hand
in hand. David went to school from
his youth ; he was mighty in the Scrip-
tures as they then existed. Let us,
then, read our Bibles, In the old days,
there was nothing the Romanists so
much dreaded as the Catechism. Then
let the experienced be teachers of others,
As regarded David, the Lord taught
him; he was taught by the prophets,
and alse by Providence, He learned
lessons in the camp and in the world.
It is a blessed thing when God is our
teacher, and His school-room is large
enough for all. Further, David began
early. It is necessary to be taught
early ; for the sooner we come to Christ,
the less we have to unlearn. We grow
like early planted trees, and have none
of those horrid remembrances which are
a cross to many who are reclaimed late
in life. Hence the young promote their
own happiness by entering the Church
early to grow up in it. If they would
preserve a bright eye and an elastic step,
they must cleave to Christ in youth,

Il The Believers occupation.
David’s occupation was to declare God’s
works, This was the kernel; all else
was but the shell, Some appear scarcely
to think of this—the duty of acquaint-
ing others with the blessings they them-
selves have found. Is there such a@
thing as a secret Christian? Who knows
of one? “Ido!” yousay. Well, the
fact that you know him is a proof that
he is not a secret Christian. Are such


deserters, or are they merely persons of
retiring habits} That soldier was of
retiring habits who ran away from the
field on the day of battle. David, how-
ever, proclaimed God’s works, Let us
have a theology full of God and not of
man. This is the grandest theme one
can take up, and it was the Psalmist’s
theme. Let them keep to the atone-
ment and all the blessed doctrines of
grace. Bring out the old, well-tried
guns now that such enemies as Ritual-
ism and Popery confronted them. Note,
further, that David’s style was com-
mendable. He spoke positively, and
his object was to win sinners, What
are we doing? All should do something ;
no man should keep his gift to himself ;
we must not play at being Christians.
It is a poor, miserable thing to be half-
and-half. Some can sit in a pew-corner,
and when they have heard a good ser-
mon they say, “ Bless the Lord!” or
they are passengers in the gospel coach
who can do no more than find fault with
the horses, coachman, guard, and all
about them.

IIL David’s prayer. ‘“ Forsake me
not.” Is it not remarkable that so many
of the people mentioned in the Bible as
having fallen into sin are old people?
Experienced coachmen tell us that the
Loises are more likely to fall at the
bottom of a hill than anywhere else.
Old age may be over-confident, or is
may be harassed by many fears. They
have need of sustaining grace to the
last ; and, on the other hand, God never
forsakes His old servants,

IV. David’s wish. He desired to
bear one more testimony to his God,
The aged and the weak show forth God’s
strength, and they are often the best
“ evidences ” of the truth of religion.—
OC. H. Spurgeon, From Twelve Realistic
Sketches.


CoMPARATIVE BLESSEDNESS OF THE CHRISTIAN’S OLD AGE.
(Verse 18.)


_ “ Now also when I am old and grey-
headed, O God, forsake me not.”


Though sin is often anticipated with
pleasure, it is never remembered but
379


PRALM LXEL





with self-reproach, Though duty Is
often looked forward to with trembling,
it is never looked back upon as per-
formed but with emotions of gladness,
The memory of a life spent in wicked-
ness is a garner of evil, ever pouring out
its hoard of bitterness on the soul, and
yet ever full; while that of a life devoted
to the service of God is a treasure of
bliss, as abundant as the wants of the
soul, and as enduring as its immortality.
If this be true—

I. The aged Ohristian must be
happy in the contemplation of his
past conduct and influence. While
there is here and there a page of sorrow in
his history, it is contemplated, as a whole,
with gladness. It contains the record
of long years of allegiance and service,
rendered in the spirit of obedience and
love to his ever loved and _ glorious
Master; of many an earnest conflict
with temptation, and of many a victory
won, through grace, over its utmost
power. It contains the record of many
& purpose which had its origin in a love
that embraced both God and man; of
many a scheme of usefulness, dc.
Happy the man who, from amid the
feebleness of declining years, may look
back over the pathway of such a history,
and recognise it as his own !

II. He is happy in the contempla-
tion of the blessings which have
marked his history. The kindness of
his Heavenly Father has not only strewn
his path with rich gifts of grace and
providence, but so constituted him, that
every present blessing sends forward its
light and joy to the end of his being.
If a peculiar bliss is mine to-day, it is
mine not to-day alone, but so long as
the memory of to-day shall endure,
The thoughts of the Christian in his old
age are often sent back over the path-
way of his life, and made to mark the
points at which Heaven’s gifts were most
abundant and rich, . . . How striking,
when contrasted with the experience of
the aged sinner, appears the blessedness
of the Christian, as, from amid the in-
firmities of his ald age, he looks back
upon the blessings included in his expe-
rlence of the past!

HL He is happy in the contempla-

380


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


—_


tion of his life’s history, because of
the lessons it has served to teach.
Life is a school, and experience a teacher,
The Christian whose presence in this
school has been continued during a long
course of years, cannot but be indebted
to its teacher for rich stores of truth and
wisdom.

IV. The aged disciple is happy in
the continued possession of his life’s
chief good. Not so is it with the man
whom the grey hairs and the tottering
steps of age find still in his sins. He
has outlived even the meagre enjoy-
ments embraced in the experience of the
worldling. . . . The aged disciple of
Jesus has not thus survived his life’s
chief good. That which was years ago
chosen as the chief portion of his soul is
still the light and joy of his being,
Though his hold on earthly pleasures
was long ago relinquished, those con-
nected with the smiles of a Saviour’s
countenance, and the experience of a
Saviour’s love, are his in the fullest
measure, Who, then, would not desire
the old age of the Christian ?

V. The aged disciple is happy in
the near prospect of realising his life’s
brightest hopes. In this respect also
his experience is very different from that
of the aged transgressor. He who has
pursued the pathway of sin until he
stands with the white locks, wrinkled
features, and bowed form of an old man
on the brink of the grave, has survived
the death of all his hopes... . Turn
your thoughts now to the aged follower
of the Lamb. The present, instead of
being the darkest and saddest period in
his history, is the brightest and happiest.
He is weary with his long journeying,
but happy in the thought that the next
tottering step may introduce him to a
house not made with hands, eternal in
the heavens. Verily the old age of the
Christian, marked by infirmity and weak-
ness though it be, is a bright and happy
period in his history, “ When I am old
and grey-headed,O God, forsake me not.”

Aged disciple of Jesus! you have
reason for the profoundest gratitude that
yours is the old age of the Christian |—
Jesse Guernsey. Abridged from Tha
Preacher’ Treasury.


Ft


BOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS. PSALM LEXY.


‘SEIT EA SERENE PRS





PSALM LAXIL


INTRODUCTION.


tion.—"* A Psalm for Solomon.” M : Of Solomon.” Hengastenberg :
** Solomon is named in the title as the auéhor of the Psalm, Attempts have been made, to ne


purpose, to interpret § ia) ap here, as in Ps. cxxvii., in another sense, The i when it ocours


as in the titles, without anything to limit its application, always indicates, as here, the author.
In favour of the announcement in the title, we have first the remarkably objective character of
the Psalm, common to it with the other writings of Solomon, and in striking contrast to that
flow of feeling which forms such a marked feature in the Psalms of David. And, in the second
place, there is algo the fact that it is the circumstances of Solomon's time that form the ground-
work of the Psalm.”

We have in the Psalm a picture of the character and extent of the sovereignty of the
Messiah, ‘‘Solomon, when at the height of his own power,” says Canon Liddon, ‘‘ sketches
a Superhuman King, ruling an empire which in its character and in its compass altogether
transcends his own. The extremest boundaries of the Kingdom of Israe! melt away before the
gaze of the Psalmist. The new kingdom reaches ‘ from sea to sea, and from the flood unto the
world’s end’ (ver. 8). It reaches from each frontier of the Promised Land to the remotest
regions of the known world in the opposite quarter. From the Mediterranean it extends to
the ocean that washes the shores of Eastern Asia; from the Euphrates to the utmost West.
At the feet of its mighty Monarch, all who are most inaccessible to the arms or the influence
of Israe] hasten to tender their voluntary submission. The wild sons of the desert (ver. 9), the
merchants of Tarshish in the then distant Spain, the islanders of the Mediterranean, the Arab
chiefs, the weaithy Nubians (ver. 10), are foremost in proffering their homage and fealty. But
all kings are at last to fall down in submission before the Ruler of the new kingdom; all
nations are to do Him service (ver. 11). His empire is to be co-extensive with the world :
it is alzo to be co-enduring with time (ver. 17). His empire ia to be spiritual; it is to confer
peace on the world, but by righteousness (ver. 3). The King will Himself secure righteou
judgment (vers. 2, 4), salvation (vers. 4, 18), deliverance (ver. 12), redemption (ver. 14), to His
subjects. The needy, the afflicted, the friendless, will be the especial objects of His tender
eare (vera. 12, 13). His appearance in the world will be like the descent of ‘the rain upon
the mown grass’ (ver. 6); the true life of man seems to have been killed out, but it is yet
eapable of being restored by Him. He himself, it is hinted, will be out of sight ; but His
Name will endure for ever; His Name will ‘ propagate’; and men shall be blessed in Him to
the end of time (ver. 17). This King is immortal; He is also all-knowing and all-mighty.
‘Omniscience alone can hear the cry of every human heart; Omnipotence alone can bring
deliverance to every human sufferer.’”

Looking at the Psalm homiletically we see in it 4 Prayer for Kings (ver. 1), The Glorious
Reign of the Messiah (vers, 2, 17), and the Dozology.


A Prgarves ror Kings


(Verse 1.)


This brief prayer for the king sug-
gests—

L The character of a true king. It
is clearly implied that he should be
righteous. ‘Give Thy righteousness
unto the king’s son.” Kings should be
righteous in Aeart, in asms, in actions.
They are bound to this,—

1. By obligations which are common
to all men. Kings as much as their
subjects are required “ to do justly, love
mercy, and walk humbly with God.”
The eternal and immutable laws of Ged


for moral beings are as binding upon


the mightiest sovereign as upon the
meanest subject.

2. By obligations which are spectal to
men of high position, Their example
is incomparably more influential than
that of those who oceupy less couspt
cuous, or obscure positions. “The people
are fashioned,” says Claudian, “ accord-
ing to the example of their king; and
edicts are of less power than the model
which his life exhibits.”


‘* A sovereign’s great example forms a people 5
The public breast is noble, or is vile,


As he inspires it,"— Mallet.
981


PSALM LXXIL





Hence kings are under special obliga-
tions to “wear the white flower of a
blameless life.”


‘* King-becoming graces —


Are justice, verity, temperance, stablenesa,
Bounty, perseverance, mercy, lowliness,
Devotion, patience, courage, fortitude.”

Si


‘* He’s a king,

A true right king, who dares do aught, save

wrong ;
Fears nothing mortal, but to be unjust;
Who is not blown up with the flatt’ring puffs
Of spongy sycophants; who stands unmoved,
Despite the jostling of opinion;
Who can enjoy himself, maugre the throng
That strive to press the quiet out of him;
Who sits upon Jove’s footstool as I do,
Adorning, not affecting, majesty ;
Whose brow is wreathed with the silver crown
Of clear content.”—Marsion.


“He that ruleth over men must be
just, ruling in the fear of God.”

II. The function of a true king.
It is implied that his business is to
administer justice. ‘Give the king
Thy judgments, O God.” The ‘judg-
ments” are the legal decisions, or sen-
tences. The judgments of God are
contrasted with those which the king
gives independently. “The essence of
all justice lies in the conformity of the
decisions of the earthly judge to the
decisions of the heavenly Lord of Jus-
tice.” Barnes; “It is one of the
primary ideas of the character of a king
that he is the fountain of justice; the
maker of the laws; the dispenser of
rig..t to all hig subjects. The officers
of the law administer justice under
him; the last appeal is to him.” The
true administrators of justice are “ per-
suaded that justice is God’s own work,
and themselves His agents in this busi-
ness,—the sentence, of right, God’s own
verdict, and themselves His priests to
deliver it.” (Comp. Deut. i, 17; 2
Chron. xix. 6 ; Prov. viii. 15.)

‘© A monarch should be
Heaven's true vicegerent, whose superior soul
Raised high above the tyrant’s selfish poornesa,
Pants but for power of doing good, rejects
All power of doing ill; who makes no war
But to revenge his people’s wrongs ; no peace
But what secures their safety ; courts no fame
But from their happiness : a parent he,
The public parent—they not slaves, but sons.”
—Malles.


382





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


ee


Or, as Tennyson portrays him—

«6 Who reverenced his conscience as his king ;
Whose glory was, redressing human wrong ;
Who spake no alander, no, nor listen'd to it j
Who loved one only, and who clave to her.”

“The king that faithfully judgeth the
poor, his throne shall be established tor
ever.” The kingdom whose rulers are
not characterised by righteousness, and
whose judges are not just, must hasten
to its overthrow.

Ill. The need of a true king. It is
implied in the text that he needs—-

1. Divine guidance. “Give the king
Thy judgments, O God.” If kings are to
exercise the functions of their high office
truly and wisely, they must be instructed
and strengthened from above. When :
“the spirit of wisdom and understand-
ing, the spirit of counsel and might, the
spirit of knowledge and of the fear of
the Lord” rests upon kings, their rule
shall be righteous, their throne secure,
and their subjects happy. (Comp. Isa.
xi. 2-5.)


2. Divine grace. “Give Thy right-


eousness unto the king’s son.” Right-
eousness is not innate inkinga. ‘“ There
is none righteous, no, not one.” Right


eousness must come to them as the gift
of God, through Jesus Christ our Lord,
and must be sought and obtained by
faith, &c. Very great is the need of
kings of the constant help of God.
Their temptations are many and very
powerful; they stand in slippery places;
their exaltation has a tendency to un-
settle their moral equilibrium, &c. They
need the guidance and support of the
Divine hand.

IV. The duty of subjects. We may
make this our prayer for our rulers -—
“ Give the king Thy judgments, O God,”
&c. Every subject ought to pray for
the blessing of God upon his sovereign.
M. Henry: “Those who would live
quiet and peaceable lives must pray for
kings and all in authority, that God
would give them His judgments and
righteousness.” Let us pray God with
His favour to behold all the rulers of
men, and go replenish them with the
grace of His Holy Spirit, that they may
alway incline to His will and walk in
His way.


- HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





PSALM LEEGL





Tae Guornious Reien or THE Messin,
(Verses 3-17.)


That these splendid utterances cannot
pe applied merely to the kingdom of
Solomon, or of any of his successors,
aust be obvisus even to the most super-
ficial reader. That they are prophetic
of the kingdom of the Messiah will also
be obvious, we think, to every one who
thoughtfully regards them. Consider—

IL. The blessings of His reign. Se-
veral of these are here specified.

1. The administration of justice. “ He
shall judge Thy people with righteous-
ness, and Thy poor with judgment. He
shall judge the poor of the people. He
shall save the children of the needy,
and shall break in pieces the oppressor.”
(See remarks in the preceding sketch
on the function of a true king.) Elo-
quently has Isaiah portrayed the char-
acter of the Messianic administration
(xi. 1-5).

2. The enjoyment of peace. “The
mountains shall bring peace to the
people, and the little hills by right-
ecusness.” Mountains and hills are
characteristic features of Palestine, In
ancient times these were terraced and
cultivated as far up as possible. In the
representation of this peace by the
Psalmist we have three ideas. (1) Pre
valence. The mountains and hills by
reason of their number and prominence
are well fitted to express the idea that
the land everywhere shall be full of
peace. There shall be “abundance of
peace.” The war drum shall no longer
throb, and the battle flag shall be for
ever furled. Men “shall beat their
swords into ploughshares,” &. Strife
and bitterness between different classes
of society shall be no more. Peace in
max’s own being. Peace between man
aad man. Peace between God and man.
(2) Reality, ‘Peace by righteous-
ness.” The peace which is not rooted
in righteousness is spurious and decep-
tive. True peace is the product and
consequence of righteousness. It is so
in the individual. ‘“ Being justified by
faith we have peace with God,” &. It
ls eo alao in society and in nations.


Christ is ‘the Prince of Peace,” because
He “reigns in righteousness.” (3) Per-
manence, The spurious peace which is
not rooted in righteousness is of short
duration. The true peace, which is
“by righteousness,” shall last. Like
its Author, it is abiding, everlasting.
What an unspeakably precious boon is
this Divine peace |

8. The progress of religion (vers.
5-7). We have three conspicuous fea-
tures of true religion. (1) Reverence
towards God. “They shall fear Thee
as long as the sun and moon endure,
throughout all generations.” One of the
blessed effects of the glorious reign of the
Messiah is that God will be regarded
by man with the deepest reverence.
And this reverence shall be perpetual.
Generations of men come and go—


‘¢ Like the snowfall in the river,
A moment white—then melts for ever.”


But the sun and moon remain and shine
through all generations. While they
remain, God shall be reverenced by
man. And when they are no more,
even for ever, shall He be feared. (2)
Refreshment from God. “ He shall come
down like rain upon the mown grass ;
as showers that water the earth.” A
beautiful illustration of Divine influ-
ences—

*¢ Ag rain on meadows newly mown,

So shall He send His influence downs


His grace on fainting souls distils,
Like heavenly dew on thirsty hills.” — Watts,


The showers that water the earth tend
to produce life, beauty, and fruit. In
this they symbolise the gracious influ-
ences of the reign of Jesus Christ.
(3) Growth towards God. “In His
days shall the righteous flourish.” As
the mown grass springs into vigorous
and beauteous growth after genial show-
ers, so the righteous in His day shall
grow and prosper; they shall bring
forth “fruit unto holiness.” If they
have been depressed, by His blessing
they shall be revived and strengthened.
Their faith and love and Decne theix
83


POALM LXXII.











consecration and zeal and sanctity, their
truth and tenderness and power, all
shall increase. What an inspiring and
glorious prospect this is! Evil shall not
always lord it over good, &o.

4. Beneficent government. We have
already made some remarks on the
righteousness of His administration, but
we return to it, because the Psalmist
gives special prominence to His treat-
ment of the poor and the oppressed.
Three characteristics at least of that
treatment he sets before us, (1) He
regards the cry of the needy and help-
less. ‘‘He shall deliver the needy
when he crieth ; the poor also, and him
that hath no helper.” Not even the
most obscure or despised of men shall
cry to Him in vain, (2) He champions
their cause. ‘‘He shall spare the poor
and needy, and shall save the souls of
the needy. He shall redeem their soul
from deceit and violence.” He will be-
friend the friendless, will be the Helper
of the helpless, and the Protector of the
defenceless. ‘His administration will
have special respect to those who are
commonly overlooked, and who are ex-
posed to oppression and wrong.” (3)
He prizes their life. “ And precious
shall their blood be ‘in His sight.” In
His sight men are precious not in pro-
portion to their rank or wealth or
power, but according to their character.
“The Lord knoweth them that are
His,” and holds them dear to Him.
He guards His subjects well because He
loves them well. ‘Christ is the poor
man’s King.”

5. Abundant prosperity. “There
ehall be an handful of corn in the earth
upon the top of the mountains, the fruit
thereof shall shake like Lebanon, and
they of the city shall flourish like grass
of the field.” The word—D5—trans-


lated “handful,” is rendered abund-
ance by Conant, Gesenius, Hengsten-
berg, Moll, e al. Fuerst gives as its
meaning, superabundance. Abundance
of corn is the sign of abundant pros-
perity. As the mountains are prominent
and picturesque, so the signs of the
prosperity would be conspicuous and
beautiful. The cities also shall be popu-
lous and prosperous. Beauty, plenty, and
384


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


joy, shall be universally diffused

out the dominions of the Messiah. An
historical basis of the ideas of prosperity
presented in this verse is found in the
time of Solomon, and recorded in 1
Kings iv, 20. (For further treatment
of verse 16, see below.) Such, in brief,
are some of the more prominent bless-
ings of thereignofthe Christ. Consider—

II. The universality of His reign
(vers, 8-11).

1. He shall reign over all classes.
The wanderers of the desert and the
kings of wealthy and famous cities shall
bow to the sway of the Lord Jesus.
Rich and poor, learned and illiterate,
distinguished and obscure, great and
small, men of all ranks and conditions, |
shall loyally call Jesus Lord.

2. He shall reign in all places. “He
shall have dominion also from sea to sea,
and from the river unto the ends of the
earth.” Foran historical basis of the
statements in verses 8-10, see 1 Kings
iv. 21. Applying the words of verse 8,
to the kingdom of the Messiah we are
not, it seems to us, to fix upon any par-
ticular sea or river. M. Henry: “No
sea, no river, is named, that it might,
by these proverbial expressions, intimate
the universal monarchy of the Lord
Jesus.” Hengstenberg: “‘ The dominion
of this king extends from any one sea to
any other sea, and from any river even
to the ends of the earth—it is a kingdom
of boundless extent.” “ All nations
shall serve Him.” (Comp. Rev. xi 15.)

And His dominion shall be as secus':
as it is wide, as real as it is extensive
All His foes shall be completely sub-
dued unto Him. “ His enemies shali
lick the dust,” in token of reverence and
submission to Him.

Mark the reason of this universal and
complete sovereignty. The Psalmist
gives it in verses 12-14. Perowne:
“The reason is given why all kings and
nations should thus do homage to Him
who sits on David’s throne. He has
merited such submission by the exercise
of every royal virtue, by the justice and
the mercy of His sway, by His deep
sympathy with, and compassion for, the
poor, by the protection which He extends
to them against the ministers of fraud


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; PSALMS.


and violence, It is not that He merely
covers with the shadow of His throne
all neighbouring nations, and is acknow-
ledged as their political head, but that
the bright example which He sets, the
majesty of righteousness enthroned in
His person, compels all to bow before
Him.”

Ill. The perpetuity of His reign.
“They shall fear Thee as long as the
sun and moon endure, throughout all
generations. . . . His name shall endure
for ever; His name shall be continued
as long as the sun.” Margin: “Shall
be as a son to continue his father’s name
for ever.” Conant: “As long as the
aun shall His name flourish.” Moll:
“ Before the sun let His name sprout.”
The idea seems to be that the name of
the king would be always acquiring fresh
renown by His new deeds on behalf of
His subjects, Through all the coming
generations of men new glories shall
break forth for His name, in which all
nations may bless themselves. The
reign of Jesus will be perpetual. “‘ His
kingdom is an everlasting kingdom, and
His dominion is from generation to
generation.” The perpetuity of His
teign is guaranteed by—

1. The declarations of God’s Word
(Ps. xlv. 6, Ixxxix, 36; Isa. ix. 7; Dan.
iv. 3; Rev. xi. 15),

2. The character of Hts sovereignty.
He rules in the hearts of His subjects,
by the force of truth, righteousness, and
love. The loyalty and service which
they render to Him are voluntary and
Joyous.

IV. The praise of His reign. The
Psalmist represents this as presented to
the king in various forms. It is ex-
pressed by—

1. Rendering homage to Him, “ They
that dwell in the wilderness shall bow
before Him, and His enemies shall lick
the dust. Yea, all kings shall fall down
before Him.”

2. Rendering service to Him. “ All
nations shall serve Him.” His subjects
will praise Him not only by forms and
expressions of homage, but by loyal
obedience also. Their hearty submie-
sion to Him will be manifest in their
devoted service.

28





3. Paying tribute to Him. “The
kings of Tarshish and of the isles shall
bring presents ; the kings of Sheba and
Seba shall offer gifts. To Him shall
be given of the gold of Sheba.” The
day is surely coming when men every-
where shall gladly lay their best and
most treasured possessions at His feet.
Genius, eloquence, power, riches, shall
all be heartily rendered to Him.

4. Ascribing blessing to Him.
“Prayer also shall be made for Him
continually, and daily shall He be
praised. And men shall be blessed
in Him: all nations shall call Him
blessed.” The prayer is made “ not for
Him personally, but for the success of
His reign—for the extension of His
kingdom, Prayer made for that is made
for Him, for He is identified with that.”
Instead of “men shall be blessed in
Him,” many render: ‘Shall bless them-
selves in Him;” and interpret it as the
expression of admiration of His blessed-
ness, and desire to be blessed as He is.
Daily men praise Him. And the time
approaches when men of every nation
shall constantly ascribe to Him all
power, and dominion, and glory, and
blessing ; their lives shall become grate-
ful, adoring, and songful; from all
peoples, and from all places, praise shall
ascend to the Saviour-King.

Conotusion.—l. Let the enemies of
Christ submit themselves cheerfully to
Him as their King. Manifestly it is
both their duty and their interest to do
ao, 2. Let His loyal subjects take en-
couragement from the sure and glorious
prospect of Hts reign. The sin and
strife and sorrow of the race will have
an end. The kingdom of holiness,
peace, and joy will be universal and
perpetual. Here is encouragement to
work and wait, to pray and hope.


‘O’er every foe victorious,
He on Hia throne shall reat;
From age to age more glorioug,
All blessing and all bless’d.


© fhe tide of time shall never
His covenant remove:
His name shall stand for ever 5
That name to us is—Lovez.’
— Montgomery.
$85


PSALM LXXII.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


ee ee


Pace sy Powzn.
(Verse 3.)


“The mountains shall bring peace.”
The writer of this Hebrew ode finds
the peaceful in the grand—rest in great-
ness, Our doctrine is, that the quiet of
the human soul ts to be honestly found,
not in descending to tts lower or leas-
forcible states, but tn the freedom of tts
highest qualities, and through tts stronger
exercises: or, that Christian peace ts an
attainment of the spiritual energies, and
not a mere acquiescence in inferiority.
When the Saviour speaks of the ulti-
mate result of His religion in the single
heart or in the world, He calls it Peace ;
“Peace I leave with you; My peace I
give unto you.” But as soon as you
look into the spirit and relations of His
words, you see that in this peace there
is something quite peculiar, He says,
* My peace.” It is a peace obtained by
the drops of blood and the cross ; Geth-
semane and Calvary ; by a life in which
there was no place to lay the head. It
is not a mere constitutional, negative,
nor any superficial peace: it is not what
we call pleasure, nor a happy tempera-
ment, nor gratified sensibilities, nor
satiated appetites. It is something
deeper and stronger. It is an attain-
ment; it is a victory ; it is tribulation
overcome. It is the mightiest powers
of our nature balanced, reconciled, and
harmonised at last, though we know not
by what struggles and sufferings, till, by
the perfect sway of one supreme principle
of faith, there are the equipoise and
serenity that pass all understanding.
The three obvious attributes of moun-
tains are elevation, magnitude, and per-
manency. Out of these three several
characters comes an influence of peace,
In just such attributes of strength, hu-
man character, also, is to find its moral
balance, its real peace, viz., in its aspira-
tion, its largeness, its constancy. Man
is high with his devotional affections,
his prayers; wide with his practical
principles ; and steadfast with his con-
victions, Or, he is high with his spirit,
wide with his will, and steadfast with
his reason. With these three properly
385


adjusted, you will have a general effect
of serenity ; because such a man will
live in a certain equipoise within him-
self, centred and completed according
to the grand designs of his Creator, as
a creature belonging both to the world
and heaven. He reaches up into the
infinite mystery that broods like a sea
of conscious life about him. He reaches
out, in all liberal fellowships, to man-
kind, with a love that cannot narrow
into hatred, nor be fretted into war;
and he rests firmly on eternal founda-
tions. And thus, on all sides—God-
ward, and man-ward, and self-ward—so
far as man can, he resides in the secu-
rities of a well-defended peace.

Spiritual serenity, then, is spiritual
strength. It comes in by no softness
of sentiment, but by thorough work. It
comes by a faith that emboldens and
energises the whole soul, a penitence
that searches and strains it, and often a
secret fight of afflictions. Christianity
is a robust religion. It was planted in
the world by a race of heroes... .

Take any one of these three traits just
mentioned away, and, besides what
other ruin you make, you most disas-
trously disturb the peace. . . . On which-
ever side you enfeeble man, you un-
balance and torture him.

Proceed to some examples, in other
regions of life, how peace depends on
power.

In literary expression, the effect of
pathos is finest in thinkers habitually
severe. What saves sentiment from
sentimentality is the feeling of a firm
intellectual fibre through the emotion.

Persons who have been in the strain
and peril of some moral or civil revolu-
tion, wounded with real weapons, and
compacted by times of terror, if they
have benignant qualities, impress ue in
that way far more than is possible for
men of softer discipline. Tenderness is
doubly tender when we know a rugged
and aggressive temper has been subdued
to it by that rule over the spirit which
is mightier than the taking of cities,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





It is familiar how bereavements, which
are the storms of the soul, prepare the
way for religious tranquillity. Crosses
bring calmness, . . . In the solemn por-
trait-galleries of history, the serenest
faces are the saddest—where peace has
not been inherited, but conquered.

We have this union of power and ten-
derness eminently in such as Luther;
Again, in the great pacifications of
empires, the same rule prevails. It
takes the strongest heads to bring peace,
Diplomacy haa to summon her stoutest,
clearest-sighted, and farthest - sighted
ministers. The most intrepid are most
pacific, Magnanimity makes no quar-
rels.

Hence we come to discover in what
order of persons we are to look for the
noblest charity and the real consolation,
We want our consolers to be, not only
the subjects of pain, but its conquerors
through their suffering. The more mas-
culine your pity, the more it moves and
melts.

And when we speak of comfort, we
are directed up to the Comforter. ...
What is the whole doctrine of that Spirit,
in the New Testament, and in Paul ?
They represent Him as not only Com-
forter, but also and first, Rebuker, Re-
newer, and Sanctifier.

All our peace is in God, who is not only
the strongest, but Almighty. “The Lord
will give strength unto His people; the
Lord will bless His people with peace.”

Personal applications.

1, Learn never to be afraid of rugged
and even painful experiences.


THe GosPrzL THE


(Verse


Such figurative language as that of
the text is frequently employed to de
scribe the Gospel as a mere system of
means, unlikely to accomplish the pur-
pose contemplated, and yet as certain of
ultimate success. Considering this lan-
guage as referring to the Gospel, let us
notice—

L The insignificance of its com-


PSALM LAXIT.


s bars souls snatch vigour from the stormy
alr,
While weaker natures suffer and despair,
Grief not the languor but the action brings,
And spreads the horizon but to nerve the
wings.

2. A rule for “strengthening the
brethren.” As we would comfort one
another, we must try, with the apostle’s
earnestness, to ‘“‘ endure hardness as
good soldiers of Jesus Christ.”

3. Of how sterling worth is a form of
religious belief which holds fast the
stringent as well as the soothing doctrine
of Christ’s evangelical teaching. The
order of the universe is poised between
justice and mercy; and it is not kind-
ness, but the bitterest cruelty, which
would unsettle that order, by giving us
a Deity too doting to punish, and too
fond too judge.

4. Learn the way of making our own
eternal life secure. The New Testa-
ment speaks continually to us of salva-
tion. By salvation Christ means such
safety as lies in a sturdy and athletic
power of character, will, heart, con-
science, and intellect, got by daring to
attempt great virtues and by incessant
intrepidity. He holds up no lower stan-
dard than to be perfect as the Father in
heaven is perfect. He wins confidence
by the very immensity of His demands,

5. We disturb the true spiritual order
and invert God’s plan for us, whenever
we go in search of peace first, and not
holiness, ‘First pure, then peaceable :”
that is the clearly-pronounced order and
everlasting law of a disciple’s way.—/.
D. Huntington, D.D. Abridged from
Christian Believing and Living.


Power or Gop.


16.)


mencement. In Ezekiel’s vision of the
waters issuing from the sanctuary, it is
but “a little rill,” which takes its rise
at the south side of the altar, just where
the blood of the sacrifices overflow. In
the vision of Nebuchadnezzar it is “a
little stone,” cut out of the mountain
without hands, And in the New Tes-
tament we find our Saviour Barat


Pe4LN LIT


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





% to “a grain of mustard seed ;” and
to “a little leaven” hid in meal. In
our text it is compared to “a handful of
corn.”

1. Look at tts commencement tn the
world. It was heralded by one who
had not his abode in cities, who was not
of the honourable of the earth, either as
to wealth or learning; but one of stern
and forbidding aspect, &c. Look at its
Author ; a poor carpenter’s son, belong-
ing to the despised city of Nazareth ;
and to Him, He associates twelve of the
poorest class of society. Yet to these
twelve was committed the task of evan-
gelising the world.

2. Look at the fewness of tts doctrines.
The first preachers of the Gospel went
forth to proclaim a fact—that Jesus
Christ had died for sinners—and from
that fact they drew various inferences,
and urged various duties upon men, and
with these, as all that was necessary to
accomplish their purpose, they went
forth.

3. Look at tts commencement tn the
heart. How insignificant are some of
the means made use of. Perhaps it is a
single word dropped from the lips of a
preacher; sometimes it js the sight of a
word in the Bible ; sometimes even a
look is enough ; sometimes many are
awakened by merely seeing others in
concern, a8 in the great revival at Kil-
syth, a century ago.

II. Its unlikelihood of success.
“An handful of corn in the earth on
the top of the mountains.” How un-
likely, how impossible, for it to yield a
crop there. Yet such is the figure em-
ployed to represent the Gospel in the
world. This language may point out—

1. The feebleness of tts instrumentality.
Soil found on the tops of mountains,
both from its poverty and scarcity,
would be a very unlikely instrument for
yielding a crop of corn. So they who
have been employed by God in diffusing
the Gospel have not been such instru-
ments as were likely in human estima-
tion to accomplish its purposes. “God
hath chosen the weak things of the
world to confound the mighty.” He
hath put the “treasure in earthen ves-
sels, that the excellency of the power

388


may be of God.” The first preachers of
the cross were a few fishermen.
2. The difficulties it has to surmount,


Corn sown on the top of a mountain


would not be likely to yield a crop, on
account of the adverse influences it
would have to encounter, There would
not only be the unfitness and scarcity of
the soil itself; there would be the want
of solar heat, its exposed situation, open
to every current of air and to all the
storms of the sky; and as mountains
are the first to attract the clouds, the
teeming rain would likely wash down
both seed and soil to the base beneath.
The Gospel, in its first promulgation
among men, had to encounter many
obstacles. (1) Ié¢ had to contend with
long-established forms of error, ... to
encounter systems of superstition, which
possessed a mighty influence over the
minds of their votaries, because they
had the argument of antiquity in their
favour, and because they were the
religious systems of their fathers. (2)
It had to encounter those errors in an
age of great refinement. This was the
Augustan age of literature. It was at
this time that some of the greatest minds
that ever adorned our planet were shed-
ding the light of learning, philosophy,
and poetry around them, much of which
is resplendent to the present day. How
unlikely was the Gospel to make pro-
gress in such an age as this. Yet this
was the period chosen. (3) The enmity
of man’s nature ts another obstacle which
would then as now be presented to the
progress of the Gospel. There is nothing
in the doctrines or duties of the Gospel
which is at all congenial to man’s fallen
nature. Its truths are foolishness to
him. Its purity excites his enmity.
(4) There ts against the Gospel the com-
bined powerful agency of the mighty and
malicious prince of darkness and hés
numerous followers, This is s subject
of frequent allusion to the early pro-
moters of Christianity.

IIT. Its glorious results. ‘The fruit
thereof shall shake like Lebanon,” de,
These results are placed before us—

l. In the fertility that attends i.
Wherever the waters ef the Gospel flow,
ig turns the wilderness into a fruitful


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; PSALMS.





field, and makes the desert as “the
garden of the Lord.” ‘Lovely tempers,
fruits of grace,” everywhere attend the
proclamation of the Gospel of peace.

2. In the beauty that adorns it.
“Shake like Lebanon.” How beautiful
the change which the Gospel has effected
in avery place in which it has been
introduced. It has been alike success-
ful in demolishing callous systems of
philosophy and sanguinary superstition.
What are those buildings which rear
their fronts where once Druid temples
were erected? They are asylums for
the wretched, the sick, the destitute, and
the dying. And to what do we owe
the change? To the Gospel of our
Lord Jesus Christ. Witness its triumphs


FeaiM LXXIL





also in the islands of the South Sea, in
Africa, &.

8. In the triumphs which it ts destined
universally to accomplish. ‘They of
the city shall flourish like grass of the
earth.” Count the numbers of the
blades of grass which are spread over
the surface of this earth of ours: ‘ou
cannot! Neither can you count the
numbers of the future converts of Zion,
This language may also point out its
rapid progress in the latter day. Grass
is proverbially speedy in its growth.
The triumphs of the Gospel will very
soon be equally rapid. “ The earth shall
be made to bring forth in one day, anda
nation be born at once,”—Abridged from
One Hundred Sketches of Sermons.


Horr OpzNED TO THE WORLD.
(Verse 17.)


“Men shall be blessed in Him; all
mations shall call Him blessed.”

Hope, with respect to the world,
affords some comfort to us, when view-
ing its affecting condition since the fall ;
and this spring of consolation we have
opened to us in God’s word of promise.
What a glorious time is the Psalmist
looking forward to here! Observe—

L The objects regarded. ‘ Men.”
Not angels, While we have abundant
cause to admire the grace of God in
this ; it must obviously be looked upon
as bearing a striking impress of sove-
reignty. Men participated with devils
in their guilt ; yet not one of the latter
is ever to be blessed (Heb. ii. 16; 2
Pet. ii. 4; Jude 6).

II. The number included. “All
nations.” How many nations are there
in the world that never heard of Christ?
How many, that have been deprived of
the Gospel during a long series of ages?
But this distinction among nations with
respect to the means of salvation was


never intended in the Divine mind to
continue always (Matt, xxiv. 14; xxvi.
13; Mark xiv. 9; xvi. 15). If little
has been hitherto done for distant
countries, it must be ascribed to the
selfishness of men (Phil. ii. 21).

TIL The exercise mentioned. “Call
Him blessed.” The worth of Christ
shall be universally sung ; none shall be
afraid to confess Him before men, or
dare to offer any vain excuse for not
yielding allegiance to Him; but from
every tribe under heaven soldiers shall
hasten to His standard and proclaim
His honours.

IV. The certainty expressed. ‘All
nations shall call Him blessed.” This
certainty may be argued from prophetic
representation — from the dominion
given to the Saviour—from the facilities
afforded in the present day to mission-
ary exertions— from the desires and
expectations of the saints—and from the
Divine threatenings against the powers
of darkness.—W. Sleigh,


DoxoLuoey.
(Versee 18-20.)


“Verses 18 and 19 do not belong to
the Psalm, but contain the doxology
which forms the conclusion of the


second book.” This doxology is fuller
than that which is appended to Ps, xli,
at the close of the first book.

389


PSALM LXXI.





The historical remark which consti-
tutes verse 20 is no part either of the
Psalm or of the doxology. It seems to
have been attached to a collection of


the Psalms of David, as distinguished ©


from separate Psalms of his. Hengsten-
berg: ‘All the Psalms of David in the
last two books are inserted as component
parts into the later cycles. The sub-
scription at the end of the second book
must have been designed to separate
the free and the bound, the scattered
and the serial Psalms of David, from
each other. Analogous in some measure
is the subscription—‘ At an end are the
speeches of Job,’ in Job xxxi. 40, which
is not contradicted by the fact that Job
appears again speaking, in chaps. xl.
and xlii.; it should rather be regarded
as serving to give us a right understand-
ing of that formal conclusion.” In this
doxology there are four leading homi-
letic points—

I. The comprehensiveness of the
praise. God is praised because—

1. Of what He 18 tn Himeelf.
“Blessed be the Lord God, and blessed
be His glorious name.” Note the ideas
conveyed by these terms. “ Jehovah” —
“the existing, 4.e, He who has come
into existence by nothing outside Him-
self, the continuing, permanent, everlast-
ing ; its antithesis or opposite being the
non-real, the transitory, the nought.”—
Fuerst. “God,” Elohim, the Almighty.
“ His glorious name,” perhaps referring
particularly to Jehovah. “Still the
prayer would be, that all the names by
which He is known, all by which He
has revealed Himself, might be regarded
with veneration always and every-
where,”

2. Of what He ts to His people.
“The God of Israel.” He had entered
into covenant relation with them. (See
p. 205.)

3. Of what He does, “Who only
doeth wondrous things,” (a) In crea-
tion. (8) In providence. (y) In redemp-
tion, His wondrous redemptive work
transcends even angelic intelligence,
“Which things the angels desire to look
into,”


$90


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


‘“‘The first-born sons of light
Desire in vain its depths to see 3
They cannot reach the mystery,
The length and breadth and height.”
His works are wondrous (1) In theiz
power, (2) In their wisdom. (3) In
their kindness. ‘‘While we were yet
sinners Christ died for us.” (4) In
their significance. “No man can find
out the work that God maketh from the
beginning to the end.” Therefore,
‘6 Blessed be the Lord God,” &ec.
IL The perpetuity of the praise.
“For ever.”
“* My days of praise shall ne’er be past,
While life and thought and being last,
Or immortality endures.”


He is “the author of eternal salva- .


tion;” He calls us “to His eternal
glory ;” He promises an “ eternal inheri-
tance ;” therefore, let His praise be
eternal.
**But O! eternity’s too short
To utter all His praise,”

II. The universality of the praise.
“ Let the whole earth be filled with His
glory.” (Comp. Num. xiv. 21.) This
brief prayer involves two things—

1. That the whole earth may be filled
with His blessing. ‘It is not a little
favoured spot that the Psalmist regards ;
it is not an insulated portion of the
globe that he would have fructified and
converted into a paradise. It is not on
his own garden or fields that he wishes
the refreshing showers only to fall; but
with a noble, expansive, and generous
mind, he prays that the whole earth
may be filled with God’s glory.”

2. That the whole earth may be filled
with His pratse. “‘ Let every heart, and
every mouth, and every assembly be
filled with the high praises of God.”
(See Mal. i. 11.)

IV. The intensity of the praise.
“Amen and Amen.” (See p. 205.)

“*May kindness, truth,
Wisdom, and knowledge, liberty, and power,
Virtue, and holiness o’erspread all orbs ;
the world be bliss and love ;
And heaven above be all things ; till at laat
The music from all souls redeemed shall rise,
Like a perpetual fountain of pure sound,
Upspringing, sparkling in the silvery blue;
¥rom round ereation to Thy feet, O God!”
—P. J. Bailey.


HOMILETIC COMMBNTARY: PSALMS. POALM LALia.
Sr STEEN EECTEOER TORE


PSALM LXXIIL


INTRODUCTION.


‘a | ecartacr sant A Psalm of Asaph,” or, as in the margin, “ for Asaph.” See introduction
8. 1,

Subject.—The mental difficulties arising from the contemplation of the temporal prosperity
ef the wicked and the adversity of the righteous under the government of God. “The Psalm
is very nearly related to the xxxvii. and xlix., as far as its contents are concerned. Amyraldua
took quite a correct view as to what distinguishes it from these Psalms, and forms its individual
physiognomy. ‘In Psalm xxxvii. the prophet merely shows how believers ought to conduct
themselves when they perceive the prosperity of the ungodly ; he himself did not stumble at
it. But here Asaph, though a great and pious man, acknowledges that the providence of God
in this respect did sometimes appear to him mysterious, and that he felt great difficulty in
justifying it. Yea, from the beginning of this Psalm we see how he merged out of the deep
thoughts into which his spirit, agitated and vexed by doubts, had sunk, until, in the end, better
views obtained the ascendancy. . . . He has adopted this method in order that believers might
contemplate, as in a picture, the conflict to which at times they are exposed, and might see
what weapons they have to seize against the assaults of the flesh.’””—Hengstenberg.


Taz Goop Man’s ConFIpENCE or Gop’s Goopnxss To His PEopie.
(Verse 1.)


L He indicates the character of
God’s people.

“Tsracl, . . . such as are of a clean
heart.” The Psalmist held that “they
were not all Israel which were of Israel ;
neither because they were the seed of
Abraham were they all children.” He
speaks not of those who were Israelites
merely according to the flesh, but of
those who in spirit and principle and
conduct were “ Israelites indeed.” The
true Israelite was clean not only cere-
monially, but also spiritually. So now
the people of God are not those who
merely claim to be “ the elect ” of God,
or those who merely “ profess and call
themselves Christians,” or those who
merely say unto Jesus Christ, ‘“ Lord,
Lord ;” but those who “do the will of
the Father which is in heaven.” God
requires of His people “truth in the
inward parts.”

1. Man’s heart by nature ts impure.

2. God has provided means for the
purification of man’s heart. (Isaiah i.
18; Zech. xiii. 1; 1 John i. 7-9.)

3. God requires man to aval himself
of these means, (Isaiah i, 16; 1 Thess.
iv. 7; Heb. xii. 14.)

4. The true people of God are com
plying with this requirement.

II. He asserts God’s special goodness
to His people.


“ God is good to all, and His tender
mercies are over all His works;” but
He is espectally good to His own people.
This may be seen in that,—1. He over
rules all circumstances and events for
their well-being.  Mercies and afflic-
tions shall turn to their good; the most
poisonous drugs shall be medicinal ; the
most cross providence shall carry on the
design of their salvation.” ‘ All things
work together for good to them that love
God.” 2. He guides and sustains them
tn this life (vers, 23, 24). “In the
cloudy and dark day” He leads them
wisely and safely, and when life’s “ bur-
den seems greater than their strength
can bear,” He makes His grace to abound
untothem. 3, He Himself ts their ever.
lasting portion and joy (vers. 25, 26).
His presence breathes peace within them
even amidst outward agitation and con-
flict, fills their heart with supernal music
even amidst the most hoarse and tumul-
tuous voices of the world, and so enriches
their being that they feel that they have
all things in Him. 4. He will receive
them into ever-increasing glory (ver. 24).
The fulness of life and treasure, of joy
and blessedness, which is reserved in
heaven for them, is unspeakably great.
“Truly God +s good to Israel.” This
Asaph bad once doubted, sadly and
painfully doubted. Now Pi eee it

1


PSALM LXXIM.


no longer, but asserts 1 with the clear
accent of deep conviction, He is con-
fident that God is thus good to Israel,—

1. Notwithstanding all appearances
tending to an opposite conclusion (vers.
3-14.) 2. Notwithstanding his own dark
doubts (vers. 3,11, 13). 3. As may be
proved satisfactorily to men of sincere


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





a eT


heart by many considerations, ¢.9., («)
Our ignorance (ver. 22). We see only
a small part of His ways (8) The
brevity of the prosperity of the wicked
(vers. 18,19). (7) The vast superiority
of the portion of the good man (vers.
23-26). It is superior in ite nature,
duration, &c.


Tue TEMPORAL PROSPERITY OF THE WICKED,
(Verses 2-14.)


I Fhe temporal prosperity of the
wicked is sometimes clearly manifest.

1. In their exemption from trouble.
“They are not in trouble as other men,
neither are they plagued like other men,”
It is not unfrequently the case that men
who are living selfish and sinful lives
appear to enjoy complete immunity from
the sufferings and trials to which the
great majority of men are subjected.
It almost seems as though there had
been some special interposition of Pro-
vidence in their favour, warding away
from them “ the ills that flesh is heir to.”
They are the most ill-deserving, yet they
have the best portion. To unaided
human reason this is an inexplicable
anomaly; but to the meek believer
“there ariseth light in the darkness.”
There are stones which are so common
that no lapidary will attempt to cut or
polish them into brilliance and beauty.
There are others which they manipulate
with fond care and patient enthusiasm.
“Whom the Lord loveth He chasteneth,”
&e.
2. In the gratification of their destres,
“Their eyes stand out with fatness;
they have more than heart could wish,”
Their luxury and self-indulgence are so
great that they are manifest in their
countenance, and especially in their eyes,
The face, that index of the soul, pro-
claims to all observers the nature of
their portion and its plenteousness.
They “fare sumptuously every day.”
The crumbs which fall from their table
would be a feast in the eyes of many a
poor saint. “Their wishes are gratified,
and more; their very greediness is ex-
ceeded ; they call for water, and the
world gives them milk; they ask for

392


hundreds, and thousands are lavished at
their feet.”

3. In the increase of their possessions,
They “ prosper in the world; they in- .
crease in riches.” They are like the
rich man whose grounds brought forth
ao plentifully that he had not where to
bestow his fruits and goods. Their
harvests are not injured by blight or
mildew or storm; their vessels are not
wrecked at sea; their business is not
ruined by losses or the failures of other
men. Swiftly and surely “ they increase
in riches.” Such was the temporal
prosperity of the wicked which met
the eye, and arrested the attention,
and troubled the soul of the Psalmist.
It was unmistakably great and mani-
fest,

II. The temporal prosperity of the
wicked is sometimes continued even
to the very end of life.

It might have been thought that as
they drew near to the end of life their
peace and pleasure would have been ex-
changed for anxiety and pain; and that
their death would be marked by remorse
and dread. But “there are no bands
in their death; but their strength is
firm.” Their prosperity apparently en-
dures to the very last moment of their
life in this world. They have lived in
pleasure, and they die in peace. Their
spiritual sensibilities are so blunted that
death and eternity make no impression
upon them. Or their hearts have be-
come “ hardened through the deceitful-
ness of sin.” Or they delude themselves
with false hopes, and “ believe a lie.”

I. The temporal prosperity of the
wicked has an injurious effect upon
their character,


-HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM LXXUI,





1. Jt generates pride, “Pride com-
pesseth them about as a chain; ...
they speak loftily.”” Their temporal
prosperity awoke in them no feeling of
gratitude, no humble gense of want of
desert ; but a conceited notion and feel-
ing that they were incomparably superior
to other men. When prosperity humbles
us with the feeling of our unworthiness
it is truly a blessing ; when it leads us
to ask, “What shall I render unto the
Lord for all His benefits to me?” it is
enriching our souls. But when by rea-
son of it we are inflated with presumption
and pride it becomes to us a great curse,
How vain and mistaken is pride of wealth
even in the man of greatest possessions |

2. It generates tyranny and violence.
Violence covereth them as a garment ;
. . . they speak wickedly concerning
oppression.” Their own prosperity,
which should have made them generous
and kind to the unfortunate, made them
violent and tyrannical. Violence was
their habit ; they wore it as a garment.
They oppressed the poor, and, so far
from feeling ashamed of themselves for
ao doing, or having any misgivings as to
their conduct, they boasted of it, they
gioried in it, They were tyrannical, and
paraded their tyranny. They were cruel,
and exulted in their cruelty. Such con-
duct reveals the meanness and cowardice
of their nature, and stamps them as be-
longing to the basest and blackest of the
race of evil-doers.

3. It generates blasphemy. “ They
set their mouth against the heavens, and
their tongue walketh through the earth.”
So far are they from acknowledging God
as the Author of their prosperity that
they speak against Him. They are so
puffed up that they imagine themselves
independent of God and masters of the
world; and they blaspheme His name.
Surely such sinners—proud, oppressive,
violent, blasphemous sinners—are ripen-
ing for destruction. Sure as there is
justice in the universe, sooner or later it
must smite them, unless they turn from
their evil way. They are “ treasuring
up wrath against the day of wrath.”
The temporal prosperity of these men is
not to blame for their wickedness. in
the nature of prosperity itself there is


nothing fitted to deprave human char
acter. On the other hand, it has often
been the means of great spiritual bless-
ing. Nor in granting such prosperity
does God design the corruption or hard-
ening of human hearts, All His designe
aim at human blessedness. It is the
depraved heart of man that perverts
the blessing of temporal prosperity and
educes so much evil from it. Sinful
man can pervert the bread of life into
rankest poison, and even “ turn the grace
of God into lasciviousness,”

IV. The temporal prosperity of the
wicked is a great trial to the people
of God.

1. It generates painful doubts concern-
ing Him. As they reflect upon the
prosperity of these wicked men they
say, “How doth God know? and is
there knowledge in the most High?”
Can it be that God sees all this pros-
perity and all this wickedness, and yet
allows it? If He knew these apparently
great anomalies which perplex and dis-
tress His people, would He not prevent
them? It is difficult at times for a
thoughtful mind to believe in the omni-
science of an Almighty and righteous
and good God. And the contemplation
of good men suffering, and outrageously
wicked men triumphing, frequently oe
easions such doubt.

2. It generates doubts as to the value
of religion. Asaph felt that he had
“cleansed his heart” in vain, and “ washed
his hands in innocency” in vain, It
seemed to him that it was of no use that
he had striven after purity in his inner
and outer life.

3. Occasions great sorrow to them.
“His people return hither, and waters
of a full cup are wrung out to them.”
They returned again and again to the
contemplation of this subject, and as
often as they returned they would drink
deep draughts of sorrow. The mysteries
of Providence are sometimes painful to
believers ; and when faith is sorely tried
in any matter that pertains to God, great
is the grief of His people. Asaph was fre-
quently and greatly afflicted. ‘All the
day long he was plagued, and chastened
every morning ;” while the proud rebels
were exuliing in their prosperity.

393


PSALM LXXIT.





4. Imperils their spiritual safety. The
Psalmist felt that his “feet were almoss
gone, his steps had well-nigh slipped.”
His faith almost failed him in his great
trial ; unbelief was almost victorious.

Conotusion.—l. Let those who are
prospering temporally learn to grasp theur
blessings with a grateful hand, and to
dispense them with a generous hand, lest


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


they become a curse to them. 2. Let the
proud sinner humble himself penttently
before God and sue for mercy ere tt ts too
late. 3. Let the perplexed saint learn
with patience to watt till God explains
the mysteries of His government. “ What
I do thou knowest not now; but thou
shalt know hereafter.”


Criszs IN THE SpreituaAL Lire
(Verse 2.)


Considering these crises as illustrated
by this of Asaph’s, we remark—

I. That they are sometimes occa-
sioned by the providence of God. It
was so in the case before us. Nearly
every thoughtful person has felt the
difficulty which perplexed the Psalmist.
So also when useful and valued lives are
cut off in the midst of their days, while
hoary-headed sinners are left cumbering
the ground, or afflicted saints who long
for release are left to linger here in pain;
—or when generous and diligently prose-
cuted plans of usefulness end in apparent
failure, while selfish and evil projects
succeed, our faith in the government of
God is sorely shaken. Ah! there are
times when the working out of the ar-
rangements of Providence leads us to cry
out, “ How doth God know?” d&e. At
such times nothing seems real, every-
thing eludes our grasp, we can obtain
no sure footing, &c.

These crises of the inner life are
sometimes occasioned by temptations in
business, or in society, or in solitude;
the temptation is real, has great influence
over us, we are on the point of yielding,
our “feet are almost gone,” &.

II. That they are painful to the
soul Asaph tried to overcome his
doubts and fears, but his speculations
were all baffied, his reason was over-
matched, and his heart was pained. His
greatest suffering was in this, that he
was “ perplexed in reference to his God.”
To a true man doubt as to God’s charac-
ter and government is ever a distressing
thing. Only fools glory in doubting,
criticising, and denying the great truths
which are the stay of human hearts. He
who parades his doubts has never expe-

394


rienced true faith, and his doubts are
unreal or he could not parade them.
Such sham doubts never cause any
spiritual crises. The doubts of a living ,
soul are faith in conflict with difficulties,
faith fighting against such aspects and
interpretations of life, and against such
arguments that threaten her life. Such
struggles of faith are always painful. To
the sincere soul to doubt God’s wisdom,
righteousness, and love, is unspeakable
anguish.

Ill. That they are surmounted in
communion with God. In drawing near
to God the Psalmist received such revela-
tions as strengthened his faith and hope,
and such inspirations as gave calmness
and joy to his heart (verse 17). In
fellowship with God mental difficulties
vanish, temptations lose their power,
spiritual perils cease. ‘The meek will
He guide in judgment,” &. “The
secret of the Lord is with them that
fear Him,” &c. “Such as are of a clean
heart” will surely pass victoriously from
the darkness and pain of doubt into the
light and joy of assured confidence,

“‘Perplext in faith, but pure in deeds,

At last he beats his music out,”


Take your doubts to God, tell Him of
your temptations, hide yourself in Him
in the time of danger, and you will come
out of every trial and crisis of your inner
life more than conqueror.

bs subject urges the importance
0. ——

1. Watchfulness, lest we fall.

2. Mutntaining purity of heart and
righteousness of life. Integrity, truth-
fulness, love, are ever right and beautiful,
In the densest mental darkness cleave te


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.








these things. “If any man will do His
Ag he shall know of the doctrine,”
C.
3. Seeking fellowship with the best and
highest, especially with God Himself. If
trouble, and doubt, and pain send us


PSALM LXXIT





“into the sanctuary of God” to seek
help, they will prove blessings in disguise.
If the great trials of our spiritual life
are the means of bringing us nearer to
the heart of God, they will turn out to
be our greatest blessings


Toe Vatvg or Dymva EXPERIENcEs.
(Verse 4.)


The calm deaths of the wicked per-
plexed the Psalmist. They not only
lived in pleasure; they also died with
ease. Let us consider The Value of
Dying Experiences—

L The calm death of the wicked is
no proof of Divine support. Such
calmness may arise from—

1. Unconcern. Their spiritual suscep-
tibilities may be so blunted, and their
spiritual faculties so enervated, that they
have no lively apprehensions of the
spiritual and eternal state though they
are so near to it. “Conscience may be
cold and dead, so that when the man
comes to die he is utterly callous to the
unseen things of God’s other world, and
his friends say that he died like a lamb.”
“Like brutes they live, like brutes they
die.” Such a death may be quiet, but
it is unspeakably terrible. Such uncon-
cern is more deplorable than wild alarm.
Think of the man when the unconcern
is broken !

2. Hardthood. “Careless persons
become case-hardened, and continue pre-
sumptuously secure even to the last.”
There have been persons so hardened in
profanity and crime that they have de-
termined, to quote their own words, “to
die game.” Lord Byron asked, “ ‘Shall
I sue for mercy?’ After a long pause
he added, ‘Come, come, no weakness,
let’s be a man to the last.’”

3. False and presumptuous hopes tm
Divine mercy. We have known persons
who have neglected God and His service
all their life, and who, when remonstrat-
ed with have said, “God is merciful ;
if when we come to die we ask Him to
save us, He will do so.” And insucha
state they have died. But theirs was
not Christian faith or hope, but sinful
presumption. And they encouraged the


presumption until they accepted the de-
lusion as reality, and believed the lie to
be true (Prov. xi. 7).

II. Shrinking and fear on the part
of the righteous as they approach
death are no proof that the divine
support is withdrawn.

In the last hours, pain and a sense of
the solemnity of the great change may
be a gore trial to the child of God. Our
Lord Himself as He drew near to death
cried out in mysterious and awful an-
guish of spirit. We need not then be
surprised if His humble followers cry
out as they draw near to the awful
bourn.—This point is admirably illus-
trated in Christian and Hopeful passing
through the river of death, in Bunyan’s
Pilgrim’s Progress.

IiI. The most precious religious
testimonies of the dying are poor
compared with the testimony of a
useful and godly life.

I would not in the least undervalue
the testimonies of dying men to the
truth of Christianity, or to the faith-
fulness of God, or to the preciousness
of Christ. To loving friends and
relatives such testimonies are unspeak-
ably precious. Some of these testimonies
are held as a sacred possession by the
Christian Church at large. (See an ex-
cellent collection of them in The Dict.
of Illus. Prose, Dickinson.) But we
hold that they are not to be compared
with the testimony of the life. What
are a few dying words, however beau-
tiful and precious, to years of holy liv.
ing and useful working? Moreover, the
mental state of the dying is often affect -
ed by the nature of the disease, or by
the medicines administered.

1. Learn to estimate truly the worth
of death-bed scenes and tt A

3


PSALM LRTI.


quiet death is no more a proof of God’s
favour than a life of temporal prosperity.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; PSALMS.





2. Learn to live devoutly and righte-
ously, because eo to live is the will of God.


A Great Necessity or aLL Mew anp A Great Mistake oF soME MEN.
| (Verse 13.)


L A great necessity of all men.
Purity of heart and life. ‘“‘ My heart,”
my inner life: “my hands,” my outer
life. Heart and hands represent spirit
and conduct. Asaph had sincerely
striven after purity in both. His words
imply—

1. Consciousness of impurity in heart
and life.

2. Knowledge of a cleansing element
or tnfluence (Isa, i, 18; Zech. xiik 1;
Heb. ix. 13, 14; 1 John i. 7, 9).


3. Personal application of this element
or influence. (Isa. i. 16; Rev. vii. 14.)

IL A great mistake of some men.
“Tn vain.” In this Asaph was mis-
taken; for, 1. Jn ttself purity ts better
than impurity. 2. The desire and effort
to attain purity enrich and strengthen
the soul. 3. The reward of purity ws
spiritual, not material, and 1s largely
realised in the present. 4. The reward
of purity ts to a great extent im the |
Suture.


Tue TRANSITION OF A TROUBLED Sovun FRoM ConFLICT TO VICTORY.
(Verses 15-17.)


The passage of the Poet from doubt
to confidence as here set before us was
marked by—

I. Thoughtful
others.

Asaph felt that, if he published his
inward doubts, and made known the
dark suggestions which occurred to him,
and the painful experiences through
which he passed, he would be acting
wrongly towards God’s people. All his
trouble he kept to himself, lest by
making it known he should injure the
children of God. Doubtless there are
times when we may and even ought to
speak of our mental perpiexities. We
may speak of them with a view of obtain-
tng help to overcome them. To those
who, by reason of large spiritual expe-
rience, or patient and devout study, or
eminent piety, are able to assist us in
solving the enigmas which perplex us,
we may advantageously speak of our
difficulties and doubts. We may speak
of them with the view of affording help
to others who may be engaged tn the con-
jisct. If we have overcome our difficul-
ties and have entered into rest, the story
of our battle and victory may nerve the
heart of some brother who is fighting a
similar Sone If we know such an

396


consideration of


one let ua tell him of the trial of our
faith, and how we overcame, and “ what
God hath done for our soul.” But we
may not speak of them to those who
are strangers to such questionings. Un-
told mischief may be the result if we
do. We have no right to infect others
with the doubts which distress us, And
without this kindly consideration of
others, which the Psalmist exercised, we
shall not be likely to attain the victory
over our own doubts, Let us be ever
ready to speak wise and helpful words,
which may tend to increase men’s faith
and hope ; but let us bear our own pain
in silence rather than obtain relief by
communicating our doubts to those who
are strangers to such experiences, and
thereby injuring them perhaps irreme-
diably.

“© thou that after toil and storm

Mayst seem to have reach’d a purer air,


Whose faith has centre everywhere,
Nor cares to fix itself to form ;


“ Leave thou thy sister when she prays,
Her early Heaven, her happy views;
Nor thou with shadow’d hint confuse

A life that leads melodious days.”


—Tennyson,
IL Personal effort for himself.
According to verse 16, the Psalmist


- HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS.


PSALM LXXH





made earnest efforts to overcome his
mental difficulties, but without success,
He looked at the subject in many
aspects, he approached it from various
directions, he considered carefully the
respective portions of it, he reasoned
with himself concerning it; but he
eould not overcome his doubts. His
perplexities remained in full force. The
enigma still confronted him, sphinx-like
and distressing. Human reason is un-
able to fully understand the workings
of Divine Providence. Its mysteries
and seeming anomalies arouse many
inquiries to which we are utterly unable
to give any satisfactory response. We
think to know this, but it is too painful
for us. Nor is this surprising, when we
eonsider—

1. Our proneness to error. We are
liable to err in judgment. Our moral
imperfections prevent us from obtaining
clear views of spiritual truth. At times
bodily suffering and mental distress lead
us to meditate almost exclusively upon
the pain and travail of life; we close
our eyes to its brightness and beauty
and joy. In all ages mankind has ex-
hibited an extraordinary willingness to
“ follow cunningly-devised fables ;” and
even sincere truth-seekers have often
wandered into strange districts of error
and untruth.

2. The vast disparity between the
student and the subject of investigation.
We strive to comprehend “eternal Pro-
vidence, and justify the ways of God to
man ;” and “ we are but of yesterday, and
know nothing, because our days upon the
earth are as a shadow.” The great plan
of God’s government is so vast and com-
plicated, it has already been in opera-
tion so long, it is destined to continue
to operate so long, and the span of its
operations is so wide that we can only
see a very small portion of its working.
In our endeavour to interpret His way
and work we are speedily baffled and
bewildered, while He calmly carries for-
ward the development of His great
plans and purposes, leaving us to work
and wait with patience the unfolding
of their significance. We see “ parts of
His ways; but how little a portion is
heard of Him? but the thunder of His


power who can understand!” “Where
wast thou when I laid the foundations
of the earth? declare if thou hast un-
derstanding.” “QO the depths of the
riches both of the wisdom and know-
ledge of God! how unsearchable are
His judgments, and His ways past find-
ing out |”

3. The Divine reserve. Many things
are intentionally hidden from us by
God. “Secret things belong unto the
Lord our God.” ‘ Clouds and darkness
are round about Him.” ‘“ His way is
in the sea, and His path in the great
waters, and His footsteps are not known.”
Mystery is educational. It excites to
inquiry and investigation. It promotes
humility and reverence. Mystery 1s
merciful. If the secret things were
revealed to us the knowledge may be
overwhelming. “I have yet many
things to say unto you, but ye cannot
bear them now.”

OI. Approach unto God.

“The Psalmist goes here with the feet
of his heart into the sanctuary, draws
near to God, and gets from this clear
fountain the insight which natural rea-
son could not give him.” He sought
fellowship with God, and in that fellow-
ship he obtained the help which he
needed. He entered the holy place of
Divine communion, and there received
such intelligence and inspiration as
brought confidence and peace to his
eoul.

1. Light was imparted to him. The
sinner’s portion and the saint’s heritage
appeared to him in new and different
aspects. He saw the perils which sur-
round the wicked, and the fearful end
which awaits them. He saw also the
strong “right hand” that upholds, the
infallible ‘‘ counsel ” that guides, and the
exceeding “ glory ” that awaits the good ;
and he felt the vast superiority of the
saint’s portion, God’s revelation in pro-
vidence should be studied in the light
which proceeds from His revelation in
His Word.

2. His faith was increased. In com-
munion with God Asaph saw clearly
his own insufficiency and God’s all-suffi-
ciency, and his faith grew strong. As
he contemplated the ee of the

39





fubere which he recelved in the sanc-
tuary of God his confidence waxed
strong and triumphant. Communion
witk God imparts assurance and peace
to the soul. In His presence doubt
expires.

3. His heart was strengthened. He
felt no longer pained and powerless, but
strong and joyful. His troubled and
almost-despairing wail has given place
to a hymn of rest and gladness; for
“God is the Rock of his heart, and his
portion for ever.”

CoxoLusion.—1l. Let those who boast
themselves tn the strength of their reason


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS,





learn how insufficient tt te to comprehend
the ways of God.

2. Let the perplexed and troubled
child of God learn to seek help in com
munion with his Father —God.

3. Let us all cultivate a large and
loyal trust in the providence of God.
He doeth all things well.


“T’m apt to think, the man
That could surround the sum of things, andspy
The heart of God and secrets of His empire,
Would speak but love; with him the bright
result
Would change the hue of intermediate scenes,
And make one thing of all theology.”


—Ga


THE PRESENT PosiITION AND FUTURE PRosPECTs OF THE WICKED AS SEEN
BY THE SPIRITUALLY ENLIGHTENED Man.


(Verses 18-20.)


L. Their present position is perilous.

“Surely Thou didst set them in slip-
pery places.” The prosperity of the
wicked is not a stable, abiding thing.
Riches frequently “make themselves
wings ; they fly away as an eagle toward
heaven.” All temporal prosperity and
wealth must be laid down at death.
When the rich man “dieth he shall
carry nothing away.” In the grave all
are equal, The poor wretch who died
homeless and penniless is no poorer there
than “kings and counsellors of the earth,
which built desolate places for themselves,
or princes that had gold and filled their
houses with silver.” And even while their
wealth and pleasure continue, wicked
men stand in slippery places; no solid
rock supports them; they have no firm
footing ; their very wealth may prove
the occasion of their overthrow; their
self-indulgence and luxury may lead to
their utter and painful ruin. Surely
their position is not an enviable one.
Better far is it to travel our life-journey
upon a rugged and thorny road so that
it be safe and lead to a blessed destiny,
than to waik as on velvet lawns amid
the odours of sweetest flowers, in con-
stant peril, and with certain and fearful
destruction awaiting us in tlie end.

I. Their future prospects are
terrible.

Destruction lies before them as their

398


portion in the next world. In this life
prosperity, in the next perdition. In
this life purple and fine linen and sump-
tuous fare ; in the next the robe of flama
and not even a drop of water to allay
their burning thirst.

1. Their destruction will be completa
“Thou castedst them down into de-
struction. How are they brought inte -
desolation as in a moment! they are
utterly consumed with terrors.” Not
withstanding their wealth, and pomp,
and power, justice smites them sternly
and ruinously. They are ‘ punished
with everlasting destruction from the
presence of the Lord and the glory of
His power.”

2. Their destruction will be sudden.
“In amoment.” “ When they shall say,
peace and safety; then sudden destruc-
tion cometh upon them, as travail upon
@ woman with child, and they shall not
escape.” In the midst of their prosper-
ity, when their cup of pleasure is fullest,
and their power greatest, and their sense
of security most confirmed, they are
smitten down into destruction and cast
into hell.


“They fall as falls the oak—
At once, and blasted by the thunder stroke.”


3. Their destruction is effected by God.
« Thou castedst them down into destruc
tion.” Not by chance does their raj


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALM.


come upon them, but ‘‘as a destruction
from the Almighty.” God comes forth
in judgment against them to punish them
for their corruption and pride, their op-
pression and violence, their presumption
and blasphemy. There is justice in the
universe ; under God’s government evil-
doers are punished. Though the execu-
tion of the sentence may be long delayed,
it will take place in due time. Sinners
must either be saved by God in His
mercy, or be destroyed by Him in His
justice.

4. Their destruction will make manifest
the unreality of their former prosperity.
Ungodly men who have their portion in
this life are asleep and dreaming as re-
gards the realities of the great spiritual
world. To them truth, righteousness,
love, their own souls, and the great God,
are very unreal and shadowy. Their
temporal possessions, pleasures, and
powers, they regard as realities grand
and precious. But their dreams will


PaALM LEXI,


come to an end, A great awakening is
at hand for them. When awakened by
God their estimate of things will be
completely reversed, What were once
their realities will have passed away
from them as shadows ; while the grand
verities which once they set aside as
myths and fables will be clear to them
in all their reality and importance,
They will “‘awake to shame and ever.
lasting contempt.” ‘ As a dream when
one awaketh ; so, O Lord, in the awak-
ing, Thou shalt despise their image.”
Who can fathom the abyss of sin and
degradation which he has sounded whom
God despises? To be despised by God
—how unutterably dreadful!
Conotusion.—1. Let the wicked take
warning and turn from their evil way.
The “Lord is good, and ready to for-
give, and plenteous in mercy to all them
that call upon” Him. 2. Let the child
of God never more envy the wicked their


temporal prosperity.


Tue Lire or Uxaopty Men a Dream.
(Verse 20.)


Humen life on the earth has been
eompared to a Pilgrimage (Gen. xlvii.
9).—To a Race (1 Cor. ix. 24).—To a
Battle (1 Tim. vi. 12).—To a Stewardship
(Matt. xxv. 14-30)—and to a Dream,
as in our text,

There is much in the present life of
every good man that is very dreamlike,


“ We are such stuff as dreams are made of,
And our little life is rounded by a sleep.”


In relation to spiritual and eternal
verities the impressions of earnest godly
men are but dim and dreamy as com-
pared with the verities themselves.
But our text represents the life of um
godly men as a dream. Let us notice
some points of analogy between the
two—

I. Unreality. In dreams the mind
is in a world of illusions, a world of
fiction. Such is the life of the wicked,
who have their portion in this world.
See this in thetr ideas of pleasure, wealth,
and usefulness. How false! See it
especially in the things upon which their


heart was set, as mentioned by Asaph,
viz., temporal prosperity and worldly
possessions.

1. They are evanescent. Wealth,
rank, power, are often lost. They must
all be laid down at death.

2. By thetr very nature they are not
permanent things. Worldly power is
essentially a shifting thing; worldly rank
an adventitious thing; material wealth
an unstable transitory thing.

3. The only permanent realities to
spiritual beings must be spiritual. Truth,
righteousness, love, the human soul,
God, are real and abiding. But men
call the shadows realities, &c.

IL Brevity. Dreams are very short.
In our dreams we seem to live for hours,
days, weeks, even in a few minutes.
And, at the longest, how brief is this
life of ours here!

1. When viewed with respect to the
work to be done by us in tt. Think of
the work to be done by us in ourselves
and for ourselves, and of the work we
have to do fos others. ey eee:

9


PaaALM LXXI.


momentous issues depend upon our life
In this world.

2. When contrasted with eternity. This
present life is a mere “twinkling of an
eye” when placed by the side of eternity.
Yet men live as though it would last
for ever. Surely they are dreaming ;
their life is a dream.

Ill. Termination. Dreaming is not
@ permanent state. Every dream has
its ending. So is it with the dream
of an ungodly life, There are two
awakenings, one or other of which
must arouse every sinful dreamer to
realities.

1. Some awake tn response to the call
of Divine love. God says to them,
“Awake thou that sleepest,” &c. They
hear aud obey, and are as it were
in a new world. “Old things have
passed away; all things have become
new.” To them now “life is real,
life is earnest.” They are converted.


Tue ATTITUDE OF


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ;: PSALMS.


They have awoke to reality and blessed.
ness,

2. Some awake only when aroused by
the thunder peals of judgment. There is
no refusing to listen to that call, They
awake to— :

(«.) Disappointment. Their realities
have vanished ; their hope expires ; their
trust becomes their confusion.

(8.) Destitution. The things in which
they rested all fail them now. Their
fancied wealth is all gone. Now they
know themselves to be “ wretched, and
miserable, and poor,” &c.

(y.) Shame and Distress.
shalt despise their image.” Think of
“their end. ... Thou castedst them
down into,” &c.

Are youawake? Or are you asleep and
dreaming? God calls to you, “ Awake
thou that sleepest,” &. ‘ Awake to
righteousness,” &e, Listen and obey.
AwaKkE Now.


“ Thou


A Victorious Soun


(Verses 21-28.)


Having considered the severe spiritual
conflict of the Psalmist, and the transi-
tion from conflict to victory, and his
estimate of the portion of the wicked
after he had been spiritually enlight-
sned, we now proceed to notice the atti-
tude of his soul in victory. This was
marked by two main features.

I. Deep self-abasement.

Having completely mastered his diffi-
culties and come out of the battle more
than conqueror, we listen to his voice,
and hear no tone of self-applause, no
sound of boasting, but rather a humble
confession of his folly and ignorance.
“So foolish was I, and ignorant: I was
as a beast for thee.” He felt deeply his
ewn ignorance and folly, especially in
this that he had considered human life
in relation to the Providence of God as
a beast might have done, and that in
the presence of God. He looked only
at the things which are seen and tem-
poral, at the things of sense, like the
beasts that perish. The things which
are unseen and eternal, the spiritual


things, the things which relate to a
400


future state, he took no account of. Inthe
light which he has received he sees how -
grievous was his mistake, and humbles
himself before God on account thereof.
Pride and spiritual enlightenment are
incompatible. They cannot co-exist.
When we are at a distance from God,
and walking in darkness, we may con-
ceitedly criticise His ways, and rashly
pronounce judgment upon His doings.
But let a man enter into the sanctuary
of God and there commune with Him,
and his soul will be humbled, his pride
and presumption perish, and in self-
abasement he will bow before God.
Criticism now gives place to worship,
Presumption is changed into adoration,

**The more Thy glories strike

The humbler I shall lie.”

The victorious soul is profoundly
humble, and cries, “Not unto us, not
unto us, but unto Thy name give glory.”
It is the revelation of the abounding
grace of God that produces the deepest
humility in us, and the manifestation of
His glory that prostrates us in lowliess
aelf-abasement.


mine eyes


HOMILETIC OOMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PsaLM@ LXXII.





IL Sublime Confidence in God.
¥ The Psalmist had a glorious assurance

1. The constant presence of God.
“Tam continually with Thee.” He
says this not as an assertion of His
faithfulness to God, but of God’s faith-
fulness to him, notwithstanding his igno-
rance, and folly, and unbelief. Ever-
more God besets us behind and before,
and lays His hand upon us for good.
We may wander from Him, but He
does not abandon us. In our sorrow
and blinded by our tears we may see in
Him nothing more than an unsym-
pathetic “gardener,” but it is He Him-
self continually with us, and waiting to
bless us. Our unworthiness does not
drive Him away from us. Through all
the dark wanderings of our doubting
and perplexed souls He accompanies us.
And when we seek for Him, lo! He is
at hand to help us, and to “ compass us
about with songs of deliverance.”

2. The unfailing support of God.
“Thou hast holden me by my right
hand.” As for the Psalmist, his “feet
were almost gone, his steps had well-
nigh slipped,” and he would have fallen
had not God upheld him. In the trying
journey when the little, weak hand of
the child can no longer retain its hold
upon the father, the father feels the re-
laxing grasp, and with his strong hand
holds the little, weak one, and so leads
and supports the dear child in safety.
And so the heavenly Father supports us,
His weak and erring children. Blessed
be His name! ‘“ Fear thou not; for I
am with thee: be not dismayed; for I
am thy God: I will strengthen thee ;
yea, I will help thee ; yea, I will uphold
thee with,” &c. ‘‘ When thou passest
through the waters, I will be with thee,”
&c. ‘As thy days, so shall thy strength
be.” The promises of His Holy Word,
and the experience of His people, and
especially His own character, give to ua
most encouraging assurance of His un-
failing support. He will never forsake
even the most imperfect of His people.

8. The infallible guidance of God.
Asaph had tried his own counsel, and
found it folly. He had made expe
riment of his own knowledge, and dis-

20


covered it to be ignorance as of a beast.
Now, with unfaltering confidence, He
turns to the Divine counsel for guid-
ance. He is willing that God should
determine His destiny, that He should
choose the path by which that destiny
shall be reached, and he is confident
that the destiny will be a glorious one.
He who is guided through life by God
—(1) Will never go astray. He can-
not err. “His understanding is infi-
nite.” He is perfectly acquainted with
the traveller, and knows well every step
ef the road. (2) Will enjoy the highest
companionship. ‘He Himself shall be
with them, walking in the way, and the
foolish shall not err therein.” Our
hearts burn within us while He walks
with us by the way, and opens to us
the Scriptures. This companionship is
—(a) Enlightening. (8) Strengthen-
ing. (y) Transforming. ‘We are
changed into the same image.” (3)
Will be conducted to Divine honours.
‘“ Afterward receive me to glory.” Oh,
that “afterwards”! What surprises of
joy and blessedness God has for ua in
the endless “ afterwards” !

4, The all-suffictency of God. Asaph
cannot sufficiently exalt the Lord his
God. He regards Him as—(1) Supe-
rior to every other good that he possessed
or desired. ‘‘ Whom have I in heaven,
but Thee? and there is none upon earth
that I desire beside Thee.” In heaven,
with all its high and holy, its wise and
strong intelligences, he had no helper
and saviour but God. And upon earth
he had found no one who could satisfy
the necessities and longings of the soul
like God. Deep within each one of us
there is the consciousness of guilt, we
Jong for pardon. He alone has autho-
rity to say unto us, “ Thy sins are for-
given thee; go in peace.” There are
times when we are oppressed with the
consciousness of moral weakness, we
feel unable to live holily and labour use-
fully, we long for help. He alone can
say, ‘ My grace is sufficient for thee.”
We feel our mortality, yet shrink from
death, we long deeply and intensely for
immortal and blessed Ife. He alone
can say, “ He that liveth and believeth
in Me shall never die.” Our hearts ar

401


FeaLM LXXIT,





made to love and to be loved, we long
for the love of some perfect being who
will accept our affection and reciprocate
it, in whom we realise the fulfilment of
eur highest ideal of excellence, and who
will abide with us for ever. He, and
He alone, can satisfy this longing, He
loves us with an infinite love, He craves
our love. He is the supremely Beau-
tiful, the All-perfect One, and He is
eternal. ‘ Whom have I in heaven but
Thee?” &c. (2) Adequate to the soul’s
needs when all other resources fail. “My
flesh and my heart faileth; but God is
the strength,” &c. He looks onward to
the time of his dissolution, feels by an-
ticipation the exhaustion of his physical
powers, and his heart, the seat of vitality,
failing him, and all human aids of no
avail, and he is confident that even then
he would find in his God all that he
needed. ‘ When other helpers fail and
comforts flee,” and our heart faints and
fails, He will be “the Rock of our
heart and our portion for ever.” His
resources are adequate to all our needs,
In all the unknown possibilities of our


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





future no want can occur to us which
He will not be able to supply. And
His love is as great as His resources,
Both are infinite.

5. The righteousness of the govern-
ment of God (vers. 27, 28). Of this he
has not now the shadow of a doubt.
Those who depart from God depart from
life, and light, and blessedness. They
“ shall perish.” God will “ destroy
them.” Those who draw near to God
shall find it good so to do. In His pre-
sence and fellowship there are life and
“ fulness of joy.” Of all this he is con-
fident. He speaks with the clear accent
of strong conviction. He is so assured
that all God’s ways and works are just,
and right that he will declare them to
others. Draw near to God, my brother,
and His smile will banish all your dark-
ness, and brighten and beautify your life.
Heartily trust Him, and you will have
occasion joyously to praise Him.

Conatusion.—1. How gloriously me-
tortous are they whose confidence in God
ts strong. 2. How blessed are they who
have God for thetr portion.


THE Goop Man’s Present, Past, anp Fururs,
(Verses 23, 24.)


What the Psalmist says of himself in
these words merits much consideration,
Observe—

I. His present experience, ‘“ I am
continually with Thee.” Every good
man is with his God—in a way of com-
munition, in a way of affection, in a way
of delight, in a way of desire, and in a
way of service.

IL His retrospective testimony.
“Thou hast holden me by my right
hand.” His experience has been realised
by God’s people in every age ; from them,
therefore, his acknowledgment is due,
and by them it will be readily made.

IIL His prospective consolation.
This is twofold, and respects what God


DEPARTING


secures to him tn this life. How neces-
sary is guidance considering our various
difficulties and dangers. And it is proper
always, from a consciousness that God
alone can guide us, to ask of Him the
guidance of His Word, of His Spzrit,
and of His Providence.

What God secures to him in the life to
come. Glory is that to which we may
look forward, as the consummation of
our bliss; and in the expectation of
this, we may rejoice, even as if we were
already in possession of it.

Let us, then, be stirred up to humble
inquiry, and to devout adoration.— W,
Sleigh.


From Gop.


(Verse 27.)


Distance from God.

L What it is. ‘Go a whoring from
Thee.” Alienation from Him—l. Of
fidelity. 2. Of affection. 3. Of worshep.

402


IL What it leads to. Ruin, de
struction. 1. Certain. “Thou hast de


stroyed.” 2, Complete. “Perish,. .
destroyed,”


m


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PRALM LXXiv.


ener errr incersvaee soe heute,


Drawine Niex ro Gop,
(Verse 28.)


«
ae fs good for me to draw near to

God is not far from any one of
us. He is everywhere present. But
to draw near to Him is to endeavour to
realise His presence with us, to feel Him
near, to commune with Him.

I How may we draw near to God.
1. By devoutly reading His Word. 2.
By meditation on Him. 3. By prayer
to Him. 4. By praiseof Him. 5. By
imitating Him in life and work.


should specially seek His helpful Pre-
sence. 1. In time of painful doubt. 2,
In time of suffering. 3. In time of
gladness we should draw near to Him
with our gratitude. 4. When entering
upon and toiling in dificult enterprises,

I. The advantages of drawing
near to God. By so doing, 1. Faith is
increased. 2. Suffering is removed, or
more grace 18 given to the sufferer, and
the suffering ts sanctified. 3. Gladness
ts hallowed and increased. 4. Wisdom


IL When should we draw near to
God. We should at all times live near
to Him. But there are times when we


and strength are imparted for dificult
dutéses,


Tae Goop Man’s Acczss, Trust, AND TESTIMONY.
(Verse 28.)


I, The blessedness of the good man’s
access to God.

Il. The strength of the good man’s
trust in God,


TI The clearness of the good man’s
testimony for God.

All doubt is gone. With confident,
glad, and grateful heart, he longs to
“ declare all His works,”


PSALM LXXIV,


INTRODUCTION.


iption.—* A Maschil of Asaph,” é.¢,, an Instruction of Asaph, a Didactic Song by
Asaph. See introduction to Pa. L f ; ak ae

“But here we cannot have the least idea of the authorship belonging to David’s time, We
must not, however, on this account convict the title of a mistake : for just in proportion as the
contents are decidedly and manifestly inconsistent with David's age, was it unlikely that the
titie would announce that the Psalm was composed at that time. Asaph was the Sounder of a
family of singers, who went by the name of the sons of Asaph, even in the time of Isaiah (Comp.
2 Chron. xxxv. 15), yea, even in the time of Ezra and Nehemiah (Ex. ii. 41, iii. 10; Neh. vii.
44, xi. 22). That the Holy Ghost, who inspired the founder, continued to exert His influence
upon the members of this family from age to age, is manifest from the example of Jehaziel, one
of the sons of Asaph in Jehoshaphat’s time, on whom the spirit of the Lord came down in the
midst of the assembly (2 Chron. xx. 14). All the sacred compositions of the members of this
family were designated songs of Asaph, just as in the title of the lxii Psalm, Jeduthun stands
for the Jeduthunic choir. If the family had not possessed a founder go very famous in this
department, these Psalms, like those which bear the name of the sons of Korah, would have
had inscribed on their titles ‘the sons of Asaph,’ ”— Hengatenberg. : ‘ :

Occasion.—On this expositors are not agreed, Some think that it was written by Asaph, in
David’s time, with a prophetical reference to the destruction by the Chaldeans. Others look
upon it as historical, and having reference to the destructions wrought at the time of the Mae-
cabees. Othera, who regard it as historical, consider that it refers to the Chaldean destruction,
The occasion cannot be determined certainly; but the last-named opinion seems to us most
likely to be the correct one. It was written at a time of great misery, the temple was deaolated
and destroyed, the land was ravaged, the enemies of the Church triumphed, and God seemed to
have forgotten or cast away His people. The Psalmist bewails their sad condition and pray
ter deliverance, 408


PSALM LEXY.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





—_


Tur Surrerzme CuvrcH Pourme our rrs ComPLaAINts uw/0 Gop.
(Verses 1-11.)


L The description of the Church

*“ The sheep of Thy pasture ; Thy con-
gregation which Thou hast purchased,”
&c. The Church is here represented as—

1. Shepherded by God. We use the word
“ shepherded,” because we do not know of
any other which expresses the various
duties of the shepherd to his flock. That
Jehovah is the Shepherd of His people
is an idea of frequent occurrence in the
Scriptures. (Psalms Ixxx. 1, xev. 7, ¢.
8; Isa. xl. 11; Ezek. xxxiv. 11-16.)
The relationship involves His Gusdance.
With infallible knowledge and tender
care He goeth before His people through
all their journeyings, By the mystic
and majestic pillar of cloud by day and
of fire by night He led His people in
their forty years’ journey through the
wilderness, And still He leads His
people, though by different means. He
guides us now by the indications of Pro-
vidence, by influencing our convictions,
and by the teaching of His Word. The
relationship involves Protection. The
shepherd had to guard his flock against
the attacks of robbers and beasts of prey ;
and frequently displayed great faithful-
ness and courage in so doing. In this
way David, while a mere stripling, slew
a lion and a bear (1 Sam. xvii. 34-36).
So Jehovah guards His people. “ As
the mountains are round about Jerusa-
lem, so the Lord is round about His
people,” &c, The relationship involves
Provision. It was the duty of the shep-
herd to provide for his sheep, and when
one pasture was bare to lead them to
another, or when the herbage was defi-
cient to cut down the tender shoots of
trees for them to eat, and to see that
they had water to drink. In thus
providing for them the shepherd fre-
quently underwent long and severe la
bour. Jehovah thus provides for “ His
people, and the sheep of His pasture.”
“The Lord is my Shepherd ; I shall not
want.” His provisions are varied, abus-
dant, exhaustless,

3. Redeemed by God. The Church is
spoken of as “purchased of old” by

404


God, and as an inheritance “ redeemed ”
by Him. From Egyptian bondage He
redeemed them at an immense ccat.
The Church is an ancient possession of
the Lord’s. He has the most indefeasible
right to it as Hisinheritance. It is His
because He called it into being. It owea
its origin to Him. He has preserved it
in being, watching over it in all the vicis-
situdes of its fortune. Much of its his-
tory resembles the burning bush— the
bush burned with fire, and the bush was
not consumed,” and the secret of its
mysterious preservation must be traced’
to Him. He has redeemed:it. His
ancient people He frequently redeemed
out of the hand of their enemies, And
the Church to-day He has redeemed with
a nobler, Diviner redemption. ‘ Ye were
not redeemed with corruptible things,
as silver and gold ; but with the precious
blood of Christ.” He “gave Himself
for us.” What a Sexr to give! And
how freely was He given by both His
Father and Himself! How unspeak-
ably precious is this redemption! How
complete and indisputable God’s title to
an inheritance so redeemed !

3. Inhabited by God. “ Mount Zion
wherein Thou hast dwelt.” The mys
terious Shekinah, the symbol of God’s
special presence, dwelt in the holy of
holies, In the Psalms God is repre-
sented as both dwelling in His people,
and the dwelling-place of His people.
“God is in the midst of her.” “In
Salem is His tabernacle, and His dwell:
ing-place in Zion.” So in the Christian
Church God is specially present. “Where
two or three are gathered together in My
name, there am | in the midst of them.”
He dwells in His Church to hear and
answer prayer, to reveal His will, to be-
stow His grace, to make known His sal-
vation, and to manifest His glory. He
dwells in every humble and believing
heart as in His temple by the Holy
Ghost.

Reflect how the consideration of these
aspects of the Church in relation to God
would affect His people. They wer


‘HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


es


the sheep of His pasture,” yet they
were in captivity, and oppressed by their
anemies, and far away from Zion. How
pould they reconcile these things with
the guidance, protection, and provision
of their Shepherd? They were redeemed
by Him at a great cost, yet now they
were once more in bondage. Had He
ceased to value the inheritance which He
had “purchased of old”? They were
inhabited by God, but now the glory of
His presence has departed, Had He
then cast them off forever? Thus there
have often been times when the position
and sufferings of the Church have seemed
utterly irreconcilable with their most
fundamental relations to God.

IL The distress of the Church.

1. Their enemies triumphed over them
and spread ruin around them. They had
destroyed everything in the sanctuary,
had broken down the carved work, had
burnt it with fire, and desecrated it to
the ground. The Jews gloried in their
temple. They spoke of it as a “holy
and beautiful house.” It was a costly
and magnificent edifice. Around it were
gathered many precious and sacred mem-
ories. Its associations were most inter-
esting and treasured. To see it ruth-
lessly destroyed and profaned must have
been a great distress to them. The
Church in all ages has had its enemies
who have sought its destruction. With
eaptious and destructive criticism men
seek to destroy the Church, by endea-
vouring to overthrow the faith of her
members in many precious truths in
which they have rested. The Church
has had foes who have persecuted her
by fire and sword, bonds and imprison-
ments, pains and penalties. Different
are the weapons which are used to-day.
The theories and arguments of cold in-
tellectual men—men often of large heads,
but infinitesimally small hearts ; whose
knowledge has “grown from more to
more,” but in whom ne reverence dwells
—are the weapons by which it is now
sought to overthrow the Church. She
has spiritual foes also. “The gates of
hell” are arrayed against her. And
many in this world by word and deed
are foes to the cause of God.

2. Their enemies blasphemed the name


PALM LX XIV.





of God. Where God had been reverently
worshipped by devout hearts they madly
shouted their war cry, in the temple they
had set up their military standards, and
they had reproached and blasphemed the
name of God. This was a great grief
to the people of God. And to those of
them who were faithful and pious the
grief would be most deep and acute.
The godly heart is most deeply pained
in its tenderest part when anything is
done by which God is dishonoured. And
this blasphemy had been long continued,
adding amazement to the grief of the
Psalmist, and causing him to inquir,
“OQ God, how long shall the adversary
reproach? shall the enemy blaspheme
Thy name for ever?” (1) Man is free
to reproach and blaspheme God tf he will.
We may praise and adore Him, or revile
and curse Him if we will. God has
made us thus morally free. He allows
us the exercise of this freedom. (2) God
has long patience even with the profanest
and most outrageous sinners. For a long
season He tolerates even blasphemers,
giving them time for repentance. He
waits to show mercy even to the chief of
sinners, He wills not that any should
perish. (3) God’s patience with blasphe-
mers causes sore amazement to His people.
They cannot understand why He does not
pluck His hand out of His bosom and
smnite them, They cry, “O God, how
long?” Assuredly, not for ever. If the
wicked “turn not, He will whet His
sword; He hath bent His bow, and made
it ready.” But while judgment lingers,
and men continuetoblaspheme, the people
of God are distressed by the blasphemy,
and amazed at the delay of judgment.
3. The prophetic voice was silent. The
prophetical office of Jeremiah terminated
with the destruction of the temple. “It
was assuredly the cessation of his office
that more immediately gave occasion to
the painful cry; there is no longer any
prophet, This standing ruin of the pro-
phetical class proclaimed, even in loudez
accents than the non-appearance of other
rophets, that God was no longer Israel’s
aie It was necessary that along with
the other signs of the dominion of God,
this one also should cease for a long
period of time, that the people might be
405


PSALM LXZIV.





taught how they had treated it, wherein
they had offended, and might, at the
same time, be led with tears of repent-
ance to seek its return.” —Hengstenberg.
The cry of the Psalmist reminds me of
the words of Saul to the apparition of
Samuel, “I am sore distressed ; for the
Philistines make war against me, and
God is departed from me, and answereth
me no more, neither by prophets, nor by
dreams.” Well may he be distressed !
Man cut off from God—severed from
the great central Life and Light of the
universe—appealing to heaven, and
being answered only by stony-hearted
silence! How appalling! God had
threatened, “ Behold, the days come,
saith the Lord God, that I will send a
famine in the land,” &c. (Amos viii.
11, 12; Comp. Ezek. vii. 26.) That
time had come. “ Her prophets found
no vision from the Lord.” Distress had
come upon the people; and no prophet’s
voice was heard, either in merciful en-
couragement, or faithful rebuke, or stern
threatening. They have treated the pro-
phetic message with scornful indifference
at times, and at times they have cruelly
persecuted the Heaven-sent messenger ;
and now they cry for some word from
heaven, some communication from the
Divine, and the only answer they receive
is inexorable silence, Sureiy there is
warning for us here. How do we treat
the great and precious privileges which
are granted unto us? The Word of God,
do we prize it? The opportunities of
worship, are they dear to us? The in-
fluence of the Holy Spirit, do we value
it? do we profit by it? If we fail to
appreciate our spiritual privileges, and
practically despise them, God may with-
draw them from us, and we may awake
to a sense of their value too late.


ao ee whose beauties languish, half-con-


Till mounted on the wing, their glossy plumes

Expanded shine with azure, green, and gold ;

How blessings brighten as they take their
flight.” — Young.


Let us prize the gifts of God while
we have them, lest God should remove
them from us for ever,

4. God in anger had cast them off.
Bo aes one ; and it was true that


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


=


their miseries came upon them in conse.

quence of their sins. God was visiting
them with the rod of chastisement be-
cause of their idolatry, their spiritual
apostasy, and rebellion. Their Babylo-
nian enemies were unwittingly the agenta
of God to punish them. But God had

not cast them off for ever. When they
turned unto. Him in true repentance, He

turned unto them and had mercy upon

them. Yet at this time they could see

no sign of His favour. His anger seemed
to smoke against them. Such were

some of the distresses of the ancient

Church. Their foes were triumphant

and were spreading ruin on every side,

even destroying their best treasures ; the

name of God was blasphemed, the pro-

phetic voice was silent, and God seemed

to have abandoned them. Their dis-

tresses are a picture and parable of

sufferings which have befallen the

Church in other ages. Their distresses

were on account of their sins. So also

in subsequent times, in some instances,

the Church has been tried and chastened

by reason of error, or unfaithfulness, or

lukewarmness. In every time of suffer-

ing let the Church seek to ascertain the

cause and meaning of her suffering ; and

if it be God’s expostulation with her for

her sins, let her repent and do her first

works, or He will remove her candlestick

out of its place.

IIL The prayers of the distressed
Ohurch.

1. That God would remember them.
God seemed to have forgotten them.
They seemed to have passed away from
His mind. He bestows no attention
upon them. They entreat Him to re
member them, thinking that, if He
turned His attention to them and saw
their miseries, He would surely deliver
and save them.

2. That God would interpose for them.
“Lift up thy footsteps unto the eternal
ruins.” ‘The Psalmist speaks of eternal
ruins, because the complete destruction
had cut off all human hope of a restora.
tion.” Man could not deliver them.
Their only hope was in God. They
pray Him to hasten His approach t
them. In the day of their distress the:
have to seek help from Him whom they


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


weglected in their prosperity, for He
slone can help them.

3. That God would interpose for them

edily. God’s help seemed to them long

layed. They were weary of waiting
for His appearing. “O God, how long
shall the adversary approach? shall the
enemy blaspheme Thy name for ever ?”
They longed to hear the sound of the
chariot wheels of their Deliverer. They
knew not that the waiting for His coming
was itself a blessing. Their sufferings
made the time seem long. Their anxiety
made them impatient. But God delays
His salvation until the captivity has
fulfilled its mission to them, and suffering
has done its work in them, and waiting
itself has blessed them.

There is something very touching
and effective in the form of expression
adopted by the Psalmist in addressing
the Lord. ‘The sheep of Thy pasture,
Remember Thy congregation, which
Thou hast purchased of old; Thine
inheritance, which Thou hast redeemed ;
this mount Zion in which Thou hast
dwelt.” He thus brings before Him
His interpositions for them in former
times, His ancient loving-kindness for
them, His relation to them, and His


PRALM LEXI.





having dwelt in Zion. Thus he pleads not
their own misery only, but His mercy
also ; not their need only, but His fulness
and power also, and their relation ta
Him. Surely He will listen to such
pleadings. He will not leave His sheep
to perish, or lose His ancient purchase,
or suffer His inheritance to be entirely
desolated, or leave His glorious dwelling-
place a ruin for ever.

Conciusion.—1l. Let the enemies of
the Church of God take warning. Let
them not interpret His silence as non-
existence, or construe His patience into
powerlessness. He lives, and His arm
has lost none of its ancient strength,

2. Let those who are richly blessed with
spiritual privileges remember that they
involve corresponding responsibilities. Be
wise, prize them, improve them, lest
they be the occasion of greater condem-
nation to you.

3. Let the favoured Church be warned.
Be faithful, or God may write “Ichabod”
upon your temples and altars.

4. Let the suffering Church take en-
couragement from her relationship to
God, and from His past interpositions on
her behalf, and learn how to plead them
at Hts throne.


Tre CONSTRUCTIVE AND THE DESTRUCTIVE
(Verses 5, 6.)


Destruction is sometimes a wise and
good employment. It is wise and good
to destroy disease, error, evil, “ For
this purpose the Son of God was mani-
fested, that He might destroy the works
of the devil.” But destruction is inferior
to construction.

I. The constructive is greater and
more difficult than the destructive.
An idiot might destroy St. Paul's
Cathedral, London; but it needed the
genius of Sir C. Wren to design it. A
child might destroy a young oak sapling ;
but the mightiest man cannot create &
daisy. A fool might unsettle a man’s
faith and destroy his character; but the
wisest and holiest of men cannot of
himself establish a man’s faith and build
up his character.


Il. In the kingdom of the truth it
is wiser and nobler to aim at building
up the true than destroying the
false.

1. Zt ts wiser ; for you may destroy one
error only to make room for another. One
evil spirit is expelled, but “ other spirits
more wicked than himself” enter in his
place. But he who builds up the true
is effectually destroying old errors and
guarding against the entrance of new
ones,

2. It ts nobler, In destroying even the
false and bad, men are often actuated by
mean and base motives and feelings, but
in aiming at edification in the true and
good the motives and feelings are noble,

Ill. How terrible is it to destroy the
true and good! To destroy a nobii

407


FUALM LXXTV,





HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





building, a magnificent city; to destroy the good. He is ever engaged in oves
life, virtue, truth, beauty, how heinous coming error and evil by building wg


ia this!
IV. God is the great constructor of


souls in truth and grace,


Let us imitate Him in this.


THE SUFFERING CHURCH RECOUNTING THE Dornes or Gop IN THE Past
as AN ARGUMENT FoR His HELP IN THE PRESENT.


(Verses 12-17.)


The poet, in calling to mind and cele-
brating the interpositions of God on
behalf of His people in former times,
brings into prominence the Divine
Sovereignty. From that Sovereignty,
as it had been manifested in past
deliverances and blessings, he drew
encouragement for himself and the peo-
ple in their present distresses,

I. The history of God’s dealings
with His people reveals His universal
sovereignty.

1. He ws sovereign over His people.
“God is my King.” The people of God
loyally and heartily recognise His sove-
reignty over them, He is sovereign over
all men; but His sovereignty is not
acknowledged by all men. There are
those who disown it and rebel against
it; there are others who meanly and
slavishly submit to it from base motives,
But His own people recognise its righte-
ousvess, and wisdom, and goodness, and
cordially own Him as their King. To
them His “law is holy, and His com-
mandment holy, and just, and good.”
He occupies the throne of their affections,
In the hearts of His people He is su-
preme. They serve Him with willing
minds. They bow to His authority with
loyalty, and love, and reverence.

2. He 1s sovereign over His enemies.
Expositors are pretty generally agreed
that by “the dragons” and the
“leviathan” whose heads were broken
in the waters, the poet intended to set
forth the Egyptians and their Pharaoh
who were destroyed in the Red Sea
God manifested His sovereignty over
them by destroying them for their
rebellion against Him, and for their
oppression of His people. They would
not submit themselves to His authority,
80 He crusbed them by His power. God
ig sovereign over all men, whether they

408


acknowledge Him or not. The rebellion
of the wicked in no way diminishes His
right to reign, or His power to do all
His pleasure, He is King. ‘He must
reign till He hath put all enemies under
Hie feet.”

3. He ts sovereign over nature. The
Psalmist speaks of Him as dividing the
sea, cleaving the fountain and flood, dry-
ing up mighty rivers, preparing the light
and the sun, setting all the borders of
the earth, making summer and winter.
God is not only the great Creator of
the universe, but its Sustainer also, We
discover in nature not only wise and
beneficent laws, but a Lawgiver also.
We are acquainted with great forces,
and are persuaded that there must be
some intelligent and almighty Being
who originated and sustains them. We
mark a beautiful order and arrangement
in nature, and regard them as signs of
a Divine presence and power. He is
but a superficial student of nature who
never pursues his investigations beyond
the discovery of mere laws and forces.
To the devout and earnest listener nature
is eloquent of God. God is the sove
reign of nature. He controls her forces.
He regulates her operations. He pre
sides over all her processes. He is
supreme in all. There is no province of
His universe from which He is excluded.
His sovereignty is complete and univer
sal. He rules over all nature and all life
The life of the ephemera sporting its littl
hour in the rays of the summer sun, anc
the life of the archangel standing in Hi
own presence, are both subject to Him.

IL The History of God’s dealing
with His people reveals the beneé
cence of His sovereignty.

God is a “ King working salvation t
the midst of the earth.” God is activel;
engaged in every department of Hi


HOMILEYVIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





aniverse, He is the supreme Worker.
“My Father worketh hitherto, and I
work.” In the operations of nature He
ceaselessly works. In the events of
history He works, aiding His servants,
restraining the wrath of His foes, direct-
ing and controlling all things, so that
in the end truth and righteousness and
love may be triumphant everywhere.
And He works in human souls, delivering
them from sin, and educating them into
holy living and useful working. The
Psalmist recognised the work of God in
the past history of His people. He
had brought them forth from Egypt
with a high hand and an outstretched
arm. He had smitten their enemies
with destruction, He had led them
through the sea as on dry land. He
had wrought for their salvation. It is
of the very nature of His sovereignty to
work beneficently. And the salvation
which He works is gloriously complete.
This the Psalmist indicates by the words,
“Working salvation in the midst of the
earth,” “The words denote the com-
prehensive nature of the salvation : who-
ever has obtained possession of the
interior of a country has got the ascen-
dency over the whole boundaries,—
whatever is done there extends to the
whole circumference” (Exod. viii. 22 ;
Isa, x. 23). What God undertakes
He carries to completion. His salvation
is ‘unto the uttermost.” He is “ mighty
to save.” Let us rejoice in God’s sove-
reignty. ‘The Lord reigneth ; let the
earth rejoice; let the multitude of isles
be glad.” Man has sadly misrepresented
His sovereignty. We have contemplated
with horror representations of a Being of
unlimited and arbitrary power, which
power is often used to crush and curse
his creatures, a power which, except in
the case of a favourite few, works de-
struction in the midst of the land. Such
is not the sovereignty of God. His rule
is a thing of infinite wisdom, and good-
ness, aud beauty. He doeth all things


PSALM LXX


well. Under His sovereignty the race
is advancing not to darkness and night,
but to the glad and beautiful morning
of eternal day. The beneficence of the
work of God is seen by the Psalmist
when he looks at tt through the interven-
txg years. While it is yet in process
we cannot discover the significance or
beauty of His work. While events are
in progress they often seem chaotic, and
sometimes even maleficent. Wait until
the work has advanced toa period, and
then the design of the great Worker wil!
be before you a thing of joy and beauty,

Til. The history of God’s dealings
with His people is full of encourage-
ment to them.

The poet recounts the doings of
Israel’s King to encourage their hearts
in their time of distress. His past
interpositions are 80 mauy reasons for
our placing our trust in Him in every
time of need. God is unchangeable and
eternal,—“ the same yesterday, and to-
day, and for ever.” He is unchangeable
in power: what He has done already
He can do again, He is unchangeable
in purpose. The design and tendency
of His government is to ‘ work sulva-
tion.” “He is not a man that He
should lie, or the son of man that He
should repent.” He is unchangeable in
goodness ; what He willed to do in the
past He will do again. ‘He abideth
faithful.” So past deliverances and
blessings encourage us to plead with
Him, and to trust Him for help in pre-
sent distresses. ‘Because Thou hast
been my heip, therefore in the shadow
of Thy wings will I rejoice.”

Conctusion.—l. Let us rejoice in the
beneficence ani universality of the Divine
Sovereignty. God—the Supremely Good
—is King. He rules in righteousness,
wisdom, and love. 2. Let the troubled
heart take encouragement from God's
relationship to him, and past dealings
with him. He wio has led you hitherts
will never fail you or forsake you.


Tug SoveREIGNTY oF GOD.
(Verse 12.)


In the time of trouble to which this
Psalm refera the Psalmist took encour-


agement from the consideration of God’s
sovereignty. His kingship implig
409


POALM LXXIV.





authority. As a Sovereign He proclaims
His laws for the government of His
subjects. And these laws involve
penalties for those who violate them,
and rewards for those who obey and
honour them, God’s kingship implies
the protection of His people. It is the
duty of kings to protect their subjects
in the enjoyment of their rights, God
is our shield. God’s sovereignty is
moral. He rules by reason, not by
force. The laws which He prescribes
are in harmony with the laws of our
own nature. Thus, He has made us
morally free, and His sovereignty never
invades our freedom. He never coerces
man into obedience,

In the text His sovereignty is pre-
sented in several aspects.

I. As loyally acknowledged. “My
King.” The sovereignty of God is uni-
versal in its extent, but is only partially
acknowledged. There are those who
utterly deny it, and are avowed rebels
agaiust His government. There are
others who acknowledge it as slaves. If
they obey His rule at all, it is because
they feel compelled to do so by dread of
the lash, There are others who acknow-
ledge it as Airelings. They avoid trans-
gression lest they”should incur severe
penalties; they obey that they might
receive the reward of obedience, But
there is no spontaneity or heartiness in
their obedience. There are others who
acknowledge it heartily as loyal subjects.
They recognise and admire the justice
and benevolence of His laws, and the
wisdom of their administration; they
cordially acknowledge His right to
reign ; they venerate Him as their King
and God, What is our relation to this
government? Are we rebels? slaves?
hirelings # or loyal subjects 9

IL As of ancient date. ‘Of old.”
God’s sovereignty has existed from ever-
lasting as regards Himself. His fitness
for rule, His right to rule, His purpose
to rule, are all eternal ag Himself. In
the solitude of the awful eternity He
was supreme. As to His sovereignty
over the Jews, by the term “of old”
the Psalmist referred to the days when
God brought His people out of Egypt
with signs, and wonders, and great

410


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





power. His sovereignty over them may
be traced back to the call of Abram,
His sovereignty over us began with the
beginning of our being, and is coexten-
sive with our being. Earthly monarchs
pride themselves upon the antiquity of
their dynasties. Here is a dynasty
which no beginning knew. ‘‘ Thy king-
dom is established of old; Thou art
from everlasting.”

TIL As beneficent im operation.
“Working salvation.” God’s sovereignty
is,—1. Operative. God works. ‘ He
is not sitting down in what men call
everlasting repose, calmly or indifferently
marking the operations of the universe,
and luxuriating in a peace which no
storm can invade. Thatis not the kind
of God which guilty, weary, broken-
hearted man requires.” He works in
nature, in history, in redemption. 2.
Operates beneficently. The King works
salvation. God’s sovereignty has been
grievously misinterpreted. Human no-
tions of favouritism have been set down
to God’s sovereignty. Men have formu-
lated a doctrine of reprobation, and have
had the audacity to call it God’s sove-
reignty. Most firmly do we believe in
His sovereignty, but we believe in it
as “working salvation.” Of the King
it was predicted, “ He is just and having
salvation.” God rules to bless. He
works to save men, not to destroy them.

But is it really sof? Does God's
government work beneficently? At this
time, as the Psalm indicates, His people
were in a most desolate and afilicted
state. Was the King working for their
salvation? Their misery arose from
their sin, from their rebellion against
His government. At present darkness,
suffering, and sorrow are here ; but they
are here because sin is here. God rules
to bless.

IV. As a plea for His help. Se
the Psalmist uses it on this occasion.

e mentions what God had done for
them in olden time, and pleads that as
their King He would interpose for them
again. As their King,—l. He would
possess sovereign authority, None could
stay His hand or say unto Him, what
doest Thou? He could smite dows
their foes, and set them free and prosper


| HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


them. 2. He would be faithful to His
sovereign obligations. He would keep
His promises and ‘‘respect the covenant,”
as they entreated Him to do (ver. 20).
3. Hs was immutable. He was the
same when this Psalm was written as
when He divided the Red Sea He
changes not. And still He has sove-
reign power to save, and is faithful and
unchangeable; and still we may urge
His sovereignty as a reason why He
should help us, A powerful reason it





MHALM LERTY





is, It appeals to His honour, acknow
ledges His beneficence, &e. This plea
may be used by us,—(1) As communities
Sorming part of His Church. When
any portion of His Church languishes,
or is afflicted, or is in difficulty, it may
plead with the King for help. (2) Ae
individuals on our own behalf, In our
times of perplexity and distress let us
go te our King, and plead with Him for
guidance and deliverance,


Gop us Narors.
(Verses 16, 17.)


The poct was neither, 1. An atheist.
He believed in God. Nor, 2. A pan-
theist. He believed in God as distinct
from nature, Nor, 3. A mere natural-
fst, seeing nothing in nature higher
than order, and law, and development.


He recognised God in nature. He re-
gards God as—
I. The Creator of nature. “Thou


hast prepared the light and the sun.
Thou hast set all the borders of the
earth. Thou hast made summer and
winter.” God being the Creator of
nature, nature is a revelation of God,
and as such should be studied by us.
He is a superficial or partial student
who has not advanced beyond the dis-
covery of laws. Nature reveals the
Divine, 1. Power in her stupendous
forces. 2. Unchangeableness in the re
gularity and order of her revolutions. 3.
Wisdom in her marvellous and beauti-
ful adaptations of means to ends. 4.
Goodness in her ample provisions for
the needs of both man and beast. 5.
Delight in beauty in the countless forms
of loveliness, sublimity, and grandeur
fin earth and sea and aky.


‘These are Thy glorious worka, Parent ad


Gee Thine this universal frame,

Sone st iets fair; Thyself how wondrous

en

Unspeakable, who sitt’st above these heaveng

To us invisible, or dimly seen

In these Thy lowest works; yet these

declare

Thy goodness beyond thought, and power

Divine,” —NMilton.

Ii, The Proprietor of nature. ‘The
day is Thine, the night also is Thine.”
He who created has the most indubi-
table right to His own creations. God
being Proprietor of nature, it follows:
1. That we are but stewards. The
wealthiest man cannot call an acre
absolutely his own. 2. Large posses-
stons involve large responsibilities. We
hold our possessions in trust for Him.
He who holds most has most accounta-
bility. 3. God will call all men to gtve
an account of their stewardship.

III. The Sustainer of nature. The
boundaries of the earth remain. Day
and night, summer and winter, still
alternate as of old. God’s sustenance
of nature should inspire man to trust
in Him.


Toe Surrerina Couron PLeapina THE FAITHFULKXESS AND Honour
oy Gop as AN ArRaumzENT For His InrTERPosiTION.


(Verses 18-23.)


‘She eorrowful complaint of the suffer-
4g people of God passed into a re-
iss_ssal of His former glorious doings
@a their behalf, which was eminently


adapted to inspire and strengthen
their faith, And now that rehearsal
pases into earnest pleading with God.
such ‘leading that has “ eve with


PRALM LITEZIY.








God and prevails” The Psalmist
pleads—

I. The attitude of their enemies to
Wim.

The enemies of Israel were arrayed
in avowed hostility to God, they blas-
phemed His name daily, they rose
tumultuously against Him, therefore
His people call upon Him to plead His
own cause and subdue His foes and
theirs.

1. Thetr enemies blasphemed Hem.
“Remember this, the enemy hath re-
proached, O Lord, and the foolish people
have blasphemed Thy name: remember
how the foolish man reproacheth Thee
daily.” What was done against the
people of God may in an important
sense be said to be a reproach offered to
Him. But more than that is meant
here. These cruel persecutors were also
profane and daring blasphemers, By
oppressing and reviling His people they
offered insult and hurled reproach to
Him. They had also directly and
scandalously blasphemed Him. Yet
God forbore to smite them. No
lightnings strike them. No thunders
alarm them. And His people were
amazed at this, These blasphemers
were foolish people. “The foolish
people have blasphemed Thy name, .. .
the foolish man reproacheth Thee daily.”
Wickedness is essential folly. The
sinner is a great fool. He is so because
(1) He ts wilfully pursuing a course
which is incompatible with his true well-
being. The conditions upon which alone
the noblest capacities and faculties of
his being can be developed he rejects
with scorn, The highest and divinest
joys of life he is a stranger to. (2)
He ts educating himself for a dark and
miserable hereafter. He is qualifying
himself for hell—the hell of sinful habits,
evil and furious passions, accusing and
tormenting memories, and black and
threatening prospects, (3) He ts con-
tending against irresistible forces. Truth,
righteousness, love are against him, and
they are eternal and must conquer. God
is against him. The sinner is a worm
fighting against Almightiness, The
enemies of God, unless they submit to
Him, must be crushed. No sinners are

412


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMS.





greater fools than those who ridicule
religion and reproach the religious. If
religion be true, then the folly of those
who ridicule it is utter, egregious, and
ruinous. If religion be false, then it
becomes the duty of those who have
made the discovery to lead the religious
to trath and reality, and not to treat
them with reproach.

2. Their enemies loudly opposed Him.
“Forget not the voice of Thine enemies;
the tumult of those that rise up against
Thee increaseth continually.” The
wicked were clamorous in their fury
against Him, and for the destruction of
His people, They were making war
against Him with loud and defiant cries,
like the shouts of battle. They were
challenging God to combat.

3. All this is urged by the inspired
poet as a reason why God should artse
in defence of His own cause and that of
His people. These enemies were doing
their utmost to tarnish and sully the
glory of His name; would He submit
to that? They were openly aspersing
His honour; would He not appear in
self-vindication ? Fools were loudly
bidding Him defiance; would He not
smite them with perpetual dumbness#-
If He did not care for the sufferings of
His people, was He not jealous of His
own glory? If He was indifferent as
to their cause, was He also indifferent
as to His own? “Arise, O God, plead
Thine own cause,” and so send us
deliverance from our enemies, for they
are Thy foes. It is well when the suf-
fering Church can plead for deliverance
on the ground that her enemies are also
the enemies of God, and that His
interests and hers are identical. It is
also well when the suffering Church, in
strong assurance of the identity of her
interests and God’s, can wait with con-
fident expectation and calm patience for
His interposition,

IL Their own relation to Him.

1. They were His turtledovea “O
deliver not the soul of thy turtle-dove
unto the multitude.” By comparing
themselves to a turtle-dove they plead
(1) Thetr helplessness, They were weak
and utterly defenceless against the
fierce host of their foes, if His proses:


HOIMWILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





tion were withdrawn. This is a plea
which moves the heart of God. “ When
I am weak, then am I strong.” (2)
The plaintiveness and incessancy of their
ery to Him, “The turtle pours forth
from every garden, grove, and wooded
hill its melancholy yet soothing ditty,
unceasingly from early dawn till sunset.
It is from its plaintive note, doubtless,
that the Psalmist, in pouring forth his
lament to God, compares himself to a
turtle-dove.”—Smith’s Bible Dict. The
ery of God’s defenceless people was
rising constantly and mournfully to
Him for His help. Could He close His
ear to such appeals$ (3) Their con-
stancy to Him in the future. ‘From
its habit of pairing for life, and its
fidelity for its mate, the turtle was a
symbol of purity” and faithfulness of
affection. The euffering people could
not plead their faithfulness to Him in
the past. They had wandered far from
Him, and often. “The turtle and the
crane and the swallow observe the time
of their coming; but My people know
not the judgment of the Lord.” But
henceforth, as His turtle-dove, they will
be constant in their love to Him.
“Ephraim shall say, What have I to
do any more with idols?” Let Him have
mercy upon them, and they would never
forsake Him again.

2. They were the congregation of His
poor. God had manifested frequently
@ special interest in the poor. Those
‘who were specially needy were the
objects of His special care. He was
pre-eminently the Friend of the father-
less and widow, the afflicted and broken
in heart. He had issued particular
commands for the treatment of the poor.
“T command thee, saying, Thou shalt
open thine hand wide unto thy brother,
to thy poor, and to thy needy, in thy
land.” Some of the sternest denuncia-
tions of the prophets were directed
against those who oppressed the poor.
“ God has chosen the poor of this world.”
They plead that they were His poor,
yet they were sorely distressed, and He
seemed es though He had forgotten
them.. Would He forget them for ever ?
They were His poor, they were His
turtle-dove; would He not appear on


PSALM LEXIV,





behalf of His own? Was their night of
oppression to last for ever? Oh, when
would He cause their day to dawn by
coming to their help?

3. They were His covenanted people.
“Have respect unto Thy covenant.”
This is the sublimest and most effectual
plea of all. Circumstances such as they
were now placed in had been described
by God through His servant Moses, and
He had said, “If then their hearts be
humbled, and they then accept of the
punishment of their iniquity ; then will
I remember My covenant with Jacob,
and also My covenant with Isaac, and
also My covenant with Abraham will I
remember; and I will remember the
land” (Lev. xxvi. 33-45). “God is
not a man, that He should lie; neither
the son of man, that He should repent:
hath He said it, and shall He not do
it? or hath He spoken, and shall He
not make it good?” “My covenant
will I not break, nor alter the thing
that is gone out of My lips (Psalm
lxxxix. 30-34). The appeal is made to
the truth and faithfulness of God. “If
we believe not, He abideth faithful:
He cannot deny Himself.” How much
more will He abide faithful if Hie
people, even in darkness and distress,
do believe, and plead His promises, and
urge Him to fulfil them! Certainly, if
their punishment has done its work in
them, if they are truly and sufficiently
humbled and penitent, He will respect
His covenant by delivering them from
their distresses. But, if their sufferings
have not led them to genuine and
thorough repentance of their sins, He
will respect His covenant by withhold-
ing His help until they turn to Him
with all their heart. He cannot forget
His covenant. His faithfulness cannot
fail, ‘Heaven and earth shall pasa
away, but His words shall not paas
away.”

Conciusion.—Here are, at least,
three lessons for suffering Christians or
churches in their pleadings with God.
1, Let us urge His mercy towards us
rather than the claims of our miseries
upon Him. Perhaps our miseries are
all deserved, 2. Let us trust His pro-
mses rather than the force or fervour of

413


WeaLM LEXV.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





our petitions. The heartiest prayer does
not merit any blessing. 3. If we have
broken our share of the covenant, let us
be thankful that He abideth faithful, and
that in His covenant provision ts made.
for the pardon and restoration of trans-
gressors, ‘‘Take with you words, and


turn to the Lord: say unto Him, Take
away all iniquity, and receive us gra-
ciously : so will we render the calves of
our lips. ... I will heal their back-
sliding, I will love them freely: for
Mine anger is turned away from
him.”


Tox Cuurcn a Turtie-Dove.
(Verse 19.)


L The church of God is like a turtle-
dove. 1. Zn innocence and tnoffenssve-
ness. 2. In defencelessness. We have
no defence, but God. Left to our-
selves, we are helpless. 3. Jn purity.
“Purifying your hearts by faith.” 4.
In fidelity of affection. (See Smith’s
Bible Dict., Art. Turtle-Dove.)


Il. The chureh of God is exposed
to enemies.

III. The church of od can suffer
no real harm unless God should de-
liver her to her enemies.

IV. The church of God is dear to
Him, therefore He will not abandon
her. ‘“ Thy turtle-dove.”


Hurts ror a Missionary SERMOX.
(Verse 20.)


I. The state of the heathen world.

1. Darkness. Not without the light
of nature, reason, or conscience; but
without the light of revelation, 2.
Cruelty. Missionary records, and the
narratives of explorers afford sadly nume-
rous and painful illustrations of this.

Il. The covenant’ of God in relation
to the heathen world. That the hea-
then are included in it is manifest from


PSALM


both prophecies and promises of the
Word (Ps. ii. 8, Ixxii. 8-17; Isa. xi. 9,
et al.)

IIL The duty of the church in rela-
tion to the heathen world. 1. To
plead God's covenant on tts behalf. 2, |
To carry out the command of God for —
the fulfilment of the covenant. “Go ye
into all the world, and preach the Gos
pel to every creature.”


LXXY.


INTRODUCTION.


Buperscription.—" To the chiaf Musician, Altaschith :” see introduction to Psalm lvif.
Psalm—a song of Asaph :” see introduction to Psalm lxxiv.


Law |


‘‘There are,” says Perowne, “no clearly marked historical allusions in the Psalm. It
seems, however, not improbable, as has been conjectured by many commentators, that it may
zefer to the time of the Assyrian invasion, either as celebrating, or immediately anticipating
the defeat of Sennacherib. Like Ps. xlvi., it bears some resemblance to the prophecies of


tsaiah uttered at that time.”


It seems to us that in this Psalm we have the ‘‘thank-prayer”


xf the people in confident anticipation of victory over the Assyrians ; and, in the following
Psalm, we have their exultant and grateful praise for the accomplishment of that victory,


IsRAEL’s PRAISE FOR THE PromisED HELP or Gop.
(Verses 1-3.)


In the first verse, the Psalmist speaks
as the mouth-piece of the people of
Yerael ; in the second and third verses,
he represents Jehovah as addressing
them, In these verses we have—


414


I. Heroie anticipation of victory.
The people are threatened by Senna
cherib, His army is near them even
while they chant this prayer-psalm. Yet
they are confident of ultimate victory


' HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





Around them all was darkness, and to
the carnal eye no helper was near, but
to the faith-enlightened eye all around
them was luminous with the near pre-
sence and help of God, They seem to
have attained this brave anticipation of
victory somewhat in this way.

1. Bycontemplating the wondrous works
of God. In former times He had done
great and wondrous things for them.
He had repeatedly caused their foes to
flee before them, utterly discomfited, in
battle. He had done wondrous things
in nature on their behalf. And now in
the day of their distress the great things
which He had done for them pass before
them clearly and impressively, and their
troubled hearts grow calm and strong.

2. By connecting the wondrous works
which He had done for them with promises
of wondrous works which He would yet do
for them. He had made to them declara-
tions of the stability of the throne of
His servant David. He had promised
them victory over their foes. Won-
drous things He had said He would do
for them. They received and inter-
preted His promises in the light of His
former doings for them, and their hearts
grew calm and strong, and buoyant
with hope.

3. By regarding these wondrous works
as signs of the Divine presence. As
the threatened Jews contemplated God’s
wondrous works, they appear to have
felt Him near to them, and, thus re-
alising His presence, they confidently
anticipated their release from danger,
and their restoration to peace and secu-
rity. Mark the strength of their
assurance. The Assyrians have come
against them into their own land ; there
are no outward and visible signs of
deliverance, yet so confident are they
of the help of God that they pour out
their hearts in this thanksgiving Psalm.
Their anticipation was so vivid and
eager as to make their deliverance ap-
pear to them almost an accomplished
thing. It reminds us of our Lord’s
sublime assurance of victory as He
entered into the darkness and anguish of
His last and fiercest strife. He has fore-
warned His disciples of the trials and
persecntions which await them. And


PaaLM LEXV,





now He would encourage them, and He
says, “These things I have spoken unto
you, that in Me ye might have peace.
In the world ye have tribulation ; but
be of good cheer; I have overcome the
world.” There is much of temptation
and grief and terrible battling imme-
diately awaiting Him, yet He regards
the victory as so infallibly sure that it
seems His already. The faith is grand,
heroic, which so trusts God’s promise as
to anticipate the victory, as the poet
does in this Psalm.

Il. Firm ground of confidence. In
the second and third verses we under-
stand the poet as representing God as
the speaker. The translation of the
second verse given in the margin, ap-
pears to give the correct idea, “ When I
shall take a set time I will judge up-
rightly ;” or, “For I shall fix a time
when I shall judge righteously.” Upon
the promise of God to interpose for
them, they base their faith and hope as
upon a sure foundation.

1. In times of the greatest distress He
ts all-sufictent. Such a time is indi-
cated in the third verse, ‘The earth,
in consequence of the success of the
conqueror of the world, is, as it were,
dissolved, sunk back into its ancient
chaotic state ; but the same omnipotence
which at that time brought its dissolu-
tion to an end, shall aid it now.” In
the greatest calamities, such as a dis-
solution of the earth, God is calm and
unmoved in His own conscious suffi-
ciency and sovereignty. When the
earth seems to be reeling into ruin He
calms His people with the assurance,
‘‘T have adjusted the pillars of it ;” and
they know that they are secure. Can
we conceive any distress which He is
unable to cope with and overcome? Is
it possible that any evil or misery can
be so complicated as to baffle infinite
wisdom? Can there be a calamity so
appalling and utter as to triumphantly
defy omnipotence to remove or relieve it?

2. When He interposes He will judge
righteously. He will manifest no unfair
partiality or favouritism, He sitteth
upon the throne judging in righteousness,
This was an encouragement to His
menaced and imperilled peopie. They

415


PSM LXXV,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





thought upon it, and lifted up their
heads, believing that their redemption
drew nigh. Let the oppressed people
of God take heart at the remembrance
of His upright government. The Lord
reigneth to smite down the oppressor
and vindicate the oppressed. He will
deliver the righteous out of all their
troubles, and bring them out into a
wealthy place, Let the enemies of God
take warning. God is supreme. He is
also righteous. You are opposing om-
nipotence, and must be crushed unless
you desist from your insane conduct,
“ Because there is wrath, beware lest
He take thee away with His stroke, and
@ great ransom cannot deliver thee.”

3. He will interpose in due season.
“When I shall take a set time I will
judge uprightly.” “Our God, who
governs the world by His omnipotence
and wisdom, has appointed to all things
a boundary, and has also fixed a time
and an hour for His judgment, and when
this comes, He reveals His judgments,
and no man can hinder them, God
withholds His punishments for a very
long time, but at last it comes with cer-
tainty, and makes no delay.” Let the
much-tried child of Ged learn to wait
patiently and hopefully for His appear-
ing. In infinite wisdom and love He
has fixed the time when the night of
your mourning shall be ended by the
rising of the Sun of Righteousness, with
healing in His wings. He will not
come a moment too soon. He will not
tarry one moment after the due season.
At the best time He will come and judge
uprightly.

Surely there is here the firmest ground
for the strong confidence which the
Psalmist expresses for the people. God
is more than sufficient even to their
great needs, when He interposes He will
judge righteously, and He will interpose
in due season.

III. Devout utterance of praise.
“Unto Thee, O God, do we give thanks,


do we give thanks.” The thanksgiving of
the people was hearty. The Psalm opens
with praise, and before it closes it breaks
forth into praise again. The praise was
emphasised, repeated—“ We give thanks,
we give thanks.” Praise auch as this,
for a promised blessing, in a special
manner honours God by the calm, strong
trust in His word which it implies. It
rises as an acceptable offering unto Him.
Such praise as this also blesses those
who offer it. It is indeed a means of
grace unto them. By means of it their
faith is yet more increased. Their soul
is calmed, enriched, and exalted into
communion with God.

‘¢ When gratitude o’erflows the swelling heart,
And breathes in free and uncorrupted praine '
For benefits received: propitious Heaven
Takes such acknowledgment as fragrant

incense,
And doubles all its blessings.”
—George Lillo,

ConoLusion.—l. Jn times of the
greatest calamity let us trust in the Lord,
and not be afraid. He has adjusted
the pillars of the earth, “ God is our re-
fuge and strength, a very present help in
trouble. Therefore will not we fear,” dc.

2. Let us learn to recognise God in
His works, both tn nature and tn grace.
Let us pray that our eyes may be opened
to see Him, and our ears to catch the
inspiring accents of His voice.

3. Let us culiwvate a grateful spirit.
“Nothing more detestable,” said Au-
sonius, “does the earth produce than an
ungrateful man,”

‘*T hate ingratitude more in a man
Than lying, vainness, babbling, drunkenneas,
Or any taint of vice, whose strong corruption
Inhabits our frail blood.” —Shakespeare,

Gratitude is well pleasing to God. It

also enriches man. The ungrateful man

has his blessings in his hand only ; the
grateful man has them in his heart and
hand. He is thus “twice blessed.”

Let our gratitude rise to God in psalms

of praise, and express itself amongst

men in kindly deeds,


Gop’s Nzarness to His Proriz a Reason FoR Praisina How
(Verse 1.)


I. There are times when God speci-
wlly manifests Himself to His people.
416


“Thy name” = Thyself, God’s wondrous
works led the Psalmist to feel that Gud


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMS.


PSALM LXXV.





Himself was near. God specially mani-
fests Himself to His people—

1. In deltverances wrought for them.
Cite examples.

2. In judgments inflicted upon them.
Cite examples. It is our shame that
we sometimes fail to see God in the
blessings which He bestows upon us,
He must needs visit us in judgment ere
we feel Him near.

3. In revivals of His work. What
quickening of spiritual life! What in-
crease of spiritual activities! What
gracious conversions! What restora-
tions of backsliders !

‘«Thy noblest wonders here we view,

In souls renewed and sins forgiven.”
God is near to many objectively, yet not
subjectively. He is near to them, yet
they do not feel Him near. Let. His
wondrous works in nature, in providence,
and in the human soul be to us a sign,
an indication, of His own presence.

II. These manifestations should
awaken the praise of His people.


“Unto Thee, O God, do we give thanks,
do we give,” &e. Our thanksgiving,
like that of the people in this Psalm,
should be,—l. Repeated. “We give
thanks, we give thanks.” ‘“Stinted
gratitude is ingratitude. For infinite
goodness there should be measureless
thanks.” 2. Hearty. God accepts our
praise only as it proceeds from the heart.
3. Practical, The people by the poet
express their resolve to oppose evil, and
favour righteousness. We should praise
God “not only with our lips, but in
our lives ; by giving up ourselves to His
service and by walking before Him in
holiness and righteousness all our days.”

Let us cultivate fervent gratitude to
God. Gratitude is the duty of every
one. Let us esteem it a privilege.
“What shall I render unto the Lord?”
&c. “Bless the Lord, O my soul,” &e.
““ While I live will I praise the Lord.”
&e.


‘6 We'll praise Him for all that is past,
And trust Him for all that’s to come.”


Asprors oF THE DivinE GOVERNMENT,
(Verses 4-8.)


In these verses the Poet speaks as the
mouth-piece of the people. “ According
to some expositors, the address of God
is still continued in this verse ; according
to others in verse fifth ; and according to
others even in verse sixth. But verse
seventh, where God is spoken of in the
third person, hangs together with verse
sixth by ‘ for,’ and this verse again with
verse five by ‘for,’ and verses four and
five cannot be disjoined from each
other.” Moreover, “the Selah stands
at the end of the preceding verse, and the
expression, ‘I say,’ at the beginning of
this one, indicates a change of speaker.”
—Hengstenberg.

The Divine government is here re-
garded—

L Asarebuke to wicked oppressors.

1. The wicked are admonished of the
folly of sin. “I said unto the fools,
Deal not foolishly.” Sin is folly, and he
who acts wickedly “deals foolishly.”
Sin is irrational, All sound reasoning
is opposed to moral evil. Conscience

2D


condemns it as wrong. Reason pro
nounces it to be folly. The laws of God
in nature all antagonise it. The law of
God as revealed in His Word exhibits it
as moral insanity. Sin is self-injury.
The evil-doer is working his own ruin ;
he is destroying himself. In this world
he is foregoing the most exquisite and
exalting joys for the unsatisfying plea-
sures of sin. In the world to come
there is for him “ a fearful looking for.”
“He that pursueth evil pursueth it to
his own death.” Sinner, “Do thyself
no harm,” . . . “deal not foolishly.”

3. The proud are counselled to shun
insolence. ‘‘I said unto the wicked,
Lift not up the horn. Lift not up,” &.
The horn was a symbol of power. And
the foes of Israel are here exhorted not
to boast insolently of their power. Pride
of power is a most absurd thing. In
some respects, how insignificant is the
greatest of men! how weak the most
powerful of men! God is supreme.
With what infinite ease can He bafile

417


PUALM LEXY,


the most cunningly devised schemes of
man! And the strength of the mightiest
is utter weakness before Him.

Haughtiness and arrogance ill-become
any creature. To boast of power is @
sure sign of weakness, and usually her-
alds a great fall. “Pride goeth before
destruction, and a haughty spirit before
a fall.” It was pride that led to the
expulsion of Lucifer from heaven, Pride
ruined King Saul. Pride brought
Haman to the gallows. Pride, “lifting
up of the horn, and speaking with a stiff
neck,” brought Nebuchadnezzar from
his throne, expelled him from his palace,
drove him from human society, and sent
him to herd with the beasts of the field.
The fact of the supremacy of the Divine
government should silence all proud
boasters.

If. As an encouragement to the
righteous. “For lifting up,” te, de-
liverance from trouble, safety, victory,
“cometh neither from the east, nor
from the west, nor from the south,” dc.

1. There are times of need when all
human aids are unavailing. Israel was
experiencing such a time. They looked
eastward, westward, southward, and
could see no signs of deliverance. From
the north their adversary approached.
There was no help for them in man, If
they must look to an arm of flesh for
support, then their case seems hopeless,
Reliance upon any human assistance is
utterly vain. Their case is too extreme
to be met by any efforts of their own,
or by any alliances which they might
form,

Their case is surely a picture of what
sometimes happens to the good man.
From one quarter the trouble comes,
and from all other quarters of the earth
no help can reach him, The experience
of each man will afford examples of such
times—times when human helpers all
fail, when human resources are utterly
inadequate to our need, when we look
around us for encouragement or hope,
but look in vain. May it not be that
such seasons of helplessness, and extreme
need, and human inability are of Divine
arrangement? They certainly have the
divinest uses. They tend to teach us
our own helplessness, and the vanity of

#18


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





all human beings as objects of trust, and
to lead us to place our hope in God.

2. At such times consideration of the
Divine government inspires the soul to
hope in God. “God is the judge: He
putteth down one, and setteth up
another.” He ordereth human affairs.
“Kingdoms shift about like clouds,
obedient to His breath.” And He is
ever on the side of truth and righteous-
ness. So the threatened people of Israel
turned confidently to Him when all
other helpers failed, and all other re-
sources were inadequate to their need,
He could put down their foes, as He
had done in past times. He could lift
them up into safety and triumph. He
could defend their cause, and carry it to
glorious victory. And, therefore, they
lifted up their hearts and voices in glad
thanksgivings to Him. He is ever the
hope of His people. He “turneth the
shadow of death into the morning.” In
our extremity, when our strength is all
spent, and “‘the collied night ” surrounds
us, and the storm is loud and strong,
and progress is impossible to us, He
cometh to us walking on the boisterous
and threatening waves, hushes the thun-
derous clamours into peace, quells our
craven fears, and brings us to the desired
haven. Courage, servant of God! ‘‘The
Lord reigneth.”

ItI As an assurance of the punish-
ment of the wicked. “For in the
hand of the Lord there is a cup, and the
wine is red, it is full of mixture,” &c.

1. The punishment of the wicked ts
from God. The cup is in His hand.
There is a grave tendency in our time
to a dangerous sentimentalism which
represents God as pitiful, compassionate,
and forgiving, and ignores His holiness
and justice. God is merciful; He is
also righteous. He pardons the penitent ;
He also punishes the persistently im-
penitent. There is wrath in God—
not a stormy, passionate, revengeful
feeling, as it too often is in man; buta
calm, holy, fixed determination to punish
those who scorn His reproofs, trample
under foot His laws, and reject His
salvation. God must wage incessant
war against evil. His love burns with
unquenchable fire against sin His laws


n . HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM LXX¥,





are all arrayed against it in stern an-
tagonism. Wisely and benevolently He
has so ordered His universe that penalty
shall ever follow transgression, And if
men persist in iniquity, then iniquity
will be their ruin.

2. The punishment of the wicked ts
severe. The cup is “full of mixture,”
an allusion to the custom of mixing
roots and spices with the wine to increase
its intoxicating power. What a cup is
that which is being prepared for the
wicked! What blighted hopes, what
lost opportunities, what ever-accusing
memories, what bitter self-reproaches,
what unutterable anguish! Oh! the
unfathomable depths of misery involved
in the words—“ Hell fire: where their
worm dieth not, and the fire is not
quenched.” They shall drain this cup
to the very “dregs.” The bitter draught
cannot be evaded. No part of it may
be left undrank. There is no escape
from the misery ; for the misery is within
the guilty breast,

‘«Me miserable! which way shall I flee }

Where’er I am is hell ; myself am hell!”

3. The punishment of the wicked ts
without exception. “ All the wicked.”
“There is no respect of persons with
God.” He is just in His dealings with


all men. Favouritism or partiality is
unknown to Him. The finally impeni-
tent, the irreciaimably wicked, of all
lands and of all ages, “shall drink of the
wine of the wrath of God.” “God will
render to every man according to his
deeds: ... unto them that are con-
tentious, and do not obey the truth, but
obey unrighteousness, indignation and
wrath, tribulation and anguish, upon
every soul of man that doeth evil, of the
Jew first, and also of the Gentile.”

Conciusion.—1l. Warning to the
wicked, ‘If man will contend with
God, he cannot answer Him one of a
thousand, He is wise in heart and
mighty in strength: who hath hardened
himself against Him, and hath pros-
pered?” 2. Counsel to the wicked.
‘Repent, and turn from all your trans-
gressions; so iniquity shall not be your
ruin.” 3. Admonition to those in high
stations. Realise your dependence.
“The most High ruleth in the kingdom
of men, and giveth it to whomsoever
He will.” 4. Encouragement for the
oppressed righteous. “Light is sown
for the righteous, and gladness for the
upright in heart.” “Though I walk in
the midst of trouble, Thou wilt revive
me.”


A Mover or Devout PRAIsE,
(Verses 9, 10.)


The Poet still speaks as the mouth-
piece of all the people of Israel, And,
feeling confident of deliverance, declares
their resolution to praise God for ever,
to suppress the wicked, and to exalt the
righteous. The praise resolved upon
here is worthy of our imitation, inas-
much as it—

I. Loses sight of self in devout
admiration of the character and
doings of God.

1. He will praise God for His doings.
He resolves to declare for ever the
wondrous works of God, God had
done great things for them, they were
confident that He would again do great
things for them, and were determined
to “praise the Lord, declare His doings
among the people, and make mention


that His name is exalted.” God has
done great things for us, whereof we
are glad. Shall not we praise Him for
His mighty acts? ‘‘Come and hear,
all ye that fear God, and I will declare
what He hath done for my soul.” ‘“ He
inclined unto me, and heard my ery.
He brought me up also out of an
horrible pit, out of the miry clay,” é&c.
Considering what God has done for us,
especially in giving to us Christ and
His salvation, if we were not to praise
Him, surely the very stones would cry
out, The great things He has done for
us were (1) Undeserved by us. ‘“ While
we were yet siuners Christ died for us.”
(2) Unsought by us. We did not seek
God, but He sought us by Jesus Christ.
(3) Freely and heartily eae es Ged


BALM LIX.





out of His own sovereign love. “ Bless
the Lord, O my soul.”

2. He will prawse God for His fatth-
fulness. ‘1 will sing praises to the
God of Jacob.”
covenant with Jacob, and that covenant
He had kept. Through all the vicis-
situdes of their history, from the time
of their father Jacob until the time
when this Psalm was sung, God had
never abandoned them. They had had
their seasons of darkness and trial, but
the Lord was their Friend and God in
those seasons, though they saw Him
not. They praise the God of their
fathers, for His faithfulness. ‘“ For
the Lord will not cast off His people,
neither will He forsake His inheritance,”
We, too, have found Him a covenant-
keeping God. We have proved that
His promises are reliable, that He ever
abideth faithful. With Him there is
“no variableness, neither shadow of
turning.” Shall we not praise Him as
we recollect that we have never trusted
Him in vain? and that He is the un-
failing rock of our heart?

3. He will praise God “for ever.”
Not simply while His gracious inter-
positions are recent, but for ever. Con-
stant mercies should awaken constant
gratitude, and constant gratitude will
seek to express itself constantly in some
form of praise. In some of the old
monasteries it was a rule that the
chanting of praise should never be
interrupted, and thet one choir of
monks should relieve another in the
sacred service. Let us learn a lesson
from this. ‘Let not thy praises be
transient—a fit of music, and then the
instrument hung by the wall till another
gaudy day of some remarkable provi-
dence makes thee take it down. God
comes not guest-wise to His saints’
house, but to dwell with them. David
took this up for a life-work: ‘As long
as I live, I will praise Thee.’ ”

II. Evinces its reality by resolving
to imitate Him, Anticipating their
“lifting up” the people resolve, through
the grace of God and in the strength


420


God had entered into.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALHS.


which He grants them, to cut off all the
horns of the wicked, and to exalt the
horns of the righteous. When they
were restored to peace and security
they would use their power in pat
down wickedness, and upholding an
honouring the righteous. These are
the very things which, by anticipation,
they have beheld God doing, and in
this Psalm have praised Him for doing.
They resolve that they will imitate Him
in these things. It has been well ‘said
that, ‘Imitation is the sincerest praise.”
This praise they here offer to God. Do
we know by personal experience this
praise? Our praise of the excellences
of others is a very hollow affair unless
we also cultivate those excellences, We:
praise God for His “unspeakable Gift ;”
are we imitating His pure generosity ?
We praise Jesus Christ for His great
self-sacrifice for us; are we denying
ourselves in His spirit that others might
be benefited? We bless God for the
Gospel; are we exemplifying the spirit
of the Gospel? A certain Dr. Whitaker,
on reading the fifth chapter of Matthew,
brake out, saying, “Hither this is not
the Gospel, or we are not of the Gospel.”
And is it not to be feared that the
spirit of the Gospel for which men
praise God, and the spirit of their
lives, are often widely different! Let us
evince the sincerity of our praise to
God by imitating Him in our spirit
and life. Let us admire Him, com-
mune with Him, adore Him, until we
are transformed into the same image,
Let us, like the Psalmist, cultivate
such thoroughness and fervency of praise
that we shall lose sight of everything
but God and Hia glory. May God
so fill the horizon of the soul that we
may be filled with admiration and praise
of Him.


6*God! God! God!
Thou fill’st our eyes
As were the skies
One burning, boundless sun g
While creature mind,
In path confined,
Passeth a spot thereon.
God! God! God !"—P, J. Bailey,


’ HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS,





POALM LXXVL


PSALM LXXVL


INTRODUCTION.


—“ To the chief Musician on Neginoth.” See Introduction to Psalm liv.


Superscription
A Psalm—a Song of Asaph.


(See notes on the authorship of Psalm Ixxiv.) The supers


scription may be thus paraphrased—A Psalm, a Song of Asaph, to be delivered to the director
of music, that he may arrange for its performance with the accompaniment of stringed instru-


ments.


Oceasion.—There appear to us very good reasons for regarding the Psalm as a celebration
of Isracl’s victory over theA ssyrians, The preceding Psalm sang the heroic anticipation of
triumph, this one the uxultant realisation of triumph.


Gop THE CHAMPION oF THE Goop,


The victorious army of Sennacherib is
encamped before Jerusalem threatening
to besiege it unless Hezekiah will sub-
mit to them, and admit them into the
city. The invading army was very
numerous and powerful, and was em-
boldened by many and signal victories,
In his extremity Hezekiah is strength-
ened by the word of the Lord, by the
mouth of Isaiah the prophet, and he
refuses to surrender to the generals of
Sennacherib, Isaiah declared, that “the
virgin, the daughter of Zion, despised
and laughed to scorn” the invaders.
According to His promise, God inter-
posed on behalf of His people, “and on
the first night of the siege, a hundred
fourscore and five thousand, with their
captains and generals, were destroyed.”
(Vide 2 Chron, xxxii.; Isa xxxvii. ;
Josephus Antig. x. 1.)

We may profitably regard this chapter
of ancient history as an illustration of
God’s Championship of His people. It
is common to speak of human life upon
earth as a battle. To every man who
is in any degree acquainted with the
meaning and importance of life there
are difficulties and struggles to be en-
countered. There is disorder to be
attacked, subdued, made orderly and
rhythmic. There are ignorance, stu-
pidity, brutality, to be encountered and
vanquished by intelligence, wisdom, and
manliness. The truly good man, he
who, in the strength of God, is trying
to live holily, usefully, and bravely,
especially finds life a battle. To him
there are not only the manifest enemies
of ignorance, vice, and crime, but subtle,


spiritual foes within him and around
him. His own soul is beleaguered
by enemies. The cause of God in the
world, too, is attacked by foes, as was
Jerusalem by the Assyrian hosts, We
are inadequate to contend with forces so
numerous and powerful. Yet ‘there
be more with us than with him: with
him is an arm of flesh; but with us is
the Lord our God to help us, and to
fight our battles.”

I. The enemies of the good are
many and mighty. The Assyrian
army was vast and powerful, and
had been very victorious, The Pxal-
mist speaks of them as “the stout-
hearted,” . . . “the men of might,”
They illustrate the enemies of the people
of God. ‘ Be strong in the Lord, and
in the power of His might, Put on the
whole armour of God,” &c, (Eph. vi.
10-13). Good men have to contend
with Satan. He is the great leader of
the antagonism against God and good-
ness. He strives for his own diabolical
mastery, for the sovereiynty of darkness
and evil. In our day the great adver-
sary of God and man seeks to compass
his diabolic ends not so much by force
as by fraud. The time was when the
good had to dread the “roaring lion,
going about seeking whom he may de-
vour.” At present, he is far more
dangerous when he “is transformed into
an angel of light.” He works with a
shrewd cunning, a subtle diplomacy, and
by means of politic disguises. He can
assume the self-possession of a man of
the world, or the manners of a gentle-
man, He can speak the language of

421


PSALM LXXVE,





accomplished scholarship, or of deep
and patient thought. Or, he can assume
the garb of religion, and speak the lan-
guage of piety. Indirectly and by means
of artful disguises he seeks to accomplish
his fiendish purpose, the utter deprava-
tion and ruin of souls. In all scenes
and at all times he steadily works to
accomplish his object. By many and
varied means he is suggesting evil to
the soul, and stimulating and impelling
the soul under false pretences to follow
that evil. A man is lured to drunken-
ness under the pretence of sociality and
good companionship. Another is snared
into the most miserable avarice under
the guise of making provision for future
emergencies, or of practising a proper
economy. In this indirectness and
subtlety of method lie the great strength
of the devil ; and by reason of these his
attacks are fraught with great peril to
men. Moreover, in his great warfare
against the good, Satan has many allies.
From the revelations of the Bible, it is
clear to us that there are many angelic
helpers of the good, and that there are
many fallen angels who, under their
great leader, oppose the good. There are
ranks and orders of these fallen angels—
“principalities, powers, the rulers of the
darkness of this world, spiritual hosts
of wickedness,”

These beings exert much influence in
suggesting evil to the mind and heart,
and in impelling the mind and heart to
evil. He is but a shallow thinker that
ridicules the idea of malign spiritual in-
fluences acting upon us; and has studied
with but little effect either the expe-
riences of his own heart or the pheno-
mena of mind in general. Assuredly


** There are more things in heaven and earth
Than are dreamt of in his philosophy.”


Satan has allies also in human society.
The good have to contend against “ the
world” as well as against the devil, or
against the devil as he works by human
agency. ‘There are men of splendid but
impure imagination who are corrupting
souls by sensuous literature, There are
others of education and mental power who
are producing works which tend to un-
settle men’s faith not only in human
423


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





creeds, but in Divine revelation, and even
in the reality of truth, and righteousness,
and love. Music, and many of the so-
called refinements and arts of life are,
to a great extent, made to minister to
the senses rather than to the soul, te
the appetites rather than to the aspira-
tions of man’s nature. And the souls
of many seem steeped in worldliness.
At the shrine of Mammon immense mul-
titudes are ever bowing. Men are sac-
rificing all mental culture and progress
for gold, sacrificing principle for gold,
sometimes sacrificing their soul for gold.
Parents are willing to immolate their
children upon the altar of Mammon, and
sacrifice their daughters for gold. It is
not without reason that we pray for de-
liverance from the snares and seductions
of “the world,” for they are full of
peril, and they beset all classes and con-
ditions of men. The good have also to
contend against enemtes within themselves,
There are tendencies to evil in our own
nature. The completeness of our moral
power is broken. “The flesh lusteth
against the spirit.” Passion is fre-
quently arrayed against principle. In-
clination and conscience are often at
variance. “To will is present with me ;-
but how to perform that which is good
I find not.” There is that in us which
responds to temptation, and gives to
temptation its power ; that in us which
is attracted by evil in certain of its
forms as steel is drawn by the magnet.
Thus some of the severest struggles are
fought in the arena of human souls,
Here, then, are the enemies against
which we have to battle, “the world,
the flesh, and the devil ;” evil within us,
and evil around us; ignorance, super-
stition, oppression, bigotry, unbelief, vice,
crime, pain, disease, misery, and death.
“O our God, we have no might against
this great company that cometh against
us, neither know we what to do; but
our eyes are upon Thee,”

I. The Ohampion of the good is
greater than all their enemies. The
Psalmist represents God as completely
vanquishing the foes of Israel. In one
night one hundred and eighty-five thou-
sand of the Assyrian army were slain.
“When God srose te judgment te


' HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





save” His people, the enemy was speedily
and utterly discomfited,

1. He tssues forth to batile from Zion.
Zion is represented as the dwelling-place
of God. ‘In Judah is God known:
His name is great in Israel: in Salem
also is His tabernacle, and His dwelling-
place in Zion.” ‘ The Lord hath chosen
Zion ; He hath desired it for His habita-
tion. This is my rest for ever: here
will I dwell; for I have desired it,”
Sennacherib had virtually challenged
Jehovah to combat. He sent to the
Jews, saying, “ No god of any nation or
kingdom was able to deliver his people
out of mine hand, and out of the hand
of my fathers; how much less shall
your God deliver you out of mine
hand?” The contest was “ between
the gods as well as the military forces
of the two kingdoms.” The presump-
tuous monarch begins to besiege the
holy city. He will capture the very
dwelling-place of the Lord God of
Sabaoth. God accepts the challenge,
and in the silence of the night He
calmly goes forth, and with the breath
of His nostrils He slays His foes, ‘‘ The
stout-hearted are spoiled, they have slept
their sleep; and none of the men of
might have found their hands.” And
the proud boaster hastily retreats, to
meet with a speedy and ignominious
death. Not in any local Zion does God
now manifest His glory. Jesus Christ
is the true Shekinah, “‘ the brightness of
His glory, and the express image of His
person.” God goes forth in Him to
combat His foes. The great contro-
versies of Christendom are concerning
Him. The opposition to religion is to
@ great extent directed against Him,
His spirit and principles, His authority
to legislate for human society, His right
to reign over men, His claim of God-
hood, these are combated by men to-day.
All the opposition to which His disciples
are subjected He regards as directed
against Himself. Their foes He holds
to be His foes. He is the great anta-
gonist of all evil. By His Spirit and
His Church He wages war against sin,
suffering, and death. In proportion as
His people are animated by His Spirit
and live in His life are they victorious


PALM LXXVI.


in conflict. God in Christ shall conquer
all our foes, The sublime wisdom of
His teaching, the Divine beauty of His
life, the heart-moving, Godlike power
of His death shall subdue the world unto
Him, “At the name of Jesus every
knee shall bow,” &e.

2. He tssues forth to complete victory.
When God entered the lists the vast and
valiant hosts of Sennacherib were swept
into the silent sleep of death in a
moment. ‘‘ There brake He the arrows
of the bow, the shield, and the sword,
and the battle,” &e.


« Like the leaves of the forest when summer


ia green,
That host with their banners at sunset were
seen ;

Like the leaves of the forest when autumn

hath blown,

That host on the morrow lay wither’d and

strown.”

God not only got to Himself a com-
plete victory, but His glory was in-
creased amongst His people and amongst
the heathen by reason of the wrath of
His enemies. He made the wrath of
man to praise Him. ‘The proud boast-
ing of Sennacherib and the attack of his
mighty hosts called forth a conspicuous
display of the power and majesty of
God. His people saw it, and celebrated
His praises, The heathen saw it, and
“brought gifts unto the Lord to Jeru-
salem, and presents to Hezekiah, king of
Judah; so that He was magnified in the
sight of all nations.” Thus the Lord
got Him honour upon Sennacherib,
This is an illustration of the victory
which He will achieve over all His foes,
There are times when we stand dismayed
before our enemies. The evils of our
own hearts are more than a match for
us. And, when we think of the foes
that are in the world, and of the vast
influence of the great leader of the evil
forces, we feel how utterly inadequate
we are to cope with such tremendous
powers. But the Captain of our salva-
tion is more than sufficient for us. He
will turn the counsel of the enemies of
His people to their own confusion. He
will give us the victory over our foes.
“The God of peace shall bruise Satan
under thy feet shortly.” ‘We are more
than conquerors through Him that hath

423


PSALM LXXVI.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS





loved us.” He will enable us to draw
from our conflicts a strength and cour-
age, a hatred of evil, and an enthusiasm
for goodness which we could not other-
wise have obtained. He will continue
the conflict until He is victorious over
every foe. He will even overrule the
dark and malicious designs and workings
of Satan and his allies for the promotion
of His glory. After all the devil is but
the vassal of the Lord our God. Un-
wittingly he is being used to promote
the enthronement of the true and good.
“ Hallelujah, for the Lord God omni-
potent reigneth.”

3. He achieves complete victory with
the utmost ease. Whatever the “ angel,”
messenger, which the Lord sent against
the Assyrian host was, it is clear that
the victory was achieved with the utmost
ease. ‘Who can stand in Thy sight
when once Thou art angry ?”

‘* For the angel of death spread his wings on
the blast,

And breathed in the face of the foe as he

passed ;

And the eyes of the sleepers wax’d deadly

and chill,


And their hearts but once heav’d, and for
ever grew still,”


God rebukes His foes, and they are
vanquished, Soin the end He will
subdue His foes with the most consum-
“mate ease. The foes of the good exist
and are active, not because He is unable
to subdue them, but because for wise
and benevolent purposes He sees fit to
allow them to resist Him and oppose
His cause. But when He arises to
judgment they will “melt like snow in
His glance.” Wherefore let the people
of God take courage and exult in their
Champion.

III. The Champion of the good
should be duly honoured.

1, Hts people should pay their vows
to Him. ‘‘Vow, and pay unto the
Lord your God all ye who are round
about Him.” The latter clause makes
it clear that this refers to His people.
The twelve tribes used to pitch round
about the tabernacle. And Jehovah
was said to dwell in the midst of them,
The vows which they had made to Him
in the time of their danger and fear,
they are exhorted te pay to Him now

424


that deliverance has been wrought for
them. In the conflicts of life men
frequently vow that if deliverance from
trouble, or extrication from difficulty,
or victory over enemies be granted to
them, they will consecrate themselves or
their possessions more fully to God.
But these vows are frequently forgotten
when the peril is past. Thy vows are
registered in heaven by the faithful
God. Pay them. With shameful in-
gratitude thou hast far too long left
them unpaid, pay them at once.

2. Offerings of devotion should 6e
made to Him. ‘Bring presents unto
Him that ought to be feared.” After
the defeat of Sennacherib “many brought
gifts unto the Lord to Jerusalem,” and
“He was magnified in the sight of all
nations.” God is worthy to receive the
homage of all peoples. The day ig
coming when men shall esteem it a high
privilege and pleasure to bring their
richest treasures as an offering to Him,

Let us bring presents to Him who
fighteth for us in all our battles, Man
of wealth, dedicate thy possessions to
Him. Man of genius, lay thy genius
on the altar of Divine consecration. Let
us each give to Him of our best and
richest treasures.

3. The glory of victory should be as-
cribed to Himalone. In the case of the
Assyrian hosts He alone encountered
and vanquished them. ‘O sing unto
the Lord a new song; for He hath done
marvellous things: His right hand, and
His holy arm, hath gotten Him the
victory.” And the praise and honour
were all ascribed to Him. In all the
victories of His people He is the real
Conqueror. If we come out of tempta-
tion victorious, it is because of the help
of His grace. If in any measure we
have been successful in our conflict with
ignorance and sin and misery, we have
been so by the power of His might,
“Blessed be the Lord my rock, who
teacheth my hands to war, and my
dngers to fight.”


“He makes the glorious victory mine,
And His shall be the prains, te


Conciusion.—1. Let the Church of
God remember its obligation. “Be





strong in the Lord, and in the power
ef His might,” &c. (Eph. vi. 10-18),
2. Let the Church of God remember


‘HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





PALM LEXVE.


tts Champion. “Through God we shall
do valiantly ; for He shall tread down


our enemies,”





Gop tae Savioug or tHe Merk.
(Verse 9.)


Consider—

I. The character of the people of
God. ‘The meek.” “A pious, patient
one.” —Fuerst’s Lex.

1. Meekness 1s not mere easiness of dis-
position, or apathy. Absence of sensi-
bility, whether physical, mental, or moral,
is neither virtuous nor blessed.

2. Meekness ts not cowardice or weak-
sess, The truly meck man is as brave
as he is calm, as courageous as he is
patient.

3. Meekness has a God-ward and a
man-ward aspect. (1) Its attitude to-
wards God ts that of cheerful acquiescence
tn the appointments of His will and the
arrangements of Hts providence. It does
not criticise, or complain, or murmur
because of His doings, but is humble
and quiet before Him. (2) Towards
man, meckness manifests itself im pa-


tiently bearing with the defects and
weaknesses of others, in willingness to
endure insult and injury rather than
do wrong, and in charitably adopting the
most favourable construction on the action
or course of conduct of any one, when
two constructions are admissible. Meek-
ness is “ not overcome of evil, but over-
comes evil with good.”

II. The peril of the people of God.
They need some one “to save” them. 1.
They have enemies. 2. These enemice
are many and strong. 3. They are
tnadequate to cope with these enemies.

III. The Deliverer of the people of
God. God is their vindicator and Sav-
iour. 1. He punishes the proud oppres-
sor. 2. He saves the oppressed meek.
“For the oppression of the poor, for
the sighing of the needy, now will I
arise, saith the Lord.”


Gop GLoRIFIED THROUGH Man’s WRaTH.
(Verse 10.)


Our text gives a special aspect of
Divine Providence. Amid the confusion
and suffering and sin of the present
God reigns, so that the issue is His
highest glory. The world has not been
deserted by its Maker, although the
mode of His continuous presence and
working ts inexplicable. But how won-
derful that man’s freedom and responsi-
bility should be inviolate, while his
resistance is overcome, the fierce and
swelling tide of his passions controlled,
and the character of God illustrated and


glorified. God’s spiritual Providence is


an organ for bringing forth the largest
possible amount of happiness and good,
and for filling the universe with pure
and lasting glory. From the first the
world has been afflicted with sufferings
and tumults, and the crimes which war


against private and publie good. There


are times of social and political earth-
quake, when the abyss opens at our feet.
But for the Divine Providence these
phenomena must have been more dis-
tressing and terrific. Through God’s
continuous and universal presence and
acting, the misery springing from the
sin and crime of men is immeasurably
lessened. With this conviction, we
gratefully say, “Surely the wrath of
man shall praise Thee,” &c.

I, The wrath of man not unfre-
quently defeats its own aims and ac-
complishes the Divine purpose. The
cruel envy of Joseph’s brothers, Pha-
raoh’s crafty policy of imposing heavier
and more grievous burdens on the Is-
raclites, Haman’s ambition and his en-
mity against Mordecai, illustrate this.
Opposite and conflicting interests, as it
seems to us, are so balanced, violence is

425


PSALM LXXVI.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





zo checked, “vaulting ambition” so
“overleaps itself,” that man’s wrath
brings into greater clearness and glory


the Divine power and wisdom and


goodness.

II. The wrath of man is sometimes
the instrument of the Divine will
Generally our sins become our scourge.
Our “own wickedness corrects” us, &.
But specially. The sole object of the
Babylonian monarch was the gratifica-
tion of his ambition by conquest and
spoil, yet he was “the rod” of God
(Isa, x. 5-7). This is frequently exem-
plified in the conduct of the first Na
poleon—in our Chinese wars, indefen-
sible, yet introducing the Gospel—in
the Russian war, so unnecessary and so
barren in anticipated results, yet abolish-
ing serfdom, and preparixg for the
emancipation of religion from a bigotry
as narrow and fierce as that of Rome—
in the Indian Mutiny, which roused the
Church to acknowledge India’s claim on
her prayers and efforts—in the terrible
conflict that raged in America, issuing
in the freedom of the slave, and, despite
appearances, in a higher and purer pub-
lic opinion and morality—in the recent
Franco-German war, tending to widen
civil and religious liberty, as it limits
and weakens the priestly power, every-
where and always the enemy of popular
rights and of a free Gospel. With no
fear of God, in the simple pursuit of
their own ends, men are the instruments
of the Divine Providence.

TIT. Man in his wrath accomplishes
the Divine will when setting himself
to resist and frustrate it. The design
of God is fulfilled by direct attempts to
defeat it (Acts iv. 27 and 28, with iv.


10 and 11.) Persecution defeats itself.
“ Noble lives crowned by heroic deaths *
are the best arguments and defences of
any church. The assaults of infidelity
result in the more triumphant vindica-
tion of the faith, Hume prophesied
that Christianity could not survive the
nineteenth century. Voltaire impiously
said that one wise man would undo
what twelve fools had accomplished.
Julian will exterminate the faith; but
he and all exclaim—‘ O Galilean ! Thou
hast conquered.” “Surely the wrath of
man shall praise Thee.”

God rules in wisdom, righteousness,
and love. The end of His rule, the
triumph of purity and truth, The way:
to the end is not traceable by us; but
the fact, the end ig sure,

Courage, then. We are not the sport
of fortune. It is not a great drama of
chance which is now acted. A hand
unseen is turning all to a great end, and
blessed as great—the glory of God in
the triumph of truth and holiness and
love, and thus the complete and ever-
lasting blessedness of man.

For God ts not a despot, careless at
what cost His purposes are realised, if -
only He triumph. He ts a wise and
beneficent Ruler ; or rather a holy and
wise and loving Father, employing His
resources for the good of all His chil-
dren, patient though they are rebellious
and foolish, and only at last, if at last,
banishing from the home they have for-
saken and despised the obstinately per-
verse. Because God is so wise and
holy and gracious, and withal so mighty,
how hazardous to resist His will or de


spise His grace !—W. Y., B. A.


Vows MADE om TROUBLE.


(Verse


“Vow and pay unto the Lord your
God, all ye who are round about Him.”
“ Round about Him. A description of
His people, as the twelve tribes pitched
round about the tabernacle, and the four
and twenty elders were round about
God’s throne.” — Ainsworth.

L ane tendency of man to

2


11.)


make religious vows in times of danger
and trouble. The Jews did so when
the Assyrians were before Jerusalem.
Men are very prone to do so.

1. This ts sometimes evil, because it
indicates a disposition to bargain with
God. To vow that we will serve God
on condstion that He will deliver or help


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





ss is wrong. He hag an absolute claim
upon our possessions and upon ourselves.
See the meanness and selfishness of
Jacob as manifested in his vow at
Bethel (Gen, xxviii. 20-22).

2. This ts sometimes good. When
trouble awakens thought, and thought
leads to repentance, and the humble
spirit vows to honour and serve God,
such vows are excellent.

Ii, The great tendency of man to
forget these vows when the trouble
and danger are past. This is pro-
verbial—

“When the devil was sick, the devil a monk
would be;

When the devil was well, the devil a monk

was he,”
“Thus we say, The river past, and God
forgotten, to express with how mournful
@ frequency He whose assistance was


PBALM LEXVIL





invoked, it may have been earnestly,
in the moment of peril, is remembered
no more, so soon as by His help the
danger has been surmounted.”—Arch-
bishop Trench.

1. Vows begotten of fear are not likely
to be kept when the cause of fear is
removed. 2. Vows begotten of penitence
or gratitude will be piously remembered
and fulfilled.

Itt. The great sin of forgetting or
failing to fulfil these vows. 1. There
is ingratitude. Having received the
benefit we ignore our obligation to the
Benefactor. 2, There ts unfatthfulness,
Having promised we fail to perform
that which we have promised. We lie
unto the faithful God. Brother, thy
vows are registered in heaven. Pay
them. Pay them fully, heartily, at
once,


PSALM LXXVIL


INTRODUCTION.


Superscription. —*‘ To the chief Musician, to Jeduthun, a Psalm of Asaph.” Jeduthun waa
one of the leaders of sacred music in David’s time (1 Chron. xvi, 41, 42, 2 Chron. v. 12).
One of the twenty-four musical choirs left by David bore the honorary title Jeduthun or Jedi-
thun, perhaps from him, as its founder (1 Chron. xxv.)

A Psalm of Asaph. Sce Introduction to Psalm lxxiv.

Occasion.—It is not known, nor have we any means of determining upon what occasion the


Psalin was written. But, Perowne has well said concerning it, “‘ Whenever, and by whomsocever,
the Psalm may have been written, it clearly is individual, not national. It utterly destroys all
the beauty, all the tenderness and depth of feeling in the opening portion, if we suppose that
the people are introduced speaking in the first person. The allusions to the national history
may indeed show that the season was a seagon of national distress, and that the sweet singer
was himself bowed down by the burden of the time, and oppressed by woes which he had no
power to alleviate ; but it is his own sorrow, not the sorrow of others, under which he sighs,
and of which he has left the pathetic record.” The Psalm is eminently fitted to teach us how
we may obtain comfort and peace even in the severest diatresses.

Homiletically the Psalm sets before us, First: The good man’s trouble and Deliverer, versea
1-3. Second: The thoughts and inquiries of a godly soul in distress, verses 4-9. Third: The
godly soul rising superior to trouble by the devout contemplation of the works and ways of God,
verses 10-20,


Toe Goop Maws Trovsix axp DELIvERER.
(Verses 1-3.)


L The Good man’s trouble. All we have to walkin loneliness and sorrow,


men have some measure of acquaintance
with trouble. It is not given to us to
travel through life under unclouded
skies, favoured by refreshing breezes,
amid enchanting scenery, with delightful
companionships, and upon a pleasant
and easy road. There are times when


with weary limbs, and bleeding feet,
and aching heart, beneath darkened
skies, and amid pelting storms. The
good man has no exemption from life’s
sorrows and trials, He is exposed to
physical trials, Bodily pains and diseases
‘elait and try “the true-born child of
427


PRALM LXKVEL


God” as well as the wicked. He suffers
from social trials also. He has disap-
pointments and losses in business, he is
pained by the inconstancy and duplicity
of those whom he regarded as true, he
suffers by reason of the afflictions and
sorrows of those who are dear to him,
and he is sometimes stricken with
anguish by the invasions of death into
the home or social circle. He also
experiences religious trials, His own
imperfections and sins are a source of
grief to him, The contrast between the
ideal and the actual in his own life is
great and painful. He has seasons of
dark doubt, and sad misgiving, and
distressful hiding of the face of God
from him. Of such experiences the poet
sings in this Psalm. The compassions
and favours, the mercies and faithful-
nesses of God seemed to be all cut off
from him. God himself seemed to have
forsaken him, cast him off. The inten-
sity of his trouble is seen in that—

1. It was continuous. In the day he
sought the Lord by reason of it, and at
night his hand was unweariedly out-
stretched in prayers for deliverance.
His grief knew no intermission. His
soul obtained no rest either by night or
by day.

2. His soul accepted no consolation,—
“refused to be comforted.” Some con-
solations seemed inadequate to his need.
Others seemed too precious for one who
was so unworthy in his own sight. And
so the wounded heart refused the balm
which would have healed it.

3. The remembrance of God was
painful. We do not wonder that the
remembrance of God is painful to the
wicked. But that the godly man should
find it painful to direct his thoughts to
God is indeed strange. Meditation on
tiod should fill the soul of the good man
with holiest music. Very sore must
have been the trial of the Psalmist when
he was troubled at the recollection of
God.

4, Meditation increased grief. “I
meditated and my spirit was over-
whelmed.” Reflection brought no relief
to his soul, but seemed to sink him
deeper in the abyss of trouble. A very
aad state he was in. He ie in deep

a)


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALM8.


a ae





waters, the waves and billows go over
him, and he is unable to obtain relief
or rest.
‘¢ All things have rest: why should we toll
alone?
We only toil, who are the firat of things,
And make perpetual moan;
Still from one sorrow to another thrown :
Nor ever fold our wings,
And cease from wanderings,
Nor ateepour brows in slumber’s holy balm."
—Tennyson.

These sore trials of godly men by the
grace of God are often the means of
richest blessings to the soul. As the
darkness of night brings out the glory
of the starry heavens, so in afiliction
and trouble some most precious truths
shine forth with the greatest brilliance.

‘‘'Thou canst not tell
How rich a dowry sorrow gives the soul,
How firm a faith and eagle-sight of God.”
—Alford,

IL The Good man’s Deliverer. In
his trouble the Psalmist betook himself
to the throne of grace, he had recourse
to God. When trouble drives us nearer
to God it is already a blessing to us.

1. His application to God involved
faith. (1) In the accessibility of God. _
The Psalmist felt that he could approach
unto God, and speak to Him in prayer.
Trouble cannot drive us into any region
where He is not. From the deepest
abyss of distress the moan of suffering,
the cry of penitence, or the prayer for
help, will reach the ear and touch the ,
heart of God. (2) In the sufficiency of
God to help those who seek unto Hum.
The Psalmist would not have cried to
God had he not believed in His power
to help him. Our God is all-sufficient,
There are no sorrows that defy His
consolations. There are no wounds
which the balm of Gilead cannot heal.
(3) In the goodness of God. Not
withstanding his declaration that he
“‘remembered God and was troubled,”
the Psalmist must have believed in God's
kindness and willingness to help him, or
he would not have carried his burden to
His throne. Though He seems to hide
His face from us, yet He is ever gracious
and kind. His name and nature are
love. When trouble thus leads us to
draw eloser to God, and to cast our


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





burden upon Hin, it has not visited us
in vain.

2. His application to God was perse-
vering and earnest. ‘I cried unto God
with my voice, unto God with my voice;
and He gave ear unto me, In the day
of my trouble I sought the Lord: my
hand is stretched out at night unwea-
ried.” The repetition of the first verse
is emphatic, presenting the idea of
earnest and fervent supplication. The
“hand stretched out at night unwearied”
in prayer, indicates how importunate
and persevering were his supplications.
Hearty, fervent, importunate prayers
are acceptable to God. Cold, heartless,
formal prayers He does not regard. Let
the Psalmist’s example be imitated by
troubled hearts.

3. Hts application to God did not
lead to immediate relief. He says that
God “gave ear unto” him; but he
seems to have obtained no immediate
respite from his troubles. The Divine
answer to our supplications is sometimes
the continuance of those very trials or
afflictions from which we have prayed
to be delivered. The answer to the
apostle Paul’s prayer was not the re-
moval of the thorn from the flesh
quivering with agony, but, “ My grace
is sufficient for thee.” The withholding
or delaying of that for which we have
so importunately pleaded may be the
true and gracious answer to our prayers.
The blessing may be delayed that our
faith and patience may thereby be in-


PSALM LXXVIT,


creased, and that when it comes to us
it may come richer and fuller. Or that
for which we have asked may be with-
held, because Infinite Wisdom sees that
to us it would not be a blessing. Thus
it is that the earnest, importunate
prayers of good men are not always
answered at once, and sometimes are not
answered at all by granting the thing
desired. Yet they are always helpful to
the soul, and bring down blessings into
the soul from God.

Conciusion.—l. Learn the sacred
uses of trouble, ‘These light afflictions,
which are but for a moment, work,” dec.
“ Tribulation worketh patience, and
patience experience,” é&c.


‘* The tears we shed are not in vain 3
Nor worthless is the heavy strife;
If, like the buried seed of grain,
They rise to renovated life,
It is through tears our spirits grow 3
Tis in the tempest souls expand,
If it but teaches ua to go
To Him who holds it in His hand.
Oh, welcome, then, the stormy blast?
Oh, welcome, then, the ocean’s roar!
Ye only drive more sure and fast
Our trembling bark to Heaven’s bright
shore.” —T. 0. Upham.


2. Learn the grand resource in trouble.
“God is our refuge and strength, a very
present help in trouble.” a, He ts all-
sufficient. B. Hers ever available. y. He
ts ever gracious. ‘‘ From the end of
the earth will I cry unto Thee, when my
heart is overwhelmed: lead me to the
rock that is higher than L”


Prayer m TROUBLE


(Verees


We have here—

I. Something common to all men.
“The day of trouble.” “Man is born
unto trouble, as the sparks fly upward.”
With so much of sin in the world sorrow
and trouble are inevitable.

IL A commendable example for all
men. “I cried unto God,....I
sought the Lord.” 1. Harnestly. “I
cried with my voice, unto God with my
voice.” 2. Perseveringly. “My hand
is stretched out at night unwearied.”
“Ip the day” and “in the night” he


1, 2)


sought the Lord. “Call upon Me in
the day of trouble: I will deliver thee,”
&e.

IIL A Divine auditor of all men
“He gave ear unto me.” Into the ear
of God the cries of humanity are ever
entering. Graciously He attends to the
feeblest whisper of His people.

IV. A great mistake of some men.
“My soul refused to be comforted.”
Surely the Psalmist erred in this, God
has graciously arranged our life and cir-
cumstances so that healing eh come te


WEALM LEXVEL





the wounded spirit in many ways.
Through the aspects and voices of
nature, through the contemplation of


His Providence, through His holy Word. :


To refuse His consolation is, 1. Un-
grateful to Him. 2. Injurious to our-
selves,


V. An experience which may hap-


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS.


pen to all men. To pray earnestly
and importunately without any im-
mediate reply was the lot of the poet,
and may be the lot of all men. Let
us learn the lessons of such an ex-
perience. 1. Calmly trust Him. 2
Perseveringly pray to Him. 3. Patiently
wart for Him.


ReEco.ttections or Gop ParixruL TO THE WICKED,
(Verse 3.)


“JT remembered God and was
troubled.”

Why isa the remembrance of God
pleasant to some of us and painful to
others? Why is it sometimes pleasant,
and at other times painful, to the same
individual ¢

IL. Briefly state what we mean by
remembering God. We certainly mean
something more than a transient recol-
lection of the word God, or of any
other name by which He isknown. By
remembering God, the Psalmist meant
recollecting those ideas which the term
God is used by the inspired writers to
signify. An eternal, self-existent, in-
finitely wise, just, and good Being, &c.

If. Inquire why the recollection
of such a being should ever be pain-
ful; or, why any of God’s creatures
should be troubled at the remem-
brance of Him. There is nothing in
the Divine character and government
which necessarily renders the remem-
brance of God productive of painful
emotions. The remembrance of God is
always delightful to holy angels, and to
the spirits of just men made perfect,
The constant presence of God constitutes
their heaven. The recollection, also, of
His existence, eharacter, and govern-
ment, is usually, though not always,
highly pleasing to all good men. If any
are troubled by the remembrance of
God, the cause must exist solely in
themselves. Nothing but sin can ever
render the remembrance of God painful
to any of His creatures. If our hearts
or consciences condemn us, it is impos-
sible to remember Him without being
troubled. It will then be painfui to
remember that He is our Creator and

430


Benefactor ; for the remembrance will
be attended with a consciousness of base
ingratitude. Painful to think of Him
as Lawgiver; for such thoughts will,
remind us that we have broken His law.
So also as to His holiness, omniscience,
omnipresence, power, &c,

Nor is this all Every sinner loves
sin, The only happiness with which
he is acquainted, consists in gratifying
either the desires of the flesh, the desires
of the eye, or the pride of life. But all
these are contrary to the will of God.
He forbids the sinner to pursue them ;
He commands him to deny himself, &ec.
He threatens all who do not comply
with everlasting punishment.

The more clearly the wicked perceive
God’s character and their own, the more
light is thrown into their consciences,
the more mercies, privileges, and oppor-
tunities they have enjoyed and abused,
so much the more they will be troubled
by a remembrance of God.

AppiicaTion.—l. This subject affords
a rule by which we may try ourselves,
and which will assist us much in dis-
covering our real characters ; for the
moral character of every intelligent
creature corresponds with his habitual
views and feelings respecting God. 2,
How wretched is the situation of im-
penitent sinners; of those, who cannot
remember God without being troubled,
They cannot enjoy real happiness in this
life, for the world cannot afford it, and
they dare not look up for it to heaven.
How much more wretched must their
aituation be at death and in eternity !
3. How great are eur obligations to
God for the gospel of Christ! Were it
not for this, the remembrance, and still


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





more the presence of God, would have
occasioned nothing but pure, unmingled
wretchedness to any human being. 4,
Is sin alone the cause which renders the
remembrance of God painful? Then let
all who have embraced the terms of


PRALM LXXYVII.


reconciliation offered by the gospel, all
who desire to remember God without
being troubled, beware of sin. Swear
an eternal war with sin ; not only swear,
but maintain it— Ldward Payson, D.D.,
abridged.


Toe THovucuts anp Inquiries oF a Gopty Sout m TROUBLE.
(Verses 4-9 )


In our previous section we had to do
with the Psalmist’s trouble and his
application to God by reason thereof.
We have now to do with his mental
condition as affected by his troubles.

I. The thoughts of a godly soul in
trouble. In the mental exercises of the
Psalmist we notice—

1. Reflection on the past doings of
God. “TI have considered the days of
old, the years of ancient tisme.” In his
distress the Psalmist considered the
former dealings of God with mankind,
with a view of obtaining relief from his
present troubles and light in his present
perplexities. To us it seems that a
study of the Divine working in human
history is calculated to inspire the
student with confidence in God, in the
wisdom, righteousness, and goodness of
His rule. Yet the Psalmist seems to
have obtained no help from his con-
sideration of the ancient doings of God.
The state of his own soul spread a black
pall over everything.

2. Recollection of times of trouble tn
his own life, which were also times of
song. ‘I call to remembrance my song
in the night.” In the Bible “ night”
is frequently used figuratively, to repre-
sent ignorance, sin, suffering, distress,
death. Here it is used as the emblem
of distress and trouble. ‘ Where is
God, my Maker, who giveth songs in
the night?” The poet calls to mind
former seasons of affliction and sorrow,
in which he realised Divine comforts,
and was enabled to sing in the darkness,
Yet he seems to find no comfort for his
present sorrow. He can discover no
star to relieve his present darkness,
From the recollection of experiences 80
precious and helpful as God’s mercies to
him in former troubles he is vuable to


draw any consolation. A godly man’s
condition is deplorable indeed when
such experiences afford no help and
hope.

3. Communion with his own heart.
“JT ecommuned with mine own heart, and
my spirit made diligent search.” He
had recalled past experiences of his own,
he had reflected and reasoned upon the
work of God in human history, now he
will consult his own heart. He has
tried to get help by the exercise of his
intellect, and has failed to do so, now
he will seek help by the exercise of his
better feelings. ‘The secret, silent
teachings of the heart are often our best
and safest guide.” The heart is ‘tho
centre of the spiritual, thinking, and
conceptional life” (Muerst’s Lex.) ; and
man can commune with his heart, can
contemplate his own spiritual nature
and faculties, can examine his own
spiritual condition, can speak to his soul
and be spoken to by his soul. Thus the
poet communes with his own heart,
But no help does he receive. The
trouble seems to have obtained the com-
plete mastery of his entire nature.
Intellect and heart are alike subdued by
it. Human history and his own experi-
ence are alike darkened by it. The
soul which is swayed by grief sees all
things shrouded in gloom and sadness.
To each of us nature wears the colour
of our spirit. This truth is finely ex-
pressed in Hamlet. “I have of late
lost all my mirth, foregone all custom of
exercise ; and, indeed, it goes so heavily
with my disposition, that this goodly
frame, the earth, seems to me a sterile
promontory ; this most excellent canopy,
the air, look you, this brave o’er-hanging
firmament, this majestical roof fretted
with golden fire, why, it es no

431


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY; PSALM.





other thing to me, than a foul and pesti-
lent congregation of vapours. What a
piece of work is man! How noble in
reason! how infinite in faculties! in
form and moving, how express and
admirable ! in action, how like an angel !
in apprehension, how like a god! the
beauty of the world! the paragon of
animals! And yet, to me, what is this
quintessence of dust? Man delights not
me, nor woman neither.” In a some-
what similar plight was the Psalmist.
Trouble had so completely mastered him
that he could find neither comfort, help,
nor hope any where,

IL The inquiries of a godly soul in
trouble.

The Psalmist makes several inquiries,
which may be classified thus, He
inquires—

1. As to God’s mindfulness of His
people. ‘Will the Lord cast off for
ever?” &. “Hath God forgotten to
be gracious?” &c. God seemed to have
“forgotten to be gracious” in His deal-
ings with His servant, and to have so
far overlooked him as to lead to the
inquiry, “Will the Lord cast off for
ever?” It is a sore aggravation of a
believer’s trials when, the Lord seems to
be unmindful of him in his time of need.
How severe was the smart of the sisters
of Bethany, when several days passed,
and their Friend and Lord came not
near to them, although they had sent to
tell Him of their trouble !

2. As to God’s unchangeableness, In
past times He had been to His people a
God of mercy and grace, supporting and
defending them. Has He changed in
this respect? Is it possible that God
can change? The thought is “too
painful for” us, What misery and
desolation would supervene if God, the
supremely Good, could change! were to
change, and be other than He is! The
Psalinist seems to have tasted of this
misery as he urged his pain-inspired
inquiries.

3. As to God's faithfulness. “Doth
His promise fail for evermore?” Shall
the promise which was made to, and
good for, one generation, fail to the
next generation? Is not the word of
Jehovah reliablef The troubled soul

432


seems to find repose nowhere. To him
nothing appears firm and true, but sin,
labour, and suffering. The shadows
presented themselves as the only rea-
lities.

These inquiries of the troubled Psal-
mist reveal the depth and intensity of
his sufferings. It is extremely painful]
to doubt one’s own salvation ; but who
shall depict the anguish of doubt as to
the truth and faithfulness, the right-
eousness and goodness of God? These
inquiries present a hopeful symptom of
the spiritual condition of the Psalmist.
“Tt is a wise thing thus to put unbelief
through the catechism. Each one of the
questions is a dart aimed at the very —
heart of despair.”

IIL Let us offer a few Suggestions
to a godly soul in trouble. In his
thoughts and inquiries the troubled poet
seems much amazed and bewildered.
Certain facts were painfully real to him
which sorely tried his faith in God, and
in His relation to His people, Good
men are often tried in like manner. But
let us remember—

l. That there ts something radically
abnormal in the present state of human
society, It is not natural that under
the governinent of an almighty, wise,
and good Being, there should be so
much of suffering, and that sometimes
the best of men should be the greatest
of sufferers, Suffering is here because
sin is here. Find suffering and you find
sin, either literally or consequentially.
Sin is the unnatural, the abnormal
thing. ‘God made man upright.” He
is not responsible for sin. He is rather
the great Antagonist of all evil.

2. That even godly men need discipline,
An educational process is going forward
in this life. This world is a great
moral school, man is the learner, and
suffering is one of the teachers. In the
case of the good man suffering is not
punitive, but disciplinary, educational,
While there are defect and imperfection
in us, we need the discipline of the
Divine school.

3. That suffering ts often the occasion
of richest blessing. To a true-hearted
man doubt as to any of the great
spiritual verities is a painful thing.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


quite) always conducts to a calmer faith.
Time tells his tale by shadows, and by


clouds

The wind records its progress, by dark
doubts

Th spirit swiftening on fits heavenward
course,” — Bailey.


Tennyson has described such a doubter.


“ He fought his doubts and gathered strength,
He would not make his judgment blind ;
He faced the spectres of the mind,

And laid them: thus he came at length


But such a man doubt almost (if not


PSALM LXXAVIL.


To find a stronger faith his own;

And Power was with him in the night,
Which makes the darkness and the light,
And dwells not in the light alone.”


The Captain of our salvation was made
“perfect through suffering.” And those
of His followers in this world who are
most like Him are able to say, ‘We
glory in tribulations, knowing that
tribulation worketh patience,” &c.
* “Glory to God,—to God,’ he saith;
‘Knowledge by suff ring entereth,
And life is perfected by death.’ ”


Tus Gopty Sout rgisina Superior To TROUBLE BY THE DEvyourT
CoNTEMPLATION OF THE WORKS AND Ways or Gob.


(Verses 10-20.)


The mind and heart of the poet are
growing calm. His agitation and dis-
tress are yielding to the exercise of
reason and the power of faith. He is
able to reflect to some purpose now.

I. The troubled soul’s consideration
of the works and ways of God. “I
will remember the works of the Lord,”
&e.

1. Recollection of the works and ways
of God. How wonderful is the faculty
of memory! How great is its conserva-
tive power! Memory has been defined
as ‘“‘the treasure house of the mind,
wherein the monuments thereof are
kept and preserved.” Cicero spoke of
it as the “thesaurus omnium rerum.”
By means of it nothing in life is lost.


*¢ What wealth in memory’s firm record,
Which, should it perish, could this world
recall,
In colours fresh—originally bright—
From the dark shadows of oerwhelming
years.” — Young.


Memory makes the fleeting present
abiding and everlasting. How wonder-
ful is its reproductive power! A very
amall circumstance will unlock and
throw wide open its chamber doors ;
and words and deeds, scenes and cir-
cumstances, unthought of for many
ears, appear with startling vividness
fore us.
Slight withal may be the things which bring
Back on the heart the weight which it


would fling
28


Aside for ever; it may be a sound—

A tone of music—summer’s eve—or spring—

A flower—the wind—the ocean—which
shall wound,

Striking th’ electric chain wherewith we're
darkly bound;

And how and why we know not, nor can
trace

Home to its cloud this lightning of the
mind,

But feel the shock renew’d, nor can efface

The blight and blackening which it leaves
behind.” —Byron.


The Psalmist calls into exercise this
wondrous power, for the relief of his
troubled soul. He summons forth from
the treasury of memory some of the
ancient doings of God. The marvellous
works which He had wrought on behalf
of His people in former days he makes
to live before him. Probably he also
called to mind former deeds and ways
of God in relation to his own indivi-
dual life.

2. Reflection on the works and ways of
God. “I will meditate also of all Thy
work.” Recollection would not havs
profited the Psalmist unless he had
meditated upon the things which he
recollected. Thought, meditation, en-
ables us to realise the facts of history,
science, philosophy, and theology, and
to appropriate to ourselves their lessons.
“Tf I should be asked,” said Dr. Bates,
“‘what I think are the best means and
ways to advance the faculties, to make
the ordinances fruitful, to increase

433


PRALM LYXVIL





grace, to enlarge our comfort, and pro-
duce holiness, I should answer, medita-
tion, meditation, meditation.” The
Psalmist acted wisely in following up’
his recollection by meditation.

3. Speech concerning the works and
ways of God. “Talk of Thy doings.”
With the Psalmist recollection and re-
flection preceded speech. Much of our
talk is utterly worthless, because the
talkers are not thinkers. It is especially
important in relation to religious sub-
jects that meditation should precede
speech. The Psalmist did not reserve
to himself the results of his meditation,
but declared them to others. Others
were benefited by reason of his recollec-
tion and reflection.

If. The troubled soul’s conclusions
on the works and ways of God. Placing
them in the order in which we find them,
the conclusions of the Psalmist on the
works and ways of God are, that they
are characterised by holiness (ver. 13),
strength (ver. 14), beneficence (vers. 15,
20), majesty (vers. 16-18), and mystery
(ver. 19). Let us consider them, slightly
altering their order.

1. God’s works and ways reveal His
strength. ‘ Thouyart the God that
doest wonders ; Thou hast declared Thy
strength among the people.” God had
made known His great power in crush-
ing the enemies of His people, and de-
livering them from all their afflictions.
No one can meditate upon the works of
God in nature, or upon His ways in
Providence, without being impressed
with His Almightiness. ‘Thou hast a
mighty arm; strong is Thy hand, and
high is Thy right hand.” The Almighti-
ness of God should be a warning to evil-
doers. ‘‘ Hast thou an arm like God?”
The Almightiness of God should be
an encouragement te His people. His
strong arm is pledged to succour and
defend you. He is “ mighty to save.”

2. God’s works and ways reveal His
majesty. In verses 16-18 the Psalmist
mentions some of the mighty works of
God in a very poetical manner. The
imagery is both sublime and effective ;
and gives a deep impression, not only
of the might of God in these transac-
tions, but also of His majesty If the

434





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


majesty of God is so impressive that the
earth and the sea are represented aa
greatly moved thereat, shall man remain
unmoved at the contemplation thereof ?
Is there nothing in the wondrous works
and ways of God to awaken the admi-
ration and reverence of men #

3. God’s works and ways reveal His
holiness. “QO God, in holiness is Thy
way.” His way is often mysterious ;
and can never be comprehended by us,
yet is it ever right and pure. The
troubled Psalmist when he calmly con-
sidered the dealings of God with men,
not in the present, in which only a very
small fragment is visible, but in ancient
time, was convinced that they were all '
in holiness. Trembling and troubled
heart, and sorely perplexed with insolu-
ble enigmas, look away and look calmly
to His glorious deeds of ancient date,
and thou, too, shalt conclude, “ Thy
way, O God, is in holiness.”

4. God's works and ways reveal His
beneficence. The manifestation of power
and majesty is not sufficient to awaken
trust and hope in us, or to afford any
encouragement to the despondent and
sorrowing heart. Being conscious of sin
and ill-desert it is calculated to awaken
anxiety and even dread. We fear lest
the glorious majesty should consume us,
and the great might should smite and de-
stroy us. The revelation of the Divine
holiness tends to make manifest the
awful contrast between us and God in
this respect, by showing the exceeding
sinfulness of our hearts and lives. The
troubled heart needs to know more of
God than this before it can obtain com-
fort or rest. The Psalmist saw the
Divine power and majesty working bene-
jicently. The “ mighty arm” of God was
displayed in smiting down the wicked
oppressor, and delivering the oppressed
people. “Thou hast with Thine arm
redeemed Thy people, the sons of Jacob
and Joseph.” He saw Omnipotence
gently and patiently leading His people
through the wilderness. God is as great
in mercy as He is in majesty. He is
infinite in pity as well as in power. He
is gracious as He is great, He is as
tender as He is terrible. Here, then,
may the troubled heart find peace.


rad


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY PSALMS.
| eae pr


5. God’s works and ways are myste-
rious. The Psalmist had ascertained
and declared certain characteristics of
the works and ways of God. Might,
majesty, holiness, and beneficence he
head discovered therein. Yet there was
much that remained obscure and myste-
rious. ‘Thy way is in the sea, and
Thy path in the great waters, and Thy
footsteps are not known.” There are
certain topics upon which the Most High
maintains an inviolable reserve. There
are certain regions into which the eye
of the most earnest inquirer has never
penetrated. ‘The secret things belong
unto the Lord our God.” Moreover,
God’s way is so vast that we are able to
perceive only a very small portion of it,
His purposes and methods are so com-
prehensive and profound that we can
anderstand them only very partially.
But this mystery was by no means pain-


ful to the Psalmist. He speaks of it
calmly and trustfully ; and then speaks
of God’s gracious guidance of His people
through the wilderness, So also to ua
mysteries should not be an occasion of
unbelief or sorrow, but of patient trust
and hope. They should also teach us
lessons of humility and reverence. Our
own ignorance and inability to compre-
hend the ways of God should humble
us. “We are but of yesterday, and
know nothing, because our days upon
earth are a shadow.” While the reserve
of a Being of such holiness and bene-
volence should be regarded by us with
reverence. “Clouds and darkness are
round about Him: righteousness and
judgment are the habitation of His
throne,” “ Mysteries! what are they but
worlds at nighé time speeding on with
swift wing to the all-revealing bright-
ness of morning *”


SprmirvaL Ixviemiries,
(Verse 10.)


“TJ said, This is my infirmity.”

When a good man is made sensible of
any evil in his heart or life, he is ready
to acknowledge it, and take shame to
himself on account of it. ‘I said, This
is my infirmity.” No doubt but the
Psalmist had often said tt to himself ;
and such soliloquies are very becoming
and may be very useful. He said it
also to God, in a way of humble confes-
sion. “I acknowledge my sin unto
Thee, and mine iniquity have I not
hid,” &c, Probably he might say tt to
his intimate friends, whose piety and
sympathy he had often witnessed ; for we
are commanded to confess our faults one
to another, and to pray one for another.

I. Inquire into the nature of that
infirmity. By considering the context
we may conclude that it consisted in
something like the following—

1, A proneness to live too much on
frames and feelings. This is common
among Christians, and hinders their
establishment and growth in grace.
Those who live on spiritual frames will
be like Reuben ; unstable as water, they
shall not excel At one time they are


raised to a full asstrance of faith, say-
ing, “My mountain standa strong, I
shall never be moved ;” and at another
they are sinking into the depths of
despondency, and saying, “ Will the
Lord cast off for ever, and will He be
favourable no more ¢”

2. Forgetfulness of past mercies 18
another evil to which good men are sub-
ject, and the natural consequence of this
ts unthankfulness.

3. Distrust with respect to future ap-
pearances, When faith was in exercise
David could say, “‘ The Lord is my light
and my salvation ; whom shall I fear?”
&c. (Ps. xxvii. 1-3). But here the
Psaimist speaks as one that was utterly
forsaken. ‘ Will the Lord cast off for
ever 1” d&c. (vers. 7-9).

4. Refusing to be comforted tn time of
distress (ver. 2). Moses told the chil-
dren of Israel that the Lord would
bring them out from under the burdens
of the Egyptians, and give them the land
which He had promised to Abraham, to
Isaac, and to Jacob ; but they hearkened
not unto Moses, for anguish of spirit,
and for cruel bondage.

435


FeaLM LXEXVI.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS.





5. Giving vent to distrustful thoughts
tm unbecoming language too frequently
accompanies despondency.

II. The reasons why God suffers
such infirmities to attend His people
in this life.

1. To promote humility and self-
abasement. As creatures, our insigni-
ficance should make us humble ; but as
sinners we have reason to be still more
BO.
2. To excite watchfulness, Those who
are liable to so many miscarriages ought
certainly to be upon their guard. If
nothing else will preserve the Christian
from carnal security, yet the danger to
which he is exposed should have that
effect. “Let him that thinketh he
standeth, take heed lest he fall.”

3. To inerease our sympathy and
compassion towards others. We are
made to know the heart of a stranger
by being strangers ourselves, If others
are overcome by temptation, we may be
so too, “ Brethren, if a man be over-
taken in a fault,” &c, (Gal. vi. 1, 2).

4. To show the necessity of a frequent
epplication to Christ, our spiritual
Physician. If we had no infirmities,
we should not want healing. ‘ They
that are whole need not a physician;


but they that are sick.” The value of


the remedy is known by them that feaj
the disease, and the need of a Saviour
by those who see themselves to be lost,
‘“¢ And if any man sin, we have an advo
cate with the Father, Jesus Christ the
righteous.”

5. To render heaven the mere desirable,
The Psalmist is now free from all his
infirmities, and so will every saint be
when he gets to glory. The conflicts
we now have with the enemy, and the
evils of our own hearts, will give a
delightful relish to our happiness here-
after, and heighten the triumphs of the
final victory (Ps. xvii, 15; 2 Cor. v.
1-4).

IIL Oonclude with a few observa .
tions.

1. The best of saints have ther tn-
Jirmities.

2. There ts some particular infirmity
which everyman may call his own. “IT
kept myself,” said David, “from mine
iniquity ;” that is, from the sin which
most easily beset him,

3. It becomes us well to know our
particular infirmity, that we may guard
against tt; for to be without defence ts
the way to be overcome without resistance.

4, Having discovered what is our easily
besetting sin, let us bewail tt before God,
and seck for help against t.—B... @


REOOLLECTION, REFLECTION, AND DECLARATION.
(Verses 11, 12.)


The Psalmist in his trouble seeks
relief by recollecting the wondrous
works of God, and reflecting and speak-
ing thereon,

L Recollection. “I will remember,”
&c. The powers of memory are two-
fold. They are the power of retention,
and the power of reproduction. By
virtue of the former, memory is the
storehouse of past scenes, circumstances,
events, words, deeds. By virtue of the
latter we are enabled to reproduce and
relive the past. Memory may be re-
garded in several aspects, 1. As a
source of pain. Tennyson has beauti-
fully and truthfully said,—


“* A sorrow’s crown of sorrow is remembering
happier things,”
436


«* Remembrance wakes with all her busy train,
Swells at my breast, and turns the past t«
pain.”—Goldsmith,


** Will no remorse, will no decay,

O Memory ! soothe thee into peace ?
When life is ebbing fast away,

Will not thy hungry vultures cease ?
Ah, no ! as weeds from fading free,
Noxious and rank, yet verdantly
Twine round a ruin’d tower;

So to the heart, untamed, will cling
The memory of an evil thing,

In life’s departing hour :

Green is the weed when grey the wall
And thistles rise while turrets fall.”
—Heraud.


2. As a source of pleasure. “A
memory without blot or contamination,”
said Charlotte Bronté, “must be an


HOMILETIG COMMENTARY; PSALMS,


POALM LEXVII.





exquisite treasure,—an inexhaustible
source of pure refreshment.”


“ The joys I have possess’d are ever mine}
Out of thy reach, behind eternity,
Hid in the sacred treasure of the pust,
But bless’d remembrance brings them hourly
back,” — Dryden.


3. As an aid to faith. So the
Psalmist uses it in this case. Observe,
(1) God’s works are wonders. What
marvellous things He is ever accomplish-
ing in the material world! What won-
ders He wrought on behalf of His
ancient people! How wonderful are
His doings now in the experience of
His people,—in their conversion, spiri-
tual education, sanctification, and glori-
fication! Truly, “the bright glories of
His grace, beyond His other wonders
shine.” (2) God’s wondrous works
should be remembered. Not to remember
them would indicate great insensateness
of mind. He who does not remember
them overlooks the most glorious of
records ; and cannot be held guiltless of
ingratitude. (3) God’s wondrous works
remembered are calculated to inspire con-
fidence. They reveal a Being who is
supremely trustworthy.


IL Reflection. “I will meditate,”
&e. By means of reflection we are
enabled to realise the facts recalled by
memory, to perceive their significance
and applications; and the emotions
which naturally spring from the facts
remembered are excited by reflection,
Recollection is of little worth com-
paratively, unless accompanied and fol-
lowed by meditation. It was by the
exercise of both these faculties that the
troubled heart of the poet grew calm
and victorious.

IIL Declaration. “I will talk of
Thy doings.” A good man, having
passed through experiences similar to
those of the Psalmist, should talk of
God’s doings, After his trouble, re-
collection, and meditation, his talk
would be—l. Jntelligent. He would
not utter crude or rash statements con-
cerning God. 2. Trust-inspiring. Hia
own faith would grow stronger as he
recounted to others, &c. The faith of
those who heard him would also grow
as they thought of his conflict, and how
he won the victory.

Conciusion.—Here is an example
well worthy our imitation, Recollect,
meditate, and then apeak,


THe Ways or Gop.
(Verse 19.)


I. God’s ways are vast in their ex-
tent. ‘In the sea.” His ways are
celated—1l. 7'o all ages—past, present,
future. 2. To all worlds. 3. To all
events.

IL God’s ways are profound in their
meaning. ‘In the great waters.” Not
in streams or rivers, but in the im-
measurable, unfathomable ocean. His
ways are “too deep to sound with
mortal lines.”

III. God’s ways are mysterious in
their aspect. “Thy footsteps are not
known,” cannot be always traced.


“They are not always known; oe
they are not known in all things; yea,
they are not altogether known in any-
thing.”

“The acknowledgment of mystery,”
says Dr. Huntington, “the frank con-
fession that our being is folded all about
with the unknowable, our light fringed
on every side with darkness, our little
globe swimming in an ocean of un-
fathomable designs, but God guiding it
on and caring for every passenger soul—
this is an end of the trying of ow
faith.”


Gop Lzapive His Prorum
(Verse 20.)


1 The Leader of the good. “;Thou.”
The Leader possesses—l. Unlimited
}


power, for the protection and support
of His people. 3. Perfect intelligence.
437


PSALM LXXVITL





He knows His people individually and
thoroughly. He is perfectly acquainted
with the way along which they travel to
their destination.
for each member of the flock. He
tenderly cares for every one, and for
all.
It. The instruments by which they


are led. ‘By the hand of Moses and
Aaron.” He still guides instrumentally.
How? 1. By His Providence, pointing


out our way by the indications of cir-
cumstances and current events. 2. By
His Word, with its “Thou shalt,” and
“Thou shalt not.” 3. By His Spirtt
influencing our spirits. 4. By the
counsel of His servants. The wise and
good are here to direct us.

IIL The manner in which they are
led. “tke a flock.” We have here
three ideas. 1. Particularity. The
Eastern shepherds have a_ particular
knowledge of each sheep, of its peculi-
arities, &c. And a name for each sheep.
(See illus. in “The Land and the Book,”
by Dr. Thomson.) ‘He calleth his


3. Solicitous regard .


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS





Shepherd, and know My sheep, and am
known of Mine.” 2. Unity. Though
the distinctness and individuality of
each one is preserved, yet they are not
separated. They constitute a “ flock,”
‘One flock” under “one Shepherd.”
3. Leading as contradistinguished from
driving. The Eastern shepherd goes
before his flock, and so leads them.
“And when He putteth forth His own
sheep, He goeth before them, and the
sheep follow Him; for they know His
voice.” Dr. Bushnell briefly, yet clearly
and suggestively, states the idea—“ He
does not drive them on before as a herd
of unwilling disciples, but goes before
Himself, leading them into paths that.
He has trod, and dangers He has met,
and sacrifices He has borne Himeelf,
calling them after Him, and to be only
followers.”
* Jesus still lead on
Till our rest be won;
And although the way be cheerless,
We will follow, calm and fearless:


Guide us by Thy hand


To our Fatherland.”


eg e


own sheep by name.” “Iam the good


PSALM LXXVIIL


INTRODUCTION.


Superscription.—‘* Maschil of Asaph,” i... an instruction of Asaph, a didactic song by Asaph.
The Psalm was probably written by the celebrated Asaph in the time of David.

Occasion.—The Psalm seems to have been occasioned by the jealousy of the tribe of Ephraim,
by reason of the position which the tribe of Judah held under David. For many years the
haughty and powerful tribe of Ephraim was pre-eminent amongst the tribes. The sanctuary
was placed in Shiloh, which is in this tribe. When David selected Jerusalem as the home of
the sanctuary and the capital of the nation, ‘‘that haughty spirit which could brook no equal
or superior chafed against the growing dominion of Judah” (Stanley). In this Psalm they are
taught that what they regarded as a usurpation was in fact a Divine judgment; and the ten
tribes are warned not to rebel against the Divine arrangementa,


Maw’s Re.ation to tHE Law AnD TrsTiMoNy or Gop,
(Verses 1-8.)


The Psalm opens with a sammons of
the people to attention. The Poet
speaks as one who has a right to be
heard with respectful attention, and who
is about to make statements which were
worthy of their particular regard. From
the second verse it seems as though the
Psalmist regarded the historical facts
mentioned in the subsequent part of the

438


Psalm as illustrations of spiritual facta
and relationships. The history of the
Israelites sets forth in clear light many
aspects of human life and Divine pro-
vidence. Amongst other things it
strikingly illustratee—l. The great
goodness of God, in His care of His
people, in His guidance of them, &e.
2. The abiding faithfulness of God, ir


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS





fulfilling His promises and threatenings,
3. The sad tendency of human nature to
tngratitude and departure from God.
In this respect this history is a very
painful one, 4. The inviolable connection
between sin and suffering. These and
other facts and tendencies of human
life and the Divine government are set
forth in striking and impressive aspects
in this history.

The section now before us is intro-
ductory to the history recorded in the
Psalm, and presents us with some im-
portant views of MJan’s relation to the
law and testimony of God.

I. Man has received a knowledge
of the will and works of God. The
Hebrews were acquainted with the laws,
moral and ceremonial, which God had
given unto them. They also had ordi-
nances of Divine institution which were
abiding testimonies of the character and
will of God, and of their relation to Him.
They were also acquainted with the
wonderful facts of their own national
history. They had the Scriptures.
Hengstenberg holds that “by the testi-
mony and the law in verse 5 are meant
the whole contents of the Pentateuch,
the direct commandments contained in
it, and the deeds of the Lord which are
to be considered as indirect command-
ments.” This Pentateuch, with its
marvellous history, its Divine legislation,
and its revelations of God and His will,
they possessed. They had much know-
ledge which they had received by
tradition. As children, their souls had
been thrilled as they listened with rapt
attention to the narratives of the won-
drous and glorious works of God on
behalf of their ancestors. Their memo-
ries were richly stored with these glorious
deeds, and Divine revelations.

What a noble and precious heritage is
ours in this respect! We have the holy
Word. Not simply the Pentateuch ; but
the inspired hymns of the ancient poets,
the wise instruction of men moved by
the Holy Ghost, &c. “The holy Scrip-
tures, which are able to make men
wise unto salvation through faith which
is in Christ Jesus.” What a rich
and blessed possession we have in the
Bible |


PRALM LXXVIT.





“s aoe reacts book! bright candle of the
OT’

Star of eternity! The only star

By which the bark of man can navigate

The sea of life, and gain the coast of bligs

Securely ; only star, which rose on time,

And, on its“dark and troubled billows, still
As generation, drifting swiftly by,
Succeeded generation, threw a ray
Of apne own light, and to the hills of
od—
The everlasting hills— pointed the sinner’s
eye.” —Pollock,

We have also religtous instruction.
Much of the intellectual and spiritual
wealth of the true and good of past ages
has been handed down to us in books.
The best utterances of the mind and
heart of wise and holy men of this age
are given to us in books. Who can
estimate his indebtedness to literature #
In our early days the earnest and loving
teaching of Christian parents and Sun-
day school teachers was ours, And
now we have the instruction, exhortation,
and counsel of the Christian ministry.
We have received a great and precious
knowledge of the Divine will and way.
The way of salvation is clearly made
known unto us. “We see Jesus,” and
in Him God has revealed Himself to us,
“He that hath seen Me,” said Christ,
“hath seen the Father.”

II. Man should impart a knowledge
of the will and works of God to others.
The Israelites were distinctly and re-
peatedly commanded to impart religious
knowledge to their children. (Vide
Deut. iv. 9, vi. 6 and 7, and xi, 19.) It
was a binding religious duty. To this
the Psalmist refers in the fifth verse.
The Psalmist’s resolve to communicate
this knowledge to posterity has two
points worthy of notice. He resolves,
1. Zo communicate a knowledge of His
wondrous works. “ Showing to the gene-
ration to come His strength, and the
wonderful works that He hath done.”
Their history was peculiarly rich in
marvellous and glorious deeds which He
had done on their behalf, and in judg-
ments with which He had visited them
by reason of their numerous and heinous
sins. It was plenteously stored with
wise teaching, and helpful encourage-
ment to faithfulness, and grave warning
sgainst evil He will oe to the


POALM LIXVINE.


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





children a knowledge of this remarkable
history. He resolves, 2. To communi-
cate a knowledge of His wondrous works
that the generation to come might praise
the Lord. He will narrate God’s glo-
rious deeds of ancient date, not that
national pride might be promoted there-
by, but that God might be glorified.
His was the power, and His shall be
the praise. He will show to the chil-
dren “the praises of the Lord.”

We, too, are bound to transmit to
posterity the religious knowledge and
the spiritual privileges that we enjoy.
Our Lord lays down the principle with
transparent clearness—“ Freely ye have
received, freely give.”

‘* Heav’n doth with us as we with torches do,

Not light them for themselves,

For if our virtues do not go forth of us

*Twere all alike as if we had them not.”

—Shakespeare,

The coming generations will need the
knowledge of God that we possess. Our
systems of philosophy and theology they
may do without, our human creeds and
religious formule they may in many
things outgrow. But our knowledge of
God, especially as revealed in Jesus
Christ and His redemption, the genera-
tions that are to come will need. Nay,
without it they will be undone.

III. Man should impart a know-
ledge of the will and works of God to
others with a noble aim. The object
of the impartation of this knowledge is
thus stated by the Psalmist—“ That the
generation to come might know them,
the children which should be born, who
should arise and declare them to their
children,” é&ec. (vers, 6-8).

The object then aimed at was—

1. That the knowledge might be con-
tinued to the race. We have received
from our fathers great treasures of in-
formation and experience, of knowledge
and wisdom, and every generous emotion
and every conviction of duty strongly
urge us to hand them down to coming
ages. If it is not in our power to make
much addition to the treasures of the
past, we can at least with scrupulous
fidelity do our share to transmit those
treasures undiminished to the coming
generations.


2. That the coming generations mighi
avoid the errors and sins of their ances-
tors. “That they might not be as their
fathers, a stubborn and rebellious gene-
ration ; a generation that prepared not
their heart aright, and whose spirit was
not steadfast with God.” The history .of
the Israelites abounds with painful illus-
trations of the statements of this verse.
With sad frequency throughout theis
journeyings in the wilderness they mani-
fested a murmuring, stubborn, and rebel-
lious spirit. Again and again they for-
sook the Lord God, and worshipped the
idols of the idolatrous nations around
them. Their history was to be made
known that their posterity might take’
warning and shan their errors. Let us
point out to the generations to come the
sins of past ages with their consequences,
that they may avoid them.

3. That the coming generations might
be righteous. “That they might keep
His commandments.” Let us so teach
the law of God to the uprising generation
that they shall regard it as “ holy, just,
and good,” a Divinely wise and benevolent
thing, and shall loyally and heartily seek
to comply with its requirements, |

4, That the coming generations might
be religious. “That they might set
their hope in God, and not forget the
works of God.” Two things are aimed
at in this, (1) A recognition of the
Divine presence and actinty. “Not for-
get the works of God.” God is ever
working in the universe, in history, in
redemption. History should be studied
with reverence as well as with inquisi-
tiveness, for God has been working in
it. Our life should be lived holily,
for God is ever active within us and
around us, In imparting instruction
let us aim at the recognition of the
Divine presence and agency by the gene-
tations to come—that the history, sci-
ence, and philosophy of the future might
not be materialistic, atheistic, but intel-
ligent, humble, reverent. (2) A calm
trust in the Divine Being. “ Set their
hope in God,” te, “place their trust
in God.” Let us endeavour to represent
God to our children truthfully, in His
Divine beauty, in His all-sufficiency, in
His perfect reliableness, that so they


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


might be attracted to Him, and be led
to repose in Him with supreme and un-
faltering trust.

Here, then, we have a grand end in im-
parting a knowledge of the will and works
and ways of God—the continuation and
increase of knowledge, the avoidance of
error and sin, the promotion of Divine
righteousness and religiousness amongst
men—ina word, thefurtheranceof human
progress in its path towards perfection.








REALM LXXVIII.


—.5


The race advances, the world makes
progress. Christianity is spreading and
diffusing widely its blessings. Each
generation grows richer in the highest
knowledge and wisdom than its prede-
cessor was, The time comes on apace
when “the earth shall be full of the
knowledge of the Lord, as the waters
cover the sea.” Are we each doing what
we can to usher in that time #


Fon a Sasspatu-SoHoot ANNIVERSARY.
(Verses 2-8.)


The text is the preface or introduction
to the whole Psalm.

It shows the design of Asaph in its
composition.

Its design was the instruction of
ehildren.

Its style—parabolic and enigmatical.
Spiritual truths hidden under narration
of facts.

I The interesting objects of our
solicitude mentioned. Consider—

1. The love which welcomes them. The
love of mother, father, friends.

2. The evils which surround them. A
sinful nature within. Evil example
without ; public house, theatre, dc.

3. The possibilities which awant them.
Greatness in good or in evil.

II. The sacred duties which we owe
to them.

First: They are weak ; we must pro-
tect them. Jacob’s children, and Esau.
(Gen. xxxii.)


Second: They are helpless; we must
provide for them,

Third; They are ignorant; we must
instruct them.

1. The nature of this duty. What
must we teach ?

(1) The praises of the Lord.
of the mouth,” &e. (Pa. viii. 2).

(2) The strength of the Lord.

(3) The wonderful works of the Lord.
In nature, providence, grace,

2. The importance of this duty. The
docility and impressibility of children.

3. The way to perform this duty.
Parents, Christians, example, precept.

III. The object which we hope shall
be realised.

1. The knowledge of truth shall be
perpetuated.

2. Our children will put their hope ts
God.

3. They shall be better than their
Sathers.


Out


—B. D. from The Study.


Ovr RELATION TO OUR ANCESTORS AND SUCCESSORS.
(Verses 3 and 4.)


Consider—

i Our great obligations to our
ancestors. 1. For the Bible. 2. Fora
glorious literature. How vast the num-
ber of books which are characterised by
high and deep thinking, and pure and
reverent feeling! 3. For holy and
heroie examples, Martyrs, reformers,
and a great multitude of obscure yet
faithful and noble lives, 4, For reds


gious teaching. We are immeasurably


indebted to those who in the home, the
school, and the church, have instructed
us.

If. Our great duty to our successors.
1. To hand down to them intact the
heritage of religious intelligence and
privilege which we possess. 2. To seck to
increase that heritage. The stream of
blessing should grow broader and deeper.
8. To endeavour to lead them to prize
and improve their heritage. That they

441


GALS LYRVIE,





may not only know His will, but do it;
not only know His wondrous works, but
praise and trust Him.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





Be it ours to contribute something te
the promotion of the progress of our
race in all that is true, wise, and good.


Moran CowARDICE AND ITs CAUSES.
(Verses 9-11.)


The term “the children of Ephraim”
is not used here in contradistinction to
the rest of Israel, but as representing
the whole, because of the prominent
position of that tribe. ‘For more than
four hundred years Ephraim, with its
two dependent tribes of Manasseh and
Benjamin, exercised undisputed pre-
eminence. Joshua the first conqueror ;
Gideon the greatest of the judges, whose
brothers were ‘as the children of kings,’
and whose children all but established
hereditary monarchy in their own line ;
Saul, the first king—belong to ene or
other of these three jibes.” The
haughty spirit of she trive “ could brook
no equal or superior, and chafed against
the rise even of the kindred tribe of
Manasseh in the persons of Gideon and
fephthah, and yet more against the
growing dominion of Judah in David
and Solomon, till it threw off the yoke
altogether, and established an indepen-
dent kingdom.”—(Stanley).

It seems clear to us that the Psalm
does not refer to the disruption of the
kingdom ; but that our text refers to an
event or series of events during the
period of the Judges. We propose to
regard the text as an illustration of
Moral Cowardice and its Causes, Let
us consider—

I. The illustration of moral cowar-
dice, ‘‘ The children of Ephraim, armed
and carrying bows, turned back in the
day of battle.” Whether this refers to
one specific battle, or to several battles,
or whether “the Ephraimites are merely
compared to cowardly bowmen,” we need
not attempt to decide. In either case
tl ey are charged with cowardice. The
greatmess of this cowardice is apparent
from three facts. 1. They were men of
might. Ephraim was a warlike tribe,
famed for valiant men. Joshua was of
this tribe. Perhaps they are specially
named hete because of their proud,

442


domineering, boastful spirlt. 2. They
were fully armed. They were not sur-
prised and attacked at a disadvantage.
They were “armed and carrying bows.”
Proud, boastful, powerful, and well
armed, yet—3. They refused to fight,
“Turned back in the day of battle.”
A brave English drummer boy was taken
captive in some battle by the French,
He was ordered to beat several military
signals, and obeyed. But, being com-
manded to beat a retreat, he pertina-
ciously refused. He had never beaten
a retreat, and he never would do so.
Unlike this heroic lad, the Israelites,
with the strong and warlike tribe of
Ephraim, turned their back to their foes
and fled. A picture of what has often
been the case in our spiritual history.
We have been bold and courageous in
speech, we have been supplied with
weapons from the Divine armoury, yet —
we have fled before our foes, have
weakly yielded to temptation, and dis-
honoured our uniform and our colours.

II. The causes of moral cowardice.
“They kept not the covenant of God,
and refused to walk in His law,” &e.

1. They lacked the support of con-
science. If conscience is with us in
arduous and perilous enterprises, it will
nerve the heart with courage and fill
the arm with energy.


“What stronger breastplate than a heart un-
tainted ?


Thrice is he arm’d that hath his quarrel just ;
And he but naked, though lock’d up in steel,
Whose conscience with injustice is corrupted.”


—Shakespeare,


But this “heart untainted” the men of
Ephraim had not. “They kept not the
covenant of God, and refused to walk
in His law.” Conscience in them was
an accusing voice. And the conscious-
ness of guilt “makes cowards of us all.”
“The wicked flee when no man pur.
sueth,” d&c.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: P84E.MS.


PSALM LXXVIii.





* Suspicion always haunts the guilty mind ;

The thief doth fear each bush an officer.”

—Shakespeare.
If in our moral battles we would stand
before our enemies, we need a clear self-
approving conscience. Without it “every
noise appals” us; with it we may be
as “bold as a lion.”

2. They lacked the inspiration to be
drawn from the recollection of past inter-
positions of God on their behalf. ‘They
forgat His works, and His wonders that
He had showed them.” When David
did battle with Goliath of Gath, he was
inspired and fortified by the recollection
of what God had done for him and by
him in former times. ‘The Lord that
delivered me out of the paw of the lion,
and out of the paw of the bear, He will
deliver me out of the hand of this Philis-
tine.” In this spirit he met the foe,
and speedily the proud, gigantic cham-
pion of Philistia fell before the shepherd
boy, who trusted in the God who had
aided him in the past. But the glorious
doings of God on behalf of Israel were
shamefully forgotten by them, and,
when they went forth to battle, the
inspiration, which they would have had
if they had remembered His works, was
missing, and they cowardly turned back.
If we would meet the foes of the future
hopefully and courageously we need to
remember the victories of the past de-
voutly and thankfully.

3. They lacked the help of God. They
did not seek Him whose covenant they
had violated, and whose law they had
disregarded, They could not trust Him


whose wondrous works on their behalf
they had basely allowed to sink into
forgetfulness. And so they went up to
battle without the Lord, and returned
from battle dishonoured. “@O Lord,
what shall I say when Israel turneth
their backs upon their enemies? And
the Lord said, Israel hath sinned, and
they have also transgressed My cove-
nant which I commanded them; there-
fore the children of Israel could not
stand before their enemies, but turned
their backs before their enemies.”

As we contemplate this picture, let
us learn the lessons which it has for ua.
We, too, have enemies which are both
subtle and powerful—Satanic tempta-
tion, evil in society, proneness to sin in
ourselves. We must battle with courage
and fortitude against these foes, or they
will vanquish us, and that means ruin,
Complete and splendid armour, both
offensive and defensive, is provided for
us (Eph. vi. 11-18), Let us gird it on.
And in this holy war let us go forth in
the strength of God, and we shall re-
turn victorious. It has been well said
that, “Courage consists not in blindly
overlooking danger, but in seeing it,
and conquering it.” We need moral
courage ; and for that we must have an
approving conscience, the memory of
past victories won by the help of God,
and an unfaltering trustin Him, With-
out these, as cowards we shall turn
our back to the foes, ‘Be strong in
the Lord, and in the power of His


might.”


Somes FROM A REMARKABLE History.
(Verses 12-20.)


In these verses we have a brief record
ef some of God’s wonderful and gra-
cious dealings with His people, and of
their great sin against Him. On the
one side, the portion of history here
referred to is luminous with the great
and beneficent works of the Lord; on
the other side, it is dark with the basest
ingratitude, unbelief, and perversity of
man. We have here—

L A people divinely emancipated.


By great signs and wonders wrought on
their behalf Jehovah had delivered them
from the cruel oppression of the Egyp-
tians. His hand was clearly manifest—

1. In their delwerance out of Egypt.
‘6 Marvellous things did He in the sight
of their fathers, in the land of Egypt,
in the field of Zoan.” It was because
of His blessing that, notwithstanding
their oppressions, they increased and
yaultiplied and gathered power in Egypt.

443


Peale LEXVINE,





It was because of the wonders wrought
by Him on their behalf, the stroke after
stroke of judgment, each one severer
than its predecessors, with which He
smote their tyrannical lords, that they
were at length permitted to go forth
from the land of bondage.

2. In their deliverance from their pur-
swuers at the Red Sea, Narrate the
circumstances of the departure from
Egypt, the encampment by the sea, the
pursuit of the Egyptians after them, the
apparently desperate situation in which
they were placed, their alarm, murmur-
ings, &c.; the prayer of Moses, the
answer of Jehovah, &. ‘He divided
the sea, and caused them to pass through;
and He made the waters to stand as an
heap.” ‘‘On a sudden,” writes the late
Dean Milman, ‘‘ Moses advances towards
the sea, extends his rod, and a violent
wind from the east begins to blow. The
waters recede on both sides, a way ap-
pears ; at nightfall, probably about eight
o’clock, the caravan begins to defile
along this awful pass. The wind con-
tinued in the same quarter all the night,
but immediately they had passed over,
and while the Egyptians, madly plung-
ing after them, were in the middle of
the passage, the wind as suddenly fell,
the waters rushed back into their bed,
the heavy chariot-wheels of the pursuers
sank into the sand, broke and overthrew
the chariots, and in this state of con-
fusion the sea swept over the whole
host, and overwhelmed the king and all
the flower of the Egyptian army.” We
have in this a triple wonder :—({1.) The
division of the sea. This was no ordi-
nary phenomenon of nature, but an ex-
traordinary manifestation of the presence
and power of God. (2.) The prepara-
tion of the road. When the waters were
divided, the bed of the sea would not
have been in a fit state for the great
multitude to pass over, had not Jehovah
prepared it for their passage. (3.) Zhe
encouraging of the people to pass through
the opening made for them. Such an
unbelieving and craven-hearted crowd of
serfs needed an infusion of courage ere
they would have attempted to make
such a passage. The bard “ caused
them to pass through.” If ever any

444





HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALME.





wen


people were emancipated by Sod, the
Israelites were when they came forth
from the land of Egypt. His hand was
manifestly outstretched to subdue the
pride of the oppressors, and to rescue
the oppressed from thraldom,

II. A people divinely led. ‘In the
daytime also He led them with a cloud,
and all the night with a light of fire.”
‘“‘The fiery, cloudy pillar” went before
them in all their journeyings. 1. They
were led constantly. In the day the
cloud led them onward, and at night
the pillar of fire moved mysteriously
and majestically before them. 2. They
were led divinely. The guiding pillar
was not merely a sign to indicate their
way, but a visible symbol of the presence
of God. He Himself guided them,
Rightly understood, the cloud and the
fire were an assurance that God was
with them to lead them, to protect
them, to provide for them. What a
proof of the goodness of God to them we
have tn this /

III. A people divinely provisioned.
“He clave the rocks in the wilderness,
and gave them drink as out of the great
depths,” &. Upon two occasions, at_
the command of God, Moses had smitten —
a rock, and water had flowed forth in
abundance. (Vide Exod. xvii. 6, Num,
xx. 11.) But it was not simply water
that God provided for them, but food
and raiment also. ‘‘He gave them
bread from heaven to eat.” ‘I have
led you,” said Moses, “forty years in
the wilderness: your clothes are not
waxen old upon you, and thy shoe is
not waxen old upon thy foot.” 1. Thew
supplies were abundant. ‘“ As out of
the great depths; ... caused waters to
run down like rivers.” Whatever God
gives, He gives abundantly. His hand
is free and bounteous. And if at any
time the Israelites suffered from hunger
or thirst it was by reason of their un-
belief, or to humble them and impress
them with their dependence upon God.
2. Their supplies were divine, An un-
riven rock was a most unlikely object
from which to obtain water. Rocks are
“not capable of receiving it either from
the clouds above or the springs be-
neath.” Yet, when smitten by Moses,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS.


¥SaALM LXXVITL





water copiously flowed from them.
Moses was but the instrument of Jeho-
vah in this matter. Moses smote the
rocks, but God clave them and brought
forth streams from them. 3. Thetr sup-
plses are ulustrative of ours. Ours are
divine. ‘Every good gift and every
perfect gift is from above,” &c. Ours
are abundant. ‘God giveth us richly
all things to enjoy.”

IV. A people basely perverse and
wicked. ‘And they sinned yet more
against Him, by provoking the Most
High in the wilderness,” d&c. (vers,
17-20). Notice here,—

1. Divine signs leading to profane
eurtosity. The miracles which God had
wrought on their behalf should have
impressed the Israelites with a deep
sense of the presence and power of God;
and should have been to them signs of
His almightiness, His hatred of tyranny
and oppression, and His interest in the
oppressed and afflicted. But, with
amazing and saddening perversity, they
regarded God with little more of rever-
ence than the Egyptians did their magi-
cians and sorcerers. They had seen the
divine wonders, but failed to recognise in
them divine signs. Having witnessed
marvellous displays of His power, sinful
curiosity is awakened within them, and
they ask, “‘Can God furnish a table in
the wilderness? can He give bread
also?” &c. They should have been
humble, reverent, trustful; they were
eurious, profane, presumptuous.

2. Divine providence leading to a
desire for the indulgence of appetite.
The provision which God made for them
seems to have awakened in them neither
gratitude, contentment, nor faith; but
a desire for the gratification of their
animal appetite by a greater variety in
their diet. And, with awful audacity
and presumption, they tempted God by
their questions as to His power, and
by their demands upon Him. They
“demanded meat for their lust” (WD)


= here, the animal soul). It was not a
desire for what was necessary, but a
craving for variety. And this craving
was expressed, not as a humble request,
but as an insolent demand, accompanied


by profane questions as to the limit of
the Divine power. This sin took its
rise in the heart. There the evil desire
sprang upand was fostered into strength.
Then it expressed itself in speech. “Keep
thy heart with all diligence, for out of
it are the issues of life.”

3. Divine goodness responded to by
heman distrust and ingratitude. No
song of thankfulness arises from them
as they call to mind the great goodness
of God to them, but an impious chal-
lenge to Him to supply them with flesh.
They utter no boly declaration of confi-
dence in Him as they recall His won-
drous works, but distrustful, irreverent
inquiries.

As we look upon this picture of ex-
treme wickedness, let us remember that
it was an utter perverston of the dealings
of God with them. God’s emancipation,
guidance, and provisioning of them were
both adapted and intended to awaken
within them contentment, trust in Him,
gratitude, and reverence to Him. But
their own sinful hearts wickedly per-
verted the Divine relation to them
and dealings with them in the way we
have indicated. We have a power by
which we may make evil the occasion of
good, We may gather patience out of
suffering. By means of defeat we may
learn how to conquer. Through trial)
we may grow in strength and graca
But by the abuse of this power we may
pervert a means of grace into an occa-
sion of evil, out of the Divine longsuf-
fering may educe arguments in favour
of impenitence and presumption, may
so treat God’s richest blessings that
they shall become to us a dire curse.

Conciusion.—1. See the terrible ef-
fects of slavery. These Israelites would
not have been so utterly base, irreligi-
ous, and despicable had not their man-
hood been eaten out of them by slavery.
Physical oppression had left them mere
serfs in spirit.

2. See the depravity of human nature.
In the midst of the richest goodness
and the divinest signs, it remains un-
grateful, unbelieving, impious.

3. See our need of Divine preservation,
“ Hold Thou me up, and I shall be safe.”


445





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





Divisz BiEssrves.
(Verses 15, 16.)


I. Divine blessings from unlikely
sources. Water from solid rocks.
Emancipation of the Hebrews by means
of the shepherd Moses. Redemption
out of Nazareth. The Light of the
World from a carpenter’s shop. Jesus
Christ was “a root out of dry ground.”
Most of the apostles were “ unlearned
and ignorant men.” Tenderness, trust,
triumph out of suffering. Spiritual
wealth out of temporal loss.

II. Divine blessings in rich abun-
dance. “As out of the great depths,
. . . like rivers.” All pure blessings
God gives abundantly. Light, air, dew,
beauty, d&c., He gives abundantly.
“‘ Abundantly pardon.” ‘ Plentuous re-


Human Sin anp


demption.” “ Peace as a river, righte
ousness as the waves of the sea.” “ Make
all grace abound toward you, that ye,
always having all sufficiency in all
things,” dc.

III. A type of the supreme blessing.
1 Cor. x. 3 and 4. “That Rock was
Christ.”

Analogy—l. In the blessings. Christ
gives “the water of life” 2. In the
mode of obtaining them. The rock
was smitten and cleft. Christ “was
wounded,” &c. 3. In the conditions of.
bestowul. “Freely.” ‘“ Without money
and without price.” The river of life
flows freely by, we have but to stoop
down and drink.


DIVINE JUDGMEN®.


(Verses 21-31.)


In these verses we see how God re-
garded the conduct described in the
preceding paragraph, and how He re-
sponded to the insolent demands of the
Hebrews. The main teaching of this
portion of the Psalm may be developed
under two main topics.

I. Human Sin. We have here the
Divine view of the sin of the perverse
Israelites.

1. The nature of their sin. Unbelief.
“‘ They believed not in God, and trusted
not in His salvation.” They doubted
either the power or the goodness of
God, or both, He had given to them
signal displays of His might and ma-
jesty, yet they perversely questioned His
ability to provide for them. He had
also given to them gracious assurances
that He would guide, guard, and supply
them, yet they seem to have doubted
these assurances. Herein was their
great sin in the sight of God. Unbelief
is a sin which directly dishonours the
Divine being and character, Amongst
men of honour it is a great insult to
discredit the word of another. But what
shall we say of the sin of discrediting
the word of God? It is an impeach-

446


ment of His faithfulness. Or a tacit
declaration that we doubt His ability to
fulfil His promise. But whether we
doubt His willingness or His ability to
keep His promises, His goodness or His
power, we dishonour Him. To this sin
the Hebrews in the wilderness were very
prone. It is lamentably prevalent in
the present day. There are many sin-
cere Christians who are often guilty in
this respect. They fail to believe God’s
promises, &c. In ‘his Christian dis-
pensation unbelief towards Christ is the
damning sin. ‘“‘ He that believeth not
shall be damned.”

2. The aggravation of ther sin.
“Though He had commanded the clouds
from above, and opened the doors,” &ec.
(vers. 22-25). The aggravation of their
sin in distrusting God in the matter
of provision is seen in that, (1) He
had hitherto supplied them with food.
Though journeying in a wilderness, yet
they had not suffered from the lack of
anything. God had provided for their
wants. He had supplied them with
water (Exod. xv. 25, xvii. 6), and quaila
(Exod. xvi. 13), and with a regular
supply of manna (Exod. xvi 14-26)


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM LXXVI,





(2) He had supplied them with choice

“The corn of heaven. Man did
eat angels’ food.” The word translated
“angels” has been variously rendered.
But whatever rendering be adopted, the
idea of rare, choice food is presented.
The Hebrews in the wilderness were
not supplied with coarse, common fare,
Their food was delicate in its nature
and rich in quality, such as is found on
the tables of nobles or princes. Or it was
so delicious and rare that, coming down
as it did from heaven, the poet naturally
speaks of it as “ angels’ food.” (3) He
had supplied them with choice food in
abundance. ‘He sent them meat to
the full.” There was no lack of provi-
sions. The supply was as abundant in
quantity as it was rich in quality. (4)
He had supplied them with choice food
supernaturally, The water was drawn
from the rock miraculously. Concern-
ing the manna, Dr. C. E. Stowe, writing
in Smith’s “Bible Dict.,” says, “The
manna of Scripture we regard as wholly
miraculous, and not in any respect a
product of nature.” The people had
not to put forth any effort to procure
this provision, except the mere gather-
ing of it. It was manifestly the special
provision of God for them. Yet “they
believed not in God, and trusted not in
His salvation.” On this very question
of their food supply they had distrusted
God, and insolently called into question
His power. While subsisting upon pro-
visions miraculously supplied by God,
and which clearly manifested His abound-
ing goodness, they basely distrust Him
and impiously propose to submit His
power to tests of their invention. Much
of the unbelief of this age is painfully
aggravated in its character. When men
do not trust Christ as their Saviour, is
not their guilt the greater because His
qualifications as such are so ample and
couvincing—in His teaching, miracles,
life, resurrection, and in the witness of
a great and ever-increasing multitude
who have trusted Him and proved Him
all-sufficient? When men distrust the
providence of God in their lives, is not
their sin aggravated by the abundant
evideuce of the universality, wisdom,
and beneficence of that providence’


When Christian men distrust the power,
or faithfulness, or goodness of God,
does not His gift of Christ to us make
the sin of such distrust much greater ?
“He that spared not His own Son, but
delivered Him up for us all, how shall
He not with Him also freely give us all
things?” The sin of the Israelites in
its essential principle is deplorably com-
mon to day.

II. Divine judgment. “Therefore
the Lord heard this, and was wroth: so
a fire was kindled against Jacob, and
anger also came up against Israel. He
caused,” &c. (vers. 26-31), This judg-
ment against Israel,—

1. Reveals God’s observation of man’s
life. “The Lord heard.” All human
speech is audible to the Divine ear.
During a dark period in the history of
the ancient church, the few faithful and
godly men “spake often one to another:
and the Lord hearkened, and heard,” &c,
He hears the voice of prayer and of
praise. Words of murmuring, com-
plaint, and unbelief are heard and regis-
tered in heaven. The hard speeches
and awful blasphemies of the wicked
find their way to the ear of God. God
is the great Auditor of human utter-
ances. No sound escapes His ear.

2. Reveals God as affected by man’s
life. He not only hears, but feels also.
The Lord heard, and was wroth: so a
fire was kindled against Jacob, and anger
also came up against Israel.” God is
affected by man’s life. Our trust and
praise of Him are gratifying to Him.
Our distrust of Him and our murmuring
against Him are grievous to Him. Men
cannot tempt Him, or impiously chal-
lenge Him to display His power, as did
the Hebrews in the wilderness, without
provoking Him to anger. Let no one
deceive himself in this matter. There
is in God a principle of anger which
burns with unquenchable fire against
evil. While God is God His wrath
must burn against sin. Being good
and righteous He must punish evil doers
unless they turn and repent.

3. Reveals the punishment as growing
out of man’s sin. (1) In the granting
of their own demands, “ They demanded
meat for their lust.” Theirs was not an

447


PSALM LXXVPR,


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY ¢ PSALM.


pn ne ae


urgent pray?., which submits even the
most eager desires to His will; but an
impicas demand that God would give


them meat for the gratification of their


animal appetite. God complied with
their demand, and that which they had
so eagerly coveted proved a great curse
to them. The flesh which they had de-
manded occasioned their death. Let us
beware of urging selfish desires in prayer
to God. In every petition that we pre-
sent to the throne of grace let us copy
the example of Him who in His most
impassioned prayer said, ‘‘ Nevertheless,
not as I will, but as Thou wilt.” Who
has not become acquainted with instances
in which God has granted the passionate
demand that has been made to Him,
and the demander has lived to rue the
day when the demand was made and
granted? What seems to us unques-
tionably desirable and good, may really
be a thing of great peril and evil to us.
The well-watered plain of Sodom nearly
led to the ruin of Lot. That sick child
over whom fond parents bend in anguish,
and whose life they demand God to
Bpare, may perchance grow up, and
bring down their grey hairs with sorrow
to the grave. ‘‘ Net my will, but Thine
be done.” (2) Jn their gluttony. When
they had eaten of the quails which God
sent into the camp, “and were well
filled; they were not estranged from
their lust.” They had eaten as much,
or even more, than their physical nature
required and could appropriate, yet they
would have more. The drunkard and the
glutton are never satisfied. And by the
gluttony with which they devoured the
flesh that they had demanded, “ the
wrath of God came upon them, and
slew the fattest of them, and smote
down the young of Israel.”

** Heaven is most just, and of our pleasant

vices
Makes instruments to soourge us.”
—Shakespeare.


* Whatsoever a man soweth thas shall
448


he also reap.” In the judgments of
God against sin there is nothing arbi-
trary. A sinners punishment is the
natural fruit of His sin. The hell of
every sinner is developed out of his own
corrupt heart. Let the wicked be
warned. They are “ treasuring up
wrath against the day of wrath, and
revelation of the righteous judgment of
God.”

4. Reveals the punishment as being
brought about by the forces of nature.
“‘ He caused an east wind to blow in the
heavens ; and by His power He brought
in the south wind.” By means of a
south-east wind, God brought immense
quantities of quails into the camp of’
Israel. This wind is so spoken of as to
lead us to conclude that it was miracu-
lous. By His direct agency, He caused
it to blow from that particular quarter.
All the powers of nature are under His
command. He can employ them as He
pleases. The winds are His couriers,
carrying messages of judgment or of
mercy to men. Again, let the wicked
be warned. You are not only preparing
your own punishment, but God may
command nature’s forces to aid in carry-
ing out His judgment upon you. You
are gathering the materials for your own .
hell-fire, and God may despatch the
lightning-flash which shall kindle them
into a blaze,

ConcLusion. — Let us especially
ponder,—1. The great evil of unbelief.
It is a reflection cast upon God; it
grieves Him, &c. 2. The peril of un-
submissiveness in prayer. “He gave
them their request, but sent leanness
into their soul.” 3, The terribleness of
the Divine anger, “The wrath of the
Lamb; the great day of His wrath is
come; and who shall be able to stand?”
4. The certainty of Divine retribution.
The only way by which we may escape
hell is by getting rid of a sinful cha
racter. ‘The blood of Jesus Christ
His Soo cleanszeth us from all ain.”


i"


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


POALM LXXVIIL.


eS Seen


Maw’s Provocation or Gop, anv Gop’s Parreyce with Max.
(Verses 32-41.)


IL Man’s provocation of God.
“They sinned still, and believed not
for His wondrous works.” In the verses
before us the Psalmist mentions two chief
features of their provocation of God.

1. Their persistence in evil. They
persevered in their wnbelief. All
the wondrous works which they had
witnessed failed to quicken faith in
them. Notwithstanding the many mira
cles which God had wrought in their
sight, they still doubted His power.
Notwithstanding His great and constant
kindness to them, they still doubted
His goodness, It was thus that they
“limited the Holy One of Israel.” They
regarded His willingness and ability to
aid them as bounded, Man’s unbelief
ever limits and dishonours God, They
also persevered in their murmuring and
rebellious spirit,, “ How often did they
rebel in the wilderness, and grieve Him
in the desert?” When any inconven-
ience met them, or any difficulty or
privation confronted them, they at once
fell to murmuring against Moses and
against the Lord. Their mean and un-
grateful spirits were constantly turning
to thoughts and feelings of rebellion
against God. And this, notwithstand-
ing all God’s efforts to effect their moral
reformation, His mercies awoke no
feeling of humility, gratitude, or trust
in them ; but were followed by exhibi-
tions of selfishness and unreasonable
exaction. His judgments produced no
lasting improvement in their character ;
for, as soon as they were removed, the
people returned to their old courses,
“For all this they sinned still.” What
a correct representation is this of many
sinners to-day! God has enriched them
with countless blessings, but His good-
ness has not led them to repentance.
He has smitten them with the rod of
affliction, but they have not turned in
penitence to Him. He has stripped
them of temporal prosperity, He has
taken from them the desire of their eyes
at a stroke, He has shut them up in
loneliness and sorrow of heart, yet have
they not turned unto Him He seems to

rE


have used every means for their salva-
tion ; yet “for all this they sinned still.”

2. Their spurious repentance. When
God’s severe judgments were upon
Israel they sought Him in apparent
humility and penitence. But their peni-
tence was neither deep nor sincere. (1.)
The confessions and promises which they
made to God were untrue, ‘They did
flatter Him with their mouth, and they
lied unto Him with their tongues.
They could not deceive Him. Yet
their repentance was false. Their prayers
and professions made in affliction were
not hearty, but were extorted by suffer-
ing. And the promises they made to
God were not kept, but forgotten when
the pain and peril were removed. (2.)
Their heart was not really turned to
God. “ Their heart was not right with
Him.” In true repentance the soul
turns from sin with loathing and abhor-
rence, and seeks God with humility,
and faith, and prayer. It was not the
sin that they shrank from, but the pen-
alties of the sin. (3.) Their life re-
mained unchanged. “ Neither were they
stedfast in His covenant.” ‘The pro-
mises made in affliction were speedily
broken. Addison says that repentance
is “the relinquishment of any practice,
from the conviction that it has offended
God. Sorrow, fear, and anxiety are
properly not parts, but adjuncts of re-
pentance; yet they are too closely con-
nected with it to be easily separated.”
Shakspeare defines it thus : “Repentance
is heart’s sorrow, and a clear life ensu-
ing.” But the Israelites did not relin-
quish their sinful practices, A “clear
life” did not follow their pretended re-
peptance. ‘He who seeks repentance
for the past, should woo the angel virtue
for the future.” But they provoked
God by their frequent rebellions. His
heart was grieved, and pained by their
many and heinous sins against Him.

IL God’s patience with man. This
was manifested in—

1. His judgments upon them. “ Their
days did He consume in vanity, and their
years in trouble. He slew them.” His

449


PSALM LXXVI.


judgments were severe, but not so severe
as they had deserved. They were not suffi-
ciently severe to restrain the people from
returning to their evil ways. And when
they cried unto him, or Moses entreated
Him for them, He withdrew His stroke
away from them. And as for their
bootless wanderings in the wilderness —
were such craven-hearted creatures the
men to go up against the Canaanites
and conquer them? Retaining, as they
did, the spirit of slaves, were they fit
to be intrusted with freedom and inde-
pendence in a land of their own? In
His very judgments God manifested His
patience and mercy, or, instead of leav-
ing them to live out their life in the
wilderness, He would have consumed
them in His anger when they had pro-
voked Him by their unbelief, and mur-
murings, and rebellion.

2. Hts mercies to them. “‘ He being
full of compassion forgave their iniquity,
and destroyed them not; yea, many a
time turned He His anger away, and
did not stir up all His wrath.” In
their base rebellions He did not destroy
them. Though they had provoked Him
many times, yet many times He turned
His anger away from them. And when
He did visit them in’ judgment, He did
not pour the full flood of His fury upon
them. “He did not deal with them
after their sins, nor reward them accord-
ing to their iniquities.” ‘“ He forgave
their iniquity.” He not only removed
the dark and threatening clouds of His
wrath, but He lifted upon them the
light of His forgiving and favouring
countenance. How graciously and com-
pletely God forgives! ‘As far as the
east is from the west, so far hath He
removed our transgressions from us.”


“ Thou hast cast all my sins behind Thy





HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: PSALMS.





“Thou hast cast all their sine
into the depths of the sea.” ‘He will
abundantly pardon.” Thus graciously
and patiently God has dealt with us.

3. His remembrance of them. ‘“ He
remembered that they were but flesh; a
wind that passeth away, and cometh not
again.” He remembered their frazlty
and corruption. ‘They were flesh,” and
liable to suffering and pain. “ They
were flesh,” and exposed to temptation,
and prone to evil; and, therefore, He
had long patience with them. He spared
them when He would otherwise have
destroyed them. He had compassion
on them. He remembered their evan-
escence. ‘A wind that passeth away, |
and cometh not again.” “ Life is a
vapour, that appeareth for a little time,
and then vanisheth away.”

*¢ How short is human life ! the very breath
Which frames my words, accelerates my
death.” —H. More,
The Lord remembered this, and spared
them when their sins loudly called for
their destruction.

This subject urges its—1. Warning to
all who have long persisted tn evil. This
generation so patiently borne with, «
mercifully dealt with, at last found their
graves in the wilderness, Beware lest.
through further persistence in evil you
life ends in utter failure as regards ali
that is true and good. 2. Hncourage-
ment even to themost sinful to seek the Lord.
His long patience with you proclaims
His willingness to pardon and save you
Turn unto Him heartily in true repent-
ance (Isa. lv. 6, 7). 3. Counsel to all.
Let us not frustrate God’s gracious deal-
ings with us, By judgments and by
mercies He seeks to save us. Let us
trust Him, and earnestly enter into His
gracious designs concerning us,


back.”


Man vuNDER DIVINE CHASTISEMENT.
(Verses 34-37.)


I. Man under Divine chastisement
sorely smitten. “When He slew
them.” See the case before us in this
Psalm, vers. 30 and 31, Examples are
frequently transpiring. There are some
who, like this generation of Israelites,
seem to need stroke upon stroke of the

450


rod of God
5.)
II. Man under Divine chastisement
remembering God. “They remem-
bered that God was their rock, and the
Most High,” &ec. ‘‘ Reflection followed
infliction.” They remembered God—


(Comp, Isa. i 4 and


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


PSALM LXXVI.





1. As their Rock. Three ideas here:
(1.) Security. He shall dwell on high :
His place of defence shall be the muni-
tions of rocks.” (2.) Stability. “A stone,
a tried stone, a precious corner stone, a
sure foundation.” (3.) Shelter. ‘The
shadow of a great rock in a weary
land.”

2. As their Redeemer. He had re-
deemed them from the bondage of
Egypt; therefore He was able to save
them, and worthy of their trust.

III. Man under Divine chastisement
seeking God. ‘‘Then they sought Him;
and they returned and inquired,” &c.

1. “They returned,” implying that
they had departed from God. Here we
have the reason of the chastisement.

2. “ They inqutred early after God.”
In their prosperity they had forgotten
God, in their affliction they promptly
jnquired after Him.

3. “ They sought Him.” Aforetime
they had neglected and forsaken Him;
now they search for Him by prayers and
sacrifices, How inexpressibly mean.
‘‘Like whipped curs, they licked their
Master’s feet.”

IV. Man under Divine chastise-
ment offering to God unreal repent-
ance. ‘‘ Nevertheless they did flatter
Him,” &c., vers. 36 and 37. Repent-
ance begotten of terror or suffering dies
when the terror or suffering is removed,
Their penitence was pretence. ‘‘ Under


the pressure of heavy judgments, the
loss of property, the loss of friends, or
the failure of health, men become serious,
and resolve to give attention to religion.
It is rarely that such purposes are
founded in sincerity, and that the con-
versions apparently resulting from them
are true conversions.” “The devil can-
not be whipped out of human nature,
though another devil, namely hypocrisy,
may be whipped into it.”  Qood re-
solutions called at their hearts as men
do at inns; they tarried awhile, and then
took their leave.” Two main features
of true repentance were wanting to them.
1. Change of heart. ‘Their heart was
not right with Him.” In true repent-
ance sin is regarded as the “ abominable
thing,” and the sinner turns from it to
God. But “they would fain be rid of
their sufferings, but did not care to be
rid of their sins.”

2. Reformation of life. ‘‘ Neither
were they steadfast in His covenant.”
The truly penitent turn ‘“ from evil and
do good.” They ‘‘ make haste and delay
not to keep God’s commandments.” But
the Israelites “sinned still.” How awful
to offer to God a mockery and a sham!

Conciusion.—1. Remember the fate
of this generation of the Israelites, and
take warning. 2. Consider the mercy
that sought to save them both by favours
and by judgments, believe in tt, accept tt,
and be saved.


THe Exercise or THE Divinz MEnroy.
(Verses 38, 39.)


L In holding back deserved punish-
ment. “He destroyed them not,” &e.
Notice—

1. Their sins against God were very
heinous. Ingratitude, though His good-
ness to them was very great. Un-
belief, though they had much to quicken
and strengthen faith. Rebellion, though
God’s rale over them had been marked
by so much patience and generosity.
2. Their sins against God were very
numerous, ‘ How oft did they provoke
Him in the wilderness, and grieve Him in
the desert.” Many atime turned He His
anger away.” God’s forbearing mercy
was manifested—(1.) In not stnfiscting


the judgments threatened (Deut. ix.
13-20; Num. xiv. 11-21). (2.) Jn only
partially inflicting the judgments threat-
ened. Asin the case of the judgment
of the fiery flying serpents, and the heal-
ing of the diseased and dying by means of
the brazen serpent. And others, How
frequently when we have sinned has God
graciously turned His anger away from us.

II. In forgiving great iniquities.
How frequently God forgives, ‘ Not
until seven times; but until seventy
times seven.” “He aboundeth in for-
giveness.” How completely God forgives,
“Though your sins be as scarlet, they
chall be as white as snow ; though they be

451


PRALM LEXVIMI,


HMOMILELIC COMMENTARY: PSALILS,





red like crimson, they shall be as wool.”
“TI, [am He that blotteth out thy trans-
gressions for mine own sake, and will not
remember thy sins.”
moves His condemnation from us, but lifts
upon us the light of His countenance.

TI. In compassionating human frail-
ties. “He remembered that they were
but flesh, a wind,’ &c. He remembered—

1. Man’s tendency to sin. “ Flesh.”
Our carnal appetites are depraved. By
means of the flesh the soul is frequently
tempted to evil.


He not only re-.


2. Man’s exposure to suffering. “Flesh.”
The body is subject to weariness, infir-
mity, disease, pain, death.

3. Man’s brief tenure of life.
wind that,” de.
(2.) Hver-moving.
mg.

Conotusion.—In the great mercy of
God to us, behold—

1. The grand support of frawd ha-
manity. (Ps. ciii. 13-18.)

2. The grand hope of sinful humanity,
ver. 38. (Ps. clit 3, 4, 8-12.)


“A
(1.) Unsubstantial.
(3.) Never return-


Maw’s Lire upon Earrs.
(Verse 39.)


“He remembered that they were but
flesh,” &c.

I. The weakness of human life.
““He remembered that they were but
flesh.” Man is here regarded—

1. As having a tendency to evil. “The
flesh lusteth against the spirit.” Ani-
mal appetites are often opposed to
spiritual aspirations. Animal passions
to moral principles.

2. As being subject toweakness, affliction,
and pain, There is much of physical
suffering in human lifeupon earth, and the
mystery and pain of death at the close,

II. The unsubstantiality of human
life. ‘ Wind.”

“ Life’s but a walking shadow; a poor player,
That struts and frets hia hour upon the stage,
And then is heard no more: it is a tale
Told by an idiot, full of sound and fury,
Signifying nothing.” —Shakespeare.

Of the work of the most gifted and
laborious of men how little result re-
mains! Man himself passes away, leav-
ing few traces behind him.

Til. The impermanence of human
life. ‘ Passeth away. This is true of—

1. Individuals. “It is appointed
unto men once to die.”

2, Generations. “One generation
passeth away, and another generation
cometh.”

“Fast to thedriving winds the marshalledclouds
Sweep discontinuous o’er the ethereal plain !
Another still upon another crowda,

All hastening downwards to their native main,
Thus passes o’er through varied life’s career
Man’s fleetimg age ; the seagons as they fly

Snatch from us in their course, year after year,


Some sweet connection, some endearing tée,
4&2


The parent, ever honoured, ever dear,
Claims from the filial breast the pious sigh;
A brother’s urn demands the kindred tear,
And gentle sorrows gush from friendship’s eye,
To-day we frolic in the rosy bloom

Of jocund youth—the morrow knells us to

the tomb,”’

5. The race in this world. The
human race will not remain on this
earth for ever. The earth as it now is
will not continue for ever. The great
drama shall be played out, and the
theatre shall then be taken down.

IV. The irretrievableness of human
life. ‘‘Cometh not again.” ‘Whena
few years are come, then I shall go the
way whence I shall not return.” Man
passes hence to “the undiscovered
country, from whose bourn no traveller
returns.” What an argument have we
here for the prompt and faithful dis
charge of duty! ‘“ Whatsoever thy hand
findeth to do, do with thy might ; for
there is no,” &c. “I must work the
works of Him that sent me while,” &,
There is no coming back to correct
errors or to discharge neglected duties,
&e.

V. The grand distinction of human
life. Jt is remembered by God. He is
interested in it. 1. He remembers our
frailties and sufferings, and pities us.
2. Our weakness, and succours us. 3.
Our capabilities, and saves us. Here ia
the glory of human life. God is con-
cerned in it. He is working in it and
for it. Through Him man shall

“ Re-rise from ruin,


High, holy, happy, stainless as a star,
Imuperishable as eternity.” ;


AOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PRALM LXXVIS3.





Tax Instruments anD Mernops or True Divine JupeMEnra.
(Verses 42-53.)


In this paragraph the Psalmist speaks
of the plagues with which God visited
Egypt, and by means of which Pharaoh
and his people were humbled, and the
Israelites were delivered from bondage.
He does not mention all the plagues,
and those which he does mention are
not named in the order of their oc-
currence, The subject is introduced
here as affording another illustration of
the great sinfulness of the unbelief and
rebelliousness of the Hebrews.

I. The instruments by which Divine
judgments are inflicted.

1. He uses their famous river as an
tnstrument of His judgments. With
them the river was the great means of
life, and a thing in which they boasted
themselves; but God turned all its
waters into blood. When purified from
slime, those waters were most delicious
drink ; but now they are most loath-
some even to look upon. In this case,
the great glory of a people was turned
by God into their great curse. He
can make our choicest treasures His
instruments to scourge us for our
Bins,

2. He uses some most despicable crea-
tures as instruments of His judgments.
“Flies, frogs, caterpillars, locusts.” The
great Pharaoh, with his princes and
nobles, were greatly afflicted and tor-
mented by these insignificant creatures.
God can make use of the weakest and
meanest creatures to bring down the
pride of the loftiest princes. What they
are deficient in strength, He makes up
by increasing their numbers. Terrible
plagues they were. No armour could
ward off the flies. The frogs came in such
shoals as to defy all repressive measures,
While caterpillars and locusts came in
dense clouds, devouring every green
thing.

3. He uses the elements of nature
as instruments of His judgments.
“Hail, frost, lightnings,” The laws and
forces of nature bow loyally to the Lord.
The God of providence is the God of
nature also, and when He pleases He


can use nature’s elements and forces for
the carrying out of His plans. In this
ease, He sends forth the hail as his
scourge. The frost is the minister of
His wrath. The lightnings are the
executioners of His judgments.

4. He uses angels as instruments of
His judgments. By the term “ end
angels” we are to understand not that
the angels spoken of were themselves
wicked, but angels who were used by
God for bringing evil or calamity upon
the wicked. The reference is to the
angel, or angels, who smote with death
all the first-born of the Egyptians. All
holy angels come and go at God’s com-
mand. “ Angels that excel in strength,
do His commandments, hearkening unto
the voice of His word.” He sends them
forth to succour and deliver the right-
eous, or to smite and destroy the wicked,
and they hasten to do His bidding.
Thus we see that God can use any and
all of His creatures as instruments to
carry out His judgments, if He please
to do so. He can arm all nature,—air,
earth, fire, water—to fight against those
who refuse to submit to Him. He can
employ all ranks of creatures, from the
tiny insect of an hour to the august
“angel standing in the sun,” as mes-
sengers of His wrath. He can arm the
universe to fight against the wicked.

II. The method according to which
Divine judgments are inflicted. Two
features of the Divine method of ad-
ministering judgment stand prominently
forth here,

1. Gradualness tn the severity of the
judgments. Pharaoh must suffer, but
God will spare him as much as possible,
The sternest judgments are reserved to
the last, so that if the proud monarch
will obey the commands of God he may
escape their infliction. Mark the grada-
tion in the severity of these judgments,
First, they suffer privation and annoy-
ance by reason of the water being turned
into blood, and the plague of frogs.
Then they suffer the irritation and the
severe pain ef body arising from the

453


PSALM LXXVII,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





plague of flies and that of boils. Then
they suffer the loss and disappointment
of seeing the fruit of their labours con-
sumed by caterpillars and locusts, They.
also saw the trees of their fields and
vineyards destroyed by hail, and their
flocks and herds first afflicted with a
grievous murrain, and afterwards de-
stroyed by hail and lightning. But still
God has heavier and more terrible judg-
ments in store. After every plague
there is a pause in the storm of the
Divine anger to ascertain if Pharaoh
will repent and obey God. (od has no
pleasure in smiting him. But when the
former plagues have failed to produce
any lasting and salutary impression upon
the king, God prepares to inflict the
severest stroke of all, to “cast upon
them the fierceness of His anger, wrath,
and indignation, and trouble, by send-
ing” His angels to destroy all the first-
born of the land of Egypt. And in one
dread night all the first-born of the land
were slain, “from the first-born of
Pharaoh that sat on his throne, unto the
first-born of the captive that was in the
dungeon; and all the first-born of
cattle.” The gradualness with which
God inflicts His judgments is a proof
that even in wrath He remembers mercy.
Tt should also act as a warning to the
impenitent not to provoke God to do
His worst. He has sharper swords in
His armoury than He has as yet drawn
against you.

2. The exemption of the Israelites
from the judgments. When the Egyp-
tians suffered the Lord separated the
Israelites from them. From the common
sufferings and trials of life the people of
God are not exempted; but from the
judgments of God they are exempted.
When the world was destroyed by the
flood, Noah and his family were saved.
Before the fiery deluge consumed the
cities of the plain, Lot was rescued
from them. In the terrible siege and


Tue WITHDRAWAL OF


destruction of Jerusalem it is not know,
that any Christian perished. So will it
be in the final judgment.

Ill. The object for which the
Divine judgments are inflicted. The
object of the judgments inflicted on
Egypt was, at least, threefold—

l. The humbling of the proud Pharaoh
and his advisers.

2. The emancipation of Israel from
their captivity, de.

3. The carrying out of His own great
plan. The great plan of God, a small
portion of which was developed by
means of these judgments, stretches far
beyond the Egyptians and the Israelites,
It embraces all ages and all peoples.
The Hebrews occupy a most important
position in that plan. ‘Of whom as
concerning the flesh Christ came.” God
makes all events contribute to the
development of His own wise, bene-
volent, and glorious purposes,

Conciusion.—1l. Let the manifold
snstruments of Divine judgments lead the
stout-hearted sinner to pause and con-
sider. “If He will contend with him,
he cannot answer Him one of a thou-
sand, He is wise in heart, and mighty _
in strength: who hath hardened him-
self against Him and hath prospered 1”
2. Let the method of Divine judgments,
as here exhibited, strengthen our confidence
in the righteousness and mercy of God.
He is merciful to tyrants such as
Pharaoh. He is righteous and will not
in judgment “destroy the righteous
with the wicked.” 3. Let us mark well
the assurance which this subject gives us
of the certainty of the accomplishment of
the Divine purposes. He has engines of
judgment wherewith to crush incorrigible
rebels. He controls all events for the
furtherance of his own vast and sublime
designs. In the end evil shall be en-
gulfed as in ocean’s depths, and the
exultant praise of the good shall resound
throughout the universe.


THE DIVINE PRESENOR.


(Verses 54-64.)


In this portion of the Psalm, as in the
previous portions, we have brought be-
454


fore us the sad sins of the Hebrews, and
the great goodness of God in His deal-


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





ings with them both of mercy and of
judgment. We may profitably group
the teachings of the paragraph round
verses 60 and 61, as a centre, and take
as our subject; The withdrawal of the
Divine presence. When the Israelites
had entered upon the possession of
Canaan, they set up the tabernacle at
Shiloh, where it remained during the
period of the Judges, During the ad-
ministration of Eli, who was at once
high priest and judge, the moral condi-
tion of Israel grew extremely evil. His
two sons, Hophni and Phinehas, were
notorious for their wickedness, ‘The
war between the Philistines and Israelites
broke out anew. A bloody battle was
fought at Aphek, in which the Israelites
were totally defeated, They determined
to resort to those means of conquest
which had proved irresistible under the
direction of Joshua. They sent to
Shiloh for the Ark, and the Ark was
brought forth from its holy place, and
was placed in the centre of the camp of
Israel. But the days were gone when
the rivers dried up, and the walls of
cities fell down, and the enemy fled at
once, before the symbol of the presence
of Israel’s God. The measure was un-
authorised by the Divine command... .
The Israelites fought with desperate but
unavailing resolution—the iron chariots
of the Philistines triumphed. Thirty
thousand Israelites perished, and the
Ark of God fell into the hands of the
uncircumcised—the guilty sons of Eli
were slain in its defence. The aged
high priest sat by the wayside in dread-
ful anxiety for the fate of the Ark. A
messenger rushed in, bearing the sad
intelligence ; a wild cry ran through the
whole city; the blind old man, now
ninety-eight years of age, fell from his
seat, broke his neck, and died.” (Vide
1 Sam. iv.) After seven months the
Philistines sent back the Ark, which
was placed successively at Nob and at
Gibeon, and finally by David on Mount
Zion. In our text we are taught that
it was in consequence of the sins of the
people that the Ark was removed for
ever from Shiloh, in the tribe of
Ephraim, and was at length placed upon
Monnt Zion, ia the tribe of Judah.





PRALN LIXVIOL.





When the Ark was removed by the
Philistines the Israelites felt that God
had abandoned them, and that their
independence and glory had departed
for ever.

I. The withdrawal of the Divine
presence is invariably preceded by
many and aggravated sins.

1. The sins of Israel were many.
They were guilty of oft-repeated acts of
disobedience. ‘“ They kept not His testi-
monies.” As they had tempted and
provoked God in the wilderness, so alse
did they in Canaan under the judges,
They were guilty of unfatthfulness to
God. They turned away from God in
their hearts and in their lives, no reli-
ance was to be placed upon them, they
were untrue even in their most solemn
engagements, As a treacherous bow in
the hands of the archer fails of its true
aim and may occasion disaster, so Lad
they proved in relation to God utterly
untrustworthy. They were guilty of
tdolatry. Imitating the idolatrous
Canaanites, they had erected altars on
high places, and bowed down to graven
images. They committed spiritual
adultery, and so moved God to jealousy.
Can we wonder that God withdrew from
them? That they, whom He had chosen
as His own people, and called to be the
witnesses to the nations of His essential
unity, and blessed above all others,—
that they should depart from Him unto
idols is surely a trumpet-call for the
display of His signal displeasure.

2. The sins of [srael were aggravated.
To estimate their sin aright we must
view it in the light of His dealings with
them. Look at their disobedience in
the light of His great goodness to them,
their unfaithfulness in the light of His
constant fidelity, their idolatry in the
light of His non-abandonment of them
notwithstanding their sins, and you will
be able to appreciate the greatness of
their wickedness which led to His with-
drawal from their midst. ‘God never
leaves us till we leave Him, never with-
draws till we have driven Him from us.”
See this in the case of Saul, the king of
Israel. Not until he had grieved God
by repeated acts of disobedience did God
forsake him. See also the case of the

455


ALM LXXVOL


AOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; PSALMS,





Jews, Notwithstanding extreme provo-
cation God continued to own and bless
them, until they had filled up the


measure of their iniquity by rejecting


and crucifying Him, in the person of
His Son. And even then He rejected
them with unutterable sorrow and bitter
tears. Thus He deals now with
individuals. He does not desert the
temple of the human soul until He is
driven thence by inexpugnable depravity.
He never says of any one, “let him
alone,” unless he is hopelessly ‘joined
unto his idols.” Thus He deals with
churches also. Persistent infidelity to
duty, truth, and God, will cause Him to
depart from any church, leaving it in
the darkness of error and evil to sink
into dreary nothingness,

Il. The withdrawal of the Divine
presence is invariably succeeded by
many and terrible calamities. In the
case of Israel it was followed by—

1. The loss of power and honour.
The Ark is spoken of by the Psalmist as
the strength and glory, or ornament of
God. On many occasions it had been a
defence and an inspiration to Israel.
It was the visible symbol of their dis-
tinction and glory as the chosen people
of God, among whom He dwelt. When
it was captured by their enemies, their
inspiration and fortitude were gone, and
their glory had suffered a dreary eclipse.
Let God abandon a man, and all moral
power, all spiritual dignity are gone. Let
Him withdraw from a church, and, what-
ever else may remain, the spiritual life,
strength, and glory have all passed
away.

2. Defeat and slaughter in battle. In
the battle of Aphek thirty thousand
Israelites were slain. Forsaken by God,
they could not stand before their ene-
mies. In our personal spiritual conflicts
we are strong only as we are animated
by God. If He withdraw from us we
shall fall an easy victim to our enemies,
In the war of the Church against igno-
rance and sin she is strong in exact pro-
portion as God is with her. If He
desert her, though all her arrangements
and offices are perfect in other respects,
her victorious life and power are com-
pletely gone,

456


3. Great social misery. “The fire
consumed their young men, and their
maidens were not given to marriage,”
&c. The young men were slain in battle
The maidens were thus doomed to in-
voluntary maidenhood. They ‘‘were not
praised ” in the songs which were usually
sung at marriage celebrations. “Their
priests fell by the sword.” The refer
ence is to Hophni and Phinehas, who
were sinners before the Lord exceedingly,
and who were out of place amid the
ferocity and carnage of a battle-field.
When the priests of God were slain it
was regarded as a most severe calamity.
“And their widows made no lamenta-
tions.” Take one case in point. When’
the wife of Phinehas heard the issue of
the battle of Aphek, she “was seized
with the pains of premature labour ;
the women around her endeavoured to
console her with the intelligence that
she had borne a male child: she paid
no attention to their words, and only
uttered a passionate exclamation. The
pride and exultation of maternal tender-
ness, the grief for her father-in-law and
her husband, were absorbed in a deeper
feeling. She said, The Ark of God ts
taken; and she called her child Ichabod,
the glory is departed from Israel.” Sor-
rows for personal loss were swallowed
up by the great sorrow for the national
loss and dishonour. In verses 63 and
64 we thus trace the outlines of a pic-
ture of extreme social misery. Let God
withdraw from a people, and the greatest
social wretchedness must supervene.

Brothers, heed well the message of
this subject to you personally. ‘Grieve
not the Holy Spirit of God.” You have


grieved Him much already, Then pray
to Him at once—


“* Stay, thou insulted Spirit, stay,
Though I have done Thee such despite,
Nor cast the sinner quite away,
Nor take Thine everlasting flight.”
—C0. We


Let Christian churches also heed the
warning voice, “Trust ye not in lying
words saying, The temple of the Lord,
The temple of the Lord, The temple of
the Lord are these. . . . But go ye now
into my place which was in Shiloh,
where I set my name at the first, and


HOMILETIC OOMMENTARY ; PSALMS.


see what I did to it for the wickedness
of my people Israel.” “Repent,” ye
backsliding churches, “and do your firat
works,” or God may say of you, “ Pray


ILLUSTRATIONS OF THE


( Verses


In these verses God in His sove-
reignty is represented as—

I. Arousing Himself to interpose in
human affairs. ‘Then the Lord
awaked as one out of sleep, like a
mighty man that shouteth by reason of
wine. And He smote,” &. He arose,

1. To smite His enemies. He had
made use of the Philistines to punish
His people for their sins; but they
were not His servants. Their pride and
power were used by Him for the execu-
tion of His purposes, but they wist not
what they did. And now He arises for
their confusion. By raising up and
sending forth against them His servant
David He rebuked their insolence,
curbed their power, and in due time
drove them from every portion of the
land of Canaan. Nay, more, “ He put
them to a perpetual reproach ;” for, as
Hengstenberg remarks, “The eternal
shame is in accordance with the history.
The Philistines went downward step by
step, till they disappeared from the
scene altogether.”

2. To adjust the affairs of Hts people.
Though He withdrew from them for a
season, He had not cast them off for
ever. He again comes to their help, in
the manner indicated in the text, and
which we shall shortly consider. In the
representation which the Psalmist gives
of God arousing Himself, as a mighty
man refreshed by sleep and wine, and
shouting for the battle, there is much
that is anthropomorphical and poetical.
God never sleeps, His control of human
affairs is continuous. His sovereign
purposes are ever being developed under
His superintendence. His activity is
incessant. But there are periods in
which His hand is not manifest in
human affairs, in which He seems
regardless of the interests of His people,
as though He slept and knew not the


PSALM LXXVII,





not for this people, neither lift up cry
nor prayer for them, neither make in-
tercession to Me; for I will not hear
thee,”’


SoveREianry or Gop.
65-73.)


state of those affairs. His sovereignty
is calm, eternal, unchangeable. But ita
continuity and immutability of opera-
tion is not fully manifest to us. Thus,
for a time, He appeared to resign His
control of the affairs of Israel and to
surrender them to their enemies. Now
that His hand is again manifest, the
poet pictures Him as a mighty warrior
arousing from slumber and shouting
with joy to do battle with His foes.

It. Rejecting men from the posses-
gion of privileges. ‘‘ He refused the
tabernacle of Joseph, and chose not the
tribe of Ephraim.” He deposed Eph-
raim from the priority and supremacy
which that tribe had hitherto held. Why
did He so? This Psalm is a complete
answer to the inquiry. Why, except
that they were no longer worthy of
holding that position; nay, that they
were utterly unworthy. Our Lord, in
many instances, represents God as re-
jecting men, and we believe that in every
instance the rejection is because of some
fatal flaw in the character of the men
rejected. He delights not in rejecting
men, but in accepting them,

III. Selecting men to the posses-
sion of privileges and the perform-
ance of duties. ‘He chose the tribe
of Judah,” &e.

1. He selected Judah to receive the
sanctuary. Ephraim had been tried, and
had been found sadly wanting. Now the
Lord will try Judah. So that tribe is
raised to precedence. Within its territory
on Mount Zion the sanctuary was estab-
lished, and the seat of government
placed ; and from its people King David
was chosen. And this was in accordance
with God’s sovereign purposes, The
supremacy of Judah had been predicted
by Jacob long before (Gen. xlix. 8-10).
And from that tribe tre Messiah was to
come forth. God still selects men to be

457


PeaLM LXXVIL


the recipients of privileges. Some enter
upon the work of life with countless
advantages, while others enter upon that
work burdened and straitened by reason
of disadvantages. He still selects
nations to privileges, and honours, and
responsibilities.

2. He selected David to become the
sovereign. ‘He chose David also His
servant, and took him from the sheep-
folds,” &c. Here is a remarkable ex-
ample of Divine sovereignty. (1.) God
chooses a man of humble position to fill
the most exalted position. ‘He took
him from the sheepfolds,” &. David
was not of royal descent, nor was he
selected because of his acquaintance with
king’s courts, or with the arts of king-
craft. ‘‘ He was bred not a scholar, not
a soldier, but a shepherd.” He was
chosen not for his appearance or posi-
tion, but for his ability and character.
“ Man looketh on the outward appear-
ance, but the Lord looketh on the heart.”
(2.) God chooses a man of eminent fit-
ness for the most exalted position. David
was aman of singularly great ability.
He was remarkable for strength, courage,
endurance, tact, ruling faculty, &ce. He
was distinguished as.a shepherd, warrior,
musician, poet, and king. He was a
man of approved faithfulness. As a
shepherd he was no hireling. He had
risked his own life to defend that of
some members of his flock. He seems
to have been particularly careful of
“those that were with young.” Having
been faithful in his lowly sphere, God
raised him to the honours and responsi-
bilities of the most lofty sphere. He
was a man of noble character. He is
eminent for gentleness, generosity, and
self-sacrifice ; he was profoundly religi-
ous ; but for the one black and painful
exception, he lived as a man who had
set God always before him ; he was a
man after God’s own heart. Thus in
His sovereignty God selected the fittest
instrument for the great work. He can
use the most incompetent instrument for
the most important task. But such is
not His rule of action, In calling men
to important posts, He selects for each
post him who is most adapted for it,
God’s sovereignty is a thing of infinite

458


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


wisdom. He does not choose the most
ignorant and incapable man for the
greatest mission (as some men seem to
hold and certainly preach), but the
greatest and godliest. He can employ
the feeblest intelligence. And He calls
the man of scholarship, and genius,
and heroism, and faith, and power, to
consecrate himself thoroughly to His
service,

IV. Establishing a beneficent insti-
tution. ‘He built His sanctuary like
high,” &, We have here the ideas of
prominence and stability. ‘ Palaces” is
supplied by the translators. The taber-
nacle, and afterwards the temple, was
the most conspicuous and important
thing in the land. Its services appealed
to all that was tender, true, and noble
in their nature ; its ministrations were
fitted to help them to attain to strength
and beauty of character. Those insti-
tutions which contribute to our right
spiritual development are of all others
the most valuable and beneficent. God
established His sanctuary there. It was
not to be removed as it was from Shiloh.
It was to be a permanent institution,
and permanent there. So it continued.
The tabernacle gave place to its magni-
ficent successor the temple, which re-
mained with varying fortunes until its
mission was accomplished, and then the
local Jewish temple made way for the
universal Christian Church.

V. Resulting in human advantage.
The reign of the divinely elected king
was an inestimable benefit to Israel.
“ He fed them according to the integrity
of His heart; and guided them by the
skilfulness of His hands.” His admi-
nistration was pure and upright, wise
and beneficent. During his reign the
kingdom attained to a rank among
nations and to a height of prosperity
altogether unknown, if not unimagined,
hitherto. In choosing a king for them,
God’s sovereignty was the people’s pros-
perity.

From this rapid glance at these illus-
trations of the sovereignty of God, we
learn—1. That God’s sovereignty 1s not
capriciously or unreasonably arbitrary,
buc a thing of the highest reason and
wisdom. 2. God's sovereignty ts not


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.
a








weak and changeful, but eternally and
tmmutably great and good. 3. God’s
sovereignty ts not tyrannical, but in per-
feet accordance with man’s entire moral
Treedom. 4, God's sovereignty ts not
malevolent or maleficent, but benevolent


PSALM LXXIX.


and beneficent in the highest degree, In
one word, it is the sovereignty of GOD,
the supremely Wise and Good. “For
of Him, and through Him, and to Him,
are all things: to whom be glory for
ever, Amen,”


Tae Caine or Dav.
(Verses 70, 71.)


IL David’s Calling. Two questions
present themselves. 1. Howwas David's
shepherd life an unconscious preparation
Sor his calling? and 2. How did the Divine
summons, when tt came, fit him for his
mighty destiny ? Observe—He was sent
back to his flocks. Nothing could train
him more perfectly than that waiting.
Two great convictions awakened in him


then that formed in him elements of


PSALM


strength. (1.) The belief in a Divine
leader (see Psalm xxiii.) (2.) The be
lief in a Divine choice.

II. Its modern lessons. 1. There is
@ Divine plan in every life. 2. There is
a Divine vocation for every man. 3.
There is a Divine Shepherd for every
man.—E. L, Hout, in The Treasury of
David.


LXXIX


INTRODUCTION.


Superseription,—"* A Psalm of Asaph.”


See Introduction to Pealm lxxtv.


Occasion.—This Psalm is closely related to the lxxivth, and both most probably refer to
the devastation and desecration wrought by the Chaldeans,


A SorrowruL CompPLarmnt, AN Earnest PRAYER, AND A Devout
RESOLUTION.


I. A sorrowful complaint. The
Psalmist complains—

1. Of the devastation of Jerusalem,
and especially of the desecration of the
temple. ‘*O God, the heathen are come
into Thine inheritance ; Thy holy tem-
ple have they defiled ; they have laid
Jerusalem on heaps.” ‘The reference is
to the havoc wrought by Nebuchad-
nezzar and his army. The strongholds
of the city were cast down ; the palace
of Solomon, the temple of God, with
all its courts, its roofs of cedar and of
gold, were levelled to the earth, or com-
mitted to the flames ; the sacred vessels,
the ark of the covenant itself, with the
cherubim, were pillaged by profane hands.
(See 2 Chron, xxxvi. 18,19.) Great,
indeed, must have been the distress of
those Jews who were religious and patri-
otic. Their distress must have been the


more keen by reason of their knowledge
that the heathen could never have laid
Jerusalem in ruins and desecrated the
temple of God, had not the chosen people
themselves first desecrated that holy place.
(See 2 Chron, xxxvi. 14-21.) Their
continued pursuit of evil, notwithstand-
ing the earnest remonstrances of God
by His prophets, led Him to abandon
them for a time to their foes.

2. Of the cruelties inflicted upon the
people of God. ‘‘The dead bodies of
Thy servants have they given to be meat
unto the fowls of the heaven, the flesh
of Thy saints unto the beasts of the
earth. Their blood have they shed like
water round about Jerusalem ; and there
was none to bury them.” Here is a
picture of wide-spread slaughter and
misery. The words of the poet are a
graphic commentary on the brief state-

459


PRALM LXXIX.


ment of the inspired chronicler,
2 Chron. xxxvi. 17.) The bloodshed
was great and terrible. Men were slain
without compunction, and their con-
querors hastened away with their cap-
tives, leaving the dead bodies to be
devoured by wild beasts and birds of
prey.

3. Of the reproaches cast upon the
people of God. ‘‘We are become a re-
proach to our neighbours, a scorn and
derision to them that are round about
us.” They were treated by surround-
ing peoples as unworthy of respect, and
were derided by them as a people van-
quished by their foes and forsaken by
their God. They were conquered, were
made captives, and in their subjection
were despised and reproached. They
had great reason for sorrowful com-
plaint. Their sorest grief must have
sprung from their knowledge of the fact
that their own sins caused their suffer-
ings. The intense sorrow of the pious
and patriotic amongst them may be
known by considering the plaintive
mournings of the prophet Jeremiah.
“Never did city suffer a more miserable
fate, never was ruined city lamented in
language so exquisitely pathetic.” Vede
The Lamentations. °

It. An earnest prayer. The Psal-
mist in his prayer—

1. Manifests a consciousness of the sins
of the people. The inquiries, “ Wilt
Thou be angry for ever? Shall Thy
jealousy burn like fire?” imply on the
part of the inquirer the consciousness
that there had been human provocations,
that there had been a cause for God’s
anger and jealousy. In the Scriptures,
idolatry, of which they had been greatly
guilty, is represented as spiritual adul-
tery. God was not jealous without
reason, And their manifold sins had
aroused His anger against them. The
Psainist is right, God was angry with
them on account of their sins, and their
conquered and captive and suffering
state was a sign of His anger.

2. Petitions God for various favours
for His people. Here is a prayer for
pardon. ‘‘O remember not against us
the iniquities of them that were before
us: and purge away our sins.” The


(Bee


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMS.


effects of sin frequently descend from
one generation to another. God de-
clared Himself a “jealous God, visiting
the iniquity of the fathers upon the
children unto the third and fourth gene-
ration of them that hate” Him. Asa
matter of fact men do suffer in many
ways from the sins of their ancestors,
Prayer is here offered that God would
remove from them the judgment of
the sins of them that had gone before
them ; that they might not suffer by
reason of them any more. Prayer is
offered for the forgiveness of their own
sins. ‘Purge away our sins.” Cleanse
us from our transgressions, and from all
impurity of soul. It is well when the
soul in trouble cries out not for the’
removal of the suffering alone, but for
the removal of the sin also. To those
who sincerely seek Him, God is ever
ready to grant pardon and purity. Here
is a prayer for speedy help and deltver-
ance, “ Let Thy tender mercies speedily
prevent us: for we are brought very
low. Help us, O God of our salvation,
for the glory of Thy name ; and deliver
us for Thy name’s sake.” As sinners
their hope is in the mercy of God.
There is great beauty and force in the ~
phrase, “tender mercies.” It comes
from the religious heart, and appeals to
the heart. To the tender mercy of the
Lord His unworthy and afilicted people
look for help. The captive Jews were
beyond the aid of human resources. In
man they could find no adequate assist-
ance. So they directed their prayer to
Him who is equal to the utmost need of
His people, and who if He pleased could
help them, and deliver them from their
enemies. They prayed God to come
quickly to their aid; that His “tender
mercies” might “‘ speedily prevent” them,
Prevent does not signify hinder, but
anticipate. ‘“God’s mercy must antici-
pate, ‘come to meet,’ man’s necessity.”
They felt that if God did not speedily
interpose for them their utter ruin must —
be the result. Their salvation depended
upon Him, and upon His prompt inter-
position on their behalf. Here is a
prayer on behalf of the captwe and the
dying. “ Let the sighing of the prisoner
come before Thee; according to the


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM LXXIX,





greatness of Thy power preserve Thou
those that are appointed to die.”
Whether the whole of the people are
thus spoken of, or the terms “ prisoner”
and “appointed to die” are to be taken
literally, cannot, we think, be determined.
In either case there is an appeal made
to the Divine compassion; that God
would graciously regard “the sighing
of those that are bound.” And to the
Divine strength ; that He would by the
greatness of His energy save from death
those who were appointed thereunto.
Here is a prayer for judgment. “ Pour out
Thy wrath upon the heathen that have
not known Thee, and upon the kingdoms
that have not called upon Thy name.
Wherefore should the heathen say,
Where is their God $ Let Him be known
among the heathen in our sight by the
revenging of the blood of Thy servants
which is shed. And render unto our
neighbours sevenfold into their bosom,
wherewith They have reproached Thee,
O Lord.” We are by no means sure
that the spirit expressed in these peti-
tions isa commendable one, The verses
certainly require a great deal of explana-
tion when viewed in the light of the
teachings, life, and death of our Lord
Jesus Christ. Perhaps, however, it is
illogical and unfair to view them in
that light. Ifthe petitions in the text
are simply a prayer for justice, then are
they right, and such as may fitly be pre-
sented at the throne of grace. If the
strong desire was that God would assert
His own presence and power and glory
before the heathen who said, “ Where is
their God?” then the desire is com-
mendable. The time came when He
did interpose in judgment. “In that
night was Belshazzar the king of the
Chaldeans slain. And Darius the Me-
dian took the kingdom.”

3. Urges his petition with powerful
pleas. On two grounds the Psalmist
urges his prayer. He pleads the great-
ness and urgency of the people's need.
“We are brought very low.” Their
affliction and helplessness was an appeal
to His pity. Their numbers were
diminished, their condition was deplor-


able; if He did not quickly come to


their aid they would be utterly undone
He pleads the glory of the Divine name.
“For the glory of Thy name;.. . for
Thy name’s sake.” ‘The idea is, thai
as they were His redeemed people, His
professed people, His honour was in-
volved in the question of their salvation
or their destruction. There is no plea
80 mighty with God as that of His own
honour, when it is sincerely urged. If
He left them to perish, the heathen
would say that He could not or would
not save them. If He delivered them,
the mockers would be silenced, and His
name would be feared. In ancient time
God had proclaimed His name to Moses,
and there is in this plea, probably, an
allusion to that proclamation. If so,
there is an appeal to His faithfulness,
that He would maintain that name,

IIL A devout resolution. “So we
Thy people and sheep of Thy pasture
will give Thee thanks for ever: we will
show forth Thy praise to all generations,”
This is the language of —

1. Confidence. With assured faith
they looked forward to the salvation of
God. They anticipated deliverance and
blessing.

2. Gratitude. With thankful hearts
they would ascribe unto Him the praise
and glory of their redemption. And
they would transmit the story of His
wondrous doings on their behalf to
coming generations, that they also might
praise Him.

3. Service. It is implied here that
they would no more turn aside to idols
or decline from His ways, but would
serve Him with glad and grateful
hearts.

Conctusion.—1. Blessed are they
who, having tasted that He is gracious,
have not by sin exiled themselves from
God’s favour and fellowship. Brethren,
prize your blessedness, “ Walk in the
light, as He is in the light,” so shall
your path be cheered by His presence
and conduct you to His throne, 2. Let
those who have departed from God return
unto Him with earnest prayer and devout
resolution. Your hope is in the tender
mercy of the Lord. (See Jer. iii, 12.
22.)

46)


PSALM LXXIx.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





Prorane Inrrupers mv Sacrep Puaczgs,
(Verse 1.)


“The holy land, the holy house, and the
holy city were all polluted by the uncir-
cumcised.” We have in this an illustra-
tion of what is taking place in this
day—

I. In Christian churches. The
Church is God’s “tnheritance.” “The
Church of God, which He hath pur-
chased with His own blood.” The
Church is the abode of God, His
“temple.” He dwells in it by His
Spirit. Desecrating intruders have
entered intoit. 1. Aitualism. Forms,
ceremonies, genuflexions, pictures, sym-
bols, instead of the worship of God “in
spirit and in truth.” Superstition in-
stead of faith, Sacraments instead of
the living, personal Saviour. 2. Ration-
alism. Human philosophies instead of
the Gospel of Christ. Theories of self-
culture instead of the regenerating and
sanctifying power of the Holy Spirit.
3. Selfish religionism. The church is
desecrated by men who are religious
that they might escape a coarse, mate-
rialistic liell, and gain an inglorious and
vulgar heaven. ‘Their spiritual state is
the very opposite of that expressed in
Xavier's beautiful hymn—

“* My God, I love Thee, not because
I hope for heaven thereby ; ” &c.
But the spirit which should animate our
churches is not that “of fear; but of
power, and of love, and of a sound
mind.” The Christian spirit is not self-
seeking, but self-sacrificing.

Hi. In human spirits. The human
spirit is the “inheritance” of God,
which He has redeemed. “Ye are not
your own; for ye are bought with a
price.” The human spirit is also the
“temple” of God. Know ye not that
ye are the temple of God, and that the
Spirit of God dwelleth in you?” What


intruders have defiled and desecrated
this temple? Worldliness, carnality,
selfishness, hatred, impurity, have de-
filed God's holy temple. The human
soul has too often resembled a “ whited
sepulchre” or “a cage of every unclean
and hateful bird ” rather than the dwell-
ing-place of God. Even amongst reli-
gious men there are some in whose soul
a human formula or creed has usurped
the place of God ; they are theologians,
not Christians. There are others in
whose soul some ecclesiastical system has
usurped the place of God ; they are more
devoted to “the church,” or to “our
denomination,” or to “our body,” than
to the Lord of all,

These desecrating intruders must be
expelled from the Church, or they will
lay it in ruins. These unholy spirits
that have entered the human soul must
be cast out, or that “temple of God”
will become a “ synagogue of Satan.”


On the contrast exhibited in this -
verse and verse 55 of the preceding
Psalm a useful discourse might be made,
Subject,—What God does for man, and
what man does for God. I. God casts
out the heathen for His people, His
people by their sins admit the heathen
to destroy His city. II. God gave to
His people an inheritance, His people
suffer His inheritance to be invaded
by foes. III. God provided dwelling.
places for His people, His people defiled
His dwelling-place, and allowed others
to defile it also, &c. Or the contrast
might be exhibited thus,—

I. God’s faithfulness, man’s unfaith-
fulness.

IL God’s goodness, man’s ingratitude.

III. God’s conquering power, man’s
cowardly weakness, &c,


A Mopru PRAYER.
(Verse 9.)


L The Person addressed. “O God
of our salvation.” “Our God, even
when He is most severely angry, is not


462


the God of destruction, but of salvation,”
1. God was their only Saviour. They
were brought so very low as to be be-


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM LIXX,





yond the help of all others. 2. God
was their sufficient Saviour. He who
delivered their fathers from the Egyp-
tians could deliver them from the Chal-
deans.

II. The Prayer offered. Three re-
quests they make to God. 1. For
Pardon. ‘“ Purge away our sins.” 2,
For Deliverance. “Deliver us” from
our afflictions, from our enemies. 3,
For Assistance. ‘ Help us” to bear our
troubles, to serve Thee in our lives.

III. The plea urged. ‘For the
glory of Thy name, . . . for Thy name’s
sake.” The honour of His name would
be affected by His treatment of their
prayer. If He did not deliver them, the
heathen would say that He could not or


Tur AFFLICTIONS OF Man
(Verse


The prisoners are those of the He-
brews who were in bondage and suffer-
ing. ‘‘ Those that are appointed to die
might apply to those who were con-
demned to death ; or to those who were
sick and in danger of death ; or to those
who were prisoners and captives, and
who were, by their sufferings, exposed
to death.”

I. The afflictions of man. “The
prisoner, . . . those that are appointed
to die.” To bea prisoner is to be de-
prived of light, of liberty, &c. How
many and varied are the afflictions of
man. The sighs and cries of the suffer-
ing are ever arising from our world,

‘* Each new morn
New widows howl; new orphans cry; new

SOrrows
Strike heaven on the face, that it resounds
Like syllable of dolour.”—Shakespeare.


PSALM


would not help them. If He delivered
them, the display of His mercy would
excite admiration, the exhibition of His
power would beget awe. His name
would be feared. ‘The choicest mer-
cies God’s people have are for His name’s
sake: they have pardon of sin for His
name’s sake” (Ps. xxv. 11; 1 John ii. 12);
“purging of sin for His name’s sake;
leading in the paths of righteousness for
Hisname’s sake” (Ps, xxiii. 3); ‘‘quicken-
ing of their dead and dull hearts for His
name’s sake” (Ps. exliii. 11). “Though
His people offend Him, yet He forsakes
them not, for His great name’s sake.”
Let us ask for spiritual blessings of
God, urging in faith this plea, and we
shall receive, and our joy will be full


AND THE HELP or Gon,
11.)


II. The help of God. It is His “to
proclaim liberty to the captives, and the
opening of the prison to them that are
bound.” Asa helper He is—l. Qutck
to hear. The sigh of a prisoner in the
dungeon reaches His ear in an instant.
2. Strong to save. “The greatness of
Thy power.” His energy is more than
equal to the extremest human need.
And His tenderness is as great as His
strength.

ITI. The connecting link between
the two. Prayer is the means whereby
suffering man obtains the help of God.
Prayer implies in the suppliant felt
need and faith in God. To the ear of
God a sigh may he a devout and earnest
prayer.

Let distressed and dying men direct
their sighs to God and obtain relief.


LXXX


INTRODUCTION.


Superseription—" To the chief Musician upon Shoshannim-Eduth.” On “ Shoskawnim ”


gee Introduction to Ps. xlv.


Probably ‘‘Shoshannim-Eduth ” denotes ‘‘the melody or air


‘after’ or ‘in the manner of’ which the Psalm was to be sung. As the words now stand they


signify ‘lilies, a testimony,’ and the two are separated by a large distinctive accent.


In them-


ives they have no meaning in the present text, and must therefore be regarded as probably a
Paracel 168 the beginning of an older Psalm with which the choir were familiar.” —Smith’s


Dict. of the Bible.


463


PALM LXXX.





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMS.





**4A Psalm of Asaph.”


See Introduction to Ps. lxxiv.


> a = _ $$


Perowne: * As in the case of


most of the historical Psalms, so in the case of this, it is impossible to say with certainty at


what period it was written.
conclusion. .


The allusions are never sufficiently definite to lead to any positive
. - All that is certain is, that the time was a time of great disaster, that tee
nation was trampled down under the foot of foreign invaders,


The poet turns to God with th.


earneat and repeated prayer for deliverance, and bases his appeal on the past.”


Toe Divisz Favour IMPLORED.
(Verses 1-7.)


In these verses the poet complains of
the sorrowful condition of the people,
and prays for salvation from God.
Their sad condition he regards as the
result of the withdrawal of the favour of
God, and he prays for their salvation
by the renewal of that favour. The
Psalmist represents the people as—

IL Sorely needing God's favour.
The sad condition of the people appears
from—

1. The reproaches of their neighbours,
“Thou makest us a strife unto our
neighbours; and our enemies laugh
among themselves.” “The neighbours
are always the petty tribes in the im-
mediate neighbourhood of Israel, who
continually availed themselves of those
occasions when Israel was oppressed by
more powerful nations, to give vent to
their hatred.” These neighbours strove
among themselves as to who should ob-
tain most of the spoila of Israel, and who
should be bitterest in their reproaches
against them. When a people who have
occupied a position of eminence and
power are derided by petty neighbours
they must have fallen very low, and
great must be their sorrow as they
realise the painful contrast between their
present and their past. They who
“laugh among themselves ” over a fallen
and suffering foe must have sunk very
low in the scale of humanity. Yet their
jeers may torment the sufferers to whom
they are directed, may make their bitter
drink more bitter, and their heavy bur-
den more heavy.

2. The rejection of their prayer. “O
Lord God of hosts, how long wilt Thou
be angry against the prayer of Thy
people?” The marginal reading gives
@ literal translation, “How long wilt
Thou smoke against the prayer of Thy
people?” The smoke of incense was a

464


symbol of prayer amongst the Hebrews,
“Let my prayer be set forth before
Thee aa incense ; and the lifting up of
my hands as the evening sacrifice.”
According to the teaching of their
Scriptures the smoke of the incense in
prayer would propitiate God, and cause
the smoke of His anger to cease. But
instead of this the smoke of His anger
opposes the smoke of the incense of their
prayers. Such seems to be the poetic
dress of the idea, The idea itself is that
God rejected their prayer. If such were
really the case there must have been
something wrong in their prayers, or in
the spirit in which they presented them.
They must have “asked amiss.” (1.)
There might have been a lack of fervour
and earnestness in their prayers. God _
does not regard cold, half-hearted peti-
tions. (2.) Or they might have suppli-
cated Him from an impure or unworthy
motive. (3.) Or, while they sought Him
in prayer, they might have cherished sin
in their hearts. “If I regard iniquity
in my heart the Lord will not hear me.”
(4.) Or, probably, God only appeared ag
though He rejected their prayer. He
delayed His response in order to increase
His blessing. By making them wait He
would test and increase their faith, and
the fervour of their desires, and the
earnestness of their prayers. But to
them He seemed as though He rejected
their prayers ; and it was a sore trial to
them. Men reproached them, and God
rejected their entreaties. Earth greeted
them with cruel persecution or scornful
laughter, and heaven with stony-hearted
indifference or stern rejection.

3. The greatness of their sorrow.
“Thou feedest them with the bread of
tears ; and givest them tears to drink in
great measure.” God dealt out sorrows
to them as though they were their foo


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM LXXE,





and drink. Their grief was intense and
constant, Tears were their daily portion.
All their trials and sorrows they regarded
as proceeding from God. ‘‘ how feed-
est them with the bread of tears.”
“Thow makest us a strife unto our
neighbours,” &e. In this they were
certainly right thus far, that God had
allowed these miseries to befall them.
If He had not directly brought them
upon them as a chastisement for their
sins, He had withdrawn the shield of
His protection from them because of
their sin, He had hidden His face from
them, and they were troubled. He had
withdrawn His favour, and innumerable
evils had compassed them about. Truly
His favour was sorely needed by
them.

II. Earnestly imploring God’s fa-
vour. In the prayer here recorded we
have—

1. An implied confession of sin.
“Turn us again, O God.” They are
conscious of having turned aside into
sinful ways. In them there had been
an evil heart of unbelief, and they had
departed from God, and were now feel-
ing the bitter result. They had with-
crawn their loyalty from Him before
He withdrew His favour from them.
And they humbly and repeatedly pray,
“Turn us again, O God.” When sin is
mourned over and confessed to God,
and restoration to fidelity and right-
eousness is sought from Him, the return
of His favour will not tarry long.

2. A recognition of the gracious rela-
tion of God to them. (1.) God is ad-
dressed as their Shepherd. This relation
is one of great intimacy and tenderness,
It involves His guidance, protection,
and provision, (See Hom. Com. on
Ps. lxxiv. 1.) (2.) God is addressed as
dwelling between the cherubim, The
allusion is to the Shecinah, the visible
symbol of the Divine presence, which
was above the mercy-seat and between
the cherubim. From the mercy-seat
He communed with man and dispensed
His favour. There He had manifested
Himself to the Hebrews as He had to
no other people. In this address to
Him they remind Him of this special
favour shown to them, and seek to en-

2@


courage themselves thereby. Jesus
Christ is the true Shecinah. He is “ the
brightness of the Father’s glory and
the express image of His person.”

3. An earnest entreaty for His salva-
tion. ‘‘Give ear, shine forth, stir up
Thy strength, and come and save us,
Turn us again, O God, and cause Thy
face to shine; and we shall be saved.”
(1.) They pray that God would attend
to them. ‘“‘ Give ear.” He had seemed
to disregard their cries to Him, and even
to reject their prayers in His anger; and
they entreat Him to lend an attentive
ear to the voice of their supplications.
(2.) They pray that God would arouse
His strength for their salvation. Fora
time it seemed as though His mighty
saving arm had slumbered. They knew
how mightily that arm had wrought sal-
vation for their fathers in ancient days,
and they cried, ‘‘ Awake, awake, put
on strength, O arm of the Lord.” (3.)
They pray that God would manifest His
favour to them and so save them. ‘“ Cause
Thy face to shine” is a poetical expres-
sion of, Show Thy favour. They felt
that in His favour was their salvation. ©
At the rebuke of His countenance they
perished ; in the shining of His coun-
tenance they lived and rejoiced. The
idea is poetical and beautiful, and pro-
foundly true. “In His favour is life.”
Only as our being is illumined and
warmed by the beams of His love do we
live. His favour is the life-giving breath
of souls,

In conclusion, Is this favour ours ?
Are we living in the smile of God?
Then, let us never cause Him to avert
His face from us. Let us yield to the
mighty attraction of His love, and be
transformed into His ineffable beauty.
But if any have no consciousness of His
favour, no saving acquaintance with
Him, let them at once pray, “ Lord,
lift Thou up the light of Thy counte-
nance upon us.” “Turn us again, O
God, and eause Thy face to shine ; and
we shall be saved.” ‘Believe in the
Lord Jesus Christ.” Rise through faith
in Him into the conscious realisation of
the favour of God, and so into the pos-
session of a life spiritual, everlasting,
blessed, and Divine.

465


PRALM LXXX,





HOMILERIC COMMENTARY: PSALHS,





Tre SHEPHERD OF ISRAEL.


Verse 1. “Give ear, O Shepherd of
Israel, Thou that leadest,” &c. To the
great majority of devout souls, next to
the revelation of God in Christ Jesus,
the revelation of Him in His various
offices and relationships is the most pre-
cious. Here He is set forth as the
Shepherd of His people.

I. The relation which He sustains
to His people. ‘‘ Shepherd.” Certain
relationships He sustains to all men.
Creator, Sustainer, Sovereign, Judge.
Certain other relationships He sustains
only to those who confide in Him, rela-
tionships which involve trust and sym-
pathy. Such is that of Shepherd.
“Shepherd of Israel,” not of Philistia
or Assyria. He is the Shepherd now
of those who know Him, trust Him,
follow Him. Very intimate and tender
is the relation between Eastern shep-
herds and their flocks,

1. Hach sheep ts individually known.
’ He calleth His own sheep by name.”

2. Hach sheep ts individually cared
for. ‘He shall gather the lambs with
his arm,” &c. ,

3. Hach sheep ds individually pro-
tected. ‘‘The good Shepherd giveth
His life for the sheep.”

4, Hach sheep is individually provi-
stoned. “The Lord will give grace and
glory : no good will He withhold,” &c,
And, in conjunction with this personal
knowledge and care of the Shepherd for
each individual member of His flock,
there is unity of the whole. They con-
stitute a flock.

II. The service which He renders
to His people. ‘ Leadest Joseph like
@ flock.” This is only a development
of the previous clause. The Eastern
shepherd goes before his flock, and the
sheep follow him. The Lord leads His
people. By the exercise of their reason
and conscience ; by the openings and
closings of His providence; by the
teachings of His holy Word; and by
the action of His holy Spirit upon the
heart, He now leads all who trust in
Him. Ponder what is involved in thia

466


l. ‘fiat man ts not competent to ar
range his own course of life. “It ia
not in man that walketh to direct his
steps.” “Thou knowest not what a day
may bring forth.”

2. That man is not compelled to yield
to the Divine direction. The good Shep-
herd does not drive men before Him
as unwilling disciples, but He goes
before them, leads them, leaving them
to follow Him or forsake Him as they
choose.

3. That the Divine direction of human,
life ts exercised in the most gracious
manner. “I will go before thee and
make the crooked places straight.” The
Shepherd first encounters every difficulty
or danger, then the sheep follow Him.
This Divine guidance is a fact to-day,
a blessed reality which we may each
prove by committing our way unto the
Lord.

Il. The manifestation of Himself
to His people. ‘Thou that dwellest
between the cherubim.” “Thou who
sittest enthroned upon the cherubim.”
It has been thought that the prayer for
help in the first part of the verse rests
upon the shepherd care of God, and in
this part on the omnipotence of Him
who is enthroned upon the cherubim,
and rulest over all. What the symbol
of the Divine presence was to the Jews,
the Lord Jesus Christ is tous. He is
the Divine Representative, the Revealer
of God. In Him we meet with God,
and read His character, and see His
mercy, and learn His grace. ‘“ He that
hath seen Me hath seen the Father.”
Through Him God dispenses His favours,
“Whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in
My name He will give it you.”

IV. The great Desire of His people
from Him. “Shine forth.” “Turn us
again, O God, and cause Thy face to
shine ; and we shall be saved.” ‘Their
own arm did not save them, but Thy
right hand, and Thine arm, and the
light of Thy countenance.” ‘ Who will
show us any good? Lord, lift Thou up
the fight of Thy countenance upon us.”


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





The idea is that in the manifestation of
God’s favour, salvation and blessing are
to be found.

So is it now and for us, Our great


PBALM LXX&,


need is that God in Christ would shine
forth unto us, To see God in Christ
Jesus is a saving, spiritually transform-
ing sight.


SaLvaTIon In Gop’s Smite
(Verse 3.)


The thrice-uttered prayer, “Turn us
again, O God,” seems to show that the
Hebrews were sensible of departure from
God, and desirous of being turned peni-
tently to Him as a means of regaining
His favour. There is, we fear, much
backsliding of heart in the Church at
this time. What we mean by backslid-
ing. The loss of the intense conscious-
ness of peace and joy which followed
conversion, and of the burning enthu-
siasm and zeal, which things were then
irregular and spasmodic, is not always
to be regretted. If our consciousness
of peace and joy have grown profounder
and calmer, though less intense; if our
enthusiasm and zeal have grown into a
habit of regular, steady, and self-denying
work for God, there is no matter for
regret. We do not mourn the loss of
the sapling in the oak, or of the little
child in the man or woman. Such loss
is really development and gain. But
there are many signs of real spiritual
decline in many persons in the great
Church of Christ. Absorption in busi-
ness has benumbed the zeal of many.
Marriage and the cares of domestic life
have taken the lofty aspiration out of
many others, and ended their useful-
ness. Worldly prosperity has injured
others, There are thousands in the
Church the promise of whose early dis-
cipleship remains unfulfilled. They are
members of the Church ; but the zeal,
enthusiasm, usefulness, consecration, and
joy of their early Christian life—where
are they? Ah, where? To such persons
God very often sends trouble, in some
form or other, as His messenger to recall
them from their backslidings. Is He
so sending to any of you? Or has He
go sent to you? Then, be thankful
that He is still seeking you ; and make
the prayer of the text your own. “Turn
us again, O God, and cause Thy face to
shine,” d&e.


The Poet’s idea of salvation and
its attainment is, that it is a something
which springs out of the shining of
God’s countenance, and which is to be
sought by prayer. ‘Cause Thy face to
shine, and we shall be saved. . . . They
perish at the rebuke of Thy counte-
nance.” In His favour is life.” Pro-
bably he was thinking of the shining of
the sun. It gives life, light, warmth,
exhilaration. Its absence means death ;
its presence, life and gladness, Taking
this analogy, the view of salvation here
set forth is that a consists in the life and
growth of the soul under the favour of
God. Itis not mere deliverance from
wrath or hell, as commonly understood,
The poet’s idea of hell is given here—
“ The rebuke of Thy countenance.” He
seeks salvation by seeking the blessing
which is exactly antithetic to that evil,
“The light of Thy countenance.” All
spirits must sustain some relation to God.
Spiritual existence in total separation
from Him is an impossibility. But
spirits are found in various and different
relations to Him. Some are avowedly
hostile to Him. Devils are of this clasa,
They are sustained by Him, but they
are bitterly antagonistic to Him. Many
men too are “alienated and enemies in
their mind by wicked works.” Hostile
to Him actually, though not avowedly.
In this state all true spiritual growth is
impossible. Others are indifferent to
Him, practically “without God in the
world,” and have no desire to be other-
wise. Such indifference involves indif-
ference to their own spirit. There can
be no true spiritual growth in such a
state. Others have some sort of belief
in His existence, but despair of obtain-
ing His favour. They cannot grow
spiritually, for hope is essential to
growth. Others are trusting and loving
Him. They regard Him as merciful
and gracious, wise and beneficent, strong

467


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





and kind ; and so they trust Him and
enjoy His favour. The position of the
Psalmist I take to be this, that all
in this state, or sustaining this attitude


towards God, are being saved, and that


by the growth of their souls under the
influence of God’s favour. Under this
influence, in what would souls grow?

1. In thoughtfulness. God is in
finitely thoughtful, He frequently calls
upon men to “consider,” “reason,” be
“wise,” &c, Every soul that is fully
open to His influence He quickens into
holy thoughtfulness.

2. In holy principles, Living in the
light of God’s countenance, the principles
of the Divine administration and con-
duct become ours.

3. In spiritual strength to will and
do and suffer. The sense of His loving
. presence makes the will imperial in the
right, the hands strong for holy doing,
and the heart calm and patient in suf-
fering.


4. In reverence. “TI have heard of
Thee by the hearing of the ear ; but now
mine eye seeth Thee, Wherefore I
abhor myself, and repent in dust and
ashes.” (See also Isa, vi. 1-5.)

5. In spiritual beauty. ‘ The beauty
of the Lord our God upon us.” In one
word, under God’s smile the soul grows
into His image. According to our in-
terpretation of the text, that is salvation.
How philosophie/ How true/ How
exalted / We may secure His favour
by earnest, persistent prayer (see verses
8, 7, 19). Mark the cumulation of
names, Such prayer is the approach
of the soul to God. Apply the sub-
ject—

1. To backsliders, 2. To the uncon
verted.

“The Lord bless thee and keep thee:
the Lord make His face shine upon
thee, and be gracious unto thee: the
Lord lift up His countenance upon thee,
and give thee peace.”


PassaGEs FROM THE History oF THE ANCIENT CHURCH, WITH THEIR
Lussons To THE MopERN CHURCH.


(Verses 8-19.)


Israel is here compared to a vine, and
under this figure some experiences of
her history are referred to. A devout
and thoughtful study of these verses
will not fail in discovering teachings
which are applicable to us to-day, without
resorting to any fanciful or irreverent
handling of the Book of God. The
verses bring before us—

I. The Divine planting of the ancient
Church. In respect to the ancient
Jewish Church the Lord is represented
here as—

1. Bringing them out of Hgypt.
“Thou hast brought a vine out of
Egypt.” Israel in Egypt was like a
vine in an unfavourable situation, with
an unsuitable soil and an ungenial clime.
If it grew and bore fruit there, it was
not by the aid of its circumstances, but
in despite of them. So the Lord God
of hosts brought forth His people from
their uncongenial circumstances and
surroundings, like a vine from an un-
friendly soil and an inclement air,

468


2. Expelling the heathen from the pro-
mised land. He had chosen that land
for His own people, and promised it to
their fathers, and He fulfils His promise,
He had long purposed to plant His vine
in that goodly land. And, in order to
the accomplishment of His purpose, He
“cast out the heathen.” Seven nations
were rooted out to make room for this
vine which the Lord had chosen.

3. Firmly planting Hts people in a
goodly situation. Having prepared room
for it by the expulsion of the heathen,
He “planted it, and caused it to take
deep root.” In fertile soil, refreshed by
“brooks of water, fountains, and depths
that spring out of valleys and hills,”
beneath translucent skies and amid
genial airs, He planted His vine, and
caused it firmly to strike its roota,
Thus the ancient Jewish Church was
emancipated from the bondage of Egypt,
enabled to conquer the Canaanites, and
to take secure possession of the land
which God had promised to their fathers,


a ba


entirely by means of His power. So
much so that, with the strictest truth,
He may be said to have delivered them
from Egypt, vanquished their enemies,
and planted them in Canaan. So now
the Lord calls men out of the moral Egypt,
with its bondage of evil habits, its de-
grading fleshly lusts, its oppressive bur-
dens of guilt, and its cruel task-masters
of lordly passions. At His girdle hangs
the key which unlocks the doors of the
prison in which the captives of sin are
immured. He breaks the power of the
oppressor. ‘ The Lord looseth the pri-
soners.” He is the great Emancipator
from the guilt and sovereignty of evil.
All who listen to His call and accept
His deliverance, He makes to rejoice in
glad liberty. He not only calls men out
of Egypt, but also plants in His own
vineyard all those who obey His call. In
what favourable circumstances the Lord
has planted us! How many culturing
agencies He is causing to operate upon
us! What innumerable aids to growth
and development, strength and maturity,
fruitfulness and beauty, He is ever be-
stowing upon us! The Church of God
in Britain to-day is ‘‘ exalted to heaven”
with privileges.

II. The great progress of the ancient
Church. ‘It filled the land. The
hills were covered with the shadow of
it, and the goodly cedars with its boughs.
She sent out her boughs unto the sea,
and her branches unto the river.” The
hills or mountains which were shadowed
by this vine were probably those in the
extreme south of Canaan. And as the
vine when planted in fertile soil runs up
the trees and covers them, so the poet
pictures this vine as running up and
covering the great cedars of Lebanon.
“The sea” is the Mediterranean, which
bounded the Promised Land on one
side; ‘the river” is the Euphrates,
which bounded the land on the other
side. The whole is a beautiful picture
of the prosperity of the Hebrews in their
best days. During the latter portion of
the reign of David, and through almost
the whole of that of Solomon, they
occupied a proud position amongst
neighbouring nations; their power was
recognised and respected; their pros-


LiOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMS,





perity was great; thelr wealth also
was great. So the Christian Church
has spread, and is still spreading, Its
institutions and literature are spreading
and growing in almost every part of the
known world. Rank and fashion, wealth
and power, education and genius, are to
be found in large proportions within her
fold. Her financial resources for earry-
ing on her work are greater than they
ever were, and are still increasing. The
greatest institutions are overshadowed
by her. Her roots seem to be ever
striking deeper; and her branches are
spreading and growing in every direction.

III. The ruinous failure of the
ancient Church. This vine rose to a
great height, spread abroad its branches
to a great extent, was well covered with
foliage, so that it cast a great and deep
shadow; but not a word is said of its
fruit. It bore nofruit. It failed in its -
chief end. Of what use is a vine unless
it bring forth fruit? If it fail in that
it fails in the main thing. And it was
in the main thing that the Hebrews
failed. Israel was a fruitless vine. As
their material prosperity increased, their
religious faithfulness and zeal decreased.
In the Holy Land idolatry was permitted
by Solomon. He even allowed a part
of one of the hills overlooking Jeru-
salem, and almost fronting the temple
of God, to be consecrated to obscene
and barbarous deities. Can we wonder
that “clouds on ail sides gathered about
his declining day”? Is it surprising
that he should “ bequeath to his heir
an insecure throne, a discontented
people, formidable enemies on the
frontiers,” and the probability of a
contested succession? Let the Church
of Christ to-day take warning from the
ancient Jewish Church. God demands
fruit of us, the fruit of personal holiness
and social usefulness, Is the Church
meeting that demand? Is she holy in
herself? Is she abolishing the dis-
honesties of trade? Is her face set
against human oppression? Is she
striving to purify the land of the scan-
dalous social corruptions? Is she waging
war against drunkenness and gluttony ?
Is she leading the lost to the Saviour ?
O Church of Christ, examine thyself!

462


PSALM LX¥Z.





IV. The mournful devastation of
the ancient Church. “ Why hast Thou
then broken down her hedges, so that
all they that pass by the way do pluck
her?
waste it, and the wild beast of the field
doth devour it. . . It is burned with
fire, it is cut down; they perish at the
rebuke of Thy countenance.” We can-
not determine what particular calamities
are referred to in these verses, But
notice—

1. God withdrew His defence from
them. He “broke down her hedges.”
They had lost their defence by reason of
their sin. They had forsaken their Pro-
tector, and so exposed themselves to
their foes. They had provoked God to
anger, and He had left them like a vine-
yard with its fences demolished, open to
the foot of every intruder.

2. Their enemies ravaged them. The
picture of the havoc and ruin wrought
is striking and powerful. Their enemies
are represented as various, fierce, and
strong. ‘‘They which pass by the way,
the boar out of the wood, and the wild
beast of the field.” They would waste
the vineyard in different ways, and what
one failed to destroy would speedily be
ruined by the others. The devastation
us represented as very great. They are
being “plucked, wasted, devoured,
burned,” and are “ perishing.” Alas,
poor vineyard! Desolation itself could
scarce be more desolate ; or ruin more
ruinous. Their misery ts represented
as the result of the displeasure of God.
“They perish at the rebuke of Thy
countenance.” Conscience speaks here,
and speaks truly, ‘They were powerless
and defenceless before their enemies,
because they were conscious of having
forsaken their Almighty Friend. The
consciousness of sin led them to see a
frowning God, and emptied their spirit
of courage and their arm of strength.

3. They failed to understand fully the
reason of their miseries, ‘ Why hast
Thou broken?” &, One would have
thought that they would not have
needed to ask “why.” Did they think
shat, having shown so much favour to
this vine, and bestowed upon it #0 much
rare, it was strange that He should

Fadi)


The boar out‘of the wood doth


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; PSALMS,





leave it exposed to destroyers? But
that very favour and that care only
made its worthlessness the more mani-
fest in bearing no fruit. Qod’s great
mercies to the Jews made their sin and
rebellion against Him the more heinous
and aggravated. Instead of asking God
why He had left them defenceless, they
would have done well to have looked
into their own life and conduct, and
turned to Him in sincere penitence. Let
the Christian Church heed the warning.

V. The earnest prayer of the an-
cient Church. The poet prays—

1. For the Divine presence and favour.
“Return, we beseech Thee, O God of
hosts: look down from heaven, and
behold, and visit this vine.” That God
would see and consider their sad case,
that He would look upon them with
favour, that He would visit them in
mercy, is their appropriate desire.

2. For the Divine protection. “Guard
what Thy right hand hath planted, and
the branch that Thou madest strong for
Thyself.” This is a prayer for the de-
fence of God that they may not be
utterly and entirely destroyed. The
petition refers to His ancient kindness
in their planting and increase, and pleads
their relation to Him. The vine was
planted by Him and for Him, and in
its misery and desolation the poet com-
mits it to Him.

3. For the Divine blessing on thetr
leaders. “Let Thy hand be upon the
man of Thy right hand, upon the son of
man whom Thou madest strong for
Thyself.” The expositors differ in their
interpretations of this verse. Some see
with clearness, and assert with confi-
dence, that there is “an outlook to the
Messiah here ;” while others are unable
to see anything of the kind. “The
man of Thy right hand” is the man
who holds the place of honour, “The
son of man,” we regard as a poetical
variation from the term “man” in the
firat clause of the verse. ‘Whom Thou
hast made strong for Thyself,” ¢.e., whom
Thou hast raised to power for the carry-
ing out of Thy purposes. So we regard
it as a prayer on behalf of some leade.
or leaders of the people, that God’s
hand may be upon him, or upon them,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





for good; and that through him, or
them, He would bless the afflicted
people.

4, For the Divine restoration or revival.
“Quicken us.” Restore to us as a peo-
ple vitality and power; our languishing
and dying cause do Thou revive and
strengthen. Such is the prayer of the
ancient Church in its distress. And if
any portion of the Lord’s vineyard to-
day is lying desolate and distressed,
Christians will do well to carry the case
to God in prayer, and seek His inter-
position and salvation.

VI. The devout promise of the
ancient Church. The poet on behalf
of the people engages that if God
granted their requests, their conduct
towards Him should be marked by—

1. Perseverance. ‘So will not we go
back from Thee.” They had _back-
slidden from His ways many times ;
but now they vow that, if God will de-
liver them from their distresses, they
will cleave with constancy to Him.


PSALM LXEXI.





2. Praise, “We will call upon Thy
name.” We will worship Thee faith-
fully. Such is their promise made in
affliction. And we know with how
deplorable a frequency such promises
are forgotten when the affliction is
removed. Such was the case repeatedly
in the history of the Jews.

Concnusion. — 1. Let individual
Christians and Christian churches take
heed to this beacon. As individuals,
“have we our fruit unto holiness” ?
In the ancient Jewish Church, we have
a striking analogue of the planting,
privileges, and progress of the Christian
Church. Let us see to it that the
analogy does not become true as regards
fruitlessness ; for, if it should, our de-
fence will be gone, and we shall be
wasted and destroyed by our enemies.
2. If any have backslidden from the
ways of the Lord, let them seek Him a
once in penitence and by prayer. “ Turk
us again, O Lord God of hosts, cause Thy
face to shine ; and we shall be saved.”


PSALM LXXXL
INTRODUOTION.


Superscription.—* To the chief Musician upon Gittith.” Glittith is explained in several ways.
One interpretation is that it was a musical instrument invented in Gath, or common among the
Gittites. Or it may have been the name of a tune to which the Psalm is to be sung, and which
originated from Gath. Others have derived the word from J)3 = a wine press, and concluded
that it denotes an instrument which was used by those accustomed to tread the wine-vat, and
intended to accompany the songs of the vintage. Fuerst in his Lexicon says it is the ‘“‘ proper
name of a musical body of Levites, who had their chief seat in the Levitical city en Ame
‘A Psalm of Asaph.” This Psalm appears to have been composed by Asaph, who was the
contemporary of David.

Occasion.—The Psalm seems to have been composed for the celebration of the Passover,
“It is well remarked by De Wette that as the Hebrews were required to make known to their
children the design of the ordinance of the Passover (see Exod. xii. 26, 27), nothing would be
more natural than that the sacred poets should take occasion from the return of that festival to
enforce the truths pertaining to it in songs composed for the celebration. Such seems to have
been the design of this Psalm,—reminding the people of the goodness of God in the past, and
recalling them from their sins by a remembrance of His mercies, and by a view of what would
be the consequences of fully obeying His law.”— Barnes.


Rexiegious WoORsHIP.
(Verses 1-7.)


to some thing, or being. If this ten-

dency of our nature be misdirected, its

exercise will be most baneful in its in-

fluence upon us. But if it be rightly
471


In these verses we have an exhorta-
tion to worship God. By nature man
is a worshipper. There is that within
him which impels him to render homage


PSALM LXXXL





directed, its exercise will influence us
most blessedly. Religious worship is
set before us here,—

L In its Object. “ God "—the
Supremely Good. The object is—

1. A Person. Not an abstraction of
the intellect, or amental concept, a mere
idea. Nor yet an impersonal influence
or force. Nor yet the absolute sub-
stantia underlying all phenomena. But
a Divine Person.

2. A Person related to ws. The Paal-
mist does not represent God as en-
throned in solitary and awful grandeur,
having no interest in His creatures, and
being inaccessible tothem. He is “ God
our strength,” “the God of Jacob,” who
regards the cry of His troubled people,
and delivers them. He is deeply con-
cerned in the welfare of His ereatures,
and is ever actively engaged in promov-
ing it.

3. A Person of supreme excellence.
“Gop,” tHE Goop. He is essentially and
infinitely perfect. He is worthy of the
homage of the noblest spirits. There
are in Him those properties which meet
our deepest and holiest cravings. The
intellect craves truth ; and in Him are
all the treasures of wisdom and know-
ledge. The conscience cries out for
rectitude; and in His character and
administration He presents to us the
example of immutable and perfect right-
eousness, and by the salvation of Jesus
Christ makes us partakers thereof. The
heart longs for perfect goodness, for
some one to love who meets its ideal of
excellence, who abideth faithful, and
abideth evermore ; and the longing is
met by God in Christ. In Him the
heart finds rest. The spirit yearns for
some supernal and unfading beauty
and glory, which it may admire and
adore ; and God answers the yearning
by revealing Himself to “the pure in
heart.” Here is the one sublime Object
of true worship. ‘God is greatly to be
feared in the assembly of the saints, and to
be had in reverence of all them that are
about Him.” “Give unto the Lord the
glory due unto His name; worship the
Lord in the beauty of holiness.” “ Holy,
holy, holy, is the Lord God of hosts;
the whole earth is full of His glory.”

472


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


os


IL In its character. Several charac.
teristics of true religious praise are here
indicated.

1. [tts hearty, “Sing aloud,...
make a joyful noise.” It is not mere
loudness and noise that are desired, but
a loud noise as the natural expression of
a full heart, The Lord delights in the
hearty worship of His people. The
psalmody of merely professional choirs,
however perfect artistically it may be,
is obnoxious to Him who will be wor-
shipped “in spirit and in truth.” If
there must be deficiency in our psalmody,
it is better far that it should be in the
musical execution than in the spiritual
feeling.

2. It ts joyous. ‘Make a joyful
noise.” There are seasons in life when
we feel that





“ Notes of sadness
Best befit our state forlorn.”


But, when we recall the benefits which
we have received from God, and the
great things which He has done for us,
songs of gladness should be the true
expression of our feelings. We should
praise God not with funeral dirges, but -
with grateful anthems; not with plain-
tive cries, but with cheerful hearts and
joyous songs.

3. It ts variously expressed. “Take a
psalm, and bring hither the timbrel, the
pleasant harp, with the psaltery,” dc.
The use of both vocal and instrumental
music is here enjoined. It is an igno-
rant prejudice which would exclude all
instrumental music from religious wor-
ship, a prejudice which is directly
opposed to much of the teaching of
the inspired Word concerning worship.
When instrumental music is an aid to
vocal, and when it stimulates or ex-
presses religious emotions, it is not only
lawful, but eminently desirable.

ITI. In its obligation. “This waa
a statute for Israel,” &c. Religious
worship is here represented as a binding
duty. On what ground does this obli-
gation rest? Why does God require us
to worship Him ?

1, Because t& ts right. The obliga
tion to praise God is based upon—(1.)
What He ts im relation to ws. He is


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY PSALMS,


PSaLM LEXXL,





our Creator, Sustainer, Sovereign. (2.)
What He is in Himself. He is a Being
of infinite perfection. We are so con-
stituted that we ought to reverence that
which is holy, to love that which is kind
and good, to admire that which is beau-
tiful, to trust that which is truthful. God
is infinitely truthful, beautiful, good, and
holy, therefore we ought to trust, ad-
mire, love, and adore Him—we ought
to worship Him. Or we may argue the
obligation to worship God,—

2. Because tt ts needful. That neces-
sity shapes itself to our mind in this
way. (1.) Man must worship. If he
worship not the true God, he will exalt
some creature into a god, or make an
idol of wealth, pleasure, fame, &c. (2.)
That which man worships exercises the
mightiest influence upon him. Worship
is a transforming thing. We become
like unto the object of our worship,
Let a man make power his idol, and he
will grow into a cruel tyrant. Let any
one worship pleasure, and his sensuous
and animal nature will be developed at
the expense of his moral and religious
nature. Let another make wealth his
god, and he will shrivel into a wretched
miser. Let a man worship any fellow-
creature, and he will come to resemble
him, and it is very probable that the
resemblance will be most complete in
eccentricities and imperfections. (3.)
The worship of God +8 the only one which
ts conducive to human well-being. Wor-
shipping God our whole nature receives
harmonious and happy development.
Adoring Him in Christ we “ are being
transfigured into the same image from
glory to glory, even as by the Lord the
Spirit.” Our highest blessedness is in
the worship of Him “ who is God over
all, blessed for ever.” Therefore the
Lord commands us to worship Him.

IV. In its incentives. “I removed


his


shoulder from the burden; his
hands were delivered from the pots,”
&c. The Psalmist in verses 6 and 7
represents Jehovah as addressing them,
and reminding them of His goodness in
delivering them from Egypt, with its
oppressions and distresses. He does
this as an incentive to them to worship
God. God’s goodness to us should
awaken our gratitude to Him, and gra-
titude is one of the chief elements of
worship. The remembrance of God’s
former mercies should awaken us to
praise Him in thankful songs; while
the blessings that we are constantly re-
ceiving should lead us to live lives of
grateful praise. A correct estimate of
God’s goodness to us and its due im-
pression upon our heart would prove an
abiding incitement, and ever-increasing
in power, to move us to worship
Him.

ConoLusion.—l. See these character-
tstics of true worship. It must have
God for its Object ; it should be hearty,
joyous, and reverent, and it may be
variously expressed. 2. Remember that
such worship ts a duty which we owe to
God. Reason, conscience, gratitude,
aspiration, and the holy Word all urge
the command, “ Thou shalt worship the
Lord thy God.” 3. Let us esteem tt a
privilege rather than a duty. If through
Christ we are atoned unto God, and are
walking with Him, then religious wor-
ship will be the heaven of our soul, 4.
Let us cultwate worship as the very spirit
of our life. Let gratitude, trust, adora-
tion, be an abiding spiritual state with
us. Let us seek to be of those

*¢ With whom the melodies abide
Of th’ everlasting chime; '

Who carry music in their keart

Through dusky lane and wrangling mart,
Plying their daily task with busier feet,
Because their secret souls a holy strain ie


THe SouicirupE or Gop ror THE WrLL-Brine or Man,
(Verses 8.16.)


We shall endeavour to expound this
section of the Psalm from the 13th
verse, as from a centre. In that verse


the Psalmist, speaking as the mouth-

piece of the Lord, expresses an intense

wish that Israel had followed the Divine
473


PSALM LEXI,


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





sounsel and kept the Divine law. We
regard it as an utterance of God’s soli-
citude for man’s well-being.

I. The solicitude of God for the
well-being of man is very deep. “Oh,
that My people had hearkened unto Me,
and Israel had walked in My ways!”
God in His great love here expresses
His regret because of the sin and punish-
ment of His people. He is not an un-
feeling, cold, heartless Ruler. He is
profoundly interested in those over
whom He reigns. Their holiness and
happiness are a great pleasure to Him.
Their sin and suffering cause Him sor-
row and pain. This is not the only
passage in which He laments the dis-
obedience and punishment of Israel.
(See Isa. xlviii. 18; Hos. xi. 8.) So
also our Lord mourned, with intense
feeling, over the guilty and doomed
people of Jerusalem. (See Matt. xxiii.
37.) With all the unfathomable love of
His nature God mourns over our sins
and sorrows. He is not willing that
any of His creatures, created in His
image, should perish. The depth of His
solicitude for the good of man is mani-
fested by the gift of His only-begotten
Son for human salyation. ‘‘ He spared
not His own Son, but delivered Him
up for us all,”

If. The solicitude of God for the
well-being of man has respect to his
various needs. The Divine arrange-
ments concerning Israel were of such a
nature that, if they had kept the com-
mands of the Lord, their peace would have
been secured, their wants abundantly
and choicely supplied, and their pros-
perity continued. God would have—

1, Subdued their enemies. ‘I should
soon have subdued their enemies, and
turned My hand against their adver-
saries. The haters of the Lord should
have submitted themselves unto Him.”
He would have fought their battles and
vanquished their foes; for they were
His foes also. If they had been obe-
dient to the Lord, He would have con-
quered their enemies quickly. ‘“ Soon,”
in a little time, He would have defeated
them. They would not have been long
harassed by them. He would have
conquered their enemies completely. So

474


utterly would He have broken theis
power, that even those whose hearts
were still hostile to them and to Hiza,
would come and acknowledge His supre-
macy, feeling themselves powerless to
stand against Him. Let Christians
learn a lesson from this. Our spiritual
enemies are many, subtle, and powerful.
We are not able to subdue them. But
if we walk in the commandments and
ordinances of the Lord, He will speedily
vanquish them for us. Our foes cannot
harm us if we are in the way of His
commandments. ‘“ Who is he that will
harm you, if ye be followers of that
which is good?” ‘The God of peace
shall bruise Satan under your feet,
shortly.” If they had been obedient,
God would have—

2. Supplied their wants. ‘ Open thy
mouth wide, and I will fill it. ... He
should have fed them also with the
finest of the wheat; and with honey out
of the rock should I have satisfied thee.”
The provisions here indicated are most
choice. “The fat of the wheat,” the
very best food of the land. And even
in the hard and barren rocks the bees
should have stored the finest honey for
them. The provisions here indicated —
are most abundant. They were to open
the mouth wide, and God promises to
fill it. He promises to “satisfy” them.
How rich and abundant are the bless-
ings which God has provided for us!
Very appropriately has Christianity been
compared to a great feast. Its bless-
ings are various and choice—“ Wine and
milk ;” pardon, peace, joy in the Holy
Ghost, the favour of God, the hope of
heaven, &c. Its blessings are abundant
and free. ‘“ Whosoever will, let him
take the water of life freely.” ‘ Buy
wine and milk without money and with-
out price.” The riches of Christ are
“unsearchable riches.” The treasures
of His grace are inexhaustible, infinite.

3. Continued their power and pros-
perity. ‘Their time should have en-
dured for ever.” Had they remained
faithful to God, their possession of
Canaan would have been undisturbea,
their peace and prosperity would have
been perpetuated. It was their unbe-
lief and disobedience towards God that


rid


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


brought upon them all their sufferings
and sorrows. Even so it has ever been,
and in all cases. “ Righteousness ex-
alteth a nation.” Persistence in evil
will overthrow the most ancient thrones,
and ruin the most magnificent kingdoms.
Sin is the deadly enemy of the peace,
prosperity, and power of both indivi-
duals and nations. “ The righteous shall
hold on his way, and he that hath clean
hands shall be stronger and stronger.”
“The path of the just is as the shining
light, that shineth more and more unto
the perfect day.”

III. The solicitude of God for the
well-being of man recognises the great
conditions of that well-being. Two
great conditions of the well-being of
man are mentioned here—

1. Recetwing communications from
God. ‘Oh, that My people had heark-
ened unto Me.” There can be no true
growth, peace, or joy for man, except in
communication with God. While priests
and prophets spake to the Jews, and
they gave heed to them, it was well
with the nation. But when the “ people
would not hearken to” the voice of the
Lord, dark clouds began to gather on the
firmament, and speedily heavy storms fell
upon them. The true well-being of man
can never be secured except his mind
and heart are in a condition to receive
the light and truth of God,

2. Rendering obedience to God. “O
shat Israel had walked in My ways,”
&e. Human blessedness is ever depen-
dent upon obedience to Divine law.
“The law is holy, and the command-
ment is holy, and just, and good ;” and
it is only as man walks in the way of
the commandments that he can be vir-
tuous, useful, or blessed. The Jews had
disregarded the divinely-prescribed way;
and, as a result, their peace and pros-
verity had forsaken them, Even the
anfathomable solicitude of God for our
well-being cannot secure that well-being
except we render to Him loyal obedience,
(See Ps, xix. 7, 8, 11.) Wouldst thou
know the secret of the true blessedness
of being? Learn it in true-hearted obe-
dience to God. “ Blessed are the un
defiled in the way, who walk in the law
of the Lord. Blessed are they that keep


PSALM LXXXI.


His testimonies; that seek Him with
the whole heart.”

IV. The solicitude of God for the
well-being of man is exercised in har-
mony with man’s moral freedom, He
commands, exhorts, entreats Israel to
that obedience upon which their happi-
ness depended. He endeavoured to
allure them to righteousness and faith-
fulness by His promises. He sought te
deter them from evil by His threaten-
ings. By both goodness and severity
He tried to save them from sin and ruin,
When all means failed to bless and save
them, He pathetically bewails their
obstinacy in sin, and its consequences,
But He never attempts to compel them
to yield obedience toHim. He respects
man’s moral freedom.

1. Notwithstanding the solicitude of
God for their well-being, Israel would not
obey Him. He had commanded them
not to worship idols, but to worship
Him alone. And as an incentive to
obedience He reminded them of the
wonderful display of His power when
He brought them forth out of the land
of Egypt, aad of their obligations to
Him by reason of what He had done for
them. But they would not obey Him.
God saves men with the consent of the
will, not against their will.

2. Notwithstanding the solicitude oy
God for their well-being, He left them te
themselves. When Israel proved incor-
rigibly depraved, He “gave them up
unto their own hearts’ lust; and they
walked in their own counsels.” They
would not be governed by Him, so He
allowed them to attempt self-government.
They would not listen to His voice, so
He ceased to speak to them. “My
Spirit shall not always strive with man.”
“Ephraim is joined to his idols ; let
him alone.” ‘Grieve not the Holy
Bpirit of God.” “Quench not the
Spirit.” No punishment is more severe
than that of being given up by God,
and none is more just. Man first aban-
dons God, utterly turns his back upon
Him, persistently disregards His voice,
and sets at nought His will, and then
God leaves him to take his own course.
“ My people would not hearken to My
voice; and Israel would Benes of Me.

4


PSALM LXXXI,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMA,





Bo I gave them up unto their own hearts’
lust.” He will not coerce the will of man.

Conotusion.—l. Let the solicitude of
God for our salvation encourage us to.
trust in Him. 2. Let the solicitude of
God for our salvation arouse the careless
to solicitude for themselves. If God is so
anxiously concerned for your well-being,
it surely behoves you to consider your


ExHortTaTION, PRomisE,


own state. 3. Let us beware lest, not-
withstanding the solicttude of God for
our salvation, we destroy ourselves by our
self-will. Our moral freedom is a most
glorious endowment. Let us not per-
vert it into a crushing curse.

‘Our wills are ours, we know not how;


Our wills are ours, to make them Thine.”
—Tennysom,


AND ENCOURAGEMENT.


(Verse 10.)


Dlustrations of this metaphor are
often met with. Oriental rulers have
been known to put jewels into the mouth
of a favourite. God’s blessings are
better than these. He pays well. There
is another illustration. At an Eastern
feast the master will take a piece of the
fattest part of the meat, dip it in the
liquid fat, and, by way of compliment,
will put it in the mouth of a favoured
guest, There is yet another illustration.
Last year I discovered suddenly a nest
of young birds. Unable to fly, the little
creatures at once mistook the intruder for
their mother, or their father, and opened
their mouths, until each seemed to be
all mouth. The text contains—

I, An exhortation. “Open thy
mouth wide.” What does it mean?
1. Labour after a sense of need. The
birds feel a lack by instinct, Prayer
with Christ’s people should be an in-
stinct also. We need all things, and
in ourselves have nothing. Let us be-
come conscious of weakness. We have
not attained to a high degree of grace,
if we think we have done so. A sense
of spiritual wealth is a token of poverty.
We must count ourselves nothing. 2.
Open the mouth wide and increase the
vehemence of destre, so that “no” cannot
be taken for an answer. Prayers speed
best which are vehement, not those
which “besiege” the throne of the
Almighty, and make one’s flesh creep by
their irreverence. Still, if we would
have great things, we must want them
terribly, must “hunger and thirst after
righteousness.” 3. The way of opening
the mouth—pray for capacity. In the
bird’s nest where goes the biggest piece ?
Into the widest mouth. It is s0 with

476


us; we have different capacities. We
are not straitened in God, but in our-
selves. A bushel cannot be put intu a
peck. May we become more capacious.
Let us seek after greater things. God’
can do more than we ask. He that
craves spiritual good will have it—God
will be sure to give it. It is in His way
to give great things. We should not
ask trifles, nor be satisfied with being
little Christians. Then we must attempt
great things. William Huntingdon
prayed for a pair of leather breeches,
and he got them. William Carey prayed
for India. The one was a little thing,
soon done with ; the other is still being

answered. ;

II. A promise. “TI will fill it.” It
is a great God who says it. God has a
way of filling our mouths so that they
are never empty. Whatdoes He fill us
with? With prayer, with arguments, a
sense of want, of desire. He will give
all kinds of spiritual blessing.

III. An encouragement. It is Jeho-
vah who speaks. He says, “I am God.”
With men ask little, and expect less;
with God ask much, and expect more,
We cannot with our need surpass His
benevolence. In prayer we ask our
own, because we are Christ’s, The
Lord has brought us from Egypt. He
cannot do for us again so much as He
has already done. Life in the soul is
the master blessing. What cannot God
do who brought the plagues on the
enemies of Israel? Who would not ask
great things of such aGod? He makes
a path for His people. And we have
been redeemed by the blood of the
Lamb.—C. H. Spurgeon, from a report
in The Christian World.


' HOMILETIC COMMENTARY. PSALMS. PSALM LXXXIL





PSALM LXXXIL


INTRODUCTION.


Superscription.—* A Psalm of Asaph.” (See Introduction to Psalm lxxiv.)

Occasion.—We are unable to determine upon what occasion the Psalm was written. It is
elear, however, that it is addressed to wicked magistrates or judges. It has been called “the
Judges’ Psaim, wherein is taught the duty of judges and rulers” The question hag arisen
whether the Psalm is directed against wicked judges amongst the Jews, or whether we are to
regard the Jews as the poor and afflicted, and their heathen enemies as the unjust judges. The
former appeara to be the correct opinion, All that is here said of corrupt magistrates may
frequently have been said of the judges of the Hebrews, (Comp. Isa. i. 17, 23, 26.) And
there are in the Psalm itself convincing evidences that it was intended to apply to the Israclitish
rulers,


Asprots or MAGIsTRAOY.


In this Psalm Asaph sets magistrates
and judges before us in several aspects,

I. As occupying a distinguished
position. Ale speaks of them as
“gods” and “sons of the Most High.”
The word Elohim, “gods,” is one of
the names applied to the Supreme
Being. It is not like Jehovah, a name
indicating essence, but a name of office.
The word Elohim occurs in several
places, where it is translated “judges”
(Exod. xxi. 6; xxii, 8, 9, 28). This
name was given to the judges as repre-
senting God in the theocracy, and as
judging in His name and by His autho-
rity. In charging the judges, Moses
distinctly asserted that “the judgment
is God's.” And in seeking judgment
from them the people are said to seek
it from Hlohim. The office of magis-
trate is Divine. God by His servants
applies to them one of His own names.
They are appointed to administer judg-
ment for Him. They represent Him in
His judicial relation to men. They are
to be honoured because of their office.
And, under the theocracy, any insult
which was offered to them was regarded
as offered to God Himself. St. Paul
says, ‘‘ The powers that be are ordained
of God. Whosoever therefore resisteth
the power, resisteth the ordinance of
God: and they that resist shall receive
to themselves damnation.” The office
of magistrate and judge is one of the
most responsible and honourable of all
offices, and should be filled by men of
keen and comprehensive intelligence
and of unimpeachable uprightness, It is


an office, too, which should ever be re
garded with respect and honour.

Tl. As observed by God. “God
standeth in the congregation of the
mighty ; He judgeth among the gods.”
Perowne: “QGod standeth in the con-
gregation of God.” “The congregation
of God” is the congregation of Israel,
the people of God, among whom the
judges were called to exercise their func-
tions, and among whom He can suffer no
injustice. The idea seems to be that the
exercise of magistracy among His people
was carried on beneath His inspection.

1. He is the observer of ali magisterial
acts. He stands in the congregation of
His people, mindful of their interests,
taking cogauisance of their affairs, noting
their oppressions, and watching how
they fared at the seat of judgment. In
all courts of justice He is present, see-
ing whether righteousness is enthroned
there,

2. He ts the judge of all magisterial
acts. ‘He judgeth among the gods.”
At His bar those who have judged
others must stand and be judged them-
selves, It is a solemn consideration for
all magistrates and judges that they
must appear at the judgment seat of
Christ, and render an account for every
administration of the law which they
have exercised. Let them ponder it,
and strive to discharge their important
duties uprightly and faithfully. Let the
oppressed remember it and rejoice. God
judgeth in the earth. He will ultimately
correct all false judgments, and judge
righteously amongst all men.

477


PeALM LXIXEE.


Tl. As called to the highest
duties. Judges are exhorted by the
poet to “judge the poor and fatherless,
do justice to the afflicted and needy;


deliver the poor and needy, rid them out’


of the hand of the wicked.” (Comp.
Isa. i. 17.) The idea seems to be that
judges were to take up the causes of
those who were unable to urge them
themselves, whether by reason of orphan-
hood, poverty, or any other disability.
Not that they should pronounce verdicts
in their favour because they were orphans
or poor, but that their poverty or orphan-
hood should not be any barrier in the
way of obtaining their rights. The
Supreme Judge has ever warmly es-
poused the cause of the widow, the father-
less, the poor, and the oppressed. Hear
His Word on this subject. (See Exod.
xxii, 22-24 ; Deut. x. 17, 18, xxvii. 19;
Ps, Ixviii. 5, cxlvi. 9.) Let magistrates
remember that God is the helper of the
helpless, the champion of the cause of
the fatherless, the widow, and the needy:
and let them see to it that they atten-
tively regard and justly deal with the
causes which God has espoused. “Ifa
poor man has an honest cause, his
peverty must be no prejudice to his
cause, how great and powerful soever
those are that contend with him.”
“Suffer not the afflicted to be further
afflicted by enduring injustice, and let
not the needy long stand in need of an
equitable hearing.”

IV. As exhibiting the worst per-
versity. The judges and magistrates are
charged with the gravest perversion of
their high office, The Psalmist accuses
them of—

1. Jgnorance. “They know not,
neither will they understand ; they walk
on in darkness.” They were ignorant
probably in two respects—(1.) As re-
gards the law. They had not striven to
make themselves thoroughly acquainted
with the law which they were ap-
pointed to administer, (2.) As regards
the facts of the causes which were
brought before them. They did not
patiently and thoroughly investigate the
causes on which they were called to
adjudicate. Their ignorance was wilful.
They did not care to know the lew or

478


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: P8ALMS.


the facta, Their high office had lost for
them its sacredness. The ruling motive
of their conduct was selfishness rather
than the desire to discharge their duties
intelligently and conscientiously. They
love bribes rather than truth and right-
eousness. They have left “the paths of
uprightness to walk in the ways of
darkness,” and now “they walk on in
darkness.” How can such men dis-
charge the holy duties of their office


aright? The Psalmist accuses them
of—
2. Injustice. “ How long will ye


judge unjustly and accept the persons
of the wicked?” The injustice with
which the judges are charged is that of
partiality or favouritism. They did °
not deal with and decide cases according
to their facts and circumstances, accord-
ing to their merits, but according to
the wealth, or rank, or influence of the
persons concerned, They not simply
showed favour to the rich, the ex-
alted in rank, and the powerful. That
would have been evil. Partiality is
ever wrong in a judge. But they ac-
cepted the persons of the wicked. They
showed favour to them in their wicked-
ness. A greater perversion of judgment
is almost, if not quite, inconceivable.
As we have seen, the office of magistrate
or judge is one of the highest and most
important, but when it is perverted, the
perversion is most sinful, and the result
most terrible. The office itself is
Divine ; the conduct of the men who
filled it was diabolic. And the result of
this maladministration of justice was
extreme social disorder. “ All the foun-
dations of the earth are out of course.”
The whole fabric of society was shaken,
and seemed to be tottering into ruin,
Its very foundation principles were dis-
located. These corrupt judges, instead
of promoting order and harmony, were
bringing all things into a state of
anarchy and misery.

V. As tending to a great change.
“Ye shall die like men, and fall like one
of the princes,” Here we have—

1. Something which ts common to all
men. These judges had been spoken of
as “gods,” but they must submit to
death like the poorest wretch who had


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


ever stood at their unrighteous judg-
ment bar. Death comes equally to us
all, and makes all equal when it comes.
In that respect, the peer has no advan-
tage over the peasant, or the prince over
the pauper. “ He bringeth the princes
to nothing; He maketh the judges of
the earth as vanity.” ‘All flesh is as
grass, and all the glory of man as the
flower of grass.” Death is the great
leveller.

2. Something peculiar to men of exalted
position. “ Fall like one of the princes.”
Some interpret this that death would
be more painful to them amid their
worldly power and material luxuries
than to the poor amid their poverty
and hardship. Their elevated position
would render their fall the more dis-
tressing. But the true interpretation
seems to be that they should die a
violent death, and be cut off in the
midst of their days. “The expression,
‘as one of the princes,’ reminds them of
the numerous examples in early times of
similar dignitaries who were removed by
the judgment of God. The connection
shows that it is fallen princes that: are
meant.” Men holding high and respon-
sible positions who abuse their privileges
and powers, are frequently cut down
by violence. “ Bloody and deceitful
men shall not live out half their days.”
How vain, then, is it for men to pride
themselves upon their eminent positions
or sounding titles!

The conduct of magistrates and judges
is here set forth—

VI. As leading man to cry for the
inauguration of the direct magistracy


ef God. “Arise, O God, judge the
earth: for Thou shalt inherit all
nations.”


1. This ery springs from man’s long-
ing for judgment. In all ages the
wronged and oppressed have lifted up
their hands to heaven, and implored the
interposition of God. Justice being
denied them here, they have turned
their imploring eyes to God and cried,
“ Arise, O God, judge the earth.”

2. This cry implies the inadequacy oj
human judgment, Man has failed to


PRALM LEEXT,


rectify the wrongs under which the race
bas groaned for ages. The administra-
tion of justice has often been malad-
ministration, a disgrace and a curse,
And, even at its best, human magistracy
is not able to rectify the disorders, and
adjust the inequalities of this world,

3. This ery implies confidence in the
judgment of God. The Psalmist trusted
the justice of God. From the partiality
and corruption of human judges he con-
fidently carried his appeal to “ the Judge
of all the earth.”


** Heaven is above all, yet; there sita a Judge
That no king can corrupt.” —Shakespeare.


The Psalmist trusted the sovereignty of
God. He knew that all nations be-
longed to Him. The administration of
the affairs of the whole world pertained
to Him. And so the Psalmist appealed
to Him, in strong assurance that He
would hear and respond to his appeal.
The grand hope of the world is in the
interposition of Him whose justice is
unimpeachable, and whose sovereignty is
universal,

Conciusion.—1. Let us be thankful
that in this land and in this age, as @
rule, justice ts administered with great
intelligence and strict impartiality. 2.
Let unjust magistrates and judges, and
all who seek to gain or promote an un-
righteous cause, be warned. “He
judgeth among the gods.”


“‘ In the corrupted currents of this world,
Offence’s gilded hand may shove by justice :
And oft ’tis seen, the wicked prize itself
Buys out the law. But ’tis not so above:
There is no shuffling, there the action lies
In ite true nature; and we ourselves com-


pell’'d
E’en to the teeth and forehead of our faulte,
To give in evidence.” —Shakespeare.


3. Let the oppressed behold thew
hope. “ He shall judge thy people with
righteousness, and thy poor with judg-
ment. He shall judge the poor of the
people, He shall save the children of the
needy, and shall break in pieces the
oppressor.” ‘ Arise, O God, judge the
earth; for Thou shalt inherit all
nations.”


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





Tse Piverimmags or THE WICKED,
(Verse 5.)


“ They walk on in darkness.”

The life of all men upon earth is a
pilgrimage, a journey.

1. A journey constantly prosecuted,
Asleep or awake, frivolous or earnest,
sinful or holy, we are ever advancing on
this journey. 2. A journey rapidly
prosecuted, “ My days are swifter than
a post ; they flee away, they see no good.
They are passed away as the swift ships ;
as the eagle that hasteth to the prey.”
3. A journey trretraceably prosecuted.
In the walk of life there is no going
back to our yesterdays. We pass along
the way but once. 4. A journey of
great importance. There is an end to
our earthly pilgrimage, and the nature
of the end is determined by our conduct
on the journey. We are preparing our
future heaven or hell as we tread the
path of daily life. In this journey the
wicked “ walk on in darkness.” Their
pilgrimage is characterised by—

I. Privation. Night hides the beau-
ties and sublimities of the landscape.
They are there even as in the daytime,
but the darkness veils them. When
the darkness is very great even the stara,
the peculiar glory of the night, are ob-
scured. The sinner sees not the mor-
ally sublime and beautiful. The glory
of God surrounds him, but he is in
darkness, and beholds it not, The
truth of God is revealed, but he sees it


not, for he walks on in darkness, The
spiritual privations of the wicked are
many and great; ¢.g., pardon, peace, d&c.

IL Folly. The wicked condema
themselves to these privations, ‘“ They
walk on in darkness,” because they will
so to do. Light is in the world, but
they elect to prosecute their journey in
the dark. They may walk in the day
if they will, but they prefer to walk at
night. The sinner excludes himself from
all the true brightness and joy of life.
Sin is arrant folly.

IIL. Peril. “Ifa man walk in the
night, he stumbleth.” Obstacles may
overthrow him, he may step over a
precipice and be shattered into frag-
ments, hostile powers may approach un-
observed and kill him. Faint images
these of the moral perils which beset
the sinner in his darkened walk.

IV. Criminality. To walk on in
moral darkness when we may walk in the
light of truth is sinful, “This is the
condemnation, that light is come into
the world, and men loved darkness rather
than light, because their deeds were evil.”

V. Ruinousness. If men persist in
walking in darkness they will, sooner or
later, stumble into hell.

Sinners, turn from your dangerous
course. While yet you may, turn from
darkness to light, from sin to the
Saviour, from hell to heaven.


PSALM LXXXIIL


INTRODUCTION,


This ia the last of the Psalms of Asaph. If the Psalm refers to the times of Jehoshaphat,
the author was probably ‘‘ Jahaziel, a Levite of the sons of Asaph,” upon whom ‘“‘ came the
Spirit of the Lord in the midst of the congregation” (2 Chron, xx. 14). In the 19th verse we
read that ‘‘ The Levites stood up to praise the Lord God of Iarael with a loud voice on high,”
Probably this was the Psalm which they sung.

Occasion.—Hengstenberg says, ‘‘ There is no room for doubt as to the historical occasion
of the Psalm. It refers to the war of Jehoshaphat against the allied Edomites, Moabites,
Ammonites, and other nations, and forms the earliest as to subject of a seriea of cognate
Psalms. While it makes mention of the help of God im the midst of danger, the 47th
Psalm was sung, after the discomfiture of the enemy, on the jield of battle, and the 48th,
at the thanksgiving service tm the temple. This view has been taken by al] commentator,
except those who have been prevented from arriving at the truth by some prejudice, such as
that all the Psalms of Asaph were composed in David’s time, or that the narrative at 2 Chron,
xx. is Pyenointe correet.” Alexander, Perowne, and Spurgeon held the above view.

4


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMB,





WOAiM BXXXITL





Tae Perm axp Prarer or tHe CHurcn.


Amyraldus writes,—‘ The Psalm may
be applied now to the enemies of the
Christian Church, of which Israel was
the type. The most important and
formidable of these are assuredly sin
and Satan, from whom we most especi-
ally long to be delivered.” Regarding
the Psalm thus, in the peril of Israel we
have an illustration of the peril of the
Church of Christ, and in the prayer of
Israel an illustration (in some respects)
of the prayer of the Church of Christ.

I. The peril of the Church. ‘Ths
peril of Israel at this time arose from
her enemies, who had banded themselves
together to make war against her and
destroy her power. Several things in
the disposition and conduct of the con-
federate forces are here mentioned which
would make their hostility formidable,

1. Their hostility was violent. ‘ For,
lo, Thine enemies make a_ tumult.”
They were loud and clamorous in their
opposition to Israel, and were rushing
on tumultuously to accomplish the de-
struction of the people of God. There
have been times in the history of the
Church of Christ when violent opposition
has been directed against her. In the
apostolic age how tumultuous were her
foes! And how they raged in the time
of the Roman emperors! Such enemies
as Voltaire and Tom Paine have been
loud in their opposition to Christianity.

2. Their hostility was confident.
“They that hate Thee have lifted up
the head.” In dismay or penitence the
head is bowed down; in courage and
confidence it is lifted up. The enemies
of Israel proudly lifted up their heads,
feeling assured of success. Their vast
numbers, and compact unity, and great
power, seemed to them to place their
triumph far beyond question. And so
men have felt confident that they could
destroy the Church of Christ, and have
published abroad their intention and
power to do so, and to do so speedily—
with what results the existence, position,
and power of the Church to-day declare.

3. Ther hostility was crafty. ‘‘ They
have taken crafty counsel against Thy

28


people, and consulted against Thy hia-
den ones.” They were not only strong
in power, but subtle in strategy also.
Their plans were matured with much
care and cunning. And Satan and his
emissaries, in seeking to destroy the
Church of our Lord, put forth all their
skill in the formation of their schemes
of operation. The Church has to con-
tend against Satanic cunning as well as
against Satanic power. ‘Put on the
whole armour of God, that ye may be
able to stand against the wiles of the
devil.” ‘That old serpent, called the
devil, and Satan, which deceiveth the
whole world.” ‘ Satan himself is trans-
formed into an angel of light.”

4. Their hostility aimed at the utter
ruin of Israel, ‘‘ They said, Come, and
let us cut them off from being a nation,
that the name of Israel may be no more
in remembrance.” They did not merely
aim at arresting the progress or crippling
the power of Israel. Nothing would
satisfy them but the utter destruction
of the chosen people. They seek to cut
off both root and branch from the face
of the earth, leaving of them not even a
memorial. Such is the aim of Satan
and his allies against the Christian
Church, They would banish all true
religion from the world. Every Chris-
tian temple they would pervert into a
“synagogue of Satan;” every godly
man they would cut off; all religious
literature they would destroy. This
has been attempted by means of perse-
cution. But persecution purified and
strengthened the Church. The foes of
the Church are now seeking her over-
throw by corruption and error working
within. Ritualism and Rationalism are
doing their part towards the destruction
of the Church, The rash and hasty
conclusions of scientists, and the con-
ceited dogmatism of the professors of
“the higher criticism,” are arrayed
against the Book. But the Book and
the Church are unconquerable, inde-
structible, “ The gates of hell shall not
prevail against” the Church of Christ.

5. Their hostility was eae “They

48





have consulted together with one con-
sent; they are confederate against
Thee.” There was unanimity in their
counsels.
laid in abeyance, that they might unite
in one irresistible and all-conquering
army. They solemnly covenanted to-
gether to seek the destruction of the
Hebrews. And there is unity amongst
the enemies of the Church in the matter
of opposing her and seeking her over-
throw. The Jews and Romans, hostile
in other respects, united against Christ.
The Sanhedrim, Pilate, Herod, and the
people all united in opposition to Him.
“Of a truth against Thy holy child
Jesus, whom Thou hast anointed, both
Herod and Pontius Pilate, with the
Gentiles and the people of Israel, were
gathered together.” This is an illus-
tration of the opposition of the world
and the devil to the Church in our own
day. Opposed in other things, the
unchristian world is united in this.

6. Their hostility was powerful. No
less than ten nations were joined in this
eonfederacy against Israel. “ Edom,
the Ishmaelites, Moab, the Hagarenes,
Gebal, Amon, Amalek, the Philistines
with the inhabitants of Tyre, Assur
also.” All the nations bordering on
Palestine had joined the confederacy,
so that the chosen people were quite
surrounded by enemies. And some of
these enemies were very powerful, so
that they felt confident of complete
triumph. And Israel turned to God
in prayer for help as to their only re-
source. The enemies of the Christian
Church are many and mighty, Satan
is strong, subtle, and numerously sup-
ported, Sin is strong. Many forms of
evil are united against the Church. The
lusts of the flesh, drunkenness, gluttony,
uncleanness, the greed of gold, the
ruinous absorption of mind and heart
in temporal and material things, the


frivolities of fashionable life, the
vices of fast life, the assaults of
dishonest scepticism, the miserable


negations of atheism, and the corrup-

tions within the Church iteelf, all tend

to its overthrow. Yet the Church,

loyally trusting in God, is stronger than

all her foes, They may assault her, out
482


Their mutual hostilities they _


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


their assaults will be like those ef the
tumultuous waves which furiously dash
against a rock-bound coast to be hurled
back as if in calm contempt.

It is noteworthy that in this statement
of their trouble and danger the poet
represents the enemies of Israel as the
enemies of God, the confederacy against
Israel as a confederacy against God, and
the people of Israel as the people of
God. Thus they identify their cause
and interest with God’s. Their foes
hated the laws and religion of God;
and in striking at His people, they were
striking at His kingdom in this world.
The strength of the Church is in her
oneness with God. When she is loyal to |
Him, He saith to her persecutors, “‘ Why
persecuteat thou Me?” No weapon that
is formed against her shall prosper.

Il The prayer of the Ohurch.
‘Keep not Thou silence, O God: hold
not Thy peace, and be not still, O God.
. . . Do unto them as unto the Midian-
ites ; as to Sisera, as to Jabin,” &c.

The people here pray—

1. For the interposition of God.
“Keep not Thou silence, O God: hold
not Thy peace, and be not still, O God.”
There are times when God seems as
though He did not observe the circum-
stances and needs of His people, or as
though He were not concerned for their
prosperity or safety. He stands as it
were aside, taking no part in their
affairs. His people here pray that He
would not thus treat them on this
occasion, but that He would speak in
mighty deeds, and arouse Himself for
their help and defence. The prayer of
this verse is clearly an urgent one. The
brevity and rapidity and repetition of
the request, all indicate the imminence
of the need and the earnestness of the
desire. It is well when the Church in
her dangers betakes herself to the throne
of grace to implore the help of God.
Not in the wealth of her material re-
sources, not in the wisdom and eloquence
of her leaders, not in the patronage of
parliaments and princes, but in the pre-
sence and power of God in her midst, is
the Church’s true and sure defence
against her foes,

2. For the utter destruction of their


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PRALM LXXxIy,





foes. ‘Do unto them as unto the
Midianites, as to Sisera, as to Jabin,”
&c. (verses 9-15). These petitions are
evidently for their utter destruction.
The confederate foes of Israel had
agreed to seek her utter ruin, and now
in her turn Israel pleads with God that
He would terrify, trouble, and com-
pletely destroy them. (On the impreca-
tions (vers. 9-17) see our remarks on
Psalm lxix. 22-28; and the quotation
from Perowne on pp. 163, 164.) The
Church of Christ should both pray and
work for the destruction of her enemies,
We would destroy the wicked by de-
stroying their wickedness. We would
that all sinners were exterminated by
their being regenerated into saints. We
would that all the enemies of the Lord
were destroyed by becoming loyal to
Him.

3. For the confusion of thetr foes.
It seems strange to pray for the confu-
sion of their foes after having prayed
for their complete destruction. Yet
this is done in the Psalm. “Fill their
faces with shame: let them be con-
founded and troubled for ever.” The
prayer is that the schemes of the
enemies may be thwarted, their pur-
poses defeated, their designs baffled,
their plans all overturned ; and that with
shame and trouble their confederacy may
be broken up for ever. This is a very
fitting prayer for the Christian Church.
It is both wise and right, our duty and
interest, to pray that the counsels of the
wicked may be frustrated, the designs of
hell baffled, and all the politics of the
enemies of the Church confounded.


4, For the submission of their foes to
God. ‘That they may seek Thy name,
O Lord.” The context will not allow
us to interpret this as a seeking of the
friendship and favour of God. It
means simply, that they may seek Thee
in forced submission, being able to hold
out no longer. But we who have
learned of Christ may urge this petition
with a much higher and diviner mean-
ing. It is ours to pray that the plans
of the enemies of God and of His
Church may be bafiled, that so they
might be led to know and trust Him,
May their wicked plans be brought to
confusion that they might be brought
to conversion.

5. For the glory of the Divine name.
“That men may know that Thou, whose
name alone is JEHOVAH, art the Most
High over all the earth.” The context
compels us to regard the knowledge and
acknowledgment as not voluntary, but
forced. The prayer is that God would
so display His power against the foes of
Israel that men would be compelled to
acknowledge His supremacy in the earth.
So, but with a fuller and higher mean-
ing, let the Christian Church pray for
the universal diffusion of the knowledge
of the glory of God,

The subject preaches its own conclu-
sion. We are surrounded by a host of
foes; “‘we have no might against the
great company that cometk ..«:).3t us.”
But the Lord of Hosts 1 with us.
Through Him we shall do valiantly.
Onward, Christian soldiers, in God’s
name; and ye shall be “more than
eonquerors through Him.”


PSALM LXXXIV,


InTRODUCTION,


n.—** fo the chicf Musician upon Gittith.” (See Introduction to Ps. lxxxi.)


Super:
« 4 Psalm for the sona of Korah,”


(See Introduction to Px. xlii.)


Occasion.—The Psalm was rhcaeae Be composed when the writer waa exiled from the


sanctuary. It was probably written by


vid when he was compelled to flee from Jerusalem


by reason of the rebellion of Absalom. He laments this chiefly because it separated him from


*¢¢the courts of the Lord.”


Homiletieally, the Psalm sets forth, The exile’s longing for the


house of Ged, vera. 1-4; Religious progress, vera, 5~7 ; and The exile’s prayer, vers. $-12,


WEALM LEXXIV,


SOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALES,





THe Exinz’s Lonaine ror tHe Hovste or Gom
(Verses 1-4.)


The Psalmist was banished from his:


eapital and from the tabernacle of the
Most High by the wicked rebellion of
his son Absalom. This exile must have
been one of the most painful experiences
in the life of the royal bard. When he
left the holy city he did not conceal his
sorrow, but “went up by the ascent of
Olivet, and wept as he went up, and had
his head covered, and he went barefout ;
and all the people that were with him
covered every man his head, and they
went up, weeping as they went up.”
A sadly pathetic sight this—the noble
king in his old age driven forth by the
rebellion of his own son from the city
which he had founded or ornamented,
the abode, for many years, of all his
power, his glory, and his happiness,
perhaps never more to return to it.
But his great and pious soul was great
and pious then as ever. And in his
exile his greatest grief arose from the
fact that he was sundered from the
worship of the tabernacle of God, and
his most ardent desire for himself was
to return to an enjoyment of its privi-
leges. The emtle’s longing for the house
of God—

I Arose from his love for the house
of God. ‘ How beloved are Thy taber-
nacles, O Lord of hosts!” ‘“Amiable”
or lovely does not express the meaning
of the word used by the Psalmist; but
dear, beloved, ‘the plural, “ taber-
nacles,” is used in reference to the
divisions of the sanctuary, each part
being regarded by the poet as the abode
of God. The tabernacle was dear to
David. ‘Lord, I have loved the habi-
tation of Thy house, and -he place
where Thine honour dwelleta.” Every
godly soul loves the house of God, and
delights in His worship. The Psalmist
doubtless had excellent reasons for his
love to the house of God. And so have
we. We love it because—

1. It ts the place of holy fellowship.
In its sacred engagements the holiest
and bravest souls unite. The com-
munion of saints in divine and bleased

484


exercises and experiences—in penitence,
prayer, praise, aspiration, adoration—is
enjoyed in the sanctuary.

_ 2, It ts the place of social prayer and
praise. There the glad and grateful
heart pours out its joy and thankfulness
to Him in hymns of praise consecrated
by a thousand precious memories. And
sincere, humble, devout praise is a fore-
taste of heaven. And there the anxious,
troubled spirit can cast its burden in
prayer upon the heart of the loving
Father, or its sin upon the Saviour, and
find rest.

3. It te the place of instruction and
exhortation, The teachings of the living
and abiding Word of God are here set
forth, The teachings of a godly and
enlightened ministry cannot be too
highly estimated. And its warnings
and exhortations are often of unspeak-
able importance and value,

4. It 1s the place of Divine communion,
“There,” said the Lord, “I will meet
with thee, and I will commune with
thee from above the mercy-seat.” To
the godly soul the presezce of God is
the great attraction in the sanctuary.
When His presence is blessedly realised,
the grand object of worship is attained.
But if His presence is not realised, no
matter whosoever or whatsoever else
may be present, the one essential thing
is lacking. “In His presence is fulness
of joy.” Adoration, in the conscious-
ness of His presence and approval, is
the heaven of the soul. For all these
reasons the godly suul loves the house
of God.

II. Was a longing for conscious fel-
lowship with God. “My heart and
my flesh crieth out for the living God.”
It was not so much the courts of the
Lord’s house that he longed for as the
living God Himself. Religious ordi-
nances are lifeless, useless things, mere
formalities, if they do not help us con-
sciously to realise the presence of the
living God. The soul which is alive
and healthful cannot bear the sense of
distance from God. He is its life, ita


HOMILETIO OOMMENTARY: PSALMS.





health, its inspiration, its joy, its crown,
its supreme and essential good ; and in
His absence it languishes and is cast
down. Moreover, the Psalmist ad-
dresses God as One in whom he con-
fided and with whom he was accustomed
to hold converse—“ My King and my
God.” Though exiled from His courts
he still loves the King. Though far
from the tabernacle he still claims God
as his portion. The repeated “my” is
precious and suggestive. It shows his
holy intimacy with, and strong confi-
dence in, and deep affection for, God.
God is all in all to the godly soul

IIL Was the longing of his entire
being. “My sould longeth, ... my
heart and my flesh crieth out for the
living God.” The Psalmist was not
conscious of any thought or feeling
opposed to this strong desire. His
whole being concurred in it, He says
that his “flesh” even, which we so fre-
quently find lusting against the spirit,
eried out for God. Ali the desires and
aspirations of his nature were for com-
munion with God. The whole man,
with every faculty and affection, thirsted
for the sacred engagements and Divine
communion of the tabernacles of the
Lord. The Psalmist seems to have
attained that state for which the apostle,
ages after, prayed on behalf of the Thes-
salonians. ‘The very God of peace
sanctify you wholly; and your whole
spirit and soul and body be preserved
blameless.” Brethren, blessed will it be
for us when our whole being is thus
athirst for God. In response to such
desires God will give fullest and divinest
satisfactions.

IV. Was a longing of great inten-
sity. “My soul longeth, yea, even
fainteth for the courts of the Lord; my
heart and my flesh crieth out for the
living God.” The word translated
“longeth” by itself denotes an intense
desire, a pining after a thing. “It
means literally,” says Perowne, “ ‘hath
grown pale,’ as with the intensity of the
feeling.” Then there are the other
words. “ Fainteth,’”’ is spent, faileth of
strength, is exhausted. “Crieth out”
in earnest importunate desire. It would
- be difficult to express the intensit. «


desire more strongly than it is here ex-
pressed. It was, in its intensity, that
kind of longing which God never denies,
when it seeks for that which is in accor-
dance with His will. In our day the
evidence of such ardent desire for the
means of grace is conspicuous chiefly by
its absence. In religious services to a
painful extent the outward show and
glitter of ritualistic ornament, or the fine
musical performances of professional
choirs, or the gifts of some popular
preacher, are the things desired rather
than the presence and fellowship of God,
Oh, for more of the holy longing of
David !

V. Led him to extol the blessedness
of those who were constantly engaged
in God’s house. To David the lot of
the little birds who had their nests in
the vicinity of the tabernacle seemed
enviable as compared with his own,
They in perfect safety could place their
dearest possession, their young, in their
nests about the tabernacles ; but he was
an exile far away from the tabernacle,
and exposed to constant and great perils,
And as he thought of the priests and
levites who ministered in the sanctuary,
and who were entirely devoted to its
sacred services, and had their dwelling
near to it, he said, “ Blessed are they
that dwell in Thy house: they will be
still praising Thee.” So David desired
to live all his life in conscious and
blessed fellowship with God, to walk
with God every day and in all things,
and never to be separated from the
opportunities of social worship. He
esteemed the life of those who ministered
in the sanctuary ea life of praise. And
it is certain that a holy life, a life of
communion with God, is a life of praise.
Whatever may be its occupations, what-
ever its circumstances and outward
conditions, praise will be its spiritual
mood, They who have attained the
blessedness of the “Father's house”
above, have reached the fulness of that
the foretaste of which David here speaks
of. They “dwell” in God’s house.
They are made “pillars in the temple
of God, and go no more out.” In that
high world every place is consecrated by
the presence and emile of ee There


FOAL LIXZIV.





all service is blessedness ; activity is

ecstasy ; work is worship.
Conanvsion.—True social worship is

indeed @ precious and blessed thing. It


is now essentially a spiritual thing, and


is independent of any special locality.


“From every place below the skies,
The grateful song, the fervent prayer,
The incense of the heart, may rise
To heaven, and find acceptance there.”


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; PSALMB.


Let us seek to live a life of communion
with God and praise to Him. Let our
life be worship.


¢ My will be swallowed up in Thee ;
Light in Thy light still may I see,
Beholding Thee with open face ;
Call’d the full power of faith to prove,
Let all my hallow’d ee be love,
And all my spotless life be praise.”
rie —O, Wesley


Reuigious Progress.
(Verses 5-7.)


Religious progress is here represent-
ed


lL. As deriving its support from God.
“ Blessed is the man whose strength is
in Thee.” Spiritual life flows from
God. He starts the soul in its upward
course. All true religious progress may
be traced back to Him. All spiritual
vitality and strength come to men by
reason of their connection with Him.
The explanation of this is not difficult.
Well-grounded faith is a strengthening
thing. ‘‘ All things are possible to him
that believeth.” Columbus with invin-
cible faith is mightier than mutinous
crews, conqueror of, coward fears, and,
despite his frail vessels and opposing
winds and waves, he accomplishes what
the world had pronounced impossible.
In the spiritual life faith brings over the
all-sufficiency of God to replenish the
exhausted moral powers of our being.
God is the only true ground and object
of faith, “He that believeth on Him
shall not be ashamed.”  Well-centred
affection ts a strengthening thing. There
are no difficulties which love will not en-
counter, no labours which it cannot
endure, no perils which it cannot brave.
Supreme love to God fills the soul with
invincible energy. Only as our love is
fixed on Him shall we find complete
satisfaction and full spiritual power.
Well assured hope ws a strengthening
thing. It has been well said that ‘‘ Hope
is the companion of power, and the
mother of success; for whoso hopes
strongly has within him the gift of
miracles.” Whileaman retains hope, how-
ever adverse his circumstances may be, he

486


may yet conquer. Hope imparts one of
the most powerful of inspirations. But
in the spiritual life God is the only :
object or person in whom we can safely
place our hope. In every way the
strength of the godly man is in God.
II. As advancing in conformity with
God’s law. Hengstenberg’s rendering
and interpretation of the last clause of
the fifth verse appears to us to be cor-
rect. ‘“‘ In whose hearts are ways. The
second condition of salvation is, that a
man has ways, made roads, in his heart.
By this is designated zealous, moral
effort, blamelessness, and righteousness.
The heart of man, in its natural condi-
tion, appears like a pathless wilderness,
full of cliffs and precipices ; and repent-
ance is a levelling of the roads. The
following passages are parallel: Psalm
1. 23, ‘whoever prepares a way, to him
will I show the salvation of God ;’ Prov.
xvi. 7; and Isa. xl. 3, 4.” Matthew
Henry, in applying the words, also uses
them in this sense. ‘If we make God’s
promise our strength, we must make
God’s Word our rule, and walk by it.”
There can be no true religious progress
except God’s will is our law of life and
conduct. It is in vain that we talk of
“higher life” except we are growing in
hearty recognition of, and loyal obe-
dience to, that will. The soul that is
really progressing utters itself in strains
like these: “‘Make me to understand
the way of Thy precepts. I will run
the way of Thy commandments, when
Thou shalt enlarge my heart. I have
refrained my feet from every evil way,


that I might keep Thy Word. Thy


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,


P@ALM LXXXIV,





Word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light
unto my path.” ‘True religious progress
is progress in holiness of heart and life.

Ill. As making unfavourable cir-
cumstances conduce to its own ends,
“Who passing through the Valley of
Baca make it a well; the rain also
filleth the pools.” ‘ The Valley of Baca”
is the valley of tears or of weeping.
We are by no means certain that the
Psalmist by the phrase referred to any
particular locality. And if he did it
is impossible now to determine where
that valley was. The idea is that, “ As
the valley of weeping is an image of
misery, the fountain is an image of sal-
vation.” By their faith in God and
fellowship with Him they transformed
the gloomy and inhospitable valley into
a valley of refreshment and joy. By
the grace of God the godly soul can
compel the unfavourable circumstances
of his pilgrimage to help him onward
in his career. In the desert of afflic-
tion the grace of God opens up a foun-
tain of consolation and peace, and so
the affliction becomes the occasion of
blessing. Tennyson sings of one,

*¢ Who breaks his birth’s invidious bar,

And grasps the skirts of happy chance,


And breasts the blows of circumstance,
And grapples with his evil star ;”’


and so forces his way to great eminence
and influence. In like manner, by the
blessing of God, the good man by resist-
ing temptation acquires moral strength,
by means of tribulation he grows patient,
by means of suffering he attains unto
spiritual purity, and tenderness, and
beauty. ‘ We glory in tribulations also ;
knowing that,” d&c.

IV. As steadily advancing. “ They
go from strength to strength.” Pro-
gress is a great law of life. ‘‘ Where
there is life there is growth. The law
is seen in all creation—in the tiny moss
upon the wall and the lordly oak of
the forest, in the insect of an hour,
and the beast of the field. And the
Christian is enjoined to grow in grace,
not in wealth, or in power ; but in that
appropriation of the revealed will of
God to the heart that results in satisfy-
ing, not some one faculty or passion of
the soul, but the whole man.” God


calls us to move onward and upward.
“ Leaving the principles of the doctrines
of Christ, let us go on unto perfection.”
“Be ye perfect, even as your Father
which is in heaven is perfect.” “I
count not myself to have apprehended ;
but this one thing I do, forgetting those
things which are behind,” &c. “ Giving
all diligence, add to your faith virtue ;
end to virtue knowledge; and to know-
ledge temperance,” &c. Let us seek to
advance from strength to strength, from
strength of patience to strength of hope;
from strength of hope to strength of
faith ; from strength of faith to strength
of vision, Let us aim at expressing our
inner life in the activities of growth and
usefulness, In our career there must
be no pause. The goal of yesterday
must be the starting point of to-day.
“‘They that wait upon the Lord shall
renew their strength ; they shall mount
up with wings as eagles,” &c.

V. As gloriously terminating.
“ Every one of them in Zion appeareth
before God.” Those who set forth in
the various companies on their way to
Jerusalem shall arrive there in safety,
and join in the holy festivities, None
shall perish on the way. None shall
turn back without having attained the
object in view. The godly soul moves
onward to a glorious end. ‘The ran-
somed of the Lord shall return and
conie to Zion with songs and everlasting
joy upon their heads;” &c. ‘‘ When
He shall appear, we shall be like Him ;
for we shall see Him as He is.” Our
progress leads onward right to the
palace and throne and presence of the
King. Our pilgrimage ends at home,
our “ Father's home.” We have spoken
of our progress as gloriously terminating
at the heavenly Zion ; but it terminates
only to begin again under higher and
more blessed conditions and circum-
stances. The progress of the godly
soul is a never-ending progress. When
millenniums of growth and glory have
been realised by the ransomed of the
Lord, they aspire to yet higher and
diviner things, crying, “It doth not yet
appear what we shall be.”

Conciusion.—1. Have we entered
wpe this career of progress I ae we

48


PGALM LEXETV.





started, and started truly and well, in
the religious life? Know we the


blessedness of “the man whose strength


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


isin God”? 2. Christian pilgrims, are
you advancing? “Let us lay aside
every weight, and the sin,” &.


Toe Exine’s Praveen.
(Verses 8-12.)


I The address which is presented.
“OQ Lord God of hosts, hear my prayer:
give ear, O God of Jacob. Behold, O
God our shield.” In this address the
Psalmist reminds God of—

1. His sovereign power. “ Lord God
of hosts.” “He doeth according to His
will in the army of heaven, and the in-
habitants of the earth; and none can
stay His hand, or say unto Him, what
doest Thou ?”

2. His covenant relation to Hts people.
“God of Jacob.” “I said not unto the
seed of Jacob, Seek ye Me, in vain.” He
has pledged His faithfulness and mercy
to them when they call upon Him.

3. His protecting care of His people.
“God our shield.” “Fear not, Abram ;
I am thy shield.” David could not hide
himself at this time in the secret of
God’s tabernacle, but he could hide
himself in God Himself.

II. The object which is sought.
“ Behold, and look upon the face of
Thine anointed.” The “anointed” is
David himself, who was anointed, or set
apart, to the office of king. He pre-
sents no petition except this, that God
would look upon him, which is a way
of asking Him to grant His favour.
David’s great desire was to return to
the joys and fellowships of the sanctuary,
there his heart was fixed, thither his
face was directed; and, having ex-
pressed his ardent affection for it, he
needed not to specify his desires any
further than he does here. “ Hear my
prayer: look upon the face of Thine
anointed.” Show me Thy favour and
grant me the desire of my heart.

IIL The pleas which are urged.
“For a day in Thy courts is better
than a thousand. I had rather,” d&c,
(vers, 10, 11). The Psalmist urges
in these words three pleas why God
should restore him to the pnvileges of
the sanctuary—

488


1. His great affection for the house of
God. In his estimation—(1.) A little time
there was preferable to a long season else-
where. “A day in Thy courts is better
than a thousand” elsewhere. (2.) The
lowest station there was preferable to the
highest elsewhere. ‘‘I would rather sit
at the threshold in the house of my
God, than to dwell in the tents of:
wickedness.” Would not God hear his
prayer, and restore him to the place he
loved so well and dearly ?

2. The relations which God sustaina
to His people. (1.) He is a “sun.”
From Him His people derive their
light, and strength, and joy. (2.) He
ts a “shield.” From Him His people
derive protection in time of peril. As
a “shield,” would He not guard His
servant from the dangers to which he
was at this timeexposed? As a “sun,”
would He not grant to His servant the
light and joy of His presence in His
tabernacle 4

3. The gifts which God bestows upon
His people. (1.) He gives “ grace.”
In every time of need we may hear His
yoice saying unto us, ‘“ My grace is
sufficient for thee.” ‘God is able to
make all grace abound toward you;
that ye, always having all-sufficiency in
all things,” &c. (2.) He gives “glory.”
“The glory which Thou gavest Me,” said
Christ, “I have given them.” The glory
of moral conquest, of spiritual purity,
and of unfading hope. Ina word, the
glory of moral resemblance to Christ.
Glory in its dim beginning here, in its
splendid fulness hereafter. (3.) He
withholds no good. Nothing that will
really contribute to our well-being will
He withhold from us if we “ walk up-
rightly.” Surely the God who confers
such gifts upon His people would grant
unto David, His anointed, the desire of
his heart, in bringing him back again to
@ae courts and tabernacles of the Lord.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMS.


PSALM LEXXIV.





IV. The sublime conclusion of the
whole. ‘“O Lord of hosts, blessed is
the man that trusteth in Thee.” This
blessedneas the Psalmist possessed. In
the depths of his soul there was a peace
which no rebellion in his kingdom, no
gin and sorrow in his family, no banish-
ment from the sanctuary, could shake,
for it depended upon God alone. If God
granted to him the desire of his heart,
great would be his delight; but if He


should not do so, still was he blessed,
for he trusted in God,—God was his
portion.

Cono.vsion.—1. J the trials of life
what ts tt we feel most? David's
greatest trial was the loss of his religi-
ous privileges. How different, alas! is
the case of many others! 2. Js our
trust reposed in the Lord of hosts?
Then, whatever our circumstances may
be, we are blessed.


THe Lorp Gop a Sun ann SarEnp.
(Verse 11.)


We propose to glance at the figures,
the facts, and the persons which the text
presents to our attention.

I. The figures. ‘‘The Lord God is a
sun and shield.”

1. The sun dispenses light.
made two great lights: the greater
light to rule the day, and the lesser
light to rule the night.” The moon,
which is the lesser light here referred
to, derives her light from the greater ;
and consequently the sun may properly
be represented as the source of light, so
far at least as we are concerned. if
this glorious orb were blotted out of
existence, everything around us would
be involved in obscurity. And what
would be the state of the human mind,
especially in relation to religious sub-
jects, if it were not for the illuminations
of “the Sun of Righteousness” % Alas!
all would be gloom and uncertainty.

2. The sun imparts life. During the
months of winter, an immense number
of creatures either cease to exist, or
remain in a state of torpidity. But in
the spring of the year, when the orb of
day begins to exert an increasing in-
fluence, what a remarkable change
takes place! Animals and vegetables
are alike the subject of a revival ; and
the whole face of nature is renewed.
Equally remarkable, and much more im-
portant, are the effects of that Sun by the
wartnth and energy of whose beams life is
imparted to those who were dead in sin.

3. The sun produces fruitfulness.
When, during a part of the year, we
are favoured with but little of hus


* God |


presence, barrenness and sterility are
observable on every hand. But the
season of promise returns at the ap-
pointed time. The sun gradually rises
higher, and continues longer above the
horizon, The happy results are imme-
diately perceptible; and it is not long
before we are favoured with the ap-
pointed weeks of harvest, The heart of
man may, with great propriety, be com-
pared to a soil; but, alas! it is natu-
rally hard, and dry, and barren,—so far,
at least, as spiritual things are con-
cerned. The good seed of the kingdom
may be sown thereon with a liberal
hand, but until the Sun of Righteous-
ness shines upon it in all His glory and
effulgence, no signs of fruitfulness will
gladden the eye.

The Psalmist tells us Jehovah “ts a
shield.” The shield is a piece of defen-
sive armour used by warriors, and at-
tached to the left arm, as a protection
against the injuries to which they are
exposed from the enemy. We are,
therefore, reminded that the people of
God are surrounded by foes, with whom
it is their duty to contend ; and that in
the time of conflict, they may look to
Him whose cause they espouse for suc-
cour and protection. In all ages, Jeho-
vah has been the defence of His people;
consequently, none of the weapons
formed against them have prospered.

IL. The facts. “The Lord will give
grace and glory,” &.

1. “The Lord will withhold no good
from them that walk uprightly.” It is
probable that the reference here is

«69


FOALM LYXXV.


principally to temporal things ; the com-
forts and conventences of life. They are
secured to the believer, so far as is con-


ducive to his good, in the covenant of.


grace. There may also be a reference
to afflictions. He, who knows us better
than we know ourselves, may see that
they will be good for us; and if so,
they will not be withheld.

2. “The Lord will give grace.”
Whatever afflictions we have to endure
while upon earth, all will be well if this
promise be fulfilled in our experience.
The grace of God will sanctify both us
and our afflictions,—ws as vessels fitted
for the Master’s use, and them to the
advancement of our best interests. It
will sustain us in the time of trial, and
enable us quietly to submit to the Lord’s
will, It will strengthen us in running
the race that is set before us. It will
give us the victory over every adversary ;
and at length hold out the crown of
righteousness, which fadeth not away.

3. “ The Lord will give glory.” This
is the consummation of grace, and is
reserved for the world to come. If
religion afforded its professors no enjoy-
ment whilst on earth, the glories of
heaven would prove an ample reward.

Ill. The persons. ‘Them that
walk uprightly.” Those walk uprightly
who walk with God. And who are they
that walk with God?

1. That man does so, who, in all his
engagements, recognises the Divine
authority, consults the Divine will, and
seeks the Divine blessing.


PSALM


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; PSALMS.





2. That woman walks with God, whe,
like Mary, has chosen the good part
which can never be taken from her; and
delights to sit at the Saviour’s feet, to
hear His words,—who, like Martha, is
found diligently attending to household
duties,—and, at the same time, like
Dorcas, is “full of good works and
alms-deeds.”

3. That chéld walks with God, who,
like Samuel, is desirous to hear the
words of Divine wisdom; and, like
Timothy, has acquired a knowledge of
those Scriptures which are able to make
him “wise unto salvation, through faith,
which is in Christ Jesus.”

Conciusion.—1. If the Lord God.
bea sun, let my hearers pray that they
may be enlightened, quickened, and
qualified to bring forth fruit unto holi-
ness, that the end may be everlasting
life. 2. If He be a shield, let His pro-
tection be sought in every season of con-
flict and danger. 3. If He will with-
hold no temporal good from His people,
let them rely on His paternal regards,
4. If He will give grace, let it be ex-
pected in every time of need. 5. If He
will give glory, let it be prepared for
and anticipated. 6. If those only who
walk uprightly have a right to expect
this blessedness, let unceasing solicitude
be manifested that the character may be
formed by grace Divine, so that it may
be viewed with approbation by Him
who will render to every man accord-
ing to his works.—The Young Minie-
ter's Companion.


LXXXV.


INTRODUCTION.


Buperscription.—“ To the chief Musician,” See Introduetion te Ps. Ivil, “4 Peales for
the sons of Korah.” See Introduction to Ps. xlii.

“There seems,” says Perowne, ‘‘every reason to conclude that this Psalm was written
after the return of the exiles from the Babylonish captivity. It opens with an acknowledg-
ment of God's goodness and mercy in the national restoration, in terms which could hardly
apply to any other event, But it passes immediately to earnest entreaty for deliverance from
the pressure of existing evils, in language which almost contradicts the previous acknowledge
ment, First, we hear the grateful confession, ‘Thou hast turned the captivity of Jacob ;’ and
then we have the prayer, ‘Turn us, O God of our salvation.’ If the third verse contains the
joyful announcement, ‘Thou hast withdrawn all Thy wrath,’ &., the fifth pleads as if no such
assurance had been given: ‘ Wilt Thou for ever be angry with us?’ &. The moat probable
way of explaining this conflict of opposing feelings is by referring the Psalm to the circum-
atances mentioned by Nehemiah (chap. i. 3)... . The 126th Psalm ia conceived in a some
what similar strain,”

490





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM LYXXV.





A GrarercL ReEco.iecrios.
(Verses 1-3.)


f. Of national deliverance. “ Lord,
Thot hast been favourable unto Thy
land; Thou hast brought back the
eaptivity of Jacob.” Thus the Psalmist
acknowledges the goodness of God in
the restoration of His people from the
Babylonish captivity. At the very be-
ginning of the Psalm the poet expresses
the identity of God’s interest and theirs.
“Thy land.” God had chosen this
land to be the dwelling-place of His
people. He had driven out the heathen
from it, and established His worship in
it. This intimacy of relation to it is
named evidently with a view of obtain-
ing further manifestations of His favour
towards it. It is well when we can
realise and plead in our prayers the
identity of God’s interest and ours.
When we are devoted to His work, and
seek the accomplishment of His pur-
poses, and aim at His glory, when we
live for Him, we may plead with Him
in our distresses that His favour shown
to us will promote His own cause. The
Psalmist traces their deliverance to the
favour of God All their happiness
and prosperity flowed to them from His
goodness. We may regard their distress
as illustrating the troubles into which
we are brought by reason of our unfaith-
fulness to God. Our backslidings of
heart have been many, and our conse-
quent spiritual darkness and distress
great, yet God in His favour has restored
to us the light and help of His counten-
ance. It was a happy and helpful thing
for the Jews in their present troubles,
that they were so wealthy in recollections
of great blessings from God in past
times. Such recollections would—1. Jn-
spire them with hope. 2. Encourage them
ta prayer. 3. Incite them to effort.

I. Of the removal of the Divine
anger. ‘“ Thou hast taken away all Thy
wrath ; Thou hast turned Thyself from
the fierceness of Thine anger.” The
captivity was regarded as a sign of the
Divine wrath; and their restoration as
a sign that that wrath no longer burned


against them. God is angry with His —
people when they sin against Him.
His wrath ever burns against sin. He
longs to save sinners from their sin.
Sin is the “abominable thing which He
hates.” The Psalmist gratefully recol-
lects past seasons in which God had
turned away His anger from them.
The recollection of those seasons would
encourage the Hebrews in pleading
with Him to remove His displeasure
from them. What He had formerly
done He would probably do again.

IIL Of the bestowal of forgiveness.
“Thou hast forgiven the iniquity of
Thy people; Thou hast covered all their
sin.” Not only had He removed His
anger from them, but had forgiven the
sin which caused His anger, and restored
unto them His favour. The forgiven
soul has the assurance that God will not
charge his sins against him. The Bible
is rich in declarations of the readiness
of God to pardon all who penitently
seek Him, (See Ps. cxxx. 4; Isa. lv.
7; Jer. xxxiii.8; 1 Johni.9.) The ex-
pressions used by the Psalmist indicate
the completeness of God’s forgiveness.
“Thou hast forgiven,” borne away,
“the sins of Thy people.” There is
doubtless a reference to the scape-goat
which was sent out into the wilderness
bearing the sins of the people, and
never more returned. “Thou hast
covered all their sin.” It is all hidden
away. It is all completely hidden away.
“Though your sins be as scarlet, they
shall be as white as snow ; though they
be red like crimson, they shall be as
wool.” ‘Thou hast cast all my sins
behind Thy back.” “TI, even I, am He
that blotteth out thy transgressions for
Mine own sake, and will not remember
thy sins.” “Thou wilt cast ali their
sins into the depths of the sea.” The
recollection of God’s former forgivenesses
encouraged the Psalmist to pray for His
forgiving mercy at this time. He is
unchangeable. What He has done for
His penitent people in times past, He

491


PeALW LEXXV.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





will do for them again if they approach
Him in penitence,

Conotusion.—We have grateful me-
mories like these of the Psalmist. Let
them have their due and proper effect
upon us. They should inspire us with—
1. Humility. “He hath not dealt with
us after our sins, nor rewarded us accord-


ing to our iniquities.”” What if He
had? What, but utter ruin? 2. Gra-
titude. ‘What shall I render unto the
Lord for all His benefits towards me?”
8. Confidence. “This God is our God
for ever and ever: He will be our guide
unto death.”


Aw Earnest SuprriicarTion.
(Verses 4-7.)


The prayer presented to God in these
verses is for His deliverance of His peo-
ple from the affliction or distress from
which they were suffering at this time.
The deliverance which is implored is
represented in several aspects; but let
us notice—

I. That with a view to their salva-
tion the people pray for repentance.
“Turn us, O God of our salvation.”
This petition indicates a right under-
standing of the state of the case, and
augurs well for the success of their
prayer. They had turned themselves to
folly and sin, and now they pray that
Goud would turn them from their sin,
and grant them true repentance. The
first and chief thing for the erring tribes
of Israel was that they might be turned
from sin unto God. It would have been
in vain if they had prayed for the re-
moval of the Divine anger apart from
this change in themselves. The begin-
ning of their distresses was in themselves,
and in order to their complete restoration
there must be a change in themselves,
This is true as regards the salvation of
the soul, If there is no conversion, no
turning of the soul from sin unto God,
there is no salvation. The Psalmist,
speaking for the people, asks God to turn
them. It needs the power of Divine
grace to convert a soul. Salvation both
in its origin and completion is the work
of God. Yet when a soul turns to God
in prayer, and prays for repentance, it
is a sign that its salvation has already
begun,

The deliverance which is implored is
represented—

™ As «a cessation of God’s anger.
“Cause Thine anger toward us to cease,

492


Wilt Thou be angry with us for ever?”
&c. They rightly regarded their dis-
tresses as a sign of the Divine anger
because of their sins. And they plead.
with God that He would remove that
anger from them. Mark with what
force they plead. ‘‘ Wilt Thou be angry
with us for ever #” Is there no boun-
dary to Thy wrath? Is the flame of
Thy fury unquenchable? His anger had
continued so long that it almost seemed
to them as though it would never cease.
“Wilt Thou be angry with us for ever?”
It is true that we have sinned against
Thee, and merited Thy displeasure ; yet
we are Thy people, and the sheep of Thy
pasture. Thus they appeal to His com- —
passion towards His own, as an argument
for the removal of His wrath. “ Wilt
Thou be angry with us for ever?” God
had made Himself known to them as
“The Lord God, merciful and gracious,
longsuffering, and abundant in goodness
and truth, keeping mercy for thousands,
forgiving iniquity, transgression, and
sin ;” and could He be angry with them
for ever? The idea seems opposed to
His own revelation of Himself. And,
blessed be His name! His anger ceases
ag s00N a8 any person or any people turn
from their evil ways in penitence to
Him. “I will not execute the fierceness
of Mine anger, I will not return to de
stroy Ephraim ; for I am God, and not
man; the Holy One of Israel in the
midst of thee,”

Til. As a manifestation of His
mercy. “Show us Thy mercy, O
Lord.” They sought salvation from
their troubles or calamities as a favour
from the hand of God. They felt that
they did not deserve it, could not ask


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





for it on any ground of merit, so they
seek it as a mercy from God. Mercy is
the disposition whereby God is inclined
to succour those who are in misery, and
to parden those who have offended. It
-is to the mercy of our God that we look
for salvation. It is to His mercy that
we are indebted for the countless bles-
sings of life. Archbishop Tillotson has
well said: “Consider how many evils
and miseries that every day we are ex-
posed to, by His preventing mercy are
hindered, or, when they were coming
upon us, stopped or turned another way.
How oft our punishment has He deferred
by His forbearing mercy ; or, when it
was necessary for our chastisement, miti-
gated and made light! How oft we
have been supported in our afflictions by
His comforting mercy, and visited with
the light of His countenance, in the
exigencies of our soul and the gloomi-
ness of despair! How oft we have been
supplied by His relieving mercy in our
wants ; and, when there was no hand to
succour, and no sonl to pity us, His arm
has been stretched out to lift us from
the mire and clay, and, by a providential
train of events, brought about our suste-
nance and support! And, above all,
how daily, how hourly, how minutely
we offend against Him ; and yet, by the
power of His pardoning mercy, we are
still alive! For, considering the multi-
tude and heinousness of our provocation,
‘it is of His mercy alone that we are not
consumed, and because His compassions
fail not. Whoso is wise will ponder
these things, and he will understand the
loving kindness of the Lord.’”

IV. Asaquickening. ‘ Wilt Thou
not revive us again!” Their conditiop
was like that of our world in winter.
The earth is cold, the winds are bleak,
the trees are bare «and show no signs
of life, the flowers are all withered and
gone, the fruits of field and garden are
all gathered ; death seems to reign on
all hands. But how the scene changes
with the advent of spring. All things
seem to burst into a new life of won-
drous wealth and beauty. The people
pray that they in like manner may be
quickened from their state of desola-
tion into a state of life and prosperity.


“ Revive us with comforts spoken to us,
revive us with deliverances wrought for
us.” This prayer for revival is one
which we, both as individuals and as
churches, need to present frequently to
God. The petition implies—

1. The presence of life. Where there
is utter death it is folly to talk of re
vival.

2. The decline of life. The health-
fulness and vigour have departed. Life's
pulse beats feebly.

3. The desire for the renewal of the
Freshness and power of life. Where this
desire is strong, decline will soon be
superseded by growth, and barrenness
be changed to fruitfulness,

4. The conviction that God only can
impart such renewal. <A true revival
cannot be “got up” by any man, or any
number of men, ‘O Lord, revive Thy
work,”

V. As a means to their joy in God.
“That Thy people may rejoice in
Thee.”

l. Their revival would be a joy to
them. The removal of their distress and
the return of prosperity would make
glad their hearts.

2. Their joy would be in God. ** When
God changeth the cheer of His people,
their joy should not be in the gift, but
in the Giver.” “If God be the fountain
of all our mercies, He must be the
centre of all our joys.”

3. God willed their joy. Of this they
were persuaded, or they would not have
pleaded for deliverance on this ground,
that it would give them joy. God takes
pleasure in the joy of His people. ‘‘ Let
the Lord be magnified, which hath
pleasure in the prosperity of His ser-
vant.” He is eternally and infinitely
blessed, and He delights in the blessed
ness of His people. Our songs of glad-
ness are more pleasing to His ear than
any sighs of sadness can possibly be.
(a) “There is always joy in a revival
of religion. Nothing is so much fitted
to make a people happy; nothing dif-
fuses so much joy (comp. Acts viii. 8).
(8) This is particularly joy in God, It
is because He comes near; because He
manifests His mercy ; because He shows
His power and His grace.”—Barnee

493


PSALM LXXEV,


Such, then, are the aspects in which
their salvation is viewed in this prayer
to God.


ConoLusion.—Our subject addresses .


itself to individuals and churches in
which vitality has declined, and depres-
sion exists,

1. Here 1s encouragement for you.
Our God is the “ God of our salvation.”
His mercy is infinite. His salvation
is “unto the uttermost.” He is both
able and willing to raise you from


Tax REVIVAL


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


your low estate into health and pros
perity.

2. Here ts example for you. In
earnest supplication take your case unto
Him. First seek to be made right your-
selves, and then to be made happy.
First pray, ‘“‘Turn us, O God of our
salvation,” and then, “ Wilt Thou not
revive us again, that Thy people may
rejoice in Thee?” And His salvation
will not tarry, and His joy will not be
withheld.


or RELIGION,


(Verse 6.)


Many Christians have come to have a
distaste for the word “revival” when
used with reference to religious work.
There has been so much exaggeration,
so much fanatical excitement, and so
much transient profession, that I cannot
wonder at the revulsion which many
sober-minded Christians feel when they
hear the very word “revival.” All
“got-up” revivals are bad. You cannot
organise a true revival ; you cannot treat
spiritual influences as fixed quantities.
As a matter of fact, there have been
extraordinary visitations of Divine in-
fluence; there have been seasons when
the Holy Ghost has made the earth-
quake, the fire, the rending wind, and
the stormy tempest His ministers, and
when men have been shaken with a
wholesome fear, not knowing the way,
yet feeling the nearness of the Lord,
There have been great birthdays in the
Church, when prodigals have come back
to sonship, when shepherds have re-
turned with recovered fiocks, and the
dead have risen to immortal life. There
have, too, been times when the people
have realised with special vividness the
personality and life-giving power of the
Holy Ghost ; when they have had the
keys of interpretation wherewith to un-
lock the boundless treasures of the
Divine Word ; when prayer was as the
speech of love that never wearies ; when
the Sabbath shed its sacred glory over
all the days of the week ; when God’s
house shone with heavenly lustre, and
all life throbbed in joyful harmony with

494


the purposes of God. Cannot such
delights be more permanently secured {
At the same time, we are not constituted
for constant rapture ; we have to con-
tend with the deceitfulness of the flesh ;
we have to fight and suffer upon the
earth, &c, Still there is danger that
we may be content with low attainments,
There is a steady and penetrating glow
of piety, there is a fervour of love, there
is an animated intelligence, a zealous
affection, a godly yearning for personal
progress and social evangelisation, which,
when found together, make up a life of
delight in God, and blessed service for
men. To promote this realisation I ask
your attention to a few suggestions.

I. As individual Christians, and as
churches of Jesus Christ, we need to be
very clear tn our doctrinal foundations.
Let us get a distinct idea of the prin-
cipal points in the Christian faith. Be-
ginning with the doctrine of sin, let us
strive after God’s view of it. To Him
sin is infinitely hateful; He cannot
tolerate it with the least degree of
allowance; it troubles His otherwise
perfect and happy universe ; it despoils
human nature; it is the cause of death
and the source of hell. To under-esti-
mate the heinousness of sin is to put
ourselves out of the line of God’s view;
to understand sin is to understand re-
demption. Sin interprets the cross;
sin shows what is meant by God’s leve,
Have we, as individuals and churches,
lost the true notion of sin? Is it no
longer infinitely abominable to ust Is


HOMILETIOC COMMENTARY : PSALMS.


PeaLM BXEXV.





it toned down to something almost indis-
tinguishable? We cannot be right in
our relation to Jesus Christ until we
regard sin with unutterable repugnance,

Out of a true knowledge of sin will

come a true appreciation of Jesus Christ
as the Saviour. I could sum up my
creed in a sentence, yet that sentence
contains more than all the libraries in
the world: I BELIEVE IN Jesus CHRIST,
THE Son oF Gop! My heart hungers
for Him, my sin cries out for His mercy,
my sorrow yearns for Hia coming; and
when He does come He speaks just the
word that my soul needs; He under-
stands me; He knows me altogether ;
He can get down into the low, dark pit
into which sin has thrown me; He
draws me to His cross; He hides my
sins in His sacrifice; He shows me how
God can be honoured, yet the sinner
forgiven; He destroys the devil, and
puts within me the Holy Ghost ; He so
fills me with life that death has no
longer any terror with which to affright
me.
If we lay firmly hold of these two
points, viz., the sinfulness of sin and
the work of Jesus Christ, we shall come
to know what is meant by what I have
ventured to call the glow of piety.
Only the liberated slave can know the
joy of freedom—only the recovered leper
can appreciate fully the blessing of
health. . . . Do we know sin in its
essential, unchangeable loathsomeness ?
Do we love Jesus Christ as the only,
the Almighty, and the ever-blessed
Saviour? Then, out of this should come
an intense fervour of piety. We should
have strength here.

II. We must have a public ministry
which is faithful to the spirit and de-
mands of Jesus Christ. All Christian
ministers are called to be faithful to
Jesus Christ in seeking the salvation of
men. .. . We must not throw off the
old words—Repentance, Faith, Salva-
tion—-and the things that they signify
must be the very life-blood of our
ministry. In any genuine revival of
interest in Christianity there must be a
revived interest in a preached Gospel.
The sanctuary will be thronged, and the
throvging listeners will. be justly im-


patient of everything that does not bear
immediately and intensely upon the
salvation of men. ... Then must we
be made to feel that the doctrines of
the Gospel are humbling doctrines ; that
they smite down our natural pride and
self-trustfulness; that they kill before
they make alive ; that out of our utter
impoverishment and nothingness they
bring all that is distinctive and enduring
in Christian manhood. . . . I am con-
firmed in the opinion that we should
devote ourselves with increasing earnest-
ness to seeking the salvation of men
when I look at the character of our
general congregations, We address the
public, not a select few; we speak to
men whose whole time is engrossed in
worldly engagements; we speak to the
poor, the unlearned, the sorrowing ; we
address the young, the careless, the
worldly ; and to such there is nothing
that can be preached that will so in-
stantly touch the heart as the glorious
Gospel of the blessed God. . . . Whilst
there will be this full and bold procla-
mation of evangelical doctrine in the
pulpit, there will be a system of teaching
proceeding more privately. Some men
have a peculiar gift in biblical teaching,
and those men should be encouraged to
pursue their laborious but most neces-
sary vocation. The preacher and teacher
should be fellow-labourers, The preacher
should collect men into great companies,
arrest their attention by earnest and
convincing statements of Christian
truth, and then pass them on, s0 to
speak, to the critical and patient teacher.
Thus the man of God will become
thoroughly furnished ; having received
deep instruction, he will be able to give
a reason for the faith and hope that are
in him, and he will be strong to resist
the importunities of those who are
driven about by every wind of doctrine.

III. There is one feature in our
public Christian life which I should like
to see more fully brought out—I mean
the bearing of individual testimony on
behalf of Jesus Christ. By no means
seek to supplant what is known as the
regular ministry, but supplement it;
and at all costs destroy the impression
that nobody has a good word to say for

495


PaALM LXXXKV.





Christianity except its paid teachers,
. Why should not the banker, the


great merchant, and the eminent lawyer


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMB.





say publicly what God has done for theiz
souls?—Dr, Parker, Abridged from
The Oty Temple.


Aw Enoovracine ANTICIPATION.
(Verses 8-13.)


The Psalmist, as the representative of
the people, having reviewed God’s former
mercies to them, and urged their prayer
for salvation from their present dis-
tresses, resolves to listen for the Divine
response to their supplication. “I will
hear what God the Lord will speak.”
He becomes silent, that he may hear the
voice of God. His anxiety and fervour
of prayer are stilled, and he seeks to
attain that state of spiritual attention
that shall catch the first whisper of the
Divine voice, and of spiritual receptive-
ness that shall secure the first instalment
of the Divine blessing. Having spoken
to God, it becomes us to listen for His
reply. The Psalmist expected an answer
from God, and therefore he watted and
listened for rt. In this he is at once a
rebuke and an example to us. A rebuke,
inasmuch as we have so frequently
offered our prayers without any real
thought of its being answered. We
have not waited God’s reply, because
we did not expect Him to reply. An
example. When we pray let our prayer
be real; let us honour God by our con-
fidence, and then, like the Psalmist, we
shall expect and listen for His voice in
reply to us.

The Psalmist is confident that God
will grant a favourable answer to their
prayer. “He will speak peace unto
His people.” Thus, in general, does he
speak of the response which he expected
from God. God’s reply would de such
as would impart to them outward peace
in deliverance from their troubles, and
inward peace in the communications of
His grace, And now the Psalmist, with
some particularity, sets forth his antici-
pations as to God’s answer to their
prayers. Consider—

I. The blessing anticipated. Several
particulars are mentioned by the poet.

1. Deliverance from their distresses,
‘‘His salvation is nigh them that fear

496


Him.” His hand was “nigh” to help
them ; and their deliverance would be
effected speedily. Such was the confi-
dent anticipation of the distressed people,
And surely every tried and oppressed
child of God now may feel equally con-
fident that, in answer to prayer, He will
speedily appear bringing salvation with —
Him.


2. EHwxaltation to honour, “That
glory may dwell in our land.” The
glory of the Divine presence and worship.
God’s presence would be manifested in
their salvation; and, being delivered
from the evils under which they groaned,
they would render to Him a more hearty
and more constant worship. The glory
of national prosperity. ‘‘ Our land shall
yield her increase.” Husbandry should
be diligently prosecuted, and God’s
blessing would come down upon the
land in sun and shower; and fruitful
seasons and abundant harvests would
be the result, There should be an in-
crease of worship and of spiritual pros-
perity, and an increase of work and of
material prosperity. And in their
spiritual peace and temporal happi-
ness, their glory as the people of God
would be manifest, and His glory as
the God of His people would be mani-
fest also,

3. Prevalence of moral jacana
“Mercy and truth are met together ;
righteousness and peace have kissed,
Truth shall spring out of the earth;
and righteousness shall look down from
heaven.” “This may be understood,”
says Matthew Henry, and we think
correctly, “of the reformation of the
people and of the government, in the
administration of which all those graces
should be conspicuous and commanding.
The rulers and ruled shall all be meret
ful and true, righteous and peaceable,
When there is no truth or mercy all
goes to ruin (Isa lix. 14, 15; Hoa. iv,


MOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





1) ; but when these meet in the man-
agement of all affairs, when these give
aim, when these give law, when there
is such plenty of truth that it sprouts
ap like the grass of the earth, and of
righteousness that it is showered down
like rain from heaven, then things go
well, When in every congress mercy
and truth meet, in every embrace right-
eousness and peace kiss, and common
honesty is indeed common, then glory
dwells in a land, as the sin of reigning
dishonesty is a reproach to any people.”
In support of this interpretation of these
verses we remark—(l.) Zhe absence of
these moral qualities had often led to
disastrous results in the history of Israel.
(2.) The prevalence of these moral quals-
ties would follow the fulfilment of their
petition, “ Turn us, O God of our sal-
vation.” (3.) The prevalence of these
moral qualities ts conducive in a great
degree to social and commercial pros-
perity. (4.) The prevalence of these
moral qualities ts the securest bulwark
and the brightest glory of any nation.
This was indeed a bright and cheer-
ing anticipation of the poet and the
people.

II. The character of those for
whom the blessing is anticipated.
Certain marked features in the char-
acter of the people who should receive
this blessing are indicated.

1. Consecration to God. ‘ His people,
His saints.” They were a people called
of God, and consecrated to God, They
were subject to His will, and sanctified
by His grace.


2. Veneration of God. ‘“ Them that


PRALM LXXXY.


fear Him.” “ Salvation is far from the
wicked,” but it is “nigh them that"
regard God with sincere and becoming
reverence.

3. Obedience to God. “ Righteous-
ness shall go before Him, and shall set
us in the way of His steps.” The idea
of the last clause appears to be that the
effect of the coming of the Lord for
their salvation would be to dispose men
to tread in His footsteps, to be imita-
tors and followers of Him in respect of
righteousness. The blessings of salva-
tion are for the obedient. ‘The new
salvation rests throughout upon the
foundation of the new obedience.”
Hence the warning, “Let them not
turn again to folly ;” for if they did,
their prosperity would vanish, and their
distresses would return again. The
same is true of the blessings of the
Gospel, Our Lord saves His people
“from their sins,” not tx their sins. We
must walk ‘in the way of His steps,”
if we would share His blessedness.

Conciusion.—What is the salvation
for which we are looking? Is it deli-
verance from a hell of material torment,
and the enjoyment of a heaven of self-
indulgence ? Then the ideas of the
ancient Jews were more advanced and
spiritual than ours. The salvation of a
state.is not in its great armaments, or
its vast wealth ; but in the prevalence
of “ mercy and truth, righteousness and
peace.” The salvation of individuals is
in their conformity with the will of God,
in reverencing Him, in consecration to
Him. If these things are realised in us,
great will be our blessednesa


Tue Speaker, THE LIsTENER, THR PEAOR.
(Verse 8.)


Let us meditate on this verse under
the following heads :—

L The listener. ‘I will hear,” says
the writer of this Psalm, He speaks as
a listener, a3 one whose ears are open.
“He that hath ears to hear, let him
hear.” This is our true attitude into
which we come at conversion. God
said, “ Hear, and your soul shall live ;”
He “opened our ears to hear as the

21


learned,” ¢.¢,, a8 “one who is under
teaching.” So we began to listen; and,
tn listening, found life. Such is to be
our life; a life of listening ; not to man,
nor self, nor the world, but to God. As
creatures, listening is our proper atti-
tude, much more as sinners. Let the
willing ear be ours. How much we
lose by the closed ear!

IL The Speaker. ‘God the Lord ;”

497


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





God, even Jehovah. Other speakers
may win the ear of the multitude, but
it is to God the Lord that the saint
listens.
tones are penetrating ; its words attrac-
tive. God speaks as one entitled to be
heard, expecting to be heard. He speaks
with authority, waiting for our obedience
to the heavenly voice. To less than such
a speaker we do not feel constrained to
listen, but to Him we must. He speaks,
we cannot but hear.

III. The message. ‘“‘ He will speak
peace to His people.” He is the God
of peace; “He maketh peace in His
high places.” Peace is the substance of
the message that has all along been
carried to us; peace to him that is afar
off, and to him that is nigh; peace in
heaven ; peace on earth , peace between
man and God; the peace of pardon,
the peace of reconciliation; the peace
that passeth all understanding—peace
through the blood of the cross, through
Him who is our peace. It might have
been wrath, nay, owght to have been
wrath ; but it is not wrath, only peace ;
for He is long-suffering and slow to
wrath ; nay, God is love !

IV. The confidence. The Psalmist
knows what He is to expect from such
a God. Before the peace comes, he
knows that it is coming ; for he knows
the God to whom he is called upon to
listen. This is the confidence which he
has in Him. He does not listen uncer-
tainly, as not knowing what will come
forth. He has heard of this God be-
fore---of what He does and speaks—and
he opens his ear in happy confidence.
He is sure that no wrath will come, only


His voice is powerful. Its |


love, only peace. This God is the God
of salvation—the God who gave His
Son. Shall He not then speak peace #

V. The issue. “ Let them not re
turn to folly ;” or, and “ they shall not
return to folly.” He does not say, Let
them not turn to folly, and then He will
speak peace to them; but He will speak
peace first, and then they shall not re-
turn to folly. This is God’s order ; the
true and Divine order; the reverse of
man’s. It is not first holiness and then
peace, but first peace and then holiness,
The root of all holiness is peace with
God. Till the clouds are rolled away
and the sun shines out, we cannot be
warmed and enlightened. Till the frost .
is gone, and the ice dissolved, the river
cannot flow on and water the fields,
Christ did not say, Go, and sin no more,
and I will not condemn thee; but,
“Neither do I condemn thee; go, and
sin no more.” ,.. The first step toa
holy life is being at peace with God.
... This great point between us and
God once settled, we are free to devote
our undivided energies to the work of
progress ; not till then.

A saint, then, is one who has listened
to God; who has heard the words of
peace from His lips; who has believed
them; who has been reconciled ; ard
who knows that he is so. Therefore
he seeks to be holy. He hates his
former folly. He does not return to it.
He does not make his free pardon a
reason for returning to it.

Brethren, be consistent. Show that
the peace you have received is a holy
peace. — H. Bonar, D.D. Abridged
from Light and Truth.


PSALM LXXXVL


INTRODUCTION.


Superscription.—* A Prayer of David.” Although this Pealm {s not placed with the great
body of David’s Psalms (1-lxx), there is no sufficient ground for disputing his authorship of it.

Occasion.—Barnes ways, ‘‘The occasion on which it was composed is unknown, but it has
been commonly supposed that it was written in the time of the persecution under Saul,” But
the opinion of Hengstenberg, that it was written during the dangers to which David was exposed
by reason of the rebellion of Absalom, seems to us better supported by the evidence which the
Psalm itself affords. Amid the dangers to which he is now exposed, the Psalmist calls to mind
for his encouragement a remarkable deliverance which God had formerly granted to him (ver.
13), May it not have been that the former deliverance was from Saul, and his present danger
from ery Still we cannot with certainty determine the occasion of ita composition.


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS





PSALM LEXXVL,





THz Goopness or Gop an ENCOURAGEMENT TO SEEK Hs.
(Verses 1-5.)


The “ Prayer of David” runs through
the whole Psalm, but as the Psalm is
too long and suggestive for treatment in
one homily, we purpose dividing it by
the grounds on which for his encourage-
ment the Psalmist bases his prayer. Let
us consider—

I, The petitions of the suppliaa..
The Psalmist prays—

1. For audience. ‘Bow down Thine
ear, O Lord, hear me.” The petition
seems to include—(1.) Divine condescen-
ston. Being sensible of his unworthiness
of the regard of God, he prays Him to
“bow down” His ear to his prayer.
(2.) Divine attention. “Hear me.” It
is not a petition that God would simply
hear the prayer of the Psalmist, but that
He would hear him favourably, that He
would hear and bless him.

2. For protection. ‘“‘ Preserve my
soul, .. . save Thy servant.” David
was at this time exposed to danger, his
very life was in peril ; he prays that God
would protect his life, and deliver him
from his enemies. If God protect us
we are invulnerable. Saul could not
harm David, though he sought by every
means 10 his power to do so, because the
Lord was his shield. And Absalom and
his rebel army were equally powerless
against him, because God defended him,
All the hosts of hell with their allies
upon earth, even when led by their
subtle and mighty prince, cannot really
harm the child of God who has sought
the protection of his Father.

3. For mercy. “Be merciful unto
me, O Lord.” Implied in this petition
is the conscious unworthiness of the
suppliant. David seeks the protection
and deliverance of God, not as a right,
but as a favour. He presented to God
not a claim, but a humble supplication.
He addressed himself not to the Divine
justice. but to the Divine mercy. “Be
gracious unto me, O God.” In all our
need it is to the mercy of the Lord we
must look.

4. For joy. “Rejoice the soul of
Thy servant.” If God should deliver
His servant from danger his heart would


greatly rejoice. And such were the cir-
cumstances of the Psalmist at this time
that God only could deliver him from
his foes and fill him with gladness,
Salvation is a joyous thing. It is the
Christian’s privilege to “rejoice in the
Lord alway.”

Il. The pleas of the suppliant. The
Psalmist pleads—

1. Hts necessity, ‘For I am poor
and needy.” Oppression and poverty
are the principal meanings of the words
used by the Psalmist in this plea. David
pleads that he was bowed down by
trouble, as he asks God to “bow down”
and hear him, and that he was necessi-
tous, as he asks God to help him, Or
we may regard his plea in this way, he
was ‘ poor,” t.¢., without supply, he was
“needy,” #.e., full of wants ; therefore he
must look away from himself, above
himself for satisfaction. Man’s necessity
does not give him any claim upon God’s
bounty. But human misery always
moves Divine mercy. And when we
humbly and sincerely plead our poverty
with God, He will enrich us with the
treasures of His grace. “When I am
weak, then am I strong.”

2. His consecration, “For I am
holy.” Margin: “one whom Thou
favourest.” Hengstenberg: “for I am
pious.” Calvin: “for I am meek.”
Perowne: “one whom Thou lovest.”
He was pious, not profane. He was
the “servant” of God. Twice he
pleads that fact; and as we are sure
that he would not plead “for I am
holy” in any boastful or self-righteous
spirit, we conclude that his consecration
to God is one of his pleas. He was the
servant of God, and therefore im asking
God to save him, he was asking Him to
save His own, If we in the strength of
grace have consecrated ourselves to God,
we may plead that fact with Him in our


prayers. He has never forsaken His
faithful servants.
3. His confidence. ‘“ Thy servant that


trusteth in Thee.” He has pledged

Himself to save those who put their

trust in Him, By trvsting Him we
499





really place our salvation in His hands.
Can He fail? Is His power inadequate 4
His workings in nature, in human his-
tory, and in the conversion of souls pro-


claim it as great and wonderful as ever. ©


Is His willingness diminished? ‘The
mountains shall depart, and the hills
be removed ; but My kindness shall not
depart from thee, neither shall the
covenant of My peace be removed, saith
the Lord that hath mercy on thee.”
Our trust in God is a mighty plea in
our prayers to Him.

4, His importuntty. “I cry unto
Thee daily.” Margin: “ all the day,”—
continually. His prayer was importu-
nate. ‘Unto Thee, O Lord, do I lift
up my soul.” These words show that
his prayer was earnest, hearty, sincere.
He did not merely lift up his hands
unto God, but he lifted up his heart
also. Prayers which are characterised
like this by heartiness, importunity, and
faith, when presented by God’s devoted
but needy servants, are certain to result
in gracious replies from heaven.

IiI. The encouragement of the
suppliant. ‘For Thou, Lord, art good
and ready to forgive ; and plenteous in
mercy to all them that call upon Thee.”
Here are— .

1. Goodness for man as a dependent
and needy creature. “Thou, Lord, art
good.” In Himself “God is good.”
He is perfect in holiness and in grace.
He is also “ good to all, and His tender
mercies are over all His works.” He
delights in His works, and in dealing
bountifully with His creatures. He,
the infinitely and ever blessed God, hath
assured us that “‘it is more blessed to
give than to receive;” and He is the
infinite Giver. Being and well-being,
life and joy, He gives abundantly.
Here then is encouragement to seek
Him in prayer in every time of need,


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.





2. Mercy for man as a sinful createre.
“Ready to forgive, and plenteous in
mercy.” ‘‘ Goodness is the disposition
to communicate happiness. Mercy is a
modification of goodness. Goodness is
the genus, mercy the species. The
fruits of goodness are enjoyed by holy
and happy creatures. The fruits of
mercy, by the guilty and miserable,
Mercy with relation to an offender is a
disposition to forgive. Mercy in refer-
ence to a sufferer is a disposition to
relieve.” Here then is our encourage-
ment. We are sinful and ill-deserving,
but He is merciful and pardons. We
are wretched, but He is merciful and
succours.

3. Mercy tw great abundance and '
dispensed freely. He is “ ready to for-
give, and plenteous in mercy unto all
them that call upon Him.” “ With the
Lord there is mercy, and with Him is


‘ plenteous redemption.” “ He delighteth


in mercy.” ‘Like Himself His mercy is
inexhaustible, infinite. And it is be
stowed freely “unto all them that call
upon Him.” ‘“ Ask, and ye shall re
ceive.” Unless we are prepared to
receive the mercy of God as a free gift,
we cannot receive it at all. Here then
is encouragement to seek God in our
times of need. His mercy is unspeak-
ably greater than our sin and misery,
and He waits “ready” to bestow it
freely “unto all them that call upon
Him.”

Concivsion.—In the great goodness
and mercy of our God there is encourage-
ment for each and for all of us to seek
Him in time of need. We are poor and
needy, but the riches of His grace are
unsearchable and free. We are sinful
and sorrowful, but He is plenteous in
mercy and ready to forgive. His love
is infinite,

In Him let us trust and rejoice.


Toe Supremacy or Gop an ENCOURAGEMENT TO sEEK How,
(Verses 6-10.)


In that portion of the Psalm which
we have already considered the Psalmist
encouraged himself by the willingness
of God to help bim ; in this he encour-

500


ages himself by the ability of God to
help him, In that the goodness and
mercy of God were the ground of his
prayer for deliverance; in this the


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY : PSALMS,


PSALM LEZXVi.





power and glory of God constitute that
ground. Let us consider—

I. The supremacy of God. The
Psalmist sets forth two aspects of this
supremacy. He represents God as
supreme—

1, Jn Himself. “Among the gods
there is none like unto Thee, O Lord.
Thou art God alone.” The Psalmist
refers to the false deities worshipped by
the heathen, and he says that none of
them are like Jehovah in power and
goodness. In might and majesty, in
grace and glory, God is supreme. He
only is God. It has been well said by
Bishop Wilkins, “If God be an infi-
nitely-perfect Being, it is impossible to
imagine two such beings at the same
time, because they must have several
perfections, or the same. If the former,
neither of them can be God, because
neither of them has all possible perfec-
tious. Ifthey have both equal perfections,
neither of them can be absolutely perfect,
because it is not so great to have the
same equal perfections in common with
another, as to be superior to all others.”
There can be but one Supreme Being.

2. In His doings. ‘‘ There are no
works like unto Thy works, Thou art
great and doest wondrous things.”
God’s works in creation are wonderful
in the wisdom and power which they
manifest. And in His providence there
had often been remarkable displays of
His skill in making the designs of the
enemies of His people promote their
interests, and of His power in over-
throwing His foes and saving them that
trust in Him. All His works praise
Him and proclaim His sole supremacy.
But the doing of God which most en-
couraged the Psalmist was His hearing
of prayer. ‘Thou wilt answer me.” It
is the great glory of God that He who
created the heavens and bringeth out
their host by number, also regardeth
the faint breathings of penitence and
the softest whispers of prayer. He
hears and attends to all the prayers that
rise to Him. He is “the proper object
of worship everywhere alike, and at all
times. This is a thought,” says Dr.
Wardiaw, “not less pregnant with in-
terest than it is with wonder. When


you are desirous to present a petition in
person to a fellow-creature, you require
to leave your place, and to find your
way to the nearer or more distant spot
where he is. But whatever request you
have to present to God, you need not
move from the spot you occupy. Never.
Wherever you chance to be He is there,
This is true, not of you alone, but of all
alike. He listens to the prayers and
the praises of His people that are poured
into His ear at the same instant, in
every place and every language. And,
at the same instant, too, He is listening
to the songs of the ‘ten thousand times
ten thousand, and thousands of thou-
sands’ which arise to Him around His
seraph-circled throne in the heavens;
and to the addresses which are offered
to Him from all the worlds with which
the fields of immensity are replenished.
And to all these He bends His ear, with
the most perfect discrimination, and at
the same time with the most perfect
ease, without the slightest approach to
anything like difficulty or effort. And
there is no mixing up of one thing with
another ; of any of the particulars of
one case with those of another. Each
case, in all its details, is as distinctly
heard and recorded as if there had been
no other to which to attend.” In this
we have a marvellous exhibition of the
supremacy of God.

IL. The effects of that supremacy.
Two are mentioned—

1. All nations shall worship God.
“All nations whom Thou hast made
shall come and worship before Thee, O
Lord; and shall glorify Thy name.”
The nations of the earth are represented
as éreated by God. He “ hath made of
one blood all nations of men for to
dwell on all the face of the earth.” All
nations have a common origin. God is
the Creator-Father of all men. Human
brotherhood is a great fact, however man
may disregard it. The king and the
beggar have a common origin. The
oppression of one man by another, or
one class of men by another, is a
crime in the sight of the common
Maker of us all, The nations shall all
come and worship God. “All kings
shall fall down before Him: all nations

501


PSALM LXXXVIL





shall serve Him. ... All nations shall
call Him blessed.” It is thought by
some that the prediction of the text was
partially fulfilled in the great number of


proselytes to the Jewish religion during ~


the reigns of David and Solomon. But
its complete fulfilment is certainly yet
in the future. The triumphs of Chris-
tianity are spreading. A bright future
is before our world and race. God ia
supreme over all, and the time is coming
on apace when His supremacy shall be
loyally and enthusiastically acknow-
ledged by all nations.

2. The troubled soul shall trust in
Him. The supremacy of God encour-
aged the distressed Psalmist to seek
Him. Such will ever be the effect of
that supremacy when it is rightly under-
stood. God is supremely gvod, su-
premely beneficent, and, while enthroned
high over all things, He stoops to listen
to the feeblest prayer. He is both able
and willing to succour the distressed,
and help the needy, and comfort the
sorrowful.

‘<His love is as great as His power,

And knows neither measure nor end,”
There is every encouragement presented
to the suppliant soul in drawing near to
God. Qh, ye impoverished ones, come


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


 amel


and be enriched out of His fulness.
Burdened and anxious ones, come and
cast yourselves with your weight of
cares upon Him who careth for you.
Sinful and sorrowing ones, come in faith
to God, and He will forgive your sins,
and soothe or sanctify all your sorrows.

Conotusion.—l, Seeing that God ia
supreme, let us reverence Him, serve
Him. “Give unto the Lord the glory
due unto His name; worship the Lord
in the beauty of holiness.”

2. Seeing that He 18 so compassionate
to the troubled, let them seck His help and
comfort. From the highest throne in
glory He will listen to your cry and
hasten to your help. ‘‘ Casting all your
care upon Him, for He careth for you.” |
“Call upon Me in the day of trouble ; I
will deliver thee, and thou shalt glorify
Me.”

3. Seeing that there ts so sure a pros-
pect of His untwersal worship, let us
rejoice in spirit, and hopefully pray and
work for tts realisation. ‘The earth
shall be full of the knowledge of the
Lord, as the waters cover the sea.”
“The kingdoms of this world shall be-
come the kingdoms of our Lord, and of
His Christ ; and He shall reign for eves


and ever.”


THe Day or TRovuBLE.
(Verse 7.)


We have here—

I. A period with which all men are
acquainted. “The day of trouble.”
Trouble is a common experience amongst
men in this world. We are troubled
by physical infirmities, pains, ‘and
diseases ; by perplexities, cares, and
losses in business; by the unfaithful-
ness of professed friends; by the be-
reavements of death; by spiritual dis-
tresses and conflicts.

1. The indwidual character of trouble.
“ My trouble.” Our troubles often arise
partly from peculiarities in our circum-
stances and temperament and disposi-
tion. The same events very differently
affect different persons, The sorrows of
no two persons are exactly alike. “The
heart knoweth his own bitterness.”

502


“Every
burden.”

2. The limited duration of trouble.
“The day of my trouble.” Through
the mercy of God our troubles are short-
lived. There is more of gladness than
of gloom in the world. In the case of
the great majority of persons sufferin
is the exception, not the rule of life.
Courage, troubled heart, the day of thy
trouble will soon be over, and happy
months of peace shall be thine. Even
if the whole of this earthly life were
dark and sad it is but as a day when
contrasted with the glad, and bright,
and endiess future.

IL A resolve which all men should
make. ‘I will call upon Thee.” The
Psalmist did not stoscally endure hia


man must bear his own


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY : PSALMS.





distresses. He was keenly sensible of
their painfulness. Nor did he tmpi-
ously rebel against God by reason of
them. That, not to mention its sinful-
ness, would only have made the matter
worse, But by prayer he took his
trouble to God. We should do the
same with ours, And we should do so
humbly. It may be that our trouble is
a consequence of some sin or sins of
ours. Sin is the fruitful parent of suf-
fering. Therefore we should call upon
God with humble and penitent hearts.
We should call upon Him submissively.
While our object in seeking Him is to
obtain relief from trouble, let us leave
it to Him to impart that relief as He
may choose. He may relieve us by
removing the trouble. He may con-
tinue the trouble, but relieve us by im-
parting more grace to us that we may bear
it. ‘Not my will, but Thine be done,”

IIL A result which all men may
anticipate. ‘Thou wilt answer me.”
The Psalmist was confident that God
would hear and answer his prayer. “ He
that cometh to God must believe that
He is, and that He is a rewarder of them
that diligently seek Him.” ‘Thou wilt
answer me ”—


1. Because Thou hast promised to do
so. “Call upon Me in the day of
trouble; I will deliver thee.”  ‘ All
things, whatsoever ye shall ask in
prayer, believing, ye shall receive,” d&c.
“ Ask, and ye shall receive,” dec.

2. Because Thou hast done so. Jacob
prayed, and God answered and blessed
him (Gen. xxxii.) Isaiah and Hezekiah
prayed, and the Lord answered and cut
off 185,000 Assyrians in one night
(1 Kings xix.; 1 Chron. xxxii.) ‘“ Elias
was a man subject to like passions as
we are, and he prayed earnestly,” &e.
(James v. 17, 18). The early Christians
prayed instantly and earnestly, and the
Lord answered, and by an angel deli-
vered Peter out of prison (Acts xii.
et al). What He has done, He will do
again.

3. Because of what Thou art. Thou
art omniscient, and therefore knowest
our need; omnipotent, and therefore
canst help us; ‘“ good, and plenteous in
mercy,” and therefore wilt take pleasure
in relieving us, é&c.

Trembling and troubled hearts seek
the Lord in believing prayer; and He
will calm and cheer, soothe and streng-
then you.


Toe Former Merrocirzs or Gop aN ENOOURAGEMET TO SEEK Him.
(Verses 11-17.)


In this division of the Psalm we have—

I. A grateful recollection of former
mercies. ‘“ Great is Thy mercy toward
me; and Thou hast delivered my soul
from the lowest hell.” The word trans-
lated “hell” is “sheol,” in the Greek
“ Hades.” ‘Thou hast delivered my
soul,” or life, “ out of deep sheol,” is a
poetical way of saying that God had
delivered the Psalmist out of extreme
dangers or deep distresses. The allusion
is very probably to the repeated and
remarkable deliverances vouchsafed to
David in the time when Saul persecuted
him and sought his life. During that
persecution there were times when David
despaired of his life, feeling that it was
vain to hope to escape from the cunning
and strength that were put forth against
him. Yet God had graciously and mar-
vellously preserved him safely. He


regarded this deliverance as a Divine
“mercy.” He knew that he had no
claim upon the protection of God..
He felt that he had not deserved
the great favours which God had be-
stowed upon him. The Christian may
use these words in a spiritual sense.
“ Great is Thy mercy toward me; and
Thou hast delivered my soul from the
lowest hell.” When God in mercy saves
a soul He saves it from sin, death, and
hell, This recollection of past mercy
was an encouragement to the Psalmist
in his present distress, It would keep
before his mind—1. God's ability to de-
liver him. He had saved him in former
times, therefore He, the unchangeable
One, could save him now. 2 God's
willingness to save ham,
** His love in time past
Forbids me to think,” oon


PSALM LXXXVI.


Memories like this of the Psalmist’s are
amongst the most helpful and precious
of all our possessions,


TI, An earnest prayer for deliver- .


ance from present danger. The great
object of the prayer was that the Psalmist
might be delivered from the enemies
that were aiming at his life. “QO God,
the proud are risen against me, and the
assemblies of violent men have sought
after my soul, and have not set Thee
before them. . . . Save the son of Thine
handmaid.” The foes from whom he
sought deliverance were “ proud.” They
were men of haughty spirit and daring
ambition, who would despise the welfare
or the right of others if they stood in
the way of the accomplishment of their
projects. They were “wolent.” They
wrought out their plans by force. They
were fierce and cruel, caring not what
violence they used in accomplishing
their ambitious designs. They were
united. Hengstenberg translates—“ The
band of the violent.” And Barnes
says—‘‘ The word assembly here means
merely that they were banded together ;
what was done was the result of a con-
spiracy or combination,” They were
erreligious. They had not set God
before them, They‘did not fear Him,
or respect His law. His threatenings
they despised ; His presence and obser-
vation they disregarded. What evils
might not be expected from enemies
such as these? From such enemies
.David prays for deliverance. ‘Save
the son of Thine handmaid,” In his
prayer he sets forth the desired deliver-
ance—l, As a mercy. “O turn unto
me, and have mercy upon me.” He
asks that God would favourably regard
him, pity him, and relieve him. 2. As
a communication of Divine power. “ Give
Thy strength unto Thy servant.” He re-
garded his case as requiring nothing less
than the strength of God to meet it,
And he asks that he may be enabled to


act as if he were nerved with the very


power of God. 3. As found tn obedience

to the Divine will, “Teach me Thy

way, O Lord; I will walk in Thy truth;

unite my heart to fear Thy name.” The

Psalmist felt that if deliverance were to

come to him, he must be found in the way
504


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; PSALMS.


of the Divine precepts, walking withGod,
and serving Him with undivided heart.
It cannot be too earnestly insisted upon,
that, if we would be saved, we must be
found walking in the way which God
prescribes for us. ‘‘ Narrow is the way
which leadeth unto life.” Nor can we
insist too earnestly upon the necessity
of whole-heartedness in the service of
God. “A double-minded man is un-
stable in all his ways.” In the Chris-
tian life and work we need fixedness of
purpose and concentration of effort if
we would succeed. ‘‘ Unite my heart
to fear Thy name.” ‘“ This one thing I
do,” &c. 4. As calculated to produce a
JSavourable impression. To the Psalmist .
himself his deliverance would be a
“token for good,” a clear and unmis-
takable sign of the favour of God. To
the enemies of the Psalmist his deliver-
ance would be a rebuke. By it their pur-
poses would be defeated, their schemes
frustrated, and themselves humbled and
shamed. Thus David prays to God for
deliverance, and encourages himself in
so doing, by thinking of the goodness
and faithfulness of God. Having men-
tioned the haughtiness and violence, the
unity and irreligiousness of his foes, he
says, “ But Thou, O Lord, art a God
full of compassion, and gracious, long-
suffering, and plenteous in mercy and
truth.” The Psalmist felt that he had
nothing but evil to expect from his ene-
mies, And from so gracious a God, he,
though unworthy, could expect nothing
but good. (We have already looked at
“The goodness of God as an encourage-
ment to seek Him”—-vers. 1-5.)

TL A devout resolution to serve
God The Psalmist resolves to serve .
God—l. By obedience. “I will walk
in Thy truth ;” &e., I will conform my
life to Thy will The truth of God
should not only be held by us as senti-
ment, or doctrine, or fact; but should
also be practised by us. We should
translate our creed into our conduet.
We should seek not only to hold the
truth, but also to live the truth; not
only to know the will of God, but also
to do His will. The “ doer of the work
shall be blessed in his doing.” 2. By
worship. ‘I will praise Thee, O Lord


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY ; PSALMS,


PS4LM LEXEVL





my God, with all my heart; and I will
glorify Thy name for evermore.” The
poet resolves to worship God heartily.
“With all my heart.” When God
united his heart he would pour it all
out in worship to Him. His undivided
affection and adoration he would give
to God. Such hearty worship is accept-
able unto God. He would worship God
eternally—* for evermore.” While he
had any being he would praise God.
In time and through eternity he would
glorify Him.

Conctusion.—l. Learn the value of
sacred memories. How greatly David
was encouraged by his recollections of


past mercies! Such memories should
be monitors, reminding us of our weak-
ness, &c. Such memories should be
inspirers, telling us of Divine strength,
goodness, &c. He who does not use
wisely the memories of the past is not
living as he ought in the present, and
is ill-furnished for the changes and trials
of the future. 2. The obligations um-
posed by Divine mercies, Goodness calls
for gratitude. New favours demand
new songs. Our obligations to God are
ever increasing. “I will praise Thee,
O Lord my God, with all my heart;
and I will glorify Thy name for ever-
more.”


Tos Divine Way For Mas,
(Verse 11.)


L The Divine way for man indi-
cated by God. ‘‘Teach me Thy way,
O Lord.” 1. There ts a Divine way in
which man should walk. ‘Thy way.”
The way prescribed by Him in His holy
Word. The way of obedience to His
precepts. The way which our Lord
Jesus Christ trod. 2. God must indi-
cate that way to man, ‘Teach me.”
“The original meaning of the Hebrew
word is to potnt out, or mark the way.”
The way is clearly revealed in the sacred
Scriptures ; but man’s moral perceptions
are not clear, his moral judgment is
warped by sin; hence his need of the
direction of God. He must indicate to
man the true way of human life.

II. The Divine way for man trod
by man. “JI will walk in Thy truth.”
It is the way of Divine truth which
God points out, and which the Psalmist
resolves to walk in. To walk in God’s
truth implies—1l. Harmony with the
fruth. “To walk in the truth of God
signifies to be always mindful of it.”
“« Walking, in the Scripture, takes in
the whole of our conversation or con-
duct.” The whole life in accord with
the Divine mind and will. 2. Progress
én the truth. The Psalmist resolves to
walk, not to stand, in God’s truth,
Walking implies advancement. The
godly soul “follows on to know the
Lord.” We must advance in two things:


in knowledge of the truth, and in prac-
tice of the truth.

III. The need of integrity of heart
to tread the Divine way for man.
“Unite my heart to fear Thy name,”
We use the word integrity in its literal
meaning. 1. There is a great tendency
tn human nature to division of heart.
There are many rival claimants for our
affections ; and the heart itself has lost
its true centre. 2. Integrity of heart ts
essential to enable us to tread the Divine
way. “A double-minded man is un-
stable in all his ways.” Unless we are
whole-hearted we shall speedily wander
from the way, or faint by the way.
God demands our undivided affection
and our complete devotion. Only by
hearty and concentrated effort can we
secure the prize. ‘“‘ One thing I do, for-
getting,” &c. 3. God alone can impart
to us integrity of heart in the Divine way.
The bias of the unrenewed heart is averse
from Divine things. None but God
can harmonise our powers and affections
in His service. He will thus unite
the hearts of all who sincerely seek
Him.

‘‘ Let earth no more my heart divide;

With Christ may I be crucified,

To Thee with my whole goul aspire ;

Dead to the world and all its toys,

Its idle pomp and fading joys,

Be Thou alone my one desire,”


—O. Wesley.
605


PRALM CXXEVEL,





HOMILETIC COMMENTARY ; PSALMB.





PSALM LXXXVIL


InTRODUOCTION,


ion.—** A Peal or Song for the sone of Korah.” It so far combines the proper.
ties of a religious Psalm and a patriotic song that either of the names may with propricty be


applied to it.


‘(For the sons of Korah,” see Introduction to Psalm xlii. The Psalm was either


eomposed by them, or given to them to sing in the Temple service, i

Occasion.—Hengstenberg argues very forcibly, if not quite conclusively, that the occasion
of its composition was the joyful events under Hexzekiah,—the destruction by the angel of the
Lord of one hundred and eighty-five thousand Assyrians of the army of Sennacherib, which
was before Jerusalem, and the consequent deliverance of Jerusalem from the siege and capture
threatened by Sennacherib (2 Kings xix.; 2 Chron. xxxii. 1-28),


Tau Giory oy THE CHURCH oF Gop.


In this brief and joyous Psalm, the
poet celebrates the praise of the Church
of the Most High. In so doing, he
shows us some of the things in which
her glory consisted. The Church of
God is—

L Glorious in her sanctity. “His
foundation is in the holy mountains,”
The sanctity of Mount Zion consisted in
its being chosen by God as the abode
of His Church ; and the “ mountains”
(plural) are said to be “holy ” because
Zion is part of a mountain range. Zion
was holy as being the dwelling-place of
God. The Church ef God upon earth is
glorious in so far as she is holy, and she
is holy in so far as God dwells in her.
“A glorious Church, not having spot or
wrinkle, or any such thing, but holy and
without blemish.” God hath chosen the
members of His Church “that they
should be holy and without blame before
Him in love.” “ Holiness is inward
glory. Glory is conspicuous holiness,”
The Church is called to be separate from
the world. Its members are called to be
saints, Christ our great exemplar is
perfectly holy. And His redemption is
from sin to holiness. ‘The blood of
Jesus Christ His Son cleanseth us from
all sin.” “ Being made free from sin,
and become servants to God, ye have
your fruit unto holiness, and the end
everlasting life.”

II. Glorious in her security. “ Hia
foundation is in the holy mountains... .
The Highest Himself shall establish
her.” Jerusalem was “a mountain
city,... enthroned as compared with
Jericho or Damascus, Gaza cr Tyre, on

506


& mountain fastness. In this respect, it
concentrated in itself the character of '
the whole country of which it was to be
the capital,—the ‘mountain throne,’ the
‘mountain sanctuary’ of God. ‘They
that trust in the Lord shall be as Mount
Zion, which may not be removed, but
standeth fast for ever.’ ‘God is in the
midst of her, therefore shall she not be
removed.’ It was emphatically the lair
of the lion of Judah, of ‘Ariel,’ the
Lion of God. ‘In Judah is God known ;
His name is great in Israel. In Salem
is His leafy covert, and His rocky den
in Zion.’... ‘Thou art more glorious
and excellent than the mountains of the
robbers.’ And this wild and fastness-
like character of Jerusalem was concen-
trated yet again in the fortress, the
‘stronghold’ of Zion. That point, the
highest in the city, the height which
most readily catches the eye from every
quarter, is emphatically the ‘hill fort,’
the ‘rocky hold’ of Jerusalem — the
refuge where first the Jebusite and then
the Lion of God stood at bay against
the hunters.”—Stanley. The founda-
tions of the holy city were high and
firm, and on nearly every side it was
guarded by the ancient mountains. So
the Church of God is secure. The city
of Zion has gone. The Temple at
Jerusalem is no more; but the Church
of God, which the Highest has estab-
lished, remains and prospers, The
Church is founded upon the rock of
Divine truth, and all the raging storms
of earth and hell cannot shake her. The
Church is guarded by God Himeelf,
“and the gates of hell shall not prevail


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS.


PSALM LXXKVIL





Can infinite wisdom be
baffled? Can Almightiness be over-
come? Can the word of the Unchange-
able fail? Then the Church of God is
inviolably secure.

ITI. Glorious in being beloved by
God. “The Lord loveth the gates of
Zion more than all the dwellings of
Jacob.” When Sennacherib and his
host were encamped before the city, the
Lord suffered them not to pass the gates
though “all the rest of the country was
subject to their sway,” and while the
gates remained safe, the whole city was
safe. God loved Jacob much, but He
loved Zion more. He loves the worship
of His people in their homes much, but
He loves their worship in His sanctuary
more. “A father is glad to see any
one of his children, and makes him
welcome when he visits him, but much
more when they come together; the
greatest feast is when they all meet at
his house. The public praises of the
Church are the emblem of heaven itself,
where all the angels make but one con-
cert.” Thts love of God for His Church
should lead every believer—1. To seek
union with the Church. 2. To esteem
the worship of the Church a solemn duty
and precious privilege. 3. To unite in
that worship with deep humility, pro-
found reverence, and great delight. He
who “loveth the gates of Zion more
than all the dwellings of Jacob ” is pre-
sent in His Church, and is well pleased
to accept the spiritual worship of sincere
worshippers,

IV. Glorious in her exalted reputa-
tion. “Glorious things are spoken of
thee, O city of God.” Many glorious
things were spoken of Mount Zion as to
its situation. “ Beautiful for situation,
the joy of the whole earth is Mount
Zion,” &, As being inhabited by God.
“God is known in her palaces for a
refuge.” ‘The Lord of Hosts is with
us; the God of Jacob is our refuge.”
As to the diffusion of religion from tt
(Isa. ii. 3). The city and temple passed
away, but true religion has spread
widely, aud is still doing so. The
Church ot God has am exalted repute-
tion—


1. As possessing the highest intelit


wgainst it.”


gence. The revealed mind and will of
God on the most important of all ques
tions, as contained in the Sacred Writ-
ings, is given into her keeping. “We
have the mind of Christ.”

2, As animated by the Divinest spirit.
The true Church of God is composed
only of those who “have the spirit of
Christ.” He came “‘not to be ministered
unto but to minister, and to give His life
aransom.” The spirit of self-surrender-
ing love actuates every member of the
Church of God.

3. As engaged in the most useful and
glorious work, Its members, in their
measure, go forth to seek and to save
the lost. They labour to “ present
every man perfect in Christ Jesus,” to
abolish sin and suffering, to establish
holiness and joy, and to make the moral
wastes break forth into beauty and
fragrance and fruitfulness.

V. Glorious in her increase. This
increase is—

1. Variously composed. “I will make
mention of Rahab and Babylon to them
that know me: behold Philistia, and
Tyre, with Ethiopia; this was born
there.” Some regard these as the words
of God Himself, and translate, “I an-
nounce Rahab and Babylon as those that
know Me,” &c. But with either render-
ing the idea is, that converts to the
Church of God would be added from
those nations. Hengstenberg expresses
what we regard as the true idea: “ At
the time when these hopes were ex-
pressed, the number of the members of
the Church of God had been very much
melted down. The ten tribes had
already been led away into captivity,
and Judah remained alone in the land.
In these circumstances, the longing after
the fulfilment of the old promises of a
posterity to Abraham as numerous as
the stars of heaven and the sand of the
sea, must have been awakened with
peculiar power, and must have seized
with especial ardour upon everything,
such as the above-mentioned events iz
the time of Hezekiah, which furnished
a foundation on which such a hope
could rest, and brought into view a
compensation for the loss of Israei in
the coming in of the heathen.” These

507


PSALM LEZKVEL


foreign nations are here set forth as
actually incorporated by a new birth
into the Church of God. Even the
worst enemies of the Jews, Egypt and.
Babylon, are regarded as -citizens of
Zion. God Himself acknowledges and
registers them as such. The grand
fulfilment of this splendid hope is
found in the kingdom of our Lord
Jesus Christ. “ Many shall come from
the east and the west, and from the
north and the south, and shall sit down
in the kingdom of God.” They are
coming from all nations into His king-
dom, and they shall continue to come
until all the nations of the earth loyally
submit to Him,

2. Distinguished in character, “This
and that man was born in her.” The
word translated man is WN = dy4e = vir,
a man of eminence, Men of distin-
guished ability and excellence shall be
born in the Church, The most illustri-
ous names in the annals of the world
are those of men who have been mem-
bers of the spiritual Zion, The Church
of God has been, and still is, the abode
of the men most renowned for knowledge
and wisdom, for patience and courage,
for tenderness and..truth, for piety and
usefulness, for independence and rever-
ence.

3. Registered by God. “The Lord
shall count when He writeth up the
people, that this man was born there,”
In the great census the Lord will clearly
distinguish those who were born in


Zion. The Divine registration is in-
fallible. There are no mistakes in it,


Pusiic Worship MORE ACCEPTABLE


( Verses


Man has the capacity to worship God,
and as God reveals Himself man is under
obligation to worship Him. To be ae-
ceptable to God, this worship must be
the tribute of free and sincere affection,
Wherever such an offering is made,
whether in the secret chamber, at the
family altar, or in the public sanctuary,
t is “a spiritual sacrifice, holy and ac-
ceptable to God.” It also sends back
wto the heart of the worshipper that joy

5OB


HOMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





None but the true citizens of Zion will
be found “ written in the Lamb’s book
of life.” And the name of no true
citizen will be omitted.

VI. Glorious in the joy which her
supplies produce. “ As well the singers
as the players on instruments: all my
springs are in thee.” This verse is
generally acknowledged to be a very
difficult one, Various interpretations
of it have been propounded. The idea
seems to us to be that the citizens of
Zion rejoice with music and song in the
fountains of refreshment and blessing
which are found in Zion. The streams
which make glad the city of God are
found there. How abundant and rich
and free are the provisions which God
has given to us in His Church! We
have there the helpful communion. of
saints, the dispensation of the trea-
sures of the truth of God by the Chris-
tian ministry, the exalting ana sanctify-
ing and blessed exercise of worship, and
the participation in the Divine sacra-
ments. In the work and worship of the
Church of God “with joy we draw
water out of the wells of salvation.”

Conciusion.—l. Are we born into
the Church of God? Are we citizens of
the spiritual Zion? Aye our names in
the heavenly register? Registration in
the records of the Church on earth will
avail us nothing, unless our names “are
written in the Lamb’s book of life.” 2,
If we are citizens of Zion, let us rejoice in
the honour and privilege; for, as such,
we are members of the most glorious
society.


to Gop roan Private Devotion.
13.)


and peace which are unspeakable and
full of glory. But public worship is
more lovely in the sight of God than
private worship.

I. Adduce some facts in the Divine
administration indicative of God’s
higher estimate of public worship.

1. The jacis of the Divine institution
of public worshtp, The Sabbath is
favourable for all religious worship.


But, when God gave special ordinances


' HOMILETIC COMMENTARY; PSALMS.





to His ancient people, corspicuous
amongst them all was this solemn in-
stitution of public worship. Three
periods in the year were assigned as
seasons of ‘holy convocation, &, In
addition to these more conspicuous s0-
lemnities, there were the public services
for the new moons, the year of rest, and
the year of jubilee. Moreover, "each
day at the Temple was the morning and
evening sacrifice offered, &c.... In the
fact that God thus instituted public
worship, we read His higher apprecia-
tion of it.

2. The fact that on special occasions
public homage to God has been specially
demanded, indicates His high pleasure in
tt. Many instances occur in the history
of God’s dealings with His people when
some special interposition was followed
by as special a requisition for the public
acknowledgment of His supremacy and
authority as their Lord and Sovereign. ...
On occasions like these the elders were
commanded to “ proclaim a fast, to call
a solemn assembly,” &c. So also when
there had been a special deliverance
from pestilence, or famine, or, &c. ; or
when there had been remarkable provi-
dential bounties, the whole nation was
called to public thanksgiving, d&c.

3. The fact that the ordinance of
public worship ts perpetuated under the
Christian dispensation. The example of
inspired apostles and primitive saints is
left on record, in relation to their fre-
quent “‘ coming together in one place”
and ‘‘ with one accord;” and the solemn
injunction given as ‘applicable to all
ages “not to forsake the assembling of
ourselves together,” d&c, These facts
abundantly indicate God’s higher regard
for it.

II. State some reasons why, in the
nature of the case, God should prefer
public to private worship.

1. Public worship is attended with
greater sacrifices, That piety is best
which will make the greatest sacrifices,
That faith or love is the strongest which
will bear the greatest strain. In pro
portion as the sacrifice of public exceeds
that of private worship is the service ot
the former more acceptable to God than
the latter. It is a higher expression of


PeaALM LXXXVIL





your piety. Itisa brighter test of your
faith and love.

2. It exerts @ more Romerhul and
extensive moral influence. The influ-
ence of regular secret prayer upon the
heart and life of a Christian is very
great. So also is the influence of morn-
ing and evening family worship. But,
in the public courts of the Lord, there
are many influences flowing in upon the
soul, and many emotions are there
awakened, which can never spring out
of the devotions of the closet or the
family. The sanctuary is emphatically
“the house of God and the gate of
heaven.” The Christian’s graces kindle
anew in Christian communion, as the
coals glow with increasing light and
heat when brought into contact.

3. It stands connected with the most
signal displays of the power of Divine
truth. Nowhere upon earth has this
two-fold work of the Spirit, in comfort-
ing the saint and convincing the sinner,
been so signally effected as in eennec-
tion with the solemnities of public
worship. It is in the house of God,
when the quick and searching words of
Divine truth have been applied with
wise discrimination, and urged upon the
conscience with faithful and affectionate
importunity, that the sinner has been
the most thoroughly arrested in his
course, and made the most to feel him-
self alone with his God, and most
vividly to anticipate the coming scenes
of the judgment and the awful issues
of the final sentence. Yes, and here
also the voice of mercy has fallen upon


the ear of penitential sorrow, with the


most melting, soothing tenderness, and
filled the contrite bosom with new joys
and péace, unknown in any other place
but heaven.

4. It is the grand instrumentality for
perpetuating and extending the Church,
The light of this day of Christian
activity and benevolence would go out
in darkness, ere our generation had
passed, were the sanctuary to be de-
serted, and all manifestations of devo-
tion to be shut up within the family
and the closet. How direct is the
tendency to all that is good in the ordi-


nances ef public worship! Keep up
509


PQALM LKXXVil.


this agency in its purity and strength,
and civil and social and religious bless-
ings abound; but, as you abolish this
agency, religion droops and virtue fails,
the dark passions of the depraved heart
rage unchecked till the judgments of
heaven cut short the rebellion and im-
piety in hopeless desolation.

5. It ts most like heaven. The wor
ship of heaven is pure and perfect, and
also united and public, devotion. The
place on earth the most like to heaven,
is the house of God on the Christian
Sabbath, filled with sincere and humble


HOMILETIO COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





worshippers. Nowhere shall you come
so near heaven in all its glory as when
you enter the sacred courts of the Lord,
and mingle your prayers and praises
with His children, while He bows His
ear to hearken.

InreRENcES.—1, <All the arrange-
ments for public worship should be amply
and cheerfully provided. 2. A regular
attendance upon publie worship ts de-
manded. $3. Yield to the influence and
instructions here imparted.—Rev. L. P.
Hickok, D.D. Abridged from “ The
Preachers’ Treasury.”


Gtorzious Tuouses SPOKEN OF THE CHURCH.
(Verse 3.)


Here we have an expressive testi-
mony in favour of the Church. Let us
illustrate and improve the subject.

I. Let us illustrate it. What glori-
ous things are spoken of her$ She is
commended—

1. As having Jehovah Himself for her
founder. She became a city through
His love, mercy, wisdom, and grace.

2. As having the ark of Hts presence
dwelling in her. To the saints He
vouchsafes most delightful displays of
His excellency and brightness; most
captivating views of His glory.

3. As having the solemnities of His
worship performed there. In this city,
God is worshipped in spirit and in truth ;
worshipped in the beauty of holiness.

4. As having His laws to govern her.
The laws of God are holy, just, and
good ; and all are found in the written
revelation He has given us.

5. As having constant supplies from
Him. The community is a great one ;
but they are richly clothed, well fed,
and kindly nourished,


6. As having His immediate and con-
stant protectton. She is surrounded on
every side by Him; and, guarding her
night and day, “the gates of hell shall
not prevail against her.”

I. Let us improve it.
learn—

1. In what light we ought to regard
the Church. On account of the poverty
of her members, and the fewness of their
number, her glory is scarcely at all seen,
but, notwithstanding her visible aspect,
she is yet most beautiful, most glorious
(Ps. L 2; Isa. Ix. 18).

2. What reason for thankfulness we
have if we are enrolled her citizens. In
comparison of this all else should be
esteemed by us as “ dung and droas,”

3. How much we should exert our-
selves to advance her interests, In refer-
ence to her, a glorious period is pre-
dicted (Isa Ix. 1-14); and this we
should long for and help forward by all
means within our power to adopt (Isa.
Ixit 1, 6, 7).—W. Sleigh,


We may


REGENERATION,
(Verse 6.)


From these words we may derive
some instructive and useful remarks.
Let us attend to the following—

I. It is highly important to every
man to be regenerated. This will
appear by considering the language of

510


our Lord respecting ft (John fil, 5-7)
the dege->rscy of our nature (Eph. iL
1); the natu:. and design of the Gospel
dispensation; the relation of the present
to another world ; the capacity of the
soul for enjoyment or suffering; and


id


ROMILETIC COMMENTARY: PSALMS,





FEALM LEXXVIZ.


the ansuitabieness of the character of an
wnregenerate person for future happl-
ness (Luke xvi. 24, 25).

I. The present is the only state in
which this momentous change can be
accomplished. Death makes no change
of a moral kind in man ;—his probation
terminates on his leaving the present
world (2 Cor. vi. 2; Rev. xxii. 11),
and all beyond is awarded according to
character (Matt. xvi. 27 ; Rev. xxii. 12).

ITl. Regeneration is not a fancy or
dream, but a reality. Its existence is
evinced in the phraseology by which it
is described (1 John v.1; 2 Cor. v.
17); in the accounts given of the first
Christians of their having actually un-
dergone a spiritual birth (Rom. vi.
11-13; Eph. ii 4-6); and in the
present experience of all believers, who
are themselves living witnesses to the
truth of this doctrine (2 Cor. v. 17;
Col. iii. 1).

IV. The Holy Spirit is the agent
in the regeneration of men. Our own
state and character before the change
takes place, the images used to describe
it, and the positive declarations of
Scripture if duly considered will con-
vince us of this (John i. 12, iii 4; Eph.
ii, 8-10; 1 John iii. 9).

V. Though the Spirit can do this
immediately, yet He generally does
it in the use of the means. Those
means are chiefly His written Word
(Ps. exix. 93; James i: 18; the min-
istry of the Gospel (2 Cor. v. 18-20;
1 Thess. i 5); and prayer (Isa. xlv. 19;
Exek. xxxvi. 37).


VL It,is not every one that thinks
he is regenerated that is really so.
We are not spiritually born merely be
cause we have been baptized, nor be-
cause we have correct views of religion,
nor because we observe certain rites, nor
yet because our lives are reformed. Re-
generation is widely different from these
things, and those who rest satisfied with
these are mistaking the shadow for the
substance.

VII. Zion, or the Church, is hon-
oured as the birthplace of the saints.
This is that to which our attention is
called in the words of our text. It is
because of this, amongst the many things
spoken of her, that she stands so high
in the estimation of God and man (Ps.
exxxii, 13, 14, cxxxvii. 5, 6).

VIIL The work of regeneration is
made apparent by its effects and evi-
dences. Such are—deliverance from
sin (1 John jii. 9, v. 18); victory over
the world (Rom. xii. 2; 1 John v. 4, 5);
spirituality of mind (John iii. 6; Rom.
viii. 5, 14); love to the saints (1 John
iv. 7); submission to Christ (John vi,
45; 1 John v. 1); true obedience (1
John ii. 29); and hope (1 Pet. i. 3; 1
John iii. 2, 3).

And now, am I myself the subject of
this change? Have I already experi-
enced it? AmTI born of God? AmI
decidedly a new creature? If my best
interests be deemed worthy of my at-
tention, these questions cannot be im-
proper; nor can I too seriously apply
them to myself.— W. Sleigh.


Tas Fount or BiLEssine,
(Vorse 7.)


* All my springs are in Thee.”

Consider—

I. What is meant by the pronoun
“Thee.” The Psalmist meant Zton,
All his springs were in Zion. From the
time of Constantine to the present the
name Zton has been applied to the
western hill on which the city of Jeru-
gaiem stands. But anciently, and down
to the time of the destruction of the
city by Titus, the name Zion was ap-
plied exclusively to the eastern hill on


which the Temple stood. So it was in
Zion as being the place on which the
Temple stood that the Psalmist found
his springs. In this light, the signifi-
cance of the Psalm is at onve manifest.
To the devout Jew Zion was the abode
of joy and blessing, the place of special
Divine manifestation, and of special
communion with God, who is repre-
sented as dwelling there (Ps. lxxxi. 1,
exxxii. 13, 14).

In this Christian age, there is not one

611


PRALM LEXXVILL





sacred place, for all places are sacred,
Not one local mercy-seat, for Christ is
the universal mercy-seat,—the meeting-


place between God and man. The Jew


found all his springs in the Temple,
because by means of its ordinances he
realised the presence and obtained the
blessing of God. To us, “Christ is the
true temple; all our springs are in
Him, and from Him all our streams
flow.” But Christ is Himself the gift
of God to us. So God is the primal
fount of blessing. And through Christ
we rise to God, commune with God,
&c. So all our springs are in Gop.
We trace all our blessings to the
heavenly Father. ‘Every good gift
and every perfect gift is from above,”
&c.

II. The number and variety of the
springs from which we are drawing.
How numerous are they/ The sun, the
atmosphere, the earth, &c ; society,
books, &c,; many spiritual ministries,
the communion of saints, religious wor-
ship, the comfort, and guidance and
sanctification of the Spirit, the example
and sympathy and sacrifice of the
Saviour, and the great love of our
Father, which is the fountain from
which all other blessings flow.

How various also are they/ Varied
to suit the many needs of our complex
nature in all our various circumstances
and moods, When the heart overruns
with joy, the joyousness of the ever-
blessed God is adapted to our need,
and so we delight to approach Him.
When the heart is crushed with grief,
the tenderness and compassion of Him
who pitieth as a father and comforteth
as a mother are the balm that heals ua.

The number and variety of our needs
are evidence of the greatness of our
nature. Only great natures have great
requirements, God has made us for


HOMILBTIC COMMENTARY : PSALMB.





Himself, and nothing leas than Himself
can satisfy the cravings of our soul.

IIL The blessedness of having all
our springs in God. ‘All my springs
are in Thee ;” then, they are all-sufji-
cient, They will meet every variety of
need. For the perplexed student, con-
scious of ignorance, and crying for light,
there is an inexhaustible spring of know-
ledge and guidance. For the wor: and
wearied sufferer, sighing for rest and
comfort, there are springs of patience
and solace, and even joy. For the
Christian, conscious of weakness and im-
perfection, there are springs of power
and inspiration and hope. For the
penitent sinner, sorrowing over a dark.
past, mourning his sin, there are springs
of pardon and peace and purity.

These springs are inexhaustible. They
are as full and as fresh now as ever they
were. Exhaust the solar fires, exhaust
the ocean, &c. But you cannot exhaust
the Infinite, Our springs are all in
God, so they cannot fail ; in God, then,
they will meet all our thirst for ever-
more.

Our springs being in God, we may
draw from them liberally and joyfully
because God is infinitely generous. “He
giveth to all liberally, and upbraideth
not.” His generosity is as great as His
resources: both are infinite as Himself.
He delights in imparting joy and bless-
ing to man, I rejoice that all my
springs are in God. Let us learn to
practise more fully than hitherto these
two things —1. Adoring gratitude 4
God. 2. Joyous trust in God. Come
what may, our resources cannot fail.

O God, the fount of blessing,

Our springs are all in Thee:
And though life’s cares are pressing,
Weakness our soul possessing,
Our prayers to Thee addressing,
And looking for Thy blessing,

We find our springs iv Thee.


INDEX OF


Pace
&G3SNCE from God, a godly soul un-
der a sense of (See SOUL),
Access, the good man’s, trust, and tes-


timony, 403
Activity, the beneficent, of God in
nature, . . e 5 ° 2 329
is incessant, ° * ° : » 330
omnipresent, . ° ° ° e 330
abundant, A 5 z : + 330
inspiring, . : fo)
hen Sermon, an (See SERMON), ees
Affliction, praising God for His great
dness in (See PRAISING), > 335


Scop eagons the ewes of the godly in
143
Aatitons anes aL man, ,and the help of


Go < - 463
Aged saint, the, and his God, 2373
Aged, the cry ofthe . 5 “ + 374


the phenomena of human decay, . 374
eae reasons of this law of physical
cay, > 375
the duties which spring out of these
facts and considerations, 3 - 375
Ages, dark, . ; ; 4 5 . 46
wail age of a country may be
rk age in the estimate of the


ists faults with which a splendid civi-
lisation may be chargeable . 5 ty
the duty of the Christian patriot . 48
Alamoth, eres 225
Alive, buried (See. BURIED), és » 145
Alpha and Omega, 5 ° . . 28
Altar of God, the, 212

the peculiar nature of that worship
which God has authorised, . . 212

the emphatic description of the joy
which results from it, . > . 212
Al-taschith,. . ee zey,

Ancestors and successors, our relation


to our (See RELATION), 5 . 441
Anniversary, for a Sabbath-School, . 441
Antagonistic forces,

describe the two states of feelings,
fear and joy, . : 0 - 9
these are not incompatible, : 9


they are essential to the security
a development of the Christian
2 e ° . e e 9


SUBJECTS,


Anticipation, an encouraging,
the blessing anticipated — deliver.
ance from distresses; exaltation to
honour ; prevalence of moral excel-
lence, . 5 ; 5 5 .
the character of those for whom the
blessing is anticipated, is marked
by, censecration to God, venera-


tion of God, obedience to God, - 497
Anticipation, the, of the godly soul, » 320
presents a triple contrast, . . + 320
a contrast of Upaicet ° ° » 320
et ursuit, : ° ° 2 320
estin ° ° 320
rene tie bane and the (See BANE), fp
Apologetics of childhood, the (See
CHILDHOOD), .
Appeal, an AS and prayer (See
PRAYER), 6 - a7
Appealing to ‘God, man, 2 - 13


to His righteousness, fai eas,

merc Observe : the blessedness

and the conditions of so doing, . 13
ent of experience, the z - 319
rejoicing is reasonable, personal,


need abe Pre Ss ft . 319
selfish men set tra


=e for the young
and inexperience
the world contrives traps for the


an


godl
Satan Aig atraps for us all. Let the
innocent put their trust in God, and
walk circumspectly ; let an "who
are in the snare of the devil look
up to the Deliverer ; let the wicked
be assured that God’s eye is upon
them, and that justice must over-
take them, . . . -  « 43
Asaph, . di ° : : « 245, 403
Ice of Christ, a esas «35k
the fact of, » 351
the triumphs with which it lod
attended " ms Fi Lips
the inestimable benefits sup e vit ae
Aspects of Divine worship Boe Wo
« 38§


SHIP), . 6 ;
of magistracy (See Maam-


TRACY), 4
Aspects of piety, three "(See Pmery), Hs


d INDEX.





Aspects of the Divine Depend (oe uae
GOVERNMENT), . ° . 417
Assurance, a well- founded, . . 213
@ commemoration of God’s former
and glorious doings; the nature,
Author, and reason of these doings ;
the obligation of every generation
to transmit to posterity an account
of the doings of God in their day,
and to profit by the experience of

those who have gone before, .
a declaration of confidence in God,
which is worthy of imitation in the
und on which their faith Dane

erelationship which Hesustain

te them, the petition which they
present to Him, the renunciation
of other objects of trust, their assur-
ance of weeny: and their praise of
Go . 214


213


Assyrian army, overthrow of the, . 231
Atheism, practical, 40
the nature, history, “characteristios,
and doom of, . : 40
Atheism, the immorality of, ; 52


in its principle, pert ‘and conse-
quences, 52
Attitude of a victorious soul, the, « 400
marked by deep self-abasement, « 400
sublime confidence in God. The Paal-
mist was assured of the constant
resence, the unfailing support, the
allible guidance, the all-suffi-
ciency, and the righteousness of the
government of God,


; . 401
Attitude of man in a thunder- storm, the


true (See THUNDER-STORM), - 136
Awful fallacy, an (Sée FALLACY), . 251
BANE and the antidote, the, 53

the corruption of the race, universal,

thorough, profound, . 53


the Deliverer of the race, neither phi-
losophy, education, institutions,
nor any restorative principle in


human nature, but Christ Jesus, . 54
Banquet, a royal, . . 113
is provided fa the midst of conflict, . 113
wiliactteny® of abundant joy, . . 113
rey all the wants of a life-


. 11g
is the type an d pledge of the everlast-
ing feast in the heavenly banquet-


ing hall, . 114
Barren lot of the wicked, the (See
Lot), : . . - 346
Beacon, an impressive, . 263
the moral portrait of a wicked man, 263
remonstrance with a wicked man, . 253
the doom of a wicked man, . 264
Behaving as a friend (See FRIEND), . 168
Benedictions of the good, the disposi-
tions and (See DISPOSITIONS), . 172
Beneficent activity of es in nature
*
63


(See ACTIVITY), . 0 °
Besetting sins (See SINs), . C :
the grandeur of the Psalmist’s hope,


PAGE
salvation, and fall, various, per-
petual glories, - 63

the ground of his hope, Jesus Christ, 63
Black ae (See ARTS), . . 42
Blessed life, the (See Lire), I
Blessedness of communion with God, :

the, - 32
Blessedness of the Christian’s old age,
com rative, : 379
he is happy in the contemplation of


his past conduct and influence, . 380
in the contemplation of the blessings
which have marked his history, . 380
in the contemplation of his life’s his-
tory, because of the lessons it co
served to tea


in the continue possession of hing


life’s chief good, 3
in the near Prospect “of realising his
life’s brightest hopes, . . 380
Blessedness of the compassionate, the
(See COMPASSIONATE), . : » 202
Blessedness of the forgiven, the,. . 148
declared asa doctrine, . . - 148
illustrated as a fact, . - 149
confirmed by the experience of the
godly in all ages, . ° 5 150
Blessings, Divine, 7h e 446
from unlikel 446


in rich aren ance, . i
a type of the supreme essing,
Bieadee, the Fount of, :
Blessing to the race, Christ as Hee source
of (See CHRIST), . . 5
Bow in the cloud, the, . 5
the supremacy ‘of God's  pSrerinent 75
e discriminativeness of His action, 76
the tenderness of His methods, - 76
the effectiveness of His aid, . - 76
the bountifulness of His grace, 70
Burden and Sustainer, man’s, .
man is burdened, . 280
exhoruedite to cast his burden upon the


e e
sources, . ae
e


d,
encouraged to do so by the « ‘assur-
ance of His ay pte °

Buried alive, : ° . . 145
by the malice of enemies, - 145
by the neglect of contemporaries, 145

by the lack of opportunities for dis-
tinction, . 145

by the failure of capacity ‘for useful-
« 145
CALLING of David, the, 5 - 459


ness, e e e e
Cowseless hater, the (See HATER), . 167


Chain of life, links in the (See LINKS), ee
Challenge to religious hypocrites,

(See HYPOCRITES), ° ee
Champion of the good, God the, ‘ » 421


the enemies of the pak are many and
mighty, Satan and his allies, the
rontiete arenes re ie rpeioe i . 421
e Champion of the good is
than ait their enemies, aeeaee
forth to battle from Zion’ to
complete Manat with the utmost


Case, ° e ° 432





INDEX, vai

the of the good should Be a the religious capacity of childhood, wee
gale honoured, vows should be the religious service ue childhood, 30
paid to Him, offerings made to Him, Choice of our inheritance, the, 234
victory ascribed to Him alone, . 424 distrust of self, . AO 234


ter of God, a welcome revelation


at eo 3 . . 170
e unspeakable in me ° « 170
immutable in rectitude, Ys 5 bk
invites the confidence of the soul, 5 OR
is the source of all life, . . 17
is the protection of the oe from the
ces of the wicked, . 171
Character of true worship (See Wor-
SHIP), . 154
Character and privileges of the godly,
the (See GODLY), . - 323
Character and destiny, a terrible, » 353
a terrible character, great enormity
and persistency in wickedness, . 353
a terrible destiny, destruction, com-
plete, unavoi able, eae de-
clar + 353
Characters, contrasted, 176
the wicked and the good “contrasted
in their possessions, . . - 176
intheirstrength, . e .» + 176
in their perpetuity, » . - 176
in their integrity, e e e ° 177
in their posterity, . - 177


Characteristic of a Divine revelation,

the (See REVELATION), : 48
Characteristics of a wicked life, the dis-

tinguishing (See WICKED), . - 169

Chastisement, : 20
the twofold character of the Divine; ;
the one is measured, the other is
overwhelming; the one destroys,
the other perfects ; the one is tem-


poral, the other eternal, 5 20

the grounds of apnea! to the Divine
clemency, 20

the Divine response ‘to the prayer of
penitence, ar

Oheeeace cat the Divine, ‘conscience
awakened by a sense of, . 180


the Divine chastisement is greatly
afflictive to men, makes them appre-
hensive of the wrath of God, is keen
in its penetration into their soula,
makes them morally loathsome to
themselves, leads them to an over-
whelming consciousness of sin,
leads them into grievous unrest,
divests life of all human joy, . 180

the Divine chastisement often tests
the epvesl and worth of human
friends

ealls aioe requisition the self-restraint
of the ed 5

awakens the repentant soul to impor-


183
181


tunate prayer, . 182
Chastisement, man under Divine, » 450
sorely smitten, . : ° . « 450
remembering God, . .». » « 450
seeking - 451
offering to God unreal repentance, . 451
Che Cored life, the (See LIFE) . . 51
Childhood, the apologetics of, . . 29


trust in God, °
trust in God rewarded,
tasthesource of blessing: totherac
is exalted to the highest dignity,
endowed with all power, . °
inexhaustible in supply, . °
rejoices to communicate, . .


nse the Ascension of (See ASCEN


N),

Christ, the reign of,
its sovereignty,
authority, . °
universality,
irresistibility, .
graciousness,

Christ, the utter overthrow of the ene-

mies of (See ENEMIES), 10
ree victory for Christ and victory i in, 85
icture of Christ’ ’s victory over ae
oes, its completeness, rapidity, uni


e@@®@@m@eeceeae
e©ees
fom f.co¢ea As aos
= =
° °o
~ L al


ee* g@g@eee
ee ®e6e¢@


versali . . 85

the saint's victory in ‘Christ, 86
Christianity, human nature in the light

of Christianity, . 32
Christianity recognises the intrinaic

grandeur of human nature, . 32


restores the lost grandeur of human
nature, the glory of human charac-
ter, the fulness of hamandominion, 32


Church and her Lord, the, .  . . 225
exhortation to the Church, ° . 225
encouragement to the Church, . 5 OPE
the glory of the Church, . 226


themarriage celebration ofthe Chureh, 226

the assurances given to the Lord of
the Church, .

Church, a tumultuous world and a tran-


quil,
the tumult ‘of the world is an evidence
of the sin of the world, and will one


day be removed, . - 2329
the tranquil Church is assured of secu-
rity and of refreshment, . 229
Church, the glory of the (See Gory), 349
Church, the g glory of the, a striking illus-
tration OL er ° ° e ° 235
as the rae of God, . .« « . 235
as exalted beforemen, . 6 » 236
as victorious over enemies, . 236


Church, the glory of the, an instructive
illustration of,

the triumphs wrou, ht for the Church

should regarded as a confirma-


237


tion of faith, . . - 237

an heap to meditation onthe, grace 8
eer

a stimulus to praise God, nner 235


a reason for considering ‘the security


and beauty of the Church, . 238

an enco ement to pinope! in God, Ae
Church a iearile -dove, the, . ;

Church, glorious things spoken of the, Ric

Church ot peyde the glory of the, - 506

consisted her sanctity, . 2 6» gos





wii
PaGh
in her security, ® ® ° ® «
in being beloved byGod,. . «© §07
in her exalted reputation, . 5 - 507
in her increase, . °


Se: . 507,

in the joy which her supplies produce, 508
Church, passages from the history of
the ancient, with their lessons to


the modern Church, . ° - 468
the Divine planting,. .« ec . 468
great progress, . ° ° . . 469
ruinous failure, e ° ° e 469
mournful devastation, . ° ° 470
earnest prayer, . 5 e 5 (o)


° 47
devout promise of the ancient Church, 471
Church, the peril and prayer of the, . 481
the peril arose from her enemies,
whose hostility was violent, confi-
dent, crafty, aimed at the utter ruin
of Israel, united, and powerful, . 481
the prayer was for the interposition
of God ; the destruction, confusion,
and submission of their foes to God 3
and for the glory of the Divine
name, . es ed Bees
Church, the suffering, pouring out its
complaints unto, . 6 . « 404
the description of the Church, it is
shepherded by God, redeemed by
God, inhabited by God, é - 404
the distress of the Church; their ene-
mies triumphed over and spread
ruin around them, and blasphemed
the name of God; the prophetic
voice was sile:t; God in anger had
cast them off, 3 . 6 A
the prayers of the distressed Church ;
that God would:remember them,
and interpose for them speedily, . 406
Church, the suffering, recounting the
doings of God in the past as an
argument for Hishelp in thepresent 408
the history of God’s dealings with
His people, reveals His universal
sovereignty, . . c ° °
reveals the beneficence of His sove-
reignty, . : 5 ° . °
is full of encouragement tothem, . 409
Church, the suffering, pleading the
faithfulness and honour of God as
an argument for His interposition, 43%
the attitude of their enemies to Him ;
that ee blasphemed and loudly
opposed Him is urged as a reason
why He should defend His own
cause and that of His people. . 412
their own relation to Him; they were
His turtle-dove, the congregation
of His poor, His covenanted
people, . : : . . -4
Church, the triumph of the (See
TRIUMPH), . : ° 4 - 347
Cloud, the bow in the (See Bow), mS
Comfort to His people, the knowledge
of God a, : : ; :
Commendable resolution, a (See RE-
SOLUTION), . 6 é 6 5
Communion with God, the’ blessedness
of,


. 327


482


405


INDEX,





PB.

Compassionate, the blessedness of the,
he is blessed with Divine deliverance,
peebian : °
lessing, . ° °
reservation, : °
support in affliction, . one
Compassionate, the complaint, prayer,
and confidence of the, . : 5

he complains of his enemies, and o}
those whom he had regarded as his
friends, ° . ° ° ° .
he prays for mercy, and for restora-


tion, = ‘ 6 a ( .

he is confident of the Divine favour
and support, . 2 : : :
Complaint, a sorrowful, an earnest
prayer, and a devout resolution, . 459
complaint of the devastation of Jeru-
em and the desecration of the
temple, of the cruelties inflicted
and the reproaches cast upon the
people of God, 5 ° “ :
prayer, manifests a consciousness of

e sins of the people, petitions

God for various favours, urges his
petitions with powerful pleas, .
resolution, the language of confidence,
gratitude, service, . 5 A ;
Complaint, the, prayer, and confidence
of the compassionate (See Com-
PASSIONATE), 5 : : ;
Complaint, prayer, and encouragement,
complaint, great calamities are com-
plained of, these calamities are
regarded as signs of the Divine
displeasure, the Divine displeasure

is always the result of human


5
a


BB & BBESRE


460
461


203
300


Bin,'y }see- cme a ne eee
prayer, for the restoration of the
Divine favour, and the repair of
their calamities, . A 5 >
encouragement, God has given to His
people glorious heen these are
thoroughly reliable, should be
conspicuously exhibited that men
may trust in them, should inspire
His people with hope and courage
in the time of trial, 6 : :
Campiaiaes unto God, the suffering
hurch pouring out its (See
CHURCH), : ; . : :

Confess Him, he that knows God will, 1
Confidence, a triumphant, . 4 - as
its nature, comprehensive, strong,
intelligent, . ° ° . .
its pounds the number and character
of His enemies, and the ancient
sovereignty of God, : : :
Confidence in Jehovah the pledge of
victory, . f : 5 : .
gonadenes in Jehovah fills the heart
with gladness, ; : 0 °
inspires with courage for the conflict
secures the exercise of His almighty
DOWEU, tate ec a ee
exposes the inadequacy of the best
umanh contrivances, . ; °
tarns apparent defeat into victory, .


301


279


oO
~~


SS &2 39S





INDEX. |
PAGE PAGE
ponkdence a Cod a life of, ; . 289 are to the soul, . 5 394


unds, nature, and advantages, 289
Conk ence of a troubled heart, ages


(See HEART), 307
peronaence of God’s goodness to His
poo the good man’s . - 391
he indicates the character of God’s
people, and asserts God’s special
ay ess to them, . 5 ae sOk
Conflict, prayer a preparation for (Bee


IE RANER) Wee ih Pact) ohn s
Conflict, the glorious, . : °
the object of the conflict, . A 0 » 302
the character of the soldiers, . 302
the authority of the Commander, ego2
Conqueror, the Messiah as a majestic
(See MESSIAH), . . ° . 222
Conquest, full, . 81
the fulness, and the source of the


95
302


Psalmist’s victo 81
Conscience awaken ine a sense of the

Divine chastisement (See CHAS-

TISEMENT), . . 180


Conscience, informed, asleep, aroused, | 55

Constructive and the ‘destructive, « 407

Contemplation of the doings of God, . 230

the object contemplated, ° » 230

the design of the contem lation, warn-
ing of the enemies of the Church,
encouragement of the Church, in-
struction of all,

Contemplation of the works and ways
of God, the godly soul rising
superior to poabls by the devout
(See TROUBLE), .

Contrasted characters (See CHARAC-


. 231


433


TERS), 176
Contrasted with the peaceful destiny of
the good, the temporary prosperity,
of the wicked as, .
wicked men are often in the posses:
sion of great power, :
often experience unexpected reverses,
the good are happy in their life, an
peaceful in their futurity, . °
Counsels of wisdom, two, .
love the Lord, urged by Reason, Grati-
tude, Experience, : A °
be of good courage, . :
Courage, moral, 4
the severity of the trial, ; ;


. 178


. 178
179


179
» 147


147
147


the constancy of the tried,
the certainty of the triumph,
Cowardice and its causes, moral, .
the illustration of moral cowardice, 4
the causes of moral cowardice, absence
of the support of conscience, the
inspiration to be drawn from past
interpositions of God on their be-
half, and the help of God, .
Creation, a : ;


°
°
°
.
°
°
.


44
44
44
45

442

442


deriving its glory from God, 5
revealing the glory of God, °
awakenin is iration and love in
the children of God, ‘ : ,
Crises in the spiritual life, .
are sometimes occasioned by the Pro-
vidence of God, . . opetine


g $s gest


a surmounted in communion with
- 3
Cry for help, : a pathetic (See HELP), 9 ae
Cry from a soul in Gers a (See
DIsTREss), + 273
Cry of : troubled heart, the (Bee
395


HEART), . :
Cry of the aged, the (See AGED), . neo 74
Cry of the righteous i in extreme suffer-
ing, the (See SUFFERING), . - 357


DARK ages (See bel A . - 46
David, the calling of, . e ° « 459
David's prayer, . S . » 258, 261
David’s prayerand vow, . . 253

the petitions, . é . 258


the ee Gets results of a gracious


af
Day ot trouble, the ( See TROUBLE), : ee
Decided piety (See PIETY), 292
Declaration of a grateful soul, the, 337
help in trouble implored by ae 337
‘granted by God, 5 338
recounted tomen, . 4 5 338
acknowledged to God, .. 338
Deliverance, a song of, 109


this deliverance was celebrated by


teful praise, 109
will be the means of conferring bless-
ing on all mankind, 110


will vindicate the Divine righteous-
ness to future ages, 110
Deliverer, the good man’s trouble and


(See TROUBLE), . 9 6 . 427
Departing from God, . 5 c » 402
Deposit, the great, ° - 143


Depression, the e deep, and strong con-
solation of a godly soul (See


SouL), . . . : , 208
De profundis, anaes 73
the Psalmist’s peril, . ew T3
prayer, . . . 8 . 473
preservation, 5 > ° Py Kk}
Destinies of men, the, . ; C c 5
are various, 5
decided by their moral character and
conduct, 5


as pes, contrasted as their charac-
ter, 5
Destinies of men, the diverse, manifest:
in Mel) the reign of God, 297
estiny of the enemies of the good,


"it Bi Spe sige: in misery and en one


irs deny of the suffering good, a
life of devout and hearty praise to


the reign of God manifested in these
diverse destinies, . 299
Destiny, a terrible character and (See
CHARACTER), 5 « 353
Destruction of her enemies, ‘the salva-
tion of the Church and the, .
the Poet represents the destruction of
the wicked as utter and irrever-
sible, . : ‘ ° 5
es efiected by God, . . .


sit


x IND EE.





PAGE
them when they re-
ed themselves as quite secure, 269
as inflicted because of their hostility
to the people of God,
im former times as an encouragement
to the good to expect salvation from
present dangers,
Destructive, the constructive and the, 407
eres longings (See LONGINGS), . 210
ignity of human nature, the (See
Na roan) 5 31
Dispositions and benedictions of the
od, the, . 173
dispositions, trust, j joy, devotion, rest,
patience, meekness, 172
benedictions, watched over by the
beneficent providence of God, privi-
leged by the gratification of its best
deaivo, vindicated from the cal-
umny and slander of men, enriched
by a true ownership of the earth,
shail experience & sweet and afflu-


ent peace, . 193

Distinction between " goodness. and
mercy, . - » 500
Distress, a cry from a soul in, . 273

the cause of his distress, the evil

speeches, wicked deeds, and see
hatred of his enemies, . . 273

the description of his distress, "great

mental anxiety, deep pain of ‘heart,
overwhelming read? oe - 274

his desire in his distress, was natural,
mistaken, significant, 274


nis prayer in his distress, involves
faith in the accessibleness, intreati-
bleness, and sufficiency of God, . 275
Distributed, sorrow and mercy ond
(See Sorrow), é 152
Divine blessings (See BLESSINGS, he 446
Divine gentleness (See GENTLENESS), 83


Divine salvation (See SALVATION) 71
Doings of God, contemplation of the
(See CONTEMPLATION), . . 230
Doings of God in the past, the suffering
Ghureh recounting the, as an ar,
ment for His help i in the present, 408
Doings, the Lord’s, for His servant
Bee SERVANT), . . . 192


Dexolazy, : 205
blessing i is ascribed to God, as a God
holding relations with His people, 205


eternally, . e e ° ° e 205
gsrvently, C ° . e ° ° 205
Doxology, . . ° e e 389
the comprehensivences, e e + 390
perpetuity, ° ° e 390
universality, A e ° 390
intensity o the praise 6 6 one
test nigh to Blas 1G ° 40.
Dreadfu a aetee ve (See PERDITION), - 12
Dream, the life of ungodly mena, . 399
characterised by, unreality, . . 399
brevity, : : : : 6 - 399
termination, . ° e ° » 400


EARNEST appeal and prayer, an (Sse
PRAYER), ° e e e e ary





Earnest eupplication, an (Bee BURL
mr can
1pses,


ene Sotaes of,
the cause of, to teach us that God is
the source of happiness, wisdom,
strength, life, 49
the duty of the saints in these hours
of darkness, to wait in faith, prayer,
and hope, 50
Effect, the, upon the righteous of the
judgment of God upon the wicked, 264
the righteous behold, 5 2 264
are awed by, . ° - 265


° 494
° ° e . ° 49
° 49


approve, .. 265
are instructed 265
flouriah in the midst of, 265
worship God because of His judg-
ment upon the wicked, . - . 266
Encouraging anticipation, an (See
ANTICIPATION),
Encouragement, complaint, prayer, and
(See COMPLAINT), 300
Enemies of Christ, the utter overthrow
of the, - 103
the enemies of Christ, are full of
ignity, . . ° . « 103
will ee certainly detected ant ex-
- 103
wil b be stricken with ‘dismay, cereEIO3
will be utterly overthrown, : . 104
their overthrow will illustrate the
supreme power of Jehovah, . - 104
Enemies, the godly man and his, - 282
the enemies of the godly man, are
eager, numerous, constant, dis-
pace confederate, oe aud


ruel, 282
cate prayer ‘of the godly man in the
midst of his enemies, contains a
comprehensive petition, a powerful
plea, and an pret anes
the confidence of the godly man in
the midst of his enemies, was re-
posed in the grandest Object, exer-
cised in the most trying season,
and produced ee sublimest re-
sults, 5 0 . 283
ynongh sincerity: not, , 129
mtry of the glorious king, ¢ e trium-
phal (Bee KG): . 17
Raye of the good, ne transient pro-
ney of the wicked unworthy the
OSPERITY), 5 GAL
an eangsial morality (Bee MopRAuITy), nen S 7;


fe , . 166
“Timecete calumniated, 5 , c 104
repaid with bereavement, 6
mee dness requited wih
rotherly ; : - 166
misfortune met with derision, 5 . 166
piety made the subjoct of ribaldry


. 282


and scorn, ; cC é . 167
Evil of sin, the chief evil, 0 : 256
consists in its being committed
against God, . e ° e e 2
Evil, the programme of, «ees
the evil life in its inception, . oe








INDEX. xt
PAGE PA
development, . oO ce oy tee! in his realisation of the all-suffi-
consummation, . 4 ciency of God, in his reliance upon


Exemplary praise (See PRAISE) + 29%
Exhortation of faith, the (See aun 310
Exhortation, eee and encourage-
Ment, . 476
Exhortation to praise God, because of
His LSM ae of the world oer
PRAISE),
Exile’s longing for the house of Ged
the (See Lonarn@), 3 : 4
Exile’s rayer, the (See PRAYER),
Exile, the rejoicing (See REJOICING), . 384
erience, & pa’ “ - 315
e miseries of which they complain,
their rejection by God, their defeat
in battle and its consequent Aa
the reproaches of their enemies,
their own shame, . . . ai
the Author of their miseries, . 31
the instruction which their miseries
ape peeps te 5 ne Be a17
Experience a man, the (
Man), 3


« 339
Experience, ‘the ” argument of (See
ARGUMENT), . - 319
Experiences, sad acenes and pe
(See Sap), - 276
Experiences, the value of dying, . : - 395
he calm death of the wicked is no
proof of Divine support, - 395


shrinking and fear on the part of the
righteous as they approach death is
no proof that the Divine support is
withdrawn, .
the most press religious testimon-
ies of the dying are poor compared
wait the testimony of a useful and
. ° ° . 395
Expbstulation . - 4
e Psalmist reminds his enemies of
the vanity of their opposition to
himself, . 14
he exhorts them to Tepentance and
piety, . 14
gee he and punishment of ain, the
(See Sry), : - 101
Extremity and asylum of the ay the 24
Extremities of the saints, the ieee
SAINTS), “ ; - ° 37


Fact, privilege, and prospect, a great, 326


aaa God, oY, Ghee Memes
° ° ° e ® e 59
ataatate: > : . e ° ° 59
habitual, : . ° - 60
So the exiurtssion of, perce - 310
e trust prohibited, man, op
unlawfully acquired Bid ie aad
lawfully acquired wealth, . . 310
the trust prescribed, its nature and
nid; ¥: on Stk
Faith, the trial and triumph of, . . 308


the trial of the good man’s faith arose
from the assaults of his enemies,
Notice: their design, method, and


eowardice, . : A ;
the triumph of his faith is manifest,


alone, in his assurance of
safety and stability, and in his rest
in God,


30g

Faith of an "aged saint, the triumphant 376

the prayer, 5 O : . 376

the anticipation, 376
the resolution of faith, to continually

hope in and praise 377
Faithfulness and honour of God, the

suffering Church pleading the, as

an argument for His Beis an

(See CHURCH), i . . 41

Fallacy, an awful, . 251
to see that cas is altogether like

: 5 . 255

Faults secret, 6 =
sins known to ourselves, but not to

the world, 92
sins known to the world, ‘but not to


us, .
ains neither known to us nor to the
world, but known to God: recognise
the ut of them, seek ena
for 92
Favour implored, the Divine, . «464
peuvie sorely needing God’s favour,
because of the reproaches of their
arava ale the rejection of their
Psi aren the greatness of their a
- 4
carnestly tin; lorin God’s favour, with
an implied confession of sin, a re-
cognition of the gracious relation
of God to them, and an earnest en-


92


treaty for His epee ae 465
Fear, and trust in God, times of (See
TRUST); Cee - 283
Fearlessness of the good, the, . 129
springs from personal faith in God, 129
strengthened by the remembrance of
elit deliverances, . - 130
nt for the greatest emergen-
130
First ‘Sabbath in the "New-Year, the
(See NEW-YEAR), . » 332
Fitness of the true worshipper, the
moral (See WORSHIPPER), . 116
Flock, the Divine Shepher "and His
(See SHEPHERD), . < . Int
Folly of trusting in riches, the, : 266
Foolish way of wealthy worldlings, the
(See Way), . . 241
Acai antagonistic (See ‘ANTAGON-
TIC), 9
vonived: the bleasedness of the (Bee
BLESSEDNESS), . - 148
Forlorn AY hie (See Hors), . 5 45
Formal and the spiritual in divine ser-
vice, the (See SERVICE), : 247
Forsaken, : ; ° ° . + 105
and suffering, . ° . 105
but not prayerless, e ° « 105
but trusting in ove » 105
Fount of blessing, the, . ° te Sel
behaving asa,. . «© « 168
kind co . « 168


generous sympathy, . ° °


INDEX,


self-denying service, . ° . 169
constancy in love and devotion, « 169
Full conquest (See CONQUEST), . . 81

GENERAL TRUTHS, the personal realisa-

tion of (See TRUTHS), . 5 « 37

Gentleness, Divine, . - 83
the greatness of the good, | 83
the gracious discipline through which

this greatness is realised, in our sin-
ful state, in our penitential state,
in our accepted state, .  .. =< &

Gittith, . 471

Glorious conflict, the (Bee CoNFLict), . 302

Glorious picture, a, . 127

Glorious prospect, a (See PROSPECT), + 354

Glorious things spoken of the Church, 510

Glory of the Church, the, . '
consists in_ its being the dwelling-

place of God, . » 349
transcends the utmost glory of the
world, e e e « 349
is seen in its security, 5 . « 350
in its sanctit 2 350
has been piicnaly illustrated, . » 350
Glory of the Church, an instructive
illustration of the (See CHURCH), . 237
Glory of the Church, a striking illus-
tration of the (See CHURCH), » 235
Glory of the Church of God, the (See
CHURCH), . - 506
Glory maniiested in ‘the sanctuary,
God’s powerand , 315
God afflicting man, and man submitting
to God, . e IQ1I
God and His people (See Puorie), . 161
God a refuge, ° 312
God as a man of war (See Wan), . 26
God, departing from, . 5 . o 402
d-awing nigh to, 5 : ° » 403
faith in (See FAITH), : - 59
glorified through man’s wrath (See
WRATH), C + 425
he that knows, will confess Him, - 197
in nature, . . ; . . . 411
the Creator, ; 5 : c . 4Ir
Proprietor, . . ° ° . 411
Sustainer of nature, . 4Ir
inspecting man (See INSPECTING), : 267
ealous for, 51
is honour is bound up with the con-
duct of His people, 51

leading His people (See LEADING), . - 437
man appealing to (See APPEALING), 13
our helper, 273
our salvation (See SALVATION), » 352
realised by His people, . . + 342
the Divine Being, . . : « 342
His relationship to us, 342
ope blessed assurance of this relation-

: 3
Sas erro of, painful tothe wicked, oh
seeking, + 315
the Chanipion of the good (See CHAM-

PION), . + 42K
the character of, a welcome revela-
tion of (See CHARACTER), . » £70





the Fount of blessing, . . .
the power of, .
the Protector and Avenger of the
oppressed,

the Saviour of the meek (See Mrxx),
Sovereignty of re SOVE-
REIGNTY), Fi .

the ways of (See Ways), . i
God’s power and glory manifested in
the sanct ° °
God’s shield (See Surep), 3 °
Godly in afhiction, prayer the resource

of the (See PRAYER), .
Godly, Boh character and privileges of


a dencnpen of “character, righteous-
ness of character and conduct, .
ry patbestng of privilege, joy, trust,


riump
Goaly in Tits world, the state of the
(See STATE), . Z C 5 :
Good, evil for (See Evin), . 6 5
the chief, ° e ° e e e
the grand question, .
the true answer, the spirituality, suf-
ficiency, and fruits of the supreme
blessing, :
the dispositions and benedictions of
the (See DISPOSITIONS), .
the (tees of the (See Frar-
LESSNESS), :
as access, trust, ‘and testimony,
e.
man’s present, past, and future, the,
the ple of the wicked against
the (See LOTTINGS),
the temporal prosperity of the wicked
as contrasted with the peaceful
destiny of the eee CONTRASTED),
Good things for good people,
God deala with us as we deal with
im, 3 :
as we deal with « one another,
Goodness and mercy distinguished, .
€oodness of God an encouingement to
seek Him, the (See SEEK),
Goodness of God to His people, the
good man’s confidence of the mice
NFIDENCE), ‘ ‘ A
Goodness of the Lord, the, . ;
as a spectacle of surpassing beauty,
a treasury of inexhaustible wealth,
a work of infinite beneficence, .
Gospel of the stars, the (See CREA-
TION), a
Gospel the power of God, the, ‘ :
the remeron of its commence-
its unlikelihood of success, 5 .
its glorious results, .
Government, aspects of the Divine, .
& rebuke to wicked oppressors,
an encouragement to the righteous, .
apn assurance of the punishment of
the wicked, .
in ita relation to the nations, the
Divine, ees ° ;


by equity, 2


513
312


425


409
» 437


315
82


129


403
402
174


178
78


387


417
418


- 418


35
3§


gv





INDEX, zill
PaGs PAGE
vindicated with severity,. . =. 35 ata in the saddest situation, . . 194
survives all opposition, . wns © situation the Psalmist was in, 194
comprehends all nations, and shall he devout exercise of his mind, 194
bring them all into judgment, the deliverance he obtained, 194
Government of the world, exhortation Hope of the righteous in extreme suffer-
to praise God because of His (See ing, the (Ses SUFFERING), 365
PRAISE), ; - . : - 233 | Hope opened to the world, . - 389
sa fernt pipet a (See RECOLLEC- Hopes e grandeur oud ground of the
. . ; . 491 salmist’s, . 63
Great aepete the, 143 dope, forlorn, i 45
Soa the hunted life and its Divine the saint often appear forlorn, - 45
See LIFE), . 5 5 : » 295 have nevertheless strong foundations, 46
Guilty, not, . : : 5 : « 24 are destined to glorious realisation, . 46
when we may plead, . 24 | House, love of God’s, 128
may rely on a triumphant acquittal House of God, the exile’s longing for
when we can justlydoso, . . 25 the (See Lonarna), 5 - 484
Human nature in the light of Chris-
Shtlon: the causeless, . . ° . 167 tianity (See CHRISTIANITY), . 32
his character, . é : ° - 167 | Human nature, the dignity of (See
his righteous doom, . 167 NATURE), 31
Heart, the sonadanke of a troubled, 306 | Human perfection (See PERFECTION), . 302
confidence of safety and stability in Hepes es God’schallenge toreligious, 249
5 + 306 religious hypocrites proclaiming God’s
arising out of past experiences, « 307 law ° ° » 249
expressing itself in prayer, ° 307 despising God's Word, a . - 249
issuing in constant eh bag 3 - 308 breaking God’s laws, 249
Heart, the cry of a troubled, . » 305 deceiving themselves as to the Divine
B 29 toa experience, e ° 2 305 character and conduct, , ° . 250
rvent prayer, Ge. ok eH interrogated by God, <P hs . 250
a cheering recollection, . e ° 305 convicted of their sins, . e . 250
an exemplary resolution, . ° » 306 warned by God, athon's ° . 250
Heart, the instincts of the, .  . » 133
the sense of dependence th Go God, . 133 | IGNORED, Omniscience, 5 Bee
craving for fellowship wit 133 | Illustration of the glory of the Chureh,
confidence in the eternal justice of an instructive (See ern 237
God, - 134 | Dlustration of the glory of the C ureh,
gratitude for the goodness ‘of God, 134 a striking (See CHURCH), 235
Joy in the saving strength of God, 135 | Illustrations of the Sovereignty of God
trust in the ultimate srimph and (See SOVEREIGNTY), . 457
blessedness of God’s pee 135 | Immorality of atheism, the (See ATHE-
poor the finde 0 ee! Pua PEER- 18M), 52
3 60 Imperfection of the righteous in ex-
Help, eahets cry for, : 108 treme suffering (See SUFFERING), . 362
is the unfailing source of help in aeons of the Psalmist, . 363
time of trouble, . 108 Sy aise us with the imperfection a
deliverance is implored from immi- the best men,
nent peril, 108 the gradualness of the education ae
the cry for help is emboldened by the mankind, a kl
recollection of past deliverances, . 108 the truth of the Sacred Scriptures, - 304
Help of God, Israel’s praise for the Implored, the Divine favour (See
promised (See HELP), . . 414 FAVOUR), : ° : 464
the afflictions of man and the, . : - 463 | Imp presstory Psalm, an, : . 162
Hoe need, special, ° . » 65 views of A. A. Bonar, Canon Perowne,
r,Godour,. . ye Berk! and Dr. D. Thomas on, . - 162
Hints vy a missionary sermon, . . 414 Psalm, an, . 362-364
History of human rapeconcen the views of Professors Alexander and
(See WICKEDNESS), : « 293 daateranh and Dr. Moll on, - 362-364
History of the Ancient Church, passages oressive beacon, an (See BEACON), 263
from the, with their lessons to the ndinpensable prayer for every one, an
Modern Church (See CHURCH), . 468 ee PRAYER), 6 ‘ ° . 255
History, scenes from a remarkable Tageaiiee spiritual, . : F - 435
(See SCENES), A é . A + 443 their nature, . S « ; Br 435
Hold of sin, the, . 200 their reasons, cC ; . 436
sin takes hold of man by its power, | 200 | Inheritance of t the ‘sainta, the, . . 62
an accusing co N08, b » 200 is Divine,. . i. 4 eo ney, G2
y its evil consequences, . ; . 200 secure, : ° . 5
Holy war, the (See WAR), . 5 ot6 joyful, - cs 62
Homily, a May, . ° e s ® 331 e ° ® > 63


IND&X.


—-


PAGE

Inheritance, the choices of our (See
CHOICE), 5 : ° : . 234
Inspecting man, God, . 5 ty)
Cod? ’s profound interest in ‘humanity, 267
His searching scrutiny of humanity, 268
the supreme concern of humanity, . 268

Instincts of the heart, the (See
HEART), ‘ - 133
Instruments and methods of the Divine
judgments (See JUDGMENTS), - 453
Intruders in sacred places, profane, . 462

in Christian churches, Ritualism,
Rationalism, selfish religionism, . 463

in human aes carnality, worldli-

ness, hatred, &e.

Israel, the Shepherd of (See SHEP-

HERD), e ) e e e e 466


JEALOUS for God (See Gop), ° 51
Jehovah, confidence in, the pledge of


victory (See CONFIDENCE), . - OF
Jehovah, the name of, S . . 94
a consolation i in trouble, ° - 94
an inspiring battle-c 5 - - 95
the strength of the Militant Church, 9
Sehosla het King of Judah, 232, 235-238
Jerusalem, . ° : ° ee
J onath- Elem-Rechokim, 5 ;
soya the Lord Christ, a
cause of the peace of His char-
acter, - 152
the splendour of His achievements, - 153
the blessedness of His rei ° - 153


‘ Joy of the heavenly King, the, .
arose from a consciousness of newly
achieved victory,
was accelerated by possessing an
affluence of Divine blessing, . 99
was intensified by the assurance of
the permanency of His government, 100
Joy, the Messiah’s roel and (See
MESSIAH), . : .
Joys of salvation, the, . - « 259
the joy of a sufiicient and final an-
swer to the self-upbraidings of a
guilty soul, . 259
ef a portion which satisfies the heart’s
largest conceptions and desires, . 260
of an answer to all the difficulties
and perplexities which beset the
spirit and the intellect in their


.


aes the key to all the mysteri-
ous ways of Providence in the
world,
of victory over death, A
of living union with God, with Christ,
with all living and blessed vate
eternally, :
Sourney, the life of man upon earth a, 480
Judah, the Seapeer of, . GES
Judgment, a scene of, . ° ° °
the Judge, ae


the de tn upon bee? judgment Oke


BB


« 245
the certainty of the jud ent, . .
the terrible pat a tuatvudes at at

Hisappearing, . . « . 246





PAGE
the to be . 246
the witnesses of the judgment, . 247


the righteousness of the judgment, . 247
Judgment, seed sin igdeDi Divine (Bee


IN)»

Judgment of God ‘zpon the wicked, the
effect upon the righteous of the
(See EFFECT), A

Judgments, the instruments and
methods of the Divine, and the
objects for which they are inflicted, 453

cratered as the eure of Hester ee
upright man pleading for C)
PLEADIN' .


Kine, the joy of the Heavenly (See


Joy), .- 99
aie triumphal entry ‘of the glo-


W7

will” S into a palace of enduring
splendour, . wy

the character of a mighty con-
queror, . « : . . 518

attended a brilliant phen of
celestial ore é - 158

the occasion of inexpressible joy to
ee aaa : : eon
aprayerfor, . I

the characte wean eee and need of
a true king, ° . 381
the duty of subjects, . 5 : 382
Saale ot God a comfort to His Do:
Knows ene he that, will confess ‘Him, 197
Korah, the sons of, : e + 205


Law and testimony of God, man’s re-
lation to the (See RELATION), - 438
Law of the lip, the (See Lip), . . 58
Law, the absolute perfection of the, . 91
its incomparable excellence as con-
sidered initself, . 91
in its relation to those who keep i it,
intellectually, emotionally,
ger ee it is year) exces
Law, the joy-giving power of the, “
in a complete moral life there are
reece in relation te the law


rebellion "against it,
submission to it,
joy init, .
Law, the the light; giving power ‘of the,
eral : Mii we law,
e subjects of its umination,
Law, the purifying power of the, .
how the law makes us
how this purity is the source
strength, joy and vision, c
Law, the soul-restoring power of the,
the attribute of the law, “ perfect,”
te ere of the law, “ converting the


Lending His inl, ot @ God, 6 437
the instruments ue they ee
the manner in they


eee S8SSSEEEE BE


&


INDEX. av





PaGE


Lehaskir,
Life, a glimpae of a triump hant, . ae


opel ho Lic haps. life, it
characterise in God,
and worship of “Gol, + « 27%
the con bata Ledsbie of the trium-
phant . 274
Life, a pliunnes of a troubl » + 270
the cause of, and the comfort in the
trouble, . 2 270
Life, crises Fin the spiritual, . 5 2 394
are sometimes occasioned by the
Providence of God, S ° o 394


are painful to the soul, .


are surmounted in communion with


God, 394
Life, links in the chain of (See LINKS), 14!
Life of confidence in God, a,

Life of man, the loving- kindness of
God better than the eee LOVING-
KINDNESS), . » 316

Life of man upo n earth ; a journey, the, 480

Life Suge pat aneodiy men a dream, the


( ° e
Life, the lemeaet 2 ta
its pocres, a right relation of the will,
6 affections, and the intelligence
to the law of God, . o 6
itssecurity, manifestation, perpetuity,
universality, A fy
Life, the chequered, 51


the vicissitudes of the outer life, of
the inner life, ° - 5S!
the aim of this discipline, « : on SE
characteristics


Life, the distinguishin:
‘of a wicked (See Wickxn), 3 . 169
Life, the hunted, and its Divine


: : ; . 29
the character and conduct of the -


persecutors, - 29

the prayer and confidence of the per- ;

= rhe igh wi 2 ~ ° 96
the Psalmist God as the

source of te t, . e ° e 80

joy, e e e ° a

e e e e I

Pleats BBR ltomer iss


the pacar which the Psalmist pro-


ses,
the. comprehensive answer which is 56
given, e e


Life a upon i ie - 452
the weakness, panera: im-
permanence, irretrievableness, and


grand distinction of human life 452
Ligne erring power of the moh the (See 3}
Light ¢ ai letiheGeeiLivn, * =o: Bo
Links in the es pemaae : ° 141

rosperity and presumption, . 141
presumption and Ciastiacuieat)


chastisement and prayer,. .
ey yer and deliverance, ‘ °
eliverance and praise, . e
Lip, the law of the, °
the nature of, the evil of, end be
eure for slander, . ;


e e e e e e e e e
=
as
=





Little of the righteous better than ee


much of the wicked, the, 0 - 175
because it is honestly gained, . =. 175
may pe racine retain: ined, e - 175
ma enjoye » 176
wil we potet eal eons f » 176
benevolently used, se sor x70
divinely blessed, ; : “ 176

Ttchnies of suffering, the (See Sur. -
@), I
Longing for the house of” God, the
e's, . . C 5 . .
ares from his love for the house of
was & longing for conscious ; fellowship
with God, i
eee the Leng, ‘of his entire being, . as 5
a lon, of great intensit °
led EME exter ithe§blersduces cf oi
those who were constantly engaged

sate God’s house, . ° 5 - 485

ous colons : . 210
aie ication and deliverance, . 210
for restoration to the tabernacle of

God, . 218

Lord, a song to the (See Sona), ; a


Lord Christ, joy in the (See souls :
Lord, re Church and her (See CHURCH), S Pe
ae the goodness of the (See Goop- vf
Ess), ies Sel
Lot of the wicked, the barren, ‘ - 346
seen in relation to the ordinary events


of this life, 5 - 346
the great fied of the soul, . 346
the great future, ay ed » 347
Love of God’s house, . . ° . 128
Love, true, ® o ° ° ° e 7O
the right object, e e e « 7o
and inspl ti ° ° ° . Jt
an iration ° 5 og TA
Lovi igkindaees of a better than the
ue a Seep ° : 316
31
th lr mt ane of God is better
ife even atits best, . . 387
MAGISTRACY, 477
magistrates fal ype are set before
us as occupying a distinguished
position, : 2 - ‘ - 477
observed by God, » 477
called to the highest duties, - 478
exhibiting the worst st perversity, - 478
tending to s great Tepe - 478
leading man ta cry for the inangura-
tion of the direct se eonge tay
e s e e ° 479
Mahala : c - 867
Majorities, minorities and, - Io
majority without God, ite great-
ness and bitterness, ; 10


the minority with God, his conscious-

ness of safety, refuge in prayer,

sublime peacefulness, assurance of

spa and generous temper, - &
gudlate irene the godly (See

ai toawicres . 283

Man palsek re to God (See APPEALING), 13


Man a walking shadow (Bee SHADOW), 188
Man re the thunderstorm, the true
attitude of (See THUNDERSTORM), 136
Man pleading for justice in the court of
eaven, the upright (See see
ING), .
Man’s life upon earth (See LiFE), iia
Man s g to his soul (See SPEAK.
ING), « 208
Man submitting, God afflicting and. 19
Man, the Divine way for (See Wav), 2 505
Man, the Ad ho ofa godly, . . 339
the godly man is anxious to impart
his experience to others, : - 339
his exper: includes both penitence
and praise, e ° ° e e 339
his logic, . - 340
his experience always culminates in
a song of praise . 340
Man, the solicitude of God for the
well-being of (See SOLICITUDE), . 473
Man under Divine chastisement (See
CHASTISEMENT), . « 450
Manifestations of Divine power, . » 328
their sphere, in nature, in human
rociety, . ° ° ; . . 328
their significan « 329
their eauences "they inspire awe,
confidence, and joy, ; °
ie of the good, the victorious, © 343
opposed by enemies, . e - 344
yas ed by trials, . ° e © 344
led on victoriously, . 4 ° 344
led on to a glorious termination, « 345
May Homily, a, . : . : 3 Set


Meditation aid praise, » 299
the subject and influence of the
Psalmist’s meditation, . : . 299


Meek, God the Saviour of the, . . 425
the "character, eril, and Deliverer of


the people o: God, or) oye 425
Memory pene 433 436
Men of t the world, one 6 68

their portion, . ° ° ° - 68
their prosperity, - 68


the disadvantages of their lot, the
hand of God is against them, they
have a profound discontent, they
soon part with their inheritance
for ever, 68
Men of the ‘world who have their por-


tion in this life, . + 243
must resign it atdeath, . 243
when they depart hence are gathered

to their moral ancestors, _ - 244
degrade their being, . . een 244

Men, the destinies of, . . ‘ IG
are various, meas
are decided by their moral character

and conduct, 5
are as widely ‘contrasted as their

character, 3

Mercies of God an encouragement to
seek Him, the former (See
“ see at + 503
ercy, goodness an istinguished, - 500
Morey’ justly dit seated het sorrow and :
e ° . e (52


IN DEX.





PAGa

M the exercise of the Divine, . 451
ia holding back deserved punish-

ment, ° . 451

in forgiving great iniquities, ° 451


in compassionating human ties, 452
Messiah as a majestic conqueror, the, . 222

the enterprise which He has under-
taken, . 222

the manner in which He 008 "forth
to this enterprise, . 222

the reasons for which He coos * forth
to this enterprise, . 223

the success which He achieves in this
ente rise, + 223
Messiah-King, the praise of the « . . 220
the reasons why He is praised, + 220
the manner in which He is praised, . 221
the excellence of this praise, . 5 EER
Messiah’s reign and joy, the : . 223


His reign, its righteousness and per-
era . ° ° . . o 2230


His jo PEE Po ere) 5 CEN
Messiah. the ‘glorious reign of the (See
REIGN), . 2) us Gr - 383
Michtam, . . 281
Minorities and mjorities " (Bee Ma-
JORITIES),


Missionary prayer - of the Church, the
(See PRAYER), : °

Missionary sermon, hints for avec

Mistake of some men, a great necessity


+ 340
- 414


of all men, and a great, : - 396
Mistaken verdicts, e etl
the verdict of sense, popular, lan-
hee confident, . é he ahi
the ju ent of faith, 12
Mode ee evout praise, a (See PRAISE), 419
Model prayer, a (See YER), . 462
Moral courage (See COURAGE), . 44
Moral cowardice and be causes (Bee
(COWARDICE), e ° » 442
Morality, evangelical, . 5 5 » 57
its comprehensiveness, ° e - 57
loftiness, ° e e e e e 57
inspiration, 2. ae See eee
recompense, 5 . 58


Maralityc of prayer, the (See PRAYER), 84
Morning prayer (See PRAYER),


Motive to prayer, the Providence af
Geode, 4 5 . e + 290
Multehriess: c Te
sinreriatel the Divine plan, irate . 151
debases the powers of the soul, . 15%


imperils the highest interests of being, 151

NAME OF JEHOVAH, the (See JEHOVAH) 94

Nations, the Divine government in its
relation to the (See GOVERNMENT), 35


Nature and the superna . 74
nature as obedient to supernatural
power, + 74


the executant of a supernatural will, 74


ministering to supernaturai purpose,
Nature, God in (See Gop), . f z ia
Nature God’s Lacie (See TEMPLE), . 138
Nature in the light of Christianity,
human (See CHRISTIANITY). . $f
Nature of sin, the self-punishing, . @





INDEX. xvii

PAE PAGE

all sin is the axing of apit, . . 87 bond of unity, on et) OO

all sin sinks into the pit which i uncompromising loyalty, 3S

digs, cues 28 grand inheritance, . . .» . 62

Nature, the dignity of human, e « gt | Penitent’s Psalm, they eu etal 60253
the apparent haber 5 : . ‘3t the penitent’ 8 confession, recognises
the essential grea . 38 the evil of sin, recognises the sin as


the arene: of iy nae of human


a GE
Natural, theology (See THEOLOGY), ; $6
Nearness to His lage God’s, a reason
for praising : . ee
there are times =e God apeci:
manifests Himself to His penis,» Laie
oe penises as
e praise people, .  . 417
Necessity of all men, @ great, and a
mistake of some men, » °
Need and God’s thought, man’s, . —_—._-200


= acknowledgment of human need, 200 |


expression of confidence in God, 201


a help, special, time of (See PRAYER) 2

es e * 5,

2 5 pcleped e e ) e a Pe

ao the first Sabbath inthe . 333
mark that goodness which has crowned

the year, as to our was ° + 332

our ee A . . e 332

our personal e erience, ° » e 333

the aiversal Cia: Sete a 8333

ay of repentance, on sos.) es 82

its dar kness, e ® ° s e 22

duration, . on as e ‘ » 22

spectres, . . ° e ® » 23

° . * ° ry e 33

e s e . eo 23

Not guilty (See GUILTY), . : . 24

OBEDIENCE AND SACEIFICE, +» 195


Object, season, and hope of prayer, the
(See PRAYER),
Offering to his Lord, the servant's (Bee
SERVANT)
Old the ge blessedness ot
the Christian 8 (See Seopa 379
Old man’s retrospect, an (See RETRO-
SPECT), . eieunieg) sp * 379
Atha and, pais, fe . 28
+ 323


36
103


Oppressed, "Protector fae
nore ofthe, .

Overthrow of the enemies of Christ, the
utter (See ENEMIES), . . °


PAINFUL EXPERIENCE, a (See EXPERI-

pd robin el edge ye ee
a es on dangerous, . -
our need of ihe Divine succour, be-

ents of steep paths, rough paths,

aths, pear re paths, . .

ciency 0 Divine succour,

Paces with man’s provocation


IDAi,
of God and God’s plpre Provooa-
TION), .  .


Peace by T, « . ° ° %
Peerage of heaven, the, fi +) 60
their patent of nobility, . . - 6
eath , °° ) e ® 8 6a


his own, roancas sin as hostile to


the penitent’s prayer, for forgiveness
of his sins, for cleansing and re-
newal of his spirit, for restoration
of the joy of salvation, for preser-
vation trom sin and ruin,

the penitent’s resolution, to seek the
conversion of sinners, to worship


ape and His, .
eople are the “objects of His
ote erly regard, .
the subjects of His hol discipline, 5
the pres of His re goon (So
People, good things fie g (See
GooD), ._. °
Perdition, dreadful,
the good man is chiefly “concerned
about his soul,
knows that the destiny of the soul is
eh atdeath, .
reeoils with horror from being asso-
ciated in destiny with the wicked,
Perfection, human, .
its nature, salvation from troubles,
victory over enemies, posseasion of
promised privileges, 5
its attainment, promised by God, pro-
moted by prayer, guaranteed by
past triumphs and present posses-
sions, demanding strenuous effort,
ascribed to
irae of the okt the absolute (See
AY) ais
Peril and prayer “of the Church, the
(See CHURCH), :
Peril, a safe capes in sore Geo Ru


FUGE), . ° .
Perplexity, soul, .
the pro lem, ss ny standest Thou
afar off, O Lord t .
the solution, has re to our per-
sonal discipline, the salvation of


the wicked, the glo of God, 0
Persecution, prayer "50 PRAYER),
roucnsl realisation of general truths,

the, .

the Psalmist his raonal
fault and ee ie
appeals to God as ; his personal Helper,
vows his personal consecration,
Picture, a glorious, . °


the subject, ° ° . ° °
the position, ., ° .
the effect upon the beholders, : ;
Piety, decided, . e °
its properties and advantages, seer cs
Piety, throe fel bay of, ars
pie on the Land, mes
rejoicing in in God, Be ty) gc


. 128
128
302


+ 303


» 303





vial INDEX.
PAGE PAee
of the wicked, the . . 480 | Praise, exeroplary, +O =o) cere, SOR
is characterised by Lah Morro » » 480 in its theme, ~ . <.) teen 20K
ant : ; : : . . 480 in the spirit of its offere, F ° » 291
: ; . ne > 480, in its enthusiasm, cents » 293
GA oO z 6 . » 480 in its sphere, ° * + 29%
ruinousness, ° . 430 in the sense of its impe . 292
omar the hidden ways of God made Praise for the maiectbads help of God,
(See WAYS), . 12% Israel's, . ° » 4h4
Pleading for justice in the court of heroic anticipation of victory, oo 434
heaven, the upright man, . 124 firm ground of confidence, - - 4!
David's appeal was made to the right devout utterance of praise, . ° 41
judge, . : . 124 God, exhortation to, becamse of
presented in a pro rs pirit, a oo LEE His pS Sees of the world, . 232
ported by ee evidence, . . 126 reasons bee ne should praise God,
ran by strong and impassioned. because of His majesty and power,


ts,
ara ieee with the expression of un-


hits preter pid . 127
tinge of ‘te wicked against the

e e e ° o 174

ae ae ry ° e ® e 174
q@uel, - ° F . e 2 174
determined, . . ‘ ‘ © 175
cowardly, ® r ® ® o L758
self- deateeive . 175


Portion in this life, men of the world

who have their (See MEN), .
Position, the Many and future pros-
pects of the wicked az seen by the

spiritually enlightened man, . - 398

thei pid setae position is perilous,

ture brogpecss are Se de-
wractin com ete, sudden, effected
manifest the un-

realty of t Aen ormer ke

Power an et a manifeste


tuary,
Power, nanitestations “of Divine (See
MANIFESTATIONS), Oo 8 ghee
Power of God, tue, o 312
men do not rally believe ay
helps to faith in in God" ’g sel
Power of God, the Gospel th
GOSPEL),
Power of the law, the ‘Joy-giving a


Law),
Power of the law, the light-giving (Bee
WwW e e . s e °
Power of the law, the purifying (See


LAW
Power of the law, the soul-restoring
(See LAW), . 5 ° °
Power, peace by, .
Practical atheism (See ATHEISM),
ise, . ® ° e e
the minstrel, : 4 5 3
the


harp,
the song, ” ita " theme, joyfainess,
object, and occasion, . 34


398
- 315


rity,
6 sanc


Praise, a model of devout, . » 419
the praise resolved upon loses. sight
of self in devout admiration of the
character and doings of God, - 419
evinces its reality by ge fa to
imitate Him, . é » 420
Praise, a song oi, . 157
for what God is in . 157
what He does for His people, . 158


the universality ef His rule, under
es St nite the porte of ae
oyal subjects are y secur
the holiness of P the ee government,
the success of His governmen - 232,
giececrs pore should beep
enthusiastically, intelligently, o 233
Praise, meditation and, é « 299
Praise of the Messiah- King, the (See


MESSIAH),
Praising God for His great kindness in


affliction, . 35
& great affliction, variously repre-

sented, A esac by + 335
great kindness in iction, in


preserving the rated. in the de-
sign and eatte Hy the Apeiaire ty « 336
praise for great kindness in great
affliction - 337
Praising God for His mighty ‘works, - 334
the reason of this praise, the nature,
constancy, and influence of His
works, and the necessity of observ-
ing them, - 34
the centhusam of this raise, it is
offered heartily, jo Y, openly, . 33
the universality of this praise, . : ae
g Him, God’s nearness to His
people a reason for (See NEAR=


NESS), . ° ° . - $16
Prayer, a model, o) Selene
the Person addressed, es) tend OD)
the prayer a diy A Oo atk!
the plea urged, c : - 463
Prayer a preparation for conflict,. . 95
prayer should have reference to future
emergencies, 9§


invokes the invincible protection of
Jehovah, . 2 96
should be accompanied with nacrifice, 96
is urgent to secure apeces answer
to its petitions,
is founds wherever the presence of
Jehovah is manifested, . . 97
Prayer, an earnest appeal and, “ . any
in the appeal they assert that they
have neither broken God’s cove-
nant, nor lapsed into peels]
backslidden from God, the
to His omniscience in prot of eal
they also assert tha were
matdertiy severely because “at their
ent to ies « B89


UNDE,





PAGE
im the prayer we have, believing ex-
postulatlons, urgent entreaties, and
effective pleas, i . 218
Prayer, and encouragement, nant
(See COMPLAINT), .
Prayer and prediction of the good man
concerning his wicked enemies, the, 32%
prayer for preservation from wicked
enemies, the description of the
enemies, the prayer of the Psalmis
prediction of the destruction of wicke
enemies, the author, instrumenta,
manner and effect of their destruc-


tion, es
Prayer aa vow, David's, es
Prayer, David’s, . °
Prayer for a time of need, .
characterised by deep "humility are
earnestness, . 133
Christ-like trast in God’s word, » 132
grateful recognition of God’s favour, 132
steadfast reliance upon God’s faith-
fulness amidst the failure of earthly
comforts,
ical submission to God’s will as
the truest safety, .
seecurs ing self-admonition to hope
forever, .
Prayer for every one, an indispensable, 4 : ;
255


321


3


» 132
» 133


**Cleanse me from my sin,
the need you have to offer this prayer, 255
the requisites adath must poasess to
present it successfull ° 6
Prayer for kings, a (See 2 98%
Prayer in persecution, . » 367
the circumstances and condition of
the suppliant, persecution, afflic-
tion, need, + 367
the prayer of the suppliant, the Being
to whom it is addressed, the objecta
which it seeks to attain, the ur-


G8), »


gency with which it is  Hiceds ied 367
Prayer in trouble, : 429
something common to all men, + 429
@ commendable example for men, 429
a Divine Anditor of allmen, . + 429
a great mistake of some men, . . 429
an experience which may happen to
all men, . » 430
Prayer, ieeatakle topics for, . 119
ee be addressed to Je-
. 119
ghovis be offered that our enemies
have no ground to taunt us
the failure of our trust in God, 119
Sala be offered for Divine guid-
ance, ° . . * ® eo 120
for Divine mercy, ° a . 120
Prayer, morning, . . ® . yy
true prayer is personal, ° . 17
profound and aaa ee eae
resolute, ° Fy ® eo &-
obedient, . ° ° ° ° : =
expectant, . e 5 OT
Prayer of the Church, the missionary, 340
the great aeons of this prayer, that
God may be known and worshipped
by all men, . nie = . 340








six
PAGE
the means by which the attainment
of this object is sought,. . - 341
the confidence in vie this ar
is offered, . + 341
Prayer, the exile’ 8, A - 488
the address which ia presented, ‘ 438
the object which ia Sought. ° - 488
the pleas which are arged, 488
the sublime conclusion of the whole, 489
Prayer, the morality of, ( 84
PAE must be offered in « ® right
e ° ° ° &4
ina a right 8} pirit, 4 : Senos
ata right tine ° 6 85
abaely e object, season, and hope of, 361
the object must be infinite in intelli-
gence, approachable, entreatable, . 36%


the season, when we suffer wrong-
fully, when our need is great and
greatly felt, when our desire for
iritual blessings is intense, while
e overtures of divine grace are
made tous, . 361
the great encouragements, the abound-
ing mercy and saving truth of God, 362
Prayer, the GN easy of God a motive
to, » 390
Prayer the resource of the godly in
iction, 142
springs from trust in God, as the
epee Father, the everlasting
. 142
flan the est blessings, . qo 1S
wear tasagee we the noblest emo-
143
followed by the grandest deliverance, 143
Prayer, the return of (See RETURN), . 168
Prayer to his Lord, the servant’s (See


SERVANT), . : . 198
Prayer, trust and (See Trust), : « 370
Prayer, ney in peek URGENCY), . 368
Preacher of wisdom, th + 239

addresses himself to all peoples . 239
fe all classes, . . 239
Pre caer his subject, . . 240
with difficult questions, . . 240

A with them poetically, musically, 240
Precept and promise, . cee amen 25K
the duty enjoined, . 281
the promise with which it is enforced, 282


Prediction of the good man concernin
his wicked enemies, the prayer cad
(See PRAYER), maar
Presence, the withdrawal of the Divine, 454
is invariably preceded by pany and


aggravated sins, . 4
is invariably succeeded by many and Hs
terrible ities, » 456
Present, , past, and future, the good
man’s, . ” 402
Presumptuous sins (Bee SIN8), A 93
Privilege, and ape te a great fact, . » 326
ine es of thateodi e character
(Bee eee « 323
Protasie intruders in sacred places (Bee
INTRUDERS), . °


Profundis, de (See Dr), 73
Programme of evil, the (See Evi), . 3


>





om 6
advancing In conformity with His


Ww : - 486
makin unfavourable circumstances
con ve to its own ends, : . 487
steadily advancing, . : is
gloriously terminating,
Promise, precept and ( 30 PRECEPT mest
Proprietorship of the world, fa Di
(See WORLD), : S . 14
Prospect, a glorio 354


of a time when Mhet Divine triumphs
will be She ia i ed one witnessed, ; 354
ously cele y pie, : 355
de en beattion nations preieeiee
themselves unto Him, . : its
when He shall be universally praised, 356
Prospect, a ieee fact, privilege, and, . 326
Prosperity of the wicked, the temporal, 393
is sometimes clearly manifest,. . 392
sometimes continued even to the very
end of life, . « 392
has an injurious effect tpon ca
SD great aginl to the people af God
& great to ple o re 393
Ereeberry of the etcked waworthy
of the good, the rabhiet feng
there is = arently much in the pro-
rivet the vinpaney to excite the
soy of the e Boos é - 17
it ry foolish to envy rosperity of
the wicked, because it is only of
temporary duration, : » 192
ft is sinful, because tt is contrary to
the command of God, 6 . 1972
ft is injurious, because it awakens
cine lower sentiments of the soul, . 172
"al sumptuous, because it is re-
on against the providence of


5g the
Prepay of Zion | sough the, bi
the importance of the o ject sought, 262
the eroungs of encouragement in seek-


it, 262
the manner in which we should seek
ys ° - . . - S65
ae ence of God a motive to prayer,
Prevceacon of God, and God’s patience
with man, man’s, . 9
man’s provocation of God, ‘by pe ersist-
ae in evil, and oh cepents


.19t


God’ a atin with man, manifested
is judgments upon Israel, His
mercies to them, and His remem-
brance of them, . + 449
Psalm, an imprecatory (Bee [MPREOA-
Poains oe Hiatus (Gos Lavei Oh eae a
0 @ '
Psalm, the Penitent’s (See brine) 25
Public worship more acceptable to God
than private ppl wein
adduce some facts in the Divine ad-
ministration indicative of God's


higher estimate of publie worship, 508


Fach
state some reasons why, in the nature
of the case, God should prefer

public to Bibi ats worship, . + 509

» 10K


Panishuant sin, the regina and
(See SIN), . 5 “5
Ree ieee by His people, God (See
Ran leness of worship, the (See
WORSHIP), . 5 ° : - 154
Reasons, ultimate, : ° 77
why God delivers and honours ‘men?


< 7 Becanae He delighted in a 7
gare lessons pee by this


; ° . 78
Heeolicclens 5 “4 - 491
of national de tei : F e 491


of the removal of the D Divine anger, . 491
of the bestowal of forgiveness, . + 491
Recollection, Ajeet and de ‘

tion, : - 436

recollection: memory regarded as &
source of pale & source of pleasure,
and an ai


to faith. ° ° 436
reflection, ‘‘I will meditate,” - 437
declaration, would be intelligent, and
trust-inspiring, 437


Reocilections. of God ‘painful to the |
gene oy bering God,
what we mean by remem 5 55
wit, the recollection of such sae
ould ever be painful, . . 43°
Recollections, the precious, present
trials, and ee resource of an
ed saint, 371
recollections, of a life of trust in God,
of a life sustained by God, . . 37!
trials, arose from his serps he sets


before us their Pht! and
method,
resource, confidence in and prayer to
2
Recovery from sickness, thoughta on ae
(See SICKNESS), . 4 ° - 139
Redemption, : . ° 243
the subject of, “‘the soul,” oe 843
the price of, ‘the Lgiosen nd of
bie peal i, in time only, sage
e period o} e 0 y © -e 243
Refuge, God a, ‘eer ats
Refuge in sore se peril, a zafe, ° - 287


the extreme perils in a good man’s
life, arose from thebitterreproachea,
the fierce cruelty, and the subtle
schemes of his enemies, . 287
the secure refuge from the perils of a
man’s life, mpd ground,


e expression, and tness

of his t i in e irr e
Refuge, thesaint’s,) . . . « 130
earnest 800 ght, . * e  e 130
graciously enjoy: e e 131
y enjoyed : e 131
Repeats ° e ° ‘ » 510
its ts importancs, e e e r e 510
Holsing tr . ° e r r) o §EE
reality, 8 a ® ® o $n

iced »— ee e@ @ e eo §s8 .





IND}
ora PAGE
means, . 546 6 RAE
its counterfeits, . Oy) ee etek SIT
its evidences, . » SII


Reign and joy, the Messiah’s (See
MESSIAH), + 22

Reign of Christ, the (See CHRIST), 3

Reign of God, the diverse destinies of
ne manifesting the (See DESTI-


NIKS), + + 207
Reign of the Messiah, the glorious, + 383
the blessings of His re the a
nistration of justice, ny e enjo ent
of peace, the progress of religion,
beneficent government, abundant
prosperity,
the universality of His reign, over ail oe
classes and in all laces, 6
the gd es tuity of Hig reign, aran-
y the declaration of God’s
Word, and the character of His :
sovereignty, .
the praise of His rei expressed by “ifs
rendering to Him homage, service,
tribute, and blessing, . > - 385
Rejoicing exile, the, . . 284
he rejoices in the minuteness of the
Divine knowledge and the tender-
ness of the Divine regard, . 284
in His assurance of deliverance from
his enemies, notice, the condition,
oromptitude, and assurance of de-
iverance,
in his triumphant confidence in God,
in his delightful obligations to God,
notice ha nature and reason of


285
285


these . 285
Relation of God to the saints, the (See

SAINTS), 19
Relation of God to “the wicked, the (Bee

WICKED), 2 18
Relation to our ancestors and j muccessors,


our, - 441
our great obligations to our ancestors, 441
our t duty to our successors, » 441
Relation to the law and testimony of
God, man’s, .
man has received @ knowledge of the
will and works of God, .
should impart a knowledge of the
will and works of God to others, . 439
should do this with a noble aim, that
the poe ce might be continued
to the race, that the coming genera-
tions might avoid the errors and
sins of their ancestors, might be
apie and religious, . 5 - 440
Religion, the revival ig - - 494
gel on, three views of, 159
t it is, personal faith in God, de-
ei otoiiees to God, communion ‘with


God,
what it does, establishes right rela-
tions between the soul and God,
effects a moral transformation of
character, Sore the eo bles-
sedness of be 1%
what it asserred earnest 8


sonal trial, hearty ae ry, Bo 159


- 428


> 45)


159


xxi


bere
Religious worship (See WORSHIP), 227, 47
Repentance, the night of (See NIGHT),


Religious progress (See PROGRESS),


Resolution, a commendable, 0 5 134
a great danger of sinful speech, - 184
@ wise precaution, to guard against
this danger, 185
Resource and comfort in trouble (See
TROUBLE), . : ; . 249
Results (See DustINtE), 5 : c
Retribution, . , 2
the pit of human misery and ruin is
digged by man, not by God, - 33


sin may be cleverly devised and exe-
cuted, but its frustration is cer-
tain, : 39
ae feel ra remain unpunished, but


Remrene hment; is certain, 55 - 39
al aenee mare of sin is over-


byes Ne . ° ® ° 39
Retrospect, an old man’s ' ° » 379
the Psalmist’s scholarship, 4 - 379
occupation, one . e  « 379
prayer, ° 0 ° 2 ° « 379
wis . ® ° e ° 379
Return of prayer, the, eS oe ere LOS
prayer may return unheard, , . 168
unanswered, . . 0 168
bringing benedictions, c F . 168
Revelation of the character of God, a
welcome (See CHARACTER), . . 170
Revelation, the characteristics of a’
Divine, C


. 48

the ad characteristic, purity, 48

the Beriptutes which profess to to be the
words of the Lord have been tested,
and their divinity established ;
tested by Fe pers and


experience, . 48
the consequent preciousness of the
Sacred Scriptures, . : ° - 49
Revival of religion the, . h » 494
Riches, the fo of trusting in, . . 266
Righteous and his little better than the
wicked with his much, the (See
LITTLE), : 6 . ° . 175
Ri pitecous fee a oes el 77;
e land he inherits, . ° ° . 177
the wisdom he oe e ° . 177
the law he keeps, . s ° - 177
the safety he enjoys, 5 F ~ oh
the condemnation he escapea, . - 178
the exaltation he expects, ° . 178
Rock, the sheltering, . - 306
Royal banquet, a (See BANQUET), . 113
SABBATH-SCHOOL anniversary, fora, . 44%
Sacrifices, material and spiritual, . + 247
Sad scenes and painful experiences, . 276
sore evils in the city, the evils were
manifold in form, universal in
extent, continuous in their ac-
eis and painful in their re-
ts,
base treachery in friendship, friend-
ms Lletey violated, injured and 76
° 2
oes prayer "in suffering, - e S77





PAGE
bere pies the precious recolles-
ons, present trials, and glorious
resource of (See RECOLLECTIONS),
Saint and his God, the aged, ;
Saint’s refuge, the (See REFUGE), » 130
Saints, the extremity and asylum of the, 24
Saints, the extremities of the, : > 37
the depth of their distress, 6 : 37
the fulness of their deliverance, rah
the expression of their gratitude, . 38
Saints, the inheritance of the (See


371


INHERITANCE), .
Saints, the relation of God to the, . 9
He is their Eee se 5 » 19
at: 7 6 c ° e 19
° ° e 2 {9

Baint nite triumphant faith of an aged
(See FAITH), . : f . 376


Salvation, Divine, :
the Psalmiat’s confession, °
his resolution, . cj °

Balvation, God our, . .
in relation to life's burdens,


o eo ° e s e es e e
(ae)
ur
[>]


Salvation, Tamthy, . . 164
salvation is from 164
implies death to evil and life to 164
aaa Abella gratitude an .

. 165


Ralvation in God’s ; smile, : 9 . 467
salvation consists in the life and
growth of the soul under the favour
of God, - 467
Salvation of the Church, and the de-
struction of her enemies, the (See
DESTRUCTION), + .
Salvation, the great, . °
eat danger, . s °
a Divine deliverer, . °
a complete redemption,
Salvation, the joys of (See Joys),
Sanctified trial (See TRIAL), . ;
Satisfaction of the godly soul, the,
is found in the provisions of God,
which are spiritual, rich, abundant, 317
in meditation on God: notice, the
nature, subject, and season of this
exercise, oi eegt
in the protection of God, . : oe
in the sustentation of God,
in the celebration of the praise of God, 318
Gatisfaction, . 69
the nature of true, itis spiritual, com:


gasssad


plete, full, everlasting, 69
the source of true, the vision of God,
the likeness of God, . 69


Scene of judgment, a (See J UDGMENT), 245
Scenes from a remarkable history, » 443
# people divinely emancipated,» . 443


divinely led, . ; 5 + 444
aianely provisioned, c « 444
basely perverse and wicked, - » 445
Becret faults (See FAULTS),. . 92

eek Him, the former mercies of God
2n encouragement to, » 50%

® grateful recollection of f former mer-
cies, ° e e ® ® « 903


- 373


en


PAGE
an earnest are for deliverance from
resent dangers, . 2 504
a devout resolution to serve God, by
obedience and worship, .


‘Seek Him, the goodness of God an en-


couragement to, . + 499
the petitions of the suppliant, for

audience, protection, mercy, joy, » 499
the pleas of, his necessity, consecra-


tion, confidence, importunity, » 499
the encouragement of, the goodness
and mercy of God,. 5 6 » 500
Seek Him, the el ess of God an
ach ei cape ae 500
the suprema f God, in Bimeels
and in His pas 501


the effects of that supremacy, all


nations shall worship Him, the
troubled soul shall trust Him, . 501,
Seeking God, 315
how,


where when, and why we
should seek God, 315
Sennacherib, King a Assyria, 228-231,


421-424


Sermon, an Adullam, . ‘ : - 160
the congregation, . e ts HES
the preacher, . : . ° - 160
the sermon, ° . 160

Servant, the Lord’s doing for His, - 192


a sad situation, Speer distress,


helplessness, . . 192
a great salvation, Was granted. in
answer to prayer, eitpiate, joy-
inspiring, influential, . ° - 192
a hearty celebration, 5 - 193
Servant’s offering to his Lord, the » 195


obedience to he will not offer
sacrifices instead of obedience, he
will render the obedience which
God requires, he will render it
eo God had disposed him to

0 so

publication of the perfections of God,
what he announces, where he makes
the announcement, . 196

Servant’s prayer to his Lord, the, » 198

the most assured confidence in God
is not regarded by His servant as a
substitute for prayer, . - 198

& eee phe, of God may fall into

I

if ke do a avthe penalt of his sin will
surely come upon

a servant of God suffering the penalty
of his sin may seek deliverance
from God,

in his prayer the servant of God has
reference not to himself rie but
to others also, 199

the servant of God in his deepest dis-
tress confides in the Lord

Service, the formal and the spiritual in

Divine, .

the worthlessness of merely formal
and material sacrifices in the Divine
service, because of the infinite re-
sources, and the spirituality of
God, + 247


195


199


+ 247





PAGH
the worth of spiritual sacrifices in the


vine service, they are enjoined
by God, they secure His blessing,
and are a means by which we


ied petal Him, . lis .


ow, man & walking, 5 ° °
life a journey, . ° ‘
@ journey prosecuted. falsely, . .

Sheltering rock, the, ry .
Shepherd : and his flock, the Divine, 5
the Divine Shepherd supplies every
want, .,
affords tranquillising rest to the
weary,
prepares the soul for the loftiest
service, .
provides rotection and consolation
in the darkest peril, . . °
Shepherd of Israel, the . °


the relation which He sustains, c
the service which He renders, and, -
eas ne ener of Himself to His


ee Ra desire of tis people from
Him,


Shield, God"
indicates
help,
“re many-sidedness of His protecting
ove, .
the invincibility of His stren h,
Shield, the Lord God a sun and, .
the figures, °
the facts, . *
the persons, °
Shoshannim, )
Shushan-edut®, ,
Sickness, thoughts on recovery from,
God’s hand in sending sickness,
His mercy in alleviating it, .
gee lovingkindness in restoring oe


. °


a availsbleness of His


.
e s
s s
2 °


t,
Silence in trouble (Bee TROUBLE),
Sin and Divine judgment, human, .
human sin, the nature and aggrava-
tion of the sin of the Israelites, .
Hedda judgment, against Israel re-
Blaciail's observation of man’s
es God as affected by man’s life,
Hee aa growing out of man’s
ee ent brought about by
orces of nature, 5 .
Sin, sorrow for (See SORROW), . :
Sin, the chief evil of (See Evi), . :
ay the exposure and punishment of, .
e exposure of sin is inevitable,
will extend to the inmost feelings of
the heart, 0
its punishment will be terrible and
complete, .
Sin, the old of (See. Hor), A
Sin, the self- ee nature of (See
bd N eolars . :
ins, besetting,
we are all the subjects ‘of special
weaknesses and temptations, :
observations touching me particular
elass ef sina, .





INDEX, xxiii
Paak
Sins, presumptuous, , ® © « 93
wit they are, , : 5 ° + 93
out of what they arise, » 93
the tyranny which the exercise, - 94
248 the absolute sin in which ney, cul-
188 minate, . 6 ' - 94
188 | Sincerity not enough, . : 6 » 129
188 | Situation, hope in the saddest (See
306 OPE) Pek 78s eve) hs euro 104
111 | Slander, : A A . ‘ “58
the nature of, . = 5 0 . 58
. INI the evil of, 5 5 A eo se
the cure for, . ° 58
11 | Slander, “ . 18s, 203, 206, 358
Seales lines in in God’s (See SALVA-
112 ON), - 467
Solicitude of God, the, for the well-being
112 of man, . ‘ C . . - 473
466 is very deep, . »- 474
466 se respect to his various needs, - 474
466 recognise the great conditions of his
being, receiving communica-
» 466 _tions from and rendering obedience
to God, » 475
466 is exercised in harmony with man’s
83 moral freedom, 475
Bong of Deliverance) a "(See DELIVER-
82 ANCE), . 4 ; 5 . . 10g
Song of loves, a, . . 220
83 | Song of praise, a (See Pratsz), ° ml5 7
83 | Song tothe Lord,a, . . : + 140
489 the singers, His saints, ° » 140
489 the song, its theme, apirit, and occa-
489 sion, - 148
490 | Sorrow and mercy ‘justh distributed, . 152
220 the sorrows of the wicked, many, self-
300 caused, inevitable, . 5 . 1§3
139 the mercy promised to the ri hteous,
139 mark their character and ‘laced?
139 ness, 5 5 ot . « 152
Sorrow forsin, . 6 5
139 the necessity for such sorrow, ° . 2i
| 132 mistakes concerning it, . ° qa et
446 the efficacy of it, 0 ; . - 23
Sorrowful complaint, a, an earnest
446 Pe yer, and a devout peeoletion (See
OMPLAINT),. . » 459
Sry Se godly, under a sense "of absence
om
sp peated of @ godly soul, its cause,
vation, and continuousness, . 206
447 tha esire of a godly soul, its object
21 and intensity,
256 the here of a godl "soul, whom he
101 hoped in, what he 1 fc for, where-
. Tor on he grounded his . 207
Boul, a godly, the deep oped and
102 atrong consolation of, . 208
his depression, the greatness of his
102 troubles, their causes, their relation
200 God, . : : - . . 208
his consolation, in the remembrance
27 of God, in the assurance of His con-
79 stant mercy, in access to Him in
prayer, in anticipation of deliver-
79 ance from trouble, . 2 A . 209
Soul eclipses (See ECLIPsES), . . Ps
80 | Boul, man speaking tohia, - °





PAGE
eelf-remonstramc®, . «2 » « 208
self-exhortation, ° ° . . 208
self-encouragement, , -. ’ . 208
Soul perplexity (See PERPLEXITY), . 39
Soul, the anticipation of the godly (See
ANTICIPATION), . a : :
Soul, the attitude of a victorious (See
gctasney . . . : .
Soul, the declaration of a grateful
(See DECLARATION), . ; 5
Soul, the satisfaction of the godly (See
SATISFACTION), . 5 5 r
Soul, the thirst of the godly (See
THIRST), : “4 5 : . 314
Sovereiguty of God, illustrations of the, 457
God arousing Himself to interpose in
human affaire, : 5 = . 457
rejecting men from the possession of
puvless, A : : ° - 457
selecting men to the possession of
ae ie and the performance of
uties, . . . é : :
establishing a beneficent institution,
conferring benefits on men, °
Sovereignty of God, the,
loyally acknowledged,
of ancient date, . “
beneficent in operons
a plea for His help, .
Speaker, the listener, the peace, the,
the listener, 5 e .
the speaker, ° .
the message, . °
the confidence, . °
the issue, . é 2 < 5
Speaking to his soul, man (See Sout), .
Speech in trouble (See TROUBLE), :
Spiritual infirmities (See INFIRMITIES), 435
Stars, the Gospel of the (See CREATION),
State of the godly in this world, the, .
a divinely delivered, . ° ‘ c


320
400
337
317


of s. oe, 6 a6; @ 06 ey etie
Eo >

Lal

°


sustained, and, . 5 A ° . 287
approved state, ° . : . 287

ps in dangerous paths, safe (See
PATHS), . - 3 : ° . 64
Story of a sufferer, the, ° * o 144
the Divine listener, . e ° . 144
the sad complaint, . ® e . 144
the relieved sufferer, . . . » 145
Sufferer, the story of a (See Story), . 144

Sutfering, the ery of the righteous in
extreme, . ’ ° . . » 357

a cry of suffering, the nature and
severity of his sufferings, c + 357

a cry of supplication, comprising a

confession, petitions,and encourage-
ments, . . . . . - 359

Suffering, the hope of the righteous in
extreme, 3 . . . « 365
what he hoped for, . . a 365
the ground, oer ats 5 Sc » 365


the influence, and, . . She Cis)
the anticipated result of this hope, .


ering, the imperfection of the
ighteous in extreme, . . . 362
consider, the imprecations urged, . 363


the reason assigned : impresses with,
the imperfection of the best men,


INDEX.





PAGE
the gradualness of the education of
mankind, and the truth of the
Sacred Scriptures, . : ( 364
Suffering, the loneliness of, . : ok
oppresses the soul with a sense of
personal unworthiness, . . - 106
throws the mind back upon the
thought of the Divine care from
the earliest period of life, . - 107
is embittered by the violence and
cruelty of relentless enemies, - 107
intensifies the sense of utter helpless-
ness and agony, . ° : . 107
Suggestions to a Vee Deets in trouble, 432
)


Sun and shield, rd God a (See
SHIELD), ; : 5 : - 489
Supernatural, Nature and the (See


NATURE), : c : ° . 74

Supplication, an earnest, . c . 492

with . view Me their salvation the :
people pray for repentance, . + 492

the deliverance which is implored is

represented as, a cessation of God's


anger, . c : : 6 + 492

& manifestation of His mercy, . « 492

& quickening, . : - 5 - 493

a means to their j yan Ges, i - 493
e


Supplication in trouble (See TROUBLE), 189
Supremacy of God an encouragement

to seek Him, the (See SEEK), .
Survey of redemption work, . ; .
Sustainer, man’s burden and (See BuR-


500
128


DEN), . . . . . e 279
Tactics of the tempted, the, . e » 46
Temple, nature God’s, . 5 ° 2 138

built by His hand, . . * . 138
hallowed by His presence, ° - 138
consecrated to His worship, ., . 138
Tempted, tactics of the * ‘ » 46
Theology, natural, @ eke tie tee SO
the subject, :) sa. 75°) Geeoe
the characteristics, . : : . 87
the importance, . ; : e . 87
the limitation of this revelation, - 88


per joe good people, good (See


D) ee : : : - » 78
Thirst of the godly soul, the, . . ao
the nature, ; ; . . o 314
the occasion, . ; 5 ‘ . 314
the Treason. of, . . e . ° 314
hapten of this thirst to the praise

0 e e ° . . « I
Thought, man’s need and God's (See a
NEED), . : 200


Thoughts and inquiries of a godly soul
in trouble, the (See TROUBLE), . 431
Thoughts on recovery from. sickness
(See SICKNESS), . ‘ : . 139
Three views of religion (See RELIGION), 159
Thunderstorm, the true attitude of man


in the, . . - : : . 136

to hear the voice of Godin, . . 136

to adore the glory of Godin, . - 137
to confide in God as the hty

Ruler of the thunderstorm, . - 137
Topics for prayer, invariable (See

PRAYER), ° . . ° o kg


lad





Paan
Transition of a troubled soul from con-
; flict to victory, the,
was marked by thoughtful considera-
tion of others, : 6
personal effort for himself, -
approach unto God, .
Trial and triumph of ‘taith, the (See
VAITH, . : : . . 308
Trial, sanctified, . 6 : : °
drives us nearer "God, ;
conducts to a higher spiritual life, :
awakens longings for the heavenly
and eternal life, .
Triumphant moe a (See Conrt-
DENCE),
Triumphant life, a glimpee of a (See
LIFE), . : . 271
Triumph of the Church, the,
in its source, the Lord gives the word
of command, of promise, and of
power,
in its completeness, the utter rout of
the foes, the greatness of the spoil,
the subsequent prosperity, . : ae
in its celebration, .
Trouble and Deliverer, the good man’ He
his trouble, was continuous, his so
accepted ne consolation, the re-
membrance of God was
meditation increased grief,
his Deliverer, his application to God
involved faith, was persevering and
earnest, did not aa to immediate


» 427


relief, 5 - 428
Trouble and the way out of it, . . 123
sin is the prolific source of all trouble, 123
trouble shall not be permitted to over-
whelm the good, 123


prayer to God is the infallible method
of deliverance from the greatest


trouble, . . 124
Trouble, prayer in (See PRAYER), + 429
Trouble, resource and comfort in, . 249
Trouble, silence in, . 5 < . 182

silence maintained in, 4 . . 182
increasing trouble, . . 183
growing insupportable in trouble, . 184
Trouble, aan i 185
the Psa mist’s, reveals his desire to

know the duration of his life, - 185

his a arate of the brevity ot his

life, - 186

his i impression of the vanity of life, . 186
his impatience of life, 187


his want of clear and assured know-
ledge of any life beyond the present,


Trouble, supplication in, ° . 189
the confidence avowed, : . 189
the submission expressed, . ‘ . 189
the petitions presented, . ° - 190
the pleas urged, ° . 190


Trouble, the day of trouble, » 502
a period with which all men are
acquainted, . + 502
a resolve which all men should make, 502
a result which all men may antici-


eee ia thal golly eal ratag expactos


67

. 278

347

+ 347
Trus

503





to, by the devout contemplation =e
the works and waysofGod,. .
the troubled soul’s consideration a
the works and ways of God, recol-
lection of, reflection on, and speech
concerning the noe and ways of
the troubled soul's "conclusions on ies
the works and ways of God, God’s
works and Me Las ray ae Heats
His majesty, His is
pay ot and sha are mysteri


Trouble, the thoughts and inquiries of ne
agodly soulin, . - 43!
the thoughts, reflection on the past

doings of God, recollection of times
of trouble in his own life, which
were also times of song, commu-


nion with his own heart, . 433
the inquiries, as to God’s mindful-
ness of His people, as to His un-
prep renemn as to His faithful-
432
anggestions toa edly soul in trouble, 432
e, VOWS a - 426
pee life, a glim of a (See Lirz), 270
True love (See LOVE), Jo
t and prayer, + 370
the good man’s trust was i in a Divine
Person, sustaining personal rela-
tions to His creatures, who has
given gracious assurances of salva
sda to His peop ple, . + 370
sbereeed man’s prayer, for Divine
ience, deliverance, Peotone,
sad vin lication, + 370
Trust in God, times of fear and, . . 283
Trusting in riches, the folly of, . . 266
Truths, the personal realisation of gene-
ral (See PERSONAL), . : 5 yy
Turtle-dove, the Church a, . - 414
ULTIMATE reasons (See REASONS), . 77
Urgency inprayer, . 68
implies a deep sense of present and
mimediste need,
apparent delay in answe prayer, 368
atrong faith in ae entreata) inbirl
God, . 369
VALUE of dying experiences, the tee
EXPERIENCES), . 395
Verdicts, mistaken (See MISTAKEN)
Victorious march of the good, the ee:
MARCH) - 343
Victory, ei hiedes in Jehovah a pledge
of (See CONFIDENCE), . 97


Victory for Christ and victory in Christ
(See CHRIST), : 85
Victory, the trarsition of a troubled soul

from conflict to (See eri eal 396
LS plpbesd sf Mee three (See RELI-


By Maca . 159
Vow. David's and, bs ees . 258
Vows made is prayer am ry ° ° 46


Wak, God as a man af, ° ° °


ENPREX,





uxvi
PAGE
the Divine admonition, . . . 26
amnesty, . . . . : - 26
arsenal, the variety, readiness, and
deadly efficacy o His weapons, . 26.
War, the holy, . 6
the revolt against Messiah, its extent, 6
determination, . . ° qo YG
mere Sete c ° e ao ©
anity, oe) tomatoe?
Way for man, the ‘Divine, se meees SOS
ae by God, . « ec « 505
trod b: A 2 - 505
oe peed of (al integrity of heart to tread
év 505
Way of wealthy worldlings, the foolish, 241
the characteristics of, trust in their
wealth, boasting in their wealth, . 241
fancied power to retain wealth » 24%
the folly of, is seen in their ina-
bility to retain their wealth, and
the limitation of the power of
wealth, . 241
Way out of "trouble, the ‘(Bee TROUBLE), 123
Ways of God made plain, the hidden, 121
the character of God is a guarantee of
infallible direction, < 121
the ways of God are made known to
the morally needy, ; 121
the deeper revelations of God are re-
served for the morall 9 122
opt ap AUS eres ways of
is morally sa . 123
Ways of God, the, ‘ 0 2 437
are vast in their extent, 5 « 437
profound in their Tamale 5 + 437
wellfounod in their aspect, . + 437
founded assurance, a (Bee Ags
CE), + 213
Wicked against the good, the lottings
of the (See PLOTTINGS), : ; 174
Wicked life, the Aalogudterektres
teristics of a, . 5 5 5 - 169
practical atheiam, . e 5 - 169
self-adulation, e e e . s 169
rere ae S 6 oo athe
° ° ° ® ° 170
ani 0 ° « 170


Wicked, t sillciingcd the Beste


GRIMAGE), . 480
Wicked, the present position. and future
prospects of the, as seen by the spi-
aay enlightened man (See Post-
ON), :

Wicked, the relation of God to the, ( a8)

He has no pone injure ° - 18

does not tolerate, but, ° A . 8

hates wickedness, - 18


Wicked, the Gmperal prosperity of the

(See PROSPERITY), ° 392
Wicked, the temporal prosperity of the,

as contrasted with the peaceful des-

ea of the good (See CONTRASTED), 178

Wicked, the transient prosperity of the, I

unworthy the envy of the good (See

PROSPERITY), - 172
Wicked, with his much, the righteous

and his little Vest are (See

Lrrr_z), . . oo


PAGH
Wickedness, the history of piney - 293


wickedness in its root, . n205
in its manifestation, . e . 3 203
in its full development, . » 293
in its consummation, . 2 294
as viewed in its Sore + 295


Wisdom, the preacher of (Se
ER), : 5 2
eee two counsels of (Bee Coun-


‘ACH-


LS), 147
Withdrawal of the Divine presence, the
(See PRESENCE), . ° - 454
Work, survey of redemption, 128
Works, as God for His mighty
(See PRAISING), . 334
World, a tumultuous, and ‘8 tranquil
Chureh, . 228


a tumultuous world, the tumult is an
evidence of the sin of the world,


and will one eal be removed, . 228.
& tranquil Church, an assurance of
Seounty and of refreshment, . . 229
World, hope opened to the, . 389
World, men of the (See MEN), 68
World, men of the, who have their
rtion in this life (See MEN), 248


World, the Divine proprietorship of the, 114
is absolute and all-inclusive, . . 114
is based on the act of creation, . 5 esi
is confirmed by the fact of its presery

vation, .

Worldlings , the foolish way ot wealthy

Wo hi AY), ee . 241
ors ate aspects 0: ivine, . . . 2

rahip in its source, God, who grants ce
othe opportunity and inspires the
tion to worship, 32
in its Object, God, as the hearer of
prayer, the pardoner of sin, the


satisfier of the soul, 325
in its nature, submission to the will,
celebration of the praise, and fulfil-
ment of our vows to God, . 32
in its locality, . ' : ° oe
in its extent, . ° . . . 326
in its influence, . c + 326
WY ocean pu ublic, more acceptable to
than Lived devotion (See
PUBLIC), : ie . 508
Worship, re igious, 5
its nature, internal principles, external
manifestations, 2 227
its ground and Snir “He is thy
Lord,” : . . . 227
its importance, : : : ° 5 ey
Worship, religious, . 471


in hy Object, a Person related to us,
supreme excellence, . -4
in its Ae hearty, joyous, vari- /
ously expressed,

in its obligation, it is right, and need
“ 2
in its incentives, 5 : .
Worship, the character of true, a OMe

erode of God is the chief j joy of

fo


the highest duty of the :
the Seat ood a 154


2


rr


TN DEX TO AUTHORS QUOTED.





PaGR
Worship, the reasonableness of . . 154
God is to be worshipped becanse He


is the God of creation, . : . 384
providence, é : = . ~t ee
redemption,

ere ad the moral fitness of ros r
aK


tru
it i ’ the privilege’ of ‘the true
worshipper to se Ae near to
God, . 116
the true socahipper must possess a
moral fi » 116
is aeit WE the Divine benedie-
tion, . 887





envii








PAGH
is the representative ef a distinctive
and privileged clasa, » 117
Wrath, glo through man ‘a, 5 425
the wrath of man not pep he de-
feats its own aims and accomplish
the Divine purpose, 425
is sometimes the instrument of the
Divine will, .
man in his wrath accomplishes the
Divine will when rete himself


to resist and frustrate it, - 426
Zion, Mount, 236, 423, 515
Zion, the prosperity of, sought, > a6





INDEX TO AUTHORS QUOTED.


Vary ivief quotations are not indicated tn this Indem,


AESCHYLUS, 136.

Alexander, J. A., Ban's 59, 105, 362.

Alford, Henry, 2

Anon., 262, 281, 283, 286, 289, 290, 292,
299, 312, 315, 327, 373-


BAILEY, P. J., 390, 420, 433
Barnes, Albert, 369.
Barzia, Joseph de, 27.


B—e, 435.

Billing, R. C., 261.
Binnie, W., 56

Blaikie, W. G., 165

Bonar, A. A., 126, 162.
Bonar, H., 497.

Brown, J., 161.

Brown, J. Baldwin, 259, 374
Browni pid 1425

Bryant, C., 146.


Burns, Jabez, 273, 342.
Bushnell, Horace, 197.
Byron, Lord, 423, 424, 433


Lee Dr., 15
Cowper, W., 146, 5% 156, 268, 274


DB, 441.

Dale, R. W., 246.

Davenant, W., 3
cis, 114


soadee, Fran
aaa A. F., 312
en, John, 437.
Emerson, Ralph, ag&


P—R, 258.


GA‘MBOLD,
Goethe, By +) 181, 18%
Goldsmith, O liver, 277, 43%


Grant, Robert, 371.
Gray, Thomas, 145
Guernsey, Jesse, 379.


Hemans, Felicia D., 275.
Hengstenberg, E. W., 313, 348, 402, Sop
Henry, Matthew, Ae
Sie J. jose 436.

erbert, George, 339.
Hickok, L. P., 508.
“ Homiletio Quarterly,” the, 261, 39y
ee BoE » 240.

orne Tee, 52, 91.
Hull, E. L., 459.
Huntington, F. D., 384.


KEBLE, John, 473.


Liwpox, H. P., 159, 220, 388.
Lillo, REPEAT «


M‘A., 243.
Maclaren, Alexander, 11%.
Mallet, D., 187, 381, 7a.
Mant, Bishop,
epeiteh J., a
Mi Iwill, e
e I
Milman, H , ony, 1 vei
Milton, John, en 141, 148, 184, gaa.
Moll, Carl B., 33, 364.


INDEX TO AUTHORS QUOTED.





tgomery, J., 385.
More, marie "358, 4
Murphy, 153, 155, 157, 165


NEWTON, John, 270.


ONE FUNDRED SKETCHES OF SERMONS,
243, 351, 387.
Ozorious, John, 16,


PARKER, Joseph, 195, 305, 494.
Payson, Edward, 430.
Perowne, J. J.S8., 1, 5, 46, 49, 94, 105, 124,
119, 124, 135, 138, 140, aero 163.
TEC, 20, 44, .
PalloE Rabsit 184, 439 io
Punshon, W. M., 377.


R., J
Bobedeae F. W., 206, 2
Ryland. go. ts ca


SHAKSPEARE, W., 17, 169, 185, 277, 382,
416, 422, 431, 440, 442, 443, 448, 452, 463,


479.
Sleigh, William, 194, 249,
Smith, Horace, 138 Sat en


Smith, John, 255,
Smith, ae 1g
Spencer, J: mE 4


5 gett mF


8 ee


ey, A. re 2
Statham, W. M ae
ar George, 306.


’ Stuart, Moses, 362.


TENNYSON, nee! 135, 168, 38a, 396, qa
433) 436, 487.

Thomas, David, 126, 127, 16a

Thomson, James, 330.

Thomson, W. oe 236,


Tipple, 8. A.
Twisleton, E. RB, 34
Uruam, T. C., 429.

W., J.,

Wardlaw, vRalnk. 5or.


Watson, Richard, 212, 227,
Watson, Thomas, 14. al


Wosley, Cha, eas 86,
ey, Charles, 52, 456, 486, 5e5.
Weadaworth, W: St, 128, 145


Youna, Edward, rule eee 406, 43
“Young Minister mpanioa,” ” the, ak


Y., W., 425.
Eeyzenvory, NM. L, eR




















a]


BS491 .PoS/volll = &


The Preacher S complete homiletical com


$2 (N
LenS
LG /


Lb | o


Ake oy,
ae


THEOLOGY LIBRARY
SCHOOL OF THEOLOGY
AT CLAREMONT
CLAREMONT, CALIFORNIA
91711





A ce tg 2
ee


NS
{~


EMAAR A MASE ELSA EAE oe PAA EAL AIA MA ED AS
FI IT TP es i Ds WV a7 i i PF AMEADADATESESAAEDEEELESLEEEEEAL A A AA LEA EA EADADEADADES EOD SD

[ALAR DL ADMD EA OOD DAL A 4A A wh Shh hihi Pe a LELES

Dtt tp Lp tA eA Ld Te hd ed ae




































STAT RTT NLL Ee Oe ee er
PS OP a tr i We iv, 4 Abbett esses esse dd SISISEP VISIR ILI R PTR R ILL AO a
VOCE AAS ahd 4 Wie ry SULIT NTR ICI DD aS ae ie POA LEE ESEL SALES ESS Nee eee ee Be ee 1 1 1 I
TY Ee Om eo we a a eS a aie Te, CEM NELALAELEPMLE ELE PLE L PEL ELLIE ELE ILLITE ELTA ELLA ERE S AMES LEE,
SER OEL CELL Li CRM PP Ee MY Ue ede a, IIIT IIIT IIIT OODLE
LAS EAE PEA EAE ee LL AE A MELEE LAME LE ELLE PEL EP MEME ELEM PEELE EELELERS GY

EIST Pau Nir DIMI TRIED RT Min mW Ew My ei el i Sail Rah NiO TIESTO LOST EDDIE OTe
Va S ue e a tr S SMITH IKI REM Oe i a aaa PIT IRI RIM LM ELE EME LAA PPE ELE EAL Gt
Pow TR Mir U RY HTD Me MD De a Sa RID TID SLIT TURIN ERR RNY LE Te PT TTT Say Say “cy LLELSS PEEPS LL
A AMAT AMA A AAA AA eS Lad EEE EE PE EIT EE DALAL EEL PELE EEL EL MEE EEE ELI NTDL DELLE ADL LAALP ELL DOP AL SLE
LT RENEE ee ey ee wwe OU eT yy SSSI IPI LER VIL OWED IT IIT ATID TIT I DI PLEMIE VIM PL OM aN DO a A Roncs
y TIS PITS ORES ORIEL TIEN EMO ey ier VRPT E AT POTATO ISI TSS SLL SITIES TP ttt LLL LL
Saar P SIRE IIE IN ie ey a Debi ie WW o dy IIS II NIST TR ISIN SIS RRA DMM NNT INIT ND PEEPIDI DILL SLL,
SM OILED
SPAMS H SRT Sa III ae Pe ee DT ea PILLS NRE MM WW IT DAIS TD aaa DIST ITS VOSS IS SSSI LES LIISA SD
4 yi PAA ELL DEEP LEE ES Ld de VI Paw INIA TSOTSI SITIOS III OLE ep eee PI LISI ISIS VILA IL OSORIO LPN EM RM es
SIDI PRESTR PEL ED Ee a aaa LLL EL ML Att A AEE Lt tty PEELED LE EEL
PI PSI DIDS SD API LIER ETRY 2 UD MD De Dry Sa OO ttt hte ALTE vy PEEL EEE EEL LY
VERON APR aly SIGS III ISIS II RE RELL POMS ALE DE SDI DIT IIIS RUM IE STR A LT a OTT
eye LIP IPI IIRL PISO PATE ITPA EEL IITA, LEE EIELL ELE LSI
RV UNRATE ROL OSPR OTOP TLIO TRIS SSO RTA PRT OLA SAMI SATIS IIIS OR VI PII VILE ER YAN EL ELM OS TaD
PIITIISA SSSR TRE EI RE PO PPTL I TID V IDL RIL ISIS NLS II RY EPID L MD IMD SILI T I SISSY ILLIA
SA ti tt AAA AA LL ep hitatss SI ISI AL LIOR TRULY IS DO SO ai PLE,
PVR T POSS To SST T TRIN PAVE LORY ea TO Tea ee LTD I PRN MN NLL LLM Te De i PEELS
ALLE A EPA Atte he EMMA ELA EEL ALS PEELE LLL LSS DLA AL ESAEA ELLE EDLY AE ELELLE LL LE,
TEE LE EEL EG Vee PW ee we LIT NAN TT AIAN MARY PLO MRAM LM UID ey SME aD iO PEELS
aa me Ree a ee CL LEL LLG ‘ PEELE EEL EE LPL ELLY TANNIN IY ee ND an PLES,
Sad PD aS a TORN TELE D Re Welt Ie we re MO aT ay SRA NN TS MER We Oe aL vy PEEL IILDL LIDDELL LLG
PTR WSO WR Bis WW Wie OF ere ar aD Mi Rar BEEEEEL ELL ELLE ELS oh ppt ttt LIP IA MLSE PP EEL,
ATE ELL EL fad ry) PEELE EEL ELS OA Lt tPA EEA LEL TL UPELES PELELI LSS S GEL PEEL, Be
ey RU Wy we PLILEEES | ene Ree LSD SIDR DRIAL URS ED TT SITS DTI PELE,
MELLEL ELL SLE ss ed EA CP LEE PEELE LEED PEEELE LL LG PEELE ee LT
BELLE LESS CLELS 4 ’ CLLLL IY RN Re eS aD 4 EELLEL SSL , PEELS
IR eae EN ey i Ne Ty “as vy TIPIII ILIA UN ELS REM LOTT “y JLEEEL LISS
CELIA AP AEA E ELE LED A ELS SATIS DR ERNST De aaa PELLEELD LLL LLY VLISELL LY PEEL LLG

weed PLEEL ED EEL SG PEELE Sy LOE PII MI STILE SILI LER LLL LLNS Le SNL DDI SILI ELI LID
NI ew ey ae er, PLE ELLELS LEGS ry) TN Nee eee ee ee a ae PELLA SELLS PELLL SELL,

ae) MEAL E EELS La Chas eed ELL LS ELE EL MEP A ph thet EE EEE ELLE cy

LELS LE AL ELI LEED EEL ALTE SG BPEL EEL LES IY 4,

OCALA ay
PAGS Ls











PR ei!
OLDE ELELEL ELS SE
PAELLA EL Dee L ELE
ELS ELLEEL EEL EE ES
Le SP Ly Ur
BEERL ETAT AS Fg














OLR EL
Sea hy








PACES
CELL ES LS MES,


CP EL ETA Gs
Cae AED ELE A














DPEPELG IG SG A et
POR ea BAO








PPI DOI
PET ered eae Hees
MRM ICR ie ta





















SARA
COE CECC OO OOO eke

PPP I Da OD INO Debs beh ee

ROTA CIN OSE
2 ATO PARGAATRPAPAPL AM PLL PKR DL PCPA Da od
er SS Ae CECE EC OE Od CORE
DTA APTAPR AP PAPA Pa 0h 2 BCREN OCC COS SAR ASCO OOO Uo Sa
OOOO Es 43 DPPDPL IAAP Mes PDP DOLE AOE A DERN R
BE NiREhS SAU COUT ETO COCR ERE
us aps







‘
NOUR
SAN AUS RCN































VEOV EOC OK


SOOT GU CAR OS OS
NASALUS IS









FOO ROTO TORN EN NN
SRNL EOS EW OO ES
SPARS A MDS PK Oe DD
SPARE Pa AAI DS POC MN OCD BOC
TOUR UA CURIE EE EOC
SANUS VAS SO
Net PLNS RA RA hf
VASES Oe es
PPS PA SLC RCD I RK OR AC
ROOD ALS PARA DOPE s BCD BEDS Arh
SFAPSPA PATA tA ODD LO Ora A Re
LEV es
SEE E CER PEE <
wis .



























Qa ANNES









SN
YN TALS,
QUEUE €
SAISON ety
SUAS OVS SCO
SESS OV Ny

















meh tars WY
SAUNAS CUS ES LAE
SSE ee ea,
wae UNF ee eae We EN








VAS S
SS ay














ASSN
















Dh
BLE V

xe - SY
SIA RRR ih VERON

OSS RR ats

WSS TA TNE

APPA SKOA Ta Ra RTA He DL PL RAED CDN Po MERA a PR

RO ehh

easly






Hoch tok a RSAC ORS RRA
Shia! ERE EET Eee ee S
ev % LUNA Vy oy Net nay See!









































SD
Ve
SATAROM ORCI aa tS Dr Pat 2s POL VEO
WARE UR EEN OT a eg SAN
YR EE Deas Woy Oa are le eae SNARES hs Os
TIRUACE RUALUOT UTE Coa epee SY
. .
Sah)
VN
See
VEO SS
Se RS
VS
. SS
wy aye Vas SOPARATA MARDER LCD
S RUE E CTS Wy Ae SAS ARORDORR DANN ARID S AUS UN OR VN
. LRERUUU TTY SAN Sy VN
Seve Ss VEVEN
VEREUUUY ee Re eh Ses
ROSSA Th N SRI NS
5 a NS
VET ys
ANAS
MANNS
Y AA
WOW : Aaa A NTS , SADA ARANDA ROC SRDS
. SO RIAs SRS ENR SAAN ay SN OAs SAN
AEN OOO ALA SASS IO EULA, \ ORO EEN
SURE SOV E eRS EUR TUTE UCU UES NN ETE EU UA ATA OS YN
MUU EVER UU ETE at Wey yy SAD HAS RE TORE Aa Nata SNS
: wy \ ,
AUN SEERA AUTEN WU A ENS wy SN SN wy PON
S) SOYA ENS, PE RELAPAAEAA PAS PRES DADS PDS DDS A RAC iy ALAA
DOSED DAA BRS DSDSATAPAPDDAPAPORDADSOS RARE ISOS DDS APARAIATAA RA AA RX RRORIE AREAL SLIAS RASS DD AOC RAIA AAA
TMU OO ETT ET Urs Ua eee CARRE EET ETE STEER REET UU UL AT VY,
a : \ wy
3 RARAAN SRR ey ROARS RAMAN NAS SW ANNNNNES wy OS AEN . ay CASAS RA
‘ SUA as ayy aly NARA. AST, \ a SEAS AAAS AeA
TORRE EEE LUNN, SAAD DS RCA A AAR DI eel ANA AAT MS
RASS AANA EASA DD MODDED AREOLA DA Nye RCRTRPASA ARADO Da Pa DDD Jae y s s
INE ARERR E EVEN Te EMT N ETN DOERR RER APA ARR DSRNA AST
SNES N WEAN EREEEC EE anh fly SUSU ORIN SO
AWE ey ASA SN Ay Nera wv
SES Sa Fa P02 Th Be Bs Oa Da Ts Ba TO DAC om
UV VU Oye wae yee eV ES Sh PP
