^'-^r'^v 


•^1 


5      -.    -.>  ./      :M^_ 


^>.r'> -">r^.1 


^^^,«„.t  *.»'•'*.  ^^^^^^ 


PRINCETON,  N.  J. 


5/4^^ 


Division 


Seciioti . 


Numbtr 


"2)5^^ 


J* 


%iM 


'^^^k^ 


■  ■X 


■■'-^■v 


,t'<  - 


VVJ 


.^A- 


V 


THE 


BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOR: 


eB, 


ANECDOTES,  SIMILES,  EMBLEMS,  ILLUSTBATIONS,  EXPOSITORY, 
(        SCIENTIFIC,  GEOGRAPHICAL,  HISTORICAL,  AND  HOMILETIC, 
GATHERED    FROM    A    WIDE    RANGE    OF    HOME    AND 
FOREIGN  LITERATURE,  ON  THE  VERSES 
OF  THE  BIBLE. 


REV.   JOSEPH   S.   EXELL,   M.A. 
I. of  P^^n^ 


LIEVITICUS. 


NEW  YORK: 
ANSON   D.  F.  RANDOLPH   &  COMPANY 

(incorporated), 
182   FIFTH   AVENUE. 


INTEODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS. 

The  Importancje  of  the  Book, — The  historical  importance  of  the  Book  of  Leviticus 
is  very  great.  One  might  as  well  expect  to  understand  the  history  of  Greece,  while 
remaining  in  ignorance  of  philosophy  and  art,  or  of  England,  while  knowing 
nothing  whatever  of  parhament  and  the  constitution  as  to  understand  the  history 
of  Israel  without  a  knowledge  of  the  Hebrew  ritual.  Think  how  much  labour  is 
spent  in  the  study  of  the  classical  mythology  at  our  schools  and  universities,  not  for 
any  value  there  is  in  itself,  but  for  the  light  it  throws  upon  classical  literature  ;  and 
yet  how  little  do  Christian  people  realise  the  importance  of  studying  the  modes  of 
worship  among  the  Jews,  in  order  to  understand  their  literature,  which  is  our  Bible  I 
And  besides,  not  only  is  the  knowledge  of  the  Tabernacle  worship  necessary  in  order 
to  understand  the  sacred  literature,  but  it  is  of  real  value  in  itself  ;  not  merely  of 
antiquarian  and  psychological  value,  like  the  ancient  mythologies,  but  of  present 
practical  value,  as  throwing  light  upon  the  New  Testament  and  illustrating  that 
gospel  on  which  our  hopes  are  founded.  This  Book  of  Leviticus,  like  the  Tabernacle 
itself,  is  rough  and  unattractive  on  the  outside,  and  may  even  provoke  the  sneers 
of  the  mere  passers-by ;  but  it  is  all  glorious  within,  and  to  those  who  with  reverent 
feet  enter  its  portal,  there  will  be  unfolded  no  inconsiderable  amount  of  "the 
unsearchable  riches  of  Christ."  There  are  the  rough  "  badgers'  skins  "  without ; 
but  within  there  is  the  glory  of  gold  and  the  beauty  of  • '  the  fine  twined  linen,  with 
blue  and  purple  and  scarlet,  and  cherubims  cunningly  wrought."  (/.  M.  Gibson, 
D.D.) 

The  Unity,  Design,  and  Contents  op  the  Book. — This  Book  is  marked  on  the 
surface  with  these  elements  of  unity ;  it  is  all  centred  in  the  newly-erected  Taber- 
nacle ;  and  ©nly  a  few  weeks  passed  away  between  its  beginning  and  its  close. 
There  is  necessarily  much  variety  in  so  considerable  a  collection  of  laws,  and  some- 
thing of  historical  narrative  in  connection  with  the  immediate  application  of  those 
laws  ;  but  the  main  purpose  is  everywhere  apparent  and  controlling — the  arrange- 
ments whereby  a  sinful  people  may  approach,  and  remain  in  permanent  communion 
with  a  holy  God.  This  will  better  appear  in  the  following  table  of  contents.  The 
arrangement  of  the  Book  is  as  systematic  as  the  nature  of  its  contents  allowed.  In 
regard  to  one  or  two  alleged  instances  of  repetition  (chap,  xi,  39,  40  compared  with 
chap.  xxii.  8 ;  and  chap.  xix.  9  with  chap,  xxiii.  22)  it  is  sufficient  to  say  that  they 
were  intentional ;  and  in  regard  to  several  chapters  supposed  to  be  placed  out  of 
their  natural  connection  (as,  e.g.,  chaps,  xii.  and  xv.),  it  simply  does  not  appear  that 
the  thread  of  connection  in  the  mind  of  Moses  was  the  same  as  in  that  of  the  critic. 
In  fact,  in  the  instances  alleged,  the  great  Legislator  seems  to  have  taken  especial 
pains  to  break  that  connection  which  is  now  spoken  of  as  the  natural  one,  and  has 
thus,  for  important  reasons,  separated  the  purification  after  child-birth  from  all 
other  purifications  which  might  otherwise  have  seemed  to  be  of  the  same  character. 
Nevertheless,  it  is  to  be  remembered  that  Leviticus  was  given  at  Sinai  in  view  of  an 
immediate  and  direct  march  to  Canaan,  which  should  have  culminated  in  the  pos- 
session of  the  Promised  Land.     When  this  had  been  prevented  in  consequence  of 

V 


vi  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS. 

the  sin  of  the  people,  a  long  time — above  thirty-eight  years — passed  away  before  the 
encampment  on  the  plains  of  Moab.  During  this  period  the  law  was  largely  in 
abeyance,  as  is  shown  by  the  fact  that  its  most  imperative  requirement,  circumcision, 
was  entirely  omitted  to  the  close  (Josh.  v.  5-8).  After  this  long  interval  it  is  not 
unreasonable  to  supp'>se  that  the  writings  of  Moses  would  have  been  revised  before 
his  death,  and  such  clauses  and  exhortations  added  as  the  changed  circumstances 
might  require.  These  passages,  however,  if  really  written  at  that  time,  so  far 
from  being  in  any  degree  incongruous  with  the  original  work,  do  but  fill  out 
and  emphasise  its  teachings.  The  contents  of  Leviticus  are  arranged  in  the 
following  table  in  such  a  way  as  to  show  something  of  the  connection  of  its  parts : 
Book  I.  Of  Approach  to  God  (chaps,  i.-xvi.). — First  part.  Laws  of  sacrifice 
(chaps,  i.-vii.). — 1.  General  rules  for  the  sacrifices  (chaps,  i.-vi.  7).  (1)  Burnt- 
offerings  (chiip.  i.).  (2)  Oblations  (meat-offrrings)  (chap.  ii.).  (3)  Peace-offerings 
(chap.  iii.).  (i)  Sin-offerings  (chaps,  iv.-v.  13).  (5)  Trespass-offerings  (chaps,  v.  14- 
vi.  7).  2.  Special  instructions  chiefly  for  the  priests  (cbaps.  vi.  8-vii.  38).  (1)  For 
burnt-offerings  (chap.  vi.  8-13).  (2)  For  oblations  (meat-offerings)  (chap.  vi.  14-23). 
(3)  For  sin-offerings  (chap.  vi.  24-30).  (4)  For  trespass-offerings  (chap.  vii.  1-6). 
(5)  For  the  priests'  portion  of  the  above  (chap.  vii.  7-10).  (G)  For  peace-offerings 
in  their  variety  (chap.  vii.  1^.-21).  (7)  For  the  fat  and  the  blood  (chap.  vii.  22-27). 
(8)  For  the  priests'  portion  of  peace-offerings  (chap.  vii.  28-36).  (9)  Conclusion  of 
this  section  (cliap.  vii.  37,  38).  Second  part.  Historical  (chaps,  viii.-x). — 1.  The 
consecration  of  the  priests  (chap.  viii.).  2.  Entrance  of  Aaron  and  his  sons  on 
their  office  (chap.  ix.).  3.  The  sin  and  punishment  of  Nadab  and  Abihu  (chap.  x.). 
Third  part.  The  laws  of  purity  (chaps,  xi.-xv.). — 1.  Laws  of  clean  and  unclean 
food  (chap.  xi.).  2.  Laws  of  purification  after  child-birth  (chap.  xii.).  3.  Laws  con- 
cerning leprosy  (chaps,  xiii.,  xiv.).  (1)  Examination  anil  its  result  (chap.  xiii.  1-46). 
(2)  Leprosy  in  clothing  and  leather  (chap.  xiii.  47-59).  (3)  Cleansing  and  restora- 
tion of  a  leper. (chap.  xiv.  1-32).  (4)  Leprosy  in  a  house  (chap.  xiv.  33-53).  (5) 
Conclusion  (chap.  xiv.  54-57).  4.  Sexual  impurities  and  cleansmgs  (chap.  xv.). 
Fourth  part.  Thf  Day  of  Atonement  (chap,  xvi.).  Book  IL  Of  Continuance 
IN  Communion  with  God  (chaps,  xvii.-xxvi.). — First  part.  Holiness  on  the  j^art 
of  the  people  (chaps,  xvii.-xx.). — 1.  Hohness  in  regard  to  food  (chap.  xvii.). 
2.  Holiness  of  the  marriage  relation  (chap,  xviii.).  3.  Holiness  of  conduct 
towards  God  and  man  (chap.  xix.).  4.  Punishment  for  unholiness  (chap.  xx.). 
Second  part.  Holiness  on  the  part  of  the  priests,  and  holiness  of  the  offcrin<is  (chaps, 
xxi.,  xxii.).  Third  part.  Sanctification  offcasts  (chaps,  xxiii.- xxv.). — 1.  Of  the 
sabbaths  and  annual  feasts  (chap,  xxiii.).  2.  Of  the  holy  lamps  and  shewbread 
(chap.  xxiv.  1-9).  3.  Historical.  The  punishment  of  a  blasphemer  (chap.  xxiv. 
10-28).  4.  Of  the  sabbatical  and  jubilee  years  ^chap.  xxv.).  Fourth  part.  Con- 
clusion.— Promises  and  threats  (chap.  xxvi.).  Appendix. — Of  vows  (xxvii.).  {Prof. 
F.  Gardiner.) 

The  BEiiATioN  of  the  Levitical  Code  to  Heathen  Usages. — Widely  divergent 
views  have  been  held  by  different  writers  upon. this  subject.  Spencer  was  disposed 
to  find  an  Egyptian  origin  for  almost  every  Mosaic  institution.  Baehr  has  sought 
to  disprove  all  connection  between  them.  The  a  priori  probability  seems  well 
expressed  by  Marsham  :  "  We  know  from  Scripture  that  the  Hebrews  were  for  a  long 
time  inhabitants  of  Egypt ;  and  we  may  suspect,  not  without  reason,  that  they  did 
not  wholly  cast  off  Egyptian  usages,  but  rather  that  some  traces  of  Egyptian  habit 
remained.  Many  laws  of  Moses  are  from  ancient  customs.  Whatever  hindered  the 
cultus  of  the  true  Deity  he  strictly  forbad.  Moses  abrogated  most  of  the  Egyptian 
rites,  some  be  changed,  some  he  held  as  indifferent,  some  he  permitted,  and  even 
commanded."  Yet  this  legislation  by  its  many  additions  and  omissions,  and  the 
general  remoulding  of  all  that  remained,  became,  as  Bosenmueller  remarks, 
peculiarly  and  distinctively  Hebrew,  adapted  to  their  needs,  and  sharply  separating 
them  from  all  other  people.  It  can  scarcely  be  necessary  to  speak  of  what  the 
Mosaic  Law  taught  in  common  wil.i  the  customs  of  all  people  at  this  period  of  the 
world's  history.  The  aim  of  the  law  was  to  elevate  the  Israelites  to  a  higher  and 
better  standard,  but  gently,  and  as  they  were  able  to  bear  it.  Certain  essential  laws 
were  given,  and  these  were  insisted  upon  absolutely  and  with  every  varied  form  of 
command  which  could  add  to  the  emphasis.  The  unity  of  God  and  His  omni- 
potence, were  taught  with  a  distinctness  which  was  fast  fading  out  from  the  world's 
recollection,  and  which  we  scarcely  find  elsewhere  at  this  period  except  in  the  Book 
of  Job,  which  may  itself  have  been  modified  in  Mosaic  hands.  So,  too,  the  necessity 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  vii 

of  outward  sacramental  observance  for  the  whole  people,  whereby  communion  with 
God  through  His  Church  should  be  maintained,  were  strongly  insisted  upon,  as  in 
Circumcision  and  the  Passover,  and  other  sacrifices.  But  when  we  come  to  consider 
the  conduct  of  the  ordinary  life,  we  find  the  universally  received  customs  of  the 
times  not  abrogated,  but  only  restrained  and  checked  according  to  the  capacity  of 
the  people.  All  these  checks  and  restraints  were  in  the  direction  of,  and  looking 
towards,  the  higher  standard  of  the  morality  of  the  gospel,  as  may  be  seen  in  the 
law  of  revenge,  where  unlimited  vengeance  was  restricted  to  a  return  simply  equal 
to  the  injury  received ;  in  the  laws  of  marriage,  which  imposed  many  restrictions 
on  the  freedom  of  divorce  and  of  polygamy  ;  in  the  laws  of  slavery,  which  so  greatly 
mitigated  the  hardships  of  that  condition.  But  in  these,  as  in  many  other  matters, 
their  Heavenly  Father  dealt  tenderly  with  His  people,  and  "  for  the  hardness  of 
their  hearts  "  suffered  many  things  which  were  yet  contrary  to  His  will.  The  same 
general  principles  apply  to  the  retention  among  them  of  very  much  of  Egyptian 
custom  and  law.  It  is  more  important  to  speak  of  these  because  the  Israelites  lived 
so  long  and  in  such  close  contact  with  the  Egyptians  from  the  very  time  of  their 
beginning  to  multiply  into  a  nation  until  the  eve  of  the  promulgation  of  the  Sinaitic 
legislation.  It  is  only  necessary  here  to  point  out  on  the  one  hand  how  apparent 
lacuna  in  the  Mosaic  teaching  may  thus  be  explained,  and  on  the  other  how  largely 
the  Egyptian  ctiltus  itself  had  already  been  modified,  in  all  probabiUty,  by  the 
influence  of  the  fathers  of  the  Jewish  people.  By  consideration  of  the  former  it  is 
seen,  e.g.,vfhj  so  little  should  have  been  said  in  the  Mosaic  writings  of  immortality 
and  the  future  life.  This  doctrine  was  deeply  engraven  in  the  Egyptian  mind,  and 
interwoven  as  a  fundamental  principle  with  their  whole  theology  and  worship.  It 
passed  on  to  the  Israelites  as  one  of  those  elementary  truths  so  universally  received 
that  it  needed  not  to  be  dwelt  upon.  The  latter  is  necessarily  involved  in  more 
obscurity  ;  but  when  we  consider  the  terms  on  which  Abraham  was  received  by  the 
monarch  of  Egypt ;  the  position  occupied  at  a  later  date  by  Jacob ;  the  rank  of 
Joseph,  and  his  intermarriage  with  the  high-priestly  family  ;  and  remember  at  the 
same  time  that  the  priesthood  of  Egypt  was  stiU  in  possession  of  a  higher  and  purer 
secret  theology  than  was  communicated  to  the  people — we  see  how  Israel  could 
have  accepted  from  the  land  of  the  Pharaohs  an  e^ent  of  customs  (to  be  purified, 
modified,  and  toned  by  their  own  Sinaitic  legislation)  which  it  might  have  been 
dangeious  to  receive  from  any  other  people.  Yet  plainly,  whatever  of  detail  may 
have  been  adopted  from  Egyptian  sources,  it  was  so  connected  and  correlated  in  the 
Mosaic  legislation  that  the  whole  spirit  of  the  two  systems  became  totally  unlike, 
(Ibid.) 

The  Spibitual  Meaning  of  the  Book. — That  so  elaborate  a  ritual  looked  beyond 
itself  we  cannot  doubt.  It  was  a  prophecy  of  things  to  come  ;  a  shadow  whereof 
the  substance  was  Christ  and  His  Kingdom.  We  may  not  always  be  able  to  say 
what  the  exact  relation  is  between  the  type  and  the  antitype.  Of  many  things  we 
may  be  sure  that  they  belonged  only  to  the  nation  to  whom  they  were  given, 
containing  no  prophetic  significance,  but  serving  as  witnesses  and  signs  to  them  of 
God's  covenant  of  grace.  We  may  hesitate  to  pronounce  with  Jerome,  that  '•  every 
sacrifice,  nay,  almost  every  syllable — the  garments  of  Aaron  and  the  whole  Levitical 
system — breathe  of  heavenly  mysteries."  But  we  cannot  read  the  Epistle  to  the 
Hebrews  and  not  acknowledge  that  the  Levitical  priests  "  served  the  pattern  and 
type  of  heavenly  things  " — that  the  sacrifices  of  the  law  pointed  to  and  found 
their  interpretation  in  the  Lamb  of  God — that  the  ordinances  of  outward  purifica- 
tion signified  the  true  inner  cleansing  of  the  heart  and  conscience  from  dead  works 
to  serve  the  living  God.  One  idea,  moreover,  penetrates  the  whole  of  this  vast  and 
burdensome  ceremonial,  and  gives  it  a  real  glory  even  apart  from  any  prophetic 
significance.  Holiness  is  its  end.  Holiness  is  its  character.  The  Tabernacle  is 
holy — the  vessels  are  holy — the  offerings  are  most  holy  unto  Jehovah — the  garments 
of  the  priests  are  holy.  All  who  approach  Him  whose  name  is  "Holy,"  whether 
priests  who  minister  unto  Him  or  people  who  worship  Him,  must  themselves  be 
holy.  It  would  seem  as  if,  amid  the  camp  and  dwellings  of  Israel,  was  ever  to  be 
heard  an  echo  of  that  solemn  strain  which  fills  the  courts  above,  where  the 
seraphim  cry  one  unto  another.  Holy,  Holy,  Holy.  {Bp.  Perowne,  in  Smith's  Dirt. 
of  Bible.) 

It  shadows  forth  the  Gospel. — Sometimes  in  a  shadow  we  may  see  details  of 
workmanship  which  otherwise  in  the  substance  we  might  have  missed.     One  of  the 


viii  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS. 

most  wonderful  achievements  of  the  present  day  is  Bun-photography,  by  which 
photographs  are  obtained  of  the  sun-disc,  under  certain  conditions.  And  it  is 
obviously  much  easier  to  investigate  the  natui"  of  thp  sun  from  such  photographs 
than  to  study  it  amid  the  unbearable  glory  of  his  presence.  The  eye  may  quietly 
pursue  its  investigations  undazzled  and  unabiished.  So  we  may  better  understand 
some  of  the  details  of  Christ's  work,  as  we  study  Leviticus,  tlian  when  we  stand 
with  the  apostles  amid  the  marvels  of  the  Cross,  or  with  thf*  seer  amid  the  supernal 
blaze  of  Apocalyptic  vision.  Turn  not  lightly,  then,  from  the  Book  of  Leviticus, 
which  shadows  forth  the  gospel;  and,  indeed,  gives  much  of  the  terminology,  the 
phrases  and  symbols,  to  be  afterwards  employed.  And  beneath  the  teachin.,'  of  the 
same  Holy  Spirit  as  taught  Moses  of  obi,  explore  the  sacred  meanings  which 
underlie  ark  and  propitiatory;  fine  twined  linen  and  blue ;  candlestick  and  table; 
altar  of  incense  and  altar  of  burnt-offering  ;  basin  and  vessel  and  snuffer.  Each  is 
like  a  hook  in  the  Divine  household,  to  which  God  has  attached  a  sacred  meaning, 
and  which  will  yield  up  its  secret  to  those  who  reverently  ask,  and  seek,  and  knock. 
Adapting  some  memorable  words  we  may  say :  "  The  invisible  things  of  God  from 
the  construction  of  the  Tabernacle  are  clearly  seen,  being  understood  by  the  things 
that  were  made,  even  His  eternal  purpose  of  redemption."     {F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 

Was  the  Eeligion  of  Israel  a  Revelation  ob  a  jrERELY  Human  Development  ?  — 
What  were  the  salient  features  of  the  religion  of  Israel  as  compared  with  other 
religions  of  the  ancient  world  ?  Nowhere  else  is  there  the  same  recognition  at 
once  of  the  unity  of  the  Supreme  Being,  of  His  separation  from  and  yet  constant 
government  over  His  creation,  and  of  the  consequent  relations  of  duty  and  love  on 
the  part  of  man  towards  Him.  Single  philosophers  in  various  nations  and  at 
various  times,  as  Confucius  or  Buddha,  Zoroaster  or  Plato,  in  some  of  these  points 
rose  to  higlier  and  better  conceptions  than  their  contemporaries ;  but  confessedly, 
the  religion  proclaimed  with  authority  to  the  whole  people  of  Israel  was  immeasur- 
ably superior  to  that  made  known  to  any  other  ancient  nation.  For  this  fact  there 
must  be  a  cause.  A  theory  proposed  for  acceptance  is  this:  Some  germs  of  this 
higher  religion  were  handed  down  from  very  ancient  times,  here  and  there  accepted 
and  impro\  ed  by  the  wiser  and  more  spiritual  among  the  people,  gradually  worked 
over  by  the  enlightened  prophets  of  Israel  in  the  face  of  much  opposition,  and 
finally  adopted  by  tbe  people  in  the  erroneous  belief  that  such  had  been  the  faith 
of  their  falljers.  We  need  not  stop  to  ask  how  it  happened  that,  among  this 
particular  people,  so  obstinately  given,  like  their  contemporaries,  to  polytheism  and 
idolatry,  such  a  long  succession  of  enlightened  prophets,  leaching  as  with  one  voice, 
should  have  arisen.  The  theory  itself  does  not  meet  the  facts.  The  tradition  that 
the  religion  of  Amos  and  Isaiah  was,  in  all  its  essential  features,  the  religion  also 
of  Abraham  and  Moses  was  deeply  imbedded  in  all  the  literature  of  Israel,  and, 
■what  is,  perhaps,  still  more  important,  in  all  their  •'  folk-lore."  Assign  what  dates 
we  please  to  the  narratives  of  Genesis  and  Exodus,  make  even  the  realitv  -breathing 
stories  of  Abraham  and  Joseph  and  Moses  mere  legends  and  myths,  if  one  can, 
there  yet  remains  in  these  very  legends  and  in  every  record  by  which  we  may  look 
into  the  deepest  convictions  of  the  people,  the  consciousness  that  they  were  a  nation 
chosen  out  of  the  whole  earth  by  the  Lord  to  receive  certain  revelations  and 
promises  from  Him,  bound  to  Him  by  peculiar  ties,  intended  to  fulfil  certain 
purposes  of  His,  and  under  the  obligation  of  certain  duties  towards  Him.  How  is 
this  to  be  accounted  for  ?  Again,  another  difficulty  with  this  theory  is,  that  the 
essential  basis  of  the  religion  of  Israel  is  not  one  which  admits  of  the  sort  of 
growth  supposed.  We  might  imagine  a  worship  of  the  separate  powers  of  nature 
gradually  superseded  by  a  re-iognition  of  the  unity  of  nature,  and  so  of  one 
nniversal,  umierlying  force,  although  historically  such  a  process  has  tended  rather 
to  pantheism  than  to  monotheism.  But  in  Israel  the  first  notes  that  are  heard  at 
all  are  of  solitary  supremacy.  The  fundamental  utterance  alike  of  command,  of 
history,  of  popular  song,  through  all  the  previous  ages,  is  summed  up  in  the  words 
of  Isaiah  (xlii.  8),  "  I  am  the  Lord,  ...  My  glory  will  I  not  give  to  another."  The 
ten  commandments  form  the  very  gist  and  kernel  of  the  Hebrew  religion,  and  are 
acknowledged  by  all  critics  to  be  a  part  of  its  most  ancient  statutes.  They 
belonged  to  Israel  when  just  emerging  fiom  a  servile  condition  and  when  bent  upon 
having  a  golden  calf  for  their  god  ;  yet  they  open  with  the  absolute  and  uncom- 
promising command  :  "I  am  the  Lord  thy  God:  thou  sbalt  have  none  other  gods 
but  Me."  Other  nations  were  more  powerful,  more  numerous,  more  wealthy,  more 
advanced  in  the  arts ;  but  in  religion  they  stood  on  a  lower  plane.     The  only 


INTEODUGTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS. 


escape  from  the  enormous  difficulties  of  supposing  such  an  evolution  among  the 
ancient  Israelites  is  in  the  recognition  of  a  revelation,  and  such  revelation  is 
entirely  in  accordance  with  the  character  of  a  loving  and  Almighty  Father.  The 
religion  of  Israel  did  not  stop  with  the  bare  assertion  of  the  unity  of  God.  It 
insisted  equally  upon  His  absolute  holiness  and  His  benevolence.  Here  it  was  still 
more  widely  separated  from  other  religions  of  antiquity.  Is  it  probable  that  the 
Israelites,  of  all  people  in  the  world,  developed  this  conception  unaided  ?  It  is  alleged 
that  even  among  them  this  conception  was  very  imperfect,  that  the  sacred  books 
attribute  to  God  human  passions  and  imperfections  unworthy  of  this  ideal,  and  put 
into  His  mouth  commands  of  savage  cruelty  and  revenge.  The  simple  answer  to 
this  allegation  is,  that  it  is  not  true.  God  did  indeed  allow  slavery,  whQe  greatly 
mitigating  its  hardships.  He  suffered  divorce  and  polygamy,  while  imposing  many 
restraints  upon  its  license.  He  tolerated  revenge,  and  even  requited  a  penalty 
equal  to  the  injury  in  judicial  judgments.  But  in  all  these  things  the  same 
Scriptures  taught  that  this  was  suffered  for  the  time  because  of  the  hardness  of 
men's  hearts.  Man  cannot  be  suddenly  lifted  from  a  very  low  to  a  high  spiritual 
level.  He  must  be  raised  little  by  liltle,  as  children  are  trained.  But  it  is  further 
said  that  men  were  "  raised  up  by  the  Spirit  of  the  Lord  "  for  the  deliverance  of 
Israel,  like  Ehud,  Samson,  and  others,  who  did  very  strange  and  very  vsricked 
things.  These  men  were  raised  up  for  a  noble  purpose,  but  in  the  execution  of  it 
they  were  guided  by  their  own  imperfect  light  and  erring  judgment,  and  perhaps 
often  swayed  far  more  than  they  knew  by  human  passion.  But  besides  the~e  there 
were  men  "  after  God's  own  heart,"  whom  He  loved  and  blessed,  and  y  t  who  were 
guilty  of  very  abominal^le  crimes.  "  What,"  it  is  asked,  "  was  the  hoUness  which 
coiild  bear  with  such  things  ?  "  But  is  God  to  be  held  responsible  for  every  ill- 
advised  or  even  wrong  act  which  a  man  may  do  who  has  set  out  with  an  earnest 
desire  to  serve  Him  ?  Do  we  now  reduce  our  conception  of  the  holiness  of  our 
Heavenly  Father  to  the  level  of  the  imperfect  lives  of  those  who  profess  to  serve 
Him?  Then  why  should  we  do  so  in  judging  of  those  far-away  ages?  There  is 
really  no  difficulty  in  any  of  the  thin^is  alleged  when  the  story  is  read  in  the  li^-ht 
of  the  times  to  which  it  belongs.  The  difficulties  only  become  insoluble  when  the 
narratives  and  commands  are  supposed  to  have  been  written  in  a  later  and  more 
enlightened  age.  But  however  these  things  may  be,  and  whatever  difficulties  may 
arise  from  the  lives  of  the  saints  of  old,  or  from  things  suffered  or  commanded  in 
dealing  with  the  hardness  of  men's  hearts,  everywhere  in  the  sacred  books  God 
Himself  appears  in  unutterable  and  perfect  holiuess.  Only  in  Israel  is  the  first  and 
greatest  of  all  the  commandments,  "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  wiih  all  thy 
heart,  and  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy  might  "  (Deut.  vi.  5) ;  and  nowhere 
else  do  we  find  failure  in  this  authoritatively  recognised  as  a  moral  offence,  as  sin. 
Is  it  more  probable  that  the  sages  of  Israel  worked  ont  this  deepest  of  all  relations 
from  their  own  understanding  and  embodied  it  in  their  earliest  law,  or  that  they 
•were  taught  it  from  on  hiyh?  Closely  related  with  the  idea  of  sin  was  the  practice 
of  sacrifice.  This  practice,  whencesoever  derived,  was  substantially  univers  d  in 
the  ancient  world.  The  Hebrew  sacrifices,  however,  are  so  distinguished  from 
those  of  other  nations  in  two  points  as  to  make  them  an  essentially  different 
institution.  1.  Elsewhere  sacrifice  might  be  oflered  by  any  one,  without  regard  to 
his  character ;  and — 2.  It  was  customary  to  increase  the  value  of  the  offering — 
even  to  the  extent  sometimes  of  providing  human  victims — in  proportion  to  the 
magriitude  of  the  offence.  The  underlying  idea,  therefore,  of  tbese  sacrifices,  was 
the  offering  to  the  offended  Deity  an  equivalent  for  the  offence — a  qrdd  pro  quo,  a 
compensation  for  the  wrong  done — so  that  no  further  penalty  could  justly  be 
exacted.  Hence  there  was  very  little  of  a  moral  character  about  the  transaction. 
In  Israel  it  was  far  othervrise.  Sacrifices  were  allowed  by  the  law  only  for  "  sios  of 
ignorance" — rather  of  inadvertence,  of  carelessness,  of  being  led  away  by  tempta- 
tion and  passion  ;  for  sins  committed  with  a  "high  hand,"  with  a  fml  knowledge 
of  their  wrongfulness  and  the  defiance  of  a  proud  heart,  no  sacrifice  was  allowed 
(Numb.  XV.  30  ;  Deut.  xvii.  12).  This  fact  alone  gives  a  totally  different  character 
to  sacrifice  in  the  two  cases,  because  it  introduces  a  moral  element,  and  makes  their 
acceptance  depend  upon  motive  and  character.  The  second  point  is,  if  possible, 
Btill  more  distinctive.  While  the  idea  of  sacrificial  compensation  was  carried  out 
among  the  heathen  by  proportioning  the  number  and  value  of  the  victims  to  the 
greatness  of  the  offence,  nothing  of  this  kind  was  so  much  as  allowed  by  the 
Hebrew  law.  The  sin-offering  in  every  case  must  be  the  same,  the  she-goat — the 
commonest  and  cheapest  of  the  domestic  animals.    Whole 'burnt-offerings  might 


X  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS. 

be  increased,  and  peace-offerings,  those  feasts  of  communion  with  God,  might  be 
indefinitely  multiplied  ;  but  for  the  atoning  sin-offering  only  and  always  the  same 
simple  victim.  The  lesson  hereby  taught  is  plain  :  sacriHce-!  in  themselves  had  no 
compensatory  value.  The  value  of  sacrifices  therefore  could  be  but  symbolic.  Now, 
to  suppose  such  a  system  of  sacrifice,  so  unlike  that  of  any  other  nation,  so  far- 
reaching  in  its  meaning,  and  yet  so  adapted  to  a  spiritually  debased  people,  keeping 
alive  in  them  the  sense  of  sin  and  yet^  pointing  to  something  bettor  as  the  true 
atonement  for  sin — to  suppose  such  a  system  to  have  been  evolved  by  the  philoso- 
phers of  Judea  and  adopted  by  the  Jews,  seems  by  many  degrees  more  improbable 
than  that  it  was  given  them  from  on  high.  In  the  Hebrew  religion  the  ground  of 
man's  acceptance  with  God  was  neither  sacrifice  nor  ceremonial  observance,  though 
these  were  required,  but  faith — a  trust  in  God,  bringing  the  whole  heart  and  life 
into  dependence  upon  Him  ami  harmony  witli  His  will.  The  gospel  teaches  that 
this  is  the  essential  principle  of  all  true  religion;  but  how  did  Israel  know  it? 
Here  and  there  the  truth  was  more  or  less  clearly  seen  by  one  and  another  of  the 
sages  of  antiquity;  in  Israel  it  was  the  fundamental  teaching  by  the  m  >st  varied 
teachers  during  more  than  a  millennium  of  most  changing  fortune.  How  were 
those  rude  ages  and  those  rough  men  of  action  able  to  grasp  that  principle  which, 
even  in  our  times,  it  has  ever  proved  so  difficult  to  keep  alive  in  the  hearts  of  men? 
It  seems  almost  an  insult  to  the  understanding  to  ask  whether  it  could  have  been 
a  merely  human  development.  It  does  not  matter  how  little  or  how  much  the 
ordinary  Hebrew  may  have  recognised  and  acted  upon  this  principle.  It  avails 
nothing  to  say  that  the  men  who  illustrate  it  were  remarkable  and  exceptional. 
The  point  is,  that  whether  the  people  heard,  or  whether  they  forbore,  this  was  the 
teaching  of  their  religion.  And  there  is  no  parallel  to  it  elsewhere  in  the  world. 
It  may  be  objected  that  this  must  be  a  partial  representation,  since  the  religion  of 
Israel  was  confessedly  so  largely  ceremonial.  But  there  was  certainly  no  ceremonial 
law  down  to  the  time  of  Moses  ;  and  if  (which  the  objectors  deny)  it  was  given 
then,  it  could  have  been  but  slightly  observed  during  the  wanderings  in  the  wilder- 
ness, since  even  its  fundamental  rite  of  circumcision  was  neglectt^d  during  this 
whole  period  (Josh.  v.  2-7) ;  further,  it  must  have  been  largely  in  abeyance  during 
the  troubled  time  of  the  Judges  ;  and  it  certainly  could  not  have  been  carried  out 
during  the  separation  of  the  ark  and  the  Tabernacle  in  the  reigns  of  Saul  and  David. 
Thus  its  full  observance  only  became  possible  after  the  building  of  Solomon's 
temple,  leaving,  at  the  most,  but  two  centuries  before  the  voice  of  the  prophets 
begins  clearly  to  exalt  the  inward  disposition  of  the  heart  above  the  outward  forms 
of  the  ritual.  It  is  impossible,  chronologicallv,  that  the  ceremonial  law  could,  for 
any  great  length  of  time,  have  obscured  the  higher  teaching  of  faith  ;  and  during 
this  short  period  there  were,  on  the  one  hand,  some  spiritual  leaders,  and  on  the 
part  of  the  people  continual  opposition  and  revolt  against  the  law.  The  general 
result,  therefore,  cannot  have  been  very  deeply  affected  in  th'  'Se  early  times  by  the 
ceremonial  law  ;  and  even  the  law  itself,  as  has  been  seen  iu  regard  to  the  sacrifices 
and  as  is  equally  true  in  other  points,  was  but  a  guard  aiTanged  to  prevent  apostasy 
from  the  principle  of  faith.  The  ceremonial  law  has  formed  the  gist  of  recent 
controversies  about  the  antiquity  of  the  religious  system  of  the  Israelites.  "  If;" 
it  is  asked,  "  the  fundamental  principle  of  that  system  was  so  true  and  spiritual, 
how  came  it  to  be  overlaid  by  a  mass  of  detailed  and  often  petty  precepts,  by  a 
rigid  and  elaborate  ritual,  and  by  a  sternly  fixed  priestly  hierarchy?  "  Two  answers 
have  been  given.  One  is  that  of  St.  Paul,  that  the  law  "  was  added  because  of 
transgressions"  (Gal.  iii.  19),  and  that  it  "was  our  schoolmaster  to  bring  us  to 
Christ"  (Gal.  iii.  24);  the  other,  put  forward  by  certain  recent  critics,  is,  that  it 
was  a  gradual  growth  of  ordinances  under  the  influence  of  men  who  had  usurped 
priestly  power  and  functions.  They  maintain  that  while  certain  germs  of  it  may 
have  been  handed  down  from  very  ancient  times,  it  had  its  formal  beginning  about 
the  reign  of  Josiah,  and  received  its  great  development  during  the  Babylonian 
captivity,  esp  cially  under  the  influence  of  the  prophet-priest,  Ezekiel,  but  did  not 
take  its  final  shape  until  the  remnant  of  the  people  had  returned  and  been  settled 
again  in  their  ancestral  land.  Without  h*-re  entering  into  tlie  question  of  the 
reliability  of  the  history,  it  is  sufticient  to  say  tbat  while  St.  Paul's  statement  gives 
a  clear  and  satisfact'Ty  view  of  the  whole  matter,  an  examination  of  the  theory  of 
the  critics  will  show  it  to  be  improbable  and  self-destruetive.  In  the  first  place, 
with  what  purpose  in  view  could  men  have  worked  out  such  an  elaborate  system  as 
the  Levitical  law?  There  are  many  instances  of  arrogant  hieran^hical  systema 
among  ancient  nations  as  well  as  incorrupt  forma  of  Christianity ;  but  in  all  the 


INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS.  xi 

system  has  ministered  to  the  wealth  or  to  the  power  of  the  priesthood  by  whom  it 
is  upheld.  Now  the  fact  stares  us  in  the  face  that  at  no  period  of  history,  until 
long  after  the  captivity,  were  the  priests  of  Israel  either  a  wealthy  or  a  powerful 
body.  At  the  outset,  it  was  not  Aaron,  but  Moses  who  was  chosen  to  be  the  leader 
and  lawgiver  of  the  people;  and  Aaron,  tliough  high  priest,  was  in  a  wholly 
subordinate  position.  He  and  his  descendants,  and  the  whole  trioe  of  Levi,  were 
cut  off  from  inlieritance  with  their  fellow  tribes  in  the  division  of  land,  except 
mere  cities  of  residence  scattered  among  the  other  tribes.  For  their  support  the 
tithes  of  the  increase  of  the  other  tribes  was  assigned  to  the  Levites,  and  from  them 
in  turn  the  priests  were  to  receive  their  tithes  and  also  certain  portions  of  the 
sacrifices.  This  seems,  at  first  sight,  an  ample  provision,  and  to  have  given  the 
Levites  a  larger  income  than  their  brethren.  But  how  was  the  collection  of  these 
tithes  to  be  enforced  ?  For  this  there  was  no  other  provision  whatever  than  the 
influence  of  moral  obUgation.  What  would  be  the  revenue  of  a  modern  state  and 
the  salaries  of  its  officers  if  the  payment  of  taxes  rested  only  upon  men's  sense  of 
duty?  In  truth,  all  the  incidental  notices  of  the  Levites,  down  to  the  time  of 
David,  represent  them  as  poor,  and  as  easily  tempted  to  sacrifice  the  purity  of  their 
religion  for  the  merest  support,  and  they  are  spoken  of  in  the  law  as  objects  for  the 
charity  of  the  people.  If,  then,  the  Levitical  law  was  devii-ed  by  the  priests,  it  was 
so  devised  in  opposition  to  all  experience  of  human  nature  &>  to  bring  to  them- 
selves neither  wealth  nor  power.  They  exerted  a  certain  moral  influence,  and 
sometimes  were  advisers  of  the  kings,  as,  e.g.,  Abiathar  was  to  David,  under  very 
peculiar  circumstances ;  yet  even  in  this  case  the  prophets  Nathan  and  Gad  appear 
to  have  had  more  influence,  and  Abiathar  was  at  last  deposed  altogether  from  the 
high  priesthood  by  Solomon.  Peculiar  circumstances  gave  Jehoia'la  great  power 
over  the  youthful  Joash,  but  when  the  old  high  priest  died  his  successors  could  not 
keep  Joash  from  apostasy  (2  Chron.  xxiv.  17,  &c.),  and  it  was  not  t"  the  pi'iests  but  to 
the  prophet  Zi-chari  ih  that  the  fatal  duty  was  entrusted  of  remonstrating  with  him 
for  his  sin  (2  Cijron.  xxiv.  20,  22).  When  we  come  down  to  the  times  of  the  writing 
prophets,  represented  on  the  theory  of  the  critics  as  teachers  of  a  more  spiritual 
religion  which  the  priests  were  perverting  to  ceremonialism,  two  of  the  greater  of 
them,  Jeremiah  and  Ezekiel,  and  we  know  not  how  many  of  the  min  r,  were  them- 
selves priests.  Further,  in  all  the  charges  brought  against  the  priests  for  their  sins, 
the  acquisition  of  power  is  not  mentioned.  On  the  return  from  the  captivity  Ezra 
is  prominent  in  the  organisalion  of  the  restored  state ;  but  it  is  more  in  his 
capacity  as  a  scribe,  leMrned  in  the  law,  than  as  a  priest,  and  even  so,  he  is  entirely 
subordinate  to  Nehemiah,  the  civil  governor.  The  theory,  then,  that  the  Levitical 
law  was  gradually  developed  by  the  priests  for  their  own  benefit,  is  plainly  in- 
sufficient and  not  in  accordance  with  the  facts.  Before  taking  up  the  other  answer, 
given  by  St.  Paul,  a  rapid  glance  must  be  taken  at  the  prominent  teal  ires  of  the 
law  itself.  Many  of  its  precepts  were  simply  intended  to  make  Israel  a  peculiar 
people  and  prevent  their  too  close  mingling  with  men  of  other  religions.  Were 
these  more  likely  to  have  been  given  at  the  outset,  when  there  was  no  insuperable 
difficulty  in  their  observance,  or  is  it  more  probable  that  they  grew  up  after  Israel 
had  been  for  centuries  inextricably  involved  in  the  political  stuggles  of  her  more 
powerful  neighbours  ?  A  very  large  part  of  the  detailed  precepts  of  the  law  may  be 
classed  as  educational — rules  designed  to  train  for  a  time  spiritu  i)  children  until 
they  should  be  able  to  receive  the  principles  on  which  they  rested.  If  we  compare 
the  principles  of  morality  and  virtue  as  they  are  set  forth  in  Christianity  and  in  the 
various  heathen  religions,  it  Is  evident  that  the  training  provided  b>  ti  e  precepts  of 
the  Mosaic  Law  was  a  preparation  for  the  former  and  not  for  the  Litter.  This 
relation  of  Judaism  to  Christianity  is  amply  recognised  by  all  the  te  chers  of  the 
latter,  and  it  is  historically  abundantly  evident  that  the  gospel  arose  out  of  Judaism, 
as  it  could  not  have  arisen  out  of  any  form  of  heathenism.  Can  it  be  supposed 
that  a  system  of  legislation  should  have  been  gradually  evolved,  providing  petty 
precepts  for  a  narrow-miuded  nation  and  seeking  to  isolate  them  from  all  other 
people,  and  yet,  as  shown  by  the  result,  designed  to  prepare  them  for  the  broad 
principles  of  a  world-wide  religion  in  the  future  ?  We  may  now  turn  to  St.  Paul's 
answer  to  the  question,  "Wherefore  then  the  law?"  He  had  heen  maintaining 
that  "  the  gospel  was  preached  before  unto  Abraham,"  to  whii  h  this  question  came 
as  an  objection.  He  gives  a  twofold  reply :  (1)  "  It  was  added  because  of  trans- 
gressions," and — (2)  "  It  was  our  schoolmaster  to  bring  us  to  Christ."  The  force  of 
the  first  reason  is  plain,  and  the  whole  history  of  Israel  is  an  illustration  of  it.  The 
nation  who  could  worship  a  golden  calf  in  the  shadow  of  Sinai,  and  commit  them- 


xii  INTROBUCTIOX  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  LEVITICUS. 

selves  to  the  abominations  of  the  Canaanites,  and  could  again  and  again  apostatise, 
surely  needed  some  stringent  law  "  because  of  transgressions,"  lest  the  kuowledge  of 
God  should  altogether  perish  from  the  world.  The  other  answer,  that  "  it  was  our 
schoolmaster  to  bring  us  to  Christ,"  is  involved  in  the  whole  preparatory  office  of 
the  Hebrew  religion,  and  is  historically  true.  It  did  lead  to  Christ  all  that  portion 
of  the  people  who  "looked  for  redemption,"  "  many  myriads  of  the  people,"  and 
"  a  great  company  of  the  priests."  A  glance  must  now  be  given  to  the  completing 
elation  of  Christianity  to  Judaism.  Throughout  the  New  Testament,  in  every 
form  of  utterance,  teaching,  narrative,  exhortation,  argument,  it  is  constantly 
reiterated  by  our  Lord  Himself  and  by  all  those  whom  He  commissioned,  that  the 
gospel  was  the  intended  fulfillment  and  culmination  of  the  law.  It  were  hard  to 
conceive  of  a  greater  contrast  to  the  outward  eye  and  to  the  superficial  thought 
than  was  presented  between  the  Judaism  and  the  Christianity  of  apostolic  days. 
So  the  unbelieving  Jews  regarded  it,  and  persecuted  to  the  death  those  who,  they 
considered,  had  apostatised  from  the  ancestral  faith.  Nevertheless,  aU  the  earlier 
promulgators  of  Christianity  with  one  view  steadfastly  affirmed  that  the  religion 
was  essentially  the  same,  and  that  the  gospel  was  but  the  designed  culmination  of 
the  law  and  the  realisation  of  the  "  new  covenant "  which  the  God  of  Israel  had 
promised  to  make  with  His  people.  They  started  in  their  preaching  from  the 
synagogue,  and  the  Old  Testament  was  everywhere  the  foundation  of  their  reason- 
ing. Now  if  all  this  was  an  entire  error  in  the  men  who  made  the  mistake  and  in 
the  circumstances  under  which  it  was  made,  it  was  one  of  the  most  wonderful 
illusions  of  history,  and  an  illusion  shared  by  substantially  all  believers  in 
Christianity  to  the  present  day.  It  is  a  phenomenon  without  parallel  and  requires 
explanation.  But  if  they  were  right,  then  the  law  and  the  gospel  must  have 
proceeded  from  the  same  source,  and  that  source  coald  have  been  none  other  than 
Divine.     (Fro/,  Gardiner.) 


THE    BIBLICAL    ILLUSTEATOE. 

LEVITICUS. 

CHAPTEE  I. 

Veb.  1.  The  Lord  called  unto  Moses,  and  spake. — The  oripin  and  authority  of 
Leviticus : — These  words  evidently  contain  by  necessary  implication  two  affirma- 
tions :  first,  that  the  legislation  which  immediately  follows  is  of  Mosaic  origin — 
"  The  Lord  spake  unto  Moses  "  ;  and  secondly,  that  it  was  not  the  product  merely 
of  the  mind  of  Moses,  bnt  came  to  him,  in  the  first  instance,  as  a  revelation  from 
Jehovah — ^^  Jehovah  spake  unto  Moses."  And  although  it  is  quite  true  that  the 
words  in  this  first  verse  strictly  refer  only  to  that  section  of  the  book  which 
immediately  follows,  yet,  inasmuch  as  the  same  or  a  like  formula  is  used  repeatedly 
before  successive  sections — in  all,  no  less  than  fifty-six  times  in  the  twenty-seven 
chapters — these  words  may  with  perfect  fairness  be  regarded  as  expressing  a  claim 
respecting  these  two  points,  which  covers  the  entire  book.  The  words  say  nothing, 
indeed,  as  to  whether  or  not  Moses  wrote  every  word  of  this  book  himself ;  or 
whether  the  Spirit  of  God  directed  and  inspired  other  persons,  in  Moses'  time  or 
afterwards,  to  commit  this  Mosaic  Law  to  writing.  They  give  us  no  Lint  as  to  when 
the  various  sections  which  make  up  the  book  were  combined  into  their  present 
literary  form,  whether  by  Moses  himself,  as  is  the  traditional  viesv,  or  by  men  of 
God  in  a  later  day.  They  simply  and  only  declare  the  legislation  to  be  of  Mosaic 
origin  and  of  inspired  authority.  Only,  be  it  observed,  so  much  as  this  they  do 
affirm  m  the  most  direct  and  uncompromising  manner.  (S.  if.  Kellogg,  D.D.) 
God  speaking: — Leviticus  is  replete  with  "the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God." 
While  it  paints  the  blackness  of  sin,  and  the  depths  to  which  man  has  fallen,  it 
paints  likewise,  in  glowing  colours,  the  amazing  love  of  God,  in  the  full,  rich,  and 
complete  provision  He  has  made  to  meet  man's  every  need  in  Christ  Jesus  our  Lord. 

1.  "  The  Lord  .  .  .  spake."  So  they  are  God's  words,  not  man's,  to  which  we  are 
called  to  listen  in  this  deeply  instructive  book.  Then  let  us  give  it  attentive 
hearing  (Matt.  xi.  15).  Moses  here  records  the  very  words  of  God,  and  the  Holy 
Spirit  alone  can  bring  to  our  apprehension  His  own  teaching  (John  xiv.  26,  xvi.  13). 
II.  The  Loed  spake  unto  Moses.  God  had  before  spoken  unto  him,  specially  on 
two  memorable  occasions.  1.  From  the  burning  bush  (Exod.  iii.),  when  He  came 
down  in  grace  to  deliver  His  people  Israel  from  bondage  in  Egypt — as  now  He 
delivers  from  the  bondage  of  sin  and  Satan — revealing  Himself  as  Jehovah,  the 
self-existent  "I  AM,"  able  to  destroy  their  enemies,  and  rescue  them  (Exod.  vi.). 

2.  From  Mount  Sinai,  after  the  deliverance  from  Egypt,  when  the  people  had  rashly 
undertaken  (apparently  in  their  own  strength)  to  do  all  that  the  Lord  had  spoken 
(Exod.  xix.  8),  God  spake  the  words  of  His  "Holy  Law,"  the  "fiery  law" 
(Heb.  xii.  18-21 ;  Exod.  xix.  18-20 ;  Kom.  vii.  12  ;  Deut.  xxxiii.  2).  That  law 
showed  the  exceeding  sinfulness  of  sin,  but  provided  no  way  of  salvation  for  those 
who  disc^beyed  it,  therefore  could  only  condemn  (Kom.  vii.  13,  10,  11),  as  "  all  have 
sinned"  (Eom.  iii.  23),  and  "  sin  is  the  transgression  of  the  law  "  (1  John  iii.  4),  or 
"lawlessness"  (E.V.);  but  in  the  passage  before  us — III.  The  Lobd  spake  "out 
OF  the  Tabernacle  of  the  congregation  " ;  and  this  tells,  not  only  of  deliverance 
from  bondage,  but  of  the  Lord's  dwelling  in  the  midst  of  His  people,  as  their 
Leader  and  Guide  (Exod.  xiii.  21 ;  xl.  38),  meeting  and  communing  with  His  servant 
Moses  from  ttie  mercy-seat  (Exod.  xxv.  22,  xxx.  6  ;  Numb.  vii.  89),  and  establishing 


2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

a  medium  for  worship  and  access.  IV.  "  God  hath  spoken  unto  us  by  His  Son," 
■who  is  the  Eevealer  of  the  Father  (John  i.  18).  But  even  now,  as  we  Ksten  to  the 
words  of  God  out  of  the  Tabernacle,  it  is  God  speaking  to  tis  by  His  Son  ;  for  the 
Tabernacle  is  a  type  of  Jesus.  "  The  glory  of  the  Lord  filled  the  Tabernacle  " 
(Exod.  xl.  34) ;  Jesus  is  the  "  Brightness,"  or  outshining  of  God's  glory  (Heb.  i.  3). 
He  is  the  true  Tabernacle,  "  For  in  Him  dwelleth  all  tbe  fulness  of  the  Godhead 
hodily  "  (Col.  ii.  9).  "  God  was  in  Christ  reconciling,"  &c.  (2  Cor.  v.  19).  Christ 
is  the  manifestation  of  the  Father's  love  (1  John  iv.  9, 10).  He  brings  untold  glory 
to  God  in  the  salvation  of  sinners  (John  xvii.  4) ;  and  the  saved  ones  He  will  take 
to  share  His  glory  hereafter  (Luke  ix.  30,  31),  as  the  blessed  result  of  "  His 
decease."  V.  The  Lord  would  speak  by  toe  Church,  also  typified  by  the  Taber- 
nacle. It  was  "  sprinkled  .  .  .  with  blood  "  (Heb.  ix.  21) ;  "  the  Church  of  God  " 
was  "  purchased  with  His  own  blood  "  (Acts  xx.  28).  The  Tabernacle  was  anointed 
with  holy  oil  (Exod.  xxx.  25,  26,  xl.  9) ;  the  CLiurch  has  "  an  unction  from  the  Holy 
One  "  (1  John  ii.  20).  The  Lord  dwelt  in  the  Tabernacle  (2  Sam.  vii.  6) ;  the 
Church  is  "  builded  together  for  an  habitation  of  God  through  the  Spirit " 
(Eph.  ii.  21,  22).  The  Spirit  reveals  "the  deep  things  of  God,"  the  things  of 
Christ  (1  Cor.  ii.  10-12 ;  John  xvi.  14,  15) ;  the  Church  is  "  the  fulness  of  Him  that 
filleth  all  in  all "  (Eph.  i.  23) ;  hence  it  is  God's  purpose  that  "  unto  the  .  .  . 
might  be  made  known  through  the  Church  the  manifold  wisdom  of  God  "  (Eph.  iii. 

10,  E.V.).  VI,  God  would  speak  through  each  member  of  the  Church.  First  He 
speaks  to,  and  then  by  them.  He  spake  to  Moses,  that  he  might  "  speak  unto  the 
children  of  Israel."  In  like  manner  He  acts  now  :  Have  we  received  blessing  to  our 
soul  ?  If  so,  God  would  have  us  help  others  (Mark  v.  19).  (Lady  Beaujolois  Dent.) 
The  Tabernacle  of  the  congregation. — The  way  of  access  to  God: — I.  In  our  approach 
TO  God  nothing  is  left  to  human  invention.  1.  There  are  conditions  to  our 
acceptable  approach.     2.  There  are  minutely  revealed  conditions  for  our  approach. 

11.  For  our  rightful  approach  to  Him,  God  has  made  full  and  gracious  pro- 
vision. 1.  A  place  for  meeting  God.  2.  A  sacrificial  basis  of  acceptance.  3.  A 
mediatorial  ministry.  III.  By  such  arrangements  for  our  acceptable  approach, 
God  has  laid  us  under  most  solemn  obligations  to  seek  Him.  1.  Shall  God 
wait  in  vain  within  the  Holy  Place,  and  none  draw  near  ?  2.  Can  sinful  man 
despise  the  sacrifice  of  Jesus  offered  for  his  propitiation  ?  8.  With  such  a  Priest 
within  the  Holy  Place,  have  we  no  mediation  to  ask,  no  sins  to  confess,  no  offerings 
to  bring?  (PF.  H.  Jellie.)  The  essential  significance  of  the  Tabernacle  .-—The 
essential  significance  of  the  Tabernacle  may  be  inferred  from  the  names  customarily 
given  to  it.  These  names  may  be  divided  into  three  classes :  1.  Those  which, 
like  "house,"  "tent,"  "  dwelling,"  "dwelling  of  the  testimony,"  convey  the  general 
idea  of  a  place  of  Divine  residence  (Exod.  xxiii.  19,  xxv.  9,  xxvi.  36,  xxxviii.  21). 
2.  Those  which,  like  "  tent  of  meeting,"  or  "  tent-house  of  meeting,"  express  the 
idea  of  a  meeting-place  for  God  and  man  (Exod.  xxvii.  21,  xxxix.  32).  3.  Those 
which,  like  "  sanctuary,"  draw  attention  to  holiness  as  an  attribute  of  the  place 
itself  (Exod.  xxv.  8).  Now  a  house  where  God  was,  or  was  supposed  to  be,  must 
be  a  place  for  worshii),  and  a  place  for  Divine  worship  must  of  necessity  be  holy 
ground  ;  thus  one  fundamental  idea  lay  at  the  root  of  all  these  appellations,  viz., 
that  the  Tabernacle  was  a  meeting-place  between  Jehovah  and  His  covenant  people. 
There  Jehovah  was  to  be  thought  peculiarly  present,  and  therefore  peculiarly 
approachable.  By  the  Jew  the  Lord  God  Almighty  was  not  to  be  sought  in  woods 
or  fountains  or  valleys,  but  in  this  house  which  He  had  appointed.  ...  It  must  be 
remembered,  however,  that  approach  to  Jehovah  was  conditioned  by  the  terms  of  the 
Sinaitic  revelation.  Whilst,  therefore,  the  Tabernacle  as  the  dwelling-place  of  the 
Most  High,  was  by  the  Divine  condescension  a  place  where  God  and  the  Jew  might 
come  together,  that  contact  was  arranged  in  accordance  with  the  characteristics  of 
the  Mosaic  dispensation.  The  whole  structure  was  a  place  of  meeting  where  man 
and  God  could  congregate;  bu^  it  was  in  the  court  only  that  the  common  Israelite 
could  approach  Jehovah,  and  that  by  mediation  in  the  person  of  the  appointed 
priestly  representatives  ;  in  the  Holy  Place,  to  which  the  priests  alone  had  access, 
the  worshippers  also  approached  the  throne  of  Deity  by  mediation,  being  admitted, 
so  to  speak,  to  the  anteroom  of  the  Divine  audience-chamber  by  the  adoration  of 
their  chief;  whilst  to  the  high  priest  alone,  and  that  after  solemn  preparation,  was 
it  permitted  on  one  day  in  the  year  to  pass  within  the  veil,  and  gaze  unhindered 
Upon  that  mercy-seat,  aglow  with  gold,  where  rested  the  shadowy  cloud  of  the 
Shechinah.  Further,  if  the  Tabernacle  was  the  appointed  sanctuary  where  man 
might  meet  with  God  on  the  fulfilment  of  certain  conditions,  be  it  noted  that  the 


CHAP.  I.]  LEVITICUS. 


several  altars  were,  so  to  speak,  the  points  at  which  those  conditions  could  be  best 
fulfilled.  Every  square  inch  of  the  sacred  enclosure  was  a  place  of  meeting 
between  Jehovah  and  His  people,  according  to  the  terms  of  the  Divine  revelation  : 
but  it  was  at  the  altar  of  burnt-offering  in  the  court  that  the  non-priestly  wor- 
shippers approached  most  nearly  to  their  God ;  it  was  at  the  golden  altar  in  the 
Holy  Place  that  the  priests  were  admitted  to  closest  access ;  and  it  was  as  he 
approached  most  directly  the  space  beneath  the  outstretched  wings  of  the  cherubim 
that  the  high  priest  drew  nearest  to  the  throne  of  intercession.  The  several  altars 
•were  the  shrines,  so  to  speak,  of  the  several  sanctuaries,  in  which  their  essence  was 
concentrated,  and  from  which  their  power  radiated.  The  essential  significance  of 
the  peculiar  sanctuary  of  Judaism  lay,  then,  in  the  fact  that,  being  the  visible 
dwelling-place  of  Jehovah,  it  testified  to  the  possibility  of  human  approach  to  God 
so  long  as  the  conditions  of  the  related  laws  were  observed — these  conditions  being, 
so  far  at  least  as  the  theocratic  status  of  the  worshippers  was  concerned,  that 
the  Israelite  might  come  near  to  God  in  the  person  of  His  priests  in  the  court,  and 
especially  at  the  altar  of  burnt-offering;  that  in  the  Holy  Place,  and  especially  at 
the  altar  of  incense,  the  priesthood  might  do  homage  to  Jehovah  as  enshrined 
behind  the  veil ;  and  that  in  the  Holy  of  Holies,  and  especially  at  the  high  altar  of 
the  mercy-seat,  the  high  priest  might,  by  careful  obedience  to  the  prescribed  con- 
ditions, occasionally  regard  that  cloud  by  which  the  Almighty  condescended  to 
reveal  and  at  the  same  time  to  conceal  His  presence.  [A.  Cave,  D.D.)  God 
knoidn  in  the  Tabernacle ;  or,  redemptive  relations : — The  redeemed  people  of  God 
only  know  God  in  the  Tabernacle  ;  and  none,  who  belong  not  to  that  Tabernacle  on 
earth,  can  belong  to  God  in  heaven.  All  who  are  "  of  faith  " — all  who  have  fed  on 
the  Passover  Lamb,  belong  to  the  Tabernacle  ;  but  Egypt  is  the  type  of  the  position 
of  all  besides.  How  important  to  remember  this,  when  so  many  efforts  are  being 
made  to  destroy  the  distinctions  which  redemption  has  constituted,  and  to  speak  of 
man's  natural  condition  as  having  in  it  the  elements  of  saving  relation  to  God  I 
Men  wish  to  sweep,  as  it  were,  from  the  earth  the  Tabernacle  and  its  lessons,  and 
to  sanctify  Egvpt  in  the  name  of  God.  Israel  themselves  knew  nothing  of  the 
Tabernacle  whilst  in  Egypt :  it  was  a  gift  reserved  for  them  after  they  had  entered 
the  wilderness.  They  were  led  into  the  wilderness  not  merely  to  learn  its  solitude 
and  its  sorrows,  but  to  become  acquainted  with  God — His  service  and  His  ways. 
The  holy  vessels  of  the  Tabernacle,  the  inner  curtains  of  blue,  and  purple,  and 
scarlet,  the  priest  robed  in  garments  of  glory  and  beauty,  stood  in  strange  contrast 
with  the  waste  and  howling  scene  around  them ;  yet  faith  has  still  to  know  the 
same  contrast,  whilst  learning  here  respecting  Christ  and  the  various  relations  in 
which  we  stand  to  God  and  to  Him.  The  heart  that  lingers  in  Egypt,  and  refuses, 
as  it  were,  to  enter  the  wilderness,  will  little  learn  the  lessons  of  the  Tabernacle ; 
but  all  who  recognise  how  truly  redemption  has  separated  them  for  ever  from  that 
land  of  nature  and  of  curse,  will  find,  in  the  knowledge  of  the  Tabernacle,  tbeir 
daily  solace,  till  the  hour  comes  for  them  to  enter  into  the  abiding  rest.  In  the 
Tabernacle  we  typically  learn  the  relations  of  God  to  His  redeemed  peo^Dle.  "We  are 
there  taught  respecting  the  sacrifice  provided  for  us  in  Christ — its  fulness,  its 
various  relations  to  God  and  to  ourselves.  There  we  learn  the  ground  on  which 
we  worship  and  serve  Him,  meeting  Him  in  the  blessings  of  peace  through 
redemption.  (B.  W.Newton.)  God  found  in  His  sanctuary  : — But  when  the  Lord 
had  arranged  a  tent  of  meeting  with  His  people.  He  spoke  to  Moses  out  of  the  tent  of 
meeting.  It  is  all  very  well  for  the  man  who  is  in  the  wilderness  or  on  the 
mountain-top,  in  the  line  of  duty,  to  listen  for  the  sound  of  the  Lord's  voice  there ; 
but  when  a  man  can  find  his  way  into  the  sanctuary  there  is  where  he  may  expect 
to  be  spoken  to  by  the  Lord.  If  he  leaves  the  sanctuary  to  wander  among  the 
thorn-bushes,  or  to  clamber  the  mountain  peaks,  with  the  idea  that  it  is  in  Nature's 
temples  that  he  is  to  find  the  God  of  nature,  he  will  miss  a  meeting  with  the 
covenant-making  and  covenant-keeping  God  in  the  place  of  meeting.  There  is  no 
more  likely  place  to  find  God  than  where  God  says  He  may  be  found  ;  no  more 
hopeful  place  for  meeting  God  than  in  God's  meeting-place.  "  Thy  way,  0  God, 
is  in  the  sanctuary!"  Help  us  to  find  Thee  there!  (H.  G.  Trumhull.)  The 
pardoning  presence  of  Jesus  : — The  Tabernacle  was  a  figure  of  Christ,  and  was 
intended  to  teach  us  some  important  lessons  respecting  Him.  We  have  in  the 
Tabernacle  a  beautiful  illustration  of  one  of  the  precious  names  of  Jesus  our 
Saviour.  Just  before  He  came  into  our  world,  the  angel  Gabriel  was  sent  to  Joseph, 
His  reputed  father,  to  tell  him  about  that  wonderful  Child  that  was  to  be  born 
unto  Mary  his  wife.     And  this  is  what  the  angel  said :  "  They  shall  call  His  name 


4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  i- 

Emmanuel,  which  being  interpreted  is,  God  with  us"  (Matt.  i.  23).  This  name  is 
wonderful.  It  is  full  of  meaning.  But  many  find  it  difScnlt  to  understand  its 
meaning.  And  so  God  ordered  the  Tabernacle  to  be  built  in  the  wilderness,  that  in 
it  He  might  dwell  among  the  people,  and  thus  be  a  figure,  or  illustration  to  them  of 
the  way  in  which  Jesus  now  dwells  in  the  hearts  of  His  people  by  faith.  The 
Tabernacle  was  a  definition  of  this  name — Emmanuel.  As  God  was  present  with 
the  Israelites  in  the  wilderness,  in  the  Tabernacle,  so  Jesus  is  present  with  His 
people  in  this  world.  And  as  we  study  the  different  parts  of  this  Tabernacle  we  are 
taught  much  that  is  interesting  and  profitable  concerning  the  presence  of  Jesus 
with  His  people.  The  Tabernacle  taught  that  there  was  to  be  pardon  connected 
with  His  presence.  The  brazen  altar,  or  the  altar  of  burnt  sacrifice,  was  the  part 
of  the  Tabernacle  that  taught  this  lesson.  That  was  the  first  thing  one  would  see 
on  entering  the  court  of  the  Tabernacle.  Here  the  daily  sacrifice  was  offered.  Here 
the  blood  of  the  slain  animals  was  shed,  that  it  might  be  sprinkled  both  on  the 
priests  and  on  the  people.  No  one  was  allowed  to  enter  the  Tabernacle  or  to 
worship  God  there  till  he  had  first  been  to  this  brazen  altar,  and  had  the  blood  of 
the  sacrifice  sprinkled  upon  him.  And  the  great  blessing  represented  by  the 
shedding  and  sprinkling  of  the  blood  was  the  pardon  of  sin.  There  was  no  power 
in  the  blood  of  those  animals  to  put  away  sin,  or  to  procure  pardon.  But  it  pointed 
to  the  blood  of  Christ,  through  which  alone  all  pardon  comes.  And  this  is  what  the 
Apostle  Paul  teaches  us,  when  he  says  that,  "  without  the  shedding  of  blood  there  is 
no  remission  "  (Heb.  ix.  22),  or  no  pardon.  If  Jesus  had  not  shed  His  precious 
blood  there  never  would  have  been  any  pardon  for  sin.  But  that  blood  was  shed. 
And  now  there  is  pardon  for  all  who  repent  and  believe  in  Him.  His  presence  with 
His  people  is  a  pardoning  presence.  "  He  has  power  on  earth  to  forgive  sins  " 
(Matt.  ix.  6).  There  is  nothing  that  we  need  more  than  pardon.  We  are  born  in 
sin.  We  sin  every  day,  and  we  are  always  needing  pardon.  And  it  is  a  blessed 
thing  to  know  that  we  can  have  this  pardon  at  any  time  by  seeking  it  in  the  right 
way.  Jesus  is — "  ready  to  forgive  "  (Psa.  Ixxxvi.  5).  His  promise  is  that — "  He  will 
abundantly  pardon  "  (Isa.  Iv.  7).  Here  is  an  illustration  of  the  pardoning  power 
of  Jesus.  It  was  told  by  a  sailor  who  witnessed  it,  who  was  made  a  Christian  by  it, 
and  afterwards  became  a  chaplain.  '*  0;ar  vessel  lay  at  anchor,"  said  he,  "  off  the 
coast  of  Africa.  The  yellow  fever  had  broken  out  on  board,  and  several  of  the  men 
had  died.  It  was  my  duty  every  morning  to  go  through  that  part  of  the  vessel  used 
as  a  hospital,  and  see  if  any  of  the  men  had  died  during  the  night.  One  morning 
as  I  was  passing  through  this  sick  ward,  a  poor  fellow  lying  there  took  hold  of  me 
with  his  cold,  clammy  hand.  I  knew  him  very  well.  He  was  an  old  shipmate,  and 
one  of  the  wickedest  men  on  board.  I  saw  in  a  moment  that  he  had  not  long  to 
live.  'Oh,  Jim,'  he  said,  'for  God's  sake,  let  some  one  come  and  read  the  Bible 
to  me  before  I  die ! '  None  of  the  sailors  had  a  Bible ;  but  at  last  I  found  that  there 
was  one  on  board  belonging  to  the  cabin-boy.  I  told  him  to  get  his  Bible,  and 
bring  it  into  the  sick  ward,  and  went  back  there  myself.  Presently  the  boy  came 
with  a  small  Bible  in  his  hand.  In  the  meantime  a  number  of  the  Kroomen,  or 
native  Africans,  who  were  working  on  board,  gathered  round  the  sick  man,  not  to 
see  him  die,  but,  as  one  of  them  said,  '  to  see  what  de  good  book  do  for  poor  Massa 
Eichie.'  I  told  the  boy  to  read  a  chapter.  He  sat  down  by  the  sick  man,  and, 
opening  at  the  third  chapter  of  St.  John,  he  began  to  read.  The  poor  fellow  fixed 
his  eyes  on  the  reader,  and  listened  most  earnestly  to  every  word  he  spoke. 
Presently  the  boy  came  to  the  beautiful  words  in  the  sixteenth  verse,  '  God  so  loved 
the  world  that  He  gave  His  only  begotten  Son,  that  whosoever  believeth  in  Him 
should  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life ! '  I  watched  the  face  of  the  dying  man 
as  these  words  were  read.  I  never  saw  such  earnestness  and  anxiety  in  any  face  as 
were  in  his.  The  boy  was  going  on  with  the  next  verse,  when  the  sick  man 
exclaimed,  •  Stop  my  boy,  stop  !  Read  that  verse  again,  and  read  it  slowly.'  The 
boy  repeated  the  verse,  and  was  going  on  again.  But  he  was  interrupted  a  second 
and  a  third  time  with  the  earnest  cry,  '  Stop,  my  boy,  stop  !  Bead  that  verse 
again.'  And  when  he  had  done  so  a  number  of  times,  the  dying  man  said,  'Don't 
read  any  more.  That's  enough.'  And  then,  as  he  grew  fainter  and  fainter,  we 
heard  him,  in  a  low  voice,  repeating  to  himself  those  wonderful  words,  and  making 
his  own  remarks  on  th<  m,  '  Whoxoever — that  means  anybody.  That  means  me. 
Vfhosoe\er  believeth.  I  do  believe  this.  Well,  what  then?  Whosoever  believeth  shall 
not  perish.  No,  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life.  Not  perish — not  perish — but 
have  everlasting  life.'  These  were  his  last  words.  With  these  upon  his  lips,  he 
passed  away,  and  entered  into  heaven — '  o«e  pardoned  sinner  more,'  saved  through 


CHAP.  I.]  LEVITICUS. 


the  precious  blood  of  Christ."  The  presence  of  Jesus  which  the  Tabernacle  illus- 
trates is — a  pardoning  presence,     (liichard  Newton,  D.D.) 

Ver.  2.  Bring  an  offering  unto   the   Lord. — The  Levitical  sacrifices : — I.   The 

SACKiriCES  AKISIXG  FROM  BREACH    OF   THE  COVENANT — COIIPOLSORY.       Sin  and  trCSpaSS- 

offerings  (chaps,  iv.-vi.).  Presumptuous — literally  high-handed — sins  incurred  that 
forfeiture(Numb.  xv.  30;  Deut.  xvii.  12).  In  contrast  to  these  sins  of  presumption — 
1.  The  sin-oii'ering  was  for  sins  of  ignorance  (chaps,  iv.,  v.).  2.  The  trespass-offering 
(chap.  V.  14,  etc.)  differed  from  the  sin-oti'eriug  mainly  in  the  character  of  the 
sin  to  be  atoned  for.  It  was  a  sin  calling  for  "ameuds"  or  compensation.  II.  The 
SACRIFICES  FROJi  WITHIN  THE  COVENANT — VOLUNTARY.  Omitting  the  mcat-offering 
(chap,  li.),  which  was  an  adjunct  of  the  other  sacrifices,  and  involved  no  shedding 
of  blood,  we  notice — 1.  The  burnt-offering.  The  stated  and  congregational  burnt- 
offermgs  of  the  day,  and  week,  and  year,  &c.,  were  compulsory.  The  occasional 
offering,  of  which  we  speak  here,  was  voluntary  (chap.  i.).  The  burnt-offering 
pointed  to  the  entire  surrender  of  a  man's  being  and  life  to  Go  1.  Its  characteristic 
was  its  entire  consumption  and  up-going  in  a  flame  to  God.  It  was  equivalent  to  a 
prayer,  recognising  God's  sovereignty,  aud  His  claim  of  service  in  all  our  relations. 
He  who  asks,  "  How  can  I  best  serve  God?  "  will  commit  his  way  to  God,  and  be 
at  peace.  2.  The  offering  vowed :  i.e.,  made  as  the  result  of  a  preceding  vow 
(Gen.  XXXV.  1 ;  1  Sam.  i.  11,  28).  3.  The  thank-offering,  the  greatest  of  the  three. 
The  occasions  for  the  thank-offering  were  innumerable.  Joy  as  well  as  sorrow  calls 
to  religious  exercise.  "In  everything  give  thanks."  This  sacrifice  of  praise  is  the 
one  sacrifice  of  heaven.  (W.  Roberts,  M.A.)  TIte  giving  of  the  sacrificial  laws: — 
I.  The  very  same  voice  which  proclaimed  the  commandments  on  Sinai  is  here  said 

TO  ANNOUNCE  THE  NATURE  OF  THE  SACRIFICES,  AND  HOW,  WHEN,  AND  BY  WHOM  THEY  ARE 

TO  BE  PRESENTED.  The  unsecu  King  and  Lawgiver  is  here,  as  everywhere,  making 
known  His  will.  Those  sacrifices  which  it  was  supposed  were  to  bend  and  determine 
His  will  themselves  proceeded  from  it.  II.  These  words  were  spoken  to  the  children 
of  Israel  out  of  the  Tabernacle.  The  Tabernacle  was  the  witness  of  God's 
abiding  presence  with  His  people,  the  pledge  that  they  were  to  trust  Him,  and  that 
He  sought  intercourse  with  them.  III.  The  Tabernacle  is  represented  as  the  Taber- 
nacle of  the  CONGREGATION.  There,  where  (xod  dwells,  is  the  proper  home  of  the 
whole  people  ;  there  they  may  know  that  they  are  one.  IV.  "  Say  to  the  children 
of  Israel,  If  any  of  you  bring  an  offering  to  the  Lord."  The  desire  for  such 
SACRIFICE  IS  presumed.  Everything  in  the  position  of  the  Jew  is  awakening  in 
him  the  sense  of  gratitude,  of  obligation,  of  dependence.  He  is  to  take  of  the  herd 
and  the  flock  for  his  offering.  The  lesson  is  a  double  one.  The  common  things, 
the  most  ordinary  part  of  his  possessions,  are  those  which  he  is  to  bring;  that  is  one 
part  of  his  teaching.  The  animals  are  the  subjects  of  man  ;  he  is  to  rule  them  and 
make  use  of  them  for  his  own  higher  objects ;  that  is  another.     V.  The  victim  was 

TAKEN  TO  THE  DOOR  OF  THE  PLACE  AT  WHICH  ALL  ISRAELITES  H.VD  AN  EQUAL  RIGHT  TO 
APPEAR  ;    BUT  THE  MAN  WHO  BROUGHT  IT  LAID  HIS  OWN  HAND  UPON  THE  HEAD  OF  IT.      He 

signified  that  the  act  was  his,  that  it  expressed  thoughts  in  his  mind  which  no  one 
else  could  know  of.  VI.  The  reconciliation  which  he  seeks  he  shall  find.  God 
will  meet  him  there.  God  accepts  this  sign  of  his  submission.  He  restores  him  to 
his  rights  in  the  Divine  society.  VII.  Now  it  is  that  we  first  hear  of  the 
PRIESTS,  Aaron's  sons.  If  there  was  to  be  a  congregation,  if  the  individual  Israelites 
were  not  to  have  their  separate  sacrifices  and  their  separate  go  Is,  then  there  must 
be  a  representative  of  this  unity.  The  priest  was  consecrated  as  a  witness  to  the 
people  of  the  actual  relation  which  existed  between  them  and  God.  (F.  D.  Maurice, 
3I.A.)  Communion  with  God  by  a  redeemed  j^eople  through  altar-offerings: — I. 

Altar-offerings  and  Tabernacle  ministries  all  reach  their  completion  in 
Christ.  1.  In  each  offering  three  distinct  objects  are  present :  the  offering,  the 
priest,  the  oft'erer.  Christ  is  each  of  and  all  these  :  Substitute,  Mediator,  Innocent 
Victim.  2.  The  difference  in  the  several  offerings.  Different  aspects  of  Christ's 
offering.  3.  The  offerer  himself  also  reflects  Christ  in  His  diverse  aspects.  4.  The 
different  grades  in  the  various  offerings  :  bullock,  lamb,  dove.  Denoting  the  different 
estimates  and  apprehensions  formed  of  Christ  by  His  people.  Some  never  go 
beyond  the  conception  of  Christ  as  their  Paschal  offering,  securing  their  redemption 
from  Egyptian  bondage  and  death.  Others,  however,  see  Him  as  their  Burnt- 
offering,  wholly  devoted  to  God  for  them  ;  while  to  others  He  is  the  passive  Lamb, 
silent  and  submissive  in  affliction ;  and  to  others  the  mourning  Dove,  gentle  and 
Sorrowful  in  His  innocency.    11.  Altab-offerings  and  Tabernacle  ministbies  vebb 


6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

DESIGNED  FOR  Isbael's  ACCEPTABLE  COMMUNION  WITH  GoD.  The  types  of  Leviticus, 
in  distinction  from  the  types  of  redemption  or  deliverance  from  doom,  give  us  the 
work  of  Christ  in  its  bearing  on  worship  and  communion.  1.  They  meet  the  needs 
of  a  ransomed  people  in  providing  for  their  access  to  God.  If  they  come  for  con- 
secration they  bring  the  burnt-offerings;  if  for  grateful  acknowledgment  of  Divine 
bounty  and  graciousness,  they  bring  the  food  offerings ;  if  for  reconciliation,  after 
ignorant  misadventure  or  neglect  of  duty  or  temporary  transgression,  they  bring 
their  peace  or  trespass-offering.  But  they  all  provide  a  basis  for  access  to  and 
acceptance  with  God.  2.  Christ's  work,  as  connected  with  the  communion  of  His 
people,  must  be  viewed  under  manifold  representations.  {A.  Jukes.)  Of  the 
differences  between  the  giving  of  the  moral  law,  and  these  ceremonial  latvs : — 1. 
The  moral  law  contained  in  the  Decalogue  was  delivered  immediately  by  God 
Himself,  because  it  concerned  all  people ;  the  ceremonial  law  by  Moses,  because  it 
specially  concerned  the  Jews,  2.  They  differed  in  the  manner  ;  for  the  Decalogue 
was  written  in  tables  of  stone,  but  these  only  in  a  book  ;  to  show  that  they  were 
perpetual,  these  not  to  endure  always.  3.  The  place  was  different.  The  moral 
law  was  delivered  in  Mount  Sinai ;  the  ceremonial  out  of  the  Tabernacle,  to  show 
that  it  served  only  for  the  Tabernacle,  and  was  to  continue  no  longer.  4.  They 
differ  in  the  time  of  delivery.  The  moral  law  was  delivered  at  once ;  the  ceremonies 
were  given  at  divers  times,  for  Moses  had  not  been  able  at  once  to  have  received 
them  all.  5.  There  was  some  difference  in  respect  of  the  people,  in  whose  hearing 
these  laws  were  delivered.  Tbe  Decalogue  was  delivered  in  Mount  Sinai  by  a  lond, 
thundering  voice,  that  all  might  hear ;  but  here  at  the  giving  of  the  ceremonial  law 
only  the  heads,  princes,  and  elders  came  together,  particularly  the  Levites  whom  the 
observations  of  these  ceremonies  more  nearly  concerned.  (A.  Willet,  D.D.) 
Essential  significance  of  the  Mosaic  injunctions : — 1.  At  the  root  of  the  essential  sig- 
nificance of  the  Mosaic  sacrifices  two  ideas  lie — viz.,  the  Mosaic  idea  of  presentation, 
and  that  of  atonement.  (1)  Upon  the  idea  of  presentation  (or  "  giving  to  God,"  as 
it  has  been  otherwise  termed),  the  fundamental  idea  of  all  sacrifice,  little  need  here 
be  said.  The  Mosaic  system  of  worship,  like  the  patriarchal,  was  based  upon  the 
fact  that  man  might  approach  God  so  long  as  his  hands  were  not  empty.  As  Adam 
worshipped  in  Eden  by  the  surrender  of  time  and  strength  in  obedient  performance 
of  the  Divine  will,  and  possibly  by  the  presentation  of  some  of  the  fruits  of  his 
labour,  as  Abel  brought  of  the  firstlings  of  his  flock,  the  acceptance  of  his  gift 
opening  a  way  to  God  which  the  patriarchs  were  not  slow  to  follow ;  so,  in  the  law 
given  upon  Sinai,  the  Jew  was  bidden  to  come  near  his  Maker  and  Preserver,  gifts 
in  hand.  Offerings  of  toil  became  means  of  grace ;  things  eloquent  of  cost  were 
channels  for  what  was  priceless  ;  pledges  of  human  sincerity  in  appeal  were  trans- 
muted into  pledges  of  Divine  earnestness  in  reply ;  gifts  from  men  to  God  brought 
gifts  from  God  to  men.  (2)  Unlike  the  preceding  idea,  which  belonged  to  every 
sacrifice  of  whatever  name,  in  some  measure  or  other,  the  idea  of  atonement 
belonged  simply  to  sacrifices  of  blood.  "  To  make  an  atonement,"  if  we  probe  the 
Hebrew  figure  to  the  bottom,  was  to  throw,  so  to  speak,  a  veil  over  sin  so  dazzling 
that  the  veil  and  not  the  sin  was  visible,  or  to  place  side  by  side  with  sin  something 
BO  attractive  as  to  completely  engross  the  eye.  The  figure  which  the  New  Testament 
uses  when  it  speaks  of  the  "  ne\v  robe,"  the  Old  Testament  uses  when  it  speaks  of 
"  atonement."  When  an  atonement  was  made  under  the  Law,  it  was  as  though  the 
Divine  eye,  which  had  been  kindled  at  the  sight  of  sin  and  foulness,  was  quieted  by 
the  garment  thrown  around  it ;  or,  to  use  a  figure  much  too  modern,  yet  equally 
appropriate,  it  was  as  if  the  sinner  who  had  been  exposed  to  the  lightning  of  the 
Divine  wrath  had  been  suddenly  wrapped  round  and  insulated.  The  idea  of  atone- 
ment was  the  so  covering  the  sinner  that  his  sin  was  invisible  or  non-existent  in  the 
sense  that  it  could  no  longer  come  between  him  and  his  Maker.  2.  Carrying  in 
mind  these  two  conceptions  of  presentation  and  atonement  which  the  language  of 
the  law  associates  with  every  animal  sacrifice,  tbe  names  and  express  statements 
concerning  each  variety  of  such  sacrifice  will  enable  us  to  add  their  distinguishing 
to  their  general  characteristics.  (1)  The  burnt-offering  was  at  once  a  sacrifice  and 
an  atonement ;  but  it  was  the  element  of  presentation  which  was  brought  by  it 
into  especial  prominence.  It  was  pre-eminently  the  sacrifice  of  worship.  (2) 
The  peace-offering  resembled  the  burnt-offering  in  the  relative  insignificance 
which  it  attached  to  the  fact  of  atonement ;  it  differed  in  laying  stress 
upon  quite  another  affinity  which  might  exist  between  God  and  man.  As 
the  burnt-offering  provided  a  means  of  individual  worship,  the  peace-offering 
provided  a  worship  that  was  social.      The  peace-offerings  were  the  sacrifices  of 


CHAP.  I.]  LEVITICUS. 


friendship,  and  were  presented  by  those  who  either  desired,  or  lived  and  rejoiced  in, 
the  sense  of  an  established  friendship  between  themselves  and  their  Maker  and  Pre- 
server. (3)  In  the  sin  and  trespass-oiiferings  the  fact  of  atonement  is  emphasised. 
(c)  The  sin-offerings,  as  their  name  implies,  were  offerings  for  sin.  They  may  be 
divided  into  three  classes  :  those  which  were  presented  in  processes  of  purification  ; 
those  which  had  to  do  with  the  expiation  of  precise  sins,  whether  committed  in 
church  or  state,  by  priest  or  ruler  or  common  Israelite ;  and  those  which  had  to  do 
with  the  expiation  of  undefined  sins,  (b)  The  trespass-offerings  were  presented  in 
atonement  for  sins  against  God  or  against  man  which  admitted  of  compensation. 
There  was  in  every  trespass-offering  the  idea  of  retribution.  (4)  Of  the  several 
species  of  bloodless  sacrifices,  nothing  further  need  be  said  as  regards  their  essential 
siguificauce  than  that  they  are  gifts  pure  and  simple,  without  any  element  of  atone- 
ment, and  that  they  have  for  their  aim  to  carry  this  fundamental  conception  of 
worship  by  presentation  into  all  the  ramifying  relations  of  life.  By  the  aid  of  the 
meat-offerings  and  drink-offerings  and  their  priestly  analogues,  the  shew-bread  and 
oil  and  incense,  God  might  be  approached  by  the  produce  of  labour  ;  by  the  rausoms 
and  firstfruits,  He  might  be  approached  in  recognition  of  the  gifts  of  child  and 
beast  and  produce  of  the  earth  ;  even  battle  might  be  consecrated  by  the  presenta- 
tion of  spoils.  By  gifts  God  could  be  approached,  and  the  sources  of  these  gifts 
being  various,  the  Divine  hallowing  might  be  as  various.  3.  Without  minutely  in- 
vestigating the  essential  significance  of  the  various  holy  days  of  the  Jewish  calendar, 
it  is  sufficient  to  call  to  mind  that,  amongst  other  uses,  these  holy  days  weie  days 
f or  "  holy  convocation."  They  were  opportunities  specially  arranged  for  a  more 
regular  and  continuous  attendance  upon  the  means  of  grace  provided  by  the  Taber- 
nacle and  its  services.  (A.  Cave,  D.D.)  The  Jeicish  calendar  of  sacrifice  : — How 
laborious,  protracted,  and  intricate  a  system  was  this  Mosaic  worship  by  presenta- 
tion !  Yet  how  imposing!  No  religious  ritual  of  ancient  or  modern  times  bas 
appealed  more  forcibly  to  the  eye  or  the  imagination.  It  was  a  stirring  and  sugges- 
tive sight,  beyond  all  question,  which  greeted  such  an  one  as  a  Levite,  as  he  stood 
in  early  morning  within  the  court  of  the  Tabernacle  ready  to  perform  those  more 
menial  offices  to  which  he  had  been  appointed.  Around  him  ran  the  white  curtains 
of  the  sacred  enclosure,  relieved  at  regular  intervals  by  the  dull  gold  of  the  copper 
uprights  and  the  gleam  of  the  silver  capitals.  A  few  paces  from  where  he  watches, 
the  more  favoured  members  of  his  tribe,  bearded,  clad  in  their  priestly  robes  of 
white  and  their  parti-coloured  girdles,  are  standing  barefoot  near  the  altar  of  burnt- 
offering,  on  the  hearth  of  which  the  remnants  of  last  night's  sacrifice  are  still 
burning,  or  possibly  purifying  themselves  at  the  laver  in  preparation  for  their  sacred 
duties.  The  lamb  for  the  morning  sacrifice  is  slain  and  burnt  before  his  eyes  ;  and 
a  few  moments  afterwards,  the  high  priest,  in  his  ofiQcial  robes  of  white  and  blue, 
"  Holiness  to  the  Lord  "  glistening  in  gold  upon  his  fair  mitre,  the  jewelled  breast- 
plate flashing  in  the  sun,  is  passing  to  the  Holy  Place,  the  golden  bells  and  pome- 
granates at  the  fringe  of  his  tunic  ringing  as  he  goes.  Perhaps,  as  holy  hands  draw 
aside  the  curtain  of  the  sanctuary,  a  glimpse  is  caught  of  the  consecrated  space 
within,  lit  by  the  golden  candlestick  and  hazy  with  incense  from  the  golden  altar; 
or,  if  the  interior  is  sealed,  there  nevertheless  is  the  tent  of  Jehovah,  its  gorgeous 
parti-coloured  curtain  in  full  view,  and  its  immediate  covering  of  blue  and  gold  and 
scarlet  and  purple  worked  upon  white,  with  cherubim,  just  visible  beneath  the  outer 
awnings ;  and  the  onlooker  knew  that  within,  not  far  from  the  ark  and  the  mercy- 
seat  and  tbe  Shechinah,  which  were  hidden  behind  the  veil,  the  high  priest  was  per- 
forming Divine  service,  and  meeting  with  Jehovah  under  exceptional  privileges. 
As  private  members  of  the  chosen  race  come  streaming  in  with  their  offerings,  the 
more  active  duties  of  the  day  begin.  At  one  time,  one  who  has  inadvertently  broken 
some  commandment  of  the  law  is  watching  the  blood  of  the  sin-offering,  which  he 
has  just  brought  and  killed  with  his  own  hand,  as  it  is  smeared  in  atonement  upon 
the  horns  of  the  altar  ;  at  another,  the  priest  is  listening  over  the  head  of  a  ram  to 
a  conf  ssion  of  fraud,  and  computing  the  amount  of  monetary  indemnity  to  be  paid. 
Now  a  Hebrew  woman,  but  recently  a  mother,  is  modestly  presenting  herself  with 
her  offering  of  pigeons  ;  and  now  the  high  priest  is  passing  through  the  gate  of  the 
court,  attended  by  a  Levite  carrying  birds  and  scarlet  wool  and  hyssop — he  has 
been  summoned  without  the  camp  to  examine  a  restored  leper.  Anon  an  applica- 
tion is  made  for  the  means  of  purifying  some  tent  where  the  dead  is  lying.  Here, 
in  joyful  recognition  of  the  Divine  favour,  a  solitary  worshipper  is  presenting  a 
burnt-oft'ering ;  there,  recumbent  upon  the  holy  soil,  a  whole  family  are  merrily 
partaking  of  the  remains  of  a  peace-offering.    At  one  hour  a  householder  is  com- 


8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

pounding  for  the  property  which  lie  has  voluntarily  vowed  unto  the  Lord  ;  the  next, 
a  Nazarite,  with  unshorn  hair  and  beard,  is  presenting  the  prescribed  sacrifices  for 
release  from  his  vow.  Possibly,  as  the  day  advances,  a  consecration  to  the  priesthood 
is  impressively  performed.  And  these  and  other  ceremonies  are  maintained  the  whole 
year  round.  As  the  Jewish  calendar  ran  its  course  in  those  times,  exceptional,  alas ! 
when  the  religious  sense  of  the  nation  was  quick  and  its  practice  scrupulous,  it  was  as 
if  one  long  bleat,  one  incessant  lowing,  filled  the  air  ;  it  was  as  if  one  lung,  continuous 
stream  of  sacrificial  blood  choked  the  runnels  of  the  court.  The  year  opened  with 
the  evening  sacrifice  and  the  new  moon  celebration,  the  expiring  flames  of  which 
were  fed  next  day  by  the  ordinary  morning  sacrifice  and  by  a  round  of  individual 
presentations,  which  must  sometmies  have  known  no  interruption  until  the  smoke 
of  the  evening  sacrifice  again  rose  into  the  air  and  another  day  began.  Day  after 
day  the  customary  ceremouial  was  repeated,  till  the  Sabbath  twilight  fell  and  double 
sacrifices  were  slaughtered.  On  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  first  month  came  the 
solemn  celebration  of  the  Passover,  when  in  every  home,  with  devout  recollections 
and  enthusiastic  hopes,  a  Paschal  lamb  was  spread  upon  the  board.  Then  followed 
the  seven  days  of  Unleavened  Bread,  with  their  customary  and  holy-day  ritual,  bring- 
ing at  length,  after  the  repeated  diurnal,  sabbatic,  and  mensual  formalities,  the  fuller 
slaughter  of  Pentecost.  Day  after  day,  Sabbath  after  Sabbath,  new  moon  after  new 
moon,  the  authorised  worship  was  again  continued,  until  there  came  a  break  to  the 
monotony  once  more  on  the  first  day  of  the  seventh  month  in  the  Feast  of  Trumpets, 
and  on  the  tenth  day  of  the  same  month  in  the  awful  and  grave  procedure  of  the 
Day  of  Atonement,  followed  after  five  days'  interval  by  the  singular  and  more 
grateful  worship  of  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles.  The  year  was  afterwards  brought  to  a 
close  by  the  common  series  of  daily,  weekly,  and  monthly  effusions  of  blood.  {Ibid.) 
Divers  sacrifices,  Init  one  Christ : — 1.  There  were  many  sorts  of  sacrifices  and  yet  but 
one  Christ  to  be  signified  by  them  all.  This  did  the  Lord  in  great  mercy  and 
wisdom,  that  so  His  people,  fully  busied  and  pleased  with  such  variety,  might  have 
neither  cause  nor  leisure  to  look  unto  the  wicked  idolatries  of  the  heathens,  accord- 
ing to  the  several  charges  given  them  of  God,  "  To  beware  lest  they  were  taken  in  a 
snare,  to  ask  after  their  gods  saying.  How  did  these  nations  serve  their  gods,  that  I 
may  do  so  likewise?"  &c.  Seeing  all  the  abomination  that  God  hateth,  they  did 
unto  their  gods,  burning  both  their  sons  and  daughters  with  fire  to  their  gods,  and 
the  Lord  would  have  them  do  only  what  He  commanded,  putting  nothing  unto  it, 
neither  taking  anything  from  it.  2.  Although  Christ  be  but  one,  and  His  sacrifice 
but  one,  yet  great  is  the  fruit,  and  many  mercies  flow  from  Him  and  His  death 
unto  us.  By  Him  our  sins  are  washed  out,  by  Him  God's  wrath  against  us  is 
appeased,  by  Him  we  are  adopted  and  taken  for  the  sons  of  God  and  fellow-heirs 
with  Him,  by  Him  we  are  justified  and  endued  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  enabled 
thereby  to  die  unto  sin  and  to  live  unto  righteousness,  walking  in  His  holy 
commandments  with  comfort,  and  longing  for  our  deliverance  out  of  this 
vale  of  misery,  "  That  we  may  be  clothed  with  our  house,  which  is  from 
heaven,"  &c.  Divers  sorts  of  sacrifices,  therefore,  were  appointed,  to  note, 
by  that  variety,  the  variety  of  these  fruits  of  Christ  to  all  believers,  though 
He  be  but  one.  3.  There  were  many  sorts  of  sacrifices,  that  so  plainly  the 
Church  might  see  that  these  kind  of  sacrifices  were  not  the  true  sacrifices  for 
sins.  For  if  any  one  had  been  able  to  take  away  sin  the  others  had  b^en  in  vain 
added  (see  Heb.  x.  1).  {Bp.  Bahington.)  The  need  of  varied  sacrifices  : — The 
commencing  ehaiiters  of  Leviticus  present  to  us  five  different  aspects  of  the  sacri- 
ficial service  of  Christ,  varied  according  to  the  variety  of  those  needs  in  us  which 
the  grace  of  the  One  Sacrifice  is  designed  to  meet.  The  want  of  that  full  and  unre- 
served devotedness  which  is  due  on  our  part  to  God,  and  claimed  by  Hiru,  iuut 
which  is  by  us  never  rendered,  is  met  by  that  abounding  grace  which  has  appointed 
another,  perfect  in  devotedness  and  self-renunciation,  to  be  a  burnt-offering  in  our 
room.  The  manifold  deficiences  in  our  personal  characters — the  presence  in  them 
of  so  much  that  should  be  absent,  and  the  absence  of  so  much  that  should  be 
present,  is  met  by  the  presentation  of  Him  for  us,  the  perfectness  of  whose  character 
is  here  typified  by  the  excellency  of  the  meat-offering.  The  condition  of  our  nature 
which  is  enmity  against  God,  because  sin,  essential  sin,  dwells  in  it,  is  met  by  the 
efficacy  of  the  peace  sacrifice,  whereby,  notwithstanding  the  enmity  of  our  nature, 
peace  with  the  Holy  One  becomes  our  portion.  Sin,  even  when  committed  in  such 
intensity  of  blindness,  as  that  we  understand  not  the  heinousness  of  tliat  which  we 
are  doing,  and  perhaps  mistake  it  for  good — such  sin  is  met  by  the  sin-offering  ;  or 
if  it  be  committed  knowingly,  not  under  the  blindness  of  ignorance,  but  in  the  wil- 


CHAP.  I.]  LEVITICrS. 


fulness  of  a  heart  that  consciously  refuses  to  be  restrained,  it  i'^  met  by  the  grace  of 
the  trespass-offering.  Such  are  the  aspects  under  which  the  j^erfectness  of  the  One 
Sacrifice  is  presented  to  us  in  the  commencing  chapters  of  Leviticus.  The  aspects 
are  various,  but  the  sacrifice  is  one ;  just  as  the  colours  of  the  rainbow  may,  for 
instruction  sake,  be  presented  to  us  separately,  but  the  rainbow  which  they  uniteiily 
constitute  is  one.  After  we  have  learned  in  distinctness,  we  combine  in  unity. 
Nor  is  there  any  division  of  the  perfectness  of  the  One  Sacrifice  iti  its  application 
to  them  that  believe.  From  the  first  moment  we  believe,  the  ptn-fectness  of 
Christ's  sacrifice  is  in  all  its  totality  ours.  We  may  not,  perhaps,  either 
appreciate  or  understand  all  that  is  typified  by  these  various  offerings,  jet 
the  united  value  of  them  all  is  reckoned  to  us  by  God.  (B.  W.  Newton.) 
Origin  of  sacrifices  : — It  is  a  little  surjjrising,  upon  first  view,  that  God  should 
appoint  or  sanction  rites  and  services  of  worship,  the  observance  of  wliiuh  would 
make  His  sanctuary'  look  so  much  like  a  solemn  slaughter-house.  But  where  sin  is 
stayed  and  quenched,  tbere  must  be  blood.  Blood  is  the  substance  of  life;  and  as 
sin  involves  the  forfeiture  of  life,  "  without  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  remission." 
Hence  "  almost  all  things  are  by  the  law  purged  with  blood."  These  bloody  rites, 
however,  did  not  originate  with  "  the  law."  It  is  a  question  with  learned  men  how 
they  did  originate.  Some  refer  them  to  some  primitive  enactment  of  God,  and 
others  regard  them  as  the  natural  outgrowth  of  man's  consciousness  of  sin,  and  his 
desire  to  appease  the  Divine  anger  felt  to  attend  upon  it.  It  is  certain  that  they 
are  nearly  as  old  as  man.  They  date  back  to  Noah,  to  Abel,  to  Adam  1  imself.  They 
have  been  found  among  nearly  all  nations.  And  when  God  gave  commandment  to 
Moses  concerning  them,  they  already  formed  a  part  of  the  common  religion  of  the 
world.  They  are  not  here  spoken  of  as  a  new  institution,  now  for  the  first  time 
introduced,  but  are  referred  to  rather  as  an  ancient  and  well-known  element  of 
man's  worship,  to  which  the  Divine  Legislator  meant  only  to  affix  a  more  specific 
ritual.  That  offerings  would,  and  ought  to  be  made,  seems  to  be  taken  for  granted, 
whilst  these  new  commands  relate  only  to  the  manner  in  which  they  were  to  be  made. 
"  If,"  that  is,  in  the  ordinary  course  of  things  already  familiar,  or,  "  when  any  man 
of  you  shall  bring  an  offering  to  the  Lord,  ye  shall  bring  "  so  and  so.  There  is  a 
worship,  at  least  a  disposition  to  worship,  which  has  descended  upon  all  serious 
men  from  the  very  beginning.  There  is  a  theology  even  in  Nature,  and  a  faculty  of 
worship  or  religiousne^:s  which  is  somehow  natural  unto  man.  Eevelation  does  not 
deny  this,  but  takes  it  for  granted,  and  often  appeals  to  it,  and  proceeds  upon  it  as 
its  original  groundwork.  It  does  not  propose  to  engraft  a  religious  department  on 
man's  constitution,  but  recognises  such  a  department  as  already  in  existence,  and 
proposf-s  merely  to  assist,  and  guide,  and  guard  it  against  falsehood,  idolatry,  and 
superstition.  "  Nature,  left  to  herself,  and  unassisted  by  Divine  teachings,  certainly 
wanders  into  mazes  of  perplexity,  involves  herself  in  error  and  blindness,  and 
becomes  the  victim  of  folly,  full  of  all  sorts  of  superstition."  So  said  the  knowing 
leader  of  the  glorious  Keformation  ;  and  all  the  records  of  time  attest  the  truth  of 
his  statement.  Man  needs  to  hear  a  voice  from  heaven — a  supernatural  word — to 
guide  him  successfully  to  the  true  God,  and  to  the  right  worship  of  that  God. 
Nature  may  dispose  him  to  make  offerings,  and  a  common  religious  consciousness 
may  approve  and  sanction  them;  but  it  yet  remains  for  God  to  say  what  sort  of 
offerings  are  proper,  and  how  they  are  to  be  acceptably  presented.  (J.  A.  Seiss, 
D.D.)  Redemption  hy  blood  offeni^ive  to  some  minds  : — Eedemption  by  blood  is  the 
great  theme  of  the  Scriptures,  from  beginning  to  end.  It  ever  and  again  comes  wp. 
God  will  not  permit  it  to  remain  out  of  sight  for  a  single  chapter.  No  matter  what 
the  figure  is,  it  is  made  somehow  to  embrace  this.  It  is  rei:)eated  at  every  turn.  It 
stands  out  boldly  at  every  step.  Every  imaginable  method  is  taken  to  write  it  deep 
in  the  soul,  to  engrave  it  upon  the  conscience,  to  fill  the  whole  mind  with  it,  and  to 
make  it  the  grand  centre  of  all  religious  thought  and  belief.  It  seems  greatly  to 
disgust  and  offend  many  that  we  have  so  much  to  say  about  blood.  Some  verily 
seem  to  think,  and  some  sceptics  have  argued,  that  the  Bible  cannot  be  what  it 
claims  to  be,  because  it  represents  God  as  appointing  and  taking  pleasure  in  such 
sanguinary  arrangements  and  services.  But  observe  the  glaring  inconsistency  of 
such  people  in  shrinking  with  abhorrence  from  the  bloody  nature  of  the  system 
which  God  has  arranged  for  our  salvation,  whilst  they  are  yet  great  admirers  of  the 
taste  and  culture  of  the  men  and  times  we  read  of  in  the  classics.  They  are  charmed 
with  the  ancient  Greeks  and  Eomans,  and  are  ever  putting  them  forward  as  our 
exemplars  and  guides ;  and  cannot  get  done  talking  about  their  glorious  civilisation ; 
just  as  if  the  religion  of  Greece  and  Rome  had  no  sanguinary  rites,  or  involved  no 


10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

dealing  in  bloody  sacrifices.  Never  was  there  a  religious  system  on  earth  more 
bloody  in  its  observances,  or  more  shocking  in  its  sacrificial  ritual,  than  those  in 
vogue  among  these  very  Greeks  and  Romans,  sanctioned  and  supported  by  their 
laws,  and  advocated  by  their  greatest  men.  Their  altars  flowed,  not  only  with  the 
blood  of  bulls  and  goats  and  various  unclean  and  disgusting  creatures,  but  with  the 
blood  of  human  beings,  who  were  annually  slain  and  offered  up  in  religious  worship 
to  propitiate  their  sanguinary  deities.  In  the  worship  of  Zeus  Lyca'us  in  Arcadia, 
human  sacrifices  were  regularly  offered  for  hundreds  of  years,  down  to  the  time  of 
the  Eomau  Emperors.  In  Leucas,  a  man  was  every  year  put  to  death  at  the  high 
festival  of  Ajiollo.  When  their  great  generals  went  out  to  war,  they  first  offered 
up  human  victims  to  gain  the  assistance  of  their  divinities.  Before  the  battle  of 
Salauiis,  Themistocles  sacrificed  three  Persians  to  Dionysius.  The  city  of  Athens 
— the  very  "  eye  of  Greece  " — had  an  annual  festival  in  honour  of  the  Delian  Apollo, 
at  which  two  persons  were  every  year  put  to  death,  the  one  for  the  men  and  the 
other  for  the  women,  of  that  renowned  metropolis.  Ttie  neck  of  the  one  who  died 
for  tlje  men  was  surrounded  with  a  garland  of  black  figs,  and  ihe  neck  of  the  other 
with  a  garland  of  white  figs,  and  both  were  beaten  with  rods  of  fig-wood  as  they 
were  led  foith  to  a  place  where  tbey  were  burned  alive,  and  their  ashes  cast  into 
the  air  and  sea.  And  Grecian  story  tells  of  many  parents,  who  laid  violent 
hands  upon  their  children,  and  offered  them  up  as  bloody  sacrifices  to  their  gods. 
Nor  was  it  much  different  with  the  Romans.  In  their  earlier  history  it  was  the 
custom,  under  certain  contingencies,  to  sacrifice  to  their  deities  everything  born  of 
man  or  beast  between  the  first  day  of  March  and  the  last  day  of  April.  Even  in  the 
latest  period  of  the  Roman  Republic,  men  were  sacrificed  to  Mars  in  the  Campus 
Martius,  by  priests  of  state,  and  their  heads  stuck  up  at  the  Regia.  I  mention  these 
things,  not  to  vindicate  the  Levitical  rites,  of  which  they  were  monstrous  and  wicked 
distortions  and  perversions,  but  to  show  the  miserable  inconsistency  of  those 
sceptical  people  who  denounce  the  atoning  regulations  of  the  Scriptures,  and  hold 
up  the  taste  and  ideas  of  the  Greeks  and  Romans  as  the  true  models  of  what  is 
beautiful,  refined,  and  elevated.  I  merely  wish  to  have  you  know  and  feel,  that  if 
the  Hebrew  ritual  is  to  be  regarded  as  offensive  to  a  lofty  esthetic  taste,  the  ritual 
of  the  most  polished  nations  of  antiquity  was  still  more  offensive  and  abhorrent  in 
the  utmost  degree ;  and  that  if  the  religion  of  the  Scriptures  cannot  be  received  as  of 
God  by  reason  of  its  connection  with  soenes  of  blood,  there  is  no  system  of  religion 
upon  earth,  ancient  or  modern,  that  can  be  so  received ;  because  all  others  have 
been  equally  and  still  more  sanguinary  in  their  services,  and  that,  too,  without  any 
of  the  deep  and  affecting  moral  meaning  of  this.  And  I  freely  confess  that  I  see 
nothing  in  the  doctrine  of  salvation  by  blood,  or  in  the  Jewish  rites,  which  typified 
it  with  so  much  strength  and  clearness,  either  to  offend  my  taste,  to  shock  my 
reason,  or  the  least  to  interfere  with  the  readiest  and  fullest  acceptation  of  the 
Scriptures  as  the  true  revelation  of  Almighty  God.  True,  I  behold  in  it  much  that 
humbles  rriy  pride — that  tells  me  I  am  a  very  wicked  sinner — that  proclaims  my 
native  conctition  far  removed  from  what  God's  law  requires — that  assures  me  I  am 
undone  as  regards  my  own  strength — and  that  holds  out  death  and  eternal  burning 
as  what  I  deserve.  But  all  this  accords  with  my  conscience,  and  is  re-echoed  in 
the  deepest  convictions  of  my  soul.  And  with  it  all,  it  presents  to  me  a  plan  of 
redemption  so  out  of  the  line  of  man's  thoughts,  so  fitted  to  my  felt  wants,  and  so 
completely  attested  by  its  moral  efficacy,  that  it  is  itself  a  mighty  demonstratioa 
to  my  mind  of  its  Divine  original.  The  very  fact  that  the  Bible  has  but  one  great 
subject  running  through  all  its  histories  and  prophecies,  ordinances  and  types, 
epistles  and  psalms — that  salvation  by  blood  is  the  focal  point  in  which  all  its  various 
lines  of  light  converge — is  to  me  one  of  the  strongest  evidences  that  it  has  come 
from  God.  When  I  consider  that  its  writers  lived  hundreds  and  thousands  of  years 
apart,  that  they  were  found  in  all  walks  of  life,  and  that  they  wrote  in  languages 
foreign  to  each  other,  I  can  find  no  way  to  account  for  the  unity  which  pervades  it 
but  by  admitting  that  these  various  writers  were  all  moved  and  guided  by  the  same 
high  intelligence  and  inspired  of  God.     (Ibid.)  The  ancient  ritual : — Here  is  a 

singular  conjunction  of  the  legal  and  the  voluntary.  Jehovah  fixes  the  particulars, 
but  the  man  himself  decides  on  the  act  of  sacrificial  worship.  Observe  how  the 
Lord  works  from  tht<  opposite  point  from  which  the  first  of  the  Ten  Commandnif-nts 
■was  given.  There  God  called  for  the  worship :  here  He  leaves  the  man  to  offer  the 
■worship  and  proceeds  to  tell  him  how.  The  preparation  of  the  heart  and  the 
answer  of  the  tongue  aVe  from  God.  No  man  was  at  liberty  in  the  ancient  Church 
to  determine  his  own  terms  of  approach  to  God.     The  throne  must  be  approached 


CHAP.  I.]  LEVITICUS.  11 

in  the  appointed  way.  We  are  not  living  in  an  era  of  religious  licentiousness. 
There  is  a  genius  of  worship,  there  is  a  method  of  coming  before  God.  God  does 
not  ask  us  to  conceive  or  suggest  methods  of  worship.  He  Himself  meets  us  with 
His  time-bill  and  His  terms  of  spiritual  commerce.  God  is  in  heaven  and  we  are 
upon  the  earth ;  therefore  should  our  words  be  few.  The  law  of  approach  to  the 
Divine  throne  is  unchanged.  The  very  first  condition  of  worship  is  obedience. 
Obedience  is  better  than  sacrifice,  and  is  so  because  it  is  the  end  of  sacrifice.  But 
see  how,  under  the  Levitical  ritual,  the  worshipper  was  trained  to  obedience.  Mark 
the  exasperating  minuteness  of  the  law.  Nothing  was  left  to  ha23hazard.  The 
worshiiJ  was  to  be  offered  through  mediation.  The  priestly  element  pervades  the 
universe  ;  it  is  the  mystery  of  life  and  service.  The  service  was  voluntary.  Notice 
the  expression,  "  He  shall  offer  it  of  his  own  voluntary  will."  The  voluntariness 
gives  the  value  to  the  worship.  We  can  only  pray  with  the  heart.  There  is  in  this 
great  ritual  a  wonderful  mixing  of  free  will  and  Divine  ordination  ;  the  voluntary 
and  the  unchangeable  ;  the  human  action  and  the  Divine  decree.  We  cannot 
understand  it ;  if  we  are  able  to  understand  it  then  it  is  no  larger  tban  our  under- 
standing :  so  God  becomes  a  measurable  God,  merely  the  shadow  of  human  wit,  a 
God  that  cannot  be  worshipped.  It  is  where  our  understanding  fails  or  rises  into  a 
new  wealth  of  faith,  that  we  find  the  only  altar  at  which  we  can  bow,  with  all  our 
powers,  where  we  can  utter  with  enthusias-m  all  our  hopes  and  desires.  So  we  come 
with  our  sacrifice  and  offering,  whatever  it  may  be,  and  having  laid  it  on  the  altar, 
we  can  foUow  it  no  further — free  as  the  air  up  to  a  given  point,  but  after  that 
bounded  and  fixed  and  watched  and  regulated  — a  mystery  that  can  never  be  solved, 
and  that  can  never  be  chased  out  of  a  universe  in  which  the  infinite  and  finite 
confer.  The  worship  of  the  ancient  Church  was  no  mere  expression  of  sentiment. 
It  was  a  most  practical  worship,  not  a  sentimental  exercise ;  it  was  a  confession 
and  an  expiation — in  a  word,  an  atonement.  This  fact  explains  all.  Take  the  word 
"  atonement "  out  of  Christian  theology,  and  Christian  tlieology  has  no  centre,  no 
circumference,  no  life,  no  meaning,  no  virtue.  If  we  could  read  this  Book  of 
Leviticus  through  at  one  sitting  the  result  might  be  expressed  in  some  such  words 
as  these — "  Thank  God  we  have  got  rid  of  this  infinite  labour;  thank  God  this  is 
not  in  the  Christian  service  ;  thank  God  we  are  Christians  and  not  Jews."  Let  not 
our  rejoicing  be  the  expression  of  selfishness  or  folly.  It  is  true  we  have  escaped 
the  bondage  of  the  letter,  but  only  to  enter  into  the  larger  and  sweeter  bondage  of 
the  spirit.  The  Jew  gave  his  bullock  or  his  goat,  his  turtledove  or  his  young 
pigeon  ;  but  now  each  man  has  to  give  himself.  We  now  buy  ourselves  off  with 
gold.  Well  may  the  apostle  exhort  us,  saying,  "  I  beseech  you,  therefore,  brethren, 
by  the  mercies  of  God,  that  ye  present  your  bodies  a  living  sacrifice,  holy,  accept- 
able unto  God,  which  is  your  reasonable  service."  Wonderful  is  the  law  which  lays 
its  claim  upon  the  ransomed  soul — none  of  us  liveth  to  himself,  and  no  man  dieth 
to  himself ;  whether  we  live,  we  hve  unto  the  Lord ;  whether  we  die,  we  die  unto 
the  Lord ;  living  or  dying  we  are  the  Lord's.  We  have  escaped  measurable 
taxation,  but  we  have  come  under  the  bond  of  immeasurable  love.  We  have 
escaped  the  letter,  we  have  been  brought  under  the  dominion  of  the  spirit.  Let  us 
be  careful,  therefore,  how  we  congratulate  ourselves  on  having  escaped  the  goat- 
offering  and  heifer-offering,  and  turtledove  and  young  pigeon  sacrifices ;  how  we 
have  been  brought  away  from  the  technicality  and  poverty  of  the  letter  into  the 
still  further  deeper  poverty  of  selfishness.  As  Christians  we  have  nothing  that  is 
our  own  ;  not  a  moment  of  time  is  ours  ;  not  a  pulse  that  throbs  in  us,  not  a  hair 
of  our  head,  not  a  coin  in  the  coffer  belones  to  us.  This  is  the  severe  demand  of 
love.  Who  can  rise  to  the  pitch  of  that  self-sacrifice  ?  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  God's 
way  out  of  sin: — What  an  important  part  the  word  "if"  plays  in  the  opening 
chapters  of  Leviticus  !  At  first  we  did  not  seem  to  see  it,  but  by  frequent  repetition 
it  urges  itself  upon  our  notice  as  a  term  of  vital  importance  in  the  argimient  of  the 
subject,  whatever  that  subject  may  be.  We  cannot  enter  into  the  subject  except 
through  the  gate  if.  It  is  God's  word.  Through  the  gate  (/'  we  enter  into  the 
temple  of  obedience.  Having  crossed  the  threshold,  then  law  begins  to  operate. 
After  the  if  comes  the  discipline — the  sweet,  but  often  painful  necessity.  Observe 
the  balance  of  operation  :  Man  must  reply ;  having  replied,  either  in  one  form  or 
the  other,  necessary  consequences  follow.  It  is  so  in  all  life.  There  is  no  excep- 
tion in  what  is  known  as  the  religious  consciousness  and  activity.  The  gr(  at  sea 
says  in  its  wild  waves,  "  If  ye  will  walk  on  me  and  become  citizens  of  this 
wilderness  of  water,  then  you  must  submit  to  the  law  of  the  country;  you  must  fall 
into  the  rhythm  of  the  universe  ;  you  must  build  your  wooden  houses  or  your  iron 


12  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

habitations  according  to  laws  old  as  God  ;  you  need  not  come  upon  my  waters  ;  I 
do  not  ask  you  to  come  ;  when  you  come  I  will  obliterate  your  footprints  so  that  no 
man  may  ever  know  that  you  have  crossed  me;  but  if  you  come  you  must  obey." 
We  have,  therefore,  no  liberty  after  a  certain  time.  This  is  the  law  of  all  life.  But 
we  never  give  up  our  liberty  in  response  to  the  laws  of  the  universe  without  our 
surrender  being  compensated  after  God's  measure.  The  law  gave  great  choice  of 
offering.  It  said,  "If  you  bring  a  burnt-offering,  bring  it  of  the  herd  if  you  have 
one.  If  you  have  not  a  herd  of  cattle,  bring  it  of  the  flocks ;  bring  it  of  the  flock  of 
the  sheep  ;  but  if  you  are  too  poor  to  have  a  flock  of  sheep,  bring  a  goat  from  the 
flock  of  the  goats ;  only  in  all  cases  this  condition  must  be  permanent :  whatever 
yi>u  offer  must  be  without  blemish.  But  if  you  have  no  cattle,  no  sheep,  no  goats, 
then  bring  it  of  the  fowls :  bring  turtledoves  or  young  pigeons ;  the  air  is  full  of 
them,  and  the  poorest  man  can  take  them."  Is  that  not  mercy  twice  blessed?  We 
are  not  all  masters  of  cattle  that  browse  upon  the  green  hills ;  nor  are  we  all  flock- 
masters,  and  amongst  flockmasters  thei-e  are  rich  and  poor.  God  says,  "  Let  your 
offering  be  according  to  your  circumstances,  only  without  blemisb,  and  it  sball  be 
accepted."  There  is  no  short  and  easy  method  witb  sin.  Men  have  sought  by 
excess  of  the  very  tiling  itself  to  destroy  sin,  and  if  they  could  have  gone  forward 
from  indulgence  to  indulgence,  from  insanity  to  insanity,  they  might  have  escaped 
the  remorse  of  this  world  ;  but  God  has  so  constituted  the  universe  that  men  have 
moments  of  sobriety,  times  of  mental  and  moral  reaction,  periods  in  which  they  see 
themselves  and  their  destiny  with  an  appalling  vividness,  and  in  those  hours  it  is 
found  that  the  sin  which  began  the  mischief  is  still  there.  There  is  no  way  out  of 
it  but  God's  way.  (Ihld.)  What  is  our  offfrhig  to  the  Lord  ? — "If  any  man  of 
you  bring  an  offering  unto  the  Lord."  And  is  there  any  man  of  you  who  will  not 
bring  an  offering  unto  the  Lord  ?  Have  you  brought  an  offering  to  Him  ?  When  ? 
What  was  it  ?  You  don't  mean  to  call  that  trifle  that  you  dropped  into  the  contri- 
bution-box— because  you  must  keep  up  appearances  in  church,  you  know ;  you  don't 
mean  to  call  that  your  offering  unto  the  Lord!  You  don't  mean  to  call  your 
amount  paid  for  pew-rent — so  that  you  could  have  your  own  independent  sittings, 
and  that  in  the  very  best  place  you  could  get  for  your  money  ;  you  don't  mean  to 
call  that  your  offering  to  the  Lord  !  Come,  now,  wliat  has  been  your  offering  unto 
the  Lord— an  offering  that  you  could  fairly  point  the  Lord  to,  in  comparison  with 
what  He  has  given  to  you,  and  could  say,  "  There,  Lord,  that  is  my  offering  to 
Thee  "  ?  "  If  any  man  of  you  bring  an  offering  unto  the  Lord  " — well,  what  is  the 
offering  ?  Let  it  be  fairly  recognised.  God  wants  to  know  what  it  is.  Can  you  tell 
Him?     {H.  C.  Trumbull.)  Sacrifice  the  one  great  idea  of  the  Bible: — As  in 

Beethoven's  matcbless  music  there  runs  one  idea,  worked  out  through  all  the 
changes  of  measure  and  of  key,  now  almost  hidden,  now  breaking  out  in  rich, 
natural  melody,  -whispered  in  the  treble,  murmured  in  the  bass,  dimly  suggested  in 
the  prelude,  but  growing  clearer  and  clearer  as  the  work  proceeds,  winding  gradually 
back  until  it  ends  in  the  ke^s  m  which  it  began,  and  closes  in  triumphant  harmony  : 
so  throughout  the  whole  Bible  there  runs  one  great  idea  :  man's  ruin  by  sin,  and 
his  redemption  by  grace  ;  in  a  word,  Jesus  Clirist  the  Saviour.  This  runs  through 
the  Old  Testament,  tbat  prelude  to  the  New  ;  dimly  promised  at  the  Fall,  and  more 
clearly  to  Abraham  ;  typified  in  the  ceremonies  of  the  law;  all  the  events  of  sacred 
history  paving  the  way  fur  His  coming ;  the  great  idea  growing  clearer  and  clearer 
as  the  time  drew  on.  Tiien  the  full  harmony  broke  out  in  the  song  of  the  angels, 
"Glory  to  God  in  the  highest;  on  earth  peace,  goodwill  towards  men."  {H.  W. 
Beecher.)  The  ceremonies  of  the  law  iiointed  to  Christ  .-—The  earth  brinceth  forth 
fruit  of  itself,  but  first  the  blade,  then  the  ear,  after  that  the  full  corn  in  the  ear 
(Mark  iv.  28).  So  did  the  blade  or  herb  spring  out  of  the  law  of  nature  ;  the  ear  or 
culm,  in  the  law  written  ;  but  we  have  in  the  gospel  the  pure  grain  or  fall  corn, 
which  is  Christ  Jesus.  Therefore,  as  the  stalk  or  ear  is  of  necessary  use  till  the 
corn  be  ripe,  but  tlie  corn  being  ripe  we  no  longer  use  the  chaff'  with  it,  so  till 
Christ  was  exhibited  in  the  flesh,  which  lay  hidden  in  the  blade  and  spike  of  the 
law,  the  ceremonies  had  their  use ;  but  since  that  by  His  death  and  passion  this 
pure  wheat  is  thrashed  and  winnowed,  and  by  His  ascension  laid  up  in  the  garner  of 
heaven,  they  are  of  no  further  use  (Eph.  ii.  15).  The  Jews  were  taught  by  those 
shadows  that  the  body  should  come,  and  we  know  by  the  same  shadows  that  the 
body  is  come  ;  the  arrow  moveth,  whilst  it  flies  at  the  mark,  but  having  hit  the  mark, 
resteth  in  it.  {J.  Sjiencer.)  The  completed  design  : — Bartholdi's  gigantic  statue 
of  "  Liberty  Enlightening  the  World,"  occupies  a  fine  position  on  Bedloes  Island, 
which  commands  the  approach  to  New  York  Harbour.    It  holds  up  a  torch,  which 


CHAP.  I.]  LEVITICUS.  13 

is  to  be  lit  at  niglit  by  electric  light.  The  statue  was  cast  in  portions  in  Pari?.  The 
separate  pieces  were  very  different  in  appearance,  and,  taken  apart,  of  uncouth 
shape.  It  was  only  when  all  were  brought  together,  each  in  its  right  place,  that  the 
complete  design  was  apparent.  Then  the  omission  of  any  one  would  have  left  the 
■work  imperfect.  In  this  it  was  an  emblem  of  Holy  Scripture,  We  do  not  always 
see  the  object  of  different  portions,  nevertheless  each  has  its  place,  and  the  whole 
is  a  magnificent  statue  of  Jesus  Christ.  {The  Freeman.)  Outlines  of  Christ: — 
I  was  looking  one  day  at  some  of  the  paintings  of  the  late  American  artist,  Mr. 
Kensett.  I  saw  some  pictures  that  were  just  faint  outlines ;  in  some  places  you 
would  see  only  the  branches  of  a  tree  and  no  trunk,  and  in  another  case  the  trunk 
and  no  branches.  He  had  not  finished  the  work.  It  would  have  taken  him  days, 
and  months,  perhaps,  to  have  completed  it.  Well,  my  friend,  in  this  world  we  get 
only  the  faintest  outlines  of  what  Christ  is.     (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.) 

Ver.   3.  If  his   offering  be  a   burnt  sacrifice. — The  burnt -offer  ing  .-—I.   In  its 

CONTEAST  TO  THE  OTHER  OFFEEiNGS.  1.  It  was  "  a  swcct  savour  "  off el  ing  ;  as  sucb 
in  perfect  contrast  with  the  sin-offerings.  We  are  not  here,  therefore,  to  consider 
Christ  as  the  sin-bearer,  but  as  the  man  in  perfectness  meeting  God  in  holiness. 
The  thought  here  is  not,  "  God  hath  made  Him  to  be  sin  for  us,"  but  rather,  "  He 
loved  us,  and  gave  Himself  for  us  an  offering  and  a  sacrifice  to  God  of  a  sweet- 
smelling  savour."  Jesus,  both  in  the  burnt-offering  and  sin-offering,  stood  as  our 
representative.  When  He  obeyed,  He  obeyed  "for  us":  when  He  suffered,  He 
suffered  "  for  us."  But  in  the  burnt-offering  He  appears  for  us,  ro"  as  our  sin- 
bearer,  but  as  man  offering  to  God  something  which  is  most  precious  to  Him.  We 
have  here  what  we  may  in  vain  search  for  elsewhere  :  man  giving  to  God  what 
truly  satisfies  Him.  We  too  often  omit  this  thought  when  thinking  of  the  offering 
of  Jesus.  We  think  of  His  death,  but  little  of  His  life.  We  look  but  little  into  His 
ways.  Yet  it  is  His  ways  throughout  His  pilgrimage,  even  to  the  way  He  laid  down 
His  life,  which  God  so  delights  in.  Our  views  are  so  selfish  and  meagre.  If  we 
are  saved,  we  seek  no  further.  God,  however,  puts  the  burnt-offering  first :  for  this 
was  peculiarly  His  portion  in  Jesus.  And  just  in  proportion  as  a  believer  grows  in 
grace,  we  shall  find  him  turning  intelligently  to  the  Gospels  ;  from  them  adding  to 
the  knowledge  he  has  of  the  work  of  Jesus,  greater  knowledge  of  His  ways  and 
person ;  with  earnest  desire  to  know  more  of  the  Lord  Himself,  and  how  in  all 
things  He  was  "  a  sweet  savour  to  Jehovah."  2.  But  the  burnt-offering  was  not 
only  "  a  sweet  savour  "  ;  it  was  also  an  offering  "  for  acceptance  " — that  is,  it  was 
offered  to  God  to  secure  the  acceptance  of  the  offerer.  So  we  read — I  give  the  more 
correct  translation — "  he  shall  offer  it  for  his  acceptance."  To  understand  this, 
we  must  recur  for  a  moment  to  the  position  Christ  occupied  as  offerer.  He  stood 
for  man  as  man  under  the  law,  and,  as  under  law,  His  acceptance  depended  on  His 
perfectness.  God  had  made  man  upright ;  but  he  had  sought  out  many  inventions. 
One  dispensation  after  another  had  tried  whether,  under  any  circumstances,  man 
could  render  himself  acceptable  to  God.  But  age  after  age  passed  away  :  no  son 
of  Adam  was  found  who  could  meet  God's  standard.  The  law  was  man's  last  trial, 
whether,  with  a  revelation  of  God's  mind,  he  could  or  would  obey  it.  But  this  trial, 
like  the  others,  ended  in  failure  :  "  there  was  none  righteous,  no,  not  one."  How, 
then,  was  man  to  be  reconciled  to  God?  How  could  he  be  brought  to  meet  God's 
requirements  ?  One  way  yet  remained,  and  the  Son  of  God  accepted  it.  "  He  took 
not  on  Him  the  nature  of  angels  ;  but  He  took  the  seed  of  Abraham  "  ;  and  in  His 
person,  once  and  for  ever,  man  was  reconciled  to  God.  In  effecting  this,  Jesus,  as 
man's  representative,  took  man's  place,  where  He  found  man,  under  law  ;  and  there, 
in  obedience  to  the  law,  He  offered,  "  for  His  acceptance."  3.  The  third  point 
peculiar  to  the  burnt-offering  was,  that  a  life  was  offered  on  the  altar  (ver.  5),  in 
this  particular  differing  from  the  meat-offering.  Life  was  that  part  in  creation 
which  from  the  beginning  God  claimed  as  His.  As  such — as  being  His  claim  on 
His  creatures — it  stands  as  an  emblem  for  what  we  owe  Him.  What  we  owe  to  God 
is  our  duty  to  Him.  And  this,  I  doubt  not,  is  the  thought  here  intended.  Of 
course,  the  offering  here,  as  elsewhere,  is  the  body  of  Jesus,  that  body  which  He 
took,  and  then  gave  for  us :  but  in  giving  God  a  life,  in  contradistinction  to  offering 
Him  corn  or  frankincense,  the  peculiar  thought  is  the  fulfilment  of  the  first  table  of 
the  Decalogue.  Thus  the  life  yielded  is  man's  duty  to  God,  and  man  here  is  seen 
perfectly  giving  it.  Am  I  asked  what  man  ever  thus  offered?  I  answer.  None  but 
One — "  the  man  Christ  Jesus."  He  alone  of  all  the  sons  of  Adam  in  perfectness 
accomplished  all  man's  duty  to  Godward ;  He  in  His  own  blessed  and  perfect 


14  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

righteousness  met  every  claim  God  could  make  upon  Him.  4.  The  fourth  and  last 
feature  peculiar  to  the  burnt-offering  is,  that  it  was  wholly  burnt  on  the  altar.  In 
this  particular  the  burnt-offering  differed  from  the  meat  and  peace-offerings,  in 
which  a  part  only  was  burnt  with  fire  ;  nor  did  it  differ  less  from  those  offerings 
for  sin,  which,  though  wholly  burnt,  were  not  burnt  upon  the  altar.  The  import 
of  this  distinction  is  manifest,  and  in  exact  keeping  with  the  character  of  the 
offering.  Man's  duty  to  God  is  not  the  giving  up  of  one  faculty,  but  the  entire 
surrender  of  all.  So  Christ  sums  up  the  First  Commandment — all  the  mind,  all 
the  soul,  all  the  affections.  "  Thou  shalt  love  the  Lord  thy  God  with  all  thy  heart, 
and  with  all  thy  soul,  and  with  all  thy  mind."  I  cannot  doubt  that  the  type  refers 
-to  this  in  speaking  so  particularly  of  the  parts  of  the  bnrnt-offering  ;  for  "  the  head," 
"  the  fat,"  "  the  legs,"  "  the  inwards,"  are  all  distinctly  enumerated.  "The  head" 
is  the  well-known  emblem  of  the  thoughts  ;  "  the  legs  "  the  emblem  of  the  walk ; 
and  "  the  inwards  "  the  constant  and  familiar  symbol  of  the  feelings  and  affections 
of  the  heart.  The  meaning  of  '*  the  fat "  may  not  be  quite  so  obvious,  though  here 
also  Scripture  helps  us  to  the  solution  (Psa.  xvii.  10,  xcii.  14,  cxix.  70 ;  Dent,  xxxii. 
15).  It  represents  the  energy  not  of  one  limb  or  faculty,  but  the  general  health  and 
vigour  of  the  whole.  In  Jesus  these  were  all  surrendered,  and  all  without  spot  or 
blemish.  II.  Its  varieties,  that  is,  the  different  measures  of  apprehension  with 
which  it  may  be  seen.  There  were,  then,  three  grades  in  the  burnt-offering.  It 
might  be  "  of  the  herd,"  or  "  of  the  flock,"  or  "  of  fowls."  These  different  grades 
gave  rise  to  several  varieties  in  the  offering,  the  import  of  which  we  shall  now 
consider.  1.  The  first  difference  is  in  the  animal  offered.  We  have  in  the  first 
grade,  "  a  bullock  ";  in  the  second,  "  a  lamb  ";  in  the  third,  "  a  turtledove."  Each 
of  these  animals,  from  their  well-known  character,  presents  us  with  a  different 
thought  respecting  the  offering.  The  bullock,  "  strong  to  labour" — for  "great 
increase  is  by  the  strength  of  the  ox  " — suggests  at  once  the  thought  of  service,  of 
patient,  untiring  labour.  In  the  lamb  we  have  another  picture  presented  to  us ; 
here  the  thought  is  passive  submission  without  a  murmur ;  for  the  lamb  is  the 
figure  constantly  chosen  to  represent  the  submissive,  uncomplaining  character  of 
Christ's  sufferings.  The  turtledove  is  different  from  either  of  these,  and  gives 
again  another  view  of  the  offering  of  Jesus.  In  this  class  the  thought  of  labour  is 
lost  sight  of:  the  unmurmuring  submission,  too,  of  the  lamb  is  wanting:  the 
thought  is  rather  simply  one  of  mourning  innocence ;  as  it  is  written,  "  We  mourn 
like  doves  "  ;  and  again,  "Be  harmless  as  doves."  It  may  be  asked,  What  do  we 
learn  by  "  the  goat,"  which  was  sometimes  offered  in  one  of  the  lower  grades  of 
the  burnt-offering  ?  If  I  mistake  not,  this  emblem  suggests  a  thought  of  the 
sin-offering,  reminding  us  of  Christ's  offering  as  scape-goat.  2.  A  second  distinction 
between  tbe  different  grades  of  the  burnt-offering  is,  that  while  in  the  first  grade 
the  parts  are  discriminated,  in  the  last  this  peculiarity  is  omitted  :  the  bird  was 
killed,  but  not  divided.  In  the  case  of  the  bullock  and  the  lamb,  it  is  noticed  that 
the  offering  is  "cut  into  its  pieces."  Here  "the  legs,  the  head,  the  fat,  the 
inwards,"  are  all  distinctly  noticed  and  enumerated.  In  the  last  case — that  of  the 
turtledove — it  is  otherwise :  "  he  shall  not  divide  it  asunder."  "  The  legs,  the 
head,  the  inwards,"  as  we  have  already  seen,  represent  the  walk,  the  thoughts,  the 
feelings  of  Jesus.  In  the  first  grade  these  are  all  apprehended  :  they  are  all  lost  sight 
of  in  the  last.  These  grades  represent,  as  I  have  said,  measures  of  apprehension. 
Where  the  measure  of  spiritual  apprehension  is  large,  a  saint  will  see  the  offering 
dissected :  his  eyes  will  be  turnmg  constantly  to  see  the  walk,  the  mind,  tbe 
affections  of  Jesus.  He  will  now  observe,  what  once  he  regarded  not,  how  Jesus 
walked,  how  He  thought,  what  were  His  feelings.  On  the  other  hand,  where  Jesus 
is  but  little  apprehended  all  the  details  of  His  walk  and  feelings  will  be  unseen. 
3.  A  third  distinction  between  the  different  grades  of  the  burnt-offering  is,  that 
while  in  the  first  grade  the  offerer  is  seen  to  lay  his  hand  on  the  offering,  in  the 
other  grades  this  act  is  not  observed.  Not  a  few  see  Christ  as  offering  for  us 
without  fully  realising  that  His  offering  was  Himself.  They  see  that  He  gave  up 
this  thing  or  that ;  that  He  gave  much  for  us,  and  that  what  He  gave  was  most 
precious.  But  they  do  not  really  see  that  "  He  gave  Himself,"  that  His  own  blessed 
person  was  what  He  offered.  This  is  clearly  seen  in  the  first  grade  of  the  burnt- 
offering.  It  is  lost  sight  of,  or  unobserved,  in  the  other  grades.  4.  A  fourth 
distinction,  closely  allied  with  the  one  just  considered,  is,  that  in  the  first  class  the 
offerer  is  seen  to  kill  the  victim — in  the  last  the  priest  kills  it.  In  fact,  in  the  last 
class,  the  priest  does  nearly  everything,  the  offerer  is  scarcely  seen  at  all ;  whereas 
in  the  first  class  it  is  just  the  reverse,  there  are  many  particulars  noted  of  th« 


CHAP.  I.]  LEVITICUS.  15 

offerer.  The  import  of  this  is  at  once  obvious,  when  we  see  the  distin  ttion  between 
the  priest  and  offerer.  The  offerer,  as  I  have  akeady  observed,  sets  Christ  before 
us  in  His  person.  The  priest  represents  Him  in  His  official  character,  as  the 
appointed  Mediator  between  God  and  man.  Where  the  identity  between  the  offerer 
and  offering  is  apprehended,  the  offerer  is  seen  to  kill  the  offering  ;  that  is,  Christ 
is  seen  in  His  person,  of  His  own  will  laying  down  His  life  ;  as  it  is  written — "  No 
man  taketh  it  from  me,  but  I  lay  it  down  of  Myself."  On  the  contrary,  where  the 
identity  of  the  offering  and  offerer  is  unseen  or  disregarded,  the  priest  is  seen  to  kill 
the  victim,  that  is,  Christ's  death  is  seen  as  the  work  of  the  Mediator  ;  and  is  con- 
nected with  His  official  character  as  Priest,  rather  than  with  His  person  as  the 
willing  offerer.  So  with  believers,  where  there  is  only  a  limited  measure  of  appre- 
hension, httle  is  known  of  Christ  save  His  office  as  Mediator :  He  Himself,  His 
blessed  person,  is  overlooked  or  but  little  seen.  Such  are  the  chief  varieties  of  the 
burnt-oiiering :  how  full  are  they  of  instruction  to  the  believer ;  how  clearly  do  they 
mark  the  different  apprehensions  among  saints  respecting  the  work  and  person  of 
our  Lord !  Some,  however — I  speak  of  believers — are  content  to  know  nothing 
of  this;  and  they  would  rather  not  be  told  their  ignorance.  They  can  see 
but  one  truth— the  Paschal  lamb— and  anything  further  they  neither  care  nor 
wish   for.     {A.  Jukes.)  The   burnt-offering  :—l.  Characteristics.     1.   Perfect. 

2.  Voluntary.  3.  Vicarious.  4.  Slain  by  offerer  himself.  5.  Blood  sprinkled. 
6.  "Wholly  consumed.  H.  Features  which  distinguish  it  from  the  sin-offering. 
1.  Nothing  is  said  of  the  voluntary  character  of  the  sin-offering.  Does  not  this 
throw  light  on  the  agony  and  prayer  of  Christ  in  Gethsemane?  2.  Only  parts  of 
the  sin-offering  were  to  be  burnt  on  the  altar  of  burnt-offering  (Heb.  iv.  11,  12,  xiii. 
11-13  ;  2  Cor.  v.  21).  This  explains  the  suffering  of  Christ  and  His  cry  on  the 
cross — "  Eloi,"  &c.  HI.  To  observe  these  distinctions  important,  as  bearing 
UPON  THEIR  TYPICAL  SIGNIFICATION.  1.  The  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews  proves  that 
Christ  and  His  work  are  typified  in  the  whole  Mosaic  ritual.  2.  The  one  represents 
our  Lord  in  His  consecration  to  His  Father's  will ;  the  other,  as  its  name  indicates, 
represents  Him  as  the  sin-bearer.  (1)  His  consecration  has  in  it  the  elements  of 
voluntariness  and  completeness,  and  that  it  was  of  sweet  savour  unto  Jehovah. 
(2)  As  sin-bearer  He  is  represented  as  not  being  permitted  to  suffer  even  within  the 
camp.  Lessons  :  1.  As  a  burnt-offering  our  Lord. is  to  us  an  example  in  our  con- 
secration to  God,  which  should  be— (1)  Perfect  in  its  sincerity.  (2)  Cheerful  in  its 
spirit.  (3)  Unreserved  in  its  degree.  2.  As  a  sin-offering  our  Lord  teaches  us  how 
hateful  sin  was  to  Him  ;  yet  He  endured  its  imputation,  "  being  made  sin  for  us," 
that  we  might  be  made  God's  righteousness  in  Him.  (D.  C.  Hughes,  31. A.) 
Significance  of  the  burnt-offering  :— To  be  offered — 1.  Orderly.  2.  Openly.  3. 
Devoutly.  4.  Cheerfully.  {F.  W.  Brown.)  The  burnt-off'ering  .-—I.  Consider 
THE  SORT  OF  VICTIM  REQUIRED  FOR  THIS  SACRIFICE  :  a  bullock,  or  a  shcep,  OT,  in  case 
of  great  poverty,  a  young  pigeon  or  dove — the  very  purest,  cleanest,  and  best  of 
creatures — nothing  else  would  answer.  And  even  these  had  to  be  the  finest  and 
most  desirable  siDecimens.  Pure  and  perfect  as  the  bright  world  from  which  He 
came,  Christ,  our  sacrifice,  "  was  holy,  harmless,  uudefiled,  and  separate  from 
sinners" — "a  Lamb  without  spot" — the  first,  the  purest,  the  gentlest,  and  the 
best  in  all  the  domain  of  the  great  God.  He  was  the  very  Prince  of  creation,  who 
knew  no  sin,  neither  was  guile  found  in  His  mouth.  II.  Consider  next  what  was 
DONE  WITH  the  VICTIM  SELECTED.  If  a  buUock,  the  Divine  command  was,  "  Kill  it 
before  the  Lord,  and  flay  it,  and  cut  it  into  his  pieces."  If  from  the  flock,  the  word 
was  "Kill  it  on  the  side  of  the  altar  northward,  and  cut  it  into  his  pieces."  Who 
was  to  do  this  is  not  clearly  specified.  Any  one,  good  or  bad,  priest  or  private,  the 
worst  or  best,  may  become  the  executioner  of  the  Divine  sentence.  When  Jesus 
was  made  an  oft'ering  for  us,  earth  and  hell  joined  in  the  infliction  of  the  sacrificial 
stroke.  If  a  bird,  the  word  of  the  Lord  was,  "  Wring  off  his  head,  and  pluck  away  his 
crop  withhis  feathers,  and  cleave  it  with  the  wings."  Fit  picture  this  of  the  end  which 
awaits  the  unf orgiven,  and  of  what  actually  befell  the  blessed  Saviour  who  "  was  once 
offered  to  bear  the  sins  of  many."  The  plucking  and  tearing  off  of  the  skin  was  to 
show  how  naked  the  sinner  is,  and  how  completely  he  is  exposed  to  the  fires  of 
Divine  wrath,  and  how  unprotected  Jesus  was  when  He  submitted  to  bear  our  sins 
in  His  own  body  on  the  tree.  But  in  addition  to  this  terrible  mutilation,  the  victim 
was  yet  to  be  put  upon  the  altar  and  burned.  The  command  was,  "  The  priest 
shall  burn  all  on  the  altar."  And  a  particular  method  was  also  to  be  observed  in 
this  burning.  First,  the  head  and  the  loose  fat  were  to  be  placed  upon  the  fire  ; 
i;he  head  from  without,  and  the  fat  from  within.    After  that  the  legs  and  the 


16  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  lchap.  i. 

entrails  were  to  be  given  to  the  flames ;  the  outward  and  the  inward  together.  Man 
has  a  double  nature  ;  and  in  all  Divine  services,  and  under  all  Divine  inflictions, 
both  departments  fare  alike.  We  cannot  give  our  bodies  to  God  and  reserve  our 
hearts,  nor  serve  Him  in  the  spirit  without  bringing  that  service  out  into  controlling 
influence  over  the  flesh  also.  The  whole  man  must  go  or  nothing.  Nor  is  the 
ultimate  doom  of  sin  a  mere  bodily  suffering,  or  the  mere  consuming  of  the  exterior 
members  ;  nor  yet  mere  mental  woe  and  spiritual  grief.  As  the  Saviour  says,  it  is 
the  destruction  of  "  both  body  and  soul  in  hell."  Christ  as  our  sacriflce,  sulfered 
not  only  in  the  outer  man,  but  in  His  whole  inner  and  outer  nature  conjoined. 
in.  Consider  further  what  was  to  be  effected  by  the  presentation  of  this  pab- 
TicuLAB  KIND  OF  SACEiFicE.  If  the  man  who  brought  it  would  lay  his  hand  upon  its 
head,  and  so  acknowledge  it  as  that  by  which  he  hoped  and  prayed  and  trusted  to 
be  forgiven,  the  Lord  said  "  it  shall  be  accepted  for  him  to  make  atonement  for 
him."  That  is,  the  devoting  of  such  a  victim  to  death  and  fire  was  to  answer  as  a 
substitute  for  the  death  and  burning  of  the  sinner  himself.  What  a  beautiful 
illustration  of  our  reconciliation  to  God  through  the  death  of  His  Son  !  IV.  There 
yet  remains  one  other  particular  to  be  noticed  with  regard  to  this  atoning  offering  ; 
and  that  is  the  perfect  freedom  with  which  any  and  every  one  might  avail 
HIMSELF  OF  ITS  BENEFITS.  It  was  Confined  to  no  special  time,  and  demanded  no 
specific  juncture  of  affairs.  It  was  as  free  at  one  season  as  at  another,  and  could 
be  resorted  to  whenever  any  one  felt  himself  moved  in  that  way.  If  the  worshipper 
could  not  bring  a  bullock,  a  sheep  would  answer.  And  if  too  poor  to  furnish 
either,  a  dove  or  pigeon  was  just  as  acceptable.  There  was  no  reason  why  any  one 
should  not  come  and  share  the  benefits  of  a  full  expiation  through  the  burnt- 
offeiing  of  atonement.  All  that  a  man  wanted  was  the  consent  and  determination 
of  his  own  heart — the  motion  of  "his  own  voluntary  will."  Now  this  was  not 
accidental.  It  was  meant  to  set  forth  a  great  gospel  truth.  It  tells  of  the  perfect 
freeness  with  which  one  and  all  may  be  saved,  if  only  there  is  the  proper  effort 
made.  It  was  the  lifting  up  of  the  voice  of  mercy  even  in  that  remote  antiquity, 
crying,  "Come;  whosoever  will,  let  him  come."  (J.  A.  Seiss,  D.D.)  The  burnt- 
offering  ;  or,  the  Father  glorifii'd  : — I.  The  burnt-offering  is  placed  first  in  order, 
when  the  Lord  spake  unto  Moses  "  out  of  the  Tabernacle,"  teaching  that  the 
primary  and  grand  object  of  Christ's  death  was  "the  glory  of  God."  The  burnt- 
offering  may  be  said  to  answer  to  St.  John's  Gospel,  where  this  object  is  very 
prominent  (see  John  xii.  27-33,  xvii.  1-4).  1.  Atonement,  as  expiation  of  guilt,  is 
not  the  prominent  thought  in  burnt-offering,  yet  it  is  seen  there,  verifying  Heb.  ix. 
22  ;  and  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood  testifies  to  the  righteousness  of  God  in  accepting 
the  worshipper  whose  worship — like  all  else — needs  the  atoning  blood,  being  in 
itself  not  only  worthless,  but  tainted  with  sin  ;  and  worship  is  one  prominent 
feature  of  burnt-offering  as  regards  man.  Now  look  at  details.  2.  Male  without 
blemish.  That  is,  highest  order  of  offering,  whether  of  herd  or  flock  (chap.  i.  3, 10). 
Nothing  with  slightest  taint  or  blemish  must  be  used  to  represent  Christ.  II. 
Acceptance  was  another  prominent  characteristic  of  burnt-offering.  It  was  presented 
that  the  offerer  might  be  "  accepted  "  (chap.  i.  3).  "  Lo  1  I  come  ...  to  do  Thy 
will,  0  God  "  (Heb.  x.  7 ;  Psa.  xl.  7),  were  the  words  of  Jesus.  He  presented 
Himself  for  acceptance;  He  was  "  obedient  unto  death  "  (Phil.  ii.  8).  His  sacrifice 
was  that  of  devotion  and  service,  as  typified  in  this  offering.  Thus  was  the  Father 
glorified  in  the  death  of  His  beloved  Son  1  See,  too,  how  Father's  love  drawn  forth 
because  He  laid  down  His  life  for  sheep  (John  x.  11,  17),  in  obedience  to  Father's 
will  (John  vi.  38-40).  Thus  the  Father's  glory  seen  to  be  bound  up  in  the  salvation 
of  "  sheep" ;  and  His  acceptance  of  Jesus  ensures  theirs  (chap.  i.  4;  Eph.  i.  6). 
III.  Hand  upon  head  of  burnt-offering  further  shows  identification  of  offerer 
and  offering.  The  word  rendered  "  put  "  (ver.  4)  signifies  to  lean  with  whole  weight, 
which  implies  full  reliance,  trust,  and  transfer,  so  to  speak,  of  whole  being  to  Him, 
who  both  amply  met  God's  claim  to  entire  devotedness  to  Him  and  made  atonement 
for  His  people,  that  is,  "  covered "  their  failures  with  His  atoning  merits  and 
sacrifice.  Believers  are  "in  Him"  (1  John  v.  20),  and  thus  God  sees  and  accepts 
them.  IV.  Kill,  .  .  .  flay,  .  .  .  cut  into  his  pieces  (vers.  5,  6).  Significant 
actions.  Not  only  death,  but  all  laid  bare  to  be  exposed  to  searching  fire  of  God's 
hoHness,  and  testify  to  the  perfections  of  His  Christ,  whether  in  part  or  whole. 
Believers  should  look  into  Christ,  and  study  His  perfectious  in  every  detail.  There 
is  also  a  "rightly  dividing  the  Word  of  truth"  (2  Tim.  ii.  15),  which  testifies  of 
Jesus  the  living  Word.  Again,  "  His  pieces,"  typifying  "  members  of  His  body,"  are 
laid  bare  before  God  ;  all  within  revealed,  i.e.,  "  naked  and  opened  .  .  ."  (Heb.  iv.  13), 


CHAP.  I.]  LEVITICUS.  17 

to  the  Searcher  of  hearts  (Psa.  vii.  9  ;  Luke  xvi.  15) ;  and  He  requires  holiness 
within  (1  Pet.  i.  15,  16).  V.  "The  priests,  Aakon's  soxs  "  (vers.  5-8)  represent 
"  the  Church  of  God,"  "  the  children  "  (Heb.  ii.  13),  an  holy  priesthood  "  (1  Pet.  ii. 
5) :  here  seen  as  worshipping  saints,  oi¥ering  to  God  what  most  "  acceptable"  to 
Him.  1.  They  "  sprinkle  tbe  blood,"  showing  ground  of  acceptable  worship  (1  Pet. 
i.  2).  2.  They  "  put  fire,"  and  lay  all  "  in  order  "  "  upon  the  altar."  Christ,  the 
Head,  in  His  entirety,  with  His  rich  excellency  (fat),  oiiernig  Himself  (voluntary  act), 
through  the  eternal  Spirit  (fire),  without  spot  to  God  (Heb.  ix.  14).  "  Many  waters 
cannot  quench  love  "  (Song  of  Sol.  viii.  7),  such  as  His,  glowing  with  the  fire  of  the 
Spirit,  shown  in  zeal  and  devotion  to  the  Father's  will.  And  no  work  for  God,  no 
offering  acceptable,  except  through  the  fire  of  the  Spirit  (Rom.  viii.  4,  8-10, 14),  sent 
from  above  to  dwell  in  believers,  and  kindle  in  them  flame  of  love  and  zeal,  which 
again  ascends  to  heaven.  VI.  The  washing  of  inwaeds  and  legs  (ver.  9)  rendered 
the  offering  typically  what  Christ  is  inherently  and  intrinsically.  Perfectly  clean 
and  pure,  not  only  in  outward  walk,  but  inwardly  also  ;  in  exact  accordance  with 
the  requirements  of  a  holy  God.  Truth,  wisdom  found  in  Him  who  was  both  (Psa. 
11.  6,  XV.  2;  John  xiv.  6  ;  Prov.  viii.  11,  30;  1  Cor.  i.  24).  "VII.  The  priest  shall 
BURN  ALL  (ver.  13).  The  whole  of  the  burnt-offering  was  to  be  consumed  upon  the 
altar,  because  exclusively  for  God.  God  requires  whole-heartedness  in  His  service  ; 
want  of  devotedness  to  God  is  sin  ;  we  offend  if  we  keep  back  part  for  ourselves,  or 
for  the  world,  instead  of  presenting  all  to  Him ;  and  these  failures,  sins,  short- 
comings, are  all  met  by  the  precious  One  in  the  burnt-offering.  VIII.  The  ashes 
carried  forth  from  beside  the  altar  testify  to  the  completeness  of  the  work 
"finished"  on  Calvary,  and  to  God's  complete  acceptance  of  the  perfect  Sacrifice, 
His  own  "  unspeakable  gift  "  (2  Cor.  ix.  15)  to  man.  The  "  clean  place  "  "  without 
the  camp  "  (chaps,  i.  16,  vi.  10,  11)  points  to  the  "  new  tomb  "  (Malt,  xxvii.  58-66), 
where  the  body  of  Jesus  was  laid  ;  and  He — the  risen  One — then  entered"  into  heaven 
itself,  now  to  appear  ..."  (Heb.  ix.  24).  IX.  "  A  sweet  savour  u.vto  the  Lord  " 
(vers.  9,  13,  17).  As  such  the  "  continual  "  burnt-offering  ascended  (Numb,  xxviii. 
3-8) ;  and  so  the  fragrant  merits  of  Christ's  one  all-sufficient  sacrifice.  For  "  Christ 
also  hath  .  .  .  given  Himself  for  ...  a  sacrifice  to  God  for  a  sweet-smelling  savour  " 
(Eph.  V.  2).  Yes,  Jesus,  who  is  feasting  the  Father's  eyes  and  heart,  is  the  one  iu 
whom  He  smells  "a  sweet  savour  "  or  "  savour  of  rest  "  (Gen.  viii.  21).  {Lady  Beau- 
jolois  Dent.)  The  burnt-oft'erinci: — Concerning  this  offering  we  note — I.  The  prin- 
ciple that  acceptable  worship  3ICST  BE  IN  ACCORDANCE  WITH  DiVINE  DIRECTION.       Not 

now  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats,  but  the  blood  of  Christ  is  the  sacrifice  by  which 
we  come  to  God  (Heb.  x.9, 10).  The  way  is  as  distinctly  and  definitely  described  under 
the  new  dispensation  as  under  the  old  (John  xiv.  6).  True  religion  is  a  revealed  way  of 
approach  to  God.  II.  Its  special  significance.  Its  Hebrew  name  means,  "  an 
ascending."  The  first  symbol  by  which  men  sought  communion  with  God  expressed 
a  voluntary  and  entire  dedication  of  themselves  to  Him.  They  declared,  by  it,  their 
aspiration  after  Him  ;  th<-ir  desire  to  do  His  will;  their  self-surrender  to  Him.  It 
was  this  devotion  of  soul  that  made  the  offering  a  sweet  savour  unto  Him.   III.  The 

RELATION  OF    THE    BOBNT-OFFERING  TO  CHRISTIAN  WORSHIP.       1,    This  offering  SUggestS 

the  holiness  of  God.  2.  The  spirit  of  acceptable  Christian  worship  :  Pure.  3.  The 
character  of  the  acceptable  Christian  worshipper :  Constant  self-devotion  to  God. 
{A.  E.  Dunning.)  The  burnt-offering : — The  burnt-offering  was  one  of  what  might  be 
called  the  common  law  offerings  of  mankind.  There  were  two  of  these  at  least — the 
slain  and  the  burnt-offering.  It  is  not  always  possible  to  distinguish  these  in  the 
early  history  of  sacrifices.  The  former  was  one  in  which  slain  beasts  were  laid  upon 
the  altar  in  token  of  man's  fellowship  with  God  ;  the  latter  was  one  where  the 
animals  were  burned  with  fire  as  incense  to  Jehovah,  expressive  of  man's  depen- 
dence, obedience,  and  need  of  forgiveness.  The  burnt-offering  was  the  most  signi- 
ficant of  all  these  earlier  sacrifices,  and  probably  included  at  times  all  the  others. 
It  is  fitting  for  this  reason,  as  well  as  for  its  superior  importance,  that  it  occupy  the 
first  place  in  the  directions  of  the  sacrificial  code  for  Israel.  The  law  of  burnt-offer- 
ings was  one  which  now  became  invested  with  the  new  sovereignty  of  a  statute.  It 
was  not  superseded  in  its  significance  or  any  of  its  associations,  but  some  of  these 
were  emphasised.  Branches  grew  out  of  the  stalk  which  had  its  roots  in  the  first 
sinner's  heart  and  the  earliest  race  history,  I.  The  idea  of  self- surrender  under- 
lay THE  GIFT  OF  THE  BUKNT-OFFERiNG.  Save  on  great  occasions,  hke  that  of  a  dedi- 
cation of  the  Tabernacle  or  Temple,  this  was  a  voluntary  offering.  As  men  were 
urged  onward  into  clearly  marked  modes  of  worship  they  were  not  deprived  of  their 
npward  look.     Before  there  is  expiation  or  justification  there  must  be  a  relation  of 

2 


18  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

fellowship  between  man  and  his  Maker.  The  burnt-offering  was  the  best  symbol  of 
this  confidential  self -surrender  because  it  was  the  sacrifice  of  a  living  thing.  The 
blood  was  regarded  as  the  vehicle  of  the  life.  When  the  Hebrew  came  of  his  own 
choice  thus  before  the  Lord  he  made  an  offering  of  himself.  II.  The  idea  of  ex- 
piation UNDERLAY  THE  OFFERING  OF  THE  BURNT  SACRIFICE.  The  Israelite  who  Came 
before  the  altar  to  make  a  burnt-offering  laid  his  hand  upon  the  victim  in  token  of 
his  desire  to  have  it  accepted  as  a  sacrifice  for  sin.  The  great  breaches  of  the  moral 
law  were  not  atoned  for  by  any  ceremonial  under  the  Hebrew  code.  The  most  flag- 
rant sins  which  were  atoned  for  or  covered  by  sacrifice  were  those  of  carelessness, 
and  had  reference  to  a  breach  of  ceremonial  law.  Therefore  we  are  justified  in 
emphasising  in  the  burnt-offering  the  idea  of  self -surrender.  The  expiation  of  the 
murderer's  sin  must  come  from  a  sacrifice  God  should  make  in  His  own  Son.  The 
sinner  took  refuge  with  God  in  the  hope  of  the  holier  offering  and  Mediator  God 
should  provide.  III.  The  acceptable  sacrifice  of  the  burnt-offering  requires 
THE  mediatorial  OFFICE.  The  worshipper  has  accepted  the  offices  of  God's  mediator. 
God  has  received  man's  trust,  his  surrender,  his  obedience.  The  spirit  of  Abraham 
with  raised  hand  above  his  only  son  is  that  which  must  till  the  heart  of  every  true 
worshipper  under  the  Mosaic  dispensation.  He  accepts  God's  offering  as  a  sacrific", 
whether  made  before  the  foundation  of  the  world,  at  the  Tabernacle  altar,  or  on  Cal- 
vary. Obedience  is  the  best  element  man  furnishes  in  the  atonement.  Obedience 
to  the  unseen  God  is  the  arrow  of  which  faith  is  the  bow-string.  (]/.  R.  Campbell.) 
The  t,ospel  of  the  burnt-offering : — I.  The  offerer  was  to  bring  it  to  the  door  of  the 
Tabernacle.  1.  A  voluntary  act.  (1)  Christ  died  willingly.  (2)  So  should  we  in 
all  our  services  be  a  willing  people.  2.  This  points  every  way  to  Christ  as  the  cause 
of  our  acceptance  with  God.  He  is  both  Door  and  Tabernacle,  Altar  and  Priest. 
3.  We  are  to  see  God  in  all  our  services,  in  and  by  Jesus  Christ.  4.  We  are  to 
worship  God  in  His  Church.  II.  The  sinner  that  brought  the  sacrifice  was  to  lay 
HIS  HAND  UPON  THE  HEAD  OF  IT.  This  cercmony  relates  to  the  confession  of  sin,  and 
the  translation  of  the  guilt  of  it  upon  the  sacrifice  (Isa.  liii.  4,  5 ;  1  John  i.  7,  9). 
III.  The  sacrifice  must  be  killed  and  slain,  and  that  upon  the  north  side  of  the 
altar.  1.  The  death  of  Christ  (Dan.  ix.  26 ;  Isa.  liii.  10).  2.  Christ  was  killed  in 
Jerusalem  and  Mount  Sion,  which  was  on  the  sides  of  the  north.  IV.  The  blood 
WAS  poured  forth  at  the  foot  of  the  altar,  and  sprinkled  uron  it  round  about.  1. 
Christ's  blood  was  shed  (Isa.  liii.  12  ;  Matt.  xxvi.  28).  2.  Sprinkled  (Heb.  xii.  24 ; 
1  Pet.  i.  2).  V.  The  priest  is  to  flay  it,  and  cut  it  into  its  pieces.  1.  This  related 
in  general  to  the  sufferings  of  Christ  (Micah  iii.  2,  3;  P?a.  xxii.  15,  16).  2.  As  the 
sacrifice,  being  dead  and  slain,  did  leave  a  skin  for  clothing  to  the  priest  by  whose 
hand  he  died,  so  Christ,  our  true  sacrifice,  who  was  led  as  a  lamb  to  the  slaughter, 
leaves  a  garment  of  righteousness  to  clothe  believers  with  (Rom.  xiii.  14).  3.  Whereas 
the  sacrifice  in  this  action  was  laid  open,  and  the  inward  parts  of  it  discovered  to 
open  view :  so  is  Christ  fully  and  openly  discovered  in  the  preaching  of  the  gospel 
(Gal.  iii.  1).  4.  The  skin  of  the  sacrifice  went  to  the  priest.  It  was  part  of  his 
maintenance  (see  Cor.  ix.  13,  14).  VI.  The  pieces  were  to  be  salted  (chap.  ii.  13 ; 
Mark  ix.  49).  1.  This  sif^nifies  the  perpetuity  of  the  covenant  of  grace.  2.  Its 
wholesomeness.  VII.  The  legs  and  inwards  must  be  washed.  So  the  bodies  of 
believers  are  said  to  be  washed  with  pure  water,  and  their  hearts  sprinkled  from  an 
evil  conscience.  VIII.  The  several  parts  of  the  offering  must  be  laid  upon  the 
ALTAR,  AND  BURNT  WITH  FIRE,  TILL  CONSUMED.  This  is  tlic  fire  of  the  justicc  and 
wrath  of  God  from  heaven,  which  seized  upon  Christ ;  and  every  part  of  Him  was 
burnt:  His  head  crowned  with  thorns,  His  side  pierced  with  the  spear.  His  hands 
and  feet  with  nails,  His  whole  body  did  sweat  drops  of  blood,  His  soul  was  heavy 
unto  death,  yea,  burnt  to  ashes,  as  it  were,  brought  to  the  utmost  extremity  of 
misery.  His  saints  also  endure  the  fiery  trial  (1  Pet.  iv.  12).  IX.  The  ashes  must 
BE  CARRIED  OUT  of  the  camp  into  a  clean  place  (chap.  vi.  10,  11 ;  see  Heb.  xiii.  11- 
13).  Christ's  crucified  body  was  not  buried  within  the  city,  but  placed  in  a  new 
sepulchre  where  never  any  man  lay  before  (John  xix.  41).  So  the  dead  bodies  of 
all  His  saints,  when  they  are  spent  and  consumed  to  ashes,  are  regarded  and  pre- 
served in  the  dust  by  God  as  sacred  relics,  and  He  will  raise  them  up  again  unto 
eternal  life.  Lessons  :  1.  See  here  the  difference  between  God's  ceremonies 
and  men's.  Divine  ceremonies  are  full  of  light  and  spirit ;  human  ceremonies 
are  full  of  darkness  and  vanity.  2.  See  the  fierceness  of  the  wrath  of  God 
against  sin.  It  is  nothing  but  death  and  blood  and  slaughter  that  will  appease 
offended  justice.  8.  Direction  under  the  guilt  of  sin  what  to  do,  and  what  course  to 
take,  to  make  atonement  and  reconciliation  between  God  and  thee.  Go  and  bring  your 


«HAP.  I.]  •         LEVITICUS.  n 

sacrifice  to  the  Priest,  and  by  Him  unto  God.  4.  Unspeakable  consolation  unto  them 
that  have  taken  this  course.  (-S.  Mather.)  The  hunit-offerbuj : — An  offerer  comes. 
Mark  what  he  brings.  If  his  offering  be  from  the  herd,  it  must  be  an  unblemished 
male  (chap.  i.  3).  It  must  be  the  choicest  produce  from  his  pastures — the  primest 
flower  from  his  fields.  There  must  be  strength  in  fullest  vigour,  and  beauty  without 
one  alloy.  Such  are  the  properties  required.  The  purport  is  distinct.  Jesus  is  here. 
The  victim  chosen  before  worlds  were  framed  is  thus  portrayed.  Strength  and  per- 
fection are  main  colours  in  His  portrait.  We  next  approach  the  chambers  of  the 
offerer's  heart.  We  read,  "  He  shall  offer  it  of  his  own  free  will  "  (chap.  i.  3).  There 
is  no  compulsion.  There  is  no  reluctance.  His  step  is  willingness.  This  is  a  picture 
of  faith's  happy  actings.  Its  chariot- wheels  move  swiftly.  It  feels  sin's  miserable 
need.  It  knows  the  value  of  redeeming  blood.  So  it  flies,  with  rapid  wing,  to  plead 
it  at  the  mercy-seat.  The  eager  offerer  puts  his  hand  upon  the  victim's  head  (chap. 
i,  4).  Do  any  ask  the  meaning  of  this  rite  ?  It  graphically  shows  a  transfer.  Some 
load  oppresses,  which  is  thus  cast  off.  Some  burden  passes  to  another's  person. 
Here  is  again  the  happy  work  of  faith.  It  brings  all  guilt,  and  heaps  it  on  the  Saviour's 
head.  One  sin  retained  is  misery  now  and  hell  at  last.  All  must  be  pardoned  by 
being  brought  to  Christ.  And  He  is  waiting  to  receive.  The  victim,  to  which  sins  thus 
typically  pass,  must  die  (chap.  i.  5).  Can  Jesus,  who  in  reality  receives  our  guilt,  not 
lay  down  life  ?  It  cannot  be.  The  holy  Word  stands  sure  :  "  In  the  day  that  thou 
eatest  thereof,  thou  shalt  sarely  die  "  (Gen.  ii.  17).  The  sinner's  surety,  then,  cannot 
be  spared.  He  gives  His  life  to  pay  the  debt — to  satisfy  the  wrath — to  bear  the  curse 
— to  expiate  the  guilt.  0  my  soul,  "  Christ  died  "  is  all  your  hope — your  plea — your 
remedy — your  life.  "  Christ  died  "  opens  your  path  to  God.  The  victim's  blood  is 
sprinkled  "round  about  upon  the  altar"  (chap.  i.  5).  The  blood  is  evidence  that  life 
is  paid.  This  token  then  is  profusely  scattered.  The  victim  is  next  flayed  (chap.  i.  6). 
The  skin  is  torn  away.  The  sacrificing  priest  received  this  as  his  portion.  Here  is  a 
picture  of  that  heaven-pure  robe,  in  which  Christ  decks  each  child  of  faith.  His 
blood,  indeed,  removes  all  curse.  But  it  is  obedience,  which  merits  all  glory. 
Because  He  died,  we  live.  Because  He  lived,  we  reign.  The  piercing  knife  divides 
the  limbs.  Members  are  torn  from  members,  and  all  the  parts,  without,  within,  to 
which  defilement  usually  adheres,  are  diligently  washed  (chap.  i.  9).  The  type  of 
Jesus  must  be  clean.  No  shadow  of  impurity  may  darken  it.  The  parts  thus 
severed,  and  thus  washed,  are  placed  upon  the  altar.  Consuming  fire  is  brought.  It 
preys  on  every  limb.  The  raging  flame  devours,  until  this  fuel  is  reduced  to  ashes 
(chap.  i.  9).  Let  us  now  seek  the  truth,  which  echoes  from  this  blazing  pile.  The 
Garden  and  the  Cross  unfold  it.  There  Jesus  presents  Himself,  laden  with  all  the 
sins  of  all  His  chosen  race.  {Dean  Law.)  The  burnt-offering  : — "  If  his  offering 
be  a  burnt  sacrifice  of  the  herd,  let  him  offer  a  male,  without  blemish."  The 
essential  glory  and  dignity  of  Christ's  Person  form  the  basis  of  Christianity,  He 
imparts  that  dignity  and  glory  to  everything  He  does,  and  to  every  office  He  sustains. 
We  shall  see,  when  we  come  to  examme  the  other  offerings,  that  "  a  female  "  was, 
in  some  cases,  permitted ;  but  that  was  only  expressive  of  the  imperfection  which 
attached  to  the  worshipper's  apprehension,  and  in  nowise  of  any  defect  in  the  offer- 
ing, inasmuch  as  it  was  "unblemished"  in  the  one  case,  as  well  as  in  the  other. 
Here,  however,  it  was  an  offering  of  the  very  highest  order,  because  it  was  Christ 
offering  Himself  to  God.  "  He  shall  offer  it  of  his  own  voluntary  will  at  the  door  of 
the  Tabernacle  of  the  congregation  before  the  Lord."  The  use  of  the  word  "  volun- 
tary,"  here,  brings  out,  with  great  clearness,  the  grand  idea  in  the  burnt-offering. 
It  leads  us  to  contemplate  the  Cross  in  an  aspect  which  is  not  sufficiently  apprehended. 
We  are  too  apt  to  look  upon  the  Cross  merely  as  the  place  where  the  great  question 
of  sin  was  gone  into  and  settled,  between  eternal  Justice  and  the  spotless  Victim — 
as  the  place  where  our  guilt  was  atoned  for,  and  where  Satan  was  gloriously  van- 
quished. Eternal  and  universal  praise  to  redeeming  love  !  the  Cross  was  all  this. 
But  it  was  more  than  this.  It  was  the  place  where  Christ's  love  to  the  Father  was 
told  out  in  language  which  only  the  Father  could  hear  and  understand.  It  is  in  the 
latter  aspect  that  we  have  it  typified,  in  the  burnt-offering  ;  and  therefore  it  is  that 
the  word  "voluntary"  occurs.  The  guilty  sinner,  no  doubt,  finds  in  the  Cross  a 
Divine  answer  to  the  deepest  and  most  earnest  cravings  of  heart  and  conscience. 
The  true  believer  finds  in  the  Cross  that  which  captivates  every  affection  of  his  heart, 
and  transfixes  his  whole  moral  being.  The  angels  find  in  the  Cross  a  theme  for 
ceaseless  admiration.  All  this  is  true ;  but  there  is  that,  in  the  Cross,  which  passes 
far  beyond  the  loftiest  conceptions  of  saints  or  angels ;  namely,  the  deep-toned 
devotion  of  the  heart  of  the  Son  presented  to,  and  appreciated  by,  the  heart  of  the 


20  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOn.  [chap.  r. 

Father.  This  is  the  elevated  aspect  of  the  Cross,  which  is  so  strikingly  shadowed 
forth  in  the  burnt-oliering.  "And  he  shall  put  his  hand  upon  the  head  of  the  burnt- 
offering  ;  and  it  shall  be  accepted  for  him,  to  make  atonement  for  him."  The  act 
of  laying  on  of  hands  was  expressive  of  full  identification.  By  that  significant  act 
the  offerer  and  the  offering  became  one ;  and  this  oneness,  in  the  case  of  the  burnt- 
offering,  secured  for  the  offerer  all  the  acceptableness  of  his  offering.  The  applica- 
tion of  this  to  Christ  and  the  believer  sets  forth  a  truth  of  the  most  precious  nature, 
and  one  largely  developed  in  the  New  Testament ;  namely,  the  believer's  everlastinj? 
identification  with,  and  acceptance  in,  Christ.  "  As  He  is,  so  are  we,  in  this  world." 
"  We  are  in  Him  that  is  true"  (1  John  iv.  17;  v.  20).  Nothing,  in  any  measure, 
short  of  this  could  avail.  "  And  he  shall  kill  the  bullo  -k  before  the  Lord  :  and  the  ■ 
priests,  Aaron's  sons,  shall  bring  the  blood,  and  sprinkle  the  blood  round  about 
upon  the  altar  that  is  by  the  door  of  the  Tabernacle  of  the  congregation."  It  is  most 
needful,  in  studying  the  dot-trine  of  the  burnt-offering,  to  bear  in  mind  that  the 
grand  point  set  forth  therein  is  not  the  meeting  of  the  sinner's  need,  but  the 
presentation  to  God  of  that  which  was  infinittdy  acceptable  to  Him.  Christ,  as 
foreshadowed  by  the  burnt-offering,  is  not  for  the  sinner's  conscience,  but  for  the 
heart  of  God.  Further,  the  Cross,  in  the  burnt-offeiing,  is  not  the  exbibition  of  the 
exceeding  hatefulness  of  sin,  but  of  Christ's  unshaken  and  unshakable  devoteduess  to 
the  Father.  Neither  is  it  the  scene  of  God's  outpoured  wrath  on  Christ  the  Sin- 
bearer  ;  but  of  the  Father's  unmingled  complacency  in  Christ,  the  voluntary  and 
most  fragrant  sacrifice.  Finally,  "  atonement,"  as  seen  in  the  burnt-offering,  is  not 
merely  commensurate  with  the  claims  of  man's  conscience,  but  with  the  intense 
desire  of  the  heart  of  Christ,  to  carry  out  the  will  and  establish  the  counsels  of  God 
— a  desire  which  stopped  not  short  of  surrendering  up  His  spotless,  precious  life, 
as  "  a  voluntary  offering  "  of  "  sweet  savour  "  to  God.  "  The  priests,  Aaron's  sons, 
shall  bring  the  blood,  and  sprinkle  the  blood  round  about  upon  the  altar  that  is  by 
the  door  of  the  Tabernacle  of  the  congregation."  Here  we  have  a  type  of  the  Church, 
bringing  the  memorial  of  an  accomplished  sacrifice,  and  presenting  it  in  the  place 
of  individual  approach  to  God.  But,  we  must  remember,  it  is  the  blood  of  the  burnt- 
offering,  and  not  of  the  sin-offering.  It  is  the  Church,  in  the  power  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  entering  into  the  stupendous  thought  of  Christ's  accomplished  devotedn^ss 
to  God,  and  not  a  convicted  sinner,  entering  into  the  value  of  the  blood  of  the  Sin- 
bearer.  "And  he  shall  flay  the  burnt-offering,  and  cut  it  into  his  pieces."  The 
ceremonial  act  of  "  flaying"  was  peculiarly  expressive.  It  was  simply  the  removing 
of  the  outward  covering,  in  order  that  what  was  within  might  be  fully  revealed.  It 
was  not  sufficient  that  the  offering  should  be,  outwardly,  "  without  blemish,"  "  the 
hidden  parts  "  should  be  all  disclosed,  in  order  that  every  sinew  and  every  joint 
might  be  seen.  It  was  only  in  the  case  of  the  burnt-offering  that  this  action  was 
specially  named.  This  is  quite  in  character,  and  tends  to  set  forth  the  depth  of 
Christ's  devotedness  to  the  Father.  It  was  no  mere  surface-work  with  Him.  The 
more  the  secrets  of  His  inner  life  we-e  disclosed,  the  more  the  depths  of  His  being 
were  explored,  the  more  clearly  was  it  made  manifest  that  pure  devotion  to  the  will 
of  His  Father,  and  earnest  desire  for  His  gloiy,  were  the  springs  of  action  in  the 
great  Antitype  of  the  burnt-offering.  He  was,  most  assuredly,  a  whole  burnt-offer- 
ing. "And  cut  it  into  his  pieces."  This  action  presents  a  somewhat  similar  truth 
to  that  taught  in  the  "  sweet  incense  beaten  small  "  (chap.  xvi.).  The  Holy  Ghost 
delights  to  dwell  upon  the  sweetness  and  fragrance  of  tlie  sacrifice  of  Christ,  not 
only  as  a  whole,  but  also  in  all  its  minute  details.  Look  at  the  burnt-offering,  as  a 
whole,  and  you  see  it  without  blemish.  Look  at  it  in  all  its  parts,  and  you  see  it  to 
be  the  same.  Such  was  Christ ;  and  as  such  He  is  shadowed  forth  in  this  impor- 
tant type.  "  And  the  sons  of  Aaron  the  priest  shall  put  fire  upon  the  altar,  and 
lay  the  wood  in  order  upon  the  fire.  And  the  priests,  Aaron's  sons,  shall  lay  the 
parts,"  &c.  This  was  a  high  position — high  communion — a  his-'h  order  of  priestly 
service — a  striking  type  of  the  Church  having  fellowship  with  God,  in  reference  to 
the  perfect  accomplishment  of  His  will  in  the  death  of  Christ.  As  convicted  sinners 
we  gaze  on  the  Cross  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  behold  therein  that  which  meets 
all  our  need.  The  Cross,  in  this  aspect  of  it,  gives  perfect  peace  to  the  conscience. 
But,  then,  as  priests,  as  purged  worshippers,  as  members  of  the  priestly  family,  we 
can  look  at  the  Cross  in  another  lifjht,  even  as  the  grand  consummation  of  Christ's 
holy  purpose  to  carry  out,  even  unto  death,  the  will  of  the  Father.  "  But  his  inwards 
and  his  legs  shall  he  wash  in  water:  and  the  priest  shall  burn  all  on  the  altar,  to  be  a, 
burnt  sacrifice,  an  offering  made  by  fire,  of  a  sweet  savour  unto  the  Lord."  This  action 
tendered  the  sacrifice,  typically,  what  Christ  was  essentially,  pure,  both  inwardly  and, 


CHAP.  I.]  LEVITICUS.  21 

outwardly  pure.  The  members  of  His  body  perfectly  obeyed  and  carried  out  the 
counsels  of  His  devoted  h^art— that  heart  which  only  beat  for  God,  and  for  His  glory, 
in  the  salvation  of  men.  Well,  therefore,  might  the  priest  "  burn  all  on  the  altar. "  It 
was  all  typically  pure,  and  all  designed  only  as  food  for  the  altar  of  God.  (C.  H.  Mac- 
kintosh.) The  hurnt-nfering : — In  the  burnt-offering  the  atoning  element  of  sacrifice 
fell  into  the  background,  though  not  wholly  absent ;  there  is  no  special  manipula- 
tion of  the  blood,  as  in  the  sin-offering ;  all  centres  on  the  entire  consumption  of 
the  sacrifice  upon  the  altar,  which  was  especially  the  altar  of  burnt-offering.  The 
burnt-offeiing  was,  then,  peculiarly  the  offering  of  worship.  And  the  offerer  was  set 
forth  as  being  "  a  living  sacrifice,  holy,  acceptable  unto  God."  The  principal  burnt- 
offering  under  the  law  was  the  daily,  or  continual,  burnt-offering  (Exod.  xxix.  38—42 ; 
cf.  Numb,  xxviii.  3-8,  Lev.  vi.  9-12).  Nothing  was  ever  allowed  to  interfere  with 
this  "continual"  burnt-offering.  "The  great  national  offering  of  Israel, "  says 
Archdeacon  Freeman,  "  the  morning  and  evening  lamb,  was  simply  the  ancient 
burnt-offering,  or  the  Mosaic  offering  of  private  persons,  lifted  into  a  new  sphere  of 
power  and  activity.  The  directions  given  in  the  two  cases  are,  as  far  as  they  go 
(cf.  Numb,  xxviii.  with  Lev.  i.  1-13),  perfectly  coincident ;  even  to  the  quantity  of 
flour,  wine,  and  oil.  Insomuch  that  the  lofty  powers  wielded  by  the  continual 
sacrifice  might  well  seem  at  first  sight  unaccountable.  But  they  are  fully  accounted 
for  when  we  call  to  mind  the  august  circumstances  with  which  this  particular 
offering  was  surrounded.  These,  joined  to  the  direct  command  and  promise  of  God 
in  respect  of  it,  render  an  abundant  account  of  the  transcendent  powers  which  are 
ascribed  to  it.  And  though  we  might  on  some  accounts  rather  have  expected 
to  find  the  ox  or  the  ram  selected,  for  their  physical  superiority  and  greater  value, 
as  the  national  and  all-containing  sacrifice,  we  easily  perceive,  from  the  standing- 
ground  of  the  gospel,  the  superior  fitness  for  this  purpose  of  the  feeblest,  meekest, 
and  most  unresisting  of  creatures.  At  the  same  time,  even  as  the  Divine  "  strength 
was  made  perfect  in  the  weakness  "  of  Christ,  so  this  outwardly  simple  and  single 
sacrifice  was  seen,  on  occasion,  to  carry  within  it  all  that  was  noble  and  powerful 
in  the  sacrificial  sphere.  On  each  Sabbath  it  expanded  into  two  lambs,  offered 
morning  and  evening ;  at  the  new  moons,  and  other  feasts,  it  became  seven  lambs, 
two  young  bullocks,  a  ram,  and  a  goat ;  on  each  day,  during  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles, 
fourteen  lambs,  from  eight  to  thirteen  bullocks,  two  rams,  and  a  goat,  became,  in  a 
word,  "  fat  burnt  sacrifices,  with  incense  of  rams,  bullocks,  and  goats."  By  all  these 
was  manifested  forth  the  might  that  was  veiled  under  the  meekness  of  the  lamb. 
...  It  is  of  the  utmost  importance  thus  to  have  pointed  out  the  function  and 
capacities  of  the  ancient  burnt-offering,  because  the  siicrificial  work  of  Christ  is  to 
so  great  a  degree  interpreted  to  us  by  it,  and  specially  by  that  loftily  empowered 
instance  of  it,  the  Mosaic  continual  sacrifice.  To  this  is  to  be  referred  whatever 
is  said  in  the  New  Testament,  and  in  the  Liturgies,  of  His  fiivinfi  Himself,  as 
a  most  unspeakably  acceptable  gift  to  God ;  as  discriminated  either  from  His 
"giving"  or  delivering  Himself  over  for  suffering  and  death,  to  wicked  men  and 
powers  of  evil,  which  is  more  especially  set  forth  by  the  sin-offering ;  or  again,  as 
distinguished  from  His  giving  Himself  to  man  as  the  life  of  his  soul,  which  was 
represented  by  the  "peace-offering."  The  continual  burnt-off'ering  represents  also 
our  Lord's  perpetual  presentation  of  His  sacrifice  in  heaven,  that  sacrifice 
which  St.  Athanasius  calls  "  a  faithful  sacrifice,  one  which  remains  and  does 
not  pass  away."  (E.  F.  Willis,  M.A.)  Tlie  hurnt-offering  : — The  leading  feature 
of  the  burnt-off'ering  consisted  in  its  being  wholh/  consumed  upon  the  altar.  What 
have  we  here  but  a  type  of  the  preciousness  of  Jesus,  as  exhibited  in  His  whole- 
hearted devotedness,  His  entire  consecration  to  the  will  and  service  of  His  Father  ? 
Is  not  His  language  in  the  fortieth  Psalm,  "  Lo,  I  come  :  in  the  volume  of  the 
book  it  is  written  of  Me,  I  delight  to  do  Thy  will,  0  My  God.  Yea,  Thy  law 
is  within  My  heart  " — precisely  the  language  of  the  "  Burnt-Offering  "?  Again,  in 
John,  "  I  seek  not  My  own  will,  but  the  will  of  Him  who  sent  Me."  Who  but  Jesus 
could  say,  "I  do  always  those  things  that  please  Him  "  ?  Isolated  acts  of  devoted- 
ness we  may  and  do  see  exhibited  by  many  of  His  followers.  But  in  the  Man 
Christ  Jesus  we  see  one  who  through  life,  and  in  death  could  say,  "  My  meat  and 
My  drink  is  to  do  the  will  of  Him  who  sent  Me,  and  to  finish  His  work  " — One  who 
loved  and  served  "  the  Lord  His  God  with  all  His  heart.  His  soul,  His  strength  " — 
One,  therefore,  who  met  in  every  respect  the  requirements  of  the  type  before  us. 
Before  the  victim  for  the  burnt-offering  was  placed  upon  the  altar,  it  was  flayed 
and  cut  into  pieces,  and  the  parts  thereof,  "  the  head  and  feet,"  laid  "  in  order  upon 
the  wood."     This  was  a  testing  process,  and  served  to  try  the  animal's  fitness  for 


22  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

the  sacrifice.  Jesus  was  tried.  Tried  by  man.  Tried  by  Satan.  Tried  by  God. 
His  thoughts,  the  feehngs  of  His  heart,  His  words.  His  every  act — all  were  laid  bare 
to  the  eyes  of  Him  with  whom  He  had  to  do.  Yet  all  bore  the  test.  The  minutest 
examination  of  His  inner  as  well  as  His  outer  life  failed  to  disclose  aught  but 
consisted  with  the  purest  and  most  perfect  devotion  to  His  Father's  will.  He 
Himself  could  say,  "Tbou  hast  proved  Mine  heart,  Thou  hast  visited  Me  in  the 
night,  Thou  hast  tried  Me  and  shalt  find  nothing."  Whilst  His  Father  from  the 
excellent  glory  declared,  "  Thou  art  My  beloved  Son,  in  whom  I  am  well  pleased." 
In  other  words,  "  I  rest  in  Thee  and  am  satisfied.  My  holiness  rests  in  Thee  and 
is  satisfied.  My  justice.  My  truth,  all  the  essential  attributes  which  I  possess 
,  as  Jehovah,  all  are  satisfied."  All  My  most  righteous  claims  are  met  to  the  full. 
Thou  art  unto  Me  a  perfect  burnt-offering.  "A  sacrifice  of  a  sweet-smelling 
savour."  But  not  only  was  the  burnt-offering  one  of  a  "  sweet-smelling  savour"  to 
God,  it  was  rich  also  in  results  towards  the  offerer.  It  st^od  in  his  stead.  All  its 
perfectness  wa«  regarded  as  if  it  had  been  his.  In  its  acceptance  he  was  accepted. 
So  with  Christ's  sacrifice  (see  Eph.  v.  2;  Eom.  v.  19).      (F.  H.  White.)  The 

burnt-offerings  aptly  commence  the  sacrificial  laws  : — First,  they  were  probably  the 
oldest  form  of  sacrifice.  In  the  next  place,  they  had  the  very  widest  application, 
and  could  be  presented  by  any  person  without  distinction,  a  point  which  is  the  more 
significant  as  the  offerer,  sharing  the  sacred  functions  with  the  priests,  had  to 
perform  several  important  parts  of  the  ceremony  himself.  And  lastly,  though 
originally  designed  to  convey  merely  the  worshipper's  awe  and  his  unconditional 
surrender  to  the  Divine  supremacy,  they  were,  in  the  Levitical  code,  invested  with 
the  character  of  atonement  (ver.  4),  and  were  not  only  commanded  on  specified 
occasions,  but  left  to  the  spontaneous  impulse  of  the  heart  that  yearns  for  peace 
and  for  the  expiation  of  sins  known  to  the  trangressor  alone.  They  were  therefore 
meant  to  serve  the  highest  ends  of  an  inward  religion.  Thus  modified,  they 
marked  a  decided  progress  in  the  path  of  spiritual  faith ;  they  were,  in  fact,  the 
forerunners  of  the  expiatory  offerings  which  form  the  vei'y  crowning  point  of 
the  sacrificial  system,  and  beyond  which,  even  at  the  very  next  step,  the  mind 
leaves  the  fetters  of  the  ceremonial  law  and  enters  the  purer  regions  of  freedom 
and  elevation.  Hence  the  Levitical  holocausts  lead  us  to  a  time  when  the  deep- 
rooted  tendencies  towards  pagan  idolatry  had  been  conquered,  and  the  intellectual 
efforts  of  the  more  thoughtful  and  more  gifted  among  the  Hebrews  had  been 
rewarded  by  the  establishment  of  a  religious  creed,  which,  however  far  removed 
from  absolute  truth,  and  however  repugnant  to  the  true  attributes  of  the  Deity  and 
the  requirements  of  philosophy  and  reason,  at  least  permitted  the  exercise  of  noble 
and  exalted  humanity,  and  even  facilitated,  more  than  any  of  the  preceding  and 
most  of  the  later  systems  of  theology,  an  insight  into  the  moral  government  of  the 
■world,  and  the  higher  aims  of  human  existence.  Thus  the  very  beginning  of  the 
Book  reveals  unmistakably  the  time  and  purposes  of  its  composition,  and  forms  the 
first  link  in  that  great  chain  of  evidence  which  leads  to  the  most  pregnant  and  most 
interesting  historical  results.     {M.  M.  Kalisch,  Ph.D.)  The  burnt-off'ering  : — 

Here  we  are  so  accustomed  to  fall  short  of  God's  glory,  and  failure  in  glorifying 
Him  is  so  much  regarded  as  the  necessary  law  of  our  condition,  that  even  believers 
find  it  difficult  to  look  on  failure  in  devotedness  as  sin — sin  that  needs  atoirement 
as  much  as  their  most  dire  transgressions.  Even  after  we  have  owned  the  blood  of 
the  Paschal  Lamb  as  delivering  from  the  judgment  due  to  our  natural  condition, 
and  after  we  have  recognised  the  necessity  of  the  Holy  One  bearing  the  curse  earned 
by  our  transgressions,  we  nevertheless  fail  to  estimate  the  want  of  perfect  devoted- 
ness as  being  positive  sin  ;  and  hence  the  appreciation  of  our  own  condition,  as  well  as 
of  the  grace  that  meets  it,  becomes  proportionately  enfeebled.  In  order  to  correct 
this  error — an  error  fatal  to  all  right  apprehension  of  God,  and  our  relation  both  to 
His  holiness  and  to  His  grace  —the  first  lesson  given  to  us  in  the  Tabernacle  respects 
the  whole  burnt-offering.  In  other  offerings  part  was  sometimes  given  to  the  priest, 
sometimes  to  the  offerer;  but  the  burnt-offering  wu'!  all  (the  skin  only  excepted) 
rendered  to  God,  and  all  burnt  upon  His  altar.  In  the  burnt-offering,  therefore, 
there  was  a  distinct  recognition  of  the  ri^'hteous  claim  of  God  on  the  unreserved 
devotedness  of  His  creatures ;  but  it  was  also  the  confession  that  that  claim  was 
responded  to  by  none.  When  an  offerer  presented  a  victim  to  be  accepted  in  his 
room,  the  very  act  of  substitution  implied  that  the  offerer  acknowledged  himself  to 
be  destitute  of  the  qualifications  whi.h  were  found  in  his  offering;  otherwise 
substitution  would  not  be  needed,  for  the  offerer  would  stand  in  his  own  integrity. 
There  was  the  confession,  too,  that  the  absence  of  these  qualifications  involved 


CHAP.  I.]  LEVITICUS.  ?3 

guilt — guilt  deserving  death  ;  for  otherwise  the  offering  would  not  have  been 
substitutionally  slain — "  killed  before  Jehovah  "  ;  and  lastly,  there  was  the 
acknowledgment  that  because  no  unreserved  devotedness  had  been  found  in  him, 
he  needed  an  offering  to  be  wholly  given  in  his  stead  as  "a  sweet  savour  of  rest 
before  Jehovah."  The  burnt-offering  therefore  may  be  regarded  as  the  type  of 
Christ  in  respect  of  that  full,  unreserved  devotedness  of  service  which  caused  Him, 
as  the  servant  of  Jehovah,  in  all  things  to  renounce  Himself,  and  to  render  eveiy 
energy,  and  every  feeling,  and  finally  His  life  itself,  as  a  whole  burnt-offeriug  unto 
God.      (B.  IV.  Newton.)  Eight  use  of  the  grace  of  the  hurnt-offcring  : — To  use 

aright  the  grace  of  the  burnt-offering  requires,  whilst  we  remain  in  the  flesh, 
continued  watchfulness :  else  we  may  sit  down  under  the  shadow  of  its  mercies 
and  slumber.  When  protection  in  the  earth  was  by  the  especial  gift  of  God  granted 
to  Cain,  the  opportunities  which  that  protection  gave  were  instantly  used  by  him 
against  God.  It  may  be  said,  what  else  could  be  expected  from  the  unregenerate 
heart  of  Cain  ?  But  it  must  be  remembered  that  unregenerate  energies  are  still 
found  in  the  flesh  even  of  the  regenerate.  "  In  our  flesh  no  good  thing  dwelleth," 
bat  sin — essential  sin — is  there.  "  The  flesh  lusteth  against  the  spirit."  And 
although  the  protection  vouchsafed  to  Cain  was  a  temporary  mercy  only,  and 
althougn  no  burnt-offering  spread  the  power  of  its  acceptance  over  his  guilty  head, 
and  therefore  in  him  unregeneracy  might  be  expected  to  work  and  to  bring  forth 
its  proper  fruits,  yet  what  shall  we  say  of  another — him  who  is  first  mentioned  in 
Scripture  as  standing  by  the  side  of  a  burnt-offering  altar?  Noah  offered  whole 
burnt- offerings,  and  the  Lord  smelled  a  sweet  savour  of  rest  and  made  a  covenant 
of  blessing,  and  under  it  Noah  rested  :  but  to  what  did  he  devote  his  energies  ?  To 
planting  a  vineyard  for  himself  and  cherishing  its  fruits,  till  he  drank  the  wine 
thereof  and  became  drunken  and  dishonoured.  Can  there  be  any  other  result, 
when  the  Church,  forgetting  its  high  and  separate  calling,  finds  its  chief  present 
use  of  the  grace  of  redemption,  in  trying  to  sanctify  to  itself  mere  earthly  joys  ?  It 
was  otherwise  with  the  Apostle  Paul.  Who  knew,  as  he,  the  value  of  the  burnt- 
offering  and  the  joy  of  its  acceptance  ?  Yet  to  him,  "  to  live  was  Christ  "  ;  and  he 
laboured  on  till  he  could  say,  "  I  have  fought  the  good  fight,  I  have  kept  the  faith, 
I  havQ  finished  my 'course  with  joy."  And  why  this  difference?  It  was  because 
the  apostle  better  understood  that  the  only  true  place  of  blessing  was  "  the  new 
creation."  His  soul  followed,  as  it  were,  the  offering  to  the  place  into  which 
its  sweet  savour  ascended — even  above  the  heavens.      {Ibid.)  Inferior  nfferingx 

permitted  : — One  offerer  might  bring  a  bullock — another  an  offering  from  the  flock 
— another  only  an  offering  of  fowls.  There  was  evidently  much  mercy  in  this 
provision ;  fi>r  if  poverty,  or  even  disinclination,  prevented  an  Israelite  from 
bringing  the  highest  offering,  he  was  permitted  to  bring  a  lesser,  in  order  that  he 
might  not  be  deprived  entirely  of  the  blessings  connected  with  the  burnt-offering. 
Antitypieally,  there  ought  to  be  in  believers  sulficient  enlargement  of  faith  to  form 
a  proper  conception  of  Christ  as  the  burnt-offering ;  but  if  this  be  wanting,  there 
may  be  a  more  feeble  power  of  faith,  not  without  its  value,  which  is  able  to  appre- 
hend partially.  Such  a  character  of  faith  is  likely  to  be  prevalent  at  an  hour  of 
general  weakness  like  the  present.  The  superior  worth  of  the  bullock,  as  contrasted 
■with  the  lesser  offerings,  is  doubtless  the  point  chiefly  to  be  rested  on.  But  there 
seems  a  peculiar  suitability  in  such  a  type  as  the  bullock,  when  our  minds  are 
directed  to  Christ  as  the  Servant  of  Jehovah.  If  we  are  to  consider  the  strength, 
the  patience,  the  submissiveness,  which  characterised  His  service,  or  the  value 
of  tiiat  service  in  result,  the  bullock  is  evidently  a  far  fitter  type  than  either 
the  sheep  or  the  dove.  When  the  offering  was  from  the  flock,  and  yet  more, 
when  it  was  taken  from  the  fowls,  we  find,  as  might  be  expected,  the  ceremonies 
indicating  far  less  distinct  and  discriminative  apprehension  of  the  value  of  the 
burnt-offering  than  in  the  former  case.  A  distinct  recognition  of  Him  and  His 
perfections,  to  whom  the  offering  was  rendered,  was  most  material.  Accordingly, 
in  offering  the  bullock  the  offerer  presented  it  "at  the  door  of  the  Tabernacle  of 
congregation  before  Jehovah,"  and  killed  it  "  before  Jehovah."  Great  prominency 
is  thus  given  to  "  Jehovah  " ;  but  in  this  second  case  there  is  no  such  presentation 
before  Jehovah,  no  laying  the  hand  on  the  head  of  the  victim,  no  mention  of  its 
being  presented  for  acceptance  or  for  atonement.  It  was  killed  also  in  a  diU'erent 
place,  not  simply  "  before  Jehovah,"  but  "  on  the  side  of  the  altar  northwai'd 
before  Jehovah."  In  the  former  case  the  offerer  advanced  to  the  door  of  the 
Tabernacle  of  congregation  before  Jehovah ;  as  if  recognising  Him,  and  all  His 
attributes  in  their  totality  ;  but  in  this  second  case  he  slew  the  victim,  not  in  front 


•24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR,  [cdap.  i. 

of  the  altar,  or  at  the  altar,  but  on  the  side  of  the  altar  northward — indicating, 
apparently,  that  his  attention  was  directed,  not  to  tbe  manner  in  which  all  the 
attributes  of  God  were  recognised  by  the  altar,  as  it  looked  eastward  and  westward, 
northward  and  southward ;  but  that  it  was  fixed  peculiarly  on  its  relation  to 
Jehovah  in  some  of  His  attributes.  To  speak  generally  the  deficiencj'  in  tbis 
second  class  of  offerings  may  be  described  thus:  An  insufficient  apprehension 
of  Him  to  whom  the  ottering  is  brought.  InsulliL-ient  api^reciation  of  the  value  of 
tbe  offering  itself,  both  in  its  life  and  in  its  death.  Thoughts  not  sufficiently 
discriminative  as  regards  the  altar,  and  the  qualities  that  attach  to  the  offering  &•> 
there  burned.  Seeing,  then,  it  is  tbe  great  object  of  these  ceremonies  to  expand 
truth,  and  to  give  distinctness  of  apprehension,  that  object  fails  of  being  attained, 
just  in  pi-oportion  as  there  is  deficiency  of  apprehension  or  confusion  of  thougbts 
tliat  should  be  distinguished.  This  is  still  more  manifest  in  the  offering  from  the 
fowls.      (Ihid.)  "■Kill  it  on  the  side  of  the  altar  northward^' : — One  obvious 

reason  seems  to  be  this — there  was  a  necessity,  for  the  sake  of  order,  that  there  should 
be  a  separate  place  for  killing  the  oxen  and  the  sheep.  No  quarter  of  the  heavens 
was  sacred  ;  and  since,  at  other  times,  the  sacrifice  was  presented  on  the  east  side, 
a  variety  like  this  answered  the  purpose  of  proclaiming  that  Jesus  is  offered  to  any 
soul  in  any  nation,  east  or  north,  i.e.,  from  east  to  west,  north  to  south  ;  His  death 
is  presented  to  the  view  of  all,  to  be  believed  by  men  as  soon  as  they  see  it.  "  Look 
unto   Me   and   be  ye  saved,    all   ends   of   the   earth."      (A.  A.  Bonar.)  The 

complete  offering  of  self  required  by  God: — Give  to  God  ourselves  or  nothing; 
and  to  give  ourselves  to  Him  is  not  His  advantage  but  ours.  The  philosopher 
said  to  his  poor  scholar,  who  told  him  he  had  nothing  but  himself  to  give : 
"It  is  well,"  said  he;  "and  I  will  endeavour  to  give  thee  back  to  thyself 
better  than  I  received  thee."  Thus  doth  God  with  us,  and  a  Christian  makes 
himself  his  daily  sacrifice ;  he  renews  this  gift  of  himself  every  day  to  God,  and, 
receiving  it  every  day  bettered  again,  still  he  hath  the  more  delight  to  give  it,  as  being 
fitter  for  God  the  more  it  is  sanctified  by  former  sacrificing.  Now  that  whereby 
we  offer  all  other  spiritual  sacrifices,  and  even  ourselves,  is  love.  That  is  the  holy 
fire  that  burns  up  all,  sends  up  our  prayers  and  our  hearts  and  our  whole  selves,  a 
whole  burnt-offering  to  God.  (Archhp.  Leighton.)  Worthy  offerings : — There  are 
some  of  the  heathens  that  worship  the  sun  for  a  god,  and  they  would  offer  to  the 
sun  somewhat  suitable;  and  therefore  because  they  did  so  much  admire  at  the 
swiftness  of  the  motion  of  the  sun,  they  would  not  offer  a  snail  but  a  flying  horse, 
a  horse  with  wings.  Now  a  horse  is  one  of  the  swiftest  creatures,  and  one  of  the 
strongest  to  continue  in  motion  for  a  long  time  together ;  then,  having  added  wings 
to  the  horse,  they  conceived  he  was  suitable  to  be  a  sacrifice  for  the  sun.  So  when 
we  come  to  God  to  worship  Him,  to  sanctify  Him,  to  call  upon  His  name,  we  must 
not  bring  the  bare  calves  of  our  lips,  but  the  fervency  of  our  hearts ;  we  must 
behave  ourselves  so  as  to  give  Him  the  glory  that  is  fit  for  such  a  God  to  have.  {J. 
Spencer.)  The  best  to  be  sacrificed  : — The  Persian  metal-\\X)rkt-rs  will  use  little  or 
no  alloy  with  their  gold,  professing  to  despise,  as  base  and  beneath  the  name  of 
gold,  the  metal  alloyed  with  silver  or  c.pper  employed  by  European  and  American 
jewellers,  even  though  it  be  eighteen  carats  fine.  Christ  deserves  the  best  of  our 
best.  (Sharpened  Arrows.)  Hearty  offerings  : — It  is  said  of  the  Lacediemonians, 
who  were  a  poor  and  homely  people,  that  they  offered  lean  sacrifices  to  tlieir  gods ; 
and  that  the  Athenians  who  were  a  wise  and  wealtliy  people,  offered  fat  and  costly 
sacrifices  ;  and  yet  in  their  wars  the  former  always  had  the  mastery  over  the  latter. 
Whereupon  they  went  to  the  oracle  to  know  the  reason  why  those  should  speed 
worst  who  gave  most.  The  oracle  returned  this  answer  to  them  :  "  That  the 
Lacediemonians  were  a  people  who  gave  their  hearts  to  their  gods,  but  that  the 
Athenians  only  gave  their  gifts  to  their  gods."  Thus  the  heart  without  a  gift  is 
better  than  a  gift  without  a  heart.     But  both  are  desirable.      (T.  Seeker.)  The 

motive  in  offering  .-—There  may  be  many  things  that  move,  and  yet  their  motion  is 
not  an  argument  of  life :  a  windmill,  when  the  wind  serveth,  moveth,  and  moveth 
very  nimbly  too,  yet  this  cannot  be  said  to  be  a  living  creature  ;  no,  it  moveth  only 
by  an  external  cause,  by  an  artificial  contrivance ;  it  is  so  framed  that  when  the 
wind  sitteth  in  such  or  such  a  corner  it  will  move,  and  so,  having  but  an  external 
motor  and  cause  to  move,  and  no  inward  principle — no  soul  within  it  to  move  it — it 
is  an  argument  that  it  is  no  living  creature.  So  it  is  also,  if  a  man  see  another  man 
move,  and  move  very  fast  in  those  things  which  of  themselves  are  the  ways  of  God, 
you  shall  see  him  move  as  fast  to  hear  a  sermon  as  his  neighbour  doth,  as  forward 
and  as  hasty  to  thrust  himself  and  bid  himself  a  guest  to  the  Lord's  table  (when 


CHAP.  I.]  LEVITICUS.  25 

God  hath  not  bid  him)  as  any.  Now  the  question  is,  Wha*^^  principle  sets  him  at 
work?  If  it  be  an  inward  principle  of  life,  out  of  a  sincere  affection  and  love  to 
God  and  His  ordinances  that  carrieth  him  to  this,  it  argueth  that  man  hath  some 
hfe  of  grace;  but  if  it  be  some  wind  that  bloweth  on  Lim,  the  wind  of  state,  the 
wind  of  law,  the  wind  of  danger,  of  penalty,  the  wind  of  fashion  or  custom,  to  do  as 
his  neighbours  do  :  if  these,  or  the  like,  be  the  things  tliat  draw  him  thither,  this 
is  no  argument  of  life  at  all ;  it  is  a  clieap  thing,  it  is  a  counterfeit  and  dead  piece 
of  service.     (J.  Sj^encer.) 

Ver.  4.  He  shall  put  Ms  hand  upon  the  head. — Putting  the  hand  upon  the  h-ad  of 
the  sacrifice  : — Two  matters  were  essential  in  the  sacrifices  of  the  ceremonial  law; 
and  you  have  them  both  in  our  text :  "He  shall  put  his  hand  upon  the  liead  of 
the  burnt-offering,"  and  "  He  shall  kill  the  bullock  before  the  Lord."  The  appro- 
priation by  the  offerer  and  the  death  of  the  offering  are  most  fitly  joined  together, 
and  must  neither  of  them  be  overlooked.  Let  us  on  the  present  occasion  look  at 
THE  LEADING  ACT  OF  THE  OFFERER :  "  He  shall  lay  his  hand  upon  the  head  of  the 
burnt-offering."  All  that  goes  before  is  important,  but  this  is  the  real  sacrificial 
act  so  far  as  the  offerer  is  concerned.  Before  he  reached  this  point,  the  person 
who  presented  the  offering  had  to  make  a  selection  of  the  animal  to  be  brought 
before  the  Lord.  It  must  be  of  a  certain  age,  and  it  mnst  be  without  blemish; 
and  for  this  latter  reason  a  careful  examination  had  to  be  made ;  for  the  Lord 
would  not  accept  a  sacrifice  that  was  lame,  or  broken,  or  bruised,  or  deficient  in 
any  of  its  parts,  or  in  any  way  blemished.  He  required  an  offering  "  without  spot." 
Now  I  invite  all  those  who  seek  reconciliation  with  God  to  look  about  them,  and 
consider  whether  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  be  such  an  atoning  sacrifice  as  they  nf  ed 
and  as  God  will  accept.  After  you  have  well  examined  His  blessed  person  and  His 
spotless  charactei;,  if  you  arrive  at  the  conclusion  that  He  is  a  fit  and  acceptable 
sacrifice  for  you  to  present  before  the  Lord,  then  I  long  that  you  may  take  the 
much  more  practical  step,  and  accept  the  Lord  Jesus  to  be  your  representative, 
your  sin-offering,  your  burnt-offering,  your  substitute,  and  your  sacrifice.  Happily 
you  have  not  to  find  a  sacrifice  as  the  Jew  had  to  supply  a  bullock  ;  God  has  pro- 
vided Himself  with  a  perfect  sacrifice;  that  which  you  have  to  bring  to  God,  God 
first  brings  to  you.  Happily,  there  is  no  need  for  you  to  repeat  the  examination 
through  which  the  Lord  Jesus  passed  both  at  the  hands  of  men,  and  of  devils,  and 
of  God,  when  He  was  tested  and  tried  and  examined,  and  even  the  prince  of  this  world 
found  nothing  of  his  own  in  Him.  You  have  to  attend  to  this  one  thing,  namely, 
the  laying  of  your  hands  upon  the  sacrifice  provided  for  you.  To  the  Jew  it  was 
a  sacrifice  to  be  slain,  to  you  it  is  a  sacrifice  already  offered;  and  this  you  are  to 
accept  and  recognise  as  your  own.  I  pray  from  my  inmost  soul  that  you  may 
immediately  do  that  which  was  meant  by  laying  the  hand  upon  the  victim's  head. 
What  did  that  mean  ?  I.  It  meant  four  things,  and  the  first  was  confession.  1. 
He  that  laid  his  hand  upon  the  head  of  the  offering  made  confession  of  sin. 
Your  touch  of  Jesus  must  be  the  touch  of  one  who  is  consciously  guilty.  He 
belongs  not  to  you  unless  you  are  a  sinner.  Confession  of  sin  is  no  hard  duty  to 
some  of  us,  for  we  can  do  no  other  than  acknowledge  and  bemoan  our  guilt!  Here 
we  stand  before  Thee  self-condemned,  and  with  aching  hearts  we  each  one  cry, 
"  Have  mercy  upon  me,  0  God,  according  to  Thy  lovin^kindneis."  Do  any  of  you 
refuse  to  make  confession  of  guilt?  Then  do  not  think  it  hard  if,  since  according 
to  your  own  proud  notions  you  are  not  sinners,  the  Lord  should  provide  for  you 
no  Saviour!  Should  medicine  be  prepared  for  those  who  are  not  sick?  Where- 
fore should  the  righteous  be  invited  to  partake  of  pardon  ?  Why  should  a  righteous- 
ness be  provided  for  the  innocent  ?  Our  true  place  is  that  of  sinners  :  we  plead 
guilty  to  the  dread  indictment  of  God's  holy  law,  and  therefore  we  are  glad  to  lay 
our  hand  upon  the  head  of  the  sinner's  Saviour  and  sacrifice.  2.  In  this  act 
there  was  also  a  confession  of  self-impotence.  Oh,  what  can  we  do  without  Christ  ? 
I  like  what  was  said  by  a  child  in  the  Sunday' School,  when  the  teacher  said,  "  You 
have  been  reading  that  Christ  is  precious  :  what  does  that  mean  ? "  The  children 
stayed  a  little  while,  till  at  last  one  boy  replied,  "  Father  said  the  other  day  that 
mother  was  precious,  for  '  whatever  should  we  do  without  her  ?  ' "  This  is  a 
capital  explanation  of  the  word  "precious."  You  and  I  can  truly  say  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Chi  ist  that  He  is  precious  to  us,  for  what  should  we  do,  what  could  we  do 
without  Him  ?  Because  we  are  so  deeply  conscious  of  our  own  self-impotence  we 
lean  hard  upon  His  all-sufficiency.  If  you  could  read  the  text  in  the  Hebrew  you 
would  find  it  runs  thus:  "He  shall  put  his  hand  upon  the  head  of  the  burnt- 


26  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

offering,  and  it  shall  be  accepted  for  him  to  make  a  cover  for  him  " — to  make 
atonement  for  him.     Tue  word  is  copher  in  tne  Hebrew — a  cover.     Why,  then,  do 
we  hide  behind  the  Lord  Jesus?     Because  we  feel  our  need  of  something  to  cover 
us,  and  to  act  as  an  interposition  between  us  and  the  righteous  Judge  of  all  the 
earth.     If  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  shall  look  upon  us  as  we  are  He  n:ujt  be  dis- 
pleased ;  but  when  He  sees  us  in  Christ  Jesus  He  is  well  pleased  for  His  righteous- 
ness' sake.     3.  There  was  a  further  confessinn  of  the  desert  of  punishment.     When 
a  mm  brousht  his  bullock,  or  his  goat,  or  his  lamb,  he  put  his  band  on  it,  and  as 
1  e  knew  that  the  poor  creature  must  die  he  thus  acknowledged  that  he  himself 
deserved  tlsatb.     II.   Secondly,  the  laying  on  of  hands  meant  acceptance.     The 
offerer  by  laying  his  hand  upon  the  victim's  head  signified  that  he  acknowledged 
the  offering  to  be  for  himself.     1.  He  accepted,  first  of  all,  the  principle  and  the 
plan.     Far  too  many  kick  against  the  idea  of  our  being  saved  by  substitution  or 
representation.     Why  do  they  rebel  against  it?     Why  should  I  complain  of  that 
which  is  to  deliver  me  from  destruction?     If  the  Lord  does  not  object  to  the  way, 
why  should  I  ?     God  grant  that  no  one  may  hold  out  against  a  method  of  grace  so 
simple,  so  sure,  so  available  !     But,  then,  mind.     2.  After  you  have  accepted  the 
plan  and  the  way,  you  must  not  stop  there,  but  you  must  go  on  to  accept  the  sacred 
person  whom  Ciod  provides.     It  would  have  '  "--n  a  very  foolish  thing  if  the  offerer 
Lad  stood  at  the  altar  and  said,  "  Good  Loi,i,  I  accept  the  plan  of  sacrifice;   be  it 
burnt-otfering  or  sin-offering,  I  agree  thereto."     He  did  much  more  than  that;  he 
accepted  that  very  bullock  as  his  offering,  and  in  token  thereof  placed  his  hand 
upon  it.     I  pray  you  beware  of  resting  satisfied  with  understanding  and  approving 
the  plan  of  salvation.     I  heard  of  one  who  anxiously  desired  to  be  the  means  of 
the  conversion  of  a  young  man,  and  one  said  to  him,  "  You  may  go  to  him,  and 
talk  to  him,  but  you  will  get  him  no  further,  for  he  is  excep'^ingly  well  acquainted 
with  the  plan  of  salvation."    When  the  friend  began  to  speak  with  the  young  man, 
he  received  for  an  answer,  "  I  am  much  obliged  to  you,  but  I  do  not  know  that  you 
can  tell  me  much,  for  I  have  long  known  and  admired  the  plan  of  salvation  by  the 
substitutionary  sacrifice  of  Christ."     Alas !  he  was  resting  in  the  plan,  but  he  had 
not  believed  in  the  Person.     The  plan  of  salvation  is  most  blessed,  but  it  can  avail 
us  nothing  unless  we  believe.     What  is  the  comfort  of  a  plan  of  a  house  if  you  do 
not  enter  the  house  itself  ?     What  is  the  good  of  a  plan  of  clothing  if  you  have  not 
a  rag  to  cover  you  ?     The  offerer  laid  his  hands  literally  upon  the  bullock  :  he 
found  something  substantial  there,  something  wliich  he  could  handle  and  touch  ; 
even  so  do  we  lean  upon  the  real  and  true  work  of  Jesus,  the  most  substantial  thing 
under  heaven.     We  come  to  the  Lord  Jesus  by  faith,  and  say,  "  God  has  provided 
an  atonement  here,  and  I  accept  it ;  I  believe  it  to  be  a  fact  accomplished  on  the 
Cross  that  sin  was  put  away  by  Christ,  and  I  rest  on  Him."     Yes ;  you  must  get 
beyond  the  acceptance  of  plans  and  doctrines  to  a  resting  in  the  Divine  person  and 
finished  work  of  the  blessed  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  a  casting  of  yourself  entirely 
upon  Him.     III.  But  thirdly,  this  laying  of  the  liand  upon  the  sacrifice  meant  not 
only  acceptance,  but  also  transfeeence.    1.  The  offerer  had  confessed  his  sin,  and 
had  accepted  the  victim  then  presented  to  be  his  sacrifice,  and  now  he  mentally 
realises  that  his  guilt  is  by  Divine  appointment  to  pass  over  from  himself  to  the 
sacrifice.     Of  course  this  was  only  done  in  type  and  figure  at  the  door  of  the 
Tabernacle  ;  but  in  our  case  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  a  matter  of  literal  fact  has 
borne  the  sin  of  His  people.     "The  Lord  hath  made  to  meet  on  Him  the  iniquity 
of  us  all."    "  Who  His  own  self  bare  our  sins  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree."    "  Christ 
was  once  offered  to  bear  the  sins  of  many."     But  do  we  by  faith  pass  our  sins  from 
ourselves  to  Christ  ?     I  answer.  No  :  in  some  senses,  no.     But  by  faith  he  that 
accepts  Christ  as  his  Saviour  agrees  with  what  the  Lord  did  ages  ago,  for  we  read 
in  the  book  of  Isaiah  the  prophet,  "  The  Lord  hath  laid  on  Him  the  iniquity  of  us 
all."     2.  The  laying  of  the  hand  upon  the  head  of  the  sacrifice  meant  a  trans- 
ference of  guilt  to  the  victim,  and,  furthermore,  a  confidence  in  the  efficacy  of  the' 
sacrifice  there  and  then  presented.   The  believing  Jew  said,  "  This  bullock  represents 
to  me  the  sacrifice  which  God  has  provided,  and  I  rejoice  in  it  because  it  is  the 
symbol  of  a  sacrifice  whicb  does  in  very  deed  take  away  sin."     There  are  a  great 
number  of  people  who  believe  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  after  a  fashion,  but  it  is  not 
in  deed  and  in  truth,  for  they  do  not  believe  in  the  actual  pardon  of  their  own  sin: 
they  hope  that  it  may  one  day  be  forgiven,  but  they  have  no  confidence  that  the 
Lord  Jesus  has  already  put  away  their  sin  by  His  death.     "  I  am  a  great  sinner," 
says  one,  "  therefore  I  cannot  be  sa^ed."      Man  alive,  did  Christ  die  for  those  who 
are  not  -inners?     What  was  tlie  nee  I  of  a  Saviour  except  for  sinners  ?     Has  Jesua 


CHAP.  I.]  LEVITICUS. 


actually  borne  sin,  or  has  He  not  ?  If  He  has  borne  our  sin,  it  is  gone  ;  if  He  has 
not  borne  it,  our  sin  will  never  depart.  What  does  the  Scripture  say  ?  "  He  hath 
made  Him  to  be  sin  for  us,  who  knew  no  sin  ;  that  we  might  be  made  the  righteous- 
ness of  God  in  Him."  If,  then,  Cljrist  did  take  the  sinner's  sin,  it  remains  not  upon 
the  sinner  that  believeth.  IV.  Once  more,  this  laying  of  the  hand  upon  the  head 
of  the  victim  meant  identification.  The  worshipper  who  laid  his  hand  on  the 
bullock  said,  "  Be  pleased,  0  great  Lord,  to  identify  me  with  this  bullock,  and  this 
bullock  with  me.  There  has  been  a  transferring  of  my  sin,  now  I  beseech  Thee 
let  me  be  judged  as  being  in  the  victim,  and  represented  thereby."  Now  consider 
that  which  happened  to  the  sacrifice.  The  knife  was  unsheathed,  and  the  victim 
was  blain.  He  was  not  merely  bound,  but  killed ;  and  the  man  stood  there  and 
said,  "  That  is  me ;  that  is  the  fate  which  I  deserve."  The  poor  creature  struggled, 
it  wallowed  in  the  sand  in  its  dying  agonies,  and  if  the  worshipper  was  a  right- 
minded  person,  and  not  a  mere  formalist,  he  stood  with  tears  in  his  eyes,  and  felt 
in  his  heart,  "  That  death  is  mine."  I  beseech  you  when  you  think  of  our  blessed 
Lord  to  identify  yourselves  with  Him.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Noihing  but  laying 
the  hand  on  the  sacrifice  icill  suffice  : — Now,  suppose  that  the  Jew,  who  went  up  to 
the  Tabernacle  and  to  the  altar,  when  he  came  there  had  been  content  to  talk 
about  the  sacrifice  without  personally  placing  his  hand  on  it.  To  talk  of  it  would 
be  a  very  proper  thing  to  do ;  but  suppose  that  he  had  spent  all  his  time  in  merely 
discoursing  about  the  plan  of  a  sacrifice,  the  providing  of  a  substitute,  the  shedding 
of  blood,  the  clearance  of  the  sinner  through  sacrificial  death  ;  it  would  have  been 
a  delightful  theme,  but  what  would  have  come  of  it?  Suppose  he  had  talked  on 
and  on,  and  had  gone  away  home  without  joiniug  in  the  offering,  he  would  have 
found  no  ease  to  his  conscience ;  he  would,  in  fact,  have  done  nothing  by  going  to 
the  house  of  the  Lord.  I  am  afraid  that  this  is  what  many  of  you  have  done 
hitherto.  You  are  pleased  to  hear  the  gospel,  you  take  pleasure  in  the  doctrine  of 
substitution,  and  you  know  true  doctrine  from  the  current  falsehoods  of  the  hour  : 
for  all  which  I  am  very  glad ;  but  yet  you  are  not  saved,  because  you  have  not 
taken  Christ  to  be  your  own  Saviour.  You  are  like  persons  who  should  say,  "  We 
are  hungry  ;  but  we  admit  that  bread  is  a  very  proper  food  for  men,  besides  which 
we  kno*  what  sort  of  food  makes  bone,  and  what  makes  muscle,  and  what  makes 
flesh."  They  keep  on  talking  all  day  long  about  the  various  qualities  of  food : 
do  they  feel  refreshed  ?  No.  Is  their  hunger  gone  ?  No.  I  should  suppose  that, 
if  they  are  at  all  healthy,  their  appetite  is  increased,  and  the  more  they  talk 
about  food  the  more  sharp  set  they  become.  Why,  some  of  you  here  have  been 
talking  about  the  bread  of  heaven  lor  years,  and  yet  I  am  afraid  you  are  no  more 
hungry  than  you  used  to  be.  Do  go  beyond  talking  about  Christ,  and  learn  to 
feed  upon  Christ.  Come,  now,  let  us  have  done  with  talk,  and  come  to  deeds  of 
faith.  Lay  hold  on  Jesus,  who  is  set  before  you  in  the  gospel :  otherwise,  dear 
friend,  I  fear  you  will  perish  in  the  midst  of  plenty,  and  die  unpardoned,  with 
mercy  at  your  gate.  Suppose,  again,  that  the  Israelite  instead  of  talking  with  his 
friends,  had  thought  it  wise  to  consult  with  one  of  the  priests.  "  Might  I  speak 
with  you,  sir,  a  little  ?  Have  you  a  little  room  somewhere  at  the  back  where  you 
could  talk  with  me,  and  pray  with  me?"  "Yes,"  says  the  priest,  "what  ails 
you?  "  "  My  sin  lies  heavy  upon  me."  The  priest  replies,  "  You  know  that  there 
is  a  sacrifice  for  sin  ;  a  sin-offering  lieth  at  the  door,  and  God  will  accept  it  at  your 
hands."  But  you  say,  '*  I  beg  you  to  explain  this  matter  more  fully  to  me."  The 
priest  answers,  "  I  will  explain  it  as  well  as  I  can ;  but  the  whole  of  my  explana- 
tion will  end  in  this  one  thing — bring  a  sacrifice,  and  over  its  head  confess  your 
sin,  and  let  an  atonement  be  made.  The  sin-offering  is  what  God  has  ordained, 
and  therefore  God  will  receive  it.  Attend  to  His  ordinance  and  live  :  there  is  no 
other  way.  Fetch  your  offering  ;  I  will  kill  it  for  you,  and  lay  it  on  the  altar  and 
present  it  to  God."  Do  you  say  to  him,  "I  will  call  again  to-morrow,  and  have  a 
little  more  talk  with  you"?  Do  you  again  and  again  cry,  "To-morrow"?  Do 
you  go  again  and  again  into  the  inquiry-room  ?  Oh,  sir,  what  will  become  of  you  ? 
You  will  perish  in  your  sin  ;  for  God  has  not  appointed  salvation  by  inquiry-rooms 
and  talks  with  ministers,  but  by  your  laying  your  own  hand  upon  the  sacrifice 
which  He  has  appointed.  If  you  will  have  Christ,  you  shall  be  saved  ;  if  you  will 
not  have  Him,  you  must  perish  ;  all  the  talking  to  you  in  the  world  cannot  help  you 
one  jot  if  you  refuse  your  Saviour.  But  I  see  another  Israelite,  and  he  stands  by 
his  offering,  and  begins  to  w^ep  and  groan,  and  bewail  himself.  I  am  not  sorry 
to  see  him  weep,  for  I  trust  he  is  sincerely  confessing  his  guilt ;  but  w^hy  does  he 
not  place  his  hand  on  the  sacrifice  ?   He  cries  and  he  sighs,  for  he  is  such  a  sinner ; 


28  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  I. 


but  he  does  not  touch  the  offering.     The  victim  is  presented,  and  in  order  that  it 
may  avail  for  liim,  he  must  lay  his  hand  upon  it ;  bat  tliis  vital  act  he  neglects 
and  even  refuses  to  perform.     "  Ah,"  he  says,  "  I  am  in  such  trouble,  I  am  in  such 
deep  distress,"  and  he  begins  starting  a  dilficulty.     You  bunt  that  difficulty  down, 
but  there  he  stau  Is,  still  groaning  and  moanmy:,  and  producing  another  difficulty, 
and  yet  another,  world  without  end.     The  sacr.fi  ;e  is  slain,  but  he  has  no  part  in 
it,  for  he  has  not  laid  his  hand  upon  it,  and  he  goes  a  vay  with  all  the  burden  of 
his  gailt  upon  him,  though  the  sacrificial  blood  has  reddened  the  ground  on  which 
he  stood.     That  is  what  some  of  you  do.     You  go  about  lamenting  your  sin,  when 
your  chief  lament  should  be  that  you  have  not  believed  on  the  Son  of  God.     If 
you  looked  to  Jesus  you  might  dry  your  eyes  and  bid  all  hopeless  sorrows  cease  ; 
for  He  gives  remission  of  sins  to  all  penitents.     Your  tears  can  never  remove  your 
sins ;  tears,  though  flowing  like  a  river,  can  never  wash  away  the  stain  of  guilt. 
Your  faith  must  lay  her  hand  on  the  head  of  the  Lord's  sacrifice,  for  there  and 
there  only  is  there  hope  for  the  guilty.     Observe  that  the  Israelite  had  to  put  his 
hand  upon  a  victim  which  was  not  slain  as  yet,  but  was  killed  afterwards.   This  was 
to  remind  him  that  the  Messiah  was  not  yet  come ;  but  you  have  to  trust  in  a  Christ 
who  has  come,  who  has  lived,  who  has  died,  who  has  finished  the  work  of  salva- 
tion, who  has  gone  up  into  the  glory,  and  who  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for 
transgressors.     Will  you  trust  Him  or  will  you  not  ?     I  cannot  waste  words ;  I 
must  come  to  the  point.     John  Bunyan  says  that  one  Sunday  when  he  was  play- 
ing the  game  of  tip-cat  on  Elstow  Green,  as  he  was  about  to  strike  the  cat  with  the 
stick,  he  seemed  to  hear  a  voice  saying  to  him,  "  Wilt  thou  leave  thy  sins  and  go 
to  heaven,  or  wilt  thou  keep  thy  sins  and  go  to  hell  ?  "     This  morning  the  voice 
from   heaven   sounds  forth  this  question,  "  Will  you  trust  in  Christ  and  go  to 
heaven,  or  will  you  keep  apart  from  Him  and  go  to  hell?  for  thither  you  must  go 
unless  Jesus  becomes  your  Mediator  and  your  atoning  sacrifice.     Will  you  have 
Christ  or  no  ?     I  hear  you  say,  "But  " — 0  that  I  could  thrust  your  "  buts  "  aside. 
Will  you  have  Christ  or  not?     "  Oh,  but " — Nay,  your  "  buts  "  ought  to  be  thrown 
into  limbo  ;   I  fear  they  will  be  your  ruin.     Will  you  trust  Christ  or  not?     If  your 
answer  is,  "  I  trust  Hmi  with  all  my  heart,"  then  you  are  a  saved  man.     I  say  not 
yon  thall  be  saved;  but  you  are  saved.     "He  that  believeth  in  Him  hath  ever- 
lasting life."      (Ibid.)        He   shall   put    his   hand   upon   the   head   of  the   burnt- 
offering  : — If  we  want   an   offering  of   ours  accepted   of  God,  we  must   show  it 
in  some  way.     If  we  want  a  share  in  that  which  another  offers,  we  must  let  that 
be  manifest  hIso.     It  is  not  for  us  to  stand  off,  or  to  sit  upright,  while  the  minister 
prays,  or  the  choir  sings,  ourselves  having  no  part  in  the  service  of  prayer  or  song. 
We  must  in  some  way  put  our  hand  on  the  head  of  that  offering,  and  say  Amen,  or 
join — feebly  and  unmelodiously  though  it  may  be — in  the  chorus.     If  we  fail  of 
this,  we  fail  of  any  share  in  the  offering  and  in  its  benefits.     The  Lord  wants  us  to 
rest  confidently  on  His  provisions  of  grace  for  us.     He  wants  us  to  lean  hard  on 
the  Substitute  offered  and  accepted  in  our  behalf.     We  are  not  able  to  staud  alone. 
God  understands  that  very  well.      But  we  ought  to  be  able  to  lean  on  a  sure 
support.      That  support  is  provided.      Do  you  rest  on  it?      {H.  C.   Trumbull.) 
Fnr  the  sake  of  the  substitute  : — I  was  led  into  the  church  of  Dr.  Kirk,  at  Boston, 
when  some  special  meetings  were  Roing  on.     I  did  not  know  my  right  hand  from 
my  left  in  spiritual  things.     While  the  doctor  was  preaching  I  got  angry,  for  I 
thought  he  was  telling  the  people  all  about  me,  and  I  thought  it  was  very  impudent 
of  him  to  do  so.     I  determined  that  I  would  never  enter  that  church  agnin.     How- 
ever, I  was  there  next  Sunday.    Then  I  went  to  the  prayer-moctiug,  and  got  behind 
a  pillar,  but  a  kind  gentleman  came  and  gave  me  a  seat.    On  coming  out,  although 
it  was  not  cold  weather,  I  pulled  my  coat-collar  up  that  I  might  not  be  recognised. 
When  I  began  to  be  anxious  aiad  to  pray,  I  would  not  say  "  for  Jesus'  sake."    I 
did  not  understand  it.     I  said,  "  It  ain't  for  Jesus'  sake  ;  I  want  it  for  my  own 
sake."     I  could  not  see  what  "  Jesus'  sake  "  had  to  do  with  it.     I  was  in  Boston  the 
other  day,  and  saw  the  old  settee  I  used  to  sleep  on.     I  had  a  good  mind  to  bring 
it  home  as  a  relic ;  perhaps  I  may  yet.     I  went  home  one  night  and  knelt  down 
by  that  settee  full  of  trouble,  and  I  cried  out,  "  0  God  !  for  Jesus'  sake  take  this 
load  off  me."     In  a  moment  it  was  gone;   and  I  thank  God  that  then,  twenty-five 
years  ago,  Jesus  became  my  personal  Friend,  and  He  has  been  my  Friend  ever 
since.      [D.  L.  Moody.)         Substitution : — A  friend  of  mine  was  master  in  a  school 
of  black  children  in  Jamaica.     He  had  made  a  law  that  every  lie  told  in  school 
sh>nld  be  punished  by  seven  strokes  on  the  palm  with  a  strap.     One  day  Lottie 
Pail  told  a  lie,  and  was  called  up  to  receive  the  seven  strokes.     Lottie  was  a  poor 


CHAP.  I.]  LEVITICUS.  ^9 

little  thing,  and  pain  was  terrible  to  her.  But  the  mister  must  euforce  his  law. 
So  Lottie  had  to  hold  out  her  hand  and  receive  the  seven  strukes.  But  lier  cry  of 
pain  when  she  had  received  the  first  went  to  the  master's  heart.  So  he  looked  to  the 
forms  on  which  the  boys  were  seated,  and  asked,  "  Is  there  any  boy  will  bear  the 
rest  of  Lottie's  punishment  ?  ''  And  as  soon  as  the  words  were  out  of  his  lips  up 
started  a  bright  little  fellow  called  Jim,  and  said,  "  Please,  sir,  I  will  I  "  And  he 
rose  from  his  seat,  stepped  up  to  the  desk,  and  received,  without  a  cry,  the  six 
remaining  strokes.  What  moved  this  brave  boy  to  bear  Lottie's  punishment  ?  It 
was  his  gentle  heart.  And  it  was  the  vision  of  a  heart  gentler  still  which  filled 
the  master's  eyes  with  tears  that  day,  and  made  him  close  his  books,  and  bring  his 
scholars  round  about  his  desk,  and  tell  them  of  the  Gentle  One  who  long  ago  bore 
the  punishment  of  us  all.  {Alex.Macleod,  D.D.)  Laying  the  hand  on  tJic  luctiin  : 
— The  offerer  indicated  then-by  both  the  surrender  of  his  ownership  of  the  victim 
and  the  transfer  to  it  of  the  feelings  by  which  he  was  influenced  in  performing 
this  act  of  dedication  to  the  Lord.  From  the  practice  which  obtained  during  the 
second  Temple,  we  know  that  the  offerer  himself  laid  both  his  hands  between  the 
two  horns  of  the  animal  whilst  alive,  and  that  no  proxy  could  do  it.  If  several 
offered  one  sacrifice,  each  one  laid  his  hand  separately  on  the  victim,  confessing 
his  sins  and  saying,  "  I  have  sinned,  I  have  committed  iniquity,  I  have  transgressed 
and  I  have  done  this  and  this,  but  I  repent  before  Thee,  and  this  is  my  atonement." 
(C  D.  Gimburg,  LL.D.)  The  substituting  sacrifice  : — In  dealing  with  this  lesson 
the  teacher  may  group  his  illustrations  around  the  substitute,  the  accepted  offer- 
ing, and  the  completed  sacrifice.  During  a  recent  European  war  a  young  man  was 
drawn  by  conscription  for  the  army.  He  was  very  unwilling  to  join,  but  the  law 
of  his  country  decreed  that  he  must  go  unless  he  could  find  some  one  to  take  his 
place.  At  last  a  friend  came  forward,  went  to  the  front  in  his  stead,  and  was  sh.>t 
down  in  his  first  battle.  That  was  substitution  ;  the  volunteer  died  for  his  friend. 
In  a  fog  on  one  of  the  American  coasts  the  fishermen  heard  the  steam- \vhistle  of 
an  ocean  steamer  that  was  coming  direct  for  the  rocks.  Out  some  of  them  went 
in  a  fishing-boat,  sailed  in  before  the  steamer,  shouted  words  of  warning  to  the 
captain,  saved  the  ship,  and  were  run  down  and  drowned.  They  gave  their  lives 
for  the  lives  of  the  passengers  on  the  steamship.  That  is  the  law  of  life — life  out 
of  death.  The  life  and  liberty  of  a  nation  are  bought  in  fields  of  blood  and 
sacrifice.  The  death  of  a  mother  becomes  the  occasion  of  the  salvation  of  a  hitherto 
thoughtless  son.  Even  the  continued  life  of  individuals  is  bought  by  the  sla"r^"if-er 
of  countless  cattle.  In  picturing  out  the  ceremonies  described  in  the  lesson, 
emphasise  the  substitutionary  offering  of  a  perfect  victim.  Only,  in  applying  the 
type  to  Christ,  remember  that  the  meaning  of  His  death  for  us  is  greater  and 
fuller  than  that  of  any  type  or  illustration.  If  you  tender  a  clipped  coin  in  pay- 
ment of  what  you  buy,  it  will  be  refused  ;  it  is  not  full  value.  If  a  man  offer  to 
become  bail  for  an  accused  person,  and  it  is  shown  that  his  property  cannot  cover 
the  amount  of  bail,  his  offer  is  refused.  If  a  college  professor  were  about  to  take 
a  week's  vacation,  it  is  not  likely  that  the  offer  of  an  illiterate  man  to  fill  his 
place  till  he  returned,  would  be  accepted.  So  the  sacrifice  that  redeems  a  human 
soul  must  be  perfect  and  without  blemish.  The  typical  peifect  burnt-offering 
pointed  to  the  accepted  offering  of  the  perfect  antitype  Christ.  Picture  out  the 
scene  at  the  burning  of  the  offering — the  sprinkled  blood,  the  parted  body,  the 
smoke  rising  from  the  burning  fat.  The  wounded  man  does  not  realise  how 
dangerous  a  thing  that  slight  wound  in  the  arm  is,  till  he  sees  the  surgeons  stand- 
ing around,  and  notes  the  preparations  made  for  cutting  the  limb  off.  So  the 
sinner  must  have  realised  what  a  terrible  thing  sin  was,  when  he  saw  the  bloody 
sacrifice  and  the  burning  fire.  Should  our  hatred  and  fear  of  sin  be  any  less  when 
we  look  upon  the  completed  sacrifice  at  Calvary  ?  {American  Sunday  School  Times.) 
To  make  atonement  for  him. — Atonement : — In  this  word  "atonement"  we  are 
introduced  to  one  of  the  key-words  of  Leviticus,  rs  indeed  of  the  whole  Scripture. 
The  Hebrew  radical  originally  means  "to  cover,"  and  is  used  once  (Gen.  vi.  14)  in 
this  purely  physical  sense.  But  ccimnionly,  as  here,  it  means  "  to  cover "  in  a 
spiritual  sense,  that  is,  to  cover  the  sinful  person  from  the  sight  of  the  Holy  God, 
who  is  "  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  evil."  Hence,  it  is  commonly  rendered  "  to 
atone,"  or  "to  make  atonement";  also,  "to  reconcile,"  or  "to  make  reconcilia- 
tion." The  thought  is  this :  that  between  the  sinner  and  the  Holy  One  comes  now 
the  guiltless  victim ;  so  that  the  eye  of  God  looks  not  npon  the  sinner,  but  on  the 
offered  substitute  ;  and  in  that  the  blood  of  the  substituted  victim  is  offered  before 
God  for  the  sinner,  atonement  is  made  for  sin,  and  the  Mo=t  Koly  One  is  satisfied. 


?0  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap.  i. 

And  when  the  believing  Israelite  should  lay  his  hand  with  confession  of  sin  upon  the 
appointed  victim,  it  was  graciously  pmniised  :  "  It  shall  be  accepted  for  him,"  &c. 
And  just  so  now,  whenever  any  guilty  sinner,  fearing  the  deserved  wrath  of  God 
because  of  his  sin,  especially  because  of  his  lack  of  that  full  consecration  which 
the  burnt-sacrifice  set  forth,  lays  his  hand  in  faith  upon  the  great  Burnt-offering  of 
Calvary,  the  blessing  is  the  same.  For  in  the  light  oi  ihe  Cross,  this  Old  Testament 
word  becomes  a  sweet  New  Testament  promise :  "  When  thou  shalt  rest  with  the 
band  of  faith  upon  this  Lamb  of  God,  He  shall  be  accepted  for  thee,  to  make  atone- 
ment for  thee."  This  is  most  beautifully  expressed  in  an  ancient  "  Order  for  the 
Visitation  of  the  Sick,"  attributed  to  Anselm  of  Canterbury,  in  which  it  is  written  : 
"The  minister  shall  say  to  the  sick  man,  Dost  thou  believe  that  thou  canst  not  be 
saved  but  by  the  death  of  Christ?  The  sick  man  answereth,  Yes.  Then  let  it  be 
said  unto  him.  Go  to,  then,  and  whilst  thy  soul  abideth  m  thee,  put  all  thy  confi- 
dence in  this  death  alone;  place  thy  trust  in  no  other  thing;  commit  thyself 
wholly  to  this  death  ;  cover  thyself  alway  with  this  alone.  .  ,  .  And  if  God  would 
judge  thee,  say.  Lord,  I  place  the  death  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  between  me  and 
Thy  judgment ;  otherwise  I  will  not  contend  or  enter  into  judgment  with  Thee. 
And  if  He  shall  say  unto  thee  that  thou  art  a  sinner,  say,  I  place  the  death  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  between  me  and  my  sins.  If  He  shall  say  unto  thee,  that  thou 
hast  deserved  damnation,  say.  Lord,  I  put  the  death  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ 
between  Thee  and  all  my  sins  ;  and  I  offer  His  merits  for  my  own,  which  I  should 
have,  and  have  not,"  And  whosoever  of  us  can  thus  speak,  to  him  the  promise 
speaks  from  out  the  shadows  of  the  tent  of  meeting :  "  This  Christ,  the  Lamb  of 
God,  the  true  Burnt-offering,  shall  be  accepted  for  thee,  to  make  atonement  for 
thee."  (S.  H.  Kellogg,  D.D.)  The  blood  of  Christ:— "The  sacrifice  which 
Jesus  Christ  offered  for  His  people  was  better  than  any  or  all  offered  under  the 
Levitical  lnw  ;  for  they  all  combined  in  Him.  It  was  a  richer  sacrifice  by  far  in 
itself,  for  in  the  Levitical  sacrifice  there  was  only  the  principle  of  brute  life  ;  but  in 
Christ's  not  only  human,  but  holy,  and  more,  it  was  Heavenly  blood,  and  so  much 
higher  in  intrinsic  value.  His  was  no  involuntary  sacrifice,  no  accidental  death; 
for  while  sentence  was  pronounced  in  Pilate's  hall  j  et  "  it  pleased  the  Lord  to  bruise 
Him."  His  sacrifice  of  Himself  procures  a  more  thorough  cleansing,  for  it  is  no 
ritual  or  ceremonial  cleanness,  but  a  purged  conscience,  and  eternally  settles  the 
question  of  sin.  It  brings  the  soul  at  once  into  freedom  to  serve  God  ;  the  cleansed 
spirit  is  brought  into  delightful  service  for  the  Eedeemer  ;  it  sweeps  all  time  in  its 
efficacy,  and  is  yet  to  have  a  more  glorious  consummation  ;  for  our  High  Priest  is 
in  the  Holy  Place  just  now,  but  the  curtain  will  be  drawn  before  long,  and  He  shall 
come  with  stretched-out  hands  hearing  the  print  of  the  nails — coming  out  to  bless 
His  people."  (Arch.  Brown.)  Redeemed  by  blood  : — Some  Africans  are  terribly 
bloodthirsty  and  cruel.  A  chief,  one  day,  ordered  a  slave  to  be  killed  for  a  very 
small  offence.  An  Englishman  who  overheard  the  order  at  once  went  to  the  chief 
and  offered  him  many  costly  things  if  he  would  spare  the  poor  man's  life.  But  the 
chief  turned  to  him  and  said  :  "  I  don't  want  ivory,  or  slaves,  or  gold;  I  can  go  to 
yonder  tribe  and  capture  their  stores  and  villnges.  I  want  no  favours  from  the 
white  man.  All  I  want  is  blood."  Then  he  ordered  one  of  his  men  to  pull  the 
bowstring  and  discharge  an  arrow  at  the  heart  of  the  poor  slave.  The  Englishman 
instinctively  threw  himself  in  front  and  held  up  his  arm,  and  the  next  moment  the 
arrow  was  quivering  in  the  white  man's  flesh.  The  black  men  were  astonished. 
Then,  as  the  Englishman  pulled  the  arrow  from  his  arm,  he  said  to  the  chief : 
"  Here  is  blood  ;•  I  give  my  blood  for  this  poor  slave,  and  I  claim  his  life."  The 
chief  had  never  seen  such  love  before,  and  he  was  completely  overcome  by  it.  He 
gave  the  slave  to  the  white  man,  saying :  "  Yes,  white  man,  you  have  bought  him 
with  your  blood,  and  he  shall  be  yours."  In  a  moment  the  poor  slave  threw  himself 
at  the  feet  of  his  deliverer,  and  with  tears  flowing  down  his  face,  exclaimed  :  "  Oh, 
white  man,  you  have  bought  me  with  your  blood  ;  I  will  be  your  slave  for  ever." 
The  Englishman  could  never  make  him  take  his  freedom.  Wherever  he  went  the 
rescued  man  was  beside  him,  and  no  drudgery  was  too  hard,  no  task  too  hopeless 
for  the  grateful  slave  to  do  for  his  deliverer.  If  the  heart  of  a  poor  heathen  can 
thus  be  won  by  the  wound  on  a  stranger's  arm  shall  not  we,  who  are  "  redeemed  by 
the  precious  blood  of  Christ,"  give  our  whole  lives  also  to  His  service  ?  (S.  S. 
Chronicle.)  Remission  by  blood : — I  would  earnestly  commend  this  remission  by 
the  shedding  of  blood  to  those  who  have  not  yet  believed.  Mr.  Innis,  a  great  Scotch 
minister,  once  visited  an  infidel  who  was  dying.  When  he  came  to  him  the  first 
time,  he  said,  "  Mr.  Innis,  I  am  relying  on  the  mercy  of  God ;  God  is  merciful,  and 


CHAP.  I.]  LEVITICUS.  81 

He  will  never  damn  a  man  for  ever."  When  he  got  worse  and  was  nearer  death, 
Mr.  Innis  went  to  him  again,  and  he  said,  "  Oh,  Mr.  Inuis,  my  hope  is  gone  ;  for 
I  have  been  thinking  if  God  be  merciful,  God  is  just  too ;  and  what  if,  instead 
of  being  merciful  to  me,  He  should  be  just  to  me?  What  would  then  become  of 
me  ?  I  must  give  u])  my  hope  in  the  mere  mercy  of  God  ;  tell  me  how  to  be  saved ! " 
Mr.  Innis  told  him  that  Christ  had  died  in  the  stead  of  all  believers — that  God 
could  be  just,  and  yet  the  justifier  through  the  death  of  Christ.  "  Ah  !  "  said  he, 
"  Mr.  Innis,  tbere  is  something  solid  in  that ;  I  can  rest  on  that ;  I  cannot  rest  on 
anything  else."  (C.H.Spurgeon.)  Simnkled  witlithe  blood  of  Christ: — Martin  Luther 
went  one  day  to  see  a  lad  who  lay  dying.  Among  the  questions  asked  him  was  this  : 
♦'  What  will  you  take  with  you  to  God  ?  "  "  Everything  that  is  good,"  was  the  reply. 
*'  How  can  you,  a  poor  sinner,  take  anything  to  God  ?  "  asked  the  ^reat  man.  "  I  will 
take  to  God  in  heaven  an  humble  and  a  contrite  heart,  sprinklbd  with  the  blood  of 
Christ,"  was  the  reply  of  the  dying  boy.  "  Go  then,  dear  son,  you  wiU  be  a  welcome 
guest  with  God,"  responded  Luther. 

Ver.  5.  He  shall  kill  the  bullock. — Slaying  the  sacrifice  : — I.  Concerning  the 
killing  and  slaying  of  the  offering,  our  first  point  is  that  it  was  absolutely  essential. 
1.  The  pouring  out  of  the  blood  of  the  victim  was  of  the  very  essence  of  the  type. 
The  death  of  Christ  by  blood-shedding  was  absolutely  necessary  to  make  Him  an 
acceptable  sacrifice  for  sin.  "  It  behoved  Christ  to  suffer."  He  could  only  enter 
into  the  presence  of  God  with  His  own  blood.  He  could  not  be  the  graiu  of  wheat 
which  bringeth  forth  much  fruit  unless  He  should  die.  "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ 
His  Son  cleanseth  us  froni  all  sin."  Observe,  not  the  life,  not  the  incarnation,  not 
the  resurrection,  not  the  second  coming  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  but  His  blood.  His  death, 
the  giving  up  of  His  life,  is  that  which  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin.  This  is  that 
purging  with  hyssop  whereof  David  speaks  when  he  laments  his  sin,  and  yet  looks 
to  be  made  whiter  than  snow  by  the  free  pardon  of  his  God.  This  truth  is  the 
subject  of  all  true  gospel  preaching.  Do  you  not  know  how  Paul  puts  it — "  The 
preaching  of  the  Cross  is  to  them  that  perish  foolishness ;  but  unto  us  which  are 
saved  it  is  the  power  of  God  "  ;  "  for,"  he  says,  "  the  Jews  require  a  sign,  and  the 
Greeks  seek  after  wisdom  :  but  we  preach  Christ  crucified."  It  is  not  Christ  in  any 
other  position,  but  Christ  as  crucified,  Christ  as  made  a  curse  for  us  up  n  the  tree, 
that  is  the  first  and  most  prominent  fact  that  we  are  called  to  preach  among  tlie 
sons  of  men.  2.  Here  let  us  further  consider  that  death  is  the  result  and  penalty 
of  sin — "  The  soul  that  sinneth  it  shall  die."  "  Sin,  when  it  is  finished,  bringeth 
forth  death."  "The  wages  of  sin  is  death."  It  was  meet  that  ihe  Substitute 
should  bear  a  similar  chastisement  to  that  which  should  have  fallen  upon  the 
sinner.  3.  This  death  of  Christ  was  absolutely  necpssary  also  for  the  clearing  of  the 
troubled  conscience.  An  awakened  conscience  will  never  be  juieted  with  au,y thing 
less  than  the  blood  of  the  Lamb  :  it  rests  at  the  sight  of  the  great  Sacrifice,  but 
nowhere  else.  II.  Secondly,  we  will  with  great  delight  meditate  upon  the  fact  that 
the  death  of  Christ  is  effectually  pbevalent.  Other  offerings,  though  duly  slain, 
did  nothing  thoroughly,  did  nothing  laf 'ingly,  did  nothing  really,  by  way  of  expia- 
tion ;  for  the  Scripture  saith,  "  It  is  not  possible  that  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of 
goats  should  take  away  sins  "  :  the  true  purific'  on  is  alone  found  in  the  death  of 
the  Son  of  God.  Why  was  there  such  cleansing  power  in  the  Eedeemer's  blood  ?  I 
answer,  for  several  reasons.  1.  First,  because  of  the  glory  of  His  person.  Only 
think  who  He  was  !  He  was  none  other  than  the  "Light  of  light,  very  God  of  very 
God."  2.  Next,  consider  the  perfection  of  our  Lord's  character.  In  Him  was  no 
sin,  nor  tendency  to  sin.  He  was  "  holy,  harmless,  undeiiled,  and  separate  from 
sinners."  In  His  character  we  see  every  virtu  eat  its  best ;  He  is  incomparable.  If 
He  therefore  died,  "  the  just  for  the  unjust,"  what  must  be  the  merit  of  such  a 
death  ?  3.  Think  next  of  the  nature  of  the  death  of  Christ,  and  you  will  be  helped 
to  see  how  effectual  it  must  be.  It  was  not  a  death  by  disease  or  old  age,  but  a 
death  of  violence,  well  symbolised  by  the  killing  of  the  victim  at  the  altar.  4.  And 
then  think  of  the  Spirit  in  which  our  Lord  tvud  Saviour  bore  all  this.  Martyrs  who 
have  died  for  the  faith  have  only  paid  the  debt  of  nature  a  little  before  its  time,  for 
they  must  have  died  sooner  or  later ;  but  our  Lord  needed  not  to  have  died  at  all. 
He  said  of  His  life,  "  No  man  taketh  it  from  Me,  but  I  lay  it  down  of  Myself."  0 
glorious  Christ,  there  must  be  infinite  merit  in  such  a  death  as  Thine,  endured  in 
such  a  style  !  5.  And  then  I  bid  you  to  remember  once  more  the  covenant  character 
which  Christ  sustained:  for  when  He  was  crucified  we  thus  judge  that  one  died  for 
all,  and  in  Him  all  died.    He  was  not  slain  as  a  private  individual,  but  He  was  put 


32  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  i. 

to  death  as  a  representative  man.  III.  That  the  fact  of  the  neces^itv  for  the  death 
of  the  Lord  Jesus  is  intensely  instructive.  1.  Must  the  victims  die  ?  must  Jesus 
bleed  ?  then  let  us  see  what  is  claimed  by  oar  righteous  God.  He  claims  our  life  : 
He  claimed  of  the  offering  its  blood,  which  is  the  life  thereof  :  He  justly  requires  of 
each  of  us  our  whole  life.  Nor  is  the  demand  unjust.  Did  He  not  make  us,  and 
does  He  not  preserve  us?  Should  He  not  receive  homage  from  the  creatures  of  His 
hand?  2.  Next,  must  the  sacrifice  die?  then  see  the  evil  of  sin.  It  is  not  such  a 
trifle  as  certain  men  imagine.  It  is  a  deadly  evil,  a  killing  poison.  It  is  a  horrible 
and  a  grievous  thing,  and  God  saith  to  you,  "  Oh,  do  not  this  abominable  thing 
which  I  hate."  Go- 1  help  you  to  flee  from  all  iniquity.  3,  Next  learn  the  love  of 
God.  Behold  how  He  loved  you  and  me  !  He  must  punish  sin,  but  He  must  save 
us,  and  so  He  gives  His  Son  to  die  in  our  stead.  I  shall  not  go  too  far  if  I  say  that 
in  giving  His  Son  the  Lord  God  gave  Himself,  for  Jesus  is  one  with  the  Father. 
Next  learn  how  Christ  has  made  an  end  of  sin.  His  one  offering  has  j)erfected  for 
ever  the  set-apart  ones.  These  are  but  a  few  of  the  great  lessons  which  we  may  learn 
from  the  necessity  that  the  Sacrifice  should  be  slain.  IV.  And  so  I  shall  close  by 
saying  that  this  blessed  subject  is  not  only  full  of  instruction,  but  it  is  eneegeticallt 
iNsriKiNG.  1.  First,  this  inspires  us  with  the  spirit  of  consecration.  When  I  think 
that  I  could  not  be  saved  except  by  the  death  of  Jesus,  then  I  feel  that  I  am  not  my 
own,  but  bought  with  a  price.  2.  Next,  this  truth  should  create  in  us  a  longing  after 
the  greatest  holiness,  for  we  should  say,  "  Did  sin  kill  my  Saviour?  Then  I  will 
kill  sin  !  "  3.  Does  not  this  inspire  you  with  great  love  for  the  Lord  Jesus  ?  Can  you 
look  at  His  dear  wounds,  and  not  be  wounded  with  love  for  Him  ?  Are  not  His 
wounds  as  mouths  which  plead  with  you  to  yield  Him  all  your  hearts  ?  4.  Lastly, 
do  you  not  think  that  this  solemn  truth  should  inspire  us  with  great  zeal  for  the 
salvation  of  others?     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  6-13.  The  priest  shall  hum  all  on  the  altar. — The  $acrijicial  burning  : — 
What  was  the  significance  of  the  burning  ?  It  has  been  often  answered  that  the 
consumption  of  the  victim  by  fire  symbolised  the  consuming  wrath  of  Jehovah,  utterly 
destroying  the  victim  which  represented  the  sinful  person  of  the  offerer.  And, 
observing  that  the  burning  followed  the  killing  and  shedding  of  blood,  some  have 
even  gone  so  far  as  to  say  that  the  burning  typified  the  eternal  fire  of  hell !  But 
when  we  remember  that,  without  doubt,  the  sacrificial  victim  in  all  the  Levitical 
off'erings  was  a  type  of  Christ,  we  may  well  agree  with  one  who  justly  calls  this 
interpretation  "  hideous."  .  .  .  While  it  is  quite  true  that  fire  often  typifies  the 
■wrath  of  God  punishing  sin,  it  is  certain  that  it  cannot  always  symbolise  this,  not 
even  in  the  sacrificial  ritual.  For  in  the  meal-offering  (chap,  ii.)  it  is  impossible 
that  the  thought  of  expiation  should  enter,  since  no  life  is  offered  and  no  blood 
shed ;  yet  this  also  is  presented  to  God  in  fire.  We  must  hold,  therefore,  that  the 
burning  can  only  mean  in  the  burnt-offering  that  which  alone  it  can  signify  in  the 
meal-offering,  namely,  the  ascending  of  the  offering  in  consecration  to  God,  on  the 
one  hand,  and,  on  the  other,  God's  gracious  acceptance  and  appropriation  of  the 
offering.  This  was  impressively  set  forth  in  the  case  of  the  burnt-offering  presented 
•when  the  Tabernacle  service  was  inaugurated;  when,  we  are  told  (chap.  ix.  24),  the 
fire  which  consumed  it  came  forth  from  before  Jehovah,  lighted  by  no  human  hand, 
and  was  thus  a  visible  representation  of  God  accepting  and  appropriating  the 
offering  to  Himself.  The  symbolism  of  the  burning  thus  understood,  we  can  now 
perceive  what  must  have  been  the  special  meaning  of  this  sacrifice.  As  regarded 
by  the  believing  Israelite  of  those  days,  not  yet  discerning  clearly  the  deeper  truth 
it  shadowed  forth  as  to  the  great  Burnt  Sacrifice  of  the  future,  it  must  have 
symbolically  taught  him  that  complete  consecration  unto  God  is  essential  to  right 
worship.  There  were  sacrifices  having  a  different  special  import,  in  which,  while  a 
part  was  burnt,  the  offerer  might  even  himself  join  in  eating  the  remaining  part, 
taking  that  for  his  own  use.  But  in  the  burnt-offering  nothing  was  for  himself: 
all  was  for  God ;  and  in  the  fire  of  the  altar  God  took  the  whole  in  such  a  way 
that  the  offering  for  ever  passed  beyond  the  offerer's  recall.  In  so  far  as  the  offerer 
entered  into  this  concpption,  and  his  inward  experience  corresponded  to  this  out- 
ward rite,  it  was  for  him  an  act  of  worship.  But  to  the  thonglitf  ul  worshipper,  one 
would  think,  it  must  sometimes  have  occurred  that,  after  all,  it  was  not  himself  or 
his  gift  that  thus  ascended  in  full  consecration  to  God,  but  a  victim  appointed  by 
God  to  represent  him  in  death  on  the  altar.  And  thus  it  was  that,  whether  under- 
stood or  not,  the  offering  in  its  very  nature  pointed  to  a  Victim  of  the  future,  in 
whose  person  and  work,  as  the  one  only  fully  consecrated  Man,  the  burnt-offering 


CHAP.  I.]  LEVITICUS.  S3 

should  receive  its  full  explication.  And  this  brings  us  to  the  question,  What 
aspect  of  the  person  and  work  of  our  Lord  was  herein  specially  typified?  It 
cannot  be  the  resultant  fellowiship  with  God,  as  in  the  peace-offering  ;  foi'  the  sacri- 
ficial feast  which  set  this  forth  was  in  this  case  wanting.  Neither  can  it  be  expiation 
for  sin ;  for  although  this  is  expressly  represented  here,  yet  it  is  not  the  chief  thing. 
The  principal  thing  in  the  burut-offeiing  was  the  burning,  the  complete  consump- 
tion of  the  victim  in  the  sacrificial  tire.  Hence  what  is  represented  chiefly  here,  is 
not  so  much  Christ  representing  His  people  in  atoning  death  as  Christ  representing 
His  people  in  perfect  consecration  and  entire  self-surrender  unto  God ;  in  a  word, 
in  perfect  obedience.  How  much  is  made  of  this  aspect  of  our  Lord's  work  in  the 
Gospels !  The  first  words  we  hear  from  His  lips  are  to  this  effect  (Luke  ii.  49) ; 
and  after  His  official  work  began  in  the  first  cleansing  of  the  Temple,  this  manifes- 
tation of  His  character  was  such  as  to  remind  His  disciples  tiiat  it  was  written, 
"The  zeai  of  Thy  house  shall  eat  Me  up  " — phraseology  which  brings  the  burnt- 
offering  at  once  to  mind.  And  His  cons^tant  testimony  concerning  Himself,  to 
which  His  whole  life  bare  witness,  was  in  such  woids  as  these  :  "  I  came  down  from 
heaven,  not  to  do  My  own  will,  but  the  will  of  Him  that  sent  Me.  .  .  ."  And  so  the 
burnt-offering  teaches  us  to  remember  that  Christ  has  not  only  died  for  our  sins, 
but  also  consecrated  Himself  for  us  to  God  in  full  self-surrender  in  our  behalf. 
We  are  therefore  to  plead  not  only  His  atoning  death,  but  also  the  transcendent 
merit  of  His  hfe  of  full  consecration  to  the  Father's  will.  To  this  the  words  three 
times  repeated  concerning  the  burnt-offering  (vers.  9,  13,  17)  blessedly  apply:  it  is 
"  an  offering  made  by  tire,  of  a  sweet  savour  unto  the  Lord."  That  is,  this  full 
self-surrender  of  the  holy  Son  of  God  unto  the  Father  is  exceedingly  delightful  and 
acceptable  unto  God.  And  for  this  reason  it  is  for  us  an  ever-prevailing  argument 
for  our  own  acceptance,  and  for  the  gracious  bestowment  for  Christ's  sake  of  all  that 
there  is  in  Him  for  us.  Only  let  us  ever  remember  that  we  cannot  argue,  as  in  the 
case  of  the  atoning  death,  that  as  Christ  died  that  we  might  not  die,  so  He  offered 
Himself  in  full  consecration  unto  God,  that  we  might  thus  be  released  from  this 
obligation.  Here  the  exact  opposite  is  the  truth  ;  for  Chiist  Himself  said  in  His 
memorable  prayer,  just  before  His  offering  of  Himself  to  death,  "  For  their  sakes  I 
sanctify  (consecrate)  Myself,  that  they  also  might  be  sanctified  in  truth."  And  thus 
is  brought  before  us  the  thought,  that  if  the  sin-offering  emphasised  the  substitu- 
tionary death  of  Christ,  whereby  He  became  our  righteousness,  the  burnt-off'ering 
as  distinctively  brings  before  us  Christ  as  our  sanctitication,  offering  Himself  with- 
out spot,  a  whole  burnt-offering  to  God.  And  as  by  that  one  life  of  sinless  obedience 
to  the  will  of  the  Father  He  procured  our  salvation  by  His  merit,  so  in  this  respect 
He  has  also  become  our  one  perfect  example  of  what  consecration  to  God  really  is. 
(S.  H.  Kellogg,  D.D.)  The  best  offering  : — Some  children  lost  their  Sunday-school 
teacher  by  death.  The  scholars  gathered  round  the  open  grave,  and  the  little  hands 
dropped  in  their  wreaths  of  fiowers.  They  talked  afterwards  about  his  goodness 
and  his  love,  and  then  cousidered  what. they  should  do  to  keep  his  memory  bright. 
One  httle  girl  said:  "  Let  us  keep  his  grave  fresh  with  flowers,"  so  every  Sunday, 
after  school  hours,  one  of  the  little  girls  was  told  off  to  beg  the  flowers  she  could 
not  gather,  and  lay  them  on  her  teacher's  grave.  Twelve  months  passed  away,  and 
one  sultry  July  morning  one  of  the  grave-diggers  saw,  lying  on  the  grave  which  had 
been  so  tentlerly  cared  for,  a  little  slumbering  child  of  five  or  six  years.  He  took 
her  in  his  arms  and  gently  woke  her  up.  "Where  am  I  ?  "  exclaimed  the  aroused 
sleeper.  Then  suddenly  recalling  why  she  had  come  there,  she  added,  "  Oh,  I 
know ;  it  was  my  turn  to  put  the  flowers  on  teacher's  grave  last  night,  and  I  couldn't 
find  anything  haK  good  enough.  He  used  to  call  me  his  'little  flower,'  and  I 
thought  I  would  give  myself  to  him,  just  to  show  him  how  I  loved  him."  In  that 
cemetery  there  are  two  graves  opposite  each  other,  the  one  the  Sunday-school 
teacher,  and  the  other  that  of  the  little  girl,  and  on  her  grave  are  these  words, 
"  Little  Flower."  She  gave  herself  to  show  how  much  she  loved  him.  (G.  S. 
Reaney.)  Genuine  comecration  : — A  personal  friend  asked  Wendell  Phillips  not 
long  before  his  death,  "  Mr.  Phillips,  did  you  ever  consecrate  yourself  to  God  ?  " 
"Yes,"  he  answered,  "when  I  was  a  boy,  fourteen  years  of  age,  in  the  old  church 
at  the  north  end,  I  heard  Lyman  Beecher  preach  on  the  theme,  '  You  belong  to 
God,'  and  I  went  home  after  tbat  service,  threw  myself  on  the  floor  in  my  room, 
with  locked  doors,  and  prayed,  '  0  God,  I  belong  to  Thee  ;  take  what  is  Thine  own. 
I  ask  this,  that  whenever  a  thing  be  wrong  it  may  have  no  power  of  temptation  over 
me  ;  whenever  a  thim/  be  riglit  it  may  take  no  courage  to  do  it.'  From  thst  day  to 
this  it  has  been  so.     Whenever  I  have  known  a  thing  to  Le  wrong  it  has  held  no 

3 


34  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

temptation.   Whenever  I  have  known  a  thing  to  be  right  it  has  taken  no  courage  to 
do  it."     A  devoted  life: — David  Brainerd  was  one  of  tliose  who  might  be  called 
God's  men.     From  the  first,  it  was  the  vision  of  God's  splendour  which  subdued 
him  ;  it  was  for  the  glory  of  God  that  he  laboured ;  his  nearness  to  the  blaze  of  the 
Divine  presence  enabled  him  to  kindle  a  light  which  will  never  be  extinguished. 
Hear  what  he  says  concerning  his  experience  when  first  he  obtained  a  foothold  in 
the  kingdom,  "  My  soul  rejoiced  with  joy  unspeakable  to  see  such  a  God !  such  a 
glorious,  Divine  Being  ;  and  I  was  inwardly  pleased  and  satisfied  that  He  should  be 
God  over  all  for  ever  and  ever.     My  soul  was  so  captivated  and  delighted  with  the 
excellency,  loveliness,  greatness,  and  other  perfections  of  God,  that  I  was  even 
swallowed  up   in  Him ;  at  least,  to  that  degree  that  I  had  no  thought,  that  I 
remember  at  first,  about  my  own  salvation,  and  scarcely  reflected  that  there  was 
such  a  creature  as  myself."     And,  again,  on  his  twenty-fourth  birthday,  "I  hardly 
ever  so  longed  to  live  to  God,  and  to  be  altogether  devoted  to  Him,  I  wanted  to  wear 
out  my  life  in  His  service  and  for  His  glory."     He  wrote  a  journal,  detailing  the 
exercises  of  his  soul,  and  recounting  his  experiences  amongst  the  Kedskins.     Two 
early  volumes  of  it  he  destroyed,  lest  he  might  be  led  to  glory  in  anything  he  had 
felt  or  done  ;  the  remaining  volumes  he  also  desired  to  demolish  when  he  came  to 
die  ;  but  through  the  influence  of  Jonathan  Edwards,  who  had  caught  a  glimpse  of 
their  contents,  and  estimated  their  worth,  he  was  induced  to  spare  them,  and  even 
permit  them  to  be  published,  though  they  had  not  been  written  with  such  an  inten- 
tion, but  in  the  weary  solitudes  had  been  like  a  friend,  to  whom  he  could  pour  out 
the  secrets  of  his  heart.    William  Carey,  the  pioneer  of  modern  missions,  read  these 
journals  of  Brainerd  as  he  sat  on  the  shoemaker's  bench,  and  said  to  himself,  "  If 
God  can  do  such  things  among  the  Indians  of  America,  why  not  among  the  pagans 
of  India  ?  "     He  was  thus  led  to  offer  himself  for  missionary  work  just  one  hundred 
years  ago.     Henry  Martyn  read  the  book,  aud  received  an  impulse  which  sent  him 
to  live  and  die  for  Christ  in  Persia.     John  Wesley,  in  answering  the  question, 
"  What  can  be  done  to  revive  the  work  of  God  where  it  is  decayed?  "  said,  "  Let 
every  preacher  read  carefully  over  the  life  of  David  Brainerd."   McCheyne  records, 
in  his  journal,  that  after  reading  it,  he  was  "  more  set  on  missionary  enterprise 
than   ever."     {W.   Y.   Fullerton,   "  Sicord  and  TroiceV)         Results  of  total  self- 
surrender : — What  are  the  results  of  total  self-surrender  to   God,  as   known  to 
universal  ethical  experience?     Peace,  spiritual  illumination, hatred  of  sin,  adraira- 
tion  of  holiness,  a  strange  new  sense  of  the  Divine  presence,  a  feeling  of  union 
with  God,  a  love  of  prayer.     Even  in  the  sphere  which  historic  Chi'istianity  has 
not  reached,  there  will  be,  after  total  self-surrender,  as  I  hold,  at  least  a  dim  sense 
of  forgiveness,  the  feeling  that  one  can  say  "  Abba  Father  "  ;  a  new  delight  in  God's 
works  and  in  His  Word  ;  love  of  man ;  loss  of  fear  of  death  ;  a  growing  and  finally 
supreme  love  of  the  Father,  Eedeemer,  Ruler,  Saviour,  which  has  become  the  soul's 
all.    An  evangelist  of  great  experience  and  wisdom,  or.e  of  whose  anniversaries  was 
lately  honoured  in  this  city,  has  distributed  many  thousands  of  cards  on  which 
were  printed  the  following  evidences  of  conversion.     He  speaks  from  the  point  of 
view  of  exegetical  knowledge.     I  have  spoken  thus  far  from  the  point  of  view  of 
ethical  science,  strictly  so-called.     Let  me  contrast  now  with  my  results,  these 
results  of  a  practical  evangelist.     These  are  the  signs   of  conversion  which  Dr. 
Earle  gives — 1.  A  full  surrender  of  the  will  to  God.     2.  The  removal  of  a  burden 
of  sin  gi  adually  or  suddenly.     3.  A  new  love  to  Christians  and  to  Jesus.     4.  A  new 
relish  for  the  Word  of  God.    5.  Pleasure  in  secret  prayer,  at  least  at  times.    6.  Sin 
or  sinful  thoughts  will  cause  pain.    7.  Desire  and  efforts  for  the  salvation  of  others. 
8.  A  desire  to  obey  Christ  in  His  commands  and  ordinances.     9.  Deep  humility 
and  self-abasement.     10.-  A  growing  desire  to  be  holy  and  like  Christ.         (Joseph 
Cook.) 

Vers.  14-17.  Bring  his  offering  of  turtledoves. — The  burnt  sacrifice  of  birds : — 
I.  We  observe,  in  the  first  place,  that  wohship  and  dedication  to  God  are  the 

GENERAL   IDEAS    CONNECTED    WITH    SACRIFICES     IN     THE    SACRED    ScRIPTURES,    and    this 

is  most  important  to  a  right  understanding  of  them.  His  own  Divine  love  induced 
the  Saviour  to  glorify  His  humanity  through  sufferings,  that  He  might  be  a  Saviour 
for  ever  to  bring  His  children  to  Himself ;  and  thus  He  suffered,  as  the  apostle 
Bays,  the  just  for  the  unjust,  to  bring  us  to  God.  He  suffered  to  satisfy  His  love, 
not  as  a  punishment  to  appease  the  anger  of  another  Divine  person.  In  the 
Bacrifice  before  us,  "it  is  a  burnt  sacrifice,  an  offering  made  by  fire,  of  a  sweet 
Bavour  unto  the  Lord.      A  symbol  this  of  the  offering  of  interior  worship  from 


CHAP.  I.]  LEVITICUS.  35 

love,  the  fire  of  the  soul,  on  the  altar  of  the  heart.     II.  But  secondly,  the  objects 

OFFERED    UP    WERE    COBEESPONDENCES    OF    GOOD    PRINCIPLES    OR    POWERS    IN    THE    MIND. 

The  animals  used  in  the  sacrifices  were  lambs,  sheep,  oxen,  goats,  turtledoves,  and 
pigeons,  and  a  consideration  of  the  typical  character  of  each  will  assist  us  to  confirm 
ihe  truth  of  our  first  proposition.  The  lamb  is  used  in  Scripture  as  the  symbol  of 
innocence,  and  is  so  expressive  of  this  grace  that  it  is  almost  a  household  word  for 
those  who  are  in  possession  of  it.  "I  send  you  forth,"  said  our  Lord,  "  as  lambs 
in  the  midst  of  wolves. "  Sheep  are  the  types  of  the  gentle  principles  of  charity, 
or  sympathising  brotherly  love.  The  sheep  described  by  the  Lord  Jesus  in  Matt. 
XXV.  were  those  who  had  fed  the  hungry,  clothed  the  naked,  visited  the  sick  and 
the  prisoners,  and  succoured  the  strangers.  Oxen  are  the  types  of  the  dispositions 
to  duty  and  obedience.  It  was  the  animal  chiefly  devoted  to  the  plough,  and 
ploughing,  in  the  spiritual  sense,  means  the  preparation  of  the  soul  to  receive  the 
knowledge  of  heavenly  things.  The  goat,  whose  delight  is  in  leaping  from  rock  to 
rock,  is  the  symbol  of  the  disposition  to  regard  the  truths  of  faith  with  great 
pleasure,  which  sometimes  degenerates  into  a  love  of  faith  only,  and  then  is 
strongly  condemned  by  the  Lord  (Ezek.  xxxiv. ;  Matt.  xxv.).  Birds,  from  their 
soaring  power,  are  the  symbols  of  thoughts.  Turtledoves  and  pigeons  are  corre- 
spondences of  those  tender  thoughts  and  yearninas  after  the  heavenly  life  which  the 
soul  has  in  the  early  part  of  its  regeneration.  The  cooing  of  the  turtledove  was 
first  heard  in  the  groves  of  Palestine,  on  the  return  of  spring.  Its  sweet  sound  was 
the  sign  of  the  approach  of  a  brighter  and  warmer  season.  When  the  soul,  there- 
fore, is  coming  to  a  more  genial  condition,  the  sweet  thoughts  of  hope  and  trust 
that  encourage  its  advance  towards  the  heavenly  state  and  kingdom  are  like  the 
soft  notes  of  a  God-sent  turtledove.  All  these  types,  then,  of  good  affections  and 
thoughts,  as  well  as  the  mode  of  offering  up  by  fire,  abundantly  confirm  the  view 
we  have  drawn  from  the  Holy  Word,  that  the  sacrifices  were  representative  of  good 
things  and  principles  dedicated  to  the  Lord  in  worship,  not  of  punishment  for 
human  sin.  May  I  not  ask  you  if  you  have  no  spiritual  sacrifice  to  make  ?  Have 
not  the  turtledove,  or  the  youna  pigeon  of  heavenward  thought,  begun  to  make 
themselves  heard  within  you  ?  Have  you  no  yearnings  after  a  better  land  ?  Have 
you  not  felt  the  aspirations  after  a  fuller  conformity  to  the  Lord,  after  greater 
purity  of  heart,  and  greater  usefulness  on  earth  ?  .  If  you  have,  follow  their  lead- 
ings, and  offer  them  up  to  the  Lord  in  love.  Let  the  fire  glow  on  the  altar  of  your 
heart.  Acknowledge  that  these  first  yearnings  for  good  are  from  Him.  He  will 
not  despise  the  gift,  but  bless  it,  as  an  offering  made  by  fire,  a  sweet  savour  unto 
the  Lord.  III.  We  observe  that  so  far  from  the  idea  of  sacrifices  being  regarded 
as  symbolical  of  punishment  by  the  Divine  Being,  the  truth  is,  that  outward 

SACRIFICES  NEVER  WERE  IN  ACCORDANCE  WITH  THE  DiVINE  COMMAND  AT  ALL,  BUT 
WERE  MERE  PERMISSIONS  TO  SERVE  AS  TYPES  DURING  HUMAN  DARKNESS  AND  DE- 
GENERACY. A  common  idea  has  been  entertained  that  outward  sacrifices  are 
frequently  commanded  by  God,  and  He  originated  the  Divine  arrangement  with 
the  Israelites ;  but  this  is  altogether  an  error.  Sacrifices  were  prevalent  among 
the  nations  of  the  East  before  God  spoke  from  Sinai  at  all.  Pharaoh  told  the 
Hebrews  they  could  sacrifice  in  his  land,  before  a  single  law  respecting  sacrifice 
was  given  them  (Exod.  viii.  25).  In  the  Book  of  Leviticus,  where  the  laws  respect- 
ing sacrifices  are  all  expressly  given,  they  do  not  command  sacrifices,  they  only 
regulate  them.  The  language  is,  "  If  any  man  of  you  bring  an  offering  unto  the 
Lord,"  as  in  chap.  i.  2  ;  "  If  his  offering  be  of  the  flocks  "  (ver.  10) ;  "  If  the  burnt 
sacrifice  for  the  offering  of  the  Lord  be  of  fowls  "  (ver.  14) ;  and  so  on  through  the 
book,  evidently  implying  no  command,  but  regulation.  The  Israelitish  people, 
like  all  their  neighbours,  had  sunk  from  worshipping  God  in  the  heart  and  mind, 
with  those  affections  and  thoughts  to  which  animals  are  the  figures  and  correspon- 
dences, and  were  only  too  ready  to  offer  up  animals  instead  of  offering  up  them- 
selves. God  only  regulated  this  disposition  to  be  a  shadow  of  a  better  worship  to 
come.  The  graces  of  the  heart  are  what  God  requires,  not  the  slaughter  of  animals 
(see  Jer.  vii.  22,  23  ;  1  Sam.  xv.  22;  Micah  vi.  7,  8).  Let  us  never  suppose,  then, 
that  any  sacrifice  will  be  acceptable  to  Him,  instead  of  that  devotion  of  all  the 
principles  of  the  soul  to  do  His  holy  will,  which  is  the  inward  meaning  of  all  the 
sacrifices.      IV.   Lastly,  To  enable  us  to  do  this,  and  thus  to  kbturn  to  the 

ORDER  OF  heaven,  AND  TO  OFFER  SPIRITUAL  SACRIFICES  AGAIN,  THE  LoRD  HiMSELF 
TOOK  HUMAN  NATURE  UPON  HiMSELF,  AND  PURIFIED,  PERFECTED,  AND  GLORIFIED  THIS, 
SO    THAT    ALL   THE    SACRIFICES   HAVE    THEIR    HIGHEST    FULFILMENT    IN    THE   LoRD  JeSUS 

Christ,  the  great  High  Priest  and   the    Supreme  Sacrifice.      Now  we  have 


36  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

seen  that  in  relation  to  man  the  sacrifices  represent  the  dedication  of  the  several 
principles  of  his  nature  to  the  Divine  will,  by  the  destruction  of  selfishness  in  him, 
and  his  consequent  regeneration.  In  our  blessed  Lord  this  sauctification  of  His 
humanity  was  far  higher;  it  was  the  making  of  it  Divine,  and  thus  the  supreme 
sacrifice.  He  had  the  same  principles  in  His  humanity  which  we  have  in  ours, 
thus  He  had  the  innocence  represented  by  the  lamb,  the  charity  of  which  the 
sheep  is  the  symbol,  the  obedience  typified  by  the  ox,  the  desire  for  faith  of  which 
the  goat  is  the  emblem,  the  thought  and  yearnings  for  the  salvation  of  the  human 
race  represented  by  the  turtledoves  and  young  pigeons.  As  His  humanity  was 
from  Jehovah  interiorly,  being  the  Son  of  God,  but  clothed  with  infirm  coverings 
from  His  mother,  He  needed  to  sanctify  and  perfect  it  by  a  process  precisely 
similar  to  that  by  means  of  which  His  children  are  prepared  for  heaven.  {J.  Bay  ley, 
Ph.D.)  Onr  Lord's  tenderness  in  dealing  unth  the  offerings  of  the  poor  : — "  Then  he 
shall  bring  his  offering  of  turtledoves,  or  of  young  pigeons."  There  is  a  great  deal 
of  tenderness  in  the  Lord's  way  of  dealing  with  the  offerings  of  the  poor  among 
men  ;  but  there  is  a  great  deal  of  meanness  in  man's  way  of  giving  poor  offerings 
to  the  Lord.  The  Lord  says.  If  the  offering  is  of  the  herd,  let  it  be  of  the  best ;  if 
the  offerer  is  too  poor  to  bring  a  bullock,  let  him  take  a  choice  offering  from  his 
sheep  or  his  goats ;  if  indeed  he  has  neither  herd  nor  flock,  let  him  bring  the  best 
he  can  find  from  among  his  fowls  or  his  pigeons,  and  the  willing  sj^irit  shall  enlarge 
the  small  offering  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord.  But  man  says,  My  cows  are  all 
Alderney  or  Durham  stock ;  I  must  hold  on  to  them.  My  sheep  are  South  Down 
and  Cotesworth  ;  they  are  needed  for  wool  and  mutton.  Some  of  my  fowls  and 
pigeons  are  of  fancy  breed  :  I  don't  see  how  I  can  let  them  go.  But  there  is  a. 
sickly  pigeon,  and  a  chicken  with  the  "  pip."  They'll  do  for  an  offering.  And  the 
close-fisted  believer  goes  up  smilingly  to  the  sanctuary,  and  passes  in  his  shabby 
offering,  with  a  self-gratulatory  likening  of  his  gift  to  the  "  widow's  mites."  There 
is  a  world  of  beauty  in  the  Lord's  regard  for  the  circumstances  and  necessities  of 
His  children.  There  is  a  shameful  perversion,  by  ungrateful  men,  of  God's  good- 
ness in  His  call  for  offerings  according  to  the  means— not  according  to  the  mean- 
ness— of  those  who  profess  to  love  and  serve  Him.     {H..  C.  Trumbull.) 


CHAPTEE  II. 

Vebs.  1-16.  A  meat-ofFeiing. — The  meat-offering: — It  is  only  when  we  have 
received  Christ  in  His  character  of  a  sacrifice  for  our  sins,  that  we  are  in  a  condition 
to  render  ourselves  a  living  sacrifice,  so  as  to  be  acceptable  to  God.  The  meat- 
offering illustrates  the  second  great  step  in  the  process  of  salvation.  I.  The  Jew, 
for  the  substance  of  his  meat-offering,  was  directed  to  being  fine  flour,  or  cakes 
or  wafers  of  fine  flour,  or  fine  flour  baked  on  a  plate,  or  fine  flour  fried  in  oil,  or 
the  firstfruits  in  advance  of  the  harvest  beaten  out  of  full  ears  dried  by  the  fire. 
Either  wheat  or  barley  would  answer ;  but  the  requirement  reached  the  very  best 
grain,  either  whole,  as  in  the  case  of  the  firstfruits,  or  in  its  very  finest  and  best 
preparations.  Thus  are  we  to  offer  our  very  best  to  the  Lord — our  bodies  and 
souls,  our  faculties  and  attainments — and  in  the  highest  perfection  to  which  we 
can  bring  them.  Holiness  is  not  the  mere  saying  of  a  few  prayers,  or  the  paying 
of  a  few  weekly  visits  to  the  sanctuary,  or  the  giving  of  a  few  pennies  now  and  then 
for  the  Church  or  the  poor.  It  is  the  rendering  of  fresh  grain  and  fine  flour  to  the 
Lord,  our  God  and  Benefactor.  It  is  the  presentation  of  our  entire  selves  a  living 
sacrifice,  holy,  acceptable  unto  God,  which  is  our  reasonable  service.     II.  Oil  was 

TO    BE    POURED    UPON,  OR    MIXGLED    WITH,    THE    FLOUR    OF    THE    MEAT-OFFEIIING.       This 

was  not  common  oil,  but  the  oil  of  unction,  or  holy  oih  It  was  a  material  used  in 
consecrating,  or  setting  apart.  It  refers  to  the  Holy  Spirit,  Hnd  the  operations  of 
that  Spirit  in  setting  npart  whom  He  pleases.  It  typifies  that  "  unction  of  the 
Holy  One,"  of  which  John  speaks  so  largely.  No  offering  of  ourselves  to  God,  no 
true  sanctification  can  occur,  without  the  oil  of  Divine  grace,  the  principle  of 
holiness  and  s«cred  power  which  is  poured  upon  the  believer  by  the  Holy  Ghost. 
III.  There  was  fhankincenre  to  be  put  on  it.  This  circumstance  identifies  it  at 
once  with  the  burnt-offering,  or  holocaust.  That  burnt-offeriug  represented  Christ 
as  the  Sacrifice  for  our  sins.     The  frankincense  therefore  plays  the  part  here  of 


CHAP.  II.]  LEVITICUS.  37 

representing  the  mediation  and  intercession  of  the  Saviour — the  grateful  fragrance 
■which  comes  up  before  God  froai  tlie  altar  of  burnt  sacrifice.  Our  consecration  to 
God,  even  with  the  gracious  operations  of  the  Spirit,  could  not  be  accei^table,  except 
through  Cbrist,  ami  the  sweet  intercessorial  jjerfume  which  arises  from  His  offering 
in  our  behalf.  IV.  It  was  to  be  kept  clear  of  leaven  and  honey.  Leaven 
indicates  corruption.  Its  principle  is  a  species  of  putrefaction.  It  tends  to  spoil 
and  decay.  We  must  be  honest  in  these  sacred  things,  and  in  real  earnest,  and 
not  deal  deceitfully  with  others  or  with  ourselves.  But  why  keep  away  honey  ? 
Simply  because  it  is  a  fermenter,  a  corrupter,  and  carries  in  it  the  principle  of 
putrefaction.  And  as  leaven  represents  the  ugly,  offensive,  sour  elements  of 
depravity,  so  honey  is  the  emblem  of  such  as  are  sweet  and  attractive  to  the  taste 
— "  the  lust  of  the  flesh,  and  the  lust  of  the  eyes,  and  the  pride  of  life."  Sensual 
indulgences  and  worldly  pleasures,  as  well  as  hypocrisy  and  malice,  will  corrupt 
and  destroy  our  best  oblations.  V.  Salt  was  to  be  used  in  it.  What  did  this 
mean  ?  Salt  is  just  the  opposite  of  leaven.  The  one  corrupts,  the  other  preserves. 
The  one  taints  and  hastens  putrefaction,  the  other  purifies  and  keeps  wholesome. 
It  was  the  custom  in  ancient  times  to  ratify  and  confirm  nearly  every  important 
bargain  or  contract  by  the  eating  together  of  the  parties.  This,  of  course,  required 
the  use  of  salt  as  an  article  invariably  present  on  all  such  occasions.  It  thus,  or  in 
some  other  way,  came  to  be  regarded  as  a  symbol  of  agreement  and  pure  abiding 
friendship.  If  we  are  true  in  presenting  ourselves  to  God,  we  come  into  harmony 
with  God.  We  become  His  friends,  and  He  our  Friend.  As  we  move  to  Him,  He 
moves  to  us.  As  we  come  to  terms  with  Him,  He  comes  to  terms  with  us.  We 
agree  to  be  His  obedient  and  loving  children,  and  He  agrees  to  be  our  protecting 
and  loving  Father.  We  give  ourselves  up  to  be  His  people,  and  He  brings  Himself 
down  to  be  our  God.  But  this  same  salt  tells  also  of  a  pure,  healthful,  pervading 
savour  of  virtue  and  grace.  It  was  the  principle  of  savoury  purification  to  the 
sacrifice  ;  and  so  the  Saviour  requires  of  us  to  "have  salt  in  ourselves."  As  every 
Christian  is  to  be  a  living  sacrifice — an  acce^sted  oblation  unto  God,  he  must 
comply  with  the  law  of  sacrifice,  and  "  be  salted  with  salt " ;  that  is,  made 
savoury  and  incorruptible  by  being  pervaded  with  unfaltering  principles  of  righ- 
teousness. VI.  Its  euchakistic  nature.  It  was  not  so  much  a  sacrifice  as  an 
oblation  of  praise.  Many  are  the  obligations  by  which  we  are  bound  to  present 
ourselves  as  living  sacrifices  unto  God.  Viewed  in  whatever  light,  it  is  our 
"  reasonable  service."  But  of  all  the  great  arguments  which  bind  and  move  us  to 
this  surrender  to  our  Maker,  none  stand  out  with  a  prominence  so  full  and  com- 
manding as  that  drawn  from  "  the  mercies  of  God."  We  were  wrapped  up  with 
them  in  our  Creator's  thought  before  our  life  began.  They  were  present,  breathing 
their  blessings  with  our  very  substance,  when  we  were  fashioned  into  men.  Before 
our  appearance  in  the  world,  they  had  been  at  work  preparing  many  fond  affections 
for  our  reception,  and  arranging  many  a  soft  cushion  to  come  between  this  hard 
earth  and  our  youthful  tenderness.  They  have  tempered  the  seasons  for  our  good, 
and  filled  the  horn  of  plenty  to  make  us  blessed-  Every  day  is  a  handful  of  sun- 
beams, kindled  and  cast  down  by  the  mercies  of  God,  to  gladden  the  place  of  our 
abode,  and  to  light  us  to  the  paths  of  peace.  Every  night  is  a  pavilion  of  the  same 
making,  set  around  us  to  give  us  rest,  whilst  God  touches  His  fingers  to  our  eyelids, 
saying,  "  Sleep,  My  children,  sleep."  [J.  A.  Seiss,  D.D.)  The  meat-offerinrf ;  or 
tlie  Father  Jtonoured  : — Whereas  in  burnt-offering  Christ  is  seen  glorifying  God  in 
His  death,  in — I.  Meat-offering  (or  meal-offering,  K.V.),  the  chief  feature  is 
Jesus  honouring  the  Father  in  His  life,  each  alike  a  "  sweet  savour  unto  the  Lord." 
The  Blessed  One  must  live  as  man  before  He  could  die  for  men  ;  and  here  we  have 
the  perfect  character  of  the  sinless,  holy  "Man  Christ  Jesus"  (Acts  x.  38;  John 
ix.  4).  See,  then,  how  the  holy  life  and  sacrificial  death  are  inseparably  con- 
nected ;  how  former  must  culminate  in  latter.  Hence  meat-offering  is  found 
constantly  in  conjunction  with  "  burnt  "  and  "  peace  "  offerings  (Numb.  xv.  3,  4,  9, 
11,  24,  xxviii.  4,  5,  12,  13,  27,  28,  xxix.  6;  Lev.  vii.  12),  but  never  with  sin  or 
trespass-offerings,  each  of  which  shadows  forth  some  aspect  of  the  death,  and  botb 
are  "sweet  savour"  offerings.  Observe,  too,  that  while  life,  not  death,  i3_  the 
prominent  feature  in  meat-offering,  there  is  a  thought  of  latter  in  •'  memorial  " 
burned  upon  brazen  altar  (ver.  2,  9,  16),  upon  and  around  which  blood  had  been 
sprinkled,  and  on  which  burnt  and  peace-offerings  were  consumed.  Hebrew  word, 
Mincha,  translated  meat-offering,  signifies  gift  or  present,  and  what  "  present " 
could  any  offer  to  the  holy  God  that  would  be  acceptable  save  His  own  "  unspeak- 
able gift"  (2  Cor.  ix.  15),  Jesus?    Component  parts  of  meat-offering  were  most 


38  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  ir. 


significant.     1.  Fine  flour  (vers.  1,  4,  5,  7),  well  sifted,  free  from  every  unevenuess, 
coarseness,  or  sptck  ;  or  could  not  have  typified  Jesus,  who  was  (1  Pet.  i.  19) ; 
every  grace  all  ke  perfect ;  perfect  evenness  of  character  and  temperament ;  every 
quality  perfectly  adjusted  and  evenly  balanced ;  a»id  this  from  birth,  for  He  was 
"  the  Holy  One  of  God."     2.  Oil,  both  mingled  witb  and  poured  upon  (vers.  4-G). 
Jesus  filled  with  Spirit  from  birth  (Luke  i.  35  ;    Matt.  i.  20).     Spirit  filled  the  • 
human  body  that  veiled  Divinity,  imbuing  the  whole  nature  with  His  graces ;  yet 
was  Jesus  "  anointed"  for  service  on  earth  (Acts  x.  38;  Isa.  Ixi.  1;  Luke  iv.  18) 
at  His  baptism,  when  Spirit  descended  and  abode  upon  Him  (Luke  iii.  22 ;  .John  i. 
33,  34).     Given  not  "  by  measure,"  but  in  sevenfold  power  (John  iii.  34 ;  Isa.  xi. 
2)."     3.  Frankincense  further  illustrates  this.      It  was  white  and  fragrant.     White 
betokens  purity,  innocence  ;  striking  characteristics  of  the  Blessed  One  (John  viii. 
46  ;  1  Pet.  ii.  22,  23).     His  judge  could  find  "  no  cause  of  death  in  Him,"  and  the 
centurion  "  glorified  God,"  and  pronounced  the  Crucified  One  a  "righteous  man" 
(Acts  xiii.  28  ;  Luke  xxiii.   4,  47).     Fragrance  was  what  Jesus  truly  ever  shed 
around,  as  He  spake  the  words  (Cant.  v.  13)  and  did  the  works  of  Him  that  sent 
Him  (Luke  iv.  40-44  :  John  xvii.  8,  viii.  28,  xii.  49,  50,  xiv.  10).     The  name  of  Jesus 
"  is  as  ointment  poured  forth  "  (Song  of  Sol.  i.  3),  and  when  He  dwells  within,  the 
heart  is  filled  with  sweet  fragrance — as  was  the  house  at  Bethany  (John  xii.  3) — 
and  He  is  to  that  soul,  as  to  the  Father,  "  a  savour  of  rest  "  (Gen.  viii.  21,  mar.)  ; 
and  truly  the  Father  could  "  rest "  in  the  love  and  devotion  of  His  beloved  Son. 
n.  "  Memorial,"  bdrned  upon  the  altar,  shows  this  still  more.     Fire  brings  forth 
more  fully  the  sweetness,  and  tells  of  the  Father's  delight  in  Jesns,  and  acceptance 
of  that  holy,  consecrated  life  of  devotion  to  His  service,  laid  on  His  altar.     Observe, 
too,  that  all  the  frankincense  was  to  be  burnt  (ver.  2,  16,  vi.  15),  telling  of  the 
special  fragrance,  intended  only  for  the  Father,  in  whose  service  He  was  consumed 
by  zeal  (John  ii.  17),  and  whom  He  "  glorified  on  the  earth  "  (John  xvii.  4  ;  xiii. 
31).     The  burning,  as  before  said,  seems  likewise  to  point  to  death,  in  which  the 
holy  life  culminated;  but  no  question  of  judgment  because  no  question  of  sin,  as 
shown  by  word  used  for  burning.    Still,  though  judgment  is  not  portrayed  in  meat- 
offering, yet  is  Jesus  there  seen  as  "  a  Man  of  sorrows  ..."  (Isa.  liii.  3),  and  such 
expressions  as  "Baken  in  the  oven,"  "  in  the  frying-pan,"  "  the  firstfruits,  green 
ears  of  corn  dried  by  the  fire,"  "  corn  beaten  out  "  (vers.  4,  7,  14),  surely  tell  of  the 
grief  and  sufferings  of  the  Holy  One.     But  the  more  He  was  tried,  the  sweeter  the 
fragrance  that  ascended,  as  in  all  things  He  showed  Himself  submissive  to  His 
Father's  will.     Observe  further — III.  "The  salt  or  the  covenant  "  must  not  be 
lacking  from  the  meat-offering  (ver.  13).     Salt  typified  both  the  incorruption  and 
incorruptibihty  of  our  Blessed  Lord  (Psa.  xvi.  10 ;  Acts  ii.  27).     Salt  thus  betokens 
perpetuity.     Hence  the"  covenant  of  salt  "  (Numb,  xviii.  19;  2  Chron.  xiii.  5)  tells 
of  the  enduring  character  of  Jehovah's  "  everlasting  covenant  ordered  in  all  things 
and  sure  "  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  5-7  ;  Isa.  Iv.  3).    Assured  in  Jesus — given  "  for  a  covenant 
..."  (Isa.  xiii.  6,  xlix.  8),  and  Himself  "  the  Amen  "  of  God's  covenant  promises 
(Luke  i.   72  ;  2  Cor.   i.  20  ;   Eev.  iii.   14).     Again,  see  "  speech,  .  .  .  with  grace 
seasoned  with  salt "  (Col.  iv.  6),  exemplified  in  Him  of  whom  it  is  written,  "  Grace 
is  poured  ..."  (Psa.  xlv.  2).     Truly  gracious  words  proceeded  out  of  His  mouth 
(Luke  iv.  22),  but  ever  seasoned  with  salt,  its  pungency,  its  enduring  and  incorrupt- 
ing  influence.     See  how  He  gave  right  answers  to  each,  so  that  no  man  could 
"  entangle  Him  ..."  (Matt.  ii.  15-46).     The  like  is  enjoined  to  His  people  (Col. 
iii.  16 ;  Mark  ix.  50),  whom  He  calls  "  the  salt  of  the  earth  "  (Matt.  v.  13  ;  see  Prov. 
xii.  18) ;  and  while  He  would  have  them  follow  His  example  in  this,  as  in  all  else. 
He  Himself — the  Unchangeable — preserves  them  from  c<irrup(ing  influences  ;  He 
would  have  them  pure  (1  Pet.  i.   14-16),  "filled  with  the  Spirit"  (Eph.  v.  18), 
testifying  of  Jesus,  and  thus  made  "  unto  God  a  sweet  savour  of  Christ  "  (2  Cor. 
ii.  15).      IV.    Two    THINGS    FORBIDDEN    in    meat-offeriug.      1.   Leaven.      Used  in 
Scripture  as  type  of  evil,  of  false  doctrine  (Matt.  xvi.  6,  12  ;  1  Cor.  v.  6-8) ;  hence 
strictly  forbi.lden  in  every  Levitical  type  of  our  Lord.     It  also  indicates  sourness 
of  temper  and  puffing  up,  not  uncommon  in  man ;  but  impossible  in  the  perfect, 
spotless  "  Man  Christ  Jesus,"  "  the  second  Man,  the  Lord  from  heaven  "  (1  Cor. 
XV.  47).     2.  Honey.     Sweet  to  taste,  but  producing  sourness  afterwards,  as  some- 
times is  the  case  with  the  words  and  ways  of  man;  and  like>vise  with  Satan's 
tempting;  baits,  by  which  he  seeks  to  lure  men  to  their  destruction;  but  as  im- 
possible as  the  characteristics  of  leaven  in  the  God-m:in  of  whom  the  meat-offering 
is  type.     Lastly,  an  important  question  arises :    Who  are — V.  Partakers  of  the 
MEAT-OFFKRiNG  ?     Aaron  and  sons  (vers    3,  10,  vi.  16-18).      They  represent  the 


CHAP.  II.]  LEVITICUS.  39 

Church  ;  and  the  "  Church  of  God  "  is  to  feast  on  Jesus,  "  the  Bread  of  Life  ";  to 
feed  on  His  words  (John  vi.  35,  47-54,  63  ;  Jer.  xv.  16) ;  to  mi-ditate  on  details  of 
holy  life  of  Him  who  was  the  Father's  delight.  The  "  remnant  "  of  the  acceptable 
"  memorial "  burnt  upon  the  altar  of  the  Lord  was  given  to  the  priests  ;  th  it  is,  all 
that  is  not  specially  ajipvopriated  to  the  Father,  who  joys  in  the  Son,  is  bestowed 
for  the  sustenance  of  His  people.  Further  mark,  the  priests  were  to  feed  on  the 
meat-offering  "  in  the  holy  place  "(chap.  vi.  16),  consecrated  to  the  service  of  God. 
How  can  any  feed  on  Jesus  in  places  devoted  to  the  world?  (Lady  Beaujolois 
Dent).  The  meat-offering : — I.    The   mateeials.      1.    Bread,    corn,    wheat,    or 

barley  (1  Chron.  xxi.  23  ;  Ezek.  xlv.  13,  15).  (1)  Fine  flour,  purgtxl  from  the 
bran.  The  pure  estate  of  Christ,  and  of  all  Christians,  with  their  services  in  Him, 
being  purged,  as  it  were,  from  the  bran  of  natural  corruption.  (2)  Firstfruits 
(see  1  Cor.  xv.  20).  (3)  Ground,  sifted,  baked,  fried,  beaten,  &c.  (see  Isa.  liii.  5  ; 
Col.  i.  24).  Ignatius,  when  about  to  suffer  martyrdom  by  being  devoured  of  wild 
beasts,  speaks  of  his  body  as  the  Lord's  corn,  which  must  be  ground  by  their  teeth, 
to  be  prepared  for  Him.  2.  Oil.  This  signified  in  general  the  Spirit  of  God  in 
His  graces  and  comfoits  (Isa.  Ixi.  1),  which  Spirit  Jesus  Christ  did  receive  above 
measure,  and  from  Him  all  believers  do  partake  of  His  anointing.  There  is,  and 
must  be,  this  sacred  oil  in  all  our  offerings,  the  influence  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  3. 
Frankincense.  Signif.ving  the  acceptableness  unto  God  of  the  persons  and  services 
of  His  people,  thiough  the  mediation  and  intercession  of  Jesus  Christ.  4.  Salt. 
The  perpetuity  of  the  covenant  of  gi'ace,  and  the  wholesome  and  savoury  carriage 
and  walking  of  God's  people.  11.  The  actions  to  be  performed  about  it.  1.  It 
must  be  brought  to  the  priest.  Imports  a  voluntary  act  of  the  offerer,  and  a  making 
use  of  Christ  for  acceptance  in  all  our  services  and  approaches  unto  God.  2.  The 
priest  is  to  burn  the  memorial  of  it  upon  the  altar,  before  the  Lord  (see  Psa.  xx.  3  ; 
Acts  X.  4).  3.  The  remnant  was  Aaron's  and  his  sons'.  (1)  The.  communion  and 
particijDation  of  Christ  by  all  believers  (Rev.  i.  6 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  9  ;  John  vi.  33).  (2) 
Part  of  the  priests'  maintenance.  III.  The  meaning.  1.  It  prefigured  and 
shadowed  forth  the  atonement  or  expiation  of  sin  by  the  righteousness  of  Jesus 
Christ — both  by  His  sufferings  and  actings.  His  active  and  pa'«sive  obedience.  2. 
It  signified  also  the  persons  of  believers,  who,  through  Christ,  are  sanctified  and 
cleansed  to  be  a  pure  oblation  to  God  (Isa.  Ixvi.  20  ;  Phil.  ii.  17  ;  2  Tim.  iv.  6).  3. 
It  signified  those  fruits  of  grace  and  good  works  that  believers  perform,  whether 
towards  God  or  towards  man.  (1)  Prayer.  (2)  Praise.  (3)  Holy  Communion. 
(4)  Alms.  4.  It  shadowed  forth  the  acceptance  of  our  persons  and  services  with 
the  Lord  (Phil.  iv.  17,  18 ;  Mai.  i.  10,  11).  IV.  The  additions  fokbidden.  1. 
Leaven  argues  corruption.  (1)  False  doctrine  (Matt.  xvi.  6,  11,  12).  (2)  Scandalous 
and  wicked  practices  (1  Cor.  v.  6-8).  (3)  Hypocrisy  and  secret  sins  (Luke  xii.  1, 
2).  (4)  Promiscuous  communion  and  carnal  mixtures  in  Church  society  (1  Cor.  v. 
6).  2.  Honey  cloys  and  loads  the  stomach,  and  turns  to  choler  and  bitterness. 
(1)  God  will  be  worshipped  according  to  His  own  institution  and  command.  His 
will  is  the  rule,  though  we  cannot  well  see  the  reason  of  it.  We  must  not  follow 
any  invention  of  our  own,  though  to  our  carnal  thoughts  it  seem  as  sweet  as 
honey,  though  it  seem  never  so  decent,  never  so  orderly.  (2)  Learn  that  holy 
temper  and  equability  of  spirit,  which  becometh  saints  in  all  the  conditions  and 
vicissitudes  they  pass  through.  We  must  take  heed  of  extremes.  There  must  be 
neither  leaven  nor  honey ;  neither  too  much  sour  nor  too  much  sweet ;  neither 
inordinate  sorrow  nor  inordinate  pleasures  in  the  meat-offering  of  the  saints.  (3) 
Some  apply  it  to  Christ  Himself :  that  there  is  in  Him,  our  Meat-offering,  no  such 
sweetness  which  turns  to  loathing,  no  such  pleasure  whereof  a  man  can  take  too 
much,  no  such  delight  as  proves  bitter  in  the  latter  end.  V.  The  appurtenance  of 
drink-offerings.  1.  Wine,  in  typical  and  allegorical  Scriptures,  sometimes 
signifies  the  joys  and  consolations  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  2.  We  find  the  saints 
pouring  out  their  blood  in  the  cause  of  Christ,  compared  to  a  drink-offering  (Phil. 
ii.  27  ;  2  Tim.  iv.  6).  And  so,  in  a  much  higher  sense,  the  blood  of  Christ  is 
rt'prcsented  by  wine  in  the  Holv  Communion.  3.  It  shadowed  forth  the  Lord's 
acceptance  of  His  people.  (S.  Mather.)  Homage  graced  loith  excellencies: — I. 
Every  element  of  worth  and  attractiveness  should  concentrate  in  our  wor- 
ship and  service  of  God.  "Fine  flour" — "oil" — "frankincense."  By  all  these 
combined  ingredients  a  total  result  would  be  produced  which  constituted  the 
offering  one  "  of  a  sweet  savour  unto  the  Lord."  1.  Solitary  graces  are  not  despised 
by  Hiin  we  worship.  2.  Yet  worship  should  be  the  outflow  of  all  noble  affection^- 
and  aspirations  of  the  soul.     3.    Preparation  for  such  a  blending  of  graces  in 


40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ciap.  ii. 

worsliip  is  our  evident  duty.  II.  Adorable  pkesentations  to  God  secuue  His 
GRACIOUS  APPRECIATION  AND  LAVISH  PRAISE.  "  Sweet  savour."  "  A  tiling  most 
holy."  1.  No  poverty  of  approval  ever  repels  a  fervent  worshipper.  2.  Offering 
such  excellency  of  homage,  we  shall  assuredly  realise  that  God  is  well  pleased. 
III.  Excellencies  in  typical  offekixgs  foreshadowed  the  beauties  and 
worthiness  of  Jesus.  1.  The  quality  of  the  flour  bespeaks  the  intrinsic 
excellence  of  Christ.  2.  The  pouring  oil  tliereon  denotes  the  anointing  of  the  Spirit. 
3.  The  added  frankincense  tells  of  the  delightfulness  of  Christ.  (W.  H.  Jellie.) 
The  meat-offering  typical  of  Christ  and  His  people : — I.  Consider  the  principal 
ingredient  of  it.  There  were  two  things  of  which  it  consisted,  one  of  which  was 
fine  Hour.  This  fine  flour  was  of  wheat,  as  is  clear  from  various  accounts  we  have 
of  this  offering.  1.  This  may  denote  the  excellency  of  Christ :  the  superior  excel- 
lency of  Him  to  all  others,  not  only  as  a  Divine  person,  but  as  God-man  and 
Mediator  ;  He  is  preferable  to  angels  and  to  men.  2.  But  this  meat-offering,  being 
of  fine  flour,  of  wheat  the  choicest  of  grain,  may  also  denote  the  purity  of  Christ : 
fine  fiour  of  wheat  being  the  purest  and  cleanest  of  all  others.  As  He  is  a  Divine 
person,  He  is  a  rock  and  His  work  is  perfect  :  a  God  of  truth,  and  without  iniquity, 
just  and  true  is  He.  As  man,  His  human  nature  was  entirely  free  from  all  con- 
tagion and  corruption  of  sin  :  from  original  taint,  as  the  fine  flour  of  which  this 
meat-offering  was,  free  from  all  bran,  so  He  was  free  from  the  bran  of  original  cor- 
ruption. Pure  and  free  was  He  from  any  iniquity  in  life :  He  did  none,  neither  was 
guile  found  in  His  mouth.  3.  Moreover,  as  fine  flour  of  wheat  is  the  principal  part 
of  human  sustenance,  and  what  strengthens  the  heart  of  man,  and  nourishes  him, 
and  is  the  means  of  maintaining  and  supporting  life,  it  may  fitly  shadow  and  figure 
out  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  who  is  the  bread  of  God,  which  came  down  from  heaven. 
The  bread  of  God's  preparing,  the  bread  of  God's  giving,  and  the  bread  which  God 
blesses  for  the  nourishment  of  His  people.  Thus  this  meat-offering,  as  to  the  sub- 
stance of  it,  being  of  fine  flour  of  wheat,  is  a  very  special  and  particular  representa- 
tion of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  4.  It  may  also,  with  great  propriety  be  applied  unto 
His  people,  who  are  represented  in  Scripture  frequently  as  wheat.  These  may  be 
signified  hereby,  because  of  their  peculiar  choiceness ;  being  the  excellent  in  the 
earth,  in  whom  is  the  delight  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  as  well  as  of  His  Divine 
Father,  whom  He  has  chosen  from  all  others,  to  be  His  peculiar  people.  And  they 
being  compared  to  wheat,  may  denote  also  their  purity.  Not  as  considered  in  them- 
selves, but  in  Christ.  II.  Consider  the  things  which  \\^ERE  to  be  made  dse  of  along 
with  this  meat-offering  ;  and  the  things  which  were  forbidden  to  be  used  in  it. 
There  were  some  things  to  be  made  use  of  in  it,  such  as  oil,  frankincense,  and  salt. 
Oil  was  to  be  poured  upon  it,  frankincense  put  thereon,  and  every  oblation  was  to  be 
seasoned  with  salt.  The  oil  that  was  poured  upon  the  meat-offering,  or  to  be 
mingled  witL  it,  may  denote,  either  the  grace  of  God  in  Christ,  or  the  grace  of  God 
communicated  to,  and  bestowed  upon  His  people.  Frankincense  put  upon  the  meat- 
offering, may  denote  either  the  acceptableness  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  God  and 
His  people,  or  the  acceptableness  of  His  people  unto  God  and  to  Christ.  Salt  was 
another  thing  that  was  used  in  it,  which  makes  food  savoury,  and  preserves  from 
putrefaction,  and  may  denote  the  savouriness  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  to  believers. 
"  Can  that  which  is  unsavoury  be  eaten  without  salt  ? "  says  Job  (Job.  vi.  6).  Now 
Christ,  as  a  meat-offering,  is  to  His  people  savoury  food,  such  as  their  souls  love  : 
pleasing,  delightful,  comfortable,  refreshing,  nourishing,  and  strengthening.  Salt 
is  an  emblem  of  perpetuity.  Now  this  may  denote  the  perpetuity  of  Christ's  sacri- 
fice, which  always  remains  ;  and  the  perpetuity  of  Him,  as  the  meat-offering.  For 
He  is  that  meat  which  endures  to  everlasting  life ;  and  Him  has  God  the  Father 
sealed.  And  this,  as  it  respects  the  people  of  God,  may  be  an  emblem  of  the  savour 
of  their  life  and  conversation.  There  were  two  things  which  the  Jews  were  forbidden 
to  use  in  the  meat-offering ;  the  one  was  leaven,  and  the  other  was  honey.  There 
was  to  be  no  leaven  in  it.  This,  as  it  may  respect  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  the  Anti- 
type of  the  meat-offering,  may  denote  His  freedom  from  hypocrisy,  and  all  false 
doctrines,  which  were  the  leaven  of  the  scribes  and  Pharisees.  He  is  truth  itself — 
the  Way,  the  Truth,  and  the  Life  :  and  the  doctrines  preached  by  Him  were  grace 
and  truth.  To  apply  this  to  the  people  of  God,  as  no  meat-offering  was  to  be' made 
with  leaven,  it  may  denote  that  they  should  take  heed  of  communing  with  profane 
and  scandalous  persons.  And  it  may  denote  that  they  should  be  clear  of  malice 
and  wickedness ;  they  ought  to  lay  aside,  as  new-born  babes,  all  superfluity  and 
naughtiness.  Another  thing  forbidden  in  the  meat-offering  is  honey.  The  reason 
of  this  is  because  it  was  made  use  of  among  the  heathens  in  their  offerings,  and 


CHAP.  II.]  LE  Vine  US.  41 

the  people  of  God  were  not  to  walk  in  their  ordinances,  but  in  the  ordinances  ap- 
pointed of  the  Lord.  Besides,  honey,  like  leaven,  is  of  a  fermenting  nature,  and 
which,  when  burned,  gives  an  ill  smell ;  and  no  ill  smell  was  to  be  in  tlie  offering. 
It  was  to  be,  as  our  text  says,  "  of  a  sweet  savour  unto  the  Lord  " ;  which  it  could 
not  have  been  if  the  honey  had  been  in  it.  Besides,  it  is  of  a  cloying  nature,  it 
causes  a  loathing  when  j^ersons  eat  too  freely  of  it.  Now  there  is  notliing  of  this 
to  be  found  in  the  antitypical  Meat-offering,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  No,  the  true 
believer  that  feeds  by  faith  upon  Him,  the  language  of  his  soul  is,  "Lord,  evermore 
give  us  this  bread  "  ;  let  me  always  feed  upon  this  provision.  Moreover,  honey  may 
be  considered  as  an  emblem  of  sin,  and  sinful  pleasures ;  which  are  as  a  sweet 
morsel  rolled  under  the  tongue  of  a  wicked  man,  though  it  prove*^  the  poison  of 
asps  within  bim  at  last :  and  so  denotes  unto  us,  that  such  who  would  feed  by  faith 
on  Christ  ou;j;ht  to  relinquish  sinful  lusts  and  pleasures.  As  well  it  may  also  further 
denote  that  the  people  of  God  must  not  expect  their  sweets  without  their  bitters. 
They  that  will  live  godly  in  Christ  Jesus  must  suffer  persecution  of  one  kind  or 
another.  So  the  passover  was  to  be  eaten  with  bitter  herbs  as  the  representation  of 
the  same  thing.  III.  As  to  the  composition  thereof,  and  the  diffeeent  manner 
OF  DEESsiNO  THIS  MEAT-OFFEEiNG.  It  was  to  be  made  of  fine  flour,  made  of  wheat, 
beaten  out  of  the  husk,  and  ground  ;  it  was  to  be  mingled  with  oil,  kneaded,  bak^-d 
in  an  oven,  fried  in  pans,  or  parched  by  the  fire.  Now  all  this  may  be  an  emblem 
of  the  dolorous  sorrows  anil  sufferings  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  And  as  it  may  be 
applied  to  the  people  of  God,  it  may  denote  not  only  their  separation  from  others, 
but  the  trials  and  exercises  they  meet  with,  which  are  sometimes  called  fiery  trials. 
IV.  The  USE  that  was  made  of  this  offeeing.  Part  of  it  was  burnt  as  a  memorial 
unto  the  Lord,  either  to  put  the  Lord  in  mind  of  His  loving-kindness  to  His  people, 
and  of  His  covenant  with  them,  and  promises  unto  them,  to  which  the  allusion  is 
(Psa.  XX.  3),  or  to  put  the  offerer  in  mind  of  the  great  sacrifice  of  Christ,  who  was 
to  be  offered  for  his  sins,  and  to  be  a  meat-offeriug  to  him.  And  the  other  part  of 
it  was  to  be  eaten  by  the  priests,  which  shows  the  care  taken  by  the  Lord  for  the 
maintenance  of  the  priests,  and  from  whence  the  apostle  argues  for  the  support 
of  the  ministers  of  the  gospel  (1  Cor.  ix.  13,  14).  And  this  may  denote  that  such 
who  are  made  priests  unto  God  by  Christ  have  a  right  to  feed  upon  Christ,  the  meat- 
offering by  faith  ;  who  is  the  altar  and  meat-offering,  which  none  but  such  have  a 
right  to  eat  of.  V.  The  acceptableness  of  it.  It  is  said  to  be  "  of  a  sweet  savour 
unto  the  Lord,"  as  Chrict's  sacrifice  is  said  to  be  (Eph.  v.  2).  And  so  His  people 
also,  their  persons  are  an  offering  of  a  sweet-smelling  savour  to  God,  in  Christ ; 
being  accepted  in  Him  the  Beloved,  and  as  are  their  sacrifices  both  of  prayer  and 
praise.      {John  Gill,  D.D.)  The  vieat-offering  : — The  meat-offering  (or  rather 

bread-offering,  for  the  word  "  meat  "  has  changed  its  meaning  since  our  translation 
was  made)  was  an  accompaniment  of  the  burnt-offering,  and  therefore  must  be 
looked  at  in  its  connection  with  it.  It  consisted  in  the  offering  of  fine  flour  (ver.  1), 
or  bread  made  of  fine  flour  (vers.  4,  5,  7),  with  oil  and  frankincense  (ver.  1),  and 
salt  (ver.  13).  Its  symbolic  meaning  is  quite  obvious.  Just  as  the  burnt-offering 
symbolised  the  dedication  of  the  man  himself  to  God,  with  all  his  powers  and 
faculties,  the  bread-offering  signified  the  dedication  to  God  of  the  fruit  of  his  labours, 
the  produce  of  his  industry.  In  its  fullest  sense  it  symbolised  the  dedication  of  his 
life-energy  to  God  in  holy  obedience.  The  close  association  of  bread  with  life 
throughout  the  Scriptures  is  quite  familiar  to  us,  and  perhaps  our  Lord  had  this 
offering  in  hiind  when  He  said  :  "  My  meat  "  (bread)  "  is  to  do  the  will  of  Him  that 
sent  Me,  and  to  finish  His  work"  (J.>hn  iv.  34).  But  while  in  its  fullest  sense  the 
bread-offering  may  be  understood  as  symbolising  the  entire  new  life  which  is  the 
result  of  our  dedicating  of  ourselves  to  God,  its  most  obvi  us  application  is  to  the 
dedication  of  our  substance  to  Him,  to  whom  we  have  dedicated  ourst-lves.  The  oil 
to  be  poured  upon  the  offering  has  here  its  invariable  significance  of  lieavenly  grace, 
and  the  frankincense  the  devotional  spirit  in  which  the  offering  should  be  presented. 
The  salt  is  spoken  of  as  "  the  salt  of  the  covenant  of  thy  God  "  (ver.  13)  ;  and  the 
caution  never  to  allow  it  to  be  lacking  seems  to  guard  against  the  danger  of  sup- 
posing that  our  gifts  to  the  Lord  can  find  acceptance  in  any  other  way  than 
through  the  i^rovisions  of  the  covenant  which  He  has  made  with  us  by  sacrifice 
(Psa.  1.  5).  The  things  prohibited  are  equally  suggestive  with  the  things  enjoined. 
They  are  leaven  and  honey:  leaven,  the  symbol  of  corruption,  and  honey,  of  a 
sweetness  which  was  in  the  Hebrew  mind  esppcially  associated  with  fermentation. 
The  disposal  of  the  offering  was  also  significant.  Part  of  it  was  to  be  burnt  upon 
the  altar  "  as  a  memorial"  (vers.  2^  6)  :  the  rest  v.'as  set  apart  for  use  by  the  priests 


42  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

(ver.  3).  Inasmuch  as  the  priests  in  these  transactions  represented  the  people,  while 
the  altrtr  represented  God,  the  idea  of  fellowship  or  sharing  is  here  conveyed,  as  if 
to  suggest  the  thought  that  while  all  our  energies  and  all  our  substance  should  be 
consecrated  to  God  in  the  first  place,  the  sum  is  nevertheless  in  the  issue  divided 
between  the  more  sacred  and  the  more  personal  uses.  In  the  matter  of  property, 
for  instance,  the  true  idea  is  not  to  give  a  portion  to  the  Lord  and  to  keep  the  rest 
for  ourselves,  but  to  give  all  to  God;  and  then,  with  His  approval,  to  expend  so 
much  on  personal  use,  and  set  aside  so  much  for  consumption  on  the  altar.  But 
while  the  offering  is  to  be  thus  divided,  the  frankincense  is  to  be  all  burnt  upon  the 
altar  (ver.  2).  The  devotional  element  is  for  God  alone.  You  have  heard,  jjerhaps, 
of  the  newsjiaper  writer  who,  referring  to  the  devotional  part  of  the  service  in  one 
of  the  churches  in  Boston,  spoke  of  his  having  had  the  privilege  of  listening  to  "the 
most  eloquent  prayer  that  was  ever  addressed  to  a  Boston  audience."  We  are  too 
apt  to  forget  that  our  prayers  are  not  for  Boston  audiences  or  London  audiences, 
but  for  the  audience  of  Heaven,  for  the  ear  of  God.  The  frankincense  was  all  to  be 
burnt  upon  the  altar.  (J.M.  Gibson, D.D.)  The  meat-offciinii : — First, the  meat- 
oft'ering  was  one  of  the  offerings  commanded  by  the  law  of  God  ;  it  consisted  of  fine 
flour,  oil,  and  frankincense.  A  handful  of  this  flour,  with  the  oil  and  all  the  frankin- 
cense, was  to  be  burnt  by  the  priest  on  the  altar  as  an  offering  to  God,  the  remainder 
of  the  flour  and  oil  was  to  belong  to  the  priest.  Afterwards  we  read  of  three  kinds 
of  meat-offeiings,  of  which  the  first  was  baked  in  an  oven,  the  second  in  a  pan,  the 
third  in  a  frying-pan,  which  is  thought  by  some  expositors  not  to  mean  what  we 
call  a  frying-pan,  l)ut  a  coarse  earthen  pot  in  which  the  poorer  sort  in  the  East  cook 
their  food.  These  three  kinds  of  meat-offerings  were  all  of  the  same  materials,  but 
probably  different  in  quantity  from  one  another,  as  well  as  in  mode  of  preparation. 
The  meat-ofl'ering  in  the  oven  was  intended  as  the  offering  of  the  rich  ;  that  in  the 
pan  for  the  middling  class  ;  that  in  the  frying-pan  for  the  poorest  sort.  God 
requires  an  offering  from  all,  both  rich  and  poor,  and  will  accept  the  offering  of  the 
poorest  as  well  as  thnt  of  the  richest.  The  meat-oft'ering  seems  to  mean  the  entire 
giving  up  of  a  man,  his  body  and  soul,  and  all  he  has  to  God,  which  follows  his 
believing  acceptHnce  of  Christ's  work  and  sacrifice.  The  man  looks  witli  faith  to 
Christ's  sacrifice  (this  is  the  burnt-offering),  this  sight  of  Christ  crucified  fills  all 
his  heart  with  love  and  gratitude  to  his  kind  and  loving  Saviour,  this  causes  hnn  to 
give  himself  and  all  that  he  has  to  God  and  His  service  (this  ia  the  meat-offering). 
The  fine  flour,  probably  meant  the  man's  self,  his  property  and  services.  It  was 
not  only  flour,  but  fine  flour,  the  best  part  of  the  flour,  the  flour  cleansed  from  liran, 
dirt,  &c.  When  the  believer  offers  himself  to  God,  he  offers  that  new  man  which 
is  created  in  him  bv  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  which  is  most  pleasing  and  precious  in 
God's  sight  through  Christ.  The  remains  of  sin  in  the  believer  are  like  the  bran, 
dirt,  &c. ,  in  the  flour;  these  are  cleansed  out  of  and  destroyed  in  the  believer  by 
the  Spirit,  and  are  not  offered  to  God.  The  oil  in  the  meat-offering  probably  denoted 
the  Holy  Spirit.  He  was  poured  without  measure  on  Christ  the  Head  of  the  Church, 
and  flows  down  to  the  skirts  of  His  clothing,  so  that  the  meanest  believer  shares  in 
this  Divine  oil  which  adorns  and  beautifies  the  soul.  Frankincense  was  also  a  part 
of  the  meat-oft'ering.  Now,  frankincense  was  a  type  of  the  prayers  of  Christ  and 
His  intercession,  by  which  the  sacrifices  and  services  of  believers  are  offered  to,  and 
accepted  by  the  Father.  Just  as  man  is  delighted  with  the  sweet  smell  of  frankin- 
cense, so  the  Father  is  most  delighted  with  Christ,  and  His  prayers  for  believers, 
which  are  always  sweet  smelling  and  fragrant  to  Him.  The  man  was  to  offer  the 
whole  quantity  of  the  meat-offering,  but  the  priest  was  only  to  take  a  handful  of  it 
for  the  Lord.  The  part  that  God  took  was  to  be  offered  up  as  a  memorial,  to  teach 
a  man  that  all  he  had  belonged  to  God,  and  that  He  had  a  right  to  take  the  whole, 
or  any  part  of  it  He  pleased.  All  the  frankincense  was  to  be  taken,  since  the  prayers 
of  Chiist  are  all  so  precious  to  the  Father  that  not  one  of  them  can  be  left  out  by 
Him  from  His  own  peculiar  offering.  All  the  remainder  that  was  not  offered  on  the 
altar  became  most  holy.  This  teaches  us  that  when  once  we  have  offered  ourselves 
to  the  Lord,  everything  of  ours  becomes  separated  from  the  world  and  sin,  and  set 
apart  to  God's  service,  and  though  He  returns  it  to  us,  yet  we  must  remember  that  it 
is  most  holy,  and  though  it  may  be  used  by  us,  yet  it  must  be  used  as  a  most  holy 
thing,  and  not  for  ungodly  or  sinful  uses.  Secondly,  let  us  consider  the  two  things 
that  were  forbidden  to  be  used  in  meat-offerings,  and  in  most  sacrifices.  They  were 
(1)  leaven ;  and  (2)  honey.  Leaven  is  a  striking  figure  of  decay  and  corruption. 
It  is  often  used  in  Scriptui'e  as  a  figure  of  sin,  which  is  the  corruption  and  decay  of 
the  soul  from  the  ori^'inal  state  of  righteousness  and  holiness  in  which  man  was 


CHAP.  II.]  LEVITICUS.  43 


created  to  a  state  of  ungodliness  and  wickedness.  Any  sin,  then,  wilfully  indulged 
and  allowed  is  the  leaven  which  is  positively  forbidden  to  be  offered  in  any  of  onr 
spiritual  sacrifices  to  God.  The  second  thing  forbidden  to  be  offered  in  the  meat- 
offering was  honey.  And  by  honey  being  forbidden  in  the  sacrifices,  we  are  taught 
that  in  all  our  spiritual  sacrifices  of  praise  and  prayer  and  good  works  and  all  others, 
we  should  carefully  avoid  seeking  the  pleasure  or  gratification  of  the  natural  heart, 
instead  of  or  in  addition  to  God's  glory  and  approval.  Thirdly,  let  us  observe  what 
was  to  be  put  not  only  in  the  meat-offering,  but  in  every  Jewish  sacrifice — that  was 
salt.  Whatever  else  was  wanting,  the  salt  was  never  to  be  wanting  from  any  sacri- 
fice made  to  God.  By  salt  is  meant  grace  in  Scripture,  and  that  work  of  tbe  Spirit 
in  the  heart  which  is  a  fruit  and  effect  of  the  grace  or  undeserved  love  of  the  God- 
head. Just  as  salt  preserves  from  natural  corruption,  so  the  Holy  Spirit  and  His 
grace  preserves  from  spiritual  corruption — that  is,  the  departure  of  the  heart  from 
the  love  and  fear  of  God.  It  was  not  only  salt  that  was  to  be  in  the  meat-oft'ering 
and  other  sacrifices,  but  the  salt  of  the  covenant  of  thy  God.  The  salt  in  believers 
must  be  the  salt  of  the  covenant — the  Holy  Spirit — not  mere  human  principles  of 
endurance,  temperance,  philosophy,  and  virtue.  This  covenant  is  the  covenant  of 
grace  made  between  the  Father  and  the  Son,  its  object  is  to  give  eternal  life  and 
blessings  to  those  who  are  in  it,  who  are  all  true  believers  on  account  of  and  in  con- 
sideration of  the  work  of  Christ  in  His  life  and  death.  God  gives  believers  the 
Spirit  as  the  certain  mark  and  sign  of  the  covenant  of  grace  into  which  He  has 
admitted  them  through  Christ.  Lastly,  consider  the  application  of  this  to  our- 
selves. Take  heed  that  there  is  no  leaven,  no  tolerated,  or  indulged,  or  ruling  sin 
in  your  heart  or  conduct,  or  God  will  abhor  and  curse  j'our  offerings  and  sacrifices, 
for  the  "  sacrifice  of  the  wicked  is  abomination  to  the  Lord  "  (Prov.  xv.  8).  Weak- 
ness and  sins  of  in6rnjity  there  will  always  be  in  all  your  offerings  to  God ;  but  the 
blood  of  Christ  will  wash  out  all  these  if  you  go  to  that  fountain.  But  no  sin  must 
be  wilfully  indulged,  or  suffered  to  rule  in  your  heart  or  life  •  no  sin  must  be 
inwardly  loved  and  cherished  by  you.  Take  heed  also  that  there  is  nothing  of  what 
the  law  of  God  condemns  as  honey  in  your  offerings  to  God.  Many  only  seek  to 
please  themselves,  or  to  get  the  praise  of  men  in  their  service  or  worship  of  God  ; 
but  this  is  the  honey  God  forbids  in  the  sacrifices.  Above  all,  take  heed  that  you 
have  the  Holy  Spirit.  (C.  S.  Taylor,  M.A.)  The  meat-offering  : — I.  In  its  con- 
trast TO  THE  other  OFFERINGS.  Fivc  poiuts  here  at  once  present  themselves,  which 
bring  out  what  is  distinctive  in  this  offering.  The  apprehension  of  these  will  enable 
us  to  see  the  particular  relation  which  Jesus  filled  for  man  as  Meat-offering.  1. 
The  first  point  is  that  the  meat-offering  was  "  a  sweet  savour."  In  this  particular 
it  stands  in  contrast  to  the  sin-offering,  but  in  exact  accordance  with  the  burnt- 
offering.  2.  The  second  po'int  in  which  the  meat-offering  differed  from  the 
others  is  seen  in  the  materials  of  which  it  was  composed.  These  were  "  ffour, 
oil,  and  frankincense";  there  is  no  giving  up  of  life  here.  It  is  in  this  particular, 
especially,  that  the  meat-offering  diff'ers  from  the  burnt-offering.  Life  is  that 
which  from  the  beginning  God  claimed  as  His  part  in  creation :  as  an  emblem, 
therefore,  it  represents  what  the  creature  owes  to  God.  Corn,  the  fruit  of 
the  earth,  on  the  other  hand,  is  man's  part  in  creation ;  as  such,  it  stands  the 
emblem  of  man's  claim,  or  of  what  we  owe  to  man.  What  we  owe  to  God 
or  to  man  is  respectively  our  duty  to  either.  Thus  in  the  burnt-off'ering 
the  surrender  of  life  to  God  represents  the  fulfilment  of  man's  duty  to  God ; 
man  yielding  to  God  His  portion  to  satisfy  all  His  claim.  In  the  meat- 
offering the  gift  of  corn  and  oil  represents  the  fulfilment  of  man's  duty  to  his 
neighbour :  man  in  his  offering  surrendering  himself  to  God,  but  doing  so  that  he 
may  give  to  man  his  portion.  Thus  the  burnt-offering  is  the  perfect  fulfilment  of 
the  laws  of  the  first  table ;  the  meat-offering  the  perfect  fulfilment  of  the  second. 
Of  course,  in  both  cases  the"  offering  is  but  one — that  offering  is  "the  body"  of 
Jesus  ;  but  that  body  is  seen  offered  in  different  aspects :  here  in  the  meat-otl'ering 
as  fulfilling  man's  duty  to  man.  The  one  case  is  man  satisfying  God,  giving  Him 
His  portion,  and  receiving  testimony  that  it  is  accej^table.  The  other  is  man  satis- 
fying his  neighbour,  giving  man  his  portion  as  an  offering  to  the  Lord.  3.  The 
meat-offering  was  "  not  wholly  burnt."  In  this  it  differed  from  the  burnt-offerin?. 
Christ  as  performing  man's  duty  to  God — that  is,  the  burnt-offering — was  wholly 
the  food  of  God,  wholly  put  upon  His  altar,  wholly  consumed  by  Him.  But  Christ 
as  performing  His  duty  to  man — that  is,  the  meat-offering — is  also  man's  meat,  the 
food  of  the  priests:  "The  remnant  of  the  meat-offering  shall  be  Aaron's  and  hs 
sons' ;  it  is  a  thing  most  holy  of  the  offerings  of  the  Lord  made  by  fire."     Yet  even 


44  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

here  He  sati-fies  God.     "  A  handful,  the  memorial  of  the  offering,"  is  put  upon  the 
altar,  to  teach  u-,  that  even  in  fultilling  man's  duty  to  his  neighbour,  Christ  ful- 
filled it  as  "  an  otfering  unto  the  Lord."    But  though  God  had  thus  a  portion  in  the 
nieat-oiifering,  it  is  nevertheless  specially  the  food  of  man ;  primarily  to  be  viewed 
as  offered  for  us  to  God,  but  also  as  given  to  us,  as  priests,  to  feed  on.     For  us,  as 
meat-offering,  Jesus  fultilled  what  was  due  to  man.     He  did  this  as  onr  representa- 
tive, as  the  substitute  of  those  who  trust  Him — in  this  aspect  of  the  offering  our 
souls  find  peace  ;  here  is  our  acceptance — but  this,  though  securing  peace,  is  but  a 
part  of  our  bles-ed  portion.  If  Jesus  did  all  this  for  us,  will  He  not  do  it  to  us  ?    As 
righteous  in  Him,  we  still  have  wants,  we  need  daily  food  and  anointing ;  and  for 
tlje^e  as  much  as  for  righteousness,  we  are  debtors  to  His  abounding  grace.     The 
law  is  that  the  priests  should  be  fed  at  the  altar ;  they  may  not  work  for  their  bread 
as  others.     The  faithful  Israelite  is  the  appointed  channel  of  their  subsistence ;  on 
his  faithfulness,  under  God,  do  they  depend  for  their  food.     Jesus,  as  the  faithful 
Israelite,  will  not  fail  the  priests  who  wait  at  the  altar.     Let  His  priests  ("  ye  are  a 
royal  priesthood")  be  but  found  where  they  should  be,  and  His  offering  will  be  there 
to  feed  them.     "  He  will  abundantly  bless  the  provision,  He  will  satisfy  His  poor 
with  bread."     4.  The  fourth  point  I  notice  in  the  meat-offering  is,  that,  though  in- 
tended for,  and  for  the  most  part  consumed  by,  man,  it  was,  nevertheless,  "  offered 
unto  the  Lord."     In  the  meat-offering  the  offerer  gives  himself  as  man's  meat ;  yet 
this  is  yielded  as  "  an  offering  unto  Jehovah."     The  offering  indeed  fed  the  priests  ; 
but  it  was  offered,  not  to  them,  but  to  the  Lord.     The  first  Adam  took  for  man  not 
only  what  was  given  him,  but  what  God  had  reserved  for  Himself.     The  second 
Adam  gave  to  God  not  only  God's  portion,  but  even  of  man's  part  God  had  the  first 
memorial.     Jesus,  as  man,  in  satisfying  man's  claim  on  Him,  did  it  as  "an  offering 
unto  the  Lord."     With  us  how  much  even  of  our  graces  is  offered  to  man  rather 
than  to  God.     Even  in  our  most  devoted  service,  what  a  seeking  there  is,  perhaps 
unconsciously,   to  be  something  in  the  estimation  of  others :  some  secret  desire, 
some  undetected  wish,  even  by  our  very  service  to  be  greater  here.     The  very  gifts 
of  God  and  the  power  of  His  Spirit  are  sought  the  better  to  give  us  a  place  in  this 
world.     Surely  this  is  one  of  the  reasons  why  God  cnn  trust  us  with  so  little,  for 
with  His  gifts  we  build  up  our  own  name,  instead  of  His  name.     But  how  unlike 
all  this  to  our  Master.     5.  In  the  last  place,  the  contrast  between  the  meat-offering 
and  "the  offering  of  firstfruits  at  Pentecost."  The  distinction  is  stated  in  the  twelfth 
verse — "As  for  the  oblation  of  the  firstfruits,  ye  shall  offer  them  unto  the  Lord, 
but  they  shall  not  be  burnt  on  the  altar  for  a  sweet  savour."     The  contrast  is  this 
— the  meat-offering  was  a  sweet  savour :  the  oblation  of   firstfruits,  though  very 
like  the  meat-offering,  vvas  not  so.     For  the  key  to  this  we  must  turn  to  chap,  xxiii., 
where  the  law  respecting  "the  oblation  of   firstfruits"  is  given  to  us.     In  that 
chapter  we  have  a  list  of  the  feasts.     First  in  order  comes  the  Passover,  on  the 
fourteenth  day  at  even  ;  then  the  wave-sheaf  of  firstfruits,  on  the  morrow  after  the 
Sabbath ;  and  then,  fifty  days  after,  the  oblation  of  the  firstfruits  on  the  day  of 
Pentecost.     The  "  sheaf  of  firstfruits,"  on  the  morrow  after  the  Sabbath,  might  be 
burnt  to  the  Lord  as  a  sweet  savour;   but  "the  oblation  of   the  firstfruits  "  at 
Pent-cost  might  not  be  burnt  on  the  altar.    The  reason  for  this  distinction  is  found 
in  the  fact  that  "  the  sheaf  of  firstfruits"  was  unleavened,  while  "the  oblation  of 
firstfruits  "  at  Pentecost  was  mixed  and  made  with  leaven.     The  tvpical  applica- 
tion of  all  this  is  too  obvious  to  need  any  comment.  Christ,  our  Passover,  was  sacri- 
ficed for  us,  and  saciificed  on  the  predetermined  day.     Then  "  on  the  morrow  after 
the  Sabbath,"  the  next  ensuing  Sabbath, that  is, on  the  appointed  "first  day  of  the 
week,"  Christ  "rose  from  the  dead,  and  became  the  firstfruits  of  them  that  slept." 
In  Him  there  was  no  sin,  no  leaven  ;  He  was  in  Himself  a  sweet  savour  to  Jehovah. 
With  this  offering,  therefore,  no  sin-off'ering  was  coupled  ;  it  was  offered  only  with 
a  burnt-olfering  and  meat-offering.     But  tifty  days  after  this,  "when  the  day  of 
Pentecost  was  fully  come,"  the  Church,  tj'pified  by  the  leavened  oblation  of  first- 
fruits,  is  offered  unto  the  Lord:  for  we,  as  well  as  Jesus,  are  firstfruits;  "  we  are," 
says  James,  "  a  kind  of  firstfruits  of  His  creatures."     But  this  offering,  having  sin 
in  it,  being  "  mixed  with  leaven,"  could  neither  stand  the  test  of  the  fire  of  the 
altar,  nor  be  an  offering  made  by  fire  of  a  sweet  savour  unto  the  Lord.     Yet  it  was 
to  be  both  offered  and  accepted—"  Ye  shall  offer  it,  but  it  shall  not  be  burnt."  And 
why,  and  how,  was  this  leavened  cake  accepted?  Something  was  offered  "with  it," 
for  the  sake  of  whinh  the  leavened  firstfruits  were  accepted.     They  offered  with 
the  leavened  bread  a  burnt-oft'ering,  a  meat-offering,  a  peace-offering,  and  a  sin- 
offering;  for  leaven  being  found  in  the  oblation  of  firstfruits,  a  sin-offering  was 


CHAP.  11.]  LEVITICUS.  45 

needed  with  it.     And  the  priest  wave!  all  together  :  "  the  priest  shall  wave  them 
with  the  bread  of  the  firstiruits  for  a  wave-oti'ering  before  the  Lord."     The  Church 
cornea  with  Christ  before  God ;  it  is  offered  with  all  the  value  of  His  work  attached 
to  it.     II.  In  its  diffekent  grai>es  or  varieties.     These  are  three  in  number,  and 
represent  the  different  measures  of  apprehension  with  which  a  saint  may  see  Jesus 
in  any  of  His  relations.     1.  The  first  contrast  is,  that  while  in  the  first  grade  each 
article  of  the  materials  is  enumerated,  the   second  describes  the  offering  more 
generally  as  "  unleavened  wafers  anointed."     The  import  of  this  distinction  is  at 
once  and  easily  discoverable.     How  many  saints  are  there,  who,  in  thinking  or 
speaking  about  Jesus,  can  fully  assert  that  He  is  "unleavened,"  who  know  and 
believe  He  is  sinless,  while  yet  they  cannot  see  all  His  perfectness.     But  absence  of 
evil,  the  being  without  leaven,  is  a  lower  thought  than  the  possession  of  perfect 
goodness.     We  can  say,  "  He  did  no  sin,  neither  was  guile  found  in  His  mouth," 
long  before  we  can  tell  what  was  in  Him,  and  the  way  in  which  He  spent  it  all  for 
others.     2.  A  second  point  of  contrast  between  the  different  grades  of  the  meat- 
offering is  too  remarkable  to  be  omitted.     In  the  first  class  it  is  observed  that  ih^ 
offerer  himself  takes  the  memorial  for  God  out  of  the  offering  ;  in  the  second,  the 
priest  is  said  to  take  it ;  while  in  the  last  class — "  in  the  dried  ears  " — no  mention 
is  made  who  takes  it.     The  difference  is  obvious  and  instructive.     The  one  view 
shows  Christ  in  His  person  as  offerer,  the  other  in  His  appointed  office  as  the  priest. 
The  first,  Christ  as  offerer  personally  giving  to  God,  is  a  higher  view  than  Christ 
offering  as  priest  officially.     The  latter  view  loses,  at  least,  one  precious  object  in 
the  precious  offering  of  Jesus ;  the  office  is  indeed  seen,  but  the  person  of  the  i^ord 
quite  lost  sight  of.     3.  But  there  is  a  third  contrast,  and  one  which  may  be  more 
generally  apprehended,  between  the  first  class  of  the  meat-offering  and  the  others. 
In  the  first  class  Christ's  offering  is  seen  as  flour  :  He  is  "  the  fine  flour  "  bruised. 
In  the  other  classes  this  particular  is  almost  merged :  He  is  rather  bread,  either 
"  loaves  "  or  "  wafers."     The  distinction  here  is  very  manifest.     We  may  see  Jesus 
as  our  "bread,"  or  even  as  God's  bread,  without  entering  into  the  thoughts  which 
are  suggested  by  the  emblems  of  "fine  flour"  and  "frankincense."     The  perfect 
absence  of  all  uneveuness,  and  the  deep  bruisings  which  He  endured  that  He  might 
satisfy  us ;  the  precious  savour  also  of  the  offering,  only  more  fragrant  when  tried 
by  fire ;  these  are  not  our  first  views  of  Jesus ;  for  as  they  are  the  most  perfect 
apprehensions,   so    are    they   generally   the    last.       4.    The    difference    between 
the   first   class   of  the   meat-offering   and  the  third  is  even  more   striking  and 
manifest;   this  latter   offering  giving   us   a  thought   of   Christ   as  "firstfruits," 
the  first   sheaf    of    the    ripening  harvest,   rather   than   the   bread   already  pre- 
pared for  food,   or  the    fine    flour    as    seen    in    the    first    grade.      (A.    Jukes.) 
The  meat-offering : — The  meat-offering  (so  called  by  our  translators  because  the 
greater  part  of  it  was  used  for  food)  represents  the  offerer's  person  and  property, 
his  body  and  his  possessions.     The  mercies  of  God  constrain  him  to  give  up  all  he 
has  to  the  Lord.     The  meat-offering  was  generally,  or  rather  always,  presented 
along  with  some  animal  sacrifice,  in  order  to  show  the  connection  between  pardon 
of  sin  and  devotion  to  the  Lord.     The  moment  we  are  pardoued,  all  we  are,  and  aU 
we  have,  becomes  the  property  of  Christ.     A  type  that  was  to  represent  this  dedica- 
tion of  body  and  property  was  one  that  behoved  to  have  no  blood  therein ;  for 
blood  is  the  life  or  soul  which  has  been  already  offered.     This  distinction  may 
have  existed  as  early  as  the  days  of  Adam.     When  God  instituted  animal  sacrifice 
to  represent  the  atonement  by  death  He  probably  also  instituted  this  other  sort ; 
the  fact  of  this  latter  existing,  and  its  meaning  and  use  being  definitely  under- 
stood, would  tend  to  confirm  the  exclusive  use  of  animal  sacrifice  when  atonement 
was  to  be  shown  forth.     Cain's  offering  of  firstfruits  might  have  been  acceptable 
as  a  meat-offering,  if  it  had  been  founded  upon  the  slain  lamb,  and  had  followed 
as  a  consequence  from  that  sacrifice.      This   meat-offering  was  presented  daily, 
along  with  the  morning  and  evening  sacrifice,  teaching  us  to  give  all  we  have  to 
the  Lord's  use,  not  by  irregular  impulse  on  particular  exigencies,  but  daily.    But 
we  have  still  to  call  attention  to  the  chief  application  of  this  type.     It  shows  forth 
Christ  Himself.     And  indeed  this  should  have  been  noticed  fiist  of  all,  had  it  not 
been  for  the  sake  of  first  establishing  the  precise  point  of  view  in  which  this  type 
sets  forth  its  object.     We  are  to  consider  it  as  representing  Christ  Himself  in  all 
His  work  of  obedience,  soul  and  body.     And  if  it  represent  Christ,  it  includes  His 
Church.      Christ  and  His  body,  the  Church,  are  presented  to  the  Father,  and 
accepted.     Christ,  and  all  His  possessions  in  heaven  and  earth,  whether  possessions 
of  dominion  or  possessions  in  the  souls  of  men  and  angels,  were  all  presented  to, 


46  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

and  accepted  by  the  Father.  Let  us  now  examine  the  chapter  in  detail.  The 
meat-offering  must  be  of  fine  flour — the  fine  wheat  of  Palestine,  not  the  coarser 
"  meal,"  but  the  fine,  boiled  and  sifred  well.  It  must  in  all  cases  be  not  less  than 
the  tenth  of  an  ephah  (chap.  v.  11)  ;  in  most  ca^es  far  more  (see  Numb.  vii.  13). 
It  was  taken  from  the  best  of  their  fields,  and  cleansed  from  the  bran  by  passing 
through  the  sieve.  The  rich  seem  to  have  ofl'ered  it  in  the  shape  of  pure  fine  flour, 
white  as  snow,  heaping  it  up  probably,  as  in  Numb.  vii.  13,  on  a  silver  charger,  or 
in  a  silver  bowl,  in  princely  manner.  It  thus  formed  a  type,  beautiful  and  pleasant 
to  the  eye,  of  the  man's-self  atid  substance  dedicated  to  God,  when  now  made  pure 
by  the  blood  of  sacrifice  that  had  removed  his  sin.  For  if  forgiven,  then  a  blessing 
rested  upon  his  basket  and  his  store,  on  the  fruit  of  his  body,  and  the  fruit  of  his 
ground,  the  fruit  of  his  cattle,  and  the  increase  of  his  kine  (see  Deut.  xxviii.  3-6). 
Even  as  Jesus,  when  raised  from  the  tomb,  was  henceforth  no  more  under  the  curse 
of  sin  ;  but  was  blessed  in  body,  for  His  body  was  no  longer  weary  or  feeble  ;  and 
blessed  in  company,  for  no  longer  was  He  numbered  among  transgressors ;  and 
blessed  in  all  His  inheritance,  for  "  all  power  was  given  Him  in  heaven  and  in 
earth."  The  oil  poured  on  the  fine  flour  denoted  setting  apart.  It  was  oil  that 
was  used  by  Jacob  at  Bethel  in  setting  apart  his  stone  pillow  to  commemorate  his 
vision  ;  and  every  priest  and  king  was  thus  set  apart  for  his  office.  Oil,  used  on 
these  occasions,  is  elsewhere  appropriated  to  mean  the  Spirit's  operation — the  Spirit 
setting  apart  whom  He  pleases  for  any  oflice.  The  frankincense,  fragrant  in  its 
smell,  denoted  the  acceptableness  of  the  offering.  As  a  flower  or  plant — the  rose 
of  Sharon  or  the  balm  of  Gilead — would  induce  any  passing  traveller  to  stoop  down 
over  them,  and  regale  himself  with  their  fragrance,  so  the  testimony  borne  by 
Christ's  work  to  the  character  of  Godhead  brings  the  Father  to  bend  over  any  to 
whom  it  is  imparted,  and  to  rest  over  him  in  His  love.  The  Lord  Jesus  says  to 
His  Church,  in  Song  of  Sol.  iv.  6,  "  Until  the  day  break,  and  the  shadows  flee  away, 
I  will  get  me  to  the  mountain  of  myrrh,  and  the  hill  of  frankincense."  This  spot 
must  be  the  Father's  right  hand.  In  like  manner,  then,  it  ought  to  be  the  holy 
purpose  of  believing  souls  who  are  looking  for  Christ,  to  dwell  so  entirely  amid  the 
Eedeemer's  merits,  that,  like  the  maidens  of  King  Ahasuerus  (Esther  ii.  12),  they 
shall  be  fragrant  with  the  sweet  odours,  and  with  these  alone,  when  the  bridegroom 
comes.  When  Christ  presented  His  human  person  and  all  He  had.  He  was,  indeed, 
fragrant  to  the  Father,  and  the  oil  of  the  Spirit  was  on  Him  above  His  fellows  (see 
Isa.  Ixi.  1 ;  Psa.  xlv.  7  ;  Heb.  ix.  14).  And  equally  complete  in  Him  is  every 
believer  also.  Like  Jesus,  each  believer  is  God's  wheat — His  fine  flour.  {A.  A. 
Bonar.)  Christ  the  true  Meat-offering  : — That  Christ  is  the  true  Meat-offering  is 
manifest  from  its  materials.  These  clearly  represent  features  of  character  found 
nowhere  else  but  m  Him.  In  the  bruising  of  the  corn  necessary  to  the  formation 
of  the  flour — the  baking  of  the  cakes  or  wafers  in  the  second  division  of  the  offer- 
ing— the  scorching  of  the  green  ears  of  corn  in  the  oblation  of  the  firstfruits — in 
each  of  these  particulars  we  have  a  type  of  His  sufferings,  who  was  "bruised  for 
our  iniquities,"  and  by  whose  stripes  we  are  healed.  For,  while  the  meat-offering 
chiefly  directs  our  attention  to  Christ  in  life,  exhibiting  a  faultlessness  of  character 
to  be  seen  in  none  else,  it  does  not  stop  short  of  the  Cross.  True,  no  life  was 
taken,  it  was  a  bloodless  sacrifice.  It  was,  however,  burned  upon  the  altar  (not 
the  altar  of  incense,  but  of  burnt-offering),  and  was  usually,  and  I  am  inclined  to 
think  always — accompanied  by  an  animal  sacrifice.  Does  not  this  prove  how 
closely  in  its  typical  application  this  offering  is  connected  with  those  which  more 
especially  set  forth  Christ  as  making  atonement  in  death  ?  It  is,  in  fact,  but 
another  aspect  of  the  great  sacrificial  work  of  Christ — a  work,  to  the  accomplish- 
ment of  which  the  unblemished  life  of  the  Saviour  was  as  needful  as  His  death. 
"  Full  of  grace  and  truth  "  ;  the  unction  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  oil,  was  ever,  and 
without  measure,  upon  Him.  Every  incident  in  His  i)recious  life  was  redolent 
with  the  frasrant  frankincense  ;  whilst  the  healthful  savour  of  the  salt  impregnated 
everything  He  did  and  said.  No  corrupting  leaven  !  no  mere  superficial  honey- 
like sweetness  (which  in  us  is  often  called,  or  mis-called,  "our  good  nature") 
characterised  the  conduct  and  conversation  of  the  "Anointed  Man."  View  Him 
under  what  circumstances  you  will,  whether  in  the  society  of  those  by  whom  He 
was  loved,  or  surrounded  with  men  who  went  about  to  kill  Him,  He  is  ever  the 
pure,  perpetual  Meat-offering.  True,  while  we  are  in  the  flesh,  neither  our  conduct 
nor  our  gifts  can  fully  answer  to  the  pure,  unleavened  Meat-offering.  God  has, 
however,  provided  a  perfect  offering  in  Jesus  to  supply  our  lack,  to  ascend  as  a 
sweet-smelling  savour  for  us.     Yet,  as  we  are  exhorted  to  be  like  Jesus  in  being 


CHii'.  II.]  LEVITICUS.  47 

"  whole  burnt-offerings,"  presenting  "  our  bodies  living  sacrifices,  holy  and  accept- 
able unto  God,"  so  must  we  seek  to  imitate  Him  in  the  purity  and  perfectness  of  His 
walk  as  our  Meat-offering.     {F.  H.   White.)  The  vieat-offerinn  : — 1.  Its  main 

material  is  flour.    Earth  yields  the  grain  ;  repeated  blows  thresh  it  from  the  husks  ; 
the  grinding  mill  reduces  it  to  powder.     This  thought  glides  easily  to  Christ.     He 
stoops  to  be  poor  offspring  of  poor  earth.     And  then  what  batterings  assail  Him ! 
2.  The  quality  of  the  flour  is  distinstly  marked.     It  must  be  fine.     All  coarseness 
must  be  sifted  out.     No  impure  sj)eck  may  stain  it.     See  the  lovely  beauties  of  the 
Lord.     His  charms  bring  comfort  to  the  anxious  soul.     3.  Oil  is  added  (ver.  3). 
Emblem  of  the  Spirit's  grace.     4.  Frankincense  is  sprinkled  on  the  mass.     And  is 
not  Christ  the  incense  of  delight,  in  heaven,  in  earth  ?     The  precious  merits  of  His 
work  reg-'  ■  each  attribute  of  God.     He  brings  full  honour  to  their  every  claim. 
He,  too,  is  perfume  to  His  people's  hearts.     Say,  ye  who  know  Christ  Jesus,  is  not 
His  name   "as  ointment  poured  forth"?      5.  No  leaven  and  no  boney  may  be 
brought.     The  first  is  quick  to  change  and  taint  the  meal.     It  rapidly  pervades. 
It  casts  a  savour  into  every  part.     Hence  it  is  evil's  emblem.     For  sin  admitted 
will  run  wildly  througli  the  heart.     Its  course  pollutes.     The  latter  is  most  luscious 
to  the  palate.     But  is  it  harmless?    Nay,  it  soon  proves  a  sickening  and  fermenting 
pest.     Its  sweetness  tempts.     But  bitterness  ensues.     Here  is  a  symbol  of  sin's 
flattering  bait.     6.  But  salt  mu^t  be  infused.     Its  properties  r^pel  corruption  and 
defy  decay.     Where  it  is  sprinkled  freshness  lives.     At  its  approach  time  drops  its 
spoiling  hand.     Again  behold  the  Lord.     His  essence  and  His  work  are  purity's 
bright  blaze.     7.  The  use  of  the   meat-offering.     A  part  is  cast  upon  the  altar's 
hearth.     The  fire  enwraps  it  in  devouring  folds.     It  is  the  prey  of  the  consuming 
blaze.     The  burning  meal  exhibits  Jesus  in  the  furnace  of  keen  anguish.     What 
awe,  what  peace  live  in  this  wondrous  sight !     The  meat-offering  had  further  use.  • 
The  remnant  "  shall  be  Aaron's  and  his  sons' :  it  is  a  thing  most  holy  of  the  offer- 
ings of  the  Lord  made  by  fire."     Here  is  another  view  of  Christ.     It  shows  most 
tender  and  providing  love.     The  gospel  truth  is  bread  of  life  to  hungry  souls. 
They,  who  serve  Christ,  sit  down  at  a  rich  board.     A  feast  is  spread  to  nourish  and 
regale.      Christ   gives   Himself — heaven's   richest  produce — as   substantial  food. 
(Dean  Law.)         The  meal-offering  : — Israel's  bodily  calling  was  the  cultivation  of 
the  ground  in  the  land  given  him  by  Jehovah.     The  fruit  of  his  calling,  under  the 
Divine  blessing,  was  corn  and  wine,  bis  bodily  food,  which  nourished  and  sustained 
his  bodily  life.     Israel's  spiritual  calling  was  to  woik  in  the  field  of  the  kingdom  of 
God,  in  the  vineyard  of  his  Lord ;  this  work  was  Israel's  covenant  obligation.     Of 
this,  the  fruit  was  the  spiritual  bread,  the  spiritual  nourishment,  which  should 
sustain  and  develop  his  spiritual  life.     (J.  H.  Kurtz,  D.D.)         The  offering  of  conse- 
crated  labour : — In  the  meal-offering  we  are  reminded  that  the  truit  of  all  our 
spiritual  labours  is  to  be  offered  to  the  Lord.     This  reminder  might  seem  unneedful, 
as  indeed  it  ought  to  be;  but  it  is  not.     For  it  is  sadly  possible  to  call  Christ 
"Lord,"  and,  labouring  in  His  field,  do  in  His  name  many  wonderful  works,  yet 
not  really  unto  Him.     A  minister  of  the  Word  may  with  steady  labour  drive  the 
ploughshare  of  the  law,  and  sow  continually  the  undoubted  seed  of  the  Word  in  the 
Master's  field  ;  and  the  apparent  result  of  his  work  may  he  large,  and  even  real,  in 
the  conversion  of  men  to  God,  and  a  great  increase  of  Christian  zeal  and  activity. 
And  yet  it  is  quite  possible  that  a  man  do  this,  and  stil  do  it  for  himself,  and  not 
for  the  Lord  :  and  when  success  comes,  begin  to  rejoice  in  his  evident  skill  as  a 
spiritual  husbandman,  and  in  the  praise  of  man  which  this  brings  him ;  and  so, 
while  thus  rejoicing  in  the  fruit  of  his  labours,  neglect  to  bring  of  this  good  corn 
and  wine  which  he  has  raised  for  a  daily  meal-offering  in  consecration  to  the  Lord. 
And  so,  indeed,  it  may  be  in  every  department  of   religious   activity.     But   the 
teaching  of  the  meal-offering  reaches  further  than  to  what  we  call  religious  labours. 
For  in  that  it  was  appointed  that  the  offering  should  consist  of  man's  daily  food, 
Israel  was  reminded  tbat  God's  claim  for  fuU  consecration  of  all  our  activities  covers 
everything,  even  to  the  very  food  we  eat.     The  New  Testament  has  the  same 
thought  (1  Cor.  x.  31).     And  the  offering  was  not  to  consist  of  any  food  which  one 
might  choose  to  bring,  but  of  corn  and  oil,  variously  prepared.     That  was  chosen 
for  the  offering  which  all,  the  richest  and  the  poorest  alike,  would  be  sure  to  have  ; 
with  the  evident  intent  that  no  one  might  be  able  to  plead  poverty  as  an  excuse  for 
bringing  no  meal-offering  to  the  Lord.     From  the  statesman  who  administers  the 
affairs  of  an  empire  to  the  day-labourer  in  the  shop,  or  mill,  or  field,  all  alike  are 
hereby  reminded  that  the  Lord  requires  that  the  work  of  every  one  shall  be  brought 
and  offered  to  Him  in  holy  consecration.    And  there  was  a  further  prescription. 


i8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ii. 

although  not  mentioned  here  in  so  many  words.  In  some  offerings  barley-meal 
was  ordered,  but  for  this  oiiering  the  grain  presented,  whether  parched,  in  the  ear, 
or  ground  into  meal,  must  be  only  wheat.  The  reason  for  this,  and  the  lesson  it 
teaches,  are  plain.  For  wheat  in  Israel,  as  still  in  most  lands,  was  the  best  and 
most  valued  of  the  grains.  Israel  must  not  only  offer  unto  God  of  the  fruit  of  their 
labour,  but  the  best  result  of  their  labours.  Not  only  so,  but  when  the  offering 
was  in  the  form  of  meal,  cooked  or  uncooked,  the  best  and  finest  must  be  presented. 
That,  in  other  words,  must  be  offered  which  represented  the  most  of  care  and 
labour  in  its  preparation,  or  the  equivalent  of  this  in  purchase  price.  .  .  .  But,  in 
the  selection  of  the  materials,  we  are  pointed  toward  a  deeper  symbolism,  by  the 
injunction  that,  in  certain  cases  at  least,  frankincense  should  be  added  to  the 
offering.  But  this  was  not  of  man's  food,  neither  was  it,  like  the  meal  and  cakes 
and  oil,  a  product  of  man's  labour.  Its  effect,  naturally,  was  to  give  a  grateful 
perfume  to  the  sacrifice,  that  it  might  be,  even  in  a  i^hysical  sense,  "  an  odour  of  a 
sweet  smell."  The  symbolical  meaning  of  incense,  in  which  the  frankincense  waa 
a  chief  ingredient,  is  very  clearly  intimated  in  Scripture  (see  Psa.  cxli.  2  ;  Luke  i. 
10 ;  Eev.  v.  8).  The  frankincense  signified  that  this  offering  of  the  fruit  of  our 
labours  to  the  Lord  must  ever  be  accompanied  by  prayer  ;  and  further,  that  our 
prayers,  thus  offered  in  this  daily  consecration,  are  most  pleasing  to  the  Lord,  even 
as  the  fragrance  of  sweet  inceuse  unto  man.  But  if  the  frankincense,  in  itself,  had 
thus  a  symbolical  meaning,  it  is  not  unnatural  to  infer  the  same  also  with  regard 
to  other  elements  of  the  sacrifice.  Nor  is  it,  in  view  of  the  nature  of  the  symbols, 
hard  to  discover  what  that  should  be.  For  inasmuch  as  that  product  of  labour  is 
selected  for  the  offering,  which  is  the  food  by  which  men  live,  we  are  reminded  that 
this  is  to  be  the  final  aspect  under  which  all  the  fruit  of  our  labours  is  to  be 
regarded;  namely,  as  furnishing  and  supplying  for  the  need  of  the  many  that 
which  shall  be  bread  to  the  soul.  In  the  highest  sense,  indeed,  this  can  only  be 
said  of  Him  who  by  His  work  became  the  Bread  of  Life  for  the  world,  who  was  at 
once  "  the  Sower  "  and  "  the  Corn  of  Wheat "  cast  into  the  ground ;  and  yet,  in  a 
lower  sense,  it  is  true  that  the  work  of  feeding  the  multitudes  with  the  bread  of  lite 
is  the  work  for  us  all ;  and  that  in  all  our  labours  and  engagements  we  are  to  keep 
this  in  mind  as  our  supreme  earthly  object.  And  the  oil,  too,  which  entered  into 
every  form  of  the  meal-offering,  has  in  Scripture  a  constant  and  invariable 
symbolical  meaning.  It  is  the  uniform  symbol  of  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God.  Hence, 
the  injunction  that  the  meal  of  the  offering  be  kneaded  with  oil,  and  that,  of  what- 
ever form  the  offering  be,  oil  should  be  poured  upon  it,  is  intended  to  teach  us 
that  in  all  work  which  shall  be  offered  so  as  to  be  acceptable  to  God,  must  enter,  as 
an  inworking  and  abiding  agent,  tbe  life-giving  Spirit  of  God.  It  is  another  direc- 
tion, that  into  these  offerings  should  never  enter  leaven.  In  this  prohibition  is 
brought  before  us  the  lesson  that  we  take  heed  to  keep  out  of  those  works  which 
we  present  to  God  for  consumption  on  His  altar  the  leaven  of  wickedness  in  every 
form.  In  ver.  13  we  have  a  last  requisition  as  to  the  mateiial  of  the  meal-offering  : 
"  season  with  salt."  As  leaven  is  a  principle  of  impermanence  and  decay,  so  salt, 
on  the  contrary,  has  the  power  of  conservation  from  corruption.  Accordingly,  to 
this  day,  among  the  most  diverse  peoples,  salt  is  the  recognised  symbol  of  incorrup- 
tion  and  unchanging  perpetuity.  Among  the  Arabs,  when  a  compact  or  covenant 
is  made  between  different  parties,  it  is  the  custom  that  each  eat  of  salt,  which  is 
passed  around  on  the  blade  of  a  sword ;  by  which  act  they  regard  themselves  as 
bound  to  be  true,  each  to  the  other,  even  at  the  peril  of  life.  In  like  manner,  in 
India  and  other  Eastern  countries,  the  usual  word  for  perfidy  and  breach  of 
faith  is,  literally,  "unfaithfulness  to  the  salt";  and  a  man  will  say,  "Can 
you  distrust  me  ?  Have  I  not  eaten  of  your  salt  ? "  Herein  we  are  taught, 
then,  that  by  the  consecration  of  our  labours  to  God  we  recognise  the 
relation  between  the  believer  and  his  Lord,  as  not  occasional  and  temporary, 
but  eternal  and  incorruptible.  In  all  our  consecration  of  our  works  to  God, 
we  are  to  keep  this  thought  in  mind  :  "  I  am  a  man  with  whom  God  has 
entered  into  an  everlasting  covenant,  '  a  covenant  of  salt.'  "  (<S.  H.  Kcllofjg,  D.D.) 
The  hurnt-offering  and  the  ment-offering  contrasted : — In  ver.  3  we  find  one  of  the 
points  of  contrast  between  the  burnt-offering  and  the  meat-off'ering.  No  part  of  the 
burnt-offering  was  to  be  eaten.  It  was  called  the  Holah  (ascending  offering)  because 
it  was  all  made  to  ascend  upon  the  altar,  whereas  in  the  meat-offering  all  that 
remained  after  the  burning  of  that  which  the  priest's  hand  had  grasped,  was  allowed 
to  be  eaten  by  the  priests.  The  great  thoughts  connected  with  these  offerings  are — 
first,  the  satisfaction  of  the  claim  of  God's  bolinesB  by  expiatory  death  ;  secondly^ 


LEVITICUS.  49 


the  presentation  of  that  which  by  its  perfectness  satisSes  the  claim  of  God's  altar, 
as  it  seeks  for  an  offering  of  sweet  savour;  thirdly,  the  provision  of  something  to 
comfort,  feed,  and  strengthen  us.  In  the  two  first  cases  the  thought  is  directed 
from  the  »ltar  towards  God  ;  in  the  latter  case  we  are  taught  to  consider  that  which 
God  froiii  His  altar  minis, ers  to  us.  In  the  bumt-offering  the  two  first  of  these, 
viz.,  expiation  and  acceptableness,  are  made  the  promiiient  thoughts;  but  in  the 
meat-oBering  the  second  and  third,  viz.,  acceptableness  aud  provision  of  food  for 
us  predominate.  (B.  W.  Newton.)  The  meat-offering  : — As  the  burnt-offering 
typifies  Christ  in  death,  the  meat-offering  typifies  Him  in  life.  In  neither  the  one 
nor  the  other  is  there  a  question  of  sin-bearing.  In  the  burnt-offering  we  see 
atonement  but  no  sin-bearing — no  imputation  of  sin — no  outpoured  wrath  on 
account  of  sin.  How  can  we  kn^w  this  ?  Because  it  was  all  consumed  on  the  altar*. 
Had  there  been  auglit  of  sin-bearing  it  would  have  been  consumed  outside  tbe 
camp.  But  in  the  meat-olfering  there  was  not  even  a  question  of  bloodshedding. 
We  simply  find  in  it  a  beauteous  type  of  Christ  as  He  lived  and  walked  and  served, 
down  here,  on  this  earth.  There  are  few  things  in  which  we  exhibit  more  failure 
than  in  maintaining  vigorous  communion  with  the  perfect  manhood  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  ChrisD.  Hence  it  is  that  we  suffer  so  much  from  vacancy,  barrenness,  restless- 
ness, and  wandering.  In  the  examination  of  the  meat-offeriug  it  will  give  clear- 
ness and  simplicity  to  our  thoughts  to  consider,  first,  the  mate  ials  of  which  it  was 
composed ;  secondly,  the  various  forms  in  which  it  was  presented ;  and  thirdly,  the 
persons  who  paitook  of  it.  I.  As  to  the  materials,  the  "  tine  flour"  may  be  regarded 
as  the  basis  of  the  offering;  and  in  it  we  have  a  type  of  Christ's  humanity,  wherein 
every  perfection  met.  Eveiy  virtue  was  there,  and  ready  for  effectual  action,  in  due 
season.  The  "  oil,"  in  the  meat-offering,  is  a  type  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  But 
inasmuch  as  the  oil  is  applied  in  a  twofold  way,  so  we  have  the  Holy  Ghost  pre- 
sented in  a  double  aspect,  in  connection  with  the  incarnation  of  the  Son.  The  tine 
flour  was  "  mingled  "  with  oil ;  and  there  was  oil  "  poured  '  upon  it.  Such  was  the 
type;  and  in  the  Antitype  we  see  the  blessed  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  first,  "conceived," 
and  then  "  anointed,"  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  When  we  contemplate  the  Person  and 
ministry  of  the  Lord  Jesus,  we  see  how  that,  in  every  scene  and  circumstance,  He 
acted  by  the  direct  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Having  taken  His  place  as  man, 
down  here.  He  showed  that  man  should  not  only  live  by  the  Word,  but,  act  by  tbe 
Spirit  of  God.  The  next  ingredient  in  the  meat-offering  demanding  our  considera- 
tion, is  "  the  frankincense."  As  has  been  remarked,  the  "  fine  flour  "  was  the  basis 
of  the  offering.  The  "  oil  "  and  "  frankincense  "  were  the  two  leading  adjuncts: 
and,  truly,  the  connection  between  these  two  latter  is  most  instructive.  The  "  oil  " 
typifies  the  power  of  Chiist's  ministry;  "the  frankincense"  typifias  the  object 
thereof.  The  former  teaches  us  that  He  did  everything  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  the 
latter  that  He  did  everything  to  the  glory  of  God.  It  now  only  remains  for  us  to 
consider  an  ingredient  whicu  was  an  inseparable  adjunct  of  the  meat-ofl"ering, 
namely,  '■'  salt."  The  expression,  "  salt  of  the  covenant,"  sets  forth  the  enduring 
character  of  that  covenant.  God  Himself  has  so  ordained  it  in  all  things  that 
nou.!ht  can  ever  alter  it — no  influence  can  ever  corrupt  it.  In  a  spiritual  and 
practical  point  of  view,  it  is  impossible  to  overestimate  the  value  of  such  an  in- 
gredient. Christ's  words  were  not  merely  words  of  grace,  but  words  of  punge  it 
power — words  Divinely  adapted  to  preserve  from  all  taint  and  corrupting  influence. 
Having  thus  considered  the  ingredients  whioh  composed  the  meat-offering,  we  shall 
now  refer  to  those  which  were  excluded  from  it.  The  first  of  these  was  "leaven." 
"  No  meat-offering  which  ye  shall  bring  uato  the  Lord,  shad  be  made  with  leaven." 
No  exercise  can  be  more  truly  edifying  aud  refreshing  for  the  renewed  mind  than 
to  dwell  upon  the  unleavened  perfectness  of  Christ's  humanity — to  contemplate  the 
life  and  ministry  of  One  who  was,  absolutely  and  essentially,  unleavened.  But 
there  was  another  ingredient,  as  positively  excluded  from  the  meat-ofl'ering  as 
"leaven,"  and  that  was  "honey."  The  blessed  Lord  Jesus  knew  how  to  give  nature 
and  its  relationships  their  proj)er  place.  Hs  knew  how  much  "  honey"  was  "  con- 
venient." H-!  could  say  to  His  mother,  "  Wist  ye  not  that  I  must  be  about  My 
Father's  business?  "  And  yet  He  could  say,  again,  to  the  beloved  disciple,  "  Behold 
thy  mother."  In  other  wjrds,  nature's  claims  were  never  allowed  to  interfere  with 
the  presentation  to  God  of  all  the  energies  of  Christ's  perfect  manhood.  II.  The 
second  point  in  our  th-me  is  the  mode  in  which  the  meat-offerixg  was  prepared. 
This  was,  as  we  read,  by  the  action  of  fire.  It  was  "  baken  in  an  oven  " — "  bakeu 
in  a  pan" — or  "  bakeu  in  a  frying-pan."  The  process  of  baking  suggests  the  idea 
of  suiloring.    But  inasmuch  as  the  meat-offering  is  called  "a  sweet  savour" — a 

4 


50  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  n. 

term  which  is  never  applied  to  the  cin-offering  or  trespass-offering — it  is  evident 
that  there  is  no  thought  of  suffering  for  sin — no  thought  of  suffering  the  wrath  of 
God,  on  account  of  sin — no  thought  of  suffering  at  the  hand  of  infinite  Justice,  as 
the  sinner's  substitute.  The  plain  fact  is  this,  there  was  nothing  either  in  Christ's 
humanity  or  in  the  nature  of  His  associations  which  could  possibly  connect  Him 
with  sin  or  wrath  or  death.  He  was  "made  sin"  on  the  Cross;  and  there  He 
endured  the  wrath  of  God,  and  there  He  gave  up  His  hfe  as  an  all-sufficient  atone- 
ment for  sin ;  but  nothing  of  this  finds  a  place  in  the  meat-offering.  The  meat- 
offering was  not  a  sin-offering,  but  "a  sweet  savour"  offering.  Thus  its  import  is 
definitely  fixed ;  and,  moreover,  the  intelligent  interpretation  of  it  must  ever  guard, 
with  holy  jealousy,  the  precious  truth  of  Christ's  heavenly  humanity,  and  the  true 
nature  of  His  associations.  As  the  righteous  Servant  of  God  He  suffered  in  the 
midst  of  a  scene  in  which  all  was  contrary  to  Him  ;  but  this  was  the  very  opposite 
of  suffering  for  sin.  Again,  the  Lord  Jesus  suffered  by  the  power  of  sympathy ;  and 
this  character  of  suffering  unfolds  to  us  the  deep  secrets  of  His  tender  heart. 
Human  sorrow  and  human  misery  ever  touched  a  chord  in  that  bosom  of  love. 
Finally,  we  have  to  consider  Christ's  sufferings  by  anticipation.  IH.  The  persons 
WHO  PAETOOK  OF  THE  MEAT-OFFERING.  As  in  the  bumt-offeriug,  we  observed  the  sons 
of  Aaron  introduced  as  types  of  all  true  believers,  not  as  convicted  sinners  but  as 
worshipping  priests ;  so,  in  the  meat-offering,  we  find  them  feeding  upon  the 
remnant  of  that  which  has  been  laid,  as  it  were,  on  the  table  of  the  God  of  Israel. 
This  was  a  high  and  holy  privilege.  None  but  priests  could  enjoy  it.  Here,  then, 
we  are  furnished  with  a  beauteous  figure  of  the  Church,  feeding,  "  in  the  Holy 
Place,"  in  the  power  of  practical  holiness,  upon  the  perfections  of  "  the  Man  Christ 
Jesus."  This  is  our  portion,  through  the  grace  of  God;  but,  we  must  remember, 
it  is  to  be  eaten  "with  unleavened  bread."  We  cannot  feed  upon  Christ  if  we  are 
indulging  in  anything  evil.  (C  H.  Mackintosh.)  Self-consecration : — Consecra- 
tion is  not  wrapping  one's  self  in  a  holy  web  in  the  sanctuary,  and  then  coming  forth 
after  prayer  and  twilight  meditation,  and  saying,  "  There,  I  am  consecrated."  Con- 
secration is  going  out  into  the  world  where  God  Almighty  is,  and  using  every  power 
for  His  glory.  It  is  taking  all  advantages  as  trust  funds — as  confidential  debts 
owed  to  God.  It  is  simply  dedicating  one's  life,  in  its  whole  flow,  to  God's  service. 
{U.  W.  Beecher.)  We  should  offer  to  God  what  we  like  best  ourselves : — A  reporter 
thus  mentions  his  visit  to  a  Chinese  "  Joss-house  "  in  San  Francisco.  The  place 
where  they  held  their  religious  services  was  a  chamber  in  one  of  their  best  houses. 
An  intelligent  Chinese  man,  who  could  speak  a  little  English,  was  in  charge  of  this 
room.  I  asked  him  why  they  put  tea-cups  of  wine  and  tea  and  rice  before  their  god ; 
did  they  believe  that  the  god  would  eat  and  drink  ?  "  Oh,  no,"  he  said.  "  That's 
not  what  for.  What  you  like  self,  you  give  God.  He  see,  He  like  see."  Too  many 
Christians,  instead  of  giving  to  God  "  what  they  like  themselves,"  offer  Him  only 
what  they  would  as  lief  spare  as  not.  Labour  consecrated  to  God  : — T.  A.  Ragland, 
an  eminent  mathematician  and  a  devoted  Christian,  gained  the  silver  cup  at  Corpus 
Christi  College,  Cambridge,  four  years  in  succession.  One  of  these  was  dedicated 
to  God  for  the  communion  service  of  a  small  native  Church,  mainly  gathered  by 
him,  in  Southern  India,  and  aU  were  set  apart  for  the  same  purpose  in  connection 
with  his  itinerating  missionary  service.  [J.  Tinllng.)  Offering  the  best  to  God: — 
An  aged  minister  advised  the  people  of  a  neighbourhood  in  Wales,  where  he  laboured 
for  the  Master,  to  hold  "  cottage  prayer-meetings,"  taking  the  houses  in  regular 
order  up  the  mountain-side.  One  day  a  poor  woman  went  to  a  store  and  asked  for 
two  penny  candles.  The  storekeeper  said  to  her,  "  Why,  Nancy,  what  do  you  want 
with  penny  candles  ?  Is  not  the  rushlight  good  enough  for  you?"  Her  answer 
was,  "  Oh  yes,  rushlight  is  good  enougb  for  me,  but  the  prayer-meeting  will  soon 
be  coming  to  my  house,  and  I  want  to  give  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  a  good  welcome." 
Is  there  not  a  lesson  here  for  each  Christian  ?  Are  we  always  ready  to  "  give  the 
Lord  Jesus  a  good  welcome"  ?  Or  do  we  keep  the  candles  for  self,  and  give  the 
rushlight  to  Him  ?  Offering  God  the  true  end  of  man  .-—As  we  see  birds  make  their 
nests  and  breed  up  their  young,  beasts  make  a  scuffle  for  their  fodder  and  pasture, 
fishes  float  up  and  down  rivers,  trees  bear  fruit,  flowers  send  forth  their  sweet 
odours,  herbs  their  secret  virtues,  fire  with  all  its  might  ascending  upward,  earth 
not  resting  till  it  come  into  its  proper  centre,  waters  floating  and  posting  with  their 
waves  upon  the  neck  of  one  another,  till  they  meet  in  the  bosom  of  the  ocean,  and  air 
pushing  into  every  vacuity  under  heaven.  Shall  we  then  think,  or  can  we  possibly 
imagine,  that  God,  thegreatCreator  of  heaven  and  earth,  having  assigned  to  everything 
ia  the  world  some  particular  end,  and,  as  it  were,  impressed  in  their  nature  an  appetite 


CHAP,  n.]  LEVITICUS.  61 

and  desire  to  that  end  continually,  as  to  the  very  point  and  scope  of  their  being ;  that 
man  (the  most  noble  creature)  for  whom  all  things  were  made,  should  be  made  in  vnin, 
as  not  having  His  peculiar  end  proportionably  appointed  to  the  nobleness  of  His 
quality?  Yes,  doubtless,  that  God  that  can  never  err,  nor  oversee  in  His  works,  hath 
allotted  unto  man  the  worship  and  service  of  Himself  as  the  main  object  and  aiming 
point  whereto  he  ought  to  lead  and  refer  himself  all  the  days  of  his  life.  (•/.  Spencer.) 
Oil  as  a  srjmbol:  service  permeated  by  the  Holy  Spirit : — Two  women  used  to  come 
to  my  meetings,  and  I  could  tell  from  the  expression  of  their  faces  that  when  I  began 
to  preach  they  were  praying  for  me.  At  the  close  of  the  meetings  they  would  say 
to  me,  "  We  have  been  praying  for  you.  You  need  the  power."  I  thought  I  had 
power.  There  were  some  conversions  at  the  time,  and  I  was  in  a  sense  satisfied. 
I  asked  them  to  come  and  talk  with  me,  and  we  got  down  on  our  knees.  They 
poured  out  their  hearts  that  I  might  receive  an  anointing  from  the  Holy  Ghost, 
and  there  came  a  great  hunger  into  my  soul.  I  did  not  know  what  it  was.  The 
hunger  increased.  I*  was  crying  all  the  time  that  God  would  fill  me  with  His 
Spirit.  Well,  one  day,  I  cannot  describe  it,  it  is  almost  too  sacred  an  experience  to 
name,  God  revealed  Himself  to  me,  and  I  had  such  an  experience  of  His  love  that 
I  had  to  ask  Him  to  stay  His  hand.  I  went  to  preaching  again.  The  sermons 
were  not  different.  I  did  not  present  any  new  truths,  and  yet  hundreds  were  con- 
verted. (D,  L.  Moody.)  Tlie  Holy  Ghost  needed  : — I  was  speaking  one  day 
with  a  young  minister  of  the  gospel,  who  told  me  that  on  one  occasion  during  his 
college  days  he  was  present  when  a  number  of  students  delivered  trial  sermons  for 
criticism  in  the  presence  of  their  professor.  One  very  talented  young  man 
distinguished  himself  by  the  freedom  of  his  delivery  and  the  great  eloquence  with 
■which  he  spoke.  All  present  were  charmed  by  the  power  and  beauty  of  his  sermon. 
As  a  work  of  art  it  was  practically  faultless.  At  the  conclusion  the  professor  put 
his  hand  kindly  on  the  young  man's  shoulder,  solemnly  saying  to  him,  "  My  young 
friend,  your  sermon  only  requires  to  be  baptised  by  the  Holy  Ghost."  That  is  just 
what  we  all  want,  in  order  that  we  may  be  able  to  overcome  all  temptations,  or 
coldness  of  heart,  and  work  cordially  and  continuously  for  Christ.  Happily  if  we 
ask  the  Lord  Jesus  to  send  the  Comforter,  He  will  come  and  bless  us.  {J.  Davidson.) 
Frankincense  as  a  symbol :  prayer  the  true  help  in  service  : — As  Michael  Angelo  says, 
*'  The  prayers  we  make  will  then  be  sweet  indeed,  if  Thou  the  Spirit  give  by  which 
we  pray."  Our  own  desires  may  be  hot  and  vehement,  but  the  desires  that  run 
parallel  -with  the  Divine  will,  and  are  breathed  into  us  by  God's  own  Spirit, 
are  the  desires  which,  in  their  meek  submissiveness,  are  omnipotent  with  Him 
whose  omnipotence  is  perfected  in  our  weakness.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  The 
aroma  of  the  Christian  life : — If  one  should  ask  you  to  explain  the  odour  which  fills 
your  room  from  that  beautiful  climbing  honeysuckle,  you  could  not  do  it ;  but  you 
are  conscious  of  the  fragrance  none  the  less.  Just  so  there  is  a  quality,  a  kind  of 
aroma  which  pervades  the  personality  of  certain  Christians  which  is  as  clearly 
recognised  as  the  fragrance  of  the  honeysuckle,  but  which  you  can  as  little  define 
or  describe. 

••  When  one  who  holds  communion  with  the  skies 
Has  filled  his  urn  where  those  pure  waters  rise 
And  once  more  mingles  with  these  meaner  things, 
'Tis  e'en  as  if  an  angel  shook  his  wings. 
Immortal  fragrance  fills  the  circuit  wide 
And  tells  us  whence  these  treasures  are  suppUed." 

Attractive  fragrance  : — As  I  passed  through  a  glade  of  trees  upon  a  summer's  day 
I  heard  the  hum  of  bees.  Ah  !  thought  I,  there  is  sweetness  near !  Presently  I 
smelt  the  lime,  the  odour  of  the  flowers  which  had  attracted  the  bees.  They  did 
not  stop  at  the  other  trees,  but  made  direct  for  their  favourite.  What  a  bright  little 
lesson,  Christian,  for  us  !  Are  we  sought  after  because  there  is  the  savour  of  Christ 
in  us,  or  are  we  passed  by  like  the  scentless  trees  ?  (From  Witherbtfs  Scripture 
Gleanings.)  Every  Christian's  life  ought  to  be  fragrant :  fragrance  more  titan 
beauty : — "  I  saw,"  says  one,  "  a  bank  covered  with  violets.  The  sun  was  shining 
full  upon  it,  and  its  genial  warmth  had  opened  the  flowers,  and  caused  them  to 
exhibit  the  most  beautiful  colours.  But  when  I  began  to  gather  them,  I  found, 
with  the  exception  of  very  few,  that  their  colour  was  all  they  had  to  recommend 
them  ;  they  were  not  the  sort  of  violets  which  afford  the  sweet  fragrance  which  we 
expect  to  find  in  that  flower.    It  struck  me  forcibly  that  this  was  an  emblem  of 


52  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

the  Church,  the  professing  Church  of  Christ.  How  many  are  there  of  fair  and 
promising  appearance,  professing,  and  seeming  to  be  of  the  tiuth,  who  yet  fail  to 
send  up  a  '  sweet-smelHng  savour  to  God  ' — who  are  wanting  in  those  holy  and 
devout,  and  grateful  dispositions  and  affections,  which  their  profession  indicates. 
I  bid  my  heart  take  the  lesson  home.  What  fragrance  have  I  diffused  abroad? 
What  iucense  have  I  sent  upwards  ?  Are  not  my  words  and  thoughts,  is  not  my 
whole  profession  and  character,  like  those  scentless  violets?  There  is  beauty  even 
in  the  outward  profession  of  religion  and  holiness,  but  if  the  inward  principle  be 
wanting  or  deficient,  there  will  be  no  fragrance  shed  around,  no  incense  wafted 
upwards.  And  yet  I  have  been  situated,  as  it  were,  on  a  green,  sunny  bank  ;  my 
oi^portunities  and  means  of  grace  have  been  many."  Fine  enoiKjh  to  he  fragrant : — 
A  company  was  assembled  to  see  some  incense  burned  ;  the  incense  which  ascended 
from  the  altar  morning  and  evening  like  the  prayers  of  God's  people,  "  a  sweet- 
smelling  savour  unto  the  Lord."  A  gentleman  placed  the  incense  in  a  mortar  and 
proceeded  to  grind  it.  When  it  was  fine  he  placed  some  upon  the  coals  which  were 
ready,  and  all  anxiously  awaited  the  perfume  which  was  to  be  the  result.  They  sat 
hushed  for  some  minutes,  when  a  murmur  of  disappointment  arose.  It  was  a 
failure.  The  gentleman  took  up  the  mortar  and  ground  the  remainder  of  the 
incense  to  powder ;  it  was  exceedingly  fine.  Then  it  was  placed  upon  the  coals, 
■when  immediately  the  room  was  filled  with  the  delightful  odour.  Thus  with  our 
prayers  ;  when  we  get  them  fine,  when  we  have  ground  out  all  the  generalities,  and 
simply  go  to  the  Lord  with  every  little  thing  of  joy,  of  sorrow,  as  we  would  tell  to 
a  friend,  never  forgetting  to  thank  Him  for  even  the  little  blessings  of  life,  then  our 
prayers  ascend  unto  heaven  as  a  sweet-smelling  savour  to  a  loving  and  gracious 
God.       {S'lrah    Siitiley.)  Offerings   to    God   must  be  simple   and  sincere  : — In 

all  Buddhist  temples  a  tall  and  broad-leaved  lily  stands  directly  on  the  front  of 
the  altar.  Its  idea  is  as  beautiful  as  its  workmanship.  This  pure  white  emblem 
suggests  that  all  offerings  on  God's  altar  should  at  once  be  simjDle  and  sincere.  And 
it  applies  with  tenfold  force  to  the  service  of  the  Christian  sanctuary,  and  the  wor- 
ship of  that  God  who  is  a  Spirit,  and  seeketh  only  such  as  worship  Him  in  spirit 
and  in  truth.  All  sin  must  be  excluded  from  our  offerings  to  God  : — There  is 
no  man  in  his  right  wits  would  come  as  a  suitor  to  his  prince,  and  bring  his  accuser 
with  him,  who  is  ready  to  testify  and  prove  to  his  face  his  treason  and  rebellion  ; 
much  less  would  any  present  himself  before  so  great  a  majesty  to  make  petition 
for  some  benefit  after  he  had  killed  his  sovereign's  only  son  and  heir,  having  still 
in  his  hand  the  bloody  weapon  wherewith  he  committed  that  horrid  act ;  there  is 
no  adulteress  so  shamelessly  impudent  as  to  desire  pardon  of  her  jealous  husband 
having  her  lover  still  in  her  arms,  with  whom  she  hath  often  had  wanton  dalliance 
in  times  past,  and  is  resolved  to  have  the  like  for  the  time  to  come  ;  if  any  be  so 
mad,  so  shameless  to  make  suits  in  this  odious  manner,  they  are  sure  to  be 
repulsed,  and  find  wrath  and  vengeance  where  they  look  for  grace  and  mercy.  But 
thus  do  they  behave  themselves  towards  God,  who,  remaining  polluted  with  their 
sins,  do  offer  up  their  prayers  unto  Him  ;  for  they  bring  their  accusers,  even  their 
defiled  consciences  and  crying  sins,  which  continually  accuse  and  condemn  them,  and 
call  for  that  due  judgment  and  punishment  which  they  have  deserved.  {J.  Spencer.) 
Firstfruits  of  our  young  years  to  be  consecrated : — The  Jews  presented  the  first- 
fruits  of  their  ears  of  corn,  early,  about  Easter;  the  second  was  2}rimiti(e  pnnuvi, 
the  firstfruits  of  their  loaves,  and  that  was  somewhat  early  too,  about  Whitsun- 
tide ;  and  the  third  was  primitia:  frugum,  the  fruits  of  all  their  latter  fruits  in  general, 
and  that  was  very  late,  about  the  fall  of  the  leaf,  in  September.  In  the  two  first 
payments,  which  were  offered  early,  God  accepted  a  part  for  Himself,  but  in  the 
third  payment,  which  came  late,  God  would  have  no  part  at  all.  Even  so,  if  we 
offer  the  firstfruits  of  our  young  years  early  unto  God,  He  will  accept  of  them  as 
seasonably  done  ;  but  if  we  give  our  best  years  unto  Satan,  sacrifice  the  flower  of 
our  youth  unto  sin,  serve  the  world,  and  follow  after  the  lusts  of  our  flesh  while  we 
are  young,  and  put  all  the  burden  of  duty  upon  our  weak,  feeble,  and  decrepit  old 
age,  give  our  first  years  to  Satan,  and  the  last  unto  God,  sure  it  is,  that  as  He  then 
refused  puch  sacrifices  under  the  law,  He  will  not  easily  receive  them  now  in  the 
time  of  the  gospel.     (Ihid.)  Se?/-dcrficn<ed;— It  was  Christmas  morning.     The 

door-bell  rang,  and  two  young  girls  were  ushered  into  the  study.  One  of  them 
was  about  eight  years  old,  and  the  other  ten.  After  the  usual  Christmas  salutations, 
the  elder  of  them  said,  "We  have  come  to  make  Christ  a  Christmas  present." 
"  Have  you  ?  "  I  asked.  "  Well,  what  are  you  going  to  give  Him  ?  "  "  We  are 
going  to  give  Him  our  hearts,"  she  said.      After  conversing  with  them  awhile,  I 


CHAP,  n.]  LEVITICUS. 


found  this  was  no  mere  childish  freak,  but  a  serious  purpose.  We  then  kneeled 
together  in  prayer,  closing  with  a  formal  dedication  of  those  young  hearts  to  Him 
■who  was  God's  great  Christmas  Gift  to  mankind.  From  that  time  those  children 
lived  the  lives  of  Christians,  and  not  long  after,  at  the  communion-table,  they  sealed 
the  vow  they  made  that  bright  Christmas  morning.  Tbey  are  faithful  Christian 
women  now.     (J.  Breed,  D.D.)  The  time  of  offering  the  firstfruits  : — A  young 

lady  in  a  Sabbath  School  a  few  mornings  since  asked  her  class,  "How  soon  should 
a  child  give  its  heart  to  God?  "  One  little  girl  said,  "  When  thirteen  years  old  ;  " 
another,  "ten  ;  "  another,  "  six."  At  length  the  least  child  in  tbe  class  spoke: 
"  Just  as  soon  as  we  know  who  God  is."  Could  there  be  a  better  reply?  Youth  the 
time  for  reliijioits  offering  : — There  is  one  obstacle  which  affects  us  in  the  dedication 
of  our  lives  to  this  work,  and  that  is  the  passing  of  time.  It  is  very  natural  that 
we  should  think  that  when  we  grow  older  it  will  be  easier  to  dedicate  ourselves  to 
this  work.  It  reminds  me  of  what  Holman  Hunt,  the  great  artist,  said  on  one 
occasion  when  he  was  congratulated  by  a  friend  on  his  selection  to  paint  the 
historical  frescoes  for  the  House  of  Commons  :  "  Yes,"  he  said,  with  sadness,  "  but 
I  began  with  my  hair  grey."  It  will  not  be  easier  for  us  to  wait  until  our  hair  is 
grey.  Our  opportunities  and  our  strength  are  greatest  in  our  youth,  and  it  is  now 
that  we  should  make  our  decision.     (Professor  Drumniond.)  Why  such  varieties 

of  offering  ? — It  speaks  in  one  place  of  the  meat-offering  with  oil  and  frankincense ; 
the  next  place,  of  flour  baked  in  the  oven  ;  in  the  next  place,  of  green  corn.  Why 
this  variety  ?  It  is  just  one  of  those  traits  which  indicate  that  the  God  that  made 
creation  has  inspired  the  Bible.  He  is  here  providing  for  the  poor  man  as  minutely 
a*  for  the  rich.  He  says.  If  you  are  a  rich  man,  and  can  give  a  valuable  and  a  costly 
offering,  it  is  your  duty  to  do  so  ;  but  if  you  are  a  poor  man,  then  offer  that  offering 
which  agrees  with  your  position  ;  and  be  sure  that  the  poor  man's  offering  of  twenty 
seeds  of  corn  will  be  as  acceptable  to  God  as  the  rich  man's  offering  of  the  finest 
flour  perfumed  with  costly  frankincense,  and  anointed  and  consecrated  with  the 
most  precious  oil.  It  is  a  beautiful  thought  of  our  heavenly  Father,  that  the 
archangel  that  is  nearest  to  His  throne  is  not  dearer  to  Him  nor  more  watched  by 
Him  than  the  poorest  widow  or  orphan  that  weeps  and  prays,  and  looks  and  leans 
on  Him  in  the  streets  of  this  great  metropolis.  It  is  one  of  those  traits  that  come 
out  incidentally  in  the  Bible,  indicating  the  harmony  between  a  God  that  made 
the  now  torn  and  stained  book — the  earth — and  that  inspired  the  perfect  and  holy 
Book — His  own  gracious  Word.     (J.  Gumming,  D.D.) 

Ver.  13.  Season  with  salt. — Salt  for  sacrifice  : — If  you  will  read  the  chapter 
through  you  will  note  that  other  things  were  needed  in  connection  with  the  sacri- 
fices of  the  Israelites.  Their  sacrifices  were  of  course  imperfect.  Even  on  the  low 
ground  which  they  occupied  as  emblems  they  were  not  complete  ;  for  you  read,  in 
the  first  place,  that  they  needed  frankincense ;  God  did  not  smell  sweet  savour  in 
the  bullock,  or  the  ram,  or  the  lamb,  unless  sweet  spices  were  added.  What  does 
that  teach  us  but  that  the  best  performances  of  our  hands  must  not  appear  before 
His  throne  without  the  merit  of  Christ  mingled  therewith  ?  Another  thing  that 
was  enjoined  constantly  was  that  they  should  bring  oil;  and  oil  is  ever  the  type  of 
the  blessed  Spirit  of  God.  What  is  the  use  of  a  sermon  if  there  is  no  unction  in 
it?  What  is  prayer  without  the  anointing  that  cometh  of  the  Holy  Spirit  ?  What 
is  praise  unless  the  Spirit  of  God  be  in  it  to  give  it  life,  that  it  may  rise  to  heaven? 
That  which  goes  to  God  must  first  come  from  God.  Then  came  a  third  requisite, 
namely,  salt.  If  you  read  the  preceding  verses  you  will  see  that  the  Lord  forbids 
them  to  present  any  honey.  "  No  meat-oft'ering,  which  ye  shall  bring  unto  the 
Lord,  shall  be  made  with  leaven  :  for  ye  shall  burn  no  leaven,  nor  any  honey,  in 
any  offering  of  the  Lord  made  by  fire.  As  for  the  oblation  of  the  firstfruits,  ye 
shall  offer  them  unto  the  Lord :  but  they  shall  not  be  burnt  on  the  altar  for  a  sweet 
savour."  Eipe  fruits  were  full  of  honey,  full  of  sweetness  ;  and  God  does  not  ask 
for  sweetness.  He  asks  for  salt.  I.  It  appears,  then,  that  salt  was  the  symbol  of 
THE  covenant.  Whcu  God  made  a  covenant  with  David,  it  is  written,  '*  The  Lord 
gave  the  kingdom  to  David  for  ever  by  a  covenant  of  salt " — by  which  was  meant 
that  it  was  an  unchangeable,  incorruptible  covenant,  which  would  endure  as  salt 
makes  a  thing  to  endure,  so  that  it  is  not  liable  to  putrefy  or  corrupt.  "  The  salt 
of  the  covenant "  signifies  that,  whenever  you  and  I  are  bringing  any  offering  to 
the  Lord,  we  must  take  care  that  we  remember  the  covenant.  1.  We  want  this  salt 
of  the  covenant  in  all  that  we  do,  in  the  first  place,  to  preserve  us  from  falling  into 
legality.     He  that  serves  God  for  wages  forgets  the  word — "  The  gift  of  God  is 


54  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  hi. 

eternal  life."  If  you  forget  that  you  are  under  a  covenant  of  pure  grace,  in  which 
God  gives  to  the  unworthy,  and  saves  those  who  have  no  claim  to  covenant  bless- 
ing, you  will  get  on  legal  ground ;  and,  once  on  leg  il  ground,  God  cannot  accept 
your  sacrifice.  2.  Tlie  covenant  is  to  be  remembered  also  that  it  may  excite  grati- 
tude. Whenever  I  think  of  God  entering  into  covenant  that  He  will  not  depart 
from  me,  and  that  I  shall  never  depart  from  Him,  my  love  to  Him  overflows. 
Nothing  constrains  me  to  such  activity  and  such  zeal  in  the  cause  of  God  as  a 
sense  of  covenant  love.  Standing  on  covenant  ground  we  feel  consecrated  to  the 
noblest  ends.  3.  This  tends  to  arouse  our  devotion  to  God.  When  we  remember 
that  God  has  entered  into  covenant  with  us,  then  we  do  not  do  our  worii  for  Him 
in  a  cold,  dead  way ;  neither  do  we  perform  it  after  a  nominal  sort  ;  for  we  say,  "  I 
am  one  of  God's  covenanted  ones."  II.  But,  secondly,  salt  is  the  token  of  com- 
munion. In  the  East,  especially,  it  is  the  token  of  fellowship.  When  an  Oriental 
has  once  eaten  a  man's  salt,  he  will  do  him  no  harm.  Whenever  you  are  attempt- 
ing to  serve  God,  take  cai'e  that  you  do  it  in  the  spirit  of  fellowship  with  God.  III. 
But  salt  is  THE  EMBLEM  OF  SINCERITY.  "With  all  thine  offerings  thou  shalt  offer 
salt."  There  must  be  an  intense  sincerity  about  all  we  do  towards  God.  IV. 
Lastly,  salt  is  the  type  c  f  purifying  power  ;  and  with  all  our  sacrifices  we  have 
need  to  bring  a  great  deal  of  this  salt.  The  salt  eats  into  the  meat ;  it  drives  away 
corruption ;  it  preserves  it.  If  we  come  before  God  with  holy  things  while  we  are 
living  in  sin  we  need  not  deceive  ourselves,  we  shall  not  be  accepted.  If  there  be 
any  man,  of  whom  it  can  be  said  that  he  is  a  saint  abroad  and  a  devil  at  home, 
God  will  estimate  him  at  what  he  is  at  home,  and  not  at  what  be  is  abroad.  He 
may  lay  the  sacrifice  upon  the  altar,  but  if  it  is  brought  there  with  foul  hands  and 
an  unholy  heart,  God  will  have  nothing  to  do  with  it.  "  Without  holiness  no  man 
can  see  the  Lord,"  and,  certainly,  without  holiness  can  no  man  serve  the  Lord. 
W^e  have  our  imperfections  ;  but  known  and  wilful  sin  God's  people  will  not  indulge. 
(C   H.    Spurgeon.)  "  Salt   of   the   covenaiit  "  ; — Eating    salt    together  is   in 

the  East  a  pledge  of  amity  and  friendship.  Hence  the  "covenant  of  salt" 
was  an  indissoluble  pact;  and  "salted  with  the  salt  of  the  palace"  (Ezra  iv.  14) 
meant  not  maintenance,  but  the  sign  of  faithfulness  to  the  king.  Salt  was  used 
in  the  sacrifices  and  offerings  of  the  Israelites,  probably  with  the  same  idea  of 
honour  and  fidelity.  (G.  Dearie.)  Salt  to  be  included  in  all  offerings  : — This  salt 
indicates  corruption  removed  and  prevented  ;  and  in  the  case  of  the  meat-offering, 
it  is  as  if  to  say,  "  Thy  body  and  thy  substance  are  become  healthy  now  "  ;  they  shall 
not  rot.  They  are  not  like  those  of  the  ungodly  in  James  v.  2,  "Your  riches  are 
corrupted."  There  is  a  blessing  on  thy  body  and  thy  estate.  And  next  it  inti- 
mates the  friendship  (of  which  salt  was  a  well-known  emblem)  now  existing  between 
God  and  the  man.  God  can  sup  with  man,  and  man  with  God  (Rev.  iii.  18).  There 
is  a  covenant  between  him  and  God,  even  in  regard  to  the  beasts  of  the  field  (Job 
V.  23),  and  fowls  of  heaven  (Hos.  ii.  18).  The  friendship  of  God  extends  to  His 
people's  property  ;  and  to  assure  us  of  this  He  appoints  the  salt  in  the  meat-offer- 
ing, the  offering  that  especially  typified  their  substance.  How  comforting  to  labour- 
ing men  !  how  cheering  to  careworn  merchants  if  they  dedicate  themselves  to  God ; 
He  is  interested  in  their  property  as  much  as  they  themselves  are  !  "  Who  is  a  God 
like  unto  Thee  !  "  But  more;  "  with  all  thine  offerings  thou  shalt  offer  salt,"  de- 
clared that  the  sweet  savour  of  these  sacrifices  was  not  momentary  and  passing,  but 
enduring  and  eternal.  By  this  declaration  He  sprinkles  every  sacrifice  with  the  salt 
of  His  unchanging  satisfaction.  And  "the  covenant  by  sacrifice"  (Psa.  1.  5)  is 
thus  confirmed  on  the  part  of  God  ;  He  declares  that  He  on  His  part  will  be  faith- 
ful.    {A.  A.  Bonar.) 


CHAPTER  III. 

Vers.  1-17.  A  sacrifice  of  peace-offering. — The  peace-offering  : — The  word  peace, 
in  the  language  of  the  Scriptures,  has  a  shade  of  meaning  not  commonly  attached 
to  it  in  ordinary  use.  With  most  persons  it  signifies  a  cessation  of  hostilities,  har- 
monious agreement,  tranquillity,  the  absence  of  disturbance.  But  in  the  Scrip- 
tures it  means  more.  Its  predominant  import  there  is,  prosperity,  welfare,  joy, 
happiness.  The  original  Hebrew  word  includes  both  these  meanings.  The  old 
Greek  version  renders  it  by  terms  \n  hich  signify  a  sacrificial  feast  of  salvation.    W© 


CHAP.  III.]  LEVITICUS.  55 

may,  therefore,  confidently  take  the  peace-offering  as  a  joyous  festival,  a  solemn 
sacrificial  banqueting,  illustrative  of  the  peace  and  joy  which  flows  to  believers 
from  the  atoning  work  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  our  sanctification  through 
His  blood  and  Spirit.  Beligion  is  not  a  thing  of  gloom,  but  of  gladness.  I.  The 
PEACE-OFFERING  WAS  A  BLOODY  OFFERING.  Everything  in  Christian  life,  justification 
and  sanctification,  the  forgiveness  of  our  sins,  and  the  acceptableness  of  our 
services,  our  hopes,  and  our  spiritual  festivities,  run  back  into  Christ's  vicarious 
suii'eriugs,  as  their  fountain  and  foundation.  This  is  the  centre  from  which  all 
Christian  doctrine,  and  all  Christian  experience,  radiates,  and  into  which  it  ulti- 
matelv  resolves  itself.  Without  this,  Christianity  dwindles  down  into  a  cold  and 
powerless  morality,  with  no  warming  mysteries,  no  animating  sublimities,  no  melt- 
ing affections,  no  transforming  potencies.  Without  this,  the  soul  languishes  like  a 
))lant  excluded  from  the  sunshine,  or  flourishes  only  in  its  own  disgrace.  If  we 
would  have  a  feast  of  fat  things,  the  provision  must  come  from  the  altar  of  immo- 
lation. II.  The  peace-offeking  comes  after  the  meat-offering.  We  must  pre- 
sent the  "  fine  flour  "  of  our  best  affections,  and  the  fresh  flrstfruits  of  uncorrupted 
obedience,  before  we  can  come  to  feast  upon  the  rich  provisions  of  the  altar. 
We  mast  surrender  ourselves  to  God,  and  give  up  to  Him  in  a  "  covenant  of  salt  " 
before  we  can  taste  of  the  "  peace-offering,"  or  be  happy  in  the  Lord.  III.  The 
peace-offering  was  so  arranged  that  the  most  inward,  the  most  tender,  and  the  most 
marrowy  part  of  the  sacrifice  became  the  Lord's  part.  The  inner  fat  of  the 
animal,  the  kidneys,  the  caul  of  the  liver,  and,  if  a  sheep,  the  great  fatty  outward 
appendage,  were  to  be  burned  on  the  altar,  a  sweet  savour  unto  the  Lord.  God  must 
be  remembered  in  all  our  joys.  Especially  when  we  come  to  praise  and  enjoy  Him, 
and  to  appropriate  to  our  hearts  the  glad  provisions  of  His  mercy,  must  we  come 
offering  to  Him  the  inmost,  tenderest,  and  richest  of  our  soul's  attributes.  It  was 
thus  that  Jesus  was  made  a  peace-offering  for  us.  And  as  He  devoted  every  rich 
thought,  every  strong  emotion,  for  us,  we  must  now  send  back  the  same  to  Him 
without  stint  or  tarnish.  We  may  love  our  friends  ;  but  we  must  love  Christ  more. 
We  may  feel  for  those  united  to  us  in  the  bonds  of  domestic  life  ;  but  we  must  feel 
still  more  for  Jesus  and  His  Church.  We  may  be  moved  with  earthly  passions  ; 
but  the  profoundest  and  best  of  all  our  emotions  must  be  given  to  the  Lord.  The 
fat,  the  kidneys,  and  the  most  tender  and  marrowy  parts  are  His.  IV.  The  peace- 
offerings  were  sacrifices  of  gratitude  and  praise — a  species  of  joyous,  thankful 
banquetings.  When  the  Jew  came  to  make  a  peace-offering,  it  was  with  his  heart 
moved  and  his  thoughts  filled  with  some  distinguished  mercy.  The  true  Christian 
has  been  the  subject  of  wonderful  favours.  He  has  had  deliverance  wrought  for 
him,  to  which  he  may  ever  refer  with  joyful  recollection.  He  considers  the  length, 
and  breadth,  and  depth,  and  height  of  that  love  which  thus  interposed  for  his 
rescue — the  mighty  woes  which  the  Lord  endured  for  him — the  secure  ground  upon 
which  he  now  stands  in  Christ  Jesus — and  his  soul  overflows  with  tremulous  glad- 
ness. He  is  melted,  and  yet  is  full  of  delight.  He  is  solemnly  joyous.  What  to 
say  or  do  he  hardly  knows.  He  weeps,  and  yet  exults  while  he  weeps.  The  whole 
thing  to  him  becomes  a  feast  of  profoundly  solemn  joy,  in  which  he  would  gladly 
have  all  the  world  to  participate.  V.  But  the  feasting  of  the  peace-offering  was 
on  SACRED  FOOD.  The  people  might  have  feasts  at  home,  and  have  other  banquets  ; 
but  they  were  not  peace-offerings.  And  so  the  Christian  may  have  feasts  and  viands 
apart  from  the  sacred  food  furnished  directly  from  Christ.  There  is  much  virtuous 
enjoyment  in  this  world  of  a  merely  secular  sort,  from  none  of  which  does  Chris- 
tianity exclude  us.  But  all  these  are  mere  home-feasts  on  common  viands.  The 
food  that  was  eaten  in  the  joyous  feast  of  the  peace-offering  fell  from  the  altar.  It 
was  holy.  No  defiled  person  or  stranger  was  allowed  to  touch  it  or  to  partake  of 
it.  And  so,  superadded  to  the  common  joys  of  ordinary  life,  the  Christian  has  a 
feast  with  which  the  stranger  dare  not  meddle — a  feast  of  fat  things,  of  which  the 
pure  only  can  taste — a  banquet  of  holy  food  proceeding  directly  from  the  altar  at 
which  His  sacrifice  was  made.  Let  us  briefly  review  some  of  the  faithful  Chris- 
tian's peculiar  joys.  Let  us  follow  him  a  little  into  the  sources  of  his  consolation, 
and  see  of  what  sort  his  feast  is.  1.  First  of  all  is  the  great  and  cheering  conviction 
of  his  heart  that  there  is  a  God ;  that  the  universe  is  not  an  orphan,  but  has  a 
righteous,  almighty,  and  loving  Father,  who  sees  all,  and  provides  for  all,  and  takes 
care  of  all.  2.  The  next  "is  the  joyous  light  that  shines  upon  him  from  God's  reve- 
lation, relieving  his  native  perplexities,  comforting  his  heart,  filling  him  with 
pleasant  wisdom,  and  kindling  radiance  along  all  his  path.  Here  the  riddle  of  life 
is  explained  to  him,  his  duty  made  plain,  and  his  conscience  put  to  rest.     3.  Along 


56  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOU.  [chap.  hi. 

•with  these  are  the  gifts  and  graces  of  a  present  redemption.  4.  And  beyond  all  present 
experiences,  he  is  authorised  to  look  forward  to  still  higher  and  greater  things  in  the 
future.  (J.  A.  Seiss,  D.D.)  Tlie  peace-offeritifis : — I.  Their  natuke.  They  were 
sacrifices  of  thanksgiving,  whereby  the  godly  testified  their  gratitude  to  God  for  the 
benefits  received  from  Him.  II.  The  DiFiEHExcE between  theii  and  othee  saceifices. 
1.  Generally  they  were  thus  distinguished  from  other  sacriiices,  which  are  afterward 
prescribed  (chap.  iv.  5),  becnuse  these  were  voluntary,  the  other  necessary  and  com- 
manded ;  and  the  peace-offerings  were  never  offered  alone,  but  always  joined  with  other 
sacrifices,  showing  that  the  godly  should  begin  always  with  giving  of  thanks.  2. 
Herein  it  also  differs  from  the  holocaust,  which  might  be  of  birds  ;  but  so  were  not  the 
l)eace-ofi"erings,  because  they  were  to  be  divided;  so  could  not  the  holocaust  of  birds 
(chap.  i.  17).  3.  The  holocausts,  which  were  of  beasts,  were  only  of  the  males,  but 
the  peace-offerings  might  be  either  males  or  females,  because  this  kind  of  sacrifice 
was  not  so  perfect  as  the  other.  III.  Why  the  peace-offerings  were  confined  to 
THESE  three  KINDS — OXEN,  SHEEP,  GOATS.  1.  All  thcsc  were  a  figure  of  Christ,  who 
indeed  was  that  Peace-offering  whereby  God  is  reconciled  to  us  :  the  ox  resembled 
His  fortitude;  the  sheep  His  innocence;  the  goat,  because  He  took  our  flesh,  like 
unto  sinful  flesh.  2.  Some  apply  them  to  the  divers  qualities  of  the  offerers  :  the 
ox  signifying  the  workers  and  keepers  of  the  law ;  the  sheep,  the  simple  ;  the  goats, 
the  penitent.  3.  But  the  true  reason  why  these  beasts  are  prescribed  only  for  peace- 
offerings,  not  turtledoves  or  pigeons,  as  in  the  burnt-ofl'erings,  is  because  they  could 
not  rightly  declare  their  gratitude  to  God  in  giving  things  of  no  value.  IV.  What 
BLEMISHES  AND  OTHER  IMPEDIMENTS  WERE  TO  BE  AVOIDED.  The  impediments  which 
made  the  beasts  unfit  for  sacrifice  were  either  general  in  respect  of  the  kind,  or 
particular  in  legard  of  the  thing  offered.  1.  For  the  kind.  Some  were  both 
unlawful  for  meat  and  sacrifice  (chap.  xi.  3),  others  for  sacrifice  but  not  for  meat 
(Deut.  xiv.  4).  2.  The  particular  impediments  were  either  intrinsical  in  the  things 
themselves,  or  extrinsical  without.  (1)  The  inward  defects  were  such  as  made 
them  altogether  unfit  for  any  kind, of  sacrifice,  as  if  they  were  blind,  broken, 
scabbed,  etc.  (2)  The  external  impediments  were  such  as  came  by  touching  any 
unclean  thing.  V.  Why  the  fat,  as  of  the  belly,  kidneys,  and  liver,  was  set 
APART  for  sacrifice.  1.  Generally  hereby  is  signified  that  all  our  carnal  desires  are 
to  be  mortified  by  the  fire  of  the  Spirit.  2.  More  particularly  by  the  fat  which 
covereth  the  inward  parts  where  the  heart  is,  the  seat  of  anger  is  insinuated,  that 
■we  should  temper  our  wrath  ;  and  by  the  kidneys  and  reins,  wherein  is  the  strength 
of  lust,  carnal  concupiscence ;  and  by  the  liver  the  fountain  of  heat,  the  gluttonous 
desire,  may  be  understood  all  which  must  be  sacrificed  unto  God.  Hereunto  the 
signification  of  the  Hebrew  word  here  used  agreeth  ;  for  chelaiotli,  the  kidneys,  is 
derived  of  Calah,  desire.  3.  And  further,  because  the  fat  is  of  its  own  nature, 
without  sense,  and  so  signifieth  the  hardness  of  the  heart,  which  is  the  cause  of 
unbelief:  hereby  tbey  were  admonished  to  remove  and  take  away  all  hardness  of 
heart.  VI.  Whether  it  were  required  generally  in  all  sacrifices  that  blood 
should  be  sprinkled  on  the  altar.  As  there  was  diflcrence  in  the  end,  use,  and 
manner  of  sacrifices,  for  some  were  only  for  the  honour  of  God,  as  the  burnt-offerings ; 
some  for  the  benefit  of  the  offerer,  either  for  obtaining  of  some  benefit,  or  giving 
thanks  for  some  benefit  received,  as  the  peace-offerings,  or  for  expiation  of  sin,  so 
there  was  difference  in  the  sprinkling  and  offering  of  the  blood;  yit  because  in  all 
sacrifices  there  was  some  relation  unto  the  expiation  of  some  sin,  there  was  an 
oblation  of  blood  in  all  sacrifices,  &c.;  and  so  the  apostle  saith  that  in  the  "law 
without  effusion  of  blood,  there  was  no  remission,"  whereof  this  reason  is  given 
because  the  life  is  in  the  blood,  and  therefore  the  Lord  gave  the  blood  for  the 
expiation  of  their  souls  (chap.  xvii.  11),  that  whereas  they  themselves  had  deserved 
to  die  for  their  sins.  VII.  Of  the  manner  and  order  of  the  peace-offerings. 
1.  The  priest  killed  the  beast,  sprinkled  the  blood,  flayed  it,  and  took  out  the 
inwards.  2.  Then  he  cut  the  flesh  in  pieces,  and  separated  the  breast  and  right 
shoulders  with  the  inwards,  and  put  them  into  the  owner's  hands.  3.  Then  the 
priest  put  his  hands  under  the  owner's,  and  waved  all  before  the  Lord ;  if  many 
joined  in  one  oblation,  one  waved  for  all,  the  women  waved  not,  but  the  priest, 
unless  in  the  offering  of  jealousy  (Numb,  v.),  and  of  a  Nazarite  (Numb.  vi.  4).  After 
he  salted  the  inwards,  and  laid  them  on  the  altar,  and  the  priest  had  the  breast  and 
right  shoulder,  the  owner  the  rest ;  but  the  priest  was  not  to  have  his  part  until 
the  Lord  were  first  served  and  the  inwards  burnt.  VIII.  Wh.\t  became  of  the 
remainder  of  the  peace-offerings  which  was  not  burnt  on  the  altar.  Though 
it  be  not  here  expressed,  yet  it  may  be  gathered  out  of  other  places  that  the  priests 


CHAi-.  III.]  LEVITICUS.  57 

had  part,  and  the  offerer  that  brought  it  had  his  portion  also,  so  then  some  sacrifices 
there  were  of  the  whicli  nothing  remained,  as  the  burnt-ofleiings.  1.  In  some  other, 
the  part  which  remained  was  to  be  eaten  only  among  the  males  of  the  children  of 
Aaron;  and  they  were  the  sin-offerings  (chap.  vi.  18).  2.  But  the  heave-offerings  and 
shake-offerings,  as  the  shoulder  and  breast,  were  lawful  to  be  eaten,  not  only  by  the 
males  and  sons  of  the  priests,  but  by  their  daugliters  also  (Numb,  xviii.  17).  3.  But 
in  the  peace-offerings  there  was  greater  liberty,  for  of  them  they  which  bi-on{2;ht  the 
offeringmight  eat  (Prov.  vii.  14).  [A.  Wlllet,  D.D.)  Tlw ])eace-o[1'ering ;  or,fell"ws]np 
with  the  Father  and  the  Son  : — I.  In  the  peace-offeeing  we  have  a  beautiful  type 
of  the  making  and  bestowing  peace,  and  thereby  admitting  to  "  fellowship  with  the 
Father  and  with  His  Sou  Jesus  Christ  ";  one  of  the  most  blessed  privileges  result- 
ing to  the  Lord's  people  from  His  death.  The  peace-offering  being  the  central  one 
of  the  five,  as  set  forth  in  the  opening  chapters  of  Leviticus,  seems  to  tell  us  that 
peace  was  the  central  object  of  the  Father's  loving  purpose  when  He  gave  His  S'in. 
His  desire  and  design  was  to  give  His  people  peace.  We  see  it  as  regards  Israel  of 
old  (chap.  xxvi.  6  ;  Numb.  vi.  26 ;  1  Chron.  xxii.  9),  and  no  less  in  the  gospel  dispen- 
sation (Luke  ii.  14),  for  "  when  we  were  enemies  we  were  reconciled  .  .  ."'  (Rom.  v, 
10).  In  the  burut-offering  His  people  are  seen  as  accepted  worshippers  ;  in  the 
peace-offering  both  as  participating  in  the  personal  result  to  offerer  of  previous 
offerings,  and  feeding  on  what  delights  the  heart  of  God,  typified  by  portions  con- 
sumed by  fire  on  the  altar.  II.  Male  or  female  (chap.  lii.  1,  6)  were  permitted  in 
peace-offering,  not  male  only,  as  in  burnt-offering,  which,  pertaining  to  God  alone, 
must  be  what  was  esteemed  the  highest  order  of  oft'ering;  wliile  in  peace-offering 
man  had  a  large  portion,  and  this  may  account  for  the  distinction.  Some  think  the 
alternative  of  "  male  or  female  "  indicates  greater  or  less  appreciation,  estimation, 
or  enjoyment  of  Christ  by  the  worshipper ;  female  perhaps  implying  deeper  love, 
male  stronger  devotion.  Others  take  it  as  showing  how  God,  in  His  grace  and 
love,  would  give  every  facility  for  approaching  Him  in  and  through  Christ.  And 
again,  as  the  laying  on  of  offerer's  hand  (vers.  2,  8,  13)  tells  of  identification  of 
offerer  and  offering,  the  thoughts  are  led  to  Gal.  iii.  28,  where  we  read,  "  There  is 
neither  male  nor  female ;  for  ye  are  all  one  in  Jesus  Christ."  Under  the  Levitical 
dispensation  the  "  males  "  only  were  to  go  up  at  stated  periods  to  worship  (Exod. 
xxiii.  17,  xxiv.  23)  ;  but  the  mention  of  "male  or  female  "  in  the  type  before  us 
seems  to  point  onward  to  this  dispensation,  in  which  such  distinction  no  longer 
exists;  for  each  one,  whether  "  male  or  female,"  who  is  "  justified  by  faith,"  has 
*' peace  with  God,  through  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ"  (Rom.  v.  1).  III.  The  blood 
SPRINKLED  by  Aaron's  sons,  the  priests  (vers.  2,  8,  13),  tells  of  the  worshipper 
approaching  God  on  thw  ground  of  reconciliation  made  (Rom.  v.  11,  mar.).  Jesus 
♦'made  peace  .  .  ."  (Col.  i.  20).  God  calls  His  people  to  peace  (1  Cor.  vii.  15). 
He  fills  with  (Rom.  xv.  13),  and  keeps  in  "  perfect  peace  "  the  trusting  one  (Isa. 
xxvi.  3).  Jesus  gives  peace  (John  xiv.  27),  for  He  "  gave  Himself  "  CTit.  ii.  14)  ; 
and  if  we  have  Christ  as  "  our  life  "  (Col.  iii.  4),  "  He  is  our  Peace  "  (Eph.  ii.  14) 
likewise;  and  dwelling  in  us  by  His  Spirit,  peace  is  "the  fruit"  (Gal.  v.  22).  IV. 
The  Lord's  portion  is — not  the  whole,  as  in  burnt-offering,  but — the  choicest  parts. 
"  The  fat  "  with  portions  of  inwards  (chap.  iii.  3-5,  9-11,  14-16),  representing  the 
rich  excellences  or  preciousness  of  the  Lord  Jesus  (see  Psa.  xxxvii.  20,  mar.,  same 
•word  as  Isa.  xliii.  4),  His  truth,  purity,  wisdom,  &c.  (Psa.  Ii.  6  ;  John  xiv.  6  ;  Job 
xxxviii.  36 ;  1  Cor.  i.  24).  This  was  typified  by  the  burning  on  the  altar,  called  "  the 
food  of  the  offering  made  .  .  ."  (chap.  iii.  5,  11,  16).  The  burnt-offering  was 
"  continual  "  (Exod.  xxix  42  ;  Numb,  xxviii.  6) ;  and  the  peace-offering  being  burnt 
upon  it  tells  of  virtue  of  former,  possessed  by  latter.  The  meat-offering  also  was 
offered  with  peace-offering,  the  three  sweet-savour  offerings  together,  to  the  full 
satisfaction  of  the  Father ;  and  giving  solid  ground  for — V.  Communion  or  fellow- 
ship, to  which  God  calls  those  who  are  "accepted  in  the  Beloved"  (1  Cor.  i.  9; 
Eph.  i.  6).  Fellowship  signifies  partnership,  companionship  ;  and  what  treasures 
and  1  lessings  does  this  ensure  (Isa.  xiv.  3  :  Col.  ii.  3),  as  porti-a^ed  by  the  portions 
assigned  to  priest  and  offerer,  graciously  permitted  to  partake  of  what  delights  the 
Father's  heart !  This  is  the  striking  fpa'ure  of  peace-offering.  "  Breast  "  waved 
may  tell  of  "  risen  with  Christ  "  (Col.  i'l  1);  "  shoulder"  heaved,  that  He,  who  is 
the  strength  of  our  life  (Psa.  xxvii.  1),  is  on  high ;  breast  representing  affection, 
and  shoulder  strength  of  Him  whose  "  love  is  strong  .  .  ."  which  "  many  waters 
cannot  quench  "  (Song  of  Sol.  viii.  6) ;  for  He  is  "  everlasting  Strength  "  (Isa.  xxvi.  4). 
"Upon  His  heart"  and  "shoulders"  Jesus  bears  His  people  (as  typified  in  high 
priest's  dress,  Exod.  xxviii,  12,  29),  now,  "in  the  presence  of  God"  (Heb.  ix.  24), 


58  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

while  they  feast  in  His  banqueting  house  under  His  banner  "  Icve  "  (Song  of  Sol.  ii. 
4),  and  are  "  strengthened  with  might  by  .  .  ."  (Eph.  iii.  16).  VI.  Unleavened  cakes 
— offered  with  peace-oii'ering  when  for  a  thanksgiving  (chap.  vii.  12) — tell  of  holy 
life  of  Jesus  as  inseparably  connected  with  His  death,  for  had  He  not  magnitied 
"  the  law  and  .  .  ."  (Isa.  xlii.  21),  He  could  not  have  atoned  for  the  sins  of  those 
who  had  broken  it.  They  tell  also  of  "  holiness  ''  needed  in  offerer  (Heb.  xii.  14), 
and  for  such  holiness  and  "  fellowship  "  there  must  be  abiding  and  walking  "  in  the 
light  '  (John  XV.  4,  6 ;  1  John  i.  6,  7,  ii.  6).  This  is  further  seen  in  what  is  said  of 
— Vli.  Leaven  and  tjncleanness  (chap.  vii.  13,  20,  21).  The  "  leavened  bread  " 
offered  "  besides  the  cakes  "  betokens  "  sin  "  in  the  offerer,  never  wholly  eradicated 
whilw  life  lasts.  Our  best  efforts  are  tainted  by  sin  (Isa.  Ixiv.  6),  and  need  the  cleans- 
ing blood  ;  but  though  sin  is  within,  it  is  not  to  reign  or  "  have  dominion  "  over  those 
"  under  grace,"  who,  "  being  justified  by  faith  in  the  precious  blood  .  ;  ."(sprinkled 
in  type  by  priest,  chap.  iii.  13),  are  reckoned  "  dead  "  to  sin,  and  risen  with  Christ  to 
"newness  of  life"  (Rom.  v.  1,  9,  vi.  1,  2,  4-7,  11,  12).  (Ladij  Beaujolois  Dent.) 
The  peace-offeriiifi : — I.  In  its  contrakt  to  the  other  offerings,  it  may  be 
sufficient  to  enumerate  two  chief  points — 1.  It  was  a  sweet-savour  offering;  and — 
2.  The  offerer,  God,  and  the  priest  were  fed  by  it.  (1)  In  the  peace-offering  the 
offerer  feasts,  in  other  words,  finds  satisfaction,  and  feeds  upon  the  same  offering 
of  which  a  part  his  already  satisfied  God  :  for  a  part  of  the  peaue-oflering,  "  the 
fat,  the  blood,  the  inwards,"  before  the  offerer  can  tonch  his  part,  must  have  already 
been  consumed  on  the  altar.  I  fear  that  there  are  but  too  many  saints  who  never 
reahse  this  aspect  of  the  offering,  and  therefore  never  fully  experience  that  satis- 
faction which  the  offering  has  purchased  for  them.  Thank  God,  the  sufficiency  of  His 
work  does  not  depend  upon  our  apprehension _of  it.  But  our  satisfaction  depends 
much  on  our  apprehension.  It  is  because  we  apprehend  so  little  that  we  have  so 
little  comfort.  And  our  strength  particularly  depends  on  our  apprehension  of 
that  view  of  Christ  which  the  peace-offering  teaches  ;  for  strength  is  sustained  by 
food,  and  the  peace-offering  shows  man  fed  by  the  sacrifice.  Yet  how  little  is  this 
view  of  Christ  apprehended  1  Am  I  asked  the  cause  ?  It  is  because  so  few  really 
know  acceptance.  (2)  The  offerer  feasts  with  God.  Man  (in  Christ)  and  God  find 
common  food.  The  offering  is  shared  between  them.  The  thought  here  is  not, 
as  in  the  burnt-offering,  merely  that  God  finds  satisfaction  in  the  offering.  It 
includes  this,  but  it  goes  further.  It  shows  communion  ;  for  God  and  man  share 
together.  (3)  But  further,  in  the  sacrifice  of  peace-offerings,  the  offerer  feasts  with 
the  priest.  The  sacrificing  Priest,  as  I  have  already  observed,  is  always  Christ, 
viewed  in  His  official  character  as  Mediator.  We  learn  here  how  the  offering, 
which  He  offered  as  man,  feeds,  that  is,  satisfies  Him,  not  only  as  man,  but  also 
as  Mediator.  To  understand  this  we  must  recollect  and  apprehend  the  varied 
relations  in  which  Christ  stands  connected  with  the  offering;  for  He  appears  for 
us  in  many  offices,  in  more  than  one  relation.  In  connection  with  the  offering 
alone  we  see  Him,  as  I  have  said,  in  at  least  three  characters.  Now,  if  this  simple 
distinction  be  apprehended,  it  will  be  manifest  that  there  are  things  true  of  Christ 
in  one  relation  which  are  by  no  means  true  of  Him  in  another.  For  instance.  His 
intercession  for  us  is  as  Priest.  As  the  Offering,  He  does  not  intercede;  as  Lamb, 
He  dies  for  us.  So  again  as  Priest  and  Offerer,  He  is  fed ;  as  the  Lamb,  as  the 
Offering,  He  is  not  fed.  Now  there  are  offerings  in  which  the  priest  finds  food, 
but  from  participating  in  which  the  offerer  is  excluded :  some  of  the  sin-offerings 
are  of  this  latter  character,  for  in  tliem  the  priest  is  fed,  while  the  offerer  has 
nothing.  The  sin-offerings,  as  we  shall  see  more  fully  in  the  sequel,  are  man 
satisfying  offended  justice.  They  are  not  man  giving  something  sweet  to  God,  but 
man  receiving  from  (lod  in  his  offering  the  penalty  of  sin.  These  sin-offerings 
supply  food  to  the  priest,  that  is,  Christ  as  Mediator  finds  satisfaction  in  them, 
but  they  afford  Him  no  food  as  man  the  offerer :  as  man  in  them  He  only  confesses 
sin.  The  priest,  God's  official  servant,  is  satisfied,  because  offended  justice  is 
vindicated  :  but  man,  who  pays  the  penalty  in  his  offering,  finds  no  satisfaction  in 
the  act.  (4)  But  the  type  takes  us  further  still,  and  shows  us  the  priest's  children 
also  sharing  with  the  offerer  in  the  peace-offering.  They,  too,  as  well  as  the 
offerer,  the  priest,  and  God,  find  satisfaction  in  this  blessed  offering.  Our  first 
question  here,  of  course,  must  be,  Who  are  represented  by  the  priest's  children  ? 
We  have  alieady  seen  that  the  Priest  is  Christ — Christ  viewed  in  His  official 
character  as  Mediator.  His  children,  that  is.  His  family,  are  therefore  the  Church. 
Just  as  of  old  he  that  really  feasted  with  God  in  the  peace-offering  could  not  do 
so  without  sharing  with  (iod's  priests,  so  now  communion  with  God,  if  enjoyed 


CHAP.  III.]  LEVITICUS.  59 

at  all,  must  be  shared  with  all  in  communion  with  Him.     There  is  no  question  of 
choice  :  it  cannot  be  otherwise ;  for  he  that  is  in  communion  with  God  must  be  in 
communion  also  with  all  whom  He  communes  with.     II.  The  different  grades 
OR  VARIETIES  WHICH  ARE  OBSERVED  IN  THIS  OFFERING.     These  show  US  the  different 
measures  of  intelligence  with  which  this  view  of  Christ's  offering  may  be  apprehended. 
And  here,  as  there  are  several  distinct  sharers  in  the  offering — for  God,  man,  and 
the  priest,  have  each  a  portion — it  may  be  well  to  consider  each  portion  separately 
with  its  particular  differences,  since  in  each  portion  there  are  distinct  varieties 
observed.     1.  First,  then,  as  to  God's  part  in  the  peace-offering.     In  this  certain 
varieties  at  once  present  themselves ;  some  of  them  relating  to  the  value  of  the 
offering,  others  connected  with  tlie  offerer's  purport  in  the  oblation.     (1)  To  speak 
first  of  the  varieties  touching  the  value  of  the  offering.     We  have  here,  just  as  in 
the  burnt-offering,  several  different  grades.     There  is  the  "  bullock;'"  "  the  lamb," 
"the   goat";  and  these  respectively  represent  here  what  they  do  in  the  burnt- 
offering.     Each  gives  us  rather  a  different  thought  as  to  the  character  of  Chiist's 
blessed  offering.     2.  But  there  are  other  varieties  noticed  in  the  type,  as  to  that 
part  of  the  peace-offering  which  was  offered  to  God,  which  are  connected,  not  with 
the  value  of  the  offering,  but  with  the  offerer's  purport  in  bringing  the  oblation. 
If  we  turn  to  the  seventh  chapter,  where  the  distinction  I  refer  to  is  mentioned,  it 
will  be  seen  that  the  peace-offering  might  be  offered  in  two  ways.     It  might  be 
offered  either  as  a  thanksgiving,  that  is  for  praise,  or  as  a  vow  or  voluntary  offer- 
ing, that  is  for  service.     If  it  were  seen  to  be  offered  "for  thanksgiving,"  many 
particulars  are  noticed  respecting  man's  share  in  it,  which  are  entirely  lost  sight 
of  and  omitted  when  it  is  seen  to  be  offered  "  for  a  vow."     And  most  of  the  varieties 
in  the  peace-offering  (I  may  say  all  the  varieties  touching  the  priest's  and  offerer's 
part  in  it)  depend  upon  the  view  which  may  be  taken  of  the  general  character  cf 
the  offering,  whether  it  were  offered  "  for  thanksgiving,"  or  whether  it  were  offered 
"for  a  vow."     (2)  The  priest's   and   offerer's  part,   and  the   varieties  which  are 
observable  here.     It  will  be  found  that  the  particulars  respecting  this  portion  of  the 
peace-offering   differ  very  much  according   as   the  offering   is   apprehended  "  for 
praise"  or  "for  service."     (a)  In   the  offering   "for  praise,"  a  meat-offering   is 
offered  of  which  the  offerer  as  well  as  the  priests  partake.     The  purport  of  the 
meat-offering  is  the  fulfilment  of  the  second  table  of  the  Decalogue  ;  man  offering  to 
God  as  a  sweet  savour  the  perfect  accomplishment  of  his  duty  towards  his  neigh- 
bour.    The  peculiarity  here  is  that  the  offerer  partakes  of  this  meat-offering — a 
thing  not   permitted  in  the  common  meat-offering.     The  common  meat-offering 
shows  us  the  fulfilment  of  the  law,  simply  with  reference  to  God,  to  satisfy  Him. 
But  that  same  fulfilment  of  the  law  has  other  aspects,  one  of  which  is,  that  it 
satisfies  the  offerer  also.     This  is  the  truth  brought  out  in  the  peace-offering,  in 
which  the  offerer,  as  well  as  God,  finds  satisfaction  in  the  fulfilment  of  all  righteous- 
ness.    And  this  satisfaction  is  not  only  in  the  fulfilment  of  that  part  of  the  law 
which  had  reference  to  God,  and  which  was  represented  by  the  offering  of  a  life, 
but  in  that  part  also  which  referred  to  man,  and  was  represented  by  the  unleavened 
cakes  of  the  meat-offering.     The  latter  part  of  this  appears  to  be  quite  lost  siwht 
of,  unless   the  peace-offering  is  apprehended  as  offered   "  for  praise."      (b)  But 
further,  in  the  offering   "  for  praise  "  leavened  cakes  also  are  seen  to  be  offered 
with  the   sacrifice.      Those  cakes  represent  the  offering  of  the  Church.     When 
Christ's  work  is  seen  merely  as  "the  vow,"  as  a  matter  of  service,  the  Church's 
offering  does  not  come  into  sight :  but  when  His  offering  is  seen  "  for  praise,"  that 
is  for  God's  glory,  the  Church  is  seen  united  with  Him.     3.  One  cake  out  of  all  the 
oblation  is  given  to  the  priest  who  sprinkles  the  blood,  while  the  remainder,  belongs 
to  him  who  brings  the  offering.     Christ,  as  Priest,  finds  food  and  satisfaction  not 
only  in  His  own  blessed  and  perfect  offering:  He  feeds  also  on   "the  leavened 
cake"  :  the  offering  of  His  Church,  with  all  its  failings,  satisfies  Him.     4.  The  last 
particular  noticed  respects  the  period  during  which  the  peace-offering  was  to  be 
eaten.     The  time  for  eating  the  offering  "  for  praise  "  was  "  the  same  day,"  or 
"  until  the  morning  "  :  in  the  "  vow-off'ering  "  there  is  a  little  difference  ;  it  might 
be  eaten  "  the  same  day  and  on  the  morrow,"  or  "  until  the  third  day."     Now  the 
••  morning  "  and  the  "  third  day "  are  sufficiently  common  types,  and  are  both 
constantly  used,  I  believe,  to  denote  the  resurrection  :  but  I  am  not  so  certain  as 
to  the  different  aspect  of  the  resurrection  represented  by  each  of  them.     I  am  dis- 
posed, however,  to  think  that  "the  morning"  represents  the  resurrection  as  the 
time  of  Christ's  appearing,  while  the  thought  connected  with  "  the  third  day  "  is 
Bimply  deliverance  from  the  grave.    In  either  case  the  main  truth  remains  the 


CO  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  in. 

same — that  tlie  peace-offering  is  our  food  until  the  resurrection  :  but  in  the  one 
case  we  eat  as  those  whose  lime  is  short,  in  the  night  it  may  be,  but  in  hope  of  the 
morning;  in  the  other  the  thought  of  the  morning  is  lost,  and  instead  of  it  we  see 
days  of  labour  to  intervene.  I  need  not  say  tlurt  tlie  first  is  the  higher  and  happier 
view.  {A.  Juki'g.)  Clirkt  our  Peace-offering  : — 1.  Be  persuaded  and  encouraged  to 
feed  and  feast  upon  Christ  our  Peace-offering.  Do  not  say.  Such  and  such  may  ;  if  I 
had  such  parts  and  such  abilities,  and  so  eminent  as  sucLi  and  such,  I  durst  believe. 
This  .blessed  Peace-offering  is  not  for  the  priests  only,  for  saints  of  the  highest  rank 
and  greatest  eminency,  but  for  the  common  people  also.  Do  but  draw  near  with 
a  pure  heart,  and  then  come  and  welcome.  2.  Do  not  defer  the  eating  of  your 
peace-offerings.  Take  heed  of  a  procrastinating  spirit.  3.  Let  all  your  peace- 
offerings  be  seasoned  with  the  new  leaven  of  grace  and  holiness  ;  gf^t  this  blessed 
leaven  of  the  kingdom  of  God  into  your  hearts.  4.  Give  God  the  fat,  the  strength, 
the  vigour  of  your  spirits,  the  best  of  your  endeavours  ;  do  not  leave  the  worst  you 
have  to  Him,  the  very  dregs  of  time  at  night,  when  you  are  all  sleepy,  for  prayer 
and  family  duties,  when  you  have  spent  the  strength  of  your  time  in  y^ur  callings. 
5.  Take  heed  of  accounting  the  blood  of  the  peace-offering  a  common  thing.  But, 
as  the  typical  blood  might  not  be  eaten,  but  was  sacred  to  the  Lord,  let  the  blood 
of  Christ  be  sacred  and  precious  to  you.  6.  To  you  tbat  believe,  let  Christ  be 
precious.  There  is  a  reverential  esteem  of  Him  in  the  hearts  of  all  that  are  His. 
(S.  Mather.)  The  j)eace-offering  : — Some  anxious  soul  sighs  for  felt  peace  with 

God.  What  shall  be  done?  God  smooths  the  way.  His  voice  declares,  Let  the 
appeasing  victim  be  now  brought.  Peace  rightly  sought  shall  surely  be  obtained. 
Now  mark  this  victim.  It  may  be  male  or  female.  It  may  be  taken  from  larger 
cattle,  or  from  sheep  or  goats  (chap.  iii.  1,  6,  12).  There  is  permission  of  unwonted 
breadth.  The  prince,  the  peasant,  from  richest  pastures,  or  bare  mountain's  brow, 
may  readily  obtain  the  expiating  means.  But  from  whatever  flock  the  male  or 
female  came,  one  test  must  prove  it.  It  must  be  free  from  fault.  A  blameless 
type  proclaims  the  blameless  Lord.  God  next  directs  the  offerer  to  touch  its  head 
(chap.  iii.  2).  This  act  denotes  the  transfer  of  all  guilt.  The  burdened  thus  rolls 
off  Lis  load.  The  lightened  shoulder  thus  receives  relief.  The  victim  is  then 
slain  (chap.  iii.  2).  Here  is  the  wondrous  fact,  which  is  the  light  of  types,  and 
rites,  and  prophecies.  Death  falls  on  Christ.  He  claims  the  dying  place.  The 
slaughtered  animal  was  then  divided.  The  best — the  choicest  of  the  parts,  were 
placed  on  the  burning  altar.  Another  portion  was  the  priest's  own  due.  The  rest 
supplit'd  the  offerer  with  food.  1.  God  claims  His  share.  All  which  seems  rich 
and  precious  is  first  brought  to  Him.  The  holy  fire  reduces  it  to  dust.  2.  Pro- 
vision is  then  made  for  those  who  ministered.  The  altar-servant  never  wants. 
They  who  leave  all  for  God  have  all  in  God.  3.  The  offerer  then  takes  his  part 
and  eats.  We  see  the  essence  of  true  faith.  It  finds  soul-sustenance  in  Jesu's 
work.      (Dean   Laic.)  The   best  for  God  : — 1.    That    in  all  things  we  should 

give  thanks  unto  God.  This  is  all  the  recompense  which  God  requires  for 
all  His  benefits.  2.  That  the  best  thin>.'s  are  to  be  offered  to  God.  Especially 
in  spiritual  duties  "  the  fat "  must  be  offered,  that  is,  the  heart  and  inward 
aifection.  Ambrose  well  says,  "  Thy  affection  gives  a  name  to  thy  work."  3.  To 
abstain  from  all  kinds  of  cruelty  (ver.  17).  4.  That  all  the  parts  and  members  of 
our  body  should  be  dedicated  to  God's  service.  {A.  WiUct,  D.D.)  The  peoce- 
off'ennf/f! : — These  peace-offerings  were  offeied  first  of  all,  on  the  recovery  of  peace 
with  God  in  consequence  of  the  expiation.  The  expiatory  offering  was  first,  not 
the  peace-offering:  first  the  atonement,  then  the  calm  tliat  results  from  peace  with 
God  through  Oirist  the  Atonement.  These  peace-offerings  were  also  presented  as 
expressive  of  thanksgiving  for  mercies,  blessings,  and  benefits  that  had  been 
received.  They  were  also  presented  on  the  performance  of  a  vow  that  had  been 
made  by  any  of  the  children  of  Israel.  You  will  notice  another  feature  in  all 
these  oiferings— that  the  offerer  might  kill  the  lamb,  but  the  priest  of  Levi  alone 
might  offer  it :  so  Jew  and  Gentile  slew  with  wicked  hands  the  Lord  of  glory,  but 
He  Himself  was  the  Priest  that  presented  Himself  a  sacrifice  on  the  altar  of  Deity, 
peifect  and  complete,  for  the  sins  of  all  that  believe.  These  offerings  were  also 
made,  I  may  mention,  at  the  consecration  of  priests,  on  the  expiyy  of  a  Nazarite's 
vow,  at  the  dedication  of  the  Tabernacle  and  the  Temple,  and  at  the  presentation 
of  firstfruitfi.  You  will  notice  that  in  the  Jewish  economy  everything  brought  a 
Jew  to  the  Temple,  and  above  the  Temple,  to  the  Temple's  God.  Was  he  afflicted  ? 
He  prayed.  Was  he  merry?  He  sung  psalras.  Was  he  blessed  with  a  golden 
harvest  ?    He  gave  the  firstfruits  to  God.    Had  he  finished  a  vow  ?     He  went  to 


CHAP.  III.]  LEVITICUS.  Gl 

God  to  thank  Him.  Had  he  received  any  mercy,  was  he  enriched  with  any  bless- 
ing? He  felt  it  his  first  duty  to  ask  God's  blessing,  to  give  to  God  praise,  and 
to  expect  prosperity  in  the  ratio  in  which  he  did  so.  Does  God  expect  less  of  us 
in  this  dispensation  ?  And  yet  how  often  do  we  murmur  when  we  lose,  how 
rarely  are  we  thankful  when  we  gain !  You  will  notice,  too,  in  this  account,  that 
the  person  that  made  the  offering  was  to  lay  his  hand  upon  the  head  of  the  victim 
that  was  slain.  What  a  beautiful  picture  is  that  of  our  interest  in  Christ  .Jesus  ! 
The  poor  Jew — though  this  was  not  confessing  sin  in  this  chapter,  but  giving 
thanks — yet  whether  he  confessed  his  sins  or  gave  thanks  he  did  the  same ;  he 
laid  his  hand  upon  the  head  of  the  victim,  confessed  his  sins  over  it,  gave  thanks 
over  it ;  and  all  the  sin  was  transferred  typically  to  the  victim  that  suffered,  and 
all  the  glory  transferred  typically  to  him  who  was  the  great  antitype  and  object  of 
that  victim.  Thus  the  believer  still  lays,  not  his  literal  hand — for  ours  is  the 
economy  of  the  Spirit ;  whatever  a  Jew  did  materially,  mechanically,  palpably, 
that  a  Christian  does  spiritually,  but  no  less  truly  and  really.  The  Jew  laid  h;s 
literal  hand  upon  a  literal  victim's  head ;  the  Christian  lays  the  trust  of  liis 
heart  upon  an  unseen  but  not  an  unknown  Saviour.  I  say,  the  Jew  laid  his 
hand  upon  the  head  of  his  victim,  confessed  his  sins,  and  was  forgiven;  the 
Christian  lays,  not  his  hand,  but  his  heart,  not  upon  a  slain  bullock  or  a 
slain  lamb,  but  on  a  once  slain  but  now  living  Saviour.  And  as  sure  as 
the  Jew  got  ceremonial  forgiveness  by  doing  literally  that  act,  so  surely  will  the 
greatest  sinner  that  thus  leans,  and  looks  to,  and  trusts  in  the  only  Atonement, 
receive  the  pardon  and  the  remission  of  his  sins.  (J.  Cummini),  D.D.)  The 
peace  sacrifice  : — "  Peace  through  the  blood  of  His  Cross,"  "  Eeconciliation  in 
the  body  of  His  flesh  through  death,"  "  Fellowship  with  the  Father  and  with  His 
Son  Jesus  Christ,"  are  the  great  leading  truths  in  the  peace  sacrifice.  The  prodigal's 
repentance,  the  return  home,  the  ready  embrace,  the  ring,  the  rich  feast  within  the 
house,  the  mutual  rest  and  rejoicing — all  are  here  ;  nothing  is  lacking  to  assure  our 
hearts  before  God.  If  there  be  any  lack,  it  is  our  want  of  ability  to  appreciate  the 
rich  and  varied  grace  displayed  in  every  particular  of  the  "  peace-offering."  Happy 
is  it  for  us  that  the  possession  of  its  blessings  does  not  depend  upon  the  measure  in 
which  we  understand  the  type.  "  The  peace  of  God  which  passeth  all  under- 
standing "  is  the  sure  portion  of  all  the  justified.  It  belongs  to  the  babe  in  Chrisi 
as  much  as  to  the  more  advanced  in  Divine  knowledge.  (F.  H.  White.)  The 
sacrificial  feast  of  the  peace-offering  : — How  are  we  to  conceive  of  the  sacrificial  feast 
of  the  peace-offering?  Was  it  a  f^ast  offered  and  presented  by  the  Israelite  to  God, 
or  a  feast  given  by  God  to  the  Israehte  ?  In  other  words,  in  this  feast  who  was 
represented  as  host  and  who  as  guest  ?  Among  other  nations  than  the  Hebrews  it 
was  the  thought  in  such  cases  that  the  feast  was  given  by  the  worshipper  to  his  god. 
This  is  well  illustrated  by  an  Assyrian  inscription  of  Esarhaddon,  who,  in  describing 
bis  palace  at  Nineveh,  says :  "  I  filled  with  beauties  the  great  palace  of  my  empire, 
and  I  called  it  '  the  palace  which  rivals  the  world.'  Ashur,  Ishtar  of  Nineveh,  and 
the  gods  of  Assyria,  all  of  them,  I  feasted  within  it.  Victims,  precious  and  beautiful, 
I  sacrificed  before  them,  and  I  caused  them  to  receive  my  gifts."  But  here  we  come 
upon  one  of  the  most  striking  and  instructive  contrasts  between  the  heathen  con- 
ception of  the  sacrificial  feast  and  the  same  symbolism  as  used  in  Leviticus  and 
other  Scripture.  In  the  heathen  sacrificial  feasts  it  is  man  who  feasts  God ; 
in  the  peace-offering  of  Leviticus  it  is  God  who  feasts  man.  Do  we  not  strike 
here  one  of  the  deepest  points  of  contrast  between  all  of  man's  religion  and 
the  gospel  of  God?  Man's  idea  always  is,  until  taught  better  by  God:  "I  will 
be  religious  and  make  God  my  friend  by  doing  something,  giving  something 
for  God."  God,  on  the  contrary,  teaches  us  in  this  symbolism,  as  in  all  Scripture, 
the  exact  reverse — that  we  become  truly  religious  by  taking,  first  of  all,  with  thank- 
fulness and  joy,  what  He  has  provided  for  us.  A  breach  of  friendship  between  man 
and  God  is  often  implied  in  the  heathen  rituals,  as  in  the  ritual  of  Leviticus ;  as 
also  in  both  a  desire  for  its  removal  and  renewed  fellowship  with  God.  But  in  the 
former  man  ever  seeks  to  attain  to  this  intercommunion  of  friendship  by  some- 
thing that  he  himself  wiU  do  for  God.  He  will  feast  God,  and  thus  God  shall  be 
well  pleased.  But  God's  way  is  the  opposite.  The  sacrificial  feast  at  which  man 
shall  have  fellowship  with  God  is  provided,  not  by  man  for  God,  but  by  God  for 
man,  and  is  to  be  eaten,  not  in  our  house,  but  spiritually  partaken  in  the  presence 
of  the  invisible  God.  (S.  H.  Kellogg,  D.D.)  Reason  for  minute  prescriptions  : — 
Some  may  think  that  these  prescriptions  are  so  needlessly  specitic  and  minute  that 
they  appear  unworthy  of  the  God  that  instituted  them.  But  you  will  recollect  that  thia 


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  in, 

people  were  surrounded  by  dense  masses  of  heathenism,  just  as  the  Dutch  are  by 
the  sea,  and  tljat  every  pi'ovision  made  in  Israel  was  to  keep  at  bay  the  inrush  of 
heathenism,  and  to  present  a  people  tbat  should  be  the  witnesses  of  God  in  spite 
of  heathendom ;  and  the  very  rites  and  ceremonies  that  they  were  to  practise  were 
designedly  minute,  that  there  might  be  no  opening  for  conformity  to  the  heathen, 
very  often  cro'^sing  those  of  the  heathen  ;  that  they  might  be  a  marked,  a  distinctive, 
and  a  peculiar  people.  There  is,  therefore,  far  greater  wisdom  in  these  prescriptions 
than  strikes  the  superficial  reader.  And  another  reason  why  all  this  is  given  so 
minutely  is  that  the  great  subject  of  the  teaching  of  Christianity  is  the  Atonement. 
That  is  the  heart  and  the  life  of  Christianity  ;  all  else  without  that  is  hard  and  dry ; 
all  its  precepts  pervaded  by  that  are  full  of  life,  and  not  hard.  Well,  then,  these 
rites  and  ceremonies  were  minute  in  order  to  impress  upon  the  Jewish  mind  and 
upon  the  mind  of  humanity  itself  the  great  ideas  of  substitution,  atonement, 
vicarious  sacrifice,  till  this  idea  became  so  familiarised  to  the  hearts  of  mankind 
that  they  should  be  able  not  only  to  appreciate,  but  to  hail  with  gratitude  and  joy 
that  perfect  Atonement  of  which  these  were  the  shadows — that  finished  sacrifice  to 
which  these  pointed  as  John  the  Baptist  pointed  to  the  Saviour.  (J.  Cumming, 
D.D.)  Peace-offerings  turned  to  sin: — Few  ordinances  were  more  blessed  than 
these  peace-offerings.  Yet,  like  the  Lord's  Supper  with  us,  often  were  they  turned 
to  sin.  The  lascivious  woman  in  Pro  v.  vii.  14  comes  forth  saying,  "I  have  peace- 
offerings  with  me  ;  this  day  have  I  paid  my  vows."  She  had  actually  gone  up 
among  the  devoutest  class  of  worshippers  to  present  a  thank-offering,  and  had  stood 
at  the  altar  as  one  at  peace  with  God.  Having  now  received  from  the  priest  those 
pieces  of  the  sacrifice  that  were  to  be  feasted  upon,  lo  !  she  hurries  to  her  dwelling 
and  prepares  a  banquet  of  lewdness.  She  quiets  her  conscience  by  constraining 
herself  to  spend  some  of  her  time  and  some  of  her  substance  in  His  sanctuary.  She 
deceives  her  fellow-creatures,  too,  and  maintains  a  character  for  religion ;  and  then 
she  rushes  back  to  sin  without  remorse.  Is  there  nothing  of  this  in  our  land  ?  What 
means  Christmas  mirth  after  pretended  observance  of  Christ's  being  born  ?  What 
means  the  sudden  worldliness  of  so  many  on  the  day  following  their  approach  to 
the  Lord's  Table?  What  means  the  worldly  talk  and  levity  of  a  Sabbath  afternoon 
or  evening  after  worship  is  done  ?  Contrast  with  this  the  true  worshipper,  as  he 
appears  in  Psa.  Ixvi.  He  has  received  mercies  and  is  truly  thankful.  He  comes 
up  to  the  sanctuary  with  his  offerings,  singing,  "  I  will  go  into  Thy  house  with  burnt- 
offerings  :  I  will  pay  Thee  my  vows,  which  my  lips  have  uttered,  and  my  mouth 
hath  spoken,  when  I  was  in  trouble."  In  the  "  burnt-offering  "  we  see  his  approach 
to  the  altar  with  the  common  and  general  sacrifice ;  and  next,  in  his  "  paying 
vows  "  we  see  he  has  brought  his  peace-offerings  with  him.  Again,  therefore,  he 
says  at  the  altar,  "I  will  offer  to  Thee  burnt  sacrifices  of  fatlings."  This  is  the 
general  offering:;,  brought  from  the  best  of  his  flock  and  herd.  Then  follow  the  peace- 
offerings.  "  With  the  incense  of  rams  ;  I  will  offer  bullocks  with  goats."  Having 
brought  his  offerings,  he  is  in  no  haste  to  depart,  notwithstanding  ;  for  his  heart  is 
full.  Ere,  therefore,  he  leaves  the  sanctuary  he  utters  the  language  of  a  soul  at  peace 
with  God  (vers.  16-20).  (A.  A.  Bonar.)  Charles  Wesley's  peace-offering  : — Although 
Charles  Wesley  had  been  engaged  in  preaching  the  gospel  with  much  diligence  and 
earnestness,  he  did  not  know  what  it  was  to  enjoy  peace  with  God  until  he  was  in  his 
thirtieth  year.  Being  laid  low  by  an  alarming  illness,  and  seeming  as  if  he  were  going 
to  die,  a  young  Moravian  named  Peter  Bohler,  who  was  undergoing  a  course  of  pre- 
paration by  him  to  go  out  as  a  missionary,  asked  him,  "  Do  you  hope  to  be  saved  ?  " 
Charles  answered,  "Yes."  "For  what  reason  do  you  hope  it?"  "  Because  I  have  used 
my  best  endeavours  to  serve  God."  The  Moravian  shook  his  head  and  said  no  more. 
That  sad,  silent,  significant  shake  of  the  head  shattered  all  Charles  Wesley's  false 
foundation  of  salvation  by  endeavours.  He  was  afterwards  taught  by  Peter  Bohler 
the  way  of  the  Lord  more  perfectly,  and  brougiit  to  see  that  by  faith  in  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  men  are  justified.  And  now  in  his  sick-room  he  was  able  to  write  for 
the  first  time  in  his  life,  "  I  now  find  myself  at  peace  with  God  " ;  and  it  was  on 
this  occasion  he  composed  that  beautiful  hymn,  "  0  for  a  thousand  tongues  to 
sing  my  great  Redeemer's  praise."  Peace  proclaimed : — When  Russia  was  in  one 
of  her  great  wars  the  suffering  of  the  soldiers  had  been  long  and  bitter,  and  they 
were  waiting  for  the  end  of  the  strife.  One  day  a  messenger  in  great  excitement  ran 
among  the  tents  of  the  army  shouting,  "  Peace  I  peace  1 "  The  sentinel  on  guard 
asked,  "  Who  says  '  Peace '  ?  "  And  the  sick  soldier  turned  on  his  hospital  mattress 
and  asked,  "  Who  says  'Peace'  ?"  And  all  up  and  down  the  encampment  of  the 
Russians  went  the  question, "  Who  says, '  Peace '  ?  "  Then  the  messenger  responded. 


CHAP.  III.]  LEVITICUS.  63 

"  The  Czar  says  '  Peace.' "  That  was  enough.  That  meant  going  home.  That 
meant  the  war  was  over.  No  more  wounds  and  no  more  long  marches.  So  to-day, 
as  one  of  th*?  Lord's  messengers,  I  move  through  this  great  encampment  of  souls 
and  cry,  "  Peace  between  earth  and  heaven  !  Peace  between  God  and  man  !  Peace 
between  your  repenting  soul  and  a  pardoning  Lord  I  "  If  you  ask  me,  "  Who  says 
'  Peace '  ?  "  I  answer,  "  Christ  our  King  declaies  it."  "  My  peace  I  give  unto  you  "' ! 
"  The  peace  of  God  that  passeth  all  understanding."  (Christian  Age.)  On  terms 
of  peace  tcith  God: — Some  one  could  not  undei  stand  why  an  old  German  Christian 
scholar  used  to  be  always  so  calm  and  happy  and  hopeful  when  he  had  so  many 
trials  and  sicknesses  and  ailments.  A  man  secreted  himself  in  the  house.  He  said, 
"  I  mean  to  watch  this  old  scholar  and  Christian  "  ;  and  he  saw  the  old  Christian 
man  go  to  his  room  and  sit  down  on  the  chair  beside  the  stand  and  open  the  Bible 
and  begin  to  read.  He  read  on  and  on,  chapter  after  chapter,  hour  after  hour,  until  his 
face  was  all  aglow  with  the  tidings  from  heaven  ;  and  when  the  clock  struck  twelve  he 
arose,  shut  his  Bible,  and  said,  "  Blessed  Lord,  we  are  on  the  same  old  terms  yet. 
Good-night.  Good-night."  Praise-offering  : — A  servant  girl  in  great  anxiety  of 
Boul  sought  the  help  of  her  minister.  All  his  explanations  of  the  gospel  and  appli- 
cations of  it  to  her  case  failed  to  bring  peace.  She  said  she  had  tried  to  pray,  but 
dared  not  speak  to  God.  "  If  you  cannot  pray,"  said  the  minister,  "  perhaps  you 
can  praise."  He  recommended  her  to  go  home  and  sing  the  10.3rd  Psalm — "  0  thou, 
my  soul,  bless  God  the  Lord."  She  departed  with  a  light  heart,  singing  as  she  went. 
"  And,"  said  the  minister  in  telling  the  story,  "  she  is  singing  still,  praising  and 
praying  and  rejoicing  with  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory."  (S.  S.  Chronicle.) 
Peace  through  Christ : — A  young  lady  went  to  Eome  to  study  art.  Having  a  great 
liking  for  it,  she  soon  became  one  of  the  first  modellers  in  the  city.  While  she  was 
busy  at  work  one  day  a  companion  called  to  see  her,  and  began  to  give  a  long 
description  of  a  ball  to  which  she  had  recently  been,  and  talked  of  dresses,  jewellery, 
flowers,  &c.  The  young  lady  turned,  and  looking  at  her  friend,  said,  "  Be  done ;  I 
am  sick  and  tired  of  it.  I  have  gone  through  and  experienced  it  all  myself."  And 
then  she  added,  "  Oh,  if  you  could  only  tell  me  where  I  might  get  rest !  "  Her 
companion,  a  little  taken  by  surprise,  hastily  left.  The  young  artist  sat  there 
wondering  where  she  might  find  rest.  She  had  secured  the  praise  of  man,  but  that 
did  not  satisfy  her — she  was  looking  for  something  higher  ;  and  shutting  herself  in 
her  room  that  night,  she  began  to  think,  and  as  she  was  thinking  a  bright  thought 
entered  her  mind.  She  rose  and  brought  forth  a  little  Testament  which  had  been 
lying  untouched  since  a  kind  friend  had  given  it  to  her  with  these  words,  "  Now, 
mind,  if  ever  you  are  in  trouble,  or  weary,  just  open  this  little  book  and  read,  and 
you  will  find  rest."  And  now  she  thought,  "  I  will  see  if  I  can  find  the  rest  she 
promised."  After  she  had  looked  a  little  her  eyes  fell  on  these  words  in  Eom.  v.  1 : 
"  Therefore,  being  justified  by  faith,  we  have  peace  with  God,  turough  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ."  Her  eyes  rested  long  on  that  verse,  until  at  last  she  found  Christ  as 
her  Saviour,  and  obtained  rest  in  Him.  Peace  through  the  Atonement : — Professor 
Shedd  has  well  said,  "  Whoever  is  granted  this  clear,  crystalline  vision  of  the 
Atonement  will  die  in  peace,  and  pass  through  all  the  unknown  transport  and  terror 
of  the  day  of  doom  with  serenity  and  joy.  It  ought  to  be  the  toil  and  study  of  the 
believer  to  render  his  conceptions  of  the  work  of  Christ  more  vivid,  simple,  and 
vital ;  for  whatever  may  be  the  extent  of  religious  knowledge  in  other  directions, 
whatever  may  be  the  worth  of  his  religious  experience  in  other  phases,  there  is  no 
knowledge  and  no  experience  that  will  stand  him  in  such  stead  in  those  moments 
that  try  the  soul  as  the  experieoce  of  the  sense  of  guilt  quenched  by  the  blood  of 
Christ."  Gospel  peace : — I  saw  a  picture  in  London  of  the  battle  of  Waterloo 
years  after  the  battle  had  pa=sed,  and  the  grass  had  grown  all  over  the 
sacied  places,  and  the  artist — for  it  was  a  masterpiece — had  represented  a  dis- 
mounted cannon,  and  then  a  lamb,  which  had  wandered  up  from  the  pasture  field, 
sound  asleep  in  the  mouth  of  the  cannon.  Oh,  what  a  suggestive  picture  it  was  to 
me  I  and  I  thought  right  away  that  the  war  between  God  and  the  soul  is  ended,  and 
right  amid  the  batteries  of  the  law  that  once  quaked  with  fiery  death  now  you  may 
behold  the  Lamb  of  God  that  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world. 

•'I  went  to  Jesus  as  I  was. 
Weary  and  worn  and  sad  ; 
I  found  in  Him  a  resting-place, 
And  He  has  made  me  glad." 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOR.  [chap.  m. 

(T.  De  Witt  Talmafie.)  Gratitude  ojf'eritrfj : — A  poor  widow  brought  a  basl:et  of 

tine  fruit  to  a  rich  man,  and  begged  him  to  accept  it  as  a  present.  He  did  so, 
knowing  that  he  would  make  her  happier  by  accepting  it  as  a  gift  than  he  would  by 
paying  her  for  it  liberally.  The  gift  hndcost  her  self-denial.  She  would  not  sell  her 
choice  fruit,  that  she  might  have  the  privilf  ge  of  bestowing  it  upon  one  who  needed 
nothing  at  her  hands.  She  counted  it  a  privilege  to  practise  self-denial  for  the  sake 
of  one  who  was  rich  and  needed  nothing  that  i^he  could  give.  AVhy  was  it?  That 
rich  man  had  saved  the  life  of  her  son  ;  he  had  found  him,  in  want  and  sickness,  in 
a  distant  city.  He  watclied  him  till  he  was  able  to  travel,  when  he  furnished  him 
with  the  means  of  returning  to  his  mother.  Hence  her  gratitude.  Did  that  rich 
man  place  that  widow  under  obligations  to  gratitude  as  God  has  placed  every  one 
of  us?  Has  not  God  done  for  us  infinitely  more  than  that  rich  man  did  for  the 
widow's  son  ?  Can  we  count  up  His  favours  to  us  ?  Can  we  estimate  the  value  of 
His  "  unspeakable  gift "  ?  Do  we  count  it  a  privilege  to  practise  self-denial  for  His 
sake?  Depend  upon  it,  we  have  very  little  religion  unless  we  can  see  and  feel  that 
it  is  a  great  privilege  for  a  sinner  to  practise  self-denial  for  his  Saviour's  sake. 
{Great  Thoiiglits.)  The  fat. — Fat  and  blood  not  to  be  eaten: — You  may  here 

observe  how  they  were  forbi'klen  to  eat  either  fat  or  blood.  The  Lord's  prohibition 
of  fat  might  teach  tbem  to  like  and  use  a  mo'lest,  moderate,  and  fitting  diet,  which, 
as  it  is  good  for  the  body,  so  also  hath  it  profit  for  the  soul.  "  He  that  loveth  wine 
and  oil,"  saith  the  wise  man,  "  shall  not  be  rich  "  ;  and  "  Beware  of  surfeiting  and 
drunkenness,  of  excess  and  belly-cheer,"  often  saith  the  Scripture  in  regard  of  the 
soul.  Fasting  and  prayer  are  joined  together,  not  feasting  and  prayer.  A  ship  too 
much  laden  sinketh  ;  and  a  body  too  much  stuffed  with  fulness  of  bread  perisheth. 
"  It  is  a  double  conquest  to  conquer  thyself,"  and  "it  is  a  double  destruction  to 
destroy  thyself."  John's  meat  was  locusts  and  wild  honey — a  moderate  diet.  The 
companion  of  gluttony  is  rottenness,  and  the  follower  of  drunkenness  is  forgetful- 
ness  and  sottishness.  God's  people  are  here  forbidden  to  eat  their  fat,  and  think 
ever  on  the  meaning.  Blood  also  was  forbidden  to  them,  that  so  they  might  learn 
to  take  heed  of  cruelty  and  to  taste  of  mercy  and  lovingkindness  in  all  their  actions 
and  behaviour.  God  is  merciful,  and  we  must  follow  Him  ;  Satan  and  his  members 
are  bloody  and  cruel,  we  must  avoid  it.  (Bp.  Babinglon.)  If  his  offering  be  a 
goat. — The  gout  in  sacrifice: — The  goat  stands  here  in  the  same  relation  to  the 
peace-offering  from  the  herd  as  did  the  turtledove  and  pigeon  to  the  bullock  of  the 
whole  burnt  sacrifice.  The  poorer  sort  might  bring  the  goat  ;  when  he  could  not 
bring  the  blood  of  bulls  he  brought  the  blood  of  goats.  And  thus  still  they  were 
prevented  from  attaching  importance  to  the  mere  type.  The  goat  represents  Jesus, 
as  one  taken  out  of  the  tiock  for  the  salvation  of  the  rest.  Let  us  suppose  we  saw 
"  a  flock  of  goats  appearing  from  Mount  Gilead  "  (Song  of  Sol.  vi.  5).  The  lion  from 
Bashan  rushes  upon  this  flock ;  one  is  seized,  and  is  soon  within  the  jaws  of  the 
lion  !  This  prey  is  enough  ;  the  lion  is  satisfied  and  retires  ;  the  flock  is  saved  by 
the  death  of  one.  This  incidental  substitution  does  not  indeed  show  forth  the 
manner  of  our  Substitute's  suffering;  but  it  is  an  illustration  of  the  fact  that  one 
dying  saved  the  whole  flock.  The  goat  is  one  of  a  class  that  go  in  flocks  in 
Palestine,  and  so  are  fitted  to  represent  Christ  and  His  people.  And  pprhaps  the 
fact  of  an  animal  like  the  goat  being  selected  to  be  among  the  types  of  Christ  was 
intended  to  prevent  the  error  of  those  who  would  place  the  value  of  Christ's  under- 
taking in  His  character  alone.  They  say,  "  Behold  His  meekness  ;  He  is  the  Lamb 
of  God  1  "  Well,  all  that  is  true  ;  it  is  implied  in  His  being  "  without  blemish." 
But  that  cannot  be  the  true  point  to  which  our  eye  is  intended  to  be  directed  by  the 
types ;  for  what,  then,  becomes  of  the  goat  ?  They  may  tell  us  of  the  meekness  of 
the  lamb  and  patience  of  the  bullock,  and  tenderness  of  the  turtledove  ;  but  the 
goat,  what  is  to  be  said  of  it  ?  Surely  it  is  not  without  a  special  providence  that  the 
goat  is  inserted  where,  if  the  order  of  chap.  i.  had  been  followed,  we  would  have 
had  a  turtledove  ?  The  reason  is  to  let  us  see  that  the  main  thing  to  be  noticed  in 
these  types  is  the  atonement  which  they  represeuted.  Observe  the  stroke  that  falls 
on  the  victim,  the  fire  that  consumes  the  victim,  tlie  blood  that  must  flow  from  the 
victim,  whether  it  be  a  bullock,  a  lamb,  a  turtledove,  or  a  goat.  TheSocinian  view 
of  Christ's  death  is  thus  contradicted  by  these  various  types,  aad  our  eye  is  intently 
fixed  on  the  atoning  character  of  the  animal  more  than  on  anything  in  its  nature. 
iA.  A.  Bonar.) 


CH-U-.  IV.]  LEVITICUS.  65 


CHAPTER  IV. 

Vers.  2-35.  If  a  soul  shall  sin  through  ignorance. — The  sin  and  trespass-offerings  : — 
I.  There  are,  then,  some  lingering  defilements  and  trespasses  adhering  to 

MAN,  even    though    HE    BE    JUSTIFIED,    CONSECRATED,  AND    IN    FELLOWSHIP    WITH    GoD. 

A  man  may  run  from  a  gathering  storm,  and  be  terribly  shocked  at  the  idea  of 
being  caught  in  it,  and  exert  all  his  wisdom  and  his  power  to  escai^e  it,  and  yet 
may  be  made  to  feel  its  force  ;  and  though  a  good  man's  whole  being  is  averse  to 
sin,  and  he  can  have  no  more  fellowship  with  the  unfruitful  w'orks  of  darkness,  it 
can  argue  nothing  against  a  remaining  weakness  subjecting  him  every  day  to  lacks 
and  failings  which  would  undo  hira  but  for  the  pleadings  of  his  Saviour's  blood. 
Though  his  face  and  heart  are  fully  turned  away  from  sin,  it  proves  nothing 
against  his  liability  to  be  "  ovenaken  by  a  fault."  II.  And  these  lingering 
IMPERFECTIONS  AND  DEFECTS  ARE  REAL  SINS.  M  H  do  not  scruple  to  plead  their 
ignorance,  their  infirmities,  their  natural  and  habitual  propensities,  in  excuse  for 
their  misdeeds.  But  the  law  of  God  acknowledges  no  such  plea.  Sin  is  sin  ;  and 
guilt  is  a  part  of  its  essential  nature  wheievtr  found.  True,  in  their  effects  upon 
the  perpetrator,  or  in  their  influences  upon  society,  some  are  worse  than  others  ;  but 
in  their  relations  to  God  and  His  holy  law,  they  are  always  the  same,  always  evil, 
abhorrent,  and  damning.  Men  may  talk  of  "  little  sins,"  but  God  never  does. 
Let  them  be  never  so  little,  they  are  big  enough  to  sink  the  soul  to  everksting 
death  if  uncancelled  by  the  Saviour's  blood.  All  this  is  very  forcibly  portrayed  in 
the  rites  of  the  sin  and  trespass-offerings  now  under  consideration.  As  to  sins  of 
ignorance,  if  the  guilty  party  were  a  priest,  he  was  to  offer  "  a  young  bullock  "  ;  if 
a  judge  or  magistrate,  he  was  to  offer  "  a  kid  of  the  goats,"  of.  the  male  kind  ;  if 
one  of  "  the  common  people,"  he  was  to  offer  "  a  kid  of  the  goats,"  of  the  female 
kind,  or  a  lamb.  And  so  in  the  case  of  trespass,  the  guilty  one  was  to  offer  "  a 
lamb  or  kid  "  ;  or,  if  poor,  two  doves  or  young  pigeons  ;  or,  if  poor,  and  unable  to 
procure  the  doves  or  pigeons,  an  offering  of  fine  flour  might  be  substituted  as  the 
representative  of  the  animal  or  bird  which  could  not  be  procured,  but  was  to  be 
looked  upon,  not  as  a  meat-otfering,  but  as  a  "  sin-offering,"  the  same  as  if  it  were 
a  Uving  animal.  These  offerings  were  then  to  be  slain  and  burned,  and  their  blood 
presented  as  the  only  adequate  expiation.  And  from  the  nature  of  the  expiation 
we  are  to  learn  God's  estimate  of  the  offence.  Though  committed  in  ignorance,  or 
no  more  than  a  trespass,  or  an  accidental  contamination,  it  required  blood  and 
sacrifice  to  cover  it.  III.  There  is  also  a  noticeable  gradation  in  these  sins  of 
IGNORANCE.  Though  they  are  all  sins,  so  that  blood  only  can  atone  for  them,  they 
aie  yet  more  serious  and  offensive  in  some  persons  than  in  others.  When  a  priest 
or  ruler  sinned  in  this  way,  a  more  valuable  sacrifice  was  required  than  when  one 
of  the  common  people  thus  sinned.  The  more  prominent  and  exalted  the  person 
offending,  the  more  flagrant  was  the  offence.  There  is  a  very  serious  augmentation 
of  responsibility  going  along  with  high  station.  A  public  man  is  like  a  town  clock, 
upon  which  much  more  depends  than  upon  private  time-pieces.  Hence  the 
necessity  for  greater  care  and  attention  with  reference  to  the  one  than  to  the  other. 
IV.  But  whilst  we  are  treating  of  these  defects  and  failings  which  are  to  be  found 
in  Christian  life,  let  us  not  overlook  the  principal  point  of  the  text,  that  there  is 
AN  ADEQUATE  REMEDY  FOR  THEM.  What !  are  we  to  be  told  that  Christ's  infinite 
atonement  is  that  shallow  thing,  that  the  first  draw  of  the  sinner  upon  it  quiie 
exhausts  its  virtue,  and  leaves  all  subsequent  sins  to  be  disposed  of  by  the  con- 
fessional, and  the  fires  of  purgatory  ?  Are  we  to  be  told  that  Christ  "  ever  liveth  to 
make  intercession,"  and  for  this  reason  "  is  able  to  save  unto  the  uttermost,"  and 
yet  that  there  is  not  virtue  enough  in  His  mediation  to  cover  a  few  sins  of  ignorance 
and  infirmity  in  Christian  life  ?  Are  we  to  behold  the  priest  of  a  typical  economy, 
with  the  mere  blood  of  beasts  upon  his  fingers,  obtaining  a  full  remission  for  the 
Jew,  and  yet  believe  that  our  great  High  Priest  in  heaven,  bearing  the  scars  of 
deadly  wounds  endured  for  us,  is  unable  to  secure  mercy  for  those  struggling  saints 
of  God,  who,  in  hours  of  surprise  or  weakness,  become  entangled  again  in  guilt  of 
which  they  heartily  repented  the  moment  it  was  done?  Give  us  this,  and  we  want 
no  pontifical  absolutions,  no  penal  inflictions,  no  purgatorial  fires,  to  make  us 
acceptable  to  God.  From  this  general  subject  we  are  now  led  to  reflect — 1.  First, 
■what  a  holy  thing  is  God's  law  !  It  finds  guilt,  not  only  in  the  sins  which  are 
deliberate,  but  even  in  the  mistakes  of  ignorance,  the  contaminations  of  accident, 
and  the  shortcomings  of  the  holiest  saints.      2.  Second,  what  reaoon  have  we  to 

5 


66  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

ft 

cultivate  the  modest  virtues  of  Christian  life — to  be  moderate  in  our  pretensions, 
humble  in  our  spirit,  charitable  in  our  censures,  forgiving  under  injuries,  lenient 
towards  offenders,  pungent  in  our  self-examinations,  hearty  in  our  repentance, 
watchful  in  our  walk,  constant  in  our  i:)rayers,  and  deeply  anxious  to  be  finuly 
rooted  in  the  true  faith  !  I  care  not  how  good  we  may  be,  we  are  still  great 
offenders,  and  much  worse  than  we  think  we  are.  3.  Finally,  how  precious  is  the 
mercy  of  God  in  Christ  Jesus!  (J.  A.  Seiss,  D.D.)  The  sin-qfering  : — I.  View 
OUR  BLESSED  LoRD  AS  MADE  SIN  FOR  US.  1.  His  personal  character  is  set  forth 
in  the  victim  chosen.  It  was  a  bullock,  the  most  valuable  of  the  sacrifices,  an 
animal  laborious  in  life  and  costly  in  death  ;  it  was  a  young  bullock  in  the  fulness 
of  its  strength  and  vigour ;  it  was  without  blemish ;  and  the  slightest  fault  dis- 
qualified it  from  being  laid  upon  the  altar  of  God.  Behold,  0  believer,  your  Lord 
Jesus,  more  precious  far  than  ten  thousands  of  the  fat  of  fed  beasts  :  a  sacrifice  not 
to  be  purchased  with  gold,  or  estimated  in  silver.  Full  of  vigour,  in  the  very  prime 
of  manhood,  He  oiiered  up  Himself  for  us.  Even  when  He  died,  He  died  not 
through  weakness  ;  for  that  cry  of  His  at  His  death,  "  with  a  loud  voice,"  proved 
that  His  life  was  still  firm  within  Him,  and  that  when  He  gave  up  the  ghost.  His 
death  was  not  one  of  compulsion,  but  a  voluntary  expiring  of  the  soul.  His  glory  is 
as  the  firstling  of  the  bullock,  full  of  vigour  and  of  strength.  How  distinctly  was 
our  Lord  proved  to  be  without  blemish  !  Naturally  born  without  sin,  practically 
He  lived  without  fault.  2.  The  act  of  the  transference  of  sin  to  the  victim  next 
calls  for  our  attention.  This  laying  of  the  hand  does  not  appear  to  have  been  a  mere 
touch  of  contact,  but  in  some  otber  places  of  Scripture  has  the  meaning  of  leaning 
heavily,  as  in  the  expression,  "  Thy  wrath  lieth  hard  upon  me  "  (Psa.  Ixxxviii.  7). 
Surely  this  is  the  very  essence  of  faith,  which  doth  not  only  bring  us  into  contact 
with  the  great  Substitute,  but  teaches  us  to  lean  upon  Him  with  all  the  burden  of 
our  guilt ;  so  that  if  our  sins  be  very  weighty,  yet  we  see  Him  as  able  to  bear  them 
all ;  and  mark,  the  whole  weight  of  our  iniquity  taken  off  from  us,  and  laid  on  Him 
who  took  the  weight  and  bore  it  all,  and  then  buried  it  in  His  sepulchre  for  ever. 
3.  We  must  now  beg  your  notice  of  the  sins  transferred.  In  the  case  of  the  type, 
they  were  sins  of  ignorance.  Alas !  the  Jew  knew  nothing  about  a  sin-offering  for 
sins  of  presumption,  but  there  is  such  a  sin-offering  for  us.  Our  presumptuous 
sins  were  laid  on  Christ ;  our  wilful  sins,  our  sins  of  light  and  knowledge,  are 
pardoned  by  His  blood.  The  mention  of  sins  of  ignorance,  suggests  a  very  com- 
fortable reflection,  that  if  there  are  any  sins  which  I  know  not,  they  were,  not- 
withstanding my  ignorance,  laid  on  my  Substitute  and  put  awHy  by  His  atonement. 
It  is  not  sin  as  we  see  it  which  was  laid  on  Christ,  but  sin  as  God  sees  it ;  not  sin 
as  our  conscience  feebly  reveals  it  to  us,  but  sin  as  God  beholds  it,  in  all  its 
unmitigated  malignity,  and  unconcealed  loathsomeness.  Sin  in  its  exceeding 
sinfulness  Jesus  has  put  away.  4.  Passing  on,  still  keeping  to  the  same  point,  we 
would  remark  that  the  sin  was  laid  upon  the  bullock  most  conspicuouF^y  "  before 
the  Lord."  Did  you  notice  the  frequent  expressions  :  "  shall  bring  him  to  the  door 
of  the  congregation  before  the  Lord  "  ;  "  kill  the  bullock  before  the  Lord  "  ;  "  shall 
sprinkle  the  blood  seven  times  before  the  Lord,  and  shall  put  some  of  it  upon  the 
horns  of  the  altar  of  sweet  incense  before  the  Lord"?  Apart  from  the  blood,  we 
are  guilty,  condemned  :  washed  in  blood,  we  are  accepted  and  beloved.  Without  the 
atonement  we  are  aliens  and  strangers,  heirs  of  wrath  even  as  others ;  but,  as  seen 
in  the  ett^rnal  covenant  purpose,  through  the  precious  blood  of  Jesus,  we  are 
accepted  in  the  beloved.  The  great  stress  of  the  transaction  lies  in  its  being  done 
"  before  the  Lord."  5.  Still,  further,  carefully  observe  tliat  as  soon  as  ever  the  sin 
was  thus  "  before  the  Lord,"  laid  upon  the  bullock,  the  bullock  was  slain.  "  He 
shall  lay  his  hand  upon  the  bullock's  head,  and  kill  the  bullock  l)efore  the  Lord." 
So,  in  the  fifteenth  verse,  "The  elders  of  the  congregation  shall  lay  their  hands 
upon  the  head  of  the  bullock  before  the  Lord,  and  the  bullock  shall  be  killed  before 
the  Lord."  Ah  !  yes  ;  as  soon  as  the  sin  is  transferred,  the  penalty  is  transferred 
too.  Down  fell  the  pole-axe  the  minute  that  the  priestly  hand  bad  been  laid  on 
the  bullock.  Unsheathed  was  the  kuife  of  sacrifice  the  moment  that  the  elders  had 
begun  to  lean  upon  the  sacrificial  head.  So  was  it  with  our  Saviour ;  He  must 
smart.  He  must  die,  for  only  as  dying  could  He  become  our  Sin-offering.  II.  The 
EFFICACY  OF  THE  puECious  BLOOD  OF  Jesus.  1.  As  soon  as  the  bullock  was  slain, 
the  priest  carefully  collected  the  blood.  Seven  times  towards  the  veil  tlie  blood  of 
the  sin-offering  was  sprinkled.  This  was  to  show  that  our  communion  with  God 
is  by  blood.  2.  The  next  act  of  the  priest  was  to  retire  a  little  from  the  veil  to  the 
place  where  stood  the  golden  altar  of  incense,  adorned  with  four  horns  of  gold. 


CHAP.  IT.]  LEVITICUS.  67 

probably  of  a  pyramidal  shape,  or  fashioned  like  rams'  horns,  and  the  priest, 
dipping  his  finger  in  the  basin,  smeared  this  horn  and  the  other,  until  the  four 
horns  glowed  with  crimson  in  the  light  of  the  golden  candlestick.  The  horn  is 
always,  in  the  Oriental  usage,  indicative  of  strenj,'th.  What  was  the  blood  put 
upon  the  altar  for,  then  ?  That  incense  altar  was  typical  of  prayer,  and  especially 
•of  the  intercession  of  Christ ;  and  the  blood  on  the  horn  showed  that  the  force  and 
power  of  all-prevailing  intercession  lies  in  the  blood.  Why  was  this  the  second 
thing  done  ?  It  seems  to  me  that  the  second  thing  which  a  Cbristian  loses  is  his 
prevalence  in  prayer.  Whereas  first  he  loses  communion  with  God  when  he  back- 
slides, the  next  thing  he  loses  is  his  power  in  supplication.  He  begius  to  be 
ieeble  upon  his  knees  ;  he  cannot  win  of  the  Lord  that  which  he  desireth.  How  is 
he  to  gel  back  his  strength  ?  Here  the  great  Anointed  Priest  teaches  us  to  look 
to  the  blood  for  renewed  power,  for  see,  he  applies  the  blood  to  the  horns  of  the 
altar,  and  the  sweet  perfume  of  frankincense  ascends  to  heaven,  and  God  accepts 
it.  3.  This  being  finished,  the  priest  goes  backwards  still  further  and  enters  the 
■court  of  the  Israelitts.  There  stood  the  great  altar  of  brass,  whereon  was  consumed 
■the  burnt  offerings  ;  and  now  the  priest,  having  the  basin  full  of  the  blood  of  which 
■only  a  small  quantity  had  been  used  in  sprinkling  the  veil  and  touching  the  horns 
of  the  golden  altar,  pours  the  whole  of  the  remaining  blood  in  a  great  stream  at  the 
foot  of  the  altar  of  burnt-offering.  What  does  that  typify  ?  Did  he  not  thus  teach 
us  that  the  only  ground  and  basis  (for  mark,  it  is  put  at  the  foot  of  the  altar),  of 
the  acceptance  of  our  persons  and  of  our  thank-offerings  is  found  in  the  blood  of 
Jesus?  Thus  I  have  tried  to  set  forth  the  threefold  prevalence  of  the  precious 
blood,  but  let  it  not  be  forgotten  that  the  blood  also  put  away  sin  ;  for  you  find  at 
the  end  of  the  chapter,  "  His  sin  shall  be  forgiven."  First  forgiven,  then  accepted, 
then  prevalent  in  prayer,  and  then  admitted  into  access  with  boldness  to  God; 
what  a  change  of  blessings!  All,  all  through  the  blood  of  Jesus!  HI.  Thirdly, 
the  most  painful  part  of  our  sermon  remains,  while  I  beg  you  to  view  the  shame 
■WHICH  ODK  Lord  enddbed.  While  it  is  all  so  well  for  us  I  want  you  now  to  reflect 
how  bitter,  how  shameful  it  was  for  our  Lord  !  The  offerer  who  brought  the  sin- 
offering  has  been  forgiven  :  he  has  been  accepted  at  the  brazen  altar  ;  his  prayers 
have  been  heard  at  the  golden  altar ;  and  the  veil  has  been  sprinkled  on 
his  behalf :  but  what  of  the  victim  itself  ?  Draw  nigh  and  learn  with  holy 
wonder.  1.  In  the  first  place,  albeit  that  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  was  made 
sin  for  us,  it  is  noteworthy  that,  though  nearly  all  the  bullock  was  burned 
without  the  camp,  there  was  one  portion  left  and  reserved  to  be  burnt  upon  the 
altar  of  burnt-offering — that  was  the  fat.  Certain  descriptions  are  given  as  to  the 
fat  which  was  to  be  consumed  upon  the  altar,  by  which  we  believe  it  was  intended 
to  ensure  that  the  richest  part  of  the  fat  should  be  there  consumed.  As  much  as  if 
•God  would  say,  "  Though  My  dear  Son  must  be  made  sin  for  this  people,  and  con- 
sequently I  must  forsake  Him,  and  He  must  die  without  the  camp,  yet  still  He  is 
most  dear  and  precious  in  My  sight,  and  even  while  He  is  a  sin-oifering,  yet  He  is 
My  beloved  Son,  with  whom  in  Himself  I  am  still  well  pleased."  Whenever  we 
speak  about  our  Lord  as  bearing  our  sins,  we  must  carefully  speak  concerning  Him 
— not  as  though  God  ever  did  despise  or  abhor  the  prayer  of  His  afflicted  Son,  but 
only  seemed  to  do  so  wbile  He  stood  for  us,  representatively  made  sin  for  us,  though 
He  knew  no  sin.  Oh  !  I  delight  to  think  that  the  Lord  smelled  a  sweet  savour  even 
in  the  Cross,  and  that  Jesus  Christ  is  this  day  a  sweet  savour  unto  God,  even  as  a 
sin-offering ;  the  fat,  the  excellence  of  His  heart,  the  consecration  of  His  soul,  were 
acceptable  to  God,  and  sweet  in  His  esteem,  even  when  He  laid  upon  Him  the 
iniquity  of  His  people.  Still,  here  is  the  shameful  part  of  it :  the  priest  then  took 
the  bullock,  and  gathering  up  all  the  inwards,  every  part  of  it,  the  skin,  the  dung — 
all  mentioned  to  teach  us  what  a  horrible  thing  sin  is,  and  what  the  Surety  was 
looked  upon  as  being  when  He  took  our  sin — He  took  it  all  up,  and  either  Himself 
personally,  or  assisted  by  others,  took  it  away  out  of  the  camp.  2.  After  the  removal, 
they  gathered  the  hot  ashes,  they  kindled  the  fire,  and  burnt  it  all.  See  here  a 
faint  image  of  the  fire  which  consumed  the  Saviour  on  Calvary  !  His  bodily  pains 
ought  never  to  be  forgotten,  but  still  the  sufferings  of  His  soul  must  have  been  the 
very  soul  of  His  sufferings  ;  and  can  you  teU  what  they  were  ?  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
TJi£  sin-offering  : — I.  In  contrast  with  the  other  offj.kings.  (1)  The  sin-offering, 
though  without  spot  or  blemish,  was  yet  not  a  sweet-savour  offering.  The  distinction 
is  this :  the  sweet-savour  offerings  were  for  acceptance  ;  the  others  for  expiution. 
In  the  first  class  sin  is  not  seen  at  all — it  is  simply  the  faithful  Israelite  satisfying 
Jehovah.     In  the  sin-offeri-  gs  it  is  just  the  reverse — it  is  an  offering  charged  with 


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

the  sin  of  the  offerer.  In  the  sin-offerings,  as  in  the  burnt-olYerings,  Christ  is 
Offerer  :  but  here  He  is  seen  standing  for  us  under  the  imputation  of  sin.  For 
though  in  Himself  without  sin,  "  the  Holy  One,"  yet  He  became  our  Substitute, 
confessed  our  sins  as  His  sins,  and  bore  their  penalty.  (2)  The  sin-offering  was 
burnt  without  the  camp.  This  testified  how  completely  the  offering  was  identified 
with  the  sin  it  suffered  for  ;  so  completely  identified  that  it  was  itself  looked  at  as 
sin,  and  as  such  cast  out  of  the  camp  into  the  wilderness.  A  part  iudei  d,  "  the 
fat,"  was  burnt  on  the  altar,  to  show  that  the  offering,  though  made  a  sin-bearer, 
was  in  itself  perfect.  But  the  body  of  the  victim,  "even  the  whole  bullock,"  was  cast 
forth  without  the  camp.  "  Wherefore  Jesus  also,  that  He  might  sanctify  the  people 
with  His  own  blood,  suffered  without  the  gate."  He  was  cast  out  as  one  who  was 
unfit  for  Jerusalem,  as  unworthy  a  place  in  the  city  of  God.  And  what  this  must 
have  cost  that  Blessed  One  can  never  be  entered  into  or  understood  till  the  holiness 
of  Christ  and  the  sinfulness  of  sin  are  seen  in  measure  at  least  as  God  sees  them. 
(3)  The  third  peculiarity  we  may  note  in  the  sin-offering  is,  that  it  was  an  offering 
for  sin,  not  an  offering  for  trespass.  God  judges  what  we  are  as  well  as  what  we 
do;  our  sin,  the  sin  in  us,  as  much  as  our  trespasses.  In  His  sight  sin  in  us,  our 
evil  nature,  is  as  clearly  seen  as  our  trespasses,  which  are  but  the  fruit  of  that 
nature.  He  needs  not  wait  to  see  the  fruit  put  forth.  He  knows  the  root  is  evil, 
and  so  will  be  the  buddings.  Now  the  distinction  between  the  sin  and  trespass- 
offerings  is  just  this :  the  one  is  for  sin  in  our  nature,  the  other  for  the  fruits  of  it. 
Thus  iu  the  sin-offering  no  particular  act  of  sin  is  mentioned,  but  a  certain  person 
is  seen  standing  confessedly  as  a  sinner  :  in  the  trespass-offering  certain  acts  are 
enumerated,  and  the  person  never  appears.  II.  The  vakieties  in  this  offering. 
(1)  The  first  variety  which  is  seen  in  the  sin-offering  is  the  difference  in  the 
animal  offered.  In  the  burnt-offering,  the  offering  though  varied  was  limited, 
either  to  a  bullock,  a  lamb,  a  goat,  or  turtledoves.  Here  in  the  sin-offering  we 
have  several  other  grades,  coming  down  at  last  to  a  sin-oft'ering  composed  of  simple 
"  flour."  Suffice  it  to  say  that  here,  as  in  the  burnt-offerings,  they  show  us  the 
different  characters  under  which  the  offering  of  Christ  may  be  apprehended  by  us. 
In  the  sin-oft'ering,  as  in  the  burnt-offering,  one  saint  has  one  view,  another 
another  view  respecting  the  character  of  the  offering.  (2)  The  next  variety  we  may 
notice  is  in  the  person  offering  :  we  have  the  priest,  the  congregation,  the  ruler,  and 
the  common  Israelite.  First  in  order  we  have  the  sin-offering  for  the  priest ;  then 
the  sin-offering  for  the  whole  congregation  ;  then  the  sin-offering  for  a  ruler ;  then 
for  one  of  the  common  people  ;  and  lastly,  the  sin-offering  for  particular  sins ;  in 
•which  last  the  person  of  the  offerer  is  Idst  sight  of,  and  the  particular  act  for  which 
he  offers  more  clearly  seen.  This  last  is  very  nearly  akin  to  the  trespass-offering, 
and  is  indeed  called  indifferently  by  both  names  of  sin  and  trespass.  In  this  last 
class,  as  in  the  lowest  classes  of  the  other  offerings,  we  get  the  lowest  view  which 
can  be  taken  of  this  particular  aspect  of  the  offering.  But  what  is  the  import  of 
this  variety  in  the  person  offering  ?  They  are  only  different  measures  of  appre- 
hension. Of  course  the  Offerer  here,  as  elsewhere,  is  Christ,  made  under  the  law, 
our  Eepresentative.  As  such  He  is  here  seen  confessing  sin ;  but  though  seen  as 
Offerer  in  this  aspect.  He  may  yet  be  seen  very  differently.  For  example,  in  the 
first  case  the  offerer  is  apprehended  as  "  priest,"  a  person  who  stands  the 
representative  of  a  family  or  congregation.  In  other  cases  the  offerer  is  seen  as 
"  one  of  the  common  people,"  one  who  stands  simply  the  representative  of  an 
individual.  In  the  lowest  cases  of  all,  the  person  of  the  offerer  is  altogether  lost 
sipht  of,  neither  individual  nor  congregation  are  seen,  and  the  sin  for  which  he 
suffers  is  almost  the  only  thing  apprehended.  (3)  A  thiid  variety  in  the  sin- 
offering  has  reference  to  "  the  blood."  In  the  higher  classes  the  blood  was 
sprinkled  on  the  incense  altar  ;  in  the  lower  classes  it  was  not  taken  into  the 
Holy  Place,  but  sprinkled  upon  the  brazen  altar  in  the  court.  The  deeper  the 
apprehension  of  the  efficacy  of  the  blood,  the  deeper  will  be  the  sense  of  that  from 
•which  it  delivers  us.  (4)  A  fourth  variety  in  the  sin-offering  has  reference  to  "  the 
fat."  In  the  higher  grades  the  fat  was  burnt  upon  the  altar;  in  the  lowest  class 
this  is  overlooked  :  what  was  done  with  the  fat  is  entirely  unnoticed.  "  The  fat" 
represents  the  general  health  and  energy  of  the  whole  body.  Its  being  burnt  to 
God  was  the  appointed  pronf  that  tlie  victim  offered  for  sin  was  yet  in  itself 
acceptable.  This  acceptability  is  most  seen  in  the  higher  classes,  but  it  is  .appre- 
hended also  in  all  save  the  lowest  grade.  There  the  atonement  made  for  sin  ia 
indeed  apprehended,  but  the  perfect  acceptableness  of  the  victim  is  unnoticed.  So 
•with  some  Christians,  is  not  their  thought  respecting  the  sin-offering  more  of  our 


CHAP.  IV.]  LEVITICUS.  69 

pardon  than  of  Christ's  perfectness  ?  (5)  Another  variety  we  may  observe  in  the 
sin-offering  has  reference  to  "  the  body  "  of  the  victim.  In  the  higher  grades  it  is 
cast  witliout  the  camp  ;  in  the  lower  this  is  unnoticed  ;  but  in  the  law  of  the 
offerings  another  particular  is  marked;  the  priest  is  seen  to  feed  on  the  offering. 
The  import  of  this  distinction  is  at  once  obvious.  Where  the  sin-offering  is  fully 
apprehended,  the  victim,  which  is  the  sin-bearer,  is  seen  accursed,  and  as  such  cast 
out  as  unclean  into  the  wilderness.  Where  the  sin-offering  is  more  partially  appre- 
hended, the  victim  is  still  seen  as  sin-bearer,  but  the  reality  of  its  separation  from 
God  is  lost  sight  of,  and  its  death  viewed  merely  as  satisfying  the  Mediator.  And 
hoiv  exactly  this  accords  with  the  successive  stages  of  Christian  experience  will  be 
sufficiently  understood  by  those  who  know  much  either  of  themselves  or  others.  At 
first  Christ's  work,  or  person,  or  offering,  is  viewed  with  interest  solely  on  account 
of  what  it  is  to  us.  It  has  taken  away  our  sins  ;  it  has  made  atonement ;  this  is  the 
one  thing,  and  almost  the  sole  thing,  seen  respecting  it.  Anything  further  than 
this  at  such  a  stage  would  appear  a  grand  impertinence.  But  let  the  question  of 
peace  with  God  be  settled,  let  our  acceptance  become  a  thing  known  and  realised, 
then  the  perfectness  of  the  offering,  and  what  it  is  in  itself,  will,  without  exception, 
be  more  seen  and  dwelt  upon.  (6)  The  last  variety  I  will  here  notice  in  the  different 
grades  of  the  sin-offering  is  connected  with  the  name  by  which  the  offering  is 
variously  designated.  In  the  higher  classes  it  is  always  called  a  "  sin-offering," 
and  no  particular  act  of  trespass  is  noticed ;  in  the  lower  classes  it  is  called  a  "  tres- 
pass-offering "  as  well  as  a  "  sin-offering,"  and  the  person  of  the  offerer  is  lost  sight 
of  in  the  particular  trespass.  So  when  the  measure  of  apprehension  is  limited, 
there  will  be  want  of  intelligence  respecting  the  precise  difference  of  sin  and 
trespass  ;  nor  this  alone  ;  the  offering  will  be  seen  only  for  sins ;  that  it  is  offered 
for  persons  will  not  be  apprehended.  We  have  thus  gone  through  the  particulars 
of  the  sin-offering,  as  far  at  least  as  they  are  given  in  the  law  of  the  offerings.  In 
other  places  there  are  some  other  details  added,  the  principles  of  which  are,  how- 
ever, all  contained  in  what  we  have  investigated.  The  additions  only  give  us  some 
new  combinations  as  to  the  character  under  which  the  sin-offering  may  be  exhibited : 
I  refer  to  the  offerings  of  the  red  heifer  (Numb,  xix.),  and  of  the  scapegoat  on  the 
great  Day  of  Atonement  (chap.  xvi.).  The  offering  of  the  red  heifer,  as  we  might 
expect  from  its  being  found  in  Numbers,  exhibits  not  so  much  what  the  offering  is 
in  itself,  as  its  use  in  meeting  the  wants  of  the  wilderness.  Thus  no  memorial  of 
it  was  burnt  on  the  altar,  nor  was  the  blood  seen  to  be  taken  into  the  Tabernacle ; 
but  the  whole  animal  was  burnt  without  the  camp,  and  its  ashes  laid  up  to  be 
mixed  with  the  water  of  purification.  Then  when  an  Israelite  found  himself 
unclean,  through  contact  with  the  dead,  these  ashes  with  water  were  sprinkled  on 
him.  All  this  is  the  sin-offering  as  meeting  our  need  of  cleansing,  and  as  given  to 
remove  the  defilement  caused  by  the  dead  things  of  the  wilderness.  The  view 
presented  by  it  has  to  do  with  the  effects  of  the  offering,  and  its  use  towards  man 
as  applied  by  water,  that  is  the  Spirit.  In  the  scapegoat,  offered  on  the  great 
day  of  atonement,  the  view  presented  is  very  different.  In  this  sin-offering,  which 
was  offered  but  once  a  year,  the  blood  was  seen  to  be  put  on  the  mercy-seat. 
The  offering  it  spoke  of  is  shown  (Heb.  x.  1,  22)  to  have  been  "  once  for 
ever,"  and  "  access  into  the  holiest  "  the  consequence  of  it.  {A.  Jukes.) 
The  sin-offering ;  or,  God  just  and  justijier  :~^The  most  awful  and  terrible  aspect  of 
Jesus'  death  is  presented  in  this  type.  In  the  burnt-offering  He  is  seen  as  the 
"Delight"  of  the  Father  (Prov.  viii.  30),  the  One  in  whom  He  is  "well  pleased" 
(Matt.  xvii.  5),  in  the  peace-offering  we  beliold  Him  as  the  blessed  Peacemaker 
(Matt.  V.  9  ;  Col.  i.  20).  But  in — I.  The  sin-offering  we  are  shown  the  heinousness, 
the  awful  nature  of  sin,  that  called  for  such  a  sacrifice.  Atonement  is  its  chief 
feature.  The  Blessed  One  "knew  no  sin,"  yet  He  hung  upon  the  Cross  as  "an 
offering  for  sin  "  (Isa.  liii.  10),  the  sin-bearer,  the  personation  of  that  "  abominable 
thing "  that  God  hates  (Jer,  xliv.  4).  Studying  the  details  of  sin-offering,  we 
read — II.  "  If  a  soul  .  .  .  sin  through  ignorance."  All  are  sinners  by  nature 
(Rom.  iii.  23,  v.  12),  and  ever  prone  to  sin,  by  reason  of  the  root  of  evil  that  dwells 
within.  This  root  it  is  that  is  specially  met  in  sin-offering  (Rom.  viii.  3;  Heb.  ix.  26), 
the  sinful  nature,  more  perhaps  than  the  actions  that  spring  therefrom,  though 
these  are  included ;  but  till  God  opens  our  eyes  to  see  the  exceeding  sinfulness  of 
sin,  and  how  the  smallest  sin  separates  from  Him,  and  endangers  our  eternal  safety, 
we  are — so  to  speak — sinning  ignorantly.  Still,  no  sin — even  when  done  in  ignor- 
ance— can  be  passed  over  or  forgiven  by  a  holy  God  "  without  shedding  of  blood  " ; 
hence  God,  in  His  grace  and  mercy,  has  provided  a  complete,  a  perfect  atonement. 


70  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

in  the  "  precious  blood  "  shed  (Heb.  ix.  22,  28,  x.  12 ;  1  Pet.  i.  19).  Even  after 
being  "made  nigh,"  how  prone  are  we  to  sin!  But  see  Psa.  xxxvii.  24;  Pruv. 
xxiv.  16.  To  sin  "through  ignorance"  signifies,  not  only  through  actual  want  of 
knowledge,  but  through  weakness — failing  to  lay  hold  of  the  "power"  to  keep 
(1  Pet.  i.  5) — unintentionally  offending,  and  not  realising  at  the  time  the  guilt ;  for, 
in  truth,  who  can  fully  realise  what  is  sin  in  the  sight  of  a  holy  God  ?  But  He 
foresaw  all,  and  provided  a  perfect  Sacrifice  sufficient  to  meet  it  all,  whether  the  sin 
be  committed  by  "anointed  priest,"  "whole  congregation,"  a  "ruler,"  or  "one  of 
the  common  people."  The  variation  in  the  oft'eriugs  teaches  how  sin  becomes  deeper, 
according  to  the  position  or  privileges  of  the  sinning  one.  The  more  prominent 
were  these,  the  greater  the  harm  done  by  evil  example.  III.  The  laying  of  hands 
on  the  victim's  head  teaches  much.  1.  Sense  of  sin,  and  need  of  pardon  (Psa.  li.  4  ; 
Luke  xviii.  13  ;  1  Tim.  i.  15).  "  The  wages  of  sin  is  death  "  (Eom.  vi.  23) ;  hence 
I  need  a  substitutionary  sacrifice.  "Who  shall  deliver  me?"  (Rom.  vii.  24).  2. 
Transmission  of  guilt;  truth  of  deepest  importance.  "  The  Lord  hath  laid  .  .  .  "^ 
(Isa.  liii.  6).  "Christ  .  .  .  suffered  for  sins,  the  Just  for  the  unjust,"  &c.  (1  Pet. 
iii.  18).  The  holy  Jesus  received  "  the  wages  of  sin."  "  He  put  away  sin  by  the 
sacrifice  of  Himself";  He  overcame  "through  death"  (Heb.  ii.  14)  tlae  one  who 
had  introduced  it  into  the  world ;  and  thus  the  Just  One  could — without  the 
smallest  sacrifice  of  His  justice — exercise  His  prerogative  of  mercy,  and  be  "  the 
Justifier  of  him  which  believeth  in  Jesus  "  (Eom.  iii.  24-26).  3.  Faith  in  God's 
acceptance  of  a  substitutionary  sacrifice  (Rom.  iv.  25,  v.  1,  9).  The  offering  was 
slain  for  the  offerer ;  it  was  laden  typically  with  his  sins,  as  was  the  holy  Jesus 
actually  when  He  was  "  made  a  curse  for  us"  (Gal.  iii.  10-13).  As  we  meditate  on 
these  things  we  cannot  wonder  at  another  feature  of  the  sin-offering.  IV.  Not 
VOLUNTARY.  There  is  nothing  in  this  type — as  in  others — to  show  willingness  on 
the  part  of  the  Holy  One,  and  our  Lord's  words  in  Gethsemane  plainly  show  how 
He  shrank  from  being  "  made  sin  " — that  hateful  thing  which  would  separate  Him 
from  His  God  and  Father.  Hence  the  prayer  thrice  repeated,  with  increasing 
earnestness  (Matt.  xxvi.  39-44;  Luke  xxii.  42-45):  which  contrast  with  the  willing- 
ness displayed  in  the  words  (Psa.  xl.  7,  8,  with  Heb.  x.).  V.  The  animals  sacrificed 
as  sin-offerings  varied  (chap.  iv.  3,  14,  23,  28,  32),  according  to  whether  it  was  for 
the  "priest,"  "whole  congregation,"  "ruler,"  or  "one  of  the  coinmon  people." 
Also,  as  before  observed,  no  one  type  could  ever  suffice  to  depict  the  glorious 
Antitype ;  therefore  no  doubt  some  different  characteristic  or  aspect  of  the  Blessed 
One,  in  His  passion,  is  set  forth  in  each  of  the  animals  sacrificed.  (Lady  Bcaxijolois 
Dent).  The  sin-offering ;  or,  expiation  and  forgiveness  : — I.  The  siN-OFFERiNa 
shadows  forth  the  fulfilment  of  Psa.  Ixxxv.  10  ;  mercy  can  be  shown  to  sinners  in 
the  "free  gift  of  .  .  .  eternal  life"  (Rom.  vi.  23,  R.V.),  because  God's  truth  as  to^ 
sin's  "wages"  was  verified  on  Calvary.  Righteousness,  i.e.,  the  righteous  judg- 
ment of  a  holy  God,  was  shown  in  the  just  punishment  of  "sin,"  borne  by  a  sinless 
victim ;  and  Peace  becomes  the  portion  of  every  soul  taught  by  the  Holy  Spirit  to 
know  that  Jesus  was  punished  for  him  or  her;  that  is,  every  one  that  believes  in 
God's  acceptance  of  Christ's  substitutionary  Sacrifice  (Rom.  iv.  25,  v.  1).  II.  The 
blood  strikingly  shows  the  double  aspect  of  this  mighty  sacrifice.  "  The  life  .  .  .. 
is  in  the  blood"  (chap.  xvii.  11).  Life  was  forfeited  by  fall  (Gen.  ii.  17,  iii.  19; 
Eom.  V.  12) ;  therefore  life  must  be  taken,  blood  must  be  shed  (Ezek.  xviii.  4,  20 ; 
Heb.  ix.  22),  a  substitutionary  victim  must  be  slain,  before  a  holy  God  could  pardon 
and  accept  the  sinner.  Jesus  died.  He  shed  His  "precious  blood,"  and  through  it 
we  have  "redemption"  (Matt,  xxvii.  50;  John  xix.  34;  Rom.  v.  8,  9;  Eph.  i.  7).. 
Observe  what  was  done  with  the  blood.  1.  For  anointed  priest,  or  whole  congrega- 
tion, it  was  to  be  sprinkled  "  seven  times  before  the  Lord,  before  the  veil "  (chap.  iv. 
6,  7,  17,  18),  and  put  on  "horns  of  altar  of  sweet  incense";  seven  betokening 
completeness,  and  horns  power.  We  thus  learn  the  completeness  of  restoration  to 
worship  and  communion — interrupted  by  sin — through  the  power  of  Jesu's  blood, 
shed  on  Calvary's  Cross,  and  brought  symbolically  into  the  very  presence  of  God  for 
us :  the  ground,  too,  of  His  advocacy  for  us,  as  our  "  Great  High  Priest "  (1  John  ii, 
1,  2;  Heb.  iv.  14).  The  higher  the  position,  privilege,  light,  the  greater  the  sin. 
The  anointed  priest  was  in  a  very  blessed  position,  admitted  daily  to  minister  in  the 
Tabernacle;  and  the  whole  congregation  were  marked  by  Jehovah's  favour.  They 
were  His  "redeemed"  or  "purchased"  people,  called  by  Him,  His  "son,"  "a 
peculiar  treasure,"  A'C.  (Exod.  xv.  13,  16,  iv.  22,  xix.  6) ;  brought  into  covenant 
relationship  with  Jehovah,  who  Himself  dwelt  in  their  midst,  guarding  and  guiding 
them  night  and  day  (Exod.  xiii.  21,  22).    And  they  were  encamped  around  His 


CHAP.  IV.]  LEVITICUS.  71 

habitation,  as  accepted  worshippers,  through  the  medium  of  the  priesthood  and 
offerings.  Hence,  when  sin  entered,  blood  alone  could  atone  and  restore.  2.  For 
a  ruler  or  one  of  the  common  people  the  priest  must  put  blood  on  the  horns  of  the 
altar  of  burnt-offering  (chap.  iv.  2.5,  30),  telling  of  the  power  of  the  atoning  blood 
to  clemse  from  all  sin,  and  restore  basis  for  worship,  peace,  etc.  3.  All  the  blood 
was  to  be  poured  out  at  the  bottom  of  the  altar  (vers.  7.  18,  25,  30,  34).  This  was 
to  be  done  in  every  case,  as  there  atonement,  or  reconciliation,  was  made  ;  there 
the  Lord  met  with  the  children  of  Israel  (Exod.  xxix.  42,  43).  The  pouring  out 
tells  of  the  fulness  of  the  atonement  made  by  Jesus.  He  "  poured  out  His  soul 
unto  death  "  (Isa.  liii.  12 ;  Psa.  xxii.  14) ;  made  "  reconciliation  for  iniquity " 
(Dan.  ix.  24);  gave  "His  life  a  ransom,"  &c.  (Matt.  xx.  28;  1  Tim.  ii.  6);  and  in 
Him — our  "Altar"  (Heb.  xiii.  10) — God  and  the  sinner  meet.  HI.  Fine  flouk.  It 
is  thought  that  in  chap,  ix.,  sin,  as  the  root  of  all  evil,  the  great  principle  of  evil 
within,  is  specially  dealt  with,  and  when  it  shows  itself  in  the  committal  of  sin — 
though  of  ignorance — it  must  be  judged  by  a  holy  God.  In  chap.  v.  certain  sinful 
actions  are  specified  (vers.  1-4),  and  dealt  with  in  the  same  spirit  (vers.  5-13) ;  but 
while  again  we  see  how  a  just  and  holy  God  must  punish  sin,  we  see  also  how  a 
God  of  love  meets  the  need  of  every  sinner — even  the  poorest — by  permitting  fine 
flour  to  be  offered,  when  the  offender  was  "  not  able  "  to  bring  any  of  the  animals 
named.  IV.  The  burning,  again,  shows  the  double  aspect  of  the  holy  Sufferer,  by 
the  two  words  used.  1.  The  fat,  and  portions  of  the  inwards  (as  m  peace-offering) 
— representing  the  rich  excellences,  heart  and  affections  reserved  for  God  Himself — 
were  to  be  burnt  as  incense,  or  "  savour  of  delight,"  upon  the  altar  of  burnt-oft'er- 
ings  (chap.  iv.  8-10,  19,  26,  35).  Striking  testimony  to  the  intrinsic  worth  of  the 
holy  Jesus,  even  when  presented  to  our  gaze  as  "made  sin!"  2.  The  whole 
bullock  was  to  be  burnt — in  judgment — "  without  the  camp  "  (chap.  iv.  11,  12). 
The  animal  was — typically — loaded  with  man's  sin.  It  represented  man  in  his 
corrupt  state,  outwardly  and  inwardly  evil  (Rom.  iii.  12,  vii.  18) :  head  guiding,  legs 
walking,  in  evil  ways,  engendered  within  (James  i.  15) ;  therefore  too  loathsome  to 
remain  in  sight  of  holy  God,  or  be  consumed  with  fire  on  His  altar  or  table.  The 
sin-offering  must  be  cast  forth — so  to  speak — from  His  presence.  Thus  "  sin  "  was 
"laid  upon"  the  sinless  Son  of  God;  the  holy  Jesus  was  separated  from  God, 
when.  "  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh,"  He  "  sufl'ered  without  the  gate  "  (Eom.  viii. 
8;  Heb.  xiii.  11,  12).  The  gate  of  the  very  city  chosen  of  God  to  put  His  Name 
there.  Yes — outside  its  walls,  the  holy  Son  of  God  was  crucified  in  a  place  set  apart 
for  the  execution  of  malefactors  (John  xix.  16-18).  3.  "In  a  clean  place"  the 
bullock  was  to  be  burnt,  "where  the  ashes"  of  burnt-offering  were  poured  out 
(chap.  iv.  12).  Ashes  told  of  "redemption"  accomplished,  and  the  pouring  out  of 
those  of  burnt-offering,  of  acceptance  of  "  finished  "  work.  The  "  body"  of  Jesus 
was  laid  in  a  "  new  tomb  "  (Matt,  xxvii.  60),  "  with  the  rich  in  His  death  "  (Isa.  liii. 
10) ;  token  of  work  "  finished,"  complete  reconciliation  made,  "  eternal  redemption  " 
obtained  (Heb.  ix.  12).  V,  "Outside  the  camp" — "the  gate,"  full  of  deep  teach- 
ing, can  here  but  point  to  subjects  for  meditation  and  study,  sufficient  for  whole 
lesson.  1.  Christ  forsaken  of  God,  "  made  a  curse  for  us  "  (Psa.  xxii.  1 ;  Matt,  xxvii. 
46;  Gal.  iii.  13),  showing  both  desert  of  sinner  and  fate  of  those  who  die  unrepen- 
tant and  unpardoned,  and  must  therefore  bear  the  curse  due  to — God's  judgment 
upon — then-  own'  sin.  2,  Christ  rejected  by  His  own — by  the  world  (John  i,  11 ; 
Luke  xxiii.  18,  24;  xix.  14);  bearing  reproach,  scorn  (Psa.  xiii.  10;  Ixix.  9,  20; 
Eom.  XV.  3  ;  Matt,  xxvii.  43),  buffeted,  scourged,  crucified  (Matt.  xxvi.  67,  xxvii.  26, 
30-35).  3.  All  who  are  Christ's  are  called  to  be  "  separate  from  the  world,"  "  bearing 
His  reproach"  (2  Cor.  xii.  10;  Heb.  xiii.  13),  for  "the  servant  is  not  greater  than 
his  Lord"  (John  xiii.  16,  xv.  20);  hated  by,  crucified  to  world,  "with  Christ" 
(John  xvii.  14;  Gal.  vi.  14,  ii.  20).  4.  Christ,  the  "  Saviour  of  the  world  "  (John  iv. 
42;  1  John  iv.  14).  Place  of  Gentiles  was  outside  the  camp,  so  may  here  see 
how  Christ  died — "not  for  that  nation  only,"  &c.  (John  xi.  51,  52).  {Ibid.) 
On  sins  committed  in  ignorance  : — I.  Man's  own  disposition  is  to  condone  inadver- 
tent SINS.  1.  Ignorance  is  treated  as  if  synonymous  with  guiltlessness.  2.  The 
responsibilities  which  attach  to  the  knowledge  become  secretly  a  reason  why  know- 
ledge is  eschewed.  II.  Wherein  the  guiltiness  of  inadvertent  sins  consists. 
1.  What  such  sinfulness  has  wrought.  The  death  of  the  Saviour.  2.  Sin  in  ignor- 
ance is  the  embodiment  in  action  of  those  dark  principles  of  enmity  against  God 
which  lie  embosomed  in  the  human  heart.  III.  God's  emphatic  witness  against 
inadvertent  sins.  1.  Sources  of  Divine  remonstrance  against  such  sins.  Nature. 
Scripture.     Conscience.    2.  Man's  resistance  of  the  Divine  remonstrance.    3.  How 


72  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

is  such  daring  ignorance  fostered?  (1)  By  the  perversion  of  revealed  truth.  (2) 
By  erroneous  teaching.  IV.  Godly  souls  are  beirayed  into  the  cojijiis&ion  of 
INADVERTENT  SINS.  When  Christians  give  themselves  up  to  the  guidance  of  any 
individual,  or  of  any  system,  not  strictly  accoidant  with  God's  revealed  truth,  they 
will  surely  act  agaiust  Christ  and  His  commandments  ignorantly.  V.  Sins  in  the 
GODLY  ARE  MOST  HEINOUS  IN  God's  esteeji.  Sin  is  to  be  estimated  by  a  man's 
spiritual  elevation.  VI.  Expiation  provided  for  sins  of  inadvertence.  1.  Against 
whorn  the  sins  were  committed.  Blood  sprinkled  "before  the  Lord."  2.  The 
process  of  purging.  3.  Its  suggestion  of  death.  4.  Its  suggestion  of  wrath.  VII. 
Typical  intimations  of  Christ's  death  for  man's  sins.  1.  God's  condemnation  of 
our  Substitute.  2.  God's  acceptance  of  our  Substitute.  (The  Preacher's  Horn. 
Com.)  Ignorance  in  sinning : — I.  Man's  perception  of  right  and  wrong  cannot 
BE  an  allowed  standard.  He  may  "sin  through  ignorance."  1.  Neither  his 
judgment  nor  his  conscience  is  an  adequate  guide.  2.  Hence  the  inquiry,  What  is 
sin?  must  be  determined  from  without  a  man,  not  from  within.  God  must  be 
heard.  3.  The  presence  of  sin  in  man,  even  ignorantly  contracted,  imperils  man's 
relationship  to  God.  It  interrupts  man's  approach  to  God,  prevents  his  acceptable 
worship  of  God,  and  alienates  his  relationship  with  God.  II.  God's  estimate  and 
MEASUREBiENT  OF  SIN  REGULATED  THE  ATONEMENT.  A  fuU  atonement  for  all  sin  has 
been  made  in  Christ.     1.  This,  if  apprehended,  lays  the  ground  of  a  settled  peace. 

2.  This  will  exalt  our  conception  of  the  fulness  and  efficacy  of  the  Saviour's  sacrifice. 

3.  This  will  assure  us  of  acceptable  and  satisfactory  fellowship  with  God,  since  all 
sin  is  propitiated.  III.  Ignorance  concerning  sin  argues  man's  real  helplessness 
IN  dealing  with  it.  {W.  H.  Jellie).  Sins  of  infirmity: — 1.  Even  sins  of  in- 
firmity contract  a  guilt  upon  the  soul ;  yea,  such  a  guilt  as  needs  atonement  and 
expiation  in  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ.  Do  not  slight  sins  of  infirmity,  for  then 
they  become  more  than  mere  infirmities.  2.  Here  is  relief  unto  faith  against  those 
usual  complaints  of  daily  infirmities,  which  many  gracious  souls  so  much  com- 
plain of  and  mourn  under.  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  cleanses  us  from  all  our 
sins.  3.  Here  is  great  encouragement  to  engage  in  the  service  and  work  of  God, 
notwithstanding  our  own  infirmities  and  disabilities.  The  Lord  hath  provided  a 
sin-offering  for  us  ;  He  will  accept  our  sincere,  though  weak  endeavours,  and  pardon 
our  failings.  4.  Take  notice  what  continual  obligations  of  love  are  upon  us  to 
Jesus  Christ.  We  have  such  continual  need  of  Him.  {S.  Mather.)  The  sin- 
offering  : — Sin !  The  sound  is  brief.  But  it  presents  a  dark  abyss  of  thought.  No 
mind  can  trace  its  birth.  No  eye  can  see  its  death.  It  ever  rolls  an  ever-deepening 
course.  Think  much  of  sin.  It  is  earth's  death-blow.  It  marred  the  beauty  of  a 
beautous  world.  It  is  man's  ruin.  Its  most  tremendous  blight  fell  on  our  inner 
life.  It  drove  the  soul  from  peaceful  fellowship  with  God.  Its  terrible  destructions 
die  not  in  the  grave.  It  works  this  bitter  and  eternal  anguish,  because  God's  curse 
attends  it.  As  the  bright  sun  behind  a  threatening  cloud,  the  sin-offering  waits  to 
change  the  aspect.  Though  sin  is  death,  the  sinner  need  not  die.  There  is  a 
fortress  of  escape.  Such  are  the  tidings  of  the  sin-offering.  Say,  is  not  this  the 
truth  of  truths?  Mark,  now,  how  the  sin-offering  in  every  part  proves  sin  to  be  a 
vanquished  foe.  There  are  indeed  some  grades  of  difference  in  this  type,  as  rank  or 
as  offence  might  differ.  The  first  example  will  illustrate  all.  The  offender  is  the 
anointed  priest  (chap.  iv.  3).  Sin  has  allured— ensnared — defiled  him.  But  now 
he  sees  his  guilt.  He  cannot  rest  till  pardon  be  obtained.  God's  voice  directs  his 
course.  He  must  bring  a  young  unblemished  bullock  to  the  Tabernacle  door. 
Behold  the  proof,  that  God  has  found  a  ransom.  This  is  an  idle  and  an  empty 
rite,  except  it  shows  the  victim  of  God's  choice.  This  is  but  mockery,  except  it 
witnesses,  that  help  is  laid  on  the  redeeming  Jesus.  A  solemn  act  is  next  enjoined. 
The  offender's  hands  must  touch  the  victim's  head.  This  sign,  too,  has  no  mean- 
ing, unless  it  bids  the  sin-lost  to  transmit  their  guilt.  The  proxy  is  then  slain 
(chap.  iv.  4).  Sin  must  have  death.  The  curse  must  fall.  Believer,  your  sins 
slew  Christ.  They  cannot  now  slay  you.  His  death  is  yours.  The  precious  rite 
continues  to  unfold  the  Saviour's  worth.  It  shows  three  uses  of  the  outpoured 
blood.  1.  The  veil  is  sprinkled  seven  times  (chap.  iv.  G).  This  hun*;  before  the 
mercy-seat.  It  was  the  entrance  to  the  holiest  place.  The  truth  is  manifest. 
They,  who  would  enter  heaven,  must  plead  blood  shed.  2.  Part  dyed  the  golden 
altar's  horns  (chap.  iv.  7).  This  was  the  place  where  incense  rose,  as  emblem  of 
ascending  prayer.  Christ's  intercession  is  salvation's  crown.  3.  The  brazen  altar 
drank  the  rest  (chap.  iv.  7).  Thus  all  is  used  to  bring  assurance  to  the  anxious 
heart.     Each  drop  subserves  its  part.    Atonement  needs  the  whole.     The  whole  is 


cnAP.  IV.]  LEVITICUS.  73 

given.  [Dean  Law.)  Sins  of  infirmity  : — 1.  To  take  heed  by  the  fall  of  others  (ver.  3). 
If  the  pillars  may  bend,  and  the  chief  props  of  the  house  shake,  what  shall  the 
tender  rafters  do?  "Be  not  high-minded,  but  fear."  2.  To  bear  with  them  that 
are  weak  (Gal.  vi.  1).  He  more  easily  excuses  sin  in  others,  who  himself  is  bitten  with 
the  consciousness  of  his  own  infirmity.  3.  Of  the  greatness  of  the  sin  of  the  priests. 
As  by  their  good  life  and  doctrine  they  save  themselves  and  those  who  hear  them,  so 
by  the  contrary  they  destroy  both.  4.  To  bear  patieutly  the  momentary  aftiiciions 
of  this  life  (ver.  12 ;  cf.  Heb.  xiii.  13).  We  should  in  our  meditation  and  desire 
go  out  of  the  world,  as  out  of  the  camp,  and  be  content  to  bear  reproach  for  Christ's 
sake,  seeing  we  shall  have  no  long  continuance  here,  but  look  for  an  everlasting 
habitation  in  heaven.     5.  The  multitude  of  sinners  does  not  excuse  sin  (ver.  13). 

6.  The  prince  is  to  take  notice  of  his  error  (ver.  22).  [A.  Willet,  D.D.)  Sins 
unpeixeived : — These  are  not  sins  of  omission,  but  acts  committed  by  a  person 
when  at  the  time  he  did  not  suppose  that  what  he  did  was  sin.  Although  he  did 
the  thing  deliberately,  yet  he  did  not  perceive  the  sin  of  it.  So  deceitful  is  sin,  we 
may  be  committing  that  abominable  thing  which  cast  angels  into  an  immediate 
and  an  eternal  hell,  and  yet  at  the  moment  be  totally  unaware  !  Want  of  know- 
ledge of  the  truth  and  too  little  tenderness  of  conscience  hide  it  from  us.  Hard- 
ness of  heart  and  a  corrupt  nature  cause  us  to  sin  unperceived.  But  here 
again  the  form  of  the  Son  of  Man  appears  !  Jehovah,  God  of  Israel,  institutes 
sacrifice  for  sins  of  ignorance,  and  thereby  discovers  the  same  compassionate  and 
considerate  heart  that  appears  in  our  High  Priest,  "  who  can  have  compassion  on 
the  ignorant !  "  (Heb.  v.  2).  Amidst  the  types  of  this  Tabernacle  we  recognise  the 
presence  of  Jesus  ;  it  is  His  voice  that  shakes  the  curtains  and  speaks  in  the  ear  of 
Moses,  "  If  a  soul  shall  sin  through  ignorance !  "  The  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and 
forever!  (A.  A.  Bonar.)  The  sin-offering  : — The  sin-offering,  although  first  in 
order  of  application,  came  last  in  order  of  institution.  It  is  distinctly  a  creation 
of  the  law.  Sin  having  become,  by  the  commandment,  "exceeding  smful,"  the 
remedy  provided  by  the  law  was  the  sin-offering,  with  all  its  elaborate  ritual. 
The  most  prominent  feature  is  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood.  The  blood  being  that 
which  atones  (ciiap.  xvii.  11),  it  naturally  comes  most  prominently  forward  in  that 
which  was  especially  the  atoning  sacrifice.  The  sin-offerings  fall  into  two  classes 
— viz.,  those  whose  blood  was  taken  into  the  Tabernacle,  placed  upon  the  horns  of 
the  golden  altar,  and  sprinkled  seven  ^imes  before  the  veil ;  and  those  whose  blood 
was  not  taken  into  the  Tabernacle,  but  only  placed  upon  the  horns  of  the  brazen 
altar  which  stood  in  the  outer  court.  To  the  first  class  belong  the  sin-offerings  of 
the  high  priest  (vers.  3-12),  and  of  the  whole  congregation  (vers.  13-21);  to  the 
second,  those  offered  by  rulers  (vers.  22-26),  or  by  any  of  the  common  people  (vers. 
27-35).  Certain  portions  of  the  sacrifice  were  laid  upon  the  altar  of  burnt-offering 
(vers.  8-10) ;  the  main  part  was  dealt  with  in  one  of  two  ways — in  sin-offerings  of 
the  first  class  mentioned  above,  it  was  consumed  by  fire  outside  the  camp  (vers.  12, 
21) ;  in  other  cases,  viz.,  where  the  blood  was  not  carried  into  the  Tabernacle,  it 
became  the  food  of  the  officiating  priests  (chap.  vi.  26,  29 ;  x.  17,  18) ;  the  greater 
part  of  the  blood  was  poured  away  at  the  bottom  of  the  altar  of  burnt-offering  (vers. 

7,  18,  25,  30,  34).  Tradition  adds  that  it  desceuded  thence  into  the  valley  of  the 
Kedron.  It  is  to  be  observed  that  a  sin-offering  was  ordained  to  consist  of  one 
animal  only,  and  that  in  each  case  the  precise  offering  to  be  made  was  specified. 
*'  Men  were  not  allowed  to  choose  or  multiply  their  sin-offerings,  as  if  there  could 
really  be  any  proportion  between  their  gift  and  the  privileges  to  which  it  readmitted 
them,  lest  they  should  dream  of  compensating  for  so  much  sin  by  so  much  sacri- 
fice." According  to  the  unanimous  tradition  of  the  Jews,  a  verbal  confession  of 
the  sin  or  sins  for  which  the  offering  was  brought  accompanied  the  imposition  of 
hands  in  the  case  of  sin  and  trespass-offerings.  The  next  i^oint  to  be  noticed  is 
that  remarkable  provision  of  the  law  by  which  it  was  ordained  that  the  majority  of 
the  sin-ofl'erings  should  be  eaten  by  the  priests.  The  explanation  of  this  is  given 
in  chap.  x.  17.  The  people's  sin  passed  into  the  very  substance  of  the  priests  who 
thus  "  in  a  deep  mystery  neutralised,  through  the  holiness  vested  in  them  by  their 
consecration,  the  sin  which  the  offerer  had  laid  upon  the  victim  and  upon  them." 
By  this  solemn  act,  which  served  but  to  increase  the  guilt  of  an  unholy  priesthood, 
the  priests  became  in  a  remarkable  manner  types  of  Him  who  was  "  made  sin  for 
us."  It  remains  to  inquire.  For  what  sins  did  the  sin-offering  atone?  Cleaily  not 
for  wilful  breaches  of  any  of  God's  commandments  (2  Cor.  iii.  7  ;  Heb.  ii.  2 ;  x. 
28;  also  Numb.  xv.  27-31;  Dent.  xvii.  12).  The  law  proclaimed  aloud  that  "  the 
wages  of  sin  is  death."    For  what,  then,  were  the  Mosaic  sacrificial  atonements 


74  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chai-.  it. 

available  ?  The  cases  which  admitted  the  application  of  a  sin  or  trespass-offering 
may  be  bi-ought  under  four  beads — viz.,  (1)  bodily  defilements  (chap.  v.  2,  3  ;  xii. 
6,  7  ;  XV.  13-15,  25-30 ;  (2)  ceremonial  olTence  (chap.  v.  15-19 ;  (3)  certain  specified 
cases  of  moral  transgression  knowingly  committed,  in  favour  of  which  an  excep- 
tion from  the  general  severity  of  the  law  was  admitted,  and  an  atonement  ordained 
(chap.  vi.  1-7) ;  (-1)  sins  of  ignorance  and  inadvertency,  or  offences  unwittingly 
done  (chap.  iv.  2,  13,  22,  27 ;  v.  15,  18 ;  Numb.  xv.  24-29).  These  last  formed  the 
largest  class  of  offences  to  be  atoned  for  by  the  Mosaic  sacrifices.  All  this  vast  and 
complicated  machinery  of  confession,  bloodshed,  sacrifice,  and  priestly  atonement 
existed  in  the  main  for  what,  in  modern  language,  we  should  call  vi-nial  sins,  for 
sins  committed  in  ignorance  or  inadvertence — it  might  almost  be  said,  for  involun- 
tary sins.  One  great  lesson,  then,  which  the  system  of  atonement  under  the  law 
must  have  taught,  was  the  extreme  heinousness  of  sin,  since  even  "  little"  sins,  as 
men  might  call  them,  had  to  be  atoned  by  blood.     {E.  F.  Willis,  M.A.)  Sing  of 

ignorance : — I  know  nothing  that  gives  a  higher  view  of  the  holiness  of  God  than 
this  :  that  not  only  sins  that  we  culpably  and  deliberately  commit  are  guilt  in  His 
sight,  but  that  we  commit  sins  in  our  ignorance  which  are  sins  though  we  do  not 
suppose  them  to  be  so.  God's  law  is  a  fixture,  and  is  not  dependent  u^Don  our 
estimate.  There  is  sin  committed  in  the  dark  as  well  as  noonday.  Sin  committed 
by  those  who  are  not  acquainted  with  it  as  such,  as  well  as  when  committed, 
though  it  may  be  aggravated  in  the  last  case  by  those  who  are  acquainted  with  it,  is 
still  sin.  Now,  it  has  been  said  that  sins  committed  in  ignorance  are  no  sins  at 
all ;  and  that  the  ignorance  of  a  duty  is  atonement  for  omitting  that  duty,  or  expia- 
tory of  the  sin.  My  answer  is — ignorance  may  extenuate  our  guilt,  but  it  does  not 
in  the  least  modify  the  sin,  or  make  an  atonement  for  it.  (J.  Cuminin(j,D.D.)  The 
sin-offering  : — There  is  a  prevailing  disposition  in  the  hearts  of  many  to  think  of 
sins  of  ignorance  as  if  they  were  no  sins  ;  or  if  it  be  allowed  that  they  need  mercy, 
such  mercy  is  regarded  rather  as  a  right  than  as  the  free  and  unmerited  gift  of 
grace.  Ignorauce  in  the  minds  of  such  persons  becomes  synonymous  with  guilt- 
lessness ;  to  act  conscientiously  (however  dark  or  dead  the  conscience)  is  to  act 
blamelessly.  The  thought  of  the  responsibilities  that  attach  to  knowledge  becomes 
secretly  a  reason  why  knowledge  is  eschewed.  In  a  word,  darkness  is  loved  rather 
than  light,  because  darkness  brings  quiet,  but  light  has  awakening  and  convicting 
power.  A  sufficient  answer  to  all  such  thoughts  is  this — that  the  especial  reason 
for  the  appointment  of  the  sin-offering  was,  that  it  might  meet  sins  committed  in 
ignorance.  The  hemousness  of  such  sins  of  ignorance  depends,  not  so  much  on 
the  character  of  the  deed  done  as  on  that  condition  of  heart  which  is  capable  of 
committing  sin  without  knowing  that  it  is  sin,  and  commits  it,  perhaps  exultingly, 
triumphing  in  it  as  good.  What  must  angels  in  heaven  think  of  the  state  of  that 
soul  which  is  so  thoroughly  blinded,  so  utterly  astray  from  God,  as  to  violate  His 
commandments  and  resist  His  will  in  total  unconsciousness  that  it  is  doing  wrong? 
What  can  be  more  terrible  than  a  conscience  so  hardened  ?  Nothing  has  a  greater 
tendency  to  bring  the  conscience  into  this  state,  and  to  lead  to  tlie  daring  commis- 
sion of  sins  of  ignorance,  than  religious  truth  perverted.  It  would  be  happy, 
indeed,  if  we  could  assert,  even  of  real  Christians,  that  they  are  free  from  tlrese 
fearful  sins  of  ignorance.  But  whenever  they  give  themselves  up  to  the  guidance 
of  any  individual,  or  of  any  system  whose  influence  is  not  strictly  according  to  the 
revealed  truth  of  God,  they  will  surely  act  against  Christ  and  His  commandments 
ignorantly.  There  is  nothing,  perhaps,  at  this  present  moment,  that  is  operating 
more  terribly  against  the  progress  of  truth  than  the  misdirected  energies  of  real 
Christians,  ignorantly  snstaiuing  error,  ignorantly  resisting  light.  If,  then,  there 
may  be  sins  of  ignorance,  even  where  there  is  most  diligence  and  watchfulness,  how 
much  more  where  there  is  negligence  or  slumber,  or  acquiescence  in  the  prevailing 
evil  of  the  age  !  There  has  been  only  One  on  earth  free  from  sins  of  ignorance, 
even  He  who  said,  "  I  have  set  the  Lord  always  before  me  "  ;  and  He  came  to  be 
our  Sin-offering — to  bear  the  wrath  due  to  these  very  sins  of  ignorance ;  otherwise, 
they  alone  would  have  sunk  us  into  perdition  for  ever.  The  chapter  before  us,  as 
being  addressed  to  those  who  were  ostensibly  the  separate  people  of  God,  teaches 
us  especially  respecting  sins  of  ignorance  committed  by  believers.  The  greater  our 
privileges,  the  nearer  we  are  brought  to  God  ;  the  more  intimately  we  are  connected 
with  His  service,  the  more  terrible  must  be  the  consequences  of  transgression.  .  .  . 
In  atonement.  Divine  holiness  requires  in  the  Surety  not  only  that  He  should  bear 
every  penalty,  but  that  He  should  also  present  a  substitutional  perfectness  for  us. 
There  are  few  chapters  worthy  of  more  solemn  consideration  than  this.    It  teaches 


CHAP.  IV.]  LEVITICUS.  75 

us  the  deep  responsibility  of  all  positions  of  ostensible  service,  especially  such  as 
are  influential  over  the  minds  and  habits  of  others.  Any  influence  we  may  possess, 
any  abiUty  of  instructing,  comforting,  or  in  any  way  helping  others,  by  word  or  by 
example,  is  a  talent  which  we  cannot  escape  the  responsibility  of  using.  The  priests 
of  God  (and  all  believers  are  priests)  must  act,  and  that,  too,  openly.  But  how 
needful  that  they  should  well  consider  the  responsibility  of  their  position ;  the 
danger  in  which  they  are  of  acting  ignorantly,  and  the  disastrous  effects  of  such 
ignorance,  in  dis^honouring  God  and  injuring  others  who  may  be  involved  in  the 
consequences  of  their  sin  !  Honest-hearted  reception  of  the  Word  of  God  can  alone 
preserve  us  from  such  ignorance.     (Z>.  W.  Newton.)  MarVs  Incompetency  to  dfcil 

with  ain  : — Nothing  can  more  foiciMv  express  man's  incompetency  to  deal  with  sin 
than  the  fact  of  there  being  such  a  thing  as  a  "  sin  of  ignorance."  How  could  he 
deal  with  that  which  he  knows  not  ?  How  could  he  dispose  of  that  which  has 
never  even  come  within  the  range  of  his  conscience?  Impossible.  Man's  ignorance 
of  sin  proves  bis  total  inability  to  put  it  away.  If  he  does  not  know  of  it,  what  can 
he  do  about  it  ?  Nothing.  He  is  as  powerless  as  he  is  ignorant.  Nor  is  this  all. 
The  fact  of  a  "  sin  of  ignorance"  demonstrates,  most  clearly,  the  uncertainty  which 
must  attend  upon  every  settlement  of  the  question  of  sin,  in  which  no  higher  claims 
have  been  responded  to  than  those  put  forth  by  the  most  refined  human  conscience. 
There  can  never  be  settled  peace  upon  this  ground.  There  will  always  be  the 
painful  apprehension  that  there  is  something  wrong  underneath.  If  the  heart  be 
not  led  into  settled  repose  by  the  Scripture  testimony  that  the  inflexible  claims 
of  Divine  justice  have  been  answered,  there  must  of  necessity  be  a  sensation  of 
uneasiness,  and  every  such  sensation  presents  a  barrier  to  our  worship,  our  com- 
munion, and  our  testinoay.  If  I  am  uneasy  in  reference  to  the  settlement  of  the 
question  of  sin,  I  cannot  worship  ;  I  cannot  enjoy  communion,  either  with  God  or 
His  people,  nor  can  I  be  an  intelligent  or  effective  witness  for  Christ.  The  heart 
must  be  at  rest,  before  God,  as  to  the  perfect  remission  of  sin,  ere  we  can  "  worship 
Him  in  spirit  and  in  truth."  If  there  be  guilt  on  the  conscience  there  must  be 
terror  in  the  heart ;  and  assuredly  a  heart  filled  with  terror  cannot  be  a  happy  or  a 
worshipping  heart.     (C.  H.  Mackintosh.)  The  Bible  tells  of  sin  and  its  cure: — 

The  Bible  is  a  book  with  a_ single  purpose  ;  and  that  purpose  is  to  reveal  the  sinful- 
ness of  the  human  family,  and  a  method  of  salvation  from  that  sinfulness.  And, 
of  course,  a  book  that  has  only  one  end  in  view  must  necessarily  be  silent  witb 
reference  to  a  thousand  other  subjects.  A  few  years  ago  a  man  was  galloping  on 
horseback,  as  if  he  had  seen  a  spectre,  down  the  bank  of  a  New  England  river  in 
the  dead  of  night.  His  mission  was  to  inform  the  sleeping  dwellers  in  a  number  of 
manufacturing  towns  farther  down  the  stream  that  the  great  dam  ftriber  up  the 
river  was  about  to  burst  its  barriers.  The  horseman,  as  he  sped  along,  trampled 
myriads  of  flowers  underfoot,  but  he  had  nothing  to  say  of  botany.  He  rushed  by 
hundreds  of  projecting  rocks,  rich  in  stories  of  prehistoric  ages,  but  he  had  nothing 
to  say  on  the  subject  of  geology.  Over  his  head  the  starry  hosts  were  marshalled 
as  they  had  been  since  the  foundation  of  the  world,  but  he  had  nothing  to  say  on 
the  subject  of  astronomy.  He  had  just  one  mission — to  inform  the  sleeping  toilers 
of  their  danger,  and  how  they  might  escape  it,  and  he  had  no  time  to  devote  to  the 
consideration  of  any  other  subject,  however  important,  or  however  fascinating  to 
other  minds.  So  it  is  with  God's  Word.  Its  single  object  is  to  tell  us  of  sin  and 
its  cure.     On  this  subject  it  is  full  and  explicit  and  infallible.  Involnntanj 

offences : — "  Truth,  real  inward  truth,  is  the  rarest  of  all  things."  Thus  wrote  the 
late  Rev.  F.  D.  Maurice,  one  of  the  most  saintly  men  of  his  day.  Let  him  who 
questions  this  consider  this  good  man's  confession,  that  "  some  little  petty  subter- 
fuge, some  verbal  or  acted  dishonesty,  we  are  continually  surprised  into ;  and 
against  this  neither  a  high  code  of  honour  nor  an  exact  profession  of  religion  is 
much  preservation."  Does  the  reader  see  in  this  confession,  as  in  a  mirror,  his 
own  heart  ?  If  so,  and  if  he  would  know  how  to  become  absolutely  truthful,  let 
him  learn  that  "  continued  intercourse  with  the  Father  of  Lights,  revealing  our 
own  darkness  to  us,  is  tbe  one  safeguard ;  and  the  Christian  who  loses  that  is  in 
more  danger  of  stumbling  than  an  intidel."  Perhaps  not  in  more,  but  certainly  in 
as  much  danger;  since  when  a  Christian  runs  from  the  light  into  darkness  he  is 
bhnd  as  other  men.  To  be  thoroughly  truthful  in  aU  things,  it  is,  therefore,  need- 
ful for  a  good  man  to  live  very  near  to  the  God  of  truth.  Our  virtues  are  never  so 
pure  as  when  we  live  close  to  our  Eedeemer's  throne.  Errors  and  oversights  in 

all  our  lives  : — It  is  with  the  children  of  men  as  with  the  housewife,  that  having 
diligently  swept  her  house  and  cast  the  dust  out-of-doors,  can  see  nothing  amiss, 


76  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

not  so  much  as  a  speck  of  dust  in  it,  whereas,  if  the  sun  do  but  a  little  shine  in 
through  some  cranny  in  the  wall,  or  some  broken  quarrel  in  the  window,  she  may 
soon  see  the  whole  house  swim  and  swarm  with  iimurnerable  motes  of  dust,  floating 
to  and  fro  in  the  air,  which  for  dimness  of  light  or  sight  before  she  was  not  able  to 
discern.  Even  so  it  is  witli  many  that  are  careful  of  their  ways,  so  that  little  may 
be  seen  amiss  that  might  require  either  refoimaiion  or  amendment,  yet,  when  they 
fhall  come  to  look  more  attentively  into  God's  law,  a  little  beam  of  liglit  reflecting 
upon  their  souls  from  it,  will  discover  unto  them  such  an  innumerable  company, 
as  well  of  corruptions  in  their  hearts  as  of  errors  and  oversights  in  their  lives,  that 
it  shall  make  them,  as  men  amazed,  cry  out.  Lord,  what  earthly  man  doth  know 
the  errors  of  his  lite  ?     (T.  Gataker.)  lite  best  are  not  free  from  imperfeetion : — 

He  who  boasts  of  being  perfect  is  perfect  in  folly.  I  have  been  a  good  deal  up  and 
down  the  world,  and  I  neither  did  see  either  a  perfect  horse  or  a  perfect  mau,  and 
I  never  shall  until  two  Sundays  come  together.  You  cannot  get  white  flour  out  of 
a  coal  sack,  nor  perfection  out  of  human  nature ;  he  who  looks  for  it  had  better 
look  for  sugar  in  the  sea.  The  old  saying  is,  "  Lifeless,  faultless."  Of  dead  men 
we  should  say  nothing  but  good ;  but  as  for  the  living,  they  are  all  tarred,  more  or 
less,  with  the  black  brush,  and  half  an  eye  can  see  it.  Every  head  has  a  soft  place 
in  it,  and  every  heart  has  its  black  drop.  Every  rose  has  its  prickles,  and  every 
day  its  night.  Even  the  sun  shows  spots,  and  the  skies  are  darkened  with  clouds. 
Nobody  is  so  wise  but  he  has  folly  enough  to  stock  a  stall  at  Vanity  Fair.  Where 
I  could  not  see  the  fool's  cap,  I  have,  nevertheless,  heard  the  bells  jingle.  As  there 
is  no  sunshine  without  some  shadow,  so  is  all  human  good  mixed  up  with  more  or 
less  evil ;  even  poor  law  guardians  have  their  little  failings,  and  parish  beadles  are 
not  wholly  of  heavenly  nature.  The  best  wine  has  its  lees.  All  men's  faults  are 
not  written  on  their  foreheads,  and  it  is  quite  as  well  they  are  not,  or  hats  would 
need  wide  brims  ;  yet,  as  sure  as  eggs  are  eggs,  faults  of  some  sort  nestle  in  every 
man's  bosom.  There's  no  telling  when  a  man's  sins  may  show  themselves,  for 
hares  pop  out  of  a  ditch  just  when  you  are  not  looking  for  them.  A  horse  that  is 
weak  in  the  legs  may  not  stumble  for  a  mile  or  two,  but  it's  in  him,  and  the  rider 
had  better  hold  him  up  well.  The  tabby  cat  is  not  lapping  milk  just  now,  but  leave 
the  dairy  door  open,  and  we  wiU  see  if  she  is  not  as  bad  a  thief  as  the  kitten. 
There's  fire  in  the  flint,  cool  as  it  looks  ;  wait  till  the  steel  gets  a  knock  at  it,  and 
you  will  see.  Everybody  can  read  that  riddle,  but  it  is  not  everybody  that  will 
remember  to  keep  his  gunpowder  out  of  the  way  of  the  candle.  (C  H.  Spurcteon.) 
All  sin  must  be  abhorred : — It  is  credibly  reported  that  in  some  parts  of  Italy  there 
are  spiders  of  so  poisonous  a  nature  as  will  kill  him  that  treads  upon  them,  and 
break  a  glass  if  they  do  but  creep  over  it.  This  shows  clearly  that  the  force  of  this 
poison  is  not  in  measure  by  the  quantity,  but  in  the  nature  by  the  quality  thereof. 
And  even  so  the  force  of  sin  consists  not  in  the  greatness  of  the  subject  or  object  of 
it,  but  in  the  poisonful  nature  of  it,  for  that  it  is  the  breach  of  the  law,  violation  of 
the  justice,  and  a  provocation  of  the  wrath  of  God,  and  is  a  present  poison  and 
damnation  to  men's  souls ;  therefore,  as  the  least  poison,  as  poison,  being  deadly 
to  the  body,  is  detested,  so  the  least  sin,  as  sin,  being  mortal  to  the  soul,  is  to  be 
abhorred.     (J.  Spencer.) 

Ver.  3.  If  the  priest  that  is  anointed  do  sin. — The  eminent  sinfulness  of  error  in 
the  pr  lent : — I.  Fitoji  the  superior  position  he  occupied.  II.  From  the  superior 
PRIVILEGES  HE  ENJOYED.  Exempt  from  many  secular  anxieties  and  temptations.  Con- 
stantly in  contact  with  sacred  influences.  III.  From  the  superior  knowledge  he 
POSSESSED.  Intimately  acquainted  with  requirements  of  law.  Possessing  ample  means 
and  opportunities  for  ascertaining  purpose  of  precepts  enjoined.  IV.  From  the 
superior  INFLUENCE  HE  EXERTED.  Lookcd  up  to  as  an  example.  {F.  W.  Brown.) 
Defiled  sanctities : — 1.  Christians  occujjying  exalted  positions,  enjoying  elevated 
privileges,  rendering  distinguished  service  for  God,  may  fall  into  sin.  2.  They 
know  that  the  dishonour  done  to  God  is  commensurate  with  the  dignity  of  their 
position  and  the  holiness  of  their  profession.  3.  So  acutely  is  their  guilt  felt  by 
tbem  when  thus  brought  under  consciousness  of  sin,  that  its  burden  and  bitterness 
■would  overwhelm  them  were  there  not  adequate  grace  in  the  siu-offering  for  even 
each  sin  as  theirs.     Here,  therefore,  it  is  clearly  shown — I.  That  however  far  sin 

MAY  have  penetrated,  AND  WHATEVER  SOLEMN  AND  SACRED  THINGS  IT  MAY  HAVE 
DEFILED,  THITHER  THE  ATONING  BLOOD  FOLLOWS,  CARRYING  FULL  EXPIATION  WHERE  SIN 
HAS  CARRIED  DEFILEMENT.  II.  Th.AT  THE  DISHONOUR  DONE  TO  GoD,  TO  THE  SANCTITIES 
OF  A  GODLY  LIFE,  AMD  TO  THE  SOLEMNITIES  OF  SANCTCABY  MINISTBIES,  WAS  COMPENSATED 


CHAP.  IV.]  LEVITICUS.  77 

FOE  IN  OFFEKING  UPON  THE  ALTAK  OF  INCENSE  THE  SYMBOLS  OF  THE  INHERENT  AND  INTRINSIC 

EXCELLENCY  OF  Cheist.  (W.  H.  Jellie.)  Sin  in  the  priesthood: — I.  A  holy  office  does 
NOT  ensure  infallibility.  II.  Occupants  of  a  holy  office  are  specially  called  to 
SANCTITY.  III.  Eminently  privileged  and  enlightened,  they  who  minister  before 
God  should  be  most  vigilant  lest  they  sin.  IV.  Sin  in  God's  priests  had  to  be 
purged  by  a  great  sacrificial  expiation.  Expressing — 1.  The  peculiar  magnitude 
of  sin  in  them.  2.  The  boundless  sufficiency  of  redemption,  even  for  them.  {Ibid.) 
The  priest's  sin : — This  man  is  a  priest ;  the  holy  anointing  oil  of  the  Lord  his  God 
is  upon  him,  and  therefore,  of  course,  he  cannot  sin  !  The  fact  of  the  matter  is 
that  none  of  us  are  beyond  the  reach  of  temptation,  beyond  the  possibility  of  a  fall. 
Well,  what  then  ?  I  know  what  the  mocking  world  will  say  :  "  If  the  priest  that  is 
anointed  do  sin,"  I  will  have  nothing  to  do  with  religion  at  all;  it  is  all  hypocrisy; 
he  is  no  better  than  other  men.  I  know  quite  well  what  uncharitable  professors 
will  say :  Turn  him  out ;  he  is  a  hypocrite.  "  If  the  priest  that  is  anointed  do 
sin,"  he  has  disgraced  himself.  I  know  what  your  own  heart  will  say  :  It  is  no 
good  ;  I  have  tried  ;  I  have  fallen ;  I  may  as  well  give  it  all  up,  there  is  no  hope  at 
all.  But  what  does  God  say?  "If  the  priest  that  is  anointed  do  sin,"  let  him 
bring  his  sacrifice  ;  "  let  him  bring  .  .  .  a  young  bullock  without  blemish  .  .  .  for 
a  sin-offering."  Is  it  not  marvellous  !  I  do  not  so  much  wonder  at  the  27th  verse 
whe're  God  says :  "  If  any  one  of  the  common  people  sin,"  but  "  if  the  priest  that  is 
anointed  do  sin,"  let  him  bring  his  sacrifice.  And  yet,  if  you  read  that  verse  care- 
fully all  through,  you  will  see  that  there  is  no  minimising  of  the  priest's  sin.  God, 
in  the  terms  that  He  uses,  says  that  it  is  a  very  heinous  thing  for  a  priest  to  sin.  If 
one  of  His  own  children  goes  astray  it  is  a  very  serious  thing.  He  has  been  anointed ; 
that  anointing  not  only  implies  separation  to  God,  but  enduing  with  power.  That 
anointing  of  the  Holy  Spirit  is  upon  him,  he  ought  not  to  have  sinned.  No  tempta- 
tion came  upon  him  more  than  he  was  able  to  bear.  And  if  you  read  on  you  will 
see,  in  the  Eevised  Version,  "  If  the  priest  that  is  anointed  do  sin,  so  as  to  cause 
the  people  to  sin."  Yes,  if  the  priest  sin,  he  causes  the  people  to  sin,  and  if  the 
Chnstian  sin  he  is  a  stumblingblock  to  others,  therefore  an  ungodly  man  will  go 
still  further  into  the  depths  of  sin.  And  yet,  "  if  the  priest  that  is  anointed  do  sin, 
let  him  bring  his  sacrifice."  What  does  he  do  when  he  sacrifices?  There  are 
seven  points  you  ought  to  consider.  The  first  thing  he  has  to  do  (ver.  4),  "  He 
shall  bring  the  bullock  unto  the  door  of  the  Tabernacle  of  the  congregation  before 
the  Lord,  and  shall  lay  his  hand  upon  the  bullock's  head."  The  bullock  is  to  be 
■without  spot  or  blemis-h.  The  priest  comes  there  conscious  of  his  own  sin,  and  lays 
his  hand  upon  the  bullock's  head.  And  that  is  the  first  thing  you  must  do.  You 
must  find  a  spotless  victim.  The  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  that  Lamb  without  sin, 
without  spot.  The  first  thing  to  do  is  to  put  our  hand  upon  the  victim.  And  the 
moment  the  man  laid  his  hand  upon  the  victim  that  moment  a  transference  took 
place.  All  the  sinner's  sin  was  placed  upon  the  victim.  The  victim  was  slain  and 
cast  outside  the  camp,  and  the  sinner  goes  into  the  Temple  of  God  and  takes  his 
place  in  the  Holy  Place  of  Jehovah,  And  directly  you  lay  the  hand  of  faith  upon 
Christ,  directly  you  grasp  Christ  as  your  great  Substitute,  the  same  thing  takes 
place.  And  if  you  are  a  child  of  God,  ynu  have  felt  that  the  burden  of  sin  is 
intolerable,  it  has  weighed  you  down,  and  all  that  sin  has  been  made  to  meet  upon 
Him.  Another  reason  why  he  was  to  lay  his  hand  hard,  was  to  show  that  all  his 
trust  was  in  that  victim  alone.  He  was  to  lean  hard  with  all  his  weight  upon  him. 
If  the  victim  did  not  support  him  the  man  fell  prostrate  to  the  ground.  So  we 
must  lean  entirely  upon  Christ,  all  our  confidence  must  be  in  Him  and  Him  alone. 
The  second  point  is  this — He  shall  kill  the  bullock  before  the  Lord.  There  is  no 
doubt  about  it,  "  the  wages  of  sin  is  death."  Look  at  it  I  look  priest !  and  see  what 
your  sin  has  brought  about — the  death  of  that  pure  and  spotless  victim.  Now 
there  were  three  things  to  be  done  with  the  blood  of  the  bullock.  The  blood  of  the 
bullock  was  to  be  taken  and  sprinkled  in  three  different  places.  First  of  all  you 
read  in  ver.  6,  the  priest  was  to  take  the  blood  and  sprinkle  it  seven  times 
before  the  Lord,  before  the  veil  of  the  sanctuary.  Seven  times  he  was  to  sprinkle 
it  there  at  the  Holy  of  Holies.  Why  ?  Because  within  that  Holy  of  Holies  dwell 
the  Shechinah  clory  of  God.  Christian,  is  this  not  the  first  result  of  your  sin? 
You  lose  your  communion  with  God.  The  first  thing  to  be  done  is  to  restore  that 
communion  with  God.  The  next  thing  to  be  done  is  this — he  was  to  take  some  of 
the  blood  (ver.  7)  and  put  it  upon  the  altar  of  sweet  incense.  What  was  that  ? 
The  place  where  the  priest  prayed  for  the  people.  When  the  people  were  j^raying 
outside  the  priest  went  into  the  Holy  Place,  and  his  offering  went  up  as  incense 


78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

before  God.  Is  not  this  the  second  result  of  sin — you  I'^se  the  power  of  prayer  ;  you 
say  your  prayers  but  you  no  longer  pray;  you  lose  all  that  joy  and  spontaneity  of 
service ;  there  is  no  fragrance  about  your  prayers,  it  is  mei'e  routine,  antl  there  ia 
no  reality  about  them  at  all.  If  you  want  to  have  communion  with  God  in  prayer, 
and  to  be  able  to  pray  as  you  ought  to  pray,  there  must  be  the  sprinkling  of  the 
blood  there.  The  third  thing  to  be  done  was  to  take  the  rest  of  the  blood  and  pour 
it  out  on  the  altar  of  burnt-offering.  What  was  that  ?  The  place  where  the  daily 
burnt-offering  was  offered  up.  God  will  not  accept  your  burnt-offering  if  there  is 
sin  in  the  heart.  There  is  a  controversy  between  me  and  God,  and  though  I  may  try 
and  bring  Him  offerings,  God  will  not  accept  them.  There  was  another  thing  to  be 
done.  "  And  the  skin  of  the  bullock,  and  all  his  flesh,  with  his  head,  and  with  his 
legs,  and  his  inwards,  and  his  dung,  even  the  whole  bullock  shall  he  carry  forth 
without  the  camp  unto  a  clean  place,  where  the  ashes  are  poured  out,  and  burn  him 
on  the  wood  with  fire :  where  the  ashes  are  poured  out  shall  he  be  burnt."  Now 
we  have  never  had  that  word  for  burnt  before.  That  word  means  to  thoroughly 
consume  with  burning.  Very  different  to  another  word  for  burning  I  shall  notice 
presently.  It  is  no  use  your  saying  you  cannot  get  peace  and  joy  as  long  as  you  are 
keeping  your  bullock  within  the  camp.  You  must  take  it  out  and  burn  it.  There 
wiU  be  no  peace  until  you  do.  Inside  the  camp  a  very  different  scene  was  taking 
place.  There,  upon  the  altar,  we  read  in  the  eighth  and  following  verses,  all  the  fat 
of  the  bullock,  all  the  inwards  of  the  bullock,  he  is  to  offer  it  up  upon  the  altar  of 
the  burnt-offering  for  a  sweet  savour  to  God.  That  is  a  very  different  word  from 
burnt — the  word  in  ver.  10,  is  kHour ;  it  means  to  burn  as  fragrance — not  with 
consumiog  burning,  but  as  sweet  incense  to  God.  And  there  is  a  sweet  incense 
ascending  from  that  altar.  The  priest  may  almost  hear  that  whisper  from  the 
open  heavens,  and  it  is  forgiven  him.  It  is  all  forgiven ;  the  sacrifice  is  accepted,  and 
the  sin  is  blotted  out.  (£.  A.  Stuart,  M.A.)  Sin  in  ministers  .-—The  high  priest, 
although  a  single  individual,  if  he  sin,  must  bring  as  large  and  valuable  an  offering  as 
is  required  from  the  whole  congregation.  For  this  law  there  are  two  evident  reasons. 
The  first  is  found  in  the  fact  that  in  Israel  the  high  priest  represented  before  God  the 
entire  nation.  When  he  sinned  it  was  as  if  the  whole  nation  sinned  in  him.  So  it 
is  said  that  by  his  sin  he  "  brings  guilt  on  the  people  "—a  very  weighty  ma' ter. 
And  this  suggests  a  second  reason  for  the  costly  offering  that  was  required  from 
him.  The  consequences  of  the  sin  of  one  in  such  a  high  position  of  religious 
authority  must,  in  the  nature  of  the  case,  be  much  more  serious  and  far-reaching 
than  in  the  case  of  any  other  person.  And  here  we  have  a  lesson  as  pertinent  to 
our  time  as  to  those  days.  As  the  high  priest,  so,  in  modern  time,  the  bishop, 
minister,  or  elder,  is  ordained  as  an  officer  in  matters  of  religion,  to  act  for  and 
with  men  in  the  things  of  God.  For  the  proper  administration  of  this  high  trust, 
how  indispensable  that  such  a  one  shall  take  heed  to  maintain  unbroken  fellowship 
with  God !  Any  shortcoming  here  is  sure  to  impair  by  so  much  the  spiritual  value 
of  his  own  ministrations  for  the  people  to  whom  he  ministers.  And  this  evil  con- 
sequence of  any  unfaithfulness  of  his  is  the  more  certain  to  follow,  because,  of  aU 
the  members  of  the  comirwnity,  his  example  has  the  widest  and  most  effective 
influence  ;  in  whatever  that  example  be  bad  or  defective,  it  is  sure  to  do  mischief  in 
exact  proportion  to  his  exalted  station.  If,  then,  such  a  one  sin,  the  case  is  very 
grave,  and  his  guilt  proportionately  heavy.  (S.  H.  Kellogg,  D.D.)  Sin  not  excused 
by  ignorance  : — One  would  wonder  whether  it  is  po-sible  that  sin  can  be  committed 
in  ignorance — that  is  to  say,  whether  the  ignor.ince  does  not  do  away  with  the  sin- 
ful character  of  the  deed.  Is  not  sin  a  wilful  action?  Is  not  its  wilfulness  the 
very  essence  of  its  guilt  ?  So  we  would  think  ;  yet  again  and  again  in  the  ritual  we  find 
that  ignorance  is  never  made  into  a  sufficient  excuse  for  sin.  The  sense  of  my^tery 
which  we  may  feel  in  regard  to  this  matter  can  only  be  relieved  by  looking  for 
analogous  instances  in  the  field  of  nature.  There  is  no  law  written  on  all  the 
dominion  of  nature  with  a  broader  and  clearer  hand  tli:ui  that  all  sin  is  followed  by 
penalty.  Exclude  the  air,  and  you  exclude  vitality  ;  shut  out  the  light,  and  you 
impoverish  the  life  ;  doom  yourself  to  solitude,  and  you  doom  yourself  by  the  same 
fiat  to  e:^tinction.  It  is  in  vain  to  plead  that  we  did  not  know  the  nature  of  air,  or 
the  utility  of  light,  or  the  influence  of  high  things  upon  things  that  are  low  ;  we 
must  be  taught  the  depth  of  our  ignorance  and  its  guilt  by  the  in'ensity  and  con- 
tinuance of  our  personal  suffering.  Leaving  the  region  of  nature  and  coming  into 
the  region  of  civilisation,  we  find  that  even  in  legal  affairs  violations  of  law  are  not 
excused  on  the  ground  of  ignorance.  The  judge  upon  the  bench  does  not  hesitate 
to   inform  the  trespasser  that  he  ought  to  have   known  the  law  of  which  he 


CHAP.  IV.]  LEVITICUS.  79 

pleaded  ignorance.  Turning  from  purely  legal  criticism  of  this  kind,  we  find  the 
same  law  in  operation  in  social  affairs.  A  man  is  not  excused  from  the  conse- 
quences of  ill-behaviour  on  the  ground  that  he  did  not  know  the  customs  of  society 
or  the  technicalities  of  etiquette.  He  may  be  pitied,  he  may  be  held  in  a  kind  of 
mild  contempt,  his  name  may  be  used  to  point  a  moral ;  but  at  the  root  of  all  this 
criticism  lies  the  law  that  the  man  is  a  trespasser,  and  that  ignorance  cannot  be 
pleaded  as  a  complete  excuse.  This  canon  of  judgment  has  a  very  wide  bearing 
upon  human  affairs.  Were  it  to  be  justly  and  completely  applied,  it  would  alter 
many  arrangements  and  relations  of  life.  There  are  many  things  which  we  ought 
to  know,  and  which  we  ought  to  be ;  and  instead  of  excusing  ourselves  by  our 
ignorance,  we  should  be  stimulated  by  its  effects  to  keener  inquiry  and  more  diligent 
culture.  That  sense  of  ignorance  will  possibly  show  us  in  what  critical  conditions 
our  life  is  being  spent.  What  watchfulness  is  imposed  upon  us  by  the  fact  that  it 
is  possible  to  sin  through  ignorance  !  If  sin  were  a  mere  act  of  violence,  we  could 
easily  become  aware  of  it,  and  with  comparatively  little  difficulty  we  might  avoid 
its  repetition.  But  it  is  more  and  other  than  this.  It  is  committed  when  we  little 
think  of  its  commission  ;  we  inflict  wounds  when  we  think  our  hands  are  free  of  all 
weapons  and  instruments  ;  we  dishonour  God  when  we  suppose  we  are  merely  silent 
about  Him.  Neglect  may  be  sin  as  well  as  violence.  'I  here  is  a  negative  criminality 
as  well  as  a  positive  blasphemy.  All  this  makes  life  most  critical  and  most  pro- 
foundly solemn.  The  commandment  of  God  is  exceeding  broad.  Being  a  Divine 
commandment  it  comes  of  continual  and  minute  exactions  covering  all  life  with  the 
spirit  and  obligation  of  discipline.  The  mercy  is  shown  that  a  special  offering  was 
provided  for  the  sin  of  ignorance.  .  .  .  Let  every  soul,  then,  boldly  say,  as  if  in 
solemn  monologue,  Whatever  my  sin  may  be,  it  is  provided  for  in  the  great  Offering 
established  as  the  way  of  access  to  the  Father ;  I  will  invent  no  excuses  ;  I  will 
seek  for  no  new  methods  of  pajment  or  compensation  ;  I  will  bring  no  price  in  my 
hand,  no  excuse  on  my  tongue,  nor  will  I  hide  even  in  the  depths  of  ray  conscious- 
ness any  hope  that  I  can  vindicate  my  position  before  God  ;  I  will  simply  fall  into 
the  hands  of  the  Living  One,  and  look  upon  the  Lamb  of  God  which  taketh  away 
the  sin  of  the  world.  In  that  spirit  I  will  go  forward  to  judgment,  and  in  that 
spirit  I  will  encounter  the  mysteries  of  destiny.     (/.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Vers.  6,  7.  Sprinkle  of  the  blood. — The  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  the  sacrifice  : — 
There  is  not  that  intensity  of  evil  in  a  sin  of  ignorance  which  is  to  be  seen  in  wilful 
transgression  ;  but  still  there  is  sin  in  it :  for  no  law  can  allow  ignorance  to  be  an 
excuse  for  trespass,  since  it  is  the  duty  of  the  subject  to  know  the  law.  No  amount 
of  sincerity  can  turn  injustice  to  righteousness,  or  transform  falsehood  into  truth. 
If  a  man  partakes  of  a  deadly  poison  believing  it  to  be  a  health-giving  medicine, 
his  sincerity  will  not  hinder  the  natural  course  of  nature :  he  will  die  in  his  error. 
It  is  precisely  so  in  the  moral  and  spiritual  world.  Sins  committed  i  i  ignorance 
must  be  still  sins  in  tlie  sight  of  the  Lord,  or  else  no  expiation  would  have  been 
provided  for  them.  I  am  greatly  rejoiced  to  think  there  should  be  such  a  sacrifice 
provided,  since  it  may  yet  turn  out  that  the  larger  number  of  our  sins  are  sins  of  which 
we  have  not  been  aware,  because  the  hardness  of  our  heart  has  prevented  our  dis- 
covering our  error.  Many  good  men  have  lived  in  an  evil  habit,  and  remained  mit 
unto  death,  and  yet  have  not  known  it  to  be  evil.  Now,  if  the  precious  blood  of 
Jesus  only  put  away  the  sin  which  we  perceived  in  detail,  its  efficacy  would  be 
liuiited  by  the  enlightenment  of  our  conscience,  and  therefore  some  grievous  sin 
might  be  overlooked  and  prove  our  ruin.  "  Cleanse  Thou  me  from  spcret  faults  "  is 
a  prayer  to  which  the  expiation  of  Christ  is  a  full  answer.  The  atonement 
acts  according  to  God's  sight  of  sin  and  not  according  to  our  sight  of  it, 
for  we  only  see  it  in  part,  but  God  sees  it  all  and  blots  it  all  out.  I. 
We  begin  with  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  in  its  relation  to  the  Lord  God  of 
Israel.  1.  In  the  type  before  us  the  prominent  thing  before  God  is  tbe  blood 
of  atonement.  It  was  God's  intent  to  awaken  in  man  a  great  disgust  of 
sin,  by  making  him  see  that  it  could  only  be  put  away  by  suffering  and  death. 
In  the  Tabernacle  in  the  wilderness  almost  everything  was  sanctified  by  blood. 
The  purple  drops  fell  even  on  the  book,  and  all  the  people.  The  blood  was  to 
be  seen  everywhere.  2.  The  blood  of  the  sacrifice  was  sprinkled  before  the  veil 
seven  times,  signifying  this  :  first,  that  the  atoneme.jt  made  by  the  blood  of  Jesus 
is  perfect  in  its  reference  to  God.  All  through  the  Scriptures,  as  you  well  know, 
seven  is  the  number  of  perfection,  and  in  this  place  it  is  doubtless  used  with  that 
intent.     The  seven  times  is  the  same  as  once  for  all:  it  conveys  the  same  meaning 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cnAP.  iv. 

as  when  we  read,  "  For  Christ  also  hath  once  suffered  for  sins,"  and  again,  "  We 
are  sanctified  through  the  offering  of  the  body  of  Jesus  Christ  once."  It  is  a  com- 
plete act.  No  man  need  bring  anything  more,  or  anything  of  his  own,  wherewith 
to  turn  away  the  anger  of  God  ;  but  he  may  come  just  as  he  is,  guilty  and  defiled, 
and  plead  this  precious  blood  which  has  made  eSectual  atonement  for  him.  8. 
Note  next,  that  not  only  is  the  atonement  itself  perfect,  but  that  the  presenl;ition  of 
that  atonement  is  perfect,  too.  The  sevenfold  sprinkling  was  typical  of  Christ  as  a 
Priest  presenting  unto  the  Father  Himself  as  a  sacrifice  for  sin.  This  has  been 
fully  done.  Jesus  has  in  due  order  carried  the  propitiation  into  the  sanctuary,  and 
appeared  in  the  presence  of  God  on  our  behalf.  We  now  pass  on  to  a  few  thoughts 
about  ourselves  in  relation  to  the  type.  4.  This  sevenfold  sprinkling  of  tbe  blood 
upon  the  veil  meant  that  the  way  of  our  access  to  God  is  only  by  virtue  of  the 
precious  blood  of  Christ.  Do  you  ever  feel  a  veil  hanging  between  you  and  God? 
In  very  truth,  there  is  none  ;  for  Jesus  has  taken  it  away  through  His  flesh.  5.  I 
further  think  that  the  blood  was  sprinkled  on  the  veil  seven  times  to  show  that 
a  dehberate  contemplation  of  the  death  of  Christ  is  greatly  for  our  benefit.  What- 
ever else  you  treat  slightly,  let  the  saciifice  of  Calvary  be  seriously  considered  again 
and  again.  6.  Eemember,  too,  that  this  sets  out  how  great  our  guilt  has  been, 
since  the  blood  must  be  spiiukled  seven  times  ere  the  work  of  atonement  is  fully 
seen  by  you.  Our  guilt  has  a  sevenfold  blackness  about  it,  and  there  must  be  a 
sevenfold  cleansing.  If  you  plead  the  blood  of  Jesus  once  and  you  do  not  obtain 
peace  thereby,  plead  it  again  ;  and  if  still  the  burden  lies  upon  your  heart,  still  go 
on  pleading  with  the  Lord  the  one  prevailing  argument  that  Jesus  bled.  God,  who 
bids  us  forgive  unto  seventy  times  seven,  sets  no  bound  to  His  own  forgiveness.  7. 
Do  reflect  that  if  your  case  seems  to  yourself  to  be  very  difficult,  it  is  provided  for 
by  this  sevenfold  sprinkling  of  the  blood.  The  devil's  desire  will  be  to  keep  you 
from  thinking  upon  Christ ;  but  do  remember  that  thoughts  about  anything  else 
will  do  you  very  little  good.  Your  hope  lies  in  thinking  upon  Jesus,  not  upon  your- 
seM-  "He  is  able  to  save  them  to  the  uttermost  that  come  unto  God  by  Him." 
Mr.  Moody  Stuart  somewhere  tells  us  that  he  once  talked  with  a  woman  who 
was  in  great  trouble  about  her  sins.  She  was  a  well-instructed  person,  and  knew 
the  Bible  thoroughly,  so  that  he  was  in  a  little  difficulty  what  to  say  to  her,  as  she 
was  so  accustomed  to  all-saving  truth.  At  last  he  urged  upon  her  very  strongly 
that  passage,  "  This  is  a  faithful  saying,  and  worthy  of  all  acceptation,  that  Jesus 
Christ  came  into  the  world  to  save  sinners,"  and  he  noticed  that  she  seemed  to  find 
a  quiet  relief  in  a  gentle  flow  of  tears.  He  prayed  with  her,  and  when  she  rose 
from  her  knees  she  >ieemed  much  comforted.  Meeting  her  the  next  day,  and  seeing 
her  *.niiling  face,  and  finding  her  full  of  rest  in  the  Lord,  he  asked,  "  What  was  it 
wrought  your  deliverance?  "  "  Oh,"  she  said,  "it  was  that  text,  'Jesus  came  to 
save  sinners.'"  "Did  you  not  know  that  before?"  said  Mr.  Stuart.  Yes,  she 
knew  the  words  before,  but  ^he  found  that  in  her  heart  of  hearts  she  had  believed 
that  Jesus  came  to  save  saints,  and  not  sinners.  Do  not  many  awakened  persons 
abide  in  the  same  error?  II.  The  blood  in  its  influence  upon  pk.\yer.  "The 
priest  shall  put  some  of  the  blood  upon  the  horns  of  the  altar  of  sweet  incense 
before  the  Lord."  Horns  signify  power,  and  the  explanation  of  the  symbol  is  that 
there  is  no  power  in  intercessory  prayer  apart  from  the  blood  of  expiation.  1. 
Eemember,  first,  that  the  intercession  of  Christ  Himself  is  based  upon  His  atone- 
ment. He  is  daily  pleading  before  the  throne  of  God,  and  His  great  argument  is 
that  He  offered  Himself  without  spot  unto  God.  "  It  pleased  the  Father  to  bruise 
Him,"  and  now  it  pleases  the  Father  to  hear  Him.  The  bruised  spices  of  His 
passion  are  an  incense  of  sweet  smell,  and  derive  a  double  acceptance  from  the 
blood-smeared  altar  upon  which  they  are  presented.  And  now  take  the  type  to 
yourselves.  2.  You  and  I  are  to  offer  incense  upon  this  golden  altar  by  our  daily 
intercession  for  others,  but  our  plea  mubt  always  be  the  atoning  blood  of  Jesus. 
3.  And,  as  this  must  be  the  plea  of  our  intercession,  so  it  must  be  our  impulse 
in  making  intercession.  When  we  pray  we  come,  as  it  were,  to  this  golden 
altar,  and  we  look  thereon :  what  is  that  we  see  ?  Stains  of  blood !  We 
look  again,  and  again  see  crimson  spots,  while  all  the  four  horns  are  red  with 
blood.  Did  my  Lord  pour  out  His  soul  unto  death  for  men,  and  shall  not  I 
pour  out  my  soul  in  living  earnest  when  I  pray?  Can  you  now  bow  your  knee  to 
plead  with  God  and  not  feel  your  heart  set  upon  the  good  of  men,  when  you  see 
that  your  Lord  has  laid  down  His  life  that  they  may  be  saved  ?  Where  He  poured 
out  His  blood,  will  not  you  pour  out  your  tears  ?  He  has  given  His  bleeding  heart 
for  men,  will  not  you  give  your  pleading  lips  ?    4.  I  think,  too,  I  must  say  that 


CHAP.  IV.]  LEVITICUS.  81 

thia  smearing  of  the  horns  of  the  altar  with  blood  is  meant  to  give  us  very  great 
encouragement  and  assurance  whenever  we  come  to  God  in  prayer.  Never  give 
anybody  up,  however  bad  he  may  be.  Why,  there  is  the  blood  of  Christ.  What 
sin  is  there  which  it  cannot  remove  ?  When  we  pray,  let  us  with  vehement  desire 
plead  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ.  Perhaps  fesver  petitions,  and  more  urging  of  the 
merit  of  Christ,  would  make  better  prayers.  III.  The  last  point  is,  the  blood  in 
ITS  INFLUENCE  UPON  ALL  OUR  SERVICE.  You  SBC  wc  havc  been  coming  outwards 
from  the  veil  to  the  }j;olden  altar,  and  now  we  pass  outside  the  Holy  Place  into  the 
outer  court,  and  there  in  the  open  air  stands  the  great  brazen  altar — the  first  object 
that  the  Israelite  saw  when  he  entered  the  sacred  precincts.  1.  That  altar  repre- 
sents a  great  many  things,  and  among  the  rest  our  Lord  Jesus  presenting  Himself 
to  God  as  an  acceptable  sacrifice.  Whenever  you  think  of  our  Lord  as  being  an 
offering  of  a  sweet  smell  onto  God,  never  dissociate  that  fact  in  your  mind  from 
His  being  slam  for  sin,  for  all  our -Lord's  service  is  tinged  by  His  atoning  death. 
2.  Viewing  the  type  in  reference  to  ourselves,  let  us  learn  that  whenever  we  come  to 
offer  any  sacrifice  unto  the  Lord  we  must  take  care  that  we  present  it  by  virtue  of 
the  precious  blood  of  Christ.  We  must  view  the  atonement  as  connected  with  every 
holy  thing.  I  believe  that  our  testimonies  for  God  will  be  blessed  of  God  in  pro- 
portion as  we  keep  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  to  the  forefront.  Somebody  asked  our 
brother,  Mr.  Moody,  how  it  was  that  he  was  so  successful,  and  he  is  said  to  have 
replied,  "  Well,  if  I  must  tell  you,  it  is  I  believe  because  we  come  out  fair  and 
square  upon  the  doctrine  of  substitution."  In  that  remark  he  hit  the  nail  on  the 
head.  That  is  the  saving  doctrine  ;  keep  that  before  your  own  mind,  keep  it  before 
the  minds  of  those  whom  you  would  benefit.  3.  And,  beloved,  do  you  not  tliink  that 
this  pouring  of  the  blood  at  the  foot  of  this  brazen  altar  indicates  to  us  how  much 
we  ought  to  bring  there  ?  If  Jesus  has  brought  His  life  there,  and  laid  Himself 
thereon,  ought  we  not  to  bring  all  that  we  are  and  all  that  we  have,  and  consecrate  all 
to  God  ?  4.  Lastly,  you  notice  the  blood  was  poured  out  at  the  bottom  of  the  altar. 
What  could  that  mean  but  this — that  the  altar  of  thank-offering  stood  upon  and 
grew  out  of  a  basis  of  blood.  So  all  our  deeds  for  God,  our  sacrifices  for  His  cause, 
must  spring  out  of  the  love  which  He  has  manifested  in  the  death  of  His  dear  Son. 
We  love  Him  because  He  first  loved  us.  And  how  do  we  know  that  He  loves  us  ? 
Behold  the  death  of  Jesus  as  the  surest  proof.  I  long  to  put  my  whole  being  upon 
that  altar,  and  I  should  feel  as  I  did  so  that  I  was  not  giving  my  God  anything, 
but  only  rendering  to  Him  what  His  dear  Son  has  bought  a  million  times  over  by 
once  shedding  His  life-blood.  {C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Burn  all  sin  : — The  blood  was 
put  upon  the  horns  of  the  altar  of  sweet  incense  to  signify  that  no  prayer  can 
pierce  up  to  God  but  in  and  by  the  blood  of  Christ.  All  the  rest  of  the  blood  was 
poured  at  the  foot  of  the  altar  of  burnt-offering,  to  note  still  the  true  shedding  of 
Christ's  blood  for  mankind,  and  because  also  it  was  holy,  it  might  not  be  cast  out 
as  profane.  The  burning  of  the  holy  without  the  host  plainly  showed  that  Christ 
should  not  sufter  in  Jerusalem,  but  should  be  led  out  of  the  city  to  a  place  appointed, 
and  there  suffer  ;  which  you  know  was  fulfilled  accordingly  (Heb.  xiii.  11,  1'2).  And 
the  whole  bullock  was  to  be  burned,  being  a  sin-offering,  to  teach  men  to  burn  all 
their  sins,  and  not  to  divide  them,  as  we  do,  when  we  say,  I  wiU  amend  my  drunk- 
enness, but  I  cannot  leave  my  swearing,  or  if  I  leave  that  also,  yet  my  licentious 
life  a  little  more  must  have  a  swing,  &c.  But  burn  all,  thou  wert  best,  and  wil- 
lingly keep  none,  burn  them,  I  sav,  by  true  sorrow  and  detestation  of  them,  even 
all,  all,  lest  but  one — being  wilfully  still  delighted  in — burn  thee  all,  and  wholly  in 
hell  for  ever.  When  Moses,  with  the  Israelites,  was  to  depart  out  of  Et-ypt,  and 
Pliaraoh  would  have  had  them  leave  their  cattle  behind  them,  saving  what  they 
intended  to  sacrifice,  answer  was  made,  they  would  not  leave  one  hoof  of  a  beast 
behind  ;  and  so  deal  you  with  your  sins — leave  not  one  hoof  of  sin  behind.  No  one 
sin,  no  part  of  sin,  that  is,  still  I  say,  by  wittingly,  willingly,  and  boldly  continu- 
ing in  it  and  delighting  in  it.  Otherwise,  free  from  sin  in  this  life  we  cannot  be. 
But,  through  the  grace  of  God,  we  may  be  free  from  presumptuous  pleasure  in  sin, 
and  sigh  and  groan  no  more,  for  that  anyway  we  should  offend  so  good  a  God,  as  we 
find  infinite  ways  of  Hiin  that  we  do  offend,  desiring  and  longing  to  be  free  evf  n 
from  all  sin.  (Bp.  Babinrjton.)  Sprinkling  the  blood: — Ewald  thus  explains  the 
various  ceremonies  of  sprinkling  :  "  It  was  in  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood,  the 
proper  sacrament  of  sacrifice,  that  the  distinction  between  the  guilt-offering  and  the 
expiatory  offering  in  the  narrow  sense  came  most  clearly  to  the  front :  and  it  is  easy 
to  understand  why  it  would  reveal  itself  most  plainly  here.  As  it  was  right  that 
the  blood  of  an  expiatory  offering  for  public  transgressions  should  be  made  far  more 

6 


82  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  iv, 

conspicuous  to  eyes  and  sense,  so  it  was  sprinkled  on  an  elevated  place,  or  even  on 
one  which  was  extraordinarily  sacred.  The  way,  too,  in  which  this  was  done  was 
marked  by  three  stages.  If  the  atonement  was  made  for  an  ordinary  man  or  for  a 
prince  the  priest  sprinkled  the  blood  against  the  high  towering  horns  of  the  outer 
altar,  and  poured  the  remainder,  as  usual,  out  at  its  base  ;  if  it  was  made  for  the 
community  or  for  the  high  priest,  some  of  the  blood  was  seven  times  sprinkled 
against  the  veil  of  the  Holy  of  Holies,  then  some  more  against  the  horns  of  the 
innej.-  altar,  and  only  what  was  then  left  was  poured  out  as  usual  at  the  base  of  the 
outer  aliar.  The  third  and  highest  expiation  was  adopted  on  the  yearly  Day  of 
Atonement.  On  the  other  hand,  in  the  case  of  the  guilt-offering  no  reason  existed 
for  adopting  any  unusual  mode  of  sprinkling  the  blood.  It  was  sprinkled,  just  as 
in  other  cases,  round  the  sides  and  foot  of  the  outer  altar.  As  soon  as  this  most  sacred 
ceremony  of  the  sprinkling  was  completed,  then,  according  to  the  ancient  belief,  the 
impurity  and  guilt  were  already  shaken  off  fcorn  the  object  to  which  they  had 
clung."  Substitution  satisfying  the  conscience  : — In  Passion  week  as  I  was  reading 
"  Bishop  Wilson  on  the  Lord's  Supper,"  I  met  with  an  expression  to  this  effect,  that 

The  Jews  knew  what  they  did  when  they  transferred  their  sin  to  the  head  of  their 

offering.  The  thought  rushed  into  my  mind.  What  1  may  I  transfer  all  my  guilt  to 
another  ?  Has  God  provided  an  offering  for  me  that  I  may  lay  all  my  sins  on  His 
head  ?  Then,  God  wilUng,  I  will  not  bear  them  on  my  own  soul  one  moment 
longer.  Accordingly  I  sought  to  lay  my  sins  upon  the  sacred  head  of  Jesus  ;  and 
on  the  Wednesday  began  to  have  a  hope  of  mercy;  on  the  Thursday  that  hope 
increased,  on  the  Friday  and  Saturday  it  became  more  strong,  and  on  Easter 
Sunday  I  awoke  early,  with  these  words  upon  my  heart  and  lips,  "  Jesus  Christ  is 
risen  to-day  !  Hallelujah  !  Hallelujah  !  "  From  that  hour  peace  flowed  in  rich 
abundance  unto  my  soul.  (C  Simeon.)  Repentance  insufficient  without  atone- 
iiunt: — 1.  Some  tell  us  that  repentance  is  sufficient  without  atonement.  "Con- 
trition," say  they,  "is  all  that  God  wants.  Why  insist  on  the  need  of  sacrifice? 
Let  a  man  mourn  over  his  iniquities  and  he  will  be  forgiven."  This  is  a  mode  of 
speech  not  more  unscriptural  than  unphilosophical.  To  maintain  that  "repent- 
ance is  sufficient  without  atonement "  is  uncommonly  like  declaring  that  life  is 
enough  without  bread  or  that  heat  is  sufficient  without  the  sun.  The  fact  is,  that 
as  existence  is  sustained  by  food,  and  as  warmth  proceeds  from  the  orb  of  day,  so 
repentance  is  with  most  men  the  result  of  belief  in  redemption.  John  the  Baptist 
was  pre-eminently  a  preacher  of  repentance:  we  invariably  associate  the  two. 
"  Repent  ye,  for  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  at  hand  "  ;  such  was  the  keynote  of  his 
teaching.  He  bids  the  Pharisees  and  Sadducees  "  bring  forth  fruit  meet  for  repent- 
ance." Yet  he  who  thus  spoke  took  care  to  cry,  "Behold  the  Lamb  of  God." 
2.  "  Repentance  toward  God,  and  faith  toward  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,"  stand  in  the 
relation  of  effect  and  cause.  The  executioner  of  Socrates,  handing  him  the  cup  of 
hemlock,  burst  into  tears,  deeply  grieved  that  he  should,  in  any  way,  be  an  accessory 
to  the  death  of  one  so  illustrious.  In  like  manner,  when  we  hear  a  well-known 
voice  exclaiming,  "  If  it  be  possible,  let  this  cup  pass  from  Me,"  we  are  conscious 
that  our  transgressions  necessitated  the  fatal  draught,  and,  feeling  their  enormity, 
we  mourn  over  them.  Some  years  ago  patriotic  regard  for  their  country  introduced 
the  following  fashion  among  Polish  ladies.  Each  wore  a  small  iron  cross  bearing 
upon  it  the  name  "  Warsaw."  Thereby  they  were  reminded  of  the  wrong  done  to 
the  nation  which  they  loved  so  well,  and  thereby,  also,  they  sought  to  stir  up 
brothers,  husbands,  and  sons  to  hatred  of  tyrannic  Russia.  Let  us  have  the  Cross 
near  our  hearts,  for  nothing  will  so  effectually  inflame  animosity  against  sin.  Aptly 
has  it  been  remarked  that  "  contrition  is  the  tear  in  the  eye  of  faith."  (2'.  R. 
Stevenson.) 

Vers.  11,  12.  Tte  whole  bullock- shall  lie  caxry  forth.— WJiy  the  skin,  flesh,  and 
other  parts  of  the  bullock  was  carried  out  of  the  host: — 1.  The  legal  reason  was 
because  it  was  a  sacrifice  for  sin,  and  therefore  unmeet  to  be  burnt  as  other  sacri- 
fices upon  the  altar.  2.  The  historical  reason,  because  the  Lord  suffered  without 
the  gate  of  the  city.  3.  The  moral  reason,  to  show  that  the  skin  with  the  flesh  was 
carried  forth  so  the  priest  should  be  far  off,  not  only  from  sin,  but  the  occasion 
thereof.  4.  The  mystical  reason,  that  Christ  doth  cast  out-of-doors,  and  remove 
far  away  from  us  our  sins.  5.  Now  further,  the  sin-offering  for  the  priest,  and  for 
the' whole  congregation  were  burnt  without,  to  show  the  horror  and  greatness  of 
their  sin ;  and  though  it  were  unclean,  being  a  sacrifice  for  sin,  yet  because  some 
part  thereof,  namely  the  fat,  was  burnt  upon  the  altar,  the  remaining  part  was 


CHAP.  IT.]  LEVITICUS.  83 

with  reverence  to  be  burned,  and  in  a  clean  place,  and  therefore  without  the  camp, 
because  it  was  separated  from  tbe  common  pollutions  which  might  happen  within 
the  camp.  6.  The  Hebrews  further  observe  that  tbe  high  priest's  sin-offering  was 
commanded  to  be  burnt  openly  without  the  camp,  to  the  end  that  no  man  might  be 
ashamed  to  confess  his  sin.  (A.  Willet,D.D.)  Tohearimtiently  the  momentary  afflic- 
tions of  this  life  : — Whereas  ver.  12,  the  bullock  was  to  be  carried  out  of  the  host, 
the  apostle  applieth  it  to  Christ  suffering  without  the  gate,  making  this  further  use 
of  it — "  Let  us  go  forth  therefore  outof  the  camp,  bearing  His  reproach,  for  we  have 
no  continuing  city  "  (Heb.  xiii.  13).  We  should  in  our  meditation  and  desire  go  out 
of  the  world  as  out  of  the  camp,  and  be  content  to  bear  reproach  for  Christ's  sake, 
seeing  we  shall  have  no  long  continuance  here,  but  look  for  an  everlasting  habita- 
tion in  heaven  ;  by  this  reason  taken  from  the  shortness  of  our  afiflictions  the  apostle 
exhorteth  thus  (2  Cor.  iv.  17).  The  imitation  of  the  saints,  shortness  of  time, 
fragility  of  the  body  do  persuade  to  perseverance,  nature  hath  well  provided  that 
grief  if  it  be  great  cannot  be  long,  for  a  short  danger  thou  shalt  receive  an  everlast- 
ing reward.     {Ibid.) 

Vers.  13-21.  If  tlie  whole  congregation  . .  .  sin. — Responsibility  of  communities 
and  7iatio7is  : — Israel  was  taught  by  this  law,  as  we  are,  that  responsibility  attaches 
not  only  to  each  individual  person,  but  also  to  associations  of  individuals  in  their 
corporate  character,  as  nations,  communities,  and — we  may  add — all  societies  and 
coi-porations,  whether  secular  or  religious.  Never  has  a  generation  needed  this 
reminder  more  than  our  own.  The  political  and  social  principles  which,  since  the 
French  Revolution  in  the  end  of  last  century,  have  been,  year  by  year,  more  and 
more  generally  accepted  among  the  nations  of  Christendom,  are  everywhere  tending 
to  the  avowed  or  practical  denial  of  this  most  important  truth.  It  is  a  maxim  ever 
more  and  more  exteiisively  accepted  as  almost  axiomatic  in  our  modern  democratic 
communities,  that  religion  is  wholly  a  concern  of  the  individual ;  and  that  a  nation 
or  community,  as  such,  should  make  no  distinction  between  various  religions  as 
false  or  true,  but  maintain  an  absolute  neutrality,  even  between  Christianity  and 
idolatry,  or  theism  and  atheism.  It  should  take  little  thought  to  see  that  this 
modern  maxim  stands  in  direct  opposition  to  the  principle  assumed  in  this  law  of 
the  sin-offering ;  namely,  that  a  community  or  nation  is  as  truly  and  directly 
responsible  to  God  as  the  individual  in  the  nation.  But  this  corporate  responsi- 
bility the  spirit  of  the  age  squarely  denies.  Not  that  all  indeed,  in  our  modern 
so-called  Christian  nations  have  come  to  this.  But  no  one  will  deny  that  this  is 
the  mind  of  the  vanguard  of  nineteenth-century  liberahsm  in  religion  and  politics. 
Many  of  our  political  leaders  in  all  lands  make  no  secret  of  their  views  on  the 
subject.  A  purely  secular  state  is  everywhere  held  up,  and  that  with  great  plausi- 
bility and  persuasiveness,  as  the  ideal  of  political  government ;  the  goal  to  the 
attainment  of  which  all  good  citizens  should  unite  their  efforts.  It  is  not  strange, 
indeed,  to  see  atheists,  agnostics,  and  others  who  deny  the  Christian  faith,  main- 
taining this  position ;  but  when  we  hear  men  who  call  themselves  Christians — in 
many  cases,  even  Christian  ministers — advocating,  in  one  form  or  another,  govern- 
mental neutrality  in  religion,  as  the  only  right  basis  of  government,  one  may  well 
be  amazed.  Will  any  one  venture  to  say  that  this  teaching  of  the  law  of  the  sin- 
offering  was  only  intended,  like  the  offering  itself,  for  the  old  Hebrews  ?  Is  it  not 
rather  the  constant  and  most  emphatic  teaching  of  the  whole  Scriptures,  that  God 
dealt  with  all  the  ancient  Gentile  nations  on  the  same  principle  ?  The  history 
■which  records  the  overthrow  of  those  old  nations  and  empires  does  so,  even 
professedly,  for  the  express  purpose  of  calling  the  attention  of  men  in  all  ages  to 
this  principle,  that  God  deals  with  all  nations  as  under  obligation  to  recognise  Him- 
self as  King  of  nations,  and  submit  in  all  things  to  His  authority.  So  it  was  in  the 
case  of  Moab,  of  Ammon,  of  Nineveh,  and  Babylon  ;  in  regard  to  each  of  which  we 
are  told,  in  so  many  words,  that  it  was  because  they  refused  to  recognise  this 
principle  of  national  responsibility  to  the  one  true  God,  which  was  brought  before 
Israel  in  this  part  of  the  law  of  the  sin-offering,  that  the  Divine  judgment  came 
upon  them  in  their  utter  national  overthrow.  How  awfully  plain,  again,  is  the 
language  of  the  second  Psalm  on  this  subject,  where  it  is  precisely  this  national 
repudiation  of  the  supreme  authority  of  God  and  of  His  Christ,  so  increasingly 
common  in  our  day,  which  is  named  as  the  ground  of  the  derisive  judgment  of  God, 
and  is  made  the  occasion  of  exhorting  all  nations,  not  merely  to  belief  in  God,  but 
also  to  the  obedient  recognition  of  His  only-begotton  Son,  the  Messiah,  as  the  only 
possible  means  of  escaping  the  future  kindling  of  His  wrath.    {S.  H.  Kellogg,  D.D.) 


84  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

Multitude  no  excuse  for  offence  : — Note  how  a  multitude  of  offenders  excuseth  no 
offence :  but  if  even  the  whole  congregation  should  sin  through  ignorance,  yet  a 
sin-offering  must  be  offered  by  them  all,  and  their  number  yieldeth  no  excuse. 
Great  was  the  number  of  sinners  when  God  sent  the  flood,  but  their  number' 
defended  them  not.  So  in  Sodom  and  Gomorrah  the  offenders  were  many.  Ten 
tribes  of  twelve  fell  away  from  God  and  became  idolaters.  Broad  is  the  way  that 
leadeth  to  hell,  and  many  find  it,  going  to  hell,  though  they  be  many,  etc.  Secondly, 
observe  with  yourself  the  praise  (hid  from  your  eyes)  and  see  the  state  of  many  a 
man  and  woman  do  evil.  The  matter  is  hid  from  their  eyes  in  God's  anger,  and 
albeit  they  lie  at  the  pit's  brink  of  destruction,  yet  they  see  it  not,  feel  it  not,  are 
not  troubled  with  it.  Because,  indeed,  they  never  sit  and  take  an  account  of 
themselves  and  their  works,  laying  them  to  the  rule  of  the  word  :  which  if 
they  did,  conscience  would  quickly  bite  and  spy,  and  speak  of  a  misdoing. 
The  godly  do  this  at  last,  and  therefore  you  see  it  here  in  your  chapter,  a 
time  of  knowing  to  them,  as  there  was  a  time  of  hiding.  Pray  we  ever  for  this 
grace,  that  we  sleep  not  in  death  ;  I  mean  in  sin,  that  leadeth  to  death,  but 
that  we  may  awake  and  stand  up  from  the  dead,  and  Jesus  Christ  vouchsafe 
us  light,  to  amendment  of  life,  and  eternal  comfort  and  safety.  (Bj).  Babington.) 
Some  difference  between  the  sacrifice  of  the  priest  and  that  of  the  -people: — 1.  It  is 
said  when  the  sin  which  they  have  committed  is  known  this  was  not  rehearsed 
before  in  the  sacrifice  of  the  priest  to  show  that  the  priests  for  the  most  part  do  sin 
wittingly,  but  the  people  through  ignorance.  2.  In  the  other  sacrifice  the  priest 
alone  was  to  put  his  hand  upon  the  head  of  the  sacrifice;  but  here  the  elders  are  to 
lay  on  their  hands  both  in  their  own  nnme  and  of  all  the  people.  3.  Here  is  added 
ver.  20,  and  the  priest  shall  make  atonement  for  them,  which  was  not  expressed 
before,  because  the  priest  before  offered  sacrifice  for  his  own  sin,  and  so  could  not 
be  a  mediator  for  himself.  Herein  the  priest  interceding  for  the  people  was  a  type 
of  Christ  who  is  the  only  effectual  Intercessor  both  for  sin  of  priest  and  people.  4. 
This  congregation  here  offending  may  represent  the  synagogue  of  the  Jews  who  put 
Christ  to  death,  crying,  "  Crucify  Him  "  ;  but  they  did  it  of  ignorance  as  St.  Peter 
saith  :  "  and  now  I  know,  brethren,  that  through  ignorance  ye  did  it,"  and  as  here 
a  sacrifice  is  appointed  after  the  people  came  to  the  knowledge  of  their  sin,  so  there 
St.  Peter  exhorteth  the  people  to  acknowledge  and  confess  their  sin,  "repent  and 
turn,  that  your  sins  may  be  put  away  "  ;  and  as  here  the  elders  put  their  hands  upon 
the  sacrifice,  so  the  elders,  rulers,  and  governors,  had  their  hand  in  Christ's  death. 
(A.  Willet,  B.D.) 

Vers.  22-26.  When  a  ruler  hath  sinned. — A  lesson  for  politicians  : — While  there 
are  many  in  our  parliaments  and  like  governing  bodies  in  Christendom  who  cast 
their  every  vote  with  the  fear  of  God  before  their  eyes,  yet,  if  there  be  any  truth  in 
the  general  opinion  of  men  upon  this  subject,  there  are  many  in  such  places  who, 
in  their  voting,  have  before  their  eyes  the  fear  of  party  more  than  the  fear  of  God  ; 
and  who,  when  a  question  comes  before  them,  first  of  all  consider,  not  what  would 
the  law  of  absolute  righteousness,  the  law  of  God,  require,  but  how  will  a  vote,  one 
way  or  the  other,  in  this  matter,  be  likely  to  affect  their  party?  Such  certainly 
need  to  be  emphatically  reminded  of  this  part  of  the  law  of  the  sin-offering,  which 
held  the  civil  ruler  specially  responsible  to  God  for  the  execution  of  his  trust.  For 
so  it  is  still ;  God  has  not  abdicated  His  throne  in  favour  of  the  people,  nor  will  He 
waive  His  crown-rights  out  of  deference  to  the  political  necessities  of  a  party.  Nor 
is  it  only  those  who  sin  in  this  particular  way  who  need  the  reminder  of  their 
personal  responsibility  to  God.  All  need  it  who  either  are  or  may  be  called  to  places 
of  greater  or  less  governmental  responsibility;  and  it  is  those  who  are  the  most 
worthy  of  such  trust  who  will  be  the  first  to  acknowledge  their  need  of  this  warning. 
For  in  all  times  those  who  have  been  lifted  to  positions  of  political  power  have  been 
under  peculiar  temptation  to  forget  God,  and  become  reckless  of  their  obligation  to 
Him  as  His  ministers.  But  under  the  conditions  of  modern  life,  in  many  countries 
of  Christendom,  this  is  true  as  perhaps  never  before.  For  now  it  has  come  to  pass 
that,  in  most  modern  communities,  those  who  make  and  execute  laws  hold  their 
tenure  of  office  at  the  pleasure  of  a  motley  army  of  voters,  Protestants  and  Eomanists, 
Jews,  atheists,  and  what  not,  a  large  part  of  whom  care  not  the  least  for  the  will 
of  God  in  civil  government,  as  revealed  in  Scripture.  Under  such  conditions,  the. 
place  of  the  civil  ruler  becomes  one  of  such  special  trial  and  temptation  that  we  do, 
well  to  remember  in  our  interce-sions,  with  peculiar  sympatby,  all  who  in  such 
positions  are  seeking  to  serve  supremely,  not  their  party  but  their  God,  and  so  best 


.CHAP.  iv.J  LEVITICUS.  85 

serve  their  country.  It  is  no  wonder  that  the  temptation  too  often  to  many  becomes 
overpowering  to  silence  conscience  with  plausible  sophistries,  and  to  use  their  office 
to  carry  out  in  legislation,  instead  of  the  will  of  God,  the  will  of  the  people,  or, 
rather,  of  that  particular  party  which  put  them  in  power.  Yet  the  great  principle 
affirmed  in  this  law  of  the  sin-offering  stands,  and  will  stand  for  ever,  and  to  it  all 
will  do  well  to  take  heed  ;  namely,  that  God  will  hold  the  civil  ruler  responsible,  and 
more  heavily  responsible  than  any  private  person,  for  any  sin  he  may  commit,  and 
especially  for  any  violation  of  law  in  any  matter  committed  to  his  trust.  And  there 
is  abundant  reason  for  this.  For  the  powers  that  be  are  ordained  of  God,  and  in 
His  providence  are  placed  in  authority  ;  not  as  the  modern  notion  is,  for  the  purpose 
of  exe -uting  the  will  of  the  constituents,  whatever  that  will  may  be,  but  rather  the 
unchangeable  will  of  the  Most  Holy  God,  the  Euler  of  all  nations,  so  far  as  revealed, 
concerning  the  civil  and  social  relations  of  men.  Nor  must  it  be  forgotten  that  this 
eminent  responsibility  attaches,  to  them,  not  only  in  their  official  acts,  but  in  all 
their  acts  as  individuals.  No  distinction  is  made  as  to  the  sin  for  which  the  ruler 
must  bring  his  siu-oSering,  whether  public  and  official  or  private  and  personal.  Of 
■whatsoever  kind  the  sin  may  be,  if  committed  by  a  ruler,  God  holds  him  specially 
responsible,  as  being  a  ruler,  and  reckons  the  guilt  of  that  sin,  even  if  a  private 
offence,  to  be  heavier  than  if  it  had  been  committed  by  one  of  the  common  people. 
And  this,  for  the  evident  reason  that  his  exalted  position  gives  his  example  double 
influence  and  effect.  (S.  H.  Kellogg,  D.D.)  Sins  of  the  great : — Judges  and  magis- 
trates are  the  physicians  of  the  state,  and  sins  are  the  diseases  of  it.  What  skills 
it,  whether  a  gangrene  begin  at  the  head  or  the  heel,  seeing  both  ways  it  will  kill,  if 
the  part  that  is  diseased  be  not  cut  off ;  except  this  be  the  difference,  that  the  head 
being  nearer  the  heart,  a  gangrene  in  the  head  will  kill  sooner  than  that  which  is 
in  the  heel.  Even  so  will  the  sins  of  great  ones  overthrow  a  state  sooner  than  those 
of  the  meaner  sort ;  therefore  wise  was  that  advice  of  Sigismund  the  Emperor,  when  ' 
upou  a  motion  to  reform  the  Church,  one  said,  "Let  us  begin  at  the  minorities." 
"  Nay  rather,"  saith  the  Emperor,  "  let  us  begin  at  the  majorities  ;  for  if  the  great 
ones  be  good,  the  meaner  cannot  be  easily  ill,  but  be  the  mean  ones  never  so  good, 
the  gr'eat  will  be  nothing  the  better."  The  influence  of  a  ruler's  sin  on  others  : — 
Nourshivan  the  Just,  being  one  day  a-hunting,  would  have  eaten  of  the  game  which 
he  had  killed,  but  from  the  consideration  that,  after  dressiug  it,  his  attendants  had 
no  salt  to  give  it  relish.  He  sent  at  last  to  buy  some  at  the  next  village,  but  with 
severe  injunctions  not  to  take  it  without  paying  for  it.  "  What  would  be  the  harm," 
said  one  of  his  courtiers,  "  if  the  king  did  not  pay  for  a  little  salt  ?  "  Nourshivan 
answered,  "  If  a  king  gathers  an  apple  in  the  garden  of  one  of  his  subjects,  on  the 
morrow  the  courtiers  cut  down  all  the  trees. " 

Vers.   27-31.   If  any  one  of  the  common  people  sin  through  ignorance. — The 

■tin-nffering  for  the  common  2ieople  : — I.  The  pekson  :  a  common  person.  1.  If  a 
common  person  sin  his  sins  will  ruin  him  ;  he  may  not  be  able  to  do  so  much  mis- 
chief by  his  sin  as  the  ruler  or  a  public  officer,  but  his  sin  has  all  the  essence  of 
evil  in  it,  and  God  will  reckon  with  him  for  it.  No  matter  how  obscurely  you  may 
live,  however  poor  and  unlettered  you  may  be,  your  sin  will  ruin  you  if  not  pardoned 
and  put  away.  If  one  of  the  common  people  sin  through  ignorance,  his  sin  is  a 
damning  sin,  he  must  have  it  put  away,  or  it  will  put  him  away  for  ever  from  the  face 
of  God.  2.  A  common  person's  sin  can  only  be  removed  by  an  atonement  of  blood. 
In  this  case  you  see  the  victim  was  not  a  bullock,  it  was  a  female  of  the  goats  or  of 
the  sheep,  but  still  it  had  to  be  an  offering  of  blood,  for  without  shedding  of  blood 
there  is  no  remission.  However  commonplace  your  offences  may  have  been,  how- 
ever insignificant  you  may  be  yourself,  nothing  will  cleanse  you  but  the  blood  of 
Jesus  Christ.  3.  But  here  is  the  point  of  joy,  that  for  tlie  common  people  there 
"was  an  atonement  ordained  of  God.  Glory  be  to  God,  I  msy  be  unknown  to  men, 
but  I  am  not  unthought  of  by  Him.  4.  Observe  with  thankfulness  that  the  sacri- 
fice appointed  for  the  common  people  was  as  much  accepted  as  that  appointed  for 
the  ruler.  Of  the  ruler  it  is  said,  "  the  priest  shall  make  an  atonement  for  him  as 
concerning  his  sin,  and  it  shall  be  forgiven  him."  The  same  thing  is  said  of  the 
common  person.  Christ  is  as  much  accepted  for  the  poorest  of  His  people  as  for 
the  richest  of  them.  II.  The  sacrifice:  "  a  kid  of  the  goats,  a  female  without 
blemish."  1.  Observe  that  there  is  a  discrepancy  between  the  tyi^e  and  the  reality, 
for  first  the  sin-offering  under  the  law  was  only  for  sins  of  ignorance.  But  we  have 
a  far  better  sacrifice  for  sin  than  that,  for  have  we  not  read,  "  The  blood  of  Jesus 
Christ,  His  Son,  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin,"  not  from  sins  of  ignorance  only,  but 


86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  it. 

from  all  sin.  2.  Note  another  discrepancy,  that  the  sinner  of  the  common  people 
in  this  case  had  to  bring  his  sacrifice — "  he  shall  bring  his  offering."  But  our  sin- 
offering  has  been  provided  for  us.  3.  Now  let  us  notice  that  in  the  type  the  victim 
chosen  for  a  sin-offering  was  unblemished ;  whether  it  was  a  goat  or  a  sheep,  it 
must  be  unblemished.  How  could  Clirist  make  an  atonement  for  sins  if  He  had 
had  sins  of  His  own?  4.  But,  the  main  point  about  the  sacrifice  was,  it  was  slain 
as  a  substitute.  There  is  nothing  said  about  its  being  taken  outside  the  camp — I 
do  not  think  it  was  in  this  case :  all  that  the  offerer  knew  was,  it  was  slain  as  a 
substitute.  And  everything  that  is  essential  to  know  in  order  to  be  saved  is  to 
know  that  you  are  a  sinner  and  that  Chnst  is  your  Substitute.  III.  The  after 
CEEEJioxiES.  1.  In  the  case  of  one  of  the  common  people  after  the  viciim  was 
slain,  the  blood  was  taken  to  the  brazen  altar,  and  the  four  horns  of  it  were  smeared, 
to  show  that  the  power  of  fellowship  with  God  lies  in  the  blood  of  substitution. 
There  is  no  fellowship  with  God  except  through  the  blood,  there  is  no  acceptance 
■with  God  for  any  one  of  us  except  thrvju;.'li  Him  who  suffered  in  our  stead.  2.  But 
then  the  blood  was  thrown  at  the  feet  of  this  same  brazen  altar,  as  if  to  show  that 
the  atonement  is  the  foundation  as  well  as  the  power  of  fellowship.  We  get  nearest 
to  God  when  we  feel  most  the  power  of  the  blood,  ay,  and  we  could  not  come  to 
God  at  all  except  it  were  through  that  encrimsoned  way.  3.  After  this,  a  part  of 
the  offering  was  put  upon  the  altar,  and  it  is  said  concerning  it,  what  is  not  said 
in  any  other  of  the  cases,  ' '  the  priest  shall  burn  it  upon  the  altar  for  a  sweet  savour 
to  the  Lord."  This  common  person  had,  in  most  respects,  a  dim  view  of  Christ, 
compared  with  the  others,  but  yet  there  were  some  points  in  which  he  had  more 
light  than  others,  for  it  does  not  say  of  the  priest  that  what  he  offeied  was  a  sweet 
savour ;  but,  for  the  comfort  of  this  common  person,  that  he  might  go  his  way  having 
sweet  consolation  in  his  soul,  he  is  told  that  the  sin-offering  he  has  brought  is  a 
sweet  savour  unto  God.  And  oh,  what  a  joy  it  is  to  think  not  only  has  Christ  put 
away  my  sin  if  I  believe  in  Him  ;  but  now  for  me  He  is  a  sweet  savour  to  God,  and 
I  am  for  His  sake  accepted,  for  His  sake  beloved,  for  His  sake  delighted  in,  for  His 
sake  precious  unto  God.  IV.  I  have  purposely  omitted  an  essential  act  in  the 
sacrifice,  in  order  to  enlarge  upon  it  now.  Observe  that  in  aU  four  cases  there  was 
one  thing  which  was  never  left  out,  "  He  shall  lay  his  hand  upon  the  head  of  the 
sin-offering."  1.  That  act  signified  confession.  "  Here  I  stand  as  a  sinner,  and 
confess  that  I  deserve  to  die.  This  goat  which  is  now  to  be  slain  represents  in  its 
sufferings  what  I  deserve  of  God."  Oh,  sinner  !  confess  your  sin  now  unto  your 
great  God,  acknowledge  that  He  would  be  just  if  He  condemned  you.  Confession 
of  sin  is  a  part  of  the  meaning  of  laying  on  of  the  hand.  2.  The  next  thing  meant 
by  it  was  acceptance.  "  I  accept  this  goat  as  standing  for  me.  I  agree  that  this 
victim  shall  stand  instead  of  me."  That  is  what  faith  does  with  Christ,  it  puts  its 
hand  upon  the  ever  blessed  Son  of  God,  and  says,  "  He  stands  fur  me,  I  take  Him 
as  my  Substitute."  3.  The  nest  meaning  of  it  was  ti'ant-ference.  "I  transfer, 
according  to  God's  ordinance,  all  my  sin  which  I  here  c^  nfess,  from  myself  to  this 
victim."  By  that  act  the  transference  was  made.  God  did  lay  sin  in  bulk  upon 
Christ  when  He  laid  upon  Him  the  iniquity  of  us  all,  but  by  an  act  of  faith  every 
individual  in  another  sense  lays  his  sins  on  Jesus,  and  it  is  absolutely  needful  that 
each  man  should  do  so,  if  he  would  participate  in  the  substitution.  4.  This  was  a 
peisonal  act.  Nobody  could  lay  his  hau.i  upon  the  bullock,  or  upon  the  goat,  for 
another  ;  each  one  had  to  put  his  own  hand  there.  A  godly  mother  could  not  say, 
"  My  graceless  boy  will  not  lay  his  hand  upon  the  victim,  but  I  will  put  my  hand 
there  for  him."  It  could  not  be.  He  who  laid  his  h.md  there  had  the  blessing,  but 
no  one  else,  and  had  the  godliest  saint  with  holy  but  mistaken  zeal  said,  "  Ilebel- 
lious  man,  wilt  thou  not  put  thy  hand  there,  I  will  act  as  sponsor  for  thee,"  it  had 
been  of  no  avail ;  the  ofteuder  must  personully  come.  And  so  must  you  have  a 
personal  faith  in  Christ  for  yourself.  The  word  is  sometimes  interpreted  "  to  k-an," 
and  some  give  it  the  meaning  of  leaning  hard.  What  a  blessed  view  of  faith  that 
gives  us  !  V.  The  assured  blessing:  "  And  it  shall  be  forgiven  him"  (ver.  31). 
Was  not  that  plain  speaking?  There  were  no  "ifs,"no"buts,"no  "  peradventures"; 
but  "it  shall  be  fort^iven  nim."  Now,  in  those  days  it  was  only  one  sin,  the  sin 
confessed,  that  was  forgiven,  but  now  "  all  manner  of  sin  and  blasphemy  shall  be 
forgiven  unto  men."  In  those  days  the  forgiveness  did  not  give  the  conscience 
abiding  peace,  for  the  offerer  had  to  come  with  another  sacrifice  by  and  by  ;  but 
now  the  blood  of  Christ  blots  out  all  the  sins  of  believers  at  once  and  for  ever,  so 
that  there  is  no  need  to  bring  a  new  sacrifice,  or  to  come  a  second  time  wiih  the 
blood  of  atonement  in  our  hands.     The  sacrifice  of  the  Jew  iiad  no  intrinsic  value. 


CHAP,  v.]  '  LEVITICUS.  87 

How  could  the  blood  of  bulls  aii'l  goats  take  away  sin  ?  It  could  only  be  useful  as 
a  tjpe  of  the  true  sacrifice,  the  sin-oiiering  of  Christ.  But  in  our  Lord  Jesus  there 
is  real  efficacy,  there  is  true  atonement,  there  is  real  cleansing,  and  whosoever 
believeth  in  Him  shall  find  actual  pardon  and  complete  forgiveness  at  this  very 
moment.  (C.  H.  Spnrgeon.)  Lay  Ms  hand  upon  the  head.— La?//?i(;  the  hand 
on  the  s  icrijice  : — The  text  gives  us  a  pictorial  answer  to  the  question — How  can 
Christ's  sacrifice  become  available  for  me  ?  I.  The  intent  of  the  symbol.  1. 
It  was  a  confession  of  sin :  else  no  need  of  a  sin-offering.  To  this  was  added  a 
confession  of  the  desert  of  punishment,  or  why  should  the  victim  be  slain  ?  There 
was  also  an  abandonment  of  all  other  methods  of  removing  sin.  2.  It  was  a 
consent  to  the  plan  of  substitution.  If  God  is  content  with  this  method  of  salva- 
tion, surely  we  may  be.  Substitution  exceedingly  honours  the  law,  and  vindicates 
justice.  No  other  plan  meets  the  case,  or  even  looks  fairly  at  it.  3.  It  was  an 
acceptmce  of  the  victim.  Jesus  is  the  most  natural  substitute,  for  He  is  the 
Second  Adam,  the  second  head  of  the  race  ;  the  true  ideal  man.  He  is  the  only 
Person  able  to  offer  satisfaction,  having  a  perfect  humanity  united  with  His  God- 
head. He  alone  is  acceptable  to  God  ;  He  may  well  be  acceptable  to  us.  4.  It  was 
a  believing  transference  of  sin.  By  laying  on  of  hands  sin  was  typically  laid  on  the 
victim.  It  was  laid  there  so  as  to  be  no  longer  on  the  offerer.  5.  It  was  a  depen- 
dence— leaning  on  the  victim.  Is  there  not  a  most  sure  stay  in  Jesus  for  the  leaning 
heart?  Consider  the  nature  of  the  suffering  and  death  by  which  the  atonement  was 
made,  and  you  will  rest  in  it.  Consider  the  dignity  and  worth  of  the  sacrifice  by 
whom  the  death  was  endured.  The  glory  of  Christ's  person  enhances  the  value  of 
His  atonement  (Heb.  x.  5-10).  II.  The  simplicity  of  the  symbol.  1.  There 
were  no  antecedent  rites.  The  victim  was  there,  and  hands  were  laid  on  it :  nothing 
more.  We  add  neither  preface  nor  appendix  to  Christ  :  He  is  Alpha  and  Omega. 
2.  The  offerer  came  in  all  his  sin.  "  Just  as  I  am."  It  was  to  have  his  sin  re- 
moved that  the  offerer  brought  the  sacrifice  :  not  because  he  had  himself  removed 
it.  3.  There  was  nothing  in  his  hand  of  merit  or  price.  4.  There  was  nothing 
on  his  hand.  No  gold  ring  to  indicate  wealth  ;  no  signet  of  power;  no  jewel  of  rank. 
The  offerer  came  as  a  man,  and  not  as  learned,  rich,  or  honourable.  5.  He  per- 
formed no  cunning  legerdemain  with  his  hand.  By  leaning  upon  it  he  took  the 
victim  to  be  his  representative  ;  but  he  placed  no  reliance  upon  ceremonial  petform- 
ances.  6.  Nothing  was  done  to  his  hand.  His  ground  of  trust  was  the  sacrifice, 
not  his  hands.  He  desired  his  hand  to  be  clean,  but  upon  that  fact  he  did  not  rest 
for  pardon.  {Ibid.)  All  can  lean  on  Christ : — The  Puritans  speak  of  faith  as  a 
recumbency,  a  leaning.  It  needs  no  power  to  lean  ;  it  is  a  cessation  from  our  own 
strength,  and  allowing  our  weakness  to  depend  upon  another's  power.  Let  no  man 
say,  "  I  cannot  lean  " ;  it  is  not  a  question  of  what  you  can  do,  but  a  confession  of 
what  you  cannot  do,  and  a  leaving  of  the  whole  matter  with  Jesus.     (Ibid.) 


CHAPTER  V. 

Ver.  1.  If  he  do  not  utter  It. — Of  the  difference  tetioeen  these  laws  in  the 
fifth  and  those  in  the  fourth  chapter: — 1.  The  former  laws  seem  to  concern 
the  Israelites  specially,  where  it  said  (ver.  27),  "  If  any  people  of  the  land  "  ; 
but  these  concern  aU  whomsoever  they  see  or  know  to  offend.  2.  The  sins 
of  ignorance  there  are  propounded  generally,  here  instance  is  given  in  some 
special  and  particular  sins.  3.  There  sins  are  mentioned  which  a  man  com- 
mitteth  by  himself,  here  such  as  are  done  by  others  whereby  one  may  be  defiled.  4. 
Beside  these  laws  are  set  forth  without  any  distinction  of  persons,  as  in  the  former 
chapter  of  the  priest,  the  congregation,  and  prince,  because  the  vulgar  people  are 
here  understood,  every  law  beginning  thus,  "  If  any  soul,"  as  chap.  iv.  27.  ''  If  any 
soul  of  the  peo|jle,"  by  this  phrase,  then,  are  meant  of  private  persons  of  the  vulgar 
sort ;  as  for  the  special  persons  as  of  the  priest  and  prince,  they  must  be  understood 
here  as  in  the  former  laws  to  make  satisfaction  for  these  sins  also  with  the  rite  pre- 
scribed in  their  privileges.  5.  Add  hereunto  the  reason  which  is  yielded  by  Tostatus 
that  whereas  sins  of  ignorance  are  incident  both  unto  the  priest,  prince,  and  people, 
and  differ  in  degree  accordin;;;  to  the  quality  of  their  persons,  as  it  is  more  grievous 
for  the  high  priest  to  fail  by  error  or  ignorance  than  the  congregation,  and  for  them 


88  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

rather  than  the  prince,  yet  for  sins  committed  of  malice  and  passion  there  cannot 
be  the  like  difference,  for  the  whole  multitude  cannot  offend  iu  passion  as  of  ignor- 
ance as  a  particular  person  may  (chap.  iv.  1).  But  I  resolve  rather  with  C  ijetaue, 
that  these  laws  are  specially  understood  of  private  persons,  and  of  private  olfences. 
6.  And  this  further  difference  there  is  between  the  sins  rehearsed  in  this  chapter 
and  the  former — that  there  the  sins  of  ignorance  are  by  name  expressed,  here  such 
as  proceed  of  passion ;  which  kind  of  sins  must  be  understood  with  some  kind  of 
limitation,  for  there  is  no  sin  committed,  though  of  malice,  but  there  is  some 
passion  in  it,  as  he  which  for  fear  or  hope  of  reward  forsweareth  himself  is  led  by 
some  passion,  yet  it  cannot  projjerly  be  called  a  sin  of  passion.  (1)  It  must  be  a 
strong  and  forcible  passion  which  are  either  wrath  or  lust — the  love  of  money  is 
none  of  them.  (2)  It  must  be  a  passion  suddenly  rising,  not  inveterate,  as  he  that 
is  suddenly  enraged  sinneth  of  passion,  not  he  which  doth  any  evil  of  hatred  which 
is  a  settled,  festered,  and  inveterate  passion,  for  such  an  one  deliberately  offendeth, 
and  not  of  passion.  (^1.  Willet,  D.D.)  Sins  of  silence  : — The  spiritual  truth  under- 
lying the  Mosaic  law  is  that  man  is  under  the  direct  eye  of  God,  and  his  life  is,  there- 
fore, lifted  into  direct  responsibility  to  God.  God  sees  us,  and  God  sees  everything 
about  us  and  within  us.  Sins  of  silence  and  secrecy,  sins  of  public  error  and 
notoriety,  which  go  before  a  man  to  judgment,  are  alike  open  and  naked  to  Him 
■with  whom  we  have  to  do,  Moses  taught  that  the  life  of  the  meanest  man 
fulfilled  itself  under  the  open  eye  of  heaven.  He  was  no  mere  atom  in  the  human 
ant-hill,  no  insignificant  unit  of  humanity,  lost  in  the  vast  ebb  and  flow  of  universal 
life,  for  insignificance  is  impossible  to  man,  and  obscurity  is  denied  him.  He  was 
a  person,  active,  powerful,  working  woe  or  weal  to  others ;  and  just  as  the  calling 
of  a  man's  voice,  or  the  footfall  of  a  child's  step,  stir  the  waves  of  sound  which 
travel  onward  and  ever  onward,  tiU  they  may  be  said  to  break  upon  the  shores  of 
the  furthest  stars,  so  the  influences  of  a  man's  life  are  boundless.  This  passage 
is  a  striking  illustration  of  these  principles.  It  recognises  that  sin  may  lie  in 
silence  as  in  speech,  that  to  hear  the  word  of  swearing  and  not  rebuke  it  is  to  share 
the  guilt  of  it ;  that  men  are  responsible  to  each  other  because  they  are  responsible 
to  God.  There  are  three  forces  in  human  hfe,  the  action  of  which  is  illustrated 
by  this  passage.  I.  The  first  is  influence — that  intangible  personal  atmosphere 
which  clothes  every  man,  an  invisible  belt  of  magnetism,  as  it  were,  which  he 
carries  with  him.  Every  human  being  seems  to  possess  a  moral  atmosphere 
quite  peculiar  to  himself,  which  invests  and  interprets  him,  and  the  presence  of 
which  others  readily  detect.  For  instance,  a  pure  woman  carries  a  moral  and 
ennobling  atmosphere  with  her.  The  atmosphere  which  clothes  her  seems  to  flood 
the  room,  and  the  coarse  weeds  of  vicious  thought  and  talk  cannot  thrive  in  it. 
Or  look  on  the  other  side  of  the  illustration.  Picture  a  type  of  man  but  too 
common — the  fast  man  of  society.  There  is  an  exhalation  of  evil  which  goes 
before  him  and  spreads  around  him.  That  is  influence :  something  subtle, 
indefinable,  yet  real ;  without  lips,  yet  speaking ;  without  visible  shape,  yet  acting 
with  tremendous  potency,  like  the  magnetic  forces  which  throb  and  travel  unseen 
around  us,  hidden  in  the  dewdrop  and  uttered  in  the  thunder ;  influence,  which 
streams  out  from  every  human  being,  and  shapes  others,  and  moulds  and  makes 
them  ;  influence,  which  is  stronger  than  action,  more  eloquent  than  speech,  more 
enduring  than  life,  which  being  holy  sows  the  centuries  with  the  seeds  of  holy 
life,  and  being  evil  multiplies,  indeed,  transgressors  in  the  earth  !  II.  The  second 
force  is  example.  Every  man  sets  a  copy  for  his  neighbour,  and  his  neighbour  is 
quick  to  reproduce  it.  The  covetous  man  has  a  miser  for  his  son,  the  light 
woman  has  a  daughter  hastening  towards  the  ways  of  shame,  the  drunkard  infects 
a  whole  neighbourhood  with  his  vices.  III.  And  then,  from  influence  and  example 
there  results  responsibility.  You  can  as  easily  evade  the  law  of  gravitation  as 
the  law  of  human  responsibility.  If  you  cease  to  speak  that  will  not  rid  you  of 
the  burden  ;  you  must  cease  to  he  to  do  that.  Nay,  even  death  itself  is  powerless 
to  destroy  influence.  Often  it  multiplies  it  a  thousandfold.  Is  the  life  of  the 
heroes,  the  patriots,  the  martyrs  really  closed  ?  They  were  never  so  much  aUve 
as  now ;  the  fire  that  slew  them  freed  them,  and  the  steps  of  their  scaffolds  were 
the  staircase  of  immortality.  Thus  influence  and  example  bring  with  them 
responsibility  to  God  and  responsibility  to  man.  IV.  Let  us  mark  further  the 
PEECisE  WAY  IN  wuicH  THESE  FOBCES  woEK.  1.  First,  it  is  clear  that  personal  sin 
always  involves  others.  "  If  a  man  hear  the  voice  of  swearing,"  if  he  even  knows 
of  it,  he  shares  the  complicity  of  the  sin.  There  is  always  some  one  who  hears, 
M  ho  witnesses,  who  shares.    Here  is  the  most  tragic  and  awful  aspect  of  sin — we 


CHAP,  v.]  LEVITICUS.  89 

share  our  sins !  We  have  involved  others  in  our  guilt,  and  if  we  forget  they  will 
go  remembering.  It  is  well  that  thou  sbouldest  stand  in  God's  house  to-day, 
clothed  with  decorous  reverence,  unsuspected,  and  with  no  scar  of  fire  upon  thee ; 
hut  what  of  the  poor  soiled  body  of  that  other  one,  the  sharer  of  thy  sin  and 
shame  ?  For  there  is  a  dreadful  comradeship  in  guilt — often  iutentiimal,  for  men 
love  company  in  their  sins,  but  often  unintentional,  for  others  share  what  they 
concealed  and  know  what  they  did  secretly.  It  is  the  most  appalling  aspect  sin 
assumes ;  it  is  never  sterile,  it  is  always  multiplying  aud  prolific,  passing  like  a 
fever-taint  from  man  to  man ;  till  from  one  sin  a  world  is  infected  and  corrupt. 
2.  Notice  again,  that  he  who  sees  a  sin  and  does  not  rebuke  it  shares  the  sin  and 
bears  its  iniquity.  The  only  way  to  purge  one's  self  of  the  contaminating  com- 
plicity of  another  man's  guilt  is  instantly  to  witness  against  it.  Tnere  is  no  other 
course  open  to  a  spiritual  honesty.  (1)  Look,  for  instance,  at  this  truth  personally. 
No  one  need  go  very  far  for  an  illustration.  You  are  a  youth  employed  in  a  ware- 
house or  office  where  religion  is  at  a  discount.  In  the  warehouse  there  is  sure  to 
be  a  fast  set,  a  group  of  youths  whose  habitual  talk  is  seasoned  with  profanity  or 
impurity,  and  who  are  always  eager  to  get  an  audience  for  their  shameful  recitals. 
You  were  silent,  you  blushed,  you  were  indignant,  you  turned  aside  full  of 
abhorrence  for  the  sin  and  contempt  for  the  sinner,  and  no  doubt  you  flattered 
yourself  you  must  be  very  virtuous  and  good  to  feel  such  virtuous  anger,  and  there 
you  were  content  to  rest.  But  this  text  puts  an  entirely  new  meaning  on  your 
conduct ;  because  you  did  not  witness  against  that  sin  you  shared  it.  Blushing 
is  one  thing,  confessing  Christ  quite  another.  (2)  Look  at  this  matter  nationally. 
Look  at  what  is  going  on  at  the  present  time  in  India,  Hong  Kong,  the  Barbadoes, 
wherever  the  flag  of  Britain  is  flying.  What  is  going  on,  do  you  ask?  This,  that 
•wherever  that  flag  goes  the  shame  of  British  vice  follows.  And  now,  mark,  who 
is  responsible  for  all  this  ?  According  to  my  text,  all  who  know  the  facts,  and 
therefore  from  this  hour  all  who  hear  these  words  are  responsible  for  the  existence 
of  this  licensed  infamy.  This  passage  particularly  rebukes,  then,  sins  of  silence. 
To  be  silent  when  you  should  speak  is  as  evil  as  to  speak  when  you  should  be 
silent.  To  be  tongue-tied  by  cowardice  when  wrong  discovers  its  hideous  naked- 
ness to  us,  is  as  vile  a  thing  as  to  praise  wrong  and  sing  the  coronation  song  of 
wickedness.  (iV.  J.  Daivson.)  The  sin  of  conniving  at  urong-doings : — I.  That 
THE  SINS  OF  MEN  CANNOT  EVADE  WITNESSES.  An  old  Writer  has  forcibly  said  "that 
to  every  sin  there  must  be  at  least  two  witnesses,"  viz.,  "a  man's  own  conscience 
and  the  great  God."  II.  That  it  is  the  duty  or  witnesses  to  give  evidence 
WHEN  justice  DEMANDS  IT.  When  a  witness  heard  the  words  of  adjuration  he  was 
required  at  the  proper  place  to  give  the  needed  information.  It  was  his  duty 
because — (1)  The  law  of  the  Lord  commanded  it,  and  (2)  The  purity  of  society 
demanded  it.  III.  That  in  concealing  evidence  against  sin  we  involve  our- 
selves IN  serious  guilt.  The  guilt  of  concealing  evidence  is  seen,  in  that  by 
so  doing  we — 1.  Dishonour  God's  voice,  which  speaks  within  us.  2.  Disobey  God's 
published  laws.  3.  Decrease  our  own  antipathy  to  sin.  4  Encourage  the  trespasser 
in  his  wrong-doing.  All  sin  ought  to  be  acknowledged  aud  expiated  for  the  sake 
of  the  sinner  and  the  wronged.  (F.  W.  Brown.)  Lessons  : — 1.  Not  to  conceal, 
or  consent  to  other  men's  sins.  2.  God's  dishonour  not  to  be  endured.  3.  Con- 
fession of  our  sins  unto  God  necessary  (ver.  5).  This  is  the  beginning  of  amend- 
ment. 4.  Against  negligent  hearers  of  the  Word  (ver.  15).  5.  Against  sacrilege. 
6.  To  take  heed  of  the  sleights  and  subtle  temptations  of  Satan.  6.  To  appear 
before  the  Lord  in  sincerity  and  simplicity  of  heart.     (A.  Willet,  D.D.)  The 

voice  of  swearing  repudiated  : — When  the  late  Eev.  Mr.  K was  settled  in  his 

congregation  of  S ,  they  could  not  furnish  him  with  lodgings.  In  these  circum- 
stances, a  Captain  P ,  in  the  neighbourhood,  though  a  stranger  to  religion, 

took  him  into  his  family.  But  our  young  clergyman  soon  found  himself  in  very 
unpleasant  circumstances,  owing  to  the  captain's  practice  of  swearing.  One  day 
at  table,  after  a  very  liberal  volley  of  oaths  from  the  captain,  he  observed  calmly, 
"  Captain,  you  have  certainly  made  use  of  a  number  of  very  improper  terms." 
The  captain,  who  was  rather  a  choleric  man,  was  instantly  in  a  blaze.  "  Pray, 
sir,  what  improper  terms  have  I  used?"  "Surely,  captain,  you  must  know," 
replied  the  clergyman  with  greater  coolness;  "and  having  already  put  me  to  the 
pain  of  hearing  them,  you  cannot  be  in  earnest  in  imposing  upon  me  the  additional 
pain  of  repeating  them."  "You  are  right,  sir,"  resumed  the  captain,  "you  are 
right.  Support  your  character,  and  we  will  respect  you.  We  have  a  parcel  of 
clergymen  around  us  here  who  seem  quite  uneasy  till  they  get  us  to  unuers  and 


90  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ▼. 

that  we  may  use  any  freedom  we  please  before  them,  and  we  despise  them." 
Guilty  silence  deplored  and  amended  : — Kilstein,  a  pious  German  minister,  once 
heard  a  labouring  man  use  the  most  awful  curses  and  imprecations  in  a  fit  of 
passion,  without  reproving  him  for  it.  This  so  troubled  him  that  he  could  scarcely 
sleep  the  following  night.  In  the  morning  he  arose  early,  soon  saw  the  man 
coming  along,  and  addressed  him  as  follows  :  "  My  friend,  it  is  you  I  am  waiting 
to  see."  "  You  are  mistaken,"  replied  the  man  ;  "you  have  never  seen  me  before." 
"  Yes,  I  saw  you  yesterday,"  said  Kilstein,  "  whilst  returning  from  your  work,  and 
heard  you  praying."  "  What !  heard  me  pray  ?  "  said  the  man.  "  1  am  sure  now 
that  you  are  mistaken,  for  I  never  prayed  in  my  life."  "And  yet,"  calmly  but 
earnestly  replied  the  minister,  "if  God  had  heard  your  prayer,  you  would  not  be 
here,  but  in  hell ;  for  I  heard  you  beseeching  God  that  He  might  strike  you  with 
blindness  and  condemn  you  unto  hell  fire."  The  man  turned  pale,  and  trembling 
said  :  "  Denr  sir,  do  you  call  this  piayer?  Yes,  it  is  true,  I  did  this  very  thing." 
"Now,  my  friend,"  continued  Kilstein,  "as  you  acknowledge  it,  it  is  my  duty  to 
beseech  you  to  seek  with  the  same  earnestness  the  salvation  of  your  soul  as  you 
have  hitherto  its  damnation,  and  I  will  pray  to  God  that  He  will  have  mercy  upon 
you."  From  this  time  the  man  regularly  attended  upon  the  ministry  of  Kilstein, 
and  ere  long  was  brought  in  humble  repentance  to  Christ  as  a  true  believer.  "A 
word  in  season  how  good  it  is."  "  Be  mstant  in  reason  and  out  of  season  ;  rebuke, 
reprove,  exhort,  with  all  long-suffering  and  patience."  Sister  Dora's  noble  rehiihe 
of  sicearinq  : — Sister  Dora  was  once  travelling,  as  usual,  third  class,  when  a  number 
of  half-drunken  navvies  got  in  after  her,  and  before  she  could  change  her  carriage 
the  train  was  in  motion.  She  recollected  that  her  dress,  a  black  gown  and  cloak, 
with  a  quiet  black  bonnet  and  veil,  would  probably,  as  on  former  encounters  with 
half-iutoxicated  men,  protect  her  from  insult.  Her  fellow-travellers  began  to  talk, 
and  at  last  one  of  them  swore  several  blasphemous  oaths.  Sister  Dora's  whole  soul 
burnt  within  her,  and  she  thought,  "  Shall  I  sit  and  bear  this?  "  but  then  came 
the  reflection,  "What  will  they  do  to  me  if  I  interfere?  "  and  this  dread  kept  her 
quiet  a  moment  or  two  longer.  But  the  language  became  more  and  more  violent, 
and  it  passed  through  her  mind,  "  What  must  these  men  think  of  any  woman 
who  can  sit  by  and  hear  such  words  unmoved  ;  but,  above  all,  what  will  they  think 
of  a  woman  in  my  dress  who  is  afraid  to  speak  to  them  ?  "  At  once  she  stood 
up  her  full  height  in  the  carriage  and  called  out  loudly,  "  I  will  not  hear  the 
Master  whom  I  serve  spoken  of  in  this  way."  Immediately  they  dragged  her  down 
into  her  seat,  with  a  torrent  of  oaths,  and  one  of  the  most  violent  roared,  "  Hold 
your  jaw,  you  fool ;  do  you  want  your  face  smashed  in  ?  "  They  held  her  down  on 
the  seat  between  them;  nor  did  sh-f  attempt  to  struggle,  satisfied  with  having 
made  her  open  protest.  At  the  next  station  they  let  her  go,  and  she  quickly  got 
out  of  the  carriage.  A  minute  after,  while  she  was  standing  on  the  platform,  she 
heard  a  rough  voice  behind  her,  "  Shake  hands,  mum  !  you're  a  good-plucked  one, 
you  are !  You  were  right  and  we  were  wrong."  She  gave  her  liand  to  the  man, 
who  hurried  away,  for  fear,  no  doubt,  that  his  comrades  s'lould  jeer  at  him. 
Sins  of  ifinorance  classified  : — If  we  compare  the  fourth  and  the  sixth  chapters  of 
Leviticus,  it  is  very  evident  that  th3  first;  broad  distinction  between  them  is  that 
the  former  treats  of  sins  committed  ignorantly,  tbe  latter  of  sins  committed 
knowingly.  The  division,  however,  into  sins  ignorantly,  and  sins  knowingly 
committed,  is  not  alone  sufficient.  Sins  committed  ignorantly,  greatly  vary,  not 
only  in  the  degree,  but  also  iu  the  kind  of  ignorance;  and  for  such  ignorance,  we 
may  be  in  different  degrees  responsible.  In  order,  therefore,  to  mark  that  such 
differences  are  appreciated  by  God,  and  that  He  desires  that  we,  too,  slionld 
appreciate  them,  vaiious  classifications  of  sins  of  ignorance  are  given  in  the  fifth 
chapter;  in  some  of  which  there  is  so  much  of  self-caused  ignorance  that  they 
very  nearly  approach,  in  the  character  of  their  guilt,  to  sins  knowingly  committed. 
Indeed  in  the  first  examplegivcn  in  the  fifth  chapter,  there  is  so  much  that  is  voluntary 
in  the  action  supposed,  that  we  may  perhaps  wonder  how  such  an  action  can  at 
all  be  placed  in  the  same  rank  with  sins  of  ignorance.  The  case  supposed  is  that 
of  a  person,  who  having  committed  a  sin,  and  being  adjured  to  declare  it,  refuses. 
It  is  evident  that  terror,  or  f orgetf ulness,  or  carelessness,  or  some  plausible  sophistry 
whereby  we  may  deceive  ourselves  into  the  belief  that  our  par.icular  case  is  an 
exception  to  the  general  rule,  may  prevent  such  a  sin  from  being  committed  with 
the  deliberate  voluntariness  that  inaiks  the  trespasses  of  the  sixth  chapter.  But  it 
stands  in  striking  contrast  with  sins  that  spring  from  that  deep  universal  ignorance 
which  characterises  the  sins  of  the  fourth  chapter.     Tlie  stcjnd  case  is  that  of 


CHAP,  v.]  LEVITICUS.  91 

unconsciously  touching  something  <hat  is  unclean.  Here,  again,  there  is  evidently 
no  ignorance  of  any  general  piiucip'e.  The  ignorance  concerns  a  specific  fact,  and 
is,  more  or  less,  the  result  of  carelessness  or  failure  in  applying  the  tests  which  we 
possess.  There  are,  however,  cases  in  which  ignorance  of  particulars  is  the 
immediate  result  of  being  imbued  with  false  general  principles.  He  whose  mind 
has  been  from  his  youth  up  trained  in  the  school  of  error,  and  thence  received 
principles  which  have  formed  his  habits  of  thought  and  action,  will  be  found  very 
iuf-apable  of  determining  what  is  clean  or  unclean  in  the  particulars  of  action. 
The  eye  of  his  conscience  is  blinded ;  his  moral  sense  is  paralysed.  The  wander- 
ing or  inattentive  eye  may  be  recalled  to  observation;  the  slumbering  eye  may  be 
aroused ;  but  how  can  we  gain  the  attention  of  an  eye,  over  which  the  film  of  thick 
darkness  has  firmly  formed  ?  Sins  committed  in  such  darkness  as  this  would 
properly  be  traced  to  ignorance  as  their  root,  and  would  be  classed  with  the  sins 
of  the  fifth  chapter,  requiring  the  sin-offering  as  there  described.  (B.  W.  Newton.) 
Complacent  ignorance: — Transgression  may  ensue  from  lack  of  knowledge  that  such 
conduct  is  forbidden;  or  it  may  be  that,  knowing  the  prohibition,  disobedience 
is  speciously  excused  on  some  vague  plea  that  circumstances  warrant  it  or 
expediency  condones  it.  In  such  cases  ignorance,  if  it  be  really  ignorance  at  all, 
is  self-induced,  and  is  therefore  the  more  culpable.  Amid  such  reprehensible 
forms  of  ignorance  may  be  placed — I.  Carelessness  ;  the  mind  too  placid  to  rouse 
itself  to  inquiry.  II.  Indiscrimination  ;  the  habit  of  ignoring  vital  principles  and 
conniving  at  inconsistencies.  III.  Self-excusing  ;  finding  exceptional  circum- 
stances which  extenuate  faults  and  condone  misconduct.  IV.  Neglect  of 
Scripture  ;  not  "  coming  to  the  light  lest  their  deeds  should  be  reproved  "  (John 
iii.  20).  V.  Satisfaction  with  a  state  of  conscious  darkness  ;  indifference  to 
precise  regulations  of  religion,  indisposition  of  heart  towards  "perfect  holiness  "  ; 
a  loose  and  easy  content  over  failings  and  negligence.  Ignorance  is  by  some  persons 
consciously  cherished :  it  allows  them  a  covert  from  the  exactions  of  a  lofty  and 
honest  piety.  VI.  Plausible  sophistry  ;  entertaining  the  delusion  that  because 
there  is  not  determined  wilfulness  in  sinning,  or  not  fullest  knowletlge  of  God's 
prohibitions  of  sin,  they  are  less  responsible,  less  to  be  condemned.  Note  :  Many 
persons,  trained  from  jouth  in  a  school  of  error,  grow  up  with  false  principles 
dominating  their  judgments  and  consciences,  or  with  ignorance  of  the  application 
of  right  principles  to  particular  incidents  and  actions.  Thus  Luther,  trained  amid 
the  blinding  theories  of  Komanism,  groped  on  till  manhood  in  delusions  and 
dimness.  Thus  Paul,  brought  up  amid  the  traditions  of  Judaism,  found  his  soul 
clouded  with  wholly  wrong  thoughts  concerning  what  was  "doing  God  service." 
It  is  our  duty  to  undeceive  ourselves,  to  inquire  after  knowledge,  to  seek  full  light, 
that  our  dimness  may  yield  to  discernment.  A  complacent  ignorance  is  as  the 
softly  gliding  stream  which  flows  onwards  to  the  rapids.  To  be  able  to  rest  in 
such  self-satisfied  ignorance  indicttes  that  self-delusion  has  begun,  portending 
doom.  "  Whom  the  gods  would  destroy  they  first  dement."  1.  Search  the  Scrip- 
tures. 2.  Seek  the  Sjt^r.t's  illumination.  3.  Culture  a  pure  and  enlightened 
conscience.  4.  Exercise  the  judgment  and  will  in  efforts  to  "  ceast;  from  evil  and 
learn  to  do  well."  {W.  H.  Jellie.)  Adjuration: — Our  translation  suggests,  if  it 
suggests  at  aU,  a  very  obscure  and  imperfect  meaning.  It  is  not,  "If  a  soul  hear 
a  person  swear,  and  do  not  rebuke  the  swearer,  or  tell  of  the  swearer,"  wbich 
seems  to  be  suggested  by  our  version ;  but.  If  a  person  summoned  to  a  court  of 
law,  under  the  ancient  Jewish  economy,  adjured  by  the  officiating  judge  to  tell 
the  truth,  should  not  so  tell  the  truth,  and  all  that  he  knew,  then  he  should  be 
guilty.  We  have  an  illustration  of  this  verse  in  such  a  passage  as  that  wiiere 
the  high  priest  came  to  our  blessed  Lord,  as  recorded  in  Matt.  xxvi.  63,  and  said, 
"I  adjure  thee  by  the  living  God,  that  Thou  tell  us  whether  Thou  be  the  Chiist, 
the  Son  of  God."  Now,  that  was  the  high  priest  acting  upon  the  first  verse  of 
this  very  chapter.  And  our  Lord  then  heard  what  is  called  "  the  swearing  "  in 
this  verse,  or  what  in  that  case  was  the  adjuration  of  the  high  priest;  and  aa 
you  notice,  so  obedient  was  the  true  Lamb,  the  true  Saviour,  to  all  the  require- 
ments of  the  ceremonial  law,  that  though  He  had  been  dumb  when  asked  previously, 
yet  the  moment  that  the  high  priest  adjured  Him,  that  moment,  in  obedience  to 
the  first  verse  of  this  chapter,  our  blessed  Lord  answered  the  question  addressed 
to  Him  ;  as  if  it  was  inipossilile  that  He  could  fail  in  the  observance  of  the  least 
jot  or  tittle  of  the  ceremonial  law,  any  more  than  in  the  weightiest  requirement 
of  God's  moral  law.  We  have  in  Prov.  xxix.  an  allusion  to  this:  "He  heareth 
an  -djuration,  and  telleth  not,"— that  is  laid  down  as  a  sin,  or,  in  other  words,  the 
violation  of  ihis  verse.     (J.  Ciiinntinij,  D.D.) 


92  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 


Ver.  2.  He  also  shall  be  unclean. — Moral  cnntaijion  : — This  avoidance  of  unclean 
animals  and  places  is  not  without  practical  illustration  in  our  own  personal  ex- 
perience and  action.  To-day,  for  example,  we  avoid  places  that  are  known  to  be 
fever-stricken.  We  are  alarmed  lest  we  should  bring  ourselves  withiu  the  influence 
of  contagion.  The  strongest  man  might  fear  if  he  knew  that  a  letter  were  put  into 
his  hand  which  had  coiue  from  a  house  where  fever  was  fatally  raging.  However 
heroic  he  might  be  in  sentiment,  and  however  inclined  to  boast  of  the  solidity  of  his 
nervous  system,  it  is  not  impossible  that  even  the  strongest  man  might  shrink  from 
taking  the  hand  of  a  fever-stricken  friend.  All  this  is  natural  and  all  this  is 
justifiable,  and,  in  fact,  any  defiance  of  this  would  be  unnattu-al  and  unjustifiable. 
Is  there,  then,  no  suggestion  in  all  such  rational  caution  that  there  may  be  moral 
danger  from  moral  contagion?  Ctiu  a  body  emit  prstilence  and  a  soul  dwell  in  all 
evil  and  riot  in  all  wantonness  without  giving  out  an  effluvium  fatal  to  moral  vigour 
and  to  spiritual  health  ?  The  suggestion  is  preposterous.  They  are  the  unwise  and 
most  reprehensible  men  who  being  afraid  of  a  fever  have  no  fear  of  a  moral  pestilence ; 
who  running  away  in  mortal  terror  from  influences  leading  towards  small-pox, 
cholera,  and  other  fatal  diseases,  rush  into  companionships,  and  actions,  and 
servitudes  which  are  positively  steeped  and  saturated  with  moral  pollution.  That 
we  are  more  all'ected  by  the  one  than  by  the  other  only  shows  that  we  are  more 
body  than  soul.  Literally,  the  text  does  not  refer  in  aU  probability  to  a  purely 
spiritual  action,  yet  not  the  less  is  the  suggestion  justified  ly  t^xp  rieuce  that  even 
the  soul  considered  in  its  most  spiritual  sense  may  touch  i  in^s  that  are  unclean 
and  may  be  defiled  by  tliem.  A  poor  thing  indeed  that  the  nand  has  kept  itself 
away  from  pollution  und  defilement  if  the  mind  has  opened  wide  all  the  points  of 
access  to  the  influence  of  evil.  Sin  may  not  only  be  in  the  hand,  it  may  be  rolled 
as  a  sweet  morsel  under  the  tongue.  There  may  be  a  chamber  of  imagery  in  the 
heart.  A  man  may  be  utterly  without  offence  in  any  social  acceptation  of  that 
term — actually  a  friend  of  magistrates  and  judges,  and  himself  a  high  interpreter 
of  the  law  of  social  morality  and  honour,  and  yet  all  the  while  may  be  hiding  a  very 
perdition  in  his  heart.  It  is  the  characteristic  mystery  of  the  salvation  of  Jesus 
Christ  that  it  does  not  come  to  remove  stains  upon  the  flesh  or  spots  upon  the 
garments,  but  to  work  out  an  utter  and  eternal  cleansing  in  the  secret  places  of  the 
soul,  so  that  the  heart  itself  may  in  the  event  be  without  "  spot  or  wrmkle  or  any 
such  thing  " — pure,  holy,  radiant,  even  dazzling  with  light,  tit  to  be  looked  upon  by 
the   very   eye   of    God.       {J.    Parker,   D.D.)  Dread  of  defilement ;— Pir-rius 

Valerianus,  in  his  book  of  Egyptian  Hieroglyphics,  maketh  mention  of  a  kind  of 
white  mouse,  called  the  Armenian  mouse,  being  of  such  a  cleanly  di'^position,  that 
it  will  rather  die  than  be  any  way  defiled,  so  that  the  passage  into  her  hole  being 
besmeared  with  any  filth,  she  will  rather  expose  herself  to  the  mercy  of  her  cruel 
enemy,  than  any  way  seek  to  save  her  life  by  passing  so  foul  an  entrance.  {J. 
Spencer.)  Defilement  to  be  avoided  : — Men  have  luolied  into  the  crater  of  a 
volcano  to  see  what  was  there,  and  going  down  to  explore,  without  coming  back  to 
report  progress.  Many  and  many  a  man  has  gone  to  see  what  was  in  hell,  that 
did  see  it.  Many  and  many  a  man  has  looked  to  see  what  was  in  the  cup,  and 
found  a  viper  coiled  up  therein.  Many  and  nniuy  a  man  has  gone  into  the  house  of 
lust,  and  found  that  the  ends  thereof  were  death— bitter,  rctten  death.  Many  and 
many  a  man  has  sought  to  learn  something  of  the  evils  of  gambling,  and  learned 
it  to  his  own  ruin.  And  I  say  to  every  man,  the  more  you  know  about  these  things 
the  more  you  ought  to  be  ashamed  of  knowing;  a  knowledge  of  tliem  is  not 
necessary  to  education  or  manhood ;  and  they  ought  to  be  avoided,  because 
wlien  a  man  has  once  fallen  into  them,  the  way  out  is  so  steep  and  hard. 
{H.  W.  Beecher.) 

Ver.  5.  He  shall  confess  that  he  hath  sinned  in  that  thing.— .Shi  mmt  be  fully 
coDfctsed : — Cover  siu  over  as  much  as  we  may,  and  smother  it  down  as  carefully  as 
we'can,  it  will  break  out.  Many  years  ago  the  packet  ship  Poland  was  bound  for 
Havre,  with  a  cargo  of  cotton  on  board.  By  some  singular  accident  the  cotton 
took  fire  clear  down  in  the  hold.  The  captain,  finding  that  he  could  not  reach.the 
fire,  undertook  to  smother  it;  but  in  vain.  Then  he  caulked  down  the  hatchways; 
but  the  deck  grew  so  hot  that  neither  passengers  nor  crew  could  stand  on  it.  At 
length  hn  fired  a  signal  gun  in  distress,  put  all  his  people  into  the  boats,  and  left 
the  doomed  ship  to  her  fate.  He  watched  her  as  she  ploughed  gallantly  through  the 
waves,  with  all  her  canvas  on ;  but  ere  she  sunk  below  the  horizon,  the  fire  burst 
forth  in  a  sheet  of  flame  to  the  mast-head.     That  ill-fated  packet,  carrying  the 


CHAP,  v.]  LEVITICUS.  93 

fatal  fire  in  her  own  hold,  is  a  vivid  picture  of  the  moral  condition  of  thousands  of 
men  and  women.  They  cover  their  sihs  by  all  manner  of  concealments;  they  batten 
down  the  hatchways  with  a  show  of  respectability,  and,  alas  !  sometimes  with  an 
outward  profession  of  religion  ;  but  the  deadly  thing  remains  underneath  in  the 
heart,  and  if  it  does  not  burst  forth  in  this  world,  it  will  in  the  next.  Probably  this 
reveals  the  reason  why  some  Church  members  are  so  constantly  halting  and 
stumbling  and  fall  so  easily  into  backsliding.  Their  "  first  works  "  of  repentance 
and  confession  to  God  were  shallow.  (T.  L.  Ciiyler.)  Particular  sins  must  be 
confessed: — Physicians  meeting  with  diseased  bodies,  when  they  find  a  general 
distemperature,  they  labour  by  all  the  art  they  can  to  draw  the  humour  to  another 
place,  and  then  they  break  it,  and  bring  out  all  the  corruptions  that  way  ;  all  which 
is  done  for  the  better  ease  of  the  patient.  Even  so  must  all  of  ns  do  when  we  have 
a  general  and  confused  sorrow  for  our  sins ;  i.e.,  labour  as  much  as  may  be  to  draw 
them  into  particulars  ;  as  to  say,  In  this  and  in  this,  at  such  and  suc-h  a  time,  on 
such  an  occasion,  and  in  such  a  place,  I  have  sinned  against  my  God  ;  for  it  is  not 
enough  for  a  man  to  be  sorrowful  in  the  general,  because  he  is  a  sinner;  but  he 
must  draw  himself  out  into  particulars,  in  what  manner,  and  with  what  sins  he 
hath  displeased  God,  otherwise  he  may  deceive  his  own  soul.     {J.  Spencer.) 

Vers.  14-19.  If  a  soul  commit  a  trespass. — The  trespass-offering  : — I.  As  to  the 

DISTINCTIVE      CHAEACTEE     OF     THIS     OFFERING.         1.    It    WaS    UOt     E     "  SWeet     SaVOUr  " 

offering.  Christ  is  here  seen  suffering  for  sins  ;  the  view  of  His  work  is  expiatory. 
2.  It  was  a  trespass  as  distinct  from  a  sin-offering.  Not  the  person,  but  the  act  of 
wrong-doing,  is  the  point  noticed  and  dwelt  upon.  And  how  solemn  is  the  truth 
here  taught  us,  that  neither  our  conscience,  nor  our  measure  of  light,  nor  our 
ability,  but  the  truth  of  God,  is  the  standard  by  which  both  sin  and  trespass  are  to 
be  measured.  "  Though  he  wist  it  not,  yet  is  he  guilty ;  he  hath  certainly  tres- 
passed against  the  Lord."  If  man's  conscience  or  man's  light  were  the  standard, 
each  man  might  have  a  different  rule.  And,  at  this  rate,  right  or  wrong,  good  or 
evil,  would  depend,  not  upon  God's  truth,  but  on  the  creature's  apprehension  of  it. 
At  this  rate,  the  filthiest  of  unclean  beasts  could  not  be  convicted  of  uncleanness, 
while  it  could  plead  that  it  had  no  apprehension  of  that  which  was  pure  and 
seemly.  But  we  do  not  judge  thus  in  the  things  of  this  world  ;  neither  does 
God  judge  so  in  the  things  of  heaven.  "Who  argues  that  because  swine  are 
filthy,  therefore  the  standatd  of  cleanliness  is  to  be  set  by  their  perceptions  or 
ability ;  or  that  because  they  seem  unconscious  of  their  state,  therefore  the 
distinction  between  what  is  clean  and  unclean  must  be  relinquished.  No :  we 
judge  not  by  their  perceptions,  but  our  own;  with  our  light  and  knowledge,  not 
their  ignorance,  as  our  standard.  3.  In  the  trespass-offering  we  get  restitution, 
full  restitution  for  the  original  wrong.  The  amount  of  the  injury,  according  to  the 
priest's  valuation  of  it,  is  paid  in  shekels  of  the  sanctuary  to  the  injured  person. 
The  thought  here  is  not  that  trespass  is  punished,  but  that  the  injured  party 
is  repaid  the  wrong.  The  payment  was  in  shekels :  these  "  shekels  of  the 
sanctuary  "  were  the  appointed  standard  by  which  God's  rights  were  measured  ;  as 
it  is  said,  "  And  all  thy  estimation  shall  be  according  to  the  shekel  of  the  sanctuary. " 
Thus  they  represent  the  truest  measure,  God's  standard  by  which  He  weighs  all 
things.  By  this  standard  the  trespass  is  weighed,  and  then  the  value  paid  to  the 
injured  person.  And  God  and  man,  though  wronged  by  trespass,  each  receive  as 
much  again  from  man  in  Christ  through  the  trespass-offering.  Whether  honour, 
service,  worship,  or  obedience,  whatever  God  could  claim,  whatever  man  could  rob 
Him  of,  all  this  has  He  received  again  from  man  in  Christ,  "  according  to  the 
priest's  estimation  in  shekels  of  the  sanctuary."  But  man  also  was  injured  by 
trespass ;  and  he,  too,  receives  as  much  again.  Christ  for  man  as  offerer  of  the 
trespass-offering,  must  offer  to  injured  man  the  value  of  the  original  injury.  And  such 
as  accept  His  offering  find  their  loss  through  man's  trespass  more  than  paid.  Has 
trespass  wronged  man  of  life,  peace,  or  gladness,  he  may  claim  and  receive  through 
Christ  repayment.  For  man  to  man,  as  for  man  to  God,  Christ  stands  the  One  in 
whom  man's  wrongs  are  remedied.  4.  But  this  is  not  all.  Not  only  is  the  original 
wrong  paid,  but  a  fifth  part  more  is  paid  with  it  in  the  trespass-offering.  Who 
would  have  thought  that  from  the  entrance  of  trespass,  both  God  and  man  should 
in  the  end  be  gainers  ?  But  so  it  is.  From  man  in  Christ  both  God  and  man  have 
received  back  more  than  they  were  robbed  of.  In  this  sense,  "where  sin  abounded," 
yea,  and  because  sin  abounded,  "  grace  did  more  abound."  II.  The  varieties  or 
OBASES  m  IBIS  OFSEVSSQ.    These  are  fewer  than  in  any  other  offering,  teaching  us 


94  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chaj>.  v. 


that  those  who  apprehended  this  aspect  of  Christ's  work,  will  apprehend  it  all  very 
much  alike.     It  will  be  remembered  that  in  the  sin-oft'ering  the  varieties  were  most 
numerous  and  that  because  sin  in  us  may  be,  and  is,  so  differently  apprehended ; 
but  trespass,  the  act  of  wrong  committed,  if  seen  at  all,  can  scarce  be  seen  diffe- 
rently.   Accordingly,  we  find  but  one  small  variety  in  the  trespass-offering,  for  I  can 
scarce  regard  the  two  different  aspects  of  trespass  as  varieties.     These  aspects  are, 
first,  trespasses  against  God,  and  then  trespasses  against  our  neighbour ;  but  this 
distinction  is  more  like  the  difference  between  the  offerings  than  the  varieties  in 
different  grades  of  the  same.     It  simply  points  out  distinct  bearings  of  trespass,  for 
which  in  each  case  the  atonement  seen  is  precisely  similar.     There  is,  however,  one 
small  yet  remarka-ble  difference  between  the  two  grades  of  the  offering  for  wrongs 
in  holy  things.     In  the  first  grade,  which  gives  us  the  fullest  view  of  the  offering, 
we  read  of  the  life  laid  down,  the  restitution  made,  and  the  fifth  part  added.     But 
in  the  lower  class,  the  last  of  these  is  unnoticed :  "  the  fifth  part  "  is  quite  unseen. 
And  how  true  this  is  in  the  experience   of  Christians.     Where  the  measure  of 
apprehension  is  full,  there  not  only  the  life  laid  down,  and  the  restitution  made  in 
the  trespass-offering,  but  all  the  truth  also  which  is  caught  in  the  "fifth  part," 
will  be  seen  as  a  consequence  of  trespass  and  a  part  of  the  trespass-offering.     Not 
so,  however,  where  the  apprehension  is  limited:  here  there  is  no  addition  seen 
beyond  the  amount  of  the  original  trespass.     (A.  Jukes.)        The  trespass-offering  ; 
or,    substitution    and    restitution: — I.   The   teespass-offering    (or  guilt-offering, 
E.V.)  refers  more  especially  to  the  evil  actions  which  are  the  outcome  of   our 
corrupt  nature:  while  the   sin  that  is  inherent  in  that  nature,  as  descendants 
of   fallen   Adam,   is   fully  met  in    the    sin-offering — last    considered.      The   evil 
deeds,  or   sins,   met   by  the  trespass-offering  may  be  thus  divided — as  agamst 
God   and  against  man.     II.  "  A  trespass  .  .  .  through  ignorance,  in  the  holy 
THINGS  of  the   Lord,"  Is  the  first  mentioned.      Here  there  is   a  similarity  to 
the  sin  spoken  of  in  chap,  iv.,  for  it  is  "  through  ignorance."     Who  can  measure 
the  holiness  of  God,  or  know  the  extent  of  sin  against  such  a  Being?    Perfect 
purity  and  holiness  demand  the  same ;   but  we   are   born  in   sin,  "  shapen  in 
iniquity  "  (Psa.  li.  5) ;  and  "  who  can  bring  a  clean  thing  out  of  an  unclean  ?     Not 
one "   (Job  xiv.  4).     Hence,  till  the  heart  is  changed  by  "  the  grace   of  God " 
(Kom.  V.  15 ;  1  Cor.  xv.  10),  the  sin  within  is  ever  showing  itself  in  evil  actions ;  and 
even  after  we  know  the  Lord  we  are  apt  to  trespass  in  His  "holy  things."   In  men's 
very  religion,  too,  there  may  be  sin.     How  often  do  they  invent  a  worship  of  their 
own,  not  in  accordance  with  God's  Word ;  a  way  of  salvation  which  dishonours 
Him  ;  a  way  of  approach  to  Him  other  than  He  has  given  !     If  living  for  self,  the 
world,  or  other  purpose  than  God's  glory,  we  are  robbing  God.     It  may  be  through 
ignorance,  but  "though  he  wist  it  not.  yet  he  is  guilty,  and  shall  bear  his  iniquity" 
(vers.  17-19),  saith  the  Lord.     There  is  thus  no  hope  for  us  in  ourselves,  but  He 
has  met  this  (as  all)  our  need  in  His  "  Beloved  Son,"  as  shown  in  type  before  us, 
for  the  sinning  one  is  bidden  to  bring — 1.  "  A  ram  without  blemish  ...  for  a 
trespass-offering  "  (guilt-offering,  E.V.),  "  and  the  priest  shall  make  atonement  for 
him  concerning  his  ignorance  .  .  . ;  "  for  "lie  hath  certainly  trespassed  against  the 
Lord."     Mark  well  the  words  "certainly  trespassed,"  though  in  ignorance.     The 
same  truth  is  here  again  shown,  that  no  sin  could  be  atoned  for  without  the  shedding 
of  Jesu's  blood ;  but  His  was  a  full,  perfect,  and  complete  atonement,  when  He 
made  "  His  soul  a  guilt-offering  "  (Isa.  hii.  10,  marg.,  K.  V. ;  same  word  as  vers.  v. 
19,  K.V.).     He  "was  delivered  up  for  our  trespasses"  (Rom.  iv.  25,  v.  IG,  R.V.) 
2.  "  Shekels  of  silver,  after  the  shekel  of  the  sanctuary,"  were  also  to  be  brought 
with  the  ram,  to  "  make  amends  for  the  harm  .  .  .  done  in  the  holy  thing."     No 
lower  standard  than  God's  could  be  accepted.     Have  we  a  just  perception  of  God's 
holiness  ?     3.  A  fifth  part  added.     Who  could  do  this  in  its  full  meaning  ?     None 
but  Jesus.     And  He  brought  more  glory  to  God  by  redemption  than  could  have 
accrued  from  creation.     Christ  was  perfect  in  His  obedience  to  God's  holy  law,  and 
gave  rich  surplus.     He — the  Antitype  of  trespass-offering  (both  of  ram  and  silver, 
1  Pet.  i.  18,  19) — was  also  Priest  who  made  atonement  or  reconciliation  (Rom.  v. 
10,  11 ;  1  John  ii.  2) ;  and  the  blessed  result  is— 4.  Forgiveness   (vers.   l(i,  18)  to 
"  all  that  beheve"  (Acts  xiii.  38,  39).     III.  Wrong  done  to  a  nkighbour  is  equally 
described  as  "trespass  against  the  Lord"  (chap.  vi.  1-7).     This  the  unregenerate 
heart  fails  to  see,  but  God  pronounces  it  to  be  "  sin  "  ;  and  the  truth  of  Heb.  ix.  22 
is  once  more  brought  before  us ;  but,  in  contrast  to  the  trespass  against  the  holy 
things,  in  the  case  of   wrong  done  to  a  neighbour — restitution  with  addition  of 
fifth  part  must  be  made,  before  bringing  the  trespass-offering  of  "  a  ram  without 


CHAP,  v.]  LEVITICUS.  95 

blemish,"  with  the  "estimation."  The  former  teaches  that  only  on  the  ground  of 
blood  shed  could  God  accept  the  offerer,  or  "the  amends"  He  would  have  him 
luake  ;  whereas,  in  the  case  of  wrong  done  to  a  neighbour,  "  amends  "  must  first  be 
made  to  that  neighbour  before  pardon  can  be  sought  of  God.  This  is  the  lesson 
enforced  by  our  Lord  (Matt.  v.  23,  24,  vi.  14,  15).  See,  too,  Zaccheus  ready  to 
"  restore  fourfold  "  (Luke  xix.  8).  To  approach  God  with  a  wrong  against  a 
neighbour  unredressed  will  not  bring  acceptance  ;  while  in  the  case  of  trespass 
against  the  Lord  in  holy  things,  pardon  through  Jesus  must  first  be  sought  before 
"  amends  for  the  harm  "  done,  can  be  accepted.  Each  must  be  according  to  God's 
ordering,  and  then  there  is  the  same  gracious  promise  of  forgiveness  (vers.  16,  18, 
vi.  7  ;  Eph.  iv.  32  ;  Col.  iii.  13).  IV.  The  law  of  the  teespass-offeeing  opens  out 
some  further  details  (chap.  vii.  1-7).  It  was  to  be — 1.  Killed  in  the  same  place  as 
the  burnt-offering  (chap.  i.  5, 11),  that  is,  "  on  the  side  of  the  altar  northward  before 
the  Lord."  It  was  the  "  same  Jesus  "  in  all,  though  different  aspects  and  results 
of  His  death  are  presented  in  each.  2.  The  blood  was  to  be  sprinkled  ' '  round 
about  upon  the  altar."  Only  in  the  sin-offering  was  it  to  be  poured  out,  as  that 
offering  presented  a  more  comprehensive  view  of  the  fulness  of  the  atonement.  3. 
The  costliest  parts  were  to  be  burned  on  the  altar,  as  in  the  sin-offering,  telling  of 
the  rich  and  intrinsic  excellency  of  the  Lord  Jesus  which  could  stand  the  searching 
fii'e  of  God's  hohness.  4.  "  Most  holy  "  (chaps,  vi.  25,  29  ;  vii.  1,  6).  The  use  of  such 
an  expression,  in  connection  with  sin-offering  and  trespass-offering  is  most  striking. 
The  more  we  meditate  thereon  the  more  we  learn  how  the  heart's  affection,  mind, 
inward  parts,  were  all  perfect  in  Jesus — hence  He  is  a  perfect  Saviour.  Lastly,  the 
trespass-offering  was — 5.  To  be  eaten  in  the  Holy  Place,  by  "  every  male  among  the 
priests,"  typifying  the  Church,  as  partakers  of  Him  who  bare  their  "sins" 
(1  Pet.  ii.  24),  while  "  the  priest  that  maketh  atonement  "  was  type  of  Jesus,  thus 
seen  to  identify  Himself  with  His  people.  (Lady  Beaujolois  Dent.)  Sacrilege : — 
The  trespass  here  indicated  is  sacrilege — mistake  and  misappropriation  in  the  use 
of  sacred  things  :  a  culpable  trespass,  whether  done  wittingly  or  unwittingly.  From 
this  rite  we  are  taught — I.  The  jealousy  of  Jehovah  foe  the  honour  of  His 
woESHip  IN  the  Tabernacle.  II.  The  influence  this  jealousy  was  calculated 
TO  EXEET  UPON  THE  woESHippEES  IN  THE  Tabernacle.  1.  Seiisitivcness  of  feeling. 
2.  Tenderness  of  conscience.  3.  Scrupulousness  of  conduct.  (F.  W.  Brown). 
Reparation : — I.  Sin  is  a  wrong  done  to  God.  II.  Sin  is  a  weong  done  to  man. 
Amends  must  be  made  by — 1.  Appropriate  contrition.  2.  Personal  sacrifice.  3. 
Unreserved  consecration:  evincing  itself  in  a  holy,  useful,  Christly  life.  (Ibid.) 
Error,  though  inadvertent,  is  guilty: — 1.  A  sophistey  needing  correction.  This :  that 
intention  constitutes  the  quality  of  an  action,  whether  conduct  is  criminal  or  not. 
But  this  declaration  of  "guilt,"  though  in  the  action  he  "wist  it  not,"  testifies 
against  a  sweeping  and  all-inclusive  application  of  that  principle,  viz.,  that  intention 
qualifies  action.  1.  Ignorance  may  and  does  extenuate  the  guilt  of  an  action. 
Knowledge  deepens  guilt  (John  ix.  41 ;  iv.  22).  Ignorance  alleviates  it  (Luke  xxiii. 
34 ;  Acts  iii.  17  ;  1  Tim.  i.  13).  2.  Yet  ignorance  cannot  excuse  guilt.  A  man  is 
not  excused  for  breaking  the  laws  of  the  land  because  he  was  ignorant  of  them. 
Nor  is  he  innocent  who  trespasses,  through  error,  against  any  ordinance  of  the 
Lord.  And,  if  so  in  respect  of  ceremonial  observances,  much  more  so  in  relation  to 
moral  duties.  Hence  the  curse  stands  against  "  every  one  that  coutinueth  not  in 
all  things  written  in  the  book  of  the  law  to  do  them  "  (Gal.  iii.  10).  3.  God  Himself 
refuses  to  condone  such  ignorance.  His  Word  declares  that  men  "  perish  for  lack 
of  knowledge"  (Hos.  iv.  6);  and  that  though  "a  people  be  of  no  understanding, He 
will  not  have  mercy  on  them,  and  will  show  them  no  favour."  II.  Man's  un- 
cojiPUTED  GUILT.  1.  Kcckon  up  our  remembered  sins.  "  They  are  more  in 
number  than  the  hairs  of  our  head."  2.  Add  the  sins  realised  at  the  time  but  now  for- 
gotten. Memory  lets  slip  multitudinous  trespasses.  3.  Yet  what  can  represent  the 
number  of  our  unrecognised  sins,  done  in  ignorance,  done  in  error  ?  4.  Deviations 
and  defects  also,  which  God's  eye  alone  detected,  and  which  we  too  self-indulgently 
condoned.  III.  Vast  virtue  needed  in  atonement.  1.  Under  the  ceremonial 
arrangements  for  expiation,  how  manifold  and  minute  and  numerous  were  the 
regulations  and  provisions  necessary  to  make  atonement  for  sin  1  2.  When  all  sin 
had  to  be  expiated  by  Christ's  one  offering,  what  value  it  must  needs  possess  !  Yet 
"by  one  offering"  the  Saviour  "purged  our  sins."  (1)  It  summons  us  to  faith. 
"  Look  unto  Me  and  be  ye  saved."  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God  which  taketh  away 
the  sin  of  the  world."  (2)  It  incites  us  to  grateful  adoration.  "  Unto  Him  that 
loved  us  and  washed  us  from  our  sins  in  His  own  blood,"  &o.  (Rev.  i.  5,  6).    (3)  It 


96  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

assures  us  of  perfect  redemption.  "  There  remaineth  no  more  offering  for  sin,"  for 
"the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  God's  Son,  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin."  ()V.  H.  Ji'llie.) 
Gain  by  redemption: — In  the  addition  of  "the  fifth  part,"  as  here  set  forth,  we 
have  a  feature  of  the  true  trespass-offering,  which,  it  is  to  be  feared,  is  but  liUle 
appreciated.  When  we  think  of  all  the  wrong  and  all  the  trespass  which  we  have 
done  against  the  Lord ;  and,  further,  when  we  remember  how  God  has  been 
wrong  d  of  His  rights  in  this  wicked  world,  with  what  interest  can  we  contemplate 
the  wiirii.  of  the  Cross  as  that  wherein  God  has  not  merely  received  back  what  was 
lost,  but  whereby  He  is  an  actual  gainer.  He  has  gained  more  by  redemption  than 
ever  He  lost  by  the  fall.  "  The  sons  of  God  "  could  raise  a  loftier  song  of  praise 
around  the  empty  tomb  of  Je-us  than  ever  they  raised  in  view  of  the  Creator's 
accomplished  work.  The  wrong  has  not  only  been  perfectly  atoned  for,  but  an 
eternal  advantage  has  been  gained  by  the  work  of  the  Cross.  This  is  a  stupendous 
truth.  God  is  a  gainer  by  the  work  of  Calvary.  Who  could  have  conceived  this  ? 
When  we  behold  man,  and  the  creation  of  which  he  was  lord,  laid  in  ruins  at  the 
feet  of  the  enemy,  how  could  we  conceive  that,  from  amid  those  ruins,  God  should 
gather  richer  and  nobler  s]Doils  than  any  which  our  unf alien  world  could  have 
yielded  ?  Blessed  be  the  name  of  Jesus  for  all  this !  It  is  to  Him  we  owe  it  all.  It 
is  by  His  precious  Cross  that  ever  a  truth  so  amazing,  so  divine,  could  be  enunciated. 
(C.  H.  Mackintosh.) 

Vers.  17,  18.  Though  he  wist  it  not,  yet  is  he  guilty. — f^ins  of  ignorance: — It  is 
supposed  in  our  text  that  men  might  commit  forbidden  things  v.ithout  knowing  it ; 
nay,  it  is  not  merely  supposed,  but  it  is  taken  for  granttd,  and  provided  for.  The 
Levitical  law  had  special  statutes  for  sins  of  ignorance,  and  one  of  its  sections 
begins  with  these  words  (chap.  iv.  2).  It  is  first  of  all  supposed  that  a  priest  may 
sin  (chap.  iv.  3).  As  Trapp  says,  "The  sins  of  teachers  are  teachers  of  sins,"  and 
therefore  they  were  not  overlooked,  but  had  to  be  expiated  by  trespass-offerings. 
Further  on  in  the  chapter  (ver  22)  it  is  supposed  that  a  ruler  may  sin.  Errors  in 
leaders  are  very  fruitful  of  mischief,  and  therefore  they  were  to  be  repented  of  and 
put  away  by  an  expiatory  sacrifice.  It  was  also  according  to  the  law  regarded  as 
very  likely  that  any  man  might  fall  into  sins  of  ignorance,  for  in  chap.  iv.  ver.  27, 
we.  read,  "  And  if  any  one  of  the  common  people  sin  through  ignorance,  while 
he  doeth  somewhat  against  any  of  the  commandments  of  the  Lord."  The  sin  even 
of  the  commonest  person  was  not  to  be  passed  over  as  a  mere  trifle,  even  though  be 
could  plead  ignorance  of  the  law.  An  enlightened  conscience  mourns  over  sins  of 
ignorance,  which  it  would  never  do  if  they  were  innocent  mistakes.  The  word 
rendered  "  ignorance"  may  also  bear  the  translation  of  "inadvertence."  Inadvertence 
is  a  kind  of  acted  ignorance  :  a  man  frequently  does  wrong  for  want  of  thought, 
through  not  considering  the  bearing  of  his  action,  or  even  thinking  at  all.  He 
carelessly  and  hastily  blunders  into  the  course  which  first  suggests  itself,  and  errs 
because  he  did  not  study  to  be  right.  There  is  very  much  sin  of  this  kind  com- 
mitted every  day.  There  is  no  intent  to  do  wrong,  and  yet  wrong  is  done.  Culpable 
ne^;lect  creates  a  thousand  faults.  "  Evil  is  wrought  by  want  of  thought  as  well  as 
want  of  heart."  We  do  not  lake  time  enough  to  examine  our  actions  ;  we  do  not 
take  good  heed  to  our  steps.  Life  should  be  a  careful  work  of  art,  in  which  every 
bingle  line  and  tint  should  be  the  fruit  of  study  and  thought,  like  the  paintings  of 
the  great  master  who  was  wont  to  say,  "I  paint  for  eternity" ;  but  alas  !  life  is  often 
slurred  over,  like  those  hasty  productions  of  the  scene  painter,  in  which  present 
effect  alone  is  studied,  and  the  canvas  becomes  a  mere  daub  of  colours  hwstily  laid 
on.  We  seem  intent  to  do  much  rather  than  to  do  well ;  we  want  to  cover  space 
rather  than  to  reach  perfection.  This  is  not  wise.  Oh  that  every  single  thought 
were  conformed  to  the  will  of  God  !  Now,  seeing  that  there  are  sins  of  ignorance 
and  sins  of  inadvertence,  what  about  them?  Is  there  any  actual  guilt  in  them? 
In  our  text  we  have  the  Lord's  mind  and  judgment.  I.  By  the  Divine  declaratioa 
that  sins  of  ignorance  are  really  sins  the  commandment  of  God  is  honoured.  1. 
Enlarging  upon  this  tbought,  I  would  observe  that  hereby  the  law  is  declared  to  be 
the  supreme  authority  over  men.  The  law  is  supreuie,  not  conscience.  Conscience 
is  differently  enhghtened  in  different  men,  and  the  ultimate  appeal  as  to  right  and 
wrong  cannot  be  to  your  half-blinded  conscience  or  to  mine.  If  we  break  the  law, 
although  our  conscience  may  not  blame  us,  or  even  inform  us  of  the  wrong,  yet  still 
the  deed  is  recorded  against  us ;  we  must  bear  our  iniquity.  The  law  is  also  set 
above  human  opinion,  for  this  man  says,  "  You  may  do  that,"  and  a  second  claims 
that  he  may  do  the  other,  but  the  law  changes  not  according  to  man's  judgment, 


CHAP,  v.]  LEVITICUS.  97 

and  does  not  bend  itself  to  the  spirit  of  the  age  or  the  taste  of  the  period.  It  is  the 
supreme  judge,  from  whose  infallible  decision  there  is  no  appeal.  TLiis  exalts  the  law 
above  the  custom  of  natious  and  periods  ;  for  men  are  very  wont  to  say,  "  It  is  true 
I  did  so  and  so,  which  I  could  not  have  defended  in  itself ;  but  then  it  is  the  way  of 
the  trade,  other  houses  do  so,  general  opinion  and  public  consent  have  endorsed  the 
custom ;  I  do  not  therefore  see  how  I  can  act  differently  from  others,  for  if  I  did  so 
I  should  be  very  singular,  and  should  probably  be  a  loser  through  my  scrupulosity." 
Yes,  but  the  customs  of  men  are  not  the  standard  of  right.  2.  Note  again,  if  a  sin 
of  ignorance  renders  us  guilty,  what  must  a  wilful  sin  do  ?  Do  you  not  perceive  at 
once  how  the  law  is  again  set  on  high  by  this  ?  3.  Thus  again,  by  the  teaching  of 
our  text,  men  were  driven  to  study  the  law :  for  if  they  were  at  all  right-hearted 
they  said,  "  Let  us  know  what  God  would  have  us  do.  We  do  not  wish  to  be  leaving 
His  commands  undone,  or  committing  transgressions  against  His  prohibitory 
precepts  through  not  knowing  better."  4.  And  you  will  see  at  once  that  this  would 
lead  every  earnest  Israelite  to  teach  his  children  God's  law,  lest  his  son  should  err 
through  ignorance  or  indavertence.  Fear  of  committing  sins  of  ignorance  was 
a  spur  to  national  educjation,  and  tended  greatly  to  make  all  Israel  honour  the  law 
of  the  Lord.  5.  I  close  these  tlioughts  by  noting  that  to  me  the  sin-reveahng 
power  of  the  law  is  wonderfully  displayed  as  I  read  my  text.  What  a  law  is  this  by 
whicl!  men  are  bound  !  How  severe  and  searching  !  How  holy  aud  how  pure  must 
God  Himself  be !  II.  By  the  teaching  of  the  text  the  consciexce  is  arodseo.  1. 
Our  ignorance  is  evidently  very  great.  As  the  conies  swarm  in  the  holes  of  the 
rocks,  the  bats  in  the  sunless  caves  of  the  earth,  and  the  fish  in  the  deep  abysses 
of  the  sea,  so  do  our  sins  swarm  in  the  hidden  parts  of  our  nature.  "  Who  can 
understand  his  errors  ?  Cleanse  Thou  me  from  secret  faults  ! "'  2.  Tlie  ignorance  of 
very  many  persons  is  to  a  large  degree  wilful.  Many  do  not  read  the  Bible  at  all,  or 
very  seldom,  and  then  without  desiring  to  know  its  meaning.  Even  some  professing 
Christians  take  their  religion  from  the  monthly  magazine,  or  some  standard  book 
written  by  a  human  author  and  adopted  by  their  sect,  but  few  go  to  the  Word  of 
God  itself ;  they  are  content  to  drink  of  the  muddied  streams  of  human  teaching 
instead  of  fiUing  their  cups  at  the  crystal  fount  of  revelation  itself.  Now,  if  ye  be 
ignorant  of  anything  concerning  God's  mind  and  will,  it  is  not,  in  the  case  of  any 
of  you,  for  want  of  the  Book,  nor  for  want  of  a  willing  guide  to  instruct  you  in  it ; 
for,  behold,  the  Holy  Spirit  waiteth  to  be  gracious  to  you  in  this  respect.  Break 
in,  0  light  eternal  1  Break  in  upon  the  dimness  of  our  ignorance.  3.  Now  it  will 
be  vain  for  any  man  to  say  in  his  mind,  as  I  fear  some  will  do,  "  God  is  hard  in 
thus  dealing  with  us."  If  thou  safest  thus,  O  man,  I  ask  thee  to  remember  God's 
answer.  Christ  puts  your  rebellious  speech  into  the  mouth  uf  the  unfaithful  one 
who  hid  his  talent.  Wiser  far  is  it  to  submit  and  crave  for  mercy.  4.  Let  us 
recollect,  in  order  that  our  doctrine  may  appear  less  strange,  that  it  is  according  to 
the  analogy  of  nature  that  when  God's  laws  are  broken,  ignorance  of  those  laws 
sbould  not  prevent  the  penalty  falling  upon  the  offenders.  5.  It  is  of  necessity  that 
it  should  be  according  to  this  declaration.  It  is  not  possible  that  ignorance  should 
be  a  justification  of  sin;  for,  first,  if  it  were  so,  it  would  follow  that  the  more 
ignorant  a  man  was  the  more  innocent  he  would  be.  If,  again,  the  guilt  of  an 
action  depended  entirely  upon  a  man's  knowledge,  we  should  have  no  fixed  standard 
at  all  by  which  to  judge  right  and  wrong  ;  it  would  be  variable  according  to  the 
enlightenment  of  each  man,  and  there  would  be  no  ultimate  and  infallible  court  of 
appeal.  Moreover,  ignorance  of  the  law  of  God  is  itself  a  breach  of  law,  since  we 
are  bidden  to  know  and  remember  it.  Can  it  be  possible,  then,  that  one  sin  is  to 
be  an  excuse  for  another?  If  sins  of  ignorance  are  not  sins,  then  Christ's  inter- 
cession was  altogether  a  superfluity.  6.  Once  again,  I  am  sure  that  many  of  us 
now  present  must  have  felt  the  truth  of  this  in  our  own  hearts.  You  who  love  the 
Lord  and  hate  unrighteousness,  must  in  your  lives  have  come  to  a  point  of  greater 
illumination,  where  you  have  said,  "I  sec  a  certain  action  to  be  wrong  ;  I  have 
been  doing  it  for  years,  but  God  knows  I  would  not  have  done  it  if  I  had  thought  it 
wrong.  Even  now  I  see  that  other  people  are  doing  it,  and  thinking  it  right ;  but 
I  cannot  do  so  any  more  ;  my  conscience  has  at  last  received  new  light,  and  I  must 
make  a  change  at  once."  In  such  circumstances  did  it  ever  come  to  your  mind  to 
say,  "  What  I  have  done  wa-^  not  wrong,  because  I  did  not  know  it  to  be  wrong  "? 
Far  from  it.  You  have  justly  said  to  yourself,  "My  sin  in  tbis  matter  is  not  so 
great  as  if  I  had  transgressed  wilfully  with  my  eyes  open,  knowing  it  to  be  sin  "  ; 
but  yet  \ou  have  accused  yourself  of  the  fault  and  mourned  over  it.  Ilf.  By  the 
grand  and  awful  truth  of  the  text  the  pajrifice  is  endeared.     Just  according  to 

7 


98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

our  sense  of  sin  must  be  our  value  of  the  sacrifice.  God's  way  of  delivering  those 
■who  sinned  ignorantly  was  not  by  denying  their  sin  and  passing  it  over,  but  by 
accepting  an  atonement  for  it.  Under  the  law  this  atonement  was  to  be  a  ram 
without  blemish.  Our  Lord  had  no  sin,  nor  shade  of  sin.  He  is  tbe  spotless 
victim  which  the  law  requires.  All  that  justice,  in  its  most  severe  mood,  could 
require  from  man  by  way  of  penalty  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  has  rendt^red ;  for  in 
addition  to  His  sacrifice  for  the  sin,  He  has  presented  a  recompense  for  the  damage, 
as  the  person  who  sinned  ignorantly  was  bound  to  do.  He  has  recompensed  the 
honour  of  God,  and  He  has  recompensed  every  man  whom  we  have  injured.  Has 
another  injured  you?  Well,  since  Christ  has  given  Himself  to  you,  there  is  a 
full  recompense  made  to  you,  even  as  there  has  been  made  to  God.  We  may  rest 
in  this  sacrifice.  How  supremely  efficacious  it  is.  It  takes  away  iniquity,  trans- 
gression, and  sin.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Ignorance  may  be  culpable: — Some  years 
ago  through  the  mistake  of  a  signalman  an  accident  took  place  on  the  Metropolitan 
Railway,  by  which  several  persons  lost  their  lives.  At  the  inquiry  it  transpired 
that  the  signalman  had  in  his  possession  a  book  of  instructions  which  if  they  had 
been  attended  to  the  accident  could  not  have  occurred,  but  this  book  he  confessed 
he  had  never  read,  hence  the  terrible  accident.  How  many  of  the  sins  of  professing 
Christians  may  be  traced  to  similar  culpable  ignorance  !  Knowledge  of  God's 

law  to  be  cultivated : — A  kindred  error  is  that  a  man  does  right  when  he  obeys  his 
conscience — does  what  his  conscience  tells  him  is  right;  in  other  words,  does  what 
he  thinks  is  right.  If  this  be  true  then  Saul  was  right  when  he  made  havoc  of  the 
Church,  for  he  verily  thought  he  was  doing  God  service.  We  are,  no  doubt,  bound 
to  do  what  we  think  is  right ;  but  we  are  under  equal  obligations  to  have  our 
thinking  in  regard  to  duty  correct.  God  has  given  us  reason,  moral  powers,  and 
revelation  that  we  may  know  our  duty  and  do  it.  The  intellect  needs  training  that 
it  may  perceive  what  is  true.  The  conscience  needs  training  that  it  may  perceive 
what  is  true  ;  in  other  words,  the  mind's  power  of  perceiving  both  scientific  and 
moral  truth  needs  cultivating.  It  may  err  in  regard  to  scientific  truth.  It  may  err 
in  regard  to  moral  truth.  In  regard  to  the  latter  we  have  an  infallible  standard  in 
the  Word  of  God,  which,  if  rightly  applied,  will  relieve  us  from  error.  We  see  why 
the  Bible  attaches  so  much  importance  to  a  knowledge  of  the  truth.  It  is  the 
condition  of  right  perception  in  regard  to  duty. 


CHAPTEE  VI. 

Vers.  2-7.  Bring  his  trespass-offering. — Christ  the  true  Trespass-offering  : — In 
Christ  Jesus,  the  true  Trespass-offering,  God  has  provided  an  offering  after  His  own 
estimation.  "  Kestitution,"  "compensation,"  and  "expiation" — all  are  found  in 
Him.  When  He  gave  His  life  a  ransom  for  many,  the  fullest  satisfaction  was  made 
to  God  and  man.  Both  had  been  trespassed  against,  and  both  could  now  say,  "  I 
am  satisfied.  I  have  all  back  and  more."  As  God  and  man  had  shared  in  the 
wrong  inflicted  by  the  trespass  of  the  latter,  so  there  is  this  blessed  community,  so 
to  speak,  in  the  offering  by  which  the  wrong  is  put  away.  God  is  glorified  in 
"  Christ  crucified."  A  crucified  Christ  is  our  glory.  "  Christ  is  God's,"  and  God's 
Christ  is  ours.  Such  is  the  wondrous  mystery  of  grace  displayed  in  the  aspect  of 
redemption  furnished  by  the  trespass-offering.  Well  may  we  exclaim  with  the 
apostle,  "  Oh,  the  depth  of  the  riches,  &c.,  both  of  the  wisdom  and  knowledge  of 
God — how  unsearchable  are  His  judgments,  and  His  works  past  finding  out," — how 
comforting  is  the  assurance  that  one  day  we  shall  know  these  things  as  we  cannot 
know  them  now.  {F.  H.  White.)  Social  sins  and  their  Godward  aspect : — I  can 
conceive  no  law  more  beautiful,  more  impartial,  more  fitted  to  do  the  highest  good, 
than  the  very  first  requirement  with  which  this  chapter  begins  :  "  If  a  soul  sin,  and 
commit  a  trespass  against  the  Lord."  But  mark  what  constitutes  a  trespass  against 
the  Lord.  It  consists  in  "  lying  to  his  neighbour,"  or  in  that  which  was  delivered 
to  him  to  keep,  or  in  fellowship,  or  in  taking  anything  away  from  his  neighbour  by 
violence.  Now,  in  doing  so,  he  commits  a  trespass  against  the  Lord  :  the  injury  is 
done  against  his  neighbour,  but  in  its  rebound  it  is  sin  against  God.  Every  deed  of 
injustice,  whether  it  break  the  last  six  commandments  or  the  first  four,  is  sin  against 
God — if  it  be  one  of  the  last  six.  commandments  of  the  law,  it  has  in  it  two  aspects  : 


CHAP.  VI.]  LEVITICUS.  99 

one  aspect  towards  man,  or  injury  done  to  man — a  neighbour;  and  its  aspect 
towards  God,  or  sin  committed  against  Him.  We  never  sin  against  each  other— 
we  do  injury  to  each  other — but,  when  we  do  so,  we  sin  always  against  God.  And 
hence  the  distinction  is  so  important — especially  in  these  days  when  errors  are 
abroad — that  the  person  against  whom  the  thing  is  done  can  forgive  in  the  thing 
which  relates  to  him  ;  if  I  steal,  or  if  I  injure  or  wound  the  neighbour,  he  from 
whom  I  plunder  can  forgive  me  the  injury,  because  he  is  injured  and  the  owner  ; 
but  the  sin  that  underlies  the  injury,  reaching  to  God,  God  alone  can  forgive.  See, 
too,  how  very  comprehensive  the  law  is — "  shall  sin  in  that  which  was  delivered 
him  to  keep."  Are  you  made  a  trustee  ? — is  property  deposited  with  you  ? — are  you 
a  banker  ? — has  some  client  left  his  money  in  your  hands  ?  Then  it  is  your  duty  to 
be  faithful;  it  is  your  duty  to  remember  that  the  least  breach  of  that  trust  is  injury 
against  your  neighbour  and  sin  against  your  God.  "  Or  in  fellowship  " — that  is, 
&s  we  call  it  in  modern  days,  "  in  partnership."  Are  you  a  partner  in  a  house  of 
business  ?  You  are  bound  to  look  to  your  co-partner's  interests  as  if  they  were 
your  own  ;  and  your  co-partner  is  bound  to  look  to  your  interests  just  as  if  they 
■were  his.  "  Or  in  a  thing  taken  away  by  violence,  or  hath  deceived  his  neighbour," 
such  a  one  commits  sin.  "  Or  hath  found  that  wiiich  was  lost,  and  lieth  concern- 
ing it,  and  sweareth  falsely."  Among  the  Eomans,  it  was  always  regarded  as  theft 
to  appropriate  anything  you  found  upon  the  streets,  whether  you  could  find  the 
owner  of  it  or  not :  and  this  law  here  says — from  which  that  was  evidently  a  reflec- 
tion— that  if  you  find  anything  of  which  you  cannot  find  the  owner,  or  if  you  find 
anything  and  know  the  owner,  and  either  conceal  it,  or  deny  it,  or  swear  falsely 
concerning  it,  all  that  is  sin  against  God.  "  Then  it  shall  be,  because  he  hath 
sinned  and  is  guilty,  that  he  shall  restore  that  which  he  took  violently  away,  or  the 
thing  which  he  hath  deceitfully  gotten,  or  that  which  was  delivered  him  to  keep,  or 
the  lost  thing  which  he  found,  or  all  that  about  which  he  hath  sworn  falsely ;  he 
shall  even  restore  it  in  the  principal  " — that  is,  the  sum  itself — "  and  shall  add  " — 
not  as  an  atonement,  but  as  what  may  be  fairly  due — "  the  fifth  part  more  thereto, 
and  give  it  unto  him  to  whom  it  appertaineth."  And  then,  not  only  was  he  to  do 
so,  but  he  was  also  to  do  it  at  the  time  of  his  confession  and  his  trespass-offering 
made  by  the  priest.  The  sin  was  forgiven  through  the  trespass-offering  as  a  type 
of  Christ's  atonement ;  the  injury  against  the  brother  was  rectified  by  returning  the 
principal,  and  a  fifth  of  the  principal  added  to  it,  and  receiving  from  that  brother 
he  had  injured  his  forgiveness.  {J.  Gumming,  D.D.)  All  shis  are  against  God: — 
When  a  man  defrauds  you  in  weight  he  sins  against  you,  not  against  the  scales, 
which  are  only  the  instruments  of  determining  true  and  false  weight.  When  men 
sin  it  is  against  God,  and  not  against  His  law,  which  is  but  the  indicator  of  right 
and  wrong.  You  care  little  for  sins  against  God's  law.  Now,  every  sin  that  you 
commit  is  personal  to  God,  and  not  merely  an  infraction  of  His  law.  It  is  casting 
javelins  and  arrows  of  base  desire  into  His  loving  bosom.  I  think  no  truth  can  be 
discovered  which  would  be  so  powerful  upon  the  moral  sense  of  men  as  that  which 
should  disclose  to  them  that  sinning  is  always  a  personal  offence  against  a  personal 
God.  {H.  W.  Beecher.)  Refusing  to  deceive  : — A  young  inan  came  to  a  gentle- 
man one  day  with  a  case  of  conscience.  He  was  corresponding  clerk  in  a  flourish- 
ing house  of  business.  His  employers  had  begun  to  direct  him  to  write  letters  to 
customers  containing  statements  which  he  and  they  knew  to  be  false.  He  had  ob- 
jected, and  they  said  :  "  We  are  responsible  for  these  statements  ;  it  is  nothing  to 
you  whether  they  are  true  or  false."  I  said  to  him,  "Did  they  sign  the  letters,  or 
ask  you  to  write  them  in  your  own  name  ?  "  As  soon  as  the  question  left  my  lips  I 
saw  that  if  there  were  a  difference  both  would  be  wrong,  and  I  hastened  to  tell  him 
so.  He  said,  "  I  have  to  sign  them  with  my  name,  per  Messrs.  Blank."  I  said, 
"  Your  case  is  clear  ;  you  must  decline  to  do  it."  He  said,  "  Then  I  shall  be  dis- 
missed"; and,  after  a  pause,  "I  have  a  wife  and  family."  I  replied,  "  My  dear 
friend,  this  is  a  trial  of  faith  and  principle  ;  you  must  do  right,  and  trust  to  God  to 

take  care  of  you  and  your  faimily."   I  met  him  some  days  after.    "  Well  Mr. ," 

I  said,  "  how  are  you  getting  on  ?  "  He  replied,  "  I  am  still  in  my  situation  ;  I  had 
an  interview  with  the  partners,  and  told  them  I  could  not  write  letters  I  knew  to  be 
untrue.  They  were  very  angry,  and  I  expected  to  receive  notice,  but  I  have  not 
received  it  yet."  Months  passed,  and  he  remained  in  his  situation.  After  a  while 
he  called  upon  me,  and  I  saw  in  his  face  that  something  had  happened.     "  Well, 

Mr. ,"  I  said,  "  have  you  had  your  dismissal  ?  "    "  No,"  he  said,  "  I  have  not," 

and  smiled.  "  What  then  ?  "  "A  very  confidential  post  in  their  service,  with  a 
higher  salary,  has  fallen  vacant,  and  they  have  put  me  into  it."     On  second 


100  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

thoughts  these  unprincipled  men  had  come  to  the  conclusion  that  a  clerk  who  woul  I 
not  deceive  a  customer  would  not  deceive  them,  and  was  too  valuable  to  be  lost. 
Fruits  of  deceit : — There  is  an  old  story  of  a  Frenchman  who  persuaded  some 
Missouri  Indians  to  exchange  fur  for  gunpowder,  representing  that  they  could 
obtain  a  fine  crop  by  sowing  it.  The  Indians  prepared  a  field,  and  sowed  the  powder, 
and  set  a  guard  to  watch  it.  As  it  did  not  come  up  they  saw  that  they  h<'  ^  been 
deceived.  Some  time  after  the  partner  of  the  deceiver  visited  these  Indians  with  a, 
large  stock  of  goods  for  the  purpose  of  trade.  The  Indians  each  took  such  things 
as  pleased  him,  tiU  all  were  gone.  The  Frenchman  went  to  the  head  chief  and 
demanded  redress.  The  chief  assured  him  that  full  justice  should  be  done  as  soon 
as  the  harvest  of  gunpowder  should  be  gathered.  This  was  poor  consolation  for  his 
loss,  but  such  a  rebuke  as  his  partner's  perfidy  deserved.  (S.  S.  Chruiiicle.)  A 
hoy's  temptation  resisted : — For  two  years  had  sailor  Ben  been  off  on  the  sea.  Now 
his  ship  touched  the  shore,  and  his  heart  was  full  of  joy.  When  he  said  good-bye 
to  his  mother  he  was  a  wild,  careless  boy  ;  but  in  the  rough  days  and  stormy  nights 
on  the  water  he  had  learned  not  only  to  love  his  mother  better,  but  to  love  and 
serve  tie  God  she  loved.  So  he  longed  to  go  to  her  and  tell  her  of  this  joy.  Once 
on  shore  he  hurried  to  buy  a  gift  for  her  ;  a  silver  purse  with  long  silver  fringe,  and 
into  it  he  counted  twenty  gold  dollars.  "  I'll  make  your  heart  glad  in  more  ways 
than  one,  mother,"  he  said,  as  he  snapped  the  clasp  and  bounded  over  the  rocks  to 
the  ship,  for  this  was  to  be  his  last  night  on  board  for  many  months.  In  his  haste 
his  foot  slipped,  and  he  fell  heavily,  bruising  his  head,  spraining  his  wrist,  and  the 
precious  purse  was  flung  out  of  his  hands  down  out  of  sight  to  the  rocks  below. 
Poor  Ben  !  Never  thinking  of  his  bruises  he  climbed  down,  searching  for  his 
treasure  tiU  the  night  closed  about  him,  then  slowly  with  an  aching  heart  he  went 
back  to  his  ship.  But  there  was  a  boy  whose  name  was  Aleck,  and  who  early  every 
morning  swung  himself  down  among  the  rocks  to  hunt  for  the  eggs  the  sea-birds 
leave  in  their  nests.  The  next  morning  he  caught  sight  of  something  he  never  saw 
before  in  any  nest,  and  eagerly  grasped  it.  It  is  Ben's  silver  purse  !  No  more  eggs 
for  Aleck  to-day  ;  but  with  his  treasure  safe  in  his  pocket  he  climbs  up  the  rope  to 
show  his  riches  to  his  mother.  Up  on  the  rocks  he  meets  sailor  Ben,  with  limping 
gait  and  anxious  face,  searching  for  his  purse.  "  My  boy,  I'll  give  you  the  brightest 
gold  dollar  you  ever  put  your  eyes  on  if  you'll  find  the  purse  I  lost  here  last  night. 
It  was  for  ray  old  mother.  It  will  break  my  heart  to  go  home  without  it !  "  For  a 
minute  there  was  a  battle  fierce  and  terrible  in  Aleck's  heart.  Was  not  the  purse 
his  ?  He  had  found  it.  His  mother  needed  the  gold  as  much  as  Ben's  mother  ; 
but  would  she  ever  touch  it  if  she  knew  he  had  kept  it  from  its  rightful  owner  ?  No, 
he  knew  what  she  would  bid  him  do,  and  laying  the  purse  in  Ben's  hands  he  gained 
the  victory,  the  battle  was  over.  And  so  while  Ben  was  rattling  along  in  the  coach, 
happy  to  pour  into  his  mother's  lap  the  gold  he  bad  saved  for  her,  in  the  little 
cottage  among  the  trees,  Aleck  was  teUing  his  mother  the  story  of  his  temptation. 
"  Better  an  honest  heart,  my  boy,  than  all  the  gold  and  silver  in  the  land."  (Chris- 
tian Age.)  Harm  done  by  trespass  :—l.  The  injury  wrought  by  trespass.  1. 
Trespass  defined.  Actual  wrong  and  robbery.  2.  Trespass  conditioned.  Might  be 
wrought  "  in  ignorance."  3.  Trespass  weighed.  By  the  Word  of  God.  4.  Tres- 
pass recognised  (ver.  4).  II.  The  reparation  made  for  TREsrASs.  1.  Trespass 
atoned.  2.  Trespass  compensated.  (1)  Judgment  inflicted.  (2)  Injury  compen- 
sated. (3)  Dues  exceeded.  There  was  in  Christ's  obedience  an  excess  of  merit 
presented  to  God,  passing  beyond  man's  demerit.  And  in  Christian  devotedness 
and  mmistry  there  are  blessings  brought  to  men  by  man  far  more  saured,  tender, 
consolatory,  and  helpful,  which  more  than  outweigh  all  the  injury  done  to  men  by  man. 
{W.  H.  Jellie.)  Lessons : — 1.  Of  careful  attention  to  be  given  unto  the  Word  of  God 
(ver.  1).  2.  To  restore  things  that  are  lost  (ver.  4).  3.  Not  to  make  a  schism  in  the 
Church  (ver.  16).  4.  That  in  the  morning  we  should  first  think  of  God,  and  give  Him 
praise.  5.  The  merciful  man  shall  obtain  mercy  by  his  prayers.  {A.  Willet,  D.D.) 
That  which  was  delivered  him  to  iLeev.—Depositiiif)  property  .-—I.  A  neighbourly 
CONVENIENCE.  1.  How  hclpful  a  neighbour  may  become.  2.  How  grand  is  this 
confidence  in  another.  3.  How  mutually  dependent  we  are  one  upon  another.  4. 
How  honourable  we  should  be  in  all  transactions.  5.  How  jealously  we  should 
strive  to  merit  implicit  trust.  II.  A  hazardous  transaction.  1.  Man's  reliableness 
is  sorely  discredited  by  continuous  breaches  of  faith.  2.  Treasure  becomes  often  a 
serious  anxiety  to  its  possessor.  3.  No  security  can  be  guaranteed  in  any  earthly 
confidence.  III.  A  doubtful  alternative.  There  was  another  method  adopted, 
■when  a  man  was  about  to  journey,  if  he  could  not  trust  his  neighbour:  he  would 


CHAP.  VI.]  LEVITICUS.  101 

conceal  his  treasures  underground.  IV.  A  spiritual  analogy.  This  committing 
treasure  to  a  neighbour  suggests  Paul's  imagery  of  the  soul  committed  to  Christ 
(2  Tim.  i.  12,  see  also  vers.  14,  and  Tim.  vi.  20).  1.  Christ  is  faithful  to  our  trust. 
2.  We  canuot  safely  risk  our  souls  in  other  keeping.  (W.  H.Jellie.)  Cuxtody  of 
trfasure  : — To  deijosit  valuable  property  with  a  neighbour  was,  and  still  is,  a 
common  practice  in  the  East  where  no  responsible  establishments  exist  for  the 
reception  of  private  treasure.  Hence,  when  a  man  went  on  a  journey,  he  concealed 
his  precious  things  underground.  This  was  connected  with  the  danger  of  forgetting 
the  spot  where  tbey  were  hidden,  when  search  and  digging  had  to  be  resorted  to. 
This  not  only  accounts  for  the  fact  that  treasure  is  called  in  Hebrew  by  a  name 
which  denotes  "  hidden,"  or  things  which  men  are  in  the  habit  of  hiding  under- 
ground, but  explains  such  allusions  as  "hidden  riches  of  secret  places"  (Isa.  xlv. 
3),  "  and  searchest  for  her  as  for  hid  treasure  "  (Prov.  ii.  4),  "  dig  for  it  more  than 
for  hid  treasure  "  (Job  iii.  21).  To  avoid  this  danger,  men  entrusted  their  treasure 
to  the  custody  of  a  neighbour.  It  is  to  this  practice  that  the  text  refers,  and  it  is 
from  this  practice  that  the  apostle  took  the  expression  in  2  Tim.  i.  12 ;  see  also  ver. 
14,  and  1  Tim.  vi.  20).  (C.  D.  Gimburg,  LL.D.)  Found  thatwhich  was  lost. — 
liestoraiioii  of  Inst  x'roperty  : — Nauhaught  was  an  Indian  deacon  of  a  native 
Christian  Church  in  America.  He  was  a  poor,  hard-working  trapper,  with  a  sick 
wife  and  child.  One  night  he  dreamed  that  an  angel  came  to  him  and  dropped  in 
his  hand  "  a  fair,  broad  gold  piece,  in  the  name  of  God."  When  he  rose  that 
morning  he  went  out  into  the  wilderness  to  examine  his  traps ;  but  neither  beast 
nor  bird  had  been  caught  in  the  toils,  and  poor  Nauhaught  grieved  sorely  over  his 
misfortunes  as  he  thought  of  the  bare  home  and  the  needs  of  his  sick  wife.  While 
praying  that  God  would  send  the  angel  of  his  dream  to  help  him  in  his  dire 
distress,  his  feet  touched  something  hard  amid  the  grass,  and  there  lay  a  purse 
filled  with  gold. 

So,  then,  the  dream  was  true, 

The  angel  brought  one  broad  piece  only ; 

Should  he  take  all  these  ? 

He  was  sorely  tempted  to  conceal  and  appropriate  his  prize.  The  thing  was  so 
easy.  No  one  need  know  he  had  found  the  purse,  and  all  the  wants  of  his  needy 
family  could  be  at  once  supplied.  But  his  conscience  stirred  within  him  like  the 
voice  of  God : — 

Nauhaught,  be  a  man. 

Starve,  if  need  be,  but  while  you  live,  look  out 

From  honest  eyes  on  all  men  unashamed. 

So  the  Indian  deacon,  mindful  of  the  Divine  voice,  walked  bravely  back  to  the 
hamlet,  asking,  as  he  went,  if  any  one  had  lost  anything  that  day.  "I,"  said  a 
voice,  "  ten  gold  pieces  in  a  silken  purse."  On  which  Nauhaught  at  once  gave  up 
the  purse,  and  walked  away,  as  poor  as  ever  in  pocket,  but  far  richer  and  stronger 
in  soul  through  the  conflict,  in  which  right  had  won  the  victory.  The  sea  captain 
to  whom  the  lost  jiroperty  had  been  restored,  however,  called  him  back,  and  begged 
him  to  accept  a  tithe  of  the  prize  he  had  found.  This  was  one  gold  piece.  He  took 
it,  and  recognising  here  the  very  fulfilment  of  his  dream,  he  gave  God  thanks. 
The  people  told  him  afterwards  who  this  seaman  was,  and  how  well  known  all 
around  the  coast.  He  answered,  with  a  wise  smile — to  himself :  "  I  saw  the  angel, 
where  they  saw  a  man."  He  shall  restore  it. — liestitution  : — To  wrong  man  is  to 
dishonour  God.  To  lie  to  a  neighbour,  or  to  deceive  him,  is  to  "  commit  a  trespass 
against  the  Lord."  Yet  Low  liitle  is  this  thought  of !  Few  regard  in  any  such 
light  as  this  the  ten  thousand  little  injustices  and  over-exactions  of  which  men,  in 
many  of  the  conditions  of  life,  are  guilty  towards  others.  But  no  such  acts  are 
overlooked  by  God.  He  is  as  observant  of  your  conduct  towards  your  fellow-men  as 
towards  Himself.  God  requires  restitution  to  be  made  to  Himself  when  defrauded 
or  wronged  by  men  in  the  sins  which  they  commit.  We  therefore  read  (chap.  v.  15, 
16).  God  is  wronged  by  every  sin  of  man.  On  every  such  occasion  there  is  with- 
held from  Him  what  is  His  due.  And  yet  He  will  have  His  claims  met.  But  by 
whom  is  the  fulfilment  to  be  made?  Not  by  the  sinner  himself.  He  is  insolvent,  and 
cannot  satisfy  the  first  and  easiest  demand  of  his  Great  Creditor.  But  what  he 
himself  is  powerless  to  do  can  be  done  to  the  full  by  his  Divine  Substitute.  Yes, 
Man— the  Man  Christ  Jesus,  makes  awards  for  harm  which  those  for  whom  He  acts 
have  done.     He  restores  the  principal,  and  with  it  gives  the  addition  which  God 


102  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vr. 

requires.  He  fulfils  all  righteousness,  and  yields  to  God  a  greater  glory  and  pleasure 
by  the  obedience  He  renders  and  the  character  He  exemplifies  than  would  have 
been  rendered  by  mankiud  at  large,  even  had  they  never  known  sin.  The  restitu- 
tion on  which  I  wish  specially  to  fix  attention  is  that  which  has  to  be  made  to 
defrauded  and  injured  man.  It  is  impossible  to  keep  one's  eyes  and  ears  open  to 
what  is  going  on  in  the  worlds  of  politics,  commerce,  and  social  life,  and  not  feel 
that  there  is  nothing  that  more  needs  to  be  urged  and  performed  than  restitution. 
The  extent  to  which  overreaching,  undue  exaction,  and  unjust  dealin^^'  are  practised 
is  almost  beyond  what  words  can  express.  This  was  very  wonderfully  disclosed  by 
the  results  of  some  sermons  on  Eestitution,  which  the  late  Dr.  Finney,  of  America, 
delivered  in  this  country  some  years  ago.  Moneys  were  sent  to  him,  varying  in 
sums  from  one  shilling  to  a  hundred  pounds,  with  the  names  and  addresses  of  the 
persons  to  whom  they  were  to  be  delivered,  and  to  whom  they  were  due.  So  con- 
victed aud  miserable  were  the  persons  who  thus  acted  in  the  remembrance  of  the 
dishonesties  of  which  they  had  been  guilty,  that  they  could  find  no  relief  until 
restitution  according  to  the  Divine  comniMnd  had  been  made.  But  that  was  not 
all,  nor  the  worst.  They  could  not  gam  the  ear  of  the  Most  High  (Matt.  v.  23,  2^). 
God  is  a  God  of  truth,  and  cannot  give  countenance  to  falsehood  :  of  justice,  and 
cannot  even  seemingly  make  any  c  mpromise  with  dishonesty  and  oppression.  He 
cannot  give  heed  to  the  prayer  of  the  injurer  of  his  brethren,  nor  fill  with  good  the 
heart  and  hand  of  the  dishonest.  They  are  "the  upright,"  says  David,  whom  He 
allows  to  "  dwell  in  His  presence  "  (Psa.  cxl.  13),  to  whom  He  does  good,  and  who 
are  His  delght.  Men  of  an  opposite  character  yield  Him  no  pleasure,  and  are 
debarred  from  the  privileges  of  His  people.  But  let  the  necessary  reparation  be 
made,  and  the  required  restitution  be  rendered,  and  yours  will  be  the  privilege  of 
those  whom  the  Lord  accepts  and  honours.  Standing  rijzht  with  men,  in  the 
matter  under  consideration,  you  will  have  rightness  of  relationship  to  the  God  of 
justice  and  truth.  It  is  thus  first  restitution,  then  reconciliation.  The  conditiou 
on  which  God  admits  the  wrongdoer  to  the  place  of  privilege  in  His  presence,  is  the 
restoration  of  what  he  has  by  false  means  taken  from  another.  In  the  case  of 
defrauding  God,  it  is  first  sacrifice,  then  restitution;  in  the  case  of  wronging  man, 
it  is  first  restitution,  then  sacrifice.  And  yet  it  is  only  when  the  sin  which  the 
wrong-doing  implies  is  forgiven  that  the  wrong-doing  itself  is  repaired.  It  is 
accordingly  only  when  the  man  who  has  injured  his  neighbour  is  convicted  of  the 
evil  done,  and  sees  it  in  the  all-revealing  light  of  the  Divine  presence,  that  he 
repairs  to  the  injured  with  "  the  principal  "  and  "  the  fifth  part  "  in  his  hand.  You 
may  more  than  satisfy  the  njan  that  lias  been  wionged  ;  but  that  will  not  satisfy 
God.  Sin  can  be  answered  for  only  by  the  Cross ;  and  the  defilement  it  leaves 
bebind  on  the  soul  can  only  be  remo\ed  by  the  blood  of  cleansing.  But  bring  to  God 
the  sacrifice  of  expiation,  and  offer  to  Him  His  Christ  as  your  plea  for  the  accept- 
ance you  require  and  wish,  and  you  render  to  Him,  in  full,  the  restitution  which 
He   demands.      (Jas.   Fleming,   D.D.)  Restitution: — An   extensive    hardware 

merchant  in  one  of  the  Fulton  Street  prayer-meetings  in  New  York  appealed  to  his 
brother  merchants  to  have  the  same  religion  for  "down-town"  as  they  had  for 
"  up-town  "  ;  for  the  week-day  as  for  the  Sabbath  ;  for  tiie  counting-house  as  for 
the  communion-table.  After  the  meeting  a  ma'  ufacturer  with  whom  he  had  dealt 
largely  accosted  him.  "You  did  not  know,"  said  he,  "  that  I  was  at  the  meeting 
and  heard  your  remarks.  I  have  for  the  last  five  years  been  in  tbe  habit  of 
charging  you  more  for  goods  than  other  purchases.  I  want  vou  to  take  your  books 
and  charge  back  to  me  so  much  per  cent,  on  every  bill  of  goods  you  have  had  of  me 
for  the  five  past  years."  A  few  days  later  the  same  hardware  merchant  had  occasion 
to  acknowledge  the  payment  of  a  debt  of  several  hundred  dollars  wliich  had  been 
due  for  twenty-eight  years  from  a  man  who  could  as  easily  have  paid  it  twenty-four 
years  before.  (Family  Treasurij.)  ReparatHm  by  restitution  .— Another  wny  ot 
being  lid  of  guilt  is  bv  making  handsome  reparation  to  the  injured  party — a  hand- 
some, genuine  recognition  and  reparation,  such  as  Jacob  made  to  Esau,  or  David  to 
Bathsheba,  or  Zacclia?us  to  the  widows  and  orphHus  of  Judea.  It  is  a  step  out  of 
sin  towards  the  God  of  truth  and  honesty,  and  towards  Jesus  Christ.  Your  agonies 
over  cases  of  conscience  and  want  of  peace  may  lie  there — that  you  have  never 
made  rejiaration.  Oh,  we  know  about  it.  God  is  not  i-iocked.  lou  cannot  have 
the  peace  of  conscience  of  a  saint  while  living  in  dishonesty.  You'll  sleep  better, 
and  enjoy  your  food  better,  and  the  air  of  June  will  be  round  you  in  mid-Januaiy 
the  day  you  make  reiteration.  That  will  slacken  the  bonds  of  conscience,  though  it 
\\  ill  not  take  them  off.    It  is  a  sweet  thing  to  do,  though  desperately  hard  to  begin. 


CHAP.  VI.]  LEVITICUS.  103 

I  know  it  because  I've  done  it — there  are  people  here  to  whom  I've  made  reparation, 
and  I'm  going  to  make  more.  Tlie  faith  of  some  is  scandalised  by  seeing  you  come 
to  the  prayer-meeting,  he  or  she  knowing  what  reparation  you  have  made.  Go  and 
say,  "I  have  not  only  to  pay  thee  for  the  past,  but  here  are  arrears  of  interest." 
Try  it ;  it  will  make  you  twenty  years  younger.  There  is  no  more  mischievous 
doctrine  than  the  Antinomianism  which  makes  men  blink  at  common  honesty  and 
cover  up  falsehood  with  Evangelicalism.  God  will  not  do  it.  The  minister  may 
come  and  pronounce  a  benediction  on  your  sophistries,  but  it  will  not  do.  I  am 
dwelling  long  on  this,  though  not  a  moment  too  much  for  some  men  here.  Make 
reparation.  (A.  Whyte.)  Confession  and  restitution  : — We  may  here  relate  an 
incident  from  the  life  of  a  disciple  of  Jesus  Christ  who  had  been  richly  blessed. 
When  he  was  a  student  he  was  absorbed  in  the  things  of  this  world,  but  soon  after- 
wards yielded  to  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  was  led  to  his  Eedeemer.  He  became,  in 
reality,  another  man.  But,  as  often  happens,  the  friends  and  acquaintances  of  his 
"jolly  student  days  "  could  not  understand  the  change,  and  the  only  conclusion 

they  could  come  to  was  that  "  N had  turned  hypocrite."   Now  it  happened  that 

N had,  while  he  was  a  student,  taken  away  from  one  of  his  friends  a  paper- 
knife,  which  the  owner  set  great  store  by.  When,  after  his  conversion  to  a  new 
life,  his  eye  haipeued  one  day  to  fall  on  the  knife,  his  conscience  smote  him  for  his 
sin  in  taking  it.  The  Spirit  of  God  gave  him  no  rest,  urging  him  to  take  back  the 
knife  to  its  true  owner,  and  acknowledge  his  sin.  "  Oh,"  t-aid  the  man  to  us,  "  that 
was  a  hard  step  to  take !  I  was  willing  enough  to  part  with  the  knife,  and  would 
have  given  up  a  thousand  knives,  but  I  trembled  when  I  thought — 'he  regards  you 
already  as  a  hypocrite,  and  what  will  he  think  now  ? '  But  I  went  to  him  and 
confessed  with  trembling  lips,  and — what  happened  ?  He  took  my  hand,  with  tears 
in  his  eyes,  and  said,  '  Now  I  see  that  there  is  something  genuine  in  your  conver- 
sion.    I  respect  you  now,  and  would  gladly  be  as  you  are.'  "     {Otto  Funcke.) 

Vers.  8,  9.  The  law  of  the  burnt  offering. — The  law  of  the  burnt-offering  : — The 
Holy  One  speaks  again  from  the  Holy  Place.  He  now  teUs  some  of  the  more  awful 
thoughts  of  His  soul.  His  words  reveal  views  of  sin  and  righteousness  that  appear 
overwhelmingly  awful  to  men.  His  eternal  justice,  flaming  forth  against  all 
iniquity,  is  declared  to  Israel  in  the  fire  of  the  altar.  This  fire  is  never  to  be 
extinguished  ;  "  for  every  one  of  His  righteous  judgments  endureth  for  ever  "  (Psa. 
cxix.  160).  It  burns  all  night  long — an  emblem  of  the  sleeplessness  of  hell,  where 
"  they  have  no  rest,  day  nor  night  " — and  of  the  ever-watchful  eye  of  righteousness 
that  looks  down  on  this  earth.  Perhaps  it  was  intended  to  exhibit  two  things  :  1. 
"  The  smoke  of  their  torment  ascendeth  up  for  ever  and  ever,"  &c.  (Eev.  xiv.  10, 
compared  with  ver.  18).  The  whole  camp  saw  this  fire  burning  in  the  open  court 
all  niyht  long.  "So  shall  you  perish,"  might  an  Israelitish  father  say  to  his 
children,  taking  them  to  his  tent  door,  and  pointing  them,  in  the  gloom  and  silence 
of  night,  to  the  altar,  "  So  shall  you  perish,  and  be  for  ever  in  the  flames,  unless 
you  repent !  "  2.  It  exhibited,  also,  the  way  of  escape.  See,  there  is  a  victim  oa 
the  altar,  on  which  these  flames  feed !  Here  is  Christ  in  our  room.  His  suffering, 
seen  and  accepted  by  the  Father,  was  held  forth  continually  to  the  faith  of  Israel, 
night  and  day.  And  upon  that  type,  the  jjledge  and  token  of  the  real  sacrifice,  did 
the  eye  of  the  Father  delight  to  rest  night  and  day.  It  pleased  Him  well  to  see  His 
justice  and  His  love  thus  met  together  there.  And  the  ujan  of  Israel,  who  under- 
stood the  type,  slept  in  peace,  sustained  by  this  truth  which  the  struggling  rays 
from  the  altar  gleamed  into  his  tent.     (A.  A.  Bonar.) 

Vers.  10-12.  The  priest  shall  put  on  his  linen  garment. — Sacred  attire : — I.  In 
HOLY  ATTiKE  THEY  SEiiVE  ;T  THE  ALTAR.  1.  Suggcstive  of  the  esscutial  holiness  of 
Christ.  2.  Symbolic  of  their  derived  purity  and  righteousness.  3.  Indicative  of 
the  spirit  of  service.  II.  In  altkeed  garments  they  bear  the  ashes  from  the 
SANCiUAKY.  1.  Tlie  changed  tone  of  feeling  in  the  ministrant.  2.  The  altered 
scenes  which  a  Christian  frequents.  (W.  H.  Jellie.)  The  priest's  garments: — 
The  linen  garment  is  the  t)  pe  of  purity,  as  we  see  in  the  Book  of  Eevelation  xi^.  8. 
The  priest  ivs  the  emblem  of  the  Piedeemer  in  his  perfect  purity  coming  to  the  work 
of  atonement.  The  word  for  garment  means  a  suit  of  clothes.  It  takes  in  the 
linen  breeches,  as  well  as  all  the  other  parts  of  the  priest's  dress.  His  whole  suit 
is  to  be  the  garb  of  purity.  It  is  not  glory  ;  these  aie  not  the  "  golden  garments." 
It  is  hol.v  humanity  ;  it  is  Jesus  in  humiliation,  but  without  one  stain  of  sin. 
There  is  a  sj^ecial  reu.son  for  the  duection  as  to  the  linen  brei.ches.     It  is  meant  to 


104  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vr. 

denote  the  completeness  of  the  purity  that  clothes  him  ;  it  clothes  him  to  his  very- 
skin,  and  "  covers  the  flesh  of  his  nakedness  "  (Exod.  xxviii.  42).     It  was  not  only 
our  unrighteousness  and  our  corrupt  nature  that  Jesus  was  free  from,  but  also 
from  that  other  part  of  our  original  sin  which  consists  in  the  imputed  guilt  of  Adam. 
The  linen  breeches  that  "  covered  the  nakedness  "  of  the  priest,  lead  us  back  at 
once  to  our  first  parents'  sin,  when  they  were  naked  and  ashamed  in  the  garden, 
after  the  Fall.     Here  we  see  this  sin  also  covered.     {A.  A.  Bonar.)        Take  up  the 
ashes. — "  He  sltall  take  up  the  ashes  tohicli  the  fire  ha,s  consumed  "  ; — By  the  tigure 
which  grammarians  call  ellipsis,  or  breviloquence,  "  ashes  "  is  used  for  the  material 
out  of  which  ashes  came,  as  Isa.  xlvii.  2,  speaks  of  grinding  "meal  "  (Ainsworth). 
The  wood  was  underneath  the  burnt-offering.     Tiiis  being  done,  the  ashes  were  to 
be  placed  by  themselves,  for  a  little  time,  "  beside  the  altar."     All  eyes  would  thus 
see  them  and  take  notice  of  them,  before  they  were  carried  out  into  a  clean  place. 
Probably  there  were  two  reasons  for  this  action.     1.  The  fire  was  thus  kept  clear 
and  bright,  the  ashes  being  removed.     God  thereby  taught  them  that  He  was  not 
careless  as  to  this  matter,  but  required  that  the  type  of  His  justice  should  be  kept 
full  and   unobscured.     2.    The  ashes  were  shown  for  the  purpose  of  making  it 
manifest  that  the  flame  had  not  spared  the  victim,  but  had  turned  it  into  ashes.   It 
was  not  a  mere  threatening  when  the  angels  foretold  that  Sodom  and  Gomorrah 
were  to  be  destroyed  for  their  sin  ;  their  doom  (2  Pet.  ii.  6)  is  declared  to  have  come 
on  them,  "  turning  them  to  ashes."     So  here,  all  that  was  threatened  is  fulfilled. 
There  the  ashes  lie  ;  any  eye  may  see  them.    The  vengeance  has  been  accomplished ! 
The  sacrifice  is  turned  into  ashes !     Justice  has  found  its  object !  _  The  Lord's 
arrows  are  not  pointless ;  He  performs  all  His  threatenings,  for  He  is  holy.     *'  0 
Lord  God  of  hosts,  who  is  a  strong  Lord  like  unto  Thee  ?  or  to  Thy  faithfulness 
round  about  Thee ? "   (Ibid.)      Bum  wood  on  it  every  morning,  and  lay  the  burnt- 
offering  in  order  upon  it. — The  daily  sacrifice  : — By  no  Levitical  rite  or  service  was 
Christ,  as  "  the  Lamb  of  God,"  more  perfectly  typified,  than  by  the  daily  sacrifice. 
It  significantly  prefigured  Him  in  His  death,  the  satisfaction  He  yielded  to  the 
Father,  and  His  intercession  in  behalf  of  men.    It  is  Christ,  then,  that  we  have 
here  ;  and — I.  In  the  peefectness  of  His  character.    The  lamb  was  without  spot ; 
and  He  was  without  blemish.     And  this  is  what  He  needed  to  be.     And  yet  He  was 
more.     He  was  marked  not  only  for  the  absence  of  all  defect,  but  for  the  presence 
of  every  excellence.    He  was  absolutely  and  universally  perfect.     This  was  the  case 
with  the  affections  He  cherished,  the  dispositions  He  cultivated,  and  the  virtues  He 
practised.     Only  what  is  perfect  can  satisfy  an  infinitely  perfect  God.     All,  there- 
fore, that  is  defective  and  unholy  is  forbidden  a  place  on  His  altar.     God's  require- 
ment extends  to  what  is  internal  as  well  as  to   what  is  external.     He  demands 
"  truth  in  the  inward  parts  "  as  well  as  integrity  in  the  outward  life.     The  demand 
was  fully  met  by  Jesus.     But  what  God  required  in  the  offering.  He  required  also 
iu  those  for  whom  it  was  presented.     Only  as  we  are  personally  what  God  requires, 
in  righteousness  of  walk  before  Him,  can  we  occupy  the  position  to  which  we  are 
invited,  appreciate  and  enjoy  the  blessings  of  salvation,  and  fulfil  the  purposes  of 
our  high  calling.     But  we  may  be  that ;  provision  for  our  being  so  has  been  made. 
Strengthened,  therefore,  with  might  by  the  Spirit  in  the  inner  man,  there  is  no  duty 
that  we  may  not  fulfil,  and  no  appropriation  of  offered  blessing  that  we  may  not 
make.     But  God  not  only  strengthens  for  service  ;  He  Himself  works  in  us,  and 
for  us,  and  by  us— leading  us  to  will  and  to  do  according  to  His  good  pleasure.     II. 
We  have  Christ  here  in  His  completeness  of  dedication  to  the  Father  and  to  men. 
The  lambs  were,  with  the  exception  of  the  skin,  wholly  consumed  by  the  fire  ;  and 
Christ  gave  Himself  to  God  for  us.     The  primary  object  of  His  incarnation  and 
mission  to  earth  was— to  glorify  the  Father.     The  path   might   be   rugged,  but 
leading  to  the  glory  of  the  Father,  He  cheerfully  trod  it;  the   Cross  might  be 
ignominious,  but  ensuring  the  glory  of  the  Father,  He  gave  Himself  up  to  it.     He 
made  of  Himself  a  whole  burnt-offering  to  God.    But  it  was  a  twofold  gift  He 
made  of  Himself  when  He  laid  Himself  upon  the  altar.     "  He  gave  Himself  for  us 
an  offering  and  a  sacrifice  to  God  for  a  sweet-smelling  savour  "  (Pph.  v.  2).     "  He 
loved  me,  and  gave  Himself  for  me."    One  of  the  purposes  for  which  He  became  our 
substitute,  deUvered  us  from  the  dominion  of  evil,  and  endued  us  with  Divine 
strength,  was,  that  we  might  walk  in  His  steps,  and,  in  our  measure,  yield  ourselves 
to  God  as  He  did.    But  is  this  being  done  ?     It  is  on  record  that,  during  the  late 
ci-vil  war  in  America,  and  when  victory  was  swaying  from  side  to  side,  that  com- 
missioners from  the  Confederate  States  sought  and  obtained  an  interview  with 
I'resident  Lincoln,   with   the   view   of  trying   to   effect  an  arrangement   for  the 


CHAP.  VI.]  LEVITICUS.  105 

independence  of  the  territory  they  represented.  Tlieyknew  the  tender-heartedness 
of  Mr.  Lincoln,  and  appealed  to  him  to  stay  the  effusion  of  blood  which,  at  the 
moment,  was  flowing  in  torrents.  They  were  willing  to  forego  several  of  the  States 
for  which  they  had  hitherto  fought,  if  he  would  consent  to  the  remainder  being 
independent.  They  pleaded  with  him  for  hours,  and  made  use  of  the  strongest 
arguments  and  considerations  they  conld  adduce  to  gain  fheir  object.  When  they 
had  finished,  the  president,  who  had  patiently  listened  to  all  that  had  been  said, 
raised  his  hand,  and  then  bringing  it  down  with  emphasis  on  the  map  which  lay 
before  him,  replied,  "  Gentlemen,  this  Government  must  have  the  whole."  And  so 
God  says,  regarding  the  inner  kingdom  of  every  human  heart.  He  will  allow  no 
partition  or  division  there.  The  whole  is  His  by  right,  and  He  will  suffer  no  one  to 
share  with  Him  the  throne  He  has  erected  for  His  own  occupancy.  III.  By  the 
daily  burnt-offering  we  are  minded  of  Christ's  acceptableness  to  toe  Father. 
The  lamb  was  an  offering  of  a  sweet  savour  unto  God,  in  which  He  had  delight, 
and  from  which  He  derived  satisfaction.  And  He  was  ever  pleased  with  Christ. 
But  is  this  remembered  as  it  should  be  ?  Christ  is  much  more  thought  of  as 
providing  for  men's  necessities  than  for  God's  requirements  ;  as  appeasing  justice 
than  as  giving  delight  to  Him  from  whom  He  came ;  as  ministering  peace  to  the 
troubled  than  as  satisfying  the  Father's  heart.  But  what  Christ  was  to  God, 
believers  are  intended  to  be,  in  their  measure,  also.  Is  this  now,  to  any  extent,  the 
case  ?  Has  God  satisfaction  in  aU  who  call  themselves  by  the  name  of  His  Son  ? 
Has  He  joy  in  that  which  you  lay  upon  His  altar,  in  the  services  that  you  fulfil, 
and  in  the  measure  of  resemblance  which  you  bear  to  His  Beloved  ?  Then  Christ 
is  brought  before  us  here  in  the  position  He  ever  occupies  on  our  behalf.  A  lamb 
was  always  before  God,  and  Christ  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  us.  Now, 
where  Christ  is  in  reference  to  the  Father  He  ought  to  be  in  reference  to  all  who 
bear  His  name.  Only  as  this  is  the  case,  as  He  is  ever  before  you,  occupying  the 
vision  of  your  faith,  filling  the  sphere  of  your  life,  and  engaging  your  feelings  and 
thoughts,  will  you  become  assimilated  to  His  likeness  and  meet  for  His  presence 
and  glory  above.     {Jas.  Fleviing,  D.D.) 

Ver.  13.  The  fire  shall  ever  be  burning'  upon  the  altar. — Divine  fire  humanly 
viaintained : — I.  Divine  endowments  committed  to  the  control  of  men.  As  in 
the  instances  of  that  "  fire,"  supernaturally  originated  on  that  altar,  and  then  left 
in  man's  hands,  so  with — 1,  Pure  sympathies  implanted  within  man.  2.  Eevelation 
in  the  Scriptures.  3.  Quickened  life  in  the  regenerated  soul.  4.  Spiritual  endow- 
ments to  the  believer.  5.  Saored  affections  in  the  Christian  heart.  6.  Holy  en- 
thusiasm firing  an  earnest  nature.  From  God  they  come  :  but  man  has  them  in 
his  hands.  II.  Divine  endowments  entrusted  to  the  preservation  of  men. 
The  priests  had  to  keep  that  "  fire  "  alive,  or  it  would  expire.  1.  Having  received 
the  gifts  of  God  we  are  responsible  for  their  maintenance.  2.  How  solemn  the 
priestly  office,  which  all  are  called  to  perform  :  feeding  the  Divine  "  fire  "  in  our 
souls  continually !  III.  Divine  endowments  requiring  the  co-operative  watch- 
fulness OF  men.  The  priest's  eye  would  need  to  be  often  turned  to  the  altar  fire  : 
•'every  morning"  it  needed  care.  1.  A  watchful  life  is  imperative  if  we  would 
maintain  godliness  within.  2.  Neglect  will  allow  the  extinction  of  the  Divinest 
gift.  Only  neglect — (1)  daily  prayer  ;  (2)  daily  reading  of  the  Scriptures  ;  (3)  daily 
fellowship  with  Christ ;  (4)  daily  watching  against  temptation.  Fail  in  these  duties, 
and  the  "  fire  "  will  expire.     "  Every  morning  "  bring  wood  to  the  fire !     IV.  Divine 

ENDOWMENTS    ENDURING    ONLY   WHERE    ACTIVELY   MAINTAINED.        That    fire    did    expire  ! 

At  the  destruction  of  the  Temple  by  Nebuchadnezzar.  1.  May  the  Divine  life  in  a 
soul  go  out?  2.  May  the  Christian's  "  first  love  "  become  extinct?  3.  May  the 
holy  aspirations  of  a  child  of  God  droop  ?  4.  May  all  sacred  ardour,  in  prayer,  in 
consecration,  die  away?  "Work  out  your  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling." 
"See  that  ye  make  your  calling  and  election  sure."  {W.  H.  Jellie.)  The  fire 
upon  the  altar  : — "  The  fire  shall  ever  be  burning."  I  take  the  words  as  typical  of 
our  common  life,  and  its  common  duties  and  opportunities.  It  is  only  a  shallow 
mind  that  can  think  without  being  awed  of  the  privilege  or  the  responsibility  which 
belongs  to  us  as  custodians  of  a  light  that  may  be  dimned  or  desecrated  in  our 
keeping,  but  cannot  die  ;  so  much  stronger  is  it  and  more  enduring  than  ourselves. 
Yet  the  words  suggest,  too,  that  if  our  life  be  as  the  fire,  it  must  be  as  the  fire  in  its 
intensity  and  purity.  It  is  not  worth  having  if  it  is  dull  and  cold  and  heartless,  if 
it  is  not  enkindled  with  zeal  and  generosity.  I.  The  fire  of  enthusiasm.  It  was 
said  of  Sir  Walter  Ealeigh,  "  He  can  toil  terribly  "  ;  and  I  think,  if  the  great  souls 


106  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 


of  the  past  could  speak  to  you  in  tones  that  would  command  your  interest,  they 
would  say  that  whatever  good  they  did  upon  earth  was  acbieved  at  the  cost  of 
strong  resolve  and  strenuous  effort.  II.  The  fire  of  indignation.  It  is  not 
enough,  right  as  it  is,  to  love  what  is  good.  We  must  hate,  we  must  spurn  the  evil. 
The  wicked  are  always  a  discredited  minority  ;  and  if  the  good  had  only  the 
courage  of  their  opinions,  the  wicked  would  never  have  the  courage  of  theirs. 
III.  The  fiee  of  peksonal  sANCTiiV.  The  flame  which  consumes  the  dross  of  the 
world  must  itself  be  bright  and  bt-autiful.  It  must  be  "  a  burning  and  a  shining 
light."  Yes,  and  it  must  be  "  ever  burning  "  ;  it  must  "  never  go  out."  It  was  the  o^ 
law  of  the  Vestal  Virgins  in  old  time  that,  night  and  day  they  should  watch  with 
sleepless  care  the  everlasting  tire  upon  the  altar  of  the  go  dess.  No  calamity  tha*; 
could  iiappen  to  the  State  was  so  terrible  as  if  through  their  fault  that  fire  .shoull 
become  extinct.  But  there  was  one  essential  condition  of  their  watcdiiug  :  they 
must  themselves  be  chaste  ;  should  any  one  of  them  break  the  Divine  law  of 
chastitv,  it  was  death  for  her  and  for  him  who  made  her  break  it.  And  oh  1  let  us 
resolve  that  "  the  fire  shall  ever  be  burning  upon  the  altar  "  of  this  school,  which 
is  so  dear  to  us.  Let  it  be  bright,  fierce:,  and  lambent.  Let  it  burn  away  the 
selfishness  which  lies  at  the  heart  of  so  many  an  one  who  knows  it  not.  (J.  E.  C. 
WeUdon,  M.A.)  Habitual  pic ly  : — I.  Piety  must  be  habitual  to  prove  that  it 
IS  real.     1.  Whatever  is  chief  in  the  heart  will  be  ever  showing  itself  in  the  life. 

2.  We  shall  thus  surely  and  thus  only  verify  and  carry  out  the  Scripture  descrip- 
tions of  godliness.  II.  Piety  must  be  habitual  in  order  to  be  progressive. 
1.  The  attainment  of  holy  character  is  by  degrees.  2.  These  advances  can  only 
be  attained  by  constant  we. 1-doiug.  III.  Piety  must  be  habitual  in  order  to  be 
USEFUL.  1.  If  there  be  inconsistency  or  fitfulness,  a  painful  sense  of  insincerity 
will  be  felt  by  those  to  whom  the  truth  may  be  addressed.  2.  With  habitual  piety, 
how  much  greater  weight,  pathos,  and  earnestness  will  there  be.  3.  An  uncon- 
scious yet  speaking  power  is  in  such  godhiiess.  IV.  Habitual  piety  gives  a 
DioNiTY  AND  ELEVATION  TO  THE  WHOLE  OF  LIFE.  It  was  a  noble  testimony  that  the 
son  of  J.  A.  James  bore  of  his  father  :  "  I  never  found  in  him  anything  inconsistent 
or  unworthy."  What  a  wreath  to  lay  on  that  honoured  tomb  !  Conclusion  :  See 
to  it  that  the  fire  be  ever  burning.  What  Christian  workers  should  we  have  then — 
lips  touched  with  a  live  cual,  because  the  heart  is  glowing  with  the  sacred  flame. 
What  Churches  should  we  have  then— not  formal  and  languishing,  but  strong  iu 
godliness  and  increasing  in  numbers.  What  households  should  we  have  then — 
where  the  younger  members  would  prove  their  appreciation  of  devout  sincerity  and 
the  attractiveness  of  lofty  example.  Individual  influence  would  be  benign  as  that 
of  the  Australian  tree  which  dtstroys  infection,  and  breathes  health  around;  and 
the  whole  spiritual  scene  would  be  beautiful  and  fragrant,  as  "  a  field  that  the  Lord 
hath  blessed."  Cherish  the  sacred  fire,  if  it  is  within.  As  the  Parsees  with  the 
precious  sandalwood  keep  alive  the  ever-burning  flame  in  their  temples,  so  with 
precious  passages  of  Divine  truth  and  prayer  seek  to  keep  alive  and  vigorous  the 
ilame  of  love.  {G.  AJcMich  lel,  B.A.)  The  altar  fire  a  symbol  of  regeneiatiihj 
grace: — 1.  In  its  source  or  origin.  2.  In  its  tendency.  3.  In  its  nature  and  pro- 
perties. 4.  In  iis  permanency.  5.  In  its  perpetuity.  Lesson  :  Be  diligent  in  the 
use  of  the  means  of  grace — 1.  Prayer :  secret,  family,  social.     2.  Study  of  Bible. 

3.  Meditation.  4.  Attendance  on  the  ordinances.  (G.  F.  Love.)  Fuel  for  heart 
flames: — "I'U  master  it,"  said  the  axe,  Hnd  the  blows  fell  heavily  on  the  iron  ;  but 
every  blow  made  his  edge  more  blunt,  till  he  ceased  to  strike.  "  Leave  it  to  me," 
said  the  saw,  and  with  relentless  teeth  he  worked  backward  and  forward  on  its 
surface  until  they  were  all  worn  '  iwn  or  broken ;  then  he  fell  aside.  "  Ha  !  ha  !  " 
said  the  hammer,  "  I  knew  you  would  not  succeed;  I'll  show  you  the  way."  But 
at  his  first  stroke  off  flew  his  head,  and  the  iron  remained  as  before.  "  Shall  I 
ti-y '?  "  said  a  flame  of  fire.  They  all  despised  the  flame,  but  he  curled  gently  round 
the  solid  bar,  and  embraced  it,  and  never  left  it,  until,  under  his  irresistible  in- 
fluence, it  was  so  melted  as  to  take  the  form  of  any  mould  you  i)lease.  If  hard 
hearts  are  to  be  won  for  Jesus,  they  must  be  melted,  not  hammered.  No  power 
has  been  found  so  effective  as  love  for  taking  self-trust  and  self-righteousness  out  of 
men.  I.  Ijet  us  seek  to  fan  the  flame.  Of  the  Baptist  our  Lord  said,  "  he  was  a 
burning  and  a  shining  light."  Blessed  eulogy!  may  it  be  earned  by  each  one  of 
us.  "Burning  and  shining" — our  very  idcdl  of  a  minister;  a  hot  heart  with  a 
clear  head  ;  impetuosity  and  prudence  blended ;  zeal  and  knowledge  linked  in  holy 
wedlock.  The  motto  on  David  Brainerd's  banner,  and  the  prayer  in  his  heart,  ever 
war,  "  Oh,  that  I  were  a  fiiiming  tire  iu  the  service  of  my  God."     We  have  as  oui' 


CHAP.  VI.]  LEVITICUS.  107 


model  Him  who  could  say,  "  The  zeal  of  Thine  house  hath  eaten  Me  up  " ;  and 
while  we  profess  to  be  His  followers,  we  dare  not  rest  satisfied  with  the  "  icy  torpor  " 
and  "  decorous  coldness  "  which  are,  alas  !  the  usual  temperature  of  too  many  pro- 
fessors. We  do  not  wish  to  be  for  ever  praying  for  the  smouldering  embers  to  be 
blown  into  a  flame,  for  we  covet  a  steady  furnace  heat,  and  no  mere  fitful  zeal, 
which,  like  the  fire  from  the  horse's  hoof,  dies  in  the  moment  of  its  birth.  Most  of 
us  know  the  sad  experience  of  preaching  with  the  fire  burning  only  amid  grey  ashes. 
We  cannot  expect  much  blessing  while  this  is  the  case.  If  the  gospel  is  to  have  a 
mighty  effect  upon  the  congregation,  it  must  pass  through  the  fire  of  an  intense 
spiritunl  life  in  the  preacher ;  and  this  life  we  feel  we  must  have.  And  what  a  boon 
will  it  be  to  us  also !  What  purifying  force  there  is  in  consuming  zeal  and  passion- 
ate love  of  souls  !  How  it  burns  up  all  unworthy  and  selfish  motives  !  Tnis  holy 
fire  has  also  an  educating  force  ;  by  it  the  soul  is  transfigured,  and  made  to  enjoy 
a  grand  outlook.  It  awakens  the  intellect  as  nothing  else  can  ;  it  quickens  the 
sensibiliiies  of  inferior  minds,  and  makes  them  capable  of  achievements  which, 
without  it,  they  would  never  have  dreamed  of.  John  Howard  had  no  commanding 
intellect,  but  what  he  had  was  illuminated  with  Divine  light,  and  thus  his  name 
became  immortal.  Thomas  Chalmers  had  always  an  intellect  so  commanding  as 
to  grasp  a  planet  in  its  span  ;  but  it  needed  the  grace  of  God  to  so  illuminate  the 
mind  of  Chahners  that  he  could  write  his  astronomical  discourtes,  and  grasp,  not 
a  planet  merely,  but  myriads  of  worlds  as  a  boy  handles  his  marbles,  and  move 
"  like  a  strong  swimmer  in  a  stormy  sea."  Divine  fire  in  the  soul  kindles  a  light 
in  the  intellect,  elevates  every  naturnl  faculty,  and  makes  it  a  handmaid  to  the 
Spirit  of  God;  it  burns  every  bond  ti...  lies  the  tongue,  and  makes  men  orators 
who  else  were  dumb.  This,  too,  will  give  us  the  most  attractive  characters.  It  is 
said  that  the  slopes  of  a  volcano  supply  soil  so  fruitful  that  the  richest  vines  flourish 
best  upon  them  ;  when  the  heart  is  full  of  holy  fire  the  life  is  sure  to  be  adorned 
with  the  rich  graces  of  the  Spirit,  productive  of  that  fruit  which  glorifies  our  Father 
in  heaven.  And  yet  to  have  the  fieart  throb  with  a  might  pulse  of  love — to  have  a 
holy  passion  thrilling  and  burning  in  every  artery  and  vein  will,  in  all  probability, 
involve  much  trial.  Every  cherished  idol  of  the  heart  must  submit  to  the  action  of 
this  fire.  It  will  consume  all  that  is  consumable.  Upon  sin  in  the  soul  it  will 
have  no  mercy.  It  will  probably  involve,  too,  the  scorn  of  some  whose  friendship 
we  fain  would  cultivate.  II.  Let  cs  now  gather  a  few  mateeials  to  feed  it. 
Scientific  men  are  asking,  "  What  is  to  be  the  fuel  for  coming  ages?"  "  What 
will  our  great-great-great-grandchildren  sit  around  instead  of  our  household  fire  ?  " 
One  authority  suggests  as  a  source  of  heat,  when  coal  is  exhausted,  the  beating  of 
the  tidal  wave  on  the  shore.  Happily  the  Christian  Church  need  not  trouble 
herself  with  any  conjectures  as  to  the  fuel  which  is  to  feed  her  fires.  The  light  and 
love  invested  in  the  covenant  of  graces  ages  back  will  never  be  exhausted  until 
every  elect  soul  glows  with  love  to  God,  and  every  redeemed  wanderer  is  lighted 
lack  to  his  Father's  home.  Does  not  even  Nature  speak  to  us  upon  this  matter  of 
earnestness  in  our  Master's  woik  ?  The  sun  is  earnest :  in  his  path  he  never 
lingers,  in  his  course  he  never  halts :  the  stars  never  falter  in  their  race,  never 
swerve  from  their  round ;  the  sea  is  constant  in  its  ebb  and  flow,  unchanging  in 
eternal  change.  All  Nature  says,  "  Tlie  King's  business  requires  haste  " ;  and  the 
man  who  is  not  in  earnest  when  about  "  the  King's  business  "  is  out  of  gear  with 
the  universe,  and  is  a  blot  in  the  creation  of  God.  Our  age  speaks  to  us,  we  live  in 
the  cumulated  light  of  succeeding  ages.  Our  age,  too,  is  telling  upon  ages  yet  to  be 
— nay,  upon  eternity  itself.  Is  there  not  inspiration,  too,  in  the  memory  of  our 
early  vows  ?  If  we  would  be  full  of  Divine  energy,  let  ns  labour  after  a  strong  sense 
of  tlie  love  of  God  in  Cnrist.  All  the  love  of  eternity  meets  here  as  in  a  focus,  and 
if  we  only  seek  full  and  deep  communion  with  it  our  lives  will  not  lack  the  holy  five. 
There  is  one  other  tlioughl  which  ought  ever  to  arouse  our  spirits  and  inspire  our 
hearts  with  zeal  and  courage  in  our  holy  warfare.  We  are  on  the  winning  side. 
Victory  is  surely  ours.  (W.  Williams.)  The  fire  upon  the  altar  : — The  term 
"  fire  "  in  Scripture  language  is  commonly  employed  to  express  the  judgment  ■  f 
God  upon  sin  (Heb.  xii.  29  ;  Psa.  1.  2  ;  2  Thess.  i.,  (fee.) ;  and  accordingly,  when  the 
Jewish  worshipper  (the  veil  being  off  his  heart)  contemplated  the  altar's  heaven- 
kindled  flame,  and  bore  in  mind  the  Divine  edict  for  its  preservation,  he  was  given 
to  understand  that  the  judgment  of  God  was  1  eld  in  abeyance,  that  the  Divine 
arrangements  for  turning  aside  that  judgment  from  the  contrite  sinner  though 
revealed  to  hope,  were  not  consummated  in  fact,  and,  that  as  the  fire,  dny  by  oay, 
Bwallowed  victim  after  victim,  and  burned  still  as  fierce  as  ever,  tL.a  victim  had 


108  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

not  yet  been  laid  thereon  whose  blood  should  quench  in  mercy  the  fire  maintained 
in  justice.  Well — "  God  is  the  Lord  who  bath  showed  us  light ;  bind  the  sacrifice 
•with  cords,  even  to  the  horns  of  the  altar" — the  victim  has  been  found  and 
accepted  ;  "  He  was  led  as  a  sheep  to  the  slaughter  "  ;  His  blood  is  "  shod  for  many 
for  the  remir-sion  of  sins,"  and  the  fire  is  gi<ue  out — God  Himself  hath  "put  it 
out":  "  for  by  one  offering  He  hath  perfected  for  ever  them  that  are  sanctified," 
and,  "tbrough  the  offering  of  the  body  of  Christ  once  for  all,"  mercy  and  truth, 
righteousness  and  peace  have  met  together,  and  like  the  wings  of  the  mystic 
cherubim,  they  shadow  the  mercy-seat  of  God — the  throne  of  Divine  grace.  Well, 
the  fire  is  "gone  out" — God  Himself  hath  "put  it  out,"  but  in  so  doing  He 
hath  kindled  another.  Accordingly,  when  the  fire  of  Divine  justice  died  away 
in  the  ofi'eriug  up  of  Christ,  the  flame  of  Divine  love  shot  upwards  upon  the 
altar-hearts  of  the  Lord's  redeemed ;  it  was  and  is  kindled  from  above,  for  love 
begets  love,  and  "  we  love  Him  because  He  first  loved  us."  This  is  the  heavenly 
tire  which  kindles  upon  the  altar  of  the  heart,  the  sacrifice  of  the  affections  ;  it  is 
the  fruit  of  satisfied  justice  ;  it  is  the  movement  of  Divine  mercy,  besprinkling  the 
poul  with  the  all-awakening,  all-cleansing  blood  of  Jesus,  producing  a  responsive 
movement  of  the  soul  to  God,  by  the  drawings  of  the  Spirit  of  grace,  and  lighting 
up  a  flame  in  its  Divinely  occupied  recesses,  not  to  be  extinguished  by  the  deepest 
waters  of  trial.  "  It  shall  never  go  out."  1.  In  time  of  trial  and  affliction  it  shall 
not  go  out ;  for  "  in  the  time  of  trouble  He  shall  hide  me  in  His  pavilion :  in  the 
secret  of  His  Tabernacle  shall  He  hide  me."  2.  In  seasons  of  spiritual  depression  it 
f^hall  not  go  out ;  "  O  my  God,  my  ?oul  is  cast  down  within  me,"  &c.  3.  In  the  hour 
of  temptation  it  shall  not  go  out ;  "  for  God  is  faithful,  who  will  not  suffer  you  to  be 
tempted  above  that  you  are  able  ;  but  will,  with  the  temptation,  also  make  a  way  to 
escape,  that  ye  may  be  able  to  bear  it. "  4.  When  life,  too,  is  waning,  and  the  night  of 
death  is  setting  in,  and  the  blighting  chill  is  paralysing  the  frame  as  it  enters  the 
deep  and  dark  river,  it  shall  not  go  out;  for  "  love  is  strong  as  death"  ;  and  "many 
waters  cannot  (juench  love,  neither  can  the  floods  drown  it."  {H.  Hardy,  31. A.) 
The  contimial  burnt -offering  : — This  ordinance  reminds  us  that  Christ,  as  our 
Burnt-offering,  continually  offers  Himself  to  God  in  self -consecration  in  our  behalf. 
Very  significant  it  is  that  the  burnt-offering  stands  in  contrast  in  this  respect  with 
the  sin-offering.  We  never  read  of  a  continual  sin-offering ;  even  the  great  annual 
sin -offering  of  the  Day  of  Atonement,  which,  like  the  daily  burnt-offering,  had 
reference  to  the  nation  at  large,  was  soon  finished,  and  once  for  all.  And  it  was  so 
with  reason ;  for  in  the  nature  of  the  case,  our  Lord's  offering  of  Himself  for  sin 
as  an  expiatory  sacrifice  was  not  and  could  not  be  a  continuous  act.  But  with  His 
presentation  of  Himself  unto  God  in  full  consecration  of  His  person  as  our  Burnt- 
offering  it  is  different.  Thnaighout  the  days  of  His  humiliMtion,  this  self-offering 
of  Himself  to  God  continued;  nor,  indeed,  can  we  say  it  has  yet  ceased,  or  ever 
can  cease.  For  still,  as  the  High  Priest  of  the  heavenly  Sanctuary,  He  continually 
ofl'ers  Himself  as  our  Burnt-offering  in  constantly  renewed  and  constantly  continued 
devotementof  Himself  to  the  Father  to  do  His  will.  {S.  H.  Kellogg,  D.D.)  The 
contimial  burning :—Suinpose  the  sin  should  cease,  would  the  fire  then  be  put  out? 
Certainly  not.  The  fire  has  a  double  significance  ;  it  is  not  there  only  to  consume 
the  sacrifice,  it  is  there  to  express  the  cuntinual  aspiration  of  the  soul.  The  fire 
still  burns.  There  is  an  uni]ueijchable  fire  in  heaven.  Aspiration  is  the  highest 
expression  of  character.  That  is  the  peimanent  quantity  in  the  text.  Fire 
ascends;  it  sp'  echlessly  says,  "  This  is  not  my  home  ;  I  must  travel,  I  must  fly,  I 
must  return  ;  the  sun  calls  me,  and  I  must  obey."  A  character  without  aspiration 
cannot  live  healthily  and  exercise  a  vital  and  ennobling  influence.  When  religion 
becomes  mere  controversy,  it  has  lost  veneiation;  and  whatever  or  whoever  loses 
veneration  slips  away  from  the  centre  of  things,  and  falls  evermore  into  thickening 
darkness.  There  is  a  philosophy  in  this  conception  as  well  as  a  theology.  To 
asi^ire  is  to  grow.  "The  tire  shall  ever  be  burning  upon  the  altar;  it  shall  never 
go  out."  Then  there  are  two  things  in  ihe  text — "fire"  and  "altar."  We  may 
have  an  altar,  but  no  fire.  That  is  the  deadly  possibility;  tiiat  is  the  fatal  reality. 
The  world  is  not  dying  for  want  of  a  creed,  but  for  want  of  faith.  We  are  not  in  need 
of  more  prayers,  we  are  iu  need  of  more  prayerfulness.  If  the  little  knowledge  we 
have — how  small  it  is  the  wisest  men  know  best  of  all — wei'e  turned  to  right  use, 
fire  in  its  happiest  influences  would  soon  begin  to  be  detected  by  surrounding 
neighbours  and  by  unknown  observers.  Of  what  avail  is  it  that  we  have  filled  the 
grate  with  fuel  if  we  have  not  applied  the  flame  ?  Does  the  unlighted  fuel  warm 
the  chamber?    No  more  does  the  unsanctified  knowiedge  help  to  redeem  and  save 


CHAP.  VI.]  LEVITICUS.  109 

society.  We  need  the  fire  as  well  as  the  altar.  What  is  needed  now  is  a  fire  that 
will  burn  the  altar  itself — turn  the  marble  and  porphyry  and  granite  and  hewn 
soft-stone  all  into  fuel  that  shall  go  up  in  a  common  oblation  to  the  waiting 
heavens.  We  may  have  fire  and  no  altar,  as  well  as  have  an  altar  and  no  fire. 
This  is  also  a  mistake.  We  ought  to  have  religious  places  and  Christian  obser- 
vances, locality  with  special  meaning,  resting-places  with  Heaven's  welcome  written 
upon  their  portals.  There  is  a  deadly  sophism  lurking  in  the  supposition  that  men 
can  have  the  fire  without  the  altar,  and  are  independent  of  institutions,  churches, 
families,  places,  Bibles,  and  all  that  is  known  by  Christian  arrangement  for  common 
worship.  We  are  not  meant  to  be  solitary  worshippers.  When  a  man  says  he 
can  read  the  Bible  at  home,  I  deny  it.  He  can  partially  read  it  there,  he  can 
see  some  of  its  meaning  there  ;  but  society  is  one,  as  well  as  is  the  individual,  in 
some  degrees  and  in  some  relations.  There  is  a  religion  of  fellowship  as  well  as 
of  solitude.  Forsake  not  the  assembling  of  yourselves  together :  there  is  a  touch 
that  helps  life  to  gather  itself  up  into  its  full  force ;  there  is  a  contagion  which 
makes  the  heart  feel  strong  in  masonry.  When  a  man  says  he  can  pray  at  home, 
I  deny  it — except  in  the  sense  that  he  can  there  partially  pray.  He  can  transact 
part  of  the  commerce  which  ought  to  be  going  on  continually  between  heaven  and 
earth,  earth  and  heaven ;  but  there  is  a  common  prayer — the  family  cry,  the  con- 
gregational intercession,  the  sense  that  we  are  praying  for  one  another  in  common 
petition  at  the  throue  of  grace.  It  is  not  enough  to  kindle  a  fire  :  we  must  renew 
it.  "  The  fire  shall  ever  be  burning  upon  the  altar ;  it  shall  never  go  out."  Did  • 
not  some  men  burn  once  who  are  cold  now?  Have  not  some  men  allowed  the  holy 
flame  to  perish  ?  and  is  not  their  life  now  like  a  deserted  altar  laden  with  cold 
white  ashes?  Once  they  sang  sweetly,  prayed  with  eagerness  of  expectation, 
worked  with  both  hands  diligently,  were  always  open  to  Christian  appeal,  focalised 
their  hves  in  one  poignant  inquiry — Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do?  I  know 
of  no  drearier  spectacle  than  to  see  a  man  who  still  bears  the  Christian  name  on 
the  altar  of  whose  heart  the  fire  has  gone  out.  That  is  a  possibility.  Lost  enthu- 
siasm means  lost  faith;  lost  passion  means  lost  conviction.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
Use  of  means : — That  fire  on  the  altar  was  lighted  originally  from  heaven  ;  it  was 
lighted,  it  is  supposed,  from  the  bright  glory  that  was  in  the  cloud,  and  ultimately 
dwelt  in  the  Tabernacle  between  the  cherubim ;  but  while  lighted  from  heaven  it 
was  kept  burning  by  human  appliances.  God  never  dispenses  with  means ;  He 
gives  grace,  and  expects  us  to  use  means.  So  that  text  that  many  pervert,  "  My 
grace  is  sufficient  for  you,"  some  people  practically  read  as  if  it  were,  "  My  grace  is 
a  substitute  for  you."  Now  it  is  not  so  ;  it  is  sufficient  for  you,  but  it  never  will  be 
a  substitute  for  you.  God  does  not  canonise  indolence.  He  lights  the  spark  that  is 
in  the  heart  from  heaven,  and  He  expects  that,  by  prayer,  by  reading,  by  thought, 
you  will  keep  it  constantly  burning.  (J,  Cumming,  D.D.)  Conscientious  perfor- 
mance of  holy  duties : — Be  conscientious  in  the  performance  of  holy  duties.  A  fire 
which  for  awhile  shoots  up  to  heaven  will  faint  both  in  its  heat  and  brightness 
without  fresh  supplies  of  nourishing  matter.  Bring  fresh  wood  to  the  altar  morn- 
ing and  evening,  as  the  priests  were  bound,  for  the  nourishment  of  the  holy  fire. 
God  in  all  His  promises  supposes  the  use  of  means.  When  He  promised  Hezekiah 
his  life  for  fifteen  years,  it  cannot  be  supposed  that  he  should  live  without  eating 
and  exercise.  It  is  both  our  sin  and  misery  to  neglect  the  means.  Therefore  let 
a  holy  and  humble  spirit  breathe  in  aU  our  acts  of  worship.  If  we  once  become 
listless  to  duty  we  shall  quickly  become  lifeless  in  it.  If  we  languish  in  our  duties 
we  shall  not  long  be  lively  in  our  graces.  (S.  Charnock.)  The  perpePial  Jire  : — 
So  careful  is  God  of  this  continual  burning,  that,  if  you  mark,  it  is  reported  over 
and  over  (see  vers.  9,  12).  To  this  end,  the  priest's  care  was  to  feed  it  with  wood, 
and  see  to  it  day  and  night,  and  with  no  other  fire  might  either  sacrifice,  or  incense, 
be  burned  and  offered  to  God.  This  fire  was  carefully  kept  upon  the  altar  to  the 
captivity  of  Babylon,  and  afterward  found  again  of  Neh.  ii.,  2  Mace.  i.  18,  19. 
Of  like  from  hence  might  grow  that  great  honour  and  regard,  which  the 
heathens  had  fire  in,  whereof  we  read  often.  The  Athenians  in  tbeir  Prytaneo, 
and  at  Delpbos,  and  at  Eome,  of  those  Vestal  Virgins  continual  fire  was  kept,  and 
of  many  it  was  worshipped  as  a  God.  The  Persians  called  it  Orismada,  that  is, 
holy  fire  ;  and  in  public  pomp  they  used  to  carry  it  before  kings  with  great  solem- 
nity. -What  might  be  the  reason  why  God  appointed  this  ceremony  of  continual 
fire  upon  the  altar,  and  how  may  we  profit  by  it  ?  1.  First,  there  was  figured  by  it 
the  death  of  Christ  from  the  beginning  of  the  world ;  namely,  that  He  was  the 
Lamb  slain  from  the  beginning  for  mankind,  and  by  this  shadow  they  were  led  to 


110  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

believe  that  although  as  yet  Christ  was  not  come  in  the  flesh,  nevertheless  the 
fruit  of  His  death  belonged  to  them,  as  well  as  to  those  that  sbould  live  when  He 
came,  or  was  come  ;  for  this  fire  was  continual  and  went  not  out,  no  more  did  the 
fruit  of  His  pission  fail  to  any  true  believer,  even  from  the  beginning.  But  they 
were  saved  by  believing  that  He  should  come,  as  we  are  now,  by  believing  that  lie 
is  come.  2.  Also  this  fire  came  from  heaven  (chap.  ix.  24),  and  so  should  Christ 
in  the  time  appointed.  This  fire  was  ever  in,  and  never  went  out,  and  so  is  God 
ever  ready  to  accept  our  sacrifices  and  appointed  duties,  ever  ready  to  hear  us  and 
forgive  us,  but  we  are  slow  and  dull,  and  come  not  to  Him  as  we  ought.  3.  No 
other  fire  might  be  used  but  this,  and  so  they  were  taught  to  keep  to  God's  ordi- 
nances, and  to  fly  from  all  inventions  of  their  own  heads.  For  ever  it  was  true,  and 
ever  will  be  true,  "  In  vain  do  men  worship  Me,  teaching  for  doctrines  men's  precepts. " 
Our  devices,  seem  they  never  so  wise,  so  fit,  so  holy  and  excellent,  they  are  strange 
fire,  not  that  fire  that  came  from  heaven,  not  that  fire  that  God  will  be  pleased 
withal  or  endure.  This  fire  coming  first  from  heaven,  and  thus  preserved,  still 
preached  unto  them  by  figure,  that  as  well  did  their  sacrifices  and  services  duly 
performed  according  to  the  law  please  God,  as  that  did  when  first  God  sent  His  fire 
from  heaven  to  consume  it,  in  token  of  approbation,  which  surely  was  a  great 
comfort  to  their  consciences  and  a  mighty  prop  to  fainting,  fearing  weak  faith. 
4.  This  fire  thus  maintained  and  kept  with  all  care,  and  "  not  suffered  ever  to  go 
out,"  taught  them,  and  still  may  teach  us,  to  be  careful  to  keep  in  the  fire  of  God's 
holy  Spirit,  that  it  never  die,  nor  go  out  within  us.  The  fire  is  kept  in  by  honest 
life,  as  by  wood,  by  true  sighs  of  unfeigned  repentance,  as  by  breath  or  blowing,  and 
by  meek  humility,  as  by  soft  ashes.  Oh,  that  we  may  have  care  to  keep  it  in ! 
what  should  I  say  ?  This  continued  fire  taught  then,  and,  though  it  be  now  gone 
and  abrogated,  may  still  teach  us  now,  to  be  careful  to  keep  in,  amongst  us,  the  fire 
of  God's  Word,  the  true  preaching  of  His  truth,  to  the  salvation  of  our  souls.  5. 
For  the  fire  hath  these  properties — it  shineth  and  giveth  light,  it  heateth,  it  con- 
sumeth,  it  trieth  :  so  the  preaching  of  the  gospel.  "  Thy  Word  is  a  lantern  unto  my 
feet,  and  a  light  unto  my  path."  St.  Peter  calleth  it  "  a  candle  in  a  dark  place,"  and 
many  Scriptures  teach  the  shining  light  of  it.  The  heat  in  Uke  sort :  "  Did  not  our 
hearts  burn  within  us,  whilst  He  talked  with  us,  and  opened  the  Scriptures  ?  The 
fire  kindled,  and  I  spake  with  my  tongue,"  saith  the  Psalm;  and  as  fire  it  pleased 
the  Holy  Spirit  to  appear  at  Pentecost,  to  show  this  fruit  of  effect  of  the  Word 
preached  by  their  mouths,  it  heateth  the  heart  to  all  good  life,  and  maketh  us 
"  zealous  of  good  works."  The  dross  of  our  corruption  by  degrees  it  washeth,  the 
stubble  of  our  fancies  it  "  burneth  up  and  consumeth,"  so  that  we  abhor  the  sins  we 
have  been  pleased  with,  and  hate  the  remembrance  of  evU  passed.  6.  Lastly,  it 
trieth  doctrine,  and  severeth  truth  from  error;  it  trieth  men,  and  discovereth 
hypocrites.  All  worthy  motives  to  make  us  careful  to  preserve  this  fire  perpetually 
amongst  us  whilst  we  live,  and  in  a  holy  zeal  to  provide  for  it  also  when  we  are 
dead.  So  shall  we  live  being  dead ;  nay,  so  shall  we  assuredly  never  die,  but  with 
immortal  souls,  and  never-dying  tongues,  praise  His  name  that  liveth  for  ever,  and 
■will  have  us  with  Him.  (Bp.  Babington.)  A  fire  easily  perpetuated : — At  Elildare 
a  memorial  fire  was  kept  up  in  honour  of  St.  Bridget  for  seven  hundred  years,  and 
extinguished  in  the  thirteenth  century  by  order  of  an  Archbishop  of  Dublin.  It  is 
easier  to  keep  up  the  outward  fires  of  superstition  than  the  Divine  fire  on  the  altar 
of  the  heart.  The  constancy  of  religion: — David  Livingstone,  who  did  so  much 
toward  opening  up  the  dark  continent  of  Africa,  told  the  following  story.  When 
he  was  a  boy,  a  faithful  Christian  man  called  hnn  to  his  death-bed  and  said,  "  My 
son,  make  religion  the  everyday  business  of  your  life,  and  not  a  thing  of  fits  and 
starts."  Livingstone's  life  shows  that  he  followed  the  advice  to  the  day  of  his 
death,  even  to  his  last  hour,  which  was  spent  on  his  knees  in  prayer  to  Him  to 
whom  he  had  so  often  gone  for  comfort.  Keeping  the  fire  burning  : — In  Florence 
good  housewives  use  cakes  of  vine-refuse  to  keep  the  fire  in  when  they  are  away 
from  home.  These  cakes  cannot  yield  much  heat  or  create  a  blaze,  but  they  feed 
sufficient  fire  to  save  lighting  it  again.  Do  not  many  obscure,  untalented,  but 
quietly  sincere  believers  answer  just  this  purpose  in  our  churches?  In  dull  and 
dead  times  they  preserve  "  the  things  which  remain  and  are  ready  to  die  " ;  they 
detain  the  heavenly  flame,  which  else  would  quite  depart,  and  though  the  best  they 
can  do  is  but  to  smoulder  in  sorrow  at  the  declension  of  the  times,  yet  they  are  not 
to  be  despised.  When,  in  happier  days,  the  fire  of  piety  shall  burn  with  renewed 
energy,  we  shall  be  grateful  to  those  who  were  as  the  ashes  on  the  hearth,  and  kept 
the  dying  flame  alive.        ifeed  for  constant  ;piety : — Some  Christians  are  like  those 


CHAP.  VII.]  LEVITICUS.  Ill 

toys  they  import  from  France,  which  have  sand  in  them ;  the  sand  runs  down,  and 
some  httle  invention  turns  and  works  them  as  long  as  the  sand  is  running,  but 
when  the  sand  is  all  out  it  stops.  So  on  Sunday  morning  these  people  are  just 
turned  right,  and  the  sand  runs,  and  they  work  all  the  Sunday  ;  but  tlie  sand  runs 
down  by  Sunday  night,  and  then  they  stand  still,  or  else  go  on  with  the  world's 
work  just  as  they  did  before.  Oh !  this  will  never  do !  There  must  be  a  living 
principle  ;  something  that  shall  be  a  mainspring  within ;  a  wheel  that  cannot  help 
running  on,  and  that  does  not  depend  upon  external  resources.  Rekindling  the 
spiritual  fire : — Epiphanius  maketh  mention  of  those  that  travel  by  the  deserts  of 
Syria,  where  are  nothing  but  miserable  marshes  and  sands,  destitute  of  all  com- 
modities, nothing  to  be  had  for  love  or  money  ;  if  it  so  happen  that  their  fire  go 
out  by  the  way  then  they  light  it  again  at  the  heat  of  the  sun,  by  the  means  of  a 
burning-glass  or  some  other  device  that  they  have.  And  thus  in  the  wilderness  of 
this  world,  if  any  man  have  suffered  the  sparks  of  Divine  grace  to  die  in  him,  the 
fire  of  zeal  to  go  out  in  his  heart,  there  is  no  means  under  the  sun  to  enliven  those 
dead  sparks,  to  kindle  that  extinguished  fire  again,  but  at  the  Sun  of  Righteousness, 
that  Fountain  of  Light,  Christ  Jesus.  (/.  Spencer.)  Constant  light : — Many 
hypocrites  are  like  comets,  that  appear  for  awhile  with  a  mighty  blaze,  but  are 
very  unsteady  and  irregular  in  their  motion  ;  their  blaze  soon  disappears,  and  they 
appear  but  once  in  a  great  while.  But  true  saints  are  like  fixed  stars,  which, 
though  they  rise  and  set,  and  are  often  clouded,  yet  are  steadfast  in  their  orb,  and 
shine  with  a  constant  light.  {Pres.  Edwards.)  A  constantly  burning  lamp : — 
Any  man  or  woman,  however  obscure,  whose  life  is  clean,  whose  words  are  true, 
whose  intention  is  to  help  God  in  His  world,  kindles  a  light  which  never  goes  out. 


CHAPTEE  VII. 

Vers.  1-10.  The  law  of  the  trespass- ofiFering. — Lessons: — 1.  The  fatness  and 
grossness  of  the  carnal  heart  is  to  be  removed  and  taken  away.  2.  God  requires 
the  heart.  3.  Against  covetousness  in  ministers.  4.  To  receive  the  sacraments 
reverently  and  with  due  preparation.  {A.  Willet,  D.D.)  The  trespass-offering  : 
— The  trespass-offering  may  be  considered  as  a  variety  of  the  sin-offering.  The 
distinguishing  characteristic  of  the  trespass-offering  proper  was  restitution.  The 
offences  for  which  it  was  offered  were  such  as  admitted  of  restitution,  and  the 
distinction  from  the  sin-offering  cannot  be  better  expressed  than  in  the  words  of 
Prof.  Cave  :  "  The  sin  and  trespass-offerings  were  both  sacrifices  for  sins  ;  but  in 
the  former  the  leading  idea  was  that  of  atonement,  the  expiation  of  sin  by  a 
substituted  life ;  in  the  latter  the  leading  feature  was  that  of  satisfaction,  the 
wiping  out  of  sin  by  the  payment  of  a  recompense."  It  is  well  worthy  of  note  that 
in  the  trespass-offering  for  sins  against  God,  the  ritual  prescribed  was  sacrifice 
first,  restitution  following ;  while  in  those  against  man  the  order  was  reversed : 
restitution  first,  followed  by  sacrifice  on  the  altar.  The  appropriateness  of  the 
difference  will  be  readily  seen.  In  the  former  case,  where  the  sin  consisted  in 
withholding  from  God  that  which  was  His  due,  it  was  not  really  God  that  lost 
anything,  it  was  the  sinner.  Giving  to  God  is  not  regarded  as  a  debt  which  a  man 
must  pay,  but  rather  as  a  privilege  which  he  may  enjoy  ;  and,  accordingly,  before  a 
man  can  enjoy  the  privilege  of  which  he  has  foolishly  deprived  himself,  he  must 
come  and  offer  his  sacrifice  upon  the  altar.  But  when  the  sinner  has  been  with- 
holding from  his  fellow-man  that  which  is  his  due,  the  delinquency  is  regarded  in 
the  light  of  a  debt,  and  he  is  not  allowed  to  go  to  the  altar  of  God  until  he  has 
paid  his  debt,  and  not  only  discharged  the  principal  in  full,  but  added  one-fifth 
part  thereto.  (J.  M.  Gibson,  D.D.)  This  is  the  law: — We  fiud  this  text  in 
many  places  (see  chaps,  vi.  25 ;  vii.  1,  11,  37).  What  we  want  is  just  this — 
definiteness.  There  must  be  a  line  of  certainty  somewhere,  or  the  universe  could 
not  be  kept  together.  There  may  be  ten  thousand  contributory  lines,  contingent 
or  incidental  lines,  but  there  must  be  running  right  through  the  heart  of  things  a 
law  of  definiteness  and  certitude  ;  otherwise  coherence  is  impossible,  and  perma- 
nence is  of  the  nature  of  a  dissolving  cloud.  We  want  to  get  upon  that  line.  Quest 
in  search  of  that  line  is  orthodoxy.  To  seek  after  truth,  what  is  this  but  to  love 
wisdom  and  to  pant  for  God  ?     What  have  you  ?    You  have  great  information. 


112  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOE.  [chap.  vu. 

What  is  the  value  of  information?  Nothing,  beyond  that  which  is  merely 
momentary  and  tentative.  It  is  the  last  thing  to  be  known  or  that  is  known.  But 
then  in  two  hours  we  shall  know  something  more.  Information  is  never  final. 
Hence  men  say,  "  To  the  best  of  my  knowledge."  What  a  confession  is  in  these 
simple  words  if  we  submit  them  to  their  last  analysis  !  "  To  the  best  of  my  judg- 
ment," "  So  far  as  I  know,"  "  According  to  the  best  advice  I  can  get"  ;  what  is  all 
this  but  sand  ?  You  could  not  build  a  house  upon  such  sand.  It  would  never  do 
for  information  to  be  final  or  complete  or  authoritative ;  it  is  by  this  kind  of  un- 
certainty that  we  are  kept  modest,  it  is  by  this  kind  of  incertitude  we  are  often 
inspired,  and  it  is  because  intellectual  liie  is  a  continual  tumult  that  we  grow 
athletically,  that  the  brain  becomes  stronger.  What  we  want  to  come  upon  is  the 
line  of  law  which  itself  is  a  line  of  progress,  a  hue  of  change  into  ever-increasing 
largeness,  but  never  a  change  of  quality  or  of  moral  purpose.  If  we  want  to  knov 
the  law  v/e  can  find  it.  If  you  want  to  be  right  you  can  be  right.  "  To  him  that 
knoweth  to  do  good  and  doeth  it  not,  to  him  it  is  sin."  Can  we  go  to  the  law? 
We  can  do  better.  It  is  the  business  of  the  gospel  minister  to  say  how.  We  can 
not  only  go  to  the  law,  we  can  go  to  the  Lawgiver,  we  can  go  to  the  living  Jesus 
Christ.  We  can  see  Him  face  to  face,  or,  better  still,  using  the  word  "  face  "  in  its 
true  interpretation,  we  can  see  Him  soul  to  soul.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  priest 
shall  have  to  himself  the  skin  of  the  burnt-offering. — The  skin  legislated  for  : — 
Why  God  should  think  of  so  small  and  base  a  thing  as  the  skin,  some  may  ask  a 
reason  ;  and  see  you  the  reason  and  tlie  good  of  it.  1.  It  notably  confirmeth  our 
faith  in  His  providence,  that  He  will  never  forget  us  and  leave  us  destitute  of 
things  needful  and  good  for  us,  seeing  we  are  much  better  than  the  skin  of  a  brute 
beast,  whereof  yet  He  hath  care  and  thought.  2.  It  showed  that  sweet  and 
comfortable  care  that  the  Lord  then  had,  and  still  hath,  of  the  ministry,  that  it 
should  be  maintained,  and  not  defrauded  of  the  least  thing  allotted  to  it,  which 
still  He  sho-veth  in  all  other  particulars,  ui'ging  still  that  they  be  given  to  the 
priests  accordnig  to  His  will.  3.  This  care  of  the  Lord  for  the  beast's  skin,  to 
appoint  it  to  one  that  should  have  it,  well  taught  that  people  then,  and  still 
teacheth  us  ever  to  be  careful  to  prevent  strife,  and  to  take  away  all  questions  and 
controversies  as  much  as  we  may,  that  every  one  knowing  what  is  his  may  therein 
rest,  and  peace  ensue.  The  more  God  hath  given  you,  the  more  must  be  your  pain 
this  way,  in  your  good  health  and  perfect  memory.     (Bp.  Babington.) 

Vers.  11-18.  The  law  of  the  sacrifice  of  peace -ofiFerings. — The  peace-offering  : — 
1.  Characteristics.  1.  The  animal  offered  might  be  a  male  or  a  female — diiSering 
in  this  from  tae  burnt-offering.  2.  It  v?as  not  to  be  wholly  consumed  as  the 
burnt  offerings.  3.  If  for  a  thanksgiving  offering,  unleavened  cakes,  mingled  with 
oil,  as  well  as  leavened,  might  be  offered.  4.  If  for  a  vow  or  a  voluntary  offering, 
the  parts  to  be  eaten  must  be  eaten  on  the  same  or  the  following  day.  5.  No 
ceremonially-unclean  person  could  eat  of  the  peace-offering.  II.  Significance.  1. 
The  peace-offering,  as  the  name  implies,  presents  to  us  our  Lord  Jesus  as  our 
peace  (Eph.  ii.  14).  2.  This  is  the  key  to  this  symbolic  offering,  by  which  may  be 
unlocked,  with  certainty,  some,  at  least,  of  its  rich  treasures.  (1)  The  parts  con- 
sumed—  repiesenting  the  most  excellent  parts,  the  inward  parts,  the  hidden 
energies — were  offered  on  the  altar  unto  God  the  Father — in  which  He  was  "  well 
pleased."  (2)  The  other  parts  eaten  by  the  priests  representing  the  true  believer 
feeding  on  Christ  as  his  Peace,  having  laid  his  hand  of  faith  on  Him  ;  the  sprinkled 
blood  being  the  ground  of  peace.  (3)  The  wave-breast  representing  the  love  of 
Christ,  and  the  heave-shoulder  His  all-power,  give  the  two  leading  elements  in 
Christ  on  which  the  believer  feeds  with  joyous  delight.  (4)  The  unleavened  cakes, 
representing  the  new  nature  of  the  believer,  being  mingled  with  oil,  the  oil  repre- 
senting the  Holy  Spirit,  show  the  necessity  for  even  the  regenerated  to  be  assisted 
by  the  power  of  the  Sjiirit  for  profitable  communion  with  God  in  Christ,  and  to 
enter  into  the  fulness  of  the  love  and  power  of  Christ.  (5)  Leavened  bread,  signi- 
fying evil,  was  to  be  offered  as  well  as  unleavened,  to  signify  that  our  sinful  nature 
should  be  recognised  in  our  "  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving" — not  for  condemnation, 
but  for  joy  that  it  is  judged.  The  sin  in  us  should  not  himler  our  communion 
with  God  in  Christ,  if  we  have  no  sin  upon  us.  (6)  The  cerem  mially-uuclean 
could  not  eat  of  the  wave-breast  or  heave-shoulder,  to  signify  that  sin  unconfessed, 
andtberefore  unpardoned,  is  an  insurmountable  hindrance  to  fellowship  with  God 
in  Christ.  (D.  C.  ILtghes,  M.A.)  The  peace-offering  : — I.  The  peace-offering 
IB  ▲  SACEiFiCE  of  thanksoivinq.     Three  forms  of  it  are  specified — 1.  The  off<.ring 


CHAP.  VII.]  LEVITICUS.  113 

of  thanksgiving,  i.e.,  for  some  special  blessing.  2.  The  vow,  the  fulfilment  of  a 
promise  to  God.  3.  The  voluntary  offering,  made  from  a  principle  of  gratitude, 
when,  with  no  special  occa-^ion,  the  worshipper  culled  upon  his  soul  and  all  within 
him  to  praise  and  bless  Gud's  holy  name.  It  was  a  peace-offering,  a  national 
thanksgiving,  which  Solomon  made  at  the  dedication  of  the  Temple.  It  is  this 
sacrifice  which  is  so  frequently  referied  to  in  the  Psahns.  In  connection  with  the 
celebration  of  the  Passover  there  were  two  peace-offerings.  The  former  of  these 
is  continued  in  the  Lord's  Supper,  which  is  a  feast  of  thanksgiving  for  God's 
greatest  gift  to  men.  We  should  thank  God  at  the  sacramental  table  for  all  special 
exhibitions  of  the  Divine  goodness.  II.  The  peace-offeeikg  is  a  sacrifice  of 
FELLOWSHIP.  This,  taken  with  thanksgiving,  is  its  characteristic  idea.  The  feature 
peculiar  to  it  was  the  sacrificial  meal  ;  the  partaking  of  that  which  was  offered  by 
the  worshipper.  The  priests  shared  in  what  was  offered  in  the  meat  and  sin- 
offerings.  The  worshipper  also  p  irtook  of  the  peace-offering.  The  sacrifice  was 
an  act  of  holy  communion.     Also  a  social  meal.     III.  The  basis  of  communion  in 

THE    PEACE-OFFEEING    IS    SACRIFICE  ;    AND    IN    THE    SACRIFICE,    THE    SHEDDING  OF  BLOOD. 

The  shedding  of  the  blood  in  this  particular  sacrifice  does  not  represent,  as  in  the 
sin-offering,  the  act  of  atoning  for  sin.  The  bleeding  Christ  as  our  Peace-offering 
is  not  our  sin-bearer.  But  His  blood  in  this  offering  also  declares  that  an  atone- 
ment has  been  made,  and  that  the  sole  ground  of  fellowship  with  God  is  the 
reconciling  blood  of  the  Lamb  (Eph.  ii.  13, 14).  IV.  The  peace-offeking  requires 
HOLINESS  IN  the  WORSHIPPER.  Tliis  fact  is  expressed  in  the  provision  that  un- 
leavened bread  should  be  offered  as  a  part  of  the  sacrifice.  Yeast,  or  leaven,  was 
a  symbol  of  corruption.  The  principle  of  corruption  must  be  carefully  excluded,  if 
our  offering  is  to  find  acceptance.     Is  there  old  leaven  of  sin  in  your  life  ?     V.  In 

THE  PEACE-OFFERING  THE  SINFULNESS  OF  A  NATURE  PARTIALLY  SANCTIFIED  IS  CON- 
FESSED. The  curse  of  sin  is  no  more  on  us,  but  it  is  in  usi  (G.  R.  Leavitt.) 
Thanksnivintj  and  thanndiving : — It  is  most  interesting  to  find,  here  among  the 
sober  directions  that  Moses  was  commissioned  to  deliver  to  the  Israelites,  one 
which  assumes  a  constant  recognition  of  God's  love  and  bounty.  The  peace- 
offering  seems  to  have  for  its  definite  end  the  earnest  inculcation  of  a  perpetual 
exercise  of  devotion,  without  any  special  occasion,  as  well  as  with  some  which  are 
carefully  mentioned.  Perhaps  the  best  account  of  the  whole  ordinance  is  given  in 
the  familiar  words  of  Kurtz:  "A  state  of  peace  and  of  friendship  with  God  was 
the  basis  and  the  essential  of  the  presentation  of  the  peace-offering  ;  and  the  design 
of  the  presentation,  from  which  its  name  was  derived,  was  the  realisation  and 
establishment,  the  verification  and  enjoyment,  of  the  existing  relation  of  peace, 
friendship,  fellowship,  and  blessedness."  It  may  be  well  for  us  just  to  pick  out 
the  particulars  of  this  form  of  description.  I.  In  tbe  peace-offering  there  was  in- 
culcated A  SPIRIT  OF  TRANQUIL  TRUST.  When  One  made  the  sacrifice,  it  signified 
that  he  was  in  the  state  of  reconciliation  with  God.  The  law  had  lost  its  curse  ; 
sin  was  in  process  of  being  subdued  ;  the  soul  of  the  glad  believer  simply  rested 
upon  the  promises  of  redemption,  and  waited  for  its  salvation.  Among  the  severe 
passes  of  the  Scottish  highlands,  it  is  memorable  always  to  mention  Giencoe  ;  for 
no  one  who  has  ever  climbed  the  fatiguing  steeps  can  forget  that,  after  the  weary 
way  had  led  him  up  and  on,  and  beneath  the  shadow  of  the  grotesque  Ben  Arthur, 
past  many  a  disappointing  elevation  which  he  thought  surely  would  be  the  last,  he 
finally  reached  that  mossy  stone,  by  the  winding  wayside,  on  which  are  written  the 
welcome  words,  "  Here  rest,  and  be  thankful !  "  There,  sitting  down  in  peace,  one 
sees  the  rare  prospect  of  beautiful  hill  and  vale,  rock  and  loch  kindling  and 
shadowing  each  other,  far  away  towards  the  blue  horizon;  and  just  beside  him,  at 
the  turn  of  the  road,  is  also  the  long  path  by  which  he  came.  Such  spots  of 
experience  there  are  on  the  mountains  of  life,  when  the  forgiven  sinner,  now  a 
child,  pauses  to  say  to  himself,  "  Eeturn  unto  thy  rest,  0  my  soul,  for  the  L  >rd 
hath  dealt  bountifully  with  thee."  In  the  original  verse  this  reads  "  resting- 
places."  II.  In  the  peace-offering  there  was  inculcated  also  A  SPIRIT  OF  hearifklt 
GRATITUDE.  This  service  is  called  "  the  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving"  (Psa.  cxvi.  17). 
How  many  mercies  have  been  given  us  !  How  many  perils  have  been  averted  ! 
How  many  fears  have  been  allayed !  How  many  friendly  communions  have  been 
granted !  How  many  anticipations  have  been  kindled  !  How  m'lny  hopes  have 
been  gratified  !  Per  contra,  just  a  serious  thougbt  might  likewise  be  bestowed 
upon  the  other  side  of  the  ledger.  Said  old  Christmas  Evans,  in  an  unusually 
lengthened  period  of  reminiscence,  "  Thv  love  has  bef-n  as  a  shower  ;  the  returns, 
alas  1  only  a  dewdrop  now  and  then,  and  evea  that  dewdrop  stained  with  sin  1  " 

8 


114  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vir. 

At  this  point  the  suggestion  which  this  ceremonial  makes  concerning  permanency 
of  devout  acknowledgment  is  welcome.  "  Thanksgiving  is  good,"  said  the  vener- 
able Philip  Henry  to  his  children,  "  but  thanksliving  is  better."  We  ought  not  to 
seek  to  exhaust  our  gratitude  upon  any  single  day's  exercise.  It  is  better  to  live 
our  thanks  through  all  our  lifetime.  A  happy,  grateful  spirit  is  the  Christian's 
best  offering  to  God,  morning,  noon,  and  night.  III.  In  the  peace-otferiug  there 
was  likewise  inculcated  a  spirit  of  faithful  cojs'seceation.  There  are  always  two 
sides  to  any  covenant.  When  we  plead  God's  promises,  we  certainly  have  need  to 
remember  our  own.  God  expects  a  Christian  who  has  been  favoured  to  be  un- 
forgetful.  Alexander  Severus  is  reported  to  have  made  an  edict  that  no  one 
should  salute  the  emperor  on  the  street  who  knew  himself  to  be  a  thief.  And  it 
must  be  unbecoming  for  any  one  to  praise  or  pray  who  remembers  that  his  life 
contains  the  record  of  some  vow  made  once  but  still  unkept.  Hence  it  sometimes 
happens  that  one  part  of  our  history  will  give  help  to  another,  for  it  quickens  the 
zeal  of  our  love  to  call  to  remembrance  a  day  in  which  God's  love  drew  forth  our 
engagement.  It  is  related  of  the  famous  Thomas  Erskine,  before  he  was  a 
Christian  man,  that  once  when  wandering  in  a  lonely  glen  among  the  mountains 
of  his  own  land,  he  came  across  a  shepherd  pasturing  his  flock.  "  Do  you  know 
the  Father  ?"  asked  the  plain  man,  with  unmistakable  gentleness  of  devotion. 
The  proud  scholar  vouchsafed  no  reply,  but  the  arrow  struck.  He  was  never  easy 
again  tiU  he  found  peace  with  pardon  of  his  sins.  He  would  have  been  glad  to 
thank  his  modest  unknown  benefactor.  So  he  went  forth  along  the  same  path  for 
many  a  useless  day.  Years  afterwards,  he  saw  him  almost  in  the  identical  spot. 
"I  know  the  Father  now,"  he  said,  with  sweet,  grave  greeting.  IV.  In  the  peace- 
offering  there  was  inculcated  a  spirit  of  lively  jot.  We  fiud  this  in  the  very 
unusual  ceremony  of  waving  a  portion  of  the  sacrifice  in  th^  air.  There  is  no 
explanation  given  of  this ;  what  could  it  have  meant  but  the  holding  up  of  one's 
whole  heart  in  the  offering  in  the  full  sight  of  God?  It  makes  us  think  of  the 
significant  gesture  of  courtesy  the  world  over,  the  swing  of  one's  hand  when  his 
wish  is  keen  and  his  happy  heart  longs  still  to  send  it  aloft,  wbile  the  distance  is 
too  far  for  speech.  A  Christian,  waving  the  offering  of  his  gratitude  before  God, 
ought  to  be  the  happiest  being  on  all  the  earth.  V.  In  the  peace-offering  there  was 
inculcated  a  spirit  of  confident  supplication.  Near  a  hundred  years  after  this, 
it  is  recorded  ( Judg.  xxi.  4)  that  the  men  of  Israel,  "  bewailing  the  desolation  of 
Benjamin,"  offered  "burnt-offerings  and  peace-offerings"  upon  the  same  altar. 
That  is  to  say,  they  mingled  their  prayers  with  gifts  of  ai^propriate  penitence.  So 
again,  after  a  disastrously  lost  battle  (Judg.  xx.  26).  And  even  down  in  David's 
time,  almost  five  hundred  years  later,  the  same  conjunction  of  the  two  sacrifices  is 
to  be  observed.  He  stayed  the  plague  by  his  penitence  in  a  burnt-offering,  and  he 
received  relief  in  answer  to  his  prayer  in  a  peace-offering  (2  Sam.  xxiv.  25). 
Nothing  can  be  more  attractive  than  this  artless  trust  in  the  Divine  mercy.  "  To 
give  thanks  for  grace  already  received  is  a  refined  way  of  begging  for  more."  VI. 
Finally,  in  the  peace-offering  there  was  inculcated  a  spirit  of  affectionate 
SOLICITUDE.  {C.  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Thank-ojferiiifjs,  voios,  and  freewill-offerings  : 
— It  is  easy  to  connect  the  special  characteristics  of  these  several  varieties  of  the 
peace-offering  with  the  great  Antitype.  So  may  we  use  Him  as  our  Thank-offering  ; 
for  what  more  fitting  as  an  expression  of  gratitude  aud  love  to  God  for  mercies 
received  than  renewed  and  special  fellowship  with  Him  through  feeding  upon 
Christ  as  the  slain  Lamb  ?  So  also  we  may  thus  use  Christ  in  our  vows  ;  as  when, 
supplicating  mercy,  we  promise  and  engage  that  if  our  prayer  be  heard  we  will 
renewedly  consecrate  our  service  to  the  Lord,  as  in  the  meiil-offering,  aud  anew 
enter  into  hfe-giving  fellowship  with  Him  through  feeding  by  faith  on  the  flesh  of 
the  Lord.  And  it  is  beautifully  hinted  in  the  permission  of  the  use  of  leaven  in 
this  feast  of  the  peace-offering,  that  while  the  work  of  the  believer,  as  presented 
to  God  in  grateful  acknowledgment  of  His  mercies,  is  ever  affected  with  the  taint 
of  his  native  corruption,  so  that  it  cannot  come  upon  the  altar  where  satisfaction  is 
made  for  sin,  yet  God  is  graciously  pleased,  for  the  sake  of  the  great  Sacrifice,  to 
accept  such  imperfect  service  offered  to  Him,  and  make  it  in  turn  a  blessing  to 
us,  as  we  offer  it  in  His  presence,  rejoicing  in  the  work  of  our  hands  before 
Him.  But  there  was  one  condition  without  which  the  Israelite  could  not  have 
communion  with  God  in  the  peace-offering.  He  must  be  clean ;  even  as  the 
flesh  of  the  peace-offering  must  be  clean  also.  There  must  be  in  him  nothing 
•which  should  interrupt  covenant  fellowship  with  God ;  as  nothing  in  the  type 
■which  should  make  it  an  unfit  symbol  of  the  Antitype.     (S.   H.  Kellogg,  D.D.) 


CHAP,  vn.]  LEVITICUS.  115 

Why  the  laio  of  the  peace-offering  is  given  last  of  all : — It  is  interesting  to 
observe  that,  although  the  peace-offering  itself  stands  third  in  order,  yet  "  the 
law  "  thereof  is  given  us  last  of  all.  This  circumstance  is  not  without  its  import. 
There  is  none  of  the  offerings  in  which  the  communion  of  the  worshippsr  is  so 
fully  unfolded  as  in  the  peace-offering.  In  the  burnt-offering  it  is  Christ  offering 
Himself  to  God.  In  the  meat-offering  we  have  Christ's  perfect  humanity. 
Then,  passing  on  to  the  sin-offering,  we  learn  that  sin,  in  its  root,  is  fully  met. 
In  the  trespass-offering  there  is  a  full  answer  to  the  actual  sins  in  the  life.  But 
in  none  is  the  doctrine  of  the  communion  and  worship  unfolded.  The  latter 
belongs  to  "the  peace-offering";  and  hence,  I  believe,  the  position  which  the  law 
of  that  offering  occupies.  It  comes  in  at  the  close  of  all,  thereby  teaching  us  that, 
when  it  becomes  a  question  of  the  soul's  feeding  upon  Christ,  it  must  be  a  full 
Christ,  looked  at  in  every  possible  phase  of  His  life.  His  character.  His  Person, 
His  work.  His  offices.  And,  furthermore,  that,  when  we  shall  have  done  for  ever 
with  sin  and  sins,  we  shall  delight  in  Christ,  and  feed  upon  Him  throughout  the 
everlasting  ages.  It  would,  I  believe,  be  a  serious  defect  in  our  study  of  the 
offerings  were  we  to  pass  over  a  circumstance  so  worthy  of  notice  as  the  above. 
If  "the  law  of  the  peace-offering"  were  given  in  the  order  in  which  the  offering 
itself  occurs,  it  would  come  in  immediately  after  the  law  of  the  meat-offering ; 
but,  instead  of  that,  "  the  law  of  the  sin-offering,"  and  "  the  law  of  the  trespass- 
offering  "  are  given,  and  then  "the  law  of  the  peace-offering"  closes  the  entire. 
{C.  H.  Mackintosh.)  "  Shall  be  eaten  the  same  day  that  it  is  offered  "  : — The  priest 
that  sprinkled  the  blood  was  to  eat  the  pieces  of  this  peace-offering  the  same 
day  that  it  was  offered.  Some  say  this  rule  prevented  covetousness  arising  in 
the  priests ;  no  one  had  it  in  his  power  to  hoard  up.  Others  say  this  rule  was 
fitted  to  promote  brotherly  love ;  for  he  must  call  together  his  friends,  in  order 
to  have  it  all  finished.  But  these  uses  are  only  incidental.  The  true  uses  lie 
much  nearer  the  surface.  Israel  might  hereby  be  taught  to  offer  thanksgiving 
while  the  benefit  was  still  fresh  and  recent.  Besides  this,  and  most  specially, 
the  offerer  who  saw  the  priest  cut  it  in  pieces  and  feast  thereon,  knew  thereby 
that  God  had  accepted  his  gift,  and  returned  rejoicing  to  his  dwelling,  like  David 
and  his  people,  when  their  peace-offerings  were  ended,  at  the  bringing  up  of  the 
ark  (2  Sam.  vi.  17-19).  The  Lord  took  special  notice  of  this  free,  spontaneous 
thank-offering,  inasmuch  as  He  commanded  it  to  be  immediately  eaten,  thus 
speedily  assuring  the  worshipper  of  peace  and  acceptance.  The  love  of  our  God 
is  too  fuU  to  be  restrained  from  us  one  moment  longer  than  is  needful  for  the 
manifestation  of  His  holiness.     (A.  A.  Bonar.) 

Vers.  19-21.  That  soul  shall  be  cut  off. — Impurity  forbidden  : — The  gospel  is  a 
holy  feast.  It  cannot  be  shared  in  by  those  who  continue  in  their  impurities.  He 
that  would  enjoy  it  must  be  careful  to  depart  from  iniquity.  Only  "  the  meek  shall 
eat  and  be  satisfied  " ;  that  is,  such  as  humbly  surrender  themselves  to  God's 
requirements,  and  are  really  determined  to  forsake  all  known  sin.  There  is  a  morality 
in  religion,  as  well  as  faith  and  ecstasy.  Grnce  iloes  not  make  void  the  law.  And 
faith  without  works  is  a  dead  and  useless  faith.  Though  we  are  redeemed  by  blood 
and  justified  gratuitously  by  believing  iu  Christ,  yet  that  redemption  obligates  us 
just  as  much,  and  still  more,  to  a  life  of  virtue  and  moral  uprightness  than  the  law 
itself.  "  We  are  not  under  law,"  as  those  are  under  it  for  whom  Christ's  mediation 
does  not  avail ;  but  still  we  "  are  under  law  to  Christ,"  and  bound  through  Him  to 
a  practical  holiness,  the  pattern  of  which  He  has  given  in  His  own  person  and  life. 
If  His  blood  has  purged  us,  it  is  that  we  might  "serve  the  living  God."  If  "we 
are  God's  workmanship,  created  in  Christ  Jesus,"  it  is  "  unto  good  works,  which 
God  hath  before  ordained  that  we  should  walk  in  them."  A  pure  life  must  needs 
go  along  with  a  good  hope.  "Faith,  if  it  hath  not  works,  is  dead,  being  alone." 
"  A  good  tree  cannot  produce  evil  fruit."  And  for  a  man  to  believe  himself  an 
accepted  guest  at  the  gospel  feast  while  living  in  wUf  ul,  deliberate,  and  known  sin, 
is  a  miserable  antinomian  delusion.  The  plain  gospel  truth  upon  this  subject  is, 
that,  although  we  cannot  be  saved  by  our  works  alone,  we  certainly  dare  not  hope 
to  be  saved  without  them,  or  without  being  heartily  and  effectually  made  up  to  do 
our  best.  Wherever  grace  is  effective,  a  well-ordered  morality  must  necessarily 
follow.     (J.  A.  Seiss,  D  D.) 

Vers.  29-34.  Peace-oflferings. — The  believer's  peace  and  portion : — I.  To  have 
God  is  to  have  peace  :  for  He  is  the  God  of  peace ;  especially  as  revealed  and 


116  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  T  hap.  vh. 

given  U8  in  Christ.  But  what  is  given  may  be  enjoyed,  as  what  is  off.  red  may  be 
received.  Then  let  tlie  gift  be  accepted,  and  the  peace  you  desire  will  "keep  your 
heart  and  mind,"  and  this  in  all  circumstances.  The  winds  of  adversity  may  smite 
you,  and  the  waters  of  aiiliction  overwhelm  you  ;  but  as  God  is  greater  than  these, 
He  keeps  in  the  perfectness  of  peace  the  minds  tbat  are  stayed  upon  Him.  II.  Such, 
peace  is  found  in  Christ  alone  ;  not  in  anything  done  by  Hiin,  or  given  by  Him, 
but  in  His  personal  indwelling.  "He  is  our  peace."  The  knowledge  of  Him  will 
illuminate,  and  the  faith  of  Him  will  impart  security;  but  you  must  have  Himself 
to  have  the  portion  that  will  satisfy,  and  the  peace  you  need.  III.  Cut  not  only  is 
Christ  our  peace,  but  from  being  the  Atonee,  oub  Peace-offeking,  He  gives  Himself 
to  God  an  offering  and  a  sweet-smelling  savour,  and  then  to  us  who  trust  in  Him 
for  deliverance  and  satisfaction.  The  ancient  Jewish  sacrifice  of  the  peace-offering 
illustrates  this — 1.  The  mateiial  of  which  it  consisted  was  eitlier  a  bullock,  heifer, 
lamb,  or  goat ;  but  in  all  cases  it  was  to  be  "  without  blemish."  God  is  entitled  to 
the  best,  and  will  receive  nothing  less.  Yet  how  often  is  less  than  what  He  asks 
offered  Him !  That  they  who  so  act  by  Him  should  have  few  answers  to  their 
prayers,  and  little  satisfaction  in  their  religion,  can  be  wondered  at  by  no  one. 
2.  Peace-offerings  were  offered  by  persons  who,  having  obtained  forgiveness  of  sins, 
and  given  themselves  to  God,  were  at  peace  with  Him.  Friendship  with  God  was 
the  principal  idea  represented  therein.  3.  Only  a  part  of  the  ijeace-offering  was 
given  to  God ;  but  that  was  the  best,  the  part  to  which  He  was  entitled,  and  which 
He  claimed.  And  it  was  accepted,  as  was  shown  by  its  consumption  by  fire. 
Offer  Him  your  best,  and,  though  in  itself  small  and  poor,  He  will  receive  it,  and 
make  liberal  acknowledgment  of  His  approval  of  it.  4.  The  Israelite  was  not  at 
liberty  to  lay  the  fat  of  his  offering  at  random,  any  way,  or  anywhere,  on  the  altar. 
He  had  to  lay  it  "  upon  the  sacrifice  that  was  upon  the  wood  on  the  altar  fire." 
But  that  sacrifice  was  the  lamb  of  the  daily  offering,  which  typified  atonement  in 
its  fulness.  There,  God's  portion  of  the  peace-offering  was  laid,  and  accepted 
according  to  the  value  of  that  on  which  it  was  offered.  5.  Apart  from  Christ 
nothing  is  acceptable  to  Him.  What  you  bring  to  Him  may  be  your  best,  that 
which  He  asks  for,  and  what  is  in  itself  valuable  ;  but  unless  offered  on  the  ground 
of  atonement  it  is  not  received  by  Him.  6.  But  that  is  the  ground  within  every 
one's  reach,  and  on  which  everything  that  is  offered  to  God  may  be  presented. 
There  is  no  one  by  whom  the  name  of  Jesus  may  not  be  used  as  a  plea,  and  His 
sacrifice  urged  as  a  reason  for  acceptance.  IV.  The  peace-offering  expressed  the 
thought  of  COMMUNION  AND  SATISFACTION.  It  suppHcd  God  with  a  portion,  and  man 
also.  It  furnished  a  table  at  which  both  met,  and  where  they  had  fellowship  with 
one  another.  God  fed  on  the  fat,  and  man  on  the  shoulder  and  breast  (ver.  31) ; 
and  both  were  satisfied.  1.  But  we  have  Christ  here  ;  and  we  know  what  the 
Father  ever  found  in  Him ;  with  what  pleasure  He  ever  regarded  Him,  in  His 
righteousness  of  walk,  perfection  of  obedience,  and  beauty  of  character.  God  was 
supremely  pleased  with  aU  that  Jesus  was  and  did,  as  the  representative  of  Himself 
to  men,  and  the  ideal  man  to  tbe  world,  the  indicator  of  hoUness  and  the  honourer 
of  the  law.  Christ  was,  and  is  still.  His  well-beloved  and  His  joy.  2.  But  not  God 
alone  fed  on  the  peace-offering,  man  did  that  also ;  he  ate  of  the  breast  and  the 
shoulder.  In  the  antitype  these  typified  love  and  strength.  These,  believer,  are 
your  portion  in  Christ.  You  have  His  heart  of  love  and  His  shoulder  of  might — 
His  unchanging  affection  and  His  all-sustaining  power.  Enfolded  in  His  embrace 
and  enthroned  on  His  shoulder  of  strength,  you  occupy  a  position  where  evil  cannot 
harm  you,  nor  want  remain  unmet.  V.  No  Israelite  who  was  ceremonially 
unclean  was  permitted  to  partake  of  the  peace-offering,  or  share  with  God  in  the 
provision  it  supplied.  And  without  holiness  no  man  is  now  allowed  to  see  God. 
But  provision  is  made  both  for  man's  expiation  and  for  his  sanctifying  from  all 
impurity.  The  Cross  that  separates  from  the  guilt  of  sin  also  separates  from  its 
defilement.  Christ  is  thus  Sanctifier  as  well  as  Justifier.  He  "  gave  Himself  tor 
us,  that  He  might  redeem  us  from  all  iniquity,  and  purify  unto  Himself  a  peculiar 
people  "  (Tit.  ii.  14).  Thus  beautified  with  His  salvation,  you  will  find  a  place  in 
His  banqueting-house  of  love,  a  guest  at  the  Lord's  table,  and  satisfied  with  the 
food  of  which  you  partake  (John  vi.  57,  55,  35).  Are  you  satisfied  with 
Christ?  Does  He  appease  all  your  yeai-nings,  fulfil  your  every  desire,  give  you 
rest,  and  prove  your  peace  ?  "  My  beloved  is  mine,  and  I  am  His  "  (Song  of  Sol. 
ii.  IG).  His  resources  are  inexhaustible.  His  communications  are  continuous,  and 
His  glory  is  Divine.  (James  FlemuKj,  D.D.)  The  peace-offcrhifis  : — In  regard 
10  the  peace-oileriQgs,  the  waving  was  peculiarly  connected  with  the  breast,  which 


CHAP,  vii.]  LEVITICUS.  117 

is  thence  called  the  wave-breast ;  and  the  heaving  with  the  shoulder,  for  this  reason 
called  the  heave-shoulder.  When  those  parts  were  thus  presented  to  God  and  set 
apart  to  the  priesthood,  the  rest  of  the  llesh  was  given  up  to  the  offerer  to  be 
partaken  of  by  himself  and  th"se  he  might  call  to  share  and  rejoice  with  him. 
Among  these  he  was  instructed  to  invite,  beside  his  own  friends,  the  Levite,  the 
widow,  and  the  fatherless.  This  participation  by  the  offerer  and  his  friends,  this 
family  feast  upon  the  sacrifice,  may  be  regarded  as  the  most  distinctive  character- 
istic of  the  peace-offerings.  It  denoted  that  the  offerer  was  admitted  to  a  state  of 
near  fellowship  and  enjoyment  with  God,  shared  part  and  part  with  Jehovah  and 
His  priests,  had  a  standing  in  His  house,  and  a  seat  at  His  table.  It  was  therefore 
the  symbol  of  established  friendship  with  God,  and  near  communion  with  Him  in 
the  blessings  of  His  kingdom  ;  and  was  associated  in  the  minds  of  the  worshippers 
with  feelings  of  peculiar  joy  and  gladness — but  these  always  of  a  sacred  character. 
And  in  the  way  by  which  the  worshipper  attained  to  a  fitness  for  enjoying  these 
privileges — viz.,  through  the  life-blood  of  atonement — how  impressive  a  testimony 
was  borne  to  the  necessity  of  seeking  the  road  to  all  dignity  and  blessing  in  the 
kingdom  of  God  through  faith  in  a  crucified  Eedeemer.  (P.  Fairbairn,  D.D.) 
No  offering  by  proxy : — The  worshipper  could  not  do  the  work  by  proxy.  The  man 
had  to  go  for  himself,  and  present  the  sacrifice  himself,  and  lay  his  hand  upon  its 
head,  and  confess,  and  eat,  all  for  himself.  There  can  be  no  transfer  of  religious 
obligations — no  substitution  in  the  performance  of  religious  duties.  Of  aU  things, 
piety  is  one  of  the  most  intensely  personal.  It  is  the  intercourse  of  the  individual 
soul  with  its  Maker  ;  just  as  much  as  if  there  were  no  other  beings  in  existence.  As 
each  must  eat,  and  die,  and  be  judged  for  him  or  herself,  so  each  must  repent,  and 
believe,  and  be  religious  for  him  or  herself.  I  do  not  depreciate  the  importance  of 
social  relations,  compacts  and  organisations.  I  believe  that  religion  is  very  greatly 
dependent  upon  them.  Had  we  never  been  placed  in  a  Christian  land,  or  been 
related  to  Christian  parents  and  friends,  or  been  brought  into  contact  with  the 
Christian  Chui'ch,  we  never  could  have  become  Christians.  But  when  it  comes  to 
tliH  real  activities  and  experiences  of  piety,  they  relate  as  directly  to  ourselves  as 
individuals  as  if  we  alone  existed.  It  is  a  great  thing  to  have  pious  friends.  The 
prayers  of  a  godly  mother  are  like  soft  silken  cords  around  the  heart  of  her  son, 
which  draw  upon  and  check  him  in  his  wildest  wanderings  and  his  maddest 
passion.  The  rude  sailor  on  the  deck,  or  the  hardened  culprit  in  his  cell,  is  melted 
and  subdued  at  the  mere  remembrance  of  a  sainted  mother.  But,  though  that 
mother  be  as  good  as  the  Virgin  Mother  of  our  Lord — though  she  nightly  bathe  her 
pillow  with  tears  of  supplication  for  her  boy — it  shall  avail  nothing  to  the  salvation 
of  her  erring  child,  unless  he  himself  shall  move  to  turn  from  his  follies,  to  bend 
in  penitence,  and  to  submit  himself  to  God.  True  religion  demands  one's  personal 
and  individual  action — the  putting  forth  of  one's  own  hand.  No  man  or  angel  can 
do  it  for  us.  Preachers  and  pious  friends  may  prompt,  direct,  encourage,  and  pray 
for  us,  but  that  is  all.  They  can  do  nothing  more.  We  must  individually  and  for 
ourselves  believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  or  be  lost.  There  is  no  other  alternative. 
A  very  expressive  gesture  was  required  of  the  Jew  to  signify  all  this.  He  had  to 
put  his  hand  upon  the  head  of  his  sacrifice  when  he  presented  it.  He  thereby 
acknowledged  his  sin,  and  expressed  his  personal  dependence  upon  that  sacrifice.  The 
Hebrew  word  is  still  more  suggestive.  "  He  shall  lean  his  hand  upon  the  head  of 
the  offering."  It  is  the  same  word  used  by  the  Psalmist,  where  he  says,  "  Thy 
wrath  leaneth  hard  upon  me."  Sin  is  a  burden.  It  is  ready  to  crush  him  upon 
whom  it  is.  And  with  this  burden  the  sinner  is  to  lean  upon  his  sacrifice  for  ease. 
He  could  not  lean  with  another  man's  hand  ;  he  must  use  "  his  own  hand."  The 
ceremonial  worshipper  used  the  outward  hand ;  we  are  to  use  the  hand  of  the  soul, 
■which  is  faith.     {J.  A.  Seiss,  D.D.) 

Vers.  37,  38.  This  Is  the  law  ...  to  olTer  their  oblations. — The  gospel  of  the 
sacrifices : — I.  Theke  was  a  Divine  institution  and  command  of  God,  fob  the 
OFFERINGS  AND  SACEiFiCES  WHICH  WEEE  UNDER  THE  LAW.  1.  An  offering  in  general 
is  anything  presented  to  the  Lord  to  become  peculiarly  His,  and  to  be  typical  of 
Christ  and  gospel  mysteries.  2.  The  legal  offerings  were  set  apart  for  God,  with 
respect  to  Christ  and  His  great  sacrifice  and  offering  up  of  Himself  unto  God  for 
US.  3.  Some  have  distinguished  them  into  three  sorts.  (1)  Such  as  were  offered 
at  the  brazen  altar,  or  the  altar  of  burnt-offering,  which  represented  the  death  and 
sufferings  of  Jesus  Christ.  (2)  Such  as  were  offered  in  the  sanctuary,  more  near 
to  the  Holy  of  Holies,  viz.,  the  shewbread  and  the  incense  at  the  altar  of  incense ; 


118  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  viii. 

■which  had  respect  to  His  intercession  for  us  at  the  throne  of  grace,  in  the  virtue 
and  by  the  merit  of  that  sacrifice  which  He  before  had  shed  and  offered  up.  (3) 
Such  as  were  offered  in  the  Holy  of  Holies  ;  which  represented  the  full  attainment 
of  the  ends  of  both  the  former,  viz.,  onr  full  access  unto  and  communion  with  God 
through  the  influence  both  of  the  death  and  oblation  as  hkewise  of  the  prayers  and 
intercession  of  Christ  tor  us.  4.  The  Siicrifices  that  were  offered  at  the  brazen 
altar  are  commonly  distributed  into  two  sorts — sacrifices  of  expiation,  and  sacrifices 
of  thanksgiving.  It  is  the  former  sort  whereof  the  text  speaks.  (1)  These  pro- 
pitiatory sacrifices  were  offerings  most  holy  to  the  Lord;  for  atonement,  or  for 
appeasing  of  His  wrath  ;  by  the  destruction  of  tbe  sacrifice  ;  to  shadow  forth  tbe 
true  atonement  and  expiation  of  sin,  by  the  deatl)  of  Jesus,  and  our  reconciliation 
to  and  communion  with  God  through  Him.  (2)  For  further  rules  of  illustration, 
take  these  projiositions — ((/)  llie  institution  of  sacrifices  was  presently  after  th<i 
sin  and  fall  of  man ;  but  the  renewed  institution  and  further  direction  and 
regulation  of  them  was  by  Moses  unto  Israel,  (b)  In  this  renewed  institution  and 
regulation  of  their  offeiings  and  sacrifices,  there  were  sundry  adjuncts  and  cere- 
monies, some  whereof  were  required  and  some  severely  forbidden  to  be  added  to 
them,  all  which  were  mystical  and  significant,  i.  Adjuncts  required.  Saciifices 
to  be  offered  only  at  this  one  altar.  Salt.  Music.  Incense.  Many  ceremonious 
actions,  ii.  Adjuncts  forbidden.  In  general,  any  conformity  or  compliance  with 
the  pagans  in  their  rites  and  ceremonies.  In  particular,  leaven  and  honey,  (c) 
The  occasions  upon  which  they  were  to  be  offered,  i.  When  under  guilt  of  sin. 
ii.  For  the  obtaining  of  any  needful  mercy,  iii.  To  testify  their  joy  and  thankful- 
ness for  mercies  received.  iv.  In  the  instituted  seasons  of  them.  II.  The 
SACBiFiCES  OF  PROPITIATION  UNDER  THE  LAW,  may  be  referred  to  these  six  kinds  or 
sorts — burnt-offering,  meat-offering,  peace-offering,  sin-offering,  trespass-offering, 
and  offering  of  consecrations.  1.  There  were  some  things  in  which  these  all 
agreed.  (1)  They  were  all  offered  at  the  brazen  altar.  (2)  They  were  all  holy  of 
holinesses.  (3)  They  were  all  offerings  made  by  fire.  (4)  They  were  all  propitiatory. 
2.  The  difference  consisted — (1)  Partly  in  the  different  matter  of  them.  An  ox 
or  a  sheep  in  some ;  flowers  and  wine  in  others.  (2)  Partly  in  the  particular  ends 
and  designs  and  occasions  of  them.  (3)  Principally  in  the  different  ceremonies 
accompanying  them.  Lessons :  1.  Keep  close  to  the  rule  of  Divine  institution 
in  matters  of  worship.  2.  See  the  worth  and  value  of  the  sacrifice  of  Jesus 
Christ,  and  the  necessity  of  it,  for  the  justificart.ion  and  salvation  of  lost  sinners. 
(S.  Mather.) 


CHAPTER  VIIL 


Vers.  2-30.  Sanctified  Aaron  .  .  .  and  Ms  sons. — Anron  and  his  consecration : — 
The  chapter  before  us  gives  a  description  of  the  ceremonies  by  which  the  priests 
■were  consecrated  and  formally  inducted  into  their  high  ofiice.  These  ceremonies 
were,  for  the  most  part,  the  same  for  Aaron  and  his  sons  ;  but  it  is  the  case  of  the 
high  priest  more  particularly  that  I  propobe  to  present  now.  The  case  of  the 
common  priests  is  reserved  for  another  occasion.  I.  Fixing  attention,  then,  upon 
Aaron,  as  about  to  be  set  apart  for  the  high  priesthood,  the  first  thing  I  notice  is 
THE  PUBLICITY  WITH  WHICH  THE  CONSECRATION  WAS  PEKFOKMED.  The  whule  Congrega- 
tion of  Israel  had  to  be  gathered  together  to  witness  the  solemn  transaction.  The 
creation  of  so  high  an  officer  for  the  whole  people  r.  quired  to  be  done  in  open  day- 
light and  in  the  view  of  all  concerned.  And  the  scene  jjresented  an  imposing 
spectacle.  But,  through  this  scene  in  the  Hebrew  camp,  I  ascend  at  once  to  the 
contemplation  of  a  more  glorious  spectacle.  There  rises  up  before  me,  in  awful 
grandeur,  the  mount  of  Almighty  Holiness.  Around  it,  in  serried  order.-,  lie  the 
princedoms  and  piincipalities  of  heaven.  Myriads  of  holy  ones,  who  looked  on 
when  the  world  was  made,  stand  in  compact  throngs  to  watch  in  solemn  silence  the 
deveb'pment  of  that  new  thought  which  has  b  'tn  tlirown  into  their  celestial  con- 
templations. The  four-and-twenty  elders,  with  their  crowns  of  gold  glittering  in  the 
sublime  effulgence  of  the  great  white  throne,  wait  in  impressive  seriousness  ;  when 
out  upon  the  glassy  sea,  spanned  by  emerald  bows,  and  radiant  in  jewelry  of  God- 
head, steps  the  blessed  Son,  saying,  "Lo!  I  come  to  do  Thy  will,  0  God!"  "I 
will  redeem  them  from  death  :  I  will  ransom  them  from  the  power  of  the  grave  !  " 


CHAP,  viii.]  LEVITICUS.  119 

and  the  Father  from  His  everlasting  seat  lifts  up  His  hand  in  solemn  oath  and  says, 
"  Thou  art  a  priest  for  ever  after  the  order  of  Melchisedek !  "  II.  The  first  thing 
to  be  done  after  the  appearance  of  Aaron  before  the  congregation  as  the  designated 
priest,  was  to  wash  him  with  water.  It  was  meant  to  impress  the  idea  of  cleanness 
in  him  who  was  to  act  as  an  attorney  between  man  and  his  Maker.  And  Aaron  in 
his  outward  purification  shows  us  our  great  High  Priest  in  the  sublime  purity 
which  He  brought  to  His  mediation  work.  Jesus  "  was  holy,  harmless,  unJefiled, 
separate  from  sinners."  It  was  partly  in  token  of  this  pureness  and  separation  that 
John,  as  another  Moses,  bwptized  Him  in  Jordan  vale.  He  needed  no  cleansing. 
He  always  was  pure.  But,  to  indicate  this  purity,  and  to  enter  upon  His  priesthood 
in  the  regular  Avay,  He  consented  to  be  washed,  as  was  Aaron.  His  baptism  was 
part  of  His  priestly  installation.  III.  The  next  thing  done  for  Aaron's  consecration 
was  THE  PUTTING  OF  THE  SACRED  VESTMENTS  UPON  HIM.  The  priest  was  to  be  endowed 
with  grace  and  glory  as  well  as  purity.  He  had  to  be  clothed  in  righteousness,  and 
girt  fur  active  obedience.  He  needed  covering  for  those  shoulders,  which  were  to 
bear  the  people's  guilt,  and  for  that  brow,  which  was  to  be  lifted  up  in  confession. 
A  rich,  curious,  graceful,  and  imposing  suit  was  therefore  provided  for  him — a  su^t 
which  received  its  pattern  from  God,  and  was  made  according  to  specific  Divine 
directions.  A  glorious  High  Priest  is  Jesus.  Fold  upon  fold  of  glory  and  beauty 
encompass  Him.  With  round  upon  round  of  heavenly  excellency  and  celestial 
praise  is  He  girded.  Purity,  and  holiness,  and  power,  and  grace,  and  majesty,  and 
ten  thousand  indescribable  attractions,  cluster  upon  Him,  and  surround  Him  with 
flames  of  perfection  and  light,  which  only  the  most  costly  jewelry  can  typify,  which 
angels  bend  to  contemplate,  and  which  archangels  cannot  find  words  competent  to 
express.  IV.  The  next  thing  in  this  impressive  service  was  the  holt  chrism,  or 
THE  ANOINTING  WITH  OIL.  This  was  Hot  commou  oil,  but  the  sacred,  fragrant,  and 
costly  compound  used  only  in  solemn  consecrations.  It  was  "  precious  ointment 
on  the  head,  that  ran  down  upon  the  beard,  even  Aaron's  beard,  and  went  down  to 
the  skirts  of  his  garments,"  enveloping  him  in  aroma  as  grateful  to  the  smell  as 
his  garments  were  to  the  eye.  It  was  the  symbol  of  Divine  gifts  and  unction.  It 
pointed  to  that  solemn  chrism  or  chrhting  of  Jesus,  by  the  pouring  out  upon  Him 
of  the  Holy  Spirit  and  energy  of  God  "  without  measure."  V.  But  still,  Christ 
WAS  NOT  YET  "  MADE  PERFECT."  Moscs  had  yet  to  mark  and  sprinkle  Aaron  with  the 
blood  of  sacrifice  ;  and,  as  the  Captain  of  our  salvation,  Christ  had  to  be  "  made 
perfect  through  sufferings."  He  needed  to  have  upon  Him  the  marks  of  blood. 
And  as  He  was  both  the  sacrifice  and  the  priest.  He  had  to  give  Himself  to  death 
before  He  could  enter  the  Holy  Place  as  our  availing  intercessor.  We  read  that 
"  Moses  took  of  the  blood,  and  put  it  upon  the  tip  of  Aaron's  right  ear,  and  upon 
the  thumb  of  his  right  hand,  and  upon  the  great  toe  of  his  right  foot.  And  he  took 
of  the  anointing  oil,  and  of  the  blood  upon  the  altar,  and  sprinkled  it  upon  Aaron 
and  upon  his  garments."  It  was  the  picture  of  "  the  blood  of  Christ,  who  through 
the  Eternal  Spirit  offered  Himself  without  spot  to  God,"  marking  our  great  High 
Priest  with  the  final  touches  of  His  installation  as  the  Saviour  of  the  world.  Thus 
"  being  made  perfect.  He  became  the  author  of  eternal  salvation  unto  all  them  that 
obey  Him."    (J.  A.  Seiss,  D.D.)       The  spiritual  signification  ofAaron^s  anointing  : — 

1.  Some  will  have  it  to  signify  the  pow-er  of  consecration,  which  from  the  high  pi'iest 
was  dift'used  upon  others — as  the  oil  ran  down  from  the  head  to  the  inferior  parts. 

2.  Some  refer  it  to  the  graces  of  God's  Spirit  upon  ministers,  whereby  their  minis- 
tration is  made  acceptable  unto  God.  3.  Some  that  this  abundance  of  oil  poured 
upon  the  high  priest's  bead  would  have  thereby  expressed  that  he  should  excel 
utliais  in  the  fragrant  smell  of  good  works.  4.  But  it  is  better  referred  to  Christ, 
in  wliom  there  was  a  perfection  of  gifts,  who  is  said  to  be  anointed  with  the  oil  of 
gladness  above  His  fellows  ;  and  the  Evangelist  saith,  "  God  giveth  Him  not  the 
S)iirit  by  measure."  So  also  Kupertus  understandeth  it  for  the  fulness  of  grace  in 
Christ,  wbereof  all  have  received,  as  again  the  Evangelist  saith,  "  Of  His  fulness 
have  all  we  received,  and  grace  for  grace.''  5.  Hesychius  taketh  this  unction  also 
for  tlie  iucaruation  of  Christ,  who  was  anointed  in  His  blessed  flesh  with  the  Spirit 
of  grace.  He  anointeth,  as  He  is  God,  in  respect  of  His  Divine  nature,  and  is 
anointed  in  His  humanity.  God  the  Father  anointed  Him,  as  it  is  said  in  the 
Psalms,  "  God,  even  Thy  God,  bath  anointed  Thee  "  ;  and  the  Holy  Spirit  anointed 
Him,  as  the  Prupliet  saith,  "The  Spirit  of  the  Lord  God  is  upon  Me;  therefore 
He  hath  anointed  Me."  (A.  Willet,  D.D.)  The  consecration  of  Aaron's  son.i  : — 
I.  These  sons  of  Aaron,  as  well  as  Aaron  himself,  had  been  previously  and  Divinely 
CALLED  TO  BE  PRIESTS.  They  had  not  been  eiected  by  men,  but  designated  of  God.  Even 


120  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [c:iA.r.  viii. 

so  our  calling  and  election  to  be  priests  of  God  and  of  Christ  has  come  not  from  any 
workings  of  nature,  but  from  the  supernatural  interposition  of  Divine  grace.     God, 
by  His  word  and  Spirit,  has  come  forth,  and  nominated  every  one  of  us  to  the  high 
service  of  ministering  at  His  altar.     He  has  sent  forth  His  ministers  and  com- 
missioned them  to  set  apart  all  men  whom  they  can  reach,  to  be  His  priests.     II. 
Aaron  and  his  sons  obediently  assented  to  their  Divine  appointment.     Would  to 
God  that  I  could  say  as  much  for  all  who  are  called  to  be  priests  under  the  new  and 
better  covenant!     But  it  cannot  be  said.     Though  God  calls,  many  refuse.     They 
prefer  to  be  priests  of  sin  and  self  to  being  priests  of  God  and  of  Christ.     They 
choose  rather  to  minister  for  iniquity  and  Satan  than  minister  at  the  pure  altar  of 
Him  who  made  them.     III.  Aaron  and  his  sons  were  consecrated  according  to 
specific  Divine  directions.     As  Moses  proceeded  to  attend  to  it,  he  said,  "  This  is 
the  thing  which  the  Lord  commanded  to  be  done."     No  wisdom  or  ingenuity  of  man 
can  set  apart  priests  for  God.     No  rites  that  we  can  devise,  no  observances  which 
this  world's  sages  may  invent,  can  ever  induct  a  man  into  Christian  offices.     Not 
even  Moses  had  any  right  to  proceed  a  single  step,  or  to  do  one  thing,  except  as 
God  directed  him.     And  everything  which  God  commanded  had  to  be  done.     Nor 
is  it  different  now.     We  can  only  be  set  apart  as  priests  of  God  and  of  Christ  by  the 
ceremonies  which  God  Himself,  by  His  Son,  has  prescribed.     No  rites  of  human 
make,  no  decrees  of  councils,  or  commands  of  earthly  sovereigns,  in  Church  or 
State  ;  no  liturgies  ;  no  manual  impositions  ;  no  services,  however  solemn  or  digni- 
fied ;  nothing  can  avail  one  feather's  weight  toward  making  any  one  a  priest  of 
God.    His  own  clear  and  specific  appointments  alone  can  do  this.    It  must  be  done 
by  means  of  God's  own  unmutilated  prescriptions,  or  it  cannot  be  done  at  all.     IV. 
The  consecration  of  Aaron  and  his  sons  was  a  pdblic  and  open  transaction.    The 
command  of  God  was,  "  Gather  thou  all  the   congregation  together " ;  and  the 
history  says,  "  the  assembly  was  gathered  together  unto  the  door  of  the  Tabernacle 
of  the  congregation,"  around  the  spot  where  the  solemn  deed  was  done.     We  cannot 
secretly  be  inducted  into  the  holy  priesthood  to  which  the  gospel  calls  us.     If  there 
is  any  such  a  thing  as  secret  discipleship,  it  is  a  very  imperfect  discipleship.     Christ 
requires  of  us  to  confess  Him  before  men.     He  demands  of  us  an  open  and  unre- 
served following  of  Him.     He  exacts  submission  to  all  His  holy  ordmances,  some 
of  which  are  essentially  public.     And  if  we  are  not  willing  to  be  openly  known  as 
God's  consecrated  priests,  I  doubt  whether  our  secret  religion  is  of  a  sort  that  will 
avail  in  the  Great  Day.  We  come  now  to  consider  the  particulars  of  the  consecration 
itself.     1.  "  And  Moses  brought  Aaron  and  his  sons,  and  washed  them  with  water." 
This  was  the  first  item  in  the  service.     And  what  does  it  t>pify,  but  that  "  washing 
of  regeneration,  and  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  shed  on  us  abundantly,  through 
Jesus  Christ  our  Saviour"  ?     2.  "And  Moses  brought  Aaron's  sons,  and  put  coats 
upon  them,  and  girded  them  with  girdles,  and  put  bonnets  upon  them."     This  was 
the  second  item  in  the  service.     After  their  cleansing  they  had  to  be  clothed  with 
ornaments  "  for  glory  and  for  beauty."     We  must  be  pure,  and  we  must  be  holy. 
Our  native  deformities  must  all  be  covered.     We  must  "  put  on  the  Lord  Jesus 
Christ,"  and  be  arrayed  in  His  loveliness.     His  own  glorious  attirements  are  to  be 
reflected  in  ours.     3.  A  third  item  in  this  consecration  service,  was  the  leaning  of 
hands  upon  the  head  of  the  sin-offering.     Everywhere,  even  in  our  holiest  moods 
and  most  sacred  doings,  there  still  flashes  out  the  stern  and  humiliating  accusation 
— "  0  man,  thou  art  a  sinner  !     All  thy  goodness  is  but  abomination  apart  from 
Christ ! "    There  must,  therefore,  be  a  habitual  recurrence  of  our  minds  to  this  fact. 
Our  hand  must  be  ever  keist  on  the  brow  of  the  atoning  Lamb.     4.  "  And  Moses  put 
of  the  blood  upon  the  tip  of  their  right  ear,  and  upon  the  thumbs  of  their  right 
hands,  and  upon  the  great  toes  of  their  right  feet."     The  whole  person  is  visibly 
dedicated  to  the  Lord.     Every  faculty  and  power  is  consecrated  with  the  blood  of 
the  Lamb.     5.  "  And  Moses  took  of  the  anointing  oil,  and  of  the  blood  which  was 
upon  the  altar,  and  sprinkled  it  upon  Aaron,  and  upon  his  garments,  and  upon  his 
sons,  and  upon  his  sons'  garments  with  him."     Even  after  their  setting  apart  to  be 
priests,  they  needed  to  be  yet  further  sanctified  as  priests.     Not  only  themselves, 
but  their  very  garments  also,  were  marked  as  holy.     The  sacred  oil  was  emblematic 
of  the  gifts  and  graces  of  the  Holy  Spirit.     And  so  the  Holy  Ghost,  in  conjunction 
with  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  sanctifies  and  endows  us  for  holy  services.     Sprinkled 
with  these  sacred  elements — touched  with  moral  unction  and  constrained  by  the 
dying  love  of  Jesus,  we  become  equipped  for  duty,  and  qualified  "  to  show  forth  the 
praises  of  Him  who  hath  called  us  out  of  darkness  into  His  marvellous  light."     6. 
Sail  another  item  in  the  consecration  of  God's  ancient  priests  was  that  they  had 


CHAP.  VIII.]  LEVITICUS.  121 

to  eat  the  boiled  flesh  of  the  offered  lamb  with  unleavened  bread,  at  the  door  of  the 
Tabernacle.  Tiiis  boiled  lamb  of  course  typifies  the  Saviour  as  offered  for  our  sins. 
It  calls  to  mind  the  great  sufferings  which  He  eudaied  as  our  Substitute  and  Sacri- 
fice of  consecration.  And  now  that  He  is  thu>  made  an  offering  for  our  sancti- 
fication,  it  appertains  to  us  to  put  forth  our  hands,  and  eat  of  that  offering,  as  the 
life  and  feast  of  our  souls.  He  is  the  bread  oi  life,  and  upon  that  bread  we  must 
feed  to  be  God's  priests.  7.  Aaron  and  his  sons,  having  attended  to  these  several 
particulars,  were  further  required  to  "abide  at  the  door  of  the  Tabernacle  day  and 
night  seven  days,"  before  they  could  enter  fully  upon  the  high  oflices  to  which  tbey 
had  been  consecrated.  The  number  seven  is  very  often  used  in  the  Scriptures  as 
the  type  of  perfection  and  completeness.  The  consecration  period  was  a  complete 
period — a  full  measure  of  time.  It  was  not  only  the  fact  of  completeness,  but  a 
duration  through  which  this  fact  was  brought  out.  We  are  not  only  to  be  completely 
consecrated  to  a  complete  spiritual  priesthood,  but  it  is  to  take  a  complete  period  of 
time  in  which  this  completeness  is  to  be  effected.  We  must  yet  wait  the  revolution 
of  a  complete  period  before  we  can  come  into  the  Holy  of  Holies.  That  com- 
plete period  can  be  nothing  short  of  our  entire  earthly  life.  It  is  necessary  to  com- 
plete our  glorious  installation  as  priests  of  God  and  of  Christ.  And  it  will  soon  be  over. 
It  is  only  "  seven  days  " — the  shortest  of  all  the  complete  periods  of  human  reckoning. 
Bef  01  e  we  think  of  it,  it  will  have  passed.  For  some  of  us,  much  of  it  has  already  gone. 
(Ibid.)  The  calling  of  the  priests  : — I.  The  peiestlt  calling.  1.  Intimate  access 
•with  God.     2.  Fullest  knowledge  of  God.    3.  Holy  service  for  God.    II.  A  calling 

OF  HIGHEST  HAPPINESS  AND  PEIVILEGE.  III.  A  CALLING  HAK5I0NI0US  WITH  A  CHRIS- 
TIAN'S   SACRED    INSTINCTS    AND    ENERGIES.         IV.     A     CALLING    INTO    A    WONDROUS    LIFE. 

(ir.  H.  Jellie.)  Priests   versus  priestism  : — I.   Priests  ministered  in  Israel 

WITH  THE  HIGH  SANCTION  OF  GoD.  He — 1.  Created  the  office,  and  defined  its 
solemn  functions,  which  were  of  the  loftiest  character.  2.  Invested  the  person  of 
the  priest  with  splendour,  majesty,  and  beauty,  to  command  admiration  and  awe. 
3.  Determined  the  mediatorial  intervention  of  the  priest  between  man  and  God ; 
set  one  man  in  this  august  and  solemn  supremacy  among  his  fellows.  4.  Kef  used 
any  other  than  the  priest  to  come  direct  to  His  altar  and  stand  in  His  most  holy 
presence.  II.  The  priesthood  was  a  provisional  arrangement  anticipatory  of 
Christ's  glorious  offices.  1.  In  the  personal  excellence  and  piety  of  individual 
priests,  the  faultless  being  always  chosen,  Christ's  perfect  humanity  was  fore- 
shadowed. 2.  In  the  splendid  attire  with  which  the  priests  were  adorned,  Christ's 
majestic  attiibutes  and  Divine  qualities  were  represented.  3.  In  the  imposing 
ministries  before  and  within  the  veil,  Christ's  offices  as  atoning  and  mediating 
Priest  were  pourtrayed.  4.  In  the  sacred  and  exclusive  privileges  the  priests 
enjoyed,  Christ's  entire  acceptableness  and  God's  great  delight  in  Him  were  impres- 
sively and  constantly  intimated.     III.  Chris  iian  ministers  inherit  many  of  the 

MOST    august   and    RESPONSIBLE    SPIRITUAL   FUNCTIONS    OF    THE    PRIESTHOOD.       1.    They 

have  no  priestly  calling,  yet  are  as  distinctly  commissioned  and  Divinely  consecrated 
to  their  work.  2.  Their  solemn  trust  places  them  in  highest  ministries  and  respon- 
sibilities as  mediators  between  God  and  human  souls.  3.  The  Christian  Church  is 
commanded  to  maintain  them  in  their  ministry  and  esteem  them  very  highly  in  the 
discharge  of  their  sacred  commission.  4.  As  bishops  and  shepherds  of  Christ's 
flock  they  are  put  in  trust  with  the  souls  of  their  people  ;  "  they  watch  for  souls." 
IV.  Modern  priestliness  perverts  and  prostitutes  the  sacked  office  of  the 
MINISTRY  in  the  CHRISTIAN  Chueoh.  1.  Its  oflcusive  assumption  of  spiritual 
supremacy  is  in  defiance  of  Christ's  law  of  equality  and  brotherhood  among 
believers.  2.  Its  officious  intrusion  between  God  and  men  is  an  affront  to  the  un- 
fettered liberty  and  right  of  every  one  to  seek  God  for  himself,  and  is  an  infringe- 
ment upon  the  mediatorship  of  Jesus  which  always  avails  for  all.  3.  Its  daring 
pretensions  of  altar  ministries  is  a  perversion  of  New  Covenant  doctrines ;  neither 
altar  nor  sacrificial  rites  remaining  now  within  the  Church.  4.  Its  appalling  mis- 
leading of  seduced  souls,  who  rest  on  such  beguiling  priestliness  for  spiritual 
safety,  instead  of  wholly  trusting  Christ,  is  sufficient  to  fill  Christian  hearts  witu 
indignation  and  to  cover  the  very  name  of  "  priest  "  with  anathemas.  Theru 
is  now  no  priest  but   Jesus   Christ.     [Ibid.)  Qualifications   and  ministries  of 

God's  priests  ; — I.  Consecration  wholly  the  work  of  another.  II.  Perfec  i 
cleanness  the  initial  requirement.  Ill,  Investiture  in  holy  attire.  To 
Moses  it  had  before  been  said,  "  Thou  shalt  make  holy  garments  for  Aaron  thy 
brother,  for  glory  and  beauty."  Those  garments  had  been  made.  1.  All  the  adorn- 
ments of  grace  have  been  prepared  for  us  ;  wait  in  readiness  for  us.     2.  A  moment 


122  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  viii. 

of  intenfsest  joy  to  Moses  when  he  brought  forth  those  prepared  garments  for  adorn- 
ment. Nor  less  to  Chi-ist  when  He  clothes  the  soul  "  with  the  garments  of  salva- 
tion." 3.  Attire  symbolic  of  sacred  qualities.  They  were  of  blue,  purple,  scarlet, 
fine-twined  linen,  with  connecting  chains  and  ouches  or  settings  of  gold,  indi- 
cating :  (1)  Heavenliness  of  character  (typified  by  the  blue).  (2)  Purity  (typified 
by  the  white  linen).  (3)  Official  dignity  (typ  fied  by  the  scarlet  and  purple).  (4) 
Divine  power  of  sustaining  others  (typified  by  the  chains  and  ouches  of  gold) ; 
gold  being  used  in  the  Tabernacle  as  a  symbol  of  Deity.  IV.  Adorned  with  thb 
CROWN  OF  HOLINESS.  On  his  head  was  placed  "  the  holy  crown,  the  golden  plate." 
(1)  A  "crown"  is  the  symbol  of  kingship;  it  dechaes  the  royalty  of  consecrated 
souls,  "kings  unto  God."  (2)  Holiness  inscribed  on  the  crown:  it  declares  that 
the  highest  dignity  of  man  is  moral  ictituile,  spiritual  sanctity.  That  pbite  bore 
the  inscription,  "  Holiness  to  the  Lord."  It  implied  that — 1.  The  vindication  of 
that  "  holiness"  was  the  avowed  object  of  his  priestly -service.  2.  Bearing  that 
inscription  on  his  brow  among  the  people,  during  his  priestly  ministries,  asserted 
that  God's  holiness  had  been  and  was  being  adequately  maintained.  3.  Entering 
into  God's  presence  with  that  insciiption  was  evidence  that  God  acknowledged  the 
fact  of  His  holiness  being  maintained.  V.  The  badge  or  jiediatorship.  "Breast- 
plate." Bearing  others'  names  is  the  crowning  glory  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  VI. 
Spiritual  anointing.  That  "  holy  oil  "  is  the  "  unction  from  the  Holy  One."  1. 
The  plenitude  of  the  Spirit ;  and- — 2.  The  graces  of  the  Spirit ;  and — 3.  The  efficient 
power  of  the  Spirit,  are  essential  to  a  priestly  life  of  sanctity  and  service.  VII. 
Qualification  based  on  sachifice.  1.  The  scene  suddenly  changes,  and  the 
gloriously  attired  and  anointed  priest  stands  as  a  sinner  by  the  sin-offering.  For 
sin  must  be  expiated  even  for  the  most  privileged  souls.  (1)  Its  blood  sprinkled 
upon  the  altar  indicated  that  appeasement  was  demanded  or  ever  they  could 
approach  that  altar  in  ministry.  (2)  Its  body  being  consumed  without  the  camp 
declared  what  their  doom  would  be  did  justice  exact  its  due.  (3)  But  the  blood 
on  the  altar  and  accepted,  announced  complete  propitiation  and  acceptance.  (4) 
While  the  choice  inward  parts  consumed  on  the  altar  fire,  testified  that  God's 
claim  of  inward  perfectness  was  satisfied.  2.  The  burnt-sacrifice  summoned  them 
to  absolute  self-devotion ;  for  God  will  receive  no  less  in  any  who  avowedly  become 
His.  "  His  zeal  must  consume  us."  3.  But  in  the  consecration-offering  they 
yielded  themselves  up  to  God  with  gratitude  and  gladness :  as  those  who  reach 
towards  the  self-devotion  of  Jesus — "  I  delight  to  do  Thy  will ;  yea,  Thy  law  is 
within  my  heart."  VIII.  Applied  sacrificial  grace.  "  Moses  took  the  blood  of 
it,  ai  d  put  it  upon  the  tip  of  Aaron's  ear,"  cfec.  1.  The  value  of  sacrifice,  which 
had  before  bten  accepted  for  them,  was  now  applied  to  them.  2.  The  meaning 
of  sacrifice,  als  >,  was  now  urged  upon  them  :  all  life  laid  out  for  God,  and  in  His 
service.  IX.  Symbolic  offerings  presented  to  God.  1.  Inward  perfectness : 
perfectness  in  the  reins,  and  in  the  heart ;  indicating  the  bringing,  on  their  part, 
into  God's  employ  of  their  purest  affections,  and  highest  virtues,  and  noblest 
intelligence.  2.  Outward  developed  perfectness  of  chaiacter;  represented  in  the 
unleavened  anointed  bread  that  constituted  the  meat-offering.  M  is  only  in 
Christ's  perfectness — a  perfectness  to  be  appropriated  by  us — that  we  can  present 
such  offerings  before  God.  X.  Sign  of  Divine  acceptance.  1.  Being  sprinkled 
by  the  blood  which  first  had  been  sprinkled  and  accepted  upon  the  altar  conveyed 
the  fact  that  Go<i  received  their  cotn-ecration  :  that  themselves,  their  office,  and  all 
its  various  functions  were  placed  under  the  sanction  and  the  acceptableness  of  the 
blood.  2.  The  sprinkling  of  the  holy  anointing  oil  symbolically  connected  the 
Holy  Spirit's  grace  with  those  offices  into  which  God  was,  and  is,  pleased  to  call 
His  people.  3.  Their  feeding  upon  the  sacrifice  signified  the  communication  of 
strenMth,  for  we  are  nourished  by  food ;  and  suggested  the  fellowship  now  estab- 
lished between  them  and  God.  (Ibid.)  Clothed  and  anointed  for  service  : — 
Moses  having,  in  obedience  to  the  Lord's  command,  gathered  all  the  congregation 
to  the  door  of  the  Tabernacle  (vers.  8,  4),  "  brought  Aaron  and  his  sous,  and — I. 
Washed  them  with  water  "  (ver.  G).  We  must  bear  in  mind  that  in  this  ceremonial 
Aaron  is  made  to  be  representatively  what  Christ  is  intrinsically,  while  Aaron's 
sons  represent  the  Church,  as  she  is  in  Christ.  This  ceremonial  was  "  to  hallow," 
sanctify,  or  set  apart — Aaron  and  sons  "to  minister  unto"  the  Lord  "in  the 
priest's  office"  (Exod.  xxix.  1).  Jesus,  "  sanctified  "  of  Father  (John  x.  36;  Heb. 
v.  4-6),  did  also  sanctify  Himself  for  His  people's  sake  (John  xvii.  17-19).  1. 
Aaron's  sons  must  be  "clean,"  to  "bear  the  vessels  of  the  Lord"  (Isa.  lii.  11). 
By  nature  all  are  "  as  an  unclean  ihiug  "  (Isa.  Ixiv.  6) ;  nor  can  any  wash  him- 


CHAP,  viii.]  LEVITICUS.  1C3 

self  (Jer.  ii.  22) ;  but  God  can  cleanse  the  vilest  (1  Cor.  vi.  9-11),  and  does  so  in 
His  grace  and  mercy.  Jesus  sanctifies  "  the  Church "  "  with  the  washing  of 
water  by  the  Word  "  (Eph.  v.  26  ;  John  xv.  3) ;  and  none  can  draw  nigh  to  God 
without  such  "washing"  (Heb.  x.  22;  Tit.  iii.  5).  2.  Clothed  (vers.  7-9).  In 
the  holy  garments  made  for  Aaron,  "  for  glory  and  for  beauty  "  (Exod.  xxviii.  2  ; 
see  Isa.  iv.  2,  marg.),  Christ  is  shadowed  forth  as  the  God-man,  Priest,  Saviour, 
King ;  able  to  meet  His  people's  every  need  for  time  and  for  eternity.  Moses  put 
on— II.  Aakon — 1.  The  coat.  The  Lord  clothes  (Isa.  Ixi.  10;  Zeeh.  iii.  4,  5). 
"Body,"  "prepared"  (Heb.  x.  5);  "the  Word  .  .  .  made  flesh"  (John  i.  14). 
2.  Girdle,  emblem  of  service  (John  xiii.  4 ;  Luke  xii.  37).  Jesus,  Servant 
(Isa.  xlii.  1;  xlix.  6;  liii.  11).  3.  Eobe ;  blue,  heavenly,  Jesus,  "the  Lord 
from  heaven."  There,  even  when  on  earth,  returned  thither;  will  come  from 
thence  (1  Cor.  xv.  47;  John  iii.  l.S ;  Mark  xvi.  19;  Phil.  iii.  20).  Heavenly  in 
nature,  character,  all.  Where  Jesus  is,  there  is  heaven.  4.  Ephod.  Same 
materials  as  glorious  inner  covering  of  Tabernacle.  (1)  Gold  and  blue,  betokening 
the  Divine  and  heavenly  Man  Christ  Jesus,  God  "  manifest  in  the  flesh  "  (John 
iii.  31;  1  Tim.  iii.  16  ;  Luke  i.  35).  (2)  White  and  scarlet.  Of  spotless  purity, 
and  obedient  unto  death  (Heb.  vii.  26 ;  Phil.  ii.  8).  (3)  Purple.  "  Kiug  of 
glory";  "King  eternal"  (Psa.  xxiv.  7-10 ;  1  Tim.  i.  17  ;  Zech.  ix.  9;  Luke  xix. 
34-38).  5.  Cudous  girdle,  Hke  ephod.  "  Righteousness  "  and  "  faithfuluess  "  of 
our  "  Great  High  Priest  "  (Isa.  xi.  5  ;  Heb.  iv.  14).  6.  Breastplate.  Jesus  bears 
His  people  on  His  heart,  proof  of  love.  He  loves  to  end  (John  xiii.  1).  "  Gave 
Himself"  for  Church,  and  now  appears  "in  the  presence  of  God  for"  His 
people  (Eph.  v.  25  ;  Heb.  ix.  24).  7.  Urim  and  Thummim  in  breastplate,  by 
which  the  mind  of  God  was  made  known.  Literally,  "  Lights  and  Perfections." 
Jehovah  Jesus,  in  the  midst  of  His  chosen  ones,  is  "  the  Light  "  and  outshining  of 
the  Father's  glory  (John  viii.  12 ;  Heb.  i.  3)  ;  the  Manifestation  of  His  love 
(1  John  iv.  9) ;  the  Declarer  of  His  mind  and  will  (John  i.  18).  8.  Mitre  and 
crown  (see  Zech.  iii.  5  ;  vi.  11,  13).  Essential  holiness  and  purity  of  our  High 
Priest  and  King,  who  bare  the  "  iniquity  of  the  holy  things "  of  His  people 
(Exod.  xxviii.  38  ;  Isa.  liii.  11).  Next  see— III.  Aaron's  sons  clothed  (ver.  13)  in 
coats,  girdles,  bonnets  "of  fine  hnen"  (Exod.  xxviii.  40;  xxxix.  8,  9,  27,  29). 
1.  Coats.  Putting  on  "the  Lord  .  .  .  Christ"  (Rom.  xiii.  14).  2.  Girdles. 
Serving  Him  (Col.  iii.  24 ;  Heb.  xii.  28).  3.  Fine  linen.  Death  and  resurrection 
with  quickened  "  seed  "  (1  Cor.  xv.  36  ;  John  xii.  24).  4.  Bonnets.  Mind,  intel- 
lect. A  "royal  priesthood"  purified.  Every  thought  brought  "into  captivity" 
(Eph.  iv.  23,24;  2  Cor.  x.  5).  5.  "For  glory  and  for  beauty"  (Exod.  xxviii. 
40)  ;  which  His  people  to  share  with  their  risen  Lord  (John  xvii.  10,  22;  Rom. 
viii.  30  ;  2  Cor.  iii.  13,  18;  Psa.  xc.  17;  Ezek.  xvi.  14) ;  as  they  shine  for  Him  and 
reflect  His  image ;  "  for  as  He  is,  so  are,"  &c.  (1  John  iv.  17).  6.  Woven. 
Righteousness  wrought  out  (Rom.  iii.  22,  25,  26 ;  Eph.  i.  20  ;  Psa.  cxxxii.  9  ; 
Rev.  xix.  8) ;  by  the  Head,  Christ,  who  directs  His  "members"  in  the  service  of 
God.  IV.  Anointed.  Moses  having  "  anointed  the  Tabernacle,  and  all  therein" 
(vers.  10-12),  where  Aan  n  was  to  minister,  as  type  of  Jesus,  "minister"  of 
"true  Tabernacle"  (Heb.  viii.  2) ;  then  "poured"  anointing  oil  on  Aaron's  head 
(Psa.  xxiii.  5 ;  cxxxiii.  2).  Here  Aaron  stood  alone,  nor  were  his  sons  clothed 
till  after  his  anointing.  Jesus,  holy  from  birth,  yet  anointed  for  service  (Luke 
iii.  21,  22).  "  God  anointed  Jesus,"  <fec.  (Acts  x.  38 ;  Luke  iv.  18) ;  "  above  " 
those  He  graciously  deigns  to  call  His  "fellows"  (Psa.  xlv.  7;  Heb.  i.  9).  He 
must  "  have  the  pre-eminence  "  (Col.  i.  18) ;  being  "  above  all,"  and  "  the  Head  " 
(Eph.  i.  21,  22).  Oil  poured.  "  God  giveth  not  the  Spirit  by  measure,"  &c. 
(John  iii.  34),  but  in  sevenfold  power  (Isa.  xi.  2,  Ixi.  1,  2  ;  Rev.  iii.  1) ;  for  service, 
death,  resurrection  (Acts  ii.  22,  iv.  27  ;  Heb.  ix.  14  ;  1  Pet.  iii.  18).  But  the  Spirit 
could  not  be  given  to  His  people  till  His  atoning  work  was  accoinplished  and 
Himself  "  glorified  "  (John  vii.  39).  Hence,  till  the  sacrifices  were  offeied,  Aaron's 
sons  were  not  anointed  (ver.  30).  Then,  together  with  Aaron,  because  Head  and 
"members"  one  (Heb.  ii.  11).  First,  blood  was  put  on  ear,  hands,  feet  (ver.  24), 
then  Moses  "sprinkled"  it  "upon  the  altar."  After  which,  following  the 
"wave-offering  "  (ver.  27) — typifying  resurrection  with  Christ — ','  Moses  took  of  the 
anointing  oil,  and  of  the  bloud  which  was  upon  the  altar,  and  sprinkled  "  upon 
them  and  upon  their  gaiments.  Oil  and  blood,  blood  and  oil  (Exod.  xxix.  21); 
significant  of  justification  and  sanctificaticn,  which  are  inseparably  connected 
(1  Cor.  vi.  11;  1  Pet.  i.  2).  Sealing  and  sanctifying  (Eph.  i.  13)  are  the  work  ot 
tiie  blessed  Trinity.     God  not  only  cleanses  and  clothes,  but  auuiuts  (Ezek.  xvi. 


124  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  viii. 

9,  10;  2  Cor.  i.  21,  22).  Here  see  in  type  the  sanctifying  power  of  Jesu's  blood 
shed  for  us,  and  Holy  Spirit's  work  within,  when  the  Father  draws  to  Jesus 
those  whom  He  has  given  Him  (John  vi.  37,  44,  4.5).  Thus,  behold  Aaron  and 
sons,  washed,  clothed,  anointed — V.  Consecrated,  or  set  apart  for  service  of  God. 
The  oneness  of  Christ  and  His  people  seen  in  Aaron  and  sons  laying  hands  on 
head  of  each  victim  (leaning  with  weight,  as  word  implies) ;  Jesus — Antitype 
of  offerings.  His  people  partakers  of  the  benefits  resulting  from  His  great 
work.  1.  Sin-olfering.  Pardon  and  justification.  2.  Burnt-offering.  Accep- 
tance and  worship.  3.  Eam  of  consecration.  Consecration  and  devotedness, 
all  in  and  through  Christ.  VI.  Filling  the  hand.  See  marginal  reading  of 
"  consecrate  "  (Exod.  xxviii.  41  ;  xxix.  9).  The  personal  reception  and  appro- 
priation of  the  Father's  Gift  of  love  (vers.  25-28  ;  2  Cor.  ix.  15),  even  Christ. 
His  rich  precionsness  (fat  and  inwards).  His  life  (cakes),  His  death  (ram  slain), 
His  strength  (shoulder).  "  All  things  are  yours  ;  and  ye  are  Christ's;  and  Christ 
is  God's  "  (1  Cor.  iii.  21-23) ;  and  all  given  back  to  God  as  burnt-offering,  "  a 
sweet-smeUing  savour"  (Eph.  v.  2  ;  Eom.  xii.  1).  VII.  Feeding  and  communion 
(vers.  31-36)  are  needed  to  maintain  the  life  given  and  consecrated  to  God.  No 
fitness  of  service  without.  Seven  days,  complete  cycle  of  time,  as  appointed  by 
God.  Some  would  rush  into  service  directly  the  heart— through  the  operation  of 
the  Holy  Spirit — has  opened  to  receive  Jesus;  but  ofttimts  God  sees  fit  to  give 
long  training.  Only  let  God  feed,  strengthen,  and  fit  for  the  service  to  which  He 
calls,  and  then  go  forth  in  His  strength.     (Lady  Beaujolois  Dent.)  Lessons  :  — 

1.  Of  the  office  of  the  law,  which  prepares  for  the  gospel.  2.  A  good  life  much 
available  unto  the  understanding  of  God's  Word.  8.  None  should  take  upon  them 
the  office  of  the  ministry,  but  thereunto  called.  4.  Without  the  knowledge  of  God, 
all  other  science  is  vain  and  unprofitable.  5.  No  laws  or  doctrine  to  be  brought 
into  the  Church,  but  by  warrant  from  God  in  His  Word.  6.  That  every  good  gift 
is  of  God,  and  that  we  can  do  nothing  of  ourselves.  7.  No  sacrifice,  sacrament, 
nor  priesthood  out  of  the  Church.     {A.   Willet,  D.D.)  The  separation  of  Aaron 

and  Ids  sons  : — We  are  already  familiar  with  the  use  that  has  been  made  of  separa- 
tion in  the  third  age  to  inculcate  the  absolute  necessity  of  holiness  in  order  to 
intercourse  with  God.  Abraham  was  separated  from  an  idolatrous  and  wicked 
world,  to  be  the  head  of  a  family  and  a  nation  that  should  be  holy  to  the  Lord ; 
and  accordingly,  in  comparison  with  the  heathen  world  Israel  as  a  whole  was  a 
priesthood,  as  is  set  forth  in  Exod.  xix.  6  :  "Ye  shall  be  unto  Me  a  kingdom  of 
priests  and  a  holy  nation."  Observe  now  how  the  same  principle  is  further  carried 
out.  From  the  entire  nation  one  tribe,  the  tribe  of  Levi,  is  set  apart  to  be,  above 
all  the  others,  holy  unto  the  Lord.  From  the  tribe  of  Levi,  one  family,  that  of 
Aaron,  is  set  apart  to  be,  above  all  the  other  families  of  the  tribe,  holy  unto  the 
Lord.  And  finally,  from  the  family  of  Aaron  a  single  individual,  the  high  priest, 
is  set  apart  to  be,  above  all  the  other  members  of  the  family,  holy  unto  the  Lord. 
The  washing  with  water  (ver.  6)  led  the  mind  still  farther  in  the  same  direction. 
The  effect  of  this  on  the  minds  of  the  people  may  perbaps  be  illustrated  in  this 
way  :  Suppose  you  wish  to  give  the  idea  of  perfectly  pure  water  to  some  person  who 
has  never  seen  it,  and  you  have  no  means  of  showing  him  the  genuine  article  ;  by 
taking  water  in  different  degrees  of  impurity,  and  leading  him  to  look  at  the  different 
specimens,  beginning  with  that  which  is  most  impure  and  going  on  to  that  which 
is  least,  you  will  at  all  events  set  his  mind  in  the  diiection  of  the  conception  which 
you  wish  him  to  attain.  And  in  tbe  same  way,  though  there  was  no  way  open  of 
showing  Israel  at  this  time  a  genuine  specimen  of  that  holiness  without  which  no 
man  can  see  the  Lord,  yet  by  these  successive  separations  of  officially  (or,  if  you 
choose,  artificially)  holy  persons,  the  mind  of  Israel  was  set  in  the  direction  of 
that  holiness  up  to  which  the  Lord  was  educating  them.  It  must  be  remembered 
that  they  had  the  moral  law  to  help  them  to  translate  the  symbolical  holiness  into 
the  reality,  of  which  it  was  the  mere  expression  in  language  addressed  to  tbe  eye. 
While  Aaron  and  his  sons  represented  Israel,  they  typified  Christ  and  His  Church. 
(J.  M.  Gibson,  D.D.)  Divine   institution  of  ministry  : — The  reasons  why  the 

Lord  thus  precisely  appointed  these  priests,  and  would  not  leave  it  to  every  man 
to  perform  this  office,  were  these  and  such  like.  1.  It  was  to  be  known  that 
not  every  man — no,  not  any  man  but  the  Man  Christ  Jesus  could  appease  God's 
wrath,  satisfy  His  justice,  and  take  away  the  sins  of  the  world,  reconciling  us 
to  God  and  putting  us  in  assurance  of  eternal  life.  This  could  not  be  figured 
out  better  than  by  secluding  all  the  whole  host  of  Israel  from  this  office  and 
choosing  but  Aaron  and  his  sons  as  types  of  Christ,  this  only  able  Priest,  and  there- 


CHAP,  vin.]  LEVITICUS.  125 

fore  they  only  were  chosen,  and  so  by  such  ordinance  the  majesty,  authority,  and 
(if  we  may  so  speak)  tlie  propriety  of  Christ's  office  resembled  and  shadowed.  2, 
God  was  ever  the  God  of  order,  decency,  and  comeliness,  and  therefore  in  His 
Church  would  have  all  things  done  accordingly,  not  enduring  any  to  be  an  invader 
of  another  man's  right,  an  intruder  of  himself  into  another  man's  office,  and  a 
busybody  out  of  rule,  out  of  order.  Certain  men,  therefore,  are  appointed,  and  they 
only  shall  do  it.  Others,  if  they  meddle,  being  strangers,  because  not  called,  shall 
die  the  death  as  you  hear  before.  Thus  hath  He  also  in  the  New  Testament  estab- 
lished a  ministry,  and  given  some  apostles,  some  evangelists,  some  i:)astors  and 
doctors  for  the  building  up  of  His  Church,  &c.  He  also  decreed  that  the  contempt 
of  these  is  the  cont  mpt  of  Him ;  and  then  judge  you,  first  or  last,  what  punish- 
ment will  ensue.  [Bp.  Bahhigton.)  The  essential  significance  of  tlie  prie^tlwod: — 
The  essential  significance  of  the  priesthood  cannot  be  deduced  from  the  ety- 
mology of  the  Hebrew  word  thus  translated,  since  that  is  not  clear;  nor  is  the 
extra-Levitical  usage  of  the  word  so  restricted  as  to  afford  an  unequivocal  solu- 
tion of  the  question.  A  direct  dechiration  of  the  Mosaic  conception  is,  liowever, 
given  in  connection  with  the  Korahitic  rebelhon  (Numb,  xvi.)  ;  in  which  passage 
the  notes  of  the  priesthood  are  given  by  Moses  himself  as  follows:  1.  A  Divine 
choice  or  call  ("  Whom  He  hath  chosen").  2.  A  right  of  Divine  service  ("Who 
are  His  ").  3.  Holiness  ("  Who  is  holy  ").  4.  A  right  of  Divine  access  ("Come 
near  unto  Him").  The  priest  was  one  who,  having  been  Divinely  selected,  had 
accepted  his  call  without  reservation,  and  being  possessor  of  an  imputed  righteous- 
ness, was  privileged  to  draw  near  the  Majesty  from  on  high.  A  closer  analysis 
might  still  further  simplify  this  Mosaic  conception  of  priesthood.  Of  the  attri- 
butes just  enumerated,  it  may  be  said  that  the  second  and  the  fourth  are  identical; 
then  the  first  and  the  third  rather  belong  to  the  prerequisites  of  priesthood  than 
to  its  essence.  The  essential  significance,  therefore,  of  the  priesthood  may  be 
stated  to  lie  in  its  privilege  of  Divine  approach.  It  will  thus  be  seen  that  in  a 
Uinited  degree  every  Jew  was,  as  the  primary  form  of  the  covenant  announced,  a 
priest ;  nevertheless  the  right  of  Divine  approach,  restricted  as  it  was  to  the  court 
of  the  Tabernacle,  was  so  meagre  as  to  be  unworthy  of  the  name  of  priesthood. 
It  was  to  the  Aaronites,  with  their  more  tangible  privileges  of  worship  before  the 
veil,  that  the  name  seemed  more  especially  applicable  ;  whilst  to  the  officiating 
high  priest  alone  was  it  permitted  to  occasionally  enter  within  the  veil,  and  parti- 
cipate in  that  highest  access,  in  that  most  exalted  priesthood,  which  was  possible 
to  Judaism.  Guarded  by  so  many  restrictions,  and  rising  through  such  grada- 
tions, how  lofty  the  dignity,  how  sublime  the  privilege,  of  standing  in  the  presence 
of  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  to  worship  and  petition !  The  essential  significance  of 
the  priesthood  may  be  otherwise  stated.  For,  if  it  be  remembered  that  the 
privilege  of  Divine  approach  carried  with  it  the  privilege  of  representing  others 
to  whom  such  approach  was  denied,  it  may  be  said  that  the  essence  of  the 
priesthood  was  mediation,  that  of  the  ordinary  priests  being  indirect,  and  that  of 
the  high  priest  direct.  Again,  the  essential  attribute  of  tlie  high  priest,  the 
privilege  of  access  to  the  Holy  of  Holies,  implying  the  purpose  for  which  that 
access  was  made,  the  essence  of  the  high  priesthood,  may  be  roughly  described,  as 
in  some  passages  of  the  New  Testament,  and  in  popular  theology,  by  its  excep- 
tional privilege  of  atonement.  {A.  Cave,  B.D.)  The  altar  and  the  laver : — 
As  the  sacrifices  are  ever  leading  us  to  the  great  altar  of  b  ass,  and  as  the 
continual  washings  that  are  mentioned  in  this  chapter  will  be  ever  turning  us  to 
the  laver  of  brass,  let  us  here,  for  a  moment,  fix  our  eye  upon  them.  The  one 
shows  us  pardon  of  sm  by  Christ's  death,  the  other  shows  us  purification  of  lieart 
by  Christ's  Spirit.  But  why  is  there  such  a  singular  peculiarity  in  the  construction 
of  botii  altar  and  laver?  The  former  was  covered  wiih  the  brass  of  the  censers 
that  had  been  held  in  the  polluted  hands  of  Korah,  Dathan,  and  his  company 
(Numb.  xvi.  38) ;  and  the  latter  was  formed  of  the  brass  that  was  obtained  from 
the  mirrors  of  the  women  (Exod.  xxxviii.  8)  who  worshipped  at  the  Tabernacle 
door,  and  liad  been  used  but  too  frequently  to  gratify  the  unholy  feelings  called 
forth  by    "the   lust    of    the   eye."      I.    The   brazen    censers  op  Korah  and  his 

COMPANY   CONI  hasted   VERY   EVIDENTLY   WITH    THE    GOLDEN    CENSER   OF  A  TRDE    PRIEST. 

The  gold  of  the  latter  marked  its  heavenly  character  and  use,  as  we  see  also  in  the 
gold  of  the  candlestick,  of  the  table,  and  of  the  meicy-seat,  or  in  the  golden 
streets  and  golden  harps  of  New  Jerusalem.  But  nevertheless,  out  of  these 
poUnted  materials,  the  Lord  forms  the  altar  where  atonement  for  sin  was  to  be 
made.     Shittim-wood  (very  durable  and  incorruptible)  is  spread  over  with  plates  of 


123  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vm. 

this  brass.  Is  not  this  fitted  to  remind  us  that  Christ  had  the  "  likeness  of  sinful 
flesh  " — the  shittim-wood  being  veiled  and  hid  bv  the  brass  ?  In  the  very  nature 
that  sinned  so  presumptuously  the  Lord  Jesus  appears  ;  and,  wearing  that  nature, 
presents  in  it  His  offering — only,  in  His  person  it  was  so  pure  that  the  "Altar 
sanctified  the  Gift."  When  He  arose  and  ascended.  He  threw  off  this  obscurity, 
and  was  "  the  Golden  Altar."  11.  The  lavek,  made  of  the  iriRROR  brass,  held 
PURE  WATER,  THE  TTPE  OF  THE  HoLT  SPIRIT.  In  our  Very  nature,  which  in  our 
hands  serves  only  the  purposes  of  sin  and  vanity,  the  Redeemer  exhibited  purity — 
the  very  purity  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  who  dwelt  in  Him  without  measure!  He  took 
our  true  nature  from  the  womb  of  the  Virgin  ;  and,  assuming  it  to  Himself,  thereby 
made  it  holy.     And  so  it  became  a  holy  vessel  for  the  Spirit  to  fill.  The  main 

ideas  symbolised  in  the  vestments  of  the  high  priest : — The  ephod  with  its  girdle 
signified  the  beautiful  character  and  the  exalted  service  which  are  becoming  to 
the  Holy  Place ;  and  the  shoulder-pieces  and  the  breastplate,  with  the  precious 
stones  and  the  engraving  on  them,  signified  that  the  children  of  Israel  as  a 
whole,  and  each  child  individually,  was  borne  on  the  strong  shoulders  and  carried 
in  the  warm  heart  of  their  representative  in  the  presence  of  the  Lord,  giving  the 
conceptions  of  strength  to  sustain  and  love  to  cLerish  ;  the  Urim  and  Thummim 
added  the  thought  of  heavenly  guidance  along  a  path  that  "  shineth  more  and 
more  unto  the  perfect  day  "  ;  the  pomegranates  and  beUs  on  the  blue  robe  of  the 
ephod  symbolised  heavenly  fruitfulness  and  joy ;  while  the  climax  of  all  was 
reached  in  the  golden  graving  of  "  Holiness  unto  the  Lord."  Tou  see  how  rich 
was  the  symbolism  of  the  high  priestly  vestments.  And  how  expressive  as  types 
of  the  glory  and  the  grace  of  our  great  EQgh  Priest !  The  Lord  Jesus  needed  no 
priestly  vestments  ;  for  He  had  the  great  realities,  of  which  these  were  only  the 
symbols.  He  really  possessed  the  lovely  character  which  was  only  symboUsed  in  the 
ephod  ;  and  no  "  curious  girdle  "  was  needed  to  make  it  evident  that  it  was  a  high 
and  holy  work  in  which  He  was  engaged.  His  strength  to  save  and  His  love  for 
lost  sinners  were  so  conspicuous  all  through  His  strong  and  loving  life,  that  onyx 
stones  upon  His  shoulders  or  precious  stones  upon  His  breast  would  have  been 
superfluous.  No  symbol  of  Urim  and  Thummim  was  needed  for  One  who  could 
say  :  "  I  am  the  Light  of  the  world ;  He  that  foUoweth  Me  shall  not  walk  in 
darkness,  but  shall  have  the  light  of  life."'  Nor  were  bells  and  pomegranates 
needful  on  that  garment  hem,  the  very  touching  of  which,  in  the  spirit  of 
trembling  faith,  brought  health  to  a  cheek  that  for  twelve  years  had  been  pale, 
and  joy  to  a  heart  that  after  every  remedy  bad  been  tried  in  vain,  had  bidden 
farewell  to  hope  (Luke  viii.  43,  44).  And  why  should  there  be  a  plate  of  gold  with 
"  Holiness  to  the  Lord  "  inscribed  upon  it,  on  the  forehead  of  One  who  could 
fearlessly  issue  the  challenge  :  "  Which  of  you  convinceth  Me  of  sin  ?  " — One  who 
was  really,  as  the  other  was  only  symbolically,  "  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  and 
separate  from  sinners  "  ?  Verily,  in  a  far  higher  sense  is  it  true  of  Him  than  it  was 
of  Aaron,  that  "  Holiness  unto  the  Lord  "  is  "  always  on  His  forehead,  that  we 
may  be  accepted  before  the  Lord."     (-/.  M.   Gibson,  D.D.) 

Yer.  8. — The  Urim  and  the  Thommim. — The  Urim  and  the  Thummim: — I.  The 
Urim  and  the  Thummim  was  something  distinct  from  the  twelve  stones  in  the  pec- 
toral of  the  high  priest.  Evidently  the  breastplate  with  its  jewels  was  outward  and 
visible ;  the  Urim  and  the  Thummim  were  inward,  and  concealed  beneath  the  ephod, 
for  it  is  said  of  the  former,  "  they  shall  bind  the  breastplate  unto  the  rings  of  the 
ephod,  that  it  may  be  above  the  curious  girdle  of  the  ephod."  With  regard  to  the  Urim 
and  the  Thummim,  on  the  other  hand,  it  is  enjoined  "  thou  shalt  put  in  "  (enclose 
within)  "  .he  breastplate  the  Urim  and  the  Thummim,  and  they  shall  be  upon"  (next) 
"  Aaron's  heart  when  he  goeth  in  before  the  Lord."  Nor  is  it  to  be  overlooked  that, 
with  carefully  selected  terms,  Moses  speaks  of  the  stones  in  the  breastplate  being 
"  set.  or  filled  in,"  but  the  Urim  and  the  Thummim  be  describes  simply  as  "put 
in,"  as  if  the  one  had  been  fixed  with  elaborate  art,  the  other  merely  deposited  by 
the  hand — dropped  in.  Nay,  it  is  stated  expressly  that  "  Moses  put  theH)reastplate 
upon  Aaron,"  and  that,  after  he  had  thus  put  on  him  the  breastplate,  all  gemmed  and 
finished,  *'  he  put  in  the  breastplate  the  Urim  and  the  Thummim."  The  artificers, 
therefore,  must  have  prepared  the  sacerdotal  vestment,  even  to  the  stones  of  the 
breastplate,  whilst  Moses  provided  the  Urim  and  the  Thummim.  II.  Urim  and 
Thummim  are  proper  names  susceptible  of  a  very  definite  and  obvious  meaning. 
"Urim"  might  have  been  translated  "light,"  or  "  manifestation,"  for  it  imports 
•'  a  light  or  shining  thing  "  ;  and  "  Thummim  "  might  have  been  rendered  "  truth 


CHAP,  vin.]  LEVITICUS.  127 

or  perfection,"  meaning,  as  it  does,  '*  the  perfect  or  the  true."  III.  If,  however* 
the  TTrim  and  the  Thummim  be  not  the  brea-tplate  of  the  high  priest,  and  some- 
thing distinct  from  the  stones  thereof;  if ,  likewise,  it  be  entitled  to  the  designations 
of  "  light  and  truth,"  a  "  perfect  and  a  shining  thing,"  being  thus  loftily  character- 
ised of  God  Himself,  what  else  could  it  mean  than  the  law  as  given  on  Sinai,  and 
written  by  Moses,  when  he  descended  from  the  M>.unt?  1.  It  is  to  be  noticed  that, 
when  the  article  is  first  introduced,  Moses  re'ers  to  it  as  already  in  existence,  and 
not  as  a  thing  that  needed  to  be  prepared.  "  Thou  shalt  put  within  the  breastplate 
the  TJrim  and  the  Thummim  " — all  which  accords  whoUy  with  the  idea  that  the  law 
was  meant,  it  being  already  in  possession  of  Moses,  and  known  to  all  the  camp. 
2.  Let  it  also  be  taken  into  consideration  that  the  law  received  different  names 
according  to  the  light  in  which  it  was  viewed.  It  is  called  "  the  Ten  Command- 
ments" when  its  moral  precepts  are  numbered.  It  is  designated  "the  table  of 
covenant"  when  regarded  as  the  tenure  by  which  Israel  held  Cmaan.  It  was 
spoken  of  as  "  a  commandment"  considered  as  being  stamped  with  Divine  authority. 
It  went  under  the  name  of  "judgment"  when  adduced  as  the  standard  that  fixes 
all  moral  truth.  And  it  is  "  a  testimony  "  when  meaning  a  pubUc  declaration  of 
what  God  expects  from  His  creatures.  If,  however,  the  law  were  thus  denoted  by 
expressions  taken  from  some  of  its  aspects  and  properties,  there  is  nothing  forced 
in  the  supposition  that  it  may  also  have  received  the  designation  of  "  light  and 
perfection"  ("  Urim  and  Thummim")  as  another  formula  by  which  briefly  to 
signify  its  character  as  a  whole.  IV.  And  the  appellations  given  both  to  the 
breastplate  and  the  Urim  and  Thummim  add  probably  to  this  view.  The  former 
is  entitled  "the  breastplate  of  judgment,"  which  can  only  mean  the  breastplate 
including  judgment  or  containing  the  law.  Urim  and  Thummim  are  likewise 
designated  as  "  the  judgment,"  that  is,  the  law  of  Israel.  It  enhances  the  argu- 
ment to  consider  that  the  terms  "  Urim  and  Thummim  "  ("  light  and  perfection  ") 
answer  precisely  to  the  description  God  has  given  of  His  law  :  "  Thy  word  is  a  lamp 
unto  my  feet,  and  a  light  unto  my  paths."  Nay,  "  the  law  of  Jehovah  is  perfect  " 
(Thummim) ;  "the  law  of  Jehovah  is  pure,  enlightening  the  eves  "  (Urim).  This 
explanation  invests  the  practice  of  consulting  the  Urim  and  the  Thummim  with 
dignity  and  reasonableness.  Were  the  Urim  and  Thummim  a  mere  ornament  of 
skilful  jewelry,  it  would  seem  not  only  unmeaning,  but  a  direct  encouragement  of 
idolatry  to  associate  it  with  the  revelation  of  the  Divine  mind.  But  let  it  be 
admitted  that  the  law  is  within  the  sacerdotal  robe,  and  it  is  at  once  app^irent  that 
the  man  who  consults  by  Urim  and  Thummim  is  only  advising  with  the  high  priest 
as  to  the  statutes  of  Jehovah,  and  ascertaining  their  import  from  hi  in  who  had 
been  ordained  to  interpret  them.  Taking  the  Urim  and  the  Thummim  to  mean 
the  law,  this  article  completes  the  typical  character  of  the  sacerdotal  apparel,  as 
pointing  out  the  offices  of  Christ.  The  robe  and  mitre  worn  by  Aaron  denoted  the 
priesthood  of  Christ ;  the  golden  plate  on  the  forehead  signified  the  royalty  of  the 
Saviour ;  and  the  Urim  and  the  Thummim,  if  intei^jreted  to  be  the  law,  would 
shadow  forth  the  Eedeemer's  prophetic  office.  The  view  now  taken  throws  light 
on  several  passages  of  Holy  Writ.  1.  To  hide  a  law  would,  according  to  usual 
notions,  mean  anything  but  showing  it  reverence  and  obeying  it  with  anxiety.  Yet 
"  Thy  law%"  savs  David,  "  have  I  hid  in  mine  heart,  that  I  might  not  sin  against 
Thee."  The  phrase,  therefore,  is  strictly  a  Jewish  one,  and  can  only  be  explained 
by  the  custom  now  illustrated.  The  allusion  is  to  the  high  priest  depositing  the 
law  within  his  breastplate  for  the  purpose  of  being  consulted.  2.  Througho'.t  the 
whole  of  Psa.  xl.  Christ  is  shadowed  forth  in  reference  to  the  ancient  priesthood, 
and  in  the  words  "  I  delight  to  do  Thy  will,  0  my  God ;  yea,  Thy  law  is  within  my 
heart,"  the  allusion  is  manifestly  to  Aaron  carrying  the  law  beside  his  heart  witiiin 
the  breastplate.  The  meaning  is,  therefore,  not  simply  that  Christ  is  holy.  But, 
first,  it  is  to  be  understood  that,  as  Priest  of  the  Church,  Jesus  is  prepared  to  fulfil 
all  that  has  been  typified  in  the  law ;  and,  next,  that,  as  the  Prophet  of  God,  He 
alone  can  guide  and  sanctify.  3.  The  prayer,  "0  send  forth  Tliy  light  and  Thy 
truth ;  let  them  lead  me,"  is  just  a  request  that  the  Urim  and  Thummim  might  be 
David's  guide,  so  that  he  may  not  miss  his  way  to  God,  or  come  by  a  forbidden 
road.  But  the  Urim  and  the  Thummim  being  the  law,  the  Psalmist's  desire  was 
to  approach  God  in  the  observance  of  those  rites  and  in  possession  of  that  spirit 
which  the  law  required.  4.  The  Jew  ever  turned  to  his  high  priest  for  information 
on  all  religious  points,  and  guidance  in  all  perplexing  junctures,  knowing  that  in 
him  was  hid  a  source  of  light  and  the  means  of  perfection  which  could  neither  fail 
nor  mislead.    But  the  apostle  asserts  that  the  High  Priest  of  the  Christian  profes- 


128  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  viii. 

sion  is  also  thus  gifted  and  beuignant.  "In  Christ  are  hid  all  the  treasures  of 
■wisdom  and  knowledge."  Within  His  breast  there  is  a  spring  of  knowledge  aq 
exhaustless — a  law  of  holiness  as  authoritative — a  beam  of  light  as  pure.  He  will 
lead  in  the  paths  of  truth  and  holiness  all  who  ask  counsel  at  His  lips.  5.  It  may 
be  asked,  To  what  are  the  Jewish  phvlacteries  to  be  traced  but  to  the  Urim  and 
Thummim  of  the  high  priest  ?  There  is  a  Divine  command  to  bind  the  law  as  a 
bracelet  on  the  hand — on  the  head,  as  a  frontlet,  but  the  practice  of  inscribing 
portions  of  the  law  on  parchment  and  depositing  them  in  a  case  is  evidently  the 
Uiim-  and  the  Thummim  on  a  smaller  scale.  Indeed,  the  idea  of  interpreting 
literally  the  order  of  Moses  above  alluded  to  must  have  arisen  from  observing  what 
the  high  priest  did  with  the  scroll  of  the  law  entire,  and  a  desire  to  imitate  his 
practice.  The  view  taken  suggests  some  practical  lessons.  (1)  It  teaches  the 
sinlessness  of  Chiist;  for,  let  the  character  of  Jesus  be  surveyed  in  His  type,  as 
bearing  the  law  within  His  heart,  and  it  must  be  instantly  felt  that  in  One,  of  whom 
this  was  a  just  and  chosen  emblem,  there  could  be  no  unrighteousness.  (2)  It  s'lows 
the  manner  in  which  Christ  executes  the  office  of  a  Prophet.  It  is  not  by  creating 
a  new  law,  or  giving  direction  independent  of  the  law,  for  then  would  He  not  corre- 
spond with  His  type,  the  high  priest,  who  drew  his  responses  from  the  will  of  God 
written  within  his  inspired  scroll.  It  is  by  pointing  us  to  the  law  which  bears  upon 
our  case,  through  the  influence  of  His  Spirit,  and  explaining  its  precepts,  and  en- 
forcing its  sanctions.  (3)  Let  the  believer,  from  this  statement,  understand  more 
exactly  what  is  required  of  him  in  point  of  character  as  being  a  priest  of  God.  God 
has  called  him  to  "  the  royal  priesthood  "  ;  He  has  given  him  at  once  the  crown  of 
royalty  and  the  mitre  of  priesthood.  He  must  not,  however,  exult  in  this  distinction 
without  adverting  to  the  qualifications  it  infers,  but  remember  that,  if  a  priest  to 
God,  he  must  place  the  law  as  a  candle  within  his  hf-art,  and  fasten  on  what  the 
apostle,  in  allusion  to  the  sacerdotal  equipage,  calls  "the  breastplate  of  righteous- 
ness."    {J.  J.  Bonar.) 

Vers.  22,  23.  Moses  took  of  the  blood. — Consecration  by  blood : — 1.  There  is,  first, 
the  selection  of  the  victim.  "  Behold  My  servant  whom  I  have  chosen,"  is  God's 
message  to  us  concerning  Him  ;  and  again.  He  says,  "  I  have  exalted  one  chosen  out 
of  the  people"  ;  and,  in  the  New  Testament,  He  is  called  "the  Christ,  the  chosen 
of  God"  (Luke  xxiii.  35).  The  Great  Sacrifice,  the  propitiation  for  our  sins,  the 
lamb  for  the  burnt-oft'ering,  is  entirely  of  God's  selection.  And  in  this  of  itsidf  we 
have  the  blessed  assurance  of  its  suitableness  and  perfection.  2.  There  is  the 
transfer  of  the  sinner's  sin  to  this  selected  victim.  Though  in  one  sense  this  is 
done  by  God,  through  that  same  eternal  purpose  by  which  the  victim  was  selected, 
yet  in  another  sense,  and  as  a  thing  brought  about,  or  becoming  a  fact,  in  time,  it 
is  the  sinner  that  does  this  when  he  accepts  the  sacrifice,  and,  putting  his  hand 
upon  it,  confesses  his  sin  over  it.  3.  There  is  the  death  of  the  victim.  Wiihout  that 
shedding  of  blood,  which  is  the  means  of  death,  and  the  evidence  of  its  having 
taken  place,  is  no  remission.  4.  There  is  the  transfer  of  this  death  to  the  sinner 
by  putting  the  blood  upon  him.  The  sinner's  death  is  first  of  all  transferred  to  the 
Surety,  who  dies  as  the  sinner's  substitute.  Then  the  Surety's  death  is  transferred 
back  again  to  the  sinner,  and  placed  to  his  account  as  if  it  had  been  his  own.  In 
confession  we  transfer  our  death  to  the  Surety.  In  believing  we  trunsfer  His  death 
to  ourselves,  so  that,  in  the  sight  of  God,  it  comes  to  be  reckoned  truly  ours.  This 
transference  of  the  Surety's  death  to  us  is  that  which  is  set  before  us  by  the  putting 
the  blood  upon  us.  Fur  blood  means  death — or  life  taken  away  ;  and  the  putting  of 
blood  upon  us  is  the  intimation  the  death  has  passed  upon  us— and  that  death,  none 
other  than  the  death  of  tlie  Surety.  Put  yourself  in  the  position  which  God  asks 
thee  to  do;  that  is,  believe  the  Father's  testimony  to  the  death  of  His  Son.  The 
moment  that  thi^u  believest,  the  blood  is  sprinkled,  the  death  is  transferred,  thou 
art  counted  as  one  who  hast  died,  and  so  paid  the  penalty — and  thou  art  forgiven, 
accepted,  clean  1  5.  There  is  the  sinner's  new  life  thus  received  through  death. 
Made  partakers  of  Christ's  resurrection  and  Christ's  life,  they  go  forth  to  do  His 
will,  in  the  strength  of  His  risen  life.  It  is  as  resurrection-men  that  they  serve 
Him,  and  who  are  drawing  from  that  resurrection-fountain  daily  treasures  of  life, 
wherewith  to  labour  for  Him  who  died  for  them  and  who  rose  again.  If  ye  then  be 
risen  with  Christ,  seek  those  things  that  are  above,  and  make  use  of  your  risen  life 
for  duty,  for  temptation,  for  battle,  for  trial,  for  suffering.  It  will  be  sufficient  for 
every  time  of  need.  6.  There  is  the  entire  consecration  of  the  whole  man  to  God, 
in  consequence  of  His  having  thus  died  and  risen.  That  which  proclaimed  them 
dead,  in  consequence  of  the  applied  death  of  the  sacrifice,  sets  them  apart  for  holj 


CHAP.  IX.]  LEVITICUS.  129 

purposes  in  God's  house.  Thus  it  is  that  the  cleatli  and  resurrection  of  our  true 
ram  of  consecration,  our  better  sacrifice,  operate  upon  us.  They  "  sanctify  "  us,  as 
the  apostle's  expression  is,  in  tlie  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews:  "Jesus  also,  that  He 
might  sanctify  the  people  witli  His  own  blood,  suffered  without  the  gate."  The 
whole  man,  from  head  to  feet,  becomes  a  sacred  thing,  dedicated  to  the  service  of 
the  living  God.     (H.  Bonar,  D.D.) 

Ver.  33.  The  days  of  your  consecration. — Consecration  and  service : — It  seams 
singular  and  almost  frivolous  that  the  priests  were  commanded  not  to  go  out  of  the 
door  of  the  Tabernacle  of  the  congregation  for  seven  days.  This  is  our  own  practice. 
The  accident  has  changed,  but  this  is  the  philosophy  of  all  calculated  and  well-set 
life.  No  priesthood  is  worth  aocppting  that  any  fool  may  step  into  without  notice, 
without  preparation,  and  without  thought.  The  great  piiesthoods  of  life  are  all 
approached  by  a  seven  days'  consecration.  Does  the  medical  priest  run  into  his 
priesthood  without  consecration  ?  is  he  not  hidden  for  many  a  day  in  the  tabernacle 
of  wisdom — in  the  tent  in  which  he  meets  all  the  authorities  of  his  science  ?  For 
a  long  time  he  may  not  prescribe ;  for  a  considerable  period  he  has  but  to  inquire 
and  to  give  proof  of  capacity  and  industry.  A  whole  week  of  time — meaning  by  that 
some  perfect  period — must  elapse  before  he  goes  forth  authoritatively  to  feel  a  puls^-, 
or  to  prescribe  a  remedy.  Apply  this  to  the  preaching  of  the  gospel.  The  preacher 
must  be  long  time  hidden,  during  which  no  man  may  suspect  that  he  is  a  preacher  ; 
his  silence  may  be  almost  provoking;  people  may  be  driven  to  iiqnire  what  the 
purpose  of  his  life  is  :  he  says  nothing;  he  never  reveals  himself ;  he  looks  as  if  he 
might  be  about  to  speak,  but  speak  he  never  does  ;  he  is  full  of  I'ooks  and  thoughts, 
and  prayer  seems  to  be  written  upon  his  transfigured  face.  What  is  the  meaning 
of  this?  He  is  in  the  tent  of  meeting;  he  is  in  conference  with,  the  Trinity  ;  be  is 
undergoing  consecration— in  no  merely  ceremonial  sense  ;  in  the  sense  of  acquiring 
deeper  knowledge  of  God,  fuller  communion  with  the  truth,  and  entering  into  closer 
fellowship  with  all  the  mysteries  of  human  life.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  spiritual 
application  of  this  abiding  of  the  priests  seven  days  in  the  Tabernacle  : — 1.  Hesychius 
applieth  it  to  the  Pentecost,  which  was  seven  times  seven  da.ys  from  the  resurrec- 
tion of  Christ,  and  the  apostles  were  commanded  not  to  depart  from  Jerusalem  till 
they  had  received  the  Holy  Ghost,  as  these  are  not  to  go  out  of  the  door  of  the 
Tabernacle  during  the  time  of  their  consecration.  2.  Lyranus  would  have  under- 
stood by  the  seven  dnys  seven  things  from  which  the  priests  should  abstain — long 
sleep,  pleasure  in  eating,  unprofitable  actions,  multiplicity  of  distraction,  vanity  of 
talking,  variety  of  fiction,  vileness  of  affection.  3.  Some  hereby  would  have  sij^nified 
that  they  which  are  to  receive  orders  should  exereise  themselves  with  spiritual 
meditations  in  some  retired  place.  4.  Some  would  have  this  a  type  of  baptism,  so 
sucli  as  were  baptized  did  use  to  go  seven  days  apparelled  in  white.  5.  But  thes^ 
are  fitter  applications  :  That  ministers  should  learn  hereby  to  frequent  the  Church 
and  to  attend  Divine  things,  or  that  these  seven  days  may  betoken  all  the  time  of 
this  life,  that  we  should  not  day  or  night,  in  prosperity  or  adversity,  depart  from 
the  faith  of  the  Church,  or  that  the  priests,  as  long  as  they  live,  should  not  depart 
from  the  observation  of  the  Divine  law,  and  should  be  admonished  that  all  their  life 
they  are  devoted  to  another's  service  ;  and  the  staying  in  the  Tabernacle  showeth 
two  principal  duties  of  the  priest — to  learn  somewhat  of  God  or  to  teach  the  people  ; 
but  he  should  teach  what  he  hath  learned  out  of  Scripture,  not  out  of  his  own  brain. 
(A.  Willet,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  IX. 

Vers.  1-24.  Aaron  therefore  went  unto  the  altar. — Aaron  in  the  duties  of  Ms 

office  : — The  duties  of  the  high  priest,  as  exhibited  in  this  chapter,  divide  themselves 
into  two  general  classes.  Some  of  his  services  related  exclusively  to  himself,  and 
the  rest  exclusively  to  the  people.  Aaron,  though  a  priest,  was  still  a  man,  with  all 
the  wants  and  infirmities  of  men.  He  consequently  needed  atonement  as  much  as 
those  for  whom  he  was  to  officiate.  And  before  he  was  allowed  to  pro(^eed  with  his 
in  ties  for  others,  he  was  required  to  offer  sacrifices  for  himself.  1.  Aaron  was  first 
Df  all  to  offer  a  calf  for  a  sin-offering.  And  it  may  be  that  this  was  intended  to 
refer  back  to  his  great  sin  in  the  matter  of  the  "  golden  calf,"  which  he  had  been 

9 


130  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

prevailed  upon  to  make  for  the  worship  of  the  people  while  Moses  was  in  the  mount. 
It  is  a  hard  thing  to  shake  off  the  degrading  recollection  of  any  marked  deed  of 
wrong  !  The  soil  of  sin  upon  the  conscience  cannot  be  easily  washed  out.  I  once 
heard  a  man  say  with  tears  upon  his  cheeks,  that  if  he  owned  a  world,  he  would 
willingly  and  gladly  give  it  to  have  certain  recollections  of  crime  blotted  from  his 
mind.  He  was  a  pious  man — a  man  who  had  solemnly  consecrated  himself  to 
labours  for  the  good  of  his  kind ;  but  the  thought  of  his  former  deeds  of  shame 
haunted  him  like  a  demon,  and  clouded  his  brightest  peace.  Aaron  had  done  a 
greiU  evil  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  the  dark  shadow  of  its  remembrance  followed 
him  even  into  the  honours  of  his  high  priesthood,  and  stood  before  him  every  time 
he  came  to  enter  into  the  Tabernacle  of  the  Most  High.  2.  The  second  offering 
which  Aaron  was  to  make  for  himself  was  the  holocaust,  or  whole  burnt-offering. 
In  addition  to  his  special  sin  he  was  a  common  sinner  with  all  other  men.  He 
needed  justification  by  the  blood  of  Jesus,  just  as  everybody  else.  There  is  a  sense 
,  in  which  all  are  equally  guilty  before  God,  the  high  and  the  low,  the  rich  and  the 
poor,  the  young  and  the  old,  the  learned  and  the  ignorant,  the  priest  and  the  people. 
And  the  only  deliverance  from  this  common  guilt,  as  from  all  other  guilt,  is  through 
the  one  great  offering  of  "  The  Lamb  of  God  that  taketh  away  the  sin  of  the  world." 
Even  Aaron  in  his  priesthood  needs  it  just  as  much  as  the  wickedest  and  vilest  of 
the  race.  These  preliminary  and  personal  services  having  been  attended  to,  Aaron 
proceeded,  as  God  directed,  to  perfonn  the  duties  of  his  office  for  the  people  for 
whom  he  was  ordained.  A  sin-offering,  a  burnt-offering,  a  peace-offering,  and  a 
meat-offering  had  been  prescribed,  and  his  functions  with  reference  to  these  he  now 
proceeded  to  discharge.  Let  us,  then,  contemplate  him  in  the  solemn  service.  1. 
Aaron's  first  official  duties  were  connected  with  the  altar  at  the  door  of  the  Taber- 
nacle, and  were  all  performed  in  the  presence  of  the  people.  Now,  in  order  to 
understand  the  typical  meaning  of  all  this,  it  will  be  necessary  to  observe  that 
Christ  is  at  once  the  priest  and  the  sacrifice.  It  was  impossible  to  unite  these  two 
things  in  the  type.  They  stand  in  the  Levitical  ritual  as  distinct,  and  they  are  not 
at  all  confounded  together  in  the  great  mediation  of  Calvary.  But  we  must  bear  in 
mind  that  Christ  is  at  the  same  time  the  victim  and  the  High  Priest  who  officiates 
in  offering  that  victim.  When  He  was  led  forth  to  His  immolation,  He  was  the 
lamb  without  blemish  and  also  the  one  who  was  to  lay  its  body  upon  the  fire,  and 
sprinkle  its  blood  upon  the  altar.  As  the  apostle  tells  us,  "  He  offered  up  Himself." 
He  is  the  great  High  Priest  who  officiated  at  His  own  immolation.  It  was  He  Him- 
self that  presided  at  the  awful  ceremony,  in  which  all  His  joints  were  relaxed,  and 
all  the  binding  ligaments  of  His  being  cut  asunder,  and  all  tlie  tender  parts  of  His 
most  interior  nature  torn  out  for  burning — and  His  body,  soul,  and  spirit,  laid  down 
as  a  sacrifice  for  the  sins  of  the  world.  It  was  by  His  own  will  that  the  blow  was 
struck ;  that  the  blood  flowed ;  that  every  covering  and  protection  was  torn  off' ; 
and  the  whole  blessed  Christ  reduced  to  a  mangled  and  lifeless  mass  around  and 
upon  the  altar  of  God.  And  it  is  this  very  fact  that  so  infinitely  ennobles,  exalts, 
and  dignifies  Christ's  sacrifice.  It  was  a  willing  surrender  of  Himself  to  death. 
There  is  a  very  remarkable  expression  in  the  fifteenth  verse  to  which  I  desire  to 
call  your  particular  attention  in  this  connection.  You  read  there  that  Aaron  "  took 
the  sin-offering  for  the  people,  and  slew  it,  and  offered  it  for  sin."  A  stricter 
rendering  of  the  original,  as  noted  by  various  critics,  would  be,  "  He  sinned  it,"  or, 
"  He  made  it  to  be  sin."  The  same  diction  occurs  in  chap.  vi.  26.  The  idea  is, 
that  the  sin-offering  somehow  had  the  sin  transferred  to  it,  or  laid  on  it,  or  was  so 
linked  with  the  sin  for  which  it  was  to  atone  as  to  become  itself  the  sinful  or 
sinning  one,  not  actually,  but  imputatively  and  constructively.  The  animal  had  no 
sin  and  was  not  capable  of  sinning ;  but,  having  been  devoted  as  a  sin-offering,  and 
having  received  upon  its  head  the  burden  of  the  guilty  one  who  substituted  its  life 
for  his  own,  it  came  to  be  viewed  and  treated  as  a  creature  which  was  nothing  but 
sin.  And  this  brings  us  to  a  feature  in  the  sacrificial  work  of  Christ,  at  which  many 
have  stumbled,  but  which  deserves  to  be  profoundly  considered.  Jesus  died,  not 
only  as  a  martyr  to  the  cause  He  had  espoused,  not  only  as  an  offering  apart  from 
the  sins  of  those  for  whom  He  came  to  atone,  but  as  a  victim  who  had  received  all 
those  sins  upon  His  own  head,  and  so  united  them  with  His  own  innocent  and  holy 
person  as  to  be  viewed  and  treated,  in  part  at  least,  as  if  He  Himself  had  sinned 
the  sins  of  all  sinners.  "  The  Lord  laid  on  Him  the  iniquity  of  us  all."  "  He  made 
Him,  who  knew  no  sin,  to  be  sin  for  us."  2.  Having  attended  to  what  was  to  be 
done  with  the  sacrifices  at  the  altar,  in  presence  of  the  people,  the  next  duty  of 
Aaron,  as  the  high  priest,  was  to  enter  into  the  sanctuary  and  the  most  Holy  Place 


CHAP.  IX.]  LEVITICUS.  131 

■with  the  blood  of  the  sin-offeriug,  as  directed  in  Exod.  xxx.  But  before  entering 
upon  this  second  grand  department  of  his  priesthood  he  "  lifted  up  his  hands 
towards  the  people,  and  blessed  them."  It  was  a  very  significant  act.  It  was  as  if 
he  were  emptying  over  them  from  his  bloody  hands  all  the  effects  and  virtues  of 
that  blood.  And  it  pointed  forward  to  those  gracious  transactions  of  the  Lord  Jesus 
subsequent  to  His  offering  of  Himself  for  us,  aud  prior  to  His  ascension  into 
heaven.  But  having  thus  spread  his  hands  in  blessing  towards  the  people,  Aaron 
"went  into  the  Tabernacle,"  and  was  hidden  from  the  view  of  the  solemn  wor- 
shippers. How  beautiful  the  connection  between  type  and  Antitype  !  Of  owr  Aaron 
it  is  written,  "  He  lifted  up  His  hands,  and  blessed  them.  And  it  came  to  pass, 
while  He  blessed  them,  He  was  parted  from  them,  and  carried  up  into  heaven  " ; — 
■"  while  they  beheld.  He  was  taken  up ;  and  a  cloud  received  Him  out  of  their  sight." 
Airon  was  to  enter  into  the  Tabernacle  with  the  atoning  blood  of  the  victim  slain 
without.  "  But  Christ  being  come  an  High  Priest  of  good  things,  which  were  to 
come,  enterelinto  a  greater  and  more  perfect  tabernacle,  not  made  with  hands,  not 
by  the  blood  of  goats  and  calves,  but  with  His  own  blood.  .  .  .  For  Christ  is  not 
entered  into  the  holy  places  made  with  hands,  which  are  the  figures  of  the  true; 
but  into  heaven  itself,  now  to  appear  in  the  presence  of  God  for  us."  Moses,  as  the 
representative  of  Jehovah  in  these  transactions,  accompanied  Aaron  into  the  holy 
places,  and  delivered  over  to  his  care  all  the  vessels  of  the  sanctuary,  and  put  the 
ordering  of  all  the  sacred  services  into  his  hands.  And  thus  also  hath  Jens 
"  received  from  God  the  Father,  honour  and  glory."  But  Aaron  did  not  stay  in  the 
TabtTnacle.  He  went  in  after  the  morning  sacrifices  were  made  ;  but  before  the 
evening  sacrifices  he  again  "  came  out,  and  blessed  the  people."  The  soul  kindles 
as  we  proceed  with  these  ancient  types.  They  portray  so  beautifully  the  grand 
mysteries  of  redemption's  progress.  When  I  read  of  Aaron  returning  from  his 
duties  in  the  Holy  Place  the  words  of  the  bright  angels  that  kept  guard  at  the 
Saviour's  ascension  gather  new  preciousness.  "  Ye  men  of  Galilee,  wluy  stand  ye 
gazing  up  into  heaven  ?  this  same  Jesus  which  is  taken  up  from  you  into  heaven, 
shall  so  come  in  like  manner  as  ye  have  seen  Him  go  into  heaven."  When  Aaron 
came  out  of  the  Holy  Place,  it  was  to  bless  the  waiting  people.  And  so  it  is  wi  itten 
of  our  great  High  Priest  in  heaven — "Unto  them  that  look  for  Him  shall  He  appear 
the  second  time  without  sin  unto  salvation. "  Most  people  are  afraid  of  the  Saviour's 
second  coming,  and  never  think  of  it  but  with  dread.  It  is  because  they  have  not 
sufficiently  considered  its  nature,  and  what  it  is  for.  It  is  not  to  curse,  but  to  ble-s. 
It  is  not  to  distress,  but  to  heal  and  save.  It  is  not  a  thing  to  be  dreaded,  but  to  be 
prayed  for  and  most  earnestly  desired.  It  is  the  event  that  is  to  finish  our  redemp- 
tion and  complete  our  bliss.  When  Aaron  came  out  of  the  Holy  Place,  "  the  glory 
of  the  Lord  appeared  unto  all  the  people."  Nor  shall  it  be  otherwise  when  Christ's 
epijihany  shall  occur.  Th>^n  shall  Jerusalem's  light  com^",  and  the  glory  of  the  Lord 
arise  u^Don  her.  Then  shall  the  pure  in  heai  t  see  God,  and  the  righteous  behold 
the  King  in  His  beauty.  When  Aaron  came  out  of  the  Holy  Place,  "  there  came  a 
fire  out  from  before  the  Lord,  and  consumed  upon  the  altar  the  burut-offeriug  and 
the  fat."  These  things  had  been  "  made  sin."  It  was  the  exact  picture  of  what 
is  predicted  concerning  the  reappearance  of  our  great  High  Priest  (2  Thess.  i.  7-9  ; 
Mai.  iv.  1 ;  Heb.  x.  20,  27).  But  the  fire  that  darted  forth  before  Aaron,  and  burned 
up  what  was  accounted  to  be  sin  in  that  congregation,  touched  not  one  of  the  wait- 
ing worshippers.  They  saw  it  leap  out  with  lightning  fierceness,  and  lick  up  the 
guilty  mass  in  a  moment,  but  it  came  not  near  either  of  them.  Not  a  saint  of  God 
shall  be  burned  by  the  terrific  fires  of  the  Great  D.iy.  When  the  wicked  are  cut  off, 
they  shall  see  it.  But  He  who  upholds  the  worlds,  yet  marks  the  sparrow's  fall, 
s  iji  to  His  people  :  "  When  these  things  begin  to  come  to  pass,  then  look  up,  and 
life  up  your  he>ds  :  for  your  redemption  draweth  nigh."  Nay,  when  the  congrega- 
tion of  Israel  saw  the  fires,  "  they  shouted  "  and  adored.  They  "  fell  on  their 
faces  "  for  very  ecstasy,  aud  holy  worshipful  admiration.  They  had  expected 
much,  but  the  thing  transcended  their  most  rapturous  imaginings.  And  so, 
in  the  day  of  our  Saviour's  coming,  there  is  a  joy,  and  glory,  and  holy  ex- 
ultation, and  adoring  gladness,  for  the  people  of  Gad,  which  eye  hath  not 
seen,  nor  ear  heard,  nor  the  heart  of  man  conceivel.  (J.  A.  Seiss,  D.D.)  For 
to-day  the  Lord  will  appear  unto  you. — SucrifirJal  prenaration  for  Jehovah  s 
appearing  : — Who  would  see  God  ?  Let  the  soul  make  ready.  To  wliom  will  God 
show  Himself?  They  who  make  ready  by  sacrifices.  I.  To  sek  the  Lokd  demands 
SPIRITUAL  PREPABEDNEss  IN  MAN.  1.  For  man  to  meet  God  without  readiness  would 
entail  on  him  terror  and  dea;h.    2.  But  man  may  mset  God  with  readiness,  prepared 


132  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOR.  [chap  ix. 

evpn  to  behold  His  glory.  3.  When  man  meets  God  thus  prepared,  the  meeting  is 
propitious  and  privileged.  II.  Sackificial  merits  prepare  man  for  searching  mani- 
festations OF  God.  1 .  By  effecting  the  complete  removal  of  his  sin  (by  sin-offering), 
and  therefore  cancelling  his  condemnation.  2.  By  presenting  an  offering  of  self- 
devotion  (burnt-offering),  and  thereby  obtaining  the  Divine  favour.  3.  By  con- 
ciliatory acts  of  propitiation  (peace-offering),  thus  removing  all  estrangement.  4. 
By  covenanted  communion  with  God  (meat-off'ering) ;  fellowship  with  God  in  the 
sacrificial  feast.  When  Jehovah  meets  a  soul  thus  "made  nigh"  by  sacrificial 
merit,  not  only  is  there  "  no  condemnation,"  but  "access  unto  grace"  is  assured, 
and  even  "  joy  in  God  "  {cf.  Rom.  v.  1,  2,  11).  III.  Amid  most  glorious  Divike 
manifestation  the  soul  prepared  by  sacrifice  stands  fearless  and  blest.  1. 
Bevelations  of  God  come  now  to  privileged  s  uls,  and  are  "times  of  refreshing." 
2.  The  unveilings  of  death,  which  will  bring  the  goul  to  God's  clear  presence,  will 
not  terrify  the  believer :  it  will  be  "  far  better."  3.  The  Lord's  appearance  "  in  gre-t 
glory"  at  the  judgment  will  be  welcomed  with  joyous  acclaim  by  those  who  "  look 
for  His  appearing."  4.  And  in  the  splendour  of  heaven  tl'e  ransomed  hosts  will 
stand  without  rebuke,  realising  in  God's  presence  "  fulness  of  joy."  (W.  H.  Jellie.) 
Advent  glory  : — Sometimes,  perhaps,  you  have  passed  in  the  daytime  through  some 
public  place  where  at  night  there  was  to  be  a  magnificent  exhibition  of  pyrotechnic 
art,  and  you  have  seen  the  figures  that  are  to  be  lighted  up  as  they  stand  ready  for 
the  exhibition.  They  are  very  plain  and  common-looking.  You  can  see  in  the 
rude  outlin'  i  the  forms  of  men,  the  crown  upon  the  kingly  brow,  and  the  jewels  that 
flash  from  it ;  but  there  is  no  beauty  and  glory  whatever  about  them.  But  wait  till 
the  eventide,  till  the  sun  goes  down,  and  the  master  of  ceremonies  appears  on  the 
scene,  and  suddenly,  at  the  signal,  perhaps  of  a  trumpet-blast  or  a  chorus  of  melody, 
the  lights  are  turned  on  and  a  blaze  of  glory  lights  up  the  scene.  Every  figure 
stands  out  in  radiant  light,  and  the  whole  scene  is  illuminated,  transfigured,  and 
seems  almost  supernatural.  So  it  will  be  when  our  Master  appears,  and  these 
bodies  of  humiliation  shall  be  lighted  up  with  His  brightness,  and  all  the  members 
shall  shine  with  the  beauty  and  majesty  of  their  living  Head,  and  He  shall  reveal 
all  His  glory  in  His  heavenly  Bride.  Aaron  lifted  up  Ms  hand  toward  the 
people,  and  blessed  them. — A  solemn  benediction : — I.  In  the  relations  of  men  to 
.Jehovah  there  are  those  who  attain  a  higher  life  of  privilege  and  of  power. 
The  high  priest  alone  was  empowered  to  bless.  His  was  a  spirituiil  elevation  above 
the  priests.  1.  Conscious  nearness  to  God  is  not  equally  attained  by  all.  2.  Saeied 
power  from  God  is  not  equally  derived  by  all.  II.  Hidden  fellowship  with 
Jehovah  is  the  source  of  exalted  qu.\likication,  the  spring  of  beneficent 
SPIRITUAL  power.  Aaron  had  spent  solemn  seasons  during  the  seven  days  enclosed 
within  the  Tabernacle.  It  nerved  his  heart  for  his  high  task ;  it  gave  him  assurance 
as  he  assumed  the  high  function  of  blessing  the  people  in  Jehovah's  name.  But 
after  that  official  act  he  went  into  more  intimate  fellowship  and  prayer  with  God 
(ver.  23);  and  when  he  came  forth  he  again  "blessed  the  people."  It  was  the 
act  of  one  whose  soul  was  full  of  conscious  power,  to  whom  it  was  no  longer  an 
official  trust  and  duty  to  bless,  but  a  delight  and  privilege ;  it  was  the  outflowing  of 
a  soul  all  ai  dent  and  adoring.  1.  Blessings  can  only  flow  from  a  soul  itself  rich  in 
the  affluence  of  blessedness.  2.  Affluence  of  blessedness  can  only  be  won  by  the 
most  intimate  communion  with  the  Lord.      III.    They   who    livb   an   elevated 

SPIRITUAL    life    ARE    RICH    BENEFACTORS    TO    A    SINFUL    WORLD.        1.    They    draW    pOACr 

from  God  which  does  not  rest  unused,  but  goes  forth  in  blessing  others.  2.  They 
exert  salutary  and  saving  energy  among  men,  by  which  earthly  lite  is  sweetened, 
and  spiritual  health  is  imparted,  and  Christian  peace  is  bestowed.  3.  Their  very 
praters,  unheeded  as  factors  of  good,  win  daily  benediction  from  Heaven  on  many 
liearts  and  homes.  4.  As  a  daily  influence  in  society  such  elevated  souls  shed  a 
benign  grace,  making  social  circles  purer,  kinder,  less  selfish  and  sinful,  more  gentle, 
peaceful,  and  Christian.  5.  In  all  their  active  ministries  for  Christ  they  are  potent 
for  good.  They  cannot  "  lift  up  their  hands  towards  the  people  "  but  gracious 
results  ensue.  Thus  should  every  Christian  seek  to  be  a  "  light  of  the  world,"  "  salt 
in  the  earh."  Therefore  let  each — (1)  Live  a  life  of  nearest  intercourse  with  the 
Lord — a  "life  hid  with  Christ  in  God"  ;  (2)  fulfil  the  solemn  office  of  gracious- 
intercessors  for  men,  winning  blessings  by  secret  prayers.  ( W.  II.  Jellie.)  Blessincf 
the  people  : — I.  The  recooniiion  of  man's  6Re.\test  need,  viz.,  God's  blessing. 
Probably  the  formulary  employed  was  that  recorded  in  Numb.  vi.  23  27,  or  Psa.  xc. 
17.  What  a  complete  and  comprehensive  blessing!  Man  needed  the  face  of  God 
to  shiue  upon  him— Gods  reconciled,  cheering,  transforming  face,  the  face  of  hi* 


CHAP.  IX.]  LEVITICUS.  133 

Father  and  King.  The  peace  of  God  alone  could  remove  remorse  for  the  past  and 
di'ead  apprehensions  for  the  future.  Here,  then,  was  the  bestowment  of  all  needed 
grace,  the  earnest  as  well  as  preparation  for  final  glory.  These  blessings  centre  in 
and  fiow  from  Christ  with — 1.  Infinite  fulness.  2.  Inestimable  graciousness ;  for 
all  men  and  all  time.  II.  The  declaration  of  God's  greatest  joy,  viz.,  blessing 
MEN.  He  is  slow  to  anger,  and  delights  in  mercy.  Aaron,  standing  with  outspread 
hands,  was  the  represeutative  of  God  as  well  as  of  the  people ;  and  in  the  words  of 
the  Lord,  as  well  as  in  His  name,  he  pronounced  the  blessing.    God  blessed  man — 

1.  In  equity.  He  had  not  connived  at  iniquity,  had  not  accepted  man  into  His 
confidence  and  communion  without  obedience  and  satisfaction.  2.  Out  of  the 
sanctuary.  The  high  priest  came  out  of  the  Tabernacle  and  blessed  the  people  ;  and 
God  still  pronounces  His  best  and  brightest  blessing  out  of  Zion,  where  His  name  is 
recorded,  His  worship  observed.  3.  In  connection  with  human  means.  It  was  the 
blessing  of  God,  but  it  passed  through  the  lips  of  Aaron.  God  employed  and  honoured 
human  agency.  (F.  W.  Brown. )  Christ's  priestly  blessing  : — Jewish  priests  were 
required  to  give  the  blessing — or,  as  we  say,  "  pronounce  the  benediction" — at  the 
close  of  their  religious  meetings,  as  the  ministers  of  the  gospel  do  now.  And  this  was 
especially  done  at  the  close  of  the  solemn  service  here  among  the  Jews  every  year 
on  what  was  called  "  the  great  Day  of  Atonement."  We  kuow  what  the  words  were 
which  the  priests  used  on  these  occasions.  We  find  them  in  Numb.  vi.  24-26.  They 
are  these  :  "  The  Lord  bless  thee  and  keep  thee  :  the  Lord  make  His  face  shine  upon 
thee,  and  be  gracious  unto  thee :  the  Lord  lift  up  His  countenance  upon  thee,  and 
give  thee  peace."  These  words  are  very  beautiful.  But  then  the  Jewish  priests 
could  only  use  them  as  a  kind  of  prayer.  But  they  had  no  power  to  give  the  people 
these  blessings.  And  here  we  see  the  great  difference  between  all  other  priests  and 
Jesus,  our  heavenly  Priest.  He  not  only  speaks  the  words  of  blessing,  but  He  really 
gives  the  blessings  those  words  represent.  This  was  what  He  meant  when  He  said 
to  His  disciples,  "  Peace  I  leave  with  you ;  My  peace  I  give  unto  you:  not  as  the 
world  giveth,  give  I  unto  you"  (John  xiv.  27).  The  world,  or  the  people  in  the 
world,  can  only  wish  or  pray  that  we  may  have  peace.  But  Jesus  can  give  peace. 
Yes,  and  not  only  peace,  but  pardon,  and  hope,  and  joy,  and  grace,  and  every 
blessing  that  we  need,  Jesus  is  able  to  give.  He  came  to  bless  the  world.  He  did 
bless  it  while  He  was  in  it.  He  "  went  about  doing  good."  He  was  scattering 
blessings  wherever  He  went.  And  He  is  doing  the  same  still.  He  loves  to  bless  ;  and 
the  store  of  blessings  He  has  to  draw  upon  is  so  large  and  full  that  it  never  can  fail. 
Look  at  yonder  sun.  For  thousands  of  years  it  has  been  shining  away  all  the  time ; 
and  yet  the  sun  has  as  much  light  to  give  to-day  as  it  had  in  the  day  when  God  first 
made  it.  Or  look  at  yonder  ocean.  It  has  been  giving  up  its  water  to  supply  the 
springs  and  fountains  of  the  earth  ever  since  it  was  made  ;  and  yet  there  is  as  much 
water  in  the  ocean  to-day  as  there  was  thousands  of  years  ago.  And  so  it  is  with 
Jesus.  For  thousands  of  years  He  has  been  giving  away  blessings  continually ; 
and  yet  He  has  as  many  to  give  to-day  as  though  He  had  never  given  one  before. 
He  came  to  bless  the  world.  He  has  blessed  it,  and  He  is  blessing  it  still. 
He  is  blessing  nations  and  families  and  individuals  in  such  a  way  as  nothing  else 
«an  bless  them.  {Richard  Newton,  D.D.)  There  came  a  fire  out  from  before 
the  Lord. — The  miraculous  fire : — I.  Some  of  the  facts  which  the  flashing  fike 
CONFIRMED.  1.  That  the  sacrifices  were  Divinely  accepted.  2.  That  the  priests 
were  Divinely  accredited.  3.  That  the  Tabernacle  was  Divinely  appropriated.  II. 
Some  of  the   effects   which   the    flashing   fire   produced.     1.  Holy  rapture. 

2.  Gratitude.  3.  Sacred  awe.  4.  All  the  manifestations  of  God's  glory  to  men, 
in  nature  and  in  revelation,  are  calculated  and  designed  to  awaken  rapture  and  beget 
reverence.  The  gospel  brings  glad  tidings  of  great  joy ;  it  begets  reverence,  for  it 
shows  us  how  great  our  sins  and  how  holy  our  God.  We  see  God  as  a  consuming 
fire  to  consume  sin  and  to  purify  from  all  defilement.  Let  us  so  live  that  hereafter 
•we  may  enter  into  the  glory  unchanging  and  eternal.  Eapture  and  reverence  will 
characterise  the  delight  and  worship  of  heaven.  [F.  W.  Brown.)  God's  acceptance  of 
the  sacrifices  : — I.  The  testimonies  op  God's  acceptance.  These  were  of  different 
kinds.  1.  Ministerial.  Moses  and  Aaron  having  finished  all  that  they  had  to  do 
within  the  Tabernacle,  came  forth  and  "  blessed  the  people."  In  this  they  were — 
<1)  Types  of  Christ.  Showing  what  He  would  do  as  soon  as  He  had  finished  His 
sacrifice  :  He  blessed  His  disciples  (Luke  xxiv.  50,  51)  as  He  was  taken  up  to  heaven ; 
and  He  sent  the  promised  blessing  of  the  Holy  Spirit  quickly  thence  (Acts  ii.  33 ; 
iii.  26).  (2)  Examples  to  ministers.  Showing  what  all  ministers  are  empowered  to 
declare  to  those  who  rely  on  the  Great  Sacrifice.     They  are  to  stand  forth  in  the 


134  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

very  name  of  God  and  proclaim  pardon  and  peace  to  all  (Acts  xiii.  38,  39).  2. 
Personal.  In  two  ways  did  God  Himself,  by  direct  testimonies,  apart  from  all 
indirect  human  agency,  manifest  His  acceptance.  (1)  He  displayed  His  glory  before 
all  the  people.  Now  we  have  no  such  visible  manifestation,  but  we  have  instead,  as 
direct  testimonies  from  God,  "  the  Spirit  of  God  witnessing  with  our  spirit."  and 
"  the  love  of  God  shed  abroad  in  our  hearts."  (2)  He  sent  fire  upon  the  sacrifice. 
Showing  what  fiery  indignation  they  deserved,  but  that  He  had  turned  it  aside  from 
them  and  caused  it  to  fall  on  the  altar.  II.  Effects  pkoduced  by  these  testi- 
monies "of  God's  acceptance.  Visible  objects  affect  us  strongly ;  the  people  now 
were  deeply  impressed  with  what  they  saw.  They  were  filled — 1.  With  exalted  joy. 
Had  they  not  been  taught  to  expect  this  manifestation  they  would  have  been  terrified 
thereby,  as  Gideon  and  Mam  ah  (Judg.  vi.  21,  22;  xiii.  19-22);  but  being  prepared, 
they  rent  the  air  with  their  shouts.  The  inward  triumph  of  Paul  seems  more  suited 
to  our  dispensation  (Rom.  viii.  31-39),  and  that  is  both  the  privilege  and  duty  of 
every  one  of  us  to  enjoy.  2.  With  profound  reverence.  Humility  united  with  joy. 
Even  the  seraphim  cover  their  faces  and  feet  before  the  throne ;  glorified  saints  cast 
their  crowns  at  the  feet  of  Him  who  sitteth  thereon.  Exalted  joys  should  be  tem- 
pered with  adoration.  Illustrations  will  be  found  in  Gen.  xvii.  3 ;  Exod.  iii.  6. 
Learn— (1)  To  lay  no  stress  on  transient  affections.  Such  a  state  of  feeling  in  the 
people  ought  to  have  issued  well,  but  soon  passed  away  when  temptation  arose. 
(2)  To  be  thankful  for  the  advantages  we  enjoy.  We  are  apt  to  envy  the  Jews  their 
privileges :  they  walked  by  sight,  we  walk  by  faith.  But  our  High  Priest  "  blesses 
us  with  all  spiritual  blessings."     (C has.  Simeon,  M. A.)  Gracious  fire  : — I.  Fire 

SEALS  WITH  Heaven's  own  seal  the  atoning  bites.  Wherefore  comes  the  fire  forth  ? 
Is  it  to  seize  the  guilty  sons  of  men  ?  Is  it  to  hurl  on  them  deserved  wrath  ?  Far 
otherwise.  It  comes  with  olive-branch  of  peace.  It  settles  on  the  altar.  It  feeds 
on  the  victim  as  its  feast.  Then  it  brings  evidence  of  God's  delight.  Then  it  fills 
hearts  with  tranquil  peace.  The  flame  with  blazing  tongue  proclaims,  "  Here  is  the 
sacrifice  which  God  selects,  approves,  calls  men  to  bring,  and  never  will  refuse." 
II.  The  attesting  fibe  speaks  God's  acceptance  of  substitution.  The  altar 
victims  were  the  foreshadowing  of  Christ.  Faith,  therefore,  loves  this  scene.  It 
is  one  of  the  wells  from  which  it  gladly  draws  new  joy.  It  is  one  of  the  meadows  of 
its  richest  food.  But  what  is  the  antitype  of  the  descending  flame  ?  The  clear 
gospel  page.  Three  distinct  testimonies  answer  to  this  approving  sign.  1.  The 
angelic  host,  a  shining  train,  which  swept  down  from  heaven  at  Jesus'  birth.  2.  The 
baptismal  seal  (Luke  iii.  21,  22).  3.  Transfiguration  glories  rest  on  Him,  and  a 
voice  from  the  cloud  proclaims,  "  This  is  My  belo\ed  Son."  4.  The  opened  grave, 
guarded  by  the  angels,  for  in  the  resurrection  of  Christ  we  have  the  fiery  seal  of  an 
accepted  sacrifice.  When  Israel's  host  beheld  the  fire  of  God,  what  were  their 
feelings  ?  "They  shouted  and  fell  on  their  faces."  Sweet  joy  was  theirs.  Deep 
adoration  warmed  each  heart.  Exulting  praise  burst  forth.  Profoundest  worship 
was  their  instant  act.  Shall  we  not  do  the  like  ?  God  sent  His  Son  to  seek,  to  save. 
Oh,  then,  let  every  breath  praise  God !  Let  every  hour  of  every  day  be  inward 
worship  1  {Dean  Lau\)  Of  the  divers  occasions  of  the  sending  of  mirac%dous  fire 
upon  the  sacrifices : — 1.  One  occasion  was  when  in  the  confusion  of  things  they  had 
need  of  some  unwonted  confirmation  ;  as  when  Gideon  was  appointed  to  be  the 
deliverer  of  the  people  this  figure  was  given  him  in  that  confused  state  to  confirm 
him  in  his  calling  (Judg.  vi.  21).  2.  Another  reason  was  when  God's  worship  was 
to  be  maintained  against  idolatry  and  false  worship  ;  as  when  Elijah  contended  with 
Baal's  priests  the  like  miracle  was  shown  (1  Kings  xviii.  38).  3.  And  further  when 
the  Lord  was  pleased  to  give  assurance  of  His  favour  and  reconciliation  after  some 
sin  committed ;  as  when  David  had  numbered  the  people,  and  the  Lord  being  there- 
with offended  had  sent  a  great  plague,  He  showed  his  acceptiiuce  of  David's  sacrifice 
by  answering  him  by  fire  from  heaven  (1  Chron.  xxi.  26).  4.  By  the  sending  also 
of  fire  the  Lord  gave  assurance  of  His  perpetual  presence  and  assistance  ;  as  at  the 
dedication  of  Solomon's  Temple.  Thereby  He  testified  that  the  mount  of  Sion 
pleased  Him.  5.  And  hereby  also  the  Lord  gave  approbation  of  His  own  ordinance, 
as  here  He  doth  demonstrate  Himself  to  be  the  Author  of  the  legal  priesthood.  (A. 
Willet,  D.D.)  The  fire  in  the  gospel: — This  fire  which  came  from  God  upon 
Aaron's  sacrifice  representeth  the  spiritual  force  of  the  gospel.  The  fire  hath  four 
properties — to  give  light,  to  heat,  to  examine  and  try,  to  consume  ;  so  the  Word  of 
God  is  a  lantern  to  our  feet ;  it  inflameth  the  heart ;  it  trieth  our  life  and  doctrine ; 
it  consumeth  and  purgeth  our  sin.  Ambrose  here  saith  well,  "  Thou  art  the  bush, 
I  the  fire  in  the  bush  ;  I  therefore  am  as  fire  in  the  flesh,  that  I  may  give  thee  light 
and  consume  thy  sins."     (Ibid.) 


CHAP.  X.J  LEVITICUS.  135 


CHAPTER  X. 

Vees.  1,  2.  Nadab  and  Abihu  .  .  .  offered  strange  fire. — The  fall  of  Nadab  and 
Abihu  : — Nadab  and  Abihu  were  no  inconsiderable  personages.  They  were  the 
sons  of  Israel's  priest,  the  nephews  of  Israel's  leader,  the  head  of  Israel's  princely 
elders.  They  had  been  with  Moses  and  Aaron  in  the  hallowed  mount ;  they  bad 
looked  upon  the  glorious  vision  of  God  as  He  appeared  on  Sinai ;  they  had  been 
chosen  and  consecrated  to  the  priesthood;  they  had  stood  by  and  assisted  Aaron 
in  the  first  operations  of  the  Hebrew  ritual ;  and  in  all  that  camp  of  God's 
ransomed  ones,  Moses  and  Aaron  alone  had  higher  dignity  than  theirs.  But,  from 
the  mount  of  vision  they  fell  into  the  pit  of  destruction.  They  were  accepted 
prie^ts  yesterday  ;  they  are  disgraced  victims  of  God's  holy  indignation  to-day. 
An  event  so  startling  and  melancholy,  occurring  at  the  very  inception  of  the  Mosaic 
ceremonies,  challenges  our  special  attention,  and  calls  for  serious  thinking.  I. 
Let  us  inquire,  then,  into  the  nature  of  the  offence  which  called  out  this 
startling  visitation  upon  these  unfortunate  men.  The  context  sh  iws  that  it  was 
not  one  isolated  and  specific  act  of  disobedience.  It  was  of  a  complex  nature,  and 
involved  sundry  particulars,  each  of  which  contributed  to  make  up  the  general 
crime  for  which  judgment  came  upon  the  guilty  ones.  The  special  statute 
recorded  in  the  ninth  verse,  of  which  this  occurrence  seems  to  have  been  the 
occasion,  furnishes  ground  for  the  inference,  that  Nadab  and  Abihu  had  indulged 
too  freely  in  stimulating  drinks,  and  thus  incapacitated  themselves  for  that 
circumspection  and  sacred  reverence  which  belonged  to  the  priestly  functions.  And 
if  this  inference  be  correct,  we  have  here  another  among  the  many  sad  exhibitions 
of  the  mischiefs  wrought  by  indulging  in  a  too  free  use  of  intoxicating  liquors. 
The  history  of  strong  drink  is  the  history  of  ruin,  of  tears,  of  blood.  It  is,  perhaps, 
the  greatest  curse  that  has  ever  scourged  the  earth.  But,  although  drunkenness 
was  most  likely  the  root  of  Nadab  and  Abihu's  offending,  it  was  not  the  body  of 
their  crime.  If  these  men  had  not  been  first  "  set  on  fire  of  heU  "  by  excessive 
indulgence  in  drink,  they  would  never  perhaps  have  been  driven  to  the  daring 
impiety  which  cost  them  their  lives.  The  head  and  front  of  the  sin  of  these  men, 
as  I  understand  it,  was  the  presumptuous  substitution  of  a  will-worship  of  their 
own,  in  defiance  of  what  God  had  appointed.  In  three  points  did  they  offend — 
first,  in  the  time  ;  second,  in  the  manner ;  and  third,  in  the  matter  of  the  service 
which  they  undertook.  It  was  the  prerogative  of  Moses  or  Aaron  to  say  when  their 
services  were  needed  ;  but  they  went  precipitately  to  work,  without  waiting  for 
instructions,  or  asking  for  directions.  It  was  for  the  high  priest  alone  to  go  in 
before  the  Lord  and  offer  incense  at  the  mercy-seat ;  but  they  wickedly  encroached 
upon  His  functions,  and  went  in  themselves.  Never  more  than  one  priest  was 
to  officiate  in  burning  incense  at  the  same  time ;  but  they  both  together  entered 
upon  a  service  which  did  not  belong  to  either.  These  things  in  themselves  evince 
a  very  high-handed  disregard  of  Divine  order.  But  the  great  burden  of  their  sin 
rested  m  the  matter  of  the  service.  They  "offered  strange  fire" — common  fir^i 
—  fire  wholly  foreign  to  the  fire  which  God  had  kindled  for  such  purposes.  They 
thus  obtruded  what  was  profane  into  what  was  holy,  desecrated  God's  ritual,  casi 
contempt  upon  His  institutions,  put  their  own  will-worship  above  His  f-acred 
regulations,  and  thus  called  down  upon  themselves  a  judgment  which  made  all 
Israel  tremble.  II.  Let  us  now  consider  some  of  the  implications,  sdrroundings, 
AND  fores HADowiNGS  of  this  sad  occurrencc.  The  shadows  of  the  future  were 
linked  in  with  the  facts  of  the  past.  Scarcely  had  Christianity  been  constituted, 
until  we  find  a  foreign  and  fitful  spirit  insinuating  itself  into  the  operations  of 
those  into  whose  charge  its  earthly  services  had  been  given  (see  2  Thess.  ii.  3,  4  ; 
1  John  iv.  3).  Along  with  pontifical  power,  came  in  great  doctrinal  and  moral 
corruption.  The  one  was  a  part  of  the  other.  Bishops  retired  from  the  pulpits 
to  sit  as  spiritual  lords,  superior  to  all  the  kings  of  earth  ;  the  Virgin  Mary 
was  installed  as  the  world's  mediator  ;  earthly  priests  assumed  the  work  of  inter- 
cession, and  undertook  to  forgive  and  license  crime  for  a  price  ;  the  Church  was 
driven  to  the  wilderness  ;  another  Abihu  in  his  drunkenness  had  entered  the  Holy 
Place,  and  was  offering  strange  fire  before  the  Lord.  And  the  thing  that  hath  been 
is  the  thing  that  is.  Philosophy  still  has  its  additions  to  make  to  the  Word  of  God. 
Heathenish  pomp  stiU  moves  to  lift  itself  up  in  our  temples.  Human  reason  is 
still  at  work  to  devise  ways  to  worship  and  please  God  which  He  has  not  com- 
manded.    Men  are  still  found  who  claim  authority  to  perform  offices  for  the  souls 


136  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

of  others,  which  belong  only  to  our  great  High  Priest  in  heaven.  Thousands  there 
are  who  flatter  themselves  that  they  are  doing  great  things  in  their  worship,  though 
the  spirit  that  is  in  them  is  not  at  all  the  Spirit  of  Christ.  But  it  shall  not 
always  be  so.  There  is  a  price  annexed  to  all  these  usurpations  and  irregularities 
with  regard  to  holy  things.  God  has  magnified  His  Word  above  all  His  name  ; 
and  he  that  adds  to  or  takes  from  it,  has  his  I'eward  siJecified,  and  his  portion 
reserved  for  him.  Nadab  and  Abihu  were  sudilenly  and  miraculously  cut  off  iu  the 
midst  of  their  sin  ;  and  so  shall  it  be  at  last  with  all  the  confederates  in  usurpation 
and  wrong,  whether  secular  or  ecclesiastical.  Fire  from  the  Lord  shall  slay  ihem. 
{J.  A.  Seisx,  D.D.)  Repulsive  incense: — I.  Theih  offensive  offeking.  1. 
Whatrendered  their  incense  odious  to  God?  "Strange  fire."  (1)  Not  kindled  by  God. 
(2)  Not  mingled  with  blood.  2.  What  corresponding  offensiveness  may  mar  our 
offerings?  The  lire  is  "  strange  "  when  our  religion  or  work  is  the  outcome  of — 
(1)  Mere  emotional  fervour.  (2)  Mere  intellectual  excitement.  (3)  Mere  feverish 
activity.  (4)  Mere  self-glorifying  religious  effort.  (5)  Mere  spiritual  rhapsody. 
II.  Their  rash  impiety.  1.  Fearless  presumption.  2.  Wilful  disobedience.  III. 
Their  alarming  destruction.  1.  Bemember  the  Gnd  with  whom  we  have  to  do. 
2.  The   rebuke  which  presumption  will  receive.      (W.  H.  Jellie.)  The  sin  of 

Aaron's   so7is: — I.  How  elevation  to  high  and  holt  positions   does    not    place 

MEN  BEYOND  THE  TEMPTATION  AND  LIABILITY  TO  COMMIT  SIN.  II.  HoW  THE 
committal  of  sin  MERITS,  AND  MAY  MEET  WITH  SUDDEN  CORRESPONDING  RETRIBU- 
TION.      III.    How    SUCH     RETRIBUTION,    WHILE    IT    CONDEMNS     THE     SINNER,    VINDICATES 

THE  BROKEN  LAW  AND  GLORIFIES  THE  LAWGIVER.  1.  We  may  note  that  the  punish- 
ment they  received — (1)  Condemns  them  here  in  the  eyes  of  all  Israel.  (2)  Showed 
the  exceeding  sinfulness  of  sin ;  and  (3)  The  exacting  demands  and  exalted  dignity 
of  the  law.  2.  God  thus  manifesting  Himself  as  a  consuming  fire  showed — (I) 
His  jealousy,  that  He  could  not  be  openly  and  grossly  insulted.  (2)  His  power, 
that  the  fire  which  glowed  in  the  cloud,  which  had  kindly  let  them  out  of  Egypt, 
protected  them  from  their  foes,  and  which  consumed  the  burnt-offering  on  the 
day  of  consecration,  had  power  to  destroy,  and,  unless  held  in  check,  would 
consume  all  sinners.  (3)  His  mercy,  that  while  sin  deserved  punishment,  and 
God  had  the  right  and  power  to  destroy.  He  made  judgment  His  strange  work,  and 
such  retribution — as  that  which  visited  Aaron's  sons — an  exceptional  thing.  Let 
us  learn  that  though  worship  must  be  voluntary  yet  it  must  be  according  to  God's 
own  appointed  way.  Liberty  is  not  to  be  perverted  into  lawlessness.  3.  Strange 
fire  is  offered  upon  God's  altar  when  worship  is  presented  with— (1)  Unsolicited 
materials,  or  from  (2)  Unsanctified  motives.  Enthusiasm  is  holy  ardour — literally, 
God  in  us — His  own  fire  ascending  to  Himself.  (jF.  W.  Brmvn.)  Nadah  and 
AhUiu: — I.  The  position  of  these  two  men.  Regularly  ordained  priests  of  the 
Lord  (Exod.  xl.  12-16).  They  had  a  right,  therefore,  to  burn  incense  before  the 
Lord.  II.  The  charge  against  these  men  (ver.  1).  1.  The  letter  of  the  law 
was  violated  (chap.  xvi.  12,  13).  2.  The  essence  of  this  sin  (ver  3).  (1)  Emphasis 
to  be  placed  on  "I."  "7  will  be  sanctified,"  &c.  (2)  This  implies  that  when 
deviations  from  Divine  and  clearly-defined  instructions  occur,  the  Lord  charges 
that  such  deviations  do  not  enhance  His  glory  ;  neither  is  He  sanctified  in  those 
who  are  guilty  of  such  deviations.  III.  The  punishment  inflicted  on  these 
MEN  (ver.  2).  The  punishment  indicates  the  unspeakable  importance  with  which 
God  regards  implicit  and  strict  obedience  to  the  letter  of  all  His  ordinances.  IV. 
The  conduct  of  Aaron,  the  father  of  these  two  men.  "  Held  his  peace." 
1.  How  great  the  grace  needed  for  this.  2.  How  exemplary  the  use  of  needed 
grace  in  such  a  trial  as  this.  V.  The  accustomed  mourning  foe  the  dead  was 
PROHIBITED  IN  RESPECT  TO  THESE  MEN  (ver.  6).  Docs  not  the  rebelfious  element 
oftentimes  enter  into  our  mourning,  and  thus  the  grace  of  God,  in  bereavement, 
becomes  of  no  practical  value?  VI.  The  new  prohibition  (vers.  8-11).  The 
connection  in  which  this  prohibition  stands  suggests — 1.  That  Nadab  and  Abihu 
were  probably  under  the  influence  of  some  intoxicating  liquor  when  led  to  offer 
"  strange  fire  "  before  the  Lord.  2.  That  such  liquors  have  a  tendency  to  unfit 
any  one  for  any  true  spiritual  exercise,  because  of  their  exciting  nature.  Lessons : 
1.  How  profound  a  lesson  is  here  taught  in  regard  to  the  only  acceptable  manner 
of  administering  the  ordinances  of  God's  house — not  with  the  strange  fire  of  will- 
worship,  nor  by  the  slightest  deviation  from  the  prescribed  order.  2.  We  learn 
the  unfitness  of  those  who  minister  in  holy  things,  who  neglect  the  proper 
observance  of  the  ordinances,  and  teach  men  so  to  do.  3.  Let  us  learn  to  submit 
to  God's  judgments,  however  severe.      4.  Let  us  avoid  everything  that  would 


CHAP.  X.]  LEVITICUS.  137 

disqualify  us  for  acceptable  worship.  (D.  C  Huf/hes,  M.A.)  Lessons  : — 1.  No 
new  or  strange  doctrine  to  be  brought  into  the  Church.  2.  God's  election  free, 
and  of  grace,  not  of  any  worthiness  in  man.  3.  That  God  is  no  accepter  of  persons. 
4.  God  is  to  be  glorified  even  in  His  judgments.  5.  Of  a  double  power  of  the 
Word,  to  life  or  death.  6.  The  bodies  of  the  dead  to  be  reverently  used,  and  after 
a  seemly  manner  to  be  buried.  7.  That  it  is  lawful  upon  just  occasion  to  be 
angry.  (A.  Willet,  D.D.)  Moral  obserratioiis  : — 1.  In  prosperity  we  must  think 
of  adversity.  2.  Not  to  present  ourselves  before  God  with  carnal,  vile,  and 
strange  affections.  3.  Wherein  a  man  sinneth,  he  shall  be  punished.  4.  To 
submit  ourselves  to  the  will  of  God.  5.  That  men  should  not  for  the  occasion  of 
private  giief  neglect  the  public  business,  especially  in  God's  service.  6.  Against 
the  sin  of  drunkenness,  especially  in  ministers.  7.  That  our  sins  are  an  offence 
unto  Christ,  and  to  aU  the  celestial  company.  8.  Not  to  be  too  rigorous  toward 
those  who  are  in  heaviness,  and  sin  in  weakness.  {Ibid.)  Strange  fire  : — Their 
sin  was  that  to  burn  incense  withal,  they  took  not  the  fire  from  the  altar  of  that 
which  came  down  from  heaven,  and  was  preserved  by  the  diligence  of  the  priests 
till  the  captivity  of  Babylon,  but  other  fire,  which  therefore  is  called  strange  fire 
because  it  was  not  fire  appointed  and  commanded.  Which  fault  in  man's  eyes 
may  seem  to  have  excuse,  and  not  to  deserve  so  fearful  a  punishment.  For  they 
were  but  yet  green  in  their  office  and  so  of  ignorance  might  offend,  being  not  yet 
well  acquainted  with  the  nature  of  their  office.  Again,  of  forgetfulness  they  might 
offend,  not  remembering  or  thinking  of  the  matter  as  they  ought.  Thirdly,  there 
was  no  malice  in  them,  or  purpose  to  do  evil,  but  wholly  they  aimed  at  God's 
service  with  a  true  meaning,  although  in  the  manner  they  missed  somewhat.  But 
all  these,  and  whatsoever  like  excuses,  were  as  fig-leaves  before  God,  vain  and 
weak  to  defend  them  from  guiltiness  in  the  breach  of  His  commandment.  1.  First, 
with  what  severity  the  Lord  challengeth  and  defendeth  His  authority  in  laying 
down  the  way  and  manner  of  His  worship,  not  leaving  it  to  any  creature  to  meddle 
with,  but  according  to  prescription  and  appointment  from  Him.  Content  He  is 
that  men  shall  make  laws  for  human  matters,  concerning  their  worldly  estate  in 
this  earth  as  shall  be  fittest  for  the  place  where  they  live.  Laws  against  murder, 
theft,  oppression,  &c.,  but  for  His  Divine  worsbip  He  only  will  prescribe  it  Himself, 
and  what  He  appointeth  that  must  be  done  and  tbat  only,  or  else  Nadab  and  Abihu 
their  punishment  expected,  that  is,  God's  wrath  expected,  in  such  manner  as  He 
shall  please.  2.  But  doth  not  a  good  intent  and  meaning  prevail  with  God,  albeit 
the  thing  be  not  expressly  warranted  ?  Yourself  judge  by  that  which  you  see  here, 
and  in  many  other  Scriptures.  Had  Nadab  and  Abihu,  the  sons  of  Aaron,  here  any 
ill-meaning  towards  God,  or  did  they  of  malicious  purpose  offend  Him  and  procure 
their  own  destruction?  No;  you  must  needs  think  their  intent  was  good,  but 
because  they  swerved  from  the  Word,  that  good  intent  served  not.  The  words 
out  of  Deuteronomy  are  not,  you  shall  not  do  ill  in  your  own  eyes,  "  But  you  shall 
not  do  that  which  seemeth  good  " — good  I  say,  and  I  pray  you  mark  it,  you  shall  not 
do  that,  but  shall  keep  you  to  My  commandment.  Be  it  never  so  good,  then,  in  my 
conceit,  that  is,  be  my  meaning  never  so  good,  it  profiteth  not,  neither  shall  excuse 
God's  destroying  wrath  more  than  it  did  here  these  sons  of  Aaron.  "  There  is  a  way," 
saith  Solomon,  "  that  seemeth  good  to  a  man  and  right,  but  the  issues  thereof  are 
the  ways  of  death."  Such  assuredly  are  all  will-worships  not  grounded  upon  the 
Word,  but  upon  man's  will  and  good  intent.  "  They  shall  excommunicate  you," 
saith  our  Saviour  Christ,  "yea,  the  time  shall  come  that  whosoever  killeth  you 
will  think  that  he  doth  God  good  service."  What  then  ?  Shall  his  so  thinking 
excuse  his  bloody  murder?  Joseph  had  no  ill-meaning  when  he  prayed  his  Father 
to  change  his  hand  and  lay  his  right  hand  upon  his  elder  son's  head.  What  ill 
meant  Joshua  when  he  wished  Moses  to  forbid  those  that  prophesied  ?  Micah's 
mother,  when,  according  to  her  vow,  she  made  her  sou  two  idols  ?  Peter's  mean- 
ing had  no  hurt  in  it  when  he  forbade  Christ  to  wash  his  feet ;  with  a  number 
like  places  in  Scripture.  Yet  you  know  no  good  intent  was  accepted  in  these  cases. 
No  more  shall  it  ever  be  when  it  is  not  agreeing  to  the  Word,  which  only  is  a 
Christian  man  and  woman's  true  and  perfect  guide.  Let,  therefore,  these  things 
take  place  within  us,  and  never  wrestle  we  against  the  Lord,  for  He  is  too  strong 
for  us,  and  His  will  must  stand,  not  ours.  Oh,  why  should  it  grieve  me  to  be  ruled 
by  His  word,  seeing  it  is  so  sure  a  way  for  me  to  walk  in  ?  Or  why  should  any 
teacher  deliver  to  me  that  which  he  never  received  of  God  to  be  delivered  to  His 
people  ?  If  they  crave  obedience  why  should  they  be  angry,  that  I  pray  to  have  it 
showed  out  of  His  Word  whom  only  I  must  obey  ?     He  hath  prescribed  a  form  of 


138  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

serving  Him,  that  form  He  will  accept  and  bless  with  eternal  peace  ;  all  other 
forms  He  will  abhor  and  punish.  Nadab  and  Abihu  preach  so  unto  us  and  all 
flesh.  Tbey  wish  us  to  take  heed  by  their  harm.  God  is  in  other  things  full  of 
patience,  but  in  this  He  is  full  of  wrath,  and  His  authority  to  appoint  His  own 
worship,  He  will  not  endui'e  it  to  be  taken  from  Him  by  any  man.  {Bp.  Bablnqton.) 
Nadab  and  Ahihu  ; — In  this  passage  we  have  the  law  of  worship  announced,  not  in 
the  measured  statements  of  a  statute,  but  in  words  of  terror  spoken  with  tongues  of 
flame.  What  answer  does  tlie  incident  give  us  to  the  vital  question.  How  can  men 
worship  God  acceptably?  I.  The  characteb  of  the  worshipper  is  a  factor  of 
IMPORTANCE.  Those  who,  like  the  apostle,  are  "  in  tlie  Spirit  on  the  Lord's  day" 
— and  every  day  may  be  a  "Lord's  day  " — are  caught  up  mlothe  realm  of  spiritual 
vision,  and  stand  face  to  face  with  realities  that  on  lower  levels  are  at  best  the 
dreams  and  hopes  of  faith.  Worship  as  an  offering  may  be  formal,  (hough  even 
for  that  to  be  acceptable  there  must  be  some  preparedness  of  heart ;  but  worship, 
in  order  to  prove  a  revelation,  must  be  spiritual,  and  in  securing  that  the  attitude 
of  soul  is  evei'ything.  H.  The  purpose  of  the  worshipper  is  an  element  of 
which  God  makes  account.  Whatever  other  reasons  influenced  Nadab  and  Abihu 
to  offer  "  strange  fire,"  it  is  evident  that  they  had  some  selfish  end  to  serve.  God 
looks  down  into  every  pulpit,  and  into  every  minister's  heart,  and  judges  every 
praver,  and  criticises  every  seiunon,  and  estimates  the  worth  or  worthhssness  of 
t'je  service  offered,  according  as  He  finds  or  fads  to  find  a  singleness  of  purpose  to 
honour  Him  the  sovereign  motive  that  originates  and  regulates  it  all.  As  God 
looks  down  on  our  Sabbath  assemblies,  in  how  many  pewe  He  sees  men  and  women 
offering  "strange  fire,"  instead  of  bringing  the  api^ointed  sacrifice.  The  spirit  of 
devotion  that  animates  real  service  is  omitted.     III.  The  preparation  for  worship 

IS  A  MATTER   TO  WHICH  GoD    ATTACHES    GREAT   IMPORTANCE.       The  UUmC'OUS  directioUS- 

in  the  Jewish  ritual  locking  to  personal  purity  were  all  symbolic  and  significant  of 
the  value  of  character  in  the  office  of  worship  (Psa.  xxiv.  3,  4;  1  Tim.  ii.  8;  Heb. 
X.  22).  Both  the  old  covenant  and  the  new  are  imperative  in  insisting  upon  right 
character  as  essentinl  to  right  worship.  IV.  The  mode  of  worship  has  its  limits 
of  importance.  The  Jewish  ritual  was  complicated,  but  it  was  in  all  its  parts 
significant.  A  distinguished  writer  has  said  that  "  whoever  would  write  out  the 
spiritual  symb"!ism  of  the  Book  of  Leviticus,  would  give  the  world  a  fifth  Gospel." 
Nadab  and  Abihu  were  punished  for  departing  from  the  Divinely  estiiblished  order 
of  service.  The  folly  of  men  is  never  so  apparent  as  when  it  sets  itself  up  as  being 
wiser  than  God.  Under  the  Christian  dispensation  larger  liberty  of  choice  is 
allowed.  Men  are  free  to  adopt  such  methods  of  worship  as  are  most  afiiuent  in 
ministries  to  their  spiritual  life.  But  the  old  underlying  principle  which  was 
soveieign  in  the  Jewish  ritual  still  remains  in  force.  Any  method  of  worsliip  which 
is  anything  more  than  a  means  to  an  end,  any  ceremony  which  suffers  the  thought 
to  go  no  further  than  itse  f,  is  radically  defective.      {E.  S.  Attrood.)  A  md 

incident: — I.  The  grievous  sin  of  Nadab  and  Abihu.  II.  The  severe  punish- 
ment OF  'iniCiR  sin.  The  punishment  in  its  severity  seems  out  of  i^roportion  to 
the  sin.  But  on  this  question  two  cons;  'erations  of  great  importance  should  bfl 
duly  weighed.  1  The  time  at  which  tlje  sin  was  committed.  They  were  now 
getting  the  sacred  ritual  into  full  operation;  and  it  was  of  essential  importance 
that  a  people  such  as  the  Israelites  were  at  this  time  should  be  taught  that  all 
sacred  things  should  be  reverently  regarded,  and  all  religions  services  performed 
in  a  devout  spirit  and  becoming  manner,  and  with  minute  attention  to  Divine 
directions.  2.  The  persons  by  whom  the  sin  was  committed.  They  were  the  elder 
sons  of  the  high  priest,  and  were  consecrated  to  the  holy  office  of  the  priesthood, 
"  the  very  persons  whose  official  charge  it  was  to  maintain  "  the  sacredness  of 
religious  institutions.  A  severe  punishment  was  necessary  for  the  welfare  of  the 
nation.  III.  The  exemplary  submission  of  Aaron.  IV.  The  burial  of  the 
bodies  of  the  offenders.  What  a  sight  that  was  passing  through  part  of  the 
camp — the  dead  bodies  of  two  men  recently  so  distinguished  in  relationship  and 
office,  now  so  distinguished  as  examples  of  the  awful  judgments  of  God,  and  in 
their  priestly  vestments  too !  How  fitted  to  impress  even  the  most  frivolous  with 
the  sacredness  of  Divine  institutions  and  the  dread  peril  of  violating  Divine 
directions !  V.  The  mourning  because  of  the  judgment  upon  the  offenders. 
VI.  The  legislation  to  which  these  things  g.ave  rise  (vers.  8-11).  1.  The 
law.  That  the  priesfs  should  abstain  from  every  kind  of  intoxicating  drink  during 
their  sacred  ministrations  (<•/.  Ezek.  xliv.  21).  2.  The  reasons  by  which  the  law 
was  enforced.     (1)  That  their  perceptions  might  be  clear,  and  their  judgment  true 


CHAP.  X.]  LEVITICUS.  139 

in  the  duties  of  their  holy  ofBce  (ver.  10).  (2)  That  they  might  teach  the  people 
all  God's  statutes  (ver.  11).  (3)  The  law  was  further  enforced  by  a  stern  penalty 
for  its  violation,  "  Lest  ye  die."  VII.  The  subject  suggests  lessons  :  1.  On 
worship.  We  should  worship  God  in  the  way  whicli  He  has  appoiuted — with 
humility,  with  reverence,  &c.  2.  On  sin  and  its  punishment.  Every  sin,  unless 
repented  and  forgiven,  must  be  punished.  But  presumptuous  sins,  such  as  that  of 
Nadab  and  Abihu  seems  to  have  been,  are  specially  heinous  and  ruinous  (c/.  Numb. 
XV.  30,  31 ;  Psa.  xix.  13).  3.  On  submission  to  the  will  of  God.  Imitate  Aaron  in 
this.  4.  On  fitness  for  the  service  of  God.  Aaron  and  his  sons  might  not  touch 
,  or  even  approach  the  dead,  &c.  The  servants  of  God  must  keep  themselves  from 
everything  that  might  defile  them.  "  Be  ye  clean  that  bear  the  vessels  of  the 
Lord."  5.  On  temperance.  The  wise  man  will  be  temperate  in  all  things  and  at 
all  times.  When  about  to  enter  upon  sacred  services  it  is  specially  advisable  to 
abstain  entirely  from  everything  intoxicating.  The  inspiration  for  such  services 
should  not  be  spirituous,  but  spiritual.  {Willia7n  Jones.)  Strange  fire  : — I.  Who 
OFFERED  IT.  Nadab  and  Abihu.  The  last  one  would  have  expected  to  be  guilty  of 
such  a  sin.  They  were  not  ignorant,  but  over-zealous  people,  who  only  imperfectly 
knew  the  law.  But  they  were  the  sons  of  Aaron,  Could  hardly  be  ignorant  of  the 
sin  they  were  committing.  The  best  that  can  be  said  of  them  is  that  they  were  not 
sufficiently  thoughtful.  Ignorance  and  thoughtlessness  are  sinful  in  those  with 
whom  knowledge  is  possible,  and  who  have  many  incentives  to  consideration.  We 
should  strive  to  know  that  we  may  more  perfectly  do  the  will  of  God.  The  great 
probability  is  that  their  sin  was  not  merely  sin  of  ignorance,  but  presumption. 
Preferred  their  choice  to  God's.  11.  What  they  offeeed.  From  chap,  xvi..  Numb, 
xvi.  18,  46,  it  is  clear  that  they  should  have  taken  a  coal  from  off  the  altar.  Every 
act  of  worship  was  strictly  prescribed.  Intention  to  beget  in  the  minds  of  the 
people  a  profound  reverence  for  the  will  of  God.  In  everything  to  consider  His 
will  first.  To  find  their  happiness  in  obedience.  Instead  of  acting  in  accordance 
with  the  will  of  God  they  obeyed  the  impulse  of  their  own  proud  and  selfish  hearts. 
It  is  likely  that  the  time  of  offering  was  also  wrong.  III.  How  they  weke  eeceived. 
They  draw  near  and  tawing  their  censers.  And  suddenly  "  there  went  out  fire,"  etc. 
(ver.  2).  Their  strange  fire  had  been  rephed  to  with  a  fire  more  strange  to  them. 
They  were  struck  dead  as  by  a  lightning-ilash.  A  sudden  and  emphatic  protest 
against  their  presumption.  Learn — 1.  To  study  earnestly'  that  we  may  more 
perfectly  obey  the  will  of  God.  2.  To  avoid  trifling  with  holy  things  and  ordinances. 
3.  The  instruments  of  sin  may  become  instruments  of  punishment.  With  fire  they 
sinned,  by  fire  they  were  overthrown.  4.  The  very  gospel,  if  abused,  may  become 
an  instrument  of  condemnation.  (J.  C.Gray.)  "Strange  fire": — Ere  that  "  eighth 
day  "  had  closed  (chap.  x.  19),  when  Jehovah  had  sent  fire  from  heaven  to  consume 
with  delight  the  offerings  laid  upon  His  altar,  in  token  of  acceptance — yea,  that 
very  day  Satan  was  again  at  work,  this  time  with  the  sons  of  Aaron,  leading  them 
to  offer — I.  "  Strange  fire,"  in  direct  violation  of  God's  command  (chap.  x.  1). 
His  fire  was  to  be  ever  burning  upon  His  altar  (chap.  vi.  12,  13),  continually  fed  by 
what  ascended  as  "  a  sweet  savour"  to  the  Lord  ;  and  "  strange  fire,"  like  strange 
incense  (Exod.  xxx.  9),  was  an  abomination  to  Him.  But  man  is  ever  prone  to 
think  his  way,  his  fire,  his  incense  as  good  or  better  than  God's.  And  where  God's 
Pire — i.e.,  the  Holy  Spirit — has  been  manifestly  working,  there  surely  does  Satan 
begin  to  work  by  his  emissaries,  as  in  the  case  of  Jannes  and  Jambres  (2  Tim.  iii. 
5-9  ;  Exod.  vii.  11,  22,  viii.  18) ;  and  again  with  the  "  vagabond  Jews,  exorcists  " 
(Acts  xix.  6-17),  in  the  days  of  St.  Paul.  Satan  inspires  "  false  teachers," 
"seducing  spirits"  (1  Tim.  iv.  1 ;  2  Pet.  ii.  1),  who,  Uke  Nadab  and  Abihu,  shall 
"  bring  upon  themselves  swift  destruction."  II.  The  sons  of  Aaron  had  been 
specially  privileged.  The  sons  of  Aaron  represent — as  we  know — the  Church, 
whose  members  are  also  partakers  of  many  privileges  (Heb.  vi.  4).  But  — as  "  they 
are  not  all  Israel  which  are  of  Israel"  (Rom.  ix.  6),  so  all  called  Christians  are  not 
"  Christ's  "  ;  and  it  is  just  in  the  professing  Church  that  we  may  expect  to  hear  of 
"strange  fire,"  and  false  worship,  inaugurated  by  "  false  teachers,"  who  shall  bring 
in  destructive  heresies  "  (2  Pet.  ii.  1,  R.V.) ;  and  "  many  shall  follow  their  pernicious 
ways  "  (ver.  2,  A.V.).  Especially  will  this  be  the  case  as  we  approach  the  end  of 
the  age — "  the  last  days  " — when  "  perilous  times  shall  come"  (2  Tim.  iii.  1).  III. 
"Fire  from  the  Lord,"  sent  forth  in  judgment,  as  in  the  case  of  Nadab  and 
Abihu.  That  fire  is  used  of  the  Lord  for  judgment  we  learn  from  many  passages 
in  Scripture.  See,  as  to  the  piist — 1.  "  The  cities  of  the  plain  "  (Gfmj^iy..24-2VM. 
"  making  them  an  ensample,"  &c.  (2  Pet.  ii.  6 ;  Jude  7).    2.  AtJC«H95?aJiJbicaHse^f"- 


140  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

the  complaining  of  the  children  of  Israel  (Numb.  xi.  1 ;  Psa.  Ixxviii.  21).  3.  "  The 
two  hundred  and  fifty  men  that  offered"  "  incense  "  (Numb.  xvi.  2,  35 ;  Psa.  cvi. 
18).  4.  The  captains  and  their  fifties  (2  Kings  i.  10,  12).  Then  as  to  the  future, 
we  read — "  Our  God  shall  come :  .  .  .  a  fiie  sh  ill  devour  before  Him,"  &c.  (Psa.  1. 
3  ;  see  also  xcvii.  3).  "  The  Lord  Jesus  shall  be  revealed  ...  in  flaming  fire,"  &c 
(2  Thess.  i.  7,8);  and  "  that  wicked  " — or  lawless  one  referred  to — shall  be  consumed 
(2  Thess.ii.  8).  "Afire  .  .  .  from  God  out  of  heaven  "  shall  devour  those  gathered 
against  the  saints  and  the  "  beloved  city  "  (Rev.  xx.  8,  9).  And  "  the  devil,  that 
deceiveth  them,"  shall  be  "  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire  and  brimstone"  (ver.  10).  He 
who  had  energised  many  with  "  strange  fire  "  will  be  consigned  to  the  "  everlasting 
fire  prepared,"  &c.  (Matt.  xxv.  41).  Appalling  indeed  to  think  of  these  judgments 
to  come  ;  and  while  we  speak  of  such  things  let  us  give  good  heed  lest  we  should 
seem  to  have  aught  of  the  spirit  of  James  and  John,  which  called  forth  our  Lord's 
rebuke  (Luke  ix.  51-56).  Let  us  rather  first  test  ourselves,  and  then  in  love  warn 
others.  He  is  ready  to  give  the  Holy  Spirit — His  purifying,  guiding  Fire  to  all 
who  ask  (Luke  xi.  13).  Lastly,  observe — IV.  Aaron's  attitcde  of  silent  submis- 
sion to  the  swift  and  appalling  judgment  with  which  his  sons  were  visittd.  "Aaron 
held  his  peace."  Think  of  the  agony  of  the  father's  grief,  yet  not  a  word !  He 
knew  his  sons'  great  sin,  and  Jehovah's  perfect  justice.  The  silence  of  Aarou 
may  also  teach  that  our"  Great  High  Priest"  could  not  intercede  for  any  guilty  of 
the  sin  He  declared  should  "  not  be  forgiven  "  (Matt.  xii.  31,  32 ;  Mark  iii.  28-30) : 
*'  Blasphemy  against  the  Holy  Ghost,"  to  which  the  "  strange  fire  "  seems  to  point. 
{Lady  Beaujolois  Dent.)  Clerical  apostasy  and  usurpation : — Many  a  pious  heart 
has  been  saddened,  and  sickened  almost  unto  death,  over  the  calamities  that  have 
befallen  the  camp  of  the  Lord  in  the  shape  of  apostasies,  false  doctrine,  unholy 
living,  and  reckless  usurpation.  Who  among  us  that  could  not  tell  the  story  of 
many  a  heart-rending  fall  in  the  Church  of  God  1  More  than  once  have  I  seen  the 
man  in  affluent  prosperity  a  great  patron  of  the  Church,  prompt  in  his  place  in  all 
the  services  of  the  sanctuary,  and  esteemed  as  one  of  Israel's  elders;  but  when 
reverses  and  bankruptcy  came  I  have  seen  him  turn  aside  to  walk  in  the  ways  of 
the  ungodly,  the  forger,  the  counterfeiter,  the  robber,  and  even  the  ribald  blasphemer. 
Many  a  time  have  I  seen  the  poor  man  in  his  daily  toil,  seemingly  waliiing  humbly 
with  his  God,  and  atteative  to  the  things  that  relate  to  heavenly  treasures ;  but 
when  the  tide  of  fortune  came  and  gave  him  riches,  or  advanced  him  to  places  of 
influence  and  distinction,  he  forgot  his  Church  and  pious  associations,  and  drifted 
away  into  pride  like  Lucifer's,  or  into  covetousuess  as  niggardly  as  Shylock's. 
I  have  seen  men  of  the  loudest  professions ;  yea,  men  ordained  to  stand  as  watch- 
men on  Zion's  walls,  secretly  dallying  with  the  demon  of  vicious  appetite,  until  they 
became  the  reeling  sport  of  boys  upon  the  street,  the  shame  of  their  denomination, 
and  the  tenants  of  ignoble  graves.  And  history  tells  again  and  again  of  men  whose 
heads  reached  unto  the  clouds,  who  in  an  unguarded  hour  came  down,  like  some 
tall  pine  of  the  forest  which  makes  the  wilderness  howl  in  its  fall ;  of  impious 
hands  touching  the  holy  vessels  of  God's  sanctuary  ;  of  false  incense  burned 
in  the  holy  place,  until  the  very  lamps  and  stars  were  hid,  and  the  very  house 
of  salvation    made   a   den   of   robbery   and  death.      (J.  A.  Seiss,  D.D.)  The 

sin  of  }iadah  and  Abiliu : — These  men  were  not  at  liberty  to  take  each  his  own 
censer  ;  there  was  a  utensil  provided  for  that  action,  and  for  any  man  to  bring  his 
own  ironmongery  to  serve  in  such  a  cause  was  to  insult  the  Spirit  of  the  universe. 
This  is  how  we  stand  to-day :  every  man  bringing  his  censer — his  own  censer — 
which  means  the  prostitution  of  personality,  the  loss  of  the  commonwealth-spirit 
and  of  the  recognition  of  the  unity  and  completeness  of  the  Church.  There  are 
men  who  spend  thf^ir  time  in  amending  Providence :  Nadab  and  Abihu  represent 
two  such  men  to-day.  There  are  men  who  are  always  trying  to  naturalise  the 
supernatural:  this  is  what  Nadab  and  Abihu  did.  They  said  in  effect,  "  This  evil 
fire  will  do  quite  as  well ;  build  your  life  on  reason  ;  order  all  the  ministry  of  your 
life  by  coherent  and  cumulative  argument ;  drop  the  ancient  words,  and  choose 
aud  set  new  words  of  your  own  ;  there  is  no  supernatural :  let  us  banish  super- 
stition and  inaugurate  the  reign  of  reason."  Nadab  and  Abihu  had  a  kind  of 
church,  but  a  church  without  the  true  God — an  uninhabited  shell,  a  mockery,  a 
base  irony — the  baser  because  it  was  in  a  sense  religious.  There  are  men  who 
substitute  invention  for  commandment.  This  is  what  Nadab  and  Abihu  did :  they 
invented  a  new  use  of  the  common  censer ;  they  brought  into  new  service  common 
fire ;  they  ventured  to  put  incense  thereon  when  only  the  pontiff  of  Israel  was 
allowed  to  use  such  incense ;  they  invented  new  Bibles,  new  laws,  new  churches. 


CHAP.  X.]  LEVITICUS.  141 

new  methods ;  they  were  cursed  with  the  spirit  of  extra  independence  and  indi- 
viduality, with  the  audacity  of  self-trust — not  with  its  religious  worship  and 
adoration.  This  all  occurs  every  day,  and  it  occurs  quite  as  rudely  and  violently 
in  the  current  and  flow  of  our  own  history.  All  this  invention  and  all  this  deposition 
of  God  and  of  law  comes  just  as  swiftly  after  our  conscious  realisations  of  the  Divine 
presence  as  this  instance  came  swiftly  upon  the  conscious  benediction  of  God. 
"  There  is  but  a  step  between  me  and  death."  It  would  seem  as  if  a  universe  might 
,  intervene  between  true  prayer  and  the  spirit  of  distrust  and  cursing — yet  not  a 
hair's-breadth  intervenes.  A  man  on  his  knees  is  next  to  the  worst  self,  namely, 
a  man  with  clenched  fists  defyinfs;  the  heavens.      (-/.  Parker,  D.D.)  A  solemn 

jrtdgment : — This  judgment  that  fell  upon  the  two  sons  of  Aaron  seems  very  severe. 
But  notice  that  the  high  and  dignified  position  they  occupied  made  sin,  in  their 
case,  far  more  grievous  and  calculated  to  do  much  more  extensive  mischief  amoug 
Israel,  than  if  it  had  been  perpetrated  by  some  one  occupying  a  less  conspicuous 
position  in  the  state.  Though  sin  is  in  itself  always  the  same,  yet,  committed  in 
the  high  places  of  the  land  by  those  who  occupy  in  Church  or  in  State  lolty  and 
responsible  positions,  it  has  an  atrgravation  and  an  enormity  that  it  has  not  when 
committed  by  those  who  occupy  lowlier  and  obscurer  spheres  in  the  land.  Not  that 
the  sin  differs  in  its  absolute  and  personal  guilt,  but  that  it  differs  in  the  iniiueuce 
it  spreads  around  it.  Evil  in  high  places  is  very  contagious — is  seen  by  many,  and 
imitated  by  more.  And,  in  the  next  place,  this  was  the  commencement  of  a  new 
economy.  The  commander  of  an  army,  or  the  commander  of  a  fleet,  must  insist 
upon  rigid  discipline  at  the  commencement  of  the  military  expedition,  or  of  the 
sailing  of  the  fleet ;  if  he  do  not,  the  issue  is  disastrous  to  the  soldiers  and  the 
sailors,  as  it  will  be  injurious  to  great  interests  and  painful  to  him.  Therefore,  at 
the  commencement  of  a  new  economy,  it  was  requisite  that  it  should  be  seen  that 
the  least  of  God's  laws  may  not  be  transgressed  with  impunity ;  and  that  the 
authority  of  God  alone,  struck  upon  the  least  and  the  loftiest,  must  be  the  great 
reason  why  there  should  be  instant,  unqualified,  and  undiluted  obedience.  (J. 
Camming,  D.D.)  Speedij  judgment : — If  God  had  struck  them  with  some  leprosy 
in  their  forehead,  as  he  did  their  aunt  Miriam  soon  after,  or  with  some  palsy,  or 
lingering  consumption,  the  punishment  had  been. grievous.  But  He,  whose  judg- 
ments are  ever  just,  sometimes  secret,  saw  fire  the  fittest  revenge  for  a  sin  of  fire  ; 
His  own  fire  fittest  to  punish  strange  fire ;  a  sudden  judgment  tit  for  a  present  and 
exemplary  sin  :  He  saw  that  if  He  had  winked  at  this.  His  service  had  been  exposed 
to  profanation.  It  is  wisdom  in  governors  to  take  sin  at  the  first  bound,  and  so  to 
revenge  it  that  their  punishment  may  be  preventions.  Speed  of  death  is  not  always 
a  judgment :  suddenness  as  it  is  ever  justly  suspicable,  so  then  certainly  argues 
anger,  when  it  finds  us  in  an  act  of  sin.  Leisure  of  repentance  is  an  argument 
of  favour.  When  God  gives  a  man  law,  it  implies  that  He  would  not  have 
judgment  surprise  him.  {Bp.  Hall.)  God's  orders  must  he  carried  out : — If  the 
architect  of  a  house  bad  one  p\a.n,  and  the  contractor  had  another,  what  conflicts 
would  there  be !  How  many  walls  would  have  to  come  down,  how  many  doors  and 
windows  would  need  to  be  altered  before  the  two  could  harmonise  !  Of  the  building 
of  life  God  is  the  Architect,  and  man  the  contractor.  It  is  for  God  to  give  the 
orders,  and  for  us  to   carry  them  out.       (H.    W.   Beecher.)  No  strange  fire 

permitted: — There  is  only  one  way  of  obeying  God,  and  that  is  by  doing  just  as 
God  tells  us  to  do.  Satan  began  the  trial  of  improving  on  God's  commandments 
in  the  Garden  of  Eden.  Cain  followed  up  the  idea,  and  substituted  the  fruit  of  his 
own  toil  for  the  designated  lamb,  as  a  sinner's  acceptable  offering  Each  of  these 
attempts  proved  a  curse  as  well  as  a  failure;  and  so  it  will  be  to  the  end  of  time. 
The  sous  of  Aaron  were  consecrated  priests  when  they  offered  other  fire  on  God's 
altar  than  that  which  God  had  commanded.  Saul  was  the  anointed  king  over  the 
Lord's  people  when  he  offered  sheep  and  oxen  contrary  to  the  command  of  God. 
Both  priest  and  king  were  punished  of  God  for  their  disobedience  in  failing  to 
worship  God  in  God's  commanded  way.  God  is  the  same  God  to-day  as  then.  His 
commands  concerning  worship  are  as  binding  now  as  four  thousand  years  ago — 
binding  on  theological  professors,  preachers,  and  Bible-class  teachers.  It  is  not 
enough  to  proffer  an  offering  to  God  in  worship,  you  must  worship  Him  according 
to  His  commandments,  or  you' must  take  the  consequences  of  your  disobedience. 
It  is  important,  then,  that  you  know  what  is  God's  law  concerning  His  day,  His 
house,  His  Word,  His  worship.  Your  eternal  interests  hang  on  your  fidelity  in 
httle  things  as  well  as  in  great.       (if.  C.  Trumbull.)  Revi-rence  in  holy  things: 

— Contrast  with  the  conduct  of  Nadab  and  Abihu  the  reverence  displayed  by  the 


142  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

young  King  Edward  of  England.  One  of  his  companions,  wishing  to  aid  him  in 
his  efforts  to  grasp  something  just  beyond  his  reach,  pLtced  a  large  Bible  for  him 
to  step  on.  "  No,"  said  Edward,  stooping  to  lift  the  volume,  "  I  shall  never  tread 
on  God's  holy  Word."  Pos.-ibly  there  was  a  touch  of  superstition  here;  but  was  not 
the  spirit  commendable  ?  What  is  sacred  is  to  be  held  as  sacred.  The  meanest 
thief  is  the  one  who  runs  off  with  a  church-collection ;  for  he  adds  sacrilege  to  his 
other  crime.  Show  how  we  may  in  a  very  real  sense  offer  strange  fire.  Is  there 
not  something  of  irreverence  in  the  chipped  coins  and  torn  bills  that  find  their  way 
into  the  contribntion-box  ?  Custom  may  make  us  treat  sacred  things  with  levity. 
Luther  tells  us  that  he  knew  priests  whose  sacred  ofSce  had  become  a  mere  form, 
and  who,  instead  of  repeating  the  proper  formula  in  the  consecration  of  the  bread 
and  wine,  mumbled  irreverently,  "  Bread  thou  art,  and  bread  thou  wilt  remain  ;  — 
wine  thou  art,  and  wine  thou  wilt  remain."  Has  our  church-going  degenerated 
into  a  meaningless  form?     (American  Sunday  School  Times.) 

Ver.  3.  Aaron  held  his  peace. — Aaron;  or,  the  disturbing  and  tranquilising 
influences  of  life : — I.  The  disturbing  influences.  Physical  sufferings,  secular 
anxieties,  social  grievances,  moral  remorsf,  heart  bereavements.  To  the  last  of 
these  Aaron  was  now  the  victim.  1.  He  has  los  two  sons.  A  double  trial.  2.  He 
had  lost  two  sons  after  they  had  reached  maturity.  3.  After  they  had  entered  upon 
the  most  important  and  honourable  office  in  life.  What  a  disappointment !  4.  In 
the  most  sudden  way.  5.  With  no  hope  for  their  future  blessedness.  They  were 
struck  down  by  offended  justice,  without  a  moment  for  repentance.  II.  The 
tranquilising  influences  of  human  life.  "He  held  his  peace."  1.  There  are 
three  kinds  of  calming  influences  that  are  resorted  to  by  men  under  trial — the 
carnal,  the  stoical,  and  the  Christian.  2.  The  last  of  these  is  the  only  true 
tranquilisins<  force.  It  contains  at  least  four  doctrines  that  tpnd  to  pacify  the 
human  spirit  under  the  most  trying  circumstances  of  life.  (1)  That  all  who  have 
implicit  confidence  in  Christ  as  the  Mediator  are  reconciled  to  God  and  delivered 
from  condemnation.  (2)  That  every  disturbing  event  takes  place  under  the 
superintendence  of  God.  (3)  That  God  has  an  absolute  right  to  dispose  of  ail 
things  as  He  thinks  fit.  (4)  That  the  most  painful  events  to  the  good  are  short, 
and  may  be  rendered  sub'^ervient  to  their  highest  interest.  They  deepen  the  sense 
of  our  individuality  by  detaching  us  from  society  and  making  us  in  our  sufferings 
feel  our  loneliness ;  they  impress  us  with  the  unsatisfactoriness  of  all  things  per- 
taining to  this  material  life.  Southey  has,  with  great  poetic  beauty,  described  how 
the  calamities  of  life  aff  ct  the  pious  soul:  they  are  only  as  clouds  passing  over 
the  moon,  making  the  queen  of  night  appear  more  majestic  in  her  march. 
{Homilist.)         Silence  in  affliction: — I.    Even  a  child  of  God  mat  be  exercised 

WITH     SORE      trials      AND      AFFLICTIONS,     THAT      MAY     LIE     VERY     HEAVY      UPON      HIM. 

(Psa.  xxxviii.  2;  Job  ix.  17).  -^.nd  what  wonder,  if  the  children  of  God  meet 
with  trials  upon  earth,  where  they  were  never  promised,  nor  could  rationally 
expect  their  rest?  What  wonder,  seeing  they  so  often  sin,  and  procure  the  evils 
under  which  they  groan?  All  this  is  consistent  with  the  love  of  a  father,  and  our 
relation  to  him.  II.  What  is  implied  in  bking  silent  under  the  trials  God  sees 
FIT  AT  any  time  TO  EXERCISE  US  WITH?  1.  A  deep  Sense  of  God's  hand  in  what  we 
suffer.  This  was  the  ground  of  David's  silence:  "I  was  dumb,  and  I  opened  not 
my  mouth,  because  Thou  didst  it  "  (Psa.  xxxix.  9).  And  Hezekiah,  mourning,  directs 
his  eye  to  God  and  heaven.  "What  shall  I  say?  He  hath  both  spoken  unto  me, 
and  Himself  hath  done  it"  (Isa.  xxxviii.  15).  2.  It  includes  a  subscribing  to  God's 
justice  in  all  His  dealings  with  us,  and  that  whatever  He  takes  from  ns  or  lays 
upon  us,  we  dare  not  to  conclude  the  worse  of  Him  in  our  tlii)ug'i1;s  or  to  open  our 
mouths  against  Him.  Thus  being  silent  is  opposed  to  self-justification,  as  being 
convinced  that  He  hath  punished  us  less  than  our  ini(iuities  ileserve.  3.  It  includes 
a  resigning  ourselves  to  God,  as  having  the  most  unquestionable  d  >minion  over  us, 
and  right  to  do  with  us  and  ours  as  seems  good  in  His  sight  (Job  iii.  12).  4.  It 
includes  resting  in  His  pleasure,  as  that  which  is  wisest  and  best;  in  npposition  to 
murmuring  and  impatience,  inward  frets  and  discomposure  of  soul.     III.  What 

CONSIDERATIONS  MAY  HELP  TO  WORK  THE  SOUL  OF  A  CHILD  OF  GOD  INTO  SO  DESIRABLE  A 
FRAME,  AS  TO  BE  MUTE  WHEN  God'S  AFFLICTING   HAND  M.\Y  BE  MOST  PRESSING  UPON  HIM. 

The  reasonableness  of  this  frame  may  appear — 1.  From  God's  umiuestionable 
right  to  dispose  of  us  and  ours  as  He  pleases.  When  it  is  His  will  which  is  done 
upon  us.  His  sovereignty  should  teacli  His  creatures  to  he  silent  (Rom.  ix.  21,  22). 
2.  It  should  teach  us  to  be  silent  in  whatever  instance  God  afflicts ;  as  it  is  He  that 


CHAP.  X.]  LEVITICUS.  143 

continues  to  us  many  other  mercies,  which  have  been  all  forfeited,  and  which 
might  have  beea  as  justly  removed  as  those  He  has  taken  away.  3.  We  ought  to 
be  silent  under  what  God  will  have  us  suffer,  as  considering  we  have  many  ways 
sinned  and  offended  against  Him  (Job  xl.  4,  5).  4.  We  have  reason  to  be  silent, 
as  considering  that  all  God's  dispensations,  how  afflictive  soever,  are  conducted  by 
unerring  wisdom  to  His  own  glory.  And  if  God  be  glorified,  why  should  we  be 
'dissatisfied?  5.  The  people  of  God  have  reason  to  be  silent  under  every  aifliction 
He  brings  upon  them,  considering  He  hath  made  with  them  an  everlasting 
covenant  ordered  in  all  things  and  sure,  which  is  sufficient  to  be  all  their  salvation 
and  is  aU  their  desire  (2  Sam,  xxiii.  5).  Application :  1.  To  be  impatient  under 
affliction  is  unbecoming  a  child  of  God,  considered  as  a  new  creature.  2.  To 
oppose  our  wills  to  the  wiU  of  God  is  high  presumption,  and  both  provoking  to 
God,  and  dangerous  to  ourselves  (Isa.  xlv.  9).  3.  It  is  contrary  to  our  covenant 
engagements.  When  we  yielded  ourselves  to  God,  did  we  not  expressly  agree  that 
He  should  lead  us  to  heaven,  and  that  we  would  follow  Him  through  what  way  He 
pleased  to  show  us — through  seas  or  wildernesses,  or  through  any,  even  the  roughest 
paths,  so  He  brought  us  safe  to  the  promised  land.  4.  Impatience  under  affliction 
is  inconsistent  with  onr  own  prayers.  Submission  to  the  will  of  God  is,  or  ought 
to  be,  our  daily  request,  and  especially  under  such  trials.  5.  It  would  bring  us 
under  the  charge  of  ingratitude  to  our  best  benefactor  and  friend.  Has  God  heard 
my  main  prayer,  and  drawn  me  to  Christ  ?  Yet,  if  He  lays  His  hand  upon  me  in 
this  or  the  other  instance,  shall  I  by  my  complaints  drown  all  the  remembrance  of 
His  former  loving-kindness  and  grace  ?  Moreover,  what  a  slight  should  we  put  on 
the  remaining  everlasting  rest,  should  we  repine  at  preront  sufi'erings,  which  are  so 
soon  to  issue  in  endless  joy!      (D.  Wilcox).         Silence  under  affliction: — I.  What 

IT  IS  FOK  THE  ATFLICTED  AND  BEREAVED  TO  HOLD   THEIR   PEACE  UNDER  THE  CORRECTING 

HAND  OF  God.  1.  It  certainly  implies,  in  the  first  place,  that  the  afflicted  and 
bereaved  should  not  complain  of  the  Divine  conduct  towards  them.  They  have  no 
ground  to  complain,  because  God  takes  nothing  from  them  but  what  He  has  given 
them,  and  inflicts  no  more  upon  them  than  they  deserve  and  He  has  a  right  to 
inflict.  2.  For  the  afflicted  to  hold  their  peace  implies  that  they  not  only  cease  to 
complain,  but  that  they  cease  to  think  hard  of  God.  It  is  much  easier  to  suppress 
their  verbal  complaints  than  to  suppress  all  their  inward  repinings  under  the 
correcting  hand  of  God.  3.  The  only  way  in  which  the  afflicted  and  bereaved  can 
get  rid  of  their  inward  murmuring  thoughts  is  cordially  to  approve  of  the  conduct 
of  God  in  causing  them  to  suffer  their  present  afflictions  and  bereavements. 
Nothing  can  remove  hatred  of  God  but  love  to  God.  Nothing  can  remove  opposi- 
tion to  God  but  submission  to  God.  II.  Why  the  afflicted  and  bereaved  ought 
TO  hold  their  peace  and  silently  submit  to  the  correcting  hand  of  God.  This 
is  their  duty — 1.  Because  they  always  deserve  the  bereavements  which  they  are 
called  to  suffer.  They  are  under  the  same  obligations  to  submit  silently  itnd 
unreservedly  under  the  frowns  of  God  as  to  rejoice  under  His  smiles.  2.  The 
afflicted  and  bereaved  ought  to  hold  their  peace  and  silently  submit  to  the  correct- 
ing hand  of  God  because  He  has  a  right  to  afflict  and  bereave  them  whenever 
He  sees  it  necessary  to- do  it.  3.  It  becomes  the  afflicted  and  bereaved  to  bow  in 
silence  to  the  sovereign  wiU  of  God  because  He  always  afflicts  and  bereaves  them 
at  the  proper  time.  It  is  well  that  God  does  not  allow  men  to  choose  when  He 
shall  afflict  them.  He  always  knows  the  best  time,  and  when  He  does  afflict  them 
they  must  know  that  He  sees  good  reasons  to  afflict  them  at  that  time  rather  than 
any  other.  And  since  He  sees  good  reasons  for  afflicting  tbem  at  such  a  particular 
time  they  have  no  ground  to  complain  but  ought  silently  to  submit  to  His  unerring 
wisdom,  whether  they  are  high  or  low,  or  whether  they  are  young  or  old.  4.  TLiat 
men  o^ght  to  hold  their  peace  under  the  afflicting  hand  of  God  because  He  always 
afflicts  them  in  the  best  way  as  well  as  at  the  best  time.  Improvemei  t :  1.  It 
appears  from  the  nature  of  silent  submission  under  Divine  corrections,  that  it  must 
be  highly  pleasing  to  God.  It  is  the  very  spirit  which  He  requires  them  to  feel  and 
express  while  He  lays  His  chastising  hand  upon  them.  He  says  to  them,  "  Be 
still,  and  know  that  I  am  God."  2.  It  appears  from  the  nature  of  sincere  sub- 
mission under  trials  and  afflictions  that  insubmission  is  extremely  criminal.  When 
either  saints  or  sinners  complain  under  Divine  corrections  they  practically  say 
that  He  who  has  made  them  shall  not  reign  over  them.  Can  there  be  anything 
more  displeasing  to  God  ?  3.  It  appears  from  the  nature  of  true  submission  under 
afflictions  that  it  is  something  different  from  stupidity.  Stupidity  consists  in 
despising  the  chastenings  of  the  Lord.     Mankind  are  far  more  apt  to  be  stupid 


lU  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTIiATOR.  [chap.  x. 

than  to  be  faint  under  afflictions  and  bereavements.  They  try  to  overlook  the 
hand  of  God  in  them,  and  to  consider  tbem  as  mere  accidents,  or  necessary  evils, 
which  could  not  be  avoided  and  must  be  borne.  Such  stupidity  under  Divine 
corrections  in  the  sinners  in  Zion  God  severely  condemned.  If  alHictious  do  not 
remove  stupidity  they  increase  it ;  if  tlipy  do  not  soften  the  heart  they  harden  it ; 
and  if  they  do  not  produce  submission  they  create  obstinacy.  But  the  afflicted  are 
extremely  apt  to  misconstrue  the  effect  of  their  afflictions  and  to  mistake  stupidity 
for  submissiim,  and  imagine  that  they  feel  resigned  when  they  only  feel  stupid 
and  insensible.  4.  True  submission  is  diametrically  opposite  to  stupidity  and  is 
perfectly  consistent  with  the  keenest  sensibility  Under  the  correcting  hand  of  God. 
It  becomes  the  bereaved  to  view  their  bereavements,  as  far  as  possiblf^,  in  all  their  pain- 
ful effects  and  consequences,  that  they  may  exercise  a  deep  and  unlimited  submission 
to  the  Divine  corrections.  Though  Aaron  held  his  peace  and  refruined  from  speak- 
ing, yet  he  did  not  refrain  from  thinking.  His  mind  was  undoubtedly  awake,  and 
all  his  powers  and  faculties  in  vigorous  exercise.  There  is  much  more  danger  of 
feeling  too  little  than  of  feeling  too  much  under  Divine  chastisements.  5.  If  the 
afflicted  and  bereaved  ought  to  hold  their  peace  under  the  chastising  hand  of  God, 
then  they  ought  to  submit  to  the  heaviest  as  well  as  to  the  lightest  chastisements. 
6.  It  appears  from  the  nature  of  submission  that  it  is  easy  for  the  afflicted  and 
bereaved  to  determine  whether  they  do  or  do  not  sincerely  submit  to  the  correcting 
hand  of  God.  There  is  no  medium  between  approving  or  disapproving  His  conduct 
in  afflicting  them.  (N.  Eviiiioiis,  D.D.)  The  silence  of  Aaron: — An  ancient 
philosopher  has  said,  "Lij^ht  sorrows  speak;  great  sonows  are  silent."  The 
experience  of  the  human  heart,  and  of  this  life,  where  affliction  has  so  many 
degrees  and  arrays  itself  in  so  many  different  shades,  justifies  this  observatiou. 
The  sacred  poets  of  Israel,  in  this  thought,  had  anticipated  pagan  wisdom  (see 
Isa.  xlvii.  5;  Lam.  ii.  12,  13).  1.  The  impressions  and  the  conduct  of  Aaron 
cannot  be  usefully  estimated  without  a  knowledgn  of  the  event.  2.  It  is  a  test  of 
humility  to  be  silent  in  the  bosom  of  an  irreparable  loss,  of  a  profound  affliction. 
3.  In  the  mute  sorrow  of  Aaron,  there  is  more  than  this  wise  humility ;  we  must 
see  there  also  acquiescence.  4.  Lastly,  it  is  just  to  recognise  in  the  conduct  of 
Aaron  lowly  and  firm  resignation.  (A.  Coqucrel.)  Aaron'' s  silence  in  jiresence  of 
God's  judcjment: — Doubtless  Aaron  looked  somewhat  heavily  on  this  sad  spectacle: 
it  could  not  but  appal  him  to  see  his  two  sons  dead  before  him — dead  in  displeasure, 
dead  suddenly,  dead  by  the  immediate  hand  of  God.  And  now  he  could  repent 
him  of  his  new  honour  to  see  it  succeed  so  ill  with  the  sons  of  his  loins ;  neither 
could  he  choose  but  see  himself  stricken  in  them.  But  his  brother  Moses,  that  had 
learned  not  to  know  either  nephews  or  brother  when  they  stood  in  his  way  to  God, 
wisely  turned  his  eyes  from  the  dead  carcases  of  his  sons  to  liis  respect  of  the 
living  God.  My  brother,  this  event  is  fearful,  but  just ;  these  were  thy  sons,  but 
they  sinned ;  it  was  not  for  God,  it  is  not  for  thee,  to  look  so  much  who  they  were, 
as  what  thfey  did.  If  they  have  profaned  God  and  themselves,  can  thy  natural 
affection  so  miscarry  thee  that  thou  couldst  wish  their  impunity  with  the  blemish 
of  thy  Maker?  Show  now  whether  thou  more  lovest  God  or  thy  sons.  Show 
whether  thou  be  a  better  father  or  a  son.  Aaron,  weighing  these  things,  holds  his 
peace,  not  out  of  an  amazement  or  sullenness,  but  out  of  patient  and  humble  sub- 
mission ;  and  seeing  God's  pleasure,  and  their  desert,  is  conteut  to  forget  that  he 
had  sons.  He  might  have  had  a  silent  tongue,  and  a  clamorous  heart.  There  is 
no  voice  louder  in  the  ears  of  God,  than  a  speechless  repining  of  the  soul.  There 
is  no  greater  proof  of  grace,  than  to  smart  patiently,  and  humbly  and  contentedly 
to  rest  the  heart  in  the  justice  and  wisdom  of  God's  proceeding.  {Dp.  Hall.) 
Divine  judgment  and  domestic  ties : — Serious  people  sometimes  wonder  how  it  shall 
be  at  the  last  day — how  godly  parents  shall  be  able  to  bear  the  sight  df  their 
Christless  children  given  over  to  everlasting  death;  whether  the  knowledge  or  sigbt 
of  near  and  beloved  relatives  in  perdition  will  not  interrupt  aud  destroy  the  peace 
of  heaven.  But,  if  such  persons  would  reason  ujon  the  subject  from  a  standpoint 
hiyher  than  the  mere  sympathies  of  nature,  they  would  have  less  trouble  concern- 
ing it.  Aaron  looking  upon  his  slain  sons,  is  a  picture  of  how  it  shall  be.  Whea 
God's  ultimate  judgments  shall  go  into  effect,  their  justice  shall  be  so  conspicuous, 
and  the  goodness  aud  glory  of  God  in  them  shall  be  so  luminous  and  manifest, 
that  it  will  not  be  in  the  power  of  any  ransomed  soul  to  think  of  demurring,  or 
indulging  one  tearful  regret.  When  we  come  to  see  things  in  the  light  of  heaven, 
every  enemy  of  God  will  appear  so  essentially  an  enemy  to  ourselves  and  our  peace, 
that,  however  otherwise  related  to  us,  we  will  be  glad  to  see  them  shut  up  in  the 


CHAP.  X.]  LEVITICUS.  145 

dreadful  prison-house  for  ever  and  for  ever.  What  are  domestic  ties  and  sympathies 
in  comparison  with  tlie  glorious  will  of  our  blessed  Lord?  Jesus  says,  "He  that 
loveth  father  or  mother  more  than  Me,  is  not  worthy  of  Me :  and  he  that  loveth 
son  or  daughter  more  than  Me,  is  not  worthy  of  Me."  Every  saint  is  fully  wrapped 
up  in  the  righteousness,  wisdom,  and  goodness  of  his  Lord.  Everything  that  God 
does  carries  the  heart  of  the  ransomed  ones  so  completely  with  it,  and  so  over- 
whelms and  swallows  up  all  other  affections,  that  they  are  as  utter  nothing.  Nadab 
and  Abihu  may  die  for  ever  under  Aaron's  very  eyes,  and  yet  God's  honour  and 
glory  in  it  leave  him  not  a  tear  to  shed,  and  not  a  word  of  lamentation  to  ut.er. 
{J.  A.  Seiss,  D.Dl)  The  silence  of  Aaroii's  sorrow  :—l.  The  poignant  chaFvActbr 
OF  Aaron's  sorrow.  The  blow  came  and  smote — 1.  His  patriotism — he  would  feel 
that  Israel  as  a  nation  was  disgraced.  2.  His  piety — religinn  was  dishonoured  and 
God  insulted.  3.  His  paternity.  (1)  It  is  a  great  grief  for  parents  to  watch  their 
children  die  when  they  have  seen  the  end  approaching,  but  in  Aaron's  case  the 
bereavement  was  sudden.  (2)  It  is  a  great  grief  for  parents  to  surrender  their 
children  even  when  they  feel  t>ure  they  die  in  the  Lord,  but,  in  Aaron's  case,  his 
sons  died  under  the  frown  of  the  Lord,  and  concerning  their  future  he  could  have 
no  sure  and  certain  hope.  To  lose  two  suns  under  such  circumstances  was  sorrow 
of  the  most  poignant  kind.  II.  The  patient  conduct  of  Aaron  under  such 
SORROW.  [F.  W.  Brown.)  God  glorified  before  the  people  : — If  I  so  hold  a  mirror 
that  I  cause  it  to  reflect  on  your  dazzled  vision  the  brilliant  rays  of  the  sun,  that 
mirror  adds  nothing  to  the  lustre  of  the  grand  orb  of  day  ;  it  only  directs  the  light 
towards  you.  If  I  write  to  you  in  most  glowing  and  graphic  terms  concerning  my 
bosom  friend,  I  do  not  thereby  increase  his  well-known  talents  and  virtues.  I 
simply  beget  in  your  mind,  or  foster,  feelings  of  admiration,  resjiect  or  love.  So 
when  you  and  I  praise  God,  we  do  not,  we  cannot,  augment  His  essential  glory.  It 
is  impossible  for  us  finite  and  dependent  creatures  to  add  anything  to  the  infinite 
love,  wisdom,  and  power  of  the  Divine  One.  But  we  can  elevate  Him  in  our  own 
estimation,  increase  our  own  comfort,  stimulate  our  own  spiritual  life,  and  intensify 
the   affection  which  others   entertain  for  Him.      {J.  H.   Hitchen,  D.D.)  The 

stillness  of  intense  emotion : — As  I  have  felt  a  tear  drop  from  a  cloudless  sky,  and 
wondered  whence  it  could  come,  so  have  I  seen  a  fair  countenance  full  of  openness, 
serenity,  and  majesty,  and  the  large  still  tear  standing  in  the  eye.  Yet  no  single 
muscle  was  distorted;  it  seemed  to  lue  like  the  stillness  of  intense  emotion,  like 
the  sorrow  of  goodness,  like  a  broken  heart  at  peace  with  its  own  woe ;  as  though 
one,  whose  hopes  of  earthly  bliss  had  all  vanished,  were  comforted  from  within  by 
the  presence  and  assurance  of  Holy  Love,  saying,  "  It  is  well,  peace  be  unto  thee." 
(John  Piilsford,  D.D.)  The  broken  heart  is  like  a  broken  harp: — The   broken 

heart  is  like  a  broken  harp.  The  harp  is  either  absolutely  silent,  or  sends  foi1;h 
discordant  sounds.  Human  grief  is  so  deep  that  it  is  either  speechless  or  gives 
expression  to  bitter  complaints  and  hard  thoughts.  Whatever  human  ministries 
may  accomplish  by  way  of  modifying  it,  they  do  not  heal.  Here  is  the  superiority 
of  Christ  Jesus  in  His  treatment.  He  "  heals  "  the  broken-hearted.  Service  for 
God  not  to  be  interrupted  by  adversity  : — A  certain  heathen  making  an  oration,  as  he 
was  sacrificing  to  his  god,  in  the  midst  of  his  devotion,  word  was  brought  him  that 
his  only  son  was  dead  :  whereat  being  nothing  at  all  moved,  he  made  this  answer,  "I 
did  not  get  him  to  live  for  ever ;  "  and  so  went  on  with  his  business.  Thus  when  we 
are  entering  into  the  sight  of  God's  favour,  it  may  so  please  Him  to  tiy  us  by  afliic- 
tions  ;  there  may  news  come  of  a  ship  wrecked  at  sea,  of  a  chapman  broke  in  the 
country,  of  the  death  of  friends  and  allies,  &c.  Yet  ought  we  not  for  all  this  to  leave 
off  our  course  in  the  service  of  Him,  but  rather  whatsoever  comes  cross,  make  it  as  it 
were  a  parenthesis,  an  ornament,  not  a  hindrance,  in  our  progress  to  heaven.  {J. 
Spencer.)  Undisturbed  service : — Valerius  Maximus  tells  a  story  of  a  young  noble- 
man, that  attended  upon  Alexander,  while  he  was  sacrificing  ;  this  nobleman  held  his 
censer  for  incense,  and  in  ihe  holding  of  it>  there  fell  a  coal  of  fire  upon  his  flesh,  and 
burned  it  so  as  the  very  scent  of  it  was  in  the  nostrils  of  all  that  were  about  him ; 
and  because  he  would  not  disturb  Alexander  in  his  service,  he  resolutely  did  not 
stir  to  put  off  the  fire  from  him,  but  held  still  the  censer.  If  heathens  made  such 
ado,  in  sacrificing  to  their  idol  gods,  that  they  would  mind  it  so  as  no  disturbance 
must  be  made,  whatsoever  they  endured :  what  care  should  we  then  have  of  our- 
selves, when  we  come  to  worship  the  High  God  1  Oh  that  we  could  mind  the  duties 
of  God's  worship,  as  matters  of  high  concernment,  as  things  of  greatest  conse- 
quence, that  so  we  might  learn  to  sanctify  the  name  of  our  God  in  the  perfor- 
mance of  duty  more  ihan  ever  we  have  done.     {Ibid.)         Over-tenderness  to  the 

10 


146  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  x 

criminal: — Uncover  not  your  heads,  neither  rend  your  clothes.  There  is  such  a 
thing  as  sinning  through  over-tenderness  of  feeling ;  and  unless  we  are  on  the 
■watch  just  here,  we  shall  fail  of  being  both  just  and  merciful  in  our  sympathies  and 
in  our  conduct.  When  a  great  crime  is  committed,  it  is  not  a  wise  exhibit  of 
tender  feelings  to  dwell  upon  the  peculiar  temptations,  and  tLe  peculiar  weaknesses, 
and  the  unfortunate  early  disadvantages  of  the  brutal  criminal,  to  a  forgetfulness 
of  the  sufferings  of  his  innocent  victims,  and  of  the  wretchedness  which  his  crime 
has  brought  into  one  home  and  another.  It  is  not  that  we  are  to  take  vengeance 
into  our  own  hands ;  but  that  we  are  to  refrain  from  mourning  over  the  execution 
of  justice.  It  is  a  sinful  as  well  as  a  sickly  sentimentalism  which  gives  its  tears  to 
the  criminal  class  in  the  community,  instead  of  to  those  who  are  wronged  through 
crime.  The  prevalence  of  this  sentimentalism  is  one  of  the  stimulating  causes  of 
crime.  There  is  need  of  the  re-echoing  of  the  words  of  God  to  His  peoi^le  over 
the  displays  of  His  justice,  "  Uncover  not  your  heads,  neither  rend  your  clothes  " 
[in  mourning  over  the  evil-doers]  "  but  let  .  .  .  the  whole  house  of  Israel  bewail 
the  burning  which  the  Lord  hath  kindled."  Let  the  crime  be  mourned  over,  but 
not  the  criminal — as  a  criminal.  (H.  C.  Trumbull.)  "  For  the  anointing  oil  of  the 
Lord  is  upon  you  " ; — That  oil  must  separate  between  you  and  the  appearance  of 
unbelief ;  that  oil  is  a  restraint  as  well  as  an  inspiration.  Is  it  not  so  now,  varying 
the  terms  and  the  relations  of  things  ?  If  we  could  enter  into  the  spirit  of  that 
restriction,  what  different  men  we  should  be  !  The  name  of  your  country  is  upon 
you :  dishonour  it  not.  A  venerable  name,  never  associated  with  meanness, 
cowardice,  corruption,  or  fear  of  man.  Kise  to  the  dignity  of  the  signature  which 
is  upon  you.  When  you  flee,  the  enemy  will  say  your  country  has  fled  ;  when  you 
play  the  coward,  the  enemy  will  say  the  throne  has  tottered  and  the  sovereign  has 
succumbed.  The  holy  vow  is  upon  you.  You  said  you  would  be  better  and  do 
better.  You  punctuated  the  vow  with  hot  tears ;  your  emphasis  was  quite  an 
unfamiliar  tone,  so  much  so  that  we  wondered  at  the  poignancy  of  your  utterance, 
and  felt  in  very  deed  that  you  were  speaking  the  heart's  truth.  Eemember  that 
vow.  The  vow  of  the  Lord  is  upon  you.  If  you  stoop,  it  will  not  be  condescension, 
it  will  be  base  prostration ;  if  you  palter  with  the  reality  of  language,  it  will  not  be 
ability  in  the  use  of  words,  it  will  be  the  profanation  of  ihe  medium  which  God  has 
established  for  the  conveyance  and  the  interchange  of  truth.  The  exalted  position 
is  yours.  You  are  the  head  of  a  family :  if  you  go  wrong,  the  whole  family  will 
suffer  to  the  second  and  third  and  fourth  generations,  iou  are  known  and  trusted 
in  business :  if  you  be  found  mean,  untrustworthy,  faithless,  deceitful,  the  whole 
city  will  feel  the  anguish  of  a  pang,  for  you  were  regarded  as  a  trustee  of  its  honour 
and  its  reputation.  The  anointing  oil  is  upon  you  in  some  form  or  in  some  way. 
The  name  of  Christ  is  upon  us  all.  We  cannot  get  rid  of  it.  In  this  way  or  in 
that  we  have  all  to  do  with  Christ,  with  His  name.  His  honour,  His  cross.  His 
crown.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Vers.  9-11.  Do  not  drink  wine. — Help  to  temperance : — Combine  with  this  verse 
Jer.  XXXV.  6  ;  Ephes.  v.  18  ;  1  Thess.  v.  7.  Intemperance,  one  of  the  giant  evils  of 
the  land,  is  self-imposed.  This  is  its  saddest  feature.  All  the  evils  connected  with 
it  mif-ht  be  swept  away  if  men  ao  willed.  I.  The  natural.  Use  no  intoxicants  ; 
and  thus  never  acquire  a  passion  for  them.  II.  The  medical.  Some  treat 
drunkenness  as  a  disease  ;  and  by  medicine  seek  to  destroy  the  appetite  for 
alcohol.  III.  The  sanitary.  Asylums  for  inebriates  have  been  opened,  which 
combine  physical  and  moral  means  to  effect  a  cure  ;  and  with  success.  IV.  The 
legal.  Its  object  is  to  control  or  arrest  the  evil ;  and  by  prohibition  of  its  manu- 
facture and  sale,  to  remove  it  from  the  land.  V.  The  voluntary.  This  involves 
the  pledge  and  membership  in  societies  banded  together  for  mutual  help  and 
safety.  Earnest  work  for  others  is  a  good  preventative,  so  long  as  it  is  actively 
continuf  d.  VI.  The  spiritual.  Grace,  wherever  received,  casts  out  the  demon  of 
drink.  VII.  The  philanthropic.  Here  is  a  reform  in  which  to  engage.  The 
beneficent  change  in  public  sentiment  deniauds  devout  thankfulness,  and  is  pro- 
phetic of  what  shall  be  achieved.  (Lcw/s  0.  IVioiiquoii.)  Abstinence  recom- 
mended : — It  is  one  of  the  attractions  of  a  glass  of  wine  to  those  wlio  like  it,  that  it 
gives  a  different  colour  to  everything  the  drinker  looks  at,  just  as  soon  as  it  has 
any  effect  at  all.  If  there  were  no  effect  from  wine-drinking,  tiiere  would  be  no 
temptation  to  drink  wine.  But  so  soon  as  the  wine  takes  hold  of  the  brain,  the 
brain  takes  hold  with  a  new  grip  of  everything  it  thinks  of.  Memory  is  keener, 
anticipation  is  brighter,  and  the  present  is  a  great  deal  livelier.     Everybody  in 


CHAP.  X.]  LEVITICUS.  147 

sight  or  in  thought  looks  brighter,  too.  This  isn't  so  bad  a  world  as  it  seeuifct  an 
hour  ago  !  "  When  the  wine  is  in,  the  wit  is  out."  What  does  a  man  under  tlie 
influence  of  champagne  know  of  sbarp  distinctions  in  morals,  or  in  social  life,  or 
in  logic  ?  The  inspired  teacher  was  never  more  clearly  inspired  than  when  that 
teacher  wrote,  "  It  is  not  for  kings,  0  Lemuel,  it  is  not  for  kings  to  drink  wine,  nor 
ior  princes  strong  drink ;  lest  they  drink  and  forget  the  law,  and  pervert  the  judg- 
ment of  any  of  the  afflicted."  And  it  was  God  Himself  who  insisted  that  priests 
should  let  wine  and  strong  drink  alone,  lest  they  should  fail  to  know  the  difference 
between  holy  and  unholy,  clean  and  unclean,  and  lest  they  should  be  unable  to 
teach  the  truth  aVight.  If  you  want  to  know  what  is  right,  and  to  do  what  is  right, 
and  to  be  able  to  teach  others  to  know  and  do  right,  do  you  let  wine  and  strong 
drink  alone — before  you  go  to  church,  and  after  you  come  back  from  church. 
What  is  good  enough  for  a  king,  and  safe  enough  for  a  priest,  can  wisely  be  your 
•choice  wherever  you  are.  {H.  C.  Trumbtill.)  Excitement  to  be  avoided  by 
ministeri : — The  effect  of  wine  is  to  excite  nature,  and  all  natural  excitement 
hinders  that  calm,  well-balanced  condition  of  soul  which  is  essential  to  the  proper 
discharge  of  the  priestly  office.  The  things  which  excite  mere  nature  are  manifold 
indeed — wealth,  ambition,  politics,  the  various  objects  of  emulation  around  us  in 
the  world.  All  these  things  act,  with  exciting  power,  upon  nature,  and  entirely 
unfit  us  for  every  department  of  priestly  service.  If  the  heart  be  swollen  with 
feelings  of  pride,  covetousness,  or  emulation,  it  is  utterly  impos-ible  that  the  pure 
air  of  the  sanctuary  can  be  enjoyed,  or  the  sacred  functions  of  priestly  ministry 
discharged.  If  we  are  not  keeping  our  priestly  garments  unspotted,  and  if  we  are 
not  keeping  ourselves  free  from  all  that  would  excite  nature,  we  shall,  assuredly, 
break  down.  The  priest  must  keep  his  heart  with  all  diligence,  else  the  Levite  will 
fail,  and  the  warrior  will  be  defeated.  It  is,  let  me  repeat  it,  the  business  of  each 
one  to  be  fully  aware  of  what  it  is  that  to  him  proves  to  be  "  wine  and  strong 
drink  " — what  it  is  that  produces  excitement — that  blunts  his  spiritual  perception, 
or  dims  his  priestly  vision.  It  may  be  an  auction-mart,  a  cattle-show,  a  news- 
paper. It  may  be  the  merest  trifle.  But  no  matter  what  it  is,  if  it  tends  to  excite, 
it  will  disqualify  us  for  priestly  ministry ;  and  if  we  are  disqualified  as  priests,  we 
are  unfit  for  everything,  inasmuch  as  our  success  in  every  department  and  in  every 
sphere  must  ever  depend  upon  our  cultivating  a  spirit  of  worship.  {C.  H.  Mackin- 
tosh.) Testimony  of  a  clergyman  as  to  the  value  of  total  abstinence : — The  Rev. 
S.  Hooke,  vicar  of  Clopton,  Woodbridge,  offers  the  following  testimony :— "  As 
there  are  so  many  of  my  clerical  brethren  who  are  doubtful  if  they  could  carry  on 
their  arduous  labours  if  they  abstained  from  alcoholic  drinks,  I  write  my  experience 
of  the  last  seven  years,  during  which  time  I  have  been  an  abstainer.  I  believe  I 
•can  do  treble  the  amount  of  work  without  the  use  of  these  drinks  than  with  them. 
At  first  I  doubted  if  I  could,  and  it  was  with  trembling  hand  th  it  I  signed  the 
pledge  of  the  C.E.T. S.  But  I  thank  God  from  the  depth  of  my  heart  that  I  took 
that  step,  for  I  am  certain  that  I  have  been  able  to  do  more  real  good  by  my 
advocacy  of  total  abstinence  than  I  did  before.  On  looking  through  my  diary  of 
last  year  I  find  I  have  preached  a  hundred  and  seventy-five  times,  given  forty-four 
temperance  lectures,  ninety-five  gospel  addresses  and  cottage  lectures,  besides 
travelling  nearly  four  thousand  miles.  Included  in  the  above  are  the  sermons  and 
addresses  I  deliver(Hl  at  two  Church  Missions  of  ten  days  each.  I  am  thankful  to 
say  I  enjoy  robust  healtb,  which  I  am  confident  is  the  result,  in  part,  at  least,  of 
total  abstinence.  I  am  sure  the  happiness  and  joy  of  doing  good  to  our  fallen 
brothers  and  sisters  more  than  compensates  for  the  loss  of  a  trifling  gratification." 
The  value  of  abstinence  : — It  was  Dr.  Hook's  boast  that  for  more  than  thirty  years 
he  had  "  laboured  in  the  manufacturing  districts,  not  for  the  working  classes,  but 
with  them,  in  the  measures  desired  by  themselves  for  the  improvement  of  their 
class,  and  having  for  their  object  the  formation  of  habits  of  temperance  and 
prudence ;  and  especially  that  he  bad  worked  with  them  in  the  cause  of  rational 
recreation  and  education."  It  was  with  a  view  to  aid  this  wide  and  general  step  in 
the  education  of  the  masses  that,  late  in  life,  he  joined  the  temperance  movement, 
and  became  a  pledged  teetotaler.  He  used  to  tell  the  story  of  his  change  in  this 
direction  in  the  following  way : — "  I  had  in  my  parish  at  Leeds  a  man  who  earned 
18s.  a  week ;  out  of  this  he  used  to  give  7s.  to  his  wife,  and  to  spend  tbe  rest  in 
drink  ;  but  for  all  that,  he  was  a  good  sort  of  man.  I  went  to  him  and  said, '  Now, 
suppose  you  abstain  altogether  for  six  months.'  '  Well,  if  I  do,  will  you,  sir  ? '  was 
his  reply.  '  Yes,'  I  said,  '  I  will.'  '  What,'  said  he,  '  from  beer,  from  spirits,  and 
from  wine  ?  '     '  Yes.     And  how  shall  I  know  if  you  keep  your  promise  ?  '     '  Why, 


148  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOV,.  [chap.  x. 

sir,  you  ask  my  "  missus,"  and  I'll  ask  yonrn.'  It  was  agreed  bstween  us  for  six 
months  at  first,  and  afterwards  we  renewed  the  promise.  He  never  resumed  the 
bad  habit  that  he  had  left  off;  and  he  is  now  a  prosperous  and  happy  man  in 
business  at  St.  Petersburg,  and  I  am  Dean  of  Chichester."  Tolal  ahgtlnence  a 
safegitard  in  responsible  ■positions: — On  almost  all  boilers  connected  with  engines 
there  can  be  found  a  safety-valve.  Whenever  the  boiler  gets  too  full  of  steam  and 
is  in  danger  of  bursting,  this  little  valve  opens  and  lets  the  steam  out.  No  one  has 
to  watch  it,  for  it  opens  of  itself.  There  was  once  a  man  who  wanted  to  travel  on 
a  certain  steamboat.  He  went  to  the  boat  and  examined  the  machinery,  but  he 
found  that  there  was  not  an  efficient  safety-valve  on  the  boiler,  so  he  said  to  the 
captain,  "  I  won't  go  on  your  boat,  captain.  You  haven't  a  proper  safety-valve, 
and  I  am  afraid  the  boat  may  be  blown  up  without  it."  "  Come  down  with  me  to 
the  engine-room,"  said  the  captain,  "  and  I  will  show  you  the  best  safety-valve  in 
the  world,"  When  they  reached  the  engine-room  the  captain  went  up  to  the 
engineer,  and  laying  his  hand  on  his  shoulder,  said,  "  There,  sir,  is  my  safety-valve, 
the  best  to  be  found  anywhere — a  man  who  never  drinks  anything  but  cold  water." 
*'  You  are  right,  captain  ;  I  want  no  better  safety-valve  than  that.  I  will  go  on  this 
boat."  He  knew  that  the  engineer  would  always  watch  the  machinery,  and  if  any- 
thing went  wrong  he  would  know  it  instantly.  Only  a  sober  man  ought  to  be 
trusted  in  such  a  responsible  position  ;  and  when  boats  have  such  engineers  they 
have  the  best  safety-valves  in  the  world. 

Vers.  16-20.  Wherefore  have  ye  not  eaten  the  sin  offering  ? — Consideration  for 
neglected  duty  : — Part  of  this  goat  being  a  sin  offering,  should  have  been  eaten — I 
mean  the  shoulder  and  breast  allotted  to  the  priest — but  it  was  all  burned  contrary 
to  the  law,  for  which  Moses  was  justly  offended,  having  seen  so  lately  God's  wrath 
upon  the  other  fault.  The  answer  of  Aaron  you  have  in  verse  19,  in  effect  and 
sense  as  if  he  should  have  said,  "  I  confess  and  acknowledge  the  ordinance  of  God 
is  to  be  kept,  and  we  are  to  eat  with  joy  of  the  parts  allotted  unto  us  of  the  sacrifice 
for  sin ;  the  blood  was  not  brought  into  the  Tabernacle  of  the  testimony.  But  how 
could  I  eat  with  joy  in  so  heavy  and  woful  a  case  of  my  children  ?  Compelled, 
therefore,  with  the  greatness  of  my  grief,  I  did  what  I  did,"  &c.  At  which  answer, 
saith  our  chapter,  Moses  was  content,  so  bearing  with  his  infirmity,  considering 
his  great  sorrow,  but  not  leaving  an  example  to  forgive  them  that  maliciously 
transgress  the' commandment  of  God.  And  as  Moses  is  said  to  have  stayed  his 
anger,  so  you  see  the  Lord  Himself  did,  not  punishing  again  this  fault.  It  layeth  open 
unto  us  the  great  kindness  of  our  gracious  God,  of  whom  the  psalm  saith,  "  He  is 
full  of  compassion  and  mercy,  long  suffering  and  of  great  goodness.  He  will  not 
always  be  chiding,  neither  keepeth  He  His  anger  for  ever.  He  dealeth  not  with  us 
after  our  sins,  neither  rewardeth  us  according  to  our  wickedness,"  &c.  Secondly, 
you  may  see  here  how  these  ceremonial  laws  gave  place  to  necessity,  as  David  also 
in  necessity  did  eat  the  shewbread,  which  was  otherwise  unlawful  for  him  to  do ; 
and  Hezekiah  admitted  to  the  Passover  those  that  were  not  cleansed.  But  for 
moral  laws  tbere  is  no  dispensation  for  corporal  necessity,  but  a  constant  course 
must  be  held  in  obeying  them.  For  it  is  not  necessary  that  I  should  live  ;  but  it  is 
ever  necessary  that  I  should  live  righteously.  Lastly,  in  that  Moses  admitted  a 
reasonable  excuse,  we  may  learn  to  abhor  pride  and  to  do  the  like ;  pride,  I  say, 
which  scorneth  to  hear  what  may  be  said  against  the  conceit  we  have  once 
harboured.  A  modest  man  or  woman  doth  not  thus  ;  but  even  for  his  servant  or 
his  maid  holy  Job  had  an  ear,  and  did  not  despise  tbeir  judgment,  their  complaint, 
or  grief,  when  they  thought  themselves  evil  entreated  by  him.  The  example  of 
God  Himself  is  instead  of  a  thousand,  who  both  heard  and  accepted  of  Abimelech 
his  excuse  for  taking  away  Abraham's  wife,  "I  know,"  saith  He,  "that  thou 
didst  it  even  with  an  upright  mind,  and  therefore  I  kept  thee  also  that  thou  shouldest 
not  sin  against  Me,"  A'c.  Shall  the  Lord  be  thus  sweet,  and  we  so  dogged,  so 
churlish,  so  stern  and  sour,  that  no  excuse  may  serve  for  a  tiling  done  amiss  if 
once  we  have  taken  notice  of  it  ?  Beware,  beware,  and  remember  your  own  frailty 
well.  A  stubborn  frowardnesshath  hurt  many,  sweet  gentleness  and  courtesy  never 
any;  but  though  wicked  men  were  unthankful,  yet  our  gracious  God  was  pleased. 
{Bp.  Babington.)  Such  things  have  befallen  me. — The  njjlictions  which  befall 
the  servants  of  God : — I.  That  sokk  afflictions  sometimes  befall  the  servants 
OF  God.  1.  The  death  of  two  sons  by  one  stroke.  2.  The  distressing  character  of 
their  death.     3.  The  prohibition  of  any  expression  of  grief.     II.  That  under  thb 

rBESSDKB    OF   SORE   AFFLICTIONS    THE    SERVANTS    OF  GoD   ARE   REQUIRED    TO   ATTEND    TU 


CHAP.  X.]  LEVITICUS.  149 

EELiGious  DUTIES.  1.  The  obligatoriness  of  such  duties  is  not  annulled  by  trial. 
Trust  in  God,  and  prayer  and  praise  to  bim,  are  binding  in  sickness  as  in  health, 
in  sorrow  as  in  joy.  So  are  all  religious  duties.  2.  The  need  of  the  help  which 
attention  to  such  duties  affords  is  not  diminisbed  by  trial,  but  rather  increased. 

III.  That  under  the  pressure  of  sore  afflictions  the  mixd  and  heart  of  the 

SERVANTS     OF     GoD     OFTEN     SEEil     UNEQUAL     TO   A     PROPER     DISCHARGE     OF     EELIGIOUS 

DUTIES.  On  the  day  when  this  calamity  befell  them,  Aaron  and  his  surviving  sons 
did  not  accuratdy  discharge  their  sacred  duties.  It  was  expressly  commanded  that 
the  flesh  of  those  sin  offerings,  the  blood  of  which  was  not  carried  into  the  Taber- 
nacle of  the  congregation,  should  be  eaten  by  the  ofiieiating  priests  (chap.  vi. 
24-30).  Instead  of  doing  this,  Aaron  and  his  sons  burnt  the  flesh  of  the  sin- 
offering  (vers.  16-18).  Tbe  error  may  be  viewed  as — 1.  An  oversight  caused  by  the 
things  which  had  befallen  them.  In  great  griefs  the  heart  seems  dead  to  every 
feeling  but  the  predominant  one,  and  the  mind  seems  incapable  of  sustained  atten- 
tion to  anything  except  what  is  related  to  its  griefs.  Meditation  upon  the  holy 
Scriptures,  prayer,  spiritual  aspirations,  communion  with  God — these  seem  im- 
possible to  the  sorrow-stricken  soul.  Needing  them  so  urgently,  yet  the  soul 
seems  unable  properly  to  attend  to  them.  2.  Intentional  because  of  felt  unfitness 
to  eat  of  the  "most  holy"  flesh.  This  seems  to  receive  most  support  from  the 
words  following  the  text :  "  Such  things  have  befallen  me,  and  if  I  had  eaten  the 
sin-offering  to-day.  should  it  have  been  accepted  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  ?  "  The 
bereaved  father  seems  to  have  been  not  only  sorrowful,  but  deeply  awed  and 
humbled  by  the  things  which  had  befallen  him,  and  to  have  felt  that  if  he  had 
eaten  the  "  most  holy  "  flesh  in  such  a  frame  of  mind  it  would  not  have  been 
acceptable  to  God.  His  case  reminds  us  of  some  who  absent  themselves  from  the 
sacrament  of  the  Lord's  supper  because  of  a  sincere  feeling  of  unworthiness.  But 
let  such  persons  remember  that  Aaron's  sense  of  unworthiness  did  not  disqualify 
him   for  eating  the  flesh  of  the   sin-offering ;   he  rather  erred  in  not  doing  so. 

IV.  That  when  the   mind   and  heart  of  the   suffering  servants  of  God  seem 

THUS    unfitted    FOE    RELIGIOUS   DUTIES,    GoD    DOES   NOT   ACCOUNT     SUCH    UNFITNESS   AS 

SIN.  When  Moses  heard  the  apology  of  Aaron  "he  was  content";  and  we 
are  warranted  in  regarding  his  "content"  as  an  evidence  that  God  also  was  satis- 
fied with  the  reason  assigned  by  the  high  priest  for  his  deviation  from  the  line  of 
duty.  Surely  the  Lord  knew  the  intense  anguish  which  His  servant  was  suffering, 
and  regarded  him  with  deepest,  tenderest  pity.  "  The  Lord  is  very  pitiful,  and  of 
tender  mercy."  Here  is  consolation  for  the  sorrow-stricken  soul.  If  in  the  day  of 
your  sore  afflictions  you  seem  to  have  no  heart  for  worship,  your  efforts  to  pray  end 
in  what  seems  to  you  to  be  utter  failure,  and  religious  thouj^ht  and  emotion  seem  to 
have  entirely  departed  from  you,  remember  the  touching  words  of  Aaron  in  his 
great  calamity,  "  Such  things  have  befallen  me  "  ;  remember  also  those  other  words, 
"  And  when  Moses  heard  that,  he  was  content."  {W.Jones.)  The  vicissitudes 
of  life : — Observe  here  again  with  yourself  the  strange  and  admirable  change  of 
these  worldly  matters  in  the  turn,  as  we  say,  of  a  hand.  For  but  yesterday,  as  it 
were,  Aaron  and  these  sons  of  his  had  a  famous  and  glorious  consecration  into  the 
greatest  and  highest  dignity  upon  earth,  nothing  under  the  sun  being  more 
glorious  than  that  priesthood  in  those  days.  And  how  may  you  think  his  heart 
rejoiced  to  see,  not  only  himself,  but  his  children  (which  parents  often  love  more 
than  themselves),  so  blessed  and  honoured  ?  But,  0  change !  how  sudden  and 
fearful !  0  fickle,  fading  comfort,  that  man  taketh  hold  of  in  this  world,  whatso- 
ever it  be,  if  worldly !  These  sons  so  lately  exalted  and  honoured  to  their  old 
father's  sweet  and  great  joy,  now  lie  destroyed  before  his  face,  to  his  extreme  and 
twitching  torment.  And  how  ?  Not  by  any  ordinary  and  accustomed  death,  but 
by  fire  from  heaven,  a  sore  and  dreadful  judgment.  For  what  also?  Even  for 
breach  of  commanded  duty  by  the  Lord,  all  which  doubled  aud  trebled  the  father's 
sorrow.  As  it  did  in  David  when  his  sen  Absalom  died  not  a  usual  death,  and  in 
rebellion  and  disobedience  against  his  king  and  father.  You  remember  his  passion 
then  uttered:  "0  my  son  Absalom,  my  son,  my  son  Absalom;  would  God  I  had 
died  for  thee,  0  Absalom,  my  son,  my  son."  He  considered  the  cause  wherein  he 
died,  and  the  manner  how  he  died  ;  to  a  father  so  kind  as  David  was,  both  of  them 
full  of  woe  and  sorrow.  Let  never,  therefore,  any  prosperity  in  this  world  puff  us  ; 
for  we  little  know  what  to-morrow  may  bring  with  it.  The  glass  that  glittereth 
most  is  soonest  broken;  the  rankest  corn  is  soonest  laid;  and  the  fullest  bough 
with  pleasant  fruit  is  soonest  slit,  having  more  eyes  upon  it,  and  more  stones  cast 
at  it,  than  all  the  other  boughs  of  the  tree.     Pleasant  wine  maketh  wise  men  fools. 


150  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

and  fools  often  stark  mad.  Milo's  strong  arm  overthrew  him,  and  Csesar  his- 
ambition.  The  one  trusted  too  much  to  nature,  and  the  other  to  foitune.  As  a. 
spider's  web,  so  is  a  man's  greatne.^s  in  this  world  st>on  wiped  away  with  a  little 
whisk.  (Bp.  Bahington.)  When  Moses  heard  that,  he  was  content. — A  contented 
law : — Some  explanations  carry  their  own  conviction.  We  know  the  voice  of 
honesty  when  we  hear  it ;  there  is  a  frankness  about  it  that  can  hardly  be  mistaken. 
But  the  meaning  lies  deeper;  there  can  be  no  contentment  in  the  presence  of 
violated  law.  Where  a  law  is  violated  wantonly,  nature  can  have  no  rest  ;  she 
says,  "  I  cannot  sleep  to-night."  Thank  God  she  cannot !  When  she  can  forget 
her  Maker,  the  end  will  have  come  in  darkness,  and  there  will  in  very  deed,  in 
spirit  and  effect,  be  no  more  any  God.  Law  must  be  satisfied  in  one  of  two  wayc 
Law  can  rest  upon  the  ashes  of  Sodom  and  Gomorrah,  saying,  "  Judgment  has. 
been  inflicted,  righteousness  has  been  vindicated,  and  the  seal  of  condemnation  has 
been  attacLed  to  the  testimony  of  evil  ";  and  mighty,  imperial,  inexorable  law  sits 
on  the  desolated  cities — "  content."  That  is  not  the  way  in  which  the  Lord  would 
bring  about  His  own  contentment ;  still,  there  is  the  law  :  fall  upon  this  stone  and 
be  broken,  or  the  stone  will  fall  upon  you  and  you  will  be  ground  to  powder.  The 
gospel  is  a  savour  of  life  unto  life,  or  of  death  unto  death.  God  would  have  law 
obeyed  :  all  His  ordinances  carried  out  in  simple  obedience,  every  statute  turned 
into  conduct,  every  appointment  represented  in  obedience  and  praise.  Then  the 
universe,  faithful  to  her  Creator,  the  stars  never  disloyal  to  their  Creator-King — the 
whole  creation  will  say — "  Content."     (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  XI. 

Vees.  2-47.  These  are  the  heasts  which  ye  shall  eat. — The  clean  and  the  unclean  : 
— The  Mosaic  Law  attached  great  importance  to  meats  and  drinks  :  the  Christian 
religion  attaches  none.  The  Apostle  Peter  was  shown,  by  the  vision  of  a  sheet  let 
down  from  heaven,  not  only  that  all  nations  were  now  to  receive  the  gospel  message, 
but  that  all  kinds  of  food  were  now  clean,  and  that  all  the  prohibitions  which  had 
foi-merly  been  laid  upon  them  for  legal  purposes  were  now  once  for  all  withdrawn.. 
A  Christian  may,  if  he  pleases,  put  himself  under  restrictions  as  to  these  matters. 
You  will  remember  that  the  Apostle  Paul  says,  "  I  know  and  am  persuaded  of  the 
Lord  Jesus  that  there  is  nothing  unclean  of  itself  ;  but  to  him  that  esteemeth  any- 
thing to  be  unclean,  to  him  it  is  unclean."  The  doctrine  of  the  New  Testament  is 
expressly  laid  down,  "  Every  creature  of  God  is  good  and  nothing  to  be  refused,  if 
it  be  received  with  thanksgiving."  And  as  for  the  practice  enjoined  upon  believers, 
"All  things  are  lawful,  but  all  things  are  not  expedient."  The  Levitical  law 
enjoined  many  precepts  as  to  meats  and  drinks  ;  but  th'se  carnal  ordinances  were 
imposed  until  the  time  of  reformation.  I.  It  is  our  firm  belief  that  these  distinc- 
tions of  meats  were  laid  down  on  purpose  to  keep  the  Jews  as  a  distinct  people, 
and  that  herein  they  might  be  a  type  of  the  people  of  God,  who  are  also,  throughout 
all  ages,  to  be  a  separate  people — not  of  the  world,  even  as  Christ  was  not  of  the 
woild.  1.  But  you  will  ask  of  me  in  what  respects  are  you  to  be  distinguished  ? 
In  a  pure  consistency  always,  in  a  vain  eccentricity  never.  Not  by  any  peculiarity 
in  garments  or  language  are  you  to  be  known.  Heavenly  realities  within  do  not 
always  need  to  be  labelled  outside,  so  that  everybody  may  recognise  you  and  say, 
"  There  goes  a  saint."  There  are  other  modes  of  being  distinguit-hed  from  the 
•world  than  any  of  these.  2.  We  ought  ever  to  be  distinguished  from  the  world  in 
the  great  object  of  our  life.  As  for  worldly  men,  some  of  them  are  seeking  wealth, 
others  of  them  fame ;  some  seek  after  comfort,  others  after  pleasure.  Subordi- 
nately  you  may  seek  after  any  of  these,  but  your  principal  motive  as  a  Christian 
should  always  be  to  live  for  Christ.  3.  By  your  spirit,  as  well  as  your  aim,  you 
should  likewise  be  distinguished.  The  spirit  of  this  world  is  often  selfish ;  it  is 
always  a  spirit  that  forgets  G<k1,  that  ignores  the  existence  of  a  Creator  in  His  own 
world.  Now,  your  spirit  should  be  one  of  unselfish  devotion,  a  spirit  always  con- 
scious of  His  presence,  bowed  down  with  the  weight,  or  raised  up  with  the  cheer  of 
Hagar's  exclamation,  "Thou  God  seest  me":  a  spirit  which  watcheth  humbly 
before  God,  and  seekt-th  to  know  His  will  and  to  do  it  through  the  grace  of  God 
given  to  you.    4.  Your  maxims,  too,  and  the  rules  which  regulate  you,  should  be 


CHAP.  XL]  LEVITICUS.  151 

very  different  from  those  of  others.  The  believer  reads  things,  not  in  man's  light, 
in  the  obscurity  of  which  so  many  blind  bats  are  willing  to  fly,  but  he  reads  things 
in  the  sunlight  of  heaven.  If  a  thing  be  right,  though  he  lose  by  it,  it  is  done ;  if 
it  be  wrong,  though  he  should  become  as  rich  as  Crcesus  by  allowing  it,  he  scorns 
the  siu  for  his  Master's  sake.  5.  The  Christian  should  be  separate  in  his  actions. 
I  would  not  Kive  much  for  your  religion  unless  it  can  be  seen.  I  know  some 
people's  religion  is  heard  of,  but  give  me  the  man  whose  religion  is  seen.  6.  A 
Christian  is  distinguished  by  his  conversation.  He  will  often  trim  a  sentence  where 
others  would  have  made  it  far  more  luxuriant  by  a  jest  which  was  not  altogether 
clean.  Following  Herbeit's  advice,  "  He  pares  his  apple — he  would  cleanly  feed.'' 
If  he  would  have  a  jest,  he  picks  the  mirth,  but  leives  the  sin  ;  his  conversation  is 
not  used  to  levity,  but  it  ministereth  grace  unto  the  hearers.  How  shall  I  urge  you 
to  give  more  earnest  heed  to  this  holy  separation  ?  If  we  do  not  see  to  this  matter 
we  shall  bring  sorrow  on  our  own  souls ;  we  shall  lose  all  hope  of  honouring  Christ, 
and  we  shall  sooner  or  later  bring  a  great  disaster  on  the  world.  II.  The  distinc- 
tion drawn  between  clean  and  unclean  animals  was,  we  think,  intended  by  God  to 
KEEP  His  people  always  conscious  that  they  were  in  the  neighboukhood  of 
SIN.  It  is  all  the  prayer  that  is  wanted — "Lord,  show  me  myself;  Lord,  show  me 
Thyself ;  reveal  sin  and  reveal  a  Saviour."     III.  It  was  also  intended  to  be  a  rule  of 

DISCRIMINATION    BY    WHICH    WE    MAY   JUDGE    WHO   ARE    CLEAN    AND    WHO    ARE    UNCLEAN — 

that  is,  WHO  ARE  SAINTS  AND  WHO  ARE  NOT.  There  are  two  tests,  but  they  must 
both  be  united.  The  beast  that  was  clean  was  to  chew  the  cud :  here  is  the  inner 
life;  every  true-hearted  man  must  know  how  to  read,  mark,  learn,  and  inwardly 
digest  the  sacred  Word.  The  man  who  does  not  feed  upon  gospel  truth,  and  so 
feed  upon  it,  too,  that  he  knows  the  sweetness  and  relish  of  it,  and  seeks  out  its 
marrow  and  fatness,  that  man  is  no  heir  of  heaven.  You  must  know  a  Christian 
by  his  inwards,  by  that  which  supports  his  life  and  sustains  his  frame.  But  then 
the  clean  creatures  were  also  known  by  their  walk.  The  Jew  at  once  discovered 
the  unclean  animal  by  its  having  an  undivided  hoof;  bat  if  the  hoof  was  thoroughly 
'livided,  then  it  was  clean,  provided  that  it  also  chewed  the  end.  So  there  must  be 
iu  the  true  Christian  a  peculiar  walk  such  as  God  requires.  You  cannot  tell  a  man 
by  either  of  these  tests  alone  ;  you  must  have  them  both.  But  while  you  use  them 
upon  others,  apply  them  to  yourselves.  What  do  you  feed  on  ?  What  is  your 
habit  of  life  ?  Do  you  chew  the  cud  by  meditation  ?  "When  your  soul  feeds  on  the 
desh  and  blood  of  Christ  have  you  learned  that  His  flesh  is  meat  indeed,  and  that 
His  blood  is  drink  indeed  ?  If  so,  it  is  well.  What  about  your  life  ?  Are  your 
conversation  and  your  daily  walk  according  to  the  description  which  is  given  in  the 
Word  of  believers  in  Christ  ?  If  not,  the  first  test  will  not  stand  alone.  You  may 
profess  the  faith  within,  but  if  you  do  not  walk  aright  without,  you  belong  to  the 
unclean.  On  the  other  band,  you  may  walk  aright  without,  but  unless  there  is  the 
chewing  of  the  cud  within,  unless  there  is  a  real  feeding  upon  precious  truth  in  the 
heart,  all  the  right  walking  in  the  world  will  not  prove  you  to  be  a  Christian.  That 
holiness  which  is  only  outward  is  moral,  not  spiritual ;  it  does  not  save  the  soul. 
That  religion,  on  the  other  hand,  which  is  only  inward  is  but  fancy  ;  it  cannot  save 
the  soul  either.  But  the  two  together — the  inward  parts  made  capable  of  knowing 
the  lusciousness,  the  sweetness,  the  fatness  of  Christ's  truth,  and  the  outward  parts 
conformed  to  Christ's  image  and  character — these  conjoined  point  out  the  true  and 
clean  Christian  with  whom  it  is  blessed  to  associate  here,  and  for  whom  a  better 
portion  is  prepared  hereafter.     (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  clean  and  unclean  : — 

Great  surprise  and  wonder  have  been  expressed  by  some  learned  men  at  the  pro- 
found acquaintance  with  the  animal  kingdom  exhibited  in  this  chapter.  Our 
greatest  men  of  modern  science  have  penetrated  no  deeper  into  natural  history 
than  the  author  of  these  laws.  Leibnitz,  and  Buffon,  and  Cuvier,  and  Erxleben, 
and  Humboldt,  have  been  unable  to  make  any  material  advances  upon  the  classifi- 
cations and  distinctions,  in  the  nature,  habits,  and  qualities  of  animals,  here  given 
long  before  mere  human  science  in  these  departments  was  born.  And  those  may 
well  wonder  who  allow  no  higher  wisdom  in  these  laws  than  that  of  mere  man. 
The  fact  is,  that  these  Mosaic  institutes  all  have  upon  them  such  distinct  traces  of 
the  hand  and  mind  of  God,  that  it  becomes  the  height  of  folly  to  refer  them  to  the 
mere  ingenuity  of  man.  I.  I  find  in  this  chapter  A  system  of  wholesome  dietetics. 
All  the  animals  here  pronounced  clean  are  the  most  valuable,  nutritious,  and  whole 
some  of  creatures  for  human  food.  It  does  not  follow  that  none  among  those  for- 
bidden are  good  for  food  ;  but  I  wish  to  say  that  it  is  certain  all  the  animals  here 
called  "  clean  "  are  the  best.    II.  A  second,  and  somewhat  more  direct  aim  of  these 


152  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [nikv.  xi. 

arrangements,  looked  to  the  keeping  of  the  Hebrews  entirely  distinct  from 
ALL  OTHER  PEOPLE.     They  Were  to  be  the  light  and  truth-bearing  nation  a'liong  the 
families  of  man.     They  were  elected  to  perpetuate  a  knowledge  of  the  true  God, 
and,  by  their  peculiar  training,  to  prep-ire  the  way  for  Christ  and  Cluistiauity.     To 
fulfil  this  mission  they  needed  to  be  strongly  fenced  in  and  barricaded  against  the 
subtle  inroads  of  idolatry.     And  it  was,  in  part,  to  effect  this  segregation  of  the 
Jewish  people  that  this  system  of  religious  dietetics  was  instituted.     Nothing  more 
effectual  could  be  desired  to  keep  one  people  distinct  from  anotlier.     It  causes  the 
difference  between  them  to  be  ever  present  to  the  mind,  touching,  as  it  does,  at  so 
many  points  of  social  and  every-day  contact;  and  it  is  therefore  far  more  powerful 
in  its  results,  as  a  rule  of  distinction,  than  any  difference  in  doctrine,  wo  ship,  or 
morals,  which  men  could  entertain.  Kitto  says  that  when  in  Asia  he  had  almost  daily 
occasion  to  be  convinced  of  the  incalculable  efficacy  of  such  distinctions  in  keeping 
men  apart  from  strangers.     A  Mahomedan,  for  instance,  might  be  kind,  liberal, 
indulgent ;  but  the  recurrence  of  a  meal,  or  any  eating,  threw  him  back  upon  his 
own  distinctive  practices  and  habits,  reminding  him  that  you  were  an  unclean 
person,  and  that  his  own  purity  was  endangered  by  contact  with  you.     III.  A  still 
further  and  more  direct  intent  of  these  religious  dietetics  was  to  train  the  under- 
standing to  the  perception  of  moral  distinctions — to  engrave  upon  the  mind  an 
idea  of  holiness.     Indeed,  tbis  was  one  of  the  leading  objects  of  the  entire  cere- 
monial law.     There  are  islands  in  the  sea  which  would  not  exist  but  for  the  coral 
reefs  upon  which  they  rest ;  and  so  there  would  be  no  Christianity  without  these 
ceremonial  regulations,  which,  by  small  beginnings,  laid  in  the  human  mind  the 
foundations  upon  which  all  our  Christian    convictions  have   been   wrought  out. 
Geologists  tell  us  that  the  physical  world  is  composed  of  various  layers,  one  on  the 
other,  from  a  deep  granite  base  up  to  the  fertile  mould  which  furnishes  us  food 
while  we  live  and  graves  when  we  are  dead.     It  is  much  the  same  in  the  moral  and 
religious  world.     It  has  been  brought  forth  by  degrees.     As  there  have  been  many 
geologic  eras,  so  there  have  been  various  religious  dispensations,  each  one  furnish- 
ing the  basis  for  the  next  succeeding.      Each  of  these  successive  dispensations 
furnished  a  distinct  stratum  upon  which  the  following  one  was  built.     The  last 
could  not  exist  without  the  first.     Each  one  is  a  part  of  the  grand  whole.     Con- 
necting this  chapter  with  the  laws  concerning  offerings  and  priests,  we  can  easily 
see  how  the  whole  would  operate  in  begetting  and  establishing  the  idea  of  purity 
and  holiness.     Dividing  off  all  animated  nature  into  clean  and  unclean,  some  would 
be  regarded  as  better  and  purer  than  others.     Of  this  pure  kind  only  could  be  taken 
for  sacrifices.     And  even  of  the  better  kind  only  the  purest  and  most  spotless 
individuals  were  to  be  selected.     The  sacdficial  victim  would  hence  appear  very 
■widely  separated  from  the  common  herd  of  living  creatures,  and  very  clean  and 
good.     A  thoroughly  cleansed  and  consecrated  officer  was  then  to  take  it  in  charge, 
and  wash  both  it  and  himself  before  it  could  come  upon  the  altar.     And  when  the 
presentation  was  to  be  made  to  the  Lord  in  the  most  Holy  Place,  only  the  pure 
blood,  in  a  golden  and  consecrated  bowl,  could  be  brought,  and  even  that  with  great 
fear  and  trembling.     Thus,  from  the  clean  beast,  and  the  cleaner  priest,  and  the 
still  further  cleansing  of  both,  and  the  most  Holy  Place,  which  could  be  approached 
only  by  so  holy  a  personage  with  such  sacred  circumspection,  the  worshipper  was 
taught  the  idea  of  holiness,  the  intense  purity  of  his  God,  and  the  necessity  of 
holiness  in  order  to  come  into  His  favour.     The  fact  is,  that  the  religious  world 
has  derived  its  idea  of  moral  purity  from  the  Mosaic  rights.     It  was  part  of  their 
great  office  to  teach  mankind  moral  distinctions,  and  to  open  the  human  under- 
standing and  conscience  to  the  idea  of  sanctity.     IV.  Connected  with  this,  then, 
was  the  still  further  intent  of  these  laws  to  give  a  picture  of  sin.     We  here  have 
the  finger  of  God,  pointing  out  on  the  great  map  of  living  creation  the  natural  and 
material  symbols  of  depravity.     The  combined  characteristics  of  the  creatures  here 
declared  unclean  furnish  an  exact  exhibition  of  what  sin  is.     They  constitute  a 
living  mirror  in  which  the  sinner  may  look  at  himself.     1.  In  the  first  place  he  is 
unclean,  filthy,  disagreeable,  noxious.     There  may  be  soine  good  qualities,  as  there 
were  in  many  of  the  unclean  creatures ;  but,  upon  the  whole,  he  is  unclean.    Impurity 
is  upon  him.     He  is  uufit  for  holy  association,  or  to  come  acceptably  before  God. 
2.  In  the  next  place  he  is  brutish.     His  character  is  typified  by  the  vile  and  noxious 
of  living  things.     He  was  originally  made  but  a  little  lower  than  the  angels.     And 
what  are  the  effects  of  sin  upon  him  in  whom  it  reigns  ?     It  dethrones  intellect, 
and  makes  it  the  slave  of  mere  impulse,  nullifies  the  deductions  of  wisdom,  stifies 
mid  overrides  the  conscience,  and  makes  the  man  the  servant  of  lust,  living  only 


LEVITICUS.  1.-3 


for  selfish  gratification,  and  following  only  the  dictates  of  the  baser  nature.  A 
brute  is  a  thing  bent  downward.  It  goes  upon  its  hand^.  Its  face  is  towards  the 
ground.  And  what  is  a  slave  of  sin  but  one  whose  eyes  have  been  diverted  from 
heaven,  and  whose  absorbing  attention  is  directed  to  what  is  earthy?  A  brute  is  a 
creature  destined  to  perish.  Its  spirit  goeth  downward.  Its  end  is  extinction. 
How  like  the  sinner/ in  his  guilt !  What  hope  has  he  for  another  world?  But  he 
is  not  only  like  what  all  brutes  are  in  comaiou,  but  also  more  or  less  like  what  the 
several  kinds  of  unclean  cri^atures  are  in  particular.  Sin  is  the  ugliness  and  spite- 
fulness  of  the  camel ;  the  burrowing,  secretive,  wily  disposition  of  the  coney,  the 
rabbit,  and  the  fox;  the  filthy  sensuality  of  the  hog;  the  stupid  stubbornness  .of 
the  ass  ;  the  voracious  Hppetency  of  the  dog,  the  wolf,  the  jackal,  and  hyena  ;  the 
savage  ferocity  and  bloodthirstiness  of  the  tiger,  the  panther,  and  the  lion  ;  the 
sluggishness  of  the  sloth  ;  the  prowling  shyness  and  cruelty  of  the  cat ;  and  the 
base  treachery  and  mischievousness  of  multitudes  of  unclean  creatures  that  roam 
in  darkness.  It  is  the  abominable  thing  which  God  hateth.  It  is  of  all  things  the 
most  hideous,  an  uncleanness  which  cannot  be  expressed,  a  filthiness  so  intense 
that  God  cannot  look  upon  it  with  the  least  degree  of  allowance.  3.  But  it  is  just 
as  abundant  as  it  is  hateful.  The  unclean  creatures  are  as  numerous  and  abound- 
ing as  they  are  base.  The  air  is  full  of  them  ;  the  earth  is  alive  with  them ;  the 
ocean  teams  with  innumerable  kinds  of  them.  They  cover  every  mountain,  they 
crowd  every  plain.  The  crevices  of  the  rocks  are  filled  with  them ;  the  deserts 
have  them  as  numerous  as  sands.  The  trees  of  the  forests  are  thick  with  them  ; 
every  stream  and  fountain  contains  them.  They  move  about  every  street ;  they 
play  m  every  field.  They  are  upon  the  most  beautiful  flowers,  and  crawl  within 
the  most  guarded  enclosures.  They  are  in  our  housts  ;  they  come  up  upon  our 
tables  ;  they  creep  into  our  very  beds.  They  are  present  in  every  climate.  They 
may  be  seen  at  all  seasons.  They  continue  with  all  generations.  And  as  these 
unclean  things  abound,  so  does  sin  abound  ;  for  they  are  God's  natural  types  of 
sin.  And  looking  at  the  appointments  of  this  chapter  as  a  mere  remembrancer  of 
sin,  it  seems  to  me  very  remarkable.  How  impressive  the  arrangement !  All  living 
nature,  by  a  few  simple  words,  at  once  transmuted  into  a  thousand  tongues  to 
remind  and  warn  of  sin  and  uncleanness !  I  do  not  say  that  there  is  no  good  in 
the  world.  There  are  clean  as  well  as  unclean.  There  always  have  been  good  and 
piety  in  the  earth,  and  some  virtuous  ones  among  the  base.  But,  with  all,  there 
were  more  vile  than  clean.  We  have  not  escaped  this  uncleanness  which  has 
gone  out  over  all  the  earth.  (J.  A.  Seiss,  D.D.)  MimUe  enactments  : — Many 
people  have  a  notion  that  there  is  something  unwoithy,  or,  if  I  may  not  be 
misunderstood,  undignified,  in  God  descending  to  such  paltry  regulations,  or,  as 
they  would  call  it,  to  little  things.  But  may  not  this  be  proof  of  His  presence  ? 
The  truth  is,  I  know  not  whether  God  is  greatest  when  He  wields  and  wheels  the 
planets  in  their  orbits,  or  when  He  clothes  the  lily  with  all  its  loveliness,  and 
finds  its  daily  food  for  the  ephemeral  insect  that  is  born  and  perishes  in  a  day. 
God's  greatest  glory  is  often  in  His  ministry  to  the  minutest  things.  We  call  them 
minute  because,  with  considerable  self-conceit,  we  make  ourselves  the  standpoint 
from  which  we  look  at  everything ;  that  which  is  very  much  above  ourselves  we 
think  very  great,  and  that  which  is  below  ourselves  we  thmk  very  little  ;  whereas 
the  truth  is  that  the  microscope  has  revealed  to  man  far  more  stupendous  wonders 
in  a  drop  of  water  than  the  telescope  has  revealed  in  the  starry  firmament  above 
him  ;  and  we  have  more  majestic  footprints  of  infinite  wisdom,  beneficence,  and 
power,  and  love,  visible  in  an  atom  of  dust  than  in  the  firmament  above  us.  And, 
therefore,  it  was  not  unworthy  of  God,  who  ministers  to  His  creatures  the  bread  of 
life,  to  lay  down  what  I  may  call  these  dietetic  precepts,  or  such  regulations  for 
their  nutriment  as  are  given  in  this  and  parallel  chapters.  God  wants  man  not 
only  to  be  happy  in  heaven,  but  He  wants  him  to  be  happy  on  earth  ;  and  He  takes 
the  way  of  making  him  happy  by  trying  in  these  rubrics  to  show  him  that  sin  and 
disobedience  to  His  Word  are  the  spring  of  misery  ;  that  obedience  to  God's  Word 
is  the  source  of  all  true  and  lasting  happiness.  The  classification  that  is  made 
here  is  a  most  remarkable  one.  It  is  not  wholly  an  arbitrary  one ;  but  evidently  a 
distinction  originally  inherent  in  the  animal  economy.  The  distinctions  that  are 
drawn  here  have  lasted  till  now,  and  are  practically  acted  on.  For  instance, 
animals  that  are  called  graminivorous  and  ruminative,  and  that  divide  the 
hoof,  are  still  found  to  be  most  wholesome  for  food.  (J.  Cunnninu,  D.D.) 
Distinguishing  the  precious  from  the  vile : — I.  That  God's  people,  the  spiritual 
IsBAEL,  move  in  A  SCENE  OF  MINGLED  GnoD  AND  EVIL.     1.  In  the  splicre  of  daily  life 


154  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  sr. 

we  have  contact  with  both.  2.  Onr  contact  with  them  entails  the  danger  of  con- 
tamination. 3.  In  such  a  defihng  spliere  our  duty  is  to  sejDarate  the  precious  from 
the  vile.  II.  That  in  life's  mingled  scene  the  godly  must  exercise  continual 
VIGILANCE.  1.  We  enter,  by  relationship  with  Chri.-t,  into  a  separated  life.  2.  Such 
a  separated  life  must  assert  itself  in  habitual  avoidance  of  prohibited  things.  3. 
Minute  distinctions  are  forced  upon  us  by  this  principle  of  conduct.     III.  That  by 

STRICTEST  ADHERENCE  TO  DiVINE  DIRECTIONS  SANCTITY  OF  LIFE  SHOULD  BE  MAINTAINED. 

1.  Every  godly  soul  is,  to  a  degree,  put  in  trust  with  the  imparted  sanctity.  2. 
Derived  sanctity  is  no  assurance  against  defilement  if  we  forsake  God's  commands, 
(ir.  H.  Jellie.)  Lessons: — 1.  All  the  creatures  good  in  tbemselves.  2.  Of  the 
provident  care  of  God  toward  both  the  souls  and  bodies  of  men.  3.  God  no 
respecter  of  persons  (ver.  3).  4.  Of  the  diiference  of  sins,  and  divers  degrees  of 
spiritual  uucleauness.  5.  The  doctrine  may  be  good,  though  the  doctors  and 
teachers  are  evil.  6.  Holiness  the  end  of  the  precepts  of  the  law  (ver.  44).  7.  The 
virtue  of  the  sacraments  depends  not  on  the  worthiness  of  the  minister.  (A.  Will  t, 
D.D.)  Types  of  manhood : — 1.  Of  meditating  in  the  Word  of  God.  Whereas  the 
chewing  of  the  cud  was  one  mark  to  know  a  clean  beast  by :  hereby  is  understooil 
that  we  should  meditate,  and,  as  it  were,  ruminate  on  the  Word  of  God  (Psa.  i.  1,  2). 

2.  To  the  knowledge  of  the  Word,  to  join  practice.  Besides  chewing  the  cud,  the 
clean  beast  was  to  divide  the  hoof.  Men  in  their  life  should  discern  between  good 
and  evil  works,  and  to  their  jjrofession  of  tlie  Word  add  the  practice  of  a  good  life. 

3.  Of  divers  vices  to  be  shunned,  shadowed  forth  in  the  natural  properties  of  some 
creatures.  (1)  Eich  men  in  this  world  are  compared  to  camels,  and  the  cumber- 
some burden  of  their  riches  to  the  bunch  on  the  camel's  back.  (2)  The  coney, 
which  undermines  and  makes  holes  in  the  ground,  is  an  emblem  of  crafty  and 
deceitful  men  who  entrap  others  by  subtle  wiles.  (3)  The  timorous  and  fearful 
hare  that  is  afraid  of  the  least  noise,  is  an  image  of  carnal  and  faint-hearted  men, 
who,  in  the  day  of  trouble,  know  not  which  way  to  turn.  (4)  A  swine,  always 
rooting  in  the  ground  and  wholly  occupied  in  filling  his  belly,  is  a  true  image  of 
worldly-minded  men  who  despise  heavenly  treasure,  and  care  only  for  the  things  of 
this  life.  (5)  Whereas  there  are  twenty  several  fowls  counted  unclean  for  meat,  it 
is  observed  that  most  of  them  are  such  as  live  by  rapine,  feed  on  carrion,  or  delight 
in  darkness  :  representing  three  sorts  of  unclean  persons — covetous,  oppressors,  and 
extortioners.  (6)  The  young  eagle  first  picks  out  the  eye  of  the  carcase  :  denoting 
the  guile  and  manner  of  false  teachers  and  deceivers,  that  would  take  away  the  eye 
of  knowledge  and  right  judgment  (Matt,  xxiii.  13).  (7)  The  vulture  lives  altogether 
on  carrion  and  dead  carcases  :  representing  those  who  wait  for  other  men's  death, 
and  fraudulently  suborn  devised  testaments.  (8)  The  raven  is  unkind  to  his  young 
ones,  and  forsakes  his  nest :  a  true  type  of  such  as  embrace  this  present  world,  and 
leave  the  society  of  the  saints,  and  the  fellowship  of  the  Church — Demas.  (9) 
The  ostrich  signifies  hypocrites;  having  wings,  but  flying  not:  so  the  hypocrite  has 
the  spirit  of  virtue,  but  not  the  power.  (10)  Tlie  owl,  who  sees  in  the  night,  but 
his  eyes  dazzle  in  the  day,  signifies  worldly  wise  men,  who  in  the  matters  of  the 
world  are  quick-sighted  enough,  but  blind  in  spiritual  things  (1  Cor.  ii.  13).  (11) 
The  seagull,  who  lives  and  dives  in  the  water,  represents  men  given  to  pleasure 
(1  Pet.  iv.  3,  4).  (12)  They  write  of  the  pelican,  that  she  nourishes  and  embraces 
her  young  ones,  and  with  the  kisses,  as  it  were,  of  her  bill,  wounds  and  so  kills 
them,  and  afterwards  revives  them  with  her  own  blood:  a  true  resemblance  of 
cockering  parents,  who  make  their  children  wantons,  and  spoil  them  through  too 
much  indulgence.  (13)  The  swan  is  white  without  and  fair  to  see,  but  her  flesh  is 
black  and  unwholesome.  Hereby  are  described  proud  persons,  that  want  inward 
substance,  carrying  outwardly  goodly  shows.  (14)  The  stork,  though  much  cele- 
brated for  her  natural  affection  to  her  parents,  yet  is  counted  an  unclean  bird, 
because  she  feeds  on  unclean  and  poisonous  meats — as  serpents,  snakes,  and  such 
like  :  betokening  such  men  as  have  a  show  of  some  civil  virtues,  and  yet  have  no 
delight  in  God's  Word,  the  wholesome  food  of  the  soul.  4.  Of  the  necessity  of 
sanctification.  5.  Of  separating  the  clean  from  the  unclean.  (Ibid.)  Clean  and 
unclean  animals  : — It  is  of  much  significance  to  note,  in  the  first  place,  that  a  large 
part  of  the  animals  which  are  forbidden  as  food  are  unclean  feeders.  It  is  a  well- 
ascertained  fact  that  even  the  cleanest  animal,  if  its  food  be  unclean,  becomes 
dangerous  to  health  if  its  flesh  be  eaten.  The  flesh  of  a  cow  which  has  drunk 
water  contaminated  with  typhoid  germs,  if  eaten,  especially  if  insufficiently  cooked, 
may  communicate  typhoid  fever  to  him  who  eats  it.  It  is  true,  indeed,  that  not  all 
animals  that  are  prohibited  are  unclean  in  their  food;  but  the  fact  remains  that,  on 


CHAP.  XI. T  LEVITICUS.  155 

the  other  hand,  among  those  which  are  allowed  is  to  be  found  no  animal  whose 
ordinary  habits  of  life,  especially  in  respect  of  food,  are  unclean.  But,  in  the 
second  place,  an  animal  which  is  not  unclean  in  its  habits  may  yet  bo  dangerous  for 
t'o'id,  if  it  be,  for  any  reason,  specially  linble  to  disease.  One  of  the  greatest  dis- 
coveries of  modern  science  is  the  fact  that  a  large  number  of  diseases  to  which 
animals  are  liable  are  due  to  the  presence  of  low  forms  of  parasitic  life.  To  such 
diseases  those  which  are  unclean  in  their  feeding  will  be  especially  exposed,  while 
none  will  perhaps  be  found  wholly  exempt.  Another  discovery  of  recent  times, 
wbich  has  a  no  less  important  bearing  on  the  question  raided  by  this  chapter,  is  the 
now  ascertained  fact  that  many  of  the  parasitic  diseases  are  common  to  both 
animals  and  men  and  may  be  communicated  from  the  former  to  the  latter.  In  the 
light  of  such  facts  as  these,  it  is  plain  that  an  ideal  dietary  law  would,  as  far  as 
possible,  exclude  from  human  food  all  animals  which,  under  given  conditions, 
might  be  especially  liable  to  these  parasitic  diseases,  and  which,  if  their  flesh 
should  be  eaten,  might  thus  become  a  frequent  medium  of  communicating  them  to 
men.  Now  it  is  a  most  remarkable  and  significant  fact  that  the  tendency  of  the 
most  recent  investigations  of  this  subject  has  been  to  show  that  the  i^rohibitions 
and  permissions  of  the  Mosaic  Law  concerning  food,  as  we  have  seen  in  this  chapter, 
become  apparently  explicable  in  view  of  the  above  facts.  Not  to  refer  to  other 
authorities,  among  the  latest  competent  testimonies  on  this  subject  is  that  of  Dr. 
Noel  Gueneau  de  Mussy,  in  a  paper  presented  to  the  Paris  Academy  of  Medicine  in 
1885;  in  which  he  is  quoted  as  saying  :  "  There  is  so  close  a  connection  between  the 
thinking  being  and  the  living  organism  in  man,  so  intimate  a  solidarity  between 
moral  and  material  interests,  and  the  useful  is  so  constantly  and  so  necessarily  in 
harmony  with  the  good,  that  these  two  elements  cannot  be  separated  in  hygiene. 
...  It  is  this  combination  which  has  exercised  so  great  an  influence  on  the 
preservation  of  the  Israelites,  despite  the  very  unfavourable  external  circumstances 
in  which  they  have  been  placed.  .  .  .  The  idea  of  parasitic  and  infectious 
maladies,  which  has  conquered  so  great  a  position  in  modern  pathology,  appears  to 
have  greatly  occupied  the  mind  of  Moses,  and  to  have  dominated  all  his  hygienic 
rules.  He  excludes  from  Hebrew  dietary  animals  particularly  liable  to  parasites ; 
and  as  it  is  in  the  blood  that  the  germs  or  spores  of  infectious  disease  circulate,  he 
orders  that  they  must  be  drained  of  their  blood  before  serving  for  food."  It  may  be 
added  that  upon  this  principle  we  may  also  easily  explain,  in  a  rational  way,  the 
very  minute  prescriptions  of  the  law  with  regard  to  defilement  by  dead  bodies.  For 
immediately  upon  death  begins  a  process  of  corruption  which  produces  compounds 
not  only  obnoxious  to  the  senses  but  actively  poisonous  in  character ;  and  what  i•^ 
of  still  more  consequence  to  observe,  in  the  case  of  all  parasitic  and  infectious 
diseases,  the  energy  of  the  infection  is  specially  intensified  when  the  infected  person 
or  animal  dies.  Hence  the  careful  regulations  as  to  cleansing  of  those  persons  or 
things  which  had  been  thus  defiled  by  the  dead :  either  by  water,  where  joracticable, 
or,  where  the  thing  could  not  be  thus  thoroughly  cleansed,  by  burning  the  article  with 
fire,  the  most  certain  of  all  disinfectants.  But  if  this  be  indeed  the  principle  which 
underlies  this  law  of  the  clean  and  the  unclean  as  here  given,  it  will  then  be  urged 
that  since  the  Hebrews  have  observed  this  law  with  strictness  for  centuries,  they  ought 
to  show  the  evidence  of  this  in  a  marked  immunity  from  sickness,  as  compared  with 
other  nations,  and  especially  from  diseases  of  an  infectious  character ;  and  a  con- 
sequent longevity  superior  to  that  of  the  Gentiles  who  pay  no  attention  to  these 
laws.  Now  it  is  the  fact,  and  one  which  evidently  furnishes  another  powerful 
argument  for  this  interpretation,  that  this  is  exactly  what  we  see.  Even  so  long  ago 
as  the  days  when  the  plague  was  desolating  Europe,  the  Jews  so  universally  escaped 
infection  that,  by  this  their  exemption,  the  popular  suspicion  was  excited  into  fury, 
and  they  were  accused  of  causing  the  fearful  mortality  among  their  Gentile  neigh- 
bours by  poisoning  the  wells  and  springs.  In  our  own  day,  in  the  recent  cholera 
epidemic  in  Italy,  a  correspondent  of  the  Jewish  Chronicle  testifies  that  the 
Jews  enjoyed  almost  absolute  immunity,  at  least  from  fatal  attack.  Professor 
Hosmer  says :  "  Throughout  the  entire  history  of  Israel,  the  wisdom  of  the  ancient 
lawgiver  in  these  respects  has  been  remarkably  shown.  In  times  of  pestilence  the 
Jews  have  suffered  far  less  than  others ;  as  regards  longevity  and  general  health, 
they  have  in  every  age  been  noteworthv,  and,  at  the  present  dny,  in  the  life- 
insurance  offices,  the  life  of  a  Jew  is  said  to  be  worth  much  more  than  that  of  men 
of  other  stock."  (S.  H.  Kellofir/,  D.D.)  Ansioers  to  objections  rettpectinfi  thexe 
regulations  : — It  is  very  strange  that  it  should  have  been  objected  to  this  view,  that 
since  the  law  declares  the  reason  for  these  regulations  to  have   been  religious. 


156  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

therefore  any  supposed  reference  herein  to  the  principles  of  hygiene  is  by  that  fact 
excluded.  For  surely  the  obligation  so  to  live  as  to  conserve  and  promote  the 
highest  bodily  health  must  be  regarded,  both  from  a  natural,  and  a  Biblical  and 
Christian  point  of  view,  as  being  no  less  really  a  religious  obligation  than  truthful- 
ness or  honesty.  The  central  idea  of  the  Levitical  holiness  was  consecration  unto 
God,  as  the  Creator  and  Eedeemer  of  Israel — consecration  in  the  most  unreserved 
sense,  for  the  most  perfect  possible  service.  But  the  obligation  to  such  a  con- 
secration, as  the  essence  of  a  holy  character,  surely  carried  with  it,  by  necessary 
consequence,  tben,  as  now,  the  obligation  to  maintaia  all  the  powers  of  mind  and 
body  also  in  the  highest  possible  perfection.  That,  as  regards  the  body,  and,  in  no 
small  degree,  the  niind  as  well,  this  involves  the  duty  of  the  preservation  of  health, 
so  far  as  in  our  power;  and  that  this,  again,  is  conditioned  by  the  use  of  a  proper 
diet,  as  one  factor  of  prime  importance,  will  be  denied  by  no  one.  It  miy  be  asked, 
by  way  of  further  objection  to  this  interpretation  of  these  laws :  Upon  this 
understanding  of  the  immediate  purpose  of  these  laws,  how  can  we  account  for  the 
selection  of  such  test-marks  of  the  clean  and  the  unclean  as  the  chewing  of  the  cud, 
and  the  dividing  of  the  hoof,  or  having  scales  and  fins  ?  What  can  the  presence  or 
absence  of  these  peculiarities  have  to  do  with  the  greater  or  less  freedom  from 
parasitic  disease  of  the  animals  included  or  excluded  in  the  several  classes  ?  It  may 
fairly  be  replied,  that  the  object  of  the  law  was  not  to  give  accurately  distributed 
categories  of  animals,  scientifically  arranged,  according  to  hygienic  principles,  but 
was  purely  practical ;  namely,  to  secure,  so  far  as  possible,  the  observance  by  the 
whole  people  of  such  a  dietary  as  in  the  land  of  Palestine  would,  on  the  whole,  best 
teiid  to  secure  perfect  bodily  health.  It  may  be  objected,  again,  that  according  to 
recent  researches,  it  appears  that  cattle,  which  occupy  the  foremost  place  in  the 
permitted  diet  of  the  Hebrews,  are  found  to  be  especially  liable  to  tubercular 
disease,  and  cnpable,  apparently,  under  certain  conditions,  of  communicatiug  it  to 
those  who  feed  upon  their  flesh.  And  it  has  been  even  urged  that  to  this  source  is 
due  a  large  part  of  the  consumption  which  is  responsible  for  so  large  part  of  our 
mortality.  Two  answers  may  be  given.  First,  and  most  important,  is  the  obser- 
vation that  we  have  as  yet  no  statistics  as  to  the  prevalence  of  disease  of  this  kind 
among  cattle  in  Palestine ;  and  that,  presumably,  if  we  may  argue  from  the 
climatic  conditions  of  its  prevalence  among  men,  it  would  be  found  far  less 
frequently  there  among  cattle  than  in  Europe  and  America.  Further,  it  must  be 
remembered  that,  in  the  case  even  of  clean  cattle,  the  law  very  strictly  provides 
elsewhere  that  the  clean  animal  which  is  slain  for  food  shall  be  absolutely  free  from 
disease ;  so  that  still  we  see  here,  no  less  than  elsewhere,  the  hygienic  principles 
ruling  the  dietary  law.  It  will  be  perhaps  objected,  again,  that  if  all  this  be  true, 
then,  since  abstinence  from  unwholesome  food  is  a  moral  duty,  the  law  concerning 
clean  and  unclean  meats  should  be  of  universal  and  perpetual  obligation  ;  whereas, 
in  frtct,  it  is  explicitly  abrogated  in  the  New  Testament,  and  is  not  held  to  be  now 
binding  on  any  one.  But  the  abrogation  of  the  law  of  Moses  touching  clean  and 
unclean  food  can  be  easily  explained,  in  perfect  accord  with  all  that  has  been  said 
as  to  its  nature  and  intent.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  to  be  remembered  that  it  is  a 
fundamental  characteristic  of  the  New  Testament  law  as  contrasted  with  that  of  the 
Old,  that  on  all  points  it  leaves  much  more  to  the  liberty  of  the  individu>il,  allowing 
him  to  act  according  to  the  exercise  of  an  enlightened  judgment,  under  the  law  of 
supreme  love  to  the  Lord,  in  many  matters  which,  in  the  Old  Testament  day,  were 
made  a  subject  of  specific  regulation.  But,  aside  from  considerations  of  tijis  kind, 
there  is  a  specific  reason  why  these  laws  of  Moses  concerning  diet  and  defilement  by 
dead  bodies,  if  hygienic  in  character,  should  not  have  been  made,  in  the  New  Testa- 
ment, of  universal  obligation,  however  excellent  they  might  be.  For  it  is  to  be  re- 
membered that  these  laws  were  delivered  for  a  people  few  in  number,  living  in  a  small 
country,  under  certain  definite  climatic  conditions.  But  it  is  well  known  that  what 
is  unwholesome  for  food  in  one  part  of  the  world  may  be,  and  often  is,  necessary  to 
the  maintenance  of  health  elsewhere.  A  class  of  animals  which,  under  the  climatic 
conditions  of  Palestine,  may  be  specially  liable  to  certain  forms  of  parasitic  disease, 
under  different  climatic  conditions  may  be  comparatively  free  from  them.  Abstinence 
from  fat  is  commanded  in  the  law  of  Moses  (chap.  iii.  17),  ami  great  moderation  in 
this  matter  is  necessary  to  health  in  hot  climates ;  but,  on  the  contrary,  to  eat  fat 
largely  is  necessary  to  life  in  the  polar  regions.  From  such  facts  as  these  it  would 
follow,  of  necessity,  that  when  the  Church  of  God,  as  under  the  new  dispensation, 
was  now  to  become  a  world-wide  organisation,  still  to  have  insisted  on  a  dietetic 
law  perfectly   adapted  only  to  Palestine  would  have  been  to  defeat  the  physical 


CHA?.  XI.]  LEVITICUS.  157 

object,  and  by  consequence  the  moral  end  for  -which  that  law  was  given.  Under 
these  conditions,  except  a  special  law  were  to  be  given  for  each  land  and  climate, 
there  was  and  could  be,  if  we  have  before  us  the  true  conception  of  the  ground 
of  these  regulations,  /no  alternative  but  to  abrogate  the  law.  (Ibid.)  Bodily 
holinefis : — It  foUows,  as  a  present-day  lesson  of  great  moment,  that  the  holiness 
which  God  requires  has  to  do  with  the  body  as  well  as  the  soul,  even  with  such 
commonplace  matters  as  our  eating  and  drinking.  This  is  so,  because  the  body  is 
the  instrument  and  organ  of  the  soul,  with  which  it  must  do  all  its  work  on  earth 
for  God,  and  because,  as  such,  the  body,  no  less  than  the  soul,  has  been  redeemed 
unto  God  by  the  blood  of  His  Son.  There  is,  therefore,  no  religion  in  neglecting 
the  body  and  ignoring  the  requirements  for  its  health,  as  ascetics  have  in  all  ages 
imagined.  Neither  is  there  rehgion  in  pampering,  and  thus  abusing,  the  body,  after 
the  manner  of  the  sensual  in  all  ages.  The  principle  which  inspires  this  chaptnr  is 
that  which  is  expressed  in  1  Cor.  x.  31.  If,  therefore,  a  man  needlessly  eats  such 
things,  or  in  such  a  manner  as  may  be  injurious  to  health,  he  sins,  and  has  come 
short  of  +he  law  of  perfect  holiness.  No  less  needful  is  the  lesson  of  this  law  to 
many  who  are  at  the  opposite  extreme.  For  as  there  are  those  who  are  so  taken  up 
with  the  soul  and  its  health,  that  they  ignore  its  relation  to  the  body,  and  the 
bearing  of  bodily  conditions  upon  character,  so  there  are  others  who  are  so 
preoccupied  with  questions  of  bodily  health,  sanitation  and  hygiene,  regardfd 
merely  as  prudential  measures,  from  an  earthly  point  of  view,  that  they  forget  that 
man  has  a  soul  as  well  as  a  body,  and  that  such  questions  of  sanitation  and  hygiene 
only  find  their  proper  place  wben  it  is  recognised  that  health  and  i^erfection  ot  the 
body  are  not  to  be  sought  merely  that  man  may  become  a  more  perfect  animal,  but 
in  order  that  thus,  with  a  sound  mind  in  a  sound  body,  be  may  the  more  perfectly 
serve  the  Lord  in  the  life  of  holiness  to  which  we  are  called.  (Ibid.)  Ajjolofjetic 
value  of  this  law  : — The  question  will  at  once  come  up  in  every  reflecting  mind : 
Whence  came  this  law?  Could  it  have  been  merely  an  invention  of  crafty  Jewish 
priests  ?  Or  is  it  -possible  to  account  for  it  as  the  product  merely  of  the  mind  of 
Moses  ?  It  appears  to  have  been  ordered  with  respect  to  certain  facts,  especially 
regarding  various  invisible  forms  of  noxious  parasitic  life,  in  their  bearing  on  the 
causation  and  propagation  of  disease — facts  which,  even  now,  are  but  just  appearing 
within  the  horizon  of  modern  science.  Is  it  probable  that  Moses  knew  about  these 
things  three  thousand  years  ago  ?  Certainly,  the  more  we  study  the  matter  the 
more  we  must  feel  that  this  is  not  to  be  supposed.  It  is  common,  indeed,  to  explain 
much  that  seems  very  wise  in  the  law  of  Moses  by  referring  to  the  fact  that  he  was 
a  highly  educated  man,  "instructed  in  all  the  wisdom  of  the  Egyptians."  But  it 
is  just  this  fact  of  his  Egyptian  education  that  makes  it  in  the  last  degree  im- 
probable that  he  should  have  derived  the  ideas  of  this  law  from  Egypt.  Could 
he  have  taken  his  ideas  with  regard,  for  instance,  to  defilement  by  the  dead,  from 
a  system  of  education  which  taught  the  contrary,  and  which,  so  far  from  regard- 
ing those  who  had  to  do  with  the  d^ad  as  unclean,  held  them  especially  sacred? 
And  so  with  regard  to  the  dietetic  laws :  these  are  not  the  laws  of  Egypt ;  nor 
have  we  any  evidence  that  those  were  determined,  like  these  Hebrew  laws, 
by  such  scientific  facts  as  we  have  referred  to.  "Whence  had  this  man  this 
unique  wisdom  three  thousand  years  in  advance  of  his  times  ?  The  secret 
will  be  found,  not  in  the  court  of  Pharaoh,  but  in  the  holy  tent  of  meeting :  it 
is  all  explained  if  we  but  assume  that  which  is  written  in  the  first  verse 
of  this  chapter  is  true:  "The  Lord  spake  unto  Moses  and  unto  Aaron."  {Ibid.\ 
The  clean  and  the  unclean  : — Here  we  find  Jehovah  entering,  in  most  marvellous 
detail,  into  a  description  of  beasts,  birds,  fishes,  and  reptiles,  and  furnishing  His 
people  with  various  marks  by  which  they  were  to  know  what  was  clean  and  what 
was  unclean.  With  regard  to  beasts,  two  things  were  essential  to  render  them  clean — 
they  should  chew  the  cud  and  divide  the  hoof.  We  pass  on  to  the  consideration  of 
that  which  the  Levitical  ceremonial  taught  with  respect  to  "  all  that  are  in  the 
waters."  Here,  again,  we  find  the  double  mark  (vers.  9,  10).  Two  things  were 
necessary  to  render  a  fish  ceremonially  clean,  namely,  "  fins  and  scales,"  which, 
obviously,  set  forth  a  certain  fitness  for  the  sphere  and  element  in  which  the 
creature  had  to  move.  But,  doubtless,  there  was  more  than  this.  If  a  fish  needs 
a  "  fin  "  to  enable  him  to  move  through  the  water,  and  "  scales  "  to  resist  the  action 
thereof,  so  does  the  believer  need  that  spiritual  capacity  which  enables  him  to  move 
onward  through  the  scene  with  which  he  is  surrounded,  and,  at  the  same  time,  to 
resist  its  influence — to  prevent  its  penetrating — -to  keep  it  out.  These  are  precious 
qualities.     From  ver.  I'd  to  ver.  24  of  our  chapter  we  have  the  law  with  respect 


158  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

to  birds.  All  of  the  carnivorous  kind,  that  is,  all  that  fed  on  flesh,  were  unclean. 
The  omnivorous,  or  those  who  could  eat  anything,  were  unclean.  All  those  which, 
though  furnished  with  power  to  soar  into  the  heavens,  would,  nevertheless,  grovel 
upon  the  earth,  were  unclean.  As  to  the  latter  class,  there  were  some  exceptional 
cases  (vers.  21, 22) ;  but  the  general  rule,  the  fixed  ijrinciple,  the  standing  ordmance, 
was  as  distinct  as  possible  ;  "  all  fowls  that  creep,  going  upon  all  fours,  sliall  be  an 
abomination  unto  you"  (ver.  20).  All  this  is  very  simple  in  its  instruction  to  us. 
Those  fowls  that  could  feed  upon  flesh  ;  those  that  could  swallow  anything  or  every- 
thing ;  and  all  grovelling  fowls  were  to  be  unclean  to  the  Israel  of  God,  because  so 
pronounced  by  the  God  of  Israel ;  nor  can  the  spiritual  mind  have  any  difficulty  in 
discerning  the  fitness  of  such  an  ordinance.  We  can  not  only  trace  in  the  habits  of 
the  above  three  classes  of  fowl  the  just  ground  of  their  being  prouounced  unclean; 
but  we  can  also  see  in  the  striking  exhibition  of  that,  in  nature,  whicti  is  to  be 
strenuously  guarded  against  by  every  true  Christian.  Such  an  one  is  called  to 
refuse  everything  of  a  carnal  nature.  Moreover,  he  cannot  feed  promiscuously 
upon  everything  that  comes  before  him.  He  must  "  try  the  things  that  differ." 
Finally,  he  must  use  his  wings — rise  on  the  pinions  of  faith,  and  find  his  place  in 
the  celestial  sphere  to  which  he  belongs.  As  to  "  creeping  things  "  (see  ver.  41). 
How  wonderful  to  think  of  the  condescending  grace  of  Jehovah  !  He  could  stoop 
to  give  directions  about  a  crawling  rep'ile.  He  would  not  leave  His  people  at  a  loss 
as  to  the  most  trivial  affair.  The  priest's  guide-book  contained  the  most  ample 
instructions  as  to  everything.  He  desired  to  keep  His  people  free  from  the  defile- 
ment consequent  upon  touching,  tasting,  or  handling  aught  that  was  unclean. 
They  were  not  their  own,  and  hence  they  were  not  to  do  as  they  pleased.  (C.  H. 
Mackintosh.)  The  right  use  of  things  : — We  are  easily  led  in  the  direction  of  our 
preferences.  All  the  animals  in  this  chapter  were  good  creatures  of  God,  in  the 
sense  of  having  been  created  by  the  Almighty.  "  And  these  are  they  which  ye 
shall  have  in  abomination  among  the  fowls;  they  shall  not  be  eaten,  they 
are  an  abomination :  the  eagle,"  &c.  Who  made  these  ?  God.  Then  are 
they  not  good  creatures  of  God  ?  Possibly  so ;  but  they  are  forbidden  in  that 
particular  use.  You  do  not  depose  the  creature  from  any  dignity  to  which  it  is 
entitled  as  a  creation  of  God  ;  you  do  but  discern  tbe  right  use  and  purpose  of  the 
creature  in  the  intent  of  God.  This  argument  must  be  applied  to  every  man 
according  to  his  own  circumstances.  The  argument  of  the  chapter  does  not  end 
in  itself.  There  are  educational  beginnings ;  there  are  points  to  start  with.  The 
argument  is  cumulative  and  becomes  stronger  and  stronger  as  the  instances  are 
plied  in  illustration  of  its  meaning.  Is  God  so  careful  about  the  body  and  has  He 
written  no  schedule  <if  directions  about  the  feeding  of  the  mind  ?  May  the  body 
not  eat  of  this,  but  the  soul  eat  of  everything  ?  Are  tliere  poisons  which  take  away 
the  life  of  the  body,  and  no  poisons  that  take  away  the  life  of  the  spirit,  the  mind, 
the  soul  ?  That  is  the  chapter  magnified  by  spirituality.  This  is  an  instance  of 
how  things  may  be  made  symbols  of  truth  infinitely  greater  than  themselves.  It  is 
impossible  to  believe  tbat  God,  who  takes  care  of  the  body,  pays  no  attention  to 
the  soul.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  coney  unclean  : — The  coney  was  a  very  timid 
creature,  which  burrowed  in  the  rocks.  Now,  there  are  some  people  who  seem  as  if 
they  like  the  gospel  truth,  and  they  may  be  put  down  in  the  class  in  which  Moses 
puts  the  coney,  which  appeared  to  chew  the  cud,  though  it  did  not  really  do  so. 
They  like  the  gospel,  but  it  must  be  very  cheap.  They  like  to  hear  it  preached,  but 
as  to  doing  anything  to  extend  it,  unless  it  were  to  lend  their  tongues  an  hour,  they 
would  not  dream  of  it.  The  coney,  you  know,  lived  in  the  earth.  These  people 
are  always  scraping.  John  Bunyan's  muck-rake  is  always  in  their  hands.  Neither 
to  dig  nor  to  beg  are  they  ashamed.  They  are  as  true  misers,  and  as  covetous,  as 
if  they  had  no  religion  at  all.  And  many  of  these  people  get  into  our  Churches 
and  are  received  wlien  they  ought  not  to  be.  Covetousuj-ss  ought  to  exclude  a  man 
from  Church  fellowship  as  well  as  fornication,  for  Paul  sa^s,  "  Covetousness, 
which  is  idolatry."  He  puts  the  brand  right  on  its  forehead,  and  marks  what  it  is. 
We  would  not  admit  an  idolater  to  the  Lord's  table ;  nor  ought  we  to  admit  a 
covetous  man  ;  only  we  cannot  always  know  him.  St.  Francis  de  Sales,  who  had  a 
great  many  people  come  to  him  to  confession,  makes  this  note,  that  he  had  many 
men  and  women  come  to  him  who  confessed  all  sorts  of  most  outrageous  crimes, 
but  he  never  had  one  who  confessed  covetousness.  It  is  a  kind  of  sin  tbat  always 
comes  in  at  the  back  door,  and  it  is  always  entertained  at  the  back  part  of  the 
house.  People  do  not  suspect  it  as  an  inmate  of  their  own  hearts.  Mr.  Covetousness 
has  changed  his  name  to  Mr.  Prudent-Thrifty  ;  and  it  is  quite  an  insult  to  call  him 


CHAP.  XI.]  LEVITICUS.  159 

•— — — ■ 

other  than  by  his  adopted  name.  Old  vices,  like  streets  notorious  fur  vice,  get  new 
names  given  them.  Avaricious  grasping,  they  call  that  only  "  the  laws  of  social 
economy  "  ;  screwing  ^own  the  poor  is  "  the  natural  result  of  competition  "  ;  with- 
holding corn  until  the  people  curse,  oh  !  that  is  "  just  the  usual  regulation  of  the 
market."  People  name  the  thing  prettily,  and  then  they  think  they  have  rescued 
it  from  the  taint.  These  people,  who  are  all  for  earth,  are  like  the  coneys  who, 
though  they  chew  the  cud,  burrow  in  the  ground.  They  love  precious  truth,  and 
yet  tliey  are  all  for  this  earth.  If  there  are  any  such  here,  despite  their  fine  experi- 
ence, we  pronounce  them  unclean — they  are  not  heirs  of  heaven.  (C  H.  Simrgeon.) 
The  hare  unclean  : — The  hare  is  such  a  timid  creature  ;  she  leaveth  her  food,  and 
fleeth  before  the  passer-by.  I  would  not  say  a  hard  thing,  but  there  are  some  people 
who  appear  to  chew  the  cud,  they  love  to  hear  the  gospel  preached  ;  their  eyes  will 
sparkle  sometimes  when  we  are  talking  of  Christ,  but  they  do  not  divide  the  hoof. 
Like  the  hare,  they  are  too  timid  to  be  domesticated  among  the  creatures  whom  the 
Lord  has  pronounced  clean.  They  do  not  come  out  from  the  world,  enter  into  the 
Church,  and  manifest  themselves  wholly  on  the  Lord's  side.  Their  conscience  tells 
them  they  should  be  united  with  the  people  of  God,  and  confess  Christ  before  men 
— but  they  are  ashamed !  One  fears  lest  his  wife  should  know  it,  and  she  might 
ridicule.  Some  start  abashed  lest  their  friends  should  know  it,  for  the  finger  of 
scorn  or  the  breath  of  raillery  could  frighten  them  out  of  tlieir  senses.  Others  of 
them  are  alarmed  because  the  world  might,  perchance,  give  them  au  ill  name.  Do 
you  know  where  the  fearful  go  ?  The  fearful  that  are  afraid  of  being  persecuted, 
mocked,  or  even  laughed  at  for  Christ — do  you  know  where  they  go?  "But  the 
fearful  and  unbelieving  shall  have  their  part  in  the  lake  which  burneth  with  fire 
and  brimstone,  which  is  the  second  death."  Have  you  never  read  that  sentence 
which  says,  "  Whosoever  shall  be  ashamed  of  Me  and  of  My  words,  of  him  shall  the 
Son  of  Man  be  ashamed  when  He  shall  come  in  His  own  glory,  and  in  His  Father's, 
and  of  the  holy  angels  "?  There  you  are,  young  man  !  you  are  ashamed  of  Christ. 
Tou  have  just  come  up  from  the  country,  and  you  did  not  pray  to  God  the  other 
night  because  there  was  another  young  man  in  the  room,  and  you  were  ashamed  of 
Him.  There  are  others  of  you  who  work  in  a  large  shop,  and  you  do  not  want  to 
be  jeered  at,  as  the  other  young  fellow  is  who  works  with  you,  because  he  is  a 
Christian.  You  keep  your  love  as  a  secret,  do  you,  and  will  not  let  it  out  ?  What ! 
if  Christ  had  only  loved  you  in  secret,  and  had  never  dared  to  come  on  earth  to 
be  desi^ised  and  rejected  of  men,  where  would  you  have  been?  Do  you  think  that 
Christ  has  lit  a  candle  in  your  hearts  that  you  may  hide  it  ?  Oh  !  I  pray  you,  be 
not  like  the  hare.  Let  your  hoof  be  so  divided  from  the  rest  of  mankind  that  they 
may  say,  "  There  is  a  man — he  is  not  as  bold  as  a  lion,  mayhap,  but  he  is  not 
ashamed  to  be  a  follower  of  Jesus ;  he  does  bear  the  sneer  and  gibe  for  Him,  and 
counts  it  his  honour  to  be  thought  evil  of  for  Jesu's  sake."  Oh  !  be  not,  I  pray  you, 
like  the  timid  hare,  lest  you  be  found  among  the  unclean  !  (Ibid.)  These  shall  ye 
eat  of  all  that  are  in  the  waters. — Clean  ai.d  unclean  finh  : — It  is  a  well-known  fact, 
that  all  fish  that  have  both  scales  and  fins  are  both  wholesome  and  nutritious.  This 
provision,  therefore,  secured  to  the  people  the  free  use  of  what  was  certainly  profitable, 
and  kept  them  back  from  the  uncertainty  of  choosing  among  the  others  what  might 
have  injured  them.  Again,  therefore,  they  were  taught  that  ic  is  better  far  to  lean 
to  the  side  of  abstinence,  in  doubtful  cases,  than  to  run  the  risk  of  doing  evil.  They 
.  were  trained  to  the  principle,  "  If  meat  make  my  brother  to  offend,  I  will  eat  no 
flesh  while  the  world  standeth"  (1  Cor.  viii.  13).  Those  "  without  fins  or  scales" 
are  partly  creatures  of  the  mud  and  marsh ;  whereas  the  others  swim  through  the 
clear,  limpid  waters  of  "  seas  and  rivers."  Others  of  them  that  are  "  without 
scales,"  are  such  as  the  voracious  shark.  Thus  they  were  naturally  fitted  to  exhibit 
purity.  In  ver.  9  we  are  to  read,  "  in  the  waters,  i.e.,  whether  seas  or  river."  In 
ver.  10,  "  All  that  move  in  the  waters,"  is  rather,  "  All  that  crawl  in  the  waters  "  ; 
and  even  any  living  thing  there  that  has  not  the  specified  qualities.  In  the  same 
verse,  and  at  ver.  11,  "  They  shall  be  an  abomination,"  is  more  emphatic  if  read 
thus — "  They  are  an  abomination  to  you,  and  they  shall  be  an  abomination."  And 
it  is  thus  strongly  stated,  because  the  people  might  be  ready  to  neglect  the  rule  in 
the  case  of  some  of  the  smaller  creatures  in  the  water.  Many  of  the  forbidden 
creatures  are  exceedingly  small  in  size ;  yet,  nevertheless,  even  that  atom  is  to  be 
abhorred,  if  tbe  Lord  has  given  the  command.  It  is  not  the  importance  of  the 
thing,  but  the  majesty  of  the  lawgiver,  that  is  to  be  the  standard  of  our  obedience. 
**  Sin  is  the  transgression  of  the  law  "  (1  John  iii.  4).  There  were  tril/es  that  were 
to  dwell  by  the  waters.     Thus  Simeon  and  Dan  had  a  sea-coast  from  the  river  of 


160  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTIIATOB.  [cr.w.  si, 

— • 

Egypt  up  to  Joppa.  Ephraim  anrl  the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh  had  a  sea-coa?t  as 
far' as  Carmel — tlie  glorious  plain  of  Sliaron  descending  to  the  waterside.  Zebuhin 
and  Asher,  too,  had  their  creeks  and  bays  ;  while  Napthali,  as  well  as  Zehiilun  and 
the  other  half  tribe  of  Manasseh,  em-ircled  the  lake  of  Galilee,  so  plentiful  in  its 
sujiply  of  fish;  and  the  waters  of  Merom,  no  doubt,  swarmed  with  their  kinds. 
Others  of  the  tribes  lay  near  Jordan,  or  had  some  lesser  streams  and  lakes  at  hand. 
Hence  there  was  not  ijrobably  one  tribe  but  had  some  need  of  these  laws  and 
opportunity  for  exercising  faith  by  attending  to  them.  The  Lord  also  thus 
evidenced  His  care  over  the  spiritual  health  of  the  seamen  and  fishers  of  Israel. 
It  tried  their  faith  when  they  needed  to  cast  away  whatever  unclean  fish  they  had 
enclosed  in  their  net.  Some,  indeed,  might  reckon  such  minute  and  arbitrary  rules 
as  these  to  be  trifling.  But  the  principle  involved  in  obedience  or  disobedience  was 
none  other  than  the  same  principle  which  was  tried  in  Eden  at  the  foot  of  the  for- 
bidden tree.  It  was  really  this— Is  the  Lord  to  be  obeyed  in  all  things  whatsoever 
He  commands  ?  Is  He  a  holy  Lawgiver  ?  Are  His  creatures  bound  to  give  implicit 
assent  to  His  will  ?  But  this  discrimination  between  holy  and  unholy  penetrated 
farther.  It  readied  Israel's  hours  of  recreation,  and  kept  tlieni,  even  then,  in 
mind  of  their  Holy  One.  A  wealthy  IsraeUte,  who  has  bis  villa  by  the  lake  of 
Gennesaret,  goes  forth  on  the  bosom  of  the  lake.  In  its  clear  waters  he  finds  fish, 
darting  on  before  the  slow-sailing  bark  in  the  strength  of  their  fir.s,  and  reflecting 
back  to  the  surface,  from  their  scales,  the  light  that  fell  on  the  waters.  All  here 
speaks  of  purity — conformity  to  what  the  law  pronounced  clean.  But  at  another 
time  he  strolls  along  by  some  shallow,  or  is  compassing  the  waters  of  Merom,  and 
there  he  finds  the  crawling  reptiles  of  the  mud  and  marsh — teaching  him  to  draw 
back  in  haste  from  the  touch  of  uncleanness.  In  like  manner,  far  within  their 
land,  at  the  little  brook  flowing  through  the  valley  of  Elah,  fringed  by  its  green 
terebinths,  the  youth  of  Judah,  in  their  sports,  were  taught  to  keep  before  thenx 
the  difference  between  good  and  evil,  while  they  scrupulously  rejected  the  unclean 
minnows,  and  chose  the  clean,  amid  their  easy  angling  at  the  stream.  "  Holiness  to 
the  Lord  " — obedience  to  His  revealed  will— thus  pervaded  Israel's  land  and  Israel's 
families,  in  public  and  in  secret,  in  business  and  in  recreation ;  their  youth  and  their 
aged  men,  in  tbeir  fields  and  by  their  riversides,  must  remember  "  The  Holy  One 
of  Israel  1 "  (A.  A.  Bonar.)  Among  the  fowls.— Lessons  from  the  fowls  .-—The 
eagle,  darting  down  from  the  hills  of  Moab  or  Bashan,  or  from  the  heights  of 
Lebanon,  would  often  teach  the  shepherd  who  saw  his  flock  thus  endangered. 
Those  by  the  sea  shore  would  have  the  same  lesson  taught  them  when  the  sight  or 
cry  of  the  sea-eagle  and  fish-hawk  called  to  their  mind  that  God  had  made  a  dilfer- 
ence  between  the  clean  and  unclean  even  in  the  fowls  of  the  air.  The  vulture,  in 
their  streets  or  highways,  allured  by  the  scent  of  death,  and  the  kite,  poised  on  its 
wings  till  it  found  a  prey  upon  which  to  dart  down,  and  the  hoarse,  unpleasant  note 
of  the  raven  would  constantly  recall  the  same  distinctions,  while  their  loathsome 
qualities  would  serve  to  make  the  feeling  of  uncleanness  more  and  more  detestable 
to  the  men  of  Israel.  While  in  the  wilderness,  and  afterwards  on  their  borders, 
they  would  meet  with  the  ostrich,  whose  disagreeable  cries,  voracious  habits,  and 
parental  unkindness,  would  all  contribute  to  deepen  their  aversion  to  whatever  was 
unclean.  And  not  less  so  the  small,  but  most  ravenous  night-hawk  that  flies  in  at 
the  open  windows  and  seeks  the  life  of  infants;  and  the  seagull  incessantly 
watching  for  its  victims,  over  whom  it  screams  in  savage  delight ;  and  the  hawk,  so 
furious  in  its  attack  on  the  bu'ds  of  the  air;  and  the  owl  at  evening,  awake  for 
designs  of  destruction.  All  these,  every  time  they  were  been,  helped  to  deepen 
Israel's  remembrance  of  the  difference  between  holy  and  unholy,  and  to  give  them 
intimations  of  the  hateful  qualities  of  sin.  {Ibid.)  The  eaple  as  a  tt/pe  : — 
Reminds  one  of  those  people  who  are  conspicuous  for  certain  noble  and  praise- 
worthy qualities,  but  also  for  qualities  ignoble  and  deserving  of  the  sternest  con- 
demnation. 1.  Here  is  a  man  who  is  just,  but  has  no  mercy.  2.  Another  man  is 
kind,  but  ill-tempered.  3.  Ill-temper  is  often  associated  with  earnestness.  4. 
Another  man  is  moral,  but  niggardly.  (A.  F.  Forrest.)  The  osprey  as  a  type  :— 
The  osprey  has  been  identified  with  the  sea-eagle.  Some  species  of  it  is  to  be 
found  in  almost  every  part  of  the  world.  The  most  noticeable  thing  about  it  is  its 
fierce  temper.  A  writer  describes  "  its  savage  scream  of  anger,  when  any  one 
approaches  tlie  neighbourhood  of  its  nest,  its  intimidating  gestures,  and  even  its 
attempts  to  molest  individuals  who  have  ventured  among  its  native  crags."  Like 
the  osprey,  some  people  are  most  noticeable  for  their  ill-nature.  1.  People  with 
bad  tempers  are  terribly  numerous.     2.  Nothing  so  much  embitters  the  intercourse 


CHAP.  xi.J  LFA'ITICUS.  131 

of  life  as  the  ebullitions  of  a  violent  disposition.  3.  There  are  more  unhappy 
homes  through  bad  temper  than  through  any  oiher  cause.  4.  There  is  this  great 
peculiarity  often  about  ill-tempered  people  :  they  are  very  good  in  other  respects. 
5.  Society  may  be  to  blame  somewhat  for  the  great  prevalence  of  bad  temper.  It 
should  not  be  spoken  of  (as  it  usually  is)  as  a  misfortune,  but  as  a  sin.  6.  The  Bible 
regards  bad  temper  as  a  sin,  and  its  denunciations  of  it  are  of  the  most  unmistak- 
able character  (see  Eccles.  viii.  9  ;  Matt.  v.  22  ;  1  John  iii.  15).  7.  But  the  punish- 
ment of  anger  is  not  altogether  in  the  next  life — in  the  future.  (1)  The  ill-natured 
man  is  always  a  troubled  man.  Seldom  at  peace  with  himself.  (2)  Then  there  is 
a  physical  element  in  the  retribution  which  in  this  world  falls  upon  the  man  of 
great  wrath.  "When  anger  is  excited  in  the  mind,  it  affects  the  body  instantly  and 
violently  in  the  most  vital  parts.  8.  Anger  leads  to  other  and  often  greater  evils. 
9.  One  of  the  grandest  sights  is  to  see  a  man,  under  circumstances  of  provocation 
and  injury,  restraining  his  anger  and  showing  a  composed  and  peaceful  spirit.  10. 
A  good  practical  specific  for  the  treatment  of  anger  is  that  given  by  Solomon  (Prov. 
xix.  11).  11.  These  ebullitions  of  temper  are  not  Christlike.  12.  Sometimes 
people  attempt  to  palliate  their  bad  temper  on  the  ground  of  natural  disposition. 
This  is  a  delusion.  (Ihid.)  The  vulture  as  a  type: — The  vulture  is  a  J;ype  of 
those  people  who  revel  in  the  wreck  of  their  neighbour's  reputation.  1.  These  are 
people  you  never  like  to  meet.  They  have  nothing  good  to  say  of  anybody.  2.  In 
their  stories  they  uniformly  exaggerate.  3.  Their  caution  is  remarkable.  4.  The 
gossip  makes  a  pretence  of  wishing  a  thing  to  be  kept  a  secret.  But  it  is  only  that 
he  may  himself  enjoy  the  monopoly  of  the  scandal,  and  be  the  first  to  tell  it  to 
everybody.  5.  This  depraved  habit  of  evil-speaking  may  spring  from  various  causes. 
(1)  Envy.  (2)  Eevenge.  (3)  Pride.  6.  Of  all  bad  people,  none  are  so  thoroughly 
bad  as  the  tale-bearer.  Conclusion  :  1.  The  way  to  keep  the  city  clean  is  for  every 
one  to  sweep  before  his  own  door.  2.  Expulsive  of  the  feeling  which  swells  in 
the  bosom  of  the  evil-speaker  is  that  charity  which  thinketh  no  evil.  (Ibid.) 
The  kite  as  a  type  : — 1.  The  kite  is  remarkable  for  its  very  keen  sight,  and  for  the 
immense  velocity  with  which  it  darts  upon  its  prey.  But,  its  legs  and  claws  being 
weak,  it  is  withal  a  cowardty  creature.  It  never  attacks  large  prey,  but  only  insects, 
mice,  and  small  birds.  2.  God  would  have  His  people  characterised  by  courage 
and  a  spirit  of  noble  heroism.  I.  The  lowest  eokm  of  coubage  is  that  which 
MEETS  DANGEE  UNCON'SCioos  OF  FEAR  OR  FLINCHING.  Bra  Very.  A  Constitutional 
quality.     Costs  no  effort.     II.  A  higher  fcjrm  of  courage  is  that  which  shrinks 

NOT  IX  the  presence  OF  DANGER,  NOT    FROM  INSENSIBILITY  TO  IT,  BDT  FROM  PATRIOTISM, 

or  friendship,  or  some  such  noble  feeling.  III.  A  still  higher  courage  is  that 
which  adheres  to  duty — to  truth  and  conscience,  in  the  face  of  opposition  and  . 
hardship.  1.  How  few  have  the  courage  of  their  convictions !  2.  Many  are 
cowards  only  in  the  matter  of  avowing  and  adhering  to  their  religious  principles. 
8.  What  you  are  convinced  is  right,  do,  whether  the  world  frowns  or  smiles,  sneers 
or  applauds.  Be  influenced  by  no  fear  but  the  fear  of  God.  4.  Do  you  do  well  to 
go  away  ?  Is  it  wise  to  lose  heaven  to  escape  from  a  laugh  ?  5.  What  is  your  cross 
compared  to  the  cross  of  those  who  had,  in  their  adherence  to  Christ,  to  brave  im- 
prisonment and  death  ?  (Ibid.)  The  raven  as  a  type  : — I  take  selfishness  to  be  the 
leading  characteristic  of  the  raven.  It  has  no  pity  and  no  generosity.  With  it 
"  number  one"  is  the  only  number.  1.  God  did  not  mean  man  to  be  like  the  raven. 
Tiie  happiness  of  the  creature,  like  the  happiness  of  the  Creator,  was  to  be  in  giving, 
and  not  in  receiving.  2.  What  happiness  thus  did  God  intend  for  the  human  race  ! 
Nothing  to  hurt  or  destroy  could  even  enter  a  society  in  which  love  held  undisputed 
sway.  3.  But  the  unhappy  revolt  of  man  from  God,  and  his  assertion  of  inde- 
pendence, effectually  prevented  the  accomplishment  of  the  Divine  purpose.  4. 
Before,  therefore,  the  mischief  effected  by  the  Fall  of  man  can  be  adequately 
repaired,   we  must  find  that  which  will   destroy  the  selfishness  of   man's  heart. 

5.  The  gospel  of  Jesus  Christ,  alone  of  all  religious  systems,  has  recognised  this 
important   fact,  and    proposed    to   remove  the  disorder  by  removing  the   cause. 

6.  The  sufficiency  of  this  remedy  for  man's  disease  has  received  abundant  proof. 

7.  The  early  Christian  Church  affords  us  just  such  a  spectacle  of  unselfish 
enthusiasm  on  behalf  of  the  race  as  we  would  have  anticipated  from  the  renewal 
of  men's  hearts,  and  the  restoration  to  them  of  the  lost  principle  of  benevolence. 

8.  Is  it  asked  why  in  this  age  we  have  not  a  repetition  of  Pentecostal  phenomena? 
The  explanation  is  to  be  found  in  the  character  of  those  who  are  now  entrusted 
with  the  commission  to  preach  the  gospel.  The  Christian  of  this  age  is  only 
partially  restored  from  his   enmity  against   God,  partially  cured  of  his  disease. 

11 


1*^.2  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  tt. 

(Ibid.)  The  owl  as  a  type  : — A  melancholy  bird.  Flies  about  at  niglit.  Childreu 
afraid  of  it.  Owl  typifies  all  moping,  morose,  melancholy  i^eople,  who  have  no  sun- 
shine in  their  soul.  1.  No  Christian  should  belong  to  this  geuus.  Inconsistent. 
2.  The  Bible  everywhere  represents  religion  as  a  thing  of  joy.  3.  This  joy  is 
entirely  independent  of  worldly  conditions.  (Ibid.)  The  bat  as  a  type  : — The 
bat  is  a  type  of  those  people  who  seek  both  to  walk  in  worldliness  and  to  fly  in 
heavenliness.  Neither  believers  nor  unbelievers ;  half  for  Satan,  and  half  for  God. 
1.  The,  vast  majority  of  professing  Christians  belong,  probably,  to  this  genus.  I 
have  read  of  a  Spanish  bisbop  who  took  a  strange  way  once  of  ending  a  contro- 
versy. The  clergy  in  his  diocese  had  been  debating  together  in  regard  to  the 
fate  of  Solomon  in  the  other  world.  Some  maintained  that  he  was  in  heaven  ; 
others  that  he  was  in  hell.  They  referred  the  matter  at  last  to  this  dignitary. 
He  thought  he  would  gratify  both  parties.  Accordingly,  he  ordered  an  artist  to 
paint  on  the  walls  of  his  chapel  a  picture  of  the  Jewish  king,  representing  him 
as  half  in  bell  and  half  in  heaven.  Multitudes  of  people  could  only  be  repre- 
sented in  the  same  way.  2.  This  state  of  indecision  in  religion  may  arise  from 
various  causes.  (1)  The  fear  of  the  woi'ld's  laugh  or  frown  may  keep  some  from 
making  a  decided  stand  for  God.  (2)  With  others,  an  attachment  to  some 
particular  form  of  sin.  (3)  The  notion  that  there  will  be  time  enough  yet  to 
provide  for  a  happy  eternity.  3.  However  caused,  this  indecision  is  most  unsatis- 
factory. Those  in  this  state  have  neither  the  mirth  of  the  sinner  nor  the  happi- 
ness of  the  saint.  "  Woe  to  the  double  mind,"  says  Augustine.  "  Of  God's  own 
they  make  a  share — half  to  Him  and  half  to  the  devil.  But,  indignant  at  such 
treatment,  the  Lord  departs  ;  and  the  devil  gets  all !  "  4.  Choose  ye  this  day 
whom  ye  will  serve.  5.  Oh,  why  do  you  hesitate?  (1)  Is  there  some  sin  you  are 
unwilling  to  abandon  ?  You  are  paying  too  dear,  surely,  for  your  pleasures,  if  you 
are  paying  for  them  with  your  life.  (2)  Do  you  fear  the  frown  or  the  laugh  of  the 
ungodly  ?  Will  the  frown  of  God  be  easier  to  bear?  Or  will  you  wince  less  under 
the  mockery  of  Satanic  spirits?  (3)  Do  you  put  off  to  another  time  ?  Death  may 
intervene.  One  of  the  rivers  of  America  had  been  greatly  swollen  by  the  excessive 
rains.  A  man,  who  bad  gone  out  in  a  boat  to  secure  some  logs,  drifted  accidentally 
into  the  current.  All  resistance  was  useless.  Eapidly  his  boat  whs  making  for  the 
great  f;  lis  a  few  mihs  down  the  river.  Destruction  stared  him  in  the  face.  There 
was  only  one  slight  chance  of  escape.  A  friend,  seeing  his  danger,  leaped  on  a  horse 
and  galloped  to  a  bridge  which  the  skiff  would  pass  under  just  before  reaching  the 
cataract.  Getting  there  in  time,  be  hung  a  rope  over  the  parapet  for  the  man  to 
clutch  the  moment  he  attained  the  arch.  It  was  his  only  chance.  The  man  knew 
his  peril.  He  stood  ready  to  grasp  the  rope  the  instant  it  was  within  his  reach. 
Suddenly  he  makes  a  spring.  He  has  it.  The  boat  glides  rapidly  from  under  him 
and  is  dashed  to  pieces  on  the  rocks.  He  is  pulled  up  by  his  deliverer  and  saved. 
There  may  be  but  a  step  between  jou  and  denth.  Grasp  the  rope  now.  (Ibid.) 
Every  flying  creeping  thing. — Clean  and  unclean  insects : — All  insects  are  unclean 
except  four  classes ;  for  it  is  insects  that  are  here  meant  by  "  the  creatures 
that  both  fly  and  creep,"  using  feet  in  the  manner  of  quadrupeds.  All  reptiles, 
worms,  and  insects,  e.g.,  flies  and  bees,  are  thus  pronounced  unclean — except  only 
the  four  elasses  that  have  springing  legs,  in  addition  to  the  hgs  used  in  creeping. 
The  sight  of  insects  without  number  in  their  groves,  on  the  leaves  of  theii'  fig-trees, 
or  the  vine-leaves  that  shaded  them — the  innumerable  hosts  that  thickened  the  air 
at  sunset,  or  that  played  on  the  waters,  and  from  time  to  time  alighted  on  the  head 
of  the  solemn  .Tew  who  marked  the  sight — could  not  fail  to  remind  the  soul  that  it 
was  encompassed  with  unholy  things.  I  remember  (while  in  Palestine  in  18:59)  the 
vast  number  of  such  insects,  some  of  them  very  beautiful  and  lare,  which  we  saw 
one  afternoon  by  the  lake  of  Galilee,  near  Magdala  ;  and,  also,  on  a  previous  day  at 
the  pools  of  Solomon,  near  Bethlehem.  They  skimmed  along  tlie  waters,  or  flew 
gaily  through  the  air,  or  kept  their  seat  upon  a  sappy  leaf — and  the  eye  could  not 
but  be  attracted  by  them.  Now  an  Israelite  would  feel  in  these  insects  a  memorial  of 
sin,  however  fair  the  external  form  appeared.  No  retirement  into  quiet  seats  and 
bowers  could  give  freedom  from  the  presence  of  what  was  unclean.  The  dragon-fly 
that  wafted  itself  past  their  eye,  and  the  many  magnificent  insects,  though  fed  amid 
the  fragrance  of  Lebnnon  and  the  excellency  of  Carmel  and  Sharon,  were  all  made 
to  speak  of  God  having  set  a  mark  on  this  earth  as  no  longer  a  paradise.  These 
creatures  on  the  wing  were  like  messengers  sent  to  admonish  the  saints  of  God  that 
the  sweetest  spots  of  earth  were  polluted,  and,  therefore,  they  must  watch  and  keep 
their  garments.  The  only  clean  insects  were  the  locusts — the  insects  so  often  used 
by  God  to  punish  a  guilty  land  and  an  unclean  people.     (A.  A.  Bonar.) 


CHAP.  XII. J  LEVITICUS.  1G3 


CHAPTER  XII. 

Vers.  1-8.  Sbe  shall  be  unclean. — Birth-sin  and  its  developments  : — The  theme 
of  the  chapter  is  the  same  as  that  of  the  one  preceding  and  the  one  following.  The 
subject  is  sin,  portrayed  by  symbols.  In  the  division  of  the  animals  into  clean  and 
unclean  we  had  the  nature  of  sin  in  its  general  character  and  outward  manifes- 
tations. It  is  a  brutalisation  of  humanity.  It  has  its  type  in  all  sorts  of  savage, 
noxious,  vile,  annoying  creatures.  But  this  chapter  presents  another  and  still  more 
affecting  phase  of  man's  corruption.  Surveying  those  masses  of  sin  and  vileness 
which  hang  about  our  world,  the  question  arises,  Whence  comes  it  ?  How  are  we 
to  account  for  it?  It  is  useless  to  attribute  it  to  errors  in  the  structure  of  society, 
for  society  itself  is  the  mere  aggregate  of  human  life,  feelings,  opinions,  intercourse, 
agreement,  and  doings.  It  is  man  that  corrupts  society,  and  not  society  that  corrupts 
man.  The  one  may  react  very  powerfully  upon  the  other,  but  the  errors  and  cor- 
ruptions in  both  must  have  a  common  source.  What  is  that  seat  ?  Penetrating  to 
the  moral  signification  of  this  chapter,  we  have  the  true  answer.  Sin  is  not  only  a 
grovelling  brutality  assumed  or  taken  upon  a  man  from  without.  It  is  a  mauifes- 
tation  which  comes  from  within.  It  is  a  corruption  which  cleaves  to  the  nature, 
mingles  with  the  very  transmissions  of  life,  and  taints  the  vital  forces  as  they 
descend  from  parent  to  child,  from  generation  to  generation.  We  are  unclean,  not 
only  practically  and  by  contact  with  a  bad  world,  but  innately.  We  were  conceived 
in  sin  ;  we  were  shapen  in  iniquity.  And  it  is  just  this  that  forms  the  real  subject 
of  this  chapter.  It  is  the  type  of  the  source  and  seat  of  human  vileness.  The 
uucleanness  here  spoken  of  is  no  more  a  real  uncleannesa  than  tliat  attributed  to 
certain  animals  in  the  preceding  chapter.  The  whole  regulation  is  ceremonial,  and 
not  at  all  binding  upon  us.  It  is  an  arbitrary  law,  made  only  for  the  time  then 
present,  as  a  figure  of  spiritual  truths.  Its  great  significance  lies  in  its  typical 
nature.  And  a  more  vivid  and  impressive  picture  can  hardly  be  conceived.  It 
imposes  a  special  legal  disability  upon  woman,  and  so  connects  with  the  fact  that 
"  the  woman  being  deceived  was  in  the  transgression  "  (1  Tim.  ii.  24).  It  is  a  vivid 
remembrancer  of  the  occurrences  in  Eden.  It  tells  us  that  we  all  have  come  of 
sinful  mothers.  It  portrays  defilement  as  the  state  m  which  we  receive  our  being  ; 
for  "  who  can  bring  a  clean  thing  out  of  an  unclean  ?  Not  one  "  (Job  xiv.  4).  You 
may  plant  a  good  seed,  and  surround  it  with  all  the  conditions  nects^^ary  to  a  goodly 
plant ;  but  it  may  put  forth  so  eccentrically,  or  meet  with  some  mishap  in  the 
incipient  stages  of  its  development,  in  consequence  of  which  all  its  subsequent 
growth  will  be  marred,  and  all  its  fruits  give  evidence  of  the  adversities  that  befell 
it  in  the  beginning.  You  may  open  a  pure  fountain,  giving  forth  nothing  but  pure, 
good  water  ;  yet  the  issuing  stream  may  touch  upon  poison  and  take  up  turbid  com- 
mixtures at  its  first  departure  from  its  source,  and  so  carry  and  show  pollution 
whithersoever  it  goes.  And  so  it  has  been  with  humanity.  It  was  created  pure  and 
good,  but  by  that  power  of  free  choice  which  necessarily  belongs  to  a  moral  being 
some  of  its  first  movements  were  eccentric  and  detrimental  to  its  original  qualities. 
It  absorbed  vileness  at  its  very  beginning ;  and  hence  all  its  subsequent  develop- 
ments have  upon  them  the  taint  of  that  first  mishap  and  contagion.  It  is  worse  in 
some  lines  than  in  others.  The  operations  of  Divine  grace  in  the  parent  doubtless 
help  to  enfeeble  it  in  the  child.  Now  it  is  just  to  this  univerfal  taint  of  human 
nature,  derived  from  the  defection  of  Adam,  that  the  whole  outgrowth  of  this  world's 
iniquity  is  to  be  traced.  By  virtue  of  our  relation  to  an  infected  parentage  we  come 
into  the  world  with  more  or  less  affinity  for  evil.  The  presentation  of  the  objects  to 
which  this  proclivity  leans  awakens  those  biases  into  activity.  This  awakening  of 
the  power  of  lust  is  what  we  call  temptation.  Theie  is  an  innate  taint  or  bias,  the 
presentation  to  which  of  the  objects  of  evil  desire  involuntarily  excites  lust ;  and 
from  this  has  flown  out  the  flood  of  evil  which  has  deluged  all  the  earth.  {J.  A. 
Seiss,  D.D.)  In  the  eighth  day  the  flesh  .  .  .  shall  be  circumcised.— r/«?  ordi- 
nance  of  circumcision  .-—Although  the  rite  of  circumcision  here  receives  a  new  and 
special  sanction,  it  had  been  appointed  long  before  by  God  as  the  sign  of  His  covenant 
with  Abraham  (Gen.  xvii.  10-14).  Nor  was  it,  probably,  even  then  a  new  thing. 
That  the  ancient  Egyptians  practised  it  is  well  known  ;  so  also  did  the  Arabs  and 
Phoenicians;  in  fact,  the  custom  has  been  very  extensively  observed,  not  only  by 
nations  with  whom  the  Israelites  came  in  contact,  but  by  others  who  have  not  had, 
in  historic  times,  connection  with  any  civilised  peoples,  as,  e.g.,  the  Congo  negroes 
and  certain  Indian  tribes  in  South  America.     The  fundamental  idea  connected  with 


164  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap,  nu 

circumcision  by  most  of  the  peoples  who  have  practised  it  appears  to  have  been 
physical  purification  ;  indeed,  the  Arabs  call  it  by  the  name  tatiir,  which  has  this 
precise  meaning.     And  it  deserves  to  be  noticed  that  for  this  idea  regarding  circum- 
cision there  is  so  much  reason  in  fact  that  high  medical  authoiities  have  attributed 
to  it  a  real  hygienic  value,  especially  in  warm  climates.     No  one  need  feel  any 
difficulty  in  supposing  that  this  common  conception  attached  to  the  rite  also  in  the 
minds  of  the  Hebrews.     Eather  all  the  more  fitting  it  was,  if  there  was  a  basis  in 
fact  for  this  familiar  opinion,  that  God  should  thus  Lave  taken  a  ceremony  already 
known  to  the  surrounding  peoples,  and  in  itself  of  a  wholesome  physical  eifect,  and 
constituted  it  for  Abraham  and  his  seed  a  symbol  of  an  analogous  spiritual  fact, 
namely,  the  purification  of  sin  at  its  fountain-head,  the  cleansing  of  the  evil  nature 
with  which  we  all  are  born.     When  the  Hebrew  infunt  was  circumcised  it  was  an 
outward  sign  and  seal  of  the  covenant  of  God  with  Abraham  and  with  his  seed  to 
be  a  God  to  him  and  to  his  seed  after  him ;  and  it  signified  further  that  this  covenant 
of  God  was  to  be  carried  out  and  made  efiectual  only  through  the  putting  away  of 
the  flesh,  the  corrupt  nature  with  which  we  are  born,  and  of  all  that  belongs  to  it, 
in  order  that,  thus  circumcised  with  the  circumcision  of  the  heart,  every  child  of 
Abraham  might  indeed  be  an  Israelite  in  whom  there  should  be  no  guile.     And  the 
law  commands,  in  accord  with  the  original  command  to  Abraham,  that  the  circum- 
cision should  take  place  on  the  eighth  day.  This  is  the  more  noticeable,  that  among 
other  nations  which  practised  or  still  practise  the  rite  the  time  is  different.     The 
Egyptians  circumcised  their  sons  between  the  sixth  and  tenth  years,  the  modern 
Mohammedans  between  the  twelfth  and  fourteenth.     What  is  the  significance  of 
this  eighth  day  ?     In  the  first  place,  it  is  easy  to  see  that  we  have  in  this  direction 
a  provision  of  God's  mercy ;  for  if  delayed  beyond  infancy  or  early  cbildhood,  as 
among  many  other  peoples,  the  operation  is  much  more  serious,  and  may  even 
involve  some  danger,  while  in  so  early  infancy  it  is  comparatively  trifling,  and 
attended  with  no  risk.     Further,  by  the  administration  of  circumcision  at  the  very 
opening  of  life  it  is  suggested  that  in  the  Divine  ideal  the  grace  which  was  signified 
thereby,  of  the  cleansing  of  nature,  was  to  be  bestowed  upon  the  child,  not  first  at 
a  late  period  of  lite,  but  from  its  very  beginning,  thus  anticipating  the  earliest 
awakening  of  the  principle  of  inborn  sin.     But  the  question  still  remains,  Why  was- 
the  eighth  day  selected,  and  not  rather,  e.g.,  the  sixth  or  seventh,  which  would  bave 
no  less  perfectly  represented  these  ideas  ?    The  answer  is  to  be  found  in  the  symbolic 
significance  of  the  eighth  day.     As  the  old  creation  was  completed  in  six  days,  with 
a  following  Sabbath  of  rest,  so  that  six  is  ever  the  number  of  the  old  creation,  as 
under  imperfection  and  sin,  the  eighth  day,  the  first  of  a  new  week,  everywhere  in 
Scripture  appears  as  the  number  symbolic  of  the  new  creation,  in  which  all  things 
shall  be  restored  in  the  great  redemption  through  the  Second  Adam.     The  thought 
finds  its  fullest  expression  in  the  resurrection  of  Christ,  as  the  Firstborn  from  the 
dead,  the  Beginning  and  the  Lord  of  the  new  creation,  who  in  His  resurrection  body 
manifested  the  firstfruits  in  physical  life  of  the  new  creation,  rising  from  the  dead 
on  the  first,  or,  in  other  words,  the  day  after  the  seventh,  the  eighth  day.     (S.  H. 
Kellogg,  D.D.)         Her  purifying.— Pwrj/icaffon  after  child-birth  .-—The  teaching  of 
this  law  is  twofold :  it  concerns,  first,  the  woman,  and,  secondly,  the  child  which 
she  bears.     As  regards  the  woman,  it  emphasises  the  fact  that,  because  "first  in 
the  transgression,"  she  is  under  special  pains  and  penalties  in  virtue  of  her  sex. 
The  capacity  of  motherhood,  which  is  her  crown  and  glory,  though  still  a  precious 
privilege,  has  yet  been  made,  because  of  sin,  an  inevitable  instrument  of  pain,  and 
that  because  of  her  relation  to  the  first  sin.    We  are  thus  reminded  that  the  specific 
curse  denounced  against  the  woman  (Gen.  iii.  16)  is  no  dead  letter,  but  a  fact.     No 
doubt  the  conception  is  one  which  raises  difficulties  which  in  themselves  are  great, 
and  to  modern  thought  are  greater  than  ever.   Nevertheless,  the  fact  abides  unaltered 
that  even  to  this  day  woman  is  under  special  pains  and  disabilities  inseparably  con- 
nected with  her  power  of  motherhood.     But  why  should  all  the  daughters  of  Eve 
suffer  because  of  her  sin  ?     Where  is  the  justice  in  such  an  ordinance  ?     A  question 
this  is  to  which  we  cannot  yet  give  any  satisfactory  answer.     But  it  does  not  follow 
that  because  in  any  proposition  there  are  difficulties  which  at  present  we  are  unable 
to  solve  therefore  the  proposition  is  false.     And,  further,  it  is  important  to  observe 
that  this  law,  under  which  womanhood  abides,  is  after  all  only  a  special  case  under 
that  law  of  the  Divine  government  by  which  the  iniquities  of  the  fathers  are  visited 
upon  the  children.     It  is  most  certainly  a  law  which,  to  our  apprehension,  suggests 
treat  moral  difficulties,  even  to  the  most  reverent  spirits ;  but  it  is  no  less  certainly 
a  law  which  represents  a  conspiiuous  and  tremendous  fact,  which  is  illustrated. 


CHAP,  xiii.l  LEVITICUS.  165 

e.q.,  in  the  family  oi  every  drunkard  in  the  world.  And  it  is  well  worth  observing 
tliat  while  the  ceremonial  law,  which  was  specially  intended  to  keep  this  fact  before 
the  mind  and  the  conscience,  is  abrogated,  the  fact  that  woman  is  still  under  certain 
Divinely-imposed  disabilities  because  of  that  first  sin  is  reafiirmed  in  the  New 
Testament,  and  is  by  apostolic  authority  applied  in  the  administration  of  Cliurch 
government  (1  Tim.  ii.  12,  13).  But,  in  the  second  place,  we  may  also  derive  abiding 
instruction  from  this  law  concerning  the  child  which  is  of  man  begotten  and  of 
woman  born.  It  teaches  us  that  not  only  has  the  curse  thus  fallen  on  the  woman, 
but  that,  because  she  is  herself  a  sinful  creature,  slie  can  only  bring  forth  another 
sinful  creature  like  herself  ;  and  if  a  daughter,  then  a  daughter  inheriting  all  her 
own  peculiar  infirmities  and  disabilities.  The  law,  as  regards  both  mother  and 
child,  expresses  in  the  language  of  symbolism  those  words  of  David  in  his  penitential 
confession  (Psa.  li.  5).  Men  may  contemptuously  call  this  "theology,"  or  even 
rail  at  it  as  "  Calvinism  "  ;  but  it  is  more  than  theology,  more  than  Calvinism  ;  it 
is  a  fact,  to  which  until  this  present  time  history  has  seen  but  one  exception,  even 
that  mysterious  Son  of  the  Virgin,  who  claimed,  however,  to  be  no  mere  man,  but 
the  Christ,  the  Son  of  the  Blessed !  And  yet  many,  who  surely  can  think  but 
superficially  upon  the  solemn  facts  of  life,  still  object  to  this  most  strenuously,  that 
even  the  new-born  child  should  be  regarded  as  in  nature  sinful  and  unclean.  Difficulty 
here  we  must  all  admit — difficulty  so  great  that  it  is  hard  to  overstate  it — regarding 
the  bearing  of  this  fact  on  the  character  of  the  holy  and  merciful  God,  who  in  the 
beginning  made  man  ;  and  yet,  surely,  deeper  thought  must  confess  that  herein  the 
Mosaic  view  of  infant  nature — a  view  which  is  assumed  and  taught  throughout  Holy 
Scripture — however  bumbling  to  our  natural  pride,  is  only  in  strictest  accord  with  what 
the  admitted  principles  of  the  most  exact  science  compel  us  to  admit.  For  when- 
ever, in  any  case,  we  find  all  creatures  of  the  same  class  doing,  under  all  circumstances, 
any  one  thing,  we  conclude  that  the  reason  for  this  can  only  lie  in  the  nature  of 
such  creatures,  antecedent  to  any  influence  of  a  tendency  to  imitation.  If,  for 
instance,  the  ox  everywhere  and  always  eats  the  green  thing  of  the  earth,  and  not 
flesh,  the  reason,  we  say,  is  found  simply  in  the  nature  of  the  ox  as  he  comes  into 
being.  '  So  when  we  see  all  men  everywhere,  under  all  circumstances,  as  soon  as 
ever  they  come  to  the  time  of  free  moral  choice,  always  choosing  and  committing 
sin,  what  can  we  conclude — regarding  this  not  as  a  theological,  but  merely  as  a 
scientific  question — but  that  man,  as  he  comes  into  the  worll,  must  have  a  sinful 
nature  ?  And  this  being  so,  then  why  must  not  the  law  of  heredity  apply,  according 
to  which,  by  a  law  which  knows  of  no  exceptions,  like  ever  produces  its  like  ? 
Least  of  all,  then,  should  those  object  to  the  view  of  child-nature  which  is  repre- 
sented in  this  law  who  accept  these  commonplaces  of  modern  science  as  representing 
facts.  Wiser  it  were  to  turn  attention  to  the  other  teaching  of  the  law,  that,  not- 
withstanding these  sad  and  humiliating  facts,  there  is  provision  made  by  God, 
through  the  cleansing  by  grace  of  the  very  nature  in  which  we  are  born  and 
atonement  for  the  sin  which  without  our  fault  we  inherit,  for  a  complete  redemption 
from  all  the  inherited  corruption  and  guilt.  And  especially  should  Christian  parents 
with  joy  and  thaukfulness  receive  the  manifest  teaching  of  this  law,  that  God  our 
Father  offers  to  parental  faith  Himself  to  take  in  hand  our  children,  even  from  the 
earliest  beginning  of  their  infant  days,  and,  purifying  the  fountain  of  their  life 
through  "  a  circumcision  made  without  hands,"  receive  the  little  Ones  into  covenant 
relation  with  Himself,  to  their  ete.nal  salvation.     (Ibid.) 


CHAPTER  XIII. 


Vers.  2-46.  The  plague  of  leprosy, — The  cleansing  of  the  leper : — I.  The  loath- 
some AND  GHASTLY  SPECTACLE  OF  A  LEPEK.  1.  A  leper  was  extremely  loathsome  in 
his  person.  But  let  me  remind  you  that  this,  fearful  as  it  seems  to  be,  is  a  very 
poor  portrait  of  the  loathsomeness  of  sin.  If  we  could  bear  to  hear  what  God  could 
tell  us  of  the  exceeding  wickedness  and  uncleanness  of  sin,  I  am  sure  we  should  die. 
God  hides  from  all  eyes  but  His  own  the  blackness  of  sin.  2.  The  leper  was  not 
only  loathsome  in  his  person,  but  was  defiled  in  all  his  acts.  If  he  drank  out  of  a 
vessel,  the  vessel  was  defiled.  If  he  lay  upon  a  bed,  the  bed  became  unclean,  and 
whosoever  sat  upon  the  bed  afterwards  became  unclean  too.     All  that  he  did  was 


166  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiii. 

full  of  the  same  loathsomeness  as  was  himself.     Now  this  may  see  in  to  be  a  very 

humiliating  truth,  but  faithfulness  requires  us  to  say  it,  all  the  actions  of  the  natural 

man  are  tainted  with  sin.     Whether  he  eats,  or  drinks,  or  whatsoever  he  does,  he 

continues  to  sin  agiuust  his  God.     3.  Being  thus  the  medium  of  contagion  and 

defilement  wherever  he  went,  the  Lord  demanded  that  he  should  be  shut  out  from 

the  society  of  Israel.     Living  apart  from  their  dearest  friends,  shut  out  from  all  the 

pleasures  of  society,  they  were  required  never  to  drink  of  a  running  stream  of  water 

of  which  others  might  drink;  nor  might  they  sit  down  on  any  stone  by  the  roadside 

upon  which  it  was  probable  any  other  person  might  rtst.     They  were,  to  all  intents 

and  purposes,  dead  to  all  the  enjopnents  of  life,  dead  to  all  the  endearments  and 

society  of  th  ir  fi  lends.     Ay,  and  such  is  the  case  with  the  sinner  with  regard  to 

the  people  of  God.     4.  Once  more,  the  leper  was  wholly  unable  to  come  up  to  the 

house  of  God.     Other  men  might  olfer  sacrifices,  but  not  the  leper  ;  others  had  a 

share  in  the  high  priest's  great  sacrifice,  and  when  he  went  within  the  veil  he 

appeared  for  all  others  ;  but  the  leper  had  neither  part  nor  lot  in  this  matter.     He 

was  shut  out  from  God,  as  well  as  shut  out  from  man.     He  was  no  partaker  of  the 

sacred  things  of  Israel,  and  all  the  ordinances  of  the  Tabernacle  were  as  nothing  to 

him.     Think  of  that,  sinner  !     As  a  sinner  full  of  guilt  thou  art  thut  out  from  all 

communion  with  God.     True,  He  gives  thee  the  mercies  of  this  life  as  the  leper  had 

his  bread  and  water,  but  thou  hast  none  of  the  spiritual  joys  which  God  affords  to 

His  peoi^le.     II.  I  shall  now  bring  the  leper  up  to  the  high  priest.     Here  he 

stands  ;  the  priest  has  come  out  to  meet  him.     Mark,  whenever  a  Itperwas  cleansed 

under  the  Jewish  law — the  leper  did  nothing — the  priest  did  all.     My  text  asserts 

that  if  there  was  found  any  sound  place  in  him,  he  was  unclean.     But  when  the 

leprosy  had  covered  him,  wheresoever  the  priest  looked,  then  the  man  became  by 

sacrificial  rights  a  clean  leper.     Now,  let  me  bring  up  the  sinner  before  the  great 

High  Priest  this  morning.     How  many  there  are,  who,  as  they  come  up  hither,  are 

ready  to  confess  that  they  have  done  many  things  which  are  wrong,  but  they  say, 

"  Though  we  have  done  much  which  we  cannot  justify,  yet  there  have  been  many 

good    actions  which  might  almost  counterbalance  the  sin.      Have  we  not  been 

charitable  to  the  poor,  have  we  not  sought  to  instruct  the  ignorant,  to  help  those 

that  are  out  of  the  way  ?     We  have  some  sins  we  do  confess ;  but  there  is  much  at 

the  bottom  which  is  still  right  and  good,  and  we  therefore  hope  that  we  shall  be 

delivered."     I  put  you  aside  in  God's  name  as  unclean  lepers.     For  you  theie  is  no 

hope,  and  no  promise  of  salvation  whatever.     Here  comes  a  second.     "  Sir,  a  month 

or  two  ago  I  would  have  claimed  a  righteousness  with  the  very  best  of  them.   I,  too, 

could  have  boasted  of  what  I  have  done ;  but  now  I  see  my  righteousness  to  be  as 

filthy  rags,  and  all  my  goodness  is  as  an  unclean  thing.  As  for  the  future,  I  can  make 

no  promise ;  I  have  often  promised,  and  so  often  lied.     Lord,  if  ever  I  am  made 

whole,  Thy  grace  must  make  me  so."  III.  Having  thus  brought  the  man  before  the 

priest,  we  shall  now  briefly  turn  our  attention  to  the  cEREiroNiES  which  the  priest 

USED  IN  THE  CLEANSiiVG  OF  THE  LEPER.     1.  You  wiU  pcrccive,  first,  that  tbe  priest 

went  to  the  leper,  not  the  leper  to  the  priest.     We  go  not  up  to  heaven,  first,  till 

Christ  comes  down  from  His  Father's  glory  to  the  place  where  we  as  lepers  aie  shut 

out  from  God.     Thou  dost  take  upon  Thyself  the  form  of  man.     Thou  dost  not 

disdain  the  Virgin's  womb ;  Thou  comest  to  sinners ;  Thou  eatest  and  drinkest 

with  them  1     2.  But  the  coming  of  the  priest  was  not  enough,  there  must  be  a 

sacrifice,  and  on  this  occasion,  in  order  to  set  out  the  two  ways  by  which  a  sinner 

is  saved,  there  was  sacrilice  mingled  with  resurrection.     First,  there  was  sacrifice. 

One  of  the  biids  was  taken,  and  its  blood  was  shed  in  a  vessel  which  was  full,  as 

the  Hebrew  hath  it,  of  "  living  water  " — of  water  which  had  not  been  stagnant, 

but  which  was  clean.     Just  as  when  Jesus  Christ  was  put  to  death,  blood  and  water 

flowed  from  His  side  to  be  "  of  sin  a  double  cure,"  so  in  the  earihen  vessel  there 

■was  received,  first,  the  "  living  water  "  and  then  the  blood  of  the  bird  which  had 

just  been  slain.     If  sin  is  put  away  it  must  be  by  blood.     There  is  no  way  of  putting 

sin  from  before  the  presence  of  God  except  by  the  streams  which  flow  from  the  open 

veins  of  Christ.     The  leper  was  made  clean  by  sacrifice  and  by  resurrection,  but  he 

was  not  clean  till  the  blood  was  sprinkled  on  him.     Christians,  the  Cross  does  not 

save  us  till  Christ's  blood  is  spriakled  on  our  conscience.     Yet  the  virtual  salvation 

was  accomplished  for  all  the  elect  when  Christ  died  for  them  upon  the  tree.     IV. 

That  after  the  leper  was  cleansed,  there  were  certain  things  which  he  had 

TO  DO.     Yet,  until  he  is  cleansed,  he  is  to  do  nothing.     The  sinner  can  do  nothing 

towards  his  own  salvation.     His  place  is  the  place  of  death.     Christ  must  be  hij 

life.    The  sinner  is  so  lost  that  Christ,  m.st  begin,  and  carry  on,  and  finish  all ;  but 


CHAP.  XIII.]  LEVITICUS.  1G7 

•when  the  sinner  is  sa/ved  then  he  begins  to  work  in  right  good  earnest.  When  once 
he  is  no  more  a  leper,  but  a  leper  cleansed,  then,  for  the  love  he  bears  his  Master's 
name,  there  is  no  trial  too  arduous,  no  service  too  hard  ;  but  he  spends  his  whole 
strength  in  magnifying  and  gloiifyiug  his  Lord.  I  will  not  detain  you  further  than 
to  notice  that  this  man,  before  he  might  further  enjoy  the  privileges  of  his  healed 
estate,  was  to  bring  an  offering,  and  the  priest  was  to  take  him  to  the  very  door  of 
the  Tabernacle.  He  never  dare  come  there  before,  but  he  may  come  now.  So  the 
pardoned  man  may  come  right  up  to  God's  mercy-seat,  and  may  bring  the  offering 
of  holiness  and  good  works.  He  is  a  pardoned  man  now.  You  ask  me  how  ?  Not 
by  anything  he  did,  but  by  what  the  priest  did,  and  that  alone.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Lep'osy,  a  special  type  of  sin  : — I.  In  the  first  place,  leprosy  is  undoubtedly  selected 
to  be  a  special  type  of  sin,  on  account  of  its  extkeme  loathsomeness.  Beginning, 
indee  1,  as  an  insignificant  spot,  "  a  bright  place,"  a  mere  scale  on  the  skin,  it  goes 
on  progressing  ever  from  worse  to  worse,  till  at  last  limb  drops  from  limb,  and  only 
tbe  hideous  mutilated  remnant  of  what  was  once  a  man  is  left.      II.  But  it  will 

BE  KEJOINED  BY  SOME  :  SORELY  IT  WERE  GROSS  EXAGGERATION  TO  APPLY  THIS  HORRIBLE 
SYMBOLISM  TO  THE  CASE  OF  MANY  WHO,  ALTHOUGH    INDEED    SINNERS,  UNBELIEVERS    ALSO 

IN  Christ,  yet  certainly  exhibit  truly  lovely  and  attractive  characters  (see 
Mark  x.  21).  But  this  fact  only  makes  leprosy  the  more  fitting  symbol  of  sin.  For 
another  characteristic  is  its  insignificant  and  often  imperceptible  beginning.  We 
are  told  that  in  the  case  of  those  who  inherit  the  taint,  it  frequently  remains  quite 
dormant  in  early  life,  only  gradunlly  appearing  in  later  years.  How  perfectly  the 
type,  in  this  respect,  then,  symbolises  sin  !  No  comfort  can  be  rightly  had  from  any 
complacent  conijiarison  of  our  own  characters  with  those  of  many,  perhaps  pro- 
fessing more,  who  are  much  worse  than  we.  No  one  who  knew  that  from  his 
parents  he  had  inherited  the  leprous  taint,  or  in  whom  the  leprosy  as  yet  appeared 
as  only  an  insignificant  bright  spot,  would  comfort  himself  greatly  by  the  observa- 
tion that  other  lepers  were  much  worse ;  and  that  he  was,  as  yet,  fair  and  goodly 
to  look  upon.  Though  the  leprosy  were  in  him  but  just  begun,  that  would  be 
enough  to  till  him  with  dismay  and  consternation.  So  should  it  be  with  regard  to 
sin.  III.  And  it  would  so  affect  such  a  man  the  more  surely,  when  he  knew  that 
the  disease,  however  slight  in  its  beginnings,  wa.s  certainly  progressive.  This  is 
one  of  the  unfailing  marks  of  the  disease.  And  so  with  sin.  No  man  can  morally 
stand  still.  Sin  may  not  develop  in  all  with  equal  rapidity,  but  it  does  progress  in 
every  natural  man,  outwardly  or  inwardly,  with  equal  certainty.  IV.  It  is  another 
mark  of  leprosy,  that  sooner  or  later  it  affkcts  the  whole  man  ;  and  in  this,  again, 
appears  the  sad  fitness  of  the  disease  to  stand  as  a  symbol  of  sin.  For  sin  is  not  a 
partial  disorder,  affecting  only  one  class  of  faculties,  or  one  part  of  our  nature. 
It  disorders  the  judgment ;  it  obscures  the  moral  perceptions ;  it  either  perverts 
the  affections  or  unduly  stimulates  them  m  one  direction  while  it  deadens  them 
in  another  ;  it  hardens  and  quickens  the  will  for  evil,  while  it  paralyses  its  power 
for  the  volition  of  that  which  is  holy.  And  not  only  Scripture,  but  observation 
itself,  teaches  us  that  sin,  in  many  cases,  alsi  affects  the  body  of  man,  weakening 
its  powers,  and  bringing  in,  by  an  inexorable  law,  pain,  disease,  death.  V.  It  is 
another  remarkable  feature  of  the  disease  that,  as  it  progresses  from  bad  to  worse, 
the  victim  becomes  more  and  more  insensible.  A  recent  writer  says  :  "  Though  a 
mass  of  bodily  corruption,  at  last  unable  to  leave  his  bed,  the  leper  seems  happy 
and  contented  with  his  sad  condition."  Is  anything  more  characteristic  than  this 
of  the  malady  of  sin  ?  The  sin  which,  when  first  committed,  costs  a  keen  pang, 
afterward,  when  frequently  repeated,  hurts  not  the  conscience  at  all.  Judgments 
and  mercies,  which  in  earlier  life  affected  one  with  profound  emotion,  in  later  life 
leave  the  impenitent  sinner  as  unmoved  as  they  found  him.  VI.  Another  element 
of  the  solemn  fitness  of  the  type  is  found  in  the  persistently  hereditary  nature 
OF  leprosy.  It  may  indeed  sometimes  arise  of  itself,  even  as  did  sin  in  the  case  of 
certain  of  the  holy  angels,  and  with  our  first  parents  ;  but  when  once  it  is  introduced, 
in  the  case  of  any  person,  the  terrible  infection  descends  with  unfailing  certainty 
to  all  his  descendants;  and  while,  by  suitable  hygiene,  it  is  possible  to  alleviate  its 
violence,  and  retard  its  development,  it  is  not  possible  to  escape  the  terrible  inherit- 
ance. Is  anything  more  uniformly  characteristic  of  sin  ?  The  most  cultivated 
and  the  most  barbarous  alike,  come  into  the  world  so  constituted  that,  quite  ante- 
cedent to  any  act  of  free  choice  on  their  part,  we  know  that  it  is  not  more  certain 
that  they  will  eat  than  that,  when  they  begin  to  exercise  freedom  they  will,  each 
and  every  one,  use  their  moral  freedom  wrongly — in  a  word  will  sin.  VII.  And 
again,  we  find  yet  another  analogy  in  the  fact  that,  among  the  ancient  Hebrews, 


1G8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [ciiaf.  rrn. 

the  disease  was  regarded  as  incurable  by  human  means  ;  and,  notwithstanding 
pccasional  announcements  in  our  day  that  a  remedy  has  beeu  discovered  for  the 
plague,  this  seems  to  be  tlie  verdict  of  tlie  best  autliorities  in  medical  bcieuce  still. 
That  in  this  respect  leprosy  perfectly  represents  the  sorer  malady  of  the  soul, 
every  one  is  witness.  No  possible  eli'ort  of  will  or  fixedness  of  determination  has 
ever  availed  to  free  a  man  from  sin.  Neither  is  culture,  whether  intellectual  or 
religious,  of  any  more  avail.  VIII.  Last  of  all,  this  law  teaches  the  supreme  lesson, 
that  as  with  the  symbolic  disease  of  the  body,  so  with  that  of  the  soul — sin  shuts 

OUT  FROM  GOD  AND  FROM  THE  FELLOWSHIP  OF  THE  HOLY  (seC  EcV.  Xxi.  27  ;  Xxii.  15). 

(S.  H.  Kellogg,  D.D.)  Discipline  in  the   Chuvch  : — 1.  Of   the   necessity  and 

moderation  of  discipline  in  the  Church.  2.  That  the  discipline  of  the  Ciiurch  be 
advisedly  exercised,  not  rashly  precipitated.  3.  Of  the  wholesome  power  left  to  the 
Church,  of  binding  and  loosing,  and  of  obedience  to  be  given  thereunto.  4.  The 
law  declares  men's  sins,  but  does  not  heal  tbem.  5.  Of  the  diversity  of  censures  in 
the  Church.  (A.  Willet,  D.D.)  Sin  as  a  disease  : — 1.  Sin  the  cause  of  diseases. 
2.  To  take  heed  of  the  least  sins.  3.  Ministers  to  rebuke  sin.  4.  Not  to  go  forward 
in  sin.  5.  Not  to  sin  against  the  conscience.  6.  Not  to  be  swift  to  judge  others. 
7.  To  shun  the  company  of  the  wicked.  8.  Against  pride  in  apparel.  (Ibid.) 
Leprosy : — Sin  is  a  corrupting  and  disorganising  disease,  as  well  as  a  brutal  degra- 
dation and  hereditary  uncleanness.  It  is  a  loathsome  putrescence  of  the  whole 
nature.  It  is  a  sickness  of  the  whole  head,  and  a  faintness  of  the  whole  heart. 
Deliverance  from  it  is  called  a  cure  and  a  healing,  as  well  as  a  pardon.  Notice  its 
beginnings.  Leprosy  was,  for  the  most  part,  hereditary.  After  doing  its  work  in 
the  parent  it  was  very  apt  to  break  out  in  the  child.  Sin  began  in  Adam,  and 
having  wrought  nine  hundred  years  in  him  he  died  ;  but  the  taint  of  it  was  left  in 
all  who  sprang  from  him.  But  leprosy  was  not  always  hereditary.  Hence  the 
necessity  of  a  special  symbol  on  the  subject  of  innate  depravity,  such  as  we  have  in 
the  preceding  chapter.  The  germ  of  all  human  sin  is  derived  from  our  connection 
with  a  fallen  parentage.  But  leprosy,  whether  hereditary,  or  contracted  by  conta- 
gion or  otherwise,  began  far  within.  Its  seat  is  in  the  deepest  interior  of  the  body. 
It  is  often  in  the  system  as  many  as  three  or  a  dozen  years  before  it  shows  itself. 
How  exactly  this  describes  sin !  Nero  and  Caligula  were  once  tender  infants, 
apparently  the  very  personifications  of  innocence.  Who  that  saw  their  sweet 
slumbers  upon  tbe  bosoms  of  their  mothers  would  ever  have  suspected  that  in  those 
gentle  forms  were  latent  seeds  which  finally  developed  into  bloody  butchery,  and 
tyranny,  and  vice,  at  which  the  world  for  ages  has  stood  amazed !  And  little  do 
we  know  of  those  depths  of  deceit  which  we  carry  in  ourselves,  or  to  what  enormities 
of  crime  we  are  liable  any  day  to  be  driven.  The  taint  of  leprosy  is  within,  and 
nothing  but  watchfulness  and  grace  can  keep  it  from  breaking  out  in  all  its  corro- 
sive and  wasting  power.  1.  The  first  visible  signs  of  leprosy  are  often  very  minute 
and  inconsiderable,  and  not  easily  detected.  A  small  pustule  or  rising  of  the  flesh 
— a  little  bright  red  spot  like  that  made  by  a  puncture  from  a  pin — a  very  trifling 
eruj^tion,  indentation,  or  scaliness  of  the  skin — or  some  other  very  slight  symptom, 
is  usually  the  first  sign  which  it  gives  of  its  presence.  And  from  these  small 
beginnings  the  whole  living  death  of  the  leper  is  developed.  How  vivid  the  picture 
of  the  fact,  that  tbe  worst  and  dnrkest  iniquities  may  grow  out  of  the  smallest 
beginnings  1  A  look  of  the  eye,  a  uesire  of  the  heart,  a  thought  of  the  imagination, 
a  touch  of  the  hand,  a  single  word  of  compliance,  is  often  the  door  of  inlet  to  Satan 
and  all  hell's  troops.  2.  Leprosy  is  also  gradual  in  its  development.  It  does  not 
break  out  in  its  full  violence  at  once.  Its  first  manifestations  are  so  trifling  that 
one  who  did  not  understand  it  would  consider  it  nothing  at  all.  No  man  is  an 
outbreaking  and  confirmed  villain  at  once.  People  are  shocked,  and  hold  up  their 
hands  in  horror  at  scandalous  crimes  ;  but  tbey  forget  that  these  are  only  the  easy 
sequences  of  little  indulgences  and  sins  of  which  they  take  no  account.  They  need 
to  be  told  that  there  is  a  close  interior  brotherhood  and  cohesion  between  sins,  and 
that  he  who  takes  one  to  his  favour  is  at  once  beset  with  all  the  rest.  3.  Again, 
leprosy  is  in  itself  an  exceedingly  loathsome  and  offensive  disorder — a  kind  of 
perpetual  small-pox.  only  more  deeply  seated  and  attended  with  more  inward 
corruption.  4.  Again,  leprosy  under  this  law  carried  with  it  a  most  melancholy 
condemnation.  A  Jewish  leper  was  not  only  horribly  diseased,  but  also  fearfully 
cursed  in  consequence  of  his  disease.  He  was  pronounced  unclean  by  the  law  and 
by  the  priests.  Such  is  the  type,  and  it  is  the  same  with  the  antitype.  Every 
sinner  is  condemned  as  well  as  diseased,  and  condemned  for  the  very  reason  that 
he  is  diseased.     There  is  a  sentence  of  uncleanness  and  exclusion  upon  him.     H;) 


CHAP.  xiri.J  LEVITICUS.  1G9 

has  no  fellowship  with  the  saints,  and  no  share  in  the  holy  services  of  God's  people. 
He  is  a  spiritual  outcast — a  moral  leper — unclean,  and  ready  for  the  realms  of 
everlasting  banishment  and  deatb.  5.  And  yet  the  picture  is  not  quite  complete. 
It  remains  to  be  said  that  there  was  no  earthly  cure  for  leprosy.  The  prophet  of 
God,  by  his  miraculous  power,  could  remove  it,  but  no  human  power  or  skill  could. 
It  was  beyond  the  reach  of  physician  or  priest.  And  so  it  is  with  sin.  It  is  a  consump- 
tion wbich  cannot  be  cured — a  cancer  which  cannot  be  extracted — a  leprosy  which 
cannot  be  cleansed — except  by  the  direct  power  of  Divine  grace.  (J .  A.  Seiss,  D.I). ) 
The  (jospel  of  the  leprosy  : — 1.  It  is  a  work  both  difficult  and  weighty  for  peoplo 
to  discern  and  judge  aright  of  their  own  spiritual  condition.  This  appi  ars  by  a'l 
these  rules  and  directions.  2.  It  is  the  priest's  office  to  judge  of  the  leprosy.  God 
has  given  His  ministers  power  to  retain  and  remit  sins  (Jobn  xx.  23).  3.  Note  the 
rules  of  trial,  whereby  the  priest  is  to  judge  of  the  leprosy.  (1)  If  it  be  but  skin- 
deep,  it  is  not  the  leprosy,  he  is  clean  ;  but  if  deeper,  he  is  unclean  (vers.  3,  4,  20, 
25,  30).  A  child  of  God  may  have  spots  in  his  skin,  frailties  in  his  life  ;  but  his 
heart  is  sound.  There  are  other  sins  rooted  deep  in  the  heart,  that  affect  the 
vitals.  (2)  Does  it  stand  at  a  stay,  or  does  it  spread  further  and  further  (vers.  5-8, 
23,  27,  28,  34,  36,  37)  ?  Evil  men  grow  worse  and  worse  :  their  corruptions  gain 
ground  upon  them.  But  it  is  a  sign  there  is  some  beginning  of  healing  if  it  stand 
at  a  stay.  If  the  Lord  be  healing  a  sinner,  mortifying  his  lusts,  he  is  clean.  (3) 
If  there  be  proud  raw  flesh  in  the  rising,  he  is  not  to  be  shut  up  in  suspense  ;  the 
thing  is  evident  (vers.  9-11, 14, 15).  Pride,  presumption,  and  impatience  of  reproof, 
are  bad  signs.  (4)  If  all  be  turned  white,  a  man  is  clean  (vers.  12,  17,  34).  (a) 
The  natural  reason.  It  is  a  sign  of  some  inward  strength  of  nature,  that  it  expels 
the  disease,  and  sends  it  forth  to  the  outward  parts,  (h)  The  spiritual  reason.  A 
humble  acknowledgment  of  the  overspreading  corruption  of  our  nature,  and  flying 
to  Clirist  for  help  under  a  thorough  conviction  and  sense  of  our  total  uncleanness 
and  pcllutedness ;  this  is  a  sign  the  plague  is  healed,  and  the  leper  made  clean. 
(5)  In  case  the  leprosy  be  in  the  head,  he  is  doubly  unclean  (ver.  44).  Where  sin 
has  prevailed  so  far  as  to  blind  the  very  mind  and  understanding,  men  are  more 
incapable  of  conversion  than  others,  because  so  far  from  conviction.  4.  Note  the 
duties  imposed  upon  the  leper  (vers.  45-47).  (1)  Rend  clothes.  Sign  of  sorrow 
and  lamentation.  (2)  Bare  head.  (3)  Cover  lips  to  express  shame.  (4)  Give 
warning  to  others  to  shun  him.  A  scandalous  sinner  must  not  charge  others  with 
his  failings,  but  load  his  own  conscience,  and  take  his  guiltiness  home  to  himself. 
(5)  Dwell  alone.  Excommunication.  (S.Mather.)  Avoidance  of  false  suspicion  : — 
"When  you  read  in  the  fourth  verse  of  shutting  up  the  parties  for  seven  days,  and 
then  to  look  on  it  again,  you  may  note  with  yourself,  how  greatly  God  hateth 
hasty,  rash,  and  uncharitable  judgment.  A  thing  which  many  men  and  women, 
otherwise  honest  and  good,  are  carried  away  withal,  to  their  own  great  hurt,  not 
only  in  soul,  but  in  worldly  reputation  also,  and  to  the  bitter  and  biting  discomfort 
of  those  whom  they  ought  to  love  and  judge  well  of.  Nay,  you  may  reason  further 
with  yourself  thus  :  That  if  in  a  matter  thus  subject  to  the  eye,  as  these  sores  were, 
yet  God  would  have  no  haste,  but  a  stay  for  seven  days,  and  longer  as  occasion 
served,  before  any  judgment  should  be  given  that  the  party  was  unclean.  Oh,  how 
much  more  doth  He  abhor  haste  and  love  leisure,  in  pronouncing  of  the  hearts  and 
thoughts  of  our  friends  and  neighbours  which  are  not  seeu,  nor  subject  to  an  easy 
censure  ?  {Bp.  Babington.)  Sin  may  he  invisible  to  human  eyes  : — A  lady,  whose 
portrait  had  often  been  successfully  taken  before,  paid  a  visit  one  day  to  the 
photographer's  for  the  purpose  of  having  a  new  one  taken.  After  she  had  sat  for 
it  in  the  usual  way,  the  photographer  retired  with  the  plate  to  examine  the  picture 
which  the  sun's  light  had  drawn  there,  but  as  the  lines  gradually  developed  in  the 
chemical  bath  a  strange  sight  was  revealed.  In  the  portrait  the  lady's  face 
appeared  covered  with  a  number  of  dark' spots  ;  but  yet  no  one  looking  at  her  that 
day  was  able  to  detect  the  slightest  trace  of  them  in  her  face  !  But  the  next  day 
the  explanation  came.  The  spots  had  then  become  distinctly  visible.  The  lady 
was  ill  of  small-pox,  of  which  she  died.  The  faint  yellow  of  the  spots,  some  time 
before  human  eyes  could  discern  it,  had  been  marked  by  the  pure  light  of  the  sun, 
and  traced  in  darkened  spots  in  that  inexorably  true  picture  drawn  on  the  photo- 
graphic plate,  revealing  the  horrible  disease  that  already,  though  as  yet  invisible  to 
human  eyes,  was  seated  there.  (Biblical  Treasury.)  The  importance  of  attendini/ 
to  the  disease  of  sin  : — Sin  is  an  awful  disease.  I  hear  people  say,  with  a  toss  of 
the  head,  and  with  a  trivial  manner  :  "  Oh,  yes,  I'm  a  sinner."  Sin  is  an  awful 
disease.    It  is  leprosy.     It  is  dropsy.     It  is  consumption.     It  is  all  moral  disorders 


170  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiii. 

in  one.  Now,  you  know  there  i?  a  crisis  in  a  disease.  Perhaps  you  have  had  some 
iUustration  of  it  in  your  own  family.  Sometimes  the  physician  has  called,  and  he 
has  looked  at  the  patient  and  said  :  "  That  case  was  simple  enough  ;  but  the  crisis 
has  passed.  If  you  had  called  me  yesterday,  or  this  morning,  I  could  have  cui'ed 
the  patient.  It  is  too  late  now ;  tire  crisis  has  passed."  Just  so  it  is  in  the 
spiritual  treatment  of  the  soul — there  is  a  crisis.  Before  that,  life.  After  that, 
death.  Oh,  as  you  love  your  soul,  do  not  let  the  crisis  pass  unattended  to.  There 
are  some  here  who  can  remember  instances  in  life  when,  if  they  had  bought  a 
certain  property,  they  would  have  become  very  rich.  A  few  acres  tlrat  would  have 
cost  them  almost  nothing  were  offered  them.  They  refused  them.  Afterwards 
a  large  village  or  city  sprang  up  on  those  acres  of  ground,  and  they  see  what  a 
mistake  they  made  in  not  buying  the  property.  There  was  an  opportunity  of  gettin  c 
it.  It  never  came  again.  And  so  it  is  in  regard  to  a  man's  spiritual  and  eternal 
fortune.  There  is  a  chance;  if  you  let  that  go,  perhaps  it  never  comes  back. 
Certainly  that  one  never  comes  back.  (H.  IF.  Beecher.)  Leprosy  and  sin 
hereditary  : — Never  shall  I  forget  a  visit  which  I  paid  to  the  leper  hospital  outside 
the  East  Gate  of  Damascus,  which  tradition  says  occupies  the  site  of  Naaman's 
house.  A  woman  was  crossing  the  courtyard,  whose  loathsome  features  seemed  all 
but  eaten  away  by  disease.  In  her  hands — the  fingers  of  which  were  almost  con- 
sumed by  leprosy — she  held  a  sweet-looking  infant,  as  fair  and  pi'etty  a  child  as  one 
could  desire  to  see.  The  contrast  was  most  painful.  Life  and  health  and  innocence 
seemed  to  sleep  in  the  arms  of  sin,  disease,  and  death.  I  said  to  the  missionary 
who  accompanied  me,  "  Surely  the  woman  is  not  the  mother  of  the  child?  "  He 
said,  "  Yes,  she  is  "  ;  the  child  does  not  shuw  the  leprosy  now,  but  it  is  in  the  blood, 
and  before  long  it  will  probably  appear ;  and  if  the  infant  live  long  enough  she  will 
be  as  bad  as  the  mother."  Who  can  bring  a  clean  thing  out  of  an  unclean  ?  (J.  W. 
h'ardsley .)  Ministers  must  seek  to  produce  conviction  of  sin  : — A  devoted  minister 
relates  the  following:  "A  friend  of  mine  was  visiting  a  dying  carter,  and  said  to 
him,  '  My  friend,  do  you  feel  yourself  a  sinner  ?  '  '  I  do  not  know  that  I  am,'  was 
the  reply  ;  '  I  suppose  I  am  like  other  people  ;  I  do  not  feel  very  bad.'  '  We  must 
get  that  point  settled,'  said  my  friend.  '  Let  me  ask  you  a  few  questions.  Have 
you  ever  taken  too  much  to  drink?  '  '  Well,  fellows  like  me,  you  know,  are  likely 
to  do  that  now  and  then,  out  as  we  are  in  all  weathers.'  '  I  am  not  asking  you 
about  the  weathers,  my  question  is,  Hare  you  done  this  ?  '  '  Yes,  I  have.'  '  Have 
you  ever  sworn  ? '  '  Well,  we  carters  are  a  rongh  lot,  and  a  man's  temper  some- 
times  '     'Stop!  you   admit  that  you  have  sworn,  that  you  have  cursed,  and 

taken  God's  name  in  vain.  Did  you  ever  bieak  the  Lord's  day  ?  '  '  Well,  it  would 
be  difficult  for  us  carters,  busy  as  we  are  with  our  horses,  to  keep  the  Lord's  day.' 
'  Stop  !  here  are  three  things — drunkenness,  profane  swearing,  and  Sabbath-break- 
ing— that  you  admit  yourself  guilty  of.  How  can  you  say  that  you  are  not  a  sinner  ? 
You  must  take  your  place  as  a  sinner,  my  friend  ;  and  the  sooner  you  do  it,  the 
better.'  He  did  so,  and  found  mercy  and  pardon  through  the  atoning  blood  of 
Christ."  It  is  of  no  use  for  men  to  deny,  or  try  to  explain  away,  the  fact  of  their 
sinfulness ;  they  will  never  take  their  true  place  until  they  do  so  as  sinners  in  the 
sight  of  God.  The  difficulty  of  knowing  aright  one's  true  spiritual  state: — A 
young  lady,  who  was  under  concern  of  soul,  said  to  Dr.  Nettleton :  "  I  certainly  do 
desire  to  be  a  Christian.  I  desire  to  be  holy.  I  would  give  all  the  world  for  an 
interest  in  Christ."  "What  you  say  will  not  bear  examination,"  said  Dr.  Nettle- 
ton.  "  If  you  really  desire  religion  for  what  it  is,  there  is  nothing  to  hinder  you 
from  possessing  it.  I  can  make  a  representation  which  will  show  you  your  heart, 
if  you  are  willing  to  see  it."  "I  am,"  she  replied.  "It  will  look  very  bad,"  said 
Dr.  N.,  "  but  if  you  are  willing  to  see  it,  I  will  make  the  representation.  Suppose 
you  were  a  young  lady  of  fortune ;  and  suppose  a  certain  young  man  should  desire 
to  possess  your  fortune,  and  should,  for  that  reason,  conclude  to  pay  his  addresses 
to  you.  But  he  does  not  happen  to  be  pleased  with  your  person.  He  does  not  love 
you,  but  hates  you.  And  suppose  he  should  come  to  you,  and  say,  '  I  really  wish  I 
could  love  you,  but  I  do  not.  I  would  give  all  the  world  if  I  could  love  you ;  but  I 
cannot.'  What  would  you  think  of  that  young  man?"  We  may  readily  guess 
the  confusion  and  silence  to  which  she  was  brought,  by  this  faithful  exposure  of 
the  deception  which  she  had  practised  upon  herself.  (Sword  and  Trowel.) 
Sinners  ought  to  he  willing  to  know  tlieir  true  state : — A  man  once  said  this  to  Dr. 
Nettleton,  "I  sincerely  desire  to  be  a  Christian.  I  have  often  gone  to  the  house  of 
God,  hoping  that  something  which  should  be  said  might  be  sent  home  to  my  mind 
by  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  be  blessed  to  my  salvation."     "You  are  willing,  then,  are 


CHAP,  xiii-l  LEVITICUS.  171 

* . ^_ 

you  not,"  said  Dr.  N.,  "  that  I  should  converse  with  you,  hoping  that  my  conversa- 
tion mny  be  the  means  of  your  conversion  ?  "  "I  am,"  was  his  reply.  "If  you 
are  wilUng  to  be  a  Christian,"  added  Dr.  Nettleton,  "  you  are  wiUing  to  perform  the 
duties  of  religion  ;  for  this  is  what  is  implied  in  being  a  Christian.  Are  \ou  willing 
to  peiform  these  duties  ?  "  "I  do  not  know  but  thati am,"  was  the  rather  doubtful 
reply.  "  Well,  then,  you  are  the  head  of  a  family.  One  of  the  duties  of  religion 
is  family  prayer.  Are  yon  willing  to  pray  in  your  family  ?  "  "I  should  be,"  he 
replied,  "if  I  were  a  Cbristian  ;  but  it  cannot  be  the  duty  of  such  a  man  as  I  am  to 
pray.  The  prayers  of  the  wicked  are  an  abomination  to  the  Lord."  "  And  is  it 
not,"  said  Dr.  Nettleton,  "  an  abomination  unto  the  Lord  to  live  without  prayer  ? 
But  just  let  me  show  you  how  you  deceive  yourself.  You  think  you  really  desire  to 
be  converted.  But  you  are  not  willing  to  be  convicted.  Just  as  soon  as  I  mention 
a  duty  which  you  are  neglecting,  you  begin  to  excuse  and  justify  yoiir-elf,  on 
purpose  to  keep  your  sin  out  of  sight.  You  are  not  willing  to  see  that  it  is  an  heinous 
sin  to  live  in  the  neglect  of  family  prayer.  How  can  you  expect  to  be  brought  to 
repentance  until  you  are  willing  to  see  your  sinfulness ;  and  how  can  you  flatter 
yourself  that  you  really  desire  to  be  a  Christian  while  you  thus  close  your  eyes 
against  the  truth?"  (Ibid.)  A  diseased  nature: — It  is  not  necessary  to  split 
hairs  over  the  doctrine  of  "  original  sin,"  nor  to  trip  against  stumblingblocks 
labelled  "  transmitted  iniquity,"  in  order  to  arrive  at  the  conclusion  that  man  as  he 
is  in  this  world  needs  moral  helps.  It  was  forcibly  said,  by  way  of  illustration,  that 
a  wolf  cub  has  probably  never  killed  a  sheep,  but  it  undoubtedly  will  if  it  lives  and 
has  a  chance — because  it  has  the  wolf  nature.  Man  does  not  need  to  look  outside  of 
his  own  heart,  if  he  be  honest,  to  know  that  he  has  in  his  nature  a  tendency  to  sin — 
that  he  needs  constraints  around  him  and  a  new  spirit  within  him  to  keep  him 
true  to  the  higher  life.  Sin  progressive  : — Amongst  many  other  diseases  that  the 
body  is  incident  unto,  there  is  one  that  is  called  by  the  name  of  gangrena,  which 
doth  altogether  aft'eot  the  joints,  against  which  there  is  no  remedy  but  to  cut  otf 
that  joint  where  it  settled,  otherwise  it  will  pass  from  joint  to  joint,  till  the  whole 
body  is  endangered.  Such  is  the  nature  of.  sin,  which  unless  it  be  cut  off  in  the 
first  motion,  it  proceedeth  unto  action,  from  action  to  delectation,  from  delight 
unto  custom,  and  from  that  unto  habit,  which  being  as  it  were,  a  second  nature,  is 
never,  or  very  hardly  removed  without  much  prayer  and  fasting.  {J.  Spencer.) 
The  power  of  one  sin  : — While  I  was  walking  in  the  garden  one  bright  morning, 
a  breeze  came  through  and  set  all  the  flowers  and  leaves  a-fluttering.  Now,  that  is 
the  way  flowers  talk,  so  I  pricked  up  my  ears  and  listened.  Presently  an  old  elder- 
tree  said:  " Flowers,  shake  off  your  caterpillars."  "Why?"  said  a  dozen  alto- 
gether, for  they  were  like  some  children  who  always  say,  "  Why  ?  "  when  they  are 
told  to  do  anything.  Bad  children,  those  !  The  eldfr  said  :  "  If  you  don't,  they'll 
gobble  you  up."  So  the  flowers  set  themselves  a-shaking,  till  the  caterpillars  were 
shaken  oil.  In  one  of  the  middle  beds  there  was  a  beautiful  rose,  which  shook  off 
all  but  one,  and  she  said  to  herself:  "Ob,  that's  a  beauty!  I'll  keep  that  one." 
The  elder  overheard  her,  and  called  out :  "  One  caterpillar  is  enough  to  spoil  you." 
"  But,"  said  the  rose,  "  look  at  bis  brown  and  crimson  fur  and  his  beautiful  black 
eyes,  and  scores  of  little  feet.  I  want  to  keep  him.  Surely  one  won't  hurt  me." 
A  few  mornings  after  I  passed  the  rose  again.  There  was  not  a  whole  leaf  on  her ; 
her  beauty  was  gone,  she  was  all  but  killed,  and  had  only  life  enough  to  weep  over 
her  folly,  while  the  tear  stood  like  dewdrops  on  her  tattered  leaves.  "  Alas  !  I  didn't 
think  one  caterpillar  would  ruin  me  !  "  "  If  the  plague  be  turned  into  lohite,  then 
the  priest  shall  pronounce  him  clean^^  : — At  first  sight  it  seems  strange  to  ordain  flint 
the  man  should  be  reckoned  clean  if  the  leprosy  were  out  upon  him  and  covered  him 
wholly.  The  reason,  however,  may  be — 1.  Natural.  2.  Moral.  If  natural,  then  it  is 
either  becnuse  the  leprosy  is  not  so  infectious  wh<^n  it  has  thus  come  all  out  on  the 
body,  the  hard,  dry  scurf  not  being  likely  to  spread  infection,  whereas  the  ichor  of  raw 
flesh  would  (see  Bn^i-ter) ;  or,  because  it  really  is  not  a  proper  leprosy  if  it  so  come 
out — it  is  a  salt  humour  cast  out  by  the  strength  of  the  man's  constitution,  and 
is  not  deep-seated.  It  is  rather  a  relief  to  the  constitution;  as  when  measles  or 
small-pox  come  out  to  the  surface  of  the  body,  recovery  is  hopeful.  If  it  was  for  a 
moral  reason,  then  it  seems  meant  to  teach  that  the  Lord  has  a  deep  abhorrence 
of  a  corrupt  nature — deeper  far  than  merely  of  corrupt  actions.  We  are  ever  ready 
to  take  home  the  guilt  of  evil  deeds,  but  to  palliate  the  evil  of  a  depraved  heart. 
But  the  Lord  reverses  the  case.  His  severest  judgment  is  reserved  for  inward 
depravity.  And  yet  more.  Is  it  not  when  a  soul  is  fully  sensible  of  entire  corrup 
tion  (as  Isa.  i.  5)  that  salvation  is  nearest  ?    A  complete  Saviour  for  a  complete 


172  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xm. 

sinner?  If  there  appeared  any  "raw  flesh,"  then  the  man  is  unclean.  For  this 
indicates  inward  disease — not  on  tlie  surface  only.  It  is  working  into  the  flesh. 
But  if  the  "  raw  flesh,"  turn  and  be  "  changed  into  white,"  then  it  is  plnin  that  the 
disease  is  not  gone  inwards  ;  it  is  playing  on  the  skin  only.  Let  him  stand,  there- 
fore, as  clean.  Perhaps  the  case  of  a  paidoned  man  may  be  referred  to  again  in 
this  type.  His  iniquity  comes  all  out  to  view,  when  it  is  thrown  into  the  fountain 
opened  ;  and  the  inner  source  of  it  is  checked.  The  seat  of  corruption  has  been 
removed,  Eut  if,  after  the  appearance  of  pardon,  the  man  turn  aside  to  folly  (if 
"raw  flesh"  appear),  he  is  to  be  counted  unclean.  If,  however,  this  turning 
aside  to  folly  be  checked,  if  this  backsliding  be  healed,  then  it  is  like  the 
"raw  flesh,"  turning  "into  white" — it  evidences  that  his  nature  is  sound — 
it  has  not  returned  to  its  state  of  thorough  depravity.  {A.  A.  Bonar.) 
Unclean,  unclean. — The  I  per  diseased: — Leper,  canst  thou  not  read  thy  case  here? 
Afflicted,  exercised,  tempted,  downcast  child  of  God,  dost  thou  not  see  thy  character 
here  described  by  an  inspired  pen  ?  1.  "  The  leper  in  whom  the  plague  is."  Is  sin 
your  plague  ?  Take  all  your  worldly  anxieties,  tie  them  uj)  in  one  bundle,  and  put 
them  into  the  scale ;  now  place  in  the  other  scale  the  plague  of  sin.  Which  scale 
goes  down  ?  If  you  are  a  spiritual  leper,  you  will  say,  "  Oh,  it  is  sin,  sin,  that  I 
sometimes  fear  will  be  a  millstone  to  drown  my  soul  in  hell."  And  canst  thou  find 
this  mark,  "  the  leper  in  whom  the  plague  is  "  ?  Is  not  this  a  very  striking  ex- 
pression, "  In  whom  "  ?  I  think  Paul  has  hit  the  matter  to  a  nicety  ;  and  well  he 
might,  for  he  wrote  as  a  man  who  knew  what  he  was  writing  about ;  be  says,  "The 
sin  that  dwelleth  in  me."  Sin  is  not  like  a  martin  that  builds  its  nest  under  the 
eaves,  which  sticks  to  the  house,  but  is  not  in  the  house.  Neither  is  sin  a  lodger  to 
whom  you  can  give  a  week's  or  a  month's  notice  to  quit ;  nor  is  it  a  servant  whom 
you  may  call  up,  pay  him  his  month's  wages,  and  send  him  about  his  business. 
No,  no.  Sin  is  one  of  the  family  who  dwells  in  the  house,  and  will  not  be  turned 
out  of  the  house — haunts  every  room,  nestles  in  every  corner,  and  like  the  poor 
ejected  Irish  of  whom  we  read,  will  never  leave  the  tenement  while  stick  or  stone 
hangs  together.  Is  not  this  the  case  with  you?  Does  not  sin  dwell  in  you,  work 
in  you,  lust  in  you,  go  to  bed  with  you,  get  up  with  you,  and  all  the  day  long,  more 
or  less,  crave,  design,  or  imagine  some  evil  thing?  Do  you  feel  sin  to  be  a  plague 
and  a  pest,  as  it  must  be  to  every  living  soul  ?  Then  are  you  not  something  of  a 
leper  if  the  plague  dwell  in  you?  2.  But  the  leper's  clothes  were  to  be  rent.  (1) 
This  was  a  sign  of  mourning.  Grief,  sorrow,  is  their  continual  portion  on  account 
of  the  lejjrosy  that  is  in  them.  (2)  Eending  the  clothes  was  also  a  sign  of  abhor- 
rence. Thus  "the  high  priest  rent  his  clothes,  saying.  He  liath  spoken  blasphemy," 
when  the  Lord  Jesus,  in  answer  to  his  question,  atiirmed  that  He  was  the  Sou  of 
God.  (3)  The  rent  clothes,  therefore,  of  the  leper  show  his  self-abhorrence  and 
self-loathing.  Seeing  the  holiness  and  purity  of  God  it  is  with  him  as  with  Job. 
"  I  have  heard  of  Thee  I'y  the  hearing  of  the  ear  ;  but  now  mine  eye  seeth  Thee. 
Wherefore  I  abhor  myself,  and  rej)ent  in  dust  and  ashes."  (4)  The  rent  clothes 
was  also  a  fifjure  of  a  rent  and  contrite  heart.  "  Ilend  your  hearts,"  says  the 
prophet,  "  and  not  your  garments  "  ;  implying  that  though  the  rent  garment  was  a 
flgure  of  a  rent  heart,  yet  the  outward  mark  was  nothing  without  the  inward  feeling. 
3.  But  the  leper  was  also  to  have  his  he  d  bare.  No  covering  from  God's  wrath 
was  allowed  him  ;  barehea'led  he  stood  exposed  to  the  winds  and  storms  of  heaven, 
bare  before  the  lightning's  flash.  And  does  not  this  represent  the  poor  sinner  with- 
out a  covering  before  God ;  sensible  that  he  is  amenable  to  God's  justice  and  eternal 
indignation  ?  4.  But  he  was  also  to  have  a  covering  on  his  upper  lip.  And  this  for 
the  same  reason  that  we  cover  the  mouth  of  the  grave — to  prevent  the  infection  of 
his  breatl).  If  he  covered  but  the  lower  lip,  the  breath  m'ght  come  forth.  Have 
you  ever  thought  and  felt  that  there  was  sin  enough  in  your  heart  to  infect  a  world? 
that  if  every  man  and  woman  in  the  world  were  perfectly  holy,  and  you  were  left 
freely  to  give  vent  to  every  thought  and  imagination  of  your  carnal  mind,  there  was 
sin  enougli  there  to  taint  every  individual?  It  is  so,  felt  or  not;  for  sin  is  of  that 
infectious  nature  that  tbere  is  enough  in  one  man's  heart  to  fill  all  London  with 
horror.  Ob,  when  a  num  knov\s  this  he  is  glad  to  have  a  covering  for  his  ujiper 
lip !  He  cannot  boast  then  of  what  a  good  heart  he  has,  nor  what  good  resolutions 
he  has  made,  or  what  great  performances  he  means  to  accomplish.  He  has  at 
times  a  very  Vesuvius  in  him,  and  wants  no  one  to  come  within  the  mouth  of  the 
crater.  If  a  man  has  a  covering  upon  the  upper  lip  he  will  not  boast  of  his  good- 
ne^'S.  5.  But  the  leper  was  to  have  a  cry  in  his  mouth.  That  cry  was  "Unclean, 
unclean."     It  was  a  warning  cry.     He  was  to  shout  to  the  passengers,  if  any  were 


CHAP,  xiii.]  LEVITICUS.  173 

/ • 

drawing  near,  "Unclean,  unclean;  come  not  near  me;  I  am  a  leper;  I  shall 
pollute  you ;  beware  of  my  breath,  it  carries  infection  with  it ;  touch  me  not ;  if 
you  touch  me  you  will  be  tainted  with  the  same  malady ;  beware  of  me  ;  keep  your 
distance;  stand  offl  "  Yes,  but  you  say,  "Come  ;  I  am  not  so  bad  as  that;  I  am 
religious,  and  holy,  and  consistent.  I  am  sure  I  need  not  cover  my  upper  lip  and 
cry,  Unclean,  unclean."  Oh,  no  ;  certainly  not.  You  are  not  a  leper.  You  have 
had  years  ago  a  rising,  or  a  boil,  and  at  the  priest's  direction  you  have  washed 
your  clothes  and  are  clean.  But  if  you  do  not  feel  to  be  a  leper,  there  are  those 
who  do  ;  and  such  do  cry,  and  ever  must  cry,  "  Unclean,  unclean."  And  if  they 
do  not  uncover  all  their  sores  to  men,  they  can  do  so  to  God.  6.  But  all  the  days 
wherein  the  plague  was  in  the  leper  he  was  to  be  defiled  ;  he  was  unclean.  Such 
is  a  spiritual  leper ;  defiled  by  sin ;  polluted  from  head  to  foot,  as  long  as  the 
leprosy  remains.  7.  But  v/hat  was  the  necessary  consequence  of  this  ?  "  He 
shall  dwell  alone."  A  solitary  religion  is  generally  a  good  religion.  God's  tried 
people  have  not  many  companions.  The  exercised  cannot  walk  with  the  unexer- 
cised ;  the  polluted  with  the  unpolluted  ;  the  sick  with  the  well ;  the  leper  with 
the  clean;  for  "how  can  two  walk  together  except  they  be  agreed?"  {J.  C. 
Philpot.)  Disease  and  sin  : — This  great  fact  that  a  disease  in  the  body  was 
typical  of  a  malady  in  the  soul  reminds  us  at  once  that  there  was  perfect  harmony 
between  the  body  and  the  soul,  between  things  spiritual  and  things  temporal, 
between  things  heavenly  and  things  earthly.  There  is  enough  of  the  harmony 
still  surviving  to  show  what  and  how  rich  it  once  was.  The  historical  statement 
in  this  chapter  is,  that  the  leprosy  overspread  the  whole  body,  till  it  became,  in 
language  used  by  one  of  the  prophets,  "  white  as  snow  "  ;  tlie  whole  physical 
economy  was  infected  with  its  deadly  poison.  And,  in  that  respect,  it  was  the 
type,  and  is  indeed  referred  to  in  the  New  Testament  as  the  type,  of  that  sin  which 
Ijas  infected  the  whole  soul  and  body  of  mankind.  Take  any  one  faculty  that  is 
within  us,  and  we  shall  find  on  it  the  great  leprosy,  or  taint,  or  moral  influence  of 
sin.  Man's  intellect  has  in  it  still  remaining  energies  that  give  token  of  what  it 
once  was ;  but  it  has  in  it  also  defects,  and  tremulousness,  and  weakness,  and 
paralysis,  that  indicate  that  it  is  the  subject  of  some  great  derangement.  I  need 
not  attempt  to  prove  that  the  heart  also  is  defiled.  Our  blessed  Lord  gives  the 
heart  its  faithful  character  when  He  says,  "  Out  of  the  heart  proceed  evil  thoughts, 
murder,  adultery,  and  such  like;  and  these  are  the  things  that  defile  a  man." 
Truly,  therefore,  and  justly  did  the  Psalmist  pray,  "Create  in  me  a  clean  heart, 
0  God  :  renew  a  right  spirit  within  me."  But  not  only  are  the  heart  and 
intellect  affected,  as  I  have  shown  you,  but  the  conscience  also  has  suffered,  and  is 
poisoned  by  the  universal  disease.  It  is  sometimes  overflowed  by  guilty  passions, 
it  is  sometimes  silent  when  it  ought  to  rebuke  them  ;  sometimes  quiescent  when  it 
ought  to  assert  its  original  authority,  and  sometimes  the  democracy  of  the  passions 
rises  in  fierce  array,  dethrones  the  monarch  that  ought  to  govern  them,  and  prompts 
man  to  pursue  the  infatuated  course  that  leads  to  his  ruin.  And  in  the  worst  of 
cases  this  power  of  conscience  is  often  perverted  to  the  wrong  side,  sanctioning 
the  sins  which  it  ought  to  abhor.  When  the  intellect  that  discerns,  the  heait  that 
loves  or  hates,  and  the  conscience  that  testifies  what  is  right  or  wrong,  are  thus 
infected,  truly  may  we  say  with  Isaiah,  "  The  whole  head  is  sick,  the  whole  heart 
is  faint,"  &c.  Were  the  tokens  and  the  evidences  of  the  assertion  I  have  made  not 
so  obvious  and  so  numerous  as  they  actually  are,  you  find  other  proofs  in  the  miser 
fixing  his  heart  upon  gold,  in  spite  of  the  decisions  of  intellect,  the  better  impulses 
of  the  heart,  and  the  rebukes  of  conscience.  You  find  the  drunkard  still  indulging 
in  his  cups,  notwithstanding  a  thousand  testimonies  within  and  without,  that  he  is 
ruining  soul  and  body.  You  find  the  Pharisee  robbing  widows'  houses,  and  making 
long  prayers  for  a  pretence.  You  find  the  very  religion  of  love  and  truth  corrupted 
into  the  religion  of  superstition,  of  hate,  and  a  lie.  So  depraved  and  fallen  is  man 
that  it  looks  that,  if  he  had  the  power,  he  would  turn  redemption  itself  into  a 
nullity,  or  into  a  curse.  There  is,  then,  on  all  sides  the  evidence  of  some  great 
derangement.  We  never  can  suppcise  we  were  made  so.  Disease  seems  to  us 
natural,  but  it  is  most  unnatural ;  error,  sin,  hate,  all  seem  to  us  normal  and 
ordinary,  but  they  are  really  altogether  the  reverse.  We  find,  on  tracing  the 
similitude  between  the  disease  which  is  here  mentioned,  that  the  leper  hud  to  be 
insulated  from  the  rest  of  the  world,  and  left  by  himself  to  get  rid  of  the  disease 
that  thus  separated  him.  So  the  sinner,  in  God's  moral  government,  must  be  for 
ever  separated  from  the  communion  and  company  of  the  holy,  if  he  continue  th<- 
subject  of  this  great  moral  malady — sin.     The  leper's  disease  was  so  bad  that  it 


174  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiii. 

was  incurable  by  human  means.  It  is  so  with  sin.  Like  tlie  leprosy,  in  the  next 
place,  sin  is  contagious.  The  characteristic  disease  of  the  Israelite  spread  from 
person  to  per^;ou,  from  house  to  house,  and  throughout  the  whole  land.  And  who 
needs  to  be  taught  that  "  evil  communications  corrupt  good  manners  "  ?  Who 
needs  to  learn  that  there  is  in  an  evil  word,  in  a  crooked  course,  a  contagious 
influence  that  is  distilled  upon  susceptible  and  sensitive  and  living  hearts  ?  In  the 
ancient  economy,  the  party  to  whom  the  leper  presented  himself,  was  not  the 
physician,  as  in  other  diseases,  but  the  priest.  And  this  shows  that  it  was  a 
disease  in  some  shape  intimately  associated  with  man's  guilt,  or  with  sin.  A  Jew 
of  old,  like  a  Gentile  now,  if  taken  ill,  applied  to  the  physician ;  but  when  infected 
with  this  great  typical  disease,  he  did  not  go  to  the  physician,  but  to  the  priest. 
But,  more  than  this,  even  the  priest  could  not  heal  him;  the  priest  had  no 
prescription  that  could  heal  him,  no  balm  that  could  remove  it.  All  that  he  could 
do  was  to  say,  "  You  are  healed,"  or  "  You  are  not  healed,"  or,  "You  are  advancing 
towards  convalescence,"  or  the  reverse.  The  priest  was  to  pronounce  him  clean, 
or  to  pronounce  him  unclean.  But  how  much  better  is  the  economy  under  which 
we  live  !  Our  High  Priest  can  not  only  pronounce  us  clean,  but  make  us  clean  ; 
He  can  not  only  say  tbat  we  are  justified,  but  He  can  justify  us  by  His  perfect 
righteousness,  forgive  us  by  His  atoning  blood,  by  His  sanctifying  Spirit,  through 
His  inspired  Word.     (J.  Gumming,  D.D.)  The  separating  injiuences  of  sin : — 

Any  one  who  has  visited  Jerusalem  may  have  seen  the  lepers  standing  d«y  by  day 
near  the  Jaffa  Gate  soliciting  alms  from  those  passing  the  threshold  of  the  city 
which  they  themselves  were  not  allowed  to  enter.  Most  travellers  who  have  either 
witnessed  this  painful  sight  or  visited  the  houses  of  the  lepers  at  the  Zion  Gate 
must  have  recalled  the  words,  "  Without  the  camp  shall  his  habitation  be."  No 
type  so  strikingly  brings  out  the  separating  influences  of  sin  as  that  of  leprosy ; 
telling  the  sinner,  in  no  uncertain  tones,  that  unless  his  sin  be  pardoned,  his  leprosy 
cleansed,  he  shall  never  enter  the  gates  of  the  heavenly  city.  Howels,  in  one  of 
his  sermons,  finely  says  that  when  Adam  sinned,  God,  having  locked  the  gate  of 
Paradise  to  prevent  the  entrance  of  men,  cast  the  key  into  the  very  depths  of  hell. 
There  it  lay,  and  man  must  for  ever  have  been  excluded — "  without  the  camp," 
the  place  of  God's  dwelling,  whether  typified  by  garden,  camp,  or  city,  must  his 
habitation  have  been— had  not  the  Son  of  God,  with  His  Father's  will  and  pleasure, 
wrought  our  deliverance.  As  He  stood  on  the  edge  of  the  fiery  abyss — the  wrath 
of  God  due  to  man's  sin — He  drew  back.  Again  He  looked  into  the  terrible  gulf. 
Then,  with  a  love  incomprehensible  were  it  not  Divine,  He  plunged  into  its  depths, 
found  the  key,  ascended  upon  high,  led  captivity  captive,  opened  the  gate  of 
Paradise  ;  and  now  the  kingdom  of  heaven  is  open  to  all  believers.  (/.  TV.  Burdsley, 
M.  A.)  Leprous  outcasts  in  England : — A.  gentleman  visiting  the  venerable  church 
of  St.  Mary's  in  the  village  of  Minster,  near  Kamsgate,  said  to  the  guide,  "  What 
means  this  hole  through  the  wall?"  "  That,"  replied  the  guide,  "recalls  a  fact 
which  is  full  of  interest  and  pathos.  In  the  twelfth  century  there  were  a  number 
of  lepers  in  the  neighbourhood.  You  will  understand,  of  course,  that  they  were 
obliged  to  live  by  themselves,  and  were  supported  by  charity.  Over  at  the  old  Abbey 
you  may  still  see  the  place  where  bread  and  other  food  was  passed  out  to  them. 
Being  unclean,  and  afilicted  with  a  horrible  and  incurable  disease  which  was  con- 
tagious, they  were  not  allowed  in  church,  or  to  come  in  contact  with  healthy 
persons,  so  they  had  no  way  of  taking  any  direct  part  in  the  worship  of  God.  Both 
as  to  soul  and  body  they  were  driven  out  from  all  intercourse  with  the  rest  of  man- 
kind. Yet  many  of  them  longed  for  some  sound  or  sight  that  might  comfort  them 
in  their  sad,  loathsome,  and  hopeless  condition.  Taking  pity  on  the  poor  creatures, 
the  monks  made  this  hole  in  the  wall,  so  that,  one  at  a  time,  they  could  see  the 
prie.sts  ministering  at  the  altar,  hear  the  music,  and  perhaps  a  few  words  of  the 
Mass.  Then  they  would  go  back  to  their  huts  and  caves,  trusting  that  in  heaven, 
if  not  on  earth,  they  might  be  free  from  the  dreadful  curse  under  which  they 
suffered.  That  is  why  this  hole  is  called  the  Leper's  Squint.  Poor  outcasts !  my 
heart  aches  to  think  of  them,  though  they  are  all  dead  and  gone  these  seven 
hundred  years." 

Vers.  47-59.  Leprosy  in  a  garment. — The  leprosy  of  garments : — I  do  not  suppose 
that  this  leprosy  of  garments  and  skins  was  just  the  same  disease  of  that  name 
which  attacked  the  human  system.  It  may  have  been  ;  and  one  may  have  some- 
times taken  it  from  the  other  ;  but  we  are  not  required  to  take  this  view.  It  is  enough 
to  understand  it  to  be  some  affection  of  woven  fabrics  bearing  a  general  resemblance 


CHAP.  XIII.]  '  LEVITICUS.  175 


to  a  leprous  affection  of  the  living  body.  As  the  life  and  comeliness  of  the  leper 
are  fretted  away  by  his  disease,  so  clothes  and  skins  are  affected  by  dampness, 
mould,  or  the  settling  in  them  of  animalcule,  fretting  away  their  strength  and 
substance.  Michaelis,  who  very  thoroughly  investigated  this  whole  subject,  speaks 
of  dead  wool,  that  is,  the  wool  of  sheep  which  have  died  by  disease,  as  particularly 
liable  to  damage  of  this  sort.  His  explanation  is,  that  it  li  Sis  its  points  and  breeds 
impurity  ;  and  that  when  made  into  cloth  and  warmed  by  the  natural  heat  of  the 
wearer,  it  soon  becomes  bare  and  falls  in  holes,  as  if  eaten  by  some  invisible  vermin. 
The  unsoundness  and  unhealthiness  of  fabrics  made  of  such  materials  were  thought 
so  serious  by  this  learned  investigator,  that  he  strongly  urges  the  interference  of 
legal  enactments  to  prohibit  the  use  of  such  wool  in  the  manufacture  of  cloths.  It 
is  evidently  to  some  such  affections  that  God  refers  in  these  laws  concerning  the 
leprosy  of  garments  ;  not  because  they  were  so  particularly  noxious  or  dangerous, 
but  for  typical  purposes.  The  proper  vindication  of  all  tbe^e  ceremonial  regula- 
tions is  tbeu'  lively  signification  of  moral  and  religious  ideas.  We  have  seen  that 
leprosy  in  the  living  body  represents  sin  as  it  lives  and  works  in  man.  Leprosy  in 
clothing  must  therefore  refer  to  disorder  and  contagion  around  man.  There  is 
disease  breeding  in  everything  about  us,  as  well  as  in  us.  Jude  speaks  of  "  the 
garment  spotted  by  the  flesh."  Christ  commends  a  few  names  in  Sardis  because 
they  bad  "not  defiled  their  garments."  The  leference  in  these  and  like  passages 
plainly  is  to  the  matter  of  external  contact  with  the  world,  and  to  the  liability  of 
Christians  to  be  tainted  by  their  earthly  surroundings.  The  phraseology,  however, 
is  borrowed  from  these  ancient  laws.  It  contemplates  the  associations  of  a  man  as 
his  clothing.  Morally  speaking,  the  state  of  things  in  which  we  live  is  our  garment. 
It  is  that  which  is  put  upon  us  when  we  come  into  life,  which  we  continually  wear 
while  in  the  world,  and  which  we  put  off  when  we  die.  It  includes  all  the  circum- 
stances in  which  we  are  placed,  the  business  in  which  we  engage,  the  social  systems 
under  which  we  act,  our  comforts  and  associations  in  the  world,  and  all  the  out- 
ward every-day  occurrences  which  enter  into  and  shape  our  external  existence. 
You  will  notice  that  these  laws  do  not  prohibit,  but  rather  enjoin,  the  use  of 
clothing.  Toil  is  good  ;  and  family  relations  are  good ;  and  society  in  all  its 
complex  and  varied  affairs  is  good.  We  cannot  sever  ourselves  from  anything 
which  it  imposes  without  interfetence  with  God  and  detriment  to  ourselves.  But 
whilst  all  these  natural  surroundings  are  good,  they  are  liable  to  disease,  and  may 
become  the  sources  of  infection  and  evil.  They  may  become  tainted,  and  so  help 
to  render  us  unclean.  Society  is  as  capable  of  corruption  as  the  individual ;  and 
with  this  augmentation  of  mischief,  that  it  reacts  upon  the  individual,  and  may 
contaminate  and  deprave  him  still  more  than  he  would  otherwise  be.  The  fact  is, 
that  our  social  factors  have  introduced  a  great  deal  of  dead  wool  into  the  fabrics 
which  men  in  this  world  are  compelled  to  wear.  Take  the  subject  of  government. 
Civil  rule  is  ordained  of  God.  It  is  meant  for  good.  And  when  framed  upon 
principles  of  righteousness,  earth  knows  no  higher  blei-sing.  It  is  a  defence  tor 
the  weak,  a  restraint  upon  outbreaking  passion,  a  handmaid  to  social  dignity,  the 
bulwark  of  freedom,  the  grand  regulator  of  the  outward  world.  And  yet,  how 
leprous  has  government  often  become  !  What  curses  has  it  infiicttd  upon  man  !  It 
has  been  breeding  leprosy  and  plague  for  six  thousand  years.  And  not  the  least 
among  its  dreadful  contaminations  has  been  its  deleterious  effects  upon  the  virtue 
of  mankind.  An  arbitrary  and  tyrannical  government  cripples  and  stunts  morality 
in  its  very  germ,  by  divesting  goodness  of  its  proper  reward,  and  making  justice 
yifld  to  the  bribes  of  power  and  gain.  It  makes  outward  authority  or  sordid 
passion,  instead  of  inward  conviction  and  moral  principle,  the  rule  of  conduct. 
Take  the  domestic  relations.  God  saw  that  it  was  not  good  for  the  man  to  be  alone. 
He  has  set  mankind  in  families.  He  has  ordained  the  home,  and  made  it  the  seat 
and  centre  of  the  mightiest  influences  that  work  in  society.  ^  et,  how  often  may 
we  find  the  leprous  jDlague  fretting  into  the  warp  and  woof  of  the  domestic  fabric, 
and  forming  a  moral  atmosphere  about  the  plastic  souls  of  infancy  and  childhood, 
more  awful  than  upas  shades  and  more  desolating  than  Lybian  siroccos  !  Take 
business.  It  is  necessary  to  en;.age  in  it.  God  himself  commands  it.  Virtue,  and 
religion,  and  even  earthly  comfort,  require  it.  But  how  liable  to  become  corrupt, 
and  a  mere  instrument  of  death.  The  commercial  world  is  a  very  trying  world 
upon  the  health  of  honour  and  honesty.  Take  education  and  literature.  We  must 
have  schools  and  books.  They  are  an  indispensable  part  of  the  great  machinery  of 
human  progress.  But  they  are  apt  to  become  leprous,  and  to  impart  contagion. 
Oh,  what  a  power  of  mischief  has  gone  out  upon  the  world  from  schools  and  books. 


176  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ch-^p.  xiii. 

How  has  Genius  descended  from  the  altars  of  Heaven,  to  light  her  torch  at  tho 
flames  below !  Dead  wool  is  in  much  of  the  cloth  she  wears.  Take  even  the 
Church.  By  it  redemption  is  conveyed  to  men;  and  outside  of  it  man  has  no 
Saviour  and  no  hope.  And  yet  it  is  one  of  those  garments  around  us  which  are 
liable  to  leprous  taint.  Instead  of  serving  as  a  house  of  prayer,  it  has  sometimes 
been  a  mere  den  of  thieves.  Instead  of  a  nursery  of  failh,  hope,  and  charity,  it 
has  often  been  a  nest  for  pestilential  superstition,  narrow  self-righteousness,  and 
iiitolefant  bigotry.  But  I  need  not  enter  further  into  specifications  of  this  sort. 
You  can  see  plainly  that  nothing  around  us  in  this  world  is  so  holy  or  so  good  but 
that  it  may  be  perverted  to  base  uses,  and  rendered  the  instrument  of  contamina- 
tion and  exclusion  from  the  camp  of  God's  saints.  And  whilst  we  continue  upon 
the  earth,  not  one  of  us  shall  ever  be  able  to  escape  liability  to  become  leprous  from 
the  social  influences  which  hang  upon  and  beset  us  continually.  Having  thus 
looked  at  the  disorder,  let  us  now  direct  our  attention  to  the  prescriptions  con- 
cerning it.  1.  The  first  thing  I  notice  here  is  that  God  set  every  Israelite  on  the 
lookout  for  it.  This  must  necessarily  have  been  the  direct  effect  of  the  announce- 
ment of  these  laws.  Every  article  of  clothing  was  at  once  thrown  under  suspicion. 
Now  there  is  a  kind  of  suspiciousness  which  I  would  not  encourage.  There  is  an 
affection  arising  from  a  bad  conscience  or  a  bad  heart — a  feeling  closely  akin  to 
ugly  jealousy,  which  mistrusts  everything  and  everybody.  It  is  just  the  contrary 
of  that  charity  which  "  believeth  all  things,  hopeth  all  things."  And  the  farther 
any  one  can  keep  himself  from  it  the  better  for  his  own  comfort,  and  for  the  good 
of  those  around  him.  But  there  is  a  suspiciousness  which  is  good.  It  mingles 
with  the  deepest  piety  and  goes  along  with  the  greatest  usefulness.  But  it  is  a 
suspicion  of  self  rathei  than  a  suspicion  of  others.  It  is  a  jealousy  for  one's  own 
purity — a  holy  fear  of  doing  wrong  or  of  being  led  into  evil.  It  is  a  diligent  watch- 
fulness over  self — a  careful  guarding  against  the  contaminations  of  evil.  It  is  a 
suspiciousness  based  upon  the  clear  evidence  that  everything  is  liable  to  corruption, 
and  that  there  is  continual  danger  of  falling  into  condemnation.  It  is  a  sacred 
dread  of  sin — the  desire  of  a  pure  heart  to  "keep  unspotted  from  the  world."  It 
sets  a  man  upon  the  lookout  for  dangers  in  all  his  earthly  surroundings.  2.  A 
second  particular  in  this  law,  to  which  I  will  call  your  attention,  is,  that  whenever 
any  symptoms  appeared  which  might  perhaps  be  leprous,  the  case  was  always  to  be 
immediately  submitted  to  the  judgment  of  the  priest.  The  priest  typified  Christ; 
and  his  office,  the  office  of  Christ.  And  a  great  Christian  lesson  here  comes  to  our 
view.  Human  judgment  is  weak.  The  wisest  of  men  has  said,  "  He  that  trusteth 
to  his  own  heart  is  a  fool."  We  need  light  from  heaven.  Jesus  is  the  only  reliable 
arbiter.  There  are  many  instances  in  which  nothing  can  guide  us  safely  but  His 
own  decisive  Word.  And  this  law  pointed  forward  to  the  fact  that  Christ  is  our 
Teacher  and  Judge — that  He  is  to  be  our  authoritative  Instructor — and  that  by  His 
decision  we  are  to  know  what  is  not  pure.  3.  A  third  particular  in  these  laws 
relates  to  the  treatment  which  a  garment  declared  to  be  leprous  was  to  receive. 
This  varied  somewhat  with  the  nature  of  the  symptoms.  If  the  affection  was  active 
and  rapid  in  its  progress,  the  article  was  at  once  to  be  burned,  "  whether  warp  or 
woof,  in  woollen  or  in  linen,  or  anything  of  skin."  It  mattered  not  how  valuable 
the  article  was,  or  how  great  the  inconvenience  of  its  loss,  it  was  to  be  destroyed 
by  fire.  We  are  bound,  as  Christians,  at  once  to  cut  loose  for  ever  from  ever\  thing 
infected.  If  the  affection,  however,  was  not  active  and  fretting,  remedial  measures 
were  to  be  adopted,  if  possible,  to  cleanse  and  save  the  garment.  The  natural 
remedy  for  defilement  was  to  be  applied.  And  here  comes  in  the  whole  subject  of 
reform.  This  is  the  natural  remedy  for  all  manageable  social  disorders.  I  say  all 
manageable  ones  ;  for  as  some  garments  were  so  badly  aiJected  as  to  be  doomed  at 
once  to  burning,  so  there  are  some  infections  in  the  surroundings  of  man  in  this 
world  which  never  can  he  healed.  Take,  for  instance,  some  of  our  popular  amuse- 
ments. That  they  are  leprous  none  will  deny.  What  hope  is  there  of  reforming 
them?  Theirs  is  "  a  fret  inward,"  and  there  is  no  help  for  them.  No  washing  can 
get  them  clean.  And  the  only  alternative  tor  Christians  is  to  separate  themselves 
from  them  entirely.  These,  and  such  like  infected  articles,  are  past  cleansing.  But 
there  are  others  in  which  the  taint  is  less  malignant  and  less  defiling.  These  are 
the  legitimate  subjects  of  Christian  reform.  There  are  many  abuses  in  society 
which  may  be  corrected.  To  this  end,  therefore,  are  our  energies  to  be  directed. 
But  there  is  one  very  important  peculiarity  to  be  observed  in  all  Christian  reforms. 
The  washing  of  the  infected  garment  was  to  be  done  by  direction  of  the  priest. 
'♦The  priest  shall  command  that  they  wash  the  thing  wherein  the  plague  is." 


CHAP.  XIV.]  LEVITICUS.  177 

Christ's  Word  is  to  be  our  guide  for  getting  rid  of  social  disorders,  as  well  as  for 
the  detection  of  them.  He  is  our  Priest,  and  we  must  conduct  our  cleansing  effoi  ts 
upon  the  basis  of  His  gospel.  Finilly,  along  with  the  washing  of  a  leprous 
garment,  it  was  to  be  shut  up  seven  days,  after  which  the  priest  was  to  examine  it 
again ;  and  if  the  bad  symptoms  had  disappeared  it  was  to  be  washed  again,  and  it 
was  clean ;  but  if  the  symptoms  had  not  disappeared,  it  was  then  to  be  finally  torn 
or  burned.  A  vivid  picture,  this,  of  God's  plans  with  the  social  fabrics  of  this  world. 
Some,  in  which  the  disorder  was  great,  have  already  been  quite  destroyed.  Others, 
in  which  the  affection  is  less  malignant,  are  undergoing  the  efforts  of  purification. 
They  are  shut  up  now  until  time  shall  complete  its  period.  The  great  High  Priest 
and' Judge  shall  then  come  forth  to  give  them  the  last  inspection.  And  as  things 
then  are,  so  shall  their  eternal  portion  he..  (J.  A.  Seus,  D.D.)  The  diffusiveness 
of  sin: — We  are  told  t'at  one  gram  ^f  iodine  will  give  colour  to  seven  thousand 
times  its  own  weight  of  water,  and  one  grain  of  poisoned  literature  will  give  a 
colouring  to  all  the  threescore  and  ten  years  of  a  man's  life,  and  to  his  character 
and  power,  we  know  not  to  what  extent.  Lord  Shaftesbury  speaks  of  it  as  poison. 
He  reminds  me  of  an  incident  that  occurred  in  a  town  in  which  I  lived  and  laboured. 
In  the  manufacture  of  some  lozenges,  arsenic,  instead  of  some  comparatively 
harmless  compound,  had  been  mixed  up,  and  they  were  sold  in  the  market.  It  was 
ascertained,  in  the  course  of  a  day  or  two  after,  what  had  been  done,  and  all  who 
had  purchased  them  were  warned.  Many  had  bought  them  and  died  at  the  time, 
and  a  panic  of  grief  spread  through  the  town.  But  there  were  some  who  did  not 
die ;  it  did  not  kill  them  ;  but  they  never  lived — that  is,  there  was  no  real  life  about 
them  ;  the  very  fountain  of  their  life-blood  was  poisoned,  and  you  could  tell  by  the 
paUid  cheek,  and  the  lack-lustre  eye,  and  the  feeble  brain,  and  the  sluggish  existence 
that  it  was  not  life.  They  were  young  as  to  years,  some  of  them,  but  half-palsied, 
and  feeble  and  old^hey  were  poisoned.  Oh,  there  are  men  and  women  living  in 
this  London  to-day  whom  the  poison  of  literature  has  not  killed  altogether,  and  still 
they  are  not  living;  the  very  fountain  of  their  life  is  poisoned,  and  they  carry  it 
about  with  them,  Hud  bear  its  curse  within  them  ;  and  still  wherever  you  go  you 
see  it.     (J.  P.  Chown.) 


CHAPTER  XIV. 


Vees.  2-32.  The  law  of  the  leper  in  the  day  of  his  cleansing. — Cleansing  the 
leper: — I.  The  disease.  1.  Its  peculiar  designation.  Leprosy  the  "plague  of 
boils"  (Dent,  xxviii.),  which  applies  very  forcibly  to  sin.  2.  Its  distinguishing 
characteristics.  Small  in  appearance;  so  in  a  vicious  course  of  life.  It  gradually 
spread,  as  does  sin  spread  over  all  the  powers  and  faculties  of  a  man.  3.  Its  per- 
nicious consequences.  The  malady  was  injurious  to  society,  as  being  infectious  and 
pernicious  ;  to  the  person  himself,  e-vcluding  him  from  all  society,  civil  and  religions. 
So  sinners  corrupt  others,  while  their  abominable  ways  shut  them  from  the  com- 
munion of  the  faithful.  II.  The  cuke  of  the  disease.  1.  No  human  mean^ 
could  be  avaihng.  The  leper  would  gladly  have  cured  himself.  No  art  of  man  was 
effectual  (2  Kings  v.  7).  We  have  no  remedy  of  man's  devising  for  sin  (Eom.  vii. 
19,  24).  2.  If  the  leper  was  curerl,  it  was  by  God  alone,  without  the  intervention 
of  human  means  (Luke  xvii.  14 ;  Isa.  li.  7).  Nothing  was  prescribed  or 
attempted  for  the  removal  of  this  distemper.  And  none  but  God  can  remove  sin, 
&c.  (Rom.  vii.  10,  18 ;  Eph.  v.  9 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  2).  3.  But  the  cure  was  associated 
with  blood  and  water.  And  to  be  cleansed  from  the  leprosy  of  sin  we  must  have 
applied  the  blood  and  spirit  of  Christ  (1  John  i.  7 ;  Ezek.  xxxvi.  25).  III.  The 
coNFiKiiATioN  OF  THE  CURE  BY  THE  PEiEST.  1.  A  pcrson  was  Dot  to  be  prouounced 
clean  on  a  sudden.  The  priest  was  to  use  much  caution  and  deliberation.  Caution 
should  be  exercised  by  ministers  and  office-bearers  in  the  Church  towards  those  who 
are  candidates  for  fellowship.  2.  When  it  evidently  appealed  that  soundness  had 
been  imparted  to  his  disordered  body,  this  was  declared  with  due  solemnity.  Here 
we  see  the  pre-eminence  of  our  High  Priest ;  for  while  the  priest  merely  declared  the 
leper  healed,  He  most  effectually  heals.  Let  those  infected  with  the  leprosy 
apply  to  their  souls  the  Divinely  appointed  remedy ;  and  let  those  who  have  been 
cleansed  from  it  carefully  discharge  the  duty  enjoined  on  them.  (ver.  10,  &c.). 
{W.  Sleijh.)       The  leper  : — 1.  How  God  is  the  Author  of  plagues  and  diseases.   Not 

12 


178  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xnr. 

to  hurt  man,  but  to  help  him ;  for  man  being  afflicted,  is  humbled  ;  being  humbled, 
he  runs  to  Him  who  can  raise  him  up.  2.  That  sin  infects  men's  bodies,  garments, 
and  houses.  3.  Of  the  office  of  ministers,  in  visiting  the  sick  (ver.  44).  4.  Of  our 
cleansing  by  the  blood  of  Christ.  5.  Of  the  honourable  calling  of  physicians. 
They  should  be — (1)  Skilful.  (2)  Faithful  to  their  patient.  (3)  Eeligious,  referring 
all  to  God's  glory.  (4)  Not  covetnus.  (A.  Willet,  D.D.)  Lessons: — 1.  Regenera- 
tion must  be  total  in  every  part.  That  vicious  persons  be  not  with  too  great 
facility  reconciled.  3.  God  accepts  of  our  obedience  according  to  our  heart.  4.  To 
give  thanks  to  God  for  our  health.     (Ibid.)  The  leper  cleansed: — Although 

leprosy  was  not  curable  by  human  remedies,  it  did  not  always  continue  for  life.  It 
was  often  sent  as  a  special  judgment,  as  in  the  cases  of  Miriam,  Azariah,  and 
Gehazi,  The  Jews  generally  looked  upon  it  in  this  light.  Its  very  name  denotes 
a  stroke  of  the  Lord.  This  of  itself  rather  implies  that  it  may  cease  with  the 
repentance  and  forgiveness  of  the  smitten  offender.  It  was  the  anticipation  of  the 
healing,  of  at  least  some  persons  leprously  affected,  that  formed  the  basis  of  the 
provisions  here  laid  down.  They  constitute  "  the  law  of  tbe  leper  in  the  day  of  his 
cleansing  "  ;  and  if  there  was  no  possibility  of  cure,  there  was  no  use  of  this  law. 
You  will  observe,  however,  that  these  regulations  were  not  for  the  cure  of  the  leper, 
but  for  his  ceremonial  cleansing  after  tlie  cure.  The  disease  had  first  to  be  stayed, 
and  then  began  this  process  of  cleansing  off  all  its  lingering  effects  and  disabilities. 
I  therefore  take  the  deepest  intention  of  these  rites  to  be  to  illustrate  the  nature  of 
sanctification.  Justification  is  also  implied,  but  only  as  connected  with  sanctifica- 
tion.  1.  In  the  first  place,  it  is  presupposed  that  the  leper's  disease  had  been 
stayed.  And  this  healing  again  points  to  some  putting  forth  of  Divine  power  and 
gi-ace  quite  different  from  anything  here  brought  to  view,  and  far  anterior  to  the 
comujencement  of  these  services.  The  first  motion  of  our  salvation  is  from  God. 
It  begins  while  we  are  yet  in  the  very  depths  of  our  defilement  and  guilt.  "  While 
we  were  yet  sinners,  Christ  died  for  us."  A  full  and  free  forgiveness  of  all  our  sins 
is  provided.  And  the  only  remaining  requirement  is  to  "go  show  thyself  to  the 
priest,  and  offer  for  thy  cleansing,  according  as  Moses  commanded."  2.  The  leper, 
finding  his  leprosy  stayed,  was  to  go  to  the  judge  in  the  case  and  claim  exemption 
from  the  sentence  that  was  upon  him.  And  to  render  this  the  more  easy  for  him, 
the  priest  had  to  "  go  forth  out  of  the  camp  "  to  meet  him.  The  very  moment  the 
sinner  believes  in  the  healing  proclaimed  to  him  in  the  gospel,  and  sets  himself  to 
move  for  his  cleansiftg,  Christ  meets  him.  3.  And  when  the  healed  leper  thus  pre- 
sented himself  to  the  priest,  there  was  no  alternative  left.  He  had  to  be  pronounced 
cured.  And  so  Christ  hath  bound  Himself  to  acquit  and  absolve  every  sinner  who 
thus  comes  to  Him  in  the  strength  of  the  gospel  me-sage.  'J  here  is  no  further 
hindrance  in  the  way.  The  man  is  justified.  The  sentence  that  was  against  him  is 
rescinded  and  taken  away.  But  the  mere  absolution  of  the  priest  did  not  fully 
restore  the  leper.  Though  his  disease  was  stayed,  there  was  a  taint  of  it  remaining 
to  be  purged  off  before  he  could  join  the  camp  or  the  holy  services.  And  so  our 
whole  salvation  must  miscarry  if  it  does  not  also  take  in  an  active  holiness,  purifying 
our  hearts  and  lives,  and  transforming  us  into  the  image  of  our  Redeemer.  How  this 
sanctification  is  effected  is  what  we  are  now  to  consider.  I.  To  cleanse  the  recovered 
leper,  tbe  first  thing  to  be  done  was  the  peocueement  of  two  clean  birds,  the  one 

OF  WHICH  WAS  TO  BE  SLAIN,  AND    THE   OTHEE  TO  BE    DIPPED  IN  ITS  FELLOW'S  BLOOD   AND 

SET  AT  LiBEKTY.  Thcse  two  doves,  the  gentlest  of  all  God's  dentures,  at  once  carry 
our  thoughts  back  to  Christ  and  His  wonderful  history.  The  fate  of  the  one  t^hows 
us  how  He  was  mangled  for  human  guilt,  crushed  to  death  for  tlie  sins  of  others, 
and  brought  down  to  the  depths  of  the  earth.  The  other,  coming  up  out  of  the 
earthern  vessel,  out  of  the  blood  of  its  fellow,  shows  us  how  Jesus  rose  again  from 
the  rocky  sepulchre,  and  ascended  up  out  of  the  hand  of  His  captor  on  strong  and 
joyous  pinions  far  into  the  high  abodes  of  heaven,  scattering  as  He  went  the 
gracious  drops  of  cleansing  and  salvation.  The  introduction  of  these  birds,  in  this 
connection,  presents  a  great  theological  fact.  As  they  typify  Christ,  they  show  that 
our  sanctification,  as  well  as  our  justification,  proceeds  from  His  Cross  and  resur- 
rection.    II.  The  next  thing  to  be  done  for  the  cleansing  of  the  recovered  leper  was 

THE    ARRANGEMENT    AND    USE    OF    MEANS   TO   APPLY    THE    CLEANSING    OF    BLOOD.        Christ 

has  appointed  certain  instruments  and  agencies  to  conv<  y  to  us  the  purifying 
elements.  First  of  all  is  the  cedar  stem  of  His  Word,  durable,  fragrant,  and  instinct 
with  celestial  power  and  life,  speaking  through  all  the  visible  creation,  but  much 
more  distinctly  and  powerfully  in  the  written  Scriptures.  Along  with  this,  and 
fastened  to  it,  is  the  scarlet  wool  of  the  holy  sacraments,  absorbing,  as  it  weie,  the 


CHAP.  xiY.]  LEVITICUS.  179 

whole  substance  of  Christ  crucified,  and  performing  an  important  part  in  the  im- 
partation  of  the  same  to  our  souls.  And  along  with  this  scarlet  wool,  and  bound  to 
the  same  stem,  are  the  many  little  aromatic  stems  of  prayer,  with  the  sanctifying 
blood  running  out  and  hanging  in  drops  on  every  point,  ready  to  flow  upon  and 
cleanse  the  humble  worshipper.     III.  A  third  requirement  for  the  leper's  cleansing 

was,  THAT    HE    SHOULD  "WASH    HIS    CLOTHES,  AND    SHAVE    OFF    ALL    HIS    HAIR,  AND   WASH 

HIMSELF  IN  WATER."  This  was  his  own  work.  It  was  to  be  done  by  the  leper 
himself.  Its  spiritual  significance  is  easily  understood.  It  refers  to  the  sinner's 
repentance  and  reformation.  He  must  cleanse  himself  from  all  his  old  and  base 
surroundings.  He  must  separate  between  himself  and  everything  suspicious.  IV. 
But  there  is  another  particular  entering  into  this  ritual  cleansing.  After  everything 
else  had  been  done,  sacrifices  were  to  be  offered.  We  must  wash,  and  repent, 
and  reform  ;  but  it  avails  nought  without  blood.  Water,  the  purest  that  ever 
dropped  from  mossy  rock,  or  gushed  from  the  mountain  spring,  is  not  able  to 
cleanse  a  man  for  heaven.  Tears  of  repentance,  though  pure  as  those  which 
trickled  down  the  Saviour's  cheeks,  cannot  wash  out  the  stains  of  sin,  except  they 
be  mingled  with  the  blood  that  dripped  from  His  wounds.  And  no  moral  improve- 
ments can  entitle  us  to  eternity's  honours  if  they  are  not  connected  with  the  surety- 
ship and  sacrifice  of  Jesus.  The  source  of  all  sanctification  is  in  His  death  and 
resurrection.  All  the  glories  of  eternal  life  still  refer  us  back  to  Calvary.  Grace  in 
Christ  Jesus  commenced  the  work,  and  grace  in  Christ  Jesus  must  complete  it. 
The  only  peculiarity  which  I  notice  here  is  that  some  of  the  blood  and  oil  was  to  be 
touched  to  the  cleansed  leper,  tbe  same  as  in  the  consecration  of  the  priests.  It 
points  to  the  very  culmination  and  crown  of  Christian  sanctity.  The  blood  of  the 
trespass-offering  stands  for  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  the  holy  oil  for  the  Holy  Spirit. 
These  are  the  two  great  consecrating  elements  of  Christianity.  With  these  our 
High  Priest  approaches  us  through  the  gospel,  to  complete  our  cleansing  and  ordain 
us  to  the  dignities  and  duties  of  our  spiritual  calling.  V.  There  is  one  point  more 
in  these  ceremonies  to  which  I  will  call  your  attention.  I  refer  to  the  time  which 
THEY  required.  A  leper  could  by  no  possibility  get  through  with  his  cleansing 
under  seven  days.  One  day  was  enough  to  admit  him  into  the  camp  ;  but  seven  full 
days  were  requisite  to  admit  him  to  his  home.  There  was  therefore  a  complete 
period  of  time  necessary  to  the  entireness  of  his  cleansing.  This  arrangement  was 
not  accidental.  It  has  its  full  typical  significance.  It  refers  to  the  fact  that  no  one 
is  completely  sanctified  in  the  present  life  ;  and  that  a  complete  period  of  time  must 
ensue  before  we  reach  the  rest  to  which  our  cleansing  entitles  us.  We  have  attained 
unto  very  high  honours.  We  have  secured  very  exalted  privilegea.  But  everything 
has  not  yet  been  done,  and  all  our  disabilities  are  not  yet  removed.  Great  services 
yet  remain  to  take  place  when  the  seven  days  have  elapsed.  And  until  then  we 
must  patiently  wait.  The  influences  of  sin  still  linger  about  the  old  tenement,  and 
we  must  suffer  the  consequences  of  it  until  the  term  of  this  present  dispensation 
ends.  Then  shall  our  High  Priest  come  forth  again,  and  "  change  our  vile  bodies, 
and  fashion  them  like  unto  His  own  glorious  body."  The  last  lurking-places  of 
defilement  shall  then  be  cut  off.  The  last  act  of  the  leper's  cleansing  was  to  shave  off 
his  hair.  When  that  was  done  he  entered  upon  all  the  high  services  of  the  Taber- 
nacle, and  went  to  his  home  a  saved  man.  {J.  A.  Seiss,  D.D.)  Cere7)ionies  on 
recovery  of  the  leper : — First  of  all,  "  he  shall  be  brought  unto  the  priest ;  and  the 
priest  shall  go  forth  out  of  the  camp,"  and  see  him  ;  and  then  the  priest,  when  he 
finds  that  he  is  clean,  shall  pronounce  him  clean.  Next  the  priest  was  to  take  "  two 
birds  alive  and  clean,  and  cedar- wood  and  scarlet,  and  h\ssop  :  and  the  priest  shall 
command  that  one  of  the  birds  be  killed  in  an  earthern  vessel  over  running  water." 
Now  it  seems  absurd  to  speak  of  an  earthern  vessel,  and  water  in  it  called  "  running 
water."  But  all  the  absurdity  is  taken  away  when  we  recollect  that  the  original  is 
"living  water."  It  is  the  same  expression  that  occurs  in  other  parts  of  Scripture, 
"  I  wiU  give  unto  him  living  water  " — "  It  shall  be  in  him  a  well  of  living  water." 
And  the  real  meaning  of  this  passage  is  "  fresh  water"  from  the  fountain,  and  not 
stagnant,  and  unfit  for  physical,  or  for  spiritual,  or  for  ecclesiastical  purposes. 
Then  it  has  been  supposed  that  the  one  bird  that  was  slain  was  meant  to  describe 
the  death  of  Christ ;  and  the  dismissal  of  the  other  bird,  after  being  di|  ped  in  the 
blood  of  the  slain  bird,  was  meant  to  be  a  type  and  prefiguration  of  the  resurrection. 
It  is  nowhere  in  Scripture  said  to  be  so,  but  it  is  obviously  typical  of  sucrifice ;  and 
no  one  sacrifice,  no  one  symbol,  could  set  forth  the  completeness  of  the  work  of 
Christ ;  and  therefore  many  symbols  may  have  been  employed  and  combined  to  set 
forth  that  great  and  blessed  act.    We  read,  then,  that  the  person,  after  this,  was  still 


180  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  xiv. 

to  present  an  offering  of  "  two  he-lambs,  without  blemish  " ;  and  to  remain  at  the 
door  of  the  Tabernacle  of  the  congregation  till  the  priest  had  offered  these ;  and  by 
this  he  was  to  have  access  to  the  congregation.  We  read  that  the  priest  was  to 
sprinkle  him  seven  times;  that  is,  comiiletely,  the  number  meant  to  denote  perfec- 
tion. He  was  also  to  touch  the  tip  of  his  right  ear,  to  denote  that  that  ear  should 
be  opened  only  to  all  that  was  pure.  He  was  also  to  touch  the  thumb  of  the  right 
hand,  to  teach  that  every  act  was  to  be  consistent  with  his  cbaracter.  And  upon 
the  right  foot,  to  show  that  he  was  to  walk  in  God's  ways,  which  are  ways  of 
pleasantness  and  of  peace.  So  that  the  man  should  feel — what  is  stated  by  the 
apostle  in  Eom.  xii. —  that  he  was  to  present  himself,  soul  and  body,  a  living  sacri- 
fice, acceptable  to  God  through  Jesus  Christ.  Now  the  language  employed  here — 
the  hyssop,  and  the  cedar- wood,  and  the  sprinkling — casts  light  upon  many  pass;iges 
in  the  Psalms,  and  those  passages,  again,  cast  light  upon  the  phraseology  of  the  New 
Testament.  "Ye  are  come  unto  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  Jesus."  We  read 
again, in  another  passage, of  "  the  sprinkling  of  His  blood,"  the  "blood  of  sprinkling." 
The  meaning  of  that  is,  just  as  the  life  of  the  turtledove,  the  lamb,  or  the  bird, 
was  sacrificed  by  the  shedding  of  its  blood,  and  typically  and  ecclesiastically,  or 
Levitically,  virtue  or  qualification  was  imparted  to  the  person  related  to  it ;  so  the 
efficacy  of  Christ's  death,  represented  by  His  blood — that  is,  the  atoning  efficacy  of 
it — is  to  be  applied  so  to  our  hearts  and  consciences  that  we  may  have  peace  witb 
God,  free  pardon  of  our  sins,  and  tbe  hope  of  an  inheritance  among  all  them  that 
are  sanctified.  (J.  Cumminij,  D.D.)  Do  not  forget  the  remedy : — Cecil  bad  been 
a  great  sufferer  for  years,  and  none  of  his  medical  friends  had  been  able  to  ascertain 
the  cause.  At  length  Mrs.  Cecil  was  told  of  a  physician  who  was  extremely  skilful 
in  intricate  cases,  and  whom  she  entreated  him  to  consult.  On  entering  the  phy- 
sician's room,  he  said,  "  Welcome,  Mr.  Cecil ;  I  know  you  well  by  character,  and  as 
a  preacher.  We  must  have  some  conversation  after  I  have  given  you  my  advice." 
Mr.  Cecil  then  described  his  sufferings.  The  physician  considered  a  moment,  and 
then  said,  "  Dear  sir,  there  is  only  one  remedy  in  such  a  case  as  yours  ;  do  first  try 
it ;  it  is  perfectly  simple,"  and  then  he  mentioned  the  medicine.  Mr.  Cecil,  fearing 
to  occupy  too  much  of  his  time,  rose  to  leave,  but  the  physician  said,  "  No,  sir,  we 
must  not  part  so  soon,  for  I  have  long  wished  for  an  opportunity  of  conversing  with 
you."  So  they  spent  half  an  hour  more,  mutually  delighted  with  each  other's 
society.  On  returning  home,  Mr.  Cecil  said  to  his  wife, "  You  sent  me  to  a  most  agree- 
able man — such  a  fund  of  anecdote,  such  originality  of  thought,  such  a  command 
of  language."  "  Well,  but  what  did  he  prescribe  for  you?"  Mrs.  Cecil  anxiously 
inquired.  There  was  a  pause,  and  then  Mr.  Cecil  exclaimed,  "  I  have  entirely  for- 
gotten the  remedy  ;  his  charms  of  manner  and  conversation  put  everything  else  out 
of  my  mind."  "Now,  young  men,"  said  Mr.  Cecil,  "  it  will  be  very  pleasant  for 
you  if  your  congregations  go  away  saying,  '  What  eloquence !  what  original 
thought !  and  what  an  agreeable  delivery  ! '  Take  care  they  do  not  forget  the  remedy, 
the  only  remedy,  Christ  and  His  righteousness,  Christ  and  His  atonement,  Christ  and 
His  advocacy."  {Memoir  of  Wm.  Marston. )  The  cured  and  uncured  : — Christ  cured 
the  demoniac,  the  paralytic,  the  leper.  He  took  the  most  chronic  and  complicated 
diseases,  and  they  could  not  stand  before  His  fiat.  To  one  He  said,  "  Be  thou  clean  " ; 
to  another  He  said,  "Take  up  thy  bed  and  walk";  to  another,  "Damsel,  arise  "  ;  and 
all  these  were  not  only  cured  as  to  the  body,  but  cured  as  to  the  sicknesses  of  the  soul. 
A  pastor  went  into  the  house  where  there  was  a  young  Chiistian  dying  in  great 
triumph.  He  entered  the  room  to  congratulate  her  as  she  was  about  to  enter  heaven, 
and  as  he  went  into  the  room  and  began  to  talk  cheerfully  about  the  joys  that  were 
immediat^-ly  before  her,  her  sister  left  the  room.  A  few  weeks  after  the  pastor  was 
called  to  the  same  house,  and  this  sister  who  had  left  the  room  was  about  to  take 
her  departure  into  the  eternal  world,  but  she  was  not  ready.  She  said  to  the  pastor, 
•'  You  don't  remember  me,  do  you  ?  "  "  Oh,  yes,"  he  replied,  "  I  remember  you." 
"  Do  you  remember  when  you  were  talking  to  my  sister  about  heaven  I  left  the 
room?  "  "  Yes,"  he  said,  "I  remember  that."  She  said,  "Do  you  know  why  I 
left  ?  "  "  No,"  he  replied,  "  I  don't."  "  Well,"  she  said,  "  I  didn't  want  to  hear  any- 
thing about  my  soul,  or  about  heaven,  and  now  I  am  dying.  Oh,  sir,  it  is  a  dreadful 
thing  to  die  !  "  Now,  what  was  the  dilference  between  those  two  sisters  ?  The  one 
was  perfectly  cured  of  the  terrible  disease  of  sin,  the  other  was  not.  [T.  Be  Witt 
Talmafic)  Christ  the  onlij  Healer: — Now,  children,  if  my  watch  has  lost  its 
mainspring,  where  shall  I  go  to  get  it  mended  ?  To  the  tailor's  ?  No.  To  the 
blacksmith's?  No.  To  the  watchmaker's?  Yes.  Why?  Because  he  makes 
Avatches,  and  knows  how  to  mend  them.     Now,  if  your  hearts  are  bad,  where  will 


CHAP.  XIV.]  '  LEVITICUS.  181 

you  go  to  have  them  healed  ?  To  your  parents  ?  No.  To  the  priest  ?  No.  To 
Jesus  Christ?  Yes.  Why?  Because  He  made  the  heart,  and  knows  how  to  heal 
it.  (lite  Church  Scholars'  Magazine.)  Christ  is  an  Almiiihty  Doctor : — Christ  is 
an  Almighty  Doctor.  At  midnight  a  sudden  disease  comes  upon  your  little  child. 
You  hasten  for  a  physician,  or  you  telegraph  for  the  doctor  as  soon  as  you  can,  and 
hour  after  hour  there  is  a  contest  between  science  and  the  King  of  Terrors.  And 
yet  you  stand  there  and  you  watch  and  you  see  the  disease  is  conquering  fortress  of 
strength  after  fortress  of  strength,  until  after  a  while  you  stand  over  the  lifeless 
form  aud  have  to  confess  that  there  is  a  limit  beyond  which  human  medicament 
cannot  go.  But  I  hail  at  this  moment  an  Almighty  Doctor,  who  never  lost  a  patient. 
Why,  a  leper  came  out  with  a  bandage  over  his  mouth  and  utterly  loathsome,  so 
they  (;lrove  him  out  from  all  society,  and  when  he  came  out  the  people  all  ran,  and 
Christ  ran.  But  Christ  ran  in  a  different  direction  from  the  people.  They  all  ran 
away  from  the  poor  man  ;  Christ  ran  towards  him.  And  then  a  second  leper  came 
out  with  a  bandage  over  his  mouth,  and  a  third,  and  a  fourth,  and  so  on  until  there 
were  ten  lepers,  and  I  see  Christ  standing  among  them.  It  is  a  dangerous  experi- 
ment, you  say.  Why,  if  you  c-iught  the  breath  of  one  such  man  as  that,  it  would 
be  certain  death.  There,  sublimely  great  in  goodness,  Christ  stood  among  the  ten 
lepers,  and  He  cured  the  first,  and  the  second,  and  the  t^nth.  [T.  De  Witt  Talmage.) 
Christ  can  remove  the  root  of  the  disease  of  sin  : — Some  time  ago  a  man  wished  to 
cut  down  a  tree  in  his  garden,  and  took  it  in  hand  to  do  it  himself.  Taking  a  spade, 
he  cleared  away  the  earth  from  the  roots,  and  laid  them  bare  for  the  axe.  He  hewed 
all  the  roots  and  suckers  he  saw,  and  then  pushed  and  pulled  at  the  tree,  but  it 
remained  as  firm  as  ever.  Going  to  his  gardener,  he  consulted  bim  about  it,  and 
his  reply  was,  "  Ah,  sir,  you  have  not  cut  the  tap-root.  You  may  hack  and  cut 
away  at  all  the  rest  of  the  roots,  but  unless  you  cut  it  the  tree  will  never  fall." 
There  are  hundreds  of  sin -sick  souls  who  persist  in  pruning  away  this  sin 
and   that    sin,   but    they   wilfully   refuse   to   cut    the   tap-root   of    sin.  Two 

birds. —  The  two  birds  considered  typically: — 1.  In  the  first  bird  let  us  see  the 
Saviour.  1.  The  bird  was  to  be  "clean."  Christ  perfectly  holy.  2.  A  bird's 
being  chosen  in  this  rite  may  point  us  whence  our  Saviour  came — from  heaven. 
3.  The  bird  was  slain.  Christ  tasted  death  for  us.  This  shows — (1)  The  evil  of 
sin.  (2)  The  certainty  of  its  punishment.  (8)  God's  unspeakable  love.  4.  As  to 
what  bird  it  was,  we  do  not  certainly  know,  but  commentators  tell  us  all  the  birds 
prescribed  by  Moses  were  common  and  accessible.  So  the  Saviour  is  not  far  off, 
but  near  at  hand.  5.  The  "  earthern  vessel "  reminds  us  of  the  Saviour's  humanity. 
And  the  fact  that  it  contained  not  only  blood  but  also  clear  water,  may  remind  us 
that  He  saves  by  His  Spirit  as  well  as  by  His  blood — that  His  salvation  includes 
sanctification  as  well  as  justification.  II.  Let  ns  see  in  the  other  bird  the  believeb. 
1.  That  the  Christian  is  represented  by  a  bird,  just  as  the  Saviour  is,  may  teach 
us — (1)  That  .Jesus  in  some  sense  makes  the  Christian  equal  to  Himself ;  and  (2) 
That  every  Christian  should  seek  to  be  Christlike  (see  1  John  iii.  4).  2.  That  the 
Christian  is  represented  by  a  clean  bird  teaches — (1)  That  the  man  who  believes  is 
justified  from  all  things ;  and  (2)  That  the  Christian's  effort  should  ever  be  after 
cleanness  of  character  as  well  as  of  condition.  3.  That  this  bird  was  dipped  in  the 
blood  of  the  slain  bird  shows  us  plainly  the  way  of  salvation — by  faith.  4.  That 
the  bird  on  being  dipped  was  then  let  loose  into  the  open  field,  teaches  the  blessed 
fi'eedom,  the  glorious  change  which  immediately  takes  place  on  a  man's  believing. 
5.  May  we  not  also  leirn  that  while  the  Christian  is  free,  yet  he  will  always  use 
his  liberty  as  the  bird  does,  not  to  sink  earthward,  but  to  soar  heavenward  ?  III. 
As  the  living  bird  seems  to  have  been  dipped  into  the  blood  of  the  dead  by  means 
of  a  cedar  staff,  to  which,  along  with  a  bundle  of  hyssop,  it  was  attached  by  a  band 
of  scarlet  wool,  we  take  this  staff  as  a  representation  of  the  gospel,  through  the 
foolishness  of  preaching  which  it  pleases  God  to  save  them  who  believe.  Doing  so, 
•we  learn  from  1  Kings  iv.  30,  that  cedar-wood  and  hyssop  were  regarded  as  the  two 
extremes  of  vegetable  creation  ;  and  so  the  gospel  is  (1)  adapted  to  the  two  extremes 
of  men  ;  (2)  addressed  to  the  highest  and  lowest ;  (.S)  to  the  best  and  the  worst. 
(D.  Jamison,  B.A.)  .  The  two  birds  : — As  in  all  the  Levitical  types,  so  in  this  case, 
at  the  very  entrance  on  the  redeemed  life  stands  the  sacrifice  of  a  life,  and  the 
service  of  a  priest  as  mediator  between  God  and  man.  Blood  must  be  shed  if  the 
leper  is  to  be  admitted  again  into  covenant  standing  with  God  ;  and  the  blood  of 
the  sacrifice  in  the  law  ever  points  to  the  sacrifice  of  Christ.  But  that  great  Sacri- 
fice may  be  regarded  in  various  aspects.  Sin  is  a  many-sided  evil,  and  on  every 
side  it  must  be  met.     As  often  repeated,  because  sin  as  guilt  requires  expiation. 


182  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ctiap.  xiv. 

hence  the  type  of  the  sin-offering ;  in  that  it  is  a  defrauding  of  God  of  His  just 
rights  from  us,  satisfaction  is  required,  hence  the  tjpe  of  the  guilt-offering;  as 
it  is  absence  of  consecration,  life  for  self  instead  of  life  for  God,  hence  the  type 
of  the  burnt-offering.  And  yet  the  manifold  aspects  of  sin  are  not  all  enumerated. 
For  sin,  again,  is  spiritual  death ;  and,  as  death,  it  involves  corruption  and 
defilement.  It  is  with  special  reference  to  this  fact  that  the  work  of  Christ  is 
brought  before  us  here.  In  the  clean  bird,  slain  that  its  blood  may  be  apiilied 
to  the  leper  for  cleansing,  we  see  typified  Christ,  as  giving  Himself,  that  His 
very  life  may  be  imparted  to  us  for  our  life.  In  that  the  blood  of  the  bird  is- 
mingled  with  water,  the  symbol  of  the  Word  of  God,  is  symboHsed  the  truth,  that 
with  the  atoning  blood  is  ever  inseparably  united  the  purifying  energy  of  the  Holy 
Ghost  through  the  Word.  Not  the  water  witbout  tlie  blood,  nor  the  blood  without 
the  water,  saves,  but  the  blood  with  the  wnter,  and  the  water  with  the  blood  (1  John 
v.  6).  But  the  type  yet  lacks  something  for  c-mpleteness  ;  and  for  this  reason  we 
have  the  second  bird,  who,  when  by  his  means  the  blood  has  been  sprinkled  on  the 
leper,  and  the  man  is  now  pronounced  clean,  is  released  and  flies  away  heavenward. 
Wlmt  a  beautiful  symbol  of  that  other  truth,  witbout  which  even  the  atonement  of 
the  Lord  were  nought,  that  He  who  died,  having  by  that  death  for  us  procured  our 
life,  w-as  then  released  from  the  bonds  of  death,  rising  from  the  dead  on  the  third 
day,  and  ascending  to  heaven,  like  the  freed  bird,  in  token  that  His  life-giving, 
cleansing  work  was  done.  Thus  the  message  whieh,  as  the  liberated  bird  flies 
carolling  away,  sweet  as  a  heavenly  song,  seems  to  fall  upon  the  ear  is  this  (Rom. 
iv.  25).  (S.  H.  Kellogg,  D.D.)  The  two  birds  .-—There  is  nothing  more  sugges- 
tive than  a  caged  bird.  In  the  down  of  its  breast  you  can  see  the  glow  of  southern 
eUmes.  In  the  sparkle  of  its  eyes  you  can  see  the  flash  of  distant  seas.  In  its 
voice  you  can  hear  the  song  it  learned  in  the  wild  wood.  It  is  a  child  of  the  sky  in 
coptivity.  1.  Now  the  dead  bird  of  my  text,  captured  in  the  air,  suggests  the  Lord 
Jesus,  who  came  down  from  the  realms  of  light  and  glory.  He  once  stood  in  the 
sunlight  of  heaven.  He  was  the  favoured  of  the  land.  He  was  the  King's  Son. 
But  one  day  there  came  word  to  the  palace  that  an  insignificant  island  was  in 
rebellion,  and  was  cutting  itself  to  pieces  with  anarchy.  I  hear  an  angel  say :  "  Let 
it  perish.  The  King's  realm  is  vast  enough  without  the  island.  The  tributes  to 
the  King  are  large  enough  without  that.  We  can  spare  it."  "  Not  so,"  said  the 
Prince,  the  King's  Son ;  and  I  see  Him  push  out  one  day,  under  the  protest  of  a 
great  company.  He  starts  for  the  rebellious  island.  He  lands  amid  the  execrations 
of  the  inhabitants,  that  grow  in  violence  until  the  malice  of  earth  has  smitten  Him, 
and  the  spirits  of  the  lost  world  put  their  black  wings  over  His  dying  head  and  shut 
the  sun  out.  The  hawks  and  vultui-es  swooped  down  upon  this  dove  of  the  text, 
until  head  and  breast  and  feet  ran  blood — until,  under  the  flocks  and  beaks  of  dark- 
ness the  poor  thing  perished.  No  wonder  it  was  a  bird  taken  and  slain  over  ao 
earthern  vessel  of  running  water.  It  ^vas  a  child  of  the  skies.  It  typified  Him  who 
came  down  from  heaven  in  agony  and  blood  to  save  our  souls.  2.  I  notice  also  in 
my  text  that  the  bird  that  was  slain  was  a  clean  bird.  The  text  demanded  that  it 
should  be.  The  raven  was  never  sacrificed,  nor  the  co'^norant,  nor  the  vulture. 
It  must  be  a  clean  bird,  says  the  text,  and  it  suggests  the  pure  Jesus,  the  holy 
Jesus.  Although  He  spent  His  boyhood  in  the  worst  village  on  earth,  although 
blasphemies  were  poured  into  His  ear  enough  to  have  poisoned  any  one  else.  He 
stands  before  the  world  a  perfect  Christ.  3.  I  remark  also,  in  regard  to  this  first 
bird,  mentioned  in  the  text,  that  it  was  a  defenceless  bird.  When  the  eagle  is 
assaulted,  with  its  iron  beak  it  strikes  like  a  bolt  against  its  adversary.  This  was  a 
dove  or  a  sparrow — most  probably  the  former.  Take  the  dove,  or  pigeon,  in  your 
hand,  and  the  pecking  of  its  beak  upon  your  hand  makes  you  laugh  at  the  feebleness 
of  its  assault.  Th^  reindeer,  after  it  is  down,  may  fell  you  with  its  antlers.  The 
ox,  after  you  think  it  is  dead,  may  break  your  leg  in  its  death  struggle.  The  har- 
pooned whale,  in  its  last  agony,  may  crush  you  in  the  coil  of  the  unwinding  rope. 
But  this  was  a  dove — perfectly  harmless,  perfectly  defenceless — type  of  Him  who 
said,  "I  have  trod  the  winepress  alone,  and  there  was  none  to' help.''  None  to 
help  !  The  murderers  have  it  all  their  own  way.  Where  was  the  soldier  in  the 
Roman  regiment  who  swung  his  sword  in  the  defence  of  the  Divine  IMartyr  ?  Did 
they  put  one  drop  of  oil  on  His  gashed  feet  ?  Was  there  one  in  all  that  crowd 
manly  and  generous  enough  to  stand  up  for  Him?  Were  the  mi.screants  at  the 
Cross  any  more  interfered  with  in  their  work  of  spiking  Him  fast  than  the  carpenter 
in  his  shop  driving  a  nail  through  a  pine  board  ?  The  women  cried,  but  there  was 
no  balm  in  their  tears.    None  to  help !  none  to  help !     4.  But  I  come  now  to  speak 


CHAP.  XIV.]  LEVITICUS.  183 

of  this  second  bird  of  the  text.  The  priest  took  the  second  bird,  tied  it  to  the 
hyssop  branch,  and  then  phinged  it  in  the  blood  of  the  first  bird.  Ah,  that  is  my 
soul  plunged  for  cleansing  in  the  Saviour's  blood.  Theie  is  not  enough  water  in 
the  Atlantic  and  Pai-itic  oceans  to  wash  away  our  smallest  sin.  Sin  is  such  an 
outrage  on  God's  universe  that  nothing  but  blood  can  atone  for  it.  You  know  the 
life  is  in  the  blood,  and  as  the  life  had  been  forfeited,  nothing  could  buy  it  back  but 
blood.  What  was  it  that  was  sprinkled  on  the  door-post  wheu  the  destroying  angtl 
went  through  the  land?  Blood.  What  was  it  that  went  streaming  from  the  altar 
of  ancient  sacrifice  ?  Blood.  Wliat  was  it  that  the  priest  carried  into  the  Holy  of 
Holies,  making  intercession  for  tlie  people  ?  Blood.  What  was  it  that  Jesus  sweat 
in  the  Garden  of  Gethsemane  ?  Great  drops  of  blood.  What  does  the  wine  in  tbe 
sacramental  cup  signify  ?  Blood.  What  makes  the  robes  of  the  righteous  in 
heaven  so  fair?  "  They  are  washed  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb."  What  is  it  that 
cleanses  all  our  pollution  ?  "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ,  which  cleanses  from  all 
sin.''  5.  I  notice  now  that  as  soon  as  this  second  bird  was  dipped  in  the  blood  of 
the  first  bird,  the  priest  unloosed  it,  and  it  was  free — free  of  wing  and  free  of  foot. 
It  could  whet  its  beak  on  any  tree-branch  it  chose  ;  it  could  pick  the  grapes  of  any 
vineyard  it  chose.  It  was  free.  A  type  of  our  souls  after  we  have  been  washed  in 
the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  We  can  go  where  we  will.  We  can  do  what  we  will.  You 
say,  "  Had  you  better  not  qualify  that?  "  No  ;  for  I  remember  iu  conversion  the 
will  is  changed,  and  the  man  will  not  will  that  which  is  wrong.  6.  The  next  thing 
I  noticed  about  this  bird,  when  it  was  loosed — and  that  is  the  main  idea — is,  that  it 
flew  away.  Which  way  did  it  go  ?  When  you  let  a  bird  loose  from  your  grasp 
which  way  does  it  fly  ?  Up.  What  are  wings  for?  To  fly  with.  We  should  be 
going  heavenward.  That  is  the  suggestion.  But  I  know  that  we  have  a  ^reat  many 
drawbacks.  You  had  them  yesterday,  or  the  day  before  ;  and  although  you  want 
to  be  going  heavenward,  you  are  constantly  discouraged.  But,  I  suppose,  when 
that  bird  went  out  of  the  priest's  hands,  it  went  by  inflections— sometimes  stooping. 
A  bird  does  not  shoot  directly  up — but  Vhis  is  the  motion  of  a  bird.  So  the  soul 
soars  towards  God,  rising  up  in  love,  at^d  sometimes  depressed  by  trial.  It  does 
not  always  go  jnst  in  the  direction  it  would  like  to  go.  But  the  main  course  is 
right.  {T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)  Freedoniand  exultation  of  the  restored  life  : — Alas  for 
any  poor  beguiled  soul  that  turns  away  in  scorn  of  the  glorious  gospel  of  the  blessed 
God!  Ye  mistake  it  who  regard  it  as  a  summons  to  a  slavish  and  sorrowful  life. 
It  is  a  great  voice  out  of  heaven  crying,  "  Come  up  hither."  It  is  a  call  of  the 
radiant  dayspring  as  it  bursts  on  the  poor  bird  nestling  in  the  withering  grass, 
revealing  the  grandeurs  of  the  everlasting  firmament,  that  it  may  fly— fly — fly ! 
Let  me  teU  you  again  my  old  story  of  the  eagle.  For  many  months  it  pined  and 
drooped  in  its  cage,  and  seemed  to  have  forgotten  that  it  was  of  the  lineage  of  the 
old  plumed  kings  of  the  forest  and  the  mountain ;  and  its  bright  eye  faded,  and 
its  strong  wings  drooped,  and  its  kingly  crest  was  bowed,  and  its  plumes  were 
torn  and  soiled  amid  the  bars  and  dust  of  its  prison-house.  So  in  pity  of  its  forlorn 
life  we  carried  its  cage  out  to  tbe  open  air,  and  broke  the  iron  wire  and  flung  wide 
the  lowly  door  ;  and  slowly,  falteringly,  it  crept  forth  to  the  sultry  air  of  that  cloudy 
summer  noon  and  looked  listlessly  about  it.  But  just  then,  from  a  rift  in  an  over- 
hanging cloud,  a  golden  sunbeam  flashed  upon  the  scene.  And  it  was  enough. 
Tijen  it  lifted  its  royal  crest,  the  dim  eye  blazed  again,  the  soiled  plumes  unfolded 
and  rustled,  the  strong  wings  moved  themselves,  with  a  rapturous  cry  it  sprang 
heavenward.  Higher,  higher,  in  broader,  braver  circles  it  mounted  toward  the 
firmament,  and  we  saw  it  no  more  as  it  rushed  through  the  storm-clouds  and  soared 
to  the  sun.  And  would,  0  ye  wingf  d  spirits !  who  dream  and  pine  in  this  poor 
earthly  bondage,  that  only  one  ray  from  the  blessed  Sun  of  Eighteousness  might 
fall  on  you  this  hour !  for  then  would  there  be  the  flash  of  a  glorious  eye,  and  a  cry 
of  rapture,  and  a  sway  of  exulting  wings,  as  another  redeemed  and  risesi  spirit 
spraufi  heavenward  unto  God !  (C.  Wadsworth,  D.D.)  Blood-washed  Christians  : — 
It  is  .'^aid  in  Germany,  of  one  Prince  Henry,  when  a  little  boy,  that  he  had  a  great 
aversion  to  his  bath.  He  didn't  Uke  it,  and  cried  and  squealed  every  morning  when 
the  time  for  his  ablutions  came  round.  One  morning,  to  his  very  great  pleasure, 
the  nurse  said  he  need  not  have  it,  and  he  soon  took  to  showing  to  the  other 
children  how  he  had  conquered  the  nurse  to  his  royal  mother's  aggravation.  He 
went  out  for  a  walk  later  in  the  day,  and  when  he  entered  the  palace  gates  on  the 
return  journey,  the  sentinel  at  that  point  offered  him  no  salute,  and  that  had  never 
happened  before.  Being  a  prince  he  was  greatly  respected,  and  felt  proud  of  the 
salute  of  the  soldiers.      Coming  up  to  the  palace  door,  there  the  soldier  stood  on 


184  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cum:  xiv. 

guard,  but  no  salute  was  given.  The  little  boy  went  up  to  the  staiwart  sentinel 
quite  angry,  and  said,  "  Do  you  know  who  I  am  ?  "  "  Oh.  yes,  Prince  Henry ;  but 
we  never  salute  unwashed  princes."  He  never  said  anything  in  reply,  but  passed 
quietly  into  the  palace,  and  the  next  morning  he  took  his  bath  as  required.  Tliey 
did  not  salute  unwashed  princes,  and  theworld  does  not  salute  unwashed  Christian-. 
You  are  a  royal  blood-washed  prince  if  you  believe  on  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the 
worldwilltakeknowledgeof  you  if  you  have  been  with  Jesus,  taking  knowledge  of  Christ 
in  you  the  hope  of  glory.  (J.  Spotcer.)  Apiiiojyriate  return  for  tlie  Saviour's  hlood- 
slieddiiif/ : — In  an  Italian  hospital  was  a  severely  wounded  soldier.  A  lady  visitor 
spoke  to  him,  dressed  his  wounds,  smoothed  his  pillow,  and  made  him  all  right  f^  r 
the  day.  When  leaving  she  took  a  bouquet  of  flowers,  and  laid  it  beside  his  head. 
The  soldier,  with  his  pale  face  and  eyes  full  of  tears,  looked  up,  and  said  :  "  That 
is  too  much  kindness."  She  was  a  lady  with  a  true  Italian  heart,  and  looking  back 
to  the  soldier,  she  quietly  re2)lied,  "  No,  not  too  much  for  one  drop  of  Italian 
blood."  Shall  we  not  freely  own  that  the  consecration  of  all  our  powers  of  body 
and  spirit  is  not  too  much  to  give  in  return  for  the  shedding  of  our  Emmanuel's 
blood  on  our  behalf?  {S.  S.  Chronicle.)  Christian  consecration : — Did  you  ever 
hear  of  Hedley  Vicars,  that  good  soldier  ?  He  was  once  reading  the  Bible,  and 
accidentally — he  was  not  religious  then,  I  believe — accidentally  he  happened  to  come 
upon  the  verse — "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  His  Son  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin." 
He  thought,  "Is  that  true?  Is  that  true  to  me?  Does  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ 
wash  out  all  my  sin  ?  Then  I  resolve  I  will  henceforth  live  as  a  man  who  has  been 
washed  in  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ."  A  noble  resolve !  Eemember  it — "  I  will 
live  as  a  man  ought  to  live  who  has  been  washed  in  the  blood  of  Jesus  Christ." 
Huw  is  a  man  to  live  who  has  been  washed  in  the  blood  of  Christ  ?  That  was  a 
noble  resolve!  {John  Vaughan.)  Hyssop.—  ^  sermon  to  children  on  hyssop: — 
(chap.  xiv.  4.)  Text  chosen  to  illustrate  one  simple  truth.  A  very  little  and  insigni- 
ficant thing  may  be  used  for  very  important  work.  Of  tbis  ' '  hyssop  "  the  Jews  were 
to  make  a  sort  of  brush  to  sprinkle  the  door-posts  with.  It  was  but  a  little  plant, 
for  of  Solomon  it  is  said,  "  He  spake  of  trees,  from  the  cedar-tree  even  unto  the 
hyssop  that  springeth  out  of  the  wall."  It  is  a  short-stemmed  plant,  growing  in 
crevices  like  the  ferns  in  our  walls.  It  is  bristly,  and  so  suitable  for  making  into  a 
brush.  It  is  bitter,  and  so  it  was  thought  to  have  cleansing  properties  ;  and,  there- 
fore, the  Psalmist  prays,  "  Purge  me  with  hyssop,  and  I  shall  be  clean."  1.  God 
uses  little  things  for  His  work.  True  He  uses  the  great  cedar  for  making  His  temple, 
and  the  acacia  boards  for  His  tabernacle ;  but  He  also  uses  the  little  hyssop. 
Children  are  but  "  little  things,"  and  yet  the  Lord  needs  and  uses  them.  Illustra- 
tion :  Naaman's  maid.  Children  at  our  Lord's  triumphal  entry.  The  nurse  who 
influenced  the  good  Lord  Shaftesbury.  2.  God  chooses  the  little  things  He  wants 
to  use.  There  are  many  little  plants  besides  the  hyssop ;  but  only  that  one  was 
chosen  for  this  particular  work.  There  are  many  sorts  of  grass,  but  only  one,  with 
specially  interlacing  roots,  is  used  to  keep  up  the  great  dams  that  hold  back  the 
sea  in  Holland.  God  will  find  out  some  particular  work  for  each  one  of  us  ;  and 
all  through  life,  as  well  as  now,  our  joy  will  be  to  do  what  He  finds  for  us  to  do.  3. 
God  expects  us  to  put  something  of  our  own  into  our  service.  The  hyssop  had 
something  of  its  own.  It  put  it  into  its  work  when  it  was  used  to  soothe  Christ's 
pain  on  the  Cross.  It  is  not  enough  just  to  do  right,  we  must  try  to  do  right 
earnestly,  skilfully,  cheerfully,  prettily  :  putting  our  own  best  selves  into  the  doing. 
We  are  to  be  God's  agents,  but  we  must  never  forget  this — He  would  have  us 
put  our  love,  our  goodwill,  our  abilities,  and  our  hapi^y  spirit,  into  all  His  work. 
If  he  be  poor. — Provision  for  the  poor  : — The  poor  man  is  often  overlooked.  There 
is  always  a  strong  tendency  in  the  more  favoured  classes  to  pass  him  by,  and  to 
forget,  if  not  to  despise  him.  I'ut  God  does  not  forget  him.  The  directions  for  his 
particular  case  are  just  as  special  and  authoritative  as  any  contained  in  this  ritual. 
The  Lord  would  thus  assure  him  of  His  care — that  He  feels  for  him  the  same  deep 
interest  as  for  others,  and  brings  atonement  equally  within  his  reach.  There  is  a 
common  level  in  the  Divine  administrations,  upon  which  "  the  rich  and  poor  meet 
together,  and  the  Lord  is  the  Maker  of  them  all."  The  poor  are  His  children,  as 
well  as  the  rich.  He  anointed  His  St)n  Jesus,  to  preach  the  gospel  to  them.  And 
the  most  neglected  and  down-trodden  child  of  want  has  just  as  good  a  right  to 
cleansing  and  heaven,  and  may  count  as  much  upon  the  sympathy  and  grace  of 
God,  as  his  wealthy  neighbour.  If  he  cannot  get  three  lambs,  he  is  just  as  welcome 
and  acceptable  with  one  lamb  and  two  doves.  The  poor  widow's  mite  cast  into  the 
treasury  of  the  Lord  receives  a  higher  commendation  than  all  the  costly  donations 


CHAP.  XIV.]  LEVITICUS.  185 

of  the  wealthy.  Mary,  with  her  two  young  pigeons  is  just  as  completely  cleansed 
as  she  who  could  add  thereto  a  lamb  of  a  year  old.  But  although  the  law  favoured 
the  leper  who  was  poor  it  did  not  exempt  him.  It  accommodated  the  burden  to 
his  strength,  but  it  did  not  remove  it.  If  he  could  not  bring  thre-i  lambs  he  was 
still  bound  to  bring  one  lamb  and  two  doves.  If  he  could  not  get  three  deals  of 
flour  one  deal  had  to  be  forthcoming.  There  are^somp  people  who  make  poverty 
a  virtue,  and  claim  exemption  from  everything  because  they  are  poor.  But  God's 
commands  are  upon  the  poor  as  well  as  uj)on  those  more  favoured  in  eartlily 
possessions.  He  does  not  excuse  them  because  they  are  indi^-'ent.  They  ate  s-inners 
as  well  as  other  inen,  and  must  be  cleansed  by  the  same  processes.  There  is  no 
more  merit  in  being  poor  than  in  being  rich.  Poverty  cannot  save  a  man.  Beggars 
may  go  down  to  eternal  death  as  well  as  millionaires.  There  is  often  as  much 
crime  in  lags  as  in  purple  and  fine  linen.  All  classes  are  infected,  and  all  classes 
must  have  recourse  to  the  blood  of  the  Lamb  and  receive  upon  them  the  same 
"blood  of  sprinkling,"  and  the  same  consecrating  oil  of  the  Spirit.  {J.  A.  Seiss, 
D.D.)  Such  as  lie  can  get. — According  to  ability  : — He  shall  "offer."  That  is 
the  law.  But  he  shall  offer  only  "  such  as  he  can  get."  That  is  the  mercy.  But 
in  mercy  there  is  a  law.  Pity  is  not  unruly,  out  of  harmony  with  eternal  righteous- 
ness and  truth  ;  tears  are  part  of  the  Divine  economy,  as  well  as  constellations. 
See  how  everywhere  in  the  holy  Book  we  find  judgment  and  mercy,  law  and  love, 
discipline  and  rest  of  soul.  Christianity  is  a  yoke,  a  burden,  but  light  and  easy. 
Here  is  the  considerateness  of  God  even  in  law.  The  law  is  not  cast-iron ;  the  law 
is  not  an  expression  of  ariltrary  will.  The  law  rises  high  as  heaven,  and  yet  it 
stoops  as  lowly  as  human  infirmity  and  need.  The  next  verse  is  even  more  explicit 
in  its  tendtrness  ;  ver.  31  begins,  "  Even  such  as  he  is  able  to  get."  The  emphasis 
is  on  the  word  "  able  "  ;  all  the  meaning  is  to  be  found  in  that  word.  Not,  such  as 
he  can  casually  pick  up  ;  not,  such  as  may  happen  to  come  in  his  way  at  the  moment ; 
that  is  not  law,  that  is  folly.  A  thought  of  that  kind  would  wreck  the  order  and 
unity  of  creation.  How  very  different  is  the  instruction  or  injunction,  "  Even  such 
as  he  is  able  to  get  " — after  he  has  walked  ten  miles,  after  he  has  done  the  very  best 
in  his  power,  after  he  has  strained  his  thought  to  the  agony  of  anxiety;  then  if  his 
offering,  how  poor  soever  it  be,  shall  prove  to  be  the  very  best  of  his  ability,  it  shall 
go  right  up  into  heaven  and  be  accepted  there  as  if  it  were  a  king's  offering,  without 
spot  or  blemish,  without  infirmity  of  age,  or  without  sign  of  unequal  conflict.  Here, 
then,  is  unity  combined  with  diversity.  If  you  bring  a  thousand  pounds,  it  may  be 
much,  it  may  be  nothing.  If  you  bring  the  smallest  coin  of  the  realm,  which 
indeed  is  no  coin  at  all  but  a  mere  token,  if  it  be  all  you  can  do,  if  it  be  such  as  you 
are  able  to  get,  it  is  a  mountain  of  fine  gold  and  there  is  hardly  room  for  such  a  gift 
in  heaven.  Wliat  a  variety  of  offering  may  be  found  on  the  Christian  altar !  There 
is  a  great  offering  of  gold.  Some  men  have  nothing  but  gold  to  give,  but  they  give 
it  with  both  hands,  they  give  it  with  a  blessing  ;  they  send  their  love  with  it,  and 
love  doubles  every  gift.  Here  is  a  great  offering  of  work ;  morning,  noon,  and 
night  the  offerer  is  wondering  what  he  can  do  next.  All  his  time  is  God's  ;  be  will 
accei^t  any  position  that  may  be  given  to  him.  He  does  not  elect  his  own  place,  he 
simply  tells  what  his  faculty  is,  and  he  is  willing  to  give  the  whole  of  that  faculty 
twelve  hours  in  the  day  to  the  service  of  Christ.  Here  is  a  great  offering  of  music ; 
here  is  a  leading  voice,  here  is  a  spiritual  interest  in  that  sweet  department  of 
public  worship  ;  the  voice  is  given,  all  that  the  voice  means  is  joyously  contributed  ; 
the  giver  says,  "  I  would  give  more  if  I  could,  but  this  is  all  I  have  been  able  to  get, 
take  it,  O  Christ,  it  is  given  in  Thy  name  ;  receive  it  all."  Here  is  a  great  offering 
of  home-service.  That  home-church  has  never  had  its  history  written.  The 
history  of  the  home-church  never  can  be  put  into  words.  It  is  the  great  church,  it 
is  the  church  out  of  which  all  other  churches  are  cut,  hke  palaces  out  of  the  solid 
rocks.  Palaces  owe  themselves  to  the  great  quarries  of  the  earth ;  they  are  not 
select,  dainty,  specially- jewelled  stone ;  the  great  cathedrals  all  came  out  of  the 
quarry.  And  the  home-church  is,  if  it  may  be  so  expressed  without  roughness,  the 
quarry,  the  stone  bed,  out  of  which  all  the  other  churches  are  built,  though  they  be 
called  minsters  and  temples  and  cathedrals.  What  a  great  offering  there  is  of  love. 
Love  has  no  hours.  Love  never  entered  into  a  union  or  a  federation  for  the  purpose 
of  seeing  how  little  it  could  do  and  how  much  it  could  get.  Love  never  begins, 
because  it  never  ceases.  "  Such  as  he  can  get."  Nor  is  this  the  only  phrase  that 
indicates  the  tenderness  of  law.  In  ver.  21  of  this  very  chapter  we  read,  "  And  if 
he  be  poor,  and  cannot  get  so  much  ;  then,"  &c.  We  need  not  ask  if  this  book  is 
an  inspired  book.     The  righteousness,  the  tenderness,  meet  so  uniquely  and  co- 


186  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

operate  so  perfectly  that  there  must  be  more  than  human  thought  in  all  tbes) 
economic  and  considerate  arrangements.  Points  of  this  kind  are  the  true  arguments 
for  inspiration.  "If  he  be  poor,  and  cannot  get  so  much;  then,"  &c.  Thus  God 
makes  room  at  the  altar  for  the  poor  man,  and  any  altar  that  makes  room  for  th^ 
poor,  stands  en  earth,  but  reaches  up  to  heaven.  By  this  sign  know  ye  that  ye  are 
in  front  of  God's  altar.  "Such  as  he  can  get"  often  means  nothing  more  than, 
"  Such  as  God  has  given  liim.^'  What  have  we  that  we  have  not  received?  God 
orders  the  business  of  men.  If  men  would  recognise  this  they  would  be  quieter  and 
more  thankful.  There  is  a  sense  in  wbich  we  can  all  do  more.  What  is  that  sense  ? 
It  is  only  true  in  so  far  as  it  proceeds  out  of  the  deeper  doctrine  that  we  can  all  be 
more.  This  is  a  qu  stion  of  quali'y;  this  a  question  of  moral  capacity.  The  great 
tiling  in  this  Christian  education  and  discipline  is  to  make  the  man  himself  more, 
his  quality  finer,  his  sensitivene-s  more  exquisite,  his  consciousness  of  indc  btedness 
to  God  profounder  and  livelier.  We  shall  never  have  any  revival  of  hand-action 
that  is  worth  anything  until  we  have  a  revival  of  heart-life,  heart-love,  beait-faith. 
Let  us  pray  for  increase  of  heart.     {J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Vers.  34-57.  Leprosy  in  a  house. — Leprosy  of  house  and  garments  (see  also  chap, 
xiii.  49) : — Few  subjects  have  proved  more  perplexing  to  the  student  of  Sciiptuve  than 
this.  That  human  dwellings  and  garments  should  exhibit  a  similar  disease  to  that 
which  infectx  the  human  body  seems  at  first  sight  to  be  highly  improbable.  We  are 
indebted  to  the  recent  discoveries  of  the  microscope  for  the  first  intimation  of  the 
true  nature  of  the  leprosy  of  house  and  garments.  A  careful  examination  of  the 
Levitical  narrative  in  the  light  of  modern  science  leaves  no  room  to  doubt  that  the 
conclusions  of  Sommer,  Kuitz,  nnd  other  recent  authors,  who  attiibute  a  vegetable 
origin  to  this  plague,  are  correct.  The  characteristics  mentioned  are  such  as 
can  belong  only  to  plants.  Theie  are  some  species  of  fungi  which  couLi  have 
produced  all  the  effects  described,  and  whose  form  and  colour  answer  admirably 
to  the  appearances  presented  by  the  leprosy.  We  are  therefore  safe  in  believing 
that  the  phenomena  in  question  were  caused  by  fungi.  The  language  of  Moses 
is  evidently  popular,  not  scientific,  and  may  therefore  be  supposed  to  include 
not  only  different  species,  but  even  different  genera  and  orders  of  fungi  as  con- 
cerned in  tbe  production  of  the  effects  described.  The  leprosy  of  the  bouse 
consisted  of  reddish  and  greenish  patcbes.  The  reddish  patches  on  the  wall  wei'e 
in  all  likelihood  caused  by  the  presence  of  a  fungus  well  known  under  the  common 
name  of  dry-rot,  and  called  by  botanists  Merulhis  lachrymans.  Builders  have  often 
painful  evidence  of  the  virulent  and  destructive  nature  of  this  scourge.  It  is 
frequent  all  the  year  round,  being  in  this  respect  different  from  other  fungi,  which 
are  usually  con6ned  to  the  season  of  decay.  If  once  established  dry-rot  spreads 
with  amazing  rapidity,  destroying  the  best  houses  in  a  very  short  time.  The  law 
regarding  it  in  Leviticus  is  founded  upon  this  property;  seven  days  only  were  allowed 
for  its  development,  so  that  its  true  nature  might  be  placed  iieyond  doubt.  The  pre- 
cautions here  adopted  are  in  entire  ac-ordance  with  the  nature  and  habits  of  fungi. 
By  emptying  the  house  of  its  furniture,  shutting  the  doors  and  windows,  and  exclu- 
ding the  air  and  light,  the  very  conditions  were  provided  in  which  the  dry-rot  would 
luxuriate  and  come  to  maturity.  If  the  walls  were  conipletely  impregnated  with  its 
seed  and  spawn,  this  short  period  of  trial  would  amply  suffice  to  show  the  fact,  and 
the  building  might  then  safely  be  condemned  to  undergo  a  process  of  purification. 
There  are  no  means  of  restoring  rotten  timber  to  a  sound  condition,  and  the  dry-rot 
can  only  be  eradicated  by  removing  the  decayed  and  affected  parts,  clearing  away 
all  the  spawn  and  destroying  the  germs  with  which  the  plaster  and  the  other 
materials  of  the  walls  may  have  been  impregnated.  For  this  purpose  the  process 
of  kyanising  and  burnetising  have  been  recommended — that  is,  washing  the  walls 
or  the  woodwork  with  a  strong  solution  of  corrosive  sublimate  or  chloride  of  zinc. 
If  the  dry-rot  is  not  fairly  established  in  a  house  it  may  be  removed  with  tolerable 
ease  by  these  processes  ;  should  the  disease,  however,  have  become  widespread  and 
deep-seated,  no  means  of  dealing  with  the  evil  can  be  depended  upon,  except  that 
of  removing  altogether  the  corrupted  a^d  contagious  matter  and  admitting  a  free 
circulation  of  air.  This  was  exactly  what  the  Jewish  priest  was  commanded  to  do 
(vers.  40-42).  It  often  happens,  however,  that  even  this  severe  operation  proves 
ineffectual ;  and  after  repeated  repairs  of  the  same  nature,  it  is  found  that  tbe 
building  is  so  hopelessly  ruined  that  it  must  be  abandoned  and  dismantled  (vers. 
43-45).  Dr.  Thomson,  in  "  The  Land  and  the  Book,"  mentions  that  the  upper 
rooms  of  the  houses  in  Palefetine,   if  not  constantly  ventilated,  become  quickly 


CHAP.  XIV.]  LEVITICUS.  1S7 

covered  with  mould  and  are  unfit  to  live  in.  In  many  cases  the  roofs  of  the  houses 
are  little  better  than  earth  rolled  hard,  and  it  is  by  no  means  uncommon  to  see 
grass  springing  into  a  short-lived  existence  upon  them.  Such  habitations  must 
be  damp  and  peculiarly  subject  to  the  infection  of  fungi.  During  the  months 
of  November  and  December  especially,  fungi  make  their  appearance  in  the 
wretched  ephemeral  abodes  of  the  poorer  classes ;  and  in  the  walls  of  many  a 
dwelling  at  the  present  day  may  be  seen  the  same  leprous  appearances  described 
by  Moses  three  thousand  years  ago.  When  the  Israelites  entered  Palestine  they 
occupied  the  dwellings  of  the  disjjossessed  aboriginal  inhabitants  instead  of  building 
new  houses  for  themselves.  And  in  these  dwellings,  as  the  Canaanites  lived  in  the 
mir.  ;t  of  moral  and  physical  impurity,  and  were,  moreover,  ignorant  of  all  sanitary 
conditions,  the  plague  of  leprosy  would  be  very  apt  to  manifest  itself.  The  Bible 
speaks  of  it  as  sent  expressly  by  God  Himself :  "  When  ye  be  come  into  the  land  of 
Canaan,  which  I  give  to  you  for  a  possession,  and  I  put  the  plague  of  leprosy  in  a 
house  of  the  land  of  your  possession."  It  was  so  sent  in  mercy  and  not  in  judgment, 
to  show  to  them,  by  a  palpable  proof  appealing  to  the  eye,  what  could  not  be  so  well 
revealed  by  other  evidence.  It  was  the  visible  manifestation  of  a  hidden  insidious 
unwholesome n ess — the  breaking  out,  as  it  were,  of  an  internal  and  universal 
disease.  It  directed  attention  to  the  unhealthy  character  of  the  house,  and 
stimulated  inquiry  as  to  how  it  could  be  remedied.  Whereas  if  no  such  abnormal 
appearance  presented  itself,  the  inhabitants  might  remain  uuconsdously  ua  the 
midst  of  conditions  which  would  slowly  but  surely  undermine  their  health,  and  in 
the  end  prove  fatal.  In  the  Levitical  narrative  we  read  that  in  the  wails  of  the 
affected  houses  there  were  greenish  as  well  as  reddish  strenks.  These  greenish 
streaks  were  caused  by  a  much  humbler  kind  of  fungus  than  the  the  Merulius 
lachrymans,  or  dry-rot,  concerned  in  the  production  of  ttie  reddish  streaks.  Every 
one  is  familiar  with  the  common  green  mould,  or  Penicillium  glaucum,  of  botanists. 
This  fungus  is  extremely  abundant  everywhere,  and  seems  to  have  been  no  less 
general  in  the  ancient  world,  for  we  find  traces  of  it  pretty  frequently  in  amber, 
mixed  with  fragments  of  lichens  and  mosses.  It  grows  on  all  kinds  of  decaying 
substances,  and  is  very  protean  in  its  appearance,  assuming  different  forms 
according  to  the  nature  of  the  body  or  situation  which  it  affects.  Common  mould 
grows  on  every  substance,  whether  animal  or  vegetable,  in  a  state  of  decay.  It 
grows  even  upon  the  human  body  when  it  is  in  an  enfeebled  or  disordered  condition  ; 
and  many  diseases  of  the  skin  are  owing  to  its  efforts  to  develop  and  spread  itself. 
The  thrush  in  children,  the  muscardine  so  destructive  to  silkworms,  the  fungoid 
growth  which  so  often  causes  the  death  of  the  common  house-fly  in  autumn,  are 
all  different  forms  of  the  common  mould.  Its  germs  or  spores  are  constantly 
floating  in  the  air  or  swimming  in  the  water  in  incalculable  myriads,  so  that  it  is 
difficult  to  conceive  how  any  place  can  be  free  from  their  presence.  The  atmosphere 
of  our  houses  is  loaded  with  them  ;  and  were  we  endowed  with  micro.scopic  vision, 
we  should  see  them  dancing  about  in  the  draughts  and  currents  of  our  rooms,  or 
shining  among  the  motes  in  the  pencilled  rays  of  sunshine.  The  ubiquity  of  mould 
has  given  rise  to  the  theory  of  spontaneous  generation,  still  held  by  a  certain  class 
of  naturalists  ;  but  the  immense  profusion  of  its  seeds,  and  their  wonderful  powers 
of  adaptability  under  varying  circumstances,  and  of  entering  through  the  finest 
conceivable  apertures,  will  easily  account  for  its  presence  in  every  situation, 
without  being  under  the  necessity  of  admitting  what  has  never  yet  been  proved — 
that  substances  in  a  particular  state  of  decay  can,  without  seeds  or  germs  of  any 
kind,  generate  low  forms  of  life.  Many  medical  men  are  of  opinion  that  various 
zymotic  diseases,  if  not  originated,  are  increased  by  the  presence  of  these  minute 
cellules  in  the  blood,  and  by  their  deleterious  action  in  developing  themselves. 
The  injuries  inflicted  by  fungi  are  indeed  incalculable.  But  we  have  nevertheless 
a  grand  compensation  in  the  benefits  wbich  they  confer  in  acceleratin;;,  by  their 
unparalleled  rapidity  of  growth,  the  process  of  decay,  and  removing  from  the 
atmosphere  into  their  own  tissues,  where  they  are  innocuous,  the  putrescent 
effluvia  of  dead  substances.  They  also  economise  the  stock  of  organised  material 
which  has  been  slowly  and  tediously  gained  from  the  earth,  air,  and  water,  by 
preventing  it  from  going  back  through  decomposition  to  the  mineral  state,  and 
preserving  it  in  an  oiganic  form  to  be  at  once  made  available  for  the  purposes 
of  higher  animal  and  plant  life.  Mould,  for  these  reasons,  is  not  so  much  an  evil 
in  itself  as  an  indication  of  evil  conditions  in  the  world,  and  by  minimising  these 
it  renders  an  all-important  service  in  the  economy  of  nature.  Its  gxeti  purpose  ia 
purely  benev^  lent ;  but,  like  the  storm  intended  to  purify  the  atmosxjhere,  it  some- 


188  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

times  oversteps  its  limits,  and  proves  injurious  in  particular  cases.  The  minute 
regulations  for  inspecting  and  cleansing  those  houses  where  symptoms  of  leprosy 
ajjpeared,  indicate  how  complete  was  the  sanitary  .svbtem  under  which  the  ancient 
Israelites  lived.  God  c  nsidered  no  part  of  their  domestic  and  social  economy, 
however  humble,  beneath  His  notice.  Cleanliness  in  person,  in  dress,  in  dwellings, 
and  in  all  outward  ai^pointments,  was  enforced  by  statutes  of  a  peculiarly  solemn 
character.  All  these  ceremonial  enactments  were  in  the  first  instance  intended  for 
sanitary  purposes.  God  had  respect  to  the  physical  health  and  well-lieing  of  His 
i:)eople.  He  wished  them  to  be  patterns  of  purity,  models  of  beauty,  their  bodies  to 
be  perfectly  developed  in  the  midst  of  the  most  favourable  circumstances ;  and 
therefore  the  most  admirable  arrangements  were  made  for  securing  cleanly, 
orderly,  and  healthy  habitations.  But  not  for  purely  physical  purposes  alone  were 
the  Levitical  laws  regarding  the  leprosy  of  the  Louse  enforced.  Tbey  had  also  a 
spiritual  significance.  All  experience  tells  us  of  the  mysterious  connection,  founded 
uiDon  the  constitution  of  our  twofold  nature,  between  physical  and  moral  evil — 
between  external  and  internal  imj^urity.  The  proverb,  "  Cleanliness  is  next  to 
godliness,"  is  truer  even  than  it  is  admitted  to  be.  Physical  filth  has  in  innumerable 
instances  been  the  means  of  turning  away  the  Lord  from  the  homes  of  those  who 
endure  it.  For  want  of  a  little  more  room  and  a  Utile  more  purity  in  their  dwellings, 
the  sublimest  truths  fall  dead  upon  the  ears  of  thousands.  The  salvation  of  the 
poor,  though  to  them  the  gospel  is  preached,  is  in  very  many  cases  rendered 
impossible,  humanly  speaking,  on  account  of  the  degrading  conditions  amid  which 
they  live,  and  the  deadening,  hardening  influence  which  familiarity  with  noxious 
sights  and  smells  produces.  How  often  are  the  spiritual  instructions  of  the  district 
visitor  thrown  away  on  account  of  the  unhallowed  effects  of  filthy  surroundings ! 
Sad  it  is  to  think  of  the  leprosy  of  the  house  being  the  type  of  the  leprosy  of  sin 
which  infects  the  enrthly  tabernacle  of  this  body.  We  bear  about  with  us  this 
plague  in  all  our  members.  From  the  crown  of  the  head  to  the  sole  of  the  foot 
there  is  no  soundness  in  us.  Be  it  ours  to  put  our  natuies  entirely  under  the 
purifying  power  of  God's  Spirit,  so  that  they  may  be  cleansed  from  all  impure 
desires,  &c.  So  much  for  the  leprosy  of  the  house.  The  leprosy  of  garments 
may  have  been  caused  by  the  same  fungi.  Precisely  the  same  appearances 
manifested  themselves  in  the  one  case  as  in  the  otber.  I  am  disposed  to  attribute 
the  greenish  streaks  on  the  garments  to  the  common  green  mould ;  for,  as  I  have 
observed,  it  is  ubiquitous,  and  grows  as  readily  on  clothes  as  on  house  walls,  when 
left  in  damp,  ill-ventilated,  ill-lighted  places.  The  reddish  patches,  however,  seem 
to  me  to  have  been  produced  by  the  growth  of  the  Spore ndonema,  or  red  mould,  very 
common  on  cheese ;  or  of  the  Palmella  prodigiosa.  This  last-mentioned  plant  is 
occasionally  found  on  damp  walls  in  shady  places,  and  on  various  articles  of  dress 
and  food,  sometimes  extending  itself  over  a  considerable  area.  It  is  usually  a 
gelatinous  mass  of  the  colour  and  general  appearance  of  coagulated  blood,  whence 
it  has  received  the  famous  name  of  Gory-dew.  Though  formerly  ranked  with  the 
algae,  or  seaweed  family,  it  is  now  ascertained  by  more  accurate  physiological 
reseanhes  to  be  a  species  of  mould  ;  so  that,  under  whatever  names  we  may  class 
them,  the  plants  which  occasioned  the  strant;e  appearances  on  houses  and  garments 
belong  to  the  same  tribe.  Instanct-s  of  reddish  patches  suddenly  investing  linen  and 
Woollen  clothes  are  by  no  in^aus  confined  to  the  Levitical  narrative.  A  whole 
volume  might  be  filled  with  similar  examples.  Along  with  other  marvellous 
prodigies  they  abound  in  the  medijeval  chronicles  ;  and  were  they  not  authenticated 
by  the  most  trustworthy  evidence,  we  should  hesitate — from  their  very  extraordinary 
character — -to  accept  them  as  true.  It  was  by  no  means  rare  to  find,  in  the  Micidle 
Ages,  consecrated  wafers  and  priestly  vestments  sprinkled  with  a  minute  red 
substance  like  blood.  Such  abnormal  appearances  were  called  Si<iiiaculn,  as  tokens 
of  the  Saviour's  living  body ;  and  pilgrimages  were  not  unfrequently  made  to  witness 
tbem.  In  several  cases  the  Jews  were  suspected,  on  account  of  their  abhorrence  of 
Christianity,  of  having  caused  sacramental  hosts  to  bleed,  and  were,  therefore, 
ruthlessly  tormented  and  put  to  death  in  large  numbers.  Upwards  of  ten 
thousand  were  slaughtered  at  Eotil,  near  Frankfort,  in  1296,  for  this  reason. 
The  bleeding  of  the  host,  produced  in  consefjuence  of  the  scepticism  of  the 
officiating  priest,  gave  rise  to  the  miracle  of  Bolsena  in  12G4 ;  the  priest's  garment 
stained  with  this  bloody-looking  substance  being  preserved  until  recent  times  as  a 
relic.  This  gave  rise  to  the  festival  of  the  Corpus  Christi  founded  by  Urban  IV. 
Before  the  potato-blight  broke  out  in  1846,  red  mould  spots  appeared  on  wet  linen 
surfaces  exposed  to  the  air  in  bleaching-greens,  as  well  as  on  household  linen  kept 


CHAP.  XIV.]  LEVITICUS.  189 

in  damp  places,  in  Ireland.  In  September,  1848,  Dr.  Eckard,  of  Berlin,  while 
attending  a  cholera  patient,  observed  the  same  production  on  a  plate  of  potatoes 
which  had  been  placed  in  a  cupboard  in  the  patient's  house.  All  these  instances — 
and  hundreds  more  might  be  enumerated — though  somewhat  exaggerated  by  the 
dilated  eye  of  fear,  were  found  by  microscopic  investigation  to  be  caused  by  the 
extraordinary  development  in  abnormal  circumstances  of  the  red  mould.  Occurring, 
as  most  of  them  did,  before  the  outbreak  of  epidemics,  which  they  were  supposed 
to  herald,  they  obviously  point  to  the  conclusion  that  they  were  developed  by  un- 
healthy conditions  of  the  atmosphere.  In  ordinary  times  but  few  of  the  fungi 
which  caused  these  alarming  appearances  are  produced,  and  then  only  in  obscure 
and  isolated  localities  ;  but  their  seeds  lie  around  us  in  immense  profusion,  waiting 
but  the  recurrence  of  similar  atmospheric  conditions  as  existed  in  former  times,  to 
exhibit  as  extuaordinary  a  development.  "  0  Lord,  how  manifold  are  Thy  works  ; 
in  wisdom  hast  Thou  made  them  all ! "  is  the  thought  that  arises  in  the  devout 
soul  at  the  contemplation  of  the  wonderful  structure  and  history  of  these  minute 
existences,  which  live  and  die  unknown  to  the  great  majoiity  of  mankind.  Even  a 
mould,  requiring  the  highest  powers  of  the  microscope  for  its  examination,  can 
become  in  His  hands  a  mighty  scourge  or  a  transcendent  benefit.  (H.  Maciiiilhm, 
D.D.)  House  leprosy  : — The  particular  nature  of  this  affection  I  cannot  very 
certainly  determine.  Michaelis  thinks  it  was  a  sort  of  mural  efflorescence,  which 
often  appears  in  damp  situations,  cellars,  and  ground-floors,  and  so  corrodes  walls 
and  plastering  as  to  affect  and  damage  everything  near  it,  and  sometimes  quite 
destroying  the  entire  building.  Calmet  thinks  it  was  a  disorder  caused  by  animal- 
culae  which  eroded  the  walls,  and  finally  destroyed  them,  if  left  undisturbed.  But 
perhaps  we  cannot  do  better  than  to  agree  with  the  Rabbins  and  early  Christian 
Fathers,  who  believed  that  this  leprosy  was  not  natural,  but  sent  of  God  as  an 
extraordinary  judgment,  to  compel  men  to  the  public  acknowledgment  and  expiation 
of  some  undetected  negligence  or  crime.  It  was  the  stone  crying  out  of  the  wall 
against  the  sinner,  and  the  beam  out  of  the  timber  answering  it  (Hab.  ii.  11).  It 
came  like  a  great  domestic  affliction,  saying,  "  This  is  not  your  rest,  because  it  is 
polluted."  It  was  the  hand  of  God  upon  the  forgetters  of  His  law.  It  v/as  "  the 
curse  of  the  Lord,  in  the  house  of  the  wicked."  Its  typical  significance  will  at  once 
suggest  itself.  It  plainly  points  to  the  fact  that  not  only  man,  and  his  surround- 
ings in  life,  but  his  very  dwelling-place — the  earth  itself— is  infected.  The  whole 
surface  and  framework  of  the  world  bespeaks  infection,  disobedience,  and  disorder. 
"We  must  tear  it  with  instruments  of  iron,  and  mix  its  mould  with  tears  and  sweat, 
before  it  will  yield  us  bread.  Walls  and  houses  must  be  built  to  shelter  us  from  its 
angry  blasts.  And  with  all  that  we  can  do,  the  sea  will  now  and  then  engulf  the 
proudest  navies,  and  the  hailstones  blast  the  budding  harvests,  and  famine  and 
pestilence  cut  down  the  strength  of  empires,  and  earthquakes  bury  up  great  cities 
in  a  common  tomb,  and  the  sun  and  the  moon  flash  down  death  in  their  rays,  and 
the  very  winds  come  laden  with  destruction.  And  even  in  a  moral  aspect,  the 
material  world,  though  meant  for  spiritual  as  well  as  other  good,  has  often  been  to 
man  a  source  of  defilement.  Creation  is  a  standing  miracle  to  sliow  us  eternal 
power  and  Godhead.  Every  ray  of  light  is  an  electric  cord,  let  down  from  the 
unknown  heavens  to  lift  our  hearts  into  communion  with  "  the  Father  of  light." 
Every  night  puts  us  into  the  midst  of  a  sublime  temple  in  which  the  tapers  burn 
around  the  everlasting  altar,  and  through  which  rolls  the  vesper  anthem  of  the 
heavenly  spheres,  to  inspire  us  with  adoration.  And  the  innumerable  changes  that 
pass  before  our  eyes  are  but  so  many  letters  to  spell  out  to  us  the  name  of  the 
unknown  God,  in  whom  we  live  and  have  our  being.  But,  how  often  have  these 
very  things  tended  to  establish  men  in  unbelief,  and  tempted  them  from  the  ways 
of  piety  and  peace?  How  often  have  persons  looked  up  into  the  starry  sky,  and 
reasoned,  until  they  were  led  to  say  the  gospel  is  a  forgery  ? — or  dug  into  the  earth, 
and  insisted  that  Moses  was  mistaken  in  its  age  ? — or  cut  among  the  arteries  and 
tissues  of  organic  life,  and  denied  man's  immortality?- — or  watched  the  unif(jrmity 
of  God's  common  laws,  and  pronounced  a  miracle  impossible  ? — or  dipped  a  little 
into  physical  science,  and  controverted  the  very  existence  of  a  deity  ?  How  often 
have  earth's  products  proven  to  be  mere  baits  and  lures  to  unguarded  souls  to  lead 
them  down  to  death?  How  have  its  wines  tempted  men  to  intemperance,  and  its 
beautiful  groves  to  the  licentiousness  of  the  idolater?  How  frequently  the  very 
gold  or  silver  of  its  rocks  have  taken  the  place  of  God  Himself,  aud  fastened  ever- 
lasting condemnation  on  the  worshipper?  And  what  scene  of  beauty  contained  in 
this  world,  but  has  served  to  draw  the  heart  of  some  one  from  the  Loid  ?     But  it 


190  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

shall  not  always  be  so.  The  leprosy  in  our  dwelling-pLice  may  pass  away  as  well 
as  leprosy  in  our  persons,  or  in  our  clothing.  God  has  appointed  rites  for  its 
cleansing.  The  time  is  coming  when  "  there  shall  be  no  more  curse."  But  it  is  to 
be  the  la.><t  thing  cleansed.  Regeneration  begins  first  in  the  spirit.  From  the  sijirit 
it  extends  to  the  outward  life,  then  to  the  redemptitin  of  the  body.  And  after  that 
comes  the  grand  deliverance,  when  "  the  creature  (or  creation)  itself  shall  be 
delivei-ed  from  the  bondage  of  corruption,  into  the  glorious  liberty  of  the  children 
of  God."  Not  only  our  personal  nature  is  to  be  renewed,  but  the  very  world  in 
which  we  live.  And  it  is  only  upon  the  theory  of  the  ultimate  and  complete  re- 
covery of  the  world  from  all  damage  of  sin,  that  the  prescriptions  now  before  us  c^,n 
be  explnined.  The  first  thing  to  be  done  to  a  house  found  to  be  leprous,  was  to 
have  the  affected  stones  removed,  the  walls  scraped,  and  the  plastering  renewed. 
This  done,  all  parties  were  to  wait  to  see  what  the  effect  would  be  upon  the  dis- 
order. This  evidently  recalls  the  flood,  and  God's  dealings  with  the  earth  at  that 
time.  It  was  then  that  He  broke  up  the  old  and  tainted  foundations,  swept  away 
the  scum  of  its  surface,  and  overcast  it  with  a  new  order  of  things.  All  is  therefore 
in  waiting  now,  till  our  great  High  Priest  and  Judge  shall  come  forth  again  to 
inspect  the  earth.  After  the  lapse  of  an  appropriate  time  of  trial,  which  is  left 
indefinite  in  the  record,  the  priest  was  again  to  examine  the  house  that  had  been 
thus  dealt  with  ;  and  if  the  plague  had  broken  out  again,  and  had  spread  in  the 
house,  he  was  to  break  it  down,  "  the  stones  of  it,  and  the  timber  thereof,  and  all 
the  mortar  of  the  house,  and  carry  them  forth  out  of  the  city  into  an  unclean  place." 
If  the  leprous  symptoms  were  not  stayed,  it  was  to  be  completely  and  for  ever 
demolished.  There  was  no  further  hope  for  it.  It  perished  in  its  uncleanness. 
I  take  this  as  a  type,  not  of  what  is  to  befall  the  world,  but  of  what  would  have 
befallen  it  without  the  redemption  that  has  come  in  to  stay  its  corruption  and  save 
it  from  ruin.  How,  then,  was  a  leprous  house  to  be  cleansed?  We  have  seen  what 
was  to  be  done  to  it  upon  the  first  appearance  of  the  plague.  We  accordingly  read 
that,  after  the  lapse  of  a  suitable  time  to  test  whether  the  infection  was  stayed, 
"the  priest  shall  come  in,"  &c.  (vers.  48-53).  All  this  refers  us  back  to  the  blood- 
shedding,  death,  and  resurrection  of  Jesus  Christ,  and  holds  forth  tlie  great  fact 
that  the  world  is  made  clean  to  us  now,  and  will  be  entirely  cleansed  hereafter,  by 
virtue  of  the  redemptive  work  of  our  great  High  Priest.  Because  Jesus  was  slain, 
and  has  redeemed  us  to  God  by  His  blood,  the  saints  may  take  it  as  their  song, 
"  We  shall  reign  on  the  earth."  Some  suppose  that  this  dwelling-place  of  man  is 
some  day  to  fall  to  pieces,  and  pass  away,  and  be  no  more.  Had  Christ  not  died, 
or  having  died,  not  risen  again,  it  might  be  so ;  but  now  a  light  of  glory  rises  upon 
its  futurity,  u.  shall  not  die,  but  live.  Great  changes  may  yet  pass  upon  it,  but  it 
shall  survive  unharmed.  This  world  was  Heaven's  gift  to  man.  It  was  his  patri- 
monial estate.  It  was  his  sin  that  blighted  it.  And  just  so  far  as  he  is  redeemed, 
he  shall  get  his  own  again,  and  hold  it  by  a  charter  written  in  his  Saviour's  blood. 
{J.  A.  Seiss,  D.D.)  The  plague  in  the  house  : — I  fancy  you  have  heard  words  like 
these  before,  though  you  might  never  have  known  that  they  were  in  the  Bible.  But 
you  have  heard  mother  or  father,  when  worried  and  vexed,  often  say,  "  It  almost 
seems  as  if  there  w'as  a  plague  in  the  house !  "  I.  The  kind  of  plague  the  text 
SPEAKS  about  was  A  STRANGE  ONE.  It  first  appeared  in  a  little  green  or  reddish  spot, 
growing  on  the  wall  of  the  house.  When  that  was  noticed,  the  person  who  hved  in 
the  house  had  to  go  to  the  priest  and  say  to  him,  "  It  seemeth  to  me  there  is  as  it 
were  a  plague  in  the  house."  Then  the  priest  came  and  looked  at  the  spot,  and 
ordered  the  house  to  be  locked  up  for  a  week.  At  the  end  of  that  tiuje,  if  the  spot 
had  not  grown  any  larger,  it  was  simply  cut  out,  and  the  house  was  declared  to  be 
quite  safe  to  dwell  in.  But  if  the  spot  had  increased,  then  they  knew  that  it  was 
the  plague,  and  all  the  stones  round  about  it  were  taken  out  and  new  ones  put  in 
their  places,  and  the  old  ones  were  carried  away  to  a  distance.  But  if,  after  all  this 
care  had  been  taken,  the  spot  appeared  again,  then  they  knew  it  was  no  use  trying 
further  that  way.  This  was  a  "  fretting  leprosy,"  as  it  was  called ;  so  the  house 
was  ordered  to  be  pulled  down,  and  all  its  stones  carried  far  away,  and  a  new  house 
built  in  its  stead  with  entirely  new  stones.     II.  Haven't  we  plagues  in  thk  house 

NOW,  SOMETHING    DlFFEliENT    FROM   THAT   PERHAPS,  AND  YET  SOMETHING    LIKE  TOO?       1. 

There  is  a  bad  temper.  What  a  plague  that  is  in  the  house !  There  is  a  sulky 
temper  and  a  quick  temper.  The  sulky  one  is  when  a  boy  or  girl  goes  moping, 
moping,  and  won't  speak  or  do  anything  cheerfully.  It  is  a  very  hurtful  plague  in 
the  house.  Then  there  is  the  quick  temper,  up  in  a  moment,  over  in  a  moment ! 
Perhaps  this  is  better  than  the  other,  if  we  are  to  make  any  distinction ;  but  better 


CHAP.  XV.]  LEVITICUS.  191 


be  lid  of  bad  temper  altogether.  2.  Selfishness  is  another  plague  in  the  house.  3. 
Disobedience  is  another  plague  in  the  house.  No  boy  or  girl  ever  yet  came  to  good 
who  did  not  try  to  obey  father  and  mother.  III.  Where  the  plague  breaks  out. 
1.  Where  ventilation  is  bad.  Now  what  fresh  air  is  to  the  body,  God's  Spirit  is  to 
the  soul— that  which  keeps  it  fresh  and  free  from  plague.  Maintain  that  Spirit  in 
the  house,  praver  and  love  for  God,  and — striving  to  obey  Hira — no  plague  shnll 
come  nigh  thy  dwelling.  2.  The  plngue  also  breaks  out  where  sunshine  never 
comes.  What  a  healing  thing  is  the  sunshine  !  How  glorious  it  can  make  even 
the  dingiest  street !  The  plague  never  comes  where  the  sunshine  is,  and  chef-rful- 
ness  is  the  sanshine  of  the  home.  There  was  a  great  scholar  once,  Dr.  Dwight,  a 
big  man  with  a  great  broad  chest.  Once  when  the  students  in  the  college  were  not 
getting  on  well,  he  said  to  them,  "  Gentlemen,  I  see  there  is  something  wrong ;  you 
ai'e  becoming  too  melancholy.  You  must  learn  to  laugh,  that's  the  way  to  cure  the 
plague."  So  he  broadened  his  own  chest,  took  a  big  breath,  and  burst  into  such  a 
hearty  laugh  that  all  the  others  laughed  too.  "  That's  very  good,"  he  said,  "  very 
good  for  a  beginning  ;  but  see  that  you  keep  it  up!  "  And  it  is  good  practice  in  tlie 
house  to  have  a  hearty  laugh.  Keep  cheerfulness  there,  and  the  plague  won't 
trouble  you.  (•/.  Reid  Howatt.)  The  way  to  remove  the  plague : — When  plague, 
or  pestilence,  or  war,  or  famine,  come  on  a  land,  there  are  two  classes  of  persons 
who  act  in  opposite  ways.  One  class  will  pray  only  that  God  may  remove  them, 
and  do  nothing  more;  another  class  will  set  about  sanitary  reform — a  most  precious 
and  important  thing — but  they  will  do  nothing  more.  Now,  we  are  taught  in  this 
chapter  that  the  two  are  to  be  combined.  The  priest  not  only  applied  to  God,  and 
oiJered  sacrifices  that  the  plague  might  be  removed  from  the  house,  but  he  set  to 
work  and  pulled  down  the  stones,  and  broke  the  timbers,  and  scraped  the  house, 
and  had  it  plastered  and  cleansed ;  and  thus  there  was  the  mo^t  effective  sanitary 
process,  accompanied  with  the  most  pacred  and  Christian  appeal  to  Him  who  is  the 
Lord  and  the  Giver  of  life ;  and  who  alone  healeth,  and  when  He  healeth  none  can 
make  ill.  Now,  it  is  the  hap^jy  combination  of  these  that  constitutes  in  all  things 
the  perfection  of  Christian  conduct.  If  we  so  think  of  means  as  to  think  of  nothing 
else,  we  shall  have  no  blessing  ;  if  we  so  think  of,  or  engage  in  prayer,  as  to  exclude 
means,  we  shall  have  no  blessing.  If  we  suppose  that  by  attending  to  all  that  is 
just,  and  proper,  and  obligatory  m  sanitary  measures,  we  may  defy  God,  we  blas- 
pheme ;  but  on  the  other  hand,  if  we  act  as  some,  pray,  and  appoint  days  of  fasting 
and  of  prayer,  but  do  nothing  to  lift  the  poor  from  their  degradation,  to  improve 
their  dwellings,  to  increase  their  comforts,  to  give  raiment  to  the  naked,  food  to  the 
hungry,  a  shelter  and  a  home  to  them  tliat  have  none,  then  that  is  downright 
hypocrisy.  But  if  we  can  combine  the  two,  by  using  all  the  means  that  God  in 
His  providence  has  given  us,  as  vigorously  as  if  all  depended  upon  the  means,  and 
yet,  while  we  do  so,  look  up  to  God  as  if  the  means  were  worthless,  and  He  must 
do  all,  then  we  shall  combine  the  blessed  heavenly  bene  Uction  with  the  use  of  th** 
most  effective  earthly  means,  and  God,  our  own  God,  shall  crown  us  with  His  bless- 
ing.    (J.  Cuiiuniiig,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  XV. 

Vers.  2-33.  Because  of  his  issue  he  is  unclean. — Human  nature  unclean : — 1. 
We  learn,  in  a  very  striking  manner,  the  intense  holiness  of  the  Divine  presence. 
Not  a  soil,  not  a  stain,  not  a  speck  can  be  tolerated  for  a  moment  in  that  thrice- 
hallowed  region.  2.  Ai^am,  we  learn  that  human  nature  is  the  ever-flowing  fountain 
of  uncleanness.  It  is  hopelessly  defiled  and  defiling.  3.  Finally,  we  learn,  afresh,  the 
expiatory  value  of  the  blood  of  Christ,  and  the  cleansing,  sanctifying  virtues  of  the 
precious  Word  of  God.  When  we  think  of  the  unsullied  purity  of  the  sanctuary, 
and  then  reflect  upon  nature's  irremediable  defilement,  and  ask  the  question, "  How- 
ever can  we  enter  and  dwell  there  ?  "  the  answer  is  found  in  "  the  blood  and  water  " 
which  flowed  from  the  side  of  a  crucified  Christ — a  Christ  who  gave  up  His  life  unto 
death  for  us,  that  we  might  live  by  Him.  (C.  H.  Mackintosh.)  Secret  unclean- 
ness:— All  the  uncleannesses  here  enumerated  are  suih  as  were,  for  the  most  part, 
unknown  except  to  the  individual  alone.  They  must,  therefore,  refer  to  sins  of  soli- 
tude and  secrecy.  The  lesson  is  here  taught  that  we  may  be  great  sinners  without 
anybody  else  knowing  anything  about  it.     There  may  be  a  very  correct  exterior  life, 


t92  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

and  yet  a  secret  cherishing  of  pride,  and  lust,  and  unbelief,  and  a  secret  jjainting  of 
the  walls  with  imagery,  as  much  unfitting  us  for  the  society  of  the  pure  and  good  as 
any  open  and  outbreaking  wickedness.  "  The  lively  imagination  of  a  gay,  poet'C 
mind  is  not  less  sinful  when  it  scatters  forth  its  luscious  images,  than  tlie  dull, 
brutal  feelings  of  the  stupid,  ignorant  boor."  Even  the  quiet  and  involuntary 
exudations  of  natural  feeling  are  often  to  be  numbered  with  the  uncleanest  things. 
It  is  amazing  how  deep-seated  the  contaminations  of  sin  are.  A  man  may  be  truly 
penitent.  He  may  be  set  to  be  a  good  servant  of  God ;  and  yet,  every  now  and 
then,  he  will  find  the  disgusting  uncleanness  of  sin  quietly  and  unintentiouMlly 
escaping  from  him,  contaminating  himself  and  those  who  come  in  contact  with 
him  or  touch  what  he  has  touched.  His  whole  nature  is  jet  so  full  of  remaining 
corruption  that  the  least  agitation  causes  it  to  trickle  over.  He  lies  down  to  sleep, 
and  presently  he  finds  it  in  his  dreams.  He  puts  forth  his  hand  to  welcome  a 
friend,  and  the  very  touch  sometimes  awakes  wrong  echoes  in  the  soul.  Hj  is 
accidentally  thrown  into  the  mere  neighbourhood  of  sin,  and  the  very  atmosphere 
about  him  seems  at  times  to  be  laden  with  excitations  of  impurity.  His  depravity 
cleaves  to  him  like  an  old  sore.  Nor  are  these  secret  and  involuntary  outflowings 
of  corruption  mere  trifles,  unworthy  of  notice.  They  are  here  set  forth  under 
images  and  types  among  the  most  offensive  and  disgusting.  They  are  too  loathsome 
for  public  recital — too  hideous  even  for  the  mind  to  dwell  upon.  God  intends  thus 
to  signify  His  deep  abhorrence  of  our  inherent  corruptions.  He  means  to  intimate 
to  us  that  we  have  reason  to  be  ashamed  and  confounded  at  the  secret  disorder 
which  still  works  in  us.  Nay,  He  yet  adds  to  these  defilements  a  judicial  sentence. 
They  were  uncleannesses  which  excluded  from  the  tanctuary  and  everything  holy. 
They  brought  condemnation  with  them.  And  some  of  them  were  su  bad  as  to  need 
atonement  by  blood.  We  need,  therefore,  to  be  on  our  guard  against  the  beginnings 
of  evil.  It  is  indeed  melancholy  that  we,  as  Christians,  still  have  so  much  impurity 
cleaving  to  us.  But  still  it  is  not  without  its  good  effects.  We  need  somethmg  to 
keep  us  humble,  to  drive  us  continually  to  the  throne  of  grace,  and  to  keep  us  ever 
mimiful  of  our  dependence  upon  the  mercy  of  God.  It  helps  to  soften  us  towards 
the  failings  of  others,  and  to  make  us  charitable  in  our  judgments  of  offenders.  It 
helps  greatly  to  reconcile  us  to  the  idea  of  dying.  It  contributes  to  make  our  dying 
day  a  blessed  day,  because  it  will  put  an  everlasting  end  to  these  vexations.  Then 
we  shall  be  delivered  "  from  the  body  of  this  death."  (J.  A.  Seiss,  D.D.)  Purity 
required : — In  this  chapter  the  defilement  of  sin  is  the  leading  thought.  Here  again 
there  can  be  no  doubt  that  there  was  a  sanitary  element  in  the  regulations.  "  Cleanli- 
ness is  next  to  godliness  "  is  not,  as  some  suppose,  a  Bible  sentence,  but  it  is  bevond 
all  question  a  Bible  sentiment.  Tlie  first  all-embracing  law  of  the  Mosaic  economy 
is,  "  Be  holy."  And  the  second  is  like  unto  it,  "  Be  clean  "  :  clean  in  person,  clean 
in  garments,  clean  in  house,  clean  in  camp,  clean  everywhere.  Who  can  tell  how 
much  the  world  owes  to  these  "  health  laws  of  Moses  "  ?  "  It  is  certainly  a  curious 
thing,"  writes  one  who  is  an  authority  on  the  subject,  "  worthy  the  notice  of  every 
student  of  the  progress  of  the  human  race,  whether  his  standpoint  be  religious  or 
jjurely  scientific,  that  the  moving  camp  in  the  wilderness  was  governed  by  as  strict 
and  perfect  a  sanitary  code  as  any  sanitary  commission  could  now  devise."  But  in 
the  Mosaic  institutes  the  purity  of  the  soul  was  ever  kept  before  the  mind  as  th* 
main  thing  to  be  desired  and  secured.  "  Our  hearts  sprinkled  from  an  evil  con- 
science," was  always  the  first  thing;  "our  bodies  washed  with  pure  water  "was 
the  second  (Heb.  x.  22)  ;  and  thi-oughout  the  book  of  the  law  tliese  two  have  been 
by  God  so  joined  together  that  no  candid  mind  can  put  them  asunder.  {J.  M.  Gib- 
son, D.D.)  GleanVuieux  a  religinns  duty: — We  get  here  an  illustration  of  that 
which  so  often  occurs  in  the  law  of  Moses,  viz.,  that  duties  of  the  lowest,  humblest 
order  are  urged  on  the  people  by  the  highest  and  noblest  sanctions.  Common  work 
may  be  dignified  by  great  motives.  It  will  be  regarded  by  a  wise  Christian  man  as 
a  part  of  his  duty  which  is  by  no  means  to  be  neglected,  to  maintain  order  and 
unsullied  cleanliness  in  person  and  home.  (C.  Clemance,  D.fK)  The  secret  fimo 
of  sin  from  the  natural  heart,  ty  pi  lied  in  the  runniny  issue: — We  are  here  taught  the 
disgusting  constancy  with  which  our  original,  deep-seated  corruption  will  naturally 
discover  itself.  In  all  situntions,  towards  all  persons,  at  all  seasons,  this  filthiness 
of  the  secret  soul  may  be  traced.  In  ver.  4  the  man  is  represented  as  unclean  when 
he  lieth  down  to  sleep,  or  even  to  rest  at  noon.  Ah  !  yonder  lies  a  sinner,  and  the 
very  ground  under  him  is  accursed.  His  very  pillow  may  shortly  become  a  spear 
under  his  throat ;  just  as  Jonah's  rest  soon  became  a  tempestuous  sea.  A  friend 
comes  to  see  him  and  gently  wakes  him,  but  touches  his  couch  in  so  doing,  and 


CHAP.  XV.]  LEVITICUS.  193 

becomes  thereby  unclean  (ver.  5) ;  for  the  man  is  all  polluted.     However  amiable 
the  friend  you  visit,  yet,  if  still  in  his  unhealt^d  corruption,  your  intercourse  with 
him  spreads  its  baleful  influence  over  you.     You  have  insensibly  been  injured  by 
the  contact.     Oh,  how  we  should  watch  our  souls  in  mingling  with  a  world  lying 
in  wickedness !      Oh,  how  holy,  how  marvellously  strong  in  holiness  was  Jesus, 
who  breathed  this  polluted  air  and  remained  as  holy  as  when  He  came  1     If  the  man 
leave  the  spot,  and  anotlier  occupy  it,  that  other  has  seated  himself  in  the  sinner's 
place  (ver.  6),  and  the  memory  of  his  sin  is  not  gone.     He  is  in  contact  with  a 
polluted  thing.     As  when  one  of  us  now  reads  the  details  of  a  sinner's  career,  and 
our  mind  rests  tbereon,  we  are  involved  in  this  sin.     If  a  phx  sician  (ver.  7)  or  an 
attendant  touch   the  sick  man's  flesh,  he   is  in  contact  with   sin,  and  becomes 
polluted.     This  legal  consequence  of  any  actual  contact  with  the  defiled  shows  us, 
no  doubt,  th--  danger  and  hazard  of  even  attempting  to  aid  the  polluted.     It  is  at 
the  risk  of  being  ourselves  involved  in  their  sin.     Therefore  it  must  be  v/atchfuUy 
done,  not  boldly  and  adventurously.     You  breathe  an  impure  atmosphere :  proceed 
with  caution.     If  (ver.  8)  any  even  accidental  touch  occur — as  if  the  diseased  man 
spit  or  sneeze,  so  as  anything  from  him  reaches  the  bystander,  pollution  is  spread. 
An  accidental  word,  a  casual  expression,  an  unexpected  look,  may  suggest  sin ;  and 
if  it  does,  forthwith  wash  it  all  away  ere  evening  comes.     "  Let  not  the  sun  go 
down  upon  thy  wrath."     Leave  no  stain  for  a  mouient  upon  thy  conscience.    When 
the  man  rides  forth,  lo  !  yonder  is  a  sinner;  and  his  saddle  is  pidluted;  and  the 
mattress  he  spread  on  the  floor  of  bis  tent  for  a  temporary  rest  in  his  journey  (ver. 
10)  is  so  polluted  that  the  attemlant  who  lifts  it  is  defiled.     Oh  1  sad,  sad  estate  of 
man  !     In  going  out  or  coming  in,  in  the  house  or  by  the  way,  his  inward  fountain 
of  sin  flows  on  unceasingly,  and  the  Holy  One  of  Israel  follows  him  with  His  eye  to 
mark  him  as  a  sinner.     Nay,  if  he  put  his  hand  forth  (ver.  11). to  touch  any  one — 
to  give  him  a  friendly  welcome,  or  aid  him  in  any  work,  he  conveys  pollution,  unless 
he  ha\e  first  "rinsed  his  hands  in  water."     The  sinner,  whose  natural  heart  is 
still  unhealed,  cannot  do  even  a  kind  act  without  sin — his  only  mode  of  doing 
so  would  be  "  washing  in  clean  water."     And  the  vessels  he  uses  (ver.  12)  must 
be  broken  or  rinsed  in  water ;  even  as  the  earth,  on  which  the  sinner  has  stood  as 
his  theatre  for  comm  tting  evil  shall  be  broken  in  pieces  by  the  fire  of  the  last  day 
("All  these  things  shall  be  dissolved,"  2  Pet.  iii.  11),  the  trial  by  water  being 
already  past.     [A.  A.  Bonar.)         Atonement  required  for  secret  sins : — A  full  atone- 
ment is  required  for  our  inward,  secret  sins,  as  much  as  for  open  and  flagrant  sins. 
The  sinful  vision  that  our  fancy  spread  out  before  us  for  a  moment  must  be  washed 
away  by  blood.     The  tendency  which  our  soul  felt  to  sympathise  in  that  act  of 
reseutment  or  revenge  must  be  washed  away  by  blood.     The  hour,  or  minutes,  we 
spent  in  brooding  over  our  supposed  hard  lot  must  be  redeemed  by  blood.     The 
selfish  wish  we  cherished  for  special  prosperity  in  some  undertaking  that  was  to 
reflect  its  credit  on  us  only,  is  to  be  washed  away  by  blood.     The  proud  aspiration, 
the  sensual  impulse,  the  world-loving  eye  or  soul  cast  on  earth's  glories,  must  be 
washed  away  by  blood.     The  darkness,  ignorance,  suspicion,  and  misconception  we 
entertain  toward  God  and  His  salvation,  must  be  washed  in  blood,     "  Behold,  Thou 
desirest  truth  in  the  inward  parts,  and  in  the  hidden  part  (hidden  region  of  the  soul) 
Thou  shalt  make  me  to  know  wisdom"  (Psa.  li.  6).     (Ibid.)        Impurity  a  con- 
tagious evil : — All  those  details  of  Divine  precept,  by  which  every  person  and  article 
anywise  brought  into  contact  with  the  unclean  man  or  woman  became  unclean, 
bring  out  the  truth  that  impurity  is  an  essentially  communicable  evil.      It  is  so 
physically;  "let  sinners  look  to  it."    It  is  so  spiritually.     How  guilty  in  the  very 
last  degree  are  those  who  drive  a  nefarious  trade  in  corrupt  literature !      How 
shameful  to  put  indecent  thought  into  print  to  pollute  the  young!  How  demoralising 
to  the  soul,  how  displeasing  to  God,  how  scrupulously  to  be  avoided,  the  questionable 
conversation  that  borders  on  the  indelicate  and  impure !  (see  Eph.  v.  3,  4, 12  ;  Col. 
iii.  8).     (W.  Clarhson.)        Beivare  of  contact  with  sinful  persons  : — All  this  mysti- 
cally teaches  us  to  beware  of  courting  or  choosing  the  conversation  of  those  that 
have  received  any  tincture  of  vice,  and  not  to  contract  acquaintance  with  any  persons 
who  we  have  reason  to  believe  are  not  on  good  terms  with  God.     There  is  such  a 
venomous  contagion  in  vice  and  immorality  that  familiarity  with  sinners  does,  of 
itself,  make  a  man  an  associate  in  their  practices  :  so  saith  the  son  of  Sirach  (Ecclus. 
xiii.  1),  and  thus  the  apostle  commands  (1  Tim.  v.  22).     (Biblioth.  Bibl.)        Plain 
speaking  on  the  subject  of  purity  : — That  plain  speaking  and  plain  dealing,  such  as 
we  find  here,  was  necessary,  is  amply  proved  by  the  history  of  the  ancient  world,  and 
of  the  modern  world  too.     The  Bible  is  the  only  book  that  has  exercised  any  con- 

13 


194  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ciiap.  xvi. 

fiiderable  effect  in  keeping  men  and  women  pure.  There  are  many  books,  where 
everything  offensive  to  the  ear  is  studiously  avoided,  which  nevertheless  are  very 
poison  to  the  soul.  In  the  Bible,  on  the  other  hand,  while  there  is  not  a  little  that 
is  offensive  to  the  ear,  there  is  absolutely  nothing  that  is  poisonous  to  the  spirit, 
unless  the  spirit  has  been  poisoned  already  ;  for  we  must  remember  that  while  "  to 
the  pure  all  things  are  pure,"  "  unto  them  that  are  defiled  and  unbelieving  is  ni.  thing 
pure,  but  even  their  mind  and  conscience  is  defiled."  There  is  absolutely  nothiug 
in  the  entire  Bible  that  will  not  exert  a  holy  and  purifying  influence  on  those  who 
read  it  in  the  right  spirit.  And  as  a  historical  fact,  such  has  been  the  result  among 
those  who  have  made  these  Scriptures  their  companion  and  counsellor.  The  Jews 
alone  among  the  nations  of  antiquity  had  even  the  conception  of  purity  as  we  under- 
stand it  now.  Consider  for  a  moment  whence  we  derive  those  exalted  notions  of 
purity  which  are  widely  prevalent  in  modern  society,  especially  among  Christian 
people.  Even  the  purest  and  the  best  of  Greek  philosophers,  those  who  in  other 
respects  have  come  nearest  to  Bible  ethics,  are  wofully  behind  in  regard  to  personal 
purity  of  heart  and  life,  some  of  them  tolerating  and  others  approving  that  which 
enhghtened  Christian  sentiment  utterly  condemns.  Let  any  one  faiily  investigate 
the  genesis  and  "  evolution  "  of  our  modern  ideas  of  chastity  and  purity  and  he 
will  find  that  they  are  traceable  chiefly  to  the  Hebrew  Scriptures  as  their  source. 
And  so  the  remarkable  fact  will  present  itself  that  to  these  very  Scriptures,  and 
largely  to  those  parts  of  them  which  the  corrupt  imagination  of  certain  cavillers 
finds  an  indecency  which  is  all  its  own,  we  owe  that  very  sentiment  of  delicacy 
which  makes  it  impossible  for  us  to  read  them  aloud  in  public  or  in  the  family. 
(J.  M.  Gibson,  D.D.) 


CHAPTEE  XVI. 

Veks.  2,  3.  I  will  appear  in  the  cloud. — Jehovah  appearing  in  a  cloud : — 
I.  The  cloudy  dispeinsaxions.  By  a  cloud  I  understand  a  density  approaching  to 
darkness  and  gloom ;  and  yet  that  very  density  and  darkness  inhabited  by  the 
glory  of  God.  If  the  glory  of  God  were  to  burst  upon  us  without  a  cloud,  it  would 
be  nothing  less  than  a  consuming  fire.  The  Church  of  God  has  to  pass  through 
dispensations  that  are  cloudy  in  her  public  capacity,  in  God's  providential  dealings 
with  her  individual  members.  Look,  for  instance,  at  the  Church  of  God  as  a  body 
at  the  present  time.  Is  she  not  beclouded  ?  Are  there  not  clouds  of  ignorance, 
superstition,  idolatry,  despotic  power — clouds  of  carnal  wickedness  under  the  name 
of  Christianity,  overspreading  Zion  ?  The  cloud  is  still  more  dense  wben  it  over- 
whelms the  soul,  as  it  regards  its  conflicts  when  darkness  overspreads  the  mind,  and 
the  poor  believer  cannot  pray,  cannot  sing,  nor  cannot  belinve.  II.  The  appearance 
THAT  IS  PROMISED.  "  I  Will  appear  in  the  cloud  upon  the  mercy-seat."  He  appears 
as  a  wonder-working  God;  and  when  in  any  of  the  dispensations  to  which  I  have 
referred,  the  hand  of  God  is  seen,  how  are  the  souls  of  God's  people  filled  with 
awe!  "  I  wiU  appear."  Is  it  the  Church  that  is  overwhelmed  with  a  cloud  ?  I  will 
appear  for  her  deliverance,  though  I  may  suffer  her  to  pass  through  fiie  and  through 
water  first.  Is  it  Providence  that  is  mysterious — every  hope  cut  off,  all  prospects 
darkened?  "  I  will  appear,"  says  Jehovah.  Mark  the  promise — it  is  positive — "I 
will  appear."  The  cattle  upon  a  thousand  hills  are  His  property ;  the  gold  and  the 
silver  He  declares  are  all  His  own;  the  hearts  of  kings  ure  in  His  hands,  and  He 
turns  them  as  riv>  rs  of  water  as  He  pleases.  So  that  He  appears  working  wonders 
frequently  in  the  world,  and  those  very  things  which  were  most  threatening  appear 
to  be  the  very  things  that  God  was  making  use  of  for  the  real  advantage  of  His 
people.  HI.  The  mercy  displayed.  It  is  the  mercy  of  the  Triune  Jehovah,  the 
gift  of  mercy  from  God  the  Father — immutable,  eternal,  covenant  mercy — the 
mercy  of  God.  That  mercy  is  fully  and  freely  displayed  in  the  person  of  Christ ; 
yea,  more,  so  far  as  regards  our  view  of  it — the  mercy  of  God  the  Father  laid  up 
from  everlasting,  recorded  in  the  covenant,  fixed  in  decree,  is,  to  a  certain  extent, 
concealed  from  us,  until  we  discover  it  in  the  person  of  Christ.  But  when  we  are 
brought  to  view  Him  as  the  mercy  promised,  and  then  mark  the  display  of  that 
mercy  in  His  incarnation,  in  His  obedience,  in  His  merit,  in  His  blood,  in  His  suffer- 
ings, in  His  victories,  in  His  present  employment  before  the  throne,  why  He  is  all 
mercy — mercy  embodied  in  the  person  of  the  glorious  Mediator.    And  then,  if  we 


CHAP.  XVI.]  LEVITICUS.  195 

look  at  the  merciful  dealings  of  God  the  Holy  Ghost  with  His  people,  in  melting 
their  hearts,  making  them  new  creatures,  giving  them  life  Divine,  perfecting  the 
work  He  has  first  commenced  in  personal  experience — why  we  come  to  this  conclu- 
sion that  our  God,  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Ghost,  is  the  God  of  mercy,  a  merciful 
God.  Then  mark  the  transcendent  glory  of  this  mercy,  how  it  is  displayed  in  the 
face  of  misery,  and  rebellion,  and  ingratitude,  and  all  our  wanderings,  and  all 
our  wants.  IV.  The  kffects  which  follow  when  Jehovah  comes  down  and 
APPEARS  IN  the  MIDST  OF  THE  CLOUD.  It  is  not  merely  for  a  momentary  inter- 
position, but  for  a  permanent  deliverance,  and  mercies  may  be  expected  by  all  the 
praying  seed  of  Jacob.  Now  allow  a  familiar  illustration  here.  If  a  benevolent 
individual,  very  wealthy,  were  accustomed  to  take  a  seat,  as  they  used  to  do  in 
olden  times,  at  the  gate  of  the  city,  or  in  any  other  place  of  public  concourse,  and 
to  do  so  for  the  very  purpose  of  distributing  his  bounty,  would  not  that  gate  be 
crowded  ?  Who  would  not  go  there  ?  Even  if  we  did  not  want  pecuniary  alms, 
if  honours,  jewels  were  to  be  distributed  by  this  person,  who  would  not  be  there? 
Who  would  not  receive  some  token  of  the  kindness  and  favour  of  such  an  one  ? 
My  hearer,  is  it  not  grievous  that  you  and  I  are  not  oftener  at  the  mercy-seat  ? 
{J.  Irons.)  The  concealing  cloud  : — I  once  visited  an  invaUd  woman.     She  hnd 

been  confined  to  bed  for  a  long  time,  and  when  I  spoke  to  her,  she  said  :  "  I  think 
the  Lord  has  forgotten  me  altogether."  The  eye  of  faith  had  grown  dim  through 
bodily  weakness,  and  I  replied  to  her,  "Did  you  ever  go  down  the  I'iver  and  see  the 
lighthouse  ?  "  She  said  she  had.  "  Well,  suppose  you  lived  on  the  opposite  side 
from  it,  and  one  day  the  mist  came  down,  and  it  grew  so  thick  that  you  could  not 
see  the  lighthouse  on  the  other  side ;  would  you  believe  it  was  there  ?  "  "  Oh, 
yes,"  she  said,  "  because  I  had  seen  it  before."  "  And  there  is  another  thing 
would  make  you  believe,"  I  said  ;  "  you  would  hear  the  shrill  whistle  coming  from 
the  lighthouse  warning  mariners  of  the  danger  that  was  near.  In  the  same  way 
you  should  believe  that  the  Lord  is  still  near  you  ;  that  He  has  not  forgotten  you, 
although  a  cloud  has  come  between  you  and  God ;  if  you  will  but  listen,  you  will 
hear  His  voice  speaking  to  you  ;  the  mist  will  soon  roll  away  if  you  look  right  at 
Him  with  the  eye  of  faith."  She  did  look,  and  beheld  Jesus  as  precious  to  her  as 
ever,     (J.  Cameron.) 

Vers.  3-34.  Make  an  atonement. — The  annual  atonement: — Before  Adam  trans- 
gressed he  lived  in  communion  with  God,  but  after  he  had  broken  the  covenant  he 
could  have  no  more  familiar  fellowship  with  God.  Under  the  Mosaic  dispensation, 
in  which  God  was  pleased  in  His  grace  to  dwell  among  His  people  and  walk  with 
them  in  the  wilderness,  it  was  still  under  a  reserve  :  there  was  a  Holy  Place  wherein 
the  symbol  of  God's  presence  was  hidden  away  from  mortal  gaze.  No  man  might 
come  near  to  it  except  in  one  only  way,  and  then  only  once  in  the  year,  "  The 
Holy  Ghost  thus  signifying  that  the  way  into  the  holiest  of  all  was  not  yet  made 
manifest,  while  as  the  first  Tabernacle  was  yet  standing."  Our  subject  illustrates 
the  appointed  way  of  access  to  God.  This  chapter  shows  that  the  way  of  access  to 
God  is  by  atonement,  and  by  no  other  method.  I  want  you  to  notice  that,  of  course, 
this  was  only  a  type.  The  great  Day  of  Atonement  did  not  see  an  actual  atone- 
ment made,  nor  sin  really  put  away  ;  but  it  was  the  figure  of  heavenly  things  to 
come.  The  substance  is  of  Christ.  I.  Now,  theu,  let  us  come  to  the  text,  and 
note,  first,  what  was  done  on  that  particular  day.  The  text  tells  us  what  was  done 
symbolically — "Ou  that  day  shall  the  priest  make  an  atonement  for  you,  to  cleanse 
you,  that  ye  may  be  clean  from  all  your  sins  before  the  L(a-d."  1.  The  persons 
themselves  were  cleansed.  If  any  of  them  had  become  unclean  so  as  to  be  denied 
communion  with  God  and  His  people,  they  were  made  clean,  so  that  they  might  go 
up  to  the  Tabernacle,  and  mingle  with  the  congregation.  AH  the  host  were  that 
morning  regarded  as  unclean,  and  all  had  to  bow  their  heads  in  penitent  sorrow 
because  of  their  uncleanness.  After  the  sacrifice  and  the  sending  away  of  the 
scapegoat  the  whole  congregation  was  clean  and  in  a  condition  to  rejoice.  It  is  a 
far  simpler  thing  to  remove  outward  stains  than  it  is  to  purge  the  very  substance 
and  nature  of  man  ;  yet  this  is  what  was  done  on  the  Day  of  Atonement  typically, 
and  this  is  what  our  redeeming  Lord  actually  does  for  us.  We  are  outlaws,  and 
His  atonement  purges  us  of  outlawry,  and  makes  us  citizens  ;  we  are  lepers,  and 
by  His  stripes  we  are  so  healed  as  to  be  received  among  the  clean.  2.  Their 
persons  being  made  clean,  they  were  also  purged  of  all  the  sins  confessed.  Sin  that 
is  confessed  is  evidently  real  sin,  and  not  a  mere  dream  of  a  morbid  conscience. 
There  is  a  certain  mythical  cloud  of  sin  which  people  talk  about,  and  ali'ect  to 


196  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  xvi. 

deplore,  and  yet  they  have  no  sense  of  the  solid  heinousness  of  their  actual 
iniquity.  Sin  confessed  with  tears,  sin  which  causes  the  very  heart  to  bleed — 
killing  sin — this  is  the  kind  of  sin  for  which  Jesus  died.  Sin  which  you  dare  not 
confess  to  man,  but  acknowledge  only  as  you  lay  your  hand  upon  the  Divine 
sacrifice — such  sin  the  Lord  removes  from  you.  The  passage  is  very  particular  to 
mention  "  all  sins."  "  The  goat  shall  bear  upon  him  all  tlielr  ini(iuities. "  This 
includes  every  form  of  sin,  of  thought,  of  word,  of  deed,  of  pride,  of  falsehood,  of 
lust,  of  malice,  of  blasphemy.  This  comprehends  crimes  against  man,  and  oifences 
against  God,  of  peculiar  blackness;  and  it  does  not  exclude  sins  of  inadvertence, 
or  carelessness,  or  of  omission.  Transgressions  of  the  body,  the  intellect,  the 
affections  are  all  blotted  out.  3.  It  seems  that  the  Divine  atonement  puts  away 
the  sin  of  sin — the  essence  and  heart  of  sin.  Sin  has  its  core,  its  mort  d  spot, 
within  each  iniquity  there  seems  to  lie  a  something  more  essentially  evil  than  the 
act  itself  :  this  is  the  inner  hate  of  the  mind.  Whatever  may  be  the  sin  of  the 
soul,  or  the  soul  of  the  sin,  atonement  has  been  made  for  it  all.  The  Lord  Jesus 
has  not  left  upon  those  for  whom  He  has  made  atonement  a  single  spot,  or 
wrinkle,  or  anv  such  thing,  so  far  as  their  justification  is  concerned.  He  has  not 
left  an  iniquity  for  which  t.hey  can  be  condemned  before  the  bar  of  judgment. 
"  Ye  are  clean  every  whit  "  is  His  sure  verdict,  and  none  can  contradict  it. 
4.  Not  only  were  all  the  sins  that  they  had  committed  put  away,  but  also  all  their  holy 
things  were  purged.  I  do  feel  so  glad  tliat  our  Lord  has  atoned  for  the  sins  of  our 
holy  things.  I  feel  so  glad  that  Jesus  has  purified  our  prayers.  Many  saints 
spend  much  time  in  hearty,  earnest  cries  to  God ;  but  even  on  your  knees  you  sin  ; 
and  herein  is  our  comfort — that  the  precious  blood  has  made  atonement  for  the 
shortcomings  of  our  supplications.  We  need  pardon  for  our  psalms  and  cleansing 
for  our  hymns.  Jesus  puts  away  not  only  our  unholy  things,  but  the  sins  of  our 
holy  things  also.  5.  Once  more,  on  that  day  all  the  people  were  cleansed.  This 
gives  great  comfort  to  those  of  us  who  love  the  souls  of  the  multitude.  All  who 
believe  are  justified  from  all  things.  H.  Now  we  notice,  in  the  second  place,  how 
IT  WAS  DONE.  1.  The  atonement  was  made  first  of  all  by  sacrifice.  We  know  that 
the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats  could  never  take  away  sin ;  but  very  distinctly  do 
these  point  to  the  sufferings  of  our  Redeemer.  The  woes  He  bore  are  the  expia- 
tion for  our  guilt.  2.  Notice,  next,  that  the  atonement  was  made  not  only  by  the 
blood  of  sacrifice,  but  by  the  presentation  of  the  blood  withiia  the  veil.  With  the 
smoke  of  incense  and  a  bowl  filled  with  blood  Aaron  passed  into  the  most  Holy 
Place.  Let  us  never  forget  that  our  Lord  has  gone  into  the  heavenly  places  with 
better  sacrifices  than  Aaron  could  present.  His  merits  are  the  sw.  et  incense  which 
burns  before  the  throne  of  the  heavenly  grace.  His  death  supplies  that  blood  of 
sprinkling  which  we  find  even  in  heaven.  3.  Furthermore,  atonement  was  made 
effectual  by  its  application  to  the  thing  or  person  cleansed.  The  atonement  was 
made  for  the  Holy  Place  :  it  was  sprinkled  seven  times  with  blood.  The  same  wa.=! 
done  to  the  altar ;  the  horns  thereof  were  smeared  seven  times.  So  to  make  the 
atonement  effectual  between  you  and  God  the  blood  of  Jesus  mnst  be  sprinkled 
upon  you  by  a  lively  faith.  4.  Further,  inasmuch  as  no  one  type  was  sutiicient, 
the  Lord  set  forth  the  method  of  the  removal  of  sin,  as  far  as  we  are  concerned, 
by  the  scapegoat.  One  of  two  goats  was  chosen  to  live.  It  stood  before  the  Lord, 
and  Aaron  confessed  all  the  sins  of  Israel  upon  its  head.  A  fit  man,  selected  for 
the  purpose,  led  this  goat  away  into  a  land  not  inhabited.  What  became  of  it? 
Why  do  you  ask  the  question  ?  It  is  not  to  edification.  You  may  have  seen  the 
famous  picture  of  the  scapegoat,  representing  it  as  expiring  in  misery  in  a  desert 
place.  That  is  all  very  pretty,  and  I  do  not  wonder  that  imagination  .«hould  picture 
the  poor  devoted  scapegoat  as  a  soi-t  of  cursed  thing,  left  to  perish  amid  accuum- 
lated  horrors.  But  please  observe  that  this  is  all  mere  groundless  fancy.  The 
Scripture  is  entirely  silent  as  to  anything  of  the  kind,  and  purposely  so.  All  that 
the  type  teaches  is  this :  in  symbol  the  scapegoat,  has  all  the  sin  of  the  people  laid 
upon  it,  and  when  it  is  led  away  into  the  solitary  wilderness,  it  has  gone,  and  the 
sin  with  it.  We  may  not  follow  the  scapegoat  even  in  imagination.  It  is  gone 
where  it  can  never  be  found,  for  there  is  nobody  to  find  it :  it  is  gone  into  a  land 
not  inhabited — into  "  no  man's  land,"  in  fact.  Stop  where  the  Scripture  stops. 
Sin  is  carried  away  into  the  silent  land,  the  unknown  wilderness.  The  sins  of 
God's  people  have  gone  beyond  recall.  Where  to?  Do  not  ask  anything  about 
that.  If  they  were  sought  for  they  could  not  be  found ;  they  are  so  gone  that  they 
are  blotted  out.  Into  oblivion  our  sins  have  gone,  even  as  the  scapegoat  went  out 
of  track  of  mortal  man.     "  Who  shall  lay  anything  to  the  charge  of  God's  elect?  " 


CHAP.  XVI.]  LEVITICUS.  197 

5.  Yet  the  ceremony  was  not  quite  finisbed  ;  for  now  everybody  who  had  had  a  hand 
in  it  must  needs  be  washed,  so  that  everybody  might  be  clean.  Everybody  becomes 
purged ;  the  whole  camp  is  clean  right  through.  No  sin  remains  upon  Him  on 
whom  the  Lord  ou'^e  laid  the  iniquities  of  us  all.  The  great  atonement  is  made, 
and  everything  is  cleansed,  from  beginning  to  end.  Christ  hath  put  it  all  away  for 
ever  by  the  water  and  the  blood  which  flowed  from  His  riven  side.  All  is  purided, 
and  the  Lord  looks  down  on  a  clean  camp  ;  and  soon  He  will  have  them  rejoicing 
before  Him,  each  man  in  His  tabernacle,  feasting  to  the  full.  III.  In  the  third 
place,  I  ask  your  attention,  for  a  brief  interval,  to  this  special  point — who  did  it  ? 
The  answer  is,  Aaron  did  it  all.  Now  fix  your  eye  on  the  great  Antitype  of  Aaron. 
There  was  none  with  our  Lord :  He  trod  the  winepress  alone.  He  His  own  self 
bare  our  sins  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree.  He  alone  went  to  where  the  thick  dark- 
ness covered  the  throne  of  God,  and  none  stood  by  to  comfort  Him.  "  All  the 
disciples  forsook  Him,  and  fled."  Worship  our  Lord  as  working  salvation  by  His 
own  single  arm.  Let  that  truth  abide  in  your  hearts — our  High  Priest  alone  has 
made  reconciliation.  IV.  Lastly,  what  were  the  people  to  do  for  whom  this 
atonement  was  made  ?  There  were  two  things  they  had  to  do  that  day,  only  I  must 
add  that  one  of  them  was  doing  nothing.  1.  For  the  first  thing,  they  had  to  afflict 
their  souls  that  day.  It  was  a  day  of  confession  of  sin.  And  should  not  confes- 
sion be  made  with  sorrowful  repentance  ?  To  acknowledge  sin  without  grieving 
over  it  is  to  aggravate  sin.  2.  Not  only  was  it  a  day  of  confession,  but  it  was  a  day 
of  sacrifice.  No  tender-hearted  Israelite  could  think  of  that  bullock,  and  ram,  and 
goat  dying  for  him,  without  saying,  "  That  is  what  I  deserve."  When  we  think  of 
our  dying  Lord  our  emotions  are  mingled  :  we  feel  a  pleasing  grief  and  a  mournful 
joy  as  we  stand  at  Calvary.  3.  Once  more,  it  was  a  day  of  perfect  cleansing,  and 
hence,  by  a  strange  logic,  a  day  of  the  affliction  of  the  soul ;  for,  oh  I  when  sin  is 
forgiven,  when  by  Divine  assurance  we  know  that  God  has  blotted  out  our  sins  like 
a  cloud,  then  it  is  we  mourn  over  our  iniquities.  Afflict  your  soul  when  you  re- 
member what  you  once  were.  4.  On  the  Day  of  Atonement  they  were  to  afflict  their 
souls,  and  yet  they  were  to  rest.  Can  these  things  come  together — mourning  and 
resting  ?  I  never  am  so  truly  happy  as  when  a  sober  sadness  tinges  my  joy. 
Nothing  is  more  really  sweet  than  the  bitterness  of  repentance.  Nothing  is  more 
healtbf ul  than  self-abhorrence,  mixed  with  the  grateful  love  which  hides  itself  in 
the  wonnds  of  Jesus.  The  purified  people  were  to  rest ;  they  were  to  rest  from  all 
servile  work.  I  will  never  do  a  hand's  turn  to  save  myself  by  my  own  merits, 
works,  or  feelings.  I  have  done  for  ever  with  all  interference  with  my  Lord's  sole 
work.  They  were  assuredly  to  cease  from  all  sinful  work.  How  can  the  pardoned 
man  continue  in  sin?  We  have  done  with  toiling  for  the  devil  now.  We  will  no  more 
waste  our  lives  in  his  service.  We  are  slaves  no  longer  :  we  quit  the  hard  bondage 
of  Egypt  and  rest  in  the  Lord.  We  have  also  done  with  selfish  work ;  we  now  seek 
first  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  and  look  that  all  other  things  shall  be  added  unto  us 
by  the  goodness  of  our  Heavenly  Father.  Henceforth  we  find  rest  by  bearing  the 
easy  yoke  of  Christ.  We  joy  to  spend  and  be  spent  in  His  beloved  service.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  The  Bay  of  Atonement : — I.  First,  the  person  who  was  to  make  the 
atonement.  And  at  the  outset  we  remark  that  Aaron,  the  high  priest,  did  it. 
Inferior  priests  slaughtered  lambs  ;  other  priests  at  other  times  did  almost  all  the 
work  of  the  sanctuary  ;  but  on  this  day  nothing  was  done  by  any  one,  as  a  part  of  the 
business  of  the  great  Day  of  Atonement,  except  by  the  high  priest.  Old  rabbinical 
traditions  tell  us  that  everything  on  that  day  was  done  by  him,  even  the  lighting  of 
the  candles,  and  the  fires,  and  the  incense,  and  all  the  offices  that  were  required, 
and  that,  for  a  fortnight  beforehand,  he  was  obliged  to  go  into  the  Tabernacle  to 
slaughter  the  bullocks  and  assist  in  the  work  of  the  priests  and  Levites,  that  he 
might  be  prepared  to  do  the  work  which  was  unusual  to  him.  All  the  labour  was 
left  to  him.  So  Jesus  Christ,  the  High  Priest,  and  He  only,  works  the  atonement. 
There  are  other  priests,  for  "  He  hath  made  us  priests  and  kings  unto  God." 
Every  Christian  is  a  priest  to  offer  sacrifice  of  prayer  and  praise  unto  God,  but 
none  save  the  High  Priest  must  offer  atonement.  1.  Then  it  is  interesting  to  notice, 
that  the  high  priest  on  this  day  was  a  humbled  priest.  As  Mayer  tells  us,  he  wore 
garments,  and  glorious  ones,  on  other  days,  but  on  this  day  he  wore  four  humble 
ones.  Jesus  Christ,  then,  when  He  made  atonement,  was  a  humbled  priest,  i 
did  not  make  atonement  arrayed  in  all  the  glories  of  His  ancient  throne  in  heaven. 
Upon  His  brow  there  was  no  diadem,  save  the  crown  of  thorns  ;  around  Him  was 
cast  no  purple  robe,  save  that  which  He  wore  for  a  time  in  mockery;  in  His  hand 
was  no  sceptre,  save  the  reed  which  they  thrust  in  cruel  contempt  upon  Him ;  He 


198  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

had  no  sandals  of  pure  gold,  neither  was  He  dressed  as  king ;  He  had  none  of 
those  splendours  about  Him  which  should  make  Him  distinguished  among  men. 
Oh !  my  soul,  adore  thy  Jesus,  who  when  He  made  atonement,  humbled  Himself 
and  wrapped  aronnd  Him  a  garb  of  thine  inferior  clay.  2.  In  the  next  place,  the 
high  priest  who  offered  the  atonement  must  be  a  spotless  high  priest;  and  because 
there  were  none  such  to  be  found,  Aaron  being  a  sinner  himself  as  well  as  the 
people,  you  will  remark  that  Aaron  had  to  sanctify  himself  and  make  an  atonement 
for  his  own  sin  before  he  could  go  in  to  make  an  atonement  for  the  sins  of  the 
people.  We  have  a  spotless  High  JPriest ;  we  have  one  who  needed  no  washing,  for 
He  had  no  filth  to  wash  away.  3.  Again,  the  atonement  was  made  by  a  solitary 
high  priest — alone  and  unassisted.  No  other  man  was  to  be  present,  so  that  the 
people  might  be  quite  certain  that  everything  was  done  by  the  high  priest  alone. 
God  kept  that  holy  circle  of  Calvary  select  to  Christ,  and  none  of  His  disciples 
must  go  to  die  there  with  Him.  O  glorious  High  Priest,  thou  hast  done  it  all 
alone  !  4.  Again  it  was  a  laborious  high  priest  who  did  the  work  on  that  day.  It 
is  astonishing  how,  after  comparative  rest,  he  should  be  so  accustomed  to  his  work 
as  to  be  able  to  perform  all  that  he  had  to  do  on  that  day.  I  have  endeavoured  to 
count  up  how  many  creatures  he  had  to  kill,  and  I  find  that  there  were  fifteen 
beasts  which  he  slaughtered  at  different  times,  besides  the  other  offices,  which 
were  all  left  to  him.  He  was  ordained  priest  in  Jeshurun,  for  that  day,  toiled 
like  a  common  Levite,  worked  as  laboriously  as  priest  could  do,  and  far 
more  so  than  on  any  ordinary  day.  Just  so  with  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
Oh,  what  a  lab.jur  tlie  atonement  was  to  Him!  It  whs  a  work  that  all  the 
hands  of  the  universe  could  not  have  accomplished ;  yet  He  completed  it  alone. 
II.  The  means  wheeeby  this  atonement  was  made  (see  vers.  5,  7-10).  The  first  goat 
I  consider  to  be  the  great  type  of  Jesus  Christ  the  Atonement ;  such  I  do  not  consider 
the  scapegoat  to  be.  The  first  is  the  type  of  the  means  whereby  the  atonement  was 
made,  and  we  shall  keep  to  that  first.  1.  Notice  that  this  goat,  of  course,  answered 
all  the  pre-requisites  of  every  other  thing  that  was  sacrificed;  it  must  be  a  perfect, 
unblemished  goat  of  the  fiist  year.  Even  so  was  our  Lord  a  perfect  Man,  in  the 
prime  and  vigour  of  His  manhood.  2.  And  further,  this  goat  was  an  eminent  type 
of  Christ  from  the  fact  that  it  was  taken  of  the  congregation  of  the  children  of 
Israel,  as  W3  are  told  at  the  fifth  verse.  The  public  treasury  furnished  the  goat. 
So  Jesus  Christ  was,  first  of  all,  purchased  by  the  public  treasury  of  the  Jewish 
people  before  He  died.  Thirty  pieces  of  silver  they  had  valued  Him  at — a  goodly 
price  ;  and  as  they  had  been  accustomed  to  bring  the  goat  so  they  brought  Him  to 
be  offeieJ,  not  indeed  with  the  intention  that  He  should  be  their  sacrifice,  but 
unwittingly.  Indeed,  Jesus  Christ  came  out  from  the  midst  of  the  people,  and  the 
people  brought  Him.  Strange  that  it  should  be  so  1  "  He  came  unto  His  own,  and 
His  own  received  Him  not  "  ;  His  own  led  Him  forth  to  slaughter ;  His  own  dragged 
Him  before  the  mercy-seat.  3.  Note,  again,  that  though  this  goat,  like  the  scape- 
goat, was  brought  by  the  people,  God's  decision  was  in  it  still.  Mark,  it  is  said, 
"  Aaron  shall  cast  lots  upon  the  two  goats ;  one  lot  for  the  Lord,  and  the  other 
lot  for  the  scapegoat."  I  conceive  this  mention  of  lots  is  to  teach  that  although 
the  Jews  brought  Jesus  Christ  of  their  own  will  to  die,  yet,  Christ  had  been 
appointed  to  die ;  and  even  the  very  man  who  sold  Him  was  appointed  to  it — so 
saith  the  Scripture.  Christ's  death  was  fore-ordained,  and  there  was  not  only 
man's  hand  in  it,  but  God's.  4.  Next,  behold  the  goat  that  destiny  has  marked 
out  to  make  the  atonement.  Come  and  see  it  die.  The  priest  stabs  it.  Mark  it  in 
its  agonies  ;  behold  it  struggling  for  a  moment ;  observe  the  blood  as  it  gubhes 
forth.  Ye  have  here  your  Saviour.  See  His  Father's  vengeful  sword  sheathed  in 
His  heart ;  behold  His  death  agonies;  hear  His  sighs  and  groans  upon  the  Cross  ; 
hark  to  His  shriek,  "  Eli,  Eli,  lama  sabachlhani,"  and  you  have  more  now  to  think 
of  than  you  could  have  if  you  only  stood  to  see  the  death  of  a  goat  for  your  atone- 
ment. As  the  blood  of  the  goat  made  the  atonement  typically,  so  thy  Saviour 
dying  for  thee  made  the  great  atonement  for  thy  sins,  and  thoumayest  go  free.  5. 
But  mark,  this  goat's  blood  was  not  only  shed  for  many  for  the  remission  of  sins  as 
a  type  of  Christ,  but  that  blood  was  taken  within  the  veil,  and  there  it  was  sprinkled. 
So  with  Jesus'  blood,  "  Sprinkled  now  with  blood  the  throne."  III.  We  now  come 
to  the  EFFECTS.  1.  One  of  the  first  effects  of  the  death  of  this  goat  was  the  sancti- 
fication  of  the  holy  things  which  had  been  made  unholy.  Is  it  not  sweet  to  reflect 
that  our  holy  things  are  now  really  holy  ?  2.  But  observe,  the  second  great  fact  was 
that  their  sins  were  taken  away.  This  was  set  forth  by  the  scapegoat.  3.  One 
more  thought  concerning  the  eltects  of  this  great  Day  of  Atonement,  and  you  will 


CHAP.  XVI.]  LEVITICUS.  199 

observe  that  it  runs  throughout  the  whole  of  the  chapter — entrance  within  the  veil. 
Onlj'  on  one  day  in  the  year  might  the  high  priest  enter  within  the  veil,  and  then  it 
must  be  for  the  great  purposes  of  the  atonement.     Now  the  atonement  is  finished, 
and  you  may  enter  within  the  veil :  "  Having  boldness,  therefore,  to  enter  into  the 
holiest,  let  us  come  with  boldness  unto  the  throne  of  the  heavenly  grace."    The  veil 
of  the  Temple  is  rent  by  the  atonement  of  Christ,  and  access  to  the  throne  is  now 
ours.   IV.  Now  we  come  to  notice,  in  the  fourth  place,  what  is  oue  proper  behaviour 
WHEN  WE  CONSIDER  THE  Dat  OF  ATONEMENT.     You  read  at  ver.  29,  "And  this  shall 
be  a  statute  for  ever  unto  you:  that  in  the  seventh  month,  on  the  tenth  day  of 
the  month,  ye  shall  afflict  your  souls."   That  is  one  thing  that  we  ought  to  do  when 
we  remember  the  atonement.    "  Law  and  terrors  do  but  liarden,"  but  methinks  the 
thought  that  Jesus  died  is  enough  to  make  us  melt.     Then,  better  still,  we  are  to 
"do  no  work  at  all,"  as  ye  find  in  the  same  verse  (29th).     When  we  consider  the 
atonement,  we  should  rest,  and  "  do  no  work  at  all."   Rest  from  your  own  righteous- 
ness ;  re.-'t  from  your  toilsome  duties  :  rest  in  Him.    "  We  that  believe  do  enter  into 
rest."     As  soon  as  thou  seest  the  atonement  finished,  say,  "  It  is  done,  it  is  done  !  " 
Then  there  was  another  thing  which  always  happened.     Wlien  the  priest  had  made 
the  atonement,  it  was  usual  for  him,  after  he  bad  washed  himself,  to  come  out 
again  in  his  glorious  garments.     When  the  people  saw  him  they  attended  him  to 
his  bouse  with  joy,  and  they  offered  burnt-offerings  of  praise  on  tbat  day:  he  being 
thankful  that  his  life  was  spared,  and  they  being  thankful  that  the  atonement  was 
accepted ;  both  of  them  otiering  burnt-offerings  as  a  type  that  they  desired  now  to 
be  "  a  living  sacrifice,  holy  and  acceptable  unto  God."     The  atonement  is  finished ; 
the  High  Priest  is  gone  within  the  veil ;  salvation  is  now  complete.   He  has  laid  aside 
the  linen  garments,  and  He  stands  before  you  with  His  breastplate,  and  His  mitre, 
and  His  embroidered  vest,  in  all  His  glory.     Hear  how  He  rejoices  over  us,  for  He 
hath  redeemed  His  people,  and  ransomed  them  out  of  the  hands  of  His  enemies. 
Come,  let  us  go  home  with  the  High  Priest ;  let  us  clap  our  hands  with  joy,  for  He 
liveth  ;  the  atonement  is  accepted,  and  we  are  accepted  too;  the  scapegoat  is  gone, 
our  sins  are  gone  with  it.    Let  us,  then,  go' to  onr  houses  with  thankfulness,  and  let 
us  come  up  to  His  gates  with  praise,  for  He  hath  loved  His  people,  He  hath  blessed 
His  children,  and  given  unto  us  a  day  of  atonement,  and  a  day  of  acceptance, 
and  a  year  of  jubilee.     (Ibid.)         Moses  and   CJirist ;  the  Day  of  Atonement: — 
I.  The  Divine  Redeemer.    1.  His  humiliation.    2.  His  sinlessuess.    II.  The  Divine 
Sacrifice.    1.  God  admits  vicarious  suffering  into  His  righteous  rule.    (1)  Involun- 
tarily we  suffer  for  one  another.     (2)  The  finer  instincts  of  the  auinial  world  lead 
the  parent  to  endure  suffering  and  death  to  shield  and  save  the  young.     (3)  Volun- 
tarily, man  interposes  to  rescue  his  brother  by  his  own  loss  and  suffering.     (4)  In 
proportion  to  the  spiritual  nobility  of  men  we  find  voluntary  vicarious  suffering  in 
their  hearts  and  lives.    2.  The  sacrifice  of  Christ  avails  to  remove  all  condemnation. 
III.  The  human  worshipper — our  sinning,  seeking   selves.     1.  Without  personal 
participation  everything   will  be  as  nothing.      2.  The  spirit  in  which  we  must 
participate  is  that  of  penitence  and  faith.     [W.  Clarkson,  B.A.)         The  Day  of 
Atonement : — Now,  what  did  such  a  ritual  mean?     If  it  be  said  that  the  Divine 
forgiveness  depended  upon  such  a  day,  then  why  did  the  world  wait  twenty-five 
hundred  years  before  its  appointment  ?     If  absolutely  necessary,  why  was  it  not 
enjoined  upon  Abraham,  and  especially  upon  Adam   in  Paradise?     What  is  the 
meaning  of  sacrifice?     What  relation  does  it  bear  to  forgiveness  of   sin?     We 
observe — 1.  God's  character  is  not  changed  by  sacrifices.     He  neither  regards  sin 
with  less  hatred,  nor  loves  the  sinner  more  because  of  these.     The  Sacrifice  of 
Calvary — compared  with  which  all  otbers  are  as  shadows  to  the  light — was  the 
natural  outcome  of  the  Divine  nature,  rather  than  the  means  of  changing  that 
nature  (Rom.  v.  8  ;  1  John  iv.  9, 10).   2.  These  mere  sacrifices  possessed  no  intrinsic 
value.     If  there  were  a  value  in  these,  it  must  have  been  either  to  Him  in  whose 
name  they  are  offered,  or  to  man  for  whom  they  were  offered.     Happily  for  us  the 
Scriptures  settle  both  points  (Isa.  i.  13 ;  Micah  vi.  6-8 ;  Psa.  xl.  6,  li.  16,  17). 
Thus   much,   therefore,  follows :   these  sacrifices  were  not  transactions  of  any 
intrinsic  value  to  God,  in  themselves  considered.    Every  part  of  that  ceremonial 
for  the  childhood  age  was  a  Divine  lesson,  pointing  to  a  greater  offering  and  sacrifice 
to  come.    While  God  accommodated  His  laws  to  the  perception  of  childhood.  He 
made  use  of  them  to  proclaim  eternal  truths — a  fact  we  shall  see  illustrated  in  the 
lessons  of  the  Day  of  Atonement.   In  it  we  have — I.  The  Divine  testimony  against 
SIN.     II.  The  basis  of  atonement.    III.  The  necessity  foe  a  perfect  High  Priest. 
(p.  0.  Mears.)         The  climax  of  sacrificial  worship — the  Day  of  Atonement : — I, 


200  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

Theee  is  the  voluntary  humiliation  of  the  high  priest.    The  Day  of  Atonement 
was  the  high  priest's  day:  he  undertook  the  atouiug  work,  and  no  man  was  to 
venture  near  the  Tabernacle  (ver.  17)  while  he  was  engaged  in  it.     The  first  thing 
required  of  him  was  humiliation.     II.  The  high  priest  was  requiricd   next  to 
PERFOME  the  AUDIENCE-CHAMBER  WITH  INCENSE.     Prayer  is  the  beginning,  middle, 
and  end  of  the  redemptive  work.    It  seems  evident  from  this  tbat  we  must  put  away 
those  business-like  illustrations  of  atonement  as  a  hard  bargain  driven  on  the  ime 
side  and  paid  literally  and  in  full  on  the  other.     We  must  allow  a  sufficient  sphere 
in  our  conceptions  for  the  play  of  intercession  and  Appeal,  and  remember  that  wliile 
it  is  a  God  of  justice  who  is  satisfied,  He  proves  Himself  in  the  transaction  a  God 
of  grace.     III.  After  the  incense  there  is  brought  in  the  blood,  first  of  his 
OWN    sin-offering   and   then   of   the   people's.     The   blood  of    Jesus   Christ  is 
symbolised  by  both,  and  the  act  of  sprinkling  it  before  God  is  also  to  be  attributed 
to  our  great  High  Priest.     The  law  of  mediation  is  that  self-sacrifice  stimulates  the 
element  of  mercy  in  the  Judge.     And  if  it  be  objected  that  surely  God  does  not 
require  such  an  expensive  stimulant,  the  reply  is,  that  the  self-sacrificing  Son  and 
the  stimulated  Father  and  Judge  are  in  essence  one.     The  act  is  consequently  a 
Divine  self-sacrifice  to  stimulate  the  element  of  mercy  towards  man  and  make  it 
harmonise  with  justice.   IV.  But  the  high  priest  was  expected  not  only  to  secure 
the  pardon  of  sin,  but  also  to  put  it  away  by  the  dismissal  of  the  scapegoat. 
For  the  pardon  of  sin  is  not  all  man  needs.     He  requires  sin  to  be  put  away  from 
him.     Now  this  putting  away  of  sin  was  beautifully  represented  in  the  dismissal 
of  the   scapegoat.     This  second  sin-offering,  after  having  the  sins  of  the  people 
heaped  upon  its  head  by  the  priestly  confession,  is  sent  away  in  care  of  a  faithful 
servant  in  the  wilderness,  there  to  be  left  in  loneliness  either  to  live  or  die.     Here 
again  we  have  a  type  of  Jesus.     V.  The  high  priest  having  thus  disposed  of  sin, 
resumed  his  glorious  garments  and  offered  the  burnt-offerings  for  himself 
AND  the  people.     It  is  Christ  who  offers  this  burnt -offering,  and  is  the  Burnt- 
offering.     That  is  to  say.  He  has  offered  for  men  a  perfect  righteousness,  as  well  as 
afforded  us  a  perfect  example.     Our  consecration  to  God  is  ideally  to  be  a  perfect 
one — but  really  how  imperfect !    But  Christ  is  made  unto  us  sanctification ;  we  are 
complete  in  Him  ;  we  are  accepted  in  the  beloved  ;  and  we  learn  and  try  to  live  as 
He  lived,  holy  as  He  was  holy.     Moreover,  upon  the  burnt-offering  was  presented 
the  fat  of  the  sin-offering,  the  Lord  thus  emphasising  His  satisfaction  with  the 
atonement,   and   His   acceptance   of   it.      VI.    The  washing   of  the   three    men 
officiating  on  the  Day  of  Atonement  conveys  surely  the  idea  of  the  contami- 
nating power  of  sin.     (R.  M.  Edgar,  M.A.)         The  Day  of  Atonement : — I.  The 
authority  fob  the  day  and  its  measures.     1.  Both  authorise  d  of  God  (vers.  1,  2). 
2.  Both,  then,  Divinely  important.     (1)  In  regard  to  the  definiteness  of  the  uay. 
(2)  In  regard  to  the  meaning  and  order  of  its  ceremonies.    II.  The  typical  meaning 
OF  the  Jewish  atonement-day.     1.  The  Divinely  stated  reason  for  its  appointment 
(ver.  16).     (1)  The  fact  of  sin  and  the  necessity  for  its  expiation  by  blood.     (2)  Sin 
necessitates   atonement   if   it   is  to   be   pardoned.       (3)   This   fact   bespeaks   the 
antagonism  of  sin  against  the  Divine  will,  and  the  holiness  and  righteousness  of 
the  Divine  character.     2.  The  Divinely  appointed  measures  for  its  observance.     (1) 
In  respect  to  the  agent.     (2)  In  respect  to  the  measures  themselves.     Lessons  :  1. 
The  hatefulness,  heinousness,  and  guiltiness  of   sin  are  here  shown.     2.    God's 
desire  to  provide  for  the  removal  of  its  guilt,  and  the  prevention  of  its  consequences, 
demonstrated.     3.  The  comprehensiveness   of    tbe   provision   in   the   atonement. 
(D.  C.  Hughes,  M.A.)         The  Daxj  of  Atonement : — I.  Note  vhe  cuief  services  of 
the   Day  of   Atonement.     II.   Show  that   the   sacrifices   then   offered   wkre 
strictly  propiti.\tory.     When  you  consider  the  two  goats  as  together  constituting 
the  sin-offering,  you  must  receive  as  the  only  satisfactory  account  of  the  transaction 
that  which  sets  forth  the  scapegoat  as  exhibiting  the  effects  of  the  expiation  which 
■was  represented  by  the  death  of  the  other.     The  sins  of  the  people  were  laid  upon 
the  head  of  the  scapegoat,  and  borne  away  to  the  wilderness;  but  this  scapegoat 
was  a  part  of  the  sin-offering,  and  therefore,  by  combining  the  parts  of  the  sin- 
offering,  you  have  before  you  both  the  means  and  the  effect :  you  have  the  means, 
the  shedding  of  blood  without  which  there  is  no  remission ;  you  have  the  effect, 
the  removal  of  guilt,  so  that  ini(iuity,  though  searched  for,  can  nowhere  be  found. 
It  seems  certain  that  such  was  the  view  entertained  by  the  Jews,  who  were  wont  to 
treat  the  scapegoat  as  actually  an  accursed  thing.     Though  not  commanded  by  the 
law,  they  used  to  maltreat  the  goat  Azazcl — for  by  this  name  was  the  scapegoat 
known — to  spit  upon  him,  and  j)luck  off  his  hair.   Thus  they  acted  towards  the  goat 


LEVITICUS.  £01 


as  they  acted  towards  Christ,  who,  in  a  truer  sense  than  the  Ax.azel,  was  "  made  sin 
for  us."  And  if  further  proof  were  needed  of  the  idea  which  the  Jews  them- 
selves attached  to  the  ceremony  of  the  imposition  of  hands  ou  the  head  of  the 
victim,  it  is  to  be  found  in  the  forms  of  confession  which  their  writers  have  trans- 
mitted as  used  ordinarily  in  expiatory  sacrifices.  It  appears,  for  example,  that  when 
an  individual  presented  his  own  sacrifice,  he  laid  his  bauds  on  the  head  of  the 
offering,  saying  amongst  other  thii)gs,  "  Let  this  victiiu  be  my  expiation  " — woids 
which  were  universally  considered  equivalent  to  an  entreaty  that  evils  wbich  ought 
in  justice  to  have  alighted  upon  the  offender  might  fall  upon  the  sacrifice.  And  it 
is  every  way  worthy  of  note,  as  marking  the  traditional  idea  of  the  great  day  of 
expiation,  that  the  modern  Jews,  as  well  as  the  ancient,  hold  fast  the  notiou  of  a 
strict  propitiatory  atonement.  Where,  then,  can  be  the  ground  for  douliting,  that 
by  "atonement,"  in  our  text,  is  to  be  uuderstood  what  we  understand  by  it  in 
Christian  phraseology  ;  that  there  was  effected  a  real  removal  of  guilt  and  its 
consequences  from  the  Jewish  transgressor,  when  on  the  great  and  solemn  day  of 
expiation,  in  compliance  with  a  Divine  statute  an  atonement  wns  made  for  the 
cbildren  of  Israel  for  all  their  sins  once  every  year?  III.  And  here  we  bring  you 
back  to  the  main  argument  we  have  all  along  had  in  hand — the  infekking  from  the 

CHAKACTEE  OF    THE  LEGAL    SACRIFICE    THAT  OF  THE    CHRISTIAN.       If  yOU  CaU  OnCC  shoW 

that  the  sacrifices  of  the  law  typify  the  sacrifice  of  Christ,  and  that  the  sacrifices  of 
the  law  were  strictly  propitiatory,  it  follows  as  an  irresistible  deduction — notwith- 
standing the  cavils  of  philosophising  sects — that  the  Lamb  of  God  died  truly  as  a 
Sin-offering,  making,  by  His  death,  atonement  for  the  world.  Indeed,  if  no  reference 
were  made  to  the  Old  Testament,  the  language  of  the  New  is  so  explicit  that  nothing 
but  the  most  determined  prepossession  could  fail  to  find  in  it  the  doctrine  that 
Christ's  d^ath  was  a  propitiatory  sacrifice.  But  the  connection  between  the  two 
dispensations,  and  therefoie  the  two  Testaments,  is  so  strict  in  every  point,  tbat  it 
were  no  just  examination  of  the  gospel  which  would  keep  the  law  out  of  sight ; 
therefore  we  come  to  examine  more  definitely  the  correspondence  between  the 
sacrifice  of  the  Saviour  and  those  which  have  just  been  : viewed.  {H.  Melvill, 
B.D.)  The  Day  of  Atonement: — By  referring  to  ver.  29,  you  will  find  that  this 
Dny  of  Atonement  was  appointed  for  "the  seventh  mouth."  Seven,  as  you 
remember,  is  a  symbol  of  completeness.  This  location  of  these  solemnities  in  the 
seventh  month,  would  therefore  seem  to  refer  to  the  fact  noted  by  the  apostle,  that 
it  was  only  "when  the  fulness  of  the  time  was  come,  G.id  sent  forth  His  Son  to 
redeem  them  that  were  under  the  law."  He  lived  when  the  world  was  sufficiently 
at  peace  to  give  Him  a  hearing— when  the  human  mind  was  maturely  developed, 
and  competent  to  investigate  His  claims — when  the  ways  were  sufficiently  open  for 
the  immediate  universal  promulgation  of  His  gospel — and  when  the  experience  of 
four  thousand  years  was  before  men  to  prove  to  them  how  much  they  needed  such 
a  Teacher  and  Priest  as  He.  His  appearance,  therefore,  to  take  away  our  sins,  was 
in  "  the  fulness  lif  time" — in  the  Tisri  or  September  of  tbe  world — when  every- 
thing was  mature  and  ripe.  He  put  the  Day  of  Atonement  in  "  the  seventh 
month."  You  will  also  notice  that  this  great  expiation  service  occurred  but  once  in 
a  complete  revolution  of  time — "once  a  year."  A  year  is  a  full  and  comi:>lete 
period.  There  is  no  time  which  does  not  fall  within  the  year.  And  the  occurrence 
of  the  Day  of  Atonement  butonce  in  the  entire  year  plainly  pointed  to  another  great 
fact  noted  by  the  apostle,  that  "  Christ  was  once  ofieied  to  bear  the  sins  of  many." 
There  is  no  repetition  in  His  sacrificial  work.  "  Christ  was  once  offered"  ;  and  in 
that  one  offering  of  Himself,  all  the  eras  of  human  existence  were  condensed  and 
included.  It  was  the  event  of  this  world's  year.  It  is  also  to  be  observed,  that  the 
atoning  services  of  this  remarkable  day  had  respect  to  the  whole  nation  at  once. 
They  were  "  to  make  an  atonement  for  the  priests,  and  for  all  the  people  of  the 
congregation."  Most  of  the  other  offerings  were  personal,  having  respect  to 
particular  individuals,  and  to  special  cases  of  sin,  uncleanness,  or  anxiety.  But 
on  this  day  the  offerings  weic;  general,  and  the  atonement  had  respect  to  the  entire 
people.  This  recalls  another  great  evangelic  truth,  namely,  that  Christ  "  died  for 
all" — "gave  Himself  a  ransom  for  all" — "by  the  grace  of  God  tasted  death  for 
every  man  " — and  "  is  the  propitiation  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world."     I.  It  was 

TO    THE    HIGH    PRIEST    A  DAY    WHICH    IMPOSED    NUMEROUS    INCONVENIENCES,    ANXIETIES, 

AND  HUMILIATIONS.  And  SO  was  it  with  our  great  High  Priest  when  He  under- 
took to  expiate  the  guilt  of  man.  Separated  from  His  heavenly  home.  He 
became  a  suffering,  laborious,  self-denying  servant.  No  gold  glittered  upon 
His  brow,  or  tinkled  with  His  steps,  or  mingled  its  glory   with   royal  colours 


202  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

to  adorn   His   robe.     No   jewelry  sparkled   on  his   shoulders   or   on   His   breast. 
No   chariots  of  grMndeur  bore  Him  to  the  place  of  His  mighty  deeds   of   love. 
And  thus  amid  privations,  humiliations,  and  anxieties  which  made  Him  sorrowful 
even  unto  death,  did  He   go  through  with  the  services  of  tlie  great  day  of   the 
world's   expiation.     2.  It   was  to  the  high  priest   a   day  which  imposed  all   its 
services   upon   him   alone.      Thus,   when   Jesus  undertook  the  expiation   of  the 
world's  guilt,  "  of  the  people,  there  was  none  with  Him."     Isaiah  sa.vs,  "  I  looked, 
and  there  was  none  to  help."     His  "  own  arm  brought  salvation."     He  "  His  own 
self  bi  re  our  f-ins  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree."     3.  The  Day  of  Atonement  was  to 
tliH  high  priest  also  a  very  oppressive  and  exhausting  day.     His  duties,  in  his 
complete  isolation,  were  really  crushing.     So  laborious  and  trying  was  his  work 
that   after  it  was  over  the  people  gathered  round  him  with   symjjathy  and  con- 
gratulation that  he  was  brought  through  it  in  safety'.     But  it  was  only  a  picture  of 
that  still  more  cru^hing  load  which  was  laid  upon  our  great  High  Priest  when 
making  atonement  for  the  sins  of  the  world.     None  among  all  the  sons  of  the 
mighty  could  ever  have  performed  the  work  which  He  performed,  and  lived.     All 
His  life  through  there  was  a  weight  upon  Him  so  heavy,  and  ever  pressing  so 
mightily  upon  His  soul,  that  there  is  no  account  that  He  ever  smiled.     Groans  and 
tears  and  deep  oppression  accompanied  Him  at  almost  every  step.     And  when  we 
come  to  view  Him  in  His  agonising  watchings  and  prayers  in  the  garden,  and 
under  the  burdens  of  insult  and  wrong  which  were  heaped  upon  Him  in  the  halls 
of  judgment,  and  struggling  with  His  load  along  that  dolorous   wny   until  the 
muscles  of  His  frame  yielded,  and  He  fell  faint  upon  the  ground,  and  oppressed 
upon  the  Cross  until  His  inmost  soul  uttered  itself  in  cries  which  startled  the 
heavens  and  shook  the  world;  we  have  an  exhibition  of  labour,  exhaustion,  and 
distress,  at  which  we  may  well  sit  down  and  gaze,  and  wonder,  and  weep,  in  mere 
sympathy  with  a  sorrow  and  bitterness  beyond  all  other  sorrow.     II.  We  come  now 
to  LOOK  AT  THE  ATONEMENT  ITSELF.     Here  wc  find  that  several  kinds  of  offerings 
were  to  be  made.     The  object  was  to  make  the  picture  complete,  bv  bringing  out 
in  different  offerings  what  could  not  all  be  expressed  by  one.      They  were  only 
different  phases  of  the  same  unity,  pointing  to  the  one  offering  of  Jesus  "  Christ, 
who,  tlirough  the  eternal  Spirit,  offered  Himself  without  spot  to  God."     There  is  a 
multiplication  of  victims,  that  we  may  see  the  amplitude  and  varied  applications  of 
the  one  great  atonement  effected  by  Christ  Jesus.     The  most  vital,  essential,  and 
remarkable  of  these  atoning  services  was  that  relating  to  the  two  goats,  as  provided 
for  in  vers.  7-10,  15-17,  21,  22.    One  of  these  goats  was  to  be  slain  as  a  sin-offering, 
and  the  other  was  to  have  the  sins  of  Israel  laid  upon  its  head,  and  then  to  be 
taken  away  alive  and  left  in  the  wilderness.     The  one  typified  the  atonement  of 
Christ  in  its  means  and  essence ;   the  other  the  same  atonement  in  its  effects. 
III.  A  word  now  with  kegard  to  the  people  to  be  benefited  by  the  services  of 
this  remarkable  da.v.     That  the  services  and  offerings  of  this  day  were  m^ant  for 
the  entire  Jewish  nation  is  very  clear  and  distinct.     But  not  all  were  therefore 
reconciled   and   forgiven.      The   efficacy   of  these   services,   in   any   given    ease, 
depended  upon  the  individual  himself.     The  atonement  day  was  to  be  a  day  of 
contrition,  of  weeping,  of  soul-sorrow  for  sin,  of   confession,   reformation,    and 
return  to  God,  a  day  of  heart-melting  and  charity.     Without  these  accompani- 
ments its  oblations  were  vain,  its  incense  useless,  its  solemnities  but  idle  cere- 
monies.    And,  as  it  was  with  the  type,  so  it  is  with  the  Antitype.     Would  you, 
then,  have  Christ's  atoning  day  to  be  a  blessing  to  thy  soul,  come  to  it  with  a> 
moved  and  melting  heart ;  come  to  it  with  thy  spirit  bowed  for  thy  many,  many 
sins;  come  to  it  as  the  humbled  prodigal  came  back  to  the  kind  father  he  had 
wronged ;  come  to  it  as  the  poor  heart-broken  publican  came,  smiting  thy  guilty 
breast  and  crying,  "God  be  merciful  to  me  a   sinner!"     (/.    A.  Seiss,  D.D.) 
The  ceremonies  of  the  Day  of  Atonement : — The  Day  of  Atonement  was  one  of  the 
most  interesting,  as  it  was  perhaps  the  most  solemn  and  impressive,  of  all  the  holy 
days  of  the  Jews.     For  seven  days  previously  the  high  priest  had  been  making 
preparation  for  taking  up  his  abode  within  the  Temple  precincts.     The  services  of 
the  day  began  with  the  first  grey  light  of  dawn ;  for  then  th^ '  high  priest,  after 
performing  the  ordinary  morning  service,  arrayed  himself  in  his  fine  white  linen 
garments   and  prepared  to  go  within  the  awful  sanctuary  where  the  Shechinah 
dwelt.     But  first  he  must  confess  his  own  sins,  and  so  he  lays  his  hand  upon  the 
head  of  the  bullock,  which  was  to  be  for  his  sin-offering,  and  said,  "  0  Jehovah, 
J  have  committed  inicjuiiy,  /  have  sinned,  I  and  my  house."     Ten  times  in  this 
prayer  he  n-peated  the  name  of  Jelijvah— a  word  which  had  Ian  awful  significance 


CHAP.  XVI.]  LEVITICUS.  203 

in  the  ears  of  every  Jew  ;  and  every  time  he  repeated  it,  those  who  stood  near  cast 
themselves  with  their  faces  to  the  ground,  while  the  multitude  responded,  "  Blessed 
be  the  name  ;  the  glory  of  His  kingdom  is  for  ever  and  ever."  "  After  some  other 
ceremonies,"  says  Edersheim,  "  advancing  to  the  altar  of  burnt-offering,  he  next 
filleil  the  censer  with  burning  coals,  and  then  ranged  a  handful  of  frankincense  in 
the  dish  destined  to  hold  it.  Every  eye  was  now  strained  toward  the  sanctuary  as, 
: lowly  bearing  the  censer  and  the  incense,  the  figure  of  the  white-robed  priest  was 
seen  to  disappear  within  the  Holy  Place — the  place  that  had  never  been  visited  by 
any  other  except  the,  high  priest,  and  which  he  had  not  seen  for  a  full  twelve- 
month. After  that  nothing  further  could  be  seen  of  his  movements.  The  curtain 
of  the  most  Holy  Place  was  folded  back,  and  he  stood  alone  and  separated  from  all 
the  people  in  that  awful  gloom  of  the  holiest  of  all,  only  lit  up  by  the  red  glow  of 
the  coals  in  the  priest's  censer."  What  a  sight  met  his  eyes  as  they  became  accus- 
tomed to  the  gloom ! — the  mercy-seat;  on  either  side  the  outstretched  wings  of  the 
cherubim ;  and  above  them  the  visible  presence  of  Jehovah  in  the  cl'^ud  of  the 
Shechinah.  He  whose  name  alone,  in  after-\  ears,  the  Jews  dared  not  pronounce 
was  there,  and  upon  him,  revealed  in  the  cloud,  gazed  the  white-robed  priest  as  he 
stood  alone  in  that  awful  presence.  Then,  when  the  smoke  of  the  incense  filled 
the  place,  came  this  prayer  from  the  lips  of  the  priest:  "  May  it  please  thee,  0 
Lord  our  God,  and  the  God  of  our  fathers,  that  neither  this  day  nor  during  this 
year  any  captivity  come  upon  us.  Yet  if  captivity  befall  us  this  day  or  this  year, 
let  it  be  to  a  place  where  the  law  is  cultivated.  May  it  please  Thee,  0  Lord  our 
God,  and  the  God  of  our  fathers,  that  want  come  not  upon  us  either  this  day  or  this 
year.  But  if  want  visit  us  this  day  or  this  year,  let  it  be  due  to  the  liberality  of 
our  charitable  deeds."  After  further  prayer  and  other  ceremonies  the  priest  re- 
turned to  the  people,  and  then  began  perhaps  the  most  unique  and  interesting 
service  of  the  da.\ — the  sending  away  of  the  scapegoat.  Earlier  in  the  day  two 
goats,  as  similar  in  all  respects  as  could  be  found,  were  chosen;  lots  were  cast  upon 
their  heads,  one  being  reserved  for  a  sacrifice,  the  other  to  be  sent  into  the  wilder- 
ness. Upon  the  horns  of  tlie  latter  a  piece  of  scarlet  cloth  or  "  tongue  "  was  tii^d, 
telling  of  the  guilt  it  had  to  bear.  After  the  sacrificing  of  the  first  animal  the 
priest  laid  both  his  hands  upon  the  head  of  the  second  and  confessed  the  sins  of 
the  people.  "  0  Jehovah,  they  have  committed  iniquity ;  they  have  transgressed  ; 
they  bave  sinned,"  &c.  "Then,"  as  Edersheim  further  says,  "a  strange  scene 
would  be  witnessed.  The  priest  led  the  sin-burdened  goat  out  through  Solomon's 
Porch  and,  as  tradition  has  it,  through  the  Eastern  Gate,  which  opened  upon  the 
Mount  of  Olives.  Here  an  arched  bridge  spanned  the  intervening  valley,  and  over 
it  they  brought  the  goat  to  the  Mount  of  Olives,  where  one  specially  appointed  took 
him  in  charge."  The  distance  betwee  i  Jerusalem  and  the  beginning  of  the  wilder- 
ness was  divided  into  ten  stations,  where  one  or  more  persons  were  placed  to  offer 
refreshment  to  the  man  leading  the  goat,  and  then  to  accompany  him  to  the  next 
station.  At  last  they  reached  the  wilderness,  and  their  arrival  was  telegraphed  by 
the  waving  of  flags  from  one  station  back  to  another  until  in  a  few  minutes  "  it 
was  known  in  the  Temple  and  whispered  from  ear  to  ear  that  the  goat  had  borne 
upon  him  all  their  iniquities  into  a  laud  not  inhabited."  (F.  E.  Clark.) 
Spiritual  significance  of  the  ceremonies  on  the  Day  of  Atonement : — We  cannot 
regard  the  symboUcal  arrangements  of  this  Day  of  Atonement  without  feeling  that 
it  is  a  matter  of  supreme  importance,  of  urgent,  indispensable  necessity,  that  some 
means  be  devised  whereby  man  may  be  separated,  and  separated  for  ever,  from  his 
sins — their  guilt,  their  power,  their  memory.  All  the  ceremonies  of  this  day  declare 
this  fact,  as  do  all  the  arrangements  of  the  old  economy,  and  indeed  all  the  utter- 
ances of  God's  Word.  What  is  the  meaning  of  those  abortive  attempts  to 
discover  some  scapegoat,  who,  if  he  cannot  wholly  bear,  may  at  least  share  th". 
burden  and  the  blame?  The  religions  and  the  irreligious,  the  beliefs  and  the  in- 
fidelities of  men  declare  the  same  fact  with  unmistakable  plainness.  Nothing  can 
be  more  evident  than  that  men  have  the  haunting  consciousness  of  sin,  from  which 
they  seek  to  escape ;  some  in  one  way,  some  in  another.  Man  everywhere  ba^ 
knowledge  enough  of  sin  to  feel  that  it  would  be  indeed  a  good  thing  to  be  sepa- 
rated, if  not  from  sin  itself  (and  from  that  the  sinner  is  not  willing  to  part)  at  least 
from  those  wretched,  miserable  consequences  which  follow  in  its  train.  Turning 
away  from  the  vain  and  fruitless  efforts  of  men  in  this  direction,  we  find  that  what 
is  impossible  with  men  is  possible  with  God.  We  find,  indeed,  that  God  lias  inter- 
posed in  a  very  wonderful  way  to  secure  this  result — the  separation  of  man  from 
Bin,  and  all  the  hateful  and  deadly  consequences  of  sin,  and  that  by  the  sacrific.  and 


204  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

substitution  of  His  own  Son,  our  Saviour.  And  the  arrangements  of  the  Day  of 
Atonement  were  Divinely  ordered  that  th^y  might  prefigure,  in  its  character  and 
consequences,  that  true  atonement  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ — that  complete  and 
finished  sacrifice  offered  once  for  all  by  Him,  "  who  is  a  priest,  not  according  to 
the  law  of  a  carnal  commandment,  but  according  to  the  i^ower  of  an  endless  life  " 
— "  a  priest  for  ever,  after  the  order  of  MelchizeJek."  And,  as  we  have  already 
remarked,  our  attention  is  especially  directed  to  two  things — the  means  of  atone- 
ment, and  the  result,  the  consequences  of  atonement ;  in  other  words,  to  the 
sacrifice  for  sin,  and  the  separation  from  it.  We  have  a  picture  of  the  one  in  the 
goat  slain  and  the  blood  sprinkled ;  we  have  a  picture  of  the  other  in  the  leading 
forth  into  the  wilderness  of  the  sin-burdened  goat,  to  return  no  more.  The  truth 
to  which  there  is  need  for  the  most  express  testimony  to  be  borne  is  the  atonement 
of  Christ — atonement  by  means  of  blood-shedding  and  blood-sprinkling.  Whether 
men  bear  or  forbear,  whether  it  seem  to  them  wisdom  or  foolishness,  we  must 
everywhere  proclaim  the  same  truth,  that  the  only  atonement  made  known  in  God's 
Word  is  atonement  by  sacrifice  by  the  substitutionary  sacrifice  of  God's  own  Son. 
{T.  M.  Morris.)  The.  garments  of  the  priest: — They  were  of  pure  white  linen. 
The  ordinary  "  golden  garments  "  were  laid  aside,  for  only  the  vestments  of  snowy 
purity  must  be  worn  when  the  high  priest  enters  into  the  Holy  of  Holies.  The 
most  extraordinary  care,  too,  must  be  taken  to  avoid  defilement  of  every  kind.  Five 
times  during  the  Day  of  Atonement  must  the  priest  bathe  his  whole  body  ;  ten  times 
must  he  wash  his  feet ;  many  times  must  he  change  his  garments.  These  pre- 
cautions, at  first  thought,  seem  to  our  modern  views  unnecessary  and  finical,  but 
when  we  remember  Him  to  whom  all  these  svmbols  point,  what  type  can  express 
His  purity  who  was  holy,  harmless,  and  undefiled ;  who  lived  among  sinners  yet 
without  sin;  who  lived  in  leprous  Judaea  yet  without  spot  or  taint  of  leprosy? 
The  sinlessness  of  Christ !  What  can  typify  it  ?  The  snow,  perhaps  we  think,  as 
it  falls  from  the  laboratory  of  the  clouds,  each  flake  a  crystal  of  exquisite  form  and 
all  covering  with  a  fleecy  mantle  every  brown,  dirty,  unsightly  thing  in  the  land- 
scape. But  the  snow  itself,  when  it  touches  earth,  soon  becomes  defiled.  The 
lamb  washed  in  the  running  stream  soon  loses  his  purity;  the  high  priest  himself, 
even  for  a  single  day,  could  not  keep  his  garments  unpolluted,  but  must  change 
them  and  wash  his  flesh  over  and  over  and  over  ;  but  our  High  Priest  came  and 
lived  among  sinners  for  three-and-thirty  years,  and  yet  knew  no  sin.  Pure  as 
was  the  priest's  linen  robe,  it  is  but  a  poor,  faulty  representative  of  the  robe  of 
righteousness  of  our  High  Priest.  (F.  E.  Clark.)  There  shall  be  no  man  in  tlie 
Tabernacle  .  .  .  ichen  he  goeth  in  to  make  an  atonement : — Wben  sin  is  to  be  accounted 
for,  we  must  face  God  each  for  himself,  coming  alone,  one  by  one,  into  His  presence. 
Friends  and  loved  ones  can  be  with  us  in  sinning,  but  not  in  answering  for  sin. 
Help  and  cheer  and  sympathy  can  be  given  to  us  by  our  fellows,  up  to  the  time 
when  we  are  to  meet  God  and  give  an  account  of  ourselves  ;  then  "  every  one  of  us 
shall  give  account  of  himself  to  God,"  then  "every  man  shall  bear  his  own 
burden,"  then  "every  man  shall  receive  his  own  reward  according  to  his  own 
bibour,"  then  "  every  man's  work  shall  be  made  manifest,  for  the  day  shall 
declare  it,  because  it  shall  be  revealed  by  fire,  and  the  fire  shall  try  every  man's 
work  of  what  sort  it  is."  How  we  lean  on  human  helpers :  children  on  parents, 
husband  and  wife  on  one  another,  scholar  on  teacher,  people  on  pastor,  friend  on 
friend!  But  there  shall  be  no  one  of  these  earthly  supp  irters  with  us  when 
we  enter  the  holy  place  of  God's  presence,  seeking  an  atonement  for  our  sins. 
Then  we  must  stand  alone,  face  to  face  with  God.  (H.  C.  Trumbull.) 
Trusting  in  the  Substitute  : — A  good  old  Christian  woman  in  humble  life  was  once 
asked,  as  she  lay  on  her  dying  pillow,  the  ground  of  her  hope  for  eternity.  She 
replied,  with  great  composure,  "  I  rely  on  the  justice  of  God  "  ;  but  seeing  that  the 
reply  excited  surprise,  added,  "Justice,  not  to  me,  but  to  my  Substitute,  in  whom 
I    trust."  A    proffered    substitute : — During    the    Franco-Prussian    War,    an 

English  clergyman  was  travelling  in  the  district  occupied  by  the  German  army. 
There  he  met  a  German  gentleman,  whose  route  lay  in  the  same  direction,  and 
quickly  becoming  friends,  they  resolved  to  accompany  each  other.  As  they 
walked  out  one  day  they  saw  a  small  comjiany  of  soldiers  come  out  of  the  camp 
with  a  handcuffed  prisoner  in  their  midst.  Wondering  what  was  about  to  be  done, 
they  waited  until  the  party  had  approached,  then  asked  the  officer  what  they  were 
going  to  do  with  that  man.  "Shoot  him."  "Why?"  "  He  has  been  robbing  the 
dead,  and  by  the  law  of  the  laud  he  must  die."  "  Poor  man,"  said  the  clergyman, 
"is  he  prepared  to  die?  "  "  I  do  not  know,"  replied  the  officer,  "  but  you  can  speak 


CHiP.  XVI.]  LEVITICUS.  205 

to  bim  if  you  like."  The  minister  at  once  took  advantage  of  the  permission,  and 
began  to  speak  to  the  prisoner  about  liis  soul.  He  had  not  spoken  long  when  the 
wretched  man  burst  into  tears.  The  clergyman  stopped,  thinking  something  he 
had  said  had  broken  him  down,  but  he  was  speedily  undeceived  by  the  man  ex- 
claiming, "  Oh,  sir,  I  am  not  weeping  because  of  anything  you  have  said,  or 
because  I  am  going  to  die ;  I  am  weeping  because  I  do  not  know  what  will  become 
of  my  wife  and  children  when  I  am  gone."  These  words  touched  the  old  German 
gentleman,  who  said  as  he  gazed  with  tears  in  his  eyes  at  the  prisoner,  "I  tell  you 
what.  I  have  no  one  in  the  world  to  feel  my  loss.  I  shall  take  your  place,  and  as 
your  law  demands  a  life  I  shall  lay  down  mine."  And  turning  to  the  ofiicei ,  he 
continued,  "  Now,  please,  take  off  these  handcuffs  and  put  them  on  me."  "  But." 
interposed  the  Englishman,  "  think  what  you  are  doing;  is  there  no  one  who  will 
miss  you  ?  "  "No  one."  "  Well,"  said  the  officer,  as  soon  as  he  hail  recovered  from 
his  amazement,  "  I  have  no  power  to  do  what  you  wish,  but  you  can  come  to  the 
camp  and  hear  what  the  general  says."  But  it  turned  out  the  general  had  not  the 
power:  the  general,  however,  said,  "The  Crown  Prince  is  here,  and  he  has  the 
power."  To  the  Crown  Prince  they  went,  and  when  he  heard  the  strang^-  story  he 
was  very  much  affected.  "  Our  laws,"  he  said,  "  will  not  admit  of  a  substitute  being 
executed  for  another,  but  though  I  cannot  take  your  life,  I  can  give  you  a  present 
of  this  man's  hfe.  He  is  yours."  The  prince  could  pardon,  but  God  cannot 
pardon  without  a  Substitute,  even  Jesus  who  died  in  our  stead  that  W3  might  live. 
{W.  Thompson.)  Need  for  the  great  atonement : — Mr.  Hardeastle,  when  dying, 
said,  "My  last  act  of  faith  I  wish  to  be  to  take  the  blood  of  Jesus,  as  the  high 
priest  did  when  he  entered  behind  the  veil;  and  when  I  have  passed  the  veil  I 
would  appear  with  it  before  the  throne."  So,  in  making  the  transit  from  one  year 
to  another,  this  is  our  most  appropriate  exercise.  We  see  much  sin  in  the 
retrospect ;  we  see  many  a  broken  purpose,  many  a  misspent  hour,  many  a  rash 
and  unadvised  word  ;  we  see  much  pride  and  anger,  and  worldliness  and  unbelief ; 
we  see  a  long  track  of  inconsistency.  There  is  nothing  for  us  but  the  great  atone- 
ment. With  that  atonement  let  us,  like  believing  Israel,  end  and  begin  anew. 
Bearing  its  precious  blood,  let  us  pass  within  the  veil  of  a  solemn  and  eventful 
future.  Let  a  visit  to  the  fountain  be  the  last  act  of  the  closing  year,  and  let  a 
new  year  still  find  us  there.      {J.  Hamilton,  D.D.)  Christ's   ancesthesia   for 

the  remembrance  of  sin : — If  the  Creator  of  the  universe  has  pi'ovided  in  nature 
an  anaesthesia  for  physical  pain,  shall  He  not  much  more,  in  grace,  provide 
one  for  moral  pain?  There  is  a  wholesome  and  necessary  pain  for  both  the 
physical  and  the  moral  natures — the  pain  which  gives  warning  of  the  disease, 
or  indicates  its  presence;  but  when  the  physician  comes,  his  province  is  to 
effect  the  cure  without  the  pain  as  far  as  possible,  as  it  is  a  retarding  element 
in  the  process  of  recovery,  exhausting  the  patient's  strength,  which  is  all  needed 
for  recuperation.  Just  such  a  useless  devitalising  pain  for  the  soul  would  be 
the  eternal  regretful  remembrance  of  sin,  therefore  it  is  that  God  declares, 
"  Your  sins  and  transgressions  shall  not  be  remembered  nor  come  into  mind  "  ; 
"  Blessed  is  he  whose  transgression  is  covered  "  ;  "  Though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet, 
they  shall  be  as  white  as  snow."  "  As  far  as  the  east  is  from  the  west,  so  far  will  I 
remove  thy  transgressions  from  thee "  ;  "I  will  not  look  upon  them  nor  remember 
them."  And  yet  in  this  age  of  questioning  people  say,  "How  shall  I  not  re- 
member when  science  tells  me  memory  is  indestructible?"  As  well  may  the 
patient  in  his  incredulity  ask,  "  How  shaU  I  not  feel  the  knife  penetrating  to  the 
bone,  when  the  mere  scratch  of  a  pin  gives  me  pain  ?  "  Christ  is  the  aufEsthesia 
for  the  soul's  regretful  remembrance  of  sin.  Sinners  aliraijs  ready  to  conceal 
their  sin : — It  is  said  of  the  elephant  that  before  he  drinks  in  the  river  he 
troubleth  the  water  with  his  feet,  that  so  he  may  not  see  his  own  deformity,  and  it  is 
usual  with  such  as  are  well  struck  in  years,  not  so  much  to  mind  the  looking-glass, 
lest  therein  they  behold  nothing  but  hoUov/  eyes,  pale  cheeks,  and  a  wTinkled  front, 
the  ruins  of  a  sometime  more  beautiful  visage.  Thus  it  is  that  men  by  nature  are 
hardly  drawn  to  the  confession  of  their  sins,  but  every  man  is  ready  to  hide  his 
sins  by  excusing  them  with  Aaron,  by  colouring  them  with  fair  pretences,  as  did 
the  Jews,  by  laying  them  on  others  as  Adam  did,  or  by  denying  them  with  Solo- 
mon's harlots ;  they  are  ready  to  decline  sin  through  all  the  cases,  as  one  said 
wittily:  in  the  nominative  by  pride,  in  the  genitive  by  luxury,  in  the  dative  by 
bribery,  in  the  accusative  by  detraction,  in  the  vocative  by  adulation,  in  tlie 
ablative  by  extortion,  but  very  loth  to  acknowledge  them  in  any  case,  very  hardly 
brought  to  make  any  confession  of  them  at  all.    (T.  Adams.)         Value  of  repent- 


206  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

ance  .-  —  In  the  country  of  Arabia,  where  almost  fill  trees  are  savoury,  and  frank- 
incense and  myrrh  are  even  as  common  firewood,  styrax  is  sold  at  a  dear  rate, 
tliotigh  it  be  a  wood  of  unpleasant  smell,  because  experience  proveth  it  to  be  a 
present  remedy  to  recover  their  smell,  who  before  had  lost  it.     We  all  of  us  have 
lived  in  the  pleasures  of  sin,  have  our  senses  stuffed  and  debilitated,  if  not  over- 
come; and  the  best  remedy  against  this  malady  will  be  the  smelling  to  styrax,  the 
unsavoury  and  unpleasing  smell  of  our  former  corruptions ;  thus  David's  sin  was 
ever  before  him,  and  St.  Augustine  (as  Possidonius  noteth),  a  little  before  his  death, 
caused  the  penitential  psalms  to  be  written  about  his  bed,  which  lie  still  looking 
upon,  out  of  a  bitter  remembrance  of  his  sins,  continually  wept,  giving  not  over 
long  before  he  died.     This  practice  will  work  repentance  not  to  be  repented  of. 
(J.  Spencer.)         Christian's  confession   of  sin : — You   may  have   noticed   in    the 
biography  of  some  eminent  men  how  badly  they  speak  of  themselves.     Eobert 
Southey,  in  his  "  Life  of  Bunyan,"  seems  at  a  difficulty  to  understand  how  John 
Bunyan  could  have  used  such  depreciating  language  concerning  his  own  character. 
For  it  is  true,  according  to  all  we  know  of  his  biography,  that  he  was  not,  except  in 
the  case  of  profane  swearing,  at  all  so  bad  as  most  of  the  villagers.     Indeed,  there 
were  some  virtues  in  the  man  which  were  worthy  of  all  commendation.     Southey 
attributes  it  to  a  morbid  state  of  mind,  but  we  rather  ascribe  it  to  a  return  of  spiri- 
tual health.     The  great  light  which  shone  around  Saul  of  Tarsus  brighter  than  the 
midday  sun,  was  the  outward  type  of  that  inner  light  which  flashes  into  a  regene- 
rate soul,  and  reveals  the   horrible  character   of  the   sin  which   dwells  within. 
Believe  me,  when  you  hear  Christians  making  confessions  which  seem  to  you  to  be 
unnecessarily  abject,  it  is  not  that  they  are  worse  than  others,  but  that  they  see 
themselves  in  a  clearer  light  than  others.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)        Hindrances  to 
repentance   removed: — They  who  have  water  running  home  in  conduit  pipes  to 
their  houses,  as  soon  as  they  find  a  want  of  that  which  their  neighbours  have 
in  abundance,  by  and  by  they  search  into  the  causes,  run  to  the  conduit-head,  or 
take  up  the  pipes  to  see  where  they  be  stopped,  or  what  is  the  defect,  that  so  they 
may  be  supplied  accordingly.     Even  so  must  every  man  do,  when  he  finds  that  the 
grace  of  repentance  flows  into  other  men's  hearts,  and  hath  no  recourse  or  access 
into  his  soul,  by  and  by  sit  down  and  search  himself  what  the  cause  should  be, 
where  the  hindrance  is  that  stays  the  course,  where  the  rub  lies  which  stoppeth  the 
grace  of  repentance  in  him,  seeing  they  that  live  (it  may  be)  in  the  same  house,  sit 
at  the  same  table,  lie  in  the  same  bed,  they  can  be  penitent  for  their  sins,  sorry  that 
they  have  offended  God,  and  so  complain  in  bitterness  of  soul  for  their  sins  ;  but  he 
that  had  the  same  means,  the  same  occasions,  more  sins  to  be  humbled  for,  more 
time  to  repent,  and  more  motives  to  draw  him  to  the  duty,  is  not  yet  moved  with 
the  same,  nor  any  way  affected  with  the  sense  of  sin  ;  this  must  needs  be  matter  of 
high  concernment  to  look  about  him.     {J.  Spencer.)         True  repentance  : — I  think 
that  men  look  upon  repentance  and  humiUation  before  God  very  much  as  they  do 
upon  a  voyage  from  the  tropics  to  the  North  Pole.     Every  single  league  as  they 
advance  toward  tbe  Arctic  region  they  leave  more  and  more  behind  them  greenness, 
and  fruit,  and  warmth,  and  civilisation,  and  find  themselves  more  and  more  in 
the  midst  of  sterility,  barrenness,  ice,  and  barbarism.     I  think  that  men  repent 
toward  the  frigid  zones.     They  think  that  to  go  to  God  is  dreary  and  desolate  in  the 
extreme.     It  is  not.     The  sinner  is  an  Esquimaux !     He  lives  in  ice  and  burrows 
underground,  and  is  but  little  better  than  a  beast.      But  if    by  any  means  he 
becomes  fired  with  a  conception  of  a  better  clime,  and  leaving  his  hibernating 
quarters,  he  takes  tbe  ship  Repentance  and  sails  toward  the  torrid  zone,  at  every 
league  he  is  surprised  by  the  new  forms  of  vegetation  by  which  he  is  surrounded.   Ho 
has  seen  oak-trees  only  about  as  high  as  his  knee.     Not  long  after  he  sets  out  on 
his  voyage  he  is  astonished  to  see  them  as  high  as  his  head.   By  and  by,  as  he  draws 
near  the  tropics,  he  is  lost  in  wonder  and  ecstasy  to  see  them  lifting  themselves 
far  above  him  in  the  air.    And  with  what  satisfaction  does  he  compare  the  deliglitful 
home  that  he  has  found  with  the  miserable  one  that  he  has  It  ft  behind.     (H.  W. 
Beecher.)        Two  kids  of  the  goats  for  a  sin-offering.— C/tr/st  typified  by  the  two 
goats:— 1.  As  to  the  goat  that  w.as  put  to   death.     To   die   as   a   sacrifice   for 
human  guilt  was  the  great  end  of  Christ's  life  and  mission  into  our  world.     Thus 
was  He  represented  by  the  goat  that  was  sacrificed.   Notice  how  the  figure  was  still 
further  carried  out.    II.  In  the  goat  which  was  kept  alive.     1.  Over  the  head 
of  this  goat  the  sins  of  the  people  were  confessed,  and  on  it  symbolically  laid. 
Thus  Jesus  came  to  be  our  Surety  and  Substitute.     2.  Iniquities,  transgressions, 
and  sins,  were  conftssed  and  laid  on  the  scapegoat.    Showing  us  here  the  extent 


CHAP.  XVI.]  LEVITICUS.  207 

of  Christ's  sacrifice  for  all  kinds  of  guilt,  whether  arising  from  neglect  of  God's 
commands  or  the  wilful  violation  of  His  righteous  prohibitions.  In  the  sacrifice 
of  Christ  there  was  an  atonement  for  every  kind  of  sin,  and  for  all  grades  and 
classes  of  sinners.  3.  The  scapegoat  was  dismissed  into  the  wilderness  with  the 
imputed  iniquity  of  the  people  upon  it.  Thus  has  Jesus  truly  borne  our  guilt 
away.  He  has  obtained  for  a  world  of  transgressors  the  offer  of  pardon.  Fur  the 
polluted  race  of  Adam  the  means  of  purity.  For  condemned  and  dying  sinners 
the  favour  of  God  and  the  gift  of  eternal  life.  Notice — III.  How  the  benefits  of 
THE  scapegoat  WERE  CONFERRED  UPON  THE  PEOPLE.  Aaron  was  to  lay  both  his 
hands  upon  the  head  of  the  scapegoat,  and  there  confess  all  the  sins  of  the  people. 
How  clearly  does  this  show  us  the  app  )inted  medium  by  which  we  enjoy  the  salva- 
tion of  Christ.  1.  There  must  be  implicit  faith  or  confidence  in  His  person  and 
sacrifice.  2.  Faith  in  Jesus  will  ever  bo  accompanied  by  sincere  rep  ntance.  It 
will  be  connected  with  ingenious  confession,  deep  contrition,  entire  self-abasement, 
and  self -loatbing  before  God,  with  earnest  forsaking  of  the  paths  of  impenitence 
and  sin.  Application  :  1.  We  see  here  the  connection  between  sin  and  death.  Sin 
deserves  death,  exposes  to  death  ;  where  it  is  unforgiven  it  will  involve  in  eternal 
death.  "  The  soul  that  sinneth,"  &c.  2.  In  Christ's  death  is  the  only  real  sacrifice 
for  sin  :  "He  died  for  our  sins."  "What  a  glorious  truth!  How  precious!  how 
momentous  1  3.  Faith  is  the  only  medium  of  securing  to  the  soul  the  benefits  of 
that  death.  (J.  Burns,  D.D.)  Lessons  .-—1.  Of  tbe  divers  lots  appointed  for 
men,  of  some  unto  life,  some  unto  death.  2.  Ministers  should  have  a  great  care  to 
govern  their  families.  3.  Christ  alone  sufficient  to  save  us.  4.  Eemission  of  sins 
not  procured  by  any  strength  in  man,  but  by  faith  in  Christ.  5.  Eighteousness  not 
by  the  words  of  the  law,  but  by  faith  only  in  Christ.  {A.  Willet,  D.D.)  Moral 
observations : — 1.  Divine  secrets  not  curiously  to  be  searched  into.  2.  To  approach 
and  draw  near  before  God  with  holiness  and  reverence.  3.  Of  the  force  and 
efficacy  of  prayer.  4.  Of  the  profit  and  fruit  of  fasting.  5.  Eemission  of  sins  only 
granted  to  the  penitent.  6.  Evil  thoughts  and  lusts  to  be  cast  away.  (Ibid.) 
The  tivo  goats : — The  two  goats  really  formed  one  and  the  same  figure — one  was 
slain  and  one  was  led  off  into  the  wilderness ;  but  to  typify  that  the  figure  was  one, 
and  the  same,  they  must  both  be  exactly  alike,  they  must  cost  thu  s>ime  price, 
they  must  be  bought  at  the  same  time ;  one  was  slain  for  sin,  the  other  was  led 
away  far  into  the  wilderness,  bearing  the  sins  of  all  the  people  laid  upon  His 
head.  Our  Lord,  in  His  life  and  death,  combined  both  these  tjpes.  He  was 
slain  for  sin  and  bears  the  sin  away.  There  is  one  element  of  this  ceremonial  that 
we  must  carefully  note.  The  idea  of  vicarious  sacrifice  is  very  prominent.  This 
element  must  never  be  lost  out  of  our  doctrine  of  the  atonement.  An  atonement 
v/ithout  the  sacrifice  is  no  atonement.  "  According  to  the  law  I  may  almost  say  all 
things  are  cleansed  with  blood,  and  apart  from  the  shedding  of  blood  is  no  remission." 
Bring  every  beautiful  thought  and  theory  into  the  atonement  that  belongs  there : 
the  example,  the  upholding  of  law,  tbe  lustral  effect  on  man's  moral  nature,  are  all 
there  ;  but  this  is  there  too.  Through  the  vicarious  sacrifice  of  the  God  Man  our 
sins  are  borne  for  ever  away  into  the  wilderness,  and  are  remembered  no  more 
against  us.  {F.  E.  Clark. )  The  two  fjoats — varimon  interpretations : — There  have 
been  disputes  about  the  interpretation  of  this.  I  may  state  that  Faber,  a  very  acute 
and  able  critic  upon  Leviticus,  thinks  that  the  one  goat  was  sacrificed  for  sin — 
representing  Christ's  death ;  that  the  scapegoat  was  dedicated  to  the  evil  spirit — 
representing  Christ  put  into  the  power  of  Satan  to  be  tempted  in  the  wilderness. 
The  reason  that  he  thinks  so  is  that  the  word  for  goat  of  "  scape  "  is  azazel;  and 
that  name  was  applied  to  the  fallen  spirit  by  the  Jews.  And  therefore  Faber 
thinks  it  was  one  goat  for  a  sacrifice — to  denote  CI  rist's  atonement;  the  other 
goat  let  loose  to  Satan,  or  sent  away  to  Satan — to  represent  the  Saviour  given  up 
into  the  hands  of  the  wicked  one  to  be  tempted  for  a  season.  The  second  interpre- 
tation is  bv  Bush,  the  American  commentator,  a  man  of  great  sagacity  and  talent; 
and  he  thinks  that  the  one  goat  that  was  slain  as  a  sacrifice  represented  Christ's 
atonement  for  us,  but  that  the  other  goat  represented  the  Jewish  races  let  loose, 
bearing  the  fearful  resr>onsibility  of  having  trodden  under  foot  the  precious  blood 
of  Christ,  and  crucified  the  Son  of  God,  and  stained  their  name  and  their  nation 
with  the  infamy  of  that  crime ;  and  that  they,  a  blasted  race,  driven  into  the  desert, 
were  represented  by  the  scapegoat  that  was  here  let  go.  And  he  thinks  on  the 
same  ground,  that  when  the  lots  were  cast,  and  Jesus  was  condemned  and  Barabbas 
was  let  go,  that  that  was  the  carrying  out  of  the  same  great  symbol — Barabbas,  the 
representative  of  the  Jews,  let  go,  but  branded  with  an  inexpiable  crime  ;   and 


203  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [c:iap.  xvi. 

Jesus,  the  Great  Atonement,  sacrificed  for  the  sins  of  all  that  believe.  These  criti- 
cisms, however,  are  more  plausible  than  true.  I  do  think  the  old-Uishioned  inter- 
pretation is  the  just  one,  and  there  is  no  valid  reason  for  superseding  it :  that  the 
one  goat  sacriticed  on  the  altnr  was  the  symbol  of  Christ  our  Saviour  or  Atonement 
sacrificed  for  us;  and  that-  tlie  cither  goat  let  loose  into  the  desert  was  the  symbol 
and  representation  to  the  children  of  Israel  of  Jesus  rising  from  the  dead,  lieiiring 
the  sins  that  He  had  exhausted,  entering  into  heaven,  and  there  ever  living  to  make 
intercession  for  us.  I  know  there  are  difficulties  even  in  accepting  the  last  of  these ; 
but  those  difhculties,  if  they  do  not  completely  vanish,  are  much  diluted  when  you 
notice  the  accompaniments  or  the  rites  by  which  this  gnat  was  let  loose  into  the 
wilderness :  that  the  priest  was  to  lay  his  hands  upon  the  head  of  the  scapegoat — 
the  one  that  was  presented  aUve ;  over  it  he  was  to  confess  a.l  the  sins  of  the 
children  of  Israel,  and  then  this  scapegoat  was  let  loose  with  the  sins  of  Israel  upon 
its  head.  Now,  the  very  phi aseolot'y  that  is  applied  to  the  scapegoat  is  applied 
to  Jesus:  "Behold  the  Lamb  of  God  that  takeih  away" — that  carrieth  away — 
"  the  sins  of  the  world."  And  I  cannot  conceive  a  more  beautiful  type  of  Christ 
our  Saviour,  or  a  more  expressive  exhibition  of  the  mode  in  which  we  become 
interested  in  Him  than  that  of  the  high  priest  laying  his  hand  upon  his  head, 
transferring  the  sins  of  Israel  to  it,  dismissing  it,  and  the  sins  blotted  out,  no  more 
remembered,  carried  mto  a  desert,  passed  away  from  the  reminiscf^nces  of  Israel 
and  of  God  for  ever.  (J.  Cumming,  D.D.)  The  cloud  of  the  incense. — Liter- 
cession  of  Christ : — 1.  The  doctrine  of  the  intercession  of  Christ.  1.  As 
typically  exhibited  under  the  law.  2.  As  actually  fulfilled  in  Christ.  He  not  only 
suffered  on  the  Cross,  but  ascended;  not  on  His  own  account,  but  ours.  Illustrated 
by  cmmon  analogies  :  as  an  advocate  appears  on  behalf  of  his  clients ;  a  king  on 
behalf  of  his  subjects ;  a  general  as  representative  of  his  troops  ;  a  priest  at  the 
altar  as  representative  of  whule  body  of  worshippers  ;  so  Christ  appears  as  the 
representative  of  all  His  believing  people.  As  our  King  He  appears  in  beauty  ;  as 
Captain  of  salvation  appears  victorious  ;  as  Elder  Brother ;  as  Priest,  Counsellor, 
Advocate.  Grand  expression  of  His  love.  Not  content  to  offer  one  life  on  the 
Cross.  He  consecrates  His  new  existence.  Though  raised  to  the  throne  of  reve- 
rence, does  not  overlook  His  little  Hock  (John  xvii.).  II.  The  benkkits  we  derive 
FROM  IT.  1.  The  forgiveness  of  our  sins.  "If  any  man  sin."  After  all  done  for 
us,  we  are  guilty  and  undeserving.  But  while  our  sins  are  crying  out  against  us  on 
earth,  Christ  is  pleading  in  heaven.  2.  Belief  of  our  sorrows.  Christ  pos-^esses  a 
cap'icity  of  sympathy,  especially  in  mental  distresses,  tenderness  of  conscience,  <fec. 
Hannah  prayed,  but  Eli's  heart  was  not  touched  with  feeling  of  her  infirmity. 
3.  The  acceptance  of  our  duties.  These  are  maimed  and  imperfect.  Enough  evil 
in  them  to  render  them  offensive  and  displeasing  to  God.  But  Christ  presents 
them  (Rev.  viii.  2).  4.  The  frustration  of  spiritual  enemies.  Satan  is  the 
avenger,  but  Christ  is  our  Advocate.   "Peter,  I  have  prayed  for  thee."   (S.  Thodey.) 

Vers.  20-22.  The  goat  shall  hear  upon  Mm  all  their  iniquities. — The  scapegoat 
a  ti/pe  of  Christ: — I.  The  typical  sacrifice  here  enjoined.  1.  Appointed  by 
God.  Therefore  an  atonement  fully  equal  to  our  guilt ;  a  full,  perfect,  and  suffi- 
cient sacriiice ;  an  oblation  which  satisfies  the  unbending  law  and  even  the  infinitely 
holy  mind  of  the  great  Jehovah,  which  leaves  justice  nothing  to  ask  for,  and  the 
redeemed  sinner  nothing  to  dread.  2.  The  efficacy  of  the  sacrifice  enjoined  in  it  must 
be  traced  to  the  Divine  appointment.  II.  The  conduct  which  Aaron  was  commanded 
TO  observe  with  respect  to  it.  The  mere  appointment  of  these  two  animals  as  a 
sin-off"ering  was  not  sntficieut  to  atone  for  the  transgressions  of  the  Israelites  :  the 
one  must  be  slain,  and  the  other  must  be  presented  before  the  Lord  and  have  a 
particular  ceremony  performed  over  it,  before  Israel  can  be  pardoned.  1.  A  part 
of  this  ceremony  consisted  in  the  confession  of  guilt.  We  are  called  on  to  be  very 
earnest  in  our  efforts  to  become  acquainted  with  the  full  extent  of  our  depravity  ;  to 
be  often  looking  into  our  hearts  and  reviewing  our  lives,  and  to  be  particular  and 
minute  in  acknowledging  the  sins  which  we  discover  there.  2.  It  tells  us  that  the 
high  priest,  after  having  confessed  over  the  goat  the  sins  of  the  people,  was  to 
transfer  them  to  the  victim  before  him  ;  he  was  to  put  them  on  its  head,  thus  inti- 
mating that  their  guilt  no  longer  rested  on  them  but  on  the  devoted  animal  on 
which  his  hands  were  laid.  The  spiritual  meaning  of  this  part  of  the  ceremony  is 
plain.  It  was  designed  to  teach  us  figuratively  the  same  blessed  truth  which  has 
now  been  revealed  to  us  without  a  figure,  and  which  constitutes  the  substance  and 
glory  of  the  gospel,  that  "  Christ  has  redeemed  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law,  being 


CHAP.  XVI.]  LEVITICUS.  203 

made  a  curse  for  us  "  ;  that  "  He  bare  our  sins  in  His  own  body  on  the  tree  " ;  that 
the  Lord  hath  laid  on  Him  "tlie  iniquities  of  us  all."     HI.  The  benefits  which 

RESULTED    FROM     AaRON's      OBEDIEXCE      TO     THE    INJUNCTIONS    GIVEN    HIM.       After   the 

appointed  confession  had  been  made  over  it,  and  the  sins  of  tbe  people  put  upon 
its  head,  the  goat  was  to  be  sent  away  into  an  uninhabited  wilderness.  1.  This 
was  undoubtedly  designed  to  show  us  the  completeuess  of  that  pardon  of  sin 
which  Christ  has  purchased  by  tbe  sacrifice  of  Himself  for  the  believing  sinner.  It 
is  a  pardon  extending,  not  to  a  few  iniquities,  but  to  all.  2.  But  the  pardon  the 
beheving  penitent  receives  through  Christ  is  an  everlasting,  as  well  as  a  complete 
pardon.  This  is  strongly  implied  in  the  text.  The  goat  was  not  only  to  bear  away 
all  tbe  iniquities  of  the  children  of  Israel,  but  it  was  to  bear  them  away  into  "  a 
wilderness,"  into  "  a  land  not  inhabited  "  ;  a  land  cut  off  from  all  other  countries  ; 
a  desolate,  unvisited,  and  almost  inaccessible  region,  in  which  the  devoted  animal 
was  to  be  let  go,  and  where  it  would  remain  unseen  and  forgotten  till  it  perished. 
The  Israelites  therefore  had  not  only  the  assurance  that  all  their  past  iniquities 
were  pardoned,  but  they  were  taught  also  by  this  ordinance  that  they  had  no 
reason  to  fear  the  return  of  them,  or  the  revoking  of  this  pardon.  (G.  Bradley, 
M.A.)  The  scapegoat : — I.     The  scapegoat  represented  the  substitution  op 

Christ  in  the  place  of  sinners.  II.  This  substitution  of  Christ  has  made  ample 
satisfaction  for  sin.  III.  This  aionement  by  Christ  extends  to  all  sins.  1. 
Iniquities.  Some  say  these  refer  to  our  original  depravity.  2.  Transgressions. 
The  violations  of  the  positive  laws  of  God.  3.  Sins.  Neglect  of  His  boly  com- 
mands. Perhaps  they  are  used  to  denote  that  the  scapegoat  bore  away  sins  of 
every  kind  and  description.  IV.  That  Christ,  as  typified  by  the  sc.ipegoat,  has 
effected  substitution  for  all  people.  V.  In  what  way  the  benefits  of  Christ's 
substitution  are  RECEIVED.  1.  Faith  is  requisite.  2.  Sins  confessed  and  repented 
of.  Application :  1.  Man's  criminal  and  dangerous  condition.  Laden  with 
iniquities  and  sins.  2.  The  only  way  of  avoiding  the  terrible  results  of  trans- 
gression. "  By  Jesus  Christ."  3.  The  only  means  by  which  the  blessings  of 
salvation  are  to  be  received.  By  true  repentance  and  faith  in  Jesus  Christ.  4.  Let 
all  men  thus  avail  themselves  of  the  redemption  that  is  in  Christ.  {J.  Burns,  D.D.) 
The  scapegoat: — I.  The  innocent  victim.  1.  Innocent.  Had  no  sins  of  its  own 
to  bear.  Thus  Jesus  Christ  (1  Pet.  ii.  24).  With  sins  of  its  own  how  could  it 
atone  for  the  sins  of  others  ?  No  man  selected  who  might  ceremonially  bear  the 
sins  of   the   people   away,  and  then    return    after    being    ceremonially    purified. 

2.  Divinely  selected.  Chosen  by  lot.  "  The  lot  is  cast  into  the  lap,  but  tbe  whole 
disposing  tberepf  is  of  the  Lord."  Jesus  was  the  Lamb  of  God.  The  lamb  of 
Divine  selection.      Hence  how  great  should   be  our  confidence   in   this  Saviour ! 

3.  Eepresentative.  Goat  generally  regarded  as  representing  evil  propensities,  and 
therefore  as  specially  illustrating  the  wicked  (Matt.  xxv.  32-46).  So  Jesus  took  our 
nature.  Likeness  of  men  and  of  sinful  flesh  (Phil.  ii.  7;  Rom.  viii.  3).  II.  The 
IMPUTED  TRANSGRESSIONS.  1.  Of  all  the  people,  and  all  their  iniquities.  Vast 
number,  variety,  &c.,  of  their  sins.  Jesus  gave  Himself  a  ransom  for  all.  Died  for 
our  sins.  2.  Transferred  from  the  people  by  tbe  wiU  of  God.  By  the  grace  of  God 
Jesus  tasted  death  for  us.  Our  sins  laid  upon  Him  according  to  the  mercy  of  God. 
3.  Transferred  by  the  priest  with  confession.  They  were  to  be  acknowledged  as  the 
people's  sins.  Confession  of  sin  a  condition  of  our  acceptance.  Not  that  God  does 
not  know,  but  that  the  act  of  confession  brings  our  guilt  home  more  to  our  own 
heart,  and  tends  to  promote  humility  and  an  earnest  desire  for  mercy.  Besides, 
God  has  willed  it  (chap.  v.  5  ;  Hos.  v.  15),  and  added  promises  of  rnercy  tosuch  as 
obey  (chap.  xxvi.  40-42 ;  Prov.  xxviii.  13).  And  pardon  follows  (Psa.  xxxii.  5 ;  1  John 
i.  9).  4.  Bearing  tbis  burden,  the  goat  was  then  lead  away  into  the  wilderness. 
Away  from  the  camp,  whither  it  might  never  return  to  defile  it.  The  iniquity  to  be 
clean  gone  for  ever.  The  people  not  to  be  punished  for  the  sins  thus  "  removed 
far  "  from  them.  Christ  bore  our  reproaches,  and  was  crucified  outside  the  camp. 
III.  The  delivered  people.  1.  Deliverance  from  sin  the  greatest  deliverance. 
Other  deliverances  being  temporal,  but  this  eternal ;  others  bodily,  &c.,  this 
spiritual.  2.  It  would  promote  happiness.  They  felt  that  a  great  load  had  been 
removed.  Eejoiced  in  spiritual  liberty.  The  joy  of  imputed  innocence.  Now 
looked  upon  with  favour,  their  sins  being  borne  away.  "  As  far  as  the  east  is  from 
the  west,  so  far  hath  He  removed  our  transgressions  from  us."  3.  It  would  excite 
gratitude.  Otherwise  they  would  have  had  to  answer  for  their  sins.  Apply  this  to 
Jesus,  and  those  who  are  saved  from  wrath  through  Him.  Learn — 1.  Christ  Jesus 
•was  holy,  harmless,  undefiled,  and  separate  from  sinners.     2.  He  made  Him  to  be 

14 


210  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

sin  for  us,  who  knew  no  sin,  that  we  might  be  made,  &c.  3.  The  duty  of  confession 
and  personal  faith.  (J.  C.  Gray.)  The  scapegoat: — I.  That  the  separation  of 
MAN  FBOJi  HIS  SINS  IS  A  SUBJECT  OF  TKEiiENDOus  MOMENT.  1.  The  moral  Struggles  of 
mankind  show  the  necessity  of  man  being  separated  from  his  sins.  2.  The 
influence  of  sin  on  human  nature  shows  this.  It  has  mortalised  our  bodies, 
clouded  our  intellects,  polluted  our  affections,  burdened  our  consciences,  enfeebled 
and  enslaved  our  powers.     3.  The  intervention  of  Christ  shows  this.     II.  That 

A    PENITENTIAL    APPKOACH     TO      GoD    THKOTJGH     SACRIFICE    IS    THE    DiVINE    METHOD    OF 

SEPARATION.     1.  Sin  dcservcs  death.     2.  Through  the  death  of  another,  the  sinner's 
death  may  be  avoided.    III.  That  the  separation  of  man  from  his  sin,  if  effected 
THROUGH  THE  TRUE  SACRIFICE,  IS  COMPLETE.     {HomUist.)       AJuTi's  need  of  a  scapc- 
goat : — As  soon  as  man  sins,  and  his  conscience  becomes  at  all  alive  to  the  fact, 
and  troublesome  on  account  of  it,  he  begins  at  once  to  look  around  for  some  "  scape- 
goat."    The  sinner  always  feels,  after  the  first  flush  and  excitement  of  sin  have 
passed  away,  and  the  fire  of  its  passion  has  died  out,  that  it  would  be  an  ex- 
ceedingly desirable  thing  to  put  the  guilt,  burden,  and  consequences  of  sin  as  com- 
pletely away  from  himself  as  possible.     Now  that  the  fleeting  pleasure  of  sin  has 
been  extracted  and  only  the  bitter  dregs  remain,  the  sinner  would  willingly  and 
by  any  means  get  quit  of  them,  and  so  he  casts  around  a  glance  of  inquiry,  hoping 
to  discover  some  "  scapegoat  "  with  whom  he  may  share  the  blame  of  sin,  or  upon 
whom  he  may  put  it  altogether.      The  first  sinners,  in  this  matter,  set  an  example 
which  all  sinners  from  that  time  to  this  have  diligently  copied.     Adam  shabbily  put 
the  blame  upon  his  wife,  and  Eve  foolishly  put  the  blame  upon  the  serpent,  and 
both  impiously  sought  to  put  the  blame  upon  God.     Do  we  not  in  the  offering  of 
these  vain  excuses  see  our  first  parents  looking  about  for  a  "  scapegoat,"  who  shall 
at  least  share  the  burden  of  their  recently  contracted  and  still  unacknowledged  and 
unabsolved  guilt  ?    And  thus  has  it  been  with  all  sinners  from  that  time  to  this. 
Still  do  we  find  men  seeking  to  explain  the  fact  of  sin,  and  to  excuse  the  guilt  of 
sin,  by  referring  to  something  outside  of  themselves.     A  man,  for  instance,  commits 
some  sin  :  his  conscience  calls  him  to  some  kind  of  reckoning.     And  what,  under 
such  circumstances,  does  he  do  ?      He  does  not,  it  is  to  be  fe  ired,  cry  out  in  peni- 
tence before  God,  "  Against  Thee,  Thee  only  have  I  sinned,  and  done  this  evil  in  Thy 
sight,"  but  instead  of  this  he  looks  about  for  some  "  scapegoat."      His  conscience 
charges  him  with  having  told  a  lie.      Well,  if  it  were  a  lie,  it  was  a  very  white  one  ; 
it  was  certainly  told  with  the  very  best  of  intentions ;  it  was  to  obviate  some  very 
unpleasant  consequences  which  would  have  injuriously  atfected  not  only  himself 
but  others.     A  man  gets  drunk.     He  cannot  but  admit  that  he  was  "  overtaken," 
or  "overcome,"  but  he  would  like  all  his  friends  to  know  that  the  circumstances 
were  very  peculiar,  indeed,  quite  exceptional ;  it  was  the  excitement  of  the  company 
which  led  him  on,  and  not  the  love  of  the  drink.      Another  man  takes  some  unfair 
advantage  of  his  neighbour  :  Well,  he  dares  to  say  that  his  neighbours  have  often 
taken  advantage  of  him.     He  swears :  'Tis  an  old  habit  into  which  he  unconsciously 
lapses.     He  indulges  in   ungovernable  outbursts  of  anger :  Well,  he  always  had 
a  hasty  temper,  and  no  one  could  know  how  much  he  had  to  annoy  and  provoke 
him.     You  remind  a  man  that  he  is  very  seldom  found  in  God's  house  on  the  Lord's 
day,  and  might  be  very  often  met  in  the  fields,  or  on  the  river  or  rail :  He  knows  it 
isn't  altogether  the  right  sort  of  thing  to  do  ;  he  certainly  was  brought  up  differently 
at  home  and  at  school ;  but  then  he  is  so  pent  up  during  the  week  that  he  wants  a 
little  fresh  air  on  Sunday.     You  expostulate  with  another  who,  while  rarely  or 
never  running  into  any  actual  excess,  spends  a  great  deal  too  much  time  and  money 
in  the  public-house.     He   excuses  himself  by  reminding  ynu  that  persons  in  his 
station  have  not  the  same  comforts  at  home  which  those  have  who  live  in  larger 
houses  and  on  larger  incomes  ;  and  that  those  who  expostulate  or  condemn  would 
moderate  their  complaints  if  they  knew  more   about  the  matter.     And  thus,  but 
that  time  would  fail  us,  I  might  go  through  a  much  longer  catalogue,  and  show  you 
how  in  every  case  men,  as  soon  as  their  conscience  becomes  troublesome,  look  about 
instinctively  for  some  scapegoat.      They  endeavour  to  discover  something  in  their 
character,  their   temperament,  their   circumstances,   tbeir  education,    their   com- 
panionship, their  occupation — something,  in   short,  outside  of  themselves,  which 
shall  bear  in  some  degree  the  blame  and  guilt  of  sin,  which  all  the  while  they  are 
indulging  and  cherishing.    All  such  attempts  are  vain.    All  such  excuses  empty 
and  unavailing.     These  scapegoats  break  down  under  the  burden  imposed  upon 
them,  and  have  no  power  to  carry  the  guilt,  the  bitterness,  the  clinging  memory  of 
one  single  sin  into  the  wilderness  of  oblivion.     It  is  my  pleasing  task  to  direct  your 


CHAP.  XVI.  LEVITICUS.  211 

attention  to  the  true  Scapegoat :  the  provision  vvliich  God  Himself  has  made  for 
separating  the  sinner  from  his  sins,  and  from  all  their  terrible  consequences,  finally 
and  for  ever.  A  provision  which  in  its  Divine  fulness  is  sufficient  to  meet,  and 
more  than  meet,  all  the  exigences  of  our  sinful  nature.  (T.  M.  Morris.)  Heathen 
imitations  of  the  scapegoat: — From  this  law  of  God,  no  doubt,  did  spring  that 
custom  among  the  heathen  who,  offering  sacrifices,  used  to  ban  and  curse  the  head 
of  the  beast  offered  in  sacrifice  with  these  words,  "  That  if  any  evil  be  so  come, 
either  upon  the  sacrificers  themselves,  or  upon  the  whole  country  of  Egypt,  it  would 
please  the  gods  to  turn  all  upon  that  head."  The  Massilians  also  yearly  used  to 
make  an  atonement  or  expiation  for  their  city  with  some  holy  man,  whom,  decked 
and  set  out  with  holy  garments  and  with  garlands,  after  the  manner  of  a  sacrifice, 
they  led  through  the  city,  and  putting  all  the  evils  upon  his  head  that  might  any- 
way hang  over  their  city,  they  cast  him  into  the  sea,  sacrificing  of  him  so  unto 
Neptune,  speaking  these  words  with  great  solemnity,  "  Sis  pro  nobis  piaculum  " 
<"  Be  thou  an  expiation  for  us  ").  Thus  the  heathen  caught  at  things,  but  not  in  a 
right  manner,  whereby  we  may  well  see  what  a  darkness  it  is  to  be  deprived  of  the 
light  of  the  Word  of  God.  In  like  manner  receiving  it  from  the  doctrine  of  the  old 
Fathers,  by  the  tradition  of  Noah's  sons,  that  there  should  in  time  come  a  Man 
who,  taking  upon  Him  the  sins  of  all  men,  should  become  a  sacrifice  for  the 
salvation  of  all  men ;  and  notwithstanding  the  manner  how  this  sbould  be,  they 
used  in  great  extremities  and  perils — as  plagues,  famine,  wars,  &c. — to  offer  np  men 
to  their  gods  to  appease  their  wrath  thereby.  So  in  Livy  we  read  Quintus  Curtius 
did  in  a  time  of  pestilence  ;  the  Decii,  father  and  son,  in  a  time  of  hard  war  with 
the  Latines  and  Samnites  ;  Codrus,  king  of  the  Athenians,  in  Lycurgus ;  Menceceus 
in  Euripides,  and  the  daughters  of  Erecteus  offered  themselves  to  be  sacrificed  for 
their  country.  So  Ahaz  (2  Kings  xvi.) ;  Manasseh  (chap,  xxi.),  and  the  King  of  Moab 
^chap.  iii.),  their  own  sons.  This  was  a  great  mistaking  you  plainly  see,  and  there- 
fore let  it  move  you  to  send  up  thankful  thoughts  to  God  for  your  better  knowledge 
and  understanding.  (Bp.  Babington.)  The  solitary  sin-hearer  : — The  solitude  of 
the  sin-bearer  is  something  altogether  distinct  from  the  solitude  of  the  Holy  One. 
The  solitude  of  holiness  separated  Him  from  sinners ;  but  that  separation,  which 
made  Him  lead  in  His  humanity  a  strange,  lonesome  life,  yet  brought  Him  into 
such  full  contact  with  aU  the  glorious  beings  and  the  realities  of  the  spirit-world, 
that  such  a  solitude  could  hardly  be  looked  upon  with  any  considerable  regrat,  or  be 
the  source  of  actual  pain.  The  soUtude  of  the  sin-bearer  is  different  from  that  of 
the  representative  of  holiness  and  purity.  Consider  the  causes  of  this  solitude. 
1.  Wherever  sin  exists  it  is  an  isolating  principle.  Its  tendency  is  to  induce 
seclusion  and  separation,  to  shut  the  person  who  is  possessed  of  it  from  all  connec- 
tion with  that  which  is  outside  itself.  2.  The  scapegoat  was  to  bear  upon  its  head 
aU  the  confessed  iniquity  of  the  children  of  Israel,  and  to  bear  it  into  a  land  of 
separation.  Christ  was  the  Scapegoat  of  the  human  family.  In  the  Epistle  to  the 
Hebrews  we  read  that  He,  by  the  Eternal  Spirit,  offered  Himself  to  God.  The 
scapegoat  finds  the  land  of  separation  at  last,  all  alone  in  the  darknpss.  He  bore 
our  sins  into  the  land  not  inhabited.  No  witnessing  spirit  can  find  them  there  ;  no 
denizen  of  those  dreary  regions  can  rediscover  them.  They  are  lost  sight  of  by 
man  ;  tbe  angels  find  them  obliterated  from  their  view  ;  and  God  Himself  has 
turned  His  back  upon  them,  and  left  them  in  the  land  of  separation.  ( \V.  Hay 
Aitken,  M.A.)  "  And  the  goat  sJiall  bear  upon  him  all  their  iniquities  unto  a  land  not 
inhabited  "  .-—When  confessed  sins  are  fairly  laid  upon  Him  who  is  appointed  to  bear 
them,  they  will  never  come  back  to  those  who  confessed  them.  He  will  carry  them 
"  unto  a  land  not  inhabited  " — a  land  where  there  are  no  talebearers  or  gossips  to 
keep  the  story  of  those  sins  alive.  Forgiven  sins  will  be  also  forgotten  sins  :  in  the 
day  of  final  account,  not  one  of  them  wiU  appear  against  the  transgressor.  Sins 
■which  are  not  laid  upon  the  Scapegoat  must  be  faced  by  the  sinner  in  the  presence 
of  the  universe.  Sins  which  the  Scapegoat  has  borne  away  into  the  land  not  inhabited 
cannot  then  be  found  in  all  the  universe.  God  Himself  will  have  forgotten  them : 
for  His  promise  is  that  those  sins  and  those  iniquities  He  will  remember  no  more 
for  ever.    (H.  C.  Trumbull.) 


212  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvn. 


CHAPTEE  XVII. 

Vebs.  2-16.  This  is  the  thing  which  the  Lord  hath  commanded. — Laics  for  holif 
living : — From  chap.  xvii.  to  chap,  xxiii.  everything  relates  to  the  duties,  qualities, 
and  associations  of  individuals  in  private  life.  This  fact,  coming  as  it  does  right 
after  the  great  Day  of  Atonement,  is  very  suggestive.  It  indicates  that  God  con- 
templates much  more  respecting  us  than  the  mere  pardon  of  our  sins ;  that  justi- 
fication is  not  the  whole  intent  of  the  Saviour's  redemptive  services ;  and  that 
there  is  to  be  a  personal  righteousness  and  purification  which  rests  upon  our  own 
exertions.  "In  Him  was  life,"  and  His  "  life  is  the  light  of  men."  Without  some 
degree  of  conformity  to  Him,  our  religion  is  but  a  shadow  and  a  name.  For  so  it 
is  written,  "  If  any  man  have  not  the  Spirit  of  Christ,  he  is  none  of  His."  Let  me 
invite  attention,  then,  more  specifically  to  the  means  and  elements  of  a  good  and 
holy  life,  as  they  are  shadowed  forth  in  the  chapters  before  us.  I.  Tlie  principal, 
and,  perhaps,  the  only  permanent  provision  contained  in  this  chapter,  is  that 
WHICH  EESPECTS  THE  MANNER  OF  TREATING  BLOOD.  No  matter  how  or  from  what 
animal  it  came,  it  was  always  to  be  looked  upon  with  consideration.  The  use  of 
blood  was  not  forbidden  because  it  was  unclean,  but  because  it  was  sacred.  It 
represents  life.  It  is  that  by  which  life  was  redeemed.  Now,  it  is  easy  to  see  how 
a  law  of  this  sort  would  work  to  solemnise,  restrain,  and  soften  the  heart  of  a 
conscientious  Jew.  It  would  ieep  the  solemn  atonement  before  him  whithersoever 
he  went.  The  very  huntsman  would  be  met  by  it  in  the  deep  recesses  of  the  forest. 
And  if  we  desire  to  learn  what  constitutes  the  deepest  essence  of  a  Christian  life, 
we  here  have  it  most  beautifully  tyj)ified.  We  must  keep  in  view  the  blood  of 
atonement.  It  is  our  clear  and  continual  recognition  of  what  Jesus  has  done  for 
us  that  weakens  temptation,  disposes  to  duty,  and  prompts  to  the  deeds  of  righteous- 
ness. I  remember  to  have  met  with  an  affecting  little  incident  in  Roman  history 
connected  with  the  death  of  Manlius  Capitolinus,  a  renowned  consul  and  general, 
who  was  once  proudly  hailed  as  the  saviour  of  Eome.  It  happened  one  night  when 
the  Gauls  threatened  to  overwhelm  the  Capitol,  that  he  bravely  took  his  stand  upon 
the  wall  where  they  came  on  with  their  attack,  and  there  fought  singly  and  alone 
until  he  had  repelled  them,  and  so  saved  the  city  from  destruction.  It  so  occurred 
that  this  distinguished  man  was  afterwards  accused  of  some  gi'eat  public  fault,  and 
put  upon  trial  for  his  life.  But  just  as  the  judges  were  about  to  pass  sentence  upon 
him,  he  looked  up  at  the  walls  of  the  Capitol,  which  towered  in  view,  and  with  tears 
in  his  eyes  pointed  to  where  he  had  fought  for  his  accusers,  and  perilled  his  life  for 
their  safety.  The  people  remembered  the  heroic  achievement,  and  wept.  No  one 
had  the  heart  to  say  aught  against  him,  and  the  judges  were  compelled  to  forbear. 
Again  he  was  tried,  and  with  the  same  result.  Nor  could  he  be  convicted  until  his 
trial  was  removed  to  some  low  and  distant  point,  from  which  the  Capitol  was 
invisible.  And  so,  while  Calvary  is  in  full  view,  in  vain  will  earth  and  hell  seek  to 
bring  the  Christian  into  condemnation.  One  serious  look  at  the  Cross,  and  at  the 
love  which  there,  unaided  and  alone,  when  all  was  dark  and  lost,  interposed  for  our 
salvation,  is  enough  to  break  the  power  of  passion  at  once,  and  to  strike  dead  every 
guilty  proceeding.  II.  Passing  to  chap,  xviii.,  we  find  sundry  laws,  but  all  bearing 
upon  two  general  points.     The  first  relates  to  the  customs  of  the  Egyptians, 

FROM   among    whom   THE  JeWS  CAME,  AND  OF  THE  CaNAANITES,  WHOSE  LAND  THEY  WERE 

TO  INHERIT.  Israel  was  to  be  a  holy  nation,  and  therefore  was  not  to  follow  the 
ways  of  the  unclean.  The  greatest  danger  of  a  purified  man  arises  from  his  old 
habits  and  associations.  It  is  not  easy  to  turn  a  stream  quite  out  of  tlie  channel 
in  which  it  has  been  flowing  for  ages.  It  is  a  mighty  work  to  revolutionise  a 
character  which  has  been  forming  for  years,  or  to  tear  quite  away  from  a  long- 
continued  routine  which  includes  all  our  recollections  of  infancy,  and  in  which  our 
life  took  its  chief  attractions.  The  sow  that  has  been  washed,  still  has  strong 
affections  for  the  mire.  The  second  grand  element  of  a  good  Christian  life,  there- 
fore, is  a  complete  and  thorough  reformation  with  regard  to  old  habits.  If  we  have 
been  in  close  intimacy  with  the  vile,  we  must  withdraw  from  their  communion,  and 
keep  aloof  from  their  wicked  ways.  If  we  have  been  giving  way  to  bad  passions, 
we  must  cut  ourselves  off  from  the  occasions  of  our  transgressions,  and  beware  of 
putting  ourselves  into  circumstances  which  invite  temptation.  III.  The  other 
specifications  of  chap,  xviii.  all  relate  to  sexdal  purity.  They  typically  refer  to 
the  necessity  of  a  proper  government  of  the  affections.  We  may  love,  but  we  must 
love  virtuously.     We  may  cherish  the  most  ten  Ur  regards,  but  they  must  not  rest 


CHAP.  XVII.]  LEVITICUS  213 

upon  criminal  hopes.  Our  warmest  feelings  may  be  enlisted  and  indulged,  but  we 
must  be  cautious  that  they  do  not  betray  us  into  sin  and  shame.  Even  the  secret 
thought  of  unchasteness,  the  hidden  incontinent  wish,  the  impure  desire,  the 
cherished  hope  uf  unclean  gratifications,  must  be  spurned  and  crucified  as  criminal 
before  God,  and  crushed  as  an  enemy  to  the  peace  and  good  of  society.  The  heart 
must  be  kept  with  all  diligence,  for  out  of  it  are  the  issues  of  life.  It  is  God  who 
saith,  "  Defile  not  yourselves  in  any  of  these  things."  IV.  We  come  now  to  chap, 
xix.  Here  we  have  quite  a  list  of  moral  pkecepts,  setting  eokth  an  extensive 
CODE  OF  Christian  righteousness.  The  provisions  of  the  preceding  chapter  were 
negative ;  these  are  mostly  positive.  In  the  one  God  shows  us  how  we  are  to 
"  cease  to  do  evil "  ;  in  the  other  He  instructs  us  how  to  "  do  well."  V.  A  remark 
or  two,  now,  upon  chap.  xx.  We  have  been  contemplating  the  laws  of  holy  living. 
In  this  chapter  we  have  God's  threatjsnings  against  those  who  violate  them.  It 
is  a  chapter  of  penalties.  God  is  not  only  our  adviser,  but  our  Lord  and  Judge. 
His  commands  are  not  only  gracious  counsels,  but  authoritative  laws.  The  gospel 
is  indeed  glad  tidings — glad  tidings  of  great  joy.  It  is  a  call  of  mercy  from  the 
heavens  to  the  suffering  and  the  lost.  But  it  is  a  call  to  holiness.  And  whilst  it 
is  a  glorious  savour  of  life  unto  life  to  them  that  yield  to  it,  and  walk  in  its  light, 
it  is  a  fearful  savour  of  death  unto  death  to  those  who  despise  or  disobey  it.  (J.  A. 
Seiss,  D.D.)  Various  regulations  in  chaps,  xvii.-xxii.: — First,  in  regard  to  those 
passages  which  caution  the  people  against  vices  of  special  enormity,  we  must 
remember  that  they  were  about  to  be  settled  in  dangerous  proximity  to  peoples  who 
were  thoroughly  corrupted  by  these  very  vices,  and  therefore  the  cautions  were  not 
by  any  means  unnecessary.  Accustomed  as  most  of  us  are  to  the  pure  air  of 
Christian  society,  in  which,  notwithstanding  all  the  selfishness  and  sin  that  still 
abound,  vices  such  as  these  are  "not  so  much  as  named,"  and  the  very  possibility 
of  them  seems  out  of  the  question,  it  is  difficult  for  us  to  imagine  how  different  was 
the  condition  of  society  before  these  purifying  influences  were  brought  to  bear  on 
it.  which  issued  from  Mount  Sinai  first,  and  afterwards  from  Gennesaret's  shore 
and  "  the  place  called  Calvary."  And  when  we  find  such  warnings  in  the  Book  of 
Leviticus,  we  ought  in  the  first  place  to  feel  humbled  by  the  thought  of  the  fearful 
lengths  to  which  sin  unrestrained  by  Divine  grace  will  carry  its  wretched  victim  ; 
and,  in  the  second  place,  to  lift  up  our  hearts  in  gratitude  to  God,  that  in  these 
latter  days,  though  evil  still  abounds,  we  are  nevertheless  protected  from  such  out- 
rages to  our  moral  and  spiritual  nature  as  those  to  which  even  the  chosen  people 
were  exposed  in  the  ancient  times.  On  the  other  hand,  it  is  pleasant  to  find  in 
these  chapters  the  evidence  that  the  Mosaic  Law  came  in  many  respects  nearer  to 
the  morality  of  the  New  Testament  than  most  people  are  willing  to  admit  (see 
chap.  xix.  9,  10,  32-34).  Finally,  it  is  interesting  to  notice  in  these  regulations, 
and  throughout  the  entire  law,  the  care  which  is  taken  to  keep  religion  and 
morality  closely  wedded  and  welded  together.  "  I  am  the  Lord  your  God  "  is 
continually  put  forth,  not  as  a  creed  article,  but  as  an  unanswerable  argument  for 
strictest  obedience  and  the  most  scrupulous  integrity.  The  relations  of  privilege 
which  the  people  enjoyed  are  continually  set  forth  as  increasing  their  responsi- 
bility. "  To  whom  much  is  given,  of  them  much  shall  be  required,"  is  a  principle 
taken  for  granted  all  through,  (J.  M.  Gibson,  D.D.)  Before  the  Tabernacle  of 
the  Lord. — Tlie  grand  principle  of  right  action — God  in  everything  : — The  prin- 
ciple which  underlies  this  stringent  law,  as  also  the  reason  which  is  given  for  it,  is 
of  constant  application  in  modern  life.  There  was  nothing  wrong  in  itself  in  slaying 
an  animal  in  one  place  more  than  another.  It  was  abstractedly  possible — as,  likely 
enough,  many  an  Israelite  may  have  said  to  himself — that  a  man  could  just  as 
really  "  eat  unto  the  Lord  "  if  he  slaughtered  and  ate  his  animal  in  the  field,  as 
anywhere  else.  Nevertheless  this  was  forbidden  under  the  heaviest  penalties.  It 
teaches  us  that  he  who  will  be  holy  must  not  only  abstain  from  that  which  is  in 
itself  always  wrong,  but  must  carefully  keep  himself  from  doing  even  lawful  or 
necessary  tilings  in  such  a  way,  or  under  such  associations  and  circumstances,  as 
may  outwardly  compromise  his  Christian  standing,  or  which  may  be  proved  by 
experience  to  have  an  almost  unavoidable  tendency  toward  sin.  The  laxity  in  such 
matters  which  prevails  in  the  s^o-called  "Christian  world  "  argues  little  for  the  tone 
of  spiritual  life  in  our  day  in  those  who  indulge  in  it,  or  allow  it,  or  apologise  for 
it.  It  may  be  true  enough,  in  a  sense,  that,  as  many  say,  there  is  no  harm  in  this 
or  that.  Perhaps  not ;  but  what  if  experience  have  shown  that,  though  in  itself 
not  sinful,  a  certain  association  or  amusement  almost  always  tends  to  worldliness, 
which  is  a  form  of  idolatry  ?     Or— to  use  the  apostle's  illustration — what  if  one  be 


214  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xviu 

seen,  though  with  no  intention  of  wrong,  "  sitting  at  meat  in  an  idol's  temple," 
and  he  whose  conscience  is  weak  be  thereby  emboldened  to  do  what  to  liim  is  sin  ? 
There  is  only  one  safe  principle,  now  as  in  the  days  of  Moses :  everything  must  be 
brought  "  before  the  Lord  " — used  as  from  Hiin  and  for  Him,  and  therefore  used 
under  such  limitations  and  restrictions  as  His  wise  and  holy  law  imposes.  Only 
so  shall  we  be  safe  ;  only  so  abide  in  living  fellowship  with  God.  {S.  H.  KelJoijg, 
D.D.)  Peace-offerings  unto  the  Lord. — ■Dedication  of  food  to  God  : — Very 
beautiful  and  instructive  was  the  direction  that  the  Israelite,  in  the  cases  specified, 
should  make  his  daily  food  a  peace-offering.  This  involved  a  dedication  of  the 
daily  food  to  the  Lord  ;  and  in  his  receiving  it  back  again  then  from  the  hand  of 
God,  the  truth  was  visibly  represented  that  our  daily  food  is  from  God ;  while  also, 
in  the  sacrificial  acts  which  preceded  the  eating,  the  Israelite  was  continually 
reminded  that  it  was  upon  the  ground  of  an  accepted  atonement  that  even  these 
everyday  mercies  were  received.  Such  also  should  be,  in  spirit,  the  often  neglected 
prayer  before  each  of  our  daily  meals.  It  should  be  ever  oiifered  with  the  remem- 
brance of  the  precious  blood  which  has  purchased  for  us  even  the  most  common 
mercies  ;  and  should  thus  sincerely  recognise  what,  in  the  confusing  complexity  of 
the  second  causes  through  which  we  receive  our  daily  food,  we  so  easily  forget  that 
the  Lord's  Prayer  is  not  a  mere  form  of  words  when  we  say,  "  Give  us  this  day  our 
daily  bread  "  ;  but  that  working  behind,  and  in,  and  with,  all  these  second  causes, 
is  the  kindly  providence  of  God,  who,  opening  His  hand,  supplies  the  want  of  every 
living  thing.  And  so,  eating  in  grateful,  loving  fellowship  with  our  Heavenly 
Father  that  which  His  bounty  gives  us,  to  His  glory,  every  meal  shall  become,  as 
it  were,  a  sacramental  remembrance  of  the  Lord.  We  may  have  wondered  at  what 
■we  have  read  of  the  worldwide  custom  of  the  Mohammedan,  who,  whenever  the 
knife  of  slaughter  is  lifted  against  a  beast  for  food,  utters  his  "  Bism  AllhW''  ("  In  the 
name  of  the  most  merciful  God  ")  ;  and  not  otherwise  will  regard  his  food  as  being 
made  halal  or  "  lawful  "  ;  and  no  doubt  in  all  this,  as  in  many  a  Christian's  prayer, 
there  may  often  be  little  heart.  But  the  thought  in  this  ceremony  is  even  this  of 
Leviticus,  and  we  do  well  to  make  it  our  own,  eating  even  our  daily  food  "  in  the  name 
of  the  most  merciful  God,"  and  with  uplifting  of  the  heart  in  thankful  worship  toward 
Him.  [Ibid. )  For  the  life  of  the  flesh  is  in  the  blood. — Tlie  Scriptural  doctrine  of 
blood: — "Blood"  is  one  of  the  characteristic,  regent  words  of  Scripture,  occurring 
in  it  more  than  four  hundred  times.  A  word  so  recurrent  must  mean  something 
fundamental.  In  fact,  it  is  the  blood  of  Christ  which  is  the  basis  of  Christianity, 
the  very  pivot  of  the  Christian  religion.  1.  First  of  all,  let  us  ponder  what  in  Ught 
of  modern  physiology  is  certainly  a  remarkable  Scripture.  Moses,  in  forbidding 
the  eating  of  blood,  assigns  for  his  prohibition  the  following  reason  :  "For  the  life 
of  the  flesh  is  in  the  blood  ;  and  I  have  given  it  to  you  upon  the  altar,  to  make  an 
atonement  for  your  souls ;  for  it  is  the  blood  that  maketh  an  atonement  for  the 
soul"  (ver.  11).  1.  The  fact  asserted:  "The  life  (soul)  of  the  flesh  is  in  the 
blood."  (1)  This  is,  in  fact,  one  of  the  instinctive  beliefs  of  humanity  ;  and 
instinct  is  often  prophetic,  holding  latent  history.  How  thoroughly  the  idea  that 
blood  is  the  seat  of  life  has  taken  possession  of  the  race  is  evident  from  such 
instinctive  idioms  as  these:  "  shedder  of  blood,"  "man  of  blood,"  "  imbrue  in 
blood,"  "bloody-minded,"  "  blooil -thirsty,"  "avenger  of  blood,"  "blood-guilti- 
ness," "cold-blooded,"  "prince  of  the  blood  royal,"  "blooded-stock,"  "  blood - 
relation,"  "next  of  blood,"  "consanguinity,"  "sanguine  of  success,"  "sanguine 
temperament,"  &c.,  &c.  So  that  marvellous  diviner  and  formulator  of  human 
instincts,  Shakespeare — the  word  "  blood  "  occurs  seven  hundred  and  thirty-one 
times  in  his  plays — for  example  : — 

"  Will  all  great  Neptune's  ocean  wash  this  blood 

Clean  from  my  hand  ?     No  ;  this  my  hand  will  rather 
The  multitudinous  seas  incarnadine, 
Making  the  green  one  red." 

("  Macbeth,"  ILii.) 


Again — 


Sluic'd  out  his  innocent  soul  through  streams  of  blood  : 
Which  blood,  like  sacrificing  Abel's,  cries. 
Even  from  the  tongueless  caverns  of  the  earth, 
To  me,  for  justice  and  rough  chastisement." 

("  King  Bichard  U.,"  I.  i.) 


CHAF.  XVII.]  LEVITICUS.  215 

So  England's  poet-laureate — 

"  Defects  of  doubt,  and  taints  of  blood." 

("  In  Memoriam,"  liii.) 
Again — • 

"  Through  all  the  years  of  April  blood." 

("  In  Memoriam,"  cviii.) 
So  Virgil— 

"  His  purple  life  {purpuream  animam)  he  poureth  forth." 

{"^neid,"  ix.  349.) 
So  Homer,  and  very  frequently,  thus — 

"  The  soul  comes  floating  in  a  tide  of  gore." 

("  Iliad,"  iv.  537.) 
Again — 

"He  sobs  his  soul  out  in  the  gush  of  blood." 

("  Iliad,"  xvi.  419.) 
Once  more — 

"And  the  soul  issued  in  the  purple  flood." 

("  Iliad,"  xvi.  624.) 

So  the  Scriptural  writers  ;  for  example  :  "  The  voice  of  thy  brother's  blood  crieth 
unto  Me  from  the  ground  "  ;  "  Earth,  cover  not  thou  my  blood  "  ;  "  Deliver  me 
from  blood-guiltiness,  0  God  " ;  "  Precious  shall  their  blood  be  in  His  sight  "  ; 
"  All  the  righteous  blood  shed  upon  the  earth  from  the  blood  of  righteous  Abel 
unto  the  blood  of  Zachariah  the  son  of  Barachiah  "  ;  "I  have  sinned  in  that  I 
have  betrayed  the  innocent  blood."  "  How  long,  0  Lord,  holy  and  true,  dost  Thou 
not  judge  and  avenge  our  blood  on  them  that  dwell  on  the  earth?  "  The  blood 
being  thus  instinctively  conceived  as  the  seat  of  life,  and  so  the  representative  of 
the  soul  or  person,  no  wonder  that  blood  has  ever  been  regarded  as  a  sacred  thing. 
Here  is  the  secret  of  the  Mosaic  prohibition  to  eat  blood,  a  prohibition  frequently 
repeated,  and  in  vers.  10-14  with  solemn  minuteness  of  detail.  The  blood  being 
regarded  as  the  symbol  and  home  of  the  personality,  to  eat  it  was  to  be  guilty  of 
sacrilegious  cannibalism.  Here  is  the  key  to  that  chivalrous,  pathetic  incident  in 
David's  life:  "  Be  it  far  from  me,  0  Lord,  that  I  should  do  this  ;  is  not  this  the 
blood  of  the  men  that  went  in  jeopardy  of  their  lives  ?  "  (2  Sam.  xxiii.  15-17). 
But  the  Divine  prohibition  was  not  peculiar  to  the  Jews.  A  millennium  before 
Moses,  when  the  new  stock  of  humanity,  just  escaped  the  Deluge,  was  still  young, 
God  commanded  Noah,  saying,  "  Every  moving  thing  that  liveth  shall  be  food  for 
you.  .  .  .  But  flesh  with  the  life  (soul)  thereof,  which  is  the  blood  thereof,  shall 
ye  not  eat  "  (Gen.  ix.  1-4).  As  the  prohibition  antedated  the  Mosaic  Dispensa- 
tion, so  it  postdated  it.  A  score  of  years  after  Christ  was  crucified,  a  controversy 
arose  in  the  Church  at  Antioch  respecting  the  subjection  of  Gentile  converts  to 
circumcision  and  the  Mosaic  institutions  generally  (Acts  xv.  1-35).  So  much  for  the 
instinctive  belief  that  the  life,  or  soul,  of  the  flesh  is  in  the  blood.  (2)  And  modern 
science  remarkably  confirms  this  instinctive  belief.  The  blood,  in  respect  to  its  com- 
position, consists  of  two  principal  parts  :  a  liquid  plasma,  and  countless  microscopic 
corpuscles,  or  blood-discs,  floating  in  it,  by  far  the  larger  part  of  which  are  red, 
and  the  rest  colourless.  The  office  of  the  colourless  corpuscles,  called  "  Leu- 
cocytes," is  not  yet  distinctly  understood.  This  thing,  however,  must  be  said  about 
them,  When  blood  is  taken  from  the  living  system,  these  leucocytes,  or  white 
corpuscles,  if  kept  at  something,  like  their  normal  temperature,  present  for  some 
time  remarkable  life-like  phenomena;  they  protrude  and  retract  numerous  arms 
or  processes,  and  even  move  about  from  place  to  place,  as  though  things  of  life  ; 
in  fact,  so  much  do  the  motions  of  these  corpuscles  resemble  the  protean  changes 
in  figure  and  motions  of  the  microscopic  Rhizopod  called  "Amoeba,"  that  they  have 
received  the  name,  amoeboid  movements.  The  red  corpuscles  constitute  nearly 
one  half  of  the  mass  of  the  blood,  tinging  it  so  thoroughly  as  to  give  it  its  red 
colour.  The  office  of  these  red  globules,  or  blood  discs,  is,  in  the  main,  to  serve 
as  carriers  of  oxygen.  To  use  the  words  of  Prof.  Flint,  the  red  corpuscles  "  are 
respiratory  organs  ;  taking  up  the  gi^eater  part  of  the  oxygen  which  is  absorbed  by 
the  blood  in  its  passage  through  the  lungs,  and  conveying  it  to  the  tissues,  where 
it  is  given  up,  and  its  place  supplied  by  carbonic  acid."     One  more  remark  must 


216  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvii. 

be  made  about  these  red  blood  discs.  Although  the  diagnosis  of  blood  stains  is 
not  yet  sufficiently  advanced  to  enable  us  in  all  cases  to  discriminate  with  absolute 
certainty  between  the  blood  corjpuscles  of  man  and  those  of  all  mammals,  yet  it  is 
far  enough  advanced  to  enable  the  microscopical  expert  to  pronounce,  in  certain 
cases,  with  accuracy  on  the  character  of  blood  stains  in  murder  trial-* ;  thus  con- 
verting these  tiny  globules,  having  a  diameter  of  only  -g-joTJ  o^  ^.n  inch,  into 
solemn,  resistless  witnesses.     The  melancholy  Dane  is  right : 

"  Murder,  though  it  have  no  tongue,  will  speak. 
With  most  miraculous  organ." 

("  Hamlet,"  II.  ii.) 

Ay,  "  blood  will  tell."  Thus  the  blood  is  in  an  eminent  sense  the  seat  and  organ  of 
life.  The  language  of  Hervey,  the  demonstrator  at  least,  if  not  the  discoverer,  of  the 
circulation  of  the  blood,  is  striking :  The  blood  is  the  "  primigenial  and  principal  part, 
because  that  in  it  and  from  it  the  fountain  of  motion  and  pulsation  is  derived  ; 
also  because  the  animal  heat  or  vital  spirit  is  first  radicated  and  implanted,  and  the 
soul  takes  up  her  mansion  in  it.  .  .  .  The  blood  is  the  genital  part,  the  fountain 
of  hfe,  primum  viveiis,  ultimum  moriens."  It  is  a  solemn  thing  to  observe  the 
rhythmical  systole  and  diastole  of  the  heart,  especially  as  recorded  by  that  delicate 
instrument,  the  sphygmograph.  The  blood  is  a  very  river  of  life,  the  arterial  and 
venous  systems  of  circulation  constituting  an  intricate  network  of  canals,  making 
the  body  a  corporeal  Amsterdam  or  human  Venice.  Each  corpuscle  is  a  barge, 
moving  with  various  rates  of  speed  in  different  parts  of  the  body,  toiling  through 
the  capillaries  at  the  rate  of  two  inches  a  minute,  rushing  through  the  arteries  at 
the  rate  of  from  twelve  to  twenty  feet  a  second,  ceaselessly  carrying  on  the 
organic  functions  of  the  body  by  perpetually  exchanging  freight,  depositing  at  the 
depot  of  this  and  that  tissue  oxygen,  and  taking  up  carbonic  acid.  What  money 
is  to  society,  that  blood  is  to  the  bodily  system ;  it  is  the  means  of  exchange,  or 
the  circulating  medium.  The  scientific  accuracy  of  the  assertion,  "  the  life  of  the 
flesh  is  in  the  blood,"  is  strikingly  shown  in  such  facts  as  blood-letting,  strangling, 
fainting,  pycemia,  or  blood-poisoning,  and  especially  transfusion — a  sometimes 
beneficent  surgical  operation,  in  which  blood  from  a  strong  and  healthy  person,  or 
from  one  of  the  lower  animals,  is  injected  into  the  veins  of  a  feeble  or  anamic 
patient.  The  life  or  soul  of  the  flesh  is  in  the  blood.  Thus  the  Bible  of  Scripture 
and  the  Bible  of  Nature  is  one  ;  Scripture  announcing  a  truth.  Nature  echoing  it. 
2.  The  rite  appointed :  "  And  I  have  given  it  to  you  upon  the  altar  to  make  atone- 
ment for  your  souls."  (1)  "  I  have  given  it  to  you  upon  the  altar."  Blood  is 
emphatically  the  characteristic  thing  in  the  Levitical  ritual,  the  very  basis  of  the 
old  sacrificial  economy.  Particularly  is  this  true  of  the  eminently  sacred  rites  of 
the  paschal  lamb,  the  sin-offering,  the  day  of  atonement,  and  the  mercy-seat ;  all 
the  significance  of  these  elaborate  ceremonies  turned  on  the  element  of  blood. 
Indeed,  the  writer  of  the  letter  to  the  Hebrews,  summing  up  the  Old  Covenant  in 
respect  to  ritual,  expressly  says,  "  Almost  all  things  are  by  the  law  purified  with 
blood  ;  and  without  shedding  of  blood  there  is  no  remission  "  (Heb.  ix.  22).  The 
Old  Testament  is  in  very  truth  a  scai'let  dispensation.  (2)  "To  atone  for  your 
souls."  To  atone  ;  literally,  to  cover,  hide,  shelter.  But  in  what  sense  to  atone? 
Certainly  not  in  the  heathen  sense  of  placating  as  with  presents,  or  expiating  as 
by  offering  a  quid  pro  quo;  but  in  the  gracious  sense  of  reconciling  by  sacrificial, 
vicarious  interception.  3.  The  reason  assigned:  "  For  it  is  the  blood  that  maketh 
atonement" — i.e.,  by  the  life  thereof,  in  virtue  of  the  soul  in  it.  (1)  "It  is  the 
blood  that  maketh  an  atonement."  It  atones  not,  of  course,  abpolut(>ly  ;  for  it  is 
not  possible  that  the  blood  of  bulls  and  goats  should  take  away  the  consciousness 
of  sins.  But  the  blood  atones,  so  to  speak,  constructively,  pictorially,  prophetically. 
(2)  "  For  the  life  (or  soul)  of  the  flesh  is  in  the  blood."  And  this  on  the  principle 
that  the  blood,  as  being  the  seat  of  the  life,  is  the  representative  of  the  person. 
Life  for  life,  soul  for  soul ;  this  is  the  meaning  of  the  old  sacrificial  ritual.  And  it 
is  all  based  on  the  admitted  physiological  principle — the  life  of  the  flesh  is  in  the 
blood.  II.  And  now  we  have  the  key  to  the  Scriptural  doctrine  of  blood.  1.  The 
blood  of  Jesus  Christ  it  is  which  is  the  antitype  or  fulfilment  of  the  blood  of  the 
Levitical  victims.  To  prove  this  forms  a  great  part  of  the  argument  of  the  Epistle 
to  the  Hebrews.  Take  chap,  ix.,  verses  13,  14,  as  a  typical  specimen  of  the 
argument.  2.  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  is  the  antitypal,  i^al  atonement  for  our 
souls  on  the  same  principle  which  held  under  the  Old  Dispensation — the  principle 


CHAP,  xviii.]  LEVITICUS.  217 

of  vicarious  representation.  That  is  to  say,  Christ's  blood,  as  being  the  vehicle 
and  representative  of  His  own  personality,  was  vicariously  shed  ;  and  in  this  way 
He  became  the  propitiation  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world.  This,  then,  is  the 
Scriptural  doctrine  of  blood.  It  is  based  on  the  ancient  IMosaic  affirmation  and  on 
the  modern  scientific  observation — "The  life  of  the  tlesh  is  in  the  blood. "  How 
significant  now  the  New  Testament  allusions  to  the  efficacy  of  Christ's  blood.  For 
example  :  "  Purchased  with  His  own  blood  "  ;  "  Set  forth  as  a  propitiation  throuuh 
faith  in  His  blood";  "Justified  by  His  bL>od";  "Redemption  through  His 
blood  "  ;  "  Made  peace  through  the  blood  of  His  Cross  "  ;  "  Boldness  to  enter  into 
the  holiest  through  the  blood  of  Jesus  "  ;  "  The  blood  of  sprinkling  that  speaketh 
better  things  than  that  of  Abel  "  ;  "  The  blood  of  the  everlasting  Covenant " ; 
"  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  His  Son  cleanseth  us  from  all  sin  "  ;  "  Washed  their 
robes  and  made  them  white  in  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,"  &c.  Thus  blood  is  the 
scarlet  thread  winding  through  both  the  Covenants,  their  crimson  rubric.  This, 
then,  is  the  conclusion  of  the  whole  matter— blood  is  the  natural,  physiological 
basis  of  the  Scriptural  doctrine  of  the  Atonement.  "  Science  "  inexorably  holds 
us  to  "orthodoxy"  in  the  prime,  pivotal  article  of  the  Christian  religion.  (G.  D. 
Boardman,  D.D.)  Ye  shall  eat  tbe  blood  of  no  manner  of  flesh. — Restrictions 
respecting  the  use  of  blood  : — The  moral  and  spiritual  purpose  of  this  law 
concerning  the  use  of  blood  was  apparently  twofold.  In  the  first  place,  it  was 
intended  to  educate  the  people  to  a  reverence  for  life,  and  purify  them  from  that 
tendency  to  bloodthirstiness  which  has  so  often  distinguished  heathen  nations,  and 
especially  those  with  whom  Israel  was  to  be  brought  in  closest  contact.  But, 
secondly,  and  chiefly,  it  was  intended  everywhere  and  always  to  keep  before  the 
mind  the  sacredness  of  the  blood  as  being  the  appointed  means  for  the  expiation  of 
sin,  given  by  God  upon  the  altar  to  make  atonement  for  the  soul  of  the  sinner, 
"  by  reason  of  the  life  "  or  soul  with  which  it  stood  in  such  immediate  relation. 
Not  only  were  they,  therefore,  to  abstain  from  the  blood  of  such  animals  as  could  be 
offered  on  the  altar,  but  even  from  that  of  those  which  could  not  be  offered.  Thus 
the  blood  was  to  remind  them,  every  time  they  ate  flesh,  of  the  very  solemn  truth 
that  without  shedding  of  blood  there  was  no  remission  of  sin.  The  Israelite  must 
never  forget  this,  even  in  the  heat  and  excitement  of  the  chase ;  he  must  pause  and 
carefully  drain  the  blood  from  the  creature  he  had  slain,  and  reverently  cover  it 
with  dust :  a  symbolic  act  which  should  ever  put  him  in  mind  of  the  Divine 
ordinance — that  the  blood,  the  life,  of  a  guiltless  victim  must  be  given  in  order  to 
the  forgiveness  of  sin.  A  lesson  lies  here  for  us  regarding  the  sacredness  of  all 
that  is  associated  with  sacred  thiugs.  All  that  is  connected  with  God,  and  with 
His  worship,  especially  all  that  is  connected  with  His  revelation  of  Himself  for  our 
salvation,  is  to  be  treated  with  the  most  profound  reverence.     {S.  H.  Kellogg,  D.D.) 


CHAPTEE  XVIII. 


Vers.  1-5.  Ye  shall  do  My  judgments — Safety  in  the  observance  oj  God's  laws  : — 
This  preface  of  some  is  taken  generally  to  concern  all  the  laws  of  God ;  the 
observation  whereof  is  ever  the  sure  safety  of  a  state  public  or  private,  for  it  is 
not  the  munition  of  walls,  leagues,  and  alliance  with  foreign  princes,  largeness  of 
confines,  plenty  of  treasure,  or  such  like,  that  preserve  a  commonwealth,  but  careful 
and  diligent  observation  of  public  laws  ordained  of  God  for  the  good  of  man.  It 
is  said  that  Lacedemon  flourished  whilst  Lycurgus's  laws  were  observed :  much 
more  any  commonwealth  when  God's  be  kept.  For  what  comparison  betwixt 
man's  laws  and  God's  ?  Demosthenes  saith.  It  was  the  manner  of  the  Locrenses, 
that  if  any  man  would  publish  and  devise  a  new  law  he  should  put  his  neck  into  a 
halter  ready  to  be  put  to  death,  if  the  law  were  not  good,  by  which  means  they 
made  men  more  careful  to  observe  old  and  ancient,  tried  and  known  laws,  than 
with  busy  heads  to  make  new.  Now  what  laws  so  old  and  so  approved  good  as 
God's  laws  ?  Ever,  therefore,  are  they  to  be  regarded  and  hearkened  unto.  Others 
take  this  preface  particularly  of  these  laws  concerning  marriage  now  following, 
that  if  they  be  carefully  kept,  a  kingdom  long  flourisheth,  and  if  not,  soon  it 
Cometh  to  a  fearful  fall.  For  so  odious  and  abhorred  of  God  is  the  unlawful 
mixture  of  man  and  woman  that  the  Lord  cannot  long  withhold  great  judgments. 


218  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xviii. 


And  thus  much  remember  as  you  read  them  ever,  that  these  laws  do  not  concern  the 
Jews  only,  as  the  ceremonial  laws  now  spoken  of  and  judicial  did,  but  these  laws 
belong  to  all  men  and  women  and  to  all  succeeding  times,  being  eternal,  immutable, 
grafted  by  God  in  man's  nature  and  given  by  Him  for  holiness'  sake.  Note  all  the 
words  well  that  G  d  would  not  have  them  like  either  the  Egyptians  or  Canaanites, 
and  wish  with  me  that  there  was  a  like  law  against  our  being  like  foreign  nations 
near  us,  with  ruffs  dipped  in  the  devil's  liquor  called  starch,  Turkish  heads, 
Spanish  backs,  Italian  waists,  &c.,  giving  daily  occasion  to  the  mockers  that  say 
French  nets  catch  English  fools.     (Bp.  Babington.) 

Vers.  6-30.  None  of  you  bhall  approach  to  any  that  is  near  of  kin  to  him. — 

Consanrj^iinity : — 1.  God  the  institutor  of  marriage  (ver.  6).  2.  Faith  in  Christ 
not  commanded  in  the  law  (ver.  5).  3.  Of  the  several  kinds  of  kindred  by  con- 
sanguinity or  affinity.  4.  Of  the  computation  of  the  degrees  of  consanguinity. 
(1)  Consanguinity  is  a  communicating  in  blood,  derived  from  one  stock.  (2) 
Affinity  is  a  respective  alliance  and  kindred  which  comes  in  by  marriage.  (3)  A 
line  is  a  collection  of  persons  coming  from  the  stock.  (4)  And  it  is  threefold  :  the 
right  line  nseending,  as  the  father,  grandfather  ;  or  descending,  as  the  son,  &c.  ;  or 
collateral-  a'love,  as  the  father's  brother — or  in  the  middle,  as  brother,  sister, 
uncle's  children— or  below,  as  brother's  son  or  daughter,  and  their  sons  and 
daughters.  (5)  A  degree  is  the  distance  of  persons  from  the  stock.  (6)  In  the 
right  line  ascending  or  descending,  there  are  as  many  degrees  as  generations  and 
persons.  (7)  In  the  collateral  line  there  are  as  many  degrees  as  persons.  (8)  In 
the  collateral  line  the  prohibition  is  extended  to  the  fourth  degree.  (9)  In  the 
right  line  ascending  and  descending,  the  impediment  is  perpetual  when  they  are 
alive  or  dead,  as  grounded  upon  the  law  of  nature.  (10)  The  same  degrees  are 
forbidden  ascending  and  descending  by  the  like  analogy.  (11)  The  same  degrees 
are  restrained  by  the  like  analogy  in  both  sexes.  (12)  Where  the  degree  further 
off  is  forbidden,  the  nearer  are  inclusively  interdicted.  5.  Of  the  computation  of 
the  degrees  of  affinity.  (1)  In  what  degree  of  consanguinity  the  husband  is  distant, 
in  the  same  degree  of  affinity  the  wife  is  removed,  because  man  and  wife  are  one 
flesh.  (2)  One  person  added  to  another  by  carnal  copulation  changes  the  kind  of 
affinity,  not  the  degree  :  as  the  brother's  wife  is  of  affinity  in  the  second  degree,  and 
first  kind ;  if  after  she  marry  another  husband,  he  is  in  the  same  degree  of  affinity, 
but  in  the  second  kind.  (3)  There  are  three  kinds  of  affinity — the  near,  middle, 
and  remote :  as  the  brother's  wife  is  in  the  first  kind,  the  brother's  wife's  second 
husband  in  the  second,  the  second  husband's  second  wife  in  the  third.  (4) 
Affinity  in  the  first  kind  is  a  perpetual  impediment.  (5)  Between  such  as  are  of 
kindred  in  blood  to  the  husband,  and  them  that  are  of  kin  to  the  wife,  there  is  no 
affinity  to  hinder  marrirge  :  as,  two  brothers  may  marry  two  sisters.  (6)  In  the 
degrees  of  affinity  ascending  and  descending  in  the  right  line,  the  prohibition  is 
infinitely  extended  without  any  limitation  :  as,  it  is  not  lawful  to  marry  the  wife's 
daughter's  daughter,  and  so  downward,  nor  the  wife's  mother,  or  grandmother,  and 
so  upward.  (7)  In  the  collateral  line,  affinity  is  restrained  to  the  third  degree,  as 
to  uncle's  wife,  who  is  in  the  same  degree  of  affinity  that  her  husband  is  in 
consanguinity.  (8)  Of  the  agreements  and  differences  between  the  degrees  of 
consanguinity  and  affinity.  (1)  Agreement,  (a)  In  what  degree  one  is  of  con- 
sanguinity, the  wife  or  husba  .d  is  in  the  same  degree  of  affinity.  (b)  The 
impediment  in  both  continues  not  only  during  life  but  afterward,  ic)  The  pro- 
hibition extends  itself  in  both  alike,  in  the  right  Jine  ascending  and  descending 
without  limitation  ;  and  in  the  collateral  to  the  third  degree  expressly,  and  by  a 
certain  analogy  to  the  fourth.  (2)  Differences,  {a)  The  efficient  cause  of  con- 
sanguinity is  a  natural  obligation,  without  any  relation  to  the  will  and  consent  of 
man,  in  the  propagation  and  the  line  of  consanguinity ;  but  in  affinity  there  is  a 
voluntary  bond  or  obligation  by  consent  in  marriage.  (b)  Consanguinity  is  by 
generation  from  one,  both  father  and  mother ;  affinity  is  by  the  copulation  of  two. 
The  first  is  real,  the  second  by  relation,  (c)  In  consanguinity,  on  both  sides  the 
bond  holds,  both  by  the  father  and  mother,  but  the  kinsmen  of  the  husband  are 
not  of  affinity  to  the  kindred  of  the  wife ;  on  the  contrary,  affinity  holds  only  in  the 
first  kind,  which  changes  by  a  new  copulation,  though  the  degree  alter  not,  as  the 
brother's  wife's  second  husband  is  not  properly  of  affinity ;  but  in  consanguinity, 
the  kind  and  degree  hold  out  together.  6.  Marriage  of  divers  wives  successively, 
lawful,  though  not  together  (ver.  18).  7.  The  Scripture  most  pure,  even  when  it 
makes   mention  of   impure   and   obscene   things.     {A.    Willet,   D.D.)  Moral 


CHAP,  xviii.]  LEVITICUS.  219 

observations : — 1.  To  walk  constantly  in  the  obedience  of  God's  law  (ver.  4).  2. 
Against  the  monstrous  sin  of  adultery  (ver.  20).  3.  AMainst  the  unnatural  and 
most  abominable  sin  of  bestiality  (ver.  23).  4.  To  profit  by  other  men's  examples, 
and  to  be  warned  by  their  punishments  (ver.  25).  5.  God  not  partial  in  His 
judgments,  and  therefore  no  man  should  presume  (ver.  28).  (Ibid.)  Onmarriage 
with  a  deceased  icife's  sifter : — By  the  wording  of  the  Hebrew  text  a  man  is 
permitted  to  many  his  deceased  wife's  sister,  but  not  to  have  two  sisters  for  wives 
at  the  same  time,  or  one  after  the  other  while  both  are  living — this  is  the  logical 
inference  to  be  drawn  from  the  qualifying  addition  "in  her  lifetime";  and  yet 
by  the  spirit  of  the  Levitical  laws,  the  former  alliance  also  is  like  an  alliance  with 
a  sister,  and  therefore  no  less  objectionable.  Such  scruples  were  indeed  unknown 
to  the  Hebrews  of  earlier  times,  since  even  in  Genesis  Jacob  is  I'epresented  as  the 
husband  of  the  sisters  Rachel  and  Leah ;  but  they  followed  with  necessity  from  the 
severe  theory  of  marriage  gradually  worked  out  and  adopted.  Philo,  in  the  oldest 
explanation  of  our  law  that  has  come  down  to  us,  observes  that  it  is  impious  for 
one  sister  to  usurp  the  place  of  the  other,  and  to  make  the  misfortune  of  the  latter 
a  stepping-stone  of  her  own  happiness;  thus  bitter  jealousies  and  implacable 
enmities  must  be  engendered  ;  and  it  would  be  as  if  the  different  members  of  the 
body,  abandoning  their  natural  harmony  and  fellowship,  were  to  quarrel  with  one 
another,  thus  inevitably  causing  incurable  diseases  and  endless  mischief.  In  this 
sense  the  prohibition  has  commonly  been  understood,  and  if  the  words  of  our 
verse  alone  are  weighed,  it.  can  hardly  be  understood  otherwise :  and  yet  the 
matrimonial  law^s,  taken  as  a  whole,  wei  e  not  prompted  by  considerations  of  mere 
expediency,  such  as  the  prevention  of  unsisterly  rivalry,  since  their  main  object 
was  to  warn  against  alliances  between  near  relations  (ver.  6).  From  whatever  side 
we  weigh  the  question,  we  cannot  help  being  struck  by  the  incongruity  of  a 
code  which  permits  a  woman  to  marry,  at  least  under  certain  conditions,  her 
sister's  husband,  but  expressly  forbids  a  man  to  marry  his  brother's  wife.  If  the 
wife  dies,  her  husband  does  not  cease  to  be  the  brother  of  that  wife's  sister; 
yet  practical  life  seemed  to  demand  some  relief  from  the  rigour  of  abstract  logic, 
and  the  prohibition  was  limited  to  the  lifetime  of  both  sisters.  It  has  bee  i 
contended  that  this  was  a  concession  analogous  to  the  levirat  and  the  permission  of 
divorce  ;  but  the  cases  are  not  quite  parallel :  the  Levitical  legislators  are  entirely 
silent  with  regard  to  the  levirat  and  divorce  ;  for  in  their  own  time  the  former  was 
unnecessary,  and  tbe  latter  was  strongly  opposed  by  contemporaries,  such  as 
Malachi;  a  direct  repeal  of  the  two  statutes,  known  to  the  people  as  a  part  of 
Deuteronomy,  or  "  the  Book  of  the  Law,"  was  unfeasible ;  and  silence  on  these 
subjects  was  sufficiently  significant.  We  need  hardly  add  that  these  remarks  are 
merely  designed  to  elucidate  the  meaning  and  intention  of  the  command,  without 
attempting  to  decide  upon  its  value  or  its  binding  force  ;  the  latter  points  must  be 
left  to  individual  judgment  and  feeling,  which  in  no  other  sphere  claim  greater 
respect  and  freedom.  The  prevailing  laws  of  matrimony  may  possibly,  in  the 
course  of  time,  call  for  revision ;  and  progress  and  liberty  of  action  should  not 
be  checked  by  a  misconception  of  Biblical  authority.  The  very  verse  under  con- 
sideration affords  the  strongest  proof  that  the  ordinances  of  the  Levitical  code  are 
not  final  and  unalterable;  for  this  verse  involves  the  sanction  of  polygamy,  which, 
not  even  abrogated  by  Christ  and  the  apostles,  is  now  regarded  by  western  Jews 
and  Christians  not  merely  as  inexpedient,  but  as  immoral.  It  is  well  known  that 
from  comparatively  early  times,  many  chiefs  of  the  Christian  Church  indeed 
translated  the  words  of  our  verse  literally,  yet  weighing  the  spirit  of  the  law,  were 
strongly  opposed  to  the  marriage  with  the  deceased  wife's  sister.  By  the  Apostolic 
Canous  (about  300)  persons  contracting  such  an  alliance  were  for  ever  incapacitated 
for  clerical  functions.  The  Council  of  Illiberis  (about  30.5)  excluded  them  from 
holy  communion  for  five  years  ;  St.  Basil  (375)  imposed  upon  them  for  seven  years 
the  ecclesiastical  penalties  fixed  for  adultery  ;  his  celebrated  letter  on  the  subject 
proves  that,  in  the  Church  "a  custom  equivalent  to  a  law,  and  handed  down  by 
holy  men "  had  been  established  against  such  marriages ;  it  was  in  his  time 
probably  that  the  Septuagint  (in  Deut.  xxvii.  23)  received  the  interpolation  found 
in  the  Vatican  copy  of  that  version,  "  Cursed  be  he  who  lies  with  his  wife's  sister ''  ; 
and  similar  views  were  enforced  by  the  emperors  Constantius  and  Theodosius, 
Honorius,  Theodosins  XL,  and  Justinian,  and  by  all  the  leaders  of  the  Greek  and 
Latin  Church  :  the  only  notable  exception  is  Diodorus,  bishop  of  Tarsus ;  but  he 
was  indignantly  opposed  by  his  contemporary  St.  Basil,  who  declared  that  such 
marriages  are  indeed  permitted  to  the  Jews  because  they  are  under  the  law  and  ail 


220  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xviii. 

its  ceremonial  enactments,  but  not  to  the  free  Christians,  and  asked  how  the  off- 
spring of  the  two  sisters  would  be  related  to  each  other,  whether  they  should  be 
called  cousins  or  brothers,  since  by  a  deplorable  "  confusion  "  they  could  claim 
both  names.  In  England  those  marriages  were  forbidden  in  1603  by  the  Convoca- 
tion of  the  province  of  Canterbury  in  a  Canon  which  has  never  been  formally 
ratified  by  Pailiament.  Dispensations  were,  however,  readily  granted  in  the 
Roman  Church  ;  and  since  the  last  century  many  Protestant  theologians  and  jurists, 
and  ainong  the  first  those  of  the  pietistic  schools,  as  PhiUp  Jacob  Spener,  declared 
marriage  with  the  deceased  wife's  sister  unobjectionable,  since  the  prohibition  is 
not  unequivocally  enjoined  in  the  Bible.  It  was  disapproved  of  by  the  Karaites ; 
but  among  the  bulk  of  the  Jews  it  has  at  all  times  not  only  been  tolerated  but 
encouraged.  [M.  M.  Kalisch,  Ph.D.)  Of  unlawful  marriages: — As  the  chosen 
and  covenant  tribes  of  Israel  were  soon  to  take  up  their  journey  to  the  land  of 
Canaan,  the  inhabitants  of  which  were  to  be  exterminated  for  their  multifarious 
iniquities  in  the  sight  of  God,  a  recital  is  here  made  of  some  of  those  aggravated 
forms  of  wickedness  which  were  rife  among  them,  and  which  God  had  determined 
signally  to  punish.  This  is  done  not  only  to  illustrate  the  justice  of  the  Divine 
proceedings  in  their  excision,  but  also  with  a  view  to  put  the  peculiar  people  them- 
selves on  their  guard  against  yielding  to  the  contagion  of  their  pernicious  example, 
and  thus  becoming  obnoxious  to  the  same  fearful  retributions  which  were  now 
about  to  be  visited  upon  the  Canaanites.  The  particular  class  of  abominations 
more  especially  pointed  out  in  this  chapter,  and  to  which  the  brand-mark  of  the 
Divine  reprobation  is  so  conspicuously  affixed,  is  that  of  incestuous  connections. 
Not  only  had  that  abandoned  race  been  guilty  of  a  total  apostacy  from  the  worship 
of  the  true  God,  substituting  in  His  room  the  sun,  and  moon,  and  host  of  heaven, 
and  bowing  down  to  stocks  and  stones  and  creeping  things,  but  they  had  mingled 
with  their  idolatry  every  vice  that  could  degrade  human  nature  and  pollute  society. 
In  the  black  catalogue  of  these  the  abominations  of  lust  stand  pre-eminent ;  and 
whether  in  the  form  of  adultery,  fornication,  incest,  sodomy,  or  bestiality,  they 
had  now  risen  to  a  pitch  of  enormity  which  the  forbearance  of  heaven  could  tolerate 
no  longer,  and  of  which  a  shuddering  dread  was  to  be  begotten  in  the  minds  of  the 
people  of  the  covenant.  And  in  order  that  no  possible  plea  of  ignorance  or  un- 
certainty might  be  left  in  their  minds  as  to  those  connections  which  were  lawful 
and  those  which  were  forbidden,  the  Most  High  proceeds  in  the  present  and  in  the 
20th  chapter  to  lay  down  a  number  of  specific  prohibitions  on  this  subject,  so 
framed,  as  not  only  to  include  the  extra-nuptial  pollutions,  which  had  prevailed 
among  the  heathen,  but  also  all  those  incestuous  unions  which  were  inconsistent 
with  the  purit  and  sanctity  of  the  marriage  relation.  Both  classes  of  crimes  we 
think  are  iu  fact  included  ;  so  that  it  is  doing  no  violence  to  the  spirit  of  the  text 
to  regard  it  as  containing  a  system  of  marriage-laws  by  which  the  peculiar  people 
were  ever  after  to  be  governed.  As  this  is  the  only  passage  in  the  compass  of  the 
whole  Bible  where  any  formal  ena-tments  are  given  on  this  subject,  this  and  the 
connected  chapters  treating  of  this  theme  have  always  been  deemed  of  peculiar 
importance  in  their  relations  to  the  question  of  the  lawful  degrees  within  which 
the  marriage  connection  may  now  be  formed  by  those  who  make  the  law  of  God  the 
great  standard  of  moral  duty.  {G.  Btish.)  The  wilderness  a  suitable  place  for  the 
givin<)  of  these  law.^ : — The  wilderness  in  which  they  now  were  was  a  very  fit  place 
for  enjoining  these  laws  upon  the  Israelites,  as  they  were  now  removed  from  the 
snares  and  temptations  of  Egypt,  and  were  not  yet  mingled  with  the  people  of 
Canaan.  (Bp.  Kiddn-.)  Need  for  niarringe  latvs  : — Tlie  necessity  for  laws  on 
this  point  at  once  discriminating,  wise,  and  stringent,  will  be  sufficiently  obvious 
when  we  consider  the  strength  of  the  passion  to  be  controlled — constitutionally 
common  to  all  ages  of  the  world  ;  the  sacredness  of  the  marriage  relation  and  the 
inestimable  value  of  moral  purity  in  all  human  society — also  common  to  all  ages 
of  the  world's  history ;  and  (peculiar  to  the  earlier  ages)  the  necessity  of  defining 
the  limits  of  consanguinity  within  which  marriage  should  be  prohibited.  Perhaps 
we  need  to  remind  ourselves  that  the  race  having  sprung  from  a  single  pair  and  the 
world  having  been  repeopled  a  second  time  from  one  family,  those  primitive 
examples  may  have  sent  down  for  many  generations  a  certain  looseness  which 
called  for  special  restraint  and  a  carefully  defining  law.  The  crimes  of  Sodom, 
their  polluting  influence  in  so  good  a  family  as  that  of  Lot ;  the  low  morals  of 
Egyptian  life  ;  some  sad  manifestations  in  the  early  liistory  of  Jacob's  family ;  the 
horrible  contagion  of  Moab  and  Midian  when  the  tribes  of  Israel  came  socially  near 
them ;   these  and  kindred  facts  will  be  readily  recalled  as  in  point  to  show  the 


CHAP.  SIX.]  LEVITICUS.  221 

necessity  of  vigorous  legislation  in  the  Mosaic  code  to  counteract  these  untoward 
influences  of  their  antecedent  life  and  of  surrounding  society.      {H.  Cowles,  D.D.) 


CHAPTEE  XIX. 

Veb.  2.  Ye  shall  he  holy. — The  object  of  God's  laws  : — The  position  of  this  come 
mand  at  the  head  of  the  long  list  of  precepts  which  follows  is  most  significant  and 
instructive.  It  sets  before  us  the  object  of  the  whole  ceremonial  and  moral  law, 
and,  we  may  add,  the  supreme  object  of  the  gospel  also,  namely,  to  produce  a 
certain  type  of  moral  and  spiritual  character,  a  "  holy  "  manhood  ;  it,  moreover, 
precisely  interprets  this  term,  so  universally  misunderstood  and  misapplied  among 
all  nations,  as  essentially  consisting  in  a  spiritual  likeness  to  God :  "  Ye  shall  be 
holy :  for  I  the  Lord  your  God  am  holy."  These  words  evidently  at  ooce  define 
hoUness  and  declare  the  supreme  motive  to  the  attainment  and  maintenance  of  a 
holy  character.  This,  then,  is  brought  before  us  as  the  central  thought  in  which  all 
the  diverse  precepts  and  prohibitions  which  follow  find  their  unity ;  and,  accord- 
ingly, we  find  this  keynote  of  the  whole  law  echoing,  as  it  were,  all  through  this 
chapter,  in  the  constant  refrain,  repeated  herein  no  less  than  fourteen— twice  seven 
— times ;  "  I  am  the  Lord  !  "  "  I  am  the  Lord  your  God !  "  {S.  H.  Kellogg,  D.D.) 
A  fountain  of  purity : — One  summer  day,  a  few  years  ago,  strolling  for  rest  and 
pleasure  near  the  moutb  of  the  Columbia  river,  where  there  is  a  large  rise  and  fall 
of  the  tide,  I  came,  at  low  tide,  upon  a  splendid  spring  of  pure,  fresh  water,  clear  as 
crystal,  gushing  up  from  between  the  rocks  that  two  hours  before  had  formed  a  part 
of  the  river's  bed.  Twice  a  day  the  soiled  tide  rises  above  that  beautiful  fountain 
and  covers  it  over ;  but  there  it  is,  down  deep  under  the  salt  tide,  and  when  the 
tide  has  spent  its  force  and  gone  back  again  to  the  ocean's  depths,  it  sends  out  its 
pure  waters  fresh  and  clear  as  before.  So  if  the  human  heart  be  really  a  fountain 
of  love  to  Christ  it  will  send  out  its  streams  of  fresh,  sweet  waters,  even  into  the 
midst  of  the  salt  tides  of  politics  or  business.  And  the  man  who  carries  such  a 
fountain  into  the  day's  worry  and  struggle  will  come  again  at  night,  when  the 
world's  tide  has  spent  its  force,  with  clean  hands,  sweet  spirit,  and  conscience  void 
of  offence  toward  God  and  man.  (S.  S.  Chronicle.)  Holiness  silences  the  profane  : — 
Holiness  has  a  mighty  influence  upon  others.  It  stops  the  mouths  of  the  ungodly, 
■who  are  ready  to  reproach  religion  and  throw  the  dirt  of  professors'  sins  on  the  face 
of  profession  itseK.  They  say  frogs  will  cease  croaking  when  a  light  is  brought 
near  them  ;  the  light  of  a  holy  conversation  hangs,  as  it  were,  a  padlock  on  profane 
lips.     {W.  Gurnall.) 

Ver.  3.  Ye  shall  fear  .  .  .  mother  .  .  .  father, — Maternal  rule : — This  is  a 
remarkable  command,  given  by  God  to  Moses.  Not  for  the  matter  of  it,  for  it  is 
the  same  in  substance  with  the  fifth  in  the  Decalogue.  But  as  differing  from  that 
and  other  parallel  passages,  it  is  remarkable  on  two  accounts.  In  those  the  father 
is  always  put  first.  It  is,  "  Honour  thy  father  and  thy  mother."  "  He  that  smiteth 
his  father  and  his  mother,  shall  surely  be  put  to  death."  "  My  son,  hear  the 
instruction  of  thy  father,  and  forsake  not  the  law  of  thy  mother."  "  Hearken  unto 
thy  father  that  begat  thee,  and  despise  not  thy  mother  when  she  is  old."  "Honour 
thy  father  and  thy  mother,  which  is  the  first  commandment  with  promise."  But 
here,  mother  is  put  first — "  Ye  shall  fear  every  man  his  mother  and  his  father." 
Then  again,  the  word  "  fear  " — "  Thou  shalt  fear  thy  mother  and  thy  father,"  occurs 
in  no  other  passage.  There  must  be  a  meaniug,  both  in  the  word  "fear,"  and  the 
singular  collocation  of  the  sentence.  And  what  is  it  ?  Fathers  are  in  general  wont 
to  govern  their  children  more  by  authority,  and  mothers  by  love.  Hence  they  are 
more  afraid  of  offending  their  fathers  than  their  mothers.  This  is  especially  the 
case  with  boys,  about  the  time  when  they  enter  their  teens.  For  three  or  four 
years  they  are  more  impatient  of  restraint  than  ever  before  or  after.  They  are 
then  apt  to  think  they  know  much  more  than  their  mothers,  and  are  quite  capable 
of  governing  themselves.  To  guard  against  this  undervaluing  of  their  mother's 
authority  seems  to  have  been  the  special  design  of  the  command  in  question.  "  Ye 
shall  fear  every  man  his  mother  " — detracting  nothing  from  the  father's  authority ; 
but  putting  the  mother's  in  the  foreground,  because  there  is  danger  of  its  being 


222  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xix. 


despised  or  overlooked.    The  word  "  fear,"  in  this  case,  is  not  quite  synonymous  with 
"honour,"  in  the  fifth  commandment.   It  has  rather  more  intensity  of  meaninj?,  if  it 
is  not  more  imperative.     There  is  more  of  awe  in  fear,  if  not  more  of  reverence. 
God  intended  to  put  both  parents  on  the  same  level.     Both  are  to  be  feared  alike. 
And  this  purity  of  governmental  control  carries  along  with  it  corresponding  obliga- 
tions.    Mothers  must  not  shrink  from  exercising  the  authority  with  which  God  has 
clothed  them,  to  "train  up  their  children  in  the  way  in  which  they  should  go," 
however  crossing  it  may  sometimes  be  to  their  parental  yearning.     Let  them  rule 
by  love  as  much  as  they  can.     The  more  the  better.     But  restraint,  by  coercion, 
where  nothing  else  will  do,  is  one  of  the  highest  forms  in  which  parental  love  is 
manifested.     It  would  be  wrong,  it  would  be  cruel  to  withhold  it  from  the  wayward 
child.     Thousands  upon  thousands  have  been  greatly  wronged,  if  not  ruined,  by 
overweening  motherly  indulgence.     The  surest  way  ultimately  to  win  that  undying 
filial  love,  "  which  casteth  out  fear,"  is  to  restrain  and  govern  the  boy  just  at  the 
age  when  he  is  most  restive  under  parental  control.     Woe  to  the  child  that  breaks 
away  from  the  authority  which  God  has  ordained.     Evil  is  as  surely  before  him  as 
the  going  down  of  the  sun  (Prov.  xxx.  17).     {Dr.  Humphrey.)       Ungrateful  children 
rebuked  by  birds : — The  birds  can  teach    ungrateful  children  their  duty  towards 
aged  parents.     It  is  an  old  tradition  with  regard  to  storks,  says  Mr.  Morris  in  his 
"  British  Birds,"  that  they  take  care  of  and  nourish  their  parents  when  they  are  too 
old  to  take  care  of  themselves,  from  whence  the  Greek  word  "  pelargicos,"  signify- 
ing the  duty  of  children  to  take  care  of  their  parents ;  and  "  pelargicoi  nomoi," 
signifying  the  laws  relating  to  that  duty,  both  derived  from  the  Greek  word  for  a 
stork  ;  "  Pelargos,"  from  pelas,  black  ;  and  "  argos,"  white,  alluding  to  the  prevail- 
ing colours  of  the  stork.    [Scientific  Illustrations.)     A  son^s  devotion  to  his  mother  : — 
I  remember  just  now  a  young  man  whom  the  Lord  has  blessed  on  account  of  the 
love  he  has  shown  his  mother.     Many  years  ago  when  her  husband  died,  she  was 
walking  the  streets  of  Glasgow  in  sore  distress,  her  heart  being,  as  it  were,  in  the 
grave  with  her  husband.     She  was  utterly  heedless  of  the  great  crowd,  and  almost 
forgetful  of  the  kindly  little  boy,  then  only  three  and  a  half  years  old,  who  was 
walking  by  her  side.     He  reminded  her  that  he  was  there  by  pulling  her  hand 
earnestly,  and  when  she  looked  down  to  him,  he  said, "  Motlier,  don't  cry  1  " — for  he 
saw  the  tears  were  stealing  down  her  cheeks — "  I  will  be  the  father,"  and  the  whole 
soul  of  the  child  was  in  his  face.     As  he  spoke  those  words  the  warmth  of  summer 
and  the  life  of  the  spring-time  of  joy  came  again  into  the  mother's  heart.     God 
spared  him  to  fulfil  his  promise,  and  to  receive  the  blessing  that  is  annexed  to  the 
fifth  commandment,  and  I  am  glad  he  is  living  to-day  a  prosperous  and  honour- 
able merchant.   It  is  some  years  since  I  joined  him  in  laying  his  mother's  honoured 
head  in  the  grave.     Shortly  before  she  died  she  was  able,  beautifully  and  lovingly, 
to  testify  that  her  son  had  amply  redeemed  the  promise  of  his  childhood,  that  what 
his  father  would  have  been,  had  he  been  spared,  her  son  had  successfully  tried  to 
be  to  her.     {J.  G.  Cunniniiham.)         Respect  for  a  mother: — Men  who  have  risen 
from  humble  life  to  wealth  and  high  social  rank  have  often  been  ashamed  of  their 
parents,  and  shown  them  little  alteution  or  respect.     Such  treatment  indicates  a 
vulgar  mind.    True  nobility  follows  a  different  method.    Eichard  Hurd,  an  eminent 
bishop  of  the  Church  of  England  at  the  close  of  the  last  century,  was  a  man  of 
courtly  manners,  of  great  learning,  who  moved  with  distinction  in  the  best  society 
in  the  kingdom.     George  III.  pronounced  him  "  the  most  naturally  polite  man  he 
had  ever  known."     He,  however,  never  failed  to  show  the  utmost  respect  for  his 
mother,  a  farmer's  wife,  of  no  education,  but  of  sterling  character.   When  he  enter- 
tained large  companies  at  the  Episcopal  Palace,  he  led  her  with  a  stately  courtesy 
to  the  head  of  the  table,  and  paid  her  the  greatest  deference.     The  high-born 
families  who  sat  at  his  table  reverenced  his  conduct,  so  becoming  to  a  son  and  a 
gentleman.      (Neio   Orleans  Democrat.)         Sacred  to  the  memory  of  a  mother: — 
"  I  want,"  said  the  late  Emperor  of  Germany,  the  last  but  one,  the  great  William, 
"  I  want  a  lamp  such  as  Such-aud-so  has,"  naming  some  distinguished  member  of 
the  Court.     The  lamp  was  provided  according  to  the  very  pattern,  but  his  Majesty 
complained,  on  returning  to  his  study  after  wiihdrawment,  that  he  could  not  bear 
the  savour  of  the  room ;    the  lamp  was  emitting  smoke,  and  it  was  altogether 
intolerable.     One  of  the  secondary  servants  knew  the  reason,  but  dare  not  name  it 
to  his  Majesty.     One  of  the  higher  servants  learned  the  cause  and  brought  it  under 
his  Majesty's  attention.     "  It  is  because  your  Majesty  turns  down  the  light  when 
you  leave  the  study  that  occasions  the  emission  of  smoke  and  vapours,  and  if  you 
will  cease  to  do  that  all  will  be  well."     "  Ah,"  said  the  sweet  old  patriarch  of  his 


CHAP.  XIX.]  LEVITICUS.  223 

nation,  "  I  know  how  that  is.  I  learned  that  in  the  days  of  our  poverty.  After  the 
battle  of  Jena  we  were  very  poor,  and  my  mother  never  allowed  us  to  leave  the  room 
at  night  without  turning  down  the  light,  and  I  continue  to  turn  down  the  light  in 
memory  of  my  mother."  A  beautiful  example,  a  tender  domestic  story  that.  Here 
is  a  man  who  could  have  had  a  thousand  lamps,  yet  in  memory  of  the  days  of  his 
poverty,  when  his  mother  taught  him  the  uses  of  money,  be  kept  turning  down  the 
light,  saying,  "  Sacred  to  the  memory  of  my  mother."  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  And 
keep  My  Sabbaths.— T/ie  Sabbath  kept : — During  the  latter  part  of  his  life  General 
Jackson  was  in  the  haliit  of  coming  down  to  New  Orleans  to  see  his  old  friends  and 
comrades  in  arms  and  participate  in  the  celebration  of  the  glorious  8th  of  January. 
It  happened  on  one  of  these  visits  that  the  8th  occurred  on  Sunday.  General 
Plauche  called  upon  the  old  hero  and  requested  him  to  accompany  the  military  to 
the  battle-ground  on  the  anniversary  ot  the  great  day.  "  I  am  going  to  church 
to-morrow,"  mildly  observed  the  General.  The  military  preparations  for  the  cele- 
bration went  on,  and  on  Sunday  morning  at  ten  o'clock  General  Plauche  called  at 
the  St.  Charles  and  informed  General  Jackson  that  the  mihtary  and  civic  proces- 
sions were  ready  to  accompany  him  to  the  scene  of  his  glory.  "  General  Plauche," 
responded  old  Hickory,  turning  upon  him  the  glance  of  his  kindling  eye,  "  I  told 
you  I  was  going  to  church  to-day."  General  Plauche  withdrew,  muttering  to 
himself,  "I  might  have  known  better."  The  celebration  was  postponed  till  the 
next  day. 

Ver.  4.  Turn  ye  not  unto  idols. — Folly  of  idolatry  .-—A  Chinese  wife  was  one  day 
seen  by  a  missionary  to  enter  a  temple.  In  her  hands  were  some  humble  offerings, 
such  as  a  twig,  or  rice,  for  propitiating  the  poor,  blind  deity.  There  he  stood, 
some  forty  feet  high,  blackened  and  begrimed  with  the  smoke  of  incense  for  hun- 
dreds of  years.  She  presented  her  petition  ;  she  called  upon  the  idol  to  protect  and 
return  in  safety  her  husband,  then  on  the  sea  in  a  storm.  A  few  weeks  after  the 
missionary  was  there,  and  saw  the  same  female  enter  the  temple  in  a  rage.  She 
stood  before  the  grim  idol  and  cursed  it  for  being  so  blind,  so  deaf,  so  helpless,  as 
to  let  her  husband  perish  !  Yes,  the  waihng  widow  of  heathen  life  only  echoed  the 
sad  complaints  of  millions  in  Christian  lands.  They  found  their  hopes  and  build 
their  plans  on  jist  such  baseless,  blind,  deaf  gods  as  this  humble  dweller  in  dark- 
ness.   The  worldling  ever  prays  to  a  god  that  is  deaf  and  blind  I   (VanDoren,  D.D.) 

Vers.  9,  10.  Thou  shalt  not  wholly  reap  the  comers  of  thy  field. — A  sermon  to 
gleaners: — The  subject  of  gleaning  in  the  tields  may  appear  to  some  to  be  a  very 
lowly  one,  and  an  address  delivered  exclusively  to  those  who  have  been  engaged  in 
it,  unnecessary  :  but  a  little  reflection  will  suihce  to  remove  such  objections,  if  they 
ever  existed  in  the  mind  of  any  person.  Gleaning  is  not  a  humbler  employment 
than  that  of  a  fisherman,  and  if  the  Lord  turned  the  latter  so  as  to  convey  instruc- 
tion to  His  followers,  there  is  no  reason  why  the  former  should  be  beneath  the 
notice  of  His  ministers,  in  their  efforts  to  reach  the  consciences  of  men.  The 
custom  of  gleaning  in  the  fields  is  very  ancient.  It  is  probable  that  it  prevailed  in 
the  land  of  Canaan  long  before  it  was  taken  possession  of  by  the  children  of  Israel, 
and  it  is  not  unlikely  that  they  found  it  there  and  adopted  the  practice.  The 
nations  wbo  dwelt  in  this  land  were  so  wicked  and  abandoned  that  they  were 
marked  for  destruction  by  the  sword  of  Israel  and  of  God.  Their  fields  were  fertile 
far  beyond  any  fertility  which  now  exists,  as  it  was  not  an  uncommon  thing  for 
grain  to  be  reaped  a  hundred  times  beyond  what  was  sown.  The  vines  were  so 
fruitful  and  the  clusters  were  so  large  that  the  two  men  who  went  out  as  spies 
from  the  camp  of  the  Israelites  at  Kadesh-Barnea,  returned  fiom  the  valley  of 
Eschol  carrying  one  buneh  of  grapes  on  a  staff  upon  their  shoulders  as  a  specimen 
of  what  they  saw  growing  in  the  vineyards.  The  gleaning  of  such  tields  and  of  such 
vineyards  must  have  afforded  no  insignificant  reward.  When  the  Jews  obtained 
possession  of  the  land,  after  they  had  driven  out  the  nations  which  were  before 
them,  God  recognised  gleaning  in  the  Mosaic  Law,  and  laid  down  rules  for  its  regu- 
lation. The  text  which  I  have  chosen  from  the  nineteenth  chapter  of  Leviticus 
contains  part  of  this  law;  the  rest  will  be  found  in  Deut.  xxiv.  God  sanctioned 
the  practice,  and  commanded  that  some  grain  and  olives  and  grapes  should  be  left 
to  be  gleaned  by  the  poor,  the  stranger,  the  fatherless,  and  the  widow,  and  thus  He 
required  the  Jews  to  pay  to  those  who  are  more  immediately  depending  for  support 
on  His  bounty,  a  sort  of  tribute  in  acknowledgment  of  the  tenure  under  which  they 
held  their  land.     The  Jews  paid  no  rent,  because  God  Himself  was  the  owner, 


224  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOR.  [chap.  xix. 

having  given  it  to  them  without  price  or  reward ;  and  when  He  commanded  tliem 
to  leave  something  for  the  poor  gleaners  in  harvest,  He  did  so  that  He  might  be 
able  to  bless  His  people  m  all  the  work  of  their  hands.  The  reason  why  the 
Almighty  sanctioned  the  practice  of  gleaning  is  very  similar  to  this  notion.  He 
commanded  His  people  to  allow  their  fields  to  be  gleaned,  that  they  might  always 
be  kept  in  remembrance  that  they  had  been  bondmen  in  Egypt.  The  recollection 
of  this  slavery  was  also  preserved  among  them  by  the  Sabbath,  and  by  the  command 
to  do  strict  justice  between  man  and  man,  as  if  the  Almighty  intended  that  the 
people,  after  they  had  attained  to  national  power  and  pro&perity,  should  be  con- 
tinually reminded  of  "  the  rock  from  whence  they  were  hewn,  and  of  the  hole  of  the 
pit  from  whence  they  were  digged."  The  sight  of  poor  persons  gleaning  in  the  fields 
always  reminded  the  Jews  that  they  had  been  in  slavery  in  Egypt,  and  that  like 
them  they  had  been  depending  upon  others  for  a  hard  and  uncertain  living.  In 
fact,  both  the  gleaners  and  the  owners  of  the  fields  had  been  bondmen,  and  both 
were  alike  the  receivers  of  God's  bounty,  although  in  different  ways  and  in  different 
degrees.  More  than  three  thousand  years  have  rolled  past  since  this  law  was 
enacted,  but  the  principle  which  it  contains  is  just  as  applicable  to  gleaners  now  as 
it  was  then.  The  poor  Jew,  gleaning  in  the  fields  of  his  rich  brethren,  had  been  a 
slave,  but  after  he  got  into  the  Promised  Land  he  became  free ;  and  exactly  so, 
every  gleaner  who  now  searches  in  the  fields  of  the  farmers  for  heads  of  grain  is 
free.  I  mean  to  tell  you  that  you  are  politically  free,  and  that  you  do  not  owe 
obedience  to  any  master,  except  you  bind  yourselves  to  serve  him  for  some  payment. 
You  were  never  slaves,  as  the  Jews  had  been  in  Egypt,  when  they  were  forced  to 
serve  in  a  cruel  bondage.  But,  let  me  ask  you,  are  you  really  free  ?  When  you 
were  gleaning  in  the  fields  this  harvest,  could  you  say  with  truth  that  you  had 
once  been  slaves,  but  that  you  were  now  free  ?  A  person  gleaning  in  the  fields  in 
harvest  may  be  free,  but  she  is  a  slave,  bound  hand  and  foot,  if  sin  ha  e  the 
dominion  over  her.  A  woman  gathering  heads  of  grain  in  the  fields  mi  y  b  f lee, 
but  she  is  a  slave  if  she  spend  her  hard-won  earnings  in  the  public-house,  araiking 
out  of  the  cup  which  cheers,  but  swallowing  along  with  the  drink  liquid  fire  and 
death.  That  gleaner  is  free  who  goes  out  and  comes  in  without  any  to  forbid,  but 
she  is  a  slave  to  the  custom  of  gleaning,  which  is  otherwise  lawful,  if,  for  the  sake 
of  the  trifle  which  she  may  obtain  in  this  way,  she  neglects  her  children,  her  hus- 
band, and  her  home.  Every  gleaner  is  as  free  as  the  air  of  heaven,  but  they  are 
all  slaves  to  their  own  passions  if  they  are  unable  to  agree  together  in  the  same 
field,  and  begin  to  use  abusive  language,  to  quarrel  about  rights  which  have  no 
existence,  except  in  the  goodwill  of  the  farmer,  exhibiting  scenes  which  could  only 
find  a  parallel  in  the  fields  of  the  degraded  Canaanites  before  they  were  driven  out 
by  the  Jews.  There  is  not  a  gleaner  in  the  land  who  is  not  absolutely  free,  but 
every  one  of  them  is  bound  in  fetters  far  stronger  than  fetters  of  iron  or  of  brass, 
if,  with  this  privilege  of  gleaning  in  another  man's  fields  at  their  command,  they 
have  thankless  hearts,  and  entertain  no  gratitude  to  God  for  His  mercy,  nor  to  the 
farmers  for  their  benevolence.  This  brings  me  in  natural  consequence  to  speak 
about  the  persons  on  whose  behalf  God  made  the  law  about  gleaning.  They  are 
the  poor,  the  stranger,  the  fatherless,  and  the  widow.  I  do  not  know  whether  those 
who  go  out  to  glean  in  the  fields  in  these  days  could  be  arranged  into  these  four 
classes ;  but  they  at  least  furnish  a  guide  as  to  the  persons  to  whom  the  Almighty 
especially  extends  His  care.  He  told  His  people  that  the  poor  should  never  cease 
out  of  the  land,  therefore  He  commanded  them,  saying,  "  Thou  shalt  open  thine 
hand  wide  unto  thy  brother,  to  thy  poor  and  to  thy  needy  in  thy  land."  The  poor 
are  the  objects  of  God's  special  protection,  as  long  as  they  lead  lives  of  holiness  and 
humility,  contented  with  their  lot,  and  confident  in  the  mercy  of  Heaven.  If  they 
are  profligate  and  ungodly,  dishonest  and  discontented,  idle  and  careless,  not  one 
of  the  promises  in  Scripture  will  apply  to  them  any  more  than  they  do  to  any  of 
God's  open  and  avowed  enemies.  2.  The  next  class  of  persons  who  were  permitted 
to  glean  in  the  fields  were  strangers,  from  whatever  country  they  might  have  come, 
as  was  Ruth,  who  was  a  daughter  of  Moab.  God  also  made  provision  for  them, 
knowing  how  unhappy  is  the  lot  of  that  man  who  is  an  exile  from  his  native  land. 
He  commanded  His  people  not  on  any  account  to  do  them  an  injury  :  "  Thou  shalt 
neither  vex  a  stranger  nor  oppress  him,  for  ye  were  strangers  in  the  land  of  Egypt. " 
God  by  His  providence  watches  over  strangers,  and  never  fails  to  reward  those  who 
help  them,  whether  by  allowing  them  to  glean  in  the  fields  in  harvest-time,  or  in 
any  other  manner.  3.  The  next  class  who  were  allowed  to  glean  were  the  father- 
less, whose  parent  was  dead.     If  the  Jew  drove  off  from  his  fields  in  harvest  a  poor 


CHAP.  XIX.]  LEVITICUS.  225 

fatherless  child,  who  wanted  to  glean  some  heads  of  corn,  I  have  no  doubt  that  he 
was  guilty  of  a  sin  and  a  crime.  There  is  no  obligation  upon  any  Christian  man  to 
allow  such  a  one  to  search  over  his  fields  at  this  season  of  the  year,  but  when  he 
does  permit  the  fatherless  to  glean  up  what  the  reapers  have  left  behind,  I  make  no 
doubt  that  he  does  that  which  is  pleasing  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  he  will  be  able  to 
understand,  from  the  description  of  the  judgment  in  the  twenty-fifth  chapter  of  St. 
Matthew,  that  the  reward  will  far  outbalance  the  kindness.  4.  The  only  other  class 
whom  God  allowed  to  be  gleaners  were  widows.  Like  the  poor,  the  stranger,  and  the 
fatherless,  God  always  remembers  them.  Let  them  always  remember,  that,  whether 
they  may  be  in  a  cornfield  among  other  gleaners,  like  Euth  in  the  field  of  Boaz,  or, 
like  the  woman  of  Sidon,  alone  in  a  cottage  with  scarce  enough  food  to  eat,  or,  like 
the  widow  of  Nain,  following  in  tears  an  only  son  to  the  grave,  God  watches  over  them, 
and  commands  His  angels  to  give  them  an  invisible  but  effectual  protection.  There 
is  little  more  to  be  said  on  this  subject  of  gleaning,  beyond  one  other  consideration, 
which  we  shall  do  well  to  lay  seriously  to  heart.  We  reflected  upon  the  great  harvest 
of  men,  which  is  to  be  gathered  in  by  the  angelic  reapers  at  the  end  of  this  dispensa- 
tion. That  will  be  a  harvest  after  which  there  will  be  no  gleaning.  (0.  B.  Courtenay, 
M.A.)  Harvest  gleanings  : — How  notable  are  the  provisions  made  in  the  Mosaic 
Law  for  the  poor.  1.  The  Sabbatical  year  (Exod.  xxiii.  10,  11;  cf.  Deut.  xv.  12, 
15).  2.  The  equalisation  of  the  atonement  money  for  poor  and  rich,  thus  establish- 
ing the  value  of  the  poor  as  equal  to  the  rich  (Exod.  xxx.  12).  3.  The  same  minute 
directions  for  the  poor  man's  offerings,  showing  God's  equal  interest  in  his  sacrifice 
(chap.  ii.  &c. )  4.  And  here  the  command  that  the  harvest  and  vintage  gleanings- 
should  be  left  (vers.  9,  10).  Notice — 1.  That  the  humane  laws  of  modeen  times, 
respecting  gleaning  privileges,  are  all  based  upon  this  Mosaic  command.  Every- 
where there  is  a  popular  feeling  that  the  farmer  should  allow,  and  was  not  entitled 
to  prevent  the  poor  from  gathering  what  the  reaper  left  behind.  In  England  the 
custom  of  gleaning  had  very  nearly  passed  into  a  legal  right,  for  there  is  an  extra 
judicial  dictum  of  Lord  Hall,  in  which  he  says  that  those  who  enter  a  field  for  this 
purpose  are  not  guilty  of  trespass  ;  and  Blackstone  (iii.  12)  seems  to  adopt  his 
opinion.  But  that  has  since  been  twice  tried,  and  decided  in  the  negative  in  the 
Court  of  Common  Pleas ;  the  Court  finding  it  to  be  a  practice  incompatible  with  the 
exclusive  enjoyment  of  property,  and  productive  of  vagrancy  and  many  mischievous 
consequences.  "  It  is  still,  however,  the  custom  all  over  England  to  allow  the  poor 
to  glean,  at  least  after  the  harvest  is  carried  "  (Chambers).  II.  That  a  benevolent 
helpfulness  in  bespect  op  the  poor  is  a  special  obligation  of  those  who  enjoy 
PLENTY.  1.  With  God  in  thought  the  rich  will  spare  of  their  abundance  that  the 
poor  may  be  fed.  You  owe  all  to  Him,  especially  in  harvest ;  and,  therefore,  share 
with  the  needy  His  gifts  to  you.  2.  Amid  harvest  rejoicings,  gratitude  should 
incite  to  generosity.  "  As  ye  have  received,  give ! "  Seek  occasion  to  gladden 
others — those  in  need.  God  is  lavish  ;  let  your  "  hands  be  open  "  also  (Psa.  cxlv. 
16).  3.  Kindness  to  the  poor  has  especial  assurances  of  Divine  approval  (Psa.  ix. 
18 ;  xii.  5).  III.  That  this  generous  consideration  for  the  poor  is  a  token  of 
God's  regard  for  the  lowly.  1.  Their  maintenance  engaged  the  Divine  attention. 
For  them  "  the  corner  "  of  the  field  was  claimed  from  the  reapers,  and  to  them  was 
assigned  the  right  to  clear  the  ground.  It  was  their  part  in  the  national  soil,  the 
poor  had  this  heritage  in  the  land.  And  God  enjoins  on  His  Church  now  to  "  care 
for  the  poor."  They  are  Christ's  bequeathment  to  His  disciples.  "  The  poor 
always  ye  have  with  you."  2.  Their  salvation  is  prominently  sought  in  the  gospel. 
"  To  the  poor  the  gospel  is  preached."  And  "  God  hath  chosen  the  poor  rich  in 
faith."  He  who  showed  concern  for  their  physical  supply  and  maintenance,  as 
emphatically  manifests  His  desire  that  they  be  "  blessed  with  all  spiritual  bless- 
ings "  in  Christ.  Therefore — (1)  The  poor  should  cherish  a  grateful  and  trustful 
hope  in  their  God.  (2)  They  should  value  the  high  mercies  of  redemption  in 
Christ  beyond  all  the  kindnesses  of  His  providence.  For  the  favours  of  providence 
only  affect  them  temporally,  but  "  the  riches  of  His  grace  "  are  of  eternal  conse- 
quence. (3)  Let  none,  because  of  lowliness  or  poverty,  despond  of  God's  favour. 
All  His  regulations  prove  that  "  He  careth  for  you."  Look  unto  Him  with  assur- 
ance. (W.  H.  Jellie.)  A  margin  for  the  benefit  of  the  poor  : — I  think  one  of  the 
most  beautiful  traits  in  the  provision  and  economy  of  God  in  the  Old  Testament 
Scriptures  is  the  constant  reference  to  the  poor.  The  permanency  of  the  rich  and 
the  poor  is  what  Christ  Himself  has  declared  ;  there  will  be  rich  and  poor  as  long 
as  this  dispensation  lasts,  and  any  attempt  to  break  down  the  distinction  entails 
calamity  on  the  nation  that  makes  it.     The  distinction  does  exist,  and  will  exist  as 

15 


226  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  xr:. 

long  as  men  live  and  intellectual  energies  differ  in  degree — for  the  fact  is,  men  are 
not  all  equal,  they  may  talk  as  they  will  that  all  men  are  equal.  In  one  sense, 
before  God,  all  men  are  equal ;  but  in  another  respect  they  are  not.  One  man  has 
more  physical  energy  or  more  mental  energy  than  another.  One  man  has  more 
skill  than  another,  one  man  more  activity  than  another ;  and  several  things  are 
constantly  keeping  up  that  broad  and  j^alpable  distinction  between  them  that 
have  and  them  that  have  not.  But  just  as  the  Israelite  reaper  left  some  ears 
of  corn  for  the  poor  and  for  the  stranger,  so  you,  in  estimating  your  labours, 
which  are  to  you  for  all  practical  purposes  your  cornfields,  in  arranging  your  profits, 
your  gaius,  yonr  losses,  ought  to  have  a  balance  or  a  mart^in  for  the  benefit  of  the 
poor,  the  destitute,  and  the  needy.  God  especially  blessed  a  nation  that  took  cariS 
of  the  poor ;  and  God  still  provides  for  and  pronounces  blessed  those  that  consider 
the  poor.  I  know  that  what  are  called  "  poor's  rates  "  are  extremely  objectionable, 
because,  when  you  pay  your  poor's  rates  you  give  a  tax,  and  when  the  poor  get  in 
the  workhouse,  the  bread  that  it  buys  they  take  as  a  right,  and  the  consequence 
is,  all  benevolence  on  your  part  is  quenched,  and  all  gratitude  on  the  part  of  the 
poor  is  ruined  also.  But  then,  such  is  the  hardness  of  the  human  heart  in  so  many 
cases,  that  a  wise  and  merciful  Government  is  bound  to  make  the  law,  and  to  compel 
that  as  a  right  which  many  would  much  rather  give  as  the  act  of  benevolence  and 
kindness.  But  because  you  do  pay  poor's  rates  you  still  must  leave  a  margin  to 
give  something ;  for  those  rates  are  not  yet  intolerable,  and  on  all  occasions  we 
should  be  delighted  that  we  have  an  opportunity  of  making  the  heart  of  the  widow 
.rejoice  and  the  orphan  sing  for  joy.     (J.  Gumming,  D.D.) 

Ver.  11.  Ye  shall  not  steal. — Stealing  discouraged  : — The  illustrious  Joseph 
Priestley  tells  us  in  his  Memoir  that  he  was  influenced  in  his  very  earliest  life 
by  an  act  of  his  mother,  who  died  when  he  was  seven  years  old.  He  had 
returned  from  visiting  his  cousins,  and  had  brought  home  a  pin.  "  Where  did 
you  get  that  pin  from,  Joseph  ?  "  said  his  mother.  "  I  brought  it  from  my  cousins'." 
"  Then,"  she  said,  "  it  is  not  \  ours — take  it  back  "  ;  and  he  was  gently  and  lovingly, 
yet  firmly,  made  to  take  it  back.  So  great  was  the  impression  made  on  his  mind  that 
afterwards  not  the  smallest  detail  of  wrong  could  he  ever  think  of  without  being  in- 
fluenced by  the  recollection  of  that  simple  admonition.  Such  is  the  influence  upon  the 
young  life  of  all  that  it  sees.  It  is  the  tabula  rasa  on  which  you  write  your  words  and 
thoughts  in  the  deeds  that  are  yet  to  come.  {Dr.  Richardson.)  Neither  lie  one  to 
another. — Discredit  gained  Inj  falsehood : — When  Aristotle  was  asked  what  a  man  could 
gain  by  telling  a  falsehood,  he  replied,  "  Never  to  be  credited  when  he  tells  the  truth." 
Truth-telling  : — I  remember  some  years  ago,  when  living  in  a  country  town  in  Kent, 
the  superintendent  of  our  Sunday  School  saying  :  "  We  are  to  have  an  arldress  this 
afternoon.  Mr.  Waters  has  asked  to  say  a  few  words  to  us."  True  to  his  promise 
he  soon  came  into  the  chapel,  and  all  eyes  were  on  him.  "  My  dear  teachers,  you 
often  think  you  labour  in  vain,  but  it  is  not  so  ;  I  want  to  encourage  you  this  after- 
noon. This  last  week  I  have  met  with  two  circumstances  which  have  pleased  me 
much.  One  day  I  was  in  my  shop,  when  a  stone  came  through  the  window.  I 
went  to  the  door ;  there  were  a  good  many  boys  in  the  road ;  I  called  out,  '  Who 
broke  my  window  ?  '  No  answer.  I  then  asked  several  of  them,  but  all  said,  '  No, 
not  me.'  Just  then  a  httle  lad  stepped  up  and  said,  '  I  am  very  sorry,  sir,  but  I 
did  it.'  '  But  how  is  it,  my  lad,  that  you  own  to  it?  Come  in  and  tell  me.'  '  Sir, 
I  go  to  the  Sunday  School,  and  I  can't  tell  a  lie.'  Well  done,  John  Eolfe,  I  have 
come  here  this  afternoon  to  give  you  a  shilling— not  for  breaking  my  window,  no, 
no,  but  for  speaking  the  truth,  and  practising  what  you  hear."  (Mrs.  Spurgeon.) 
Truth  a  handle  to  lying  : — A  lie  always  needs  a  truth  for  a  handle  to  it,  else  the 
hand  would  cut  itself  which  sought  to  drive  it  home  upon  another.  The  worst  lies, 
therefore,  are  those  whose  blade  is  false,  but  whose  handle  is  true.  (H.  W.  Beecher.) 
Prolific  lying  : — One  sin  entertained  fetcheth  in  another ;  a  lie  especially,  which 
being  a  tinkerly,  blushful  sin,  is  either  denied  by  the  liar,  who  is  ashamed  to  be 
taken  with  it,  or  else  covered  by  another  and  another  lie,  as  wf^  see  in  Jacob,  who, 
being  once  over  shoes  will  be  over  boots  too  but  he  will  persuade  his  father  that  he 
is  his  very  son  Esau.     (J.  Trapp.) 

Ver.  12.  Ye  shall  not  swear  hy  My  name  falsely.  False  swearing : — All  nations 
have  severely  punished  perjury.  The  Egyptians  with  death  or  mutilation;  the 
Greeks  with  heavy  fines  and  ultimate  loss  of  all  civil  rights  ;  the  Eomans  visited  it 
with  the  penalty  of  death.     These  ancient  nations  all  held  that  the  gods  were 


CH.u>.  XIX.]  LEVITICUS.  227 

especially  incensed  by  this  crime,  and  that  a  Divine  Nemesis  pursued  the  perjurer. 

1.  What  swearing  by  God's  name  entails.  1.  Acknowledgment  of  His  Omni- 
science.    It  calls  Him  to  witness,  and  imprecates  Him  as  the  avenger  of  falsehood. 

2.  Acknowledgment  of  His  righteousness.  He  is  to  be  the  umpire  and  arbitrator. 
We  call  in  as  a  witness  to  our  fidelity  only  such  a  one  as  is  himself  faithful  and 
true,  and  will  act  a  right  part.  Such  is  God,  Man's  use  of  His  name  is  an  appeal 
to  the  certainty  that  He  will  judge  aright.  II.  What  perjury  in  God's  name 
ENTAILS.  1.  An  insolent  affront  upon  God's  character.  It  is  infamv,  daring 
insolence,  the  degradation  of  His  most  holy  name  for  unholy  ends.  It  invokes 
Him  to  act  as  a  witness  that  a  lie  is  true.  Yet  He  loathes  falsity.  It  is  defiant 
trifling,  an  affront  to  the  God  of  truth.  It  "profanes  His  name."  2.  A  certain 
visitation  of  judgment.  He  "  will  not  hold  him  guiltless  that  taketh  His  name  in 
vain "  (Exod.  xx.  7).  Certainly,  therefore,  He  will  punish  lying  and  profanity. 
Having  been  called  in  as  a  witness  to  a  lie.  He  will  prove  that  He  witnessed  it. 
Thus  to  insult  His  love  of  truth  and  defy  His  power  to  vindicate  it,  and  trail  the 
purity  of  His  character  in  the  mire — before  whom  the  very  angels  veil  their  faces 
as  they  adore  Him — will  ensure  a  just  requital  (Heb.  x.  30).  And  "  there  shall  in 
no  wise  enter  the  heavenly  city  any  who  loveth  and  maketh  a  lie  "  (Eev.  xxi.  27). 
{W.  H.  Jellie.)  Perjury : — I.  What  perjury  is,  and  how  many  ways  it  is 
COMMITTED.  1.  Peijury  is  a  swearing  by  God's  name  falsely,  a  calling  God  to 
■witness  for  the  confirmation  of  a  lie.  2.  It  is  committed  several  ways.  (1)  When 
men  do  assert  and  testifiy  upon  oath  a  thing  to  be  true  which  they  know  to  be 
false.  (2)  When  men  do  assert  and  testify  upon  oath  a  thing  to  be  true  of  the 
truth  of  which  they  are  not  fully  assured.  (3)  They  that  promise  upon  oath, 
what  they  intended  not  to  perform,  or  are  unresolved  and  indifferent  whether  they 
shall  perform  it  or  not.  These  are,  ipso  facto,  guilty  of  perjury,  because  they  swear 
by  God's  name  falsely ;  they  call  God  to  witness  and  to  vouch  for  the  truth  and 
sincerity  of  their  promise,  when  the  intention  of  their  minds  does  not  concur  with 
the  words  of  their  mouths.  (4)  They  also  are  guilty  of  perjury  that  having 
promised  upon  oath  sincerely  and  with  an  honest  intention  do  yet  afterwards  fall 
off  and  renounce  the  obligation,  do  not  faithfully  and  resolvedly  endeavour  and 
take  care  to  fulfil  their  word,  do  act  contrary  to  their  oath  when  a  just  occasion 
requires  and  calls  for  the  performance  of  their  promise  or  sworn  duty.  (5)  They 
are  involved  in  the  guilt  of  perjury  who  against,  or  without  the  consent  of  the 
Supreme  Power,  do  frame  and  impose  upon  others,  or  take  themselves  new  oaths 
contrary  to,  and  destructive  of,  their  former  obligations.  (6)  They  are  guilty  of 
perjury  who  make  use  of  tricks  and  cheats  and  subtle  artifices  to  evade  and  elude 
the  obligation  of  their  oaths,  who  will  not  understand  the  words  of  an  oath  in 
their  assertions  or  promises,  according  to  the  plain  and  common  acceptation  of 
them,  but  by  fastening  a  secret  sense  of  their  own  upon  some  ambiguous  terms, 
or  by  some  reserves,  or  exceptions,  or  additions  within  their  minds,  do  not  quite 
alter  the  meaning  of  the  words,  and  thereby  intend  neither  to  be  obliged  to  speak 
truth  nor  perform  their  promises.  II.  The  heinodsness  of  this  sin  of  perjury. 
1.  It  is  an  affront  to  God,  and  to  all  those  glorious  attributes  that  shine  forth  and 
display  themselves  in  the  government  of  the  world.  2.  It  is  also  most  injurious 
and  mischievous  to  man.  (1)  In  his  private  capacity.  Life,  liberty,  reputation, 
estate  are  all  at  the  mercy  of  the  perjurer.  (2)  To  conversation  and  commerce. 
All  our  dealings,  and  trades,  and  contracts,  and  friendships  are  grounded  upon  and 
managed  by  the  faith  and  assurance  that  we  give  and  take  of  the  sincerity  of  our 
minds  and  purposes,  expressed  by  our  words,  and  in  great  concerns  confirmed  by 
our  oaths.  (3)  As  to  government  and  the  consequents  of  it — peace  and  order,  and 
just  liberty — there  is  nothing  but  perjury  can  destroy  it  and  deprive  us  of  them. 
Nothing  but  perjury  can  carry  on  faction  and  begin  a  rebellion.  Nothing  but 
the  highest  profanation  of  God's  name  can  ruin  the  monarchy.  (4)  Perjury  is 
injurious  to  public  justice.     III.  The  occasions  of,  or  temptations  to,  this  sin. 

1.  Atheism.  A  denying  of  God  and  Providence.  This  indeed  were  a  rational 
account  of,  and  excuse  for,  perjury,  if  atheism  itself  were  rational.  An  atheist, 
should  he  swear  falsely  every  hour,  upon  every  occasion,  would  do  like  an  atheist, 
and  act  consistently  to  his  principles.  For  what  should  hinder  him  from  complying 
with  our  forms  and  customs  of  calling  of  God  to  witness  when  it  is  for  his  advantage? 
He  knows  of  no  God  to  come  at  his  call  to  look  on  and  be  a  witness  of  his  words, 
and  the  searcher  of  his  heart.     He  believes  no  judgment  to  come,  no  future  state. 

2.  Lying,  and  treachery,  and  customary  swearing.  These  things  do  qualify  and 
dispose  a  man  to  forswear  himself  upon  any  convenience  or  temptation.    Because 


228  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xix. 

hereby  men  throw  off  that  reverence  and  respect  to  religion,  tliat  fccar  of  God's 
power  and  justice,  which  would  restrain  them.  3.  To  these  I  might  add  the  usual 
occasions  and  common  temj)tations  to  this  sin.  Such  are  poverty  and  necessity  ; 
covetousness,  and  hope  of  reward  ;  also  fear,  whether  of  shame  or  of  punishment, 
or  of  both.  In  some,  ambition  and  popularity,  a  desire  and  thirst  after  honour 
and  greatness.  In  others,  or  perhaps  in  the  same,  revenge  and  malice ;  or  else 
favour,  affection  and  partiality.  Or,  lastly,  faction,  sedition,  and  designs  against 
the  government.  As  to  all  of  which  it  may  be  enough  to  remark,  that  when  these 
furious  passions  and  violent  desires  are  able  to  overmaster  and  run  down  the  fear 
of  God,  and  the  reverence  of  an  oath  in  the  hearts  of  men,  then  is  perjury  the 
most  easy  and  compendious,  the  most  secure,  the  most  proper  way  to  relieve  their 
wants,  or  satisfy  their  covetous  desires,  or  to  rid  them  of  tLeir  fears,  or  to  gratify 
their  ambition,  or  to  pleasure  their  friends,  or  despatch  their  enemies,  or  to 
compass  and  complete  their  seditious  designs.  IV.  The  punishments  of  peejdry, 
and  these  are  severe  and  dreadful  in  proportion  to  the  guilt  of  this  great  sin.  It  is 
a  good  rule.  Men  ought  to  weigh  well  the  damages  and  mischievous  consequences 
of  their  false-witnessing  and  perfidiousness,  not  to  others  only,  but  to  themselves  ; 
that  if  conscience  and  the  sense  of  their  duty  cannot  prevail  with  them,  they  may 
be  restrained  by  the  fear  of  suffering.  {John  Allen,  3I.A.)  Of  the  nature  and 
manner  of  an  oath,  and  when  to  he  taken  : — 1.  An  oath  is  a  constant  and  serious 
asseveration  of  the  truth  of  a  thing,  whereunto  the  Divine  Majesty  is  called  to 
witness.  2.  The  use  of  an  oath  is  common  to  God,  who  sweareth  by  Himself, 
having  not  a  greater  to  swear  by,  to  angels  and  to  men.  3.  Things  affirmed 
by  oath  are  either  uncertain  in  themselves — as  to  swear  touching  things  to  come ; 
or  are  certain,  but  seem  uncertain  to  us,  and  therefore  an  oath  is  required ;  or 
they  are  not  only  certain  but  necessary,  as  are  all  God's  promises,  which  depend 
upon  His  immutable  word,  yet  in  regard  of  our  weakness  are  confirmed  by  the 
Lord's  oath.  4.  As  God  is  the  auihor  and  institutor  of  an  oath,  so  His  name  only 
is  to  be  used  therein,  because  He  alone  knows  the  heart,  is  everywhere  present  to 
hear,  and  of  omnipotent  power,  able  to  take  revenge  both  of  soul  and  body.  5. 
Three  things  are  to  be  considered  in  a  lawful  oath — the  necessity,  the  truth,  and  the 
manner.  (A  Willet,  D.D.)  The  nature  and  obligation  of  an  oath  ;  the  guilt  and 
danger  of  perjury  : — The  necessity  of  oaths  is  almost  universally  admitted  among 
men.  It  arises  out  of  the  unavoidable  condition  of  human  affairs,  and  is  so 
essential  to  the  peace  and  order  of  society  that  they  could  scarcely  subsist  without 
it.  It  is  not  only  in  places  of  trust,  and  in  cases  of  evidence,  that  it  is  necessary 
to  have  recourse  to  this  sacred  obligation.  It  is  frequently  requisite,  for  the  final 
decision  of  disputes,  to  refer  to  the  oath  of  one  of  the  parties.  Not  that  an  oath  is 
always  a  true  and  infallible  decision;  but  it  is  the  highest  credit  which  a  human 
being  can  give  to  his  own  declaration ;  it  is  the  utmost  security  which  a  man  can 
give  to  the  public  in  doubtful  cases ;  it  is  the  last  effort  of  truth  and  confidence 
among  mankind.  After  this  we  can  go  no  farther ;  for  if  the  religion  of  an  oath 
will  not  oblige  a  man  to  speak  the  truth,  there  is  nothing  which  will  oblige  him. 
It  must  rest  till  that  awful  day  of  retribution  come,  when  God  will  bring  to  light 
the  hidden  things  of  darkness,  and  judge  the  secrets  of  men's  hearts  by  Christ 
Jesus.  One  would  be  almost  tempted  to  conclude  that  no  man  who  believes  iu  a 
future  state  could  be  guilty  of  false  swearing.  But  there  is  no  arguing  against 
fact,  and  fact  is  decidedly  against  this  conclusion.  The  generality  of  men  who 
swear  falsely,  do  it  either  to  procure  some  worldly  advantage,  or  to  save  themselves 
from  some  necessary  expense  ;  and  there  have  been  some  so  abandoned  as  to 
take  the  wages  of  iniquity,  and  to  sell  themselves  to  prostitute  the  name  of  God. 
What  is  the  reason  that  these  temptations  prevail,  and  drive  men  to  this  wicked- 
ness and  sin  against  God?  It  is  either  because  they  are  ignorant  or  inconsiderate. 
If  men  distinctly  understood  the  force  of  this  sacred  obligation,  and  considered  the 
guilt  and  danger  of  violating  it,  there  is  scarcely  any  earthly  consideration  which 
could  tempt  them  to  perjury.  I.  There  are  two  lights  in  which  an  oath  principally 
regards  God,  that  of  an  omniscient  witness,  and  that  of  a  bighteous  judge. 
So  help  me  God,  is  one  of  the  ordinary  expressions  in  it.  So  protect  me  from  evil, 
or  abandon  me  to  misery,  as  I  now  use  Thy  name  to  support  truth  or  to  cover  false- 
hood. So  help  iu  the  hour  of  solemn  devotion,  when  Thou  hearest  the  prayer  of 
the  upright  man,  and  rejectest  him  who  has  sworn  deceitfully.  So  help  me 
amidst  the  dangers  and  evils  of  life,  through  which  I  have  to  pass,  and  from  which 
no  man  can  deliver  me.  So  help  me  in  the  awful  hour  of  dissolution,  when 
I  must  walk  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,  when  all  human  help  is 


CHAP,  XIX.]  LEVITICUS.  229 


vain,  and  our  only  hope  is  in  God.     To  swear  falsely  is  to  renounce  that  hope, 
and  te  forfeit  all  title  to  the  Divine  protection.     II.  Such  is  the  nature  of  an  oath  ; 
and  from  this  account  it  will  be  easy  to  ascertain  the  goilt  of  false  swearing, 
which  was  the  second  thing  we  proposed  to  consider.     In  whatever   light  you 
view  perjury,  whether  in  respect  of  God  or  man,  you  will  find  it  to  be  a  sin 
of  the  most  enormous  nature.     Consider  the  impiety  of  it  towards  God,  and  it  will 
appear  to  be  the  grossest  indignity  which  man  can  offer  to  his  Maker.     1.  It  is  not 
a  sin  of  ignorance  or  infirmity,  into  which  he  may  fall  through  the  weakness 
of  human  nature.     It  is  a  presumptuous  transgression  agninst  God,     The  guilt  of 
perjury  is  deliberate,  which  is  one  of  the  greatest  acrguavations  of  sin.     Other  sins 
generally  priiceed  from  a  forgetfulness  of  God,  a  want  of  due  sense  of  His  presence  ; 
but  to  swear  falsely  by  the  name  of  God  is  at  once  to  remember  God  and  to  disobey 
Him.     Other  sins  are  n.^thing  more  than  acts  of  disobedience  to  God  ;  but  perjury 
is  much  more  than  disobedience,  it  is  a  direct  insult  olfei'ed  to  the  Supreme  Being. 
To  call  solemnly  on  God  to  witness  a  falsehood,  in  order  to  cover  our  own  guilt, 
and  to  impose  on  the  ignorance  of  mankind — what  does  it  imply  ?     It  is  to  invoke 
the  Supreme  Being  to  be  present  at  an  unrighteous  action ;  it  is  to  summon  in  the 
Almighty  to  be  a  spectator  of  wickedness.     Awful  as  this  is,  it  is  not  the  worst. 
To  call  on  God  to  countenance  falsehood,  and  to  sanction  a  lie  by  His  sacred  name, 
contains  a  still  grosser  impiety,  which  I  shudder  to  mention.     It  is  an  attempt  to 
<Jraw  God  Himself  into  sin,  to  make  the  great  Creator  a  party  in  vice,  to  make  the 
Holy  One  and  the  Just  an  accomplice  in  villaiuy.     2.  The  guilt  of  perjury  farther 
appears  from  it«  effect  on  socit-tv.     It  is  not  only  an  act  of  the  grossest  indignity 
to  God,  but  01  the  greatest  injury  to  mankind.     There  are  some  individuals  who 
suffer  by  every  act  of  false  swearing.     Consider  what  loss  of  property,  what  hurt 
of  character,  or  what  vexation  and  distivss  of  mind  it  frequently  brings  on  an 
innocent  man.     Ask  the  person  who  has  suffered  by  perjury,  and  he  will  describe, 
from  his  feelings,  what  a  heinous  crime  it  is.     Put  yourself  in  his  place,  enter  into 
his  feelings,  listen  to  the  language  of  your  own  heart,  and  you  will  see  clearly  the 
guilt  of  false  swearing.     But  the  mischievous  effects  of  perjury  are  not  confined  to 
the  persons  who  more  immediately  suffer  by  it.     It  is  of  much  more  extensive 
influence  ;  it  militates  against  mankind  in  ceneral ;  it  is  an  act  of  treason  against 
human  society.     It  is  an  attempt  to  subvert  the  foundation  of  public  order,  and  of 
private  security.     It  is  an  attempt  to  defeat  the  last  method  wbich  the  wisdom  of 
man  has  devised  in  order  to  maintain  the  peace  and  order  of  society,  and  to  decide 
doubtful  matters.     The  man  who  can  be  guilty  of  this  sin,  must  be  void  of  all 
reverence  for  his  Maker,  and  of  all  regard  for  the  interests  of  his  fellow  creatures. 
He  is  not  only  a  reprobate  in  the  sight  of  God,  but  also  a  traitor  against  mankind. 
III.  Need  I  now  proceed  to  the  last  head  of  discourse,  to  point  out  the  danger  of 
FALSE  sweating  ?     A  vicc  of  SO  uncommon  a  magnitude,  every  man's  coascience 
must  tell  him,  deserves  to  be  punished  both  by  God  and  man.     Among  all  nations 
with  whioh  we  are  acquainted,  false  swearing  has  he^n  punished  as  a  crime  which 
strikes  at  the  root  of  society ;  and  in  many  places  of  the  world  the  perjurer,  as 
well  as  the  murderer,  has  been  thought  worthy  of  death.     But  though  the  perjurer 
should  escape  the  scourge  of  the  law,  there  is  another  punishment  from  men  which 
geoprallv  awaits  him.     He  forfeits  his  character,  the  most  precious  thing  in  the 
world,  and  is  consi'^med  to  infamy.     But  what  are  all  the  punishments  from  men  in 
comparison  of  the  judgments  of  God,  which  awiiit  the  perjurer?     This  is  a  degree 
of  gniii,  which  God  will  certainly  punish  with  more  than  ordinary  vengeance.     I 
will  come  near  to  you  in  judgment,  says  God  Himself  bv  the  prophet,,  and  be  a 
swift  witn3s<  against  th<'  swearer.     The  curse,  says  another  inspired  writer,  goeth 
over  the  face  of  the  whole  earth  ;  and  God  shall  bring  it  forth,  and  it  shall  enter 
into  the  house  of  him  that  sweareth  falsely  by  the  name  of  God,  and  shall  remain 
in   the  midst  of  his  house,  and  shall  consume  it  with  the    timber   thereof   and 
the  stones  thereof.     It  shall  remain  in  the  midst  of  his  house,  and  shall  consume 
it.     But  the  external  judgments  of  God  are  not  the  only  punishment  to  which  the 
perjurer  becomes  liable.     He  destroys    the  foundation  of  the  peace  of  his  own 
miml,  and   exposes   himself  to  the  greatest  of   all   terrors,  to   the  dread  of  the 
great  Creator.  But  wliat  are  all  the  sufferings  of  tliis  life  in  comparison  to  that 
of  everlasting  misery  which  awaits  the  false  swearer  in  the  life  to  come  ?     With 
what  tremblings  of  heart,  with  what  confusion  of  face,   will  he    appear    before 
the  Judge    of    all   the   earth,  whose   authoi-ity  he  conteni'  el,   and   whose  name 
he   prostituted  ?      The  whole  scene  of  his  iniquity  will  then  be  disclosed,  in  the 
p'-eseic9  of  an  assembled  world,  in  the  presence  of  Christ  and  the  holy  angels. 


230  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xix. 

He  must  then  lie  down  in  shame  and  everlasting  contempt,  (Atidrew  Donnan.) 
Neither  shalt  thou  profane  the  name  of  thy  God. — Af/aimt profaning  the  name  of 
Gud: — I.  The  signification  of  the  terms.  II.  The  nature  of  the  several  vices 
INCLUDED  IN  THIS  PROHIBITION.  1.  The  highest  and  most  presmnptnous  degree  is 
perjury  ;  when  a  man  solemnly  calls  God  to  witness  to  the  truth  of  that  which  he 
either  knows  to  be  false  or  does  not  know  to  be  true.  2.  The  next  degree  is  that 
indecent,  as  well  as  wicked,  custom  of  rash  swearing  in  common  conversiition.  (1) 
Of  which  sin  the  first  aggravation  is,  that  they  who  are  guilty  of  it  are  in  perpetual 
danger  of  the  crime  of  perjury.  For  he  who  uses  himself  to  swear  habitually  will 
never  attend  carefully  that  what  he  swears  to  be  true.  (2)  But  if  the  danger  of 
perjury  could  certainly  be  avoided  (as  it  never  can  be  by  habitual  swearers),  yet  to 
call  upon  God  perpetually  as  a  witness  to  trivial  matters,  is  manifest  want  of 
reverence  and  want  of  a  just  sense  of  God  and  religion.  And  this  fault  is  the  more 
inexcusable  because  there  cannot  here  be  pretended,  as  in  most  other  vices,  any 
natural  temptation.  3.  Scoffing,  blaspheming,  or  speaking  reproachfully  of  re- 
ligion. This  is  what  the  Psalmist  reckons  in  the  highest  degree  of  sins,  where  he 
distinguishes  offenders  into  three  several  ranks  (Psa.  i.  1).  4.  Careless  and  incon- 
siderate vows.  When  the  m.atter  of  them  is  unjust,  as  in  the  case  of  the  Corban 
among  the  Jews,  who  hypocritically  dedicated  that  to  the  service  of  God  and  for  the 
use  of  the  Temple,  which  they  ought  to  have  employed  in  relieving  the  necessities 
of  their  destitute  parents  (Mark  vii.  2).  Or  when  the  matter  of  a  vow  is  impossible 
or  unreasonable,  or  the  thing  vowed  be  unprofitable  and  of  no  tendency  to  promote 
true  religion,  or  the  manner  of  making  the  vow  be  rash  and  irreligious.  5.  Too 
frequent  familiar  and  irreverent  mention  of  God  in  ordinary  conversation,  without 
an  habitual  sense  and  just  awe  of  Him  upon  our  minds  ;  men  are  very  apt  to  run 
into  some  degree  of  the  fault  forbidden  here.  III.  The  argdiient  brought  to 
ENFORCE  THE  PROHIBITION.  "  I  am  the  Lord."  The  Lord,  that  is.  He  whose  sovereignty 
and  supreme  dominion  or  authority  over  us  gives  Him  a  right  to  demand,  and 
whose  continual  mercy  and  goodness  towards  us  gives  Him  reason  to  expect  that  we 
should,  in  an  equal  sense  both  of  duty  and  gratitude,  pay  all  possible  obedience  to 
Him.  The  Lord,  who  made  and  governs  all  things,  whose  power  is  irresistible,  and 
His  kingdom  infinite  and  eternal,  who  will  not  be  mocked,  nor  hold  them  guiltless 
that  take  His  name  in  vain.  Will  not  hold  them  guiltless ;  that  is,  will  certainly 
and  severely  punish  them.  (S.  Clarke,  D.D.)  Onprofaninri  the  name  of  God  : — 
I.  An  oath  is  an  appeal  to  the  Supreme  Being,  as  Judge  of  the  truth  of  what  we 
assert,  whose  omniscience  knows  the  secrets  of  our  hearts,  knows  whether  what  we 
declare  be  correspondent  or  not  to  the  conviction  of  our  minds,  and  whose  justice 
will  accordingly  either  favour  or  be  avenged  of  us ;  it  is  the  submitting  to  God,  the 
invisible  Judge,  and  imploring  His  protection,  or  imprecating  His  vengeance, 
according  to  the  truth  or  falsehood  of  what  we  affirm.  II.  Let  us  next  observe 
WHAT  it  is  to  profane  THE  NAME  OF  GoD.  1.  This  is  douc  wlieu  we  use  it  without 
due  consideration  and  reverence,  or  when  we  use  it  in  an  unlawful  action.  We  are 
directed  to  sanctify  the  Lord  our  God,  i.e.,  to  form  such  holy  conceptions  of  His 
great  and  adorable  nature  as  may  lead  us  to  a  suitable  return  of  reverential  homage. 
And  yet  how  common  is  it,  on  the  most  slight  and  unimportant  occasions,  to  hear 
men  utter  inconsiderately  the  name  of  God  when  neither  the  subject  of  their 
thoughts  is  so  weighty,  nor  the  temper  of  their  minds  so  serious,  as  to  justify  the 
use  of  it,  2.  But  further,  the  name  of  God  is  in  a  peculiar  manner  profaned  when 
we  invoke  His  presence  to  an  unlawful  action,  and  summon  Him,  as  it  were,  to  be 
a  spectator  of  our  guilt.  This  is  a  sin  of  more  than  common  magnitude  ;  it  is  an 
open  defiance  to  the  power  and  justice  of  the  Almighty,  and  an  insult  on  almost  all 
the  perfections  of  the  Divine  nature.    III.  I  proceed  to  offer  some  considerations 

ON    THE    GUILT    OF    HABITUALLY    PROFANING    THE    NAME    OF    GoD    IN    CONVERSATION.       No 

one  instructed  in  the  first  rudiments  of  religion  can  be  ignorant  of  the  flagitious 
nature  of  this  sin  (Exod.  xx.  7).  In  the  New  Testament  our  Saviour  says,  "  Swear 
not  at  all."  And  by  the  vehemence  expressed  by  St.  James  we  may  reasonably 
judge  that  he  considered  this  sin  of  habitually  profaning  the  name  of  God  as  a  sin 
of  no  small  weight.  •'  Above  all  things,  my  brethren,"  says  he,  "  swear  not."  But 
why  "  above  all  things,"  if  not  because  it  is  a  sin  in  a  peculiar  manner  hateful  and 
offensive  in  the  sight  of  God  ?  The  passionate  man  may  plead  the  fire  of  a  wai'm 
disposition ;  the  gloomy  sullenness  of  the  morose  may  urge  the  power  of  an 
unhappy  complexion ;  but  the  profaner  of  the  name  of  God  has  no  such  plea. 
Common  reason  teaches  us  to  reverence  the  majesty  of  the  Supreme  Being;  and  no 
corruption  of  our  nature  tempts  us  to  profane  that  name  which  we  all  know  it  is 


CHAP.  XIX.]  LEVITICUS.  231 

our  duty  to  adore.  But  further,  besides  the  guilt  of  this  practice  in  itself,  it 
unhappily  leads  to  a  sin  of  a  still  more  enormous  magnitude — to  that  of  perjury. 
This  should  incline  all  to  contribute  their  endeavours  by  advice,  by  example,  by 
reproof,  or  any  other  method,  to  suppress  the  common  practice  of  profaning  the 
name  of  God;  since  the  pernicious  sin  of  perjury,  by  which  the  character,  property, 
or  life  of  a.nj  person  whatever  may  be  endangpred — a  sin  which  has  a  tendency  to 
destroj'  all  mutual  confidence,  and  to  subvert  all  civil  society — is  in  a  great  degree 
owing  to  it.  I  shall  conclude  with  some  short  admonitions,  in  order  to  preveut  the 
growth  or  continuance  of  this  sin.  1.  He  who  would  avoid  the  habit  or  custom 
must  beware  of  the  first  step  or  tendency  to  it.  It  is  a  maxim  in  spiritual  as  well 
as  bodily  disorders,  to  check  the  first  appearance  of  a  disease,  lest  it  should  grow 
inveterate,  and  at  length  incurable.  And,  therefore,  we  should  do  well  to  avoid  all 
vehemence  of  assertion,  all  violence  of  passion,  as  dangerous  approaches  to  this 
sin.  2.  We  may  observe  the  danger  of  yielding  to  the  first  impulses  of  passion, 
since  even  an  apostle,  in  a  short  space  of  time,  was  led  on  from  a  bare  denial  to 
bitter  and  violent  imprecations.  When  the  mind  is  hurried  on  by  the  impetuosity 
of  violent  passion,  oaths  are  often  found  the  readiest  way  to  discharge  the  heat  of 
resentment ;  and  the  mind,  not  under  the  conduct  of  reason,  vents  a  sinful  passion 
by  a  more  sinful  execration.  3.  Let  us  possess  our  minds  with  the  most  respectful 
and  awful  sentiments  of  the  greatness  and  goodness  and  majesty  of  the  Supreme 
Being.  This  is  the  most  rational  and  effectual  means  to  preveut  us  from  prostitut- 
ing and  profaning  His  sacred  name.  Let  us  ever  preserve  an  awful  and  reverential 
regard  for  the  majesty  of  Heaven ;  let  us  not  speak  or  think  of  God  but  with 
veneration ;  let  the  words  of  our  mouth,  as  well  as  the  meditations  of  our  heart,  be 
ever  acceptable  in  His  sight ;  let  us  ever  consult  His  honour,  and  "  Hallowed  be 
His  name."  {G.  Carr,  B.A.)  A  just  rebuke: — After  Dr.  Scudder's  return  from 
India,  he  was  on  a  steamboat  with  his  son,  when  he  heard  a  person  using  profane 
language.  Accosting  him,  he  said,  "  This  boy  was  born  and  brought  up  in  a 
heathen  country  and  a  land  of  idolatry  ;  but  in  all  his  life  he  never  heard  a  man 
blaspheme  his  Maker  until  now."  The  man  apologised  and  moved  away  ashamed. 
Profanity  : — Profanity  is  the  tribute  which  the  devil's  servants  pay  to  their  master 
as  token  of  allegiance.     {New  Handbook  of  Illustration.) 

Ver.  13.  Thou  shalt  not  defraud  thy  neighbour. — Against  fraud : — 1.  The 
purchaser  is  guilty  of  fraud  when  he  makes  use  of  falsehood  or  low  cunning  to 
diminish  the  value  of  any  commodity  in  the  estimation  of  its  proprietor.  He  like- 
wise defrauds  his  neighbour  when  he  takes  advantage  of  his  ignorance  to  obtain 
anything  for  less  than  its  real  value ;  when  he  receives  any  part  of  his  property  and 
apphes  it  to  his  own  use,  without  being  careful  to  make  him  the  equitable  return, 
at  the  time  when  he  may  reasonably  expect  it ;  and  lastly,  when  he  makes  that 
wise  and  merciful  institution  of  the  legislature,  which  was  only  intended  for  the 
security  of  those  whom  misfortune  hath  rendered  incapable  of  answering  the 
demands  of  equity,  a  protection  for  extravagance  and  knavery.  2.  The  seller 
defrauds  his  neighbour  when  he  takes  advantage  of  the  ignorance  or  mistakes  of 
the  purchaser,  or  makes  use  of  arts  to  impose  upon  his  judgment.  3.  The  master, 
or  he  who  employs  labourers  under  him  for  hire,  acts  a  dishonest  part  when  he 
lays  upon  them  burdens  too  heavy  to  be  borne  ;  when  he  requires  harder  or  longer 
labour  from  them  than  was  at  first  agreed  upon,  without  making  them  a  propor- 
tionable acknowledgment ;  or  when  he  deprives  them  of  their  wages,  or  withholds 
them  beyond  a  reasonable  time.  4.  The  labourer,  or  servant,  acts  contrary  to  the 
rules  of  equity,  and  defrauds  his  neighbour  when,  without  good  reason,  he  quits  the 
business  he  hath  undertaken  and  leaves  his  master  in  difficulty;  when  he  performs 
his  engagements  in  a  negligent  and  defective  manner  ;  or  when  he  takes  advantage 
of  the  confidence  which  his  master  hath  placed  in  him,  to  embezzle  or  injure  his 
property.  I  proceed  to  lay  before  you  the  principal  argument,  to  guard  you  against 
all  the  low  arts  of  fraud  and  deceit,  and  to  enforce  the  observance  of  the  strictest 
honour  and  most  perfect  equity  in  your  dealings.  I.  And,  in  the  first  place,  let  it 
be  considered  that  the  observance  of  the  injunction  of  the  text  is  of  the  highest 
iJipoKTANCE  TO  THE  WELFAEE  OF  SOCIETY.  What  would  be  the  conscqucnce  if  in- 
justice and  knavery  were  daily  to  gain  ground  in  the  world,  and  at  last  to  become 
universally  prevalent  ?  surely  nothing  less  than  universal  confusion  and  wretched- 
ness. On  the  contrary,  were  all  unrighteousness  and  deceit  banished  from  the 
earth,  what  a  long  train  of  evils  would  take  their  flight  with  them !  what  unin- 
terrupted peace  and  harmony,  what  perfect  satisfaction  and  happiness  would  ensue! 


232  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xix. 

II.  But  it  may  be  observed,  farther,  that  the  viktdk  of  honesty  is  of  essential 
IMPORTANCE  TO  THE  HAPPINESS  OF  INDIVIDUALS.  The  honest  man  is  most  secm-e 
from  disappointment  in  business,  and  has  the  fairest  prospect  of  success  in  his 
undertakings.  It  often  happens  that  the  artful  and  designing  knave  is  discovered, 
and  his  schemes  of  iniquity  are  blasted,  before  he  hatli  accomplished  his  purpose. 
After  much  care  and  labour,  and  many  fears  and  anxieties,  he  may  very  possibly 
betray  himself  and  frustrate  his  own  designs.  But  the  honest  man  pursues  the 
plain  and  beaten  path  of  diligence,  prudence  and  integrity,  till  he  gradually  obtains 
a  competence  which  he  can  behold  with  satisfaction  and  enjoy  with  pleasure. 
Honesty  is  likewise  the  best  guard  of  our  reputation.  Let  two  men  be  in  every 
other  respect  equal;  if  the  one  have  the  character  of  an  upright  and  good  man, 
and  the  other  be  deemed  treacherous  and  fraudulent,  it  will  be  no  difficult  thing  to 
determine  which  will  be  generally  espoused,  employed  and  assisted,  and  which  will 
be  treated  with  neglect  and  contempt.  The  honest  man  likewise  enjoys  the  con- 
tinual happiness  of  being  satisfied  from  himself.  If  he  enjoys  an  abundance  of  the 
good  things  of  life,  he  hath  the  happiness  to  reflect  that  it  is  the  fruit  of  his  honest 
industry  and  the  blessing  of  heaven.  Or  if  he  meets  with  disappointment  and 
trouble,  he  hath  this  for  his  consolation,  that  "  they  have  not  befallen  him  for  any 
iniquity  in  his  hands  "  ;  and  can  triumph,  if  not  in  the  success  of  his  undertakings, 
in  the  innocence  of  his  life.  Let  it  be  remembered,  in  the  last  place,  that  all 
injustice  and  fraud  are  highly  displeasing  to  the  Almighty,  and  that  uprightness 
and  honour  will  always  be  acceptable  in  His  sight.  {W.  Enfield.)  Unjust  dealing 
repudiated : — A  customer  of  Messrs.  Thomas  Adams  and  Co.,  of  Nottingham,  from 
whom  they  were  in  the  habit  of  receiving  considerable  orders,  requested  that  besides 
Thomas  Adams  and  Go's  ticket,  the  firm  would  affix  the  ticket  of  this  customer, 
marked  with  a  larger  number  of  yards  than  was  really  in  tbe  piece.  Pressure 
having  been  put  on  some  of  the  salesmen,  the  thing  had  actually  been  done  a  few 
times,  when  it  was  brought  under  the  notice  of  Mr.  Adams.  At  that  period  trade 
was  exceedingly  bad,  and  orders  scarce,  yet,  as  soon  as  he  was  apprised  of  the  facts, 
he  boldly  declared  to  his  customer  that  he  could  be  no  party  to  a  transaction  so 
unjust,  and  that  such  misleading  tickets  could  not  again  be  affixed  to  goods  going 
forth  from  his  warehouse.  The  customer  was  exceedingly  angry  at  this  practical 
rebuke  of  his  injustice,  and  withdrew  all  his  orders  immediately.  After  a  time, 
however,  he  reopened  the  account  on  a  scale  as  large  as  ever,  and  was  content  to 
deal  with  Mr.  Adams  on  his  own  terms.  (H.  A.  Page.)  Sad  result  of  an  unpaid 
bill: — A  wealthy  banker,  who  is  noted  for  his  large  subscriptions  to  charities,  and 
for  his  kindly  habits  of  private  benevolence,  was  called  on  by  his  pastor,  one  even- 
ing, and  asked  to  go  with  him  to  the  help  of  a  man  who  had  attempted  suicide. 
They  found  the  man  in  a  wretched  house,  in  an  alley  not  far  from  the  banker's 
dwelling.  The  front  room  was  a  cobbler's  shop  ;  behind  it,  on  a  miserable  bed,  in 
the  kitchen,  lay  the  poor  shoemaker,  with  a  gaping  gash  in  his  throat,  while  his 
wife  and  children  were  gathered  about  him.  "  We  have  been  without  food  for 
days,"  said  the  woman,  when  he  returned.  "  It  is  not  my  husband's  fault.  He  is 
a  hard-working,  sober  man.  But  he  could  neither  get  work,  nor  pay  for  that  which 
he  had  done.  To-day  he  went  for  the  last  time  to  collect  a  debt  due  to  him  by  a 
rich  family,  but  the  gentleman  was  not  at  home.  My  husband  was  weak  from 
fasting,  and  seeing  us  starving  drove  him  mad.  So  it  ended  that  way,"  turning  to 
the  fainting,  motionless  figure  on  the  bed.  The  banker,  having  fed  and  warmed 
the  family,  hurried  home,  opened  his  desk  and  took  out  a  file  of  little  bills.  All 
his  large  debts  were  promptly  met,  but  he  was  apt  to  be  careless  about  the  accounts 
of  milk,  bread,  &c.,  because  they  were  so  petty.  He  found  there  a  bill  of  Michael 
Goodlow's  for  repairing  children's  shoes,  £2.  Michael  Goodlow  was  the  suicide. 
It  was  the  banker's  unpaid  debt  which  had  brought  these  people  to  the  verge  of  the 
grave,  and  driven  this  man  to  desperation,  while,  at  the  very  time,  the  banker  had 
given  away  hundreds  in  charity.  The  cobbler  recovered,  and  will  never  want  a 
friend  while  the  banker  lives,  nor  will  a  small  unpaid  bill  ever  again  be  found  on 
the  banker's  table.  No  man  has  a  right  to  be  generous  until  his  debts  are  paid  ; 
and  the  most  efficient  use  of  money  is  not  alone  in  almsgiving,  but  to  pay  liberally 
and  promptly  the  people  whom  we  employ.  The  wages  of  Mm  that  is  hired. — 
Fairness  to  hired  labourers : — I.  Work  is  a  just  basis  for  an  equitable  claim. 
Therefore  it  should  be  paid  for,  not  patronisingly,  nor  grudgingly,  but  as  a  due. 
The  labourer  has  given  you  his  time,  strength,  ability,  and  ingenuity ;  he  has  a 
right  to  an  equivalent  from  you,  and  should  not  be  treated  ignominiously,  but  re- 
spectfully, in  asking  a  just  return.     11.  Wages  cannot  righteously  be  deferred 


CHAP.  XIX.]  LEVITICUS.  233 

AFTEp  WORK  IS  DONE.  During  a  day  of  toil  the  labourer  has  put  his  capital  into 
your  service,  spent  his  life  for  that  period  for  your  advantage  and  gain.  You  are  to 
that  extent  his  debtor ;  to  detain  his  wages  is  to  make  yourself  more  his  debtor, 
and  delay  in  payment  should  be  compensated  with  increment.  "  Short  reckonings 
make  long  friends."  III.  Masters  should  study  the  position  and  comfort  of 
THOSE  THEY  EMPLOY.  A  pooT  man  has  no  capital,  wants  prompt  settlement ;  he 
lives  day  by  day  upon  his  hard  earnings.  His  strength- -expended  by  the  day's  toil 
— must  be  replenished  for  the  morrow's  work.  To  hold  back  the  means  for  his 
nourishment  is  to  rob  him  of  the  morrow's  capital,  his  replenished  energy.  And 
he  may  have  dependants  in  his  lowly  home  waiting  to  share  in  the  earnings  of  the 
day.  Hold  not  back  his  dues  "  all  night  until  the  morning,"  lest  your  incon- 
siderateness  inflict  privation  and  embitter  poverty  (Deut.  xxiv.  14,  15 ;  Jer. 
xxxii.  13;  Mai.  iii.  5;  James  v.  4).  {W.  H.  Jellie.)  God's  consideration  for 
hired  labourers  : — ^Vhat  tender  care  is  here  1  The  High  and  Mighty  One  that  in- 
habiteth  eternity  can  take  knowledge  of  the  thoughts  and  feelings  that  spring  up  in 
the  heart  of  a  poor  labourer.  He  knows  and  takes  into  account  the  expectations 
of  such  an  one  in  reference  to  the  fruit  of  his  day's  toil.  The  wages  will,  naturally, 
be  looked  for.  The  labourer's  heart  counts  upon  them  ;  the  family  meal  depends 
upon  them.  Oh  !  let  them  not  be  held  back.  Send  not  the  labourer  home  with  a 
heavy  heart,  to  make  the  heart  of  his  wife  and  family  heavy  likewise.  By  all 
means  give  him  that  for  which  he  has  wrought,  to  which  he  has  a  right,  and  on 
which  his  heart  is  set.  Thus  does  our  God  take  notice  of  the  very  throbbings  of 
the  labourer's  heart,  and  make  provision  for  his  rising  expectations.  Precious 
grace !  Most  tender,  thoughtful,  touching,  condescending  love !  The  bare  con- 
templation of  such  statutes  is  sufficient  to  throw  one  into  a  flood  of  tenderness. 
Could  any  one  read  tliem  and  thoughtlessly  dismiss  a  poor  labourer,  not  knowing 
whether  he  and  his  family  have  wherewithal  to  meet  the  cravings  of  hunger  ?  (<7. 
H.  Mackintosh.)  Debt  forbidden  : — Far  from  defrauding,  or  withholding  what  is 
due  to  thy  neighbour,  thou  shalt  not  even  delay  giving  him  what  he  is  entitled  to. 
This  precept  is  directly  pointed  against  incurring  debt.  Fraudulent  bankruptcies, 
and  pretexts  for  withholding  payments,  are  condemned  by  it ;  but  remaining  in 
debt  to  any  one  is  also  pointedly  condemned.  "Owe  no  man  anything,  but  to  love 
one  another."  In  James  v.  4,  this  is  spoken  of  as  a  sin  of  the  last  days.  {A.  A. 
Bonar). 

Ver.  14.  Thou  sbalt  not  curse  the  deaf. — The  weak  protected  : — I.  The  meanness 
OF  TSE  CONDUCT  HERE  REBUKED.  Dishonourablc  dealing,  commercial  sharp-practice, 
trading  upon  the  defects  of  others,  issuing  delusive  prospectuses  to  entrap  the 
unwary,  traducing  our  fellows  behind  their  backs  so  that  they  cannot  learn  and 
answer  the  charges  brought  against  them — all  such  action  deserves  our  reprobation 
and  avoidance.  The  natural  ills  of  humanity  call  for  commiseration  and  help, 
rather  than  for  ridicule  and  maltreatment.  Where  weakness  has  been  self-incurred, 
where  ignorance  is  wilful,  there  is  less  need  of  sympathy.  Let  our  young  people  be 
early  imbued  with  the  feeling  that  it  is  wrong  to  trample  upon  the  defenceless. 
II.  The  way  to  guard  against  invasion  of  the  rights  of  others.  "  But  shalt 
fear  thy  God."  1.  Eeverence  for  Jehovah  is  the  best  security  against  violation  of 
His  statutes.  Eemember,  that  to  transgress  is  to  grieve  our  heavenly  Father,  to 
show  ourselves  unmindful  of  His  claims.  2.  The  omniscience  of  Jehovah  should 
restrain  from  the  commission  of  unfair  deeds.  He  hears  every  word  and  sees  every 
act,  though  the  deaf  and  the  blind  cannot.  Let  not  mean,  cowardly  performances 
expect  to  pass  unnoticed,  unpunished.     III.  The  comfort  the  weak  may  derive 

FROM    THE    knowledge    THAT    THEY   ARE    UNDER    THE    PROTECTION   OF   GoD.       He  is  SCCn 

to  cherish  them,  to  make  provision  for  their  need ;  He  puts  His  strong  right  arm 
around  them,  shelters  them  under  His  wing.  We  cannot  believe  that  His  fostering 
care  is  denied  to  any  class  of  the  infirm,  in  body,  mind,  or  spirit.  [S.  R.  Aldridge,  B.A.) 
Protection  of  the  infirm  : — Persons  stricken  with  some  defect  which  renders  them 
helpless,  stand  under  God's  special  protection  ;  it  would  be  heartless  and  impious 
to  "  curse  the  deaf,"  who  is  unaware  of  the  attacks  made  upon  him,  which  may 
involve  calumnies,  and  which  he  is  unable  to  rebut ;  and  it  would  be  cruel  indeed 
to  "put  a  stumbling-block  before  the  blind,"  to  whom  every  right-minded  man 
should  be  eager  to  "serve  as  eyes";  a  crime  like  the  latter  was  publicly  cursed  on 
Mount  Ebal ;  and  in  both  cases  the  law  warns  the  offender,  "  Thou  shalt  fear  thy 
God,"  who  hears  if  there  is  no  other  ear  to  listen,  who  sees  if  there  ia  no  other  eye 
to  see,  and  who,  to  punish  thy  wickedness,  can  strike  thee  with  the  same  afflictions  : 


234  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xix. 


hence  the  same  menace,  "  Thou  shalt  fear  thy  God,"  is  repeated  with  respect  to  the 
treatment  of  old  and  infirm  men,  of  poor  persons,  of  dependents,  and  servants. 
Philo  inveighs  vehemently  against  the  inhumanity  here  forbidden,  and  observes 
that  those  who  are  guilty  of  it,  "would  not  spare  even  the  dead,  in  tlie  excess  of 
their  cruelty,  but  according  to  a  common  proverb,  would  slay  the  slain  again." 
Jewish  tradition  a]  plies  the  second  command  of  our  verse  iiguratively  to  insidious 
advice  or  false  information  given  to  a  man  who  is  in  ignorance  or  j^erplexitj, 
whether  on  some  question  of  learning  or  on  some  matter  of  business.  The  law  of 
Manu  inflicts  a  pecuniary  fine  upon  any  one  who  taunts  a  person  with  being  one- 
eyed  or  hime  or  d>'formed.  (il/.  M.  Kuli>:ch,  Ph.D.)  No  a'lvavtage  to  he  taken,  of 
iiaiqmcity  : — Tlais  base  action  of  reviling  or  cursing  a  deaf  pe'  son  is  liere  condemned. 
But  that  is  not  all ;  there  is  something  more  forbiddea  by  this  law  ;  for  it  seems  to 
be  of  a  proverbial  nature,  and  the  general  meaning  is,  Tliou  shalt  not  take  the 
sordid  advantage  of  a  man's  incapacity  to  defend  himself,  and  hurt  him  either  in 
his  body,  his  fortunes,  or  his  reputation.  To  abuse  an  absent  person,  to  calumniate 
people  in  secret,  to  attack  another's  reputation  in  the  dark  and  in  disguise,  to 
defame  those  who  are  dead,  to  hurt  in  any  manner  those  who  are  unable  to  help 
and  redress  themselves,  all  this  may  be  called.  To  curse  the  deaf.  (J.  Jortin,  D.D.) 
The  absent  not  to  be  slandered : — So  did  St.  Augustine,  that  worthy  father,  abhor 
this  vice,  that  over  his  table  where  he  dined  he  wrote  two  verses,  to  tell  all  them 
that  sat  with  him,  if  they  carped  at  any  person  absent,  that  table  was  not  for  them, 
nor  the  guests  welcome  to  him.     (Bp.  Babington.) 

Ver.  15.  In  righteousness  shalt  thou  judge  thy  neighbour. — On  judging  our 
neighbour  in  riyliteouxness : — To  judge  our  neighbour  in  righteousness,  it  is  our  duty 
to  consider  those  motives  which  may  corrupt  our  judgment.  When  we  set  ourselves 
to  reflect  how  far  we  have  cultivated  this  species  of  justice,  we  deceive  ourselves 
by  quoting  the  examiples  of  those  who  have  become  dear  to  us  from  particular 
circumstances ;  by  citing  the  judgments  we  have  made  of  friends,  of  kindred,  of 
men  who  have  embarked  with  us  in  common  designs,  and  been  actuated  by  the 
same  principles.  Doubtless,  we  are  just  enough  in  all  these  instances  ;  here  we  feel 
real  sorrow  at  the  faults  of  others,  and  do  all,  and  even  more  than  the  most 
righteous  judges  ought  to  do;  but  if  we  really,  and  faithfully,  wish  to  fulfil  this 
great  duty,  we  are  to  examine  how  far  we  have  righteously  judged  those  to  whom 
we  never  have  been  connected  in  friendship ;  those  whom  chance  has  separated 
from  us  by  rank,  and  wealth  ;  nature  by  talents ;  education  by  opinions ;  those 
who  have  been  opposed  to  us  in  questions  which  try  the  passions  ;  those  from  whom 
we  have  suffered  disrespect,  injury,  and  contempt.  If,  in  tlie  awful  moments  of 
self-judgment,  we  can  satisfy  ourselves  that  we  never  wished  that  calumny  to 
be  true  which  accorded  with  our  warmest  passions  ;  that  we  have  never  been 
disappointed  by  that  innocence  which  baffled  our  resentment,  that  the  infirmities  of 
our  nature  have  rarely  stifled  this  tenderness  for  the  good  fame  of  others  ;  then,  and 
not  till  then,  are  we  entitled  to  conceive  that  we  have  obeyed  this  precept  of  the 
Scriptures,  and  judged  our  fellow  creatures  in  righteousness.  (.?.  Smith,  M.A.) 
Just  judgment  to  be  administered : — There  must  be  in  us  no  affectation  of  kindness 
to  the  poor,  any  more  than  fawning  flattery  of  the  great.  Esj^ecially  in  matters  of 
judgment  the  judge  must  be  impanial.  The  eye  of  God  is  on  him  ;  and  as  He  is  a 
just  God,  and  without  iniquity.  He  delights  to  see  His  own  attributes  shadowed 
forth  in  the  strict  integrity  of  an  earthly  judge.  If  these  are  God's  holy  principles, 
ah  1  then  the  misery  and  oppression  and  suffering  of  the  lower  classes  will  in  no 
way  serve  as  a  reason  for  their  acquittal  at  His  bar,  if  they  be  found  guilty. 
Suffering  in  this  world  is  no  blotting  out  of  sin.  Hence,  we  find  at  Christ's 
appearing  "  the  great  men  and  the  mighty  men,  and  every  bondman,"  cried  to  the 
rocks,  "  Fall  on  us,  and  hide  us  from  the  face  of  Him  that  sitteth  on  the  throne" 
(Eev.  vii.  15).  (A.  A.  Bonar.)  Righteous  judgment: — The  power  of  the  court  of 
Areopagus  at  Athens  was  very  great ;  and  it  is  said  to  have  been  the  first  court  that 
ever  determined  upon  questions  of  life  and  death.  It  was  customary  to  hold  its 
sittings  in  the  night  only,  and  without  light.  The  reason  of  this  singular  practice 
is  said  to  have  been,  that  the  members  might  not  be  prejudiced  for  or  against  any 
accused  person,  by  seeing  his  gestures  and  looks.  Truth  only  was  regarded,  and  no 
attempt  to  warp  the  opinion  of  the  judges  was  permitted.  {Univ.  Hist.)  Im- 
partiality in  judgment : — The  Grecians  placed  justice  betwixt  Leo  and  Libra,  thereby 
signifying  that  there  must  not  be  only  courage  in  executing,  but  also  indifferency 
in  determining.     The  Egyptians  express  the  same  by  the  hieroglyphical  figure  of  a 


CHAP.  XIX.]  LEVITICUS.  235 

man  without  hands,  winking  with  his  eyes  ;  whereby  is  meant  an  uncorrupt  judge, 
who  hath  no  hands  to  receive  bribes,  no  eyes  to  behold  the  person  of  the  poor,  or 
respect  the  person  of  the  rich.  And  before  our  tribunals,  we  commonly  have  the 
picture  of  a  man  holding  a  balance  in  one  hand,  and  a  sword  in  the  other,  signifying 
by  the  balance,  just  judgment;  by  the  sword,  execution  of  judgment.  For  as  the 
balance  putteth  no  difference  between  gold  and  lead,  but  giveth  an  equal  or  unequal 
poise  to  them  both,  not  giving  a  greater  weight  to  the  gold  for  the  excellency  of  the 
metal  because  it  is  gold,  nor  a  less  to  the  lead  for  the  baseness  of  it  because  it  is 
lead  :  so  they  were  with  an  even  hand  to  weigh  the  poor  man's  cause  as  well  as  the 
rich.  But  it  is  most  notably  set  out  by  the  throne  of  the  house  of  David  (Psa. 
cxxii.  5),  which  was  placed  in  the  gate  of  the  city  toward  the  sun  rising  ;  in  the  gate, 
to  signify  that  all  which  came  in  and  out  by  tbe  gate  of  the  city  might  indifferently 
be  heard,  the  poor  as  weU.  as  the  rich,  and  might  have  free  access  and  regress  to 
and  from  the  judgment-seat ;  and  toward  the  rising  of  the  sun,  in  token  that  their 
judgment  should  be  as  clear  from  corruption  as  the  sun  is  clear  in  his  chief  est 
brightness.     {J,  Spencer.) 

Ver.  16.  Tliou  shalt  not  go  up  and  down  as  a  talebearer. — Talebearing 
and  slander: — I.  Characteb  is  in  the  keeping,  and  therefore  at  the  mercy 
of    acquaintances.      1.     Therefore    supremely   value   each    other's    good    name. 

2.  Jealously  defend  a  worthy  reputation.  3.  Scornfully  silence  the  unproved 
rumours  of  evils.  II.  Character  mat  be  rdthlesslt  shattered  by  sinister 
whisperings.  1.  For  listeners  are  ready  to  entertain  and  repeat  slander.  "  Man's 
inhumanity  to   man  ! "      2.    Aspersions   feed   on    the    inventiveness    of    malice. 

3.  Eeputation  is  ea'^ily  damaged.  That  which  only  a  lifetime  can  build  an  hour 
may  defame.     III.  Character  is  so  precious  that  its  traducers  should  be  loathed. 

1.  Dread  a  talebearer  as  a  destroying  pestilence.  2.  He  who  wrongs  another's 
reputation  may  next  wrong  yours.  By  heeding  his  slanders  you  encourage  his  vile 
trade,  and  slander  must  find  new  victims !  3.  Put  to  shame  all  talebeaiers  with 
ruthless  severity.     Note — 1.  There  is  enough  of  woe  abroad  without  increasing  it. 

2.  As  we  need  our  many  evils  to  be  pitied  by  man  and  pardoned  by  God,  let  us  with 
"  charity  hide  sins,"  not  expose  them.  3.  There  is  grace  in  Christ,  and  energy  in 
the  Holy  Spirit,  by  wbich  to  perfect  a  good  life  and  win  a  good  name,  which  even 
enemies  of  religion  shall  be  unable  to  defame  or  destroy.  4.  The  light  of  the  final 
judgment  will  refute  all  slander,  and  bring  every  secret  thing  to  the  open  gaze  of 
the  world.  (IF.  U.  Jellie.)  Mischief  of  talebearing  : — The  carrying  of  a  tale, 
and  reporting  what  such  an  one  said  or  such  an  one  did,  is  the  way  to  sow  such 
grudges,  to  kindle  such  heart-burnings  between  persons,  as  oftentimes  break  forth 
and  tlame  to  the  consumption  of  families,  courts,  and  perhaps  at  length  of  cities 
and  kingdoms.  The  mischief  such  incendiaries  do  is  incredible,  as  being  indeed 
for  the  most  part  inevitable.  And  a  vine  or  a  rose-tree  may  as  well  flourish  when 
there  is  a  secret  worm  lurking  and  gnawing  at  the  root  of  them,  as  the  peace  of 
those  societies  thrive  that  have  such  concealed  plagues  wrapt  up  in  their  hearts  and 
bowels.  {R.  South.)  Scandal  rebuked  : — One  day,  in  the  presence  of  a  pious 
tanner,  at  Elberfield,  some  people  were  tearing  their  neighbours'  characters  to 
pieces.  Diedrich,  the  tanner,  was  silent.  "  You  say  nothing,"  said  they.  "  You 
see,"  replied  he,  "  I  am  a  little  like  a  bankrupt.  He  may  be  engaged  in  a  most 
animated  conversation,  but  I  have  always  remarked,  when  the  subject  turns  upon 
bankruptcy,  he  is  suddenly  dumb.  I,  too,  am  a  bankrupt ;  the  defects  you  are  just 
reproaching  your  neighbours  with  I  find  in  myself,  and  that  shuts  my  moutli." 
(Pastor  Krummacher.)  Talebearing  condemned : — The  following  is  related  of  the 
late  J.  J.  Gurney,  by  one  who,  as  a  child,  was  often  of  his  family  circle  : — One 
night — I  remember  it  well — I  received  a  severe  lesson  on  the  sin  of  evil  speaking. 
Severe  I  thought  it  then,  and  my  heart  rose  in  childish  anger  against  him  who  gave 
it;  but  I  had  not  lived  long  enough  in  this  world  to  know  how  much  mischief  a 
child's  thoughtless  talk  may  do,  and  how  often  it  happens  that  great  talkers  run  off 
from  the  straight  line  of  truth.  I  was  talking  very  fast  about  some  female  relative, 
who  did  not  stand  very  high  in  my  esteem,  and  was  about  to  speak  further  of  her 
failings  of  temper.  In  a  few  moments  my  eyes  caught  a  look  of  such  calm  and 
steady  displeasure,  that  I  stopped  short.  There  was  no  mistaking  the  meaning  of 
that  dark,  speaking  eye ;  it  brought  the  colour  to  my  face,  and  confusion  and 
shame  to  my  heart.  I  was  silent  for  a  few  moments,  when  Joseph  John  Gurney 
asked,  very  gravely,  "  Dost  thou  not  know  any  good  thing  to  tell  us  of  her  ?  "  I  did 
not  answer.     The  question  was  more  seriously  asked,  "  Think ;  is  there  nothing 


236  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xix. 

good  thou  can^^t  tell  us  of  her?"     "Oh  yes,  I  know  some  good  things,  certainly, 

but "    "  Would  it  not  have  been  better,  then,  to  relate  these  good  things  than  to 

have  told  us  that  which  must  lower  her  in  our  est  era?  Since  there  is  good  to 
relate,  would  it  not  be  kinder  to  be  silent  on  the  evil?  Charity  rejoiceth  not  iii 
iniquity,  thou  knowest."  {Great  Tlwucihts.)  The  talebearer: — One  celebrated 
nation  of  antiquity  used  to  express  this  man's  character  by  a  very  significant  figure. 
They  called  a  talebearer  a  "  seed  picker."  They  gave  him  the  same  name  which 
they  used  for  a  bird  which  goes  about  everywhere  picking  up  seeds.  There  are 
men  in  the  world  who  live  by  their  seed  collecting  ;  by  going  about  here  and  there 
from  house  to  house,  and  gathering  together  all  the  little  stories  which  can  be 
told  or  made  about  the  neighbours  who  are  dwelling  all  the  time  securely  by 
them  and  ignorant  of  the  calumnies  by  which  they  are  assailed.  Yes,  the  "  seed 
collector,"  the  man  who  goes  about  gathering  anecdotes,  great  and  small,  about  his 
neighbours,  and  retailing  them  again  as  he  goes,  is  a  common  character  everywhere. 
I  wish  that  I  could  hold  up  the  mirror  to  him  for  his  own  conviction.  I  am  sure 
he  would  be  ashamed,  I  beUeve  he  would  be  sorry  if  he  saw  himself  faithfully 
pourtrayed.     (Dean  Vaughan.) 

Ver,  17.  Thou  shalt  In  any  wise  rebuke  thy  brother.— ^m  I  my  brother's  keeper  ? — 
I.  The  ill-conduct  of  a  neiohboue  demands  a  personal  eebuke.  1.  This  injunc- 
tion supposes  cognisance  of  another's  actions.  Man  was  made  for  society,  and  its 
value  consists  greatly  in  taking  an  affectionate  interest  in  those  about  us.  2.  It  is 
often  easier  for  a  bystander  to  detect  a  fault  than  for  the  one  actively  concerned 
in  the  deed.  Our  friend  may  be  in  ignorance  of  his  guilt,  and  a  word  of  reproof 
may  open  his  eyes.  What  we  imagined  was  done  with  intent  may  prove  to  have 
been  thoughtlessly  wrought.  3.  The  text  inculcates  what  is  acknowledged  to  be  a 
hard  duty,  one  which  most  are  willing  to  relegate  to  others.  We  may  fear  some 
cutting  retort,  "  Who  made  thee  a  judge  over  us?  "  We  know  that  our  neighbour's 
vaniti  may  be  wounded,  and  he  may  inflict  some  blow  in  return.  Perhaps  the  duty 
is  most  difficult  when  the  wrong  has  been  perpetrated  upon  ourselves.  Pride  urges 
us  to  keep  silence,  and  we  nourish  a  sentiment  of  undeserved  injury  which  rather 
flatters  our  conception  of  ourselves.  Yet  Jesus  Christ  re-enforced  the  law.  4.  Regard 
for  God  demands  the  observance  of  the  text.  Every  transgression  is  sin  against 
Him.     5.  The  welfare  of  our  neighbour  requires  it.     II.  To  rebuke  a  neighbour  is 

THE    surest    method    TO    PREVENT    OUR   HATING    HIM    FOR   HIS  EVIL  ACTION.       1.    Hatred 

proceeds  from  the  perception  of  something  repugnant  to  our  feelings,  and,  in  the 
case  supposed,  of  something  that  is  distasteful  to  our  moral  sentiments.  An  outrage 
upon  good  taste  is  committed— a  deed  that  is  offensive  to  our  judgment  of  what  is 
congruous  to  the  relationship  and  circumstances  under  consideration.  This  just 
resentment  will  be  soothed  by  the  recantation  and  improvement  of  the  transgressor 
consequent  on  the  reproof  administered.  We  learn  to  distinguish  between  the 
sinner  and  the  sin.  2.  Our  perception  of  wrong  is  clearer  and  more  intense  when 
the  injury  is  done  to  ourselves,  and  the  hatred  threatens  to  become  stronger.  The 
picture  is  directed  towards  ourselves,  and  we  get  a  good  front  view  of  it.  It  is  the 
more  necessary,  therefore,  to  take  steps  to  abate  ensuing  enmity.  We  shall  relieve 
our  burdened  breasts  by  expressing  our  sense  of  the  unright-ousness  of  our  neigh- 
bour's behaviour,  the  utterance  of  resentment  being  a  sentence  of  condemnation  that 
satisfies  to  a  certain  extent  our  love  of  justice.  Holy  indignation  will  have  been 
vented,  and  to  that  degree  appeased.  3.  On  the  other  hand,  the  repression  of 
reproof  aggravates  hatred.  The  concpalment  of  our  knowledge  gender.s  a  sore  that 
spreads  till  our  every  sight  and  thought  of  the  man  is  one  of  utter  dislik''.  By  the 
sin  of  a  brother  we  ourselves  are  thus  betrayed  into  dire  sin  against  the  very  purport 
of  the  Decalogue.  We  do  not  love,  but  hate  our  neighbour,  and  "he  that  hateth 
his  brother  is  a  murderer."  Whereas  "if  he  hear  thee,  thou  hast  gained  thy 
brother."     Thy  reproof  may  be  "  an  excellent  oil,  which  sh  ill  not  break  his  head." 

III.    The    REPROOF    will    discharge  us  FROM  ALL  GUILT  OF  TACIT  PARTICIPATION  IN  OUB 

neighbour's  sin.  The  margiual  rendering  is  preferable,  "  that  thou  bear  not  sin 
for  him"  or  "on  his  account."  To  witness  a  crime  and  not  make  an  endeavour  to 
stop  it  is  to  be  an  abettor  of  it.  {S.  R.  Aldiidfie,  B.A.)  On  reproving  sin  in 
others : — I.  The  Christian  duty  of  reproving  sin  in  others.  1.  Duty  to  God. 
(1)  FiMal  relation.  (2)  Desire  for  Divine  glory.  (3)  Conformity  to  mind  of  God. 
Now  from  these  three  principles  arises  the  duty  of  the  Christian  to  reprove  sin  in 
his  brother,  for  he  may  say,  "  I  cannot  sincerely  love  God  if  I  do  not  aim  to  please 
Him  ;  I  cannot  be  a  child  of  God  and  suffer  sin  in  my  brother;  I  cannot  be  con- 


CHAP.  XIX.]  LEVITICUS.  237 


formed  to  the  example  of  Christ  without  aiming  to  counteract  sin  ;  I  cannot  but 
aim  to  destroy  all  that  is  opposed  to  the  mind  and  will  of  God,  and  that  is  contrary 
to  His  glory."  Here  are  three  principles,  then,  to  guide  us,  better  than  any  espe- 
cial rule.  If  it  be  asked,  Shall  I  do  good?  or,  How  shall  I  do  it?  or.  Will  it  be 
prudent  to  do  it  now  ?  or,  May  not  others  do  it  better  than  I  ? — to  all  these  inquiries 
the  Christian  may  pi  esent  these  three  principles  as  an  answer.  The  God  I  love  is 
displtased  by  sin;  He  is  insulted— He  is  dishonoured.  2.  Duty  to  neighbour.  Love 
him  as  self.  No  outward  act  of  what  is  called  "  good  fellowship,"  no  degree  of 
goodwill  or  social  intercourse  can  possibly  make  up  for  neglect  of  the  soul.  Now 
the  exhortation  in  the  text  comes  enforced  by  our  duty  to  our  neighb.iur.  For 
what  is  it  which  is  most  injurious  to  our  brother  ?  It  is  sin.  And  shall  I  suffer 
sin  on  him  ?  I  should  grieve,  if  I  were  to  see  him  on  the  brink  of  a  precipice  or 
surrounded  with  devouring  flames ;  if  I  saw  that  in  his  bosom  was  concealed  a 
venomous  serpent,  or  that  he  was  about  to  lift  a  cup  of  deadly  poison  to  his  lips ! 
And  how,  then,  shall  I  suffer  sin  up  m  my  brother?  11.  The  difficulties  in  the 
WAY  OF  discharging  THIS  DUTY.  1.  There  are  a  number  of  circumstantial  difficul- 
ties, but  these  I  shall  not  dwell  upon  here.  2.  The  chief  difficulties  are  in  the  heart 
of  the  Christian  himself.  (1)  The  first  which  I  shall  mention,  and  that  which  will 
strike  all,  is  the  fear  of  man.  This  arises  from — (a)  The  weakness  of  religious 
principle  ;  (b)  The  strength  of  corruption.  (2)  The  love  of  approbation.  That 
which  is  so  unequivocally  required  by  the  Scriptures  is  too  frequently  disliked  by 
the  Christian,  because  he  knows  that  it  will  bring  on  him  a  portion  of  contempt. 

(3)  The  slight  views  we  take  of  sin  add  to  the  difficulty.  And  what  can  prove  our 
fallen  state  more  than  this?    Oh,  if  we  viewed  sin  aright,  how  active  should  we  be! 

(4)  It  is  difficult,  because  to  reprove  sin  requires  peculiar  qualifications.  It  requires 
great  faithfulness.  If  you  rebuke  sin  slightly,  it  will  lead  the  sinner  to  suppose 
that  you  think  slightly  of  it,  and  that  may  lead  him  to  think  slightly  of  it  too.  If 
you  reprove  without  fidelity,  you  do  no  good.  And  yet  joined  with  this  must  be 
much  meekness.  There  must  be  that  humble,  retiring  meekness  which  becomes  a 
man;  it  is  not  God,  it  is  not  angels  rebuking  sin,  but  man — man  rebuking,  who 
needs  to  be  rebuked — man  who  has  sinned  reproving  man  who  has  sinned.  He 
who  reproves,  therefore,  must  do  it  with  meekness,  saying,  "  Who  hath  made  me 
to  differ?  "  There  must  be  also  authority.  We  must  not  speak  slightingly,  but  as 
ambassadors  of  Heaven — as  men  speaking  in  the  voice  of  God.  But  with  this 
authority  there  must  be  humility;  this  must  not  be  forgotten.  There  must  be 
much  zeal,  and  this  zeal  must  be  united  with  knowledge  and  judgment.  Conclusion  : 
The  question  may,  perhaps,  be  asked,  "  Am  I  called  upon  to  reprove  sin  at  all  times, 
and  in  reference  to  every  man  ?  "  I  think  the  principles  I  have  laid  down  will 
furnish  an  answer  to  this  question.  Let  us  ask,  Will  it  tend  to  advance  the  Divine 
glory  and  to  promote  the  welfare  of  man?  and  we  shall  not  then  need  any  fuither 
inquiries.  There  may  be  cases — I  can  conceive  of  some  such — when  reproof  should 
not  be  administered  ;  there  may  be  cases  in  which  our  neighbour  should  be  drawn, 
and  not  driven.  Yet  the  language  of  the  text  is  positive  :  "  Thou  shalt  in  any  wise 
rebuke  thy  neighbour,  and  not  suffer  sin  upon  him."  In  answer  to  the  question, 
Is  sin  to  be  reproved  at  all  times?  I  would  say  unquestionably  not.  There  are 
times  when  a  look  will  do  much  more  than  a  word ;  there  are  seasons  when  a 
marked  silence  will  do  unquestionably  more  good  than  any  exhortation  ;  there  are 
cases,  also,  when  lightness  and  levity  so  prevail  as  to  counteract  the  effect  of  any 
kind  of  reproof.  (E.  W.  Sibthorp,  B.D.)  Brotherly  achnouition: — I.  What 
BROTHEKLY  BEPBOOF  OB  CORRECTION  IS.  It  is  an  act  of  lovc  and  charity,  whereby  we 
endeavour  to  reduce  our  offending  brother  to  repentance  and  reformation.  1.  By 
words.  Kemonstrating  to  them  the  greatness  of  their  sin ;  the  scandal  which  they 
give  to  others,  either  b.v  encouraging  or  saddening  them  ;  the  reproach  which  they 
bring  upon  religion ;  and  the  danger  which  they  bring  upon  their  own  souls.  2. 
Where  words  have  proved  ineffectual,  we  may  try  how  deeds  can  prevail — prevail, 
I  say,  either  to  deliver  them,  or,  at  least,  to  deliver  thine  own  soul  from  death.  (1) 
If  they  be  our  inferiors,  over  whom  we  have  authority,  either  as  magistrates,  or 
parents,  or  the  like,  we  ought,  when  admonition  is  fruitless,  to  reprove  them  by 
correction  and  punishment.  If  they  will  not  hear  they  must  feol  rebuke.  This 
discipline,  if  it  be  seasonably  and  prudently  used,  is  so  far  from  being  any  act  of 
cruelty  that  it  is  an  act  of  the  greatest  charity  that  can  be,  both  to  them  and  to 
others.  (2)  If  they  be  our  equals,  over  whom  we  have  no  jurisdiction  nor  coercive 
power,  we  are  then  to  rebuke  them,  if  they  continue  obstinate  after  Christian 
admonition,  by  withdrawing  ourselves  from  all  necessary  converse  with  them — not 


238  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xix. 

so  as  to  deny  them  the  offices  of  courtesy  and  our  charitable  assistance  to  promote 
their  temporal  good,  but  to  break  off  all  intimacy  with  them,  not  to  make  such 
dissolute  persons  our  chosen  companions  (2  Thess.  iii.  6).  And  to  these  two  things 
are  necessarily  previous  and  antecedent — 1.  Instruction  and  conviction.  Could  we 
but  skilfully  convince  our  brother  by  representing  the  odiousness  of  such  and  such 
sins,  to  wbich  we  know  he  is  addicted,  possibly  we  might  spare  ourselves  in  that 
which  is  the  most  ungrateful  part  of  this  work — I  mean  personal  reflection,  and 
leave  it  to  his  own  conscience  to  reprove  himself,  and  to  apply  it  home  with  "Thou 
art  the  man."  And — 2.  It  is  necessary  that  we  watch  over  our  brother,  not  so  as 
to  be  insidious  spies  upon  him,  officiously  to  pry  into  his  actions,  and  busily  to 
concern  ourselves  in  all  he  doth.  (1)  We  ought  so  to  watch  over  our  brother  as  to 
give  him  timely  caution  if  we  see  him  in  any  danger  through  temptation  or  passion, 
and  to  admonish  him  to  stand  upon  his  guard,  to  recollect  himself  and  beware  he 
be  not  surprised  or  injured  by  such  an  approaching  sin.  (2)  If  we  have  observed 
any  miscarriages  in  him,  we  are  to  watch  the  best  seasons  and  all  the  fittest  cir- 
cumstances in  which  to  remind  him  of  it,  that  so  our  reproof  may  be  well  accepted 
and  become  effectual.  II.  But  indeed,  which  is  the  second  thing,  it  is  not  so  hard 
a  matter  to  know  what  it  is  as  it  is  diffioolt  conscientiously  and  faithfully  to 
practise  it.  1.  Many  are  afraid  to  reprove  sin,  lest  they  should  incur  displeasure, 
weaken  their  secular  interest,  ruin  their  dependencies,  and  bring  some  mischief 
upon  themselves  by  exasperating  the  offenders  against  them.  But  these  are  poor, 
low,  carnal  considerations.  Where  matter  of  duty  is  in  question,  it  is  very  necessary 
for  every  Christian  to  be  of  an  undaunted  courage  and  resolution.  2.  Others,  again, 
are  ashamed  to  reprove  sin.  And  whereas  many  profligate  wretches  glory  in  their 
shame,  these,  on  the  contrary,  are  ashamed  of  that  which  would  be  their  glory. 
Either  they  doubt  they  shall  be  thought  but  troublesome  and  hypocritical  inter- 
meddlers,  or  else,  possibly,  being  conscious  to  themselves  of  many  miscarriages, 
they  suspect  their  reproofs  will  be  upbraidingly  retorted  upon  themselves ;  and 
80,  by  reproving  the  faults  of  others,  they  shall  but  give  an  occasion  to  have  their 
own  ripped  up  and  exposed,  and  so  tbey  think  it  the  safer  way  to  say  nothing. 
III.  It  is  a  most  necessaby  duty.  The  greatest  good  you  can  do  in  the  world  is  to 
pluck  up  these  briars  and  thorns  with  which  it  is  overgrown.  IV.  I  shall  give  you 
some  brief  rules  and  directions  when  you  ought  to  reprove,  and  how  you  ought  to 
manage  your  reproofs,  so  as  tbey  may  be  most  beneficial  to  your  brother.  And 
some  of  them  shall  be  negatives,  and  others  shall  be  positives.  1.  For  the  negative 
i-ules  take  these  that  follow.  (1)  I  ought  not  to  reprove  my  brother  if  I  have  no 
certain  knowledge  of  his  offence.  (2)  It  is  not  necessary  to  reprove  where  I  have 
reason  to  conclude  that  others,  of  more  prudence  and  interest  in  the  party,  either 
have  already  or  will  more  effectually  perform  it.  (3)  We  ought  not  to  give  sharp 
reproofs  for  small  offences.  (4)  We  are  not  to  reprove  those  whom  we  have  reason 
to  believe  are  such  desperate  wretches  that  our  reproofs  would  but  exasperate  them 
to  sin  the  more  for  a  reproof.  2.  Let  us  now  proceed  to  lay  down  some  positive 
rules  and  directions  for  the  right  managing  of  our  reproofs.  And  here — (1)  If  thou 
wouldst  reprove  with  success,  observe  right  circumstances  of  time  and  place.  And 
let  the  one  be  as  opportune,  and  the  other  as  private,  as  thou  canst.  Now,  usually, 
it  is  no  fit  season  for  reproof — (a)  Presently,  as  soon  as  the  sin  is  committed;  for 
then  the  heat  is  not  over,  nor  the  uproar  of  the  passions  and  affections  appeased. 
In  all  likelihood  a  reproof  as  yet  would  but  irritate.  Nor  yet — [b)  Is  a  time  of  mirth 
and  joy  fit  for  reproof ;  for  that  will  look  like  a  piece  of  envy,  as  if  we  were  malicious 
at  their  prosperity,  and  therefore  studied  to  cast  in  somewhat  that  might  disturb 
them,  and  so  they  will  be  apt  to  interpret  it.  Nor — (c)  Is  a  time  of  exceeding  great 
sadness  and  sorrow  a  proper  season  for  reproof  ;  for  this  will  look  like  hostility  and 
hatred,  as  if  we  de-igued  utterly  to  overwhelm  and  dispatch  them.  But  tlie  fittest 
opportunity  for  this  duty  is  when  they  are  most  calm,  their  passions  husheii,  and 
their  reason  (with  which  you  are  to  deal)  again  reseated  upon  its  tiirone.  (2)  If  thou 
wouldst  have  thy  reproofs  successful,  reprove  with  all  gentleness  and  meekness, 
without  giving  any  railing  or  reviling  terms.  (3)  Though  our  reproofs  must  be 
meek  and  gentle,  yet  must  they  be  quick  and  vivacious  also ;  for  as  charity  requires 
the  one,  so  doth  zeal  the  other,  and  the  best  and  most  equal  temper  is  rightly  to 
mix  these  two,  that  at  once  we  may  show  meekness  to  his  person  ('For  the  wrath  of 
man  worketh  not  the  righteousness  of  God,"  James  i.  20)  and  sharpness  against 
his  sin  (for  a  remiss  reprover  will  make  but  a  slow  penitent).  (4)  Let  all  thy 
reproofs  be  given  as  secretly  and  privately  as  possibly  thou  canst,  otherwise  thou 
wUt  seem  not  so  much  to  aim  at  thy  brother's  reformation  as  at  his  shame  and 


CHAP.  XIX.]  LEVITICUS.  239 

confusion.  (5)  Eeprove  not  one  who  is  greatly  thy  superior,  unless  it  be  at  a 
respectful  distance.  Towards  such  we  must  not  use  downright  and  blunt  rebukes, 
but  rather  insinuate  things  into  them  with  address  and  artifice.  (6)  If  thou  wouldst 
have  thy  reproofs  effectual,  especially  beware  that  thou  thyself  art  not  guilty  of 
those  sins  which  thou  reprovest  in  another.  V.  Some  motives  which  may  quicken 
you  to  the  conscientious  discharge  of  this  duty.  And  here,  next  to  the  express 
command  of  Almighty  God,  whose  authority  alone  ought  to  prevail  against  all 
the  difficulties  which  we  either  find  or  fancy  in  the  way  of  obedience  thereunto, 
consider  the  great  benefit  which  may  redound  both  to  the  reprover  and  reproved. 

1.  To  the  reprover.  (1)  Thou  shalt  hereby  provide  thyself  a  friend  who  may  take 
the  same  liberty  to  reprove  thee  when  it  shall  be  needful  and  for  thy  great  good. 

(2)  Thou  wilt  hereby  entitle  thyself  to  that  great  and  precious  promise  (Dan.  xii.  3). 

(3)  Thou  shalt  increase  thy  own  graces  and  comforts  more  than  possibly  thou 
couldst  do  by  separating  thyself  from  them.  Thy  graces  will  be  more  confirmed, 
because  reproving  of  others  will  engage  thee  to  a  greater  watchfulness  over  thyself. 
Thy  comforts  also  will  be  increased,  because  a  conscientious  discharge  of  this 
duty  will  be  to  thee  a  great  evidence  of  the  integrity  and  sincerity  of  thy  heart. 

2.  The  practice  of  this  duty  will  be  greatly  profitable  unto  him  that  is  reproved. 
How  knowest  thou  but  it  may  be  a  means  to  turn  him  from  his  iniquity  ?  and  so 
tbou  shalt  prevent  a  multitude  of  sins  and  save  a  soul  from  death  (James  v.  20). 
{Bp.  E.  Hopkins.)  The  duty  of  brotherly  admonition  or  reproof : — I.  Explain  the 
DUTY.  "  "We  are  members  one  of  another."  Then  I  may  not  act  with  a  view 
to  nAself  alone.  If  there  be  thus  an  obligation  on  me,  from  the  very  fact  of  my 
creation,  to  have  reference  in  all  which  I  do  to  the  benefit  of  my  brethren,  how  am 
I  i,o  shift  oil  from  myself  the  duty  of  brotherly  admonition  or  reproof  ?  If  I  see  that 
a  brother  or  neighbour  is  pursuing  a  course  which  is  likely  to  provoke  God's  wrath, 
and  must  issue  in  ruin,  then  it  can  be  no  matter  of  option  with  me  ;  I  must  be  alto- 
gether and  grievously  at  fault  if  I  "  suffer  sin  upon  him,"  and  do  not  strive  to  bring 
him  to  repentance  and  amendment.  It  is  bound  on  us  that  we  do  this  by  word, 
seeking  to  set  faithfully  before  the  offender  the  bitter  consequences  of  his  offence — 
invoking  him  by  his  hopes  and  his  fears  that  he  turn  away  from  evil.  The  righteous 
have  not  protested  against  wickedness  by  boldly  separating  themselves  from  it. 
They  have  denounced  heresy  and  impiety,  but  they  have  not  been  sufficiently 
diligent  in  digging  the  gulf  or  throwing  up  the  rampart  between  themsf-lves  and 
those  whom  they  profess  to  rebuke.  II.  State  rules  and  motives.  1.  There  must 
be  a  diligent  and  prayerful  observation  of  both  the  relative  and  the  absolute  circum- 
stauces  of  the  offending  party,  so  that  we  may  decide  whether  the  interference  is  likely 
to  be  spurned  as  an  unwarrantable  intrusion  or  provoke  to  additional  sin.  2.  Sup- 
posing that  neither  of  these  results  be  likely  to  follow,  and  supposing  the  offending 
party  is  one  who,  if  I  reproach,  he  may  probably  be  advantaged  by  reproof,  then  we 
give,  as  a  second  rule,  that  an  exact  proportion  should  be  preserved  between  the 
offence  committed  and  the  rebuke  which  it  receives.  It  is  very  easy,  but,  at  the  same 
time,  infinitely  removed  from  all  that  is  Christian,  to  upbraid  tbe  sinner  in  place  of 
rebuking  the  sin.  Whereas,  if  we  would  act  up  to  the  spirit  of  our  text,  the  rebuke 
should  never  part  from  our  lips  which  has  not  the  double  object  of  love  for  the 
offender  and  hatred  of  the  offence.  The  brotherly  correction,  which  alone  can  be 
expected  to  work  its  way  to  the  heart,  must  bear  upon  itself  the  evident  marks  of 
having  been  dictated  by  genuine  affection.  8.  The  reproof  should  bo  jiiven  privately 
rather  than  publicly.  4.  If  you  hope  that  your  admonition  niav  carry  any  weight, 
take  heed  that  you  be  not  yourself  chargeable  with  the  fault  that  you  reprove  in 
another.  The  force  of  example  is  vastly  greater  than  that  of  words,  and  the  reproof 
which  rebounds  on  itself  leaves  no  permanent  impression  on  the  rock  against  which  it 
was  thrown.  5.  These  are  simple  rules,  which  you  may  all  understand  and  apply. 
Their  motives  are  so  involved  in  them  that  it  is  unnecessary  to  multiply  reasons  urging 
to  the  duty  under  review.  Enough  for  us  to  know  that  he  who  neglects  the  duty 
suffers  sin  on  his  brother  ;  enough  for  us  to  be  assured  that  "  they  who  turn  many 
to  righteousness  shall  shine  as  stars  for  ever  and  ever."  An),  equipped  with  the 
fear  of  partaking  in  the  guilt  which  we  do  not  rebuke,  and  with  the  hope  of  securing 
the  glories  of  those  who  turn  souls  to  the  Lord,  we  have  all  which  can  brace  us  up 
to  the  vigorous  effort  of  checking  the  rule  and  progress  of  impiety.  [H.  Melvill, 
B.D.)  The  duty  of  reproving  our  neighbour: — I.  What  duty  is  enjoined,  and 
WHAT  SHOULD  BE  REBUKED.  1.  To  tell  any  onc  of  his  fault,  "  Thou  shalt  not  suffer 
sin  upon  him."  Sin,  therefore,  is  the  thmg  we  are  called  to  reprove,  or  rather  him 
that  commits  sin.    Do  all  we  can  to  convince  him  of  his  fault,  and  lead  him  in  the 


240  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xis. 

right  way.  2.  Love  requires  that  we  should  also  warn  him  of  error,  which  would 
naturally  lead  to  sin.  3.  Avoid  reproving  for  anything  that  is  disputable.  II. 
Who  they  ake  we  are  called  to  reprove.  1.  There  are  some  sinners  we  are  for- 
bidden to  rebuke.  "  Cast  not  your  pearls  before  swine."  2.  Our  "  neighbour  "  is 
every  child  of  man,  all  that  have  souls  to  be  saved.  3.  The  reproving  is  not  to  be 
done  in  the  same  degree  to  every  one.  First,  it  is  particularly  done  to  oui 
parents,  if  needing  it  ;  then  to  brothers  and  sisters ;  then  to  relatives  ;  then 
to  our  servants ;  to  our  fellow-citizens  ;  members  of  the  same  religious  society  ; 
watch  over  each  other  that  we  may  not  suffer  sin  upon  our  brother.  To 
neglect  this  is  to  "  hate  our  brother  in  our  heart "  ;  and  "  he  that  hateth  his 
brother  is  a  murderer."  It  imperils  our  own  salvation  to  neglect  this  duty. 
III.  What  spirit  and  manner  should  mark  our  performance  of  this  duty.  1. 
There  is  considerable  difficulty  in  doing  it  aright.  Although  some  are  specially 
quahfied  to  do  it  by  grace,  and  skilful  by  practice.  But,  though  difiicult,  we 
must  do  it ;  and  God  will  aid  us.  2.  How  most  effectual?  When  done  in  "  the 
spirit  of  love,"  of  tender  goodwill  for  our  neighbour,  as  for  one  who  is  the  son  of 
our  common  Father,  as  for  one  for  whom  Christ  died,  that  he  might  be  a  partaker  of 
salvation.  3.  Yet  speak  in  the  ppirit  of  humility.  "  Not  think  of  yourself  more 
highly  than  you  ought  to  think."  Not  feeling  or  showing  the  least  contempt  of 
tho^^e  whom  you  reprove  ;  disclaiming  all  self-superiority  ;  owning  the  good  there 
is  in  him.  4.  In  the  spirit  of  meekness.  "  For  the  wrath  of  man  worketh  not 
the  rigbteous^ness  of  God. "  Anger  begets  anger,  not  holiness.  5.  Put  no  trust  in 
yourself  ;  in  your  wisdom  or  abilities  ;  speak  in  the  spirit  of  prayer.  6.  And  as 
for  the  outward  manner,  as  well  as  the  spirit,  in  which  it  should  be  done  ;  let  there 
be  a  frank  outspokenness,  a  plain  and  artless  declaration  of  disinterested  love.  It 
will  pierce  like  lightning.  7.  With  great  seriousness,  showing  that  you  are  really 
in  earnest.  A  ludicrous  reproof  makes  little  impression,  or  is  taken  ill.  8.  Yet 
there  are  exceptions  when  a  little  well-placed  raillei'y  will  pierce  deeper  than  solid 
argument.  "  Answer  a  fool  according  to  his  folly,  lest  he  be  wise  in  his  own  eyes." 
9.  Adapt  the  manner  to  the  occasion.  By  few  or  many  words  as  the  situation 
determines  ;  or  by  no  words  at  all,  but  a  look,  a  gesture,  a  sigh.  Such  silent  reproof 
may  be  attended  by  the  power  of  God.  10.  Watch  for  a  fair  occasion.  "  A  word 
spoken  in  season,  how  good  it  is."  Catch  the  time  when  his  mind  is  soft  and  mild. 
11.  But  should  a  man  be  left  alone  when  intoxicated  ?  I  dare  not  say  so ;  for  instances 
are  forthcoming  of  a  reproof  then  having  had  good  effects.  Despise  not  the  poor 
drunkard.  Many  of  them  are  self-condemned,  but  they  despair.  He  that  tells  a  man 
there  is  no  help  for  him  is  a  liar  from  the  beginning.  "  Behold  the  Lamb  of  God  that 
taketh  away  the  sins  of  the  world."  12.  You  that  are  diligent  in  this  labour  of  love 
be  not  discouraged.  You  have  need  of  patience.  (JohnWesleij,  BI.A.)  Brotherly 
reproof: — Can  a  physician  show  his  love  better  than  by  telling  his  patient  his 
disease,  and  declaring  unto  him  the  means  whereby  to  cure  it  ?  Can  a  man, 
meeting  his  brother  wandering  out  of  his  way  in  hills  and  dales,  in  woods  and 
wildernesses,  show  his  love  better  unto  him  than  by  bringing  him  into  the  way, 
and  laying  his  error  before  his  face  ?  So  that  no  man  can  give  a  sounder  testimony 
of  his  sincere  heart  and  unfeigned  love  toward  his  brother  than  by  dealing  plainly 
with  him  when  he  walketh  not  uprightly.  For  a  friend  is  unto  the  soul  as  physic 
unto  the  body,  and  the  admonishing  of  our  brother  is  as  the  dii'ector  of  a  traveller. 
Let  us  therefore  suffer  the  word  of  exhortation.  Knowing  that  such  as  are  out  of 
order  must  be  admonished,  the  feeble-minded  must  be  comforted,  the  weak  must  be 
strengtiiened,  the  evil  must  be  reproved,  tlie  obstinate  must  be  terrified  and 
threatened.  And  let  us  not  fret  and  rage  against  our  brethren  when  we  are  checked 
and  controlled  for  our  sins.  It  is  a  sign  we  are  persuaded  and  resolved  to  continue 
in  our  sins  when  we  cannot  abide  to  be  reproved,  but  are  ready  to  say  with  Ahab  : 
"  Hast  thou  found  me,  O  mine  enemy  ?  "  The  Word  of  God  is  good  to  him  that 
walketh  uprightly  ;  and  we  shall  find  in  the  end,  that  open  rebuke  is  better  than 
secret  love  ;  yea,  that  ihe  wounds  of  a  lover  are  faithful,  and  the  kisses  of  an  enemy 
are  pleasant.  (IF.  Attersoll.)  Gentleness  in  reproof  :-^It  is  written  of  Andrew 
Fuller  that  he  could  rarely  be  faithful  without  being  severe  ;  and,  iu  giving  reproof, 
he  was  often  betrayed  into  intemperate  zeal.  Once,  at  a  meeting  of  ministers,  he 
took  occasion  to  correct  an  erroneous  opinion  delivered  by  one  of  his  brethren,  and 
he  laid  on  his  censure  so  heavily  that  Kyland  called  out  vehemently,  in  his  own 
peculiar  tone  of  voice,  "  Brother  Fuller !  Brother  Fuller  !  you  can  never  admonish 
a  mistaken  friend  but  you  must  take  up  a  sledge-hammer  and  knock  liis  brains 
out."     Gentleness  and  affection  should  be  evident  in  all  our  remonstrances;   if  a 


CHAP.  XIX.]  LEVITICUS.  241 


nail  be  dipped  in  oil  it  will  drive  the  more  readily.     There  is  a  medium  in  our 
vehemence  which  discretion  will  readily  suggest  :  we  must  not  drown  a  child  in 
washing  it,  nor  cut  off  a  man's  foot  to  cure  a  corn.    (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)         A  success- 
ful nyiover  : — Instead   of   a   long    enumeration   of    the   qualities   required   in   a 
successful  reprover,  we  instance  the  case  of  Dr.  Waugh.     "  At  one  of  the  half- 
yearly  examinations  at  the  Protestant  Dissenters'  Grammar  School,  Mill  Hill,  the 
headmaster  informed  the  examiners  that  he  had  been  exceedingly   tried  by  the 
misconduct  and  perverseness  of  a  boy  who  had  done  something  very  wrong,  and 
who,    though   he   acknowledged  the   fact,   could  not  be   brought   to  acknowledge 
the  magnitude  of  the  offence.     The  examiners  were  requested  to  expostulate  with 
the  boy,  and  try  if  he  could  be  brought  to  feel  and  deplore  it.     Dr.  Waugh  was 
solicited  to  undertake  the  task,  and  the  boy  was,  in  consequence,  brought  before 
him.     'How  long  have  >ou   been   in   the   school,  my  boy?'   asked  the   doctor. 
'  Four  months,  sir.'     '  When  did  you  hear  from  your  father  last  ?  '     '  My  father's 
dead,  sir.'     '  Ah  !  alas  the  day  !  'tis  a  great  loss — a  great  loss,  that  of  a  father ;  but 
God  can  make  it  up  to  you,  by  giving  you  a  tender,  affectionate  mother.'     On  this 
the  boy,  who  had  previously  seemed  as  hard  as  a  flint,  began  to   soften.     The 
doctor  proceeded  :  '  Well,  laddie,  where  is  your  mother  ?  '     '  On  her  voyage  home 
from  India,  sir.'     '  Ay  1    good  news  for  you,  my  boy.    Do  you  love  your  mother  ?  ' 
'  Yes,  sir.'     '  And  do  you  expect  to  see  her  soon  ? '     '  Yes,  sir.'      '  Do  you  think  she 
loves  you?'     '  Yes,  sir,  I  am  sure  of  it.'     '  Then  think,  my  dear  laddie,  think  of 
her  feelings  when  she  comes  home,  and  finds  that,  instead  of  your  being  in  favour 
with  every  one,  you  are  in  such  deep  disgrace  as  to  run  the  risk  of  expulsion,  and 
yet  are  too  hardened  to  acknowledge  that  you  have  done  wrong.     Winna  ye  break 
your  poor  mother's  heart,  think  ye  ?     Just  think  o'  that,  my  lad. '     The  little  culprit 
burst  into  a  flood  of  tears,   acknowledged  his  fault,  and  promised  amendment." 
(Ibid.)         Beproving  a  swearer  : — I  will  give  you  an  instance  of  how  you  ought  to 
reprove  the  swearer,  which  I  know  to  be  true.     It  was  by  a  friend  of  mine,  and  I 
don't  mind  telling  you  his  name.     He  was  a  clergyman,  now  dead  ;    he  wrote  some 
very  valuable  books ;  his  name  was  Benjamin  Field.     He  was  staying  at  a  Brighton 
boarding-house.     At  dinner,  at  the  boarding-house,  a  young  officer  in  the  army 
swore.     At  the  dinner-table  Mr.  Field  took  no  notice  at  all.     He  waited  his  oppor- 
tunity.    In  the  evening,  when  Mr.   Field  came  in  from  his  walk,  he  found  this 
young  man   alone  in   the  drawing-room.     He  said  to  him,    "  Sir,  you   hurt   my 
feelings  very  much   at  dinner."      The  young  gentleman  said,    "Did   I?     I   am 
exceedingly  sorry.     I  don't  know  what  you  refer  to.     Did  I  speak  of  a  friend  of 
yours  in  a  way  you  did  not  like?  "    "  That  is  exactly  what  you  did,"  Mr.  Field 
replied.     "  You  spoke  of  my  greatest  Friend  in  a  way  I  did  not  like  at  all.     You 
swore.     And  God  is  my  greatest  Friend.     And  you  spoke  of  my  greatest  Friend  in 
a  way  that  pained  me  very  much,  and  pained  Him. "    Mr.  Field  talked  to  this  young 
man  a  great  deal  ;    and  he  asked  Mr.  Field,  before  he  left  the  room,  to  pray  that 
God  would  forgive  him,  and  he  did  so  ;    and  every  day,  while  Mr.  Field  stayed  at 
Brighton,  he  went  up  to  that  young  man's  bedroom  in  the  morning  of  the  day,  and 
prayed  with  him.     That  was  the  way  to  reprove  him.     The  result  was,  I  believe, 
tbat  young  man  was  converted,  turned  to  God  by  Mr.  Field  reproving  him  for 
swearing.     (J.  Vaughan.)         Bejjroof  a  Chi-istian  duty  : — Who  is  so  kind  and  gentle 
as  the  surgeon  with  his  knife  ?     He  that  is  to  be  cut  cries,  but  cut  he  is  ;  he  that  is 
to  be  cauterised  cries,  but  cauterised  he  is.     This  is  not  cruelty  :  on  no  account  let 
that  surgeon's  treatment  be  called  cruelty.     Cruel  he  is  against  the  wounded  part, 
that  the  patient  may  be  cured  ;  for  if  the  wound  be  softly  dealt  with,  the  man  is  lost. 
Thus,  then,  I  would  advise  that  we  love  our  brethren  howsoever  they  may  have 
sinned  against  us  :    that  we  let  not  affection  toward  them  depart  out  of  our  hearts ; 
and  that,  when  need  is,  we  exercise  discipline  toward  them,  lest  by  relaxation  of 
discipline  wickedness  increase.     (St.  Augustine.)         Reproof  hindered  by  conscious- 
ness of  personal  imperfection  : — A  person  who  objects  to  tell  a  friend  of  his  faults 
because  he  has  faults  of  his  own  acts  as  a  surgeon  would  who  should  refuse  to  dress 
another  person's  wounds  because  he  had  a  dangerous  one  himself.     (R.   Cecil.) 
Mecknesx  in  reproving  .- — A  parishioner,  notoriously  culpable  for  his  inadequate  dis- 
charge of  certain  official  duties,  received  a  private  remonstrance  from  his  pastor, 
Dean  Alford,  the  force  of  which  he  attempted  to  evade  by  angrily  retorting  with  a 
charge  of  negligence.    In  the  course  of  the  day  the  following  was  sent  to  him  by  the 
vicar  :  "Eegarding  my  own  pastoral  deficiencies,  I  heartily  thank  you.    I  am  deeply 
aware  that  I  am  not  sufficient  for  these  things,  and  only  wish  mv  place  were  better 
filled.     At  the  same  time  the  deficiencies  of  one  man  do  not  excuse  another.     Let 

16 


242  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xix. 

us  both  strive,  and  pray  that  we  may  be  found  diligent  in  our  business,  fervent  in 
spirit,  serving  the  Lord  our  God,  and  do  our  best  to  hve  in  charity  and  peace  with 
one  another,  and  with  all  men. — Believe  me,  your  affectionate  minister  and  friend, 
Henry  Alford."  Firmness  in  rebuke  : — When  John  Coleridge  Pattesoa  was  at 
Eton  he  was  secretary  of  tbe  cricket  eleven.  The  boys  of  the  cricket  and  boat 
clubs  had  an  annual  dinner  at  the  hotel  at  Slough.  On  these  occasions  songs  of  a 
low  mojal  tone  were  sometimes  sung.  Patteson  gave  notice  beforehand  that  he 
would  not  tolerate  this,  and  one  of  the  lads  having  begun  such  a  song,  and  no 
notice  being  taken  of  his  immediate  remonstrance,  he  rose  and  left  the  dinner- 
table,  a  few  others  doing  the  same.  He  followed  up  this  protest  with  an  intima- 
tion that  he  must  leave  the  club  unless  an  apology  were  made  ;  and  his  firmness 
gained  the  point  and  secured  a  condemnation  of  the  abuse.  Beneficial  rebuke  : — 
A  most  profane  swearer  in  the  Eoyal  Engineers  was  remonstrated  with  bj  Sergeant 
Marjouram  in  New  Zealand.  He  was  disposed  to  be  angry  with  his  reprover,  but 
the  latter  said  to  him  :  "Well,  if  I  were  to  get  behind  your  back  and  now  and  then 
give  you  a  gentle  push  down  the  road  to  hell,  I  suppose  you  would  tbink  me  a  better 
friend  than  you  do  now  for  warning  you  before  it  be  too  late."  The  man's  face 
quivered  with  emotion,  and  he  rushed  from  the  place.  He  soon  returned,  however, 
and  exclaimed  to  his  companions  :  "  I'll  tell  you  what,  chaps — I'm  not  going  to  lead 
this  sort  of  life  any  longer,  and  to-morrow  I  shall  begin  a  change."  Formerly  the 
majority  of  his  words  were  oaths,  but  from  that  day  to  the  time  of  recording  the 
incident,  Marjouram  did  not  hear  him  use  one. 

Ver.  18.  Thou  shalt  not  avenge. — Forgive  and  forget : — In  another  place  we  read, 
"  For  vengeance  is  Mine,  and  I  will  repay."  Wrest  not  God's  sword  therefore  out 
of  His  hand,  sit  not  down  in  His  seat,  nor  make  thyself  a  god,  for  fear  of  the  end. 
Well,  let  Him  go  then,  I  will  not  avenge,  but  sure  I  will  remember  Him  ;  forgive  I 
may,  but  never  forget,  &c.  See  what  foUoweth  in  the  very  next  words  of  this  verse, 
"Neither  shalt  thou  be  mindful  of  a  wrong  against  the  children  of  thy  people." 
"  Eemembering,"  then,  you  see,  is  condemned  as  well  as  "  avenging,"  and  therefore  it 
Btandeth  you  upon  both  to  forgive  and  to  forget,  or  else  the  Lord  shall  forget  you 
out  of  His  Book  of  Life.  Nay,  see  more  :  all  this  is  not  yet  enough,  but  we  must 
"love  also  our  neighbours,  and  that  even  as  ourselves,"  or  else  we  perish.  For,  "  I 
am  the  Lord,"  saith  the  verse,  that  is.  One  that  seeth  and  hateth  and  will  smite  thee 
in  that  strength  that  thou  canst  not  resist  nor  endure.  Foolish  politic,  think,  then, 
of  piety,  and  abhor  that  policy  that  devoureth  piety  and  destroyeth  thee.  Thou 
canst  not  live  ever,  but  must  die,  and  come  unto  judgment.  (Bp.  Babington.) 
Penalty  of  the  desire  to  avenge  .-—Small  birds  have  an  intense  natural  antipathy  of 
nocturnal  birds  of  prey.  If  one  of  these  birds  happens  to  be  seen  out  of  its  lurking- 
place  during  the  day  they  assail  it  vigorously,  resent  its  intrusion,  and  avenge  the 
oppression  exercised  over  them  during  the  night  by  combined  attacks.  This  anti- 
pathy has  been  taken  advantage  of  for  the  jjurpose  of  catching  birds  ever  since  the 
days  of  Aristotle.  The  catcher  imitates,  for  instance,  the  voice  of  an  owl  about  an 
hour  before  sunset,  when  the  birds  will  flock  together  and  perch  on  the  trees  or 
bushes  in  the  suspected  neigbbourhood.  The  twigs,  &c. ,  having  been  previously 
covered  with  bird-lime,  the  birds  pay  their  liberty  and  perhaps  life  as  the  penalty 
of  their  desire  to  avenge  themselves  on  the  owl.  (Scientific  Illustratio7is.) 
Brothniy  affection : — Euclid  showed  in  himself  the  true  symptoms  of  brotherly 
affection,  who,  when  his  brother  in  his  rage  made  a  rash  vow,  saying,  "Let  me  not 
live,  if  I  be  not  revenged  on  my  brother  "  ;  Euclid  turns  the  speech  contrary  way, 
"  Nay,  let  me  not  live,  if  I  be  not  reconciled  to  my  brother  ;  let  me  not  live,  if  we  he 
not  as  good  friends  as  ever  we  were  before."  Shall  a  heathen  thus  outstrip  us 
Christians?  nature  be  stronger  than  grace?  the  bonds  of  flesh  tie  faster  and  surer 
than  the  bonds  of  grace  ?  We  call  on  God  our  Father,  we  acknowledge,  or  should 
do,  one  Chuix-h  our  mother,  we  are  bred  up  in  the  same  school  of  the  Cross,  fed  at 
the  same  table  of  the  Lord,  incoi'porated  into  the  same  comnmnion  of  saints.  If 
these  and  the  like  considerations  cannot  knit  our  hearts  in  love  one  to  another,  the 
very  heathens  will  rise  up  in  judgment  against  us,  and  condemn  us.  (J.  Spencer.) 
Victory  over  self  the  best  way  to  gain  others  : — Winthrop,  the  Puritan  Governor  of 
Massachusetts,  had  a  wonderful  control  of  his  own  passions.  On  one  occasion,  one 
of  the  ofiicers  of  the  colony  wrote  him  a  "  sharp  letter,"  complaining  of  his  ofhcial 
acts.  He  sent  back  the  letter — would  not  keep  such  a  letter  of  provocation  by  him. 
By  and  by,  the  writer  of  the  letter,  while  there  was  a  scarcity  of  food  in  the  colony, 
sent  to  buy  some  of  Wiuthrop's  cattle.     "  Eeceive  them,"  said  the  governor,  "  as  a 


CHAP.  XIX.]  LEVITICUS.  2415 

gift  in  token  of  my  goodwill."  The  offender  wrote  back :  "  Sir,  your  overcoming 
of  yourself  hath  overcome  me."  This  way  of  dealing  with  offenders  was  loved  by 
him, 

Ver.  19.  A  garment  mingled  of  linen  and  woollen. — Unnatural  commixtures : — 
Most  probably  the  reference  is  to  different  materials,  interwoven  in  the  yarn  of 
■which  the  dress  was  made ;  but  a  difficulty  still  remains  in  the  fact  that  such 
admixture  was  ordered  in  the  garments  of  the  priests.  Perhaps  the  best  explana- 
tion is  that  of  Josephus,  that  the  law  here  was  only  intended  for  the  laity ;  which, 
AS  no  question  of  intrinsic  morality  was  involved,  might  easily  have  been.  But 
when  we  inquire  as  to  the  reason  of  these  prohibitions,  and  especially  of  this  last 
■one,  it  must  be  confessed  that  it  is  hard  for  us  now  to  speak  with  confidence. 
Most  probable  it  appears  that  they  were  intended  for  an  educational  purpose,  to 
cultivate  in  the  mind  of  the  people  the  sentiment  of  reverence  for  the  order 
established  in  nature  by  God.  For  what  the  world  calls  the  order  of  nature  is 
really  an  order  appointed  by.  God,  as  the  infinitely  wise  and  perfect  One  ;  hence,  as 
nature  is  thus  a  manifestation  of  God,  the  Hebrew  was  forbidden  to  seek  to  bring 
about  that  which  is  not  according  to  nature,  unnatural  commixtures ;  and  from 
this  point  of  view,  the  last  of  the  three  precepts  appears  to  be  a  symbolic  reminder 
of  the  same  duty,  namely,  reverence  for  the  order  of  nature,  as  being  an  order 
determined  by  God.  (S.  H.  Kellogg,  D.D.)  Woollen  and  flaxen  threads  : — Not 
only  is  it  forbidden  to  weave  woollen  and  flaxen  threads  together  into  one  material 
to  make  wearing  apparel  of  it ;  but,  according  to  the  administrators  of  the  law 
during  the  second  Temple,  an  Israelite  must  not  mend  a  woollen  gaiment  with  a 
flaxen  thread,  and  vice  versa.  One  of  the  reasons  which  the  ancient  canonists 
assign  for  this  prohibition  is  that  "  wool  and  linen  were  appointed  for  the  priests 
alone."  This  law  is  observed  by  the  orthodox  Jews  to  this  day.  (C.  D.  Ginsburg, 
LL.D.) 

Vers.  20-22.  A  bondmaid  betrothed. — Divine  toleration  of  defective  morality  : — 
It  will  be  said,  and  truly,  that  by  this  law  slavery  and  concubinage  are  to  a  certain 
extent  recognised  by  the  law;  and  upon  this  fact  has  been  raised  an  objection 
bearing  on  the  holiness  of  the  lawgiver,  and,  by  consequence,  on  the  Divine  origin 
and  inspiration  of  the  law.  Is  it  conceivable  that  the  holy  God  should  have  given 
a  law  for  the  regulation  of  two  so  evil  institutions?  The  answer  has  been  furnished 
us,  in  principle,  by  our  Lord  (Matt.  xix.  8),  in  that  which  He  said  concerning  the 
analogous  case  of  the  law  of  Moses  touching  divorce  ;  which  law,  He  tells  us, 
although  not  according  to  the  perfect  ideal  of  right,  was  yet  given  "  because  of  the 
hardness  of  men's  hearts."  That  is,  although  it  was  not  the  best  law  ideally,  it 
was  the  best  practically,  in  view  of  the  low  moral  tone  of  the  people  to  whom  it 
was  given.  Precisely  so  it  was  in  this  case.  Abstractly,  one  might  say  that  the 
■case  was  in  nothing  different  from  the  case  of  a  free  woman,  mentioned  Deut.  xxii. 
23,  24,  for  which  death  was  the  appointed  punishment ;  but  practically,  in  a  com- 
munity where  slavery  and  concubinage  were  long-settled  institutions,  and  the  moral 
standard  was  still  low,  the  cases  were  not  parallel.  A  law  which  would  carry  with 
it  the  moral  support  of  the  people  in  the  one  case,  and  which  it  would  thus  be 
possible  to  carry  into  effect,  would  not  be  in  like  manner  supported  and  carried  into 
effect  in  the  other ;  so  that  the  result  of  greater  strictness  in  theory  would,  in 
actual  practice,  be  the  removal  thereby  of  all  restriction  on  license.  On  the  other 
hand,  by  thus  appointing  herein  a  penalty  for  both  the  guilty  parties  such  as  the 
public  conscience  would  apjirove,  God  taught  the  Hebrews  the  fundamental  lesson 
that  a  slave-girl  is  not  regarded  by  God  as  a  mere  chattel ;  and  that  if,  because  of 
the  hardness  of  their  hearts,  concubinage  was  tolerated  for  a  time,  still  the  slave- 
girl  must  not  be  treated  as  a  thing,  but  as  a  person,  and  indiscriminate  license 
could  not  be  permitted.  And  thus,  it  is  of  greatest  moment  to  observe,  a  principle 
was  introduced  into  the  legislation,  which  in  its  ultimate  logical  application  would 
require  and  effect — as  in  due  time  it  has — the  total  abolition  of  slavery  wherever 
the  authority  of  the  living  God  is  truly  recognised.  The  principle  of  the  Divine 
government  which  is  here  illustrated  is  one  of  exceeding  practical  importance  as  a 
model  for  us.  We  live  in  an  age  when,  everywhere  in  Christendom,  the  cry  is 
*'  Reform  " ;  and  there  are  many  who  think  that  if  once  it  be  proved  that  a  thing  is 
•wrong,  it  follows  by  necessary  consequence  that  the  immediate  and  unqualified 
legal  prohibition  of  that  wrong,  under  such  penalty  as  the  wrong  may  deserve,"  is 
the  only  thing  that  any  Christian  man  has  a  right  to  think  of.     And  yet,  according 


244  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xix. 

to  the  principle  illustrated  in  this  Ipgislation,  this  conclusion  in  such  cases  can  by 
no  means  be  taken  for  granted.  That  is  not  always  the  best  law  practically  whicli 
is  the  best  law  abstractly.  That  law  is  the  best  which  shall  be  most  effective  in 
diminishing  a  given  evil,  under  the  existing  moral  condition  of  the  community ; 
and  it  is  often  a  matter  of  such  exceeding  difficulty  to  deteru.ine  what  legislation 
agai7ist  admitted  sins  and  evils  may  be  the  most  productive  of  good  in  a  com- 
munity whose  moral  sense  is  dull  concerning  them,  that  it  is  not  stiauge  that  the 
best  men  are  often  found  to  differ.  Eemembering  this,  we  may  well  commend  the 
duty  of  a  more  charitable  judgment,  in  such  cases,  than  one  often  bears  from  such 
radical  reformers,  who  seem  to  imagine  that  in  order  to  remove  an  evil  all  that  is 
necessary  is  to  pass  a  law  at  once  and  for  ever  prohibiting  it ;  and  who,  therefore, 
hold  up  to  obloquy  all  who  doubt  as  to  the  wisdom  and  duty  of  so  doing,  as  the 
enemies  of  truth  and  of  righteousness.     (S.  H.  Kellogg,  D.D.) 

Vers.  23-25.  In  the  fourth  year  all  the  fruit  thereof  shall  be  holy. — The  laio 
regarding  fruit-trees  : — The  explanation  of  this  peculiar  regulation  is  to  be  found  in 
a  special  application  of  the  principle  which  rules  throughout  the  law — that  the 
firstfruit  shall  always  be  consecrated  unto  God.  But  in  this  case  the  application 
of  the  principle  is  modified  by  the  familiar  fact  that  the  fruit  of  a  young  tree,  for 
the  first  few  years  of  its  bearing,  is  apt  to  be  imperfect ;  it  is  not  yet  sufficiently 
grown  to  yield  its  best  possible  product.  Because  of  this,  in  those  years  it  could 
not  be  given  to  the  Lord,  for  He  must  never  be  served  with  any  but  the  best  of 
everything ;  and  thus  until  the  fruit  should  reach  its  best,  so  as  to  be  worthy  of 
presentation  of  the  Lord,  the  Israelite  was  meanwhile  debarred  from  using  it. 
During  these  three  years  the  trees  are  said  to  be  "as  uncircumcised  " ;  i.e.,thej 
were  to  be  regarded  as  in  a  condition  analogous  to  that  of  the  child  who  has  not  yet 
been  consecrated,  by  the  act  of  circumcision,  to  the  Lord.  In  the  fourth  year, 
however,  the  trees  were  regarded  as  having  now  so  grown  as  to  yield  fruit  in 
perfection ;  hence  the  principle  of  the  consecration  of  the  firstfruit  now  applies, 
and  all  the  fourth  year's  product  is  given  to  the  Lord,  as  an  offering  of  thankful 
praise  to  Him  whose  power  in  nature  is  the  secret  of  all  growth,  fruitfuluess,  and 
increase.  The  moral  teaching  of  this  law  is  very  plain.  It  teaches,  as  in  all 
analogous  cases,  that  God  is  always  to  be  served  before  ourselves ;  and  that  not 
grudgingly,  as  if  an  irksome  tax  were  to  be  paid  to  the  Majesty  of  Heaven,  but  in 
the  spirit  of  thanksgiving  and  praise  to  Him,  as  the  Giver  of  "  every  good  and 
perfect  gift."  It  further  instructs  us,  in  this  particular  instance,  that  the  people  of 
God  are  to  recognise  this  as  being  true  even  of  all  those  good  things  which  come  to 
us  under  the  forms  of  products  of  nature.  {Ibid.)  Earhj  fruits  : — 1.  A  merciful 
providence  for  posterity  ;  for  if  a  tree  be  suffered  to  bear  too  soon,  as  the 
first,  second,  or  third  year,  it  doth  not  usually  endure  long,  but  decayeth  sooner 
than  otherwise  it  would,  the  fruit  draweth  away  the  nourishment  which  should 
make  the  root  and  tree  strong.  2.  It  restrained  covetousness  in  the  Jews,  and 
taught  them  how  God  hateth  scraping  all  to  man's  self  for  his  time,  and  nothing 
caring  for  posterity.  Such  are  they  that  will  take  the  heart  out  of  the  land  before 
their  term  end,  cut  down  the  wood,  fruit-trees,  hedges,  destroy  the  game,  and  do 
all  the  mischief  they  can  and  dare  do.  The  Lord  seeth  them  and  thinketh  of  them, 
though  they  little  think  of  themselves  and  of  their  malicious  actions.  3.  It 
shadowed  how  little  worth  the  fruits  of  youth  usually  are,  either  to  the  Church  or 
commonwealth,  till  years  have  bred  strength  of  judgment,  and  made  them  both  see 
and  do  what  is  profitable.  Even  as  uncircumcised  fruits,  so  are  the  actions  of 
youth,  and  therefore  David  prayed  for  pardon  in  this  case.     {Bp.  Babington.) 

"Ver.  27.  Ye  shall  not  roiind  the  comers  of  your  heads. — That  is,  they  are  not  to 
shave  off  the  hair  around  the  temples  and  behind  the  ears,  so  as  to  leave  the  head  bald 
except  a  dish-like  tuft  upon  the  crown,  thus  imparting  to  their  heads  the  form  of  a 
hemisphere.  This  was  done  by  the  Arabs,  and  other  worshippers  of  the  godOrotal. 
Hence  the  Arabs  are  ironically  called  "  those  with  the  corner  of  their  hairpolled  " 
(Jer.  ix.  26  ;  xxv.  23  ;  xlix.  32).  (C.  D.  Ginshurg,  LL.D.)  The  true  worshipper  to 
appear  as  such : — The  command  means,  that  the  Israelite  was  not  only  to  worship  God 
alone,  but  he  was  not  to  adopt  a  fashion  in  dress  which,  because  commonly  associated 
with  idolatry,  might  thus  misrepresent  his  real  position  as  a  worshipper  of  the  only 
livinc  and  true  God.  {S.  11.  Kellogg,  D.D.)  Neither  shalt  thou  mar  the  comers  of 
thy  beard. — An  injunction  not  to  mar  the  beard  might  hardly  appear  necessary,  since 
it  is  well  known  with  what  pride  and  scrupulous  care  the  beard  was  cultivated  by  the 


CHAP.  XIX.]  LEVITICUS.  245 

Hebrews  and  other  Eastern  nations;  that  it  was  deemed  the  greatest  ornament  of  a 
man,  a  badge  of  his  dignity,  and  a  type  of  his  vigour  and  perfect  manhood  ;  beard 
and  Ufe  were  hence  often  employed  as  synonymous,  and  oaths  were  confirnied,  and 
blessings  bestowed,  by  invoking  the  one  or  the  other;  suppliants,  desirous  to  give  the 
utmost  solemnity  to  their  appeals,  touched  the  beards  of  those  they  addressed;  and 
a  mutilation  of  the  beard  was  looked  upon  as  an  unbearable  disgrace,  and  often 
regarded  as  more  calamitous  than  death.  In  some  countries  the  beard  was  the 
distinctive  mark  of  free  men.  An  old  Spartan  law  forbade  the  ephori,  from  the 
moment  of  their  taking  office,  to  clip  their  beards ;  and  those  who  had  fled  before 
the  enemy  in  battle  were  compelled  to  appear  in  public  with  half- shorn  beards. 
However,  it  was  customary  among  several  nations  for  young  men  "  to  present  to 
their  gods  the  firstlings  of  their  beards  " ;  and  it  was  possibly  to  prevent  the 
adoption  of  similar  usages  among  the  Hebrews  that  the  injunction  was  deemed 
desirable.  Besides,  "  marring  the  cornets  of  the  beard  "  was  a  heathen  mode  of 
mourning,  which  was  not  to  be  imitated,  since  it  might  easily  lead  to  more 
objectionable  perversities.  .  (If.  M.  Kalisch,  Ph.D.) 

Ver.  28.  Cuttings  in  your  flesh  for  the  dead. — -The  wild  and  frantic  demon- 
strations of  grief  so  common  among  eastern  and  southern  nations,  included  cuts 
and  incisions  in  the  body,  among  the  Hebrews,  the  Philistines,  and  the  Moabites, 
the  Arabs  and  Ethiopians,  the  Babylonians  and  Armenians  ;  among  the  early 
Greeks  and  Komans,  people  in  bereavement,  especially  women,  indulged  in  the 
hideous  practice  of  "  lacerating  their  cheeks  ";  and  when  the  king  of  the  Scythians 
died,  those  of  his  subjects  who  received  his  body  for  burial,  "  cut  off  a  part  of  their 
ears,  shaved  off  their  hair,  wounded  themselves  on  the  arms,  and  drove  arrows 
through  their  left  hands."  Such  acts,  which  are  still  customary  among  some  tribes 
of  Persia,  Arabia,  and  Abyssinia,  were  to  be  shuuned  by  the  Hebrews,  not  only 
because  immoderate  grief  is  unbecoming  a  nation  of  priests,  but  because  cuts  and 
incisions,  usually  made  by  persons  while  engaged  in  prayer  or  other  religious 
exercises,  were  meant  as  substitutes  for  self  immolation,  and  the  blood  thus  shed 
was  supposed  to  ensure  atonement :  such  notions  were  held  in  abhorrence  by  the 
advanced  Levitical  writers,  who  attributed  the  power  of  expiation  to  the  blood  of 
clean  sacrificial  animals,  but  not  to  human  blood.  More  widespread  still  was  the 
.custom  of  "inscribing"  upon  the  body,  by  means  of  a  "  caustic,"  words  or  short 
maxims,  or  of  marking  the  forehead  and  cheeks,  the  hands,  the  arms,  and  the  neck, 
with  figures  and  emblems.  It  prevailed,  and  partially  still  prevails,  in  many 
countries  of  the  old  and  the  new  world,  both  among  savage  and  more  civilised 
nations  ;  and  though  in  many  cases  it  is  in  itself  harmless,  being  merely  intended  for 
ornament,  or  for  identification,  as  when  a  slave  bears  the  name  or  the  initials  of 
his  master,  or  the  soldier  those  of  his  general,  it  was,  in  many  instances,  a  very 
efficient  mode  of  strengthening  the  most  dangerous  superstitions.  It  was  so 
common  for  idolaters  to  have  the  name  or  image  of  their  chief  deities,  or  some 
other  significant  symbol  associated  with  their  faith,  engraved  upon  their  bodies, 
that  even  the  earlier  religious  legislators  of  the  Hebrews  deemed  it  necessary  to 
devise  some  substitute  for  that  custom  in  harmony  with  their  new  creed,  and  they 
introduced  the  "phylacteries,"  which  the  Hebi'ews  were  to  "bind"  as  "a  sign" 
upon  their  head,  and  as  "  a  memorial"  between  their  eyes,  "that  the  law  of  the 
Lord  might  be  in  their  mouths."  Thus  more  than  one  advantage  was  gained  ;  the 
sign  or  memorial  was  known  to  refer  to  none  else  but  the  One  and  true  God  of  the 
Hebrews,  and  it  was  understood  not  as  an  amulet,  which  in  itself  is  a  shield  against 
danger  and  misfortune,  but  as  an  emblem  meant  to  remind  the  Israelite  of  his 
duties,  and  of  their  faithful  accomplishment  by  his  own  zeal  and  vigilant  exertion. 
Yet  it  was  even  after  the  exile  considered  unobjectionable  to  cover  -with  such 
symbolte  the  bodv  itself,  as  is  manifest  from  alkisions  of  Isaiah  (xliv.  5;  xlix.  16). 
The  Levitical  writers  prohibited,  therefore,  tattooing  of  any  kind  and  for  what-^ver 
purpose,  well  aware  how  imperceptibly  that  practice  might  lead  again  to  the  heathen 
rites  and  notions.  Christiana  in  some  parts  of  the  East,  and  European  sailors, 
were  long  in  the  habit  of  marking,  by  means  of  punctures  and  a  black  dye,  their 
arms  and  other  members  of  the  body  with  the  sign  of  the  crucifix,  or  the  image  of 
the  Virgin  ;  the  Mohammedans  mark  them  with  the  name  of  Allah,  and  Orientals 
generally  with  the  outlines  of  celebrated  towns  and  places.  A  traveller  relates  that, 
as  a  preparation  for  an  Arabian  wedding,  the  women  tattoo  the  bride  with  figures  of 
flowers,  houses,  cypresses,  antelopes,  and  other  animals.  Among  the  Thracians 
tattooing  was  considered  as  a  mark  and  privilege  of  noble  birth.     The  branding  of 


246  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xix. 

prisoners  and   malefactors,  extensively  practised  to  this  day,  is  included  in  the 
interdiction  of  our  verse.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  30.  Ye  shall  keep  My  Sabbaths. — Sabbatic  pause :  —Sahhsith.  is  a  compound 
condition  of  the  body  and  the  soul.  Misrepresentation  of  Sabbath,  the  forfeiture 
of  its  vitality,  betrays  itself  in  a  negative  conception  of  it,  as  restriction,  deprivation, 
tax,  and  task.  This  allusion  prevails  at  large,  and  prevails  in  two  forms — religious 
cant  and  religious  laxity,  disrelish,  or  disdain.  The  latter  is  engendered  in  the 
former.  Narrow  natures,  narrow  Sabbath  ideals ;  hard  natures  make  them  hard. 
They  localise  and  dwarf  the  conception,  as  a  measure  of  time,  and  a  matter  of  law. 
The  scope  of  the  Sabbath  is  the  happiness  of  man,  the  serenity  of  the  race.  It  is 
intended  to  rescue  the  world  from  recklessness  and  ruin,  from  riot  and  from  rot, 
from  hardship,  hazard,  and  over-haste.  Sabbath  is  soul-rest.  Its  purpose  is  to 
train  us  to  enjoy  this  earth  in  the  light  of  everlasting  life,  and  the  glory  of  the 
gracious  God,  and  not  be  slaves  of  time.  The  Sabbath  is  for  the  sanctity  of  peace, 
the  satisfaction  of  the  spiritual  nature.  It  therefore  takes  the  spirit  away,  not  only 
from  tasks  and  toils  and  trudges  of  its  ordinary  earth  life,  but  from  the  worry  and 
whirl  of  all  the  outer  world.  It  persuades  the  soul  to  rest  in  God,  as  God  rests  on 
behalf  of  man  ;  and  to  joy  in  His  creation  as  He  joyed,  as  His  creation  joys  in  Him. 
It  begins  by  saying.  You  must,  in  order  to  say,  You  may.  This  silences  the  plea  of 
lax  indulgence  which  so  many  put  up  for  spending  a  godless  Sunday  as  the  sub- 
stitute of  Sabbath.  An  uneasy  Sunday  is  no  Sabbath  at  all.  They  are  restless  and 
restive  who  press  this  very  argument  of  recreation  and  of  rest.  Come,  say  they, 
Sunday  is  a  holy  day — a  holiday.  Now,  to  get  as  far  from  heaven  as  may  be  ;  now,, 
to  leave  out  God ;  now,  let  loose  to  enjoy  nature,  the  fields,  the  forests,  the  ocean 
views.  To  enjoy  the  works  of  nature  is  the  best  way  to  keep  the  Sabbath  holy,  if 
you  can  call  the  Sabbath  a  delight.  To  take  a  walk,  if  you  know  how  to  walk  with 
God.  To  rest,  if  you  know  how  to  rest  in  Christ.  If  you  cannot  read  His  glory  in  the 
page  of  nature,  you  are  a  child  rustling  a  newspaper  while  yet  it  cannot  read.  That 
is  dull  enough.  If  you  never  get  an  ocean  view,  but  such  as  the  frolicking  crowd 
get  on  the  beach,  or  the  chattering,  giddy  throng  on  the  steamer's  deck,  puffing 
smoke  against  the  sky  and  babbling — earth  to  earth,  dust  to  dust,  and  ashes  to 
ashes — to  each  other,  or  staring  at  the  sea  in  sickly  sentimentality,  then  the  ocean 
takes  no  notice  of  you,  and  has  not  the  pleasure  of  your  acquaintance.  If  that  is- 
your  fresh-air  relaxation,  and  that  your  innocent  diversion,  and  that  your  poetry 
of  nature,  and  your  ocean  sublimity,  you  have  never  seen  an  ocean  at  all,  and  know 
not  what  it  is,  not  knowing  what  it  means,  and  nature's  poetry  to  you  is  no  more 
than  negro  minstrelsy,  and  the  landscape  yawns,  and  the  skies  wax  dull,  and 
instead  of  having  a  Sabbath  delight,  you  find  a  blight,  a  burden,  and  a  bondage. 
Sabbath,  like  music,  is  a  treat  to  those  alone  who  know  how  to  enjoy  it.  The 
day  of  the  Sabbath  without  the  Sabbath  of  the  day  is  gloomy  to  the  last  degree. 
There  are  Sabbatic  thoughts  privileged  to  take  on  the  complexion  of  the  heavens,, 
as  the  stilled  lake,  the  azure  of  the  firmament.  If  you  are  enjoying  a  book  or  a 
picture,  you  need  to  take  a  time  when  other  things  shall  not  interfere.  To  inter- 
mingle is  to  mar.  There  is  a  beatific  converse.  If  you  are  communing  with 
a  confidential  friend,  do  you  like  to  have  anybody  else  talking  in  the  room 
at  the  same  time?  What  the  third  person  says  may  be  all  well  enough  and 
wise  enough,  or  important.  But  please  do  not  interrupt,  you  say ;  I  am  very 
much  engaged  for  this  hour.  Opportunities  of  heaven  make  appointments  as 
reserved  and  entertain  celestial  visitants  as  well.  There  are  rounded  Sabbaths, 
different  from  Sunday  fractions.  Many  count  the  day  at  large  as  somewhat  sacred, 
but  miss  the  mautling  of  the  hours,  the  swell  and  climax.  A  wholeness  is  e-sential 
to  the  pleasure.  You  will  not  get  a  schoolboy  or  schoolgirl  who  has  a  half-holi- 
day in  the  morning  to  go  back  to  tasks  and  training  in  the  after  hours  of  tbe  day. 
They  say,  Let  us  finish  this.  A  little  longer.  And  no  one  who  has  had  a  spiritual 
zest,  a  melody  and  beauty  of  celestial  vision  for  the  first  portion  of  the  day,  will 
care  to  spend  its  latter  half  in  listlessness  or  lower  use.  The  people  who  worship 
by  halves,  by  halves  will  serve  their  Maker  through  the  week.  If  you  can  introduce 
upon  this  land  the  Continental  Sabbath,  you  can  introduce  the  Continental  history 
upon  this  land.  But  the  day  is  complete  when  the  evening  and  the  morning  round 
it.  There  can  be  Sunday  struggles,  Sunday  tasks,  Sunday  burdens,  and  there  car* 
be  a  Sabbath  of  the  spirit.  That  is  of  God,  the  beauty  of  the  Lord  our  God 
upon  us.  {H.  S.  Carpenter.)  Advantage  of  Sabbath  keeping  : — Man!  man  !  this 
is  the  great  creator  of  wealth.      The  difference  between  the  soil  of   Campania 


CHAP.  XIX.]  LEVITICUS.  247 

and  Spitzbergen  is  insignificant  compared  with  the  difference  presented  by  two 
countries — the  one  inhabited  by  men  full  of  moral  and  physical  vigour,  the  other 
by  beings  plunged  in  an  intellectual  decrepitude.  Hence  it  is  that  we  are  not 
impoverished,  but  on  the  contrary  enriched  by  this  seventh  day,  which  we  have 
for  so  many  years  devoted  to  rest.  This  day  is  not  lost.  Wiiile  the  machinery  is 
stopped,  while  the  car  rests  on  the  road,  while  the  treasury  is  silent,  while  the 
smoke  ceases  to  rise  from  the  chimney  of  the  factory,  the  natiou  enriches  itselc 
none  the  less  than  during  the  working  days  of  the  week.  Man,  the  machine  of  all 
machines,  the  one  by  the  side  of  which  all  the  inventions  of  the  Watts  and  tlie  Ark- 
wrights  are  as  nothing,  is  recuperating  and  gaining  strength  so  well,  that  on 
Monday  he  returns  to  his  work  with  his  mind  clearer,  with  more  courage  for  his 
work,  and  with  renewed  vigour.  I  will  never  believe  that  that  which  renders  a 
people  stronger,  wiser,  and  better,  can  ever  turn  to  its  impoverishment.  Neglecting 
the  Sabbath  .-—Sir  Francis  Drake,  though  a  curious  searcher  after  the  revolution  of 
time,  in  three  years  sailing  about  the  world,  through  the  variations  of  several 
climates,  lost  one  whole  day,  which  was  scarce  considerable  in  so  long  a  time.  It 
is  to  be  feared  that  there  are  many  amongst  us  that  lose  a  day  in  every  week,  one 
in  seven,  neglecting  the  Sabbath,  nay  every  day  in  the  week,  not  once  thinking  of 
God,  or  any  goodness  at  all.     {J.  Spencer.) 

Ver.  30.  Reverence  My  sanctuary. — Self-reverence  : — If  you  consider,  you  will 
find  that  there  is  scarcely  a  sin  which  does  not  concentrate  into  itself  the  venom  of 
many  sins.  It  is  sinfulness  against  God,  whose  law  it  violates  ;  against  our  neigh- 
bour, whom,  directly  or  indirectly,  it  inevitably  injures  ;  against  ourselves,  whom 
it  tends  to  destroy.  But  the  reason  why  every  sin  has  this  threefold  cord  of  iniquity 
is  because  the  tabernacle  of  God  is  with  men,  so  that  in  every  act  of  sin  we  cannot 
but  sin  against  Him  by  defiling  His  temple,  against  ourselves  by  desecrating  the 
inner  sanctuary  of  our  own  being,  against  others  because  they,  too,  are  His  living 
sanctuaries.  When  the  great  American  orator,  Daniel  Webster,  was  asked  what 
thought  impressed  him  most  by  its  awful  solemnity,  he  answered  at  once,  "  The 
thought  of  my  immediate  accountability  to  God."  There  is  a  form  of  this  thought 
yet  more  impressive — to  feel  that  God  is  with  us  and  in  us ;  that  every  sin  against 
ourselves  or  our  brother-man  is  also  a  sin  committed  in  His  very  presence-chamber, 
and  therefore  also  a  sin  committed  directly  against  Him.  In  sinning  against  my- 
self, I  sin  not  against  a  mere  handful  of  dust,  a  mere  piece  of  clay,  but  against  that 
which  is  majestic,  eternal,  and  Divine,  against  the  Holy  Spirit,  against  the  Lord 
Jesus  my  Saviour,  against  the  eternal  Lord  of  all  my  life.  A  living  poet  has  said, 
"  Self-reverence,  self-knowledge,  self-control,  these  three  alone  lead  life  to  sovereign 
power."  It  is  most  true.  Self-reverence  depends  upon  self-knowledge,  and  it  leads 
to  self-control ;  and  these  are  the  elements  of  the  only  true  greatness  of  mankind. 
Now  I  wish  to  show  how  this  high  reverence  for  our  being  lifts  men  above  tempta- 
tion, and  how  the  absence  of  it  or  unfaithfulness  to  it  plunges  them  in  vice  and 
shame.  For  instance,  self-reverence  results  in  the  preservation  of  innocence,  of 
perfect  childlike  innocence  in  some  men,  the  heart  of  childhood  takeu  up  and  glori- 
fied in  the  powers  of  manhood,  the  young  lamb's  heart  amid  the  full-grown  flocks. 
This  is  one  of  the  loveliest,  certainly  one  of  the  rarest,  if  not  always  the  most 
instructive,  forms  of  human  character.  Again,  this  self-reverence,  even  if  it  has 
failed  to  produce  this  absolute  innocence  which  is  the  rarest  thing  in  all  the  world, 
may  yet  lead  to  the  repentance  of  an  intense  conviction.  If  it  has  not  kept  a  soul 
from  lying,  for  a  moment  at  least,  among  the  dust  and  potsherds  of  a  sensuous  life, 
it  can  yet  uplift  it  from  them  and  give  it  the  wings  of  a  dove.  {Archdeacon  Farrar.) 
On  reverencing  the  sanctuary  : — I.  How  the  sanctuary  is  to  be  eevekenced.  1. 
The  sanctuary  is  reverenced  when  proper  ideas  are  entertained  of  its  nature  and 
holiness.  This  appropriate  and  sacred  respect  will  be  shown  by  not  permitting  the 
sanctuary  to  be  dishonoured  by  any  profane  use  of  it,  by  keeping  it'  in  decent  repair 
and  cleanliness,  and,  as  far  as  in  us  lies,  in  a  state  of  magnificence  worthy  of  the 
Great  Being  to  whom  it  is  dedicated ;  and  by  those  outward  tokens  of  reverence,  by 
which  we  can  express,  without  an  idle  superstition,  our  respect  for  the  Being,  the 
dwelling-places  of  whose  honour  are  the  temples  devoted  to  His  service.  2.  After 
having  proper  ideas  of  the  nature  and  holiness  of  the  sanctuary,  the  next  stej) 
towards  reverencing  it  is  to  love  to  be  in  it,  and  to  join  in  its  services.  When  a 
place  is  consecrated  to  the  worship  of  God ;  when  He  has  promised  to  be  there  with 
a  blessing  ;  when  He  has  proffered  His  word  to  be  there  as  a  fountain,  set  open  for 
sin  and  uncleanness  ;  and  has  appointed  a  priesthood  to  minister  between  Him  and 


9AB  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xix. 

His  people  ;  when  the  priesthood  of  Christ  is  there  enjoyed  after  His  ordinance ;  to 
be  wholly  absent,  or  but  jiarlially  present,  comports  little  with  a  reverence  for  the 
sanctuary.  3.  It  is  essential  to  a  reverence  for  the  sanctuary  that  we  strive  not  to 
bring  thither  our  worldly  thoughts  aud  improper  affections.  4.  In  oider  to  dis- 
charge the  duty  enforced  in  the  text,  we  must  be  attentive  to  decorum,  when  enter- 
ing the  sanctuary,  while  continuing  in  it,  and  when  returning  from  it.  II.  The 
FOUNDATION  AND  IMPORTANCE  OF  THE  DUTY  ENJOINED.  This  is  briefly  and  fully  as- 
signed in  the  words,  "  I  am  the  Lord."  1.  If  we  consider  the  nature  of  the  Being, 
to  whom  the  sanctuary  belongs,  and  whom  we  there  meet,  this  is  sulficieut  to  fill 
us  with  awe.  2.  The  authority  of  the  Lord,  as  our  Sovereign,  renders  an  obedience 
to  His  law  indispensable.  (Bj).  Dehon.)  Reverence  due  to  holy  j^laces  : — I.  What 
A  sanctuaby  of  God  is,  and  wherein  the  holiness  of  it  consists.  Places  are 
capable  of  a  relative  holiness  in  two  respeets.  1.  In  respect  of  a  peculiar  propriety 
God  has  in  them  by  their  dedication  to  His  immediate  worship  and  service.  2.  In 
respect  of  His  especial  presence  vouchsafed  in  them,  and  the  particular  communica- 
tions of  His  grace  in  the  holy  offices  there  performed.  II.  What  respect  or  reve- 
BENCE  IS  due  to  SUCH  HOLY  PLACES.  1.  The  building,  repairing,  adorning,  and 
furnishing  such  places  for  the  service  of  God.  2.  The  keeping  them  from  all 
profane  and  common  usage,  and  applying  them  wholly  to  the  worship  of  God,  and 
the  business  of  religion.  3.  The  duly  frequenting  the  worship  of  God  in  these  holy 
places  (Psa.  xliii.  3 ;  Ixxxiv.  2,  4.)  4.  Consider  what  reverence  becomes  us  when 
we  come  into  the  House  of  God.  Our  business  there  is  to  exercise  ourselves  in  holy 
and  heavenly  matters ;  and  our  demeanour  in  it  ought  to  be  such  as  may  testify 
what  awful  thoughts  we  have  of  that  glorious  Majesty,  before  whom,  in  a  particular 
manner,  we  present  ourselves.  {John  Leng,  U.D.)  The  reverence  due  to  God^s 
sanctuary  : — The  reverence  we  owe  to  public  places  of  worship  must  be  expressed — ■ 
I.  In  solemnly  separating  them  from  common  use.  Churches,  when  once  con- 
secrated, cannot  be  alienated  from  God's  service  without  sacrilege,  nor  applied  to 
any  other  use  without  profanation ;  for,  as  the  Divine  Majesty  is  holy,  so  it  is 
manifestly  a  part  of  that  honour  we  owe  to  God,  that  those  things  wherewith  and 
whereby  He  is  served  should  not  be  common  and  promiscuous,  but  reserved  solely 
for  sacred  purposes.  II.  In  the  beautifying  and  adorning  them.  Shall  the 
Almighty  vouchsafe,  in  a  peculiar  manner,  to  take  up  His  residence  among  us  here 
on  earth,  and  shall  not  we  endeavour  to  provide  the  most  honourable  reception  for 
Him?  The  bestowing  proper  ornaments  upon  God's  house  is  not  only  an  instance 
of  respect  due  from  us  to  Him,  but  is  also  a  useful  means  of  promoting  religion ; 
for  outward  objects  will  always  affect  the  mind  with  impressions,  according  to  the 
nature  of  them.  III.  By  a  comstant  attendance  upon  the  services  in  them.  God, 
no  doubt,  is  conscious  to  our  most  private  devotions  in  our  closets,  to  every  ejacula- 
tion, to  every  pious  thought  that  ever  rises  in  our  souls ;  He  requires  these,  and 
approves  of  them;  but  then  He  expects,  and  commands  also,  that  we  pay  Him  public 
homage  and  external  worship,  wherein  if  we  are  deficient,  we  dischai-ge  but  half  our 
duty.  IV.  By  a  decent  and  devout  behaviour  in  them.  As  earthly  potentates 
have  many  palaces  in  several  parts  of  their  dominions,  where  at  different  times 
they  keep  their  court,  one  whereof  is  generally  erected  in  their  principal  city, 
superior  in  magnificence  and  grandeur  to  the  rest :  so  the  Almighty,  the  King  of 
kings,  has  His  several  mansion-houses  throughout  the  world,  though  His  chief 
dwelling  be  in  heaven,  where  He  is  encircled  with  beams  of  light  and  glory,  too 
strong  for  mortals  to  approach.  These  mansion-houses  in  these  lower  realms  are 
those  places  that  are  dedicated  aud  consecrated  to  His  service,  in  which  He  is  ever 
present,  ready  to  dispense  liberally  His  favours  to  all  that  duly  ask,  surrounded 
with  a  guard  of  angels  and  archangels,  who  to  us  indeed  are  invisible,  but  we  are 
not  so  to  them.  With  what  humility,  with  what  reverence  and  devotion,  then,  ought 
we  to  carry  ourselves,  in  a  place  so  dreadful  as  is  the  house  of  God,  and  in  the 
presence  of  such  honourable,  such  awful  company  !  {S.  Griyman,  M.A.)  Rever- 
ence at  ivomhij) : — There  are  some  who,  when  they  behave  irieverently  in  chuich, 
think  that,  after  all,  it  is  only  a  matter  that  concerns  themselves.  That  if  they  do 
not  behave  well,  "that's,"  as  they  term  it,  "their  own  look-out."  Of  all  the 
mistakes  of  which  a  man  could  be  guilty,  this  is,  I  think,  one  of  the  greatest.  Do 
you  think  that  when  you  behave  badly  in  church  you  will,  at  the  day  of  account, 
only  have  that  one  sin  of  your  own  to  answer  for?  Let  me  tell  you  this — that  every 
Bin  of  irreverence  adds  to  you  a  mountain  of  sins  for  which  you  will  have  to  give 
account  at  the  Day  of  Judgment.  Let  me  illustrate  my  meaning.  You  come  to  a 
service  and  behave  badly.   There  are  people,  good  people,  sitting  or  kneeling  around 


CHAP.  xix.J  LEVITICUS.  249 


you.  They  have  come  to  church  to  worship,  but  they  see  3"our  bad  behaviour  and 
are  upset  by  it.  They  try  to  pray,  but  through  your  bad  behaviour  they  cannot  do 
so.  They  try  to  join  in  the  service  but  find  it  ahnost  impossible.  It  is  a  v/asted 
service  to  tliem.  They  feel  angry  :  it  is  a  Sunday  service  gone  for  ever,  never  to 
be  re-lived  so  far  as  that  Sunday  service  is  concerned,  spoiled  for  them  by  you. 
Who  will  have  to  answer  for  that  at  the  Day  of  Judgment?  Not  they,  but  you  I 
(/:.'.  Husband.)  Man  himself  a  sanctuary  : — St.  Augustuie  gives  the  inmost  meaning 
ox  this  exhortation  when  he  says,  "Dost  thou  worship  in  a  temple?  Worsliip  in 
thyself ;  be  thou  first  a  temple  of  the  Lord."  Our  visits  to  the  sanctuary  should 
be  frequent  .■—'We  shall  never  see  the  glory  of  that  light  which  dwells  between  the 
cherubim  if  our  visits  to  the  shrine  are  brief  and  interrupted,  and  the  bulk  of  our 
time  is  spent  outside  the  tabernacle  amidst  the  glaring  sand  and  the  blazing  sun- 
shine. No  short  swallow- flights  of  soul  will  ever  carry  us  to  the  serene  height 
where  God  dwells.  It  is  the  eagle,  with  steady,  unflagging  flaps  of  his  broad  pinion, 
and  open-eyed  gaze  upwards,  that  rises  "  close  to  the  sun  in  lonely  lands,"  and 
leaves  all  the  race  of  short  winged  and  weak-sighted  twitterers  far  below.  (A.  Mac- 
laren.)  Worshipping  together  : — Worshipping  alone  is  like  a  solo  in  music,  very 
beautiful  and  entrancing,  with  charms  that  no  chorus  can  give.  Worshipping 
together  is  like  an  anthem  with  its  harmonies  sung  by  a  large  chorus.  There  are 
powers  in  it  and  emotions  awakened,  which  no  solo,  however  beautifully  sung,  can 
produce.  Christians  who  worship  in  the  house  of  God  in  company  with  other 
Christians  will  receive  blessings  that  they  would  not  receive  worshipping  by  them- 
selves. The  sanctuary  : — The  sanctuary  should  always  be  considered  as  the  home 
of  the  people.  It  is  in  the  sanctuary  that  human  life  should  be  interpreted  in  all 
the  meaning  of  its  pain  and  tragedy.  Men  should  be  able  to  say,  "Now  that  we 
are  baffled  and  perplexed  by  the  things  which  are  round  about  us  in  this  world,  and 
now  that  we  find  oureselves  utterly  unable  to  solve  the  problems  which  crowd  upon 
our  distracted  minds,  let  us  go  unto  the  house  of  the  Lord,  for  there  we  shall  feel 
upon  our  souls  the  breath  of  eternity,  and  there  we  shall  hear  music  which  will 
quiet  the  tumult  which  carnal  reason  can  neither  explain  nor  control."  Dark  will 
be  the  day  when  men  can  hear  nothing  in  the  sanctuary  but  words  which  they 
cannot  understand,  references  which  have  no  bearing  upon  immediate  agony,  and 
discussions  which  simply  tittilate  the  intellect  and  the  fancy,  but  never  reach  the 
dark  and  mortal  sorrows  of  the  heart.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  31.  Them  that  have  familiar  spirits. — Prohibition  of  traffic  with  familiar 
spirits: — This  verse  prohibits  all  inquiring  of  them  that  "have  familiar  spirits," 
and  of  "  wizards,"  who  pretend  to  make  relevations  through  the  help  of  super- 
natural powers.  According  to  1  Sam.  xxviii.  7-11,  and  Isa.  viii.  19,  the  "familiar 
spirit "  is  a  supposed  spirit  of  a  dead  man,  from  whom  one  professes  to  be  able  to 
give  communications  to  the  living.  This  pretended  commerce  with  the  spirits  of 
the  dead  has  been  common  enough  in  heathenism  always,  and  it  is  not  strange  to 
find  it  mentioned  here,  when  Israel  was  to  be  in  so  intimate  relations  with  heathen 
peoples.  But  it  is  truly  most  extraordinary  that  in  Christian  lands,  as  especially  in 
the  United  States  of  America,  and  that  in  the  full  light,  religious  and  intellectual, 
of  the  last  half  of  the  nineteenth  century,  such  a  prohibition  should  be  fully  as 
pertinent  as  in  Israel !  For  no  words  could  more  precisely  describe  the  pretensions 
of  the  so-called  modern  spiritualism,  which  within  the  last  half  century  has  led 
away  hun^lreds  of  thousands  of  deluded  souls,  and  those,  in  many  cases,  not  from 
the  ignorant  and  degraded,  but  from  circles  which  boast  of  more  than  average 
culture  aud  intellectual  enlightenment.  And  inasmuch  as  experience  sadly  shows 
that  even  those  who  profess  to  be  disciples  of  Christ  are  in  danger  of  being  led 
away  by  our  modern  wizards  and  traffickers  with  famiUar  spirits,  it  is  by  no  means 
unnecessary  to  observe  that  there  is  not  the  slightest  reason  to  believe  that  this 
which  was  rigidly  forbidden  by  God  in  the  fifteenth  century  B.C.,  can  now  be  well- 
pleasing  to  Him  in  the  nineteenth  century  a.d.  And  those  who  have  most  care- 
fully watched  the  moral  developments  of  this  latter-day  delusion  will  most 
appreciate  the  added  phrase  which  speaks  of  this  as  "  defiling  "  a  man.  (S.  H. 
Kellogg,  D.D.) 

Ver.  32.  Rise  up  before  the  hoary  hesid.— Homage  for  age : — 1.  Because  the  aged 
represent  mature  wisdom.  2.  Because  the  aged  record  long  years  spent  in  our 
service.  3.  Because  the  aged  demonstrate  God's  providential  care.  4.  Because  the 
aged  are  solemn  admonitions  of  life's  decay.     5.  Because  the  aged  suggest  nearness 


250  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xix. 

to  eternity.  6.  Because  the  aged  exhibit  the  richest  fruits  of  grace.  7.  Because 
the  aged  mark  the  line  of  God's  covenant  blessings  for  descendants.  8.  Bpcause 
the  aged  represent  on  earth  Him  who  is  the  "  Ancient  of  Days."  (1)  Youth  should 
venerate  the  aged  (Job  xxx.  i.  12 ;  Isa.  iii.  4,  5).  (2)  Age  should  influence  and 
hallow  the  young  (2  Tim.  i.  5).  (IF.  H.  Jellie.)  Reverence  the  aged  .- — When  you 
meet  them  in  public  places,  or  they  come  to  where  you  are,  show  them  revei-ence. 
Infirmity,  wisdom,  nay,  ag^  in  itself,  have  each  a  claim  on  us.  Age,  apart  from  its 
qualities,  has  in  it  solemnity.  The  Lord  would  thus  solemnise  us  in  the  midst  of 
our  pursuits.  "Lo!  the  shadow  of  eternity!  for  one  cometh  who  is  almost  in 
eternity  already.  His  head  and  beard  white  as  snow,  indicate  his  speedy  appear- 
ance before  the  Ancient  of  Days,  the  hair  of  whose  head  is  as  pure  wool."  Every 
object,  too,  that  is  feeble  seems  to  be  recommended  to  our  care  by  God  ;  for  these 
are  types  of  the  condition  wherein  He  finds  us  when  His  gmce  comes  to  save.  It 
is,  therefore,  exhibiting  His  grace  in  a  shadow,  when  the  helpless  are  relieved,  "  the 
fatherless  find  mercy"  (Hos.  xiv.  3),  "the  orphans  relieved,  and  the  widow" 
(Psa.    cxlvi.   9),   and  the    "  stranger  preserved."      {A.  A.    Bonar.)  Reverence 

for  superiors  : — The  institutions  of  Sparta  have  everywhere  been  praised  for  the 
encouragement  which  they  gave  to  the  duty  of  showing  respect  for  the  aged,  but 
the  language  of  the  Jewish  lawgiver  is  much  more  emphatic  :  "  Thou  shalt  rise  up 
before  the  hoary  head,  and  honour  the  face  of  the  old  man."  Beautiful  examples 
are  recorded  in  the  Bible,  as  patterns  for  our  imitation,  in  this  important  particular 
of  filial  reverence  and  obedience.  The  behaviour  of  Isaac  towards  Abraham,  and 
that  of  Jacob  to  both  father  and  mother ;  Joseph's  deference  to  his  aged  father, 
even  when  he  himself  was  surrounded  by  the  splendours  of  the  Egyptian  Court ; 
Ruth  with  her  mother-in-law  ;  Solomon  in  the  grandeur  of  royalty,  paying  respect 
to  his  mother;  and,  more  than  all,  our  blessed  Saviour's  tender  care  for  His 
mother  in  the  hour  oi  His  dying  agonies — all  afford  suggestive  lessons  to  us.  It 
is,  however,  not  merely  concerning  reverence  to  parents  that  the  text  would  lead  us 
to  speak.  The  very  appearance  of  age  is  calculated  to  soften  our  hearts  and  to  call 
forth  our  respect.  No  snow  falls  lighter  than  that  which  sprinkles  the  head  in 
advancing  years ;  and  yet  none  is  really  heavier,  because  it  never  melts.  Vale 
and  mountain-top  are  covered  alike  with  the  white  flakes  which  winter  scatters 
broadcast  and  with  unstinted  hand,  but  the  cheerful  sun  will  soon  cause  them  to 
disappear.  There  is  no  returning  spring  whose  genial  warmth  can  penetrate  the 
eternal  frost  of  age.  The  decrepitude  of  age  can  claim  neither  enterprise  nor 
courage,  "  He  is  afraid  of  that  which  is  high,  and  fears  are  in  the  way,"  and  with 
the  load  of  infirmities  which  press  him  down,  the  additional  weight  of  a  "  grass- 
hopper "  would  be  burdensome.  "  Desire  has  failed,"  and  ambition  can  no  longer 
ten)pt  him  to  put  forth  ventures  and  submit  to  toil.  Only  one  wish  remains  to  be 
fulfilled — to  depart  from  this  weary  life.  With  this  vivid  picture  before  him,  who 
can  help  feeling  a  sympathy  for  the  old  ?  It  must  be  confessed  that  the  present 
generation  are  sadly  unmindful  of  the  lesson  taught  us  in  the  Catechism,  "To 
submit  myself  to  all  my  governors,  teachers,  spiritual  pastors,  and  masters ;  to 
order  myself  lowly  and  reverently  to  all  my  betters."  "  Betters,"  indeed  !  Verily, 
the  young  people  of  this  age  have  no  "betters"!  Some  years  ago  Governor 
Everett,  of  Massachusetts,  was  riding  out  of  Boston  in  a  sleigh,  with  another 
gentleman  of  high  social  position,  when  they  approached  a  school-house,  from 
which  a  score  of  noisy  boys  rushed  forth  to  enjoy  their  afternoon's  recess.  The 
governor  said  to  his  friend,  "  Let  us  observe  whether  these  lads  show  the  marks  of 
politeness  to  us  which  we  were  taught  to  practise  fifty  years  ago."  At  the  same 
time  he  expressed  his  fears  that  the  habits  of  civility  were  not  much  thought  of  in 
later  times.  As  the  sleigh  passed  the  school-house  all  doubt  on  the  subject  was 
instantly  dispelled,  for  the  rude  lads  did  their  best  at  pelting  the  dignitaries  with 
snowballs  as  they  drove  rapidly  along  the  way.  Every  right-minded  person  must 
acknowledge  that  such  conduct  was  outrageous  and  inexcusable.  We  ought,  how- 
ever, to  go  behind  this  astonishing  act  of  boorish  rudeness,  and  remember  what 
long-continued  neglect  of  proper  instruction  and  training,  on  the  part  of  parents 
and  teachers,  had  suffered  such  a  shocking  state  of  manners  to  grow  up  in  a 
civilised  land.  There  never  was  anything  quite  equal  to  the  presumption  of  the 
young  or  the  meekness  and  acquiescence  of  the  old  in  this  matter.  A  shrewd 
observer  remai-ked,  not  long  ago,  to  a  friend,  "  If,  as  you  are  going  down  town,  you 
should  approach  a  dozen  boys  playing  on  the  sidewalk,  so  that  no  room  was  left  for 
you  to  pass,  which  would  you  do  ?  would  you  say,  '  Boys,  you  must  not  block  up 
the  walk  in  this  way  I '  or  would  you  get  down  into  the  muddy  street  and  go  round?  " 


CHAP.  XIX.]  LEVITICUS.  251 

The  prompt  answer  was,  "  Go  round,  of  course  !  "  This  reply  shows  the  shameful 
pass  to  which  things  have  come.  Men  of  mature  years  must  abdicate  all  rights, 
and  truckle  under  with  cowardly  submission,  lest  they  ^Drovoke  the  ill-will  of  boys  ! 
Parents  and  teachers !  it  is  your  bounden  duty  to  correct  this  evil,  cost  what  it  may. 
The  "Church  Catechism"  must  again  be  made  what  it  was  in  past  generations, 
when  the  young  showed  respect  to  their  "  betters,"  a  text-book  in  our  families  and 
schools.  I  trust  thst  the  young  persons  who  hear  me  will  not  only  be  convinced  by 
what  has  just  beei)  said  of  the  imperative  duty  of  honouring  their  parents,  but 
that  the  kindred  obligation  of  showing  respect  to  old  age  will  be  much  more  thought 
of  and  observed.  If  your  lives  are  spared,  it  will  not  be  many  years  before  you 
will  be  old  yourselves,  and  you  will  need  the  sympathy  and  consideration  which 
I  am  now  recommending  you  to  practise.  The  rules  of  ordinary  politeness 
would  require  you  to  attend  to  this  matter,  but  the  duty  rests  on  mvich  higher 
ground.  It  is  God  Himself  who  gives  the  command,  "  Thou  shalt  rise  up 
before  the  hoary  head,  and  honour  the  face  of  the  old  man."  (J.  N.  Norton,  D.D.) 
Reverence  due  to  age  : — This  is  one  of  those  duties  which  are  derived  from  the 
instinctive  feelings  of  the  heart.  The  old  man  was  honoured  before  the  reasonable- 
ness of  the  obligation  was  considered  or  the  benefit  of  it  understood.  From  that 
sensibility  with  which  the  Almighty  Father  has  impressed  the  human  soul,  men 
often  feel  before  they  think,  and  act  before  they  have  considered  their  motives  of 
action.  From  the  same  source  many  of  the  most  refined  pleasures  of  life  originate. 
Ask  the  contemplative  man  why  he  delights  to  view  the  fragments  of  antiquity — 
the  hanging  arch,  the  mutilated  column,  the  moss-grown  tower  !  Ask  him  why  he 
sometimes  watches  the  closing  twilight,  wanders  through  the  gloomy  valley,  or 
listens  with  peculiar  pleasure  to  the  distant  murmur  of  the  sea !  He  will  find  it 
difficult,  perhaps,  to  account  for  his  sensations,  to  analyse  his  satisfactions,  or  to 
trace  them  to  their  cause ;  but  he  will  tell  you  that  he  felt  and  enjoyed  them  before 
he  knew  why  or  considered  wherefore.  In  the  same  manner  those  who  can  con- 
template the  hoary  head  without  some  prepossession  of  respect  and  tenderness 
want  ihe  essential  requisite  of  nature  for  performing  their  duty  to  the  aged  as  they 
ought.  But  if  they  wish  to  discover  other  motives,  such  may  be  found  in  abun- 
dance. It  is  to  the  pious  aged  that  the  young  are  to  look  f(U-  superior  knowledge 
and  conspicuous  virtue.  They  have  enjoyed  the  benefits  of  experience,  and  are 
therefore  qualified  to  act  as  monitors  and  guides.  They  may  be  considered,  too,  as 
oracles,  who  speak  to  the  serious  and  well-disposed  with  overwhelming  authority. 
They  have  encountered  the  temptations  and  difficulties  which  yet  await  th<-ii* 
younger  brethren,  and  can  point  out  to  others  the  way  by  which  they  escaped. 
They,  probably,  have  been  exposed  to  trials  from  which  our  fortitude  would  shrink 
in  terror,  and  have  mortified  those  evil  dispositions  of  nature  which  might  be  pre- 
paring for  us  disappointments,  misery,  and  guilt.  To  render  our  veneration  more 
personal  and  endearing  we  should  consider  them,  also,  as  dead  to  those  pleasures 
and  enjoyments  which  we  regard  as  our  chief  felicity,  ami  labouring  with  those 
infirmities  under  which  we  must  one  day  sink.  Besides,  therefore,  the  precepts  of 
religion  and  the  arguments  of  reason,  there  are  other  motives  arising  from  sensi- 
bility and  the  humane  affections  of  the  heart,  which  render  it  an  indispensable  duty 
in  the  young  to  reverence  the  old.  On  the  relative  duties  of  the  young  to  the  aged : — 
Let  us  consider  the  motives  for  honouring  "the  hoary  head,"  as  they  are  deprived 
from  the  principles  and  connected  with  the  duties  of  Christianity.  But  we  must 
remember  it  is  not  merely  to  age  that  this  reverence  is  due,  but  to  the  hoary  head  only 
"  when  it  is  found  in  the  way  of  righteousness."  From  its  very  nature  this  must  be 
one  of  the  relative  duties  of  the  young,  and  its  obligations  are  founded  on  the  genuine 
sentiments  of  the  heart,  on  the  deductions  of  reason,  as  well  as  the  precepts  of 
religion,  and  on  the  peculiar  advantages  resulting  from  it.  The  gospel  of  Christ 
strongly  inculcates  the  principles  of  general  deference  and  humility.  "  In  lowliness 
of  mind,"  says  the  apostle,  "  let  each  esteem  other  better  than  himself,"  and  to  the 
exhortation  of  being  "  kindly  affectioned  towards  our  fellow-cieatures,"  is  added 
the  precept  of  "preferring  one  another  in  honour."  The  young,  considered  in 
their  relation  to  the  aged,  have  many  additional  reasons  for  showing  this  deference 
and  honour  ;  and  farther,  the  sentiments  of  reverence  should  be  accompanied  with 
tenderness  and  affection.  It  is  to  them  that  the  young  are  to  look  for  superior 
knowledge,  and,  in  general,  superior  virtue.  They  have  enjoyed  the  benefits  of 
experience,  as  well  as  reflection,  and  are  therefore  qualified  to  be  our  monitors  and 
guides.  The  claims  to  deference  arising  from  the  distinctions  of  birth  and  fortune, 
when  compared  to  these,  are  trifiiug  and  inconsiderable.     If  reverence  be  due  from 


252  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  six. 

one  human  beinu;  to  another  it  can  never  be  offered  with  more  propriety  than  as  the 
price  of  knowledge  from  the  ignorant  to  the  wise.  The  aged  may  be  considered, 
in  this  resj)ect,  as  oracles  that  speak  to  the  serious  and  the  well-disposed  with  such 
conviction  as  they  can  nowhere  find  but  in  their  own  exp  rience.  They  are  a  sort 
of  living  chronicles,  that  impress  the  memory  and  imagination  with  all  the  energy 
of  truth.  Let  us  consider  them  as  having  husbanded  and  improved  the  talent  well, 
which  we  perhaps  shall  squander  away,  and  as  preparing,  with  humble  confidence, 
to  "enter  into  the  joy  of  their  Lord."  But  let  me  observe  that  these  observations 
relate  only  to  "the  hoary  head,"  when  crowned  with  wisdom,  virtue,  and  piety. 
Viewed  in  this  light,  the  aged  cannot  but  impress  us  with  the  deepest  sense  of 
reverence  and  honour.  They  have  encountered  difficulties  and  temptations,  in 
which  we  perhaps  shall  be  enthralled,  and  can  point  out  to  us  the  means  by  which 
they  escaped.  They  have  been  exposed  to  trials  from  which  our  fortitude  would 
shrink  with  terror,  and  have  mortified  those  evil  dispositions  of  nature  which 
might  be  preparing  for  us  disappointment,  misery,  and  guilt.  To  the  hero  who  has 
retired  from  the  field,  crowned  with  the  wreath  of  fame,  men  look  up  with  admira- 
tion and  applause ;  and  shall  we  withhold  our  reverence  from  Him  who  has  fought 
the  good  fight  of  "  Christian  faith,"  and  obtained  a  victory  over  the  temptations 
of  the  world  ?  But  as  every  human  being  is  subject  to  sin,  we  should  be  careful, 
in  all  the  examples  that  are  set  before  us,  to  avoid  the  evil  and  to  imitate  the  good. 
In  short,  let  us  joyfully  embrace  every  means  in  our  power  of  improving  that 
inestimable  talent  which  is  entrusted  to  our  care,  and  by  which  alone  we  can  "  grow 
wise  unto  salvation."  (J.  llciulett,  B.D.)  Old  aije  : — The  eye  of  age  looks  meek 
into  my  heart ;  the  voice  of  age  echoes  mournfully  through  it ;  the  hoary  head  and 
palsied  hand  of  age  plead  irresistibly  for  its  sympathies.  I  venerate  old  age ;  and 
I  love  not  the  man  who  can  look  without  emotion  upon  the  sunset  of  life,  when  the 
dusk  of  evening  begins  to  gather  over  the  watery  eye,  and  the  shadows  of  twilight 
grow  broader  and  deeper  upon  the  understanding.  {Longfellow.)  Respect  for  the 
itfjed : — One  day  (Cicero  tells  the  story  in  his  treatise  on  "  Old  Age,")  an  aged 
Athenian  came  into  the  theatre,  but  not  one  of  his  fellow-citizens  in  that  immense 
crowd  would  incommode  himself  to  make  room  for  him.  As,  however,  he  approached 
the  ambassadors  from  Lacedaemon,  who  had  their  own  special  seat,  they  all  rose  to 
receive  him  into  their  midst.  The  whole  as-sembly  burst  into  applause,  whereupon 
somebody  said,  "  The  Athenians  know  what  is  good,  but  they  will  not  practise  it." 
Many  people  know  what  is  right  but  turn  a  deaf  ear  to  conscience,  and  neglect 
their  duty,  although  it  has  been  made  clear  to  them  what  that  duty  is.  {8.  S. 
Chronicle.)  Reverence  of  old  age  : — God  hath  put  a  signal  honour  upon  it  by 
styling  Himself  the  "  Ancient  of  Days,"  and  He  threatens  it  as  a  great  judgment 
upon  a  people  (Isa.  iii.  5),  that  the  children  shall  behave  themselves  proudly  against 
the  ancients.  A  reverent  awe  before  them  is  not  only  a  point  of  manners,  but  a 
part  of  a  moral  and  express  duty;  and  therefore  it  is  said  of  Elihu  (Job  xxxii.  4), 
that  he  waited  till  Job  had  spoken  because  be  was  elder  than  he,  and  in  ver.  6  he 
saith,  "  I  am  young  and  ye  are  very  old  :  wherefore  I  was  afraid  and  durst  not  show 
you  mine  opinion."     (Bp.  E.  Hopkins.) 

Vers.  33,  34.    The  stranger  .  .  .  shall  be  ...  as  one  born  among  you.— 

Strangers  befrimded  : — I.  The  danger  apprehended.  The  fear  was  lest  they  should 
grow  too  inclusive  and  haughty,  and  begin  to  despise  and  oppress  the  individual 
foreigners  that  should  remain  in  the  land  or  might  enter  it  for  a  settlement.  The 
invitation  to  the  stranger  might  be  like  that  of  the  spider  to  the  fly — a  siren's  voice 
luring  to  destruction.  This  is  the  very  fate  that  has  befallen  the  Jews  in  mediffival 
and  modern  Europe.  To  prevent  such  usage  the  command  of  the  text  was  issued. 
There  arises  a  clashing  of  commercial  interests ;  to  see  foreigners  flourishing  in  the 
midst  whilst  home  interests  suffer,  has  often  led  to  riot  and  persecution.  H.  The 
PRiNciPLKS  ON  WHICH  THE  COMMAND  OF  THE  TEXT  IS  BASED.  1.  There  is  arecoguitiou  of 
the  brotherhood  of  man.  "He  shall  be  unto  you  as  one  born  among  you."  This 
doctrine  of  the  unity  of  the  race  was  brought  eminently  to  light  by  Jesus  Christ.  2. 
There  is  a  recognition  of  the  royal  law  of  love,  both  as  to  its  extent  and  as  an  instru- 
ment of  obedience.  For  (1)  love  is  not  to  be  centred  in  self,  nor  (2)  is  the  class  of 
neighbours  to  be  restricted,  and  (3)  to  love  the  stranger  is  seen  to  be  the  only  security 
against  inequitable  dealing — three  important  truths.  Without  affection,  the  strictest 
rules  are  in  vain.  To  guide  the  ship  by  its  helm  is  easier  than  by  any  external 
attachment  of  ropes.  Better  is  it  for  aman  to  be  impelled  towards  the  goal  by  inward 
desire  than  to  be  pushed  and  dragged  by  the  hands  of  others,  tugging  him  now  on 


CHAP.  XIX.]  LEVITICUS.  253 

this  side,  now  on  that.  3.  It  is  instructive  to  dis^cern  in  the  law  predictions  of 
the  gospel.  Here  are  the  germs  that  developed  into  trees  laden  with  richest  fruit. 
III.  The  memories  by  which  observance  of  the  command  is  enforced.  1.  By  a 
remembrance  of  their  own  condition  in  former  days.  Christians  !  your  time  of 
bondage  should  make  you  compassionate  to  those  still  in  darkness.  Will  you  shun 
them  as  evil,  or  let  praying  and  working  on  their  behalf  go  hand  in  hand  ?  2.  By 
a  remembrance  of  their  relationship  to  God.  After  nearly  every  precept  comes  this 
solemn  reminder,  "  I  am  the  Lord  thy  God."  He  was  the  covenant  God  to  whom 
the  Israelites  had  dedicated  themselves,  being  sprinkled  with  sacrificial  blood.  If 
they  entertained  a  proper  sense  of  the  authority  of  God,  they  would  attend  to  this 
particular  statute.  Stand  on  the  monument,  and  it  is  difficult  to  tell  which  is  the 
giant  and  which  the  dwarf  below  in  the  streets.  So  before  the  majesty  of  God  all 
earthly  distinctions  of  race  disappear.  Love  the  stranger !  God  hath  made  all  of 
one  blood.  (S.  R.  Aldridge,  B.A.)  Courtesy  to  strangers  : — I.  We  ourselves  are 
STRANGERS  ON  THE  EARTH.  "  FoT  ye  Were  strangers  in  the  land  "  (ver.  34).  1. 
Dependent  on  other  care  than  our  own  ;  human  and  Divine.  2.  Transient,  soon  to 
leave,  resting  but  a  little  while  on  earth.  Observe  :  it  is  good  to  see  in  the  ease  of 
others  an  analogy  with  our  own ;  it  will  foster  sympathy  and  helpfulness.  11. 
Courtesy  should  root  itself  in  generous  love.  "  Thou  shalt  love  him  as  thyself." 
1.  Acting  to  the  stranger  as  if  the  service  were  being  rendered  to  us.  This  will 
teach  us  what  to  do,  and  how  to  show  kindness.  2.  Eecognising  that  we  may  per- 
chance be  in  the  stranger's  position.  As  thus  needing  kindness,  let  us  now  exhibit 
it.  3.  Opening  our  hearts  in  ungrudging  benevolence.  "Love"  gives  lavishly. 
Courtesy  should  not  be  meagre  and  superficial.  III.  Gratitude  to  Heaven  prompts 
us  TO  generous  kindness.  "Ye  were  strangers  in  the  land  of  Egypt  ;  I  am  the  Lord 
your  God."  1.  Memory  of  God's  rescue  should  constrain  us  to  care  for  others.  2. 
God's  relationship  to  us  requires  that  we  illustrate  His  lovingkindness.  3.  His 
commands  to  courtesy  cannot  be  evaded  with  impunity.  (JT^.  H.  JeUie.)  Un- 
kindness  to  a  stranger : — Philip  of  Macedon,  hearing  of  one  in  his  kingdom  that 
refused  most  unthankfuUy  to  receive  a  stranger,  of  whom  he  had  been  formerly 
succoured  in  a  time  of  extreme  need,  as  having  lost  all  he  had  by  a  wreck  at  sea, 
caused  him  to  be  worthily  punished,  by  braiidiug  in  his  forehead  these  two  letters 
I.  H.,  i.e.,  Ingratus  Hospes,  The  Unthankful  Guest.  Now,  if  every  unthankful  man 
were  thus  used,  there  would  be  many  a  blistered  forehead  amongst  us.  Oh  the 
unthankfulness  that  we  show  unto  God,  who,  when  we  were  strangers  to  Him, 
shipwrecked  even  in  an  ocean  of  sin,  sent  His  Son  Christ  Jesus  to  deliver  us,  yet 
we  refuse  to  receive  Him,  to  relieve  Him  in  His  distressed  members,  and  to  be 
obedient  to  His  blessed  commands !  And  then  our  ingratitude  to  one  another  is 
such  that  though  we  come  off  with  smooth  fronts  here  in  this  world,  yet  such 
characters  of  shame  and  confusion  are  engraven  on  our  souls  that  men  and  angels 
shall  read  them  with  amazement  when  the  books  shall  be  laid  open  (Dan.  vii.  10). 
(J.  Spencer.) 

Vers.  35,  36.  Just  balances,  just  weights, .  .  .  shall  ye  have. — Bttsiness  honesty  : — 
I.  Social  life  is  based  upon  commercial  contracts.  Each  bringing  to  the  other 
some  product  of  skill  or  toil.  We  cannot  supply  a  fraction  of  our  own  wants,  we 
must  buy  ;  and  we  have  also  in  turn  something  to  sell.  Business  is  the  outcome 
of  this  reciprocal  deijendence.  Each  can,  each  must  help  the  other,  or  social  and 
civic  life  would  be  impossible.  II.  Dishonesty  is  subversive  of  the  very  basis  of 
social  life.  It  breaks  confidence,  alienates  intercourse  ;  closes  friendly  relation- 
ships, substitutes  roguery  for  righteousness,  and  wrecks  all  goodwill.  Pleasant  to 
reflect — 1.  How  much  ti-ade  honour  there  is  among  men.  2.  How  surely  trickery 
brings  discovery,  and  therefore  penalty,  on  rogues.  3.  How  honesty  is  ever  winning 
respect  and  reward.  III.  Justice  sits  observant  of  all  deceitful  deeds.  "  I  am 
the  Lord."  He  sees  all  secrecies  ;  weighs  all  balances  ;  hates  all  dishonesties ;  will 
requite  all  deceits.  [W.  H.  Jellie.)  Honesty  in  small  things: — A  young  American 
aspirant  for  office  in  the  State  of  Iowa  drove  up  to  an  hotel,  alighted,  and  engaj:;ed 
a  room.  He  desired  his  trunk  to  be  taken  to  his  room,  and,  seeing  a  man  passing 
whom  he  supposed  to  be  the  porter,  he  imperiously  ordered  him  to  take  it  up.  The 
porter  charged  him  twenty-five  cents,  which  he  paid  with  a  marked  quarter  worth 
only  twenty  cents.  He  then  said,  "  You  know  Governor  Grimes  ?  "  "  Oh,  yes,  sir. " 
"  Well,  take  my  card  to  him,  and  tell  him  I  wish  an  interview  at  his  earliest  con- 
venience." "  I  am  Governor  Grimes,  at  your  service,  sir."  "  You— I — that  is,  my 
dear  sir,  I  beg — a — a  thousand  pardons  1  "     "  None  needed  at  all,  sir,"  replied 


254  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xix. 

Governor  Grimes.  "  I  was  rather  favourably  impressed  with  your  letter,  and  had 
thought  you  well  suited  for  the  office  specified ;  but,  sir,  any  man  who  would 
swindle  a  working  man  out  of  a  paltry  five  cents  would  defraud  the  public  treasury 
had  he  an  opportunity.  Good  evening,  sir."  An  unfair  judgment : — A  judge  in 
New  Orleans  has  recently  set  aside  a  jury  verdict  on  somewhat  unusual  but  certainly 
good  grounds.  A  man  was  on  trial  for  murder.  After  the  case  had  been  given  to 
the  jury  they  retired  for  consultation  for  verdict,  and  spent  the  hours  in  drinking 
whiskey  and  playing  cards.  They  found  the  prisoner  guilty;  but  the  next  day,  in 
setting  aside  their  verdict,  Judge  Baker  said  :  "  Twelve  men,  supplied  with  a  quart 
bottle  of  whiskey  and  a  deck  of  cards,  who  played  poker  from  twelve  o'clock  at 
night  till  four  in  the  morning,  and  holding  a  man's  life  in  their  hands,  could  not 
possibly  give  the  prisoner  a  fair  trial.  As  long  as  I  preside  over  this  court  I  cannot 
sanction  such  a  thing,  and  therefore  I  grant  the  prisoner  a  new  trial."  (S.  S. 
Chronicle.)  Righteous  dealing : — Eev.  John  Miller,  writing  in  the  New  York  Inde- 
pendent  the  reminiscence  of  an  interview  with  the  late  A.  T.  Stewart,  the  millionaire 
storekeeper  of  New  York,  tells  us  that  on  one  occasion  in  reply  to  his  visitor's 
question,  "  What  is  the  secret  of  this  enormous  business  ?  "  Mr.  Stewart  replied  : 
"  The  only  secret  I  know  is  that  I  started  with  the  idea  of  becoming  professionally 
and  actually  a  merchant.  I  saw  lawyers  and  doctors  become  rich  by  making  them- 
selves precious  to  those  they  worked  for.  Hence  certain  rules.  I  had  only  '  one 
price.'  Ladies  who  come  in  their  cushioned  carriages  don't  want  to  be  fevered 
by  the  idea  of  beating  down.  Again,  perfect  goods !  I  bought  and  sold  nothing 
damaged.  And  in  a  third  of  a  century  people  got  to  buying  of  me  with  the  luxury 
of  an  easy  mind.  I  allowed  no  deceit.  A  youth  who  would  misrepresent  anything 
I  would  discharge.  I  forbade  ladies  to  be  allowed  to  deceive  each  other  in  talking 
of  my  goods,  and  salesmen  were  ordered  to  correct  buyers  who  were  standing  by  the 
goods,  who  said  they  would  wash,  for  example,  if  they  would  not.  You  have  no 
idea  what  comfort  this  would  give  in  shopping  through  a  long  course  of  years  and 
the  business  would  grow,  under  this  entire  freedom  from  complaint,  in  a  way  that 
neither  the  storekeeper  nor  the  buyer  at  the  time  might  quite  remark  or  under- 
stand. This  is  my  secret,"  said  he,  "  as  far  as  I  can  conceive.  I  have  demanded 
full  profits,  but  then  I  have  bought  with  uniform  care,  and  sold  correctly  and  with 
absolute  truth  all  my  time."  "  Poor  humanity  may  have  only  one  good  side,"  adds 
Mr.  Miller,  "  but,  certainly,  that  is  worthy  of  a  record."  Honesty  in  common 
dealing  : — The  idea  running  through  this  passage  is  manifestly  that  of  an  inward, 
solid,  living  truthfulness  of  mind,  as  opposed  to  all  surface-virtue  or  sham,  or  to 
any  mere  keeping  up  of  appearances  or  putting  on  of  an  outside  for  the  avoiding  of 
scandal  or  damage  or  disrepute.  It  is  that  of  a  heart  entire  and  direct  with  itself : 
a  heart  without  any  doubleness  or  intricacy  or  prevarication  ;  a  heart  that  keeps 
itself  clean  of  the  dust  and  cobwebs  that  gather  in  the  darkness  of  close  designs, 
oblique  arts,  and  snaky  thoughts  ;  and  that  rejoices  to  have  its  chambers  all  open, 
its  passages  clear,  and  full  ot  light,  and  fresh  and  sweet  with  Heaven's  own  breath. 
{Norm/in  Hudson.)  Just  dealings : — In  whatever  we  do  or  say  let  us  by  all  means 
be  faithful  and  true:  deceiving  no  man  ;  beguiling  no  man  to  his  damage  ;  punctual 
to  our  word  and  promise  ;  firm  and  constant  to  our  just  engagements  ;  honest  and 
fair  in  all  our  dealings.  Last,  not  least,  let  us  be  sure  that  we  not  only  propose  to 
ourselves  good  and  laudable  ends  but  that  we  also  pursue  them  by  no  means  bat 
what  are  just  and  pure  ;  remembering  that — 

"  Him,  only  him,  the  shield  of  Heaven  defends 
Whose  means  are  fair  and  spotless  as  his  ends." 

Trade  immoralities : — A  popular  pastor  preached  once  on  the  immoralities  of  trade. 
At  the  close  of  the  service  two  of  the  prominent  members  of  his  church,  both  suc- 
cessful business  men,  came  to  him.  Said  the  first :  "  Dominie,  there  is  no  use  in 
preaching  such  a  sermon.  That  sort  of  thing  is  never  practised  by  honourable 
houses  or  by  such  men  as  compose  this  congregation."  The  other  called  the 
preacher  aside  and  said,  "  Dominie,  there  is  no  use  in  preaching  such  sermons.  The 
practices  you  speak  of  are  so  universal  that  tliey  have  ceased  to  merit  your 
characterisation  of  them.  Every  business  house  in  this  city  does  just  that  thing, 
my  own  amongst  the  rest.  It  is  not  worth  while  to  preach  against  it."  (Horn. 
Review.)  Everyday  religion: — It  is  not  Israel  alone  which  has  needed,  and  still 
needs,  to  hear  iterated  this  command,  for  the  sin  is  found  in  every  people,  even  in 
every  city,  one  might  say  in  every  town,  in  Christendom  ;  and — we  have  to  say  it — 


CHAP,  xs.]  LEVITICUS.  255 

often  with  men  who  make  a  certain  profession  of  regard  for  religion.  All  such, 
liowever  rehgious  in  certain  ways,  have  special  need  to  remember  that  "  without 
holiness  no  man  shall  see  the  Lord  " ;  and  that  holiness  is  now  exactly  what  it  was 
when  the  Levitical  law  was  given  out.  As,  on  the  one  side,  it  is  inspired  by 
reverence  and  fear  toward  God,  so,  on  the  other  hand,  it  requires  love  to  the  neigh- 
bour as  to  one's  self,  and  such  conduct  as  that  will  secure.  It  is  of  no  account, 
therefore,  to  keep  the  Sabbath — in  a  way — and  reverence— outwardly — the  sanctuary, 
and  then  on  the  week-day  water  milk,  adulterate  medicines,  sugars,  and  other  foods, 
slip  the  yard-stick  in  measuring,  tip  the  balance  in  weighing,  and  buy  with  one 
weight  or  measure  and  sell  with  another,  "water"  stocks  and  gamble  in  "margins," 
as  the  manner  of  many  is.  God  hates,  and  even  honest  atheists  despise,  religion 
of  this  kind.  Strange  notions,  truly,  of  reUgion  have  men  who  have  not  yet  dis- 
covered that  it  has  to  do  with  just  such  commonplace,  everyday  matters  as  these, 
and  have  never  yet  understood  how  certain  it  is  that  a  religion  which  is  only  used 
on  Sundays  has  no  holiness  in  it ;  and  therefore,  when  the  day  comes,  as  it  is 
coming,  that  shall  try  every  man's  work  as  by  fire,  it  will,  in  the  fierce  heat  of 
Jehovah's  judgment,  be  shrivelled  into  ashes  as  a  spider's  web  in  a  flame,  and  the 
man  and  his  work  shnll  perish  together.  (S.  H.  Kellogg,  D.D.)  Commercial  justice 
in  other  nations  : — The  Hindoo  law  imposes  the  highest  fines  not  only  up jn  those 
who  falsify  scales  or  measures,  but  upon  official  examiners  of  coins  who  pronounce 
a  good  piece  bad  or  a  bad  piece  good  ;  it  inflicts  heavy  penalties,  and  partially 
corporeal  chastisement,  upon  those  who  overreach  customers,  give  short  measure 
or  light  weight,  adulterate  goods,  or  try  to  give  them  a  deceptive  appearance ;  and 
with  respect  to  a  trader  in  counterfeited  gold,  it  enacts  that  "  by  order  of  the  king  he 
must  be  cut  in  pieces  with  razors,"  or  that  "he  must  at  least  lose  three  limbs  of 
his  body  and  pay  the  highest  fine."  In  Egypt,  false  coiners  and  the  manufacturers 
of  false  weights  were  condemned  to  have  both  tlaeir  hands  cut  off ;  and  fraudulent 
practices  of  this  kind  were  held  in  equal  detestation  by  other  nations,  and  were 
visited  with  similar  punishments.     {M.  M.  Kalisch,  Fh.D.) 


CHAPTEB  XX. 

Vers.  2-27.  He  shall  surely  be  put  to  death. — Penal  sanctions : — This  chapter, 
directly  or  indirectly,  cnsts  no  little  light  on  some  most  fundamental  and  practical 
questions  regarding  the  administration  of  justice  in  dealing  with  criminals.  We 
may  learn  here  what,  in  the  mind  of  the  King  of  kings,  is  the  primary  object  of 
the  punishment  of  criminals  against  society.  First  and  foremost  is  the  satisfaction 
of  outraged  justice,  and  of  the  regal  majesty  of  the  supreme  and  boly  God  ;  the 
vindication  of  the  holmess  of  the  Most  High  against  that  wickedness  of  men  which 
would  set  at  nought  the  Holy  One  and  overturn  that  moral  order  which  He  has 
established.  Again  and  again  the  crime  itself  is  given  as  the  reason  for  the  penalty, 
inasmuch  as  by  such  iniquity  in  the  midst  of  Israel  the  holy  sanctuary  of  God 
among  them  was  profaned.  But  if  this  is  set  forth  as  the  fundamental  reason  for 
the  infliction  of  the  punishment,  it  is  not  represented  as  the  only  object.  If,  as 
regards  the  criminal  himself,  the  punishment  is  a  satisfaction  and  expiation  to 
justice  for  his  crime,  on  the  other  hand,  as  regards  the  people,  the  punishment  is 
intended  for  their  moral  good  and  purification  (see  ver.  14).  Both  of  these 
principles  are  of  such  a  nature  that  they  must  be  of  perpetual  validity.  The 
government  or  legislative  power  that  loses  sight  of  either  of  them  is  certain  to  go 
wrong,  and  the  people  wih  be  sure,  sooner  or  later,  to  suffer  in  morals  by  the  error. 
In  the  light  we  have  now,  it  is  easy  to  see  what  are  the  principles  according  to 
which,  in  various  cases,  the  punishments  were  measured  out.  Evidently,  in  the 
first  place,  the  penalty  was  determined,  even  as  equity  demands,  by  the  intrinsic 
heinousness  of  the  crime.  A  second  consideration,  which  evidently  had  place,  was 
the  danger  involved  in  each  crime  to  the  moral  and  spiritual  well-being  of  the  com- 
munity ;  and,  we  may  add,  in  the  third  place,  the  degree  to  which  the  people  were 
likely  to  be  exposed  to  the  contagion  of  certain  crimes  prevalent  in  the  nations 
immediately  about  them.  As  regards  the  crimes  specified,  the  criminal  law  of 
modern  Christendom  does  not  inflict  the  penalty  of  death  in  a  sin^ile  possible  case  here 
mentioned ;  and,  to  the  mind  of  many,  the  contrasted  severity  of  the  Mosaic  code 


256  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

presents  a  grave  difficulty.  And  yet,  if  one  bolieves,  on  the  authority  of  tlie  teaching 
of  Christ,  that  the  theocratic  government  of  Israel  is  not  a  fable,  but  a  historic  fact, 
although  he  may  still  have  much  difficulty  in  recognising  the  righteousness  of  this 
code,  he  will  be  slow  on  this  account  either  to  renounce  his  faith  in  the  Divine  authority 
of  this  chapter  or  to  impugn  the  justice  of  the  holy  King  of  Israel  in  charging  Him 
with  undue  severity,  and  will  rather  patiently  await  some  other  solution  of  the 
problem  than  the  denial  of  the  essential  equity  of  tbese  laws.  But  there  are 
several  considerations  which,  for  many,  will  greiitly  lessen,  if  they  do  not  wholly 
remove,  the  difficulty  which  the  case  presents.  In  the  first  place,  as  regards  the 
punishment  of  idolatry  with  death,  we  have  to  remember  that,  from  a  theocratic 
2)oint  of  view,  idolatry  was  essentially  high  treason,  the  most  formal  repudiation 
possible  of  the  supreme  authority  of  Israel's  King.  If,  even  in  our  modern  states, 
the  gravity  of  the  issues  involved  in  high  treason  has  led  men  to  believe  that  death 
is  not  too  severe  a  penalty  for  an  offence  aimed  directly  at  the  subversion  of  govern- 
mental order,  how  much  more  must  this  be  admitted  when  the  government  is  not 
of  fallible  man,  but  of  the  most  holy  and  infallible  God  ?  And  when,  besides  this, 
■we  recall  the  atrocious  cruelties  and  revolting  impurities  which  were  inseparably 
associated  with  that  idolatry,  we  shall  have  still  less  difficulty  in  seeing  that  it  was 
just  that  the  worshiiDper  of  Molech  should  die.  And  as  decreeing  the  penalty  of 
death  for  sorcery  and  similar  practices,  it  is  probable  that  the  reason  for  this  is  to  be 
found  in  the  close  connection  of  these  with  the  prevailing  idolatry.  But  it  is  in 
regard  to  crimes  against  the  integrity  and  purity  of  the  family  that  we  find  the 
most  impressive  contrast  between  this  penal  code  and  those  of  modern  times. 
Although,  unhappily,  adultery  and,  less  commonly,  incest,  and  even,  rarely,  the 
unnatural  crimes  mentioned  in  this  chapter,  are  not  unknown  in  modern  Christen- 
dom, yet,  while  the  law  of  Moses  punished  all  these  with  death,  modern  law  treats 
them  with  comparative  leniency,  or  even  refuses  to  regard  some  forms  of  these 
offences  as  crimes.  What  then?  Shall  we  hasten  to  the  conclusion  that  we  have 
advanced  on  Moses?  that  this  law  was  certainly  unjust  in  its  severity?  or  is  it 
possible  that  modern  law  is  at  fault  in  that  it  has  fallen  below  those  standards  of 
righteousness  which  rule  in  the  kingdom  of  God?  One  would  think  that  by  any 
man  who  believes  in  the  Divine  origin  of  the  theocracy  only  one  answer  could  be 
given.  Assuredly,  one  cannot  suppose  that  God  judged  of  a  crime  with  undue 
severity ;  and  if  not,  is  not  then  Christendom,  as  it  were,  summoned  by  this  penal  code 
of  the  theocracy — after  making  all  due  allowance  for  different  conditions  of  society 
— to  revise  its  estimate  of  the  moral  gravity  of  these  and  other  offences  ?  We  do  well 
to  heed  this  fact,  that  not  merely  unnatural  crimes,  such  as  sodotnj',  bestiality,  and 
the  grosser  forms  of  incest,  but  adultery,  is  by  God  ranked  in  the  same  category  as 
murder.  Is  it  strange  ?  For  what  are  crimes  of  this  kind  but  assaults  on  the  very 
being  of  the  family?  Where  there  is  incest  or  adultery  we  may  truly  say  the 
family  is  murdered  ;  what  murder  is  to  the  individual,  that,  precisely,  are  crimes  of 
this  class  to  the  family.  In  the  theocratic  code  these  were,  therefore,  made  punish- 
able with  death  ;  and,  we  venture  to  believe,  with  abundant  reason.  Is  it  likely  that 
God  was  too  severe  ?  or  must  we  not  rather  fear  that  man,  ever  lenient  to  prevail- 
ing sins,  in  our  day  has  become  falsely  and  unmercifully  merciful,  kind  with  a  most 
perilous  and  unholy  kindness  ?  Still  harder  will  it  be  for  most  of  us  to  understand 
why  the  death-penalty  should  have  been  also  affixed  to  cursing  or  smiting  a  father 
or  a  mother,  an  extreme  foi'm  of  rebellion  against  parental  authority.  We  must, 
no  doubt,  bear  in  mind,  as  in  all  these  cases,  that  a  rough  people,  like  those  just 
emancipated  slaves,  required  a  severity  of  dealing  which  with  finer  natures  would 
not  be  needed ;  and  also,  that  the  fact  of  Israel's  call  to  be  a  priestly  nation  bearing 
salvation  to  mankind,  made  every  disobedience  among  them  the  graver  crime,  as 
tending  to  so  disastrous  issues,  not  for  Israel  alone,  but  for  the  whole  race  of  man 
which  Israel  was  appointed  to  bless.  On  an  analogous  principle  we  justify  military 
authority  in  shooting  the  sentry  found  asleep  at  his  post.  Still,  while  allowing  for 
all  this,  one  can  hardly  escape  the  inference  that  in  the  sight  of  God  rebellion 
against  parents  must  be  a  more  serious  offence  than  many  in  our  time  have  been 
wont  to  imagine.  And  the  more  that  we  consider  how  truly  basal  to  the  order  of 
government  and  of  society  is  both  sexual  purity  and  the  maintenance  of  a  spirit  of 
reverence  and  subordination  to  parents,  the  easier  we  shall  find  it  to  recognise  the 
fact  that  if  in  this  penal  code  there  is  doubtless  great  severity,  it  is  yet  the  severity 
of  governmental  wisdom  and  true  paternal  kindness  on  the  part  of  the  high  King  of 
Israel,  who  governed  that  nation  with  intent,  above  all,  that  they  might  become,  in 
the  highest  sense,  "  a  holy  nation  "  in  the  midst  of  an  ungodly  world,  and  so 


CHAP.  XX.]  LEVITICUS.  257 

become  the  vehicle  of  blessing  to  others.     And  God  thus  judged  that  it  was  better 
that  sinning  individuals  should  die  without  mercy  than  that  family  government  and 
family  purity  should  perish,  and  Israel,  instead  of  being  a  blessing  to  the  nations, 
should  sink  with  them  into  the  mire  of  universal  moral  corruption.     And  it  is  well 
to  observe  that  this  law,  if  severe,  was  most  equitable  and  impartial  in  its  applica- 
tion.    We  have  here,  in  no  instance,  torture ;  the  scourging  which  in  one  case  is 
enjoined  is  limited  elsewhere  to  the  forty  stripes  save   one.      Neither  have  we 
discrimination  against  any  class  or  either  sex;  nothing  like  that  detestable  injustice 
of  modern  society  which  turns  the  fallen  woman  into  the  street  with  pious  scorn, 
while  it  often  receives  the  betrayer  and  even  the  adulterer — in  most  cases  the  more 
guilty  of  the  two— into  "  the  best  society."     Nothing  have  we  here,  again,  which 
could  justify  by  example  the  insistence  of  many,  through  a  perverted  humanity, 
when  a  murderess  is  sentenced  for  her  crime  to  the  scaffold,  her  sex  should  purchase 
a  partial  immunity  from  the  penalty  of  crime.     The  Levitical  law  is  as  impartial 
as  its  Author  ;  even  if  death  be  the  penalty  the  guilty  one  must  die,  whether  man 
or  woman.     {S.  H.  Kellogg,  D.D.)        Stone  him  with  stones. — Lapidation  : — Lapi- 
dation,  as  is  well  known,  was  frequently  resorted  to  by  excited  mobs  for  the  exercise 
of  summary  justice  or  revenge.     But  as  a  legal  punishment  it  was  not  usual  in  the 
ancient  world ;  it  is  only  mentioned  as  a  Macedonian  and  a  Spanish  custom,  and 
as  having  been  occasionally  employed  by  the  Romans.     Among  the  Hebrews,  how- 
ever, it  was  very  common ;  it  was  counted  as  the  first  and  severest  of  the  four 
modes  of  inflictiug  capital  punishment — the  three  others  being  burning,  beheading, 
and  strangling — and  it  was  in  the  Pentateuch  ordained  for  a  variety  of  offences, 
especially  those  associated  with  idolatry  and  incest ;  in  certain  cases  it  was  even 
inliicted  upon  animals  ;   and  its   application  was   by  the   Rabbins   considerably 
extended.     As  regards  the  proceedings  observed,  the  Bible  contains  no  hints  except 
the  statements  that  it  took  place  without  the  precincts  of  the  town,  and  that  the 
men  by  whose  testimony  the  criminal  had  been  convicted  were  obliged  to  throw  the 
first  stones.     But  the  Mishnah  gives  the  following  account,  some  features  of  which 
are  possibly  of  remoter  antiquity  :   When  the  offender  is  being  led  away  to  the 
place  of  execution,  an  ofiicial  remains  at  the  door  of  the  law-court,  while  a  man  on 
horseback  is  stationed  at  some  distance,  but  so  that  the  former  can  see  him  wave  a 
handkerchief,  which  he  does  when  any  one  comes  declaring  that  he  has  something 
to  say  in  favour  of  the  condemned ;  in  this  case  the  horseman  at  once  hastens  to 
stop  the  procession;  if  the  convicted  himself  maintains  that  he  can  offer  proofs  of 
his  innocence  or  extenuating  circumstances,  he  is  taken  back  before  the  tribunals  ; 
and  this  may  be  repeated  four  or  five  times,  if  there  appears  to  be  the  least  founda- 
tion for  his  assertions.     A  herald  precedes  him  all  the  while,  exclaiming,  "  So-and- 
so  is  being  led  out  to  be  stoned  to  death  for  this  and  this  offence,  and  so-and-so  are 
the  witnesses ;  whosoever  has  to  say  anything  that  might  save  him  let  him  come 
forward  and  say  it."    Having  arrived  about  ten  yards  from  the  appointed  spot,  he 
is  publicly  called  upon  to  confess  his  sins ;  for  "  whosoever  confesses  his  sins  has  a 
share  in  the  future  life  " ;  if  he  is  too  illiterate  to  confess,  he  is  ordered  to  say, 
"Let  my  death  be  the  expiation  tor  all  my  sins."     At  four  yards  from  the  place 
he   is   partially   stripped    of   his   garments.      When   the  procession   has   at    last 
reached  its  destination,  he  is  conducted  upon  a  scaffolding,  the  height  of  which  is 
that  of  two  men,  and  after  drinking  "  wine  mingled  with  myrrh,"  to  render  him  less 
sensible  to  pain,  he  is  by  one  of  the  witnesses  pushed  down,  so  that  he  falls  upon  his 
back  ;  if  he  is  not  killed  by  the  fall  the  other  witness  throws  a  stone  upon  his 
breast ;  and  if  he  is  still  alive  all  the  people  present  cover  him  with  stones.     When 
the  corpse,  which  is  usually  nailed  to  the  cross,  is  in  a  state  of  decomposition,  the 
bones  are  collected  and  burnt  in  a  separate  place  ;  then  his  relatives  pay  visits  to 
the  judges  and  the  witnesses,  in  order  to  prove  that  they  bear  them  no  hatred,  and 
that  they  acknowledge  the  justice  of  the  sentence  ;  and  they  must  show  their  grief 
by  no  external  mark  of  mourning.     {M.  M.  Kalisch,  Ph.D.) 

Ver.  26.  Ye  shall  be  holy  irnto  Me :  for  I  the  Lord  am  holy. — Holiness  enforced : 
— I.  Let  us  endeavour  to  explain  the  meaning,  and  the  force  of  that  eeason  fob 
WHICH  holiness  IS  SO  UNIVERSALLY  ENJOINED.  "Ye  shall  be  holy:  fori  the  Lord 
your  God  am  holy."  And  so  God's  holiness  is  made  the  motive  for  ours.  And 
why?  The  Lord  our  God  is  holy;  therefore  should  we  labour  to  become  so  like- 
wise, in  order  that  we  may  become  Uke  Him  in  the  most  lovely  and  glorious  of  His 
attributes.  We  should  labour  to  become  like  Him  in  the  most  lovely  and  glorious 
of  His  attributes  in  order  that  by  so  doing  we  may  become  well-pleasing  in  His 

17 


258  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

sight;  and,  by  becoming  well-pleasing  in  His  sight,  to  attain  to  tbat  eternal  happi- 
ness which  God  hath  prepared  for  all  those  who,  because  they  are  like  Him,  He  will 
condescend  to  love.  II.  Having  seen  why  the  holiness  of  God  is  proposed  to  us  as 
the  motive  to  become  holy,  let  us  proceed  to  examine  into  the  nature  of  that 

HOLINESS    WHICH    WE     AKE    COMSIANDED    TO    IJIITATE,    THAT    WE    MAY   HAVE    A    MODEL    OF 

THAT  WHICH  WE  ABE  TO  PURSUE.  1.  First  of  all,  then,  we  are  taught  that  God  is  a 
Spirit.  As  the  heavens,  therefore,  are  higher  than  the  earth,  so  also  must  we  place 
our  conceptions  of  what  constitutes  the  essential  holiness  of  the  High  and  Lofty  One 
that  inhabiteth  eternity,  above  the  pollution  of  every  earthly  passion.  Therefore  in 
knowing,  in  the  first  place,  what  is  the  model  ©f  that  holiness  of  God  which  you  are 
to  pursue,  you  must  first  of  all  remember  that  no  earthly  pleasure,  no  carnal  imagi- 
nation must  have  a  place  within  the  sanctuary  of  the  heart.  The  utter  banishment 
of  all  these  lusts,  then,  both  from  our  minds  (lest  they  be  defiled),  and  from  our 
actions  (lest  they  become  unholy),  must  be  the  first  of  our  labours,  must  be  our 
perpetual  care.  2.  But  God  is  not  holy  in  Himself  alone.  He  is  holy  also  in  His 
acts  towards  every  creature  in  His  power.  And  herein  we  have  another  point  on 
which  we  are  to  labour  after  the  similitude  to  God's  holiness ;  we  must  throw  aside 
every  regard  towards  the  persons  of  men,  which  courts  the  lofty,  which  rejects  and 
despises  the  lowly  man ;  we  must  account  the  welfare  of  all  an  object  of  our  care ;  we 
must  consider  none  too  mean  to  be  lielped  by  our  hand — none  too  high  to  mete  out  to 
them  things  which  are  expedient  and  their  due.  We  must  think  of  all,  we  must  feel  for 
all,  we  must  be  just  to  all ;  and  so  to  show  forth  the  similitudeof  God's  holiness  to  all. 
3.  Thus  holy  in  Himself,  and  holy  in  His  acts,  God  is  holy,  in  the  third  place,  in 
the  manner  in  which  He  regards  both  sin  and  the  sinner.  The  face  of  the  Lord  is 
against  them  that  do  evil ;  and  the  wicked,  though  he  be  exalted,  shall  not  stand  in 
His  sight,  for  He  is  of  purer  eyes  than  to  behold  iniquity.  To  turn,  then,  away  our 
eyes,  lest  we  look  upon  vanity,  and  to  separate  ourselves  from  all  commerce  with 
ungodly  men — to  give  no  encouragement  to  transgression,  nor  to  the  transgressor — 
to  have  no  fellowship  with  the  unfruitful  works  of  darkness,  but  rather  to  reprove 
them,  both  in  word  and  deed — these  are  the  duties  to  which  in  imitation  of  God's 
holiness  this  third  particular  would  more  particularly  direct  us.  III.  But  who  is 
SUFFICIENT  FOE  THESE  THINGS  ?  Imperfectly  as  we  have  delineated  the  holiness  of 
the  Lord,  few  as  are  the  features  which  we  have  had  time  to  detail,  yet  who  can 
consider  his  own  failings  in  life  without  confessing  how  feebly  he  has  attained  to 
the  conformity  of  the  Almighty's  holiness?  "When  the  text  is  taken  in  itself,  as  the 
measure  of  the  duty  required  of  all,  and  when  we  compare  it  with  our  weak  and 
wavering  performances,  there  is  nothing  left  for  man  but  destruction  and  despair. 
But  the  same  God,  who  hates  every  unholy  person  and  thing,  has  made  a  way  to 
escape,  that  we  may  be  able  to  bear  it.  Christ  has  fulfilled  the  law  of  holiness  for 
man ;  and  He  who  knew  no  sin,  has  been  made  sin  for  us,  that  we  might  be  made 
the  righteousness  of  God  in  Him.  This  is  at  once  the  apparently  great  mystery,  and 
this  the  congelation  of  our  religion.  (C  Benson.)  Ye  nhall  be  holy  : — There  are 
three  ways  in  which  we  may  take  these  words.  First,  as  simply  the  statement  of  a 
fact ;  the  Lord,  speaking  in  prophecy,  says  you  shall  be  holy ;  you  cannot  help 
being  holy,  for  you  belong  to  God.  He  has  chosen  you.  Thus  every  saved  one 
becomes  dedicated  ;  and  whatever  is  dedicated  is  "  holy  " ;  and,  therefore,  you 
being  dedicated,  you  must  be  "holy."  Another  interpretation  might  be  (still 
prophetically),  "  You  shall  be  holy."  The  Lord  God  Omnipotent  shall  see  to  that. 
But  then  the  promise  bears  upon  that  word  "  your."  "  Your  God."  If  He  is  really 
your  God,  the  God  you  have  chosen,  the  God  you  have  loved,  the  God  you  have 
served,  the  God  really  in  your  heart,  your  God,  then  He  will  take  care  and  make 
you  holy.  But  though  both  these  interpretations  of  the  verse  are  admissible,  and 
true,  and  comforting,  I  think  it  is  evident  that  they  are  not  the  meaning  which  is 
chiefly  intended.  "  Shall"  is  not  me.mt  to  be  a  future  tense,  but  the  imperative 
mood.  It  is  very  frequent  in  the  Bible;  a  strong  imperative,  a  positive  law  to  be 
holy.  *'  Ye  shall  be  holy,"  and  for  this  reason  above  all  others,  "  because  the  Lord 
your  God  is  holy."  The  creature  must  be  like  his  Creator  ;  the  child  must  be  like 
his  Father;  the  scholar  must  be  like  his  Master;  the  sinner  must  be  like  his 
Saviour.  "Ye  shall  be  holy."  It  is  your  first  duty  to  be  "holy."  The  reasons 
why  we  should  be  "holy"  are  very  many.  We  are  made  capable  of  holiness. 
That  is  a  great  fact.  Our  former  convictions  and  feelings  point  us  to  lioliness. 
We  have  to  do  with  "  holy  "  things.  Everything  that  we  see,  and  everything  we 
touch  is  "  holy."  God  has  provided  a  wiiy  by  which  we  may  be  "  holy."  Holiness, 
even  in  this  world,  is  the  highest  happiness,  and  we  are  made  fit  for  and  trained  for 


CHAP.  XX.]  LEVITICUS.  259 

a  holy  world  beyond — a  holy  eternity.  But  besides  and  above  all  this  our  best  and 
highest  reason  for  anything  is  always  what  we  find  in  God  Himself.  "  Ye  shall  be 
holy  :  for  I  the  Lord  your  God  am  holy."  It  was  God's  primary  principle  at  man's 
creation.  "Let  Us  make  man  in  Our  image,  after  Our  likeness."  Therefore  God 
made  man  "  holy. "  And  when  man  lost  his  holiness,  God,  being  very  jealous  about 
it,  immediately  proceeded  to  provide  a  way  by  which  we  could  recover  it.  But 
what  is  holiness  ?  The  Greek  word  for  "  holiness  "  is  compounded  of  two  words 
which  mean  "  without  earth,"  free  from  earthliness.  Or  we  may  take  holiness 
to  be  that  which  has  God  for  its  Author,  and  God  for  its  end  ;  or  that  which 
liiatches  with  God,  and  is  fitted  for  His  service  and  His  glory.  Or  sanctified 
purity.  Or,  as  we  have  seen,  that  which  resembles  God,  and  is  dedicated  to 
His  service  and  His  glory.  A  reflection  of  Himself,  or  one  or  other  of  His  attri- 
butes. A  reflection  of  His  holiness.  Now  the  great  and  all-impottant  question  is, 
How  is  "  holiness  "  to  be  attained?  How  do  we,  who  are  so  very  far  off  from  holi- 
ness, become  holy  ?  In  its  great  outline,  I  should  say  the  answer  is  this :  First, 
you  must  be,  and  realise  that  you  are,  a  member  of  Christ ;  a  Christian.  Made  so 
by  your  baptism,  and  your  membership  ratified  and  confirmed  by  the  solemn  words 
and  vows  which  you  yourself  have  made,  and  the  many  inward  feelings  in  your  own 
heart,  and  the  many  communications  which  you  have  had  with  God  from  time  to 
time.  Being,  then,  a  member  of  Christ,  and  Christ  your  Head,  the  Holy  Spirit, 
which  was  poured  upon  you  at  baptism,  must  hold  His  true  place  in  your  heart. 
The  great  work  lies  all  within  the  Trinity.  The  Father  gives  you  to  the  Son,  the 
Son  gives  you  to  the  Holy  Ghost,  the  Holy  Ghost  gives  you  back  to  the  Son  changed 
and  sanctified.  Sanctified,  but  still  a  poor  sinner.  And  the  Son  cleanses  you  with 
His  blood,  and  clothes  you  with  His  own  righteousness,  and  gives  you  back  to  the 
Father,  through  Him  and  in  Him  holy,  holy  enough  for  heaven,  holy  enough  to 
stand   in    God's   holy  presence.        (Jas.    Vaughan,   M.A.)  Holiness: — I.  The 

HOLINESS    OF    SAINTS    DEPENDS    UPON     NO     OUTWARD     CONDITION,    REQUIRES    NO     SPECIAL 

GIFT  OF  Nature  or  of  Providence,  of  understanding  or  wisdom,  nay,  I  may  say, 
OF  grace.  It  need  not  be  shown  in  any  one  form  ;  it  does  not  require  the  largeness 
of  any  one  grace ;  still  less  does  it  consist  in  austere  sadness,  or  stern  constraint,  or 
rigid  severity  as  to  ourselves  or  others,  except  as  to  our  sins.  The  blessed  company 
of  the  redeemed  saints  have  and  have  not  found  one  road  to  heaven.  One  road  they 
found,  in  that  they  were  saved  through  one  Eedeemer,  looking  on  to  Him  and 
believing  in  Him  before  He  came  or  looking  to  Him  when  He  had  come.  But  all 
else  in  their  outward  lot  was  different.  They  were  "  redeemed  to  God  out  of  every 
kindred,  and  tongue,  and  people  and  nation."  II.  Holiness  was  made  for  all. 
It  is  the  end  for  which  we  were  made,  for  which  we  were  redeemed,  for  which  God 
the  Holy  Ghost  is  sent  down  and  shed  abroad  in  the  hearts  that  will  receive  Him. 
God  did  not  will  to  create  us  as  perfect.  He  willed  that  we,  through  His  grace, 
should  become  perfect.  But  what  He  willed  that  we  should  be,  that,  if  our 
will  fail  not,  we  must  become.  His  almighty  will  vouchsafes  to  depend  on  ours. 
What  God  commands  ;  what  God  wills  ;  what  God  so  willed  that  He  made  us  for 
this  alone,  that  we  should  be  holy,  and  being  holy,  should  share  His  holiness  and 
bliss — that  must  be  within  our  reach  if  we  will.  III.  The  mistake  of  mistakes  is 
TO  think  that  holiness  consists  in  great  or  extraordinary  things,  beyond  the 
REACH  of  ordinary  MEN.  It  has  been  well  said,  "  Holiness  does  not  consist  in  doing 
uncommon  things,  but  in  doing  common  things  uncommonly  well."  Few  can  ever 
do  great  things,  and  the  few  who  can  do  them  can  each  do  but  few.  But  every  one 
can  study  the  will  of  God,  and  can  give  great  diligence  to  know  it  and  to  do  what  he 
knows.  Your  daily  round  of  duty  is  your  daily  path  to  come  nearer  unto  God. 
{E.  B.  Pusey,  D.D.)  Godhj  dUtinctiveyiess  : — I.  A  unique  code  of  moral  and 
sacred  laws.  "  Ye  shall  keep  all  My  statutes  and  all  My  judgments,  and  do  them  " 
(ver.  22).  No  other  people  had  a  standard  of  morals,  or  a  directory  of  religious 
regulations  comparable  to  these.  II.  A  studious  avoidance  or  the  customs  op 
ungodliness.  "  Ye  shall  not  walk  in  the  manners  of  the  nations,"  &c.  (ver.  23). 
Conformity  to  the  world  was  prohibited.  However  sanctioned,  or  desirable,  or  seem- 
ingly harmless,  the  customs  of  the  ungodly  were  to  be  shunned.     III.  A  cautious 

SELECTION    of    SOCIAL    ENJOYMENTS    AND    INDULGENCES.         "  Yc    shall    put     difference 

between  clean  and  unclean,"  &c.  (ver.  25).  Palate  not  to  be  gratified,  tables  not  to 
be  spread  with  promiscuous  viands.  God's  wish  and  word  were  to  rule  them  in 
every  enjoyment,  and  self-restraint  was  to  mark  them  in  every  gratification.  IV. 
A  HERITAGE  OF  SPECIAL  PRIVILEGES  AS  God's  PEOPLE.  "  Ye  shall  inherit  their  land, 
a  land  that  floweth  with  milk  and  honey,"  &c.  (ver.  24).     Sinners  lose  earthly 


260  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xx, 

felicities,  as  the  penalty  of  their  impiety  :  "  therefore  I  abhorred  them  "  (ver.  23). 
The  godly  possess  rich  heritage  of  good  as  the  mark  of  God's  favour  :  "  I  will  give 
it  unto  you  to  possess  "  (ver.  24).  V.  A  seal  of  Divine  sanctity  besting  upon 
THEM.  They  show  themselves  to  he— 1.  Divinely  "separated"  (ver.  24),  from 
other  people.  Their  history  and  career  attest  God's  dealing  with  them  as  with  no 
other  people.  2.  Divinely  sanctified.  "Ye  shall  be  holy  unto  Me:  for  I  the  Lord 
am  holy,  and  have  severed  you  from  other  people "  (ver.  26).  For  the  very 
"  beauty  of  the  Lord  "  rests  upon  the  character  and  conduct  of  those  He  redeems. 
Note  :  (1)  God  claims  His  people:  they  are  not  their  own;  may  not  follow  their 
own  desires  and  delights ;  He  is  their  law,  they  must  surrender  to  Him.  "  That  ye 
should  be  Mine  "  (ver.  26).  It  is  a  blessed  fact  to  belong  to  God  :  but  it  carries  its 
obligations.  (2)  Privileges  are  conditioned  upon  fidelity  (ver.  22).  The  inheritance 
would  be  forfeited  if  obedience  were  withheld.  All  God's  covenant  promises  to  us 
wait  upon  our  loyalty  to  Him.  "  Ye  are  My  friends  if  ye  do,"  &c.  {W.  H.  Jellie.) 
A  holy  God  requires  a  holy  p'ople : — The  various  laws  which  the  Jews  received  from 
God  through  the  medium  of  Moses  were  all  meant  to  promote  social,  personal, 
political,  national  morality ;  to  keep  the  people  distinct  from  infecting  elements 
around  them,  separated  and  hedged  off  from  the  possibility  of  contagion ;  so  that 
whatever  defiled  them  might  be  seen  not  to  come  from  others,  but  to  rise  from  the 
depths  of  their  own  fallen  and  depraved  hearts.  "  Tlierefore  I  have  separated  you 
from  all  people,  that  ye  might  be  unto  Me,"  He  says,  "a  peculiar  people  "  ;  and  the 
great  end  that  He  contemplated  constantly  was  their  holiness — that  they  might  be  a 
holy  people.  The  word  "  holy,"  in  fact,  means  properly,  separated — set  apart  to 
some  purpose  or  object  or  end.  But  in  order  to  make  their  holiness  still  more 
likely  He  presented  ever  before  them  a  grand  model.  "  Be  ye  holy,"  is  His  constant 
phrase,  "  for  I  the  Lord  am  holy."  "  Ye  shall  be  holy  unto  Me  :  for  I  the  Lord  am 
holy."  It  is  well  known  that  a  people  become,  to  a  great  extent,  what  their  god  or 
their  gods  are.  The  gods  of  the  heathen  were  most  of  them  monsters  of  lust. 
Jupiter  was  depraved  ;  Mercury  was  a  thief;  others  of  their  gods  were  infected  with 
the  greatest  crimes  ;  as  if  their  villainy  upon  earth  gave  them  a  title  to  a  niche  in 
the  Pantheon  of  heathenism.  You  must  expect,  from  such  gods  in  the  theology  of 
a  people,  bad  lives  in  the  history  of  that  people.  If  the  model  be  so  bad,  how  low 
must  the  imitator  and  the  worshipper  be  !  But  before  the  Jews  there  was  placed 
the  magnificent  ideal  of  all  that  was  holy,  pure,  just,  perfect.  The  nearer  tbey 
approached  God,  the  nobler  they  became ;  the  farther  they  receded  from  Him,  the 
more  degenerate  they  became.  They  had  the  standard  infinitely  remote,  but  infinitely 
perfect,  ceaseless  approximation  to  which  was  their  nation's  strength,  its  glory,  and 
its  happiness.  Thus  the  Jews  were  selected  that  they  might  be  holy.  They  had  a 
model  constantly  before  them  they  were  to  imitate,  that  they  might  be  holy.  And 
they  were  chosen  for  this  grand  destiny  not  because  of  their  own  virtues — for, 
strange  enough,  their  very  mercies  the  corruption  of  their  hearts  turned  into  their 
own  merits,  and  the  more  God  favoured  them,  with  a  perverse  ingenuity  the  most 
remarkable,  when  we  know  it  was  so  often  rebuked,  the  more  credit  they  took  to 
themselves ;  and  He  tells  them  that  He  chose  them,  not  because  they  were  greater 
or  more  excellent  than  any  other  nation,  but  because,  in  His  own  sovereignty,  He  set 
His  love  upon  them.  Thus  they  were  hedged  round  with  ceremonial  laws ;  they 
had  presented  before  them  a  perfect,  infinitely  perfect.  Model ;  they  were  selected 
by  distinguishing  grace  in  order  to  reach  and  strive  after  this  great  destiny ;  they 
had  ringing  in  their  ears  every  day  the  law,  "Thou  shalt  love,"  which  is  translated 
into  practical  language,  "  Thou  shalt  be  holy,"  in  order  that  they  might  obtain  the 
end  for  which  they  were  chosen  and  blessed  and  favoured — to  be  a  separated  people 
and  a  holy  people  to  the  Lord.  Now,  what  the  Jews  were  meant  to  be  nationally 
we  Christians  are  meant  to  be  personally.  We,  too,  are  selected  and  favoured  for 
this  purpose ;  and  we  shall  find  all  the  economy  of  the  New  Testament  constantly 
contemplates  the  holiness  of  God's  people  as  the  great  end  and  object  and  aim  of 
our  Christian  privileges  and  blessings  and  mercies  upon  earth.  I.  But,  first  of  all, 
LET  us  DEFINE  WHAT  HOLINESS  IS.  The  word  mcaus  simply  separation.  So  the 
Latin  word  sacer,  from  which  comes  our  word  "sacred,"  is  employed  to  denote  profane 
as  well  as  sacred — means  wicked  as  well  as  holy.  Hence  the  expression  "Auri  sacra 
fames,"  literally  translated,  "The  sacred  thirst  of  gold,"  but  strictly  and  properly, 
"  The  accursed  thirst  of  gold."  The  meaning,  therefore,  of  a  holy  person  is  one 
severed  or  separated  to  something  ;  and  when  applied  to  that  which  is  pure  and  just 
and  true  it  means  separated  to  God.  And  we  can  only  form  an  idea  of  what  holiness 
is  by  seeing  it  defined  by  God,  as  embodied  in  His  character  and  explained  at  length. 


CHAP,  sx.]  LEVITICUS.  261 

in  His  Word.  Holiness  in  a  Christian  is  just  separation,  sanctification,  severance 
from  the  excessive  love  of  things  lawful,  from  the  forbidden  love  of  things  sinful,  to 
the  growing  love  of  what  God  has  commanded  in  His  holy  Word,  and  of  the  grand 
image  that  God  has  depicted  in  every  page  of  His  revelation.  II.  Now  having  seen 
■what  this  holiness  is,  let  me  state,  in  the  next  place,  how  Christians  in  the  New 
Testament  are  constantly  associated  with  it,  1.  They  are  elected  to  it.  He 
has  chosen  us  in  Christ  from  the  foundation  of  the  world,  that  we  should  be  holy. 
2.  Now,  this  holinoss,  in  the  next  place,  is  true  and  lasting  beauty;  it  is  real  and 
original  beauty.  The  King's  daughter  has  all  her  beauty  within,  that  needs  a 
spiritual  eye  to  discriminate  and  discern.  The  mass  of  mankind  can  only  see  glare, 
pretension,  gaudiness,  but  tlie  true  Christian  sees  a  city  where  the  world  sees  none, 
ior  Christ,  when  He  came  to  His  own,  His  own  recieved  Him  not ;  there  was  no 
beauty  in  Him  that  the  world  should  desire  Him.  3.  And  this  holiness,  too,  of 
•character  is  the  highest  possible  honour.  It  is  the  livery  of  Heaven ;  it  is  the  very 
robes  of  the  King  of  glory ;  it  is  the  dress  which  He  prepares  for  His  own  ;  it  is  the 
Apocalyptic  garments  "  white  and  clean,  which  are  the  righteousness  of  saints  "  ;  it 
is  the  raiment  white  and  clean  which  no  moth  can  gnaw,  which  no  rust  can  decay, 
•which  no  thief  can  break  through  and  steal.  4.  And,  in  the  next  place,  this  holiness 
is  fitness  for  heaven.  A  man  without  an  ear  cannot  enjoy  music.  In  the  same 
manner,  a  person  without  a  sanctified  heart,  without  holiness,  is  not  fit  for  heaven. 
■5.  In  the  next  place,  it  is  ihe  distinguishing  mark  of  the  true  Church  of  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  It  is  this  that  makes  a  Christian  ;  and  witliout  this  he  cannot  see 
God  or  put  forth  any  valid  claim  to  be  a  Christian  at  all.  6.  In  the  next  place,  the 
Holy  Spirit  is  the  Author  of  this  holiness.  III.  Thus  we  have  seen  what  this 
holiness  is  and  who  is  the  Author  of  it ;  let  me  notice  now  that  all  the  insti- 
tutions OF  THE  gospel  ARE  MEANT  TO  PROMOTE  IT.  Preaching  is  meant  to  promote 
it ;  sacraments  are  meant  to  promote  it ;  the  reading  of  the  Bible  is  meant  to 
promote  it ;  the  teaching  of  teachers  is  meant  to  promote  it ;  all  our  schools  and 
institutions,  our  preaching  and  hearing,  oui  praying  and  communicating,  are  all 
Jielps  that,  by  the  blessing  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  bring  us  nearer  to  Him  who  is  the 
Fountain  of  all  holiness,  of  all  light,  and  of  all  life.    IV.  And  in  the  next  place,  all 

THE  CHASTISEJIENTS  OF  God's  PROVIDENCE  ARE  MEANT  TO  PROMOTE  THIS.     {J.   CuVlVling, 

D.D.)  Holiness: — Holiness!  There  is  sweet  music  in  the  very  name.  It  tells 
of  sin  subdued,  of  boisterous  passions  lulled,  of  fiery  lusts  becalmed,  of  miry  paths 
made  clean.  It  sets  before  us  a  pure  walk,  where  peace  and  joy  go  hand  in  hand, 
«nd  scatter  heaven-born  fragrance  round.  Holiness  !  To  cause  this  lovely  plant  to 
thrive,  its  roots  to  deepen,  and  its  branches  to  bear  fruit,  is  one  grand  purport  of  the 
scheme  of  grace.  The  Lord's  own  voice  proclaims,  "  Ye  shall  be  holy  :  for  I  am 
holy."  Holiness  falls  short  when  it  falls  short  of  God.  But  perhaps  you  say  such 
glorious  lustre  is  too  bright  for  sight.  The  heavenly  sunshine  dims  the  dazzled 
•eye.  But  still  draw  near.  God's  Holiness,  in  human  form,  has  visited  and  trod  our 
earth.  Jesus  takes  flesh  and  tabernacles  here.  His  walk  in  our  soiled  paths  is  clean 
•as  on  celestial  pavement.  Mark  every  act.  Hear  every  word.  They  have  one 
feature,  holiness.  Mark  next  the  soil  in  which  this  flower  has  roots,  the  seed  from 
■which  it  springs.  Man's  pride  must  here  lie  low.  It  never  thrives  in  Nature's  field. 
Neither  can  hand  of  Nature  plant  it.  When  sin  came  in  each  gracious  fibre  died. 
The  curse  fell  hlightingly  on  earth,  but  most  so  on  the  human  heart.  The  thorns 
and  briars  of  the  outward  world  are  dismal  emblems  of  the  wilderness  within. 
God's  likeness  was  effaced  at  once,  and  hideous  enmity  established  its  one  rule. 
How,  then,  can  holiness  revive  ?  Until  the  waste  becomes  a  garden  the  plant 
cannot  be  set ;  until  Heaven  gives  the  seed  it  can  nowhere  be  found.  God  must 
prepare  the  soil.  God  must  infuse  the  seed.  The  work  is  wholly  God's.  Next 
mark  the  renovating  means.  The  wondrous  engine  is  the  gospel  truth.  The  Spirit 
wins  by  charming  notes.  He  opens  ears  to  hear  new  melody.  He  gives  the  eye  to 
see  new  scenes.  He  reveals  Christ,  the  beauty  of  all  beauty.  He  shows  the  cleansing 
blood,  the  sympathising  heart,  the  perfect  refuge,  the  all-sufficient  aid.  These 
sights  wave  a  transforming  wand.  A  new  affection  subjugates  the  man.  Jesus  and 
purer  hopes  now  occupy  the  mind.  Darkness  is  passed.  The  true  light  shines. 
The  grace  of  faith  springs  up.  This  is  the  chain  which  binds  the  soul  to  Christ  and 
makes  the  Saviour  and  the  sinner  one.  A  channel  is  now  formed  by  which  Christ's 
fulness  plenteously  flows  down.  The  barren  branch  becomes  a  portion  of  the  fruit- 
ful stem.  Christ's  vital  juices  permeate  the  whole.  The  limbs  receive  close  union 
•with  the  head,  and  one  life  reigns  throughout  the  total  frame.  {Dean  Law.) 
Example  of  holiness  : — Christ  is  the  Pattern,  the  Sample,  the  exemplary  Cause  of 


262  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

our  sanctification.     Holiness  in  us  is  the  copy  or  transcript  of  the  holiness  that  is 
in  the  Lord  Jesus.     As  the  wax  hath  line  for  line  from  the  seal,  the  child  limb  for 
limb,  feature  for  feature,  from  the  father,  so  is  holiness  in  us  from  Christ.     (M. 
Henry.)        Influence  of  holiness  : — There  is  an  energy  of  moral  suasion  in  a  good 
man's  life  passing  the  highest  efforts  of  the  orator's  genius.     The  seen  but  silent, 
beauty  of  holiness  speaks  more  eloquently  of  God  and  duty  than  the  tongues  of  men 
and  angels.    Let  parents  remember  this.  The  best  inheritance  a  parent  can  bequeath 
to  a  child  is  a  virtuous  example,  a  legacy  of  hallowed  remembrances  and  associa- 
tions.    The  beauty  of  holiness  beaming  through  the  life  of  a  loved  relative  or  friend 
is  more  effectual  to  strengthen  such  as  do  stand  in  Virtue's  wa^s  and  raii-e  up- 
those  who  are  bowed  down  than  precept,  command,  entreaty,  or  warning.  Christianity 
itself,  I  believe,  owes  by  far  the  greater  part  of  its  moral  power,  not  to  the  precej  ts 
or  parables  of  Christ,  but  to  His  own  character.     The  beauty  of  that  holiness  which 
is  enshrined  in  the  four  brief  biographies  of  the  Man  of  Nazareth  has  done  more^ 
and  will  do  more,  to  regenerate  the  world  and  bring  on  everlasting  righteousness 
than  all  the  other  agencies  put  together.     It  has  done  more  to  spread  His  religion 
in  the  world  than  all  that  has  ever  been  preached  or  written  on  the  evidences  of 
Christianity.     {T.  Chalmers,  D.D.)         Sanctification,  lohat  it  is: — The  saintly  and 
learned  Archbishop  Ussher  was  frequently  urged  by  a  friend  to  write  his  tboughts 
on  sanctification,  which  at  length  he  engaged  to  do;  but  a  considerable  time  elapsing, 
the  performance  of  his  promise  was  importunately  claimed.    The  Archbishop  replied, 
"  I  have  not  written,  and  yet  I  cannot  charge  myself  with  a  breach  of  promise,  for 
I  began  to  write ;  but  when  I  came  to  treat  of  the  new  creature  which  God  formetU 
by  His  own  Spirit  in  every  regenerate  soul  I  found  so  little  of  it  wrought  in  myself 
that  I  could  speak  of  it  only  as  parrots,  or  by  rote,  but  without  the  knowledge  of 
what  I  might  have  expressed,  and  therefore  I  durst  not  presume  to  proceed  any 
further  upon  it."     Upon  this  his  friend  stood  amazed  to  hear  such  a  confession 
from  so  grave,  holy,  and  eminent  a  person.     Tbe  Archbishop  then  added  :  ''I  must 
tell  you  we  do  not  well  understand  what  sanctification  and  the  new  creature  are. 
It  is  no  less  than  for  a  man  to  be  brought  to  an  entire  resignation  of  his  own  will  to 
the  will  of  God,  and  to  live  in  the  offering  up  of  his  soul  continually  in  the  flames- 
of   love,   as  a  whole  burnt-offering  to  Christ  ;  and   oh  1    how  many  who  profess 
Christianity  are  unacquainted  experimentally  with  this  work  upon  their  souls  !  " 
Holiness  defined : — At  one  of  the  ragged  schools  in  Ireland  a  clergyman  asked  the 
question,  "  What  is  holiness  ?  "     A  poor  Irish  convert  in  tattered  rags  jumped  up 
and  said,  "Please,  your  Reverence,  it's  being  clean  inside."         True  holiness  : — 
True  holiness  is  a  plain  and  an  even  thing,  without  falsehood,  guile,  perverseness- 
of  spirit,  deceitfulness  of  heart,  or  starting  aside.     It  hath  one  end,  one  rule,  one 
way,  one  heart;  whereas  hypocrites  are,  in  the  Scripture,  called  "  doulde-minded 
men,"  because  they  pretend  to  God  and  follow  the  world  ;  and  "  crooked  men," 
like  the  swelling  of  a  wall  whose  parts  are  not  perpendicular  nor  level  to  their 
foundation.     Now  rectitude,  sincerity,  and  singleness  of  heart  are  ever,  both  in  the 
eyes  of  God  and  man,  beautiful  tiling-^.     {H.  G.  Salter.)         The  ideal  Holy  One  : — 
And  have  you  never  cried  in  your  hearts  with  longing,  almost  with  impatience,. 
"  Surely,  surely  there  is  an  ideal  Holy  One  somewhere,  or  else  how  could  have 
arisen  in  my  mind  the  conception,  however  faint,  of  an  ideal  holiness  ?   But  where  ? 
oh,  where?     Not  in  tbe  world  around,  strewn  with  unholiness.     Not  in  myself, 
unholy,  too,  without  and  within,  and  calling  myself  sometimes  the  very  worst  of  all 
the  bad  company  I  meet,  because  that  company  is  the  only  company  from  which  I 
cannot  escape.     Oh !  is  there  a  Holy  One  whom  I  may  contemplate  with  utter 
delight  ?  and  if  so,  where  is  He  ?     Oh  !  that  I  might  behold,  if  but  for  a  moment,. 
His  perfect  beauty,  even  though,  as  in  the  fable  of  Semele  of  old,  the  lightning  of 
his  glances  were  death."    {Charles  Kingsly.)        The  Mount  of  Holiness  .-—In  elocu- 
tion there  is  what  rhetoricians  term  a  "  second  voice."  It  comes  after  an  orator  has 
been  speaking  sufficiently  long  for  his  lungs  to  become  thoroughly  warmed.     The 
diversified  ligaments  and  muscles  and  membranes  which  compose  or  influence  his 
vocal  organs  then  take  on  a  more  perfectly  adjusted  action,  and  the  voice  grows 
flexible  and  full  and  rich,  able  to  express  "  thoughts  that  breathe  and  words  that 
burn."     There  is  a  vision  known  to  opticians  as  "  second  sight."    In  their  later 
years  many  people  come  into  possession  of  this.  They  can  lay  aside  their  spectacles, 
worn  perhaps  for  a  quarter  of  a  century,  and  with  the  naked  eye  read  the  finest 
print.     I  have  seen  octogenarians  whose  eyesight  was  apparently  as  good  as  in  the 
palmiest  days  of  their  youth.     There  is  a  mental  perception  enjoyed  by  multitudes 
of  thinkers  which  seems  to  them  like  a  "second  intellectuality."    It  is  broader» 


CHAP.  XXI.]  LEVITICUS.  263 

clearer,  and  more  satisfying  than  was  the  first.  It  is  reached  after  a  night-time  of 
doubt  and  darkness,  during  which  one's  theories  seem  like  chaos  and  one's  beliefs 
like  desperate  guesses.  It  comes  after  a  transition  period,  when,  like  Noah's  ark, 
the  mind  can  find  no  Ararat  on  which  to  anchor.  Then  breaks  in  a  new  light ;  the 
shadows  flee,  the  heterogeneous  mass  of  speculations  begin  to  crystallise ;  a  form 
appears,  and  he  who  had  well-nigh  become  Diogenes  the  Cynic  begins  to  develop 
into  Socrates  the  Philosopher.  So  there  is  a  "  second  religious  experience,"  deeper 
than  the  first.  It  lies  beyond  the  surf  of  unbelief  and  partial  consecration,  and  is 
reached  by  kuncbing  out  into  the  deep  of  an  unreserved  dedication  to  God.  Many 
have  attained  unto  it  and  enjoy  "  the  rest  of  faith."  Others  are  hungering  after  this 
more  perfect  righteousness,  and  will  not  hunger  long  in  vain.  Multitudes  more  are 
wishint!  for  but  making  no  determined  efforts  to  secure  it.  They  are  like  travellers 
ascending  the  valley  of  Chamounix,  who  catch  glimpses  of  Mont  Blanc,  and  though 
longing  to  stand  on  its  glittering  summit,  have  no  expectation  of  ever  doing  so.  I 
recall  a  memorable  Sunday  afternoon  when,  from  an  hotel  window  in  Geneva, 
seventy  miles  distant,  I  caught  my  first  view  of  that  celebrated  landmark.  The 
setting  sun  was  transmuting,  as  no  other  alchemist  ever  could,  its  whole  immense 
top  into  one  gorgeous  mass  of  burnished  gold,  and  the  desire  to  visit  it  came  upon 
me  like  a  spell.  Bat  the  city  of  Geneva,  with  its  bright  stores  and  historic  church 
and  marvellous  watch  factories,  its  bridges  across  the  crystal  river,  and  its  romantic 
lake,  lay  at  my  feet,  and  I  lingered  ;  and  when  at  last  I  sought  the  shining  mount, 
like  most  tourists  I  was  satisfied  to  reach  its  base  and  gaze  upon  it  from  below.  So 
it  is  with  thousands  of  Christians.  Before  their  raptured  vision  rises,  in  their  best 
moments,  the  Mount  of  Holiness.  They  sigh  for  its  lofty  experiences,  but  still  view 
it  from  afar,  or  journey  no  farther  than  its  foot-hills.  Would  they  but  climb  its 
rising  footways  and  scale  its  magnificent  peaks,  a  second  and  deeper  experience 
would  be  theirs.     {Sunday  School  Record.) 


CHAPTER  XXI. 

Vers.  1-24.  Speak  unto  the  priests  the  sons  of  Aaron. — Sacred  relatiomhip 
demands  sanctity  of  life : — If  there  is  one  fact  more  notably  emphasised  thnu 
another  in  this  address  to  priests,  it  is  this :  their — I.  Absolute  and  indestkdc- 
TiBLE  relationship.  Every  son  of  Aaron  was  a  "  priest."  Of  this  union  with 
Aaron  it  is  observable  that — ^1.  It  results  from  a  living  relationship.  By  birth  he 
was  connected  with  Aaron,  a  lineal  descendant  of  God's  high  priest.  And  no  truth 
is  more  a  truism  than  that  every  Christian  is  by  birth-relationship  connected  with 
Christ — the  moment  he  is  quickened  and  becomes  a  believing  and  a  living  soul,  he  is 
a  "  priest  unto  God."  By  no  process  of  spiritual  development  or  self-culture  or 
studied  effort  d-es  the  convert  to  Christ  become  a  "priest  "  ;  he  is  that  by  virtue  of 
his  living  relationship  to  the  High  Priest :  for  as  all  the  sons  of  Aaron  were  priests, 
so  are  all  the  sons  of  God  through  their  connection  with  Christ.  2.  The  relation- 
ship is  inahenable  and  indestructible.  Conduct  is  not  the  basis  of  relationship  with 
Christ,  but  life.  A  son  of  Aaron  may  be  defiled  "  for  the  dead  "  (ver.  2),  yet  he  did 
not  thereby  cease  to  be  related  to  Aaron.  If  we  were  only  priests  to  God  as  our 
conduct  was  faultless,  who  could  stand  ?  We  are  all  unclean ;  defile  ourselves  con- 
tinuously with  "the  dead,"  the  guilty  and  contaminating  things  of  earth.  But 
"  our  hfe  is  hid  with  Christ  in  God  "  ;  and  by  virtue  of  that  life-union  we  remain 
priests.  3.  Imperfections  of  nature  and  character  do  not  sever  relationship.  A 
"  blemish,"  deformity  of  body,  prove  a  disqualification  for  ministry,  but  did  not 
destroy  association  with  Aaron.  Yes  ;  there  is  exclusion  from  high  and  honoured 
services  in  consequence  of  irremediable  defect  and  fault ;  and  Christians  with  incur- 
able weakness  of  disposition,  worldliness  of  sympathy,  infirmities  of  character, 
vacillation  of  purpose,  are  thereby  set  aside  from  honour  in  the  Church  and  highest 
ministries  for  their  Lord  ;  yet  still  the  relationship  to  Christ  continues,  for  it  is  a 
birth-relationship,  based  upon  a  life-union  with  Jesus.  But  though  relationship  is 
absolute  and  indestructible — II.  Privilege  is  dependent  and  conditional.  1. 
Defilement  is  a  disqualification  for  near  fellowship  and  highest  enjoyment  of  the 
priestly  relationship.  Contact  with  "  the  dead "  was  forbidden ;  it  excluded  the 
priest  from  the  service  of  God  until  cleansed  anew  and  so  reinstated.    All  contami- 


264  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 

nation  works  disqualification,  therefore  "touch  not,  taste  not,  handle  not."     A 
priestly  life  should  be  pure.     2.  Defect  is  a  disqualification  for  highest  service  for 
our  Lord.     (1)  Physical  deformities  even  now  lonn  a  natural  barrier  to  the  loftiest 
offices  in  the  Church  of  Christ.     Not  unfitting  the  sufferer  for  many  lowlier  and 
less  public  ministries  ;  for  sacred  grace  is  not  dependent  upon  physical  "  form  and 
comeliness."      (2)  Defects  of  character,  of  mental  and  moral  constitution,  also 
exclude  from  loftiest  stations  and  services  in  the  Christian  kingdom.     They  are  a 
barrier  to  such  positions  in  the  Church  as  require  noblest  qualities  of  character  : 
for  eminence  gives  influence ;  and  he  who  moves  in  the  public  gaze  must  be  free 
from  such  weaknesses  of  will,  or  principle,  or  conduct  as  would  lay  him  open  to  in- 
constancy.   (IF.  H.  Jellie.)      Holy  unto  their  God.— Holy  priests  : — I.  The  honour- 
able POSITION  OF  THE  PBiESTS.     1.  They  are  sanctioned  by  God,  consecrated  to  His 
especial  service,  they  bear  His  stamp  upon  them,  wear  His  livery,  and  receive  of  the 
honour  that  belongs  to  Him.     2.  They  perform  the  high  function  of  offering  the 
bread  of  God.     This  phrase  included  not  only  the  placing  of  the  shewbread  in  the 
sanctuary,  but  also  the  presentation  to  God  of  the  various  sacrifices  which  become 
the  materials  for  His  glory  and  praise.     The  enlarged  priesthood  of  the  New  Testa- 
ment, embracing  the  whole  body  of  believers  in  Christ  Jesus,  are  similarly  dedicated 
to  sacred  office.  They  present  spiritual  sacrifices,  they  "  show  forth  the  excellences  of 
Him  who  called  them  out  of  darkness  into  His  marvellous  light."     II.  Honour  in- 
volves OBLIGATION  AND  RESTRICTION.  Many  acts  permissible  to  the  people  were  not  so  to 
the  pi'iests.     They  wei'e  evidently  to  be  models  of  holiness  in  their  persons,  famiUes, 
and  social  relationships.     Men  like  the  idea  of  occupying  posts  of  dignity,  but  do 
not  sufficiently  realise  the  responsibilities  thence  accruing.     We  are  always  more 
anxious  to  get  than  to  give  ;  sinecure  livings  are  at  too  high  a  premium  of  estimation. 
III.  Perfect  holiness  implies  beauty,  life,  and  jot.     It  is  in  opposition  to  dis- 
figurement, death,  and  sorrow.   How  different  this  conception  of  holiness  from  that 
of  gloom  and  moroseness  which  many  entertain.     Let  young  people  know  that  God 
loves  pretty  children,  and  handsome  men  and  women,  when  the  glory  of  the  Spirit 
is  thus  refiected  in  the  outer  person ;  He  delights  in  the  vigour  and  innocent  mirth 
of  the  young,  and  in  the  happy  enthusiasm,  the  lively  rejoicing  of  their  elders, 
when  these  are  the  outcome  of  righteousness  and  devoted  service.   The  imperfection 
of  this  present  state  is  evident  in  the  fact  that  holiness  does  not  mean  exemption 
from  anxiety  and  tribulation.     It  sometimes  appears  as  if  the  most  faithful  children 
of  God  were  visited  with  heaviest  chastisements.     We  are  assured  of  a  future  state 
where  these  contradictions  shall  be  removed.     The  ideal  shall  not  only  be  approxi- 
mated, but  attained  to ;  "  death  shall  be  no  more,  neither  shall  there  be  mourning 
nor  crying,  nor  pain  any  more  :  the  first  things  are  passed  away,"  symbolical  and 
ascriptional  righteousness  shall  give  place  to  real  perfect  holiness  ;  in  the  presence 
of  God  there  shall  be  fulness  of  joy.      (.9.  R.  Aldridge,  B.A.)         Personal  require- 
ments of  the  priests : — It  is  a  truth  which  ought  ever  to  be  before  the  minds  of 
those  who  minister  in  holy  things,  and  deeply  graven  on  their  hearts,  that  righteous- 
ness of  life  and  consistency  in  private  conduct  is  the  most  vital  element  of  a 
preacher's  power.     Let  his  ordination,  his  talents,  his  attainments,  his  eloquence, 
be  what  they  may,  without  a  life  corresponding  to  his  teachings  he  is  only  "  as 
sounding  brass,  or  a  tinkling  cymbal."   Actions  speak  louder  than  words.  Character 
is  more  eloquent  than  rhetoric.     What  a  man  is  always  has  more  weight  than  what 
he  says.     And  in  the  same  proportion  that  an  unholy  life  weakens  a  minister's 
influence,  does  uprightness,  fidelity,  and  consistency,  enhance  it.     A  truly  honest 
and  good  man,  whatever  his  sphere,  will  always  have  weight.     However  people  may 
revile  his  profession,  they  always  feel  rebuked  in  his  presence,  and  pay  homage  to 
him  in  their  secret  souls.     There  is  might  in  virtue.     It  tells  upon  a  man  in  spite 
of  him.     It  strikes  at  once  into  the  heart  and  conscience.     And  when  a  minister 
has  a  pure  and  spotless  life  to  sustain  his  profession,  he  becomes  a  host  in  strength. 
Jehovah  says  of  His  priests,  "  They  shall  be  holy  unto  their  God,  and  not  profane 
the  name  of  their  God."     "  He  that  ruleth  among  men  must  be  just,  ruling  in  the 
fear  of  the  Lord."     But  the  law  prescribes  for  the  domestic  relations  and  social 
surroundings  of  the  priest  as  well  as  for  his  personal  perfections.     Upon  this  point 
also  it  becomes  a  minister  to  be  particular.     I.  The  ancient  priest  was  required  to 
BE  PHTrsiCALLi  PERFECT.     Otherwise  he  could  not  be  a  fit  representative  of  that 
perfect  humanity  which  was  found  in  our  Saviour.     He  was  required  to  be  without 
bodily  blemish,  that  Israel  might  know  what  sort  of  a  Priest  Messiah  to  expect.  Their 
eyes  were  to  be  directed  to  Jesus  as  one  "  altogether  lovely."    II.  The  ancient 
priest  WAS  bequired  to  be  properly  and  purely  mated.    As  a  type  of  Christ  in  all 


CHAP,  xxr.]  LEVITICUS.  265 

other  respects,  so  was  he  also  in  his  espousals.      The  Lamb  is  not  alone.     He  has 
His  affianced  bride — His  holy  Church.     He  hath  chosen  her  as  a  chaste  virgin — as 
one  whom  "  the  daughters  saw  and  blessed."     Not  a  divorced  woman — not  a  vile 
offender — not  an  unclean  thing— is  the  Church  of  Jesus.     And  the  priest's  wife  had 
to  be  pure  to  typify  these  pure  espousals  of  the  Lamb,  and  the  excellencies  of  that 
Church  which  He  has  chosen  for  His  everlasting  bride.     IH.  It  was  required  of  the 
ancient    priest   that  his  children  should  be  pukh.      The    transgression   of   his 
daughter  degraded  him  from  his  place.     It  is  one  of  the  demands  laid  upon  Chris- 
tian pastors  to  have  "  faithful  children  that  are  not  accused  of  riot,  nor  unruly." 
The  reason  is  obvious.   A  minister's  family,  as  well  as  himself,  is  made  consjDicuous 
by  the  very  nature  of  his  office.     Their  misdeeds  are  specially  noticed  by  the  world, 
and  readily  laid  to  his  charge.     Any  unholiness  in  them  operates  as  a  profanation 
of  his  name.     It  is  so  much  taken  from  his  power.     The  Holy  Ghost  therefore  calls 
upon  him  to  "rule  well  his  own  house,  having  his  children  in  subjection."    But 
the  law  was  typical.     It  relates  to  Christ  and  His  Church.   It  points  to  the  fact  that 
everything  proceeding  from  His  union  with  His  people  is  goodaud  pure.    IV.  There 
are  other  requirements  which  were  made  of  the  ancient  priests,  both  in  the  twenty- 
first  and  twenty-second  chapters,  which  I  will  sum  up  under  the  general  name  of  holi- 
ness.   They  were  not  to  defile  themselves  with  the  dead,  or  by  eating  improper  food, 
or  by  contact  with  the  unclean,  or  by  irreverence  towards  the  holy  things.   They  were 
to  be  very  particular  about  all  the  laws,  and  to  devote  themselves  to  their  office  as 
men  anointed  of  God.     In  one  word,  they  were  to  be  holy  ;  that  is,  whole,  entire, 
complete,  fully  separated  from  all  forbidden,  and  fully  consecrated  to  what  was 
commanded.     This  was  necessary  for  personal  and  official  reasons  ;  but  especially 
for  the  high  priest  as  a  type  of  Christ.     It  was  a  requirement  to  shadow  forth  the 
characte**  of  Jesus,  and  the  sublime  wholeness  and  consecration  which  were  in  Him. 
Men  have  despised  and  desecrated  the  sanctity  of  everything  else  related  to  religion  ; 
but  when  they  came  to  the  character  of  Jesus,  their  hands  grew  powerless,  their 
hearts  failed,  their  utterance  choked,  and  they  turned  aside  in  reverent  awe  of  a 
goodness  and  majesty  which  could  not  be  gainsaid.     Infidelity  itself  has  freely 
and  eloquently  confessed  to  His  matchless  excellence.     Paine  disavows  "  the  most 
distant  disrespect  to  the  moral  character  of  Jesus  Christ."     Eousseau  is  struck 
with   admiration   at   His   excellence.      "  What    sweetness,    what    purity  in    His 
manner !      What  an  affecting  gracefulness  in  His  delivery !      What  sublimity  in 
His  maxims  !     What  profound   wisdom   in  His  discourses !      What  presence  of 
mind,  what  subtlety,  what  truth  in  His  replies!     How  great  the  command  of  His 
passions !     Where  is  the  man,  where  the  philosopher,  who  could  so  live,  and  so 
die,  without  weakness  and  without  ostentation?  .  .   .  Yta,  if  Socrates  lived  and 
died  like  a  sage,  Jesus  lived  and  died  like  a  God."     What  would  man  be  with- 
out Christ — without  His  holy  life?     In  Him,  and  in  Him  alone,  earth  rises  into 
communion  with  heaven,  and  light  shines  in  upon  our  benighted  humanity.     V. 
There  is  yet  one  particular  in  the  requirements  concerning  the  ancient  priests  to 
which  I  will  refer.     It  is  said  of  the  high  priest,  "  he  shall  not  uncover,"  &c. 
(chap.  xxi.  10-12).     That  is  to  say,  he  was  not  to  allow  any  natural  sympathies  to 
interfere  with  the  pure  and  proper  discharge  of  the  duties  of  his  high  office.     Some 
have  regarded  this  as  a  coldness  and  harshness  thrown  around  the  old  priesthood, 
which  has  nothing  to  correspond  to  it  .in  the  Christian  system.     I  do  not  so  under- 
stand it.     The  very  reverse  is  the  truth.     The  high  priest  was  a  great  religious 
officer  for  the  entire  Jewish  nation.     He  belonged  more  to  the  nation  than  to  his 
family  or  himself.     It  would  therefore  have  been  a  most  hearties."  thing  to  allow  a 
little  natural  domestic  sympathy  and  affection  to  set  aside  all  the  great  interests  of 
the  Hebrew  people.     So  far  from  throwing  a  chilliness  around  the  high  priesthood, 
it  gave  to  it  a  warmth  and  zeal  of  devotion,  and  showed  an  outbreathing  of  heart 
upon  the  spiritual  wants  of   the  congregation,  superior  to  the  love  of  father  or 
mother.    And  it  was  meant  to  shadow  forth  a  precious  truth  :  viz.,  that  Christ,  as 
our  High  Priest,  consecrated  all  His  highest,  warmest,  and  fullest  sympathies  in 
His  office.     He  loved  father  and  mother,  and  was  properly  obedient  to  them  ;  but 
when  it  came  to  the  great  duties  of  His  mission,  the  interests  of  a  perishing  world 
were  resting  upon  His  doings,  and  He  could  not  stop  to  gratify  domestic  sympathies. 
Eising  then  above  the  narrow  circle  of  carnal  relationships,  "  He  stretched  forth 
His  hand  toward  His  disciples,  and  said.  Behold  My  mother  and  My  brethren  ! " 
His    sympathies   are  those   of  the   spirit,  and  not  of   the   flesh.      (J.   A.  Seiss, 
D.D.)        Any  blemish. — Blemishes  affect  service,  not  sonship  : — -To  be  a  child  of 
God  is  one  thing;  to  be  in  the  enjoyment  of  priestly  communion  and  priestly 


2C6  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  xxi. 


worship  is  quite  another.  This  latter  is,  alas !  interfered  with  by  many  things. 
Circumstances  and  associations  are  allowed  to  act  upon  us  by  their  defiling  influence. 
We  are  not  to  suppose  that  all  Christians  enjoy  the  same  elevation  of  walk,  the 
same  intimacy  of  fellowship,  the  same  felt  nearness  to  Christ.  Alas  !  alas  !  they  do 
not.  Many  of  us  have  to  mourn  over  our  spiritual  defects.  There  is  lameness  of 
walk,  defective  vision,  stunted  growth  ;  or  we  allow  ourselves  to  be  detiled  by  con- 
tact with  evil,  and  to  be  weakened  and  hindered  by  unhallowed  associations.  In  a, 
word,  as  the  sons  of  Aaron,  though  being  priests  by  birth,  were,  nevertheless, 
deprived  of  many  privileges  through  ceremonial  defilement  and  physical  defects  ; 
so  we,  though  being  priests  unto  God  by  spiritual  birth,  are  deprived  of  many  of 
the  high  and  holy  privileges  of  our  position  by  moral  defilement  and  spiritual 
defects.  We  are  shorn  of  many  of  our  dignities  through  defective  spiritual  develop- 
ment. We  lack  singleness  of  eye,  spiritual  vigour,  whole-hearted  devoteduess. 
Saved  we  are  through  the  free  grace  of  God,  on  the  ground  of  Christ's  perfect  sacri- 
fice. "  We  are  all  the  children  of  God,  by  faith  in  Christ  Jesus  "  ;  but,  then, 
salvation  is  one  thing,  communion  is  quite  another.  Sonship  is  one  thing,  obedi- 
ence is  quite  another.  These  things  should  be  carefully  distinguished.  The  section 
before  us  illustrates  the  distinction  with  great  force  and  clearness.  If  one  of  the 
sons  of  Aaron  happened  to  be  "  broken-footed,  or  broken-handed,"  was  he  deprived 
of  his  sonship  ?  Assuredly  not.  Was  he  deprived  of  his  priestly  position  ?  By  no 
means.  It  was  di^tinctly  declared,  "  He  shall  eat  the  bread  of  his  God,  both  of  the 
most  holy  and  of  the  holy."  What,  then,  did  he  lose  by  his  physical  blemish  ?  He 
was  forbidden  to  tread  some  of  the  higher  walks  of  priestly  service  and  worship. 
"  Only  he  shall  not  go  in  unto  the  vail,  nor  come  nigh  unto  the  altar."  These  were 
very  serious  privations ;  and  though  it  may  be  objected  that  a  man  could  not  help 
many  of  these  physical  defects,  that  did  not  alter  the  matter.  Jehovah  could  not 
have  a  blemished  priest  at  His  altar,  or  a  blemished  sacrifice  thereon.  Both  the 
priest  and  the  sacrifice  should  be  perfect.  Now  we  have  both  the  perfect  priest  and 
the  perfect  sacrifice  in  the  Person  of  our  blessed  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  (C.  H. 
Mackintosh.) 

Ver.  22.  He  shall  eat  the  bread  of  his  God. — The  Divine  banquet : — It  is  not  easy 
to  say  whether  the  words,  "  bread  of  his  God,"  refer  generally  to  the  sacrifices  and 
offerings,  or  specially  to  the  "  shewbread."  We  take  them  as  pointing  to  the  latter  ; 
as,  indeed,  in  any  interpretation  of  the  expression,  the  shewbread  must  be  included, 
if  not  mainly  intended.  It  was  called  the  "  shewbread  "  ;  or,  more  properly,  "  the 
bread  of  the  presence  "  ;  the  bread  that  stood  on  the  King's  table,  and  in  the  King's 
presence ;  the  bread  which  was  therefore  intimately  connected  with  Him  who  ia 
called  "  the  Angel  of  the  Presence  "  (Isa.  Ixii.  9) ;  the  bread  which  was  associated 
with  Him  whose  "presence"  went  with  Israel  whithersoever  they  went  (Exod. 
xxxiii.  li).  I.  It  is  provided  by  God.  As  in  carrying  out  His  purpose  in  the  old 
creation.  He  provided  every  fruit-bearing  tree  for  man,  so,  in  accomplishing  the  new 
creation.  He  has  supplied  the  "  food  convenient."  He  has  made  the  provision  for 
His  house ;  and  He  has  also  blessed  it.  For  the  sustaining  the  life  which  He 
imparts.  He  provides  the  food  required.  II.  It  is  pkepared  by  God  Himself. 
Moses,  as  representing  God,  prepared  the  twelve  loaves  ;  and  God  Himself  has  pre- 
pared the  better  bread,  the  flesh  of  the  Son  of  Man.  "  A  body  hast  Thou  prepared 
Me."  In  the  history  of  the  birth,  the  life,  the  sorrows,  the  hardships,  the  blood- 
shedding,  the  death  of  the  incarnate  Son  of  God,  we  have  a  description  of  the  way  in 
which  the  "shewbread"  or  "presence-bread"  of  the  Church  was  prepared, 
according  to  God's  own  method,  for  our  everlasting  food.  III.  It  is  given  to  us 
BY  God.  God  causes  it  to  be  provided  for  us  ;  nay,  He  prepares  it  Himself ;  and 
then  having  thus  provided  and  prepared  it,  He  gives  it:  "  God  so  loved  the  world 
that  He  gave  His  only-begotten  Son  "  (John  iii.  16) ;  "  The  bread  that  I  will  give  is 
My  flesh,  which  I  will  give,"  &c.  IV.  Who  they  are  who  feast  on  it.  Perhaps 
the  answer  to  such  a  question  will  be — God's  priesthood,  His  Church.  Nor  would 
this  be  incorrect;  yet  it  would  be  defective.  No  doubt  this  heavenly  bread  is  for 
them,  just  as  the  tree  of  life  was  for  Adam,  or  the  Temple  shewbread  was  for  the 
sons  of  Aaron.  But  it  is  so  specially  called  "  the  bread  of  our  God  " ;  and  the  table 
on  which  it  is  set  is  so  specially  God's  own  table  ;  and  the  place  where  it  is  to  be 
eaten  is  so  manifestly  the  royal  banquet-hall  of  heaven,  that  we  come  to  the 
conclusion  that  God  Himself  is  partaker  of  this  feast  as  well  as  we.  The  King, 
sitting  at  His  own  table,  in  His  own  festal  chamber,  not  only  feeds  His  guests, 
but  Himself  partakes  of  that  which  is  set  before  them.     Israel's  various  sacri- 


CHAP,  xxri.]  LEVITICUS.  267 

fices  and  offerings  of  all  kinds  were  the  various  dishes  set  upon  the  great 
Temple  table ;  each  of  them  full  of  meaning  ;  each  of  them  containing  that 
which  would  satisfy  and  comfort ;  every  one  of  them  setting  forth  some  part  of  the 
glorious  fulness  of  the  God-man,  as  the  true  food  of  souls  ;  and  all  of  them  together 
representing  that  complete  and  blessed  feast  of  "fat  tbings"  pai'taken  of  by  God 
and  His  redeemed,  in  some  measure  now,  but  hereafter  to  be  more  fully  enjoyed  at 
the  great  marriage-supper  in  the  New  Jerusalem,  when  that  shall  be  fulfilled,  so 
long  realised  but  in  parts  and  fragments,  "  I  will  come  in  to  him,  and  will  sup  with 
him,  and  he  with  Me"  (Rev.  iii.  20).  (H.  Bonar,  D.D.)  The  bread  of  God  :  — 
It  was  an  ancient  heathen  notion  that  in  sacrifice  food  was  provided  for  the  deity 
in  order  thus  to  show  him  honour.  And,  doubtless,  in  Israel,  ever  prone  to  idolatry, 
there  were  many  who  rose  no  higher  than  this  gross  conception  of  the  meaning  of 
such  words.  Thus,  in  Psa.  1.  8-15,  God  sharply  rebukes  Israel  for  so  unworthy 
thoughts  of  Himself,  using  language  at  the  same  time  which  teaches  the  spiritual 
meaning  of  the  sacrifice,  regarded  as  the  "  food  "  or  "  bread  "  of  God.  ...  Of  which 
language  the  plain  teaching  is  this.  If  the  sacrifices  are  called  in  the  law  "  the 
bread  of  God,"  God  asks  not  this  bread  from  Israel  in  any  material  sense,  or  for  any 
material  need.  He  asks  that  which  the  offeriugs  symbolise ;  thanksgiving,  loyal 
fulfilment  of  covenant  engagements  to  Him,  and  that  loving  trust  which  will  call 
on  Him  in  the  day  of  trouble.  Even  so  !  Gratitude,  loyalty,  trust !  this  is  the 
"  food  of  God,"  this  the  "  bread  which  He  desires  that  we  should  offer,  the  bread 
which  those  Levitical  sacrifices  symbolised.  For  even  as  man,  when  hungry,  craves 
food,  and  cannot  be  satisfied  without  it,  so  God,  who  is  Himself  Love,  desires  our 
love,  and  delights  in  seeing  its  expression  in  all  those  offices  of  self-forgetting  and 
self-sacrificing  service  in  which  love  manifests  itself.  This  is  to  God  even  as  is 
food  to  us.  Love  cannot  be  satisfied  except  with  love  returned  ;  and  we  may  say, 
with  deepest  humility  and  reverence,  the  God  of  love  cannot  be  satisfied  without 
love  returned.  Hence  it  is  that  the  sacrifices,  which  in  various  ways  symbolise  the 
self -offerings  of  love  and  the  fellowship  of  love,  are  called  by  the  Holy  Ghost  "the 
food  "  or  "  bread  of  God."  And  yet  we  must,  on  no  account,  hasten  to  the  conclu- 
sion, as  many  do,  that  therefore  the  Levitical  sacrifices  were  only  intended  to 
express  and  symbolise  the  self-offering  of  the  worshipper,  and  that  this  exhausts 
their  significance.  On  the  contrary,  the  need  of  infinite  love  for  this  "  bread  of 
God  "  cannot  be  adequately  met  and  satisfied  by  the  self-offering  of  any  creature, 
and,  least  of  all,  by  the  self-offering  of  a  sinful  creature,  whose  very  sin  lies  just  in 
this,  that  he  has  fallen  away  from  perfect  love.  The  symbolism  of  the  sacrifice  as 
"  the  food  of  God,"  therefore,  by  this  verv  phrase,  points  toward  the  self-offering  in 
love  of  the  eternal  Son  to  the  Father,  and  in  behalf  of  sinners  for  the  Father's  sake. 
It  was  the  sacrifice  on  Calvary  which  first  became,  in  innermost  reality,  that 
"  bread  of  God,"  which  the  ancient  sacrifices  were  only  in  symbol.  It  was  this,  not 
regarded  as  satisfying  Divine  justice  (though  it  did  this),  but  as  satisfying  the 
Divine  love ;  because  it  was  the  supreme  expression  of  the  perfect  love  of  the 
incarnate  Son  of  God  to  the  Father,  in  His  becoming  "  obedient  unto  death,  even 
the  death  of  the  Cross."     {S.  H.  Kellogg,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  XXII. 


Ver.  11.  If  the  priest  buy  any  soul  .  .  .  and  lie  that  is  bom. — Bought,  or 
born : — Strangers,  sojourners,  and  servants  upon  hire  were  not  to  eat  of  holy 
things.  It  is  so  in  spiritual  matters  still.  But  two  classes  were  free  at  the  sacred 
table — those  who  were  bought  with  the  priest's  money,  and  those  who  were  born 
into  the  priest's  house.  I.  Bought.  Our  great  High  Priest  has  bought  with  a 
price  aU  those  who  put  their  trust  in  Him.  They  are  His  absolute  property.  Not 
for  what  they  are  in  themselves,  but  for  their  Owner's  sake  they  are  admitted  into 
the  same  privileges  which  He  Himself  enjoys,  and  they  shall  "  eat  of  His  meat." 
He  has  meat  to  eat  which  worldlings  know  not  of.  "  Because  ye  belong  to  Christ," 
therefore  shall  ye  share  with  your  Lord.  II.  Born.  This  is  an  equally  sure  way 
to  privilege;  if  born  in  the  Priest's  house  we  take  our  place  with  the  rest  of  the 
family.  Regeneration  makes  us  fellow-heirs,  and  of  the  same  body;  and,  there- 
fore, the  peace,  the  joy,  the  glory,  which  the  Father  has  given  to  Christ,  Christ  has 
given  to  us.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 


268  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ch4p.  xxii. 

Ver.  21.  It  shall  be  perfect  to  be  accepted. — A  plain  man's  sermon: — 1.  The 
ceremonial  law,  as  ordained  by  the  hand  of  Moses  and  Aaron,  called  the  worshippers 
of  God  to  great  carefulness  before  Him.  Before  thtir  minds  that  solemn  truth  was 
ever  made  visible,  "  I  the  Lord  thy  God  am  a  jealous  God."  Nothing  might  be 
done  thoughtlessly.  Of  every  ceremony  it  might  be  said,  "  It  must  be  perfect  to  be 
accepted."  God  must  have  the  minds  and  thouglits  of  men,  or  He  counts  that 
they  are  no  worshippers.  We  need  to  think  a  grt-^at  deal  more  about  how  we  come 
before  the  Most  High  ;  and  if  we  thought  more  and  prayed  more,  we  should  become 
more  certain  of  our  inability  to  do  anything  as  we  ought  to  do  it,  and  we  should  be 
driven  to  a  more  entire  dependence  upon  the  Spirit  of  God  in  every  act  of  worship. 
This  in  itself  would  be  a  great  blessing.  2.  The  ceremonial  law  also  engendered 
in  men  who  did  think  a  great  respect  for  the  holiness  of  God.  They  could  not  help 
seeing  that  God  required  everything  in  His  service  to  be  of  the  very  best.  They 
must  have  felt  that  sin  was  not  a  trifle,  but  a  thing  for  which  there  must  be  life 
given  and  blood  shed  before  it  could  be  removed  ;  and  that  life  and  blood  must  be 
the  life  and  blood  of  a  perfect  and  unblemished  offering.  3.  Under  the  Jewish 
ceremonial  law,  one  of  the  most  prominent  thoughts,  next  to  a  great  respect  for  the 
holiness  of  God,  would  be  a  deep  regard  for  the  law  of  God.  Everywhere  that  the 
Israelite  went  he  was  surrounded  by  law.  If  men  do  not  understand  the  law,  they 
will  not  feel  that  they  are  sinners ;  and  if  they  are  not  consciously  sinners,  they 
will  never  value  the  sin-offering.     I.  First,  then,  the  eole  of  our  text,  "It  shall 

BE  PEBFECT  TO  BE  ACCEPTED,"  MAT  BE  USED  TO  SHUT  OUT  ALL  THOSE  FAULTY 
OFFERINGS     WHEREON     SO     MANY    PLACE     THEIR    CONFIDENCE.       1.    It    mOSt    effectually 

judges  and  casts  forth  all  self-righteousness,  although  this  is  the  great  deceit 
wherewith  thousands  are  buoyed  up  with  false  hojjes.  "  It  shall  be  perfect  to  be 
accepted  ;  there  shall  be  no  blemish  therein."  I£  you  can  come  up  to  this  rule  you 
shall  be  saved  by  your  righteousness ;  but  if  you  cannot  reach  you  must  fail  of 
acceptance.  2.  Why,  look,  ye  that  hope  to  be  saved  by  your  own  doings,  your 
nature  at  the  very  first  is  tainted !  There  is  evil  in  your  heart  from  the  very 
beginning,  so  that  you  are  not  perfect  and  are  not  without  blemish.  Who  can 
bring  a  clean  thing  out  of  an  unclean?  Not  one.  3.  Look  again,  for  I  feel  sure 
that  there  must  have  been  a  blemish  somewhere  as  matter  of  fact.  As  yet  you  are 
not  conscious  of  a  blemish  ;  and  possibly  there  is  some  justification  for  this  uncon- 
sciousness. Looking  upon  you,  I  feel  inclined  to  love  you,  as  Jesus  loved  that 
young  man  who  could  say  of  the  commandments,  "  All  these  have  I  kept  from  my 
youth  up."  But  I  must  beg  you  to  answer  this  question— Has  there  not  been  a 
blemish  in  your  motives  ?  What  have  you  been  doing  all  these  good  things  for  ? 
"  Why,  that  I  might  be  saved  !  "  Precisely  so.  Therefore  selfishness  has  been 
the  motive  which  has  ruled  your  Ufe.  Moreover,  it  is  not  only  your  nature  and 
your  motive  which  are  imperfect.  You  certainly  must  have  erred  somewhere  or 
other,  in  some  act  of  your  life.  The  Scripture  also  is  dead  against  you  when  it 
says,  "  There  is  none  righteous;  no,  not  one."  4.  Methinks  if  I  could  read  all 
hearts,  there  is  not  one  here,  however  self-righteous  he  may  be,  who  would  not 
have  to  confess  distinct  acts  of  sin.  I  know  how  some  of  you  have  lived.  You 
were  amiable  girls  and  excellent  young  women,  and  have  grown  up  to  be  careful, 
loving  wives  ;  and  therefore  you  say,  "  I  never  did  anybody  any  harm  ;  surely  I 
may  be  accepted."  I  wish  that  there  were  more  like  you.  I  am  not  condemning 
you  ;  far  from  it ;  but  I  know  that  your  tendency  is  to  think  that  because  of  aU 
this  you  must  in  yourselves  be  accepted  of  God.  Give  me  your  hand,  and  let  me 
say  to  you,  with  tears,  "  It  is  not  so,  my  sister  ;  it  is  not  so,  my  brother.  It  must 
be  perfect  to  be  accepted  ;  there  must  be  no  blemish  in  it."  This  is  a  death-blow 
for  your  self-confidence  ;  for  there  was  a  time,  some  day  or  other  in  your  life,  in 
which  you  did  wrong.  What  I  have  you  no  hasty  temper  ?  Have  no  quick  words 
escaped  you  which  you  would  wish  to  recall?  What!  have  you  never  murmured 
against  God,  or  complained  of  His  providence?  Have  you  never  been  slothful 
when  you  ought  to  have  been  diligent?  Can  you  say  that  your  heart  has  never 
desired  evil — never  imagined  impurity?  Have  you  never  gone  to  live  in  an  old 
house  which  looked  like  new  ?  You  had  fresh  paint,  and  varnish,  and  paper  in 
superabundance;  and  you  thought  yourself  dwelling  in  one  of  the  sweetest  of 
places,  till  one  day  it  happened  that  a  board  was  taken  up,  and  you  saw  under  the 
floor.  What  a  gathering  of  every  foul  thing  !  You  could  not  have  lived  in  that 
house  at  peace  for  a  minute  had  you  known  what  had  been  covered  up.  Eottenness 
had  been  hidden,  decay  had  been  doctored,  death  had  been  decorated.  That  is  just 
like  our  humanity.     When  lusts  are  quiet,  they  are  all  there.     The  best  man  in 


CHAP.  XXII.]  LEVITICUS.  269 

this  place,  who  is  not  a  believer  in  Christ,  would  go  mad  if  he  were  to  see  himself 
as  God  sees  him.  5.  This  text  makes  a  clean  sweep  of  all  other  kinds  of  human 
confidences.  Some  are  deceived  in  this  sort:  "Well,"  they  say,  "I  do  not  trust 
in  my  works ;  but  I  am  a  religious  person,  and  I  attend  the  sacrament,  and  I  go 
to  my  place  of  worship  pretty  regularly.  I  feel  that  I  must  certainly  be  right.  I 
have  faith  in  Jesus  Christ  and  in  myself."  In  various  ways  men  thus  compose  an 
image  whose  feet  are  part  of  iron  and  part  of  clay.  II.  As  this  rule  shuts  out  all 
other  confidences,  so  this  rule  shuts  us  up  to  the  sacrifice  of  Jesus  Christ. 
Oh,  if  I  had  the  tongues  of  men  and  of  angels,  I  could  never  fitly  tell  you  of  Him 
who  offered  Himself  without  spot  unto  God,  for  He  is  absolutely  perfect ;  there  is 
no  blemish  in  Him  !  1.  He  is  perfect  in  His  nature  as  God  and  man.  There  was 
not  the  possibility  of  sinning  about  the  Saviour — ^no  tendency  that  way,  no  desire 
that  way.  Nothing  that  could  be  construed  into  evil  ever  came  upon  His  character. 
2.  As  He  was  perfect  in  His  nature,  so  was  He  in  His  motive.  What  brought  Him 
from  above  but  love  to  God  and  man  ?  Tou  can  find  no  trace  of  ambition  in  Christ 
Jesus.  In  Him  there  is  no  thought  of  self.  3.  As  His  nature  was  perfect,  so  was 
His  spirit.  He  was  never  sinfully  angry,  nor  harsh,  nor  untrue,  nor  idle.  The  air 
of  His  soul  was  the  atmosphere  of  heaven  rather  than  of  earth.  4.  Look  at  His 
life  of  obedience,  and  see  how  perfect  that  was.  Which  commandment  did  He 
ever  break  ?  Which  duty  of  relationship  did  He  ever  forget  ?  He  honoured  the 
law  of  God  and  loved  the  souls  of  men.  5.  Look  at  the  perfection  of  His  sacrifice. 
He  gave  His  body  to  be  tortured,  and  His  mind  to  be  crushed  and  broken,  even 
unto  the  death-agony.  He  gave  Himself  for  us  a  perfect  sacrifice.  All  that  the 
law  could  ask  was  in  Him.  III.  Listen,  ye  that  follow  after  righteousness,  ye  that 
know  the  Lord  !  Tou  are  saved.  You  have  not,  therefore,  to  bring  any  sacrifice 
by  way  of  a  sin-offering,  but  you  have  to  bring  sacrifices  of  thanksgiving.  It  is 
your  reasonable  service  that  you  offer  your  bodies  a  living  sacrifice  unto  God.  If 
you  do  this  you  cannot  bring  an  absolutely  perfect  sacrifice,  but  you  must  labour 
to  let  it  be  perfect  in  what  is  often  the  Biblical  sense  of  perfection.  You  must  take 
care  that  what  you  bring  is  not  blind,  for  the  blind  were  not  to  be  offered.  You 
must  serve  God  with  a  single  eye  to  the  glory  of  God.  And  as  it  must  not  be  blind, 
so  it  must  not  be  broken.  Whenever  we  serve  God,  we  must  do  it  with  the  whole 
of  our  being,  for  if  we  try  to  serve  God  with  a  bit  of  our  nature,  and  leave  the  rest 
unconsecrated,  we  shall  not  be  accepted.  Next,  they  were  not  to  bring  a  maimed 
sacrifice :  that  is,  one  without  its  limbs.  Some  people  give  grudgingly,  that  is  to 
say,  they  come  up  to  the  collection-box  with  a  limp.  Many  serve  Christ  with  a 
broken  arm.  The  holy  work  is  done,  but  it  is  painfully  and  slowly  done.  Among 
the  heathen,  I  believe,  they  never  offered  in  sacrifice  to  the  gods  a  calf  that  had  to 
be  carried.  The  reason  was  that  they  considered  that  the  sacrifice  ought  to  be 
willing  to  be  offered,  and  so  it  must  be  able  to  walk  up  to  the  altar.  Notice  in  the 
Old  Testament,  though  there  were  many  creatures,  both  birds  and  beasts,  that 
were  offered  to  God,  they  never  offered  any  fish  on  the  holy  altar.  The  reason 
probably  is  that  a  fish  could  not  come  there  alive.  Its  life  would  be  spent  before  it 
came  to  the  altar,  and  therefore  it  could  not  render  a  hfe  unto  God.  Take  care 
that  you  bring  your  bodies  a  living  sacrifice.  We  must  not  bring  Him  the  mere 
chrysalis  of  a  man,  out  of  which  the  life  has  gone  ;  but  we  must  bring  before  Him 
our  living,  unmaimed  selves  if  we  would  be  acceptable  before  Him.  It  is  then 
added,  "  or  having  a  wen."  It  does  not  look  as  though  it  would  hurt  the  sacrifice 
much  to  have  a  wen  ;  yet  there  must  not  be  a  wen,  or  spot,  or  wrinkle,  or  any 
such  thing.  Above  all,  avoid  that  big  wen  of  pride.  The  sacrifice  was  not  to  be 
scabbed,  or  to  have  the  scurvy.  That  is  to  say,  it  was  to  be  withcut  any  sort  of 
outward  fault.  I  have  heard  men  say,  "It  is  true  I  did  not  do  that  thing  well, 
but  my  heart  was  right."  That  may  be,  but  you  must  try  and  make  the  whole 
matter  as  good  as  it  can  be.  What  a  deal  of  scabbed  service  pnr  Lord  gets  !  Men 
try  to  be  benevolent  to  their  fellow-creatures  with  an  irritable  temper.  Certain 
people  try  to  serve  God,  and  write  stinging  letters  to  promote  brotherly  love,  and 
dogmatical  epistles  in  f.tvour  of  large-mindedness.  Too  many  render  to  the  Lord 
hurried,  thoughtless  worship ;  and  many  more  give  for  offerings  their  smallest 
coins  and  such  things  as  they  will  never  miss.  God  has  many  a  scurvy  sheep 
brought  before  Him.  The  best  of  the  best  should  be  given  to  theBest  of  the  best. 
Would  God  that  the  best  of  our  lives,  the  best  hours  of  the  morning,  the  best  skill 
of  our  hands,  the  best  thoughts  of  our  minds,  the  very  cream  of  our  being,  were 
given  to  our  God !  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Offerings  to  be  without  blemish  : — 1.  This 
law  was,  then,  necessary  for  the  preserving  of  the  honour  of  the  sanctuary  and  of  the 


270  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxn. 

God  that  was  there  worshipped.  2.  This  law  made  all  the  legal  sacrifices  the  fitter 
to  be  types  of  Christ,  the  great  Sacrifice,  from  which  all  those  derived  their  virtue. 
3.  It  is  an  instruction  to  us  to  oiJer  to  God  the  best  we  have  in  our  spiritual 
sacrifices.  If  our  devotions  be  ignorant,  and  cold,  and  trifling,  and  full  of  distrac- 
tions, we  offer  the  blind,  and  the  lame,  and  the  sick  for  sacrifice.  But  cursed  be 
the  deceiver  that  doth  so,  for  while  he  thinks  to  put  a  cheat  upon  God,  he  puts  a 
damning  cheat  upon  his  own  soul.  (Mattheic  Henry,  D.D.)  Blemishes  in  our 
sacrijices : — All  religious  service  is  of  the  nature  of  sacrifice.  I.  Read  this  require- 
ment of  perfect  sacrifices,  and  by  it  let  us  test  our  regard  for  the  Sabbath  services. 
God  has  once,  at  least,  read  us  a  very  solemn  lesson  of  the  manner  in  wbich  He 
regards  lost  Sabbaths.  Seventy  Sabbatical  years  the  Jews  allowed  to  drop  out  of 
their  calendar.  Seventy  years  were  spent  by  them  in  captivity.  A  fearful  presage 
to  us  of  what  might  be  the  national  judgment  if,  as  a  Church  and  people,  we  went 
on  to  blot  out  from  amongst  us  our  day  of  rest.  Every  one  will  agree  that  if  the 
Sabbath  be  obligatory,  then  it  is  assuredly  obligatory  thus  far — 1.  That  there  be 
regular  attendance  upon  public  service.  2.  Of  the  other  hours  of  the  day,  that  a 
part  be  spent  in  private  devotional  exercises,  a  part  in  religious  reading ;  that  a 
higher  and  more  sacred  tone  of  conversation  be  maintained ;  that  some  work  of 
piety  and  love  be  performed.  II.  By  this  test  let  us  judge  our  sanctuary  worship. 
Examine  ourselves  in  the  house  of  God.  Difiiculty  of  keeping  the  mind  collected 
and  devout  results  from  want  of  due  preparation.  1.  Something  may  be  said 
respecting  the  posture  of  body  we  assume  in  the  sanctuary.  Position  of  body 
reacts  upon  the  mind.  Indolence  is  associated  with,  and  leads  to,  irreverence. 
Kneeling  is  required  equally  by  the  dignity  of  God  and  the  weakness  of  our  nature. 
2.  So  with  the  voice.  Difficult  to  overestimate  how  much  is  lost — (a)  to  the 
beauty  of  our  services ;  (b)  to  the  glory  of  God ;  (c)  to  our  own  souls,  by  the 
silence  so  many  of  us  maintain,  both  in  the  responses  and  in  the  service  of  song. 
But  there  are  more  serious  "blemishes"  in  our  sanctuary  sacrifices  than  these. 
Where  is — (1)  The  constant  mental  effort  essential  to  true  worship  and  proper  in  the 
presence  of  God  ?  (2)  The  self-distrust  due  from  such  sinful  creatures  as  we  ?  (3) 
The  self-discipline  to  bring  ourselves  into  responsiveness  to  God's  Spirit  ?  (4)  The 
inward  up-looking  for  Divine  light  and  grace  ?  (5)  The  frequent  reminding  our 
selves  of  what  we  are  and  what  God  is  ?  (6)  The  simple  spirit  of  self-application  ? 
(7)  The  faith  to  give  wings  to  prayer?  "Well  might  St.  James  say,  "  Ye  have  not 
because  ye  ask  not,  or  ask  amiss."  "  Blemish  on  sacrifice  "  drives  the  flame  down 
again.  III.  By  this  test  let  us  examine  our  observance  of  the  sacrament  of  the 
Lord's  Supper.  A  word  in  solemn  affection  to  some.  You  never  attend  the  sacra- 
ment to  celebrate  the  Lord's  death  at  all.  Others,  if  at  all,  so  irregularly  as  almost 
to  turn  the  attendance  into  a  mockery.  1.  Happy  for  us  that  we  can  turn  from  all 
our  poor  "  blemished  "  sacrifices  to  tbat  pure  and  perfect  sacrifice  of  Christ,  which 
has  been  offered  "  without  blemish  and  without  spot "  for  us.  2.  Only  let  us 
never  forget  that  he  who  would  safely  trust  in  the  power  of  that  "  Sacrifice  "  for 
his  salvation  must  take  the  spotlessness  of  tbat  Sacrifice  for  his  daily  pattern. 
(A7ion.)  Giving  the  worst  to  God:— A  pastor  went  one  day  to  call  on  a  member 
of  his  church,  who  was  a  farmer.  During  the  conversation  the  work  of  Christian 
benevolences  was  touched  upon,  and  the  farmer  proudly  alluded  to  the  fact  that 
out  of  his  few  acres  of  ground  he  always  set  aside  one  acre  to  the  Lord's  use.  The 
pastor,  hoping  to  here  get  the  material  for  an  illustration  in  his  own  work,  asked 
the  farmer  brother,  "  Which  acre  do  you  set  aside  ?  "  This  was  a  question  that 
came  very  unexpectedly,  but  the  farmer  was  honest  enough  to  tell  the  truth,  and 
replied,  "  When  it  is  a  dry  season,  I  select  one  up  there,"  pointing  to  a  field  on  the 
hillside ;  "  and  when  it  is  a  wet  season,  I  choose  one  down  there,"  pointing  to  a 
field  of  very  low  land  which  lay  at  the  foot  of  the  hill.  I  give  this  illustration,  not 
on  account  of  its  rarity,  but  because  it  is  a  true  picture  of  thousands  of  professed 
Christians,  who  give  to  God's  service  that  part  of  their  time  and  means  that  is  left 
after  first  satisfying  their  own  personal  selfish  ends.  (Sharpened  Arroivg.)  God 
ought  to  have  the  best: — One  cold  morning  a  little  ragged,  woeful-looking  child 
came  in  at  our  back  door,  begging  for  food.  "  Please,  ma'am,  me  'nd  the  children 
most  starved.  Only  a  bit  o'  bread."  "Have  you  no  father  or  mother,  child?" 
asked  I.  "  Yes'm,"  and  a  look  of  shame  and  despair  mantled  his  hollow  cheeks. 
"Don't  they  work  and  earn  money?"  "Yes'm,  little;  but  they  most  alius 
spend  it  afore  they  gets  home,  at  the  'Horn  o'  Plenty.' "  Immediately  mv  heart 
became  adamant.  The  miserable,  drunken  brutes,  thought  I,  I'll  not  feed  their 
children.     Then  I  remembered  there  is  a  very  stale  loaf  of  bread  in  the  cupboard. 


CHAP.  XXIII.]  LEVITICUS.  271 

scarcely  fit  for  toast.  I  gave  that  to  the  child,  very  glad  to  dispose  of  it.  He 
grabbed  it  eagerly,  with  a  clutch  that  reminded  one  of  the  grasp  of  the  drowning, 
when  they  would  fain  save  themselves.  Little  Gracie,  our  six-year-old  darling,  had 
been  a  silent  spectator ;  but  after  the  boy  departed,  she  came  to  me  with  deep 
inquiry  depicted  upon  her  spiritual  countenance,  saying,  "Mamma,  if  Jesus  Christ 
had  come  and  said  He  was  starving  to  death,  would  you  have  given  Him  that 
awful  dry  loaf  of  bread  ?"  "Why,  child,"  said  I,  "why  do  you  ask  such  a  ques- 
tion ?  "  "  Why,  when  we  give  to  the  poor,  ought  we  not  to  think  that  we  are  really 
giving  to  Jesus  Himself  ?  I  thought  He  said  so  when  here  upon  the  earth." 
"  Well,  Gracie,"  said  I,  kissing  her  sweet,  troubled  face,  "I  think  you  ai'e  right, 
and  I  will  remember  your  lesson  next  time.  Yes,  Gracie,  we,  whom  the  Lord  hath 
blessed  in  our  '  granary  and  our  store,'  would  soon  relieve  suffering  humanity  if  we 
gave  our  alms  as  if  we  really  were  giving  to  the  '  Blessed  Kedeemer.'  We  are  too 
prone  to  forget  this  truth."  "  The  very  best  that  we  have  in  the  house  isn't  too 
good  for  Him,  is  it,  mamma?  "asked  she.  "  No,  no,  my  precious  child,"  replied  I, 
clasping  her  to  my  heart  and  thinking,  "  Out  of  the  mouths  of  babes  and  suck- 
lings hast  Thou  ordained  strength  and  wisdom."  (Christian  Age.)  Worthless 
ojf'eriiigs : — A  missionary  in  China,  describing  in  the  Sunday  at  Hovie,  the 
sacrifices  which  are  offered  to  Confucius  at  the  usual  and  autumnal  equinoxes, 
says,  "  We  looked  at  the  victims,  and  they  were  diseased,  scraggy  brutes,  worthless 
offerings.  Oh,  the  mockery  and  the  utter  insincerity  and  indifference  of  the 
Chinese  mind  to  all  sense  of  honour !  My  friend  explained  the  matter  to  me  ;  he 
said  they  were  allowed  so  much  by  the  Treasury  for  this  purpose,  and  the  cheaper 
they  could  get  the  animals  the  more  they  could  pocket."     (J.  Tinling.) 

Vers.  31-33.  I  am  the  Lord. — Five  motives  to  obedience : — Five  motives  are  strewn 
on  their  path  to  constrain  them  to  close  obedience.  1.  "  I  am  the  Lord."  This  is 
authority  employed.  2.  "  I  will  be  hallowed  among  the  children  of  Israel."  This 
is  His  holiness,  and  His  desire  to  diffuse  awe  of  His  holy  name.  3.  "  I  am  the 
Lord  which  hallow  you."  Here  is  an  appeal  to  their  privileges  as  Israelites.  Do 
you  not  feel  that  you  actually  are  set  apart  for  Me?  4.  "I  am  the  Lord  which 
brought  you  out  of  Egypt."  Here  is  His  claim  as  Eedeemer,  who  paid  the  price 
and  set  free  the  captives.  Is  there  gratitude  in  your  souls?  Is  there  sense  of 
thankfulness  for  favour  done?  5.  "Your  God" — as  well  as  your  Lord:  His  claim 
as  Father,  Shepherd,  King,  and  whatever  else  there  is  that  is  tender  in  relationship, 
or  beneficial  in  office,  or  sweet  in  character— all  is  summed  up  in  "  your  God  "  1 
Who  is  like  "our  God"?  "Who  would  not  fear  Thee?"  (.Jer.  x.  7).  {A.  A. 
Bonar.)  Unquestioning    obedience  per-'inptr.rily   enforced: — I.    What    Jehovah 

WAS  IN  Israel.  "  I  am  the  Lord."  II.  What  Jehovah  was  to  Israel.  "  Your 
God."  III.  What  Jehovah  had  done  for  Israel.  "  That  brought  you  out  of 
the  land  of  Egypt."  IV.  What  Jehovah  would  do  with  Israel.  "  I  am  the  Lord 
which  hallow  you."  Ceremonially  and  symbolically  priests  and  people  were  made 
holy  by — 1.  The  rights  they  observed.  2.  The  sacrifices  they  offered.  3.  The 
manifested  presence  of  the  Lord.     {F.  W.  Brown.) 


CHAPTER   XXni. 


Vers.  2-44.  These  are  My  feasts. — The  holy  festivals : — I.  Commentators  generally 
on  this  part  of  Hebrew  law  have  remarked  upon  the  social,  political,  and  com- 
mercial BENEFITS  resulting  TO  THE  JeWISH  PEOPLE   FROM   THESE  NATIONAL  FESTIVALS 

AND  CONVOCATIONS.  They  served  to  unite  the  nation,  cemented  them  together  as  one 
pei^ple,  and  prevented  the  tendency  to  the  foimation  of  separate  cliques  and  con- 
flicting clans  or  states.  These  convocations  also  had  great  effect  upon  tbe  internal 
commerce  of  the  Hebrew  people.  They  furnished  facilities  for  mutual  exchanges, 
and  opened  the  ways  of  trade  and  business  between  the  various  sections.     II.  There 

was  also  a  direct  religious  value  and    forethought  in  the  appointment  of  THESE 

FESTIVALS.  They  prescribed  public  consociation  in  worship.  Man  is  a  worshipping 
being.  It  is  not  only  his  duty,  but  his  nature  and  native  instinct  to  worship.  Mere 
isolated  worship,  without  association  in  common  set  services,  soon  dwindles,  flags, 
degenerates,  and  corrupts.     Neither  does  it  ever  reach  that  majesty  and  intense 


272  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOR.  [chap.  xsur. 

inspiration  which  comes  from  open  congregation  in  the  same  great  acts  of  devotion. 
"As  iron  sbarpeneth  iron,  so  man  sharpeneth  the  countenance  of  his  friend."  And 
just  as  the  multitude  of  these  mutual  sharpeners  is  increased,  will  their  common 
devotion  be  deepened  and  augmented.     III.     I  propose  to  speak  more  particularly 

of  THE  TYPICAL  KELATIONS  OF  THESE    HOLY  FEASTS   AND    SEASONS.       We  have    in  them  a 

system  of  types,  chronologically  arranged,  to  set  forth  the  true  course  of  time — to 
prefigure  the  whole  history  of  redemption  in  its  leading  outlines  from  the  com- 
menceinent  to  the  close.  1.  The  first  was  the  Passover.  It  was  a  sort  of  perpetual 
commemoration  of  their  deliverance  from  the  opprfssor  and  from  death — a  standing 
testimonial  that  their  salvation  was  by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb.  It  was  the  keynote 
of  the  Christian  system  sounding  in  the  dim  depths  of  remote  antiquity.  Tbat 
bondage  in  Egypt  referred  to  a  still  deeper  and  more  degrading  slavery  of  the  spirit. 
That  redemption  was  the  foreshadow  of  a  far  greater  deliverance.  And  that  slain  lamb 
and  its  sprinkled  blood  pointed  to  a  meeker,  purer,  and  higher  Victim,  whose  body 
was  broken  and  blood  shed  for  us  and  for  many  for  the  remission  of  sins.  2.  The 
next  was  the  Feast  ef  Unleavened  Bread,  which  was  a  sort  of  continuation  of  the 
Passover  on  the  next  day.  The  one  refers  to  what  Christ  does  and  is  to  the  believer, 
and  the  other  refers  to  what  the  true  believer  does  in  return.  The  one  refers  to  our 
redemption  by  blood  and  our  deliverance  from  condemnation  ;  the  other  to  our 
repi  ntance  and  consecration  to  a  new  life  of  obedience,  separated  from  the  leaven 
of  unrighteousness.  It  is  therefore  plain  why  both  were  thus  joined  together  as 
one.  Redemption  is  nothing  to  us  if  it  does  not  lead  us  to  a  purification  of 
ourselves  from  the  filthy  ways  and  associations  of  the  wicked.  We  can  only 
effectually  keep  the  gospel  feast  by  purging  out  the  old  leaven  of  malice  and 
wickedness.  Seven  days  was  this  Feast  of  Unleavened  Bread  to  be  kept — a  full 
pex-iod  of  time.  We  are  to  "  serve  God  in  righteousness  and  holiness  all  the  days 
of  our  life."  Our  work  is  not  done  until  the  week  of  our  stay  in  this  world  ends. 
We  must  be  faithful  until  death.  3.  Joined  with  the  Passover  and  the  Feast  of 
Unleavened  Bread  was  the  additional  service  of  presenting  before  God  the  first 
sheaf  of  the  barley  harvest.  "This,"  says  Gumming,  "  was  a  beautiful  institution, 
to  teach  the  Israelites  that  it  was  not  the  soil,  nor  the  raindrops,  nor  the  sunbeams, 
nor  the  dews,  nor  the  skill  of  their  agriculturists,  that  they  had  to  thank  for  their 
bounteous  produce;  but  that  they  must  rise  above  the  sower  and  reaper,  and  see 
God,  the  Giver  of  the  golden  harvest,  and  make  His  praise  the  keynote  to  their 
harvest-home."  It  was  all  this,  but  it  had  also  a  deeper  and  more  beautiful 
meaning.  The  broad  field,  sowed  with  good  seed,  with  its  golden  ears  ripening  for 
the  harvest,  is  Christ's  own  chosen  figure  of  His  kingdom  upon  earth,  and  the 
congregation  of  His  believing  children  maturing  for  the  garners  of  eternal  life.  In 
that  field  the  chief  sheaf  is  Jesus  Christ  Himself  ;  for  He  was  in  all  respects  "made 
like  unto  His  brethren."  He  is  the  "  firstf ruits. "  He  was  gathered  first,  and 
received  into  the  treasure-house  of  heaven.  It  was  the  Passover  time  when  He 
came  to  perfect  ripeness.  It  was  during  these  solemnities  that  He  was  "cut  off." 
And  when  the  Spirit  of  God  lifted  Him  from  the  sepulchre,  and  the  heavens  opened 
to  receive  Him,  then  did  the  waving  of  the  sheaf  of  firstfruits  have  its  truest  and 
highest  fulfilment.  Until  this  sheaf  was  thus  offered  along  with  the  blood  of  atone- 
ment there  could  be  no  harvest  for  us.  4.  There  was  another  harvest,  and  another 
festival  service  connected  with  its  opening,  fifty  days  later  than  the  barley  harvest. 
This  was  the  wheat  harvest,  at  which  was  celebrated  the  Feast  of  Weeks,  othei'wise 
called  Pentecost.  The  Passover  shows  us  Christ  crucified  ;  the  sheaf  of  firstfruits 
shows  us  Christ  raised  from  the  dead  and  Mfted  up  to  heaven  as  our  forerunner ; 
and  the  Pentecostal  feast,  with  its  two  leavened  loaves,  shows  us  Christ  in  the 
gracious  influences  of  His  Spirit  wrought  into  the  hearts  and  lives  of  those  who 
constitute  His  earthly  Church.  This  spiritual  kneading  took  its  highest  and  most 
active  form  on  that  memorable  Pentecost  when  the  disciples  "were  all  with  one 
accord  in  one  place,"  and  the  Holy  Spirit  came  down  upon  them  with  gifts  of 
mighty  power.  Three  thousand  souls  were  that  day  added  to  the  Church.  It  was 
a  glad  and  glorious  day  for  Christianity.  It  was  the  firstfruits  of  wheat  harvest 
brought  with  joyous  thanksgiving  unto  God.  But  it  was  only  the  firstfruits — the 
earnest  of  a  vast  and  plenteous  harvest  of  the  same  kind  ripening  on  the  same  fields. 
Thenceforward  the  world  was  to  be  tilled  with  glad  reapers  gathering  in  the  sheaves, 
and  with  labourers  kneading  the  contents  of  those  sheaves  into  loaves  for  God. 
Leaven  there  needs  is  in  those  loaves ;  but,  presented  along  with  the  blood  of  the 
chief  of  the  flock  and  herd,  they  stiU  become  acceptable  to  Him  who  ordained  the 
Bervioe.   There  was  a  peculiar  requirement  connected  with  these  laws  for  the  wheat 


CHAP,  xxiii.]  LEVITICUS.  273 

harvest  well  worthy  of  special  attention.  The  corners  of  the  fields  and  the  gleanings 
were  to  be  left.  This  was  a  beautiful  feature  in  these  arrangements.  It  presents  a 
good  lesson,  of  which  we  ought  never  to  lose  sight.  But  it  was  also  a  type.  Of 
what,  I  have  not  seen  satisfactorily  explained,  though  the  application  seems  easy. 
If  the  wheat  harvest  refers  to  the  gathering  of  men  from  sin  to  Christianity,  and 
from  subjects  of  Satan  to  subjects  of  grace,  then  the  plain  indication  of  this  provision 
is  that  the  entire  world,  under  this  present  dispensation,  shall  not  be  completely 
converted  to  God.  I  believe  that  the  time  will  come,  and  that  it  is  largely  and  fully 
predicted  in  the  Scriptures,  when  "  all  shall  know  the  Lord  from  the  least  unto  the 
greatest " — when  there  will  not  be  a  single  sinner  left  upon  the  earth.  But  that 
time  will  not  come  until  a  new  dispensation  with  new  instrumentalities  shall  have 
been  introduced.  5.  The  next  was  the  Feast  of  Trumpets.  This  was  held  on  the 
first  day  of  the  seventh  month  of  the  ecclesiastical  year,  which  was  the  same  as  the 
first  month  of  the  civil  year.  It  was  therefore  a  new-year  festival,  and  at  the  same 
time  the  feast  of  introduction  to  the  Sabbatic  month.  Its  chief  peculiarity  was  the 
continual  sounding  of  trumpets  from  morning  till  evening.  It  was  the  grand  type 
of  the  preaching  of  the  gospel.  The  Feast  of  Trumpets  was,  to  a  great  extent,  a 
preliminary  of  the  great  Day  of  Atonement.  We  have  already  considered  the 
peculiarities  of  this  solemn  day.  Its  leading  thought  is  contained  in  its  name — 
at-one-ment — that  is,  agreement,  reconciliation,  harmony,  and  peace  with  God. 
The  Feast  of  Trumpets  was  a  call  to  this  at-oue-ment.  The  gospel  is  an  appeal  to 
men  to  be  reconciled  to  God.  6.  Immediately  succeeding  the  great  solemnity  on  the 
fifteenth  day  of  the  month  began  another  remarkable  festival  called  the  Feast  of 
Tabernacles.  It  was  to  commemorate  the  forty  years  of  tent  life  which  their  fathers 
led  in  the  wilderness,  and  pointed,  the  same  as  that  which  it  commemorated,  to  that 
period  of  the  Christian's  career  which  lies  between  his  deliverance  from  bondage 
and  his  entrance  into  rest — that  is,  between  his  reconciliation  to  God  and  his  final 
inheritance  of  the  promises.  It  celebrates  the  state  of  the  believer  while  he  yet 
remains  in  this  present  life.  This  world  is  not  our  dwelling-place.  We  are  pilgrims 
and  strangers  here,  tarrying  for  a  little  season  in  tents  and  booths  which  we  must 
soon  vacate  and  leave  to  decay.  •'  The  earthly  house  of  this  tabernacle  "  must  "  be 
dissolved. "  The  places  that  know  us  now  shall  soon  know  us  no  more.  "  Seven  days  " 
— a  full  period — were  the  people  of  Israel  to  remain  in  these  temporary  tabernacles. 
And  thus  shall  we  be  at  the  inconvenience  of  a  tent  life  for  the  full  period  of  our 
earthly  stay.  But  it  was  only  once  in  a  year  that  Israel  kept  the  Feast  of 
Tabernacles.  And  so,  when  we  once  leave  the  flesh,  we  shall  never  return  to  it 
again.  Our  future  bodies  shall  be  glorified,  celestial,  spiritual  bodies.  It  is  also  a 
precious  thought  connected  with  this  subject  that  when  the  Jews  left  their  tents  at 
the  conclusion  of  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  it  was  the  Sabbath  morning.  This  frail 
tent  life  is  after  all  to  be  rounded  off  with  the  calm  quiet  of  a  consecrated  day  that 
has  no  night,  and  to  merge  into  a  rest  that  is  never  more  to  end.  (J.  A.  Seiss, 
D.D.)  Feasts  of  the  Lord : — I.  Sacked  life  is  itself  a  festival.  1.  Divine  in 
its  origin.  2.  Blissful  in  its  quality.  3.  Enriched  with  frequent  delights.  II.  The 
Christian  tear  has  its  festivities.  1.  Time  is  interrupted  by  sacred  seasons.  2. 
Human  life  is  refreshed  by  the  blessings  of  religion.  3.  A  witness  to  what  is  God's 
will  for  man.  III.  Gracious  seasons  are  appointed  for  the  Church.  1.  Days  of 
rest  and  gladness.  2.  Special  times  of  revival.  3.  Foretaste  of  Heaven's  joy.  [W, 
H.  Jellie.)  The  great  feasts : — I.  Political  effects.  Annual  gatherings  of  the 
people  exhibited  the  numerical  strength  of  the  nation.  As  they  went  "  from  strength 
to  strength,"  i.e.,  from  company  to  company  (Psa.  Ixxxiv.  7  marg.),  on  tlieir  way  to 
Jerusalem,  and  saw  the  vast  crowds  flocking  from  all  parts  of  the  kingdom  to  the 
capital,  their  patriotic  ardour  would  be  fired.  The  unity  of  the  nation,  too,  would 
be  ensured  by  this  fusion  of  the  tribes.  Otherwise  they  would  be  likely  to  constitute 
separate  tribal  states.  They  would  carry  back  to  the  provinces  glowing  accounts  of 
the  wealth,  power,  and  resources  of  the  country.  II.  Sanitary  effects.  They 
would  greatly  influence  the  health  of  the  people.  The  Sabbath,  necessitating 
weekly  cleansings,  and  rest  from  work,  and  laws  and  ceremonies  concerning  disease 
(as  leprosy)  and  purifications,  deserve  to  be  looked  at  in  this  light  also.  The  annual 
purifying  of  the  houses  at  Feast  of  Unleavened  Bread ;  the  dwelling  at  certain 
times  in  tents — leaving  the  houses  to  the  free  circulation  of  light  and  air  ;  and  the 
repeated  journey  on  foot  to  Jerusalem,  must  have  had  a  great  sanitary  influence. 
As  man  was  the  great  object  of  creation,  so  his  welfare — in  many  respects  besides 
religion — was  plainly  aimed  at  in  these  regulations.  III.  Social  effects.  Promoted 
friendly  intercourse  between  travelling  companions.  Distributed  information  through 

18 


274  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxin 

the  country  at  a  time  when  the  transmission  of  news  was  slow  and  imperfect. 

Imported  into  remote  provincial  districts  a  practical  knowledge  of  all  improvements 

in  arts  and  sciences.     Enlarged  the  general  stock  of  knowledge  by  bringing  many 

minds  and  great  variety  of  taste  together.     Spread  before  the  eyes  of  the  nation 

the  wonders  collected  in  Jerusalem  by  the  wealth  and  foreign  alliances  of  Jewish 

Icings.     IV.  MoBAii  EFFECTS.     The  young  looking  forward  to,  the  aged  looking  back 

upon,  and  all  talking  about  past  or  future  pilgrimages  to  the  city  of  the  great  King. 

Education,  thus,  of  memory  and  hope  and  desire.     Influence  of  this  on  the  habits 

of  the    people.      Thrift    promoted   to   provide    against    expenses  of  the  journey. 

The  promise  of  bearing  company  held   out  as   reward  to   well-conducted  youth. 

Enlargement  of  knowledge,  improvement  of  taste,  advantage  to  health,  fixing  habits, 

&c. ,  would  all  react  morally  on  the  character  of  the  people.    V.  Religious  effects. 

These  the  most  important.   Preserved  the  religious  faith  of  the  nation,  and  reUgious 

unity  among  the  people.     Constantly  reminded  the  people  of  the  Divinely  wrought 

deliverances  of  the  past.     Promoted  gratitude  and  trust.     Testi6ed  the  reverence  of 

the  people  for  the  Temple  and  its  sacred  contents.  Influence  of  well-conducted  Temple 

services  upon  the  synagogues  through  the  land.     Led  the  mind  of  the  nation  to 

adore  the  one  true  and  only  God.      {J.  G.  Gray.)  Seven  feasts  mentioned  in  this 

chapter : — There  were  seven  feasts  which  God  commanded  His  people  to  observe 

every  year.     All  these  feasts  are  mentioned  in  this  chapter,  and  should  be  studied 

together  so  that  their  relation  may  be  seen.   The  first,  the  Sabbath,  commemorated 

God's  rest  from  the  work  of  creation,  and  typified  the  rest  of  God's  people  in  the 

eternal   Sabbath-keeping.      The    second,    the    Passover,    commemorated   Israel's 

redemption  through  the  blood  of  the  paschal  lamb,  prior  to  tbeir  exodus  from 

bondage,  and  typified  our   redemption   through  Christ's  blood,   previous  to   our 

exodus  from  the  bomlage  of  sin  to  the  liberty  wherewith  Christ  makes  us  free 

(Gal.  v.  1).     The  third,  the  Feast  of  Unleavened  Bread,  typified  the  holiness  of  life 

for  which  they  were  redeemed  through  blood  (1  Cor.  v.  7,  8).     The  fourth,  the 

Firstfruits,  was  a  grateful  assurance  of  the  coming   harvest,    and  typical  of  the 

resurrection  unto  life  of  all  believers,  because  Christ  as  their  firstfruits  has  risen 

from  the  dead  (1  Cor.  xv.  20,  23).    The  fifth,  the  Pentecost,  has  become  universally 

known  by  being  the  day  on  which  the  Holy  Spirit  was  given  to  the  twelve  in  the 

upper  room  in  Jerusalem  (Acts  ii.  1-4),  and  as  in  the  Feast  of  Firstfruits  (type  of 

Christ's  resurrection),  the  sheaf  of  the  firstfruits  of  the  barley  harvest  was  waved 

before  the  Lord,  so  on  the  Day  of  Pentecost,  the  sheaf  of  the  firstfruits  of  the 

wheat  harvest,  typical  of  the  gift  of  the  Holy  Spirit  and  prophetic  of  the  harvest 

of  souls  gathered  to  Christ  through  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit.      The  fifth. 

Feast  of  Trumpets,  typical  of  IsraePs  ingathering  for  their  millennial  privileges, 

and  of  the  call  to  all  the  world  to  come  to  the  gospel  feast.     The  sixth,  the  Day  of 

Atonement,  typical  of  Christ's  atonement.     The  seventh,  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles. 

(D.  G.  Hiifjlti's,  M.A.)         God's  holy  days  : — Here  we  have  a  general  account  of  the 

holytimes  which  God  appointed  (ver.  2);  and  it  is  only  His  appointment  that  can  make 

time  holy.     For  He  is  the  Lord  of  time ;  and  as  soon  as  ever  He  had  set  its  wheels 

agoing,  it  was  He  that  first  sanctified  and  blessed  one  day  above  the  rest  (Gen.  ii. 

3).  Man  may  by  His  appointment  make  a  good  day  (Esther  ix.  19),  but  it  is  God's 

prerogative  to  make  a  holy  day;  nor  is  anything  sanctified  but  by  the  stamp  of  His 

institution.     As  all  inherent  holiness  comes  from  His  special  grace,  so  all  adherent 

holiness  from  His   special   appointment.     Now  concerning  the  holy  times  here 

ordained,  observe — 1.  They  are  called  feasts.     The  Day  of  Atonement,  which  was 

one  of  tbem,  was  a  fast ;  yet,  because  most  of  them  were  appointed  for  joy  and 

rejoicing,  they  are  in  general  called  feasts.    Some  read  it,  "  These  are  My  assemblies,' 

but  that  is  coincident  with  convocations.     I  would  rather  read  it,  "  These  are  My 

solemnities";  so  the  Word  here  used  is  translated  (Isa.  xxxiii.  20),  where  Zion  is 

called  "  the  city  of  our  solemnities."    And  reading  it  so  here  the  Day  of  Atonement 

was  as  great  a  solemnity  as  any  of  them.     2.  They  are  the  feasts  of  the  Lord  : 

"  My  feasts."     Observed  to  the  honour  of  His  name,  and  in  obedience  to  His 

command.      3.   They  were   proclaimed ;   for  they  were    not  to    be    observed  by 

the  priests  only  that  attended  the  sanctuary,  but  by  all  the  people.     And  this 

proclamation  was  the  joyful   sound  which  they  were  blessed  that  were  within 

hearing  of  (Psa.  Ixxxix.  15).    4.  They  were  to  be  sanctified  and  solemnised  with  holy 

convocations  that  the  services  of  tbese  feasts  might  appear  the  more  honourable 

and  august,  and  the  people  more  unanimous  in  the  performance  of  them.     It  was 

for  the  honour  of  God  and  His  institutions,  which  sought  not  corners,  and  the 

parity  of  which  would  be  best  preserved  by  the  public  administration  of  them  ;  it 


CHAP.  XXIII.]  LEVITICUS.  275 

was  also  for  the  edification  of  the  people  in  love  that  the  feasts  were  to  be  observed 
as  holy  convocations.  {Matthew  Henry,  D.D.)  God's  festivals  : — The  solemnities 
appointed  were — 1.  Many,  and  returned  frequently  ;  which  was  intended  to  pre- 
serve in  them  a  deep  sense  of  God  and  religion,  and  to  prevent  their  inclining 
to  the  superstitions  of  the  heathen.  God  kept  them  fully  employed  in  His  service 
that  they  might  not  have  time  to  hearken  to  the  temptations  of  the  idolatrous 
neighbourhood  they  lived  in.  2.  They  were  most  of  them  times  of  joy  and  rejoicing. 
The  weekly  Sabbath  is  so,  and  all  their  yearly  solemnities  except  the  Day  of  Atone- 
ment. God  would  thus  teach  them  that  wisdom's  ways  are  pleasantness ;  and 
oblige  them  to  His  service  by  obliging  them  to  be  cheerful  in  it  and  to  sing  at  their 
work.  Seven  days  were  days  of  strict  rest  and  holy  convocations :  The  first  day, 
and  the  seventh,  of  the  Feast  of  Unleavened  Bread  ;  the  Day  of  Pentecost ;  the  day 
of  the  Feast  of  Trumpets;  the  first  day,  and  the  eighth,  of  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles; 
and  the  Day  of  Atonement :  here  were  six  for  holy  joy,  and  one  for  holy  mourning. 
We  are  commanded  to  rejoice  evermore,  but  not  to  be  evermore  weeping.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  5.  In  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  first  month  at  even  Is  the  Lord's  passover. 

— The  Passover  : — The  typical  character  of  the  Old  Testament  is  a  subject  full  of 
instruction,  and  one  which  opens  a  very  extensive  field  of  investigation  before  the 
mind  of  the  Christian  student.  It  presents  itself  to  our  view  not  only  in  the  ordi- 
nances of  the  Jewish  people,  their  sacrifices  and  priesthood,  and  religious  rites  in 
general,  but  also  in  the  historical  parts  of  these  liwily  oracles.  Many  of  the  events 
recorded  in  these  sacred  pages  have  not  only  an  historical,  but  also  a  typical,  or  in 
other  words  a  prophetic  interest.  They  were,  in  fact,  living  prophecies,  having 
each  his  manifest  counterpart  or  antitype  somewhere  in  the  gospel  scheme.  But 
this  observation  particularly  applies  to  the  ordinances  of  the  Ceremonial  Law. 
These  rites  had,  no  doubt,  a  duty  to  accomplish  on  behalf  of  those  who  celebrated 
them,  and  subserved  some  moral  purpose  towards  them  who  did  the  service.  But 
they  had  also  a  higher  object ;  they  had  all  a  Christian  aspect,  or,  as  the  apostle  to 
the  Hebrews  says,  they  were  "  the  shadows  of  good  things  to  come."  In  the  former 
bearing  they  have  long  since  passed  away,  but  in  the  latter  they  are  still  abiding. 
And  what  an  important  addition  have  we  here  to  the  prophetic  evidence  of  Christi- 
anity !  For  these  rites  and  ceremonies  must,  every  one  of  them,  be  regarded  as 
predictions  of  those  things  they  typified.  Every  well-established  type  is  an  instance 
of  fulfilled  prophecy ;  and  when  we  view  them  all  combined  we  have  a  congeries  of 
prophecies  manifestly  fulfilled,  and  affording  an  amount  of  accumulated  evidence 
which  must  be  convincing  to  any  candid  mind.  In  all  the  necessary  elements  of 
prophetic  evidence  the  argument  derived  from  these  types  is  remarkably  certain  and 
facile.  Their  antiquity,  or  priority  in  point  of  time  to  their  antitypes,  is  undoubted, 
it  is  admitted  on  all  hands.  They  were  celebrated  by  successive  generations  for 
centuries  before  those  things  which  answered  to  them  appeared  to  human  observa- 
tion, or  could  be  known  in  any  other  way  than  by  Divine  revelation.  Their  fulfil- 
ment, also,  is  equally  certain ;  we  compare  the  antitypes  with  the  types,  and  find 
them  answer  the  one  to  the  other  in  an  immense  variety  of  particulars.  It  is 
utterly  impossible  that  this  agreement  should  be  the  result  of  accident ;  it  is  so 
minute,  and  carried  out  into  such  numerous  ramifications,  that  it  exceeds  even  the 
credulity  of  infidelity  itself  to  ascribe  it  to  anything  but  design.  Hei-e,  as  in  a 
kind  of  panorama,  that  gospel  passes  before  us,  so  that  we,  as  it  were,  behold  with 
our  eyes  those  very  trutbs  which  are  the  source  of  our  present  and  eternal  peace. 
And  this,  perhaps,  is  one  reason  why  these  ordinances  are  so  minutely  enjoined ; 
why  we  find  so  many,  and  sometimes  such  trifling  particulars  commanded.  The 
sceptic  smiles  at  this  minuteness,  and  refuses  to  believe  that  God  could  condescend 
to  be  the  author  of  such  unimportant  injunctions.  The  reply  to  this  is  at  once 
suggested  from  the  book  of  nature,  where  the  Deist  professes  to  become  acquainted 
with  his  God.  We  bid  him  to  consult  that  book  which  is  open  before  his  eyes,  and 
behold  the  minuteness  of  detail  which  characterises  all  the  works  that  meet  him 
there.  See  the  particularity  of  design  and  of  execution  which  pervades  its  every 
part.  Has  not  the  same  hand  which  restrains  the  billows  of  the  mighty  ocean  in 
their  proper  bounds  painted  the  tiny  shells  which  are  buried  in  its  deep  abyss  ?  But 
to  the  believer,  who  recognises  the  gospel  in  these  ordinances,  this  very  minuteness 
with  which  they  are  prescribed  constitutes  their  perfection.  He  sees  in  this  a 
representation  of  that  condescending  love  which  has  ordained  every  particular  of 
that  covenant  of  grace — "  the  covenant  ordered  in  all  things,  and  sure."  And  not 
only  so,  but  everything  to  him  becomes  significant ;  he  could  not  part  with  one  of 


276  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cnkv.  xxiii. 

them  ;  and  all  together  make  up  a  perfect  whole  on  which  his  faith  is  founded. 
We  are  to  consider  the  feast  of  the  Passover,  instituted,  as  its  name  implies,  in 
commemoration  of  that  night  in  which  the  Lord  passed  over  the  houses  of  the 
Israelites  when  He  smote  the  first-born  in  the  land  of  Egyj^t.  In  order,  then,  ti> 
understand  aright  the  typical  or  prophetic  bearing  of  this  ordinance,  we  must  recall 
to  mind  the  transactions  of  that  memorable  night,  and^I.  The  land  of  Egypt 

EXHIBITS  A  TXPE  OF  THIS    PRESENT  EVIL  WOELD — THE  WORLD,  I  MEAN,  AS  DISTINCT  FROM 

THE  Church  and  people  of  God.  Egypt  was  ripened  for  judgment,  and  was  devoted 
to  destruction.  She  had  despised  her  opportunities  and  hardened  herself  against 
the  warnings  of  Jehovah,  and  was  now  arrayed  in  hostility  against  God  and  His 
people.  And  such  is  the  world  in  which  we  live,  it  is  destined  to  destruction ;  and 
why  ?  Because  it  has  rejected  alike  the  mercies  and  the  warnings  of  the  Lord ;  it 
has  despised  His  counsel  and  will  have  none  of  His  reproof.  And  there  is  one 
point  of  analogy  between  the  case  of  Egypt  and  that  of  this  present  world  which  is 
especially  deserving  of  attention ;  I  mean  the  fact  that  the  climax  in  either  case  is 
preceded  by  a  succession  of  judgments.  I  feel  persuaded,  my  dear  brethren,  that 
we  ought  to  be  prepared  for  an  outpouring  of  Divine  judgments  upon  the  earth,  the 
effect  of  which  shall  be,  as  in  the  case  of  Egypt,  the  hardening  of  "  the  men  of  the 
earth."  against  the  Lord  and  against  His  anointed  (Eev.  ix.  20,  21 ;  Luke  xxi.  35, 
36).  II.  But  God  had  a  people  in  Egypt.  They  were  in  Egypt,  but  they  were 
not  of  it ;  differing  in  their  origin,  their  customs,  their  laws,  their  worship,  and  their 
God.  They  were  the  people  of  Jgjiovah ;  His  by  covenant  arrangement ;  His  chosen 
ones,  His  own.  And  why  were  they  chosen?  Was  it  because  of  their  own  good- 
ness ?  because  they  were  better  than  the  other  nations  ?  No  ;  for  they  were  a  stiff- 
necked  people.  Why,  then,  were  they  chosen?  Simply  because  He  loved  them, 
and  took  them  to  Himself  out  of  all  the  nations  of  the  earth.  And  so  it  is  at  the 
present  time.  The  Lord  has  a  people  in  the  world,  but  yet  not  of  the  world.  "  Ye 
are  not  of  the  world,  even  as  I  am  not  of  the  world."  But  if  He  has  loved  His 
people.  He  has  "  made  them  to  differ  "  from  Egypt.  As  they  are  His  by  sovereign 
grace,  so  also  are  they  His  by  manifest  consecration  to  Him  and  separation  from 
the  world.  Their  origin  is  from  above.  They  are  "born  not  of  blood,  nor  of  the 
win  of  the  flesh,  nor  of  the  will  of  man,  but  of  God."     III.  But  what  was  the 

MEANS  BY  which  THE  ISRAELITES  WERE  SAVED  FROM  THE  JUDGMENT  OF  EgYPT  ?     It  waS 

the  sprinkled  blood  (Exod.  xii.  12, 13).  And  so  if  we  escape  the  righteous  judgment 
of  God  it  can  only  be  by  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  the  Lamb— "the  precious 
blood  of  Christ  as  of  a  lamb  without  blemish  and  without  spot  "  (1  Pet.  i.  19).  Out- 
side of  Christ  is  wrath,  in  Him  is  perfect  peace  and  safety.  Not  that  this  sprinkled 
blood  is  the  exciting  cause  of  God's  love  unto  His  people.  No ;  He  needed  not 
this  inducement.  God  did  not  love  the  children  of  Israel  because  the  blood  was 
sprinkled  on  their  houses ;  no,  the  blood  was  sprinkled  there  because  He  loved 
them.  They  misunderstand  the  doctrine  of  the  atonement  who  represent  it  as 
appeasing  a  God  of  vengeance  and  stimulating  Him  to  mercy.  *'  God  is  love."  IV. 
The  Israelites  were  commanded  to  feast  upon  the  lamb.  The  lamb  was  to  be 
the  food  of  them  for  whom  his  blood  was  sprinkled.  And  what  is  the  spiritual  food 
supplied  to  the  Church  of  God  ?  It  is  the  Lamb  that  was  slain  (John  vi.  57).  If 
we  would  have  spiritual  strength  to  do  the  work  of  God  we  can  derive  it  only  by 
feeding  on,  that  is,  by  habitually  contemplating  and  confiding  in  the  work  of  Jesus. 
A  Uving  faith  in  Him  will  appropriate  Him.  And  when  the  Passover  is  called  a 
feast  we  are  reminded  that  those  who  feed  on  Jesus  have  in  Him  not  only  neces- 
saries, but  abundance  ;  not  only  salvation,  but  peace  and  happiness  and  joy — "  fat 
things  full  of  marrow,  wines  on  the  lees  well  refined  "  (Isa.  xxv.  6).  You  see  we 
are  supposed  to  be  ever  feasting.  And  if  our  souls  are  not  abundantly  satisfied,  as 
•with  marrow  and  fatness,  the  fault  is  entirely  our  own.  The  provision  is  made  ; 
all  things  are  ready ;  everything  that  the  hospitality  of  eternal  love,  aided  by  the 
counsels  of  infinite  wisdom  and  the  resources  of  infinite  power  could  procure  to 
make  glad  the  sinner's  heart.  Why  do  we  go  so  heavily  on  our  way  ?  Why  have 
we  so  little  peace  and  joy?  It  is  because  we  do  not  feed,  as  we  should,  upon  the 
Lamb.  We  do  not  make  Him  our  daily  bread,  and  incorporate  Him,  by  a  living 
faith,  with  our  souls.  And  mark,  the  whole  of  the  paschal  lamb  was  eaten  ;  not 
one  particle  of  it  was  to  be  left.  'Tis  thus  the  Saviour  gives  Himself  altogether  to 
be  His  people's  food  ;  it  is  not  a  part,  but  the  whole  of  a  precious  Christ  that  is 
provided  for  us.  All  the  holiness  of  His  life,  all  the  devotedness  of  His  death,  all 
the  efficacy  of  His  blood,  all  the  power  of  His  resurrection — the  dignity  of  His 
ascension — the  influence  of  His  intercession,  and  the  glory  of  His  coming  again  ; 


CHAP.  XXIII.]  LEVITICUS.  277 

everything  He  does — He  has — He  is ;  the  whole  is  given  unto  us  to  feast  upon  ;  and 
we  need  it  all.  I  must  have  Him  all  to  meet  the  exigency  of  my  case,  the  neces- 
sities of  my  soul.  V.  But  let  us  remark  the  adjuncts  of  this  feast.  They  were 
to  eat  it  with  unleavened  bread  and  with  bitter  herbs  ;  with  staves  in  their  hands 
and  shoes  on  their  feet.  Each  particular  is  significant.  Are  they  to  eat  it  with 
unleavened  bread  ?  If  we  would  have  communion  with  Jesus  it  must  be  "  in  the 
Spirit."  The  carnal  mind  cannot  find  enjoyment  in  Him  ;  and  if  we  are  walking 
after  the  flesh  we  cannot  feed  on  Him.  We  must  "  put  it  out  of  our  houses,"  so  as 
not  to  follow  or  be  led  by  it.  Again,  too,  "  the  bitter  herbs."  Oh !  how  significant 
is  this  !  The  paschal  feast  is  not  a  feast  of  self-indulgence  ;  it  is  not  to  gratify  the 
carnal  mind.  They  that  feed  on  Jesus  must  deny  themselves,  and  take  up  the 
cross  and  follow  Him,  The  path  He  leads  in  is  not  that  of  self-gratification  and 
carnal  ease.  If  these  be  the  objects  we  pursue  we  are  not — we  cannot  be  feeding 
on  the  Lamb  (Gal.  ii.  20).  It  is  impossible  for  the  true  believer  to  escape  the  taste 
of  the  "bitter  herbs."  The  very  principles  which  actuate  him,  the  motives  of  which 
he  is  conscious,  the  tastes  implanted  in  his  mind  are  such  as  to  render  his  life  in 
this  world  a  scene  of  constant  trial.  There  are  trials  peculiar  to  the  Christian 
which  others  have  not,  and  cannot  even  understand.  Beloved,  let  us  search  our 
hearts  diligently  ;  let  us  examine  our  motives.  Are  we  indeed  sincere  before  God  ? 
Are  we  really  humbled  before  the  Cross,  and  has  every  other  shadow  of  dependence 
been  put  away  ?  And  are  we  dressed,  too,  in  the  garb  of  pilgrims?  Or  rather  have 
we  the  pilgrim's  heart  ?  Or  are  our  thoughts  and  affections  given  to  the  things  of 
earth — the  flesh-pots  of  Egypt?     (J.  B.  Lowe,  B.A.) 

Vers.  9-15.  When  ye  be  come  into  the  land. — The  conditions  of  the  spiritual  land- 
tenure  : — I.  Man's  true  kelation  to  the  Land  of  Promise.  1.  In  his  original 
€state  man  realised  his  dependence  upon  God,  and  his  responsibility  before  God  for 
the  true  and  righteous  use  of  all  God's  gifts.  As  long  as  man  used  God's  glorious 
gifts  in  obedience  to  God's  supreme  law  of  love,  his  life  was  blessed  with  the  fulness 
of  weal :  "Of  every  tree  of  the  garden  thou  mayest  freely  eat."  But  in  the  day 
when  the  sense  of  responsibility  to  God  was  lost,  and  the  commandment  which 
embraced  in  itself  the  significance  of  all  the  other  commandments  was  broken,  the 
disorders  and  the  miseries  of  human  society  arose.  The  spirit  of  individual 
selfishness  is  the  power  which  disorganises  society,  which  brings  a  blight  upon  the 
garden  of  God,  and  drives  human  souls  out  from  the  gloiy  and  wealth  into  the 
thorny,  desolate  wilderness.  There  is  no  power  that  can  enable  man  to  dress  the 
garden  and  to  keep  it,  but  the  sense  of  responsibility  to  the  one  supreme  Lord  of 
Life,  whose  name  is  Love.  This  principle  is  tlie  Divinely  ordained  power  that 
suffices  to  check  the  deadly  evils  that  arise  from  exaggerated  notions  of  the  rights 
of  human  property.  In  human  society  gifts  are  unequally  distributed.  The  gifts  of 
genius  and  the  external  gifts  of  property  are  alike  unequal.  In  the  ownership  of 
the  riches  of  mind  we  see  men  endowed  with  vast  territories  of  knowledge  and 
intellectual  power.  It  is  God's  order.  Gifts  are  not  equally  divided.  So  the  land 
is  not,  and  never  can  be,  possessed  in  absolutely  equal  portions  by  the  citizens  of 
a  state.  There  must  be  the  large  landowners  and  the  multitude  of  the  poor  who 
have  but  little.  Where  is  the  check  that  is  to  restrain  the  abuses  of  property  ?  In 
the  perpetual  remembrance  of  the  truth  that  the  proudest  landowner  is  but  a  tenant 
who  holds  from  God,  upon  God's  conditions,  in  order  that  the  land  may  be  dressed 
and  kept  so  as  to  pi'omote  the  greatest  possible  happiness  of  the  greatest  possible 
number.  2.  Another  truth  closely  related  to  our  absolute  dependence  upon  God's 
love,  and  the  realisation  of  which  is  equally  necessary  to  our  spiritual  health,  is 
declared  in  this  passage,  viz.,  that  the  occupiers  of  the  land  of  promise  can  only 
enjoy  the  fruits  which  God  gives  upon  God's  conditions.  The  king  upon  the  throne 
who  has  not  a  kingly  heart  and  soul  occupies  a  land  of  promise,  but  does  not  eat  of 
its  fruits.  In  all  the  professions  of  human  activity,  from  the  highest  to  the  humblest, 
the  enjoyment  of  the  noblest  fruits  of  the  position  can  only  be  realised  by  those  who 
know  how  to  perform  the  duties  which  belong  to  it.  The  conditions  of  enjoyment 
are  imposed  upon  the  occupiers  of  every  land  of  promise.  The  blessed  land  of  rest, 
towards  which  human  souls  are  travelling  through  the  wilderness  of  earthly 
struggles,  can  only  produce  its  harvest,  and  pour  forth  its  stores  of  milk  and  honey 
to  those  who  shall  have  been  made  "  meet  to  be  partakers  of  the  inheritance  of  the 
saints  in  light."  II.  The  conditions  upon  which  the  fruits  of  Canaan  can  be 
eaten.  1.  The  elevated  use  of  the  gifts  of  life.  The  man  who  uses  God's  gifts  to 
paujper  his  lusts,  by  feeding  the  low  life  of  debased  animalism,  lowers  the  corn  of  the 


278  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxin. 

field  below  its  original  level  by  devoting  it  to  the  "  table  of  devils,"  as  the  food 
taken  to  create  blood  for  the  heart  in  which  the  basest,  foulest  feelings  have  their 
homes,  and  for  the  brain,  out  of  which  the  thoughts  that  are  set  on  fire  of  hell  wing 
their  flight.  The  drunkard,  the  glutton,  and  the  unclean,  degrade  the  fruits  of  the 
land  by  usiug  them  to  feed  the  life  of  the  tenants  who  dwell  in  the  moral  abyss. 
On  the  other  hand,  in  the  man  who  strives  to  live  a  life  of  high  purpose,  pure  feel- 
ing, and  noble  thought,  the  corn  is  taken  into  the  manhood  and  shares  its  elevation. 
It  is  tliat  lofty  use  alone  that  gives  man  fulness  of  enjoyment.  There  is  an  un- 
earthly delight  in  the  enjoyment  of  God's  gifts  when  they  are  thus  exalted.  It  is 
still  true  that  God  satisfies  His  people  "with  the  bread  of  heaven."  It  is  still  true 
that  for  those  who  are  redeemed  to  the  high  life  in  Christ  the  Holy  Spirit  gives  them 
"  of  the  corn  of  heaven.  Man  did  eat  angels'  food."'  Do  we  seek  elevation  in  Christ 
Jesus  ?  Are  we  pressing  towards  the  mark  for  the  prize  of  the  high  calling  of  God 
in  Christ  Jesus  ?  Are  we  sanctifying  the  fields  of  our  life  by  subjecting  all  our 
energies  to  the  influence  of  noble  aspirations  and  high  purposes  in  Christ  Jesus? 
2.  The  second  condition  which  regulates  the  enjoyment  of  the  fruits  of  the  land  of 
promise  is  embodied  in  this  command.  ■'  Ye  shall  offer  ...  an  he-lamb  without 
blemish  of  the  first  year  for  a  burnt-offering  unto  the  Lord."  What  are  the  moral 
and  spiritual  truths  embodied  in  the  form  of  this  ordinance  ?  It  gives  expression 
to  that  eternal  truth  that  man  cannot  enjoy  the  fruits  of  God's  promised  land  with- 
out innocency  of  life,  and  entire  surrender  of  self  to  God.  The  highest  jojs  and 
richest  pleasures  of  existence  cannot  be  experienced  by  tbe  man  whose  heart  is  full 
of  malice  and  wickedness.  Material  prosperity,  houses,  and  lands,  and  gold  he  may 
have.  But  the  joy,  peace,  and  satisfaction  which  feed  the  inner  Ufe  of  an  enriched^ 
ennobled  soul  are  forbidden  to  all  but  those  who  have  found  truth  and  innocency 
of  character.  The  mode  of  the  ofl'ering  is  also  f'xpi-essive  of  another  condition. 
The  lamb  was  to  be  offered  as  a  bm-nt-offering.  This  form  of  sacrifice  expresses 
the  principle  of  unreserved  dedication  of  the  life  to  God.  The  life  of  self-sacrifice 
is  the  happy  hfe.  The  heart  which  has  given  itself  unreservedly  to  the  truth  and 
love  of  God,  is  the  heart  that  experiences  the  joys  of  the  promised  land.  3.  The 
third  condition  imposed  upon  the  Israelite  was  expressed  in  the  command,  "  The 
meat-offering  thereof  shall  be  two-tenth  deals  of  fine  flour  mingled  with  oil,  an 
offering  made  by  fire  unto  the  Lord  for  a  sweet  savour;  and  the  drink-ofl'ering thereof 
shall  be  of  wine,  the  fourth  part  of  an  bin."  What  eternal  principle  is  embodied  in 
tbe  form  of  this  rite  ?  It  teaches  us  that  we  cannot  enjoy  the  fruits  of  the  promised 
land  until  we  have  learnt  to  seek  the  sustenance  and  gladness  of  the  soul  in  com- 
munion with  God.  The  flour  of  tbe  meat-offering  represents  tbat  spiritual  bread 
of  the  soul  which  "  strengtheneth  man's  heart."  The  ■nine  of  the  drink-offering 
represents  the  spiritual  flow  of  joys  that  "  maketh  glad  the  heart  of  man."  The 
oil  is  the  type  of  the  influence  of  the  Divine  Spirit  by  the  virtue  of  which  life-giving 
efficacy  comes  to  the  forms  of  human  service.  III.  How  aee  we  to  FULrtL  the. 
CONDITIONS  IMPOSED  TPON  SOULS  IN  THIS  PASSAGE  ?  How  Can  we  practically  qualify 
ourselves  to  eat  the  products  of  the  spiritual  harvest  that  grows  in  the  land  that 
God  has  given  to  us  ?  The  three  great  principles  here  set  before  us  are  acknow- 
ledged in  the  life  of  tbe  sincere,  worthy  communicants  in  the  Church  of  Christ,  "  the 
meet  partakers  of  those  holy  mysteries."  Whenever  you  approach  the  Loid's 
table  as  the  Church  commands,  you  wave  the  energies  of  life  on  high  before  the 
Lord,  and  acknowledge  the  principle  of  Divine  elevation  by  answering  in  obedience 
to  her  command,  "  Lift  up  your  hearts," — "  We  lift  them  up  unto  the  Lord."  You 
acknowledge  the  eternal  obhgation  of  the  Divine  principle  of  self-devotion  when, 
after  confessing  your  sins  and  asking  the  absolution  of  Christ,  you  offer  with  fervent 
resolve  the  service  of  a  life  delivered  from  its  blemishes  by  the  redeeming  power  of 
the  unblemished  Lamb,  who  is  the  propitiation  for  our  sins,  and  say,  "  Here  we 
offer  and  present  unto  Thee,  0  Lord,  ourselves,  our  souls  and  bodies,  to  be  a  reason- 
able, holy,  and  lively  sacrifice  unto  Thee."  You  acknowledge  the  need  of  Divine 
sustenance,  the  principle  of  the  eternal  meat-offering,  when  you  hearken  to  the  voice 
of  the  Church  saying  unto  you,  "Feed  on  Him  in  thy  heart  by  faith  with  thanks- 
giving." If  we  would  be  qualified  to  enjoy  all  the  glorious  wealth  of  Canaan  we 
must  live  the  hidden  sacramental  life  in  Christ.     (H.  T.  Edwards,  M.A.) 

Vers.  10,  11.  Wave  the  sheaf. — The  first-fruits  : — The  design  of  these  festivals 
was  two-fold  :  they  were  eucharistic  or  commemorative,  and  they  were  also 
typical  or  prophetic.  This  ordinance  is  not  a  distinct  festival,  but  a  ceremony 
observed  during  the  feast  of  unleavened  bread,  as  the   Paschal  Feast  is   some- 


CHAP.  XXIII.]  LEVITICUS.  279 


times  called,  from  the  fact  that  during  the  seven  days  through  which  it  lasted 
the  children  of  Israel  were  commanded  to  put  away  leaven  out  of  their 
houses.  It  was  observed  annually  with  great  solemnity.  Certain  persons 
were  deputed  by  the  Sanhedrin  to  go  out  into  the  fields  and  procure  a 
sheaf  of  the  newly-ripened  corn,  which  was  then  carried  into  the  temple  preceded 
by  oxen  crowned  with  garlands,  and  other  tokens  of  national  rejoicing.  There  can 
be  no  doubt  that  this  observance  had  a  moral  bearing  on  the  people  of  the  time. 
It  was  a  solemn  recognition,  on  the  part  of  the  whole  nation,  of  Him  who  was  "  the 
Lord  of  the  harvest,"  and  an  appropriate  ascription  of  praise  to  Him  for  His  good- 
ness iu  giving  the  fruits  of  the  earth  in  their  due  season.  But  we  are  now  to 
inquire  into  its  typical  or  Christian  import ;  and — I.  Here  we  have  at  once  a  clue 

IX    THE    DAY    ON    WHICH    THIS    CEllEMOXY    WAS    OBSERVED.       It  WaS  tO  be  Wavcd  "  OH  the 

morrow  after  the  Sabbath,"  that  is,  of  course,  the  Jewish  Sabbath ;  or,  in  other 
words,  it  was  to  be  presented  on  the  first  day  of  the  week,  the  Lord's  day — the  day 
on  which  Jesus  rose  from  the  dead,  and  became,  as  St.  Paul  says,  in  evident 
allusion  to  the  ordinance,  "  the  first-fruits  of  them  that  slept  "  (1  Cor.  xv.  20).  To 
this  fundamental  event,  then,  the  offering  of  the  wave-sheaf  refers  ;  it  is  a  type  of 
the  resurrection  of  the  Saviour.  But  there  is  a  farther  and  more  intimate  agree- 
ment of  the  day.  It  was  not  only  the  first  day  of  the  week,  but  it  was  the  first  day 
of  the  same  week  of  the  Jewish  ecclesiastical  year  as  that  on  which  the  Saviour 
rose.  When  we  refer  to  the  fifteenth  and  sixteenth  verses  of  this  chapter  we  read 
an  account  of  the  pentecostal  feast,  and  we  find  that  the  period  of  fifty  days,  from 
which  it  derives  its  name,  is  reckoned  from  this  very  day.  II.  Let  us,  then,  proceed 
to  examine  the  suitability  of  this  type  and  its  application  to  this  important 
subject;  and — 1.  The  first-fruits  hallowed  the  harvest  from  whence  it  was  taken. 
It  removed  the  impediment  which  stood  opposed  to  its  being  gathered ;  the  cere- 
monial impurity,  if  I  may  so  say,  which  was  attached  to  it  previous  to  the  waving 
of  the  sheaf  before  the  Lord,  until  which  time  it  was  unlawful  to  make  use  of  it. 
The  prohibition  on  this  head  was  express  (ver.  14).  There  was,  then,  you  perceive, 
an  imputed  uncleanness  attached  to  the  harvest  before  the  offering  of  the  first-fruits, 
but  which,  when  the  sheaf  was  presented,  was  done  away;  and  thus  it  is  written, 
"  he  (the  priest)  shall  wave  the  sheaf  before  the  Lord,  to  be  accepted  for  you  "  (ver. 
11).  Now  this  significantly  exhibits  the  bearing  of  the  Saviour's  resurrection  upon 
the  justification  of  His  people.  The  relation  that  the  first-fruits  sustained  to  tLe 
harvest  the  same  does  Jesus  sustain  to  those  that  beheve  in  Him — they  are  the 
harvest  in  respect  to  Him.  His  resurrection  was  necessary  in  order  to  our  justifica- 
tion before  God.  It  is  op  this  the  argument  of  the  fifteenth  chapter  of  the  First 
Epistle  to  the  Corinthians  depends.  And  thus  also  he  writes  in  another  place,  He 
"was  delivered  for  our  ofifences,  and  raised  again  for  our  justification"  (Rom.  iv. 
25).  Our  justification  depends  on  the  resurrection  of  Jesus.  Tou  will  easily  under- 
stand this  when  you  call  to  mind  the  character  in  which  He  died.  He  was  crucified 
as  a  sinner,  under  the  imputation  of  His  people's  sins;  God  "made  Him  who  knew 
no  sin  to  be  sin  for  us,"  "  He  laid  on  Him  the  iniquity  of  us  all."  It  were  utterly 
impossible  that  He  should  be  set  free  while  any  portion  of  the  debt  He  undertook 
to  pay  remained  undischarged.  We  know  the  issue  of  the  trial ;  His  work  was  ■ 
amply  sufficient  to  discharge  the  debt  He  had  taken  on  Him.  In  the  power  of  His 
own  essential  righteousness  He  burst  asunder  the  bands  of  death.  The  law  had  no 
further  claim  to  urge  or  penalty  to  exact ;  and  therefore  the  Saviour  had  power  and 
right  to  take  His  Life  again.  And  rising  in  the  character  of  the  accepted  offering 
He  became  "  the  Author  of  eternal  salvation  to  aU  them  that  obey  Him."  He  is 
"  waved  before  the  Lord  to  be  accepted  for  us."  2.  The  first-fruits  was  the  earnest 
of  the  coming  harvest.  It  was  a  pledge  that  the  harvest  would  be  gathered ;  that 
it  had  escaped  all  the  vicissitudes  of  the  chmate  and  was  now  ripe  for  the  sickle. 
And  such  was  the  resurrection  of  the  Saviour  to  His  people.  He  is  "  the  first-fruits 
of  them  that  slept."  The  fact  that  He  has  risen  from  the  dead  secures  to  us  the 
hope  that  He  shall  rise.  The  resurrection  of  the  Saviour  is  the  guarantee  which 
God  has  given  us  of  the  resurrection  of  his  people.  Does  any  one  feel  a  doubt  upon 
this  subject  ?  Does  it  seem  "  a  thing  impossible  that  God  should  raise  the  dead?  " 
We  appeal  to  the  fact — the  historical  fact,  established  upon  evidence  which  no  other 
fact  can  boast  of,  that  Jesus  is  raised  from  the  dead.  The  faith  which  reahses  this 
fact  gives  to  the  soul  the  blessed  persuasion  that  "  He  who  has  raised  up  the  Lord 
Jesus  shall  also  raise  us  up  by  Jesus."  Jesus  stands  to  us  in  the  relation  of  our 
covenant  Head.  As  by  virtue  of  our  connection  with  the  first  Adam  we  are  subject 
to  death,  so  by  virtue  of  our  connection  with  the  second  Adam  we  are  made  par- 


280  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxm. 

takers  of  His  life  and  immortality  which  we  derive  from  Him.  III.  The  shraf  of 
FiKST-FBUiTS  WAS  A  SAMPLE  OF  THE  HARVEST.  When  the  children  of  Israel  looked 
upon  it  they  beheld  a  specimen  of  the  crop  from  whence  it  was  taken  and  of  which 
it  was  itself  a  part.  And  this  reminds  us  of  another  li>.'ht  in  which  we  may  con- 
template the  resurrection  of  our  Eedeemer,  as  affording  us  a  sample  or  specimen  of 
our  own.  What  was  resurrection  unto  .Jesus?  It  was  the  resuscitation  of  His  dead 
body,  the  same  body  which  was  laid  in  the  grave.  But  in  what  power  did  He  rise  ? 
Was  it  in  the  power  of  animal  life,  such  as  that  with  which  our  mortal  bodies  are 
animated — the  life  of  nature— of  the  flesh  ?  Oh,  no,  the  body  of  Jesus  when  it  left 
the  grave  left  it  not,  as  did  that  of  Lazarus,  still  the  subject  of  weakness  and 
mortahty.  It  arose  in  the  power  of  immortality,  in  the  energy  of  the  ver>  Life  of 
God.  It  arose  the  same,  and  yet  another  ;  another,  because  animated  with  another 
life — His  own  eternal,  incorruptible,  spiritual  life.  "  He  was  put  to  death  in  the 
flesh  and  quickened  by  the  Spirit."  Such  was  the  resurrection  unto  Jesus,  and 
such  shaU  it  be  also  to  His  people — "  For  we  know  that  when  He  shall  appear  we 
shall  belike  Him."  It  had  been  but  a  pitiful  prospect,  that  of  resurrection,  were  it 
merely  restoration  to  such  bodies  as  those  which  we  have  now.  But,  blessed  be 
God,  such  is  not  the  hope  He  has  set  before  us — it  is  one  which  is  "  full,"  not  of 
mortality,  but  "of  immortality"  (2  Cor.  v.  2).  If  humanity,  in  the  person  of  the 
Saviour,  is  quickened  with  the  life  of  God,  it  is  in  order  that  the  same  life  may  be 
imparted  to  His  people.  It  is  even  now  imparted  to  the  souL  Whenever  a  sinner 
believes  in  Jesus,  and  by  faith  is  converted  to  God,  there  is  a  resurrection.  This 
faith  is  the  result  of  the  operation  of  the  Spirit  of  the  Uving  God,  working  in  the 
same  manner  as  when,  by  His  mighty  energy,  He  raised  the  Ufeless  body  of  the 
Saviour  from  the  dead  (Eph.  ii.  18-22).  And  this  life  shall  be  hereafter  imparted 
to  the  body.  The  same  Spirit  which  has  operated  on  the  believer's  soul  and  raised 
him  from  the  death  of  sin  unto  the  life  of  righteousness  shall,  in  the  resurrection 
morning,  descend  upon  the  cold  remains  of  his  lifeless  corpse,  and  shall  animate  it 
with  new,  with  spiritual,  everlasting  life  (Eom.  viii.  9-11).  Such,  then,  will  be  the 
resurrection  of  the  dead — such  is  the  blessed  prospect  which  is  set  before  the 
Church  of  Christ.  That  which  is  sown  in  corruption,  in  dishonour,  in  weakness, 
shall  be  raised  in  incorruption,  in  glory,  in  power — no  longer  an  impediment  to  the 
foul,  but  the  vehicle  through  which  its  immortal  energies  shall  be  consecrated  to 
the  praise  and  8er\"ice  of  the  Lord.  IV.  When  the  first-fruits  were  offered 
THE  harvest  was  AT  HAND ;  and  not  only  at  hand,  but  also  expected  and  wished 
for ;  all  thoughts  in  Israel  were  now  directed  to  it ;  the  wave-sheaf  was  the  certain 
indication  of  its  approach.  And  this  reminds  us  of  the  position  which  we  should 
take  in  regard  to  the  coming  of  the  Lord  and  the  resurrection  morning :  we  should 
be  in  the  attitude  of  expectation,  of  joyous  expectation,  of  "that  day."  There  is 
something  erroneous  and  unscriptural  in  our  habit  of  thought  upon  this  subject. 
We  are  accustomed  to  admit  the  truth  of  the  resurrection,  but  we  do  not  realise  its 
practical  importance,  we  do  not  embrace  it  as  a  motive  for  action  ;  it  does  not 
exercise  a  practical  and  habitual  influence  upon  ns.  And  why?  Because  we  put 
it  at  a  distance  from  us  ;  when  we  think  of  the  subject  at  all  we  regard  it  as  some- 
thing that  is  to  take  place  at  some  very  remote  period  of  time,  before  which  all  that 
is  important  to  our  eternal  condition  will  be  necessarily  fixed  for  ever.  Hence  the 
little  influence  which  this  blessed  prospect  exercises  on  our  lives.  How  different 
the  manner  in  which  it  is  spoken  of  in  the  Scriptures !  The  effect  of  apostolic 
preaching  was  to  lead  men  to  "look  for"  and  "  hasten  unio"  the  coming  of  the 
day  of  God  (2  Pet.  iii.  12).  In  fact,  an  important  feature  of  Christian  character, 
as  described  in  the  New  Testament,  is  the  expectation  of  the  coming  of  the  Lord  to 
reap  the  harvest  of  the  world.  (J.  B.Loue,B.A.)  The  wave-sheaf  typical  of  Christ : 
— I.  We  shall  endeavour  to  show  that  this  sheaf  of  the  first-fbdits  was  a  type  of 
Christ,  as  to  the  matter  of  it,  both  in  respect  to  quality  and  quantity.  With 
respect  to  quality  it  was  a  sheaf  of  barley,  as  to  its  quantity  it  was  a  single  sheaf,  or, 
however,  such  a  quantity  as  only  one  omer  of  barley  was  taken  from  it  and  waved  before 
the  Lord  by  the  priest.  Now  this  being  of  barley,  which  is  a  mean  sort  of  grain,  may 
denote  the  mean  estate  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  His  hunjiliation.  But  this  sort 
of  grain,  though  mean,  was  used  for  food  ;  so  Christ,  in  His  mean  estate  of  humilia- 
tion, is  suitable  food  for  faith.  He  is  held  forth  in  the  everlasting  gospel  as  food 
for  the  faith  of  His  people  under  the  character  of  Christ  crucified.  So  much  for 
the  quahty  of  this  sheaf  of  the  firstfruits :  it  was  of  barley.  Next,  its  quantity.  It 
■was  but  one — one  sheaf  that  was  waved — one  omer,  which  was  the  tenth  part  of  an 
ephah.    It  was  as  much  as  a  man  could  eat  in  one  day.     Christ  in  many  respects 


CHAP.  XXIII.]  LEVITICUS.  281 

is  but  one.  One  with  His  Divine  Father  in  nature  and  essence.  Christ  is  one  in 
His  person,  though  He  has  two  natures — human  and  Divine.  This  is  the  great 
mystery  of  godUness,  God  manifest  in  the  fiesli.  "  The  Word  was  made  flesh,  and 
dwelt  among  us."  Clirist  is  but  one  in  His  office  as  Mediator,  the  one  Mediator 
between  God  and  man,  the  Man  Christ  Jesus,  who  has  inteiposed  between  God  and 
man,  and  made  up  the  breach  between  them,  who  is  our  Peace,  and  by  whom  the 
way  is  opened  for  us  to  God.  He  is  the  one  Lord,  as  the  apostle  says,  "  One  Lord, 
one  faith,  one  baptism."  He  is  the  only  Head  of  the  Church  whom  the  Father  has 
given  to  be  head  over  all  things  unto  it— a  Head  of  eminence  to  rule  over  and  guide 
and  protect  it.  A  Head  of  influence,  as  the  natural  head  is  to  the  body  from  which 
it  receives  its  nourishment  and  increases.  And  He  is  the  only  Husband  of  the 
Church-^"  Thy  Maker  is  thine  Husband,  the  Lord  of  Hosts  is  His  name."  Thus  in 
maijy  respects  Christ  is  but  one,  as  this  sheaf  was.  But  then,  though  this  sheaf 
■was  but  one,  it  had  many  stalks,  many  ears  of  corn,  and  many  grains  in  it.  And 
so  Chiist,  though  He  is  but  one  in  various  respects,  as  we  have  seen,  yet  in  Him 
there  is  a  complication  of  blessings  of  grace.  Jehovah  has  presented  Him  from  all 
eternity  in  the  council  and  covenant  pf  grace  and  peace  with  all  the  blessings  of 
grace  and  goodness  for  His  people;  He  has  put  them  all  into  His  hands,  and  bles'^ed 
them  with  all  spiritual  blessings  in  Him.  Moreover,  He  has  not  only  a  complica- 
tion of  all  blessings  in  Him  ;  but  as  this  sheaf  of  the  firstfruits  represented  the 
whole  harvest,  and  was  a  pledge  and  earnest  of  it,  so  Christ  the  Sheaf  of  the  first- 
fruits  represents  all  His  people.  They  are  all  gathered  together  under  one  head  in 
Him,  and  when  He  was  crucified  they  were  with  Him  ;  when  He  was  buried  they  were 
with  Him  ;  when  He  rose  again  from  the  dead  they  rose  again  with  Him ;  and  are  now 
sat  down  in  heavenly  places  in  Christ  Jesus.  And  besides,  as  the  sheaf  of  the  first- 
fruits  had  a  connection  with  all  the  rest,  so  He  with  all  the  people  of  God.  It  whs 
for  their  sakes  He  suffered,  died,  and  rose  from  the  dead.  II.  It  was  so  with 
KESPECT  TO  WHAT  WAS  DONE  UNTO  IT  AND  DONE  WITH  IT.  First  it  was  reaped.  And 
this  was  done  in  a  very  solemn  and  pompous  manner  according  to  the  account  the  Jews 
give  of  it,  which  is  this  :  The  messengers  of  the  Sanhedrin  went  out  (from  Jeru- 
salem over  the  brook  Kidron  to  tbe  fields  near  it)  on  the  evening  of  the  feast,  and 
bound  the  standing  corn  in  bundles  that  so  it  might  be  more  easily  reaped,  and  the 
inhabitants  of  all  the  neighbouring  villages  gathered  together  there  that  it  might  be 
reaped  in  great  pomp,  and  when  it  was  dark,  one  said  to  them,  "  Is  it  sunset?  " 
They  said,  "  Yes."  "  With  this  sickle  shall  I  reap  it  ?  "  They  said,  "  Yes."  "In  this 
basket  shall  I  put  it?"  They  said,  "Yes,"  If  on  a  Sabbath-day  he  said  to  them, 
"  Ou  this  Sabbath-day  shall  I  do  it  ?  "  They  said,  "  Y'es."  These  questions  were  put 
and  aiiswered  three  times ;  then  they  reaped  it,  and  put  it  into  the  basket,  and 
brought  it  to  the  court.  Now  this  reaping  of  the  sheaf  of  first-fruits  was  an 
emblem  of  the  apprehending  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  by  the  Jews,  or  by  ofiicers 
which  they  sent  to  take  Him.  They  attempted  it  once  and  again  before  they 
accomplished  it.  We  are  told  in  the  seventh  chapter  of  John  that,  "  at  the  Feast 
of  Tabernacles  they  sought  to  lay  hold  of  Him;  but  His  time  was  not  yet  come." 
The  very  officers  were  dispirited,  and  when  they  were  called  to  an  account  by  the 
chief  priests  and  Pharisees  for  not  bringing  Him  they  said,  "  Never  man  spake  like 
this  Man."  They  could  not  take  Him.  But  when  the  set  time  was  come  He  was 
easily  apprehended  by  them.  And  as  we  are  told  they  bound  the  ears  of  corn,  that 
they  might  be  the  more  easily  reaped,  so  they  bound  Christ,  and  brought  Him  to 
the  high  priest.  This  was  done  at  night  when  it  was  dark.  And  as  the  sheaf  was 
reaped  by  a  deputation  of  men  sent  by  the  grand  Sanhedrin  at  Jerusalem,  so  our 
Lord  was  apprehended  by  officers  sent  by  chief  priests  and  Pharisees,  who  were 
assembled  together  in  council  as  the  great  Sanhedrin  of  the  nation.  Likewise  the 
circumstance  of  the  sheaf  of  firstfruits  being  reaped  near  the  brook  Kidron  exactly 
agrees  with  the  apprehending  of  Christ  near  that  brook.  When  this  sheaf  was 
reaped,  then  it  was  brought  to  the  court ;  so  Christ,  when  He  was  first  apprehended, 
was  brought  to  Annas,  then  to  Caiaphas,  then  to  the  court,  where,  after  His  arraign- 
ment and  trial.  He  was  condemned  to  death.  This  sheaf  being  brought  to  court  was 
threshed,  winnowed,  dried,  and  parched  by  the  fire,  and  ground  in  a  mill,  all  which 
set  forth  in  a  lively  manner  the  dolorous  sufferings  of  our  Lord.  The  sheaf  being 
threshed  was  expressive  of  His  being  smitten  by  men,  of  His  being  bufifeted  and 
scourged  by  the  order  of  the  Eoman  governor  by  the  soldiers,  all  in  perfect  agree- 
ment with  the  prophecy  that  "  they  should  smite  the  Judge  of  Israel  with  a  rod 
upon  the  cheek  ";  "that  He  should  give  His  back  to  the  smiters,  and  His  cheeks  to 
them  which  plucked  off  the  hair."     This  sheaf  of  the  firstfruits  as  it  was  beaten 


282  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap,  xxiii. 

out  so  it  was  dried  and  parched  by  the  fire,  which  may  be  considered  as  expressive 
of  the  wrath  of  God  which  Clirist  endured,  which  is  compared  to  fire,  and  by  which 
(as  it  is  expressed  in  the  Psahiis  concerning  Him)  "  His  strength  was  dried  up  like 
a  potsherd."  It  was  ground  also  in  a  mill  (as  was  the  manna,  another  type  of 
Christ),  which  was  another  circumstance  that  pointed  out  the  suH'erings  of  the 
Redeemer,  who  was  wounded  for  our  transgressions,  and  bruised  for  our  iniquities. 
Upon  the  omer  of  flour  that  was  taken  oil  and  frankincense  were  poured,  which 
may  denote  the  acceptableness  of  Christ  in  His  sufferings,  death,  and  sacrifice  to 
His  Divine  Fatlier.  He  gave  Himself  for  us,  an  offering  and  a  sacrifice  unto  God 
for  a  sweet-smelling  savour.  And  then  the  waving  of  this  by  the  priest  before  the 
Lord  seems  to  denote  His  resurrection  from  the  dead.  It  is  also  expressive  of  His 
connection  with  His  people  whom  He  represented,  and  whose  resurrection  is  the 
pledge,  eajnest,  and  security  of  theirs.  For  as  the  firstfruits  sanctified  the  rest  of 
their  harvest,  represented  the  whole,  gave  a  right  to  the  ingathering  of  it,  and  insured 
it,  so  our  Lord's  resurrection  from  the  dead  sanctified  and  secured  the  resurrection 
of  His  people.  Because  He  lives  they  shall  live  also,  or  as  sure  as  His  dead  body 
arose,  so  sui-e  shall  thehs  rise  also.  HI.  What  were  the  concomitants  of  it  ? 
What  accompanied  the  waving  the  firstfruits  were  a  burnt-offering  and  a  meat- 
offering. The  first  of  these  was  an  eminent  type  of  Christ,  as  all  the  burnt-offerings 
were.  It  was  a  lamb — a  figure  of  Christ  the  Lamb  of  God  who  takes  away  the  sin 
of  the  world.  A  lamb  without  blemish — a  type  of  the  immaculate  Lamb  of  God. 
This  was  a  barnt-offering,  so  a  fit  emblem  of  the  dolorous  sufferings  of  our  Lord 
Jtsus  Christ.  Then  there  was  a  meat-offering  which  always  went  along  with  this, 
which  was  also  typical  of  Christ.  From  hence  we  see  the  great  advantages  we 
receive  from  Christ.  He  is  the  firstfruits,  and  all  our  fruit  is  from  Him.  And 
therefore  many  are  the  obligations  we  lay  under  to  give  thanks  unto  His  name  and 
not  forget  His  benefits.  We  ought,  through  the  constraints  of  His  love,  to  live  to 
Him  who  died  for  us.  {John  Gill,  D.D.)  Lessons  of  the  harvest : — It  is  easy  to 
see  the  significance  of  this  rite  to  the  Israelites.  God  was  to  be  associated  with 
everything.  No  phase  of  duty  or  of  enjoyment ;  no  enterprise — social,  commercial, 
or  aggressive  ;  no  festivities  to  celebrate  triumphs  over  enemies,  to  mark  national 
progress  or  prestige,  or  to  rejoice  over  the  reward  of  industry,  but  God  was  to  be 
acknowledged,  honoured,  and  worshipped,  His  blessing  sought.  His  goodness 
remembered,  His  theocratic  rule  over  them  extolled.  We  have  had  to  unlearn 
much  that  the  Jew  taught  his  posterity,  and  the  world  through  them  ;  we  have  out- 
grown much  that  was  as  sacred  to  the  Israelitish  nation  as  the  presence  of  God 
Himself ;  the  world  has  had  to  recast  and  remould  its  creeds  of  the  relation  of  the 
Divine  Father  to  His  human  children  ;  but  we  have  not  outgrown  either  the  pro- 
priety or  the  necessity  of  associating  God  with  the  government  of  the  world  and 
with  the  supply  of  humanity's  needs.  I.  The  bountiful  kindness  of  God  in 
SUPPLYING  THE  WANTS  OF  His  cBEATUEES.  Smatterings  of  science  have  a  tendency 
to  divorce  God  from  the  providential  supply  of  the  world's  wants.  We  too  com- 
monly think  of  our  daily  supplies  as  the  results  of  physical  laws.  We  say  the  earth 
yieldeth  her  increase ;  Nature  supplieth  those  things  that  are  necessary  for  man's 
sustenance;  light  and  heat,  warmth  and  moisture  are  the  great  factors  in  the  world's 
bounty.  Let  us  grant  all  that,  but  who  is  behind  it  ?  To  me  the  supply  of  the 
■world's  daily  bread  is  a  standing  proof — not  only  of  a  self-existent  and  ever  active 
Deity,  but  of  a  Divine  Fatherhood — ever  thinking,  ever  acting,  ever  providing  for 
the  wants  of  all  His  children.  II.  The  necessakt  connection  between  the  Divine 
BENEVOLENCE  AND  HUMAN  EFFORT.  Whatever  the  Divine  rule,  whatever  the  Divine 
love  that  broods  over  this  poor  earth,  making  it  to  yield  its  fruits  in  abundance,  the 
world  without  man  would  be  a  vast  howling  wilderness.  It  is  God  plus  man  that 
enriches  the  earth  and  makes  it  to  bring  forth  abundantly.  And  thus  it  is  that  toil 
becomes  dignified,  that  the  sweat  of  labour  is  God's  crown  of  approval  upon  the 
human  brow.  Every  man  who  is  putting  God's  gifts  into  such  conditions  that  they 
become  greater  gifts ;  every  man  who  is  preparing  the  soil  for  the  seed  and  the  seed 
for  the  soil ;  every  man  who  by  any  kind  of  industry  is  helping  God  to  fulfil  His 
purposes  in  making  the  earth  provide  for  the  wants  of  man,  is  a  servant  of  God, 
however  low  and  however  humble  the  man  may  be.  To  be  idle  is  to  be  outside  the 
purpose  and  economy  of  God  ;  to  be  lazy  is  to  be  out  of  harmony  with  the  laws  of 
the  universe  III.  The  inevitable  relation  between  the  seed-time  and  the 
HARVEST.  The  man  who  wanted  a  harvest  of  wheat  knew  that  to  effect  such  a  result 
he  must  sow  wheat.  It  is  God's  law  that  it  should  be  so.  Every  harvest  is  the 
evolution  of  some  past  seed  time.     Human  life  and  human  destiny  are  evolved,  not 


CHAP,  xxiii.]  LEVITICUS.  283» 

by  chance,  not  by  miracle,  not  by  the  Divine  caprice,  but  by  the  law  of  cause  and 
effect,  of  precedent  and  consequent.  Your  present  is  the  outcome  of  some  past ;  all 
the  good  that  you  enjoy  is  the  harvest  of  your  own  or  other's  sowing  ;  your  future 
will  be  the  consequent  of  this  present.  Human  conduct  is  the  factor  of  liumau 
destiny;  the  sowing  of  time  determines  the  harvest  of  eternity.     {W.  J.  Hocking.) 

Vers.  15-17.  And  ye  shall  count  unto  you  from  the  morrow  after  the  sabbath. — 

The  Feast  of  Pentecost : — We  are  now  to  consider  that  which  was  properly  the 
second  annual  festival  of  the  Jewish  n>>tion — the  Feast  of  Pentecost.  The  distinc- 
tive ceremony  observed  upon  this  day  was  the  presentation  of  a  new  meat-offering, 
in  the  form  of  two  wave-loaves  unto  the  Lord.  These  loaves  were  the  first-fruits  of 
wheat  harvest,  and  in  allusion  to  them  the  feast  is  sometimes  called  "  the  Feast  of 
Harvest  "  (Exod.  xxiii.  16),  and  also  "  the  day  of  first-fruits  "  (Num.  xviii.  26).  The 
moral  bearing  of  this  ordinance  upon  the  people  was  therefore  similar  to  that  of 
the  last  which  we  have  bad  presented  to  our  notice  ;  it  was  a  renewed  acknowledg- 
ment on  their  part  of  the  mercies  of  Jehovah,  who  had  brought  them  into  "  that 
good  land,"  and  given  them  the  kindly  fruits  of  the  earth  in  their  season.  And 
accordingly  we  find  a  beautiful  form  of  thanksgiving  prescribed  for  this  occasion,  in 
which  these  mercies  were  briefly  but  eloquently  celebrated  (Deut.  xxvi.  1-11).  But 
we  are  now  to  examine  this  festival  with  the  view  of  discovering  its  typical  and  pro- 
phetic import ;  and  this  also  we  must  look  for  in  that  ordinance  which  characterised 
it,  and  from  which,  as  we  have  seen,  it  derived  its  name,  the  offering  of  these  two 
wave-loaves.  They  were  designed  to  set  forth  the  Church  of  Christ.  Just  as  the 
Saviour  Himself  in  resurrection  from  the  dead  is  typified  by  the  wave-sheaf,  the 
first-fruits  of  barley  harvest  ("  the  first  of  the  first-fruits  "  (Exod.  xxxiv.  26),  as  it  is 
called) ;  so  also  the  Church  as  partaking  of  His  resurrection  life — quickened  by  the 
Spirit  in  which  He  rose  from  the  dead,  is  represented  by  the  ordinance  of  the  two 
wave-loaves.  As  He  is  "  the  first-fruits  "  with  respect  to  His  people,  so  they  also  are 
by  union  with  Him  constituted  the  first-fruits  in  reference  to  that  future  harvest. 
Let  us,  then,  enter  into  detail.  I.  Theke  was  something  significant  in  the  day  on 
WHICH  THIS  OFFERING  WAS  TO  BE  PRESENTED.  It  was  OH  the  fiftieth  day  from  that  on 
which  the  wave-sheaf  was  oiiered,  or  as  it  is  called  in  the  New  Testament  the  day  of 
Pentecost.  Now  what  is  the  importance  of  the  day  of  Pentecost  to  us  as  Christians  ? 
I  answer,  it  was  the  commenctment  of  the  present  dispensation.  This  is  the  dis- 
tinguishing characteristic  of  the  Christian  Church — of  that  Church  not  merely  as 
distinguished  from  the  world,  but  also  from  the  Church  previous  to  the  day  of 
Pentecost — that  she  is  united  to,  yea  identified  with  Christ  in  resurrection  (Col.  iii. 

I,  2).  In  this  new  character  the  Holy  Ghost  was  not  given  until  that  Jesus  was 
glorified.  As  the  Spirit  of  light  and  life  He  had  been  operating  on  the  hearts  of  all 
His  faithful  people  from  the  beginning  of  the  world.  But  now  He  operates  in 
increased  power,  and  bestows  a  higher  privilege;  He  unites  the  Church  unto  Him 
who  is  "  waved"  in  the  character  of  "the  first-fruits,"  that  we  in  Him  may  also 
partake  of  the  same  character,  and  become  "the  first-fruits  unto  God  and  to  the 
Lamb  (Eev.  xiv.  4).  And  thus  it  is  written,  in  allusion,  I  believe,  to  this  very  ordin- 
ance, "  Of  His  own  will  begat  He  us  with  the  word  of  truth,  that  we  should  be  a 
kind  of  first-fruits  of  His  creatures."  (Jas.  i.  28).     And  this  brings  me  to  consider — 

II.  The  analogy  between  the  ordinance  before  us,  and  the  Church  of  which  it  is 
THE  TYPE.  This  will  appear  in  several  interesting  particulars,  and — 1.  Is  there  not 
something  significant  in  the  bipartite  character  of  the  type  ?  It  was  to  consist  of 
two  loaves.  And  surely  it  is  natural  to  suppose  that  it  was  designed  to  set  forth 
something.  Why  should  the  lump  be  divided  into  two  parts,  and  not  be  presented 
whole  ?  In  order,  I  would  venture  to  suggest,  to  set  forth  the  two  component  parts 
of  the  Christian  Church — the  Jews  and  Gentiles,  both  made  one  in  Christ.  This  is 
one  marked  peculiarity  of  the  present  dispensation.  It  was  the  mystery  hidden 
from  ages  and  generations,  but  which  is  now  made  manifest  that  the  Gentiles 
should  be  fellow-heirs  and  of  the  same  body  (Eph.  iii.  6).  There  is,  then,  you  see,  a 
unity,  and  yet  a  diversity  in  the  Christian  Church  ;  a  unity  because  it  is  one  Churc  h  ; 
a  diversity  because  it  consists  of  two  component  parts,  the  Jew  and  the  Gentile 
(Eph.  ii.  14^18).  2.  Another  point  of  analogy,  and  a  farther  confirmation  of  this 
application  of  the  type,  will  be  suggested  if  we  shall  find  that  the  Church  of  the 
present  dispensation  is  presented  in  Scripture  to  be  the  first-fruits,  or  earnest,  of 
future  and  more  enlarged  mercies  which  are  yet  to  come.  Whether  we  consider  the 
converts  to  the  gospel  from  among  the  Jews,  or  those  from  among  the  Gentiles, 
■which  are  made  during  the  present  dispensation,  we  are  taught  to  regard  them  each 


•  284  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOE.  [chap.  ran. 

and  both  together,  but  as  "a  kind  of  first-fruits  of  His  creatures"  (Eph.  i.  10). 
And  first,  with  regard  to  the  Jews,  I  would  refer  you  to  the  testimony  which  is 
borne  to  this  effect  in  the  Epistle  to  the  Romans  ^Eom.  xi.  1-5).  And  what  is  this 
result?  Is  it  the  conversion  of  the  whole  nation?  No,  as  a  nation,  Israel  is  for  the 
present  rejected ;  but  we  are  to  expect  that  there  will  be  an  election  from  among 
them,  "  a  remnant  according  to  the  election  of  gi-ace  "  ;  and  no  more  than  this. 
But  is  Israel  as  a  nation  to  be  for  ever  cast  away ?  Do  Gods  purposes  of  mercy 
reach  no  farther  than  the  gathering  of  this  remnant  ?  Far  otherwise  the  view 
that  the  apostle  gives  us  in  this  chapter  (Eom.  xi.  12,  15).  Here  we  are  expressly 
taught  to  look  for  a  period  when  the  mercies  of  God  will  no  longer  be  confined 
to  -'a  remnant"  from  among  them  as  now,  but  when  they  shall  all,  in  their 
fulness,  be  received  again  into  the  favour  of  God.  So  far,  then,  as  re^'ards  the 
Jews;  let  us  now  see  how  far  the  same  holds  good  as  respects  the  Gentiles.  And 
here  I  shall  again  confine  myself  to  one  passage.  In  the  fifteenth  chapter  of  the 
Acts  of  the  Apostles,  when  St.  James,  who  presided  at  the  council,  is  recorded 
to  have  spoken  as  follows  : — "  Simeon  hath  declared  how  God  at  the  first  did 
visit  the  Gentiles,  to  take  out  of  them  a  people  for  His  name."  Here  you  see  is 
the  idea  entertained  by  the  apostles  of  the  purposes  of  God  towards  the  Gentiles  in 
the  present  dispensation.  3.  The  first-fruits  were  considered  to  be  the  property  of 
God — peculiarly  His,  claimed  by  Him,  and  set  apart  for  His  own.  And  is  not  this 
also  true  in  regard  to  His  Church?  Has  He  not  chosen  it  to  Himself,  and  made  it 
His  own  in  a  peculiar  sense  above  ah  other  things  ?  The  universe  belongs  to  Him, 
the  beasts  of  the  forest  are  His  ;  but  the  Lord's  portion  are  His  people,  Judah  is  the 
lot  of  His  inheritance,  "  a  chosen  generation,  and  holy  nation,  a  pecuhar  people  " 
(1.  Pet.  ii.  9).  As  far  as  God  has  revealed  His  mind  towards  His  creatures,  we 
know  of  nothing  in  the  whole  universe  so  precious  to  Him  as  His  Church.  Angels 
in  this  respect  cannot  compare  with  us.  Humanity  is  in  Christ  united  to  the  God- 
head, and  therefore  stands  of  a  pinacle  far  above  all  other  created  things  (Eph.  v. 
30).  My  brethren,  it  is  not  a  mere  salvation  which  we  have  in  Jesus.  Oh  !  no,  it 
is  much  more  than  salvation,  than  dehverance,  than  restoration ;  it  is  identification 
with  the  Son  of  His  love,  who  has  come  down  to  us  to  take  us  up  to  Him,  that  we 
may  be  "  blessed  with  all  spiritual  blessings  in  heavenly  places  in  Christ  Jesus  " 
(Eph.  i.  3).  But  if  this  speaks  to  us  of  privileges  it  speaks  also  of  duty.  My 
brethren,  consider  what  it  is  to  be  the  property  of  God.  Just  as  the  first-fruits 
were  by  His  own  command  set  apart  unto  Himself,  and  given  into  the  hands  of  His 
appointed  priest  to  be  waved  before  Him.  so  it  is  with  the  Chmch.  We  are  His  by 
covenant  arrangement,  we  are  given  by  Him  unto  the  great  High  Priest — "Thine 
they  were,  and  Thou  gavestthem  Me  "  (John  xvii.  6).  And  why  are  we  thus  given 
unto  Him  ?  in  order  that  He  may  save  us  ?  deUver  us  from  wrath  ?  Oh  I  yes,  but 
that  we  may  by  Him  be  consecrated  unto  the  service  and  glory  of  our  God,  that  we 
may  be  His,  in  time  and  in  eternity.  And  this  brings  me  to  observe — i.  The 
peculiar  character  of  this  offering.  It  was  a  wave-offermg.  And  there  is  something 
significant  in  this,  the  wave  sheaf,  ym  remember,  set  forth  the  Saviour  Himself  in 
resurrection  ;  and  so  when  the  Church  is  represented  in  the  wave-loaves,  there  can 
be  no  doubt  that  it  is  intended  to  exhibit  her  in  this  character,  as  "  risen  together  " 
with  Him.  As  then  the  characteristic  last  referred  to  set  f ^irth  the  dedication  of  the 
Chwrch  to  God,  her  consecration  to  His  service ;  so  this  which  I  now  speak  of,  is 
designed  to  remind  us  of  the  power  in  which  we  are  to  be  thus  consecrated — the 
power  of  resurrection-life.  The  apostle  supposes  the  objection  brought  against  the 
gospel  of  the  grace  of  God  which  so  often  meet  with  in  the  present  day,  that  it 
tends  to  antinomianism.  "  What,  then,  shall  we  continue  in  sin  that  grace  may 
abound?"  (Rom.  vi.  1),  and  how  does  he  reply?  "God  forbid;  how  shall  we 
who  are  dead  to  sin,  live  any  longer  therein  ? "  Here  you  see  the  Christian 
is  described  as  one  that  is  dead  to  sin ;  and  how  is  that  ?  "  Know  ye  not  that  as 
many  of  us  as  were  baptized  into  Jesus  Christ  were  baptized  into  His  death  ? 
wherefore  we  are  buried  with  Him  by  baptism  unto  death  ?  that  Uke  as 
Christ  is  raised  from  the  dead  by  the  glory  of  the  Father,  even  so  we  also 
should  walk  in  newness  of  life."  Such,  then,  you  perceive,  is  practical  Chris- 
tianity. If  you  want  a  sample  of  the  life  in  which  we  ought  to  walk,  you  are 
to  contemplate  the  risen  Saviour :  this  is  the  standard  which  the  Scriptures  put 
before  ns.  5.  The  next  particular  to  which  I  would  refer  is  the  injunction 
in  the  sixteenth  verse,  "They  shall  be  baken  with  leaven."  There  is  a  beau- 
tiful significance  in  this ;  the  leaven,  we  know,  is  a  type  of  the  flesh  —  of 
nature — of  the  old  man,  and  when  it  is  directed  that  it  should  be  mingled  with 


CHAP,  xxiii.]  LEVITICUS.  285, 

this  offering,  it  appears,  at  first  sight,  extraordinary.  Why  should  that  which 
is  thus  dedicated  to  God  be  thus  defiled?  There  is  something  significant  in 
this :  there  was  no  leaven  mingled  with  the  sheaf  of  com  which  was  waved  on  the 
second  day  of  unleavened  bread,  because  it  was  a  type  of  Him  in  whom  was  no  sin; 
but  it  is  otherwise  in  regard  to  that  which  is  designed  to  represent  His  people  ;  they 
would  not  be  perfectly  exhibited  if  there  was  not  this  memorial  It  is  true  that 
they  are  raised  from  the  death  of  sin;  but  it  is  also  true  that  "  the  old  man  "  does 
still  remain  in  them,  and,  by  the  taint  and  infection  of  the  flesh,  pollutes  their  every 
service,  and  brings  them  in  stiQ  as  miserable  sinners  before  God.  Here,  then,  we 
have  an  accurate  view  of  the  present  character  of  the  Church  of  Christ :  animated, 
indeed,  with  new,  with  spiritual  life,  yet  stiU  encompassed  with  the  infirmity,  and 
impeded  by  the  opposition  of  the  flesh.  And,  accordingly,  it  is  important  to  observe 
there  is  a  sin-offeiing  expressly  enjoioed  to  be  offered  with  the  two  wave  loaves 
(ver.  19).  This  is  a  remarkable  instance  of  that  minuteness  with  which  these  types 
are  regulated,  and  more  particularly  when  it  is  observed  that  there  was  no  sin- 
offering  to  be  made  when  the  sheaf  of  firstfruits  was  presented.  Oh  I  beloved,  do 
you  feel  the  virus  of  the  flesh?  Are  you  conscious  of  its  perpetual  pressure? 
Behold,  here  is  the  provision  He  has  made  to  meet  your  anguish  (Heb.  x.  22).  6. 
But  lastly,  let  us  always  bear  in  mind  the  view  which  this  or<iinance  gives  us  of  the 
Church  as  the  firstfruits  of  God's  mercies  towards  the  world  at  large.  The  infidel 
taunts  us  with  the  Uttle  that  the  gospel  has  accomplished,  and  maintains  thai 
Christianity  has  proved  a  failure  ;  and  truly  if,  as  is  supposed  by  some,  the  Scrip- 
tures held  out  the  expectation  that  the  gospel  was  to  go  on  gradtially  extending, 
nntU  the  world  was  evangelised,  there  were  some  appearance  of  reason  in  the  impu- 
tation. Let  us  ever  bear  in  mind  we  have  an  earnest  of  a  glorious  harvest  which 
is  yet  to  come.  As  surely  as  the  firstfruits  are  now  waved  in  His  presence,  so 
sorely  shall  the  harvest  be  gathered  into  His  gamer.     (-7.  B.  Love,  B.A.) 

Ver.  22.  Not  make  clean  riddance. — Gleaning  : — The  benevolent  provision  made 
in  our  text  for  the  poor  and  stranger  proclaims  its  author :  even  God,  whose  tender 
mercies  are  over  all  His  works,  who  is  the  Friend  of  the  friendless,  and  has  enjoined 
that  even  fragments  are  to  be  gathered,  that  nothing  may  be  lost.     I.  Let  such  as 

HAVE  FIELDS  TO  GLEAS"  PAT  ATTENTION  TO  THE  LETTEE  ASI*  THE  SPIBIT  OF  THIS  TSJJTSC- 
TION",  TOGETHEB  WITH  THE  MOTIVE    OS  WHICH    OBEDIENCE    IS   ZXTORCED.       1.    The  letter 

of  this  benevolent  precept  establishes  the  propriety  of  permitting  persons  to  glean 
in  your  lar  Is  :  but  it  does  not  prohibit  clearing  your  fields  of  all  the  sheaves,  and 
carrying  them  not  only  to  a  place  of  safety,  but  out  of  the  way  of  temptation  to  the 
gleaners.  Is  not  thi«  evidently  implied  in  the  following  explanatory  directions  of 
the  law  (Deut.  xxiv.  19),  where'  not  taking  away  the  entire  crop  is  imputed  to  inad- 
vertence, rather  than  intention.  Neither  does  it  forbid  the  judicious  exercise  of 
this  permission  as  to  the  persons  who  may  glean,  as  is  clear  from  the  history  of 
Euth.  It  rested  with  the  proprietor  or  occupier  of  the  land  to  grant  or  deny  the 
privilege  to  certain  individuals.  Yet  the  command  strictly  enjoins  the  duty  of 
leaving  what  is  not  thus  carried  for  the  poor  and  strangers,  and  frowns  on  the 
inhtmian  and  selfish  practice  of  turning  cattle  of  any  description  into  the  fields 
until  some  reasonable  time  for  the  gleaning  has  been  allowed  to  elapse.  In  some 
foreign  conntries  the  law  specifies  twenty -four  hours  after  the  crop  has  been  carted, 
but  circumstances  and  conscience  must  decide  for  each  farmer.  2.  We  have,  how- 
ever, less  to  do  with  the  letter  than  the  spirit  of  this  precept.  Does  it  not  breathe 
kindness  to  the  poor,  pity  to  the  needy,  and  cherish  the  disposition  to  let  fall  pur- 
posely a  few  ears  of  corn  rather  than  collect  all  with  extreme  exactitude  ?  Eight 
too  rigid,  hardens  into  wrong.  The  sentiment  of  this  direction  should  transfuse 
itself  into  every  part  of  our  conduct,  and  pervade  all  our  transactions  with  the  poor. 
3.  The  motive  subjoined  for  your  obedience :  "  I  am  the  Lord  your  God  " — God, 
who  raiseth  up  one  and  putteth  down  another,  who  maketh  the  rich  and  the  poor, 
who  has  borne  with  your  ingratitude  and  rebellion,  and  who  has,  notwithstauding, 
given  you  another  and  an  abundant  crop — yes.  He  is  your  God  whom  you  profess 
to  obey,  and  whose  authority  you  wish  to  regard.  4.  Becollect  that  to  obedience  is 
therewardannexed(Deut.  xxiv.  19).  II.  Advice  to  strcH  as  are  gleaxees.  Eemember 
that  God,  who  has  ordained  this  permission,  and  guarded  it  by  His  command,  must  be 
honoured  by  you  in  the  enjoyment.  1.  Unless  yon  are  poor,  you  neither  might  nor 
would  glean :  "let  me  then  guard  you  against  those  snares  which  always  attend  poverty. 
It  is  a  temptation ,  when  afar  from  human  notice,  to  defraud :  "  lest  I  be  poor  and  steal." 
Forget  not  the  old  proverb,  "  He  that  will  steal  a  pin,  will  steal  a  greater  thing."  When 


286  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxm. 

opportunity  and  importunity  press,  the  hand  th  it  loosed  the  band  of  a  shf&f  will 
not  forbear  to  break  through  the  barn  and  steal.  2.  You  go  into  the  fields  to  glean: 
then  do  not  idle  away  your  time,  or  what  was  intended  for  your  good  will  be  an 
mjury  to  you.  3.  Persons  generally  glean  in  numbers  ;  then  pray  avoid  bad  com- 
pany and  they  will  soon  avoid  you.  Like  always  associates  with  its  like — lions  with 
lions,  sheep  with  sheep — a  man  may  be  known  by  the  company  he  keeps.  Choose 
society  in  your  work  who  will  do  you  good  rather  than  harm ;  better  conversation 
will  cheer  you  under  the  heat  of  the  sun  and  the  toil  of  out-door  work,  to  which  you 
may  perhaps  not  be  accustomed.  4.  Let  me  caution  you  also  against  what  is  too 
common  on  these  occasions — immodest  behaviour.  Indecent  language  and  coarse 
manners  are  disgraceful  and  dangerous.  Use  your  authority  to  prevent  your  children 
seeing  or  hearing  what  is  so  wrong  and  easily  learnt  and  but  seldom  forgotten.  5. 
It  is  mentioned  to  the  praise  of  a  most  excellent  daughter  and  industrious  but  poor 
female  that  she  came  home  early  from  gleaning.  Be  not  the  last  to  leave  the  fields ; 
late  hours  in  every  station  of  life  are  injurious ;  works  of  darkness  are  always  sus- 
picious, often  criminal.  "  Many  love  darkness  rather  than  light,  because  their  deeds 
are  evil."  6.  I  wish  you  to  notice  that  the  Scriptures  say  that  the  stranger  may 
glean.  In  some  places  the  poor  will  not  permit  this.  Are  they  right  ?  Does  not 
the  same  verse  which  permits  you  allow  them  ?  Moreover,  perhaps  your  children, 
or  remoter  descendants,  may  be  cast  where  they  are  not  known,  and  have  no  settle- 
ment; and  often  God  retributes  in  this  life ;  as  we  have  done  to  others  He  allows  or 
disposes  others  to  deal  with  us.  Lessons  :  1.  From  the  whole  of  this  subject, 
primarily,  let  us  learn  our  obligation  to  God  for  His  invaluable  Word — a  standard 
of  unerring  rectitude,  and  wherein  is  contained  every  thing  necessary  for  life  and 
godliness.  2.  We  may  infer  that  if  God  has  condescended  to  regulate  smaller  con- 
cerns. He  will  not  overlook  greater  matters.  Has  He  thus  cared  for  your  bodies  and 
temporal  interests,  and  will  He  be  less  provident  about  your  immortal  spirits  ?  3. 
Let  us  remember  that  the  evening  of  our  life  draweth  on  ;  when,  as  she  who  gleaned 
in  the  fields  of  Boaz  returned  to  her  inquiring  parent  and  reported  her  success,  we 
shall  return  to  the  dust  from  whence  we  sprang ;  and  must  say  to  corruption,  Thou 
art  my  mother.  It  shall  then  be  asked  of  us,  Where  have  ye  gleaned  to-day  ? 
where  wroughtest  thou?    What  reply  shall  we  make?     {W.  Clayton.) 

Vers.  23-25.  A  memorial  of  blowing  of  trumpets. — The  Feast  of  Trumpets  : — The 
ordinance  of  the  trumpets  occupied  a  conspicuous  part  in  the  Jewish  ceremonial ; 
and  when  we  consider  the  various  particulars  which  were  prescribed  regarding  them, 
and  the  purposes  to  which  they  were  applied,  we  cannot  but  feel  that  they  were 
intended  to  convey  some  instructive  lesson.  We  have  an  account  of  their  first 
appointment  in  the  tenth  chapter  of  the  Book  of  Numbers,  vers.  1-10.  Here  the 
following  particulars  deserve  to  be  noted :  1.  That  these  trumpets  were  made  at 
the  express  command  of  God,  who  also  enjoined — 2.  The  manner  in  which  they 
were  to  be  formed — "  of  one  piece  "  ;  and  3.  The  purposes  to  which  they  were  to 
be  applied,  viz. — (1)  For  the  calling  of  assemblies.  (2)  The  journeys  of  the  camp. 
(3)  To  sound  an  alarm  in  the  time  of  danger.  (4)  On  new  moons  and  festal  occa- 
sions, when  they  were  to  be  blown  over  the  sacrifices.  In  addition  to  the  occasions 
here  enumerated,  there  was  also  to  be  celebrated  an  anniversary  of  the  blowing  of 
trumpets,  on  the  first  day  of  the  seventh  month,  which  on  this  account  was  called 
the  Feast  of  Trumpets — the  third  of  these  solemn  annual  festivals,  which  we  are 
endeavouring  to  illustrate.  In  considering,  then,  this  ordinance,  we  shall  divide 
our  observations  into  three  heads  ;  under  the  first,  we  shall  examine  its  commemo- 
rative bearing  ;  under  the  second,  its  application  to  the  piesent  dispensation  ;  and 
under  the  third,  its  prospective  or  prophetic  reference  to  things  which  are  to 
come.  I.  For  its  comiiemor.a.tive  beaeino,  I  would  refer  to  the  nineteenth 
chapter  of  the  Book  of  Exodus,  where  we  have  an  account  of  the  manner  in 
which  the  Lord  summoned  the  children  of  Israel  to  meet  Him  on  Mount  Sinai. 
Here  we  find  the  first  mention  of  the  trumpet ;  when  God  Himself  appoints  it 
as  a  sign  by  which  the  people  should  know  when  to  approach  the  mount. 
"  When  the  trumpet  soundeth  long,  they  shall  come  up  to  the  mount "  (Exod 
xix.  13).  And  so  we  read  (Exod.  xix.  16).  And  again  (Exod.  xix.  19).  This  may 
be  regarded  as  the  source  from  whence  the  ordinance  of  trumpets  originated. 
This  was  the  voice  of  God  calling  them  into  covenant  with  Himself.  Thus, 
then,  whenever  the  people  heard  the  sacred  trumpets,  they  recognised,  as  it  were, 
the  voice  of  God.  At  His  voice  they  marched  or  halted  ;  at  His  voice  they  mustered 
to  oppose  their  enemies  ;  at  His  voice  they  assembled  on  their  festal  days.    And 


CHAP,  xxiii.]  LEVITICUS.  287 

we  have  here,  doubtless,  the  commemorative  or  retrospective  bearing  of  the  feast 
before  us.  The  time  when  it  was  celebrated,  the  new  moon  symbolising  the  com- 
mencement of  the  Jewish  Church  in  the  wilderness  ;  the  trumpet  summoning  them 
to  "  an  holy  convocation,"  recalling  the  assemblage  gathered  around  Mount  Sinai ; 
the  command,  "  Thou  shalt  do  no  servile  work  therein,"  commemorating  their 
deliverance  from  Egyptian  bondage  ;  and  finaUy,  the  injunction,  "  Ye  shall  offer 
an  offering  made  by  tire  unto  the  Lord,"  reminding  them  tbat  the  purpose  for  which 
God  had  made  them  His  people,  was  in  order  that  (what  in  Egypt  they  were  not 
allowed  to  do)  they  might  sacrifice  unto  the  Lord  their  God.  Such,  I  venture  to 
suggest,  is  the  retrospective  import  of  this  feast — such  was  its  national  application  ; 
and  I  am  confirmed  in  the  impression  by  the  reference  made  to  it  in  the  eighty -first 
Psalm,  where  we  find  it  mentioned  in  connection  with  the  deliverance  from  the  land 
of  Egypt — '*  Blow  up  the  trumpet  in  the  new  moon,  in  the  time  appointed,  on  our 
solemn   feast-day "    (Psa.    Ixxxi.   3-10).     II.    We  proceed,  then,  to  examine  its 

APPLICATION     TO     THE     PEESENT  •  DISPENSATION,     WHICH     CAN     BE     TRACED     IN     SEVERAL 

PARTICULARS.  1.  The  trumpet  was,  as  we  have  seen,  the  voice  of  a  covenant  God, 
calling  His  people  to  assemble  round  the  sacrifices;  a  lively  emblem  is  this  of  the 
gospel  of  Jesus — the  voice  of  "  Him  that  speaks  from  heaven  "  (Heb.  xii.  18-24). 
Jesus  has  ascended  up  on  high,  and  sits  ui^on  the  mount,  of  God ;  and  thence  by 
the  gospel-trump  He  sends  forth  His  invitation,  the  call  of  His  grace,  to  bring  His 
people  nigh.  It  is  His  voice,  His  call,  summoning  us  into  covenant  with  God. 
This  dispensation  is  emphatically  "  the  day  of  the  blowing  of  trumpets — the  day  of 
holy  convocation. "  This  is  the  mystery  of  the  silver  trumpets,  they  represent  the 
gospel  of  Jesus.  The  command  to  make  them,  the  manner  in  which  they  were  to 
be  made,  and  the  material  of  which  they  were  to  be  constructed,  were  all  of  God, 
all  ordained  by  Him.  And  so  with  the  gospel ;  it  is  all  of  God  from  beginning  to 
end.  His  love  suggested,  and  His  wisdom  has  contrived  it ;  and  woe  be  to  him  that 
dares  to  add  to,  or  to  take  from  it.  We  must  take  it  as  He  has  given  it ;  if  we  pre- 
sume to  alter,  we  mar  and  spoil  it.  God  alone  is  competent  to  know  what  note 
will  strike  with  effect  upon  the  smner's  ear,  and  vibrate  upon  the  sinner's  soul.  He 
has  constructed  the  trumpet  so  as  to  give  that  sound  which  the  heart  of  man 
requires  ;  and  that  sound  is  grace — "  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  God."  But  there 
are  several  other  circumstances  connected  with  this  ordinance  which  have  much 
significance  in  their  application.  Thus  we  remember — 2.  That  the  trumpets  were 
ordered  to  be  sounded  over  the  saci'ifices  :  the  victims  were  first  slain,  and  then 
the  trumpets  sounded  over  them.  And  thus  with  the  gospel  trumpet ;  it  proclaims 
a  finished  work.  It  re-echoes  the  dying  cry  of  the  Redeemer,  announcing  that  the 
work  is  done,  the  price  is  paid,  the  ransom  is  accepted.  It  bids  not  the  sinner 
attempt  some  great  thing  for  himself.  3.  On  the  Feast  of  Trumpets  no  servile 
work  was  to  be  done,  but  they  were  to  offer  an  offering  made  by  fire  unto  the  Lord 
(ver.  25).  This  reminded  the  children  of  Israel  of  their  deliverance  from  Egyptian 
bondage,  and  separation  unto  the  service  of  the  Lord.  Does  not  the  gospel  deliver 
us  from  servile  work,  and  consecrate  us  to  the  service  of  the  Lord  ?  From  captivity 
the  gospel  has  delivered  us,  for  it  has  come  with  power  to  our  hearts.  But  while  the 
children  of  Israel  were  on  this  day  to  do  no  servile  work,  they  were  not  to  be  with- 
out employment — they  were  "  to  offer  a  sacrifice  made  by  fire  unto  the  Lord."  And 
thus  the  same  gospel  which  makes  us  "  free  from  sin,"  makes  us  also  "  servants  of 
God  " ;  we  have  no  more  to  say  with  servile  work,  we  are  consecrated  henceforth  a 
"  royal  priesthood,"  to  offer  sacrifices  unto  the  Lord   our   God.      III.  But  this 

FESTIVAL  ALSO  LOOKS  FORWARD  TO  THINGS  THAT  ARE  YET  TO    COME.      The  trumpetS  were 

to  be  blown  on  the  first  day  of  every  month,  and  this  was  the  seventh  month,  the 
seventh  time  of  the  sounding  of  the  trumpets  on  which  the  feast  was  to  be  cele- 
brated. The  number  seven,  as  we  know,  implying  the  consummation,  brings  us  on 
unto  "  the  dispensation  of  the  fulness  of  times  " — "  the  times  of  the  restitution  of 
all  tbings,  spoken  of  by  the  mouth  of  all  the  holy  prophets  since  the  world  began." 
And  accordingly,  perhaps  in  reference  to  this  vex-y  ordinance,  we  find  in  the  Book 
of  Revelation,  that  the  destinies  of  the  age  are  comprised  in  a  book  sealed  with 
seven  seals,  and  the  events  of  this  seventh  seal  are  ushered  in,  successively,  by  the 
sound  of  seven  trumpets  (Rev.  x.  1-7  ;  xi.  15-20).  Such  are  the  events  which 
take  place  at  the  blowing  of  the  seventh  trumpet.  The  whole  may  be  confined 
under  three  heads  :  The  restoration  of  Israel — The  destruction  of  the  apostate 
nations,  and — The  glorification  of  His  people.  Then,  too,  shall  be  the  day  of 
perfect  service,  of  perpetual  service ;  when  the  promise  shall  be  fulfilled,  "  Hia 
servants   shall   serve  Him."      Oh  !  what  an  offering  will  then  be  offered — "  aa 


288  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxiii. 

offering  made  by  fire  unto  the  Lord."  "  Blessed  are  the  people  that  know  the  joyful 
sound  ;  they  shall  walk,  0  Lord,  in  the  light  of  Thy  countenance."  (J.  B.  Lowe, 
B.A.) 

Vers.  26-32.  For  it  is  a  day  of  atonement. — The  Day  of  Atonement : — The  seventh 
month  was  one  peculiarly  distinguished  in  the  Jewish  year,  no  less  than  three  of 
the  annual  festivals  being  assigned  to  it.  On  the  first  day  was  the  Feast  of 
Trumpets,  on  the  fifteenth  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  and  on  the  tenth  was  the  Day  of 
Atonement.  We  propose  to  consider  it  under  two  heads  :  first,  in  its  application  to 
the  Jews,  and  second,  in  its  application  to  ourselves.     I.  This  ordinance  differs 

FROM  THE  REST  IN  THIS  RESPECT — THAT  IT  DOES  NOT  APPEAR  TO  HAVE  HAD  ANY  COM- 
MEMORATIVE, OR  EUCHARISTIC  IMPORT  ;    IT  WAS,  INDEED,  A  FAST  RATHER  THAN  A  FESTIVAL 

OR  FEAST  ;  it  was  a  solemn  day  of  humiliation  before  God,  national  humiliation,  on 
which  the  people  were  called  to  an  acknowledgment  of  their  sins,  and  by  the 
sprinkling  of  the  blood  of  the  slain  sacrifice,  were  reminded  at  once  of  the  judgment 
which  their  sins  demanded,  and  of  the  only  remedy  which  was  provided  for  them. 
It  was  calculated  to  teach  a  most  important  lesson,  and  leave  a  deep  moral  impres- 
sion upon  the  national  mind.  But  I  cannot  but  think  that  this  ordinance  had  also 
a  prophetic  bearing  upon  the  Jewish  people ;  that,  in  common  with  the  two  other 
festivals  of  the  seventh  month,  it  was  designed  to  shadow  forth  the  future  dealings 
of  the  Lord  with  them,  and  that  it  will  have  its  accomplishment  in  that  day  when 
they  shall,  as  a  nation,  be  brought  to  repentance  for  their  sins,  and  faith  in  the 
blood   of  the  Lamb.     II.  When   we  come   to   examine   more  minutely  into  the 

CEREMONIES  OBSERVED  ON  THIS  DAT,  WE   SHALL  FIND  THAT  THEY  WERE  TYPICAL  OF  THE 

GOSPEL  SCHEME ;  and  indeed,  they  present  us  with  one  of  the  most  remarkable  types 
contained  in  the  Scriptures.  These  ceremonies  are  not  mentioned  in  the  chapter 
before  us,  but  in  the  sixteenth  chapter  of  this  book  they  are  detailed  at  lengtli. 
Abstracting  what  was  personal  to  the  high  priest  himself,  let  us  consider  that  part 
which  concerned  the  people  at  large ;  and — 1.  The  oiiferings  are  to  be  considered, 
and  in  the  first  instance  the  sin-oiiering.  This  consisted  of  two  goats,  for  although 
only  one  of  them  was  to  be  slain,  they  are  evidently  to  be  considered  as  one  offer- 
ing, and  indeed  are  spoken  of  as  such — "two  kids  of  the  goats  for  a  sin-offering." 
These  two  combined,  then,  represent  the  Saviour  in  death  and  life.  Both  were 
necessary  ;  Jesus  saves  us  by  His  life  as  well  as  by  His  death.  A  similar  type  to 
this  we  have  in  the  ceremony  of  the  cleansing  of  the  leper,  where  two  birds  were 
provided,  one  of  which  was  to  be  slain  over  running  water,  and  the  other,  after 
being  dipped  into  the  water  and  blood,  and  used  to  sprinkle  the  leper,  was  after- 
wards let  loose  into  the  open  field  (chap.  xiv.  1-32).  We  do  not  sufficiently  dwell 
upon  the  life  of  Jesus,  and  yet  it  is  this  life  which  saves  us  (Eom.  v.  10).  But  that 
which  was  peculiarly  characteristic  of  this  day  was — 2.  The  entrance  of  the  high 
priest  within  the  veil.  And  what  a  beautiful  illustration  have  we  here  of  the  office 
which  our  Redeemer  now  sustains — the  part  which  He  now  acts  for  us.  Beloved, 
"  we  have  a  great  High  Priest,  who  has  passed  into  the  heavens,  Jesus  the  Son 
of  God."  And  for  what  purpose  is  He  there  ?  On  whose  behalf  does  He  officiate  ? 
Let  the  reply  be  given  in  the  language  of  the  Holy  Ghost — "  now  to  appear  in 
the  presence  of  God  for  us."  Oh !  let  the  words  be  treasured  in  our  hearts — 
"for  us."  Unto  them  belonged  the  sous  of  Aaron;  unto  us  belongs  the  Son 
of  God.  If  Jesus  has  passed  into  the  most  Holy  Place,  He  has  entered  there 
in  a  public  character,  as  the  representative  of  His  people,  and  every  part  of  the 
ministry  which  He  sustains  in  all  for  them.  When  the  high  priest  went  within  the 
veil  he  had  a  defined  work  to  do ;  he  undertook  no  vague,  uncertain  commission  ; 
the  object  for  which  he  went,  and  the  results  of  his  meditation  were  clearly  laid 
down  and  defined.  It  was  for  the  chosen  people  that  he  ministered,  for  them  he 
was  ordained  "in  things  pertaining  unto  God" — to  make  reconciliation  for  the  sins 
of  the  people  was  the  task  assigned  him.  And  accordingly  he  carried  the  names  of 
the  twelve  tribes  upon  his  shoulders,  and  upon  his  breast.  And  so  with  our  great 
High  Priest;  thei-e  is  no  uncertainty  in  his  work,  it  is  all  explicitly  defined,  ordered, 
a.nd  settled  by  covenant  arrangement.  But  He  bears  them  also  in  His  breast;  it 
is  not  merely  a  matter  of  compact,  of  official  duty,  it  is  a  matter  of  affection 
and  friendship.  "He  careth  for"  us!  3.  But  when  the  high  priest  passed 
within  the  veil,  he  entered  "  not  without  blood."  He  was  commanded  to  carry 
with  him  the  blood  of  the  sin-offering,  and  to  dip  his  finger  in  the  blood,  and 
sprinkle  it  before  the  mercy-seat  (chap.  xvi.  14-16).  Just  so,  our  "  great  High 
Priest,"  "  not  by  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats,  but  by  His  own  blood,  He  has  entered 


HAP.  xxiii.]  LEVITICUS.  289 

in  once  into  the  Holy  Place,  having  obtained  eternal  redemption  for  us  "  (Heb.  ix. 
12).  The  blood  of  the  sin-offering  was  commanded  to  be  sprinkled  seven  times 
before  the  mercy-seat,  denoting  the  perfection  and  completeness  of  that  atonement 
which  it  typitied.  Beloved,  we  are  here  reminded  of  a  most  important  truth,  the 
inherent  efficacy  of  the  blood  of  Jesus  to  atone  for  sin.  4.  But  there  is  something 
more  which  the  high  priest  was  commanded  to  do  within  the  veil,  which  we  must 
not  forget  to  notice.  He  was  to  take  a  censer  full  of  burning  coals  of  fire  from  off 
the  altar  before  the  Lord,  and  he  was  to  fill  his  hands  full  of  sweet  incense  beaten 
small,  and  to  bring  it  within  the  veil.  And  then,  when  there,  he  was  to  sprinkle 
the  incense  upon  the  coals  of  fire  before  the  Lord,  that  the  smoke  of  the  incense 
might  ascend  and  cover  the  mercy-seat  (chap.  xvi.  12,  13).  "What  a  beautiful  type 
have  we  here  of  the  intercession  of  our  glorious  High  Priest,  ascending  as  sweet 
incense  perpetually  before  God  1  The  fire,  too,  with  which  this  incense  was  kindled 
must  not  be  common  fire,  it  must  be  takt^n  from  off  the  altar  of  burnt-offering, 
reminding  us  of  the  ground  of  the  Saviour's  intercession — His  consecration  of  Him- 
self to  do  His  Father's  will ;  His  self-sacrifice  upon  the  Cross  to  be  consumed  by  the 
fire  of  Jehovah's  justice  as  the  sinner's  Substitute.  Oh!  beloved,  if  we  have  not 
fellowship  with  our  God  in  Christ,  if  we  have  not  peace  of  mind  and  conscience,  it 
is  not  that  He  has  not  opened  unto  us  the  bosom  of  His  love ;  but  it  is  because  of 
our  hardness  of  heart,  and  want  of  confidence  in  His  mercy.  We  are  not  straitened 
in  Him,  but  in  ourselves.  5.  But  the  whole  of  the  duties  of  the  high  priest  upon 
this  solemn  day  were  not  conducted  within  the  veil ;  he  must  come  forth  again  to 
accomphsh  the  service  which  awaited  him  outside.  And  the  people,  in  the  mean- 
time, were  expecting  his  return  ;  "  they  were  waiting  for  him  to  reappear  and 
complete  the  work  allotted  to  the  day."  And  here  again  we  are  reminded 
of  the  position  which  the  Church  of  Christ  should  occupy  in  the  present  dis- 
pensation— waiting  for  the  reappearing  of  her  Lord — "looking  for  that  blessed 
hope,  and  the  glorious  appearing  of  the  great  God,  and  our  Saviour  Jesus 
Christ."  For  as  the  ceremonies  of  the  Day  of  Atonement  were  not  completed 
inside  the  veil,  so  is  it  with  the  work  of  our  great  High  Priest ;  His  ministry  in 
heaven  will  not  accomplish  all — there  is  a  work  outside  the  veil  which  He  must 
come  forth  to  do ;  and  those  who  are  interested,  in  the  one  are  interested  also  in 
the  other  (Heb.  ix.  27,  28).  When  the  high  priest  came  forth  from  the  sanctuary, 
and  appeared  again  unto  the  people,  he  first  dispatched  the  scapegoat  bearing  all 
their  iniquities  into  the  wilderness,  and  then  united  with  them  in  offering  the 
burnt-offering  unto  the  Lord.  And  such  shall  be  the  results  of  the  second  adveiit 
of  our  Saviour.  Then  shall  sin  be  completely  put  away,  and  every  trace  of  it 
removed  for  ever.  And  then,  too,  shall  Jesus  and  His  people  unite  to  offer  the 
burnt- offering  unto  God.  Then  in  the  midst  of  His  redeemed  He  shall  sum  up  all 
their  pure  and  holy  service ;  and,  blessed  and  consecrated  by  the  presence  of 
incarnate  Godhead,  the  untiring  energies  of  redeemed  humanity  shall  be  for  ever 
consuming,  yet  unconsumed,  upon  the  altar  of  eternal  love.     (J.  B.  Lowe,  B.A.) 

Vers.  34-42.  The  Feast  of  Tabernacles. — The  Feast  of  Tabernacles  : — I.  It  was  a 

PROTRACTED  KELIGIOUS  MEETING.  II.  It  WAS  A  THANKSGIVING  FOR  God'S  BOUNTY  IN  A 
COMPLETED  HARVEST.  III.  It  WAS  A  COMMEMORATION  OF  MERCIES  ATTEMPERING  HAED- 
SHIPS  AND  DANGERS.      IV.  It  WAS  AN  EXPRESSION  OF  THE  JOYFUL  SIDE  OF  RELIGION.       V. 

It  was  a  type  of  a  greater  feast  now  preparing  for  all  God's  true  people.  (H. 
31.  Grout,  D.D.)  The  Feast  of  Tabernacles : — The  three  distinguishing  features  of 
this  feast  were  the  dwelhug  in  booths,  the  offerings,  the  festivities.  The  first  served 
to  vividly  recall  their  forty  years  of  pilgrimage  ;  the  second — a  sacrifice  of  bullocks, 
rams,  and  lambs,  with  the  accompanying  flour  and  drink-offerings — was,  as  usual, 
a  recognition  of  God's  demands  and  a  plain,  willing  answer  on  their  part  to  whom 
He  had  given  everything ;  but  the  third — the  universal  hilarity  and  religious  cheer- 
fulness— was  its  chief  characteristic.  Very  naturally,  in  the  time  of  Christ  this 
latter  purpose  had  been  more  than  fulfilled.  Many  additions  had  been  made  by 
the  Kabbis.  Ceremonials  most  august  then,  and  which  gave  occasion  to  two  of  His 
most  blessed  utterances — the  pouring  of  the  water  from  Siloam  and  the  brilliant 
illumination  of  the  Temple — were  not  in  the  Mosaic  instructions.  Prescriptions  as 
to  the  style  and  workmanship  of  the  booths;  as  to  the  kind,  bearing,  and  disposition 
of  the  boughs ;  as  to  the  order  of  procession  and  chanting  of  psalms,  had  made  the 
feast  quite  a  different  affair  from  its  original  form.  Each  and  all,  however,  were 
devised  to  impress  upon  both  actor  and  beholder  the  happy  condition  and  fortuns 
of  the  Lord's  people.   I.  The  true  servant  is  glad  in  reviewing  God's  dealings 

19 


290  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxiri. 

WITH  HIM.  Happiuess  is  always  involved  in  the  simple  doing  of  the  will  of  God,  now 
no  less  than  in  Eden.  It  is  awakened,  too,  by  occasional  and  sober  review  of  His 
guidance  and  care.  No  Ufa  has  much  symmetry  which  neglects  this.  Way-marks, 
inscribed  "  Eemember  "  were  set  up  all  along  the  course  of  Israel's  journey.  Their 
law-givers  and  leaders  were  often  enjoining  it.  The  backward  look  was  quite  as 
profitable  as  the  forward  to  encourage  and  arouse.  Faith  would  increase  that  no 
iU  could  betide  them  in  the  future.  And  the  leafy  bowers  under  which  they  now 
camped  must  vividly  reproduce  the  days  when  such  hasty  coverings  were  all  they 
had,  and  yet  were  ample  for  shelter.  The  fair  roofs  of  the  town  were  no  more  suf- 
ficient protection  in  the  pilgrimage  they  were  making  upon  the  earth.  Whether  in 
the  desert  or  behind  lofty  and  massive  walls  of  the  defenced  city,  they  should  alike 
be  heard  exulting :  "  The  Lord  is  thy  keeper  :  the  Lord  is  thy  shade  upon  thy  right 
hand :  the  sun  shall  not  smite  thee  by  day,  nor  the  moon  by  night."  So,  as  we 
turn  aside  into  the  frail  retreat  built  on  any  housetop,  in  any  chamber,  and  there 
calmly  retrace  the  course  along  which  the  Lord  has  led  us,  there  is  the  well- 
remembered  hour  when  He  broke  the  chains  which  held  us  to  the  world's  claims, 
ideas,  and  rewards,  and  bade  us  set  forth  with  all  we  had  toward  the  better  land. 
What  revelations  of  His  power  and  compassion  were  given  then  !  How  did  He 
bring  us  into  straits,  and  open,  as  we  advanced,  a  way  from  peril  of  which  no  hint 
had  been  given,  and  how  did  we  vow  never  to  doubt  His  wisdom  more !  With  what 
strange  but  wholesome  truths,  fresh  every  morning,  did  He  feed  and  sustain  us  1 
II.  The  teue  servant  is  glad  in  seeing  God's  present  cake  for  him.  The  Jew 
must  not  then  fail  to  show  his  delight,  whatever  his  station  or  purse.  At  the  meal 
which  followed  the  free-will  offerings,  the  poor,  the  stranger,  the  Levite,  were 
welcome  guests.  Equality  of  supply  and  fortune  had  for  the  time  its  graceful  illus- 
tration then,  as  among  those  wearing  the  wedding  garment,  in  the  parable  of  the 
Christ.  So  may  we  all  alike  think  of  ourselves  as  having  one  precious  inheritance 
and  provision.  Eightly  it  has  been  said  :  "  It  is  a  sin  not  to  be  happy,"  for  gloomi- 
ness is  a  reflection  upon  the  Christ.  Our  Christianity  cannot  hope  to  dominate  the 
world  till  it  shall  have  shown  itself  possessed  of  the  secret  of  happiness.  Laments 
and  groans  never  won  a  sinner  to  a  service  which  would  chiefly  voice  itself  in  them. 
Through  aU  the  scale,  from  the  poverty  of  the  God-fearing  Waldensian  peasant  to 
the  popular,  artistic  life  of  the  great  composer  Haydn,  there  have  always  been  some 
whose  hearts  respond  to  his  words,  as  the  string  of  the  piano  to  its  kindred  tone : 
"  When  I  think  upon  God,  my  heart  is  so  full  of  joy  that  the  notes  dance  and  leap, 
as  it  were,  from  my  pen  ;  and  since  God  has  given  me  a  cheerful  heart,  why  should 
I  not  praise  Him  with  a  cheerful  spirit  ?  "  III.  The  true  servant  is  glad  in  be- 
holding God's  futube  provisions  for  him.  The  temporary  resting  beneath  green 
boughs  of  palm  and  willow  and  myrtle  ;  the  holiflay  scene  in  which  life  lost  some- 
thing of  its  pressure  and  sternness,  did  but  symbolise  the  days  when  even  such 
protection  would  not  be  needed  in  the  country  beyond  the  Jordan.  That  way  lay 
Canaan,  of  which  this  earthly  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey  was  but  a  faint 
type.  This  side  the  river,  too,  every  devout  soul  filled  with  the  hope  of  Israel  found, 
in  victories  and  progress  already  gained,  the  pledge  of  a  surpassing  joy  and  glory  in 
the  near  future.  Messiah  might  appear  any  hour,  and  with  Him  all  that  could 
satisfy  a  longing  heart  or  nation.  The  unattained,  if  believed  to  be  attainable,  has 
vast  power  of  inspiration.  None  can  tell  what  great  occasions  may  come  any 
moment  to  the  ready,  watchful  servant  of  God.  He  may  be  given  to  speak  the  word 
which  shall  determine  whether  the  philosophy  of  the  age  shall  be  atheistic  or  not. 
Some  mighty  reform  may  be  waiting  his  voice  or  deed,  some  striking  answer  to 
prayer,  some  raising  of  a  sanctuary  whence  shall  proceed  influences  to  regenerate 
remotest  peoples.  The  precious  abiding  word,  the  present  Saviour,  the  enduring 
Church,  the  unfolding  kingdom,  are  His  inalienably.  They  grow  richer,  plainer, 
more  certain.  Yet,  compared  to  the  freedom  and  splendour  of  the  future  life,  this, 
with  all  its  joy  and  liberty,  is  but  as  a  jungle,  through  whose  tanule  and  heavy 
marsh  and  sndden  dangers  one  struggles  on,  seeing  in  the  distance  the  open  spaces 
and  lofty  arches  of  the  wood,  and  beyonil,  the  fair  greensward  wheie  the  sunlight 
falls  and  flowers  bloom  and  noble  mansions  stand — his  own  henceforth.  So  bright 
and  dazzhng  was  the  temple  of  Diana,  that  the  door-keeper  always  cried  to  them 
that  entered :  "  Take  heed  to  your  eyes."  A  full  disclosure  of  all  God  has  provided 
for  them  that  love  Him  would  quench  mortal  sense.  Celestial  organs  only  are 
fitted  for  celestial  scenes.  (De  Witt  S.  Clark.)  The  Feast  of  Taberiiaclen  : — I.  The 
TIME  AND  MANNER  OF  ITS  OBSERVANCE.  1.  The  time  (ver.  34).  Five  days  after  the 
Day  of  Atonement.    2.  The  manner  (vers.  35,  36,  40-43).     (1)  The  duty  and  privi- 


CHAP.  XXIII.]  LEVITICUS.  291 

lege  of  assembling  for  Divine  worship.  (2)  The  duty  and  privilege  of  being  joyous 
in  our  recognition  of  God's  care.  II.  Its  typical  meaning.  I.  The  reality  of  de- 
liverance from  sin.  2.  The  joy  of  deliverance  from  sin.  3.  The  assurance  of  God's 
care  over  all  whom  He  delivers  from  sin.  Lessons :  1.  The  value  of  memorial 
days.  2.  The  duty  of  gratitude.  3.  The  eternal  blessedness  of  the  feast  of  taber- 
nacles awaiting  God's  children  in  the  land  of  final  deliverance.  (D.  C.  Hughes,  31. A.) 
The  Feast  of  Tabernacles  : — This  festival  derived  its  name  from  the  fact  that 
during  the  first  seven  days  for  which  it  lasted,  the  children  of  Israel  went  out  of 
their  habitations,  and  dwelt  in  booths  or  tabernacles,  until  the  eighth  day,  when 
they  returned  unto  their  houses.  It  was  also  called  the  Feast  of  Ingathering, 
because  it  was  celebrated  after  all  the  fruits  of  the  land  were  gathered  in,  as  we 
learn  in  the  thirty-ninth  verse  of  the  chapter  before  us.  This  festival,  like  the  rest, 
was  partly  commemorative,  and  partly  prophetical  or  typical ;  like  them  we  shall 
find  that  it  exhibits  things  past,  present,  and  to  come.  I.  It  had  a  commemorative 
•OB  euchaeistic  meaning  ;  IT  was  designed  to  celebrate  the  mercy  of  the  Lord 

IN     BRINGING     THE     NATION     SAFELY     THROUGH     THE     WILDERNESS,     AND    GIVING    THEM 

POSSESSION  OF  THE  PROMISED  LAND.  The  joumcy  through  the  wilderness  was  cele- 
brated when  they  went  out  of  their  habitations,  and  the  whole  nation,  leaving  their 
settled  dwelling-places,  dwelt  in  tents  or  tabernacles  throughout  the  land.  And  the 
happy  termination  of  their  wanderings  was  also  celebrated  in  this  festival,  for  on 
the  eighth  day,  when  they  returned  to  their  habitations,  they  were  to  have  "  an 
holy  convocation,"  "they  were  to  do  no  servile  work  therein,"  but  they  were  to 
keep  "a  Sabbath  unto  the  Lord"  (vers.  36,  39).  It  was  a  season  of  national 
rejoicing,  as  the  ordinance  that  preceded  it  had  been  one  of  humiliation  and  mourn- 
ing. Such  was  the  eucharistic  bearing  of  this  ordinance,  upon  which  we  need  not 
farther  dwell ;  I  will  only  observe,  that  in  this  view  of  its  import  we  can  see  a  pro- 
priety in  the  season  at  which  it  was  celebrated — after  they  had  gathered  in  all  the 
fruits  of  the  earth  ;  a  suitable  occasion  this  on  which  to  commemorate  the  good- 
ness of  the  Lord.  II.  But  I  believe  the  Jewish  application  of  this  feast  is  not  only 
retrospective,  but  prospective  also — that  it  was  designed  to  exhibit  in  typical 

REPRESENTATION  THAT  WHICH  WE  SO  OFTEN  READ  OF  IN  ORAL  PREDICTIONS,  THEIR 
TINAL    SETTLEMENT     IN     THE    PROMISED   LAND,    AND    COMPLETE    CONVERSION     UNTO    GoD. 

We  are  led  to  expect  such  a  reference  from  the  analogy  of  the  two  preceding 
festivals  of  this  month — the  Feast  of  Trumpets  and  the  Day  of  Atonement — both 
of  which  refer  to  God's  purposes  of  future  mercy  to  the  Jewish  nation.  The  Feast 
of  Trumpets  referred  more  particularly  to  their  gathering  together  from  all  the 
countries  in  which  they  are  scattered,  and  their  restoration  to  the  land  of  Israel. 
The  Day  of  Atonement  exhibited  their  conversion  unto  God  after  their  restoration, 
when  He  shall  "  take  away  the  stony  heart,  and  give  them  hearts  of  flesh,"  and 
*'  they  shall  look  upon  Him  whom  they  have  pierced  and  mourn  for  Him."  And 
now  we  have  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  which  crowns  the  whole,  and  represents,  as 
I  believe,  their  final  settlement  in  the  peaceful  and  happy  enjoyment  of  the  land  of 
promise.  It  would  appear  that  the  Jews  themselves  had  some  idea  that  this 
festival  was  designed  to  set  forth  the  future  mercies  which  the  nation  were  to 
receive  at  the  hands  of  the  promised  Messiah.  It  was  customary  at  the  celebration 
of  it  to  make  the  compass  of  the  sacrifices,  bearing  the  branches  of  palm-trees  and 
other  goodly  trees  in  their  hands  ;  and  as  they  thus  went  on  in  joyful  procession, 
they  sang  the  twenty-fifth  verse  of  the  hundred  and  eighteenth  Psalm,  "  Save  now 
[Hosanna],  I  beseech  Thee,  0  Lord :  0  Lord,  I  beseech  Thee,  send  now  pros- 
perity "  ;  and  ou  the  seventh  day  they  compassed  the  altar  seven  times,  singing  in 
like  manner,  and  this  was  called  the  Great  Hosanna.  III.  But  the  typical  import 
of  this  festival  belongs  not  merely  to  the  Jews ;  it  also,  in  common  with  the  rest, 

APPLIES   UNTO    THE    ChURCH    OF    THIS    DISPENSATION,  BOTH    IN    ITS    PRESENT    CHARACTER 

AND  FUTURE  GLORY.  The  eighth  day,  which,  as  we  have  seen,  shadows  forth  the 
time  of  Judah's  salvation,  and  of  consequent  earthly  blessedness,  refers  also  to 
heavenly  and  eternal  things.  It  is  the  first  day  of  a  new  week,  and  therefore 
remiu'ls  us  of  resurrection  ;  and  coming  at  the  end  of  the  complete  period  of  seven 
days,  it  brings  us  to  the  day  when  "  time  shall  be  no  longer" — the  eternal  day  of 
resurrection  glory.  And  to  the  Church  this  day  shall  commence  when  the  kingdom 
of  God  is  established  in  the  world.  Let  us  endeavour,  then,  to  trace  the  type  in 
the  several  particulars  of  its  application  ;  and — 1.  On  the  first  day  there  was  a  holy 
convocation,  and  the  children  of  Israel  went  forth  from  their  houses,  and  made  them 
tents  to  dwell  in.  Just  realise  the  scene  ;  all  the  families  of  Israel  leaving  their 
houses,  giving  up  their  employments,  and  devoting  themselves  to  the  service  of  the 


202  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxiii. 

Lord.    So  it  is  with  the  Church  of  Christ,  the  heir  of  promised  glorj'.   Beloved,  the 
gospel  calls  us  out  from  this  evil  world,  and  makes  us  strangers  and  pilgrims  here. 
The  gospel  finds  our  intellects  clogged  with  the  filth  of  earthliness,  our  mind  and 
thought  concentrated  upon  the  pursuits  and  occupations  of  this  life — "  the  cares  of 
this  world,  the  deceitfulness  of  riches,  and  the  lust  of  other  things  " ;  and  it  disen- 
tangles us  from  the  meshes  of  worldliness ;  it  fills  them  with  the  glorious  realities 
of  eternity.     It  assembles  us,  as  it  were,  in  holy  convocation,  to  offer  sacrifices 
unto  the  Lord.     Just  as  the  children  of  Israel  dwelt  in  tabernacles  during  seven 
days,  looking  forward  to  the  eighth  day  when  they  were  to  enter  into  rest,  so  it  is 
with  the  Israel  of  God ;  the  Church  is  a  stranger  here,  looking  forward  to  the  day 
of  coming  rest.      2.  But  this  was  a  feast  of  joy ;  when  the   children   of   Israel 
throughout  the  land  were  to  "  rejoice  before  the  Lord  "  they  cut  down  the  branches 
of  palm-trees,  and  of  other  goodly  trees,  and  carried  them  throughout  all  their 
coasts,  in  token  of  triumphant  joy.     And  so  with  those  whom  God  has  called  "  out 
of  their  habitations,"  they  are  called  to  rejoice  before  the  Lord.     If  the  gospel  has 
called  us  out  from  this  world,  it  is  that  it  may  open  to  us  springs  of  never-failing  joy 
of  which  the  world  knows  nothing,  which  it  can  never  give,  and  can  never  take 
away.     They  do  greatly  err  who  imagine  that  religion  cuts  off  all  our  present 
happiness.     But  mark,  if  we  would  taste  the  joy  we  must  come  "  out  of  our  habi- 
tations " :  if  we  would  wave  the  palm  of  triumph  in  the  land,  we  must  dwell  as 
strangers  there.     This  joy  is  not  "  as  the  world  gives,"  nor  is  it  founded  upon 
earthly  things,  and  therefore  if  we  keep  the  feast,  it  must  be  the  Feast  of  Taber- 
nacles ;  if  we  would  rejoice  before  the  Lord,  it  must  be  in  the  position  of  those 
who  are  looking  forward  to  their  rest.     Observe,  too,  these  palms  are  the  emblems 
of  victory — the  symbols  of  triumphant  joy.    The  rejoicing  Christian  will  ever  be  in 
the  attitude  of  the  conqueror,  always  conflicting  indeed,  but  not  overcome  in  the 
conflict  against  "  the  devil,  the  world  and  the  flesh."     The  character  of  the  Chris- 
tian, as   described  in  Scripture,  is  that  of  the  victor — of  one  who  is  evermore 
victorious,  overcoming  "  by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb."     3.  But  the  great  day  of  the 
feast  was  the  eighth  day,  the  type  of  rest  in  resurrection  glory.     On  this  day  the 
children  of  Israel  struck  their  tents,  and  rested  again  in  their  habitations  ;  on  this 
day  they  drew  the  water  from  Siloam,  and  watered  therewith  the  sacrifices,  with 
songs  of  joy ;  on  this  day  the  priests  made  the  compass  of  the  altar  seven  times, 
bearing  with  them  the  branches  of  palm-trees,  and  of  other  goodly  trees,  and 
singing  as  they  went,  "  Hosanna  in  the  highest,"    So  shall  it  be  with  the  Church  of 
Christ  in  that  great  day — the  sun  whereof  shall  never  set  in  darkness — the  everlasting 
day.     Then  "  the  tabernacle  of  God  shall  be  with  men,  and  He  will  dwell  with 
them,  and  they  shall  be  His  people,  and  God  Himself  shall  be  with  them,  and  be 
their  God."     Then  the  mystery  of  the  water  which  was  poured  upon  the  sacrifices 
shall  be  fulfilled,  when  He  who  is  the  Alpha  and  the  Omega,  shall  proclaim,  "  It 
is  done.     I  will  give  to  him  that  is  athirst  to  drink  of  the  water  of  life  freely." 
Then  He  who  at  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  invited  sinners  to  come  to  Him  and 
drink,  shall  lead  His  redeemed  people  by  living  fountains  of  waters,  and  make  them 
drink  of  the  river  of  His  pleasures.     Then,  too,  the  symbol  of  the  palm  branches 
shall  be  accomplished  in  the  final  victory  of  the  redeemed  over  Death  and  Hades  ; 
and  they  shall  realise  the  blessed  fulfilment  of  the  promise,  "  He  that  overcometh 
shall  inherit  all  things."    (J.  B.  Lowe,  B.A.)      The  Feast  of  Tabernacles  (a  Neio  Year's 
sermon) : — I.  Let  us  observe  this  season  as  a  feast  of  thanksgiving.     Review  the 
mercies  of  the  past  year — of  all  your  past  life.     1.  There  are  the  common  blessings, 
enjoyed  by  all,  of  continued  life  and  unceasing  bodily  sustenance.   Then  we  have  had 
houses  and  raiment.     Most  have  been  favoured  with  good  health,  and  with  all  the 
happiness  of  good  credit  and  friendly  intercourse.    As  Englishmen,  we  have  cause  for 
thankfulness  in  our  civil  rights  and  political  privileges,  and  our  present  exemption 
from  war.    As  Christians,  we  have  enjoyed  every  advantage  that  could  be  devised  for 
our  spiritual  edification  and  Scriptural  instruction.  2.  Then  there  are  special  benefits, 
which  individuals  have  received  in  particular  experiences  or  exigencies.  One  man  has 
been  singularly  prospered  in  his  business  or  profession,  another  rejoices  in  the  advanc- 
ing respectability  of  liis  children.    Perhaps  an  additional  arrow  has  been  given  to  the 
quiver,  or  the  feeble  child  has  been  made  strong,  the  dissolute  one  has  been  reclaimed, 
or  the  absent  one  restored.     S.  Then  there  are  spiritual  mercies,  such  as  the  joy  of 
conversion,  succour  in  temptation  and  trouble,  triumph  and  progress  in  labours  of 
philanthropy  and  love.    All  of  these  demand  thanksgiving  and  praise,     II.  Com- 
memoration.    At  this  season  we  should  reflect  on  the  short  and  uncertain  term  of 
our  existence  upon  the  earth.     Our  life  below  is  a  journey  through  a  wilderness 


CHAP,  xxiir.]  LEVITICUS.  293 

where  we  dwell  not  in  enduring  habitations,  but  in  temporary  tents.  We  shall  one 
day  die,  and  ought  not  to  rejoice  in  growin-jr  older,  unless  we  are  conscious  of  an 
increasing  preparation  for  a  better  world.  Heaven  is  nearer  than  it  was,  and  it 
behoves  us  to  address  ourselves  with  greater  ardour  and  zeal  to  the  prosecution  of 
our  pilgrimage  thither.  III.  The  last  constituent  of  our  spiritual  feast  is  A  eenewed 
CONSECRATION  OF  OURSELVES  TO  THE  SERVICE  OF  GoD.  This  implies  a  deep  study  of 
God's  law.  Our  growth  in  holiness  demands  this  effort  and  attention  on  our  part, 
and  we  must  not  rely  on  the  spontaneous  and  uncultured  growth  of  our  souls  in 
religion.  The  commencement  of  a  new  year  is  a  fitting  time  for  reviewing  our  pro- 
gress in  Divine  knowledge  and  adopting  fresh  plans  for  the  future.  (Anon.)  The 
Feast  of  Tabernacles  : — 1.  This  feast  was  to  be  kept  in  remembrance  of  their  dwelling 
in  tents  in  the  wilderness.  Thus  it  is  expounded  here  (ver.  43).  "  That  your  gene- 
rations may  know,"  not  only  by  the  written  history,  but  by  this  ocular  tradition, 
that  "  I  made  the  children  of  Israel  to  dwell  in  booths."  Thus  it  kept  in  perpetual 
remembrance  (1)  the  meanness  of  their  beginning,  and  the  low  and  desolate  state 
out  of  which  God  advanced  that  people.  Note — those  that  are  comfortably  fixed 
ought  often  to  call  to  mind  their  former  unsettled  state,  when  they  were  but  little 
in  their  own  eyes.  (2)  The  mercy  of  God  to  them  ttiat  when  they  dwelt  in  taber- 
nacles, God  not  only  set  up  a  tabernacle  for  Himself  among  them,  but  with  the 
utmost  care  and  tenderness  imaginable  hung  a  canopy  over  them,  even  the  cloud 
that  sheltered  them  from  the  heat  of  the  sun.  God's  former  mercies  to  us  and  our 
iathers  ought  to  be  kept  in  everlasting  remembrance.  The  eighth  day  was  the  great 
day  of  this  feast,  because  then  they  were  returned  to  their  own  houses  again  ;  and 
remembered  how,  after  they  had  long  dwelt  in  tents  in  the  wilderness,  at  length  they 
came  to  a  happy  settlement  in  the  land  of  promise,  where  they  dwelt  in  "  goodly 
houses."  And  they  would  the  more  sensibly  value  and  be  thankful  for  the  comforts 
And  conveniences  of  their  houses,  when  they  had  been  seven  days  dwelling  in 
booths.  It  is  good  for  those  that  have  ease  and  plenty  sometimes  to  learn  what  it 
is  to  endure  hardness.  2.  It  was  a  feast  of  "  ingathering,"  so  it  is  called  (Exod. 
xxiii.  16).  When  they  had  gathered  in  the  "fruit  of  their  land"  (ver.  39),  the 
vintage  as  well  as  the  harvest,  then  they  were  to  keep  this  feast  in  thankfulness  to 
God  for  all  the  increase  of  the  year ;  and  some  think  that  the  eighth  day  of  the  feast 
had  special  reference  to  this  ground  of  the  institution.  Note — the  joy  of  harvest 
ought  to  be  improved  for  the  furtherance  of  our  joy  in  God.  "  The  earth  is  the 
Lord's  and  the  fulness  thereof  " ;  and  therefore  whatever  we  have  the  comfort  of 
He  must  have  the  glory  of,  especially  when  any  mercy  is  perfected.  3.  It  was  a 
typical  feast.  It  is  supposed  by  many  that  our  blessed  Saviour  was  born  much 
about  the  time  of  this  feast ;  then  He  left  His  mansions  of  light  above  to  "  taber- 
nacle among  us  "  (John  i.  14),  and  He  dwelt  in  booths.  And  the  worship  of  God 
under  the  New  Testament  is  prophesied  of  under  the  notion  of  keeping  the  "  Feast 
of  Tabernacles  "  (Zech.  xiv.  16).  For — (1)  The  gospel  of  Christ  teacheth  us  to  "  dwell 
in  tabernacles,"  to  "sit  loose"  to  this  world  as  those  that  have  "here  no  con- 
tinuing city,"  but  by  faith  and  hope,  and  a  holy  contempt  of  present  things,  to 
go  out  to  Christ  "  without  the  camp "  (Heb.  xiii.  13,  14).  (2)  It  teaches  us  to 
■"  rejoice  before  the  Lord  our  God."  Those  are  the  circumcision,  Israelites  indeed, 
tbat  always  "  rejoice  in  Christ  Jesus  "  (Phil.  iii.  3).  And  the  more  we  are  taken  off 
from  this  world  the  less  liable  we  are  to  the  interruption  of  our  joys.  {Matthew 
Henry,  D.D.)  The  Feast  of  Tabernacles  : — The  use  was — 1.  To  remember  them 
of  their  estate  when  they  had  no  houses,  but  lived  in  tents,  or  tabernacles,  or 
booths,  made  with  boughs ;  no  fields,  no  lands,  but  lived  in  the  wilderness ;  and  so 
to  stir  up  a  thankfulness  for  their  happy  change.  2.  To  remember  them  of  the 
Lord's  great  works  in  driving  out  the  Canaanites  and  giving  that  fruitful  land  unto 
them.  Then  they  were  a  prey  to  all  men,  but  now  a  terror  to  all  men,  wheresoever 
the  fame  of  them  came.  3.  It  served  to  j)reach  unto  them  the  doctrine  afterward 
delivered  by  the  apostle,  to  wit,  that  here  we  have  no  biding  city,  but  should 
reckon  of  our  houses  as  but  of  tabernacles  for  the  time,  our  true  hope  being  for 
houses  and  dwellings,  and  everlasting  tabernacles  not  made  with  hands  in 
heaven,  &c.  And  may  not  we  consider  on  our  feast  days  all  these  things, 
although  we  have  not  now  the  same  ceremonies  ?  May  not  we  remember  our  state 
past  under  superstition,  cruelty,  and  bondage?  May  not  we  remember  burnings 
and  killings,  and  most  hateful  handlings  of  persecutors?  May  not  we  remember 
great  wars  and  dissensions  in  this  our  native  country,  the  fall  of  our  friends,  and 
the  change  of  many  houses  ?  May  not  we  remember  great  impositions  and  pay- 
xnents,  and,  in  one  word,  very  many  miseries  and  calamities?    Laying  them  to  the 


294  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATQR.  [chap,  xxiiu 

present  times,  wherein  we  enjoy  truth  and  liberty  of  conscience  without  either  death 
or  danger,  or  so  much  as  any  fear,  what  a  change  is  this  to  a  man  or  woman  that 
knoweth  and  feeleth  the  blessing !  Oh,  that  we  may  send  up  to  God  most  thankful 
thoughts  for  it  while  we  live  !  Now,  again,  we  enjoy  peace,  such  as  no  nation  hath 
had  the  like.  We  are  not  eaten  up  with  heavy  and  continual  payments,  but  we 
live  as  in  heaven  by  comparison  to  former  times.  The  Lord  hath  driven  away  the 
Canaanites  that  would  have  invaded  and  conquered  had  not  He  resisted  for  us  and 
overthrown  them.  He  hath  made  us  a  terror  to  our  foes  and  a  refuge  or  sanctuary 
for  our  friends,  when  erst  foreign  nations  were  lords  over  us.  And,  for  the  last 
point,  we  have  no  more  certainty  of  abode  here  than  they  had,  but  look  for  the 
same  end  of  faith,  an  enduring  house  in  h'  aven.  (Bp.  Bahington.)  Keep  a  feast 
unto  the  Lord. — A  festival  kept  to  the  Lord : — From  the  earliest  ages  of  which  any 
records  remain  manl<ind  have  been  accustomed  to  commemorate  joyful  events,  and 
to  express  the  joy  and  gratitude  which  such  events  excited,  by  the  observance  of 
anniversary  festivals.  As  the  all-wise  God  well  knew  how  difficult  it  would  be  to 
wean  men  from  the  observance  of  such  festivals,  and  as  they  were  capable  of 
being  rendered  subservient  to  His  own  gracious  designs,  He  saw  fit  under 
the  ancient  dispensation  to  give  them  a  religious  character,  by  directing  His 
people  to  observe  them  in  commemoration  of  the  favours  which  they  had 
received  from  His  hand,  and  as  an  expression  of  thoir  gratitude  for  those 
favours.  Of  these  Divinely  appointed  festivals,  several  are  mentioned  in  th"^ 
Levitical  law,  but  our  only  concern  at  present  is  with  that  which  is  pre- 
scribed in  our  text  —  "  When  ye  have  gathered  in  the  fruit  of  the  land,  ye 
shall  keep  a  feast  unto  the  Lord."  What,  then,  we  may  and  ought  to  inquire — - 
what  is  it  to  observe  this  day  in  a  right  and  acceptable  manner?  The  best 
answer  which  I  can  give  to  this  question  is  furnished  by  our  text.  It  is  to  keep  or 
observe  it  as  a  festival  unto  the  Lord.  To  keep  a  festival  unto  God  is  to  observe 
it  with  a  view,  not  to  please  ourselves,  but  to  please  and  honour  Him  ;  to  regard  it 
as  a  day  sacred  to  His  special  service,  and  to  spend  it  in  contemplating  and  praising 
His  perfections,  recollecting  and  thanking  Him  for  His  favours,  rejoicing  before 
Him  in  His  existence,  His  character,  His  government,  and  His  works,  and  thus 
giving  Him  the  glory  which  is  due  to  His  name.  We  shall  attempt — I.  To  give 
you  a  view  of  the  manner  in  which  this  festival  should  be  observed  by  us,  coxsir>EREi> 
SIMPLY  AS  God's  INTELLIGENT  CBEATUEES ;  and — H.  Of  the  manner  in  which  we  should 
observe  it,  considered  as  sinful,  guilty  creatures,  to  whom  His  grace  and  mercy  are 
OFFERED  THROUGH  A  REDEEMER.  I.  That  the  first  of  these  proposed  views  may  be 
placed  before  you  in  the  clearest  and  most  interesting  light,  let  me  request  you  to 
suppose  that  our  first  parents,  instead  of  falling  as  they  did  from  their  holy  state, 
had  continued  in  it,  until  they  were  surrounded  by  a  numerous  family  like  them- 
selves, and  that  in  these  circumstances  they  had  set  apart  a  day  to  be  observed  as 
a  festival  to  their  Creator  and  Benefactor.  It  is  evident  that  if  we  can  conceive  of 
the  manner  in  which  they  would  have  observed  such  a  day  we  shall  learn  in  what 
manner  this  day  ought  to  be  observed  by  us,  considered  simply  as  God's  intelligent 
creatures.  Let  us  suppose  the  morning  of  their  appointed  festival  to  have  just 
dawned.  No  sooner  do  they  wake  to  a  returning  consciousness  of  existence  than  a 
recollection  of  the  Author,  Preserver,  and  Sustainer  of  that  existence,  and  of  their 
numberless  obligations  to  His  goodness,  rushes  upon  and  fully  possesses  their 
minds.  No  sooner  do  their  eyes  open  than  they  are  raited  to  heaven  with  a  look 
expressive,  in  the  highest  degree,  of  every  holy,  affectionate  emotion.  Each  one 
perceives,  with  clear  intuitive  certainty,  that  he  is  indebted  to  God  for  everything 
— that  God  is  his  life,  his  happiness,  his  all.  These  views  fill  his  heart  with  adoring^ 
gratitude — gratitude,  not  like  ours,  a  comparatively  cold  and  half-selfish  emotion, 
but  a  gratitude  pure,  fervent  and  operative,  which  carries  out  the  whole  soul  in  a 
rapturous  bnrht  of  thankfulness  and  renewed  self-dedication  to  God.  Though 
invisible  to  their  bodily  eyes,  He  is  not  so  to  the  eye  of  their  minds;  they  perceive, 
they  feel  His  presence ;  they  feel  that  His  all-pervading,  all-enfolding  Spirit  per- 
■vades  and  embraces  their  souls,  breathing  into  them  love,  and  joy,  and  peace 
unutterable,  and  wrapping  them  up,  as  it  were,  in  Himself.  Thus  each  individual 
apart  commences  the  observance  of  their  festal  day,  and  enjoys  intimate  and 
sweet  and  ennobling  communion  with  the  Father  of  spirits  in  solitary  devotion. 
But  man  is  a  social  being,  and  the  social  principle  which  God  has  implanted  in  his 
nature  prompts  him  to  wish  for  associates  in  his  religious  pleasures  and  pursuits. 
It  is  proper  that  he  should  wish  for  them,  and  if  possible  obtain  them ;  for  when  a 
festival  is  to  be  kept  unto  the  Lord,  when  thanksgiving  and  praise  are  to  be  offered. 


CHAP,  xxm.]  LEVITICUS.  225 

two  are  better  than  one.  United  flames  rise  higher  towards  heaven,  impart  more 
heat,  and  shine  with  brighter  lustre  than  while  they  remained  separated.  If  private, 
solitary  devotion  be  the  melody  of  religion,  united  devotions  constitute  its  harmony, 
and  without  harmony  the  music  is  not  perfect  and  complete.  Mark  the  feelings 
witti  which  they  approach  and  meet.  Every  eye  sparkles  with  delight,  every 
countenance  beams  v/ith  affection  ;  there  is  but  one  heart  and  one  soul  among  them 
all,  and  that  heart  and  that  soul  is  filled  with  holy  gratitude  and  love,  tempered  by 
adoring  admiration,  reverence,  and  awe.  Fresh  excitements  to  the  increase  of  these 
emotions  are  furnished  by  their  meeting.  Each  one  sees  in  his  rational,  immortal 
fellow-ci"eatures,  a  nobler  work  of  God,  a  brighter  Bxhibiliou  of  his  moral  perfec- 
tions, than  the  whole  inanimate  creation  could  afford.  And  while  each  one  con- 
templates this  image  of  God  in  his  feUow-creatures,  he  is  ready  to  exclaim.  If  these 
miniature  images  of  God  are  so  lovely,  how  infinitely  worthy  of  love  must  the  great 
original  be  ?  If  there  is  so  much  to  admire  in  the  streams,  what  admiration  does 
the  fountain  deserve?  Nor  is  this  all.  In  the  various  relations  and  ties  which 
bind  them  together  they  see  new  proofs  of  all-wise  benevolence,  new  reasons  why 
they  should  love  and  thank  Him  who  established  these  relations  and  formed  these 
ties.  Under  the  influence  of  these  affections  the  yet  stammering  child  is  taught 
the  name  of  its  Creator  and  Benefactor,  while  to  the  attentive  ear  of  those  who  are 
a  little  farther  advanced  in  life  the  history  of  the  creation  and  of  all  that  God  has 
done  for  His  creatures  is  recounted;  His  commands,  and  their  obligations  to  obey 
them,  are  stated ;  the  nature  and  design  of  the  festival  which  they  are  observing 
are  explained  ;  and  they  are  taught  to  perform  their  humble  part  in  its  appropriate 
services.  In  these  services  all  now  join  ;  and  oh,  with  what  perfect  union  of  heart, 
with  what  self-annihilating  humility,  with  what  seraphic  purity  and  fervency  of 
affection,  do  they  present  their  combined  offering  of  thanksgiving  and  praise ! 
Suffice  it  to  say  that  the  ear  of  Omniscience  itself  can  discern  no  shade  of  difference 
between  the  langua<;e  of  their  lips  and  that  of  their  hearts  unless  it  be  this — that 
their  hearts  feel  more  than  their  lips  can  express.  These  sacred  and  delightful 
services  being  ended,  they  prepare  to  feast  before  their  Benefactor ;  but  this  pre- 
paration is  made,  and  the  feast  itself  is  participated  with  the  same  feelings  which 
animated  their  devotions ;  for  whether  they  eat,,  or  drink,  or  whatever  they  do,  they 
do  all  to  the  glory  of  God.  On  such  an  occasion  they  may,  perhaps,  place  upon 
their  board  a  greater  variety  than  usual  of  the  fruits  of  Paradise ;  but  if  so,  it  is 
not  so  much  with  a  view  to  gratify  their  appetites  as  to  exhibit  more  fully  the 
various  and  ample  provision  which  God  has  made  for  them,  and  thus,  through 
the  medium  of  their  senses,  to  affect  their  hearts ;  for  man  has  not  yet  begun  to 
consume  the  bounty  of  Heaven  upon  his  lusts.  No  ;  the  blessing  of  God  is  implored 
and  His  presence  desired  as  the  crowning  joy  of  their  feast,  without  which  even  the 
fruits  of  Paradise  would  be  insipid  and  the  society  of  Paradise  uninteresting.  Thus 
while  they  feast  upon  the  fruits  of  His  bounty  their  souls  feast  upon  the  perfections 
which  those  fruits  display.  Thus  God  is  seen  and  enjoyed  in  everything,  and  every- 
thing leads  up  their  thoughts  and  affections  to  Him,  while  He  sits,  unseen  in  the 
midst  of  them,  shedding  abroad  His  love  through  all  their  hearts  and  rejoicing 
with  benevolent  delight  in  the  happiness  which  He  at  once  imparts  and  witnesses. 
Meanwhile  their  conversation  is  such  as  the  attending  angels,  who  hover  around, 
would  not  be  ashamed  to  utter — nay,  such  as  God  Himself  is  well  pleased  to  hear. 
The  law  of  kindness  is  on  all  their  lips,  for  the  law  of  love  is  in  all  their  hearts.  If 
such  is  the  manner  in  which  innocent  creatures  would  keep  a  feast  unto  the  Lord, 
then  such  is  the  manner  in  which  we  should  aim  to  keep  this  annual  festival.  We 
should  desire  and  aim  to  exercise  the  same  feelings,  to  worship  God  with  the  same 
sincerity,  fervency,  and  unity  of  affection,  and  to  converse  and  partake  of  His 
bounty  in  the  same  manner.  Having  shown  how  we  ought  to  keep  this  festival, 
considered  simply  as  God's  intelligent  creatures,  we  shall  now,  as  was  proposed — 
II.  Attempt  to  show  how  we  should  keep  it,  consideked  as  sinful  ceeatuees, 
UNDER  a  dispensation  OF  MERCY.  In  attempting  this  we  shall  pursue  the  same 
course  which  has  been  pursued  in  the  former  part  of  the  discourse.  We  will 
suppose  that  the  holy  and  happy  community,  whose  festival  we  have  been  con- 
templating, fall  from  their  original  state  and  become  sinners  like  ourselves.  Now 
suppose  that  these  creatures,  in  this  sinful,  guilty,  wretched,  despairing  state,  are 
placed  under  a  dispensation,  in  which  the  grace  and  mercy  of  God  are  offered  them 
through  a  Eedeemer,  and  that  just  such  a  revelation  is  made  to  them  as  has  been 
made  to  us  in  the  New  Testament.  Suppose  farther,  that  after  they  are  placed 
under  the  new  dispensation  they  resolve  to  observe  a  religious  festival.      What 


296  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxiii. 

would  be  necessary,  what  would  be  implied  in  their  keeping  it  as  a  feast  unto  the 
Lord  ?     I  answer,  the  first  thing  necessury  would  evidently  be  a  cordial  reconcilia- 
tion to  God.     Until  such  a  reconciliation  took  place  they  could  neither  observe  a 
religious  festival  nor  perform  any  other  religious  duty  in  a  right  and  acceptable 
manner.     Indeed,  they  would  have  no  disposition  to  do  it,  nor  any  of  the  feelings 
which  it  implies  and  demands.      But  reconciliation  to  God  necessarily  involves 
hatred  of  sin  and  self-condemnation,  sorrow  and  shame  on  account  of  it.     The 
exercise  of  faith  in  the  Kedeemer,  tbrough  whom  grace  and  mercy  are  offered,  is 
also  indispensably  necessary  to  the  right  observance  of  a  feast  unto  the  Lord.    And 
now  let  us  suppose  the  community,  which  we  have  already  twice  contemplated,  first 
as  perfectly  holy,  and  then  as  sinful,  guilty,  and  undone,  to  be  a  third  time  placed 
before  us,  reconciled  to  God,  exercising  repentance  and  faith  in  Christ,  and  engaged 
in  keeping  a  religious  festival  like  that  which  we  this  day  observe.     They  still  feel, 
though  in  an  imperfect  degree,  the  same  affection  which  we  saw  them  exercise 
toward   God  in  their  original  state  ;    but  these  affections   are,  in  a  considerable 
degree  at  least,  excited  by  different  objects  and  variously  modified  by  the  change 
which  has  taken  place  in  their  situation.     They  still  feel  grateful  to  God  for  their 
existence,  for  their  faculties,  and  for  the  various  temporal  blessings  which  surround 
them ;  but  they  now  view  all  these  things  as  blessings  which  they  had  forfeited  and 
lost,  and  which  had  been  repurchased  for  them  by  their  Kedeemer,    and  freely 
bestowed  upon  them  as  the  gifts  of  His  dying  love.   Hence  they  seem,  as  it  were,  to 
see  His  name  on  every  blessing,  and  every  blessing  reminds  them  of  Him.     They 
still,  as  formerly,  see  and  admire  God's  perfections  as  displayed  in  the  works  of 
creation  ;  but  their  admiration  and  their  praises  are  now  prmcipally  excited  by  the 
far  brighter,  the  eclipsing  display  which  He  has  made  of  His  moral  perfections,  in 
the  Cross  of  Christ,  in  the  wonders  of  redemption.     Loud  above  all  their  other 
praises  and  thanksgivings  may  be  heard  the  cry,  Thanks  be  unto  God  for  His  un- 
speakable gift !     Thanks  be  unto  God  and  the  Lamb  for  redeeming  love !     Even 
while  observing  a  joyful  festival,  tears,  the  fountain  of  which  is  supplied  by  godly 
sorrow  for  sin,  and  gratitude  to  the  Eedeemer ;  tears,  which  it  is  delightful  to  shed, 
are  seen  on  the  same  countenances  which  glow  with  love  and  hope,  and  beam  with 
holy,  humble  joy  in  God.     And  when  they  sit  down  to  the  table  of  Providence,  to 
feast  upon  His  bounty,  the  exercise  of  these  emotions  is  not  suspended.     They  feel 
there  as  pardoned  sinners  ought  to  feel,  and  as  they  would  wish  to  feel  at  the  table 
of  Christ,  for  the  table  of  Providence  is  become  to  them  His  table ;  they  remember 
Him  there ;  they  remember  that  whenever  their  daily  food  was  forfeited  by  sin, 
and   the   curse  of  Heaven  rested  upon  their  basket  and  store,  He  redeemed  the 
forfeiture,  and  turned  the  curse  into  a  blessing.    Hence  tbey  feast  upon  His  bounty 
with  feelings  resembling  those  which  we  may  suppose  to  have  filled  the  bosoms  of 
Joseph's  brethren  when  they  ate  and  rejoiced  before  him.      (E.  Payson,  D.D.) 
Harvest  thanhsgiving  : — A  wise  man  was  once  asked  a  difiicult  question.     He  had 
been  gazing  at  some  ancient  structure  which  had  long  since  fallen  into  ruins.   And 
as  he  stood  by  those  ruined  walls  overgrown  with  ivy,  he  was  asked  the  question  : 
"  What   is   it   which   soonest  grows  old  ?  "     What  is   it   which   is   most   quickly 
forgotten,  and  is  the  soonest  out  of  date  ?     The  answer  was  summed  up  in  one 
simple  word— it  was  gratitude.     That  which  soonest  grows  old  is  thankfulness. 
Now  there  is  a  great  deal  of  truth  in  that  answer,  for  we  are  all  of  us  so  ready  to 
forget  the  giver  as  soon  as  we  have  received  the  gift.      And  this  spirit  of  unthank- 
fulness  for  every-day  mercies  is  no  recent  tbing.     It  has  always  been  so.     It  was 
just  the  same  when  our  Lord  was  upon  earth.     You  will  all  remember  the  story  of 
the  ten  lepers  :  only  one  returned  to  give  thanks.    Or  look  again,  at  the  example  of 
the  Israelites  in  the  wilderness.     See  God's  constant  care  for  them.     On  every  page 
of  their  history  we  read,  not  of  thankfulness — but  of  murmuring  and  discontent. 
It  was  to  these  same  Israelites  that  the  words  of  the  text  were  spoken.     We  have 
just  gathered  in  the  fruits  of  the  laud,  and  to-day  we  are  keeping — in  a  bright  and 
hearty  Thanksgiving  Service — a  feast  unto  the  Lord.    Let  us  now  look  a  little  more 
closely  into  this  subject  of  Thanksgiving.     As  we  keep  our  feast  to-day,  let  us  look 
at  some  of  the  things  for  which  we  ought  to  be  grateful,  and  then  see  how  we  can 
show  our  thankfulness  in  our  daily  life.      In  oiu"  general  thanksgiving  prayer,  we 
thank  God  at  every  service  for  our  creation.     That  is  the  first  thing  to  be  thankful 
for.     God  created  us  in  His  own  image,  and  sent  us  into  this  world  to  live  for  His 
glory.    Every  one  of  us — even  in  the  quiet  round  of  every-day  duties — can  do  some- 
thing, if  we  try,  to  leave  the  world  better  than  we  found  it.      From  first  to  last — in 
all  its  varied  employments  and  in  all  its  Christian  duties — life  is  a  work  for  God. 


CHAP.  XXIII.]  LEVITICUS.  297 

What  a  charm  of  sacredness  is  thus  thrown  over  the  most  menial  duty  or  the  most 
trifling  occupation  !  Let  us  remember  "  whose  we  are  and  whom  we  serve  "  in  our 
every-day  Ufe.  Tour  lot  may  be  very  humble — the  circle  in  which  you  move  may 
be  very  small — the  work  that  you  may  be  able  to  do  very  trifling,  but  still  it  is  God's 
work.  Let  your  lot  be  ever  so  humble,  still  it  can  be  a  nuble  one,  if  you  are  only 
true  to  yourself  and  your  God.  A  noble  life  needs  no  adornment  of  wealth  or 
position.  Look,  for  example,  at  that  life  which  closed  amid  loneliness  and  deser- 
tion within  the  embattled  citadel  of  Khartoum.  One  little  sentence  written  by  that 
simple-hearted  soldier — whose  allegiance  to  his  Queen  was  only  equalled  by  his 
devution  to  Christ — gives  the  key-note  of  his  life.  Speaking  of  Egypt,  he  said,  "  It 
is  God's  work  and  not  mine — if  I  fail,  it  is  His  will — if  I  succeed,  it  is  His  work." 
And  then  there  are  other  reasons  for  thankfulness  in  our  pi-eservation  and  all  the 
blessings  of  this  life,  but  above  all,  for  the  gift  of  Jesus  Christ.  This  is  the  highest 
cause  for  thanksgiving,  for  what  would  earth  have  been  without  a  Saviour  ?  And 
as  we  thank  God  to-day  for  the.  late  harvest,  which  is  to  provide  us  with  our  daily 
bread,  let  us  also  thank  Him  for  the  gift  of  His  dear  Son — the  Bread  of  Life,  which 
has  come  down  from  heaven — for  the  salvation  and  strength  of  our  immortal  souls. 
When  we  care  very  much  for  any  one,  how  anxious  we  are  to  show  our  love  by  doing 
what  we  know  will  please  them !  And  it  should  be  just  the  same  in  our  love  for 
God.  We  should  always  be  anxious  to  do  what  will  please  Him.  But  now,  let  us 
see  how  we  may  hest  show  our  gratitude  for  all  that  God  sends  us.  The  Prayer- 
Book  tells  us  of  two  ways  in  which  our  thankfulness  may  be  shown,  "  not  only  with 
our  lips,  hut  in  our  lives,"  The  first  way,  then,  to  acknowledge  God  as  the  Giver 
of  all  good  things,  is  by  giving  actual  thanks.  By  words  of  gratitude  in  our  prayers 
and  by  songs  of  praise  and  thanksgiving,  such  as  we  have  joined  in  to-day.  We 
have  seen  others  called  aside  and  laid  upon  a  sick-bed,  and  God  in  His  mercy  has 
given  us  health  and  strength.  But  we  are  to  render  thanks,  not  only  with  our  lips 
but  in  our  lives.  Thankfulness  can  be  shown  by  a  proper  enjoyment  of  God's  gifts. 
We  are  not  to  lay  them  by  in  a  miserly  manner.  If  God  blesses  us  with  the  good 
things  of  this  life,  we  are  not  to  be  selfish  and  think  only  of  ourselves.  In  taking 
a  proper  enjoyment  of  things,  we  can  also  try  to  do  good  to  others.  But  the  highest 
of  all  gratitude  is  for  us  to  realise  that  we  are  God's  stewards.  Let  us  give  of 
our  substance  to  any  who  are  worse  off  than  ourselves,  ministering  especially  to 
those  who,  through  sickness  or  adversity,  are  in  need  of  our  help.  "  To  do  good  and 
to  distribute,  forget  not,  for  with  such  sacrifices  God  is  well  pleased."  {Philip  Neale.) 
Ye  shall  dwell  in  booths  seven  days. — Sojourning  in  booths  : — It  was  commemo- 
rative (see  ver.  43).  It  was  significant  of — I.  Christ  tabebnacling  in  the  flesh. 
Three  facts  are  suggestive  here  of  Christ's  incarnation  being  foreshadowed  in  this 
feast.  1.  John's  use  of  the  idea,  "  The  Word  dwelt  (tabernacled)  among  us,  full  of 
grace  and  truth  "  (John  i.  14).  2.  The  people's  gathering  of  palm  branches  when 
persuaded  of  His  Messiahship  (Matt.  xxi.  8,  9).  3.  Christ  chose  "  the  great  day  of 
the  feast,''  of  this  very  Feast  of  Tabernacles,  to  identify  Himself  with  one  of  its 
incidents.  While  the  waters  of  Siloam  were  being,  on  that  eighth  day,  poured  on 
the  altar  steps,  "  Jesns  stood  and  cried.  If  any  man  thirst  let  him  come  unto  Me 
and  drink "  (John  vii.  37,  38).  4.  Yet  His  tabernacle  life  was  not  permanent. 
Booths  are  for  pilgrims,  not  resi'lents.  And  Jesus  was  here  but  for  a  season. 
"Yet  a  little  while  I  am  with  you.'  II.  Man's  insecure  tenure  on  the  earth. 
1.  A  booth  of  boughs  and  palms  would  quickly  wither;  so  does  our  frail  tabernacle. 
What  are  these  bodies  but  tents  of  drooping  flesh?  2.  It  was,  moreover,  occupied  but 
a  few  days ;  and  we  are  resident  in  this  body  only  a  brief  season.  Think  not  to 
stay  long  here.  3.  The  materials  of  the  booths  were  of  the  earth  and  returned  to 
the  earth  :  mere  growths  from  the  soil,  soon  to  decay  and  go  back  to  the  soil.  Even 
so,  "dust  thou  art,"  etc.,  "of  the  earth  earthy."  III.  A  Christian's  pilgrim 
career.  Israel  dwelt  in  hooths  through  their  journey  from  Egypt  to  Canaan 
(see  ver.  43).  1.  Christ's  redeemed  are  pressing  through  a  wilderness.  It  is  not 
their  goal.  2.  Eest  and  content  are  not  to  be  sought  here.  A  temporary  accommo- 
dation is  enough.  3.  Earth's  discomfort  gives  zest  to  desire  for  the  "  city  of 
habitation."  And  as  Israel,  weary  with  their  booth  life,  craved  the  sure  abodes 
of  Canaan,  so  we  "  earnestly  desire  to  be  clothed  upon  with  our  house  which  is  from 
heaven;  for  in  this  we  groan,  being  burdened."  4.  God's  ordinance  of  a  booth  life 
was  a  pledge  of  the  certainty  of  Canaan.  It  assured  them  that  He  desired  them  to 
journey  forward  to  the  goodly  land.  And  He  would  have  us  "  set  our  face  Zion- 
ward."  (IF.  H.  Jellie.)  Dwelling  in  booths: — I.  The  text  reminds  us  of  con- 
ditions OF  LIFE  VERT  LIKE  THIS  DWELLING  IN  BOOTHS,     1.  A  feeble  body,  answering 


298  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxiii. 

its  purpose  many  years,  is  like  dwelling  in  booths.  Every  birthday  from  the  first 
anniversary  has  seemed  as  though  it  must  be  th-'  last ;  but  they  will  be  gathered  to 
their  graves  full  of  years,  as  a  shock  of  corn  fully  ripe.  The  cedar  has  fallen,  but 
the  fir-tree  stands ;  the  flower  of  the  grass  has  withered,  but  some  of  the  most 
tender  blades  survive.  Verily,  looking  at  the  frailty  of  the  body,  God  makes  some 
of  us  to  dwell  in  booths.  2.  Providing  by  slender  means  all  that  is  really  needful 
for  a  large  family  is  like  dwelling  in  booths.  3.  A  morbidly  sensitive  spirit  kept 
sound  is  like  dwelling  in  booths. '  To  the  border-line  of  madness  many  come  who 
are  not  permitted  to  cross.  4.  A  nature  prone  to  gross  evil  and  kept  from  the 
power  of  temptation  is  like  dwelling  in  booths.  5.  A  church  preserved  in  peace 
and  unity,  with  the  elements  of  evil  within  it  and  evil  influences  around  it,  isL 
am)ther  example  of  God  making  to  dwell  in  booths.  While  human  nature  is  what 
it  is,  you  cannot  have  association  of  any  kind  without  the  elements  of  misL-hief  and  * 
the  seeds  of  dissolution.  Where  there  is  continuance  and  unity  and  peace  in  a 
reliyious  community,  we  have  another  illustration  of  God  making  to  dwell  in 
booths.  6.  To  have  lived  in  a  day  of  small  things,  and  gradually  to  have  come 
into  a  day  of  great  things,  is  to  have  been  made  to  dwell  in  booths.  The  once 
contracted  business  now  extensive,  the  once  limited  profession  now  a  wide  and 
broad  practice,  and  the  once  tiny  house  now  a  large  establishment,  are  illustrations. 
II.  The  text  exhibits  God  as  sufficient  for  us  in  the  most  necessitous  and 
DANGEROUS  CIRCUMSTANCES.  1.  God  hath  in  Himself  all  that  is  necessary  for  the 
working  out  of  His  will.  He  is  not  a  cistern  which  may  be  broken,  but  He  is  an 
everlasting  fountain.  Whatever  life,  knowledge,  wisdom,  or  power  are  needful  or 
desirable,  are  in  Himself.  2.  God  uses  agents  and  instruments,  but  is  not  de- 
pendent upon  any  of  the  agents  and  instruments  which  He  employs.  His  con- 
nection with  all  such  does  not  bind  or  embarrass  Him.  It  is  nothing  with  Him  to 
help,  whether  with  many  or  with  few,  or  with  them  that  have  no  power.  3.  God  is 
conscious  of  His  sufficiency.  He  thinks  of  Himself  as  sufficient,  and  feels  to  be 
sufficient.  God  had  no  more  care  of  Israel  when  they  dwelt  in  booths  than  when 
they  abode  in  fenced  cities.  He  had  no  misgiving  about  bringing  the  children  of 
Israel  through.  4.  There  is  but  one  thing  which  prevents  our  fully  experiencing  the 
sufficiency  of  God,  and  that  is  sin — wilful  and  persistent  sin.  This  shortens  the 
arm  of  God,  and  this  closes  His  ear.  III.  The  text  points  out  a  duty  of  re- 
membrance WHICH  WE  ARE  ALL  LIABLE  TO  NEGLECT.  This  direction  has  chief  refer- 
ence not  to  the  generation  which  actually  dwelt  in  the  booths,  but  to  successive 
generations,  and  to  these  after  they  had  become  tenants  of  the  cities  of  the  Holy 
Land.  Now  if  we  are  to  keep  in  remembrance  God's  goodness  to  our  ancestors, 
how  much  more  should  we  keep  in  mind  God's  mercy  to  ourselves!  There 
is  a  point  here,  however,  which  we  may  not  overlook.  God's  mercy  to  a  family  in 
previous  generations  places  the  present  members  of  that  family  under  obligation. 
The  same  remark  will  apply  to  a  nation  and  to  a  church — to  any  community  or 
association.  {S.  Martin,  D.D.)  Moses  declared  .  .  .  the  feasts  of  the  Lord. — 
Pleasant  mhmtries  : — "  And  Moses  declared  unto  the  children  of  Israel  the  feasts 
of  the  Lord."  What  a  change  in  his  great  ministry  !  Never  was  man  charged 
with  the  delivering  of  so  many  disciplinary  and  legal  words.  It  is  time  that  he  had 
something  to  say  with  easier  music  in  it,  conveying  a  pleasanter  appeal  to  the 
imagination  and  the  whole  attention  of  Israel.  It  was  a  new  mission.  The  lips  of 
Moses  must  have  grown  hard  in  the  delivery  of  hai'd  speeches.  It  was  his 
business  always  to  deliver  law,  to  recall  to  duty,  to  suppress  revolution,  to  command 
and  overawe  the  people  whose  fortunes  he  humanly  led.  What  wonder  if  the  people 
dreaded  his  appearance  ?  That  appearance  might  have  been  equal  to  a  new  Sinai, 
a  new  Decalogue — a  harder  speech  of  law  and  duty  and  servitude.  It  was  a 
pleasant  thing  for  Moses,  too,  this  change  in  the  tone  of  his  ministry  ;  he  is  now 
speaking  of  feasts,  of  festivals — times  of  solemn  rejoicing — yea,  some  of  the  very 
feasts  which  were  instituted  were  designated  by  names  the  roots  of  which  signified 
to  dance  and  be  glad  with  great  joy.  An  awful  fate  for  any  man  to  be  merely  the 
legal  prophet  of  his  age  !  A  most  burdensome  mission  always  to  be  called  upon  to 
rebuke  and  chastise,  to  suppress,  and  to  put  men  down  to  their  j)roper  level,  and 
call  them  up  to  their  proper  obedience !  Thus  the  Lord  varies  the  ministry  of  His 
servants.  He  says.  There  will  be  no  utterance  of  new  law  to-day,  but  this  very 
day  shall  be  a  day  of  feasting  and  music  and  dancing  ;  He  >.  ill  have  a  home  in  the 
wilderness — a  glad,  warm,  happy  home :  all  troublesome  memories  shall  be  dis- 
missed and  one  overmastering  joy  shall  rule  this  festal  day.  That  is  the  speech  He 
has  been  longing  to  make  ;  but  we  would  not  let  Him.     He  never  wanted  to  make 


CHAP.  XXIV.]  LEVITICUS.  299 

any  other  speech ;  we  ourselves  forced  the  hard  terms  from  His  reluctant  lips.  A 
complete  ministry  is  terrible  and  gracious.  It  is  terrible  by  the  necessities  of  the 
case.  Consider  the  nature  with  which  the  ministry  of  heaven  has  to  deal :  "  there 
is  none  righteous,  no  not  one  "  ;  we  have  turned  aside  from  the  right  way,  and  are 
far  from  the  centres  of  hght  and  rest  and  peace ;  sometimes  nothing  will  reach  us 
but  fear,  terror,  awful  denunciation  of  anger,  aud  judgment.  But  the  ministry  is 
also  gentle  :  there  is  no  gentleness  like  it.  The  true  ministry  of  Christ  is  marked 
by  surpassing  and  ineffable  grace :  its  eyes  are  full  of  tears ;  its  great  trumpet-tones 
are  broken  down  by  greater  sobs ;  it  pities  the  weak ;  it  speaks  a  word  of  hope  to 
the  fallen ;  it  tells  the  farthest  off  that  there  is  time  for  him  to  get  home  before  the 
nightfall,  or  if  he  be  overtaken  with  the  darkness  the  light  will  be  in  the  house  he 
has  abandoned ;  it  pleads  with  men ;  it  beseeches  men  to  be  reconciled  to  God  ;  it 
writes  its  promises  in  syllables  of  stars ;  it  punctuates  its  speech  with  fragrant 
flowers  ;  it  breaks  down  into  the  omnipotence  of  weakness  by  clinging  to  the  sinner 
when  all  men  have  abandone.d  Him  in  despair.  We  must  establish  a  whole 
ministry.  The  mountain  must  have  two  sides :  the  side  where  the  darkness 
lingers  ;  the  side  where  the  light  plays  and  dances  in  many  a  symbolism.  This  is 
human  life.  The  two  sides  must  go  together.  When  the  ministry  thunders  its 
law,  it  must  be  upheld ;  when  it  breaks  down  in  tears  over  the  Jerusalem  that  has 
rejected  it,  it  must  be  regarded  as  the  very  heart  of  God.  Notice  the  time  when  the 
feasts  were  spoken  of.  Let  us  regard  the  very  position  of  the  text  as  instructive. 
We  have  now  read  up  to  it ;  beginning  with  the  bondage  in  Egypt,  dwelling  tear- 
fully and  sympathetically  upon  that  pagan  servitude,  watching  the  children  of 
Israel  led  forth  by  a  mighty  hand,  we  have  noted  the  discipline  which  afflicted 
them  educationally ;  by  this  time  we  have  become  familiar  with  their  hardships, 
now  it  is  a  welcome  relief  to  the  reader  to  come  upon  festival,  dancing,  joy,  delight — 
one  touch  of  heaven  in  a  very  wilderness  of  desolation.  This  is  the  day  we  have 
longed  for.  There  was  a  hope  hidden  in  our  hearts  that,  by  and  by,  golden  gates 
would  swing  back  upon  happy  places  and  offer  us  the  liberty  of  heaven.  We  have 
come  to  that  Sabbatic  time ;  now  we  are  in  times  of  jubilee  and  Sabbath,  release, 
pardon,  rapture,  praising  God  all  the  time,  having  found  a  temple  without  a  roof, 
a  sanctuary  without  a  wall,  an  infinite  liberty  vast  as  the  Being  which  it  adores. 
Notice  whose  feasts  they  were,  and  how  joy  is  ennobled  by  solemnity.  "  And 
Moses  declared  unto  the  children  of  Israel  the  feasts  of  the  Lord."  They  were  not 
fools'  revels  ;  they  were  not  inventions  even  of  Moses  and  Aaron ;  they  were  as 
certainly  Divine  creations  as  were  the  stars  that  gUttered  above.  Is  "  feasts  "  not 
a  word  too  frivolous  to  associate  with  the  name  of  the  Lord  ?  No.  If  we  are  to 
judge  by  analogy,  No.  The  God  of  flowers  may  be  the  God  of  feasts.  We  know 
the  flowers  are  His  ;  we  know  that  no  Solomon  has  ever  arrayed  himself  in  equal 
beauty ;  He  who  made  those  flowers  must  have  made  a  feast  somewhere — a  feast  of 
reason,  a  feast  for  the  soul,  a  luxury  for  the  inner  taste,  an  appeal  to  the  larger 
appetency.  He  who  made  the  birds  may  surely  be  the  God  of  the  soul's  music.  The 
birds  sing  so  blithely,  without  one  touch  of  vanity;  so  purely,  so  independently, 
without  pedantry,  without  sign  or  hint  of  human  education  ;  the  God  who  set  their 
little  throats  in  tune  may  surely  be  the  God  of  all  pure  music — the  mother's  broad 
laugh  over  her  little  one,  the  father's  tender  voice  in  the  presence  of  distress 
and  need;  and  He  who  made  the  birds'  throat  may  have  put  it  into  the  mind  of  man 
to  make  the  trumpet,  and  the  cornet,  and  the  flute,  and  the  harp,  and  the  sacbut, 
and  the  psaltery ;  they  may  be  His  judging  by  the  happy  analogies  of  nature. 
He  who  made  summer,  may  have  made  heaven!  There  is  but  a  step  between 
them.    (J.  Farker,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 


Vers.  2-9.   Pare  oil-olive  beaten  for  the  light. — Directions  for  furnishing  of  the 

sanctuary  : — Care  is  here  taken,  and  orders  given,  for  the  decent  furnishing  of  the 
candlestick  and  table  in  God's  house.  I.  The  lamps  must  always  be  kept  bdrnino. 
The  law  for  this  we  had  before  (Exod.  xxvii.  20,  21).  It  is  here  repeated,  probably 
because  now  it  began  to  be  put  in  execution  when  other  things  were  settled.  1. 
The  people  were  to  provide  oil  (ver.  2) ;  and  this,  as  everything  else  that  was  to  bo 


300  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxnr. 

used  in  God's  service,  must  be  of  the  best,  pure  oil-olive  beaten — probably  it  was 
donble-strained.  This  was  to  cause  the  lamps  to  burn.  AH  our  English  copies 
read  it  "lamps";  but  in  the  original  it  is  siignlar  (ver.  2),  "  To  cause  the  'lamp' 
to  burn";  but  plural  (ver.  4),  "He  shall  orJer  the  'lamps.'"  The  seven  lamps 
made  all  one  lamp.  In  allusion  to  which  the  blessed  Spirit  of  grace  is  represented 
by  seven  lamps  of  fire  before  the  tlirone  (Rev.  iv.  5) ;  for  there  are  diversities  of 
gifts,  but  one  Spirit  (1  Cor.  xii.  4).  Ministers  ai'e  as  burning  and  shining  lights  in 
Christ's  Church  ;  but  it  is  the  duty  of  peojile  to  provide  comfortably  for  them,  as 
Israel  for  the  lamps.  Scandalous  maintenance  makes  a  scandalous  ministry.  2. 
The  priests  were  to  tend  the  lamps  ;  they  must  snuif  them,  clean  the  candlestick, 
supply  them  with  oil  morning  and  evening  (vers.  3,  4).  Thus  it  is  the  work  of  the 
ministers  of  the  gospel  to  hold  forth  that  Word  of  life — not  to  set  up  new  lights,  but 
by  expounding  and  preaching  the  Word  to  make  the  light  of  it  more  clear  and 
extensive.  If.  The  table  must  always  be  kept  spread.  This  was  appointed  before 
(Exod.  XXV.  30).  And  here  also:  1.  The  table  was  furnished  with  bread;  not 
dainties  or  varieties  to  gratify  a  luxurious  palate,  but  twelve  loaves  or  cakes  of 
bread  (vers.  5,  6).  Where  there  is  plenty  of  bread  there  is  no  famine ;  and  where 
bread  is  not  there  is  no  feast.  There  was  a  loaf  for  every  tribe  ;  for  in  our  Father's 
bouse  there  is  bread  enough.  They  were  all  provided  for  by  the  Divine  bounty, 
and  were  all  welcome  to  the  Divine  grace.  2.  A  handful  of  frankincense  was  put 
in  a  golden  saucer  upon  or  by  each  row  (ver.  7).  When  the  bread  was  removed 
and  given  to  the  priests  this  frankincense  was  burnt  upon  the  golden  altar  (I 
suppose)  over  and  above  the  daily  incense.  And  this  was  for  a  memorial  instead 
of  the  bread,  an  offering  made  by  fire,  as  the  handful  of  the  meat-offering  which 
was  bmrnt  upon  the  altar  is  called  the  memorial  thereof  (chap.  ii.  2).  Thus  a  little 
was  accepted  as  an  humble  acknowledgment,  and  all  the  loaves  were  consigned  to 
the  priests.  All  God's  spiritual  Israel,  typified  by  the  twelve  loaves,  are  made 
through  Christ  a  sweet  savour  to  Him,  and  their  prayers  are  said  to  come  up  before 
God  for  a  memorial  (Acts  x.  4).  The  word  is  borrowed  from  the  ceremonial  law. 
3.  Every  Sabbath  it  was  renewed.  When  the  loaves  had  stood  there  a  week  the 
priests  had  them,  to  eat  with  other  holy  things  that  were  to  be  eaten  in  the  Holy 
Place  (ver.  9) ;  and  new  ones  were  provided  at  the  public  charge,  and  put  in  the 
room  of  them  (ver.  8).  The  Jews  say,  "The  hands  of  those  priests  that  put  on 
were  mixed  with  theirs  that  took  off,  that  the  table  might  be  never  empty,  but  the 
bread  might  be  before  the  Lord  continually."  God  is  never  unprovided  for  the 
entertainment  of  those  that  visit  Him,  as  men  often  are  (Luke  xi.  5).  (Matthew 
Henry,  D.D.)  The  sanctuary  and  its  furniture : — To  conceive  of  the  shape  and 

appearance  of  the  Tabernacle,  you  must  measure  out  in  your  imagination  a  level 
ground-plot,  about  one  hundred  and  fifty  feet  long,  and  about  seventy-five  feet 
broad  ;  that  is,  an  oblong  square  enclosed  with  linen  canvas  fastened  on  stakes,  and 
cords  about  ten  feet  in  height.  Everything  relating  to  the  Tabernacle  was  inside 
of  this  enclosed  area,  which  was  called  the  court  of  the  Tabernacle.  The  Taber- 
nacle proper  was  a  smaller  enclosure  at  the  far  end  of  this  court,  equally  distant 
from  the  two  sides  of  it.  It  was  formed  of  boards,  overlaid  with  gold,  fifteen  feet 
high,  set  up  alongside  of  each  other  in  sockets  of  silver,  and  held  together  above  by 
g'llden  bars  passing  through  golden  rings  fastened  to  the  boards  on  the  outside. 
The  roof  of  this  inner  enclosure  was  formed  of  heavy  curtains  of  several  thicknesses 
thrown  over  these  rows  of  upright  boards  from  side  to  side.  This  was  the  Taber- 
nacle proper,  which  was  divided  again  into  two  apartments  by  heavy  curtains 
dropped  from  the  roof.  The  inmost  of  these  covered  chambers  was  the  Holy  of 
Holies ;  and  the  other,  which  was  the  ante-chamber  to  it,  was  the  sanctuary,  other- 
wise called  the  Holy  Place.  You  thus  observe  three  departments  in  tliis  sacred 
structure  :  first,  the  enclosed  uncovered  sjjace  outside  of  the  Tabei-nacle  proper ; 
then  the  sanctuary,  or  first  room  of  the  covered  part ;  and  third,  that  peculiarly 
sacred  room  in  the  deepest  interior,  called  the  Holy  of  Holies.  Nor  could  any  one 
come  to  the  most  Holy  Place  except  by  passing  in  through  the  court  and  through 
the  sanctuary.  In  all  this  I  see  a  symbolic  history  of  redemption,  and  of  the 
sinner's  progress  from  his  state  of  condemnation  and  guilt  to  forgiveness  and  peace 
in  Christ,  and  to  his  final  glory  in  the  pre-ence  of  his  Lord.  The  first  apartment 
was  the  outside  court.  It  was  here  that  the  Jews  came  to  offer  their  sacrifices. 
They  accordingly  appeared  there  as  sinners.  The  outside  court,  therefore,  repre- 
sents man  in  his  native  condition.  It  is  our  place  or  moral  locale  so  long  as  we  are 
only  beginning  to  believe  on  Christ  and  to  cleanse  ourselves  from  our  filthy  ways. 
The  third  and  most  interior  apartment  represents  the  heavenly,  post-resurrection. 


CHAP,  ssiv.]  LEVITICUS.  301 

or  glorified  estate  of  man.  There  was  the  visible  presence  of  the  Lord.  It  was  the 
hidden  and  guar^led  j)lace  into  which  vulgar  eyes  could  not  look,  or  unholy  ones  at 
all  enter.  But  between  the  outside  court  and  this  inmost  chamber  of  the  Taber- 
nacle was  the  sanctuary,  or  that  department  with  which  the  text  is  directly  con- 
cerned, and  of  which  I  propose  more  particulai'ly  to  treat.  Its  position  shows  that 
it  refers  to  a  condition  of  things  this  side  of  the  heavenly  estate,  and  yet  in  advance 
of  those  rudimental  experiences  by  which  we  come  to  be  Christians.  It  was  a 
picture  of  the  Christian  Church  estate,  that  is,  of  the  immunities  and  relations  in 
which  we  stand  as  the  accepted  followers  and  servants  of  Jesus  while  yet  we  remain 
in  this  woild.  With  this  idea,  then,  let  us  take  our  station  in  the  holy  sanctuary, 
and  simply  look  around  us  upon  the  objects  to  which  the  text  directs  attention. 
The  chapter  before  us  speaks  of  lamps.  These  were  the  burners  upon  the  famous 
seven-armed  candlestick  of  gold,  which  God  directed  Moses  to  make  for  the  holy 
Tabernacle.  The  central  and  all-supporting  shaft  represented  Christ,  or  rather 
"  the  right  hand  "  of  Christ,  on,  which  everything  Christian  depends.  As  the  seven 
candlesticks  and  their  lamps  were  sustained  by  that  massive  golden  stem,  so  Christ 
sustains  every  member,  branch,  institution,  and  minister  of  His  universal  Church. 
It  is  He  alone  "  that  is  able  to  keep  us  from  falling."  You  will  observe  that  the 
number  of  lamps  and  branches  of  this  peculiar  fabric  was  seven — the  complete 
number — indicating  that  the  whole  Church  was  thereby  represented.  All  rested 
upon  the  one  central  shaft ;  indicating  that  there  is  no  true  Church,  and  no  branch 
of  the  true  Church,  which  does  not  repose  in  Christ  as  its  great  and  only  foundation 
and  dependence.  The  whole  fabric  was  of  one  piece.  The  parts  were  all  solidly 
joined  together  as  one  continuous  mass  of  solid  gold.  And  so  the  Holy  Catholic 
Church  is  one.  AU  the  branches  are  compactly  joined  together  in  one  central 
support  and  stay,  which  is  Christ  Jesus.  And  yet  in  that  unity  there  was  multiplicity 
and  diversity.  There  were  seven  branches,  and  these  seven  were  not  all  exactly 
alike.  Some  were  shorter  and  lighter,  and  some  were  longer  and  heavier ;  some 
looked  towards  the  east  and  some  towards  the  west ;  some  seemed  to  diverge  very 
far  from  the  central  shaft,  others  rose  immediately  by  its  sides.  There  was  iriulti- 
plicity  and  diversity,  and  yet  perfect,  unbroken,  graceful  unity.  Beautiful  picture 
of  the  Church  of  Jesus !  It  is  not  confined  to  one  nation,  one  dispensation,  one 
denomination,  but  takes  in  all  who  are  really  united  to  Christ,  and  built  upon  Him, 
as  their  only  dependence,  no  matter  how  diverse  or  remote  from  each  other  they 
may  be  in  other  respects.  The  object  of  these  candlesticks  and  lamps  was  to 
furaish  light  to  the  sanctuary.  The  place  had  no  windows,  no  other  modes  of 
illumination.  The  light  which  characterises  Christendom  as  such  is  not  from 
nature — not  from  human  reason  and  philosophy — but  from  Christ  and  that  pure 
Spirit  which  flowed  and  shone  through  Him  and  His  inspired  ministers.  Without 
Christ,  and  the  light  which  comes  from  the  golden  candlesticks  of  His  glory,  and 
the  pure  olive-oil  of  His  Spirit,  mankind  are  in  daikipss  on  all  sacred  things. 
'•  But  he  that  doeth  truth  cometh  to  the  light,"  and  thus  is  made  a  son  of  light, 
whose  path  shall  ever  shine  more  and  more  unto  the  perfect  day.  But  the  chapter 
before  us  speaks  of  bread  as  well  as  lamps  and  light.  Twelve  loaves,  baked  of  fine 
flour,  arranged  in  piles  on  a  table  of  gold,  ever  stood  in  the  holy  sanctuary.  These 
loaves  were  to  be  renewed  every  Sabbath,  and  were  to  be  eaten  by  the  priests  in  the 
Holy  Place.  This  golden  table,  the  same  as  the  supporting  shaft  of  the  golden 
candlesticks,  represented  Christ,  and  these  unleavened  loaves  upon  it,  that  pure 
bread  from  heaven  which  He  giveth  for  the  sustenance  of  them  that  are  His. 
"Man  liveth  not  by  bread  alone."  There  are  wants  and  cravings  in  our  nature 
which  cannot  be  satisfied  with  the  produce  of  the  fields.  There  is  in  us  a  spiritual 
man,  which  must  be  fed  and  nourished  with  spiritual  food,  or  it  languishes  and 
dies.  We  need  higher  supplies  than  this  world  can  furnish,  and  which  can  be 
found  only  in  the  holy  sanctuary.  Jesus  furnishes  those  supplies.  It  has  been 
touchingly  remarked  that  "  every  sigh  of  Jesus  was  a  crumb  of  imperisliable  bread 
to  us."  The  breaking  of  His  body  on  the  Cross  has  furnished  the  sublimest  feast 
of  time.  There  "  they  that  hunger  and  thirst  after  righteousness"  are  for  ever 
filled.  There  wisdom  hath  furnished  her  table,  saying,  "  Come,  eat  of  my  bread, 
and  drink  of  the  wine  which  I  have  mingled."  Here  love  hath  poured  out  all  her 
lavish  fulness  for  the  famishing  children  of  men.  There  were  to  be  twelve  loaves 
ever  on  the  golden  table — a  loaf  for  every  name  upon  the  jewelled  breastplate  of  the 
priest.  And  they  were  ample  loaves.  One  omer  of  manna  was  enough  to  serve  a 
man  for  a  day  ;  but  each  of  these  loaves  contained  two  omers.  The  bounties  pro- 
vided for  our  souls  in  Christ  Jesus  are  superabundant — far  more  than  enough  for 


302  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxiv. 

all  that  will  ever  come  to  partake.    Neither  did  these  loaves  ever  wax  old  or  become 
stale.     Every  Sabbath  they  were  carefully  renewed,  and  thus  kei:it  always  fresh  and 
sweet.     The' bread  which  Jesus  gives  never  moulds,  never  spoils,  and  never  loses  its 
relish  on  the  tongues  of  His  priests.     Having  thus  looked  at  the  beautiful  provi- 
sions for  Hght  and  sustenance  which  characterised  the  holy  sanctuary,  there  is  yet 
a  thought  or  two  respecting  its  relation  to  the  Holy  of  Holies,  to  which  I  will  direct 
your  attention.    I  have  said  that  the  Holy  of  Holies  was  meant  to  represent  heaven, 
or  that  invisible  and  glorious  state  into  which  Christ  has  entered  as  our  Priest  and 
Forerunner,  and  into  which  all  His  saints  shall  enter  in  time  to  come.     Now,  tbe 
way  into  this  most  Holy  Place  was  through  the  sanctuary.    There  was  no  other  way 
of  entering  it.     May  not  this  be  meant  to  signify  that  the  way  to  heaven  is  through 
the  Church  ?     If  there  is  any  way  of  salvation  outside  of  this  holy  Catholic  Church 
I  cannot  find  it  revealed  in  the  Scriptures,  and  fearful  is  the  risk  of  him  who 
ventures  to  trust  in  it.     But  connected  with  this  is   another   and   more   sunny 
thought.    If  the  sanctuary  is  the  way  to  heaven,  those  who  are  in  that  way  are 
very  near  heaven.    Every  true  member  of  the  Church  has  but  a  veil  between  him 
and  the  glorious  presence  of  God  and  angels.     (J.  A.  Seiss,  D.D.)        Symbols  and 
their  vieaning  : — Among  the  very  first  symbols  appointed  in  this  chapter,  is  the  pure 
beaten  oil  for  the  lamps  that  were  "  to  bum  continually  without  the  veil  of  the 
testimony  in  the  Tabernacle  of  the  congregation."    Now  we  find  that  John  in  the 
Apocalypse  uses  the  very  imagery  that  is  here  to  set  forth  the  completeness,  the 
unity,  and  yet  the  variety  of  the  Christian  Church.     The  seven  candlesticks,  or 
the  seven  branches  of  the  one  candlestick,  are  seven  churches  ;  all  the  seven  knit 
together  in  one  golden  stem  ;  and  through  that  stem  rushing  into  each  tube,  and 
supplying  each  lamp  with  the  most  precious  and  perfumed  oil,  beaten  oil  rising 
from  the  stem  and  enabling  it  thus  to  burn.     Now  we  have  in  that  image  the  most 
complete  exhibition  of  the  variety  of  the  Christian  Church.     It  is  not  one  stem, 
there  are  seven  stems.     There  is  not  one  visible  Church,  but  many  visible  congre- 
gations, all  of  them,  greater  or  less,  constituting  together  the  one  universal  or 
Cathohc  Cliurch.    It  was  never  meant  that  there  should  be  but  one  visible  economy, 
but  many  diiifering  economies  ;  having  their  unity  not  in  the  uniformity  of  A  to  B, 
and  B  to  C,  but  in  the  unity  of  all  with  the  central  stem  to  which  they  are  all  knit. 
So  is  it  now  in  the  Christian  Church.     The  discipline  of  the  Church  is  temporary, 
but  the  doctrines  of  the  Church  are  eternal.     In  ecclesiastical  polity  it  has  varied, 
and  it  will  vary;  in  essential  attachment  to  the  Saviour,  trust  in  His  sacrifice,  love 
of  vital  and  essential  truth,  it  has  been  one  in  every  age.     The  oil  that  supplied  it 
was  oil  that  rose  from  the  stem,  penetrated  the  branches,  and  thus  fed  the  flame. 
I  need  not  remind  you  how  that  very  image  is  constantly  used  to  denote  the  Holy 
Spirit  of  God.     Then  the  object  of  this  candlestick  was  to  give  light  in  the  Taber- 
nacle.    So  the  object  of  a  Church  is  to  give  light ;  and  if  it  fail  to  give  light  it  is 
worthless.     The  best  candlestick  would  not  be  that  which  gave  least  light,  but 
most;  and  no  exquisite  beauty  of  its  chasing,  no  amount  of  gold  in  its  composition, 
would  be  any  compensation  for  its  failing  to  do  that  which  is  its  end  and  its  mission, 
to  give  light  to  them  that  are  in  the  household.     The  very  end  and  object  of  a 
Christian  is  to  be  a  light ;  and  that  is  the  best  Church  that  casts  the  light  upon 
the  truths  of  the  Bible,  the  problems  of  the  soul,  the  hopes  of  the  Christian,  the 
way  that  leads  to  glory.     After  the  representation  of  the  candlestick  we  have  the 
bread  for  a  memorial  before  the  Lord.     This  bread  consisted  of  twelve  loaves  upon 
a  table  of  gold,  and  had  two  meanings;  probably  one  was  to  bring  the  produce  of 
the  fields  of  the  earth  under  the  roof  of  the  sanctuary  of  God,  that  it  might  be  seen 
that  the  same  God  who  saves  the  soul  and  feeds  it  with  living  bread  also  supplies 
the  wants  of  the  body,  and  makes  the  com  to  grow  upon  the  earth  to  bring  forth 
abundance  for  man  and  for  beast.     Or,  secondly,  it  may  have  been  designed  to 
show  that  there  was  a  higher  want  than  the  want  of  the  bread  that  pRrisheth ;  that 
there  is  in  man's  soul  a  need,  a  hunger  for  the  bread  that  endureth  unto  life  eternal; 
which  the  viands  of  nature  never  could  furnish,  which  God  must  send  as  He  sent 
the  rryanna — directly  and  immediately  from  heaven.     And  lastly,  it  was  used  to  be 
food  for  Aaron  and  the  priests  ;  everything  being  consecrated  in  that  sanctuary, 
and  associated  in  some  way  with  God  and  the  hopes  of  heaven  and  of  eternity. 
{J.  Cumming,  D.D.)         The  priest  setting  the  lamps  in  order  daily  represents  Christ 
causing  His  people  daily  to  receive  and  give  forth  light  and  life  : — In  the  midst  of  a 
dark  world  believers  are  set  up  as  lights  (see  Phil.  ii.  15 ;  Matt.  v.  16).     They  should 
be  as  the  Baptist,  "  burning  and  shining  lights."     They  should  be  representatives 
of  Christ  Himself,  who  "  shone  as  the  light  in  darkness."    And  they  must  shine — 


CHAP,  xxrv.]  LEVITICUS.  303 

1.  Not  by  natural  gifts,  but  by  grace.  There  must  be  the  beaten  oil,  pressed  out  of 
Isiael's  olive-trees  ;  not  merely  talent  or  natural  fervour  and  benevolence.  2. 
Clearly.  There  were  golden  snuffers  for  these  lamps,  and  the  use  of  them  was 
committed  to  the  priest  who  went  in  to  set  things  in  order.  Bflievers  must  have 
their  gifts  and  graces  stirred  up,  so  that  there  be  no  dulness,  indecision,  languor. 
3.  Constantly.  Every  day  in  succession  shine  as  before  ;  never  hide  the  light.  If 
there  be  a  place  where  it  is  not  duty  to  speak,  yet  there  is  no  place  where  it  is  not 
duty  to  think  and  feel  for  God.  4.  Calmly  ;  for  the  light  of  these  lamps  did  not 
sputter  as  it  burned.  The  oil  was  pure.  Believers  must  have  the  lamb-hke  spirit 
of  Jesus,  putting  away  all  admixture  of  Luman  temper ;  not  reproving  with  the 
heat  of  human  passion,  not  harshly  upbraiding  the  obstinate  sinner,  not  impatient 
or  hasty  or  fierce  even  when  enormous  wickedness  and  deceit  appear.  A  calm  light 
generally  shines  full.  5.  In  the  face  of  the  world.  Cast  your  light  fair  on  the  world's 
sins,  that  they  may  see  them.  Point  out  their  ungodliness,  their  lawlessness,  their 
unbelief.  Bear  your  testimony  where  the  truth  is  denied  in  your  presence.  Never  be 
afraid  of  dazzling  the  world  with  too  much  light,  but  plainly  show  them  that  they  are 
wholly  pinful,  wholly  ruined,  wholly  helpless  ;  and  speak  of  a  present,  immediate, 
free,  full  pardon  in  the  Saviour.  6.  So  as  to  show  tlje  golden  table  and  the  golden 
altar.  The  lights  of  the  candlestick  did  so.  Was  not  this  pointing  the  eye  to 
Christ,  who  died  and  who  is  risen?  The  bread  on  the  table  is  Christ,  who  gave  His 
life  for  us  ;  the  golden  altar  and  its  incense  is  Jesus  exalted  and  accepted.  Here  is 
full  salvation.  7.  As  if  you  alone  were  responsible  for  the  enlightening  of  the  dark 
world.  The  candlestick  was  the  only  light ;  so  is  the  Church.  And  let  every 
member  feel  responsibility.  Perhaps  if  you  shine  not,  some  soul  shall  be  left  for 
ever  in  darkness.  If  one  lighthouse  on  the  sea-shore  were  obscured,  how  many 
ships  might  be  lost  in  consequence,  especially  if  formerly  that  lighthouse  used  to 
direct  to  the  haven  !  Oh,  then,  how  many  may  perish  if  you  backslide  and  shine 
not  as  before!  This  is  our  time  for  shining.  When  Jesus  comes  His  light  will 
dim  ours ;  we  shall  shine  with  Him,  but  our  privilege  of  bringing  others  shall  be 
ended.  When  the  sun  rises  the  vessel  needs  no  more  the  help  of  the  beacon-hght. 
(A.  A.  Bonar.)  Christ  an  enlightening  presence  : — Here  is  the  experience  of  a 
little  blind  boy,  which  shows  what  a  blessed  ligbt  the  presence  of  Jesus  gives. 
This  boy  had  had  an  attack  of  scarlet  fever,  which  left  him  perfectly  blind.  One 
day  his  minister  called  to  see  him.  In  talking  about  this  affliction,  he  said,  "Well, 
my  dear  boy,  this  is  hard  for  you,  isn't  it  ? "  He  did  not  answer  for  a  moment ; 
then  he  said,  "  I  don't  know  that  I  ought  to  say  '  hard' ;  God  knows  best";  but  his 
lips  quivered,  and  a  little  tear  stole  down  his  cheek.  "  Yes,  my  child  ;  you  have  a 
kind  Saviour,  who  loves  you,  and  feels  for  you,  even  more  than  your  mother  does." 
"I  know  it,  sir,"  said  the  little  boy,  "  and  it  comforts  me."  "I  wish  Jesus  was 
here  to  cure  Frank,"  said  his  little  sister.  "  Well,"  said  I,  "  He  will  i  pen  the  eyes 
of  little  Frank's  soul  to  see  what  a  dear,  loving  Saviour  He  is.  He  will  show  him 
that  a  blind  heart  is  worse  than  blind  eyes  ;  and  He  will  help  him  to  see  and  enjoy 
heavenly  things  in  all  their  beauty,  and  this  will  make  him  a  thousand  times 
happier  than  many  children  who  have  the  use  of  their  bodily  eyes."  "  Still,  I  can't 
help  wishing  he  could  see,"  said  Lizzie.  "  I  dare  say ;  but  I  hope  you  don't  try  to 
make  Frank  discontented?  "  "Frank  isn't  discontented,"  said  Lizzie,  earnestly  ; 
"  he  loves  God.  And  love  makes  its  own  sunshine,  doesn't  it,  Frank?  "  "  I  don't 
feel  cross  about  it  now,"  said  the  poor  blind  boy,  meekly.  "I  pray,  and  think 
about  the  sweet  hymns  I  learned  in  Sabbath  Scbool,  and  I  sing,  and  sing,  and  then 
I  think  that  Jesus  is  with  me,  and  it  feels  light,  and — and — I  forget  that  I'm  blind 
at  all,"  and  a  sweet  light  played  over  his  pale  features  as  he  spoke.  That  was  the 
light  which  the  presence  of  Jesus  gives.  The  Tabernacle  taught  us  that  His 
presence  with  His  people  was  intendtd  to  be  an  enlightening  pi-esence.  {Richard 
Newton,  D.D.)  Christ  a  comforting  presence  : — Another  thing  that  the  Taber- 
nacle taught,  in  reference  to  Christ's  presence  with  His  people,  was  that  it  will  be 
a  cumforting  presence.  There  was  the  table  of  shewbread.  Tbis  was  a  table 
covered  over  with  gold,  and  on  which  twelve  fresh  loaves  of  bread  were  placed  every 
Sabbath  day.  It  was  intended  to  teach  the  Jews  what  God  teaches  us  in  that  sweet 
promise  which  says,  "  Bread  shall  be  given  him ;  his  waters  sball  be  sure  "  (Isa. 
xxxiii.  16).  This  table  of  shewbread  pointed  to  Jesus.  He  is  "  the  Uving  bread 
that  came  down  from  heaven ;  if  any  man  eat  of  this  bread  he  shall  live  for  ever  " 
(John  vi.  51).  And  we  know  how  bread  strengthens,  or  comforts,  men's  hearts.  And 
then  the  golden  altar  of  incense  taught  the  same  thing.  As  the  priest  burnt  the 
incense  on  this  altar,  the  perfume  rose  in  clouds  of  fragrant  smoke  that  filled  the 


30^  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxiv. 

Tabernacle.  This  fragrance  was  most  pleasing  and  refreshing.  And  the  meaning 
of  it  was,  that  when  we  love  and  serve  Jesus,  the  prayers  that  we  offer  to  God,  and 
the  work  that  we  do  for  Him,  are  just  as  pleasant  to  Him  as  the  fragrance  of 
this  incense  is  to  us.  How  much  comfort  there  is  in  this  thought !  And  then 
all  the  things  in  the  Tabernacle — the  brazen  altar  of  burnt-oliering,  the  laver,  the 
candlestick,  the  table  of  shewbread,  and  the  golden  altar  of  incense — were  intended 
to  lead  the  thoughts  of  those  who  worshipped  there  to  what  was  on  the  other  side 
of  the  veil  that  hung  down  in  the  Holy  Place.  There,  beyond  that  veil,  was  the 
most  Holy  Place.  In  it  was  the  ark,  with  the  glory  of  God  shining  brightly  upon 
it.  That  place  represented  heaven.  And  so,  when  we  see  the  Tabernacle  showing 
us  how  Jesus  was  to  be  with  His  people,  to  pardon  them,  and  to  purify  them,  and 
to  enlighten  them,  and  strengthen  them,  we  see  it  teaching  us  how  all  that  Jesus 
does  for  His  people  now  is  to  make  them  ready  for  heaven.  And  if  this  is  so,  we 
may  well  say  that  the  presence  of  Jesus  with  His  people  is  a  comforting  presence. 
We  have  just  had  an  illustration  of  one  point  of  our  subject  from  a  little  blind  boy. 
We  have  another  illustration  here  from  an  old  blind  woman.  She  lived  in  North 
Wales,  and  was  known  all  through  that  part  of  the  country  as  "  Blind  Mary." 
Wales  is  a  grand  old  country.  Mountains,  and  rocks,  and  lakes,  and  waterfalls  in 
every  variety  of  form  are  found  there.  Mary's  cottage  was  in  one  of  the  wildest 
parts  of  this  country.  Great  rocks  lay  scattered  around  on  every  side.  Ferns  and 
wild  flowers  peeped  out  from  under  them.  There  was  no  more  charming  view  in 
all  that  country  than  was  to  be  seen  in  front  of  Mary's  cottage.  One  beautiful 
summer  evening  she  was  sitting  there,  with  her  large  Bible  on  her  knee.  She  was 
spelling  out  its  meaning  as  her  fingers  went  slowly  over  the  raised  letters.  Just 
then  a  traveller  who  had  been  climbing  the  mountain  came  near.  With  the  usual 
quickness  of  the  blind  Mary  heard  his  footsteps,  and  asked  him  to  take  a  seat.  As 
he  did  so  she  pointed  out  to  him  the  most  interesting  views  in  the  landscape  before 
them.  He  looked  at  her  with  surprise,  and  said,  "  They  told  me  that  blind  Mary 
lived  up  here  ;  but  I  can  hardly  believe  that  you  are  blind.  You  seem  to  see  the 
mountains  and  lakes  as  well  as  I  do."  "  I  used  to  look  at  them  with  so  much 
pleasure  when  I  could  see,  that  I  know  all  about  them,  although  I  have  been  blind 
for  years."  "Doesn't  it  make  you  unhappy,  Mary,  to  think  that  you  can  never 
look  at  them  again?  "  The  blind  woman's  eyes  filled  with  tears,  as  she  answered, 
"  Don't  ask  me  that,  sir.  At  first  I  felt  almost  angry  with  God  for  afflicting  me 
so ;  but  now  I  can  bless  His  holy  name.  I  see  something  better,  sir,  than  rocks 
and  mountains.  I  see  Jesus,  my  Saviour,  and  the  thought  that  He  loves  me  makes 
me  happy.  Forgive  an  old  woman's  boldness,  sir.  You  tell  me  you  have  good 
eyesight,  and  that  you  can  see  yonder  lakes,  and  the  blue  mountains  beyond  ;  but, 
oh !  sir,  did  you  ever  see  that  wonderful  sight,  Jesus  Christ  laying  down  His  life 
for  you?"  The  traveller  looked  at  blind  Mary  with  great  interest,  and  said, 
"Mary,  I  am  afraid  I  have  not  thought  about  these  things  as  I  ought;  but  I 
promise  you  that  I  will  do  so ;  I  shall  never  forget  my  evening's  climb  up  these 
mountains,  and  what  you  have  said  to  me."  "God  bless  you,  sir!  But  what 
should  I,  a  poor  old  blind  woman,  do  without  my  Saviour  ?  I'm  never  alone,  for 
He  is  with  me.  I'm  not  afraid  to  die,  either,  because  He  has  waslied  away  my  sins 
in  His  blood ;  and  when  I  leave  these  mountains  and  lakes  I  shall  go,  I  know,  to  a 
better  country.  '  Mine  eyes  shall  see  the  King  in  His  beauty ;  they  shall  behold  the 
land  that  is  very  far  off.'  And  I  believe  I  shall  meet  you  there,  because  I  shall  ask  my 
Saviour  to  open  your  eyes,  that  you  may  see  yourself  first  as  a  sinner,  and  then  see 
Jesus  as  your  Eedeemer."  Certainly  the  presence  of  Jesus  was  a  comforting  presence 
to  poor  blind  Mary.  (Ibid.)  Take  fine  flour,  and  bake  twelve  cakes  thereof. — The 
sliewhread  as  typical  of  Christ : — Twelve  loaves  were  always  on  the  golden  table, 
answering  to  the  number  of  the  twelve  tribes ;  and  Christ  is  all-sufficient ;  His 
salvation  can  suffice  for  every  case ;  Christ  for  every  man — refused,  indeed,  and 
rejected  by  numbers,  but  sufficient  for  all.  They  were  fresh,  as  week  by  week  they 
were  placed  there ;  and  Christ  is  ever  the  same  gracious  Saviour,  and  His  salvation 
ever  he^h  and  ever  satisfying.  He  is  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost  all  who  come 
unto  God  by  Him.  He  is  "  the  continual  Bread."  At  all  times  His  words  apply — 
"I  am  the  Bread  of  Life,"  d'c.  The  shewbread  also  was  eaten  by  the  priests  in  the 
sanctuary  on  the  Sabbath.  And  here  we  may  discern  a  blessed  type  of  privilege 
and  communion ;  for  we  remember  that  all  true  believers  in  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
all  who  have  been  born  again  of  the  Spirit,  and  are  led  and  taught  by  the  Spirit, 
answer  to  these  privileged  priests.  All  true  believers  are  addressed  as  a  holy  priest- 
hood, whose  office  it  is  to  offer  up  spiritual  sacrifices  acceptable  to  God  by  Jesus 


CHAP.  XXIV.]  LEVITICUS.  305 

Christ,  as  a  royal  priesthood,  a  peculiar  people,  that  they  should  show  forth  the 
praises  of  Him  who  hath  called  them  out  of  darkness  into  His  marvellous  light.    The 
arrangement  of  the  Tabernacle  may  remind  us  that  such  have  come  to  this  com- 
munion with  God  by  blood.    They  have  passed,  in  the  Tabernacle  court,  the  brazen 
altar  of   burnt-offering,  that  which  told  of   atonement  through  the  propitiatory 
sacrifice  of  Jesus,  the  Lamb  of  God.     Tlirough  this  sacrifice  they  have  found 
pardon  and  acceptance.     They  have  been  cleansed  in  the  laver,  having  received 
the  washing  of  regeneration  and  renewing  of  the  Holy  Ghost ;  and  thus  they  reach 
the  Holy  Place,  where  they  may  have  sweet  communion  and  fellowship  with  God 
through  His  dear  Son,  may  feed  upon  Christ  the  living  Bread,  may  rejoice  in  the 
light  of  Christ,  and  in  the  prevailing  efficacy  of  His  intercession.     {J.  H.  HoJford, 
M.A.)       The  table  for  the  bread  of  faces  : — 1.  Here  remark,  (1)  Bread  is  the  staple  of 
life.     The  manna  is  called  "  bread  from  heaven."     In  the  present  case  the  bread  is 
made  of  fine  flour,  ground  between  the  millstones.    (2)  It  is  most  likely  unleavened, 
though  the  book  nowhere  affirms  this  expressly.     The  Passover  bread,  and  most, 
if  not  all  else  offered  unto  the  Lord,  was  unleavened  (ehaps.  ii.  5-11  ;  vi.  14-17). 
(3)  It  remained  on  the  table  from  one  Sabbath  until  the  next ;   even  on  their 
journeys  it  was  not  omitted  (see  Numb.  iv.  7).     Therefore  is  it  called  shewbread — 
bread  of  faces — bread  continually  before  faces  of  the  Lord.     This  renders  it  the 
more  likely  to  be  unleavened  ;  for  in  that  climate  where  the  manna  remaining 
overnight  spoiled,  leavened  bread  a  week  old  would  be  sour.     (4)  The  frankincense 
was  probably  placed  in  some  of  the  dishes  provided,  and  was  removed  and  burnt 
in  the  censers  or  on  the  incense  altar  on  the  Sabbath.     2.  Let  us  inquire  into  the 
typical  meaning  of  the  table,  its  furniture,  and  its  contents.     In  general  it  exhibits 
Messiah  as  the  Bread  of  God,  that  comes  down  from  heaven  and  sustains  the  life 
of  the  Cliurch  (John  vi.  35-39).     But  particularly,  (1)  The  wood  and  the  gold,  as 
throughout,  symbolise  the  human  and  the  Divine  natures  in  the  person  of  Christ. 
(2)  The  sufferings  of  the  Saviour  may  be  alluded  to  in  the  grinding  of  tbe  flour 
and  the  action  of   the  fire  in  baking.     (3)  The   twelve   cakes  or  loaves    are   the 
twelve  tribes  of  Israel,  for  each  and  all  of  whom  bread  was  provided.     (4)  The 
frankincense,  when  offered,  expresses  prayers  and  thanksgivings  of  the  Church. 
(5)  The  continual  presence  of  the  bread  is  a  guarantee  that  spiritual  food  shall  never 
fail,  but  a  store  is  perpetually  on  hand.     (6)  The  exchange  of  the  bread  and  the 
priests  eating  it  in  the  Holy  Place  on  the  Sabbath  sets  forth  clearly  and  forcibly  tliat 
abundant  provision  of  spiritual  food  and  nourishment  which  the  Lord's  day  always 
brings  with  it  to  the  people  of  His  love.    (7)  Its  exclusive  appropriation  to  the  priests 
intimates  the  limited  privileges  of  the  people,  and  prepares  for  the  contrast  of  a 
later  day,  when  they  become  elevated  as  kings  and  priests  unto  God.     (8)  The 
unleavened  bread  indicates  the  absence  of  any  process  of  decay.     Leaven  is  the 
first  step  towards  dissolution,  and  its  prohibition  assuredly  intimates  the  absence  of 
all  tendency  to  corruption  in  the  Redeemer,  who,  even  in  a  physical  sense,  saw  no 
corruption.    Does  not  this  teach  that  in  the  sacramental  supper  we  ought  not  to  use 
leavened  bread,  bread  in  the  first  stage  toward  utter  putrefaction  ?     Moreover,  the 
other  idea,  suggested  by  tbe  unleavened  bread  of  the  Passover  as  an  indication  of 
being  hastily  driven  out  on  a  pilgrimage  journey,  is  still  applicable  :  we  are  tra- 
velling through  a  strange  land  toward  the  heavenly  Canaan.     {George  Junkin,  D.D.) 
Christ  the   true  Presence  Bread  : — Christ  Jesus  is  the  True  Presence  Bread.     On 
Him  the  eye  of  Jehovah  ever  looks  with  infinite  complacency.     He  is  the  "  Bread 
of  God."     "All  that  God  is,  finds  sweet  refreshment  in  Him."     We,  too,  by  faith, 
see  Him,  and  in  Him  are  seen.     His  place  is  ours.     We  are  made  to  sit  together 
with  Him  in  heavenly  places.     Where  He  is  there,  representatively,  are  we.     His 
perfect  obedience,  too,  is  ours.     What  He  is,  that  are  we.     Christ,  too,  is  our  Staff 
of  Life.     He  who  is  the  Bread  of  God  is  our  Bread  also.     Tlie  Bread  of  our  life. 
By  faith  we  eat  His  flesh,  and  drink  His  blood.     He   is   the   true,    the  proper 
nourishment  of  our  souls.     We  live  only  as  we  feed  upon  Him.     It  was  not  lawful 
for  any  of  the  priests  to  eat  of   the  shewbread  of  the  Tabernacle  (Matt.  xii.  4). 
Under  the  new  covenant  the  priesthood  includes  every  believer.     All,  who  by  faith 
are  born  unto  the  Israel  of  God,  may  eat  of  the  True  Shewbread.     God  has  spread 
a  table  in  the  wilderness  of  which  all  His  people  are  called  to  be  partakers.     He 
Himself  invites  them  to  feast  upon  its  rich   provison.      He  says,   "  Eat,  O   My 
friends,  yea,  drink  abundantly."     {F.  H.  White).         The  table  and  sheiobread  typical 
of  Christ  and  His  Church : — I.  The  mystery  or  the  gospel  of  the  table,  upon 
which  this  bread  was  set  every  Sabbath,  and  there  continued  all  the  week,  until  a 
fresh  set  of  loaves  were  placed  in  their  room.     This  table  was  a  type  of  our  Lord 

20 


306  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxiv. 

Jesus  Christ,  and  of  communion  with  Him,  in  the  administration  of  the  Word  and 
ordinances.     It  was  typical  of  tlie  person  of  Clirist,  in  both  His  natures  :  for  there 
are  two  natures  in  Him,  human  and  Divine.     The  human  nature  of  Christ  may  be 
signified  by  the  wood  of  which  this  table  was  made,  and  His  Divine  nature  by  the 
gold  it  was  overlaid  with.     And  this  shewbread  table  was  not  only  typical  of  Christ, 
as  to  the  matter  of  it ;  being  made  of  such  excellent,  incorruptible  wood,  and  that 
overlaid  with  pure  gold;  but  also  with  respect  to  the  decorations  of  it.     It  had  a 
crown  of  gold  upon  it,  which  may  be  expressive  of  that  honour  and  glory  which  is 
due  to  Christ,  and  is  given  unto  Him  as  the  King  of  kings  and  Lord  of  lords.     The 
border  of  gold,  with  the  crown  upon  it,    about  this  table  of   shewbrend,  is  also 
significant  of  what  may  be  observed  in  Christ.     For  as  this  phrase,  when  applied 
to  the  Church  of  Christ,  where  it  is  said,  "  We  will  make  tbee borders  of  gold,  with 
studs  of  silver  "  (Song  of  Sol.  iii.  11),  may  denote  the  graces  of  the  Spirit  of  God 
bestowed  upon  His  people,  which  is  as  ornamental  to  them  as  borders  of  gold  and 
studs  of  silver ;  so  this,  being  applied  to  Christ,  may  denote  that  fulness  of  grace 
that  there  is  in  Him.     He  is  full  of  grace  and  truth.     He  hath  received  the  Spirit, 
and  the  gifts  and  graces  thereof  without  measure.     Thus  this  table  was  typical 
of   the  person   of   Christ.     It   may  also  be  considered  as   typical  of  communion 
with  Him.     A  table  among  men  is  an  emblem  of  communion  and  fellowship.     Here 
men  sit,  eat,  drink,  and  converse  together  :  and  this  shewbread  table  is  an  emblem 
of  the  saints'  communion  with  Christ,  in  the  present  state  more  especially.     There 
is  the  table  of  the  Lord,  to  which  His  people  are  now  admitted,  where  He  sits  down 
with  them,  and  they  with  Him,  to  have  fellowship  with  Him  in  the  ministration  of 
the  Word  and  ordinances,  of  which  He  is  the  sum  and  substance.   Before  I  dismiss 
this  head,  give  me  leave  to  observe  unto  you  that  there  were  rings  upon  the  shew- 
bread table,  and  staves  to  be  put  in  these  rings,  which  were  for  the  removing  and 
carrying  it  from  place  to  place,  and  which  was  done  by  the  Levites,  when  it  was 
necessary  ;  as  while  they  were  in  the  wilderness,  and  before  the  Tabernacle  had  a 
fixed  place  for  it.     For  wherever  the  Tabernacle  was  carried,  the  ark  and  tbe  table 
were  also.   II.  I  proceed  in  the  second  place  to  give  you  some  account  of  the  gospel, 
and  the  mystery  of  the  shewbread  set  upon  his  table.     This  may  be  considered  as 
typical  of  the  Church  of  God,  who  are  called  bread.    "  We  being  many,  are  one  bread, 
and  one  body  "  (1  Cor.  x.  17).     They  are  all  one  bread  ;  and  they  may  be  fitly 
signified  by  the  shewbread,  by  these  twelve  cakes  of  unleavened  bread,  set  continu- 
ally upon  the  table  every   Sabbath-day.      As  they   were  made  of  fine  flour,  and 
into  unleavened  cakes,  so  they  may  denote  those  that  are  upright  in  heart  and 
conversation.     Israelites,  indeed,  who  have  the  truth  of  grace  in  them ;  who  are 
such  as  keep  the  feast,  not  with  tbe  leaven  of  malice  and  wickedness,  but  with  the 
unleavened  bread  of  sincerity  and  truth.     The  twelve  cakes  had  reference  to  the 
twelve  tribes  of  Israel ;  so  these  may  signify  the  whole  of  the  spiritual  Israel  of 
God,  whether  consisting  of  Jews  or  Gentiles ;    even    that  general  assembly  and 
Church  of  the  first-born,  whose  names  are  written  in  heaven.     In  the  original  text 
it  is  "the  bread  of  faces  "  ;  because  this  bread  was  always  before  the  face  or  faces 
of  God,  before  all  the  Three  Divine  Persons  in  the  Trinity;  before  God  the  Father, 
Son,  and  Spirit;  before  Jehovah,  before  the  Divine  Shechinah,  which  dwelt  between 
the  cherubim,  over  the  mercy-seat  of  the  ark,  a  symbol  of  the  Divine  presence. 
It  was  continually  before  the  Lord,  as  our  text  expresses  it ;  and  this  may  denote 
the  people  of  God's  constant  and  continual  presentation  of  themselves  before  the 
Lord  in  acts  of  public  and  religious  worship.     But  it  may  still  have  a  higher  sense 
than  this  ;  it  may  have  respect  unto  these  persons,  being  always  under  the  eye  and 
care  of  God.     Not  only   are   the  eyes  of   His  providence  upon  them  which  run 
to  and  fro  throughout  the  whole  earth,  to  show  Himself  strong  in  the  behalf  of 
those  whose  hearts  are  upright  towards  Him,  to  see  that  no  hurt  comes  to  them, 
that  they  stand  in  need  of  nothing,  and  to  protect,  preserve,  and  defend  them  ;  but 
His  eyes  of  love,  grace  and  mercy  are  always  upon  them.     He  never  withdraws 
His  eyes  from  them.     Again,  this  shewbread,  and  the  twelve  loaves  thereof,  were 
placed  upon  the  table,   where  they  stood  firm  and  safe.     This  may  denote  the 
standing  and  security  of  the  saints  and  people  of  God  upon  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ, 
that  sure  foundation  God  has  laid  in  Sion :  that  foundation  of  the  apostles  and 
prophets.     Here  they  have  a  sure  and  safe  standing,  as  on  a  rock — the  Kock  of 
Ages — against  which  the  powers  of  hell  and  earth  can  never  prevail.   And  as  about 
this  shewbread  table  there  was  a  border  of  gold,  to  keep  everything  put  upon  it 
from  falling  off,  this  may  still  further  point  out  unto  us  the  safety  of  the  people  of 
God,  who  are  set  upon  the  shewbread  table,  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.     And  then  you 


•CHAP.  XXIV.]  LEVITICUS.  307 

may  further  observe,  this  shewbread  was  placed  upon  the  table  every  Sabbath-day  ; 
there  was  a  constant  succession  ;  the  table  was  never  empty.  This  may  denote  the 
constancy  of  true  believers,  that  have  the  interest  of  Christ  at  heart,  in  assembling 
continually  before  the  Lord.  Not  forsaking  the  assembling  of  themselves  to- 
gether, but,  like  the  primitive  Christians,  continuing  steadfastly  in  the  apostles' 
doctrine,  and  in  fellowship,  and  in  breaking  of  bread,  and  in  prayers.  Or,  rather, 
it  may  denote  the  constant  succession  of  the  children  and  people  of  God  in  the 
world.  This  shewbread,  set  upon  the  table,  may  also  be  emblematical  of  Christ 
Himself ;  and  that  as  He  is  the  spiritual  food  of  His  people.  And  there  being 
twelve  of  these  loaves  upon  the  table,  may  denote  the  fulness  and  sufficiency  of 
Christ.  Here  is  bread  enough  and  to  spare.  And  as  this  bread  was  continual 
bread,  was  always  upon  the  table,  so  it  may  denote  the  permanency  of  Christ.  He 
is  always  the  same — the  same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever.  And  as  this  was  set 
«pon  the  table  by  the  priests,  and  only  by  them,  and  none  ate  of  this  bread  but  the 
priests  only,  Aaron  and  his  sons  (who  may  be  significant  of  the  ministers  of  the 
Word,  or  of  Christians  in  common  under  the  gospel  dispensation) ;  if  we  understand 
It  of  the  ministers  of  the  Word,  it  points  out  that  they  set  before  the  people  the 
shewbread,  even  the  wholesome  and  salutary  words  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and 
feed  the  people  with  knowledge  and  understanding.  But  if  we  understand  it  (as 
I  rather  do)  as  expressive  of  the  people  of  God  in  common,  who  under  the  prsp^l 
dispensation  are  all  made  kings  and  priests  to  God,  it  denotes  that  these,  and  these 
only,  eat  of  this  spiritual  food.  None  but  they  do  it ;  none  but  they  can  do  it. 
{John  Gill,  D.D.) 

Vers.  10-16.  Blasphemed  the  name  of  the  Lord.— Blaspheming  agamst  God's  holy 
name  : — "  Swearing  is  a  sin  that  hath  more  malignancy  in  it  against  God,  by  how 
much  the  less  is  the  temptation  to  it,"  says  Burroughs  ;  and  adds,  "  I  verily  believe 
that  if  God  had  never  made  the  Third  Commandment,  there  could  never  have  been 
so  many  oaths  in  the  world  ;  but  it  springs  from  a  mere  malignancy  of  spirit  in 
man  against  God  because  He  has  forbidden,  for  no  profit  can  arise  from  the 
practice."  Yet,  while  "  no  profit "  comes  to  the  blasphemer,  great  ill  and  grief 
are  thereby  caused  to  others.  I.  The  histokig  interest  of  this  incident.  This 
act  of  blasphemy,  and  the  judgment  which  it  called  forth  on  the  sinner  —  ]. 
Brought  out  clearly  that  the  name  of  the  Lord  was  Israel's  most  solemn  trust.  2. 
Introduced  the  significant  custom  of  avoiding  the  very  use  of  the  name  of  the 
Lord.  Certainly  this  may  admonish  us  asainst  an  undue  freeness  in  the  use  of  the 
august  name  either  in  pious  speech  or  effusive  prayer.  II.  The  heinous  quality 
OF  TiTE  CKiME.  1.  The  Clime  defined.  Blasphemy  is  calumny  and  insult  against 
the  holy  God,  uttered  with  the  intention  to  defame  Him.  It  not  only  expresses  the 
hatred  of  Him  in  the  speaker's  own  heart,  but  aims  at  awakening  in  his  hearer's 
mind  an  equal  loathing  of  Jehovah  and  all  His  claims.  It  is  held  up  in  Scripture 
■as  an  assault  upon  the  dignity  and  sanctity  of  God's  name  (Psa.  Ixxiv.  18 ;  Isa. 
lii.  5  ;  Eom.  ii.  24).  2.  The  root  of  the  sin.  This  must  be  traced  to  the  vileness 
of  the  human  heart,  and  its  natural  enmity  to  God  {cf.  Matt.  xv.  19).  It  should  be 
noticed  also  as  being  the  outgrowth  of  folly  and  pride  (see  2  Kings  xix.  22 ;  Psa. 
Ixxiv.  18).  Of  all  sins,  blasphemy  is  an  indication  of  a  mind  mad  with  impiety. 
3.  Its  great  oiJensiveness  to  God  and  man.  How  hateful  to  God  is  evident  from 
the  penalties  inflicted  (see  v.  16  and  cf.  Isa.  Ixv.  7  ;  Ezek.  xx.  27-32  ;  xxxv.  11, 12 ; 
Matt.  xii.  31,  32),  how  hurtful  to  man  is  manifest  from  Psa.  xliv.  15,  16;  Ixxiv.  10, 
18,  22.  They  who  revere  "  this  glorious  and  fearful  name,  The  Lord  thy  God  " 
(Deut.  xxviii.  58)  are  distressed  at  its  profanation.  Louis  IX.  of  France  branded 
swearers'  lips  with  a  hot  iron  for  this  offence,  and  when  some  complained  that  the 
punishment  was  too  severe,  he  replied,  "  I  could  wish  that  by  searing  my  own  lips 
I  could  banish  all  profanity  from  my  realm."  III.  Facts  explanatory  of  such 
BLASPHEMOUS  SPEECH.  The  siu  of  profanity  points  to — 1.  An  ungoverned  tongue. 
2.  Passionate  contention  and  strife.  3.  An  unsanctified  heart.  (W.  H.  Jellie.) 
Slaying  the  blasphemer : — I.  The  evil  resulting  from  connection  with  the  ungodly, 
*'  whose  father  was  an  Egyptian  " — said  by  the  Eabbins  to  be  the  man  whom  Moses 
killed.  II.  The  danger  arising  from  indulgence  in  passionate  anger  :  "  strove  "  ; 
the  blasphemy  was  uttered  in  a  quarrelsome  passion.  III.  The  blasphemy  which,  in 
this  case,  resulted  from  such  indulgence.  "  Cursed  "  the  holy  name  of  Jehovah  ; 
■which,  the  Israelites  claimed,  belonged  to  none  but  Israelites.  IV.  The  punishment 
"WHICH  all  like  sin  merits.  {W.  Wayland,  B.A.)  Stoning  the  blasphemer: — I. 
His  person.    He  is  said  to  be  the  son  of  an  Egyptian  by  an  Israelitish  woman. 


308  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxiv. 

His  father  was  one  of  that  mixed  multitude  which  came  out  of  Egypt  with  Israel 
(Exod.  xii.  38),  whom  this  woman  married  as  many  other  women  tlien  married 
Egyptian  men,  to  decline  their  rage  and  fury.  For  at  that  time  tlie  law  prohibiting 
marriages  with  the  heathen  was  not  given  them,  and  some  charitably  say  he  was  a 
seeming  proselyte ;  it  is  more  probable  that  as  his  mother  taught  him  to  speak  so 
his  father  taught  this  his  son  to  blaspheme.  II.  The  occasion.  He  was  of  a 
quarrelsome,  boisterous,  and  passionate  temper,  which  demonstrates  the  danger  of 
mixed  marriages.  For  children,  like  the  conclusion  of  a  syllogism,  follow  the 
worst  part.  III.  His  heinods  action.  He  both  blasphemed  and  cursed.  In  the 
heat  and  height  of  contention,  what  will  not  graceless  persons  both  say  and  do  ? 
If  this  man  was  drunk,  it  was  with  frenzy,  which  made  him  belch  forth 
blasphemies  and  horrid  execrations  out  of  his  black  mouth,  and  blacker  gipsy 
heart.  1.  He  blasphemed  ("Nakab,"  Hebrew  signifies  "perforate,"  to  bore  through). 
Thus  blasphemers  do  pierce  and  strike  through  the  sacred  and  tremendous  name 
of  God.  Such  diabolical  wretches  would  both  "bore"  His  name  and  "  gore  "  His 
person  if  they  could.  2.  He  cursed  ("Kalal,"  Hebrew  signifies  "  leviter  de  aliquo 
loqui,"  to  vilify  and  scoff  at).  Thus  he  set  at  naught  the  God  of  Israel,  against 
whom,  it  seems,  his  quarrel  was  (saith  Jerome)  more  than  against  that  Israelite 
he  quarrelled  with.  Thus  he  (like  those  three  unnatural  sons,  that  tried  their 
archery  which  could  shoot  nearest  their  father's  heart)  shot  his  arrows  at  God  and 
cursed  himseK.  Cursing  men  are  cursed  men ;  such  dogs  come  not  into  heaven 
by  barking  (1  Cor.  vi.  9,  &c. ;  Kev.  xxii.  15).  IV.  The  cikcumstances  of  his 
SUFFERING.  As — 1.  He  was  apprehended  as  a  grand  malefactor,  even  against  God 
Himself ;  impeaching  the  Divine  honour  by  blasphemy  and  cursing  out  of  a  deep 
intestine  malignity.  2.  This  capital  offender  is  carried  away  to  Moses,  the  chief 
magistrate,  who  soon  committed  him  to  custody,  and  probably  confined  him  with 
chains  and  fetters  ;  for  it  is  improbable  there  could  properly  be  any  strong  prisons 
in  the  wilderness,  where  they  lived  only  in  tents.  Though  Moses  might  have  put 
him  to  death  by  virtue  of  that  law  against  cursing  father,  &c.  (Exod.  xxi.  17),  but 
the  crime  being  very  heinous  against  God  Himself,  as  he  used  to  do  in  other 
arduous  cases,  so  in  this  he  consults  with  God  for  a  condign  punishment.  3. 
God,  the  judge  of  all  the  earth,  denounces  his  doom,  "  He  shall  be  stoned  "  :  a 
punishment  answerable  to  his  stony  heart.  Let  those  that  teach  their  tongues  to 
lie,  swear,  curse,  and  blaspheme  by  a  daily  custom,  consider  this  severe  sentence  of 
Gud,  and  what  danger  hangeth  over  their  heads  every  day.  4.  The  people  stone 
him,  for — 1.  It  was  a  common  quarrel  to  vindicate  the  contempt  cast  upon  their 
common  Benefactor,  from  whom  they  had  their  being  and  well-being.  2.  That  by 
executing  this  severity,  they  might  be  cautioned  from  committing  the  like  abomin- 
able crime.  Thus  the  reason  is  rendered,  "  That  all  Israel  may  fear  "  (Deut.  xiii. 
11).  And — 3.  This  was  a  means  to  pacify  God,  by  putting  away  that  evil  (both 
person  and  thing)  from  among  them  ;  whereas  His  anger  would  have  been  incensed 
against  them,  had  they  permitted  the  blasphemer  to  pass  unpunished.  And 
whereas  God  had  not  as  yet  made  a  particular  law  against  blavphemy ;  now  upon 
this  particular  occasion  a  general  law  is  here  superadded  for  punishing  blas- 
phemers in  all  succeeding  ages  (vers.  15,  16).  And  God  ordained  also,  that 
the  witnesses  who  heard  him  blaspheme  should  lay  their  hands  upon  his  head 
when  he  was  to  be  stoned.  1.  To  confirm  their  testimony  and  the  truth  of  it,  that 
they  did  not,  by  slander,  take  away  his  innocency,  nor,  by  murder,  his  life.  2. 
That  his  blood  might  be  upon  his  own  head,  and  that  they  were  not  guilty  of  his 
sin.  If  so — 3.  It  was  a  kind  of  imprecation,  that  they  might  suffer  the  same 
severity  (so  Deut.  xvii.  7,  12  ;  xix.  20,  &c.,  shows).  4.  This  sacrifice  of  justice 
expiates  wrath  from  the  survivors.  (C.Ness.)  "  The  name" : — It  is  striking  to 
notice  that  in  the  Hebrew  text  it  is  only  said  that  he  blasphemed  "  The  name  "  ; 
what  that  was  being  left  unwritten.  On  this  omis.sion  the  later  Jews  grounded 
their  prohibition  of  the  use  of  the  word  Jehovah,  under  almost  any  circumstances. 
"  Those  who  utter  the  name  of  God  according  to  its  sound,"  says  the  Talmud, 
"have  no  position  in  the  world  to  come."  The  priests  might  use  it  in  the  Temple 
services,  but  even  they  were  not  to  let  it  cross  their  lips  elsewhere.  In  the  Hebrew 
Bible  the  vowels  of  the  word  Adonai,  "Lord,"  are  placed  below  it,  and  in  the  Greek 
it  is  always  suppressed,  the  word  Kurios,  "  Lord,"  being  used  in  its  place  ;  a 
practice  followed  by  the  English  version.  Traces  of  this  aversion  to  utter  the 
Divine  name  occur  early  in  the  Old  Testament,  as  where  it  is  withheld  from  Jacob 
at  Peniel,  and  from  Maooah.  This  dread  of  using  the  special  name  of  the  Deity 
characterised  antiquity  from  the  earliest  ages,  through  the  belief  that  it  expressed 


CHAP.  XXV.]  LEVITICUS.  309 

the  awful  mysteries  of  the  Divine  es^sence,  and  was  too  holy  to  be  breathed.  Thus 
the  "  name  of  God  is  in  the  angel,"  who  was  to  lead  Israel  through  the  wilderness 
(Exod.  xxiii.  21),  and  the  Temple  was  to  be  built  for  "  the  name  "  (2  Sam.  vii.  13), 
but  in  neither  case  is  it  given.  Such  reverence,  just  in  itself,  early  led,  however, 
to  many  superstitions.  The  knowledge  of  the  secret  name  of  any  god  or  angel  was 
thought  to  convey,  to  him  who  knew  it,  the  control  of  their  supernatural  powers. 
He  who  discovered  the  hidden  name  of  the  god  Ea,  of  the  Accadians,  became  in- 
vested with  attributes  higher  than  those  of  the  gods.  The  name,  in  fact,  was 
regarded  as  a  personification  of  its  owner,  with  which  was  indissolubly  connected 
the  possession  of  his  essential  characteristics.  Thus  the  Romans  used  the  word 
"  nuraen  "  for  a  divinity,  by  a  mere  play  on  the  word  "nomen,"  "a  name." 
Among  the  Egyptians  there  was  a  god  whose  name  it  was  unlawful  to  utter ;  and  it 
was  forbidden  to  name  or  to  speak  of  the  supreme  guardian  divinity  of  Rome. 
Even  to  mention  a  god's  name  in  taking  an  oath  was  deemed  irreverent.  In  the 
book  of  Henock  a  secret  magic  power  is  ascribed  to  the  Divine  name,  and  "  it  up- 
holds all  things  which  are."  Men  learned  it  through  the  craft  of  the  evil  angel, 
Kesbeel,  who  in  heaven,  before  he  was  cast  out,  gained  it  by  craft  from  Michael,  its 
original  guardian.  Nor  did  the  ancient  world,  alone,  regard  a  name  as  thus  potent. 
The  Scandinavians  firmly  believed  that  if  that  of  a  fighting  warrior  were  spoken 
out  loud,  his  strength  would  immediately  depart  from  him,  for  his  name  was  his 
very  essence.  At  this  day,  moreover,  the  true  name  of  the  Emperor  of  China  is 
kept  a  profound  secret,  never  to  be  uttered — perhaps  to  impress  his  subjects  with 
his  unapproachable  elevation  above  common  mortals.  (C.  Geikie,  D.D.)  The  sin 
€f  profanity  : — There  is  not  a  sin  in  all  the  catalogue  that  is  so  often  peremptorily 
and  suddenly  punished  in  this  world  as  the  sin  of  profanity.  There  is  not  a  city 
or  a  village  but  can  give  an  illustration  of  a  man  struck  down  at  the  moment  of 
inprecation.  At  New  Brunswick,  U.S.,  just  before  I  went  there  as  a  student,  this 
occurrence  took  place  in  front  of  the  college.  On  the  rail-track  a  man  had  uttered 
a  horrible  oath.  He  saw  not  that  the  rail-train  was  coming.  The  locomotive 
struck  him  and  instantly  dashed  his  life  out.  The  peculiarity  of  the  circumstance 
was  that  the  physicians  examining  his  body  found  hardly  a  bruise,  except  that  his 
tongue  was  cut  out !  There  was  no  mystery  about  it.  Ha  cursed  God  and  died.  In 
Scotland  a  club  assembled  every  week  for  purposes  of  wickedness,  and  there  was  a 
competition  as  to  which  could  use  the  most  profane  oath,  and  the  man  who  suc- 
ceeded was  to  be  president  of  the  club.  The  competition  went  on.  A  man  uttered 
an  oath  which  confounded  all  his  comrades,  and  he  was  made  president  of  the  club. 
His  tongue  began  to  swell,  and  it  protruded  from  the  mouth,  and  he  could  not 
draw  it  in,  and  he  died,  and  the  physicians  said,  "  This  is  the  strangest  thing  we 
ever  saw  :  we  never  saw  any  account  in  the  books  like  unto  it :  we  cannot  under- 
stand it."  I  understand  it.  He  cursed  God  and  died.  At  Catskill,  N.Y.,  a  group 
of  men  stood  in  a  blacksmith's  shop  during  a  violent  thunderstorm.  There  came 
a  crash  of  thunder  and  some  of  the  men  trembled.  One  man  said,  "  Why,  I  don't 
see  what  you  are  afraid  of.  I  am  not  afraid  to  go  out  in  front  of  the  shop  and  defy 
the  Almighty.  I  am  not  afraid  of  the  lightning."  And  he  laid  a  wager  on  the 
subject,  and  he  went  out  and  shook  his  fist  at  the  heavens,  crying,  "  Strike,  if  you 
dare  1  "  and  instantly  he  fell  under  a  bolt.  What  destroyed  him  ?  Any  mystery 
about  it  ?  Oh,  no  ;  he  cursed  God  and  died.  Oh,  my  brother,  God  will  not  allow 
this  sin  to  go  unpunished.  There  are  styles  of  writing  with  manifold  sheets,  so 
that  a  man  writing  on  one  leaf  writes  clear  through  ten,  fifteen,  or  twenty  sheets ; 
and  so  every  profanity  we  utter  goes  right  down  through  the  leaves  of  the  book  of 
God's  remembrance.     (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.) 


CHAPTER  XXV. 


Veks.2-55.  a  Sabbath  of  rest  unto  the  land. — The  sabbatic  year  and  jubilee  : — 
1.  I  do  not  suppose  that  these  sabbatic  regulations  referred  severally  to  separate 
and  distinct  things.  The  seventh  day,  the  seventh  month,  the  seventh  year,  and 
the  year  of  jubilee,  as  I  take  them,  all  express  the  same  great  thought,  and  are 
related  to  each  other  in  signification  as  the  difierent  sections  of  a  telescope.  They 
fold  into  each  other.     The  one  is  only  a  repetition  of  the  other  on  a  larger  scale. 


310  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxv. 

And  they  all  range  in  the  same  line  to  give  a  focus  for  gazing  the  further  into  the 
depths  andminuter  details  of  one  and  the  same  scene.  We  have  sabbaths  of  days,  and 
sabbaths  of  months,  and  sabbaths  of  years,  and  septenaries  of  years,  all  multiplied 
in  each  other  with  augmenting  interest,  to  indicate  tlje  approach  of  some  one  great 
seventh  of  time  when  all  God's  gracious  dealings  with  man  shall  come  to  their 
culmination,  and  to  point  the  eye  of  hope  to  some  one  grand  ultimate  sabbath,  in 
which  the  weary  world  shall  repose  from  its  long  turmoil  and  all  its  inhabitants 
keep  jubilee.  2.  The  word  "  Jubilee "  is  of  doubtful  origin  and  signification. 
Some  derive  it  from  a  verb  which  means  to  recall,  restore,  bring  back  ;  which  would 
very  appropriately  designate  an  arrangement  which  recalled  the  absent,  restored 
the  captive,  and  brouglit  back  alienated  estates.  Some  trace  it  to  Jubal,  the 
inventor  of  musical  instruments,  and  suppose  that  this  year  was  named  after  him 
from  its  being  a  year  of  mirth  and  joy,  of  which  music  is  a  common  attendant  and 
expression.  Our  English  word  "jovial"  may  perhaps  be  traceable  to  this  origin. 
Others  think  it  a  word  meant  to  denote  the  extraoidinary  souuding  of  trumpets 
with  which  this  particular  year  was  always  introduced,  some  making  it  refer  tO' 
the  kind  of  instruments  used,  and  others  to  the  particular  kind  of  note  produced. 
But,  after  all,  it  may  have  been  a  name  invented  for  the  occasion,  and  intended  to 
carry  its  meaning  in  its  sound,  or  to  get  it  from  the  nature  of  the  period  which  it 
was  thenceforward  to  designate.  It  is  a  word  which,  if  not  in  sound,  yet  in  its 
associations,  connects  with  the  sublimest  joys,  ushered  in  with  thrilling  and 
triumphant  proclamations.  I.  First  of  all,  it  is  to  be  a  Sabbath — a  consecrated 
and  holy  rest.  The  year  of  jubilee  was  the  intensest  and  sublimest  of  the  sabbatic 
periods.  The  Sabbath  is  the  jewel  of  days.  It  is  the  marked  and  hallowed  seventh^ 
in  which  God  saw  creation  finished,  and  the  great  Maker  sat  down  complacently  to 
view  the  admirable  products  of  His  wisdom,  love,  and  power — blessed  type  of  a  still 
more  blessed  rest,  when  He  shall  sit  down  to  view  redemption  finished,  the  years 
brought  to  their  perfect  consummation,  and  the  life  of  the  world  in  its  full  and 
peaceful  bloom.  The  jubilee  is  therefore  to  be  the  crown  of  dispensations,  and  the 
ultimate  glory  of  the  ages,  when  the  Son  of  God  shall  rest  from  the  long  work  of 
the  new  creation,  and  sit  down  with  His  saints  to  enjoy  it  for  ever  and  ever.  II.  In 
the  next  place  it  is  to  be  the  period  of  eestitution.  Everything  seemed  to  go  back 
to  the  happy  condition  in  which  God  had  originally  arranged  things.  Man,  in  this 
present  world,  is  a  dispossessed  proprietor.  God  gave  him  possessions  and  pre- 
rogatives which  have  been  wrested  from  him.  God  made  him  but  a  little  lower 
than  the  angels,  crowned  him  with  glory  and  honour,  and  set  him  over  the  works 
of  His  hands.  All  creaiures  were  given  to  him  for  his  service,  and  he  was  to  "  have 
dominion  over  every  living  thing  that  moveth  upon  the  earth."  But  where  is  all 
that  glory  and  dominion  now  ?  How  has  the  gold  faded  and  the  power  waned  t 
How  much  are  we  now  at  the  mercy  of  what  was  meant  to  serve  and  obey  us ! 
Gone,  are  our  once  glorious  estates.  Gone,  the  high  freedom  which  once  encompassed 
man.  Gone,  all  the  sublime  dignity  which  once  crowned  him.  But  we  shall  not 
always  remain  in  this  poverty  and  disgrace.  Those  old  estates  have  not  gone  from 
us  for  ever.  When  the  great  joyous  trump  of  jubilee  shall  sound,  the  homesteads 
of  our  fathers  shall  return  to  us  again,  nor  strangers  more  traverse  those  patri- 
monial halls.  III.  Again,  it  shall  be  a  tkie  of  release  foe  all  that  aue  oppbessed, 
iMPKisoNED,  OB  BOUND.  The  year  of  jubilee  struck  off  the  bonds  of  every  Jewish 
captive,  and  threw  open  the  prison  doors  to  all  who  had  lost  their  liberty.  We  are 
all  prisoners  now.  Though  the  chains  of  sin  be  broken,  the  chains  of  flesh  and 
remaining  corruption  still  confine  us  and  abridge  our  fi-eedom.  Even  those  pious 
ones  who  have  passed  away  from  earth  are  still  held  in  the  power  of  death.  Their 
souls  may  be  at  rest,  but  their  bodies  are  stiU  shut  up  in  the  pit  of  the  grave. 
There  still  is  groaning  and  "  waiting  for  the  adoption,  to  wit,  the  redemption  of  our 
body."  But  when  the  great  trump  of  jubilee  shall  sound  these  groanings  shall 
cease  and  these  fetters  all  dissolve.     IV.  Another  feature  of  that  happy  time  is, 

THAT  IT  SHALL  BE    A    TIME  OF  BKGATHERING  FOR   THE  SCATTERED  HOUSEHOLD.       It  is  DOt 

possible  in  this  world  for  families  to  keep  together.  A  thousand  necessities  ai'e 
ever  pressing  upon  us  to  scatter  us  out  from  our  homes.  The  common  wants  of 
life,  to  say  nothing  of  aims  and  enterprises  for  good,  honour,  or  distinction,  operate 
to  drive  asunder  the  most  tenderly  attached  of  households.  And  if  we  should  even 
succeed  in  overcoming  dividing  forces  of  this  kind,  there  are  others  which  do  their 
work  in  a  way  which  we  cannot  hinder.  Death  comes,  and,  one  by  one,  the  whole 
circle  is  mowed  down,  and  sleep  in  separate  graves,  mostly  far  apart.  But  there 
Cometh  a  day  when  all  the  households  of  the  virtuous  and  good  shall  be  compete. 


cnAP.  XXV.]  LEVITICUS.  311 

The  year  of  jubilee  shall  bring  back  the  absent  one.  For  when  the  Son  of  man 
shall  come,  "  He  shall  send  His  angels  with  a  great  sound  of  a  trumpet,  and  they 
shall  gather  together  His  elect  from  the  four  winds,  from  the  one  end  of  heaven 
to  the  other."  Not  one  shall  be  overlooked  or  forgotten.  V.  But  there  is  still 
another  feature  of  this  blessed  time  to  come  to  which  I  will  refer.  The  sounding  of 
that  trump  shall  be  the  summons  to  a  sacred  feast  tipon  the  stores  laid  up  by 
THE  INDUSTRY  OF  PRECEDING  YEARS.  Though  no  sowing  oT  gathering  was  to  be  done 
in  the  year  of  jubilee,  Israel  was  to  have  plenty.  The  bountiful  hand  of  Heaven 
was  to  supply  them.  Years  going  before  were  to  furnish  abundance  for  all  the 
period  of  rest.  The  Sabbath  of  the  land  was  to  be  meat  for  them.  Now  is  our 
harvest-time.  The  fields  are  waving  with  beautiful  golden  products  which  God 
means  that  we  shall  gather  and  store  for  our  jubilee.  Industry  and  toil  are 
required.  We  must  thrust  in  the  sickle,  and  gather  the  blessed  sheaves,  and  lay 
up  for  ourselves  treasures  in  heaven.  It  will  not  do  to  play  the  sluggard  while 
that  ripe  vintage  is  inviting  us  to  gather.  We  must  work  while  we  may,  and  la)' 
up  while  it  is  within  reach.  When  once  the  trumpet  sounds  it  will  be  too  late  to 
begin  to  lay  up  for  the  year  of  rest.  (J.  A.  S^'ins,  D.D.)  The  year  sahbath  : — 
The  great  year-sabbath  carried  with  it  many  important  advantages  and  benefits 
that  belonged  to  no  other  period ;  and  it  is  interesting  to  observe  how  accurately 
they  all  symbolised  the  blessings  conferred  by  the  redemptive  work  of  our  Emmanuel. 
I.  One  of  these  was  the  universal  extinction  of  debt.  Here  is  a  man  who 
has  inherited  from  his  ancestors  a  narrow  strip  of  land  on  the  rocky  slopes  of 
Mount  Ephraim.  He  cultivates  a  small  vineyard  on  the  hillside,  sows  a  few  patches 
of  wheat  and  barley,  and  has  a  few  cows  and  bullocks  grazing  in  his  little  meadow. 
With  health  and  good  seasons  he  could  supply  the  modest  wants  of  his  household, 
and  escape  the  necessity  of  debt.  But  calamities  have  befallen  him.  Under  tlie 
pressure  of  his  needs  he  has  been  compelled  to  contract  debt's,  hoping  that  more 
auspicious  days  would  enable  him  to  discharge  them.  But  those  days  come  not. 
His  creditors  grow  stern  and  exacting,  demand  immediate  payment,  and  threaten 
to  eject  him  from  his  herit>ige,  cast  him  into  prison,  and  sell  his  children  into 
slavery.  Still  he  struggles  on.  Yet,  toil  as  he  may,  he  cannot  master  the  difficulties 
that  environ  him.  The  encumbrance  is  too  heavy,  the  danger  too  near  and  too 
pressing.  But  just  as  he  is  on  the  point  of  giving  up  all  further  effort  and 
resigning  himself  to  despair,  the  morning  of  the  jubilee  breaks  over  the  land.  The 
joyful  acclamations  that  welcome  its  coming  swell  out  on  the  air  and  reach  him 
among  the  hills.  Blessed  sounds  are  they  to  him !  They  tell  him  that  his  trials 
are  ended,  his  home  secure ;  and  that,  by  the  benign  decree  of  Israel's  God,  he  may 
now  go  forth  to  his  daily  labour,  safe  from  the  peril  that  has  menaced  him  so  long. 
Go  with  me  to  the  debtor's  gaol  in  Jerusalem,  and  look  at  another  on  whom 
adversity  has  dealt  blows  still  more  teri'ible.  Liable  to  claims  which  he  could  not 
meet,  he  was  stripped  of  all  that  he  possessed.  There  was  no  kinsman  rich  enough, 
or  generous  enough,  to  redeem  his  property  or  become  surety  for  his  person,  and 
his  creditors,  having  the  power,  shut  him  up  in  prison.  Many  years  have  passed 
since  then.  He  has  lost  all  reckoning  of  time — has  forgotten  to  note  the  slow 
years,  as  they  drag  wearily  by  him — forgotten  that  the  hour  of  deliverance  is 
drawing  nigh.  The  Day  of  Atonement  dawns  in  the  heavens,  but  he  knows  it  not. 
He  hears  the  loud  trumpets  proclaiming  the  year-sabbath  without  any  thought  of 
their  meaning.  The  door  of  his  cell  is  thrown  open  ;  he  is  told  that  the  jubilee  has 
come,  and  that  he  is  free.  Rising  listlessly  from  his  bed  of  straw,  he  looks  round 
amazed  and  stupefied.  The  truth  at  last  flashes  upon  him,  and  with  a  low, 
trembling  cry  of  thanksgiving,  he  goes  forth  to  tread  the  green  earth  once  more, 
to  feel  the  soft  breath  of  spring,  and  exult  in  the  bright  sun  and  sky.  Call  to  mind 
how  many  cases,  analogous  to  those  now  supposed,  there  must  have  been  in  Israel 
at  each  recurrence  of  the  year  of  release,  and  you  will  be  able  to  form  some  con- 
ception of  the  blessings  connected  with  that  sacred  season.  Nor  can  you  fail  to 
perceive  with  what  force  and  beauty  the  feature  which  we  have  considered  illustrates 
the  grace  of  the  gospel.  By  our  numerous  and  aggravated  sins  we  have  come 
under  tremendous  liabilities  to  the  justice  of  God,  and  have  incurred  an  amount  of 
obligation  which  no  human  arithmetic  can  compute,  and  no  human  efforts  can 
liquidate.  Judgment  has  been  entered  against  us  in  the  court  of  heaven,  execution 
issued  ;  and  the  stern  messenger,  Death,  only  awaits  the  Divine  signal  to  bear  us 
away  to  the  dungeons  of  hell.  But  in  this  fearful  exigency  the  Saviour  has  inter- 
posed for  our  rescue.  By  faith  in  His  atoning  sacrifice  our  mighty  debt  is  cancelled ; 
the  uttermost  farthing  is  paid  ;  the  demands  of  the  law  are  satisfied ;  and  through 


312  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxv. 

the  suretyship  of  Him  who  died  for  u?,  we  stand  exonerated  before  the  tribunal  of 
Infinite  Holiness.  II.  In  the  year-sabbath  there  was  an  end  or  bondage.  See 
that  slave  delving  and  sweltering  in  the  hot  cane-fields  of  Jericho,  condemned  to 
toil  through  the  long  summer  day  under  a  burning  summer  sun,  without  rest,  and 
without  reward.  His  childhood  was  passed  on  the  brepzy  heights  of  Carmel, 
among  babbling  brooks,  the  singing  of  birds,  and  the  odnur  of  flowers.  Tbere 
he  grew  up,  a  bold,  free-hearted  youth,  erect  and  tall,  with  an  eye  keen  as  a 
falcon's  and  a  foot  fleet  as  the  roe  which  he  chased  on  the  mountain-side.  But 
misfortune,  swifter  still,  overtook  him.  A  ruthless  claimant,  to  wliom  his  parents 
were  indebted,  seized  him,  and  doomed  him  to  bondage.  Look  at  him  now. 
Slavery  has  bowed  his  strong  frame,  and  stiffened  his  elastic  limbs,  iind  on  the 
brow,  once  so  joyous,  sits  hopeless  gloom.  As  he  bends  to  his  task,  what  sad 
memories  are  busy  within  him !  He  thinks  of  the  dear  ones  far  away — of  his 
happy  boyhood — of  all  that  he  might  have  been — of  the  hard  lot  that  has  been  his 
instead — and  tears,  bitter  tears,  are  on  bis  bronzed  cheek.  But  while  he  thus 
muses  and  weeps  his  ear  catches  the  distant  note  of  a  trumpet.  Now  it  is  nearer, 
louder.  It  comes  rolling  down  the  gorges  of  the  wilderness  in  the  way  toward 
Jerusalem,  bounding  from  cliff  to  cliff,  and  pouring  its  jocund  waves  upon  the  plain 
below.  Others  take  up  the  strain,  and  send  it  from  wall  and  housetop,  from  crag 
and  vaUey,  till  the  very  air  seems  alive  with  it.  For  a  moment  he  listens  uncertain; 
then  shouting,  "  The  jubilee,  the  jubilee  !"  tears  off  the  badge  of  his  servitude — 
stands  up  a  freeman — and  with  the  stride  of  a  giant,  journeys  back  to  the  scenes 
where  his  heart  has  ever  been.  By  nature  we  are  all  the  subjects  of  a  moral 
thraldom  as  grinding  as  it  is  criminal.  We  are  the  slaves  of  our  own  depravity, 
"sold  under  sin,"  and  "  led  by  the  devil  at  his  will."  But  the  Cross  of  Christ 
touches  our  chains,  and  they  are  shivered  into  fragments  ;  His  grace  rends  the 
serf -livery  from  our  spirits,  and  we  walk  forth  in  the  joy  of  a  blessed  emancipation. 
III.  The  jubilee  brought  with  it  the  restoration  of  property.  Pictui'e  to  your- 
selves an  Israelite  thrust  out  by  adversity  from  the  inheritance  of  his  ancestors.  He 
has  struggled  hard  to  keep  the  old  home  ;  but  losses  have  fallen  heavily  upon  him  and 
he  must  depart.  The  roof  beneath  which  he  was  born,  the  streams  by  which  he 
has  walked,  the  fields  he  has  tilled,  the  trees  in  whose  shade  he  has  reclined,  the 
graves  where  his  fathers  sleep,  all  must  be  left,  and  left,  alas  1  in  the  keeping  of 
strangers.  He  casts  one  long,  farewell  look  on  the  scene  which  he  loves  so  well, 
and  then,  with  wife  and  little  ones,  goes  forth  an  exile.  Years  pass  on.  Farther 
and  farther  he  wanders,  finding  no  resting-place,  and  "  dragging  at  each  remove  a 
lengthening  chain."  But,  hark  !  a  trumpet-blnst  breaks  upon  the  air.  It  is  caught 
up  and  repeated  from  city  and  hamlet,  from  hill-top  and  glen,  from  highways  and 
byways,  till  the  whole  land  rings  with  the  joyous  echo.  The  wanderer  hears  it. 
His  heart  knows  and  feels  it.  It  is  the  jubilee  signal.  Oh,  with  wliat  rnpture  does 
he  now  hasten  back  to  the  home  once  more  his  own  !  Old  friends  greet  his  return  ; 
old  familiar  faces  smile  upon  him ;  hands  that  he  grasped  in  youth  now  grasp 
his  in  happy  welcome.  The  days  of  his  exile  are  over.  He  is  among  his  kindred 
again.  And  what  an  image  is  there  here  of  our  own  restoration  by  the  gospel  to 
the  heritage  which  we  have  lost !  Our  condition,  as  fallen  creatures,  resembles  that  of 
the  beggared  Jew  driven  out  from  his  birthright.  Our  sins  have  stripped  us  of  our 
all.  The  original  holiness  of  our  nature,  the  likeness  and  favour  of  God,  our 
kindred  with  angels,  our  title  to  a  blessed  immortality,  are  gone,  and  gone  beyond 
our  power  to  recover.  But  the  mercy  of  God  has  provided  for  us  a  jubilee.  By 
believing  in  His  only-begotten  Son  we  receive  back,  are,  more  than  receive  back, 
our  alienated  inheritance.  We  are  again  invested  with  a  glorious  property,  and 
made  rich  with  a  wealth  which  empires  could  not  bestow.  IV.  The  year-sabbath 
WAS  intended  to  be  a  season  of  harmony  and  repose.  During  its  continuance  the 
land  was  to  rest,  the  implements  of  husbandry  to  be  put  a«ay,  and  labour  to  cease, 
that  social  intercourse  and  kindly  feeling  might  be  cultivated  without  restraint. 
There  was  to  be  no  strife,  no  oppression ;  all  disputes  were  to  be  laid  aside,  all 
contentions  abandoned ;  and  society  in  every  rank  was  to  present  one  unbroken 
scene  of  brotherhood  and  peace.  How  beautifully  does  this  feature  of  the  sacred 
year  prefigure  the  results  which  Christianity  contemplates.  Its  design  is  to  impart 
to  all  who  truly  embrace  it  a  peace  which  comes  from  heaven,  and  is  the  earnest 
of  heaven,  and  then  to  unite  them  to  each  other  in  one  harmonious  and  holy 
fraternity.  All  its  elements,  all  its  tendencies,  are  those  of  union  and  love.  Man- 
kind shall  become  one  great  family.  Public  and  private  animosities,  the  jar  of 
conflicting  interests,  the  opposition  of  classes,  the  insolence  of  the  rich,  the  over- 


cnAP.  XXV.]  LEVITICUS.  313 

bearing  of  the  strong,  shall  be  remembered  only  to  excite  wonder  that  they  could 
ever  have  been.  Then  will  be  the  jubilee  of  the  creation,  the  great  Sabbath  of  the 
world.  Over  the  face  of  humanity,  long  agitated  by  wrong,  and  struggle,  and  sin, 
shall  come  a  holy  calm  ;  like  the  quiet  of  a  still  eventide  after  the  turmoil  of  a 
tempestuous  day,  when  the  winds  have  gone  down,  and  the  clouds  disappear,  and 
the  blue  sky  breaks  forth,  and  the  settiug  sun  sprinkles  gold  over  the  smiling  land 
and  the  sleeping  waters.  And  this  universal  peace  on  earth  will  be  the  prelude  of 
everlasting  peace  in  heaven.  V.  One  more  evangelic  analogy  of  the  yi^ar-sabbath 
may  be  traced  in  the  extent  and  fulness  given  to  its  peoclaiviation.  "  Ye  shall 
make  the  trumpet  sound  throughout  all  your  land."  The  manner  in  which  this 
was  done  was  very  interesting  and  suggestive.  As  the  time  for  proclaiming  the 
jubilee  drew  on  a  company  of  priests  was  stationed  at  the  door  of  the  Tabernacle 
or  Temple,  each  with  a  silver  trumpet  in  his  hand.  The  Levites  in  the  cities  and 
towns,  and  every  householder  in  the  nation,  were  also  furnished  with  silver 
trumpets.  When  the  hour  had  arrived,  the  company  of  priests  sounded  the 
app  )inted  signal.  Those  in  their  immediate  neighbourhood  repeated  it.  It  was 
answered  by  the  Levites  and  the  inhabitants  of  the  next  town.  And  thus  it  was 
sent  on  from  dwelling  to  dwelling,  from  city  to  city,  from  mountain  to  mountain, 
from  tribe  to  tribe,  till  the  farthest  borders  of  the  land  echoed  and  re-echoed  with 
the  glad  music.  The  sounding  of  the  silver  trumpets  was  unquestionably  a  symbol 
of  the  proclamation  of  the  gospel.  The  ministeis  of  Christ  are  commanded  to 
publish  redemption  by  His  blood,  and  to  invite  the  disinherited  and  the  ruined 
to  return  to  their  Father's  house.  And  in  the  work  of  spreading  this  message  all 
the  people  of  God  are  to  bear  part.  The  tidings  of  mercy  announced  by  the  priests 
and  Levites  are  to  be  taken  up  by  private  Christians  and  carried  out  into  all  the 
walks  of  life.  At  the  fireside,  in  the  Sabbath-school  class,  in  the  social  circle,  in 
the  resorts  of  business,  the  trumpet  is  to  be  sounded.  Neighbour  should  sound  it 
to  neighbour,  village  to  village,  city  to  city,  land  to  land,  until  the  most  distant 
and  secluded  spot  on  the  globe  has  been  penetrated  by  the  joyful  summons.  And 
the  hour  is  at  hand  when  this  blessed  consummation  shall  be  reahsed.  Peal  out, 
0  trumpet  of  redemption  !  along  our  storm-swept  skies,  ringing  over  land  and 
sea,  proclaiming  the  end  of  sin,  the  end  of  .  travail,  and  heralding  the  birth 
of  the  new  spiritual  creation  in  which  dwelleth  righteousness.  [Dr.  Ide.)  The 
purpose  of  the  sahbatkal  year : — The  principal  object  of  the  sabbatical  year,  at 
least  in  the  eyes  of  the  Levitical  legislator,  was  not  its  economic  usefulness 
in  invigorating  the  soil,  or  any  other  of  the  many  material  advantages  which 
have  been  attributed  to  it,  but  its  spiritual  signifiance  as  a  genei'al  Sabbath 
devoted  to  God  ;  for  as  the  week  is  a  complete  cycle  for  the  labour  of  man,  so  is  the 
year  for  the  cultivation  and  produce  of  the  land ;  and  man  was  to  rest  every 
seventh  day,  and  the  land  every  seventh  y^ar,  in  order  that,  by  sacrificing  one 
day's  labour  and  one  year's  produce,  the  Israelite  might  express  his  gratitude  to  the 
mercy  of  God  who  blesses  his  works,  and  who  s^ustaius  him  during  the  temporary 
suspension  of  his  efforts.  He  was  to  be  reminded  that  the  treasures  of  the  earth 
were  indeed  created  for  the  benefit  of  man,  but  that  he  should  not  use  them 
selfishly  and  greedily ;  and  on  the  other  hand,  that  the  soil  had  indeed  been  laden 
with  God"s  curse,  but  that  His  bi)unty  gives  abundance  and  grants  respite  from 
wearying  toil.  Who  will  assert  that  these  and  similar  abstract  ideas,  which  underlie 
the  laws  of  the  sabbatical  year  were  conceived  in  the  early  Mosaic  age,  or  could 
be  profitably  conveyed  to  the  untutored  people  who  meant  to  worship  their 
Deliverer  by  dancing  round  the  golden  image  of  a  calf  ?  The  views  of  Philo,  who 
gives  the  oldest  comment  on  our  laws,  may  be  briefly  stated.  Moses  thought  the 
number  seven,  he  observes,  worthy  of  such  reverence,  being  "the  pure  and  ever 
virgin  number,"  that  he  ordained  in  every  seventh  year  the  remission  of  debts  in 
order  "to  assist  the  poor,  and  train  the  rich  to  humanity"  ;  he  commanded  that 
then  the  people  should  leave  the  land  fallow  and  unfilled,  and  "  deliberately  let 
slip  out  of  their  hands  certain  and  valuable  revenues,"  in  order  to  teach  them  not 
to  be  "wholly  devoted  to  gain,  but  even  willingly  to  submit  to  some  loss," 
and  thus  to  prepare  them  to  bear  patiently  any  mischance  or  calamity;  he  desired, 
moreover,  to  intimate  that  it  was  sinful  to  weigh  down  and  oppress  man  with 
burdens,  since  even  the  earth,  which  has  no  feelings  of  pleasure  or  of  pain,  was  to 
enjoy  a  period  of  relaxation ;  and  that  all  benefits  bestowed  upon  our  fellow-men 
are  sure  to  meet  with  reward  and  requital,  since  even  the  inanimate  earth,  after 
having  been  allowed  to  rest  for  one  year,  gratefully  returns  this  favour  by  producing 
in  the  next  year  much  larger  crops  than  usual ;  just  as  athletes,  by  alternating 


314  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxv. 

recreation  and  exertion  "  as  with  a  well-regulated  harmony,"  greatly  enhance  their 
strength,  and  are  at  last  able  to  perform  wonders  of  endurance ;  or  as  nature  has 
wisely  ordained  man  to  work  and  to  sleei^  by  turns,  that  he  may  not  be  worn  out 
by  toil.  But  the  lawgiver's  chief  object  was  "  humanity,  which  he  th';ught  fit  to 
weave  in  with  every  partof  his  legislation,  stamping  on  all  who  study  the  Holy  Scrip- 
tures a  sociable  and  humane  disposition."  With  this  view  he  "  raised  the  poor  from 
their  apparent  lowly  coudition,  and  freed  them  from  the  reproach  of  being  beggars," 
by  "  appointing  times  when,  as  if  they  had  been  deriving  a  revenue  from  their  own 
proper;'. 's,  they  found  themselves  in  the  possession  of  plenty,  being  suddenly 
enriched  by  the  gift  of  God,  who  had  invited  them  to  share  with  the  possessors 
themselves  in  the  number  of  the  sacred  seven."  In  these  remarks  the  charitable 
aud  moral  motives  of  the  sabbatical  year  are  admirably,  but  its  theocratic  tenden- 
cies imperfectly,  unfolded ;  nor  can  Philo  be  expected  to  appreciate  the  gradual 
development  manifest  in  the  various  Books  of  the  Pentateuch  :  in  tin-  law  of  Leviticus 
charity  is  no  more  than  an  incidental  and  subordinate  object.  (31.  31.  Kalisch,  Ph.D. ) 
A  sabbath  of  rest  unto  the  land : — I.  Divine  ownekshi^  in  the  soil.      II.  Man's 

HIGHEST  1NTEEEST6  AEE  NOT  MATERIAL  AND  EARTHLY.  III.  NEIGHBOURLINESS  AND 
BENEVOLENCE  SHOULD  BE  CULTIVATED.       IV.    KeLIANCE  ON  GoD,  IN    IMPLICIT  OBEDIENCE 

TO  His  WILL.     To  desist  f lom  effort  to  provide  for  their  own  maintenance  would — 

1.  Ehcit  their  faith  in  the  fatherly  care  of  God.  2.  Summon  them  to  a  religious 
use  of  the  time  which  God  had  set  free  from  secular  toils.  3.  Incite  them  to  grate- 
ful thoughts  of  God's  dealings  with  them  as  His  people,  and  win  them  to  a  renewed 
recognition  that  they  were  "  not  their  own,"  but  His,  who  had  redeemed  and  still 
cared  for  them.  V.  Sabbatic  rest  :  Heaven's  gracious  law  for  earthly  toilers. 
Man  needs  the  Sabbath  pause,  in  order  to  realise — 1.  That  higher  possibilities  are 
opened  to  him  by  God's  grace,  than  to  be  a  servant  of  the  soil  on  which  he  dwells. 

2.  Tbat  God  desires  of  men  the  devotion  of  fixed  seasons,  and  leisurely  hours  for 
sacred  meditation  and  fellowship  with  the  skies.  (IF.  H.  Jdlie.)  The  Sabbath 
of  the  fields  : — 1.  Palestine  was  designed  and  arranged  by  God,  when  He  laid  the 
foundations  of  the  earth  and  divided  to  the  nations  their  inheritance,  to  be  a  natural 
fortress  for  the  preservation  of  religious  truth  and  purity ;  a  home  in  which  a  cove- 
nant people  might  be  trained  and  educated,  in  the  household  of  God  and  directly 
under  His  eye,  to  be  zealous  of  good  works  themselves,  and  to  be  a  royal  priesthood 
to  mankind — to  carry  out  in  their  history  God's  promise  to  the  fouuder  of  their 
race,  that  in  him  should  all  tbe  families  of  the  earth  be  blessed.  And  therefore 
God  surrounded  it  with  natural  fortifications  which  kept  it  separate  and  secluded — 
even  although  placed  in  the  very  midst  of  the  most  concentrated  populations  of  the 
world,  in  the  very  focus  towards  which  their  intercourse  with  one  another  radiated 
— until  the  objects  of  the  hermit  training  and  discipline  of  its  inhabitants  were 
accomplished.  2.  The  Jews  could  not  help  being  a  nation  of  farmers.  As  a  new 
seed  of  Adam,  subjected  to  a  new  trial  of  obedience,  they  were  placed  in  this  new 
garden  of  Eden,  to  dress  and  keep  it,  in  order  that  through  their  tilling  of  the  ground 
the  wilderness  and  the  solitary  place  might  be  made  glad,  and  the  desert  to  rejoice 
and  blossom  as  the  rose.  Their  thoughts,  hounded  on  every  side  by  impassable 
walls,  were  turned  inward  upon  their  own  country  for  the  development  of  patriotism 
and  the  formation  of  a  more  comijact  and  concentrated  national  life.  Their  energies 
were  employed  exclusively  in  the  cultivation  of  the  soil,  and  in  developing  to  the 
utmost  the  resources  of  the  land.  And  very  rich  and  varied  were  these  resources. 
No  other  country  in  the  world  presented,  within  a  similar  limited  area,  such 
diversities  of  soil  and  climate.  3.  It  was  in  beautiful  accordance  with  all  these 
natural  provisions  of  the  country  for  the  isolation  of  the  people  during  the  ages  of 
their  discipline  under  God's  special  care  to  be  the  benefactors  of  mankind,  that  the 
remarkable  arrangements  of  the  seventh  or  sabbatical  year  were  Divinely  instituted. 
Every  seventh  year  was  holy  unto  the  Lord,  as  well  as  every  seventh  day.  During 
that  whole  year  the  entire  nation  kept  holiday.  The  people  were  not,  indeed, 
absolutely  idle ;  for  that  would  have  proved  demoralising,  and  neutralised  the 
beneficent  nature  of  the  whole  arrangement.  Much  of  their  time  was  spent  in 
religious  observances,  and  in  hearing  and  studying  the  law  of  God.  Their  attention 
was  directed  from  their  ordinary  material  affairs  to  their  spiritual  concerns.  And 
although  all  cultivation  of  arable  land  was  strictly  forbidden,  they  had  still  to  look 
after  their  sheep  and  cattle,  and  to  tend  with  more  or  less  care  their  gardens  and 
orchards ;  while,  doubtless,  a  good  portion  of  their  leisure  would  be  occupied  with 
the  repair  of  their  houses,  implements  of  husbandry  and  domestic  furniture,  and  in 
weaving  and  the  various  other  economical  arts.     At  the  end  of  a  week,  or  seven  of 


CHAP.  XXV.]  LEVITICUS.  315 

these  sabbaths  of  the  years — or  after  the  lapse  of  forty-nine  years — the  sabbatical 
scale,  beginning  with  the  seventh  day  and  going  on  to  the  seventh  month  and  the 
seventh  year,  received  its  completion  in  the  year  of  jubilee.  This  was  the  great 
political  sabbath  of  the  people  and  of  the  land.  The  sabbath  day  was  the  rest  of 
the  individual ;  the  sabbath  year  was  the  rest  of  each  farm  and  household  ;  while 
the  jubilee  was  the  rest  of  the  whole  commonwealth,  for  it  was  only  as  a  member 
of  the  state  that  each  Israelite  could  participate  in  its  provisions.  4.  What  was 
the  design  of  these  remarkable  sabbatical  years,  confining  our  attention  solely  to 
their  agricultural  relations,  and  leaving  out  of  sight  their  other  provisions  ?  Why 
were  these  sabbaths  of  the  fields  instituted?  The  first  reason  must  obviously  have 
reference  to  the  soil  itself;  for  the  ladder  of  all  the  human  relations,  social,  political, 
and  religious,  necessarily  rests  upon  the  tilling  of  the  ground.  It  was  to  benefit  the 
land  itself  in  the  first  instance,  that  the  sabbaths  of  the  fields  were  ordained.  The 
whole  arable  land  of  the  country  was  to  lie  fallow  a  whole  year  at  fixed  recurring 
intervals,  so  that  during  these  long  periods  of  rest  it  might  acquire,  from  the  atmo- 
sphere, from  the  operations  of  the  elements  and  of  animal  life,  and  from  the  decay 
of  the  plants  which  it  spontaneously  produced,  the  fertile  substances  which  it  had 
lost.  More  than  most  soils,  that  of  Palestine  needed  this  complete  periodical  rest. 
Being  principally  composed  of  disintegrated  limestone,  and  very  loose,  light,  and 
dry  in  its  texture,  it  parted,  under  the  influence  of  an  arid  chmate,  very  easily  with 
its  phosphates  and  other  fertilising  materials.  But  upon  this  physical  reason  there 
were  based  very  important  moral  reasons  for  the  sabbaths  of  the  fields.  It  was 
required  that  the  whole  land  should  rest  periodically,  not  only  that  its  fertility 
might  be  preserved,  but  also  in  order  to  limit  the  rights  and  check  the  sense  of 
property  in  it.  The  earth  and  all  the  fulness  thereof  are  indeed  the  Lord's,  as  the 
Creator  and  Preserver  of  all  things ;  but,  in  a  very  special  sense,  the  Land  of 
Promise  was  His  property.  He  let  out  His  vineyard  to  husbandmen  who  should 
render  unto  Him  the  spiritual  fruits  thereof ;  and  the  rent  which  He  required  as 
Superior  was.  that  one  year  in  seven,  and  one  year  in  forty-nine  years,  the  land 
should  lie  fallow — should  pass  from  the  yoke  of  man  to  the  liberty  of  God — should 
be  offered  up  a  sacrifice,  as  it  were,  unto  Him  upon  the  great  mountain-altar  of 
Palestine.  The  very  abstinence  from  agricultural  work  during  the  sabbaths  of  the 
fields — the  self-denial  in  refraining  periodically  for  a  whole  year  to  tiU  the  ground 
— rthe  trustfulness  needed  in  looking  to  God  for  bread  during  so  long  a  period  of 
enforced  rest — the  confidence  that  He  would  in  previous  years  secure  from  the  land 
an  increase  adequate  to  meet  the  strain  which  the  law  of  the  sabbatical  year  laid 
upon  its  productive  energies — all  this  was  but  a  repetition  of  the  conditions  annexed 
to  the  possession  of  Eden,  namely,  that  Adam  should  abstain  from  eating  the  for- 
bidden fruit.  The  sabbaths  of  the  fields  were  a  trial  of  the  faith  of  the  Israelites, 
a  test  of  their  obedience.  Only  so  long  as  they  kept  these  sabbaths,  abstained  from 
eating  the  forbidden  fruit  of  their  fields,  did  the  land  yield  to  them  its  abundance, 
and  nourish  them  with  its  fruits  of  life.  "  The  land  is  Mine,"  said  God,  when 
enacting  this  sabbatical  law  ;  "  for  ye  are  strangers  and  sojourners  with  Me."  The 
Israelites  were  living  as  truly  a  tent  life — a  life  of  pilgrims  and  strangers  on  earth 
amid  their  settled  possessions  in  Canaan — as  they  had  been  in  their  wanderings  in 
the  wilderness.  But,  further  still,  the  sabbaths  of  the  fields  connected,  in  a  most 
beautiful  and  interesting  manner,  the  agriculture  of  the  Israelites  with  the  institu- 
tions of  their  religion.  The  law  enacting  them  was  given  in  words  corresponding 
to  those  of  the  fourth  commandment :  the  one  was  only  an  extension  of  the  other. 
The  natural,  social,  and  spiritual  uses  of  the  sabbath  day  suggested  those  of  the 
sabbath  year.  The  same  sacredness  abd  Divine  obligation  attached  to  the  one  as 
to  the  other.  Under  the  theocratic  government  of  Israel,  the  sanctuary  and  the 
farm  lay  within  the  same  circle  of  holy  influences.  But  perhaps  the  most  interest- 
ing of  aU  the  aspects  of  the  sabbaths  of  the  fields  was  their  relation  to  the  future — 
their  prophetic  character.  As  the  sabbath  day  pointed  forward  to  the  true  and  final 
rest  that  remaineth  to  tbe  people  of  God,  so  the  sabbatical  year  and  the  year  of 
jubilee  pointed  forward  to  the  jubilee  of  the  world — the  times  of  refreshing  and  the 
restitution  of  all  things  spoken  of  by  all  the  prophets — the  regeneration  and  the 
glorious  kingdom  to  be  inherited  by  the  true  Israel  of  God  when  they  shall  receive 
back  an  hundredfold  all  that  they  have  lost.  The  sabbath  day  commemorated  the 
relief  of  man  from  the  burden  of  toil  imposed  upon  him  because  of  his  sin  ;  the 
sabbaths  of  the  fields  the  relief  of  nature  from  the  curse  on  the  ground  for  man's 
sake.  The  year  of  rest  for  worn-out  natuie  was  a  prefiguration  of  the  change  which 
is  in  store  for  the  outward  world,  when  every  wilderuess  shall  become  a  fruitful 


316  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxv. 

field,  and  instead  of  the  thorn  shall  come  up  the  fir-tree,  and  out  of  which  it  shall 
issue  as  a  new  heaven  and  a  new  earth  wherein  dwelleth  righteousness.  5.  But, 
alas !  beneficient  as  it  was,  a  law  so  peculiar,  and  requiring  so  much  faith  and  self- 
denial,  was  not  thoroughly  and  uninterrupti^dly  observed.  After  four  centuries  of 
obedience,  during  which  the  land  preserved  its  i)rimitive  fertility,  and  there  were  no 
famines  arising  from  impoverishment  of  the  soil,  but  only  from  unusual  droughts 
and  other  atmospheric  causes,  the  people  ceased  to  keep  the  fallow  year,  not  only 
through  want  of  trust  in  God's  providence  amid  so  peculiar  a  mode  of  living,  but 
also  through  the  moral  corruption  of  the  times.  Then  the  land,  originally  the  most 
fertile  in  the  world,  became  one  of  the  most  capricious  and  uncertain  ;  the  store  of 
feitilising  materials  was  rapidly  used  up  by  incessant  cultivation  ;  and  that  state 
of  things  which  Moses  foretold  took  place — "  And  your  strength  shall  be  spent  in 
vain,  for  your  land  shall  not  yield  its  increase."  Famine  after  famine,  some  of  them 
of  excessive  severity  and  long  continuance,  arising  from  the  overdriving  and  ex- 
haustion of  the  soil,  swept  over  the  land  and  decimated  the  people.  Henceforth 
the  disregard  of  the  sabbatical  year  became  the  burden  of  every  prophetical  denun- 
ciation, and  "the  voice  of  historian  and  prophet  was  one  continual  wail  of  famine." 
In  this  painful  extremity  of  the  country's  fortunes,  the  judgment  threatened  by 
Moses  against  the  violation  of  the  fallow  year  was  inflicted — "And  I  will  scatter 
you  among  the  heathen,  and  will  draw  out  a  sword  after  you,  and  your  land  shall 
be  desolate  and  your  cities  waste.  Then  shall  the  land  enjoy  her  sabbaths  as  long 
as  it  lieth  desolate,  and  ye  be  in  your  enemies'  land  ;  even  then  shull  the  land  rest 
and  enjoy  her  sabbaths.  As  long  as  it  lieth  desolate  it  shall  rest,  because  it  did  not 
rest  in  your  sabbaths  when  ye  dwelt  upon  it."  Throughout  the  Babylonish  cap- 
tivity there  was  a  continuous  fallow  of  seventy  years.  During  all  that  long  period 
the  fields  of  Palestine  lay  4esolate,  were  neither  sown  nor  reaped ;  and  by  this 
timely  and  much-needed  rest  the  land  recovered  a  large  portion  of  its  old  fertility. 
And  thus  God  graciously  mingled  mercy  and  judgment ;  combined  the  punishment 
of  His  people  v\ith  the  renovation  of  their  inheritance.  Weary,  footsore,  in  tears, 
the  saddened  exiUs  returned  to  their  native  land,  taught  by  their  own  experience 
that  it  is  an  evil  and  a  bitter  thing  to  sin  against  God.  {H.  Macmillan,  D.D.) 
Lessons  from  the  sabbatical  year : — I.  That  the  Lokd  was  the  sole  proprietor 
OF  the    land.      II.    That   the   land   had   resting    upon   it,   continually,   the 

FAVOUR  OF  the  LoRD.  III.  ThAT  THE  DiVINE  FAVOUR  PROVIDES  FOR  THE  WELL- 
BEING  OF  EVERY  LIVING  THING.  IV.  ThaT  OF  EVERY  LIVING  THING,  MAN  IS  THE 
NEAREST  AND  DEAREST  TO  THE  GREAT  CREATOR.  V.  ThaT  THE  GREAT  CREATOR 
TEACHES    MORAL    TRUTHS    TO    MAN   BY    MEANS    OF   WORKS    OF    NATURE.         (F .    W.    BrOWU.) 

The  year  of  jubilee. — The  jubilee  year  :  its  fourfold  sifjnificance : — I.  The  Christian 

DISPENSATION  OF  GOSPEL  LIBERTY  AND  REST  (sCC  Luke  iv.  18-21).       II.   ThE  BELIEVER'S 

privileged  life  of  sacred  release  and  joy  (c/.  Eph.  i.  13,  14 ;  Heb.  iv.  9 ;  viii. 
12).  III.  The  millennial  age,  of  established  righteousness  and  peace  (see  Isa. 
Ixvi.  18-23;  Eev.  xx.  2-4).  IV.  The  heavenly  state  of  eternal  security  and 
serenity  (see  2  Pet.  iii.  13;  Eev.  xiv.  13  ;  xxi.  4).  In  the  application  of  the 
jubilee  incidents  to  each  of  these  grand  fulfilments  of  its  symbolism,  the  following 
facts  stand  out  clearly : — 1.  Bounty.  God  gave  a  supernatural  abundance  the  year 
preceding  the  jubilee,  that  in  the  enjoyment  of  vast  supplies  there  should  be  no 
necessity  for  toil,  no  occasion  for  care  (see  ver.  21).  And  assuredly  there  is — 
(1)  Bounty  in  the  provisions  of  the  gospel  (1  Tim.  i.  14).  (2)  Fulness  of  prace  for 
the  believer  in  Jesus  (2  Cor.  iv.  15  ;  Titus  iii.  6).  (3)  Abundance  of  good  to  be 
enjoyed  in  the  millennial  age  (Psa.  Ixxii.  7).  (4)  Limitless  bliss  in  the  heavenly 
land  (Psa.  xvi.  2),  2.  Best.  That  sabbatic  year  was  to  be  consecrated  to  repose  ; 
the  land  was  to  be  allowed  to  rest ;  the  toiler  was  to  cease  from  toil.  Every  want 
was  supplied  without  the  weariness  of  labour.  Equally  true  of  the — (1)  Gospel 
rest  which  Christianity  announces  (Matt.  xi.  29).  (2)  Believer's  rest  which  faith 
secures  (Heb.  iv.  3).  (3)  Millennial  rest  for  a  wearied  Church  (Rev.  xx.  2,  3). 
(4)  Heavenly  rest  for  Christ's  redeemed  followers  (Rev.  xiv.  13).  3.  Liberty.  All 
bondservants  were  set  free  the  moment  the  jubilee  trumpet  sounded  (vers.  39-44). 
And  assuredly  this  finds  verification  in  the— (1)  Liberty  which  Christ  proclaimed 
to  souls  enslaved  in  sin  and  fear  (Luke  iv.  18  ;  Heb.  ii.  15).  (2)  Spiritual  freedom 
realised  by  faith  (Rom.  viii.  15  ;  John  viii.  36).  (3)  Emancipation  from  thraldom 
which  shall  distinguish  the  millennial  reign  (Isa.  xlix.  8,  9).  (4)  Glorious  liberty 
of  the  childreu  of  God  in  heaven  (Rom.  viii.  21 ;  Rev.  xxi.  24,  25).  4.  Restitution. 
If  the  Israelite  had  parted  with  his  inheritance,  its  possession  was  restored  to  him 
in  the  year  of   jubilee,  and  that  without  payment  (vers.  25-37).      So — (1)  The 


CHAP.  XXV.]  LEVITICUS.  317 

redemption  of  Christ  recovers  for  man  all  that  sin  had  forfeited.  (2)  Believers  in 
Jesus  regain  all  the  virtue,  happiness,   and  hopes  which   the  fall   had   ruined. 

(3)  The  weary  and  wronged  world  would  enjoy  paradisal  gladness  through  Christ's 
millennial  sway.  (4)  Heaven  will  realise  all  which  on  earth  had  been  desired,  and 
restore  all  which  death  had  desolated.  V.  Let  it  be  marked  that  the  jubilee,  with 
all  its  blessings,  was  consequent  upon  atonement.  Not  till  the  blood  of  expiation 
had  been  shed,  and  the  living  goat  had  borne  into  the  land  of  oblivion  the  sins 
which  (ceremonially)  had  been  transferred  to  it,  did  the  silver  trumpets  peal  forth 
their  exultant  notes,  proclaiming  liberty  and  rest,  restitution  and  rectitude  for  the 
people.  And  it  is  because  of  Christ's  atonement  that — (1)  Christianity  has  come 
to  sinful  man,  with  all  its  tidings  of  good  and  wealth  of  salvation  (John  i.  29 ; 
Eph.  i.  6).  (2)  Spiritual  blessings  are  inherited  by  the  believer  in  Jesus  (Rom.  v. 
11).     (3)  The  Church  will  enjoy  the  sabbatic  millennial  glory  (Rev.  xix.   11-14). 

(4)  Heaven  will  be  the  eternal  possession  of  the  redeemed  (Rev.  viii.  14-17). 
{W.  H.  Jellie.)  The  year  of  juhihe: — I.  Let  tjs  look  at  the  gospel  age  as 
THE  world's  jubilee.  And  notice  particularly  that  the  jubilee  year  was  ushered 
in  on  the  Day  of  Atonement.  Now,  how  is  it  with  our  jubilee  ?  Was  it  not 
also  ushered  in  by  atonement  ?  The  prophets  foretold  the  coming  of  the  accept- 
able year,  but  there  was  no  jubilee  until  Christ  came,  and  there  was  no  true 
trump  of  jubilee  until  after  Christ  had  died.  Three  days  He  lay  in  the 
grave,  and  the  third  day  He  rose  again,  and  then  after  forty  days  He  ascended, 
the  Great  High  Priest,  and  entered  into  the  Holiest  Place,  bearing  there  His 
own  blood.  Then,  the  atonement  h>iving  been  made,  He  sends  down  the 
Spirit  on  the  day  of  Pentecost,  and  His  servants  go  forth  everywhere  preaching 
the  jubilee  that  had  come  in — a  jubilee  based  upon  an  infinite  atonement. 
Now,  it  is  equally  true  that  the  atonement  of  Christ  must  usher  in  all  gospel 
proclamations.  There  is  no  gospel  without  the  atonement,  any  more  than 
there  was  any  trump  of  jubilee  without  first  the  atonement  day.  A  bloodless 
gospel  is  no  gospel,  but  hell's  choicest  weapon.  A  gospel  that  ignores  the  Lamb 
slain  is  worse  than  no  gospel  at  all,  for  it  not  merely  leaves  men  in  their  original 
ignorance,  but  stupefies  and  chloroforms  them  with  a  fresh  lie.  Let  us  look  for  a 
moment  at  a  few  of  the  chief  things  included  in  gospel  preaching,  and  see  how  they 
are  all  connected  with  the  great  day  of  Christ's  atonement.  1.  Certainly,  peace 
must  be  classed  among  the  first  and  chiefest  notes.  The  gospel,  like  an  augel,  flies 
through  the  world,  crying,  "Peace! — Peace! — Peace!"  Methinks,  this  is  one  of 
the  sweetest  notes  in  the  whole  of  gospel  harmony.  But  what  kind  of  peace  is  the 
gospel  peace  ?  It  is  peace  that  is  based  on  blood !  2.  If  peace  be  one  of  the  chief 
notes  in  the  gospel,  surely  we  may  place  by  its  side  remission  of  sins.  Oh,  let  us 
tell  it  out  that  God  can  forgive  all  sin,  though  He  cannot  overlook  one.  By  all 
means  tell  it  out  that  God  can  remit  all  iniquity — that  there  is  no  sinner  so  wicked 
that  God  cannot  forgive  him,  no  sin  so  heinous  that  it  cannot  be  pardoned  ;  but 
remember,  remission  of  sins,  like  peace,  is  based  on  the  blood.  3.  Cleansing  is 
also  one  of  the  most  sounded  notes  of  the  gospel,  and  it  is  a  blessed  thing  to  be 
able  to  tell  a  sinner  that  however  sin-stained  he  is  he  can  yet  be  purified,  and  that 
the  soul  that  is  black  as  perdition  can  be  made  as  white  as  wool,  and  tbat  the  soul 
that  is  crimson  dyed  with  iniquity  may  yet  be  so  cleansed  that  even  the  driven  snow 
shall  look  black  in  comparison.  But  remember  that  it  is  the  blood  that  cleanses. 
Now,  notise  next,  that  the  jubilee  was  proclaimed  with  trumpet-note.  The  atone- 
ment has  been  made,  and  from  every  hill-top  the  note  is  heard.  1.  And  who 
blows  the  trumpet?  Why,  man.  It  must  have  been  joyous  work  to  him.  No 
angel  but  would  have  coveted  the  honour,  but  it  is  man  that  receives  the  commission 
for  the  work,  and  surely,  he  will  blow  it  best,  for  as  he  blows  he  says,  "I  am  blow- 
ing good  news  unto  myself."  Perhaps  the  man  on  yonder  hill-top  owed  a  debt  and 
knew  not  how  to  pay.  Oh,  with  what  right  good  will  would  that  man  blow  the 
trumpet  !  Says  he,  "  I  am  blowing  my  own  debt  away."  Or  perhaps  that  other 
man  had  a  boy  that  was  in  prison.  Says  he,  "I  will  blow  a  blast  that  shall  be 
heard  far  and  wide,  for  I  am  blowing  a  note  that  will  open  the  prison  doors  to  my 
own  boy."  He  had  got  an  exile,  perhaps,  afar  off,  and  for  family  reasons  that  boy 
had  been  unable  to  return  home.  "  The  moment  this  note  is  heard,"  says  the 
trumpeter,  "  the  exiled  one  will  be  able  to  come  back  again."  So  the  man  blows, 
ay,  as  no  angel  or  seraph  could  have  blown.  So  no  angel  could  preach  the  gospel 
like  the  man  who  is  himself  saved  by  the  gospel.  When  we  preach  Christ  we  may 
well  preach  Him  with  a  holy  ecstacy,  for  we  preach  that  which  saves  us  ;  and  when 
■we  are  telling  the  tale  of  atonement  made  we  may  tell  it  out  with  all  the  whole  soul. 


318  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxv. 

The  trumpets  were  blown  by  man.  2.  And  then  observe,  they  were  blown  every- 
where. This  is  what  you  and  I  have  to  do.  We  have  to  help  to  sound  the  trumpet 
throughout  all  the  land.  Go,  blow  it  amongst  the  great  ones  of  the  earth,  and  tell 
kings  and  potentates  that  they  must  be  born  again.  Go  and  blow  the  note  amongst 
the  humblest  and  the  poorest  that  fill  our  mission  halls  and  theatres  and  tell  how 
Christ  can  save  the  vilest.  Go  and  be  Christ-like,  and  proclaim  to  the  perishing 
everywhere  that  the  acceptable  year  of  the  Lord  is  come,  and  that  He  is  willing  to 
bind  up  broken-hearted  ones,  and  to  open   the   prison-doors   unto   all   captives. 

3.  We  notice  further  that  the  notes  of  the  jubilee  trumpet  and  the  notes  of  the 
gospel  are  identical.  What  was  it  that  that  trumpet  proclaimed  ?  First  and  fore- 
most it  proclaimed  a  return  to  all  exiles  and  to  all  who  were  banished  from  their 
homes.  I  think  I  see  the  father  when  that  trumpet  sounds ;  he  pulls  the  bolt 
back  and  takes  the  chain  down  and  says,  "  My  boy  will  be  back  soon.  For  years 
he  has  been  shut  out  of  the  home.  We  did  not  care  to  have  him  in."  That  boy 
perhaps  had  offended  in  something,  and  did  not  care  to  show  his  face  in  the  neigh- 
bourhood, so  for  many  a  long  year  the  father  had  sighed  to  see  his  face  again. 
But  the  moment  he  heard  that  note  he  says,  "  See  that  the  door  is  not  fastened  till 
he  comes  back.  My  boy  has  heard  the  note  as  quickly  as  I  have.  Depend  upon 
it  that  by  this  time  his  face  is  turned  homeward."  The  trumpet  sounded  "  home 
sweet  home,"  to  all  banished  ones.  There  was  a  pale  captive  in  a  dungeon ;  but 
the  trumpet  note  found  its  way  between  the  iron  bars,  and  I  think  I  see  him  as  he 
says,  "  Now  jailor,  off  with  these  fetters!  and  off  with  them  quickly  !  You  have 
no  power  to  keep  me  in  durance  vile  a  moment  longer."  See  how  he  flings  the 
shackles  down  on  the  floor  and  stretches  his  unfettered  arms  with  ecstacy  !  That 
trump  said  to  him  the  one  glorious  word  "  Liberty  !  "  These  were  some  of  the 
notes  that  the  trumpet  of  jubilee  sounded  ;  but,  oh,  does  not  the  gospel  trumpet 
sound  not  merely  the  same  notes,  but  the  same  notes  pitched  to  a  higher  "  Selah," 
still.  II.  Now  WHEN  DOES  THE  SOUL  RECEIVE  ITS  JUBILEE?  I  Can  imagine  one 
saying,  "  Well,  my  case  is  a  very  bad  one  indeed.  It  is  all  very  well  to  be  talking 
about  a  jubilee  age,  but  that  and  a  jubilee  heart  are  two  different  things."  I  know  it, 
and  I  think  I  can  understand  you.  Do  I  not  express  your  feelings  when  I  put  the 
matter  thus  : — "  I  am  everything  that  you  have  spoken  about,  I  am  an  exile  far  from 
my  Father's  house,  I  am  a  captive,  and  the  iron  eats  into  my  soul.  I  am  a  debtor, 
and  I  feel  that  I  owe  that  which  I  can  never  pay.  I  am  over  head  and  ears  ;  I  am 
drowned  in  debt.  I  am  a  miserable  bankrupt.  I  cannot  pay  a  farthing  in  the 
pound.  I  am  a  lost  man.  How  am  I  ever  to  have  a  jubilee  ?  "  Why,  I  tell  thee, 
thou  wilt  have  a  jubilee  the  very  moment  thou  believest  the  report  of  the  jubilee 
trumpet.  Thank  God,  the  jubilee  of  the  soul  can  come  any  day.  It  is  not  once 
in  fifty  years,  or  once  in  fifty  days,  or  once  in  fifty  hours,  or  once  in  fifty  minutes. 
God  is  willing  to  give  salvation  any  moment.  The  moment  thou  acceptest  Christ, 
the  moment  thou  believest  the  report  of  the  gospel,  that  moment  shall  thy  jubilee 
come.  Eemember,  that  it  is  not  enough  to  have  the  gospel  preached  all  round  about 
you.  It  is  not  enough  to  live  in  a  gospel  age.  There  must  be  a  personal  reception 
of  the  truth.  (A.  G.  Brown.)  The  jubilee : — I.  The  tendency  of  society  to  go 
WRONG.  The  evils  remedied  by  the  jubilee  were — 1.  Debt.  2.  Slavery.  3.  Destitution. 

4.  Exhausting  toil.  II.  The  constant  interposition  of  God  to  put  society  right. 
(Homilist.)  The  year  of  jubilee  : — I.  Man's  need  of  occasional  rest  from  toil. 
The  Hebrew  system  was  remarkable  for  the  number  and  variety  of  its  provisions 
for  this.  By  the  emphasis  thus  given  to  rest,  God  hallowed  it  as  being  both  a  duty 
and  privilege.  It  is  needful  in  this  age  of  excessive  labour,  when  the  struggle  for 
wealth  consumes  men's  energies  so  fast,  and  makes  them  so  weary  and  prematurely 
old  and  broken.  We  can  think  of  many  who  ought  to  take  a  sabbatic  year  of  rest, 
and  then  add  to  it  a  year  of  jubilee.  II.  All  men  are  entitled  to  a  share  of 
God's  bounty.  Men  were  not  allowed  in  the  jubilee  year  to  store  up  aught  of 
what  grew  in  the  fields.  God  was  manifestly  the  sole  author  of  it.  It  was  to  be 
distributed,  therefore,  like  the  other  pure  bounties  of  His  hand,  like  the  rain  and 
the  sunshine,  to  all  alike.  This  happened  every  sabbatic  year,  as  well  as  in  the 
jubilee.  Christian  faith  endorses  this.  The  fact  of  holding  a  title  to  a  piece  of 
land  does  not  warrant  one  in  engrossing  to  himself  all  that  it  j  ields.  Christian 
charity  says,  "  Distribute  the  benefit  of  it."  III.  The  welfare  of  society  is  im- 
perilled BY  the  acquisition  OF  GREAT  LANDED  ESTATES.  The  Operation  of  the 
jubilee  was  to  prevent  the  accumulation  of  land  in  the  hands  of  a  few.  If  in  the 
course  of  fifty  years  such  an  accumulation  occurred,  the  jubilee  redistributed  it. 
The  public  good  demanded  its  general  division  among  the  people.     Great  Britain 


CHAP.  XXV.]  LEVITICUS.  319 

suffers  greatly  from  excessive  concentration  in  the  ownership  of  land.  The  prin- 
ciple of  charity,  if  given  full  operation,  would  restrain  excessive  accumulation. 
IV.  The  dignity  of  man  viewed  as  a  kvnsomed  child  of  God  is  another  idea 
EMEODiED  IN  THE  JUBILEE  (ver.  42).  {A.  H.  Currier.)  The  year  of  jubilee  : — 
I.  Its  origin.  It  stands  connected  with  two  of  the  leading  Jewish  institutions. 
1.  With  the  weekly  sabbath.  It  comes  from  the  sabbath  by  two  steps ;  first,  by 
the  institution  of  a  sabbath  for  the  land,  falling  on  every  seventh  year  ;  and 
secondly,  by  the  conferring  of  a  special  sanctity  on  the  seventh  of  these  land 
sabbaths.      2.  With  the  Day  of  Atonement.      II.  Its  provisions.    Eestoration — 

1.  Debtor  released  from  debts.  2.  Slave  released  from  bondage.  3.  Exile  restored 
to  inheritance.  III.  Its  lessons  for  ourselves.  1.  The  coming  of  Christ  was 
the  inauguration  of  a  greater  jubilee,  bringing  world-wide  and  lasting  blessings. 
We  too  are  debtors,  debtors  to  the  law  in  the  whole  round  of  its  requirements  ;  we 
are  slaves  to  sin  and  Satan ;  we  have  forfeited  our  fair  inheritance  of  innocence 
and   heaven.      But   hear  how  Christ  ushers  in   His   ministry  (Luke  iv.  16-21). 

2.  With  us  as  with  the  Jews  it  is  still  on  the  Day  of  Atonement  that  the  jubilee 
trumpet  sounds.  Our  liberty  and  restoration  have  been  dearly  won  (1  Pet.  i.  18, 19). 
With  tbe  Jews  the  neglect  of  the  Day  of  Atonement  led  to  the  loss  of  the  jubilee. 
And  if  the  atonement  of  which  we  speak  so  much  has  never  yet  been  anything  to 
us,  in  our  sense  of  the  need  of  it,  in  our  quest  after  the  blessing  of  it,  to  us  there 
has  been  no  jubilee — we  are  yet  in  our  sins.  Will  we  be  less  in  earnest  than  the 
debtor  or  the  slave  when  we  have  so  much  more  need  to  be  in  earnest  ?  {Walter 
Roberts,  M.  A.)  The  year  of  jubilee  : — I.  Its  peculiar  features.  1.  It  was  a 
great  boon  to  all  sorrowing  ones.  (1)  Every  captive  was  liberated.  (2)  The  exiled 
wanderer  returned.  (3)  The  oppressed  debtor  was  released  from  his  debts. 
(4)  The  unfortunate  poor  were  restored  to  their  ancestral  heritage.  (5)  Families 
that  had  been  separated  were  now  reunited.  (6)  Every  estate  reverted  to  the 
families  to  whom  they  were  originally  allotted  in  the  conquest  of  Canaan.  2.  All 
this  was  intimately  connected  with  the  Day  of  Atonement.  3.  It  was  to  be  a  year 
of  perfect  freedom  from  toil.  4.  Every  business  transaction  had  reference  to  the 
year  of  jubilee.  II.  Its  typical  meaning.  1.  It  has  special  reference  to  the 
millennial  glory  of  Israel  in  the  land  which  Jehovah  keeps  for  them  through  all 
generations.  (1)  God  claims  Canaan  as  He  does  no  other.  (2)  God  has  honoured 
Canaan  as  He  has  no  other,  (a)  There  His  throne  and  sanctuary  were,  (b)  There 
His  priests  ministered,  and  His  pro^Dhets  spoke,  (c)  There  His  own  Son  was  born, 
grew  up,  worked,  wept,  suffered,  died,  and  rose  again,  (d)  When  Jesus  returns, 
His  feet  shall  stand  on  the  Mount  of  Olives.  2.  It  is  a  beautiful  and  correct  type 
of  heaven.  (1)  Where  every  believer  will  enter  upon  his  inheritance,  and  enter 
into  his  perfect  rest.  (2)  Where  all  exile,  captivity,  separation,  poverty  and  op- 
pression wiU  for  ever  cease.  (D.  C.  Hughes,  M.A.)  The  jubilee  ;  or,  The  degenera- 
tive and  corrective  forces  of  society  : — I.  The  degenerative  forces  of  society  are 
IN  ITSELF.  Debt.  Slavery.  Poverty.  Materialism.  II.  The  corrective  forces 
of  society  are  from  God.  1.  Man  is  superior  to  property.  The  violation  of  this 
truth  is  the  ruin  of  society,  and  it  is  violated  every  day.  2.  God  is  the  disposer  of 
property.  "The  earth  is  the  Lord's,  and  the  fulness  thereof."  3.  Society  has 
higher  wants  than  property.  Spiritual  services.  {Homilist.)  The  resemblance 
between  the  year  of  jubilee  and  the  gospel  :^-l.  In  the  blessings  imparted.  1.  Ee- 
mission  of  debts  (see  Acts  xiii.  38).     2.  Liberation  from  bondage  (see  Eom.  vi.  22). 

3.  Restoration  of  forfeited  possessions  (see  1  Pet.  i.  4).  4.  Freedom  from  toil 
(see  Heb.  iv.  3).  5.  Abundant  provisions  and  universal  joy  (see  1  Pet.  i.  8). 
II.  The  jubilee  was  to  be  proclaimed  on  a  particular  day  and  in  a  peculiar 
WAY.  1.  On  the  Day  of  Atonement  (ver.  9;  see  Luke  xxiv.  46,  47).  2.  It  was 
announced  by  the  sound  of  trumpets  (ver.  9  ;  see  Eom.  x.  14,  15).  The  pro- 
clamation was  to  be  to  all  (see  Mark  xvi.  15).  III.  The  blessedness  of  the  gospel 
DISPENSATION  AS  EXPERIENCED  BY  BELIEVERS.  1.  The  personal  enjoyment  of  liberty 
(see  Eom.  viii.  21;  Gal.  v.  1).  (1)  Liberty  from  Satan.  (2)  From  the  world. 
(3)  From  mental  darkness  and  sin.  2.  The  realisation  of  rest  (see  Isa.  xiv.  3). 
(1)  Eest  in  Christ.  (2)  From  works.  (3)  In  labour.  (4)  In  prospect.  3.  The 
possession  of  abundance  (see  Eom.  v.  20,  21).  (1)  The  word.  (2)  The  sacraments. 
(3)  Joy.  (4)  Holy  Ghost.  (5)  Glory.  4.  The  enjoyment  of  salvation  (see  Isa. 
xii.  2).  (1)  Present  salvation.  (2)  Perfect  and  complete  salvation.  (3)  Ever- 
lasting and  infinite  salvation.  (T.  B.  Baker.)  The  joyful  sound  : — One  inter- 
pretation of  the  word  "  jubilee  "  connects  it,  in  a  wild  sort  of  way,  with  a 
rabbinical  legend  concerning  the  ram  caught  in  the  thicket,  at  the  time  when 


320  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxv. 

Abraham  was  tempted  to  sacrifice  his  son  Isaac.  It  was  fabled  in  the  foolish 
tradition  that  the  body  of  this  animal  was  burned  to  ashes,  but  God  raised  it  to  life 
again  afterwards  by  miracle.  Then  out  of  its  skin  was  made  the  mantle  that 
Elijah  wore  in  the  wilderness;  out  of  its  entrails  were  fashioned  strings  for  tlie 
harp  which  David  played  upon.  From  one  of  its  horns  was  constructed  the 
trumpet  which  was  blown  upon  Mount  Sinai ;  from  the  other,  the  trumpet  which 
remained  to  be  blown  at  the  coming  of  the  Messiah.  So  some  of  the  early  com- 
mentators said  that  the  term  "  jubilee  "  was  derived  from  an  Arabic  word  that 
signified  a  ram.  But  the  latter  and  better  interpretation  is  referred  to  an  expres- 
sion in  the  Book  of  Joshua  (vi.  5).  There  the  verse  would  read,  rendered  literally, 
"  as  they  draw  out  with  the  horn  of  jubilee."  The  meaning  seems  to  be,  that  this 
name  of  "  jubilee  "  was  not  given  to  the  instrument  exactly,  but  to  the  note  it 
uttered — the  peculiar  clanging,  continuous,  vibrating  sound  of  a  horn.  The  word 
most  likely  represents  the  prolonged,  quick-rushing,  far-reaching,  deeply  penetra- 
ting blast  of  the  trumpet  as  it  swept  across  the  whole  land.  As  we  press  into  the 
investigation  of  this  most  interesting  portion  of  Hebrew  history,  we  must  pause 
long  enough  at  the  beginning  to  insist  on  the  connection  of  the  great  Day  of 
Atonement  with  the  great  Day  of  Jubilee.  It  came  right  after  it  in  date.  It 
appears  right  after  it  in  the  record  of  institution ;  and  in  spiritual  teaching  it  is 
indispensably  associated  with  it.  There  can  be  no  jubilee  in  God's  universe  till 
atonement  for  sin  is  completed.  I,  The  type.  1.  What  was  the  design  of  the 
jubilee  year  as  God  gave  it  ?  A  necessary  question  this  is,  but  the  answer  will  not 
be  difficult  if  we  take  into  consideration  the  entire  story  of  the  institution.  In 
general,  it  appears  to  have  been  placed  in  the  midst  of  human  life  as  a  barrier 
against  the  three  greatest  ills  humanity  is  heir  to.  It  insisted  on  relief  from 
overwork.  One  grand  idea  of  the  ordinance  was  rest — rest  to  the  soil,  rest  to 
the  toilers  upon  it.  The  jubilee  also  demanded  deliverance  from  oppression. 
There  will  be  found  reward  for  the  closest  study  in  just  searching  out  in  detail  the 
skilful  provisions  made  to  relieve  the  weight  of  every  kind  of  bond-service  per- 
mitted in  those  times.  A  consideration  for  such  exigency  is  inserted  in  the  com- 
mandment. There  is  one  for  the  "  brother,"  and  one  for  the  "  stranger,"  and  one 
for  the  "  sojourner."  All  servants  are  here  declared  to  be  God's  servants,  as  the 
whole  land  is  declared  to  be  God's  land.  And  in  this  great  year  of  grace  the  time 
has  come  for  all  slaves  to  go  free — free  for  ever.  The  jubilee  likewise  ordered 
release  from  obligation.  Among  all  the  weights  and  worries  of  human  life  surely 
one  of  the  cruellest  is  debt.  "  Do  not  rich  men  oppress  you,  and  draw  you 
before  the  judgment  seats?"  It  is  only  natural  that  they  should;  for  human 
nature  knows  little  change.  The  wisest  man  in  the  world  once  said  plainly: 
"  The  rich  ruleth  over  the  poor,  and  the  borrower  is  servant  to  the  lender."  Here 
again  is  an  intervention  from  heaven  in  behalf  of  distressed  debtors.  The  law 
made  provision  for  the  restoration  of  estates,  and  clearance  from  usury  at  the  end 
of  the  fiftieth  year.  2.  What  was  the  welcome  of  the  jubilee  as  the  people  gave  it 
reception  ?  There  can  be  but  one  answer :  A  great  glad  day  of  universal  re- 
joicing it  was  through  the  length  and  breadth  of  the  land.  II.  The  antitype. 
In  general,  it  may  be  said  that  the  sound  of  those  trumpets  was  the  symbol  of  the 
proclamation  of  Christ's  gospel  over  all  the  earth.  The  purpose  of  this  gospel  was 
to  check  the  deteriorating  forces  in  human  society ;  to  set  up  jjrinciples  which  would 
deliver  men  from  all  weights  and  oppressions  of  sin  and  sinners.  1.  So  there  is 
such  a  thing  as  a  jubilee  in  the  heart.  When  the  bondage  of  corruption  is  broken, 
the  debt  of  transgression  paid,  the  handwriting  that  was  against  us  (Col.  ii.  14) 
taken  away  and  nailed  to  the  Cross,  the  soul  freed  indeed  because  freed  by  the  truth, 
our  Redeemer  surely  coming  (Job  xix.  25)  and  certain  to  stand  on  the  earth — then 
it  is  that  there  seems  to  sound  a  great  joy  of  deliverance  through  all  the  nature  of 
the  regenerate  man  !  2.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  a  jubilee  in  the  Church.  Times 
have  been  in  history  when  piety  was  low,  and  godly  men  failed  ;  the  ways  of  Zion 
mourned,  the  city  sat  solitary,  the  fires  on  the  altars  were  dim  in  the  ashes.  Then 
came  a  rushing  sound  of  spiritual  presence,  almost  like  a  pressure,  and  a  blast  of 
silver  trumpets,  calling  to  activity,  to  penitence,  to  singing,  and  to  religious  life 
again.  The  Redeemer  came  to  Zion  (Isa.  lix.  20),  and  unto  them  that  turned  from 
transgression  in  Jacob.  3.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  a  jubilee  in  the  state.  Poets 
are  singing  about,  "  the  good  time  coming  "  ;  but  it  has  not  yet  arrived.  Still,  it 
is  promised  (Isa.  Ixi.  1,  2).  4.  There  is  such  a  thing  as  a  jubilee  in  the  world. 
This  is  the  final  restitution,  the  day  of  all  days  on  the  earth.  Of  course,  the 
blessing  wUl  come  through  the  Church  ;  but  the  whole  race  will  share  something  of 


CHAP.  XXV.]  LEVITICUS.  321 

its  vast  benediction.     (C  S.  Robinson,  D.D.)         The  jubilee  a  type  of  the  gospel : — • 

1.  Its  primary  purpose.  1.  Kind  and  benevolent.  2.  Wise  and  politic.  3.  Good 
and  beneficial.  II.  Its  typical  reference.  1.  The  jubilee  of  grace.  2.  The 
jubilee  of  glory.  III.  Its  joyful  commencement  (Psa.  Ixxxix.  15).  (Wm.  Sleigh.) 
Jubilee  gladness  : — The  Old  Testament  jubilee  was  meant  to  be  a  type  of  the  entire 
New  Testament  dispensation  in  three  points,  imaging  by  its  sabbatic  character  the 
gospel  rest  in  Christ,  by  its  unreserved  deliverance  of  captives  and  slaves  the 
Christian  redemption  from  guilt  and  spiritual  bondage,  and  by  its  universal  resti- 
tution of  property  to  the  poor  and  needy  the  fulness  of  that  inheritance  which  is 
treasured  up  for  all  the  faithful  in  Christ,  whose  unsearchable  riches,  like  the 
national  possessions,  opened  up  by  the  jubilee,  enrich  all,  without  impoverishing 
any  who  make  good  their  title.  I.  The  first  element  of  jubilee  gladness,  common 
to  the  Jew  of  old  and  the  Christian  amid  the  celebrations  of  the  gospel  age,  is  the 
JOY  OF  distinction  OR  OF  PRIVILEGE.  There  was  not  a  single  memorial  of  blessing 
or  promise,  temporal  or  spiritual,  which  the  jubilee  did  not  recall,  and  hold  up 
before  the  eyes  of  that  most  favoured  nation,  so  that  it  was  on  God's  part  an 
impi-essive  reiteration  of  His  covenant,  and  on  their  part  a  grateful  recognition 
that  they  were  indeed  a  "  chosen  generation,  a  royal  priesthood,  a  peculiar  people." 
The  Christian  Church,  and  we  as  members  of  it,  are  privileged — 1.  As  to  safety. 

2.  As  to  character.  3.  As  to  work.  4.  As  to  suffering.  II.  The  second  great 
element  of  the  gladness  of  jubilee  is  the  joy  of  stability  and  progression. 
Traces  of  progress  are  to  be  found  in  every  leading  country  of  the  Christian  world. 
The  last  half  century  has  seen  the  cause  of  missions  pass  through  all  its  phases, 
and  encounter  all  its  perils  from  ridicule,  neglect,  hope  deferred,  till  now  it  ranks 
perhaps  as  the  most  distinctive  and  glorious  feature  of  our  age.  III.  The  third 
element  in  the  jubilee  gladness  is  the  joy  of  anticipation  or  consummation.  We 
believe  that  faith  and  hope  shall  in  God's  own  time  effect  a  miirvellous  conquest  of 
this  long-revolted  earth,  and  that  love,  working  in  a  united  and  purified  Church, 
shall  through  great  periods  gather  up  and  treasure  the  spoils  of  victory.  But  it  is 
to  Christ's  coming  that  we  look  forward  and  hasten,  as  the  crown  and  consumma- 
tion of  Christian  hope.  {J.  Cairns.)  Land  tenure  : — All  men  ultimately  get 
their  living  out  of  the  soil.  Tbere  never  will  be  a  process  by  which  the  original 
elements  that  enter  into  food  will  be  manufactured  into  food.  We  may  fly  in  the 
air,  or  travel  around  the  earth  with  the  sun ;  but  we  shall  never  take  the  unor- 
ganised substances  that  form  grass  and  grain  and  the  flesh  of  animals,  and  directly 
convert  them  into  food ;  they  must  first  be  organised  into  vital  forms.  Hence, 
questions  pertaining  to  land  are  the  most  imperative  that  come  before  men.  To 
get  man  rightly  related  to  the  soil,  in  such  a  way  that  he  shall  most  easdy  get  his 
food  from  it,  this  is  the  underlying  question  of  all  history,  its  keynote  and  largest 
achievement.  The  chief  struggles  in  all  ages  and  nations  have  turned  upon  this 
relation.  There  are  two  forces  at  work  in  the  matter,  both  proceeding  out  of  what 
seems  almost  an  instinct  for  ownership  of  the  soil.  The  earth  is  our  mother,  and 
she  woos  us  perpetually  to  herself.  To  own  some  spot  of  land,  and  be  able  to  say, 
"  This  is  mine,"  is  one  of  the  sweetest  of  personal  feelings;  it  declares  our  kinship 
with  this  natural  world  that  nurses  our  life  and  upholds  our  feet.  These  two 
forces  that  draw  men  to  the  soil  are,  first,  a  natural,  almost  instinctive  sense  of 
keeping  close  to  the  source  of  life,  as  a  wise  general  does  not  allow  himself  to  be 
separated  from  his  supplies.  The  other  force  is  the  pride  and  greed  and  love  of 
power  of  the  strong.  Here  is  a  triple-woven  force  out  of  which  has  sprung  by  far 
the  greater  part  of  the  injustice  and  oppression  that  have  afflicted  the  race.  The 
possession  of  the  soil  is  the  surest  exponent  and  standmg-ground  of  worldly  force. 
Everything  else  may  fail :  the  hearts  of  men,  coined  treasures,  ships  and  houses, 
bonds  and  promises  to  pay,  but  so  long  as  society  keeps  a  man  in  the  possession  of 
land  he  is  so  far  forth  strong  ;  he  has  a  place  to  stand  in,  the  fortifications  built  by 
nature,  and  the  arms  and  defences  that  spring  perpetually  out  of  the  earth ;  he 
realises  the  fable  of  Antaeus.  The  remarkable  feature  of  the  Jewish  Common- 
wealth is  its  anticipatory  legislation  against  probable,  and  otherwise  certain  abuses. 
The  struggles  of  other  nations,  and  the  skill  of  statesmanship,  have  been  to  correct 
abuses ;  in  the  Jewish  Commonwealth  they  were  foreseen  and  provided  against. 
There  are  no  words  to  express  the  wonder  felt  by  the  student  of  social  science  as 
he  first  measures  the  significance  of  that  feature  of  the  Jewish  state  known  as  the 
year  of  jubilee.  It  is  little  understood,  hidden  away  in  an  uninteresting  book, 
stated  in  ancient  and  blind  phraseology,  a  thing  of  long  past  ages,  nevertheless  it 
remains  the  most  exalted  piece  of  statesmanship  the  world  has  known — an  example 

21 


322  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxv. 

of  social  sagacity,  and  broad,  far-reaching  wisdom,  such  as  we  look  for  in  vain  in 
the  annals  of  any  other  nation.  It  settled  at  the  outs^et  the  problem  that  no  other 
people  ever  solved  except  through  ages  of  struggle  and  revolution.  The  Hebrew 
nation  existed  under  the  consciousness  of  a  covenant  with  .Jehovah.  It  would  be 
a  petty  criticism  that  pried  into  the  origin  of  this  belief,  moved  by  contempt  at  the 
seeming  presumption  of  this  little  nation  of  fugitive  slaves — petty  and  narrow 
indeed!  It  were  wiser  and  more  scientific  to  regard  every  nation  as  under 
covenant  with  God,  if  it  but  had  the  wisdom  to  know  it.  Tbat  this  nation 
discerned  the  eternal  fact,  and  wrought  it  into  the  foundations  of  their  State,  only 
shows  its  insight  into  the  nature  of  the  State,  and  its  receptivity  of  inspired  truth. 
It  does  not  lessen  the  wisdom  of  this  legislation  that  it  probably  did  not  meet  the 
exigencies  of  the  later  development  of  the  nation,  nor  even  that  its  details  may 
have  become  a  hindrance  in  the  more  complex  state  of  society  that  followed  the 
captivity  when  it  probably  ceased  to  be  enforced.  Its  wisdom  is  to  be  found  in  its 
previsionary  features,  in  its  reversal  of  ordinary  history,  that  is,  it  planted  the 
nation  on  equal  rights  at  the  outset  instead  of  leaving  them  to  be  achieved  by 
struggle,  and  in  its  assertion  of  the  general  principle  that  it  is  wise  to  keep  the 
body  of  the  people  as  near  the  source  of  their  subsistence  as  possible.  It  was  not 
given  up  until  it  bad  educated  and  grounded  the  nation  in  those  conceptions  of 
practical  righteousness  that  are  found  in  the  pages  of  the  prophets,  through  whom 
they  bave  become  the  inspiration  of  the  world.  Its  design  and  effect  are  evident. 
It  was  a  bar  to  monopoly  of  the  land.  All  greed  and  pride  in  this  direction  were 
limited.  One  might  add  field  to  field  for  a  series  of  years,  but  after  a  time  the 
process  ceased  and  the  lands  went  back  to  their  original  owners.  The  purpose 
was  to  make  such  a  habit  unprofitable,  to  keep  the  resources  of  society  evenly  dis- 
tributed, to  prevent  the  rich  from  becoming  too  rich  and  the  poor  hopelessly  poor, 
to  undo  misfortune,  to  give  those  who  had  erred  through  sloth  or  improvidence  an 
opportunity  to  improve  the  lessons  of  poverty,  to  prevent  children  from  reaping 
the  faults  of  their  parents ;  one  generation  might  squander  its  portion  but  the 
next  was  not  forced  to  inherit  the  consequences.  Though  a  political  measure,  it  is 
informed  with  spiritual  significance.  It  is  throughout  instinct  with  mercy.  It 
taught  humanity.  It  rebuked  and  repressed  the  great  sins.  It  was  in  keeping 
with  the  underlying  fact  of  the  national  history  which  was  deliverance,  and,  as 
well,  with  the  central  idea  of  the  world,  which  is  redemption,  redemption  from  evil 
however  caused  and  of  whatever  kind.  It  was  an  assertion  of  perpetual  hope, 
hope  which,  though  long  delayed,  comes  at  last  to  all,  and  every  man  returns  to 
the  possessions  his  Creator  gave  him.  It  vas  in  its  profoundest  meaning  a  prophecy 
wrought  into  the  practical  economy  of  a  nation.  It  shadows  forth  the  recovery 
from  evil,  the  undoing  of  all  burdens  that  weigh  down  humanity,  the  eternal  in- 
heritance awaiting  God's  children  when  his  cycle  is  complete.  This  ancient  piece 
of  statesmanship  is  full  of  pointed  lessons  for  these  modern  times.  It  cannot  be 
reproduced  in  form,  but  it  still  teaches  the  ever  necessary  lesson,  that  nations  and 
corporations  and  individuals  are  always  forgetting,  that  the  world  belongs  to  all 
men  by  the  gift  of  God.  It  teaches  the  wisdom  of  showing  mercy  to  the  poor  and 
unfortunate,  and  the  unwisdom  of  permitting  endless  monopolies  and  limitless 
increase  of  wealth.  It  is  the  business  of  the  State  to  see  that  these  things  are 
restricted,  as  both  right  and  safe,  as  necessary  for  the  rich  as  for  the  poor.  The 
methods  employed  may  sometimes  seem  to  lack  in  technical  justice,  but  there  is  a 
righteousness  that  lies  back  of  formal  justice.  As  the  world  goes,  the  forms  of 
justice  are  apt  to  become  the  instruments  of  oppression  in  the  hands  of  the 
avaricious,  the  proud,  and  the  strong.  These  three  always  lie  in  wait  to  oppress 
the  poor,  the  humble,  and  the  weak  ;  and  their  choicest  instruments  are  those 
legal  forms  and  institutions  that  are  necessary  to  society.  But  they  have  their 
limits  by  a  law  which  is  above  all  such  laws  and  formal  institutions.  When  wealth 
oppresses  the  poor,  or  keeps  them  at  the  mere  living  point,  when  monopolies  tax 
the  people,  whenever  a  few  own  the  soil,  however  legal  the  form  of  possession, 
when  there  is  any  process  going  on  by  which  the  rich  are  growing  richer  and  the 
poor  poorer,  there  is  a  Divine  justice  above  all  formal  justice,  that  steps  in  and 
declares  that  such  processes  must  stop.  (T.  T.  Mnvger.)  The  year  of  jubilee: — 
The  principal  and  distinguishing  point  in  the  jubilee  year  was,  that  all  landed 
property  reverted  to  its  original  possessors.  The  institution  was  this :  the  people 
coming  as  a  whole  people,  consisting  of  distinct  tribes  and  families,  and  settling 
down  upon  the  teiritory,  God  says,  "  This  land  is  Mine ;  I  give  it  to  you,  in 
distinct  portions  for  your  distinct  families,  never  to  be  alienated."     So  that  the 


CHAP.  XXV.]  LEVITICUS.  323 

proper  way  of  putting  it,  in  our  modern  language,  would  be  that  the  land,  the 
freehold  of  any  estate  never  could  be  sold,  but  only  the  produce  of  it  for  so 
many  years.  It  never  could  go  entirely  out  of  the  family  to  whom  it  belonged. 
But  the  price  to  be  given  would  vary  according  to  the  nearness  or  the  distance 
of  the  jubilee  year  ;  according  to  the  number  of  years  till  that  time,  less  or  more 
would  be  paid  for  the  produce  of  the  land;  for  when  that  time  came  the  lands 
■were  given  up  by  those  who  had  bought  the  produce  of  them  till  then,  and  every- 
body went  back  to  his  original  paternal  possession.  Houses  that  were  built  in 
villages,  and  connected  with  the  open  field,  were  subject  also  to  that  law  ;  and  they 
went  back.  But  houses  that  were  built  in  cities  were  not  subject  to  that  law.  At 
any  time  during  the  years  that  preceded  the  jubilee,  any  portion  of  land,  any  field 
or  farm,  could  be  redeemed  ;  if  the  man  that  had  parted  with  it  could  go  and  offer 
the  money  it  was  worth,  he  could  demand  it ;  any  of  his  relatives  could  redeem  it 
in  the  same  way.  They  could  only  do  this  for  one  year  with  a  house  in  a  city  ; 
after  that  it  went  from  them  entirely.  But  the  principal  point  in  the  jubilee  year 
was  this  liberty,  this  remission  of  debts,  this  return  of  everybody  to  their  original 
inheritance,  which  might  have  been  parted  with  by  vice,  by  improvidence,  by 
indiscretion,  or  which  might  have  gone  from  them  by  misfortune  and  unavoidable 
vicissitude.  The  objects  of  this  very  peculiar  institution,  I  think  it  is  fair  to 
suppose,  might  be  such  as  these.  It  was  intended  to  produce  a  recollection  in  the 
mind  of  the  people,  of  the  manner  in  which  God  had  brought  them  in,  and  settled 
them  there,  and  given  them  their  possessions  ;  and  of  course,  of  their  peculiar 
covenant  relation  to  Him.  It  would  have  a  tendency  also  to  prevent  the  rise  of  a 
large  landed  power,  that  might  become  an  oppressive  and  tyrannical  aristocracy. 
It  would  certainly  have  a  tendency  also  to  make  the  people  very  careful  about 
their  genealogies,  in  order  that  they  might  easily  estabhsh  their  claim  to  such 
and  such  property.  And  that,  we  think — the  distinctness  and  clearness  of  the 
genealogy  with  respect  to  the  tribes  and  families — had  also  a  bearing  upon  the 
prophecies  respecting  the  Messiah  and  His  coming  through  a  particular  tribe  and 
family.  It  was  intended,  perhaps,  or  at  least  it  would  have  that  tendency,  even  to 
nritigate  the  evils  that  men  by  their  indiscretion  and  improvidence  might  bring 
upon  themselves  and  upon  their  families  ;  give  to  them,  as  it  were,  another  chance 
of  recovering  themselves,  or  at  least  to  their  descendants,  of  recovering  possessions 
that  ought  to  have  been  kept.  And  altogether,  the  influence  of  it  would  be,  I 
think,  to  diffuse  a  very  humanising  and  kind  and  happy  feeling  throughout  the 
whole  community.  (T.  Binney.)  Results  of  jubilee  year: — It  was  in  ancient 
Israel,  as  in  the  heavens  above  us,  whose  luminaries,  after  a  certain  period 
of  time  has  elapsed,  always  return  to  the  same  place  in  the  firmament,  and  the 
same  relative  position  to  each  other.  The  sun,  for  instance,  although  chang- 
ing his  place  daily,  shall  rise  and  set,  twelve  months  from  this  date,  at  the 
same  hour,  and  appear  at  his  meridian  in  the  same  spot  as  to-day.  Corres- 
ponding to  that,  or  like  the  revolution  of  a  wheel,  which  restores  every  spoke  to  its 
former  place,  society,  whatever  change  meanwhile  took  place  in  personal  liberty  or 
hereditary  property,  returned,  among  the  old  Hebrews,  to  the  very  same  state  in 
■which  it  was  at  the  commencement  of  those  fifty  years  whose  close  brought  in  the 
jubilee.  (T.  Guthrie,  D.D.)  Liberty  through  Christ: — It  is  a  sad  sight  to  see 
men  bound  with  chains,  so  that  they  cannot  use  their  limbs.  And  if  they  are  shut 
up  in  prison,  as  well  as  bound  with  chains,  this  is  still  more  sad.  But  there  are 
chains  and  prisons  for  the  souls  of  men,  as  well  as  for  their  bodies.  If  we  give 
way  to  any  sin,  that  sin  binds  our  souls  so  that  they  can  have  no  more  freedom  of 
action  than  our  bodies  would  have  if  they  were  bound  id  chains  of  iron.  This  is 
what  is  meant  in  one  of  the  beautiful  collects  of  our  Church,  in  which  we  pray  that 
we  may  "  be  delivered  from  the  bands  of  those  sins  which  by  our  frailty  we  have 
committed."  And  this  is  the  reason  why  the  Bible  speaks  of  men  as  being  "  taken 
captive  by  Satan  at  his  will "  (2  Tim.  ii.  26).  He  tempts  men  to  commit  sins,  and 
then  binds  them  in  the  chains  of  those  sins ;  and  in  this  way  they  are  made  his 
prisoners  or  captives.  And  when  Jesus  seeks  a  poor  sinner,  and  converts  him  by 
His  grace  ;  when  He  delivers  him  from  the  power  of  his  sins,  changes  his  heart, 
and  helps  him  to  lead  a  new  life,  then  it  is  that  He  is  blessing  that  man  by  giving 
liberty  to  the  captive.  But  there  are  no  chains  that  Satan  makes  for  men  so  strong 
as  those  which  he  fastens  on  the  soul  of  the  poor  drunkard.  He  is  bound  hand 
and  foot.  The  prison  in  which  he  is  made  captive  has  walls  so  thick,  and  doors  so 
strongly  bolted  and  barred,  that  he  never  can  get  out  by  any  efforts  of  his  own. 
But  Jesus  is  able  to  break  the  strongest  chain  by  which  any  poor  drunkard  was 


324  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxv. 

ever  bound,  and  to  open  the  prison  door  in  spite  of  all  the  bolts  and  bars  that  may 
secure  it.  Here  is  an  illusiration  of  this  statement,  which  I  know  to  be  true. 
One  day,  while  Mr.  Moody  was  preaching  in  our  city,  I  received  a  letter  written  by 
a  person  who  signed  himself  "  A  Keformed  Drunkard."  He  wished  me  to  read 
this  letter  in  the  noonday  meeting  for  the  encouragement  of  those  who  were  trying 
to  break  loose  from  the  chains  by  which  the  drunkard  is  bound.  And  I  did  read  it 
there.  The  writer  of  this  letter  called  to  see  me  before  I  read  it  in  public,  that  I 
might  be  sure  it  was  all  right.  I  was  surprised  at  his  appearance  when  I  saw  him. 
He  was  as  fine-looking,  gentlemanly  a  man  as  I  had  ever  seen.  He  was  intelligent 
and  well  educated.  This  was  his  story,  as  briefly  as  I  can  give  it.  "  My  family," 
he  said,  "  is  one  of  the  most  respectable  in  Philadelphia.  They  belong  to  the 
Society  of  Friends.  My  mother,  now  in  heaven,  was  formerly  a  preacher  in  the 
Society.  For  seven  years  I  had  been  a  confirmed  drunkard.  By  this  terrible  evil 
I  had  lost  my  money,  my  business,  my  character,  my  health,  my  friends,  and  my 
self-respect.  It  had  even  separated  me  from  my  wife  and  family,  and  made  me 
an  outcast  from  society.  I  was  lost  to  all  that  was  good.  I  had  tried  again  and 
again  to  stop  drinking,  but  in  vain.  I  had  taken  different  medicines,  and  had 
signed  the  temperance  pledge  a  number  of  times,  but  without  any  benefit.  Every- 
body said  my  case  was  hopelpss.  At  last,  when  I  was  in  a  public  hospital,  sick 
with  that  dreadful  disease  which  drunkenness  causes,  called  delirium  tremens, 
and  was  given  up  to  die  ;  then,  as  I  believe,  in  answer  to  the  prayers  of  my  sainted 
mother,  I  was  led  to  look  to  Jesus.  I  called  on  Him  for  help.  He  heard  my  cry, 
and  helped  me.  By  the  power  of  His  grace  He  broke  the  strong  chains  of  that 
dreadful  sin  by  which  I  had  been  bound,  and  which  nothing  but  the  grace  of  God 
can  break.  I  rose  from  my  sick  bed  a  changed  man.  By  the  help  which  Jesus 
gave  me  I  was  able  to  stop  drinking.  And  now  for  months  I  have  been  a  sober 
man.  I  am  restored  to  health,  to  happiness,  and  usefulness,  to  my  friends  and 
to  my  family,  and  am  on  the  way  to  heaven,  where  I  hope  to  meet  that  beloved 
mother  through  whose  prayers  I  have  been  saved."  Such  was  this  man's  story. 
Here  we  see  how  Jesus  gives  deliverance  to  the  captives.  And  what  He  did  for 
this  poor  prisoner  of  sin  and  Satan  He  is  able  and  willing  to  do  for  all  who  call 
upon  Him.  And  if  He  has  powt^r  to  help  men  in  this  way,  then  it  may  well  be 
said  that  He  was  "  sent  to  bless  them."     {Richard  Netvton,  D.D.)  The  sinner'g 

chains  are  self  forged : — It  is  told  of  a  famous  smith  of  mediffival  times,  that 
having  been  taken  prisoner  and  immured  in  a  dungeon,  he  conceived  the  idea  of 
escaping,  and  began  to  examine  the  chain  that  bound  him,  with  a  view  to  discover 
some  flaw  that  might  make  it  easier  to  be  broken.  His  hope  was  vain,  for  he 
found,  from  marks  upon  it,  that  it  was  one  of  his  own  workmanship,  and  it  had 
always  been  his  boant  that  none  could  ever  break  a  chain  that  he  had  forged.  And 
now  it  was  his  own  chain  that  bound  him.  It  is  thus  with  the  sinner.  His  own 
hands  have  forged  the  chain  that  binds  him,  a  chain  which  in  endless  and  ever- 
multiplying  coils  is  around  his  soul,  and  which  no  human  hand  can- break.  Yet  is 
there  a  hand  can  break  it — the  hand  of  Him  who  brings  "liberty  to  the  captives, 
and  the  opening  of  the  prison  to  them  that  are  bound."  {Preacher's  Lantern.) 
Freedom  through  Christ: — It  is  stated  on  good  authority  that  when  the  old 
Emperor  of  Eussia  died,  he  made  the  present  Emperor  piomise  to  set  all  those 
serfs  free.  So  the  present  emperor  called  the  Imperial  Council  together,  and  said, 
"  I  want  to  see  if  you  can  make  some  plan  by  which  we  can  set  these  men  free." 
They  were  the  proprietors  of  these  serfs,  and,  of  course,  they  didn't  want  to  free 
them.  The  Imperial  Council  was  in  session  for  six  long  months,  and  one  evening 
they  sent  in  their  decision,  sealed,  that  it  was  not  right,  and  it  is  said  that  he  went 
down  to  the  Greek  Church,  partook  of  the  sacrament,  and  went  to  his  palace ;  and 
the  next  morning  there  was  a  great  commotion,  and  i^eople  could  not  understand 
it.  Great  cannons  were  brought  up  around  his  palace,  and  in  a  little  while 
65,000  soldiers  were  gathered  around  the  royal  palace;  and  just  at  twelve  o'clock 
at  midnight  there  came  out  what  we  call  a  proclamation,  but  what  they  call  a 
ukase,  to  the  serfs  of  Russia,  that  they  were  free  for  ever.  It  spread  through  the 
empire,  and  a  shout  went  through  the  nation,  "  The  men  born  in  slavery  are  set 
free  !  "  They  had  found  one  that  had  set  them  free.  Wasn't  that  good  news  ? 
But  here  is  the  news  of  the  gospel,  that  every  man  born  in  sin,  and  Ukea 
captive  bv  Satan,  can  be  set  free  through  the  power  of  the  Lord  Jesus. 
{T.   De  Witt  Tahnagi'.)  Deliverance  from  sin: — Sin  is  the  great  evil  of  the 

world.  It  has  infected  all  hearts,  and  there  is  none  righteous — no,  not  one. 
This  is   the  witness  of  Scripture  :    "  All  have  sinned   and   come   short   of   the 


CHAP.  XXV.]  LEVITICUS.  325 

glory  of  God."  But  it  needs  no  revelation  to  tell  men  this.  The  wise  ones 
of  the  lieatheitworld  before  Christ  came  to  bear  the  same  testimony.  A  learned 
Greek,  called  Xenophon,  said,  "It  is  clear  that  I  have  two  souls  ;  when  the  good 
one  gets  the  upper  hand  it  does  right ;  when  the  evil  it  enters  on  wicked  courses." 
A  still  wiser  man,  named  Plato,  used  the  image  of  a  good  and  bad  horse,  yoked  to 
a  chariot,  and  driven  by  the  same  charioteer.  There  are  two  powers  at  work  in 
human  nature,  dragging  in  different  directions.  And  Crates,  another  great  man  of 
olden  times,  said  that  it  was  impossible  to  find  a  man  who  had  not  fallen  ;  just  as 
every  pomegranate  had  a  bad  grain  in  it,  so  every  character  had  some  flaw,  some 
seed  of  corruption.  So  we  find  that  men  of  heathen  lands  to-day,  who  have  never 
heard  the  name  of  Christ,  echo  the  cry  of  the  Apostle  Paul,  "  0  wretched  man  that 
I  am  !  who  shall  deliver  me  from  the  body  of  this  death  ?  "  They  feel  their 
bondage  to  evil ;  they  feel  their  need  of  a  deliverance.  Now  Jesus  is  the  Saviour 
of  men.  Only  Christ  has  borne  this  great  name.  Mohammed  is  prophet ;  Buddha 
is  teacher  only ;  Jesus  is  Saviour.  He  can  deliver  us  from  the  bondage  of  sin. 
One  of  my  friends,  who  is  a  missionary  in  China,  told  me  the  other  day  that  the 
creed  of  many  a  Christian  convert  may  be  summed  up  in  a  sentence :  "  I  believe 
that  Jesus  Christ  is  able  to  deliver  me  from  the  opium  habit."  The  gospel  wins 
them  by  the  promise  of  deliverance  from  that  frightful  vice.  They  begin  with  that. 
They  put  the  saving  power  of  Jesus  to  the  proof.  "  I  am  given  up  to  every  sin 
you  can  imagine,"  said  Liu  Kisa  Shan;  "I  am  an  opium  smoker,  a  libertine,  a 
gambler,  a  drunkard,  an  unfilial  man,  and  everything  that  is  bad.  Can  Christ 
Jesus  save  me  ?  "  He  had  strolled  into  the  chapel  at  Hankow,  and  the  preacher's 
words  had  stirred  the  hope  of  deliverance  in  his  heart.  "  Can  Christ  Jesus  save 
me?"  "Yes;  He  can,  and  He  will,"  said  the  preacher.  And  they  knelt  down 
together  and  cried  to  Him  for  salvation.  And  the  new  heart  was  given  of  which 
we  were  talking  last  week.  And  Liu  went  home  to  his  friends,  to  show  them  how 
^reat  things  the  Lord  had  done  for  him  ;  and  is  to-day  the  centre  of  a  gospel  work 
where  once  he  was  notorious  for  evil  living.  Jesus  saves  men  to-day.  He  can 
save  you,  for  "  He  is  able  to  save  unto  the  uttermost  all  that  come  unto  God 
through  Him."  {Hoicard  James.)  Beleas>'d  from  debt : — The  great  Henry  Clay 
was  once  placed  in  a  position  where  he  could  not  refuse  a  favour,  and  yet  where 
he  would  not  have  credited  himself  with  doing  anything  to  earn  the  release  he 
received.  He  owed  £2,000  at  the  Northern  Bank  of  Kentucky,  and  his  note  for 
that  amount  had  been  renewed  from  time  to  time,  in  spite  of  all  his  efforts  to 
contrive  a  way  to  meet  it — until  the  debt  became  a  source  of  almost  hopeless 
anxiety  to  him.  The  thought  of  it  intruded  upon  him  everywhere,  and  embar- 
rassed his  work,  and  worried  his  rest.  The  day  for  payment  would  come  again, 
and  find  him  as  helpless  as  ever.  He  chafed  like  a  lion  in  a  net.  Whether  or  not 
he  ever  betrayed  his  uneasiness,  there  were  at  least  a  few  who  came  to  know  its 
secret — and  with  results  such  as  he  was  the  last  man  to  expect.  He  went  into  the 
bank  one  morning  on  the  old  errand.  "  I  have  called  to  see  about  my  debt."  The 
cashier  replied,  "It  has  been  paid;  you  don't  owe  us  anything."  He  was  struck 
with  amazement,  and,  under  strong  emotion,  he  turned  and  went  out.  Those  men 
who  paid  the  embarrassed  statesman's  debt  did  it  because  they  loved  him.  Christ 
Jesus  loved  us  so  well  that  He  died  to  release  us  from  the  sins  of  the  past,  and 
became  Surety  Himself  for  our  debt  to  God's  broken  law  which  we  never  could  pay. 
We  never  earned  such  a  boon.  It  was  only  His  love  that  gave  it.  {Christian  Age.) 
Ye  shall  not  therefore  oppress  one  another. — The  oppressor  rebuked  and  the  oppres 
sion  removed  : — I.  The  oppression  which  now  exists,  and  which  it  is  oub  duty  to 
BEMovE.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  there  is  a  fierce  spirit  of  competition  abroad 
— a  spirit  which  pervades  every  trade,  which  enters  every  profession,  which  stalks 
about  our  exchange,  sits  by  the  merchant  and  the  banker  at  their  desks,  opens  the 
shop  early  and  closes  it  late,  excites  angry  feeling  and  envy,  makes  the  man  of 
business  anxious  and  excited  abroad,  sullen  or  fretful  at  home,  which  unfastens  the 
restraints  of  religion  and  honour,  interposes  between  neighbour  and  neighbour, 
friend  and  friend,  relation  and  relation  :  it  suggests  enterprises  which  are  rash, 
bargains  which  are  hard,  speculations  of  doubtful  morality,  and  acts  which  once 
would  have  made  the  honest  cheek  to  glow  with  the  blush  of  shame.  This  spirit 
it  is  which  leads  to  fearful  embarrassments,  unlawful  expedients,  a  wretched  parsi- 
mony, a  false  appearance,  a  costly  display,  a  feverish  existence,  an  untimely  end. 
Oh  !  if  there  be  a  people  to  whom  it  is  a  duty  to  sound  this  warning,  "  Take  heed 
and  beware  of  covetousness,"  that  nation  is  our  own.  It  has  been  most  truly  said, 
that  the  "  desire  of  accumulation  is  the  source  of  all  our  greatness  and  all  our  base- 


326  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxv, 

ness.  It  is  at  once  our  glory  and  our  phame.  It  is  the  cause  of  our  commerce,  of 
our  navy,  of  our  militai'y  triumphs,  of  our  enormous  wealth,  and  our  marvellous 
inventions  ;  and  it  is  the  cause  of  our  factions  and  animosities,  of  our  squalid 
pauperism,  and  the  worse  than  heathen  degradation  of  our  population."  This 
spirit  has  burst  forth  with  such  a  fearful  wide-spreading  influence  that  men 
begin  to  look  aghast,  and  wonder  what  it  will  lead  to.  Poets  have  sung  of  such 
a  time ;  the  Word  of  God  has  warned  us  against  it ;  statesmen  are  meditating 
upon  it ;  the  press  is  thundering  against  it ;  and  very  late — alas !  too  late  ! — 
the  pulpit  is  giving  utterance  to  the  wise,  loving  counsels  of  One  who  said,  "  A 
man's  life  consistetli  not  in  the  abundance  of  the  things  which  he  possesses."  Now, 
before  I  proceed  to  place  before  you  the  oppression  v\hich  prevails,  and  the  serious 
consequences  which  are  resulting  from  it,  let  me  ask,  however  this  question  may 
affect  yourself,  whether  you  would  wish  such  a  state  of  things  to  go  on  unchecked 
and  unrebuked?  Would  you  wish  the  fever  of  speculation,  of  competition,  to 
increase  ?  Would  you  wish  the  spirit  of  dissatisfaction  amongst  the  working 
classes  to  strengthen  ?  There  can  be  no  question  that  whilst  many  schemes  of 
Christian  benevolence  and  piety  have  been  started  and  carried  out,  having  reference 
to  other  lands,  there  has  prevailed  amongst  ourselves  a  wretchedness  and  depth 
of  suffering  which  ought  long  ago  to  have  been  investigated  and  relieved.  This 
misery  has  been  unheeded,  not  because  other  objects  have  enlisted  sympathy  and 
received  attention — for  that  would  be  a  foul  libel  upon  that  charity  which  "  never 
faileth,"  and  can  alike  stretch  forth  its  arms  to  succour  the  African  slave  and  bend 
down  to  whisper  comfort  and  advice  to  the  miserable  at  home — but  there  has  grown 
up  so  silently  and  gradually  a  monster  evil,  that  even  the  victims  themselves  have 
been  slow  to  discern  its  character,  and  slower  still  to  suggest  a  remedy.  The  human 
frame  is  limited  in  its  power  of  enduring  fatigue ;  and  when  we  consider  that  there 
are  thousands  who  are  employed  in  constant  labour  for  more  than  twelve  hours, 
often,  too,  in  an  unwholesome  atmosphere  and  in  a  constrained  position,  you  will 
be  prepared  for  the  statement,  made  upon  medical  testimony,  that  impaired,, 
exhausted  frames,  and  often  an  untimely  death,  are  the  fruits  of  this  system.  Oh  ! 
think,  I  pray,  of  these  bitter  wrongs ;  think  of  the  agony  of  spirit,  the  long-pro- 
tracted hopeless  effort,  the  attenuated  frame,  the  hollow  cheek,  the  chilled  eye,  the 
tottering  limbs,  the  constant  heart  weight,  the  cheerless  room,  the  sleepless  night, 
the  voiceless,  gnawing  feeling  of  despair;  yes,  think  of  this  occurring  in  London, 
with  its  churches,  and  Houses  of  Parliament,  and  Exeter  Hall  meetings,  and  greet- 
ings to  Crimean  heroes,  and  running  to  help  some  sturdy  vagabond  beggar,  and 
then  remember,  with  shame  and  confusion  of  face,  that  it  has  been  written,  "  Ye 
shall  not  therefore  oppress  one  another ;  but  thou  shalt  fear  thy  God :  for  I  am  the 
Lord  your  God."  II.  It  would  not  be  of  any  use  if  we  were  to  content  ourselves 
with  sighing  over  all  these  miseries,  instead  of  inquiring  what  steps  may  be  taken 
TO  ALLEVIATE  AND  REDRESS  THEM.  I  have,  therefore,  drawn  your  attention  to  that 
painful  subject  in  the  hope  of  inducing  you  to  sympathise  with  the  efforts  which 
are  now  made,  especially  by  the  Early  Closing  Association,  to  ameliorate  the 
condition  of  the  working  classes.  It  is  very  satisfactory,  then,  and  encouraging  to 
feel,  that  the  interests  of  the  employer  and  the  employed  are  in  this  respect 
identical ;  for  it  is  evident  that  it  cannot  be  for  the  advantage  of  the  employer  that 
the  health,  and  energy,  and  spirit,  and  moral  principle  of  those  he  employs  should 
be  undermined.  Tiie  manufacturer  would  soon  suffer  if  the  quality  of  his  raw 
material  became  deteriorated ;  and  if  the  stiimina  of  England's  working  men  became 
weakened,  her  producing  power  would  necessarily  become  less.  Now  it  is  en- 
couraging to  find  that  the  employers  of  labour  are  themselves  becoming  more  alive 
to  the  necessity  of  something  being  done.  I  could  easily  multiply  instances  of 
employers  who  are  alive  to  the  duty  as  well  as  advantage  of  taking  steps  to  improve 
the  condition  of  the  employed.  And  what  are  these  steps  ?  The  closing  earlier 
every  day,  the  payment  of  wages  on  Thursday  or  Friday,  or,  at  all  events,  at  an 
early  hour  on  Saturday,  and  the  Saturday  half-holiday.  Are  these  inconsistent 
with  the  interests  of  employers  ?  Far  from  it.  We  have  ample  testimony  to  prove 
that  the  labourers  so  relieved  will  apply  themselves  with  increased  alacrity  to  their 
work,  animated  with  gratitude  to  their  employers,  and  stimulated  by  a  new- found 
hope.  Then  will  the  English  home  resume  its  cheerfulness;  then  will  the  husband 
and  father  taste  the  delights  which  purify  and  soften,  and  then,  too,  will  the  Sabbath 
dawn  on  many  who  will  spring  forth  to  perform  its  hallowed  duties,  to  feel  its 
soothing  influence,  and  to  worship  in  the  courts  of  Him  who  hath  said — "  Ye  shall 
not  oppress  one  another ;  but  thou  shalt  fear  thy  God :  for  I  am  the  Lord  your 


CHAP.  XXV.]  LEVITICUS.  327 

God."  (C  F.  S.  Money,  M.A.)  Laws  of  trade-icages  : — It  is  said  that  John 
Wanamaker,  when  a  girl  told  him  that  she  could  not  possibly  live  on  the  three  and 
a  half  dollars  a  week  that  he  offered  her,  replied :  "I  know  it,  but  the  fact  is  that 
I  am  overrun  with  applications  from  girls,  daughters  of  mechanics,  tradesmen,  dkc, 
who  have  their  homes  already,  and  use  their  wages  merely  for  dress,  and  they  set 
the  scale."  The  story  of  the  employer  who  coolly  told  a  girl  who  came  with  the 
same  complaint :  "  Most  of  our  girls  have  gentlemen  friends  who  provide  for  them  ; 
you  had  better  do  the  same,"  has  been  not  only  widely  told,  but  widely  believed. 
A  gentleman  went  to  a  wealthy  importer  on  Broadway  to  ask  for  a  situation  for  a 
friend,  and  received  the  reply  :  "He  had  better  not  come  here.  The  fact  is,  all 
our  men  are  underpaid,  but  we  can  get  all  we  want  at  present  wages.  Why  should 
we  pav  any  more  1  "  It  is  notorious  that  an  immense  amount  of  the  "  piecework  " 
done  by  women  for  the  great  stores  and  manufactories  is  done  by  those  who  merely 
wish  to  provide  themselves  with  some  additional  comforts.  So  instances  innumer- 
able might  be  given  of  the  fact  that  the  wage-earners  suffer  most  from  the  competi- 
tion of  those  who  are,  at  least  in  a  measure,  independent.  That  this  is  wrong  and 
unjust  will  be  acknowledged  at  once  by  all  right-minded  people.  The  remedy, 
however,  is  not  so  easily  recognised.  As  a  rule,  it  has  been  supposed  to  lie  with  the 
employed  themselves.  It  is  said  that  these  others  have  no  right  to  work  at  such 
low  terms.  Undoubtedly,  if  all  were  unselfish,  there  would  result  much  alleviation 
of  the  difficulty.  There  is,  however,  another  phase  of  the  case  to  which  we  would 
call  attention,  and  that  is  the  responsibility  of  the  employer.  How  far  is  it  right 
for  a  man  to  accept  of  service  for  wliich  he  does  not  pay  a  fair  price — i.e.,  a  price 
such  that  the  one  who  receives  it  can  live  upon  it  fairly  and  comfortably  ?  There 
are,  of  course,  limitations.  No  iron  rule  can  be  laid  down.  Inexperience  cannot 
claim  the  same  as  experience,  extravagance  should  not  lay  down  the  law  for 
economy.  Yet,  after  all,  every  employer  knows  perfectly  well  whether  or  not  he  is 
paying  what  are  called  "  living  wages."  It  is  much  the  fashion  to  decry  the  Mosaic 
laws  as  belonging  to  a  period  and  state  of  society  entirely  foreign  to  modern  needs. 
No  one,  however,  who  carefully  studies  those  laws  can  fail  to  recognise  the  fact 
that  they  touch  very  closely  upon  the  demands  that  we  hear  on  every  side  for  a 
more  equal  distribution  of  property,  a  more  just  relation  between  employer  and 
employed.  The  German  Empire  has  already  endorsed  the  same  principle  in  stating 
clearly  the  obligation  of  the  community  to  provide  for  its  individual  members. 
The  Occident  is  not  the  Orient.  Anglo-Saxons  are  not  Semites  ;  but  the  funda- 
mental law  that  one  man  shall  not  oppress  another,  by  taking  advantage  of  his 
necessities  is  just  as  true  now  and  here  as  it  was  in  the  desert  of  Arabia  many  cen- 
turies ago.  (Horn.  Revieiv.)  What  shall  we  eat  the  seventh  year? — I.  Let  us 
first  LISTEN  TO  THE  QUESTION.  "  What  shall  we  eat  the  seventh  year  ?  "  Now  this 
was  a  question  of  mere  nature.  Grace  had  nothing  to  do  with  it.  It  is  man  trust- 
ing in  his  own  native  strength,  man  who  judges  all  things  by  his  own  reasan,  man 
who  goes  no  further  in  his  belief  than  what  he  can  see  and  what  he  can  understand. 
Human  nature  can  understand  ploughing  and  reaping.  Nature  can  comprehend 
scattering  the  seed.  Nature  can  believe  in  a  self-dependent  life,  but  nature  cannot 
understand  renouncing  all  human  activity  and  living  absolutely  on  Jehovah's  bless- 
ing, and,  therefore,  in  a  spirit  of  querulous  unbelief,  it  asks,  "But  what  shall  we 
eat  ?  "  Asking  this  question  is  virtually  to  arraign  God  at  the  bar  of  Reason,  and 
say,  '•  It  is  all  very  well  to  tell  us  that  we  are  not  to  plough,  and  not  to  gather,  and 
not  to  reap ;  but  what  shall  we  eat  ?  We  shall  starve  if  we  are  only  to  feed  on  what 
Thou  givest  us.  If  we  do  this  thing  we  shall  have  empty  barns,  and  empty  barns 
will  mean  empty  mouths,  and  empty  mouths  will  mean  national  ruin  and  death." 
Thus  blinded  nature  always  argues,  and  will  not  trust  for  more  than  it  can  see.  A 
plough  that  can  be  beheld  is  valued  far  before  a  God  that  can  only  be  believed. 
Now  is  not  this  a  question  continually  being  asked  in  the  present  day  ?  Is  it  not 
being  put  by  some  here  this  morning?  There  is  one  yonder  asking  it  in  this  wise : 
If  I  do  all  that  God  tells  me,  how  shall  I  get  on  in  Ufe  or  make  my  way  ?  If  I 
conduct  my  business  according  to  high  Christian  principles,  if  I  give  absolute  and 
complete  obedience  to  all  the  commands  of  Scripture,  if  I  keep  my  fingers  clean  of 
those  things  that  defile  the  world's  hands,  and  if  I  maintain  my  integrity,  and 
refuse  to  stoop  to  all  the  petty  little  meannesses  that  I  find  common  in  the  business 
of  the  world,  well,  then,  what  shall  I  eat  ?  May  I  not  as  well  put  up  the  shutters 
at  once  ?  This  very  matter  was  brought  before  me  only  yesterday  by  a  professing 
Christian.  Said  he,  "  Sir,  it  is  all  very  well  for  you  to  talk  as  you  do,  and  right 
you  should,  but  if  we  don't  do  these  little  things,  our  children  will  have  to  suffer 


328  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [crrAP.  xxv. 

for  it.  We  are  living  in  the  world,  and  we  have  to  do  in  a  measure  as  the  world 
does,  for  if  we  don't,  what  shall  we  eat?"  Thus  unbelief  steps  in,  and  says, 
"  Perfect  obedience  to  God  means  starvation."  Whilst  on  the  other  hand  faith 
replies,  "  Perfect  obedience  means  a  feast  on  blessing."  Faith  cares  not  from 
whence  the  supply  may  come  ;  faith  troubles  not  about  probable  results  ;  it  obeys 
God's  commands,  asks  no  questions,  and  raises  no  objections.  Let  us  not,  however, 
be  too  hard  on  these  persons,  for  this  question  is  often  asked  more  in  a  spirit  of 
anxiety  than  a  disposition  to  cavil.  A  timid  believer,  with  no  thought  of  limiting 
the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  may  put  the  question  in  some  such  form  as  this  :  "  Well, 
sir,  it  is  all  very  true  w^hat  you  say,  and  God  forbid  I  should  doubt  His  providence, 
but  supposing  I  should  be  sick  during  this  year — supposing  I  should  have  a  long, 
weary  illness,  that  keeps  me  from  work  for  weeks  !  What  should  I  do  ?  Facts  are 
stubborn  things,  and  if  I  cannot  earn  a  penny,  how  am  I  to  purchase  anything  for 
the  family  ?  If  there  is  to  be  a  long  cessation  from  employment,  what  shall  we 
eat  ?  "  Or,  it  may  be,  there  are  some  already  in  tbis  position,  who  are  saying,  "  It 
is  easy,  sir,  for  you  to  stand  up  on  that  platform  and  talk,  but  you  would  alter  your 
language  if  you  were  in  my  place.  Look  !  When  I  scan  the  horizon,  I  cannot  see 
one  harvest-field  that  I  am  likely  to  reap  this  year.  If  I  go  to  all  my  barns  I  find 
them  empty  ;  if  I  go  to  my  trees  I  find  them  stripped.  Humanly  speaking,  I  can 
see  no  hope  of  anything  but  hardship  and  privation,  and  the  question  of  my  heart 
this  morning  is,  '  What  shall  we  eat  this  year  ?  '  and  though  I  have  asked  it  a 
hundred  tinjes,  I  seem  no  nearer  the  solution  of  the  problem."  W^ell,  dear  friend, 
you  have  my  heart's  truest  sympathy,  and  I  would  that  I  could  help  you,  and  all 
like  you,  but  yet  I  must  say,  "  Trust  in  God  and  do  the  right."  "I  will  command 
My  blessing,"  is  God's  answer  to  your  question  of  anxiety.  Sometimes,  however, 
the  question  is  asked  more  from  curiosity  than  even  anxiety.  It  is  in  such  spirit 
that  we  ask  the  question  this  morning,  "  W'hat  shall  we  eat  ?  "  It  is  not  a  question 
whether  God  will  give  us  food  or  not;  we  know  He  will ;  but  we  should  like  to 
know  what  manner  of  food  it  is  He  will  put  into  our  mouths  this  seventh  year. 
Will  it  be  the  same  as  last  year  or  better  ?  W'ill  there  be  a  new  flavour  about  it, 
or  a  repetition  of  the  old  savour  ?  Shall  it  be  fruit  from  a  new  tree,  or  new  fruit  from 
an  old  tree?  W^hat  shall  be  our  kind  of  exi^erience  during  this  year?  Shnll  we, 
during  its  months,  eat  of  the  fruit  of  Canaan,  or  shall  we  be  satisfied  with  the 
manna  of  the  wilderness  ?  II.  Well,  we  will  try  now  to  give  tou  the  answer  as 
you  have  it  in  the  text.  We  shall  live  on  the  blessing  of  our  God.  Israel  had  to 
learn  one  truth,  and  that  one  t-  nth  was  this — that  God's  blessing  was  worth  more 
than  all  their  own  efforts  ;  that  if  God  spake  a  word  of  commanding  blessing,  it  was 
worth  more  to  them  than  all  their  ploughs  and  agricultuial  labour.  Beloved,  is 
not  this  true  for  you '!  Have  not  you  in  three  ways  to  learn  the  lesson  that  the 
Lord  will  provide  ?  It  will  be  true  this  year  in  your  life  as  far  as  temporal  matters 
are  concerned.  It  is  not  the  expenditure  of  brain  power,  or  the  employ  ment  of  arm 
muscle  that  will  win  you  your  bread ;  it  is  the  blessing  of  God  resting  on  you. 
There  is  nought  apart  from  that ;  and  we  pray  that  you  may  acknowledge  the 
precious  truth,  and  at  the  end  of  this  year  say,  concerning  your  gettings,  "  It  is 
because  Jehovah  has  commanded  His  blessing."  But  there  is  a  higher  life  you  and 
I  have  to  live,  and  that  is  soul  life.  How  will  that  be  maintained  this  year  ?  I 
answer — By  the  blessing  of  God.  No  man  has  power  to  keep  the  fire  within  his 
own  soul  aglow  ;  no  man  has  might  sufficient  to  keep  his  own  faith  from  stagger- 
ing ;  no  one  has  self-contained  ability  to  keep  his  own  heart  from  wandering.  And 
how  true  will  it  be  in  reference  to  us  as  a  Church  !  The  preacher  this  year  must 
look  to  God  for  his  texts.  "  The  Lord  will  provide  "  must  be  recognised  even  in  that. 
It  is  not  the  service,  it  is  theblessiigon  the  service.  It  is  not  theword,itisthe  blessing 
on  the  word.  It  is  the  dew  that  is  on  the  manna  that  makes  it  so  refreshing;  it  is  Jeho- 
vah's benediction  that  alone  satisfies  ;  and  though  we  may  drive  our  own  plough,  and 
though  we  may  try  and  scatter  the  seed  broadcast  on  every  hand,  yet  if  you  obtain 
one  spiritual  feast  this  year,  the  speaker  steps  back  and  says  it  is  not  of  him.  If  God 
makes  him  a  means  of  blessing  unto  one  soul,  it  is  neither  he  nor  his  sermon,  it  is 
the  Lord's  commanded  blessing  that  has  refreshed  the  heart.  Had  we  time,  we 
might  show  you  how  this  applies  to  everything  in  connection  with  the  Church.  Our 
schools  will  prosper  just  as  Heaven's  blessing  is  their  portion.  There  is  one  other 
thought  which  arises  naturally  out  of  the  subject ;  it  is  this,  that  the  answer  to  the 
question,  "W'hat  shall  we  eat  the  seventh  year  "  is  "  Exactly  the  same  as  you  had 
on  the  sixth  year,"  because  you  will  observe,  if  you  look  at  the  context,  that  God 
gave  them  a  double  blessing  on  the  sixth  year,  so  that  the  trees  yielded  twice  their 


CHAP.  XXV.]  LEVITICUS.  329 

■wont — treble  rather — and  the  fields  a  threefold  harvest.  So  that  on  the  seventh 
and  eighth  years  they  Lad  no  new  kind  of  fruit  to  that  they  had  on  the  sixth.  It 
was  the  same  fruit,  and  of  the  same  flavour.  (A.  G.  Brown.)  Man  need  not 
de.-'pair  of  Providence  : — See,  then,  and  sink  it  into  your  heart  soundly,  what  God  is 
able  to  do  for  you  touching  all  worldly  necessaries,  if  you  will  obey  Him  and  trust 
in  Him.  Such  a  promise  in  Exodus  He  made  also,  to  keep  all  Ihins^'s  in  safety  for 
them  at  home,  while  they  were  at  Jerusalem  serving  Him  according  to  this  law. 
And  what  loss  had  the  shepherds  when  they  left  their  flocks  in  the  fields  and  went 
to  the  child  Jesus,  according  as  the  angel  had  told  them  ?  Let  this  place  again 
strengthen  your  faith  against  all  objections  of  flesh  and  blood,  made  from  uatural 
reasons  and  causes  as  they  seem  to  men.  For  if  the  Lord  be  able,  even  then  when 
the  earth  is  weakest,  having  been  worn  out  with  continual  tillage,  five  years 
together,  to  make  the  sixth  year  bring  forth  a  triple  blessing,  enough  for  that  j  ear, 
for  the  seventh  year,  and  for  the  eighth  year,  till  harvest  were  ready ;  what  un- 
seasonable weather,  what  barrenness  of  land,  what  this,  what  that,  shall  make  a 
man  despair  of  God's  providence  for  things  needful  ?  Leave  God  to  Himself,  and 
to  His  almighty  power :  do  you  your  duty,  fear  Him,  love  Him,  serve  Him,  obey 
Him  with  a  true  heart,  call  upon  your  children  and  servants  to  do  the  like,  and  you 
shall  see  the  lovingkiudness  of  the  Lord  to  your  comfort.  These  things  shall  be 
cast  upon  you,  and  He  that  knoweth  your  charge,  and  gave  you  that  charge,  will 
never  fail  you  nor  them  of  what  is  fit.  You  see  here  what  He  can  do,  and  let  it 
profit  you.  I  will  tell  you  the  feeling  of  my  heart  further  in  this  point,  and  thus  I 
reason  :  Can  God  be  thus  strong  when  the  land  is  weak,  and  will  He  be  thus  strong 
to  the  comfort  of  His  servants?  Why,  then,  cannot  He  be,  or  why  will  He  not  be, 
strong  in  my  weakness,  in  your  weakness,  and  in  every  man  and  woman's  weakness 
that  believe  in  Him?  Away,  Fear,  away,  I  may  not  hearken  unto  thee  !  when  I  am 
weakest  He  will  be  strongest.  For  His  power  is  best  seen  in  weakness,  and  I  will 
put  my  whole  trust  and  confidence  in  Him,  drawing  an  argument  with  David  from 
my  weakness  to  move  Him,  and  not  to  discomfort  me.  Heal  me,  O  Lord,  for  I 
am  weak.  My  weakness  shall  drive  me  unto  Thee,  not  from  Thee,  and  I  will  tarry 
Thy  good  leisure.  Lord  strengthen  me.  Lord  comfort  me,  and  under  the  covering 
of  Thy  wings  let  me  be  safe  from  all  temptations  displeasing  Thee  and  hurting  me  ! 
(Bp.  Babinotcn.)  Practical  reliance  ttpon  God  : — A  faithful  and  zealous  Methodist 
minister  in  North  Carolina  writes  to  a  friend  in  Calcutta:  "  There  are  two  cotton 
factories  here,  and  my  charge  consists  chiefly  of  the  proprietors,  operatives,  and 
others  connected  with  the  factories.  The  proprietors  are  Christians  and  Methodists, 
and  stand  ready  to  do  what  they  can  for  the  cause  of  Christ.  The  leading  man 
takes  a  lively  interest  in  our  Church  work,  and  teaches  a  large  class  of  little  boys  in 
our  Sabbath  School,  although  weighed  down  by  the  cares  of  an  immense  business 
all  the  week.  When  the  new  factory  was  built,  the  building,  with  all  its  machinery, 
was  solemnly  dedicated,  by  a  public  religious  service,  to  be  used  for  the  glory  of 

God.     Two  years  ago  a  great  revival  was  in  progress  here.     Mr. stopped  the 

factory  that  all  hands  might  attend  the  meetings.  He  received  an  urgent  order 
from  New  York  for  goods.  He  replied  that  the  goods  could  not  be  furnished.  They 
telegraphed  from  New  York  that  they  must  have  the  goods.  Then  the  wires 
flashed  back  the  message  :  '  The  Lord  is  at  work ;  the  factories  will  not  run  this 
week.'  Would  that  we  had  more  such  men  !  Christ  requires  that  money  as  well  as 
intellect  and  heart,  be  consecrated  to  Him.  '  The  silver  is  Mine,  and  the  gold  is 
Mine,  saith  the  Lord  of  hosts.'  "  Surely  the  Lord  would  say  to  that  millowner,  as 
He  said  to  the  Canaanitish  woman.  Great  is  thy  faith  !  {Indian  Witness.)  The 
land  is  Mine;  for  ye  are  strangers  and  sojourners  with  Me. — The  Hebretv  system 
of  land  tenure: — I.  The  first  and  fundamental  principle  of  the  land  system  pre- 
scribed to  the  chosen  people  who  were  to  inhabit  this  typical  land  was,  that  the 

LAND  BELONGED  TO  JeHOVAH,  AND  WAS  TO  BE  HELD  BY  THE  PEOPLE  IMMEDIATELY  OF  AND 
TJNDEK  Him,  AS  THEIR    SOVEREIGN  AND  PARAMOUNT    SUPERIOR  AND  LoRD.       II.    Flowing 

naturally — mdeed,  one  might  say  logically — from  the  principle  of  the  Divine  owner- 
ship of  the  soil,  and  its  possession  by  the  Israelites  as  the  Lord's  chosen  people,  is 
the  next  feature  of  the  IsraeUtish  land  system — viz.,  the  equal  partition  of  the 

LAND  among  the  WHOLE  FAJIILIES  CONSTITUTING  THE  NATION  (sCC  Numb.  XXvl.).       It   Is 

to  be  noticed  that,  in  the  actual  division  of  the  land,  each  tribe  was  to  receive  its 
allotment  in  proportion  to  its  numerical  extent,  distinct  from  the  others  ;  and  that 
the  tribal  allotment  was  thereafter  to  be  apportioned  among  the  whole  families 
composing  the  tribe,  so  that  each  should  have  its  own  definite  share.  Besides,  it 
was  subsequently  provided  that  an  allotment  in  the  territory  of  one  tribe  should 


330  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxv. 

never  become  the  possession  of  any  member  of  a  different  tribe,  so  that  heiresses 
iir  heiress-portioners,  could  marry  only  "  in  the  family  of  the  tribe  of  their  father." 
These  subsidiary  enactments,  doubtless,  had  reference  specially  to  the  peculiar 
character  and  aims  of  the  Israelitish  constitution.  They  tended  to  preserve  and 
perpetuate  family  and  tribal  traditions  and  sentiments  ;  they  facilitated  the  keeping 
of  accurate  gencM logical  records  ;  they  provided  a  basis  for  the  ijractical  operation 
of  the  law  of  jubilee  ;  they  promoted  the  self-government  of  tbe  people  by  the 
graduated  judicatories  of  the  family  and  the  tribe  ;  and  they,  at  the  same  time, 
welded  the  people  into  one  compact  commonwealth,  by  the  bonds  of  an  equal 
interest  in  the  soil.  It  is,  of  course,  impossible  here  even  to  glance  at  the  much- 
discussed  question  of  the  relative  merits  of  an  aristocratic  or  a  peasant  proprietory, 
of  large  or  small  landowners,  of  extensive  or  limited  farms.  But  it  is  interestiKg 
to  notice  that,  in  the  Israelitish  laud  legislation,  we  have  precisely  and  practically 
that  system  of  peasant  proprietory  which  we  find  existing  and  flourishing  in 
many  countries,  and  to  which  not  a  ftw  of  those  who  have  given  the  most 
independent  and  thoughtful  and  earnest  attention  to  the  matter,  look  for  the 
solution  of  the  difficulties  which  are  gathering  around  the  subject  in  our  own 
land.     III.  The  next  feature  of  the  Israelitish  land  system  is,  that  the  return 

TO    BE    MADI--    BY    THE    PEOPLE     FOR    THEIR    LANDS    WAS    PRECISELY    THE    SAME    AS    THAT 

WHICH  Joseph  fixed  to  be  paid  by  the  Egyptian  crown  tenantry — viz.,  one- 
fifth  OF  the  GROSS  ANNUAL  PRODUCE.  In  the  casc  of  the  Israelites,  however,  this 
fifth  was  divided  into  two-tenths,  and  its  payment  was  prescribed  in  a  form  breath- 
ing the  spirit  rather  of  grateful  religious  acknowledgmeni  than  of  strict  legal 
exaction.     IV.  The  next  characteristic  of  the  Israelitish  land  system  is,  that  the 

LAND  thus  allotted  TO  THE  PEOPLE,  AND  HELD  BY  THEM  AS  THE  VASSALS  OF  THE  LoRD, 

WAS  INALIENABLE.  "  The  land  shall  not  be  sold  for  ever,  for  the  land  is  Mine,  saith 
the  Lord."  It  was  clearly  requii^ite,  for  the  maintenance  of  the  essential  character- 
istics of  the  Israelitish  co  istitution,  and  for  the  realisation  of  the  national  destiny, 
that  the  land  should  be  inalienable.  A  system  which  permitted  of  the  aggregation, 
more  or  less  rapidly,  of  the  land  of  the  country  into  the  hands  of  the  few  ;  and  of 
the  consequent  detachment,  more  or  less  extensively,  of  the  population  from  the 
soil,  would  have  been  fatal  to  the  preservation  of  the  national  existence  and  to  the 
realisation  of  the  national  destiny.  The  law  distinctly  and  absolutely  forbade  the 
sale  or  alienation  of  the  land,  and  fortified  the  prohibition  by  the  enactments 
against  usury  or  interest.  The  successive  landholders  had,  therefore,  in  reality, 
only  a  liferent  interest  in  it ;  and  it  was  equitable  and  conceivably  beneficial  that 
they  should  possess  the  power  of  disposing  of  this  limited  interest.  Innocent  mis- 
fortune might  compel,  or  other  causes  might  induce,  them  to  part  with  it.  And 
this  the  law  of  jubilee  enabled  them  to  do.  By  that  law  the  landholder  was  enabled 
to  dispose  of  the  usufruct — the  right  to  the  fruits— of  the  land  for  a  period  not 
fxceeding,  at  its  ultimate  possible  limit,  the  interval  between  the  age  of  twenty, 
when  a  male  Israelite  attained  full  majority,  and  seventy,  the  estimated  end  of  a 
normal  human  life.  All  that  the  landholder  was  empowered  to  dispose  of  was  his 
own  liferent  interest.  But  neither  the  seller  nor  the  purchaser  knew  what  would  be 
the  certain  duration  of  that  interest ;  and  in  these  days  actuarial  tables,  exhibiting 
the  average  expectation  of  human  life,  did  not  exist.  The  law  of  jubilee  therefore 
stepped  in  and  converted  ench  liferent  interest  into  an  interest  terminating  at  the 
next  jubilee ;  and  the  purchaser  paid  for  it  a  price  corresponding  to  the  number  of 
years  intervening  between  the  sale  and  the  jubilee,  under  deduction  of  the  sabbatic 
or  fallow  years.  But  the  disposal  even  of  this  limited  interest  in  the  soil  was  not 
an  absolute  or  irredeemable  one.  The  power  to  sell  it  at  all  was  a  concession  to 
human  frailty  or  necessity.  It  was  not  to  be  presumed  that  a  true-hearted  Israelite 
would  alienate  his  interest  in  the  soil  of  the  covenanted  land  except  under  the 
severe  pressure  of  adverse  circumstances.  Indeed,  so  strong  do  we  find  this  attach- 
ment to  the  soil  that  even  in  the  troublous  times  of  Ahab,  Naboth  repels  the  over- 
tures of  the  king  for  his  land  with  the  exclamation,  "  The  Lord  forbid  it  me  that  I 
should  give  the  inheritance  of  my  fathers  unto  thee  "  (1  Kings  xxi.  3).  And  so,  to 
afford  an  opportunity  for  the  redemption  of  the  land,  if  the  circumstances  of  the 
seller  should  improve,  or  a  kinsman  be  willing  to  take  his  place,  the  law  of  jubilee 
provided  that  the  seller  or  his  kinsman  should  at  any  time  be  entitled  to  redeem 
the  liferent  by  paying  to  the  purchaser  the  value  of  the  usufruct  for  the  period  still 
to  elapse  between  the  redemption  and  the  jubilee,  calculated  on  the  basis  of  the 
original  price.  It  is  only  to  be  noticed  further  that  the  prohibition  to  alienate  did 
not  extend  to  dwelling-houses  in  walled  cities.    As  these  were  not  in  any  way  con- 


CHAP.  XXV.]  LEVITICUS.  331 

nected  with  the  agricultural  occupancy  of  the  land  they  might  be  sold  in  perpetuity  ; 
but  to  prevent  coercion,  or  thoughtless  disposal,  or  hardship  from  other  causes,  the 
law  provided  a  species  of  annus  deliberandi ,  so  that  the  house  could  be  redeemed  at 
the  stipulated  price  at  any  time  before  the  expiry  of  a  year  from  the  day  of  sale, 
after  which  it  became  irredeemable.     The  law  of  jubilee  had,  of  course,  a  national 
as  well  as  an  individual  purpose,  a  religious  as  well  as  a  secular  significance.     It 
was  part  of  that  great  system  of  types  which  ran  through  the  whole  of  Mosaisra.    It 
maile  provision  for  the  periodical  removal  or  modification  of  the  inequalities  which 
sprang  up  among  the  people  in  the  course  of  years.     It  prevented  families  being 
peimanentlv  impoverished  through  the  incapacity,  the  profligacy,  or  the  misfortune 
of  an  individual  member.     It  periodically  restored  all  diverted  lands  to  their  true 
owners,  freed  of  all  encumbrances  and  trammels.     It  was  a  national  rejuvenescence, 
a  periodical  restoration  and  renewal  of  the  original  constitution  of  the  common- 
wealth, and  an  infusion  of  fresh  life  and  spirit  into  the  whole  community  1     V.  The 
only  other  portion  of  the  Isfaelitish  land  system  that  remains  to  be  noticed  is  the 
LAW  OF  SUCCESSION.      The  Israelitish  law    of   inheritance  is  expressed  in  Numb. 
xxvii.   8-11.      The  Mosaic  law  makes  no  provision  regarding   the  testamentary 
dis230sal  of  property  ;  and  the  idea  of  such  a  power  is  excluded  both  by  its  funda- 
mental  principle,  to  which  we   have   adverted,  and  by  the  system  of   heritable 
succession  which  it  expressly  prescribes.      The  principle  that  the  land  was  thf? 
Lord's  and  that  the  successive  generations  of  Israelites  were  merely  "strangers" 
temporarily  "  sojourning  "  upon  it,  necessarily  excluded  the  power  of  posthumous 
settlement  no  less  than  that  of  alienation  during  life.     {R.  Reid.)         Sojourners 
with  God: — The  institution  of  the  jubilee  year  had  more  than  one  purpose.     As  a 
social  arrangement  it  tended  to  prevent  extremes  of  wealth  and  poverty.     As  a 
ceremonial  institution  it  was  the  completion  of  the  law  of  the  sabbath.     It  was 
appointed  to  enforce,  and  to  make  the  whole  fabric  of  the  national  wealth  rest 
upon,  this  thought  contained  in  the  text.     The  land  was  not  theirs  to  sell — they 
had  only  a  beneficial  occupation.     They  were  only  like  a  band  of  wanderers  settling 
for  a  while,  by  permission  of  the  Owner,  on  His  estate.     I.  Here  is  the  lesson 
OF  God's  proprietorship  and  our  stewardship.      "  The  land  is  Mine."     1.  This 
thought  should  nurture  thankfulness.     The  darkest  night  is  filled  with  light,  and 
the  loneliest  place  blazes  with  angel  faces,  and  the  stoniest  pillow  is  soft  to  him  who 
sees  everywhere  the  ladder  that  knits  earth  with  heaven,  and  to  whom  all  his 
blessings  are  as  the  messengers  that  descend  it  on  errands  of  mercy  and  lead  up  the 
heart  to  the  God  from  whom  they  come.    2.  This  thought  should  bring  submission. 
We  should  not  murmur,  however  we  may  regret,  if  the  Landowner  takes  back  a 
bit  of  the  land  which  He  has  let  us  occupy.     He  does  not  take  it  away  for  His 
advantage,  but  ' '  for  our  profit  " — that  we  may  be  driven  to  claim  a  better  inheri- 
tance in  Himself  than  we  can  find  even  in  the  best  of  His  gifts.     3.  This  thought 
should  produce  a  sense  of  responsibility  in  the  use  of  all  we  have.     II.  Here  is 
the  lesson   of  the  transiency  of  our  stay  on  earth.      "  Ye  are  strangers  and 
sojourners."      1.  The  contrast  between  the    external  world   and  our  stay  in  it. 
2.  The  constant  change  and  progression  of  life.     3.  The  true  and  only  permanent  . 
home.     Use  the  transient  as  preparation  for  the  eternal.     III.  Here  is  the  lesson 
OF    trust.       "With   Me."      We  have  companionship   even  when  most   solitary. 
Whoever  goes,  God  abides.     (Homilist.)        Land  laics  among  other  nations : — Some 
knowledge  of  our  ordinance  reached  heathen  authors ;  thus  Diodor  of  Sicily  writes  : 
"  Moses  divided  the  land  by  lot,  giving  equal  portions  to  the  private  citizens,  but 
larger  ones  to  the  priests;  and  he  forbade  the  former  to  sell  their  lands,  lest  some 
greedily  buy  up   many  allotments,  eject  the  less  prosperous,  and  thus   cause  a 
decrease  of  the  population."     Among  other  ancient  nations  we  find  some  arrange- 
ments slightly  analogous  to  the  Biblical  laws.     Lycurgus,  after  having  distributed 
the  land  essentially  in  equal  parts,  made  it  infamous  for  any  one  either  to  buy 
another's  possession  or  to  sell  his  own ;  yet  by  permitting  the  citizens  to  give 
their  property  away  or  to  bequeath  it,  he  paved  the  way  for  that  which  eventually 
happened  that  "  some  had  far  too  much,  others  too  little,  by  which  means  the  land 
came  into  few  hands."     Solun  enacted  a  law  restraining  persons  from  acquiring 
land  beyond  a  given  limit.     Plato  believed  that  no  one  ought  to  possess  more  than 
four  times  as  much  as  the  lowest  income  or  as  "  a  single  lot."     The  Loeriaus  were 
forbidden  to  sell  their  ancient  patrimony  or  their  original   lots  of  land  unless 
notoriously  compelled  by  distress  ;  and  in  some  other  countries  it  was  unlawful  to 
sell  such  lands  on  any  account.     The  Dalmatae  made  a  partition  of  their  land 
every  eighth  year.     With  a  view  of  equalising  the  property  of  the  citizens  Phaleas 


332  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxv. 

of  Chalcedon  ordained  that  the  rich  should  give  marriage  portions,  but  never 
receive  any,  while  the  poor  should  always  receive  but  never  give  them.  Yet  even 
these  and  similar  measures,  imperfect  and  desultory  compared  with  the  complete 
and  well-balauced  law  of  the  Pentateuch,  were  found  impracticable,  and  for  the 
most  part  remained  a  dead  letter.  Ai'istotle  thus  comments  on  equality  of  property : 
"  It  is  possible  that  an  equality  of  goods  is  established,  and  yet  that  this  may  be 
either  too  great,  when  it  leads  to  a  luxurious  living,  or  too  little  when  it  obliges  the 
people  to  live  hard.  Hence  it  is  evident  that  the  legislator  must  aim  at  a  proper 
medium  or  a  moderate  sufficiency  for  all.  And  yet  it  is  even  of  more  consequence 
that  the  citizens  should  entertain  a  similarity  of  feelings  than  an  equality  of 
property  ;  but  tbis  can  only  be  if  they  are  properly  educated  under  the  direction  of 
the  laws."  Would  the  great  philosopher,  had  he  known  the  legislation  of  the  Penta- 
teuch, have  found  in  it  the  realisation  of  his  ideal?  He  certainly  describes  with 
precision  its  main  features.     {31.  M.  Kalisch,  Ph.D.) 

Ver.  35.  And  if  thy  brother  be  waxen  poor. — Jewish  benevolence : — Mr.  William 
Gilbert,  describing  in  Good  Words  the  cases  of  mendicancy  which  he  saw  appear 
before  the  Jewish  Board  of  Guardians,  tells  of  a  Prussian  Jew,  quite  blind,  who  was 
led  into  the  room  by  a  child  of  one  of  the  lodgers  of  the  house  he  lived  in.  He 
informed  the  Board  that  he  had  been  some  weeks  in  England,  and  was  utterly 
destitute.  On  being  asked  how  he  had  contrived  to  live,  he  replied  that  the  poor 
Jews  in  Petticoat  Lane  had  made  a  subscription  for  him,  and  he  had  received 
about  eight  shillings  a  week  from  the  pence  they  had  subscribed. 

Vers.  39-55.  If  thy  brother  ...  be  sold  unto  thee.— Slavery : — I.  Texts  be- 
LATiNO  TO  SLAVES.  1.  Called  bondmen  (Gen.  xliii.  18 ;  xliv.  9).  2.  By  birth  (Gen. 
xiv.  14 ;  Psa.  cxvi.  16 ;  Jer.  ii.  14).  3.  By  purchase  (Gen.  xvii.  27 ;  xxxvii. 
36).  4.  Sometimes  captives  taken  in  war  (Deut.  xx.  14 ;  2  Kings  v.  2).  5. 
Strangers,  under  certain  restrictions  (ver.  45).  6.  Foreigners,  might  be  pur- 
chased (ver.  44).  7.  Debtors,  liable  to  be  sold  (2  Kings  iv.  1;  Neh.  v.  4,  5; 
Matt,  xviii.  25).  8.  Thieves  were  sold  (Exod.  xxii.  3).  9.  Israelites  to  be  kindly 
treated  (vers.  39,  40,  46),  and  to  be  liberated  after  six  years  (Exod.  xxi.  2;  Deut. 
XV.  12) ;  or  if  they  refused  to  be  free,  then  (Exod.  xxi.  5,  6  ;  Deut.  xv.  16,  17), 
when  sold  to  foreigners  might  be  redeemed  (vers.  47-55),  or  be  free  at  the  jubilee 
(vers.  10,  40,  41,  54),  but  could  not  demand  wife  and  child  procured  during  bond- 
age (Exod.  xxi.  3,  4) ;  were  to  be  furnisbed  liberally  on  regaining  liberty  (Deut. 
XV.  13,  14).  10.  Foreign  slaves  to  rest  on  Sabbath  (Exod.  xx.  10),  to  share  in 
national  rejoicing  (Deut.  xii.  18 ;  xvi.  11,  14).  11.  If  ill-treated  by  masters,  to  be 
set  free  (Exod.  xxi.  26,  27).  12.  Laws  respecting  killing  slaves  (Exod.  xxi.  20,  21). 
13.  If  they  ran  away,  not  to  be  delivered  up  (Deut.  xxiii.  15).  14.  Sometimes  rose 
to  rank  (Eccles.  x.  7),  and  might  intermarry  with  master's  family  (1  Chron.  ii.  34, 
35).  15.  Kidnapping  condemned  (Exod.  xxi.  16 ;  Deut.  xxiv.  7  ;  1  Tim.  i.  10). 
II.  Note  on  the  above  texts.  Consider — 1.  The  nature  of  slavery  as  practised 
by  the  heathen  world  (the  treatment  of  Israelites  by  Egyptians).  2.  The  restraint 
laid  upon  these  Israelites  in  their  conduct  to  foreign  bondsmen.  But  for  these 
laws  how  might  these  people— who  had  been  slaves  of  foreigners  themselves — have 
treated  foreigners  wben  in  their  turn  they  became  masters?  3.  The  relation  of 
Israelitish  slaves  to  Israelitish  masters,  with  their  privih  ges  (social  and  religious), 
and  certain  freedom.  4.  The  causes  for  which  alone  they  might  become  slaves. 
6.  Especially  consider  that  while  these  laws  ameliorated  the  condition  of  slavery  as 
it  then  existed — eliminating  the  elements  of  cruelty,  &c.,  leaving,  in  fact,  nothing 
of  bondage  but  the  name — they  paved  the  way,  by  the  training  of  justice  and 
mercy,  for  the  total  extinction  of  slavery.  6.  Christianity  in  spirit,  precept,  and 
practice  against  slavery.  (1)  Asserts  that  theie  is  no  bond  or  free,  but  that  all  are 
one  in  Christ.  (2)  Teaches  the  fraternity  of  the  race.  "  God  hath  made  of  one 
blood,"  &c.  "  All  we  are  brethren."  (3)  Strikingly  illustrates  this  by  the  case  of 
a  runaway  slave — Onesimus — whom  Paul  sent  back  to  his  master,  whom  in  some 
•way  he  had  wronged,  not  as  a  slave,  but  as  a  brother  beloved  (Philemon).  Learn  : 
1,  No  warrant  for  modern  slavery  in  the  Word  of  God  (Isa.  Iviii.  6).  2.  Spiritual 
slavery  the  worst  form  (2  Tim.  ii.  26).  3.  This  may  be  the  state  of  men  who  are 
politically  free  (John  viii.  34  ;  2  Pet.  ii.  19).  4.  Jesus  the  great  Emancipator  (John 
viii.  32-36  ;  Rom.  vi.  18-22  ;  Gal.  v.  1 ;  1  Pet.  ii.  16).     (J.  C.  Gray.) 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  LEVITICUS.  333 


CHAPTEK  XXVI. 

Vek.  2.  Te  shall  keep  My  Sabbaths,  and  reverence  My  sanctuary. — Of  the  stated 
times  of  God's  worship,  particularly  the  Lord's  Daxj  : — I.  What  were  the  reasons 
UPON  WHICH  God  might  be  supposed,  under  the  law,  to  have  instituted   more 
SOLEMN  AND  SET  TIMES  OF  WORSHIP.     1.  As  to  the  reasonableoess  of  the  institution 
in  general,  it  was  highly  agreeable  to  the  natural  light  of  mankind  upon  these 
following  accounts.     (1)  All  external  worship  is  designed  to  give  us  impressions  of 
greater  reverence  for  the  Divine  Majesty.     Now,  such  is  the  temper  of  human 
nature,  that  men  have  much  less  regard  for  those  things  that  are  common  than 
for  those  which  have  some  peculiai  mark  of  distinction  set  upon  them.     (2)  It 
being  one  of  the  first  principles  of  natural  religion  that  God  is  to  be  publicly  wor- 
shipped, order  requires  that  there  should  be  some  determinate  and  public  times  set 
apart  for  His  worship  and  piety,  that  such  times  should  be  vacations  from  the 
common  affairs  of  human  life.     (3)  It  being  a  further  end  of  religious  worship  to 
advance  the  spiritual  life  and  bring  us  nearer  unto  God,  it  is  not  only  agreeable  to 
piety,  but  to  all  the  maxims  of  religious  prudence,  that  the  times  appropriated  to 
the  more  solemn  worship  of  God  should  be  distinguished  by  a  cessation  from  the 
common  business  of  life,  that  by  this  means,  our  minds  being  wholly  taken  off  from 
earthly  things,  they  may  be  more  open  to  the  heavenly  impressions  of  grace  and 
truth.     2.  These  are  some  of  the  natural  reasons  upon  which  we  niiiy  account  for 
God's  commanding  His  people  to  keep  His  Sabbath,  that  is,  all  the  stated  and 
solemn  times  of  His  public  worship  ;  but  what  I  have  here  principally  an  eye  to  is 
the  institution  of  the  Sabbath,  which  the  Jews  were  so  forcibly  enjoined  to  keep 
holy  in  the  Fourth  Commandment.     Now,  the  two  principal  reasons  of  this  institu- 
tion seem  to  have  been — (1)  That  hereby  they  acknowledged  God  to  be  the  Lord, 
the  Creator  and  Governor  of  the  world ;  and — (2)  That  tbey  acknowledged  Him 
to  be  in  a  more  eminent  and  peculiar  manner  their  God  by  delivering  them  out  of 
the  hand  of  Egypt.     II.  How  far  those  reasons,  in  either  respect,  hold  good 
UNDER   the    Christian   dispensation.     1.  The  general  reasons  I  laid  down  for 
setting  apart   some  solemn  time  for  the  worship  of   God  certainly  extend  to  us 
Christians,  and  to  all  the  nations  under  heaven,  as  well  as  to  the  Jews.     Indeed, 
when  we  consider  that  to  everything  under  the  sun  there  is  a  time,  and  that  the 
natural  order  of  things  requires  there  should  be  so,  it  seems  highly  reasonable  that 
some  stated  seasons  should  be  appropriated  to  His  service,  to  whom  we  owe  all  the 
moments  of  our  time  and  the  capacity  of  all  other  enjoyments.     Jesus  Christ  did 
not  come  to  destroy  any  one  duty  arising  from  the  law  of  nature  or  the  common 
principles  of  natural  religion,  but  to  give  all  such  duties  their  utmost  force.     2. 
The  great  diiiiculty  to  be  considered  is  how  far  those  reasons,  upon  which  the 
Jewish   Sabbath   in    particular   was  instituted,   may   be   supposed    to   affect    us 
Christians.     (1)  It  appears  matter  of  moral  obligation  that  there  should  be  some 
day  set  apart  more  peculiarly  devoted  to  the  honour  and  worship  of  Almighty  God. 
(2)  It   appears  no  less  reasonable  that   the  returns  of  such  a  day  should  be  so 
frequent  as  to  keep  up  a  constant  sense  of  religion,  and  their  duty  to  God,  in  the 
minds  of  men,  without  interfering  with  the  necessary  affairs  of  human  life.     (3)  It 
must  be  granted  somewhat  difficult   to  determine  this  matter  exactly  from  any 
principle  of  natural  reason,  it  not  clearly  discovering  what  proportion  of  our  time 
we  are  to  set  apart  for  the  more  solemn  worship  of  God,  or  why  one  day  in  seven, 
rather  than  six  or  eight,  should  be  observed  to  this  end.     III.  How  and  in  what 
jiANNER  the   Lord's   Day  ought   to   be   observed.     1.  We  are  to  consider  the 
Lord's  Day  is  a  time  set  apart  for  the  more  public  worship  and  service  of  God, 
wherein  we  are  to  do  Him  honour  and  praise  Him  according  to  His  excellent 
greatness.     2.  We  ought  also  on  the  Lord's  Day  to  employ  ourselves  constantly  in 
the  private  exercises  of  religion.     3.  As  the  Lord's  Day  is  a  day  of  thanksgiving 
for  the  public  or  private  mercies  we  have  received  from  God,  it  is  a  proper  exercise 
of  it  to  perform  acts  of  mercy  and  charity  to  others,  and  both  with  respect  to  their 
souls  and  bodies.     4.  As  the  Lord's  Day  is  a  day  devoted  to  the  service  of  God  and 
religion,  let  us  take  care  to  sanctify  it  by  religious  conversation.     5.  That  we  may 
better  attend  these  dutips,  we  must  not  only  intermit  our  ordinary  labours  and 
employments,  but  take  off  our  thoughts,  as  much  as  possible,  from  the  business  of 
them.     (R.  Fiddes,  D.I).)         Of  the  stated  places  of  God's  worship,  and  in  what 
manner  our  reverence  towards  them  ought   to   be  expressed : — I.  The    reasons    of 

APPBOFBIATINO  PLACES   TO   THE   PUBLIC   WORSHIP  OP   GOD  ARE   THE     SAME    IN    GENERAL 


334  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvi. 

UNDER    THE    CHRISTIAN   AS    UNDER    THE    MoSAIC    DISPENSATION.       1.    One    end    Of    God's 

appointing  the  tabernacle,  and  aftt-rwards  the  temple,  was  to  possess  the  minds  of 
the  Jews  with  more  devout  affections  in  their  religious  addresses  to  Him.  The 
place  we  are  in  naturally  puts  us  in  mind  of  the  proper  business  and  design  of  it. 
2.  It  is  a  principle  highly  agreeable  to  the  natural  notions  of  mankind  that  God  is 
in  a  special  manner  present  in  such  places,  not  only  as  they  are  consecrated  to 
Him,  and  He  has  thereby  a  special  propriety  in  them,  but  also  by  reason  of  the 
united  prayers  which  are  therein  put  up  to  Him,  and  which  are  reasonably  pre- 
sumed to  be  of  more  efficacy  than  those  of  single  persons  to  bring  down  the  real 
and  sensible  effects  of  His  presence  with  the  blessings  prayed  for.  3.  The  common 
notions  we  have  of  order  and  decency  require  that  the  place  designed  for  God's 
more  immediate  service  should  be  appropriated  to  Him,  and  to  Him  only.  Of 
order,  that  men  may  know  where  to  repair  on  all  occasions  to  worship  God ;  and  of 
decency,  because  it  is  contrary  to  all  the  rules  of  it,  and,  indeed,  to  the  ordinary 
acceptation  of  holiness  throughout  the  Scriptures,  that  what  is  common  or  unclean 
should  be  promiscuously  used  with  things  set  apart  for  holy  and  religious  uses.  II. 
Placer  so  appropriated  have  a  relative  holiness  in  them,  and  ought  therefore 
TO  BE  reverenced.  This  is  the  notion  of  holiness  with  respect  to  things,  and 
persons,  and  times,  as  well  as  places  designed  for  the  service  of  God,  in  the  Old 
Testament,  that  they  were  separated  from  common  uses  to  His  own.  And  if  for 
this  very  reason  they  were  accounted  sacred  then,  what  imaginable  pretence  can  there 
be  that  the  same  reason  should  not  render  tbem,  and  all  of  them,  sacred  now?  If 
it  be  pretended  that  the  temple  was  accounted  holy  by  reason  of  the  legal  sacrifices 
■which  were  offered  to  God  in  it,  we  ask  why  the  Christian  sacrifice  of  praise  and 
thanksgiving  in  our  churches  should  not  be  a  sufficient  ground  for  reputing  them 
holy  also  ?  If  it  be  said  that  there  were  sensible  effects  of  God's  presence  in  the 
temple  upon  which  it  had  a  peculiar  relation  of  holiness  to  Him,  we  answer  that 
God,  as  to  the  spiritual  and  gracious  effects  of  His  presence,  and  wherein  He 
manifests  it  in  the  most  beneficial  and  excellent  manner,  is  present  in  our  Christian 
temples.  If  it  be  said,  further,  that  the  temple  was  built  by  the  special  command 
of  God,  and  upon  that  account  a  certain  holiness  was  ascribed  to  it,  whereas  we 
have  no  such  command  for  building  any  places  purely  for  God's  worship  now,  it  is 
answered  again  that  the  design  of  David's  building  a  temple,  and  Solomon's  going 
on  with  it,  do  not  appear  to  have  proceeded  from  any  positive  and  direct  command 
of  God.  God,  it  is  true,  gave  particular  directions  about  building  the  temple,  but 
it  does  not  therefore  follow  that  the  design  of  building  it  was  not  antecedently  laid 
by  these  princes  upon  natural  motives  of  piety  and  religion,  the  same  motives  upon 
which  the  patriarchs  erected  sanctuaries  or  separate  places  of  worship  to  God 
before  any  positive  institution  to  this  end.  Shall  I  now  show  that  our  Christian 
churches,  which  I  have  proved  to  be  sanctuaries  in  a  proper  sense,  ought  therefore 
to  be  reverenced?  This  is  a  consequence  which  flows  so  naturally,  or  rather, 
indeed,  necessarily,  from  what  has  been  said,  that  I  need  not  say  much  to  illustrate 
it.  I  shall  only  observe  that  we  are  agreed  in  other  cases  to  set  a  value  on  things 
or  persons,  not  in  consideration  of  their  absolute  and  real  worth,  but  of  their 
relative  use  or  character.  An  insect  i'j  considered  in  itself  as  a  living  creature  more 
valuable  than  the  brightest  or  richest  jewel  in  the  world  ;  but  we  should  think  him 
very  weak  who  would  for  that  reason  prefer  a  butterfly  to  a  diamond,  which,  by 
common  consent,  serves  him  to  so  many  more  useful  ends.  For  the  same  reason, 
with  respect  to  the  different  characters  of  men,  or  any  special  relation  tliey  bear 
to  God,  to  the  prince,  or  to  ourselves,  we  give  them  different  and  suitable  testi- 
monies of  our  esteem.  Nay,  when  we  truly  honour  or  love  any  person,  we 
naturally  express  a  value  for  everything  that  nearly  belongs  to  him  or  wherein  he 
has  a  particular  interest.  Certainly,  then,  nothing  can  be  more  reasonable  than 
that  upon  account  of  the  special  propriety  God  has  in  places  set  apart  for  His 
service,  and  for  so  many  holy  uses,  we  should  express  our  reverence  toward  such 
places  by  all  becoming  testimonies  of  it.     III.  Even  natural  reason  discovebr 

rURTHER  to  us  HOW  AND  IN  WHAT  PARTICULARS  OUR  REVERENCE  TOWARDS  SUCH 

PLACES  OUGHT  TO  BE  EXPRESSED.  1.  We  are  to  reverence  God's  sanctuary  by 
constantly  repairing  to  it  on  all  proper  occasions.  2.  We  are  to  reverence  God's 
sanctuary  by  a  serious,  devout,  and  regular  behaviour  in  it.  (1)  By  a  serious  and 
devout  bphaviour,  I  mean  such  decent  postures  of  the  body  as  most  properly 
express  the  inward  sentiments  and  attention  of  the  mind.  (2)  By  a  regular 
behaviour  in  the  worship  of  God,  I  understand  a  dun  conformity  to  the  rules  and 
order  of  the  public  service,  and  particularly  that  we  shonld  kneel  or  stand  up  at  the 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  LEVITICUS.  835 

usual  offices.  3.  If  we  reverence  God's  sanctuary  as  we  ought,  we  shall  be  willing  to 
contribute  what  may  be  thought  necessary  towards  the  i^roper  ornaments  of  it  or 
the  greater  solemnity  of  the  public  worship  in  it.  I  shall  now  pioceed  to  a  con- 
clusion, with  a  proper  application  or  two  from  what  has  been  said.  1.  To  those 
who  offend  against  the  first  rule  I  laid  down,  concerning  the  reverence  due  to  God's 
sanctuary,  by  coming  late  to  it,  or  perhaps  after  a  considerable  part  of  the  service 
is  performed.  If  you  are  conscious  to  yourselves  of  any  such  scandalous,  especially 
if  it  have  been  a  customary,  irreverence,  be  careful  not  to  give  any  further  offence 
to  God  or  man,  for  it  is  really  so  to  both  in  the  same  kind — to  God,  because  it  is 
so  insolent  a  method  of  presenting  ourselves  in  His  courts,  in  order  to  beg  any 
blessing  or  the  pardon  of  our  sins  before  we  have  made  a  humble  confession  of 
them ;  to  man,  because  the  Church,  which  we  are  presumed  by  attending  her 
service  to  be  members  of,  has  piously  directed  such  a  confessiim  at  the  beginning 
of  her  service.  Not  to  mention  the  other  disorders  occasioned  by  this  irreverence, 
and  how  contrary  it  is  to  the  rule  prescribed  us  by  holy  David,  ui  worshipping  God 
in  the  beauty  of  holiness  (Psa.  xxix.  2,  xcvi.  9).  And  for  the  same  reason— 2.  If 
your  consciences  reproach  you  with  any  former  unbecoming  or  irregular  behaviour 
in  the  sanctuary  of  God,  resolve  hereafter  to  correct  so  great  an  indecency,  or 
rather,  indeed,  so  flaming  an  impiety.  3.  What  I  shall  say  to  those  who  have  in 
any  signal  manner  expressed  their  zeal  for  God's  house,  by  contributing  to  the 
beauty  or  solemnity  of  it,  shall  be  by  way  of  encouragement.  And  certainly  men 
cannot  propose  to  themselves  to  show  their  reverence  for  God  by  a  more  truly  pious 
act — an  act  whereby  they  more  immediately  glorify  Him,  in  letting  their  good 
works  shine  before  men.  This  consideration  cannot  but,  at  the  same  time,  fill  the 
minds  of  those  who  are  concerned  in  it  with  a  sensible  pleasure  and  satisfaction, 
and  make  their  hearts  even  spring  for  joy.  This  was  the  effect  which  the  prepara- 
tions of  David  and  the  Israelites  for  building  the  temple  had  upon  them  (1  Chron. 
xxix.  8).  4.  What  I  would  observe,  in  the  last  place,  is  that  persons  who  are  sub- 
servient in  this  respect  towards  promoting  the  honour  of  God  may  piously  hope 
that  He  will  by  some  wise  methods  pour  down  His  special  blessings  upon  them  as 
He  did  upon  Obed-Eclom  and  his  household,  because  of  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of 
God  (2  Sam.  vi.  11).     (Ibid.) 

Vers.  3-13.  If  ye  walk  in  My  statutes,  and  keep  My  commandments,  and  do 
them. — The  advantages  oj  religion  in  a  nation^s  life  : — I.  Wheeein  a  nation's 
KELiGious  LIFE  CONSISTS.  The  rccognised  presence  of  God  in  the  midst  of  the 
people  (vers.  11,  12)  may  be  realised — 1.  In  sanctuaries  consecrated  to  Divine 
worship  throughout  the  land,  and  in  assembled  congregations  gathering  to  adore 
Him  (ver.  2).  2.  In  sacred  literature  diflusiug  religious  Imowledge  among  the 
people.  3.  In  benevolent  and  elevating  institutions  diffusing  Christianity  in  its 
practical  forms.  4.  In  educational  agencies  for  the  training  of  children  early  in 
moral  and  religious  truth.  5.  In  homes  and  family  life  sweetened  by  the  influence 
of  piety.  6.  In  a  legislature  ruled  by  the  fear  of  God  and  observaut  of  Sciipture 
precepts.  7.  In  wealth,  gathered  righteously,  being  expended  for  evangelical  and 
Christian  ends.  8.  In  the  happy  relationship  of  all  social  classes,  based  upon  good- 
will and  respect.  9.  In  the  stores  of  harvest  and  gains  of  commerce  being  acknow- 
ledged as  God's  providential  gifts  and  generous  benefactions  (vers.  4,  5).  All  such 
public  recognitions  of  the  authority  and  the  claims  of  religion,  emphasise  and 
declare  that  within  this  nation's  life  God  dwells — known,  revered,  and  served.  II. 
Advantages  which  eesult  to  a  nation  from  keligion.  1.  Eeligion  impels  to 
industry,  intelligence,  self-respect,  and  social  improvement ;  and  these  will  affect 
every  branch  of  labour  and  enterprise,  resulting  in  material  prosperity  (vers.  4,  5). 
2.  Religion  leads  to  avoidance  of  agitation  and  conflict,  checks  greed,  ambition,  and 
vainglory,  and  thus  promotes  a  wise  content  among  the  people,  and  peaceful 
relationships  with  surrounding  nations  (ver.  6).  3.  Eeligion  fosters  sobriety, 
energy,  and  courage,  and  these  qualities  will  assert  themselves  on  the  fields  of  war 
when  sad  occasion  arises,  and  will  ensure  the  overthrow  of  tyranny  and  the  defeat 
of  invasion  (ver.  8).  4.  Eeligion  nurtures  the  wise  oversight  of  homes  and  families, 
the  preservation  of  domestic  purity,  the  development  of  healthful  and  intelligent 
children,  and  these  will  work  out  in  a  strong  and  increasing  population  (ver.  9).  5. 
Eeligion  corrects  the  intrigues  of  self-destructive  commerce,  and  teaches  honesty, 
forethought,  and  justice  in  business  arrangements ;  thus  checking  waste,  extrava- 
gance, and  insolence,  and  these  issue  in  the  enjoyment  of  plenty  (ver.  10).  6. 
Eeligion  enjoins  Sabbath  observance  and  sanctuary  services-  (ver.  2)  which  nourish 


336  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOU.  [chap.  xxvi. 

holiness  in  thought  and  Hfe,  sweeten  character,  purify  the  spring-s  of  action,  incite 
to  lighteous  and  noble  deeds,  to  social  goodwill,  to  mutual  regard,  to  sacred  minis- 
tries, to  reverence  for  Scripture,  to  recognition  of  the  claims  of  the  unseen  world, 
and  thus  bring  down  upon  all  people  the  blessings  of  God,  the  Father,  the  Son,  and 
the  Holy  Spirit  (vers.  11,  12).  III.  Within  a  religious  nation  God  pledges  Him- 
self TO  DWELL.  And  wliere  He  makes  His  tabernacle  (ver.  11)  there — 1.  Happiness 
will  be  realised,  the  joy  of  the  Lord  will  be  known,  "His  lovingkiudness,  which  is 
more  than  life,"  will  be  enjoyed.  2.  Security  will  be  assured.  "  None  ninke  you 
afraid"  (ver.  6),  for  He  will  be  as  a  "defence  to  His  people."  3.  Sanctity  will 
flourish.  Intercourse  with  God  (ver.  12)  will  elevate,  refine,  and  grace  a  people's 
character  and  hfe.  [W.  H.  Jellie.)  Temporal  blessings  connected  rv  it  h  oh  die  nee  :  — 
These  temporal  blessings — peace's  victory  over  all  their  enemies,  the  fruitfulness  of 
the  land,  the  enjoyment  of  God's  tabernacle  in  the  midst  of  it — all  are  promised  to 
obedience.  This  is  still  true  of  nations.  Nations  that  are  highest  in  Christian 
character  will  always  be  highest  in  every  other  national  blessing.  Just  cast  your 
eyes  over  the  map  of  Europe  ;  and  if  you  had  a  thermometer,  and  could  gauge  the 
amount  of  living  Christianity  in  each  nation,  you  will  find  that  the  nation  in  which 
Christianity  is  purest,  rises  highest,  spreads  the  farthest,  descends  the  deepest,  is 
the  very  nation  that  is  highest  in  all  that  dignifies,  ennobles,  and  blesses  a  nation. 
And  so,  in  our  own  native  land,  the  \Tictory  of  our  armies  in  the  righteous  warfare 
to  which  it  is  committed,  the  maintenance  of  our  land  in  peace  and  prosperity 
against  all  foe  and  all  invasion,  will  rest,  not  only  upon  the  banners  of  our  brave 
troops,  not  only  upon  the  gallantry  of  our  heroic  sailors,  but  far  more  upon  the 
living  religion  that  saturates  the  masses  of  our  country.  It  is  righteousness  that 
exalteth  a  nation,  and  sin  is  the  ruin  of  a  nation.  If  you  will  read  the  history  of 
nations,  you  will  find  this  universally  true;  no  nation  ever  falls  before  a  foreign  foe 
— it  always  commits  suicide.  Nations  die  suicides ;  they  are  self-slain.  Rome  fell 
only  because  of  its  inner  corruption  ;  the  beautiful  sisterhood  of  Greek  states  fell 
by  their  universal  depravity  ;  and  our  nation  will  never  fall  before  a  foreign  foe  as 
long  as  it  is — what  it  is  now  in  a  greater  degree  than  any  other — a  nation  that  fears 
God,  and  works  righteousness,  and  counts  the  suns  bine  of  His  favour  more  precious 
than  gold  and  silver,  and  whatsoever  things  may  be  weighed  or  bought.  (J.  Cum- 
ming,  D.D.)  The  advantages  of  faithfulhj  serving  God: — A  Fingo,  travelling 
through  Hankey,  where  the  L.M.S.  have  a  station,  sat  down  to  rest  at  the  door  of 
the  place  of  worship  ;  and  looking  round  on  the  houses,  behind  which  the  gardens 
were  concealed,  asked  one  of  the  deacons  how  the  people  got  food  in  such  a  place, 
for  he  had  formerly  known  it  as  a  desert.  The  deacon  told  him  to  look  at  him  and 
see  if  he  was  not  in  health  and  well  clothed.  He  then  called  a  fine  child,  and  told 
the  man  to  look  at  it  and  see  if  it  was  not  well  fed.  The  deacon  then  told  him  if 
he  would  attend  service  the  next  daj  he  would  see  that  it  was  so  with  them  all. 
The  Fingo  rose  to  depart,  and  lifting  up  his  eyes  and  his  right  hand  to  heaven, 
exclaimed,  "  It  is  always  so  where  that  God  is  worshipped  !  "  (Andrew  Tiiomson, 
D.D.)  The  unbroken  continuitg  of  God's  gifts: — There  is  in  ver.  10  a  promise 
as  to  the  fulness  of  the  Divine  gifts,  which  has  a  far  wider  reach  and  nobler  appli- 
cation than  to  the  harvests  and  granaries  of  old  Palestine.  We  may  take  the  words 
in  that  aspect,  first,  as  containing  God's  pledge  that  these  outward  gifts  shall  come 
in  unbroken  continuity.  And  have  they  not  so  come  to  us  all,  for  all  these  long 
years  ?  Has  there  ever  been  a  gap  left  yawning  ?  has  there  ever  been  a  break  in 
the  chain  of  mercies  and  supplies?  has  it  not  rather  been  that  "  one  post  ran  to 
meet  another"?  that  before  one  of  the  messengers  had  unladed  all  his  budget, 
another's  arrival  has  antiquated  and  put  aside  his  store?  "  Things  grown  common 
lose  their  dear  delight."  "  If  in  His  gifts  and  benefits  He  were  more  sparing  and 
close-handed,"  said  Luther,  "we  should  learn  to  be  thankful."  But  let  us  learn 
it  by  the  continuity  of  our  joys,  that  we  may  not  need  to  be  taught  by  their  inter- 
ruption ;  and  let  us  still  all  tremulous  anticipation  of  possible  failure  or  certain 
loss  by  the  happy  confidence  which  we  have  a  right  to  cherish,  that  His  mercies 
will  meet  our  needs,  continuous  as  they  are,  and  be  threaded  so  close  together  on 
the  poor  thread  of  our  lives  that  no  gap  will  be  discernible  in  the  jewelled  circle. 
May  we  not  apply  that  same  thought  of  the  unbroken  continuitv  of  God's  gifts  to 
the  higher  region  of  our  spiritual  experience?  His  supplies  of  wisdom,  love,  joy, 
peace,  power  to  our  souls,  are  always  enough,  and  more  than  enough,  for  our  wants. 
If  ever  men  complain  of  languishing  vitality  in  their  religious  emotions,  or  of  a 
stinted  supply  of  food  for  their  truest  self,  it  is  their  own  fault,  not  His.  He  means 
that  there  should  be  no  parentheses  of  famine  in  our  Christian  life.     It  is  not  His 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  LEVITICUS.  337 

doing  if  times  of  torpor  alternate  with  seasons  of  quick  energy  and  joyful  fulness 
of  life.  So  far  as  He  is  concerned  the  flow  is  uninterrupted,  and  if  it  come  to  us  in 
jets  and  spurts  like  some  intermittent  well,  it  is  because  our  own  evil  has  put  some 
obstacles  to  choke  the  channel  and  dam  out  His  Spirit  from  our  spirits.  The 
source  is  full  to  overflowing,  and  there  are  no  limits  to  the  supply.  The  only  limit 
is  our  capacity,  which  again  is  largely  determined  by  our  desire.  So  after  all  His 
gifts  there  is  more  yet  unreceived  to  possess.  After  all  His  self-revelation  there  is 
more  yet  unspoken  to  declare.  Great  as  is  the  goodness  which  He  has  wrought 
before  the  sons  of  men  for  them  that  trust  in  Him,  there  are  far  gr^'ater  treasures 
of  goodness  laid  up  in  the  deep  mines  of  God  for  them  that  fear  Him.  Bars  of 
uncoined  treasure  and  ingots  of  massy  gold  lie  in  His  storehouses,  to  be  put  into 
circulation  as  soon  as  we  need,  and  can  use  them.  {A.  Maclaren,  D.D.)  Ye 
shall  make  you  no  idols. — Idolatry  interdicted  : — I.  What  the  proxeness  of  humax 
NATDRE  TO  IDOLATRY  SUGGESTS.  It  shows  both  the  dignity  and  depravity  of  man ; 
that — 1.  He  is  endowed  with  religious  instincts.  CajDable  of  worship,  of  exercising 
faith,  hope,  love,  reverence,  fear,  &c.  2.  He  is  conscious  of  amenability  to  some 
supreme  power.  Seeks  to  propitiate,  secure  favour,  and  aid.  3.  He  is  apprehensive 
of  a  future  state  of  existence.  Ideas  vague,  indefinite,  absurd,  yet  the  outcome  of 
inward  presentiment,  &c.  4.  He  is  unable  by  light  of  nature  to  discover  God.  His 
knowledge  is  so  faded,  light  so  dim.  How  low  the  soul  must  have  fallen  to  sub- 
stitute "  nothings"  for  the  Eternal  One  !  Heathenism  has  never  of  itself  emerged 
into  the  light  of  the  knowledge  of  the  gloiy  of  God,  as  seen  in  the  voice  that  has 
spoken  from  heaven,  and  has  been  recorded  by  holy  men  moved  by  the  Holy  Ghost. 
II.  What  indulgence  in  idolatry  ent.\ils.  1.  Degradation.  Worship  of  heathen 
deities  demoralising.  In  their  temples,  at  their  services,  the  rites  observed  are 
grovelling,  and,  in  some  instances,  demoniacal.-  2.  Superstition.  Devotees  are 
duped  by  priests,  enslaved  by  torturing  ritualism,  subject  and  victims  of  absurd 
delusions.  3.  Misery.  Fear  the  ruling  passion,  not  love.  Nothing  ennobling, 
inspiring,  quickening,  comforting.  Idol  worship  mocks  the  longings  of  the  human 
soul,  cannot  appease  its  hunger,  satisfy  its  thirst.  III.  How  idolatry  may  be 
ABOLISHED.  Darkucss  can  only  be  dispersed  by  the  letting  in  of  light.  The  folly 
of  idolatry  must  be  shown,  its  helplessness,  misery,  sin  by  the  spi-ead  of  the  written 
revelation  of  heaven,  the  preaching  of  the  glorious  gospel.  {F.  W.  Brown.)  The 
common  ivorship  of  the  sanctuary  : — There  are  many  who  make  light  of  the  common 
worship  of  the  sanctuary,  and  who  are  in  the  habit  of  depreciating  the  interest  and 
value  of  its  influences.  They  tell  us  that  Nature's  temple  is  far  grander  than  any 
human  shrine ;  that  the  voices  of  the  birds  are  a  sweeter  minstrelsy  than  that  of  a 
mediocre  choir;  that  they  find  "sermons  in  stones"  whose  eloquence  is  mightier 
and  more  penetrating  than  that  of  a  poor  preacher  with  his  string  of  stale  plati- 
tudes ;  and  that,  therefore,  a  pleasant  country  walk  is  more  profitable  and  sanctify- 
ing than  an  hour  spent  in  the  stuffy  atmosphere  of  church  or  chapel.  Nay,  even 
their  own  fireside  has  more  powerful  charms,  for  have  they  not  Bibles  at  home, 
and  cannot  they  read  for  themselves  ?  and  can  they  not  obtain  far  better  sermons 
for  a  few  pence  per  volume  than  they  are  Ukely  to  hear  ?  No  doubt  there  is  much 
truth  in  such  reasoning,  but  it  ignores  the  social  needs  of  human  nature.  Man  is 
a  social  being ;  social  worship  is  therefore  a  necessity  of  his  nature.  And  its 
necessity  has  been  universally  felt.  "  Groves,  mountains,  grottoes,  caves,  streams, 
valleys,  plains,  lakes,  as  well  as  altars  and  temples,  have  been  consecrated  as  the 
abodes  of  gods."  Everywhere  men  have  sought  out  some  shi-ine  at  which  to  offer 
common  and  united  worship.  And  in  Christian  ages  the  house  of  prayer  has  ever 
heen  held  in  honour,  and  its  services  regarded  as  hallowed  privileges  hy  the  best 
and  wisest  men.  They  meet  a  deep-seated  need  of  human  hearts.  As  Dr.  Geikie 
has  said,  "There  is  a  breadth  of  human  experience,  and  of  understanding  of  Divine 
things  to  be  obtained  in  the  great  congregation,  in  the  common  confessions,  the 
common  prayers,  the  common  praises,  the  common  exhortation  of  the  sanctuary, 
which  would  be  sought  in  vain  in  soUtudes."  As  long  as  human  nature  is  un- 
changed, the  place  of  pubUc  worship  cannot  be  superseded.  [Howard  James.) 
Commonness  of  the  idolatrous  spirit  : — Yes,  the  orthodox  Greek  Churchman  is 
grievously  scandalised  at  the  image- worship  of  the  Komanist ;  it  is  flat  idolatry, 
and  he  denounces  it  vehemently.  But  what  are  those  pictures,  many  of  them 
made  to  stand  out  with  solid  plates  of  gold  and  silver  ?  Why,  these  are  pictures  of 
the  Virgin  or  of  her  Son,  as  the  case  may  be,  and  your  anti-idolatrous  Greek  bows 
before  these  with  voluntary  humility.  He  hates  image-worship,  you  see,  but  stands 
up  for  picture-worship.    Behold  how  sinners  disagree  in  name  and  unite  in  spirit  1 

22 


338  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvr. 

Put  Greek  and  Eoman  in  a  sack  togptlier  and  let  the  greatest  idolater  out  first :  the 
•wisest  solution  would  he  to  keep  them  both  in,  for  Solomon  himself  would  be  puzzled 
to  decide  between  them.  Are  there  no  such  inconsistencies  among  ourselves  ?  Do 
■we  not  condenm  in  one  form  what  we  allow  in  another  ?  Do  we  not  censure  in  our 
neighbours  what  we  allow  in  ourselves  ?  This  query  need  not  be  answered  in  a 
huriy  ;  the  reply  will  be  the  more  extensive  for  a  little  waiting.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
Then  I  will  give  you  rain. — The  philosophy  of  rain : — To  understand  the  philosophy 
•of  this  beautiful  and  often  sublime  phenomenon,  so  often  witnessed  since  the  crea- 
tion of  the  world,  and  essential  to  the  very  existence  of  plants  and  animals,  a  few 
facts  derived  from  observation  and  a  long  train  of  experiments  must  be  remembered. 
1.  Were  the  atmosphere  everywhere  at  all  times  at  a  uniform  temperature,  we 
should  never  have  rain,  or  hail,  or  snow  ;  the  water  absorbed  by  it  in  evaporation 
from  the  sea  and  the  earth's  surface  would  descend  in  an  imperceptible  vapour,  or 
cease  to  be  absorbed  by  the  air  when  it  was  once  fully  saturated.  2.  The  absorbing 
power  of  the  atmosphere,  and  consequently  its  capability  to  retain  humidity,  is 
proportionably  greater  in  warm  than  in  cold  air.  3.  The  air  near  the  surface  of 
the  earth  is  warmer  than  it  is  in  the  region  of  the  clouds.  The  higher  we  ascend 
from  the  earth  the  colder  do  we  find  the  atmosphere.  Hence  the  perpetual  snow 
on  very  high  mountains  in  the  hottest  climate.  Now,  when  from  continued  eva- 
poration the  air  is  highly  saturated  with  vapour,  though,  if  it  be  invisible  and  the 
sky  cloudless,  if  its  temperature  be  suddenly  reduced  by  cold  currents  descending 
from  above,  or  rushing  from  a  higher  to  a  lower  latitude,  its  capacity  to  retain 
moisture  is  diminished,  clouds  are  formed,  and  the  result  is  rain.  Air  condenses 
as  it  cools,  and  like  a  sponge  filled  with  water  and  conipressed,  pours  out  the  water 
which  its  diminished  capacity  cannot  hold.  How  singular,  yet  how  simple,  the 
philosophy  of  rain !  Who  but  Omniscience  could  have  devised  such  an  admirable 
arrangement  for  watering  the  earth  ?  {Dr.  lire.)  Rain  from  God  : — St.  Ambrose, 
speaking  of  great  drought  in  his  time,  when  the  people  talked  much  of  rain,  he 
sometimes  comforted  himself  with  this  hope,  Neomenia  dahit  pluvias  ("  The  new  moon 
will  bring  us  rain  ") ;  yet  saith  he,  "Though  all  of  us  desired  to  see  some  showers,  yet 
I  wished  such  hopes  might  fail,  and  was  glad  that  no  rain  fell,  do7iec  precibiis 
ecclesice  data  essft,  &c. ,  until  it  came  as  a  return  upon  the  Church's  prayers,  not  upon 
the  influence  of  the  moon,  but  upon  the  provident  mercy  of  the  Creator."  Such 
was  the  religious  care  of  that  good  saint  then,  and  the  like  were  to  be  wished  for 
now,  that  men  would  be  exhorted  not  to  be  so  much  taken  as  they  are  with  the 
vanity  of  astrological  predictions,  to  read  the  stars  less  and  the  Scriptures  more,  to 
eye  God  in  His  providence,  not  the  moon  so  much  in  its  influence,  still  looking  up 
unto  Him  as  the  primus  motor,  and  upon  all  other  creatures  whatsoever  as  sub- 
ordinate.    (J.  Spencer.) 

Ver.  8.  And  five  of  you  shall  chase  an  hundred. — Panic  among  soldiers  : — 
During  the  Italian  war  a  panic  occurred  in  a  whole  reserve  corps  d'armee  of  the 

French  forces,  and  the  account  is  given  us  by  the  Hon.  Mr.  E ,  the  editor  of  a 

prominent  American  journal,  who  was  there,  partook  of  the  fright,  and  ran  himself 
with  the  fugitives.  Five  Austrians,  whose  retreat  was  cut  off,  rode  rapidly  into  the 
village  where  the  reserve  forces  were  stationed,  with  the  design  of  giving  themselves 
up.  The  frightened  inhabitants  cried  out,  "  The  Austrians  are  coming  !  "  and  ran 
for  their  lives.  The  soldiers  followed  suit — horse,  foot,  and  dragoons,  pell-mell, 
without  waiting  to  take  care  of  the  wounded,  ran  fifteen  miles  without  stopping. 
One  wounded  French  general  offered  a  large  reward  to  be  carried  to  a  pla.ce  of  safety. 

Mr.  R confesses  to  have  run  ten  miles  on  foot  before  he  stopped.     A  panic 

among  the  loyal  troops  in  the  first  battle  of  Bull's  Run  in  the  American  civil 
conflict,  if  not  the  cause  of  their  defeat,  greatly  aggravated  the  disasters  of  the 
battle.     (Lowrie.) 

Vers.  14-19.  But  if  ye  will  not  hearken. — National  trans grei^sion  and  disaster: — 
I.  A  nation's  progbessive  apostasy.  1.  Passive  indifference  to  Divine  teachings 
and  appeals:  "Not  hearken."  2.  Non-compliance  with  Divine  calls  and  claims: 
"Not  do."  3.  Contemptuous  rejection  of  God's  statutes:  "Despise"  (Mai.  iii. 
14,  15).  4.  Spiritual  revolt  from  all  sacied  demands  :  "  Your  soul  abhor  My  judg- 
ments "  (John  iii.  20;  Job  xxiv.  13).  A  fearful  departure  from  God.  5.  Violation 
of  all  covenant  relationship  :  "  Ye  break  My  covenant."  II.  An  apostate  nation's 
calamities.  1.  Sin  brings  disease  and  physical  suffering  in  its  train  (ver.  16)  : 
"Terror,  consumption,  and  the  burning  ague,  that  shall  consume  the  eyes  and 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  LEVITICUS.  339 

■cause  sorrow  of  heart."  Impiety  inevitably  drifts  into  impurity.  2.  Failure  and 
penury  follow  quickly  upon  habits  of  indulgence  and  impurity :  "  Sow  your  seed 
in  vain,  for  your  enemies  shall  eat  it"  (ver.  16;.  Nothing  succeeds  in  the  hands  of 
■a  dissipated  and  dissolute  man,  and  he  becomes  a  prey  to  his  hated  scorners  and 
rivals.  3.  A  godless  life  invites  the  ravages  of  the  enemy  (ver.  17).  God  withdrew 
His  protection,  and  adversaries  swept  down  upon  Israel.  They  who  repudiate 
Divine  government  are  "  taken  captive  by  the  devil  at  his  will,"  and  serve  their 
enemies.  Sin  is  very  cruel.  It  "slays"  its  victims;  slaughters  their  virtue,  peace, 
happiness,  hopes  ;  destroys  precious  souls.  4.  Sin  also  fills  the  life  of  wrongdoers 
with  terrors  ;  they  "  flee  when  none  pursueth."  Even  in  nations  there  is  "  strong 
confidence  "  and  "a  sound  mind "  only  when  conscious  of  rectitude  and  the  enjoyment 
of  God's  approval.  It  paralyses  a  people's  heart  to  feel  that  Heaven  is  alienated 
and  Divine  favour  lost.  Arrnies,  too,  have  gone  with  assurance  into  battles  when 
convinced  that  God  is  with  them — as  Cromwell's  "  Ironsides" — while  enemies  have 
fled  with  panic,  as  did  the  Spanish  Armada,  when  possessed  with  alarm  that  God  was 
against  them.  5.  There  are  the  yet  darker  calamities  of  abject  overthrow  and 
Divine  desertion  :  "  I  will  break  the  pride  of  your  power,  and  I  will  make  your 
heaven  as  iron,  and  your  earth  as  brass  "  (ver.  19) — a  picture  of  prostration  and 
helplessness  which  finds  verification  in  (1)  Babylon's  fall — now  lying  buried  amid 
bleaching  sands,  emblem  of  rebuked  pride  ;  (2)  the  desolation  of  Jerusalem — now 
a  waste  scene,  and  her  children  the  "  tribes  of  the  wandering  foot  and  weary 
breast  " ;  (3)  the  buried  cities  of  Pompeii  and  Herculaneum — interred  beneath 
volcanic  ashes,  a  monument  of  sudden  wrath  on  a  voluptuous  people.  Such 
historic  admonitions  warn  against  national  impiety,  and  call  mankind  to  serious- 
ness and  prayer ;  for  even  in  the  solemn  threatenings  of  God  there  lies  an  overt 
assurance  of  mei'cy,  that  "  if  a  nation  or  individual  will  cease  from  apostasy  and 
hearken  unto  Him  "  (ver.  18),  He  will  turn  aside  the  "  seven  times  more  "  punish- 
ment for  sins,  and  show  the  forgiveness  in  which  He  delights,  and  the  salvation 
which  the  glorious  gospel  of  His  grace  proclaims.  (W.  H.JclUe.)  God's  warning 
against  rebellion  : — I.  How  their  sin  is  described,  which  would  bring  all  this 
misery  upon  them.  Not  sins  of  ignorance  and  infirmity — God  had  provided 
sacrifices  for  these  ;  not  the  sins  they  repented  of  and  forsook,  but  sins  presump- 
tuously committed  and  obstinately  persisted  in.  1.  A  contempt  of  God's  command- 
ments. (1)  Despising  His  statutes  ;  both  the  duties  enjoined,  and  the  authority 
enjoining  them.  Those  are  hastening  apace  to  their  own  ruin  who  begin  to  think 
it  below  them  to  be  religious.  (2)  Abhorriug  His  judgments.  They  that  begin  by 
despising  religion  will  soon  come  to  loathe  it ;  mean  thoughts  of  it  will  ripen  into 
ill  thoughts  of  it.  They  that  turn  from  it  will  turn  against  it,  and  their  hearts  rise 
at  it.  (3)  Breaking  His  covenant.  They  that  reject  the  precept  will  come  at  last 
to  renounce  the  covenant.  Observe,  it  is  God's  covenant  they  break — He  made  it, 
but  they  break  it.  Note — If  a  covenant  be  made  and  kept  between  God  and  man, 
God  must  have  all  the  honour ;  but  if  ever  it  be  broken,  man  must  bear  all  the 
blame  ;  on  him  shall  this  breach  be.  2.  A  contempt  of  God's  corrections.  Their 
contempt  of  God's  Word  would  not  have  brought  them  to  ruin  if  they  had  not 
added  to  that  a  coutempt  of  His  rod,  which  should  have  brought  them  to  repentance. 
Three  ways  this  is  expressed.  (1)  "  If  you  will  not  for  all  this  hearken  to  Me  " 
(vers.  18,  21,  27).  If  ye  will  not  learn  obedience  by  the  things  which  you  suffer,  but 
be  as  deaf  to  the  loud  alarms  of  God's  judgments  as  you  have  been  to  the  close 
reasonings  of  His  Word,  and  the  secret  whispers  of  your  own  consciences,  you  are 
obstinate  indeed.  (2)  "If  ye  will  walk  contraiy  to  Me"  (vers.  21,  23,  27).  All 
sinners  walk  contrary  to  God,  to  His  truths,  laws,  and  counsels,  but  those  especially 
that  are  incorrigible  under  His  judgments.  The  design  of  the  rod  is  to  humble 
them,  and  soften  them,  and  bring  them  to  repentance ;  but  instead  of  this,  their 
hearts  are  more  hardened  and  exasperated  against  God,  and  in  their  distress  they 
trespass  yet  more  against  Him  (2  Chron.  xxviii.  22).  This  is  walking  contrary  to 
God.  (3)  "If  ye  will  not  be  reformed  by  these  things."  God's  design  in  punishing 
is  to  reform,  by  giving  men  sensible  convictions  of  the  evil  of  sin,  and  obliging 
them  to  seek  unto  Him  for  relief.  This  is  the  primary  intention,  but  those  that 
wiU  not  be  reformed  by  the  judgments  of  God  must  expect  to  be  ruined  by  them. 
II.  How  THE  MISERY  IS  DESCRIBED  which  their  sin  would  bring  upon  them.  1.  God 
Himself  would  be  against  them  ;  and  this  is  the  root  and  cause  of  all  their  misery. 
{1)  "  I  will  set  My  face  against  you  "  (ver.  17) ;  i.e.,  "  I  will  set  Mv  self  against  you, 
set  Myself  to  ruin  you."  These  proud  sinners  God  will  resist,  and  face  those  down 
that  confront  His  authority  ;  or  the  face  is  put  for  the  anger — "  I  will  show  Myself 


340  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ciikv.  xxvi. 

highly  displeased  at  you."  (2)  "  I  will  walk  contrary  to  you "  (vers.  24,  2S)> 
"  With  the  froward  He  will  wrestle  "  (Psa.  xviii.  26).  When  God  in  His  providence 
thwarts  the  designs  of  a  people,  which  they  thought  well  laid,  crosseth  their  pur- 
poses, breaks  their  measures,  blasts  their  endeavours,  and  disappoints  their  expecta- 
tions— then  He  walks  contrary  to  them.  Note — There  is  nothing  got  by  striving 
with  God  Almighty  ;  for  He  will  either  break  the  heart  or  break  the  neck  of  those 
that  contend  with  Him,  will  bring  them  either  to  repentance  or  ruin.  "  I  will  walk 
at  all  adventures  with  you";  so  some  read  it,  "AU  covenant  lovingkinduess  shall 
be  forgotten,  and  I  will  leave  you  to  common  providence."  Note,  those  that  cast 
God  off,  it  is  just  with  Him  to  cast  them  off.  (3)  As  they  continued  obstinate,  the 
judgments  should  increase  yet  more  upon  them.  If  the  first  sensible  tokens  of 
God's  displeasure  do  not  attain  their  end  to  humble  and  reform  them,  then  (ver. 
18),  "I  will  punish  you  seven  times  more";  and  again  (ver.  21),  "I  will  bring 
seven  times  more  plagues  '* ;  and  (ver.  24),  "  I  will  punish  you  yet  seven  times  "  ; 
and  (ver.  28),  "I,  even  I,  will  chastise  you  seven  times  for  your  sins."  Note — If 
lesser  judgments  do  not  do  their  work,  God  will  send  greater  ;  for  when  He  judgeth 
He  will  overcome.  If  true  repentance  do  not  stay  process,  it  will  go  on  till  execu- 
tion be  taken  out.  Those  that  are  obstinate  and  incorrigible,  when  they  have 
weathered  one  storm,  must  expect  another  more  violent ;  and  how  severely  soever 
they  are  punished  till  they  are  in  hell,  still  they  must  say  there  is  worse  behind,  unless 
they  repent.  If  the  founder  have  hitherto  melted  in  vain  (Jer.  vi.  29),  the  furnace 
will  be  heated  "seven  times  hotter"  (a  proverbial  expression  used  Dan.  iii.  19),  and 
again  and  again  "  seven  times  hotter."  And  who  among  us  can  dwell  with  such 
devouring  fire  ?  God  doth  not  begin  with  the  sorest  judgments,  to  show  that  He  is 
patient,  and  delights  not  in  the  death  of  sinners  ;  but  if  they  repent  not.  He  will 
proceed  to  the  sorest,  to  show  that  He  is  righteous,  and  that  He  will  not  be  mocked 
or  set  at  defiance.  (4)  Their  misery  is  completed  in  that  threatening  (ver.  30), 
"  My  soul  shall  abhor  you."  That  man  is  as  miserable  as  he  can  be  whom  God 
abhors,  for  His  resentments  are  just  and  effective.  Thus,  "if  any  man  draw  back," 
as  these  here  are  supposed  to  do,  "  God's  soul  shall  have  no  pleasure  in  them  " 
(Heb.  X.  38) ;  and  He  will  spue  them  out  of  His  mouth  (Rev.  iii.  16).  It  is  spoken 
of  as  strange,  and  yet  too  true,  "  Hath  thy  soul  loathed  Sion?  "  (Jer.  xiv.  19.)  2. 
The  whole  creation  would  be  at  war  with  them ;  all  God's  sore  judgments  would  \)q 
sent  against  them,  for  He  hath  many  arrows  in  His  quiver.  The  threatenings  here 
are  very  particular,  because  really  they  were  prophecies ;  and  He  that  foresaw  all 
their  rebellions  knew  they  would  prove  so  (see  Deut.  xxxi.  16,  29).  This  long  roll 
of  threatenings  shows  that  evil  pursues  sinners.  Here  is  (1)  temporal  judgments 
threatened,  (a)  Diseases  of  body,  which  should  be  epidemical  (ver.  16).  All  diseases 
are  God's  servants,  and  do  what  He  appoints  them,  and  are  often  used  as  scourges 
wherewith  He  chastiseth  a  provoking  people.  The  pestilence  is  threatened  (ver. 
25)  to  meet  them  when  they  are  gathered  together  in  their  cities  for  fear  of  the 
sword.  And  the  greater  the  concourse  of  people  is,  the  greater  desolation  doth  the 
pestilence  make;  and  when  it  gets  among  the  soldiers  that  should  defend  a  place,  it  is  of 
most  fatal  consequences,  (h)  Famine  and  scarcity  of  bread,  which  should  be  brought 
upon  them  several  ways,  as :  (i.)  By  plunder  (ver.  16) :  "  Your  enemies  shall  eat  it 
up,  and  carry  it  off,  as  the  Madianites  did"  (Judg.  vi.  5,  6).  (ii.)  By  unseasonable 
weather,  especially  the  want  of  rain  (ver.  19) :  "  I  will  make  your  heaven  as  iron," 
letting  fall  no  rain,  but  reflecting  heat ;  and  then  the  earth  would  of  course  be  as 
hard  and  dry  as  brass,  and  their  labour  in  ploughing  and  sowing  would  be  in  vain 
(ver.  20) ;  for  the  increase  of  the  earth  depends  upon  God's  good  providence  more 
than  upon  man's  good  husbandry,  (iii.)  By  the  besieging  of  their  cities  ;  for  sure 
that  must  be  supposed  to  reduce  them  to  such  extremity,  as  that  they  should  "  eat 
the  flesh  of  their  sons  and  daughters  "  (ver.  29).  {c)  War,  and  the  prevaleucy  of 
their  enemies  over  them  :  "  Ye  shall  be  slain  before  your  enemies  "  (ver.  17).  (d) 
Wild  beasts — lions,  and  bears,  and  wolves — which  should  increase  uj^on  them,  and 
tear  in  pieces  all  that  came  in  their  way  (ver.  22),  as  we  read  of  two  bears  that  in 
an  instant  killed  forty  and  two  children  (2  Kings  ii.  24).  This  one  of  the  four  sore 
judgments  threatened  (Ezek.  xiv.  21),  which  plainly  refers  to  this  chapter.  Man 
was  made  to  have  dominion  over  the  creatures,  and  though  many  of  them  are 
stronger  than  he,  yet  none  of  them  could  have  hurt  him,  nay,  all  of  them  should 
have  served  him,  if  he  had  not  first  shaken  off  God's  dominion,  and  so  lost  his 
own ;  and  now  the  creatures  are  in  rebellion  against  him  that  is  in  rebellion  against 
his  Maker,  and  when  the  Lord  of  those  hosts  pleaseth,  are  the  executioners  of  His 
■wrath  and  ministers  of  His  justice,     (e)  Captivity,  or  dispersion :  "I  will  scatter 


CHAP,  sxvi.]  LEVITICUS.  341 

you  among  the  heathen  "  (ver.  33)  "  in  your  enemies'  land  "  (ver.  34).     Never  were 
more  people  so  incorporated  and  united  among  themselves  as  they  were;  but  for 
their  sin  God  would  scatter  them,  so  that  thej'  should  be  lost  among  the  heathen, 
from  whom  God  bad  so  graciously  distinguished  them,  but  with  whom  they  had 
wickedly  mingled  themselves.     Yet  when  they  were  scattered  Divine  justice  had 
not  done  with  them,  but  would  draw  out  a  sword  after  them,  which  should  find 
them  out,  and  follow  them,  wherever  they  were.     God's  judgments,  as  they  cannot 
be  outfaced,  so  they  cannot  be  outrun.     (/)  The  utter  ruin  and  desolation  of  their 
land,  which  should  be  so  remarkable  that  their  very  enemies  themselves,  who  had 
helped  it  forward,  should  in  the  review  be  astonished  at  it  (ver.  32).    (i.)  Their  cities 
should  be  waste,  forsaken,  uninhabited,  and  all  the  buildings  destroyed ;  those  that 
escaped  the  desolations  of   war  should  fall  to  decay  of  themselves,     (ii.)  Their 
sanctuaries  should  be   a    desolation,  i.e.,  their  synagogues,  where  they  met  for 
religious  worship  every  Sabbath,  as  well  as  their  Tabernacle,  where  they  met  thrice 
a  year,     (iii.)  The  country  itself  should  be  desolate,  not  tilled  or  husbanded  (vers. 
34,  35)  ;  then  the  land  should  enjoy  its  sabbaths,  because  they  bad  not  religiously 
•observed  the  sabbatical  years  which  God  appointed  them.     They  tilled  their  ground 
when  God  would  have  them  let  it  rest,  justly  therefore  were  they  driven  out  of  it ; 
and  the  expression  intimates  that  the  ground  itself  was  pleased  and  easy  when  it 
was  rid  of  the  burthen  of  such  sinners,  under  which  it  had  groaned  (Eom.  viii.  20, 
<fcc.).     The  captivity  in  Babylorj  lasted  seventy  years,  and  so  long  the  land  enjoyed 
her  sabbaths,  as  is  said  (2  Chron.  xxxvi.  21)  with  reference  to  this  here,     {g)  The 
•destruction  of  their  idols,  though  rather  a  mercy  than  a  judgment,  yet  being  a 
necessary  piece  of  justice,  is  here  mentioned,  to  show  what  would  be  the  sin  that 
would  bring  all  these  miseries  upon  them  (ver.  30).     (2)  Spiritual  judgments  are 
here  threatened  which  should  seize  the  mind,  for  He  that  made  that  can,  when  He 
pleaseth,  make  His  sword  approach  unto  it.     It  is  here  threatened — (a)  that  they 
should  find  no  acceptance  with  God  (ver.  31).     (b)  That  they  should  have  no  courage 
in  their  wars,  but  should  be  quite  dispirited  and  disheartened  (vers.  17,  36).    Thos'> 
that  cast  off  the  fear  of  God  expose  themselves  to  the  fear  of  everything  else  (Prov. 
xxviii.  1).     (c)  That  they  should  have  no  hope  of  the  forgiveness  of  their  sins 
(ver.  39  ;  Ezek.  xxxiii.  10).     Note — It  is  a  righteous  thing  with  God,  to  leave  those 
to  despair  of  pardon  that  have  presumed  to  sin ;  and  it  is  owing  to  free  grace,  if 
we  are  not  abandoned  to  pine  away  in  the  iniquity  we  are  born  in  and  have  lived 
in.     [Matthew  Henry,  D.D.)        Imprecations  among   the  ancients  : — Imprecations 
like  those  set  forth  in  our  section  were  not  unusual  among  the  ancients  ;  one  brief 
parallel  may  here  be  inserted.     When  the  people  of  Cirrha  and  others  had  polluted 
the  temple  of  Delhi  and  profaned  its  holy  treasures,  the  Ampbictyons,  after  having 
devastated  their  territories,  and  sold  the  inhabitants  as  slaves,  protested  and  swore 
that  no  one  should  ever  cultivate  the  devoted  land,  and  they  publicly  pronounced 
this  curse :  "  If  any  persons  transgress  this  edict,  whether  private  individuals,  or  a 
tribe,  or  a  people,  their  land  shall  bear  no  fruit,  and  the  women  shall  bring  forth 
no  children  who  resemble  their  fathers,  but  shall  give  birth  to  monsters  ;  nor  shall 
the  beasts  produce  young  of  a  normal  shape ;  misfortune  shall  befall  them  in  their  ' 
wars,  their  tribunals,  and  their  public  assemblies ;    they  themselves,  with  their 
houses  and  their  whole  race,  shall  be  destroyed;  and  they  shall  never  again  present 
to  the  gods  an  acceptable  offering."     (ill.  31.  Kalisch,  Ph.D.)         God's  warning  a 
Missing  .-—In  the  summer  of  1884,  when  the  cholera  was  raging  in  Spain,  our 
newspapers  constantly  warned  the  people  that  dirt  bred  disease,  and  opened  up  a 
highway  for  the  cholera  to  spread  rapidly,  if  once  it  reached  our  shores.     This 
theme  was  not  dwelt  on  for  the  sake  of  frightening  people,  for  the  sake  of  the  alarm, 
but  to  frighten  them  into  doing  a  good  thing  which  otherwise  they  would  have  left 
undone.     The  result,  at  least  in  New  York  City,  was  most  beneficial.     Alarm  bred 
action  and  action  cleansed  the  city  as  it  never  had  been  cleansed  before.   And  not  only 
did  we  have  no  cholera,  but  in  the  fall  of  1885  the  death-rate  of  the  city  had  been 
unusually  low.     In  this  case  forewarned  was  forearmed,  and  the  warning  was  a 
blessing,  and  not  a  curse.     The  same  is  true  of  tbe  patient  and  his  wise  physician. 
The  latter  sees,  perhaps,  that  the  manner  of  his  patient's  living  is  injurious.     It 
will  end  fatally,  so  he  warns  him.     He  does  not  do  it  merely  to  frighten  him,  but 
to  frighten  him  away  from  the  folly  of  his  present  manner  of  life.    (A.F.  Schanffler.) 
God's  presence  a  source  of  Messing  to  a  nation  : — When  the  king  removes,  the  court 
and  all  the  carriages  follow  after,' and  when  they  are  gone  the  hangings  are  taken 
down  ;  nothing  is  left  behind  but  bare  walls,  dust,  and  rubbish.     So  if  God  remov«-8 
from  a  man  or  a  nation  where  He  kept  His  court.  His  graces  will  not  stay  behind ; 


342  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxvk 

and  if  they  be  gone,  farewell  peace,  farewell  comfort ;  down  go  the  hangings  of  all 
prosperity,  nothing  is  left  behind  but  confusion  and  disorder.  (J.  Spencer.)  God 
uncliangcable : — The  sun  hath  but  one  simple  act  of  shining;  yet  do  we  not  see  that 
it  dothunite  clay  and  straw,  dissolve  ice  and  water?  It  hardens  clay,  and  melteth 
wax;  it  makes  the  flowers  to  smell  sweetly,  and  a  dead  crpse  to  scent  loathsomely; 
the  hot  fire  to  be  cold,  and  the  cold  water  hotter ;  cures  one  man  with  its  heat,  yet 
therewith  kills  another.  What  is  the  reason?  The  cause  is  in  the  several  objects^ 
and  their  divers  dispositions  and  constitutions,  and  not  in  the  sun's  act  of  shining, 
which  is  one  and  the  same  thing.  Or  let  a  looking-glass  be  set  in  the  window. 
Will  it  not  represent  to  the  eye  diversity  of  objects  ?  If  thou  go  to  it  in  decent 
and  seemly  apparel,  shalt  thou  not  see  the  like  figure  ?  If  dejected,  and  in  coarse 
raiment,  will  it  not  offer  to  thy  view  the  same  equal  proportion?  Do  but  stretch 
thyself,  bend  thy  brow,  and  run  against  it,  will  it  not  resemble  the  like  person  and 
actions  ?  Where  now  is  the  change — shall  we  conclude  in  the  glass  ?  No  ;  for  it 
is  neither  altered  from  the  place  nor  in  the  nature.  Thus  the  cliange  of  love  and 
affection  is  not  in  God,  but  in  respect  of  the  object  about  which  it  is  exercised.  If 
one  day  God  seem  to  love  us,  another  to  hate  us,  there  is  alteration  within  us  first, 
not  any  in  the  Lord.  We  shall  be  sure  to  find  a  change,  but  it  must  be  when  we 
do  change  our  ways  ;  but  God  never  changeth.  Such  as  we  are  to  ourselves,  such 
will  He  be  to  us;  if  we  run  stubbornly  against  Him,  He  will  walk  stubbornly  against 
us ;  with  the  froward  He  will  be  froward,  but  with  the  meek  He  will  show  Himself 
meek ;  yet  one  and  the  same  God  still,  in  whom  there  is  not  the  least  shadow  of 
change  imaginable.  {Ibid.)  God  proceeds  from  milder  to  sharper  cournes  : — The 
physician,  when  he  findeth  that  the  potion  which  he  hath  given  his  patient  will  not 
work,  he  seconds  it  with  one  more  violent ;  but  if  he  perceive  the  disease  to  be 
settled,  then  he  puts  him  into  a  course  of  physic,  so  that,  medice  miscre,  he  sball 
have  at  present  but  small  comfort  of  his  life.  And  thus  doth  the  surgeon  too  :  if  a 
gentle  plaster  will  not  serve,  then  he  applies  that  which  is  more  corroding;  and  to 
prevent  a  gangrene,  he  makes  use  of  his  cauterising  knife,  and  takes  off  the  joint 
or  member  that  is  so  ill  affected.  Even  so  Gcid,  when  men  profit  not  by  such 
crosses  as  He  hath  formerly  exercised  them  with,  when  they  are  not  bettered  by 
lighter  afflictions,  then  He  sends  heavier,  and  proceeds  from  milder  to  sharper- 
courses.  If  the  dross  of  their  sin  will  not  come  off.  He  will  throw  them  into  the 
melting-pot  again  and  again,  crush  them  harder  in  the  press,  and  lay  on  such  irons 
as  shall  enter  more  deep  into  their  souls.  If  He  strikes  and  they  grieve  not  or 
they  be  so  foolish  that  they  will  not  know  the  judgment  of  their  God,  He  will 
bring  seven  times  more  plagues  upon  them,  cross  upon  cross,  loss  upon  loss,  trouble 
upon  trouble,  one  sorrow  upon  the  neck  of  another,  till  they  are  in  a  manner  wasted 
and  consumed.     {Ibid.) 

Vers.  27-39.  Then  I  will  walk  contrary  unto  you. — Code's  determination  to  punish 
sinners  : — I.  An  affecting  supposition  statkb.  "  If  ye  will  not,"  A'c.  The  Lord 
here  supposes  that  His  people  may  commit  three  grievous  sins :  1.  The  sin  of  dis- 
obedience. "  If  ye  will  not  hearken  unto  Me."  Hence  observe — (1)  That  the  Lord 
in  His  Word  speaks  to  us  (Heb.  viii.  12).  (2)  That  whatever  the  Lord  says  in  His 
Word  it  is  our  bonnden  duty  to  hear  (Heb.  iii.  7  ;  1  Thess.  v.  20  ;  James  i.  19).  (3) 
That  we  are  too  apt  to  turn  a  deaf  ear  to  Him  (Exod.  v.  2;  Psa.  xii.  4).  2.  The 
sin  of  incorrigiblene>s.  "  If  for  all  this  ye  will  not  hearken."  Note  here — (1)  That 
afflictions  sometimes  have  the  nature  of  punishments  (Jer.  xiii.  21).  (2)  That 
punishment  is  the  natural  and  necessary  consequence  of  transgression.  (3)  That 
in  the  punishment  which  God  inflicts  He  seeks  our  reformntion  (2  Chron.  xviii.  22). 
(4)  That  our  depravity  in  too  many  cases  frustrates  His  designs  (Zeph.  iii.  2).  3. 
The  sin  of  perverseness.  •'  If  ye  walk  contrary  to  Me."  Observe  apain — (1)  That 
the  Lord's  pleasure  is,  we  should  walk  with  Him  (Mic.  vi.  8).  (2)  That  we  walk 
with  the  Lord  when  we  walk  in  His  way  (2  Kings  xx.  3  ;  Eccles.  xii.  13).  (3)  That 
walking  otherwise  than  He  has  commanded  is  to  show  a  perverse  and  untoward 
heart.  II.  An  awful  consequence  declaked.  "  I  will  walk  contrary  also  to  you  in 
fury."  Thus  we  see  that — 1.  Conformable  to  our  character  will  be  our  end.  If 
God  should  deal  thus  with  us  (1)  We  shall  lose  the  blessing  which  He  imparts  to 
His  obedient  followers  (vers.  4  12).  (2)  Our  expectations  will  issue  in  disappoint- 
ment and  vexation  (Hos.  viii.  7)  ;  and  (3)  Like  chaff  before  the  wind  we  shall 
speedily  be  carried  to  destruction  (Psa.  i.  4,  5).  2  Enforcement  of  these  considera- 
tions :  we  see — (1)  That  a  religion  consisting  of  mere  notions  will  never  sav<»aman. 
(2)  That  men  are  not  at  liberty,  as  some  suppose,  to  live  as  they  please.     (3j  That 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  LEVITICUS.  348 

God  takes  notice  of  the  ways  of  all.  (4)  That  if  He  displays  His  anger  we  should 
be  anxious  to  find  out  the  cause ;  and  (5)  That  if  any  one  perish  he  will  have  no 
one  to  blame  for  it  but  himsr-lf  (Isa.  iii.  11).  ( Wm.  Sleigh.)  Desolation  threatened 
to  Israel : — I.  How  horrifying  the  miseries  which  may  befall  a  privileged  people. 
The  miseries  of  penury  and  siege  (ver.  29) ;  of  captivity  and  slaughter  (ver.  33) ;  of 
anguish  and  derision  (ver.  36) ;  of  pitiless  misery  and  disaster  (ver.  39).  1.  None 
are  so  secure  in  grace  and  privilege  that  they  can  disregard  the  possibility  of  a  fall. 

2.  None  are  so  rich  in  sacred  favours  as  to  be  beyond  danger  of  their  total  loss.  3, 
None  are  so  honoured  by  God's  selecting  and  distinguishing  grace  but  they  may 
lapse  into  alienation  and  desolation.  II.  How  amazing  the  disasters  which  may 
DEVASTATE  A  BEAUTIFUL  COUNTRY.  Canaan  was  a  wealtby  land,  a  scene  of  loveliness, 
abundance,  and  delight.  Yet  on  it  came  the  disasters  of  depopulation  (ver.  31), 
sterility  (ver.  32),  desertion  (ver.  35) — -even  enemies  abandoning  it.  1.  National 
plenty  and  prosperity  are  cunditional  upon  national  righteousness  and  piety.  2. 
National  greatness  and  glory  have  been  withered  by  the  anger  of  an  insulted  God. 

3.  National  strength  and  safety  are  only  guaranteed  as  religion  is  fostered  by  the 
laws  of  a  country,  and  in  the  habits  and  lives  of  its  people.  III.  How  piteous  the 
profanation  which  may  despoil  a  nation's  sanctities  !  Canaan  was  the  scene  of 
Jehovah's  sanctuary :  the  Temple  rose  on  Zion  ;  and  the  land  sent  up  her  tribes 
to  the  celebration  of  sacred  feasts  and  to  the  holy  worship  of  God.  Yet  all  her 
"  sanctuaries  "  were  brought  "  unto  desolation  "  (ver.  31),  all  the  fragrance  of  her 
sacrifices  became  loathsome  to  Jehovah  (ver.  31),  and  her  desecrated  Sabbaths 
were  avenged  in  the  bleak  silence  and  loneliness  which  fell  on  hallowed  scenes  (ver. 
34).  1.  Religious  favours,  if  abused,  may  be  utterly  withdrawn  from  us.  2.  God 
loathes  the  offerings  once  delightful  to  Him,  when  the  offerer's  love  is  estranged. 
3.  Holy  scenes  and  holy  days  become  a  barren  mockery  if  a  trifling  spirit  alienate 
the  sacred  Presence  :  "Ichabod!"     {W.  H.  Jellie.) 

Ver.  40-45.  If  they  shall  confess  their  iniquity. — God^s  promises  to  penitents  : — 
I.  What  is  that  repentance  which  God  requirks?  1.  That  we  acknowledge  our 
guilt.  Our  fathers'  sins  as  well  as  our  own  are  first  grounds  of  national  humiliation. 
Our  own  sins  are  the  chief  burden  of  personal  contrition.  But  sin  should  be  viewed 
in  its  true  light,  as  "  walking  contrary  to  God  "  (Psa.  li.  4).  2.  That  we  justify  God 
in  His  judgments.  If  we  have  dared  to  walk  contrary  to  Him,  is  not  He  justified 
in  "  walking  contrary  to  us  "  ?  Whatever  inflictions  He  imposes  we  have  reason 
to  own  it  as  less  than  our  deserts  (Ezra  ix.  13),  and  that  His  judgments  are  just 
(Rev.  xvi.  7).  3.  That  we  be  thankful  for  His  dealings  by  which  He  has  "  humbled 
our  uncircumcised  hearts."  Only  real  contrition  can  produce  this.  It  realises 
mercy  in  judgment,  and  love  in  affliction.  II.  The  connection  between  our 
repentance  and  God's  mercy.  Repentance  is  void  of  merit.  Even  obedience  is 
destitute  of  merit ;  "  when  we  have  done  all  we  could  we  are  unprofitable  servants." 
The  acknowledgment  of  a  debt  is  a  very  different  thing  from  a  discharge  of  that 
debt.  A  condemned  criminal  may  be  sorry  for  his  offences,  but  that  sorrow  does 
not  obliterate  his  crime,  still  less  entitle  him  to  rewards.  Yet  there  is  connection 
between  repentance  and  pardon,  and  meekness  in  the  exercise  of  mei'cy  towards  the 
penitent — 1.  On  God's  part.  For  repentance  glorifies  God  (Josh.  vii.  19).  2.  On 
the  part  of  the  penitents.  It  incites  to  loathing  of  the  sin,  and  to  adoration  of 
Divine  grace.  So  God  insists  on  the  condition,  "  If  they  be  humbled,  then  will  I 
pardon."  For  then  God  can  do  it  consistently  with  His  honour,  and  they  will 
make  a  suitable  improvement  of  the  mercy  vouchsafed  them.  III.  The  ground  and 
measure  of  T!<at  mercy  which  penitents  may  expect.  God's  covenant  with  their 
ancestors  was  the  basis  and  warrant  of  His  mercy  to  Israel  (vers.  42,  44,  45).  His 
covenant  with  us  in  Christ  is  our  hope  and  guarantee.  1.  Be  thankful  that  you  are 
yet  within  reach  of  mercy.  2.  Have  especial  respect  unto  the  covenant  of  grace. 
It  is  to  that  God  looks,  and  to  that  should  we  look  also.  It  is  the  only  basis  on 
which  mercy  and  redemption  are  possible.  (C.  Simeon,  M.A.)  The  how  in  the 
cloud  : — I.  That  the  way  was  left  open  foe  the  rebellious  to  return.  1.  It 
was  the  way  of  reflection.  2.  It  was  the  way  of  confession.  8.  It  was  the  way  of 
humiliation.  They  were  not  to  return  proudly,  feeling  they  had  not  been  rewarded 
according  to  their  iniquities.  The  way  is  still  open  for  the  vilest  to  return ;  for,  the 
New  Testament  teaches  that  these  are  the  steps  in  the  ladder  of  life,  out  of  sin  to 
holiness,  from  earth  to  heaven,  from  self  to  God,  viz.  :  Repentance,  conversion, 
consecration.  II.  That  if  the  rebellious  returned  to  the  Lord  in  His  own 
appointed  way  He  would  graciously  receive  them.     1.  He  would  do  so  for  the 


344  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha:-.  xxvii. 

sake  of  their  fathers.  He  would  remember  His  covenant  with  Abraham,  Isaac,  and 
Jacob.  2.  He  would  do  so  for  the  sake  of  His  name.  "  For  I  am  the  Lord."  He 
had  purposed,  as  well  as  promised,  to  deal  mAcifulIy  with  them.  3.  He  would  do 
60  for  the  sake  of  the  land.  He  had  selected  Canaan  as  the  arena  where  He  would 
specially  display  His  glory  to  men,  and  He  would  not  allow  it  to  lie  waste  for  ever. 
4.  He  would  do  it  for  the  sake  of  His  covenant.  "  I  will  remember  My  covenant." 
The  Lord  does  not  make  a  covenant  and  then  tear  it  rashly  to  pieces  ;  if  broken  by 
man  He  will  speedily  renew,  nor  allow  the  irregularities  and  irreligion  of  men  to 
thwart  His  beneficent  arrangements.  Here,  indeed,  was  a  resplendent  bow  of 
many  colours,  beaming  with  the  beautiful  light  of  the  mild  and  merciful  counte- 
nance of  the  Most  High.  What  encouragement  for  sinful  men  to  leturn  to  the 
Lord,  "  for  He  will  have  mercy  upon  tbem,  and  abundantly  pardon."  The  Levitical 
law  closes  with  offers  of  mercy,  the  last  words  of  the  law  are  words  of  entreaty  and 
promise.     {W.  H.  Jellle.)  Gains  of  a  good  ancestry  : — "  I  will  for  their  sake 

remember  the  covenant  of  their  ancestors."  I.  The  vows  and  prayeks  of  a  oooDiiY 
PARENTAGE  EXERCISE  INFLUENCE  UPON  THE  DiviNE  PLANS.  That  "  covcnant  "  is  thrice 
referred  to  as  determining  God's  arrangements  (vers.  42, 44, 45).  Note  Job's  prayers 
for  his  children  (Job  i.  5  ;  cf.  with  ver.  10),  "  Made  a  hedge  about  Job  and  about 
his  house."  H.  Over  long  intervals  the  influence  of  parental  covenants 
EXTEND.  This  "  covenant  "  with  Abraham  was  made  1900  years  e.g.  (Gen.  xv.  13, 
14).  It  is  now  1900  years  a.d.  ,  yet  the  word  stands,  "  They  are  beloved  for  tbe 
fathers'  sakes.  For  the  gifts  and  calling  of  God  are  without  repentance  "  (Eom.  xi. 
28,  29).  God  is  at  work,  though  He  seems  to  wait.  "  In  due  season  ye  shall  reap 
if  ye  faint  not."  Praying  soul,  anxious  heart,  clinging  to  the  promises — "  Hope, 
and  be  undismayed  ;  God  hears  thy  cries,  and  counts  thy  tears,  God  shall  lift  up 
thy  head."  III.  How  grand  the  linkbetween  a  parent's  piett  and  the  children's 
DESTINY !  1.  Live  and  pray  for  your  descendants.  2.  Value  the  sacred  benefits 
even  though  as  yet  unrealised,  of  a  godly  ancestry.  3.  Eest  in  the  unfailing  pledge 
of  God  to  reward  piety  and  prayer.  {Ibid.)  The  advantage  of  submission  : — It  is 
recorded  of  Edward  I.,  that,  being  angry  with  a  servant  of  his  in  the  sport  of 
hawking,  he  threatened  him  sharply.  Tbe  gentleman  answered.  It  was  well  there 
was  a  river  between  them.  Hereat  the  king,  more  incensed,  s^Durred  his  horse  into 
the  depth  of  the  river,  not  without  extreme  danger  of  his  life,  the  water  being  deep 
and  the  banks  too  steep  and  high  for  his  ascending,  Yet,  at  last  recovering  land, 
with  his  sword  drawn,  he  pursued  the  servant,  who  rode  as  fast  from  him.  But 
finding  himself  too  ill-horsed  to  outride  the  angry  king,  he  reined,  lighted,  and,  on 
his  knees,  exposed  his  neck  to  the  blow  of  the  king's  sword.  The  king  no  sooner 
saw  this  but  he  put  up  his  sword  and  would  not  touch  him.  A  dangerous  water 
could  not  withhold  him  from  violence  ;  yet  his  servant's  submission  did  soon  pacify 
him.  Wbile  man  flies  stubbornly  from  God,  He  that  rides  upon  the  wings  of  the 
wind  posts  after  him  with  sword  of  vengeance  drawn.  But  when  in  dust  and  ashes 
he  humbles  himself,  and  stands  to  His  mercy,  the  vrrath  of  God  is  soon  appeased. 


CHAPTEB  XXVII. 


Vers.  2-13.  When  a  man  shall  make  a  singular  vow. — Laws  concerning  vows  : — 
I.  That  voluntary  and  special  vows  were  permitted  by  the  Lord.  Vows  should 
be  made  cautiously,  deliberately,  and,  in  most  instances,  conditionally ;  because 
further  enlightenment,  or  changed  conditions  may  render  their  fulfilment  undesir- 
able, unnecessary,  or  even  impossible.  II.  That  vows  wf.re  acceptable  to  the 
Lord  according  to  the  spirit  which  prompted  them,  and  in  which  they  were  paid. 
When  circumstances  justified  an  Israelite  repenting  of  his  vow,  it  could  be  com- 
mutated  or  remitted,  or  some  compensation  offered  in  its  stead.  Jehovah  would 
accept  nothing  that  was  recklessly  or  reluctantly  presented.  All  adjustments  and 
decisions  were  to  be  made  according  to  the  standards  of  the  sanctuary,  not  according 
to  human  fallibility  and  caprice.  Though  a  vow  should  not  be  hterally  performed, 
it  must  be  perfectly  fulfilled  in  respect  to  honourable  intention  and  sacred  fidelity. 
The  state  of  heart,  in  the  presentation  of  sacrifice,  determined  the  value  of  the  gift. 
This  law  has  never  been  repealed.     III.  That  freedom  of  choice  given  in  the 

FULFILMENT    OF   VOWS  DID    NOT  CONTBAVENE    THE    PURPOSES    OF    THE    LoRD    CONCERNING 


CHAP.  XXVII.]  LEVITICUS.  345 

His  work  and  worship.  The  compensation  paiil  in  lieu  of  the  original  vow  went 
to  sustain  the  sanctuary  services,  and  the  Lord  reserved  to  Himself  some  unalien- 
able rights.  Some  things  when  devoted  could  not  be  withheld  or  withdrawn  under 
any  circumstances.  He  demanded  a  tenth  of  the  produce  of  the  land,  and  enforced 
His  claim  with  righteous  and  unrelaxing  rigour.  Thus  the  preservation  and  perpetua- 
tion of  Jehovah's  worship  were  secured,  and  not  left  contingent  upon  ihe  fickleness 
and  uncertainty  of  human  devotedness.  Eighteousness  lies  at  the  foundation  of 
the  Levitical  economy  ;  is  the  basis  of  natural  and  revealed  religion.  Leviticus  is 
rt  witness  to  Christ  and  His  gospel.  In  Him  we  have  combined  all  that  the  law 
embodied — Altar,  SacriBce,  Priest.  Simplicity,  and  purity  of  aims,  loftiest  motives, 
deepest  meanings,  and  incomparable  excellence,  lift  the  law  and  the  gospel  infinitely 
above  all  other  religions  of  the  world.  The  superiority  to  Jewish  narrowness  and 
bigotry,  to  human  sinfulness  and  shortsightedness,  demonstrate  their  divinity  of 
origin,  mutual  dependence,  absolute  authority,  undying  vigour,  and  inestimable 
worth.  {F.  W.  Brown. )  The  extraordinary  in  the  service  of  God  : — This  is  part 
of  the  law  concerning  singular  vows,  extraoidinary  ones ;  which  though  God  did 
not  expressly  insist  on,  yet  if  they  were  consistent  and  conformable  to  the  general 
precepts.  He  would  be  well  pleased  with.  Note — We  should  not  only  ask  what 
must  we  do,  but  what  nmy  we  do,  for  the  glory  and  honour  of  God.  As  the  liberal 
deviseth  liberal  things  (Isa.  xxxii.  8),  so  the  pious  deviseth  pious  things,  and  the 
enlarged  heart  would  willingly  do  something  extraordinary  in  the  service  of  so  good 
a  Master  as  God  is.  When  we  receive  or  expect  some  singular  mercy,  it  is  good  to 
honour  God  with  some  singular  vow.  (Matthew  Henry,  D.D.)  The  singular 
voiv  : — I.  Speaking  in  modern  phrase,  we  should  describe  this  chapter  as  the  act 
of  the  old  law  on  the  "singular  vow."  This  vow  was  distinguished  from  certain 
other  vows  common  among  the  Hebrews  by  the  circumstance  that  it  was  susceptible 
of  redemption.  We  can  all  understand  that  a  consecration  of  a  man's  self  or  of  a 
man's  estate  might  be  so  hurriedly  or  so  thoughtlessly  made  (as  in  the  case  of 
Jephtha  with  his  daughter)  that  the  author  of  them  would  find  oat  afterwards  how 
rashly  the  promise  had  been  given,  and  how  unequal  he  was  to  the  keeping  it,  and 
so  be  anxious  to  compound  by  a  money  equivalent  for  the  more  spiritual  service  he 
found  himself  incompetent  to  bring.  This  kind  of  engagement  is  called  in  the 
Hebrew  the  "Neder,"  and  is  further  marked  by  the  character  of  singularity  or 
wonderfulness  ;  whereas  towards  the  end  of  this  very  chapter  we  have  another  vow 
provided  for,  and  called  the  "  Cherem,"  which,  being  accompanied  with  some  sort 
of  anathema  or  execration,  allowed  no  redemption.  But  now,  observe  very  care- 
fully the  method  appointed  for  gaining  release  from  the  obligation.  Moses  was  to 
arbitrate  according  to  what  he  considered  the  ability  of  the  applicant  to  render. 
"  Pay  so  much,"  w^ould  be  the  decision  of  the  lawgiver,  "  and  thou  mayest  go  free." 
But  the  remarkable  and  the  beautiful  thing  is,  that  even  tbat  measure  of  relief  to  the 
vow-maker  was  not  absolutely  or  invariably  final.  Moses  might  overestimate  the 
resources  of  the  devotee  for  the  buying  himself  off  from  the  personal  service  of  the 
Tabernacle — Moses  might  adjudge  too  heavy  a  ransom — and  therefore  the  law 
provided  a  yet  further  and  more  merciful  escape.  The  man  was  at  liberty  to  appeal 
from  Moses  to  the  priest.  Aaron  was  the  priest.  His  very  name  stands  for  a 
representative  before  God  of  the  wants  and  the  sorrows  and  the  sins  of  the  people  ; 
and  hence  to  transfer  the  adjudication  of  a  debtor's  affairs  from  Moses  to  his  brother 
■would,  as  you  can  all  see,  be  the  introduction  of  a  perfectly  new  element  into  the 
case  to  be  tried.  The  appellant  would  be  as  poor  in  the  presence  of  Aaron  as  he 
was  in  the  presence  of  the  former  judge.  He  would  also  be  as  rich.  And  yet  the 
very  terms  of  the  text  are  all  but  decisive  on  the  fact  that  he  would  gain  by  carrying 
his  cause  before  this  new  tribunal.  Aaron  would  certainly — if  we  understand  the 
law  of  the  case — fix  the  money  ransom  at  a  lower  figure.  And  the  obvious  reason 
is  that  Aaron,  by  virtue  of  his  own  calling,  would  make  up  for  it — i.e.,  for  the 
deficiency — in  some  other  way,  and  in  some  way  in  which  Moses  could  not  make  up 
for  it.  We  must  not  pronounce  with  any  authority  on  the  exact  method  in  which 
the  priest  would  settle  with  the  poverty  of  a  debtor,  and  make  it  possible  for  him  to 
go  free  whom  his  brother  would  have  handed  over  to  the  full  penalties  of  the  vow, 
to  do,  perhaps,  Gibeonites'  work  as  a  hewer  of  wood  or  a  drawer  of  water.  But  the 
probability  is  that  the  remedy  in  Aaron's  hands  would  be  the  appointment  of  some 
easy  offering  in  which  the  priest  would  render  him  the  aid  of  his  sacred  functions. 
II.  Now  it  will  hardly  require  any  one  of  us  to  be  very  deep  in  controversial  divinity 
to  understand  that  if  we  are  going  to  Christianise  this  type  and  turn  it  to  the  account 
of  a  modern  religious  experience,  we  shall  be  treading  on  most  critical,  though  it 


:^46  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxvir. 

may  turn  out  very  lawful  and  very  instructive,  ground.  In  a  word,  then,  let  us  say 
we  are  now  having  no  business  whatever  with  an  unregenerate  man,  nor  any  business 
whatever  with  the  sacrifice  of  Christ  as  the  only  channel  of  his  justification.  The 
soUtary  topic  of  the  text  is  a  toi^ic  for  men  already  in  the  covenant.  Eegeneration, 
and  even  justification,  must  be  understood  as  settled  already ;  and  the  vow-making 
of  Leviticus  must  be  looked  upon  wholly  and  solely  as  the  service  of  the  Christian, 
at  peace  with  the  law,  but  struggling  with  subsequent  duties.  Is  there  no  difference  ? 
There  is  all  the  difference  in  the  world  between  the  terms  on  which  the  great  God 
will  take  a  man  to  heaven  and  the  terms  on  which  He  will  treat  him  when  already 
in  the  covenant.  In  the  former  transaction  the  man  may  vow  as  he  likes  ;  he  can 
pay  nothing,  and  he  is  never  asked  to  pay.  In  the  latter  transaction,  where  the 
former  is  finished,  the  man  is  commanded  to  pay,  and  struggles  to  pay  ;  but, 
nevertheless,  our  point  with  you  is  that  times  without  number  he  is  unable  to  pay. 
The  universal  and  the  sad  fact  is  that  entire  duty  is  what  none  of  us  can  render. 
Even  in  the  Church  the  law  is  too  much  for  us.  And  what  we  have  to  do  a  hundred 
times  a  day,  and  all  our  lives  lonp,  is  to  fall  back  on  the  solitary  and  sufficient  and 
omnipotent  righteousness  of  Christ.  We  do  greatly  err  if  we  limit  the  sacerdotal 
functions  of  lumianuel  to  the  gaining  us  forgiveness  at  our  conversion  or  the  taking 
us  to  heaven  when  we  die.  We  want  a  priest  every  moment ;  some  one  that  is  to 
furnish  the  balance  of  service  and  duty  demanded  by  our  profession,  but  never 
forthcoming.  Those  two  men,  Moses  and  Aaron,  may  be  said  to  travel  with  the 
(  hristian  every  inch  of  his  journey  :  Moses  standing  for  what  I  ought  to  do  and  to 
be ;  Aaron  standing  for  what  I  take  refuge  in  as  often  as  I  come  short  or  fall  below, 
■'If  he  be  poorer  than  thy  estimation."  Which  of  us  is  not  poorer  than  the  Law- 
giver's estimation  ?  Can  we  pay  what  is  due  from  us  ?  We  acknowledged,  when  first 
we  believed,  that  we  could  do  nothing  of  the  kind.  But  remember  that  there  is  a 
power  and  a  merit  in  the  righteousness  of  Christ  that  continues  at  the  disposal  of 
the  saint  till  the  day  of  his  death.  Immanuel  is  certain  to  judge  me,  or,  according 
to  the  text,  to  value  me  on  other  grounds  than  those  of  justice  and  of  law  :  and  the 
reason  is  that  He  has  something  to  give  me,  something  of  His  own.  He  is  my 
Priest,  and  has  business  with  the  altar  and  the  sacrifice,  and  under  the  gospel  Christ 
is  Himself  all  three.  You  who  tell  me  my  duty  are  only  my  lawgivers  fresh  fiom 
Mount  Sinai.  So  is  the  Sermon  on  the  Mount;  so  is  my  conscience;  so  is  every- 
thing and  every  one,  but  Christ.  But  do  you  not  see  that  if  a  Mediator,  who  for 
ever  is  holding  up  His  righteousness  on  my  behalf— if  He  values  me  my  value 
alters  ?  I  am  now  not  the  bankrupt  debtor  who  had  not  enough  to  pay,  I  am  that 
debtor  and  some  one  else  besides.  I  am  a  part  of  Christ.  I  bring  now  my  poor 
offerings  of  duty,  for  I  must  still  bring  them,  but  I  bring  them  covered  with  blood, 
and  made  worth  something  by  blood.  And,  therefore,  though  I  was  not  rich  enough 
to  pay  what  I  owed  as  bare  law  sat  and  measured  my  resources,  I  can  pay  the  utter- 
most farthing  as  soon  as  Jesus  the  Saviour  adds  His  own  Cross  to  my  inheritance. 
{H.  Christopherson.)  The  provisions  of  righteousness  and  grace  : — Now,  in  the  case 
of  a  person  devoting  himself,  or  his  beast,  his  house,  or  his  field,  unto  the  Lord,  it 
was  obviously  a  question  of  capacity  or  worth ;  and,  hence,  there  was  a  certain 
scale  of  valuHtion,  according  to  age.  Moses,  as  the  representative  of  the  claims  of 
God,  was  called  upon  to  estimate,  in  each  case,  according  to  the  standard  of  the 
sanctuary.  If  a  man  undertakes  to  make  a  vow  he  must  be  tried  b^'  the  standard 
of  righteousness ;  and,  moreover,  in  all  cases  we  are  called  upon  to  recognise  the 
difference  between  capacity  and  title.  Moses  had  a  certain  standard  from  which 
he  could  not  possibly  descend.  He  had  a  certain  rule  from  which  he  could  not 
possibly  swerve.  If  any  one  could  come  up  to  that,  well ;  if  not,  he  had  to  take  his 
place  accordingly.  What,  then,  was  to  be  done  in  reference  to  the  person  who  was 
unable  to  rise  to  the  height  of  the  claims  set  forth  by  the  representative  of  Divine 
righteousness  ?  Hear  the  consolatory  answer  (ver.  8).  In  other  words,  if  it  be  a 
question  of  man's  undertaking  to  meet  the  claims  of  righteousness,  then  he  must 
meet  them.  But  if,  on  the  other  hand,  a  man  feels  himself  wholly  unable  to  meet 
those  claims,  he  has  only  to  fall  back  upon  grace,  which  will  take  him  up,  just  as 
be  is.  Moses  is  the  representative  of  the  claims  of  Divine  righteousness.  The 
priest  is  the  exponent  of  the  provisions  of  Divine  grace.  The  poor  man  who  was 
unable  to  stand  before  Moses  fell  back  into  the  arms  of  the  priest.  Thus  it  is  ever. 
If  we  cannot  "  dig  "  we  can  "  beg  "  ;  and  directly  we  take  the  place  of  a  beggar  it 
is  no  longer  a  question  of  what  we  are  able  to  earn,  but  of  what  God  is  pleased  to 
give.  *'  Grace  all  the  work  shall  crown,  through  everlasting  days."  How  happy  it 
is  to  be  debtors  to  grace !     How  happy  to  take  when  God  is  glorified  in  giving  I 


CHAT.  XXVII.]  LEVITICUS.  347 

When  man  is  in  question  it  is  infinitely  better  to  dig  than  to  beg  ;  but  when  God 
is  in  question  the  case  is  the  very  reverse.  I  would  just  add,  that  I  believe  this 
entire  chapter  bears,  in  an  especial  manner,  upon  the  nation  of  Israel.  It  is  inti- 
mately connected  with  the  two  preceding  chapters.  Israel  made  "  a  singular  vow  " 
at  the  foot  of  Mount  Horeb ;  but  were  quite  unable  to  meet  the  claims  of  law — they 
were  far  "  poorer  than  Moses'  estimation."  But,  blessed  be  God,  they  will  come  in 
under  the  rich  provisions  of  Divine  grace.  (C.  H.  3Iackinto$h.)  Influence  of  a 
singular  vow  : — I  made  a  solemn  vow  before  God,  that  if  General  Lee  wei'e  driven 
back  from  Pennsylvania,  I  would  crown  the  result  by  the  declaration  of  freedom  to 
the  slaves.  (President  Lincoln.)  A  vow  kept  .-—I  met  some  time  ago  a  gentleman 
residing  in  a  retired  town  in  Kent,  who  told  that  he  was  recently  confined  to  his 
house  by  indisposition  and  inclement  weather  on  a  wintry  Sunday.  When  the  rest 
of  the  family  were  at  church  he  took  up  George  Miiller's  book,  in  which  he  describes 
"  The  Lord's  Dealings  "  with  him.  He  became  so  much  interested  in  the  author's 
life  and  labours  that  he  promised  his  conscience,  tben  and  there,  that  if  a  certain 
bu^iiness  transaction  he  had  in  hand  resulted  in  a  certain  amount  of  success,  he 
would  send  the  philanthropist  £100  for  his  Orphans'  Home.  The  success  was 
realised,  and  he  was  then  just  on  the  point  of  sending  off  a  cheque  for  the  jiromised 
amount.  (Eliltu  Burritt.)  Brittle  vows  : — It  is  said  of  Andreas,  one  of  the  kings 
of  Hungary,  that  having  engaged  himself  by  promise  to  go  to  the  holy  wars  (as 
they  then  called  them),  went  with  all  his  forces,  and  coming  to  Jerusalem,  only 
bathed  himself  there,  as  one  that  had  washed  off  bis  promise,  and  so  returned  back 
again  without  striking  one  blow.  Such  is  the  case  with  many  men  at  present,  their 
promises,  covenants,  and  agreements  with  others,  though  sealed  and  subscribed, 
prove  too,  too  often  as  brittle  as  the  glasses  they  drink  in ;  no  bounds  will  hold 
them,  they  rob  the  Grecians  of  their  proverb,  and  own  it  themselves.  For  let  but 
the  worst  of  men  say  they  will  do  this  or  that,  is  as  much  as  if  they  had  sworn  they 
would  not  do  it,  unless  it  be  when  they  embark  themselves  in  some  unwarrantable 
actions,  and  the  sun  may  sooner  be  thrust  out  of  his  sphere  than  they  diverted  from 
their  adamantine  resolutions.  (J.  Spencer.)  The  redemption  of  a  singular  voiv : — 
Incidents  in  Oriental  history  often  read  like  parables.  Men  are  moved  by  strange 
motives  to  do  strange  things  ;  and  the  student  from  the  west  wanders  in  a  maze  of 
fancies  and  facts  that  are  bewildering  indeed.  Thus  it  is  that  the  early  portion  of 
a  missionary's  life  in  an  eastern  land  teems  with  tbings  that  are  unreal,  and  he  is 
surrounded  by  fellow-men  who  seem  in  no  true  sense  his  fellows.  There  is  po  much 
that  is  inexplicable  to  him  in  their  motives  and  conduct,  that,  until  he  gets  a  "  clue 
to  the  maze,"  from  a  constant  study  of  the  religions  that  dominate  their  lives,  his 
blunders  are  many,  and  sometimes  even  disastrous  to  his  mission.  The  following 
is  an  instance  of  what  I  mean,  and  as  it  is  recorded  as  an  historical  fact,  will  serve 
the  purpose  admirably  :  "  Abd-al-Muttalib  once  vowed  that  if  he  should  be  so 
greatly  blessed  as  to  have  ten  sons,  one  should  certainly  be  devoted  to  Allah.  In 
process  of  time,  the  number  was  fulfilled,  and  the  reluctant  father  gathered  his 
offspring  in  the  Kanba,  and  cast  lots  fur  the  one  to  be  sacrificed.  The  lot  fell  upon 
Abdalla,  the  beiutiful  son  of  his  old  age.  The  sacritical  knife  was  solemnly 
prepared  ";  and,  like  Abraham,  he  stood  ready  for  the  awful  deed.  But  the  lad's 
sisters  came  to  the  rescue.  They  knew  that  the  Arabs  offered  camels  in  sacrifice, 
and  in  their  abounding  grief  they  entreated  their  father  to  cast  lots  between  their 
brother  and  ten  of  these  valuable  creatures.  He  consented ;  but,  to  their  sorrow, 
the  lot  fell  a  second  time  on  the  favourite  boy.  The  number  of  beasts  was  then 
doubled,  and  the  lot  cast  again  ;  but  still  it  fell  upon  the  lad.  Time  after  time  trial 
was  made,  as  the  sorrowing  sisters  and  the  troubled  father  became  more  and  more 
desperate  in  their  anxiety  to  save  the  dear  one.  At  last  one  hundred  camels  had 
been  proffered,  and  then,  to  their  great  joy,  the  lot  fell  upon  the  beasts.  Abdalla 
was  saved.  God  had  set  his  own  value  upon  the  devoted  boy,  and  when  an  equivalent 
was  provided  he  was  free.  Arabs  value  highly  the  "  ships  of  the  desert  "  ;  for  they 
are  so  essential  to  their  mode  of  life.  But  a  human  being  is  more  precious  than 
many  of  them.  This  was  recognised  when  ten  camels  were  proffered ;  but  until  an 
unprecedented  number  had  been  Divinely  sanctioned,  the  true  worth  of  the  man  was 
not  fully  believed  in.  Thus,  all  the  world  over,  man  has  had  to  learn  the  value  of 
his  fellow  by  degrees.  Many  have  not  learnt  the  lesson  yet,  because  only  man's 
Maker  and  Eedeemer  can  aright  estimate  the  worth  of  man,  and  reveal  it  to  us. 
This  He  hath  done  in  the  gift  of  His  Only-begotten  Son,  who  took  man's  place, 
that  the  lot  might  fall  upon  Him  as  of  n:oi'e  than  equal  value  with  the  whole  of  our 
race.    (Robert  Spurgeon. )       Philip  Henrifs  vow  : — A  good  man  named  Philip  Henry 


348  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxvii. 

resolved,  when  he  was  young,  to  give  himself  to  God,  and  he  did  it  in  these 
words ;  "  I  take  God  the  Father  to  be  my  Chief  End  ;  I  take  God  the  Son  to  be  my 
King  and  Saviour ;  I  take  God  the  Holy  Ghost  to  be  my  Guide  and  Sanctifier ;  I 
take  the  Bible  to  be  my  rule  of  life  ;  I  take  all  God's  people  to  be  my  friends ;  and 
here  I  give  my  body  and  soul  to  be  God's — for  God  to  use  for  ever."  That  was 
Philip  Henry's  resolve,  which  he  wrote  out  for  himself  when  he  was  young  ;  and 
he  put  at  the  end  of  it — "  I  make  this  vow  of  my  own  mind  freely  :  God  give  me 
grace  to  keep  it."  (C.  Bullock.)  A  vow  fulfilled : — "  I  remember  that  when  we 
arrived  at  the  hotel  at  White  Mountains,  the  ladies  sat  down  to  a  cup  of  tea,  but  I 
preferred  to  take  a  walk  alone.  It  was  a  beautiful  spot.  The  sun  was  just  then 
reclining  his  head  behind  Mount  Washington,  with  all  that  glorious  drapery  of  an 
American  sunset,  of  which  we  know  nothing  in  this  country.  I  felt  that  I  should 
like  to  be  walking  with  my  God  on  this  earth  !  I  said,  '  What  shall  I  render  to  my 
Lord  for  all  His  benefits  to  me  ?  '  I  was  led  further  to  repeat  that  question  which 
Paul  asked  under  other  circumstances,  '  Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  ? ' 
The  answer  came  immediately.  It  was  this  :  '  It  is  true  thou  canst  not  bring  the 
many  thousands  thou  hast  left  in  thy  native  country  to  see  this  beautiful  scenery  ; 
but  thou  canst  create  beautiful  scenes  for  them.  It  is  possible  on  a  suitable  spot  so 
to  arrange  art  and  nature,  that  they  shall  be  within  the  walk  of  every  working 
man  in  Halifax ;  that  he  shall  go  and  take  his  stroll  there  after  he  has  done  his 
hard  day's  toil,  and  be  able  to  get  home  again  without  being  tired.'  "  He  pondered 
the  thought,  prayed  over  it,  and  the  next  day  resolved  to  carry  it  into  execution. 
On  his  return  to  England  he  took  immediate  steps  for  the  fulfilment  of  his  purpose  ; 
the  design  of  the  proposed  park  was  entrusted  to  the  late  Sir  Joseph  Paxton,  and  on 
the  14th  of  August,  1857,  it  was  publicly  opened.  It  covers  twelve  and  a  half  acres 
of  ground,  and  its  entire  cost  was  upwards  of  £30,000.  {Memoir  of  Sir  Francis 
Crossletj.) 

Ver.  25.  According  to  the  shekel  of  the  sanctuary. — Sanctuary  vieasure  demanded 
in  small  things : — The  law  of  the  sanctuary  is  to  regulate  all.  Full  weight  is  sought 
for,  but  neither  superfluity  nor  abatement.  God  loves  a  perfect  balance  and  a 
just  weight.  We  do  not  know  whether  or  not  there  was  a  standard  measure  kept 
in  the  sanctuary  ;  but  it  is  very  probable.  Some,  indeed,  render  the  words, 
"shekel  of  holiness,"  i.e.,  a  true  shekel;  still  it  is  every  way  likely  that  the 
other  is  the  true  meaning,  admitting  that  this  rendering  be  right.  There  was 
probably  a  standard  measure  kept  in  the  sanctuary,  by  which  all  other  weights 
and  measures  were  regulated.  Here  would  be  a  type  to  Israel  of  the  Lord's 
justice.  Here,  in  the  sanctuary  of  Jehovah,  they  found  the  source  and  regulating 
measure  of  all  dealings  in  business  between  man  and  man,  and  of  all  similar 
dealings  between  God  and  man,  through  His  priests.  Would  not  this  standard 
measure  be  felt  to  be  a  type  of  the  Lord's  original  attribute  of  righteousness? 
He  it  is  that  judges ;  He  it  is  that  fixes  what  is  right  and  what  is  wrong ;  He 
it  is  to  whom  all  Israel  must  come  to  have  thought  and  action  weighed.  May 
not  1  Sam.  ii.  3  refer  to  this?  Hannah's  eye  had  rested  on  this  standard  measure, 
and  so  she  sings,  "  By  Him  actions  are  weighed."  Who  shall  stand  before  this 
holy  God?  He  perceives  what  is  wanting  the  moment  He  has  adjusted  His 
balances.  He  detects  the  want  of  faith  in  Cain  at  the  altar  ;  of  true  godly  zeal  in 
Jehu's  heart ;  of  love  in  Ephesus ;  of  life  in  Sardis  ;  of  oil  in  the  five  virgins ; 
of  the  wedding  garment  in  the  speechless  guest.  He  judges  according  to  the 
real  weight — not  the  apparent.  He  judges  "  according  as  the  work  has  been," 
not  according  as  the  show  has  been  (1  Cor.  v.  10;  Rev.  xx.  12,  xxii.  12). 
(A.  A.  Bonar.) 

Vers.  30-33.  All  the  tithes  of  tie  land  ...  Is  the  Lord's.— T^fg  history  of 
tithes : — I.  The  Scriptdue  records  concerning  the  law  of  tithes.  1.  Ante- 
cedent to  the  Mosaic  legislation.  The  principle  of  dedicating  a  tenth  to  God 
was  recognised  in  the  act  of  Abraham,  who  paid  tithes  of  his  spoils  to  Mel- 
chizedek  in  his  sacerdotal  rather  than  his  sovereign  capacity  (Gen.  xiv.  20 ; 
Heb.  vii.  6).  Later,  in  Jacob's  vow  (Gen.  xxviii.  22),  the  dedication  of  a 
"tenth"  presupposes  a  sacred  enactment,  or  a  custom  in  existence  which  fixed 
that  proportion  rather  than  any  other  proportion,  such  as  a  seventh  or  twelfth. 
2.  The  Mosaic  statutes.  These  given  in  this  section  lay  claim  in  God's  name  to 
the  tenth  of  produce  and  cattle.  An  after  enactment  fixed  that  these  tithes  were 
to  be  paid  to  the  Levites  for  their  services  (Numb,  xviii.  21-24),  who  were  to  give 


CHAP.  XXVII.]  LEVITICUS.  349 

a  tithe  of  what  they  received  to  the  priests  (vers.  26-28).  The  sacred  festivals  were 
later  made  occasion  for  a  further  tiche  (Deut.  xii.  5,  6,  11,  17 ;  xiv.  22,  23) ;  which 
was  allowed  to  come  in  money  value  rather  than  in  kind  (Deut.  xiv.  24-26). 
3.  Hezekiah's  reformation.  This  was  signalised  by  the  eagerness  with  which  the 
people  came  with  their  tithes  (2  Chron.  xxxi.  5,  6).  4.  After  the  Captivity. 
Nehemiah  made  marked  and  emphatic  arrangements  concerning  the  tithing 
(Neh.  X.  37  ;  xii.  44).  5.  Prophet's  teachings.  Both  Amos  (iv.  4)  and  Malachi 
(ill.  10)  enforce  this  as  a  duty,  by  severely  rebuking  the  nation  for  its  neglect — 
as  robbing  God.  6.  In  Christ's  day.  Our  Lord  exposed  and  denounced  the 
ostentatious  punctiliousness  of  the  Pharisees  over  their  tithing  (Matt,  xxiii.  23). 
7.  Teaching  of  the  New  Testament.  The  fact  of  the  existence  of  ministers  as  a 
distinct  class,  assumes  provision  made  for  their  maintenance.  The  necessity  for 
such  provision,  and  the  right  on  which  it  is  founded,  are  recognised  in  such  texts  as 
Matt.  X.  10 ;  Luke  x.  7 ;  Kom.  xv.  27  ;  1  Cor.  ix.  7-14.  II.  The  ecclesiastical 
DEVELOPMENT  OF  THE  DEMAND  TOR  TITHES.  1.  The  Fathers  Urged  the  obligation 
of  tithing  on  the  earliest  Christians.  The  "  Apostolical  Canons,"  the  "  Apostolical 
Constitutions,"  St..  Cyprian  on  "  The  Unity  of  the  Church,"  and  the  writings  of 
Ambrose,  Chrysostom,  Augustine,  and  other  Fathers  of  both  divisions  of  the  early 
Church,  abound  with  allusions  to  this  as  a  duty  ;  and  the  response  was  made,  not 
in  enforced  tithing,  but  by  voluntary  offerings.  2.  The  legislation  of  the  first 
Christian  emperors  recognised  the  obligation  of  maintaining  the  ministers  of  Christ. 
But  while  they  assigned  lands  and  other  property  to  their  support,  they  enacted  no 
general  payment  of  the  tenth  of  the  produce  of  the  lands.  3.  Ancient  Church 
councils  favoured  tilhings  of  land  and  produce,  e.g.,  the  Councils  of  Tours,  a.d. 
567 ;  the  second  Council  of  Macon,  a.d.  585  ;  the  Council  of  Eouen,  a.d.  650 ;  of 
Nantes,  a.d.  660  ;  of  Metz,  756.  4.  Its  first  imperial  enactment.  Charlemagne 
(king  of  the  Franks,  a.d.  768-814,  and  Eoman  Emperor,  a.d.  800-814)  originated 
the  enactment  of  tithes  as  a  public  law,  and  by  his  capitularies  formally  established 
the  practice  over  the  Eoman  Empire  which  his  rule  swayed.  From  this  start  it 
extended  itself  over  Western  Christendom ;  and  it  became  general  for  a  tenth  to 
be  paid  to  the  Church.  5.  Introduction  of  tithes  into  England.  OSa,  king  of 
Mercia,  is  credited  with  its  assertion  here,  at  the  close  of  the  eighth  century.  It 
spread  over  other  divisions  of  Saxon  England,  until  Ethelwulf  made  it  a  law  for  the 
whole  English  realm.  It  remained  optional  with  those  who  were  compelled  to  pay 
tithes  to  determine  to  what  Church  they  should  be  devoted,  until  Innocent  III. 
addressed  to  the  Archbishop  of  Canterbury,  a.d.  1200,  a  decretal  requiring  tithes  to 
be  paid  to  the  clergy  of  the  parish  to  which  payees  belonged.  About  this  time  also, 
tithes,  which  had  originally  been  confined  to  those  called  prfedial,  or  the  fruits  of 
the  earth,  was  extended  to  every  species  of  profit  and  to  the  wages  of  every  kind 
of  labour.  6.  The  great  and  small  tithe.  The  great  tithe  was  made  upon  the  main 
products  of.the  soil,  corn,  hay,  wood,  &q.  ;  the  small  on  the  less  important  growths. 
To  the  rector  the  great  tithes  of  a  parish  are  assigned,  and  to  the  vicar  the  small. 
7.  Tithes  paid  "in  kind."  These  claim  the  tenth  portion  of  the  product  itself 
(vers.  30-33).  This  is  varied  by  a  payment  of  an  annual  valuation ;  or  an  average 
taken  over  seven  years ;  or  by  a  composition,  which,  in  a  bulk  sum,  redeems  the 
land  from  all  future  impost,  rendering  it  henceforth  "  tithe  free."  {W.  H.  Jellie.) 
Tithes  : — I  know  of  two  men  who  started  business  with  this  view :  "We  will  give  to 
God  one-tenth  of  our  profits."  The  first  year  the  profits  were  considerable ;  the 
tithe  was  consequently  considerable.  The  next  year  there  was  increase  in  the 
profits,  and,  of  course,  increase  in  the  tithe.  In  a  few  years  the  profits  became 
very,  very  large  indeed,  so  that  the  partners  said  one  to  another :  "  Is  not  a  tenth 
of  this  rather  too  much  to  give  away  ?  Suppose  we  say  we  will  give  a  twentieth  ?  " 
And  they  gave  a  twentieth  ;  and  the  next  year  the  profits  had  fallen  down ;  the  year 
after  they  fell  down  again,  and  the  men  said  to  one  another,  as  Christians  should 
say  in  such  a  case,  "  Have  not  we  broken  our  vow?  Have  we  not  robbed  God  ?  " 
And  in  no  spirit  of  selfish  calculation,  but  with  humility  of  soul,  self-reproach  and 
bitter  contrition  they  went  back  to  God  and  told  Him  how  the  matter  stood,  prayed 
His  forgiveness,  renewed  their  vow,  and  God  opened  the  windows  of  heaven  and 
gave  back  to  them  all  the  old  prosperity.  (Joxeph  Parker,  D.D.)  Giving  to 
God : — What  Abraham  gave  to  Melchizedek,  and  Jacob  vowed  at  Bethel,  has  ever 
appeared  most  natural  for  men  to  set  aside  for  the  Lord  regularly — the  teirh  of  all. 
Among  the  Israelites,  there  were  several  kinds  of  tithe,  and  yet  all  cheerfully  paid ; 
the  tenth  for  the  Lord,  paid  to  the  Levites  (Numb,  xviii.  21),  and  the  next  tenth, 
consecrated  and  feasted  on  at  Jerusalem,  or  given  away  to  the  poor  (Deut.  xii.  6 ; 


350  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxvir. 

xxviii.  29).  Seed  or  fruit  might  be  redeempd  ;  and  there  might  be  good  reasons  for 
a  man  wishing  to  redeem  this  part  of  the  tithe.  He  might  require  to  sow  his  field, 
and  be  in  need  of  tlie  seed  of  dates  or  p  imegranates  to  replenish  his  orohard. 
Therefore  permission  is  given  to  redeem  these,  though  still  with  the  addition  of  a 
fifth,  in  order  to  show  that  the  Lord  is  jealous,  and  marks  anything  that  might  be 
a  retraction,  on  the  man's  part,  of  what  was  due  to  the  Lord.  He  may  redeem  this 
tit^he,  but  it  is  done  cum  nota.  As  to  the  tithe  of  herd  and  flo  ;k,  this  is  not  allowed. 
Whatever  passes  under  the  rod,  good  or  bad,  is  tithed  and  taken,  inalienably.  The 
Lord  does  not  seek  a  good  animal,  where  the  rod,  iu  numbering,  lighted  on  a  bad 
as  the  tenth  passed  by ;  neither  does  He  admit  of  the  substitution  of  an  inferior 
animal,  if  the  rod  has  lighted  on  the  best  in  the  whole  flock.  He  seeks  just  what 
is  His  due,  teaching  us  strict  and  holy  disregard  of  bye-ends  and  selfish  interests. 
And  thus  this  book — this  Gospel  of  the  Old  Testament — ends  with  stating  God's 
claims  on  us,  and  His  expectation  of  our  service  and  willing  devotedness.  As  the 
first  believers  at  Pentecost,  rejoicing  in  pardon  and  the  love  of  God,  counted  nothing 
dear  to  them,  nor  said  that  aught  they  possessed  was  their  own,  so  ought  we  to  live. 
We  must  sit  loose  from  earth  ;  and  true  love  to  our  Kedeemer  will  set  us  loose.  This 
giving  up  of  our  possessions  at  God's  call,  teaclies  us  to  live  a  pilgrim  life,  and  that 
is  an  Abrahamic  life — nay,  it  is  the  life  of  faith  in  opposition  to  sight.  The  whole 
of  this  concluding  chapter  has  been  leading  us  to  the  idea  of  giving  to  the  Lord  all 
we  have.  It  has  been  making  us  familiar  with  the  idea,  and  by  example  inculcating 
the  practice  of  like  devotedness.  God  should  be  aU  in  all  to  us  ;  he  is  "  God 
all-sufficient."  Let  us  part  even  with  common,  lawful  comforts,  and  try  if  He  alone 
be  not  better  than  all.  Like  the  child  with  the  stalk  of  grapes,  who  picked  one 
grape  after  another  from  the  cluster,  and  held  it  out  to  her  father,  till,  as  affection 
waxed  warm  and  self  faded,  she  gaily  flung  the  whole  into  her  father's  bosom,  and 
smiled  in  his  face  with  triumphant  delight ;  so  let  us  do,  until,  loosening  from 
every  comfort,  and  independent  of  the  help  of  broken  cisterns,  we  can  say,  "I  am 
not  my  own!  Whom  have  I  in  heaven  but  Thee?  and  there  is  none  upon  earth 
whom  I  desire  besides.  Thou  art  to  me,  as  Thou  wert  to  David  at  the  gates  of 
death,  '  All  my  salvation  and  all  my  desire.'  "  After  so  much  love  on  Gud's  part 
to  us,  displayed  in  rich  variety  of  type  and  shadow,  shall  we  count  any  sacrifice 
hard?  (A.  A.  Bonar.)  Are  tithes  binding  on  Cltristi'nis?—ln  attempting  to 
settle  for  ourselves  this  question,  it  is  to  be  observed,  in  order  to  clear  thinking  on 
this  subject,  that  in  the  law  of  tithe  as  here  declared  there  are  two  elements — the 
one  moral,  the  other  legal — which  should  be  carefully  distinguished.  First  and 
fundamental  is  the  principle  that  it  is  our  duty  to  set  apart  to  God  a  certain  fixed 
proportion  of  our  income.  The  other  and — technically  speaking— positive  element 
in  the  law  is  that  which  declares  that  the  proportion  to  be  given  to  the  Lord 
is  precisely  one-tenth.  Now,  of  these  two,  the  first  principle  is  distinctly  recognised 
and  reaffirmed  in  the  New  Testament,  as  of  continued  validity  in  this  dispen- 
sation ;  while,  on  the  other  hand,  as  to  the  precise  proportion  of  our  income  to  be 
thus  set  apart  for  the  Lord,  the  New  Testament  writers  are  everywhere  silent.  As 
regards  the  first  principle,  St.  Paul,  writing  to  the  Corinthians,  orders  that  "  on  the 
first  day  of  the  week  " — the  day  of  the  primitive  Christian  worship — "  every  one  " 
shall  "  lay  by  him  in  store  as  God  hath  prospered  him."  He  adds  that  he  had 
given  the  same  command  also  to  the  churches  of  Galatia  (1  Cor.  xvi.  1,  2).  This 
most  clearly  gives  apostolic  sanction  to  the  fundamental  principle  of  the  tithe, 
namely,  that  a  definite  portion  of  our  income  should  be  set  apart  for  God.  While, 
on  the  other  hand,  ncitlier  in  this  connection,  where  a  mention  of  the  law  of  the 
tithe  might  naturally  have  been  expected,  if  it  had  been  still  binding  as  to  the 
letter,  nor  in  any  other  place  does  either  St.  Paul  or  any  other  New  Testament 
writer  intimate  that  the  Levitical  law,  requiring  the  precise  proportion  of  a  tenth, 
was  still  in  force — a  fact  which  is  the  more  noteworthy  that  so  much  is  said  of  the 
duty  of  Christian  benevolence.  To  this  general  statement  with  regard  to  the 
testimony  of  the  New  Testament  on  this  subject,  the  words  of  our  Lord  to  the 
Pharisees  (Matt,  xxiii.  23),  regarding  their  tithing  of  "  mint  and  anise  and 
cummin  " — "  these  ye  ought  to  have  done  " — cannot  be  taken  as  an  exception,  or 
as  proving  that  the  law  is  binding  for  this  dispensation  ;  for  tlie  simple  reason  that 
the  present  dispensation  had  not  at  that  time  yet  begun,  and  those  to  whom  He 
spoke  were  still  under  the  Levitical  law,  the  authority  of  which  He  there  reafifirms. 
From  these  facts  we  conclude  that  the  law  of  these  verses,  in  so  far  as  it  requires  the 
setting  apart  to  God  of  a  certain  definite  proportion  of  our  income,  is  doubtless  of 
continued  and  lasting  obligation  ;  but  that,  in  so  far  as  it  requires  from  all  alike 


CHAP.  XXVII.]  LEVITICUS.  351 

the  exact  proportion  of  one-tenth,  it  is  binding  on  the  conscience  no  longer.  Nor 
is  it  difficult  to  see  why  the  New  Testament  should  not  lay  down  this  or  any  other 
precise  proportion  of  giving  to  income  as  a  universal  law.  It  is  only  according  to 
the  characteristic  usage  of  the  New  Testament  law  to  leave  to  the  individual  con- 
science very  much  regarding  the  details  of  wors'iip  and  conduct,  which  under  thu 
Levitical  law  was  regulated  by  specific  rules  :  which  St.  Paul  explains  (Gal.  iv.  1-5) 
by  reference  to  the  fact  that  the  earlier  method  was  intended  for  and  adapted  to  a 
lower  and  more  immature  stage  of  religious  development ;  even  as  a  child,  during 
his  minority,  is  kept  under  guardians  and  stewards,  from  whose  authority,  when  he 
becomes  of  age,  he  is  free.  But,  still  further,  it  seems  to  be  forgotten  by  those  who 
argue  for  the  present  and  permanent  obligation  of  this  law,  that  it  was  here  for  the 
first  time  formally  appointed  by  God  as  a  binding  law,  in  connection  with  a  certain 
Divinely  iustituted  system  of  theocratic  government,  which,  if  carried  out,  would 
effectively  prevent  excessive  accumulations  of  wealth  in  the  hands  of  individuals, 
and  thus  secure  for  the  Israelites,  in  a  degree  the  world  has  never  seen,  an  equal 
distribution  of  property.  In  such  a  system  it  is  evident  that  it  would  be  possible 
to  exact  a  certain  fixed  and  definite  proportion  of  income  for  sacred  pui poses,  with 
the  certainty  that  the  requirement  would  work  with  perfect  justice  and  fairness  to 
all.  But  with  us  social  and  economic  conditions  are  so  very  different,  wealth  is  so 
very  unequally  distributed,  that  no  such  law  as  that  of  the  tithe  could  be  made 
to  work  otherwise  than  unequally  and  unfairly.  To  the  very  poor  it  must  often  be 
a  heavy  burden  ;  to  the  very  rich,  a  proportion  so  small  as  to  be  a  practical 
exemption.  While,  for  the  former,  the  law,  if  insisted  on,  would  sometimes 
require  a  poor  man  to  take  bread  out  of  the  mouth  of  wife  and  children,  it  would 
still  leave  the  millionaire  with  thousands  to  spend  on  needless  luxuries.  The  latter 
might  often  more  easily  give  nine-tenths  of  his  income  than  the  former  could  give 
one-twentieth.  It  is  thus  no  surprising  thing  that  the  inspired  men  who  laid  the 
foundations  of  the  New  Testament  Church  did  not  reaffirm  the  law  of  the  tithe  as 
to  the  latter.  And  yet,  on  the  other  hand,  let  us  not  forget  that  the  law  of  the 
tithe,  as  regards  the  moral  element  of  the  law,  is  still  in  force.  It  forbids  the 
Christian  to  leave,  as  so  often,  the  amount  he  will  give  for  the  Lord's  work,  to 
impulse  and  caprice.  Statedly  and  conscientiously  he  is  to  "  lay  by  him  in  store  as 
the  Lord  hath  prospered  him."  If  any  ask  how  much  should  the  proportion  be, 
one  might  say  that  by  fair  inference  the  tenth  might  safely  be  taken  as  an  average 
minimum  of  giving,  counting  rich  and  poor  together  (see  2  Cor.  viii.  7-9). 
(S.  H.  Kellogg,  D.D.) 

Ver.  34.  These  are  the  commandments  -whicli  the  Lord  commanded  Moses  for 
the  children  of  Israel. — The  moral  and  ceremonial  commandments,  a<  compared  with 
the  gospel  law : — Many  of  these  commandments  are  moral  and  of  perpetual 
obligation.  Others  of  them  ceremonial  and  peculiar  to  the  Jewish  economy,  which 
yet  have  a  spiritual  significance,  and  are  instructive  to  us  who  are  furnished  with 
a  key  to  let  us  into  the  mysteries  contained  in  them ;  for  unto  us  by  these  institu- 
tions is  the  gospel  preached,  as  well  as  unto  them  (Heb.  iv.  2).  And  upon  the 
whole  matter  we  may  see  cause  to  bless  God  that  we  are  not  come  to  Mouut  Sinai 
(Heb.  xii.  18).  1.  That  we  are  not  under  the  dark  shadows  of  the  law,  but  enjoy 
the  clear  light  of  the  gospel,  which  shows  us  Christ  the  eud  of  the  law  for  righteous- 
ness (Rom.  X.  4).  The  doctrine  of  our  reconciliation  to  God  by  a  Mediator  is  not 
clouded  with  the  smoke  of  burning  sacrifices,  but  cleared  by  the  knowledge  of 
Christ,  and  Him  crucified.  2.  That  we  are  not  under  the  heavy  yoke  of  the  law 
and  the  carnal  ordinances  of  it,  as  the  apostle  calls  them  (Heb.  ix.  10),  imposed  till 
the  time  of  reformation,  a  yoke  which  neither  they  nor  their  fathers  were  able  to 
bear  (Acts  xv.  10) ;  but  under  the  sweet  and  easy  institutions  of  the  gospel,  which 
pronounces  those  the  true  worshippers,  that  worship  the  Father  in  spirit  and  truth, 
by  Christ  only,  and  in  His  name,  who  is  our  Priest,  Temple,  Altar,  Sacrifice,  Purifi- 
cation, and  All.  Let  us  not  therefore  think  that  because  we  are  not  tied  to  the 
ceremonial  cleansings,  feasts,  and  oblations,  a  little  care,  time,  and  expense  will 
serve  to  honour  God  with.  No,  but  rather  have  our  hearts  more  enlarged  in  free- 
will-offerings, to  His  praise,  more  inflamed  with  holy  love  and  joy,  and  more 
engaged  in  seriousness  of  thoughts,  and  sincerity  of  intention.  Having  boldness 
to  enter  into  the  holiness  by  the  blood  of  Jesus,  let  us  draw  near  with  a  true  heart, 
and  in  full  assurance  of  faith,  worshipping  God  with  so  much  the  more  cheerful- 
ness and  humble  confidence,  still  saying.  Blessed  be  God  for  Jesus  Christ. 
{Matthew  Henry,  D.D.)      The  covenant  in  its  relation  to  nations  and  individuals  : — 


352  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxvii. 

The  last  chapter  of  the  book  is  taken  up  with  directions  for  individual  worship,  on 
the  details  of  which  we  cannot  enter  ;  but  this  general  thought  is  suggested,  that 
though  the  nation  as  a  whole  may  lose  its  covenant  standing,  the  way  is  always 
open  for  individuals.  There  is  much  comfort  in  this  thought,  in  view  of  such 
dark  times  as  those  to  which  the  prophetical  part  of  the  preceding  chapter  points. 
The  door  of  mercy  is  never  shut,  however  dark  and  degenerate  the  times  may  be. 
However  wickedness  may  abound  in  the  world,  and  coldness  and  deadness  in  the 
Church,  God  will  always  have  His  witnesses,  and  they  will  alwavs  have  their  oppor- 
tunities. This  word  is  never  changed,  "  Whosoever  will,  let  him  come."  In  all 
times  religion  in  the  last  resort  must  be  an  individual  matter  between  the  soul  and 
God.  No  man  can  be  saved  in  a  crowd ;  but  neither  can  any  man  be  lost  in  a 
crowd.  And  sometimes,  when  the  great  multitude  seems  to  carry  all  before  it, 
God  still  may  have  His  seven  thousand  men,  known  to  Him  alone,  who  have 
brought  their  individual  offerings  to  Him,  and  "  never  bowed  the  knee  to  Baal." 
Eemember  the  comfort  that  was  given  to  Daniel,  when  his  spirit  was  ready  to  faint  in 
the  prospect  of  the  dark  days  which  the  prophetic  vision  had  disclosed.  "  Go  thou 
thy  way  till  the  end  be ;  for  thou  shalt  rest  and  stand  in  thy  lot  at  the  end  of  the 
days."  "Go  thou  thy  way" — in  times  of  apostasy  and  darkness,  it  is  for  the 
individual  believer  to  leave  the  destinies  of  the  world  and  of  the  Church  in  the 
hands  of  Him  who  "  doeth  all  things  well,"  and  seek  only  to  be  faithful  to  his  own 
duty.  As  for  others:  "  shall  not  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  do  right  ?  "  And  as 
for  thee,  "thou  shalt  rest" — there  is  the  fulfilment  of  the  Sabbath  and  all  the 
sabbatic  series — "  and  stand  in  thy  lot  at  the  end  of  the  days  " — there  is  the  ful- 
filment of  the  jubilee  and  all  the  eighth  day  series.  Amid  all  the  secularities  and 
unbelief  and  disobedience  of  the  times,  let  us  seek  to  maintain  communion  with 
God,  and  bring  our  individual  offerings,  however  "  singular  "  they  be,  and  we  shall 
certainly  find  that  "  the  joy  of  the  Lord  is  our  strength,"  and  that  His  thoughts  of 
love  expressed  in  the  feasts  of  the  old  covenant  will  be  fulfilled  for  us,  and  then 
at  the  end  of  the  days  we  shall  enter  on  our  sabbath  of  rest,  and  our  jubilee  of 
joy  eternal.     (J.  M.  Gibson,  D.D.) 


THE 


BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOE: 


OB, 


ANECDOTES,    SIMILES,  EMBLEMS,  ILLIJSTEATIONS,  EXPOSITOKY, 

SCIENTIFIC,  GEOGKAPHICAL,  HISTORICAL,  AND   HOMILETIC, 

GATHERED    FROM    A    WIDE    RANGE    OF    HOME    AND 

FOREIGN  LITERATURE,   ON   THE.  VERSES 

OF   THE  BIBLE. 


BT 

V 


EEY.   JOSEPH   S.   EXELL,   M.A. 


NUMBERS. 


•^x... 


NEW  YORK: 
ANSON   D.  F.  RANDOLPH   &  COMPANY 

(incorporated), 
182   FIFTH   AVENUE. 


INTEODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 

Thb  Name  of  thb  Book. — Bunsen  entitles  it  "  The  Muster-roll."  But  the 
thought  which  gives  unity  to  this  book  is  very  concrete  and  definite.  Both  to  the 
book  of  prophetic  legislation,  or  Exodus,  and  to  Leviticus,  the  book  of  sacerdotal 
or  cultus  legislation,  there  is  annexed  the  book  of  the  kingly  calling  of  Israel  under 
its  King  Jehovah — the  book  which  treats  of  the  host  of  God,  of  the  discipline  of 
the  army,  of  its  typical  march  from  Sinai  to  Canaan,  from  the  Mount  of  God  to 
the  elementary  conquest  of  the  world  under  the  standard  of  the  Ark  of  the  Covenant, 
and  under  the  guidance  of  Jehovah  ;  and  because  this  march  is  typical,  it  is 
darkened  and  checked  in  many  ways  by  the  power  of  sin.  Another  designation, 
"The  wandering  towards  Canaan,"  is  partly  too  indefinite,  partly  too  narrow, 
because  the  wandering  as  a  whole  had  already  begun  with  the  Exodus  from  Egypt. 
<J.  P.  Lange,  D.D.) 

Thb  Authorship  of  thb  Book. — Much  which  has  been  said  upon  the  Mosaic 
authorship  of  the  Pentateuch  generally,  applies  with  special  force  to  the  authorship 
of  this  book.  One  portion,  viz.,  the  catalogue  of  the  stations  or  encampments  (xxxiii.) 
is  expressly  ascribed  to  Moses  (ver.  2).  Some  of  the  legislative  enactments  which 
are  found  only  in  this  book,  or  which  are  recapitulated  in  Deuteronomy  are  expressly 
assigned  to  Moses  in  Joshua — (1)  the  law  that  the  Levites  were  to  have  no  separate 
inheritance  of  land  (Josh.  xiii.  14,  33 ;  xiv.  3,  4,  cf.  Num.  xviii.  20-24 ;  Deut.  x.  9  ; 
■xiv.  27 ;  xviii.  1,  2),  but  only  cities  to  dwell  in,  with  their  subui-bs  taken  out  of  the 
inheritance  of  the  other  tribes  (Josh,  xxi.  2,  cf.  Num.  xxxv.  1-4) ;  (2)  the  assign- 
ment by  lot  of  the  inheritance  of  the  nine  tribes  and  a  half  on  the  west  of  the 
Jordan,  and  of  the  two  tribes  and  a  half  on  the  east  of  Jordan  (Josh.  xiv.  2,  3  ; 
xviii.  7,  cf.  Num.  xxvi.  55 ;  xxxii.  33 ;  xxxiii.  54 ;  xxxiv.  13),  The  presumption 
thus  afforded  that  this  book  was  written  by  Moses,  is  confirmed  by  the  numerous 
indications  which  it  contains  that  it  is  the  work  of  a  contemporary  writer,  who 
lived  in  the  desert,  and  who  was  familiar  with  the  history,  customs,  and  institutions 
of  Egypt.  The  minuteness  of  the  details  respecting  the  order  of  the  march  through 
the  wilderness,  and  the  various  incidents  which  occurred  in  the  course  of  it,  the 
remarkable  manner  in  which  the  history  and  the  legislation  are  interwoven,  and 
more  particularly  the  insertion  of  additional  legislation  arising  out  of  the  protracted 
wanderings  in  the  desert  {e.g.,  xix.  14),  point  to  the  conclusion  that  the  writer  of  the 
book  was  either  an  eye-witness  of  the  scenes  which  he  records,  or  a  forger  whose 
skill  has  been  unequalled  in  after  ages.  The  topographical  notices,  again,  testify 
to  an  acquaintance  with  the  history  of  Egypt  {e.g.,  xiii.  22),  and  also  with  that  of  the 
surrounding  nations,  previously  to  the  entrance  into  Canaan  {e.g.,  xxi.  13) ;  whilst 
the  allusions  to  Egyptian  customs,  products,  and  institutions,  and  also  to  particular 
incidents  of  Egyptian  history,  are  such  as  cannot,  with  any  greit  amount  of  pro- 
bability, be  ascribed  to  any  writer  between  the  days  of  Moses  and  those  of  Solomon 
{e.g.,  xi.  5-7  ;  xxi.  5-9 ;  xxxiii.  4,  6-8),  Again,  the  contrast  between  the  general 
allusions  to  the  topography  of  Canaan,  such  as  might  well  have  been  obtained  from 
traditional  sources,  or  from  the  reports  of  the  spies,  as  compared  with  the  more 

6 


6  INTRODUCTION  TO  THE  BOOK  OF  NUMBERS. 

minute  descriptions  given  in  Joshua,  precisely  corresponds  with  the  recorded 
history  of  Moses.  Thus,  while  in  Joshua  the  boundaries  of  Canaan  are  expressed 
with  great  minuteness,  in  Numbers  they  are  laid  down  in  general  terms  (cf.  Josh.  xv. 
with  Num.  xxxiv.).  It  may  be  observed  further,  that  the  fact  that  the  boundaries 
assigned  to  the  promised  land  were  never  actually  realised,  even  in  the  days  of 
David  and  Solomon,  affords  a  strong  argument  in  support  of  the  belief  that  the 
books  in  which  they  are  described  were  not  written  at  the  late  period  to  which  they 
are  assigned  by  some  modern  critics,  in  which  case  the  original  assignment  would 
naturally  have  been  made  to  accord  with  the  actual  extent  of  the  kingdom.  It  must 
be  observed,  further,  that  the  statistics  of  this  book  stop  short  of  the  death  of  Moses, 
and  that  the  records  of  families  are  restricted  to  the  Mosaic  era.  Thus,  e.g.,  we 
read  of  the  promise  given  to  Phinehas  and  to  his  seed  after  him  of  an  eveiiasting 
priesthood  (xxv.  13),  and  we  find  mention  of  the  part  which  Phinehas  took  in  one 
of  the  latest  expeditions  in  which  Moses  was  engaged  (xxxi.  6) ;  but  we  must  have 
recourse  to  the  books  of  Chronicles  and  of  Ezra  if  we  desire  to  obtain  information- 
concerning  his  descendants.     (C  J.  Elliot,  M.A.) 

The  Chronologt  of  the  Book. — 1.  The  narrative  commences  with  "the  first 
day  of  the  second  month  of  the  second  year  after  they  were  come  out  of  Egypt  " 
(i.  1) ;  and  the  death  of  Aaron  at  the  first  encampment  during  the  final  march  on 
Canaan  (xx.  2)  took  place  in  the  first  day  of  the  fifth  month  of  the  fortieth  year 
(xxxiii.  38).  2.  Between  these  two  dates,  therefore,  intervene  no  less  than  38J  years 
{cf.  Deut.  ii.  14),  the  long  and  dreary  period  of  tarrying  in  the  wilderness  till  the 
disobedient  generation  had  wasted  away.  3.  The  solemn  rehearsal  of  the  law  con- 
tained in  Deuteronomy  was  commenced  by  Moses  after  the  overthrow  of  Sihon  and 
Og,  in  the  beginning  of  the  eleventh  month  of  the  fortieth  year  (Deut.  i.  8,  4).^ 
4.  We  have,  consequently,  from  the  death  of  Aaron  to  the  opening  of  Deuteronomy 
a  space  of  exactly  six  months,  in  which  all  the  events  narrated  in  the  fourth  part 
of  this  book  (xx.  1  to  end)  would  seem  to  have  occurred,  with  the  probable  exception 
of  the  defeat  of  the  king  of  Arad.  5.  Those  events  are  many  and  remarkable. 
After  the  tedious  years  of  suspense  were  once  passed,  the  history  of  the  chosen 
people  hurries  on,  not  without  a  sort  of  dramatic  propriety,  to  a  crisis.  Crowded 
as  this  space  is,  it  yet  has  room  enough  for  the  incidents  here  assigned  to  it.  6.  The 
first  month  of  the  six  was  passed  at  the  foot  of  Mount  Hor  in  mourning  for  Aaron 
(xx.  29).  But  it  is  likely  that  during  this  month  a  part  of  the  host  was  engaged 
in  revenging  upon  the  king  of  Arad  the  molestation  inflicted  by  him  on  the  Israelites 
during  their  journey  from  Kadesh  to  Mount  Hor.  7.  Next  ensued  the  journey 
"  from  Mount  Hor  by  the  way  of  the  Red  Sea  to  compass  the  land  of  Edom  "^ 
(xxi.  4) ;  and  this,  bt-ing  about  two  hundred  and  twenty  miles  to  the  brook  Zered, 
would  be  accomplished  within  four  weeks.  8.  The  appearance  of  the  host  in  the 
plains  of  Moab  brought  them  into  the  neighbourhood  of  Sihon,  king  of  the 
Amorites.  The  policy  pursued  by  him  of  resisting  the  progress  of  Israel  with  all 
his  forces  (xxi.  23)  caused  his  overthrow  to  be  speedy  and  total ;  as  was  also  for 
like  reasons  that  of  Og,  king  of  Bashan,  The  two  battles  at  Jahaz  and  Edrei 
probably  took  place  both  within  a  fortnight ;  i.e.,  towards  the  middle  of  the  third  of 
the  six  months  in  question.  9.  The  issue  of  the  conflict  with  the  Amorite  kings 
determined  Balak  to  send  for  Balaam  (xxii.  2).  The  distance  from  Moab  to  the 
nearest  point  of  the  Euphrates  is  about  three  hundred  and  fifty  miles,  and  Pethor 
may  have  been  yet  more  distant.  But  as  Balak  was  urgent,  and  could  of  course 
command  all  facilities  for  travelling,  two  months  would  amply  suffice  for  his 
ambassadors  to  go  and  return  twice  over ;  and  for  the  delivery  by  Balaam  of  his 
prophecies  (xxii-xxiv.).  No  doubt  during  these  weeks  the  Israelites  were  engaged  in 
completing  and  consolidating  their  conquest  of  Gilead  and  Bashan.  10.  We  have 
thus  a  margin  of  at  least  six  weeks  lelt,  during  which  occurred  the  seduction  of 
Israel  by  the  wiles  of  the  Midianites,  and  the  consequent  plague  (xxv.) ;  the  second 
numbering  of  the  people  in  the  plains  of  Moab  (xxvi.) ;  and  the  war  upon  the 
Midianites  (xxvii.).  11.  It  is  accordingly  in  full  consistency  that  the  death  of  Moses 
is  spoken  of  (xxxi.  2)  in  connection  with  the  Midianitish  war,  and  as  following  close 
upon  it ;  and  that  Balaam  after  quitting  Balak  had  not  yet  returned  home  when 
that  war  occurred,  and  was  taken  captive  amongst  the  Midianites.  (T.  E.  Espin, 
D.D.,  in  Speak.  Com.) 


THE    BIBLICAL   ILLUSTEATOE. 

NUMBERS. 
CHAPTER  I. 

Ver.  1.  to  the  wilderness  of  Slnal. — In  the  desert :  an  illustration  of  the  life  of 
the  good  in  this  world: — I.  The  natural  trials  of  the  desert.  1.  Barrenness. 
Temporal  and  material  things  cannot  satisfy  spiritual  beings.  2.  Homelessness. 
The  soul  cannot  find  rest  in  this  wilderness  world.  3.  Pathlessness.  Man,  if  left 
to  himself,  is  bound  to  stray  and  lose  himself.  4.  Perilousness.  The  wiles  of  the 
devil,  the  seductions  of  the  world,  and  the  lusts  of  the  flesh.  5.  Aimlessness.  The 
years  pass,  opportunities  come  and  go,  and  so  little  seems  accomplished,  so  little 
progress  made  in  our  character,  so  little  true  work  done.  II.  The  Divine  presence 
IN  THE  DESERT.  1.  Divlne  Communication  in  the  desert.  God's  voice  is  never 
silent.  He  is  ever  speaking  in  the  sounds  and  silences  of  nature  ;  through  Scripture ; 
and  by  His  Holy  Spirit.  2.  Divine  provision  in  the  desert.  "  The  Lord  will  give 
grace  and  glory ;  no  good  will  He  withhold  from  them  that  walk  uprightly."  "  Your 
heavenly  Father  knoweth  that  ye  have  need  of  all  these  things."  "  My  God  shall 
supply  all  your  need  according  to  His  riches  in  glory  by  Christ  Jesus."  3.  Divine 
shelter  and  rest  in  the  desert  (Psa.  xc.  1).  4.  Divine  direction  in  the  desert.  (1) 
By  the  leadings  of  His  providence.  (2)  By  the  teachings  of  the  sacred  Scriptures. 
<3)  By  the  influences  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  5.  Divine  protection  in  the  desert.  "  No 
weapon  that  is  formed  against  thee  shall  prosper."  "If  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be 
against  us  ?  "  "  Who  is  he  that  will  harm  you,  if  ye  be  followers  of  that  which  is 
good?"  III.  The  Divine  uses  of  the  desest.  1.  That  the  generation  of  slaves 
might  pass  away.  There  is  much  in  us  that  must  die  and  be  buried  before  we  can 
enter  upon  the  inheritance  of  spiritual  perfection.  Oar  crave Q-hearted  fears,  our 
carnal  lusts,  our  miserable  unbelief,  must  be  buried  in  the  desert.  2.  That  a 
generation  of  free  men  might  be  educated.  In  the  desert  we  are  being  trained  by 
God  into  spiritual  perfection  and  power  for  service  and  blessedness.  Conclusion :  » 
1.  Ponder  well  the  Divine  design  of  our  life  in  this  world.  2.  By  the  help  of  God 
seek  its  realisation  in  ourselves.     {W.  Jones.) 

Vers.  2,  3.  Take  ye  the  sum  of  all  the  congregation. — Reasons  for  numbering  the 
people  : — Not  because  God  would  understand  whether  they  were  sufficient  for  number, 
or  able  for  strength,  to  encounter  their  enemies,  forasmuch  as  nothing  is  unknown 
to  Him  or  impossible  for  Him  to  bring  to  pass,  who  is  able  to  save  as  well  with  a 
few  as  with  many.  I.  For  order's  sake  :  that  there  should  be  no  occasion  of  con- 
tention for  primacy,  but  that  every  tribe  and  family  should  know  his  place  and  time, 
when  to  remove  and  when  to  stand  still,  when  to  fight  with  their  enemies,  and  in 
every  point  what  to  do.  2.  That  such  things  as  were  to  be  paid  for  the  use  of  the 
tabernacle  might  the  more  easily  be  collected  when  tliey  Were  separated  according 
to  their  tribes,  and  the  tribes  according  to  their  families,  and  the  families  according 
to  the  household,  man  by  man.  3.  To  testify  His  exceeding  great  love  toward 
them  and  special  care  over  them.  A  faithful  shepherd  will  many  times  count  the 
sheep  committed  to  him,  lest  any  should  be  missing.  4.  Lastly,  they  are  severally 
and  distinctly  numbered  every  tribe  by  itself,  that  in  time  to  come  it  might  be 
certainly  known  of  what  tribe  and  family  Christ  Jesus,  the  promised  Messiah,  should 
be  born.  {W.  Attersoll.)  Reasons  for  the  census  taking: — 1.  To  prove  the 
accomplishment  of  the  promise  made  to  Abraham,  that  God  would  multiply  his 
seed  exceedingly ;  and  renewed  in  Jacob  (Gen.  xxviii.  14).     Now  it  appears  that 

7 


8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

there  did  not  fail  one  tittle  of  that  good  promise,  which  was  an  encouragement  t6- 
them  to  hnpe  that  the  other  promise  of  the  land  of  Canaan  for  an  inheritance  should 
always  be  fulfilled  in  its  season.  Therefore  God  would  have  Israel  numbered,  that 
it  might  be  upon  recoid  how  vastly  they  were  increased  in  a  little  time,  that  the 
power  of  Gods  providence  and  the  truth  of  His  promise  may  be  acknowledged  by 
all.  It  could  not  have  been  expected,  in  any  ordinary  course  of  nature,  that  seventy- 
five  souls  (which  was  the  number  of  Jacob's  family  when  he  went  down  into  Egypt)' 
should  in  two  hundred  and  fifteen  years  multiply  to  so  many  hundred  thousands. 
It  is  therefore  to  be  attributed  to  an  extraordinary  virtue  in  the  Divine  promise  and 
blessing.  2.  It  was  to  put  a  difference  between  the  true-born  Israelites  and  the 
mixed  multitude  that  were  among  them.  None  were  numbered  but  Israelites.  All 
the  world  is  but  a  lumber  in  comparison  with  those  jewels.  Little  account  is  made 
of  others  ;  but  the  saints  God  has  a  particular  property  in  and  concern  for  (2  Tim. 
ii.  19  ;  Phil.  iv.  3).  The  hairs  of  their  head  are  numbered ;  but  He  will  say  to 
others,  "  I  never  knew  you,  never  made  any  account  of  you."  3.  It  was  in  order  to 
their  being  marshalled  into  several  districts,  for  the  more  easy  administration  of 
justice,  and  their  more  regular  march  through  the  wilderness.  It  is  a  rout  and  a 
rabble,  not  an  army,  that  is  not  mustered  and  put  in  order.  (Matthew  Henry,  I  .D.y 
Israel's  host  mustered  : — 1.  The  order  for  this  enumeration  is  Divine.  God  gave  the 
order,  and  He  appointed  the  men  who  should  fulfil  it.  It  may  be  asked.  Why  does 
the  Lord  now  sanction  the  doing  of  this  work,  and  in  the  subsequent  ages  curse 
David  for  doing,  substantially,  the  same  thing  ?  The  answer  is  twofold  :  First,  it 
was  not  the  Lord,  but  Satan,  who  tempted  David  to  number  Israel ;  and,  secondly, 
it  was  done  for  the  gratification  of  David's  personal  pride  and  ambition.  Further ,^ 
it  may  be  said,  this  was  done  against  the  protest  of  the  general-in-chief  of  his 
armies  (see  1  Chron.  xxi.  3,  4).  When  God  commands  it  is  always  safe  to  obey ; 
but  when  Satan  incites  us  we  are  to  beware.  There  are  several  reasons  why  God 
commanded  this  muster-roll  to  be  made  now.  (1)  The  promise  1  ad  been  made  to 
Abraham  of  an  exceeding  great  multiplication  of  his  seed.  It  was  now  designed 
that  they  should  see  how  this  promise  had  been  fulfilled,  even  amid  the  heartless 
bondage  of  Egypt.  (2)  This  He  demanded  should  be  done  carefully  and  certainly. 
There  is  nothing  easier  than  to  miscalculate  numbers,  especially  where  the  basis  of 
reckoning  is  careless.  Here  He  orders  this  to  be  done  by  an  individual  count.  (3) 
It  was  only  those  who  were  able  to  go  forth  to  war  who  were  numbered.  The 
blind,  the  lame,  the  diseased,  and  the  aged  were  not  enrolled.  It  is  the  Lord's 
plan  in  all  the  ages,  never  to  ask  a  man  to  do  what  he  is  incompetent  to  perform. 
On  the  other  hand.  He  expects  every  one  to  do  all  he  is  able  to  do.  The  men 
selected  for  tb is  enrolment  were  "  renowned  men."  Heads  of  their  families  and 
their  tribes — princes  in  Isi"ael.  Sometimes  the  great,  the  wealthy,  and  the  wise 
attempt  to  excuse  themselves  from  the  service  of  God.  They  are  too  much  busied 
with  their  own  concerns.  But  there  are  those  who  wear  crowns  and  coronets  who 
do  pray  and  lnbour  in  Christ's  cause.  They  are  worthy  standard-bearers  in  the 
army  of  the  Lord.  Like  Queen  Victoria  and  Lord  Shaftesbury,  hke  Coligny  and 
Cond6,  like  the  electors  of  Germany  in  the  time  of  the  Eeformation,  they  stand 
forth  doing  the  Lord's  will,  and  accomplishing  His  purposes.  We  see  here,  further,, 
■with  what  quickness  and  promptness  this  work  was  done.  It  would  seem  as  if 
only  a  few  days  were  consumed  in  doing  a  work  so  vast.  Thus  when  God  calls  us 
to  do  His  work  there  is  to  be  no  delay.  "  The  King's  business  requires  haste." 
No  one  has  a  right  to  be  an  indifferent  or  idle  worker.  Another  thought  here  :  only 
Israelites  were  to  be  mustered.  No  one  of  the  mixed  multitude  is  to  be  put  upon 
the  rolls.  They  could  not  be  intrusted  on  the  armj'-rolls.  They  were  more  ready 
for  a  ferment  than  for  a  fight.  No  wonder  that  the  immortal  Washington,  on  an 
occasion  of  great  importance  and  peril,  said,  "  Put  no  one  but  Americans  on  guard 
to-night."  So  God  would  not  allow  any  one  but  His  own  people  to  fight  His 
battles,  or  to  do  His  work.  In  the  numeric  record  Judah  is  found  to  have  the 
largest  number  of  men.  "  This  deserves  notice  in  connection  with  the  blessing 
pronounced  on  that  tribe  in  Gen.  xlix.  8-12,  '  Thou  art  he  whom  thy  brethren 
shall  praise.' "  Judah  was  the  grand  leader  of  all  the  princes  and  tribes  of  Israel. 
God  designed  that  He  should  be  so,  as  his  was  the  tribe  from  which  Im- 
manuel  was  to  come.  The  whole  number  was  six  hundred  and  three  thousand  five 
hundred  and  fifty.  With  three  exceptions,  Eussia,  Germany,  and  France,  this  is 
larger  than  the  regular  army  of  any  nation  now  on  the  face  of  the  globe.  Of 
course,  the  war-footing  of  many  other  nations  is  greater  than  this  ;  but  this  is  an 
amazing  regular  army  for  that  day  and  age.    But,  vast  as  it  was,  it  was  all  swal- 


CHAP.  I.]  NUMBERS.  9 

lowed  up  in  thirty-eight  years  from  this  time,  because  of  unbelief  and  sin.  Only 
two  of  this  great  number  escaped  the  general  destruction  ;  namely,  Caleb  and 
Joshua.  So  multitudes  who  profess  to  be  soldiers  in  the  Lord's  army  are  wasted 
by  death  or  become  inefficient  and  useless.  One  of  the  great  defects  in  all  oui 
Churches  is  want  of  organisation.  Herein  were  the  beauty  and  the  strength  of 
this  mustering.  The  Levites,  however,  were  exempted  from  this  enrolment.  In 
all  ages  the  priestly  caste  of  men  has  been  generally  free  from  war-service  ;  so  the 
Levites,  by  the  appointment  of  God,  were  free.  To  them  were  committed  the 
spiritual  interests  of  the  tribes,  the  worship  and  service  of  God,  the  offering  of 
sacrifices,  and  the  expounding  of  the  law.  "  They  warred  the  warfare  of  the 
tabernacle."  So  we  think  no  minister  should  be  a  soldier,  a  lawyer,  a  physician,  a 
business  man,  or  a  farmer.  He  cannot  do  these  things  without  lowering  the 
standard  of  his  calling  and  materially  injuring  his  efficiency.  {Lewis  R.  Dunn,  D.D.) 
The  numbering  of  the  people  (a  homily  for  the  census  day) : — I.  A  few  words  aboxtt 
THE  CENSUS,  which  is  being  taken  to-day  in  every  town,  every  hamlet,  every  remote 
habitation  of  the  Uuited  Kingdom.  The  Israelites  dealt  largely  in  statistics.  At 
all  the  great  turuing-poiats  in  their  history  a  census  was  taken.  This  Book  of 
Numbers  owes  its  name  to  the  fact  that  it  records  two  census-takings  ;  one  at  the 
beginning,  the  other  at  the  close  of  the  forty  years'  sojourn  in  the  wilderness.  An 
admonition  to  fill  up  the  census-papers  with  exactness  and  for  conscience'  sake. 
II.  Meditations  proper  to  the  census  dat.  1.  The  filling  up  of  a  census-paper  is, 
in  itself,  a  piece  of  secular  business.  Yet  I  do  not  envy  the  man  who  can  perform 
it  without  being  visited  with  holy  feeliog.  The  setting  down  of  the  names  of  one's 
household  brings  up  many  tragic  memories.  The  setting  down  one's  own  age,  after 
a  lapse  of  ten  years,  summons  us  to  count  our  days  that  we  may  apply  our  hearts  to 
wisdom.  2.  The  Lord  keeps  an  exact  register  of  His  people.  There  is  a  Book  of 
Life  in  which  are  inscribed  the  names  of  aU  whom  He  has  chosen.  How  true  this 
is  the  whole  Scripture  bears  witness  (Exod.  xxxii.  30 ;  Isa.  iv.  3  ;  Ezek.  xiii.  9  ; 
Luke  X.  20 ;  Phil.  iv.  3  ;  Heb.  xii.  23 ;  Rev.  xiii.  8).  We  commonly  think  of  this 
as  a  book  which  is  shut  and  sealed.  The  Lord  only  knoweth  them  that  are  His. 
A  man  may  ascertain  his  own  acceptance  with  God.  (W.  Binnie,  D.D.)  The 
numbering  of  the  people  : — I.  The  authority  for  this  numbering.  Leaders  of  men 
should  be  well  assured  of  two  things  in  the  movements  which  they  inaugurate — 1. 
That  they  have  the  Divine  approval  of  their  undertakings.  The  movement  which 
is  approved  by  God,  and  well  prosecuted,  shall  advance  to  splendid  triumph.  2. 
That  they  are  actuated  by  worthy  motives  in  their  undertakings.  A  sinful,  selfish 
motive  will  vitiate  our  enterprises  and  mar  our  works.  "  The  Lord  looketh  at  the 
heart."  Let  us  scrutinise  our  motives.  II.  The  place  of  this  numbering.  "  In 
the  wilderness  of  Sinai."  1.  In  a  desert.  (1)  Privation.  (2)  Peril.  (3)  Perplexity. 
2.  In  a  desert  where  the  tabernacle  of  God  was.  III.  The  time  of  this  numbering. 
Exactly  one  month  after  the  setting  up  of  the  tabernacle  (Exod.  xl.  2,  17)  and  about 
eleven  months  from  the  time  of  their  arrival  in  the  desert  of  Sinai.  The  people 
abode  in  this  desert  nearly  a  whole  year  (comp.  Exod.  xix.  1  with  Num.  i.  1  and  x. 
11).  What  was  the  reason  of  this  protracted  halt  ?  That  they  might  be  instructed 
in  their  relations  to  God  and  to  each  other  ;  that  they  might  learn  lessons  of  duty 
and  worship  ;  that  they  might  be  taught  to  reverence  and  obey  God.  There  are 
times  and  circumstances  in  which  standing  still  is  the  speediest  advance.  IV.  The 
MANNER  OF  THIS  NUMBERING.  They  Were  to  take  account  of — 1.  Only  the  males. 
2.  Only  the  males  above  twenty  years  old.  3.  Only  the  males  above  twenty  years 
old  who  were  in  vigorous  health — "  able  to  go  forth  to  war."  4.  They  were  to  be 
numbered  "  after  their  families,"  that  it  might  be  known  of  w^at  tribe  and  of  what 
particular  house  every  able  man  was.  5.  The  numbering  was  to  be  individual,  and 
by  name.  The  census  was  minute.  (1)  The  Lord  chooses  fit  instruments  for  the 
accomplishment  of  His  purposes.  (2)  The  Lord  is  perfectly  acquainted  with  every 
one  who  is  fitted  for  His  work.  V.  The  design  of  this  numbering.  1.  The 
organisation  of  the  army.  2.  To  manifest  the  Divine  faithfulness.  3.  To  show 
the  Divine  power.  4.  To  the  promotion  of  order.  5.  To  exhibit,  on  the  coming 
of  the  Messiah,  the  correspondence  of  the  event  with  the  predictions  concerning  it. 
6.  To  illustrate  the  care  of  God  for  His  people  generally  and  particularly.  The 
Lord's  care  over  His  people  is  most  minute  and  constant  and  tender.  (W.  Jone».) 
Thi  numbered  people: — 1.  In  common  matters  men  count  possessions,  which  are 
choice  and  dear  and  prized.  They  whose  mean  joys  are  fixed  on  this  world's  pelf 
thus  calculate  their  gold.  Their  coffers  are  oft  opened.  Do  we,  then,  indulge 
unfounded  fancy  when  in  God's  numbering  we  read  God's  love?    Do  not  clear 


10  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

characters  here  write  that  His  people  are  thus  numbered  because  loved — counted, 
because  prized?  2.  Who  are  numbered?  The  young,  the  wenk,  the  female, 
stand  apart.  None  are  enrolled  but  they  whose  age  and  strength  enable  them  for 
war.  Christ's  service  is  a  mighty  work,  a  determined  fight.  About  a  year  has 
passed  since  the  last  numbering  of  this  family.  The  Levites  then  formed  part  of 
the  collected  mass.  They  are  not  now  included.  They  stand  apart,  a  separate 
portion.  But  mark  a  wondrous  fact.  The  number  then  and  now  amounts  exactly 
to  the  same.  Israel  has  surrendered  Levi's  tribe,  but  Israel's  forces  are  not  thereby 
less.  We  never  lose  by  giving  to  the  Lord.  3.  Once  more  survey  the  numbered 
people.  Tou  are  inclined  to  say  this  band  will  safely  reach  the  promised  land. 
Surely  their  willing  steps  will  ever  run  in  the  appointed  way.  Alas !  two,  and  two 
onlv,  steadfastly  adhere.  Ah,  unbelief  1  It  is  the  sin  of  sins,  the  misery  of  miseries, 
the  hopeless  malady,  the  death  of  souls,  the  bar  which  shuts  out  Christ.  (Dean 
Law. )  Counting  mercies  and  day^ : — We  may  again  learn  of  these  gracious 
numberings  of  His  people  to  number  often  with  ourselves  His  mercies  vouchsafed 
unto  us,  that  we  may  send  up  thankful  thoughts  to  His  majesty  for  them.  Such  an 
holy  numbering  used  Jacob  when  he  said,  "  0  Lord,  with  my  staff  came  I  over 
this  river,  and  now  I  return  with  much  wealth."  How  many  great  men,  of  all 
callings,  may  thus  number  God's  favour  towards  them  since  their  first  beginning, 
in  cities  and  towns,  where  little  stocks  have  grown  to  great  sums.  What  a  fit 
meditation  is  this?  and  how  shall  the  Lord  like  this  kind  of  numbering?  We  may 
also  remember  what  the  Psalm  says,  and  learn  to  number  our  days,  that  we  may 
apply  our  hearts  unto  wisdom.  But  you  may  say  this  numbering  was  restrained  to  the 
Jews,  and  even  so  was  God's  love,  in  some  sort,  for  a  time.  But  when  Christ  came,  then 
there  went  out  a  decree  from  Augustus  Caesar  that  all  the  world  should  be  taxed,  which 
could  not  be  without  numbering  of  them.  And  therefore  by  Christ  the  partition- 
wall  is  broken  down,  and  the  comforts  of  God's  numbering  ot  them  imparted  to  us, 
and  to  be  approved  by  us  to  our  joy,  praying  with  him  that  so  prayed,  "  Grant,  good 
Lord,  that  in  Thy  numberings  of  Thy  people  I  may  be  ever  one."  (Bp.  Babington.) 
The  census  paper: — The  census  paper  may  be,  by  God's  blessing,  the  means  of 
bringing  home  some  very  telling  facts.  You,  who  are  going  to  sign  it,  are  ten  years 
older  than  when  last  a  similar  paper  lay  before  you.  Ten  years  gone !  gone  for 
ever  !  Is  not  this  something  to  make  you  thoughtful  ?  The  census  papers  will  show 
what  increase  and  progress  has  been  made  throughout  the  country.  Mark  this. 
There  is  no  idea  of  failure  or  decrease.  Can  you  show  marks  of  Christian  progress 
as  clear  ?  Whether  you  have  prospered  in  your  eveiyday  work  or  not,  enjoyed 
health  and  happiness,  or  had  to  bear  sickness,  disappointment,  and  even  bereave- 
ment— in  any  case  have  you,  as  if  forgetful  of  the  past,  still  kept  "pressing  forward" 
for  the  prize  of  your  high  calling  in  Christ  Jesus  ?  Is  there  no  decrease,  no 
failure?  You  will  write  down  your  Christian  name,  condition,  and  profession. 
Your  Christian  name !  Many  a  man's  name  is  his  character.  There  are  names 
•which  in  every  rank,  profession,  business,  and  trade,  are  coupled  with  skill, 
courage,  honesty,  and  truth :  their  names  are,  as  it  were,  registered  in  the  book  of 
greatness.  There  is  a  book  in  which  the  names  of  Christians  are  registered  (Phil. 
iv.  3).  Is  your  Christian  name  entered  there  ?  Does  your  Christian  name  suggest 
before  God  and  His  angels,  to  your  neighbour,  and  yourself,  a  Christian  character. 
Perhaps  your  condition  has  not  altered.  You  are  still  what  you  were  ten  years 
ago :  Have  all  who  are  under  your  roof  learnt  to  see  in  you  a  kind  friend,  a  good 
father  or  mother,  a  forbearing  master  or  mistress,  a  steward  conscious  that  you 
must  give  account  to  God  of  the  duties  and  responsibilities  of  your  trust  ?  Perhaps 
it  has  altered.  You  have  married,  and  children  have  been  granted  to  you.  Have 
yon  been,  and  are  you,  a  true  Christian  parent,  caring  for  the  souls  of  your  children 
as  well  as  their  bodies,  training  them  by  yonr  words  and  example  for  Heaven?  Or, 
perhaps,  the  last  ten  years  have  been  full  of  sadness  to  you.  You  are  now  a 
widow  or  widower,  an  orphan,  or  childless,  a  lone  being.  Have  you  learnt,  though 
the  heart  was  torn,  to  look  up  to  the  Father  in  heaven  who  chastens  with  suffering 
all  whom  He  loves  ?  And  does  the  question  the  census  paper  asks  you  about  your 
profession  suggest  no  similar  question  about  your  Christian  profession?  Are  you 
careful  never  to  say  or  do  anything  which  will  bring  discredit  upon  that  profession  ? 
Do  you  watch  the  thoughts  of  your  heart,  that  nothing  base,  or  impure,  or  careless, 
shall  enter  in  to  dwell  there  ?  In  the  Book  of  the  Revelation,  Christians  are  taught 
that  "all,  small  and  great,  shall  stand  before  God  and  be  judged  out  of  those 
things  written  in  the  books,  according  to  their  works."  Then  will  be  the  great 
census  ;  the  names,  ages,  conditions,  and  professions  of  all  will  be  known.        Able 


CHAP.  1.]  NUMBERS.  11 

to  go  forth  to  war. — TJie  lawfulness  of  war : — I.  This  teacheth  us  that  a  godly 
MAN  MAY  LAWFULLY  BE  AWAERiOR.  If  war  were  not  in  itself  lawful,  God  would  never 
have  a  muster  taken  of  such  as  are  able  to  bear  arms.  True,  every  good  profession 
may  be  abused.  Abraham  is  said  to  be  the  father  of  the  faithful,  yet  he  made  war, 
and  overthrew  the  enemies  that  had  spoiled  Sodom,  and  earned  away  the  riches  of  it 
as  a  prey,  and  was  not  reproved  of  Melchizedeck,  the  priest  of  the  living  God,  but 
refreshed  together  with  his  army.  The  like  we  might  say  of  Moses,  Joshua,  the  Judges, 
and  other  godly  kings,  who  fought  many  battles  by  the  commandment  of  the  Lord. 
When  the  soldiers  heard  the  preaching  of  John,  the  forerunner  of  Chris-t,  they  asked 
him  what  they  must  do ;  he  did  not  dissuade  them  from  war,  but  gave  them 
directions  how  to  behave  themselves  m  that  honourable  profession.  Neither  did 
Peter,  being  sent  for  to  come  to  Cornelius,  command  him  to  follow  a  new  trade  of 
life.  Neither  did  Paul  persuade  Sergius  Paulus,  the  deputy,  a  prudent  man,  to 
renounce  that  calUng,  which  no  doubt  they  would  have  done  if  the  profession  of 
chivaliy  had  not  stood  with  the  profession  of  Christianity.  II.  The  reasons  to 
CONFIRM  THIS  TROTH.  1.  God  doth  commaud  it,  and  therefore  doth  allow  it  as  just 
and  lawful.  2.  As  God  gave  direct  commandment,  so  the  people  of  God  going  forth 
to  battle  were  to  call  upon  Him  for  a  blessing,  and  to  sanctify  the  work  by  prayer, 
and  in  doing  so  have  been  heard.  Things  in  their  own  nature  unlawful  are  so 
filthy  that  no  invocation  of  God's  name  can  cleanse  them  ;  nay,  they  make  such 
prayer  foul  and  abominable.  Seeing,  therefore,  God  blesseth  and  delivereth  such 
as  go  to  war,  it  must  needs  follow  that  war  and  true  religion  may  well  stand 
together,  so  that  one  and  the  same  man  may  be  both  a  warrior  and  yet  reli<,'ious. 
(TF.  Attersoll.)  Able  to  fight : — Then  there  were  some  who  were  not  able.  There 
were  some  who  were  not  designed  for  military  pursuits.  The  Lord  would  say  here: 
Examine  the  people  ;  go  carefully  over  them  as  to  force,  capacity,  and  providtntial 
destiny,  and  arrange  that  those  who  are  able  to  go  forth  to  war  in  Israel  may  be 
ready.  There  is  always  that  wonderful  other  side.  The  Lord  does  not  pour  con- 
tempt upon  men  who  cannot  fight.  He  knows  what  they  can  do,  and  He  will  bless 
them  if  they  keep  within  their  capacity  and  their  Diviue  call.  Each  mau's  business 
should  be  to  inquire.  Lord,  what  wilt  Thou  have  me  to  do  ?  am  I  a  soldier,  a  leader, 
a  sailor?  am  I  a  home-keeper?  am  I  intended  for  obscurity?  am  I  to  be  written 
down  amongst  Thy  feeble  ones  ?  Thy  will  be  done.  Nor  let  us  limit  this  word 
"  soldier  "  to  what  we  understand  commonly  by  war.  Let  us  get  away  from  these 
narrow  limitations  and  look  at  life  largely.  The  fact  is  that  life  itself  is  war.  You 
cannot  get  away  from  strife.  You  cannot  get  away  from  it  in  business  ;  you  found 
it  in  the  nursery  before  you  found  it  in  the  market-place.  The  Church  is  a  battle- 
field. What,  then,  is  to  be  done  ?  Everything  depends  upon  the  spirit  in  which 
the  strife  is  urged.  We  may  go  forth  to  good  wars  with  an  evil  intent.  Or  we 
may  take  it  good-heartedly,  with  a  great  rising  of  gladness  within  the  sduI,  saying, 
"  This  is  Thy  way.  Lord,  that  we  are  to  be  made  strong  b^-  tight;  we  begin  by  conflict, 
we  are  not  to  have  our  own  way  in  the  world ;  but  give  us  the  good  spirit,  loving, 
magnanimous."  The  great  fight  is  within.  If  you  are  a  living  man,  you  are  at 
war  with  yourself.  Even  supposing  all  your  friends  and  enemies  were  at  one  with 
you,  there  would  be  a  great  war  in  the  soul.  You  must  do  the  evil  deed.  Yet  you 
do  not  want  to  do  it;  you  dare  not  speak  about  it;  the  war  is  secret,  silent, 
profound,  vital.  God  give  you  strength !  You  may  overcome  yet.  Life  is  not 
only  a  war,  but  the  war  may  be  conducted  under  the  very  presence  and  with  the 
very  blessing  of  Christ.  \\  hoso  goes  forth  to  war  in  that  jiower  comes  back  at 
eventide  more  than  the  conqueror.  The  text  reads  as  if  it  were  a  direction  in 
statistics.  We  cannot  exclude  the  element  of  statistics  from  spiritual  aggression 
and  spiritual  defence.  How  strong  is  God's  army  in  numbers?  "It  is  the  glory 
of  God  to  conceal  a  thing,"  saith  the  wise  book ;  and  God  conceals  from  us  the 
exact  numerical  strength  of  His  army.  The  statistics  of  the  army  are  kept  in 
heaven.  What  if  it  should  turn  out  that  a  little  child's  little  finger  has  won  more 
victories  than  all  the  embattled  hosts  that  went  forth  in  mail  ?  What  we  have  to 
do  is  for  each  man  to  do  his  own  share  of  the  war,  fight  as  if  everything  depended 
upon  him.  Christianity  is  the  military  religion.  It  will  fight ;  it  was  born  to  fight. 
Christianity  is  dead  against  all  evil.  Not  against  great  vulgar  crimes  only ;  there 
is  not  a  magistrate  on  the  bench  who  does  not  delight  to  punish  crime.  Crime  is 
overt,  external,  rough,  vulgar,  and  men  are  paid  to  sentence  it  to  hard  labour. 
Christianity  deals  with  the  spring,  with  the  deceitful  heart.  Christianity  is  at 
war  with  motive,  purpose,  thought,  intention  of  the  heart.  Therefore  much  of  its 
war  is  done  silently.     It  is  not  therefore  the  less  vital  and  the  less  tremendous. 


13  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR,  [chap.  i. 


Christianity  insists  that  we  shall  fight  evil  spirits.  It  is  soul  against  soul,  spirit 
against  spirit,  thought  against  thought.  There  is  no  tragedy  so  sublime,  so  over- 
whelming, as  the  fight  between  the  soul  and  the  devil.  Do  not  expect  to  win  all  at 
once.  You  are  -winning  a  little  every  day.  Whatever  fight  you  are  waging  you 
believe  to  be  good,  the  mere  fighting  of  the  battle  makes  you  stronger ;  you  may 
be  driven  back  for  a  httle  time,  but  you  will  come  up  again.  Only,  in  God's  name, 
for  Christ's  sake,  do  not  lose  your  heart,  or  you  will  lose  yourself.  Let  there  be  no 
doubt  as  to  -which  side  you  are  upon.  People  who  are  going  between  this  side  and 
that  side  will  be  of  no  use  in  the  fight  and  no  use  in  the  council.  Let  us  have 
d"tiniteness  of  position.  Let  us  have  a  clear,  simple,  honest  profession  of  religion. 
Nor  let  any  soul  be  discouraged  because  it  cannot  do  much  in  the  way  of  public 
battle.  Some  conquer  by  patience.  Patience ! — who  can  write  the  history  of  that 
great  conqueror  ?  Patience,  that  hardly  sighs  ;  patience,  that  scarcely  ever  turng 
its  eyes  to  the  clock  to  see  how  the  weary  time  is  gomg;  patience,  that  puts  the 
best  view  upon  every  case ;  patience,  that  sits  up  for  the  wanderer,  though  midnight 
be  passed,  saying  all  the  while,  that  it  really  did  not  want  to  sleep  ;  it  is  the  inner 
interpretation  of  things ;  it  is  God's  view  of  life ;  it  is  love  at  its  best.  You  are 
not  doing  much  public  fighting  mi.yhap,  but  let  me  tell  you  what  you  are  doing — 
you  are  succouring  the  soldiers  that  are  out  in  the  field ;  you  spake  so  kindly  to 
the  good  man  when  he  left  home  in  the  morning  t'lat  he  went  out  as  strong  as  ten 
men.  And  you  are  but  some  poor  obscure  servitor  ;  your  place  is  in  the  kitchen  ; 
you  do  what  are  called  the  humbler  duties  of  life,  but  you  make  the  whole  house 
glad.  You  make  the  man  of  business  go  forth  a  happier  and  stronger  man  in  the 
morning  because  of  your  simplicity  and  faithfulness  and  daily  care.  Understand 
that  whoever  gives  one  of  Christ's  soldiers  a  cup  of  cold  water  with  a  loving  hand  and 
a  loving  glance  wins  part  of  the  victory.  (-/.  Parker,  D.D.)  Our  duty  to  the  state : — 
He  is  not  worthy  to  be  a  member  of  a  state,  by  whom  the  state  is  no  whit  bettered. 
The  Romans  well  understood  this,  when  they  instituted  their  censors,  to  inquire 
into  every  man's  course  of  hfe,  and  to  note  them,  carbine  nigra,  with  a  character 
of  infamy,  that  could  not  give  some  good  account  of  their  life.  It  is  a  thing  pitiful 
to  consider  how  many  there  are  in  this  land  of  ours  whose  glory  is  their  shame, 
the  very  drones  and  cumber-grounds  of  their  country,  the  chronicle  of  whose  life 
wa^  long  since  summed  up  by  the  poet,  Nos  numerus  siniius  et  friiges  consumere  nati ; 
no  better  than  ciphers  if  you  respect  the  good  they  do.  But  let  them  know  that 
God  will  have  no  mutes  in  His  grammar,  no  blanks  in  His  almanack,  no  dumb 
shows  on  His  stage,  no  false  lights  in  His  house,  no  loiterers  in  His  vineyard. 
(J.  Spencer.) 

Vers.  4-16.  A  man  of  every  tribe :  every  one  head  of  the  house  of  his  fathers. — 
Rank  and  service  : — I.  Co-operation  in  Divine  service.  1.  Tlie  toil  of  Moses  and 
Aaron  would  be  lessened.  2.  The  accomplishment  of  the  task  would  be  facilitated. 
3.  The  envy  of  the  princes  would  be  prevented.  Grumblers  are  seldom  found 
among  the  workers  of  the  Church.  II.  Socirty's  need  of  leaders.  1.  Because 
they  are  at  present  indispensable  to  social  order  and  pi'ogress.  Certain  objects  of 
utmost  importance  to  fociety  cannot  possibly  be  attained  without  cohesion  of 
purpose  and  effort  on  the  part  of  a  large  number  of  men,  and  such  cohesion  is 
impossible  without  leaders.  "  Amongst  the  masses,"  says  Guizot,  "  even  in  revo- 
lutions, aristocracy  must  ever  exist ;  destroy  it  in  nobility,  and  it  becomes  centred 
in  the  rich  and  powerful  Houses  of  the  Commons.  Pull  them  down,  and  it  still 
survives  in  the  master  and  foreman  of  the  workshop."  2.  Because  of  the  diff.^rpnces 
in  the  faculties  of  men.  These  men  were  "princes"  from  the  nobility  of  their 
birth  :  and  they  were  probably  men  distinguished  also  for  their  abilities.  "  We 
must  have  kings,"  says  Emerson,  "we  must  have  nobles;  nature  is  always  pro- 
viding such  in  every  society ;  only  let  us  have  the  real  instead  of  the  titular.  In 
every  society,  some  are  born  to  rule,  and  some  to  advise.  The  chief  is  the  chief  all 
the  world  over,  only  not  his  cap  and  plume.  It  is  only  this  dislike  of  the  pretender 
which  makes  men  sometimes  unjust  to  the  true  and  finished  man."  III.  Thp 
GRAND  cHARACTKRisTic  OF  TRUE  i^EADERS.  They  are  pre-eminent  in  service.  (H' 
Jones.)  These  are  the  names  of  the  men. — The  Lord  knows  tin'  numher  and  tin- 
names  of  all  who  belong  to  Him : — As  this  book  of  Moses  beareth  the  title  of 
Numbers,  so  a  great  part  of  it  is  spent  in  numbering  of  the  peiplo,  to  assure  us 
that  God  hath  numbered  those  that  are  His,  and  none  escape  His  knowledge  or 
sight.  The  Lord  knoweth  perfectly  who  they  are  that  are  His,  both  what  their- 
numbers  and  what  their  names  are  (1  Kings  xix.  10,  18  ;  Rom.  xi.  3,  4 ;  Psa.  cxlvii. 


CHAP,  i.j  NUMBERS.  13 

5 ;  Isa.  xl.  26).     The  reasons  are  not  hard  to  be  gathered.     1.  The  knowledge  of 
God  is  so  exact  and  perfect  that  most  secret  things  are  known  and  the  smallest  are 
regarded  of  Him.     2.  Christ  Jesus  setteth  forth  Himself  as  the  true  Shepherd  of 
His  sheep.     A  shepherd  knoweth  his  own  sheep.     3.  All  His  people  are  evermore 
present  with  Him,  wheresoever  they  be  ;  yea,  albeit  they  be  absent  from  Him. 
Uses :  1.  This  giveth  singular  comfort  to  all  God's  children,  if  anything  else  be 
able  to  minister  them  comfort.     If  an  earthly  prince  should  vouchsafe  to  look  upon 
us,  and  single  us  out  from  the  rest,  and  call  us  by  our  names,  how  would  we 
rejoice,  and  how  much  would  we  esteem  that  the  king  would  stoop  so  low  as  to 
know  us  ?     Do  we  live  as  contemptible  persons  to  the  men  of  this  world  ?  and  will 
they  not  once  vouchsafe  to  know  us?    Let  not  this  trouble  us,  we  cannot  sink 
down  in  destruction ;  but  rather  let  us  lift  up  our  heads,  assuring  ourselves  that 
albeit  they  turn  themselves  from  us,  yet  God  looketh  upon  us  :  and  though  they 
seek  to  root  out  our  names  from  the  earth,  yet  He  will  know  us  and  call  us  by  our 
names.     2.  We  may  gather  from  hence  the  wretched  state  of  all  the  ungodly. 
For  as  it  is  a  great  part  of  the  comfort  of  all  God's  children  that  He  will  know 
them  ;  who,  as  they  have  a  regard  to  know  God  in  this  life,  to  know  Him  in  His 
word  and  other  means  appointed  for  their  salvation,  so  shall  they  be  known  of  God 
in  His  kingdom,  and  acknowledged  before  the  angels  in  heaven  :  so  this  is  not  the 
least  of  the  misery  belonging  unto  all  that  work  iniquity,  that  God  wiU  not  know 
them.     Though  He  know  them  by  the  general  knowledge  of  His  power  and  provi- 
dence, yet  He  will  not  see  them  with  the  eye  of  His  pity,  nor  touch  them  with  the 
hand  of  His  favour,  nor  hear  them  with  the  ear  of  His  bounty,  nor  speak  unto 
them  with  the  mouth  of  His  goodness,  nor  compass  them  with  the  arm  of  His 
protection,  nor  come  unto  them  with  the  feet  of  His  presence,  nor  behold  them 
with  the  face  and  countenance  of   His  lovingkiudness.     Can  there   be  a  mote 
miserable  condition  described  and  felt  than  this  is?     3.  Seeing  aU  that  are  God's 
are  numbered  of  Him,  and  have  their  names  written  in  His  book,  this  serveth  to 
seal  up  the  assurance  of  our  salvation  and  election  to  eternal  life  (2  Tim.  ii.  19). 
4.  Seeing  the  Lord  knoweth  us,  it  is  our  duty. also  to  seek  to  know  Him  in  all  love 
and  obedience.     We  must  all  of  us  begin  to  know  Him  here  in  this  life,  that  we 
may  know  Him  perfectly  in  the  life  to  come.     Here  we  must  see  Him  as  it  were 
through  a  glass  darkly,  that  hereafter  we  may  see  Him  face  to  face  fully.     If  we 
do  not  know  Him  in  His  word  and  sacraments,  we  shall  never  know  Him  in  His 
kingdom.     This  knowledge  of  God  necessarily  required  of  us  consisteth  in  these 
points  following— (1)  We  must  confess  Him  to  be  the  Sovereign  and  Highest  Good, 
in  comparison  of  whom  all  things  are  reputed  as  nothing,  being  as  dross  and 
nothing  to   be   desired   with  Him.      (2)  It  behoveth  us   to   depend   upon  Him, 
and  to  put  our  whole  trust  in  Him  alone,   not  in  any  man  or  angel :  for  then 
we  make  flesh  our  strength,  and  so  lean  upon  a  broken  staff  that  cannot  stay  us, 
but  will  deceive  us.     (3)  We  must  draw  near  unto  Him  in  time  of  need,  as  to  the 
fountain  of  all  goodness,  with  all  reverence  and  humility  craving  all  things  of  Him 
by  hearty  and  fervent  prayer.     If  we  call  upon  Him,  He  hath  promised  to  reveal 
Himself  unto  us.     (4)  We  must  give  Him  thanks  for  aU  blessings  received  from 
Him,  not  only  in  prosperity,  but  in  adversity.     (5)  We  must  seek  the  knowledge  of 
His  ways  and  word,  and  increase  in  the  knowledge  thereof,  which  bringeth  us  to 
eternal  life.     As  we  grow  forward  in  knowledge,  so  we  grow  forward  unto  life  :  and 
when  our  knowledge  shall  be  perfected,  then  our  life  shall  be  perfected  in  the  next 
world.     Lastly,  we  must  yield  obedience  unto  Him  and  His  word.     (IF.  Atter^oU.) 
God's  knowledge  of  His  people  : — I.  The  geeat  truth  here  implied.     God  knows 
His  people  individually  and   altogether.      1.  This   is  philosophical.     If  God   is 
infinite.  He  must  know  aU  things.     Notbing  can  be  so  great  as  to  surpass  His 
comprehension  ;  nothing  so  small  as  to  escape  His  notice.     2.  This  is  Scriptural. 
(1  Kings  xix.  14-18 ;   Psa.  i.  6 ;   Ivi.  8  ;   cxlvii.  3,  4 ;   Isa.  xl.   26-31 ;  Mai.    iii. 
16,  17 ;  Matt.  vi.  25-34  ;  x.  29,  30  ;  John  x.  3,  14,  27  ;  Phil.  iv.  3  ;  2  Tim.  ii.  19 ; 
Eev.   iii.  5 ;  xxi.  27).    II.  The  practical  bearings  of  this  great  troth.     1.  '1  o 
restrain  from  sin.     2.  To  promote  sincerity  of  life.     3.  To  promote  humility.     4. 
To  quicken  reverence   towards  God.     5.  To   comfort  the  godly  under  reverses. 
{W.  Jones.)        They  declared  their  pedigrees. — The  pedigree  declared: — "  Cun  I 
declare  my  pedigree  ?  "     It  is  greatly  to  be  feared  there  are  hundreds,  if  not  thou- 
sands, of  professing  Christians  who  are  wholly  incompetent  to  do  so.     They  cannot 
say  with  clearness  and  decision,  "Now  are  we  the  sons  of  God"  (1  John  iii.  2). 
"  Ye  are  all  the  children  of  God,"  &c.     "And  if  ye  are  Christ's,  then  are  ye  Abra- 
ham's seed,"  &c.  (Gal.  iii.  26,  29).     "  For  as  many  as  are  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God; 


14  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  i. 

they  are  the  sons  of  God,"  &c.  (Rom.  viii.  14,  16).  This  is  the  Christian's  "  pedi- 
gree," and  it  is  his  privilege  to  be  able  to  "  declare  "  it  (cf.  John  iii.  5  ;  James  i.  18 ; 
1  Pet.  i.  23 ;  Eph.  v.  26).  The  believer  traces  his  pedigree  directly  np  to  a  risen 
Christ  in  glory.  His  genealogical  tree  strikes  its  roots  into  the  soil  of  the  new 
creation.  Death  can  never  break  the  line,  inasmuch  as  it  is  formed  in  resurrection. 
We  can  easily  see,  from  this  chapter,  how  essential  it  was  that  every  member  of 
the  congregation  of  Israel  should  be  able  to  declare  his  pedigree.  Uncertainty  on 
this  point  would  have  proved  disastrous;  it  would  have  produced  hopeless  confu- 
sion. We  can  hardly  imagine  an  Israelite,  when  called  to  declare  his  pedigree,  ex- 
pressing himself  in  the  doubtful  manner  adopted  by  many  Christians  nowadays. 
We  cannot  conceive  his  snying,  "  Well,  I  am  not  quite  sure.  Sometimes  I  cherish 
the  hope  that  I  am  of  the  stock  of  Israel ;  but  at  other  times  I  am  full  of  fear  that 
I  do  not  belong  to  the  congregation  of  the  Lord  at  all.  I  am  all  in  uncertainty  and 
darkness."  Much  less  could  we  imagine  any  one  maintaining  the  monstrous 
notion  that  no  one  could  possibly  be  sure  as  to  whether  he  was  a  true  Israelite  or 
not  until  the  day  of  judgment.  Now,  may  we  not  legitimately  ask,  "  If  a  Jew  could 
be  certain  as  to  his  pedigree,  why  may  not  a  Christian  be  certain  as  to  his  ?  "  We 
would  urge  this  point  at  the  outset.  It  is  impossible  for  any  one  to  recognise  and 
rally  round  the  proper  "  standard  "  unless  he  can  declare  his  "  pedigree."  Progress 
in  wilderness  life — success  in  spiritual  warfare,  is  out  of  the  question  if  there  be  any 
uncertainty  as  to  the  spiritual  pedigree.  We  must  be  able  to  say,  "  We  know  that 
we  have  passed  from  death  unto  life,"  "We  believe  and  are  sure,"  ere  there  can  be 
any  real  advance  in  the  life  and  walk  of  a  Christian.  We  do  not  mean  to  say  you 
cannot  be  saved  without  this.  God  forbid  we  should  say  any  such  thing.  But  we 
ask,  Are  such  able  to  go  forth  to  war  ?  They  cannot  even  know  what  true  conflict 
is;  on  the  contrary,  persons  of  this  class  mistake  their  doubts  and  fears,  their  dark 
and  cloudy  seasons,  for  true  Christian  conflict.  It  is  when  we  stand  in  the  clear 
daylight  of  God's  full  salvation — salvation  in  a  risen  Christ — that  we  really  enter 
upon  the  warfare  proper  to  us  as  Christians.  (C.  H.  Mackintosh.)  An  honest 
pccUfjree : — Dr.  Livingstone,  the  famous  explorer,  was  descended  from  the  High- 
landers, and  he  said  that  one  of  his  ancestors,  one  of  the  Highlanders,  one  day 
called  his  family  around  him.  The  Highlander  was  dying ;  he  had  his  children 
around  his  death-bed.  He  said,  "Now,  my  lads,  I  have  looked  all  through  our 
history  as  far  back  as  I  can  find  it,  and  I  have  never  found  a  dishonest  man  in  all 
the  line,  and  I  want  you  to  understand  you  inherit  good  blood.  You  have  no  excuse 
for  doing  wrong.     My  lads,  be  honest." 

Vers.  20-46.  Those  that  were  numbered.  —The  first  army  of  Israel,  an  illustration 
of  the  Church  militant : — I.  The  necessity  of  this  aemy.  The  Church  must  be 
militant.  1.  Internal  foes  have  to  be  conquered.  Carnal  appetites,  evil  passions, 
<fec.  2.  External  foes  have  to  be  conquered.  Ignorance  and  superstition,  im- 
morality and  irreli'jion,  dirt  and  disease,  vice  and  crime.  II.  The  AttTnoBiTY  for 
ORGANISING  THIS  ARMY.  God's  command.  III.  The  composition  of  this  army. 
1.  Israelites  only.  Thoroughly  decided  Christians  are  needed  now.  2.  Able  men 
only.  Christ  gives  strength  even  to  the  weak  and  timid.  3.  All  the  able  men. 
None  exempt.  We  must  either  vanquish  our  spiritual  enemies,  or  they  wiU 
vanquish  us.  Neutrality  is  out  of  the  question  here.  Neither  can  we  do  our  fight- 
ing by  proxy.  IV.  The  conquering  spirit  of  this  army.  When  our  faith  in  God 
is  strong,  we  are  invincible.  When  it  fails,  we  are  ovm-thrown  by  the  first  assault 
of  the  enemy.  True  faith  gives  glorious  visions  to  the  spirit,  inspires  us  with 
heroic  courage,  girds  us  with  all-sufficient  strength.  Conclusion^!.  A  call  to  deci- 
sion. "  Who  is  on  the  Lord's  side  ?  "  2.  A  call  to  courage.  Our  arms  are  tried 
and  true ;  our  great  Leader  is  invincible  ;  let  us  then  "  be  strong  and  of  a  good 
courage."  3.  A  call  to  confidence.  Our  courage,  to  be  true,  must  spring  from 
faith.  By  trust  we  triumph.  {W.Jones.)  The  necessity  of  war: — I  believe  in 
war.  I  believe  there  are  times  when  it  must  be  taken.  I  believe  in  it  as  a  medi- 
cine. Medicine  is  not  good  to  eat,  but  when  you  are  sick  it  is  good  to  take.  War 
is  not  a  part  of  the  gospel ;  but  while  men  and  the  world  are  travelling  on  a  plain 
where  they  are  not  capable  of  comprehending  the  gospel,  a  rude  form  of  justice  is 
indispensable,  though  it  is  very  low  down.  If  you  go  to  a  plain  still  higher,  war 
seems  to  be  a  very  poor  instrumentality.  And  if  you  go  yet  higher  and  higher  till 
TOM  reach  that  sphere  where  the  crowned  Sufferer  stands,  how  hideous  war  seems  I 
In  the  earlier  periods  of  society  it  is  recognised  as  having  a  certain  value ;  but  its 
value  is  the  very  lowest,  and  at  every  step  upward,  till  you  come  to  this  central 


CHAP.  II.]  NUMBERS.  15 

Divine  exhibition,  it  loses  in  value.  Always  it  is  a  rude  and  uncertain  police  of 
nations.  It  is  never  good.  It  is  simply  better  than  something  worse.  Physical 
force  is  the  alternative  of  moral  influence  ;  if  you  have  not  one,  you  must  have  the 
other,    (if.  W.  Beecher.) 

Vers.  47-54.  The  Levitea  .  .  .  were  not  numbered — The  Levites  and  their  service 
an  illustration  of  the  Christian  ministry  : — The  Levites  were  exempted  from  military 
service,  and  set  apart  for  the  service  of  the  tabernacle.  In  any  wise  arrangement 
of  the  affairs  of  human  society  provision  will  be  made  for  the  requirements  of  the 
spiritual  nature  of  man.  I.  The  tboe  Christian  minister  shodld  manifest  some 
riTNESS  fob  the  work  before  he  is  designated  thereto.  In  determining  the  trade 
which  their  sons  shall  learn,  wise  parents  will  consider  their  respective  inclinations 
and  aptitudes.  An  artist  would  perhaps  make  a  poor  minister;  a  successful  mer- 
chant might  utterly  fail  as  a  barrister.  Is  there  less  aptitude  required  in  the  work 
of  the  gospel  ministry  than  in  the  other  pursuits  of  life  ?  Adaptation  of  voice,  of 
mind,  of  character,  &c.  II.  The  true  Christian  minister  is  called  of  God  to 
HIS  WORK,    III.  The  work  of  the  Christian  minister  demands  his  entire  devotion 

thereto.  IV.  A  FAITHFUL  DISCHARG'^  OF  THE  DUTIES  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  MINISTER  IS 
ESSENTIAL  TO  THE  WELL-'  EI  G  OF  SOL  E  Y.  V.  PERSONAL  HOLINESS  OF  HEART  AND  LIFE 
ARE  ESSENTIAL  TO  THE  FAITHFUL  DISCHARGE  OF  THE  DUTIES  OF  THE  CHRISTIAN  MINISTRY. 

Levites  separated  from  other  tribes  for  sacred  work.  Their  outward  separation 
intended  to  show  separation  from  worldliness  and  sin.  They  who  have  to  do  with 
holy  things  should  themselves  be  holy.  (W.Jones.)  The  Levites  not  numbered: — 
We  shall  see  thf^m  afterward  numbered  by  themselves,  but  they  were  not  put  in  the 
common  reckoning,  because  God  had  chosen  them  to  be  His  possession,  aud  sepa- 
rated them  from  the  rest  of  the  people.  And  lest  any  man  should  think  that  Mosea 
did  ambitiously  prefer  the  tribe  of  Levi,  whereof  himself  descended,  he  showeth  he 
did  it  not  of  his  own  head,  but  by  the  special  commandment  of  God.  Their  office 
is  declared — to  take  the  charge  of  the  Tabernacle  and  worship  of  God,  that  when 
they  were  to  take  their  journey  they  should  carry  it,  and  when  they  were  to  stay 
and  pitch  their  tents  they  should  set  it  down  and  look  to  it  with  all  diligence. 
And  as  God  would  not  have  them  encumbered  in  affairs  unproper  to  them  and  im- 
pertinent to  their  calling,  so  He  would  not  have  others  that  were  not  of  their  tribe 
and  family  to  break  into  their  function,  as  it  were  to  invade  another  man's  posses- 
sion ;  nay,  He  denoun<-eth  death  to  such  as  were  strangers  from  that  tribe  that 
should  presume  to  meddle  with  those  holy  things,  or  set  their  hands  unto  them. 
An  example  hereof  we  have  in  Uzzah  (2  Sam.  vi.).  We  learn  from  hence  that  it  is 
the  duty  of  the  ministers  of  God's  Word  to  exercise  themselves  only  in  things  of 
their  calling  ;  they  must  wait  upon  the  office  to  which  they  are  appointed.  They 
are  not  to  be  distracted  from  their  calling  by  worldly  matters  that  no  way  belong 
nnto  them  (chap.  iii.  6,  7).  And  doubtless  it  is  great  reason  that  they  should 
content  themselves  with  their  own  callings,  that  so  they  may  please  Him  that  hath 
called  them,  and  forego  all  that  may  disturb  them  in  the  course  whereunto  they 
ought  to  tend.  We  must  be  like  soldiers  that  are  called  to  bear  arms.  The  reason 
and  comparison  is  pressed  by  the  apostle  to  this  purpose  (2  Tim.  ii.  3, 4).  Secondly, 
the  multitude  is  great,  and  the  difficulty  much  of  those  things  which  are  required 
of  the  minister,  belonging  rightly  and  duly  to  his  calling,  in  regard  whereof  we  may 
say  (2  Cor.  ii.  16).  Were  that  a  wise  servant,  who  having  both  his  hands  full,  and 
more  than  he  can  well  do,  should,  besides  his  master's  work,  undertake  a  new  and 
another  burden  of  some  other  man's  business,  which  of  right  do:h  not  belong  unto 
him  7    {W.  AttersolL) 


CHAPTEE  n. 

Vers.  1,  2.  Pitch  by  Ills  own  standard. — The  marshaWng  of  Tiirael,  and  tfs 
lessons  : — I.  They  all  dwelt  in  tents  ;  and  when  they  marched  carried  all  their 
tents  along  with  them  (Psa.  evil.  4).  This  represents  to  us  our  state  in  this  world. 
1.  It  is  a  movable  state ;  here  to-day  and  gone  to-morrow.  2.  It  is  a  military 
■tate ;  is  not  our  life  a  warfare  ?  II.  Those  of  a  tribe  were  to  pitch  together,  every 
MAN  BY  HIS  OWN  STANDARD.  It  is  the  wiU  of  God  that  mutual  1  >ve  and  affection, 
converse  and  communion,  should  be  kept  up  among  relations.    Those  that  are  of 


1«  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

kin  to  each  other  should,  as  much  as  they  can,  be  acquainted  with  each  other,  and 
the  bonds  of  nature  should  be  improved  for  the  strengthening  of  the  bonJa  of 
Christian  communion.  III.  Every  one  must  know  his  place,  and  keep  in  it. 
They  were  not  allowed  to  fix  where  they  pleased,  nor  to  remove  when  they  pleased  ; 
but  God  quarters  them,  with  a  charge  to  abide  in  their  quarters.  It  is  God  that 
appoints  as  the  bounds  of  our  habitation,  and  to  Him  we  niust  refer  ourselves 
(Psa.  xlvii.  4) ;  and  in  His  choice  we  must  acquiesce,  and  not  love  to  flit,  nor  be  ag 
the  bird  that  wanders  from  her  nest.  IV.  Every  tribe  had  its  standard,  flag,  or 
ensign,  and  it  should  seem  every  family  had  some  particular  ensign  at  theib 
father's  house,  which  were  carried,  as  with  us  the  colours  of  each  company  in  a 
regiment  are.  These  were  of  use  for  the  distinction  of  tribes  and  families,  and  the 
gathering  and  keeping  of  them  together  ;  in  allusion  to  which  the  preaching  of  the 
gospel  is  said  to  lift  up  an  ensign,  to  which  the  Gentiles  shall  seek,  and  by  which 
they  shall  pitch  (Isa.  xi.  10,  12).  God  is  the  God  of  order,  and  not  of  confusion. 
These  standards  made  this  mighty  army  seem  more  beautiful  to  its  friends,  and 
more  formidable  to  its  enemies.  The  Church  of  Christ  is  said  to  be  as  terrible  as 
an  army  with  banners  (Cant.  vi.  10).  V.  They  were  to  pitch  abodt  the  tabernaclb, 
which  was  to  be  in  the  midst  of  them,  as  the  tent  or  pavilion  of  a  general  in  the 
centre  of  an  army.  They  must  encamp  round  the  tabernacle — 1.  That  it  might  be 
equally  a  comfort  and  joy  to  them  all,  as  it  was  a  token  of  God's  gracious  presence 
with  them  (Psa.  xlvi.  5).  The  tabernacle  was  in  the  midst  of  the  camp,  that  it 
might  be  near  to  them ;  for  it  is  a  very  desirable  thing  to  have  the  solemn  adiuinig- 
tration  of  holy  ordinances  near  us,  and  within  our  reach.  The  kingdom  ol  God  is 
among  you.  2.  That  they  might  be  a  guard  and  defence  upon  the  tabernacle  and 
the  Levites  on  every  side.  No  invader  could  come  near  God's  tabernacle,  but  he 
must  first  penetrate  the  thickest  of  their  squadrons.  If  God  undertake  the  protec- 
tion of  our  comforts,  we  ought  in  our  places  to  undertake  the  protection  of  His 
institutions,  and  stand  up  in  defence  of  His  honour,  and  interest,  and  ministers. 
VI.  Yet  they  were  to  pitch  afar  off,  in  reverence  to  the  sanctuary,  that  it  might 
not  seem  crowded  and  thrust  up  among  them  ;  and  that  the  common  business  of 
the  camp  might  be  no  annoyance  to  it.  They  were  also  taught  to  keep  their 
distance,  lest  too  much  familiarity  should  breed  contempt.  But  we  are  not 
ordered,  as  they  were,  to  pitch  afar  off ;  no.  we  are  invited  to  draw  near,  and  come 
boldly.  The  saints  of  the  Most  High  are  said  to  be  round  about  Him  (Psa.  Ixxvi. 
12).  God  by  His  grace  keeps  us  close  to  Him.  (Matthew  Henry,  D.D.)  Israel 
typical  of  the  Christian  Church  : — I.  The  one  Israel.  1.  Their  real  oneness  of 
descent.  The  children  of  Abraham.  2.  Their  original  condition.  All  bondsmen. 
3.  Their  Divine  deliverance.  Brought  out  of  Egypt,  &c.  4.  In  one  Divine  covenant. 
Promises,  &o.  5.  Journeying  to  the  one  inheritance.  6.  Under  one  command. 
See  how  this  all  applies  to  the  Church  of  the  Saviour.  All  the  children  of  God  by 
faith,  all  heirs,  all  pilgrims,  all  of  one  covenant,  one  Saviour,  &c. — essentially  one ; 
one  in  Christ  Jesus.  II.  The  various  tribes.  1.  Their  different  names.  Neces- 
sary for  distinction — recognition.  2.  Their 'different  positions  in  the  camp.  See 
next  chapter.  East  side,  ver.  3 ;  south  side,  ver.  10 ;  west,  ver.  18  ;  north,  ver.  25. 
3.  The  various  tribes  were  in  one  general  accord  and  union.  All  one  religious 
confederacy,  absolutely  one,  worship  one,  &c. ;  in  perils  one,  in  warfare  one,  in 
prospects  one.  III.  The  special  directions  to  the  different  tribes.  1.  Each 
tribe  had  their  own  standard  or  banner  to  distinguish  it  from  the  rest.  No  order 
without.  2.  Each  man  was  to  be  by  his  own  standard.  Not  a  wanderer; 
not  a  visitor  to  all;  but  his  own  fixed,  legitimate  position.  3.  Thus  the 
duties  of  every  tribe  would  be  regarded  and  fulfilled.  4.  Thus  the  interests  of  all 
would  be  sustained.  IV.  Spiritual  lessons.  1.  We  see  now  the  denominational 
tribes  in  the  kingdom  of  Christ.  Christians  of  different  conditions,  education, 
training,  leaders,  &c.  2.  Christians  have  a  special  interest  in  their  own  camp. 
3.  To  devote  themselves  to  these  is  the  first  duty  and  privilege.  Just  as  families 
are  constituted,  so  churches.  4.  All  the  various  denominational  camps  constitute 
the  one  Church  of  the  Saviour.  Only  one  Israel,  one  body,  one  army,  &c.  For 
particular  purposes,  every  man  by  his  own  camp  ;  for  general  purposes,  all  acting 
in  conjunction  and  harmony.  (J,  Burns,  D.D.)  The  marshaUing  of  the  people : — 
L  Order.  1.  Gud  Himself  delights  in  order.  2.  The  importunce  of  order  is 
recognised  in  human  affairs.  3.  This  order  was  probably  divinely  instituted  as  a 
means  to  peace  and  unity.  II.  Variety.  Each  camp  had  its  own  cliaracteristio 
standard.  And  each  tribe  and  each  father's  house  had  its  own  distinctive  ensign. 
Mouoton;  is  not  a  mark  of  divinitj.    Variety  characterises  the  wurJka  oi  God. 


CHAP,  n.]  NUMBERS.  17 

Countries  differ  in  their  climates,  confonnations,  productions,  &c.     The  features  of 
landscapes  differ.     Trees,  flowers,  faces,  minds  differ.     With  one  spirit  there  may 
be  many  forms.     III.  Unity.     All  the  tribes  were  gathered  "  about  the  tabernacle 
of  the  congregation,"  as  around  a  common  centre.     They  had  different  standards, 
but  constituted  one  nation.     1.  The  dependence  of  all  on  God.     All  the  tribes 
looked  to  Him  for  support,  provision,  protection,  direction,  &c.     2.  The  access  of 
all  to  God.     The  tabernacle  was  the  sign  of  the  presence  of  God  with  them.     3. 
The  reverence  of  all  towards  God.     They  were  to  pitch  "  over  against  the  taber- 
nacle. "    Probably  the  tribes  were  two  thousand  cubits  from  it.     Cf.  Josh.  iii.  4. 
They  were  thus  to  encamp  around  the  sacred  place,  that  no  stranger  might  draw 
near  to  it ;  and  the  Levites  were  to  encamp  near  the  tabernacle  on  every  side,  that 
the  people  themselves  might  not  draw  too  near  to  it,  but  might  be  taught  to  regard 
it  with  respect  and  reverence.    IV.  Secubitt.     The  tabernacle  of  God  in  the  midst 
of  the  camp  was  a  guarantee  of  their  safety.    His  presence  in  their  midst  would 
tend  to — 1.  Quell  their  fears.     He  had  wrought  marvellous  things  on  their  behalf 
in  the  past :  He  was  ever  doing  great  things  for  them.     Then  why  should  they 
quail  before  any  danger  or  enemy  ?    2.  Inspire  their  confidence  and  courage.    It 
should  have  given  to  them  the  assurance  of  victory  in  conflict,  Ac.  (chap.  x.  35,  36). 
Distance  from  God  is  weakness  and  peril  to  His  Church.     Nearness  to  Him  is 
safety  and  power.     Living  in  vital  union  with  Him  all-conquering  might  is  ours. 
Conclusion — 1.    Learn    sincerely  and    heartily  to   recognise  as   members  of  the 
Christian  Israel  all  who  have  the  Christian  spirit,  however  widely  they  rray  differ 
from  us  in  forms  and  opinions.     2.  Think  less  of  our  isms  and  more  of  Christ's 
Church ;    less   of  theological  and  ecclesiastical   systems,    and   more   of    Christ's 
gospel ;  less  of  human  authority  and  patronage,  and  more  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ. 
{W.  Jones.)         Why  God  assigns  to  every  tribe  his  place  and  order  : — The  causes  of 
this  dealing  of  God  toward  His  people  are  three :  one  in  respect  of  Himself,  another 
in  respect  of  Israel,  the  third  in  regard  of  the  enemies  of  them  both,  of  God  and 
His  people.     I.  The  cause  respecting  God  is,  that  they  and  all  other  might  see 
what  a  wise  God  they  serve.     If  they,  professing  the  knowledge  and  service  of  the 
true  God,  had  wandered  up  and  down  in  the  wild  and  waste  wilderness,  in  such 
troops  of  men,  in    a  confused  manner,  not  knowing  who  should  go  before,  nor 
regarding  who  should  follow  after,  the  name  of  God  would  have  been  dishonoured. 
His  wisdom  impaired,  and  His  glory  diminished.     He  leaveth  them  not  to  them- 
selves, but  assigneth  to  each  tribe  his  proper  mansion,  to  take  away  from  them  all 
confusion,  and  to  cut  off  all  matter  of  contention.     For  except  He  had  established 
as  by  a  law  the  order  that  should  be  observed  among  them,  and  thereby  decided  all 
questions  that  might  arise  touching  priority,  many  hurly-burlies  and  heart-burnings 
would  be  entertained,  and  part-takings  would  be  nourished ;  which  being  kindled 
at  the  first  as  a  Uttle  spark  of  fire,  would  afterwards  break  out  into  such  a  flame  as 
would  spread  further,  and  in  the  end  hardly  be  quenched.     2.  They  are  mustered 
and  marshalled  into  an  exact  and  exquisite  order,  to  dismay  and  terrify  their 
enemies,  as  also  to  confirm  and  encourage  their  own  hearts.     Great  is  the  force  of 
unity,  peace,  and  concord.     One  man  serveth  to  strengthen  and  establish  another, 
like  many  staves  bound  together  in  one.     Many  sticks  or  staves  joined  in  one 
bundle  are  not  easily  broken;  but  sever  them  and  puU  them  asunder,  they  are  soon 
broken  with  little  strength.    Thus  the  case  standeth  in  all  societies,  whether  it  be 
in  the   Church  or  Commonwealth,  or  in  the   private  family.     If  our  hearts  be 
thoroughly  united  one  to  another,  we  need  not  fear  what  man  can  do  unto  us  ;  but 
if  we  be  at  war  between  ourselves,  we  he  open  to  our  enemies  to  work  us  indignity 
whatsoever.   {W.  Attersoll.)    God's  delight  in  order : — 1.  God  is  the  God  of  order,  not 
of  confusion.  As  He  hath  order  in  Himself,  so  Hecommandeth  and  commendethan 
order  to  be  used  of  us.     2.  All  wise  men  will  order  their  affairs  wjth  wisdom  and 
discretion,  and  will  dispose  of  them  with  seemliness  and  comeliness.     An  expert 
captain  that  goeth  aguinst  his  enemies  will  keep  his  soldiers  in  good  arrav,  whether 
he  march  or  retire.    If  he  fly  out  of  the  field  out  of  order  one  is  ready  to  overthrow 
another,  and  all  are  left  to  the  mercy  of  his  adversary.    3.  The  Church  is  not  a 
confused  multitude  shuffled  together,  where  no  man  knoweth  his  place  or  his  ofiBce, 
and  one  encroacheth  upon  another ;  but  it  is  the  house  of  the  living  God,  the  pillar 
and  ground  of  truth.     Now  in  a  house  well  ordered  ia  to  be  seen  the  master  as  the 
ruler,  and  the  family  subject  to  his  government,  every  one  employing  his  proper 
gifts,  and  no  man  usurping  the  place  and  calling  of  another.    If  this  be  to  be  seen 
in  our  private  houses,  how  much  more  must  we  conceive  this  of  the  Church  of  God, 
which  is  the  house  that  He  hath  builded,  the  mountain  of  the  Lord  which  He  hath 


18  THE  BIBLICAL.  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

prepared,  and  the  peculiar  people  which  He  hath  chosen  ?    Uses :  1.  Learn  from 
hence  to  acknowledge  an  exquisite  order  in  all  God's  words  and  works  above  and 
beneath,  in  heaven  and  on  earth.     2.  This  reproveth  such  as  know  no  order,  but 
bring  in  all  confusion    and  disorder  in  Church  or  commonwealth ;    these    have 
nothing  to  do  with  God,  but  are  the  children  of  the  devil,  that  hath  ti'ansformed  them 
into  his  image  and  likeness.     For  from  whence  are  seditions  and  confusions  but 
from  our  own  lusts,  enflamed  and  kindled  from   his  furnace  ?     3.  Seeing  God 
requireth   orderly   observation   of   His   ordinances,   we  learn   tbis   duty,  that  we 
must  be  careful  to  observe  it  and  practise  it  with  a  due  regard  of  His  command- 
ment.    This  is  the  general  rule  that  the  apostle  commendeth  unto  us  (1  Cor.  14). 
(Ibid.)        Divine  appointments  :  The  camp  of  Judah  was  to  set  forth  first,  the 
camp  of  Keuben  was  to  set  forth  in  the  second  rank,  the  camp  of  Ephraim  was  to 
go  forward  in  the  third  rank,  the  camp  of  Dan  was  to  go  hindmost  with  their 
standards.     Judah  first,  Reuben  second,  Ephraim  third  ;  these  terms  are  arithme- 
tical and  may  be  accepted  without  murmuring  ;  but  the  next  term  is  more  than 
arithmetical — the  camp   of  Dan   "  hindmost."      That   seems   to   be   a  word    of 
inferiority  and  of  rebuke.     Had  the  numbers  been — first,  second,  third,  fourth,  the 
arithmetic  would  have  been  complete  ;  but  to  be  hindmost  is  to  be  further  behind 
than  to  be  merely  fourth  ;  it  is  to  have  the  position  marked  so  brondly  as  almost 
to  amount  to  a  brand  of  tribal  degradation.  Faith  in  the  Divine  appointment  could 
alone  secure  religious  contentment  under  such  circumstances.    This  is  as  necessary 
to-flay,  in  view  of  the  distribution  of  men,  with  their  various  gifts   and  their 
endlessly  varied  vocations.     "What  is  the  astronomical  force  that  so  whirls  society 
around  an  invisible  centre  as  to  sink  the  mountains  into  plains  and  lift  up  the 
valleys  to  a  common  level  ?     Order  is  but  another  word  for  purpose,  or  another 
word  for  mind.     This  mechanism  was  not  self -invented  or  self-regulated;  behind 
this  military  table  of  position  and  movement  is  the  God  of  the  whole  universe.     It 
requires  the  whole  Trinity  to  sustain  the  tiny  insect  that  trembles  out  its  little 
life  in  the  dying  sunbeam  ;  even  that  frail  heart  does  not  throb  by  having  some  small 
portion  of  the  I)ivine  energy  detached  to  attend  to  its  affairs.     Dan  was  to  go  hind- 
most.     The  hindmost  position  has  its  advantages.      It  is  a  rule  in  the  higher 
criticism  that  a  critic  on  looking  at  a  picture  shall  first  look  for  its  beauties.     We 
ought,  surely,  to  look  so  upon  the  picture  of  Providence,  the  map  of  human  life, 
the  marvellous  academy  of  society.     The  greater  the  statesman,  the  greater  the 
responsibility  he  has  to  sustain  ;  the  greater  the  genius,  the  more  poignant  its  occa- 
sional agonies ;  the  more  sensitive  the  nature,  the  more  is  every  wound  felt,  the  more 
is  every  concussion  n  garded  with  fear.    The  foremost  soldiers  will  be  in  battle  first; 
we  who  are  hindmost  may  have  only  to  shout  the  hosanna  of  victory.     This  age  is 
the  hindmost  in  procession  of  time  ;  is  it  therefore  the  inferior  age  ?     The  nine- 
teenth century  comes  after  all  the  eighteen  ;  but  it  therefore  comes  on  the  firmer 
ground,  with   the  larf;er  civilisation,    with   the   ampler   library,  with   the   more 
extended  resources ;  it  comes  with  a  thousand-handed  ability  because  it  is  the 
hindmost  of  the  days.     Take  this  view  of  all  circumstances,  and  life  will  become  a 
joy  where  it  has  long  been  ajjnin;  our  very  disqualifications  in  one  direction  may 
become  qualifications  in  another.     In  the  Old  Testament  and  in  the  New  Testament 
there  was  some  regard  to  specialty  of  gift,  to  definiteness  of  position  ;  having  lost 
that  regard  we  have  lost  power.     You  do  not  say  the  clock  is  an  excellent  time- 
keeper, but  no  use  at  all  as  a  musical  instrument.     You  do  not  take  up  a  trumpet 
and  say,  a  finer  instrument  was  never  made  to  call  men  to  feast  or  to  battle,  but 
it  is  utterly  useless  if  you  want  it  to  tell  you  the  time  of  day.     Every  man  in  bis 
own  place,  in  his  sphere.     The  great  question  is  not  in  what  regiment  we  are,  but 
rather,  are  we  in  the  army  of  Christ — whether  with  Judah  first,  with  Reuben 
second,  with  Ephraim  third,  or  with  Dan  the  hindmost  tribe?     To  be  in  the  army 
is  the  great  consideration.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.)       Satisfied  u-ith  one's  own  position : — 
Many  would  do  well  t"  learn  the  lesson  taught  in  an  old  parable.     "  I  don't  know," 
said  the  turnstile  one  day,  in  a  reflective  mood,  "  I  don't  know  that  I  ought  to  have 
thought  so  ill  of  my  l<t,  and  to  have  fretted  over  it  as  I  have  done.     'Tis  true  a 
turnstile  has  plenty  of  woiry,  as  I  have  truly  proved;  worry  and  whirl  all  the  day 
long  !     Nobody  will  ever  pass  without  g'ving  a  turnstile  a  swing  round  ;  and  who- 
ever returns,  ten  to  one  but  he  gives  the  turnstile  a  whirling  twist  the  other  way  ! 
Indeed,  I  have  said  that  I  wouldn't  wish  to  any  one,  whether  friend  or  foe,  the  life 
of  a  poor  turnstile.    No.    But  then,  as  that  old  wheel  of  the  wa>jgon  said  yesterday, 
mine's  a  pleasant  life  and  a  favoured  lot  compared  with  his.     If  I  have  to  turn 
round,  he  has  the  same ;  and  whilst  he  has  the  burden  of  the  cart,  there  is  beside 


CHAP.  11.]  NUMBERS.  19 

the  weight  of  the  load  it  carries  pressing  on  him,  and  I  have  no  encumbrances.  So, 
on  the  wliole,  perhaps  I'd  better  try  and  be  satisfied ;  that  is,  as  satisfied  as  I  can 
aiJord  to  be,  with  so  many  turns  about  as  must  in  my  situation  naturally  come  to 
my  lot."  (Biblical  Museum.)  The  camp: — 1.  The  tents.  They  stand  to-day; 
to-morrow  sees  the  cords  relaxed,  the  fastenings  removed,  and  a  vacant  place.  My 
soul,  from  Israel's  tents  you  learn  how  fleeting  is  life's  day !  Press  then  the 
question,  When  I  go  hence,  is  an  abiding  mansion  mine?  2.  The  order.  Let 
Israel's  camp  be  now  more  closely  scanned.  What  perfect  rfgularity  appears  I 
Eule  draws  each  line.  Our  God  delights  in  order.  Is  it  not  so  in  every  Christian 
heart?  When  Jesus  takes  the  throne,  wise  rule  prevails.  Disturbing  kists  lie 
down.  Is  it  not  so  in  Christian  life  ?  There  is  no  tangled  labyrinth  of  plans — no 
misspent  diligence — no  toil  without  a  purpose.  3.  The  position.  All  these  ten's 
share  one  grand  privilege.  They  all  have  common  focus.  As  the  planets  circle 
the  sun,  so  tliese  surround  the  sanctuary.  God  is  the  centre.  They  form  the  wide 
circumference.  And  from  each  door  one  sight — the  holy  tent — is  visible.  God  in 
Christ  Jesus  is  the  centre,  the  heart,  the  life,  the  strength,  the  shield,  the  joy  of 
His  believing  flock.  4.  The  standard.  A  standard  floats  above  each  tribe. 
Beneath  the  well-known  sign  they  rest,  and  by  its  side  they  march.  Believers 
have  an  ensign  too.  The  banner  over  them  is  Jesu's  love  (Sol.  Song  ii.  4).  The 
standard  is  a  pledge  of  safety.  Beneath  it  there  is  sweet  repose.  Beside  it  there 
is  misery.  (Dean  Law.)  The  most  2)rominent  banner : — It  is  narrated  that  when, 
in  the  time  of  the  Crusades,  the  lion-hearted  Richard  I.  of  England,  the  Emperor 
of  Austria,  and  the  King  of  France  were  jointly  waging  war  against  the  valiant 
heathen,  Saladin,  a  jealousy  sprang  up  in  the  camp  betweeu  England  and  Austria, 
and  one  morning  the  British  banner  was  found  lying  in  the  dust  on  St.  George's 
Mount — a  distinguished  point  on  which  it  had  long  waved — and  the  banner  of 
Austria  was  planted  in  its  stead  ;  impetuous  Richard,  who  was  confined  to  his  tent 
through  severe  illness,  no  sooner  heard  of  it  than  he  strode  forth  alone,  and  before 
the  assembled  hosts  hurled  Austria's  ensign  to  the  ground,  and  caused  the  lion 
once  more  to  take  the  prominence,  remarking,  "  Your  banners  may  be  arranged 
around  mine,  but  must  never  take  its  place."  So  may  it  be  in  our  preaching. 
Let  the  Lion  of  the  tribe  of  Judah  alone  have  the  prominence.  (C.  IT.  Spurgeon.) 
God  the  centre  : — For  more  than  fifty  centuries  men  watched  the  starlit  sky,  noted 
the  changes  of  the  planets,  and  endeavoured  to  discover  the  laws  which  governed 
their  movements  ;  they  took  careful  observations,  made  elaborate  calculations,  and 
yet  the  law  of  the  harmony  of  the  heavens  remained  a  mystery.  The  stars  were 
still  supposed  to  follow  fantastic  circles  which  no  rule  of  science  could  explain  : 
their  orbits  formed  a  labyrinth  of  which  the  most  learned  failed  to  find  the  clue. 
One  day  a  man  of  genius  said,  "  The  sun,  and  not  the  eai'th,  is  the  centre  from 
which  the  worlds  must  be  regarded."  At  once  the  harmony  appeared  ;  planets 
and  their  satellites  moved  in  regular  orbits  ;  the  system  of  the  universe  was 
revealed.  God  is  the  sun  and  the  true  centre  of  the  spiritual  world  ;  only  in  the 
light  in  which  He  dwells  can  the  destinies  of  man  be  truly  read.  (Euijene  Bersier.) 
Effectiveness  of  unity  : — Pliny  writes  of  a  stone  in  the  island  of  Scyros,  that  if  it  be 
whole,  though  a  large  and  heavy  one,  it  swims  above  water,  but  being  broken  it 
sinks.  So  long  as  the  Church  keeps  together  nothing  can  sink  it.  "  A  thousand 
grains  of  powder,  or  a  thousand  barrels  scattered,  a  grain  in  a  place,  and  fired  at 
intervals,  would  burn,  it  is  true,  but  would  produce  no  concussion.  Placed 
together  in  effective  position  they  would  lift  up  a  mountain  and  cast  it  into  the  sea. 
Even  so  the  whole  Church,  filled  with  faith  and  the  Holy  Ghost,  will  remove  every 
mountain  and  usher  in  the  jubilee  of  the  redemption."  Lessons  from  our 
national  banner : — When  the  Union  Jack  flies  to  the  breeze  the  meaning  is  that 
what  is  under  it  is  British  property,  and  is  a  sort  of  challenge  to  touch  that 
property.  Every  country  had  a  flag.  In  old  times  very  little  did  for  a  flag.  One 
great  nation  had  simply  a  wisp  of  straw  on  a  pole,  and  another  power  in  the  East 
had  but  a  blacksmith's  apron.  The  Union  Jack  was  their  flag,  and  its  composition 
was  very  simple.  It  was  not  made  at  all ;  like  all  the  best  tilings  in  this  world,  it 
grew.  At  first,  in  the  thirteenth  century,  there  was  nothing  but  a  single  cross — 
one  straight  horizontal  line  and  another  perpendicular  line.  That  was  the  cross  of 
St.  George,  and  it  was  introduced  by  Richard  of  the  Lion-heart  on  his  return  from 
the  Crusades.  When  away  fiohting  in  Palestine  he  came  to  know  about  St.  George, 
whom  he  installed  as  his  patron  saint,  took  for  his  battle  cry,  and  emblazoned  on 
his  flag.  When  England  and  Scotland  were  united  under  James  I.  of  England,  that 
monarch  added  the  Scottish  cross,  and  called  the  flag  the  Union  Jack.     That  was 


20  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  n. 

his  own  name,  as  he  usually  signed  it  in  the  French  way,  Jacques.  Two  centuries 
later  the  Irish  flag  was  placed  on  the  top  of  the  other  two.  The  Union  Jack  was 
thus  made  up  of  three  crosses,  each  being  laid  on  the  top  of  the  other  as  each 
country  came  into  the  Union.  These  were  the  emblems  of  St.  George,  St.  Andrew, 
and  St.  Patrick — the  patron  saints  of  the  three  countries.  First,  there  was  St. 
George.  "  George  "  originally  meant  a  cultivated  piece  of  ground,  and  parents  in 
thus  christening  their  children  meant  to  say,  "Would  that  God  would  make  this 
little  boy  a  garden  of  God !  "  They  could  desire  nothing  better  than  to  be  gardens 
of  God.  They  must  be  gardens — they  must  allow  themselves  to  be  sown  in — and 
they  had  .-  in  their  choice  either  to  produce  good  or  evil.  Every  good  thought  was 
a  good  seed.  Now  let  us  think  a  little  about  St.  Andrew.  There  never  was  a  live 
apostle  in  Scotland,  but  some  one  thought  the  bones  of  St.  Andrew  would  do  the 
Scots  some  good.  So  they  were  brought  to  St.  Andrews,  and  that  was  the  beginning 
of  what  was  at  one  time  the  greatest  city  in  Scotland.  Andrew  meant  manly. 
Why  was  the  object  of  the  Brigade  said  to  be  the  promotion  of  true  manliness? 
Was  it  not  as  opposed  to  false  manliness?  Every  one  despised  those^who  tried  to 
be  men  before  their  time.  Little  was  known  about  St.  Patrick.  He  was  carried 
away  captive  from  Scotland  to  Ireland  when  a  boy,  and  after  obtaining  his  liberty 
he  so  pitied  the  people  of  Ireland  that  he  went  back  to  try  and  do  them  good.  It 
was  well  for  them  to  remember  St.  Patrick.  Now,  what  did  the  flag  teach  them  ? 
It  was  a  union — a  Union  Jack.  It  had  been  the  strength  of  the  British  army  all 
through,  and  it  was  owing  to  it  that  the  English,  Scotch,  and  Irish  had  fought 
side  by  side  and  helped  one  another.  What  they  had  to  learn  was  the  strength  of 
union.  The  Cross  led  to  victory.  The  Cross  meant  death  to  Christ,  and  the  death 
of  Christ  meant  that  One  came  from  heaven  to  die  for  them  that  tliey  might  be 
God's  children.  Under  which  flag  would  they  determine  to  serve  ?  Under  that  of 
Christ,  which  led  to  happiness,  or  under  that  which  assuredly  would  lead  to  misery 
and  ruin?  The  greatest  disgrace  that  could  befall  a  man  was  the  forsaking  of  his 
own  flag  to  serve  under  another.  To  act  thus  was  to  be  a  traitor  to  his  king.  It 
was  the  worst  thing  possible  not  to  yield  themselves  to  Christ.  Let  them  not  try 
to  serve  Christ  and  some  one  else.  Let  them  make  up  their  minds  and  resolve 
that  they  would  henceforth  fight  for  what  was  good  and  do  what  was  good.  (Prof. 
Marcus  Dods,  D.B.,  Sermon  to  Boys'  Brigade.) 

Vers.  3,  4.  The  camp  of  Judah. — The  encampment  of  Jndah  : — I.  The  tribe. 
"  Judah  "  signifies  praise.  "  Now  will  I  praise  the  Lord,"  said  his  mother  Leah 
at  his  birth  (Gen.  xxix.  35).  Thus  is  the  spiritual  Judah  established  and  made  a 
praise  in  the  earth  (Isa.  Ixii.  7),  to  the  glory  of  God  of  whom  it  is  born  and  made. 
This  whole  family  in  heaven  and  earth  is  named  and  appointed  to  be  a  continual 
praise  to  the  glory  of  the  omnipotent  grace  of  Jehovah.  Kings  and  priests  as  they 
all  are,  is  not  each  "  a  brand  plucked  out  of  the  fire  "  ?  (Zech.  iii.  2).  II.  Their 
ENCAMPMENT.  "  Judah  shall  encamp."  But  in  what  form  and  order  ?  Upon  this 
we  have  only  to  say,  with  respect  to  the  spiritual  Judah,  that  the  mystical  Cross  of 
their  great  High  Priest  embodies  itself  in  all  their  stations  and  movements,  gives 
shape  to  all  their  hopes  and  expectations,  directs  and  regulates  their  prayers, 
praises,  and  exertions.  Whatever  they  attempt  or  whatever  they  enjoy  is  conformed 
to  the  Cross.  III.  The  direction  in  which  the  camp  is  situated.  Judah  shall 
encamp  toward  the  sun-rising.  Such  too  is  the  cheerful  situation  of  the  beloved 
people;  they  have  the  evening  behind  them,  and  the  morning  in  their  eye.  All 
are  looking  towards  the  rising  day,  towards  the  Day-star  from  on  high.  IV. 
Judah's  encampment  toward  the  sun-rising  was  to  be  with  his  banner.  Banners 
gave  the  signal  for  the  people  to  march ;  they  were  planted  upon  hills  and 
eminences,  that  they  might  be  seen  at  a  distance,  and  straightway  the  hosts  marched 
towards  and  gathered  round  them.  So  it  is  with  our  banner  of  the  Cross.  It  is  a 
magnet  of  irresistible  attraction.  Wherever  it  is  lifted  up,  there  is  a  movement, 
an  excitement,  a  stir,  and  the  elect  of  God  gather  around  it  with  exultation  or  with 
weeping.  V.  Judah's  host.  How  astoni.=hed  should  we  be,  wliat  mingled  terror 
and  great  joy  would  surprise  us,  if  suddenly  those  covering  angel-hosts,  which 
encompass  the  spiritual  Israel,  were  to  burst  the  veil  which  renders  them  invisible 
to  mortal  eyes,  and  come  forth  at  once  into  full  view  I  Some  in  this  world  have 
been  favoured  to  behold  a  portion  of  those  invisible  squa'lrons  which  always  attend 
the  children  of  God.  Judah's  host  is  the  heavenly  band  of  "  watchers,"  who  are 
sent  forth  to  minifter  to  the  safety  and  welfare  of  tliose  who  sliall  be  heirs  of 
«r.Ivatijn.     VI.  The  name  of  Judah's  captain   is  Nahshon,  son  of  Amminadab- 


oCHAP.  II.]  NU3IBERS.  21 

This  name  truly  belongs  to  the  Prince  of  the  host,  the  Captain  of  our  salvation. 
Nahshon  signifies  experience  ;  and  who  is  so  experienced  in  conflict  as  He  who 
was  made  perfect  in  sufferings,  and  having  spoiled  principalities  and  powers,  over- 
came death,  and  opened  to  us  the  gate  of  everlasting  life  !  Who  is  so  experienced 
a  captain  as  He,  whose  unslumbering  pastoral  care  has  been  exercised  for  ages  in 
behalf  of  His  people !  Who  is  so  experienced  in  the  tumult  and  alarm  of  war  as 
He,  against  whom  the  infatuated  and  cold-hearted  world  have  been  bearing  arms 
■day  and  night  for  so  many  centuries  !  And  who  is  so  accustomed  to  triumph  as  He, 
who  is  making  all  such  enemies  His  footstool  and  evervwhere  abides  last  upon  the 
field  !  Appropriate  therefore  to  Him  is  the  name  of  Nahshon.  He  is  also  as  truly 
in  character  "the  son  of  Amminadab."  For  this  name,  which  signifies  "My 
people  are  a  willing  gift,"  directs  our  thoughts  first  to  God  the  Father,  as  freely 
giving  to  Christ  all  who  will  ever  come  unto  Him,  and  as  making  them  also  wilhng 
in  the  day  of  His  power.    {F.  W.  Krummacher,  D.D.)         Aspects  of  honour : — I. 

HONOUB  WISELY  CONFERRED.     II.  HONOTJB  IN  RELATION  WITH  DUTY  AND  RESPONSIBILITY. 

III.  Honour  as  connected  with  parental  influence.  IV.  Honour  as  related  to 
FUTURE  greatness.  Jacob  had  predicted  that  Judah  should  be  the  ruling  tribe ; 
he  promised  to  Judah  a  kingdom  and  sovereignty.  Ages  more  were  to  pass  away 
before  the  prediction  was  fulfilled ;  but  the  honour  now  conferred  on  the  tribe 
would  encourage  faith  in  its  predicted  destiny.  Its  natural  tendency  would  be  to 
-stimulate  them  to — 1.  Believe  in  their  destiny.  2.  Work  for  their  destiny.  3. 
Wait  for  their  destiny.  Let  every  privilege  conferred  upon  us  increase  our 
Assurance  of  the  splendid  honours  which  await  us  hereafter.     (W.  Jones). 

Ver.  17.  The  camp  of  the  Levites  In  the  midst. — The  Tabernacle  in  the  midst  of 
the  host : — I.  The  reasons  for  placing  the  Tabernacle  after  th-'s  manner.  1. 
God  doth  hereby  admonish  them,  that  they  should  always  have  Him  before  their 
«yes,  lest  they  should  forget  His  worship  or  offend  Him  with  their  sins  (comp. 
Lev.  xxvi.  11,  12).  2.  He  had  respect  indifferently  unto  all  the  tribes.  If  any 
others  had  pitched  their  tents  farther  than  from  the  Tabernacle,  they  would  have 
quarrelled  and  complained  that  they  had  been  contemned  and  despised.  3.  The 
Levites  were  hereby  put  in  mind  of  their  duty,  and  therefore  are  lodged  about  it. 
II.  The  uses  of  placing  the  Tabernacle  after  this  manner.  1.  It  assureth 
us  that  God  will  ever  be  in  the  midst  of  us,  and  settle  His  rest  and  residence 
among  us  (comp.  Lev.  xxvi.  11,  12;  Ezek.  xxvii.  27).  (1)  God  is  joined  unto  us  in 
the  person  of  His  own  only  Son  Emmanuel — i.e.,  God  with  us.  We  are  made 
members  of  His  body  (see  Matt,  xxviii.  20).  (2)  We  have  with  Him  the  preaching 
of  the  gospel,  whereby  God  is,  as  it  were,  brought  down  to  reside  and  remain 
among  us.  (3)  We  have  the  promise  of  His  presence  and  the  seals  thereof  in  His 
sacraments,  whereby  we  are  at  one  with  Him,  and  He  with  us  (see  Gal.  iii.  27  ; 
John  vi.  54-56  ;  1  Cor.  x.  16,  17).  (4)  When  we  come  together  in  the  Church  to 
call  upon  His  name  He  is  near  unto  us,  and  most  familiar  with  us  (see  Matt. 
xviii.  20).  (5)  He  dwelleth  among  us  whensoever  He  preserveth  us  from  evil  and 
delivereth  us  from  our  enemies.  2.  It  serveth  to  teach  us  to  what  end  God  hath 
instituted  civil  states  and  commonwealths  in  this  world — to  wit,  to  be  stays  and 
props  to  the  Church,  that  the  people  of  God  may  assemble  together  in  peace  and 
quietness.  8.  It  serveth  to  conclude  the  full  and  final  happiness  of  the  faithful, 
which  is  begun  in  this  life,  but  shall  be  consummated  in  the  end  of  this  world. 
(W.  Attersoll.) 

Vers.  32-34.  They  pitched  by  their  standards. — Contentment  and  obedience  : — 
I.  Contentment  with  the  Divine  appointment.  1.  We  are  incompetent  to 
determine  our  own  place  and  duty.  (1)  Our  ignorance,  (a)  Of  ourselves;  (b)  of 
the  future.  (2)  Our  proneness  to  self-indulgence.  2.  We  have  ample  grounds 
for  confidence  in  the  deteroainations  of  God  for  us.  (1)  His  knowledge.  (2)  His 
wisdom.  (3)  His  kindness.  II.  Obedience  to  the  Divine  commands.  1.  AH 
God's  commands  are  binding,  because  they  are  all  right.  2.  All  God's  commands 
are  benevolent.  Obedience  is  blessed  as  well  as  binding.  (W.  Jones.)  The  two 
banners: — We  can  easily  gaess  how  in  days  of  ancient  warfare  the  standard  was 
of  much  practical  use.  When  it  moved  forward,  then  the  warriors  took  up  sword 
and  shield  and  also  advanced.  When  it  halted,  then  they  prepared  to  encamp 
around  the  station  of  their  own  particular  standard.  The  devices  of  these  old  flags 
suggested  a  kind  of  primitive  heraldry,  and  they  knew  where  at  once  to  find  their 
leaders,   or  to  rally  for  the  last  desperate  defence  I    As  in  thought  we  float  along 


22  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  hi. 

the  stream  of  history,  we  recall  the  brazen  eagles  of  Rome,  clasping  which  the 
legionaries  tooli  that  solemn  oath  of  fidelity  which  tanght  to  the  soldiers  of  Jesus 
that  word  "  Sacrament,"  which  to  us  means  so  much!  Then  we  may  remember 
how  the  cloak  of  St.  Martin  became  the  standard  of  the  Prankish  host,  or  how  the 
sacred  banner  of  mediasval  France  was  the  renowned  "  Oritlamme."  In  England's 
history,  too,  we  have  the  story  of  the  great  car  which,  surmounted  by  three  flags, 
was  the  central  point  of  the  bloody  "Battle  of  the  Standard";  or  we  may 
sorrowfully  think  of  that  sad  day  when  our  country  was  torn  asunder  by  internal 
strife,  and  the  unfortunate  Charles,  king  and  martyr,  raised  his  royal  standard  on 
a  stormy  day  on  the  Castle  Hill  at  Nottingham,  and  which  was  that  very  day  blown 
down  by  the  furious  blasts — a  sad  and  ominous  beginning,  which  proved  too  truly 
prophetic.  Lastly,  there  flashes  across  our  memory  that  familiar  story  of  Nelson 
ordering  the  flag  of  old  England  to  be  nailed  to  the  mast,  which  has  become  a 
proverbial  expression  for  pluck  and  resolution !  But  these  legends  of  old  times- 
have  for  the  Christian  a  lesson.  There  is  a  great  conflict  going  on  around  us, 
a  spiritual  warfare  of  most  real  and  eternal  significance.  Between  the  Church, 
which  is  the  army  of  Christ,  and  the  dark  hosts  of  hell,  the  struggle  seems  daily  to 
wax  hotter  and  become  more  intense.  The  leaders  on  either  side  display  their 
banners.  "That  of  Satan,"  says  an  old  writer,  "is  set  up  in  the  market-place 
of  Babylon.  It  is  inscribed  with  the  alluring  words,  '  riches,'  '  pleasures,' 
'  honours ' ;  but  these  inscriptions  are  not  to  be  trusted.  Were  they  rightly 
inscribed  they  would  assuredly  bear  instead,  'impiety,'  '  idolatory,'  'impurity,* 
'injustice,'  and  '  hatred  against  God.'  But  these  true  names  he  conceals  with 
a  dazzling  magic,  so  that  men  are  caught  unawares  by  his  false  promises  1  "  Under 
the  standard  of  the  Evil  One  are  gathered  together  and  assembled  by  him  both  evil 
spirits  and  bad  men.  These  he  sends  forth  throughout  the  whole  world,  that  they 
should  deceive  and  ruin  the  souls  of  men.  To  each  of  his  adherents  he  gives  a 
banner,  a  net,  and  chains.  The  flag  that  they  may  allure,  the  net  that  they  may 
capture,  the  fetters  that  they  may  bind  fast  their  captives.  But  see  on  yonder  side. 
From  that  dark  valley,  up  those  steep  slopes,  there  comes  a  mighty  host.  Many 
drop  ofl',  many  fall  back,  but  still  they  pour  on  upwards.  The  sunlight  of  heaven 
rests  on  their  helms,  and  before  them  comes  borne  aloft  a  mighty  banner.  It  is 
the  Standard  of  Jesus.  Eighteen  hundred  years  ago  it  was  set  up  in  the  valley  of 
humiliation  at  Jerusalem.  Now  He,  the  King  of  Humility,  the  Prince  of  Peace,  is 
in  the  midst  of  His  people,  whose  ranks  He  gazes  on  with  loving  eye.  On  His 
banner  there  is  written,  in  letters  of  light  and  truth,  the  words,  "  repentance," 
"  a  Christian  life,"  "  paradise,"  "  heaven  ! "  Our  Lord  Jesus  also  sends  His 
ministering  servants  throughout  the  world — angels,  apostles,  priests,  and  all  who 
seek  the  saving  of  men's  souls  and  the  welfare  of  their  bodies ;  bidding  them  teach 
the  emptiness  of  earthly  treasures,  the  true  riches  of  penitence  and  faith  ;  and  that 
they  should  instruct  all  to  persevere  with  patience  till  the  golden  gates  are  in  view. 
The  soldiers  of  Jesus  advance,  holding  on  high  His  banner,  knocking  at  the  door 
of  all  hearts,  and  saying,  "Repent,  for  the  kingdom  of  God  is  nigh  ";  "  Take  My 
yoke  upon  you,  and  ye  shall  find  rest."  These  invitations  are  given  in  various 
ways,  and  by  different  methods;  sometimes  by  good  thoughts  infused  by  the  Divine 
Spirit  into  the  soul,  sometimes  by  useful  words  and  pious  writings,  sometimes  by 
good  examples.  Through  all  these  ways  and  channels  the  Saviour  speaks  to  us. 
They  who  listen,  they  who  obey,  follow  His  standard.  Thus,  with  many  alterna- 
tions, the  great  battle  goes  forward,  with  its  separate  host  on  either  side  and  its 
two  standards.     Under  which  will  you  fight ?     {J.  W.  Hardman,  LL.D.) 


CHAPTER  III. 

Vers.   1-13.  The  priests  which  were  anointed. — Aaron  and  his  sons :  parents  and 
children: — In  vers.  1-4  we  have — I.  An  incidental  illustration  op  the  exalted 

PERSONAL  character  AND  THE  DiVINE  MISSION  OF  MoSES.  II.  An  INTIMATION  THAT 
THE  DUTIES  OF  THE  MINISTERS  OF  RELIGION  DEMAND  FOR  THEIR  FAITHFUL  DISCHARGE 
THEIR  ENTIRE  CONSECRATION  THERETO.  III.  An  EXAMPLE  OF  WICKED  SONS  DESCENDING 
FROM  A  GODLY  PARENT.  IV.  An  EXAMPLE  OF  THE  WIDEST  DIFFERENCE  OF  CHARACTER 
AND  DESTINY  IN  CHILDREN  OF  THE  SAME  PARENTS.       OuT  Subject  UtterS  Camest  COUUScls 

— 1.   To  the  children  of  godly  parents.     Trust  not  in  the  character  and  prayers  of 


CHAP,  in.]  NUMBERS.  23 


jour  paxents  for  salvation.  These  are  of  priceless  value,  yet  they  will  not  avail  to 
your  salvation  apart  from  your  own  faith  and  obedience.  (See  Ezek.  xviii.)  2.  To 
parents.  Be  diligent  and  faithful  in  the  discharge  of  your  duty  to  your  children. 
(1)  Let  your  own  life  be  right,  and  so  set  them  a  good  example.  (2)  Give  them 
wise  religious  instruction  and  training.  (3)  Commend  them  often  and  earnestly  to 
God  in  prayer.  (4)  Afford  them  encouragement  in  every  manifestation  of  pious 
feeling  and  conduct.  (IF.  Jones.)  The  dedication  of  the  Levitea — Church  work 
and  ivorkers  : — Vers.  5-10.  I.  The  offices  of  the  Chorch  are  Divinely  insti- 
tuted.    II.    There   are   different  ranks  in  the   offices   of    the    Church  as 

INSTITUTED  BY  GoD.  III.  ThE  LOWLIEST  LABOUR  IN  THE  SERVICE  OF  GoD  IS  SACRED 
AND  BLESSED.      IV.    GOD  ALSO  APPOINTS  THE  PERSONS    TO    FILL    THE   VARIOUS  OFFICES  IN 

His  Church.  V.  Intrusion  into  sacred  places  and  duties  awakened  the  stern 
DISPLEASURE  OF  THE  LoRD.  Conclusion  :  1.  Encouragement  to  those  who  are  called 
-of  God  to  Christian  work.  He  who  has  called  you  to  your  work  will  sustain  you  in 
it,  make  it  efficient  by  His  blessing,  and  confer  upon  you  rich  rewards.  2.  Ad- 
monition as  to  our  estimate  of  the  ministers  of  the  Lord.  They  "  are  ambassadors 
for  Christ."  God  Himself  speaks  through  them  to  men.  (Ibid.)  God's  claim 
upon  man's  service : — From  vers.  11-13,  we  learn — I.  God's  claims  upon  man's 
SERVICE  ARE  INCONTESTABLE.  UpoH  what  are  they  grounded  ?  1.  Upon  what  He  is 
in  Himself.  2.  Upon  what  He  does  for  man.  II.  There  is  a  correspondence 
BETWEEN  THE  GIFTS  AND  THE  CLAIMS  OP  Go^.  His  demands  are  proportioned  to  His 
bestowments.     1.  This   is   righteous.      2.  This  is   beneficent.     III.  The   Divine 

ARRANGEMENTS  ARE  EVER  MARKED  BY  INFINITE  WISDOM  AND  KINDNESS.       (Ibid.)  The 

measure  of  the  Divine  demands  upon  man  : — I.  God  gave  the  best  He  had  to  effect 
OUR  SALVATION.  II.  The  SON  GAVE  HiMSELF.  Let  US  Sacrifice  ourselves  to  God  as 
He  sacrificed  His  Son  for  us.  1.  Thus  only  can  we  attain  to  a  high  ideal  in 
religion.  Be  the  best  possible  Christian  :  be  not  content  with  mediocrity:  aim 
high.  2.  This  is  the  best  way  to  be  useful.  The  power  of  Christianity  is  in  the 
fact  of  Christ  giving  Himself.  Our  influence  for  good  is  in  proportion  to  our  self- 
sacrifice.  3.  This  is  the  way  to  enjoy  religion.  The  more  we  give  of  self  to  God, 
the  more  will  He  give  of  Himself  to  us.  Let  all  think  of  what  God  has  done  for 
them,  and  consider  what  returns  they  have  made  to  Him.  (David  Lloyd.)  The 
necessity  of  a  standing  ministry  : — We  see  in  this  place,  how  Moses  immediately 
after  the  numbering  of  the  people,  that  meddled  not  with  the  ministry  of  the 
word,  or  killing  of  the  sacrifices,  or  serving  in  the  tabernacle,  or  carrying  of  the 
ark,  or  teaching  of  the  people,  handleth  in  the  next  place  the  fashion  of  the 
ministry.  For  let  there  be  never  so  great  order  or  good  policy  in  the  common- 
wealth, yet  if  the  care  of  the  ministry  be  neglected,  all  is  to  little  purpose.  We 
see  frnm  hence  the  goodly  order  that  God  observeth  in  this  great  army.  He 
establisheth  among  them  most  carefully  the  holy  ministry  to  the  end  they  might 
be  instructed  in  the  Word.  Hereby  we  learn  that  among  all  nations  and  people 
under  the  heavens,  the  ministry  of  the  Word  ought  to  be  planted  and  established, 
to  guide  them  in  the  ways  of  godliness.  1.  A  certain  and  settled  ministry  is  an 
evident  token  that  God  hath  a  church  and  a  people  to  be  begotten  by  the  immortal 
seed  of  the  Word.  2.  Without  the  light  of  the  Word  the  people  remain  in  darkness 
and  cannot  see  :  they  grope  at  noonday,  and  know  not  what  they  do — as  it  was 
in  Egypt  when  the  plague  of  palpable  darkness  was  sent  among  them  (Exod.  x. 
23).  3.  The  necessity  of  a  ministry  is  so  evident  that  all  the  Gentiles  had  their 
priests  and  prophets  that  attended  on  their  profane  and  superstitious  altars,  and 
it  was  their  first  care  to  establish  a  religion,  such  as  it  was,  among  them.  If  it 
were  thus  among  them  who  saw  darkly,  and  were  without  the  true  light  of  the 
•Scripture,  much  more  ought  we  to  learn  it,  that  have  bean  taught  better  things,  and 
have  the  sure  word  of  the  prophets  to  guide  us.  4.  Such  is  our  frailty,  that  not- 
withstanding we  live  under  a  settled  ministry,  and  have  given  our  names  to  the 
faith,  yet  we  are  ready  to  start  back  again.  For  as  the  body  is  prone  to  pine  away 
without  supply  of  daily  food,  so  are  our  souls  ready  to  perish,  being  destitute  of  the 
heavenly  manna  of  the  Word  of  God.  Uses  :  1.  There  is  offered  unto  us  this  truth 
arising  from  the  doctrine  itself,  that  the  preaching  of  the  Word  by  the  minister,  and 
the  hearing  of  it  by  the  people,  is  no  ceremony  nor  a  matter  of  indifferency,  such  as 
may  either  be  done  or  left  undone  at  our  own  discretion,  but  it  is  such  a  part  of 
the  public  service  of  God  as  ought  not  to  be  neglected  without  great  sin.  2.  It 
serveth  to  reprove  divers  abuses.  (1)  Such  as  think  and  spare  not  to  say  that  the 
ministry  is  a  vain  and  superfluous  thing,  and  that  the  ministers  are  men  that  may 
very  well  be  spared,  as  if  they  were  a  sixth  finger  upon  the  hand,  or  a  sixth  toe 


24  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTIiATOR.  [chap,  hi. 


upon  the  foot ;  that  is  bringing  a  burden  rather  than  a  benefit.  For  as  they  account 
the  Sabbath  the  loss  of  one  day  in  a  week,  so  they  account  the  maintenance  of  the 
ministry  the  loss  of  their  goods.  These  have  learned  another  language  than  the 
tongue  of  Canaan.  Tliey  do  not  the  works  that  beseem  Christians,  and  they  cannot 
speak  as  beseemeth  those  that  profess  the  fear  of  God,  if  so  be  they  do  profess 
so  much.  Is  it  a  needless  thing  to  have  the  light  of  the  sun  in  the  firmament, 
without  which  all  things  are  covered  with  darkness,  and  nothing  can  have  life  and 
quickening  ?  But  the  sun  is  not  more  necessary  to  be  in  the  world  than  the  light  of 
the  Word  in  the  Churcli  to  give  life  and  light  unto  them  that  sit  in  darkness 
(Matt.  iv.  16).  Is  it  needless  to  have  laboui-ers  to  reap  down  our  corn  in  time  of 
harvest  ?  To  have  meat  brought  unto  us  and  provided  for  us  when  we  are  hungry, 
or  drink  when  we  are  thirsty?  (2)  The  vain  conceit  of  their  hearts,  who  having 
learned  the  principles  of  religion  and  some  grounds  of  knowledge,  proceed  no 
further,  as  if  they  had  no  more  use  of  the  Word,  whereas  there  is  matter  of  instruc- 
tion always  to  be  learned  out  of  the  Word  for  all  persons.  When  we  have  eaten  one 
kind  of  meat  one  day,  we  eat  the  next  day  as  hungrily  of  it  as  we  did  before. 
(3)  They  that  extol  to  the  skies  the  king  loms  and  commonwealths  of  the  heathen, 
as  the  only  prosperous,  flourishing,  and  happy  nations,  wlaich  indeed  excelled  in 
outward  glory  and  thereby  dazzled  the  eyes  of  many,  yet  indeed  were  no  better  than 
assemblies  of  men  destitute  of  religion,  and  consequently  of  salvation.  Their  peace 
and  prosperity,  their  wealth  and  dignity,  were  all  cai'nal  and  momentary,  rising  out 
of  the  earth,  and  sinking  down  into  the  earth  again  ;  their  praise  also  is  of  men. 
It  is  the  maintenance  of  true  religion  that  maketh  a  people  truly  happy,  and  the 
means  of  si^reading  abroad  true  religion  is  the  ministry  of  the  Word.  There  is  no 
way  to  know  it  and  to  practise  it  but  by  this.  3.  Must  the  ministry  be  established 
among  all  people  under  heaven  ?  Then  let  every  one  of  us  be  careful  for  our  parts 
to  plant  it  among  us,  and  to  bring  it  home  to  the  places  of  our  abode.  4.  Let  the 
ministers  be  careful  to  discharge  their  calling,  and  to  teach  the  people  in  season 
and  out  of  season.  They  must  be  lights  of  the  world,  and  as  savoury  salt  to  season 
them  with  wholesome  doctrine.  5.  Let  the  people  carefully  attend  to  the  ministry 
of  the  Word,  where  it  is  settled  and  planted,  with  a  good  conscience,  as  to  God's 
holy  ordinance  vouchsafed  unto  them.  Let  them  bring  attention  in  hearing, 
diligence  in  marking,  and  obedience  in  practising.  Let  them  not  use  any  delays  to 
shift  off  the  performance  of  this  duty.  {W.  AttersoU.)  Consecrated  lives: — In 
the  artist's  studio  a  fleck  of  paint  lies  upon  the  palette.  It  is  so  much  colour  and 
nothing  more;  till,  taken  up  by  the  bi'ush  of  the  master  and  laid  upon  the  canvas, 
it  becomes  a  rosy  flush  on  beauty's  cheek,  or  a  lustrous  cloud  in  a  golden  sunset. 
So  has  many  a  mean  and  common  life  been  touched  by  the  Master's  hand  to  higher 
uses ;  so  has  many  an  humble  believer  been  caught  up  from  the  poverty  of  his 
earthly  lot  to  be  a  glorious  spirit  before  the  tbrone  of  the  "Eternal  Light." 
Vocation  is  in  a  line  witli  ^fitness : — If  we  agree  that  the  Christian  ministry  is  a 
vocation  for  the  teaching,  in  various  forms,  of  Christian  righteousness,  the  question 
next  comes.  What  is  meant  by  a  "  call  "  to  it  ?  Is  tbis  anything  different  from  that 
inward  impulse  to  a  specific  form  of  work  which  arises  in  a  man  from  a  conscious- 
ness of  special  gifts  in  that  direction  ?  In  that  sense  a  man  may  be  said  to  be 
called  to  the  work  of  a  musician  or  artist.  The  parents  of  Mozart,  when  they  found 
their  son,  at  the  age  of  seven,  playing  before  the  crowned  heads  of  Europe,  need 
have  been  in  no  doubt  as  to  his  life  work.  It  was  revealed  in  his  gifts  more  plainly 
than  it  could  have  been  by  a  voice  from  heaven.  And  when,  on  the  other  hand, 
Mozart's  own  son,  once  asked  whether  he  loved  music,  replied  by  flinging  down 
some  coins  on  the  table  and  exclaiming,  "  That's  the  only  music  I  care  for,"  it  was 
equally  evident  that  whatever  he  came  into  the  world  to  do,  it  was  not  to  follow  in  the 
steps  of  his  father.  Vocation  here  undoubtedly  is  in  a  line  with  fitness.  The  tools 
are  for  him  who  can  use  them.  {Christian  World.)  God  imj)roves  the  life  given  to 
Him  in  service : — It  is  said  of  vapours,  that  rising  out  of  the  earth,  the  heavens  re- 
turn them  again  in  pure  water,  much  clearer,  and  more  refined  than  they  received 
them  ;  or  as  it  is  said  of  the  earth,  that  receiving  the  sea- water  and  puddle-water,  it 
gives  it  better  than  it  received  it  in  the  springs  and  fountains,  lor  it  strains  the 
water  and  purifies  it,  that  whereas  when  it  came  into  the  bowels  of  the  earth  it  was 
muddy,  salt,  and  brinish,  it  returns  pure,  clear,  and  fresh,  as  out  of  the  well-head 
waters  are  well  liuown  to  come.  Thus,  if  men  would  but  give  up  their  heart's 
desire,  and  tho  strength  of  their  affections  unto  God,  He  would  not  only  give  them 
liack  again,  but  withal  much  better  than  when  He  received  them,  their  affections 
fchould  be  more  pure,  their  thoughts  and  all  the  faculties  of  soul  and  body  should  be 


CHAP.  III.]  NUMBERS.  25 

renewed,  cleansed,  beautified,  and  put  into  a  far  better  condition  than  formerly  they 
were.     (J.  Spencer.) 

Vers.  15-22.  From  a  month  old. — Dedication  of  infants  to  God: — ThatHetaketh 
them  from  a  month  old  is  a  thing  of  good  use,  and  we  may  note  it,  for  it  notably 
showeth  that  we  may  destinate  our  children  to  God  before  they  be  fit  for  any  other 
course  of  life.  In  the  Gospel,  those  parents  that  brought  little  children  to  Christ 
are  chronicled  up  for  an  eternal  praise  of  them,  and  for  an  example  to  all  parents 
to  the  end  of  the  world.  Matthew  calleth  them  "  little  children."  Luke  calleth  them 
"  babes,"  even  such  as  yet  hanged  >ipon  the  breast,  effectually  noting  how  soon  we 
should  bring  them  to  Christ.  Satan's  envy  even  against  these  babes  to  be  brought 
to  Christ  appeareth  there,  and  our  Saviour's  unspeakable  good  against  that 
malice,  commanding  them  to  be  brought  unto  Him,  and  not  to  be  hindered,  taking 
them  in  His  arms,  putting  His  hands  upon  them,  blessing  them,  and  gracious'.y 
afiirming,  that  "of  such  is  the  kingdom  of  God."  A  natural  parent  wishes  all 
good  to  his  child,  and  as  he  is  able,  procureth  it,  even  as  the  root  spreadeth'his 
sap  to  the  branches  without  grudge  or  exception  ;  and  a  religious  parent,  above  all 
worldly  good,  careth  for  God's  holy  fear  to  be  planted  in  his  child.  For  the  effecting 
whereof  soon  he  bringeth  him  unto  Christ,  knowing  that  the  first  liquor  put  into 
a  vessel  is  of  great  force  ever  in  the  same.  Alas,  what  will  the  whole  world  profit 
them,  were  we  able  to  give  it  them,  if  eternally  they  be  damned — yea,  they  and 
we  both,  they  for  not  knowing  Christ,  and  we  for  not  bringing  them  to  Christ. 
Wherefore  earnest  is  that  commandment  of  the  Holy  Ghost,  "  Fathers,  bring  up 
your  children  in  instruction  and  information  of  the  Lord."  Abraham  is  registered 
up  for  this  care ;  and  whilst  this  Book  of  God  remaineth  it  will  be  f  jund  written 
to  their  praise  that  Timothy's  grandmother  and  mother  brouglit  him  up  in  the 
knowledge  of  the  Scripture  from  a  child.  Honour  may  shine  and  glory  may  glitter, 
but  how  soon  covered  with  a  cloud.  Beauty  much  wished,  but  permanent  with 
neither  wishes  nor  wisdom  whatsoever.  Only  the  good  gotten  by  bringing  children 
to  Christ  remaineth  for  ever  in  his  reward.  And  therefore  let  religious  parents 
have  a  care  of  it,  even  soon,  soon,  remembering  this  place,  that  the  Levites, 
appointed  for  His  service.  He  would  have  numbered  from  a  month  old.  (Bp. 
Babington.)  Church  membership  of  children : — What,  then,  is  this  infant  member- 
ship ?  What  conception  can  we  take  of  it  which  will  justify  its  Christian  dignity  ? 
A  great  many  persons  who  are  very  sharp  at  this  kind  of  criticism  appear  to  have 
never  observed  that  creatures  existing  under  conditions  of  growth  allow  no  such 
terms  of  classification  as  those  do  which  are  dead  and  have  no  growth  ;  such,  for 
example,  as  stones,  metals,  and  earths.  They  are  certain  that  gold  is  not  iron,  and 
iron  is  not  silver,  and  they  suppose  that  they  can  class  the  growing  and  transitional 
creatures,  that  are  separated  by  no  absolute  lines,  in  the  same  manner.  They  talk 
of  colts  and  horses,  lambs  and  sheep,  and  it  possibly  not,  once  occurs  to  them  that 
they  can  never  tell  when  the  colt  becomes  a  horse,  or  the  lamb  a  sheep ;  and  that 
about  the  most  definite  thing  they  can  say,  when  pressed  with  that  question,  is  that 
the  colt  is  potentially  a  horse,  the  lamb  a  sheep,  even  from  the  first,  having  in 
itself  this  definite  futurition ;  and,  therefore,  that  while  horses  and  sheep  are  not 
all  to  be  classed  as  colts  and  lambs,  all  colts  and  lambs  may  be  classed  as  hor.-es 
and  sheep.  And  just  so  children  are  all  men  and  women  ;  and  if  there  is  the  law 
of  futurition  in  them  to  justify  it,  may  be  fitly  classed  as  believing  men  and  women. 
And  all  the  sharp  arguments  that  go  to  cover  their  membership  as  such  in  the 
Church  with  absurdity,  or  to  turn  it  into  derision,  are  just  such  arguments  as  the 
inventors  could  raise  with  equal  point  to  ridicule  the  horsehood  and  sheejjhood  of 
the  young  animals  just  referred  to.  The  propriety  of  this  membership  does  not  lie 
in  what  those  infants  can  or  cannot  believe,  or  do  or  do  not  believe,  at  some  given 
time,  as,  for  example,  on  the  day  of  their  baptism ;  but  it  lies  in  the  covenant  of 
promise,  which  makes  their  parents  parents  in  the  Lord  ;  their  nurture  a  nurture 
of  the  Lord,  and  so  constitutes  a  force  of  futurition  by  which  they  are  to  grow  up 
imperceptibly  into  "faithfuls  among  faithfuls,"  in  Christ  Jesus.  .  .  .  The  con- 
ception, then,  of  this  membership  is,  that  it  is  potentially  a  real  one  ;  that  it  stands, 
for  the  present,  in  the  faith  of  the  parents  and  the  promise  which  is  to  them  and 
to  their  children,  and  that  on  this  ground  they  may  well  enough  be  accounted 
believers,  just  as  they  are  accounted  potentially  men  and  women.  Then,  as  they 
come  forward  into  maturity,  it  is  to  be  assumed  that  they  will  come  forward  into 
faith,  being  grown  in  the  nurture  of  faith,  and  will  claim  for  themselves  the 
membership  into  which  they  were  before  inserted.     Nor  is  this  a  case  which  has 


26  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

no  analogies  that  it  should  be  held  up  as  a  mark  of  derision.  It  is  generally 
supposed  that  our  common  law  has  some  basis  of  common  sense.  And  yet  this 
body  of  law  makes  every  infant  child  a  citizen;  requiring,  as  a  point  of  public 
order,  the  whole  constabulary  and  even  military  force  of  the  state  to  come  to  the 
rescue  or  the  redress  of  his  wrongs,  when  his  person  is  seized  or  property  invaded 
by  conspiracy.  This  infant  child  can  sue  and  be  sued  ;  for  the  Court  of  Chan<'ery 
will  appoint  him  a  guardian,  whose  acts  shall  be  the  child's  acts  ;  and  it  shall  be  as 
if  he  were  answerable  for  his  own  education,  dress,  board,  entertainments,  and  the 
damages  done  by  his  servants,  precisely  as  if  he  were  a  man  acting  in  bis  own 
cause.  Doubtless  it  may  sound  very  absurdly  to  call  him  a  citizen.  What  can  he 
do  as  a  citizen  ?  He  cannot  vote  or  bear  arms ;  he  does  not  even  know  what  these 
things  mean,  and  yet  he  is  a  citizen.  In  one  view  he  votes,  bears  arms,  legislates, 
even  in  his  cradle  ;  for  the  potentiality  is  in  him,  and  the  state  takes  him  up  in  her 
arms,  as  it  were,  to  own  him  as  her  citizen.     {H.  Bushnell,  D.D.) 

Vers.  33-39.  These  shall  pitch  on  the  side  of  the  tabernacle. — The  placing  of  the 
Levites  throughout  the  host : — In  this  division  we  see  more  particularly  that  which 
was  in  part  noted  before,  namely,  the  several  situations  that  these  Levites  had  about 
the  tabernacle,  which  they  compassed  round  about  that  they  might  not  be  far  from 
any  of  the  people  of  God,  but  always  resident  among  tbem.  This  teacheth  us  that 
God  wiU  have  every  part  of  His  people  taught.  None  are  too  high  in  regard  of 
their  great  places ;  none  are  too  low  in  regard  of  their  obscure  callings  ;  none  are 
too  good  to  be  taught,  whatsoever  their  degrees  be.  This  will  be  made  plain  by 
divers  reasons.  1.  Consider  the  titles  that  are  given  unto  God  in  the  Scriptmes. 
He  is  worthily  called  the  King  of  His  Church,  and  the  Lord  and  Master  of  His 
house.  Is  not  He  "  the  Shepherd  of  Israel  that  leadeth  Joseph  like  sheep"?  (Psa.ixxx. 
1).  Will  a  shepherd  that  hath  any  care  of  his  sheep,  or  any  love  unto  them,  look 
unto  some  of  them  and  not  to  all  ?  Will  a  king  regard  only  the  chief  cities  and 
most  populous  places  of  his  kingdom,  and  suffer  the  rest  to  live  as  they  list,  with- 
out laws  and  good  orders  ?  Or  will  the  master  of  a  house  look  to  some  in  his 
family,  and  not  to  all  ?  2.  Such  is  the  grace  and  goodness  of  God,  that  He  would 
have  all  His  people  come  to  knowledge.  Such  as  know  not  His  will  are  none  of 
His  servants.  If  then  He  require  the  understanding  of  His  ways,  not  only  of  rich 
men,  of  great  men,  of  learued  men,  and  of  the  ministers,  but  of  all  the  people,  we 
must  hereof  conclude  that  He  hath  ordained  that  all  of  them  should  have  the 
means  of  knowledge  and  salvation  offered  unto  them,  and  publisbed  among  them. 

3.  The  Word  of  God  was  penned  for  all  estates,  degrees,  and  conditions  of  men. 

4.  All  persons,  whatsoever  they  be,  have  souls  to  save  ;  simple  persons,  small  con- 
gregations, little  assemblies,  as  well  as  others  that  aie  many  in  number.  Uses: 
1.  It  is  God's  ordinance  that  every  congregation  should  have  a  learned  minister  to 
teach  them  the  true  religion  and  fear  of  God.  2.  It  is  required  of  the  ministers  of 
the  Gospel,  whom  the  Holy  Ghost  hath  made  overseers  of  their  several  flocks,  to 
look  to  their  whole  charge  from  one  corner  of  it  to  another.  They  are  to  give  an 
account  for  every  soul  that  dies  through  their  ignorance  or  through  their 
negligence.  3.  We  have  warrant  from  hence  1o  desire  most  earnestly  that  the 
kingdom  of  God  may  flourish  everywhere.  Christ  our  Saviour  teaches  us  to  pray 
that  His  kingdom  may  come  (Matt.  vi.  10),  and  so  to  be  erected  in  the  hearts  of 
naen.  4.  This  doctrine  serveth  as  an  instruction  to  all  magistrates  (as  their  places 
serve  them)  to  further  the  preaching  of  the  Word,  and  to  furnish  such  places  as 
belong  unto  them  with  able  teachers.     (W.  Atteraoll.) 


CHAPTER  IV. 

Ver.  16.  The  oflace  of  Eleazar. — The  Eleazar  priesthood  .-—There  are  few 
chapters  which  will  so  amply  repay  patient  study  as  this.  It  might  be  styled  the 
directory  for  the  pilgrim  priest,  and  therefore  it  is  of  great  importance  to  us  who 
wish  to  retain  our  priestly  purity  in  the  midst  of  the  wilderness  of  this  earthly  life. 
The  first  verse  tells  us  that  it  is  addressed  to  Moses  the  lawgiver,  ar.d  to  Aaron  the 
priest.  We  therefore  at  once  expect  to  find  here  a  linking  of  duties  and  privileges. 
If  you  want  to  know  what  was  the  great  duty  of  the  pilgrim  priest,  it  was  to  carry 


CHAP.  IV.]  NUilBERS.  27 

the  tabernacle  throughout  the  wilderness,  so  that  wherever  the  children  of  Israel 
pitched  they  might  have  a  meeting-place  where  they  might  commune  with  God. 
And  so  this  great  work  in  which  we  are  engaged  may  be  summed  up  in  these 
words,  To  carry  Christ  with  us  throughout  this  wilderness ;  and  as  the  Levite's 
motto  might  be,  To  me  to  Uve  is  the  tabernacle  :  so  to  me  to  live  is  Christ,  to  carry 
Christ  where'er  I  go.  Some  of  us  may  be  entrusted  with  what  the  woild  considers 
the  more  important  service — with  the  holy  vessels ;  others  may  have  the  heavier 
burden,  or  the  little  vexatious  duties,  but  they  are  all  for  this  great  purpose,  that 
the  children  of  Israel  may  constantly  hold  communion  with  their  God.  Nay,  mark 
you,  more :  not  only  does  the  great  High  Priest  appoint  each  of  us  to  service  and 
burdens — both  passive  burdens  and  active  service — but  in  the  case  of  Merari  there 
was  to  be  a  special  inventory  of  everything  entrusted  to  their  care,  so  that  they 
might  not  consider  for  one  single  moment  that  their  part  of  the  work  was  of  less 
importance.  The  16th  verse  brings  before  us  not  so  much  the  responsibility 
as  the  privilege.  To  the  office  of  Eleazar  the  priest  pertain  these  four  things — the 
oil  for  the  light,  the  sweet  incense,  the  daily  meat-offering,  and  the  anointing  oil. 
As  Christian  men  and  women,  are  they  not,  spiritually  speaking,  just  the  four 
things  you  need  now  in  your  daily  life?  1.  The  first  is  this  :  "  To  the  office  of 
Eleazar  the  priest  pertaineth  oil  for  light."  We  recognise  that  God  has  made  us 
the  lights  of  the  world.  He  bids  us  shine  forth  to  the  glory  of  God.  He  has  given 
to  us  that  high  dignity.  But,  alas !  too  often  our  lights  are  going  out ;  they  do  not 
shine  as  brightly  as  they  ought.  It  seems  as  though  we  were  hiding  our  light  under 
the  bushel  of  business  or  the  bed  of  sloth,  instead  of  putting  it  on  a  candlestick 
that  it  might  give  light  to  others.  Call  to  j  our  Eleazar  Priest ;  ask  Him  to  give  of 
His  oil ;  ask  Him  to  take  away  sin,  and  to  give  you  the  oil  of  His  Holy  Spirit,  for 
it  is  to  the  office  of  Eleazar  the  priest  that  pertaineth  the  oil  for  the  light.  2.  The 
second  thing  pertaining  to  his  office  was  the  sweet  incense.  You  remember  the  use 
of  the  sweet  incense.  Whilst  the  children  of  Israel  were  pra^ng  in  the  outer 
court,  the  priest  went  into  the  holy  place,  and  took  with  him  the  incense,  laid  it 
upon  the  altar,  and,  as  the  prayers  ascended  from  the  people  outside,  the  incense 
ascended  from  the  priest  inside.  Now,  have  you  not  ofttimes  felt  the  necessity  of 
that  sweet  incense  ?  0  Thou  Eleazar  Priest,  do  Thou  purify  my  prayers  with 
Thine  own  sweet  incense,  so  that  God  may  listen  to  my  cry,  and  forgive  the  evil  of 
my  prayer  :  purge  out  the  unclean  selfishness  of  my  prayer,  that  it  may  ascend  up 
to  my  Fatber  in  heaven.  Thank  God,  to  His  office  it  pertains  to  provide  that 
sweet  incense.  You  have  not  to  provide  the  incense.  3.  Thirdly,  to  his  office 
pertaineth  the  daily  meat-offering.  You  remember  what  that  was.  Every  morning 
the  children  of  Israel  were  obliged  to  bring  a  lamb  for  the  burnt-offering,  and  the 
same  every  evening ;  but  as  soon  as  the  lamb  was  offered  upon  the  altar,  the  daily 
meat-ofl'eriug  had  to  be  added  representing  the  pure  and  spotless  character  of 
Christ.  Now,  in  the  same  way,  you  and  I  have  to  bring  the  daily  burnt-offering  to 
God.  Every  morning  you  ought  to  say  :  Here  I  present  myself  to  Thee,  0  God,  to 
be  a  holy,  living  sacrifice  unto  Thee,  which  is  but  my  reasonable  service.  Every 
day  you  ought  to  bring  your  daily  burnt-ofl'ering,  and  put  it  upon  the  altar,  and 
then,  when  you  have  thus  dedicated  yourself  to  God,  and  consecrated  yourself  to 
His  service,  have  you  not  often  felt — I  come  and  offer  myself  to  God,  but  what  a 
poor  offering  it  is  !  And  when  I  consecrate  myself  upon  the  altar,  how  I  need  that 
which  shall  make  my  burnt-offering  acceptable  to  God !  And  morning  by  morning 
God  accepts  you  in  tlae  Beloved — not  for  what  you  are  in  yourself,  but  for  what  He 
is.  What  can  I  do  for  God,  I  am  so  weak  and  feeble?  If  I  put  myself  upon  God's 
altar,  can  He  use  me  for  His  service  ?  Yes,  He  can ;  because  to  the  office  of 
Eleazar  the  priest  pertaineth  the  meat-offering,  and  He  will  make  acceptable  your 
burnt-offering.  4.  One  thing  more :  I  have  prayed  Him  to  give  me  oil  for  the 
light.  I  have  come  to  Him,  and  I  have  acknowledged  that  even  in  my  prayers 
there  is  a  good  deal  of  self  that  cannot  be  acceptable  to  God  except  perfumed  by  the 
merits  of  my  Saviour ;  and  although  I  have  put  myself  upon  the  altar  to  be  used 
as  He  will,  I  recognise  that  in  myself  dwelleth  no  good  thing,  that  I  want  the  daily 
meat-offering  to  atone  for  my  burnt-offering.  Now,  what  do  I  want  ?  I  want  power 
— power  to  serve  God :  I  want  that  my  life  may  be  an  influence  for  good.  I  want 
to  be  a  man  full  of  power,  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  To  the  office  of  Eleazar  the  priest 
pertaineth  the  anointing  with  oil,  and  that  oil  goes  down  to  the  very  skirts  of  his 
garments,  even  to  the  very  humblest  believer.  I  heard  only  yesterday  of  a  young 
girl  in  a  house  of  business,  only  sixteen  years  of  age,  whose  confirmation  time  was 
a  time  of  grand  decision  for  God.    She  went  back  to  that  house  of  business,  where 


28  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  iv. 

the  principals  were  practically  atheists  ;  but  I  was  told  yesterday  that  that  young 
girl,  whose  life  had  been  anointed  with  the  holy  anointing  oil,  had  such  power  in 
that  business  that  the  principal  and  his  wife  have  both  been  converted.  The 
principal  is  now  a  lay  preactier  in  the  Church  of  England,  and  the  lady  of  the 
business  holds  a  large  Bible-class  for  those  in  houses  of  business ;  one  of  them 
traces  back  the  blessing  to  the  quiet,  holy  influence  of  that  little  girl,  the  power 
of  the  Holy  One  resting  upon  her.  Oh,  that  I  might  thus  be  filled  with  power, 
have  the  anointing  oil  upon  me.  Is  not  that  what  you  want  in  the  midst  of  this 
wilderness  journey,  in  the  midst  of  all  the  trials  and  temptations  of  daily  life? 
(E.  A.  Stuart,  M.A.) 

Vers.  34-49.    They  were  numbered  .  .  .  every  one  according  to  his  service. — 

Proportion  between  number  and  service  : — Looking  at  the  relation  of  the  numbers 
to  the  service  required  of  them  we  discover  illustrations  of — I.  The  wisdom  of  God. 
"By  this  diversity  of  numbers  among  the  Levite  families,"  saith  Trapp,  "God 
showeth  His  wisdom  in  fitting  men  for  the  work  wbereunto  He  hath  appointed 
them,  whether  it  requireth  multitude  or  gifts  "  (1  Cor.  xii.  8-12).  Every  one  hath 
his  own  share  ;  all  are  not  alike  gifted."  II.  The  eeasonableness  of  the  Divine 
EEQuiREMENTS.  "  Though  the  sum  total  of  effective  Levites,"  says  Greenfield, 
"  was  very  small  compared  with  that  of  the  other  tribes  :  yet  they  would  be  far  more 
than  could  be  employed  at  once  in  this  service.  But  they  might  carry  by  turns 
and  ease  one  another,  and  thus  do  the  whole  expeditiously  and  cheerfully.  They 
would  also  have  their  own  tents  to  remove,  and  their  own  families  to  take  care 
of."  There  was  an  ample  number  for  the  performance  of  the  work;  and  its  dis- 
tribution amongst  so  many  would  render  it  comparatively  easy  to  every  one.  God's 
claims  upon  us  and  our  service  are  in  the  highest  degree  reasonable.  He  is  a  kind 
and  gracious  Master.  III.  The  exemplaey  obedience  of  the  servants  of  the  Lord. 
(IF.  Jones.)  Many  in  the  Church  who  do  not  add  to  its  service: — Observe — 1.  That 
the  Kohathites  were  in  all  eight  thousand  and  six  hundred,  from  a  month  old  and 
upward :  but  of  those  there  were  but  two  thousand  seven  hundred  and  fifty  service- 
able men,  not  a  third  part.  The  Gershonites  in  all  seven  thousand  and  five 
hundred:  and  of  them  but  two  thousand  six  hundred  and  thirtv  serviceable  men, 
little  more  than  a  third  part.  Note — Of  the  many  that  add  to  the  numbers  of  the 
Church,  there  are  comparatively  but  few  that  contribute  to  the  service  of  it.  So  it 
has  been,  and  so  it  is;  many  have  a  place  in  the  tabernacle,  that  do  but  little  of 
the  work  of  the  tabernacle  (Philip,  ii.  20,  21).  2.  That  the  Merarites  were  but  six 
thousand  and  two  hundred  in  all ;  and  yet  of  these  there  were  three  thousand  and 
two  hundred  serviceable  men,  which  were  a  good  deal  above  half.  The  greatest 
burden  lay  upon  that  family,  the  boards,  and  pillars,  and  sockets.  And  God  so 
ordered  it,  that  though  tbey  were  the  fewest  in  number,  yet  they  should  have  the 
most  able  men  among  them ;  for  whatever  service  God  calls  men  to,  He  will  furnish 
them  for  it,  and  give  strength  in  proportion  to  the  work,  grace  sufficient.  3.  The 
whole  number  of  the  able  men  of  the  tribe  of  Levi,  which  entered  into  God's  host 
to  war  His  warfare,  was  but  eight  thousand  five  hundred  and  eighty;  whereas  the 
able  men  of  the  other  tribes  that  entered  into  the  host  of  Isi'ael  to  war  their  war- 
fare were  many  more.  The  least  of  the  tribes  had  almost  four  times  as  many  able 
men  as  the  Levites,  and  some  of  them  more  than  eight  times  as  many.  For  those 
that  are  engaged  in  the  service  of  this  world,  and  war  after  the  fiesh,  are  many 
more  than  those  that  are  devoted  to  the  service  of  God,  and  fight  the  good  fight  of 
faith.  {Matthew  Henry,  D.D.)  The  numbered  people  : — I.  Here  is  authority 
FOR  THE  muster-roll — "  According  to  the  commandment  of  the  Lord  they  were 
numbered."  It  was  not  left  to  Moses  to  number  the  people  without  Divine  sanction, 
else  the  deed  might  have  been  as  evil  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  as  that  of  David  when 
he  made  a  census  of  the  nation  :  neither  may  any  man  at  this  day  summon  the 
saints  of  the  Lord  at  bis  own  discretion  to  enterprises  for  which  they  were  never 
set  apart.  The  armies  of  Israel  are  none  of  ours  to  lead  whither  we  will,  nor  even 
to  reckon  up  that  the  number  may  be  told  to  our  own  honour.  1.  Believers  in 
Christ  Jesus,  you  are  now  called  forth  to  do  suit  and  service,  because  like  the  tribe 
of  Levi  you  are  the  Lord's.  He  views  you  as  the  church  of  the  firstborn,  as  the 
redeemed  from  among  men,  and  as  His  peculiar  inheritance,  and  therefore  above 
all  other  men  you  are  under  His  t-pecial  rule  and  governance.  2.  You  are  further 
called  because  this  is  a  charge  laid  upon  you  of  the  Lord,  to  whom  you  specially 
belong.  The  Levites  were  not  numbered  with  the  rest  of  the  nation,  for  their 
vocation  was  altogether  different,  and  their  whole  business  was  "about  holy  things." 


NUMBERS.  29 


Ye  see  in  this  your  calling,  for  hereunto  are  ye  also  ordained  that  ye  may  live  unto 
the  Lord  alone.  3.  The  Lord  may  well  call  you  to  this  service,  seeing  He  has 
given  you  to  His  Son,  even  as  He  gave  the  Levites  to  Aaron,  as  it  is  written  (chap, 
iii.  9),  "  They  are  wholly  given  unto  him  out  of  the  children  of  Israel."  Because 
ye  belong  to  Christ,  therefore  hide  not  yourselves  from  His  service,  but  come 
forward  with  alacrity.  4.  The  Lord  has  constituted  you  the  servants  of  all  His 
people,  even  as  He  said  of  the  Levites  that  they  were  to  "do  the  service  of  the 
children  of  Israel  in  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation."  We  are  debtors  to  all 
our  brethren,  and  we  are  their  servants  to  the  full  extent  of  our  power.  II.  Notice 
THE  APPOINTMENT  OF  THE  INDIVIDUALS — ■"  Every  onc  accordiug  to  his  service,  and 
according  to  his  burden."  By  our  varied  gifts,  positions,  olfices,  and  opportunities, 
we  are  as  much  set  apart  to  special  services  as  were  the  sons  of  Kohath,  &c.  Great 
evils  arise  out  of  persons  mistaking  their  calling,  and  undertaking  things  of  which 
they  are  not  capable ;  and,  on  the  other  hand,  the  success  of  Christian  work  in  a 
large  measure  arises  out  of  places  of  usefulness  being  filled  by  the  right  men.  III. 
Our  text  is  the  summary  of  the  chapter  in  which  we  have  an  account  of  the  actual 
FULFILMENT  OF  THE  Lokd's  COMMAND  BY  MosES.  He  numbered  each  family,  and 
cast  up  the  total  of  the  tribe,  at  the  same  time  mentioning  in  detail  the  peculiar 
service  of  each.  We  would  imitate  him  at  this  important  moment,  and  take  the 
census  of  those  who  are  consecrated  to  tbe  Lord's  own  service.  1.  Where  are  you, 
then,  who  can  bear  the  heavier  service  of  the  sanctuary,  carrying  its  pillars,  and 
tbe  boards,  and  the  sockets  thereof  ?  You  are  now  needed  to  speak  in  the  meet- 
ings, to  lead  the  people  in  prayer,  to  order  the  assemblies,  and  to  take  the  heavier 
work  of  this  holy  business.  The  Lord  Jesus  should  have  able  men  to  speak  for 
Him  ;  He  deserves  the  best  of  the  best.  Now  is  the  hour,  where  is  the  man?  Let 
no  diffidence  or  love  of  ease  keep  one  back  who  might  make  known  the  gospel  and 
win  a  soul  for  Jesus.  2.  But  where  are  you  who  can  only  carry  the  pins  and  the 
cords  ?  Your  burden  is  lighter,  but  probably  your  strength  is  also  less,  and  lighter 
though  your  load  may  be,  the  matters  which  you  carry  are  quite  as  essential  as  the 
pillars  and  the  boards.  Where  are  you?  You  who  can  say  a  few  words  to  lonely 
inquiring  ones ;  you  who  can  do  no  more  than  pray,  where  are  you  ?  At  your 
posts,  or  idling?  Answer  quickly,  for  time  and  need  are  pressing.  If  the  load 
which  you  can  carry  be  so  very  small,  be  all  the  more  ready  to  bear  it.  3.  Are  you 
a  lover  of  the  Lord  Jesus  and  do  you  wish  to  be  omitted  from  the  roll-call  ?  If  so, 
let  it  be  known  to  yourself,  and  stated  plainly  to  your  conscience.  Do  not  pretend 
to  be  a  labourer  and  remain  a  loiterer,  but  openly  avow  to  your  own  soul  that  you 
stand  all  the  day  idle,  and  feel  fully  justified  in  so  doing.  (C.  H.  Sjmrgeon.)  All 
have  a  work  to  do  for  God: — There  is  a  work  for  all  of  ns.  And  there  is  special 
work  for  each,  work  which  I  cannot  do  in  a  crowd,  or  as  one  of  a  mass,  but  as  one 
man,  acting  singly,  accordiug  to  my  own  gifts,  and  under  a  sense  of  my  personal 
responsibility.  There  is,  no  doubt,  associated  work  for  me  to  do ;  I  must  do  my 
work  as  part  of  the  world's  great  whole,  or  as  a  member  of  some  body.  But  I  have 
a  special  work  to  do,  as  one  individual  who,  by  God's  plan  and  appointment,  has  a 
separate  position,  separate  responsibilities,  and  a  separate  work;  if  I  do  not  do  it, 
it  must  be  left  undone.  No  one  of  my  fellows  can  do  that  special  work  for  me 
which  I  have  come  into  the  world  to  do  ;  he  may  do  a  higher  work,  a  greater  work, 
but  he  cannot  do  my  work.  I  cannot  hand  my  work  over  to  him,  any  more  than  I 
can  hand  over  my  responsibilities  or  my  gifts.  Nor  can  I  delegate  my  work  to  an 
association  of  men,  however  well-ordered  and  powerful.  They  have  their  own  work 
to  do,  and  it  may  be  a  very  noble  one.  But  they  cannot  do  my  work  for  me.  I 
must  do  it  with  these  hands  or  with  these  lips  which  God  has  given  me.  I  may  do 
little  or  I  may  do  much.  That  matters  not.  It  must  be  my  own  work,  and  by 
doing  my  own  work,  poor  as  it  may  seem  to  some,  I  shall  better  fulfil  God's  end  in 
making  me  what  I  am,  and  more  truly  glorify  His  name,  than  if  I  were  either 
going  out  of  my  own  sphere  to  do  the  work  of  another,  or  calling  in  another  into 
my  sphere  to  do  my  proper  work  for  me.  (John  Rnskin.)  Happiness  of  workiiiff 
for  God : — The  Eev.  Andrew  Fuller,  the  eminent  Baptist  minister,  was  depresded 
at  one  time  by  his  people  living  in  a  low  state  of  mind ;  they  did  nothing  but  si;;h 
and  groan.  All  his  endeavours  were  fruitless  to  raise  them  to  a  higher  spiritual 
life.  Much  perplexed,  he  made  inquiry  into  their  actions,  and  found  that  they 
were  doing  nothing  for  Christ.  He  at  once  set  them  to  work,  and  a  marked  change 
took  place ;  instead  of  sighs,  groans,  and  gloomy  faces,  there  were  cheerfulness  and 
faces  glowing  with  happiness.  If  your  state  of  heart  and  mind  is  low  and  depressed, 
carry  the  story  of  the  life,  death,  and  resurrection  of  the  Saviour  to  some  perishing 


30  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 


soul;  do  something  for  the  Master,  and  soon  your  heart  will  leap  with  joy  and 
gratitude.  Vnfaithful  helpers  are  a  burden  :— An  overworked  minister,  whilst 

lamenting  the  lack  of  "workers  in  his  church,  dozed,  and,  as  the  story  goes,  dreamed. 
He  thought  he  was  between  the  shafts  of  a  four-wheeled  coach,  aud  four  of  his 
helpers  were  each  pushing  a  wheel,  and  up  the  hill  they  all  toiled  together.  Soon 
he  felt  the  coach  drag  heavily,  and  at  last  he  could  pull  no  further  so  came  to  a 
standstill.  On  looking  behind  he  discovered  that  his  four  helpers  had  quietly  got 
inside  to  ride.  How  much  happier  and  easier  Christian  work  would  be  if  all  would 
do  their  best.  {Young  I\Jen's  lievieio.)  Power  running  to  waste  : — We  are  told 
sometimes  of  the  vast  power  unutilised  as  the  waters  leap  over  the  Falls  of  Niagara; 
in  fact,  statisticians  have  given  us  calculations  of  the  marvellous  saving  of  steam, 
■which  means  coal,  which  means  money,  that  might  thus  be  saved.  We  are  not 
sure  but  that  it  has  been  proved  that  there  is  power  enough,  if  it  could  be  com- 
municated, to  give  electric  light  to  the  whole  continent,  and  no  one  who  has  walked 
along  the  banks  of  the  Niagara  Kiver  for  two  or  three  miles  above  the  Falls, 
and  studied  the  tremendous  force  of  the  current,  will  hesitate  to  doubt  such  state- 
ments. Is  there  not  in  this  a  parable  ?  There  is  a  whole  Niagara  of  Christian 
power  running  to  waste  in  our  land — power  that  if  utilised  would  flash  the  light 
of  salvation  over  the  world,  and  bring  in  the  perfect  day  of  Christ's  kingdona  on 
earth.  Take  any  of  our  churches,  what  are  a  large  portion  of  the  members  doing  ? 
Absolutely  nothing — they  are  in  their  places  on  the  Sabbath,  and  just  possibly  at 
the  weekly  prayer-meeting  ;  beyond  that  wbat?  But,  "  I  can  do  so  little."  Oh,  my 
friend,  put  your  little  and  a  thousand  littles  of  your  brethren  together,  and  it  would 
make  a  power  that  by  the  grace  of  God  would  be  irresistible.  Niagara  is  but  the 
united  power  of  a  thousand  streams  far,  far  away.     {Canadian  Jndc;pendent.) 


CHAPTER  V. 


Vebs.  2,  3.  Put  out  of  the  camp  every  leper,  and  every  one  that  Uath  an  issue, 
and  whosoever  is  defiled  by  the  dead.. — Where  God  dwells  there  must  be  purity  ; — 
I,  God  Himself  is  pube,  and  cannot  associate  with  the  impure.  If  discipline 
is  lax,  God  departs.  It  is  not  the  large  church,  or  the  intelligent  or  the  wealthy 
one,  that  attracts  Him,  but  the  pure  one.  As  the  lightning  passes  by  the  polished 
marble  and  the  carved  wood  to  touch  the  iron  or  steel,  because  there  it  finds  some- 
thing akin  to  itself,  so  God  passes  by  those  to  dwell  with  the  pure,  because  in 
them  He  finds  a  character  akin  to  His  own.  II.  God  will  not,  because  He  cannot, 
DO  ANT  GOOD  TO  THE  IMPURE.  Any  oue  tolerating  sin  would  not  appreciate  the  design 
of  God  and  accept  His  blessing ;  and  where  He  cannot  bless,  He  will  not  come  to 
dwell.  Let  us  then  "  put  out  of  the  camp  every  leper,"  everything  that  defileth ; 
for  the  presence  of  God  in  our  midst  is  of  the  utmost  importance  to  us  as  His 
Church  and  people.  His  presence  is  essential.  1.  To  our  comfort  as  Churches 
and  Christians.  What  the  shining  sun  is  in  nature  His  presence  is  with  us — 
our  brightness,  our  joy,  &c.  2.  To  our  prosperity.  God  with  His  Church 
has  been  in  all  ages  the  secret  of  its  power  and  success.  His  presence  is  the 
life  of  the  ministry  and  of  all  Christian  work  ID.  Lloyd.)  The  exclusion  of 
the  unclean  : — I.  As  a  sanitaby  measube.  1.  llie  universal  application  of  the 
rule.  2.  The  sacred  reason  by  which  it  was  enforced.  Impurity  separates 
from  God.  II.  As  a  spiritual  pabable.  1.  Siij  is  a  defiling  thing.  2.  Sin 
is  a  deadly  thing.  3.  Sin  is  a  separating  thing.  Where  sin  is  cherished  God 
will  not  dwell.  (1)  The  openly  and  persistently  wicked  should  be  expelled  from 
the  Church  on  earth.  («)  Because  of  their  corrupt  influence  (1  Cor.  v. 
6-13).  (6)  Because  of  the  dishonour  to  God  which  their  presence  in  the 
Church  involves.  (2)  The  wicked  will  be  excluded  from  the  city  of  God  above. 
Conclusion  :  1.  He  who  demands  this  purity  has  provided  the  means  whereby  we 
may  attain  unto  it.  "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  His  Son  cleanseth  us  from  all 
sin."  2.  Let  us  diligently  use  the  means  which  He  has  provided.  "Wash  you, 
make  yon  clean,"  &c.  {W.  Jones.)  In  the  midst  whereof  I  dwell.— God  ever 
present  with  His  people: — This  teaches  us  that  God  is  evermore  present  with  His 
people.  This  appeareth  in  the  example  of  Joseph  (Gen.  xxxix.  21,  23).  I  will 
propound  a  few  reasons.     1.  He  ^''.\  save  those  that  are  His.     His  presence  is  not 


CHAP,  v.]  NUMBERS.     ■  31 

a  vain  presence,  neither  is  He  an  idle  beholder  of  things  that  are  done  ;  but  His 
presence  is  to  prosper  and  to  save  (Jer.  xxx.  11).  We  must  not  therefore  dream  of 
a  presence  that  effecteth  nothing,  but  rather  willeth  His  people  oftentimes  to  stand 
still,  while  He  worketh  all  in  all.  2.  They  have  good  success  in  their  lawful 
labours,  so  that  He  maketh  the  works  of  their  hands  prosperous.  Uses  :  1.  For  the 
increase  of  a  sound  faith  in  God.  He  leaveth  them  not  to  themselves  ;  He  with- 
draweth  not  His  strength  from  them ;  He  delivereth  them  not  to  the  lust  and 
pleasure  of  their  enemies.  This  is  it  which  He  telleth  Joshua  after  the  death  of 
Moses  (Judges  i.  6).  2.  This  teacheth  us  this  good  duty,  that  we  take  heed  we  do 
not  defile  ourselves  with  the  pollutions  of  sin.  For  how  shall  we  dare  to  commit 
sin  that  is  so  highly  displeasing  in  His  sight,  forasmuch  as  He  is  with  us  to  behold 
us  and  all  our  actions  ?     (W.  Attersoll.)  God  dwelling  toitli  His  people  :—l.  God 

IS  PRESENT  WITH  His  PEOPLE.  1.  Influeutially  (Psa.  cxxxix.  1,  10).  2.  Sympa- 
thetically (Gen.  xxviii.  16,  17';  John  xiv.  16-26;  1  John  i.  3).  II.  God  is  present 
IN  THE  MIDST  OF  His  PEOPLE.  1.  As  to  the  Centre  of  union.  2.  As  the  source  of 
blessing.  Life,  light,  power,  beauty,  &c.  III.  God's  peesexce  in  the  midst  of 
His  people  should  exeht  a  great  and  blessed  influence  upon  them.  1.  A 
restraint  from  sin.  2.  An  incentive  to  holiness.  8.  An  encouragement  to  duty. 
4.  An  assurance  of  support  in  the  toils  and  trials  of  life.  5.  An  assurance  of 
victory  in  the  conflicts  of  life.  6.  An  assurance  of  perfect  salvation.  {W.  Joiii's.) 
The  presence  of  God  among  His  people  demands  holiness  on  tlieir  part : — Redenii^tion 
was  the  basis  of  God's  dwelling  in  the  midst  of  His  people.  But  we  must  remember 
that  diseipHne  was  essential  to  His  continucnce  amongst  them.  He  could  not 
dwell  where  evil  was  deliberately  sanctioned.  It  may,  however,  be  said,  in  reply, 
"  Does  not  God  the  Holy  Ghost  dwell  in  the  individual  believer,  and  yet  there  is 
much  evil  in  him?  "  True,  the  Holy  Ghost  dwells  in  the  believer,  on  the  ground 
of  accomplished  redemption.  He  is  there,  not  as  the  sanction  of  what  is  of 
nature,  but  as  the  seal  of  what  is  of  Christ ;  and  His  presence  and  fellowship  are 
enjoyed  just  in  proportion  as  the  evil  in  us  is  habitually  judged.  So  also  in 
reference  to  the  assembly.  No  doubt,  there  is  evil  there — evil  in  each  individual 
member,  and  therefore  evil  in  the  body  corporate.  But  it  must  be  judged  ;  and,  if 
judged,  it  is  not  allowed  to  act,  it  is  rendered  null.  We  are  not  to  juilge  motives, 
but  we  are  to  judge  ways.  The  very  moment  a  man  enters  the  assembly,  he  takes 
his  place  in  that  sphere  where  discipline  is  exercised  upon  ever*  thing  contrary  to 
the  holiness  of  the  One  who  dwells  there.  And  let  not  the  reader  suppose,  for  a 
moment,  that  the  unity  of  the  body  is  touched  when  the  discipline  of  the  house  is 
maintained.  We  frequently  hear  it  said  of  those  who  rightly  seek  to  maintain  the 
discipline  of  the  house  of  God,  that  they  are  rending  the  body  of  Christ.  There 
could  hardly  be  a  greater  mistake.  The  fact  is,  the  fonner  is  our  bounden  duty ;  the 
latter,  an  utter  impossibility.  The  discipline  of  God's  house  must  be  carried  out ; 
but  the  unity  of  Christ's  body  can  never  be  dissolved.  And  why,  we  may  ask,  was 
this  separation  demanded  ?  Was  it  to  uphold  the  reputation  or  respectability  of  the 
people?  Nothing  of  the  sort.  What  then  ?  "  That  they  defile  not  tbeir  camps  in 
the  midst  whereof  I  dwell."  And  so  is  it  now.  We  do  not  judge  and  put  away  bad 
doctrine,  in  order  to  maintain  our  orthodoxy;  neither  do  we  judge  and  put  away 
moral  evil,  in  order  to  maintain  our  reputation  and  respectability.  The  only 
ground  of  judgment  and  putting  away  is  this,  "  Holiness  becometh  Thine  house,  0 
Lord,  for  ever."  God  dwells  in  the  midst  of  His  people.  {C.  H.  Mackintosh.)  No 
Church  ought  to  tolerate  open  offenders : — No  Church  ought  to  tolerate  any  filthy  livers, 
or  unclean  persons,  or  notorious  offenders  among  them  (Dent,  xxiii.  17 ;  1  Cor.  v.  1, 2 ; 
Eph.  V.  3-5).  This  truth  may  be  further  strengthened  by  many  reasons.  1.  For 
it  is  a  comely  thing  for  the  saints  of  God  to  do  so  :  that  as  they  differ  from  heathf-n 
men,  so  they  may  differ  from  heathen  meetings.  Moses  teacheth  that  they  ought 
to  put  out  evil  from  them,  because  they  are  an  holy  people  (Dent,  xxiii.  14).  2.  For 
the  neglect  of  this  duty,  the  wrath  of  God  falleth  npon  the  sons  of  men.  He  is  the 
God  of  order,  and  requireth  that  all  things  in  the  Church  be  done  in  order.  Hence 
it  is  that  the  apostle  saith  (Col.  iii.  6).  And  we  have  sundry  examples  of  this  in  the 
people  of  Israel,  who  were  diversely  destroyed  because  of  their  sins  (1  Cor.  x.  5). 
3.  We  showed  before  that  they  were  as  unclean  beasts,  and  should  nut  be  admitted 
to  the  fellowship  of  Christ's  sheep  which  are  clean,  lest  they  defile  them  through 
their  contagion,  and  tread  down  with  their  feet  the  residue  of  their  pastures.  The 
apostle  saith  (1  Cor.  v.  6).  Sin  therefore  being  infectious,  the  sinner  is  not  to  be 
tolerated  in  the  assembly  of  the  riphteous.  Uses:  1.  It  should  minister  great 
matter  of  much  sorrow  to  every  society  of  Christian  men  and  women,  when  any  of 


32  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  v. 

the  congregation  grow  to  be  thus  profane  and  defiled  with  the  contagion  of  sin. 
Is  it  not  a  great  grief  to  have  any  one  member  of  the  body  cut  otf?  This  the 
apostle  teacheth  (1  Cor.  v.  2.)  2.  It  is  a  cause  of  great  mercy  and  of  a  wonderful 
blessing  from  God,  when  such  as  transgress  are  resisted  and  punished.  So  long 
as  sin  is  suffered,  God  is  offended,  and  His  wrath  is  extended  over  those  places 
and  persons.  He  hath  a  controversy  against  those  that  sin  against  Him.  3. 
Every  congregation  is  bound  to  purge  tlieir  own  body  from  such  excrements 
and  filthiness  as  annoy  it.  We  must  have  herein  true  zeal  and  godly  courage 
in  the  cause  of  God  and  His  truth.  We  must  not  stand  in  fear  of  the  faces  of 
men,  though  they  be  never  so  great  and  mighty.  The  censures  of  the  Cburch 
must  not  be  like  the  spider's  web,  which  catcheth  flies  and  gnats,  whereas  the  bigger 
creatures  break  from  it.  This  reproveth  such  as  dare  not  deal  with  great  men,  rich 
men,  and  mighty  men :  they  are  afraid  to  touch  them  lest  they  purchase  their 
displeasure.  4.  Is  no  Church  to  tolerate  any  open  offenders  among  them  ?  Then 
they  must  use  the  censure  of  excommunication  as  an  ordinance  of  God,  not  an 
invention  of  men  :  and  not  only  know  the  nature  and  use  of  it,  but  practise  it  to  the 
glory  of  God,  and  to  the  good  of  others.  This  is  it  which  our  Saviour  Christ  hath 
left  and  commanded  to  be  executed  among  us  (Matt,  xviii.  17).     (W.Attersoll.) 

Vers.  6-10.  Recompense  Ws  trespass. — The  law  as  to  fraud  : — 1.  He  must  con- 
fess his  sin,  and  crave  pardon  from  the  bottom  of  his  heart;  he  must  submit 
himself  unto  God,  knowing  that  he  can  by  no  means  hide  his  sin,  nor  by  any 
colour  keep  it  from  the  sight  of  God.  2.  We  must  make  satisfaction  to  Him 
whom  we  have  wronged.  It  is  not  enough  to  make  open  confession  unto  God, 
unless  also  we  make  actual  restitution  unto  men.  This  is  done  to  discourage 
injurious  persons.  For  if  they  should  only  restore  the  principal,  they  know,  if 
their  offences  were  found  out,  they  should  be  no  losers.  3.  He  must  seek  re- 
conciliation and  atonement  with  God,  by  offering  up  of  a  ram  in  sacrifice,  which 
figured  out  the  suffering  of  Christ,  and  offering  up  of  Himself  once  upon  the 
Cross,  for  the  discharge  of  our  sin,  and  appeasing  of  the  wrath  of  His  Father. 
It  shall  profit  us  nothing  to  be  at  peace  with  men,  except  we  be  at  peace  with 
our  God.  This  the  enacting  of  the  Law :  an  exception  is  annexed  by  way  of 
prevention.  For  the  offender  that  hath  trespassed  against  his  neighbour  might 
object  and  say,  How  can  I  restore  that  I  have  taken  ?  It  may  be  the  party  is  dead  ; 
it  may  be  he  hath  neither  son  nor  daughter  nor  kinsman :  may  I  not  then  lawfully 
conceal  it,  and  justly  retain  it  unto  myself?  I  answer,  nay ;  the  Lord  answereth. 
Thou  shalt  by  no  means  detain  the  goods  that  are  not  thine  own,  if  thou  look 
for  any  good  at  My  hand.  If  the  owner  be  dead  or  unknown,  and  he  have  none 
of  his  kindred  and  alliance  living  to  be  his  heir,  it  shall  not  be  thine,  it  is  the  Lord's, 
and  He  giveth  it  unto  the  priest  for  a  recompeuse  of  his  labours  in  the  tabernacle. 
God  is  the  Lord  of  the  soil ;  He  challengeth  it  at  His  own,  and  He  disposeth  it  at 
His  own  pleasure.  (Ibid.)  Fraud  and  forgiveness  : — I.  The  sin  of  fraud.  1. 
As  assuming  many  forms.  (1)  Fraud  in  the  matter  of  goods  entrusted  to  the 
keeping  of  another.  (2)  In  business  transactions.  (3)  In  seizing  by  force  that 
which  belongs  to  another.  (4)  In  wronging  anotber  by  means  of  deceit.  (5)  In 
the  finder  of  lost  property  injuring  the  loser  by  falsehood.  And  in  our  own  age 
fraud  assumes  many  forms,  and  is  widely  prevalent.  The  employer  who  does  not 
pay  just  wages  to  those  in  his  service  is  guilty  of  it  (Prov.  xxii.  16  ;  Isa.  iii.  14,  15 ; 
Col.  iv.  1 ;  Isa.  V.  4).  So  also  is  the  servant  or  workman  who  squanders  the  time 
for  which  his  employer  pays  him ;  in  so  doing  he  defrauds  his  employer.  The 
trader  who  takes  an  unfair  advantage  of  his  customer,  which  he  calls  by  some 
special  name,  e.g.,  "practice  of  the  trade,"  &c. ;  the  broker  or  speculator  or  manager 
who  induces  persons  to  invest  their  money  in  unreliable  enterprises ;  the  person 
who  contracts  a  debt  without  the  sincere  intention  and  reasonable  prospect  of 
paying  it— all  these,  and  others,  are  guilty  of  fraud.  2.  As  a  wrong  done  to  God. 
II.  The  conditions  of  its  forgiveness.  1.  Consciousness  of  guilt.  "The  ex- 
pression, '  that  person  be  guilty,' does  not  merely  refer  to  his  actual  criminaHty; 
but  to  his  consciousness  of  guilt  respecting  it :  for  this  case  must  be  distinguished 
from  that  of  a  person  detected  in  dishonesty  which  be  attempted  to  conceal." 
Without  thp  consciousness  of  guilt  the  other  conditions  of  forgiveneS':  could  not  be 
truly  complied  with.  2.  Confession.  "Then  they  shall  confess  tbeir  sin  which 
they  have  done."  This  is  an  essential  condition  of  forgiveness  (Psa.  xxxii.  5  ; 
Prov.  xxviii.  13  ;  1  John  i.  9).  In  itself  it  relieves  the  burdened  soul,  and  leads  to 
the  joy  and  peace  of  forgiveness.     3.  Restitution  is  essential  to  remission  of  sin ; 


CHAP,  v.]  NUMBERS.  33 

for  where  restitution  is  not  made  it  is  evident  that  sincere  repentance  is  absent 
(Ezek.  xviii.  7,  9,  12,  13,  xxxiii.  15).  4.  Sacrifice.  In  addition  to  making  resti- 
tution the  offender  was  commanded  to  offer  "  the  ram  of  the  atonement,  whereby 
an  atonement  shall  be  made  for  him."  Conclusion  :  1.  Let  those  who  have  injured 
others  make  speedy  and  full  confession  and  restitution.  2.  Let  us  all  cultivate  the 
most  thorough  integrity  and  uprightness  in  our  whole  life  and  conduct.  (W.  Jones.) 
Restitution: — When  Mr.  Moody  was  once  speaking  upon  prayer,  an  incident 
occurred  illustrating  his  subject,  which  made  a  profound  impression,  and  came 
home  to  every  one.  He  said  true  prayer  consisted  of  ten  elements — Adoration, 
Confession,  Bestitution,  Thanksgiving,  Unity,  or  Brotherly  Love,  the  Spirit  of 
Forgiveness,  Faith,  Ask  (with  a  beggar's  importunity,  a  servant's  docility,  and  a 
friend's  confidence),  Perseverance,  and  last.  Submission.  When  he  came  to  the 
third  flement,  Bestitution,  a  man  rose  in  the  audience  and  cried  out :  "Mr.  Moody, 
let  me  cut  in  here.  I  went  to  Texas  five  years  ago,  having  cheated  my  creditors  of 
15,000  dollars.  My  wife  and  I  thought  we  were  real  smart.  We  settled  in  one 
of  the  cities,  bought  a  nice  house  and  furnished  it  tip  top  ;  grand  piano,  Brussels 
carpets,  and  my  wife  thought  no  end  of  the  lace  curtains.  But  we  had  hardly  got 
settled  down  when  Mr.  Moody  came  along,  and,  like  others,  we  followed  the  crowd 
of  '  professors '  and  church  members.  He  preached  the  same  sermon  we  have  so 
far  heard  to-night.  The  Spirit  of  God  convicted  me  and  my  wife  both  of  sin,  on 
this  head  of  Bestitution,  and  we  went  home  perfectly  miserable.  I  said,  'Loo, 
what  are  we  to  do  ?  '  '  Do  ! '  says  she ;  '  you  know  what  to  do  without  asking  me  ; 
repay  everybody  to  the  last  cent.'  No  sooner  said  than  done  ;  the  house  was  sold 
and  an  auction  called  right  away  ;  and,  oh,  the  joy  I  had  in  handing  up  the  silver- 
ware and  the  china.  The  piano  and  all  went,  but  my  wife  was  so  happy  at  parting 
with  the  lace  curtains  it  was  really  curious.  Then  we  took  two  little  rooms,  a  bed- 
room and  a  kitchen,  and  the  only  table  we  had  was  the  one  we  had  used  in  the 
kitchen  for  chopping  meat  on ;  but  the  Lord  filled  us  with  Himself,  and  we  had 
peace  and  joy,  because  we  had  pardon  and  a  clean  conscience.  The  dear  Lord  has 
blessed  me  far  above  my  desert  and  beyond  what  the  devil  led  me  to  steal,  and  we 
have  come  to  Northfield  to  praise  the  Lord,  and  carryback  with  us  to  Texas  a  fresh 
baptism  of  the  blessed  power  which  set  us  free  five  years  ago." 

Vers.  11-31.  If  any  man's  wife  go  aside. — The  trial  of  the  suspected  wife : — I. 

CoNFrOENCE    IN    CONJUGAL    RELATIONS    IS    OF    GBEAX    IMPORTANCE.        "  Suspici'on,"    SayS 

Bp.  Babington,  "  is  the  cut-throat  and  poison  of  all  love  and  friendship."  And 
in  proportion  to  the  intensity  of  the  love  will  be  the  anguish  of  suspicion  in  respect 
to  the  object  of  the  love.  II.  Adultery  is  a  sin  of  the  greatest  enormity.  This 
dreadful  ordeal,  which  was  intended  to  prevent  it,  shows  how  great  was  its  heinous- 
ness  in  the  Divine  estimation.  This  is  expressed — 1.  In  the  abasement  of  the 
suspected  woman.  The  "  barley  meal,"  of  which  the  offering  whs  composed,  the 
"  earthern  vessel "  which  contained  the  water,  and  "  the  dust  "  that  was  put  into 
the  water,  indicate  a  state  of  deep  humiliation  and  disgrace.  Tl.a  absence  from  the 
offering  of  oil,  the  symbol  of  the  gifts  and  graces  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  and  of  frank- 
incense, the  symbol  of  prayer,  also  proclaimed  her  questionable  repute  and  the 
suspicion  with  which  she  was  regarded.  In  like  manner  the  "  uncovering  of  the 
woman's  head  "  was  indicative  of  the  loss  of  woman's  best  ornament,  chastity  and 
fidelity  in  the  marriage  relation.  2.  In  the  terrible  punishment  which  came  upon 
the  guilty.  This  ordeal  was  made  so  terrible  that  the  dread  of  it  might  effectually 
prevent  the  wives  in  Israel  from  the  least  violation  of  their  fidelity  to  their 
husbands.  It  remains  as  an  impressive  proclamation  of  the  utter  abhorrence  with 
which  God  regaids  the  sin  of  adultery.  It  is  a  sin  against  God ;  it  inflicts  the  most 
intolerable  injury  upon  the  husband;  it  is  an  unmitigated  blight  ui  on  the  family; 
and  it  is  a  wrong  to  society  generally.  The  most  terrible  condemnations  are 
pronounced  upon  it  in  the  Sacred  Word  (Lev.  xx.  10  ;  Mai.  iii.  5  ;  1  Cor.  vi.  9,  10  ; 
Heb.  xiii.  4).  III.  The  punishment  of  sin  is  closely  related  to  tbe  sin  itself. 
The  punishment  came  in  those  portions  of  her  body  which  she  had  abused.  IV. 
God  will  bring  to  light  the  becret  sins  of  men.  If  the  suspected  woman  were 
guilty,  after  this  ordeal  her  guilt  would  be  made  manifest.  All  sins  are  known 
unto  Him.  V.  God  will  assuredly  vindicate  the  innocent  who  have  sufferei) 
FROM  suspicion  AND  SLANDER.  In  this  casc  the  vindication  was  most  complete. 
•'  If  the  woman  be  not  defiled,  but  be  clean ;  then  she  shall  be  free,  and  sball 
conceive  seed."  "  If  not  guilty  after  such  a  trial,"  says  Adam  Clarke,  "  she  had 
great  honour;  and,  accordiing  to  the  rabbins,  became  strong,  healthy,  and  fruitful; 

8 


34  THE  niBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ti. 

ior  if  she  was  before  barren,  she  now  began  to  bear  children  ;  if  before  she  had 
only  daughters,  she  now  be^an  to  have  sons ;  if  before  she  had  hard  travail,  she 
now  had  easy  ;  in  a  word,  she  was  blessrcd  in  her  body,  her  soul,  and  her  substance." 
Thus  to  the  innocent  there  was  no  terror  in  this  stern  ordeal.  It  was  ratber  a 
blessing  to  them,  if  by  any  means  they  had  come  to  be  regarded  with  suspicion  by 
their  husbands ;  for  by  means  of  it  such  susjDicions  would  be  removed,  and  their 
fidelity  and  honour  vindicated  and  exalted.  And  God  will,  sooner  or  later, 
splendidly  vindicate  all  who  suffer  from  misrepresentation,  slander,  or  false 
accusation.  (IF.  Jones.)  Innocence  mysteriously  declared: — Aunt  C.  Fox  told  us 
of  an  American  friend  who  once  felt  a  concern  to  go  somewhere,  he  knew  not  where. 
He  ordered  his  gig,  his  servant  asking  where  he  was  to  drive.  "Up  and  down  the 
road,"  said  his  master.  At  last  they  met  a  funeral.  "Follow  this  funeral."  said 
the  master.  They  followed  in  the  procession  till  they  came  to  the  churchyard. 
Whilst  the  service  was  being  performed  the  friend  sat  in  his  gig  ;  at  its  conclusion 
he  walked  to  the  grave,  and  said  solemnly,  "  The  person  now  buried  is  innocent  of 
the  crime  laid  to  her  charge."  An  elderly  gentleman  in  deep  mourning  came 
up  to  him  in  great  agitation,  and  said,  "  Sir,  what  you  have  said  has  surprised  me 
very  much."  "I  can't  help  it,  I  can't  help  it,"  replied  the  other;  "I  only  said 
■what  I  was  obliged  to  say."  "  Well,"  said  the  mourner,  "  the  person  just  buried 
is  my  wife,  who  for  some  years  has  lain  under  the  suspicion  of  intidelily  to  me.  No 
one  else  knew  of  it,  and  on  her  death-bed  she  again  protested  her  innocence,  and 
said  that  if  I  would  not  believe  her  then,  a  witness  to  it  would  be  raised  up  even  at 
her  grave-side."  (Caroline's  Fox's  Journal.)  Innocence  strangely  declared: — It 
is  recorded  in  history  that  a  beautiful  maiden,  named  Blanche,  the  serf  of  an 
ancient  nobleman,  was  wooed  by  her  master's  son.  Not  admiring  his  character,  she 
scorned  his  suit.  Upon  this,  his  course  of  love  turned  to  bitter  hatred.  Just  then 
a  precious  string  of  pearls  confided  to  the  maiden's  care  was  lost.  Her  pseudo- 
lover  charged  her  with  the  theft,  and,  in  accordance  with  the  customs  of  that  rude 
age,  she  was  doomed  to  die.  On  the  day  of  the  execution,  as  the  innocent  girl 
knelt  to  offer  her  dying  prayer,  a  flash  of  lightning  struck  a  statue  of  Justice,  which 
adorned  the  market-place,  to  the  dust.  From  a  scattered  bird's  nest,  built  in  a 
crevice  of  the  image,  dropped  the  lost  pearls — thus  declaring  her  innocence.  In 
a  moment  the  exultant  crowd  rushed  to  the  scaffold,  demanding  her  release.  There 
she  knplt  beside  the  block,  pale  and  beautiful,  and  with  a  smile  of  peace  upon  her 
lips.  They  spoke — she  answered  not.  They  touched  her — she  was  dead !  To 
preserve  her  memory,  they  raised  a  statue  there  ;  and  to  this  day,  when  men  gaze 
upon  her  image,  they  condemn  her  oppressnr ;  they  praise  her  for  the  purity  of  her 
character;  they  recognise  the  justice  of  Him  whose  lightnings  testified  to  her 
innocence.  (IF.  Smith.)  A  fallacious  test  of  innocence  : — Man  frequently  satisfies 
himself  that  he  has  come  to  an  accurate  conclusion  merely  because,  on  the  apjili- 
cation  of  what  he  considers  an  infallible  test,  he  discovers  a  particular  anticipated 
result.  Often  enough  the  test  is  utterly  fallacious.  Take  an  example.  The 
tanghin,  or  tanguen,  is  the  only  plant  of  its  genus,  and  is  confined  to  Madagascar. 
Its  poisonous  seed  is  esteemed  by  the  natives  an  infallible  criterion  of  guilt  or 
innocence.  After  being  pounded,  a  small  piece  is  swallowed  by  the  supposed 
criminal.  If  he  be  cursed  with  a  strong  stomach,  which  retains  the  poison,  he 
speedily  dies,  and  is  held  guilty;  if  his  feeble  digestion  rejects  it,  he  necessarily 
escapes,  and  his  innocence  is  considered  proven.  Now  it  is  obvious  to  any  educated 
mind  that  innocence  and  guilt  are  in  no  way  disclosed  by  this  process.  Yet 
inasmuch  as  it  has  been  accepted  as  a  test,  its  results  are  unquestioned.  And  there 
are  numberless  instances  in  which  English  society  consents  to  be  governed  by  the 
results  of  tests,  simply  because  those  tests  are  generally  accepted.  Again  and  again 
it  becomes  important  to  inquire  whether,  supposing  your  test  does  disclose  a  given 
result,  that  test  is  really  as  infallible  as  you  deem  it  to  be?  Many  will  be  found 
to  be  only  "  tanghin  "  tests,  and  as  such  utterly  fallacious.    {Scientijic  Illustrations.) 


CHAPTER  VI. 

VKrs.  1-21.     A  vo\7  of  a  Nazarlte. — The  law  of  von-s  (irith  .special  reference  to  the 
Kuzurite) : — 1.  The  principle  of  the  vow  is  that  <3od  has  placed  earth's  good  things 


CHAP.  VI.]  NUMBERS. 


at  man's  disposal ;  and  it  is  a  becoming  thing  in  him  to  give  so  mucli  of  it  back  to 
God  (1  Chron.  xxix,  14,  16 ;  Jonah  i.  16).  But  once  made,  there  was  no  option  in 
the  performance  of  the  vow.  No  vow  was  better  than  a  voiv  unpaid  (Deut.  xxiii. 
21,  22 :  Eccles.  v.  4-6).  2.  The  subjects  of  vows  were  endless  as  a  m m's  posses- 
sions. They  extended  even  to  the  person  of  himself  or  others  over  whom  he  might 
have  control  (Lev.  xxvii).  3.  But  the  vow  at  once  most  prominent  in  the  Old 
Testament,  and  coming  nearest  to  the  personal  consecration  asked  for  in  the  New, 
is  that  of  the  Nazarite.  The  Nazaritish  vow  is  explainable  neither  on  the  one 
hand  as  stoicism,  nor  on  the  other  as  a  mystic  representation  of  the  Divine  power 
working  in  man.  It  represents  the  ideal  of  sacrifice,  in  the  devotement  of  a  man's 
own  person  to  God.  I.  The  makes  of  dedication  laid  upon  the  Nazarite.  1.  He 
is  to  abstain  from  all  alcoholic  liquor;  and,  to  avoid  danger  or  suspicion,  must 
abstain  from  all  that  comes  from  the  vine  (chap.  vi.  3,  4).  As  a  similar  regulation 
was  made  regarding  the  priests  when  in  God's  service  (Lev.  x.  9),  the  inference  is 
that  indulgence  in  strong  drink  specially  unfits  a  man  for  God's  presence  or  in- 
dwelling. 2.  He  is  to  leave  his  hair  unshorn  (chap.  vi.  5),  obvious'ly  as  a  badge  of 
his  position.  The  meaning  of  the  Nazarite's  long  hair,  i.e.  his  subjection  to  God, 
gives  meaning  to  the  woman's  long  hair  (1  Cor.  xi.  10),  viz.  her  subjection  to  man. 
3.  He  must  not  come  into  contact  with  the  dead  (chap.  vi.  7).  The  lesson  lay  in 
the  close  connection  between  death  and  sin,  and  carried  the  promise  of  victory  over 
death  to  him  who  sought  the  victory  over  sin.  IL  The  EXAiirLEs  pbesented  in 
ScRiPTDEE  OF  THE  Nazabite  vow.  The  VOW  wp.s  generally  taken  for  a  short  period 
— from  thirty  to  sixty  days — and  probably  its  very  commonness  prevents  its  being 
much  noticed  in  Scripture.  But  there  are  some  notable  examples  of  Nazarites  for 
life.  Samson  was,  in  the  full  sense  of  the  word,  a  life-Nazarite  (.Judges  xiii. ).  In 
the  case  of  Samuel  (1  Sam.  i.  11),  no  mention  is  maile  of  abstinence,  and  in  the 
case  of  John  Baptist  (Luke  i.  15)  no  mention  is  made  of  the  hair  ;  but  it  is  probable 
that  they  were  both  full  Nazarites.  III.  Its  application  to  ourselves.  1.  In 
Bible  times  it  was  a  permissible  and  honourable  thiug  to  abstain  from  intoxicating 
drinks.  When  God  had  any  specially  great  or  holy  work  for  a  man  to  do.  He  would 
have  him  a  Nazarite  or  an  abstainer  (Lev.  x.  9,  &c.).  He  classes  the  Nazarite  with 
the  prophet  (Amos  ii.  11).  Have  we  any  less  reason  to-day  to  be  abstainers  than 
these  men  had  ?  2.  The  Nazaritish  vow  raises  the  question  of  our  entire  consecra- 
tion to  God.  Christ  was  not  an  abstainer  because  He  is  the  one  perfect  exnmple  of 
consecration,  and  representative  of  the  body  which  shall  yet  stand  in  its  completed 
freedom  before  God.  There  will  be  no  vows  in  heaven,  because  at  every  moment 
the  heart's  choice  will  be  all  that  it  should  be.  But  if  we  put  vows  from  us  now, 
we  have  to  ask,  Is  it  because  we  are  above  them,  or  because  we  are  below  them? 
{W.  Roberts,  M.A.)  The  ordinance  of  Nazariteship : — 1.  The  fruit  of  the  vine,  in 
every  shape  and  form,  was  to  him  a  forbidden  thing.  Now,  wine,  as  we  know,  is 
the  apt  symbol  of  earthly  joy^the  expression  of  that  social  enjoyment  which  the 
human  heart  is  so  fully  capable  of  entering  into.  From  this  the  Nazarite  in  the 
wilderness  was  sedulously  to  keep  himself.  It  is  a  very  grave  question  indeed  how 
far  we,  as  Christians,  are  really  entering  into  the  meaning  and  power  of  this  intense 
separation  from  all  the  excitement  of  nature  and  from  all  merely  earthly  joy.  It 
may  perhaps  be  said,  "  What  harm  is  there  in  having  a  little  amusement  or  recrea- 
tion? Has  not  God  given  us  richly  all  things  to  enjoy  ?  And  while  we  are  in  tlie 
world,  is  it  not  right  that  we  should  enjoy  it?  "  We  reply,  it  is  not  a  question  of 
the  harm  of  this,  that,  or  the  other.  Tliere  was  no  harm,  as  a  general  rule,  in 
wine,  nothing  abstractedly  wrong  in  the  vine  tree.  The  question  for  us  is  this, 
Do  we  aim  at  being  Nazarites?  Do  we  sigh  after  thorough  separation  and  devote- 
ment of  ourselves,  in  body,  soul,  and  spirit,  unto  God  ?  If  so,  we  must  be  apart 
from  all  these  things  in  which  mere  nature  finds  its  enjoyment.  2.  But  th^re  was 
another  thing  which  marked  the  Nazarite.  He  was  not  to  shave  his  head.  Ir. 
1  Cor.  xi.  14,  we  leaiii  that  it  argues  a  lack  of  dignity  for  a  man  to  have  long  hair. 
From  this  we  learn  that  if  we  really  desire  to  live  a  life  of  separation  to  God,  we 
must  be  prepai'ed  to  surrender  our  dignity  in  nature.  Now  here  is  just  the 
very  thing  which  we  so  little  like  to  do.  We  naturally  stand  up  for  our  dignity 
and  seek  to  maintain  our  rights.  It  is  deemed  manly  so  to  do.  But  the  perfect 
Man  never  did  so ;  and  if  we  aim  at  being  Nazarites  we  shall  not  do  so  either.  We 
must  surrender  the  dignities  of  nature,  and  forego  the  joys  of  earth,  if  we  would 
tread  a  path  of  thorough  separation  to  God  in  this  world.  By  and  by  both  will 
be  in  place  ;  but  not  now.  This  simplifies  the  matter  amazingly.  It  answers  a 
thousand  questions  and  solves  a  thousand  difficulties.     It  is  of  little  use  to  split 


36  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

hairs  about  the  harm  of  this  or  that  particular  thing.  The  question  is,  What  is 
our  real  purpose  and  object  ?  Do  we  merely  want  to  get  on  as  men,  or  do  we 
long  to  live  as  true  Nazarites  ?  3.  The  Nazarite  was  not  to  touch  a  dead  body  (vers. 
6,  7).  When  once  the  consecration  of  God  rested  upon  the  head  of  any  one,  that 
important  fact  became  the  touchstone  of  all  morality.  It  placed  the  individual  on 
entirely  new  ground,  and  rendered  it  imperative  upon  him  to  look  at  everything 
from  a  peculiar  point  of  view.  He  was  no  longer  to  ask  what  became  him  as  a 
man;  but  what  became  him  as  a  Nazarite.  4.  We  behold,  in  the  person  of  the 
Nazarite,  a  type  of  one  who  sets  out  in  some  special  path  of  devotrdness  or  conse- 
cration to  Christ.  The  power  of  continuance  in  this  path  consists  in  secret 
communion  with  God  ;  so  that  if  the  communion  be  interrupted,  the  power  is  gone. 
(C.  H.  Machintosh.)  Nazarite  rvles : — 1.  No  juice  of  grape,  no  produce  of  the 
vine,  may  touch  the  consecrated  lips.  This  principle  is  broad  and  deep.  Flee 
whatever  may  tend  to  weaken  the  firm  energy,  or  to  stir  up  the  sleeping  brood  of 
sensual  and  ungodly  lusts.  More  than  gross  vice  is  branded  here.  Evils  mny 
enter  in  a  pigmy  form.  At  first  they  may  seem  harmless.  Avoid  them.  Tbey  are 
the  cancer's  touch.  They  are  the  weed's  first  seed.  2.  No  razor  approaches  the 
Nazarite's  hair.  His  flowing  locks  openly  announce  his  separate  state.  The  dedi- 
cation must  not  be  a  secret  act,  known  only  to  the  conscience  and  the  Lord. 
Religion  is  not  for  the  closet  or  the  knees  alone.  It  is  not  a  lily,  growing  only  in 
the  shade.  It  is  to  be  the  one  attire  in  which  you  move  abroad — the  holy  crown 
which  sparkles  on  your  brow.  3.  He  must  avoid  all  contact  with  the  dead.  Among 
tbe  living  he  must  live.  Wherefore  is  death  to  be  thus  shunned  ?  It  is  the  penalty 
of  sin — the  sign  of  God's  most  righteous  wrath.  It  is  a  proof  of  innocence  de- 
stroyed— of  evil  touched — of  vengeance  merited.  It  is  abomination's  colleague. 
Therefore  it  is  emblem  of  what  holy  men  should  holily  abhor.  (Dean  Law.) 
The  Nazarite  : — It  is  to  be  noticed  here  that  tbis  separation  was  voluntary  and  in 
full  accordance  with  the  self-determination  of  the  will  power.  The  Nazarite,  of  his 
own  choice,  vowed  a  vow  that  for  a  certain  time  at  least  he  would  be  all  the  Lord's. 
This  indicated  his  conscious  choice.  He  could  make  the  vow,  or  he  could  decline 
to  do  so.  In  all  his  dealings  with  men,  God  recognises  and  honours  their  will 
power.  No  one  is  coerced  into  His  service.  No  one  is  over-con-trained  to  set  him- 
self apart  for  God.  And  so  it  is  with  Christian  holiness — the  New  Testament  idea 
of  Nazaritism.  Men  must  first  of  all,  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  will  to  be  all  the  Lord's. 
They  must  will  to  give  up  themselves,  the  world,  and  sin,  and  every  wrong  thing, 
and  to  be  separated  to  God  for  ever.  Those  Nazarites  to  God  were  among  the 
brightest  shining  lights  of  the  Jewish  disjjensation.  And  is  it  not  so  now?  The 
more  complete  the  consecration  and  separation  the  more  blessed  and  wide-spread 
and  Divine  is  the  light  which  shines  out  from  this  holy  character.  But  there  were 
certain  conditions  of  Nazariteship  then,  as  there  are  now.  First  of  all,  the  Nazarite 
was  to  be  a  total  abstainer.  No  man  who  gives  himself  up  to  the  wine-cup  can  be 
wholly  separated  to  God.  There  must  be  a  separation  from  these  things.  As  men 
draw  consciously  near  to  God  there  will  be  an  abandonment  of  intoxicants.  2. 
Their  hair  was  to  remain  uncut  (ver.  5).  In  the  olden  time  the  growth  of  the  hair 
was  thought  to  be  indicative  of  strength.  The  idea  may  have  originated  in  many 
minds  from  the  strength  in  Samson's  unshorn  locks.  But,  whatever  the  cause, 
this  has  very  generally  been  thought  to  be  the  case.  This  was  done,  we  think,  that 
it  might  be  clearly  indicated  that  nothing  was  to  emasculate  or  effeminate  the 
persons  thus  set  apart.  The  person  who  would  be  all  the  Lord's  must  give  up 
everything  which  would  mar  or  enfeeble  his  religious  character  or  life.  It  has  been 
thought  by  some  that  long  hair  is  a  token  of  subjection.  So  Paul  is  regarded  as 
teaching  in  1  Cor.  xi.  5.  Well,  let  it  be  so.  And  then  what  does  this  indicate  to 
the  ppiiitually-minded  person  ?  Why,  surely,  that  the  Christian  Nazarite  is 
entirely  under  subjection  to  God.  3.  All  who  saw  these  persons  knew  that  they 
were  Nazarites.  Their  unshorn  locks  told  at  once  their  real  character.  In  like 
manner  the  holy  Christian  will  readily  impress  the  mind  of  those  by  whom  he  is 
surrounded  that  he  belongs  to  Christ.  4.  Furthermore,  he  was  not  to  touch  any  dead 
body,  not  even  of  those  who  were  dearest  to  him.  No  one  who  aims  to  be  a  holy 
Christian  should  fail  to  keep  his  "garments  unspotted  from  the  world."  5.  The 
Christian  Nazarite's  vow  is  for  life.  With  him,  this  consecration  is  not  merely 
for  eight  days,  or  for  a  month,  or  a  year  ;  but  it  is  for  life.  [Leiois  R.  Dunn,  D.D.) 
The  vow  of  the  Nazurite ;  or,  acceptahle  consecration  to  God: — Acceptable  personal 
consecration  to  God  is  characterised  by— 1.  Voluntariness.  The  service  of  the 
slave,  or  of  the  hireling.   He   rejects.      2.   Completeness.     Divided  allegiance  is 


CHAP,  vi.]  NUMBERS.  07 

no  allegiance.  3.  Subordination  of  sensual  enjoyments.  Our  animal  passions 
must  be  controlled  by  moral  principles.  Everything  which  tends  to  weaken  our 
soul's  vision,  to  blunt  our  susceptibility  to  spiritual  impressions,  to  interrupt  our 
communion  with  God,  or  to  deprive  us  of  spiritual  purity  and  power,  we  are  bound 
to  abstain  from.  4.  Separation  from  all  moral  evil.  {W.Jones.)  Of  the  vows  of 
the  Nazarites,  and  the  use  thereof  to  us: — The  Nazarites  were  such  persons  as 
vowed  a  special  kind  of  holiness.  The  parts  of  their  special  holiness  are  two  :  first, 
while  they  were  in  this  vow;  secondly,  when  the  days  of  it  were  accomplished. 
This  is  the  vow  and  these  are  the  rites  belonging  unto  it :  now  let  us  observe  the 
uses  remaining  for  us.  For  albeit  these  ceremonies  be  all  abrogated,  yet  we  shall 
find  great  benefit  to  arise  from  hence  to  the  whole  Church.  1.  And  first  concerning 
the  sanctification  of  these  Nazarites  professing  holiness  above  others,  it  was  a  lively 
figure  of  Christ,  signifying  to  the. whole  Church  the  wonderful  purity  of  Christ,  who 
was  fully  and  perfectly  separate  from  sinners.  But  was  Christ  such  a  Nazarite  as 
these  here  spoken  of?  I  answer,  no:  He  observed  no  part  of  this  vow.  The 
Nazarites  abstained  from  wine,  the  fruit  of  the  vine,  the  blood  of  the  grape :  but 
Christ  Himself  in  His  own  person  did  not  so.  Howbeit  He  is  indeed  a  true  Nazarite, 
or  rather  the  truth  of  the  Nazarites,  separate  from  all  the  corruptions  that  attend 
upon  the  rest  of  the  sons  of  men,  free  from  the  common  defilements  of  the  world ; 
and  that  holy  One  which  is  called  the  Son  of  God.  This  is  a  great  comfort  for  us 
to  consider  the  excellency  of  His  sacrifice,  being  without  blemish,  for  it  was  most 
requisite  that  the  unspeakable  work  of  the  Spirit  should  come  in,  that  so  He  might 
not  be  tainted  with  the  common  infection  of  original  sin,  but  might  be  endued  with 
most  perfect  purity  and  innocency,  and  so  be  fully  able  to  cover  our  impurity  and 
impiety  (Ephes.  v.  26,  27),  and  withal  as  by  a  certain  pledge  assure  us,  that  in  the 
end  all  our  sins  and  imperfections  shall  be  done  away.  In  Him  is  that  fulfilled 
therefore  which  is  spoken  in  the  Lamentations,  that  He  was  whiter  than  the  milk, 
and  purer  than  the  snow,  and  it  agreeth  more  fitly  and  truly  unto  Him  than  unto 
these  Nazarites.  2.  Secondly  this  teacheth  that  such  as  were  special  ornaments 
of  the  Church,  and  have  received  a. more  eminent  office  than  others,  should  also 
labour  to  shine  before  others  in  holiness  of  life,  according  to  the  measure  of  grace 
which  they  have  received  (Rom.  xvi.  7).  These  thus  advanced  of  God  are,  in  the 
eyes  of  the  world,  as  a  city  set  upon  a  hill ;  a  little  blemish  is  soon  seen  in  their 
face,  a  small  stain  appearetn  in  their  coat ;  and  therefore  Satan  laboureth  especially 
to  tempt  and  seduce  them.  And  Christ  telleth  His  disciples  that  Satan  desired  to 
winnow  them — them  I  say  above  others  as  their  calling  was  above  others  ;  for  they 
were  the  master-builders,  and  laid  the  foundation  of  the  Church,  upon  which  others 
builded.  Let  all  those  therefore  whose  place  and  calling  and  gifts  make  them  evident 
above  others,  take  heed  to  themselves :  let  them  labour  to  cleave  more  closely  to  God, 
and  so  to  let  their  light  shine  before  men  that  they,  seeing  their  good  works,  may 
glorify  their  Father  which  is  in  heaven.  These  are  as  chief  captains  of  the  host, 
and  the  ensign-bearers  of  the  Church,  to  show  the  way  to  others  and  to  go  in  and 
out  before  them  in  an  unblamable  course  ;  and  though  they  draw  not  aU  unto  them 
by  their  example,  yet  their  fervency,  their  earnestness,  shall  serve  to  instruct  many 
others.  3.  Thirdly,  seeing  these  Nazarites  must  keep  themselves  from  wine  and 
strong  drink,  as  also  from  eating  fresh  or  dried  grapes,  so  long  as  the  days  of  their 
separation  endured,  we  learn  hereby  that  it  is  our  duty  to  fly  from  all  evil,  even  all 
the  occasions  and  allurements  of  sin  whatsoever,  though  they  be  never  so  pleasant 
to  the  eye  or  sweet  to  the  taste  ;  inasmuch  as  we  shall  find  them  in  the  end  to  be 
more  sharp  than  vinegar,  more  bitter  than  wormwood,  more  deadly  than  poison. 
(W.  Attersoll.)  Dangerous  things  to  be  avoided : — As  much  as  we  can,  let  us  keep 
ourselves  from  slippery  places,  for  even  on  dry  ground  it  is  not  very  strongly  that 
we  stand.  (J.  Spencer.)  Beyrading  effects  of  drink  : — A  minister  of  the  gospel 
told  me  in  1847  one  of  the  most  thrilling  incidents  I  ever  heard  in  my  life,  A 
member  of  his  congregation  came  home  for  the  first  time  in  his  life  intoxicated,  and 
his  boy  met  him  on  the  doorstep,  clapping  his  hands  and  exclaiming,  "  Papa  has 
come  home  1 "  He  seized  that  boy  by  the  shoulder,  swung  him  around,  staggered, 
and  fell  with  him  in  the  hall.  The  minister  said  to  me,  "  I  spent  that  night  in  that 
house.  I  went  to  the  door,  and  bared  my  brow  that  the  night  air  might  fall  upon 
it  and  cool  it ;  I  walked  up  and  down  the  hall.  There  was  his  child  dead  ;  there 
was  his  wife  in  strong  convulsions,  and  he  asleep.  A  man  but  thirty-five  years  of 
age  asleep  with  a  dead  child  in  the  house,  having  a  blue  mark  upon  the  temple 
where  the  corner  of  the  marble  steps  had  come  in  contact  with  the  head  as  he 
swung  him  round,  and  a  wife  upon  the  very  brink  of  the  grave !     I  felt  I  must 


38  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

remain  until  he  awoke,  and  I  did.  When  he  awoke  he  passed  his  hand  over  his 
face,  and  exclaimed,  'What  is  the  matter?  Where  am  I?  Where  is  my  boy?' 
'  You  cannot  see  him.' — 'Where  is  my  boy? '  he  inquired.  'You  cannot  see  him.' 
— '  Stand  out  of  my  way.  I  will  see  my  boy  !  '  To  prevent  confusion,  I  took  him 
to  that  child's  bedside,  and,  as  I  turned  down  the  sheet  and  showed  him  the  corpse, 
he  uttered  the  shriek,  '  Ah,  my  child  1  '  One  year  afterwards  that  man  was  brought 
from  a  lunatic  asylum  to  lie  side  by  side  with  his  wife  in  one  grave,  and  I  attended 
his  funeral."  The  minister  of  the  gospel  who  told  me  that  fact  is  to-day  a  drunken 
ostler  in  a  stable  in  Boston  1  Now  tell  me  what  drink  will  do.  It  will  debase, 
degrade,  imbrute,  and  damn  everything  that  is  noble,  bright,  glorious,  and  godlike 
in  a  human  being.  (J.  B.  Goiirih.)  A  faithful  abstainer  : — The  Rev.  Canon 
Wilberforce  was  once  in  the  neighbourhood  of  the  London  Docks,  in  a  little  room 
as  black  as  a  chimney,  but,  through  the  preaching  of  the  gospel,  many  souls  have 
been  born  there.  He  asked  if  any  one  would  get  up  and  say  what  God  had  done 
for  their  souls.  An  old  sailor  rose  and  said  how  bad  he  had  been  ;  felt  that  he  was 
even  a  devil's  castaway  ;  but  six  years  ago,  in  that  little  room,  he  was  led  to  see 
that  he  was  a  great  sinner,  but  that  Christ  was  a  great  Saviour,  and  that  on  the 
cross  was  nailed  every  one  of  his  sins.  "I  signed  the  pledge  and  threw  away  my 
pipe,  and  have  been  upheld  by  God,  because  every  morning  I  pray  that  I  may  be 
protected."  Returning  recently  from  Hong  Kong,  this  old  sailor  had  an  accident 
and  was  badly  scalded,  and  was  very  ill.  When  he  began  to  recover  the  doctor 
said,  "You  must  take  some  port-wine."  "No,"  said  the  old  sailor,  "I  am  a 
teetotaller."  "  But,"  said  the  doctor,  "  you  need  it  to  strengthen  you."  "  Doctor," 
said  the  old  man,  "  do  you  think  I  shall  die  if  I  don't  take  the  wine  ?  "  "  Yes," 
said  the  doctor.  "  Then,"  said  the  sailor,  "  when  you  get  into  the  St.  Katherine's 
Docks,  go  round  to  the  little  room  and  tell  them  that  the  old  man  died  sober."  But 
he  did  not  die,  and  is  alive  to  this  hour  to  testify  of  the  sufficiency  of  God's  grace 
to  keep  him. 

Vers.  23-26.  On  this  wise  ye  shall  bless  the  children  of  Israel.— The  threefold 
blessing  : — 1.  Open  the  hand  wide.  The  Father  comes  to  fill  it.  "  The  Lord  bless 
thee,  and  keep  thee."  (1)  When?  Now  and  ever,  when  you  go  out,  come  in,  sit 
down,  rise  up,  through  all  your  living  space,  and  when  the  last  breath  flutters  on 
your  lips.  (2)  Where  ?  In  every  place  in  which  you  tarry,  or  to  which  you  move  ; 
in  the  closet,  at  the  domestic  board,  at  home,  abroad,  in  still  retreat,  and  in  the 
busiest  haunts,  in  the  publicity  of  open  work,  and  in  the  sanctity  of  holiert  spots. 
(3)  How  ?  By  causing  all  things  to  minister  to  your  true  good,  by  crowning  youi 
lot  with  all  real  happinf='ss.  2.  Jesus  comes  next.  "  The  Lord  make  His  face 
shine  upon  thee,"  &c.  The  greatest  change  on  nature's  brow  is  when  light  dawns. 
Gloom  dwells  beneath  the  pall  of  night.  It  is  so  with  the  soul.  Sad  are  the  hours 
which  are  not  bright  with  Jesus.  Then  sins  affright,  and  wrath  dismays,  #nd  all 
the  future  is  despair.  This  blessing  promises  the  shining  of  His  face,  not  a  brief 
ray,  but  the  full  blaze  of  concentrated  love.  "  The  Lord  make  His  face  shine  upon 
thee."  Here,  too,  a  precious  pearl  is  added.  It  is  grace.  The  words  proceed, "  and 
be  gracious  unto  thee."  What  wonders  are  wrapt  up  in  grace  1  Its  birth  is  in  the 
heavens,  its  fruit  upon  the  earth.  It  looks  on  those  in  whom  no  merit  dwells.  3. 
The  blessing  voice  still  speaks.  "  The  Lord  lift  up  His  countenance  upon  thee," 
&c.  Can  they  who  have  received  so  much  need  more  ?  But  more  is  wondrously 
given.  The  truly  blest  have  all  the  blessings  of  a  Triune  Jehovah.  Hence  the 
Spirit's  favour  is  moreover  pledged.  Seek  Christ,  abide  in  Him,  make  Him  your 
all,  then  will  this  threefold  blessing  be  your  crown.     {Dean  Law.)  The  priestly 

blessing  : — I.  The  Divine  direction.  The  command  to  pronounce  the  blessing  may 
be  regarded  as  an  assurance  that,  when  it  was  pronounced,  the  blessing  itself  would 
be  given.  II.  The  Divine  benediction.  1.  The  significant  form  of  the  benediction. 
(1)  The  triple  use  of  the  sacred  Name  is  significant.  (2)  The  use  of  the  singular  number 
in  reference  to  the  subject  of  the  blessing  is  significant.  2.  The  Divine  fulness  of  the 
benediction.  "  As  the  threefold  repetition  of  a  word  or  sentence  serves  to  express  the 
thought  as  strongly  as  possible  {cf.  Jer.  vii.  4,  xxii.  29),  the  triple  blpssing  expressed 
in  the  most  unconditional  manner  the  thought  that  God  would  bestow  upon  His 
congregation  the  whole  fulness  of  the  blessing  enfolded  in  His  Divine  Being  which 
was  manifested  as  Jehovah."  The  blessing  includes — (1)  The  preservation  of  God. 
"The  Lord  bless  thee,  and  keep  thee."  Danger  is  implied.  We  are  weak,  inex- 
perienced, prone  to  sin,  exposed  to  temptation.  What  subtlety  can  surprise  God 
■who  is  infinite  in  intelligence?    What  strength  can  stand  against  Omnipotence ? 


CHAP.  VI.]  NUMBERS.  39 

{2)  The  favour  of  God.  "  The  Lord  make  His  face  shine,"  (fee.  When  the  Divine 
face  is  dark  with  frowns,  distress  and  death  ensue ;  when  it  is  bright  with  favours, 
hfe  and  joy  flow  to  man.  "  They  perish  at  the  rebuke  of  Thy  countenance." 
"Cause  Thy  face  to  shine,  and  we  shall  be  saved."  There  seems  to  be  an  allusion 
to  the  shilling  of  the  sun.  It  gives  life,  light,  heat,  beauty,  power,  joy.  (3)  The 
peace  of  God.  "  The  Lord  lift  up  His  countenance,"  (fee.  "  Shalom  " — peace,  "  the 
sum  of  all  the  good  which  God  sets,  prepares,  or  establishes  for  His  people." 
"Peace,  including  all  that  good  which  goes  to  make  up  a  complete  happiness." 
This  great  blessing  is  viewed  as  flowing  from  the  gracious  regard  of  God  for  man. 
Pardon,  preservation,  peace,  an  unspeakable  wealth  of  blessing  flows  to  man  from 
the  sovereign  favour  of  our  gracious  God.  IIL  The  Divine  ratification.  "  And 
they  shall  put  My  name  upon  the  children  of  Israel,  and  I  will  bless  them."  The 
benediction  was  not  to  be  the  mere  utterance  of  a  pious  wish  ;  but  God  would  give 
effect  to  it.  "A  Divine  blessing  goes  along  with  Divine  institutions,  and  puts  virtue 
and  efficacy  into  them."  God  will  certainly  bless  His  own  ordinances  unto  all  those 
who  believe.  {W.Jones.)  The  priestly  blessing: — I.  The  priests,  among  other 
^ood  offices  they  were  to  do,  are  appointed  solemnly  to  bless  the  people  in  the 
NAME  OF  the  Lord.  Hereby  God  put  an  honour  upon  the  piuest,  for  the  less  is 
blessed  of  the  better ;  and  hereby  He  gave  great  comfort  and  satisfaction  to  the 
people,  who  looked  upon  the  priest  as  God's  mouth  to  them.  Though  the  priest  of 
himself  could  do  no  more  but  beg  a  blessing,  yet  being  an  intercessor  by  office,  and 
doing  that  in  His  name  who  commands  the  blessing,  the  prayer  carried  with  it  a 
promise,  and  he  pronounced  it  as  one  having  authority,  with  his  hands  lifted  up 
and  his  face  towards  the  people.  1.  This  was  a  type  of  Christ's  errand  into  the 
world,  which  was  to  bless  us  (Acts  iii.  26)  as  the  High  Priest  of  our  profession.  The 
last  thing  He  did  on  earth  was  with  uplifted  hands  to  bless  His  disciples  (Luke 
xxiv.  50,  51).  Bishop  Pearson  observes  it  as  a  tradition  of  the  Jews,  that  the  priests 
blessed  the  people  only  at  the  close  of  the  morning  sacrifice,  not  of  the  evening 
sacrifice,  to  show  that  in  the  days  of  the  Messiah,  which  are  (as  it  were)  the  evening 
of  the  world,  the  benediction  of  the  law  should  cease,  and  ttie  blessing  of  Christ 
should  take  place.  2.  It  was  a  pattern  to  gospel  -  ministers,  the  masters  of 
assemblies,  who  are  in  like  manner  to  dismiss  their  solemn  assemblies  with 
a  blessing.  The  same  that  are  God's  mouth  to  His  people  to  teach  and  com- 
mand them,  are  His  mouth  likewise  to  bless  them  ;  and  they  that  receive 
the  law  shall  receive  the  blessing.  II.  A  form  of  blessing  is  here  prescribed 
them.  In  other  of  their  devotions  no  form  is  prescribed ;  but  this  being  God's 
command  of  the  blessing,  that  it  might  not  look  like  anything  of  their  own  He 
puts  the  very  words  into  their  mouths  (vers.  24-26).  Where  observe — 1.  That 
the  blessing  is  commanded  upon  each  particular  person  :  "  The  Lord  bless  thee." 
They  must  each  of  them  ire  lare  themselves  to  receive  the  blessing,  and  then  they 
should  find  enough  in  it  to  make  them  every  man  happy  (Deut.  xxviii.  3).  If  we 
take  the  law  to  ourselves,  we  may  take  the  blessing  to  ourselves,  as  if  our  names 
were  inserted.  2.  That  the  name  Jehovah  is  three  times  repeated  in  it,  and  (as  the 
critics  observe)  each  with  a  different  accent  in  the  original.  The  Jews  themselves 
think  there  is  some  mystery.  And  we  know  what  it  is,  the  New  Testament  having 
explained  it  (2  Cor.  xiii.  14).  3.  That  the  favour  of  God  is  all  in  all  in  this  blessing, 
ior  that  it  is  the  fountain  of  all  good.  (1)  "  The  Lord  bless  thee."  Our  blessing 
God  is  only  our  speaking  well  of  Him,  His  blessing  us  is  doing  well  for  us  ;  those 
whom  He  blesseth  they  are  blessed  indeed.  (2)  "  The  Lord  make  His  face  shine 
upon  thee."  Alluding  to  the  shining  of  the  sun  upon  the  earth,  to  enlighten  and 
comfort  it,  and  to  renew  the  face  of  it.  "  The  Lord  love  thee,  and  make  thee  know 
that  He  loves  thee."  We  cannot  but  be  happy  if  we  have  God's  love,  and  we  cannot 
but  be  easy  if  we  know  that  we  have  it.  (3)  "  The  Lord  lift  up  His  countenance 
upon  thee. "  This  is  to  the  same  purpose  with  the  former,  and  it  seems  to  allude 
to  the  smiles  of  a  father  upon  his  child,  or  of  a  man  upon  his  friend  whom  he  takes 
pleasure  in.  If  God  gives  us  the  assurances  of  His  special  favour,  and  His  accept- 
ance of  us,  that  will  put  gladness  into  the  heart  (Psa.  iv.  7,  8).  4.  That  the  fruits 
of  this  favour  conveyed  by  this  blessing  are  protection,  pardon,  and  peace.  (1)  Pro- 
tection from  evil  (ver.  24).  "  The  Lord  keep  thee,"  for  it  is  He  that  keepeth  Israel, 
and  neither  "  slumbers  nor  sleeps  "  (Psa.  cxxi.  4),  and  all  believers  are  kept  by  the 
power  of  God.  (2)  Pardon  of  sin  (ver.  25).  The  Lord  be  gracious  or  merciful  unto 
thee.  (3)  Peace  (ver.  26),  including  all  that  good  which  goes  to  make  up  a  complete 
happiness.  (4)  God  here  promiseth  to  ratify  and  confirm  the  blessing  (ver.  27). 
■"  They  shall  put  My  name  upon  the  children  of  Israel."    God  gives  them  leave  to 


40  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

make  use  of  His  name  in  blessing  the  people,  and  to  bless  them  as  His  people  called 
by  His  name.  This  included  all  the  blessings  they  could  pronounce  upon  them,  io 
mark  them  for  God's  peculiar,  tlie  people  of  His  choice  and  love.  God's  name  upon 
them  was  their  honour,  their  comfort,  their  safety,  their  plea  :  "  we  ft,re  called  by 
Thy  name,  leave  us  not."  It  is  added,  "  and  I  will  bless  them."  A  Divine  blessing 
goes  along  with  Divine  institutions,  and  puts  virtue  and  efiicacy  into  them.  What 
Christ  saith  of  the  peace  is  true  of  the  blessing.  When  God's  ministers  pronounce 
the  blessing, "  Peace  be  to  this  congregation,"  if  the  sons  of  peace  and  heirs  of  bless- 
ing be  there,  the  peace,  the  blessing  shall  rest  upon  them  (Luke  x.  5,  6).  For  in 
every  place  where  God  doth  record  His  name.  He  will  meet  His  people  and  bless 
them.  (Mattheic  Henry,  D.D.)  The  blessing  of  the  high  priest : — I.  The  general 
CHARACTER  OF  THIS  BLESSING.  1.  It  was  E  blcssing  given  through  a  priest.  Christy 
as  the  great  High  Priest  who  offered  Himself  without  spot  unto  God,  is  the  Divine 
channel  of  blessing.  Do  we  know  the  Lord's  Anointed?  2.  This  benediction  is 
of  the  nature  of  intprcession.  Never  forget  that  Christ  "  made  intercession  for  the 
transgressors."  He  has,  moreover,  a  special  pleading  for  believers  (John  xvii.  9). 
3.  This  benediction  is  yet  of  a  higher  order  than  intercession.  Here  is  not  only 
faith  plea  ling,  bulf  faith  receiving  and  bestowing.  The  priest  speaks  the  blessing, 
for  which  he  asks.  4.  This  blessing  is  sure.  Christ  is  commissioned  of  the  Father, 
and  anointed  of  the  Spirit,  as  the  ambassador  of  peace.  5.  It  is  continuous.  God 
blesses  ever  ;  curses  never.  II.  The  blessing  itself.  1.  It  passes  from  the  priest 
to  God.  *'  The  Lord  bless  thee."  What  a  blessing  the  Lord  gives !  Have  we  not 
heard  a  mother  say  to  her  little  child,  "  Bless  you  "  ?  What  a  wealth  of  meaning 
she  threw  into  it.  But  when  God  says,  "Bless  you  !  "  there  are  iufinity  and  im- 
mutability in  it.  There  can  be  no  limit  to  the  goodwill  of  the  infinite  God.  2. 
Notice  that  the  name  of  the  Lord,  or  Jehovah,  is  three  times  mentioned.  Here  we 
hear  the  voice  of  One,  yet  Three.  3.  Notice  that  this  benediction  is  all  along  in  the 
singular.  Why  ?  Because  the  people  of  God  are  one,  and  He  views  them  as  one, 
and  so  the  blessing  comes  upon  the  entire  Church  as  a  whole.  But,  next,  I  think  it 
is  that  every  indivi'^Iual  believer  may  take  the  whole  of  this  benediction  home  tO' 
himself.  III.  The  Divine  amen.  Here  is  the  authority  repeated  by  way  of  confir- 
mation of  what  has  been  said.  "  They  shall  put  My  name  upon  the  children  of 
Israel,  and  I  will  bless  them."  The  priest  does  his  part,  and  then  the  Lord  makes- 
the  blessing  effectual.  Herein  is  condescension  on  God's  part,  and  honour  and 
security  for  us.  When  the  Lord's  name  is  named  upon  anything  He  will  guard 
His  own  dedicated  things.  The  name  of  the  Lord  is  a  strong  tower,  and  within  it 
we  are  safe.  I  think  I  see  here  a  confirmation  of  those  blessings  which  are  pro- 
nounced by  good  men.  "They  shall  put  My  name  upon  the  children  of  Israel, 
and  I  will  bless  them."  I  loved  to  have  my  grandfather's  blessing  when  I  was 
preaching  the  Word  in  early  days.  He  has  now  gone  into  the  glory;  but  he  blessed 
me,  and  none  can  take  away  the  name  of  God  from  me.  Most  of  you  will  remember 
the  blessings  of  good  men  who  are  now  gone  to  glory ;  and  God  confirms  those 
blessings.  He  allows  His  people,  whom  He  has  made  priests  and  kings  unto  God, 
to  put  His  name  upon  others,  and  to  pronounce  blessings  upon  them.  Their  word 
shall  stand,  and  what  they  bind  on  earth  shall  be  bound  in  heaven.  And  then  comes, 
best  of  all,  the  blessing  of  our  God  most  surely  promised.  "  I  will  bless  them  "  ;: 
they  shall  have  their  troubles,  but  I  will  bless  them  through  their  troubles.  When 
they  have  earthly  goods  I  will  bless  them  and  make  them  real  comforts.  I  will  bless 
their  basket  and  their  store.  If  those  earthly  comforts  are  taken  away  I  will  give 
them  compensation  a  thousandfold  in  myself.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Israel  blest  and 
kept : — 1.  The  blessing  was  put  into  the  mouth  of  Aaron  the  high  priest,  in  this  as 
in  other  points  a  type  and  figure  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  But  Aaron  could  only 
pronounce  the  blessing ;  Jesus  gives  it.  2.  Observe  how,  by  imijlication,  the  doctrine 
of  the  Trinity  is  here  set  forth.  I.  "  The  Lord  bless  thee."  The  blessings  meant 
would  seem  to  be  chiefly  spiritual.  Not  that  we  are  to  think  lightly  of  temporal 
favours.  They  are  left-hand  blessings,  if  not  right-hand  mercies  ;  they  are  gifts  to 
be  thankful  for  on  earth,  if  not  graces  that  take  to  heaven  ;  provision  for  the  perish- 
ing body,  if  not  food  for  the  immortal  soul.  Health,  strength,  such  a  measure  of 
worldly  goods  as  shall  keep  the  wolf  from  the  door  and  enable  us  to  owe  no  man 
anything  but  love,  children  growing  up  to  be  a  comfort  to  their  parents,  a  kind  and 
affectionate  partner,  warm  and  faithful  friends,  an  untarnished  name,  who  shall  say 
that  these  are  not  blessings  for  which  God  is  to  be  praised  ?  And  yet  how  infinitely 
short  do  these  temporal  blessings,  which  perish  in  the  using,  fall  of  spiritual  blessings 
which  endure  for  evermore.     1.  Godly  fear  in  the  heart— that  fountain  of  life  by 


CHAP.  VI.]  NUMBERS.  41 

which  an  awakened  sinner  departs  from  the  snares  of  death — is  not  that  of  all 
hlessiugs  first  and  foremost  because  the  "  beginning  of  wisdom  ?  "  It  is  "  a  fountain 
of  life,"  and,  like  a  river,  is  only  increased  and  deepened  by  successive  additions  of 
grace.  If  we  have  not  the  beginning  we  can  have  neither  the  miildle  nor  end.  2. 
But  is  not  faith  a  blessing  too?  And  who  know  faith  to  be  a  blessing?  Those 
who  are  deeply  exercised  and  tried  by  an  unbelieving  heart.  3.  And  is  not  hope  a 
blessing  too?  4.  Love.  5.  Patience.  6.  Testimonies  of  God's  mercy  and  grace  to 
the  soul.  7.  Is  not  the  rod  often  a  blessing?  II.  "And  keep  thee."  Blessing 
first  and  keeping  afterwards.  The  blessing  given,  and  then,  when  given,  the  bless- 
ing kept.  The  letter  written,  and  then  sealed  ;  the  jewel  put  into  the  casket,  and 
then  tbe  casket  locked.  "  The  Lord  keep  thee."  We  cannot  keep  ourselves.  1.  I 
need  hardly  observe  that  the  first  and  foremost  is  to  be  kept  from  positive  evil.  The 
Lord  asked  of  the  Father  for  His  disciples,  "I  pray  not  that  Thou  shouldst  take 
them  out  of  the  world  " — no;  let  them  suffer  there  as  I  have  suffered  before — "  but 
keep  them  from  the  evil."  And  this  will  be  first  and  foremost  in  the  petitions  of 
every  child  of  God  who  knows  his  own  evil  heart  and  has  suffered  from  its  weak- 
ness and  treachery,  that  the  Lord  will  keep  him  from  open  evil,  that  he  may  bring 
no  distress  and  guilt  upon  his  own  conscience,  or  reproach  upon  the  cause  of  God. 
2.  Error.  3.  A  spirit  of  delusion.  HI.  "  The  Lord  make  His  face  shine  upon 
THEE."  1.  The  allusion  here  seems  to  be  to  the  sun.  Sometimes  the  natural  sun 
has  not  risen,  and  the  world  must  needs  be  dark  if  the  sun  be  still  beneath  the 
horizon.  So  with  many  gracious  souls,  it  is  darkness  with  them  because  at  present 
neither  the  Day-star  has  appeared  nor  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  risen  upou  them 
with  healing  in  His  wings.  But  sometimes  after  the  sun  has  risen  we  see  not  his 
face  ;  dark  clouds  may  obscure  the  face  of  that  bright  luminary  throughout  the 
whole  day,  and  we  may  not  get  a  single  ray.  So,  many  of  the  Lord's  family,  after 
the  Sun  has  risen  upon  them  in  the  morning  of  their  spiritual  life  may  pass  per- 
haps much  of  their  subsequent  time  in  the  dark  shadow,  till  perhaps  at  evening  / 
tide  there  is  light,  and  a  departing  ray  gilds  the  dying  pillow.  But,  again,  there 
are  sometimes  days  when  mists  drive  rapidly  aci'oss  the  face  of  the  bright  orb  of  day, 
and  yet  occasionally  he  peeps  through  the  breaking  clouds.  And  is  not  this,  in  some 
measure,  an  emblem  of  the  way  in  which  the  Sun  of  Righteousness  is  continually 
obscured  by  the  mists  and  fogs  which  spring  up  out  of  our  unbelieving  heart,  hidden 
from  view  by  the  doubts  and  fears  that,  like  the  vapours  of  the  valley,  spread  them- 
selves to  our  view  over  His  beauteous  face  ?  Yet  there  are  times  when  He  gleams 
through  the  clouds  and  disperses  the  mists.  When  the  Lord  is  pleased  to  bless  the 
soul  and  shine  upon  it  with  any  sweet  manifestation,  then  He  breaks  in  through  the 
dark  clouds  ;  but  they  gather  again.  It  is  not  in  Christian  experience  one  bright 
summer  day.  Our  spiritual  climate  is  humid,  our  inward  latitude  northern.  2. 
"  The  Lord  make  His  face  shine  upon  thee."  Is  the  Lord,  then,  sovereign  in  these 
matters  ?  Can  we  not  lift  up  our  hand  and  remove  the  cloud  ?  We  have  as  much 
power  to  stretch  forth  our  hand  and  sweep  away  the  mists  that  obscure  the  Sun  of 
Righteousness,  as  we  have  power  with  the  same  hand  to  sweep  away  a  London  fog. 
How  this  puts  the  creature  into  his  right  place  !  and  the  creature  is  only  in  his  right 
place  when  he  is  nothing,  and  God  is  all  in  all.  3.  "  The  Lord  make  His  fnce 
shine  upon  thee."  And  if  He  make  His  face  shine  upon  thee,  He  will  make  thy 
face  shine  too.  IV.  "  And  be  gracious  unto  thee."  How  sweet  the  gospel  is ! 
But  what  makes  the  gospel  sweet?  That  one  word  which  sheds  a  perfume 
through  the  whole — grace.  Take  grace  out  of  the  gospel  and  you  destroy  the 
gospel.  Grace  pervades  every  part  and  every  branch  of  the  blessed  gospel ;  it  is  the 
life  of  the  gospel ;  in  a  word,  it  is  the  gospel  itself.  V.  "  The  Lord  lift  up  His  counte- 
nance UPON  THEE."  The  meaning  of  this  expression  may,  I  think,  be  illustrated  by 
a  simple  figure.  A  child  has  been  disobedient  to,  or  otherwise  displeased  its  parent. 
When  we  offend  a  person,  his  face  is  not  toward  us  as  at  other  times.  It  was  so 
with  Laban  towards  Jacob ;  and  if  we  have  in  any  way  incurred  a  friend's  or 
superior's  displeasure  we  watch  instinctively  his  countenance.  Is  it  down  or  up? 
Does  it  wear  a  frown  or  a  smile?  Is  it  looking  upon  us  with  the  eye  of  affection, 
or  are  the  eyes  averted  ?  We  can  tell  in  a  moment  if  we  know  the  countenance. 
Thus  is  the  blessing  asked,  "  The  Lord  lift  up  His  countenance  upon  thee,"  as 
a  kind  aud  affectionate  parent  upon  an  obedient  child.  VI.  "  And  give  thee 
PEACE."  Oh  what  a  blessing  1  It  is  this  that  makes  the  pillow  easy  in  life,  and 
will  alone  make  that  pillow  easy  in  death — peace  with  God  through  Jesus  Christ, 
"the  peace  of  God  which  passeth  all  understanding."  The  blessing  that  the 
gracious  soul  most  earnestly  covets  is  peace ;  for  this  is  the  sweetest  honey-drop  i'^ 


42         ,  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ciui-.  vi. 


God's  cup.  It  is  true  that  it  does  not  nicake  the  heart  overflow  like  joy,  nor  to  dance 
with  exultation  like  the  first  beaming  in  of  the  rays  of  hope,  nor  melt  it  down  like 
visits  of  love ;  but  it  is  in  some  respects  sweeter  than  all,  because  it  so  settles  down 
the  soul  into  sweet  assurance ;  it  is  the  realisation  of  the  Saviour  Himself,  for  "  He 
is  our  peace,"  and  may  thus  be  called  the  crowning  blessing.  But  see  how  the  links 
of  this  Divine  chain  meet.  "The  Lord  bless  thee  "—link  the  first;  "and  keep 
thee  " — link  the  second  ;  "  the  Lord  make  His  face  shine  upon  thee  "^the  third  ; 
"and  be  gracious  unto  thee  "—the  fourth;  "the  Lord  lift  up  His  countenance 
upon  thee  "—the  fifth  ;  "  and  give  thee  peace  "—the  sixth.  Six  blessed  hnks,  and 
all  united  into  one  continuous  chain  ;  for  when  the  Lord  begins  to  bless,  He  ends 
■with  peace.  We  need  wish  no  greatpr  nor  pray  for  a  higher  blessing  than  peace, 
for  God  has  none  greater  to  give.  When  a  father  dies  he  leaves  his  children  all  his 
goods.  Jesus,  before  He  died,  said,  "  Peace  I  leave  with  you  ;  My  peace  give 
I  unto  you ;  not  as  the  world  giveth  give  I  unto  you."  It  was  His  last  legacy  ;  His 
dying  gift ;  in  His  own  eyes  of  the  greatest  value,  and  it  should  be  such  in  ours. 
{J.   C.  Philpot.)  The  pastor's  wish  and  prayer: — I.  Let  us  reflect  on  the 

NATURE    AND    EXTENT   OF    THE     BLESSINGS     HERE     INVOLVED.        1.     Diviuc    benediction. 

In  a  world  in  which  everything  is  rather  semblance  than  reality,  how  delightful  the 
thought  that  there  is  One— the  Uncreated  and  Unconditional,  the  Ever-present  and 
Ever-true,  who  is  not  more  able  than  He  is  willing  to  overtake  all  the  conditions  of 
our  being,  and  to  do  for  us  exceeding  abundantly  above  all  that  we  ask  or  think  ! 
Our  weakness  can  never  fall  to  a  depth  lower  than  His  power  can  reach.  Our 
necessities  can  never  exceed  His  resources.  Our  difficulties  can  never  be  so  involved 
but  that  His  wisdom  can  direct  us.  Our  sorrows  can  never  be  so  acute,  or  so 
accumulated,  but  His  Spirit  can  assuage  and  relieve  us.  2.  Divine  preservation. 
Not  only  "  the  Lord  bless  thee,"  but  "  keep  thee."  The  consciousness  that  with  a 
finite  and  dependent  nature  we  are  in  a  world  of  temptation,  must  ever  render 
acceptable  and  blessed  the  help  of  another  mightier  and  more  able.  3.  Divine 
illumination.  "  The  Lord  make  His  face  to  shine  upon  thee."  The  reference  here 
is  doubtless  to  that  mysterious  symbol  of  His  presence  which  God  vouchsafed  to  His 
ancient  Church,  as  the  outward  and  visible  expression  of  His  favour  and  love.  We 
rise  from  the  material  into  the  spiritual,  and  repose  in  the  promise  of  that  inward 
light  which  is  ewer  streaming  from  the  Spirit  through  the  truth  to  guide  and  cheer 
and  render  certain  the  steps  of  the  wanderer  across  the  desert  of  life.  4.  Divine 
communication.  "  The  Lord  be  gracious  unto  thee."  The  grace  of  God  is  but 
another  expression  for  His  infinite  and  exhaustless  bounty.  The  highest  conception 
which  we  can  form  of  the  Divine  benevolence  is  derived  from  the  work  of  human 
redemption.  Herein  is  love.  In  no  other  act  of  His  administration  is  it  so  con- 
spicuous or  so  glorious.  Salvation  is  grace  running  out  into  infinite  and  everlasting 
kindness.  And  what  are  all  the  communications  of  spiritual  blessing  to  the  soul 
but  the  love  of  God  ever  repeating  itself,  and  assuring  us  that  the  treasures  of 
eternity  are  unlocked  to  supply  our  need?  5.  Divine  manifestation.  "The  Lord 
lift  up  the  light  of  His  countenance  upon  thee."  What  will  heaven  be  but  this 
perfet-ted  and  perpetuated  in  the  immediate  presence  of  God  ?  6.  Divine  satisfac- 
tion. "The  Lord  give  thee  peace."  It  is  a  question  in  mechanics  whether  there 
be  such  a  thing  as  a  body  in  a  state  of  perfect  rest.  We  confess  ourselves  to  be  in 
a  position  not  to  solve  the  problem.  Of  this  however  we  are  certain,  that  in  the 
spiritual  world  there  is  a  centre  of  eternal  repose  on  which  the  whole  universe  may 
rest  for  ever.  The  soul  of  man  is  torn  and  distracted  with  unfulfilled  desires ;  and 
possess  what  he  may,  while  one  single  longing  is  left  unsatisfied  the  perfection  of 
inward  quiet  and  peace  is  impossible.  This  can  only  come  with  that  completeness 
of  life  which  is  enjoyed  in  God.  II.  Let  us  inquire  into  the  ever-living  and 
UNCHANGEABLE  SouucE  OP  SUCH  INESTIMABLE  BLESSING.  The  incommunicablc  name 
Jehovah,  here  translated  Lord,  includes  within  itself  every  possible  perfection  and 
excellence.  It  not  only  points  to  the  sum  of  being,  but  to  the  fountain  of  blessed- 
ness. His  eternity  we  place  in  opposition  to  all  that  is  temporary  ;  His  immutability 
in  opposition  to  all  that  is  changing ;  His  immortality  in  opposition  to  whatever 
has  in  it  the  seeds  of  decay  and  death  ;  His  all-sufficiency  and  infinite  felicity  in 
opposition  to  all  that  is  inadequate  and  unsatisfying.     (R.  Ferguson,  LL.D.)  A 

comprehensive  benediction:— \Yha,t  does  this  prayer  not  include?  What  a  richness 
and  plenitude  of  Divine  mercy  does  it  bring  into  view  ?  It  expresses  as  perfectly  as 
any  human  words  can  express,  the  immense  and  infinite  good  which  can  be  found 
in  God,  as  the  Root  of  all  being  and  the  Fountain  of  all  happiness.  What  more 
could  we  ask  on  your  behalf  than  that  you  may  individually  be  the  chosen  objects 


CHAP.  VI.]  NUMBERS.  43 

of  the  unchangeable  love  and  fatherly  care  of  Him,  who,  while  He  has  the  weight 
of  all  worlds  upon  His  arm,  yet  stoops  to  feed  the  ravens  when  they  cry  ;  who, 
amid  the  government  of  worlds,  is  not  unmindful  of  individuals,  and  who,  while  He 
is  guiding  the  stars  in  their  course,  is  at  the  same  moment  numbering  the  very  hairs 
of  your  heads  ?  What  more  can  we  ask  for  you,  than  that  He  who  never  sleeps, 
and  whose  eyelids  never  slumber,  whose  power  fainteth  not,  and  who  is  ever 
travelling  forth  in  the  greatness  of  His  strength  mighty  to  save,  may  watch  over 
you  and  preserve  you,  give  you  more  than  the  warrior's  shield  of  triple  brass,  and 
bruise  every  enemy  under  your  feet  ?  What  more  can  we  now  ask  for  you  than 
that  He,  wbo  ever  lives  and  moves  in  the  light  of  His  own  eternity,  may  give  unto 
you  the  spirit  of  wisdom  and  revelation  in  the  deeper  and  ever  growing  knowledge 
of  Himself,  fill  your  soul  with  the  everlasting  beamings  of  truth,  cause  the  sun- 
shine of  His  presence  to  break  through  every  cloud,  and  falling  softly  on  your  steps, 
make  your  path  like  that  of  the  shining  light,  which  shineth  more  and  more  unto 
the  perfect  day  ?  What  more  can  we  ask  for  you,  than  that  He  whose  eternal 
love  prompted  Him  to  provide  for  the  redemption  of  our  race,  may  unlock  the 
treasures  of  His  mercy,  and  bless  you  with  all  spiritual  blessings  in  heavenly 
places,  may  grant  you  according  to  the  riches  of  His  grace,  and,  adding  to  the 
plenitude  of  His  grace  the  riches  of  His  glory,  thus  fill  you  unto  His  own  fulness  ? 
What  more  can  we  ask  for  you,  than  that  He  whose  name  is  the  Lord — the  Lord 
God,  merciful  and  gracious,  longsuifering,  slow  to  anger,  abundant  in  goodness 
and  in  truth — while  He  conceals  the  intenser  glory  of  His  nature,  would  ever 
manifest  Himself  unto  you,  take  you  into  deeper  communion  with  His  Spirit,  open 
up  heaven  to  your  view,  and  fill  your  vision  with  the  glories  of  immortality  ?  Wliat 
more  can  we  ask  for  you,  than  that  He  who  is  the  only  centre  of  rest  for  His 
dependent  universe,  may  take  from  your  nature  every  unholy  and  disturbing 
element,  and  give  you  that  peace  which  passeth  all  unrlerstanding,  sanctify  you  in 
soul,  body,  and  spirit,  and  lift  you  above  the  din  and  distraction  of  this  noisy  and 
conflicting  world,  introduce  you  into  the  deep  quiet  of  His  own  Infinite  Being,  and 
till  you  with  the  joy  which  is  unspeakable  ?  What  more  can  we  ask  for  you,  than 
that  this  goodness  and  mercy  may  follow  you  all  the  dars  of  your  life,  and  that 
when  you  enter  the  dark  valley  which  separates  the  silence  of  eternity  from  the 
murmurs  of  time,  you  may  be  conscious  of  the  immediate  presence  of  the  glorified 
Eedeemer,  and  dropping  the  worn-out  garment  of  the  flesh,  take  your  place  reclothed 
and  immortal,  before  the  throne  of  God?     (Ibid.)         The  golden  ble>isinf)  : — I.  Thk 

GOLDEN    BLESSING    WAS     GIVEN     THROUGH    A    MEDIATOE.         The    Loi'd    Spakc     tO     AarOU 

through  Moses.  Jesus  Christ  is  our  Mediator,  through  whom  all  spii'itual  blessings 
are  given.  II.  The  blessing  was  given  by  peiestly  lips.  It  was  Aaron,  and 
his  sons,  who  were  to  bless  the  children  of  Israel.  God  spake  to  Moses,  Moses  to 
Aaron,  Aaron  to  the  people.  Jesus  Christ  is  both  Mediator  and  Priest.  He  is  a 
mediatorial  Priest,  and  a  priestlv  Mediator.  There  is  no  blessing  apart  from  the 
true  priesthood  and  sacrifice.  III.  This  threefold  blessing  tells  of  a  Trinity 
IN  Unity,  and  a  Unity  in  Trinity.  Faith  believes  it,  but  reason  cannot  understand 
it.  IV.  In  this  benediction  we  have  the  earnest  of  all  spiritual  blessings. 
What  a  fulness  there  is !  V.  The  blessing  was  for  all  Israel.  "  On  this  wise 
ye  shall  b'ess  the  children  of  Israel."  It  was  a  common  blessing  for  all  the  tribes. 
It  is  a  blessing  for  those  who  are  rejoicing,  and  for  those  who  are  sorrowing ;  for 
those  who  are  praying,  and  for  those  who  are  praising.  It  is  a  blessing  for  the 
young,  and  for  the  old ;  for  those  who  labour,  and  for  those  who  suffer.  It  ia 
a  blessing  for  the  living,  if  for  them  to  live  is  Christ ;  for  the  dying,  if  they  die  in 
the  Lord.  VI.  It  is  a  blessing  secured  by  purpose,  purchase,  and  power.  "  I 
will  bless  them."  Satan,  and  all  our  enemies,  will  be  constrained  to  confess,  "He 
hath  blessed  and  I  cannot  reverse  it."     [R.  E.  Sears.)  The  Divine  blessing  and 

keeping: — What  a  joy  to  abide  uuHer  the  Divine  blessing!  This  puts  a  gracious 
flavour  into  all  things.  If  we  are  blessed,  then  all  our  possessions  and  enjoyments 
are  blessed ;  yea,  our  losses  and  crosses,  and  even  our  disappointments.  God's 
blessing  is  deep,  emphatic,  effectual.  A  man's  blessing  may  begin  and  end  in 
words,  but  the  blessing  of  the  Lord  makes  rich  and  sanctifies.  The  best  wish  we 
can  have  for  our  dearest  friend  is  not,  "May  prosperity  attend  thee,"  but,  "The 
Lord  bless  thee."  It  is  equally  a  delightful  thing  to  be  kept  of  God ;  kept  by  Him, 
kept  near  Him,  kept  in  Him.  They  are  kept,  indeed,  whom  God  keeps  :  they  are 
preserved  from  evil,  they  are  reserved  unto  boundless  happiness.  God's  keeping 
goes  with  His  blessing,  to  establish  it  and  cause  it  to  endure.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 
God's  favour  the  comfort  of  the  soul : — It  is  God's  presence  which  constitutes  the 


44  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap.  vi. 

saint's  morning.  As  the  stars  may  impart  some  light  and  yet  the  brightness  of  all 
combined  cannot  form  the  light  of  day,  but  when  the  sun  appears  there  is  day 
forthwith,  so  God  may  make  some  comfort  arise  to  a  soul  from  secondary  and 
inferior  means;  but  it  is  He  Himself  alone  who,  by  the  shining  of  His  face  and  the 
smiles  of  His  countenance,  causes  morning.      (T.  Burroughs.)  Brightness  to  be 

reneioed  : — A  friend  of  mine  has  some  diamonds.  He  tells  me  that  if  he  sets  these 
diamonds  out  in  the  strong  sunlight  for  a  time,  and  then  removes  them  into  a  dark 
room,  they  will  shine  brilliantly  even  amidst  the  darkness.  But  after  a  little  while 
this  brilliance  becomes  dim,  and  finally  goes  out  altogether.  The  precious  stones 
must  be  taken  into  the  sunshine  again  if  they  are  to  be  seen  in  the  gloom.  And  is 
not  this  a  parable  of  the  hfe  of  Christians  ?  God  calls  them  His  "  jewels  "  ;  and  if 
their  Divine  lustre  is  to  be  seen  amidst  the  darkness  of  the  world,  they  must  often 
seek  to  look  upon  the  face  of  the  Sun  of  Eighleousness.  If  they  are  careless  about 
this  their  brightness  will  soon  grow  dim ;  but  if  they  are  faithful  that  brightness 
shall   be   constantly  renewed.      {Christian   Commonwealth.)  Buoyant    in   the 

favour  of  God: — As— in  some  summer's  morning,  which  wakes  with  a  ring  of 
birds,  when  it  is  clear,  leagues  up  into  the  blue,  and  everything  is  as  distinctly  cut 
as  if  it  stood  in  heaven,  and  not  on  earth,  when  the  distant  mountains  lie  bold  upon 
the  horizon,  and  the  air  is  full  of  the  fragrance  of  flowers  which  the  night  cradled 
— the  traveller  goes  forth  with  buoyant  and  elastic  step  upon  his  journey,  and  halts 
not  till  in  the  twilight  shadows  he  reaches  his  goal,  so  may  we,  who  are  but  pilgrims, 
go  forth  beneath  the  smile  of  God,  upon  our  homeward  journey.  (H.  W.  Beecher.) 
Peace  with  God : — I  reverence  hundreds  and  hundreds  of  men  who  don't  hold  my 
opinion  ;  but  when  1  lie  dying  I  don't  want  their  speculations  to  rest  upon.  I  want 
that  Book  for  a  pillow,  for  that  Book  rests  on  the  nature  of  things.  That  is  the 
only  honest  Book  in  the  world.  That  tells  me  what  I  am ;  that  tells  me  how  to 
get  into  the  mood  of  peace  with  God  ;  that  is  what  I  wanted  on  a  cold  winter's  night 
as  I  rolled  forty  feet  down  a  precipice,  expecting  instant  death  ;  and  if  that  is  what 
I  wanted  then,  it's  what  I  want  any  time,  isn't  it?  What  is  true  in  our  highest 
moments  is  true  in  all  moments.  And  what  we  see  only  by  flashes  is  true  the  whole 
day  long,  the  whole  year  long,  life  through,  eternity  through.  If  there  is  any 
certainty,  it  is  certainty  for  all  time  and  places.  Now  it  is  certain  that  when  I  lie 
dying  I  want  that  Book  for  a  pillow,  and,  among  other  things  in  a  pillow,  I  want  a 
certainty  that  I  have  attained  similarity  of  feeling  with  God,  and  love  what  He  loves, 
and  hate  what  He  hates.  That  will  be  enough  to  give  me  peace.  What !  What ! 
I  am  depending  on  my  own  righteousness  when  I  make  this  my  pillow !  I  beg 
your  pardon,  that  is  not  what  I  say.  If  my  life  is  to  be  my  pillow,  I  must  put  my 
whole  life  into  the  pillow.  There  would  be  more  than  one  thorn  in  the  pillow  if 
I  were  to  put  my  whole  life  in  it.  Is  there  anybody  here  who  can  put  his  whole 
life  in  his  pillow  and  rest  in  peace  ?  You  are  going  to  depend  on  your  own 
righteousness  ?  Put  your  whole  life  into  the  pillow,  and  then  put  your  head 
on  it,  and  it  will  not  be  the  softest  kind  of  a  support  for  a  dying  hour.  You  may 
do  as  you  please,  but  I,  for  one,  feel  very  sure  I  am  going  hence,  that  I  want  to  go 
hence  in  peace,  that  I  cannot  go  in  peace  unless  I  love  what  God  loves,  and  hate 
what  God  hates.     (Joseph  Cook.) 

Ver.  27.  Put  My  name  upon  the  cbildren  of  Israel. — The  Christian's  Divine 
name  : — I.  The  name  of  God  pct  upox  His  people  indicates  God's  love  towards 
THEM.  II.  The  name  of  God  pdt  upon  His  people  indicates  the  relationship 
IN  which  they  stand  to  God.  Not  only  His  friends,  but  His  children.  III.  The 
name  of  God  pdt  upon  His  people  indicates  God's  property  in  them.  IV.  The 
NAME  of  God  put  upon  His  people  indicates  their  conformity  to  God's  will. 
V.  The  name  of  GpD  put  upon  His  people  indicates  the  resemblance  they 
bear  to  God.  VI.  The  name  of  God  put  upon  His  people  indicates  the 
ASSURANCE  THEY  HAVE  OF  FINAL  UNION  WITH  GoD.  {The  Evangelical  Preacher.) 
God's  name  upon  His  people  : — Your  old  name  is  an  ugly  one.  I  suppose  you 
know  what  your  name  is  ?  If  you  have  forgotten,  let  me  remind  you  that  your 
name  is  entered  in  God's  Book  as  "sinner."  I  do  not  think  you  will  be  sorry 
to  exchange  that  bad  name  for  a  better.  I  knew  a  lady  once  who  had  a  very  ugly 
name,  and  she  could  not  bear  to  be  called  by  it.  She  got  all  her  friends  to  promise 
never  to  use  it,  and  she  always  signed  herself  by  a  pretty  name  which  she  selected 
for  herself  out  of  many  others.  But  of  course,  that  never  altered  the  fact  that  her 
real  name  was  the  old  and  ugly  one.  Just  so,  you  may  not  like  the  name  "sinner," 
sind  you  may  call  yourself  by  anything  else,  and  persuade  everybody  that  it  does 


CHAP.  VII.]  NUMBERS.  45 

not  belong  to  you,  but  that  never  alters  the  fact  that  you  are  a  "  sinner."  God  gave 
you  the  name,  and  God  alone  can  change  it.  But  oh!  if  you  long  for  a  "new 
name,"  tell  Him  so.  He  has  one  ready  lor  you,  and  such  a  splendid,  beautiful, 
adorable  name!  "I  will  write  on  him  My  new  name."  (Eva  Poole.)  Valued 
because  of  the  Giver : — When  our  soldiers  returned  from  that  great  succession  of 
blunders,  the  Crimean  War,  those  who  had  specially  distinguished  themselves  were 
marshalled  in  a  line  to  receive  the  crosses  or  medals  which  rewarded  their  valorous 
merit  from  the  Queen.  As  she  passed  along  the  line  she  took  the  decorations  one 
by  one  from  a  salver  carried  by  her  side  and  pinned  it  to  the  breast  of  the  happy 
recipient.  As  she  was  pinning  one  on  it  slipped  from  her  hand  and  fell  to  the 
ground.  A  little  girl,  who  was  near,  picked  it  up  and  was  proceeding  to  pin  it  to 
the  soldier's  breast,  when  he  stepped  a  pace  back  and  said,  "  No ;  I  do  not  value  that 
piece  of  metal.  It  is  the  hand  which  bestows  it  I  value."  So  with  the  gifts  which 
God  gives  us  here,  though  they  are  of  themselves  of  priceless  value,  yet  even  more 
precious  is  the  knowledge  that  they  are  bestowed  by  our  heavenly  Father. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

Vers.  1-4.  Tlie  princes  of  Israel  .  .  .  brought  their  offering. — The  offering  of  the 
princes  : — The  offering  of  the  princes  is  set  out  by  certain  circumstances,  of  the  time 
when  they  offered,  when  Moses  had  fully  set  up  the  tabernacle  and  had  sanctified 
it,  &c.,  of  the  persons  which  offered,  the  princes  of  the  tribes,  the  heads  of  the 
house  of  their  fathers,  and  of  the  place  where  they  are  offered,  it  was  before  the 
Lord.  Then  their  offering  is  described  by  the  particulars  that  were  offered,  which 
is  perfoimed  jointly  or  severally.  The  doctrine  from  hence  is  this,  that  a  good  work 
begun,  especially  furthering  God's  worship,  is  not  to  be  intermitted  until  it  be 
brought  to  perfection.  We  see  this  in  Ezra  v.  1,  2  ;  vi.  14.  The  like  zeal  and  for- 
wardness we  see  in  Neh.  iv.  3,  4,  &c.  The  apostle  persuading  the  Corinthians  to 
liberality  toward  the  saints,  willeth  them  readily  to  perform  that  which  they  had 
willingly  begun.  The  reasons  are  plain.  1.  The  God  of  heaven  will  prosper  weak 
beginnings  if  there  be  a  readiness  and  cheerfulness  in  us.  This  should  be  a  great 
encouragement  unto  us,  as  it  was  to  Nehemiah  (Neh.  ii.  20).  2.  If  we  look  back  we 
are  not  apt  to  God's  kingdom  (Luke  ix.  62).  If  we  give  over  we  lose  our  labour,  we 
miss  onr  reward.  3.  It  is  better  not  to  begin  than,  having  begun,  not  to  proceed  ; 
better  never  to  lay  the  first  stone  in  the  building  than,  having  laid  a  good  founda- 
tion, not  to  make  an  end,  because  it  will  be  said  to  our  reproach  (Luke  xiv.  30). 
1.  This  serves,  first,  to  reprove  such  as  give  over  their  profession,  resting  in  a  good 
work  begun  and  in  weak  and  small  beginnings.  2.  Secondly,  it  reproveth  such  as 
stand  at  a  stay,  such  as  neither  go  forward  nor  backward,  but  are  always  the  same 
men,  and  look  where  you  left  them,  there  you  shall  be  sure  to  find  them.  These 
are  earthly  minded  and  savour  only  of  the  earth.  3.  Thirdly,  such  deserve  to  be 
reproved  who  hate  those  that  go  before  and  beyond  them  in  the  duties  of  piety,  in 
gifts  of  knowledge  and  understanding.  4.  Fourthly,  it  is  our  duty  to  proceed  in 
sanctification,  and  labour  to  bring  forth  fruit  evermore  in  old  age  (Psa.  xcii.  15). 
{W.  Attersoll.)  Suitable  offeriuf/s  for  God's  house  : — Why  do  they  offer  chariots, 
and  oxen  to  draw  them  ?  Because  these  things  were  fit  and  good  for  the  use  of  the 
tabernacle,  to  carry  at  removes  such  things  as  were  to  be  carried,  and  to  carry  them 
dry.  Learn  by  it  that  good  hearts  to  Godvvard  do  not  only  give,  but  they  give  fit 
things,  such  as  are  most  requisite  for  the  service  of  God,  the  comeliness  of  His 
Church,  the  use  of  the  minister,  and  the  benefit  of  the  whole  congregation  ;  yea, 
they  to  this  end  cast  their  heads,  and  observe  what  is  wanting ;  what  would  do  well 
if  it  were  had,  what  is  now  unseemly,  and  what  would  be  more  seemly  for  the 
reverence  of  God's  house,  giving  themselves  no  rest  till  either  by  them-elves,  at 
their  own  private  charge,  or  by  the  parish  -at  their  public  charge,  such  things  be 
prepared.  They  are  affected  to  God's  houses,  as  others  are  to  their  own,  who  are 
ever  decking  them  with  all  necessaries  till  they  are  to  their  liking.  Such  a  virtue 
as  I  may  boldly  say,  God  would  sooner  cease  to  be  God,  which  we  know  is  impos- 
sible, than  forget  to  reward  it.  Do  we  remember  in  our  own  houses  who  gave  us 
this  and  who  gave  us  that,  of  plate,  of  household,  of  ornaments,  or  whatsoever,  and 
■will  God  forget  in  His  house  who  gave  anything  for  the  necessary  use,  or  greater 


46  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vii. 

beautifying  it  ?  "We  cannot  think  it,  and  our  consciences  tell  us  it  cannot  be.  But 
even  a  thousand  times  more  will  God  respect  such  love  than  any  man  can  do. 
Make  use  of  it  then,  I  beg  of  you,  and  so  show  your  heart  to  God  in  adorning  His 
house  and  advancing  His  service,  as  living  and  dying  He  may  fill  your  heart  with 
His  sweet  comforts  for  it,  bless  you,  and  bless  your  friends  after  you,  which  He  will 
do,  even  as  He  is  God.      (Bp.  Babivgton.)  Princely  liberality  : — A  wealthy 

European  monarch  has  been  fired  with  enthusiasm  for  Africa.  When  I  visited 
King  Leopold  I  asked  him,  "What  makes  you  so  earnest  about  Africa?"  I  was 
touched  with  his  reply.  He  said,  "You  know  God  took  away  from  me  my  son,  my 
only  son,  and  then  He  laid  Africa  upon  my  heart.  I  am  not  spending  the  revenue 
of  Belgium  on  it,  but  my  own  private  resources,  and  I  have  made  arrangements 
that  wben  I  die  this  civilising  and  evangelising  work  in  Africa  shall  still  go  on." 
At  the  present  time  the  king  is  expending  £80,000  a  year  in  Africa  out  of  his  private 
purse.  (Grattnn  Guinvess.)  Princely  soliciinde  in  regard  to  duty  : — During  the 
illness  of  King  Edward  the  Sixth,  who  died  in  the  sixteenth  year  of  his  age,  Ridley, 
in  a  sermon  which  he  preached  before  him,  much  commended  works  of  charity, 
and  showed  that  they  were  enjoined  on  all  men,  especially  on  those  in  higher 
stations.  The  same  day,  after  dinner,  the  king  sent  for  the  doctor  into  the  gallery, 
made  him  sit  in  a  chair  by  him,  and  would  not  suffer  him  to  be  uncovered.  After 
thanking  him  for  his  sermon,  he  repeated  the  chief  points  of  it,  and  added, "  I  took 
mvself  to  be  chiefly  touched  by  your  discourse  ;  for  as  in  the  kingdom  I  am  next 
under  God,  so  must  I  most  nearly  approach  to  Him  in  goodness  and  mercy.  As 
our  miseries  stand  most  in  the  need  of  help  from  Him,  so  are  we  the  greatest 
debtors.  And  therefore,  as  you  have  given  me  this  general  exhortation,  direct  me, 
I  entreat  you,  by  what  particular  act  I  may  best  discharge  my  duty."  Prayer 
as  a  gnvye  of  liberality  : — A  gentleman  canvassing  for  an  important  benevolent 
enterprise  was  about  to  call  on  a  certain  wealthy  professor  of  religion  who  was  more 
devout  than  generous.  Ignoi'ant  of  this  fact,  he  asked  his  last  contributor  how  much 
he  thought  the  man  would  give.  "I  don't  know,"  was  the  reply;  "if  you  could 
hear  him  pray  you'd  think  he  would  give  all  he  is  worth."  The  collector  called  on 
the  rich  man,  and  to  his  surprise  received  a  flat  refusal.  As  he  was  taking  his 
leave,  it  occurred  to  him  to  repeat  what  he  had  been  told.  "  I  asked  a  man,"  said 
he,  "  how  much  you  would  probably  give,  and  he  replied,  '  If  you  could  hear  tbat 
man  pray,  you'd  think  he  would  give  all  he  is  worth.'  "  The  rich  mans  head 
dropped,  and  his  eyes  filled  with  tears.  He  took  out  his  pocket-book,  and  handed 
his  visitor  a  liberal  contribution. 

Vers.  5-9.  Give  them  unto  the  Levites,  to  every  man  according  to  his  service. — 

Divine  hestowment  varied  and  proportionate  : — I.  That  God's  gifts  abe  varied.  1. 
Men  differ  widely  in  many  things — parentage,  birthplace,  physical  vigour,  mental 
capacity,  edr.fation,  spiritual  gifts,  &c.  2.  For  many  of  these  differences  they  are 
themselves  largely  accountable.  Some  are  crippled  by  their  own  ind<ilence,  extrava- 
gance, neglect,  intemperance  ;  others  Hdvanee  by  their  thrift,  sobriety,  perseverance, 
economy,  and  indomitable  industry,  to  large  influeuce  and  wealth.  3.  But  though 
the  way  in  which  men  bear  themselves  may  account  for  many  of  the  differences 
between  them,  there  are  a  thousand  discrepnucies  which  cannot  be  thus  explained. 
No  child  is  born  in  Al  yssinia,  or  on  the  b  inks  of  the  Gauges,  or  in  crowded  London 
because  it  wills  it.  Men  are  sick  without  being  to  blame  for  it,  and  women  poor 
through  no  fault  of  their  own.  We  must  refer  these  problems  to  the  Divine 
sovereignty.  There  is  no  other  solution  for  many  of  life's  mysteries.  "  Even  so 
Father,  for  so  it  seemed  good  in  Thy  sight."  If  Gershon  and  Kohath  complain 
that  Merari  lias  more  than  they,  Moses'  sufficient  answer  will  be,  "  God  ordained  it 
so."  4.  This  truth,  apprehended  and  believed,  would  destroy  a  thousand  seeds  of 
discontent,  envy,  and  socialistic  heresy.  It  is  God  who  bestows  wealth  (Deut.  viii. 
18),  honours  (Psa.  Ixxv.  6,  7),  power  (Pom.  xiii.  1).  We  receive  gracifully  the 
assignment  of  an  earthly  superior;  why  not  as  gracefully  what  God  appoints?  II. 
God's  gifts  are  proportionate.  In  each  case  He  proportions  the  means  of  trans- 
portation to  the  burden  assigned.  1.  That  which  is  well  proportioned  is  not  exces- 
sive. This  is  true  of  a  book,  speech,  building  ;  eminently  true  of  God's  work.  God 
is  bountiful,  but  never  wasteful.  We  possess  no  talents  or  opportunities  to  be 
counted  superfluous.  Christ's  sufferings  are  proportioned  to  the  sinner's  guilt.  2. 
Not  defective.  (1)  Let  those  who  are  called  to  trust  in  Christ  remember  that  His 
sacrifice,  if  indispensable,  is  also  fully  sufficient.  (2)  Let  Christian  workers  remem- 
ber that  with  the  call  will  come  the  qualifications.    {W.  T.  Sabijie.)       Endowments 


CHAP.  VII.]  NUMBERS.  47 

and  requirements : — I.  As  Moses  appointed  to  the  sons  of  Levi  certain  facilities, 
so  the  Creator  has  endowed  man  with  certain  capabilities  for  work  in  His  ser- 
vice. 1.  Understanding.  2.  Invention.  3.  Will-power.  4.  Judgment.  5.  Affec- 
tions. 6.  Physical  organs.  II.  As  Moses  required  the  sons  of  Levi  to  use  their 
facilities,  so  God  demands  the  exercise  of  our  capabilities.  1.  Yet  how  much 
indifference  on  the  part  of  man  in  exercising  and  developing  his  faculties  in  useful 
and  honourable  employment !  Many,  instead  of  gainiug  their  livelihood  in  the 
intended  way,  by  the  sweat  of  their  face,  study  all  manner  of  trickery  and  sin  to 
satisfy  their  wants.  2.  And  how  many  professing  Christians  become  so  absorbed 
in  worldly  affairs  as  to  neglect  the  business  of  the  soul.  God  has  claims  superior 
to  all  claims  of  the  world.  III.  God's  requirements  are  no  greater  than  our 
endowments.  If  we  cannot  give  thousands,  we  can  at  least  devote  our  "two  mites." 
A  beautifully  tinted  leaf  in  the  wood  cannot  be  seen  at  a  distance,  yet  it  contributes 
its  part  to  the  glorious  autumnal  picture.  IV.  Man  must  use  his  capabilities  ac- 
cording TO  Divine  appointment.  It  is  a  solemn  thing  to  trifle  with  the  plans  of 
God.  Every  man  has  a  special  power  or  gift,  and  "  he  who  lives  by  other  laws  than 
those  that  wrapt  his  genius  at  his  birth,"  defeats,  in  a  measure,  the  object  of  his 
creation.     (W.  G.  Thrall.)         An  ancient  offering,  and  its  modern  lesions  : — I.  They 

WHO  HOLD  the  MOST  HONOURABLE  POSITIONS  SHOULD  BE  MOST  LIBERAL  IN  CONTRIBUTIONS 
TO  WORTHY  OBJECTS.  II.  ThEY  WHO  ARE  NOT  ENTIRELY  ENGAGED  IN  RELIGIOUS 
MINISTRIES  SHOULD  SEEK  TO  HELP  THOSE  WHO  ARE  SO  ENGAGED.  III.  GoD  IS  GRACIOUSLY 
PLEASED  TO  ACCEPT  OF  MAN'S  OFFERINGS.  IV.  GiFTS  FOR  RELIGIOUS  PURPOSES  SHOULD 
BE  USED  IN  ACCORDANCE  WITH  THE  WILL  OF  GoD.  V.  In  THE  DiVINE  ARRANGEMENTS 
HELP  IS  GRANTED  UNTO  MEN  ACCORDING  TO  THEIR  RESPECTIVE  NEEDS.       (W.  Jonr>!.) 

Vers.  10-89.  The  princes  offered  for  dedicating  of  the  altar. — Such  as  have  ij  r^  atest 
blessings  and  gifts,  must  he  most  forward  in  God's  service  : — We  heard  before  of  the 
offering  performed  jointly  by  the  princes,  now  let  us  see  the  offerings  which  they 
brought  severally.  For  besides  the  chariots  and  the  oxen,  each  of  these  great  com- 
manders of  the  people  offered  unto  God  for  His  service  in  the  tabernacle  a  charger 
of  line  silver  weighing  130  shekels,  a  silver  bowl  of  70  shekels,  and  one  spoon  of  ten 
shekels  of  gold  full  of  incense,  all  which  they  performed  at  the  same  time  when  the 
altar  was  dedicated  to  God  by  Aaron,  and  before  they  marched  from  Sinai  toward 
their  conquest  of  the  promised  land.  The  weight  of  all  the  12  silver  chargers  and 
the  12  silver  bowls  amounted  unto  2,400  shekels  of  silver,  and  the  weight  of  gold  in 
the  incense  spoons  did  amount  to  120  shekels  of  gold,  which  maketh  of  shekels  of 
silver  1,200,  every  shekel  of  gold  valuing  ten  of  silver,  so  that  the  whole  sum  which 
they  offered  at  this  time  was  about  420  pounds  sterling.  These  princes  offered 
before  with  men  and  women,  yet  now  they  come  again  and  think  they  can  never  do 
enough  toward  the  furtherance  of  the  tabernacle  and  the  worship  of  God.  1.  The 
doctrine  from  hence  is  that  they  which  have  most  outward  blessings  and  greatest 
ability  must  be  most  forward  in  God's  worship  and  service.  In  Ezra  it  appeareth, 
they  "  all  gave  according  to  their  ability  "  (chap.  ii.  69).  The  chief  of  the  fathers, 
when  they  came  to  tlie  house  of  the  Lord,  offered  freely  for  the  house  of  God  to  set 
it  up  in  his  place.  So  in  Nehemiah  it  appeareth  how  bountiful  he  and  the  princes 
and  the  people  were.  "  They  gave  much  silver  and  gold  to  finish  the  work  of  the 
Lord."  The  examples  of  David  and  Solomon  in  this  kind  are  very  evident  and 
apparent,  for  the  which  one  of  them  prepared  to  the  work,  and  the  other  employed 
and  bestowed  upon  the  work  is  exceeding  great,  as  appeareth  in  the  holy  history  (1 
Chron.  xviii.  11,  &c.).  And  so  much  the  rather  we  should  employ  our  blessings 
and  gifts  to  the  service  of  God,  and  so  give  them  after  a  sort  to  Him  that  gave  them 
first  unto  us,  because  it  is  a  sign  that  our  affection  is  set  upon  the  worship  of  God, 
and  an  assurance  to  our  own  hearts  that  we  love  Him  and  His  house  (1  Chron.  xxix. 
8,  4).  2.  Every  one  is  bound  to  glorify  God  with  his  riches,  knowing  that  they 
are  but  stewards  and  dispensers  of  them,  of  which  they  must  give  an  account 
unto  God  (Luke  xvi.  2).  To  tliis  end  hath  God  bestowed  them,  and  to  this  end  we 
have  received  them,  and  therefore  to  this  end  they  should  be  employed.  3.  This 
is  a  certain  rule  that  "  To  whomsoever  much  is  given,  of  him  shall  much  be 
required  "  (Luke  xii.  48).  He  that  hath  little  committed  unto  him  hath  the  less 
account  and  shorter  reikoning  to  make,  but  to  whom  men  have  committed  much,  of 
him  they  will  require  more  ;  so  is  it  with  God,  if  He  have  left  us  five  talents  He  will 
ask  five  of  us  again.  First,  this  serveth  to  reprove  the  forgetfulness  and  thankful- 
ness of  such  as  never  consider  the  end  wherefore  God  hath  blessed  them,  giving 
themselves  wholly  to  carnal  hberty  and  security,  and  so  are  more  backward  in  gooJ 


48  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  vii. 

things  than  if  they  had  never  received  so  many  and  so  great  bles-ings  from  God. 
Secondly,  it  reproveth  all  idle  and  negligent  teachers  who  have  receiveil  many  good 
gifts  and  graces  profitable  for  the  Church  of  God,  and  yet  never  use  them,  Uke  the 
covetous  person  who  hoardelh  up  great  treasures,  but  snffereth  no  man  to  be  the 
better  for  them  :  like  the  sluggish  servant  in  the  parable,  or  like  unto  those  that 
cover  the  candle  under  a  bnshel  that  it  can  give  no  light  unto  them  that  are  in  the 
house.  Wherefore  hath  God  given  greater  gifts  but  that  such  should  take  greater 
pains  ?  How  many  are  there  that  desire  great  livings,  but  they  do  not  desire  to 
bestow  great  labour  among  them  ?  Our  reward  shall  not  be  according  to  our  gifts, 
but  according  to  our  labours.  Lastly,  seeing  such  as  have  received  outward  bless- 
ings ought  to  be  most  forward  to  do  good  with  them,  we  must  know  that  thus  also 
it  ought  to  be  in  spiritual  blessings.  (W.  Attersoll.)  The  princes'  offerings  for  the 
dedication  of  the  altar : — I.  The  significance  of  the  offebings  for  the  dedication 
OF  THE  altar.  1.  Their  offerings  express  the  sense  of  equality  of  obligation.  Every 
tribe,  by  its  prince,  presents  the  same  kind  of  offering,  and  in  the  same  quantity  as 
an  expression  of  their  equal  indebtedness  to  God.  There  are  certain  mercies  which 
all  men  have  in  common  ;  certain  Divine  gifts  bestowed  upon  all  men ;  Christ "  died 
for  all  "  men  ;  and  there  are  certain  obligations  to  God  in  which  all  men  share.  2. 
Their  offerings  express  symbolically  the  Divine  calling  of  the  nation  to  be  holy  unto 
the  Lord.  All  the  vessels  presented  were  for  sacrificial  uses,  all  the  animals  were 
ceremonially  clean  and  such  as  were  proper  for  sacrifices  ;  all  the  other  gifts  were 
of  the  best  quality  and  were  to  be  used  in  the  worship  of  God.  By  these  things  it 
was  indicated  that  the  people  were  to  be  a  separate  people,  entirely  dedicated  to 
God,  and  that  God  was  to  dwell  in  their  midst.  The  lesson  for  us  is  that  God  is  to 
be  worshipped  with  our  highest  and  best.  3.  Their  offerings  express  symbolically 
the  great  truths  taught  by  the  different  sacrifices.     II.  The  significance  of  the 

RECORD   OF   the    OFFERINGS   FOR    THE    DEDICATION    OF    THE    ALTAR.       1.    The  pleasure  of 

God  in  the  gifts  of  His  people.  "  That  everything  is  so  particularly  noted,"  says 
Babington,  "  and  the  weight  so  precisely  mentioned,  may  teach  us  to  our  comfort, 
what  an  observation  there  is  in  God  of  the  gifts  we  bestow  on  Him  in  promoting 
His  glory,  advancing  His  service,  maintaining  His  ministers  in  a  liberal  manner, 
relieving  the  poor  and  doing  such  good  things  as  with  God  and  man  are  praise- 
worthy. Surely  the  number,  the  measure,  with  all  circumstances,  are  observed ; 
and  the  Lord  is  a  plenteous  Rewarder  of  all  love  to  Him."  2.  The  permanence  of 
good  works.  The  grateful  heart  will  for  ever  cherish  the  memory  of  the  kind  ser- 
vice or  generous  gift.  "  The  righteous  shall  be  in  everlasting  remembrance." 
The  noble  deed  shall  live  and  bring  forth  fruit.  And  the  doer  himself  by  his  deed 
has  gained  somewhat  of  nobility  and  strength.  Conclusion  :  Our  subject  is  most 
fruitful  of  encouragement  to — 1.  Liberality  of  giving  to  promote  worthy  objects. 
2.  Diligence  in  working  to  promote  worthy  objects.  (W.Jones.)  Rich  givers  and 
rich  gifts  : — I.  The  princes  and  great  men  were  first  and  foremost  in  the  service 
OF  God.  Those  who  are  entitled  to  precedence  should  go  before  in  good  works.  II. 
The  offerings  they  brought  were  very  rich  and  valuabt,e.  In  works  of  piety  and 
charity  we  ought  to  be  generous  according  to  our  ability.  He  that  is  the  best  should 
be  served  with  the  best  we  have.  III.  They  brought  their  offerings  each  on  a 
several  day,  in  the  order  that  they  had  lately  been  put  into,  so  that  the  solemnity 
lasted  twelve  days.  God  appointed  that  it  should  thus  be  done  on  several  days. 
1.  That  the  solemnity  might  be  prolonged,  and  so  might  be  universally  taken  notice 
of  by  all  Israel,  and  the  remembrance  of  it  more  effectually  preserved.  2.  That  an 
equal  honour  might  thereby  be  put  upon  each  several  tribe.  In  Aaron's  breast- 
plate each  had  his  precious  stone,  so  in  this  offering  each  had  his  day.  3.  Thus  it 
would  be  done  more  decently  and  in  order.  God's  work  should  not  be  done  con- 
fusedly and  in  a  hurry.  Take  time  and  we  shall  have  done  the  sooner,  or  at  least 
we  shall  have  done  the  better.  4.  God  hereby  signified  how  well  pleased  He  is,  and 
how  well  pleased  we  should  be,  with  the  exercises  of  piety  and  devotion.  The 
repetition  of  them  should  be  a  continued  pleasure  to  us,  and  we  must  not  be  weary 
of  well-doing.  If  extraordinary  services  come  to  be  done  for  twelve  days  together, 
we  must  not  snnff  at  it,  nor  call  it  a  task  and  a  burden.  5.  The  priest  and  Levites 
having  this  occasion  to  offer  the  same  sacrifices,  and  those  some  of  every  sort  every 
day  for  so  manv  days  together,  would  have  their  hands  well  set  in,  and  would  be 
well  versed  in  the  laws  concerning  them.  6.  The  peace-offerings  were  all  to  be  eaten 
the  same  day  they  were  offered ;  and  two  oxen,  five  rams,  five  he-goats,  and  five 
lambs  were  enough  for  one  day's  festival.  Had  there  been  more,  especially  if  all 
had  been  brought  of  a  day,  there  might  have  been  danger  of  excess.     The  virtue  of 


CHAP,  vii.j  NUMBERS.  49 

temperance  must  not  be  left  under  the  pretence  of  the  religion  of  feasting.  IV.  All 
their  offerings  were  exactly  the  same,  without  any  vakiation,  though  it  is  probable 
the  princes  were  not  all  alike  rich,  nor  the  tribes  neither ;  but  thus  it  was  intimated 
that  all  the  tribes  of  Israel  had  an  equal  share  in  the  altar,  and  an  equal  interest  in 
the  sacrifices  that  were  offered  upon  it.     V.  Nashon  the  prince  of  the  tribe  of 

JUDAH  offered  FIRST  BECAUSE  GoD  HAD  GIVEN   THAT  TRIBE  THE  FIRST  POST  OF  HONOUR 

in  the  camp,  and  the  rest  of  the  tribes  acquiesced,  and  offered  in  the  same  order 
that  God  had  appointed  them  to  encamp.  Judah,  of  which  tribe  Christ  came,  first ; 
and  then  the  rest.  Thus,  in  the  dedication  of  souls  to  God  everj'  man  is  presented 
in  his  own  order,  "  Christ  the  first-fruits  "  (1  Cor.  xv.  23).  VI.  Though  the  offer- 
ings were  all  the  same,  iet  the  account  of  them  is  repeated  at  large  for  each 
TRIBE  IN  the  same  WORDS.  We  are  sure  there  are  no  vain  repetitions  in  Scripture, 
what  then  shall  we  make  of  these  repetitions  ?  Might  it  not  have  served  to  say  of 
this  noble  jury,  That  the  same  offering  which  their  foreman  brought,  each  on  his 
day  brought  likewise  ?  No  ;  God  would  have  it  specified  for  each  tribe.  And  why 
so  ?  1.  It  was  for  the  encouragement  of  aU  acts  of  piety  and  charity,  by  letting  us 
know  that  what  is  so  given  is  lent  to  the  Lord,  and  He  carefully  books  it  with  every 
one's  name  prefixed  to  his  gift  because  what  is  so  given  He  will  pay  it  again,  and 
even  a  cup  of  cold  water  shall  have  its  reward.  He  is  not  unrighteous  to  forget 
either  the  cost  or  labour  of  love  (Heb.  vi.  10).  We  find  Christ  taking  particular 
notice  what  was  cast  into  the  treasury  (Mark  xii.  41).  Though  what  is  offei'ed  be 
but  little,  while  it  is  according  to  our  ability,  though  it  be  a  contribution  to  the 
charity  of  others,  yet  it  shall  be  recorded  that  it  may  be  recompensed  in  the  resur- 
rection of  the  just.  VII.  The  sum  total  is  added  at  the  foot  of  the  account  (vers. 
84,  88)  to  show  ho'w  well  pleased  God  was  with  the  mention  of  His  free-will  offer- 
ings, and  what  a  great  deal  it  amounted  to  in  the  whole,  when  every  prince  brought 
in  his  quota.  How  greatly  would  the  sanctuary  of  God  be  enriched  and  beautified 
if  all  would  in  their  places  do  their  part  towards  it  by  exemplary  purity  and  devotion, 
extensive  charity,  and  universal  usefulness  ?  [Matlhew  Henry,  D.D.)  The  sup- 
port of  religious  institutions  : — This  dedication  of  the  altar — I.  Suggests  to  us  some 
OF  the  responsibilities  of  the  wealthy.  Wealth  is  a  talent.  He  holds  the  wealthy 
responsible — 1.  To  give  of  their  wealth  to  carry  on  His  work.  God  claims  a  share 
of  all  we  get ;  how  much  that  shall  be  He  leaves  to  our  conscience.  He  looks  not 
so  much  at  the  amount  as  at  the  motive.  2.  To  take  the  lead  in  doing  good — ^to  be 
examples  in  giving.  The  wealthy  are  looked  up  to  ;  if  they  fail  to  do  their  duty, 
not  only  do  tljey  fail  to  do  good,  but  they  also  check  others  from  doing  so.  II.  Is 
A  striking  illustration  of  the  voluntary  principle.  1.  God  has  left  His  work  to 
be  carried  on  by  His  people.  2.  The  voluntary  principle  is  the  most  effective  for 
doing  this.  (1)  Because  conscience  is  brought  into  action  by  it :  giving  becomes 
an  act  of  worship.  (2)  Because  man  is  then  on  his  honour.  (3)  As  a  matter  of  fact 
it  has  never  failed.  3.  God  is  greatly  pleased  with  it.  Eead  ver.  89  with  the  text. 
He  approves— (1)  Because  voluntary  giving  evinces  real  inteiest  in  His  work — 
shows  that  it  is  done  from  love.  The  free-will  offering  is  a  good  gauge  of  the 
people's  hearts  and  interest.  (2)  He  will  accept  nothing  that  is  done  from  con- 
straint. (3)  He  testifies  to  His  pleasure,  in  His  Word  and  by  blessing  those  who 
so  help  His  work.  (D.  Lloyd.)  He  beard  the  voice  of  One  speaking  unto  him. — 
The  condescension  of  God,  and  the  privileges  of  man  : — I.  The  great  condescension 
OF  God.  1.  The  sacred  place  in  which  He  speaks.  It  was  in  the  Holy  of  holies  in 
"  the  tabernacle  of  meeting."  It  was  in  this  place  that  He  had  promised  to  meet 
with  His  servant.  He  specially  manifests  Himself  to  man  in  His  house.  2.  The 
grand  medium  through  which  He  speaks.  The  mercy-seat :  an  illustration,  perhaps 
a  type,  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  He  is  the  true  Mercy-seat  (Eom.  iii.  25).  By  the 
shedding  of  His  blood  the  great  atonement  for  the  sins  of  the  world  was  made.  In 
Him  God  draws  near  to  man  and  communes  with  him.  He  is  the  true  Divine 
Oracle ;  through  Him  the  most  precious  revelations  of  God  have  been  made ;  in 
Him  we  hear  the  voice  of  God  most  clearly  and  graciously  (Heb.  i.  1-3).  3.  The 
gracious  purpose  for  which  He  speaks.  In  this  instance,  the  voice  from  between 
tbe  cherubim  doubtless  announced  to  Moses  the  gracious  acceptance  by  Jehovah  of 
the  cheerful  offerings  of  the  princes  of  the  tribes ;  and  intimated  that  He  had  taken 
up  His  abode  in  their  midst.  All  the  utterances  of  God  are  for  the  benefit  of  man. 
II.  The  great  privileges  of  man.  1.  We  may  speak  unto  God.  In  time  of  grief 
or  gladness,  of  perplexity  or  penitence,  of  doubt  or  dread,  of  triumph  or  tribulation, 
we  may  speak  unto  God  in  praise  or  prayer,  or  in  the  silent  language  of  the  heart, 
which  He  perfectly  comprehends,  assured  that  He  will  hear  us  graciously,  and  bless 

4 


50  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATQR.  [chap.  viii. 

us  generously.  2.  We  may  receive  conimunications  from  God.  We  receive  mes- 
sages from  Him  through  the  sacred  Scriptures,  through  the  operations  of  His  pro- 
•vidence,  and  through  the  mysterious  and  gracious  ministry  of  His  Spirit.  And  how 
precious  and  helpful  are  His  communications  !  Pardon  to  the  guilty,  peace  to  the 
penitent,  joy  to  the  sorrowful,  direction  to  the  perplexed,  hope  to  the  despondent, 
&c.  III.  The  consequent  duti  of  man.  1.  To  wait  upon  God  in  His  house.  2. 
To  address  God  in  His  house.  3.  To  listen  for  the  voice  of  God  in  His  house.  (W. 
Jones.)  Indications  of  the  Incarnation : — By  this  we  may  know  that  God  heats 
and  accepts  our  prayers,  if  He  gives  us  grace  to  hear  and  receive  His  Word,  for  thus 
our  communion  with  Him  is  maintained.  I  know  not  why  we  may  not  suppose 
that  upon  each  of  the  days  on  which  these  offerings  were  brought,  probably  while 
the  priests  and  oiJerers  were  feasting  upon  the  peace-offerings,  Moses  was  in  the 
tabernacle  receiving  some  of  these  laws  and  orders  which  we  have  already  met  with 
in  this  and  the  foregoing  book.  Bishop  Patrick  observes  that  God's  speaking  to 
Moses  thus  by  an  audible  articulate  voice,  as  if  He  had  been  clothed  with  a  body, 
might  be  looked  upon  as  an  earnest  of  the  Incarnation  of  the  Son  of  God  in  the  ful- 
ness of  time,  when  the  Word  should  be  made  flesh  and  speak  in  the  language  of  the 
sons  of  men.  For  however  God  at  sundry  times,  and  in  divers  manners,  spake 
unto  the  fathers.  He  has  in  these  last  days  spoken  unto  us  by  His  Son.  And  that 
He  that  now  spake  to  Moses,  as  the  Shechinah  or  Divine  majesty  from  between 
the  cherubims,  was  the  eternal  Word,  the  second  person  in  the  Trinity,  was  the 
pious  conjecture  of  many  of  the  ancients.  For  all  God's  communion  with  man  is 
by  His  Son,  by  whom  He  made  the  world  and  rules  the  Church ;  and  who  is  the 
same  yesterday,  to-day,  and  for  ever.  {Matthew  Henrii,D.D.)  The  speech  of  the 
Divine  Spirit: — It  is  told  of  Claus  Harms,  the  preacher  who  was  most  blessed  in 
the  first  half  of  our  century,  that  he  related  to  a  Quaker  how  much  daily  he  had  to 
speak.  The  Quaker  listened,  and  when  Brother  Harms  had  finished  his  narration, 
he  asked,  "Brother  Harms,  if  thou  speakest  so  much,  when  art  thou  quiet?  and 
■when  doth  the  Spirit  of  God  speak  to  thee?  "  Harms  was  so  impressed,  that  from 
that  day  forward  he  passed  a  certain  portion  of  each  day  in  retirement.  {Prof'ssar 
Gess.)  Communion  icith  God  : — Standing  by  the  telegraph  wires  one  may  often 
hear  the  mystic  wailing  and  sighing  of  the  winds  among  them,  like  the  strains  of 
an  ^olian  harp,  but  one  knows  nothing  of  the  message  which  is  flnshing  along 
them.  Joyous  may  be  the  inner  language  of  those  wires,  swift  as  the  lightning,  far 
reaching  and  full  of  meaning,  but  a  stranger  intermeddles  not  therewith.  Fit 
emblem  of  the  believer's  inner  life;  men  hear  our  notes  of  outward  sorrow  wrung 
from  us  by  external  circumstances,  but  the  messtige  of  celestial  peace,  the  Divine 
communings  with  a  better  land,  the  swift  heart-thobs  of  heaven-born  desire,  they 
cannot  perceive  ;  man  sees  but  the  outer  manhood,  but  the  life  hidden  with  Christ 
in  God  flesh  and  blood  cannot  discern.  Communion  ivith  God  : — A  converted 
heathen  said, "  I  open  my  Bible  and  God  talks  with  me  ;  I  close  my  Bible  and  then 
I  talk  with  God."  The  ear  of  the  heart : — "  I  talk  to  Him  until  I  fall  asleep,"  she 
(Madame  Louise)  said.  I  asked  whether  He  answered  her.  "Oh,  yes,"  she 
replied ;  "  the  ear  of  my  heart  hears  His  answer." 


CHAPTEE  VIII. 


Vers.  1-4.  When  thou  lightest  the  lamps. — The  golden  candlestirTc  an  emhlem  of 
the  Church  of  God  : — I.  The  peeciousness  and  sacredness  of  the  Cudkch  of  God. 
II.  The  light  of  the  Chuech  of  God.  III.  The  ministers  of  the  Church  op 
God,  and  their  function.  IV.  The  function  op  the  Church  of  God.  "  I  would 
not  give  much  for  your  religion,"  says  Spurgeon,  "  unless  it  can  be  seen.  Lamps 
do  not  talk  ;  but  Ihey  do  shine.  A  lighthouse  sounds  no  drum,  it  beats  no  gong; 
and  yet  far  over  the  waters  its  friendly  spark  is  seen  by  the  mariner.  So  let  your 
actions  shine  out  your  religion.  Let  the  main  sermon  of  your  life  be  illustrated  by 
all  your  conduct,  and  it  shall  not  fail  to  be  illustrious."  Application  :  1.  To 
individuals.  Are  our  lives  luminous  in  the  light  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  ?  2.  To 
Churches.  Are  we  making  good  our  claim  to  a  place  in  "  the  Church  of  the  living 
God  "  by  taking  our  part  in  performing  the  Divine  function  of  that  Church  ?  Are 
yte  diffusing  the  light  of  God  in  Christ  in  this  dark  world  ?    (W.  Jones.)       Moulded 


CUAP.  vni.]  ^  NUMBEES.  51 

and  beatenwork  (with  Exod.  xxxii.  -i)  ;— I  have  chosen  these  two  texts  to  point  out 
an  instructive  lesson  regardibg  the  easiness  of  sin  and  the  difficulty  of  holiness. 
The  material  of  the  golden  calf  which  Aaron  constructed  was  poured  into  a  mould 
and  shaped  without  trouble  ;  the  material  of  the  seven-branched  candlestick  had  to 
be  beaten  out  carefully  and  slowly  with  muih  toil  and  pains.  I.  The  pattern  of  the 
calf  was  easily  constructed ;  it  required  no  originality,  no  effort  of  tbought,  only 
an  exercise  of  memory ;  and  Aaron  cast  their  golden  jewels  into  the  familiar  mould, 
and  out  of  it  came  the  familiar  image.  So  easy,  so  natural,  so  inevitable  was  the 
process,  that  Aaron  used  language  regaraing  it  which  seemed  to  imply  that,  when 
he  lighted  the  furnace  and  poured  into  the  mould  the  molten  gold,  the  image  of  the 
calf  came  out  of  its  own  accord.  It  may  be  further  remarked  that,  in  order  to  get 
the  image  sharp  and  clear  out  of  the  mould,  Aaron  must  have  put  into  the  gold  an 
alloy  of  some  inferior  metal,  or  it  was  already  in  the  ornaments  of  the  Israelites. 
And  is  this  not  true  of  all  sin  ?  It  has  a  mould  prepared  for  it  in  a  world  lying  in 
wickedness,  and  in  the  deceitful  heart  of  man.  The  pattern  of  sin  is  as  old  as 
Adam.  The  first  tran'^gression  was  not  only  the  root,  but  also  the  type  of  every 
transgression,  just  as  the  whole  plant  is  a  development  and  modification  of  the 
primitive  leaf,  and  constructed  after  its  pattern.  Why  is  it  that  we  think  so  little 
of  articles  cast  in  a  mould,  in  comparisun  with  those  wrought  by  hand?  Is  it  not 
because  these  moulded  articles  are  easily  made,  involving  the  smallest  expenditure 
of  toil  or  time  or  thought  ?  They  can  be  manufactured  and  multiplied  by  the 
thousand  with  the  greatest  ease  once  the  mould  is  formed.  The  maker  puts  as  little 
as  possible  of  himself  into  them.  He  is  not  an  artist,  but  a  mere  mechanic.  The 
essence  of  all  sin  is  a  desire  to  get  things  in  the  easiest  way— to  run  things  into 
moulds,  rather  than  to  hew  or  carve  or  build  them  with  slow,  patient  toil  and  care. 
And  hence  when  persons  do  not  take  thought  or  trouble  to  do  what  is  right,  they 
always  blame  circumstances  and  not  themselves  for  the  wrong.  When  they  do  not 
resist  temptation  they  say  that  they  could  not  help  themselves.  Sin  is  regarded  as 
a  misfortune  demanding  pity,  and  not  a  wilful  act  drawing  down  condemnation.  II. 
The  material  of  the  seven-branched  golden  candlestick  was  not  run  into  a  mould 
already  prepared  for  it.  It  was  all  hand-made  work.  It  was  the  most  elaborate  of 
all  the  vessels  of  the  sanctuary,  because  it  represented  the  result  of  what  all  the 
other  vessels  typified  and  led  up  to — the  light  of  the  world,  and  yet  it  was  beaten 
out  of  one  solid  piece  of  gold.  The  workman  who  fashioned  it  must  have  pondered 
minutely  over  every  part,  and  bestowed  immense  labour  and  skill  upon  all  its 
details;  the  pattern  and  symmetry  of  the  whole  must  have  been  clearly  in  his 
mind,  while  from  one  mass  of  metal  he  beat  out  each  shaft  and  floral  ornament. 
The  whole  idea  of  it  implied  personal  thought  and  toil  and  care.  While  it  is  easy 
for  man  to  sin,  it  is  difficult  for  man  to  be  holy.  He  finds  moulds  for  his  sin  lying 
ready  to  his  hand,  without  any  trouble.  But  he  has  to  fashion,  as  it  were,  by  tlie 
toil  of  his  hands  and  the  sweat  of  his  soul,  with  the  Divine  help,  the  means  by 
which  he  may  be  rescued  from  his  sin  and  folly.  We  can  mould  a  false  diamond 
in  glass  or  paste  in  a  few  minutes ;  but  nature  requires  ages  of  slow,  patient  workman- 
ship to  crystallise  the  real  diamond  from  the  dark  charcoal.  We  can  cover  common 
deal  wood  with  an  exquisitely  grained  veneer  of  walnut  or  mahogany  at  a  small 
expense  and  with  little  effort  ;  but  the  grain  of  the  walnut  or  mahogany  represents 
many  years  of  strain  and  struggle,  during  which  the  tree  grew  its  beautiful 
markings.  Thus  in  the  human  world  we  can  make  easy  imitations  of  moral 
and  spiritual  qualities,  which  when  genuine  can  only  be  produced  by  slow,  patient 
self-discipline,  by  many  prayers  and  tears  and  toils.  The  paste  diamond  of  relig.on, 
that  glitters  so  brightly  and  deceives  so  maay,  can  be  manufactured  in  the  mould 
of  easy  compliance  with  outward  church  duties  and  rites  ;  the  veneer  of  goiUiness 
can  be  assumed  by  a  profession  which  costs  nothing,  and  makes  no  demand  of  self- 
sacrifice  upon  the  inner  nature.  But  the  deliverance  from  sin  and  the  formation  of 
holiness,  which  the  salvation  of  Christ  implies  and  involves,  can  only  be  throupih 
toil  and  suffering.  (H.  MacmiUan,  D.D.)  The  lighted  lamp: — Who  must  light 
the  lamps?  Aaron  himself  (ver.  3).  As  the  people's  representative  to  God,  he  thus 
did  the  office  of  a  servant  in  God's  house,  lighting  his  Master's  candle.  As  the 
representative  of  God  to  the  people,  he  thus  gave  them  the  significations  of  God's 
■will  and  favour,  which  is  thus  expressed  (Psa.  xviii.  28).  And  thus  Aaron  himself 
was  now  lately  directed  to  bless  the  people,  "  The  Lord  make  His  fnce  to  shine  upon 
thee  "  (chap.  vi.  25).  The  commandment  is  a  lamp  (Prov.  vi.  23).  Tbe  Scripture  is 
a  light  shining  in  a  dark  place  (2  Pet.  i.  19).  And  a  dark  place  indeed  even  the 
Church  would  be  without  it,  as  the  tabernacle  without  the  lamps,  for  it  had  no 


52  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOli^  [chap.  viii. 

-window  in  it.  Now  the  work  of  ministers  is  to  light  these  lamps,  by  expounding 
and  applying  the  Word  of  God.  The  priest  lighted  the  middle  lamp  from  the  fire 
of  the  altar  ;  and  the  rest  of  the  lamps  he  lighted  one  from  another :  which  signifieth 
that  the  fountain  of  all  light  and  knowledge  cometh  from  Christ,  who  has  the  seven 
spirits  of  God,  figured  by  the  seven  lamps  of  fire  (Eev.  iv.  5) ;  but  that  in  expounding 
of  Scripture,  one  passage  must  borrow  light  from  another.  He  also  supposeth,  that 
seven  being  a  number  of  perfection,  by  the  seven  branches  of  the  candlestick  is 
showed  the  full  perfection  of  the  Scriptures,  which  are  able  to  make  us  wise  to 
salvation.  2.  To  what  end  the  lamps  were  lighted  ;  that  they  might  give  light  over 
against  the  candlestick,  i.e.,  to  the  part  of  the  tabernacle  where  the  table  stood, 
with  the  shewbread  upon  it,  over  against  the  candlestick.  They  were  not  hghted 
like  tapers  in  an  urn,  to  burn  to  themselves,  but  to  give  light  to  the  other 
side  of  the  tabernacle,  for  therefore  candles  are  lighted  (Matt.  v.  15).  The 
lights  of  the  world,  the  lights  of  the  Church,  must  shine  as  lights.  Therefore  we 
have  light,  that  we  may  give  light.  {Matthew  Henry,  D.D.)  Men  who  would 
quench  the  lujht  of  truth: — No  light  shone  from  the  Ship  Shoal  Lighthouse,  near 
Morgan  City,  U.S.,  on  two  consecutive  nights  in  February.  The  unusual  darkness 
at  tbat  point  caused  some  surprise,  but  surprise  was  turned  into  indignation  when 
the  facts  became  known.  One  of  the  keepers  had  seen  a  man  in  a  boat  who  needed 
assistance,  his  vessel  being  becalmed.  The  keeper  kindly  towed  the  boat  to  the 
lighthouse  and  treated  the  man  hospitably.  In  the  night  the  guest  made  a  murderous 
attack  on  the  two  lighthouse-keepers,  shooting  both  of  them  and  inflicting  dangerous 
wounds.  He  held  possession  of  the  lighthouse  for  forty-eight  hours,  during  which 
he  never  lighted  the  lamps.  Then,  as  he  could  not  find  fond,  he  surrendered.  A 
man  more  utterly  depraved  it  is  difficult  to  imagine.  But  there  are  many  infidels 
who  are  trying  to  murder  men's  souls  and  to  quench  the  warning  light  of  the  Bible. 
Luminous  centres  : — The  globe  of  the  earth  is  surrounded  by  a  mass  of  atmosphere 
extending  forty  or  fifty  miles  above  the  surface.  Each  particle  of  air  is  a  luminous 
centre,  receiving  its  light  from  the  sun,  and  it  radiates  hght  in  every  direction. 
Were  it  not  for  this,  the  sun's  light  could  only  penetrate  those  spaces  which  are 
directly  accessible  to  his  rays.  Thus,  the  sun  shining  upon  the  window  of  an 
apartment  would  illuminate  just  so  much  of  that  apartment  as  would  be  exposed 
to  his  direct  rays,  the  remainder  being  in  darkness.  But  we  find,  on  the  contrary, 
that  althouKh  that  part  of  the  room  upon  which  the  sun  directly  shines  is  more 
brilliantly  illuminated  than  the  surrounding  parts,  these  latter  are  nevertheless 
strongly  illuminated.  In  the  social  world,  too,  there  are  luminous  centres.  These 
are  noble  souls,  who,  being  especially  blessed  themselves,  diffuse  in  every  direction 
some  of  the  blessings  which  they  have  received.  Were  it  not  for  them,  and  their 
power  of  spreading  brightness,  goodness,  and  joy,  the  world  would  be  indeed  rayless 
and  cold.  {Scientific  Illustrations.)  Secondary  graces  to  he  kept  hurnincj  : — On  a 
dark  stormy  night,  when  the  waves  rolled  like  mountains,  and  not  a  star  was  to  be 
seen,  a  boat  was  rocking  and  plunging  near  the  Cleveland  harbour.  "  Are  you  sure 
this  is  Cleveland?"  asked  the  captain,  seeing  only  one  light  from  the  hghthouse. 
"  Quite  sure,  sir,"  replied  the  pilot.  "  Where  are  the  lower  lights?  "  "  Gone  out, 
sir."  "  Can  you  make  the  harbour  ?  "  "  We  must,  or  perish,  sir  I  "  And  with  a 
strong  hand  and  a  brave  heart  the  old  pilot  turned  the  wheel.  But,  alas  1  in  the 
darkness  he  missed  the  channel,  and  with  a  crash  upon  the  rocks  the  boat  was 
shivered,  and  many  a  life  lost  in  a  watery  grave.  Brethren,  the  Master  will  take 
care  of  the  great  lighthouse  ;  let  us  keep  the  lower  lights  burning  !  Obligation 
to  keep  the  light  hurning ;— It  is  one  of  the  chief  temptations  of  Christians,  and  not 
least  of  those  whose  candlebtick  is  the  lofty  one  of  the  pulpit,  to  think  unduly  of 
themselves.  Our  anxiety  should  be,  not,  What  do  you  think  of  us?  but,  What  do 
you  think  of  our  message  ?  Not,  Do  you  esteem  the  light-holder?  but.  Do  you  walk 
in  the  light?  This  truth  has  likewise  its  application,  on  the  other  hand,  for  the 
pew.  You  go  away,  and  ask,  How  did  you  like  the  sermon  ?  but  go  home  to-day, 
and  ask  yourselves.  How  did  yuu  like  the  truth  ?  You  may  be  ever  so  well  pleased 
with  sermons,  and  be  none  the  better ;  but,  if  you  receive  the  truth,  it  will  save  your 
soul ;  if  you  light  your  candle  at  the  fire  of  God's  altar,  it  will  burn  for  ever.  An(? 
while  it  shines  for  your  own  soul,  it  will  shine  through  your  life,  as  through  a, 
lantern,  for  the  good  of  others  also.  Only  "  let  your  light  shine  before  men,"  and 
they,  "  seeing  your  good  works,  will  glorify  your  Father  in  heaven."  Let  it  I  It  is 
its  property  to  shine,  if  it  gets  fair  treatment.  It  is  not  a  question  of  the  numbers, 
or  rank,  or  influence  of  those  who  shall  see  it.  Eyes  or  no  e\cs,  you  have  to  shine. 
The  gentian  fringes  the  mountain  glacier  with  its  drapery  of  blue,  though  seldom  a 


CHAP.  VIII.]  •  NUMBERS.  53 

human  eye  may  look  upon  it.     The  desert  melon  smells  with  a  refreshing  draught 
for  the  wayfarer,  though  not  a  human  foot  in  half  a  century  should  pass  that  way. 
There  God  has  placed  it  in  readiness.    If  you  help  to  light  to  heaven  and  happiness 
the  humblest  of  God's  creatures,  you  have  done  a  glorious  work.     The  Admiralty 
order  carries  with  it  a  lesson  to  the  believer.     "  Light  the  lamps  every  evening  at 
sunsetting,  and  keep  tbem  constantly  burning,  bright  and  clear,  till  sunrising." 
There  are  no  qualifications  and  no  exceptions.     If,  in  the  world's  night,  no  lamp 
were  dim,  and  no  light  kindled  by  God's  hand  were  shaded,  it  were  happier  for 
sinning  and  suffering  humanity.     It  is  only  here  we  have  the  opportunity  to  shine 
in  darkness.     When  the  morning  of  the  eternal  day  dawns  upon  us,  our  light  shall 
be  swallowed  up  in  the  surpassing  glory,  that  needs  no  light  from  sun  or  moon.    No 
bed  or  sofa  is   permitted   in  the  watch-room  of  the  lighthouse.     None  must  be 
tempted  to  slumber  at  a  post  of  so  much  responsibility.     And,  if   such   needful 
guarantees  are  taken  for  the  safety  of  those  who  navigate  our  seas,  is  there  less 
need  for  earnestness  and  watchfulness  to  remove  peril  from  the  way  of  those  whose 
voyage  must  conduct  either  to  glory  or  to  ruin  ?   No  slumberous  hours,  no  unguarded 
moments  for  those  to  whom  the  heavenly  light  has  been  entrusted.     Nor  must 
danger  keep  you  back  from  duty.     I  have  read  of  the  keeper  of  an  island  light- 
house whose  provisions  were  exhausted,  whose  frame  was  emaciated,  and  to  whom 
the  stormy  sea  for  weeks  suffered  no  access  or  relief,  nightly  lighting  his  lamp  with 
an  almost  dying  hand.     Anything  better  than  that  no  warning  ray  should  stream 
■across  that  perilous  channel.    {R.  H.  Lundie,  M.A,)      Importance  of  a  small  light : — 
Once  I  was  down  a  coal  mine.     The  man  who  received  me  was  black  and  grimy, 
but  he  had  an  honest  heart,  and  his  smile  was  like  sunlight  crossing  the  grime. 
Down  in  the  bowels  of  the  mountain,  dark  and  cheerless,  I  noticed  his  little  oil- 
lamp.   I  knew  that  there  was  a  sun  blazing  away  up  in  the  solar  universe,  but  what 
was  that  ?     What  concerned  me  down  in  the  pit   was  the  miner's  little  lamp,  the 
wick  so  tiny,  the  oil  so  very  scanty,  the  flicker  of  flame  so  little  noticed,  yet  it  was 
more  precious  to  me  at  that  time  than  the  blazino;  sun.    Oh  believe  me  for  effective 
work  in  the  mass  of  a  lost  humanity,  in  the  blackness  and  darkness  of  this  fallen 
•world,  I  believe  Christ  prizes  more  the  little  flicker  of  a  humble  Christian  who  will 
go  and  visit  a  sick  one  this  Sabbath  afternoon,  than  the  blazing  sun  of  this  public 
assembly.   Oh,  you  can  cheer  the  heart  of  God  by  letting  your  light  shine  unnoticed 
by  the  world,  but  be  assured  that  He  notices  it.     {John  Robertson.)         The  glory 
of  an  unobtrusive  light : — The  light  of  a  true  spiritual  life  must  shine  more  or  less 
conspicuously.    From  a  gifted  speaker  or  writer,  it  may  stream  out  widely  and  afar, 
like  the  gleam  of  a  beacon  flaming  from  a  mountain  top.     From  an  unendowed, 
Tetiring,  obscure  disciple,  it  may  be  only  as  the  light  of  a  lamp  in  a  narrow  room, 
noticed  by  few,  yet  not  entirely  lost  to  the  view  of  men.     A   charming  writer, 
speaking  of  such  a  modest  soul,  says :  "  A  tiny  flitting  bird  of  slight  song  may  with 
careful  scrutiny  be  seen  twisting  in  and  out  of  the  drooping  fir  tassels.    Many  would 
pass  it  unnoticed,  but  the  observant  eye  will  detect  the  gleam  of  a  gold  circlet  upon 
the  tiny  gold-crested  wren.     Thus  men  will  pass  unregarding  many  a  noiseless, 
retired  worker  for  God  in  some  sphere  of  seclusion  and  shaile.    ]3ut  they  who  watch 
and  know  will  be  aware  at  times  of  the  light  of  a  saint's  glory  encircling  the  modest 
head."     Liberality  and  service  vieived  in  the  light  of  the  sanctuary  : — Having  read, 
in  chapter  vii.,  the  lengthened  statement  of  the  princes'  liberality,  we,  in   our 
■wisdom,  might  suppose  that  the  next  thing  in  order  would  be  the  consecration  of 
the  Levites,  thus  presenting,  in  unbroken  connection,  "  our  persons  and  offerings."  . 
But  no.     The  Spirit  of  God  causes  the  light  of  the  sanctuary  to  intervene,  in  order 
that  we  may  learn  in  it  the  true  object  of  all  liberality  and  service  in  the  wilder- 
ness.    Is  there  not  lovely  and  moral  appropriateness  in  this  ?     Why  have  we  not 
the  golden  altar,  with  its  cloud  of  incense,  here  ?     Why  not  the  pure  table,  with  its 
twelve  loaves  ?    Because  neither  of  these  would  have  the  least  moral  connection 
■with  what  goes  before  or  what  follows  after ;  but  the  golden  candlestick  stands 
■connected  with  both,  inasmuch  as  it  shows  us  that  all  liberality  and  all  work  must 
be  viewed  in  the  light  of  the  sanctuary,  in  order  to  ascertain  its  real  woi'th.     Those 
■"  seven  lamps  "  express  the  light  of  the  Spirit  in  testimony.    They  were  connected 
with  the  beaten  shaft  of  the  candlestick  which  typifies  Christ,  who,  in  His  Person 
and  work,  is  the  foundation  of  the  Spirit's  work  in  the  Church.     All  depends  upon 
Christ.     Every  ray  of  light  in  the  Church,  in  the  individual  believer,  or  in  Israel  by 
and  by,  all  flows  from  Christ.    Nor  is  this  all  we  learn  from  our  type.     "  The  seven 
lamps  shall  give  light  over  against  the  candlestick."    Were  we  to  clothe  this  figure 
in  New  Testament  language,  we  should  quote  our  Lord's  words  when  He  says  to 


54  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  viii. 

tis,  "  Let  your  lipht  so  shine  before  men,"  &c.  (IVfatt.  v.  16).  Wherever  the  true 
light  of  the  Spirit  shines  it  will  always  yield  a  clear  testimony  to  Christ.  It  will 
call  attention  not  to  itself,  but  to  Him  ;  and  this  is  the  way  to  glorify  God.  This  is 
a  great  practical  truth  for  all  Christians.  The  very  finest  evidence  which  can  be 
afforded  of  true  spiritual  work  is  that  it  tends  directly  to  exalt  Christ.  If  attention 
be  sought  for  the  work  or  the  workman,  the  light  has  become  dim,  and  the  Minister 
of  the  sanctuary  must  use  the  snuffers.  It  was  Aaron's  province  to  light  the  lamps  ; 
and  he  it  was  who  trimmed  them  likewise.  In  other  words,  the  light  which,  as 
Christians,  we  are  responsible  to  yield,  is  not  only  founded  upon  Christ,  but  main- 
tained by  Him,  from  moment  to  moment,  throughout  the  entire  night.  Apart  from 
Him  we  can  do  nothing.     (C.  H.  Mackintosh.) 

Vers.  5-7.  Take  the  Levites,  .  .  .  and  cleanse  them. — The  Divine  principle  of 
cleansing  : — Here  we  have,  in  type,  the  only  Divine  principle  of  cleansing.  It  is 
the  application  of  death  to  nature  and  all  its  habits.  It  is  the  word  of  God  brought 
to  bear  upon  the  heart  and  conscience  in  a  living  way.  Moses,  as  representing  the 
claims  of  God,  cleanses  the  Levites  according  to  those  claims  ;  and  they,  being 
cleansed,  are  able  to  bring  the  sharp  razor  to  bear  upon  all  that  was  the  mere 
growth  of  nature,  and  to  wash  their  garments,  which  expresses,  in  typical  form, 
the  cleansing  their  habits  according  to  the  word  of  God.  This  was  God's  way  of 
meeting  all  that  appertained  to  Levi's  natural  state — the  self-will,  the  fierceness, 
and  the  cruelty.  The  pure  water  and  the  sharp  razor  were  called  into  action — the 
■washing  and  shaving  had  to  go  on,  ere  Levi  was  fit  to  approach  the  vessels  of  the 
sanctuary.  Thus  it  is  in  every  case.  There  is,  tliere  can  be,  no  allowance  of 
nature  among  God's  workers.  There  never  was  a  more  fatal  mistake  than  to 
attempt  to  enlist  nature  in  the  service  of  God.  It  matters  not  how  you  may 
endeavour  to  improve  or  regulate  it.  It  is  not  improvement,  but  death  that  will 
avail.  What  is  the  meaning  of  the  initiatory  act  of  Christianity — the  act  of 
baptism?  Does  it  not  set  forth  the  blessed  fact  that  "  our  old  man" — our  fallen 
nature — is  completely  set  aside,  and  that  we  are  introduced  into  an  entirely  new 
position?  Truly  so.  And  how  do  we  use  the  razor?  By  rigid  self -judgment, 
(lay  by  day;  by  "the  stern  disallowance  of  all  that  is  of  nature's  growth.  This  is 
the  true  path  for  all  God's  workers  in  the  wilderness.     (C.  H.  Mackintosh.) 

Vers.  23-26.  The  Levites ;  from  twenty  and  five  years. — Service  : — I.  The 
SERVICE  God  demands  of  all  Levites.  1.  Burden-bearing.  2.  Singing.  3.  Study 
of  the  law,  "  Search  the  Scriptures."  4.  Attendance  on  the  ordinances  of  the 
sanctuary.  II.  God  demands  the  seevice  in  oub  prime.  "From  twenty  and 
five."  III.  God  demands  this  service  when  it  can  be  most  easily  rendered. 
He  suits  the  burden  to  the  back.  All  He  asks  is,  that  we  shall  do  what  we  can. 
{R.  A.  Griffin.)  The  Divine  Master  and  His  human  servants  : — I.  The  necessitt 
OF  FITNESS  FOB  THE  DiviNE  SERVICE.  In  learning  any  handicraft  or  trade,  years 
are  spent  under  instructors ;  for  the  practice  of  law  or  medicine  men  must  have 
special  training ;  and  is  it  not  important  that  they  who  engage  in  religious  services 
should  be  qualified  for  such  services?  II.  The  variety  of  employment  in  the 
DrviNE  service.  1.  An  encouragement  to  persons  of  feeble  powers  and  narrow 
opportunities  to  try  to  do  good.  2.  A  rebuke  to  those  who  plead  inability  as  an 
excuse  for  their  indolence  in  religious  service.  III.  The  care  of  the  Great 
Master  for  His  servants.  Conclusion.  This  subject  supplies — 1.  Encourage- 
ment to  enter  into  this  service.  "  Come  thou  with  us,"  &c.  2.  Encouragement  to 
persevere  in  this  service.  A  glorious  reward  awaits  those  who  patiently  continue 
in  well-doing.  (IV.  Jones.)  Age  and  youth  in  relation  to  service  : — 1.  They  were 
to  enter  upon  the  service  at  twenty-five  years  old  (vcr.  24).  They  were  not  charged 
■with  the  carrying  of  the  tabernacle  and  the  utensils  of  it  till  they  were  thirty  years 
old  (chap.  iv.  3).  But  they  were  entered  to  be  otherwise  serviceable  at  twenty-five 
years  old — a  very  good  age  for  ministers  to  begin  their  public  work.  The  work 
then  required  that  strength  of  body,  and  the  work  now  requires  that  maturity  of 
judgment  and  staidness  of  behaviour  which  men  rarely  arrive  at  till  about  that 
age :  and  novices  are  in  danger  of  being  lifted  up  with  pride.  2.  They  were  to 
have  a  writ  of  ease  at  fifty  years  old ;  then  they  were  to  return  from  the  warfare, 
as  the  phrase  is  (ver.  25),  not  cashiered  with  disgrace — but  preferred  rather  to  the 
rest,  which  their  age  required,  to  be  loaded  with  the  honours  of  their  office,  as 
hitherto  they  had  been  with  the  burdens  of  it.  They  shall  minister  with  their 
brethren  in  the  tabernacle,  to  direct  the  junior  Levites,  and  set  them  in;  and  they 


CHAP.  IX.]  NUMBERS.  55 

shall  keep  the  charge,  as  guards  upon  the  avenues  of  the  tabernacle,  to  see  that  no 
stranger  intruded,  nor  any  person  in  his  uncleanness  ;  but  they  shall  not  be  put 
upon  any  service  which  may  be  a  fatigue  to  them.  If  God's  grace  provide  that 
men  shall  have  ability  according  to  their  work,  man's  prudence  should  take  care 
that  men  have  work  but  according  to  their  ability.  The  aged  are  most  fit  for 
truths,  and  to  keep  the  charge ;  the  younger  are  most  fit  for  work,  and  to  do  the 
service.  "  Those  that  have  used  the  office  of  a  servant  well,  purchase  to  themselves 
a  good  degree"  (1  Tim.  iii.  13).  Yet  indeed  gifts  are  not  tied  to  ages  (Job  xxxii.  9), 
•but  "all  these  worketh  that  one  and  the  self -same  Spirit."    {Matthew  Henry,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  IX. 

Vers.  1-5.  Keep  the  Passover. — Ordinance  of  the  Passover  : — The  design  of  God 
in  instituting  this  remarkable  ordinance,  the  Passover,  was  to  explain  to  us,  as  well 
as  to  prefigure  to  the  Jews,  the  method  of  salvation  through  the  blood  of  Christ. 
He  is  the  one  great  Sacrifice  for  sin ;  and  here  the  application  to  Him  in  His 
mediatorial  work  is  most  comprehensive.  Behold  the  analogy.  It  holds —I.  With 
EEGAED  TO  THE  VICTIM  WHICH  WAS  CHOSEN.  Was  it  a  lamb  ?  Christ  is  often  so 
called  on  account  of  His  innocence,  meekness,  and  resignation  (Isa.  liii.  7  ;  John  i. 
29;  1  Peter  i.  19;  Eev.  v.  6).  Was  it  chosen  from  the  flock?  Christ  was  taken 
from  among  His  brethren  (Acts  iii.  22).  Was  it  a  male  of  the  first  year?  Christ 
suffered  in  the  prime  of  His  days.  Was  it  without  blemish?  Christ  was  altogether 
perfect  (Heb.  vii.  26  ;  1  Peter  i.  19).  II.  With  regakd  to  the  oblation  which 
WAS  made.  As  the  lamb  was  slain,  so  was  Jesus  (Rev.  v.  9).  As  the  lamb  was 
slain  before  the  whole  assembly  (Exod.  xii.  6),  so  Jesus  was  publicly  put  to  death. 
As  the  larub  was  slain  between  the  two  evenings,  so  Jesus  was  offered  between 
three  o'clock  and  six  (Matt,  xxvii.  45).  As  the  lamb  was  set  apart  four  days  before 
it  was  slain  (Exod.  xii.  3,  6),  so  Christ  entered  the  city  four  days  before  His  cruci- 
fixion (Matt.  xxi.  1,  &c.).  III.  With  regard  to  the  blood  which  was  sprinkled. 
The  blood  was  sprinkled  with  a  bunch  of  hyssop  (Exod.  xii.  22),  dipped  into  the 
bason  ;  so  the  blood  of  Christ  is  the  blood  of  the  everlasting  covenant,  the  deposit 
of  privileges,  which  all  become  ours  by  the  exercise  of  faith.  The  blood  was 
sprinkled  upm  the  door-posts  of  their  dwellings.  So  the  blood  of  Christ  is  to  be 
applied  to  the  hearts  and  consciences  of  believers  (Heb.  ix.  13,  14 ;  x.  22).  The 
blood  was  sprinkled  upon  the  lintel  and  the  side-posts ;  but  not  behind  nor  below 
the  door.  So  the  blood  of  Christ  is  not  to  be  trodden  under  foot  (Heb.  x.  29). 
The  blood  secured  every  family  where  it  was  sprinkled,  it  being  within  the  limits 
of  the  Divine  protection,  so  that  the  destroying  angel  was  forbidden  to  hurt  them. 
So  the  blood  of  Jesus  is  the  only  refuge  for  the  guilty.  IV.  With  regard  to  the 
FLESH  which  WAS  EATEN.  The  fiesh  of  the  lamb  was  eaten  roasted  with  fire,  strik- 
ingly exhibiting  the  severity  of  our  Saviour's  sufferings  (Isa.  1.  6;  Iii.  14,  15; 
Psa.  xxii.  14,  15).  It  was  eaten  whole,  and  not  a  bone  broken,  which  was  amaz- 
ingly fulfilled  in  reference  to  Christ  (John  xix.  81-36).  It  was  eaten  in  haste,  with 
the  staff  in  their  hands,  to  intimate  that  Christ  is  to  be  received  immediately  with- 
-out  delay.  It  was  eaten  with  bitter  herbs,  imp  irting  our  looking  to  Christ  with 
sorrow  of  heart,  in  remembrance  of  sin,  as  expressed  in  Zech.  xii.  10.  It  was  eaten 
with  the  loins  girded,  implying  that  we  must  be  prepared  for  His  coming  (Eph.  vi. 
14).  It  was  eaten  with  the  feet  shod,  to  remind  us  of  the  freedom  and  happiness 
which  Christ  imparts  to  the  believing  Israelites  (compare  Isa.  xx.  2-4  with  Rom. 
"v.  11).  It  was  eaten  with  unleavened  bread,  because  we  are  to  receive  and  profess 
Christ  with  unfeigned  sincerity  (1  Cor.  v.  7,  8;  John  i.  47).  Upon  the  whole,  we 
learn  from  the  subject  the  happy  state  of  believers,  who,  though  once  afar  off,  are 
now  made  nigh  by  the  blood  of  Christ ;  and  likewise  the  unhappy  state  of  unbe- 
lievers, who,  rejecting  the  atonement,  must  inevitably  perish.  (iVilliam  Sleigh.) 
The  Passover  and  the  Lord^s  Supper: — There  is  this  connection  between  the  passover 
and  the  Lord's  Supper,  that  the  former  was  the  type,  the  latter  the  memorial,  of 
the  death  of  Christ.  Thus  we  read  in  1  Corinthians  v.,  "  Christ  our  passover  is 
sacrificed  for  us."  This  sentence  establishes  the  connection.  The  passover  was 
the  memorial  of  Israel's  redemption  from  the  bondage  of  Egypt ;  and  the  Lord's 
iSupper  is  the  memorial  of  the  Church's  redemption  from  the  heavier  bondage  of 


56  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  ix^ 

sin  and  Satan.  Hence,  as  every  faithful  Israelite  would  surely  be  found  keeping 
the  passover,  in  the  appointed  season,  according  to  all  tlie  rites  and  ceremonies 
thereof,  so  will  every  true  and  faithful  Christian  be  found  celebrating  the  Lord's 
Supper  in  its  appointed  season,  and  according  to  all  the  principles  laid  down  in 
the  New  Testament  respecting  it.  If  an  Israelite  had  neglected  the  passover,  even 
on  one  single  occasion,  he  would  have  been  cut  off  from  the  congregation.  And 
may  we  not  ask  in  the  face  of  this  solemn  fact.  Is  it  a  matter  of  no  moment  for 
Christians  to  neglect,  from  week  to  week,  and  month  to  month,  the  supper  of  their 
Lord?  Are  we  to  suppose  that  the  One  who,  in  Numbers  ix.,  declared  that  the 
negleeter  of  the  passover  should  be  cut  off,  takes  no  account  of  the  neglecter  of 
the  Lord's  table  ?  We  cannot  believe  it  for  a  moment.  To  a  pious  Israelite  there 
was  nothing  like  the  passover,  because  it  was  the  memorial  of  his  redemption. 
And  to  a  pious  Christian  there  is  nothing  like  the  Lord's  Supper,  because  it  is  the- 
memorial  of  his  redemption  and  of  the  death  of  his  Lord.  How  is  it,  then,  that 
any  of  God's  people  should  be  found  neglecting  the  Lord's  table?  If  the  Lord 
Christ  instituted  the  supper ;  if  God  the  Holy  Ghost  led  the  early  Church  to  cele- 
brate it,  and  if  He  has  also  expounded  it  unto  us,  who  are  we  that  we  should  set 
lip  our  ideas  in  opposition  to  God  ?  No  doubt,  the  Lord's  Supper  should  be  an 
inward  spiritual  mystery  to  all  who  partake  of  it ;  but  it  is  also  an  outward,  literal, 
tangible  thing.  There  is  literal  bread,  and  literal  wine — literal  eating,  and  literal 
drinking.  If  any  deny  this,  they  may,  with  equal  force,  deny  that  there  are  literal' 
people  gathered  together.  We  have  no  right  to  explain  away  scripture  after  such 
a  fashion.  Nor  is  it  merely  a  question  of  subjection  to  the  authority  of  scripture. 
There  is  such  a  thing  as  the  response  of  love  in  the  heart  of  the  Christian,  answer- 
ing to  the  love  of  the  heart  of  Christ.  If  our  blessed  and  adorable  Lord  has  in 
very  deed  appointed  the  bread  and  the  wine  in  the  supper  as  memorials  of  His 
broken  body  and  shed  blood  ;  if  He  has  ordained  that  we  should  eat  of  that  bread 
and  drink  of  that  cup  in  remembrance  of  Him,  ought  we  not,  in  the  power  of 
responsive  affection,  to  meet  the  desire  of  His  loving  heart  ?     (C.  H.  Mackintosh.} 

Vers.  15-23.  The  Cloud. — The  history  of  the  cloud  : — We  have  here  the  history  of 
the  cloud.  Not  a  natural  history — "  who  knows  the  balancings  of  the  clouds  ?  " — 
but  a  Divine  history,  of  a  cloud  that  was  appointed  to  be  the  visible  symbol  of  God's 
presence  with  Israel.  I.  When  the  tabernacle  was  finished  this  cloud,  which  be- 
fore had  hung  on  high  over  their  camp,  settled  cpon  the  tabernacle  and  coverei>. 
it;  to  show  th\t  God  manifests  His  presence  with  His  people  in  and  by  His 
ordinances.  II.  That  which  appeared  as  a  cloud  by  day  appeared  as  a  fire  all 
night  ;  to  teach  Israel  the  constancy  of  His  presence  with  them  and  care  of 
them  (Isa.  xxvii.  5  ;  Psa.  cxxi.  6).  III.  This  pillar  of  cloud  and  fire  directed  and 
determined  all  the  motions,  marches,  and  encampments  of  Israel  in  the  wilder- 
ness. 1.  As  long  as  the  cl"ud  rested  upon  the  tabernacle,  so  long  they  continued 
in  the  same  place  and  never  stirred.  Though  no  doubt  they  were  very  desirous 
to  be  pressing  forward  in  their  journey  towards  Canaan,  where  they  hoped  to  be 
quickly,  yet  as  long  as  the  cloud  rested,  if  it  were  a  month  or  a  year,  so  long  they 
rested  (ver.  22).  Note,  he  that  believeth  doth  not  make  haste.  There  is  no  time 
lost  whilst  we  are  waiting  God's  time.  It  is  as  acceptable  a  piece  of  submission  to- 
the  will  of  God  to  sit  still  contentedly  when  our  lot  requires  it,  as  to  work  for  Him 
when  we  are  called  to  it.  2.  When  the  cloud  was  taken  up  they  removed,  how 
comfortably  soever  they  were  encamped  (ver.  17).  Whether  it  moved  by  day  or 
night  they  delayed  not  to  attend  its  motions  (ver.  21).  And  probably  there  were 
some  appointed  to  stand  sentinel  day  and  night  within  ken  of  it,  to  give  timely 
notice  to  the  camp  of  its  beginning  to  stir;  and  this  is  called  keeping  the  charge  of 
the  Lord.  The  people  being  thus  kept  at  a  constant  uncertainty,  and  having  no 
time  fixed  for  their  stays  and  removes,  were  obliged  to  hold  themselves  in  a  con- 
stant readiness  to  march  upon  very  short  warning.  And  for  the  same  reason  we 
are  kept  at  uncertainty  concerning  the  time  of  our  putting  off  the  earthly  house  of 
this  tabernacle,  that  we  may  be  always  ready  to  remove  at  the  commandment  of  the 
Lord.  3.  As  long  and  as  far  as  the  cloud  moved,  so  long  and  so  far  they  marched  ; 
and  just  there  where  it  aljode  they  pitched  their  tents  about  it,  and  God's  tent 
under  it  (ver.  17).  Note,  it  is  uncomfortalile  staying  when  God  is  departed,  but 
very  safe  and  pleasant  going  when  we  see  God  go  before  us,  and  resting  where 
He  app  >ints  us  to  rest.  Lessons  :  1.  The  particular  care  God  takes  of  His 
people.  Nothing  could  be  more  significant  of  God's  tenderness  of  Israel  than 
the  conduct  of  this  cloud  was.     It  led  them  by  the  right  way  (Psa.  cvii.  7) ;  went 


CHAP.  IX.]  NUMBERS.  57 

on  their  pace ;  God  did  by  it,  as  it  were,  cover  them  with  His  feathers.  We 
are  not  now  to  expect  such  sensible  tokens  of  the  Divine  presence  and  guidance 
as  this  was.  But  the  promise  is  sure  to  all  God's  spiritual  Israel,  that  He 
will  guide  them  by  Hii^  counsel  (Psa.  Ixxxiii.  24)  even  unto  death  (Psa.  xlviii. 
14)  ;  that  all  the  cliildren  of  God  shall  be  led  by  the  Spirit  of  God  (Rom.  viii. 
14) ;  that  He  will  direct  their  paths  wbo  in  all  their  ways  acknowledge  Him  (Prov. 
iii.  6).  There  is  a  particular  providence  conversant  about  all  their  affairs  to 
direct  and  overrule  them  for  the  best.  The  steps  of  a  good  man  are  ordered  by 
the  Lord  (Psa.  xxxvii.  22).  2.  The  particular  regard  we  ought  to  have  to  God  in 
all  our  ways.  In  our  affections  and  actions  we  must  follow  the  direction  of  His 
Word  and  Spirit ;  all  the  motions  of  our  soul  must  be  guided  by  the  Divine  will ;  at 
the  commandment  of  the  Lord  our  heart  should  always  move  and  rest.  In  all  our 
affairs  we  must  follow  providence,  reconciling  ourselves  to  all  its  disposals,  and 
bringing  our  mind  to  our  condition,  whatever  it  is.  (Matthew  Henry,  D.D.)  The 
pillar  of  cloud  and  fire  : — I.  As  an  emblem  of  Divine  truth.  1.  Supernatural  as 
to  origin.  2.  Stable  :  only,  a  cloud,  yet  not  dispersed.  3.  Adapted  to  both  night 
and  day.  4.  Reliable.  5.  Intolerant:  "This  is  the  way,"  and  no  other.  II.  As 
A  SYMBOL  OF  DiviNE  PROVIDENCE.  1.  Different  appearance  to  different  characters. 
2.  Presented  alternations  of  aspect  to  the  same  people.  3.  Mysterious  in  its 
movements.  4.  Aims  at  the  good  of  all  who  follow  its  guidance.  III.  As  a  type 
OF  THE  Divine  Saviour.  1.  Mysterious  nature.  2.  Challenges  attention.  3.  His 
purpose  beneficent.  4.  The  source  of  great  comfort.  5.  Constant  in  His  attach- 
ment. Lessons :  1.  Seek  to  be  on  the  right  side  of  the  cloud.  2.  Seek  it  in  the 
right  place — over  the  tabernacle.  3.  Follow  its  guidance.  (/.  C.  Gray.)  The 
pillar  of  cloud  and  of  fire  : — I.  The  pillar  of  cloud  and  of  fire  is  a  perpetual 
FACT  IN  THE  LIFE  OF  God's  PEOPLE.  1.  We  scc  the  pillar  in  God's  Word.  The  Bible 
has  not  a  precept  for  every  emergency  which  can  arise  in  daily  life,  so  that  at  such 
a  point  you  can  see  a  guide-board,  like  the  signs  pointing  to  the  old  cities  of 
refuge;  but  it  is  full  of  general  principles  which,  if  obeyed,  will  direct  without  mis- 
take to  the  promised  land.  2.  We  see  the  pillar  in  God's  providences.  Sometimes 
it  appears  in  prosperity,  beckoning  us  onward  ;  sometimes  in  adversity,  turning  us 
back.  3.  We  see  the  pillar  in  God's  special  revelations.  They  come,  perhaps,  at 
the  threshold  of  some  great  undertaking.  Shall  we  move  out  from  Egypt  toward 
the  Red  Sea  ?  And  there,  if  we  are  watching,  will  be  the  sign  in  the  sky  !  When 
Pastor  Harms,  in  Germany,  was  deliberatius^  whether,  without  one  dollar  in  his 
possession,  he  should  build  a  ship  to  carry  missionaries  to  Africa,  he  says,  de- 
scribing his  conflict :  "  I  prayed  fervently  to  the  Lord,  laid  the  matter  in  His 
hands,  and  as  I  rose  up  at  midnight  from  my  knees  I  said,  with  a  voice  that  almost 
startled  me  in  my  quiet  room,  'Forward  now, in  God's  name.'  From  that  moment 
there  never  came  a  thought  of  doubt  into  my  mind."  Such  an  experience  must, 
indeed,  be  interpreted  with  great  care,  there  is  so  much  danger  of  delusion.  Yet  it 
is  true  that  with  a  prayerful  mind,  with  diligent  study  of  the  Word,  especially  with 
the  intuitions  of  a  filial  spirit,  such  revelations  may  be  as  distinct  as  any  that  ever 
came  to  Moses.  II.  The  pillar  is  a  blessing  only  to  those  who  trust  and  follow 
IT.  On  some  sides  the  Israelites  are  a  poor  example  for  us,  but  we  may  learn 
something  from  them  in  this  particular :  that  they  followed  the  pillar.  1.  They 
followed  it  promptly.  Whenever  and  wherever  it  moved,  then  and  thither  they 
moved  without  delay.  If  it  aroused  them  from  their  sleep  they  obeyed  with 
alacrity.  It  is  when  the  cloud  speaks  to  us  "  suddenly,"  unexpectedly,  that  our 
obedience  is  most  severely  tested.  But  that  is  our  standard ;  a  mind  to  run  in  the 
way  of  God's  commandments.  2.  They  followed  the  pillar  constantly  (vers,  21, 22). 
8.  They  followed  the  pillar  by  faith.  They  obeyed  even  when  they  could  not 
understand.  If  troubles  were  only  explained  they  would  be  so  much  easier  to  bear. 
But  the  best  faith  endures  without  understanding.  A  generation  ago  some  of  us 
used  to  hear  of  an  afflicted  woman  in  Connecticut  named  Chloe  Lankton,  who, 
many  will  be  surprised  to  know,  is  hving  still.  For  fifty-five  years  she  has  lain 
upon  her  bed  and  suffered,  but  without  losing  her  Christian  faith.  Acknowledging, 
not  long  ago,  a  remittance  sent  for  her  support,  she  wrote  :  "  Jesus  only  knows  how 
much  I  endure.  He  knows  it  all  and  supports  me.  ...  I  have  a  strong  arm  to 
lean  upon  and  will  trust  Him  to  the  end.  .  .  .  Oh,  how  thankful  I  feel  ...  for 
the  many  comforts  and  blessings  God  gives  me  !  "  Poor  soul !  How  long,  for  her, 
the  cloud  has  tarried  !  And  she  is  only  one  of  the  great  "  shut-in-society  "  who 
have  learned  to  trust  and  follow  "  two  days  or  a  month  or  a  year,"  or  a  lifetime,  if 
God  wills,     It  would  be  a  mistake,  however,  to  think  of  this  truth  as  applying 


58  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

only  to  the  darker  side  of  human  experience.  It  is  great  joy  in  the  brightest  pros- 
perity to  see  the  pillar ;  and  no  one  Las  so  good  a  right  to  live  in  the  sunshine  as 
a  Christian.  Friendship  is  joy,  home  is  joy,  music  is  joy,  learning  is  joy.  The 
world  is  full  of  such  pleasures.  But  does  it  not  intensify  these  to  realise  that  they 
are  all  signs  of  the  Father's  love  ?  Is  not  the  water  at  Elim  more  sweet  if,  as  we 
quench  our  thirst,  we  can  look  up  and  see  the  pillar  ?  Then,  too,  is  there  not 
comfort  in  knowing  that  if  farther  on  we  have  cause  to  apprehend  another 
experience  of  thirst  and  suffering,  we  shall  be  under  the  same  heavenly  presence 
and  can  hear  the  voice  out  of  the  cloud?  So  for  all,  in  every  condition  aud  need, 
the  pillar  has  heavenly  blessing.  Still  we  must  remember  the  blessing  is  only  for 
those  who  trust  and  follow.  (T.  J.  Holmes.)  The  guiding  pillar  : — I.  The 
DOUBLE  FORM  OF  THE  oniDiNG  PILLAR.  The  fire  was  the  centre,  the  cloud  was 
wrapped  around  it.  The  former  was  the  symbol,  making  visible  to  a  generation 
who  had  to  be  taught  through  their  senses  the  inaccessible  holiness  and  flashing 
brightness  and  purity  of  the  Divine  nature  ;  the  latter  tempered  and  veiled  the  too 
great  brightness  for  feeble  eyes.  The  same  double  element  is  found  in  all  God's 
manifestations  of  Himself  to  men.  In  every  form  of  revelation  are  present  both 
the  core  of  light,  that  no  eye  can  look  upon,  and  the  merciful  veil  which,  because  it 
veils,  unveils ;  because  it  hides,  reveals ;  makes  visible  because  it  conceals ;  and 
shows  God  because  it  is  the  hiding  of  His  power.  So,  through  all  the  history  of 
His  dealings  with  men,  there  has  ever  been  what  is  called  in  Scripture  language 
the  "  face,"  or  the  "  name  of  God  "  ;  the  aspect  of  the  Divine  nature  on  which  eye 
can  look  ;  and  manifested  through  it  there  has  always  been  the  depth  and  inacces- 
sible abyss  of  that  infinite  Being.  We  have  to  be  thankful  that  in  the  cloud  is  the 
fire,  aud  that  round  the  fire  is  the  cloud.  God  hides  to  make  better  known  the 
glories  of  His  character.  So  a  light,  set  in  some  fair  alabaster  vase,  shines  through 
its  translucent  walls,  bringing  out  every  delicate  tint  and  meandering  vein  of  colour, 
while  itself  diffused  and  softened  by  the  enwrapping  medium  which  it  beautifies  by 
pas.«ing  through  its  pure  walls.  Both  are  made  visible  and  attractive  to  dull  eyes 
by  the  conjunction.  He  that  hath  seen  Christ  hath  seen  the  Father,  and  he  that 
hath  seen  the  Father  in  Christ  hath  seen  the  man  Christ  as  none  see  Him  who 
are  blind  to  the  incarnate  Deity  which  illuminates  the  manhood  in  which  it  dwells. 
But  we  have  to  note  also  the  varying  appearance  of  the  pillar  according  to  need. 
There  was  a  double  change  in  the  pillar  according  to  the  hour,  and  according  as  the 
congregation  was  on  the  march  or  encamped.  Both  these  changes  of  aspect  sym- 
bolise for  us  the  reality  of  the  Protean  capacity  of  change  according  to  our  ever- 
varymg  needs,  which  for  our  blessing  we  may  find  in  that  ever-changing,  un- 
changing Divine  presence  which  will  be  our  companion  if  we  will.  When  the 
deceitful  brightness  of  earth  glistens  and  dazzles  around  me,  my  vision  of  Him  may 
be  "  a  cloudy  screen  to  temper  the  deceitful  ray  "  ;  and  when  "  there  stoops  on  our 
path  in  storm  and  shade  the  frequent  night,"  as  earth  grows  darker,  and  life 
becomes  grayer  and  more  sombre,  and  verges  to  its  even,  the  pillar  blazes  brighter 
before  the  weeping  eye,  and  draws  near  to  the  lonely  heart.  We  have  a  God  that 
manifests  Himself  in  the  pillar  of  cloud  by  day  and  in  the  flaming  fire  by  night. 
II.  The  guidance  of  the  pillar.  When  it  lifts  the  camp  marches ;  when  it  glides 
down  and  lies  motionless  the  march  is  stojjped  and  the  tents  are  pitched.  The  main 
thing  which  is  dwelt  upon  in  this  description  of  the  God-guided  pilgrimage  of  the 
wandering  people  is  the  absolute  uncertainty  in  which  they  were  kept  as  to  the 
duration  of  their  encampment,  and  as  to  the  time  and  circumstances  of  their 
inarch.  Is  not  that  all  true  about  us  ?  We  have  no  guiding  cloud  like  this.  So 
much  the  better.  Have  we  not  a  more  real  guide  than  that  ?  God  guides  us  by 
circumstances,  God  guides  us  by  His  Word,  God  guides  us  by  His  Spuit,  speaking 
through  our  common  sense  and  in  our  understandings,  and,  most  of  all,  God  guides 
us  by  that  dear  Son  of  His,  in  whom  is  the  fire  and  round  whom  is  the  cloud.  The 
pillar  that  we  follow,  which  will  glow  with  the  ruddy  flame  of  love  in  the  darkest 
hours  of  life,  will  glide  in  front  of  us  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death, 
brightest  then  when  the  murky  midnight  is  blackest,  nor  will  that  pillar  which 
guides  us  cease  to  blaze  as  did  the  guide  of  the  desert  march  when  Jordan  has 
lean  crossed,  but  it  will  still  move  before  us  on  paths  of  continuous  and  ever 
ii  creasing  approach  to  infinite  perfection.  They  who  follow  Christ  afar  off  and 
wiih  faltering  steps  here,  shall  there  "follow  the  Lamb  whithersoever  He  goeth." 
In  like  manner,  the  same  absolute  uncertainty  which  kept  on  was  intended  to  keep 
the  Israelites  (though  it  failed  often)  in  the  attitude  of  constant  dependence,  is  the 
condition  in  which  we  all  have  to  hve,  though  we  mask  it  from  ourselves.     That  we 


CUAP.  IX,]  NUMBF.nS.  69 

do  not  know  what  lies  before  us  is  a  commonplace.  The  same  long  tracts  of 
monotonous  continuance  in  the  same  place,  and  doing  the  same  duties,  befall  us 
that  befell  these  men.  Years  pass,  and  the  pillar  spreads  itself  out,  a  defence  above 
the  unmoving  sanctuary.  And  then,  all  of  a  flash,  when  we  are  least  thinking  of 
change,  it  gathers  itself  together,  is  a  pillar  again,  shoots  upwards  and  moves  for- 
wards ;  and  it  is  for  us  to  go  after  it.  And  so  our  lives  are  shutllecocked  between 
uniform  sameness,  which  may  become  meclmnical  monotony,  and  agitation  by 
change  which  may  make  us  lose  our  hold  of  fixed  principles  and  calm  faith,  unless 
we  recognise  that  the  continuance  and  the  change  are  alike  the  will  of  the  guiding 
God  whose  will  is  signified  by  the  stationary  or  moving  pillar.  III.  The  docile 
FOLLOWING  OF  THE  GuiDE.  That  is  what  we  have  to  set  before  us  as  the  type  of  our 
lives — that  we  should  be  as  ready  for  every  indication  of  God's  will  as  they  were. 
The  peace  and  blessedness  of  oar  lives  largely  depend  on  our  being  ea^er  to  obey, 
and  therefore  quick  to  perceive  the  slightest  sign  of  motion  in  the  resting  or  of  rest 
in  the  moving  pillar  which  regulates  our  march  and  our  encamping.  What  do  we 
want  in  order  to  cultivate  and  keep  such  a  disposition  ?  We  need  perpetual  watch- 
fulness lest  the  pillar  should  lift  unnoticed.  When  Nelscn  was  second  in  command 
at  Copenbagen,  the  admiral  in  command  of  the  fleet  hoisted  the  signal  for  recall, 
and  Nelson  put  his  telescope  to  his  blind  eye  and  said,  "  I  do  not  see  it."  That  is 
very  like  what  we  are  tempted  to  do  ;  the  signal  for  unpleasant  duties  that  we  want 
to  get  out  of  is  hoisted,  we  are  very  apt  to  put  the  telescope  to  the  blind  eye,  and 
preiend  to  ourselves  that  we  do  not  see  the  fluttering  flags.  We  need  still  more  to 
keep  our  wills  in  absolute  suspense  if  His  will  has  not  declared  itself.  Do  not  let 
us  be  in  a  hurry  to  run  before  God.  We  need  to  hold  the  present  with  a  slack 
hand,  so  as  to  be  ready  to  fold  our  tents  and  take  to  the  road  if  God  will.  We 
must  not  reckon  on  continuance,  nor  strike  our  roots  so  deep  that  it  needs  a  hurri- 
cane to  remove  us.  To  those  who  set  their  gaze  on  Christ  no  present  from  which 
He  wishes  them  to  remove  can  be  so  good  for  them  as  the  new  conditions  into 
which  He  would  have  them  pass.  We  need,  too,  to  cultivate  the  habit  of  prompt 
obedience.  "I  made  haste  and  delayed  not  to  keep  Thy  commandments"  is  the 
only  safe  motto.  It  is  reluctance  which  usually  puts  the  drag  on,  and  slow 
obedience  is  often  the  germ  of  incipient  disobedience.  In  matters  of  prudence  and 
of  intellect  second  thoughts  are  better  than  first,  and  third  thoughts,  which  ofteu 
come  back  to  first  ones,  better  than  second ;  but,  in  matters  of  duty,  first  thoughts 
are  generally  best.  They  are  the  instinctive  response  of  conscience  to  the  voice  of 
God,  wliile  second  thoughts  are  too  often  the  objections  of  disinclination  or  sloth 
or  cowardice.  It  is  easiest  to  do  our  duty  when  we  are  first  sure  of  it.  It  then 
comes  with  an  impelling  power  which  carries  us  over  obstacles  on  the  crest  of  a 
wave,  while  hesitation  and  delay  leave  us  stranded  in  sh^al  water.  If  we  would 
follow  the  pillar  we  must  follow  it  at  once.     (A.  MacJaren,  D.D.)  The  pillar  of 

cloud  and  fire: — I.  The  advantages  of  its  possession.  1.  The  distinction  it  main- 
tains. Only  Israel  so  privileged.  Christians,  you  are  a  peculiar  people,  your 
origin  is  peculiar,  your  character  is  peculiar,  your  spirit,  your  desires  and  affec- 
tions, the  objects  of  your  pursuit.  You  have  peculiar  privileges  and  honours  con- 
ferred on  you.  There  must  be  a  marked  dilTerence  between  you  and  the  world. 
2.  The  guidance  it  ensures.  Jesus  is  now  the  guide  of  His  people.  He  leads  in 
the  way  of  truth  and  wisdom.  How?  (1)  By  His  example.  He  has  gone  before 
us  in  the  path  of  dpty,  temptation,  and  sorrow.  By  His  Word.  This  is  our  rule. 
(2)  By  His  ordinances.  He  sends  His  ministers  as  your  guides.  (3)  By  His  Spirit 
effectually.  (4)  By  the  leadings  of  His  providence.  3.  The  protection  it  affords. 
God  is  the  Christian's  hiding-place.  4.  The  joy  it  inspires.  God  is  the  source  of 
happiness,  the  fountain  of  life.  5.  The  glory  it  confers.  The  presence  of  God  is 
our  highest,  best,  only  real  glory.  This  is  the  glory  of  our  nation — this  is  the  glory 
of  our  churches — this  is  the  glory  of  our  religious  assemblies — this  is  the  glory  of 
our  families — and  this  is  our  individual  glory.  But  what  is  all  that  God  confers 
here  to  what  is  in  reserve?  Everything  shall  be  glorious  there.  II.  The  per- 
petuity OF  its  enjoyment.  1.  Its  necessity.  We  always  need  the  Divine  presence. 
We  are  dependent  on  Him  for  everything.  We  need  His  providential  presence  and 
agency  to  continue  us  in  being  and  supply  our  numerous  wants ;  and  we  require 
His  gracious  presence  for  the  maintenance  of  spiritual  life  and  for  the  reception  of 
spiritual  blessings.  2.  The  manner  in  which  it  is  ensured.  This  may  be  seen 
three  ways.  From  what  He  has  done,  is  doing,  and  has  promised  to  do.  [E. 
Temple.)  Dependence  on  Divine  guidance  : — A  more  lovely  picture  of  absolute 
dependence  upon,  and  subjection  to,  Divine  guidance  it  were  impossible  to  conceive 


60  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ix. 

than  that  presented  here.  There  was  not  a  foot.prmt  or  a  landmark  throughout 
the  "  great  and  terrible  wilderness."  It  was  therefore  useless  to  look  for  any 
guidance  from  those  who  had  gone  before.  They  were  wholly  cast  upon  God  for 
every  step  of  the  way.  They  were  in  a  position  of  constant  waiting  upon  Him. 
This  to  an  unsnbdue  1  mind,  an  unbroken  will,  would  be  intolerable  ;  but  to  a  soul 
knowing,  loving,  confiding,  and  delighting  in  God,  nothing  could  be  more  deeply 
blessed.  Here  lies  the  real  gist  of  the  whole  matter.  Is  God  known,  loved,  and 
trusted  ?  If  He  be,  the  heart  will  delight  in  the  most  absolute  dependence  upon 
Him.  If  not,  such  dependence  would  be  perfectly  insutTerable.  The  unrenewed 
man  loves  to  think  himself  independent,  loves  to  fancy  himself  free,  loves  to 
believe  that  he  may  do  what  he  likes,  go  where  he  likes,  say  what  he  likes.  Alas ; 
it  is  the  merest  delusion.  Man  is  not  free.  Satan  holds  the  natural  man — the 
unconverted,  unrepentant  man  in  terrible  bondage.  Satan  rules  man  by  means  of 
his  lusts,  his  passions,  and  his  pleasures.  There  is  no  freedom  save  that  with 
which  Christ  makes  His  people  free.  He  it  is  who  says,  "  Ye  shall  know  the  truth, 
and  the  truth  shall  make  you  free."  And  again,  "  If  the  Son  shall  make  you  free, 
ye  shall  be  free  indeed."  Here  is  true  liberty.  It  is  the  liberty  wbich  the  new 
nature  finds  in  walking  in  the  Spirit  and  doing  those  things  that  are  pleasing  in 
the  sight  of  God.  (C.  H.  Mackintosh.)  The  day  and  the  night  journey  : — We 
must  look  to  have  our  portion  of  the  cloud  so  long  as  we  remain  below  the  skies. 
It  will  be  the  lot  of  the  believer,  in  the  somewhat  analogous  image  of  St.  Paul,  to 
"see  through  a  glass  darkly"  so  long  as  he  remains  in  this  tabernacle.  Pos- 
sibly a  cleaier  light  to  our  imperfect  organs  of  spiritual  vision  would  only  tend 
to  dazzle  and  obscure.  Enough  for  us  to  know  there  is  light  enough,  and  that 
what  there  is  is  light  from  Heaven  that  cannot  lead  astray.  In  following  the  cloud 
Israel  followed  God.  In  our  obedience  to  the  will  of  God,  as  expressed  in  His  pro- 
vidence or  revealed  in  His  Word,  we  obey  Him  too  ;  and  the  true  believer's  attach- 
ment to  and  connection  with  God,  is  like  that  which  is  expressed  in  the  touching 
and  holy  plighted  troth  of  marriage — "  for  richer  for  pooi'er,  in  sickness  and  in 
health."  I.  If  the  cloud  be  taken  up  by  day — that  is,  if  God  blesses  a  man 
WITH  prosperity — it  is,  in  the  first  place,  to  make  him  an  eleemosynary  ordinance, 
or  MEANS  of  usefulness  to  others.  It  is  entrusting  him  with  the  "five  talents," 
as  compared  with  the  two  or  the  one  talent.     II.  We  have  to  learn,  in  the  second 

place,  THAT  DIFFICULTY  IS  NO  GROUND  FOR  DISPENSING    WITH    DUTY  :    "  whether   it  WES 

by  day  or  by  night  the  cloud  was  taken  up,  they  journeyed."  To  obey  under  em- 
barrassment is  the  more  characteristic  obedience  of  a  Christian.  There  are  many 
forms  of  the  night-journey  of  the  pilgrim  of  Christ.  We  have  considered  the  day- 
journey  under  the  illustration  of  wealth  and  easy  circumstances,  or  in  any  other 
shape  of  general  pi'osperity  ;  let  us  meditate  upon  the  night-journey  in  the  shape 
of  poverty,  sickness,  bereavement,  or  domestic  opposition  to  the  Christian  life.  {J. 
B.  Owen,  M.A.)  The  journey  of  life  : — There  is  no  strain  upon  the  imagination 
in  thinking  of  life  as  a  journey.  That  is  one  of  the  simplest  and  nmst  beautiful 
figures  by  which  the  action  of  life  can  be  represented.  We  are  travellers ;  we  are 
here  but  for  a  little  time  ;  on  our  feet  are  sandals  and  in  our  hands  are  staves  ;  hei-e 
we  have  no  continuing  city,  and  we  are  called  upon  to  testify  to  the  age  that  we 
seek  a  country  out  of  sight.  So,  then,  we  are  familiar  with  the  figure ;  it  com- 
mends its»'lf  to  us,  as  life  enlarges,  as  quite  expressive  of  the  reality  of  the  case — 
every  day  a  milestone,  every  year  so  much  nearer  the  end.  Kegarding  life,  then, 
as  a  journey,  according  to  the  pattern  of  this  text,  is  there  not  a  mysterious  pre- 
sence or  influence  in  life  which  really  affects  our  action  ?  In  the  text  that 
influence  is  spoken  of  as  a  cloud  by  day  and  a  fire  by  night — two  striking  natural 
images.  Our  controversy  is  not  about  the  image  or  the  metaphor  ;  behind  it  is 
there  not  this  ever-abiding  solemnity,  that  in  life  there  is  a  mysterious  action — a 
ministry  we  cannot  comprehend,  an  influence  we  cannot  overrule  ?  We  speak  of 
"  impression."  When  we  think  of  changing  our  position  in  life,  we  say  we  have  an 
impression.  What  is  an  impi-ession?  Who  created  it?  Who  determined  its 
meaning  ?  How  do  you  account  for  the  impression  ?  Upon  what  is  the  impres- 
sion made  ? — upon  the  mind,  upon  something  subtler  than  itself,  upon  the  con- 
sciousness, the  soul,  the  spirit — the  innermost  man.  That  is  a  mystery  I  Or  we 
speak  of  "  circumstances."  We  say  that  circumstances  seem  to  point  in  this  direc- 
tion or  that.  What  are  circumstances  ?  Where  do  they  begin  ?  How  do  they 
sum  themselves  up  into  influence  or  into  definiteness?  Having  spoken  about 
"  impression  "  and  "  circumstances,"  we  speak  about  another  mysterious  thing 
which  has  come  to  be  known  by  the  name  of  "  tendency."     We  say  the  tendency  of 


CHAP.  IX.]  NUMBERS.  61 

things  is — ;  or  the  tendency  of  life  seems  to  indicate — .  We  have  created  a  species 
of  rliythm,  or  harmonic  movement,  falling  into  which  we  say,  This  is  the  sweep  of 
tendency,  and  to  resist  tendency  is  impossible.  How  anxious  we  are  to  get  rid  of 
religions  names !  Men  who  will  speak  of  impression,  circumstances,  and  tendency, 
will  hesitate  before  saying  Providence,  God,  Father  in  heaven.  Let  the  Church 
beware  how  it  gives  up  the  grand  old  names — God,  Providence,  heavenly  direction, 
spiritual  influence  I  Why  shrink  from  the  definite  religious  testimony  of  the  eight- 
eenth verse,  "At  the  commandment  of  the  Lord,"  &c.  When  a  man  rises  in  the 
morning  in  God's  strength,  lies  down  at  night  in  God's  blessing,  walks  all  day  in 
God's  energy,  he  Hves  and  moves  and  has  his  being  in  God;  God  is  in  his  inmost 
thonglit,  and  every  word  upon  his  tongue  is  an  implied  or  actual  confession  of 
childlike  trust  in  God.  We  need  not  be  ashamed  of  this  definite  testimony.  It 
exalts  human  life.  What  is  the- meaning  of  it?  Evidently  that  our  life  is  recog- 
nised by  God,  our  movements  are  of  some  consequence  to  Him ;  He  knows  our 
downsitting  and  our  uprising,  our  going  out  and  our  con  ing  in;  and  there  is  not  a 
word  upon  our  tongue,  there  is  not  a  thought  in  our  heart,  but  lo,  it  is  known 
wholly  in  heaven.  This  consciousness  of  Divine  guidance  in  life.  Divine  care  of 
life,  Divine  redemption  of  life,  necessitates  prayer.  The  man  who  seizes  this  view 
of  things  must  pray.  This  religious  view  of  life  brings  the  spirit  into  the  restful- 
ness  and  blessed  joy  of  obedience.  The  children  of  Israel  simply  obeyed.  Theirs 
was  not  a  life  of  controversy,  ours,  unhappily,  is.  We  have  made  it  a  life  of  con- 
troversy when  we  need  not.  We  are  always  arguing  with  our  orders ;  we  are  trying 
to  construe  them  into  different  and  inferior  meanings  ;  we  are  wasting  life  by  dis- 
cussing in  idle  words,  which  can  settle  nothing,  the  gravity  and  authority  of  our 
marching  orders.  If  we  accept  God's  Book,  do  let  us  accept  it  with  full  trust,  not 
as  a  field  for  criticism,  but  as  a  code  of  life — the  Word,  or  the  testimony,  by  which 
every  thought,  feeling,  and  action  is  to  be  determined.  Live  that  life  and  risk  your 
destiny.  To  obey  is  to  live.  {J.  Parker.  D.D.)  The  cloud  tarrying  : — I.  A  word 
OF  description.  The  time  "  the  cloud  tarried  "  was — 1.  One  of  rest.  2.  One  of 
spiritual  activity.  3.  Peculiarly  a  time  of  temptation.  II.  A  word  of  exhortation. 
1.  Be  more  anxious  to  keep  the  cloud  in  sight  than  to  see  it  tarry.  We  are  respon- 
sible for  the  one,  but  not  for  the  other.  2.  Be  more  anxious  to  improve  than  to 
enjoy  these  refreshing  times.  3.  Be  more  anxious  to  improve  than  prolong  these 
periods.  III.  A  word  of  caution.  1.  If  the  cloud  tarry  long,  think  not  that  it 
will  never  move.  Best  should  be  the  preparation  time  for  exertion.  2.  Be  not 
impatient  if  it  tarry  when  you  wish  to  journey.  It  does  rest  sometimes  over  a 
desert  land.  3.  Be  ready,  that  whenever  the  cloud  moves  you  may  be  ready  to 
journey.     {R.  A.  Griffin.)       The  cloud  and  the  tabernacle  : — I.  Why  is  the  Church 

IN  OUR  DAY  so  MUCH  OF  THE  TIME  UNDER  THE  CLOUD,  AND  SEEMINGLY  PUT  BACK  IN  THE 
PROGRESS  OF  LONG-CONTINUED  REVIVALS    OF   RELIGION  ?       Sin    is    the    trOublc.       It    tOok 

but  a  few  moments  to  bring  it  into  the  world,  but  it  takes  ages  to  get  it  out.  It 
makes  us  ignorant,  weak,  self-reliant,  and  self-seeking,  so  that  we  cannot  march 
long  at  a  time  without  getting  so  elated  that  God  must  let  down  the  cloud  a  little 
while  ;  a  day,  a  month,  or  a  year,  as  our  case  may  be,  to  get  us  ready  to  march 
again.  It  requires  great  grace  and  a  large  measure  of  previous  discipline,  and  fre- 
quent humiliations  to  keep  us  feeling  and  saying,  as  we  go  to  our  work  of  conquest 
for  Christ,  "  Not  by  might,  nor  by  power,  but  by  Thy  Spirit,  0  Lord."  And  so, 
God  must  often  bring  us  into  pecuniary  straits,  and  cut  off  our  men  and  our  means, 
aud  cause  painful  delays,  and  sad  embarrassments,  and  short  triumphs,  and  un- 
foreseen obstacles,  and  cloud-falling  times,  that  we  may  feel  our  weakness  and 
renew  our  strength  ;  and,  with  all  our  facilities  for  saving  ours'  Ives  and  the  world, 
that  we  may  just  lay  ourseb  es  over,  with  the  simplicity  of  children,  upon  the  super- 
natural power  of  God,  and  the  sole  guidance  of  Christ,  saying,  "  Help,  Lord,  for 
without  Thee  we  can  do  nothing."  II.  What  are  some  of  the  prominent  duties 
WHICH  God  requires  from  us  while  under  the  cloud,  that  we  may  be  ready  the 

SOONER  to  arise  AND  GO  FORWARD  IN  THE  MORE  ACTIVE    DUTIES,  AND  IN  THE    MORE  .TOY- 

ruL  EXPERIENCES  OF  THE  REVIVAL  DAYS?  1.  In  general,  to  be  ready  for  the  lifting  up 
of  the  cloud,  that  we  may  go  forth  in  efficient  service  in  revival  scenes,  we  must  bo 
diligent  in  all  the  ordinary  duties  of  the  tabernacle  when  it  is  resting.  2.  Among 
the  duties  which  are  specially  incumbent  when  the  Church  is  under  the  cloud  we 
will  enumerate  those  which  God  has  signalised  in  the  history  of  the  tabernacle  as 
those  which  are  at  all  times  essential  to  the  Christian  character  and  life.  (1) 
Christian  benevolence,  which  answers  quickly  to  the  voice  of  God,  as  stewards  of 
His  manifold  grace,  in  liberal  and  couscientious  giving  to  the  various  objects  ot 


62  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 


religious  charily  which  are  designed  to  promote  the  good  of  men  and  the  glory  of 
Christ.  (2)  The  ordinary  means  of  grace  should  be  specially  improved  by  the 
entire  membership  of  the  Church  as  a  preparation  for  seasons  of  extraordinary  / 
effort.  It  is  not  by  artificial  stimulants,  occasionally  taken,  that  we  gain  the  com- 
pactness of  muscle  and  the  strength  of  frame  which  fit  us  for  those  emergencies 
which  call  forth  great  physical  strength.  This  strength  is  the  slow  growth  of 
nutriment  habitually  taken  to  satisfy  the  cravings  of  hunger  and  to  supply  the 
daily  waste  of  the  system.  (E.  S.  Wright.)  God's  guidance  : — A  preacher  of  the 
gospel  was  travelliug  by  steamboat  from  Chicago  to  the  north  of  Lake  Michigan, 
and  found  that  at  a  certain  point  the  course  lay  through  a  narrow  and  diflicult 
channel  between  several  small  islands  and  the  shore.  The  difficulty  of  advancing 
here  is  greatly  increased  by  the  fact  that  a  dense  fog  almost  always  rests  upon  the 
surface  of  the  water.  When,  therefore,  this  part  of  the  voyage  is  reached,  a  man 
is  sent  up  to  the  mast-head  where  he  can  see  the  landmarks  on  either  side  rising 
above  the  fog,  and,  though  himself  out  of  sight,  is  able  to  give  directions  for  steer- 
ing to  those  below.  Thus  the  vessel  is  guided  safely  through.  So  our  gracious 
God  sits  above  the  clouds  of  temptation  and  trial  which  surroimd  us  on  earth,  and 
make  our  vojage  tbrough  life  so  perilous,  and,  seeing  all  the  dangers  of  the  way. 
He  counsels  us  as  to  the  track  of  safety.  Let  us  fully  trust  the  guidance  of  His  eye, 
and  boldly  proceed  as  He  directs.  A  trusticorthy  guide  : — I  trust  myself  implicitly 
to  the  pilots  on  the  ferry-boats.  I  do  not  know  the  tides  and  currents  that  change 
with  every  trip  across  the  river,  but  I  have  no  doubt  that  they  know  them,  and  I 
have  never  stopped  to  question  them  as  to  how  they  came  by  their  knowledge.  I 
am  satisfied  that  they  are  good  pilots,  for  I  see  them  carrying  millions  of  people 
back  and  forth  between  the  two  cities  without  accident ;  and  I  think  that  our 
Brooklyn  and  New  York  ferries  as  they  are  served  are  a  miracle  of  safety ;  and  if  I 
put  my  life,  my  happiness,  all  that  is  dear  to  me,  in  the  hands  of  those  men 
because  I  believe  that  they  know  what  they  can  do,  and  know  what  they  are  about, 
how  much  more  can  I  put  my  trust  in  Jesus  Christ,  who  has,  by  His  deeds,  by  His 
death  and  by  His  resurrection,  manifested  Himself  as  worthy  of  all  trust.  (H.  W. 
Beecher.)  Following  the  Divine  leading : — I  said  to  an  aged  minister  of  much 
experience,  "All  the  events  of  my  life  seem  to  have  been  Divinely  connected.  Do 
you  suppose  it  is  so  in  all  lives  ?  "  He  answered,  "  Yes,  but  most  people  do  not 
notice  the  Divine  leadings."  I  stand  here  this  morning  to  say  from  my  own  expe- 
rience that  the  safest  thing  in  all  the  world  to  do  is  to  trust  the  Lord.  I  never  had 
a  misfortune  or  a  trial  or  a  disappointment,  however  excruciating  at  the  time,  that 
God  did  not  make  turn  out  for  my  good.  My  one  wish  is  to  lollow  the  Divine 
leading.     (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.) 


CHAPTER  X. 

Vers.  1-10.  Make  thee  two  trumpets  of  silver. — The  laic  of  the  silver  trumpets : — 
Eevelation  is  to  man  as  a  trumpet-call  from  heaven  ;  hence  the  prophets  are  often 
told  to  lift  up  their  voices  like  a  trumpet.  The  human  race  is  a  grand  army  of 
immortals.  The  journey  of  life  is  a  series  of  marches  intended  by  the  Captain  of 
our  salvation  to  terminate  iu  heaven.  But  whether  this  journey  will  be  successfully 
accomplished  or  not  depends  upon  our  faithfulness  to  the  directions  of  our  Divine 
Head,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  1.  The  law  of  thk  silver  teumpets  is  the  law  of  the 
nature,  uses,  and  objects  of  Divine  revelation,  when  it  is  seen  and  felt  as  thk  utter- 
ance OF  Divine  love,  and  the  authorised  guide  and  director  of  our  journey  to 
heaven.  1.  And  here  we  may  remark  how  appropriate  silver  is  as  a  correspondence 
to  spiritual  wisdom.  It  is  white,  brilliant,  and  precious.  So  is  the  spiritual  mean- 
ing of  the  Word.  Oh,  may  its  sweet  and  silvery  lessons  be  to  us  as  dearest  treasure  ! 
To  teach  us,  then,  that  it  is  the  spiritual  sense  of  Divine  revelation  which  is  in- 
tended to  guide  us,  guard  us,  and  call  us  to  heaven,  the  trumpets  were  made  of 
silver.  2.  They  were  two  in  number,  but  formed  of  one  piece.  The  whole  spirit 
of  the  Word  is  expressive  of  love  to  the  Lord,  and  charity  to  man  (Matt.  xxii. 
37-40).  To  represent  this  twofold  character  of  the  spirit  of  the  Word,  then,  there 
were  two  silver  trumpets,  not  one  only.  Y'et  they  were  both  formed  out  of  one 
piece.  For,  indeed,  the  truth  that  we  sho«ld  love  our  neighbour  comes  out  from  tua 


CHAP.  X.]  NUMBERS.  63 

grander  truth,  that  we  should  supremely  love  the  Lord.  The  Apostle  Joho  states 
this  very  clearly  (1  Eph.  iv.  21 ;  2  Eph.  v.  1).  Another  idea  is  intimated  by  this 
command  to  make  them  of  one  piece  ;  that,  namely,  of  the  entire  harmony  of  the 
spiritual  sense  of  the  Word  with  itself.  It  is  bright  and  coherent  everywhere.  It 
is  silver,  all  of  one  piece.  II.  But  let  us  turn  now  from  the  composition  of  the 
trumpets  to  theib  use.  1.  They  were  to  be  used  to  call  the  people  to  the  assem- 
blies (ver.  3).  2.  They  were  to  excite  to,  and  direct  the  journey  of  the  people  (vers. 
5,  6).  3.  They  were  to  be  sounded  when  an  enemy  appeared  in  their  land  to 
oppress  them  (ver.  9).  4.  They  were  to  be  blown  on  the  days  of  rejoicing  (ver.  10). 
The  first  use  of  the  trumpets,  then,  was  to  call  the  assemblies  to  the  door  of  the 
tabernacle  of  the  congregation,  there  to  hear  the  will  and  decisions  of  the  Most 
High.  In  like  manner  we  are  called  by  the  silver  trumpets  of  the  Word  to  assemble 
together  in  the  name  and  in  the  presence  of  that  glorified  Divine  Man  who  said 
(John  X.  9).  The  whole  spirit  of  the  Word  calls  us  to  worship  Him,  and  to  learn  of 
Kim  (Eev.  xix.  10).  When  we  have  been  to  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  in  worship,  and 
to  learn  His  will,  we  shall  find  the  second  use  of  the  silver  trumpets  will  be  un- 
folded to  us.  We  must  march  on.  Regeneration  is  a  journey  in  which  we  advance 
from  state  to  state,  as  from  stage  to  stage  in  outward  travel.  We  begin  in  Egypt, 
we  must  reach  Canaan.  The  silvery  music  will  call  us  forward.  The  import  of  its 
sound  is  this.  Arise,  for  this  is  not  your  rest,  for  the  whole  land  is  polluted  (Isa. 
Ix.  1).  Arise,  child  of  heaven,  from  the  selfishness  and  darkness  in  which  thou  hast 
been  enshrouded.  Arise  from  the  slavery  and  pollution  of  sin  to  the  glorious  liberty 
of  the  children  of  light.  Move  on.  Next  we  are  carried  forward  to  the  contempla- 
tion of  the  third  use  of  the  trumpets ;  to  sound  an  alarm  when  the  enemies  within 
the  land  seek  to  oppress.  We  begin  our  regeneration  by  forsaking  the  grosser  sios 
to  which  we  have  been  accustomed,  and  we  think  we  have  left  all  that  is  offensive  in 
tbe  sight  of  heaven.  We  think  we  are  wholly  given  up  to  God  and  goodness,  and  so  we 
shall  continue.  Alas  !  we  have  in  this  but  little  conception  of  the  wonderful  nature 
with  which  we  are  endowed,  or  of  the  extent  of  the  ramifications  of  evil.  Each 
mind  is  a  world  in  ruins.  The  soul  is  organised  more  astonishingly  even  than  the 
body,  and  each  organ  or  principle  is  more  or  less  perverted.  Were  we  left  to  our- 
selves, we  might  well  turn  back  in  despair,  and  die.  But  happily,  what  is  impos- 
sible to  man  is  possible  with  God.  He  can  give  us  a  new  nature  :  He  can  give  us 
the  victory  again  and  again  :  He  can  and  will  protect  us.  When,  then,  our  internal 
enemies,  tbe  plagues  of  our  own  hearts,  appear  to  us,  and  dispositions  which  we  sup- 
posed were  for  ever  done  with  are  met  again  and  again,  let  us  not  quail  nor  be  dis- 
pirited. With  Divine  help  we  shall  overcome  them,  and  triumph  until  the  last 
enemy  is  overthrown.  But  the  Lord  saves  us  by  His  Word.  This  is  the  lesson 
intended  by  the  use  of  the  silver  trumpets  which  we  are  now  considering.  When, 
then,  selfishness  rises  up  in  your  lands  to  oppress  you,  go  to  the  Divine  Word,  and 
hear  its  holy  sound.  Let  its  voice  of  love  and  mercy  be  heard  in  your  spirit  like 
tbe  silvery  tones  of  heavenly  trumpets,  and  by  its  truth  and  power  you  will  be  saved. 
The  last  use  of  the  trumpets  was,  that  they  should  be  blown  on  the  days  of  solemn 
rejoicing.  On  our  days  of  gladness  we  should  see  that  all  our  feelings  are  such  as 
are  under  the  influence  of  the  Holy  Word.  Were  it  not  for  sin,  all  our  days,  like 
those  of  heaven,  would  be  days  of  gladness.  The  purification  of  our  joys,  then,  is 
one  of  the  great  works  of  our  regeneration.  Let  us  blow  with  the  silver  trumpets 
on  our  days  of  gladness,  and  on  our  solemn  days.  There  are  states,  which  recur 
from  time  to  time,  of  peculiar  solemnity,  when  conscience  is  more  than  usually 
earnest  with  us:  states  of  self-examination,  states  of  solemn  thought,  states  of 
recollection  of  mercies  and  blessings  formeily  received,  states  of  self-dedication  to 
high  and  holy  objects  ;  these  are  our  solemn  days.  The  period  when  we  resolved 
to  quit  a  period  of  evil,  and  entered  upon  our  passover,  or  feast  of  unleavened 
bread ;  when  we  commenced  the  reception  of  the  bread  of  heaven,  though  as  yet  to 
us  tasteless,  like  unleavened  bread  ;  then  comes  the  period  when  faith  enables  us, 
under  its  influence,  to  bring  forth  the  first-fruits  of  a  harvest  of  virtues  and  graces 
to  be  repeated  for  ever;  and  lastly, the  feast  of  spiritual  iugathering  comes  on,  that 
matured  state  of  the  soul  when  charity  rules  in  the  heart,  and  perfect  love  casteih 
out  fear.  Blow  with  the  silver  trumpets  over  the  solemn  days.  There  are  minor 
solemnities  connected  with  the  varied  events  of  life  which  induce  in  thoughtful 
minds  solemn  states:  the  births,  the  marriages,  and  the  deaths  of  those  we  love, 
the  serious  circumstances  of  our  families  and  our  country,  all  tliese  make  solemn 
days ;  let  the  spirit  which  rules  over  them  be  the  spirit  of  love  to  the  Lord,  an  I 
charity  to  man.    Blow  the  silver  trumpets  over  the  solemn  days.    Theie  is  mention 


64  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  t. 

made  also  of  the  beginning  of  the  months,  and  as  there  is  a  perfect  correspondence 
between  outward  nature  and  man's  spiritual  and  interior  existence,  there  is  a  cor- 
respondence in  this  respect  also.     The  months  are  the  times  which  depend  upon 
the  moon  ;  and  the  moon  is  the  symbol  of  faith  in  the  soul.     As  faith  has  its  varia- 
tions in  the  soul,  sometimes  being  bright  and  luminous,  at  others  dim  and  obscure, 
its  changes  are  represented  by  those  of  the  moon.     The  beginning  of  a  month  is 
therefore  the  commencement  of  a  new  state  of  faith  in  the  soul,  when,  after  being 
in  obscurity,  we  enter  into  clear  and  holy  light  on  things  Divine.     The  tree  of  life 
is  said  to  bear  twelve  manner  of  fruits — one  for  every  mouth ;  implying  that  in 
every  state  of  mind,  and  in  every  change  of  circumstances  in  our  Christian  life,  we 
may  receive  from  the  Lord  within  the  power  of  bringing  forth  the  appropriate  works 
of  piety  and  justice.     At  the  beginning  of  our  mental  changes,  in  the  attainment  of 
new  views  on  subjects  of  faith,  we  should  observe  that  they  are  in  harmony  with 
the  essential  principles  of  the  spirit  of  the  Word,  of  love  to  the  Lord,  and  charity  to 
man.     Blow  the  silver  trumpets  in  the  beginning  of  the  months.     And,  lastly,  over 
your  buint  offerings,  and  over  the  sacrifices  of  your  peace  offerings.     Our  offerings 
at  this  day  are  all  spiritual.    Yet  are  we  as  truly  called  upon  to  make  them  as  were 
the  Jews.    Life  consists  of  fixed  duties,  and  free  will  efforts.    Let  both  be  performed 
in  the  spirit  of  devoted  self-dedication,  under  the  Divine  spirit  of  the  Holy  Word. 
The  silver  trumpet  must  sound  over  our  burnt  offerings  and  our  sacrifices  of  peace 
offerings,  that  they  may  be  to  us  a  memorial  before  the  Lord  our  God.     In  conclu- 
sion, let  us  be  grateful  for  the  provision  by  our  adorable  Lord  of  the  interior  truths 
of  His  Word,  the  silver  trumpets  of  heaven.     Let  us  seek  to  find  them  by  reading, 
by  thought  and  meditation,  until  we  have  individually  realised  the  promise  of  our 
heavenly  Father  and  Saviour,  "For  iron  I  will  bring  silver."     When  we  have 
acquired  the  clear  perception  that  all  truth  hangs  upon  the  two  grand  laws  of  love 
to  God  and  love  to  man,  then  let  their  silvery  voice  be  heard  over  all  the  circum- 
stances of  our  lives.     Let  them  be  heard  calling  us  from  Sabbath  to  Sabbath  to  the 
public  worship  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ — the  Way,  the  Truth,  and  the  Life.     Let 
them  be  heard  directing  our  attention  to  Him  in  our  morning  and  evening  devotions. 
When  we  have  attained  light  and  strength  in  prayer,  they  ever  call  us  to  march  on 
to  progress.     Let  us  go  forward  with  a  glowing,  firm,  and  fervent  will,  and  then 
strengthen  and  confirm  our  progress  by  the  light  of  a  full  and  active  intellect.     {J. 
Bayley,  Ph.D.)         The  trumpets  of  Providence: — The   sacred   trumpets   are  still 
sounded;  they  still  call  men  to  worship,  to  festival,  to  battle.     If  we  have  lost  the 
literal  instrument,  we  are  still,  if  right-minded,  within  sound  of  the  trumpets  of 
Providence.   We  do  not  now  go  out  at  our  own  bidding ;  we  are,  if  wise,  responding 
to  a  Voice,  wherever  we  may  be  found.     Look  at  the  men  who  are  pouring  forth  in 
all  directions  every  morning  ;  stand,  in  imagination,  at  a  point  from  which  you  can 
see  all  the  stations  at  which  men  alight ;  so  present  the  scene  to  the  fancy  that  you 
can  see  every  little  procession  hastening  to  its  given  point  of  departure ;  then  bring 
on  all  the  processions  to  the  various  points  of  arrival ;  read  the  faces  of  the  men  ; 
take  in  the  whole  scene.     What  action  ;  what  colour ;  what  expression  of  counten- 
ance !     And  if  we  had  ears  acute  enough  to  hear,  what  various  voices  are  being 
sounded  by  every  life ;  what  tumult ;  what  desire ;  what  intersection  of  paths  ;  what 
imininent  collisions  ! — and  yet  the  whole  scene  moves  on  with  a  kind  of  rough  order 
all  its  own.     What  has  called  these  men  together — and  yet  not  together? — the 
trumpet !     Some  have  heard  the  trumpet  calling  to  controversy.     Many  of  these 
men  carry  bloodless  swords  ;  they  are  well  equipped  with  argument ;  they  are  about 
to  state  the  case,  to  defend  the  position,  to  repel,  to  assert,  to  vindicate  righteous- 
ness, and  to  claim  compensation  for  virtue  outraged  ;  they  are  soldiers ;  they  have 
mapped  out"  the  battlefield  in  private ;  all  their  forces  have  been  disposed  within 
the  sanctuary  of  the  night,  and  presently  the  voice  of  genius  and  of  eloquence  will 
be  heard  in  high  wrangling,  in  noble  contention,  that  so  the  wicked  may  claim 
nothing  that  is  not  his  own,  and  the  righteous  have  the  full  reward  of  bis  purity. 
They  are  going  to  the  political  arena  to  adjust  the  competing  claims  of  nations,  or 
causes  ;  war  is  in  their  eyes  ;  should  they  speak,  they  would  speak  stridently,  with 
clear,  cutting  tone,  with  military  precision  and  emphasis  ;  th.  y  would  hold  no  long 
parley  with  men,  for  they  mean  the  issue  to  end  in  victory.     Others  have  heard  no 
such  trumpet :  they  have  heard  another  caU — to  peaceful  business,  to  daily  routine, 
to  duty,  made  heavy  often  by  monotony,  but  duty  still,  which  must  be  done  accord- 
ing to  the  paces  and  beatings  of  the  daily  clock.     They  cannot  resist  that  voice 
without  resisting  themselves.     And  other  men,  in  smaller  bands— more  aged  men 
—men  who  have  seen  service  in  the  market  field,  in  the  poUtical  field,  in  the  field 


CHAP.  X.]  NUMBERS.  65 

of  literature — how  go  they?  Away  towards  sunny  scenes,  quiet  meadows,  lakes  of 
silver,  gardens  trimmed  with  the  patience  and  skill  of  love.  They  are  men  of  leisure, 
men  in  life's  afternoon.  The  sunbeam  has  been  a  trumpet  to  them;  hearing  it, 
they  said.  Who  would  remain  at  home  to-day  ?  All  heaven  calls  us  out,  the  great 
blue  arch  invites  us  to  hospitality  in  the  fields  and  woods,  and  by  the  riverside.  All 
men  are  obeying  a  trumpet ;  the  call  is  addressed  from  heaven  to  earth  every  morn- 
ing. We  may  have  outlived  the  little,  straight,  silver  trumpet,  turned  up  at  the 
ends  ;  but  the  trumpet  invisible,  the  trumpet  of  Providence,  the  call  of  Heaven,  the 
awakening  strain  of  the  skies — this  we  cannot  outlive  :  for  the  Lord  is  a  Man  of 
war,  and  must  have  the  battle  continued :  the  Lord  is  a  Father,  and  must  have  the 
family  constituted  in  order ;  the  Lord  is  a  Shepherd,  and  must  have  the  flocks  led 
forth  that  they  may  lie  down  in  the  shadow  of  noonday.  The  trumpets  were  to  be 
sounded  by  the  priests.  The  pulpit  should  be  a  tower  of  strength  to  every  weak 
cause.  Were  every  Sabbath  day  devoted  to  the  tearing  down  of  some  monster  evil 
— were  the  sanctuary  dedicated  to  the  denunciation,  not  of  the  vulgar  crimes  which 
everybody  condemns,  but  the  subtle  and  unnamed  crimes  which  everybody  practises, 
the  blast  of  the  trumpet  would  tear  the  temple  walls  in  twain !  There  are  trumpets 
which  call  us  in  spiritual  directions.  They  are  heard  by  the  heart.  They  are  full 
of  the  tone  of  persuasion — that  highest  of  all  the  commandments.  The  heart  hears 
the  trumpet  on  the  Sabbath  day.  The  trumpet  that  could  sound  an  alarm  is 
softened  in  its  tone  into  a  tender  entreaty,  or  a  cheerful  persuasion,  or  a  promise  of 
enlarged  liberty.  Everything  depends  upon  the  tone.  The  trumpet  may  be  the 
same,  but  the  tone  is  different.  We  cannot  take  up  the  trumpet  of  the  great  player 
and  make  it  sound  as  he  made  it.  What  is  it,  then,  that  plays  the  trumpet  ?  It  is 
the  soul.  If  we  knew  things  as  we  ought  to  know  them,  we  should  know  that  it  is 
the  soul  that  plays  every  instrument,  that  sings  every  hymn,  that  preaches  every 
discourse  that  has  in  it  the  meaning  of  God  and  the  behest  of  Heaven.  The  same 
trumpet  called  to  festival  and  to  war ;  so  the  gospel  has  two  tones  :  it  calls  lovingly, 
sweetly,  tenderly;  and  it  sounds  an  alarm,  making  the  night  tremble  through  all 
its  temple  of  darkness,  and  sending  into  men's  hearts  pangs  of  apprehension  and 
unutterable  fear.  There  is  another  trumpet  yet  to  sound  (1  Cor.  xv.  52).  The 
trumpet  is  not  lost,  then  ;  it  is  in  heaven,  where  the  Ark  of  the  Testimony  is,  where 
the  Shekinah  is,  where  the  Tabernacle  of  God  is.  {J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  insti- 
tution of  the  silver  trumpets  : — It  sets  forth,  in  the  most  distinct  manner  possible, 
that  God's  people  are  to  be  absolutely  dependent  upon,  and  wholly  subject  to. 
Divine  testimony,  in  all  their  movements.  A  child  may  read  this  in  the  type  before 
us.  The  congregation  in  the  wilderness  dared  not  assemble  for  any  festive  or 
religious  object  until  they  heard  the  sound  of  the  trumpet ;  nor  could  the  men  of 
war  buckle  on  their  armour,  till  summoned  forth  by  the  signal  of  alarm  to  meet  the 
uncircumcised  foe.  They  worshipped  and  they  fought,  they  journeyed  and  they 
halted,  in  simple  obedience  to  the  trumpet  call.  It  was  not,  by  any  means,  a  ques- 
tion of  their  likings  or  dislLkings,  their  thoughts,  their  opinions,  or  their  judgment. 
It  was  simply  and  entirely  a  question  of  implicit  obedience.  Their  every  movement 
was  dependent  upon  the  testimony  of  God,  as  given  by  the  priests  from  the  sanc- 
tuary. The  song  of  the  worshipper  and  the  shout  of  the  warrior  were  each  the 
simple  fruit  of  the  testimony  of  God.  The  silver  trumpet  settled  and  ordered  every 
movement  for  Israel  of  old.  The  testimony  of  God  ought  to  settle  and  order  every- 
thing for  the  Church  now.  That  silver  trumpet  was  blown  by  the  priests  of  old. 
That  testimony  of  God  is  known  in  priestly  communion  now.  A  Christian  has  no 
right  to  move  or  act  apart  from  Divine  testimony.  He  must  wait  upon  the  word  of 
his  Lord.  Till  he  gets  that,  he  must  stand  still.  When  he  has  gotten  it  he  must 
go  forward,  ft  is  not  by  aught  that  strikes  the  senses  that  our  Father  guides  us  ; 
but  by  that  which  acta  on  the  heart,  the  conscience,  and  the  understanding.  It  is 
not  by  that  which  is  natural,  but  by  that  which  is  spiritual,  that  He  communicates 
His  mind.  If  the  ear  is  circumcised,  you  will  assuredly  hear  the  silver  trumpet. 
Till  that  sounds,  never  stir :  when  it  sounds,  never  tarry.  This  will  make  all  so 
clear,  so  simple,  so  safe,  so  certain.  It  is  the  grand  cure  for  doubt,  hesitancy,  and 
vacillation.  It  will  save  us  from  the  necessity  of  running  for  advice  to  this  one  and 
that  one,  as  to  how  we  should  act,  or  where  we  should  go.  And,  furthermore,  it 
will  teach  us  that  it  is  none  of  our  business  to  attempt  to  control  the  actions  or 
movemeuts  of  others.  Let  each  one  have  his  ear  open,  and  his  heart  subject,  and 
then,  assuredly,  he  will  possess  all  the  certainty  that  God  can  give  him,  as  to  his 
every  act  and  movement,  from  day  to  day.  Our  ever  gracious  God  can  give  clear- 
ness and  decision  as  to  everything.   If  He  does  not  give  it,  no  one  can.  If  He  does, 

6 


60  TL'E  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

no  one  need.  (C.  H.  Macldntosh.)  The  silver  trumpets  : — The  silver  trumpets 
sent  a  piercing  note.  So  should  the  gospel  herald  utter  aloud  the  gospel  news. 
Away  with  timid  whisper,  and  a  stammering  tongue.  Note,  the  trumpets  were  of 
one  piece.  So  is  the  gospel  message.  It  knows  no  mixture.  Christ  is  all.  No 
diverse  metal  soiled  these  trumpets.  No  intermingling  error  should  soil  pulpits. 
The  type,  moreover,  fixes  attention  on  the  Christian  as  a  worshipper — a  pilgrim — a 
warrior — a  son  of  joy.  For  let  the  occasions  on  which  these  trumpets  sounded  be 
now  more  closely  marked.  1.  They  call  the  people  to  God's  sanctuary.  It  is  a 
gospel  ordinance  that  worshippers  should  throng  the  holy  courts — that  pulDlic  prayer 
and  praise  should  reverence  the  glorious  name.  2.  They  give  command  to  march. 
The  Bible  warns  that  earth  is  not  our  rest.  We  live  a  stranger-life.  We  occupy  a 
moving  tent.  We  hold  a  pilgrim-staff.  3.  They  sound  for  war.  The  life  of  faiih  is 
one  incessant  fight.  Beneath  the  cross  a  sword  is  drawn,  of  which  the  scabbard  is 
cast  far  away.  Until  the  victor's  crown  is  won,  unflinching  combat  must  go  on.  4. 
In  the  grand  feasts  they  cheer  the  worshippers  around  the  bleeding  victims.  While 
the  altar  streams,  and  happy  crowds  look  on,  the  heavens  resound  with  these  exulting 
clangs.  The  precept  is  obeyed  (Psa.  Ixxxi.  1).  Believer,  thus,  too,  the  gospel  teaches 
you  to  joy — to  joy  with  heart  abounding  with  melodious  praise,  when  you  in  faith 
contemplate,  and  in  worship  plead,  the  meritorious  death  of  Christ.  (Dean  Law.) 
The  silver  triuupets,  or  the  relation  of  the  gospel  ministry  to  the  seasons  and  services  of 
the  Christian  life: — 1.  The  trumpets  and  their  use  were  commanded  by  God.  He 
blesses  men,  saves  men  by  the  use  of  the  means  which  He  has  appointed.  2.  The 
trumpets  were  to  be  blown  by  the  priests.  Every  Christian  is  now  a  priest,  but  the 
ministers  of  the  gospel  are  especially  the  heralds  of  the  Divine  messuages.  3.  The 
trumpets  were  to  be  blown  in  accordance  with  clear  and  well-understood  instructions. 
When  they  were  to  blow  one  trumpet  only,  and  when  they  were  to  blow  both ;  when 
the  short,  sharp,  broken  notes,  and  when  the  long  and  continuous  peal — these 
things  were  clearly  explained  and  enjoined.  There  was  to  be  no  uncertainty  as  to 
the  meaning  of  the  signals.  The  meaning  of  the  sounds  of  the  gospel  trumpet 
should  be  equally  aud  unmistakably  clear  (1  Cor.  xiv.  7,  8.)  4.  The  trumpets 
were  to  be  blown  at  different  seasons  and  for  different  purposes — for  conventions, 
for  journeyings,  for  battles,  for  festivals,  &c.  In  this  we  have  an  illustration  of  the 
relation  of  the  gospel  ministry  to  the  seasons  and  services  of  the  Christian  life. 
We  proceed  to  offer  some  hints  on  the  analogy.  The  silver  trumpets  were  used— 
I.  For  ihe  calling  of  assemblies.  The  ministry  of  the  gospel  should  draw  men 
together,  even  as  the  silver  trumpets  convened  the  assemblies  of  Israel.  II.  For 
SUMMONING  THE  PEOPLE  TO  ADVANCE.  The  Christian  minister  is  required  to 
summon  the  people  to  arise  and  "go  forward"  in  their  upward  pilgrimage.  He 
summons  them  to  advance — 1.  In  personal  holiness.  He  exhorts  them  to  "  follow 
on  to  know  the  Lord,"  to  "  grow  in  grace,"  to  "  forget  those  things  which  are 
behind,"  &c.  (Phil.  iii.  13,  14j.  2.  lu  personal  and  collective  usefulness.  He 
should  incite  both  individuals  and  Churches  to  more  diligent  and  devoted  services 
in  the  cause  of  Christ.  III.  For  encouraging  the  people  in  battle.  Like  the 
priests  with  the  silver  trumpets  the  minister  of  the  gospel  should — 1.  Encourage 
Christians  to  battle  against  evil.  2.  By  inciting  them  to  trust  in  God.  He  gives 
the  victory.  IV.  For  suitably  observing  seasons  of  special  interest.  1.  Seasons 
of  joy.  "  In  the  days  of  your  gladness  ye  shall  blow  with  the  trumpets,"  &c.  The 
gospel  aims  at  the  consecration  and  promotion  of  human  gladness.  "  That  My  joy 
might  remain  in  you,  and  your  joy  might  be  full."  "  Kejoice  in  the  Lord  alway." 
"  The  kingdom  of  God  is  not  meat  and  drink;  but  righteousness,  and  peace,  and 
joy  in  the  Holy  Ghost."  "  Believing,  ye  rejoice  with  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of 
glory."  The  gospel  forbids  no  pure  delight,  but  hallows  and  increases  it.  2. 
JSeasons  of  solemnity.  "  In  your  solemn  days  ye  shall  blow  with  the  trumpets," 
&c.  There  are  many  solemn  days  in  life — days  of  mental  conflict,  of  spiritual 
darkness,  of  social  bereavement,  &c.  In  such  days  the  hopeful  and  helpful  sounds 
of  the  gospel  trumpet  are  peculiarly  precious.  3.  Closing  and  commencing  seasons. 
"  And  in  the  beginnings  of  your  months  ye  shall  blow,"  <fec.  (W.  Jo7ies.)  The 
silver  trumpets  : — We  have  here  directions  concerning  the  public  notices  that  were 
to  be  given  to  the  people  upon  several  occasions — by  sound  of  trumpet.  In  a  thing 
of  this  nature  one  would  think  Moses  needed  not  to  have  been  taught  of  God,  his 
own  reason  might  teach  him  the  convenience  of  trumpets ;  but  their  constitution 
was  to  be  in  everything  Divine,  and  therefore  even  in  this  matter,  as  small  as  it 
seems.  Moses  is  here  directed — I.  About  the  making  of  them.  They  must  be 
made  of  silver ;  not  cast,  but  of  beaten  work  (as  some  read  it) ;  the  matter  and 


CHAP.  X.]  NUMBEES.  67 

shape  no  doubt  very  fit  for  the  purpose.     He  was  now  ordered  to  make  but  two, 
because  there  were  but  two  priests  to  use  them  ;  but  in  Solomon's  time  we  read  of 
an  hundred  and  twenty  priests  sounding  with  trumpets  (2  Chron.  v.  12).     The  form 
of  these  trumpets  is  supposed  to  be  much  like  ours  of  this  day.     II.  Who  weke  to 
MAKE  USE  OF  THEM.     Not  any  inferior  person  ;  but  the  priests  themselves,  the  sons 
of  Aaron  (ver.  8).    As  great  as  they  were,  they  must  not  think  it  a  disparagement  to 
them  to  be  trumpeters  in  the  house  of  God  ;  the  meanest  office  there  was  honour- 
able.    This  signified  that  the  Lord's  ministers  should  lift  up  their  voice  like  a 
trumpet,  to  show  people  their  sins  (fsa.  Iviii.  1),  and  to  call  them  to  Christ  (Isa. 
xxvii.  13).     III.  Upon  what  occasions  the  trumpets  wepvE  to  be  sounded.     1.  For 
the  calling  of  ai=semblies  (ver.  2).      Thus  they  are  bid  to  blow  the  trumpet  in  Zion, 
for  the  calling  of  a  solemn  as-;embly  together,  to  sanctify  a  fast  (Joelii.  13).     Public 
notice  ought  to  be  given  of  the  time  and  place  of  religious  assemblies,  for  the  invita- 
tion to  the  benefit  of    ordiuances  in  general.     "  Whoever  will,  let   him   come." 
Wisdom  cries  in  the  chief  places  of  concourse.     But  that  the  trumpet  might  not 
give  an  uncertain  sound,  they  are  directed,  if  only  the  jDrinces  and  elders  were  to 
meet,  to  blow  only  one  of  the  trumpets ;  less  should  serve  to  call  them  together  who 
ought  to  be  examples  of  forwardness  in  anyth  ng  that  is  good.     But  if  the  body  of 
the  people  were  to  be  called  together,  both  the  trumpets  must  be  sounded,  ttiat  they 
might  be  the  farther  heard.     In  allusion  to  this,  they  are  said  to  be  blessed  that  hear 
the  joyful  sound  (Psa.  Ixxxix.  15),  i.e.,  that  are  invited  and  called  upon  to  wait  upon 
God  in  public  ordinances  (Psa.  cxxii.  1).     And  the  general  assembly  at  the  great 
day  will  be  summoned  by  the  sound  of  the  archangel's  trumpet  (Matt.  xxiv.  34). 
2.  For  the  journeving  of  the  camps  ;  to  give  notice  when  each  squadror)  must  move, 
for  no  man's  voice  could  reach  to  give  the  word  of  command.     Soldiers  with  us, 
that  are  well  disciplined,  may  be  exercised  by  beat  of  drum.     When  the  trumpets 
were  blown  for  this  purpose  they  must  sound  an  alarm  (ver.  5),  a  broken,  quavering, 
interrupted  sound,  which  was  proper  to  excite  and  encourage  the  minds  of  people 
in  the  marches  against  their  enemies ;  whereas  a  continued  equal  sound  was  more 
proper  for  the  calling  of  the  assembly  together  (ver.  7).     Yet  when  the  people  were 
called  together  to  deprecate  God's  judgments  we  find  an  alarm  sounded  (Joel  ii.  3). 
At  the  first  sounding,  Judah's  squadron  marched  ;  at  the  second,  Eeuben's  ;  at  the 
third,  Ephraim's;    at  the  fourth,  Dan's  (vers.  5,  6).     And  some  think  this  was 
intended  to  sanctify  their  marches ;  for  this  was  proclaimed  by  the  priests,  who  were 
God's  mouth  to  the  people,  not  only  the  Divine  orders  given  them  to  move,  but  the 
Divine  blessing  ujjon  them  in  all  tbeir  motions.      He  that  hath  ears  let  him  hear 
that  God  is  with  them  of  a  truth.     3.  For  the  animating  and  encouraging  of  tbeir 
armies  wben  they  went  out  to  battle  (ver.  9).     "If  ye  go  to  war  blow  with  the 
trumpets";    signifying  thereby  your  apfieal  to  Heaven,  for  the  decision  of   the 
controversy,  and  your  prayer  to  God  to  give  you  victory;  and  God  will  own  this 
His  own  institution,  and  you  shall  be  remembered  before  the  Lord  your  God.     God 
will  take  notice  of  this  sound  of  the  trumpet,  and  be  engaged  to  tight  their  battles; 
and  let  all  the  people  take  notice  of  it,  and  be  encouraged  to  fight  His ;  as  David, 
when  he  heard  a  sound  of  a  going  upon  the  tops  of  the  mulberry-trees.     Not  that 
God  needed  to  be  awaked  by  sound  of  trumpet,  no  more  than  Christ  nee'ed  to  be 
awaked  by  His  disciples  in  the  storm  (Matt.  viii.  25),  but  where  He  intends  mercy  it 
is  His  will  that  we  sbould  solicit  for  it.     Ministers  must  stir  up  the  good  soldiers  of 
Jesus  Christ  to  fight  manfully  against  sin,  the  world,  and  the  devil,  by  assuring 
them  that  Christ  is  the  Captain  of  their  salvation,  and  will  treal  Satan  und'  r  their 
feet.     4.  For  the  solemnising  of  their  sacred  feasts  (ver.  10).     One  of  th*ir  feasts 
was  called  the  feast  of  trumpets  (Lev.  xxiii.  23,  24).     And  it  should  seem  th>  y  were 
thus  to  grace  the  solemnity  of  all  their  feasts  (Psa.  Ixxxi,  3),  and  their  sacrifices 
(2  Chron.  xxix.  27),  to  intimate  with  what  joy  and  delight  they  performed  their  duty 
to  God,  and  to  raise  the  minds  of  those  that  attend  the  services  to  a  holy  triumph  ia 
the  God  they  worshipped.     And  then  their  performances  were  for  a  memorial  before 
God;  for  then  He  takes  pleasure  in  our  religious  exercises  when  we  take  pleasure 
in  them.      Holy  work  should  be  done  with  holy   joy.     {Matthew  Ilennj,  D.D.) 
Significance  of  the  silrer  trumpet: — It  is  the  voice  of    Him  who  came  preaching 
peace,  the  proclamation  of  those  of  whom  the  propliet  speaks  (Isa.  lii.  7).     For  just 
as  the  two  silver  trumpets  entered  into  every  part  of  Israel's  life,  and  their  varied 
notes  were  always  adapted  to  Israel's  wants  and  position,  so  it  is  with  the  goi-pel. 
Its  awakening  power,  its  soothing  promises,  its  sanctifying  influence,  is  meant  to 
consecrate  every  act  of  our  lives,  and  move  every  thought  of  our  hearts.     Did  the 
Sound  of  the  siiver  trumpets  call  the  slothful  or  backsliding  Israel  to  the  tabernacle 


68  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

■of  the  congregation,  either  to  hear  the  will  of  God  announced  by  Moses,  or  to 
worship  ?  So  does  the  voice  of  Jesus  in  the  gospel  invite  us  into  the  presence  of 
God.  It  says  to  the  slumbering  heart,  "Awake,  thou  that  sleepest,"  &c.  It 
says  to  the  fearful  and  desponding,  "Come  boldly  unto  the  throne  of  grace,"  &g. 
It  says  to  the  backsliding  and  to  the  guilty  conscience,  "  Return  unto  the  Lord  thy 
■God ;  for  thou  hast  fallen  by  thy  iniquity."  It  says,  again,  "  Behold,  I  stand  at  the 
door  and  knock,"  &c.  Did  the  sound  of  the  silver  trumpets  bid  Israel  arise  and 
■follow  the  pillar  of  fire  and  cloud  which  went  before  them  ?  So  does  the  voice  of 
Jesus  bid  us  arise  and  journey  onward.  When  our  hearts  are  entangled  by  the 
secret  influences  of  the  world — when  we  begin  to  take  up  our  rest  in  the  love  of  the 
creature — then  there  is  a  still  small  voice  full  of  warning,  "  Arise  ye,  and  depart,  for 
this  is  not  your  rest;  it  is  polluted."  Whensoever  we  rest  contented  with  low 
attainments,  losing  sight  of  Him  to  whose  image  we  ought  to  be  conformed,  the 
silver  trumpets  sound,  bidding  us  press  toward  the  mark  for  the  prize  of  our  high 
calling  in  Christ  Jesus.  As,  too,  Israel  of  old  was  called  to  engage  in  warfare  with 
their  enemies  and  God's,  and  one  use  of  the  silver  trumpets  was  to  summon  them 
to  preparation  and  to  the  field  of  battle,  so  has  the  Israel  of  God  now  a  great 
conflict  to  engage  in — a  conflict  with  enemies  seen  and  unseen,  and  the  unseen  more 
powerful  than  the  seen.  Yet,  how  seldom  do  we  realise  as  we  ought  the  greatness 
of  the  conflict,  and  the  power  of  our  spiritual  enemies!  and,  consequently,  we  are 
too  often  off  our  guard.  Hence  it  is  that  the  silver  trumpets  are  needed  to  summon 
us  to  the  conflict.  We  require  to  be  summoned  to  "  endure  hardness,"  as  good 
soldiers  of  Christ  Jesus  (2  Tim.  ii.  3),  that  we  may  not,  like  Israel  of  old,  turn  back 
in  the  day  of  battle,  but  may  feel  and  exclaim  with  David  (Psa.  xviii.  32,  34,  35). 
And,  once  more,  were  the  silver  trumpets  needed  to  consecrate  all  Israel's  offerings, 
that  they  might  be  a  memorial  before  the  Lord  ?  Oh,  still  more  is  it  the  gospel  of 
Christ  that  does  and  can  consecrate  all  acts  of  lite  and  of  worship !  It  is  the  word, 
too,  of  the  gospel  which  explains  to  us  the  means  of  approach  to  God,  and,  still 
more,  prepares  our  hearts  for  that  communion.  We  should  listen  to  the  sound  O'' 
the  silver  trumpet  in  every  act  of  life,  in  every  prayer,  and  over  every  offering.  With 
this  everything  will  become  a  memorial  before  the  Lord.  (G.  Wagner.)  The 
trumjwt  gospel : — One  of  the  good  doctors  whom  I  often  heard  in  my  boyhood  had 
a  voice  like  the  distant  rolling  of  thunder.  He  exchanged  pulpits  with  a  neighbour, 
whose  voice  was  peculiarly  effeminate.  It  was  a  little  voice,  and  withal  quite 
musical.  The  doctor  returned  to  his  own  congregation  for  the  evening  service. 
Arising  in  his  pbice,  he  commenced  with  this  preface,  "  My  friends,  you  have  to-day 
heard  the  gospel  through  a  silver  trumpet ;  but  to-night  you  must  hear  it  through  a 
ram's  horn."  Alas  !  how  many  are  charmed  with  the  silver  trumpet !  Sweet  morsels, 
drops  of  honey-dew,  like  globules  of  sugar-coated  opiates,  form  the  only  compound 
suited  to  their  taste.  "  Peel  it,  pare  it,  smooth  it,  trim  it !  "  is  their  cry ;  "  take 
away  from  it  those  distorted  and  hideous  features  !  Fashion  it,  form  it,  compound 
with  it  some  thrilling  narrative,  some  pleasant  story,  and  we  will  receive  it."  In 
other  words,  make  it  anything  but  the  plain  simple  gospel,  and  it  may  become 
palatable.  We  have  advanced  to  a  strange  pass  in  our  tastes  touching  the  gospel 
of  the  Son  of  God.     (Buffalo  Christian  Advertiser.) 

Vers.  11-18.  Took  their  journeys  out  of  the  wlldemess. — Israel's  journey  through 
the  wilderness  an  emblem  of  the  Christian's  state  on  earth: — While  we  are  in  this 
world  we  are  passing  through  a  wilderness,  and  our  removes  in  it  are  only  from  one 
wilderness  to  another.  The  men  of  this  world  will  dislike  the  comparison  because 
the  world  is  their  portion,  their  all.  But  those  whose  chief  business  and  governing 
desire  is  to  get  to  heaven,  and  who  have  their  conversation  there,  will  acknowledge 
the  emblem  to  be  just,  will  dwell  on  it  with  pleasure,  and  derive  instruction  from  it. 
This  world  is  like  a  wilderness,  as— 1.  It  is  an  uncomfortable  state.  2.  It  is  a 
dangerous  state :  dangerous  to  the  Christian's  virtue  and  peace,  to  the  life  and 
health  of  his  soul,  which  are  the  main  things  that  he  regards  and  pursues.  3.  It 
is  an  unsettled  state,  subject  to  continual  cbauges  and  alterations.  We  enter  on 
new  relations  in  life,  and  promise  ourselves  much  from  them,  but  still  it  is  a 
wilderness :  if  we  have  new  pleasures  we  have  new  cares  and  sorrows,  and  if  we 
double  our  joys  we  double  our  griefs  too.  In  every  stage  of  the  wilderness  we  leave 
some  of  our  friends  behind  us,  the  prey  of  the  universal  destroyer  death,  and  we 
find  the  rest  of  the  journey  more  tiresome  and  dangerous  for  want  of  their  assist- 
ance and  company.  Some  are  confined  long  in  the  wilderness,  beyond  the  usual 
period  of   human  life.     Sometimes   they  think  themselves  near  the  country  for 


CHAP.  X.]  NUMBERS.  m 

which  they  are  bound,  and  then,  like  Israel,  they  are  turned  back  again,  and  have 
many  more  years  to  wander.  Their  burdens  grow  heavier  and  their  pleasures  less, 
and  nothing  in  the  wilderness  can  support  them  ;  nothing  but  religion  and  the  hope 
of  getting  to  Canaan  at  last.  Application  :  1.  Let  us  be  thankful  that  we  have  so 
many  comforts  in  the  wilderness.  2.  Let  us  be  patient  and  contented  under  the 
evils  of  it.  And  for  this  plain  reason,  because  it  is  sin  that  hath  turned  the  world 
into  a  wilderness.  3.  Let  us  earnestly  seek  and  hope  for  the  presence  of  God  with 
us  in  this  wilderness,  and  that  will  be  everything  to  us.  4.  Let  us  rejoice  in  the 
views  of  the  heavenly  Canaan,  and  diligently  prepare  for  it.  (J.  Orton.)  The 
<!loud  rested. — TIte  resting  and  the  rising  of  the  good  : — I.  The  people  of  God  are 

SOMETIMES    CALLED     TO    REMAIN,    AS    IT     vvEBE,    STATIONARY    FOR    A   TIME    IN    THIS    LIFE. 

IL  Though   the   people   of   God  may  appear  to  remain  stationary  for  a  time, 

YET  there  is  no  PERMANENT  SETTLEMENT  IN  THIS  WORLD.  III.  BoTH  THE  RESTINGS 
AND    THE    RISINGS    OF   THE    PEOPLE    OF    GoD    ARE    ORDERED    BY    HiM.       IV.    ThE    PEOPLE 

OF  God,  whether  resting  or  marching,  are  protected  by  Him.  Learn,  in  con- 
ckision,  to — 1.  Gratefully  appreciate  and  diligently  use  the  seasons  of  quiet  rest  in 
lite.  2.  Remember  that,  however  long  and  grateful  a  rest  may  be  granted  unto  us,  we 
are  only  pilgrims  here.  Bo  ready  to  arise  and  depart  when  the  cloud  arises.  3. 
Follow  the  guidance  of  God.  4.  Trust  the  protection  of  God.  (W.Jones.)  Rest 
a  while  : — "  Rest  a  while !  "  Why,  it  is  a  mother's  word ;  she  says  to  her  little 
weary  child  who  has  toddled  itself  out  of  breath,  "  Rest  a  while."  It  is  the  word 
of  a  great,  generous,  noble-hearted  leader  of  men.  He  says,  "  My  company  must 
have  rest.  I  know  I  am  sent  to  gain  victories  and  to  work  great  programmes  ;  but 
in  the  meantime  my  over-worked  men  must  have  rest."  It  is  a  gentle  word. 
Where  do  you  find  such  gentleness  as  you  find  in  Jesus  Christ  ?  (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
Rest  time  not  ivaste  time : — It  is  economy  to  gather  fresh  strength.  Look  at  the 
mower  on  the  summer's  day,  with  so  much  to  cut  down  ere  the  sun  sets.  He  pauses 
in  bis  labour — is  he  a  sluggard?  He  looks  for  his  stone,  and  begins  to  draw  it  up 
and  down  his  scythe  with  rink-a-tink,  rink-a-tink,  rink-a-tink — is  that  idle  music? 
Is  he  wasting  precious  moments?  How  much,  he  might  have  mown  while  he  has 
been  ringing  out  those  notes  on  his  scythe !  But  he  is  sharpening  his  tool,  and  he 
will  do  far  more  when  once  again  he  gives  his  strength  to  those  long  sweeps  which 
lay  the  grass  prostrate  in  rows  before  him.  Even  thus  a  little  pause  prepares  the 
mind  for  greater  service  in  the  good  cause.  Fii-hei'men  must  mend  their  nets,  and 
we  must  every  now  and  then  repair  our  mental  waste  and  set  our  machinery  in 
order  for  future  service.  To  tug  the  oar  from  day  to  day,  like  a  galley-slave  who 
knows  no  holidays,  suits  not  mortal  men.  Mill-streams  go  on  and  on  for  ever,  but 
we  must  have  our  pauses  and  our  intervals.  Who  can  help  being  out  of  breath 
when  the  race  is  continued  without  intermission  ?  Even  beasts  of  burden  must  be 
turned  out  to  grass  occasionally ;  the  very  sea  pauses  at  ebb  and  flow  ;  earth  keeps 
the  Sabbath  of  the  wintry  months ;  and  man,  even  when  exalted  to  be  God's 
ambassador,  must  rest  or  faint ;  must  trim  his  lamp  or  let  it  burn  low;  must  recruit 
his  vigour  or  grow  prematurely  old.  It  is  wisdom  to  take  occasional  furlough.  In 
the  long  run  we  shall  do  more  by  sometimes  doing  less,     (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  14-28.  The  standard  of  the  camp. — The  Divine  standard  to  be  maintained : — 
There  are  few  thmgs  in  which  we  are  more  prone  to  fail  than  in  the  maintenance 
of  the  Divine  standard  when  human  failure  has  set  in.  Like  David,  when  the  Lord 
made  a  breach  upon  Uzza,  because  of  his  failure  in  putting  his  hand  to  the  ark, 
"  He  was  afraid  of  God  that  day,  saying.  How  shall  I  bring  the  ark  of  God  home  to 
me  ?  "  (1  Chron.  xiii.  12).  It  is  exceedingly  difficult  to  bow  to  the  Divine  judg- 
ment, and,  at  the  same  time,  to  hold  fast  the  Divine  ground.  The  temptation  is  to 
lower  the  standard,  to  come  down  from  the  lofty  elevation,  to  take  human  ground. 
We  must  ever  carefully  guard  against  this  evil,  which  is  all  the  more  dangerous  as 
wearing  the  garb  of  modesty,  self-distrust,  and  humility.  Aaron  and  his  sons,  not- 
withstandiuK  all  that  had  occurred,  were  to  eat  the  meat  offering  in  the  holy  place. 
They  were  to  do  so,  not  because  all  had  gone  on  in  perfect  order,  but  "  because  it 
is  thy  due,"  and  "  so  I  am  commanded."  Though  there  had  been  failure,  yet  their 
place  was  in  the  tabernacle  ;  and  those  who  were  there  had  certain  "  dues  "  founded 
upon  the  Divine  commandment.  Though  man  had  failed  ten  thousand  times  over, 
the  word  of  the  Lord  cannot  fail :  and  that  word  had  secured  certain  privileges  for 
all  true  priests,  which  it  was  their  place  to  enjoy.  Were  God's  priests  to  have 
nothing  to  eat,  no  priestly  food,  because  failure  had  set  in  ?  Were  those  that  were 
left  to  be  allowed  to  starve,  because  Nadab  and  Abihu  had  offered  "  etiange  firs  "  2 


70  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

This  would  never  do.  God  is  faithful,  and  He  can  never  allow  any  one  to  be  empty 
in  His  blessed  presence.  The  prodigal  may  wander,  and  squander,  and  come  to 
poverty  ;  but  it  must  ever  hold  good  that  "  in  my  Father's  house  is  bread  enough 
and  to  spare."  {C.  H.  Mackintosli.)  God  icouUl  have  order  observed  among  His 
peojjle  at  all  times: — When  Christ  our  Saviour  intended  to  feed  the  multitude  that 
had  continued  with  Him  to  hear  His  word,  He  commanded  His  disciples  to  make 
all  sit  down  in  ranks  by  hundreds  and  fifties  (Mark  vi.  40),  so  that  He  would  have 
all  things,  even  the  most  common,  done  in  order.  For  all  disorder  came  into  the 
world  by  Satan,  and  his  chief  employment  is  to  make  a  breach  into  that  order 
which  God  hath  established.  He  shuffleth  and  mingleth  all  together,  and  seeketh 
to  disturb  and  destroy  what  he  can,  and  how  he  can.  Again,  order  is  a  means  to 
preserve  every  society ;  the  want  of  it  threateneth  ruin  to  every  society.  This  serveth, 
first,  to  reprove  such  as  keep  not  their  places,  but  break  out  of  order,  and  will  not 
be  held  within  the  compass  that  God  hath  set  them.  Every  man  hath  his  bounds 
set  him,  and  is  enclosed  in  them  as  in  a  circle,  which  he  may  not  pass.  No  man 
hath  any  promise  of  blessing  when  he  keepeth  not  the  order  God  hath  set  him. 
Secondly,  acknowledge  from  hence  that  the  Church  is  a  blessed  company,  it  is  the 
very  school  of  good  order,  wherein  all  things  are  done  in  number,  weight,  and 
measure.  When  Balaam  had  seen  the  goodly  order  of  this  host  of  God,  as  the 
valleys  that  were  spread  forth ,  as  gardens  by  the  river's  side,  as  the  trees  which  the 
Lord  had  planted,  and  as  cedar  trees  beside  the  waters,  he  cried  out  in  admiration 
of  this  comely,  decent,  and  seemly  order,  "  How  goodly  are  thy  teuts,  0  Jacob  !  and 
thy  tabernacles,  0  Israel  I  "  For  who  is  it  that  ruleth  in  the  Church  ?  and  who  is  it 
by  whom  it  is  guided?  Is  it  not  God,  who  is  the  God  of  order?  No  confusion 
cleaveth  or  can  cleave  to  Him,  He  is  not  the  God  of  confusion,  He  is  light,  and  in 
Him  is  no  darkness  at  all  (1  John  i.  5).  He  hath  set  an  order  among  all  His  works. 
Thirdly,  when  we  see  this  order  interrupted  in  the  works  of  God,  know  that  it 
Cometh  not  of  God.  Acknowledge  therein  the  corruption  of  man  and  the  work  of 
Satan.  Fourthly,  whensoever  we  cannot  sound  the  depth  of  God's  works  nor  judge 
of  them  as  we  ought,  when  we  see  to  our  appearance  much  out  of  square,  as  soldiers 
out  of  their  squadrons,  we  must  not  condemn  the  works  of  God,  but  accuse  our  own 
blindness  and  ignorance,  "  Forasmuch  as  God  hath  made  all  beautiful  in  his 
season"  (Eccles.  iii.  11).  When  we  behold  how  the  wicked  prosjier  for  the  most 
part,  and  are  of  great  power  (Psa.  xxxvii.  35),  and  on  the  other  side  the  godly  all 
the  day  long  plagued  and  chastened  every  morning  (Psa.  Ixxiii.  14),  we  are  ready  to 
misjudge  and  misdeem  of  these  works  of  God.  Howbeit,  the  ways  of  God  are  not  as 
our  ways.  This  is  therefore  our  weakness  in  judgment.  Thus  also  was  Jeremy 
troubled  (Jer.  xii.  1,  2),  and  no  less  the  prophet  Habbakuk  (Hab.  i.  13).  This  which 
we  esteem  to  be  a  confusion  is  indeed  no  confusion  ;  and  that  is  in  order  which  we 
suppose  to  be  out  of  order.  For  God  is  a  God  of  long  suffering,  who  "  Will  take 
vengeance  on  His  adversaries,  and  He  reserveth  wrath  for  His  enemies"  (Nah.  i.  2), 
and  therefore  is  the  prophet  (nmch  perplexed  in  spirit)  willed  to  wait  by  faith  the 
issue  that  God  will  make,  "  For  the  vision  is  yet  for  an  appointed  time,  but  at  the  end 
it  shall  speak  and  not  lie  :  though  it  tarry,  wait  for  it ;  because  it  will  surely  come, 
it  will  not  tarry  "  (Hab.  ii.  3).  Lastly,  from  hence  every  man  must  learn  to  do  the 
duties  of  his  own  calling.  God  hath  set  every  man  in  a  certain  calling.  We  are 
apt,  indeed,  to  break  out  into  the  callings  of  other  men,  as  if  we  were  pinned  up  in 
too  narrow  a  room.  This  made  Solomon  to  say,  "  I  have  seen  servants  on  horses, 
and  princes  walking  as  servants  upon  the  earth."  And  as  God  hath  set  every  man 
in  a  calling,  so  must  every  man  wait  and  attend  upon  that  calling,  whether  it  be 
in  the  Church,  or  in  the  family,  or  in  the  commonwealth.     (W.  Attersoll.) 

Vers.  29-32.  Moses  said  unto  Hobab,  .  .  .  Come  thou  with  us. — A  generom 
•proposal: — I.  First,  then,  what  are  the  characteiustics  op  a  true  Chdrch  as  it 
is  PICTURED  BY  IsRAEL  IN  THE  WILDERNESS  ?  We  might  proloug  the  answcr  to  this 
question  with  many  minute  features,  but  it  will  be  unnecessary  to  do  more  than  give 
you  a  simple  broad  outline.  1.  The  people  in  the  wilderness  were  a  redeemed 
people.  They  had  been  redeemed  by  blood  and  redeemed  by  power.  So,  all  the 
true  members  of  God's  Church  understand  what  the  blood  of  sprinkling  means. 
They  have  enjoyed  a  passover  through  it.  And  the  Holy  Spirit  has  entered  into 
their  hearts,  and  made  them  hate  their  former  sins,  has  delivered  them  from  the 
dominant  power  of  their  inward  corruptions,  has  set  them  free  and  brought  them 
out  of  the  bondage  of  sin.  Thus  they  have  also  been  redeemed  by  power,  and  no  one 
has  any  right  to  think  himself  a  member  of  Christ's  Church  unless  by  faith  he  has 


CHAP.  X.]  NUMBERS.  71 

seen  himself  redeemed  by  blood,  and  in  his  experience  has  also  been  redeemed  by 
the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  2.  The  Israelites  were  a  people  who  were  passing 
through  a  land  wherein  they  found  no  rest,  neither  did  they  desire  any,  for  they 
were  journeying  to  another  country,  the  promised  land,  the  Canaan.  Now,  here  is 
another  description  of  the  true  Church  of  God.  They  are  not  of  the  world,  even  as 
Christ  is  not  of  the  world.  This  is  not  their  rest.  Here  they  have  no  continuing 
city.  3.  Israel  in  the  wilderness  was  a  people  walking  by  faith  as  to  the  future,  for 
if  you  remember,  the  words  are,  "  They  were  going  to  the  place  of  which  the  Lord 
said,  I  will  give  it  to  you."  And  such  are  God's  people  now.  As  for  joys  to  come, 
they  have  not  tasted  them,  but  they  are  looking  for  them,  because  God  has  promised 
them.  4.  These  people,  also,  as  to  their  present  circumstances  were  walking  by  faith. 
It  was  not  merely  faith  which  sang  to  them  of  Canaan,  but  it  was  faith  that  told  them 
of  the  manna  which  fell  day  by  day,  and  the  water  which  flowed  from  the  rock, 
which  stream  followed  them  in  their  journeyings.  So  also  in  this  world  the  Chris- 
tian man  has  to  live  by -faith  upon  God  as  to  present  things.  As  to  temporal 
necessities  he  must  cast  all  his  care  on  Him  who  careth  for  us,  but  especially  as  to 
all  spiritual  supplies  the  Christian  has  no  stock  of  grace.  5.  These  people  found, 
wherever  they  went,  that  they  were  surrounded  by  foes.  So  will  you  find  it  if  you 
are  a  child  of  God.  All  places  are  full  of  snares.  Events,  prosperous  or  adverse, 
expose  you  to  temptation.  All  things  that  happen  to  you,  though  God  makes  them 
work  for  good,  in  themselves  would  work  for  evil.  While  here  on  this  earth  the 
world  is  no  friend  to  grace  to  help  you  on  to  God.  II.  It  is  the  duty  of  the  Chris- 
tian Church  to  invite  suitable  persons  to  join  with  it.  1.  As  you  read — "  Come 
thou  with  us,  and  we  will  do  thee  good  " — say  if  these  are  not  the  terms  in  which 
any  Church  should  invite  a  suitable  pastor  to  unite  with  it  ?  2.  Take  the  words  as 
significant  of  the  manner  in  which  Churches  should  invite  suitable  persons  to  come 
among  them  as  private  members.  Are  there  not  those  who  go  in  and  out  merely 
as  visitors  worshipping  with  you,  who  have  never  joined  hands  with  you  in  cove- 
nant ?  They  meet  with  you  as  mere  hearers,  under  the  same  ministry,  but  they 
have  not  identified  themselves  with  the  brotherhood  to  sit  down  and  feast  with  you 
at  the  t.ible  of  the  Lord.  To  such  as  these  the  proposal  may  be  made,  and  the 
welcome  proffered.  3.  Let  me  call  your  attention  to  a  certain  sense  in  which 
Christian  men  may  address  this  invitation  to  all  that  they  meet  with,  "Come  thou 
with  us,  and  we  will  do  thee  good."  Not  "come  and  join  our  Church,"  not"  come 
and  be  members, "  not  "come  and  put  on  a  professii>n  of  faith."  You  cannot  say 
that  to  any  but  to  those  in  whom  you  see  the  fruits  of  the  Spirit,  but  you  may  say, 
and  you  ought  to  say,  to  all  persons  of  all  classes  on  all  sides,  "  Come  away  from 
the  seed  of  evil  doers,  cast  m  your  lot  with  the  people  of  God  ;  leave  the  world, 
come  on  pilgrimage  to  the  better  country ;  forsake  the  pursuit  of  vanities,  lay  hold 
on  eternal  life  ;  waste  not  all  your  thoughts  upon  the  bootless  cares  of  time,  think 
about  the  momentous  matters  of  eternity.  Why  will  you  be  companions  of  those 
who  are  upon  the  wrong  side,  and  whose  cause  is  the  cause  of  evil  ?  Why  will  you 
remain  an  enemy  to  God  ?  We,  by  God's  grace,  have  cast  in  our  lot  with  Christ  and 
with  His  cause ;  we  desire  to  live  to  His  glory.  Come  and  cast  in  your  lot  with  us — 
that  is,  believe  ;  that  is,  trust  a  Saviour  slain ;  that  is,  put  your  soul  into  the 
custody  of  Christ  the  Intercessor ;  that  is,  press  forward  through  a  life  of  holiness 
on  earth  to  a  home  of  happiness  in  heaven.  "  Come  thou  with  us,  and  we  will  do 
thee  good."  III.  The  main  argument — the  most  powerful  incentive  we  can  ever 
USE  IS — that  association  with  the  Church  of  Christ  will  do  those  who  enter  it 
cooD.  I  am  sure  it  will,  for  I  speak  from  experience  ;  and  if  I  were  to  call  upon 
many  hundreds  in  this  house  they  would  all  bear  the  same  testimony,  that  union 
with  the  people  of  God  has  done  them  good.  1.  The  Church  of  God  may  say  this, 
first,  because  she  can  offer  to  those  who  join  with  her  good  company.  2.  "  Come 
with  us,"  the  Cliurch  of  God  may  say,  "  and  you  shall  have  good  instruction,"  for 
it  is  in  the  true  Church  of  God  that  the  doctrines  of  grace  are  preached,  the  Person 
of  Christ  is  extolled,  the  work  of  the  Spirit  is  magnified,  Ac.  3.  "  Come  thou  with 
us,  and  we  will  do  thee  good,"  in  the  best  sense,  for  thou  shalt  feel  in  our  midst 
the  good  pri-sence  of  God.  4.  "  Come  with  us  "  again,  for  you  shall  participate  in 
all  the  goud  offices  of  the  Church.  That  is  to  say,  if  thou  wi'.t  cast  in  thy  lot  with 
us,  if  there  be  prayer  thou  shalt  have  thy  share  in  it.  We  will  pray  for  thee  in  thy 
trouble,  and  trial,  and  anguish.  5.  But  the  good  that  Hobab  was  to  get  was  not  only 
on  the  road.  The  main  good  he  got  was  this — he  weut  into  the  promised  land  with 
God's  peop'e.  So,  the  main  blessing  that  you  get  from  being  united  with  the 
invisible  Church  of  Christ,  through  being  part  and  parcel  of  the  body  of  Chriot,  is 


72  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  x. 

reserved  for  the  hereafter.     IV.  Lest  we  should  be  found  mere  pretenders,  let  Aiii* 

OF  VS  WHO  BELONG  TO  ChEIST's  ChUKCH  TAKE  CARE  TO  MAKE  THIS  ARGUMENT    TRUE.       I 

speak  to  many  who  have  long  been  joined  to  the  visible  Church  of  God,  and  I  put 
this  interrogatory  to  them — How  have  you  carried  out  this  silent  compact  which 
has  been  made  with  the  friends  of  Christ  ?  You  have  promised  to  do  them  good  ; 
have  you  fulfilled  your  pledges  ?  I  am  afraid  few  of  us  have  done  good  to  our  fellow 
Christians  up  to  the  measure  that  we  might  have  done,  or  that  we  ought  to  have 
done.  Some  professors,  I  fear,  have  forgotten  the  compact  altogether.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  True  pilgrim  life  : — 1.  The  life  of  all  is  a  pilgrimage.  (1)  Life  as  a. 
journey  is  constant.  There  is  no  pi  using  a  moment ;  whether  asleep  or  awake  we 
are  moving  on.  (2)  It  is  irretraceable.  We  cannot  go  back  a  step.  (3)  It  is  resist- 
less. 2.  But  whilst  the  life  of  all  is  a  pilgrimage,  all  are  not  taking  the  same 
course,  and  moving  to  the  same  destination.  Morally  there  is  a  true  and  a  false 
pilgrimage.  We  take  the  text  to  illustrate  the  life  of  a  true  pilgrim.  I.  It  i& 
4_iji:Ejro  A  GLORIOUS  DESTiKy,  .  The  true  Canaan  of  humanity  is  moral  perfection. 
The  true  soul  marches  on  through  life  not  in  quest  of  some  outward  good,  as  did  the 
Israelites  of  old,  but  in  quest  of  holinefs.  1.  It  is  the  gift  of  God.  2.  It  is  a  motive 
for  exertion.  II.  It  is  a  life  of  social  benevolence.  1.  The  language  of  a  true  life 
is  that  of  invitation.  "  Come  with  us."  2.  The  spirit  of  a  true  life  is  that  of  kind- 
ness. "We  will  do  thee  gocd."  III.  It  is  a  life  under  the  benediction  of 
Heaven.  God  has  spoken  good  concerning  all  the  holy  and  the  true ;  all  who  are 
the  genuine  disciples  of  His  Blessed  Son.  What  has  He  said  to  them?  1.  That 
they  are  His  friends.  2.  That  He  is  always  with  them.  3.  That  He  has  mansions 
prepared  for  them  in  the  future.  (Hoviilist.)  The  journey  to  heaven : — I.  The 
Christian's  destination.  He  is  not  at  home  on  earth,  but  is  a  stranger  and  a 
pilgrim.  He  desires  something  better,  and  this  desire  is  not  to  be  disappointed. 
Heaven  is  something  promised.  The  prospect  is  delightful.  II.  The  Christian's 
JOURNEY.  Heaven  is  not  only  a  place  we  desire,  but  one  to  which  we  are  rapidly 
advancing.  Travelling  does  not  mean  a  quiescent  state  of  ease  and  rest  ;  it  means 
active  exertion.  The  different  stages  of  Christian  life  do  not  represent  simply 
advancing  age,  but  the  attainment  of  higher  degrees  of  Christian  character  and 
perfection.  III.  The  Christian's  desire — that  others  should  accompany  him. 
More  especially  is  this  the  case  as  regards  relations  and  friends.  It  is  his  duty 
to  invite  them.  It  is  part  of  bis  Christian  work.  Well  may  he  be  eloquent  when 
a  matter  of  so  grave  importance  is  in  the  balance.  Let  us  seek  company  as  we 
journey  to  heaven.  It  will  be  better  for  us  here  and  hereafter.  {Preac)ier's  Analyst.} 
The  believer^ s  journey : — I.  The  place  of  every  true  believer's  destination.  II. 
The  means  he  is  adopting  to  arrive  at  it.  III.  The  call  which  he  would  fain 
address  to  all  his  unconverted  neighbours,  (."l.  Roberts,  M.A.)  niniP^  ^«/-?', 
Hobqh.; — The  historian  does  not  think  it  worih  while  to  tell  whether  Moses' 
attempt  to  secure  the  help  of  a  pair  of  sharp  Bedouin  eyes  succeeded  or  failed,  but 
passes  on  to  describe  at  once  how  "  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord  went  before 
them  to  search  out  a  resting-place  for  them,"  and  how  "  the  cloud  was  upon  them 
when  they  went  out  of  the  camp."  He  would  teach  us  that  it  mattered  little  whether 
Israel  had  Hobab  or  not,  if  they  had  the  ark  and  the  cloud.     I.   There  are  times 

AND   MOODS   in   WHICH    OUR   FORWARD    LOOK   BRINGS  WITH    IT   A    PAINFUL    SENSE    OF   THE 

unknown  WILDERNESS  BEFORE  US.  It  is  a  libel  on  God's  goodness  to  speak  of  the 
world  as  a  wildernei^s.  He  has  not  made  it  so ;  and  if  anybody  finds  that  "  all  is 
vanity  and  vexation  of  spirit,"  it  is  hia  own  fault.  But  still  one  aspect  of  life  is 
truly  represented  by  that  figure.  There  are  dangers  and  barren  places,  and  a  great 
solitude  in  spite  of  love  and  companionship,  and  many  marchings  and  lurking  foes, 
and  grim  rocks,  and  fierce  suns,  and  parched  wells,  and  shadeless  sand  wastes- 
enough  in  every  life  to  make  us  quail  often  and  look  grave  always  wlien  we  think 
of  what  may  be  before  us.  Who  knows  what  we  shall  see  when  we  top  the  next 
hill,  or  round  the  shoulder  of  the  cliff  that  bars  our  way  ?  What  shout  of  an  enemy 
may  crash  in  upon  the  sleeping  camp ;  or  what  stifling  gorge  of  barren  granite — 
blazing  in  the  sun  and  trackless  to  our  feet — shall  we  have  to  march  through  to-day?' 
II.  We  have  here  an  illustration  of  the  weakness  that  clings  to  HUJfAN  guides. 
There  are  a  thousand  ways  in  which  our  poor  weak  hearts  cry  out  in  their  sense- 
bound  unbf'lief  for  visible  stays  to  lean  upon,  and  guides  to  direct  us.  In  so  far 
as  that  is  a  legitimate  longing,  God,  who  never  "sends  mouths,  but  He  sends  meat 
to  feed  them,"  will  not  leave  us  to  cry  unheard.  But  let  us  guard  against  that  ever- 
present  weakness  which  clings  tremblingly  to  creatures  and  men  for  help  and  guid- 
ance, and,  in  proportion  as  it  is  rich  when  it  possesses  them,  trembles  at  the  prospect 


CH.u-.  X.]  NUMBERS.  73 

of  losing  them,  and  is  crushed  and  desolate  when  they  go.  Do  not  put  them  as 
harriers  between  you  and  God,  nor  yield  your  own  clearness  of  vision  to  them,  nor 
say  to  any,  "  Be  to  us  instead  of  eyes,"  nor  be  over  anxious  to  secure  any  Hobab  to 
show  you  where  to  camp  or  how  to  march.  III.  The  contrast  which  is  brought  into 
l^rominence  by  tbe  juxtaposition  of  this  section  and  that  which  follows  it,  makes 
EMPHATIC  THE  THOUGHT  OF  THE  TEUE  Leader  OF  OUR  MARCH.  God  always  goes  before 
His  people.  No  doubt  in  all  our  lives  there  come  times  when  we  seem  to  have  been 
brought  into  a  blind  alley,  and  cannot  see  where  we  are  to  get  out ;  but  it  is  very 
rare  indeed  that  we  do  not  see  one  step  in  advance,  the  duty  which  lies  next  us. 
And  be  sure  of  this,  that  if  we  are  content  to  see  but  one  step  at  a  time,  and  take  it, 
•we  shall  find  our  way  made  plain.  The  river  winds,  and  often  we  seem  on  a  lake 
without  an  exit.  Tlien  is  the  time  to  go  half-speed,  and,  doubtless,  when  we  get  a 
little  farther,  the  overlapping  hills  on  either  bank  will  part,  and  the  gorge  will  open 
out.  We  do  not  need  to  see  it  a  mile  off ;  enough  if  we  see  it  when  we  are  close  upon 
it.  It  may  be  as  narrow  and  grim,  with  slippery  black  cliffs  towering  on  either  side 
of  the  narrow  ribbon  of  the  stream,  as  the  canons  of  American  rivers,  but  it  will 
float  our  boat  into  broader  reaches  and  onward  to  the  great  sea.  Do  not  seek  to 
outrun  God's  guidance,  to  see  what  you  are  to  do  a  year  hence,  or  to  act  before  you 
are  sure  of  what  is  His  will ;  do  not  let  your  wishes  get  in  advance  of  the  pillar  and 
the  ark,  and  you  will  be  kept  from  many  a  mistake,  and  led  into  a  region  of  deep 
peace.  IV.  Our  craving  for  a  human  guide  has  been  lovingly  met  in  the  gift 
OF  Christ.  His  life  is  our  pattern.  Our  marching  orders  are  brief  and  simple : 
follow  your  Leader,  and  plant  your  feet  in  His  footprints.  That  is  the  sum  of  all 
ethics,  and  the  vade  mecuin  for  practical  life.  {A.  Madaren,  D.D.)  An  earnest 
entreaty  : — I.  Christianity  is  an  elevating  force,  filling  the  soul  with  purity 
and  love.  In  this  text  it  is  exhibited  in  all  the  charms  of  itssimiilicity  and  power. 
"  Come  with  ns,  and  we  will  do  thee  good."  On  a  cold  day  one  autumn  I  happened 
to  be  speaking  to  a  farmer  where  three  roads  met,  and  we  saw  sitting  in  the  hedge 
side  a  half-starved  melancholy  man,  to  whom  we  said,  "You  look  pale  and  ill, 
my  friend."  He  replied,  "  My  wife  and  children  are  in  the  workhouse.  I  have 
sought  work  up  and  down  in  Manchester  and  have  tailed  to  find  it.  One  has  told 
me  to  go  there,  another  to  go  yonder ;  and  I  came  out  here  to  see  if  any  farmer 
might  perhaps  find  me  work  in  his  fields."  The  good  man  at  my  side  clapped  his 
hand  on  the  poor  fellow's  shoulder  and  said,  "  Come  with  me  ;  I  will  give  you  some 
breakfast  and  then  I  will  find  you  work  to  do."  That  kindly  invitation  and  pro- 
mise is  an  inspiration  of  Christianity.  It  is  not  "  Go  here,"  or  "  go  there  "  ;  but 
"  come  with  us,  and  we  will  do  you  good."  We  need  a  human  sympathy  that  shall 
prompt  us  to  do  to  others  as  we  would  have  them  do  to  us.  We  should  imagine  the 
feelings  of  others,  and  treat  them  as  we  should  like  to  be  treated  ourselves  were  we 
in  their  position.  II.  The  Christian  life  is  an  invitation.  Is  not  the  Christian 
like  the  sun  that  shines  away  the  darkness  ?  The  petals  of  the  flowers  are  closed 
up  during  the  night,  but  when  the  sun  shines  upon  them  they  open  themselves  to 
receive  from  his  rays  beauty  and  fragrance.  So  the  Christi-nn  is  a  clear  shining 
light  in  the  night  of  tbe  fog  of  sin.  Even  as  Christ  was  the  light  of  the  world,  so 
is  every  Christian  a  brilliancy.  1.  Come  first  with  us  to  the  bar  of  conviction.  2. 
Come  with  us  to  the  door  of  repentance.  3.  Come  with  us  to  the  seat  of  mercy.  4. 
Come  with  us,  and  we  will  lead  you  to  the  fountain  for  uncleanness.  5.  Come  with 
us  to  the  Cross.  6.  Come  with  us  to  the  marringe  of  the  Lamb  with  your  soul. 
III.  The  Christian  life  is  a  trackway  of  beneficence.  "  We  will  do  thee 
good."  The  Christian  shall  be  doing  good  all  the  days  of  his  life.  Let  Christians 
join  themselves  in  a  huge  co-operative  society  for  beneficence.  And,  sinners,  come 
with  us,  and  we  will  do  you  good.  Come  and  help  us  to  help  each  other.  {W.  Birch.) 
The  heavnly  Canaan : — I.  The  great  object  which  is  sought  by  the  Church  of 
Goi>."  We  are  seeking  heaven,  and  its  perfect  felicity  we  hope  ultimately  to 
realise.  II.  The  invitation  presented  by  the  Church  of  God  to  them  that  are 
without.     "  Come  with  us  and  we  will  do  thee  good."     III.  Let  me  show  what 

WILL  BE  the  issue    OF    THE    ACCEPTANCE   OF    THIS    INVITATION.       Most    checriug   IS    the 

assurance  that  is  given  unto  those  who  go  with  God's  people  of  a  positive  bles«ing. 
"  We  will  do  thee  good,"  said  Moses  to  Hobab,  "  for  the  Lord  hath  spoken  good 
concerning  Israel."  Now  I  am  very  anxious  just  to  set  before  you  this  truth,  that 
no  person  can  be  found  who  loves  God,  and  who  has  accepted  the  invitation  to 
associate  with  His  people,  without  being  a  gainer  thereby.  [T.  W.  Aveliny.)  The 
Christian jovrneying  to  the  promised  land: — I.  The  place  spoken  of  in  the  texi 
IS  Canaan,  a  type  of  heaven,  that  far-distant  but  better  country  which  all  the 


^ 


74  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

Israel  of  God  have  ever  regarded  as  the  scene  of  their  blessedness  and  their  home. 

1.  A  much-wished-for  place.  2.  A  promised  place.  3.  The  free  gift  of  God.  II. 
The  conduct  of  the  Chkistian  with  regard  to  this  place.  It  is  evident  that  this 
heavenly  country  has  little  or  no  influence  on  mankind  in  general.  We  profess  to 
believe  that  there  is  such  a  land  somewhere  in  the  universe,  but  we  think  and  act 
just  as  though  it  could  nowhere  be  found.  If  heaven  were  to  be  blotted  out  from 
the  creation,  or  if  an  impassable  gulf  were  to  be  fixed  between  it  and  the  earth, 
our  dispositions,  our  affections,  and  our  conduct,  would,  in  too  many  instances, 
remain  the  same  as  they  are  now.  But  this  promised  land  has  a  real  and  abiding 
influence  on  the  people  of  God.  They  seek  it ;  they  travel  towards  it.  1.  To  be 
journeying  to  heaven  implies  an  actual  entrance  into  the  path  which  leads  to  it. 

2.  To  be  journeying  to  heaven  implies  also  perseverance  in  seeking  it.  3.  We  are 
warranted  to  infer  that  if  we  are  journeying  to  heaven,  we  have  not  only  kept  in 
the  road  which  leads  to  heaven,  but  have  actually  made  a  jjrogress  in  it ;  that, 
instead  of  declining  we  are  growing  in  grace ;  that  we  are  gradually  becoming  more 
and  more  meet  to  be  partakers  of  heaven,  the  nearer  we  draw  to  it.  4.  There  is 
implied  also  in  journeying  to  the  heavenly  Canaan,  a  fixed  determination  to  arrive 
there.  The  expression  iutimates  decision  of  character ;  a  willingness  to  sacrifice 
everything,  so  that  the  soul  may  be  saved  and  heaven  won.  III.  In  thus  pro- 
secuting his  journey  to  heaven,  it  is  evident  that  the  Christian  must  necessarily 
separate  himself  from  many  of  his  brethren,  with  whom  he  would  otherwise 
have  contentpdly  associated.  But  although  he  is  constrained  by  the  command  of 
his  God  and  the  very  nature  of  the  work  in  which  he  is  engaged,  to  come  out  from 
among  the  ungodly,  he  does  not  consider  himself  as  unconnected  with  them,  nor 
does  he  cease  to  regard  them  as  brethren.  1.  If  we  regard  this  invitation  as  the 
advice  of  the  Christian  traveller  to  his  fellow-sinners  around  him,  it  implies  that 
he  has  a  sincere  and  earnest  desire  to  bring  them  into  the  path  of  heaven,  which 
he  has  himself  entered.  2.  The  invitation  of  Moses  intimates  also  that  the 
Christian  is  tenderly  concerned  for  the  spiritual  welfare  of  his  fellow-travellers,  as 
well  as  for  the  repentance  and  salvation  of  the  wandering  sinner.  3.  We  may 
infer,  lastly,  from  this  invitation,  that  if  we  would  ever  reach  the  kingdom 
of  God,  we  must  join  ourselves  now  to  the  people  of  God.  (C.  Bradley, 
M.A.)  ^^The  Christian  invitatipji : — L  God's  people  are  travelling  to  the 
celestiajTCanaan.      !r.""The  "journey — (1)    Commences  in   the   day  of  conversion. 

(2)  Is   continued  by   the   soul  advancing    in  the   knowledge   and  love   of   God. 

(3)  Terminates  at  death.  2.  The  place  to  which  they  are  journeying.  This  is  the 
celestial  Canaan  ;  which  is — (1)  A  land  of  rest.  (2)  A  land  of  riches  and  prosperity. 
(3)  A  land  prepared  for  and  promised  to  God's  spiritual  Israel.     II.  God's  people 

FEEL  it  their  DUTY  TO  INVITE  OTHF.RS  TO  JOURNEY  WITH  THEM   TO  THE  PROMISED  LAND. 

Hence  they  say,  "  Come  thou  with  us,"  &c.  1.  That  there  are  many  who  are  not 
in  the  way  to  this  goodly  land.  2.  That  there  is  room  and  freedom  for  more  in  the 
way  to  heaven.  3.  That  God's  people  are  anxious  that  others  should  join  them  in 
their  way  to  heaven.  4.  God's  people  use  their  influence  to  prevail  with  tbose 
around  them  to  accompany  them  to  heaven.  They  practically  invite  them,  by 
araiableness  of  disposition,  sweetness  of  temper,  righteousness  of  life  ;  and  thus 
allure  them  by  the  excellencies  they  manifest,  and  constrain  them  to  glorify  our 
Father  who  is  in  heaven.     III.  God's  people  have  good  reasons  to  assign  why 

THOSE  AROUND  SHOULD  GO  WITH  THKM    TO  THE  GOODLY  LAND.       The    rcaSOnS  in  the   tCxt 

are  two  :  "  We  will  do  you  good  "  ;  and,  "  The  Lord  hath  spoken  good  concerning 
Israel."  The  first  is  a  human  reason,  and  therefore  limited.  The  second  is  a 
Divine  reason,  and  unlimited.  1.  There  is  the  promise  of  benevolent  help.  2. 
There  is  the  good  declaration  of  God  concerning  IsrMcl.  "  The  Lord  hath  spoken 
good."  What  has  He  not  said?  Has  He  not  given  tbe  most  precious  promises  and 
the  most  gracious  assurances?  Learn  :  1.  The  present  state  of  God's  people.  It 
is  a  journeying  state.  This  is  the  time  of  their  toil  and  suffering.  2.  The  happiness 
of  God's  people.  Children  of  God,  heirs  of  eternal  life,  expectiints  of  the  glory  that 
shall  be  revealed.  3.  The  true  wisdom  of  those  who  are  without.  To  accompany 
God's  people  on  their  heavenly  pilgrimage.  (J.  Burns,  D.D.)  The  invitation  of 
Mo^es  to  Hobab : — I.  God's  Israel  have  a  direct  object  in  view,  thus  described, 
"  The  place  of  which  the  Lord  said,  I  will  give  it  5'ou."  By  God's  Israel  I  mean 
literally  the  posterity  of  Jacob,  and  spiritually  all  genuine  Christians,  who  are 
"Israelites  indeed  in  whom  there  is  no  guile."  The  object  which  God's  ancient 
If^rael  had  in  view  was  Canaan  ;  this  is  described  as  a  place,  and  on  several  accounts 
it  was  highly  desirable.     Heaven  is  the  glorious  object  on  which  God's  spiritual 


CHAP.  X.J  NUMBERS.  75 

Israel  have  fixed  their  attention.     Canaan  was  highly  prized  by  the  Jews — 1.  As  it 
was  the  end  of  their  journey.  Heaven  is  the  termination  of  the  Christian's  journey. 
The  dangers  of  that  terrible  wilderness,  through  which  Israel  passed,  were  but 
faintly  typical  of  the  spiritual  dangers  to  which  believers  are  exposed  ;  and  if  Israel 
rejoiced  at  the  possession  of  Canaan,  with  what  exultation  will  Cliristians  enter 
their  heavenly  inheritance,  when  their  toils  will  be  finished  and  their  conflicts 
closed  !      2.  It  was  a   country  amply  stored  with  provisions.      But   with  all  tbe 
enconiums  bestowed  upon  Canaan,    how  low  it   sinks  in   comparison   with  that 
"  better  country,"  to  which  we  are  journeying !     This  is  indeed  a  land  without 
scarceness.     Here  will  be  no  lack  of  anything.     Here  every  wish  shall  be  gratified, 
and  every  desire  be  crowned  with  enjoyment.  3.  It  was  long  and  repeatedly  promised. 
4.  It  was  to  be  gratuitously  bestowed.     All  God's  blessings  are  gifts.     II.  God's 
IsR.iuEL  ARE   TENDING  TOWARDS  THAT  OBJECT.     1.  Commenced  by  the   command  of 
God.     2.  Continued  under  His  immediate  guidance.     3.  Marked  by  His  miraculous 
and  gracious  care.     III.  That  God's  Israel  are  solicitous  to  secure  companions 
FOR  their  journey.     "  Come  thou  with  us,"  &c.     1.  Piety  prompts  them  to  say 
this.     They  long  to  bring  back  to  God  His  immortal  offspring,  and  to  recover  to 
"  the  great  Shepherd  of  the  sheep,"  the  souls  for  whom  He  died ;  and  they  say, 
"  Come  thou  with  us,"  &c.     2.  Benevolence  excites  them  to  say  this.     Eeligion 
inspires  the  most  ardent  attachment  to  God,  and  breathes  the  purest  benevolence 
to  men.     3.  Self-interest  induces  them  to  say  this.      God's  Israel  are  not  only 
capable  of  duing  good  to,  but  of  receiving  good  from  their  fellow-travellers.     IV. 
God's  Israel  enjoy  the  Divine  commendation.      "  The   Lord  hath  spoken   good 
concerning  Israel."     1.  Concerning  the  country  to  which  Israel  are  tending  (Psa. 
Ixxxvii.  3;  Kev.  xxi.  23-26).    2.  Concerning  the  way  in  which  Israel  are  journ  ying. 
It  is  called  a  right  way  (1  Sam.  xii.   23) ;  a  good  way  (Jer.  vi.  16) ;  a  perfect  way 
(Psa.  ci.  2)  ;  a  way  of  holiness  (Isa.  xxxv.  8)  ;  a  way  of  peace  (Luke  i.  79)  ;  a  new 
and  living  way  (Heb.  x.  20) ;  and  a  way  in  which  there  is  no  death  (Prov.  xii.  28). 
3.  Concerning  the  succours  afforded  them  in  the  way.     Many  things  are  necessary 
for  travellers.     Light  to  see  the  way  (Prov.  iv.  18);  a  consciousness  of  being  in  the 
right  way  (Isa.  xxx.  21) ;  a  guide  to  instruct  us  in  the  way  (Psa.  xxxii.  8) ;  provision 
for  the  way  (Psa.  cxxxii.  15)  ;  strength  to  walk  in  the  way  (Isa.  xl.  29-31)  ;  and  a 
never-failing  Friend  to  lead  us  forward  in  the  way  (Isa.  xlii.  16).  4.  "  The  Lord  hath 
spoken  good  concerning  Israel  " — In  tbe  titles  by  which  they  are  designated,  such 
as  children  of  God,  sons  of  (jod,  heirs  of  God,  kings  and  priests  unto  God.— In  the 
figures  by  which  they  are  compared  :    God's  husbandry,  God's   building,    God's 
heritage,  sheep  of  God's  pasture,  a  royal  priesthood,  a  spiritual  house,  a  crown  of 
glory,  and  a  royal  diadem,  &c.— In  the  promises  to  which  they  are  entitled;  these 
include  all  things  (1  Cor.  iii.  21-23).     Infer  :  1.  The  hRppiness  of  God's  people. 
2,  The  work  of  God's  people.     3.   The  honour  of  God's  peojDle.     4.  The  security  of 
God's   people.     (Sketches   of  Fotir  Hundred  Sermons.)         HohaVs  opportunity  : — 
I.  What  God  said  to  Israel  (see  Exod.  vi   6-8).     II.  What  Moses  said  to  Hobab. 
1.  An  invitation.     2.  A  promise.     "  Good."     3.  An  argument.     Lord  has  spoken, 
not  man.     4.  An  entreaty.     Leave  us  not.     5.  An  appeal.     "  Thou  knowest,"  &c. 
6.  An   inducement.     Equal  share   promised.     III.  What   Hobab   said  to  Moses. 
"  I   will   not  go."      Six   deterring   things.     1.    His   own   land.     2.    Kindred.     3. 
Possessions.     4.   With  strangers.     Alien  race ;  other  habits.      5.  Poor  prospects. 
6.  Uncertainty.      Wbat   would  become  of  him  should  Moses  die,  or  if  invasion 
should  fail?     All  find  emphatic  expression — "I  will  not  go."     But  Moses  pleads 
long,  earnestly,  willingly.     Hobab  yields.     House  of  Eaguel.     A  lot  in  Canaan — 
Jael.     Kechab.     Saved  from  doom  of  Midian.     IV.  What  I  have  to  say  to  you. 
Same  message  from  God,     Six  things — ^1.  "Israel."     Politically  disbanded  ;  exists 
spiritually ;  the  seed  of  Abraham ;  the  children  of  the  promise ;  the  Church  of 
Christ.     2.  "Good."   Freedom  from  moral  Egypt.   Divine  favour.   Life  ;  guidance ; 
aid  from  God.     Inheritance  in  the  Canaan  of  holiness  and  heaven.     3.  "Come." 
Cast  in  your  lot  with  us.    Turn  back  on  Midian.     It  is  doomed.  Follow  our  Moses, 
Jesus,  Captain  of  our  salvation.     4.  "  Leave  us  not."   I  too  would  entreat,  beseech, 
persuade.     We  want  you  ;  your  company ;  your  help.     The  love  of  Christ  con- 
straineth  us.     5.  "  We  will  do,"  &c.   We  can.     By  prayer,  brotherhood,  mutual  aid, 
and  cheer.     Going  home.     6.  "  I  pray  thee."    This  with  my  heart  upon  my  lips, 
and  longing  for  your  soul.     Come  !  Come  !  Come  !     V.  What  you  have  to  say  to 
ME.      You  may   say — 1.    "I   will   not   go."    If  Midian  is   your  home   Midian's 
doom  is  yours.     2.  "  I  will  follow  by  and  by."    By  and  by  leads  to   house  of 
Never.     3.  "  I  will  think  about  it  " — which  means,  "  I  will  forget  it."  4.  "  Are  you 


76  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 


Israel?"  Go  tell  John  the  things,  <fec.  5.  "I  will  go  with  somebody  else."  Be 
quick,  and  God  go  with  you.  6.  "  I  will  go  with  you  for,"  &c.  Preacher's  prize  ; 
your  peace  ;  Jesus'  glory.  VI.  What  God  will  sat  to  ds  both.  I  canuot  answer.' 
The  DAY  WILL  DECLARE  IT  !  (J.  Jacksoii  Wray.)  Moses  and  Hoiaft  .-—The  spirit 
displayed  by  Moses  is  displayed  by  every  Christian  man.  His  words  also  may  be 
adopted.  These  words  suggest — I.  Settled  convictions.  "  We  are  journeying," 
&o.  How  pleasant  this  assurance.  Do  you  possess  it?  1.  Eemember  the  tirne 
when  you   had   not  this  assurance.     It  was  a  time   of  uncertainty — fearfulntss. 

2.  Eemember  the  way  in  whic-h  you  obtained  this  assurance.  It  was  after  strong 
convictions,   earnest   cries,  transporting  joys,    then    came   this  sweet   assurance. 

3.  Notice  the  great  advantages  of  this  assurance.  In  a  rough  road,  dark  night,  &c. 
II.  Pkobable  inconveniences.  Persons  on  a  journey  do  not  exjiect  the  comforts  of 
home.  They  may  have— 1.  Unpleasant  weather.  The  hail  and  sleet  of  persecution. 
The  cold  snow  of  poverty.  The  fog  of  doubt.  2.  Unpleasant  conveyance.  The 
means  of  grace  are  like  vehicles  to  help  us  on.  Some  have  to  trudge  on  nearly 
all  tiie  way,  others  get  a  lift  now  and  then.  Some  in  comfortable  carriages — 
good  doctrine  ;  others  in  tumble-down — broken  springs,  &c.  3.  Unpleasant  com- 
panions. The  world  an  inn.  In  the  house.  Shop.  Church.  4.  Unpleasant 
acci'mmodation.  The  body  is  the  tabernacle  or  house  in  which  the  soul  dwells. 
Many  have  sickly,  weak  bodies,  and  dwell  in  much  poverty.  Never  mind.  We  are 
journeying.  III.  Constant  progp.ess.  We  cannot  settle  down  either — 1.  In  the 
joys  of  home  and  kindred.  2.  In  the  joys  of  Christian  society.  3.  In  the  joys  of 
gospel  ordinances.  This  should  teach  us— (1)  To  look  upon  everytLing  with  the 
eye  of  travellers.  (2)  To  make  ever\  thing  subservient  to  our  journey.  The  place 
of  our  abode.  Our  business.  Our  friendships.  (3)  To  rejoice  over  those  who  have 
finished  their  jomney.  Tbey  have  simply  got  home  before  us.  IV.  Pleasant 
piiosPECTs.  We  have  in  view — 1.  A  land  of  freedom.  2.  A  land  of  friendship. 
3.  Aland  of  holiness.  4.  A  land  of  happiness.  (The  Study.)  lite  frofitahh' 
journey  : — I.  God  hath  spoken  great  and  good  things  concerning  the  future 
STATE  OF  His  people.  II.  Believers  are  now  on  their  journey  to  take  possession 
OF  this  heavenly  country  ;  "  We  are  journeying,"  said  Moses  to  Hobab,  "  to  the 
promised  place."  III.  Travellers  to  Zion  should  invite  and  encourage  others  to 
ACCOMPANY  THEM  ;  as  Moses  said  to  Hobab,  "  Come  thou  with  us,  and  we  will  do  thee 
good."  Moses  was  related  to  Hobab  ;  and  certainly  our  relations  have  the  first 
claim  to  our  pious  regards  (Rom.  ix.  1-3  ;  x.  1).  And  there  are  several  methods 
in  which  we  may  try  to  do  this.  1.  By  inviting  them  to  hear  the  gospel  faithfully 
preached.  2.  We  may  promote  the  salvation  of  others  by  serious  and  alfectionate 
conversation.  We  reaiiil.v  converse  with  our  neighbours  on  the  news  of  the  day, 
whether  it  be  good  or  evil.  Why  should  we  be  backward  to  tell  them  tlie  best  news 
that  ever  reached  our  ears — tbe  good  tidings  of  the  gospel,  "  that  Jesus  Christ  came 
into  the  world  to  save  sinners  "  ?  3.  The  heads  of  families  must  endeavour  to  do 
good  to  their  households  by  miintainingfamilj'-worship.  4.  We  may  promote  the 
salvation  of  the  rising  generation  by  giving  enco'rageiuent  to  Sunday-schools,  and 
other  plans  for  the  religious  education  of  children.  Some  may  assist  them  by 
subscribing  towards  their  support;  and  others  by  their  personal  help.  5.  The 
distribution  of  religious  tracts  is  another  method  in  which  we  may  easily  invite 
many  around  us  to  come  and  unite  with  us,  that  we  may  do  them  good.  6.  But 
all  these  means  must  be  accompanied  with  prayer.  7.  Above  all,  and  together  with 
all,  let  our  holy,  blameless,  and  useful  lives  recommend  the  ways  of  religion  to 
men.  Improvement :  What  influence  have  all  the  good  things  which  God  haa 
promised  in  His  gospel  had  upon  us  ?  He  has  set  before  us  His  well-beloved  Son  ; 
and  in  Him,  pardon  and  peace,  holiness  and  heaven  :  all  we  can  want  to  make  us 
happy  in  time,  happy  in  death,  happy  to  all  eternity.  Are  we  drawn  by  these  cords 
of  love  ?  Are  we  induced  to  forsake  the  sins  and  vanities  of  the  world  ?  Have  we 
set  out  on  our  journey  towards  heaven,  determined  to  be  fellow-travellers  with  the 
people  of  God?  or  do  we  hesitate?  (G.  Burder.)  The  Cliristian  journey :  —  l. 
Direct  your  meditations  to  the  representation  given  in  the  text  of  all  the  true 
Israel  of  God  ;  they  are  journeying  to  the  place  of  which  God  has  spoken.  1. 
Consider  their  setting  out  in  the  journey,  and  how  this  is  begun.  2.  Journeying 
to  the  goodly  land  of  promise  implies  perseverance  and  pi'ogress  in  the  Divine  life. 
3.  That  our  journeying  to  Zion  implies  difficulties  encountered,  resisted  and  over- 
come. These  may  be  expected,  and  will  be  experienced.  II.  We  proceed  now  to 
some  illustration  of  the  animating  motive  which  encourages  heavenly  travellers 
TO  hold  on  their  way,  which  motive  is  contained  in  the  last  part  of  the  text. 


CHAP.  X.]  ■  NUMBERS.  77 

"  For  the  Lord  hath  spoken  good  concerning  Israel."  The  Father  of  mercies  has 
made  with  us  an  everlasting  covenant,  well-ordered  in  all  things,  and  sure.  The 
Suviour  of  mankind  has  purchased  for  us  a  kingdom  which  fadeth  not  away.  The 
Holy  Spirit  is  our  Sanctifier  and  our  Comforter,  and  graciously  undertakes  to  prepare 
us  for  the  business  and  the  bliss  of  heaven.  Neither  the  legions,  nor  all  the 
powers  of  hell,  can  prevent  us  from  inheriting  with  the  saints  in  hght.  The  time, 
manner,  and  all  the  circumstances  of  our  death,  are  arranged  by  unerring  wisdom, 
and  by  infinite  love.  Again,  all  the  promises  recorded  in  the  sacred  volume, 
pertaining  to  the  life  which  now  is,  and  to  immortal  happiness  beyond  the  grave, 
are  yea  and  amen  in  Christ,  and  are  ours  through  Him.  All  the  threatenings 
recorded  in  the  same  Scriptures  are  transferred  to  our  glorious  Surety,  and  can- 
celled as  to  us.  The  God  of  glory  is  our  perpetual  defence ;  the  Lamb  in  the 
midst  of  the  throne  our  perpetual  Friend;  angels  our  kindred,  and  heaven  our 
home.  ni.  The  affectionate  and  salutaby  counsel  which  travellers  to  Zion 
ADDRESS  TO  OTHERS  :  "  Come  with  us,  and  we  will  do  thee  good."  1.  This  implies 
a  sincere  concern  for  the  salvation  of  our  kindred  and  companions.  2.  This 
affectionate  address  implies  also  a  full  conviction,  that  it  never  can  be  well  with 
those  who  have  not  their  portion  with  God's  children,  who  worship  Him  not  in 
spirit,  and  who  rejoice  not  in  Christ  Jesus.  3.  Again,  this  language  intimates  the 
full  persuasion  that  there  is  room  for  the  most  ignorant,  estranged,  and  hopeless 
of  their  kindred,  companions,  and  relatives.     (A.  Bonar.)  The  invitation: — 

1.  His  invitation  shows  faith's  happy  state.  It  is  a  mirror  reflecting  the  features 
of  calm  trust.  Full  faith  has  eagle-eye.  It  penetrates  all  earthly  mists.  It  gazes 
steadily  on  Zion's  highest  light.  Its  true  affections  centre  round  a  purer  scene. 
So  daily  it  moves  forward.  And  nightly  realises  that  an  upward  step  is  made.  We 
are  journeying  unto  the  promised  place.  What  is  this  place  ?  Faith  gazes — it 
ever  gazes  with  increasing  rapture :  but  it  fails  fully  to  describe.  It  is  rest ;  perfect 
purity  ;  joy ;  sure  ;  the  gift  of  God.  2.  This  invitation  shows  that  faith  is  aggressive. 
"  Come  thou  with  us."  Each  heaven-set  plant  strives  for  expanse.  True  grace 
has  one  sure  sign  :  it  longs  and  labours  to  communicate  its  wealth.  A  saving  view 
of  Christ  slays  self — relaxes  every  icy  band — widely  extends  embracing  arms,  and 
yearns  to  multiply  delights.  When  the  heart  burns  the  life  must  labour.  {Dean 
Law.)  The  invitation  of  Moses  to  Hobab : — I.  The  people  of  God  are  travelling 
TO  the  heavenly  Canaan.  1.  The  place  itself.  (1)  The  place  of  rest.  (2)  The  place 
of  purity.    (3)  The  place  of  unbounded  wealth.    (4)  The  place  of  unceasing  enjoyment. 

2.  The  journey.  II.  It  is  the  duty  op  Christians  to  invite  others  to  journey  with 
THEM.  So  Moses  acted.  III.  The  reasons  assigned  for  a  compliance  with  this 
REQUEST.  1.  The  promise  of  mutual  good.  2.  The  Divine  regard  for  the  Church. 
IV.  The  manner  in  which  this  invitation  may  be  received.  1.  Some  give  a  direct 
negative,  as  Hobab  did  at  first ;  "  I  will  not  go."  The  wicked  through  the  pride  of  his 
countenance  will  not  seek  after  God.  Some,  like  Ephraim,  are  joined  to  idols,  and 
cannot  give  them  up.  Is  this  your  answer?  "I  will  not  go."  Then  you  must 
perish  in  the  wilderness.  2.  Some  are  deterred  by  pride  and  shame.  Thf^j  think 
the  people  of  God  beneath  them  ;  or  what  will  the  world,' their  present  companions, 
say,  if  they  profess  Christ  ?  3.  Some  are  deterred  by  the  trials  of  the  way.  God 
will  be  your  guide,  and  He  will  support  you  in  the  severest  trials.  4.  Some  are 
convinced  of  the  necessity  and  importance  of  this  journey  to  heaven,  but  they 
procrastinate,  like  Felix ;  "  Go  thy  way,"  &c.  5.  Some  are  willing  to  go,  but  have  not 
counted  the  cost.  This  was  the  case  with  many  of  Christ's  followers,  who  set  out, 
but  turned  back,  and  walked  no  more  with  Him  (John  vi.  66).  6.  A  few  have  resolved 
to  go.  Like  Euth,  nothing  shall  hinder  them.  The  good  work  has  commenced  in  their 
souls.  The  people  are  willing  in  the  day  of  Christ's  power.  They  will  gn,  and  like 
Paul,  they  count  all  things  but  loss,  &c.  (Ruth  i.  16  ;  Heb.  xi.  25,  26).  (Helps  for  the 
Pulpit.)  Promise  of  good : — I.  Some  of  those  good  things  God  has  spoken.  He  says 
to  every  Christian  as  to  Jacob,  "  I  will  surely  do  thee  good."  1.  He  has  called  them 
to  sustain  gracious  relations  towards  Him.    2.  He  secures  to  them  special  privileges. 

3.  He  unfolds  before  them  glorious  prospects.  4.  He  enables  them  in  the  faith  of 
all  this  to  achieve  noble  exploits.  II.  Some  of  the  good  things  which  God  has 
ACTUALLY  DONE  FOR  THEM.  Not  words  but  deeds,  might  without  presumption  be 
said  to  be  the  Divine  motto.  1.  He  has  emancipated  them  from  a  most  bitter 
dominion  of  sin  and  death.  2.  He  has  enlightened  them  with  saving  wisdom. 
8.  He  has  watched  over  them.  The  pillar  of  cloud,  only  an  emblem.  '"The  hairs 
of  thy  head."  "  Fear  not,  ye  are  of  more  value  than  many  sparrows."  4.  He 
accounted  their  enemies  His  own.    Egyptians,  Philistines,  Syrians,  Babylonians. 


78  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  X. 

Lessons:  1.  Let  this  subject  endear  the  Saviour.  2.  Let  it  stamp  vanity  upon  all 
the  world  deems  great.  3.  Let  it  encourase  prayer  and  high  expectation.  4.  Let 
it  prompt  to  holiness  of  heart  and  life.  {HomHetic  Magazine.)  S^Jiristian  invita- 
tion : — I.  A  position  is  assumed.  It  was  assumed  by  Moses,  that  the  people  oi  whom 
heTi'ad  the  care  occupied  a  position,  in  regard  to  G.id  and  in  regard  to  their  own 
welfare,  which  was  essentially  favourable,  and  in  which  it  was  eminently  desirable 
to  participate.  The  same  truth  must  be  assumed  by  and  in  regard  to  Christians — 
those  who  live  under  the  economy  of  new  covenant  mercy.  And  this  will  be  vindi- 
cated by  observing  that  Christians  live  in  the  actual  enjoyment  of  Divine  favour, 
and  that  they  possess  the  prospect  of  invaluable  blessing  in  the  future.  IL  An 
invitation  is  presented.  Moses  offered  the  invitation  to  his  relative  that  he  would 
go  with  them,  and  thus  be  the  companion  of  their  course  ;  as  in  the  preceding  verse 
he  says,  "  Come  thou  with  us,  and  we  will  do  thee  good  "  ;  "  Leave  us  not,  I  pray 
thee."  The  invitation,  we  repeat,  is  presented,  in  a  sense  answering  to  the  spirit  of 
their  vocation,  by  Christians  to  men  who  hitherto  have  been  living  apart,  as  votaries 
of  sin  and  of  the  world.  1.  In  the  name  of  Christians  we  say,  we  invite  you  to  believe 
their  principles.  Those  principles  relate  not  merely  to  the  elementary  truths  con- 
cerning the  being,  the  government  and  the  attributes  of  God — they  relate  to  the 
Divine  character  and  mission  of  Him  whose  name  we  bear,  Christ  Jesus,  the  Son  of 
God  ;  they  relate  to  the  expiatory  sacrifice  He  has  offered  for  human  sin,  by  ex- 
piring upon  the  Cross;  they  relate  to  the  imputation  of  the  merit  and  righteousness 
embodied  in  that  sacrifice,  through  faith,  as  the  only  efficacious  cause  of  justifica- 
tion and  acceptance  before  the  Father ;  they  relate  to  the  agency  of  the  Holy  Spirit, 
in  His  renewing  grace,  as  requisite  to  apply  the  work  of  mediation  to  the  human 
soul ;  and  they  relate  to  the  duty  of  obedience  and  holiness,  as  the  only  satisfactory 
proof  of  an  interest  in  the  work  of  redemption  and  of  the  hope  which  that  redemp- 
tion is  intends  d  to  inspire  and  to  secure.  Now  these  various  principles  are  to  be 
sincerely  and  cordially  believed ;  their  presence  or  absence  decides  the  character 
and  the  prospects  of  men  for  ever.  2.  While  we  invite  you,  on  behalf  of  Christians, 
that  you  will  embrace  their  principles,  we  invite  you  also  that  you  will  associate 
with  their  communities.  3.  We  also  invite  you  in  the  name  of  Christians,  that  you 
will  engHge  in  their  employments.  III.  An  assurance  is  pledged.  The  emphasis 
of  the  expressions  before  us  will  be  found  singularly  powerful  and  interesting. 
"  It  shall  be,  if  thou  go  with  us,  yea,  it  shall  be,  that  what  goodness  the  Lord  shall 
do  unto  us,  the  same  will  we  do  unto  thte."  And  this  assuram-e  may  be  taken  in 
two  departments.  There  is  an  assurance  from  Christians,  and  there  is  an  assurance 
by  Christians,  for  their  God.  1.  Christians  pledge  the  assurance  for  themselves, 
that  to  those  who  go  with  them  they  will  render  all  the  assistance  in  their  power. 
"  What  goodness  the  Lord  shall  do  unto  us,  the  same  will  we  do  unto  thee."  "We 
will  endeavour  to  render  you  participators  of  all  our  supports  and  enjoyments ;  so 
that  you  shall  be  found  entirely  as  we  are,  both  in  the  possessions  of  the  present  and 
in  the  prospects  of  the  futuie."  2.  Christians  pledge  the  assurance  for  God.  We 
believe  that  the  moment  when  your  decision  occurs  will  be  the  moment  of  your 
ample  and  unreserved  introduction  to  all  the  immunities  of  the  Christian  life. 
There  is  no  process  of  discipline  or  preparatory  trial,  there  is  no  hesitation  and 
there  is  no  delay ;  the  moment  when  your  faith  is  placed  on  the  great  Messiah,  and 
when  the  resolution  of  your  heart  unier  Divine  grace  is  taken,  to  devote  yourselves 
to  His  honour,  at  that  moment  all  that  Christianity  can  vouchsafe  to  you  is,  from 
the  Source  of  Christianity,  y^ur  own.  (J.  Pamoyis.)  Come  ivith  us: — Whither? 
Israel  was  going  quite  through  the  wilderness  into  Canaan,  the  land  of  promise. 
Israel  of  the  spirit  is  going  thiough  earth  and  time  to  heaven.  When  the  Church 
says  "  Come  thou  with  us  "  to  any  who  are  hesitating  and  undecided,  her  face  is 
heavenwards,  her  movement  is  in  that  way ;  she  holds  in  her  hand  the  roll  of 
promise,  the  map  of  "  the  better  country,  even  the  heavenly,"  and  sees  her  own 
title  to  possession  written  there  as  with  the  finger  of  God.  To  that  country  her 
steps  are  all  directed ;  iuto  that  country  she  is  moving  her  ranks,  as  regularly  as 
the  morning  dawns,  as  quietly  as  the  night  darkens.  With  the  rolling  of  the  years, 
with  the  numbering  of  the  weeks,  and  even  with  the  striking  of  the  hours,  she 
throws  her  wearied  travellers  into  eternal  rest  and  safety.  We  see  the  part  of  the 
company  that  is  bright,  and  strong,  and  active,  hut  there  is  always  a  more  illus- 
trious part  of  it,  which  w'e  do  not  see,  away  somewhat  in  the  distance  before  us,  and 
passing  in  silence,  through  sickness,  and  by  the  dim  ways  of  death,  into  the  good 
land  of  immortal  life  and  glory.  And  there  is  no  time  for  divided  purposes,  for 
lingering  delays,  "Come  with  us,"  quickly  come,  lest  you  should  be  down  to  the 


CHAP.  X.]  NUMBERS.  79 

dark  river  long  before  you  think  ;  lest  your  eternal  home,  the  place  you  are  going 
to,  should  Hash  out  upon  you,  and  lest  it  should  be,  to  your  surprise  and  grief,  a 
very  different  home  from  that  which  you  are  idly  hoping  to  reach.  (A.  Raleigh, 
D.D.)  Good  to  he  ivith  the  good: — "  Come  with  us  and  we  will  do  you  good." 
It  is  good  to  be  with  the  good.  A  thousand  nameless  gifts  and  precious  influences 
are  reciprocated,  given  and  regiven,  and  enhanced,  as  tbey  circulate  among  the 
faithful.  "  We  will  do  thee  good  "  is  no  vain  boast ;  it  is  the  everyday  experience 
of  the  saints  of  God  in  fellowship,  of  the  soldiers  of  God  in  conflict,  of  the  sons  of 
God  on  the  way  through  the  wilderness  to  their  home.  To  be  with  a  person  in 
spirit-friendship  is  to  get,  in  a  measure,  what  he  has  in  him  to  give  away,  be  it 
good  or  evil,  glory  or  disgrace.  You  muat  be  changed  in  a  degree  into  the  same 
image,  whatever  that  image  may  be.  The  effluence  of  his  life  will  flow  into  yours, 
and  of  yours  into  his.  The  sublimest  action  of  this  principle  is  when  the  disciple 
is  with  the  Master,  giving  nothing,  but  receiving  all,  and  then  men  take  knowledge 
of  him  that  he  has  been  with  Jesus.  But  it  is  really  the  action  substantially,  of  the 
same  principle  when  the  company  of  His  followers,  standing  well  together  in  their 
fellowship,  and  going  step  by  step  in  their  march,  are  able  thus  to  promise  to  all 
whom  tbey  invite,  "We  will  do  you  good."  It  is  good  to  be  with  the  good.  It  is 
good  to  be  aiming  after  goodness.  The  Christian  recompense  begins  as  soon  as  the 
Christian  endeavour  begins.  (Ibid.)  Keeping  good  company  : — I  think  it  is  fair 
to  notice  that  there  was  a  little  in  the  circumstances  of  the  time  to  help  Hobab  to 
say  "  No."  For  Moses  had  to  say,  "  We  are  journeying."  They  did  not  look  at 
their  best ;  all  was  in  confusion ;  God's  people  here  below  never  do  look  at  their 
best.  You  know  how  vexed  you  are  if  some  particular  friend  comes  and  calls  when 
you  are  in  all  the  uproar  and  confusion  of  a  removal.  You  would  say,  "  Oh,  dear 
me !  I  hope  this  won't  have  a  damaging  effect ;  I  hope  there  won't  be  any  inferences 
drawn  from  this  higgledy-piggledy  condition  of  things."  And  I  think  Moses  felt  it. 
I  feel  it  as  the  spokesman  for  Israel  to-day,  pleading  with  any  who  have  not  yet 
come  to  join  themselves  to  Israel,  who  have  not  come  into  the  camp,  into  the 
household  of  faith.  I  anticipate  your  objection.  You  may  well  say  as  Hobab 
perhaps  further  thought.  "  Well,"  he  might  think,  "  I  do  know  a  little  about  these 
Israelites,  and  I  know  more  than  what  is  good  about  them.  So  far  as  I  have  been 
able  to  see  during  the  past  year,  they  are  a  mixed  lot."  And  so  they  were.  And 
I  have  to  make  much  the  same  admission  as  regards  Christians.  I  do  not  want  to 
spoil  my  case  with  any  "  halter-between-two-opiiiions,"  by  doing  what  recruiting- 
sergeants  in  the  old  days  were  given  to,  viz.,  telling  lies — for  that  is  the  plain 
English  of  it.  I  shall  not  speak  the  language  of  exaggeration.  You  find  fault  with 
us  from  the  outside,  and  I  admit  it.  You  say,  "  Why  should  I  come  ?  "  There  are, 
it  may  be,  points  of  character  on  which  worldlings,  so  far  as  you  have  met  them, 
are  superior  to  Christians  whom  you  have  met.  More's  the  pity ;  but  I  admit  it. 
We  are  ofttimes  a  sorry  lot,  a  miserable  crowd  with  our  bickerings,  and  figlitings, 
and  jealousies.  We  please  not  God,  and  are  contrary  to  all  men ;  but — but — but 
take  us  at  our  worst,  there  is  a  side  of  us  that  never  can  be  exaggerated.  There  is 
a  side  of  us,  and  a  thing  in  us,  for  the  sake  of  which  I  would  advise  our  keenest 
critic  to  rub  his  eyes  aud  look  again  ere  he  gives  us  up.  And  remember,  besides, 
that  if  I  choose,  I  can  turn  your  argument.  It  is  easy  for  you  to  turn  round  to  us  ; 
it  is  easy  for  Hobab  to  turn  to  me  and  say,  "  What  Christians  we  are,"  and  that  he 
has  found  us  a  stupid  lot,  and  so  on.  But  may  I  not  say.  Are  you  a  great  deal 
better?  Come  along,  and  show  us  an  example.  It  is  not  really  fair  to  stand  out- 
side and  criticise — take  a  turn  along  the  road  with  us  for  a  mile  or  two.  Many  a 
man  has  had  great  objections  to  being  a  Christian,  and  has  discovered  many  faults 
in  the  Israelites  so  long  as  he  was  a  Midianite.  But  when  he  crossed  over  from 
Midian  into  Israel,  and  tried  to  keep  his  own  eyes  on  the  pillar  of  cloud,  and  tried 
to  rule  his  own  cohduct  according  to  the  law  and  the  sacrifices,  his  head  hung  a  bit 
lower,  and  he  had  less  to  say  about  his  neighbours.  He  had  glimpses  within  that 
he  would  never  have  had  otherwise ;  of  great  ravines,  and  chasms  of  imperfection  ; 
tremendous  face-blanching  possibilities  of  evil  revealed  in  himself  that  have  made 
him  sing  to  a  more  gracious  tune,  if  they  have  not  made  him  sing  dumb  altogether. 
So  I  come  back  :  "  Come  thou  with  us."  I  feel  as  though  I  were  like  a  dear  mother 
I  saw  down,  I  think,  at  King's  Cross,  not  long  ago.  She  was  standing  with  one  foot 
on  the  carriage-board,  and  the  other  foot  on  the  platform,  and  she  was  arguing 
evidently  with  her  wayward  boy.  "  Come  back,  come  ;  you  will  be  better  at  home  ; 
every  one  is  waiting  for  you."  But  he  hummed  and  hawed,  turned  this  way  and 
that  way,  looked  every  way  but  into  his  mother's  face,  and  was  most  uncomfor  able 


80  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

and  uneasy.  And  sorry  am  I  to  add  that  the  last  I  saw  was  the  conductor  coming 
hurrying  along ;  there  was  a  kiss  and  an  embrace  between  mother  aud  son,  and 
then  they  parted,  she  to  step  into  the  train,  and  he  to  go  away  back,  as  he  answered, 
"  I  will  not  go."  Very  like  just  where  Moses  was  with  Hobab,  and  where  I  am  with 
some  of  you.  I  want  you  to  come,  I  long  for  you  to  come.  I  know  you  can  raise 
many  dilliculties  and  objections.  Like  that  lad,  you  like  the  freedom  ;  like  Hobab, 
you  like  a  desert  life.  But  even  although  you  should  say,  "  No,"  still  I  shall  look 
to  see  you  changing  your  mind,  like  Hobab.  For,  later  on  in  Scripture,  we  have 
evidences  that  he  afterwards  repented  and  went.  Let  me  go  on  with  my  text. 
"  We  will  do  thee  good  :  for  the  Lord  hath  spoken  good  concerning  Israel."  Will 
that  do  ?  We  are  only  journeying,  we  have  not  arrived  ;  but  we  have  the  promises 
of  God.  Yes  ;  and  we  have  something  to  show,  we  have  our  own  tale  to  tell.  We  are 
redeemed,  at  any  rate  ;  we  are  a  ransomed  lot ;  and  when  you  are  piling  together 
all  the  disparaging  adjectives  you  can  gather  to  describe  us,  don't  forget  the  others. 
There  is  a  ransomed  look  about  us,  unless  we  utterly  belie  the  deepest  and  truest 
things  in  us.  We  are  no  longer  slaves.  True,  we  are  not  what  we  ought  to  be,  but 
we  are  saved  sinners.  We  have  got  that  to  begin  with,  and  "  we  are  journeying" 
for  all  the  rest.  We  are  taking  God  at  His  word,  and  hitherto  the  dullest  of  us,  if 
you  push  him  hard,  is  compelled  to  say  the  Lord  has  been,  at  least,  as  good  as  His 
word.  Now,  Will  you  come  ?  "  And  he  said,  I  will  not  go  ;  but  I  will  depart  to  my 
own  land,  and  to  my  own  kindred."  Poor  Hobab  !  Many  have  been  kept  back  in 
that  way  :  "  mine  own  land,  mine  own  kindred."  Now,  how  would  you  like  it  if 
to-night  I  brought  the  argument  to  a  point  by  saying  I  dispute  the  word  "  mine  " — 
you  have  no  land,  you  have  no  kindred  ?  Hobab,  you  are  using  words  that  you 
have  no  right  to  use  in  any  absolute  sense  of  possession — "  Mine  own  land,  mine 
own  kindred."  That  is  a  word  that  this  world  won't  allow,  not  to  speak  of  God's 
Word.  But,  Hobab,  if  you  want  true  possessions,  if  you  want  true  wealth,  a  real 
portion,  that  even  death  will  not  destroy  (death  will  only  usher  you  into  a  more 
abundant  sense  of  the  possession  of  it),  then  come  with  us.  Don't  look  back  to 
Midian ;  don't  look  back  'to  Sodom ;  don't  cast  longing,  lingering  looks  behind. 
Look  forward.  See  what  Christ  offers  you,  and  come.  You  lose  nothing  that  would 
be  for  your  good:  "No  good  thing  will  God  withhold  from  them  that  walk 
uprightly."  And  if  you  have  to  lose;  if ,  from  a  worldly  point  of  view,  from  the 
poiut  of  view  of  selfishness,  aud  self-will,  and  your  own  unhallowed  ambitions — if 
you  have  to  lay  things  on  the  altar,  then  you  are  a  blessed  man — that  is  the  path 
of  life,  and  not  of  death.  "  He  that  loveth  his  life  shall  lose  it ;  he  that  hateth  his 
life  (lie  that  seems  to  fling  it  away)  shall  find  it  unto  life  eternal."  And  Moses 
pleaded  with  him  further,  and  said,  "  Leave  us  not,  I  pray  thee,"  &c.  Pardon  me 
if  I  am  urgent  with  you  ;  let  me  plead  with  you.  You  can  be  of  use  to  us.  Will 
that  draw  some  of  you  ?  We  want  you,  frankly  and  freely.  Are  you  imaginative, 
musical,  poetical,  literary  ?  Are  you  a  good  financier?  Have  you  certain  qualities 
that  mark  you  off  specially  as  a  father,  or  as  a  mother,  or  as  a  wife,  or  as  a  friend  ? 
Come  with  us ;  we  need  you,  you  will  be  of  use  to  us.  It  is  one  of  the  sweet  things 
about  Israel  that  God  wants  every  kind  of  person.  Then  come.  We  are  journey- 
ing, we  are  a  going  concern,  we  are  moving  on,  onward  and  upward ;  no  stop,  no 
stay.  Nothing  can  resist  our  progress  ;  from  night  to  morning,  from  m  irning  till 
night,  the  one  thing  in  God's  universe  that  moves  is  His  Israel ;  and  every  step  is 
a  step  upward,  and  every  fall  is  a  fall  forward.  We  are  on  the  winning  side,  all 
that  is  enduring  is  with  us.  Come,  oh,  come  I  (John  McNeill.)  The  state  of 
mind  in  Moses  which  inompted  this  invitation  : — These  words  afford  us  more  than 
one  glimpse  into  Moses's  state  of  mind.  More  than  forty  years  had  now  elapsed 
since  he  had  "refused  to  be  called  the  son  of  Pharaoh's  dauj^hter,  choosing  rather 
to  suffer  affliction  with  the  people  of  God,  than  to  enjoy  the  pleasures  of  sin  for 
a  season."  What  enabled  him  to  make  this  diilicult  choice  ?  The  apostle  tells  us, 
"  faith."  But  faith  is  a  grace  that  does  not  stand  alone.  It  soon  becomes  the 
parent  of  other  graces.  God  has  told  us  what  He  is ;  and  it  is  the  characteristic  of 
faith  to  rest  in  Him  as  a  present  God — to  enjoy  Him  as  an  all-sufficient  and  present 
portion.  But  God  has  spoken  about  His  people  s  future — told  them  not  only  what 
He  is,  but  what  He  wiU  be  to  them.  He  hath  spoken  "good  concerning  Israel." 
These  promises  kindle  and  sustain  "  hope."  The  heart  is  enlarged  with  the  joyful 
anticipation  of  things  to  come.  Moses's  invitation  to  Hobab  shows  that  "  hope  " 
was  one,  it  may  be  the  prevailing,  characteristic  of  his  state  of  mind  at  this  time. 
There  was  something,  too,  in  his  outward  circumstances  which  might  give  an  im- 
pulse to  this  expansive  feeling.     Hitherto  they  had  been  marching  almost  away 


CHAP.  X.]  NmiBERS.  81 

from  the  land  of  promise ;  now  their  steps  were  turned,  and  they  were  about  to 
move  in  a  direct  line  for  it.     This  had  no  eUect  whatever  on  the  minds  of  the  carnal 
and  discontented  Israel ;  present  inconveniences  and  trials  completely  thmst  all 
the  promises  out  of  their  minds.     But  Moses  pondered  the  promise ;  he  anticipated 
the  "  good  which  God  had  spoken  concerning  Israel."      Hope   rose  high  in  his 
expecting  heart,  rendering  more  bearable  the  heavy  burden  which  lie  had  to  carry — 
a  disobedient  aud  gainsaying  people.     Why  is  it  that  our  hearts  do  not  abound 
more  in  hope?     Is  it  not  that  they  are  not  occupied  enough  with  God's  promises? 
That  they  do  not  realise,  as  Moses  did,  the  good  which  God  hath  spoken  concerning 
Israel  ?     We  live  too  much  in  the  present  or  the  past,  and  not  enough  in  the  future. 
Hope,  then,  was  a  feature  of  Moses's  spirit.     But  another  is  very  apparent  in  this 
invitation  to  Hobab — his  holy  benevolence.     He  was  anxious  tbat  one  related  to 
him,  though  not  of  Israel,  should  share  in  the  "  good  "  promised  to  Israel.     And 
this  is  the  more  beautiful,  when  we  bear  in  mind  that  Israel  of  old  was  not  called 
to  impart  to  others  the  truths  which  they  had  l>een  taught.    The  Church  of  the  Old 
Testamenii  was  not  in  any  sense,  to  use  a  common  expression,  a  "missionary 
Church."     Its  duty  was  to  keep  the  oracles  of  God,  and  to  live  in  com^ilete  separa- 
tion from  all  the  other  nations  of  the  earth :  so  that  Moses  went  beyond  the  spirit 
and  requirements  of  the  law  when  he  gave  utterance  to  the  benevolent  desire  of  his 
heart,  "  Come  thou  with  us,  and  we  will  do  thee  good  :  for  God  bath  spoken  good 
concerning  Israel."     But  we  who  live  in  the  latter  times,  when  the  fulness  of  Divine 
love  has  burst  through  the  barriers  which  for  a  time  confined  it,  when  the  gracious 
command  has  been  given,  "Preach  the  gospel  to  every  creature,"  we  ought  to  say, 
by  the  holiness  of  our  lives,  by  the  sympathy  of  our  hearts,  by  the  words  of  our  lips, 
to  those  around  us,  "  Come  with  us,  and  we  will  do  thee  good."     We  see  this  com- 
passionate love  in  Paul  (Rom.  x.  1 ;  1  Thess.  ii.  8).     We  see  it  in  the  beloved  John 
(3  John  4).  But,  most  of  all,  we  see  it  in  Jesus,  the  fountain  of  all  grace — "  For  when 
He  was  come  near,  He  beheld  the  city,  and  wept  over  it,  saying,  If  thou  hadst 
known,  even  thou,  at  least  in  this  thy  day,  the  things  which  belong  unto  thy  peace ! 
but  now  thev  are  hid  from  thine  eyes."    And  how  full  of  love  are  His  repeated  invi- 
tations— "  Come  unto  Me,  all  ye  that  labour  and  are  heavy  laden."     "  Him  that 
Cometh  unto  Me,  I  will  in  no  wise  cast  out."    Oh,  we  ought  to  be  more  like-minded  with 
Jesus  ;  and  if  we  realised  more  the  good  which  God  has  spoken  concerning  Israel, 
we  should  surely  desire  that  relations  and  friends  might  "  come  with  us  "  ;  that  what 
goodness  the  Lord  shall  do  unto  us,  the  same  He  might  do  to  them.     (G.  Wagner.) 
The  religion  of  the  promise : — If   we    are   honest    and   genuine  in  our  Christian 
believing,  these  words  are  as  true  for  you  and  me  as  they  were  for  Moses  and  his 
Israel.     We,  too,  are  on  a  journey.     For  us  to-day,  just  as  really  as  for  them  in 
days  of  old,  the  stimulus  continues  to  be  simply  this — a  promise.     Heaven  cannot 
be  demonstrated.     We  simply  take  God's  word  for  it.     The  Christian  religion  is 
emphatically  the  religion  of  the  promise.     In  heathen  religion,  the  threat  pre- 
dominates over  the  promise.     But  in  the  glad  faith  that  boasts  the  name  of  gospel, 
the  promise  predominates  over  the  threat.     Christians  are  men  with  a  hope,  men 
who  have  been  called  to  inh'  rit  a  blessing.     The  complaint  that  the  progress  of 
human  knowledge  has  made  it  difficult  to  think  and  speak  of  heaven  as  believing 
men  used  to  think  and  speak  of  it,  is  a  complaint  to  which  we  must  briefly  refer. 
Let  me  obseive,  then,  that  while  there  is  a  certain  grain  of  reasonableness  in  this 
argument  for  sib-nce  with  respect  to  heaven  and  the  things  of  heaven,  there  is  by 
no  means  so  much  weight  to  be  attached  to  it  as  many  people  seem  to  suppose. 
For  after  all,  when  we  come  to  think  of  it,  this  changed  conception  of  what  heaven 
may  be  like  is  not  traceable  so  much  to  any  marvellous  revolution  that  has  come 
over  the  whole  character  of  human  thought  since  you  aud  I  were  children,  as  it  is 
to  the  changes  which  have  taken  place  in  our  own  several  minds,  and  which 
necessarily  take  place  in  every  mind  in  its  progress  from  infancy  to  maturity. 
But  let  me  try  to  strike  closer  home,  and  meet  the  difficulty  in  a  more  direct  and 
helpful  way.     I  do  it  by  asking  whether  we  ought  not  to  feel  ashamed  of  ourselves, 
thus  to  talk  about  having  been  robbed  of  the  promise  simply  because  the  Father 
of  heaveu  has  been  showing  us,  just  as  fast  as  our  poor  minds  could  bear  the 
strain,  to  how  immeasurable  an  area  the  Fatherhood  extends.     The  reality  and 
trustworthiness  of  the  promise  are  not  one  whit  affected  by  this  revelation  of  the 
vastness  of  the  resources  which  lie  at  His  command  who  makes  the  promise. 
Instead  of  repining  because  we  cannot  dwarf  God's  universe  so  as  to  make  it  fit 
perfectly  the  smallness  of  our  notions,  let  us  turn  all  our  energies  to  seeking  to 
enlarge  the  capacity  of  our  faith,  so  that  it  shall  be  able  to  hold  more.    It  may 

6 


82  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 


turn  out,  who  can  tell  ?  that  heaven  lies  nearer  to  us  than  even  in  our  ehildhoocj 
we  ever  ventured  to  suppose ;  that  it  is  not  only  nearer  than  the  sky,  but  nearsr 
than  the  clouds.  Be  this  as  it  may,  tbe  reasonableness  of  our  believing  in  Christ's 
promise,  that  in  the  world  whither  He  went  He  would  prepare  a  place  for  us,  is  in 
nowise  impugned  by  anything  that  the  busy  wit  of  man  has  yet  found  out  or  ia 
likely  to  find  out.  That  belief  rests  on  grounds  of  its  own,  and,  far  from  for- 
bidding, it  encourages  us  to  let  our  ideas  of  the  fulness,  the  extent  of  the  blessing 
promised,  expand  more  and  more.  We  need  have  no  fear  that,  so  long  as  we  are 
in  the  flesh  and  on  the  earth,  our  acquaintance  with  the  realities  of  heaven  will 
ever  outrun  the  capacity  of  the  Bible  language  about  heaven  to  express  what  we 
may  have  discovered.  On  the  contrary,  let  us  make  more  and  more  of  these  great 
and  precious  promises  of  God.  Let  us  resolve  to  think  oftener  of  the  place  of 
which  the  Lord  has  said  that  He  would  give  it  us.  There  is  no  period  of  life  from 
wbich  we  can  afford  to  spare  the  presence  of  this  heavenly  hope.  We  need  it  in 
youth,  to  give  point  and  purpose  and  direction  to  the  newly-launched  life.  It 
would  be  a  strange  answer  to  give  from  a  ship  just  out  of  the  harbour's  mouth,  in 
reply  to  the  question,  "  Whither  bound?  " — "  Nowhere."  But  not  in  youth  only 
is  belief  in  this  ancient  promise  of  God  a  blessing  to  us.  We  need  it  in  middle 
life.  We  need  it  to  help  us  cover  patiently  that  long  stretch  which  parts  youth 
from  old  age— the  time  of  the  fading  out  of  illusions  in  the  dry  light  of  experience ; 
the  time  when  we  discover  the  extent  of  our  personal  range,  and  the  narrow  limit 
of  our  possible  achievement.  We  need  it  then,  that  we  may  be  enabled  to  replace 
failing  liopes  with  fresher  ones,  and  neither  falter  nor  sink  under  the  burden  and 
heat  of  the  day.  Above  all,  shall  we  find  such  a  hope  the  staff  of  old  age,  should 
the  pilgrimage  last  so  long.      {W,  R.  Huntington,  D.D.)  The  Christian  lifp  a 

jouritey  : — I.  We  are  to  view  the  Christian  leaving  the  world  behind  him.  We 
do  not  mean  by  this  that  he  is  to  go  out  of  the  world.  He  may  remain  in  it,  and 
perform  with  diligence  all  tlie  duties  of  his  station,  but  he  must  give  up  the  spirit, 
the  tastes,  the  habits  of  the  world  ;  he  must  use  the  world  without  abusing  it,  and 
"  count  all  things  but  loss  for  the  excellency  of  the  knowledge  of  Christ  Jesus  his 
Lord."  II.  We  are  to  view  the  Christian  with  the  cross  on  his  back.  It  may 
appear  unwise  to  lay  a  cross  upon  a  man  that  is  journeying,  because  it  is  apparently 
burthensome ;  but  there  is  this  difference  between  a  temporal  journey  and  the 
spiritual  one :  the  cross  does  not  enfeeble,  it  only  makes  us  sensible  of  the  weak- 
ness that  exists.  Indeed,  in  this  journey  it  is  generally  found  that  he  whose  cross 
is  the  heaviest  makes  the  greatest  progress.  With  the  cross  on  his  back  the 
Christian  is  less  liable  to  wander.  It  keeps  him  steady  in  the  right  way.  It  is 
true  that  "  no  chastening  for  the  present  is  joyous,  but  grievous ;  nevertheless, 
afterwards  it  yieldeth  the  peaceable  fruits  of  righteousness  to  them  which  are 
exercised  thereby."  The  cross  which  the  Christian  carries  is  not  selected  by 
himself,  but  it  is  appointed  by  God.  Sometimes  it  is  outward  affiiction  ;  some- 
times inward  temptations,  as  is  best  suited  to  the  character  and  circumstances  of 
the  individual.  HI.  The  Christian  journeys  with  the  Bible  in  his  hand.  When 
a  man  sets  out  on  a  journey,  he  procures  a  book  or  map  of  the  road,  and  directs 
his  course  accordingly.  It  is  not  enough  that  he  intends  or  desires  to  go  right,  he 
must  be  regulated  by  his  guide.  If  you  were  travelling  through  a  strange  country, 
and  you  knew  not  the  various  turnings  and  windings  of  the  road,  how  anxiously 
would  you  look  to  your  map,  to  see  if  you  were  right ;  particulnrly  if  there  were 
certain  marks  by  which  you  might  know  whether  you  were  in  the  appointed  track. 
The  maxims  of  the  world  may  deceive  you ;  the  reasonings  of  your  own  mind  may 
perplex  you ;  even  the  experience  of  professed  Christians,  being  unscriptural  or 
unsuitable,  may  mislead  you  ;  but  "  the  law  of  the  Lord  is  perfect,  converting  the 
soul;  the  testimony  of  the  Lord  is  sure,  making  wise  the  simple."  IV.  In  the 
spiritual  journey  the  Christian  has  Christ  at  his  side.  Throughout  the  way,  all 
the  strength  that  is  received  is  from  His  fulness.  "  For  it  pleased  the  Father  that 
in  Him  should  all  fulness  dwell."  Christ  continually  sustains  the  believer's  soul. 
There  are  times  with  the  most  eminent  Christian  when  the  brightness  is  dimmed 
and  dangers  are  multiplied;  "  when  the  soul  is  much  discouraged  because  of  the 
way."  In  such  seasons  nothing  but  a  view  of  Christ  can  cheer  the  soul.  None 
ever  travelled  this  road  without  feeling  a  humbling  sense  of  his  own  weakness  in 
the  spiritual  conflict.  He  has  at  times  fallen,  but  a  look  at  Christ,  even  if  fallen, 
while  it  humbles,  encourages.  V.  The  Christian  pilgrim  keeps  heaven  in  his 
VIEW.  Both  the  pains  and  the  pleasures  of  the  way  stir  up  his  heart  to  think  of  it. 
He  hastens  on,  regardless  of  the  accommodations  by  the  way,  so  that  he  may  but 


CHAP.  X.]  NUMBERS.  83 

reach  his  home  at  last.  With  him  the  idea  is  not  that  of  mere  release  from 
suffering,  but  of  being  brought  to  the  permanent  enjoyment  of  that  Saviour  with 
whom  he  has  walked  by  faith.  On  this  his  mind  is  bent,  nor  will  he  be  fully 
satisfied  till  that  blessed  time  arrive.  Application  :  1.  To  you  who  are  going 
quite  another  road.  What  do  you  expect  at  the  end  of  it  ?  You  hope  to  be  saved 
at  last.  On  what  are  your  expectations  founded  ?  2.  I  would  invite  the  young  to 
commence  this  journey.  It  is  true  that  the  world  has  its  pleasures,  and  they  are 
placed  before  you  in  an  allai  ing  point  of  view  ;  but  they  are  deceitful.  Keligion 
has  its  pleasures,  and  they  are  solid  and  durable.  3.  A  word  of  encouragement  to 
those  who  are  on  the  road.  Be  grateful  that  while  so  many  are  travelling  on  in  the 
broad  road,  you  have,  through  grace,  been  brought  to  walk  in  this  heavenly  path. 
Gird  up  the  loins  of  your  mind — take  up  your  cross  cheerfully  and  follow  Christ. 
(J.  G.  Breay,  B.A.)  Persuasives  and  promises  to  pilgrims  : — I.  A  picture  of 
THE  Christian's  pilgrimage.  That  wilderness  wandering,  so  deeply  indented  with 
marks  of  Divine  intervention,  so  resplendent  with  proofs  of  a  present  God,  who 
went  before  them,  cleaving  the  sea  and  the  flood  for  them,  subduing  their  enemies 
round  about,  is  a  varied  type  of  the  Church  in  the  world.  1.  The  first  lesson  lying 
on  the  surface  is  that  which  relates  to  bearing  testimony  for  Christ.  There  should 
be  no  hesitation  about  a  Christian,  as  if  he  were  afraid  to  say  he  was  on  the  way  to 
heaven.  His  speech  or  silence ;  his  activity  or  quiet  submission  to  the  Divine  will ; 
his  work  and  his  worship,  should  boldly  declare  "whose  he  is,  and  whom  he 
serves."  2.  A  second  lesson  taught  us  here  is  one  of  mutual  forbearance.  Though 
all  Christians  are  journeying  to  the  one  place,  there  is  a  wide  diversity  of 
experience,  of  capacity,  of  attainment.  No  two  human  faces  are  alike ;  and  it  may 
be  safely  affirmed  that  no  two  conversions  are  in  all  respects  the  same,  and  no  two 
Christians,  however  close  their  affections  and  sympatliies,  "  grow  in  grace  "  at  the 
same  rate,  or  in  dependence  on  the  same  supplies.  II.  A  powerful  pleading  with 
OTHERS  TO  JOIN  THE  PILGRIM  IN  HIS  PROGRESS.  There  is  a  true  ring  in  these  words. 
Moses  knew  whom  he  had  believed,  and  trusted  his  heavenly  Father  implicitly. 
1.  His  invitation  is  founded  on  the  Divine  precept :  "  The  Lord  hath  said  I  will 
give  it  you."  It  was  a  poor  nomadic  life  after  all — the  tribes  were  living  in  the 
desert — if  there  had  been  no  goal  to  which  their  aspirations  and  their  movements 
tended.  But  the  word  of  the  Lord  was  a  sure  word  on  which  to  hope.  With 
Divine  leadership,  pioneering  and  providing,  defending  and  protectmg,  and  a 
glorious  inheritance  at  the  end  of  the  pilgrimage,  there  was  everything  to  quicken, 
stimulate,  and  strengthen.  Our  condition  is  very  like  theirs,  for  we  have  not  yet 
come  "  to  the  rest  and  the  inheritance  which  God  is  to  give  to  us,"  but  we  are  on 
the  way.  2.  It  is  founded  on  a  rich  promise  :  "  The  Lord  said  I  will  give  it  you," 
and  "  the  Lord  hath  spoken  good  concerning  Israel."  As  God  promised  Canaan  to 
the  tribes,  so  has  "  He  opened  the  kingdom  of  heaven  to  all  believers  "  by  Jesus 
Christ.  What  though  a  wearisome  pilgrimage  lie  between  us  and  the  heavenly 
rest,  though  dangers,  enemies,  fears  manifold,  are  in  the  way,  in  nothing  shall  we 
be  ashamed.  All  good  is  promised  and  not  evil,  what  is  good  for  body  and  soul, 
solid,  enduring  good,  "  the  good  part  that  shall  not  be  taken  away,"  even  when  life 
departs.  Canaan  was  the  ultimate  embodiment  of  that  good  to  ancient  Israel,  as 
heaven  and  eternal  fehcity  with  Christ  are  to  us.  But  those  of  them  that  were 
true  saints  and  pilgrims  would  have  a  foretaste  of  Canaan  beforehand,  as  we  too 
have  of  heaven  upon  earth.  What  was  good  for  Hobab  in  the  wilderness  cannot 
be  bad  for  us  here,  with  heaven  in  reversion.  3.  The  invitation  contains  an 
earnest  persuasive — "Come  with  us."  True  religion  seeks  to  propagate  itself  by 
communicating  its  goodness  to  others.  Persuasion  and  compulsion  are  the  natural 
opposites  of  each  other.  The  one  entices,  allures,  woos,  with  sweet  attention  and 
magnetic  influence  :  the  other  drives  with  mechanical  force.  Persuasion  is  that 
spirit  of  the  gospel  such  as  came  from  the  living  lips  of  Jesus  when  He  said, 
"  Come  unto  Me  and  I  will  give  you  rest  " — that  love  which  many  waters  could  not 
quench,  nor  many  floods  drown.  Who  has  not  heard  the  fable  of  the  sun  and  wind 
striving  which  of  the  two  would  compel  a  traveller  to  put  off  his  cloak,  the  sun 
being  the  victor  ?  Men  will  be  led  when  they  refuse  to  be  driven.  It  is  the  love 
that  plies  persuasions,  strengthened  by  incentives,  and  beautified  by  promises  of 
the  summum  bonum,  the  supreme  good  to  be  got  by  coming  over  the  line  and  coming 
out  from  the  world,  that  conquers.      (/.  Blair.)  The  start  from  Sinai : — I. 

Moses'  proposal.  During  their  stay  at  Sinai,  it  is  probable  that  deputations  from 
neighbouring  tribes  visited  the  people,  and  amongst  them  was  this  chieftain  of  a 
tribe  closely  related  to  Moses  by  marriage.    Hobab,  we  are  told,  was  the  son  of 


^4  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  3U 

Heuel,  the  Midianite,  Moses'  father-in-law.  Of  course,  he  knew  the  country  well, 
every  foot  of  it,  where  the  springs  lay,  and  the  pastures,  and  the  safest,  shortest 
routes,  and  so  Moses  approached  him  with  the  request  that  he  would  go  with  them, 
to  give  thena  the  benefit  of  his  practical  knowledge.  "Leave  us  not,  I  pray  thee, 
iorasmuch  as  thou  knowest  how  we  are  to  encamp  in  the  wilderness,  and  thou 
shalt  be  to  us  instead  of  eyes."  This  request  was,  of  course,  most  natural.  Moses 
■was  a  very  lonely  man,  and  it  was  pleasant  to  have  one,  bound  to  him  by  a  blood 
affinity,  to  unburden  himself  to,  in  any  special  crisis.  At  the  same  time,  it  was  at 
variance  with  the  general  custom,  which  even  then  must  have  commenced  strongly 
to  assert  itself,  of  Israelite  exclusiveness.  There  must  have  been  a  strong  reason 
that  prompted  this  invitation.  And  shall  we  not  dud  it  in  that  instinctive  shrink- 
ing of  the  human  heart  from  the  strange  and  unknown  way?  How  well  to  have  a 
Hobab  who  knows  the  ground  !  We  seek  our  Hobabs  in  the  advice  of  sage,  grey- 
haired  counsellors ;  in  the  formation  of  strong,  intelligent,  and  wealthy  com- 
mittees ;  in  a  careful  observance  of  precedent.  Anything  seems  better  than  a 
simple  reliance  on  an  unseen  guide.  Now,  in  one  sense,  there  is  no  harm  in  this. 
"We  have  neither  right  nor  need  to  cut  ourselves  adrift  from  others,  who  have  had 
special  experience  in  some  new  ground  on  which  we  are  venturing.  God  often 
speaks  to  us  thi'ough  our  fellows ;  they  are  His  ministers  to  us  for  good.  But 
there  is  also  a  great  danger  that  we  should  put  man  before  God ;  and  that  we 
should  so  cling  to  Hobab,  as  to  become  unmindful  of  the  true  Guide  and  Leader  of 
souls.  How  often  God  is  compelled  to  isolate  us  from  human  voices.  II.  The 
FAILURE  OF  HoBAB  AND  THE  DiviNE  SUBSTITUTE.  The  deseit  chicftain  was  by  no 
means  enamoured  of  the  proposal  of  his  great  relative.  Several  considerations 
may  have  weighed  with  him.  It  was  only  a  month  before  that  Aaron  and  his  sons 
had  been  set  apart  for  their  sacred  work,  and  the  fire  of  God  had  fallen  on  their 
dedicatory  sacrifices.  For  some  violation  of  the  sacred  ritual,  for  personal  mis- 
corduct  whilst  engaged  in  their  ministry,  the  two  young  priests  had  been  stricken 
dead,  and  Aaron  forbidden  to  weep.  This  must  have  struck  an  awful  fear  through 
the  camp.  Shortly  after  this  another  incident  occurred.  The  son  of  an  Israelitish 
woman,  whose  father  was  an  Egyptian,  had  blasphemed  the  holy  name  of  God, 
and  cursed  in  the  midst  of  conflict  with  a  man  of  Israel.  The  blasphemer  had 
been  stoned.  The  result  of  it  all  was  that  in  reply  to  Moses'  request,  he  said 
bluntly,  "  I  will  not  go,  but  I  will  depart  unto  mine  own  land  and  to  my  kindred." 
Moses  still  further  entreated  him,  but  whether  he  succeeded  or  not  is  doubtful, 
though  there  are  some  reasons  for  thinking  that  the  second  request  prevailed, 
because  the  descendants  of  the  Kenite  are  numbered  amidst  the  chosen  people. 
But  it  would  seem  as  if  his  aid  was  rendered  needless  by  the  provision  of  guidance 
immediately  promised.  Up  to  this  moment  the  position  of  the  Ark  had  been  in 
the  midst  of  the  host  in  front  of  Ephi'aim,  Benjamin,  and  Manasaeh,  but  hence- 
forth it  went  three  days'  journey  in  front  of  the  people,  "  to  seek  out  a  resting- 
place  for  them."  The  Lord  Himself  had  become  Director  and  Guide,  and  all  that 
Israel  had  to  do  was  to  keep  at  a  distance  siifiliciently  wide  to  enable  them  to  reap 
the  fullest  benefit  of  its  advance  guard.  Thus  God  Himself  superseded  the  pro- 
posal of  Moses  by  an  expedient  which  more  than  met  their  needs.  What  consola- 
tion there  is  to  each  of  us,  in  realising  the  spiritual  truth  underlying  this  historical 
fact !  We  have  to  pass  into  the  untried  and  unknown,  and  know  not  the  way  we 
should  take.  Some  have  to  go  alone.  Some  with  the  memory  of  companions  that 
once  went  at  their  side,  but  whom  they  will  see  no  more  in  this  life.  But  amid  all 
Jesus  is  with  them,  and  goes  before  them,  whether  for  war  or  rest.  He  never  will 
forsake  nor  leave  them.  The  Lord  Jesns  is  the  true  Ark  of  the  Covenant,  who  has 
gone  before  us  through  the  world  and  death,  through  the  grave  and  the  last  rally 
of  the  hosts  of  darkness  to  the  glory.  We  have  but  to  follow  Him.  {F.  B.  Meyer,  B. A.) 
Where  are  you  going  ? — When  friends  and  neighbours  meet  in  the  streets  or  roads, 
the  commonest  question  is,  Where  are  you  going?  All  kinds  of  answers  are 
returned ;  one  is  going  on  an  errand  of  business,  another  of  pleasure ;  one  is 
going  to  wealth  and  success,  another,  with  broken  fortunes  and  blighted  hopes,  is 
going  to  the  grave,  which  holds  all  that  was  most  dear  to  him  on  earth.  "  Where 
are  you  going  ? "  What  wonderful  answers  we  should  get  if  Tve  asked  that 
question  of  the  first  fifty  people  only  whom  we  met  I  But  however  different 
those  replies  would  be,  God's  people  ought  to  be  able  to  give  one  and  the  same 
answer — "  We  are  journeying  unto  the  place  of  which  the  Lord  said,  I  will  give 
it  you."  We  know  not  through  what  dangers,  difficulties,  and  trials ;  we  know 
not  for  how  long  our  journey  shall  be ;  we  know  not  what  will  befall  us  on  the 


CHAP.  X.]  NUMBERS.  85 

way,  but  we  have  set  our  faces  steadfastly  to  go  to  the  promised  land,  to 
Jerusalem,  which  is  above,  to  the  Paradise  of  God,  "  the  place  of  which  the 
Lord  said,  I  will  give  it  you."     (H.   J.   Wilmot-Buxton,   M.A.)  Gospel  invita- 

tions : — A  beautiful  picture  this!  full  of  modern  questioning— a  very  pattern  of 
inquiry  and  invitation  in  a  gospel  sense.  Can  we  honestly  invite  men  to  join 
us  on  our  life-march?  Consider  the  question  well.  Do  not  involve  others  in 
grievous  and  mouinful  responsibilities.  Do  not  entreat  men  to  leave  what  is  to 
them  at  least  a  partial  blessing,  unless  you  are  sure  you  can  replace  that  enjoy- 
ment by  purer  and  larger  gladness.  Can  we  honestly,  with  the  full  consent  of 
judgment,  conscientiousness,  and  experience,  invite  men  to  join  us  in  the  way 
which  we  have  determined  to  take  ?  If  not,  do  not  let  us  add  the  murder  of 
souls  to  our  other  crimes.  Do  not  let  us,  merely  for  the  sake  of  companionship, 
involve  in  ruin  innocent  men.  What  is  our  life-march  ?  To  what  place  are  we 
journeying?  Who  laid  its  foundation?  Who  lighted  its  lamps?  Who  spread 
its  feast  ?  What  is  its  name  ?  Be  careful  how  you  ask  people  to  go  along  with 
you.  First  lay  down  a  basis  of  sound  wisdom.  "  We  are  journeying  unto  the 
place  of  which  the  Lord  said,  I  will  give  it  you."  If  that  be  the  first  sentence,  or 
part  of  it,  the  sentence  may  end  in  the  boldest  invitation  ever  issued  by  love  to  the 
banquet  of  grace  and  wisdom.  But  let  us  have  no  adventuring,  no  foolish  or 
frivolous  speculation  in  life  ;  let  us  speak  from  the  citadel  of  conviction  and  from 
the  sanctuary  of  assured  religious  confidence.  Have  we  such  a  view  of  the  end  as 
may  make  us  independent  of  immediate  trials  ?  When  we  invite  men  to  join  us 
on  the  Christian  pilgrimage,  it  must  be  on  the  distinct  understanding  that  we  are 
ruling  the  present  by  the  future.  This  is  precisely  the  logic  of  Moses  :  "  We  are 
journeying  unto  the  place."  The  end  was  indicated — the  goal,  the  destiny  of  the 
march ;  and  that  was  so  bright,  so  alluring,  so  glowing  with  all  hospitable  colour, 
that  Moses  did  not  see  that  to-morrow  there  was  to  be  a  battle,  or  seeing  it,  already 
passed  the  warfield  like  a  victor.  We  must  draw  ourselves  forward  by  taking  firm 
hold  of  the  end — in  other  words,  we  must  have  such  a  conception  of  life's  destiny 
as  will  invigorate  every  noble  motive,  btir  every  sacred  passion,  and  make  us  more 
than  conquerors  in  all  war  and  conflict.  This  was  the  reasoning  of  Moses,  this 
was  the  reasoning  of  Paul,  this  was  the  practice  of  Christ ;  and  we  are  not  yet 
advanced  enough  in  true  wisdom  to  modify  the  terms  or  readjust  and  redistribute 
the  conditions.  Moses  did  not  invite  Hobab  to  join  merely  for  the  sake  of  being 
in  the  company ;  he  expected  service  from  Hobab,  the  son  of  Eaguel  the  Midianite. 
He  said,  Thou  knowest  the  ground  so  well  that  thy  presence  will  be  of  service  to 
us  ;  experience  will  assist  devotion  ;  we  are  willing  to  march  ;  we  know  nothing  of 
the  processes  of  the  way ;  thou  understandest  the  whole  country ;  come  with 
us  and  be  as  eyes  unto  us.  Moses  showed  leadership  even  there ;  it  was  the 
invitation  of  a  soldier  and  a  legislator  and  a  wise  man.  Eyes  are  of  inex- 
pressible value  in  the  whole  conduct  of  life  ;  to  be  able  to  see,  to  take 
note  of,  to  recognise  —  the  man  who  can  do  this  is  rendering  service  to  the 
whole  Church.  So  we  invite  men  to  come  with  us  that  they  may  render 
service  according  to  their  opportunity  and  capacity.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 
An  invitation  to  Christian  fellowship  : — I.  As  a  certain  Scriptukal  duty.  Every 
reasonable  person,  conscious  of  accountability  to  God,  will  seriously  inquire.  What 
is  the  duty  enjoined  upon  me  by  my  Creator,  my  Redeemer,  and  my  Judge  ?  To 
the  Bible  we  therefore  appeal,  while  considering  the  subject  of  fellowship  with 
Christ's  followers.  1.  That  it  is  our  duty  fully  to  unite  with  Christians  is  evident 
from  the  Scriptural  representations  of  the  followers  of  Christ.  Among  the  instruct- 
ive representations  which  clearly  imply  their  union  is  that  of  a  house  or  building 
(1  Cor.  iii.  9,  11).  In  a  building,  the  foundation  and  the  otiier  various  necessary 
parts  are  united,  in  order  to  form  a  useful  edifice :  and  Christians  are  built  upou 
Christ,  and  united  to  each  other,  "  as  Uvely  stones,  built  up  a  spiritual  house  " 
(1  Peter  ii.  5).  Christ's  followers  are  next  set  forth  as  a  household,  a  united 
family.  They  are  designated  "  the  household  of  faith  "  (Gal.  vi.  10),  "the  house- 
hold of  God"  (Eph.  ii.  19),  and  "the  house  of  God,"'  in  which  Paul  taught 
Timothy  "  how  to  behave  "  (1  Tim.  iii.  15).  Christians  are  also  represented  as 
*'one  body  in  Christ,  and  every  one  members  one  of  another"  (Kom.  xii.  5).  They 
♦'are  the  body  of  Christ,  and  members  in  particular"  (1  C^r.  xii.  27).  2.  The 
certain  duty  of  full  union  with  Christians  is  clearly  taught  by  the  Scriptural  history 
of  Christ's  followers.  It  is  evident  from  this  record  tliat  when  persons  received 
Christ  as  their  Saviour  they  embraced  His  people  as  their  people.  They  gave 
themselves  first  to  Him,  and  then  to  His  followers  according  to  His  will  (2  Cor.  viii. 


86  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x.  ■ 

5).  When  Saul  of  Tarsus  was  converted,  he  appears  to  have  thouf^ht  joining  the 
united  Christians  as  certainly  his  duty,  as  trusting  in  Christ  their  Saviour.  "  He 
not  only  preached  boldly  at  Damascus  in  the  name  of  Jesus,"  but  on  coming  to 
Jerusalem,  where  there  was  a  Christian  Society,  he  at  once  "  essayed  to  join  himself 
to  the  disciples,"  who  were  afraid  to  receive  him,  until  Barnabas  testified  that  he 
had  become  a  Christian.  This  narrated  conduct  of  inspired  men  clearly  teaches 
that  Christian  fellowship  ought  to  be  sought  and  manifested  by  all  professing 
Christians.  3.  The  Scriptural  obligations  of  Christ's  followers  certainly  imply  the 
public  union  of  those  who  bear  His  name.  (1)  Our  solemn  obligation  to  confess 
Christ  before  men  cannot  be  fully  discharged  unless  we  are  publicly  identified  with 
His  disciples,  and  thus  share  His  reproach  and  His  honour.  His  pain  and  His 
pleasure.  (2)  The  obligations  which  we  owe  to  ourselves  cannot  be  fulfilled  without 
union  with  Christ's  followers.  The  blessings  of  salvation  are  freely  offered  in  the 
gospel ;  but  experience  and  observation  assure  us  that  they  can  neither  be  fully 
obtained,  nor  long  retained,  without  feUowship  with  those  who  would  assist  us  to 
secure  their  enjoyment.  And  even  where  a  most  promising  state  of  grace  has  been 
manifested,  if  persons  have  "  forsaken  the  assembling  of  themselves  together  "  in 
Chiistian  communion,  the  blooming  work  has  been  blasted,  the  heavenly  offspring 
has  been  destroyed,  and  the  hopes  of  the  Church  have  been  painfully  disappointed. 
Numerous  facts,  doubtless,  caused  Mr.  Whitefield  to  remark : — "  My  brother  Wesley 
acted  wisely.  The  souls  that  were  awakened  under  his  ministry  he  joined  in  class, 
and  thus  preserved  the  fruits  of  his  labour.  This  I  neglected,  and  my  people  are  a 
rope  of  sand."  (3)  The  obligations  which  Christians  owe  to  each  other  cannot  be 
observed  without  the  fellowship  of  which  we  speak.  Christ's  disciples  are  required 
to  have  the  same  care  one  for  another  (1  Cor.  xii.  25) ;  to  rejoice  with  those  who 
rejoice,  and  weep  with  those  who  weep  (Rom.  xii.  15,  16) ;  to  bear  each  other's 
burdens  (Gal.  vi.  2)  ;  to  walk  in  love  as  Christ  has  loved  them  (Eph.  v.  2) ;  to  be 
like-minded  (Phil.  ii.  2) ;  to  teach  and  admonish  one  another  in  psalms  and  hymns 
and  spiritual  songs  (Col.  iii.  16).  How  is  it  possible,  without  public,  intimate,  and 
frequent  fellowship,  to  discharge  these  enjoined,  mutual  duties  ?  (4)  The  obliga- 
tions which  Christians  owe  to  the  world  cannot  be  performed  without  our  public 
union.  How  can  true  Christian  ministers  be  raised,  and  called,  and  sent  forth  by 
means  of  Christian  Churches,  unless  such  Churches  are  formed?  If  Christians 
really  stand  forth  as  Christ's  chosen  witnesses,  and  go  forth  as  His  servants  to 
claim  and  save  the  world,  they  must  unite  for  the  accomplishment  of  these  objects. 
II.  Highly  advantageous.  1.  This  union  raises  us  to  fellowship  with  the  best  of 
society.  2.  Public  union  with  Christ's  followers  would  prove  a  powerful  preserva- 
tive from  sin.  3.  The  union  of  which  we  speak  would  furnish  you  with  a  most 
desirable  sphere  of  usefulness.  This  powerful  motive  was  presented  to  Hobab 
when  Moses  showed  the  individual  assistance  which  he  might  afford  for  the  general 
good  (ver.  31).  Every  rightly-disposed  person  will  not  live  to  please  or  serve  him- 
self merely ;  but,  seeking  God's  honour,  and  using  his  influeuce  for  the  benefit  of 
his  generation,  will  hail  with  gladness  the  facilities  for  increased  usefulness  which 
may  be  presented  in  connection  with  Christ's  active  followers.  4.  Cliristian  union 
would  entitle  you  to  an  interest  in  the  special  prayers  of  Christ  and  His  followers. 
5.  Communion  with  Christians  will  be  attended  with  a  share  in  Christ's  most 
gracious  regard.  We  do  not  say  that  this  Christian  union  will  ensure  heaven;  but 
we  do  affirm  that  if  you  truly  trust  in  Christ,  and  are  united  in  His  name,  you 
will  have  such  an  interest  in  His  regard  as  no  individual  who  neglects  thus  to 
profess  Him  can  Scripturally  claim.  Christ  is  not  only  round  about  His  united 
Churches,  but  the  glory  in  the  midst  of  them  (Zech.  ii.  6;  Psa.  xlvi.  5;  Isa.  xii.  6). 
They  are,  and  ever  will  be,  favoured  with  His  most  gracious  presence.  III. 
Earnestly  invite  you  to  full  fellowship  with  Cuiiisx's  followers.  "Come 
thou  with  us,  and  we  will  do  thee  good."  1.  Abandon  forbid'lcn  fellowship  with 
sinners.  These  will  soon  perish  in  their  sins.  Separate  yourself,  therefore,  from 
them,  that  you  perish  not  m  their  company  (chap.  xvi.  26).  2.  Let  all  sin,  as  well 
as  the  companv  of  sinners,  be  forsaken.  I3e  not  an  Achan  in  the  camp,  nor  a 
Simon  in  a  Christian  society ;  but  let  your  hands  be  clean,  and  your  heart  right  in 
the  sight  of  God.  Thus  guard  against  substituting  a  religious  profession  for  inward 
and  outward  holiness.  3.  As  God's  unworthy  servants,  and  relying  upon  His 
promised  grace,  we  engage  to  do  you  good.  How  many  in  that  glorious  multitude 
have  received  good  in  our  connection  ?  4.  This  invitation  is  given,  and  thirf 
promise  is  made,  personally.  "Come  thou  with  us,  and  we  will  do  thee  good." 
We  invite  you  who  are  more  learned  than  most  persons,  having  enjoyed  superior 


CHAP.  X.]  NU3IBERS.  87 

advantages.     Be  to  others  what  Hobab  was  to  Israel,  "  instead  of  eyes."     You  who 
are  not   so   learned  as   others,    but  whose  attainments  are  painfully  limited,  we 
do  not  despise.     Be  not  proudly  ashamed  because  you  are  not  so  well  informed, 
and  so  able  to  speak,  as  many  with  whom  you  are  invited  to  unite.     To  you  who 
are  rich,  and  increased  in  earthly  goods,  we  say,  Come  with  us,  and  we  will  do  you 
good.     Perhaps  you  are  tempted  to  look  upon  the  poor  in  our  societies,  and  then 
around  you  in  the  circle  of  respectable  worldly  persons  who  are  your  equals,  and 
your  natural  heart  may  suggest,  "  I  cannot  associate  and  be  one  with  those  poor 
persons,  and  thus  sink  in  public  estimation,  and  sacrifice  opportunities  of  still 
rising  in  society."    Before  you  yield  to  such  suggestions,  remember  Him  who  was 
surrounded  by  heaven's  highest  inhabitants,  and  receiving  their  loudest  praises ; 
yet  He  stooped,  and  for  your  sake  became  poor,  that  you  through  His  poverty  might 
be  rich  (2  Cor.  viii.  9).     From  the  poor  in  this  world  we  turn  not  away,  but  offer 
you  the  right  hand  of  fellowship.     You  have  no  place  among  the  children  of  rich 
men,  but  you  may  have  a  place  among  God's  children.     To  the  aged,  pained  by 
the  past,  and  dreading  the  future,  we  respectfully  say,  "  Come  thou  with  us,  and  we 
•will  do  thee  good."     Oh,  that  you  had  come  sooner,  tbat  you  might  have  done  good 
as  well  as  received  good  !     But  come  now.     Eud  your  days  in  the  Christian  fold. 
Pinish  life  with  Christians  and  as  a  Christian.     With  one  accord  our  language  is, 
*'We  are  journeying  unto  the  place  of  which  the  Lord  hath  said,  I  will  give  it 
you."     The  inheritance  is  sufficient  for  all.     It  is  offered  to  all.      Part  of   our 
company  have  entered  that  better  country,  and  are  now  before  the  throne.     With 
this  fixed  purpose  to  "travel  to  the  mount  of  God  "  ourselves,  and  with  the  prospect 
of  there  joining  the  general  assembly  and  Church  of  the  first-born,  whom  shall  we  pass 
and  leave  behind  to  perish?  {Wriglit  Shovelton.)       GocVs  goodness  to  Hispeople : — A 
German,  converted  at  one  of  the  military  stations  in  America,  seemed  overwhelmed 
with  surprise  and  gladness  as  he  contemplated  God's  gracious  goodness  to  him. 
He  was  overheard  one  day  praying,  "  0  Lord  Jesus,  I  didn't  know  you  were  so 
good."         The  solicitude  of  the  godly  : — I  have  seen  birds  sitting  on  the  boughs  and 
watching  while  other  birds  were  feeding  below.     They  would  hop  from  twig  to  twig, 
and  look  wistfully  down  upon  them ;  then,  gathering  courage,  they  would  spring 
fropi  their  perch  and  back  again,  and  finding  that  it  did  not  hurt  them,  they  would 
at  last  join  the  outmost  circle,  and  feed  with  the  others.     How  many  faces  I  have 
seen  in  these  galleries,  wearing  a  wistful  look  as  they  gazed  down  upon  us  while  we 
were  celebrating  this  onlinance  of  communion.     May  God  give  all  such  wings,  that 
they  mav  fly  down  and  be  among  His  people,  and  partake  with  them  of  heavenly 
food!     {H.  IV.  Beecher.)         The  beginning  of  the  heavenly  journey  : — Some  who  see 
men  hurrying  along  at  noon  towards  the  various  prayer-meetings,  say,  "  It's  a  fever 
which  must  have  its  way,  and  then  it  will  subside."     They  see  a  young  man  going 
to  the  meeting,  and  think  it  nothing  to  excite  interest.     They  do  not  know  that  that 
joung  man  had  come  up  to  a  point  where,  if  nothing  had  occurred  to  save  him,  he 
would  have  been  bound  over  to  destruction  at  the  very  next  step.     They  do  not  see, 
in  some  far-distant  village,  the  mother  or  the  sister  praying  and  weeping  for  him — 
no  sound  of  a  father's  groan  is  heard — none  of  these  things ;  the  petitions  that  for 
years  have  assailed  the  heavens,  both  day  and  night,  do  not  cling  about  the  youth 
as  he  walks  the  street ;  but  that  prayer-meetiug  God  made  to  answer  the  desire  of 
the  parents,  and  to  bring  salvation  to  the  son.     And  eternity  will  show  that  the 
young  man's  walking  towards  that  place  of  prayer  was  the  beginning  of  his  march 
to  heaven.     (Ibid.)        Preparing  for  the  journey  : — Apoor  blacksmith,  bending  with 
age  and  weakness,  was  passing  through  a  country  village :  he  stopped  at  a  good 
woman's  cottage,  and  rested  himself  on  the  railing  before  the  door.     The  pious 
dame  came  out,  and  the  weary  traveller  remarked  that  his  time  here  would  be 
short;  he  was  always  ailing:  he  added,  "Ah,  Nanny!     I  sha  I't  be  long  for  this 
world,  I  reckon  !  "     She  thought  of  his  words,  and  replied,  "  Well,  John,  then  I 
hope  you'll  prepare  for  your  journey !  "     The  blacksmith  passed  on,  and  his  call 
was  soon  forgotten  by  Nanny ;  but  that  simple  sentence  was  impressed  on  his 
memory  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  never  to  be  erased.     He  pondered  it  while  walking 
home,  and  soon  consumption  laid  him  on  a  bed  of  pain.     Again  and  again  did  he 
think  about  "  the  journey,"  and  about  being  "  prepared"  for  it.     He  began  to  pray, 
and  all  around  him  were  continually  hearing  the  old  woman's  advice.      No  pious 
friends  were  near  to  converse  with  him,  but  it  is  confidently  believed  that  the  aged 
sinner  was  led  to  look  to  the  Saviour  through  the  simple  incident  related  above. 
Almost  his  last  breath  was  spent  in  thanking  God  that  the  good  old  woman  ever 
warned  him.     {Christian  Miscellany .)  Rejoicing  in  the  promises  : — I  went  to  see 


83  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  x. 

a  dear  aged  Christian  woman  who  is  a  member  of  the  Church  of  which  I  am  the 
pastor.  Slie  was  lying  physically  helpless,  but  no  one  had  called  to  light  the  fire 
that  day  ;  the  black  grate  with  the  whitish-grey  ash  of  yesterday's  fiie  still  in  it 
made  the  room  look  desolate  and  cold.  Turning  towards  the  bed,  I  saw  that  the 
dear  child  of  God  was  weeping,  and  thought  it  was  from  hunger  and  loneliness; 
but  I  was  mistaken,  for  she  had  spent  the  morning  reading  the  precious  promises 
of  God,  thus  forgetting  all  earthly  considerations  in  looking  forward  to  the  bright 
hereafter.  "Oh,"  she  said  in  her  Scotch  way,  "I  can  soop  (sweep)  them  (the 
promises)  up  like  diamonds."     (J.  Munro.) 

Vers.  35,  36.  Wlien  the  ark  set  forward  .  .  .  and  when  it  rested. — The  march  : — 
I.  This  has  been   the   watchword  of  the   Chukch  of  God   in   all  ages.      The 
people  of  God  in  the  wilderness  were  the  picture  of  God's  Church  upon  earth. 
We  are  strangers  and  foreigners  upon  the  eanh.     Albeit  that  they  had  no  habita- 
tion except  their  tents,  yet  it  is  true  of  Israel  in  the  wilderness  that  they  always 
had  an  habitation.     Do  you  not  remember  the  song  of  Moses  : — "  Lord,  Thou  hast 
been  our  dwelling-place  in  all  generations."     Wherever  they  were,  God  was  their 
dwelling-place.     This,  too,  is  true  of  the  entire  Church ;  always  wandering,  yet 
never  far  from  home ;  unhoused,   yet   always   in   palaces ;  sometimes   destitute, 
afflicted,  tormented,  and  yet  always  clothed,  always  rich,  always  feasting  to  the 
full ;  deserted,  yet  not  alone  ;  forsaken,  yet  multiplied  ;  left,  yet  still  abiding  with 
Him  that  filleth  all  in  all.     We  might  carry  the  parallel  out  still  further,  but  it  is 
enough  to  remark  that,  in  another  point,  the  people  of  God  in  the  wilderness  were 
the  picture  of  the  Church  of  Christ.     Wherever  they  marched,  when  God  went 
before  them,  they  marched  to  victory.     Even  so  hath  it  been  with  the  Church  of 
God  in  all  ages ;  her  march  has  been  that  of  one  who  is  fair  as  the  moon,  clear  as 
the  sun,  and  terrible  as  an  army  with  banners.     Let  but  her  silvery  trumpet  sound, 
and  the  echo  shakes  the  vaults  of  hell.     Let   but  her  warriors   unsheath  theu' 
sword,  and  their  enemies  fly  before  them  like  the  thin  clouds  before  a  Biscay  gale. 
Her  path  is  the  pathway  of   a  conqueror  :  her  march  has  been  a  procession  of 
triumph.     Wherever  she  hath  put  her  foot,  the  Lord  hath  given  her  that  land  to  be 
her  heritage  for  ever.     Now,  let  me  show  how  this  war-cry  has  really  been  heard  of 
God  and  has  been  fulfilled  to  all  His  people.     Turn  ye  to  this  book,  this  book  of  the 
wars  of  the  Lord.     Wherever  His  Church  has  gone  and  He  has  risen  up,  have  not 
His  enemies  been  scattered  ?     Methinks,  in  a  spiritual  sense,  when  Luther  first 
bowed  his  knee,  the  Church  began  to  chant,  "Let  God  arise,  and  let  His  enemies  be 
scattered."     When  Knox  in  Scotland  upheld  the  glory  of  Jesus'  name,  was  it  not 
once  again,  "0  God  arise,  let  them  that  hate  Thee  flee  before  Thee"?     Whei> 
AVhitetield  and  Wesley,  seraphic  evangelists  of  Jesus  Christ,  went  through  this  land, 
was  not  this  the  very  song  of  Israel,  "  O  God,  arise,  and  let  Thine  enemies  be  scat- 
tered "?     And  shall  it  not  be  ours  to-day  ?     Let  but  God  go  forth  with  our  arms  ; 
let  Him  but  speak  through  our  ministers  ;  let  Him  but  dwell  in  our  elders  ;  let  Him 
but  make  the  bodies  of  our  Church-members  His  temples,  and  His  enemies  must  be 
scattered,  and  they  must  consume  away.     I  can  well  conceive  that  such  a  prayer  as- 
this  well  befits  the  tongue  of  a  minister  who  lands  as  the  first  herald  of  the  Cross  in 
some  barbarian  land.     Those  brave  men  who  risk  all  for  Christ,  not  counting  their 
lives  dear  unto  them  that  they  might  finish  their  course  with  joy — methinks  when 
they  as  pioneers  for  Christ  bear  the  ark  in  the  midst  of  the  wilderness,  they  could 
not  breathe  a  better  prayer  for  themselves,  and  you  and  I  cannot  do  belter  than  put 
it  up  for  them  now,  "  Else  up.  Lord,  and  let  Thine  enemies  be  scattered  ;  let  them 
that  hate  Thee  flee  before  Thee."    II.  Now  take  the  text  in  its  reference  to- 
Christ.     Ah !  methinks  the  sorrowing  Church,  when  they  beheld  their  Lord  dragged 
by  cruel  men  to  judgment,  when  they  heard  Him  accused  and  slandered,  when  they 
saw  Him  mocked  and  spit  upon,  must  have  considered  the  battle  to  be  a  defeat.  The 
tears  must  have  stood  in  their  eyes  when  they  saw  that  He  who  was  to  be  the 
Deliverer  of  Israel  could  not  dehver  Himself.  Was  it  not  the  day  of  hell's  triumph, 
the  hour  of  earth's  despair,  the  moment  of  heaven's  defeat  ?    No ;  it  was  the  reverse 
of  all  this.     That  moment  when  Christ  died.  He  gave  the  death-blow  to  all  His 
enemies.     Even  when  the  Master  was  laid  in  the  tomb,  and  had  to  sleep  there  His 
three  days  as  Jonah  in  the  whale's  belly,  if  the  Church  had  had  faith,  they  might 
have  come  early  on  the  dawn  of  the  first  day  in  the  week,  and  standing  out- 
side the  tomb,  they  might  have  begun  to  sing,  "Rise  up,  Lord,  and  let  Thine 
enemies  be  scattered,  and  let  them  that  hate  Thee  flee  before  Thee."     III.  What 

MESSAGE  HAS   THIS   TEXT  FOB  DS,  AND  HOW  MAY  WE  D8E  IT?       "  Eise  Up,  Lord  !       0  God 


CHAP.  X.]  NUMBERS.  89 

the  Father,  rise  up  !  Let  Thy  purposes  be  accompUshed  !  O  God  the  Son,  rise  up  ; 
show  Thy  wounds,  and  plead  before  Thy  Father's  face,  and  let  Thy  blood-bought 
ones  be  saved !  Eise  up,  0  God  the  Holy  Ghost,  with  solemn  awe,  we  do  invoke 
Thee  !  Let  those  that  have  resisted  Thee  give  way  !  Come,  Thou,  melt  TIjou  the 
ice  ;  dissolve  the  granite  ;  let  the  adamantine  heart  give  way  ;  cut  Thou  the  iron 
sinew  and  bow  Thou  the  stiff  neck  !  Eise  up.  Lord,  Father,  Son,  and  Spirit,  we 
can  do  nothing  without  Thee ;  but  if  Thou  wilt  arise.  Thine  enemies  shall  be 
scattered,  and  they  that  hate  Thee  shall  flee  before  Thee."  Will  you  and  I 
go  home  and  pray  this  prayer  by  ourselves,  fervently  laying  hold  upon  the  horns 
of  God's  altar  ?  I  charge  you  do  not  neglect  this  private  duty.  Pray  for  your 
children,  your  neighbours,  your  families,  and  your  friends,  and  let  your  prayer  be^ 
"  Eise  up.  Lord  ;  rise  up,  Lord."  Pray  for  this  neighbourhood  ;  pray  for  the  dense 
darkness  of  Southwark,  and  Walworth,  and  Lambeth.  And  oh  !  if  you  cannot  pray 
for  others  because  your  own  needs  come  so  strongly  before  your  mind,  remember, 
sinner,  all  thou  needest  is  by  faith  to  look  to  Christ,  and  then  thou  mayest  say, 
"  Eise  up,  Lord  ;  scatter  my  doubts ;  kill  ray  unbelief ;  drown  ray  sins  in  Thy  blood ; 
let  these  Thine  enemies  be  scattered;  let  them  that  hate  Thee  flee  before  Thee." 
(C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  Church  in  motion  and  at  rest  .-—I.  The  Church  in  motion, 
the  Church  militant.  1.  This  camp  composed  of  Israel,  is  distinguished  from  the 
enemies  around  it.  Though  we  are  in  the  world,  we  are  not  to  be  of  the  world  ; 
though  we  are  surrounded  with  Anakims  and  Canaanites,  we  are  still  to  maintain 
the  purity  of  the  visible  Israel  of  God,  our  being  upon  the  march  is  a  circumstance 
calculated  to  hinder  the  ungodly  from  joining  us  to  a  great  degree.  2.  It  is  marching 
through  a  wilderness  of  woe  to  a  land  of  promise.  Is  their  way  long?  Is  their 
journey  weary  ?  Are  their  trials  great  ?  Are  their  enemies  numerous  ?  Do  they 
often  halt,  and  think  they  are  upon  the  verge  of  Canaan,  and  that  the  next  mandate 
of  their  Sovereign  will  be  to  enter  in ;  and  are  they  disappointed  by  finding  that 
there  are  many  other  halting  places,  and  many  a  weary  journey  lying  between  them 
and  the  Canaan  of  their  rest  ?  Yet  are  they  moving  towai  d  it — at  last  the  command 
will  be  heard  by  this  individual,  and  the  other  tribe,  to  cease  their  wanderings,  and 
to  enter  into  glorious  and  eternal  rest.  3.  It  is  under  the  guidance  of  the  Mediator. 
It  is  certainly  not  worse  off  now  than  it  was  then.  Christ  is  our  Guide.  4.  When 
His  Church  moves  forward,  God  rises  up  on  its  behalf.  Every  progressive  move- 
ment of  the  Church  of  Christ,  as  well  as  of  the  individuals  who  compose  it,  is,  in 
fact,  directed  and  dictated  by  the  Spirit  of  God.  5.  The  movement  of  the  Church 
ought  to  be  always,  and  upon  the  whole,  progressive.  6.  This  progress  will  aud 
must  be  attended  with  the  defeat  of  the  Church's  enemies.  We  can  win  no  ground 
except  we  win  it  from  the  foe  ;  we  cannot  advance  a  single  footstep  in  our  onward 
journey  except  as  we  beat  our  enemies  back.  7.  The  Church's  triumphant  march 
shall  end  in  the  complete  destruction  of  all  the  enemies  of  God.  II.  The  Church 
AT  KEST.  We  have  seen  it  moving  forward  to  that  rest,  and  we  have  noticed  that  it 
sometimes  enjoys  temporary  seasons  of  refreshment  by  the  way,  in  different  halting- 
places  as  it  passes  through  the  wilderness  ;  and  experiences  the  Divine  protection 
and  liireetion.  But  this  rest  is  only  tasted  here  below,  and  the  foretaste  of  it  is  but 
designed  to  quicken  the  appetite  of  the  people  of  God  for  their  rest  in  glory.  1.  As 
one  feature  of  that  rest,  we  observe,  that  there  the  true  Israel  shall  be  recognised, 
and  the  words  shall  be  heard  circulating  through  the  happy  host,  "Eeturn,  OLord, 
unxo  the  many  thousands  of  Israel."  There,  notwithstanding  their  multitudes,  not 
one  intruder  shall  be  found  to  have  entered  in  ;  there  nothing  .^hall  enter  that  will 
destroy  or  that  will  even  disturb  in  all  God's  holy  mountain.  However  the  mixed 
multitude  may  accompany  us  by  the  way,  there  must  be  a  separation  at  the  Jordan 
of  death.  2.  At  that  glorious  period  the  Israel  of  God  shall  consist  of  thousands  and 
thousands.  3.  They  shall  then  have  triumphed  gloriously.  Enemies  no  more  shall 
trouble  them  ;  the  sound  of  war  shall  be  a  sound  unheard  ;  there  shall  be  no  more 
conflict  with  temptation,  no  more  struggles  with  indwelling  sin.  Oh,  to  think  of 
Canaan's  rest  only  in  this  point  of  view  !  Believer,  what  a  happy,  what  a  heavenly 
rest  it  will  be!  (W.  H.  Cooper.)  Moses'  prayer: — Moses,  the  mouth  of  the 
congregation,  lifts  up  a  prayer,  both  at  the  removing  and  at  the  resting  of  the  ark. 
Thus  their  going  out  and  coming  in  were  sanctified  by  prayer ;  and  it  is  an  example 
to  us  to  begin  and  end  every  day's  journey,  and  every  day's  work  with  prayer.  1. 
Here  is  his  prayer  when  the  ark  set  forward  :  "  Eise  up,  Lord,  and  let  Thine  enemies 
be  scattered "  (ver.  35).  They  were  now  in  a  desolate  country,  but  they  were 
marching  towards  an  enemy's  country ;  and  their  dependence  was  upon  God  for 
success  and  victory  in  their  wars,  as  well  as  for  directions  and  supply  in  the  wilder- 


90  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  z. 

ness,  David  used  this  prayer  long  after  (Psa.  Ixviii.  1) ;  for  hie  also  fought  the 
Lord's  battles.  Note — (1)  There  are  those  in  the  world  that  are  enemies  to  God, 
and  haters  of  Him.  Secret  and  open  enemies  ;  enemies  to  His  truths,  His  laws, 
His  ordinances,  His  people.  (2)  The  scattering  and  defeating  of  God's  enemies  is 
a  thing  to  be  earnestly  desired  and  believingly  expected  by  all  the  Lord's  people. 
This  prayer  is  a  prophecy.  Those  that  persist  in  rebellion  against  God  are  hastening 
towards  their  own  ruin.  (3)  For  the  scattering  and  defeating  of  God's  enemies,  there 
needs  no  more  but  God's  arising.  When  God  arose  to  judgment,  the  work  was  soon 
done  (Psa.  Ixxvi.  8,  9).  "Eise,  Lord,  as  the  sun  riseth  to  scatter  tiae  shadows  of  the 
night."  Christ  rising  from  the  dead  scattereth  His  enemies  (Psa.  Ixviii.  18).  2. 
His  prayer  when  the  ark  rested  (ver.  36).  (1)  That  God  would  cause  His  people  to 
rest.  So  some  read  it,  "  Return,  0  Lord,  the  many  thousands  of  Israel ;  return 
them  to  their  rest  again  after  this  fatigue."  Thus  it  is  said,  "The  Spirit  of  the 
Lord  caused  him  to  rest  "  (Isa.  Ixiii.  14).  Thus  he  prays  that  God  would  give  Israel 
success  and  victory  abroad,  and  peace  and  tranquility  at  home.  (2)  That  God  Him- 
self would  take  up  His  rest  among  them.  So  we  read  it,  "  Eeturn  to  the  thousands 
of  Israel";  the  ten  thousand  thousand,  so  the  word  is.  Note — 1.  The  Church  of  God  is 
a  great  body ;  there  are  many  thousands  belonging  to  God's  Israel.  2.  We  ought  in  our 
prayers  to  concern  ourselves  for  this  body.  8.  The  welfare  and  happiness  of  tbe 
Israel  of  God  consists  in  the  remaining  presence  of  God  among  them.  (Matthew  Ilenrxj, 
D.D.)  Protection  and  peace  : — There  are  here  two  prayers  for  different  occasions : 
one  for  active  life,  the  other  for  quiet  rest.  In  both  cases  they  are  suitable  and 
blessed.  I.  We  have  God  fighting  our  battles.  His  enemies  are  ours,  and  He 
will  indentify  our  struggles  with  His  :  1.  So  far  as  we  are  going  in  the  way  of  His 
commands.  2.  So  far  as  our  actions  are  indentified  with  His  will.  If  we  are 
fighting  for  our  own  will,  our  own  ambition,  our  own  ideas,  we  cannot  say,  "  Scatter 
Thy  enemies."  II.  We  have  God  protecting  our  periods  of  rest.  1.  "  He 
slumbereth  not  nor  sleepeth,"  and  "  to  Him  the  darkness  is  as  the  day."  2.  He 
never  wearies  nor  is  tired  ;  hence  there  is  nothing  to  hinder  or  prevent  His  con- 
stant care.  (Homilist.)  The  Church  and  its  enemies  : — I.  The  Church  of  God 
has  had  enemies  in  every  age.  This  is  accounted  for  by — 1.  The  favours  they 
received.  God  has  set  His  heart  upon  His  people.  This  creates  envy,  which 
soon  grows  into  opposition  and  misdiief.  2.  The  principles  they  professed.  3.  The 
expectations  they  cherished.      II.  The  enemies  op  the  Church  are  considered 

THE  ENEMIES  OF  GoD.  III.  WhEN  GoD  RISES  UP  TO  JUDGMENT,  THE  DESTRUCTION 
OF    His   ENEMIES   IS    EASY,    TERRIBLE,    AND    COMPLETE.        IV.     ThE    CONSTANT   ABODE    OF 

God  WITH  His  Church  is  an  object  of  their  supreme  desire.  1.  Let  us  learn 
from  this  passage  the  condescension  and  grace  of  God,  in  that  He  will  dwell  with 
us.  2.  Let  each  of  us  inquire  whether  we  are  amongst  the  many  thousands  of 
Israel.  3.  What  comfort  should  this  give  to  the  Church  amidst  her  many  trials. 
4.  This  subject  affords  to  the  enemies  of  the  Church  a  motive  for  seeking 
reconciliation  with  God.  [G.  Clayton,  M.A.)  The  true  soldier's  convoij  :—I.  God 
Himself  hath  many  enemies.  II.  As  God  hath  enemies,  so  sometimes  He 
sleepeth  to  all  their   enmity.     III.    Though    God    sleepeth    and    they  work, 

TEX  THERE  IS  A  TIME  WHEN  THEY  SHALL  BE  SCAT  PERED  ;  AND  WHEN  GoD  ARISETH 
THEY  ARE  SCATTERED.  IV.  OUR  PRAYERS  AWAKEN  GoD.  V.  WhEN  THE  PEOPLE  OF 
THE    LAND   GO    FORTH   TO    WAU,    God's     PEOPLE     SHOULD     GO     FORTH     TO     PRAYER.       (W. 

Budfie,  M.A.)  The   risinff   and  the   restinij  prayer: — I.    The    rising   prayer. 

Here  is  confession,  that  Israel's  onward  path  was  thronged  with  foes.  It  is  so 
still,  and  so  will  always  be.  There  is  no  hour  when  sword  and  shield  may  hang 
unnfed.  Next  Moses  feels  that  his  own  might  is  nought ;  vain  are  his  counsels, 
powerless  is  his  arm.  Therefore  to  God  he  flees.  "Rise  up,  Lord."  So  now,  if 
God's  right  hand  be  not  our  help  the  tide  of  foes  must  bear  us  down.  But  God  is 
moved  by  importunities  of  faith.  "  Rise  up.  Lord,"  is  a  cry  which  brings  all  heaven 
to  aid.  It  puts  sure  victory  on  the  wing.  Observe  here  how  the  prayer  of  faith 
yearns  for  God's  glory.  "  Let  Thine  enemies  be  scattered."  These  enemies  hate 
God.  They  would  impede  the  progress  of  His  truth.  They  would  extinguish  His 
Word's  light.  They  would  cast  down  His  righteous  rule.  Can  faith  sit  still  and  see 
Him  thus  dethroned  ?  Oh,  no !  It  agonises  with  desire  that  He  would  vimiicate 
His  holy  cause,  uphold  His  honour,  and  add  trophies  to  His  name.  "  Rise  up. 
Lord,  and  let  ihe  a  that  hate  Thee  flee  before  Tliee."  II.  The  resting  prayer. 
The  going  fortn  would  have  been  ruin  except  the  Lord  moved  in  the  front. 
The  rest  will  be  no  rest  unless  the  Lord  return  Prayer  called  Him  to 
precede    their    steps.      Prayer   calls    Him  tc   abide    around   their    resting  tents. 


CHAP.  X.]  LUMBERS.  91 

Vast  was  the  multitude.  But  what  are  numbers  without  God  ?  His  presence 
is  their  power,  their  peace,  their  joy,  their  glory,  their  strength,  their  fortress, 
their  shield,  and  their  repi>se.  They  know  it,  and  they  cry,  "Eeturn,  O 
Lord."  (Dean  Laiv.)  Israel's  hymn  of  rest: — I.  As  we  meditate  upon  these 
words  we  are  reminded  generally  of  the  exercises  of  evening  devotion.  We 
connect  this  sentence  with  every  individual  who  formed  a  part  of  that  mi'.-hty 
host :  we  fancy  that  we  hear  these  words  whispering  from  the  lips  of  every  one  as 
he  enters  his  tent,  and  as  he  folds  himself  for  rest.  And  then  we  connect  it  with 
the  families,  the  tribes  of  the  people,  the  groups  of  kindred,  remote  and  intimate, 
in  that  singularly  constituted  nation,  which,  you  know,  consisted  of  one  race— all 
were  brothers  by  blood.  And  we  connect  it,  further,  with  the  congregation  at  large — 
the  sum  total  of  that  great  multitude  that  was  numbered  in  the  registration,  Israel's 
Book  of  Life,  as  it  was  called.  And  so  the  sentence  leads  us  to  think  of  evening 
worship  in  three  ways — in  the  closet,  in  the  family,  in  the  church.  II.  We  are 
led  to  penetrate  into  that  which  forms  the  meaning,  and  essence,  and  spieit  of  the 
exercises  of  praise  and  prayer,  at  eventide,  and  at  all  times.  We  are  brought 
immediately  by  prayer  into  the  presence  of  God  ;  we  come  into  immediate  contact 
and  communion  with  His  gracious  Spirit !  "Rise  up,  0  Lord  ;  let  Thine  enemies 
be  scattered."  There  is  significancy  in  that  expression,  "  Rise  up,  0  Lord  !  "  And 
so  there  is  in  this  other  expression,  equally  figurative — "Return,  0  Lord."  "Rise 
up,  0  Lord!  "  "  Eeturn,  0  Lord."  Now,  such  expressions  are  projjerly  explained 
as  indicating,  not  an  absolute  fact  in  God's  dealings,  but  in  the  perception  and 
apprehension  of  God  by  man  :  not  a  Divine  dispensation,  but  a  human  conscious- 
ness. God  did  not  leave  Israel  in  the  day's  march,  no,  not  for  an  instant.  We 
speak  sometimes  of  the  returning  sunrise,  and  we  speak  sometimes  of  the  returning 
sunset :  but  the  fact  is,  that  we  return  to  them,  and  not  they  to  us.  The  fact  is, 
that  it  is  the  earth  that  is  turning,  and  it  is  the  sun  that  remains  the  same.  And 
as  it  is  with  the  sun,  so  it  is  with  regard  to  God.  Absolute  change  in  us  produces 
relative  change  in  Him.  As  we  cease  to  think  of  Him,  apparently  He  leaves  us ; 
as  we  return  to  Him  in  thought,  desire,  and  purpose.  He  seems  to  return  to  us  in 
actual  presence.  The  process  is  ever  taking  place  in  the  history  of  spiritual  con- 
sciousness. God  and  man  meet  when  man  prays  to  God  as  the  day  is  over.  God 
and  His  people  hold  coaimunion  as  the  shades  of  evening  close  in  upon  us  at  our 
evening  devotions.     III.  The  text  suggests  to  us  the  thought  of  the  peaceful- 

NESS,  and  the    security,  AND    THE  JOY  OF  THOSE    TO  WHOM    GoD    THUS   RETURNS.        IV. 

We  turn  to  this  evening  hymn  agnin,  and  we  observe  that  it  is  very  large-hearted 
— IT  is  thoroughly  catholic.  Here  Moses  takes  up  into  that  great  heart  of  his  the 
interests  of  all  Israel — "  the  many  thousands  of  Israel."  Earnestly  should  we  pray 
for  oursehes,  and  with  equal  earnestness  should  we  identify  ouiselves  with  the 
interests  of  others,  and  pi  ay  for  them.  An  individual  consciousness  of  moral  indi- 
viduality will  be  as  a  growing  tree ;  it  will  be  rooted  in  the  heart,  but  up  will  it  grow, 
and  out  will  the  branches  shoot  in  this  direction,  and  in  that.  The  heart  will  be  as 
a  fountain,  and  there  will  come  ever  forth  the  bubbling  waters,  but  they  will  flow, 
flow,  flow,  on  and  on,  in  irrigating  streams,  that  will  reach  a  thousand  hearts. 
So  let  us  throw  thorough  catholicity  mto  our  devotion.  V.  Last  of  all,  we  think 
of  this  hymn  as  what  may  be  calleii  the  evening  hymn  of  life.  The  last  night 
will  come,  and  we  shall  lie  down  to  sleep  in  the  grave  !  and  oh !  how  beautiful 
then  to  be  able,  by  faith,  to  lift  up  our  hearts  to  heaven  and  say,  "  Return,  0  Lord, 
return  unto  me  !  I  will  return  unto  Thee  !  At  the  end  of  my  life-long  journey,  my 
weary  spirit  would  find  rest  in  Thee  I  Receive  me  to  Thyself."  And  while  this 
prayer  is  oiiered  by  us  on  our  own  behalf,  we  are  to  take  heed  of  the  whole  Israel 
of  God,  and  pray,  as  we  are  passing  out  of  time  into  eternity,  that  the  love  and  care 
which  we  have  so  richly  enjoyed,  may  be  vouchsafed  to  those  who  foUow  us.  {J. 
Stoiiphton.)  "  Return,  0  Lord,"  <&c. : — I.  The  subjects  of  this  prayer.  "Israel." 
What  the  thousands  of  Israel  are  not  doing  for  themselves  let  us  do  for  them.  Let 
us  make  inci easing  prayers  at  the  throne  of  Divine  grace,  that  the  veil  may  betaken 
awav  from  their  hearts,  that,  under  the  covenant  of  the  blessed  gospel,  they  may 
realise  the  promise  of  the  Spirit  unto  the  Churches  (Rev.  ii.  17) .  The  thousands  of  Israel, 
tracing  back  their  history,  who  were  they  ?  Looking  at  their  present  condition,  what 
are  they  ?  And  making  castings  into  the  future,  what  shall  they  be  ?  1.  Who  were 
they?  They  were  the  nation  chosen  from  aU  the  families  of  the  earth,  set  apart 
{like  the  one  day  in  seven)  for  the  peculiar  manifestation  of  the  Divine  attributer. 
and  glories.  2.  Looking  at  their  present  condition,  what  are  they  ?  After  struggling 
through  persecutions,  the  fiercest  and  most  appnlling,  after  being  the  one  common 


92  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

curse  and  hissing  of  nations,  divided  amongst  themselves  by  deadly  antipathies, 
after  their  long  and  many  trackings  of  tears  and  of  blood,  through  all  countries  and 
lands,  what  are  they  now  ?  Still  shorn  of  their  glories ;  still  a  by-word  and  a 
mockery  ;  still  the  dispersed,  the  wandering,  and  the  outcast.  3.  But  in  our  cast- 
ings into  the  future,  wliat  shall  they  be  ?  II.  The  nature  of  this  pkayeb.  Moses 
beheld  the  awful  state  of  the  people,  as  described  in  the  first  verse  of  the  next 
chapter  ;  and  tlierefore  he  prayed  to  the  Lord.  And  now  the  cloud  of  the  Lord  is 
before  the  Israelites  ;  and  now  in  the  midst  of  them  is  the  ark  of  the  new  covenant  i 
and  yet,  as  described  in  that  verse,  they  are  filled  with  sinful  complaining,  and  the 
fire  of  the  Lord  is  burning  amongst  them  and  consuming  them  ;  the  just  judgments 
of  God  are  upon  their  heads  because  of  their  unbelief,  and  pride,  and  obduracy ;  and 
they  are  sinking  beneath  the  fierceness  of  His  anger.  In  this  their  condition  it  is 
the  great  business  of  Christ's  Church  to  pray  over  them,  that  the  Lord  "  return  to 
the  many  thousands  of  Israel" — that  by  the  manifestation  of  His  Holy  Spirit  He 
show  them  the  darkness  of  their  natural  minds — that  by  the  strength  of  His  Spirit 
He  bring  down  their  arrogancy  to  the  dust — that  by  the  penetrating  influence  of 
His  Spirit  He  open  a  way  into  their  hearts,  that  they  may  receive  Christ  as  the 
power  of  God  and  the  wisdom  of  God  unto  salvation.     {T.  J.  Judkin.) 


CHAPTEK  XI. 

Vebb.  1-3.  The  people  complained. — Against  murmuring: — I.  A  dissatisfied 
SPiEiT  CAUSES  DISPLEASURE  TO  THE  LoBD.  1.  Thls  wc  might  infer  from  our  own 
feelings,  when  depeudents,  children,  servants,  or  receivers  of  alms  are  always 
grumbling.  We  grow  weary  of  them,  and  angiy  with  them.  2.  In  the  case  of 
men  towards  God  it  is  much  worse  for  them  to  murmur,  since  they  deserve  no 
good  at  His  hands,  but  the  reverse  (Lam.  iii.  29 ;  Psa.  ciii.  10).  3.  In  that  case 
also  it  is  a  reflection  upon  the  Lord's  goodness,  wisdom,  truth,  and  power.  4.  The 
e  '  lusting  which  attends  the  complaining  proves  its  injurious  character.  We  are 
ready  for  anything  when  we  quarrel  with  God  (1  Cor.  x.  5-12).  5.  God  thinks  so 
ill  of  it  that  His  wrath  burns,  and  chastisement  is  not  long  withheld.  To  set  an 
imaginary  value  upon  that  which  we  have  not — (1)  Is  foolish,  childish,  pettish. 

(2)  Is  injurious  to  ourselves,  for  it  prevents  our  enjoying  what  we  already  have. 

(3)  Is  slanderous  towards  God,  and  ungrateful  to  Him.  (4)  Leads  to  rebellion, 
falsehood,  envy,  and  all  manner  of  sins.  II.  A  dissatisfied  spieit  finds  no 
PLEASUBE  FOR  ITSELF  EVEN  WHEN  ITS  WISH  IS  FULFILLED.  The  Israelites  had  flesh  in 
superabundance  in  answer  to  their  foolish  prayers,  but — 1.  It  was  attended  with 
leanness  of  soul  (Psa.  cvi.  16).  2.  It  brought  satiety  (ver.  20).  3.  It  caused  death 
(Psa.  Ixxviii.  31).  4.  It  thus  led  to  mourning  on  all  sides.  III.  A  dissatisfied 
SPIRIT  8B0W8  that  THE  MIND  NEEDS  REGULATING.  Grace  would  put  our  dcsires  in 
order,  and  keep  our  thoughts  and  affections  in  their  proper  places,  thus — 1.  Content 
with  Kuch  things  as  we  have  (Heb.  xiii.  5).  2.  Towards  other  things  moderate  in 
desire  (Prov.  xxx.  8).  3.  Concerning  earthly  things  which  may  be  lackiiiL',  fully 
resigned  (Matt.  xxvi.  39).  4.  First,  and  most  eagerly,  desiring  God  (Psa.  xlii.  2). 
5.  Next,  coveting  earnestly  the  best  gifts  (1  Cor.  xii.  31).  6.  Following  ever  in  love 
the  more  excellent  way  (1  Cor.  xii.  31).  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  Murinurings  : — 1. 
Those  who  are  merely  hangers-on  to  a  Church  are  usually  the  beginners  of  mischief 
among  its  members.  So  in  the  community,  the  men  who  have  no  stake  in  its 
welfare  are  always  the  most  dangerous  element  of  the  population.  They  have 
nothing  to  lose  in  any  event,  and  it  is  just  possible  that,  in  the  confusion,  they 
may  gain  a  little.  Thus  they  are  always  ready  for  either  riot  or  emeute.  The 
"  mixed  multitude  "  in  our  cities  represents  what  others  call  the  dangerous  classes ; 
and  in  proportion  as  their  existence  is  ignored  by  the  respectable  portion  of  the 
people,  and  nothing  is  done  for  their  education  or  elevation,  the  danger  is 
aggravated.  2.  Murmuring  is  invariably  one-sided.  These  discontented  Egyptians 
and  Israelites  did  nothing  but  look  bauk  on  Egypt ;  and  even  when  they  did  that,  they 
saw  only  the  lights,  and  not  the  shadows.  Again,  in  tlieir  depreciation  of  their 
present  lot,  they  were  equally  one-sided.  They  could  see  in  it  nothing  but  the  one 
fact  that  they  had  no  flesh  to  eat.  They  took  no  notice  of  the  manna,  save  to 
despise  it ;  they  said  nothing  of  the  water  which  God  had  providi.d  for  them;  they 


CHAP.  XI.]  NUMBERS.  93 


never  spoke  of  the  daily  miracle  that  their  clothes  waxed  not  old ;  they  made  no 
reference  to  the  Constance  guidance  and  presence  of  Jehovah  with  them.  Now  this 
was  flagrantly  unjust ;  and  yet  in  condemning  that  it  is  to  be  feared  that  we  are 
passing  judgment  upon  ourselves,  for  if  we  were  fully  to  reckon  up  both  sides  of  the 
account  would  there  ever  be  any  murmuring  among  us  at  all  ?  3.  God  is  always 
considerate  of  His  faithful  servants.  See  how  tender  He  was  to  Moses  here.  He 
saw  that  he  needed  hurhan  sympathy  and  support,  as  well  as  Divine,  and  therefore 
He  hastened  to  provide  him  with  a  cordon  of  kindred  spirits,  who  might  act  as  a 
breakwater,  and  keep  the  waves  of  trouble  and  discontent  that  rose  in  the  camp 
from  dashing  upon  him.  One  cannot  read  of  this  without  being  impressed  by  the 
tenderness  of  God ;  and  it  is  a  suggestive  fact  that  on  almost  every  occasion  on 
which  we  are  told  of  His  judgnient  falling  upon  sinners,  we  have  in  the  near 
vicinity  some  manifestation  of  gentleness  to  His  friends.  4.  The  truly  great  man 
is  never  envious  of  others.  Here  is  a  lesson  for  p11,  and  especially  for  ministers  of 
the  gospel.  How  hard  it  is  to  rejoice  in  the  excellence  of  another,  especially  if  he 
be  in  the  same  line  with  ourselves !  And  yet  the  disparagement  of  the  gifts  of 
another  is  really  an  indication  of  our  consciousness  of  the  weakness  of  our  own. 
The  highest  and  the  hardest  cliff  to  climb  on  the  mountain  of  holiness  is  humility. 
5.  We  can  set  no  limits  to  the  lesources  of  God  (ver.  23).  6.  It  is  not  good  for  us 
to  get  everything  we  desire  (Psa.  cv.  15).  Prayers  born  out  of  murmuring  are 
always  dangerous.  (TV.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Sin  and  prayer  : — I.  A  sadly  common 
SIN.  Murmuring.  Discontent  is  the  spirit  of  this  wicked  world.  II.  A  terribly 
solemn  fact.  God  recognises  and  retributes  sin.  III.  A  general  social  tendency. 
The  wicked  ever  seek  the  good  in  their  terror  and  distress.  IV.  A  striking  result 
OF  PRAYER.  The  breath  of  Moses'  prayer  extinguished  the  flame.  (Humilist.) 
Coiiiplaininr)  of  providence  punished  : — The  people  complained — and  the  Lord  set 
fire  to  them  !  That  seems  rough  judgment,  for  what  is  man's  speech  as  set  against 
the  Divine  fire ?  Who  can  defend  the  procedure?  Who  can  so  subordinate  his 
reason  and  his  sense  of  right  as  to  commend  the  justice  of  this  tremendous  punish- 
ment ?  So  they  might  say  who  begin  their  Bible  reading  at  the  eleventh  chapter 
of  Numbers.  Read  the  Book  of  Exodus,  notably  the  fourteenth  and  following 
chapters  up  to  the  time  of  the  giving  of  the  law,  and  you  will  find  complaint 
following  complaint ;  and  what  was  the  Divine  answer  in  that  succession  of 
reproaches  ?  Was  there  fire  ?  Did  the  Lord  shake  down  the  clouds  upon  the 
people  and  utterly  overwhelm  them  with  tokens  of  indignation  ?  No.  The  Lord 
is  full  of  tenderness  and  compassion — yea,  infinite  in  piteousness  and  love  is  He  ; 
but  there  is  a  point  when  His  Spirit  can  no  longer  strive  with  us,  and  when  He 
must  displace  the  persuasions  of  love  by  the  anger  and  the  judgment  of  fire.  But 
this  is  not  the  whole  case.  The  people  were  not  complaining  only.  The  word 
complaint  may  be  so  construed  as  to  have  everything  taken  out  of  it  except  the 
feeblest  protest  and  the  feeblest  utterance  of  some  personal  desire.  But  this  is  not 
the  historical  meaning  of  the  word  complaint  as  it  is  found  here.  What  happened 
between  the  instances  we  have  quoted  and  the  instance  which  is  immediately  before 
us  ?  Until  that  question  is  answered  the  whole  case  is  not  before  the  mind  for 
opinion  or  criticism.  What,  then,  had  taken  place?  The  most  momentous  of  all 
incidents.  God  had  said  through  Moses  to  the  people  of  Israel— Will  you  obey  the 
law?  And  they  stood  to  their  feet,  as  it  were,  and  answered  in  one  unanimous 
voice — We  will.  So  the  people  were  wedded  to  their  Lord  at  that  great  mountain 
altar ;  words  of  fealty  and  kinship  and  Godhoodhad  been  exchanged,  and  now  these 
people  that  had  oft  complained  and  had  then  promised  obedience,  and  had  then 
sworn  that  they  would  have  none  other  gods  beside  Jehovah,  complained — went 
back  to  their  evil  ways ;  and  the  Lord,  who  takes  out  His  sword  last  and  only  calls 
upon  His  fire  in  extremity,  smote  them — burned  them.  And  this  will  He  do  to  us 
if  we  trifle  with  our  oaths,  if  we  practise  bad  faith  towards  the  altar,  if  we  are 
guilty  of  malfeasance  in  the  very  sanctuary  of  God.  Were  the  people  content  with 
complaining  ?  Tbey  passed  from  complaining  to  lusting,  saying,  "  Who  shall  give 
us  flesh  to  eat  ?  We  remember  the  fish  which  we  did  eat  in  Egypt,"  &c.  There  is  a 
philosophy  here.  You  cannot  stop  short  with  complaining.  Wickedness  never 
plays  a  negative  game.  The  man  who  first  complains  will  next  erect  his  appetite 
as  a  hostOe  force  against  the  will  of  God.  A  marvellous  thing  is  this,  to  recollect 
our  lives  through  the  medium  of  our  appetites,  to  have  old  relishes  return  to  the 
mouth,  to  have  the  palate  stimulated  by  remembered  sensations.  The  devil  has 
many  ways  into  the  soul.  The  recollection  of  evil  may  prompt  a  desire  for  its 
repetition.     {J.  Parker,  D.D.)        Israel's  sin: — 1,  Israel  bad  many  impediments 


94  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  h. 

in  their  march  to  the  Land  of  Promise,  not  only  from  without  (Pharaoh  pursuing, 
Amalek  intercepting,  &c.),  but  also  from  within,  among  themselves  by  their 
manifold  murmurings  (1  Pet.  iv.  18).  2.  God  writes  our  sin  upon  our  punishment. 
These  murmurprs  here  sinned  against  the  "  fiery  law"  (Deut.  xxxiii.  2) ;  therefore 
were  they  punished  by  fire  out  of  the  pillar  of  fire  from  whence  the  fiery  law  was 
given  and  publislied.  Their  perdition  is  our  caution  (1  Cor.  x.  5,  11).  3.  Evil 
company  is  infectious  and  catching  as  the  plague  (1  Cor.  xv.  33).  4.  Wherever 
there  is  sinning  again  on  man's  part,  there  will  be  punishing  again  on  God's  part 
(John  V.  14).  Here  Israel  sinned  again  with  a  double  sin — (1)  In  desiring  flesh 
which  they  wanted ;  (2)  In  disdaining  manna  which  they  enjoyed.  The  vehemence 
of  tbeir  concupiscence  was  the  more  inflamed  by  remembering  their  former 
Egyptian  diet,  yet  forgetting  withal  their  Egyptian  drudgery.  5.  The  people's 
profane  deploring  their  penury  (when  they  had  little  cause  to  do  so,  while  fed  with 
the  food  of  angels)  doth  not  only  make  God  angry  with  them  (ver.  10),  but  also 
putteth  meek  Moses  into  a  pang  of  passion  and  impatience  (vers.  11-15).  6.  The 
Divine  remedy  to  all  this  human  malady ;  both  as  to  Moses'  impatience,  and  as  to 
Israel's  intemperance.  (1)  Moses  must  not  bear  the  burden  alone,  but  shall  be 
assisted  with  the  Sanhedrin,  or  great  council  of  the  Jews,  consisting  of  seventy 
seniors  (answerable  to  the  seventy  souls  that  descended  with  Jacob  into  Egypt) 
whereof  Moses  sat  president,  all  endowed  with  the  gifts  of  the  spirit  of  Moses,  who 
was  as  a  candle  that  lighteth  others,  yet  hath  not  less  either  heat  or  light  than  it 
had  before  (vers.  16,  17,  24,  25,  30).  (2)  As  to  the  people's  intemperance,  as  God 
promised  and  performed  plenty  of  flesh  to  those  fleshly-minded  multitude,  so  He 
punished  tbeir  impiety  with  a  horrible  plague  at  the  close  thereof  (vers.  18,  19, 
20,  31,  32,  33,  34).  (C.  Ness.)  The  sin  of  complaining  .-—Observe  that  it  does 
not  say  that  the  people  "  murmured,"  but  "  complained,"  or,  as  it  is  in  the  margin, 
"  were  as  it  were  complainers  "  ;  by  which  it  is  evidently  meant  that  there  was  a 
feeling  in  their  minds  of  scarcely  expressed  dissatisfaction.  There  was  no  sudden 
outbreak  of  murmuring,  but  the  whispers  and  looks  of  discontent.  There  is  no 
special  mention  of  any  particular  reason  for  it.  It  does  not  say  that  their  manna 
failed,  or  that  any  hostile  army  was  arrayed  against  them.  Doubtless  the  journey- 
ing was  always  wearisome,  and  on  its  fatigues  they  suffered  their  minds  to  dwell, 
forgetful  of  all  the  mercies  vouchsafed  them,  and  "  complained."  Now,  we  must 
all  feel  that  right-down  murmuring  is  very  sinful,  and  in  its  worst  forms  most 
Christians  overcome  it ;  but  not  so  complaining,  for  this  seems  to  many  to  be 
scarcely  wrong,  and  it  often  grows  on  them  so  gradually  that  they  are  seldom 
conscious  of  it.  The  causes  of  complaint  are  manifold.  Little  difficulties  in  our 
circumstances— little  acts  of  selfishness  in  our  neighbours;  but  complaining  is 
most  of  all  a  danger  with  persons  who  have  weak  health — for  weakness  of  body 
often  produces  depression  of  spirits — and  this  is  the  soil  in  which  a  complaining  spirit 
takes  deepest  root.  Then,  too,  it  often  grows  into  a  habit ;  a  tinge  of  discontent 
settles  on  the  countenance,  and  the  voice  assumes  a  tone  of  complaint.  And 
though  this,  like  most  habits,  soon  becomes  unconscious,  jet  it  is  not  the  less  mis- 
chievous on  that  account.  •  It  is  mischievous  to  our  own  souls,  for  it  damps  the 
work  of  the  Spirit  of  God  in  our  hearts,  and  enfeebles  the  spiritual  Ufe.  It  is 
misciiievous  in  its  effects  upon  others ;  for  when  Christians  complain  it  gives  the 
world  altogether  wrong  impressions  of  the  strength  and  consolation  which  the  love 
of  Christ  affords,  and  it  frequently  generates  the  same  spirit;  one  complains,  and 
another,  having  the  same  or  other  causes  of  complaint,  sees  no  reason  why  he 
should  not  complain  too.  And  this  was  probably  its  history  in  Israel.  It  is 
scarcely  likely  that  all  began  to  complain  at  the  same  moment.  Doubtless  there 
were  some  who  set  the  sad  example,  and  then  the  hearts  of  all  being  predisposed, 
it  spread  like  an  epidemic.  We  should  settle  it  well  in  our  hearts  that  complaining, 
no  less  than  murmuring,  is  a  fruit  of  the  flesh.  David  complaim^d  in  Psa.  Ixxvii. 
3,  "  I  complained,  and  my  spirit  was  overwhelmed  " ;  but  he  soon  felt  that  the  root 
of  the  evil  was  in  himself.  "  This,"  he  adds  (ver.  10),  "is  my  infirmity."  But 
no  part  of  Scripture  proves  more  strikingly  than  the  events  at  Taberah,  how 
displeasing  to  God,  and  how  dangerous  in  its  results,  a  complaining  spirit  is.  The 
punishment  which  followed,  and  which  gave  the  name  to  the  place,  proves  the  first 
point.  Patient  and  long-suffering  as  God  ever  was  with  Israel,  we  are  told  (chap. 
xi.  1)  that  "  His  anger  was  kindled  ;  and  the  fire  of  the  Lord  burnt  among  them, 
and  consumed  them  that  were  in  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  camp."  The  severity 
of  the  punishment  shows  that  this  was  no  little  sin,  encompassed  as  they  were  with 
mercy,  and  guided  by  Jehovah  Himself  through  the  wilderness.     It  was  no  less 


CHAP.  XI.]  NUMB  E US.  95 

dangerous  in  its  result,  for  the  subsequent  history  shows  how  "  complnining  " 
ripened  into  "  murmuring,"  and  murmuring  was  at  last  the  cause  of  Israel's  final 
fall.  Let  us  endeavour,  then,  to  watch  against  a  "  complaining  spirit."  In  heavy 
and  stunning  afflictions  we  glorify  God,  when,  like  Aaron,  we  are  enabled  to  "  hold 
our  peace."  Like  David,  we  can  say,  "  I  was  dumb,  and  opened  not  my  mouth, 
because  Thou  didst  it "  ;  or,  as  in  Psa.  cxxxi.  2.  Still  more  if  we  can,  through 
grace,  rise  to  the  elevation  of  the  afflicted  Job,  and  say,  "  The  Lord  gave  and  the 
Lord  hath  taken  away  ;  blessed  be  the  name  of  the  Lord  " ;  or,  if  anything,  to  the 
still  higher  elevation  of  the  Apostle  Paul  (Phil.  iv.  11-13).  In  the  lesser  and  more 
ordinary  trials  of  daily  life,  its  difficulties  and  its  duties,  we  glorify  Him  by 
Christian  cheerfulness ;  and  how  can  we  maintain  this  spirit  but  by  tracing  the 
hand  of  a  Father  in  them  all,  carrying  them  all  to  God  in  prayer,  and,  most  of  all, 
by  looking  above  present  things  to  the  "  everlasting  covenant  ordered  in  all  things 
and  sure"?  For  the  things  which  are  seen,  our  difficulties  and  our  trials,  are 
temporal;  but  the  things  which  are  not  seen,  our  strength  and  our  ciown,  are 
eternal.  (G.  Wafjner.)  Ungrateful  discontent: — We  would  think  that  beggar 
intolerably  impudent,  that  coming  to  our  doors  to  ask  an  alms,  and  when  we  have 
bestowed  on  him  some  broken  bread  and  meat,  yet  (like  those  impudent  persons 
the  Psalmist  speaks  of,  that  grudge  and  grumble  if  they  be  not  satisfied,  if  they 
have  not  their  own  will,  and  their  own  fill)  he  should  not  hold  himself  contented, 
unless  he  might  have  one  of  our  best  dishes  from  the  table.  But  this  is  the  case 
of  very  many  amongst  us.  We  come  all  as  so  many  beggars  to  God's  mercy-seat, 
and  God  gives  us  abundance  of  many  good  things,  as  life,  liberty,  health  of  body, 
&c.,  yet  we  cannot  be  quiet,  nor  think  ourselves  well,  unless  we  be  clothed  in  purple, 
and  fare  deliciously  every  day  as  such  and  such  do,  not  considering  in  the  mean- 
time many  that  are  below  us,  and  above  us  too,  wanting  those  things  which  we 
comfortably  enjoy.  [J.  Spencer.)  Criticising  favours : — There  are  many  persons 
who  receive  favours  and  criticise  them.  They  make  it  a  ground  and  reason  of 
fault-finding  ;  as  in  the  case  of  the  man  who  found  a  Spanish  coin  worth  eighteen 
and  three-quarter  cents,  and  turned  it  over  in  his  hand  and  said,  "  Well,  that  is 
just  my  luck.  If  it  had  been  anybody  else  that  found  it,  it  would  have  been  a 
twenty-five  cent  piece."  He  had  no  thanks  for  what  it  was,  but  grumbled  because 
it  was  not  more.  So  it  is  with  many  men  in  the  world.  They  are  perpetually 
analysing  and  criticising  the  kindnesses  that  are  done  to  them.  They  are  not  right 
in  measure,  or  kind,  or  method ;  they  are  not  right  somehow ;  and  they  shut  off 
the  sense  of  obligation  and  refuse  to  be  grateful.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Murmuring 
against  God  : — Murmuring  is  a  quarrelling  with  God,  and  inveighing  against  Him 
(chap.  xxi.  5).  The  murmurer  saith  inteipretatively  that  God  hath  not  dealt  well 
with  him,  and  that  he  hath  deserved  better  from  Him.  The  murmurer  cliargeth 
God  with  folly.  This  is  the  language,  or  rather  blasphemy,  of  a  murmuring 
spirit :  God  might  have  been  a  wiser  and  a  better  God.  The  murmurer  is  a 
mutineer.  The  Israelites  are  called  in  the  same  text  "  murmurers  "  and  "  rebels  " 
(ch£^.  xvii.  10)  ;  and  is  not  rebellion  as  the  sin  of  witchcraft  ?  (1  Sam.  xv.  23). 
Thou  that  art  a  murmurer  art  in  the  account  of  God  as  a  witch,  a  sorcerer,  as  one 
that  deals  with  the  devil.  This  is  a  sin  of  the  first  magnitude.  Murmuring  often 
ends  in  cursing  :  Micah's  mother  fell  to  cursing  when  the  talents  of  silver  were 
taken  away  (Judges  xvii.  2).  So  doth  the  murmurer  when  a  part  of  his  estate  is 
taken  away.  Our  murmuring  is  the  devil's  music ;  this  is  that  sin  which  God 
cannot  bear  (chap.  xiv.  27).  It  is  a  sin  which  whets  the  sword  against  a  people  ; 
it  is  a  land -destroying  sin  (1  Cor.  x.  10).  (T.  Watson.)  Finding  fault  with 
God  : — God  hath  much  ado  with  us.  Either  we  lack  health,  or  quietness,  or 
children,  or  wealth,  or  company,  or  ourselves  in  all  these.  It  is  a  wonder  the 
Israelites  found  not  fault  with  the  want  of  sauce  to  their  quails,  or  with  their  old 
clothes,  or  their  solitary  way.  Nature  is  moderate  in  her  desires ;  but  conceit  is 
insatiable.  (Bp.  Hall.)  Loshig  temper  with  God: — Losing  our  temper  with  God 
is  a  more  common  thing  in  the  spiritual  life  than  many  suppose.  {F.  W.  Faber.) 
Murmuring  hurts  not  God,  but  wounds  us  : — I  have  read  of  Caesar,  that,  having 
prepared  a  great  feast  for  his  nobles  and  friends,  it  fell  out  that  the  dav  appointed 
was  so  extremely  foul  that  nothing  could  be  done  to  the  honour  of  their  meeting ; 
whereupon  he  was  so  displeased  and  enraged  that  he  commanded  all  them  that 
had  bows  to  shoot  up  their  arrows  at  Jupiter,  their  chief  god,  as  in  defiance  of  him 
for  that  rainy  weather ;  which,  when  they  did,  their  arrows  fell  short  of  heaven, 
and  fell  upon  their  own  heads,  so  that  many  of  them  were  very  sorely  wounded. 
So  aU  our  mutterings  and  murmurings,  which  are  so  many  arrows  shot  at  Go'l 


96  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

Himself,  will  return  upon  our  own  pates,  or  hearts  ;  they  reach  not  Him,  but  they 
will  hit  us  ;  they  hurt  not  Him,  but  they  will  wound  us  ;  tlierefore  it  is  better  to  be 
mute  than  to  murmur  ;  it  is  dangerous  to  conteud  with  one  who  is  a  consuming  fire 
(Heb.  xii.  29).  (I'hoinas  Brooks.)  The  fire  of  the  Lord  burnt  among  them. — 
The  worst  fire  : — Nothing  but  mercies  had  come  upon  the  back  of  their  complainings 
before.  They  had  had  water,  and  they  had  had  bread ;  but  now  the  Lord  would 
send  them  fire.  It  should  be  the  fire  of  the  Lord,  holy  fire  ;  yet  not  as  that,  which, 
descending  from  heaven  upon  the  altar,  burnt  continually  before  the  Lord  in  His 
temple,  acceptable  in  sacrifice  ;  but  a  consuming  fire ;  the  burning  of  His  wrath. 
It  is  bad  to  "  be  saved  so  as  by  fire,"  to  have  all  consumed,  but  ourselves,  to  be 
burnt  out  of  house  and  home ;  yet  far  worse  is  it  to  be  burnt  out  of  the  world.  Still 
this  might  be  the  way  to  heaven  for  some,  carried  thither  as  in  a  chariot  of  tire. 
We  know  it  was  the  way,  the  common  way  that  martyrs  went.  The  fire  was 
kindled  by  their  enemies  ;  but  it  was  not  as  the  burning  of  Taberah  ;  there  was  no 
ingredient  of  the  wrath  of  the  Almighty  in  the  flame  :  but  "  one  like  unto  the  Son 
of  Man "  was  there,  to  make  it  as  the  purest  vestment  of  the  soul,  the  involving 
element  of  love.  Oh,  there  is  a  fire  worse  than  all  others,  the  burning  of  the  Lord, 
a  fire  that  descends  to  the  bottomless  pit,  and  the  smoke  of  which  has  been  seen. 
Behold  it  kindling  in  the  camp  of  Israel.  It  had  indignation  in  it;  it  was  a  con- 
suming fire,  lighted  up  in  the  righteous  displeasure  of  heaven,  its  fuel  the  bodies  of 
transi-Tessors  themselves.  "  The  people  complained."  What  then?  "  It  displeased 
the  Lord ;  and  His  anger  was  kindled  ;  and  the  fire  of  the  Lord  burnt  among  them, 
and  consumed  them  in  the  uttermost  parts  of  the  camp."  There  was  no  flying 
from  it,  it  was  a  city  in  flames  from  its  utmost  extremities.  Who  can  run  from 
the  presence  of  the  Lord?  How  affecting  this?  It  may  be  conceived,  kindled  by 
lightning  from  the  cloud  that  bad  guided  them,  darting  in  angry  form,  and  with 
the  voice  of  the  Almighty,  in  thunders  impatient  to  be  gone.  Who  can  stand 
before  the  indignation  of  the  Lord?  who  can  abide  His  anger  when  the  gathering 
storm  of  His  displeasure  breaks  forth  ?  His  favour,  what  man  that  regards  his 
life  would  not  entreat  ?  His  wrath,  what  man  that  fears  His  power  would  not 
deprecate  ?  He  is  to  us,  as  what  we  are  to  Him — sinners  or  saints.  This  judgment 
had  in  it  everything  awful — cut  off  from  all  share  in  the  promises,  slain  by  the 
power  that  had  kept  them  alive,  and  left  heaps  of  wrath  in  the  very  way  to  life, 
(ir.  Seaton.) 

Ver.  4.  The  mixt  multitude. — The  mixed  multitnde  : — If  Israel,  according  to  its 
calHng,  be  regarded  as  a  type  of  the  new  man,  then  this  "mixed  multitude,"  a 
remnant  of  Egypt,  and  influenced  still  by  its  spirit,  will  be  a  type  of  the  old  man  in 
the  believer  But  we  may  take  another  view  of  Israel,  and  say  that  it  is  typical  of 
those  who  walk,  not  after  the  flesh,  but  after  the  Spirit — the  true  members  of 
Christ's  body,  the  living  branches  of  the  true  vine  ;  and  then,  corresponding  with 
this,  the  "  mixed  multitude"  will  be  a  type  of  those  who  accompany  the  true  Israel 
now,  without  being  purtakers  of  the  Divine  nature,  and  walking  in  the  Spirit-ythe 
dead  branches  in  the  vine.  History  shows  that  the  Church  on  earth  has  ever  been 
made  up  of  these  two  elements ;  and  prophetic  parables  show  that  such  will  be  its 
constitution  until  Jesus  comes.  The  Word  of  God  everywhere  encourages  the 
living  members  of  Christ's  body,  by  patience,  and  gentleness,  and  unwearied  zeal, 
to  win  those  who  have  only  a  name  to  live.  But  it  forbids  them  to  take  iuto  their 
own  hands  the  awful  work  of  separation  between  the  wheat  and  the  taies,  a  work 
which  the  Searcher  of  hearts  reserves  to  Himself  alone.  So  that  it  need  cause  us 
no  surprise,  as  it  did  the  Donatists  of  old,  and  still  does  to  some,  that  there  is,  and 
always  will  be,  a  "  mixed  multitude  "  associated  with  the  true  Israel.  But  though 
we  are  absolutely  forbidden  to  cast  out  the  element  from  the  Churcli,  this  passage 
of  Scripture  miiy  well  impress  us  with  the  danger  arising  from  it,  and  show  how 
watchful  we  ought  to  be.  Even  if  the  Church  were  made  up  of  true  Christians  onlv, 
there  would  be  much  evil  in  it,  for  the  simple  reason  that  there  is  so  much  sin  ip 
every  heart.  Many  temptations  may  come  to  you  even  from  those  wr.o  are  really 
Christ's,  and  who  are  engaged,  through  grace,  in  crucifying  the  affections  and  lusts 
of  the  flesh  ;  but  others  will  come  to  you,  as  they  did  to  Inrael  of  old,  from  the 
"  mixed  multitude  "  ;  and  what  dangers  in  particular  ?  Parly  spirit,  we  cannot  fail 
to  see,  is  one;  but,  oh,  there  is  a  greater  and  more  subtle  danyer  still — worldliness, 
conformity  to  the  course  of  this  world  ;  and  with  it,  forg^  tfulness  of  tlie  liigh  and 
holy  calling  wherewith  we  are  called,  and  the  adoption  of  a  low  standard  of  holiness. 
Our  ouly  safety  is  to  set  the  perfect  example  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  before  us :  to 


CHAP.  XI.]  NUMBERS.  97 

ask  ourselves  again  and  again  throughout  the  clay,  "  How  would  Christ  act  if  He 
were  in  my  place  ?  "  to  crucify  through  the  Spirit  the  root  of  worldliness  within, 
and  to  watch  all  the  avenues  bv  which  it  can  enter  the  beart  from  without.  Only  in 
this  way  can  our  own  standard  be  elevated  ;  only  in  this  way  avoid  Israel's  sin,  that 
of  being  carried  away  by  the  worldly  spirit  which  originated  in  the  "  mixed  multi- 
tude "  which  sojourned  with  them.  (G.  Wagner.)  Who  shall  give  us  flesh  to 
eat  ? — Wanton  lonpings  : — See  the  wantonness  and  delicacy  of  sinful  flesh,  it  must 
have  this,  it  must  have  that  to  pamper  and  feed  it  in  pleasure.  What  may  be  had 
is  loathed,  and  what  cannot  be  had,  that  is  longed  for,  and  nothing  more  than  that. 
But  very  wisely  doth  the  heathen  Aristotle  advise  all  men  to  look  upon  pleasures 
when  they  go,  not  when  they  come  ;  for  when  they  come  with  their  faces  towards 
us,  they  deceive  us  with  a  fair  flattering  show,  but  when  they  go  and  turn  their 
backs,  then  cometh  repentance,  woe,  and  griof,  not  a  little,  many  times.  Just  as 
the  Spirit  of  God  saith  by  the  mouth  of  Solomon,  *'  Even  in  laughing  the  heart  is 
sorrowful,  and  the  end  of  that  mirth  is  heaviness  "  ;  that  is,  the  allurement  unto  sin 
seemeth  sweet,  but  the  end  thereof  is  destruction.  Wanton  pleasure  is  like  the  lire  or 
flame  of  the  candle,  which  shining  bright  delighteth  a  child,  but  whpn  he  hath  put 
his  finger  into  it,  then  it  burneth,  and  the  child  crieth.  By  little  and  little  growe'h 
grief,  but  in  the  end  it  killeth,  so  stealingly  pleasure  creepfth  upon  us,  but  in  the 
end  overthroweth  all  love  of  virtue.  Wilt  tliou  live  in  a  right  faslrion?  Who  would 
not  ?  Then  if  virtue  only  can  grant  this  to  thee,  stout  and  strong,  tend  this  and 
omit  pleasures.  For  they  that  will  well  defend  a  city,  do  not  only  wat(^h  what  foes 
be  without,  but  as  warily  they  observe  that  there  be  no  traitors  within.  So  men  and 
women  that  love  virtue,  they  look  to  the  gates,  which  are  the  outward  senses,  and 
they  look  within,  to  the  inward  affections,  lest  by  the  one,  as  by  wickets,  evil  enter, 
lest  by  the  other,  as  by  torches  lighted,  fires  and  flames  do  follow.  The  epinure  said 
to  himself,  "Eat,  drink,  play,  for  there  is  no  pleasure  after  death."  But  well  doth 
the  poet  before  mentioned  in  an  epistle  tax  him,  saying,  "  Thou  hast  played  enoutjh, 
thou  hast  eaten  enough  and  drank,  it  is  time  for  thee  now  to  go  hence."  As  if  he 
had  said,  "  Part  thou  must  in  time  with  all  thy  pleasures  and  be  gone,  therefore 
think  of  it  ere  it  be  too  late."  Sardanapalus  is  said  to  have  caused  to  be  written  on 
his  grave  to  this  effect :  "  What  I  did  eat  that  I  had,  and  what  I  left,  that  I  lost." 
Which  Cicero  justly  reprehendeth,  saying,  "  What  else  should  a  man  hath  written 
upon  an  ox  his  grave  ?  Pleasure  infecteth  andpoisoneth  all  our  senses,  being  a  trim 
but  a  deceiving  harlot;  deceiving  us  by  her  voice,  by  her  look,  and  by  her  attire, 
that  is,  every  way."  How  many  hath  gluttony  and  the  belly,  how  many  hath  filthy 
lust  destroyed  !     {Dp.  Babington,) 

Vers.  5,  6.  There  is  nothing  at  all,  beside  this  manna. — The  manva  despised  : — 
I.  The  complaining  of  the  Israelites  in  this  case  was  very  reprehensible,  as  it 
manifested  a  state  of  aggravated  neglect  of  the  peculiar  circumstances  in  which  the 
despised  manna  was  provided  for  them.  Their  soul  had  been  dying  away  for  want 
of  it,  were  we  to  believe  their  complaint,  and  now  their  rohI  was  dying  away  when 
it  was  possessed.  The  manna  seemed  everything  when  they  first  beheld  it  strewn 
all  around  the  camp,  and  now  it  was  as  nothing  at  all  in  tlieir  eyes.  Nevertheless, 
it  was  of  such  value  in  the  eyes  of  God,  that  a  pot  of  it  was  kept  in  the  ark  of  the 
covenant  as  a  memoi  ial  of  His  kindness  in  providing  it  for  the  rebels.  The  children 
He  feeds  mav  forget  the  token  of  His  goodness,  but  He  does  not  forget  the  emana- 
tions of  His  bounty,  or  reckon  anything  small  in  the  blessings  He  confers.  11.  The 
complaining  of  the  Israelites  in  thi-<  case  was  all  the  more  sinful,  inasmuch  4s  the 

MANNA   so    despised    WAS   BOTH   SUFFICIENT   AND    AGREEABLE    FOOD — WaS    all    that  they 

stood  in  need  of  in  their  journey,  and  more  than  they  deserved.  III.  The  complain- 
ing of  the  Israelites  was  all  the  more  sinful,  inasmuch  as  the  manna  they  so  despised 
WAS  PROVIDED  F-  R  TREiM  WITHOUT  COST  OR  LABOUR.  And  it  is  for  a  like  reason  that  all 
despising  of  the  bread  of  life  will  be  accounted  the  greater  transgression,  for  it  is 
freely  offered — without  money  and  without  price.  No  one  is  required  to  pay  any- 
thing for  it  in  silver  or  in  gold — in  bodily  laijour  or  mental  suffering,  or  in  any  gift 
of  worldly  substance.  No  equivalent  is  looked  for  it  in  any  sHcritice  whatever  that 
man  can  make.     IV.  The  complaining  of  the  Israelites  was  the  more  Aggravated,  as 

IT  INVOLVED  A  VERY  SINFUL  DISREGARD  OF  THE  MIRACULOUS  MANNER  IN  WHICH  THE  JLiNNA 

WAS  DAILY  SUPPLIED  FOR  THEIR  USE.  Alas !  multitudes  are  as  blind  to  the  wonderful 
character  of  the  spiritual  or  "  hidden  manna,"  as  were  the  Jews  in  the  instance  here 
recorded,  as  to  the  manna  provided  for  them.  All  the  more  that  the  miraculous 
character  of  the  wonderfMl  provision  God  has  made  for  tlie  salvation  of  the  soul  is 

7 


98  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cttap.  xi. 

overlooked  or  despised,  all  the  more  of  blind  infatuation  and  sin  are  involved.  It 
cannot  be  safe  to  speak  slightingly  of  an  interposition,  in  providing  for  the  life  of 
immortal  souls,  iuto  which,  it  is  said,  "  the  angels  desire  to  look."  {J.  Allan.) 
Speaking  against  God  : — These  verses  represent  things  sadly  unhinged  and  out  of 
order  in  Israel.  Both  the  people  and  the  prince  uneasy.  I.  Here  is  the  people 
FRETTING  AND  SPEAKING  AGAINST  GoD  HiMSELF  (as  it  is  interpreted,  Psa.  Ixxviii.  19), 
notwithstanding  His  glorious  appearances  both  to  them  and  for  them.  1.  Observe 
who  were  the  criminals.  (1)  The  mixed  multitude  began,  "  They  fell  a  lusting  "  (ver. 
4).  These  were  the  scabbed  sheep  that  infected  the  flock,  the  leaven  that  leavened 
the  whole  lump.  Note,  a  few  factious,  discontented,  ill-natured  people,  may  do  a 
great  deal  of  mischief  in  the  best  societies  if  great  care  be  not  taken  to  discounten- 
ance them.  Such  as  these  are  an  untoward  generation,  from  which  it  is  our  wisdom 
to  save  ourselves  (Acts  ii.  40).  (2)  Even  the  children  of  Israel  took  the  infection, 
so  it  follows  (ver.  4).  The  holy  seed  joined  themselves  to  the  people  of  these  abomi- 
nations. This  mixed  multitude  was  not  numbered  with  the  children  of  Israel,  but 
were  set  aside  as  people  God  made  no  account  of.  And  yet  the  children  of  Israel, 
forgetting  their  own  character  and  distinction,  herded  themselves  with  them,  and 
learned  their  way ;  as  if  the  scum  and  outcast  of  the  camp  were  to  be  the  privy 
councillors  of  it.  The  children  of  Israel,  a  peojile  near  to  God,  and  highly  privi- 
leged, yet  drawn  into  a  rebellion  against  Him !  Oh,  how  little  honour  hath  God  in 
the  world,  when  even  that  people  which  He  formed  for  Himself  to  show  forth  His 
praise  were  so  much  a  dishonour  to  Him !  Therefore  let  none  think  that  their 
external  professions  and  privileges  will  be  their  security  either  against  Satan's  temp- 
tations to  sin,  or  against  God's  judgments  for  sin  (1  Cor.  x.  1,  2,  12).  2.  What  was 
the  crime  ?  They  lusted  and  murmured.  Though  they  were  newly  corrected  for 
this  sin,  and  many  of  them  overthrown  for  it,  as  God  overthrew  Sodom  and 
Gomorrah,  and  the  smell  of  the  fire  was  still  in  their  nostrils,  yet  they  returned  to 
it  (Prov.  xxvii.  22).  We  should  not  indulge  ourselves  in  any  desire  which  we  cannot 
in  faith  turn  into  prayer,  as  we  cannot,  when  we  ask  meat  for  our  lust  (Psa.  Ixxviii. 
18).  For  this  sin  the  anger  of  the  Lord  was  kindled  greatly  against  them  ;  which  is 
written  for  our  admonition,  that  we  should  not  lust  after  evil  things,  as  they  lusted 
(1  Cor.  X.  10).  Flesh  is  good  food,  and  may  lawfully  be  eaten  ;  yet  they  are  said  to 
lust  after  evil  things.  What  is  lawful  in  itself  becomes  evil  to  us  when  it  is  what 
God  doth  not  allot  to  us,  and  yet  we  eagerly  desire  it.  II.  Moses  himself,  though 
so  meek  and  good  a  man,  is  uneasy  upon  this  occasion.  Moses  also  was  displeased. 
Now — 1.  It  must  be  coufesseil  that  the  provocation  was  very  great.  2.  Yet  Moses 
expressed  himself  otherwise  than  became  him  upon  this  provocation,  and  came 
short  of  his  duty  both  to  God  and  Israel  in  these  expostulations.  (1)  He  under- 
values the  honour  God  had  put  upon  him  in  making  him  the  illustrious  minister  of 
His  power  and  grace  in  the  deliverance  and  conduct  of  that  peculiar  people,  which 
might  have  been  sufficient  to  balance  the  burden.  (2)  He  complains  too  much  of  a 
sensible  grievance,  and  lays  too  near  his  heart  a  little  noise  and  fatigue.  If  he 
could  not  bear  the  toil  of  government,  which  was  but  running  with  the  footmen, 
how  would  he  bear  the  terrors  of  war,  which  was  contending  with  horses  ?  He  might 
easily  have  furnished  himself  with  considerations  enough  to  enable  him  to  slight 
their  clamours  and  make  nothing  of  them.  (3)  He  magnilies  his  own  performances, 
that  all  the  burdens  of  the  people  lay  upon  him,  whereas  God  Himself  did,  in  effect, 
ease  him  of  all  the  burden.  (4)  He  is  not  so  sensible  as  he  ought  to  be  of  the  obli- 
gation be  lay  under  from  the  Divine  commission  and  command,  to  do  the  utmost  he 
could  for  this  people,  when  he  suggests,  that  because  they  were  not  the  children  of 
his  body  begotten,  therefore  he  was  not  concerned  to  take  a  fatherly  care  of  them, 
though  God  Himself,  who  might  employ  him  as  He  pleased,  had  appointed  him  to 
be  a  father  to  them.  (5)  He  takes  too  much  to  himself  when  he  asks,  "  Whence 
should  I  have  flesh  to  give  them?  "  (ver.  13),  as  if  he  were  the  housekeeper,  and  not 
God.  Moses  gave  them  not  the  bread  (John  vi.  34).  Nor  was  it  expected  that  he 
should  give  them  the  flesh,  but  as  an  instrument  in  God's  hand  ;  and  having  assis- 
tants appointed  him,  who  should  be,  as  the  apostle  speaks  (1  Cor.  xii.  28),  helps, 
governments,  i.e.,  helps  in  government,  not  at  all  to  lessen  or  eclipse  his  honour, 
but  to  make  the  work  more  easy  to  him,  and  to  bear  the  burden  of  the  people  with 
him.  And  that  this  provision  might  be  both  agreeable  and  really  serviceable — (a) 
Moses  is  directed  to  nominate  the  persons  (ver.  16).  The  people  were  too  hot,  and 
heady,  and  tumultuous,  to  be  entrusted  with  the  election.  Moses  must  please  him- 
self in  the  choice,  that  he  may  not  afterwards  complain,  (h)  God  promiseth  to 
qualify  them.    If  they  were  not  found  fit  for  the  employ,  they  should  be  made  fit, 


CHAP.  XI.]  NUMBERS.  99 

else  they  might  prove  more  a  hindrance  than  a  help  to  Moses  (ver.  17).  Though 
Moses  had  talked  too  boldly  with  God,  yet  G!)d  doth  not  therefore  break  off  com- 
munion with  him  ;  He  bt-urs  a  great  deal  with  us,  and  we  must  with  one  another. 
"  I  will  come  down  (saith  God)  and  t  ilk  with  thee,  when  thou  art  more  calm  and 
composed  ;  and  I  will  take  of  the  same  spirit  of  wisdom,  and  piety,  and  courage  that 
is  upon  thee,  and  put  it  upon  them."  Not  that  Moses  had  tlie  less  of  the  spirit  for 
their  sharing,  nor  that  they  were  hereby  made  equal  with  him.  Moses  was  still  a 
nonsuch  (Deut.  xxxiv.  10).  But  they  were  clothed  with  a  spirit  of  government  pro- 
portionable to  their  place,  and  witli  a  spirit  of  prophecy  to  evidence  their  Divine 
call  to  it,  the  government  being  a  theociacy.  Note — 1.  Those  whom  God  employs 
in  any  service  He  qualifies  for  it ;  and  those  that  are  not  in  some  measure  qualified 
cannot  think  themselves  duly  called.  2.  All  good  qualifications  are  from  God ; 
every  perfect  gift  is  from  tiie  Father  of  lights.  Even  the  humour  of  the  discon- 
tented people  shall  be  gratified  too,  that  every  mouth  may  be  stopped.  They  arc 
bid  to  sanctify  themselves  (ver.  18),  i.e.,  to  put  themselves  into  a  posture  to  receive 
such  a  proof  of  God's  power  as  should  be  a  token  both  of  mercy  and  judgment. 
"  Prepare  to  meet  thy  God,  O  Israel  "  (Amos  iv.  12).  (1)  Gnd  promiseth  (shall  I 
say?)  He  threatens  rather,  that  they  should  have  their  belly-full  of  flesh.  See  here 
— (ft)  The  vanity  of  all  the  delights  of  sense ;  they  will  cloy,  but  not  satisfy.  Spiritual 
pleasures  are  the  contrary.  As  the  world  passes  away,  so  do  tLe  lusts  of  it  (1  John 
ii.  17).  What  was  greedily  coveted,  in  a  little  time  comes  to  be  nauseated,  (h) 
What  brutish  sins  (and  worse  than  brutish)  gluttony  and  drunkenness  are.  They 
put  a  force  upon  nature,  and  make  that  the  sickness  of  the  body  which  should  be 
its  health ;  they  are  sins  that  are  their  own  punishments,  and  yet  not  the  worst  that 
attend  them,  (c)  What  a  righteous  thing  it  is  with  God  to  make  that  loathsome  to 
men  which  they  have  inordinately  lusted  after.  God  could  make  them  despise 
flesh  as  much  as  they  had  despised  manna.  (2)  Moses  objects  the  improbability  of 
makins;  good  this  word  (vers.  21,  22).  It  is  an  objection  like  that  which  the  disciples 
made  (Mark  viii.  4).  He  objects  the  number  of  the  people,  as  if  He  that  provided 
bread  for  them  all  could  not  by  the  same  unlimited  power  provide  flesh  too.  He 
reckons  it  must  be  the  flesh  either  of  beasts  or  fishes,  because  of  them  are  the  most 
bulky  animals,  little  thinking  that  the  flesh  of  birds,  little  birds,  should  serve  the 
purpose.  God  sees  not  as  men  sees,  but  His  thoughts  are  above  ours.  He  objects 
the  greediness  of  the  people's  desires  in  that  word  to  suffice  them.  Note,  even  true 
and  great  believers  sometimes  find  it  hard  to  trust  God  under  the  discouragement 
of  second  causes,  and  against  hope  to  believe  in  hope.  Moses  himself  can  scarce 
forbear  saying,  "  Can  God  furnisli  a  table  in  the  wilderness  ?  "  when  this  was  become 
the  common  cry.  No  doubt  this  was  his  infirmity.  (3)  God  gives  a  short  but 
sufficient  answer  to  the  objection  in  that  question,  "Is  the  Lord's  hand  waxed 
short?  "  (ver.  23).  If  Moses  had  remembered  the  years  of  the  right  hand  of  the 
Most  High,  he  had  not  started  all  these  difficulties.  Therefore  God  minds  him  of 
them,  intimating  that  this  objection  reflected  upon  the  Divine  power  which  be  had 
been  so  often  not  only  the  witness,  but  the  instrument  of.  Whatever  our  unbelieving 
hearts  may  suggest  to  the  contrary,  it  is  certain — (a)  That  God's  hand  is  not  short. 
His  power  cannot  be  restrained  in  the  exerting  of  itself  by  anything  but  His  own 
will ;  with  Him  nothing  is  impossible.  That  hand  is  not  short  which  measures 
the  waters,  metes  out  the  heavens  (Isa.  xl.  12),  and  grasps  the  winds  (Prov.  xxx.  4). 
(b)  That  it  is  not  waxed  short.  He  is  as  strong  as  ever  He  was ;  fainteth  not, 
neither  is  we  iry.  And  this  is  sufficient  to  silence  all  our  distrusts,  when  means  fail 
us.  Is  anything  too  hard  for  the  Lord  ?  God  here  brings  Moses  to  this  first  principle  ; 
sets  him  back  in  his  lesson  to  learn  the  ancient  name  of  God,  the  Lord  God 
Almighty ;  and  put  the  proof  upon  the  issue,  "  Thou  shalt  see  whether  My  word 
shall  come  to  pass  or  not."  This  magnifies  God's  word  above  all  His  name,  that 
His  works  never  came  short  of  it.  If  He  speaks,  it  is  done.  (Matih  iv  Henri/,  D.D.) 
Grumbling  over  spirituul  food : — The  ancient  Jews  were,  by  no  means,  the  only 
people  who  grumbled  at  the  pi'ovision  set  before  them.  The  liread  of  Life,  provided 
in  the  various  ordinances  of  the  gospel,  for  the  strengthening  of  our  souls,  is  not 
always  received  with  thankfulness.  Whatever  rank  we  may  choose  to  assign  to 
preaching,  among  the  other  agencies  for  good,  none  can  deny  (hat  it  has  its  place, 
and  an  important  one  ;  and,  yet,  how  many  who  listen  to  it,  actuated  by  the  com- 
plaining spirit  of  God's  ancient  people,  presumptuously  exclaim,  "  Our  soul  loatheth 
this  light  bread !  "  The  manner  of  God's  servant,  and  the  message  which  he 
delivers,  are  both  brought  to  the  test  of  the  most  unsparing  criticism.  Imagine  a 
prisoner,  condemned  to  die,  awaiting  the  day  of  his  execution,  when  the  door  of  the 


100  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

cell  opens,  and  the  governor's  deputy  appears,  bringing  a  pardon  for  him.  The 
prisoner  is  overjoyed  at  this,  but,  instead  of  availing  himself  of  the  permission 
to  depart,  he  stops  to  criticise  the  manner  in  which  the  deputy  has  discharged  his 
duty.  "  Why  did  not  the  governor  send  a  man  of  more  ability  ?  "  he  impatiently 
asks.  "  How  can  he  expect  me  to  listen  to  a  messnge  delivered  in  tones  so  harsh 
and  discordant  ?  "  Has  this  pardoned  criminal  any  just  appreciation  of  the  favour 
shown  him  ?  Very  humble  men,  so  far  as  worldly  wisdom  is  concerned,  often 
accomplish  more,  in  teaching  people  "  the  good  and  the  right  way,"  than  those  who 
are  learned  in  the  schools.  One  who  had  been  listening  to  the  preaching  of  such  a 
servant  of  God,  asked,  in  surprise,  "  How  is  it  that  he  always  has  sometbing  new  to 
tell  us  ?  "  The  answer  was,  "  Why,  he  lives  so  near  the  gates  of  heaven,  that  he 
hears  a  great  many  things  which  we  who  remain  afar  off  know  nothing  about !  "  It 
is  not  the  musical  sound  of  the  bell  which  assembles  the  large  flocks  of  pigeons  at 
noonday  in  the  square  of  Old  St.  Mark's  in  Venice,  but  the  liberal  scattering  of  food. 
The  complaint  of  the  text  is  most  often  made  with  reference  to  what  is  called 
"  doctrine  preaching,"  and  even  those  who  enjoy  sermons  of  another  sort  are  ready 
to  say,  when  matters  of  this  kind  are  dwelt  upon,  "  Our  soul  loatheth  this  light 
bread."  God's  truth,  in  the  hands  of  the  Holy  Spirit  (Eph.  i.  17),  is  the  great 
instrument  for  the  world's  sanctlfication.  It  is  obvious,  however,  that  this  truth 
must  take  the  shape  of  definite  doctrine,  and  be  expressed  in  becoming  language, 
before  it  can  accomplish  this  purpose.  The  Church  and  her  ministers  deal  fairly 
with  you  ;  but  are  you  dealing  fairly  with  yourselves  ?  You  listen  to  preaching  ; 
but  is  it  with  the  sincere  desire  that  you  may  grow  in  grace  and  in  the  knowledge 
of  our  Lord  and  Saviour  ?     (J.  N.  Norton,  D.D.)  Vehement  longings  wrongly 

indulged  : — But  may  not  a  good  child  of  God,  either  in  sickness  or  in  health,  lust 
for  some  meat  more  than  another  without  offending  God  ?  Yes,  indeed,  for  it 
is  not  the  thing  but  the  manner  here  that  so  much  offended  God  ;  not  the  lusting, 
say  again,  but  the  fashion  and  circumstances  of  it.  To  wit,  their  presumptous 
crossing  the  Lord's  will  when  He  appointed  them  manna  from  heaven  to  be  their 
meat,  for  what  He  would  they  would  not,  and  this  was  not  fit.  Again,  this  was  not 
coldly  done  of  them,  but  with  heat  and  vehemency,  giving  as  it  were  the  reins  to 
their  lust,  let  God  think  what  He  would.  Here  was  ingratitude  for  the  Lord's 
gracious  care  of  them,  and  most  ungrateful  speeches.  Here  was  preferring  onions 
and  leeks  and  garlic,  and  such  mean  meats  before  the  Lord's  bounty  and  mercy  from 
heaven,  feeding  them  as  never  people  were  fed,  with  such  other  circumstances  of 
very  sinful  and  ill-behaviour.  This  is  that  offended  God,  which  if  we  make  use  of 
we  shall  do  well ;  for  surely,  though  not  altogether  in  like  sort,  yet  much  after  this 
fashion,  it  is  to  be  feared  we  provoke  the  Loi'd.  Such  meat  as  God  sendeth  us,  being 
far  better  than  we  deserve,  we  cannot  eat,  but  prefer  that  which  is  far  worse  before 
it,  not  without  some  proud  and  unthankful  check  to  God's  gracious  providence  and 
mercy  for  us  and  to  us,  giving  us  that  which  thousands  as  dearly  bought  with  His 
Son's  blood  as  we,  and  serving  more  than  we,  do  want.  And  this  not  in  any  weak- 
ness of  nature  acknowledging  gratefully  the  goodness  of  God  set  before  us,  but  in 
very  wantonness  and  delicacy,  not  once  seeing  or  thinking  of  the  bounty  of  God  in 
giving  us  that  we  have.  This  if  we  do,  it  cannot  be  excused,  but  must  needs  be  to 
God  very  displeasing,  and  to  us  very  dangerous.  Besides  meat,  how  do  many  in 
other  things  tempt  the  Lord  ;  as  if  God  in  mercy  and  most  gracious  care  of  them 
that  they  may  be  saved,  and  kept  from  the  infections  of  this  world,  have  given 
them  a  learned  and  painful  pastor,  that  spendeth  the  Sabbath  in  holy  exercises  of 
his  ministry,  forenoon  and  afternoon,  with  the  elders,  with  the  children  and 
servants.  How  doth  this  dislike  many,  and  how  lust  they  for  worse  things,  breaking 
out  in  wicked  speech  :  Oh,  that  we  might  have  piping  and  dancing,  quaffings  and 
drinkings,  church-ales  and  wakes,  and  such  like  as  other  parishes  have !  "  We  are 
cloyed  with  this  n)anna,  give  us  mirth  and  let  them  have  manna  that  like  it,"  &c. 
Do  you  not  shrink  to  think  what  will  be  the  end  of  this  murmuring,  and  the  punish- 
ment of  this  lusting?  Certainly  it  is  fearful,  and  I  pray  God  Christian  people  may 
have  the  feeling  of  it  before  it  be  too  late.  [Bp.  Babington.)  Grievances  regarded 
more  thamnercies : — When  we  enjoy  good  things,  we  look  at  the  grievances  which 
are  mingled  with  the  good,  and  forgt-t  the  good  ;  which  when  it  is  gone  then  we 
remember.  The  Israelites  could  remember  their  onions  and  garlic  and  forgot  their 
slavery.  So  because  manna  was  present,  they  despised  manna,  and  that  upon  one 
inconvenience  it  had ;  it  was  ordinary  with  them.  {R.  Sibbes.)  Murmuring  a 
waste  of  time  : — Oh,  the  precious  time  that  is  buried  in  the  grave  of  murmuring  I 
When  the  murmurer  should  be  praying,  he  is  murmuring  against  the  Lord ;  whea 


CHAP.  XI.]  NUMBERS.  101 

he  should  be  hearing,  he  is  murmuring  against  Divine  providences  ;  when  he  should 
be  reading,  he  is  murmuring  against  instruments ;  and  in  these  and  a  thousand 
other  ways  do  murmurers  expend  their  precious  time  which  some  would  redeem  with 
d  world .     (T.  Brooks.) 

Vers.  10-15.  Wherefore  hast  Thou  aflaicted  Thy  servant?— T^e  svfferings  of  the 
good  in  the  path  of  duty  : — I.  Look  at  the  afflictions  of  godly  men  in  the  path  of 
duty  AS  A  FACT.  1.  Good  men  suffer  afflictions.  2.  Good  men  suffer  affliction  in 
the  path  of  duty.  II.  Look  at  the  afflictions  of  godly  men  in  the  path  of  duty  as  a 
PROBLEM.  1.  A  difficulty.  Moses  felt  it.  2.  Faith  in  the  power  of  God  to  remove 
the  difficulty.  III.  Offer  some  hi;;^ts  towards  the  solution  of  the  problem. 
The  afflictions  of  the  good  in  the  path  of  duty,  under  the  blessing  of  God,  tend — 
1.  To  test  their  faith.  "  Character,"  says  Dr.  Huntington,  "  depends  on  inward 
strength.  But  this  strength  has  two  conditions  ;  it  is  increased  only  by  being  put 
forth,  and  it  is  tested  only  by  some  resistance.  So,  if  the  spiritual  force  or  character 
in  you  is  to  be  strong,  it  must  be  measured  against  some  competition.  It  must 
enter  into  conflict  with  an  antagonist.  It  must  stand  in  comparison  with  something 
formidable  enough  to  be  a  standard  of  its  power.  .  .  .  Suffering,  then,  in  some  of 
its  forms,  must  be  introduced — the  appointed  minister,  the  great  assayist^to  put 
the  genuineness  of  faith  to  the  proof  and  purify  it  of  its  dross."  2.  To  promote 
their  perfection.  "  As  the  Perfect  One  reached  His  perfectness  through  suffering," 
says  Dr.  Ferguson,  "  so  it  was  with  His  servant.  It  was  through  the  fire  and  the 
flame  that  the  law  of  separation  and  refinement  acted  on  the  whole  nature,  and 
gave  to  it  higher  worth  and  glory.  Trial  ripened  his  manly  spirit  and  made 
it  patient  to  endure."  3.  To  enhance  their  joy  hereafter  (cf.  Matt.  v.  10-12  ; 
Rom.  viii.  17,  18 ;  2  Cor.  iv.  17,  18 ;  Eev.  vii.  14-17).  4.  To  promote  the  good 
of  the  race.  The  Christian  is  called  to  "  know  the  fellowship  of  Christ's  sufferings  " 
— to  suffer  vicariously  with  Him  that  others  may  be  saved  and  blessed.  In  the 
privilege  of  this  high  fellowship  the  sharpest  sufferings  become  sacred  and  exalting 
services.  Conclusion  :  1.  Severe  afflictions  in  the  path  of  duty  are  in  full  accord 
with  the  character  of  God.  2.  Such  sufferings  are  quite  compatible  with  the  favour 
of  God  towards  us  (cf.  Heb.  xii.  5-11).  3.  When  severe  suffering  leads  to  sore 
perplexity  let  us  seek  help  of  God  (cf.  Psa.  Ixxiii.  16,  17).  (W.  Jones.)  The 
burdens  of  leadership : — I.  That  the  position  of  leader  or  governor  of  men  is 
A  very  trying  one.  1.  Because  of  the  responsible  nature  of  the  duties  of  leader- 
ship. 2.  Because  of  the  interest  which  the  true  leader  takes  in  his  charge.  3. 
Because  of  the  intractableness  of  men.     II.  The  true  leader  of  men  must  often 

BE  PAINFULLY  CONSCIOUS  OF  HIS  INSUFFICIENCY.  III.  ThE  ABLEST  AND  HOLIEST  LEADERS 
OF    MEN    SOMETIMES    FAIL    UNDER   THE    BURDENS   OF    THEIR    POSITION.        CoUClusiou  :    1. 

Great  honours  involve  great  obligations.  2.  A  man  may  fail  even  in  the  strongest 
point  of  his  character.  Moses  was  pre-eminently  meek,  yet  here  he  is  petulant, 
(fee.  Therefore,  "  Watch  thou  in  all  things,"  &c.  3.  It  is  the  duty  of  men  not 
to  increase,  but  if  possible  to  lessen  the  difficulties  and  trials  of  leadership.  (Ihid.) 
Seeing  afflictions  from  God's  standpoint : — Christian  friend,  did  you  ever  take  your 
stand  beside  your  God,  and  see  what  there  is  to  be  seen  ?  Do  so ;  and  it  may  be 
that,  in  your  deprivations  and  disappointments,  you  will  behold  a  wonderful  and 
beautiful  arrangement  by  which  you  can  glorify  God  far  better  than  by  the  gratifica- 
tion of  your  own  selfish  and  earth-bound  desires.  Never  were  the  Israelites  better 
off  than  when  they  had  just  enough  manna  for  the  day,  and  not  a  morsel  over  ;  and 
it  may  be  you  are  richer  and  happier  in  your  present  condition  than  you  could 
have  been  in  any  other.  See  if  it  be  not  so  1  "I  thank  God  !  "  said  one,  "  that  I 
lost  my  all ;  for  it  has  led  me  up  into  many  blessed  experiences  with  my  God  which 
I  never  knew  while  I  was  held  down  by  the  golden  chain  of  worldly  possessions. 
Then  my  affections  were  set  on  things  on  the  earth,  but  now  they  rise  to  heaven." 
If  you  see  things  from  God's  standpoint  your  black  trouble  will  appear  fringed  with 
brightness,  relieving  the  monotonous  darkness  upon  which  you  have  fixed  your 
steady  gaze  far  too  long  already.  Look  at  your  prolonged  affliction  from  this  point 
of  view,  and  you  will  discern  secret  fingers  carving  the  delicate  "  lily  work  "  which 
shall  adorn  you  in  the  upper  sanctuary,  when  you  become  a  pillar  in  the  temple 
of  your  God.  It  may  be  by  the  very  method  so  distasteful  to  you,  the  cherubim  of 
adoring  reverence  are  being  woven  into  the  textore  of  your  being.  Yes,  do  see  what 
there-is  to  be  seen,  for  in  every  dispensation  there  is  the  hand  of  a  Divine  purpose, 
full  of  love,  and  wisdom,  and  grace.  (C.  H.  Spnrgeon.)  Afflictions  may  he  full 
of  mercies  : — In  one  of  the  German  picture  galleries  is  a  paiuting  called  "  Cioud-^ 


102  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

land."  It  hangs  at  the  end  of  a  long  gallery,  and,  at  first  sight,  j.^  looks  like 
a  huge,  repulsive  dauh  of  confused  colour,  without  form  or  comeliness.  As  you 
walk  toward  it  tbe  picture  begins  to  take  shape.  It  proves  to  be  a  mass  of  exquisite 
little  cherub  faces,  like  those  at  the  head  of  the  canvas  in  Raphael's  "  Madonna 
San  Sisto."  If  you  come  close  to  the  picture  you  see  only  an  innumerable 
company  of  little  angels  and  cherubims.  How  often  the  soul  that  is  frightened  by 
trials  sees  nothing  but  a  confused  and  repulsive  mass  of  broken  expectations  and 
crushed  hopes !  But  if  that  soul,  instead  of  fleeing  away  into  unbelief  and  despair, 
would  only  draw  up  near  to  God,  it  would  soon  discover  that  the  cloud  was  full  of 
angels  of  mercy.  In  one  cherub  face  it  would  see,  "  Whom  I  love,  I  chasten." 
Another  angel  would  say,  "All  things  work  ^pgether  for  good  to  them  that  love 
God."  (T.  L.  Cuyler.)  Jjjiiction  prefei-able  to  sin: — Here  are  two  guests  come  to 
my  door ;  both  of  them  ask  to  have  a  lodging  with  me.  The  one  is  called 
Afdiction  ;  he  has  a  very  grave  voice,  and  a  very  heavy  hand,  and  he  looks  at  me 
with  fierce  eyes.  The  other  is  called  Sin,  and  he  is  very  solt-spoken,  and  very  fair, 
and  his  words  are  softer  than  butter.  Let  me  scan  their  faces,  let  me  examine 
them  as  to  their  character,  I  must  not  be  deceived  by  appearances.  I  will  ask  my 
two  friends  who  would  lodge  with  me,  to  open  their  hands.  When  my  friend 
Affliction,  with  some  little  difficulty  opens  his  hand,  I  find  that,  rough  as  it  is,  he 
carries  a  jewel  inside  it,  and  that  he  meant  to  leave  that  jewel  at  my  house.  But 
as  for  my  soft-spoken  friend  Sin,  when  I  force  him  to  show  me  what  that  is  which 
he  hides  in  his  sleeve,  I  find  that  it  is  a  dagger  with  which  he  would  have  stabbed 
me.  What  shall  I  do,  then,  if  I  am  wise  ?  Why,  I  should  be  very  glad  if  they 
would  both  be  good  enough  to  go  and  stop  somewhere  else,  but  if  I  must  entertain 
one  of  the  two,  I  would  shut  my  door  in  the  face  of  smooth-spoken  Sin,  and  say 
to  the  rougher  and  ugUer  visitor,  Affliction,  "  Come  and  stop  with  me,  for  may  be 
God  sent  you  as  a  messenger  of  mercy  to  my  soul."     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  16-20.  Gather  unto  Me  seventy  men  of  the  elders. — The  answer  of  God  to 
the  appeals  of  men. — I.  The  Lord's  answek  to  the  appeal  of  His  much-tried 
SERVANT.  1.  'The  number  of  the  assistants.  2.  Their  selection.  3.  The  qualifica- 
tion imparted  to  them.  II.  The  Lord's  answer  to  the  appeal  of  His  perverse 
PEOPLE.  1.  Eecognises  the  sinful  character  of  their  appeal.  2.  Demands  prepara- 
tion for  the  granting  of  their  appeal.  3.  Promises  the  most  abundant  bestowment 
of  that  which  tbey  had  so  passionately  and  sinfully  desired.  Conclusion  :  Mark 
well — 1.  The  disgusting  nature  of  the  sins  of  gluttony  and  drunkenness.  2.  The 
necessity  of  firmly  controlling  carnal  desires.  Even  those  animal  appetites  which 
are  lawful  must  be  kept  subordinate  to  higher  things.  3.  The  necessity  of  sub- 
missiveness  in  prayer.     {W.   Jones.)         The  seventy  elders: — I.  The  calling  of 

THE    seventy   elders    IS   AN    INSTANCE    OF    THE    ORGANISING   ACTION    OF    THE    SPIRIT    OF 

God.  1.  A  new  want  needed  a  remedy.  2.  The  remedy  supplied.  3.  The  remedy 
for  the  want  extraordinary.  4.  The  remedy  had  its  counterpart  in— (1)  The 
mission  of  the  seventy  disciples.  (2)  The  ordination  of  the  seven  deacons.  II. 
The  Holy  Spirit  still  carries  on  the  same  work.  1.  The  Church  has  new 
needs.  She  must  pray  as  Moses  prayed,  and  realising  the  presence  of  the  Holy 
Ghost,  set  herself  to  meet  these  new  demands  on  her  energies,  in  scattered  hamlet 
and  crowded  alley,  where  Christ  Himself  would  come.  2.  "  Would  that  all  the 
Lord's  people  were  prophets  !  "  Each  Christian  is  a  Spirit-bearer.  Is  he  conscious 
of  this  dignity  and  responsibility  ?  Each  has  his  special  gifts.  (W.  Walters,  M.A.) 
Heljyers  for  Moses : — A  gracious  God  and  most  sweet  Father  is  moved  with  the 
complaint  and  grief  of  His  servant,  pitying  him  and  yielding  presently  helpers  to 
bear  this  burden  with  him  that  he  may  have  more  comfort.  Who  would  not  joy 
in  so  sweet  a  judge,  no  sooner  hearing  but  heljiing  His  servant  oppressed  with  a 
froward  charge.  Be  we  faithful  then  in  our  places  ever,  and  if  we  be  too  weak 
for  them  some  way  or  other  the  Lord  will  help.  These  seventy  men  He  will  have 
furnished  with  His  Spirit,  never  placing  any  to  do  a  duty  to  whom  He  giveth  not 
some  measure  of  nbilitv  to  do  the  same.  But  when  it  is  said  He  will  take  off  the 
Spirit  which  is  upon  Moses  and  put  upon  them,  we  may  not  think  that  He  lessened 
His  grace  to  Moses  ;  but  the  meaning  is,  I  will  give  to  them  df  the  same  Spirit  a 
portion,  whereof  I  have  di^tiibuted  to  him  so  great  a  measure;  thine  I  will  not 
diminish,  and  yet  they  shall  have  what  shall  be  fit.  (Bp.  Bahinqton.)  Dainties 
for  the  people  : — 0  sweet  God  !  Moses  He  will  comfort  oy  adding  helpers  unto  him, 
and  the  penple  also  He  will  satisfy  in  giving  them  flesh  which  they  so  lusted  for, 
and  that  not  ordinary  flesh,  nor  gross  meat,  but  quails,  which  to  this  day  are 


CHAP.  XI.]  NUMBERS.  103 

accounted  dainties.  And  not  for  a  meal  or  two,  or  a  day  or  two,  but  a  whole  month, 
together,  &c.  How  showeth  this  the  truth  of  that  Psalm  which  after  in  his  time 
was  made  (Psa.  1.).  Nay,  how  showeth  this  that  whatsoever  He  will,  that  can  He 
do  both  in  heaven  and  earth ;  and  therefore  blessed  is  the  man  that  putteth  his 
trust  in  Him.  Eemember  what  you  read  in  the  holy  gospel  (Matt.  vi.  25).  What 
dearth  so  great,  what  penury  so  pinching,  wherein  the  Lord  cannot  help  us  either 
ordinarily  or  extraordinarily  ?  Can  He  thus  glut  His  great  host  with  dainty  quails, 
and  caunot  He  send  you  and  yours  bread  ?  Fear  not,  but  cleave  unto  Him  fast, 
and  even  past  hope  if  the  case  should  be  such,  yet  under  hope  believe  all  the 
Scriptures,  and  that  He  will  never  leave  you  succourless  that  openeth  His  hand  and 
fiUeth  all  things  with  plenteousness.  Only  consider  that  many  ways  He  ever 
exerciseth  the  faith  of  His  children  and  their  patience,  whose  duty  is  to  bear  with 
contentment  what  He  sendeth,  praying  to  Him  to  remember  mercy,  and  to  lay  no 
moie  upon  us  than  we  are  able  to  bear,  as  He  hath  promised,  use  such  means  as 
you  can  by  just  and  honest  labour  or  otherwise;  and  be  assured,  in  goodness  He 
will  step  in  when  He  seeth  time.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  23.  Is  the  Lord's  hand  waxed  short  ? — God's  challenge  to  the  faith  and 
co-operation  of  His  people : — I.    These    words    have    special    kefeeence    to    a 

DiVINELY-EEVEALED     PUEPOSE    WHICH    STAGGERS    HDMAN    REASON.       1.    Let     US    lOok     at 

this  purpose.  "  God  hath  sent  His  Son  into  the  world,  .  .  .  that  the  world  through 
Him  might  be  saved."  2.  The  difiSculties  in  the  way  of  this  gracious  purpose, 
which  excite  men's  fears.  There  is  the  inveterate  carnality  of  the  human  heart,  the 
stubborn  resistance  of  the  human  will  to  the  Divine  ;  there  is  the  stohd  indifference 
of  great  masses  in  Christian  lands  to  the  practical  duties  and  claims  of  religion  ; 
and  the  growing  scepticism  of  the  day  regarding  the  verities  of  the  gospel.  Consider 
also  the  prevalence  of  idolatrous  systems  and  heathen  superstitions  among  great 
masses  of  mankind.  Take  also  the  subtle  rationalism  and  keen-witted  infidelity 
■which  prevail  in  civilised  and  semi-Christianised  countries.  It  requires  strong  faith 
in  a  man  to  calmly  survey  this  formidable  host  of  evil  in  the  world  and  then  take 
his  stand  by  the  side  of  Christ,  confident  that  His  cause  will  triumph.     H.  We 

HAVE     IN    THESE    WORDS    AN     ASSERTION     OF    DiVINE     POWER    WHICH    WARRANTS     HUMAN 

CONFIDENCE.  God's  purjjose  is  a  promise.  He  stakes  His  character  on  the  fulfil- 
ment of  His  Word.  1.  He  cannot  forget.  2.  He  cannot  fail  through  insincerity. 
3.  He  cannot  fail  through  inadequate  power  to  perform.  HI.  In  these  words  we 
HAVE  God's  challenge  to  the  earnest  faith,  prayer,  and  co-operation  of  His 
people.  1.  The  true  attitude  of  the  Christian  labourer  or  the  Church  is  to  stand, 
with  one  hand  of  believing  prayer  taking  hold  of  God,  and  the  other  hand  of  loving 
labour  taking  hold  of  fallen  man,  that  the  fallen  may  be  raised,  and  the  lost  saved. 
2.  When  we  are  ready  for  a  blessing,  God  will  not  fail  to  bestow  it.  {John 
Innocent.)  The  glorious  right  hand  of  God  : — I.  With  regard  to  the  Church  as 
_A  WHOLE,  bow  often  is  it  true  that  she  so  behaveth  herself  as  if  she  had  a  question 
in  her  mind  as  to  whether  the  Lord's  hand  had  waxed  short  ?  The  mass  of  us 
would  be  afraid  to  go  out  trusting  in  God  to  supply  our  needs.  We  should  need 
first  that  everything  should  be  prepared  for  us,  and  that  the  way  should  be  paved  ; 
but  we  are  not  ready  to  leap  as  champions  upon  the  wall  of  the  citadel,  leading  the 
forlorn  hope  and  planting  the  standard  where  it  never  stood  before.  No,  we  can 
follow  in  the  track  of  others.  We  have  few  Careys  and  few  Knibbs,  few  men  who 
can  go  first  and  foremost  saying,  "This  is  God's  cause;  Jehovah  is  the  only  God, 
and  in  the  name  of  the  Eternal  let  the  idols  be  abolished."  Oh,  for  more  anointed 
■ones  to  preach  the  gospel  believing  in  its  intrinsic  might,  assured  that  where  it  is 
preached  faithfully,  the  Spirit  of  God  is  never  absent !  0  Zion  !  get  thee  up,  get 
thee  up  !  Count  no  more  thy  hosts,  for  their  strength  is  thy  weakness  ;  measure 
no  longer  thy  wealth,  for  thy  wealth  has  often  been  thy  poverty,  and  thy  poverty 
thy  wealth ;  think  not  of  the  learning  or  the  eloquence  of  thy  ministers  and 
missionaries,  for  full  often  these  things  do  but  stand  in  the  way  of  the  Eternal  God. 
But  come  thou  forth  in  simple  confidence  in  His  promise,  and  thou  shalt  see 
-whether  He  will  not  do  according  to  His  Word.  II.  When  believers  doubt  their 
God  with  regard  to  Providence,  the  question  might  well  be  asked  of  them,  "  Is 
the  Lord's  hand  waxed  short  ?  "  I  do  not  doubt  tliat  I  am  speaking  to  some  who 
have  had  many  losses  and  crosses  in  their  business.  Instead  of  getting  forward 
they  are  going  back,  and  perhaps  even  bankruptcy  states  them  in  the  face.  Or 
possibly,  being  hard-working  men,  they  may  have  been  long  out  of  employment, 
iuid  nothing  seems  now  to  be  before  their  eyes  but  the  starvation  of  themselves  and 


104  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xr. 

their  little  ones.  It  is  hard  to  bear  tliis.  But  dost  thou  doubt,  0  believer,  dost 
thou  doubt  as  to  whether  God  will  fulfil  His  promise  wherein  He  said,  "  His  place 
of  defence  shall  be  the  munitions  of  rocks ;  bread  shall  be  given  him  ;  his  waters 
shall  be  sure  "  ?  Thy  God  heareth  the  young  ravens  when  they  cry,  and  giveth 
liberally  to  all  the  creatures  that  His  hands  hath  made,  and  will  He  forget  His  sons 
and  His  daughters — His  people  bought  with  blood.  His  own  peculiar  heritage  ?  No  ; 
dare  to  believe  Him  now.  His  hand  has  not  waxed  short.  Please  not  Satan,  and 
vex  not  thyself  by  indulging  anymore  those  hard  thoughts  of  Him.  Say,  "My 
Father,  Thou  wilt  hear  my  cry  ;  Thou  wilt  supply  all  my  needs  "  ;  and  according 
to  thy  faith,  so  shall  it  be  done  unto  thee.  HI.  There  is  a  third  way  by  which 
this  question  might  be  very  naturally  suggested,  and  that  is  when  a  man  who  has 
FAITH  IN  Christ  is  exercised  with  doubts  and  tears  with  regard  to  his  own 

PINAL   PERSEVERANCE    OR    HIS    OWN    PRESENT   ACCEPTANCE    IN    ChRIST.        IV.    This    is    a 

question  which  I  may  well  ask  of  any  here  present  who  are  convinced  or  sin,  but 

ARE    afraid     to     TRUST     THEIR    SOULS     NOW,   AT    THIS   VERY   HOUR,    IN     THE    HAND    OF    A 

LOVING  Saviour.  "  Oh,  He  cannot  save  me,  I  am  so  guilty,  so  callous  !  Could  I 
repent  as  I  ought,  could  I  but  feel  as  I  ought,  then  He  could  save  me  ;  but  I  am 
naked  and  poor  and  miserable.  How  can  He  clotLe,  enrich,  and  bless  me  ?  I  am 
cast  out  from  His  presence.  I  have  grieved  away  His  Spirit ;  I  have  sinned  against 
light  and  knowledge — against  mercy — against  constant  grace  received.  He  cannot 
save  me."  "And  the  Lord  said  unto  Moses,  Is  the  Lord's  hand  waxed  short? 
thou  shalt  see  now  whether  My  word  shall  come  to  pass  unto  thee  or  not."  Did  He 
not  save  the  chief  of  sinners,  Saul  of  Tarsus?  Why,  then,  can  He  not  save  you? 
Is  it  not  written,  "  The  blood  of  Jesus  Christ  His  Son,  cleanseth  us  from  all 
sin  "  ?     Has  that  blood  lost  its  efficacy  ?     V.  And  you  say,  do  you,  that  God  will 

NOT   AVENGE   TOUR   SINS    UPON    YOU,  THAT   YE    MAY    GO    ON    IN    YOUR   INIQUITIES   AND    YET 

MEET  WITH  NO  PUNISHMENT  ;  that  jB  may  reject  Chiist  and  do  it  safely.  Well,  soul,. 
"  thou  shalt  see  whether  His  word  shall  come  to  pass  or  not."  But  let  me  tell  thee 
His  hand  is  not  waxed  short ;  He  is  as  strong  to  punish  as  when  He  bade  the  floods 
cover  the  earth  ;  as  powerful  to  avenge  as  when  He  rained  hail  out  of  heaven  upon 
the  cities  of  the  plain.  He  is  to-day  as  mighty  to  overtake  and  punish  His  enemies 
as  when  He  sent  the  angel  through  the  midst  of  Egypt,  or  afterwards  smote  the 
hosts  of  Sennacherib.  Thou  shalt  see  whether  He  will  keep  His  word  or  not.  GO' 
on  in  the  neglect  of  His  great  salvation  ;  go  to  thy  dying  bed,  and  buoy  thyself  up 
with  the  false  hope  that  there  is  no  hereafter  ;  but,  sinner,  thou  shalt  see  ;  thou  shalt 
see.  This  point  in  dispute  shall  not  long  be  a  matter  of  question  to  be  cavilled  at 
on  the  one  side,  and  to  be  taught  with  tears  on  the  other.  (C.  H.  Spurgcon.)  A 
strange  question : — It  is  a  singular  thing  that  such  a  question  as  this  should  ever  be 
asked  at  all :  "  Has  the  Lord's  hand  waxed  short  ?  "  If  we  look  anywhere  and 
everywhere,  apart  from  the  conduct  of  man,  there  is  nothing  to  suggest  the 
suspicion.  1.  Look  to  God's  creation !  Is  there  anything  there  which  would 
make  you  say,  "  Is  the  Lord's  hand  waxed  short  ?  "  What  pillar  of  the  heavens 
hath  begun  to  reel  ?  What  curtain  of  the  sky  hath  been  rent  or  moth-eaten  ? 
Have  the  foundations  of  the  earth  begun  to  start  ?  Hath  the  sun  grown  dim  with 
age  ?  or  have  the  starry  lamps  flickered  or  gone  out  in  darkness  ?  Are  there  signs 
of  decay  to-day  upon  the  face  of  God's  creation  ?  Have  not  howling  tempests,  the 
yawning  ocean,  and  death-bearing  hurricanes,  asserted  but  yesterday  their  un- 
diminished mi^ht?  Say,  is  not  the  green  earth  as  full  of  vitality,  as  ready  to  yield 
us  harvests  now,  as  it  ever  hath  been  ?  Do  the  showers  fall  less  frequently  ?  No ; 
journey  where  you  will,  you  will  see  God  as  potent  upon  the  face  of  the  earth,  and 
in  the  very  bowels  of  the  globe,  as  He  was  when  He  first  said,  "  Let  there  be  light 
and  there  was  light."  There  is  nothing  which  would  temjjt  us  to  the  surmise  or 
the  suspicion  that  the  Lord's  hand  hath  waxed  short.  2.  And  look  ye  too  in 
providence  ;  is  there  aught  there  that  would  suggest  the  question  ?  Are  not  His 
prophecies  still  fulfilled  ?  Does  He  not  cause  all  things  to  work  together  for  good  ? 
Do  the  cattle  on  a  thousand  hills  low  out  to  Him  for  hunger  ?  Do  you  meet  with 
the  skeletons  of  birds  that  have  fallen  to  the  ground  from  famine?  Doth  He 
neglect  to  give  to  the  fish  their  food,  or  do  the  sea-monsters  die  ?  Doth  not  God 
still  open  His  hand  and  supply  the  want  of  every  living  thing?  Is  He  less 
bounteous  to-day  than  He  was  in  the  time  of  Adam  ?  Is  not  the  cornucopia  still 
as  full?  Doth  He  not  still  scatter  mercies  with  both  His  hands  right  lavishly? 
Are  there  any  tokens  in  providence  any  more  than  in  nature,  that  God's  arm  hath 
waxed  short  ?  3.  And  look  ye  too  in  the  matter  of  grace ;  is  there  any  token  in 
the  work  of  grace  that  God's  power  is  failing?    Are  not  sinners  still  saved?    Are 


f  lAP.  XI,]  NUMBERS.  10.1 

not  profligates  still  reclaimed  ?  Are  not  drunkards  still  uplifted  from  their  sties  to 
sit  upon  the  throne  with  princes  ?  Is  not  the  Word  of  God  still  quick  and  powerful, 
sharper  than  any  two-edged  sword  ?  Where  have  ye  seen  the  sword  of  the  Lord 
snapped  in  twain  ?  When  hath  God  assayed  to  melt  a  h'  art  and  failed  in  the 
atteiupt?  Which  of  His  people  has  found  the  riches  of  His  grace  drained  dry? 
Which  of  His  children  ha'^  had  to  mourn  that  the  unsearchable  riches  of  Christ 
had  failed  to  supply  his  need?  How  is  it,  then,  that  such  a  question  as  this  ever 
came  from  the  lips  of  God  Himself  ?  What  could  there  have  been  that  should  lead 
Him  or  any  of  His  creatures  to  say,  "Is  the  Lord's  hand  waxed  short?"  We 
answer,  there  is  but  one  creature  that  God  has  made  that  ever  doubts  Him.  The 
little  sparrows  doubt  not :  though  they  have  no  barn  nor  field,  yet  they  sweetly 
sing  at  night  as  they  go  to  their  roosts,  though  they  know  not  where  to-morrow's 
meal  shall  be  found.  "The  very  cattle  trust  Him  ;  and  even  in  days  of  drought,  ye 
have  seen  them  when  they  pant  for  thirst,  how  they  expect  the  water ;  how  the 
very  first  token  of  it  makes  them  show  in  their  very  animal  frame,  by  sone  dumb 
language,  that  they  felt  that  God  would  not  leave  them  to  perish.  The  angels 
never  doubt  Him,  nor  the  devils  either :  devils  believe  and  tremble.  But  it  was  left 
for  man,  the  most  favoured  of  all  creatures,  to  mistrust  his  God.  This  high,  this 
black,  this  infamous  sin  of  doubting  the  power  and  faithfulness  of  Jehovah,  was 
reserved  for  the  fallen  race  of  rebellious  Adam  ;  and  we  alone,  out  of  all  the  beings 
that  God  has  ever  fashioned,  dishonour  Him  by  unbelief  and  tarnish  His  iionour 
by  mistrust.  (Ibid.)  No  failure  of  potter  with  God  : — Amongst  all  the  gods  of 
the  heathen  Jupiter  was  in  the  greatest  esteem,  as  the  father  and  king  of  gods  and 
was  called  Jupiter,  quasi  jnvans  pater,  a  helping  father,  yet  (as  the  poets  feign)  he 
wept  when  he  could  not  set  Sarpedon  at  liberty;  such  was  the  imbecility  and 
impotency  of  this  master-god  of  the  heathen.  But  the  hand  of  our  God  is  never 
shortened  that  it  cannot  help.  He  is  ever  able  to  relieve  us,  always  ready  to  deliver 
us.  Amongst  all  the  gods  there  is  none  like  unto  Him,  none  can  do  like  unto  His 
works,  He  is  God  Omnipotent.     {J.  Spencer.) 

Vers.  27-30.  Eldad  and  Medad  do  prophesy. — Eldad  and  Medad : — Eldad  and 
Medad  seem  instances  of  unlicensed  preaching  and  prophesying;  and  this,  at  a 
time  of  scanty  knowledge  and  rare  spiritual  illumination,  was  not  without  its 
dangers.  So  thought  Joshua,  and,  jealous  for  Moses'  supremacy,  besought  him  to 
rebuke  them.  But  the  great  prophet,  wholly  wanting  in  the  thought  of  self, 
rebuked  Joshua  instead.  "  Enviest  thou,"  he  said,  "for  my  sake?"  and  then 
added,  in  words  of  noble  hyperbole,  "  Would  God  that  all  the  Lord's  people  were 
prophets!  "     I.  The  first  thought  that  occurs  to  us  in  reading  this  scene  is  the 

GOOD,  FELT  BY  THE   GEEATEST,  OF   ZEAL   AND   ENTHUSIASM.      And  the  SeCOUd  is,  hoW  tO 

discover  it,  how  to  encourage  it  in  God's  service.  But  then  comes  the  further 
question.  Have  these  men  the  prophet's  capacity  ?  Have  they  that  primary  want, 
the  prophet's  faith  ?  Have  they  five,  perseverance,  and  courage?  1.  The  prophet's 
faith.  Take  away  from  the  prophet  this  faith  in  the  living  God,  speaking  to  him, 
teaching  him,  encouraging  him,  in  the  midst  of  life's  sorrows  and  temptations,  and 
he  is  nothing.  Give  him  that  belief,  and  his  confidence,  his  courage  is  unshaken. 
2.  There  is  the  prophet's  belief  in  the  moral  order  underlying  the  established  order 
of  things,  as  the  only  safe  and  sure  foundation  on  which  peace  and  prosperity  in  a 
nation  can  be  built.  II.  The  prophetic  message,  however  varied  its  tone,  however 
startling  its  communication,  is  always  in  substance,  as  of  old,  the  same  :  "  He 
hath  showed  thee,  0  man,  what  is  good  ;  and  what  doth  the  Lord  require  of  thee, 
but  to  do  justly,  and  to  love  mercy,  and  to  walk  humbly  with  thy  God?"  III.  Would 
that  the  people  of  the  Lord  were  all  prophets  !  "  Would  that  we  had  all  more 
OP  THE  FIRE  OF  ENTHUSIASM,  leading  US  to  go  forth  and  act,  and  learn  in  acting,  not 
waiting  till  we  have  solved  all  doubts  or  perfected  some  scheme  of  action  I  IV. 
Zeal  may  often  make  mistakes,  but  it  is  better  than  no  zeal.  Truth  is  not 
merely  correctness,  accuracy,  the  absence  of  error,  nor  even  the  knowledge  of  the 
laws  of  nature.  It  is  also  the  recognition  of  the  moral  and  spiritual  bases  of  life, 
and  the  desire  to  promote  and  teach  these  among  men.  (A.  G.  Butler,  D.D.) 
Noble  to  the  core : — I  do  not  agree  with  those  who  think  that  there  was  any  diminu- 
tion of  the  spirit  that  rested  upon  Moses.  It  is  very  difiicult  to  speak  of  the 
subdivision  of  spirit.  You  cannot  draw  it  off  from  one  man  to  others,  as  you  draw 
off  water.  The  whole  Spirit  of  God  is  in  each  man,  waiting  to  fill  him  to  the 
uttermost  of  his  capacity.  It  seems  to  me,  therefore,  that  nothing  more  is  intended 
than  to  affirm  that  the  seventy  were  "  clothed  upon  "  with  the  same  kind  of  spiritual 


106  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  si. 

force  as  that  which  rested  upon  Mo^es.  For  sixty-eight  of  them  the  power  of  utter- 
ance was  only  spasmodic  and  temporary.  "  They  prophesied,  but  tliey  did  so  no 
more."  Emblems  are  they  of  those  who,  beneath  some  special  influence  like  that 
which  cast  Saul  down  among  the  prophets,  suddenly  break  out  into  speech  and  act, 
and  give  promises  not  destined  to  be  fulfilled.  Two,  however,  of  the  selected 
number,  who,  for  some  reason,  had  remained  in  the  camp,  sudd  nly  became  con- 
scious of  their  reception  of  that  same  spirit,  and  they,  too,  broke  out  into  prophecy 
and  appeared  to  have  continued  to  do  so.  Instantly  a  young  man,  jealous  for  the 
honour  of  Moses,  carried  to  him  the  startling  tidings,  "  Eldad  and  Medad  do 
prophesy  in  the  camp "  ;  and  as  he  heard  the  announcement  Joshua,  equally 
chivalrous,  exclaimed,  "My  loid  Moses,  forbid  them!"  eliciting  tlie  magnificent 
answer,  "  Art  thou  jealous  for  my  sake  ?  Would  God  that  all  the  Lord's  people 
were  prophets — that  the  Lord  would  put  His  Spirit  upon  them !  "  It  was  as  if  he 
said,  "  Do  you  think  that  I  alone  am  the  channel  through  which  the  Divine 
influences  can  pour  ?  Do  you  suppose  that  the  supplies  in  the  being  of  God  are  so 
meagre,  that  He  must  stint  what  He  gives  through  me,  when  He  give^'  through 
others  ?  If  it  should  please  Him  to  create  new  stars,  must  He  rob  the  sun  of  its 
light  to  give  them  brilliance  ?  Is  the  gratification  of  a  mean  motive  of  vanity  a 
matter  of  any  moment  to  me,  who  have  gazed  on  the  face  of  God  ?  Besides,  what 
am  I,  or  what  is  my  position,  amongst  this  people,  compared  with  the  benefit 
which  would  accrue  to  them,  and  the  glory  which  would  redound  to  God,  if  He  did 
for  each  of  them  all  that  He  has  done  for  me  ?  "  This  is  the  spirit  of  true  magna- 
nimity. A  spirit  of  self  aggrandisement  is  set  on  retaining  its  exclusive  position  as 
the  sole  depository  of  the  Divine  blessing,  and  this  has  the  certain  effect  of  forfeiting 
it,  so  that  fresh  supplies  cease  to  pass  through.  There  is  no  test  more  searching  than 
this.  Am  I  as  eager  for  God's  kingdom  to  come  through  others  as  through  myself? 
And  yet,  in  so  far  as  we  fall  short  of  that  position,  do  we  not  betray  the  eartlily  ingre- 
dients which  have  mingled,  and  mingle  still,  in  our  holy  service  ?  (F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 
Young  men  are  ordinarily  rash  injudying  others  : — The  doctrine  from  hence  is  that 
young  men  are  ordinarily  rash  in  judging  others,  yea,  more  rash  than  elder  men,  and 
consequently  more  apt  to  judge  amiss,  and  to  give  evil  counsel  and  sentence  of  such 
things  as  are  well  done.  Such  were  Rehoboam's  green  heads  ;  they  gave  green 
counsel,  and  such  as  cost  him  the  loss  of  the  greatest  part  of  his  kingdom  (1  Kings 
xii.  8,  13,  14).  The  reasons  are  plain.  First,  age  and  years  bring  experience  and 
ripeness  of  judgment  and  so  wisdom.  Youth  is  as  green  timber;  age  as  that  which 
is  seasoned  (Job.  xxxii.  7).  Again,  their  affections  being  hotter  and  stronger  are 
more  inconstant  and  unbridled,  ready  to  run  into  extremities,  as  untamed  heifers 
not  used  to  the  yoke.  Lastly,  they  put  far  from  them  the  evil  day ;  they  think 
themselves  privileged  by  their  age,  and  make  account  they  have  time  enough  here- 
after to  enter  into  better  courses.  The  uses  :  1.  This  teacheth  us  not  to  rest  in  the 
judgment,  nor  to  follow  the  counsel  of  young  men,  except  they  have  old  men's  gifts 
and  graces  in  them.  For  touching  gifts,  it  is  true  which  Elihu  testitieth  (Job. 
xxxii.  9).  2.  Let  young  men  siilfer  their  elders  to  speak  before  them,  especially  in 
censuring  things  that  are  strange.  3.  Seeing  rashness  and  unadvisedness  are 
specially  incident  to  youth,  let  them  learn  to  season  their  years  with  the  Word  of 
God,  let  them  make  it  their  meditition,  whereby  they  may  repress  such  hot  and 
hasty  and  headstrong  passions.  (]V.  Attersoll.)  Knvlest  thou  for  my  sake? — 
The  increase  of  the  R'deemer's  kingdom  : — Moses  had  nu  share  in  the  narrow  feelings 
which  Joshua  had  displayed,  feelings  of  envy  and  jealous.  He  had  no  wish  to 
engross  the  distinctions  of  Israel,  but,  on  the  contrary,  he  would  have  greatly 
rejoiced  had  all  the  congregation  been  richly  endowed  from  above,  though  he 
himself  might  have  ceased  to  have  been  conspicuous  in  Israel.  We  consider  that 
the  lawgiver  Moses,  when  so  finely  reproving  Joshua  for  envying  for  his  sake,  is 
worthy  of  being  admired  and  eariustly  imitated;  for  that,  in  thus  showing  himself 
above  all  littleness  of  mind  and  contempt  of  this  world,  so  that  God  might  be 
magnified  and  His  cause  advanced,  he  reached  a  point  of  moral  heroism — aye,  far 
loftier  than  that  at  which  he  stood  when,  in  the  exercise  of  superhuman  power,  he 
bade  darkness  cover  the  land  of  Egypt,  or  the  waters  of  the  Red  Sea  divide  before 
Israel.  We  are  not  bound  to  expatiate  at  any  length  on  the  magnanimity  thus 
displayed  by  Mcses.  We  have  adopted  the  instance  in  order  to  show  you  how 
direct  a  parallel  may  be  found  in  the  history  of  the  forerunner  of  our  Lord,  John 
the  Baptist.  So  soon  as  the  Saviour  entered  on  the  ministry,  the  great  o (lice  of  John 
was  at  an  end.  John  still  continued  to  baptize,  and  thus  prepare  men  for  the  dis- 
closures of  that  fuller  revelation  with  which  Christ  was  charged.     In  this  way  the 


CHAP.  XI.]  NUiUBERS.  107 

ministry  of  our  Lord  and  that  of  His  forerunner  were  for  a  while  discharged 
together  ;  though,  inasmuch  as  Christ  wrought  miracles,  and  John  did  not,  there 
was  quickly,  as  might  be  expected,  more  attendance  on  the  preaching  of  the 
Eedeemer  than  on  that  of  the  Baptist.  Now,  this  appears  exactly  the  ijoint  when 
in  truth  John's  disciples,  who,  like  Joshua,  were  jealous  of  the  honour  of  their 
Master,  thought  Jesus  intrenching  upon  his  province.  But,  however  galling  it 
might  be  to  his  followers  thus  to  see  their  master  neglected,  to  John  himself  it  was 
matter  of  great  gladness  that  He  whom  he  had  heralded  was  thus  drawing  all  men 
towards  Him.  And  tbe  Baptist  takes  occasion  to  assure  his  disciples  that  what  had 
moved  their  jealousy  and  displeasure  was  but  the  beginning — the  tirst  display  of  a 
growing  spirit  to  which  no  bounds  could  be  set.  They  were  not  to  imagine  that 
there  could  be  any  alteration  in  the  relative  positions  of  Jesus  and  John  ;  nor  that 
John  would  ever  take  that  part  of  which,  in  strange  forgetf ulness  of  his  own  sayings, 
they  seemed  to  wish  to  come  to  pass.  On  the  contrary,  he  wished  them  distinctly 
to  understand  that,  being  only  of  earth — a  mere  man  like  one  of  themselves — he 
must  decline  in  importance,  and  at  length  shrink  altogether  into  insignificance. 
Whereas  Christ,  as  coming  from  above,  and  therefore  being  above  all — possessing 
a  Divine  nature  as  well  as  a  human,  and  consequently  liable  to  no  decay — would  go 
on  discharging  His  high  office,  enlarging  His  sway  according  to  the  prediction  of 
Isaiah,  "  To  the  increase  of  His  government  and  peace  there  shall  be  no  end  upon 
the  throne  of  David,  and  upon  his  kingdom."  And  all  this  gradual  fading  away  of 
himself,  and  this  continued  exaltation  of  Christ,  the  Baj^tist  gathers  into  one 
powerful  and  comprehensive  sentence,  saying  of  our  blessed  Lord,  "  He  must 
increase,  but  I  must  decrease."  And  now  consider  more  distinctly  how  character 
was  here  put  to  the  proof ;  or  in  what  respects  either  Moses  or  John  deserve 
imitation.  The  truth  is,  that  it  is  natural  to  all  of  us  to  envy  the  growing  repu- 
tation of  others  ;  and  to  be  jealous  where  it  seems  likely  to  trench  upon  our  own. 
The  courtier,  for  example,  who  has  long  sought  to  stand  high  in  the  favour  of  his 
sovereign ;  and  who  perceives  that  a  younger  candidate,  who  has  just  entered  the 
field,  is  fast  outstripping  him,  so  that  the  probability  is  that  he  will  soon  be  widely 
distanced  ;  we  cannot  marvel  if  he  regard  the  youthful  competitor  with  irritated 
feelings  in  place  of  generously  rejoicing  in  his  rapid  success.  It  would  be  a  very 
tine  instance  of  magnanimity  if  this  courtier  were  to  cede  gracefully  the  place  to 
his  rival,  and  offer  him,  with  marks  of  sincerity  which  could  not  be  mistaken,  his 
congratulations  on  having  passed  him  in  the  race.  But  we  could  not  look  for  such 
magnanimity.  The  case,  however,  is  widely  different  when  it  is  in  the  service  of 
God,  and  not  of  an  earthly  king,  that  the  two  men  engage.  Here  by  the  very  nature 
of  the  service,  the  grand  thing  aimed  at  is  the  glory  of  God  and  not  personal 
aggrandisement ;  ami  there  is  therefore  ground  for  expecting  that  if  God's  glory  be 
promoted,  there  will  be  gladness  of  heart  in  all  Christians,  whoever  the  agent  who 
has  been  specially  honoured.  But,  alas !  for  the  infirmity  of  human  nature ;  there 
is  no  room  for  questioning  that  even  Christians  can  be  jealous  of  each  other,  and 
feel  it  a  sore  trial  when  they  are  distanced  and  eclipsed  in  being  instrumental  in 
promoting  Christianity.  We  are  far  enough  from  regarding  it  as  a  matter  of 
course,  that  a  veteran  in  the  missionary  work  would  feel  contented  and  pleased 
at  seeing  that  work  which  had  goue  on  so  slowly  with  himself,  progress  with  amazing 
rapidity  when  undertaken  by  a  younger  labourer ;  on  the  contrary,  arguing  from  the 
known  tendencies  of  our  nature,  we  assume  that  he  must  have  had  a  hard  battle 
with  himself  before  he  could  really  rejoice  in  the  sudden  advance  of  Christianity  ; 
and  we  should  regard  him  as  having  won,  through  the  assistance  of  Divine  grace, 
a  noble  victory  over  some  of  the  strongest  cravings  of  the  heart  when  he  frankly  bade 
the  stripling,  God  speed !  and  rejoiced  as  he  saw  the  idols  fall  prostrate  before  him. 
(if.  Melvill,  B.D.)  All  God's  people  tnust  beware  of  envy  : — Envy  is  an  affection 
compounded  of  sorrow  and  malice.  For  such  persons  are  malicious,  always  re- 
pining and  grudging  at  the  gifts  of  God  bestowed  upon  others,  and,  as  it  were,  look 
asquint  at  them  (as  Gen.  xxvi.  12-14,  27;xxx.  1;  xxxi.  1;  Markix.  38;  Johniii.  26,27). 
1.  Because  it  is  a  fruit  of  the  flesh  (Gal.  v.  21),  as  carnal  grief  and  hatred  are,  of 
which  it  is  compounded  :  for  it  maketh  men  repine  at  the  prosperity  of  others,  and 
that  which  is  worst  of  all,  to  hate  the  persons  that  have  those  gifts.  This  appeareth 
in  the  Pharisees  (Matt,  xxvii.  18).  2.  God  bestoweth  His  gifts  where  He  will,  and 
to  whom  He  will,  and  in  what  measure  He  will  (Matt.  xx.  15).  3.  It  procureth  the 
wrath  of  God,  and  is  never  left  without  punishment,  as  appeareth  in  the  next 
chapter,  where  Miriam,  the  sister  of  Moses,  is  stricken  with  the  leprosy,  because  she 
envied  the  gifts  of  Moses ;  God  showing  thereby  how  greatly  He  detested  this  sin. 


108  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTBATOR.  [chap.  xi. 

4.  Whatsoever  is  bestowed  upon  any  member,  is  bestowed  upon  the  whole  body 
{1  Cor.  xii.).  Whatsoever  is  given  to  any  part,  is  giving  for  the  benefit  of  the  whole 
Church  :  why,  then,  should  we  envy  any,  seeing  we  have  our  portion  in  it?  5.  It 
is  a  devilish  vice ;  it  is  worse  than  fleshly,  and  yet  if  it  were  no  more,  it  were 
sufficient  to  make  us  to  detest  it :  and  it  transformeth  us  into  the  image  of  Satan,  who 
envied  the  happiness  of  our  first  parents  in  the  garden  (Gen.  iii.  5).  So  Cain  was 
of  that  evil  one  (1  John  iii.  12),  and  envied  his  brother,  because  God  accepted  him 
and  his  sacrifice  (Gen.  iv.  5).  6.  It  crossetb  and  controlleth  the  wisdom  of  God  in 
the  distribution  of  His  gifts  and  graces,  as  if  God  had  <  o  le  them  wrong  and  been  too 
good  to  others :  we  can  challenge  nothing  as  due  to  ourselves,  but  whatsoever  we 
liave  we  have  it  freely:  howbeit,  the  envious  like  not  His  administration,  but 
dislike  that  others  should  enjoy  that  which  they  want.  7.  It  is  against  the  rule  of 
charity  which  rejoiceth  at  the  good  of  others  (1  Cor.  xiii.),  and  is  ready  to  bestow 
and  communicate  good  things  where  is  want  of  them.  So,  then,  where  envy  is,  there 
charity  is  not ;  and  where  charity  is,  there  envy  is  not.  Uses :  1.  This  teacheth  us  that 
all  are  subject  to  this  evil,  even  they  that  are  godly,  and  in  a  great  measure  sancti- 
fied, are  apt  to  envy  at  others  excelling  in  the  graces  of  God.  The  best  things  are 
subject  to  be  abused  through  our  corruption.  2.  It  serveth  to  reprove  many 
malicious  persons :  some  envy  others  temporal  blessings :  others  envy  them  the 
grace  of  God.  If  they  have  more  knowledge  than  themselves  they  cannot  abide 
them,  but  speak  all  manner  of  evil  against  them.  Hence  it  is  that  Solomon 
opposeth  envy  and  the  fear  of  God  as  things  that  cannot  possibly  stand  together 
(Prov.  xxiii.  17),  and  in  another  place  a  sound  heart  and  envy  (Prov.  xiv.  30).  3. 
Let  us  use  all  holy  and  sanctified  means  to  prevent  it,  or  to  purge  it  away  if  it  has 
seized  upon  us.  Store  of  charity  and  humility  tempered  together  will  make  a 
notable  defence  and  preservative  against  this  malady.  {IV.  AttersoH.)  Needless 
envy  : — Moses  wondered  that  Joshua  should  be  so  excited  about  this  matter. 
He  correctly  estimated  the  young  man's  temper ;  he  said,  This  is  envy :  why  this 
envy,  Joshua  ?  is  it  for  my  sake  that  thou  art  making  a  grievous  miscalculation 
of  my  spirit  ?  do  not  be  envious  on  my  account.  Contrast  the  spirit  of  Moses 
with  the  spirit  of  Joshua.  From  the  greater  expect  more.  Thus  is  the  quality  of 
men  revealed.  Our  judgments  are  ourselves  put  into  words.  Not  that  this  was 
necessarily  what  might  be  termed  the  most  wicked  jealousy  or  envy.  There  is  a 
kind  of  envy  that  may  be  regarded  as  almost  chivalrous.  That  may  be  the  most 
dangerous  envy  of  all.  Let  us  get  at  the  root  of  this  matter.  Moses  certainly 
delivered  himself  from  all  imputations  of  the  kind,  for  instead  of  wanting  the 
prophecy  to  be  confined  to  himself  he  would  have  it  multiplied  over  the  whole 
host  of  the  people  of  God.  Great  men  do  not  want  to  be  great  at  the 
expense  of  others.  The  text,  though  an  inquiry,  is  as  much  a  revelation  of 
the  quality  of  Moses  as  it  is  of  the  quality  of  Joshua.  The  most  dangerous 
envy  is  often  envy  by  proxy.  Two  men  are  at  deadly  feud ;  circuinstances  arise 
which  lead  to  explanation;  explanation  leads  to  adjustment;  adjustment  soon 
becomes  hearty  reconciliation ;  the  two  principals  are  satisfied.  But  what  is 
all  this  tumult  in  the  air?  what  all  this  petty  criticism?  The  two  principals  are 
satisfied,  but  there  are  others  that  are  fighting  the  battle  over  again,  and 
professedly  in  the  name  of  one  of  the  reconciled  men  or  the  other.  This  is  folly. 
We  should  rather  anticipate  reconciliation  and  make  the  most  of  it  than  say, 
through  wickedness  of  heart.  Though  you  may  be  satisfied,  we  are  not,  and  we 
mean  to  continue  the  battle.  That  may  be  high  temper,  but  it  is  the  temper  of  the 
devil.  Along  the  same  line  of  illustration  we  come  upon  over-zeal.  The  Jehus 
rose  up  a  million  thick  on  the  road.  What  are  they  doing  ?  Converting  men  by 
force.  They  are  going  to  stand  this  no  longer  ;  if  men  will  not  go  to  church,  then 
they  shall  go  to  gaol;  if  men  will  not  obey  spontaneously,  they  shall  obeycoercively ; 
they  shall  have  no  longer  any  parleying  with  the  enemy.  The  only  compulsion  that 
is  as  everlasting  as  it  is  beneficent  is  the  compulsion  of  persuasion.  "  Knowing  the 
terror  of  the  Lord,  we  persuade  men."  Herein  is  the  dignity  and  herein  is  the 
assured  duration  of  the  kingdom  of  Christ ;  it  is  a  kingdom  of  light  and  love  and 
truth  and  reason.  Love  is  the  everlasting — and  I  will  add,  is  the  invincible — law. 
What  was  Joshua's  motive  ?  Was  he  afraid  that  other  men  would  rise  and  be  as 
lofty  as  Moses  ?  That  was  not  the  view  which  Moses  himself  took  of  the  occasion. 
Moses  was  not  afraid  of  competition.  Moses  proved  his  right  to  the  leadership  by 
the  nobleness  of  his  spirit.  Would  God  that  this  proof  of  Divine  election  attended 
all  our  policy  1  No  man  can  puU  you  down  but  yourself.  Moses  knew  that  what 
was  lacking  in  appreciation  of  himself  would  be  made  up  in  proportion  as  the 


CHAP.  XI.]  NUMBEBS.  lOG 

people  themaelves  became  prophets.     The  more  the  people  prophesied  the  more 
they  would   appreciate  Moses.      They  would   know  what  he  had  to  bear ;  what 
occasional  torment  of  soul.    Have  pity  upon  one  another ;  believe,  and  be  kind,  and 
hope ;  let  the  devil  do  all  the  bad  work,  you  get  to  your  knees  and  to  the  work  of 
brotherly  sympathy  and  help.    Moses  saw  what  Joshua  did  not  discern.   Moses  saw 
that  it  is  part  of  the  prophet's  function  to  make  other  people  prophets.     Great  men 
are  not  sent  to  create  httle  men.     Wherever  there  is  a  great  prophet  there  will  be 
a  prophetic  church ;  the  whole  level  of  life  and  thought  will  be  elevated.     Not 
that  the  leader  can  always  command  this  kind  of  evidence  and  credential.     It  may 
come  after  his  death.    Some  men  have  to  die  that  they  may  be  known.    Great  men 
are  inspirations,  not  discouragements.     That  is  the  difference  between  real  great- 
ness and  factitious  greatness.  Where  there  is  real  greatness  it  acts  as  an  inspiration, 
as  a  welcome  ;  there  is  a  benign  and  generous  hospitality  about  it.     Eeal  greatness 
can  condescend  without  appearing  to  stoop ;  real  greatness  can  be  humble  without 
being  oppressive  to  those  to  wbom  it  bows  itself ;  real  greatness  encourages  rising 
power  just  as  the  sun  encourages  every  flower  in  the  garden.  The  Church  of  Christ 
is  not  afraid  of  rival  mstitutions.    The  Church  says,  "  Enviest  thou  for  my  sake  ?  " 
— nothing  can  put  me  down ;  I  am  founded  by  Christ,  saith  the  Church,  I  am  built 
upon  a  rock  ;  the  gates  of  hell  cannot  prevail  against  me — "  Enviest  thou  for  my 
sake  ?  " — cease  thine  envying,  it  is  wasted  energy.     We  are  building  up  all  kinds  of 
rival  institutions,  and  yet  the  Church  rises  above  them  all.    Let  the  Church  have 
time  and  opportunity  to  utter  her  gospel  and  declare  herself ;  and  let  her  be  faith- 
ful to  her  own  charter,  and  all  will  be  well.     Truth  always  wins,  and  wins  often  at 
once  ;  not  in  the  palpable  and  vulgar  way  called  winning,  but  by  a  subtle,  profound, 
mysterious,  eternal  way  that  asks  ages  by  which  to  justify  its  certainty  and  its 
completeness.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.)        Would  God  that  all  the  Lord's  people  were 
prophets. — The  prophet's   ivork  : — The   prophets    were   not   mainly  foretellers   of 
future    events,    but    interpreters    and    forthtellers    of    God's   will ;    not    minute 
historical    soothsayers,    but     essentially    patriots,    statesmen,    moral    teacher>:, 
chosen  vessels  of  spiritual  revelation.     In  each  of  their  duties  they  were  great. 
As  statesmen  they  were  intensely  practical,  gloriously  fearless ;  seeing  that  there 
was  no  distinction  between   national  and  individual   morality;   recognising  that 
what  is  morally  wrong  can  never  be  politically  right.     As  patriots  they  were  men 
of   the  people  ;   pleading  against  oppression,  robbery,  and  wrong  ;   braving    the 
anger  of  corrupted  multitudes ;  reproving  the  crimes  of  guilty  kings.     As  spiritual 
teachers  they  fostered  in  Israel  the  conviction  of  their  lofty  destiny  by  upholding 
the  majesty  of  God's  law,  by  preserving  the  authority  of  His  worship,  by  pointing 
to  the  revelation  of  His  Son.     In  each  of  these  functions  they  have  an  eternal  value 
for  the  human  race.     Every  reformation  has  been  effected  by  following  in  the  path 
which  they  trod  as  pioneers.     The  Hebrew  prophets  were  marked  by  three  great 
characteristics — Heroic  Faith,  Unswerving  Hope,  and  Absolute  Belief  in  Righteous- 
ness.    1.  I  shall  name  their  heroic  faith.    "All  men  have  not  faith. "     They  either 
openly  deny  and  disbelieve,  or  more  often  saying  they  believe  act  as  though  they  did 
not.     They  are  cowed  by  the  power  of  wickedness,  or  tempted  by  its  seductions.    If 
they  begin  to  make  an  effort  for  good,  they  fling  up  the  contest  as  soon  as  they  find 
that  it  will  compromise  their  interests.     Most   often  they  will  brave  no  danger, 
expose  no  falsehood,  stand  up  against  no  wrong;  they  will  spread  their  sails  to 
every  veering  breeze;  they  will  swim  with  the  stream ;  they  will  look  on  success  and 
popularity  as  the  ends  of  living  and  the  tests  of  truth.     Not  so  the  prophets.     They 
will  not  be  deceived  by  the  vain  shows  of  the  world,  nor  seduced  by  its  bribes,  nor 
blunt  the  edge  of  their  moral  sense  with  its  manifold  conventions.     Terror  will  not 
daunt,  nor  flattery  lure  them.     Through  Uves  of  loss  and  persecution  they  will  go 
on  with  an  intense  and  quiet  perseverance,  which  no  success  will  cause  them  to 
relax,  and  no  reverse  subdue.     They  will  devote  every  energy  and  possession  to  the 
cause  of  God,  and  the  service  of  the  most  helpless  of  mankind.      2.  They  saw 
beyond.     Over  and  around  them  towered  the  colossal  kingdoms  of  the  heathen. 
The  giant  forms  of  empires  around  them  were  but  on  their  way  to  ruin,  because 
they  were  not  founded  on  righteousness.    Kings,  priests  and  mobs  might  be  against 
them  ;  they  were  but  vain  and  idle  men  (Jer.  i.  17-19).     And  if  they  had  the  faith 
which  looked  beyond  the  little  grandeurs  of  men,  they  also  had  the  hope  which 
looked  beyond  their  sorrows,  and   this   hope   spread  outwards   in   ever-widening 
circles.     Amid  the  apostacy  of  Israel  they  always  prophesied  that  Israel  should  not 
be  utterly  destroyed.     And  this  hope  was  concentrated  in  their  greatest  and  most 
unfaltering  prophecy  of  an  Anointed  Deliverer,  a  coming  Saviour  for  all  mankind  : 


110  TllK  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xr. 

a  Man  who  should  be  "  a  hiding-place  from  the  wind ;  and  a  covert  from  the 
tempest  ;  the  shadow  of  a  great  rock  in  a  weary  land."  3.  The  third  great 
characteristic  of  the  Hebrew  prophets  is  their  sense  that  the  verv  end  and  aim 
of  all  religion  is  simply  righteousness  :  that  there  is  an  abysmal  difference  between 
a  mere  correct  worship  and  a  living  faith.  Such  was  the  spirit  of  the  prophets. 
Let  us  conclude  by  cousidering  the  way  in  whioh  we  too,  in  our  measure,  are  called 
to  share  in  their  spirit,  and  to  continue  their  work.  (1)  We  must  try  to  do  so,  first, 
by  escaping  the  average.  He  who  has  an  unswerving  faith  in  a  few  great  moral 
principles  to  which,  through  evil  rejjort  and  good  report,  he  clings  ;  he  who  will 
only  look  on  oi^inions  and  practices  as  he  believes  they  must  appear  in  the  sight 
and  before  the  tribunal  of  God  ;  he  who  in  politics  knows  no  princip''  b  st  truth  and 
right :  he  who  in  the  path  of  duty  is  indifferent  to  human  praise  oi  hu  uan  blame  ; 
he  who  will  stand  firm  when  others  fail ;  he  who  because  the  house  of  his  life  is 
built  on  a  rock  will  do  what  God  has  given  him  to  do,  and  say  what  God  has  given 
him  to  say,  holding  his  own  against  chances  and  accidents,  against  popular 
clamour  and  popular  favour,  against  the  anger  and  prejudices  of  the  circle  among 
whom  he  moves,  that  is  the  true  prophet,  that  is  the  strong  Christian  man.  (2) 
And  as  ours  should  be  the  aim  of  the  prophet,  ours  should  be  the  qualities  of  his 
mind  and  heart.  Something  at  least  we  must  have  of  their  enthusiasm,  something 
of  their  devotion,  something  of  their  indignation  against  wrong ;  something,  too,  of 
their  courage.  (Archdeacon  Farrar.)  God  calls  all  His  jien^^l"  to  be  prophets  : — As 
of  old.  He  calls  His  Gideon  from  the  threshing-floor,  and  His  Amos  from  the 
sycamore  fruit;  His  Moses  from  the  flocks;  His  Matthew  from  the  receipt  of 
custom ;  His  John  from  the  priestly  family ;  His  Peter  from  the  fishing-net,  and 
His  Paul  from  ti.e  rabbi's  school  ;  so  now  He  calls  us  from  the  farm  and  from  the 
merchandise,  from  the  shop  and  from  the  office,  from  the  profession  and  from  the 
trade,  from  the  priest's  pulpit  and  from  the  servants'  hall.  He  calls  us  in  boyhood, 
He  calls  us  in  manhood,  He  calls  us  in  old  age.  In  His  sight  there  is  not  an  inch- 
high  difference  between  the  stage  on  which  the  prince  and  the  stage  on  which  the 
pauper  plays  his  part.  Both  alike  are  called,  and  called  only  to  be  good  men  and 
true,  brave  and  faithful.  Both  have  a  like  mission,  and  both  alike  shall,  if  they  do 
Christ's  work,  receive  His  hundred-fold  reward.  The  boy  at  school  who  will  not' 
join  in  the  bad  language  of  his  companions ;  the  soldier  in  the  barracks  who  will 
kneel  down  and  pray,  though  all  his  comrades  jeer  ;  the  tradesman  who  will  hold 
out  against  a  dishonest  custom  of  his  guild  ;  tbe  tenant  who  in  the  teeth  of  his 
interests  will  give  his  vote  at  the  dictates  of  conscience  ;  the  Churchman  who  for 
truth's  sake  will  try  to  break  the  tyrannous  fetters  of  false  opinion ;  the  philan- 
thropist who  will  bear  the  unscrupulous  taunts  of  the  base,  because  he  denounces  a 
nation's  guilt — these,  too,  have  in  them  something  of  the  prophet.  They  h^-lp 
to  save  the  world  from  corruption  and  society  from  spiritual  death.  This  was 
the  example  that  Christ  set  us  all.  That  man  is  most  a  prophet  of  Christ 
who  loves  Him  best.  And  he  loves  Him  best  who  keeps  His  commandments. 
His  commandments  were  but  two :  Love  God ;  Love  one  another.  (Ibid.) 
Monopoly  and  freedom  in  r(di(iious  teaching : — I.  A  protest  against  monopoly 
IN  religious  teaching.  1.  The  prevalence  of  this  monopoly.  2.  The  causes 
of  this  monopoly.  (1)  Love  of  power.  (2)  The  love  of  money.  3.  The  iniquity 
of  this  monopoly.  What  arrogancy !  Is  not  one  mind  as  near  the  fountain 
of  knowledge,  the  source  of  inspiration,  as  another?  II.  An  authority  for 
FREEDOM  in  RELIGIOUS  TEACHiNO.  1.  All  the  Lord's  people  ought  to  be  tenchers. 
The  possession  of  superior  knowledge  implies  the  obligation  to  disseminate  it.  2. 
All  the  Lord's  people  might  be  teachers.  All  that  is  wanted  is  "  that  the  Lord 
would  put  His  Spirit  upon  them  "  ;  and  this  Spirit  is  free  alike  to  all.  (Homilist.) 
The  Spirit  given  to  all : — "  Would  God,"  was  the  longing  of  Moses,  "  that  all  the 
Lord's  people  were  prophets,  and  that  the  Lord  would  i>ut  His  Spirit  upon  them !  " 
His  desire  was  fulfilled  at  Pentecost,  and  is  realised  now.  Every  believer  possesses 
the  Holy  Spirit,  not  for  his  own  spiritual  life  only,  but  to  be  a  witness  for  Christ, 
as  were  the  hundred  and  twenty  at  Pentecost.  Eijually  does  the  charge  to  publish 
the  glad  tidings,  and  the  promise  of  adequate  power  come  to  every  one,  according  to 
that  closing  command  of  inspiration,  "  Let  him  that  heareth  say,  Come !  "  Nay, 
more,  the  tongue  of  fire,  the  gift  of  utterance  in  its  fitting  measure,  is  always 
bestowed  upon  the  kindled  heart.  Every  one  who  seeks  humbly  and  prayerfully  to 
be  a  witness  for  Christ,  in  the  home,  in  the  ways  of  toil,  in  the  spheres  of  inter- 
course, in  the  house  of  prayer,  by  the  printed  page,  with  the  lips,  and  by  the  life, 
every  such  faithful  disciple  of  the  living  Master  shall  receive  His  promised  gift, 


CHAP.  XI.]  NUMBERS.  Ill 

the  Pentecostal  power  of  the  Holy  Ghost!     (J.    G.  Butler,   D.D.)  Divine  in- 

spiration : — In  different  forms  and  in  different  degrees  that  noble  wish  was  fulfilled. 
The  acts  of  the  hero,  the  songs  of  the  poet,  the  skill  of  the  artificer,  Samson's 
strength,  the  music  of  David,  the  architecture  of  Bezaleel  and  Solomon,  are  all 
ascribed  to  the  inspiration  of  the  Divine  Spirit.  It  was  not  a  holy  tribe,  but  holy 
men  of  every  tribe,  that  spake  as  they  were  moved,  carried  to  and  fro  out  of  them- 
selves, by  the  Spirit  of  God.  The  prophets,  of  whom  this  might  be  said,  in  the 
strictest  sense,  were  confined  to  no  family  or  caste,  station,  or  sex.  They  rose, 
indeed,  above  their  countrymen ;  their  words  were  to  their  countrymen,  in  a 
peculiar  sense,  the  words  of  God.  But  they  were  to  be  found  everywhere.  Like 
the  springs  of  their  own  land,  there  was  no  hill  or  valley  where  the  prophetic  gift 
might  not  be  expected  to  break  forth.  Miriam  and  Deborah,  no  less  than  Moses  and 
Barak;  in  Judah  and  in  Ephraim,  no  less  than  in  Levi;  in  Tekoah  and  Gilead, 
and,  as  the  climax  of  all,  in  Nazareth,  no  less  than  in  Shiloh  and  Jerusalem,  God's 
present  counsel  might  be  looked  for.  By  this  constant  attitude  of  espectalion,  if 
one  may  so  call  it,  the  ears  of  the  whole  nation  were  kept  open  for  the  intimations 
of  the  Divine  Ruler,  under  whom  they  lived.  None  knew  beforehand  who  would  be 
called.  ...  In  the  dead  of  night,  as  to  Samuel ;  in  the  ploughing  of  the  field,  as 
to  Elisha  :  in  the  gathering  of  the  sycamore  figs,  as  to  Amos  ;  the  call  might  come. 
.  .  .  Moses  was  but  the  beginning ;  he  was  not,  he  could  not  be  the  end.  (Dean 
Stanley.) 

Vers.  31-35.  They  gathered  the  quails. — The  quailn : — I.  Israel's  complaint. 
1.  Its  object  was  food.  2.  Its  nature  was  intense.  "Fell  a  lusting."  3.  It  was 
general.  4.  It  was  accompanied  with  tears.  A  faint,  weary,  disappointed  people. 
Tears,  chiefly,  of  discontent.  5.  It  was  associated  with  the.retrospections  of  memory. 
"  We  remember,"  <fec.  (ver.  5).  They  should  also  have  remembered  some  other 
things  of  that  past.  Their  bondage,  &c.  6.  It  made  present  things  distasteful. 
"  There  is  nothing  at  all."  There  was  a  time  when  they  did  not  call  the  manna 
nothing.  Longing  for  what  we  have  not  tends  to  cause  disparagement  of  things 
possessed.  II.  Moses'  perplexity.  Great  popular  leaders  have  often  been  per- 
plexed by  the  unreasonable  clamours  of  their  followers.  Have  often  been  urged 
farther  than  their  greater  prudence  and  wisdom  would  have  chosen.  People  have 
often  damaged  their  own  cause  by  exorbitant  demands.  1.  Moses  displeased  at  the 
position  in  which  he  found  himself.  "  My  wretchedness  "  (ver.  15).  His  faith 
faltered  (ver.  11,  12).  Esjiecially  displeased  with  the  people  (ver.  10).  2.  In  his 
perplexity  cried  to  the  Lord.  A  good  example.  God  "  a  pres<^nt  help  in  trouble." 
3.  He  acknowledges  his  own  weakness  (vers.  21,  22).  He  could  not  feed  the  people. 
It  would  be  suicidal  to  kill  the  flocks  and  herds,  even  if  they  were  enough.  Needed 
for  sacrifice ;  and  the  religious  well-being  of  the  people  of  most  importance.  4.  He 
receives  comfort  and  diiection  (ver.  23).  III.  Gon's  providence.  Nature  is  His 
storehouse,  in  which  He  has  garnered  food  for  man  and  beast.  He  made  all  living 
things.  Endowed  them  with  habits  and  instincts.  Made  the  quails.  Ordained 
their  migratory  habits.  Made  and  ruled  the  winds.  When  the  quails  came,  the 
wind  was  ready.  It  fulfilled  the  word  of  God.  The  wonderful  flight  of  birds.  The 
scene  in  the  camp.  What  was  sent  so  abundantly  seems  to  have  been  thanklessly 
received.  Divine  anger  went  with  the  gift.  Many  of  the  people  died.  Learn — 1. 
To  pray  for  the  blessing  of  contentment.  2.  To  seek  the  moderation  of  our  desires. 
3.  To  pray  for  grateful  hearts.  4.  To  acknowledge  the  hand  of  God  in  the  supply 
of  our  wants.  5.  To  be  chiefly  anxious  for  the  supply  of  spiritual  need.  [J.  C. 
Gray.)  The  graves  of  hint .- — I.  There  are  perpetual  resurrections  of  easily 
BESETTING  SINS.  1.  The  sidc  from  which  the  temptation  came  to  them  (vers.  4-6). 
This  mixed  multitude  corresponds  precisely  to  the  troop  of  disorderly  passions  and 
appetites,  with  which  we  suffer  ourselves  to  march  through  the  des.-rt  of  life. 
Passions,  desires,  ever  mad  for  indulgence,  and  reckless,  scornful  of  Divine  law.  2. 
The  special  season  when  the  easily  besetting  sin  rose  up  and  again  made  them  its 
slave.  It  is  a  fact  which  all  close  students  of  human  character  must  have  observed, 
that  there  is  a  back-water  of  temptation,  if  I  may  so  speak,  which  is  more  deadly 
than  its  direct  assaults.  You  may  fight  hard  against  a  temptation,  and  fight 
victoriously.  You  may  beat  it  oft',  and  then,  when,  weary  with  the  con  diet,  you 
suffer  the  strain  of  vigilance  to  relax,  it  shall  steal  in  and  easily  master  the  citadel, 
which  lately  it  spent  all  its  force  in  vain  to  win.  Beware  of  \our  Lest  moments,  as 
well  as  of  your  worst  ;  or  rather  the  moments  which  succeed  the  best.  They  are  the 
most  perilous  of  all.    II.  There  comes  a  point  in  the  history  of  the  indulgence  of 


112  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xr. 

besetting  sins,  when  God  ceases  to  strive  with  us  and  fok  ds  against  them,  and 
LETS  THEM  HAVE  THEIR  WAY.  1.  God  has  great  patience  with  the  weaknesses  and 
sins  of  the  flesh.  But  it  is  a  dreadful  mistake  to  suppose  that  therefore  He  thinks 
lightly  of  them.  He  regards  them  as  sins  that  must  be  conquered,  and,  no  matter 
by  what  sharp  discipline,  extirpated  and  killed.  He  knows  that,  if  tolerated,  they 
become  the  most  deadly  of  spiritual  evils,  and  rot  body  and  spirit  together  in  hell. 

2.  Hence  all  the  severer  discipline  by  which  the  Lord  seeks  to  purge  them,  the 
various  agencies  by  which  He  fights  with  us  and  for  us  against  their  tyrannous 
power.  What  is  life  but  one  long  discipline  of  God  for  the  cleansing  of  the  flesh  ? 
Are  not  the  after-pains  of  departed  sensual  joys  among  its  chief  stings  and  thorns? 

3.  Left  alone  by  God.  God  does  not  curse  us  ;  He  leaves  us  to  ourselves  ;  that  is 
curse  enough,  and  from  that  curse  what  arm  can  save  us !  We  will  have  it,  and 
we  shall  have  it.  We  leap  through  all  the  barriers  which  He  has  raised  around  us 
to  limit  us,  yea,  though  they  be  rings  of  blazing  fire,  we  will  through  them  and 
indulge  our  lust ;  and  in  a  moment  He  sweeps  them  all  out  of  our  path — perhaps 
roses  spring  to  beguile,  where  flames  so  lately  blazed  to  warn.     IH.  The  end  of 

THAT  WAT  IS,  INEVITABLY   AND    SPEEDILY,  A  GBAVE.         The  graVS    of  lust  is   one    of    the 

most  awful  of  the  inscriptions  on  the  headstones  of  the  great  cemetiry,  the  world. 
In  how  many  do  we  now  search  in  vain  for  fruits  whose  flowers  once  bloomed  there  ; 
for  generous  emotions,  swift  responses  to  the  appeals  of  sorrow,  unselfish  ministries, 
and  stern  integrity?  How  many  have  learnt  now  to  laugh  at  emotions  which  once 
had  a  holy  beauty  in  their  sight;  to  fence  skilfully  with  appeals  which  once  would 
have  thrilled  to  the  very  core  of  their  hearts  ;  to  grasp  at  advantages  which  once  they 
would  have  passed  with  a  scornful  anathema,  and  to  clutch  at  the  gold  which  was 
once  the  glad  instrument  of  diffusing  benefits  around  I  Yes  1  there  are  graves 
enough  around  us — graves  of  passion,  graves  of  self-will,  graves  of  lust.  Beware, 
young  men  ;  young  women,  beware  !  Beware  !  for  the  dead  things  buried  in  these 
graves  will  not  lie  quiet ;  they  stir  and  start,  and  ever  and  anon  come  forth  in  their 
ghastly  shrouds  and  scare  you  at  your  feasts.  No  ghosts  so  sure  to  haunt  thoir 
graves  as  the  ghosts  of  immolated  faculties  and  vinlattd  vows.  The  memories 
which  haunt  the  worn-out  worldling's  bed  of  impotence  or  lust  are  the  true  avengers 
of  Heaven.  The  brain  loses  power  to  repel  them,  but  retains  power  to  fashion  them. 
Once  it  could  drive  away  thoughts  and  memories  ;  now  it  can  only  retain  them,  and 
fix  them  in  a  horrid  permanent  session  on  their  thrones.  [J.  B.  Brown,  B.A.) 
The  Israelites'  sin  and  punishment : — I.  Their  sin  many  consider  a  trifle.  Certainly 
it  was  not  of  that  character  which  the  judgment  inflicted  on  them  would  lead  us  to 
anticipate.  We  read  here  of  no  enormous  transgression,  or  daring  violation  of 
God's  law.  All  they  were  guilty  of,  was  a  strong  desire  for  something  which  God 
had  not  given  them.  "  Something  evil,"  you  will  say  perhaps,  but  not  so ;  it  was 
one  of  themost  harmless  things  they  could  have  desired.  The  Lord  had  provided  them 
with  manna  for  their  support ;  they  were  weary  of  manna  and  wanted  flesh.  "  The 
children  of  Israel,"  we  read,  "  wept  again,  and  said,  Who  shall  give  us  flesh  to  eat?  " 
1.  You  see,  then,  the  nature  of  the  sin  we  have  before  us.  It  is  a  sin  of  the  heart — 
coveting,  desiring  ;  and  that  not  slightly,  but  very  eagerly,  with  the  full  bent  of  the 
mind.  It  is  not  spiritual  idolatry,  though  it  is  like  it.  That  is  making  too  much  of 
what  we  have;  this  is  making  too  much  of  what  we  want.  2.  Look  at  the  cause 
or  spring  of  Israel's  sin.  Their  desire  for  flesh  was  a  desire  springing  up  amidst 
abundance.  It  bad  its  origin,  not  in  their  necessities,  but  m  tht^ir  vile  affections, 
their  own  unsubdued,  carnal  minds.  3.  Observe  next  the  occasion  of  Israel's  sin. 
Oh,  dread  the  mixed  multitude.  Stand  in  fear  of  worldly-mimled  professors  of 
Christ's  gospel.  They  will  teach  you  to  lust  for  the  things  you  now  despise.  They 
will  drive,  if  not  the  fear,  yet  the  peace  of  God  from  your  hearts,  and  all  they  will 
give  you  in  exchange  for  it  will  be  a  craving,  aching  soul,  a  share  in  their  own  rest- 
lessness and  discontent.  4.  Mark  the  effect  of  their  sin,  its  immediate  effect,  I 
mean,  on  their  own  minds.  It  made  them  completely  wretched.  The  truth  is,  the 
mind  of  man  cannot  long  bear  a  sttong  and  unchecked  desire.  It  must  be  gratified 
or  have  a  prospect  of  being  gratified,  or  it  consumes  the  soul.  Perhaps  we  may  say, 
this  is  one  main  ingredient  in  the  misery  of  hell — a  longing,  and  a  longing,  and  a 
longing  still,  for  something  that  can  be  never  had.  5.  Motice  one  thing  more  in 
this  craving  of  the  Israelites — its  sinfulness  or  guilt.  Wherein,  then,  did  its  sinful- 
ness lie  ?  In  the  twentieth  verse,  God  tells  us.  He  pronounces  it  a  contempt  of 
Himself.  Moses  is  commanded  to  go  to  the  weeping  people,  and  say  to  them,  "  Ye 
have  despised  the  Lord  which  is  among  you."  And  how  had  they  despised  Him  ? 
In  three  respects.     1.  They  had  low  thoughts  of  His  power.     "  Who,"  they  asked; 


CHAP.  XI.]  NU3IBERS.  113 

*'  shall  give  us  flesh  to  eat?  "  Who  can  give  it?  2.  And  their  conduct  involved  in 
it  a  making  light  of  His  goodness.  They  had  evidently  lost  sight  at  this  time  of  all 
He  had  done  for  them,  or  if  not  so,  they  lightly  esteemed  what  He  had  done.  3. 
And  then  there  was  also  here  a  despising  of  God's  authority.  II.  Look  at  the  con- 
duct OF  THEIE  INSULTED  GOD  TOWAEDS    THEM   IN    CONSEQUENCE    OF    THEIR    SIN.       1.    He 

granted  their  desire.  We  are  told  again  and  again  that  it  displeased  Him,  that  His 
anger' was  kindled  greatly  against  the  people  on  account  of  it ;  but  how  does  He 
show  His  displeasure  ?  He  begins  with  giving  them  the  very  thing  they  wish  for ; 
He  works  a  miracle  to  give  it  them  ;  He  gives  it  them  to  the  utmost  extent  of  their 
desires,  and  beyond  them.  But  what  was  God  really  doing  all  this  while?  He  was 
only  vindicating  His  aspersed  honour.  2.  The  Lord  touk  vengeance  on  these 
Israelites,  and  this  in  a  fearful  manner  and  at  a  very  remarkable  time.  It  is  often 
the  will  of  God  to  make  our  sin  our  punishment.  We  eagerly  crave  something ;  He 
gives  us  what  we  crave,  and  when  we  have  it,  He  either  takes  away  from  us  all  our 
delight  in  it,  and  so  bitterly  disappnints  us,  or  else  He  causes  it  to  prove  to  us  a 
source  of  misery.  (C.  Bradley,  M.A.)  The  judgments  of  God  sometimes  come  very 
suddenly  : — In  the  midst  of  their  lusts  and  pleasures,  behold  how  God's  judgments 
come  upon  them.  They  had  feasted  a  long  time,  and  had  glutted  themselves  with 
their  flesh  ;  now  their  sweet  meat  had  sour  sauce.  The  doctrine  arising  from  hence 
is  this,  that  the  judgments  of  God  do  oftentimes  fall  upon  men  and  women  very 
suddenly  before  they  be  aware,  when  they  least  of  all  think  or  imagine  of  the  day 
of  wrath  (Job.  xx.  5-7,  xxi.  17 ;  Psa.  Ixxiii.  19 ;  Isa.  xxx.  13 ;  Exod.  xii.  29 ;  Dan. 
V.  30 ;  Luke  xii.  20).  The  destruction  of  the  wicked  shall  come  as  a  whirlwind 
(Amos  i.  14).  1.  This  is  plain,  because  they  have  through  God's  long-suffering 
increased  the  number,  weight,  and  measure  of  their  sins,  and  thereby  compel  the 
Lord  to  bring  His  judgments  suddenly  upon  them.  2.  God  respecteth  herein  the 
benefit  of  others  toward  whom  He  hath  not  used  as  yet  so  long  patience,  to  the  end 
that  they,  seeing  others  fall  into  sudden  destruction,  may  learn  thereby  not  to  abuse 
His  patience,  lest  they  also  be  suddenly  destroyed  (Dan.  v.  22) .  The  u?es  follow. 
1,  See  from  hence  the  happy  estate  of  all  such  as  think  of  the  day  of  their  reckon- 
ing betimes,  and  prepare  tueir  garments  that  they  be  not  taken  naked.  Such  are 
out  of  danger,  and  have  no  cause  to  fear  wrath  and  judgment.  2.  It  serveth  to 
teach  us  that  we  should  not  envy  at  the  peace  and  prosperity  of  the  wicked,  neither 
fret  at  the  flourishing  estate  of  the  ungodly  that  live  in  their  sins,  for  howsoever 
they  be  for  a  time  forborne,  yet  thereby  they  are  the  more  hardened  in  their  sins, 
till  a  far  greater  judgment  couje  upon  them.  Therefore  envy  not  at  them  though 
they  grow  great,  for  suddenly  shall  the  judgments  of  God  take  hold  upon  them,  and 
arrest  them  as  guilty  of  death,  and  then  they  shall  perish  speedily ;  so  that  there 
is  no  reason  to  grieve  or  grudge  at  their  prosperity.  3.  From  hence  ariseth  com- 
fort to  the  faithful.  4.  It  is  our  duty  to  watch  and  attend  with  all  care  for  the  time 
of  judgment.     {IV.  Attersoll.)         The  graves  of  lust: — I.  It  is  the  tendency  of 

LUST     TO     shorten    LIFE    AND   TO    BRING    MEN   TO    AN   UNTIMELY    GRAVE.         Our    anlmsil 

desiies  are  good  servants  ;  but,  when  they  gain  the  mastery,  they  are  fearful  tyrants, 
loading  the  conscience  with  guilt  and  the  body  with  disease,  ruining  life,  and 
making  eternity  a  hell.  The  Eomans,  it  is  said,  held  their  funerals  at  the  Gate 
of  .  Venus,  to  teach  that  lust  shortens  life.  The  pleasures  of  sin  are  dearly 
bought.  II.  Let  us  record  some  of  our  feelings  as  we  contemplate  "  the 
GRAVES  of  lust."  1.  The  one  is  of  intense  pity,  that  man  should  be  so  foolish  as 
to  live  in  sin  when  he  knew  how  it  would  end ;  that  life  should  be  so  wasted, 
and  opportuniiies  lost,  &o.  2.  The  other  is  of  awful  solemnity.  He  is  goue  ;  but 
whither  ?  He  has  given  up  the  ghost ;  but  where  is  he?  Let  us  all— 1.  Ascertain 
whether  or  no  we  are  on  the  way  to  this  grave.  2.  Eesolve  through  the  help  of 
God  that  we  will  not  be  there.  Seek  Jesus  Christ.  He,  and  He  oi  ly,  can  rescue 
us  from  the  power,  the  curse,  and  the  consequences  of  sin.  (David  Lloyd.)  In- 
ordinate desiren  : — Wliat  we  inordinately  desire,  if  we  obtain  it,  we  have  reason  to 
fear  that  it  will  \  e  some  way  or  other  a  grief  and  cross  to  us.  God  sufficed  them 
first,  and  then  plagued  them.  1.  To  save  the  reputation  of  His  own  power,  that  it 
might  not  be  said.  He  had  cut  them  off  because  He  was  not  able  to  suffice  them. 
And — 2.  To  show  us  the  meaning  of  the  prosperity  of  sinners  ;  it  is  their  prepara- 
tion for  ruin.  They  are  fed  as  an  ox  for  the  slaughter.  (Matthew  Henry,  D.D.) 
Graves  of  desire  : — The  last  thing  that  most  people  would  desire  is  a  grave,  and  yet 
how  often  does  desire  conduct  to  death !  We  will  notice  several  manifestations  of 
irregul'ir  anddesiructive  desire,  and,  in  conclusion,  show  how  desire  ma\  be  directed 
and  chastened.     I.  There  is  onsbasonable  desire.     The  desire  of  the  people  for 

8 


114  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ::i. 

flesh  was  not  unnatural,  not  illegal  in  itself,  but  it  was  unseasonable.  This  is  a 
common  fault  of  ours,  to  desire  legitimate  things  in  times  and  places  whic-h  are  not 
convenient.  1.  There  is  the  impatience  of  youth.  The  course  of  life  with  many 
in  these  times  reminds  us  of  the  days  when  we  were  lads,  and  when  in  the  early 
morning  we  went  a  distance  to  school,  takiug  our  dinner  with  ns ;  then  appetite 
was  keen,  and  it  was  no  unusual  thing  to  devour  our  dinner  on  the  way  to  school, 
starving  for  the  rest  of  the  day.  It  is  thus  with  thousands  of  infatuated  ones  a 
little  later  on  ;  in  the  greediness  of  their  heart  they  devour  and  waste  their  portion 
in  the  morning  of  life,  and  then  starve  thi-ough  the  long  tedious  day,  or  else  go 
down  to  a  premature  grave.  I  say  to  my  young  brethren,  wait,  rein  in  your  desires, 
move  slowly,  and  every  joy  of  Mfe  shall  be  yours  in  turn.  "  Haste  is  of  the  devil," 
is  a  saying  in  the  East  popularly  ascribed  to  Mahomet  himself.  We  may  accept 
the  saying  in  the  matter  before  us  ;  let  youth  be  moderate,  deliberate,  avoiding  all 
feverishness,  drawing  slowly  on  the  resources  of  life.  2.  There  is  the  eagernes-i  of 
manhood.  We  should  do  little  in  life  without  intensity,  but  there  are  times  when 
we  may  with  advantage  take  in  sail,  and  give  ourselves  time  for  rest  and  reflection. 
It  is  certainly  unseasonable  to  bring  our  business  life  in  any  shape  into  the  Lord's 
Day.  It  is  also  unseasonable  to  allow  worldly  cares  and  ambitions  to  invade  those 
spaces  which  are  so  necessary  for  our  domestic  and  intellectual  life.  God  grants 
us  spaces  for  rest  and  thought  in  the  home,  in  the  chamber  ;  and  it  is  exhaustive, 
indeed,  when  our  overweening  worldliness  excludes  the  possibilities  of  solitary  and 
social  life.  Some  men  fill  their  annual  holidays  with  anxieties  until  they  are  no 
holidays  at  all.  And  there  are  days  of  personal  affliction,  of  domestic  sorrows,  of 
national  calamity,  when  it  is  our  solemn  duty  to  pause  in  the  race  for  riches  and 
think  of  life's  larger  meaning.  3.  There  is  the  greed  of  age.  Old  men  often  come 
to  the  grave  sooner  than  they  need  because  they  will  not  let  the  world  go.  They 
cling  to  ambition,  although  it  wastes  their  strength  and  peace;  they  cling  to 
business,  they  are  pushing,  grasping,  hoarding  as  ever,  although  such  application 
fast  saps  a  life  already  tottering ;  they  cling  to  pleasure,  they  will  still  wear  the 
wreath  of  roses  on  their  white  hair,  although  to  them  it  is  the  most  fatal  wreath  of 
all.  II.  There  is  immodekate  dksire.  We  may  pursue  a  right  object  with  inordi- 
nate appetite.  The  Israelites  were  not  content  with  the  simple,  pearly,  wholesome 
food  God  gave  them  —they  wanted  something  more  piquant.  They  got  what  they 
wanted — and  a  grave.  In  all  generations  how  many  fall  the  same  way.  1.  There 
is  the  immoderateness  of  our  literature.  We  must  feast  on  the  romantic,  the 
sensational,  the  morbid,  the  exagserated.  Out  of  this  excess  of  imaginative  litera- 
ture come  great  evils.  The  reading  public  live  in  a  world  of  fancy,  sentiment, 
passion ;  and  this  feverish  unreality  in  the  hours  of  retirement  gives  birth  to  much 
of  that  practical  immoderation  which  is  the  curse  of  our  age.  I  do  not  say  abandon 
this  hterature  of  romance;  but  I  do  say  restrain  and  chasten  your  imsigination,  for 
be  sure  this  habit  of  wild  dreaming  is  at  the  root  of  much  of  that  general  intemper- 
ance of  life  which  hurries  many  to  the  grave.  2.  There  is  the  immoderation  of  our 
style  of  hving.  A  writer  was  finding  fault  the  other  day  with  the  present  style  of 
gardening.  He  complained  that  we  have  rooted  up  the  old  fragrant  flowers — 
lavender,  pinks,  mtirigolds,  mignonette,  and  gone  in  for  crude  patches  of  red  and 
blue  and  yellow  ;  that  we  have  swept  away  sweet  shrubs  and  bits  of  lawn  for  the 
sake  of  violet  ribbon-borders  and  vulgar  carpet-bedding.  But  does  not  our  Italian 
gardening  largely  reflect  our  social  hfe  ?  Are  we  not  often  found  renouncing  sweet, 
simple  methods  of  living  for  a  showy,  ostentatious  style  which  brings  with  it  little 
joy?  3.  There  is  the  immoderateness  of  our  appetite.  Thousands  are  digging 
their  grave  with  their  teeth,  and  scooping  it  out  with  tl  eir  glass.  4.  There  is  the 
immoderateness  of  business.  Immoderation  in  other  directions  often  drives  men  to 
unnatural  eagerness  in  business.  In  haste  to  be  rich  they  pierce  themselves  through 
with  many  sorrows.  (1)  How  fatal  all  this  immoderation  is  to  health  1  We  fret  for 
money,  drinking  blood  out  of  a  golden  basin  ;  we  are  anxious  to  be  great,  and  the 
path  of  glory  leads  to  the  grave;  we  are  mad  to  seize  the  flowers  of  pleasure,  and 
find  the  flowers  of  the  churchyard.  (2)  How  fatal  is  all  this  immoderation  to 
happiness  !  There  are  thousands  of  successful  merchants  who  after  immense  toil 
and  saurifice  have  secured  wealth  and  position,  and  now  they  are  distressed  to  find 
they  have  no  power  t)  eat  what  cost  so  much  to  get  together.  They  h ive  whatso- 
ever their  soul  desireth,  but  they  cannot  taste  any  sweetness  in  it.  Moderation  is 
the  secret  of  all  life.  Our  health,  our  happiness,  our  character,  onr  destiny,  are 
bound  up  with  self-restr  lint.  Live  with  circumspection,  live  slowly,  live  by  line 
and  square,  and  you  shall  realise  life  at  its  best  here,  and  then  the  liie  everlasting. 


CHAP.  XI.]  NUMBERS.  115 

III.  There  is  illegal  desire.  Fixing  our  eye  on  forbidden  things  and  histing  after 
them.  How  beautiful  they  seem,  how  desirable  !  and  yet  they  eat  as  doth  a  canker. 
They  lead  to  a  premature  grave.  "  The  wicked  do  not  live  out  half  their  days." 
They  lead  to  a  dishonoured  grave  (Eccl.  viii.  10).  They  lead  to  a  hopeless  grave. 
Such  awake  to  shame  and  everlasting  contempt.  Do  not  hide  it  from  your- 
selves for  an  hour  that  death  is  the  price  of  touching  forbidden  things.  Are  you 
tempted  by  unlawful  pleasure  ?  see  the  skeleton  behind  the  flowers.  By  unlawful 
gain  ?  see  the  field  of  blood  behind  the  pieces  of  silver.  By  unlawful  greatness  ? 
see  the  shroud  wrapped  up  in  the  purple.  By  unlawful  indulgence  ?  see  that 
at  the  devil's  banquet  the  sexton  is  head  waiter.  Lust  when  it  hath  conceived 
bringeth  forth  sin,  and  sin  when  it  is  finished  will  have  finished  you.  This  is 
the  dismal  eternal  order ;  and  no  secrecy,  no  strength,  no  skill  on  your  part  can 
disturb  the  programme  or  avert  the  penalty.  Wherein,  then,  lies  our  safety  ? 
In  reducing  all  desire  to  a  minimum  ?  Some  of  our  sceptical  writers  counsel  this, 
but  it  is  not  the  philosophy  of  Christianity.  The  infinity  of  desire  is  a  grand 
characteristic  of  our  nature  which  it  is  no  part  of  our  duty  to  destroy.  Christianity 
leaves  intact  our  boundless  desire,  whilst  it  teaches  us  moderation  in  all  worldly 
things.  It  does  this  by  fixing  our  attention  on  our  inner  life.  It  assures  us  that 
the  deep,  final  satisfaction  is  not  in  our  senses,  but  in  our  spirit ;  that  we  find  the 
full  and  ultimate  delight  of  life  as  our  inner  self  grows  in  truth  and  goodness  and 
love.  It  does  this  by  fixing  our  hope  on  the  heavenly  life.  The  pilgrim  is  not  likely 
to  be  too  deeply  engrossed  about  the  tent  curtains,  tent  pegs,  tent  cords.  Think 
much  of  that  greater  life,  and  you  shall  not  think  overmuch  about  things  which 
perish  in  the  using.  (W.  L.  Watkinson.)  The  true  nursUig -father  : — It  was 
but  three  days'  march  from  Sinai,  and  the  people  encamped  on  a  site  which 
was  ever  memorable  in  their  history,  as  recalling  one  of  the  gravest,  saddest 
scenes  in  the  experiences  of  the  wilderness  journey.  We  are  only,  however, 
now  concerned  in  the  incident  so  far  as  it  affects  the  character  of  Moses.  I. 
The  test  beneath  which  Moses  broke  down.  .  But  in  the  case  of  Mo^^es  there 
was  surely  an  outbreak  of  impatience  which  was  hardly  justifiaWle.  He  loved 
tbe  people,  but  his  love  was  not  strong  enough  to  sustain  tlie  terrific  test  to  which 
it  was  exposed.  He  pitied  them,  but  beneath  the  scorching  sun  of  their  repeated 
provocations  that  pity  dried  up  like  waters  which  are  absorbed  in  the  desert  heat. 
II.  The  parallel  in  Christian  experience.  1.  We  also  have  need  to  beware  of 
the  influence  of  "  the  mixed  multitude."  Had  it  not  been  for  these,  Israel  had 
■walked  with  God,  and  been  satisfied  with  His  provision  on  their  behalf.  It  was 
from  them  that  tbe  discontent  proceeded.  There  are  many  professing  Christians 
•who  have  the  form  of  godliness,  but  deny  its  power,  and  who  pass  freely  in  and  out 
among  the  children  of  God.  It  is  among  these  that  we  may  expect  to  hear  com- 
plaints that  religion  is  dry  and  irksome,  or  rapturous  descriptions  of  the  food  of 
Egypt,  or  special  pleadings  that  there  should  be  a  mingling  of  the  delights  of  the 
Egyptian  world,  which  should  have  been  left  behind  for  ever,  with  the  manna  which 
God  lays  on  the  dew  of  the  desert  floor.  Their  influence  is  all  the  stronger  in  that 
they  appeal  to  tendencies  within  us,  which  are  so  susceptible  to  their  call.  2.  We 
must  distinguish  between  appetite  and  lust.  The  appetites  have  been  implanted 
■within  us  to  maintain  the  machinery  of  life.  If  it  were  not  for  their  action,  we 
should  neglect  food  and  rest  and  exercise,  and  many  other  things  necessary  to  our 
well-being.  But  in  us  all  appetite  is  apt  to  run  up  into  lust.  In  other  words,  we 
seek  satisfaction,  not  for  the  necessary  supply  of  our  physical  needs,  but  for  the 
momentary  pleasure  which  accompanies  the  gratification  of  appetite  itself.  Our 
motive  is  not  the  obtaining  of  some  lawful  and  necessnry  end,  but  the  titillation  of 
taste  and  sense.  Appetite  has,  therefore,  to  be  curbed  with  a  strong  band,  lest  it 
become  inordinate  passion,  for  the  moment  we  take  pleasure  in  the  indulgence  of 
appetite  for  its  own  sake,  and  apart  from  the  legitimate  end  for  which  it  was 
intended  by  the  Alm-'ghty,  we  begin  to  tread  a  path  that  leads  swiftly  down  to  the 
bottomless  pit.  3.  Let  us  guard  against  the  resurrection  of  easily  besetting  sins. 
We  say  to  ourselves  that  certain  forms  of  sin  have  died  down  within  us,  and  will 
never  trouble  us  move.  We  have  grown  out  of  them.  But  at  that  very  moment 
the  ghastly  shape  of  that  temptation  is  at  hand,  to  assert  perhaps  even  more  than 
its  olden  force.  You  can  never  be  sure  of  yourself.  The  suggestion  that  a  certain 
form  of  temptation  can  have  no  further  power  over  you  is  of  the  devil,  and  should 
excite  you  to  greater  watchfulness.  Inordinate  desire,  murmuring  and  mistrust, 
are  linked  in  the  closest  association.  When  one  of  these  enters  the  window  of  the 
'heart,  it  goes  round  to  open  the  door  to  the  other  two.     Oh,  how  often  have  we 


116  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xl 

grieved  our  heavenly  Father !  Have  we  not  had  days  of  provocation  and  tempta- 
tion in  the  wilderness  ?  III.  The  contbast  between  the  sebvant  and  the  Father. 
Moses  repudiated  the  office  of  the  nursing-father.  He  could  not  sustain  its  responsi- 
bilities. But  his  failure  only  serves  to  bring  out  into  distiucter  relief  a  touching 
conception  of  the  Fatherhood  of  God.  Forty  years  afterwards,  as  the  aged  law- 
giver, at  the  foot  of  Pisgah,  was  summing  up  the  results  of  his  experience,  he  said, 
"  Thou  hast  seen  how  that  the  Lord  thy  God  bare  thee,  as  a  man  doth  bare  his 
son,  in  all  the  way  that  ye  went,  until  ye  came  unto  this  place  "  (Deut.  i.  31 ;  Isa. 
Ixiii.  9  ;  Acts  xiii.  18,  E.V.  marg.).  Moses'  patience  gave  out  in  a  twelvemonth, 
God's  lasted  tOl  His  work  was  done,  and  the  people  were  safely  deposited  in  the 
land  of  promise.  If  only  the  true  story  of  our  lives  were  written,  it  would  be  the 
most  astounding  record  of  God's  forbearing  and  pitying  love.  Truly,  "  He  hath  not 
dealt  with  us  after  our  sins,  nor  rewarded  us  according  to  our  iniquities."  But  let 
US  beware :  there  comes  a  time  in  the  history  of  besetting  sin  when  God  ceases  to 
strive  against  it.  He  gave  them  the  quails  they  asked,  flesh  to  the  full.  You  may 
be  mad  for  gold,  and  gold  may  pour  in  ;  mad  for  pleasure,  and  tbe  golden  barges 
wait  to  waft  you  on  the  swelling  current ;  mad  for  applause,  and  it  is  yours  till  you 
are  surfeited.  God  does  not  curse  you,  He  leaves  you  to  yourself,  and  that  is  curse 
enough.  It  is  best  to  let  our  leather  choose.  His  choice  as  to  route  and  manna  and 
length  of  daily  journey  must  be  the  best.  And  when  our  yearnings  are  in  oppo- 
sition to  His  wise  provision,  let  us  quench  them  and  yield  our  will  about  them.  {F. 
B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  Uncontrolled  desires: — la  what  a  solemn  manner  does  this 
teach  us  the  danger  of  uncontrolled  desires  !  We  have  often  thought  what  a 
beautiful  prayer  that  is,  "  Grant  thee  according  to  thine  own  heart,  and  fulMl 
all  thy  counsel "  (Psa.  xx.  4),  when  offered  for  one  whose  heart  is  subdued,  and 
whose  desires  are  concentrated  on  the  fultilment  of  God's  promises.  But  would 
it  not  be  an  awful  prayer  for  one  whose  heart  is  full  of  unhallowed  desires, 
who  longs,  like  Israel  of  old,  only  for  earthly  things  ?  Oh,  we  should  take  heed 
what  we  desire,  and  for  what  we  pray.  You  may  ask  for  some  earthly  gift — it 
may  be  worldly  prosperity,  it  may  be  wealth,  or  it  may  be  for  some  other  gift — 
some  far  higher,  but  still  earthly  gift — and  because  you  are  very  intent  upon  it,  God 
may  give  it  you  :  and  then  the  fulfilment  of  that  desire  may  become  a  most  terrible 
snare  to  you.  The  gift,  whatsoever  it  be,  may  become  your  idol,  may  let  down  your 
affections  to  earth ;  and  thus,  whilst  your  prayers  have  been  granted,  God  has  sent 
leanness  withal  into  your  soul.  Oh,  it  is  exalted  mercy,  that  God  does  not  grant  aU. 
our  desires — that  He  so  often  sets  aside  some  desires,  and  greatly  disappoints 
others.  We  are  prone  to  fret  at  this,  but  it  is  a  part  of  a  meiciful  plan,  whereby 
He  would  bring  us  to  rest  in  Himself.  Oh,  then,  through  grace,  I  will  turn  away 
from  earth,  with  all  its  treasures,  and  from  the  creature,  whatever  its  attractions  be. 
I  will  turn  to  Jesus.  In  Him  I  cannot  be  disappointed.  His  love  is  altogether 
pure,  altogether  satisfying.  (G.  Warner.)  The  punislimnit  of  a  gratified  desire: — 
Among  the  passengers  on  the  St.  Louis  express  was  a  woman  very  much  over- 
dressed, accompanied  by  a  bright  looking  nurse-girl  and  a  self-willed,  tyrannical 
boy  of  about  three  years.  The  boy  aroused  the  indignation  of  the  passengers  by 
his  continued  shrieks  and  kicks  and^  screams,  and  his  viciousness  towards  the 
patient  nurse.  He  tore  her  bonnet,  scratched  her  hands,  and  finally  spat  in  her 
face,  without  a  word  of  remonstrance  from  the  mother.  Whenever  the  nurse 
manifested  any  firmness,  the  mother  chided  her  sharply.  Presently,  the  mother 
composed  herself  for  a  nap ;  and  about  the  time  the  boy  had  slapped  the  nurse 
for  the  fiftieth  time,  a  wasp  came  sailing  in,  and  flew  on  the  window  of  the 
nurse's  seat.  The  boy  at  once  tried  to  catch  it.  The  nurse  caught  his  hand,  and 
said  coaxingly,  "  Hary  mustn't  touch.  Wasp  will  bite  Harry."  Harry  screamed 
savagely,  and  began  to  kick  and  jjound  the  nurse.  The  mother,  without  opening 
her  eyes  or  lifting  her  head,  cried  out  sliarply,  "  Why  will  you  tease  that  child  so, 

Mary?     Let  hiru  have  what  he  wants  at  once."     "But,  ma'am,  its  a "     "Let 

him  have  it,  I  say."  Thus  encouraged,  Harry  clutched  at  the  wasp  and  caught  it. 
The  scream  that  followed  brought  tears  of  joy  to  the  passenj^ers'  eyes.  The  mother 
woke  again.  "Mary,"  she  cried,  "let  him  have  it!  "  Mary  turned  in  her  seat, 
and  said  confusedly,  "  He's  got  it,  ma'am  1 "     (S.  S.  Times.) 


CHAP,  xii.]  NUMBERS.  117 


CHAPTER  XII. 

Vers.  1,  2.  Miriam  and  Aaron  spake  against  Moses. — Miriam  and  Aaron's  sedi- 
tion:— 1.  The  noblest  disinterestedness  will  not  preserve  us  from  the  shafts  of 
envy.  The  poet  has  said,  in  regard  to  another  virtue,  "  Be  thou  as  chaste  as  ice, 
as  pure  as  snow,  thou  shalt  not  escape  calumny  "  ;  and  no  matter  how  unselfish  we 
are,  we  may  lay  our  account  with  some  envenomed  attacks  which  shall  plausibly 
accuse  us  of  seeking  our  own  things  and  not  the  things  that  are  Jesus  Christ's. 
Nay,  the  more  conspicuous  we  are  for  devotion  to  the  public  good,  we  may  be  only 
thereby  more  distinctly  marked  as  a  target  for  the  world's  scorn.  "  I  am  weary  of 
hearing  always  of  Aristides  as  the  Just,"  was  the  expression  of  one  who  plotted  for 
that  patriot's  banishment ;  and  if  a  man's  character  be  in  itself  a  protest  against 
abounding  corruption,  he  will  soon  be  assailed  by  some  one  in  the  very  things  in 
which  he  is  most  eminent.  2.  This  envy  of  disinterested  greatness  may  show  itself 
in  the  most  unexpected  quarters.  If  Aaron  and  Miriam  were  capable  of  such  envy, 
we  may  not  think  that  we  are  immaculate.  It  asks  the  minister  to  examine  him- 
self and  see  whether  he  has  not  been  guilty  of  depreciating  a  brother's  gifts,  because 
he  looked  upon  him  as  a  rival  rather  than  as  a  fellow-labourer ;  it  bids  the  merchant 
search  through  the  recesses  of  his  heart,  if  haply  the  terms  in  which  he  refers  to  a 
neighbour,  or  the  tales  he  tells  of  him,  be  not  due  to  the  fact  that,  either  in  business 
or  in  society,  he  has  been  somehow  preferred  before  him ;  it  beseeches  the  lady, 
who  is  engaged  in  whispering  the  most  ill-natured  gossip  against  another  in  her 
circle,  to  inquire  and  see  whether  the  animiis  of  her  deed  be  not  the  avenging  of 
some  fancied  slight,  or  the  desire  to  protest  against  an  honour  which  has  been  done 
to  the  object  of  what  Thackeray  has  called  "  her  due  Christian  animosity."  Ah  ! 
are  we  not  all  in  danger  here  ?  How  well  it  would  be  if  we  repeUed  all  temptations 
to  envy  as  John  silenced  those  who  tried  to  set  him  against  Jesus  ;  for,  as  Bishop 
Hall  has  said,  "  That  man  hath  true  light  who  can  be  content  to  be  a  candle  before 
the  sun  of  others."  3.  The  utter  meanness  of  the  weapons  which  envy  is  content 
to  employ.  A  man's  house  is  his  castle.  No  personal  malice  should  enter  into  it 
with  its  attack ;  and  no  mean  report  should  be  received  from  the  eavesdroppers 
who  have  first  misunderstood  and  then  misrepresented.  If  a  man's  pubHc  life  has 
been  blamable,  then  let  him  be  arraigned  ;  but  let  no  Paul  Pry  interviewer  cross  his 
threshold  to  get  hold  of  family  secrets,  or  descend  into  the  area  to  hear  some 
hirelings'  moralisings.  Even  the  bees,  when  put  into  a  glass  hive,  go  to  work  at 
the  very  first  to  make  the  glass  opaque,  for  they  will  not  have  their  secrets  made 
■common  property  ;  and  surely  we  busy  human  beings  may  sometimes  be  allowed  to 
be  by  ourselves.  4.  The  assaults  of  envy  are  always  best  met  by  a  silent  appeal  to 
Heaven.  Let  the  victims  of  unjust  assault  take  comfort,  for  God  will  be  their 
defence.  But  let  the  envious  ones  take  heed,  for  God  hears  their  words,  and  He 
will  one  day  confront  them  with  His  judgment.  He  may  do  that  long  before  the 
day  of  final  assize.  He  may  meet  them  in  His  providence,  and  give  them  to  under- 
stand that  they  who  touch  His  faithful  servants  are  touching  the  apple  of  His  eye  ; 
nay,  He  may  bring  such  trouble  upon  them  that  they  will  be  glad  to  accept  of  the 
intercession  of  those  whom  they  have  maligned.  (TV.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  The  sin 
of  Miriam  and  Aaron  :  evil  speaking,  Divine  hearing,  and  saintly  siUnce : — I.  The 
SIN  OF  Miriam  and  Aaron.  1.  Its  root:  jealousy  and  vaulting  ambition.  2.  Its 
occasion.  3.  Its  expression.  II.  The  Divine  cognisance  of  their  sin.  "  And 
the  Lord  heard."  No  one  utterance  of  all  the  myriads  of  voices  in  His  universe 
ever  escapes  His  ear.  There  is  a  Divine  hearer  of  every  human  speech.  This  is 
clear  from — 1.  His  omnipresence  (Psa.  cxxxix.  7-12).  2.  His  infinite  intelligence. 
3.  His  interest  in  His  servants.  III.  The  commendable  conduct  of  Moses  under 
THE  PROVOCATION  OF  THEIR  SIN.  1.  He  was  sorcly  tried  {cf.  Psa.  Iv.  12-15). 
2.  He  bore  his  sore  trial  most  nobly.  Conclusion :  1.  In  the  conduct  of  Miriam 
and  Aaron  we  have  a  beacon.  Let  us  shun  their  sin,  &c.  2.  In  the  conduct  of 
Moses  we  have  a  pattern.  Let  us  imitate  his  meekness.  (W.Jones.)  The  modern 
application  of  an  ancient  incident : — I.  The  possession  of  the  greatest  gifts  does 

KOT  exempt  men  FROM  THE  LIABILITY  TO  MEANNESS  AND  SIN.  II.  ThE  MOST  EXCELLENT 
AND    EMINENT    SERVANTS    OF    GoD    ARE    KOT    EXEMPT    FROM    THE    REPROACHES    OF    MEN. 

III.  Our    GREATEST    TRIALS    SOMETIMES   ARISE     FROM     THE    MOST    UNLIKELY    QUARTERS. 

IV.  The  Lord  takes  cognisance  of  the  reproaches  which  are  cast  upon  His 
SERVANTS.  V.  The  servants  OF  the  Lord  do  will  in  bearing  patiently  the 
beproaches  which  are  cast  upon  them.     {Ibid.)      Miriain's  sin : — I.  Miriam's  sin. 


118  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTRATOR.  [chap.  xri. 


1.  Jealousy.  2.  Envy.  3.  Evil-speaking.  Privately  sought  to  undermine  the 
power  of  Mopes  amonf;  the  people.  4.  Folly.  Could  she  have  succeeded  i:i 
destroying  the  power  of  Moses,  she  would  have  failed  in  petting  them  to  recognise 
her  as  their  leader.  She  did  not  see  that  she  shone  in  the  borrowed  light  of  her 
great  brother.  5.  Ecbellion  against  God.  Moses  was  the  servant  of  God  :  to  resist 
him  was  to  rei^ist  the  Master.  6.  Vain  excuses.  "  Because,"  and  because.  .  .  . 
Sinners  are  often  prolific  in  excuses  ;  called  by  them  reasons.  II.  Miriam's  detec- 
tion. "  And  the  Lord  heard  it."  Moses  may  have  heard  of  it.  This  seems  to  be 
implied  by  the  allusion  to  his  meekness  (ver.  3).  If  the  Lord  hear,  then  no  sin 
passes  undetected.  Moses  gave  himself  no  concern  about  it.  Could  Miriam  meet 
her  brother  without  shame?  The  Lord  spake  suddenly.  God  pronounced  Moses 
"  faithful."  What  must  Miriam  have  thought  of  her  faithfulness  ?  III.  Miriam'& 
PUNISHMENT.  She  was  smitten  with  leprosy,  and  under  circumstances  that  much 
heightened  the  effect  of  the  punishment.  1.  It  was  in  the  presence  of  the  person 
she  had  injured.  2.  In  the  presence  of  her  fellow-conspirators.  3.  By  the  great 
God,  against  whose  authority  she  had  rebelled.  4.  Was  excluded  from  the  camp 
publicly.  5.  Humbled,  by  being  cleansed  in  answer  to  the  prayer  of  him  she  had 
wronged.  Learn — 1.  The  great  sin  of  evil-speaking.  Especially  against  ministers 
of  religion,  whose  influence  for  good  ought  to  be  preserved  not  only  by  themselves 
but  by  all  about  them.  The  character  of  public  men  is  their  strength.  Destroy 
their  character,  their  power  is  gone.  By  this  loss  the  public  itself  is  impoverished 
and  injured.  Hence  such  slander  is  suicidal.  2.  God  the  defender  of  His  servants. 
The  severe  punishment — and  upon  no  other  than  Miriam — shows  the  Divine  abhor- 
rence of  the  sin.  3.  Moses,  leaving  the  exposure  and  punishment  with  God,  and 
interceding  for  Miriam,  teaches  us  how  to  regard  attacks  upon  our  character,  and 
act  under  them,  and  towards  such  unhappy  offenders.  (J.  C.  Gray.)  Envy  and 
pride  meekly  met : — I.  What  sinful  principles  will  prompt  a  man  to  do.  Here  we 
see  the  ties  of  nature  disregarded  ;  the  bonds  of  professed  fellowship  burst  asunder;. 
God's  interest  disregarded.  Pride  and  envy  had  entered  the  heart,  and  all  conse- 
quences were  unheeded,  even  though  Moses  should  be  brought  into  contempt  before 
the  whole  congregation.  Let  us  fear  lest  such  principles  should  ever  get  possession 
of  our  minds;  the  first  feeling  must  be  mourned  over  and  prayed  against.  II.  What 
DrviNE  GRACE  WILL  ENABLE  US  TO  BEAR.  If  we  imbibe  the  spirit  of  our  Lord  and 
Master  we  shall  offer  prayer  for  those  who  use  us  ill.  If  the  approbation  of  God  be 
ours,  though  all  the  world  be  against  us  it  will  do  us  no  harm.  It  was  said  of  one 
of  the  martyrs  that  he  was  so  like  Christ  that  he  could  not  be  roused  by  injuries  to 
say  one  word  that  was  revengeful.  Oh,  if  this  spirit  were  universal,  what  a  happy 
world  would  this  be !  See  how  the  grace  of  God  can  enable  us  to  return  good  for 
evil,  and  thus  feel  an  indescribable  peace  and  happiness  in  our  own  spirit,  walking, 
in  the  fear  of  the  Lord  and  in  the  comfort  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  The  power  of  man 
can  never  impart  this  meek  and  quiet  spirit;  it  can  alone  come  from  the  blessed 
influence  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  (George  Breay,  B.A.)  The  great  evil  of  ambition  : — 
The  true  cause  of  this  their  murmuring  was  pride  and  ambition,  self-love,  ostenta- 
tion, and  vainglory.  Hereby  we  learn  that  there  cometh  no  greater  plague  to  the 
Church  of  God  than  by  ambition  and  desire  of  pre-eminence.  The  ambition  and 
piide  of  Amaziah,  the  priest  of  Beth-el,  would  not  suffer  the  prophet  Amos  in  the 
land  of  Israel,  but  he  commanded  him  to  fly  away  into  the  land  of  Judah  and 
prophesy  there  (Amos  vii.  10, 12).  We  see  this  apparently  afterward  (Numb,  xvi.)  in 
Korah,  Dathan,  and  Abiram.  Neither  is  this  evil  dead  with  these  ;  for  this  is  a 
great  plague  of  the  Church  to  this  day,  and  very  pernicious.  Nothing  hath  more 
ruined  the  Church  of  God,  overthrown  piety,  corrupted  religion,  hindered  the 
gospel,  discouraged  the  pastors  and  professors  of  it,  nothing  hath  more  erected  the 
kingdom  of  anti-Christ  than  these  petty  popes,  the  true  successors  of  Diotrephes, 
such  as  desire  to  be  universal  bishops  and  to  reign  alone.  The  mischief  hereof 
appeareth  by  sundry  reasons.  1.  It  causeth  a  great  rent  and  division  in  the 
Church,  and  disturbeth  the  peace  of  it  (chap.  xvi.  1).  2.  It  setteth  up  men  and 
putteth  down  the  Lord  and  His  ordinances,  urging,  compelling,  and  commanding 
against  the  truth  (Acts  iv.  18,  19).  3.  It  proceedcth  from  very  evil  roots,  and 
bringeth  forth  very  evil  effects,  as  an  evil  tree  bringeth  forth  evil  fruits.  The  causes 
from  whence  it  floweth  are  Satan,  pride,  disdain  of  others,  self-love,  no  love  of  the 
truth,  no  zeal  of  God's  glory,  no  desire  of  the  good  of  the  Church.  The  effects  thereof 
are  trouble,  disquietn'  ss,  fear,  flattery,  envy,  and  subtilty.  Let  us  come  to  the  uses. 
1.  It  reproveth  tbosewho  bear  themselves  as  lords  over  the  flock  of  Christ.  2.  Acknow- 
ledge this  ambition  to  be  a  general  corruption,  the  remainders  whereof  are  in  aU 


CHAP.  XII.]  NmiBERS.  119 

the  servants  of  God,  yea,  in  all  the  children  of  Adam  ;  we  have  drawn  it  from  him« 
and  thereby  it  hath  leavened  and  corrupted  all  mankind.  If  any  man  ask  what  it  is, 
I  answer,  It  is  an  immoderate  desire  after  dignity,  and  of  dignity  upon  dignity  ;  it  is 
a  thirst  that  never  can  be  quenched  ;  for  as  the  covetous  person  hath  never  enough 
money,  so  the  ambitious  hath  never  enough  honour.  It  is  a  secret  poison,  a  hidden 
plague,  the  mother  of  hypocrisy,  the  father  of  envy,  the  fountain  of  vices,  the  moth 
of  piety,  a  blind  guide  and  leader  of  the  hearts  of  men.  The  farther  we  think  our- 
selves from  it  the  nearer  commonly  it  cometh  unto  us  ;  and  therefore  let  nothing 
be  done  through  strife  and  vainglory,  but  in  lowliness  of  mind  let  each  esteem 
other  better  than  themselves  (Phil.  ii.  3).  3.  Lastly,  let  all  learn  to  beware  of  this 
evil.  (ir.  Attersoll.)  Claiming  equality  : — If  the  Lord  did  speak  by  Miriam  and 
Aaron,  what  then  ?  The  Lord  Himself  acknowledges  that  He  speaks  in  different 
ways  to  different  men.  To  some — perhaps  to  most — He  comes  in  vision  and  in 
dream  ;  things  are  heard  as  if  they  were  spoken  beyond  the  great  mountain  ;  they 
are  echoes,  wanting  in  shape  and  directness,  yet  capable  of  interpretations  that 
touch  the  very  centres  and  springs  of  life,  that  make  men  wonder,  that  draw  men 
up  from  riippaucy,  and  write  upon  vacant  faces  tokens  of  reverence  and  proofs  that 
the  inner  vision  is  at  the  moment  entranced  by  some  immeasurable  revelation.  To 
other  men  God  speaks  "  apparently  " — that  is,  in  broad  and  visible  ngure.  He  is 
quite  near;  it  is  as  if  friend  were  accosting  friend,  as  if  two  interlocutors  were 
mutually  visible  and  speaking  within  hand-range  of  one  another.  There  is  nothing 
superstitious  about  this  ;  it  is  the  fact  of  to-day.  Take  a  book  of  science — what  do 
you  find  in  that  rational  and  philosophical  bible  ?  You  find  certain  names  put 
uppermost.  Why  should  not  every  boy  that  has  caught  his  first  fly,  or  cut  in  two 
his  first  worm,  say,  "  Hath  not  the  Lord  spoken  unto  me  as  well  as  unto  Darwin,  or 
Cuvier,  or  Buffon  ? — who  are  they  ?  "  But  it  does  so  happen  that  outside  the  Bible 
we  have  the  Moses  of  science — the  chief  man  of  letters,  the  prince  of  song.  Take 
the  history  of  music,  and  we  find  names  set  by  themselves  like  insulated  stars — 
great  planetary  names.  What  would  be  thought  of  a  person  who  has  just  learned 
the  notes  of  music,  saying,  "Hath  not  the  Lord  spoken  unto  me  as  well  as  unto 
Beethoven?"  He  has;  but  He  has  not  told  you  so  much.  There  is  a  difference 
in  kind ;  there  is  a  difference  in  quality.  We  find  this  same  law  operating  in  all 
directions.  There  are  books  that  say,  "  Are  not  we  inspired  as  well  as  the  Bible?  " 
The  answer  is,  "  Certainly  you  are."  The  Lord  had  spoken  to  Miriam  and  to 
Aaron  as  certainly  as  He  had  spoken  to  Moses,  but  with  a  difference ;  and  it  is  never 
for  Moses  to  argue  with  Miriam.  Moses  takes  no  part  in  this  petty  controversy. 
He  would  have  disproved  his  superior  inspiration  if  he  had  stooped  to  this  fray  of 
words.  So  some  books  seem  to  say,  "  Are  not  we  also  inspired  ?  "  The  frank  and 
true  answer  is,  "  Yes."  Is  not  many  a  sentence  in  the  greatest  of  dramatists  an 
inspired  sentence?  The  frank,  Christian,  just  answer  is,  "Yes."  Is  not  many  a 
discovery  in  the  natural  world  quite  an  instance  of  inspiration  ?  Why  hesitate  to 
say,  "Y'es;  but  always  with  a  difference  "?  The  Bible  takes  no  part  in  the  con- 
troversy about  its  own  inspiration.  The  Bible  lives — comes  into  the  house  when  it 
is  wanted,  goes  upstairs  to  the  sick-chamber,  follows  the  lonely  sufferer  into  solitude, 
and  communes  with  him  about  the  mystery  of  disappointment,  discipline,  pain  of 
heart  ;  goes  to  the  grave-side,  and  speaks  about  the  old  soldier  just  laid  to  rest,  the 
little  child  just  exhaled  like  a  dewdrop  by  the  morning  sun.  It  lives  because  no 
hand  can  slay  it;  it  stands  back,  or  comes  forward,  according  to  the  necessity  of 
the  case,  because  of  a  dignity  that  can  wait,  because  of  an  energy  that  is  ready  to 
advance.  Some  books  claim  to  be  as  inspired  as  the  Bible.  Then  they  become 
leprous,  and  all  history  has  shown  that  they  are  put  out  of  the  camp.  Many  books 
have  arisen  to  put  down  the  Bible  ;  they  have  had  their  day :  they  have  ceased  to 
be.  We  must  judge  by  facts  and  realities.  When  a  man  who  has  no  claim  to  the 
dignity  asserts  that  he  is  upon  an  equality  with  the  great  musician,  the  great 
musician  takes  no  part  in  the  fray  ;  when  the  competitor  has  played  his  little  trick, 
one  touch  of  the  fingers  regulated  by  the  hand  Divine  will  settle  the  controversy. 
By  this  token  we  stand  or  fall  with  our  Christianity,  with  our  great  gospel,  (j. 
Parker,  D.D.)  Hatred  between  brothers  and  sisters  : — What  were  Aaron  and 
Miriam  to  Moses?  Even  his  own  brother  and  sister.  And  cannot  such  agree? 
Will  there  be  jars  and  grudgings  in  such  ?  Would  God  it  were  not  too  true.  Nay, 
such  is  our  corruption,  if  the  Lord  lead  us  not  with  His  loving  Spirit,  that  not  only 
we  disagree  being  brothers  and  sisters,  but  with  a  far  more  bitter  and  implacable 
wrath  than  others  that  are  farther  off.  What  a  venom  was  in  Cain  to  his  brother 
Abel  when   nothing   but  blood  would  appease  it?     ^Vhat  was   in  Esau's  heart 


120  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTIiATOR.  [chap.  xu. 

towards  his  brother  Jacob  ?  Oh,  what  venom  is  this  tliat  lurketh  in  our  nature  if 
God  leaves  us  to  ourselves  !  May  we  not  justly  marvel  at  some  men,  otherwise  of 
great  wisdom  and  judgment,  that  dare  break  out  unto  the  praise  of  these  perturba- 
tions as  virtues  and  badges  of  noble  minds  ?  For  what  is  this  but  as  if  a  man  would 
praise  the  diseases  of  the  body  and  the  nettles  and  weeds  and  hurtful  plants  of  the 
earth.  Should  not  he  be  accounted  mad  that  would  set  his  own  house  on  fire?  And 
I  pray  you  what  he  that  will  cast  fire  into  his  own  heart  to  set  it  on  a  flame?  Saint. 
Augustine  was  wont  to  say,  "  Look  how  vinegar  put  into  a  vessel  thereby  is  made 
sour  and  corrupted  "  ;  so  is  the  malicious  person  by  his  own  anger  made  filthy  and 
most  distasteful  to  all  good  men.  And  if  thus  among  strangers,  oh,  what  among 
brothers  and  sisters  !  Wherefore  what  council  is  given  to  refrain  all  anger,  venom, 
and  hatred,  let  it  in  particular  be  applied  to  bridle  all  rage  or  dislike  among  such 
near  ones  as  now  we  speak  of.     {Bp.  Babington.) 

Ver.  3.  The  man  Moses  was  very  meek. — The  grace  of  meekness : — How  beauti- 
ful a  grace  is  meekness  !  It  may  be  somewhat  difficult  to  define  ;  but  whenever  we- 
see  we  cannot  fail  to  know  and  to  feel  its  gentle  and  winning  power.  It  is  a  grace  that 
implies  so  very  much  in  the  heart.  It  is  the  beautiful  result  of  many  other  graces  ;. 
whilst  its  place  in  the  beatitudes  shows  that  it  is  the  root  on  which  others  grow. 
Meekness  is  quite  consistent  with  power  and  authority;  for  Moses  had  great  power 
and  authority  in  Israel,  and  yet,  altogether  unspoilt  by  it,  he  was  the  meekest  of 
men.  But  we  may  look  to  another  example,  far  greater  than  Moses,  who  said,  "  All 
power  is  given  to  Me  in  heaven  and  on  earth  "  ;  and  yet  added,  "  I  am  meek  and 
lowly  in  heart."  It  is  in  such  lofty  places  that  meekness  is  the  most  beautiful, 
because  it  then  can,  and  does,  stoop  very  low.  But  though  this  grace  is  evidently 
consistent  with  any  power  and  authoiity,  however  exalted,  it  is  altogether  incon- 
sistent with  the  love  of  power  and  with  the  love  of  authority.  Meekness  can  only 
grow  upon  the  ruins  of  selfishness  in  all  its  forms,  whether  it  be  selfishness 
towards  God — that  is,  unbelief — or  whether  it  be  selfishness  towards  man,  either  in 
its  form  of  pride,  love  of  our  own  way,  love  of  ease,  love  of  money.  But  we  may 
trace  another  feature  in  meekness  from  the  example  of  Moses,  and  learn  that  this 
grace  is  not  the  attribute  of  a  weak  character,  but  the  ornament  of  a  firm  and  com- 
prehensive spirit.  Indeed,  we  seldom  find  real  meekness  in  vacillating  characters  ; 
for  such  yield  when  they  ought  not  to  yield,  and  then,  rebuked  by  conscience  for 
yielding,  they  become  angry.  Meekness  will  more  often  be  found  in  the  resolute- 
character  when  it  is  sanctified  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  and  obstinacy  is  purged  out. 
Moses  was  a  beautiful  example  of  extraordinary  strength  of  character.  His  one 
will  was  stronger  than  the  united  wills  of  all  Israel.  And  yet  amongst  them  all 
there  was  not  one  to  be  found  so  meek  as  he;  and  the  reason  was,  because  his  will 
rested  on  the  will  of  God.  It  was  an  unselfish  will,  and  theiefore  it  was  that  its 
uncommon  power  did  not  exclude  meekness.  We  all  need  this  grace  in  every  rela- 
tionship of  life.  As  parents,  for  meekness  should  be  the  border  and  fringe  of  every 
act  of  authority ;  as  mistresses,  for  in  the  carlessness  and  want  of  conscientious- 
ness of  servants  your  spirit  may  be  tried  nearly  every  day  ;  as  Christians,  for  St.. 
Peter  exhorts  us  (1  Pet.  iii.  15)  to  "  be  ready  always  to  give  an  answer  to  every  maft 
that  asketh  you  a  reason  of  the  hope  that  is  in  you  with  meekness  and  fear  " ;  as 
teachers,  for  St.  Paul  says  (2  Tim.  ii.  24,  25).  In  these  days  of  collision  between 
system  and  system,  and  of  sad  confusion  of  views  of  Divine  truth,  we  specially 
seem  to  ned  the  spirit  of  meekness.  For  it  is  not  rude  attacks  upon  error,  but 
truth  spoken  in  meekness  and  love  that  avails  and  has  most  power.  Meekness 
should  be  the  handmaid  of  zeal.  All  of  us  must  feel,  if  we  have  only  made  the 
experiment,  how  difficult  of  attainment  is  this  grace;  and  yet  there  is  great 
encouragement  to  seek  it.  It  appears  in  the  clustt-r  of  graces  described  as  the 
•'  fruit  of  the  Spirit."  It  is  the  last  but  one,  perhaps  to  show  us  the  height  at 
which  it  grows.  There  is  a  beautiful  promise  of  guidance  to  the  meek  "  The  meek 
will  He  guide  in  judgment:  and  the  meek  will  He  teach  His  way  "  (P.sa.  xxv.  i)); 
and  in  Psa.  cxlix.  4  is  a  larger  promise  still — "  He  will  beautify  the  meek  with  sal- 
vation." And  then  we  cannot  forget  the  beatitude  uttered  by  the  lips  of  Him 
whose  meekness  never  failed — "  Blessed  are  the  meek,  for  they  shall  inherit  the 
earth  1  "  (G.  Wagner.)  Moses  the  meek  : — Who  records  this  ?  The  popular 
answer  is,  Moses.  He  is  the  reputed  author  of  the  Pentateuch.  Moses  tells  us^ 
therefore,  that  Moses  was  the  meekest  of  men.  But  if  so,  what  becomes  of  his- 
humility  ?  Some  meet  the  difficulty  by  reminding  us  that  the  verse  is  a  parenthesis. 
It  is  enclosed  in  brackets.     Perhaps  it  was  added  afterwards  by  another  hand. 


CHAP.  XII.]  yUMBEES.  121 

This,  of  coarse,  is  possible.  At  the  same  time  it  is  a  desperate  mode  of  dealing 
with  the  case.  Supposing  that  Moses  did  indite  it,  what  then?  It  is  not  neces- 
sarily a  display  of  vanity.  There  are  two  kinds  of  egotism — the  false  and  the  true. 
If  a  man  refers  to  himself  simply  as  a  historian,  and  merely  because  the  circum- 
stances of  the  case  call  for  it,  that  is  quite  a  lawful,  ri^ht^ous  egotism.  If,  on  the 
contrary,  he  does  it  out  of  conceit,  he  thereby  manifests  "  vain  glory,"  and  merits 
our  scorn.  A  consciousness  of  integrity  will  sometimes  impel  its  possessor  to 
asi^ert  it,  especially  when  it  is  misunderstood  and  persecuted.  The  uprightness  of 
Job  led  him  to  exclaim,  "  When  I  am  tried  I  shall  come  forth  as  gold."  "  The  man 
Moses  was  very  meek."  But  was  he  always  such  ?  Are  we  to  regard  his  meekness 
as  constitutional  ?  There  appear  to  be  solid  reasons  for  thinking  that  Israel's  dis- 
tinguished lawgiver  was  originally  impulsive  and  even  passionate  !  At  first,  he  was 
anything  but  slow  to  anger.  And,  as  we  read  the  narrative  of  his  life,  we  mark  the 
old  disposition  ever  and  anon  asserting  itself.  Just  as  you  sometimes  see,  in  the 
midst  of  green  pastures  and  yellow  corn,  patches  of  rock,  fern,  and  heather,  remind- 
ing you  of  the  pristine  state  of  the  ground,  so  now  and  then  the  hasty  spirit  of 
Moses  got  the  better  of  him.  These  were  lingering  and  occasional  outbreaks  on 
the  part  of  what  the  apostle  would  call  "the  old  man."  They  were  exceptional. 
So  faithfully  had  he  watched  against  his  besetting  sin,  so  prayerfully  had  he  exer- 
cised vigorous  self-control,  that  the  naturally  irritable  man  became  "  very  meek 
above  all  the  men  who  were  on  the  face  of  the  earth."  As  a  certain  author 
admirably  writes:  "A  traveller,  giving  an  account  of  an  ancient  volcano,  tells  of  a 
verdurous  cup-like  hollow  on  the  mountain  summit,  and,  where  the  fierce  heat 
once  had  burned,  a  clear,  still  pool  of  water,  looking  up  like  an  eye  to  heaven 
above.  It  is  an  apt  parable  of  Moses.  Naturally  and  originally  volcanic,  capable 
of  profound  passion  and  daring,  he  is  new-made  by  grace  till  he  stands  out  in  calm 
grandeur  of  character  with  all  the  gentleness  of  Christ  adorning  him.  The  case  of 
Moses  is  representative.  It  does  not  stand  alone  in  grand  isolation.  That  our 
weakest  point  mav  become  our  strongest  is  one  of  the  most  obvious  and  inspiring 
teachings  of  the  Bible.  Peter  Thomas,  a  physiognomist,  closely  scanning  the  face 
of  Socrates,  pronounced  him  to  be  a  bad  man.  He  even  went  so  far  as  to  specify 
his  vices  and  faults.  "  Proud,  crabbed,  lustful,"  were  the  charges  brought  against 
him.  The  Athenians  laughed  this  to  scorn.  Everyb  'dy  knew  its  falsity.  The 
distinguished  sage  was  the  exact  opposite  of  the  description.  To  their  amazemen'., 
however,  Socrates  hushed  them,  and  declared  that  no  calumny  had  been  uttered. 
"  What  he  has  said,"  lie  lemarked,  "  accurately  describes  my  Uiiture,  but  by  philo- 
sophy I  have  controlled  and  conquered  it."  Let  us  be  of  good  cheer.  Philosophv  is 
good,  but  we  have  sometliing  better — "  the  grace  of  G^id  which  bringeth  salvation." 
Let  us  but  make  it  our  own,  and  we  shall  joyfully  experience  its  victories.  (T.  E. 
Stevenson.)  Meekness: — What  is  meekness  ?  It  is  not  the  repudiation  of  self- 
defence.  Everything  that  is  made  has  a  right  to  exist,  or  God  would  not  have  made 
it ;  and,  if  any  other  creature  trespasses  on  this  its  birth-charter,  it  is  justified  in 
defending  itself.  Neither  is  meekness  a  mental  incapacity  to  discern  insults  and 
injuries.  A  man  who  cannot  do  that  is  not  meek  but  stupid.  Nor  is  meekness  a 
natural  mildness  which  is  incapable  of  being  provoked.  There  are  people  of  such  a 
temper — or,  rather,  non-temper.  It  is  no  credit  to  them.  We  may  call  such  people 
soft ;  but  it  would  Ibe  a  misnomer  to  call  them  meek.  In  fact,  unless  they  can  be 
stirred  up,  they  are  incapable  of  meekness  ;  for  the  more  natural  fierceness  a  man 
has  the  more  capable  he  is  of  meekness,  and  he  upon  whom  anybody  that  comes 
along  may  make  his  scratch  is  anything  but  a  meek  person.  Neither  are  they  meek 
who  are  restrained  from  exhibiting  resentment  by  fear  or  self-interest.  They  are 
cowards.  All  these  are  negative  qualities.  And  it  is  impossible  that  meekness 
should  belong  to  this  tribe  ;  for  it  must  be  immensely  positive  and  tremendously 
energetic  since  it  is  to  subjugate  the  earth  and  inherit  it.  The  first  element  in  meek- 
ness is  docility — a  willingness  to  learn,  a  readiness  to  go  through  the  drudgery  and 
labour  connected  with  learning,  a  disposition  to  suppress  the  impatience  which  pre- 
vents us  from  learning.  The  second  element  is  self-restraint,  both  toward  God  and 
toward  man.  The  tendency  of  trouble  is  to  irritate,  to  render  the  soul  peevish, 
angry,  morose,  rebellious.  But  the  meek  soul  has  learned  in  the  school  of  Christ. 
It  accepts  the  truth  that  "  all  things  work  together  for  good  to  them  that  love 
God  "  ;  and,  therefore,  disciplines  itself  to  patience  under  trial.  Meekness  educates 
man  up  to  a  Godlike  standard.  It  stores  up  strength  in  the  soul — a  strength  that 
shall  prove  available  in  the  emergencies  of  life.  The  meek  men  are  the  men  of 
might.     They  have  broad  shoulders  and  strong  backs,  or  they  could  not  carry  this 


122  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xiu 

load  of  other  men's  ignorance,  infirmity,  and  sin  ;  and  it  is  meekness  that  squares 
their  shoulders,  toughens  their  tendons,  and  develops  their  muscles.  The  me^l^* 
men  are,  if  the  exigency  arises,  the  most  terrible  of  the  earth.  There  are  bounds 
to  the  exercise  of  meekness.  Paul  indicates  this  when  he  says  :  "  What  will  ye  ? 
Shall  I  come  unto  you  \^th  a  rod,  or  in  love  ?  "  When  the  meek  man  does  take 
the  rod,  he  lays  it  on  until  the  work  is  thoroughly  done.     (H.  31.  Scudder,  D.D.) 

Vers.  5-10.  The  Lord  came  down. — God's  vindication  of  Moses  : — There  are  several 
circumstances  of  the  Lord's  proceedings  laid  down  in  the  text.  1.  As,  first,  His 
speed.  By  and  by  the  Lord  called  them  ;  so  showing  us  how  fitting  a  thing,  yea, 
how  pleasing  to  Him,  convenient  expedition  is  in  justice,  and  how  displeasing, 
needless,  and  sinister  delays.  It  showeth  also  what  a  tender  feeling  God  hath  of 
the  wrongs  of  His  children,  not  only  of  some,  but  by  name  of  magistrates'  and 
governors'  wrongs,  when  they  are  spoken  against  without  cause.  Surely  He  so 
feeleth  it,  that  even  by  and  by  He  will  undertake  the  righting  of  them,  and  cannot  hold 
from  punishing  such  offenders  as  so  lightly  regard  His  holy  ordinance.  We  think 
that  unless  we  keep  ado  in  our  own  causes  it  is  not  well  (and  I  condemn  not  all 
care  this  way),  but  certainly  none  have  been  sooner  and  better  righted  than  such 
as  patiently  have  endured  a  time  and  committed  things  to  the  justice  of  God.  2. 
He  calleth  the  two  offenders  by  themselves,  leaving  Moses  to  hear  and  see  for  his 
comfort  the  Lord's  care  for  him.  And  this  also  is  a  great  point  of  justice,  to  call 
persons  that  have  done  amiss,  not  carrying  matters  in  secret  and  condemning  with- 
out hearing.  3.  He  speaketh  to  them  and  biddeth  them  hear  His  words  as  He  had 
heard  theirs.  Which  likewise  showeth  that  true  justice  chargeth  men,  and  doth 
not  hoard  up  in  heart  what  cutteth  off  love  and  liking;  giving  good  words  out- 
wardly, and  yet  inwardly  thinking  most  evil  things.  Oh,  let  us  hear  your  words  if 
you  have  conceived  any  offence,  and  then  will  either  confession  or  true  purgation 
give  satisfaction  ?  The  contrary  course  may  have  policy  in  it,  but  who  shtill  justify 
it  for  piety,  charity,  or  any  virtue  ?  4.  In  His  words  He  setteth  down  the  difference  of 
prophets,  showing  that  all  have  not  alike  measure  vouchsafed  of  Him,  and  there- 
fore may  not  argue,  I  am  a  prophet  as  well  as  he ;  ergo,  as  good  as  he.  Such 
kind  of  reasonings  have  in  all  times  disquieted  the  Church  and  peace  of  the  godly. 
The  differences  which  God  layeth  down  you  see  in  the  text.  To  some  by  vision ; 
to  some  by  dream ;  to  some  in  darker  words,  to  some  in  plainer ;  but  to  Moses 
mouth  to  mouth  ;  that  is  in  a  more  excellent  measure  of  grace,  and  familiar  favour 
than  ever  to  any.  Therefore,  although  the  Lord  had  also  spoken  by  them ;  yet  for- 
asmuch as  it  was  not  in  that  degree  as  to  Moses,  they  should  not  have  compared 
themselves  with  him,  but  yielded  him  a  reverence  above  themselves.  Yea,  how 
were  ye  not  afraid,  saith  the  Lord,  to  speak  against  My  servant  Moses,  even  against 
Moses?  So  showing  that  imparity  of  grace  and  gifts  from  the  Lord  should  work 
ever  an  imparity  of  honour  and  regard  by  all  that  will  walk  rightly,  though  in 
some  other  respect  there  may  be  a  parity.     {Bp.  Bahinyton.) 

Vers.  10-16.  Miriam  became  leprous. — The  punishment  of  Miriam  and  Aaron  : — 
I.  The  Divine  judoment  because  of  the  sin  of  Miriam  and  Aaron.  1.  The 
punishment  was  inflicted  by  the  Lord.  2.  The  punishment  was  appropriate  to  the 
sin.  3.  The  punishment  fell  most  severely  upon  Miriam.  (1)  She  was  the  insti- 
gator of  the  sin.  (2)  Aaron's  office  of  high  priest  also  probably  helped  to  shield 
him.  Had  he  been  smitten  with  leprosy  he  would  have  been  disgraced  in  the  eyes 
of  the  people,  and  his  holy  office  would  probably  have  been  brought  into  disesteem 
amongst  them.  (3)  Yet  Aaron  was  not  altogether  exempted  from  punishment.  As 
priest  he  had  to  examine  Miriam  and  pronounce  her  leprous.  Again  he  had  to 
examine  her  and  pronounce  her  clean  before  she  was  readmitted  to  the  camp.  That 
he  deeply  realised  his  painful  position  is  evident  from  the  narrative  (vers.  10-12). 
Let  us  remember  that  there  is  judgment  with  God.  II.  The  Divine  judgment 
LEADING  TO  PERSONAL  HUMILIATION.  1.  Humble  acknowledgment  to  Moses.  2.  Con- 
fession of  sin.     3.  Entreaty  for  the  removal  of  the  judgment  from  Miriam.     III. 

The    REM.UIKABLE    ACKNOWLEDGMENT    OF   THE    EMINENCE     OF    ]\l0SES    THE    SERVANT    OF 

THE  Lord.  1.  In  the  manner  in  which  he  was  addressed  by  Aaron.  2.  In  the 
appeal  which  was  made  to  him  by  Aaron.  This  appeal  implies  on  the  part  of  Aaron 
— (1)  Faith  in  the  magnanimity  of  Moses — that  he  would  not  retaliate  upon  them 
for  their  attack  upon  him  ;  that  he  was  forgiving  and  generous.  (2)  Faith  in  the 
influence  which  Moses  had  with  God.  IV.  The  distinguished  magnanimity  and 
GRACE  or  Moses.     "  And  Moses  cried  unto  the  Lord,  saying.  Heal  her  now,  0  God, 


CHAP.  XII.]  NUMBKIIS.  123 

J  beseech  Thee."  There  was  no  resentment  in  his  heart,  but  fullest  forgiveness 
and  sincerest  pity.  His  prayer  for  Miriam  is  an  anticipatiDU  of  the  precept  of  our 
Lord,  "Pray  for  them  which  despitefully  use  you,  and  persecute  you  "  (MMtt.  v.  44). 
V.  The  great  power  of  the  intercession  of  good  men.  VI.  The  justice  and  mep.cy 
OF  God  as  manifested  in  His  treatment  of  Miriam.  VII.  The  sin  of  one 
person  checking  the  progress  of  an  entire  nation.  {W.  Jones.)  Miriam 
ainitteii  with  leprosy  :  transfiguration  through  transyressioii : — I.  This  transfigura- 
tion was  brought  to  pass  on  account  of  the  jealousy  of  Miriam  of  Moses,  and 
the  jealousy  of  God  for  Moses.  II.  The  transformation  was  in  iceeping  with  the 
expressed  jealousy  of  God  and  of  Miriam.  (Ibid.)  The  punishment  of  wrong- 
doers : — I.  That  both  God  and.  man  express  their  displeasure  towards  wrong - 
D0ER8  ON  THIS  EARTH.  1.  God,  in  many  ways.  (1)  Providential  alHictions.  (2) 
Moral  remorses.  2.  Man,  also,  in  many  ways.  (1)  Sometimes  in  his  personal 
capacity,  by  denunciatory  language  and  physical  chastisement.  (2)  Sometimes  in 
his  corporate  capacity,  as  a  member  of  the  State,  by  pains  and  penalties.    II.  That 

THE    WRONG-DOERS   ABE    GENERALLY   FAR    MORE    AFFECTED    BY  THE  EXPRESSION   OF   MAN's 

DISPLEASURE    THAN    WITH    THAT  OF  God's.     1.  Most  irrational.     2.  Most  impious. 
3.  Most  perilous.     (Hoinilist.)         The  leprosy  of  Miriam  : — 1.  We  should  humbly 
submit  to  the  will  of  Heaven.     2.  We  should  remember  that  in  the  distribution  of 
gifts,  what  is  best  for  one  may  be  destruction  for  another.     3.  To  covet  the  gift  of 
a  neighbour  is  a  wroug  to  him  and  an  offence  to  God.     4.  Each  man's  duty  is  to 
develop  the  gift  that  is  in  him.     (Homiletic  Monthly.)         Miriam  and  Moses  : — 
Was  this  weakness,  as  some  would  say  ?     Nay,  verily,  it  was  the  exhibition  of 
colossal  spiritual  strength.     It  is  the  weak  man  who  gives  blow  for  blow,  who 
blurts  out  his  wrath,  who  cannot  control  the  passion  of  his  spirit.     It  may  be  well 
to  give  some  closing  rules  as  to  the  attainment  of  this  meek  aud  quiet  spirit,  which 
in  sight  of  God  is  of  great  price.     1.  Let  us  claim  the  meekness  of  Christ.     This, 
of  course,  was  not  possible  for  Moses  in  the  direct  way  in  which  it  is  for  us.     And 
yet  there  was  no  doubt  in  his  case  also  a  constarit  appeal  for  heavenly  grace.     And 
in  moments  of  provocation  there  is  nothing  better  than  to  turn  to  Him  and  claim 
His  calm.  His  sweet  silence.  His  patience  and  meekness,  saying,  "I claim  all  these, 
my  Lord,  for  the  bitter  need  of  my  spirit."     2.  It  is  acquired,  next,  by  cultivating 
the  habit  of  silence.     Express  a  thought,  and  you  give  it  strength  ;  repress  it,  and 
it  will  wither  and  die.     You  will  often  hear  it  said  that  the  best  way  of  getting  rid 
of  an  importunate  passion  is  to  let  it  out  and  have  done  with  it.     It  is,  however,  a 
very  mistaken  policy.     Silence  will  kill  it  as  ice  kills  fish  when  there  are  no  vent- 
holes  by  which  they  can  come  up  to  breathe.     Learn  to  be  still,  to  ktep  the  door  of 
the  lips  closed.     3.  Next,  by  considering  the  harm  done  by  the  aggressors  to  them- 
selves.    The  cloud  removed  from  over  the  tent,  as  if  it  must  leave  the  very  spot 
where  the  culprits  stood  ;  and  behold,  Miriam  was  leprous,  white  as  snow.     There 
is  a  profound  piece  of  instruction  here ;  you  cannot  say  unkind  or  bitter  things 
about  anotber  without  hurting  yourself  more  than  you  hurt  him.     Like  the  boom- 
erang of  the  savage,  curses  come  back  to  the  spot  from  which  they  start.     4.  In 
allowing   God  to  vindicate  our   cause.     Moses  let  God  vindicate  him,  and  the 
Almighty  God  rode  upon  a  cherub  and  did  fly,  and  flew  on  the  wings  of  the  wind. 
This  is  the  secret  of  rest,  to  cultivate  the  habit  of  handing  all  over  to  God,  as 
Hezekiah  did,  when  he  spread  out  Sennacherib's  letter  in  the  house  of  the  Lord. 
Commit  yourself  to  Him  that  judgeth  righteously.     5.  Also  in  intercessory  prayer. 
Moses  cried  unto  the  Lord,  saying,  "  Heal  her,  0  God,  I  beseech  Thee."    When  we 
pray  for  those  who  have  despitefully  used  and  persecuted  us,  it  is  marvellous  how 
soon  the  soul  gets  calm  and  tender.    And  the  Lord  heard  His  servant's  prayer,  and 
healed  Miriam  ;  but  the  whole  host  was  delayed  a  week  through  her  sin.     We  may 
be  forgiven,  but  these  outbreaks  of  sin  always  entail  disaster  and  delay.     Neither 
■we  nor  others  can  be  where  we  might  have  been  had  they  not  occurred.     (F.  B. 
Meyer,   B.A.)  Miriam's  punishment   humiliating  : — The  punishment  was   as 

humiliating  as  it  was  public.  Her  tongue,  so  free  upon  her  brother's  conduct, 
is  mute  enough  now,  except  to  cry  if  any  approached  her,  "  Unclean  I  unclean  I " 
She  who  aspired  to  be  Queen  of  Israel  is  cast  forth  as  an  unclean  thing 
from  the  camp.  When  the  dreadful  punishment  was  finished,  she  came  back 
to  the  camp  humbled,  and  no  doubt  strengthened  in  her  soul  by  the  correction 
she  had  received.  {S.  Robinson,  D.D.)  Shame  for  the  envious: — The  lesson 
here  has  a  very  close  application  to  all  who  engage  as  the  Lord's  instruments 
and  agents  in  the  work  of  building  up  Christ's  kingdom.  When  those  so 
engaged    forget    the    nature    of    their    calling,   and    fall    into    contentions   and 


124  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap,  xii, 

bickerings  about  their  relative  position  as  agents  for  Jehovah,  the  result  must  in 
the  end  be  shame  and  humiliation  for  the  envious  and  jealous,  and  damage  to  the 
cause  of  Christ,  about  wliich  He  will  surely  make  inquisition.  How  much  of  the 
strifes  and  bickering  betvveen  Christians  of  the  same  Church,  and  between  different 
sects  comes  not  from  earnestly  contending  for  the  faith,  but  from  the  narrow 
jealousies  and  envyings  wholly  personal  with  those  who  indulge  them !  How  often 
is  it  simply  the  Muiauis  and  Aarons  giving  way  to  their  petty  jealousy  under  cover 
of  scruples  of  conscience  !  (Ibid.)  Such  as  have  the  cldef  hand  in  sin,  are  prin- 
cipally subject  to  punishment : — Aaron  was  accessory  to  this  mutiny  against  Moses, 
but  Miriam  was  chief  in  the  sin,  and  therefore  is  also  chief  in  the  punishment. 
Simeon  and  Levi  were  not  the  only  murderets  of  the  Sichemites  and  invaders  of  ihe 
city,  but  tliey  were  the  chief  ringleaders,  and  tlierefore  are  only  named  (Gen.  xxxiv. 
25),  and  punished  (Gen.  xlix.  5).  Wiiosoever  practiseth  any  evil,  whether  he  be 
principal  or  accessory,  is  guilty  in  the  sight  of  God,  and  therefore  such  as  are 
ministers  of  other  men's  evils  are  oftentimes  punished,  whether  they  be  reasonable 
or  unreasonable  creatures  (Gen.  iii.  14  ;  Lev.  xx.  15 ;  Exod.  xxi.  28,  29,  32 ;  Josh, 
vi.  17  ;  Isa.  xxx.  22).  As  God  is  just,  so  He  punisheth  the  instruments  of  injustice. 
Notwithstanding,  though  the  instruments  do  offend  and  not  escape,  the  chief  punish- 
ment is  ever  reserved  for  the  chief  offender.  1.  For  such  as  are  chief  in  govern- 
ment ought  to  stay  their  inferiors  from  evil,  as  the  head  governeth  the  members. 
Eli  is  charged  with  the  wickedness  of  his  s-ons  (1  Sam.  iii.  13).  Such  governors 
make  themselves  the  tail  and  not  the  head,  whereas  they  should  order  tliose  of 
their  house  as  the  soul  ruleth  the  body.  2.  God  will  require  the  blood  of  those 
that  perish  at  the  hands  of  the  governors;  the  magistrate  is  the  watchman  of  the 
commonwealth ;  tlie  minister  is  the  watchman  of  the  Church  ;  the  householder  is 
the  watchman  of  the  family  ;  all  set  as  it  were  in  their  watch-tower,  and  all  must 
give  an  account  for  such  as  are  under  them.  3.  The  sin  of  those  that  have  the 
chiefest  hand  in  it  is  greater  than  of  others,  so  it  deserveth  the  greater  punishment; 
forasmuch  as  the  sin  and  punishment  shall  be  suitable  one  to  the  other.     Uses  : 

1.  It  belongeth  to  all,  especially  to  such  as  are  superiors,  to  consider  this ;  they 
think  themselves  absolute,  and  that  they  ought  of  right  to  command  what  they 
list  to  their  inferiors.  But  as  they  are  superior  in  place,  so  they  shall  also  be 
superior  in  punishment,  if  they  command  anything  against  God  and  His  Word. 

2.  It  is  the  duty  of  all  householders  to  be  careful  to  order  their  families  ariglit,  and 
to  compel  them  to  serve  the  Lord.  3.  Lastly,  there  cometh  a  great  blessing  upon 
their  heads  that  are  the  chief  in  any  good  work,  that  encourage  others  in  the  ways 
of  goiUiness,  for  tliey  shall  have  a  principal  reward.  Happy  and  blessed  therefore 
are  they  that  govn-n  their  charges  as  becometh  them  (Gen.  xviii.  18).  This  is  a 
notable  commendation  of  Abraham,  he  was  chief,  and  one  that  went  before  the  rest  in 
good  things,  and  therefore  he  should  chiefly  be  rewarded.  This  should  stir  us  up, 
not  only  to  do  good,  but  to  be  chief  in  doing  good,  to  go  before  others,  to  lead  them 
the  way,  that  so  we  may  have  the  greater  and  better  reward  in  that  great  day.  (IF. 
Atlersull.)  Miiiaui's  deiiradalion : — A  striking  spectacle  was  once  witnessed  in 
the  Four  Courts  of  St.  Louis.  A  young  man  was  under  arrest  for  some  crime. 
Before  being  committed  to  prison,  he  was  taken  to  the  photogmpher's  rooms,  and 
his  picture  taken  to  be  sent  to  the  various  cities  keeping  "rogues'  galleries,"  to  be 
hung  up  on  the  walls  with  the  faces  of  other  criminals  kept  there.  The  description 
of  the  feeling  manifested  by  the  young  man  on  this  occasion  is  both  touching  and 
suggestive.  "  Big  tears  formed  in  his  eyes  aud  fell  down  on  his  cheeks.  He 
dropped  his  head  on  his  breast  and  cried.  He  was  so  overcome  with  emotion  that 
he  could  not  speak  until  he  was  again  placed  in  his  cell  in  the  gaol.  After  swallow- 
ing great  lumps  in  his  throat,  he  said  he  now  felt  he  had  dropped  from  the  n'de 
of  a  gentleman  to  that  of  the  lowest  criminal ;  and  the  thought  of  his  picture  being 
placed  in  the  rogues'  gallery  was  more  than  he  could  bear."  Huw  dreadful  to  be 
classed  with  the  workers  of  iniquity,  and  to  become  the  spectacle  before  man  and 
angels  of  one  who  rejected  light  and  truth,  and  basely  sinned  against  a  great  and 
gracious  God.  (-S'.  S.  Chronicle.)  Heal  her  now,  0  God,  I  beseech  Thee. — lite 
prayer  of  Moses  for  Miriam: — I.  The  1'ba\'er.  1.  Explicit.  Nothing  vague.  2. 
Earnest.  3.  Generous.  4.  Well-timed.  II.  The  answer.  1.  Mo.st  gracious.  2. 
Most  wise.  3.  Most  speedy.  (R.  A.  Gri[fln.)  Moses' (jenerositij  : — Miriam  would 
have  wounded  Moses  with  her  tongue  ;  Moses  would  heal  her  with  his  :  "  0  Lord, 
heal  her  now."  The  wrong  is  the  greater,  because  his  sister  did  it.  He  doth  not 
say,  I  pout-'ht  not  her  shame,  she  sought  mine ;  if  God  have  revenged  it,  I  have  no 
reason  to  lojk  on  her  as  a  sister,  who  looked  on  me  as  an  adversary  ;  but,  as  if  her 


CHAP,  xiii.]  NUMBERS.  125 


lepropy  were  his,  he  cries  out  for  her  cure.  Oh,  admirable  meekness  of  Moses  ! 
His  people,  the  Jews,  rebelled  against  him  ;  God  proffers  revenge;  he  would  rather 
die  than  they  should  perish.  His  sister  rebelled  against  him ;  God  works  his 
revenge ;  he  will  not  give  God  pence  till  she  be  re-cured.  Behold  a  worthy  and 
noble  pattern  for  us  to  foUow !     (Bp.  Hall.) 


CHAPTEB    XIII, 


Vers.  1-20.  Send  thou  men,  that  they  may  search  the  land  of  Canaan. — Glimpses 
of  the  better  land  : — I,  The  seauch.  II.  The  retreat.  III.  An  emblem  of  God's 
DEALINGS  WITH  His  PEOPLE.  1.  The  children  of  Israel  were  sent  back  to  the  wilder- 
ness on  account  of  their  sin.  2.  While  they  are  sent  in  judgment,  they  go  back  of 
their  own  accord.  3.  Though  the  fruit  of  sin,  and  the  token  of  God's  righteous 
displeasure,  all  was  overruled  for  thsir  good.  4.  Though  chastened  they  are  not 
cast  off.  (1)  They  av 3  Divinely  delivered.  (2)  They  are  Divmely  sustained.  (3) 
They  are  Divinely  guided,  (i)  They  are  Divinely  chastened.  IV.  Improvement. 
1.  Let  young  believers  be  noL  high- minded,  but  fear.  2.  Let  backsliders  remember 
and  weep.  3.  Let  tried  and  troubled  saints  take  fresh  courage.  [Islay  Burns,  D.U.) 
The  sending  forth  of  the  spies : — I.  The  origin  op  this  expedition  [cf.  Dent. 
i.  20-25).  1.  God  had  Himself  declared  to  them  the  excellence  of  the  land  (Exod. 
iii.  8  ;  xxxiii.  3).  2.  He  h  id  promised  to  guide  them  to  the  land  (Exod.  xxxii.  34  ; 
xxxiii.  2,  14).  Moreover,  He  was  visibly  present  with  them  in  the  majestic  pillar 
of  cloud  and  fire.  3.  He  had  promised  to  drive  out  the  heathen  nations  and  give 
them  possession  of  the  land  (Exod.  xxiii.  20-33 ;  Deut.  i.  8).  4.  He  commanded 
them  to  "  go  up  and  possess  "  the  land  (Deut.  i.  8,  21),  5.  Yet  their  answer  was, 
"We  will  send  men  before  us,  and  they  shall  search  us  out  the  land,"  Ac.  (Deut.  i. 
22).  Clearly  their  duty  was  not  to  send  men  to  search  out  the  land,  but  trusting 
in  God,  to  obey  His  voice  and  go  and  take  possession  of  the  land.  God  may  allow 
us  to  carry  out  our  unbelieving  plans  to  our  own  confusion.  If  we  will  "  lean  unto 
our  own  understanding,"  He  will  let  us  take  our  way  until  we  find  what  utter  folly 
our  fancied  wisdom  is.  II.  The  agents  in  this  expedition.  "  Of  every  tribe  of 
their  fathers  shall  ye  send  a  man,  every  one  a  ruler  among  them,"  &c.  (vers.  2-lG). 
Three  points  here  requite  notice.  1.  The  wisdom  of  this  arrangement.  (1)  In 
sending  one  man  from  each  tribe.  By  this  arrangement  every  tribe  would  have  a 
witness  of  its  own.  (2)  In  sending  a  leading  man  from  each  tribe.  They  were 
approved  men  of  influence,  and  therefore  their  testimony  would  be  the  more  likely 
to  be  credited.  2.  The  scarcity  of  worthy  leaders.  We  see  here  that  a  large  pro- 
portion of  even  these  leading  men,  these  "  rulers  "  and  "  heads  of  the  children  of 
Israel,"  were  unworthy  of  the  position  which  they  occupied.  3.  The  diversity  of 
human  fame.  Tlie  names  of  these  twelve  men  have  been  handed  down  to  the 
pi  esent  time ;  but  how  different  are  the  positions  which  they  occupy !  History 
perpetuates  the  memory  of  Nero  as  well  as  of  St.  Paul,  of  Judas  Iscaiiot  as  well  as 
of  Jesus  Christ.  We  are  making  our  posthumous  reputation  now  ;  let  us  take  heed 
that  it  be  of  a  worthy  character.  III.  The  aims  of  this  expedition.  They  were 
to  report  as  to  the  condition  of — 1.  The  land,  whether  it  was  fertile  or  barren, 
wiieiher  it  was  wooded  or  bare,  &c.  2.  The  towns,  whether  they  were  walled  and 
fortified  or  open  and  unprotected,  &c.  3.  The  people,  whether  they  were  strong 
or  weak,  whether  they  were  few  or  many,  &c.  IV.  The  spiiut  APi-ROPRiAXE  to 
THIS  EXPEDiiioN.     "And   be   ye  of   good  courage."      (IF.  Jones.)  The  twelve 

spies: — I.  Their  selkction.  1.  One  from  each  tribe.  That  each  tribe,  without 
preference  or  distinction,  might  be  represented.  2.  Each  was  a  man  of  mark. 
"Every  one  a  ruler."  "  Heads  of  the  children  of  Israel."  Men  of  judgment  and 
discretion.  This  the  more  needful — (1)  Because  the  journey  was  perilous.  (2) 
Because  the  object  was  important.  Men  able  to  judge  of  the  soil,  and  inhabitants. 
3.  They  were  cho.-en  and  sent  by  Moses.  Their  various  characters  prove  the 
impartiality  of  Moses.  He  could  doubtless  have  found  in  each  tribe  a  man  after 
his  own  heart.  Probably  he  allowed  the  people  of  each  tribe  to  have  a  voice  in  the 
matter.  II.  Their  commission.  1.  They  were  to  spy  out  the  whole  land.  Not  to 
give  a  report  upon  some  few  favourable  or  unfavourable  aspects  of  it.  2.  They 
■were  to  observe  the  people,  and  note  especially  their  numbers,  character,  habits. 


t 


126  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiii. 

and  strength.  3.  They  were  to  bring  particulars  of  the  dwelliuETs  of  the  people ; 
whether  cities,  tents,  or  otherwise.  From  this,  their  habits  and  power  of  resis- 
tance might  be  inferred.  4.  They  were  carefully  to  examine  the  soil,  whether  fit 
for  pasturage  or  tillage,  whether  it  was  fat  or  lean.  5.  To  confirm  and  illustrate 
what  they  might  say  of  the  soil,  they  were  to  bring  of  the  fruit  of  the  land.  6. 
They  were  to  be  fearless.  God  would  have  them  in  His  keeping.  III.  Their 
JOURNEY.  1.  In  the  glorious  summer-time,  thus  commissionnd,  they  set  out  on 
their  enterprise.  Time  when  the  country  looked  most  beautiful.  2.  They  passed 
up  through  the  whole  country,  from  the  south  to  the  extreme  north ;  even  to 
Hamath.  3.  Keturning,  they  visited  Hebron.  Should  not  the  remembrance  of 
him  who  dwelt  there  (Abraham)  have  encouraged  them  to  believe  in  their  conquest 
of  the  country  ?  4.  At  a  place  afterwards  called  Eshcol  (the  place  of  grapes,  or 
the  cluster),  they  cut  down  a  large  bunch  of  grapes  ;  and  collecting  also  some  figs 
and  pomegranates,  they  returned  with  much  information  after  forty  days.  IV. 
Their  report.  1.  Things  in  which  they  agreed.  Concerning  the  country,  soil, 
fruit,  people.  They  showed  the  fruit  they  had  brought.  2.  Things  about  which 
they  differed.  Their  ability  to  conquer  this  wonderful  country.  3.  Effect  of  their 
representations.  (1)  Immediate.  People  discouraged  and  tumultuous  (ver.  80  ; 
xiv.  1-5).  They  began  to  rebel.  Were  for  returning  to  Egypt.  (2)  Ultimate. 
Delayed  the  stay  in  the  desert,  and  the  conquest  of  Canaan  for  many  years.  4. 
Only  Joshua  and  Caleb  faithful ;  these  were  silenced  and  out-voted.  Minorities 
have  often  been  in  the  right.  Reason  :  goodness  and  wisdom  generally  with  the 
few.  {J.  C.  Grnij.)  Wise  travellers: — To  us  at  this  day  the  use  may  be  two- 
fold. First,  to  such  as  travel  to  see  foreign  countries,  that  they  observe  fit  things 
in  them,  so  make  good  use  of  their  travel,  not  neglecting  things  profitable,  and 
sucking  up  all  venom,  that  the  corruption  of  those  places  may  yield,  as  too  many 
do,  to  tbeir  own,  not  only  temporal,  but  eternal  woe,  and  to  the  poisoning  of  many 
others  when  they  return.  Secondly,  to  magistrates,  ministers,  and  all  of  good 
disposition,  it  may  be  a  pattern  of  care  and  endeavour,  according  to  the  places  and 
power  they  have,  to  work  liking  in  men  of  the  true  Canaan  that  shall  endure  for 
ever,  and  a  daily  disliking  of  the  pleasures  of  Egypt,  this  transitoiy  and  sinful 
world,  that  bewitcheth  so  many  to  their  endless  woe  and  confusion.  (Bp. 
Bahinf]tOH.)  The  pramUcd  land: — We  have  a  heavenly  Canaan,  towards  which 
we  are  journeying ;  and  we  are  told  by  an  oracle,  even  more  sure  than  the  Urim 
and  Thummim,  "  There  remaineth  therefore  a  rest  for  the  people  of  God."  This, 
then,  being  the  case,  can  we  do  better  than  apply  to  oui-selves  the  injunction  in 
the  text,  and  "  search  out  the  land  "  which  is  our  promised  abode?  True  it  is,  we 
cannot  send  men  as  the  Jews  did,  for  "  who  shall  ascend  into  heaven,  save  the  Son 
of  God  which  came  down  from  heaven  ?  "  The  city  which  we  seek  is  no  fancy  of 
the  imagination.  But  shall  we  open  the  book  of  their  record,  and  note  what 
inspired  lips  have  spoken  concerning  the  New  Jerusalem?  Shall  we  tell  you  of 
the  gates,  each  made  of  a  single  pearl,  and  the  foundations  of  twelve  manner  of 
precious  stones  ?  When  the  gates  of  that  city  shall  close  upon  the  ransomed 
spirit,  will  it  be  on  these  things  that  the  undying  eye  will  be  fixed,  or  rather  upon 
the  face  of  "  Him  who  sitteth  upon  the  throne,"  the  triune  Jehovah,  the  glorified 
Jesus?  He  who  hath  "washed  us  in  His  own  blood,  and  made  us  kings  and 
priests  to  God  and  to  the  Lamb,"  will  be  the  supreme  object  of  our  admiration 
and  worship.  Such  is  the  land  towards  which  we  are  hastening — an  inheritance 
not  doubtful,  but  secured  to  us  by  two  "immutable  things,  by  which  it  is  im- 
possible for  God  to  lie."  And  now,  having  heard  this  good  report,  shall  we  gird 
on  our  swoi'ds  and  prepare,  as  disciples  of  the  Loi'd,  to  "  fight  the  good  fight  of 
faith,"  and  declare  in  the  heart-stirring  words  of  Caleb,  "  Let  us  go  up  and  possess 
it,  for  we  are  well  ahle  to  overcome  it."  Press  forward,  then  ;  the  voice  of  our 
Captain  is  cheering  us  onward— "Fear  not,  it  is  your  Father's  good  pleasure  to 
give  you  the  kingdom."  Angels  are  rejoicing  at  our  progress ;  and  not  only  so, 
but  fighting  on  our  side  ;  Satan  and  his  apostate  legions  are  fleeing  before  the 
triumphant  cross.  Shall  we  plead  our  terrors  at  the  Anakim,  while  the  sword  of 
the  Eternal  is  drawn  on  our  behalf?  Away  with  the  thought;  "though  they 
hedge  us  in  on  every  side,  in  the  name  of  the  Lord  we  will  destroy  them."  Yet  let 
us  not  go  on  this  warfare  "without  counting  the  cost"  ;  the  enemies  against  whom 
we  have  to  contend  are  giants  indeed.  "  We  wrestle  not  against  flesh  and  blood, 
but  against  principalities  and  powers,  acjninst  the  rulers  of  the  darkness  of  this 
world,  against  spiritual  wickciness  in  high  places."  These  our  foes  are  watchful 
as  well  as  powerful ;  they  are  most  malignant ;  they  know  our  weak  parts,  and 


\ 


CHAP,  xni.]  NUMBERS.  127 


can  tempt  us  most  craftily  ;  they  are  in  league  with  the  corruption  of  our  owu 
nature,  and  are  often  most  dangerous  when  least  suspected.  Are  we  prepared, 
against  such  antagonists  as  these,  not  only  to  draw  the  sword,  but  to  cast  away 
the  scabbard?  (H.  Christmas,  M. A.)  Moses  called  Oshea  .  .  .  Jehoshua.— r/(e 
change  of  Joshua's  name : — Originally  called  Hoshea,  or  Salvation,  this  name  was 
changed,  when  he  led  the  spies,  to  Jehoshua,  or  The  Lord  is  Salvation.  And  it  has 
never  ceased  to  seem  significant  to  the  Christian  that  this  name  of  Joshua  should 
have  been  that  by  which  our  Lord  was  called.  In  its  Greek  form,  "  Jesus,"  it  was 
given  to  Him  because  He  was  to  save  His  people  from  their  sins.  By  His  distinctive 
name  among  men  He  was  linked  to  Joshua,  and  in  the  salvation  He  accomplishes 
for  His  people  we  are  therefore  led  to  expect  the  same  leading  characteristics  as 
distinguished  the  salvation  of  Israel  by  Joshua.  1.  We  are,  in  the  first  place, 
reminded  by  this  parallel  that  the  help  afforded  to  us  in  Christ  is  God's  help,  and 
this  in  a  fuller  sense  than  was  true  in  Israel's  case.  2.  Again,  we  are  reminded  by 
this  parallel,  that  as  in  the  conquest  of  the  land  by  Joshua,  so  in  our  salvation,  is 
there  a  somewhat  perplexing  mixture  of  miracle  and  hard  fighting.  Sometimes 
the  rivers  that  flow  deep  before  us  open  at  our  approach,  and  we  pass  over  dryshod. 
At  other  times  we  are  allowed  to  fall  into  ambuscades.  And  just  as  the  Israelites, 
when  they  found  the  Jordan  open  before  them  and  the  walls  of  Jericho  fall  down, 
supposed  that  the  conquest  of  the  land  was  to  be  completed  without  their  drawing 
their  swords,  and  were  in  consequence  defeated  before  Ai,  so  are  the  great  mass  of 
those  who  enter  the  Christian  life  presuming  that  God  will  give  them  the  land  of 
uprightness,  purity  of  heai  t,  and  holiness  of  lite,  with  scarcely  an  effort  on  their 
part.  And  therefore,  though  there  was  miracle  on  the  side  of  Israel,  yet  this  rule 
was  distinctly  laid  down  as  the  rule  by  which  the  territory  was  allotted  to  the 
tribes,  that  each  was  to  have  what  each  could  take,  and  hold  against  the  enemy. 
This  is  the  law  of  our  acquisitions  also.  What  becomes  really  ours  is  what  we 
fight  for  inch  by  inch,  killing  as  we  go,  slaughtering  the  obstinate  foe  on  his  own 
soil,  so  that  the  property  be  left  to  us  uncontested.  God's  grant  is  useless  to  us  if 
we  will  not  draw  the  swoid  and  conquer  it,  if  we  wiU  not  wield  the  axe  and  clear  it. 
These  two  united  form  the  strongest  of  titles,  God's  grant  and  our  own  conquest. 
(Marcus  Dods,  D.D.) 

Vers.  23,  24.  The  place  was  exiled  the  brook  Eshcol,  because  of  the  cluster  of 
grapes. — Grapes  of  Eshcol : — I.  The  tkue  inquirers  into  the  Divine  will  ever 
HAVE  THEIR  REWARD.  There  are  grapes  for  every  student  of  God's  Book.  II.  The 
REGION  PROMISED  TO  THE  GOOD  IS  RICH  IN  BLESSING.  Their  highest  cnjoyments  on 
earth  are  only  the  taste  of  a  few  grapes  of  the  heavenly  world.     IH.  The  vast 

MAJORITY  OF  THE  HOMAH  FAMILY  HAVE  EVER  BEEN  MARKED  BY  MEANNESS  OF  SOUL.       Not 

only  did  these  specimens  fail  to  inspire  the  milhons  of  Israel  to  go  and  take  posses- 
sion of  the  land,  but  even  ten  out  of  the  twelve  discoverers  lost  heart.  Talk  not  of 
majorities!      (Homllist.)  Glimpses   of  the  promised   land: — I.    Consider  the 

NARRATIVE  ITSELF.  1.  The  evil  report.  Not  one  word  of  encouragement  do  they 
offer — no  reference  do  they  make  to  that  Divine  protection  which  they  had  exjjeri- 
enced  during  thtir  perilous  search — no  exhortation  do  they  utter,  urging  the  people 
to  obey  the  Divine  command.  Their  report  was  essentially  an  "  evil "  one,  calcu- 
lated to  dishearten  the  people — to  raise  prejudices  in  their  minds.  Now  the  conduct 
of  these  spies  has  always,  and  I  think  rightly,  been  rej;arded  as  illustrative  of  the 
conduct  of  those  who  are  dismayed  by  the  difdculties  which  attend  a  religious  life. 
For  it  cannot  be  denied  that  these  are  numerous  and  formidable.  This  does  not 
admit  of  a  doubt  and  it  ought  not  to  be  concealed.  2.  Very  different  was  the 
testimony  which  Caleb  and  Joshua  bore.  These  faithful  men  thought  and  acted 
for  themselves.  Singularity  for  its  own  sake  is  always  to  be  avoided,  since  it  may 
arise  from  a  desire  to  attract  notice  and  thus  be  the  mere  offspring  of  vanity.  But 
when  truth  is  concerned,  then,  though  we  should  stand  alune,  it  becomes  us  to  avow 
it.  There  never  was  a  more  false  or  dangerous  maxim  than  that  the  voice  of  the 
people  is  the  voice  of  God:  it  is  much  more  frequently  the  voice  of  the  devil — the 
voice  of  impulses  which  he  has  excited  and  of  passions  which  he  has  stirred.  H. 
Consider  the  spiritual  lessons  which  this  narrative  suggests.  Glimpses  of  the 
promised  land  1  No  Christian  is  without  them,  for  there  are  foretastes  of  heaven 
even  on  earth.  1.  There  are  glimpses  of  the  promised  land  which  we  obtain  by 
faith.  God  has  discovered  to  us  in  His  Word  a  better  country,  and  though  a  wise 
reserve  is  maintained,  yet  much  information  is  afforded  us  with  regard  to  it.  2. 
There  are  gUmpses  of  the  promised  land  which  we  obtain  when  v>  e  possess  th  j 


128  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xin. 

first-fruits  of  the  Spirit.  In  the  grace  tliat  you  now  receive  you  have  a  type  of  the 
glory  which  is  yet  to  be  revealed.  In  the  peace  which  you  now  enjoy,  you  have  a 
type  of  the  perfect  happiness  you  will  soon  experience.  In  tbe  purity  which  you 
now  possess  you  have  a  type  of  the  spotless  holiness  in  which  you  will  be  hereafter 
arrayed.  In  the  communion  which  you  now  hold  with  God  you  have  a  type  of  that 
more  intimate  fellowship  which  is  the  privilege  of  heaven.  3.  Glimpses  of  the 
promised  land  are  often  vouchsafed  to  the  Christian  at  an  early  stage  of  his 
experience.  But  there  was  much  for  us  to  learn,  and  God  sent  us  into  the  wilder- 
ness to  learn  it.  After  all,  our  experience  was  superficial — our  feelings  were  stronger 
than  our  principles — our  faith  needed  trial,  and  so,  like  the  Israelites  we  have  been 
"led  about  and  instructed."  Do  not  complain,  therefore,  because  your  experience  is 
not  what  it  once  was.  God  gave  you,  at  the  outset  of  your  Christian  career,  a 
glimpse  of  the  promised  laud,  and  the  memory  of  this  may  cheer  you  now  when 
you  mourn  because  of  the  travel  and  toil  of  the  wilderness.  4.  Glimpses  of  the 
promised  land  are  often  enjoyed  by  the  believer  at  the  close  of  life.  This  is  not 
invariably  the  case,  but  it  frequently  is  so,  as  a  reward  for  eminent  piety.  {H.  J. 
Gamble.)  A  cluster  of  gospd  grapes  : — Strabo  states  that  in  Bible  times  and  in 
Bible  lands  there  were  grape-vines  so  large  that  it  took  two  men  with  outstretched 
arms  to  reach  round  them,  and  he  says  there  were  clusters  two  cubits  in  length,  or 
twice  the  length  from  the  elbow  to  the  tip  of  the  long  finger.  And  Achaicus,  dwell- 
ing in  those  lands,  tells  us  that  during  the  time  he  was  smitten  with  fever  one  grape 
would  slake  his  thirst  for  the  whole  day.  No  wonder,  then,  that  in  these  Bible 
times  two  men  thought  it  worth  their  while  to  put  their  strength  together  to  carry 
down  one  cluster  of  gi-apes  from  the  promised  land.  But  I  bring  you  a  larger  cluster 
from  the  heavenly  Eshcol — a  cluster  of  hopes,  a  cluster  of  prospects,  a  cluster  of 
Christian  consolations  ;  and  I  am  expecting  that  one  taste  of  it  will  rouse  up  your 
appetite  for  the  heavenly  Canaan.  1.  First,  I  console  you  with  the  Divinely  sanc- 
tioned idea  that  your  departed  friends  are  as  much  yours  now  as  they  ever  were. 
That  child,  0  stricken  mother !  is  as  much  yours  this  morning  as  in  the  solemn 
hour  when  God  put  it  against  your  heart  and  said  as  of  old,  "  Take  this  child  and 
nurse  it  for  Me,  and  I  will  give  thee  thy  wages."  It  is  no  mere  whim.  It  is  a 
Divinely-i^lanted  principle  in  the  soul,  and  God  certainly  would  not  plant  a  lie,  and 
He  would  not  culture  a  lie  I  2.  But  I  console  you  ajjain  with  the  fact  of  your  pre- 
sent acquaintanceship  and  communication  with  your  departed  friends.  3.  I  console 
you  still  further  with  the  idea  of  a  resurrection.  On  that  day  you  will  get  back  your 
Christian  dead.  There  is  where  the  comfort  comes  in.  And  oh,  the  reunion  ;  oh, 
the  embrace  after  so  long  an  absence  !  Comfort  one  another  with  these  words. 
(T.  de  Witt  Talmage.)  Eshcol: — Contemplate  that  cluster  which  they  bear — that 
earnest  of  rich  fields.  These  grapes  are  proof  of  Canaan's  exuberant  fertility.  So, 
too,  there  is  a  heavenly  Eshcol  before  faith's  eye.  It  shows  delicious  clusters.  The 
joy  befiire  Christ  cheered  His  heart.  The  joy  before  us  should  gird  up  our  loins. 
This  cluster  was  the  vine's  perfection.  So,  too,  perfection  is  the  essence  of  our 
heaven.  Nothing  can  enter  there  to  stain,  &c.  Oh,  what  a  contrast  to  our  present 
state  !  In  the  true  Eshcol's  cluster  there  is  this  richer  fruit ;  Jesus  is  seen.  This 
is  the  crown  of  heaven.  The  rising  of  the  sun  makes  day.  The  presence  of  the 
king  constitutes  the  court.  The  revelation  of  the  Lord,  without  one  intervening 
cloud,  is  the  grand  glory  of  the  endless  kingdom.  Believer,  what  will  it  be  to  gaze 
on  the  manifested  beauty  of  Him  who  is  altogether  lovely  1  What,  to  comprehend 
all  that  Jesus  is  1  What,  never  to  lose  sight  of  Him  !  Are  you  a  traveller  towards 
this  heaven  ?  {Dean  Law.)  Foretastes  of  heaven  : — Land-birds  of  beautiful 
plumage  gi-eeted  Columbus  days  before  his  eye  caught  a  glimpse  of  the  New  World. 
A  more  southern  voyager  found  himself  in  the  fresh  water  of  the  Amazon  before 
discovering  the  continent  whence  they  came.  So  at  the  else  of  life's  voyage  do 
birds  of  paradise  come  hitherward,  careering  on  bright  wings,  and  the  river  of  hfe 
sends  its  refreshing  current  far  out  into  the  briny  sea  of  this  world.  The  pome - 
granate  : — People  in  the  East  have  always  been  fond  of  using  fruits  and  flowers  as 
symbols.  Thus  lots  of  pomegranates  were  carved  as  sacred  emblems  upon  Jaohin 
and  Boaz,  the  two  chief  pillars  in  the  temple  (1  Kings  vii.  18),  embroidered  on  the 
priest's  garments  (Exod.  xxviii.  33).  I.  Our  religion  should  be  DELKiuxFor,.  The 
pomegranate  is  delightful  to  every  sense  ;  for  it  gladdens  the  eye,  and  is  a  favourite 
ornament.  Its  leaf  is  bright  green  and  lustrous  ;  its  wood  is  yellow  and  graceful ; 
its  blossom  is  well  shaped  and  scarlet.  The  good  is  the  beautiful,  beautiful  with 
God's  beauty.  The  pomegranate  is  also  very  fragrant.  It  sweetens  the  air  and 
breathes  benediction  all  around.     You  should  behold  flowers  and  plants  not  with. 


CHAP.  XIII.]  NUMBERS.  129 

the  eyes  of  the  gardener  who  plants  them,  nor  of  the  child  who  plucks  tl  cm,  nor  of 
the  merchant  who  buys  them,  but  of  the  Christian  who  finds  in  them  sweet  sugges- 
tions of  the  love  of  God.  The  pomegranate  is  also  delightful  to  the  taste,  for  its 
juice  is  very  delicious.  It  was  also  in  Bible  times  very  delightful  to  the  mind :  for, 
like  the  olive  it  was  an  emblem  of  peace.  Invading  armies  cut  down  the  fruit  trees, 
and  one  of  the  first  to  fall  before  the  sword  and  fire  was  the  pomegranate,  as  it  was 
a  shrub  rather  than  a  tree.  This  was  one  reason  why  it  was  so  popular,  as  it  was 
a  sign  of  long-continued  peace.  It  was  thus  a  token  of  the  religion  of  peace.  II. 
Our  religion,  like  the  pomegranate,  should  be  vebt  useful.  It  was  good  for 
medicine.  Every  part  of  it  had  healing  virtue,  and  it  heals  several  of  the  diseases 
that  are  most  common  in  the  East — sore  throat,  dysentery,  &c.  You  know  that  all 
green  things  are  literally  for  the  healing  of  the  nations.  The  religion  of  Jesus, 
when  real  in  the  heart,  always  sweetens  the  breath  of  society  and  heals  many  sores. 
Our  plant  is  also  good  for  drink.  It  is  very  juicy,  and  has  a  remarkable  quality  of 
quenching  thirst  in  these  hot  climes.  Its  delicate  juice  is  often  manufactured  into 
wine,  and  is  a  great  favourite  with  the  sick,  and  indeed  with  all  classes.  It  is  also 
good  for  food.  Do  not  suppose  that  the  religion  of  Jesus  is  good  for  the  world  to 
come  but  not  good  for  this.  It  is  the  sincere  Christian  alone  who  gets  out  of  this 
present  life  all  the  good  it  can  yield  him.  Seek  ye  first  the  Kingdom  of  God,  and 
all  these  things  shall  be  added  unto  you.  III.  Our  religion,  like  the  pomegranate, 
should  be  veey  fkuitful — fruitful  both  in  ourselves  and  in  the  world.  When  our 
Saviour  speaks  of  the  fruit  bearing  of  His  disciples,  He  means  such  rich  fruit  as  you 
find  on  the  Syrian  soil,  and  under  the  wonder-working  Syrian  sun.  We  never  see 
anything  like  it  in  our  cloudy  clime.  Why,  the  seeds  in  one  pomegranate  might 
soon  fill  a  grove,  if  none  of  them  were  spoiled.  I  was  allured  the  other  day  to  a 
splendid  horse-chestnut.  I  pulled  one  of  its  blossoms,  but  I  was  disgusted  with  it, 
and  at  once  flung  it  away.  It  was  ruffled  and  bedashed  with  rain,  hored  through 
by  flies,  discoloured  with  dust — I  flung  away  the  ragged,  blighted,  deflowered  thing. 
Many  a  beautiful  and  promising  young  life  soon  becomes  like  that  outcast  blossom. 
One  of  the  darkest  things  to  me  in  the  world  is  the  ease  with  which  a  fine  young 
life  is  sometimes  injured.  But  if  you  yield  your  heart  early  to  Christ,  and  gladly 
take  Him  as  your  Teacher,  Saviour,  and  Guide,  how  delightful,  useful,  and  fruitful 
your  life  may  become — it  may  grow  as  the  pomegranate.  You  can  set  no  bounds 
to  the  possibUilies  of  good  that  belong  to  the  very  humblest  Christian.  A  portrait 
of  Dante  was  discovered  lately  ;  he  was  holding  a  pomegranate  in  his  hand.  Per- 
haps it  had  charmed  the  poet  as  an  emblem  of  what  he  desired  to  be.  {James 
Wells,  D.D.) 

Ver.  27.  It  floweth  with  milk  and  honey. — A  land  flowinrj  ivitli  milk  and  honey  : 
— The  idea  suggested  is,  that  the  true  disciples  of  the  Lord  Jesus  are  expected  to 
show  to  the  world  some  illustration  of  the  nature  of  the  heavenly  country  to  which 
they  are  journeying.  In  a  sense  they  have  been  there,  and  have  come  back.  But 
in  what  sense?  1.  The  idea  with  many  persons  is,  that  the  future  condition  of 
man  is  so  completely  different  from  this,  that  it  is  out  of  the  question  to  attempt  to 
form  a  conception  of  it.  Now,  it  is  true,  St.  Paul  tells  us,  "  t'at  eye  hath  not  seen, 
nor  ear  lieard,  neit'ier  have  entered  into  the  heart  of  man,  the  things  which  God 
hath  prepare')  for  tht^m  that  love  Him."  But  it  is  also  true,  as  the  apostle  goes  on 
to  say,  that  "  God  hath  revealed  them  unto  us  by  His  Spirit."  Some  people,  then, 
are  in  a  position  to  understand  what  the  heavenly  kingdom  is  like.  They  have  true 
ideas  about  it — foretastes.  In  fact,  "  heaven  "  is  really  the  expansion  of  a  life 
begun  here  below.  "  He  that  hath  the  Son  hath  life."  2.  What,  then,  has  the  true 
disciple  to  show  as  specimens  of  the  produce  of  this  unseen  and  unknown  country  ? 
Briefly,  the  character  of  Christ  reproduced  in  him,  by  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit. 
It  is  faintly,  imperfectly  reproduced  ;  still  it  is  reproduced  (see  2  Cor.  i.  21,  "  Hath 
Christed  us").  There  is  the  strength  which  overcometh  the  world,  the  peace 
which  passeth  understanding,  the  blessedness  of  communion  with  God,  the  soul- 
thirst  for  God  ever  renewed  and  ever  satisfied.  3.  It  is  by  the  presentation  of  these 
fruits  of  the  land  that  souls  are  won.  No  doubt  there  are  some  persons  in  the  world 
to  whom  Christ  and  everything  belonging  to  Christ,  are  only  repulsive ;  and 
these  will  scrutinise  the  disciple  with  an  unfriendly  eye,  and  rejoice  if 
ever  they  find,  or  fancy  they  find,  any  inconsistency  in  his  conduct.  But 
there  are  also  many  others  of  a  different  temper.  They  are  halting  between  two 
opinions.  They  say,  not  of  course  in  words,  but  by  their  feelings  and  manner, 
"  Be  Christ  to  us  ;  let  us  see  in  you  and  through  you  what  the  Divine  Master  is, 

9 


130  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiii. 

and  how  He  will  treat  us  if  we  venture  to  apply  to  Him  " — or,  to  express  it  differ- 
ently, "  Show  us  tlie  fruits  of  the  heavenly  land,  of  which  you  think  so  much  and 
speak  so  much.  You  are  amongst  us  as  a  citizen  of  the  heavenly  city  (Phil.  iii.  20). 
Enable  us  to  gather  from  ^  our  conduct  what  are  the  characteristics  of  that  noble 
land,  of  that  bright  and  glorious  companionship."  4.  And  lastly,  what  is  the 
practical  conclusion  to  be  drawn  from  the  whole  subject  thus  discussed  ?  Surely  it 
is  this — that  we,  who  profess  to  serve  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  should  be  careful  to 
recognise  the  responsibility  laid  upon  us  to  give  a  good  report,  like  Caleb  and 
Joshua,  and  not  a  bad  report,  like  the  ten  other  spies,  of  the  unseen  land.  We 
shall  give  a  bad  report  if  our  lives  are  not  attractive,  and  are  not  consistent.  We 
shall  give  a  good  report  if  our  characters  glow,  even  feebly,  with  the  inner  light  of 
the  life  of  Christ ;  and  if,  by  deed  as  well  as  by  word,  we  cry,  "  The  conflict  may  be 
a  formidable  one,  but  it  is  not  too  formidable  "  ;  and  if  we  trust  as  we  should  do, 
and  may  do,  that  we  shall  be  more  than  conquerors  through  Him  that  loved  us. 
(G.  Calthrov,  M.A.) 

Ver.  30.  Let  us  go  up  at  once,  and  possess  It. — The  ancient  Canaan  a  type  of 
heaven  : — I.  In  what  resimlgts  the  ancient  Canaan  was  a  type  of  heaven.  1. 
It  was  a  promised  land,  and  the  right  of  possession  was  founded  on  the  promise.  2. 
It  was  a  land  in  which  God  was  peculiarly  present.  3.  It  was  a  land  of  fruition. 
4.    It  was  a  free  gift.      II.    The  Israelites  had  dangers,  difficulties,  and  dis- 

COURAGEJIENTS   IN    THE    WILDERNESS,    IN    THEIR   WAT    TO    CaNAAN  ;    SO   HAVE    CHRISTIANS 

IN  THEIR  PROGRESS  TO  HEAVEN.  1.  There  are  formidable  foes  to  be  encountered. 
The  corrupt  heart,  the  evil  world,  and  that  apostate  spirit,  the  devil.  2.  There  are 
adversaries  in  timid  and  faint-hearted  associates.  3.  The  Israelites  in  their 
progress  were  made  dependent  on  the  Lord  for  all  things.  III.  The  rksolution — 
"Let  us  go  up  at  once,  and  possess  it."  1.  The  title  to  it  is  sure.  It  is  pledged 
in  Christ ;  as  heirs  of  God  and  joint  heirs  with  Christ.  He  is  our  Joshua  and  is 
gone  to  take  possession  for  us.  2.  We  have  means  and  ordinances  by  which  needed 
strength  is  supplied,  and  we  are  invited  and  enjoined  to  feed  in  the  spiritual  manner, 
and  to  drink  of  the  spiritual  rock.  3.  Here  we  have  many  foretastes  of  the  good 
land.  {Sketches  of  Fmir  Hiindri'd  Sermons.)  Difficulties  in  the  looy  : — 1.  The 
kingdom  of  heaven  challenges  the  inquiry  of  all  men.  It  addresses  an  appeal  to 
human  reason,  and  to  human  trust.  Though  itself  a  revelation,  and  theiclore  not 
to  be  handled  as  a  common  thing,  nor  to  be  tested  by  common  iustruments,  yet 
Christianity  invites  the  most  carelul  inquest.  It  does  not  seek  to  rest  upon  the 
human  intellect  as  a  burden,  but  to  shine  upon  it  as  a  light.  If  Chiistianity  may 
be  represented  under  the  image  of  a  land,  such  as  ancient  Canaan,  then  it  is  fair  to 
say  of  it,  that  it  offers  right  of  way  over  its  hills  and  through  its  valleys,  that  its 
fruits  and  flowers  are  placed  at  the  disposal  of  all  travellers,  and  that  he  who  com- 
plains that  the  land  is  shut  against  him  speaks  not  only  ungratefully  but  most 
falsely.  2.  Different  reports  will,  of  course,  be  brought  by  the  inquirers.  The 
result  of  the  survey  will  be  according  to  the  peculiarities  of  the  surveyors.  As 
streams  are  impregnated  by  the  soils  over  which  they  flow,  so  subjects  are  affected 
by  the  individualism  of  the  minds  through  which  they  pass.  Thus  Christianity 
niay  be  said  to  be  different  things  to  diffeient  minds.  To  the  speculative  man  it  is 
a  great  attempt  to  solve  deep  pioblems  \n  theology  ;  to  the  controversialist  it  is  a 
challenge  to  debate  profound  subjects  on  new  ground  ;  to  the  poet  it  is  a  dream,  a 
wondrous  vision  many-coloured  as  tlie  rainbow,  a  revelation  many-voicod  as  the 
tunes  of  the  wind  or  the  harmonies  of  the  sea.  (1)  Some  inquirers  will  see  all  the 
hindrances.  (2)  All  will  confess  that  there  is  something  good  in  the  land.  (3) 
Those  who  hold  back  by  reason  of  the  difficulties  will  come  to  a  miserable  end.  (a) 
We  don't  escape  by  false  reasoning,  ih)  We  don't  escape  by  fear.  Application  : 
1.  Some  have  shown  the  spirit  of  Caleb — what  is  your  testimony?  2.  Will  you 
resolve,  in  Divine  strength,  to  follow  the  Lord  fully?  (J.  I'aikcr,  D.D.)  The 
decision  and  exertion  incumhent  upon  Christians  in  all  tliinr/s: — I.  The  passiige 
serves  to  illustrate  the  reliever's  DUTY  in  general.  "Go  forward."  This  is  the 
command  of  God  to  His  people,  with  reference  to  every  obligation  that  devolves 
upon  them,  and  at  every  critical  moment,  amidst  all  our  difficulties  we  encounter 
from  the  world.  Nothing  but  this  heroism  will  suit  the  dignity  and  the  decision  of 
Cliristian  character.  II.  Tlie  passage  serves  to  illustrate  the  more  special  duty  of 
the  people  of  God  with  reference  to  missionary  exeriion.  And  that  I  conceive 
to  be  one  of  tlie  pressing  duties  of  the  Church  of  Christ  in  the  present  day.  {W.  II. 
Cooyer.)         The  magnanimous  character  and  wisdom  of  Caleb  : — 1.  He  "  stilled  the 


CHAP.  XIII.]  ,  NUMBERS.  131 

people."  Stillness  engenders  thoughtfnlness.  2.  He  seeks  to  secure  unity  of  faith. 
"  Let  us  go  up."  3.  Promptness.  "At  once."  4.  He  directs  their  minds  to  their 
ability.  Conclusion  :  The  world  belongs  to  Christ  by  creation  and  by  preservation. 
In  God's  name  the  Church  may  cLiim  Christ's  prerogative  for  the  conquest  of  the 
•world.  {W.  Miidgf.)  Good  icitncxi;csfor  God  : — I.  God  hath  ever  had  some  witnesses 
OF  His  truth.  Nicoderaus.  Joseph  of  Aiimathea.  And  how  can  it  be  otherwise,  for 
the  truth  shall  never  decay  from  the  earth,  but  be  spread  abroad  from  place  to  place, 
and  from  generation  to  generation  for  ever  (Psa.  cxix.  89).  We  perish,  for  all  flesh 
is  as  grass,  and  all  the  glory  of  man  is  as  the  flower  of  the  field,  but  the  word  of  the 
Lord  abideih  for  ever  (1  Pet.  i.  24).  God  will  have  this  never  to  die,  never  to 
wither.  He  hath  the  hearts  of  all  men  in  His  own  hand,  to  turn  them  at  His  plea- 
sure (Acts  ix.  In).  So  saith  Christ,  "  I  teli  you  if  these  should  hold  their  peace, 
the  stones  would  cry  "  (Luke  xix.  40),  and  therefore  He  can  never  be  without 
some  witness  to  maintain  His  truth.  1.  Tliis  teacheth  us  that  God  is  most  glorious 
and  powerful,  and  will  be  known  in  the  earth  (Psa.  viii.  1,  2  ;  Matt.  xxi.  15  ;  Acts 
xiv.  17).  2.  Great  is  His  truth  and  prevnileth  ;  He  hath  always  had  a  Church  upon 
the  face  of  the  earth,  and  He  never  forsaketh  it,  though  multitudes  conspire  against 
it,  it  shall  have  the  upper  hand  at  last.  3.  Bs  not  discouraged  when  the  truth  is 
oppressed,  because  God  is  able  to  maintain  it,  and  raiseth  up  His  enemies  often- 
times to  defend  it.  4.  This  should  persuade  every  one  of  us  how  to  carry  ourselves, 
namely,  that  we  should  not  take  any  approbation  or  liking  of  the  evil  of  other, 
neither  ought  we  to  imitate  any  in  sin,  how  holy  soever  they  seem  to  be,  neither 
give  consent  to  them  by  our  practice,  forasmuch  as  God's  hand  hath  overtaken 
them  at  one  time  or  other.  H.  The  evil  of  others,  tea,  although  they  be  mant, 
MAY  NOT  be  followed  OF  US.  The  reasons.  1.  Whatsoever  is  in  itself  evil  cannot 
be  made  good  and  lawful  by  any  example,  nor  by  many  examples.  It  cannot  be 
warranted  by  the  law  of  man,  much  less  by  the  pure  law  of  God  Himself.  2.  No 
greatness,  no  multitude  can  save  a  man  from  judgments  due  to  the  least  sin  ;  for 
though  hand  join  in  hand,  the  wicked  shall  not  go  unpunished  (Prov.  v;  xi.  21). 
This  serveth  to  reprove  many  carnal  and  formal  Christians  that  oftentimes  encour- 
age themselves  in  evil,  and  strengthen  themselves  by  the  example  of  others.  3.  We 
may  gather  from  hence  a  reproof  of  ignorant  recusants  grounding  only  upon  their 
forefathers  ;  such  as  can  give  no  other  reason  of  their  religion  but  that  they  were 
born  and  bred  in  it  (Psa.  Ixxviii.  8).  III.  It  is  the  duty  of  God's  children  to 
EXHORT  AND  STIR  UP  ONE  ANOTHER  TO  GOOD  THINGS.  And  that  for  divers  reasons.  1. 
We  are  quickly  hardened  in  sin.  We  are  quickly  dull  to  all  good  ;  exhortation  made 
by  others  setteth  an  edge  upon  us,  and  putteth  life  into  us  (Prov.  xxvii.  17).  2. 
Such  as  continue  to  the  end  are  made  partakers  of  Christ,  and  with  Him  of  all  other 
graces ;  this  ought  to  provoke  us  to  practise  this  duty,  the  rather  seeing  so  great 
fruit  cometh  by  it,  the  blessing  of  all  blessings,  Christ  Jesus  is  made  ours  (Heb.  iii. 
13,  14).  3.  We  have  other  reasons  used  by  the  same  apostle  (Heb.  x.  25,  2G). 
Fearful  judgments  remain  for  all  backsliders.  4.  The  day  of  the  Lord  draweth  near, 
and  we  must  take  heed  that  it  take  us  not  unprepared  ;  we  must  therefore  stir  up 
ourselves  and  others  to  look  for  it  and  to  long  after  it.  Lastly,  we  see  evil  men  do 
it  in  evil  and  to  evil.  They  labour  by  all  means  to  make  others  as  bad  as  them- 
selves. This  also  we  see  in  this  place,  much  more  therefore  ought  we  to  teach  and 
instruct  one  another,  and  be  helpers  to  the  most  holy  faith  one  of  another.  (W. 
Attersoll.)  A  antipaign  for  God: — The  Israelites  sent  twelve  spies  into  Paran  and 
Kadesh  to  reconnoitre.  I  suppose  they  wanted  to  see  if  God's  word  was  triie. 
That's  always  the  way  with  unbelievers.  God  had  said  to  them,  "  Go  over.  I'll 
help  you.  It  will  be  yours.  It's  a  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey.  All  you've 
got  to  do  is  to  go  and  take  it."  But  they  thought  they  would  first  find  out  for  them- 
selves what  it  was  worth,  and  whether  they  would  be  able  to  take  it.  They  brought 
back  what  we  would  call  in  these  days  a  majority  and  minority  report.  Ten  said 
that  it  would  be  impossible  to  take  the  country.  All  admitted  that  what  God  had 
told  them  was  true  about  the  milk  and  honey.  Only  Caleb  and  Joshua  confiuned 
the  Lord  in  regard  to  taking  the  land.  All  admitted  that  the  land  was  good,  but  ten 
said  they  saw  giants,  and  walls,  and  castles,  and  that  the  Israelites  would  not  bo 
able  to  overcome  these.  I  can  imagine  these  fellows  in  camp,  telling  their  comrades 
that  they  had  stood  alongside  these  giants,  and  had  been  obliged  to  look  up  to  see 
their  faces,  and  that  they  were  to  them  but  as  grasshoppers.  When  we  believe,  we 
are  able  to  overcome  giants,  and  walls  and  everything.  A  lie  generally  travels  faster 
than  the  truth.  It  is  an  old  saying  that  a  lie  will  go  round  the  world  before  the 
truth  can  get  his  boots  on  to  follow  him.     The  world  always  seems  to  rejoice  when- 


132  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [CH,.^.  n«. 


ever  anything  goes  wrong  with  religion.     So  thus  he  went  round  the  camp   and 
found  favour  with  the  Jews.     "  I  would  rather  go  back  to  Egypt  and  make  bricks 
v?ithout  straw  again.    I  would  rather  hear  the  crack  of  the  slaveholder's  whip  again, 
than  encounter  these  terrors."     That's  the  way  the  Israelites  talked,  and  that  is  the 
talk  of  the  unbeliever.     I  am  one  of  the  spies  sent  out  to  look  at  the  promised  land. 
I  have  found  it  flowing  with  milk  and  honey.    Let  us  say  whether  we  fear  anything 
now.     Let  us  go  up  at  once  and  take  the  land.     I  tell  you  that  it  is  good.     If 
Caleb's  voice  had  prevailed,  the  Israelites  might  have  saved  forty  years  in  tbe 
■wilderness.     To-day  I  say  that  four-fifths  of  the  professed  children  are  not  able  to 
reach  the  land,  simply  on  account  of  their  unbelief.     Many  persons  have  told  me 
that  I  mustn't  expect  so  great  a  success  as  I  had  in  the  old  country.     If  I  don't 
expect  it,  I  won't  have  it.     We  must  go  at  once  and  take  the  land.     We  are  able  to 
do  it.     "  Their  defence  has  gone  from  them."     How  easy  it  is  for  God  to  pour  out 
His  blessings  in  such  profusion  that  we  will  not  be  able  to  receive  them.    That  was 
the  difference  between  Caleb  and  Joshua  and  the  ten.   The  ten  got  their  eyes  on  the 
walls  and  the  giants,  but  Caleb  and  Joshua  lifted  theirs  above  and  saw  Him  on  His 
throne.     They  said  that  it  was  easy  for  God  to  give  them  that  country  as  He 
promised.     They  remembered  how  easily  He  had  taken  them  across  the  Eed  Sea  ; 
how  He  had  fed  them  with  manna  in  the  wilderness,  and  how  He  had  made  the 
water  gush  forth  from  the  barren  rock.    If  God  wislies  to  aid  you,  then  you  are  well 
able  to  go  up  and  take  the  land.    That  is  the  difference  between  a  man  who  has  God 
with  him,  and  the  one  who  has  not.     The  greatest  diificulty  we  have  to  encounter 
is,  therefore,  tlie  unbelief  so  current  among  Christians.     Oh,  would  that  God  would 
sweep  it  away  !     Our  God  is  able  to  do  it.     Let  us  not  limit  the  power  of  the  Holy 
One  of  Israel.     Look  upward  and  see  Him  who  sitteth  on  the  right  hand  of  God, 
and  press  forward.     (D.  L.  Moody.)         Caleb's  sjnrit  .-—Was  Caleb,  then,  a  giant- 
larger  than  any  of  the  sons  of  Anak?     Was  he  a  Hercules  and  a  Samson  in  one? 
Was  his  arm  so  tcrrifiic  that  every  stroke  of  it  was  a  conquest  ?   We  are  not  told  so ; 
tbe  one  thing  we  are  told  about  Caleb  is  that  he  was  a  man  of  "  another  spirit." 
That  determines  the  quality  of  the  man.     Character  is  a  question  of  spirit.     It  is 
an  affair  of  inward  and  spiril,ual  glow.     Caleb  had  been  upon  the  preliminary 
search;  Caleb  had  seen  the  walls,  and  the  Anakim,  and  the  fortresses, and  he  came 
back  saying.  We  can  do  this,  not  because  we  have  so  many  arms  only,  or  so  many 
resources  of  a  material  kind,  but  because  he  was  a  man  of  "  another  spirit."     In 
the  long  run,  spirit  wins  ;  in  the  outcome  of  all  history,  spirit  will  be  uppermost. 
The  great  battles  of  Ufe  are  not  controversies  of  body  against  body,  but,  as  far  as 
God  is  in  them,  they  are  a  question  of  spirit  against  boJy,  thought  against  iron, 
pra\er  against  storming  and  blustering  of  boastful  men.     While  the  cloud  hangs 
over  the  field,  and  the  dust  of  the  strife  is  very  thick,  and  the  tumult  roars  until  it 
deafens  those  who  listen,  we  cannot  see  the  exact  proportions,  colours,  and  bearings 
of  things ;  but  if  we  read  history  instead  of  studying  the  events  of  the  day  which 
have  not  yet  settled  themselves  into  order  and  final  meaning,  we  shall  discover  that 
spirit  is  mightier  than   body,  that  "knowledge   is  power,"  that  "righteousness 
exalteth  a  nation,"  and  that  they  who  bear  the  white  banner  of  a  pure  cause  ulti- 
mately triumph  because  God  is  with  them.      (J.  Parker,  D.D.)         Difficulties  may 
he  overcome  : — "  It  is  impossible !  "  said  some,  when  Peter  the  Great  determined  on 
ft  voyage  of  discovery;  and  the  cold  and  uninhabited  region  over  which  he  reigned 
furnished  nothing  but  some  larch-trees  to  construct  his  vessels.     But,  though  the 
iron,  the  cordage,  the  sails,  and  all  that  was  necessary,  except  the  provisions  for 
victualling  them,  were  to  be  carried  through  the  immense  deserts  of  Siberia,  down 
rivers  of  difficult  navigation,  and  along  roads  almost  impassable,  the  thing  was 
done;    for  the  command  of  the  sovereign  and  the  perseverance  of  the  people 
surmounted  every  obstacle. 

Vers.  32,  33.  They  hrought  up  an  evil  report.— T/ie  report  of  the  spies  :—l.  God's 
PROMISES  WILL  ALWAYS  BEAR  iNVJiSTiGATKiN.  It  is  true  that  uone  of  US  has  entered 
heaven ;  but  Jesus,  who  has  gone  on  in  advance  to  take  possession  of  it  in  His 
people's  name,  has  sent  back  an  Eshcol  cluster  of  its  vintage,  that  we  may  know 
something  of  wliat  we  should  expect.  He  has  given  us  "  the  earnest  of  the  Spirit 
in  our  hearts."  The  believer  already  has  everlasting  life;  for  the  regeneration 
■which  he  hns  here  experienced  needs  but  to  be  expanded  and  elevated  and  sublimated, 
to  become  the  life  of  heaven.  It  is  a  confirmation  of  Jehovah's  word  to  him  ;  it  is 
the  seal  of  God  Himself  to  the  truthfulness  of  His  promise  that  he  shall  yet  enter 
into  heaven's  own  rest.    II.  There  are  Anakim  to  be  encountered  in  the  co.nqdest 


CHAP,  xin.j  NUMBERS.  133 

OF  EVERY  PROMISED  LAND.  Chi'ist  has  Said,  "  If  any  man  will  come  after  Me,"  &c., 
and  has  urged  us  to  count  the  cost  before  we  commence  to  raise  our  tower.  So  He 
would  prepare  us  for  self-denial,  hardship,  and  long-continued  struggle ;  but  we 
must  not  suppose  that  in  all  this  the  gospel  is  an  exception  to  the  general  law.  No 
Canaan  of  success,  in  any  pursuit,  can  be  gained  save  by  the  conquest  of  the 
Anakim.  He  who  would  rise  to  a  position  of  eminence  in  the  department  of 
literature,  for  example,  must  learn  to  "  scorn  delights,  and  live  laborious  days."  He 
must  deny  himself  many  pleasures  in  which  others  allow  themselves  to  indulge,  and 
must  keep  himself,  in  a  sense,  secluded  from  the  world,  living  in  his  library  and  at 
his  desk.  The  man  of  business  who  would  climb  the  steep  thstt  leads  to  wealth, 
must  pursue  a  similar  course.  He  cannot  leave  his  place;  he  keeps  himself  chained 
to  the  oar  ;  he  knows  that  nothing  will  avail  but  work — hard  and  continuous  work ; 
for  so  only  can  he  conquer  those  influences  that  stand  in  the  way  of  his  attainment 
of  his  object.  It  is  the  same  with  the  artist ;  and,  on  a  lower  platform,  with  the 
athlete.  All  of  them  have  to  go  into  training  ;  and,  in  every  pursuit,  a  campaign, 
with  its  perils  and  fatigues,  comes  before  a  victory.  We  cannot  complain,  there- 
fore, if  the  same  law  holds  in  the  spiritual  life.  The  giants  with  whom  we  have  to 
contend  are  mainly  in  ourselves,  in  the  shape  of  evil  principles  and  sins  that  most 
easily  beset  us ;  and  it  is  only  through  self-couquest  that  we  can  pass  to  any  external 
victory.  We  cannot  vault  by  one  spasmodic  leap  up  to  the  height  of  holiness,  any 
more  than  the  Israelites  could  all  at  once  obtain  possession  of  the  Land  of  Promise. 
*'  By  little  and  little  "  it  has  to  be  done.  It  needs  prayer,  and  watchfulness,  and 
constancy  ;  and  if  we  decline  to  enter  upon  the  conflict,  we  shall  fall  short  of  the 
inherttance.  III.  The  true  believer  is  always  able  to  conquer  his  spiritual 
ADVERSARIES  WITH  THE  HELP  OF  GoD.  It  is  not  a  questiou  of  feebleness,  but  of 
faith.  Whether  the  work  we  set  before  us  be  our  own  sanctification,  or  tlie 
evangelisation  of  the  city,  or  the  conversion  of  the  world,  the  principle  is  still  the 
same.  We  can  do  all  things  through  Christ  strengthening  us ;  and  if  we  attempt 
great  things,  trusting  in  Him,  we  may  expect  to  do  great  things,  not  otherwise. 
IV.  There  is  a  point  beyond  which  it  is  no  longer  possible  to  repair  the 
FOLLIES  OF  THE  PAST.  They  who  will  not  when  they  may,  shall  not  when  they  will. 
Tou  see  this  in  every  department  and  pursuit  of  life.  Up  to  a  certain  limit  it  seems 
to  be  in  a  man's  power,  if  he  choose,  to  make  up  for  the  past ;  but  beyond  that 
limit  it  is  no  longer  possiMe,  whether  he  choose  or  not.  {IF.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.) 
The  spies : — I.  In  the  first  place,  the  ungodly  world  are  not  to  be  excused  for 
that  which  must,  nevertheless,  be  admitted  to  be  a  very  natural  matter,  namely,  that 

instead    of   investigating    RELIGION    FOR    THE^^SELVES,    THEY    USUALLY    TRUST    TO    THE 

representation  of  OTHERS.  1.  The  worldly  man  looks  at  a  Christian  to  see  whether 
his  religion  be  joyful.  "  By  this,"  says  he,  "  shall  I  know  whether  there  is  that  in 
religion  which  will  make  a  man  glad.  If  I  see  the  professor  of  it  with  a  joyous 
countenance,  then  I  will  believe  it  to  be  a  good  thing."  But  hark,  sir !  hast  thou 
any  right  to  put  it  to  that  test?  Is  not  God  to  be  counted  true,  even  before  we  have 
proved  Him  ?  2.  Again,  you  say  you  will  test  the  holiness  of  Christ's  religion  by 
the  holiness  of  Christ's  people.  Tou  have  no  right,  I  reply,  to  put  the  question  to 
any  such  test  as  that.  The  proper  test  that  you  ought  to  use  is  to  try  it  yourselves 
— to  "taste  and  see  that  the  Lord  is  good."  By  tasting  and  seeing  you  will  prove 
His  goodness,  and  by  the  same  process  you  must  prove  the  holiness  of  His  gospel. 
It  will  be  in  vain  for  you  to  say  at  the  day  of  judgment,  "  Such  and  such  a  man  was 
inconsistent,  therefore  I  despised  religion."  Your  excuse  will  then  be  discovered  to 
be  idle,  for  you  shall  have  to  confess  that  in  other  respects  you  did  not  take  another 
man's  opinion.  In  business,  in  the  cares  of  this  life,  you  were  independent  enough  ; 
in  your  political  opinions  you  did  not  pin  your  faith  to  any  man's  coat ;  and,  there- 
fore, it  shall  be  said  of  you  at  last,  you  had  enough  independence  of  mind  to  steer 
your  own  course,  even  against  tbe  example  of  others,  in  business,  in  politics,  and 
such  like  things  ;  you  certainly  had  enough  of  mental  vigour,  if  you  had  chosen  to 
have  done  so,  to  have  stood  out  against  the  inconsistency  of  professors,  and  to  have 
searched  for  yourselves.  II.  With  that,  by  way  of  guard,  I  shall  now  bring  fo'th 
the  bad  SPIE3.  I  wish  that  the  men  mentioned  in  the  text  had  been  the  only  s'nes 
who  have  brought  an  evil  report ;  it  would  have  been  a  great  mercy  if  the  plague 
that  killed  them  had  killed  all  the  rest  of  the  same  sort.  Remember,  these  spies 
are  to  hr  \udged,  not  by  what  they  say,  but  by  what  they  do ;  for  to  a  worldling 
words  are  nothing— acts  are  everything.  The  reports  that  we  bring  of  our  religion 
are  not  the  reports  of  the  pulpit,  not  the  reports  that  we  utter  with  our  lips,  but  the 
report  of  our  daily  life,  speaking  in  our  own  houses,  and  the  every-day  business  of 


134  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiir. 

life.  1.  Wei],  first,  I  produce  a  man  who  brings  up  an  evil  report  of  the  land,  an  1 
you  will  see  at  once  that  he  does  so,  for  he  is  a  dull  and  heavy  spirit.  If  he  preaches 
he  takes  this  text — "Through  much  tribulation  we  must  inherit  the  kingdom." 
Somehow  or  other  he  never  mentions  God's  people  without  calling  them  God's  tried 
children.  As  for  joy  in  the  Lord,  he  looks  upon  it  with  suspicion.  "  Lord,  what  a 
wretched  land  is  this !  "  is  the  very  height  of  poetry  to  him.  He  is  always  in  the- 
valley  where  the  mists  are  hovering;  he  never  climbs  the  mountain  brow,  to  stand 
above  the  tempests  of  this  life.  He  was  gloomy  before  he  made  a  profession  of 
religion — since  then  he  has  become  more  gloomy  still.  2.  But  there  is  another 
class  of  professors  who  bring  up  a  bad  report  of  the  land.  And  this  I  am  afraid  will 
affect  us  all ;  in  some  measure  we  must  all  plead  guilty  to  it.  The  Christian  man,, 
although  he  endeavours  uniformly  to  walk  according  to  the  law  of  Christ,  finds  still 
another  law  in  his  members  warring  against  the  law  of  his  mind,  and  consequently 
there  are  times  when  his  witness  is  not  consistent.  Sometimes  this  witness  is, 
"  The  gospel  is  holy,"  for  he  is  holy  himself.  But,  alas  !  with  the  very  best  of  men 
there  are  times  when  our  witness  contradicts  our  faith.  When  you  see  an  angry 
Christian,  and  when  you  meet  with  a  Christian  who  is  proud,  when  you  catch  a 
Christian  overtaken  in  a  fault,  as  you  may  sometimes  do,  then  his  testimony  is  not 
consistent.  He  contradicts  then  what  he  has  at  other  times  declared  by  his  acts. 
IIL  Thus  I  have  brought  forth  the  evil  spies  who  bring  up  a  bad  report ;  and  now 
we  have  some  good  spiks  too.  But  we  will  let  them  speak.  Come,  Joshua  and 
Caleb,  we  want  your  testimony  ;  though  you  are  dead  and  gone  you  have  left 
children  behind  you;  and  they,  still  grieved  as  you  were  at  the  evil  report,  rend 
their  clothes,  but  they  boldly  stand  to  it  that  the  land  they  have  passed  ttjroufh  is 
an  exceeding  good  land.  One  of  the  best  spies  I  haye  ever  met  with  is  an  aged  . 
Christian.  1  remember  to  have  heard  him  stand  up  and  tell  what  he  thought  of 
religion.  He  was  a  blind  old  man,  who  for  twenty  years  had  not  seen  the  light  of 
the  sun.  His  grey  locks  hung  from  his  brow  and  floated  over  his  shoulders.  He 
stood  up  at  the  table  of  the  Lord,  and  thus  addressed  us : — "  Brethren  and  sisters, 
I  shall  soon  be  taken  from  you  ;  in  a  few  more  months  I  shall  gather  up  my  feet 
upon  my  bed,  and  sleep  with  my  fathers.  I  have  not  the  tongue  of  the  learned,  nor 
the  mind  of  the  eloquent,  but  I  desire,  before  I  go,  to  bear  one  public  testimony  to 
God.  Fifty  and  six  years  have  I  served  Him,  and  I  have  never  found  Him  once 
unfaithful.  I  can  say,  '  Surely  goodness  and  mercy  have  followed  me  all  the  daya 
of  my  life,  and  not  one  good  thing  hath  failed  of  all  the  Lord  God  has  promised.'  " 
IV.  And  now  I  want  to  press  with  all  my  might  upon  every  professing  Christian 
here  the  great  necessity  of  bringing  out  a  iinieormly  good  testimony  con- 
cerning RELIGION.  One  of  Napoleon's  ofiicers  loved  him  so  well  that  when  a  cannon- 
ball  was  likely  to  smite  the  emperor  he  threw  himself  in  the  way,  in  order  that  he 
might  die  as  a  sacrifice  for  his  master.  Oh,  Christian,  you  would  do  the  same,  I 
think.  If  Christ  were  here  you  would  run  between  Him  and  insult — yea,  between 
Him  and  death.  Well,  then,  I  am  sure  you  would  not  wantonly  expose  Christ ;  but 
remember,  every  unguarded  word  you  use,  every  inconsistent  act,  puts  a  slur  on 
Christ.  The  world,  you  know,  does  not  find  fault  with  you — they  lay  it  all  to  your 
Master.  If  you  make  a  slip  to-morrow,  they  will  not  say,  "  That  is  John  Smith's 
human  nature  " ;  th^y  will  say,  "  That  is  John  Smith's  religion."  They  know 
better,  but  they  will  be  sure  to  say  it.  Do  not  allow  Christ  to  bear  the  blame — do 
not  suffer  His  escutcheon  to  be  tarnished — do  not  permit  His  banner  to  be  trampled 
in  the  dust.  Then  there  is  another  consideration.  You  must  remember,  if  you  do 
wrong,  the  world  will  be  quite  sure  to  notice  you.  They  never  think  of  looking  at  the 
virtues  of  holy  men  ;  all  the  courage  of  martyrs,  and  all  the  fidelity  of  confessors, 
and  all  the  holiness  of  saints,  but  our  iniquities  are  ever  before  them.  Please  to 
recollect  that  wherever  .\ou  are,  as  a  Christian,  the  eyes  of  the  world  are  upon  you  ; 
the  Argus  eyes  of  an  evil  generation  follow  you  everywhere.  If  a  Church  is  blind 
the  world  is  not.  And  remember,  too,  that  the  world  always  wears  magnifying 
glasses  to  look  at  Christians'  faults.      (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  evil  reporters : — 1. 

In  these  wicked  reporters  see  how  Moses,  that  worthy  governor,  was  deceived,  for 
thinking  there  had  been  a  good  choice  made  of  faithful  men,  the  greater  part  was 
naught,  even  ten  of  the  twelve  that  were  sent.  So  may  good  men  be  abused  when 
they  mean  well,  and  must  not  be  censured  for  that  which  falleth  out  against  their 
wills.  Again,  so  is  the  proverb  verified  "  All  is  not  gold  that  glittereth."  The  Lord  is 
to  be  prayed  unto  to  direct  our  choices ;  for  weak  is  the  wisdom  of  man,  unless  the 
^visdom  of  our  all-seeing  God  go  before  and  direct.  2.  In  that  they  confess  it  was 
aland  that  flowed  with  milk  and  honey,  observe  the  rich  blessings  God  bestoweth 


<!HAP.  XIII.]  NUMBERS.  13^ 

upon  men,  and  make  such  use  in  your  own  particular  as  he  did  that  said,  "0  Lord, 
thou  givest  to  me  all  things  fat  and  fair,  I  give  to  Thee  all  things  lean  and  foul." 
Again,  since  the  country  was  so  good,  and  the  inhabitants  so  wicked,  let  it  make  you 
remember  the  religious  houses,  planted  most  usually  in  places  that  flowed  with  milk 
and  honey,  and  yet  the  possessors  so  idolatrous,  and  every  way  evil,  as  the  world 
now  taketh  notice  they  were.  Happy  men  are  they  that  cousider  the  Lord's  super- 
abounding  goodness  to  them,  and  make  it  an  argument  to  pi  ess  them  daily  to  tjjiank- 
f  uluess,  love,  and  all  obedience  to  Him  both  in  soul  and  body.  3.  Note  the  manner 
of  their  praising  of  the  land.  It  is  with  a  "  but"  ;  surely  say  they,  it  floweth  with 
milk  and  houey ;  "  but,"  but  what?  "But  the  people  be  too  strong,  and  we  are  not 
able  to  go  up  to  possess  it."  Thus  do  slanderers  ever  set  out  their  praises.  Such  an 
one  is  a  good  man,  "  but."  Such  a  woman  is  a  good  woman  and  a  good  neighbour, 
"but."  The  preacher  to-day  made  a  good  sermon,  "but."  No  man  hath  a  better 
servant,  "  but."  So  ever  with  one  "  but"  or  other  they  abate  their  praise,  and 
sting  the  party  or  matter  praised  in  the  minds  of  them  they  speak  unto.  The  Lord 
of  lords  and  Judge  of  judges  well  seeth  this  their  dealing,  yea,  the  world  noteth 
it,  and  even  they,  to  whom  they,  howsoever  they  hold  their  peace,  secretly  in  their 
hearts  abhor  such  smoothing  calumniation.  The  end  of  it  with  God  may  appear 
by  this  example  as  fearful  a  one  as  may  be  read  in  any  history.  Which  you  may 
see  was  this,  that  six  hundred  thousand  of  them  died  in  the  wilderness,  and  never 
entered  into  the  Land  of  Promise,  and  the  infamy  of  these  "  butting  "  reporters  abide 
chronicled  to  this  day  in  the  Book  of  God,  the  chronicle  to  be  feared  above  all 
chronicles.  In  county  and  country,  with  great  and  small,  these  "buts"  towards 
our  brethren  and  good  matters  are  used.  God  in  mercy  work  the  remove  of  them. 
{Bp.  Bahington.)  Difficulties : — I.  There  is  the  Anak  speculative.  He  is  bred  by 
much  of  the  scientific  tendency  of  the  time.  Men  make  everything  of  law,  and 
forget  a  personal  God.  1.  While  science  has  revealed  law,  it  has  also  revealed 
marvellous  manipulation  of  law  to  special  uses,  viz.,  telegraph,  telephone,  phono- 
graph. Now,  if  man  can  so  use  law  to  special  ends  without  breaking  law,  cannot 
God  use  His  own  laws,  so  that  they  shall  come  to  focus  in  blessing  on  my  head,  and 
without  breaking  them  ?  2.  The  most  capacious  mind  is  most  attentive  to  details. 
The  infinite  mind  does  not  find  details  burdensome.  Ttierefore  God  can  care  for 
me,  and  help  me.  3.  The  revelation  of  the  Divine  Fatherhood ;  and  fatherhood 
lalways  means  care,  love,  help,  particular  attention.  II.  There  is  the  Anak  experi- 
mental. He  takes  such  shapes  as  these — I  cannot  believe,  it  is  hard  to  serve  God  ; 
I  cannot  make  myself  love ;  I  have  no  assurance,  &c.,  &c.  If  we  will  only  confront 
this  son  of  Anak  by  a  determined  doinu  of  precisely  what  Christ  tells  us,  we  shall 
soon  discover  that  he  cannot  stand  before  us  and  prevent  entrance  into  the  Canaan 
•of  forgiveness  and  of  peace.  III.  There  is  the  Anak  volitional.  And  he  is  the 
main  Anak  that  really  prevents  us.  Two  sailors  going  to  their  boat  past  midnight, 
-and  getting  into  it  that  they  might  row  themselves  to  their  ship  yonder,  with  brains 
fuddled  by  a  spree  on  shore,  laid  hold  of  the  oars  and  tugged  and  tugged ; 
and  when  the  morning  broke  found  they  had  not  moved  an  inch.  And  with 
clearer  brains  and  in  the  advancing  light  they  discovered  the  reason — they  had 
not  lifted  the  anchor.  Ah,  how  often  an  unlifted  anchor  of  some  known  sin 
is  the  real  Anak  keeping  back  and  holding  back!  (W.  Hoyt,  D.D.)  Difficulties 
determine  character : — Character,  like  Achilles  in  disguise  at  the  court  of 
Lycomedes,  does  not  disclose  itself  till  the  trumpet  blast  is  sounded,  and  there  is 
a  rush  for  armour  as  besuits  it.  I.  Intellectual.  Schoolboy  finds  pathway  beset 
with  difficulties.  They  grow,  rather  than  diminish.  Nothing  will  tell  its  own 
mystery  :  how  far  we  shall  proceed  will  depend  upon  an  unconquerable  will  and 
intensest  application.  As  answers,  we  have  illiteracy,  scholarsljip,  genius.  II. 
Social.  Problems  of  life  and  government  complex  and  infinite.  A  few  lead  ;  the 
multitude  follow.  III.  Industriai^.  We  seek  and  find  our  own  work.  Just  what 
is  in  us  will  come  out.  IV.  Religious.  Here,  too,  difficulties  will  not  remove 
themselves.  Just  how  we  approach  them  will  reveal  the  infidel,  athiest,  or 
Christian.  Conclusion:  Life,  in  all  its  departments,  is  of  one  piece  and  like  texture  ; 
and  its  difficulties  are  for  trial,  discipline,  and  mastery.  (L.  O.  Thompson.)  The 
report  of  the  spies  ;  or,  The  difference  between  truth  and  facts  : — This  was  a  mean 
report,  it  was  hardly  a  report  at  all — so  nearly  may  a  man  come  to  speak  the  truth, 
and  yet  not  to  be  truthful,  so  wide  is  the  difference  between  fact  and  truth.  Many 
a  book  is  true  that  is  written  under  the  name  of  fiction ;  many  a  book  is  untrue 
that  lays  claim  only  to  the  dry  arguments  of  statistics  and  schedules.  Truth  is 
.subtle ;  it  is  a  thing  of  atmosphere,  perspective,  uaaameable  eaviironment,  spiritual 


136  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiir. 


influence.  Not  a  word  of  what  the  truth  says  mjiy  have  occurred  in  what  is  known 
as  hteral  fact,  because  it  is  too  large  a  thing  ever  to  be  encompassed  within  the 
boundaries  of  any  individual  experience.  The  fact  relates  to  an  individuality  ;  the 
truth  relates  to  a  race.  A  fact  is  an  incident  which  occurred  ;  a  truth  is  a  gospel 
which  is  occurring  throut;hout  all  the  ages  of  time.  The  men,  therefore,  who 
reported  about  walled  cities,  and  tall  inhabitants,  and  mountain  refuges,  and 
fortresses  by  the  sea,  contiued  themselves  to  simply  material  considerations;  they 
overlooked  the  fact  that  the  fortress  might  be  stronger  than  the  soldier,  that  the 
people  had  nothing  but  figure,  and  weight,  and  bulk,  and  were  destitute  of  the  true 
spirit  which  alone  is  a  guarantee  of  sovereignty  of  character  and  conquest  of  arms. 
But  this  is  occurring  every  day.  Again  and  again  we  come  upon  terms  which 
might  have  been  written  this  very  year.  We  are  all  men  of  the  same  class,  with , 
an  exceptional  instance  here  and  there  ;  we  look  at  walls,  we  receive  despatches 
abi>ut  the  sta^ture  of  the  people  and  the  number  of  their  fortresses,  and  draw  very 
terrible  conclusions  concerning  material  resources,  forgetting  in  our  eloquent 
despatches  the  only  Ihiag  worth  telling,  namely,  that  if  we  were  sent  by  Providence 
and  are  inspired  by  the  Living  God  and  have  a  true  cause  and  are  intent  to  fight 
with  nobler  weapons  than  gun  and  sword,  the  mountains  themselves  shall  melt  whilst 
we  look  upon  them,  and  they  who  inhabit  the  fortresses  shall  sleep  to  rise  no  more. 
This  is  what  we  must  do  in  life — in  all  life — educational,  commercial,  religious. 
We  have  nothing  to  do  with  outsides  and  appearances,  and  with  resources  that  can 
be  totalled  in  so  many  arithmetical  figures  ;  we  have  to  ascertain,  first,  Did  God 
send  us?  and  secondly,  if  He  sent  us,  to  feel  that  no  man  can  drive  us  back.  (J. 
Parker,  D.D.)  The  testimony  of  a  Christian  Z?/e;  — "Now  lads,"  said  the  late 
Duncan  Mathieson,  the  Scottish  Evangelist,  to  a  lot  of  boys  who  had  been  con- 
verted at  his  meetings,  "  tlie  people  here  are  not  in  the  habit  of  reading  their  Bible 
to  learn  what  God  says  to  them,  but  I'll  tell  you  what  they'll  read.  They'll  read 
your  lives  and  ways  very  carefully  to  see  if  you  are  really  what  you  profess  to  be. 
And  mind  you  this,  if  they  find  your  lives  to  be  inconsistent  with  your  profession, 
the  devil  will  give  them  this  for  an  excuBe  in  rejecting  Christ."  Very  true  indeed 
are  these  words.  Would  that  we  could  lay  them  more  constantly  to  heart !  The 
life  of  the  professing  Christian  is  the  only  book  of  evidences  that  many  i^eople  ever 
read  in  reference  to  Christianity.  The  Christian  professor's  life  is  thus  the  world's 
Bible.  When  there  are  inconsistencies  and  flaws  in  it,  then  the  world  makes  these 
a  plea  against  religion.  Let  us  remember  that  the  world's  eyes  are  upon  us.  Let 
us  keep  our  book  of  evidences  clear  and  pure.  Reason  better  tlinn  imagination : — 
I  think  it  was  Henry  Ward  Beecher  who  used  to  relate  how  when  he  was  a  boy 
there  was  no  stove  in  the  church  which  he  then  attended.  Some  of  the  worshippers 
began  to  think  that  they  might  be  better  with  a  fire,  but  they  were  opposed  by 
others,  who  thought  that  a  stove  should  have  no  place  in  the  house  of  the  Lord,  indeed 
that  they  could  not  get  to  heaven  from  a  church  with  a  stove  in  it.  but,  despite  their 
fierce  opposition,  the  elders  by  a  narrow  majority  ultimately  decided  to  have  it,  and 
accordingly  it  was  procured  and  placed  in  the  church.  On  the  following  Sunday 
the  doubters  mustered  strong.  Some  complained  of  being  very  warm,  and  others 
declared  they  were  nearly  stifled,  while  a  few  boldly  pronounced  that  the  stove  had 
no  right  to  be  there  at  all,  and  together  they  made  a  rush  for  the  offending  piece  of 
furniture,  to  turn  it  out  of  the  building,  when  lo,  to  their  surprise,  they  found  it 
was  empty.  These  people  were  very  bad  reasoners,  but  had  a  great  imaginative 
faculty.  Folly  of  exaggerating  the  enemy's  strength  ;  -It  is  a  bad  plan  to  exaggerate 
the  enemy's  strength  ;  to  do  so  is  to  increase  it.  Our  English  warriors  have  owed 
many  a  victory  on  land  and  sea  to  the  confidence  with  which  they  entered  the  fight. 
Francis  Drake  was  playing  bowls  on  the  Hoe  at  Plymouth  when  information  was 
brought  him  of  the  appearance  of  the  terrible  Armada.  Some  were  for  hurrying 
away  at  once ;  but  the  great  sailor  insisted  on  finishing  the  game,  gaily  assuring 
his  comrades  :  "  There  will  be  plenty  of  time  to  beat  the  Spaniards."  It  is  with 
something  of  the  same  dauntless  spirit  that  we  should  enter  upon  our  holy  war. 
There  was  real  wisdom  in  the  lad's  answer  when  asked  what  he  thought  of  the 
first  two  chapters  of  Job.  He  had  but  just  learned  to  read,  and  hnd  set  himself  with 
firm  resolve  to  read  the  Bible  through  from  Genesis  to  Picvelatiou.  He  had  now 
come  to  Job,  and  his  friend  asked,  "  Well,  what  do  you  think  of  it?  "  "  Well," 
replied  the  child,  "  I  don't  like  that  Satan  a  bit ;  and  when  I  get  to  learn  to  write, 
and  when  I  have  to  write  Satan,  I  will  always  write  Satan  with  a  small  '  s.'  "  Alas ! 
too  many  of  us  would  have  to  write  the  word  in  large  capitals  if  our  writing 
"xpressed  our  feelings.  Fear  and  timidity  magnify  the  foe.  Let  us  learn  a  holier 
and  braver  lesson.     (G.  Howard  James.) 


CHAP.  XIV.]  NUMBERS.  137 


CHAPTER  XIV. 
Vees.   1-3.    Tlie  people  wept. — Truths  in  tears  : — I.  That  to   entrust   the 

IMPORTANT  AFFAIRS  OF  SOCIETY  TO  THE  CONDUCT  OF  MEN  OF  AN  INFERIOR  TYPE  IS  A  GREAT 

EVIL.  Feeble-minded,  and  mean-hearted  men,  at  the  head  of  society,  have  always 
impeded  its  onward  march,  and  endangered  its  interests.  II.  That  whilst  it  is 
COMMON,  it  is  not  ALWAYS  WELL  TO  FOLLOW  THE  MAJORITY.  1.  Becaiise  truth  does  not 
depend  upon  numbers.  The  crowds  that  skirt  the  base  of  a  mountain  cannot  see 
as  much  as  the  man  who  climbs  the  heights  and  takes  his  view  from  the  lofty 
summit.  The  solitary  eagle  sees  more  than  can  "  the  cattle  upon  a  thousand 
hills."    2.  Because  numbers  in  the  present  state  of  the  world  are  likely  to  be  wrong. 

III.  That  it  is  not  a  wise  thing  to  follow  the  opinions  of  men  rather  than  the 
WORD  of  God.  1.  Because  God's  word  is  infallible ;  men's  opinions  are  not  so. 
2.  Because  God's  word  ensures  strength  to  the  obedient ;  men's  opinions  do  not. 

IV.  That  it  is  a  sad  evil  to  forget,  under  present  trial,  the  past  merciful 
interpositions  of  God.  Had  the  Israelites  remembered  God's  wonderful  inter- 
positions in  their  behalf,  the  recollection  would  have  given  their  spirits  a  moral 
force,  which  would  have  enabled  them  to  bear  with  magnanimity  the  greatest  trials, 
and  to  brave  with  undaunted  hearts  the  greatest  perils,  and  the  greatest  opposition 
(Psa.  Ixxvii.  10,  11;  xxvii.  9  ;  1  Sam.  xvii.  37).  V.  That  a  life  of  servility  eats 
OUT  THE  independency  OF  HUMAN  NATURE.  Thepc  Israelites,  after  their  long  servi- 
tude in  Egypt,  had  scarcely  anything  of  the  heart  of  a  man  left  within  them.  The 
only  thing  that  could  resuscitate  their  expiring  life,  and  wake  up  their  manhood, 
was  a  system  of  trial  to  throw  them  upon  their  own  resources.  {Jlomilist.)  A 
warning  against  imtrnniring  and  discontent : — There  are  three  good  reasons  why  we 
should  learn  to  mind  this  warning.  1.  For  our  own  comfort.  Suppose  you  have 
a  long  walk  to  take  every  day,  but  you  have  a  thorn  in  your  foot  or  a  stone  in  your 
shoe.  Gould  you  have  any  comfort?  No;  the  first  thitig  to  do  would  be  to  rid 
yourself  of  thorn  or  stone.  Till  this  was  done  you  could  not  have  the  least 
comfort.  But  a  feeling  of  discontent  in  our  minds  is  just  like  that  thorn  or  stone. 
It  will  take  away  all  the  comfort  we  might  have,  as  we  go  on  in  the  walk  of  our 
daily  duties.  A  bishop  was  once  asked  the  secret  of  the  quiet  contented  spirit 
which  he  always  had.  He  paid,  "  My  secret  consists  in  the  right  use  of  my  eyes. 
When  I  meet  with  any  trial,  I  first  of  all  look  up  to  heaven ;  I  remember  that  my 
chief  business  in  life  is  to  get  there.  Then  I  look  down  upon  the  earth,  I  think  how 
small  a  space  I  shall  need  in  it  when  I  die  ;  and  then  I  look  round  and  think  how 
many  people  there  are  in  tbe  world  who  have  more  cause  to  be  unhappy  than  I  have. 
And  so  I  learn  the  Bible  lesson,  '  Be  content  with  such  things  as  ye  have.'  " 
2.  For  the  comfort  of  others.  A  contented  spirit  is  to  a  home  what  sunshine  is  to 
the  trees  and  the  flowers.  John  Wesley  used  to  say,  "  I  dare  no  more  fret  than 
curse  or  swear.  To  have  persons  around  me,  murmuring  and  fretting  at  everything 
that  happens,  is  like  tearing  the  flesh  from  my  bones."  3.  The  third  reason  why 
we  should  mind  this  warning  against  discontent,  is  to  please  God.  No  trials  can 
ever  come  upon  us  in  this  world  without  God's  knowledge  and  consent.  He  is  so 
wise  that  He  never  makes  a  mistake  about  our  trials,  and  so  we  try  to  be  patient 
and  contented,  because  we  know  that  this  will  be  pleasing  to  God.  (British  Weekly 
Pnlpit.)  Causeless  sorrow : — Giving  credit  to  the  report  of  the  spies,  rather  than 
to  the  word  of  God,  and  imagining  their  condition  desperate,  they  laid  the  reins  on 
the  neck  of  their  passions,  and  could  keep  no  manner  of  temper ;  like  foolish, 
froward  children,  they  fall  a-crying,  yet  know  not  what  they  cried  for.  It  had  been 
time  enough  to  cry  out  if  the  enemies  had  beaten  up  their  quarters  and  they  had 
seen  the  sons  of  Anak  at  the  gate  of  their  camp ;  but  they  that  cried  when  nothing 
hurt  them  deserved  to  have  something  given  them  to  cry  for.  And  as  if  all  had 
been  already  gone  they  sat  them  down  and  wept  out  that  night.  Note,  unbelief  and 
distrust  of  God  is  a  sin  that  is  its  own  punishment.  Those  that  do  not  trust  God 
are  continually  vexing  themselves.  The  world's  mourners  are  more  than  God's, 
and  the  sorrow  of  the  world  worketh  death.     [Matthew  Henry,  D.D.) 

Ver.  4.  Let  us  return  into  Egypt. — The  rewards  of  the  future  not  to  be  slighted 
because  of  a  present  inconvenieiice : — The  proposition  of  the  people  illustrates  anew 
the  principle  that  all  sin  is  a  species  of  insanity.  They  proposed  to  go  back  to 
Egypt.    How  did  they  suppose  they  were  going  to  get  back  ?    Could  they  expect 


138  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cfiap.  xiv. 

to  live  in  the  wilderness  without  the  manna  which  God  gave  them  ?  Could  they 
overcome  Amalek  without  Moses  to  intercede  in  their  behalf  ?  Would  God  be  more 
likely  to  deliver  tbem  in  a  cowardly  retreat  than  in  a  loyal  advance  ?  Could  they 
hope  again  for  water  to  flow  from  tlie  rock  to  quench  tlieir  thirst?  or  for  favouring 
winds  to  open  a  new  path  through  the  Bed  Sea  ?  When  some  departed  from  the 
Saviour,  He  said  to  His  disciples,  "  Will  ye  also  go  away  ?  "  and  they  returned  the 
patbetic  answer,  "  Lord,  to  whom  shall  we  go  ?  Thou  hast  the  words  of  eternal 
life."  But,  alas  !  the  children  of  Israel  were  ready  to  go  back  from  the  promised 
land  to  the  dangers  of  the  wilderness  and  to  the  hopeless  bondage  of  Egypt.  In 
the  words  of  Matthew  Henry,  "  They  wish  rather  to  die  criminals  under  God's 
justice  than  live  conquerors  in  His  favour.  How  base  were  the  spirits  in  those 
degenerate  Israelites,  who,  rather  than  die  (if  it  came  to  the  worst)  like  soldiers  in 
the  field  of  honour,  with  their  swords  in  their  hands,  desire  to  die  like  rotten  sheep 
in  the  wilderness !  "  Similar  paradoxes  in  the  conduct  of  sinners  abound  in  the 
world.  A  slight  present  danger  or  inconvenience  is  suffered  to  blind  the  eyes  to 
great  rewards  in  the  future.  A  small  hazard  before  us  is  likely  to  seem  far  greater 
than  much  more  serious  dangers  behind  us.  Under  the  smart  of  present  ills,  we 
are  ever  ready  to  shut  our  eyes  to  the  innumerable  ills  we  know  not  of.  The 
miners  of  England  cursed  the  inventor  of  the  safety-lamp  because,  in  reducing  the 
hazard  to  their  lives,  it  diminished  also  their  wages.  Multitudes  of  young  people 
attempt  to  evade  the  trials  and  self-denials  of  the  ministerial  calling  or  of  missionary 
work,  by  choosing  some  profession  or  business  that  is  more  lucrative  or  gratifying 
to  their  ambitions.  In  this  they  fail  to  remember  that  there  is  a  poverty  in  other 
callings  than  the  ministry  ;  that  the  high-road  of  selfishness  is  through  a  wilderness 
strewn  with  the  carcasses  of  those  who  have  fallen  hopeless  by  the  way.  What  is 
Wall  Street  but  a  maelstrom  around  which  are  circling  innumerable  vessels  fated 
to  augment  the  debris  of  countless  wrecks  already  in  the  vortex?  What  is  the 
path  to  worldly  glory  and  fame  but  a  crowded  throroughfare  of  hungry  and  thirsty 
•men,  the  majority  of  whom  are  moving  on  to  inevitable  disappointment  ?  On  the 
other  hand,  the  path  of  the  righteous,  whatever  its  present  shadows,  shines  brighter 
and  brighter  unto  the  perfect  day.  (G.  Frederick  Wrifjht.)  The  folly  of  im- 
patience : — 1.  It  was  the  greatest  folly  in  the  world  to  wish  themselves  in  Egypt,  or 
to  think  if  they  were  there  it  would  be  better  with  them  than  it  was.  If  they  durst 
not  go  forward  to  Canaan,  yet  better  be  as  they  were  than  go  back  to  Egypt.  What 
did  they  want  ?  What  had  they  to  complain  of  ?  They  had  plenty,  and  peace,  and 
rest ;  were  under  a  good  government,  had  good  company,  had  the  tokens  of  God's 
presence  with  them,  and  enough  to  make  them  easy  even  in  the  wilderness,  if  they 
had  but  hearts  to  be  content.  But  whither  were  they  thus  fond  to  go  to  mend 
themselves  ?  To  Egypt !  Had  they  so  soon  forgot  the  sore  bondage  they  were  in 
there  ?  Like  brute  beasts,  they  mind  only  that  which  is  present,  and  their 
memories,  with  the  other  powers  of  reason,  are  sacrificed  to  their  passions  (Psa. 
cvi.  7).  We  find  it  threatened  (Deut.  xxviii.  68)  as  the  completing  of  their  misery, 
that  tbey  should  be  brought  into  Egypt  again,  and  yet  that  is  it  they  here  wish  for. 
Sinners  are  enemies  to  themselves,  and  those  that  walk  not  in  God's  counsels 
consult  their  own  mischief  and  ruin.  2.  It  was  a  most  senseless,  ridiculous  thing 
to  talk  of  returning  thither  through  the  wilderness.  Could  they  expect  that  God's 
cloud  would  lead  them  or  His  manna  attend  them  ?  (1)  The  folly  of  discontent  and 
impatience  under  the  crosses  of  otir  outward  condition.  But  is  there  any  place  or 
condition  in  this  world  that  has  not  something  in  it  to  make  us  uneasy  if  we  are 
disposed  to  be  so  ?  The  way  to  better  our  condition  is  to  get  our  spirits  into  a 
better  frame.  (2)  The  folly  of  apostacy  from  the  ways  of  God.  Heaven  is  the 
Canaan  set  before  us,  a  land  flowing  with  milk  and  honey :  those  that  bring  up 
ever  so  ill  report  of  it  cannot  but  say  that  it  is  indeed  a  good  land,  only  it  is  hard 
to  get  to  it.  {Matthew  Henry,  D.D.)  To  retreat  is  to  perish  : — To  retreat  is  to 
perish.  You  have  most  of  you  read  the  story  of  the  boy  in  an  American  village 
who  climbed  the  wall  of  the  famous  Natural  Bridge,  and  cut  his  name  in  the  rock 
above  the  initials  of  his  fellows,  and  then  became  suddenly  aware  of  the  impossi- 
bility of  descending.  Voices  shouted,  "Do  not  look  down,  try  and  reach  the  top." 
His  only  hope  was  to  go  right  up,  up,  up,  till  he  landed  on  the  top.  Upward  was 
terrible,  but  downward  was  destruction.  Now,  we  are  all  of  us  in  a  like  condition. 
By  the  help  of  God  we  have  cut  our  way  to  positions  of  usefulness,  and  to  descend 
is  death.  To  us  forward  means  upward ;  and  therefore  forward  and  upward  let  us 
go.  While  we  prayed  this  moi;ning  we  committed  ourselves  beyond  all  recall.  We 
did  that  most  heartily  when  we  first  preached  the  gospel,  and  publicly  declared,  "  1 


t 


CHAP.  xiY.J  I^UMIIKRS.  139 

am  my  Lord's,  and  He  is  mine."     We  put  our  hand  to  the  plough  :  thank  God,  we 
have  not  looked  back  yet.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  6-9.  The  Lord  is  with  us  :  fear  them  not. — A  noble  effort  to  arrest  a  nation's 
rebellion  : — I.  Joshua  and  Caleb  were  deeply  grieved  by  reason  of  the  rebellion 

OF  THE  NATION.   II.  JoSHUA  AND  CaLEB  NuBLY  ENDEAVOURED  TO  ARREST  THE 

REBELLION  OF  THE  NATION.  1.  They  reassert  the  excellence  of  the  land.  2.  They 
declare  the  attainableness  of  the  land.  3.  They  exhort  the  people  not  to  violate 
the  conditions  of  its  attainment.  (1)  By  rebelling  against  the  Lord.  (2)  By 
dreading  the  people  of  the  land.  III.  Joshua  and  Caleb  were  in  danger  by  reason 
OF  their  effort  to  ARREST  THE  REBELLION  OF  THE  NATION.  "All  tlio  Congregation 
bade  stone  them  with  stones."  See  here — 1.  The  tactics  of  an  excited  mob  when 
defeated  in  argument.  2.  The  folly  of  an  excited  mob.  This  proposal  to  stone 
Joshua  and  Caleb  was  insane.  (1)  Stoning  would  not  disprove  the  testimony,  or 
take  away  the  wisdom  from  the  counsel  of  the  two  brave  explorers.  (2)  Stoning 
would  involve  the  nation  in  deeper  guilt  and  disgrace.  3.  The  perils  of  faithfulness. 
IV.  Joshua  AND  Caleb  rescued  from  danger  by  the  interposition  of  God.  {IV. 
Jones.)  An  encouraginf}  declaration  : — I.  A  supposition.  "If  the  Lord  delight 
in  us"  (Prov.  viii.  30).  God  delights  in  His  Son,  &c.  He  delights  in  His  holy 
angels,  &c.  But  have  we  reason  to  suppose  that  He  delights  in  His  saints  ?  1. 
We  might  conclude,  indeed,  that  He  could  not  delight  in  them,  when  we  reflect — (1) 
On  their  nothingness  and  vanity.  "  Man  at  His  best  estate,"  &c.  (2)  On  their 
guilt  and  rebellion.  Not  one  but  is  a  sinner.  (3)  On  their  pollution  and  want  of 
conformity  to  His  likeness.  (4)  And  more  especially  when  we  reflect  on  His  great- 
ness, independence  and  purity.  2.  But  there  are  the  most  satisfactory  evidences 
that  He  does  delight  in  His  people.  (1)  Observe  the  names  by  which  He  dis- 
tinguishes them.  His  "  jewels  "  —  "  inheritance  "  —  "  treasure  "  —  "  diadem" — 
"  crown  "  and  "  portion."  See  the  very  term  in  the  text.  And  Prov.  xi.  20.  (2) 
Observe  the  declarations  He  has  made  respecting  them.  "  He  that  toucheth  you, 
toucheth  the  apple  of  Mine  eye."  (3)  Observe  what  He  has  done  for  them. 
Favoured — sustained — redeemed  them — given  His  Son  —  Spirit — promises.  (4) 
What  He  has  provided  for  them.  "  The  Lord  God  is  a  sun,"  &c.  "  My  God  shall 
supply,"  &c.  "  Eye  hath  not  seen,"  &c.  (5)  Eternal  life  and  unceasing  glory.  II. 
An  inference.  "  Then  He  will  bring  us  into  this  land,"  &c.  Observe  here — 1. 
The  land  specified.  It  is  "the  land  afar  off."  The  good  land.  The  heavenly 
Canaan.  Tlie  region  of  immortality.  2.  This  land  is  God's  gift.  Not  the  result 
of  merit.  It  is  given  in  promise — given  in  Christ.  3.  To  this  laud  God  must  bring 
His  saints.  Difficulties,  enemies,  and  dangers  intervene.  He  will  guide  to  it. 
Keep— safely  conduct,  and  at  length  put  people  into  it,  as  He  did  Israel.  "  Fear 
not,  little  flock,"  etc.  "  Let  not  your  hearts  be  troubled,"  &c.  (Rev.  ii.  10,  26  ;  iii. 
5,  12).  (J.  Burns,  D.D.)  The  boldness  and  fidelity  of  Joshua  and  Caleb: — I. 
How  SOUND  WAS  THEIR  REASONING !  1.  They  drew  a  strong  argument  from  the 
assurance  that  the  Lord  was  with  them,  but  that  the  defence  of  the  Canaanites  had 
departed  from  them.  They  spoke  of  the  country  itself  as  worthy  of  the  contest. 
2.  They  reminded  the  people  of  the  danger  of  disobedience,  as  appeared  from  their 
past  history  ;  and  from  the  character  of  God.  Sin  was  the  only  giant  that  they  had 
reason  to  fear.  Happy  would  it  have  been  for  the  people,  had  they  listened  to 
these  arguments.  II.  How  resolute  was  their  spirit  I  Personally,  no  doubt,  it 
would  have  been  much  more  pleasant  to  remain  in  the  tent ;  but  viewing  this  as 
an  opportunity  of  doing  good,  and  glorifying  God,  they  encountered  the  shame  of 
uttering  sentiments  which  were  reprobated  ;  and  the  danger  of  advising  measures 
which  were  disliked.  Thus  numbers  in  the  present  day  say,  "  Eeligion  is  all  very 
well  in  its  place"  ;  but  they  have  no  idea  of  glorifying  God,  and  endeavouring  to 
save  souls,  by  acting  with  the  decision  that  Caleb  and  Joshua  did.  We,  too,  may 
mourn  over  sin,  but  we  must  do  something  more ;  we  must  use  all  our  influence  to 
put  it  down,  and  to  lead  forward  the  Israel  of  God.  III.  How  undivided  was  their 
AIM  !  Their  one  desire  was  to  get  the  land;  and  therefore  if  popular  opinion  coin- 
cided with  them,  well ;  but  if  not,  they  would  not  be  guided  by  it.  They  could  do 
without  riches,  or  honour,  or  life  itself;  but  they  could  not  do  without  Canaan. 
{George  Breay,  B.A.) 

Ver.  11.  How  long  will  this  people  provoke  Me  ? — Mistrust  of  God  deplored  and 
denounced : — I.  The  sin  of  Israel  is  here  defined  :  "  How  long  will  it  be  ere 
they  believe  Me  ?  "     Observe  that  God's  account  of  all  the  murmuring  and  fea;: 


140  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xiv, 

which  these  people  felt  was  simply  that  they  did  not  believe  Him.  They  doubtless 
said  that  they  were  Datiirally  afraid  of  their  enemies  :  the  Anakim,  the  sons  of  the 
giants,  these  would  overcome  them.  "  No,"  says  God,  "  that  is  an  idle  excuse. 
No  fear  of  giants  would  enter  their  minds  if  they  believed  Me."  If  these  sons  of 
Anak  had  been  ten  times  as  high  as  they  were,  yet  the  almighty  Lord  could 
vanquish  them,  and  if  their  cities  had  been  literally  as  well  as  figuratively  walled 
up  to  the  skies,  yet  Jehovah  could  smite  them  out  of  heaven,  and  cast  their 
ramparts  into  the  dust.  Gigantic  men  and  battlemented  cities  are  nothing  to 
Him  who  divided  the  Red  Sea.  When  the  Omnipotent  is  present  opposition 
vanishes.  "  Ah,"  but  these  people  might  have  replied,  "  we  fear  because  of  our 
weakness.  We  are  not  a  drilled  host,  like  the  armies  of  Egypt.  We  know  not 
how  to  fight  against  ciiariots  of  iron  :  we  are  only  feeble  men,  with  all  these  women 
and  children  to  encumber  our  march.  We  cannot  hope  to  drive  out  tbe  hordes  of 
Amalekites  and  Ganaanites.  A  sense  of  weakness  is  tbe  cause  of  our  terror  and 
couipliint."  But  the  Lord  puts  the  matter  very  differently.  What  had  their 
weakness  to  do  with  His  promise?  How  could  their  weakness  affect  His  power  to 
give  them  the  land  ?  He  could  conquer  Amalek  if  they  could  not.  Our  trembling 
is  not  humility,  but  unbelief.  We  may  mask  it  how  we  please,  but  that  is  the 
state  of  the  case  as  God  sees  it,  and  He  sees  it  in  truth.  Mistrust  towards  God  is 
not  a  mere  weakness,  it  is  a  wickedness  of  the  gravest  order.  H.  Describe  this 
sin  of  not  believing.  1.  At  the  first  blush  it  would  seem  incredible  that  there 
should  be  such  a  thing  in  the  universe  as  unbelief  of  God.  Jehovah's  word  is  but 
Himself  in  action.  His  will  making  itself  manifest ;  and  is  it  to  be  supposed  that 
this  can  be  a  lie  under  any  conceivable  circumstances  whatsoever  ?  Oh,  the 
incredible  infamy  which  lies  even  in  the  bare  thought  of  calling  in  question  the 
veracity  of  God.  It  is  so  vile,  so  unjust,  so  profane  a  thing  that  it  ought  to  be 
regarded  with  horror,  as  a  monstrous  wrong.  2.  Consider,  nest,  that,  though 
uubelief  certainly  exists,  it  is  a  most  unreasonable  thing.  If  God  hath  made  a 
promise,  on  what  grounds  do  we  doubt  its  fulfilment  ?  Which  of  all  the  attributes 
of  God  is  that  whi.'h  comes  under  suspicion  ?  Truth  enters  into  the  very  concep- 
tion of  God :  a  false  god  is  no  God.  Any  other  doubt  in  the  world  may  plead  some 
warrant,  but  a  doubt  of  God's  truthfulness  is  utterly  unreasonable,  and  if  sin  had 
not  filled  man  with  madness,  unbelief  would  never  find  harbour  in  a  single  bosom. 
3.  Again,  because  this  sin  is  so  unreasonable,  it  is  also  most  inexcusable.  As  it  is 
to  the  glory  of  every  man  to  be  upright,  so  it  is  to  the  honour  of  God  to  be  faithful 
to  His  solemn  declarations.  Even  on  the  lowest  conceivable  ground,  the  Lord's 
own  interests  are  bound  up  with  His  truth.  There  is  no  supposable  reason  why 
the  Lord  should  not  be  true :  how  dare  we  then,  without  the  slightest  cause,  cast 
suspicion  upon  the  truthfulness  of  the  Most  High?  4.  I  venture  to  say  that 
unbelief  of  God's  word  ou^ht,  therefore,  to  be  impossible.  It  ought  to  be  impossible 
to  every  reverent-hearted  man.  Doth  he  know  God  and  tremble  in  His  presence, 
and  shall  he  think  of  distrusting  Him?  No  one  that  hath  ever  seen  Him  in  con- 
templation, and  bowed  before  Him  in  sincere  adoration,  but  must  be  amazed  at  the 
impertinence  that  would  dare  to  think  that  God  can  lie.  III.  The  sin  bitterly 
DEPLORED.  We  have  all  been  guilty  of  it.  But  what  I  want  to  call  to  your  re- 
membrance is  this,  that  in  anyone  case  of  doubting  the  truthfulness  of  God  there  is 
the  full  venom  of  the  entire  sin  of  unbelief.  That  is  to  say,  if  you  distrust  the  Lord 
in  one,  you  doubt  Him  altogether.  The  Scriptui-e  calls  Him,  "  God  who  cannot 
lie."  Do  you  think  He  can  lie  once,  then  He  can  lie  and  the  Scripture  is  broken? 
"  Ah,  but  I  mean  He  may  not  keep  His  promise  to  me ;  I  am  such  an  unworthy 
person."  Yes,  but  when  a  man  forfeits  his  word  it  is  no  defence  for  him  to  say, 
"  I  told  an  untruth,  but  it  was  only  to  an  unworthy  person."  No,  the  truth  must 
be  spoken  irrespective  of  persons.  I  have  no  right  to  deceive  even  a  criminal.  Do 
you  dare  say  that  to  one  person  the  Lord  can  be  untrue  ?  If  it  can  be  so,  He 
is  not  a  true  God  any  more.  You  may  as  well  doubt  Him  about  everything  if  you 
distrust  Him  upon  any  one  matter.  Do  you  reply  that  you  doubted  Him  upon  a 
very  trivial  matter,  and  it  was  only  a  little  mistrust  ?  Alas  !  there  is  a  world  of 
iniquity  in  the  faintest  discredit  of  the  thrice-holy  Lord.  Reflect,  then,  with  sorrow 
that  we  have  been  guilty  of  this  sin,  not  once,  but  a  great  mauy  times.  Timorous- 
ness  and  suspii;ion  spring  up  in  some  bosoms  like  weeds  in  the  furrows.  They  sing 
the  Lord's  praises  for  a  great  deliverance  just  experienced,  but  the  next  cloud  which 
darkens  the  sky  fills  them  with  fear,  and  they  again  mistrust  Divine  love.  IV. 
Lastly,  as  we  have  now  deplored  this  sin,  we  shall  conclude  by  heartily  denouncing 
IT.     1.  This  sin  of  unbelief,  if  there  were  no  other  reason  for  denouncing  it,  let  it 


CHAP.  XIV.]  WmiBERS.  141 

be  reprobated  because  it  insults  God.  2.  This  is  sufficient  reason  for  denouncing 
it,  and  yet  since  weaker  reasons  may  pt^rhaps  help  the  stronger,  let  me  mention 
that  we  are  bound  to  hate  unbelief  because  it  is  the  ruin  of  the  great  mass  of  our 
race.  Why  are  men  lost  ?  All  their  sins  which  they  have  done  cannot  destroy 
them  if  they  believe  in  Jesus,  but  the  damning  point  is  that  they  will  not  believe  in 
Him.  Thus  saith  the  Scriptures,  "  He  ihat  believeth  not  is  condemned  already." 
Why  ?  "  Because  he  hath  not  believed  on  the  Son  of  God."  3.  We  may  hate  it, 
again,  because  it  brings  so  much  misery  and  weakness  upon  the  children  of  God. 
If  we  believed  God's  promises  we  should  no  longer  be  bowed  down  with  sorrow,  for 
our  sorrow  would  be  turned  into  joy.  We  should  glory  in  our  infirmities — yea,  we 
should  glory  in  tribulation  also,  seeing  the  good  result  which  the  Lord  bringeth 
forth  from  them.  The  man  who  steadily  believes  his  God  is  cahn,  quiet,  and 
strong.  4.  One  very  shocking  point  about  this  unbelief  is  that  it  has  hampered  the 
work  of  Christ  in  tlie  world.  The  Christ  that  can  save  is  a  Christ  believed  in,  but 
of  a  Christ  who  is  not  believed  in  it  is  written,  "He  did  not  many  mighty  works 
there  because  of  their  unbelief."  {C.  H.  Spurqeon.)  The  sin  of  unbelief: — 1. 
The  heinousness  of  unbelief ;  shun  it.  2.  The  large  number  and  convincing 
cliaract-r  of  the  evidences  of  Christianity ;  remember  that  our  faith  should  bear 
a  proportion  to  them.  "  For  unto  whomsoever  much  is  given,  of  him  shall  be  much 
required,"  &c.  3.  God  takes  our  conduct  as  evidence  of  our  belief  or  unbelief ; 
let  us  show  our  faith  ly  our  works.  "  Faith  without  works  is  dead."  "  Faith 
worketh  by  love,"  &c.  i.  Take  heed  lest  we  be  disinherited  because  of  unbelief 
(Rom.  xi.  20,  21  ;  Heb.  iii.  12-iv.  11).  (  W.  Jones.)  God's  complaint ; — Two 
things  God  justly  complains  of  to  Moses.  1.  Their  sin :  They  provoke  me  ;  or,  as 
the  word  signifies,  they  reject,  reproach,  despise  Me  ;  for  they  will  not  believe  Me. 
That  was  the  bitter  root  which  bore  the  gall  and  wormwood.  It  was  their  unbelief 
that  made  this  a  day  of  provocation  in  the  wilderness  (Heb.  iii.  8).  Note,  distrust 
of  God,  and  His  power  and  promise,  is  itself  q,  very  great  provocation,  and  at  the 
bottom  of  many  other  provocations.  Unbelief  is  a  great  sin  (1  John  v.  10) ;  and  a 
root  sin  (Heb.  iii.  12).  2.  Their  continuance  in  it:  How  long  will  tbey  do  so? 
Note,  the  God  of  heaven  keeps  an  account  how  long  sinners  persist  in  their  provoca- 
tions, and  the  longer  it  is,  the  more  He  is  displeased.  The  aggravations  of  their 
sin  were — 1.  Their  relation  to  God.  This  people  ;  a  peculiar  people  ;  a  professing 
people.  The  nearer  any  are  to  God  in  name  and  profession,  the  more  is  He 
provoked  by  their  sins,  especially  their  unbelief.  2.  The  experience  they  had  had 
of  God's  power  and  goodness,  in  all  the  signs  which  He  had  showed  among  them, 
Hy  which  one  would  think  He  had  effectually  obliged  them  to  trust  Him  and  follow 
Him.  The  more  God  has  done  for  us,  the  greater  is  the  provocation  if  we  distrust 
Him.  (Matthew  Henry,  D.D.)  Faith  induced  hy  inward  discipline  as  well  as  by 
ixtcrnal  evidence  : — It  seems  almost  incredible  ;  and  yet  when  we  think  of  it,  it  is 
only  too  natural.  It  is  important  to  remember  that  faith  is  a  plant  of  slow  growth. 
ft  cannot  be  suddenly  summoned  into  existence  on  g,  special  emergency;  and  in 
rder  to  its  development  there  must  be  not  only  "  evidences  "  presented  from  witli- 
ut,  but  a  discipline  going  on  within.  We  are  apt  to  think  that  because  so  many 
leliverances  have  been  wrought  for  Israel,  therefore  their  faith  must  have  become 
.ery  strong.  We  forget  that  though  God  had  done  His  part  all  the  way  through,  they 
■lever  had  done  theirs.  Their  faith  was  really  utterly  unexercised.  It  is  not  faith, 
ro  trust  in  God  after  He  has  wrought  deliverance.  That  was  all  they  did.  If  tbey 
had  ever  learned  to  trust  Him  before  the  deliverance  came,  it  would  have  been  a 
different  thing.  They  had  had  abundant  opportunities  for  the  exercise  of  faith  ; 
but  they  had  let  them  all  pass  by.  They  had  contracted  a  habit  of  distrust.  Ai)d 
instead  of  becoming  stronger  in  faith,  they  were  actually  getting  weaker  ;  and 
accordingly  when  the  crisis  came,  it  was  only  what  was  to  be  expected  that  their 
courage  should  utterly  fail,  simply  because  it  had  no  faith  to  rest  upon.  Howsljall 
we  stand  the  test  when  our  day  of  crisis  comes?  The  answer  will  depend  on  the 
antecedent  question,  liow  we  have  improved  those  opportunities  which  have  been 
previously  given  for  the  development  of  our  faith.  "  He  that  is  faithful  in  that 
which  is  least,  is  faithful  also  in  much."  "  Weighed  in  the  balances  and  found 
wanting."  After  all  their  advantages  they  missed  the  prize.  The  appeal  of 
Joshua  and  Caleb  was  the  last  opportunity ;  they  never  had  another.  "  The  glory 
of  the  Lord  appeared "  (ver.  10),  no  longer  to  open  up  a  way  for  them,  but  to 
frustrate  their  rebellious  attack  on  His  two  faithful  servants,  and  to  pass  sentence 
of  condemnation  on  the  entire  congregation.  Through  the  mediation  of  Moses,  the 
lives  of  the  people  are  spared ;  but  they  are  degraded  from  their  position  as  the 


142  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

hosts  of  the  Lord.     {J.  31.  Gibson,  D.D.)        All  the  signs  which  I  have  shewed. — 

Miracles  no  remedy  for  unbelief: — Nothing  is  more  surprising  to  us  at  first  reading 
than  the  history  of  God's  chosen  people  ;  it  seems  strange  that  they  should  have 
acted  as  they  did  age  after  age,  in  spile  of  the  miracles  which  were  vouchsafed  to 
them.  I.  Hard  as  it  is  to  believe,  miracles  certainly  do  not  make  men  better  ; 
the  history  of  Israel  proves  it.  The  only  mode  of  escaping  this  conclusion  is  to 
fancy  that  the  Israelites  were  much  worse  than  other  nations,  which  accordingly 
has  been  maintained.  But  as  we  see  that  in  every  other  point  they  were  exactly 
like  other  nations,  we  are  obliged  to  conclude,  not  that  the  Israelites  were  more 
hard-hearted  than  other  people,  but  that  a  miraculous  religion  is  not  much  more 
influential  than  other  religions.  II.  Why  should  the  sight  of  a  miracle  make  us 
better  than  we  are  ?  1.  It  may  be  said  that  a  miracle  would  startle  us,  but  would 
not  the  startling  pass  away  ?  Could  we  be  startled  for  ever  ?  2.  It  may  be  urged 
that  perhaps  that  startling  might  issue  in  amendment  of  life ;  it  might  be  the 
beginning  of  a  new  life  though  it  passed  away  itself.  This  is  very  true;  sudden 
emotions — fear,  hope,  gratitude,  and  the  like — all  do  produce  such  results  some- 
times ;  but  why  is  a  miracle  necessary  to  produce  such  effects  ?  Other  things 
startle  us  besides  miracles  ;  we  have  a  number  of  accidents  sent  by  God  to  startle 
us.  If  the  events  of  life  which  happen  to  us  now  produce  no  lasting  effect  upon  us 
then  it  is  only  too  certain  that  a  miracle  would  produce  no  lasting  effect  upon  us 
either.  III.  What  is  the  real  reason  why  we  do  not  seek  God  with  all  our 
hearts  if  the  absence  of  miracles  be  not  the  reason,  as  assuredly  it  is  not  ?  There 
is  one  reason  common  both  to  us  and  the  Jews  :  heartlessness  in  religious  matters, 
an  evil  heart  of  unbelief ;  both  they  and  we  disobey  and  disbelieve,  because  we  do 
not  love.  IV.  In  another  respect  we  are  really  far  more  favoured  than  the 
Israelites.  They  had  outward  miracles  ;  we  have  miracles  that  are  not  outward, 
but  inward.  Our  miracles  consist  in  the  sacraments,  and  they  do  just  the  very 
thing  which  the  Jewish  miracles  did  not :  they  really  touch  the  heart,  though  we, 
so  often  resist  their  influence.  V.  Let  us  then  put  aside  vain  excuses,  and  instead 
of  looking  for  outward  events  to  change  our  course  of  life,  be  sure  of  this,  that  if 
our  course  of  life  is  to  be  changed,  it  must  be  from  within.  Let  us  rouse  ourselves 
and  act  as  reasonable  men  before  it  is  too  late  ;  let  us  understand,  as  a  first  truth 
in  religion,  that  love  of  heaven  is  the  only  way  to  heaven.     {J.  H.  Newman,  D.D.) 

Ver,  12.    I  will  smite  them and  will  make  of  thee  a  greater  nation. — 

Proffer  of  Jehovah,  and  answer  of  Mose^ : — This  is  the  second  time  that  Jehovah, 
in  His  holy  anger,  had  proposed  to  deal  thus  with  Moses  and  make  him  the  head 
of  a  righteous  seed  to  receive  the  inheritance  which  Israel  has  so  justly  forfeited. 
How  would  any  one  else  have  acted  in  his  place  ?  As  the  offer  comes  from  Jehovah, 
can  the  Judge  of  all  the  earth  do  wrong  ?  And  if  the  forbearance  of  Jehovah  is 
exhausted,  may  not  the  patience  of  Moses  well  be  ?  Here  is  an  offer  that  wiU 
release  him  from  the  thankless  burden  of  a  cowardly,  degraded  people,  which  has 
again  and  again  almost  crushed  him.  Shall  he  not  accept  it,  and  not  only  free 
himself  from  trouble,  but  rise  to  the  greatness  in  history  of  being  the  outflowing 
stock  of  the  visible  kingdom  of  God?  No,  Moses  has  in  himself  an  intrinsic  great- 
ness of  soul  beyond  all  that,  though  it  may  make  his  name  less  celebrated.  He 
will  not  dissociate  himself  from  his  people.  He  will  rather  be  the  type  of  the  great 
Intercessor  who  is  to  come.  The  singleness  of  heart  with  which,  as  a  saint,  he 
loves  God  shall  not  impair  the  passionate  love  that  bound  him  to  his  people.  Yea, 
and  above  the  love  of  his  people  rises  his  passionate  earnestness  for  the  honour  of 
Jehovah.  Lying  there  prostrate  on  the  ground  before  the  brightness  at  the  taber- 
nacle, hear — as  you  may  almost  hear  in  the  Hebrew— his  sobs  in  broken  sentences, 
as  he  argues  the  case  with  Jehovah  and  pleads  for  his  people.  "And  Egypt  will 
hear  that  Thou  hast  brought  Thy  people  in  Thy  mi«ht  out  of  the  midst  of  her  ; 
and  they  will  say  to  the  inhabitants  of  this  land,  they  have  heard  how  Thou, 
Jehovah,  went  in  the  midst  of  Thy  people,  seen  of  them  face  to  face,  and  Thy 
cloud  standing  over  them;  even  Thou,  Jehovah,  going  in  front  of  them  in  a  pillar 
of  cloud  by  day  and  in  a  pillar  of  fire  by  night.  And  Thou  wilt  make  Thy  people 
die  as  one  man.  And  they  will  say,  the  nations  that  have  heard  tell  of  Thee : 
Through  being  not  able  to  lead  His  people  into  the  land  that  He  had  sworn  to 
them.  He  hath  slain  them  in  the  wilderness.  And  now,  I  beseech  Thee,  the  might 
of  Jehovah  shall  be  magnified,  even  as  Thou  hast  spoken,  saymg,  Jehovah,  long- 
suffering  and  of  great  mercy,  bearing  iniquity  and  transgri^ssion,  and  not  cleansing, 
but  visiting  the  iniquity  of  fathers  upon  children  to  the  third  and  fourth  genera- 


CHAP.  XIV.]  NUMBEES.  143 

tion :  forgive,  I  pray  Thee,  the  iniquity  of  this  people  according  to  Thy  great 
mercy,  and  as  Thou  hast  been  gracious  to  them  from  Egypt  up  to  this  present 
time."  Do  not  these  passionate  pleadings  raise  Moses  nearer  than  any  born  of 
woman  to  the  type  of  the  great  Intercessor  ?  And  yet,  now,  with  the  great  Inter- 
cessor on  his  side,  the  least  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  who  is  truly  in  Christ— one 
with  Christ,  is  greater  in  power  than  Moses  at  the  throne.  (S.  Ilobi7iso7i,  D.D.) 
The  gentleness  of  Hoses: — Of  Moses  it  was  to  be  said  in  miniature  what  of  his 
Antitype  can  be  said  in  full — that  his  gentleness  made  him  great.  Not  when  he 
parted  the  waters  of  the  Red  Sea,  not  when  he  sang  his  hymn  of  triumph  on  the 
shores  of  liberty,  is  he  half  so  great  as  when  he  bore  the  sorrows  and  endured  the 
murmurings  of  that  rude,  undisciplined  multitude.  If  ever  a  man  has  inherited 
the  earth  by  meekness,  that  man  was  Moses.  His  was  a  grand,  unselfish  life,  made 
to  wait  upon  the  lives  of  others.     (G.  Matheson,  D.D.) 

Vers.  13-19.  Pardon,  I  beseech  Thee,  the  iniquity  of  this  people. — Moses'  ex- 
postulation : — What  book  but  the  Bible  has  the  courage  to  represent  a  man  stand- 
ing in  this  attitude  before  his  God  and  addressing  his  Sovereign  in  such  persuasive 
terms  ?  This  incident  brings  before  us  the  vast  subject  of  the  collateral  considera- 
tions which  are  always  operating  in  human  life.  Things  are  not  straight  and 
simple,  lying  in  rows  of  direct  lines  to  be  numbered  off,  checked  off  and  done  with. 
Lines  bisect  and  intersect  and  thicken  into  great  knots  and  tangle,  and  who  can 
unravel  or  disentangle  the  great  heap  ?  Things  bear  relations  which  can  only  be 
detected  by  the  imagination,  which  cannot  be  compassed  by  arithmetical  numbers, 
but  which  force  upon  men  a  new  science  of  calculation,  and  create  a  species  of 
moral  algebra,  by  which,  through  the  medium  and  help  of  symbols,  that  is  done 
which  was  impossible  to  common  arithmetic.  Moses  was  a  great  leader ;  he  thought 
of  Egypt :  what  will  the  enemy  say  ?  The  enemy  will  put  a  false  construction  upon 
this.  As  if  he  had  said,  This  will  be  turned  against  Heaven  ;  the  Egyptians  do 
not  care  what  becomes  of  the  people,  if  they  can  laugh  at  the  Providence  which 
they  superstitiously  trusted  ;  the  verdict  passed  by  the  heathen  will  be : — God  was 
not  able  to  do  what  He  promised,  so  He  had  recourse  to  the  vulgar  artifice  of 
murder.  The  Lord  in  this  way  developed  Moses.  In  reality,  Moses  was  not  anti- 
cipating the  Divine  purpose,  but  God  was  training  the  man  by  saying  what  He,  the 
Lord,  would  do,  and  by  the  very  exaggeration  of  His  strength  called  up  Moses  to 
his  noblest  consciousness.  We  do  this  amongst  ourselves.  By  using  a  species  of 
language  adapted  to  touch  the  innermost  nerve  and  feeling  of  our  hearers,  we  call 
those  hearers  to  their  best  selves.  If  the  Lord  had  spokeu  a  hesitant  language,  or 
had  fallen  into  what  we  may  call  a  tone  of  despair,  Moses  himself  might  have  been 
seduced  into  a  kindred  dejection  ;  but  the  Lord  said,  I  will  smite,  I  wiU  disinherit, 
I  will  make  an  end ;  and  Moses  became  priest,  intercessor,  mighty  pleader — the 
very  purpose  which  God  had  in  view — to  keep  the  head  right,  the  leading  man  in 
tune  with  His  purposes.  So  Moses  said,  "  Pardon  "  ;  the  Lord  said,  "  Smite  "  ;  and 
Moses  said,  "Pardon" — that  is  the  true  smiting.  The  Lord  meant  it;  the  Lord 
taught  Moses  that  prayer  whicJi  Moses  seemed  to  invent  himself.  The  Lord  trains 
us,  sometimes,  by  shocking  our  sensibilities;  and  by  the  very  denunciation  of  His 
judgments  He  drives  us  to  tenderer  prayer.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  intercession 
of  il/o.ses  for  the  doomed  nation : — I.  The  petition  which  he  presented.  II.  The 
PLEAS  BY  WHICH  HE  URGED  HIS  PETITION.  1.  The  honout  of  the  Divine  name  amongst 
the  heathen.  (1)  The  relations  of  God  with  Israel  and  His  doings  fur  Israel  were 
well  known  amongst  neighbouring  nations.  (2)  If  God  should  destroy  Israel  at  a 
stroke,  that  also  would  be  known  amongst  these  nations.  (3)  The  inteipretation 
of  such  destruction  by  the  nati<ins  would  be  such  as  would  reflect  on  the  honour  of 
God.  They  would  conclude  that  His  resources  were  exhausted ;  that  His  power 
had  failed  to  sustain  and  lead  Israel  onward:  and  thus  His  glory  would  be  tarnished. 
(4)  That  this  might  not  be  the  cnse  Moses  entreats  the  Lord  not  to  disinherit  the 
rebellious  people.  2.  The  Divine  character  as  revealed  to  Moses.  3.  The  truth  of 
the  Divine  word.  4.  Theforgiveness  which  God  had  already  besi  owed.  Conclusion: 
From  this  intercession  of  Moses  let  us  learn — 1.  How  to  plead  with  God  for  our- 
selves. 2.  How  to  plead  with  God  for  others,  and  especially  for  His  people.  (IF. 
Jones.)  God's  pardoning  grace  in  the  past  an  encouragement  to  seek  for  the  same 
in  the  present : — I.  God  is  as  able  and  as  willing  to  foroive  now  as  ever  He  has 
BEEN.  II.  Man  is  now,  as  much  as  ever  he  has  been,  THE  object  of  God's  com- 
passion. III.  God's  purpose  with  regard  to  the  human  race  is  now  what  it  ever 
HAS  been.      {David  Lloyd.)  The  power  of  intercession : — The  intercession  of 


144  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

Christians,  who  are  aheady  formecl,  is  the  leaven  which  is  to  leaven  the  whole  earth 
with  Christianity.  It  is  one  of  the  destined  instruments,  in  the  hand  of  God,  for 
hastening  the  glory  of  the  latter  days.  Take  the  world  at  large,  and  the  doctrine  of 
intercession,  as  an  engine  of  mighty  power,  is  derided  as  one  of  ihe  reveries  of 
fanaticism.  This  is  a  subject  on  which  the  men  of  the  world  are  in  a  deep  slumber ; 
but  there  are  watchmen  who  never  hold  their  peace  day  nor  night,  and  to  them 
God  addresses  these  remarkable  words :  "  Ye  that  make  mention  of  the  Lord,  keep 
not  silence,  and  give  Him  no  rest  till  He  establish  and  till  He  make  Jerusalem  a 
praise  in  the  earth."  (T.  Chalmers.)  The  mercy  of  God  (ver.  18) :— I.  What  we 
AKE  TO  DNDEBSTAND  BY  THE  MERCY  OF  GoD.  It  is  His  goodncss  to  them  that  are  in 
misery,  or  liable  to  it.  Thus  the  mercy  of  God  is  usually,  in  Scripture,  set  forth  to 
us  by  the  affection  of  pity  and  compassion ;  which  is  an  affection  that  causeth  a 
sensible  commotion  in  us,  upon  the  apprehension  of  some  great  evil  that  lies  upon 
another,  or  hangs  over  him.  Hence  it  is  that  God  is  said,  in  Scripture,  to  be  grieved 
and  afflicted  for  the  miseries  of  men.  But  though  God  is  pleased  in  this  manner 
to  set  forth  His  mercy  and  tenderness  towards  us,  yet  we  must  take  heed  how  we 
clothe  the  Divine  nature  with  the  infirmities  of  human  passions.  When  God  is 
said  to  pity  us,  we  must  take  away  the  imperfection  of  His  passion,  the  commotion 
and  disturbance  of  it,  and  not  imagine  any  such  thing  in  God ;  but  we  are  to  con- 
ceive that  the  mercy  and  compassion  of  God,  without  producing  the  disquiet,  do 
jjroduce  the  effects  of  the  most  sensible  pity.  II.  That  this  perfection  belongs 
TO  God.  I  will  only  produce  some  of  those  many  texts  of  Scripture  which  attribute 
this  perfection  to  God.  "  The  Lord,  the  Lord  God,  merciful  and  gracious  "  (Bxod. 
xxxiv.  6).  "The  Lord  thy  God  is  a  merciful  God"  (Deut.  iv.  31).  "The  Lord 
your  God  is  gracious  and  merciful"  (2  Chron.  xxxiv.  9).  "Ready  to  pardon, 
gracious  and  merciful"  (Neh.  ix.  17).  "All  the  paths  of  the  Lord  are  mercy" 
(Psa.  XXV.  10).  "Unto  Thee,  0  Lord,  belongeth  mercy"  (Psa.  Ixii.  12).  "Merci- 
ful and  gracious"  (Psa.  ciii.  8).  "With  the  Lord  there  is  mercy"  (Psa.  exxx.  7). 
And  so  (Jer.  iii.  12 ;  Joel  ii.  13  ;  Jonah  iv.  2  ;  Luke  vi.  36),  "  Be  ye  therefore  merci- 
ful, as  your  Father  also  is  merciful."  The  Scripture  speaks  of  this  as  most  natural 
to  Him.  In  2  Cor.  i.  3,  He  is  called  "  the  Father  of  mercies."  III.  The  degree 
OF  it.  a  God  of  great  mercy.  Scripture  speaks  of  it  as  if  God  was  wholly  taken 
up  with  it,  as  if  it  was  His  constant  employment,  so  that,  in  comparison  of  it,  He 
doth  hardly  display  any  other  excellency  ;  "  All  the  paths  of  the  Lord  are  mercy  " 
(Psa.  XXV.  10) ;  as  if,  in  this  world,  God  had  a  design  to  advance  His  mercy  above 
His  other  attributes.  The  mercy  of  God  is  now  in  the  throne ;  this  is  the  day  of 
mercy ;  and  God  doth  display  it,  many  times,  with  a  seeming  dishonour  to  His 
other  attributes.  His  justice,  and  holiness,  and  truth.  1.  Preventing  mercy.  Does 
not  that  man  owe  more  to  his  physician  who  prevents  his  sickness,  than  he  who, 
after  the  languishing,  the  pains  of  several  montbs,  is  at  length  cured  by  him?  2. 
Forbearing  mercy.  And  this  is  the  patience  of  God,  which  consists  in  the  deferring 
or  moderating  of  our  deserved  punishment.  Hence  it  is  that  "  slow  to  anger,"  and 
"  of  great  mercy,"  do  so  often  go  together.  3.  Comforting  mercy  (2  Cor.  i.  3).  4. 
His  relieving  mercy,  in  supplying  those  that  are  in  want,  and  delivering  those  that 
are  in  trouble.  5.  Pardoning  mercy.  And  here  the  greatness  and  fulness  of  God's 
mercy  appears,  because  our  sins  are  great  (Psa.  Ixxviii.  38).  And  the  multitude  of 
God's  mercies  because  our  sins  are  many  (Psa.  li.  1).  Uses — 1.  We  oufiht  with 
thankfulness  to  acknowledge  and  admire  the  great  mercy  of  God  to  us.  2.  The 
great  mercy  of  God  to  us  should  stir  up  in  us  shame  and  sorrow  for  sin.  The 
judgments  of  God  may  break  us;  but  the  consideration  of  God's  mercy  should 
rather  melt  us  into  tears  (Luke  vii.  47).  3.  Let  us  imitate  the  nifrcifnl  nature  of 
God.  4.  If  the  mercy  of  God  be  so  great,  this  may  comfort  us  against  despair.  5. 
By  way  of  caution  against  the  presumptuous  sinner.  If  there  be  any  that  encourage 
themselves  in  sin,  upon  the  hopes  of  His  mercy;  let  such  kn  iw  that  God  is  just,  as 
well  as  merciful.  (Ahp.  Tillotson.)  Long -miff erhif}  of  God:— We  may  safely 
assert  that  Jeremy  T>iylor  is  none  the  less  vigorous  for  illustrating  the  lon/-suffer- 
ing  of  God  by  the  Rabbinical  story  that  the  archangel  Michael,  being  God's  mes- 
senger of  vengeance,  had  but  one  wing,  that  he  miglit  labour  in  his  flight,  while 
Gabriel  had  two  wings,  that  he  might  "  fly  swiftly"  when  bringing  the  message  of 
peace.  (J.  PdkinoUm.)  Great  vierry  : — God's  mercy  is  so  great  that  it  forgives 
great  sins  to  great  sinners  after  great  lengths  of  time,  and  then  gives  great  favours 
and  great  privileges,  and  raises  us  up  to  great  enjoyments  in  the  great  heaven  of  the 
great  God.  As  John  Bunyan  well  says,  "  It  must  be  great  mercy  or  no  mercy,  for 
little  mercy  will  never  serve  my  turn."     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 


CHAP,  xiv.j  NUMBERS.  145 

Vers.  20-23.  I  have  pardoned  according  to  thy  word. — God's  ansivi'r  to  Moses' 
prayer : — I.  The  extremity  of  the  sentence  is  receded  from  (ver.  20).  "  I  have 
pardoned,"  so  as  not  to  cut  them  all  oH  at  once  and  disinherit  them.  See  the  power 
of  prayer,  and  the  delight  God  tnkes  in  putting  an  honour  upon  it.  He  designed  a 
pardon,  but  Moses  shall  have  the  praise  of  obtaining  it  by  prayer ;  it  shall  be  done 
"  according  to  thy  word."  Thus,  as  a  prince,  he  hath  power  with  God  and  prevails. 
See  what  encouragement  God  gives  to  our  intercessions  for  others,  that  we  may  be 
public-spirited  in  prayer.  See  how  ready  God  is  to  forgive  sin,  and  how  easy  to  be 
intreated.  "  Pardon,"  saith  Moses  (ver.  19)  ;  "I  have  pardoned,"  saith  God  (ver. 
20).  David  found  Him  thus  swift  to  show  mercy  (Psa.  sxxii.  5).  He  deals  not  with 
us  after  our  sins.  II.  The  glorifying  of  God's  name  is  in  general  resolved  upon 
(ver.  21).  It  is  said,  it  is  sworn,  "  All  the  earth  shall  be  filled  with  the  glory  of  the 
Lord."  Moses  in  his  prayer  had  sh.wed  a  great  concern  for  the  glory  of  God.  "Let 
Me  alone,"  saith  God,  "  to  secure  that  effeotually,  and  to  advance  it  by  this  dispen- 
sation. All  the  world  shall  see  how  God  hates  sin  even  in  His  own  people,  and  will 
reckon  for  it ;  and  yet  how  gracious  and  merciful  He  is,  and  how  slow  to  a  iger." 
Thus  when  our  Saviour  prayed,  "  Father,  glorify  Thy  name,"  He  was  im'i  ediately 
answered,  "  I  have  both  glorified  it,  and  will  glorify  it  again  "  (.John  xii.  28).  Note, 
those  that  sincerely  seek  God's  glory  may  be  sure  of  what  they  seek.     III.  The  sin 

OF  THIS  people  WHICH  PROVOKED  GoD  TO  PROCEED  AGAINST  THEM  IS  HERE  AGGRA- 
VATED (vers.  22,  27) ;  it  is  not  made  worse  than  really  it  was,  but  is  shown  to  be 
exceedingly  sinful.  It  was  an  evil  congregation,  each  bad,  but  altogether  in  congre- 
gation very  bad.  1.  They  tempted  God — ^tempted  His  power,  whether  He  could 
help  them  in  tlieir  straits  ;  His  goodness,  whether  He  would  ;  and  His  faithfulness, 
whether  His  promise  would  be  performed.  They  tempted  His  justice,  whether  He 
would  resent  their  provocations  aud  punish  them  or  no.  They  dared  Him,  and  in 
effect  challenged  Him,  as  God  doth  the  idols  (Isa.  xli.  23)  to  do  good  or  do  evil. 

2.  They  muimured  against  Him.  This  is  much  insisted  on  (ver.  27).  As  they 
questioned  what  He  would  do,  so  they  quarrelled  with  Him  for  everything  He  did 
or  had  done,  continually  fretting  and  finding  fault.  It  doth  not  appear  that  they 
murmured  at  any  of  the  laws  or  ordinances  that  God  gave  them,  though  they  proved 
a  heavy  yoke;  but  they  murmured  at  the  conduct  they  were  under  and  the  provision 
made  for  them.  Note,  it  is  much  easier  to  bring  ourselves  to  the  external  services 
of  religion  and  observe  all  the  formalities  of  devotion  than  to  live  a  life  of  depen- 
dence upon  and  submission  to  the  Divine  Providence  in  the  cour-e  of  our  conversation. 

3.  They  did  this  aft^r  they  had  seen  God's  miracles  in  Egypt  and  in  the  wilderness 
(ver.  2).  They  would  not  believe  their  own  eyes,  which  were  witnesses  for  God  that 
He  was  in  the  midst  of  them  of  a  truth.  4.  They  had  repeated  the  provncations  ten 
times,  i.e.,  very  often.  God  keeps  an  account  how  oft  we  repeat  our  provocations, 
and  will  sooner  or  later  set  them  in  order  before  us.  5.  They  had  not  heaikened  to 
His  voice,  though  He  had  again  and  again  admonished  them  of  their  sin.  IV.  The 
SENTENCE  PASSED  ui'ON  THEM  FOR  THIS  SIN.  1.  That  they  should  not  see  the  promised 
land  (ver.  2),  nor  come  into  it  (ver.  30  ;  Psa.  xcv.  11).  Note,  unbelief  of  the  promise 
is  a  forfeitui'e  of  the  benefit  of  it.  The  promise  of  God  should  be  fulfilled  to  their 
posterity,  but  not  to  them.  2.  That  they  should  immediately  turn  back  into  the 
wil'lerness  (ver.  2-5).  Their  next  remove  should  be  a  retreat ;  they  must  face  about, 
and  instead  of  going  forward  to  Canaan,  on  the  very  borders  of  which  they  now  were, 
they  must  withdraw  towards  the  Red  Sea  again.  "  To-morrow  turn  ye"  ;  that  is, 
"  Very  sliortly  you  shall  be  brought  back  to  tiiat  vast  howling  wilderness  which  you 
are  so  weary  of;  and  it  is  time  to  shift  for  your  own  safety,  for  the  Amalakites  lie 
in  wait  in  the  valley  ready  to  attack  you  if  you  march  forward."  Of  them  they  had 
been  distrustfidly  afraid  (chap.  xiii.  29),  and  now  with  them  God  jusMy  fri;;htened 
them.  3.  That  all  those  who  were  now  grown  up  to  men's  estate  shoul  I  die  in  the 
wilderness;  not  all  at  once,  but  by  degrees.  They  wished  thev  might  die  in  the 
wilderness,  and  God  said  "Amen  "  to  their  passionate  wish,  and  made  their  sin  their 
ruin.  4.  That  in  pursuance  of  this  sentence  they  should  wander  to  and  fro  in  the 
wilderness,  like  travellers  that  have  lost  themselves,  for  forty  year>^,  i.e.,  so  long  as 
to  make  it  full  forty  years  from  their  coming  out  of  Egypt  to  their  entrance  into 
Canaan  (vers.  33,  34).  Thus  long  they  were  kept  wandering — (1)  To  answer  the 
number  of  the  days  in  which  the  spies  were  searching  the  land.  They  «ere  content 
to  wait  forty  days  for  the  testimony  of  men  because  they  could  not  take  God's  word; 
and  therefore  justly  are  they  kept  forty  years  waiting  for  the  performance  of  God's 
promise.  (2)  That  hereby  they  might  be  brought  to  repentance,  and  find  mercy 
with  God  in  the  other  world,  whatever  became  of  them  iu  this.     (3)  That  they 

10 


146  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xnr. 

might  sensibly  feel  what  a  dangerous  thing  it  is  for  God's  covenant  people  to  break 
with  Him.  "  Ye  shall  know  My  breach  of  promise,  both  the  causes  of  it — that  it  is 
procured  by  your  sin,  for  God  never  leaves  any  till  they  first  leave  Him;  and  the 
consequences  of  it — that  it  will  produce  your  ruin.  You  are  quite  undone  when  you 
are  thrown  out  of  the  covenant."  (4)  Tliat  a  new  generation  njight  in  this  time  bu 
raised  up,  which  could  not  be  done  all  of  a  sudden.  V.  The  mehcy  that  was  mixed 
WITH  THIS  SEVERE  SENTENCE.  1.  Mcrcy  to  Caleb  and  Joshua ;  that  though  they 
should  wander  with  the  rest  in  the  wilderness,  yet  they,  and  they  only  of  all  that 
were  now  above  twenty  years  old,  should  survive  the  years  of  banishment  and  live 
to  enter  Ckinaan.  2.  Mercy  to  the  cbildren  even  of  these  rebels.  {Matthew  Henry, 
D.D.)  All  the  earth  shall  be  filled  with  the  glory  of  the  Lord. — The  earth  filled 
with  the  glory  of  the  Lord : — I.  The  import  of  the  promise  before  us.  Glory  is  the 
manifestation  of  excellence.  The  glory  of  God  is  that  display  of  His  most  blessed 
character  and  will  which  opens  the  way  for  His  intelligent  creatures  to  know,  to 
love,  and  to  obey  Him.  This  glory  is  exhibited  in  various  ways.  It  shines  in  all 
the  works  of  creation.  All  the  works  of  God,  we  are  told,  praise  Him.  Again,  the 
glory  of  God  is  manifested  by  the  works  of  His  providence.  But  above  all  is  the 
glory  of  God  displayed  in  tbe  work  of  redemption.  Now,  when  the  gospel,  which 
proclaims  this  plan  of  mercy,  shall  be  preached  and  received  throughout  the  world, 
when  every  kindred  and  people  and  nation  and  tongue  shall  not  only  be  instructed 
in  its  sublime  doctrines,  but  also  brought  under  its  benign  and  sanctifying  power, 
then,  with  emphatic  propriety,  may  it  be  said  that  "  the  earth  is  filled,"  &c.  II. 
What  reason  have  we  for  believing  that  these  scenes  of  glory  will  one  day  be 
REALISED  ?  1.  Our  hope  is  founded  on  Jehovah's  faithful  and  unerring  promise. 
"Hath  He  said,  and  shall  He  not  do  it?  "  2.  Our  confidence  that  the  religion  of 
Christ  will  one  day  fill  the  whole  earth  with  its  glory  is  confirmed  by  the  consideration 
that  this  religion  is,  in  its  nature,  adapted  above  all  others  to  be  a  universal  religion. 
Its  doctrines,  its  worship,  and  its  system  of  moral  duty  are  all  equally  adapted  to 
universality.  3.  The  present  aspect  of  tlie  world  furnishes  much  reason  to  hope 
that  the  accomplishment  of  this  promise  is  drawing  nigh.  III.  What  is  our 
present  duty  in  relation  to  the  promise  before  us.  1.  Undoubtedly  our  first 
duty  is  to  believe  the  promise.  Unbelief  poisons  the  very  fountain  of  Christian 
confidence,  cuts  the  nerves  of  all  spiritual  exertion,  and  tends  to  despondency.  2. 
Another  duty  incumbent  upon  us  in  relation  to  this  promise  is  to  labour  and  pray 
without  ceasing  for  its  accomplishment.  3.  A  third  duty  in  relation  to  the  promise 
in  tlie  text  is  that  in  labouring  for  the  spread  of  the  gospel  no  adverse  occurrence, 
however  painful,  ought  to  discourage  us  or  at  all  to  weaken  eitlier  our  confidence  or 
our  efforts.  4.  A  further  duty  in  reference  to  the  promise  before  us  is  that  we  pray 
without  ceasing  for  the  power  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  to  render  all  the  means  which  are 
employed  for  its  accomplishment  effectual.  (S.  Miller.)  God's  plorij : — When  you 
understand  that  the  glory  of  God  is  not  self-laudation,  nor  enriching  His  own  power, 
nor  multiplying  His  own  treasures,  but  that  it  is  supremely  to  make  others  happy ; 
when  you  understand  that  the  glory  of  God  means  loving  other  people  and  not 
Himself,  mercy  and  not  selfishness,  the  distribution  of  His  bounty  and  not  the 
hoarding  it  up  ;  when  you  understand  that  God  sits  with  all  the  infinite  stores  of 
redemptive  love  only  to  shed  them  abroad  upon  men  for  ever  and  for  ever,  then  you 
form  a  conception  of  what  it  is  for  God  to  reign  for  His  own  glory.  If  love  is  His 
glory;  if  generosity  is  His  glory;  if  giving  is  His  glory;  if  thinking  of  the  poor  is 
His  glory  ;  if  strengthening  the  weak  is  His  glory  ;  if  standing  as  the  defender  of 
the  wronged  is  His  glory;  if  loving  and  watching  over  every  b<'ing  that  He  has 
created  for  ever  and  for  ever  is  His  glory,  then  blessed  be  that  teaching  which 
represents  that  God  does  reign  for  His  own  glory.  That  is  a  glory  which  is  worthy 
of  the  Divine  regality.  It  will  bring  out  blossoms  of  joy  and  gladness  in  heaven  and 
on  earth.     (II.   W.  Beerher.)  The  majestic  consummation  : — Progress  must  be 

gradual  toward  that  majestic  consummation  which  shed  its  lustre  from  afar  on  the 
eyes  of  these  in  what  we  call  the  semi-civilised  tribes  of  Judaea  long  ago.  Progress 
must  be  gradual.  Men  of  the  world  sometimes  say  derisively  that  it  is  very  slow. 
"You  say  you  have  thirty  thousand  converts.  Wliat  are  they  among  so  many?" 
Well,  my  friend,  will  you  tell  me  what  great  effect  has  ever  been  realised  in  a  short 
space  of  time?  What  city  was  ever  builded  to  its  ultimate  completeness  in  one  year 
or  in  ten  years  ?  Your  growth  here  in  Chicago  has  been  phenomenally  rapid  and 
fast,  and  yet  you  go  back  over  half  a  century  and  more  to  see  the  beginning  of  your 
city  life.  Will  you  tell  me  what  national  literature  was  ever  developed  to  its  com- 
pleteness in  one  generation  or  in  five  ?    Will  you  tell  me  what  government  was  ever 


CHAP.  XIV.]  NUMBERS.  147 

established  in  equity  and  wisdom,  even  witli  the  heroic  efforts  of  men  who  gave  their 
lives  to  its  service,  in  one  century  or  in  two?  Will  you  tell  me  what  physical 
continent  was  ever  transformed  from  barbarism  to  the  beauty  of  civilisation  in  one 
century  or  in  two  ?  Great  works  imply  always  gradual  progress ;  and  nothing  is  more 
preposterous  than  to  suppose  that  this  immense,  surpassing  work,  which  man  says 
is  too  great  ever  to  be  accomplished,  is  to  be  accomplished  within  a  few  generations. 
Why,  there  is  an  interval  of  ages  between  the  cave  or  the  skin  tent,  or  the  hemlock 
hut  and  any  one  of  our  modernly  equippe  1  houses.  There  is  an  interval  of  ages 
between  the  first  attempt  at  a  song  cr  a  narrative  and  the  completed  literature 
which  dates  from  that  attempt.  There  is  an  interval  of  ages  between  the  hollow  log 
floating  on  the  water  and  the  mjijestic  steamship  that  unites  the  hemispheres. 
Gradual  progress  towards  the  mighty  effect  is  the  law  everywhere  ;  and  we  are 
simply  foi'lish,  we  simply  entertain  the  most  preposterous  notion  that  can  ever  come 
into  the  human  mind,  if  we  are  offended  because  the  expectation  is  not  realised  that 
in  one  year  or  ten  years,  in  one  generation  or  five  generations,  the  work  of  redeeming 
the  world  unto  Christ  and  purifying  it  unto  His  beauty  is  not  accomplished.  But  let 
us  also  never  forget  that  supreuie  fact  that  God  is  behind  this  progress,  and  that  it 
never  will  cease  until  God  is  dead — never  while  Omnipotence  has  power,  never  while 
the  Divine  wisdom  foresees  the  end  from  the  bsi-'inning,  never  until  the  heart  of 
God  is  turned  to  indifference  or  hostility  towards  His  children  on  the  earth.  There 
is  one  banner  that  never  goes  down  in  any  battle,  and  that  is  the  banner  of  God's 
truth.  There  is  one  army  that  always  marches  to  success,  and  that  is  the  army  of 
the  Cross.  (R.  S.  Storrs,  D.D.)  They  shall  not  see  the  land. — A  bitter  dis- 
appointment : — It  was  a  weary  journey  from  Kibroth-hataavah  to  Hazeroth,  and 
tbence  to  Kac^/osh,  probably  the  weariest  of  the  entire  route.  Moses  spoke  of  it 
afterwards  as  "  that  great  and  terrible  wilderness."  And  so  at  last  the  hosts  came 
to  Kadesh-barnea,  on  the  very  borders  of  the  Land  of  Promise,  within  sight  of  the 
low  hills,  the  flying  buttresses,  so  to  speak,  of  the  verdant  table-land  which  first 
arrests  the  eye  of  the  traveller  coming  up  from  the  vast  limestone  plain  of  the 
desert.  How  welcome  that  spectacle,  after  the  four  hundred  miles  of  journey  which 
had  occupied  the  people  for  the  past  fifteen  months  !  Welcome  as  the  land-haze  to 
Columbus,  or  as  his  native  village  nestling  in  the  embrace  of  the  hills  to  the  returning 
traveller.  It  must  have  been  specially  grateful  to  the  eye  of  Moses.  I.  His  hopes. 
As  yet  God  had  graciously  veiled  from  him  the  weary  journeys  of  the  forty  years 
that  were  to  succeed.  From  the  words  he  addressed  to  the  people  he  evidently 
counted  on  a  comparatively  brief  struggle,  sharp  but  short,  through  which  they 
would  pass  to  their  possession  (Dent.  i.  19-21).  As  he  said  these  words  must  there 
not  have  been,  deep  in  his  heart,  a  s'gh  of  relief  now  his  task  was  almost  done  and 
he  might  lay  down  his  weighty  responsibilities  ?  Who  can  doubt  that  some  such  hopes 
and  thoughts  as  these  filled  his  soul,  and  whispered  the  one  deep  sweet  word, "  Eest ! 
rest ! "  No  more  the  daily  gathering  of  manna,  because  it  was  a  land  of  wheat  and 
barley,  in  which  they  should  eat  bread  without  scarceness.  Is  it  not  thus  that  we 
all  picture  to  ourselves  some  blessed  landscape,  lying  warm  and  sunny  under  the 
smile  of  Heaven  ?  Life  is  pretty  hard  just  now — a  march  over  a  great  and  terrible 
wilderness,  a  stern  fight.  But  never  mind,  it  cannot  last ;  there  must  be  respite ; 
the  long  lane  must  have  a  turning,  the  wilderness-march  must  have  a  Canaan.  But 
suppose  it  be  not  so  I  What  if  He  who  loves  us  better  than  we  love  ourselves  has 
marked  out  stations  in  a  desert-march  that  lead  right  up  to  the  mount  from  which 
we  are  to  ascend  to  our  Father's  home  !  What  if  we  are  to  fight  with  Moab,  and 
meet  Bulaam,  and  see  every  one  of  those  with  whom  we  commenced  life  droop 
around  us  1  II.  The  quarter  froji  which  his  disappointment  came.  It  came 
entirely  from  the  people.  1.  Tlieir  first  mistake  was  in  desiring  to  spy  out  the  land 
(chap.  xiii.  1).  But  the  proposal  did  not  emanate  from  the  Lord  ;  it  had  another 
origin.  As  in  the  case  of  Saul,  the  King  of  Israel,  God  gave  them  what  they  would 
have.  It  was  a  profound  mistake.  Had  not  God  promised  to  give  them  the  land, 
and  could  they  not  trust  His  choice  ?  They  had  but,  as  Moses  said,  to  go  up  and 
possess  that  which  He  had  given.  2.  Their  second  mistake  was  in  receiving  the 
discouraging  report  of  the  majority  of  the  spies.  The  difference  between  the  two 
lay  in  this,  that  the  ten  looked  at  God  through  the  difficulties,  as  when  you  look  at 
the  sun  through  a  reversed  telescope  and  it  seems  indefinitely  distant  and  shorn  of 
its  glory,  while  the  two  looked  at  difficulties  through  God.  And  the  people  sided 
with  the  ten.  Here  was  a  fatal  mistake.  Unbelief  never  gets  beyond  the  difficulties, 
the  cities,  the  walls,  the  giants.  Faith,  on  the  other  hand,  never  minimises  them, 
but  looks  them  steadily  in  the  face,  turns  from  them,  and  looks  up  into  the  face  of 


148  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

God  and  counts  on  Him.  Note,  that  they  lost  Canaan  not  because  of  the  graves  of 
lust,  but  because  of  their  unbelief.  My  brother,  do  not  sit  down  beside  that  grave 
of  lust  and  suppose  tbat  that  is  going  to  settle  your  future.  Never  1  Know  tbou 
this,  that  the  only  thing  which  can  exclude  thee  thence  is  that  thou  wilt  not  believe 
in  a  forgiveness  and  grace  which  are  like  the  blue  arch  of  heaven  above  thee  or  like 
the  immensity  of  eternity  itself.  3.  Their  next  mistake  was  in  their  murmuring, 
which  proposed  to  substitute  a  captain  for  their  tried  friend  and  God-given  leader. 
"All  the  congregation  lifted  up  their  voice  and  cried,  and  the  people  wept  that  night. 
And  all  the  children  of  Israel  murmured  against  Moses  and  against  Aaron,"  &c. 
This  was  perhaps  the  bitterest  hour  in  Moses'  life.  They  had  proposed  to  elect  a 
captain  before,  but  it  was  when  he  was  away ;  but  tliis  was  proposed  before  his  face. 
What  unutterable  agony  rent  his  breast,  not  only  that  he  should  be  thus  set  aside, 
but  that  the  anger  of  God  should  be  thus  provoked  by  the  people  He  loved  !  And 
as  he  lay  there  did  he  not  also,  in  those  dark,  sad  moments,  see  the  crumbling  of 
his  fairy  vision,  the  falling  of  a  shadow  over  the  fair  prospect  of  his  hopes,  as  when 
a  pelting  shower  of  rain  hides  all  a  landscape  which  a  moment  before  had  lain 
radiant  in  the  summer  light  ?  So  it  has  befallen  in  our  own  experience  not  once 
nor  twice.  We  had  been  on  the  point  of  realising  some  long-cherished  hope.  We 
were  within  a  day's  march  of  it.  And  suddenly  there  is  some  one  or  more  to  whom 
we  are  tied,  and  their  education  is  not  complete.  They  cannot  yet  go  over  into  the 
good  land.  Because  they  cannot  we  may  not.  And  as  we  stand  there  the  voice 
says,  "  To-morrow  turn  and  get  you  back  into  the  wilderness  by  the  way  of  the  Red 
Sea."  III.  His  refusal  to  escape  the  disappointment.  The  dream  of  Moses  for  a 
speedy  entrance  into  the  land  might  even  yet  have  been  realised.  If  all  the  people 
were  cut  off,  and  he  spared  to  be  a  second  Abraham,  the  founder  of  the  nation,  it 
might  be  possible  even  yet  for  him  to  pass  into  the  good  land,  and,  like  Abraham, 
settle  there.  And  so  the  trial  was  put  into  his  life.  Satan  tempts  us  to  reveal  the 
evil  in  us,  God  to  reveal  the  good.  So  God,  knowing  the  hidden  nobleness  of  His 
faithful  servant,  and  eager  that  it  should  be  revealed  to  all  the  world,  suggested  to 
him  a  proposal  that  He  should  smite  the  people  with  pestilence  and  disinherit 
them,  and  make  of  him  a  nation  greater  and  mightier  than  they.  "Accept  it,"  said 
the  spirit  of  the  self-life  ;  "  thou  hast  had  trouble  enough  with  them."  "  No,"  said 
his  nobler,  truer  self;  "it  may  not  be.  What  would  become  of  Jehovah's  fame  ? 
and  how  can  I  endure  to  see  my  people  cut  off?  "  There  are  few  grander  passages 
in  the  whole  Bible  than  that  in  which  Moses  puts  away  the  testing  suggestion  as 
impossible.  And  so  he  turned  away  from  the  open  gate  into  paradise,  and  again 
chose  rather  to  suffer  with  the  people  in  their  afHiciions  than  enjoy  the  pleasures  of 
Canaan  alone.  IV.  A  contrast  to  his  endurance  of  disappointment.  When  the 
people  heard  that  they  were  to  wander  in  the  wilderness  for  forty  years,  till  their 
carcases  fell  in  its  wastes,  they  rose  up  early  in  the  morning  and  gat  them  up  to  the 
top  of  the  mountain,  saying, "  Lo,  we  are  here,  and  will  go  up  unto  the  place  which 
the  Lord  hath  promised.  But  Moses  and  the  ark  of  the  Lord  departed  not  out  of 
the  camp."  By  force  of  will  and  energy  they  sought  to  reverse  the  sentence  just 
passed  on  them.  Moses  meekly  bowed  his  head  to  it,  and  accepted  the  discipline  of 
those  long  years.  Do  not  times  come  into  our  lives  like  this  ?  We  have  come  to 
the  brink  of  some  great  opportunity,  and  the  prize  has  seemed  within  our  reach  ; 
but  by  some  outburst  we  have  shown  ourselves  unable  or  unfit  to  possess  it.  God 
puts  us  back.  He  says  in  effect,  "  You  are  not  fit  to  enjoy  the  blessing  yet.  You 
must  go  back  to  the  common  round,  sit  at  the  daily  task,  plod  around  the  dull  miU- 
wheel."  But  we  will  not  submit  to  it.  "  Nay,  but  we  will  go  up."  We  wiU  storm 
the  position;  we  will  not  be  thwarted.  It  is  a  hapless  and  useless  resolve.  You 
cannot  force  the  gate.  Better  a  hundred  times  wait  meekly  outside,  learning  the 
lesson  of  patience  and  faith.  The  obscure  journeyings  of  the  forty  years  will  then 
yield  their  harvest  of  blessing.  V.  Moses'  solace  in  disappointment.  Yet  there 
were  springs  at  which  that  weary  spirit  slaked  its  thirst.  The  sense  that  he  did  the 
will  of  God  ;  the  blessedness  which  unselfishness  always  brings  to  the  elect  spirit ; 
the  joy  of  seeing  the  result  of  the  Divine  discipline  in  the  growing  earnestness  and 
strength  of  His  people  ;  the  reception  of  daily  grace  for  daily  need — all  these  were 
his.  But  even  better  than  these,  there  was  the  growing  realisation  that  the  true 
rest  of  which  he  dreamed  was  not  to  be  found  in  any  earthly  Canaan,  however 
enticing,  but  in  that  rest  of  heart,  that  repose  of  the  nature  in  God  which  is  alone 
permanent  and  satisfying,  amid  the  change  and  transience  of  all  human  and 
earthly  conditions.  (V.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.)  The  result  of  one  false  st"p  : — A  single 
f rtlse  step  may  bring  with  it  irretrievable  forfeiture  of  good  when  the  good  is  con- 


CHAP.  XIV.]  NUMBERS.  149 

spicuous  and  attainable.  This  is  true  in  temporal  things.  In  all  lives  there  are 
crises,  more  or  less  observable,  on  which  the  complexion  of  all  their  future  depends. 
Some  great  advantage  is  set  before  us  that  if  improved  will  be  the  making  of  us ; 
but  we  doubt  its  value  or  reality  or  the  sincerity  of  the  offer,  or  it  is  not  quite  to 
our  taste,  or  we  lack  courage  to  encounter  the  difficulties,  to  incur  the  dangers  that 
lie  in  the  way  of  its  attainment.  Tiiere  are  walled  cities  to  be  stormed,  sons  of  Anak 
to  be  fought,  and  the  difficulty  and  peril  are  magnified  by  a  timorous  imagination. 
We  refuse,  and  the  golden  opportunity  is  let  slip  and  will  not  come  again.  There 
is  nothing  for  us  but  a  life  of  poverty,  obscurity,  meanness,  of  hard,  unfruitful  toil 
and  meagre  results.  And  in  spiritual  things  such  crises  also  occur,  and  are  as  much 
more  solemn  as  the  interests  they  involve  are  more  momentous.  There  are  instances 
when  the  soul  is  awakened  to  ^  tend  to  its  spiritual  concerns,  and  the  proposal  of 
heavenly"  good  is  made  to  us  -■' ^  ii  such  distinctness  that  we  are  compelled  to  deter- 
mine whether  we  will  labour  i  .he  good  "  that  endureth  unto  eternal  life  "  or  take 
up  with  what  this  world  offers  and  can  afford.  The  choice  is  inevitable.  We 
cannot  cheat  ourselves  into  the  belief  that  we  are  merely  weighing  the  question  and 
postponing  the  decision  to  a  more  "convenient  season."  We  may  doubt  whether 
the  good  that  is  proposed  to  us  is  so  essential  to  our  welfare  as  it  is  represented  to 
be,  or  whether  our  enjoyment  of  its  benefits  is  really  so  dependent  upon  the  resolu- 
tion we  then  come  to.  Or  we  may  timidly  shrink  from  the  requisite  self-denial  and 
labour,  and  cover  up  our  cowardice  under  a  pretty  show  of  modesty  and  self-distrust, 
a  doubting  of  our  competency  to  fulfil  the  obligations  and  meet  the  temptations  of 
a  consistent  course,  and  may  even  plead  our  fear  of  dishonouring  God's  cause  by 
our  weaknesses  and  failings.  But,  nevertheless,  the  choice  is  made,  and  there  is  too 
much  reason  to  fear  that  it  may  be  made  finally  and  for  ever.  The  Canaan  that 
seemed  so  near  that  we  could  see  it  with  our  eyes  recedes,  and  the  garish  world 
again  asserts  the  full  influence  of  its  tawdry  beauties.  The  blessed  vision  may  never 
come  back  to  us  again.  Henceforward  we  can  only  look  upon  "  the  things  that  are 
seen  and  are  temporal."  And  what  is  left  to  us  if  we  make  this  mad  and  fatal 
choice  ?  ^Vhat  is  this  world  but  a  wilderness,  where  there  is  nothing  to  meet  the 
wants  of  the  immortal  soul,  where  in  our  aimless  pilgrimage  we  turn  back  upon  our 
steps,  and  never  reach  a  goal  that  can  afford  us  solid  satisfaction.  Poor,  poor 
portion  of  those  whose  aims  rise  no  higher  than  the  beggarly  profits  which  a  worhlly 
life  can  give  !  And  then  when  at  last  his  "  feet  stumble  on  the  dark  mountains," 
"  naked  he  must  return  to  go  as  he  came,"  and  nought  remains  to  him  but  the  dark 
noisome  grave  and  an  awful  accounting  with  God.    (R.  A.  Hallani,  D.D.) 

Ver.  24.  My  servant  Caleb,  because  he  had  another  spirit  with  him,  and  hath 
followed  Me  fully. — Caleb's  character  : — I.  The  dignity  of  Caleb's  chaeactek. 
"  My  servant. "  1.  The  Lord  justly  demands  our  services.  2.  The  Lord  distinctly 
recognises  His  servants.  II.  The  commendation  of  Caleb's  piety.  "  Another 
spirit."  1.  The  commendation  of  Caleb's  excellent  spirit.  (1)  Believing;  (2) 
Courageous.  2.  The  commendation  of  Caleb's  faithful  conduct.  He  was  decidedly, 
universally,  and  eminently  pious  and  faithful.  III.  The  kecompense  of  Caleb's 
FIDELITY.  "  Him  will  I  bring  into  the  land,"  &c.  This  gracious  promise  may  be 
considered  as  partially  applicable  to  the  people  of  God  in  all  ages,  and  suggests  two 
important  truths  by  way  of  direction  and  encouragement.  1.  God  highly  appruves 
of  fidelity  and  decision.  Nothing  is  so  important  as  the  Divine  approbation.  His 
favour  is  life.  The  characters  He  approves  are  greatly  honoured  and  blessed.  ^. 
He  will  fully  reward  His  approved  followers.  There  is  a  present  reward,  both  of 
temporal  benefits  and  spiritual  enjoyments  (Psa.  xxxiv.  9,  10 ;  Matt.  vi.  33 ;  Eph. 
i.  3;  Psa.  Ixxxiv.  11).  There  is  also  a  future  reward  of  eternal  bUss.  (Sketches  oj 
Four    Hundred    Sermons.)  Caleb — the   man    for   the    times  : — It    is  a   rough 

name  that — "Caleb."  It  signifies  "a  dog."  But  what  matters  a  man's  name? 
Possibly  the  man  himself  was  somewhat  rough  ;  many  of  the  heartiest  of 
men  are  so.  As  the  unpolished  oyster  yet  beareth  within  itself  the  priceless 
pearl,  so  ofttimes  a  rugged  exterior  covereth  worth.  A  dog,  moreover,  is  not 
all  badness.  It  hath  this  virtue,  that  it  followeth  its  master ;  and  therein  this 
Caleb  was  well  named,  for  never  dog  so  followed  his  master  as  Caleb  followed  his 
God.  The  name,  however,  has  another  signification,  and  we  like  it  rather  better : 
it  means  "  All  heart."  Here  was  a  fitting  surname  for  the  man  whose  whole  heart 
followed  his  God.  I.  Caleb's  faithful  following  ot^  his  God.  He  never  went 
before  his  God.  That  is  presumption.  The  highest  point  to  which  the  true  believer 
ever  comes  is  to  walk  with  God,  but  never  to  walk  before  Him.     1.  He  followed  the 


150  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

Lord  wholly  ;  that  is,  universally,  without  dividing.    "Whatever  his  Master  told  him 
to  do  he  did.     I  wish  we  could  say  the  same  of  all  professed  Christians.     You  see 
Caleb  was  quite  as  ready  to  tight  the  giants  as  he  was  to  cany  the  clusters.     We 
have  a  host  who  are  ready  for  sweet  duties  and  spiritual  engagements  which  bring 
joy  and  peace ;  but  as  for  the  fighting  of  giants — how  many  say,  "  I  pray  thee  have 
me  excused"!     2.  Caleb  followed  the  Lord  fully;  that  is,  sincerely,  without  dis- 
sembling.    He  was  no  hypocrite ;  he  followed  the  Lord  with  his  whole  heart.     One 
of  the  safest  tests  of  sincerity  is  found  in  a  willingness  to  suffer  for  the  cause. 
3.  Caleb  followed  the  Lord  wholly ;  that  is,  cheerfully,  without  disputing.     Those 
who  serve  God  with  a  sad  countenance,  because  they  do  what  is  unpleasant  to  them, 
are  not  His  servants  at  all.     Our  God  requires  no  slaves  to  grace  His  throne  ;  He  is 
the  Lord  of  the  empire  of  love.     4.  He  followed  the  Lord  constantly — without 
declining.    Having  begun  when  he  first  started  upon  the  search  to  exercise  a  truth- 
ful judgment,  he  persevered  during  the  forty  days  of  his  spyship  and  brought  back 
a  true  report.     Forty-five  years  he  Uved  in  the  camp  of  Israel,  but  all  that  time  he 
followed  the  Lord,  and  never  once  consorted  with  murmuring  rebels  ;  and  when  his 
time  came  to  claim  his  heritage,  at  the  age  of  eighty-five,  the  good  old  man  is 
following  the  Lord  fully.     Still  his  speech  bewrayeth  him  ;  he  shows  a  constant 
heart.    God  set  His  seal  upon  that  man's  soul  in  his  youthful  days,  and  he  remained 
his  God  when  grey  hairs  adorned  his  brow.     How  many  professors  fail  in  this 
respect!     IL  Caleb's  favoured  portion.     1.  In  reward  for  his  faithful  following  of 
his  Master  his  life  was  preserved  in  the  hour  of  judgment.     The  ten  fell,  smitten 
with  plague,  but  Caleb  lived.     "  Blessed  is  the  man  who  hath  the  God  of  Jacob  for 
his  confidence."     If  any  man  shall  experience  special  deliverances,  Caleb  is  he.     If 
he  follows  God  fully,  God  will  fully  take  care  of  him.     When  you  look  to  nothing 
but  your  Master's  honour,  your  Master  w-ill  look  to  your  honour.     When  Queen 
Elizabeth  sent  a  certain  merchant  over  to  Holland  he  complained  to  her,  "  If  I  do 
your  Majesty's  business,  my  own  business  will  be  ruined."   "  You  do  my  business," 
said  the  Queen,  "  and  I  will  see  to  your  business."    It  is  so  with  our  God.     "  My 
servant,  serve  thou  Me,  and  I  will  serve  thee."     Caleb  is  wiUing  to  give  his  life  for 
his  Master,  and  therefore  his  Master  gives  him  his  life.     2.   Caleb  was  also  com- 
forted with  a  long  life  of  vigour.     At  eighty-five  he  was  as  strong  as  at  forty,  and 
still  able  to  face  the  giants.     If  there  be  a  Christian  man  who  shall  have  in  his  old 
age  a  vigour  of  faith  and  courage,  it  is  the  man  who  follows  the  Lord  fully.     We 
gain  our  old  saints  from  among  those  faithful  young  ones.     3.  Caleb  received  as  his 
reward  great  honour  among  his  brethren.     He  was  at  least  twenty  years  older  than 
any  other  man  in  the  camp  except  Joshua.     "  All  died,  and  their  carcases  were 
buried  in  the  wilderness,  except  that  man  and  Joshua  the  son  of  Nun."     At  their 
council  he  would  be  regarded  with  as  much  reverence  as  Nestor  in  the  assemblies 
of  the  Greeks  ;  in  their  camps  he  would  stand  like  another  Achilles  in  the  midst  of 
the  armies  of  Lacedsemon.     4.  Caleb  had  the  distinguished  reward  of  being  put 
upon  the  hardest  service.     That  is  always  the  lot  of  the  most  faithful  servant  of 
God.     There  were  three  huge  warriors  in  Mount  Hebron  ;  no  one  will  undertake  to 
kill  them  except  it  be  our  good  old  friend  Caleb.    These  Anakims,  with  their  six  toes 
on  each  foot  and  their  six  fingers  on  each  hand,  are  to  be  upset  and  driven  out. 
W^ho  is  to  do  it  ?     If  nobody  else  will  offer  himself,  here  is  Caleb.     Nay,  he  does 
not  merely  allow  himself  to  be  sent  upon  the  service,  but  he  craves  permission  to  be 
allowed  to  take  the  place,  the  reason  being  because  it  was  the  worst  task  of  the  war, 
a^d  he  panted  to  have  the  honour  of  it.     Grand  old  man!     Would  God  thou  hadst 
left  many  of  thy  like  behind  thee  !   If  there  is  some  pleasant  thing  to  do  for  Christ, 
bow  we  scramble  after  the  service  ;  but  if  there  be  a  front  place  in  the  battle,  "  Oh, 
let  Brother  So-and-so  do  it."     Do  not  you  notice  the  way  the  most  of  men  decline 
the  honour  of  special  danger  ?  "Our  friend  So-and-so  is  much  better  qualified  for  that ; 
let  him  take  it."     If  we  were  true  heroes,  we  should  each  of  us  contend  which  should 
undertake  the  most  hopeless,  the  most  difficult,  and  the  most  dangerous  task.   5.  Caleb 
left  a  blessing  to  his  children.     If  I  might  envy  any  man,  it  would  be  the  believer 
■who  from  his  youth  up  has  walked  through  Divine  grace  according  to  his  Lord's 
commandments,  and  who  is  able,  when  his  day  comes,  to  scatter  benedictions  upon 
his  rising  sons  and  daughters,  and  leave  them  with  godliness  which  hath  the 
blessing  of  this  life  and  that  which  is  to  come.     The  blessing  of  the  upper  and  the 
nether  springs,  then,  was  the  reward  of  good  old  Caleb.      III.  Caleb's  secret 
CHARACTER.     The  Lord  saith  of  him,  "  Because  he  had  another  spirit  with  him." 
He  had  another  spirit — not  only  a  bold,  generous,  courageous,  noble,  and  heroic 
spirit,  but  the  Spirit  and  influence  of  God  which  thus  raised  him  above  human 


CHAP.  XIV.]  NU3IBERS.  151 

inquietudes  and  earthly  fears.     Therefore  he  followed  God  fully — literally  he  filled 
after  Him.     God  showed  him  the  way  to  take,  and  the  line  of  conduct  he  must 
pursue,  and  he  filled  up  this  line,  and  in  all  things  followed  the  will  of  his  Master. 
Everything  acts  according  to  the  spirit  that  is  in  it.     Yonder  lamp  gives  no  light. 
Why?     It  has  no  oil.     Here  is  another;  it  cheers  the  darkness  of  the  cell.    Why? 
It  is  full  of  oil,  and  oil  is  the  mother  of  light.     There  are  two  huge  bags  of  silk. 
One  of  them  lies  heavily  upon  the  ground,  the  other  mounts  up  towards  the  stars. 
The  one  is  filled  with  carbonic  acid  gas ;  it  cannot  mount — it  acts  according  to  the 
spirit  that  is  in  it ;  it  has  a  heavy  gas,  and  there  it  lies.     There  is  another  full  of 
hydrogen,  and  it  acts  according  to  the  spirit  that  is  in  it,  and  up  it  goes;  the  light 
air  seeks  the  lighter  regions,  and  up  it  mounts.     Everything  according  to  its  own 
order.     The  real  way  to  make  a  new  life  is  to  receive  a  new  spirit.     There  must  be 
given  us,  if  we  would  follow  the  Lord  fully,  a  new  heart,  and  that  new  heart  must 
be  found  at  the  foot  of  the  Cross,  where  the  Holy  Spirit  works  through  the  bleeding 
■wounds  of  Jesus.    (C  H.  Spurgeon.)        Caleb's  spirit : — 1.  There  was  in  Caleb  a  very 
reverend  conception  of  magistracy  and  government  which  made  him  still  use  some 
word  of  honour  when  he  spake  of  the  government.    As  Josh.  xiv.  6,  7,  "  Thou  knowest 
what  the  Lord  said  to  Moses  the  man  of  God  concerning  me  in  Kadesh-barnea. 
Forty  years  old  was  I  when  Moses  the  servant  of  the  Lord  sent  me  from  Kadesh- 
bf  rnea  to  espy  the  land,"  &c.     Moses  was  now  dead  and  gone,  yet  mark  it  how 
Ca^eb  speaketh  not  of  a  dead  magistrate,  but  with  addition  of  honour — "  the  man  of 
God,"  "  the  servant  of  the  Lord  " — which  words  being  true,  as  in  Moses  they  were, 
they  equal — nay,  they  excel — all  the  swelling  words  of  our  age.    Most  mighty,  high, 
renowned,  illustrious,  &c.  Words  given  to  great  personages,  to  express  their  honour 
and  our  good  affection  to  them.     Now  this  was  another  spirit  from  the  murmurers 
and  mutineers,  and  therefore  this  is  rewarded  by  God,  to  whom  such  reverence  of 
governors  is  most  pleasing.     And  let  it  ever  teach  us  that  as  we  see  the  Lord  to 
observe  the  differing  spirits  of  men,  and  accordingly  to  love  them  and  hate  them, 
to  reward  them  and  punish  them  as  their  quality  is,  so  we  ourselves  should  be  ever 
careful  to  observe  our  own  spirits,  that  so  we  may  see  whither  we  tend,  and  what 
either  in  mercy  or  justice  is  like  to  fall  unto  us.     2.  Caleb,  when  he  saw  sedition 
and  uproar  against  the  magistrate,  rent  his  clothes  for  grief,  detesting  and  abhorring 
in  his  soul  such  carriage  in  men  that  should  obey.     This  was  again  another  spirit  in 
Caleb  most  pleasing  to  God  and  graceful  to  Him.   Aulus  Fnlnius,  a  heathen  Boman, 
meeting  his  son  going  to  join  with  Cateline,  that  traitor,  laid  hands  upon  him  and 
slew  him,  saying  with  indignation  at  his  villainy,  "  I  begat  thee  not  for  Cateline, 
but  for  thy  country."    And  surely  except  we  find  that  even  against  our  own  flesh 
we  could  in  such  a  case  do  what  lawfully  we  might  with  the  like  speech  that  for  God, 
for  religion,  for  their  king  and  country  we  had  begotten  them,  and  not  for  treason 
and  villainy,  we  have  not  that  edge  of  spirit  that  we  should  have.     3.  Caleb  had  a 
quiet  disposition,  not  turbulent,  not  factious,  not  seditious,  but  loving  order  and 
obedience  to  superiors — a  thing  most  pleasing  again  to  God,  as  appeareth  by  the 
blessing  of  him.     Adoniah,  we  know,  could  not  be  quiet,  but  plotting  and  working 
till  his  brother  was  forced  by  justice  to  take  away  his  life,  and  so  make  him  quiet. 
Korah  and  his  company  will  be  envious  against  authority  till  the  earth  open  and 
swallow  them  up.     Absalom  against  his  own  father  cannot  harbour  a  dutiful  heart, 
but  must  ambitiously  be  hammering  most  hateful  designs,  till  the  vengeance  of 
God,  pursuing  such  pride,  cut  him  off  and  hanged  him  betwixt  heaven  and  earth  by 
the  hair  of  the  head,  for  an  example  to  the  world's  end  to  all  busy  brains  and 
disloyal  hearts.     Blessed  Caleb  was  quiet  of  nature — no  stirrer  of  coals ;  and  the 
remembrance  of  him  is  registered  up  in  God's  book.     He  was  obedient  to  authority 
himself,  and  an  earnest  persuader  of  others  to  the  same,  whom  had  they  hearkened 
unto  they  had  escaped  God's  wrath  and  their  own  ignominy  for  ever.     Oh,  sweet 
quality  in  a  subject,  obedience  1     4.  Caleb  had  a  most  thankful  feeling  of  their 
deliverance  out  of  Egypt  in  general  and  of  his  own  in  particular,  detesting  to  hear 
of  any  return  thither  again  with  these  mutineers ;  and  this  again  was  another  spirit 
pleasing  to  God  and  good  for  himself.     5.  Caleb  used  to  speak  as  was  in  his  heart 
(Josh,  xiv.) ;  and  this  again  was  another  spirit  than  others  had,  and  greatly  pleased 
the  Lord.     He  counterfeited  nothing  to  please  men.    And  wh'it  a  happiness  were  it 
if  all  men  would  do  so  I     "  Blessed  are  the  pure  in  heart  " ;  that  is,  such  men  as  are 
free  from  glossing  and  dissembling.     6.  The  Lord  saith  of  Caleb  that  he  followed 
Him  still ;  and  this  was  another  spirit  than  otiiers  had,  pleasing  to  the  Lord  and 
honourable  to  Him  even  to  this  day.    So  liveth  virtue  after  death.    A  blessed  spirit 
this  was,  aud  happy  had  these  mutineers  been  if  they  had  had  the  like.    "  Commit 


152  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTEATOB.  [chap.  xiv. 

thy  thoughts  to  Him,"  saith  Solomon,  "  and  thou  shalt  be  directed  " — so  safe  is  it 
ever  to  follow  Him.  7.  Lastly,  to  his  following  join  his  constancy.  He  followed 
God,  and  he  followed  Him  still,  saith  the  text.  Some  have  hearts  to  good  things, 
but  not  constant,  wherefore  the  exhortations  in  Scripture  are  many,  to  move  us  all 
unto  this.  {Bp.  lUihUujton.)  A  man  of  real  intenrity  : — But  to  the  young — to 
those  who  are  beginning  life — I  would  fain  speak.  I  would  fain  inspire  them  with 
a  higher  conception  of  the  safety  and  of  the  indispensableness  of  high  moral 
qualities.  Let  not  those  that  seem  to  be  succeeding  in  life  tempt  you  from  the 
simple  moralities  of  your  father's  house,  which  you  learned  at  your  mother's  knee. 
I  tell  you  there  is  no  honour  in  this  world  like  the  honour  of  honest  men.  There 
is  no  honour  like  that  of  men  whom  you  cannot  tempt  to  swerve  or  bend.  The 
dearest  and  the  scarcest  thing  in  the  market  to-day  is  a  man  who  is  thoroughgoing 
and  clear-headed,  who  has  right  intentions,  who  chooses  clean  measures  for  clean 
ends,  and  who  is  unbribable.  Why,  such  a  man  as  that  does  not  want  a  statue  in 
Central  Park :  he  is  his  own  monument.  We  have  enough  men  who  are  honest  as 
the  world  goes  ;  that  is,  who  are  honest  as  long  as  they  see  it  to  be  their  interest  to 
be  so,  and  who  will  never  be  dishonest  except  where  dishonesty  is  profitable.  We 
have  men  who  will  bend  like  a  Damascus  blade,  clear  round,  hoop-like,  and  spring 
back  on  communion  day,  straight  as  a  sword  ;  but  men  who  can  go  out  into  life  and 
stand  alone  ;  men  who  can  say, "  The  kingdom  of  my  thoughts  is  greater  than  any 
other  kingdom  "  ;  men  who  say,  "  I  cannot  sleep,  nor  eat,  nor  live  with  a  dishonest 
man,  and  if  I  were  that  man  I  could  not  live"  ;  men  who  believe  in  the  kingdom  of 
God— men  of  that  kind  are  above  all  price  in  every  vocation  and  everywhere  ;  and 
I  wish  I  could  inspire  the  young  with  the  sense  that  I  have  of  the  value  of  moral 
elements  and  with  my  faith  therein ;  and  higher  than  all  others,  and  the  very 
breastplate  of  the  preparation  for  life,  is  a  keen  and  abiding  sense  of  real  integrity. 
(H.  W.  Beecher.)  Caleb  :  the  distinctions  of  a  great  man  : — 1.  That  all  men  are  not 
animated  by  the  same  moral  spirit.  2.  That  God  recognises  the  particular  spirit  that 
animates  men,  and  deals  with  men  accordingly.  I.  Heke  is  a  distinction  of  spirit. 
Caleb's  spirit  was  marked  by — 1.  Independent  inquiry.  Let  us,  like  Caleb,  enter 
the  promised  land  of  truth,  and  search  it  for  ourselves.  2.  Heroic  faith.  3. 
Eeliance  on  God.  IL  Here  is  a  distinction  of  conduct.  Caleb  followed  the 
Lord  "  fully  " — with  all  the  powers  and  sympathies  of  his  soul.  This  includes — 1. 
A  knowledge  of  God's  will.  2.  A  thorough  concurrence  of  the  moral  heart  with 
His  directions.  3.  An  unbounded  confidence  in  His  character.  HI.  Here  is  a 
DISTINCTION  OF  DESTINY.  1.  Here  is  a  destiny  which  stands  in  contrast  with  the 
sad  fate  of  his  companions.  2,  Here  is  a  destiny  which  he  ultimately  realised  (see 
Josh.  xiv.  6-15).  (Homilist.)  Caleb  : — L  A  servant  of  God,  such  as  Caleb  was, 
POSSESSES  A  GOOD  CHARACTER.  Character  is  not  everything  that  is  required  to  make 
one  a  good  servant  to  an  earthly  master.  But  it  is  the  first  requisite.  He  has  a 
good  character,  and  a  good  character  well  attested.  It  was  "the  majesty  in  the 
heavens  "  who  bore  testimony  concerning  Caleb.  This  leads  us  from  the  fact  to 
the  source  of  the  good  character  which  the  true  servant  of  God  possesses.  This  is 
revealed  in  these  words  of  our  text  concerning  Caleb,  "  He  had  another  spirit  with 
him."  1.  The  good  servant  of  God  has  another  spirit  with  his  own  spirit.  He 
has  the  Spirit  of  God  with  him.  2.  The  good  servant  of  God  has  another  spirit  with 
his  old  spirit.  He  who  says,  "  I  will  put  My  Spirit  within  you,"  says,  "  A  new  heart 
also  will  I  give  you."  II.  A  servant  of  God,  such  as  Caleb  was,  renders  good  service. 
A  good  servant  is  one  who  can  do  good  work.  The  special  form  of  service  to  which 
Israel  was  called,  and  in  which  Caleb  proved  faithful,  was  that  of  war.  This  reminds 
us  that  the  service  of  every  follower  of  God  is  largely  a  conflict.  But  when  he  is  of 
the  type  of  Caleb,  and  acts  in  character,  then — 1.  Having  full  faith  in  his  Leader, 
he  is  ready  to  follow  him,  and — 2.  Having  no  fear  of  the  enemy,  he  is  ready  to 
encounter  him.  III.  A  servant  of  God,  such  as  Caleb  was,  receives  a  good 
REWARD.  The  return  made  to  a  servant  for  his  services  may  be  of  two  kinds.  He 
may  receive  a  stipulated  wage  ;  but,  in  addition,  his  services  may  be  acknowledged 
by  special  gifts.  To  this  class  of  returns  for  service  the  rewards  of  God's  servants 
belong.  These  may  be  according  to  the  measure,  but  they  do  not  rest  on  the 
ground  of  the  servant's  faith  and  obedience.  They  are  grounded  on  the  gracious 
free-will  of  God.  1.  The  servant  of  God  is  blessed  in  himself.  He  receives  blessings 
now,  but  greater  blessings  are  in  store  for  him.  2.  The  servant  of  God  is  blessed 
in  his  children.  Not  only  Caleb,  but  his  seed  was  to  reap  the  fruits  of  faith  and 
obedif  nee.  So  in  the  spiritual  sphere.  "  The  promise  is  to  you  and  to  your  children." 
These  shall  inherit  the  land  which  faithful  parents  possess.      (A.  Puterson,  M.A.) 


CHAP.  xiv.J  NUMBERS.  153 

On  folloicing  the  Lord  fully  :—I.  As  the  foundation  of  all,  we  must  look  to  the 
INWAED  MIND  AND  DISPOSITION  of  him  who  aims  at  this  character  (1  Sam.  xvi.  7). 
There  is  much  meaning  in  that  common  expression  which  we  are  every  day  using, 
of  makhifi  vp  our  minds.  When  a  man  says,  "I  have  made  up  my  mind  to  do  this 
or  that  tiling,"  we  have  no  security  that  he  will  afterwards  act  rightly,  but  we  have 
every  reason  to  expect  that  he  will  take  a  firm  and  consistent  course.  So  also  in 
religion,  the  great  point  is  to  make  up  our  minds  ;  to  come  to  a  clear  undei  stand- 
ing with  ourselves  on  every  point  which  may  affect  the  consistency  of  our  future 
course.  Wayward  and  divided  affections  invariably  lead  to  capricious  and  hesi- 
tating conduct.  A  fum  persuasion  of  God's  providence,  an  intimate  conviction  of 
His  truth,  and  an  unwavering  reliance  on  His  goodness,  are  the  groundwork  of  a 
character  which  is  equally  "  acceptable  to  God  and  approved  of  men,"  the  character 
of  those  who  "  wholly  follow  the  Lord  their  God."  II.  A  person  who  is  thus 
"  rooted  and  grounded  in  love,"  will  be  prepared  to  fulfil  the  next  requirement, 
viz.,  that  of  UNIFORM  AND  UNRESERVED  OBEDIENCE.  III.  But,  as  Christians,  we 
must  not  forget  that  our  religion  is  one  of  faith  as  well  as  of  duty.  In  fact, 
the  doctrines  and  precepts  of  the  gospel  are  so  mixed  up  together,  and  so  dependent 
the  one  upon  the  other,  that  they  must  be  accepted  as  a  whole,  as  a  system,  or  not 
at  all.  To  "believe  all  the  articles  of  the  Christian  faith"  is  as  incumbent  upon 
those  who  would  follow  the  Lord  fully,  as  to  "  keep  God's  holy  will  and  command- 
ments, and  to  walk  in  the  same  all  the  days  of  their  life."  If  the  preacher  is  bound 
to  "  keep  back  nothing"  from  his  hearers,  so,  on  the  other  hand,  the  hearers  must 
"  receive  with  meekness  the  engrafted  word,  which  is  able  to  save  their  souls."  To 
"  follow  the  Lord  fully  "  is  to  accept  the  Covenant  of  grace  in  its  simplicity;  to 
know,  and  to  desire  to  know,  no  other  terms  of  salvation  than  those  of  "  repentance 
toward  God  and  faith  toward  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ."  IV.  To  "  follow  the  Lord 
fully"  is  to  FOLLOW  Him  to  the  end.  When  we  speak  oi  final  perseverance,  we 
are  not  alluding  to  any  supposed  privilege  of  the  saints,  commonly  called  by  that 
name  ;  as  if  those  who  have  once  been  truly  converted  to  God,  could  never  finally 
fall  away  from  it.  On  the  contrary,  we  believe  that  so  long  as  we  are  in  the  flesh 
we  must  "  work  out  our  own  salvation  with  fear  and  trembling."  But  we  speak  of 
persevering  in  religion  as  we  do  of  persevering  in  any  other  good  work,  which  is 
begun  with  ardour,  but  which,  in  its  progress,  meets  with  ditliculties  and  dis- 
couragements such  as  mere  warmth  of  temper  will  never  enable  us  to  surmount. 
We  speak  of  that  perseverance  of  the  saints  which  is  pointed  at  in  such  texts  as 
Matt.  X.  22  ;  Heb.  iii.  14 ;  Gal.  vi.  9.  To  "  follow  the  Lord  fully  "  we  must  pass 
through  all  the  stages  of  the  spiritual  life  ;  we  must  be  subject  to  all  the  trials  of 
the  Christian  course.  (F.  Field,  LL.D.)  The  upright  man : — 1.  The  first  thing  to  be 
carefully  attended  to  is  your  spirit — the  motives,  inclinations,  and  dispositions  of  your 
heart.  2.  A  submissive,  cheerful  obedience  to  the  will  of  God  is  essential  to  the  cha- 
racter of  an  upright  man.  3.  Consider,  as  a  motive  and  encouragement  to  Christian 
fidelity,  the  certainty  of  a  large  reward.  (Essex  Remein9rancer.)  On  followimj 
the  Lord  fully : — I.  Let  us  begin  with  inquiring  what  we  are  to  understand  by 
FOLLOWING  the  Lord  FULLY.  And  here  I  must  observe  that  no  man  can  follow  the 
Lord  at  all  till  once  he  be  acquainted  with  Him.  Before  we  can  follow  God  we 
must  not  only  know  that  He  is  supreme,  and  hath  a  right  to  command ;  but  we 
must  likewise  believe  that  He  is  worthy  to  command,  and  infinitely  possessed  of 
all  those  perfections  which  qualify  Him  to  govern  the  creatures  He  hath  made. 
Two  things  we  must  be  thoroughly  persuaded  of :  first,  that  the  laws  of  our 
Sovereign  are  righteous  and  good  ;  and  next,  that  He  is  both  able  and  willing  to 
protect  us  in  His  service.  11.  The  duty  may  be  considered  as  including  the 
FOLLOWING  particulars.  1.  That  we  acknowledge  no  other  Lord  besides  Him.  It 
is  to  make  His  will  the  sole  and  absolute  rule  of  our  conduct,  in  opposition  to  our 
own  humour,  the  temptations  of  Satan,  and  the  corrupt  maxims  of  a  world  that 
lieth  in  wickeJness.  2.  It  is  to  obey  Him  without  any  reserve  or  limitation  ;  it  is 
to  serve  Him  with  an  affectionate  and  liberal  heart,  and  to  do  this  at  all  times.  3. 
It  is  to  follow  Him  openly,  and  in  the  face  of  the  world.  It  is  a  profession  that  is 
neither  ostentatious  nor  shamefaced  ;  it  neither  courts  observation  nor  avoids  it. 
The  true  follower  of  the  Lord,  keeping  the  laws  of  his  Master  continually  in  his 
eye,  performs  every  duty  in  its  place  and  season.  4.  It  is  to  cleave  to  Him  stead- 
fastly when  others  forsake  Him ;  and  to  persevere  in  His  service,  even  when  it 
exposeth  us  to  the  world's  hatred,  and  the  persecution  of  wicked  and  unreasonable 
men.  I  am  asking  nothing  that  is  unreasonable,  nothing  that  you  yourselves  can 
find  any  pretence  to  refuse.    All  I  ask  is — 1.  That  you  should  be  honest  men. 


154  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

Tou  call  yourselves  Christians  ;  and  what  is  my  request  but  that  you  be  Chiistiaus 
indeed?  2.  The  duty  I  am  recommending  is  equally  necessary  to  secure  the 
inward  tranquillity  of  your  minds  ;  it  contributes  to  your  interest,  no  less  than  to 
your  honour.  How  miserable  is  the  man  who  hath  discord  withiu  his  owu  breast ! 
3.  Our  Lord  hath  in  some  measure  entrusted  us  with  His  glory,  and  called  the 
world  to  take  notice  of  us,  as  the  persons  by  whom  He  expects  to  be  honoured. 
Oh,  how  should  this  fire  us  with  a  generous  ambition  to  excel  in  holiness,  that  we 
may  exhibit  a  just  representation  of  the  Master  we  serve,  and  show  that  He  is  in 
truth  what  the  Scriptures  report  Him  to  be — "  altogether  lovely,"  and  "  fairer  than 
the  children  of  men."  4.  I  am  now  going  to  plead  with  you  from  love  to  your 
neighbours.  This  is  a  principle  you  profess  to  honour  ;  nay,  if  I  mistake  not,  the 
desire  of  obliging  others,  and  of  rendering  yourselves  agreeable  to  them,  is  your 
common  apology  for  conforming  to  their  manners,  and  avoiding  the  offensive 
singularity  of  following  the  Lord  fully.  This  is  a  false  expression  of  love.  Surely 
it  is  no  office  of  love  to  deceive  another  to  his  hurt,  or  to  suiier  him  to  continue  in 
a  pleasing  mistake,  which  unavoidably  must  end  in  his  ruin;  such  "tender 
mercies  "  would  indeed  be  "  cruelty."  5.  The  reward  that  awaits  those  who  follow 
the  Lord  fully.  They  shall  possess  that  good  land  of  promise,  whereof  the  earthly 
Canaan  was  only  an  emblem  or  type.  {R.  Walker.)  Caleb  : — 1.  From  what  I 
see  of  him  here,  1  take  Caleb  to  have  been,  first  of  all,  a  thoughtful  person,  a 
considering  man,  capable  of  being  taught,  which  cannot  be  said  of  many.  He  Lad 
seen  no  more  of  God  than  had  all  the  others,  but  what  he  saw,  he  saw,  and  after 
be  had  come  through  the  Eed  Sea,  and  looked  at  the  hand  of  the  Invisible  One  in 
the  wilderness,  he  felt  that  that  was  enolfgh  for  a  wise  man  ;  and  so  he  did  not  go 
about  afterward,  as  the  others  did,  to  frame  doubts  or  to  call  every  new  case 
different,  and  say,  "  True,  He  saved  us  there,  but  can  He  save  us  here?  He  gave 
us  water,  but  can  He  give  us  bread  also  ?  "  He  had  no  brutal  capacity  for  forget- 
ting, either.  When  the  illustrious  moments  of  God  were  past,  their  shining  kept 
with  him.  He  was  not  so  swallowed  up  in  to-day  as  to  forget  yesterday,  and  to 
say,  "Where?  "  He  forgot  not  how  God  "  had  wrought  His  signs  in  Egypt,  and 
His  wonders  in  the  field  of  Zoan."  On  the  paths  behind  us,  all  along  them,  are 
scattered  the  tokens  of  a  God  as  wonderful  as  the  God  of  the  Red  Sea  or  the  God 
of  the  desert ;  but,  like  these  Hebrews,  we  must  hear  the  ^harp  crack  of  His 
thunder  again  to-day,  or  we  will  not  so  much  as  know  that  there  is  a  God.  2.  See 
next  the  independence  of  Caleb.  The  act  altogether  nearest  the  godlike  is  that  of 
a  man  who,  in  the  face  of  opinion  and  of  public  shame,  and  against  a  fiery  current 
of  everybody's  feelings,  even  of  those  who  are  near  to  being  a  part  of  himself, 
stands  fixed  in  his  judgment  of  what  is  right,  uncorrupted,  and  unshaken — a 
lit-geman  of  duty !  So  stood  Caleb ;  aud  his  attitude  is  to  me  the  noblest  I  can 
imagine.  I  know  it  is  false  and  blasphemous,  the  maxim  that  "  the  voice  of  the 
people  is  the  voice  of  God,"  yet  the  mere  power  of  universal  opinion,  universal 
feeling,  is  such  that  no  *one  can  exagu-erate  it,  and  few  withstand  it.  He  who 
resists  it  must  be  something  above  or  below  man.  And  no  fine  soul  can  resist  it, 
unless  he  is  under  a  higher  sympathy — a  sympathy  with  a  better  public  opinion 
and  with  the  nobler  society  of  God  and  the  just.  A  sympathy  with  God  and  with 
duty,  with  the  welfare  of  the  people — that,  and  that  only,  lifted  Caleb  up  clean  out 
of  sympathy  with  the  whole  degraded  nation.  3.  See  again,  not  only  his  indepen- 
dence toward  his  own  people,  but  his  courage.  Never  was  there  greater  occasion 
for  apprehension.  "  We  are  nothing  "  ;  all  the  people,  all  the  leaders,  say,  "  We 
be  not  able,"  &c.  "  We  are  of  a  gigantic  brood,  higher  and  mightier  than  they 
all,"  say  Caleb  and  Joshua.  All  courage,  if  it  is  not  merely  animal,  rests  on  some- 
thing higher — rests  often  on  dutv  and  devotion  to  others.  I  think  an  example  of 
this  is  seen  in  Arthur,  Duke  of  Wellington.  He  was  unawed,  at  the  great  crisis  of 
Waterloo  especially,  because  of  duty.  When  all  Europe,  and  mihtary  men 
particularly,  were  under  a  fascination  as  of  magic  from  the  genius  and  success  of 
Napoleon,  who  towered  over  them  like  a  phantom,  the  Duke  had  little  or  no 
imaginative  fear  on  the  subject.  He  looked  coolly  and  soberly  at  the  object  as  it 
was,  and  calmly  confided  in  his  forces  and  plans,  resting  on  duty  and  right.  And 
so  this  was  the  man  whom  God  appointed  to  win  :  hence  Waterloo.  He  first  kept 
his  soul  unsubjugated,  and  the  unprecedented  and  irresistible  genius  against  him 
did  not  master  or  overawe  his  imagination.  But  the  courage  of  Caleb  was  far 
higher  than  this  ;  it  was  against  far  greater  odds,  and  it  was  founded  not  merely 
on  devotion  to  duty,  but  on  perfect  assurance  in  God.  We  call  this  courage,  and 
i.  was;  but  it   rested  on  something  deeper  and  far  more  rare— on  trust.     The 


CHAP.  XIV.]  NUMBERS.  15-5 


heroic  virtues  of  those  old  Hebrews  were  not  the  heroic  virtues  of  Plutarch  ;  they 
were  all  that,  but  much  more.     Though  the  obstacles  were  bristling  before  him  as 
high  as  heaven,  the  Lord  on  high  was  mightier.     To  go  forward  was  to  move  in 
the  invincible  line  of  right.     See,  then,  in  Caleb  just  the  virtues  demanded  of  us 
to-day.     To  us — to  each  man  of  us — who  have  always  a  crowd  of  discouragements 
holding  us  back,  creeping  on  with  but  half  a  heart,  to  us  this  exhilarating  voice 
comes  like  a  trumpet  sounding  from  that  distant  time  :  "  Let  us  go  up,  for  we  are 
able."     We  need  the  joy,  the  hope,  of  courage  ;  and  that  we  may  have  courage,  we 
need  an  unbounded  trust  in  God.     In  this  story  of  the  old  time— this  historicul 
picture,  seen  far  back  and  illumined  with  miraculous  lights — there  is  nothing  old 
or  strange  to  me  ;  ourselves  are  there,  in  bare  fact,  as  we  are  every  day.     We  see 
that  the  land  is  good — but  ah,  the  giants  !     We  are  appointed  to  reach  a  wide  and 
rich  and  peaceable  land  through  enemies.     For  this,  I  have  said,  we  need  a  will 
which  grasps  success,  and  fastens  upon  it,  and  will  never  let  it  go ;  and  there  is  no 
such  courage  without  a  fulness-  of  trust  in  the  heart.     But  this  is  not  all  our  need. 
Listen :  "  But  My  servant  Caleb,  because  he  had  another  spirit  with  him,  and  hath 
followed  Me  fully,  him  wiU  I  bring  into  the  land."     That  is  God's  description  of 
the  man  who  wins.     "  Another  spirit  " — a  spirit  the  precise  opposite  of  that  of  the 
Hebrew  mob — and  "  because  he  hath  followed  Me  fully."     Wholeness— the  heart 
whole.     God  does  not  praise  Caleb's  courage  and  faith,  though  He  might  well  have 
done  so.     One  thing  fixed  the  Divine  attention  and  applause  :  "  He  hath  followed 
Me  fully."     "  And  him  will  I  bring  into  the  land."     The  land — the  better  laud  on 
liigh — it  is  for  him,  and  for  all  such.     I  sometimes  ask  myself  :  Must  all  this  weak 
race  perish  except  the  handful  who  have  a  Divine  energy  in  their  souls  ?     Ah  ! 
Lord   God,  some   of   us  would  follow  Thee  fully — but  our  weakness !      Breathe 
Thou   light   and   strength  within   us,    touch  us   with   a  better  trust,  let   us   see 
and   live  in   Thy  presence,  and   feel   Thy  power,   and  remember   Thy  gracious 
promise.     And  oh,  when  we  have  finished   our   course  here  "  as  good   soldiers 
of  Jesus  Christ,"  may  we  rest  in  hope,  and  our  record  be :  "  This  My  servant,  because 
he  hath  followed  Me  fully,  him  will  I  bring  into  the  land."     (A.  G.  Mercer,  D.D.) 
TJie  excellency  of  a  gracious  spirit : — I.  What  that  other  spirit  is  which  a  godly 
MAN  HATH  DIFFERING  FROM  THE  WORLD.     1.  A  Spirit  that  hath  Other  principles,  a 
better  principled  spirit  than  the  spirit  of   the  world.     Where  the  spirit  is  well 
principled,  it  is  carried  on  strongly  in  God's  ways ;  though  the  natural  parts  be 
weak,  though  objections  against  them  many,  pretences  for  evil  ways  fair,  it  cannot 
but  hold  the  conclusion.  Surely  God's  ways  are  good.     2.  It  works  by  another  rule. 
When  God  erected  the  frame  of  the  world,  which  was  to  last  but  lor  a  few  years.  He 
made  all  by  measure.     The  frame  of  man's  actions  here  must  be  for  eternity,  and 
therefore  a  godly  man  dares  venture  upon  no  other  rule  but  that  which  is  Divine  ; 
he  looks  at  the  Word  as  a  light  to  his  feet,  a  lantern  to  his  steps ;  knowing  that 
every  step  he  goes  is  either  to  hell  or  to  heaven.     God  (1  Sam.  ii.  9)  keeps  the  feet 
of  His  saints.     His  way  is  like  the  way  of  the  mariner,  guided  by  the  heavens.     3. 
Another  spirit — that  is  employed  about  other  things  ;  it  is  not  for  mean  services,  but 
set  on  work  about  high  and  honouralde  employments.     4.  This  spirit  is  carried  to 
other  ends;  the  spirit  of  the  world  looks  at  ease,  pleasure,  honour,  gain,  and  self 
in  all ;  it  is  a  low  spirit.     The  most  excellent  of  the  heathen,  who  had  the  most 
brave  spirits  the  world  had  in  their  time,  aimed  no  higher  than  to  work  according 
to  reason,  and  a  natural  conscience ;  knew  not  what  it  was  to  aim  at  God  in  all 
they  did  :  but  the  spirit  of  the  godly  is  a  raised  spirit,  looks  at  God  and  eternity  in 
all  it  doth,  carries  things  up  to  the  highest  good,  and  in  this  comes  as  near  the 
working  of  God  Himself  as  may  be.     Now  where  the  spirit  is  carried  to  God  as  the 
last  end,  there  the  beauty,  excellency,  glory  of  whatever  it  hath  or  doth  is  judged 
according  to  the  reference  it  hath  to  God.     5.  This  spirit  hath  other  qualifications  ; 
the  spirits  of  the  godly  are  glorious  within.     As — (1)  It  is  an  enlightened  spirit  ; 
the  light  of  the  glory  of  God,  in  the  face  of  Jesus  Christ,  hath  shined  into  it,  and 
transformed  it.    (2)  It  is  a  free  spirit  (Psa.  li.  12).   (a)  A  free,  disengaged  spirit,  not 
entangled  with  earthly  engagements  like  the  spirits  of  the  world,  but  a  spirit  that 
is  at  liberty  (2  Cor.  iii.  17).     (b)  Free  from  the  bondage  of  sin.     Not  brought  under 
the  power  of  lust  or  Satan.    Not  in  servile  subjection  to  men.   (c)  Free  in  regard  of 
slavish  fear.    Able  to  look  upon  the  face  of  God  with  joy  (Job  xxii.  26).     (3)  A 
sublime  spirit,  raised  high  by  spiritual,  heavenly  influences,  not  swelling  by  pride ; 
a  spirit  that  hath  all  earthly  things  under  feet,  as  the  Holy  Ghost  sets  out  the 
Church  (Rev.  xii.  1).     (4)  A  firm,  strong  spirit  (Isa.  xi.  2).     The  Spirit  of  Christ  is 
a  spirit  of  might,     (a)  First,  strong  to  resist  strong  temptations,     {b)  Secondly, 


156  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 


strong  to  overcome  strong  corruptions,    (c)  Thirdly,  strong  to  bear  strong  afflictions. 
(5)  They  are  generous  spirits,  as— (a)  They  are  not  mercenary,  they  will  not  indent 
with  God  for  what  they  do  ;  so  much  as  they  may  get  by  their  service,  so  much 
service,  and  no  more.     No,  they  go  on  in  their  work,  and  leave  themselves  to  God. 
{h)  A  true  generous  spirit  cannot  endure  basely  to  subject  itself  to  any ;  it  knows 
how  to  lie  under  the  feet  of  any  to  do  them  good,  where  God  may  have  honour  ;  but 
to  be  serviceable  to  any  man's  lusts  whatsoever  it  cannot  endure.      (c)  A  true 
generous  spirit  is  not  ready  to  take  advantages  against  those  that  are  under  it.     {d) 
A  generous  spirit  is  diligent  to  return  good,  as  well  as  desirous  to  receive  good  (as 
David,  Psa.  cxvi.  12).     (e)  A  generous  spirit  loves  to  be  abundant  in  service  ;  it  is 
not  satisfied  in  doing  ordinary  things ;  they  prize  their  service  as  well  as  their 
«ages  (as  John  xvii.  4).     (6)  Though  sublime  and  raised  as  before,  yet  withal  it  is 
an  humble,  broken,  and  contrite  spirit,  one  who  is  poor  in  spirit ;  this  a  blessed 
conjunction  indeed,  though  it  thinks  itself  too  good  for  any  lust,  yet  not  too  good 
to  be  subject  to  the  least  commandment ;  though  not  satisfied  with  mean  things, 
yet  accounts  itself  less  than  the  least  of  all  God's  mercies.     (7)  It  is  a  pubhc  spirit, 
enlarged  for  public  good  ;  not  a  narrow,  straitened  spirit.    Godliness  doth  mightily 
enlarge  the  heart  of  a  man.     (8)  It  is  a  sanctified  spirit  (1  Thess.  iv.  8  ;  v.  23).     (a) 
Not  such  a  mixed  spirit  as  the  common  spirit  of  the  world :  hath  not  that  mixture 
of  filth  and  dross  in  it,  but  is  pure,    [h)  God  hath  set  them  apart  for  Himself  (Psa. 
iv.  3).     (c)  All  the  abilities,  common  gifts  of  this  spirit  are  sanctiHed,  a  higher 
excellency  is  put  upon  them  than  they  have  in  the  spirits  of  other  men ;  weak, 
natural  parts  in  these  are  more  excellent  than  the  strongest  not  sanctified,     {d)  It 
is  able  to  make  a  sanctified  use  of  what  it  hath  to  deal  in  ;  of  all  the  works  and 
ways  of  God,  it  makes  all  to  be  holy  to  the  Lord.     (9)  It  is  a  true  heroical  spirit ;  it 
is  not  discouraged  by  difficulties,  it  will  set  upon  things  a  sluggish  spirit  thinks 
impossible ;  it  will  go  through  that  which  such  a  one  thinks  can  never  be.     (10)  It 
is  a  solid,  serious  spirit ;  it  examines  the  ground  of  actions,  compares  one  thing 
with  another,  looks  much  at  the  issue  of  things  ;  and  this  must  needs  be,  because 
the  fear  of  the  great  God  and  of  eternity  is  fallen  upon  it  (Isa.  xi.  2).     (11)  It  is  an 
active,  lively  spirit,  serious,  but  not  sullen,  not  dull ;  solid,  but  not  stupid  (1  Pet.  ii. 
5).     (12)  The  spirits  of  the  godly  are  faithful  spirits,  faithful  to  God  imd  men,  such 
as  will  certainly  be  true  to  their  principles.     6.  Another  spirit,  it  feeds  upon  other 
comforts,  diilering  from  those  that  common  spirits  feed  upon.     They  are  spiritual 
comforts,  for  they  are  administered  to  the  soul  by  a  special  work  of  the  Holy  Ghost. 
II.  Wherein  the  excellency  of  this  gkaciods  spirit  appears.     1.  These  spiritual 
excellencies  have  this  propriety  in  them — they  make  a  man  a  better  man,  wheresoever 
they  are,  which  bodily  excellencies  do  not,  nor  all  the  riches  nor  honours  in  the 
world.     2.  These  spiritual  excellencies  are  the  beginnings  of  eternal  life,  the  same 
life  we  shall  have  in  heaven.     3.  This  is  not  only  the  life  of  angi  Is,  the  life  of 
heaven,  but  the  life  of  God  Himself ;  for  so  it  is  called  by  God  Himself  (Eph.  iv. 
11).     4.  This  makes  him,  wheresoever  it  is,  fit  to  glorify  God  in  the  world,  and  so 
the  soul  thus  endued  is  not  only  a  glass  to  represent,  but  as  a  glass  to  reflect  upon 
the  face  of  God  Himstlf   the  glory  of  His  own  image,  and  that  by  a  principle 
within  itself.     5.  These  are  such  as  are  fit  to  stand   before  the  Lord,  to   have 
converse  and  enjoy  communion  with  Him.     6.  This  spirit  is  fit  for  any  service,  any 
employment  God  calls  it  to ;  it  is  a  vessel  of  mercy,  fitted  for  the  Master's  use.     7. 
This  spirit  puts  a  lustre  of  majesty  and  beauty  upon  a  man.     8.  This  spirit  makes 
men  fit  for  any  comlition  that  God  shall  put  them  into  ;  they  know  how  to  yield  to 
God,  to  find  out  God's  meaning,  to  carry  themselves  in  every  condition,  so  as  to 
work  out  that  which  God  would  have  by  it ;  which  men  of  ordinary  spirits  cannot 
do.   III.  A  discovery  to  the  men  of  the  world,  whereby  they  may  see  that  their 
SPIRITS  are  not  likk  THE  SPIRITS  OF  GODLY  MEN.     When  grace  is  gone  from  the 
soul  the  excellency  is  departed  from  it ;   as  it  was  said  of  Eeuben,  in  respect  of  that 
sin  of  his.    How  many  a  man  or  woman,  who  have  comely  bodies,  good  complexion, 
beautifully  dressed  up,  but  within,  spirits  most  ugly  and  horrid ;    spirits  full  of 
filth,  full  of   venom   and  loathsome  distempers ;    men  of  corrupt  minds,  as  the 
apostle  speaks.     How  unsavoury  to  any  who  have  the  least  of  God  in  them !     It 
is  a  rule  in  nature  that  the  corruption  of  the  best  thing  is  always  the  worst,  as  a 
stain  in  fine  camta-ic  worse  than  in  a  coarse  cloth.    So  by  how  much  the  spirit  of  a 
man  is  more  excellent  naturally  than  the  body,  which  is  the  brutish  part,  by  so 
much  the  coiruption  of  the  spirit  is  a  greater  evil  than  any  the  body  is  capable  of. 
Spirit  defilement  is  such  a  defilement  as  defiles  everything  you  meddle  with  (as 
Titus  i.  15).     IV.  The  reason  why  the  men  of  the  world  and  the  godly  can  never 


CHAP.  XIV.]  NUMBERS.  157 

AGREE.  Water  and  oil  cannot  mingle  ;  no  agreement  between  light  and  darkness  : 
they  look  at  them  as  men  whose  lives  are  after  another  fashion.  V.  Leaen  to  have 
A  RIGHT  ESTEEM  OF  SUCH  PBECioDs-spiRiTED  MEN.  There  is  a  Spirit  in  man,  and  the 
inspiration  is  from  the  Almit;hty ;  a  spirit  inspired  by  the  Almighty,  and  beautified 
with  His  heavenly  graces  ;  this  ennobles  a  man  iudeed  ;  it  is  the  ornament  of  the 
hidden  man  of  the  heart,  the  glorious  clothing  of  that  which  makes  truly  beautiful 
and  glorious.  1.  This  difference  of  their  spirits  from  other  men  is  a  certain  sign  of 
the  eternal  love  of  God  unto  them.  2.  The  spirit  receiving  these  spiritual  excel- 
lencies from  God's  choice  everlasting  love,  receives  likewise  all  other  mercies  from 
the  same  fountain.  3.  The  Lord  hath  an  especial  eye  upon  and  delight  to  dwell 
with  these  who  are  of  choice  and  excellent  spirits.  4.  The  excellencies  of  this 
spirit  are  eternal  excellencies.  5.  But  principally,  these  other  spirits  are  most 
honourable  creatures  indeed,  because  they  are  reserved  for  other  mercies  ;  God  gives 
common  mercies  to  common  spirits,  but  He  reserves  His  choice  mercies  for  choice 
spirits  (2  Sam.  xxii.  27).  Other  mercies  (in  some  respect  higher)  than  the  very 
blessed  angels  themselves  have.  VI.  A  rebuke  to  this  vile  world,  who  have  vile 
coKCEiTS  OF  this  SPIRIT,  AND  ABUSE  MEN  OF  SUCH  EXCELLENT  SPIRITS.  Certainly  the 
Lord  will  not  always  suffer  choice-spirited  men  to  be  trampled  under  feet ;  He  looks 
upon  them  in  their  lowest  estate  as  His  jewels ;  but  the  time  will  come  when  He  will 
make  up  His  jewels  (as  Mai.  iii.  17) ;  and  then  there  shall  be  seen  a  difference 
between  the  righteous  and  the  wicked  (ver.  18).  God  will  own  the  excellency  of  the 
spirits  of  His  servants  to  be  the  image  of  Himself ;  and  what  confusion  will  this  be 
to  the  ungodly  of  the  world !     VII.  No  dishonour  to  be  singular.     Seven  notes  to 

DISCOVER  THAT  GODLY  MEN  DIFFERING  FROM  OTHER  MEN  PROCEEDS  NOT  FROM  PROUD 
HUMOROUS  SINGULARITY,  BUT  FROM  THE  CHOICENESS  AND  EXCELLENCY  OF  THEIR  SPIRITS. 

1.  Where  humour  and  conceited  singularity  prevails  with  men,  there  is  no  even- 
ness, no  constancy  in  their  ways,  no  proportion  of  one  thing  with  another  in  their 
course  ;  they  are  singular  and  humorous  in  some  odd  foolish  things,  but  in  other 
things  where  they  have  as  much  reason  to  be  singular,  they  do  as  others  do.  But 
in  God's  people  you  shall  see  an  evenness,  constancy,  and  proportion  in  the  course 
of  their  lives ;  that  which  makes  them  singular  in  one  thing,  makes  them  so  in  all 
other  of  the  same  nature.  2.  Those  who  do  things  out  of  singularity,  they  care 
less  for  such  things  they  do  out  of  that  principle,  when  they  come  to  be  common, 
than  they  did  before.  But  it  is  not  so  here  in  the  ways  of  godliness ;  the  more 
common  they  grow  the  better  they  are ;  the  more  doth  God's  people  rejoice  and 
bless  themselves  in  them,  they  are  the  more  lovely  and  amiable  in  their  eyes. 
3.  Humorous,  singular  men  differ  exceedingly  one  from  another,  one  will  be 
singular  in  one  thiug  and  another  in  another ;  but  God's  people  go  all  the  same 
way,  they  have  the  same  course  with  such  as  they  never  saw.  4.  Pioud,  conceited 
singularity  acts  itself  especially  in  things  that  are  taken  notice  of  by  others  ;  if 
others  look  not  after  them,  and  will  not  vouchsafe  to  take  notice  of  them,  they 
quickly  grow  weary  of  that  they  do,  and  this  is  the  best  way  to  deal  with  such  people, 
to  neglect  them.  But  now  the  special  work  of  godliness,  wherein  God's  people 
differ  from  other  men,  in  which  their  souls  most  delight,  is  in  secret  things  not 
subject  to  the  view  of  the  world.  "  The  King's  daughter  is  all  glorious  within." 
5.  If  it  were  humorous  singularity,  it  would  not  bring  them  so  much  sweet  peace 
and  heavenly  joy  when  they  are  upon  their  sick-beds  and  death-beds  ;  and  when 
they  have  to  deal  with  God  in  a  special  manner,  to  receive  the  sentence  of  their 
eternal  doom,  how  many  then  bless  God  that  ever  He  put  it  into  their  hearts  to  go 
another  way,  not  according  to  the  common  course  of  the  world.  6.  Surely  it  is 
not  humorous  conceited  singularity,  because  most  men  who  have  enlightened  con- 
sciences, when  they  are  must  serious  in  their  best  moods,  are  of  this  mind.  7.  It 
is  not  singularity,  for  we  have  the  prophets,  apostles,  martyrs,  saints  of  Goi) 
before  us,  clouds  of  witnesses,  and  every  one  of  them  worth  ten  thousands  of 
others.  It  is  safe  to  follow  the  way  of  good  men,  according  to  that  in  Proverbs 
ii.  20.  VIII.  Bless  God  for  making  this  difference  between  your  spirit  and 
THE  VILE  spirits  OF  THE  MEN  OF  THE  WORLD.  Spiritual  blessings  have  this  ex- 
cellency in  them,  they  cause  a  man  to  feel  no  need  of  many  outward  things  which 
others  know  not  how  to  want ;  and  it  is  good  to  be  in  such  an  estate,  to  have  no 
need  of  a  thing,  as  to  enjoy  it  when  we  want  it.  And,  further,  it  is  the  excellency 
of  spiritual  blessings  to  keep  down  the  body,  and  to  carry  the  spirit  above  the  body. 
IX.  Communion  and  converse  with  men  of  such  excellent  spirits  is  a  mos 
BLESSED  thing.  Scneca  saw  so  much  excellency  that  morality  put  upon  man,  that 
he  says  that  "  the  very  look  of  a  good  man  delights  one."     The  very  sight  of  such 


158  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

servants  of  God,  who  walk  close  with  God,  who  are  careful  to  keep  their  spirits 
clear  and  shining  ;  truly,  it  is  very  delightful,  it  hath  much  quickening  in  it ;  the 
uprightness,  holiness,  spiritual  enlightenings,  that  their  souls  have,  will  guide  them 
to  advise  for  God  in  safe  and  good  ways.     X.  That  all  those  whose  spirits  God 

HATH  THUS  DIFFERENCED  SHOULD  IMPROVE  THIS  MERCY  BY  WALKING  NOT  AS  OTHER  MEN. 

1.  Your  birth  is  from  Him,  and  therefore  it  must  not  be  with  you  as  it  is  with 
others.  Men  of  high  birth  will  not  live  as  other  men  do.  Hence  we  read  of 
a  custom  amongst  the  heathen,  tbey  were  wont  to  derive  the  pedigree  of  their 
valiant  men  from  their  gods  ;  to  this  end,  though  the  thing  were  not  true,  yet  they 
believing  themselves  to  be  a  Divine  offspring,  they  might  upon  confidence  thereof 
undertake  higher  attempts  than  others  with  the  more  boldnpss.  Much  higher 
things  should  those  endeavour  after  who  are  intleed  born  of  God.  2.  God  hath 
put  forth  another  manner  of  power  upon  your  spirits  than  upon  other  men ;  other 
men  have  but  a  general  common  influence  of  God's  power  let  into  their  spirits; 
but  He  hath  manifested  the  exceeding  greatness  of  His  power  in  you  ;  as  Eph.  i.  19. 

3.  God  doth  put  other  abilities  into  you  that  others  have  not :  that  grace  with 
which  He  hath  endued  your  spirits  is  a  spark  of  His  own  Divine  nature.  4.  Your 
spirits  have  been  made  acquainted  with  more  truths  ;  God  hath  revealed  to  you  the 
secrets  of  His  councils,  of  His  kingdom  ;  He  hath  shown  you  Himself,  His  glory, 
His  majesty,  sovereignty,  holiness ;  He  hath  shown  you  the  reality,  beauty,  ex- 
cellency, equity  of  His  blessed  ways.  He  hath  made  known  to  you  the  certainty, 
the  infinite  consequence  of  the  things  of  eternity.  5.  He  hath  separated  you  for 
Himself,  He  hath  taken  you  into  a  near  communion  unto  Himself.  6.  More 
depends  upon  you  than  upon  others ;  the  weight  of  many  services  depends  all  upon 
you  which  are  no  ways  expected  to  be  performed  by  others.  What  shall  become 
of  God's  name,  His  glory,  &c.  ?  7.  Your  sins  go  nearer  to  the  heart  of  God  than 
others.  Other  men  may  provoke  God  to  anger,  but  you  grieve  His  Holy  Spirit. 
8.  The  eyes  of  many  are  upon  you  ;  the  name  of  God,  the  cause  of  God  is  engaged 
in  you.  9.  You  are  appointed  by  God  to  be  the  judges  of  other  men  (1  Cor.  vi.  2). 
God  will  bring  your  hves  and  ways  before  all  the  world  to  judge  the  world  by,  and 
therefore  they  had  need  to  be  very  exact,  and  to  have  something  in  them  more  than 
ordinary.  (1)  In  self-denial  show  that  you  can  deny  your  opinions,  your  desires, 
your  wills  ;  though  you  have  a  strong  mind  to  a  thing,  though  you  have  fit  oppor- 
tunities to  enjoy  your  desires,  yet  if  you  see  God  may  have  more  honour  any  other  way, 
you  can  freely  and  readily,  without  disturbance,  without  vexing,  yield.  (2)  Show 
the  excellency  of  your  spirit's  enabling  you  to  do  that  which  others  cannot  do,  by- 
loving  your  enemies,  praying  for  them,  doing  them  all  the  good  you  can.  (3)  Fear 
the  least  sin  more  than  the  greatest  suffering.  (4)  Prize  opportunities  of  service 
more  than  all  outward  contentments.  (5)  Make  conscience  of  time.  (6)  Make 
conscience  of  thoughts  and  secret  workings  of  heart,  of  secret  sins  to  avoid  them, 
and  secret  duties  to  perform  them.  (7)  Make  conscience  of  the  manner  of  per- 
forming hi>ly  duties,  as  well  as  the  doing  of  them,  and  look  after  them,  what 
becomes  of  them  when  they  are  done.  (8)  Rejoice  in  the  good  of  others,  though 
it  echpses  thy  light,  though  it  makes  t'ly  abilities,  thy  f-xcellences  dimmer  in  the 
eyes  of  others.  (9)  If  thou  wilt  show  the  excellency  of  this  spirit  in  some  choice 
thing,  then  labour  to  keep  the  heart  low  in  ijrosperity,  and  an  heavenly  cheerful- 
ness in  adversity;  not  only  contented,  but  joyful,  in  a  quiet,  sweet,  delightful 
frame.  (10)  B"  more  careful  to  know  the  fountain  from  whence  all  your  mercies 
come,  and  to  have  a  sanctified  use  of  them  when  you  enjoy  them,  than  to  have  the 
possession  of  them  or  dnlight  in  them.  XI.  An  exiiortvtion  to  labour  to  get  this 
EXCELLENT  SPIRIT.  1.  You  had  need  of  other  spirits,  more  need  than  others  for 
the  improvement  of  those  great  mercies  that  you  have  above  others.  As  some 
fowl  that  have  great  wings,  yet  can  fly  but  little ;  so  many  men  have  great  estates, 
but  not  having  spirits  to  improve  thorn,  they  are  of  little  use.  Know  that  your 
estates  are  either  mercies  or  miseries,  bles-ings  or  cursings  to  you,  according  as  you 
have  hearts  to  improve  them.  2.  You  had  need  of  other  spirits  for  the  im|)roving 
of  the  large  opportunities  of  service  for  God  and  His  church  that  you  have  more 
than  others  ;  these  are  as  great  blessing  as  jour  estates  or  any  olher  dignitie.s  you 
have  above  others.  3.  You  who  are  in  high  and  eminent  dignities,  you  have  the 
earnest  prayers  of  God's  servants  in  all  places,  that  God  would  raise  you  up  with 
truly  noble,  excellent,  and  gracious  spirits,  thnt  you  may  be  instruments  of  Hia 
glory.     How  blessed  you  if  God  fulfils  the  prayers  of  His  servants  upon  you  ! 

4.  Again,  you  have  need  of  other  spirits,  for  your  example  is  looked  at  more  than 
others,  either  in  good  or  evil.     5.  Their  sin  is  worse  than  others,  for  it  doth  more 


CHAP.  XIV.]  NUMBERS.  159 

hurt,  and  therefore  their  punishment  will  be  greater  than  others.  6.  And  yet, 
further,  you  have  need  of  other  spirits  because  you  have  temptations  greater  and 
stronger  than  others ;  you  are  in  greater  danger  than  others.  The  high  estate  of 
great  outward  dignity  is  a  very  dangerous  estate  if  God  gives  not  an  extraordinary 
spirit.  7.  Above  all,  you  who  are  honourable  and  great  in  the  world,  you  had  need 
labour  to  be  gracious,  because  sin  is  more  unsuitable  to  your  condition  than  to 
others.  8.  And  would  it  not  be  a  grievous  thing  to  you  to  see  poor,  inferior  men 
and  women  to  be  lifted  up  to  glory,  and  yourselves  cast  out  an  eternal  curse  ? 
Have  not  many  of  them  most  excellent  precious  spirits  ?  Do  they  not  do  God  far 
more  service  than  you  ?  Do  they  not  bring  more  honour  to  His  name  than  ever 
you  did  ?  Think  then  with  yourselves,  why  should  God  put  those  who  are  of  such 
choice  precious  spirits  into  such  a  low  condition,  and  raise  me  to  such  an  high? 
Is  it  not  because  He  intends  to  give  mc  my  portion  in  this  life,  but  reserves  better 
mercies  for  them  afterwards  ?  9.  The  hopes  we  have  of  the  continuance  of  our 
peace  in  the  happy  enjoyment  of  those  precious  liberties  of  the  gospel,  that  in  so 
great  mercy  have  been  continued  unto  us,  depends  much  uj)on  the  work  of  God's 
grace  upon  your  souls.  You,  therefore,  whom  God  hath  honoured  with  excellent 
parts,  that  you  may  not  be  confounded  another  day  before  tbe  Lord  and  His 
blessed  angels  and  saints,  be  you  restless  in  your  spirits  till  you  find  God  hath  added 
a  further  beauty  to  them,  even  the  beauty  of  holiness,  the  sanctifying  graces  of 
His  Holy  Spirit,  thatmay  make  you  lovely  in  His  eyes,  truly  honourable  before  Him, 
and  for  ever  blessed  of  Him,  Take  heed  you  rest  not  either  in  gifts  of  learning  or  in 
gifts  of  morality ;  the  gifts  of  morality  are  yet  a  further  ornament  to  men's  spirits, 
but  yet  they  come  short  of  those  Divine  excellences  of  spirit  that  will  make  it 
blessed  for  ever.  (1)  This  other  spirit  is  a  renewed  spirit  (Ezek.  ii.  19).  (2)  This 
other  spirit  works  from  God,  and  for  God.  (3)  Where  true  spiritual  excellency  is, 
there  is  a  connection  of  all  spiritual  excellences,  of  all  graces  (Eph.  v.  9). 
(4)  Where  there  are  true  spiritual  excellences  there  is  an  impulse  of  heart,  a  strong 
bent  of  spirit  in  following  after  the  Lord  ;  there  is  such  a  powerful  impression  of 
Divine  truths  upon  the  soul  as  presses  it  on  with  strength  in  God's  ways,  for  that 
it  cannot  easily  be  hindered,  as  the  prophet  saith  (Isa.  viii.  11).  (5)  Where  there 
are  only  moral  principles,  there  the  soul  sees  not  into,  turns  not  from  the  evil  of 
sin ;  it  sees  not  such  evil  in  it  as  to  make  it  subscribe  to  the  righteousness  of  God  in 
all  those  dreadful  things  that  are  threatened  against  it,  but  thinks  they  are  too 
hard.  Surely  God  is  not  so  severe  a  God.  God  forbid  things  should  be  so  as 
those  we  read  of  in  the  gospel.  (6)  Where  there  are  only  natural  and  moral 
excellences,  they  do  not  raise  the  soul  to  a  love  of  the  strictest  ways  of  God. 
(7)  Where  there  is  only  nature  or  morality,  there  is  no  sense  of  the  breathings  of 
God's  spirit  in  His  ordinances.      (J.  Burroughes.)  A  gracious  spirit  follows  God 

fully : — L  What  is  it  fob  a  man  to  follow  God  fully.  1.  A  fulness  of  all  graces  ; 
though  not  the  degree  of  all  graces,  yet  the  truth  of  every  grace.  There  is 
no  grace  wanting  where  this  evangelical  fulness  is.  2.  There  is  no  want,  no  not 
of  any  degree,  wherein  the  soul  rests  ;  there  is  such  a  perfection  as  the  soul  takes 
no  liberty  to  itself  to  fail  in  anything.  3.  There  are  sincere  aims,  as  in  the  sight 
of  God,  to  attain  to  the  highest  perfection,  the  full  measure  of  holiness  ;  and — 4. 
There  is  that  uprightness  of  the  soul,  as  it  doth  not  only  desire  and  endeavour  to 
attain,  but  doth  indeed  attain  to  the  truth  of  that  I  shall  deliver.  5.  The  heart  is 
fully  set  and  resolved  for  God ;  there  is  fulness  of  resolution  ;  so  the  SeptnaKint 
translates  that  place  in  Josh.  xv.  8.  6.  There  is  a  fulness  of  all  the  faculties  of  the 
soul  working  after  God  ;  full  apprehensions,  fuU  affections ;  the  soul  is  filled  with 
the  will  of  God,  "  That  ye  may  stand  perfect,  and  full  in  all  the  will  of  God  " 
(Col.  iv.  12),  as  the  sails  tilled  with  the  wind.  "  My  soul  and  all  that  is  within  me 
praise  the  Lord,"  saith  David.  As  it  is  in  giving  men  full  possession  of  a  house, 
they  give  up  the  keys  of  every  room,  so  here  the  soul  gives  up  every  faculty  to  God  ; 
the  whole  soul  opens  itself  to  receive  the  Word  and  His  truth.  7.  The  soul  follows 
God  fully  in  regard  of  the  true  endeavours  of  it  to  put  forth  what  strength  it  hath 
in  following  the  Lord.  8.  The  soul  that  fully  follows  the  Lord,  follows  Him  without 
delay  in  the  use  of  all  means  and  in  all  the  ways  of  His  commandments.  9.  Again, 
a  soul  that  follows  God  fully  follows  Him  in  all  the  ways  of  His  commandments, 
as  the  Lord  saith  of  David  (Acts  xiii.  22).  (1)  It  is  willing  to  follow  the  Lord  in 
diiiicult  duties,  when  it  must  put  the  flesh  to  it,  in  duties  that  require  pains,  that 
cannot  be  done  without  some  hard  things  attending  on  them.  (2)  One  that  follows 
God  fully  will  follow  Him  in  discountenanced  duties.  (3)  One  that  is  willing  to 
follow  God  fully  in  all  duties,  he  will  follow  Him  in  those  where  he  sees  no  reason 


160  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

but  the  bare  command  of  God.  (4)  The  soul  that  is  willing  to  follow  God  in  all 
duties,  will  follow  Him  in  commandments  that  are  accounted  little.  God  expects 
faithfulness  in  little  things ;  God  prizes  every  tittle  of  His  law  more  worth  than 
heaven  and  earth,  howsoever  we  may  slight  many  things  in  it,  and  think  them  too 
small  to  put  any  great  bond  upon  us.  (5)  The  soul  that  follows  God  fully  in  all 
duties,  is  willing  to  follow  Him  in  duties  wherein  it  must  go  alone  ;  it  is  willing  to 
follow  God  in  solitary  paths.  10.  To  follow  God  fully  is  to  follow  Him  so  as  to  be 
willing  to  venture  the  loss  of  all  for  Him,  willing  to  cast  otf  whatsoever  comes  in  the 
way,  though  never  so  dear  to  us;  to  follow  Him  close  whatsoever  comes  in  compe- 
tition with  Him  when  our  following  Him  will  cost  us  the  loss  of  our  formerly  most 
dear  comforts  and  contentments.  11.  To  follow  God  fully  is  to  follow  Him  only,  so 
as  to  be  willing  to  dedicate  whatsoever  God  lets  us  still  enjoy  to  God  alone.  12.  The 
soul  then  follows  God  fully  when  it  carries  through  the  work  it  undertakes  against 
all  discouragements  and  hindrances,  as  a  ship  coming  with  full  sail  bears  all  down 
before  it.  It  doth  not  only  work,  but  works  tljorouglily,  works  out  that  it  doth.  13. 
One  that  follows  God  fully  is  willing  to  bind  himself  to  God  by  the  most  full  and 
strong  bonds  and  engagements  ;  his  spirit  is  at  the  greatest  liherty  when  he  is  most 
strongly  bound  to  the  Lord.  14.  To  follow  God  fully  is  to  abide  in  all  these  con- 
stant to  the  end  of  our  days.  That  is,  we  must  be  constant  in  God's  ways,  not  think 
it  enough  to  enter  into  them  by  fits  and  starts,  but  the  ways  of  God  must  be  our 
ordinary  track  (Prov.  xvi.  17).  (1)  Wherever  the  Lord  brings  any  to  follow  Him 
fully.  He  causeth  such  a  perfect  breach  between  sin  and  that  soul  as  there  is  no 
possibility  that  the  breach  should  be  made  up  again.  (2)  A  second  reason  why 
that  man  that  follows  the  Lord  fully  must  needs  follow  Him  for  ever,  is  because  at 
the  first  giving  up  himself  to  God  he  was  content  to  let  go  all  other  holds  and  all 
other  hopes  in  all  creature-comforts  whatsoever,  and  so  to  venture  himself  upon 
God  ;  he  hath  no  other  prop  that  he  doth  expect  support  by.  There  is  a  blessed 
necessity  upon  him  to  follow  the  Lord  for  ever,  and  this  necessity  the  soul  is  glad 
of.  (3)  The  soul  that  follows  God  fully  will  follow  Him  for  ever,  because  in  the  full 
following  of  the  Lord  it  finds  so  much  ease,  peace,  joy,  satisfaction,  as  it  is  for  ever 
settled  and  confirmed  in  this  way.  II.  The  excellency  of  this  frame  of  spirit. 
1.  This  is  truly  to  honour  God  as  a  God ;  except  God  be  honoured  as  infinite  He  is 
not  honoured  as  God  ;  where  God  is  followed  and  not  thus,  He  is  followed  no  other- 
wise than  a  creature  may  be  followed.  This  is  not  therefore  to  honour  Him  as  a 
God,  but  rather  it  is  a  dishonour  to  that  infinite  excellency  and  blessedness  of  His, 
whereby  He  is  infinitely  above  all  that  creatures  are,  or  that  they  are  any  way 
capable  of.  2.  This  full  following  of  God  doth  much  honour  the  work  of  grace 
and  the  profession  of  godliness  ;  it  shows  a  reality,  power,  excellency,  and  beauty  in 
it.  3.  This  has  such  excellency  in  it,  as  that  God  Himself  boasts  of  such  as  these 
are ;  as  they  glory  in  the  Lord  and  bless  themselves  in  the  Lord,  so  the  Lord  seems 
to  glory  in  them,  and  to  account  His  name  blessed  by  ihem,  as  you  may  see  how 
God  rejoices  in  and  makes  His  boast  of  Job  (i.  8).  4.  This  following  of  the  Lord 
fully  doth  ever  attain  its  end.  HI.  Kebuke  to  divers  sorts  whose  spirits  are  not 
FULL  IN  following  after  THE  LoRo.  1.  As  some  are  convinced,  their  judgments 
and  consciences  are  for  God,  but  their  lusts  carry  them  violently  another  way.  2. 
Others  rest  in  their  good  inclinations,  their  good  desires  ;  they  say  they  would  fain 
do  better,  and  they  hope  God  will  accept  the  will  for  the  deed ;  they  like  God's 
ways,  and  speak  well  of  good  men,  and  therefore  they  think  their  hearts  are  for  God. 
3.  Others  have  good  resolutions  now  and  then  in  some  good  moods  ;  the  truths  of 
God  come  darting  in  with  some  power,  as  they  cannot  but  yield  to  them,  and  then 
they  are  resolved  that  they  will  do  better  and  their  lives  shall  be  changed  ;  but  yet 
these  vanish  too,  they  follow  not  God  fully.  4.  Others  have  strong  sudden  affec- 
tions, they  feel  sometimes  some  meltings,  in  sorrow  for  sin,  in  hearing  the  blessed 
truths  of  God  revealed  to  them  ;  they  feel  some  sweetness  in  the  working  of  truths 
upon  their  hearts,  they  have  a  taste  of  the  powers  of  the  world  to  come.  Yet  these 
are  a  great  way  off  from  following  the  Lord  fully.  For — (1)  These  affections  are 
sudden  and  flashing ;  the  truths  of  God  pass  by  them,  leaving  a  little  glimmering 
behind  them,  or  as  water  passeth  through  a  conduit  and  leaves  a  dew  ;  but  they 
soak  not  into  the  heart,  as  the  water  soaks  into  the  earth  to  make  it  fruitful.  (2) 
These  are  stirred  with  the  pardoning,  comforting,  saving  merci-  s  of  God,  but  not 
with  the  humbling,  renewing,  sanctifying  mercies.  5.  Others  follow  the  Lord,  but 
they  follow  Him  in  a  dull,  heavy  manner ;  there  is  no  spirit,  no  heat,  no  life  in 
their  following  of  Him,  and  therefore  they  do  not  follow  Him  fully.  They  rest 
themselves  in  a  lukewarm  course ;  they  like  well  of  religion  and  profession,  but 


CHAP.  XIV.]  NUMBERS.  161 

what  need  men  go  so  far,  what  need  they  do  so  much  ?  As  PharHoh  said  to  the 
Israelites  (Exod.  viii.  28).  6.  Some  go  beyond  this  dull  lukewarm  temper ;  they  are 
very  forward  in  some  things,  but  in  other  things  their  hearts  stick  ;  they  come  not 
off  fully  in  them.  7.  There  are  others  who  cannot  be  so  easily  convinced  in  what 
particulars  they  forsake  God  in  any  of  His  ways  ;  they  seem  to  have  a  general  for- 
wardness in  that  which  is  good,  but  the  truth  is,  they  follow  themselves,  and  not 
God  in  all ;  they  rise  no  higher  than  self  in  all  they  do,  which  their  own  consciences, 
upon  search  made,  will  tell  them  :  the  commandment  of  God  may  be  made  the  pre- 
tence, but  self  is  the  great  mover  in  all.  8.  Others  follow  the  Lord  earnestly  a 
while,  but  afterwards  forsake  Him.  Many  are  very  hopeful  at  the  first,  yet  they 
prove  exceeding  vile  afterwards  ;  yea,  the  more  forward  in  good  at  first,  the  more 
vile  after— as  water  that  hath  once  been  heated,  and  grows  cold  again,  is  colder 
than  ever  it  was.  Let  none,  then,  rest  themselves  in  their  good  beginnings.  Tlie 
evil  of  forsaking  the  Lord  were  great,  if  this  were  all — (1)  That  all  your  labour  in 
religion,  that  all  that  you  have  done  is  lost.  It  is  an  evil  thing  to  lose  all  that  we 
have  wrought  for ;  but  this  is  not  all.  (2)  If  you  leave  off  from  following  the  Lord, 
all  the  good  that  ever  you  have  done  and  made  profession  of  shall  serve  only  to 
aggravate  your  sin  and  increase  your  torment.  (3)  This  leaving  off  from  following 
the  Lord  is  a  great  dishonour  to  God  and  His  ways ;  an  upbraiding  of  them,  as  if 
they  were  not  good  enough  to  draw  the  heart  constantly  after  them.  (4)  Such  men 
as  these  do  much  mischief  in  the  world ;  they  are  grievous  scandals.  (5)  These 
men  shall  have  their  spirits  filled  with  horror;  they  did  not  fill  up  their  work  in 
following  the  Lord ;  but  God  and  conscience  shall  follow  them  with  anguish,  and 
fill  up  their  spirits  with  them.  (6)  Lastly,  these  men  are  hateful  both  to  God  and 
men  ;  they  are  hat'  ful  to  men  because  they  go  no  further,  as  Heb.  x.  38.  IV.  Com- 
fort  AND   ENCOURAGEMENT  TO  THOSE  WHO  FOLLOW   THE  LoBD  FULT;Y.      BleSSed  are  yOU 

of  the  Lord,  you  are  honourable  in  the  eyes  of  God  and  man,  you  make  up  in  part 
that  hurt  that  is  done  to  religion  by  others.  If  you  be  content  to  give  up  all  to  God, 
to  betrust  God  with  all,  know  that  there  are  many  blessed  promises  full  of  mercy  and 
encouragement  for  you ;  they  shall  come  to  you  fuller  of  goodness  and  blessing 
than  you  can  imagine.  God  certainly  will  remember  the  kindness  of  those  who  are 
willing  to  follow  Him  through  the  wilderness  of  difficulties  and  discouragement 
(Jer.  ii.  2).  You  who  do  thus  shall  die  without  stain,  which  few  do  ;  your  memories 
shall  be  sweet  and  blessed  when  you  are  dead  and  gone.  You  shall  have  "  an 
entrance  ministered  unto  you  abundantly  into  the  everlasting  kingdom  of  our  Lord 
and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ "  (2  Pet.  i.  11).  This  is  promised,  not  only  to  those  that 
are  godly,  but  abound  in  it,  as  ver.  8.  They  shall  be  as  a  ship  coming  gloriously 
into  the  haven  with  full  sail.  V.  An  exhortation  to  follow  the  Lord  fully.  1. 
There  is  infinite  reason  that  our  hearts  should  be  fully  after  the  Lord.  For — (1) 
There  is  a  fulness  of  all  good  in  God ;  He  is  worthy  (Rev.  iv.  11).  As  that 
blessed  martyr  John  Ardley  once  said :  "  What,  have  I  but  one  life  to  lay  down  for 
Christ?  If  I  had  as  many  lives  as  there  are  hairs  upon  my  head,  they  should  all 
go  for  Jesus  Christ."  He  saw  Christ  worthy  of  all  he  had,  yea,  of  more  than  he 
had.  This  was  God's  own  argument  to  Abraham, "  Walk  before  Me  and  be  upright "  ; 
be  perfect,  for  I  am  God  all-suflicient ;  I  have  all  perfection  in  Me,  and  therefore  be 
thou  perfect  before  Me.  (2)  Consider  God  might  have  had  full  glory  in  your 
destruction  ;  let  Him  not  be  a  loser  in  His  showing  mercy  to  you.  (3)  Christ  hath 
fully  gone  through  the  great  work  of  redemption  ;  He  would  never  leave  it  till  He 
had  accomplished  all,  and  said,  "It  is  finished."  (4)  Yea,  God's  mercies  for  the 
present  are  very  full  towards  you  ;  His  pardoning  mercies,  and  His  supplying 
mercies,  with  all  things  needful.  This  was  David's  argument  (Psa.  ciii.  1-3).  (5) 
Wicked  men  do  fully  follow  after  that  which  is  evil ;  an  infinite  shame  and  con- 
fusion then  would  it  be  to  us,  likewise  unto  God,  if  we  should  not  as  fully  follow 
the  Lord  in  that  which  is  good.  I  have  read  a  pasFage  in  St.  Cyprian  how  he 
brings  in  the  devil  triumphing  over  Christ  in  this  manner  :  "  As  for  my  followers,  I 
never  died  for  them,  as  Christ  did  for  His ;  I  never  promised  them  so  great  reward 
as  Christ  hath  done  to  His ;  and  yet  I  have  more  followers  than  He,  and  they  do 
more  for  me  than  His  doth  for  Him.  Oh,  let  the  thought  of  our  giving  the  devil 
occasion  thus  to  triumph  over  Christ  in  our  slackness  and  noL'ligence  in  following 
after  Him  cause  shame  and  confusion  to  cover  our  faces."  (6)  The  more  fully  we 
follow  God,  the  more  full  shall  our  present  pf^ace,  and  joy,  and  soul-satisfying  con- 
tentment be  (Psa.  cxix.  130).  (7)  There  is  great  reason  why  we  should  walk  fully 
after  the  Lord,  because  the  way  that  God  calls  us  to  walk  in  is  a  most  blessed  and 
holy  way.     (8)  The  consideration  of  the  end  of  our  way  should  be  a  strong  motive 

11 


162  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

to  draw  our  hearts  fully  after  the  Lord  in  it ;  the  entrance  into  it  is  sweet,  the  midst 
of  it  more,  but  the  end  of  it  most  sweet  of  all ;  there  is  that  coming  that  will  fully 
recompense  all.  2.  And  thus  I  pass  to  the  secmd  thing  propounded  in  this  use, 
namely,  to  show  what  are  the  causes  that  hinder  men  from  following  the  Lord  fully. 
And  they  are  five  especially,  which  I  shall  but  name.  (1)  Low  apprehensions  that 
men  have  of  God  ;  they  see  not  God  in  His  glory,  in  His  greatness  ;  surely  they 
know  not  God,  and  therefore  it  is  that  their  hearts  work  so  poorly  after  Him  (Jer. 
ix.  3).  (2)  Unsound  beginnings  in  the  profession  of  religion  are  the  cause  why  men 
do  not  fully  follow  after  the  Lord.  Their  hearts  are  not  thoroughly  broken,  not 
deeply  humbled.  If  cloth  be  not  wrought  well  at  tbe  first,  though  it  shows  fair  in 
the  loom,  yet  it  will  shrink  when  it  comes  to  wetting.  The  cause  why  many  do 
so  shrink  in  the  wetting,  when  they  come  to  suiier  anything  in  the  ways  of  religion, 
it  is  because  their  hearts  were  not  well  wrought  at  first.  (3)  A  third  cause  is  the 
strength  of  engagements ;  their  hearts  are  so  wrapped  in  tbem,  so  glued  to  them, 
as  it  is  exceeding  painful  to  get  them  loosened  from  them,  they  are  so  near  and  dear 
to  a  corrupt  heart.  (4)  A  fourth  thing  that  hinders  men  from  following  God  fully,  it  is 
going  out  in  the  strength  of  their  own  resolutions,  not  in  any  strength  that  they  receive 
out  of  the  fulness  of  Jesus  Christ.  (5)  A  fifth  cause  is  tbe  meeting  with  more  difficulties 
in  God's  ways  than  we  made  account  of,  when  Christians  think  only  of  the  good  and 
sweet  that  they  shall  meet  with  in  God's  ways ;  but  they  do  not  cast  in  their 
thoughts  what  the  troubles  are  like  to  be  that  they  shall  find  in  them.     VI.  That  it 

IS  THE  CHOICENESS  OF  A  MAN's  SPIRIT  THAT  CAUSES  HIM  TO  FOLLOW  GoD    FULLY.       1.    We 

shall  show  what  there  is  in  this  spirit  that  doth  carry  on  a  man  fully.  (1)  By  this 
a  man  comes  to  have  a  more  full  presence  of  God  with  him.  (2)  The  choiceness  of 
a  man's  spirit  raiseth  it  to  converse  with  high  things,  and  so  carries  it  above  the 
snares  and  hindrances  that  are  below ;  and  being  above  these,  it  goes  on  freely  and 
fully  in  its  course,  and  is  not  in  that  danger  of  miscarrying  as  other  poor  spirits  are 
who  converse  so  much  with  the  things  upon  the  earth  ;  as  birds  that  fly  high  are 
not  caught  by  the  fowler,  they  are  not  taken  by  his  lime-twigs,  by  his  net  or  pit- 
fall, so  as  others  are  who  are  much  below  upon  the  ground  (Prov.  xxv.  24).  (3)  The 
choiceness  of  a  man's  spirit  changeth  his  end,  and  so  carries  him  on  fully  after  tbe 
Lord ;  for  when  the  end  is  changed  all  is  changed.  (4)  This  choiceness  of  spirit 
causeth  a  suitableness,  a  sympathy  between  the  frame  of  the  heart  and  the  ways  of 
holiness.  (5)  This  choiceness  of  spirit  causeth  a  man  to  look  to  his  duty  and  not 
to  regard  what  may  follow.  (6)  The  choiceness  of  a  man's  spirit  causes  a  man 
that  if  he  doth  look  at  any  consequences  that  may  follow  upon  his  way,  he  looks 
only  at  the  last  issue  of  all.  Will  it  then  be  peace  ?  shall  I  then  be  glad  of  these 
ways  I  now  walk  in?  (7)  The  choiceness  of  a  man's  spirit  strengthens  it  against 
the  impressions  that  sensitive  objects  use  to  leave  upon  soft  and  weak  spirits.  2. 
Thus  you  see  what  there  is  in  this  choice  spirit  that  carries  it  on  fully  after  the  Lord. 
Now  there  must  of  necessity  be  this,  or  else  this  full  following  of  the  Lord  will  never 
be  ;  nothing  else  will  do  it.  And  that — (1)  Because  the  ways  of  God  are  supernatural, 
and  therefore  there  must  be  something  in  the  spirit  of  a  man  whicli  is  supernatural 
that  must  reach  to  tbem  ;  this  which  is  supernatural  in  the  spirits  of  godly  men  we 
Bee  it  in  the  effects,  and  we  know  it  is  above  reason  and  all  natural  principles  what- 
soever. (2)  The  ways  of  God  are  not  only  above  nature  but  contrary  to  nature,  and 
therefore  there  must  needs  be  some  special  choiceness  of  spirit  to  carry  a  man  on 
in  them.  In  following  after  the  Lord,  all  natural  abilities  and  common  grace  will  do 
no  more  but  stop  the  stream  of  corrupt  nature  ;  they  cannot  so  overpower  it  as  to 
carry  the  soul  another  way;  but  the  work  of  grace  in  this  choiceness  of  spirit 
will  do  it.  (3)  The  stream  of  times  and  examples  of  men  are  exceeding  strong,  and 
it  is  not  a  little  matter  that  will  carry  on  the  soul  against  them.  (4)  There  are  so 
many  strong  alluring  temptations,  wherein  the  wiles  of  Satan  are  very  powerful  to 
draw  the  heart  away  from  God,  that  except  there  be  some  special  work  of  God's 
grace  to  give  wisdom  to  discern  the  deceits  of  sin  and  to  discern  the  danger  of  them, 
the  soul  most  certainly  could  never  hold  on  in  the  way  of  its  following  after  the 
Lord.  (5)  There  are  so  many  troubles,  oppositions,  that  it  meets  withal  in  this 
way,  that  most  certainly  would  drive  it  out  were  it  not  for  some  choice  work  of 
God's  grace  in  it ;  but  this  choiceness  of  spirit  will  carry  a  man  through  all  them. 
(6)  There  are  so  many  scandals  and  reproaches  that  rise  against  the  ways  of  God, 
that  if  a  man  hath  not  more  than  an  ordinary  spirit  he  most  certainly  will  be 
offended.  (7)  Yea,  God  many  times  hides  Himself  from  His  servants,  while  they 
are  following  after  Him,  and  this  of tentimes  proves  the  sorest  temptation  of  all,  and 
a  greater  discouragement  than  all  the  rest.     It  must  needs  be  something  extraordi- 


CHAP.  XIV.]  yUMBEBS.  163 

narv  that  preserves  a  spark  in  the  midst  of  waves,  that  preserves  a  candlelight 
in  the  midst  of  storms  and  tempests.  Use  1 :  Never  wonder  then,  or  be  offended, 
to  see  so  many  to  fall  off  from  God ;  few  men  have  choice  spirits.  Use  2  :  Hence 
the  world  is  mistaken,  who  judge  it  stubbornness  of  spirit  in  God's  servants  that 
will  go  on  in  the  ways  of  godliness  ;  they  are  a  kind  of  inflexible  people.  No,  it  is 
no  stubbornness,  it  is  the  choiceness  of  their  spirits  ;  you  judge  it  stubbornness 
because  you  do  not  know  the  principles  upon  which  they  go.  Use  3  :  Let  those  who 
have  this  choice  spirit  encourage  themselves  in  this,  that  surely  it  will  enable  them 
to  follow  God  fully;  let  them  know — (1)  That  though  they  be  weak,  if  their  spirits 
be  right,  if  of  the  right  kind,  they  shall  certainly  hold  out.  (2)  Therefore  is 
Christ  filled  with  all  fulness  of  all  grace,  that  out  of  His  fulness  thou  mayst  receive 
grace  for  grace.  Use  4  :  If  it  be  this  choiceness  of  spirit  that  is  the  only  thing 
that  will  fully  carry  after  the  Lord,  then  let  us  learn  to  look  to  our  spirits  :  "  Keep 
thy  heart  with  all  diligence,  for  out  of  it  come  the  issues  of  life."  But  wherein 
should  we  look  to  our  spirits?  (1)  Take  heed  to  your  judgments  ;  keep  your  judg- 
ments clear  for  God  and  His  truth,  as  it  is  said  (Isa.  xxxiii.  6).  (2)  Labour  to 
keep  conscience  clear,  take  bced  of  pollution  there,  take  heed  of  a  breach  in  thy 
spirit  there,  for  that  will  weaken  it  much.  (3)  Labour  to  keep  thy  heart  low  and 
humble  ;  when  the  flesh  swells  it  cannot  bear  any  hard  thing  upon  it ;  though  a 
member  grows  bigger  when  it  swells  yet  it  grows  weaker  ;  so  it  is  with  the  soul. 
(4)  Labour  to  keep  the  spirit  heavenly ;  mixture  of  dross  will  weaken  it.  (5) 
Labour  to  keep  thy  spirit  in  a  continual  trembling  frame,  abiding  in  the  fear  of  the 
Lord  all  the  day  long.  (Ibid.)  Foil oidng  fully  : — To  follow  God  fully  demands 
— 1.  Sincerity.  2.  Cheei-fulness.  8.  Heroism.  Many  temptations  and  obstacles 
to  be  overcome.  4.  Entireness.  No  compromise.  5.  Study.  We  cannot  follow 
without  imitating.  Use  cannot  imitate  without  knowing  the  character.  (Homilist.) 
Christian  heroism : — I.  True  Christian  heroism  aims  at  great  things.     II.  True 

SPIRITUAL  heroism  ENDURES  GREAT  TRIALS  IN  THE  PERFORMANCE  AND  ACHIEVEMENT  OF 
ITS  GREAT  ENDS.  III.  To  ALL  SUCH  HEROISM  FAITH  IS  ESSENTIAL.  IV.  TrUE  HEROISM 
IS     UNDER     THE    INSPIRATION    AND    POWER    OF     GREAT    MOTIVES.         (T.     Archer,    D.D.) 

Faithfulness  toicards  God  exemplified  and  rewarded : — I.  That  the  honest  servants 
OF  Jesus  Christ  must  distinguish  themselves  from  others  by  following  the 
Lord  fully.  1.  What  it  is  to  follow  the  Lord  fully.  (1)  It  is  to  follow  the  Lord 
only  as  our  great  Guide  and  Leader  (Heb.  xii.  2).  (2)  To  follow  the  Lord  fully  is 
to  follow  Him  universally  (Psa.  cxix.  6).  (3)  To  follow  the  Lord  fully  is  to  follow 
Him  uprightly.  A  hypocrite  does  but  walk  in  a  vain  show.  His  feet  only,  not  his 
heart,  do  follow  the  Lord.  (4)  Finally,  it  is  to  follow  the  Lord  resolutely,  as  Euth 
did  Naomi,  in  opposition  to  all  discouragements  and  impediments  in  the  way. 
There  is  the  river  of  evil  example  of  the  world,  but  they  must  strive  against  the 
stream  ;  there  are  corrupt  strong  lusts  of  the  heart,  but  they  must  cut  off  right 
hands  and  pluck  out  right  eyes ;  and  there  is  the  cross  that  will  be  laid  on  their 
backs,  which  they  must  go  through  with.  They  must  not  be  as  those  who  go  to 
sea  for  pleasure,  but  like  hardy  mariners  who  ride  out  the  storm.  2.  We  now  pro- 
ceed to  give  the  reasons  of  the  point.  (1)  Because  the  change  made  in  regeneration 
is  a  real  change  though  not  perfect.  Believers  are  God's  "workmanship,  created  in 
Christ  .Jesus  unto  good  works."  The  new  creature,  from  the  time  of  its  birth,  is 
perfect  in  its  parts  though  not  in  degrees.  (2)  In  closing  with  Christ  there  is  an 
universal  resignation.  They  give  themselves  up  wholly  to  the  Lord.  (3)  The  fruit 
of  the  Spirit  is  in  all  goodness,  and  righteousness,  and  truth  (Eph.  v.  9).  When 
there  is  not  something  of  all  goodness,  there  the  Spirit  dwelleth  not.  II.  That 
they  who  would  follow  the  Lord  fully  must  have  another  spirit,  another  than 
the  spirit  op  the  world,  another  than  their  own  spirit  naturally  is.  1.  a  noble 
elevated  spirit,  aiming  at  high  things,  and  is  not  satisfied  with  these  with  which 
the  common  herd  of  mankind  are  satisfied.  Thus  Caleb  aimed  at  Canaan  (chap, 
xiii.  30),  while  the  rest  were  for  Egypt  again  (chap.  xiv.  4).  Such  another  spirit 
have  the  saints  (Phil.  iii.  14).  2.  A  spirit  of  faith  (2  Cor.  iv.  13).  3.  A  spirit  of 
holy  courage  and  resolution  (chap.  xiv.  9).  III.  That  those  who,  by  following  the 
Lord  fully  in  the  time  of  general  declining,  distinguish  themselves,  God  will 

distinguish  TFIEM  FROM  OTHEFS  BY  SPECIAL  MARKS  OF  FAVOUR  IN  THE  THIE  OF  GENERAL 

CALAMITY.  We  are  then — 1.  To  show  how  those  must  distinguish  themselves  from 
others  in  the  time  of  general  declining,  who  would  have  the  Lord  to  distinguish 
them  from  others  in  time  of  general  calamity.  Here  we  observe — (1)  That  they 
must  be  best  when  others  are  worst  (Gen.  vi.  9).  (2)  That  they  must  cleave  to 
God,  especially  in  that  article  in  which  others  are  leaving  Him,  as  in  Caleb's  case; 


164  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

they  must  be  careful  that  they  be  not  led  away  with  the  sins  of  the  time,  that  they 
do  not  enter  into  the  general  conspiracy  of  the  generation  against  the  Lord  and  His 
way,  whether  it  be  against  truth  or  holiness.  (3)  That  they  must  witness  against 
every  declining,  according  to  their  stations,  and  as  they  have  access,  for  the  exonera- 
tion of  their  own  consciences  and  the  honour  of  God.  (4)  That  they  must  be 
mourners  over  the  sins  of  others,  lamenting  them  before  the  Lord ;  sighing  for  all 
the  aboiuinations  which  are  done  in  the  midst  of  the  land  (Ezek.  ix.  4).  Let  us 
now — 2.  Point  out  the  marks  of  favour  by  which,  in  times  of  general  calamity,  God 
useth  to  distinguish  such.  There  is — (1)  Liberal  furniture  for  duty,  in  a  large 
communication  of  the  Spirit,  when  the  Spirit  is  withdrawn  from  others  (Matt.  x. 
19).  (2)  Intimation  of  His  special  love  to  their  souls.  Thus  had  Caleb  in  the  text, 
the  saints  of  God  have  often  golden  days  in  the  dregs  of  time  upon  this  account. 
{T.  Boston,  D.D.)  Of  folloiving  the  Lord  fully  : — I.  What  we  are  to  understand 
by  "  following  the  Lord  fully."  1.  That  we  acknowledge  no  other  Lord  besides 
Him.  2.  That  we  obey  Him  without  reserve.  3.  That  we  follow  Him  openly.  4. 
That  we  cleave  to  Him  steadfastly  when  others  forsake  Him,  and  when  exposed  by 
His  service  to  the  world's  hatred.  II.  Press  the  duty  by  some  motives  and  akgd- 
MENTS.  1.  If  we  would  be  honest  men  and  Christians  indeed,  we  must  "  follow  the 
Lord  fully."  So  that  it  is  for  our  own  honour.  2.  It  is  necessary  to  secure  inward 
peace.  3.  Our  Lord  has  in  some  respects  entrusted  us  with  His  glory.  4.  The  love 
of  our  neighbour  is  another  motive.  5.  Those  who  "  follow  the  Lord  fully  "  shall 
possess  the  good  land  of  promise,  of  which  Canaan  was  only  a  type.  (T.  Han- 
nam.)  The  thorough  Oiristiaii  :~To  follow  Christ  "  fully  "  means  resolute,  un- 
flinching obedience  to  all  of  Christ's  commandments.  It  is  the  carrying  out  of 
religion  to  the  utmost  detail  of  Christian  duty.  Such  a  Christian  never  asks  to 
commute  with  his  Divine  Master  as  to  hard  work  ;  he  never  strikes  for  an  eight 
hours'  system  of  labour  or  higher  wages.  He  is  not  all  the  time  coming  up  before 
that  bleeding,  self-sacrificing  Saviour  and  whimpering,  "  Master,  I  pray  thee,  have 
me  excused."  He  never  interprets  the  Bible  in  a  latitudinarian  sense,  never  reads 
it  in  a  lax,  ultra-liberal  light ;  and  if  there  is  a  right  side  to  be  found  to  the  ethical 
questions  of  the  hour,  his  first  question  is,  "  Wliat  is  right  ?  What  will  please 
Jesus?"  He  aims  to  be  thorough  in  small  things,  and  he  loves  the  wholesome 
severities  of  duty.  Now,  there  is  a  religion  nowadays  that  runs  very  rapidly  on 
the  down  grades,  and  goes  fast  on  the  descending  grades,  but  it  never  climbs.  Com- 
mend me  to  the  loyal,  uncompromising,  sturdy  Christian  that  bears  a  pain,  a  pinch, 
or  a  penalty;  a  scowl  or  a  scoff  ;  a  religion  that  can  afford  to  get  rich,  and  yet  can 
be  humble  ;  that  can  afford  to  go  into  high  society,  and  yet  carry  Christ  there  ; 
to  a  religion  that  "  follows  the  Lamb  whithersoever  He  goeth."  In  our  day  the  test 
is  not  to  go  to  Smithfield.  Our  trial  is  to  follow  Christ  in  the  warm,  relaxing 
atmosphere  of  quiet  and  external  prosperity,  and  not  to  be  enervated  thereby.  It 
is  very  easy  to  be  a  Christian  sometimes ;  or  rather,  for  a  Christian  to  be  very  warm 
and  glowing  sometimes.  For  instance,  when  a  prayer-meeting  is  crowded  with 
fervent  hearts,  and  the  atmosphere  is  alive  with  enthusiasm,  how  easy  is  it  then  to 
catch  fire,  and  to  glow,  and  to  sing  and  pray.  It  was  very  easy  for  Caleb  to  exer- 
cise faith  when  he  was  in  the  valley  of  Eshcol  picking  grapes ;  but  to  keep  up 
his  faith  in  face  of  the  contagious  cowardice  and  treason  of  the  camp,  that 
■was  another  thing.  To  hold  out  with  his  faith  during  forty  long  and  wearisome 
years  of  marching,  that  demanded  and  developed  the  most  resolute  principle  of  his 
God-loving  heart.  To  serve  God  faithfully  in  an  irreligious  family,  or  in  a 
■counting-house  or  shop  where  two-thirds  of  them  are  scoffers,  and  in  polite  fashion- 
able life,  to  serve  Christ  there  proves  the  mettle  of  your  religion.  It  is  one  thing  to 
follow  Christ  when  everything  helps  you  ;  it  is  quite  another  thing  to  follow  Christ 
wlien  everything  hinders  you.  And  to  follow  Christ  fully  means  to  keep  following 
Him  in  every  place,  and  under  every  circumstance,  against  the  current.  I  remem- 
ber when  treason  first  broke  out  in  my  own  beloved  country,  it  went  through  our 
army  and  navy,  and  sifted  it.  We  soon  found  out  who  would  follow  the  old  flag  of 
freedom  to  the  death,  and  who  would  desert  it.  I  could  point  to  a  Christian  mer- 
chant who  gives  so  largely  and  liberally  that  the  amounts  seem  almost  incredible, 
and  I  happen  to  know  that  that  man  begins  his  every  day  with  an  hour  with  Jesus, 
on  his  knees,  and  reading  his  Bible  ;  he  breaks  away  from  his  business  at  noon  for 
the  noon-day  prayer-meeting.  Such  a  man  as  that  follows  Christ  fully,  and  yet  he 
might  excuse  himself  by  the  very  vastness  of  his  traffic  and  the  pressing  nature  of 
his  immense  business.  Now  when  I  find  such  a  man  hue  and  there  in  our 
churches,  I  feel  that  each  one  of  these  is  a  Caleb  to  stir  and  stimulate  others  to 


CHAP,  siv.]  NUMBERS.  1G5 

imitation.  Sometime  ago,  when  in  a  mine,  looking  through  its  dark  corridors,  I 
every  now  and  then  saw  the  glimmer  of  a  moving  lamp,  and  I  could  track  it  all 
through  the  mine.  The  reason  was  that  the  miner  carried  it  on  his  hat — it  was  a 
part  of  himself,  and  it  showed  where  he  .,ent.  I  said,  would  that  in  this  dark  world 
every  miner  of  the  Master  carried  his  lamp  to  show  where  he  walks.  Such  people 
are  Christions  everywhere — before  their  own  children,  at  their  own  fireside,  and  in 
their  own  homes.  In  their  commercial  transactions  they  buy  and  sell  by  the 
golden  rule,  and  measure  their  goods  with  a  Christian  yardstick.  Wherever  they 
can  honour  God,  or  set  a  pure  example,  and  save  a  sinner  by  living  out  Christ, 
they  are  ready  to  do  it.  In  short,  they  follow  Christ  fully,  and  heartily,  and  faith- 
fully, looking  to  the  inheritance  of  the  reward.  And  the  reason  of  this  is  the 
same  reason  that  Caleb  had:  for  we  are  told  that  Caleb  had  "another  spirit." 
Theirs  is  another  spirit  from  the  worldUng,  and  another  spirit  from  the  gold  hunter, 
the  devotee  of  fashion,  the  carnally-minded.  Their  spirit  is  from  above,  the  fruit 
of  conversion  ;  it  is  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Ghost.  Loving  Christ,  they  love  to 
follow  Him  ;  fearing  God  rather  than  man,  they  so  live  as  to  please  God,  who  trieth 
the  heart.  (T.  L.  Cmjler,  D.D.)  Christian  thoroughness  : — What  we  want  is  not 
to  look  Christians,  or  to  pretend  Christians,  or  to  profess  Christians,  but  to  be  Chris- 
tians. You  need  not  then  so  carefully  guard  yourself ;  you  need  not  be  on  the 
ceaseless  watch  what  you  do.  Take  an  anagram,  read  it  from  the  right  or  from  the 
left,  or  from  the  top  or  from  the  bottom,  it  reads  the  same  thing.  Take  a  Chris- 
tian, look  at  him  at  one  angle,  or  look  at  another  angle  ;  look  at  him  in  any  light 
or  in  any  direction,  and  he  is  a  Christian  still.  The  great  secret  of  getting  rid  of  a 
vast  amount  of  trouble  and  inconvenience  is  being  a  Christian  ;  and  when  you  are 
a  Christian  your  eye  will  be  single,  youF  body  will  be  full  of  light,  and  all  influences 
sanctified  and  blessed  by  the  Holy  Spirit  of  God,  will  be  sanctifying  and  will  bless 
all  that  are  connected  with   you.  Difficult  ministry  the   reward   of  thorough 

service  ; — When  the  Spartan  king  advanced  against  the  enemy  he  had  always  some 
one  with  him  that  had  been  crowned  in  the  public  games  of  Greece.  And  they  tell 
us  that  a  Lacedaemonian,  when  large  sums  were  offered  him  on  condition  that  he 
would  not  enter  the  Olympic  lists,  refused.  Having  with  much  difficulty  thrown  his 
antagonist  in  wrestling,  one  put  this  question  to  him,  "  Spartan,  what  will  you  get 
by  this  victory  ?  "  He  answered  with  a  smile,  "  I  shall  have  the  honour  to  fight 
foremost  in  the  ranks  of  my  prince."  The  honour  which  appertains  to  office  in  the 
Church  of  God  lies  mainly  in  this — that  the  man  who  is  set  apart  for  such  service  has 
the  privilege  of  being  first  in  holiness  of  example,  abundance  of  liberality,  patience 
of  long-suffering,  zeal  in  effort  and  self-sacrifice  in  service.  Thou  gracious  King  of 
kings,  if  Thou  hast  made  me  a  minister  in  Thy  Church,  enable  me  to  be  foremost 
in  every  good  word  and  work,  shunning  no  sacrifice  and  shrinking  from  no  suffer- 
ing.    {C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Ver.  25.  The  wilderness  by  the  way  of  the  Eed  Sea. — The  rule  of  the  road : — 
Every  traveller  has  heard  of  the  "  rule  of  the  road,"  which  must  be  obeyed  in  order 
to  avoid  accidents.  There  are  certain  rules  of  the  road  also  to  be  observed  by  the 
pilgrim  band  on  our  journey  to  the  Eternal  City.  1.  First  of  all,  there  is  only  one 
road  for  Christ's  people  to  walk  in.  Walk  in  the  old  path,  the  King's  highway,  the 
way  of  God's  commandments.  And  this  road  of  ours  is  by  the  way  of  the  Eed  Sea 
— the  Red  Sea  of  Christ's  most  precious  blood  !  We  must  always  keep  in  sight  of 
that.  2.  Here  is  another  rule  of  the  road ;  do  the  duty  which  is  nearest  to  you. 
There  is  an  old  English  parsonage  somewhere  by  the  sea  which  has  this  sentence 
carved  over  its  porch,  "  Do  the  next  thing."  Let  it  be  our  motto.  Some  of  us  do 
nothing,  because  we  do  not  know  where  to  begin ;  we  are  thinking  of  next  week, 
when  to-day's  duty  stands  before  us.  Each  day  brings  its  own  work  ;  let  us  try  to 
do  it  faithfully,  prayerfully,  cheerfully,  trustingly,  and  then  we  may  be  s^ure  we  are 
going  forward  in  the  right  way.  3.  Another  rule  of  the  road  is :  be  brave,  "  only 
be  strong  and  very  courageous."  Be  brave  enough  to  do  what  is  right,  no  matter 
at  what  cost.  The  world  will  laugh  at  you,  sneer  at  you,  misjudge  you.  "  Trust  in 
God  and  do  the  right."  4.  Here  is  another  rule  of  the  road :  be  neighbourly. 
Never  forget  that  you  belong  to  one  family,  one  army  on  the  march — the  Holy 
Catholic  Church.  Naturalists  tell  us  that  the  pine  tree  is  one  of  the  most  inhospit- 
able, just  as  the  oak  is  the  most  kindly,  of  trees.  Beneath  the  shadow  of  the  pine 
tree  all  is  bare  and  desolate.  No  primrose  opens  its  bright  eyes  there,  no  wild  rose 
clings,  no  woodbine  blossoms.  There  are  some  people  like  the  inhospitable  pine 
tree,  they  live  only  for  themselves,  and  never  offer  help,  or  comfort,  or  shelter  to 


ICG  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xiv. 

another.  Let  us  try  by  God's  grace  to  make  our  path  of  life  bright  for  others,  not 
sad  and  desolate,  like  the  pine  wood.  5.  Yet  another  rule  of  the  road :  keep  in  the 
sunshine.  On  the  journey  through  Ufe  there  is  always  a  sunny  side  for  the 
Christian.  A  certain  king  once  asked  a  famous  general  if  he  had  seen  the  eclipse 
of  the  sun,  and  the  Duke  of  Alva  answered  that  he  had  too  much  to  do  on  earth  to 
have  time  to  look  up  to  heaven.  Ah !  if  any  of  us  are  melancholy,  discontented,  it  is 
because  we  are  looking  too  much  at  the  earth,  and  not  lifting  up  our  eyes  to  heaven. 
I  say  to  you,  come  out  of  the  gloom  of  your  own  thoughts  into  the  sunshine,  and 
thank  God — "  Praise  the  Lord,  0  my  soul,  and  forget  not  all  His  benefits."  6.  One 
last  rule  of  the  road  now :  remember  the  road  leads  home.  In  all  earthly  journeys, 
however  long  and  tiring,  this  thought  always  strengthens  the  traveller — I  shall  soon 
be  home.  Home,  even  an  earthly  home,  is  the  central  spot  of  every  man's  life. 
{H.  J.  Wilmot-Buxton,  M.A.) 

Vers.  26-29.  I  have  heard  the  murmiirings. — Base  murmuring: — Murmuring  ia 
not  a  simple  sin,  but  involves — 1.  Presumption.     2.  Ingratitude.     3.  Eebellion. 

I.    MUKMURING    WITHOUT  ANT   CAUSE.       II.    MuEMURING  AGAINST    THE    BEST    BeINO.       1. 

Think  who  and  what  He  is — the  Supremely  Wise  and  Good,  cfcc.  2.  Think  of  what 
He  had  done  for  the  Israelites,  and  what  He  has  done  for  us — redeemed,  guarded, 
sustained,  &c.  3.  Thiuk  of  what  He  had  promised  to  them,  and  what  He  has 
promised  to  us.  How  base  to  murmur  against  our  great  Benefactor  1  III.  Mur- 
muring OF  long  CONTINUANCE.  There  are  many  to-day  who  are  habitual  grumblers; 
murmuring  is  not  occasional.  How  great  is  their  sin  I  how  great,  also,  is  the 
patience  of  God  with  them  !  IV.  Murmurings  known  to  God.  God  hears  every 
bitter  complaint ;  He  perceives  every  unthankful  and  rebellious  mood.  V.  Mur- 
muring PUNISHED  BY  GoD.  Thcse  Israelite  murmurers  were  excluded  from  the 
Promised  Land.  The  murmurer  excludes  himself  from  the  Canaan  of  joy,  and 
peace,  and  contentment.  Murmuring  is  a  seK-punishing  sin.  God  has  made  it  so. 
(W.  Jones.)  Your  carcases  shall  fall  in  this  wilderness. — The  sentence  of  God 
%ipon  the  sinful  people : — I.  The  sentence  was  conspicuously  just.  Its  justice  is 
manifest.  1.  In  the  correspondence  between  the  nature  of  the  sin  and  the  nature  of 
the  punishment.  2.  In  the  correspondence  between  the  duration  of  the  unbelieving 
exploration  and  the  duration  of  the  punishment.  8.  In  the  correspondence  between 
the  different  degrees  of  guilt  and  the  different  severities  of  punishment.     II.  The 

SENTENCE    WAS    UTTERLY   IRREVERSIBLE.       III.    ThE    SENTENCE    CAUSED    GREAT     SORROW. 

1.  Their  sorrow  had  a  real  and  suflicient  cause.  2.  Their  sorrow  was  not  that  of 
repentance,  but  of  selfishness.     {Ihid.) 

Vers.  31.  Your  little  ones.  .  .  .  will  I  bring  In. — The  duty  of  parents  to  their 
children: — I.  I  propose  to  extract  from  our  text  some  permanent  and  boot  prin- 
ciples  WITH   RESPECT   TO   THE   RELATIONS   BETWEEN  PARENTS  AND  CHILDREN,  THAT  GoD 

WOULD  HAVE  US  PAY  SPECIAL  HEED  TO ;  and  then  from  these  root  principles  I  shall 
endeavour  to  draw  a  few  practical  instructions  for  our  conduct  with  our  children 
at  home.  1.  Our  first  thought  is — how  completely  Almighty  God  recognises  the 
sense  of  preciousness  which  all  parents  with  a  spark  of  heart  in  them  attach  to 
their  children,  their  little  children  especially ;  and  how  God  turns  the  instinct  of 
affection  in  parents  to  their  children  to  the  parents'  condemnation,  if  they  will 
not  use  their  affection  in  the  direction  of  securing  eternal  life  for  those  whom  they 
love.  2.  That  children  in  the  providence  of  God,  and  according  to  the  rules  of 
God's  government,  do,  in  a  certain  degree,  share  their  parents'  privileges,  suffer 
their  parents'  penalties,  nay,  even  sin  with  their  parents'  sin.  3.  That  although, 
in  a  certain  degree,  the  children  share  the  privileges,  the  penalty,  and  the  sin  of 
their  parents,  yet  there  is  mercy,  ay,  and  there  is  justice  also.  4.  That  the  great 
cause  why  the  children  of  Israel  refused  to  go  up  to  the  land  of  Canaan  was  a  want 
of  faith.  So  the  gi'eat  reason  why  so-called  Christian  parents  do  not  take  the 
trouble  to  prepare  their  children  for  eternity  is  that  their  own  personal  belief  about 
the  things  of  eternity  is  not  as  strong  as  it  ought  to  be.  II.  Now  let  me  put  these 
principles  into  a  practic.\l  shape  for  our  instruction.  What  is  the  way  in 
which  our  great  God  and  Father,  who  has  put  us  into  the  responsible  and  blessed 
position  of  parents  towards  children  whom  we  love,  would  have  us  fulfil  that  re- 
sponsibility ?  First  of  all.  He  would  have  us  fulfil  it  in  careful,  and  exact,  and 
regular  instruction  concerning  the  things  of  God.  Do  not  be  content  to  leave  this 
duty  to  others,  but  ascertain  for  yourselves  what  your  children  are  actually  learning 


CHAP.  XIV.]  NUMBERS.  167 

about  their  Lord  and  Saviour,  how  far  they  feel  it  and  know  it.  And  then  about 
example.  It  is  a  very  good  thing  to  teach  your  children  out  of  the  Word  of  God ; 
but  it  is  as  good  to  teach  them  in  your  own  daily  life  and  conversation.  There  is 
one  thing  more — prayer.     (Bp.  Thorold.) 

Vers.  33,  34.  Each  day  for  a  year,  shall  ye  bear  your  iniquities. — God  often 
punishes  siii  proportion ahhj  : — God  oftentimes  punisheth  in  proportion,  so  that  the 
judgment  is  answerable  to  the  sin.  Of  what  kind  the  sin  is,  of  the  same  kind  is  the 
punishment  (Gen.  xlii.  21).  God  sent  upon  Sodom  a  punishment  like  to  the  nature 
of  their  sin  ;  they  burned  in  unclean  and  unnatural  lust  one  toward  another,  and 
the  Lord  sent  fire  from  heaven  to  burn  them  up.  1.  God  hath  many  ways  to 
punish  sin,  yet  it  pleaseth  Him  to  send  His  punishments  according  to  our  sins, 
thereby  to  strike  us  with  inward  remorse  and  to  work  a  deeper  impression  in  the 
conscience.  For  when  He  punisheth  after  this  manner  rather  than  after  any  other, 
the  judgment  itself  doth  more  effectually  force  the  sufferer  to  acknowledge  God's 
justice  in  plaguing  of  Him  in  that  sort.  2.  This  maketh  men  not  only  to  justify 
God,  whose  judgments  are  always  just,  but  maketh  them  also  to  judge  themselves, 
and  thereby  they  oftentimes  prevent  the  more  heavy  judgments  of  God.  3.  God 
hath  given  a  law,  and  by  the  law  He  requireth  a  proportionable  punishment  for  sin 
(Lev.  xxiv.  19).  This  course  will  the  Lord  take  (who  is  the  supreme  Magistrate)  so 
often  as  it  pleaseth  Him,  albeit  He  do  not  tie  Himself  to  that  law.  Uses :  1.  This 
serveth  to  warrant  us  that  we  may  lawfully  expect  judgment  from  God  in  propor- 
tion upon  men  for  their  sins.  For  the  which  hath  been,  may  be  ;  and  that  which 
the  Lord  hath  done.  He  will  certainly  do  it  again,  so  that  we  may  promise  and 
persuade  ourselves  that  they  shall  in  the  end  be  paid  home  to  the  fuU,  with  due 
proportion  of  punishment  according  to  their  sins.  2.  Whensoever  we  remain  under 
any  judgment  of  God's  hand,  let  us  labour  for  spiritual  wisdom,  that  we  may  discern 
what  the  sin  is  which  is  the  cause  thereof.  For  by  the  manner  of  the  judgment 
we  may  oftentimes  find  out  the  manner  of  our  sin.  This  way  we  shall  make  the 
punishment  profitable  unto  us,  if  we  take  it  and  lay  it  unto  the  sin,  as  it  were  a 
salve  upon  the  sore.  It  will  work  in  us  a  care  to  "  judge  ourselves,  that  we  be  not 
judged  of  the  Lord  "  (1  Cor.  xi.  31,  32).  3.  As  God  dealeth  with  men  in  regard  to 
their  sins,  so  He  dealeth  oftentimes  with  His  children  in  good  things  and  for  good 
things.  He  will  reward  according  to  our  deeds,  blessing  with  the  same  blessing, 
and  mercy  with  the  same  mercy  (2  Tim.  i.  18).     (TF.  Attersoll.) 

Vers.  40-45.  But  they  presumed  to  go  up. — A  presumptuous  enterprise  and  its 
disastrous  terminatiun : — In  these  verses  we  have  an  illustration  of — 1.  The  sad 
perversity  of  sinful  human  nature.  2.  The  confession  of  sin,  and  persistence  in 
sin.  3.  The  great  difficulty  of  walking  humbly  and  patiently  in  the  path  which 
our  sin  has  rendered  necessary  for  us.  I.  The  presumptuous  enterprise.  1.  In 
opposition  to  the  command  of  the  Lord.  2.  Despite  the  remonstrance  of  Moses. 
3.  Without  the  symbol  of  the  Divine  Presence  and  the  presence  of  the  Divinely- 
appointed  leader.  II.  The  disastrous  termination  of  this  presumptuous  enter- 
prise. 1.  Disgraceful  defeat.  2.  Sore  slaughter.  3.  Bitter  sorrow.  Conclusion — 
From  the  whole  let  us  learn  the  sin  and  the  folly  of  entering  upon  any  enterprises, 
and  especially  difficult  ones,  in  our  own  strength.  "  Apart  from  Me,"  said  Christ, 
"  ye  can  do  nothing."  This  is  applicable  to — 1.  Spiritual  life  in  its  origin  and 
progress.  The  attempt  in  our  own  strength  to  lead  a  religious,  godly  life,  is  sure 
to  end  in  sad  disappointment  and  utter  failure.  2.  Spiritual  conflict.  Unless  we 
take  to  ourselves  "  the  whole  armour  of  God,"  our  spiritual  foes  will  be  too  many 
nnd  too  mighty  for  us.  We  can  conquer  only  througli  Christ.  3.  Spiritual  service. 
Our  efforts  to  benefit  our  fellow-men  will  succeed  only  as  they  are  made  in  reliance 
upon  the  blessing  of  God.  We  can  bless  others  only  as  He  blesses  us  (comp. 
1  Cor.  iii.  5-7).  [W.  Jones.)  Unauthorised  enterprises  : — The  man  who  forsakes 
God's  commandments  forsakes  his  own  happiness.  1.  The  importance  of  improv- 
ing present  opportunities.  You  have  a  throne  of  grace  to  go  to  ;  go  there  to-day, 
lest  by  delay  your  anxiety,  though  earnest,  should  be  as  unavailing  as  was  that  of 
Israel  to  go  to  Canaan,  and  you  are  compelled  to  say  with  the  prophet  (Jer.  viii. 
20).  2.  The  necessity  of  God's  blessing  on  all  our  undertakings.  We  do  not  say 
that  man,  without  God's  blessing,  never  gets  what  he  wants ;  he  often  does,  but 
not  what  is  good  for  him  ;  all  things  work  together  for  good  only  to  those  who  have 
this  blessing.  And  further,  those  undertakings  which,  with  the  Divine  blessing, 
are  easy,  without  it  are  impossible.     3.  The  connection  which  subsists  between 


168  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

transgression  and  sorrow.  Sorrow  is  of  two  kinds ;  first,  godly  sorrow,  which 
worketh  repentance  unto  salvation,  not  to  be  repented  of — such  was  that  of  Peter  ; 
and,  secondly,  the  sorrow  of  unavailing  regret,  when  the  day  of  recovery  has  passed 
away.  It  was  this  unavailing  sorrow  that  Israel  felt  when  the  Lord  said,  "Thou 
shalt  not  enter  into  My  rest."  In  a  spirit  of  rebellion  they  resolve,  "  We  will  go 
up  "  ;  but  they  went  without  the  Lord,  and  they  were  driven  back.  4.  The  da'  ger 
that  results  from  an  unbelieving  heart !  5.  We  see  from  this  passage  the  holiness 
of  that  God  with  whom  we  have  to  do.  While  every  provision  is  made  for  the 
returning  penitent,  the  impenitent  transgressor  will  certainly  be  destroyed.  God 
never  tolerates  sin ;  no,  not  even  in  His  own  people.  6.  Finally,  we  should  learn 
from  this  subject  our  need  of  special  sanctifying  grace ;  for  no  outward  advantages 
can  secure  personal  holiness.  {George  Breay,  B.A.)  Religious  explanation  of 
failure  : — "  Because  ye  are  turned  away  from  the  Lord,  therefore  the  Lord  will  not 
be  with  you."  Even  that  is  a  word  of  comfort.  Tlie  comfort  is  not  far  to  fetch, 
even  from  the  desert  of  this  stern  fact.  The  comfort  is  found  in  the  fact  that  the 
Lord  will  be  with  those  who  have  not  turned  away  from  Him.  The  law  operates  in 
two  opposite  ways.  Law  is  love,  when  rightly  seized  and  applied  ;  and  love  is  law, 
having  all  the  pillars  of  its  security  and  all  the  dignity  of  its  righteousness  to 
support  it  in  all  the  transitions  of  its  experience.  The  reason  why  we  fail  is  thtit 
God  has  gone  from  us.  Putting  the  case  so,  we  put  it  wrongly.  God  has  not  gone 
from  us  ;  we  have  gone  from  God.  The  Church  is  nothing  without  its  godliness  ; 
it  is  less  than  nothmg :  it  is  not  only  the  negation  of  strength,  it  is  the  utter  and 
most  helpless  weakness.  Isi'ael  was  the  Church  in  the  wilderness,  and  Israel  was 
nothing  without  its  God.  The  number  might  be  six  hundred  thousand  fighting 
men,  and  they  would  go  down  like  a  dry  wooden  fence  before  a  raging  fire,  if  the 
Lord  was  not  in  the  midst.  They  were  not  men  without  Him.  The  Church  lives, 
moves,  and  has  its  being  in  God — not  in  some  high  or  deep  metaphysical  sense 
only,  but  in  the  plain  and  obvious  sense  of  the  terms :  that  it  has  no  being  or  exis- 
tence outside  God.  When  it  foi'gets  to  pray,  it  loses  the  art  of  war ;  when  the 
Church  forgets  to  put  on  the  beautiful  garments  of  holiness,  though  it  be  made  up 
of  a  thousand  Samsons,  it  cannot  strike  one  fatal  blow  at  the  enemy.  Count  the 
Church  by  the  volume  of  its  prayer ;  register  the  strength  of  the  Church  by  the 
purity  and  completeness  of  its  consecration.  If  you  number  the  Church  in  millions, 
and  tell  not  what  it  is  at  the  altar  and  at  the  cross,  you  have  returned  the  census 
of  a  cemetery,  not  the  statistics  of  a  living,  mighty,  invincible  host.  Genius  is 
nothing,  learning  is  nothing,  organisation  is  a  sarcasm  and  an  irony — apart  from 
that  which  gives  every  one  of  them  value  and  force — the  praying  heart,  the  trustful 
spirit.    The  Church  conquers  by  holiness.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 


CHAPTEE  XV. 

Veb.  25.  Sin-ofiferlng  ...  for  their  ignorance. — Pardon  of  unknmcn  sins  through 
Christ : — 1.  Because  of  our  ignorance  we  are  not  fully  aware  of  our  sins  of  igno- 
rance. Yet  they  are  many,  in  the  form  both  of  commission  and  omission.  We 
may  be  doing  in  all  sincerity,  as  a  service  to  God,  that  which  He  has  not  com- 
manded and  can  nev«a-  accept.  2.  The  Lord  knows  these  sins  of  ignorance  every 
one.  This  may  well  alarm  us,  since  in  justice  He  will  require  these  trespasses  at 
our  hand  ;  but,  again,  faith  spies  comfort  in  this  fact,  for  the  Lord  will  see  to  it 
that  stains  unseen  by  us  shall  yet  be  washed  away.  He  sees  the  sin  that  He  may 
cease  to  see  it  by  casting  it  behind  His  back.  3.  Our  great  comfort  is  that  Jesus, 
the  true  Priest,  has  made  atonement  for  all  the  congregation  of  Israel.  That  atone- 
ment secures  the  pardon  of  unknown  sins.  His  precious  blood  cleanses  us  from  all 
sin.     (C.  H.  Spurgeon.) 

Vers.  30,  31.  The  soul  that  doeth  aught  presumptuously. — The  definition  and 
danger  of  pr-sur)iptnoas  sins : — I.  The  definition.  We  take,  first,  the  case  of  an 
individual  who  sins  against  the  positive  remonstrances  of  his  conscience  ;  and  we 
say  that  he  sins  presumptuously.  We  have  all,  at  one  time  or  another,  withstood 
the  clearest  and  most  decisive  suggestions  of  conscience.  We  have  all  proved  the 
pjwer  of  inclination,  when  it  has  come  up  in  a  pleasing  shape,  to  bear  down  a  con- 


CHAP.  XV.]  NUMBERS.  169 

sciousness  of  what  is  right,  whether  by  an  invention  of  some  ingenious  subterfuge, 
or  by  some  weapons  of  unblushing  hardihood.  We  could  give  no  better  definition 
of  conscience  than  that  it  is  evidently  the  vicegerent  of  Deity.  And  what  then  is 
presumption?  Where  shall  it  be  found,  if  we  describe  not  as  presumptuous  the 
conduct  of  the  man  who  walks  one  way  whilst  the  voice  of  the  internal  monitor 
summons  him  to  walk  another  ?  Let  us  advance  to  other  instances.  The  guilt  of  a 
sin  is  in  a  great  degree  to  be  estimated  by  the  strength  of  the  temptation  which 
solicits  its  performance.  But  if  you  take  the  generality  of  men,  you  will  find  they 
scarcely  need  any  temptation  at  all  to  induce  them  to  sin.  They  may  be  said  to 
give  the  devil  no  trouble,  but  to  strike  their  colours  without  firing  a  shot :  a  breath 
of  air  will  make  them  swerve  from  allegiance.  There  must  be  presumjition,  and 
that  too  of  an  enormity  not  easily  measured,  in  conduct  which  is  marked  on  one 
side  with  such  contempt  of  God  that  men  will  obey  His  despisers  even  without 
strong  inducement ;  and  on  the  other,  such  neglect  of  the  soul,  that  they  surrender 
it  without  requiring  anything  in  exchange.  Now  let  us  glance  at  the  third  sort  of 
presumptuous  sins.  If  I  wantonly  expose  myself  to  temptation,  then,  though  I 
may  afterwards  struggle  hard  before  I  yield,  I  ;-hall  sin  presumptuously.  It  were 
better  to  see  Christians — especially  young  ones — so  distrustful  of  themselves  that 
they  might  pass  for  timid,  than  so  overweening  of  their  own  strength  as  to  thrust 
themselves  into  danger.  Take  a  still  more  general  case — where  a  man  goes  on 
sinning,  calculating  either  that  it  will  be  time  enough  by  and  by  to  repent,  or  that 
God  will  prove  at  last  too  merciful  to  execute  His  threatenings — most  assuredly  that 
man  sins  presumptuously.  If  he  reckon  on  uncovenanted  mercies,  what  is  this  but 
presumption?  II.  But  wherein,  yoo  will  now  ask,  lies  the  pecoliar  gdilt 
AND  DANGER  OP  PRESUMPTUOUS  SINS  ?  Why  should  David  pray  so  earnestly  to  be 
kept  from  them  ?  Why  should  our  text  be  so  emphatic  in  its  condemnation  ?  We 
will  just  take  in  succession  several  cases  of  presumptuous  sins,  and  endeavour  to 
answer  the  question  in  each.  If,  in  the  first  place,  it  be  sinnins  presumptuously  to 
sin  against  conscience  and  conviction,  there  must  be  special  guilt  when  a  man  does 
a  thing  in  spite  of  the  warnings  of  the  delegate  of  God ;  he  strips  himself  of  every 
excuse  of  ignorance  or  inadvertence  ;  and  hence  a  special  guilt.  But  conscience 
also  will  grow  less  sensitive,  in  proportion  as  it  be  less  heeded.  If,  again,  it  be 
sinning  presumptuously  to  sin  on  slight  temptation,  surely  there  must  be  peculiar 
guilt,  inasmuch  as  there  must  be  a  readiness,  nay,  even  an  eagerness,  to  fail  in 
spiritual  matters.  He  is  indeed  guilty  who  is  flung  in  wrestling  with  a  giant,  for- 
asmuch as  God  is  ready  to  give  strength  in  proportion  to  the  opponent ;  but  what 
shall  we  say  of  him  who  is  flung  in  wrestling  with  a  dwarf  ?  Then  is  there  not 
peculiar  danger  and  peculiar  guilt  in  sinning  on  slight  temptation,  inasmuch  as  a 
man  grows  confirmed  in  habits  of  sin  ?  For  the  moment  sin  becomes  habitual,  the 
breaking  loose  from  it  becomes  miraculous.  If  you  take  our  third  class  of  pre- 
sumptuous sins — sins,  the  result  of  temptation  that  we  have  ourselves  sought,  or  at 
least  not  avoided,  who  sees  not  the  guilt,  who  perceives  not  the  danger  ?  Christ 
would  not  throw  Himself  from  the  pinnacle  of  the  temple,  because  it  was  unlawful 
to  tempt  the  Lord.  Yet  we  do  that  from  which  the  Mediator  indignantly  recoiled, 
wheu  we  enter  into  scenes,  or  mingle  with  companies  which  we  know  likely  to 
minister  incentives  to  passions,  or  oppose  hindrances  to  piety.  Such  is  the  guilt : 
and  the  danger  is  that  of  growing  familiar  with  vice  after  having  been  vanquished 
by  it.  Mixed  with  the  world,  let  the  world  once  seduce  you,  and  the  world  will 
appear  to  you  not  half  so  formidable  as  before,  and  not  half  so  pernicious.  Thus 
sinning  presumptuously,  through  presumpttiously  exposing  yourselves,  you  will  be 
more  and  more  inclined  to  continue  the  exposure,  and  the  presumption,  as  it  were, 
will  propagate  itself  ;  and  your  danger  will  be  that  of  growing  apathy :  issuing,  at 
last,  in  total  apostacy.  Again,  there  is  one  other  class.  If  I  continue  sinning  in 
the  vain  hope  that  there  will  be  time  hereafter  for  repentance,  or  because  I  calcu- 
late that  God  will  be  too  merciful  to  punish,  I  incur  a  special  guilt,  inasmuch  as  I 
trifle  with  the  Almighty,  or  mock  the  Almighty  ;  and  I  run  a  special  risk  as  I  deal 
with  possibilities  as  though  they  were  certainties,  or  stake  on  a  minute  chance  the 
results  of  a  long  hereafter.  So  that,  surveying  successively  the  several  descrip- 
tions of  presumptuous  sins,  we  bring  out  in  each  case  the  same  result ;  and  we  are 
forced  to  pronounce  that  he  who  sins  presumptuously — whether  the  presumption 
consist  in  withstanding  conscience,  or  in  yielding  to  slight  temptation,  or  in  seeking 
peril,  or  in  reckoning  on  future  repentance  or  future  mercy — he  who  sins  presump- 
tuously, deserves,  and  may  expect  to  have  it  said  of  him, "  The  soul  that  reproacheth 
the  Lord,  shiU  be  cut  off  from  among  His  people."     (if.  Melvill,  B.D.)      Presump- 


170  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xv, 

Hon: — I.  What  PRESUMPTION  INCLUDES.  It  signifies — 1.  Boldness  in  evil.  Sinning 
without  fear.  Hardihood,  recklessness.  2.  Arrogance  in  evil.  Setting  ourselves 
up  against  God.  Fride  of  heart  and  spirit  and  tongue  (Psa.  Ixxiii.  6,  ix.  2  ;  Acts  ii. 
18).  3.  Irreverence  towards  God.  AH  profanity.  As  in  the  case  of  PharHoh, 
"  Who  is  fcbe  Lord  ?  "  &c.  4.  Confidence  of  escape  from  the  threateniugs  of  God. 
Not  dreading  nor  caring  for  consequences,  &c.  II.  The  chief  causes  of  presump- 
tion. 1.  Spiritual  ignorance.  Ignorance  of  self  and  God.  It  is  the  offspring  of 
darkness.  2.  Kecklessness  and  inconsideration.  3.  Confirmed  unbelief,  giving  no 
credit  to  the  Word.  4.  Hardness  of  heart.  This  is  both  a  cause  and  a  result. 
III.  The  terrible  results  of  presumptuousness.  1.  God,  defied,  will  vindicate 
His  authority.  He  cannot  let  it  pass.  His  majesty  and  law  concerned,  &c.  2. 
Threatening  despised,  He  will  terribly  execute.  Not  one  jot  fail.  There  may  be 
delay,  longsuffering,  but  the  execution  of  vengeance  is  certain.  3.  Mercy  despised 
will  involve  in  fearful  retribution.  Hear  God  (Prov.  i.  24 ;  Psa.  ii.  4,  &c.).  The 
instances  of  this,  how  numerous.  The  old  world,  Pharaoh,  Sodom,  &c.,  nations 
of  Canaan,  Jerusalem  (see  Luke  xix.  41-44).  Application — 1.  How  needful  is  con- 
sideration. 2.  Repentance,  how  imperative.  3.  To  seek  mercy.  The  gospel 
publishes  it  in  Christ,  and  offers  it  to  every  sinner.  (J.  Burns,  D.D.)  Sins 
dangerotis  and  deadly  .-—I.  That  there  are  degrees  in  sin.  People  sometimes  say, 
as  an  excuse  for  their  sin,  that  as  they  have  gone  wrong  they  might  as  wall  suffer 
for  much  as  for  little.  No  !  it  is  fahe.  With  every  sin  the  man  gets  worse  ;  sin- 
fulness increases.  Sins  of  ignorance  through  trifling  may  grow  to  be  those  of  pre- 
sumption. II.  That  while  all  sins  are  dangerous,  some  are  deadly.  The  text 
shows  that  all  sin  is  dangerous  by  the  fact  that  an  atonement  had  to  be  made  for 
sins  of  ignorance  ;  none  could  be  forgiven  without.  While  ignorance  may  excuse, 
nothing  can  justify  any  sin.  1.  That  God  is  merciful.  He  sent  His  Son  to  die 
that  He  might  put  away  sin,  and  restore  us  unto  Himself.  2.  That  there  is  a  limit 
to  His  mercy.  What  cost  Him  so  much  He  will  let  no  one  despise.  (D.  Lloyd.) 
Progress  of  presumption  : — Presumption  never  stops  in  its  first  attempt.  If  Caesar 
comes  once  to  pass  the  Rubicon,  he  will  be  sure  to  march  farther  on,  even  till  he 
enters  the  very  bowels  of  Rome,  and  break  open  the  Capitol  itself.  He  that  wades  so 
far  as  to  wet  and  foul  himself,  cares  not  how  much  he  trashes  farther.  (R.  South, 
D.D.)  Presumption  punished  : — A  young  man  who  had  inherited  an  estate  from 
an  uncle  was  exhorted  to  seek  Christ,  and  said  that  he  would  do  so  as  soon  as  he 
had  paid  off  the  debts  which  encumbered  the  estate.  "Young  man,"  said  the 
pastor,  "  beware  :  you  may  never  see  that  day  :  whilst  you  are  gaining  the  world 
you  may  lose  your  soul."  The  young  heir  said,  "  I'll  run  the  risk."  He  went  into 
the  woods  and  was  engaged  in  felling  a  tree,  when  a  falling  limb  caused  his  instant 
death  within  a  few  hours  of  his  bold  presumption. 

Vers.  32-36.  A  man  that  gathered  sticks  upon  the  Sabbath. — Gathering  sticJcs  on 
the  Sahbnth :— An  Oriental  legend  tells  us  that,  while  Solomon  was  once  on  his  way 
to  visit  the  Queen  of  Sheba,  he  came  to  a  valley  in  which  dwelt  a  peculiar  tribe  of 
monkeys.  Upon  asking  about  their  history,  be  was  informed  that  they  were  the 
descendants  of  a  colony  of  Jews,  who  settling  in  that  region  years  before,  had,  by 
habitual  neglect  of  the  Sabbatli,  gradunllv  degenerated  to  the  condition  of  brutes. 
The  story  is,  of  course,  a  mere  fable,  but  the  moral  is  worth  remembering.  The 
ceremonial  part  of  the  Sabbath  is  done  away,  so  that  greater  liberty  is  allowed  to  us 
than  was  given  to  the  Jews.  Works  of  necessity  and  mercy  take  precedence  even 
of  the  regularly  appointed  duties  of  the  day  (Hos.  vi.  6).  The  moral  part  is, 
however,  as  strongly  in  force  as  ever.  To  have  the  mind  exercised  on  spiritual 
subjects,  and  occupied  in  advancing  the  interests  of  our  souls,  is  an  imperative 
duty.  To  be  guilty  of  a  wilful  profanation  of  the  Lord's  day  is — I.  An  unreason- 
able SIN.  A  young  man,  well  off  in  the  world,  and  an  elderly  man  of  business, 
were  riding  in  a  railway  carriage  together,  between  London  and  a  country  town, 
when  the  question  of  Sunday  amusements  came  up.  "  I  maintain  that  Sunday 
ought  to  be  a  general  holiday,"  said  the  younger,  in  a  tone  which  betokened  assur- 
ance and  presumption,  "  and  the  people  ouszht  not  to  be  kept  out  of  such  places  as 
the  Zoological  Gardens  and  the  Crystal  Palace  grounds.  I  would  have  Sunday 
used  for  recreation."  "  Recreation  1 "  answered  the  elder,  gravely,  "  yes,  that  is 
the  very  word.  The  Sabbath  is  meant  for  recreation,  and  if  people  were  recreated, 
they  would  want  very  little  of  the  so-called  recreation  which  they  now  make  so  much 
of."  The  conversp.tion  on  that  subject  dropped.  II.  A  presumptuous  sin.  The 
man  who  was  so  signally  punished,  for  merely  gathering  a  few  sticks  on  the 


« 

CHAP,  xv.j  NUMBERS.  171 

Sabbath,  might  have  argued  that  he  could  only  be  charged  with  a  very  small  breach 
ot  the  Divine  law,  and  that  the  bundle  of  faggots  was  really  necessary  for  his  com- 
fort. Such  flimsy  excuses  would  be  of  no  avail.  His  conduct  was  a  decided  act  of 
rebelhon  against  God,  and  he  was,  in  fact,  accusing  Him  with  being  a  hard  master, 
who  did  not  deserve  to  be  obeyed.  Those  who  believe  in  taking  God  at  His  word, 
cannot  doubt  that  any  wilful  neglect  of  His  commandments  is  always  followed, 
sooner  or  later,  by  loss  !  A  thrifty  merchant  remarked  to  his  physician,  "  Had  it 
not  been  for  the  rest  which  I  have  enjoyed  on  the  Lord's  Day,  I  should  long  ago 
have  been  a  maniac  !  "  Many  are  the  instances  of  those  who  have  dug  their  own 
graves,  because  they  had  no  Sundays.  {J.  N.  Norton,  D.D.)  Obedience  tested  in 
the  little : — This  incident  has  often  been  quoted  as  an  instance  of  extreme  and  in- 
tolerable severity,  and  has  been  cited  against  those  whose  reading  of  the  Scriptures 
leads  them  to  propose  to  keep  the  Sabbath  day.  The  mocker  has  found  quite  a 
little  treasure  here.  The  poor  man  was  gathering  sticks  on  the  Sabbath  day,  and 
he  had  to  forfeit  his  life  for  the- violation  of  the  law.  Had  the  text  read — And  a 
certain  man  was  found  in  the  wilderness  openly  blaspheming  God,  and  he  was 
stoned  to  death — we  should  have  had  some  sense  of  rest  and  harmony  in  the  mind : 
the  balance  would  seem  to  be  complete.  But  that  is  the  very  sophism  that  is  ruining 
us.  We  do  not  see  the  reality  of  the  case.  We  think  of  huge  sins  ;  there  are  none. 
We  think  of  little  sins  ;  there  are  none.  It  is  the  spot  that  is  ruin  ;  it  is  the  one 
little  thing  that  spoils  the  universe.  Obedience  can  only  be  tested  by  so-called  little 
things.  Where  one  man  is  called  to  be  a  hero  on  some  great  scale,  ten  thousand 
men  are  called  to  be  courteous,  gentle,  patient ;  where  one  has  the  opportunity  of 
being  great  on  the  battle-field  of  a  death-bed,  all  have  opportunity  of  being  good  in 
hopefulness,  charity,  forgiveness,  and  every  grace  that  belongs  to  the  Cross  of 
Christ ;  where  one  has  the  opportunity  of  joining  a  great  procession,  ten  thousand 
have  the  opportunity  of  assisting  the  aged,  helping  the  blind,  speaking  a  word  for 
the  speechless,  and  putting  a  donation  into  the  hand  of  honest  poverty.  Let  us 
realise  the  truth  of  the  doctrine  that  we  are  not  called  upon  to  display  our  obedi- 
ence upon  a  gigantic  scale  within  the  theatre  of  the  universe  and  under  the  observa- 
tion of  angels — but  to  go  out  into  the  field  and  work  with  bent  back  and  willing 
hands  and  glad  hearts,  doing  life's  simple  duty  under  Heaven's  inspiration  and 
encouragement.  The  man  who  gathered  sticks  on  the  Sabbath  day  might  have  been 
quite  a  great  man  on  festival  occasions  when  all  Israel  had  to  be  dressed  in  its  best ; 
he  might  have  been  one  of  the  foremost  of  the  show.  You  discover  what  men  are 
by  their  secret  deeds,  by  what  they  do  when  they  suppose  nobody  is  looking,  by 
what  they  are  about  when  they  are  suddenly  pounced  upon.  (-7.  Parker,  D.D.) 
The  Sabhath-breaker  and  his  doom  : — I.  The  sin.  1.  The  transgression  of  a  moral 
law,  which  was  enforced  by  the  most  solemn  commands  and  by  the  severest  penalty. 
2.  The  transgression  of  this  law  wilfully.  II.  The  arrest.  The  offender  was 
seized  in  the  act  of  transgression,  and  taken  before  the  judicial  authorities.  III. 
The  consultation.  The  direction  of  the  Lord  is  sought  as  to  the  mode  by  which 
the  sentence  of  death  is  to  be  executed  upon  him.  IV.  The  sentence.  This  was 
determined  by  the  Lord.  The  transgressor  must  be  put  to  death  (Exod.  xxxi.  14, 
15) ;  he  must  be  put  to  death  by  stoning  (ver.  35).  V.  The  execution.  "  And  all 
the  congregation  brought  him  without,"  &c.  (ver.  36).  The  people  were  the  execu- 
tioners. This  would  increase  the  force  of  tlie  warning  which  tbe  event  gave  to  the 
nation.  Conclusion  :  1.  The  moral  element  in  the  law  of  the  Sabbath  is  of  perpe- 
tual obligation.  We  still  rest  for  body  and  mind  ;  we  still  need  worship  for  the 
spirit.  2.  The  neglecters  of  religious  duties  and  privileges  will  do  well  to  take 
■warning.  If  any  man  fails  to  observe  religiously  the  Lord's  day,  he  does  so  at  his 
own  loss  and  peril.  {W.  Jones.)  Punishment  of  Sabhath-breaking  : — 1.  The 
perpetration  of  one  particular  presumptuous  sin,  together  with  its  circumstances,  as 
what,  where,  when,  and  how.  The  fact  was  seemingly  but  a  small  matter,  namely, 
gathering  a  few  sticks,  &c.,  and  possibly  he  might  pretend  some  necessity  or  con- 
veniency  to  himself  thereby,  &c.,  but  because  really  it  was  done  with  an  high  hand, 
in  contempt  of  God  and  His  law,  and  a  profaning  of  His  holy  Sabbath.  2.  The 
punishment  for  this  perpetrated  fact  of  profaning  the  Sabbath,  wherein — (1)  The 
sinner  is  apprehended.  (2)  Accused.  (3)  Imprisoned,  because  it  was  not  yet 
known  what  sentence  to  pass  upon  him.  For  though  the  matter  of  the  fact  was 
twice  doomed  with  death  (Exod.  xxxi.  14 ;  xxxv.  2),  yet  was  it  not  declared  what 
manner  of  death  such  a  sinner  should  die.  Therefore  God  is  consulted  about  this, 
•who  expressly  declareth  it  (ver.  35).  Besides,  though  the  law  be  in  the  rigour  of  it 
a  killing  letter,  yet  might  it  admit  of  some  favourable  construction  from  necessity, 


172  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xv. 

etc.,  which  might  make  the  offender  capable  of  pardon.  So  Moses  did  not  rashly 
doom  him  ;  nor  ought  magistrates  be  hasty  in  matters  of  life  and  death,  as  in  other 
cases  of  an  inferior  nature.  They  ought  to  be  wary  :  God  aud  His  Word  ought  to  be 
consulted.  (4)  He  was  condemned,  God  Himself  passing  the  sentence  that  be 
should  be  stoned  (ver.  35).  This  was  the  heaviest  of  all  the  four  kinds  of  death 
that  malefactors  suffered  in  Israel  for  capital  crimes — some  were  sentenced  to  be 
strangled,  others  to  be  slain  with  the  sword,  some  to  be  burned,  and  others  to  be 
stoned  ;  the  two  last  were  undoubtedly  the  most  painful  (because  longer  in  dying), 
and  therefore  inflicted  upon  the  grossest  offenders.  Though  in  man's  judgment 
this  might  seem  too  severe  a  sentence  for  such  a  seeniinti  small  offence,  yet  in  God's 
judgment  it  is  not  a  light  offence  to  profane  the  Saiibath  by  doing  needless  works 
upon  that  holy  day.  We  may  well  suppose  that  this  sinner  (by  the  connection  of 
ver.  30  with  this  relation)  sinned  presumptuously  and  with  public  scandal.  (5)  He 
was  executed  accordingly,  being  carried  without  the  camp,  which  was  a  circum- 
stance aggravating  the  punishment,  being  a  kind  of  reproach,  as  the  apostle  noteth 
(Heb.  xiii.  11-13).  This  was  done  to  the  blasphemer  before  (Lev.  xxiv.  14).  This 
severity  doth  likewise  farther  signify  the  eternal  death  of  such  as  do  not  keep  the 
Sabbath  of  Christ,  entering  into  the  rest  of  God  by  faith,  and  ceasing  from  their 
own  works  as  God  did  from  His  (Heb.  iv.  1-11),  finding  rest  for  the  soul  in  Christ 
(Matt.  xi.  28).     (<7.  Ness.) 

Vers.  38-40.  Put  upon  the  fringe  ...  a  ribband  of  blue. — The  law  of  the  fringe 
and  ribband : — Provision  had  been  just  now  made  by  the  law  for  the  pardon  of  sins 
of  ignorance  and  infirmity,  now  here  is  an  expedient  provided  for  the  preventing  of 
such  sins.  They  are  ordered  to  make  fringes  upon  the  borders  of  theh  garments, 
which  were  to  be  memorandums  to  them  of  their  duty,  that  they  might  not  sin 
through  forgetfulness.  1.  The  sign  appointed  is  a  fringe  of  silk,  or  thread,  or 
worsted,  or  the  garment  ii'^eli  ravelled  at  the  bottom,  and  a  blue  ribband  bound  on 
the  top  of  it  to  keep  it  tight  (ver.  38).  The  Jews  being  a  peculiar  people,  they  were 
thus  distinguished  from  their  neighbours  in  their  dress,  as  well  as  in  their  diet ; 
and  taught  by  such  little  instances  of  singularity,  not  to  be  conformed  to  the  way 
of  the  heathen  in  greater  things.  Thus  likewise  they  proclaimed  themselves  Jews 
wherever  they  were,  as  those  tbat  were  not  ashamed  of  God  and  His  law.  2.  The 
intention  of  it  was  to  remmd  them  that  they  were  a  peculiar  people.  They  were  not 
appointed  for  the  trimming  and  adorning  of  their  clothes,  but  to  "  stir  up  their 
pure  minds  by  way  of  remembrance  "  (2  Pet.  iii.  1).  That  they  might  look  upon  the 
fringe,  and  remember  the  commandments.  Many  look  upon  their  ornaments  to 
feed  their  pride,  but  they  must  look  upon  these  ornaments  to  awaken  their  con- 
sciences to  a  sense  of  their  duty,  that  their  religion  might  constantly  beset  them, 
and  they  might  carry  it  about  with  them,  as  they  did  their  clothes,  wherever  they 
went.  It  was  intendt-d  particularly  to  be  a  preservation  from  idolatry.  That  ye 
"  seek  not  after  your  own  heart,"  and  your  own  eyes,  in  your  religious  worship.  Yet 
it  may  extend  also  to  the  whole  conversation ;  for  nothing  is  more  contrary  to 
God's  honour  and  our  own  true  interest  than  to  walk  in  the  way  of  our  heart,  and  in 
the  sight  of  our  eyes  ;  for  the  imagination  of  the  heart  is  evil,  and  so  is  the  lust  of 
the  eyes.  (Mattheiv  Henry,  D.D.)  The  ribband  of  blue: — The  chief  use  of 
clothing  is  defence  against  the  chills  and  variations  of  the  weather ;  two  subor- 
dinate uses  are  for  the  promotion  of  beauty,  and  for  distinction  of  office.  We  can 
be  at  no  loss  to  perceive  that  there  are  mental  uses  corresponding  to  the  above 
which  require  for  the  soul  spiritual  clothing.  The  soul  has  its  summer  and  its 
winter,  and  all  the  varieties  of  a  mental  year.  There  are  seasons  of  hopefulness 
and  brilliancy  in  which  we  have  all  the  elasticity  and  promise  of  spring ;  there  are 
states  of  peaceful  warmth,  of  continued  serene  happiness;  "the  soul's  calm  sun- 
shine and  the  heartfelt  joy  "  which  bespeak  the  spirit's  summer ;  but  there  are 
likewise  periods  of  decreasing  warmth,  of  incipient  depressions,  and  coolnesses  to 
what  has  formerly  yielded  the  highest  pleasure ;  until  at  length  we  arrive  at  states 
of  painful  cold,  the  joylessness,  the  hopelessness,  and  the  sadness,  which  are  the 
characteristics  of  the  wmter  of  the  soul.  In  this  wintry  state  storms  of  distressing 
fears  and  darkening  doubts  will  rush  upon  the  soul.  Strong  delusions  that  we  may 
believe  a  lie,  will,  like  fierce  tempests,  howl  about  us.  Thrice  happy  are  they  who 
remember  that  the  Divine  Word  will  be  a  blessing  in  joy  and  in  sorrow,  in  sickness 
and  in  health,  in  summer  and  in  winter ;  but  they  should  also  bear  in  mind,  that 
to  be  a  protection  in  all  seasons  the  Divine  mercy  has  provided  us  with  spiritual 
clothing.     The  doctrines  of  religion,  when  intelligently  adopted  and  adapted  to  our 


CHAP.  XV.]  NUMBERS.  173 

particular  states,  serve  this  important  purpose.     And  when  those  doctrines  are,  as 
they  ought  to  be,  full,  comprehensive,  and  complete,  applying  themselves  to  all  the 
departments  of  humim  aftection,  thought,  and  life,  they  make  a  complete  dress. 
We  are,  then,  to  speak  to  the  Israelites  who  are  typified  by  those  of  our  text,  the 
spiritual  Israelites ;  and  say  first  that  they  clothe  themselves  with  genuine  doctrines 
of  Divine  truth,  with  the  garments  of  salvation,  and  next,  that  they  especially  make 
them  fringes  in  the  borders  of  their  garments.     After  we  have  meditated  upon  the 
doctrines  of  religion,  and  seen  their  fitness  to  our  own  states  of  mind  and  heart, 
thus  clothed  ourselves  in  them,  the  next  part  of  our  duty  is  to  bring  them  into  life. 
Many  there  are  who  put  on  religion  as  a  dress  for  the  head,  and  even  also  for  the 
breast,  hut  do  not  bring  it  down  to  the  feet.     But  we  are  to  make  a  border  for  our 
garments,  and  the  border  must  be  a  fringe.     The  distinctive  feature  of  a  fringe  is, 
that  the  material  of  which  it  is  composed  is  divided  into  small  portions  firmly 
united  at  the  upper  part,  but  hanging  with  separate  forms  of  beauty  at  the  lower. 
The  idea  suggested  by  this  is,  that  religion  must  be  employed  in  all  the  small  affairs 
of  daily  life  as  well  as  on  great  occasions ;  the  lowest  part  of  our  spiritual  dress 
must  be  a  fringe.     We  are,  however,  not  only  commanded  to  have  a  frin;<e  to  our 
garments,  but  to  have  upon  the  fringe  a  ribband  of  blue.     And  this  leads  us  to 
C' insider  the  correspondence  of  colours.     Natural  colours,  we  know,  originate  in 
natural  light.     They  are  the  separation  of  the  beauties  which  are  bound  up  in  the 
sunbeam,  and  their  reflection  to  the  human  eye.     There  is  a  trinity  of  fundamental 
colours,  red,  blue,  and  yellow.     From  the  blending  of  these  in  varied  proportions 
all  others  are  made.     Red,  the  colour  of  fire,  is  the  symbol  of  the  truths  of  love, 
the  fire  of  the  soul.     Blue,  the  colour  of  the  azure  depths  of  the  sky,  is  symbolic  of 
the  deep  things  of  the  Spirit  of  God,  on  which  faith  delights  to  gaze.     Yellow  is 
the  hue  of  truth  which  applies  to  outward  life,  and  in  combination  with  blue  it 
makes  green,  which  corresponds  to  truth  in  the  letter  of  the  Word,  made  simple  to 
the  common  eye  of  mankind.     Blue  gives  a  sense  of  clearness  and  depth,  in  which 
it  surp-isses  all  other  hues.     Blue,  then,  is  the  colour  which  represents  the  spirit 
of  the  Holy  Word,  the  depths  of  heavenly  wisdom.     There  is,  however,  cold  blue, 
as  it  has  more  of  white  in  it,  and  warm  blue,  as  it  derives  a  certain  hue  from  red. 
There  has  also  been  some  difficulty  in  determining  the  exact  shade  meant   by 
Techeleth,  the  Hebrew  name  for  this  colour.     But  from  a  full  consideration  of  this 
subject  we  are  satisfied  it  was  the  name  for  blue  tinged  with  red,  from  violet  to 
purple.     And  this  very  strikingly  brings  out  the  Divine  lesson  by  correspondence. 
Wliile  the  blue  indicates  that  in  our  demeanour  in  life  we  should  be  correct,  in 
harmony  with  the  spirit  of  truth,  the  red  hue  indicates  that  all  our  truth  ought  to 
be  softened  and  warmed  by  love.     "  Speak  the  truth  in  love,"  said  the  apostle,  and 
to  remind  them  of  this  duty  God  commanded  the  ribband  of  warm  blue  to  be  worn 
upon  the  fringe  of  their  garments  by  the  sons  of  Israel.     It  is  religion  in  life  that 
is  observed  by  and  is  attractive  to  good  men.    When  it  not  only  enlightens  the 
head  and  rules  the  heart,  but  comes  down  to  the  skirt  of  the  garment,  infusing 
justice,  kindness,  and  courtesy  in  every  act  and  word,  then  it  has  an  eloquence 
which  will  inspire  many  a  well-disposed  heart  to  say,  "  We  will  go  with  you,  for  we 
have  heard  that  God  is  with  vou.    Let  your  good  works  and  your  good  words  so  shine 
before  men,  that  they  may  glorify  your  Father  who  is  in  heaven."    [J.  Bai/ley,  Ph.D.) 
The  ordinance  of  the  fringes :  graciotis  reminders  of  Divine  commands : — I.  The  prone- 
NESS  OF  MAN  TO  FORGET  THE  COMMANDMENTS  OF  THE  LoRD.    This  tendency  arises  from  — 
1.  The  sinfulness  of  human  nature.     2.  The  worLily  spirit  which  so  largely  prevails 
in  human  society.     II.  The  arrangements  which  God  has  made  to  remind  man  of 
His  commandments.     1.  The  means  which  God  employs  to  remind  us  of  His  com- 
mandments.    (1)  The  Bible.     In  this  He  not  only  reveals  His  will  concerning  us, 
but  illustr;ites  and  enforces  it  iu  various  ways  so  that  we  might  not  forget  it.     (2) 
The  Holy  Spirit.     He  influences  our  spirits  ;  speaks  in  us  by  means  of  conscience, 
&c.      (3)  Holy   examples.      In  these  the  will  of   God  is  "  drawn  out  iu   living 
characters,"     (4)  Warning  examples  of  the  evil  consequences  of  overlooking  His 
commands.     These  witness  to  us  that  it  is  perilous  to  forget  the  Divine  will,  and 
admonish  us  against  doing  so.     2.  The  design  of  God  in  reminding  us  of  His  com- 
mandments.    "  That  ye  wander  not  after  your  own  heart  and  your  own  eyes,  after 
which  ye  use  to  go  a  whoring  ;  that  ye  may  remember  and  do  all  My  command- 
ments, and  be  holy  unto  your  God."     Recollection  of  the  will  of  God  must  be 
followed  by  obedience  to  that  will,  or  it  will  be  worse  than  useless.     III.  The 

GROUNDS   UPON  WHICH    GuD    KEQUIRES  FROM  US    THIS    RECOLLECTION  OF    AND    OBEDIENCE 

TO  His  COMMANDS.     1.  His  personal  relation  to  us.    2.  His  gracious  doings  for  us. 


174  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

(IF.  Jones.)  Remembrancers  : — How  wonderful  is  what  we  call  association  I  I 
hang  some  thought  upon  an  object,  and  say,  "  Whenever  I  come  hither,  ring  for 
me  as  a  bell  of  joy  "  ;  and  upon  another  I  fusten  an  experience,  saying  to  it,  "  Toll 
to  me  of  sadness  "  ;  and  to  another,  "  Give  forth  some  bold,  inspiring  strain  "  ;  and 
to  another,  "  Speak  to  me  always  of  hope."  And,  thereafter,  each  thing,  true  to 
its  nature,  whether  it  be  tree,  or  place,  or  rock,  or  house,  or  that  which  is  therein, 
never  forgets  its  lesson.  Yea,  and  when  we  forget,  they  make  us  to  remember,  sing- 
ing to  us  the  notes  which  we  had  taught  them.  Thus  the  heart,  though  it  may  not 
dismember  itself,  to  give  a  soul  to  the  material  world,  has  yet  a  power  half  to 
create  in  physical  things  a  soul  in  each  for  itself.  So  its  hfe  is  written  out,  and  it 
keeps  a  journal  upon  trees,  upon  hills,  upon  the  face  of  heaven.  Is  it  not  for  this, 
then,  that  in  turn  God  has  used  every  object  in  nature,  every  event  in  life,  every 
function  of  society,  every  affection  and  endearment  of  human  love,  yea,  and  things 
that  are  not,  the  very  silences  of  the  world,  and  memories  that  are  but  disembodied 
events,  to  represent  to  us  by  association  His  nature  and  aiiections?  Thus  the 
heaven  and  the  earth  do  speak  of  God,  and  the  great  natural  world  is  but  another 
Bible,  which  clasps  and  binds  the  written  one ;  for  nature  and  grace  are  one. 
Grace  is  the  heart  of  the  flower,  and  nature  but  its  surrounding  petals.  (H.  W. 
Beecher.)  Association: — Thus  a  house  becomes  sacred.  Every  room  has  a 
thousand  memories.  Every  door  and  window  is  clustered  with  associations.  And 
when,  after  long  years,  we  go  back  to  the  house  of  our  infancy,  faces  look  out  upon 
us,  and  an  invisible  multitude  stand  in  gate  and  portal  to  welcome  us,  and  we  hear 
airy  voices  speakiug  again  the  old  words  of  our  childhood.     (Ibid.) 

Ver.  41.  I  am  the  Lord  your  God. — Everlasting  relationship : — Can  anything  be 
more  blessed  to  God's  peoijlw  than  the  assurance  of  the  everlasting  relationship 
existing  between  Himself  and  them  ?  This  everlasting  relationship  is  a  hiding-place, 
refuge,  and  defence  in  this  desert  land  ;  a  safe  retreat,  where  the  soul  may  obtain 
repose,  satisfaction,  in  trying  moments.     I.  To  say   that   eternal  eelationship 

LEADS  TO  licentiousness,  AND  INDUCES  A  DISREGARD  TO  ALL  MORAL  AND  SOCIAL 
DUTIES,  IS  THE  SAME  AS  TO  SAT,  THAT  TO  BRING  ANY  INDIVIDUAL  INTO  THE  CLEAR, 
URIGHT    LIGHT    OF    THE    SUN     WILL     CAUSE     A     PEBDLE     TO     BECOME    A    STUMBLING-BLOCK 

UNTO  HIM.  Here  is  a  threefold  assertion  of  relationship  in  my  text,  which  rela- 
tionship now  is  but  rarely  understood,  still  less  enjoyed,  and  often  reviled.  But, 
now,  notice  the  nature  of  this  relationship.  It  is  a  relationship  of  a  father,  a 
Brother,  a  Comforter,  a  Guide,  a  Preceptor.  It  is  a  relationship  of  King  and  subject, 
Parent  and  child.  Husband  and  wife.  Friend  and  friend.  II.  The  deliverance 
EFFECTED  AS  A  PROOF  OF  THIS  RELATIONSHIP.  The  proof  is  that  Hc  brought  His 
people  out  of  Egypt.  "  Oh  !  "  says  one  timid  soul,  "  but  I  do  not  belong  to  Him. 
I  do  not  think  the  Lord  speaks  to  me."  Well,  I  do  not  desire  you  to  make  the 
assertion,  unless  God  has  brought  you  from  E^^ypt.  But  mock  not  His  love,  deny 
not  His  grace,  insult  not  His  Spirit  by  questioning  the  relationship  if  He  has 
rescued  you  from  the  bondage  of  sin,  Satan,  and  self,  the  world,  and  the  devil.  He 
has  delivered  you  on  purpose  to  be  your  God,  openly  and  avowedly.  III.  The 
CL.UM  OF  God  is  upon  us,  for  devotedness  to  His  glory  and  activity  in  His 
CAUSE.  He  has  brought  >ou  out  for  His  own  use;  and  He  has  a  right  to  all  the 
ardour  of  your  spirit,  all  the  activity  of  your  life,  all  the  affections  of  your  soul. 
Remember,  you  are  not  your  own,  but  bought  with  a  price ;  therefore  glorify  God 
with  your  body  and  spirit,  which  are  His.  Oh  !  what  ties  bind  us  to  devotedness 
to  His  name — ties  of  blood,  ties  of  love,  ties  of  grace.  As  a  King,  He  created  me 
His  subject ;  as  a  Deliverer,  He  brought  me  to  liberty  ;  as  my  God,  He  allied  me 
to  Himself  in  everlasting  relationship.  And  if  all  these  ties  fail  to  produce  the 
effect  of  consecration  of  heart,  and  soul,  and  hfe  to  Him,  I  have  one  more  tie  left — 
namely,  the  constraint  of  love.     (J.  Irons.) 


CHAPTER   XVI. 


Vers.  1-3.').  Korah,  .  .  .  Dathan,  and  Ablram  .  .  .  gathered  themselves  together 
against  Moses  and  against  Aaron. — Korah,  Dathan,  and  Abiram  : — I.  The  rebels. 
1.  Influential.   2.  Numerous.   3.  Deluded — (1)  Concerning  Moses,  who  they  asserted. 


CHAP.  XVI.]  NUMBERS.  175 

wrongly,  was  a  self-elected  leader  and  an  arbitrary  prince.  (2)  Concerning  the 
people,  who  they  assumed  (ver.  14)  would  have  willingly  followed  Moses  to  the 
promised  land,  had  he  tried  to  lead  them  hither.  Self-deceived,  and  deceiving 
others.  11.  Their  sin.  Eebellion  against  the  authority  of  God  which  was  invested 
in  Moses.  1.  Cause  in  Korah  (see  chap.  iii.  30) ;  whence  it  appears  that  for  some 
unexplained  cause  a  younger  relative  was  appointed  to  the  headship  of  the  Kohathites, 
Korah  was  descended  from  the  second  son  of  Kohath  (chap.  vi.  18),  whilst  the 
present  head  was  descended  from  the  fourth  son.  2.  Cause  in  Dathan  and  Abiram. 
The  priesthood  transferred  from  the  first-born  of  every  family  to  one  particular 
tribe,  and  that  a  branch  of  the  house  of  Moses.  But  this  was  done  by  command 
of  God,  not  of  Moses  alone.  3.  Cause  in  the  two  hundred  and  fifty.  Their  own 
assumed  rights  might  be  interfered  with,  so  they  thought.  4.  Cause  in  their 
followers.  General  dissatisfaction.  They  charged  upon  Moses  the  effects  of  their 
own  selfishness.  Pride  in  all  of  them.  III.  Their  punishment.  1.  Of  Divine 
selection.  Left  on  both  sides  to  Divine  arbitration.  On  the  part  of  the  rebels,  a 
defiance;  on  the  side  of  Moses,  humble  agreement.  2.  Manifest.  All  should  see 
it,  and  know  thereby  the  Divine  will.  3.  Of  Divine  infliction.  God  took  the 
matter  into  His  own  hands.  It  was  a  rebellion  against  Him,  more  than  Moses. 
4.  Terrible.  5.  Complete.  AU  pertaining  to  them  perished.  God  could  do 
without  men  who  had  thought  so  much  of  themselves.  Learn  :  1.  "  Our  God  is  a 
consuming  fire."  "A  fearful  thing  to  fall  into  the  hands  of  the  living  God." 
2.  Beware  of  resisting  Divine  authority.  "How  shall  ye  escape,"  &c.  3.  Have 
we  not  all  rebelled  ?  4.  God  was  in  Christ,  making  reconciliation,  &c.  (J.  C.  Gray.) 
Korah,  Dathan,  and  Abiram: — The  particular  characters  of  these  three  men,  Korah, 
Dathan,  and  Abiram,  are  not  given  in  Scripture ;  but  they  seem  to  represent 
generally  all  those  who  rise  up  against  the  powers  ordained  of  God:  Korah  the 
Levite  against  Aaron  ;  Dathan  and  Abiram  of  the  tribe  of  Eeuben  against  Moses  ; 
but  both  conspiracies  being  combined  together,  indicates  that  it  is  the  same  temper 
of  mind  which  rejects  the  ordinances  of  God  whether  it  be  in  Cliurch  or  State. 
Their  sin  was  like  that  of  the  fallen  angels  who  from  envy,  it  is  supposed,  arose  against 
the  Son  of  God.  But  let  us  consider  how  far  the  case  is  applicable  to  ourselves 
now  ;  as  it  is  in  some  degree  peculiar ;  for  Moses  and  Aaron  had  their  authority  all 
along  confirmed  of  God  by  outward  signs  and  miracles.  Add  to  which  that  their 
characters  were  such  as  less  than  any  other  to  justify  opposition  or  envy.  For 
Moses  was  the  meekest  of  men  ;  and  Aaron  was  inoffensive  in  all  his  conduct 
toward  them.  Their  pre-eminence,  too,  was  in  hardship  rather  than  in  wealth  or 
worldly  power :  in  journeyings  in  the  wilderness,  not  in  the  riches  of  Canaan.  But 
these  circumstances  do  not  in  fact  prevent  the  application  to  ourselves ;  for  the 
Pharisees  afterwards  had  no  miracles  to  prove  their  authority  from  God ;  and 
moreover  they  were  great  oppressors,  covetous  and  cruel  :  yet  our  Lord  says  of 
them,  "  The  Scribes  and  the  Pharisees  sit  in  Moses'  seat :  all  therefore  whatsoever 
they  bid  you  observe,  that  observe  and  do "  ;  and  this  He  says  at  the  very  time 
when  He  is  cautioning  His  disciples  against  their  wickedness.  They  had  to  obey 
the  ordinance  of  God,  though  it  had  neither  outward  sign  nor  holiness  to  support 
it.  Nor  indeed  is  the  presence  of  God  denied  by  the  company  of  Korah  as  being 
vouchsafed  to  them  under  the  guidance  of  Moses  and  Aaron ;  they  say  that  "  the 
Lord  is  among  them,"  as  He  was  seen  in  the  pillar  of  fire  and  the  cloud,  in  the 
holy  tabernacle,  in  the  manna  from  heaven  :  but  what  they  complained  of  was 
the  want  of  visible  fruits  and  enjoyments,  "  Thou  hast  not  brought  us  into  a  land 
that  floweth  with  milk  and  honey  "  ;  "  Wilt  thou  put  out  the  eyes  of  these  men?" 
as  men  may  say  now,  •'  We  see  not  our  tokens  "  ;  where  are  our  spiritual  privileges  ? 
where  is  the  fulfilment  of  all  the  glorious  things  which  the  prophets  have  spoken  of 
the  Christian  Church  ?  But  if  this  case  is  of  universal  applicntion  and  for  general 
warning,  then  the  question  will  arise,  are  there  no  allowances,  no  limitations,  to 
be  made  ;  and  is  there  no  relief  in  the  case  of  oppressive  governoi  s  and  bad  pastors  ? 
must  aU  resistance  be  like  that  of  Korah,  Dathan,  and  Abiram,  displea.'^ing  to  God  ? 
and  is  it  never  without  sin  ?  Let  us  consider  this  a  httle  more  particularly.  If  such 
powers  are  of  God,  then  He  gives  such  as  are  suitable  to  the  people  over  whom 
they  are  placed  ;  not  necessarily  such  as  they  like,  but  such  as  are  good  for  them 
to  have,  and  such  as  they  deserve.  For  instance,  the  Roman  emperors  during  the 
early  days  of  Christianity,  were  many  of  them  monsters  of  cruelty  and  wickedness  ; 
but  when  we  come  to  inquire  into  the  character  of  the  people  over  whom  they  were 
placed,  we  find  the  corruption  of  morals  so  deep  and  extensive  that  they  were  as  bad 
as  the  tymnta  that  governed  them.    And  it  was  to  these  Eomans  and  living  under 


176  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xn. 

some  of  the  worst  of  these  governors  that  St.  Paul  says,  "  Let  every  one  be  sub- 
ject unto  the  higher  powers.  For  there  is  no  power  but  of  Ood  :  the  powers  that 
be  are  ordained  of  God.  Whosoever  therefore  resisteth  the  power,  resisteth 
the  ordinance  of  God."  And  St.  Peter  unto  Christians  under  the  same  rule, 
"  Submit  yourselves  to  every  ordinance  of  man  for  the  Lord's  sake  :  whether  it  be 
to  the  king  as  supreme;  or  unto  governors,  as  unto  them  that  are  sent  by  Him." 
Moreover,  in  consequence  of  this,  we  find  in  Scripture  that  kings  and  people  are 
often  together  condemned  and  visited  alike.  Pharaoh  and  Egypt  both  together 
oppressed  Israel ;  both  hardened  their  hearts ;  both  were  cut  off  together.  The 
same  order  of  Divine  providence  applies  also  to  spiritual  governors  ;  it  is  so  with 
the  Church  of  God  in  all  times  and  places  ;  the  angels  of  the  Churches  and  the 
Churches  themselves  are  tended  on,  and  in  each  case  addressed  together  as  one  by 
their  Lord,  who  has  the  seven  stars  in  His  hand,  while  He  walks  in  the  midst  of 
the  seven  golden  candlesticks.  We  may  therefore  consider  it  as  a  general  law  of 
God's  providence,  that  their  rulers  both  spiritual  and  temporal  will  be  such  as  the 
people  are  worthy  of  ;  that  if  they  need  better  rulers,  the  only  way  in  which  this 
can  be  produced  efficiently  and  effectively,  is  by  becoming  better  themselves.  But 
a  case  of  difficulty  which  may  arise  is  this,  if  a  signal  repentance  should  take  place 
among  the  people,  the  spirit  of  grace  and  supplication  should  be  poured  out  upon 
them,  and  there  should  be  a  general  awakening ;  then  the  deficiency  of  their  pastors 
and  rulers  will  come  before  them  in  a  striking  light ;  and  then  will  be  their  great 
temptation  to  take  the  amendment  of  such  things  into  their  own  hands.  But  yet 
not  well  nor  wisely.  Surely  no  reformation  can  be  equal  to  that  which  took  place 
suddenly  and  simultaneously,  when  the  disciples  of  Christ  were  yet  under  the 
Scribes  and  Pharisees,  yet  He  said,  as  they  sat  in  Moses'  seat  th^y  must  be  obeyed. 
Or  again,  when  the  apostles  wrote  to  Christians,  that  they  must  submit  themselves 
to  the  powers  that  be,  while  those  powers  were  the  most  corrupt  of  heathen  govern- 
ments. It  is  true  that  the  change  had  not  then  become  exteusive,  or  leavened  the 
general  state  of  society,  but  the  law  of  God's  providence  was  the  same,  for  it  was 
the  gradual  progress  of  that  change  which  would  bring  over  them  in  God's  own 
good  time  their  own  true  governors,  such  as  were  meet  for  them.  And  in  the 
meanwhile  those  evil  rulers  formed  a  part  of  that  discipline  of  faith  by  which  they 
were  perfected  and  established,  being  purified  thereby  as  gold  in  the  fire.  More- 
over, it  is  observed  that  the  Church  of  God  has  flourished  more  under  heathen 
than  under  its  own  Christian  rulers.  This  consideration  may  allay  our  impatience ; 
we  are  at  best  so  weak  and  frail  that  we  need  the  iron  rod  more  than  the  golden 
sceptre;  in  our  present  state  the  Cross  is  more  suited  for  us  than  the  crown.  In 
prosperity  we  lean  on  an  arm  of  flesh,  and  are  weakened ;  in  adversity  we  lean  on  God, 
and  are  strengthened.  But  then  it  may  be  said  that  there  is  a  case  far  more  grievous 
than  this,  that  of  evil  ministers  in  the  Church  itself,  whether  it  be  of  chief  pastors, 
or  of  those  in  their  ov/n  nearer  and  subordinate  sphere.  These  are  trials  peculiarly 
heavy  to  a  good  man  ;  and  there  are  some  cases  which  can  only  be  considered  as 
severe  visitations  of  God,  and  the  scourge  of  sin.  But  if  God  does  not  afford  the 
power  of  remedying  this  great  evil,  then  the  same  law  of  patience  must  be  applied. 
In  one  ruler  or  pastor  you  may  read  God's  wrath,  in  another  His  love.  You  cannot 
reject  either;  take  His  wrath  in  meekness,  and  He  may  show  you  His  love.  And 
in  the  meanwhile,  with  regard  to  any  particular  case  of  great  trial,  we  must  practise 
forbearance,  and  God  will  remember  us  in  His  own  good  time.  This  duty  of 
meekness  and  patience  applies  to  a  case  so  far  as  it  is  one  we  cannot  remedy,  like 
any  evil  or  scourge  that  comes  to  us  from  God's  hand,  we  must  take  it  as  our 
punishment  from  Him.  But  then  it  may  be  said,  when  the  case  is  one  that  implies 
grievous  sin,  an  example  which  dishonours  God,  corrupts  Christ's  little  ones,  and 
poisons  the  fount  of  life,  are  we  to  acquiesce  in  this  ?  Does  not  the  love  of  God 
constrain  us  not  to  resign  ourselves  to  such  evil — to  lift  up  our  voice  and  cry — to 
move  heaven  and  earth  ?  This  is  most  true  :  for  surely  there  is  a  remedy  with 
God.  When  He  has  forbidden  one  way  of  redress.  He  has  pi  anted  out  another  and 
a  better.  Our  Lord  has  pointed  out  the  one  and  only  way,  and  that  is  the  way  of 
prayer.  He  did  not  even  Himself  send  forth  apostles  without  it.  Many  are  cast 
down  because  the  Church  is  in  bonds.  It  can  neither  appoint  for  itself  suitable 
pastors,  nor  set  aside  evil  ministers,  nor  manage  its  own  affairs,  and  the  provernment 
of  it  is  falling  into  the  hands  of  its  enemies.  But  these  are  not  the  g>eat  evils  to 
be  feared ;  the  one  great  cause  for  apprehension  is  this,  whether  in  the  body  of  the 
Church  at  large  the  spirit  of  prayer  is  sufficiently  strong  to  cast  off  all  these 
impediments  ;  for  where  prayer  is,  all  such  evils  from  without  are  thrown  off,  even 


CHAP.  2VI.]  NUMBERS.  177 

as  in  the  spring  of  the  year  nature  throws  off  all  the  chains  of  winter.  The 
imprisoned  eagle  may  even  yet  soar  aloft,  and  unfold  her  wing  in  the  free  expanse 
of  heaven.     (Isaac  H'illiams,  B.D.)        Korah,  Dathan,  and  Ahiram: — I.  The  sin. 

1.  A  jealousy  of  the  privileges  and  positions  of  God's  appointed  priesthood.  2.  A 
lack  of  reverence  for  sacred  things.  3.  An  unauthorised  and  presumptuous 
intrusion   into   Divine   mysteries.     II.  The   conviction.     1.  Moses  acted   wisely. 

2.  Modestly.  3.  Prudently.  III.  The  punishment.  1.  It  destroyed  the  guilty. 
2.  It  involved  the  innocent.  3.  It  was  deterrent  in  its  tendency.  Lessons :  1. 
The  fatal  consequences  of  extreme  irreverence.  2.  Before  we  find  fault  with 
others  we  should  take  heed  to  ourselves.  3.  All  who  attempt  to  get  to  heaven 
through  their  own  efforts,  instead  of  by  the  merits  of  the  great  High  Priest,  Jesus 
Christ,  shall  share  the  fate  of  these  wicked  men.  (Preacher's  Analyst.)  Korah, 
Dathan,  and  Abiram  : — I.  The  sin  of  Korah,  Dathan,  and  Abiram  was  this  :  they 

WERE    discontented    WITH    THE    AKRANGEMENT     MADE     FOR    PUBLIC     WORSHIP    BY    THE 

CHOOSING  OUT  OP  Aaron  AND  HIS  FAMILY  TO  BE  PRIESTS.  The  argument  they  used  was 
a  very  plausible  one,  because  it  depended  upon  the  great  truth  of  the  Lord's  being 
with  all  His  people,  consecrating  and  sanctifying  them  all,  making  them  all  in  a 
certain  sense  holy  to  the  Lord,  in  a  certain  sense  priests.  It  also  flattered  the 
vanity  of  the  people,  and  strengthened  them  in  the  notion  that  they  were  oppressed 
by  their  rulers.     II.  The  answer  to  this  argument  was  that  Moses  and  Aaron  had 

NOT  lifted  themselves  UP  AT  ALL  ;    THE   LoRD  HAD  LIFTED   THEM   UP.       This  WaS   the 

answer  which  was  ultimately  given,  with  very  terrible  emphasis,  by  the  swallowing 
up  of  Korah  and  his  company.  Korah  and  his  company  had  laid  great  stress  on 
th:'  fact  that  all  the  congregation  of  the  Lord  were  holy.  Moses  and  Aaron  might 
very  well  have  replied,  that  they  for  their  part  by  no  means  questioned  the  fact. 
Moses  had  never  represented  the  choice  of  Aaron  and  his  family  as  a  declaration 
that  they  only  of  the  people  were  holy.  Nothing  could  be  a  greater  mistake  on  the 
part  of  the  people  than  to  take  this  view  of  the  priestly  consecration.   III.  Between 

OUR  OWN  PRIESTHOOD  AND  THAT  OF  THE  ISRAELITES  THERE  IS  STILL  THE  GREAT  COMMON 
GROUND  OF  MINISTRY  BEFORE  GoD  IN  BEHALF  OF  OTHERS  WHICH  MUST  BE  AT  THE  BASIS  OP 

EVERY  RELIGION.  HcDce  both  piicst  and  people  may  learn  a  lesson.  The  priest 
may  learn  that  his  office  does  not  imply  that,  he  is  holier  or  better  than  his 
brethren,  but  that  it  does  imply  greater  responsibility,  greater  opportunities  of 
good,  greater  sin  if  he  does  evil.  And  the  people  may  learn  to  be  gentle  and  con- 
siderate to  those  who  are  over  them  in  the  Lord,  not  to  be  ready  to  find  fault  and 
condemn,  but  rather  to  be  charitable,  and  forbearing,  and  gentle.  (Bp.  Hurvej 
Goodwin.)  Korah,  Dathan,  and  Abiram: — God  has  brought  the  Israelites  out 
of  Egypt.  One  of  the  first  lessons  which  they  have  to  learn  is,  that  freedom  does 
mean  license  and  discord — does  not  mean  every  one  doing  that  which  is  right  in 
his  own  eyes.  From  that  springs  self-will,  division,  quarrels,  revolt,  civil  war, 
weakness,  profligacy,  and  ruin  to  the  whole  people.  Without  order,  discipline, 
obedience  to  law,  there  can  be  no  true  and  lasting  freedom ;  and  therefore 
order  must  be  kept  at  all  risks,  the  law  obeyed,  and  rebellion  punished.  Now 
rebellion  ought  to  be  punished  far  more  severely  in  some  cases  than  in  others.  If 
men  rebel  here,  in  Great  Britain  or  Ireland,  we  smile  at  them,  and  let  them  off 
with  a  slight  imprisonment,  because  we  are  not  afraid  of  th  m.  They  can  do  no 
harm.  But  there  are  cases  in  which  rebellion  must  be  punished  with  a  swift  and 
sharp  liand.  On  board  a  ship  at  sea,  for  instance,  where  the  safety  of  the  whole 
ship,  the  hves  of  the  whole  crew,  depend  on  instant  obedience,  mutiny  may  be 
punished  by  death  on  the  spot.  And  so  it  was  with  the  Israelites  in  the  desert. 
All  depended  on  their  obedience.  The  word  must  be,  Obey  or  die.  As  for  any 
cruelty  in  putting  Korah,  Dathan,  and  Abiram  to  death,  it  was  worth  the  death  of 
a  hundred  such — or  a  thousand — to  preserve  the  great  and  glorious  nation  of  the  Jews 
to  be  the  teachers  of  the  world.  Moses  was  not  their  king.  God  brought  them  out 
of  Egypt.  God  was  th  -ir  king.  That  was  the  lesson  which  they  had  to  learn,  and 
to  teach  other  nations  also.  And  so  not  Moses,  but  God  must  punish,  and  show  that 
He  is  not  a  dead,  but  a  living  God,  who  can  defend  Himself,  and  enforce  His  own  laws, 
and  execute  jmlgment,  without  needing  any  man  to  fight  His  l>attles  for  Him.  And 
God  does  so.  The  powers  of  nature — the  earthquake  and  the  nether  fire — shall 
punish  thf  se  rebel- ;  and  so  they  do.  Men  have  thoufjht  differently  of  the  story  ; 
but  I  call  it  a  righti  ous  story,  and  one  which  agrees  with  my  conscience,  and  my 
reason,  and  my  experience  also  of  the  way  in  which  God's  w^rld  is  governed  until 
this  day.  What,  then,  are  we  to  think  of  the  earth  opening  and  swallowing  them 
up?     This  first.     That  discipline  and  order  are  so  absolutely  necessary  for  the 

12 


178  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap,  xru 


Wfrll-beiag  of  a  nation  that  they  must  be  kept  at  all  risks,  and  enforced  by  the  most 
terrible  punishments.  But  how  hard,  some  may  think,  that  the  wives  and  the 
children  should  suffi-r  for  their  parents'  sins.  We  do  not  know  that  a  single  woman 
or  child  died  then  for  whom  it  was  not  better  that  he  or  she  should  die.     And 

next what  is  it,  after  all,  but  what  we  see  going  on  round  us  all  the  d.iy  long  ? 

God  does  visit  the  sins  of  the  fathers  on  the  children.     But  there  was  another 
lesson,  and  a  deep  lesson,  in  the  earthquake  and  in  the  fire.     "Who  sends  the 
earthquake  and  the  fiire  ?     Do  they  come  from  the  devil— the  destroyer  ?     Do  they 
come  by  chance,  from  some  brute  and  blind  powers  of  nature  ?  "     This  chapter 
answers,  "  No;  they  come  from  the  Lord,  from  whom  all  good  thing"?  do  come  ;  from 
the  Lord  who  delivered  the  Israelites  out  of  Egypt ;  who  so  loved  the  world  that 
He  spared  not  His  only-begotten  Son,  but  freely  gave  Him  for  us. "     Now  I  say  that 
is  a  gospel  which  we  want  now  as  much  as  ever  men  did ;  which  the  children  of 
Israel  wanted  then,  though  not  one  whit  more  than  we.     You  cannot  read  your 
Bibles  without  seeing  how  that  great  lesson  was  stamped  into  the  very  hearts  of 
the  Hebrew  prophets  ;  how  they  are  continually  speaking  of  the  fire  and  the  earth- 
quake, and  yet  continually  declaring  that  they  too  obey  God  and  do  God's  will, 
and  that  the  man  who  fears  God  need  not  fear  them— that  God  was  their  hope  and 
strength,  a  very  present  help  in  trouble.     Therefore  would  they  not  fear,  though 
tbe  earth  was  moved,  and  though  the  mountains  be  carried  into  the  midst  of  the 
s^a.     And  we,  too,  need  the  same  lesson  in  these  scientific  days.     We  too  need  to 
fix  it  in  our  hearts,  that  the  powers  of  nature  are  the  powers  of  God  ;  that  He 
orders  them  by  His  providence  to  do  what  He  will,  and  when  and  where  He  will ; 
that,  as  the  Psalmist  says,  the  winds  are  His  messengers  and  the  flames  of  fire  His 
ministers.     And  this  we  shall  learn  from  tbe  Bible,  and  from  no  other  book  what- 
soever.     God   taught   the   Jews    this   by  a   strange   and   miraculous   education, 
that   they  might   teach   it   in   their  turn    to  all  mankind.     (C.  Kingsley,  M.A.) 
Korah :— God  was  pleased  under  the  old,  as  He  has  done  under  the  present  dis- 
pensation, to  constitute  the  priesthood  of  His  Church,  in  accordance  with  that 
principle  of  orderly  arrangement  whii-'h  runs  through  all  His  ways,  in  a  threefold 
order,  with  a  regular  distribution  and  gradation  of  powers  from  the  lowest  to  the 
highest.    But  the  wisdom  of  men  does  not  quietly  acquiesce  in  God's  wisdom  when 
it  goes  counter  to  the  interests,  impulses,  and  aspirations  of  self-love.     Men  are 
easily  brought  to  doubt  the  divinity  of  a  system  that  sets  others  over  them,  and 
assigns  them  only  an  inferior  station,  even  though  that  be  honourable  and  good. 
The  spirit  of  discontent  and  rebellion  broke  out  even  in  the  life  of  Aaron,  and 
during  the  sojourn  in  the  wilderness.     Even  thus  early  did  the  presumption  of  man 
dare  to  criticise  and  amend  the  institutions  of  God,  and  under  the  guise  of  a  zeal 
for  liberty  and  for  right,  the  favourite  pretext  of  ambition  and  selfishness,  to  break 
the  order  which  God  had  established,  and  substitute  devices  of  its  own  creation. 
Korah  was  a  Levite,  but  he  aspired  also  to  be  a  priest,  and  could  not  acquiesce  in 
those  limitations,  which,  what  he  may  have  called  the  accident  of  birth  and  the 
arbitrary  restraints  of  the  Law,  imposed  upon  him.     And  he  easily  drew  to  him 
associates  in  his  nefarious  enterprise.   The  sedition  was  wide-spread,  and  threatened 
the  most  fatal  consequences.     Jealousy   of  power  and  place  is  contagious,    and 
always  finds  an  answering  sentiment  in  many  hearts.     Broach  it  once  among  any 
body  of  men,  and  it  will  run  "  like  sparks  among  the  stubble."     Equality  and  the 
lowering  of  eminence  and  distinction,  and  disregard  of  law,  are  popular  doctrines, 
and  easily  clothe  themselves  in  specious  forms.     It  is  alleged  that  all  society  is 
sacred ;  there  is,  there  ought  to  be,  no  special  sacredness  in  any  in  eminent  place, 
which  inferiors  in  office  or  men  in  private  condition  are  bound  to  recognise  and 
respect.     Thus  the  bonds  of  social  order  in  the  Church,  in  the  State,  are  loosened 
and   destroyed.     We   stand   on   the   dignity  of  human  nature,  and  the  spiritual 
equality  of  all  Christians :  we  can  have  no  rulers,  we  will  brook  no  superiors,  w« 
will  obey  no  restrictions — the  spurious  pleas  of  presumptuous  self-will  and  ambition. 
in  the  State  and  in  the  Church,  in  all  ages.     God,  however,  quickly  interfered  in 
this  instance,  to  vindicate  and  protect  His  own  appointments,  and  keep  that  sacred 
polity  which  His  wisdom  had  provided  for  His  Church  from  being  trampled  on  an(i 
destroyed.     What,  then,  is  this  ''gainsaying  of  Core"  to  us?  and  what  may  w** 
learn  trom  it  that  is  profitable  for  admonition  and  instruction  in  righteousness* 
1.  We  learn  the  sacredness  of  the  ministry,  and  of  its  divinely  appointed  ordei 
Every  man  was  to  know  his  place  and  to  keep  it,  and  to  do  the  duty  of  his  placti 
and  none  other,  and  not,  on  some  specious  plea  of  a  higher  fitness  »r  a  larger 
usefulness,  intrude  on  work  which  Sod  had  given  to  others.     Now,  here  are  grea* 


CHAP.  XVI.]  NUMBERS.  179 

principles,  and  these  are  applicable  to  the  Charch  in  all  her  periods  and  in  all  her 
forms.  There  is  a  ministry  now  in  the  Church,  and  it  is  there  not  because  man 
made  it,  but  God.  "Let  a  man,"  says  St.  Paul,  "so  account  of  us,  as  of  the 
ministers  of  Christ,  and  stewards  of  the  mysteries  of  God."  They  hold  their  place, 
if  they  are  really  anything  at  all,  by  a  Divine  commission.  Without  a  ministry 
recognised  as  truly  Divine,  there  will  never  be  religious  stability,  nor  long,  religious 
life  and  true  Christian  morals.  And  when  these  are  gone,  civil  liberty  and  political 
order  will  not  last  long.  And  the  first,  the  fatal  step  towards  these  dreadful  losses 
is  taken  when  that  constitution  of  the  ministry  which  Christ  appointed  is  changed, 
and  the  sacred  ofiBce  begins  to  be  looked  upon  as  a  thing  which  men  may  mould 
and  alter  to  their  convenience  and  their  fancy.  2.  But  we  must  spare  a  little  space 
for  the  broader  lesson  which  this  "  gainsaying  of  Core  "  teaches  us,  namely,  that  in 
the  social  system,  we  all,  ministers  and  laymen,  especially  ministers,  have  our 
place,  which  is  appointed  us  of  God,  and  our  true  wisdom  and  happiness  lie  in 
knowing  what  it  is,  and  keeping  in  it.  Korah  had  a  place,  and  a  very  good  place, 
but  he  did  not  like  it.  He  souglit  a  better  by  uulawful  means,  and  he  lost  all,  and 
"left  his  name  for  a  curse  unto  God's  chosen."  He  forgot  that  God  had  assigned 
him  his  place,  and  that  contentment  in  it  was  a  part  of  his  religious  obedience,  the 
service  that  God  required  at  his  hands.  How  full  this  world  is  of  restless  and 
uncomfortable  aspirings  !  Men  see  around  them  higher  places,  happier  ones  as 
they  think ;  places  that  are  certainly  grander,  that  shine  more,  that  seem  to 
contain  a  greater  plenitude  of  good,  and  to  open  larger  sources  of  pleasure  and 
enjoyment.  They  are  disconteiited.  They  are  envious.  They  get  very  little 
comfort  from  what  they  have  by  reason  of  their  uneasy  hankerings  after  what  they 
have  not.  The  true  antidote  of  this  great  evil  is  faith  ;  faith  in  God  and  in  His 
overruling  Providence ;  faith  in  the  Divine  order  into  which  we  find  ourselves 
wrought,  faith  in  the  social  economy  under  which  we  live  as  a  Divine  structure  and 
appointment ;  faith  in  our  own  assignment  to  that  j)lace  and  those  relations  in  it, 
which,  whatever  we  may  think  of  them,  are  the  mind  of  God  concerning  us,  the 
work  of  that  great  fashioning  Hand  which  "  ordereth  all  things  in  heaven  and 
earth,"  and  which  appoints  to  all  inferior  agents  their  place  aud  their  work,  not  in 
caprice,  not  in  cruelty,  not  in  partiality,  not  in  a  reckless  disregard  of  their  rights 
and  their  welfare,  but  in  wisdom,  in  equity,  in  benevolence,  for  His  glory  and  the 
greatest  good  of  the  greatest  number  of  His  creatures.  (R.  A.  Hallam,  D.D.) 
Whatsoever  evil  men  do,  they  are  ready  to  justify  it: — When  evil  men  have  com- 
mitted evil,  they  are  ready  to  justify  their  evils  that  they  may  seem  good.  We  see 
this  in  Saul,  1  Sam.  xiii.  11,  12,  xv.  15  ;  John  xii.  5,  6.  Judas  pretended  the  poor  and 
his  great  care  of  them  ;  albeit  he  cared  not  for  them,  but  for  himself.  1.  For  men 
are  affected  to  their  actions  as  they  are  to  themselves.  Though  they  be  corrupt, 
yet  they  would  not  be  thought  to  be  so ;  and  therefore  they  seek  excuses  for 
themselves,  as  Adam  did  tig  leaves  to  cover  his  shame  and  his  sin.  2.  If  they 
should  pretend  nothing,  all  would  be  ready  to  condemn  them  ;  therefore,  to  blind  the 
eyes  of  others,  they  cast  a  mist  before  them  as  jugglers  used  to  do  that  they  may 
not  be  espied.  Uses :  1.  This  serveth  to  reprove  divers  sorts  that  go  about  to 
varnish  their  actions  with  false  colours,  thereby  to  blind  the  world  and  to  put  out 
their  tyes.  These  show  themselves  to  be  rank  hypocrites.  2.  We  are  to  judge  no 
otherwise  of  all  such  as  transgress  the  law  of  God,  whatsoever  their  allegations  be. 
How  many  men  are  there  that  think  even  palpable  sins  to  be  no  sins  at  all,  because 
they  can  blanch  and  colour  them  over!  (IF.  AttersoU.)  Elevated  character 
exposed  to  violence  .-—Some  years  ago  I  went  to  see  the  lighthouse  which,  standing 
on  Dunnet  Head — the  Cape  Orcas  of  the  Komans— guards  the  mouth  of  the 
Pentland  Firth.  On  ascending  the  tower,  I  observed  the  thick  plate-glass  windows 
of  the  lanthnrn  cracked— starred  in  a  number  of  places.  I  turned  to  the  keeper  for 
an  explanation.  It  appears  that  is  done  by  stones  flung  up  by  the  sea.  The  wave, 
on  being  thrown  forward  against  the  cliff,  strikes  it  with  such  tremendous  force  as 
to  hurl  the  loose  stones  at  its  base  right  up  to  the  height  of  300  feet.  So  are  the 
great  light-bearers,  by  the  exposure  of  their  position,  and  in  spite  of  the  elevation 
of  their  character,  liable  to  be  cracked  and  starred  by  the  violence  of  the  world. 
(T.  Guthrie.)  Seek  ye  the  priesthood  also  ? — Wiched  mnbition  faithfully  rebul-ed : — 
I.  The  greatness  of  the   privileges  conferred  upon   the   Levites.     II.  The 

UNRIGHTEOUSNESS  OF  THE  AMBITION  CHERISHED  BY  THEM.     Their  ambitiou  involved 

1.  The  disparagement  of  their  present  privileges.  Their  privileges  "  seemc  d  but 
a  small  thing  unto  them."  Great  as  they  we'-e,  they  did  not  satisfy  ihem. 
"  Ambition,"  says  Trapp,  "  is  restless  and  unsatisfiable ;  for,  like  the  crocodile,  it 


180  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cuap.  xvr. 

grows  as  long  as  it  lives."  2.  Interference  in  the  Divine  arrangements.  "  Seek 
ye  the  priesthood  also  ?  "  III.  The  heinousness  of  the  kebellion  in  which  they 
ENGAGED.  Moses  points  out  to  them  concerning  their  rebellion  that — 1.  It  was  un- 
reasonable. "  What  is  Aaron  that  ye  murmur  against  him  ?  "  The  high  priest 
was  merely  an  instrument  in  the  hand  of  the  Lord.  2.  It  was  exceedingly  sinful. 
"Thou  and  aU  thy  company  are  gathered  together  against  the  Lord."  "  Those 
resist  the  prince  who  resist  those  that  are  commissioned  by  him  "  (comp.  Matt. 
X.  40;  John  xiii.  20;  Acts  ix.  4).  Conclusion:  1.  Let  us  crush  every  rising  of 
ambition  which  is  not  in  harmony  with  wisdom  and  righteousness.  2.  Let  us  seek 
to  give  to  our  ambition  a  righteous  and  noble  direction.  {W.  Jones.)  The 
■privileges  of  the  Levites  : — 1.  They  were  separated  from  the  congreg  ition  of  Israel, 
distinguished  from  them,  dignified  above  them ;  instead  of  complaining  that  Aaron's 
family  was  advanced  above  theirs,  they  ought  to  be  thankful  that  their  tribe  was 
advanced  above-  the  rest  of  the  tribes,  though  they  had  been  in  all  respects  upon 
the  level  with  them.  Note,  it  will  help  to  keep  us  from  envying  those  that  are 
above  us,  duly  to  consider  how  many  there  are  above  whom  we  are  placed.  Many 
perhaps  who  deserve  better  are  not  preferred  so  well.  2.  They  were  separated  to 
very  great  and  valuable  honours.  (1)  To  draw  near  to  God,  nearer  than  common 
Israelites,  though  they  also  were  a  people  near  unto  Him  :  the  nearer  any  are  to 
God,  the  greater  is  their  honour.  (2)  To  do  the  service  of  the  tabernacle.  It 
is  honour  enough  to  bear  the  vessels  of  the  sanctuary,  and  to  be  employed  in  any 
part  of  the  service  of  the  tabernacle  ;  God's  service  is  not  only  perfect  freedom,  but 
high  preferment.  Note,  those  are  truly  great  that  serve  the  public,  and  it  is  the 
honour  of  God's  ministers  to  be  the  Church's  ministers  :  nay  (which  adds  to  the 
dignity  put  upon  them),  (3)  It  was  the  God  of  Israel  Himself  that  separated  them. 
It  was  His  act  and  deed  to  put  them  in  their  place,  and  therefore  they  ought  not  to 
be  discontented  with  that ;  and  He  it  was  likewise  that  put  Aaron  into  his  place,  and 
therefore  they  ought  not  to  envy  that.  3.  He  convicts  them  of  the  sin  of  under- 
valuing these  privileges,  "  Seemeth  it  a  small  thing  unto  you  ?  "  It  ill  becomes  you, 
of  all  men,  to  grudge  Aaron  the  priesthood,  when  at  the  same  time  that  he  was 
advanced  to  that  honour,  you  were  designed  to  another  honour  dt  pendent  upon  it, 
and  shine  with  rays  borrowed  from  him.  Note  :  (1)  The  privilege  of  drawing  near 
to  the  God  of  Israel  is  not  a  small  thing  in  itself,  and  therefore  must  not  seem 
small  to  us.  To  those  who  neglect  opportunities  of  drawing  near  to  God,  who  are 
careless  and  formal  in  it,  to  whom  it  is  a  task,  and  not  a  pleasure,  we  may  properly 
put  this  question,  Seemeth  it  a  small  thing  to  you  that  God  bas  made  you  a  people 
near  unto  Him  ?  (2)  Those  who  aspire  and  usurp  the  honours  forbidden  them,  put 
a  great  contempt  upon  the  honours  allowed  them.  We  have  each  of  us  as  good  a 
share  of  reputation  as  God  sees  fit  for  us,  and  sees  us  fit  for,  and  much  better  than 
we  deserve;  and  we  ought  to  rest  satisfied  with  it,  and  not  as  these  here,  exercise 
ourselves  in  things  too  high  for  us :  "  Seek  ye  the  priesthood  also  ?  "  They 
would  not  own  that  they  sought  it,  but  Moses  saw  that  in  their  eye :  the  law 
had  provided  very  well  for  those  that  served  at  the  altar,  and  therefore  they  would 
put  in  for  the  office.  4.  He  interprets  their  mutiny  to  be  a  rebelhon  against 
God  (ver.  1).  While  they  pretended  to  assert  the  holiness  and  liberty  of  the  Israel 
of  God,  they  really  took  up  arms  against  the  God  of  Israel :  "Ye  are  gathered  together 
against  the  Lord."  Note,  those  that  strive  against  God's  ordinances  and  provi- 
dences, whatever  they  pretend,  and  whether  they  are  aware  of  it  or  no,  do  indeed 
strive  with  their  Maker.  Those  resist  the  prince  who  resist  those  that  are  com- 
missioned by  him.  For  alas  !  saith  Moses,  "  What  is  Aaron  that  ye  muimur  against 
him?  "  If  murmurers  and  complainers  would  consider  that  the  instruments  they 
quarrel  with  are  but  instruments  whom  God  employs,  and  that  they  are  but  what 
He  makes  them,  and  neither  more  nor  less,  better  nor  worse,  they  would  not  be  so 
bold  and  free  in  their  (^ensures  and  reproaches  as  they  are.  They  that  found  the 
priesthood,  as  it  was  settled,  a  blessing,  must  give  all  the  praise  to  God  ;  but  if  any 
thought  it  a  burden,  they  must  not  therefore  quarrel  with  Aaron,  who  is  but  what 
he  is  made,  and  doth  as  he  is  bidden.  Thus  he  interested  God  in  the  cause,  and  so 
might  be  sure  of  speedmg  well  in  his  appeal.  (Matthew  He nni,  D.D.)  Sejmration 
for  nenrnrss  to  God  : — I.  God's  separation  of  His  servants.  1.  The  demand 
for  this  may  come  with  the  first  Divine  call  of  which  the  soul  is  conscious.  To  one 
living  a  worldly  life  tliere  comes  a  conviction  of  the  folly  of  this,  which  is  really  a 
Divine  call  to  rise  and  pass  from  it,  through  surrender  to  Christ,  to  the  number  of 
the  redeemed.  But  that  call  is  not  easy  to  obey  at  first.  The  influences  under 
which  we  have  grown  hold  us  where  we  are  ;  aims  to  which  we  have  been  devoted. 


CHAP.  XVI.]  NUMBERS.  181 

and  in  which  we  have  much  at  stake,  refuse  to  be  lightly  abandoned;  old 
associations  and  pleasures  throw  their  arms  about  us,  like  the  family  of  Bunyan's 
pilgrim,  detaining  us  when  we  would  flee ;  the  woi'ld's  beauty  blinds  us  to  the 
greater  beauty  of  the  spiritual,  and  we  fear  to  cast  ourselves  into  the  unknown. 

2.  This  demand  is  repeated  by  God's  constant  requirement  of  His  people.  For  it  is 
the  law  of  spiritual  life  to  "  die  daily,"  to  "  crucify  the  flesh  with  the  affections  and 
lusts  " ;  and  what  is  that  but  to  sever  ourselves  for  Christ's  sake  from  ol)jects  to 
■which  the  natural  man  would  cleave !  3.  And  this  demand  of  God  is  supplemented 
by  His  frequent  providence.  He  calls  us  to  voluntary  separation,  He  also 
separates  us  whether  we  will  or  no.  Evidently  spiritual  life  needs  much  lone- 
liness. II.  This  sep.iration  is  for  nearness  to  Himself.  1.  For  apprehending 
God,  we  need  separation  from  what  is  wrong.  Every  turning,  however  little, 
towards  the  world  from  the  demand  of  conscience  is  a  turning  a  little  more  away 
from  God,  till  He  is  behind  us  and  we  lose  sight  of  Him,  and  live  as  though  He 
were  not.  Yea,  sin  not  only  tarns  the  back  on  Him,  it  dims  the  eye  to  the  spiritual 
so  that  though  He  stand  before  us  we  are  blind  to  His  presence.  2.  Besides  this, 
for  communion  with  God  we  need  separation  from  engrossing  scenes  and  tasks, 
■"  How  rare  it  is,"  said  Fenelon,  "  to  find  a  soul  still  enough  to  hear  God  speak !  " 

3.  Moreover,  for  God's  tenderest  ministry  we  need  separation  from  other  joys. 
III.  This  is  the  answer  to  the  spirit  of  murmuring.  Then  is  the  time  to  think 
how  we  are  separated  for  nearness  to  God,  and  to  hear  the  quf^stion  in  the  text, 
"  Seemeth  it  but  a  small  thing  unto  you  ?  "  1.  Let  it  comfort  us  in  enforced 
severance  from  what  we  love.  When  we  reflect  on  what  we  are  severed  from,  let  us 
reflect  on  the  rare  compensation — what  we  are  severed  to.  God  is  the  sum  of  joy, 
it  is  heaven  to  serve  Him  and  to  see  His  face,  all  else  is  nothing  compared  with 
conscious  nearness  to  Him,  and  that  is  our  desire  and  prayer.  2.  Let  this  impel 
us  to  seek  Divine  nearness  in  the  time  of  our  separation.  For  nearness  has  not 
always  followed  separation  in  our  experience :  on  the  contrary,  the  seasons  of 
isolation  we  have  referred  to  have  sometimes  left  us  farther  from  God  than  we 
■were.  May  not  that  be  due  to  the  fact  that  fellowship  with  Him  requires  that  we 
go  to  Him  for  reception  ?  3.  And  let  this  give  us  victory  over  the  temptation  to 
cleave  to  evil.  For  when  we  first  hear  the  call  to  relinquish  sin  the  demand  seems 
too  great,  as  though  we  were  to  leave  all  for  nothing.  And  after  our  Christian 
course  has  begun,  it  seems  impossible  to  give  up  many  an  object  we  suddenly  find 
forbidden.  From  what,  then,  we  are  called  to  leave,  let  us  turn  to  think  of  what 
we  are  called  to  have.  "Fear  not,  Abram,"  God  said  to  the  patriarch,  who  had 
refused  the  spoil  at  the  slaughter  of  the  kings,  "  Fear  not,  Abram,  I  am  thy  exceed- 
ing great  ivward  !  "  And  so  He  says  to  us,  adiUug,  as  we  waver,  Lovest  thou  these 
more  than  Me ;  are  they  more  to  you  than  My  favour.  My  fellowship.  Myself?  (C.New.) 
The  greater  our  means  are  to  prevent  sin,  the  more  we  offend  if  we  reject  those 
means : — We  learn  hereby  that  the  more  helps  we  have  to  prevent  sin,  the  greater 
our  sin  is  if  we  break  these  bands  and  cast  these  cords  from  us.  The  sins  of  the 
Israelites  are  often  aggravated,  because  the  Lord  had  sent  His  prophets  among 
them  (.Jer.  vii.  13,  14,  xi.  7,  8,  xxxv.  14  ;  Psa.  Ixxviii.  17,  31,  35,  56  ;  Matt.  xi. 
21-24  ;  Dan.  ix.  5,  6).  The  reasons  :  1.  First,  because  those  men  sin  against  know- 
ledge, having  the  Word  to  inform  them  and  their  own  consciences  to  convince  them. 
2.  Secondly,  it  argiieth  obstinacy  of  heart ;  they  have  many  strokes  given  them, 
but  they  feel  none  of  them.  For  such  as  transgress  in  the  midst  of  those  helps 
that  serve  to  restrain  sin  do  not  sin  of  infirmity,  but  of  wilfulness.  Now,  the 
more  wilful  a  man  is,  the  more  sinful  he  is.  Uses  :  1.  This  convinceth  our  times 
of  much  sinfulness,  and  in  these  times  some  places,  and  in  those  places  sundry 
persons  to  be  greater  sinners  than  others.  And  why  greater  ?  Because  our  times 
have  had  more  means  to  keep  from  sin  than  other  times  have  had.  What  hath 
not  God  done  for  us  and  to  us  to  reclaim  us  ?  Thus  do  we  turn  our  blessings  to 
be  our  bane,  and  God's  mercies  to  be  curses  upon  us.  2.  Secondly,  it  admonisheth 
all  that  enjoy  the  means  of  preventing  sin  as  benefits  and  blessings,  the  Scriptures 
and  Word  of  God,  His  corrections.  His  promises  and  threatenings.  His  patience 
and  longsufferance,  that  they  labour  to  make  profit  by  them  and  to  fulfil  all 
righteousness,  lest  God  account  their  sin  greater  than  others.  3.  Lastly,  learn 
from  hence  that  the  Word  is  never  preached  in  vain,  whether  we  be  converted  by 
iter  not  (see  Isa.  Iv.  10,  11).  (IF.  Attersoll.)  Every  man  in  his  place: — In  all 
the  departments  of  life  there  are  men  who  are  as  Moses  and  Aaron.  Take  any 
department  of  life  that  may  first  occur  to  the  imagination.  Shall  we  say  the 
department  of  commerce  ?    Even  in  the  market-place  we  have  Moses  and  Aaron, 


182  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvr. 

and  th(-y  cannot  be  deposed.     Where  is  the  man  who  thinks  he  could  not  conduct 
the  largest  business  in  the  city  ?     Yet  the  poor  cripple  could  not  conduct  it,  and 
the  greatest  punishment  that  could  befall  the  creature  would  be  to  allow  him  to 
attempt  to  rule  a  large  and  intricate  commercial  concern.     But  it  seems  to  be  hard 
for  a  man  to  see  some  other  man  at  the  very  head  of  commercial  affairs  whose  word 
is  law,  whose  signature  amounts  to  a  species  of  sovereignty,  and  to  know  that  all 
the  while   he,  the  observer,  is,  in  his  own  estimation,  quite  as  good  a  man — a 
person  of  remarkable  capacity,  and  he  is  only  waiting  for  an  opportunity  to  wear 
a  nimbus  of  glory — a  halo  of  radiance — that  would  astound  the  exchanges  of  the 
world.     But  it  cannot  be  done.     There  are  great  business  men  and  small  business 
men  :  there  are  wholesale  men  and  retail  men,  and  neither  the'  wholesale  nor  the 
retail  affects  the  quality  of  the  man's  soul,  or  the  destiny  of  the  man's  spirit ;  but, 
as  a  matter  of  fact,  these  distinctions  are  made,  and  they  are  not  arbitrary :  in  the 
spirit  of  them  there  is  a  Divine  presence.     If  men  could  believe  this,  they  would  be 
comforted  accordingly.     Every  preacher  knows  in  his  inmost  soul  that  he  is  fit  to 
be  the  Dean  of  St.  Paul's,  or  the  Dean  of  Westminster — every  preacher  knows  that; 
but  to  be  something  less — something  officially  lower — and  yet  to  accept  the  inferior 
position  with  a  contentment  which  is  inspired  by  faith  in  God,  is  the  very  conquest 
of  the  Spirit  of  heaven  in  the  heart  of  man,  is  a  very  miracle  of  grace.     (J.  Parker, 
D.D.)        Leaders   of  disaffection: — It   is   always  a  most  critical   moment  in  the 
history  of  an  assembly  when  a  spirit  of  disaffection  displays  itself ;  for,  if  it  be 
not  met  in  the  right  way,  the  most  disastrous  consequences  are  sure  to  follow. 
There  are  materials  in  every  assembly  capable  of  being  acted  upon,  and  it  only 
needs  some  restless  master  spirit  to  arise,  in  order  to  work  on  such  materials,  and 
fan  into  a  devouring  flame  the  fire  that  has  been  smouldering  in  secret.     There  are 
hundreds  and  thousands  ready  to  flock  around  the  standard  of  revolt,  when  once  it 
has  been  raised,  who  have  neither  the  vigour  nor  the  courage  to  raise  it  themselves. 
It  is  not  every  one  that  Satan  will  take  up  as  an  instrument  in  such  work.     It 
needs  a  shrewd,  clever,  energetic  man — a  man  of  moral   power — one  possessing 
influence  over  the  minds  of  his  fellows,  and  an  iron  will  to  carry  forward  his 
schemes.     No  doubt  Satan  infuses  much  of  all  these  into  the  men  whom  he  uses 
in  his  diabolical  undertakings.     At  all  events,  we  know,  as  a  fact,  that  the  great 
leaders  in  all  rebellious  movements  are  generally  men  of  master  minds,  capable  of 
swaying,  according  to  their  own  will,  the  fickle  multitude,  which,  like  the  ocean,  is 
acted  upon  by  every  stormy  wind  that  blows.     Such  men  know  how,  in  the  first 
place,  to  stir  the  passions  of  the  people ;  and,  in  the  second  place,  how  to  wield 
them  when  stirred.     Their  most  potent  agency — the  lever  with  which  they  can 
most  effectually  raise  the  masses — is  some  question  as  to  their  liberty  and  their 
rights.     If  they  can  only  succeed  in  persuading  people  that  their  liberty  is  cur- 
tailed, and  their  rights  infringed,  they  are  sure  to  gather  a  number  of  restless 
spirits  around  them,  and  do  a  vast  deal  of  serious  mischief.     (C.  H.  Mackintosh.) 
Discontent  a  rebellion  against  God : — God  counts  it  rebellion  (cf.  xvii.  10).     Mur- 
muring is  but  as  the  smoke  of  a  fire  ;  there  is  first  a  smoke  and  a  smother  before 
the  flame  breaks  forth:  and  so  before  open  rebellion  in  a  kingdom  there  is  first  a 
smoke  of  murmuring,  and  then  it  breaks  forth  into  open  rebellion.     Because  it 
has  rebellion  in  the  seeds  of  it,  it  is  counted  before  the  Lord  to  be  rebellion.    When 
thou  feelest  thy  heart  discontented  and  murmuring  against  the  dispensation  of  God 
toward  thee,  thou  shouldest  check  thy  heart  thus:  "Oh!  thou  wi-etched  heart! 
What  1  wilt  thou  be  a  rebel  against  God?  "    (/.  Burroughs.)       Fatal  discontent : — 
A  fern  told  me  that  it  was  too  bad  to  be  always  shut  up  in  a  shady  place,  and  that 
it  wanted  to  grow  beside  the  red  rose  in  the  garden.     The  fern  said,  "  I  have  as 
much  right  to  be  out  in  the  sunshine  as  the  rose  has,  and  I  will  be  out."     I  trans- 
planted the  little  malcontent,  and  in  one  hot  day  the  sun  struck  it  dead  with  his 
dart  of  fire.     Now,  if  we  be  where  Christ  means  us  to  be,  in  shade  or  in  light, 
and  will  grow  according  to  His  will,  it  shall  be  well  with  us,  but  if  we  touch  that 
which  is  forbidden,  we  shall  be  made  to  remember  that  it  is  written,  "  In  the  day 
that  thou  eatest  thereof,  thou  shalt  surely  die."     (J.  Parker,  D.D.)         Every  man 
should  walk  as  he  is  called  of  God: — As  in  an  orchard  there  is  variety  of  fruit, 
apple  trees,  pear  trees,  plum  trees,  &c.,  and  every  tree  endeavours  to  suck  juice 
answerable  to  his  kind,  that  it  may  bear  such  a  f luit ;  and  an  apple  tree  doth  not 
turn  a  plum  tree,  nor  a  plum  tree  a  cherry  tree,  <fec. ;  but  every  ti-ee  contents  itself 
to  be  of  its  own  kind  :  so  in  the  Church  and  commonwealth  there  are  varieties  of 
callings,  pastors,  people,  magistrates,  subjects ;    some  higher,  some  lower.     And 
here  now  every  man  is  to  «alk  as  he  is  called  of  God,  and  learn  what  belongs 


CHAP.  XVI.]  NUMBERS.  183 

thereunto,  not  to  encroach  or  intermeddle  with  that  which  belongs  to  others  :  for 
the  saying  of  that  Roman  general  to  the  soldier  that  kept  the  tents,  when  he  should 
have  been  fighting  in  the  field,  "  Non  amo  nimiuni  diii;jciiti'm,"  will  be  one  day 
used  of  God,  if  He  calls  us  to  one  possession,  and  we  busy  ourselves  about  another ; 
if  He  set  us  on  foot,  and  we  will  be  on  horseback ;  if  He  make  us  subjects,  and  we 
must  needs  be  superiors.  God  will  not  be  pleased  with  such  busybodies.  (J. 
Spencer.)  Respect  not  Thou  their  offering. — The  resentment  of  Moses  against 
sinners: — Moses,  though  the  meekest  man,  yet  finding  God  reproached  in  him, 
was  very  wroth  ;  he  could  not  bear  to  see  a  people  ruining  themselves  for  whose 
salvation  he  had  done  so  much.  In  this  discomposure — 1.  He  appeals  to  God  con- 
cerning his  own  integrity  ;  whereas  they  basely  reflected  upon  him  as  ambitious, 
covetous,  and  oppressive  in  making  himself  a  prince  over  them.  God  was  his 
witness — (1)  That  he  never  got  anything  by  them:  "I  have  not  taken  one  ass 
from  them,"  not  only  not  by-  way  of  bribery  and  extortion,  but  not  by  way  of 
recompense  and  gratuity  for  all  the  good  offices  he  had  done  them  ;  he  never  took 
the  pay  of  a  general,  or  salary  of  a  judge,  much  less  the  tribute  of  a  prince.  He 
got  more  in  his  estate  when  he  kept  Jethro's  flock  than  since  he  came  to  be  king 
in  Jeshurun.  (2)  That  they  never  lost  anything  by  him :  "  Neither  have  I  hurt 
any  one  of  them,"  no,  not  the  least,  no,  not  the  worst,  no,  not  those  that  had  been 
most  peevish  and  provoking  to  him.  He  never  abused  his  power  to  the  support  of 
wrong.  Note,  those  that  have  never  blemished  themselves  need  not  fear  being 
blemished.  When  men  condemn  us  we  may  be  easy,  if  our  hearts  condemn  us 
not.  2.  He  begs  of  God  to  plead  his  cause  and  clear  him  by  showing  His  displea- 
sure at  the  incense  which  Korah  and  his  company  were  to  offer,  with  whom  Dathan 
and  Abiram  were  in  confederacy.  "Lord,"  said  he,  "respect  not  Thou  their 
offering."  Wherein  he  seems  to  refer  to  the  history  of  Cain,  lately  written  by  his 
own  hand,  of  whom  it  is  said  that  to  him  and  his  offering  God  had  not  respect 
(Gen.  iv.  4).  These  that  followed  the  gainsaying  of  Korah  walked  in  the  way  of 
Cain  (they  are  put  together,  Jude  ver.  11),  and  therefore  he  prays  they  might  be 
frowned  upon  as  Cain  was,  and  put  to  the  same  confusion.  {Matthew  Henry,  D.D.) 
A  fire  from  the  Lord. — Presumptuous  service :— 'No  man  is  indispensable  to  God. 
These  men  had  no  business  to  offer  incense.  God  will  not  have  the  order  of  the 
Church  or  the  order  of  the  universe  disturbed  without  penalty.  Things  are  all 
fixed,  whether  you  like  it  or  not ;  the  bounds  of  our  habitation  are  fixed.  He  who 
would  upset  any  axiom  of  God  always  goes  down  into  the  pit,  the  earth  opens  and 
swallows  him  up.  That  will  be  so  until  the  end  of  time.  It  is  so  in  literature,  it 
is  so  in  housekeeping,  it  is  so  in  statesmanship,  it  is  so  in  preaching.  The  whole 
order  of  creation  is  God's  ;  why  can  we  not  simply,  lovingly  accept  it,  and  say. 
Good  is  the  will  of  the  Lord?  Why  this  chafing  against  the  bars  of  the  cage? 
Why  this  discontent  with  the  foundations  of  things?  The  Lord  placed  me  here,  it 
is  the  only  place  I  am  fit  for,  or  I  have  been  qualified  by  Divine  compassion  and 
love  for  this  position  :  good  is  the  will  of  the  Lord !  Better  that  incense  be  not 
offered  than  that  it  be  offered  by  unworthy  hands.  There  is  really  nothing  in  the 
incense ;  it  is  in  the  motive,  in  the  purpose,  it  is  in  the  honest  handling  of  the 
censer,  that  good  is  done  by  any  service  or  by  any  ceremony.  No  bad  man  can 
preach.  He  can  talk,  he  can  say  beautiful  words,  but  he  does  not  preach  so  as  to 
get  at  the  heart  and  at  the  conscience,  and  so  as  to  bless  all  the  deeper  and  inner 
springs  of  human  life  and  human  hope.  Officialism  is  not  piety.  A  man  may 
have  a  censer,  and  yet  have  no  right  to  it.  A  man  may  be  robed  in  the  clothes  of 
the  Church,  but  be  naked  before  heaven,  and  be  regarded  by  high  heaven  as  a 
violator  and  an  intruder.  Whoever  uses  a  censer  gives  himself  more  or  less  of 
publicity:  by  so  much  does  he  become  a  leader;  and  by  so  much  as  a  man  is  a 
leader  does  God's  anger  burn  hotly  against  him  when  he  prostitutes  his  leadership. 
How  many  men  were  there  ?  Two  hundred  and  fifty.  That  was  a  great  numerical 
loss.  Yes,  it  was  :  but  numerical  losses  may  be  moral  gains.  The  congregation 
must  be  weighed  as  well  as  numbered.  Some  churches  would  be  fuller  if  they  were 
emptier.  The  Church  of  Christ  would  be  stronger  to-day  if  all  nominal  professors 
were  shed  off,  if  the  earth  would  open  and  swallow  them  up  every  one.  These 
were  two  hundred  and  fifty  trespassers.  Whatever  they  were  outside  the  Church, 
they  had  no  right  to  be  within  it  in  the  sense  which  they  now  represent  by  this 
action.  No  true  man  was  ever  cut  off,  let  me  say  again  and  again.  The  whole 
emphasis  is  upon  the  word  "  true."  He  may  not  be  a  great  man  or  a  brilliant 
man,  he  may  be  nothing  of  a  genius,  but  if  he  be  true,  that  is  the  only  genius  God 
desiderates  as  fundamental  and  permanent.     {J.  Parker,  D.D.) 


184  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cHkV.  xvi. 

Vers.  37-40.  Take  up  the  censers. — Divine  economy: — What  God  has  kissed 
must  not  be  lost ;  ^\hat  God  has  consecrated  must  be  preserved.  The  two- 
hundred  and  fifty  men  may  be  burned  up,  the  censers  may  be  scorched,  but  they 
shall  be  turned  to  some  use  in  the  sanctuary.  0  thou  great  Economist,  the  very- 
stones  of  Thy  house  are  sacred  to  Thee  ;  they  are  not  sacred  as  magically  conse- 
crated, but  tiiey  are  sacred  because  Thou  bast  told  men  to  seek  in  the  quarries  of 
the  earth  and  iu  the  forests  of  the  laud  for  stone  and  wood  to  put  together  to  make 
a  sanctuary  for  Tbee  ;  and  once  Thine,  Thine  for  ever.  The  stoues  are  dear  to 
Thee,  yea,  the  dust  of  Zion  is  more  than  the  constellations  of  the  sky.  If  we  have 
given  anything  to  the  Cross,  it  is  God's ;  it  will  never  be  unholy.  At  the  beginning 
of  every  year  some  men  say,  "  So  much  for  Christ."  They  say,  "  There  it  is  ;  every 
penny  is  His,  it  will  all  go  to  His  treasury."  Such  men  can  never  be  vexed  and 
fretted  by  appeals,  because  they  have  given  the  money,  and  when  they  have  spent 
all  the  money  they  say  so,  and  God  is  as  pleased  with  their  not  giving  as  with  their 
giving,  because  they  have  given  it  all.  They  first  set  it  apart,  they  consecrated  it, 
they  took  it  to  the  Cross  and  said,  Jesus,  this  little  handful  is  all  Thine  ;  help  me 
to  spend  it  aright.  It  is  all  gone,  so  when  the  next  applicant  comes  and  gets- 
nothing,  God  is  not  displeased.  So  let  us  give  ourselves  to  Christ ;  then  every  hair 
on  our  head  is  His,  and  will  be  numbered  ;  all  our  outgoings  and  incomings,  our 
downsittings  and  uprisings,  will  be  of  consequence  to  Heaven.  Why  ?  Not  because 
of  the  detailed  action,  but  because  the  life  out  of  which  all  of  that  action  came  was- 
itself  baptized,  made  holy  with  the  chrism  of  fire.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Vers.  41-50.  On  the  morrow  all  the  congregation  .  .  .murmured. — Transgression 
and  intercession  : — I.  A  new  rebellion  raised  the  vert  next  day  against  Moses  and 
Aaron.  Be  astonished,  O  heavens,  at  this,  and  wonder,  0  earth !  Was  there  ever  such 
an  instance  of  the  incurable  corruption  of  sinners !  (ver.  41).  On  the  morrow  the  body 
of  the  people  mutinied — 1.  Though  they  were  but  newly  terrified  by  the  sight  of  the 
punishment  of  the  rebels.  Warnings  slighted.  2.  Though  they  were  but  newly  saved 
from  sharing  in  the  same  punishment,  and  the  survivors  were  as  brands  plucked  out 
of  the  burning,  yet  they  fly  in  the  face  of  Moses  and  Aaron,  to  whose  intercession  they 
owed  their  preservation.  II.  God's  speedy  appearing  against  the  rebels.  When 
they  were  gathered  against  Moses  and  Aaron,  perhaps  with  design  to  depose  or 
murder  them,  they  looked  towards  the  tabernacle,  as  if  their  misgiving  cons-ciences- 
expected  some  frowns  from  thence ;  and  behold  the  glory  of  the  Lord  appeai'ed 
(ver.  42)  for  the  protection  of  His  servants,  and  confusion  of  His  and  their  accusers. 
Moses  and  Aaron  thereupon  came  before  the  tabernacle,  partly  for  their  own 
safety  ;  there  they  took  sanctuary  from  the  strife  of  tongues  (Psa.  xxxvii.  5,  xxxi. 
20),  and  partly  for  advice,  to  know  what  was  the  mind  of  God  upon  this  occasion 
(ver.  43).  Justice  hei-eupon  declares.  They  deserve  to  be  consumed  in  a  moment 
(ver.  4.5).  Why  should  they  live  another  day  who  hate  to  be  reformed,  and  whose 
rebellions  are  their  daily  practices  ?  Let  just  vengeance  take  place  and  do  its 
work,  and  the  trouble  with  them  will  soon  be  over;  only  Moses  and  Aaron  must 
first  be  secured.  III.  The  intercession  which  Moses  and  Aaron  made  for  them. 
Though  they  had  as  much  reason,  one  would  think,  as  Elias  had,  to  make  inter- 
cession against  Israel  (Rom.  xi.  7),  yet  they  forgive  and  forget  the  indignities 
offered  them,  and  are  the  best  friends  their  enemies  have.  1.  They  both  fell  on 
their  faces,  humbly  to  intercede  with  God  for  mercy,  knowing  how  great  their 
provocation  was.  This  they  had  done  several  times  before  upon  the  like  occasion; 
and  though  the  people  had  basely  requited  them  for  it,  yet  God  having  graciously 
accepted  them,  they  still  have  recourse  to  the  same  method.  This  is  praying 
always.  2.  Moses  perceiving  that  the  plague  was  begun  in  the  congregation  of 
the  rebels,  i.e.,  that  body  of  them  which  was  gathered  together  against  Moses,  sends 
Aaron  by  an  act  of  his  priestly  office  to  make  atonement  for  them  (ver.  46).  And 
Aaron  readily  went,  burnt  incense  between  the  living  and  the  dead,  not  to  purify 
the  infected  air,  but  to  pacify  an  offended  God,  and  so  stayed  the  progress  of  the 
judgment  (ver.  47).  IV.  The  kksult  and  lssue  of  the  whole  matter.  1.  God's 
justice  was  glorified  in  the  death  of  some.  Great  execution  the  sword  of  the  Lord 
did  in  a  very  little  time.  Though  Aaron  made  all  the  iiaste  he  could,  yet  before  he 
could  reach  his  post  of  service  there  were  fourteen  thousand  seven  hundred  men 
laid  dead  upon  the  spot  (ver.  49).  Note,  those  that  quarrel  with  lesser  judgments 
prepare  greater  for  themselves ;  for  when  God  judgeth  He  will  overcome.  2.  His 
mercy  was  glorified  in  the  preservation  of  the  rest.  God  showed  them  what 
He  could  do  by  His  power,  and  what  He  might  do  in  justice,  but  then  showed  them 


CHAP.  XVI.]  NUMBERS.  185 

what  He  could  do  in  His  love  and  pity.  He  would  preserve  them  a  people  to  Him- 
self for  all  this,  in  and  by  a  Mediator.  The  cloud  of  Aaron's  incense  coming  from 
his  band  stayed  the  plague.  Note,  it  is  much  for  the  glory  of  God's  goodness  that 
many  a  time,  even  in  wrath,  He  remembers  mercy ;  and  even  when  judgments  have 
been  begun,  prayer  has  pat  a  stop  to  them,  so  ready  is  He  to  forgive,  and  so  little 
pleasure  doth  He  take  in  the  death  of  sinners.  {Matthew  Henry,  D.D.)  The 
ciggraiated  rebellion  of  the  people,  the  effectual  intercession  of  the  good,  and  the 
justice  and  viercy  of  God : — I.  The  aggkavated  rebellion  of  the  people.  1. 
Terrible  disregard  of  Divine  warnings.  2.  Base  ingratitude  to  Moses  and  Aaron. 
3.  Profane  characterisation  of  the  wicked  as  the  people  of  God.  II.  The  speedy 
INTERPOSITION  OF  Jehovah.  1.  The  manifestation  of  His  glory.  2.  The  declaration 
of  the  desert  of  the  rebels.  III.  The  effectual  intercession  of  Moses  and 
Aaron.  1.  The  kindness  of  Moses  and  Aaron.  Their  conduct  reminds  us  of  Him 
who  prayed,  "Father,  forgive •  them,  for  they  know  not  what  they  do."  2.  The 
courage  of  Aaron.  He  feared  neither  the  excited  people  who  were  embittered 
against  him,  nor  the  pestilence  which  was  smiting  down  the  people  by  thousands, 
but  "  ran  into  the  midst  of  the  congrf  gation,"  &c.  3.  The  zeal  of  Aaron.  He  was 
now  an  old  man,  yet  he  "ran  into  the  midst,"  &c.  An  example  for  Christian 
ministers.  4.  The  success  of  Aaron.  "The  plague  was  stayed."  How  great  is 
the  power  of  prayer !  IV.  The  exercise  of  the  justice  and  mercy  of  God. 
1.  Here  is  an  impressive  display  of  Divine  justice.  Many  slain.  2.  Here  is  an 
encouraging  mani testation  of  Divine  mercy.     Some  spared.     Conclusion  :  Learn — 

1.  The  heinousness  of  sin.  2.  The  great  value  of  a  faithful  ministry.  3.  The 
readiness  of  God  to  forgive  sin.  (W.  Jones.)  Make  an  atonement  for  them. 
The  sin  of  man  and  the  salvation  of  God : — I.^  There  is  an  awful  controversy 
between  a  holt  God  and  a  rebellious  world.  Our  sin  resembles  theirs  in 
many  aspects,  and  has  the  same  aggravations.  1.  As  it  directly  strikes  against 
the  authority  and  the  grace  of  God,  whatever  be  the  form  it  assumes.  2.  As  it  is 
often  committed  in  the  face  of  frequent  and  awful  warnings.  3.  As  it  is  heightened 
by  the  experience  of  God's  preserving  and  upholding  mercy.      II.  There  is  at 

HAND   A   PRESCRIBED    AND   DlVINELY    APPROVED     REMEDY.         1.    That    OUr    Only    CSCapC 

from  threatened  wrath  is  through  the  mediation  and  advocacy  of  our  High  Priest. 

2.  That  the  plan  of  salvation  by  faith  is  as  efficacious  in  reality  as  it  is  simple  in 
its  mode  of  application.  3.  That  an  immediate  application  to  it  is  our  only  pro- 
tection against  certain  ruin.  "  Go  quickly."  {S.  lliodey.)  An  awful  spectacle, 
and  a  sitrprisiny  remedy  : — I.  An  awful  spectacle  exhibited.  "When  private  prayer 
is  a  task,  and  the  minor  moralities  of  life  begin  to  be  disregarded,  there  are  fearful 
symptoms  of  decay  and  declension.  "  The  plague  is  begun."  II.  The  surprising 
REMEDY  FOUND.  "  Take  a  censer,"  &c.  Where  is  the  physician  who  would  have 
recommended  this  a?  a  cure  for  the  plague?  Who  would  have  thought  that  the 
appearance  of  a  single  priest  amidst  the  dying  and  the  dead  should  have  stopped 
the  progress  of  the  pestilence  ?  Yet  the  incense  and  the  fire  and  the  oblation 
accomplish  that  for  Israel  which  all  the  wisdom  of  the  Egyptians  could  never 
have  achieved.  Who  does  not,  in  like  manner,  rebel  against  God's  appointed 
method  of  pardon?  or  question  the  mysterious  virtue  of  Christ's  atoning  blood, 
and  doubt  the  efficacy  of  faith,  repentance,  and  prayer?  III.  A  practical  applica- 
tion demanded.  1.  What  infinite  solemnity  attaches  to  all  the  offices  of  religion  ! 
Death  and  life  are  involved.  The  two  hundred  and  fifty  men  that  offered  incense 
perished  :  their  spirit  was  bad.  What  if  we  bring  strange  fire !  Aaron's  offering 
saves  life.  If  awful  to  preach,  so  also  to  hear.  2.  How  dreadful  if  the  plague 
be  in  the  heart,  and  we,  unconscious  of  danger,  neglect  the  remedy !  "  Examine 
yourselves."  3.  \Vhat  need  ministers  have  for  the  prayers  and  sympathies  of  their 
people  !  4.  Eejoice  in  the  absolute  sufficiency  of  salvation  applied  by  the  Spirit. 
(Ibid.)  Aaron  staying  the  plague  : — I.  The  willingness  of  Aaron  to  intercede. 
1.  Regardless  of  the  plague.  2.  Eegardiess  of  the  people's  enmity.  II.  The  nature 
of  Aaron's  intercession.  III.  The  success  of  Aaron's  intercession.  Con- 
clusion :  1.  Let  us  tremble  at  the  wrath  of  an  offended  God.  2.  Let  us  rejoice  in 
the  intercession  of  our  Great  High  Priest.  {J.  D.  Lane,  M.A.)  The  plague 
stayed : — I.  The  evil.  H.  The  punishment.  1.  Divine.  2.  By  the  plague.  (1) 
Fatal.  (2)  Speedily  so.  (3)  Invariably  so.  III.  The  remedy.  1.  In  itself,  not 
apparently  adapted.  2.  Connected  with  pious  intercession.  3.  Intercession 
grounded  on  sacrifice.  4.  Efficient.  (1)  Completely.  (2)  At  once.  Learn :  I. 
The  extreme  evil  of  sin.  2.  The  riches  of  the  grace  of  God.  3.  The  immediate 
duty  of  the  sinner — to  call  earnestly  on  the  Lord.    (J.  Burns,  D.D.)        Mercy 


186  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

rejoiceth  against  judgment : — I.  Sin  and  its  consequence.  1.  The  sin  of  the 
Israelites  was  rebellion  against  God.  2.  The  terrible  visitation.  II.  The  ato.ne- 
MENT,  AND  ITS  SUCCESS.  1.  A  significant  act.  (1)  Aaron  a  type  of  the  Lord 
Jesus.  (2)  He  stood  between  the  dead  and  the  living.  (3)  Jesus  has  done  more 
than  Aaron.  2.  The  completeness  of  His  atonement.  II.  The  special  lessons 
TO  BE  dekived  fkom  HENCE.  1.  The  faithful  minister  of  God's  Word  dares  not 
withhold  the  instruction  to  be  derived  from  it  concerning  the  terrible  judgments 
which  ungodly  men  bring  on  themselves  by  continuing  in  sin  agamst  a  just  and 
holy  God.  2.  If  the  judgment  against  sin  is  so  terrible  to  contemplate,  how  much 
need  have  we  to  accept  God's  own  way  of  deliverance  !  (E.  Aurlol,  M.A.)  He 
stood  between  the  dead  and  the  living.  The  high  lyriest  standing  between  the  dead 
and  the  living : — The  whole  scene  is  typical  of  Christ ;  and  Aaron,  as  he  appears 
before  us  in  each  character,  is  a  most  magnificent  picture  of  the  Lord  Jesus.  I. 
First,  look  at  Aaron  as  the  loveb  of  the  people.  See  in  Aaron  the  lover  of  Israel;  in 
Jesus  the  lover  of  His  people.  Aaron  deserves  to  be  very  highly  praised  for  his 
patriotic  affection  for  a  people  who  were  the  most  rebellious  that  ever  grieved  the 
heart  of  a  good  man.  You  must  remember  that  in  this  case  he  was  the  aggrieved 
party.  Is  not  this  the  very  picture  of  our  Lord  Jesus  ?  Had  not  sin  dishonoured 
Him  ?  Was  He  not  the  Eternal  God,  and  did  not  sin  therefore  conspire  against  Him 
as  well  as  against  the  Eternal  Father  and  the  Holy  Spirit  ?  Was  He  not,  I  say,  the 
one  against  whom  the  nations  of  the  earth  stood  up  and  said,  "Let  us  break  His  bands 
asunder,  and  cast  His  cords  from  us  "  ?  Yet  He,  our  Jesus,  laying  aside  all  thought 
of  avenging  Himself,  becomes  the  Saviour  of  His  people.  Well,  you  note  again, 
tbat  Aaron  in  tbus  coming  forward  as  the  deliverer  and  lover  of  his  people, 
must  have  remembered  that  he  was  abhorred  by  this  very  people.  They 
were  seeking  liis  blood ;  they  were  desiring  to  put  him  and  Moses  to  death,  and  yet, 
all  thoughtless  of  danger,  he  snatches  up  his  censer  and  runs  into  their  midst  with 
a  Divine  enthusiasm  in  his  heart.  He  might  have  stood  back,  and  said,  "  No,  they 
■will  slay  me  if  I  go  into  their  ranks;  furious  as  they  are,  they  will  charge  this  new 
death  upon  me  and  lay  me  low."  But  he  never  considers  it.  Into  the  midst  of 
the  crowd  he  boldly  springs.  Most  blessed  Jesus,  Thou  mightest  not  only  think 
thus,  but  indeed  Thou  didst  feel  it  to  be  true.  Thou  wast  willing  to  die  a  martyr, 
that  Thou  mightest  be  made  a  sacrifice  for  those  by  whom  Thy  blood  was  spilt. 
Yon  will  see  the  love  and  kindness  of  Aaron  if  you  look  again  ;  Aaron  might  have 
said,  "  But  the  Lord  will  surely  destroy  me  also  with  the  people  ;  if  I  go  where  the 
shafts  of  death  are  flying  they  will  reach  me."  He  never  thinks  of  it ;  he  exposes 
his  own  person  in  the  very  forefront  of  tbe  destroying  one.  Oh,  Thou  glorious  High 
Priest  of  our  profession.  Thou  mightest  not  only  have  feared  this  which  Aaron 
might  have  dreaded,  but  Thou  didst  actually  endure  the  plague  of  God  ;  for  when 
Thou  didst  come  among  the  people  to  save  them  from  Jehovah's  wrath,  Jehovah's 
■wrath  fell  upon  Thee.  The  sheep  escaped,  but  by  "  His  life  and  blood  the  Shepherd 
pays,  a  ransom  for  the  flock."  Oh,  Tliou  lover  of  thy  Church,  immortal  honours 
be  unto  Thee !  Aaron  deserves  to  be  beloved  by  the  tribes  of  Israel,  because  he 
stood  in  the  gap  and  exposed  himself  for  their  sins  ;  but  Tliou,  most  mighty 
Saviour,  Thou  shalt  have  eternal  songs,  because,  forgetful  of  Thyself,  Thou  didst 
bleed  and  die,  that  man  might  be  saved !  I  would  again  dra-w  your  attention  to 
that  other  thought  that  Aaron  as  a  lover  of  the  people  of  Israel  deserves  mnch 
commendation,  from  the  fact  that  it  is  expressly  said,  he  ran  into  the  host.  That 
little  fact  of  his  running  is  highly  significant,  for  it  shows  the  greatness  and  swift- 
ness of  the  Divine  impulse  of  love  that  was  within.  Ah  !  and  was  it  not  so  with 
Christ  ?  Did  He  not  haste  to  be  our  Saviour  ?  Were  not  His  delights  with  the 
sons  of  men?  Did  He  not  often  say,  "I  have  a  baptism  to  be  baptized  with,  and 
how  am  I  straitened  till  it  be  accomplished  "  ?  His  dying  for  us  was  not  a  thing 
which  He  dreaded.  "  With  desire  have  I  desired  to  eat  this  passover."  II.  Now 
view  Aaron  as  the  great  propitiator.  Wrath  had  gone  out  from  God  against  the 
people  on  account  of  their  sin,  and  it  is  God's  law  that  His  wrath  shall  never  stay 
unless  a  propitiation  be  offered.  The  incense  which  Aaron  carried  in  his  hand  was 
the  propitiation  before  God,  from  the  fact  that  God  saw  in  that  perfume  the  type 
of  that  richer  offering  which  our  Great  High  Priest  is  this  very  day  offering  before 
the  throne.  Aaron  as  the  propitiator  is  to  be  looked  at  first  as  bearing  in  his 
censer  that  which  was  necessary  for  the  propitiation.  He  did  not  come  empty- 
handed.  Even  though  God's  high  priest,  he  must  take  the  censer  ;  he  must  fill  it 
with  the  ordained  incense,  made  with  the  ordained  materials  ;  and  then  he  must 
Jight  it  with  the  sacred  fire  from  off  the  altar,  and  ■with  that  alone.     Behold,  then, 


CHAP.  XVI.]  NUMBERS.  187 

Christ  Jesus  as  the  propitiator  for  His  people.  He  stands  this  day  before  God  with 
His  censer  smoking  up  towards  heaven.  Behold  the  Great  High  Priest  I  See  Him 
this  day  with  His  pierced  hands,  and  head  that  once  was  crowned  with  thorns.  Mark 
how  the  marvellous  smoke  of  His  merits  g  leth  up  for  ever  and  ever  before  the 
eternal  throne.  'Tis  He,  'tis  He  alone,  who  puts  away  the  sins  of  His  people. 
His  incense,  as  we  know,  consists  first  of  all  of  His  positive  obedience  to  the 
Divine  law.  He  kept  His  Father's  commands ;  He  did  everything  that  man  should 
have  done ;  He  kept  to  the  full  the  whole  law  of  God,  and  made  it  honourable. 
Then  mixed  with  this  is  His  blood — an  equally  rich  and  precious  ingredient.  The 
blood  of  His  very  heart — mixed  together  with  His  merits — these  make  up  the 
incense — an  incense  incomparable — an  incense  surpassing  all  others.  Besides  that, 
it  was  not  enough  for  Aaron  to  have  the  proper  incense.  Korah  might  have  that 
too,  and  he  might  have  the  censer  also.  That  would  not  suffice — he  must  be  the 
ordained  priest ;  for  mark,  two  hundred  and  fifty  men  fell  in  doing  the  act  which 
Aaron  did.  Aaron's  act  saved  others  ;  their  act  destroyed  themselves.  So  Jesus, 
the  propitiator,  is  to  be  looked  upon  as  the  ordained  one — called  of  God  a^  was 
Aaron.  But  let  us  note  once  more  in  considering  Aaron  as  the  great  propitiator, 
that  we  must  look  upon  him  as  being  ready  for  his  work.  He  was  ready  with  his 
incense,  and  ran  to  the  work  at  the  moment  the  plague  broke  out.  The  people 
were  ready  to  perish  and  he  was  ready  to  save.  Jesus  Christ  stands  ready  to  save 
thee  now  ;  there  is  no  need  of  preparation;  He  hath  slain  the  victim ;  He  bath 
offered  the  sacrifice ;  He  hath  filled  the  censer ;  He  hath  put  to  it  the  glowing 
coals.  His  breastplate  is  on  His  breast ;  His  mitre  is  on  His  head ;  He  is  ready  to 
save  thee  now.  Trust  Him,  and  thou  shalt  not  find  need  for  delay.  III.  Now  view 
Aaron  as  the  interposer.  Let  me  explain  what  I  mean.  As  the  old  Westminster 
Annotations  say  upon  this  passage,  "  The  plague  was  moving  among  the  people  as 
the  fire  moveth  along  a  field  of  corn."  There  it  came  ;  it  began  in  the  extremity  ; 
the  faces  of  men  grew  pale,  and  swiftly  on,  on  it  came,  and  in  vast  heaps  they  fell, 
till  some  fourteen  thousand  had  been  destroyed.  Aaron  wisely  puts  himself  just  in 
the  pathway  of  the  plague.  It  came  on,  cutting  down  all  before  it,  and  there  stood , 
Aaron  the  interposer  with  arms  outstretched  and  censer  swinging  towards  heaven, 
interposing  himself  between  the  darts  of  death  and  the  people.  Just  so  was  it  with 
Christ.  Wratb  had  gone  out  against  us.  The  law  was  about  to  smite  us  ;  the 
whole  human  race  must  be  destroyed.  Christ  stands  in  the  forefront  of  the  battle. 
"  The  stripes  must  fall  on  Me  !  "  He  cries ;  "  the  arrows  shall  find  a  target  in  My 
breast.  On  me,  Jehovah,  let  Thy  vengeance  fall."  And  He  receives  that  vengeance, 
and  afterwards  upspringing  from  the  grave  He  waves  the  censer  full  of  the  merit  of 
His  blood,  and  bids  this  wrath  and  fury  stand  back.  IV.  Now  view  Aaron  as  the 
SAVIOUR.  It  was  Aaron,  Aaron's  censer,  that  saved  the  lives  of  that  great  multitude. 
If  he  had  not  prayed  the  plague  had  not  stayed,  and  the  Lord  would  have  consumed 
the  whole  company  in  a  moment.  As  it  was,  you  perceive  there  were  some  fourteen 
thousand  and  seven  hundred  that  died  before  the  Lord.  The  plague  had  begun 
its  dreadful  work,  and  only  Aaron  could  stay  it.  And  now  I  want  you  to  notice 
with  regard  to  Aaron,  that  Aaron,  and  especially  the  Lord  Jesus,  must  be  looked 
upon  as  a  gracious  Saviour.  It  was  nothing  but  love  that  moved  Aaron  to  wave  liis 
censer.  The  people  could  not  demand  it  of  him.  Had  they  not  brought  a  false 
accusation  against  him?  And  yet  he  saves  them.  It  must  have  been  love  and 
nothing  but  love.  Say,  was  there  anything  in  the  voices  of  that  infuriated  multi- 
tude which  could  have  moved  Aaron  to  stay  the  plague  from  before  them  ? 
Nothing !  nothing  in  their  character !  nothing  in  their  looks !  nothing  in  their 
treatment  of  God's  High  Priest !  and  yet  he  graciously  stands  in  the  breach,  and 
saves  them  from  the  devouring  judgment  of  God !  If  Christ  hath  saved  us  He  is 
a  gracious  Saviour  indeed.  And  then,  again,  Aaron  was  an  unaided  saviour.  He 
stands  alone,  alone,  alone  !  and  herein  was  he  a  great  type  of  Christ  who  could  say, 
"  I  have  trodden  the  winepress  alone,  and  of  the  people  there  was  none  with  Me." 
Do  not  think,  then,  that  when  Christ  prevails  with  God,  it  is  because  of  any  of 
your  prayers,  or  tears,  or  good  works.  He  never  puts  your  tears  and  prayers  into 
His  censer.  They  would  mar  the  incense.  There  is  nothing  but  His  own  prayers, 
and  His  own  tears,  and  His  own  merits  there.  *'  There  is  none  other  name  under 
heaven  given  among  men,  whereby  we  must  be  saved."  Nor  doth  He  need  a 
helper;  "  He  came  not  to  call  the  righteous,  but  sinners  to  repentance."  "  He  is 
able  to  save  unto  the  uttermost  them  that  come  unto  God  by  Him."  He  was,  then, 
you  will  perceive,  a  gracious  Saviour,  and  an  unaided  one;  and,  once  more,  Aitron  as 
Si.  saviour  was  all-sufficient.    Trust  thou  thy  soul  with  Christ,  and  thy  sins  are  at 


188  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvi. 

once  forgiven,  at  once  blotted  out.  V.  Aaron  as  the  divideh — the  picture  of  Chrisc. 
Aaron  the  anointed  one  stands  here  ;  on  that  side  is  death,  on  this  side  life; 
the  boundary  between  life  and  death  is  that  one  man.  Where  his  incense  smokes 
the  air  is  purified,  where  it  smokes  not  the  plague  reigns  with  unmitigated  fury. 
There  are  two  sorts  of  people  here  this  morning,  and  these  are  the  living  and  the  dead, 
the  pardoned,  the  unpardoned,  the  saved,  and  tbe  lost.  A  man  in  Christ  is  a  Christian ; 
a  man  out  of  Christ  is  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins.  "  He  that  believeth  on  the  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  is  saved,  he  that  believeth  not  is  lost."  Christ  is  the  only  divider  between 
His  people  and  the  world.  On  which  side,  then,  art  thou  to-day  ?  (C.  H.  Sjjurgeon.) 
The  plague  in  the  icildcrness : — I.  To  say  tliat  this  evil  had  its  origin  in  sin,  would 
be  to  say  nothing.  All  evil  proceeds  from  sin  :  there  is  not  a  pang  or  sorrow  in  the 
universe  which  has  not  this  as  its  source.  But  then  suffering  owes  its  existence  to 
sin  in  various  ways.  Sometimes  it  is  sent  in  mercy  to  prevent  sin;  thus  Paul  had 
a  thorn  in  the  flesh  "lest  he  should  be  exalted."  At  other  times  it  comes  to  dis- 
cover sin  and  subdue  it  in  the  Christian's  heart.  "  Before  I  was  afflicted,"  says 
David,  "  I  went  astray,  but  now  have  I  kept  Thy  word."  More  frequently,  however, 
its  design  is  to  answer  the  purposes  of  God's  m>ral  government ;  to  punish  sin  ;  to 
manifest  the  abhorrence  in  which  the  great  Kiilf-r  of  the  universe  holds  it,  and  thus 
to  deter  His  creatures  from  the  commission  of  it.  And  such  was  its  object  here. 
The  Israelites  had  sinned  against  the  Lord;  this  plague  was  the  punishment  of 
their  sin.  1.  This  offence  involved  in  it  an  overlooking  of  God's  providence ;  at  all 
events,  a  refusing  to  acknowledge  it.  God  will  not  allow  us  to  say  for  ever,  "  Acci- 
dent brought  this  evil  on  me,  chance  this  disease,  a  casualty  this  bereavement,  the 
injustice  or  treachery  of  my  fellow-man  this  loss  and  poverty."  Either  by  His 
Spirit,  or  by  His  providence,  or  by  both,  God  will  drive  this  atheism  out  of  us.  He 
will  force  us  to  say,  "  It  is  the  Lord.  He  is  in  this  place,  mil  knew  it  not.  Verily 
there  is  a  God  that  judgeth  in  the  earth."  2.  The  murmuring  of  these  sinners 
included  in  it  also  a  daring  censure  of  God's  ways.  Whatever  God  does  bears  the 
impress  of  God.  In  some  wav  or  other  it  manifests  His  perfections,  and  con- 
sequently is  calculated  to  bring  honour  to  His  name.  Now  a  mind  in  a  right  state 
praises  Him  for  every  work  of  His  hands ;  and  it  does  so  on  account  of  the  traces 
of  His  glory  it  either  discovers  in  that  work,  or,  though  hidden,  believes  to  be  there. 
Indeed,  this  is  God's  great  design  in  all  His  doings,  to  draw  forth  prnise  from  His 
creatures  by  revealing  to  them  His  excellencies,  and  thus  to  surround  Himself  with 
a  deliMhted  and  adoring  universe.  It  follows,  then,  that  to  censure  any  of  God's 
ways  is,  as  far  as  in  us  lies,  to  frustrate  the  object  at  which  God  aims  in  these  ways; 
to  rob  Him  of  His  honour,  and  worse  than  this— to  asperse  His  character  and  vin- 
dicate His  enemies.  And  of  this  offence  these  Israelites  were  guilty.  3.  Th'^re 
was  yet  a  third  evil  comprel)ended  in  the  murmuring  of  these  Israelites;  and  this 
was  a  contempt  of  God's  warnings.  Millions  of  our  race  have  already  perished ; 
the  destroying  angfl  is  hastening  to  cut  down  millions  more.  The  world  some  of 
us  deem  so  fair  and  happy  is  nothing  better  than  the  camp  of  Israel — a  scene  of 
mercy,  it  is  true,  but  yet  a  scene  of  misery,  terror,  and  death.  How  anxious,  then, 
should  we  be  to  look  around  for  a  deliverer !  Blessed  be  God,  there  is  One  near. 
This  history  speaks  of  Him.  II.  Consider  now  the  cessation  of  the  pestilence. 
1.  It  was  effected  by  one  who  might  have  been  supposed  least  likely  to  interfere  for 
such  a  purpose.  Can  we  fail  to  discover  here  the  great  High  Prie>t  of  God"s  guilty 
church,  the  despised  and  rejected  Jesus?  Aaron  was  a  type  of  Him.  2.  The  ces- 
sation of  tb's  plague  was  attended  with  a  display  of  the  most  self-denying  and  ardent 
love.  3.  The  cessation  of  this  plague  was  brought  about  by  means  that  seemed 
altogether  inadequate,  that  appeared,  in  fact,  to  have  no  connection  at  all  with  the 
end  proposed.  (C.  Bradley,  M.A.)  Staying  the  plague  : — 1.  The  origin  of  the 
judgment  here  spoken  of.  Men  quickly  forget  the  Almighty.  2.  The  means  adopted 
to  arrest  its  devastating  progress.  Mediation.  3.  The  feelings  of  gratitude  which 
the  removal  of  the  plague  must  have  inspired.  (W.  C.  Le  Breton,  M.A.)  Stand- 
ing  between  the  dead  atid  the  livivg : — In  this,  as  in  all  other  similar  occasions,  we 
perceive  the  presence  of  the  Eternal  Son,  preparing  the  way  for  that  perfect  scheme 
of  redemption  which  was  to  be  unfolded  in  the  fulness  of  time.  Jesus  in  truth 
stood  between  the  dead  and  the  living;  for  Aaron  was  His  delpgate  and  servant: 
and  I  would  apply  the  particulars  of  the  present  transaction  to  our  own  case  and 
circumstances.  The  placue,  then,  to  which  we  may  now  advert  is  the  plague  of  sin, 
and  the  threatened  death  is  the  death  of  the  soul.  Truly  the  plague  has  begun.  It 
began  in  paradise,  and  has  been  raging  ever  since ;  and  as  soon  as  it  broke  out,  the 
Lord  appeared  to  intercede  and  to  atone.    We  can  entertain  no  doubt  of  the  exis- 


CHAP.  XVI.]  NUMBERS.  189 

tence  of  the  evil ;  we  cannot  look  far  into  the  world,  not  far  into  the  Christian 
world,  without  beholding  lamentable  proof  of  its  ravages  :  intemperance,  profligacy, 
and  even  blasphemy,  meet  us  in  every  quarter ;  the  moral  pestilence  is  positively 
raging  around  and  within  the  Christian  camp.  Nor  need  we  look  abroad  for  proof 
of  this  awful  fact ;  we  have  each  of  us  an  evidence  in  our  own  bosom.  But  it  was 
not  merely  the  existence  of  the  plague  itself  which  must  have  wrought  upon  the 
Israelites,  and  have  made  them  to  accept  the  proffered  remedy  ;  it  was  also  that  so 
many  lay  dead  before  them  ;  such  multitudes  of  their  neighbours  and  friends  had 
been  swept  away  before  their  eyes.  And  have  not  we,  on  this  ground,  many  power- 
ful inducements  also  ?  Have  there  not  been  presented  before  us  in  the  page  of 
history,  yea,  in  daily  report,  awful  numbers  of  the  human  race,  to  all  appearance 
dying  of  the  plague,  drying  in  their  trespasses  and  sins?  Again,  as  the  Israelites 
saw  many  destroyed,  so  did  they  likewise  see  many  recovered  and  saved ;  and  that 
would  encourage  them  to  lay  hold  of  the  means  ordained.  We  also  have  similar 
encouragements  under  the  gospel.  It  is  not  altogether  a  scene  of  desolation,  of 
heedlessness  and  ruin;  there  have. been  many  splendid  trophies  of  Divine  grace, 
many  careless  sinners  awakened  and  rescued  from  the  grave  of  destruction.  (./. 
Slade,  M.A.)  The  livimj  and  the  dead: — Every  minister  of  Jesus  Christ,  when 
he  stands  in  the  pulpit,  stands  in  the  same  responsible  relation  as  Aaron  did.  I 
stand  and  look  at  the  living  on  one  side,  and  on' the  other  I  see  the  dead.  The 
Bible,  up  and  down,  declares  that  an  unforgiven  soul  is  dead  in  trespasses  and  in 
sins.  What  killed  the  soul?  The  plague.  What  kind  of  a  plague— the  Asiatic 
plague?  No;  the  plague  of  sin.  The  Asiatic  plague  was  epidemic.  It  struck  one, 
it  struck  a  great  many ;  and  this  plague  of  sin  is  epidemic.  It  has  touched  all 
nations.  It  goes  from  heart  to  heart,  and  from  house  to  house  ;  and  we  are  more 
apt  to  copy  the  defects  than  we  are  the  virtues  of  character.  The  whole  race  is 
struck  through  with  an  awful  sickness.  Explorers  have  gone  forth,  by  ship,  and 
reindeer  sledge,  and  on  foot,  and  they  have  discovered  new  tribes  and  villages ;  but 
they  have  never  yet  discovered  a  sinless  population.  On  every  brow  the  mark  of 
the  plague — in  every  vein  the  fever.  On  both  sides  of  the  equator,  in  all  zones, 
from  arctic  to  antarctic,  the  plague.  Yes,  it  is  contagious.  We  catch  it  from  our 
parents.  Our  children  catch  it  from  us.  Instead  of  fourteen  thousand  seven  hun- 
dred, there  are  more  than  one  thousand  millions  of  the  dead.  As  I  look  off  upon 
the  spiritually  dead,  I  see  that  the  scene  is  loathsome.  Now,  sometimes  you  have 
seen  a  body  after  decease  more  beautiful  than  in  life.  The  old  man  looked  young 
again.  But  when  a  man  perished  with  the  Asiatic  plague  he  became  repulsive. 
There  was  something  about  the  brow,  about  the  neck,  about  the  lip,  about  the  eye, 
that  was  repulsive.  And  when  a  man  is  dead  in  sin  he  is  repulsive  to  God.  We 
are  eaten  of  that  abominable  thing  which  God  hates,  and  unless  we  are  resuscitated 
from  that  condition,  we  must  go  out  of  His  sight.  But  I  remark  again,  that  I  look 
off  upon  the  slain  of  this  plague,  and  I  see  the  scene  is  one  of  awful  destruction. 
Gout  attacks  the  foot,  ophthalmia  the  eye,  neuralgia  the  nerves ;  and  there  are 
diseases  which  take  only,  as  it  were,  the  outposts  of  the  physical  castle ;  but  the 
Asiatic  plague  demolishes  the  whole  fortress.  And  so  with  this  plague  of  sin.  It 
enwraps  the  whole  soul.  It  is  complete  destruction — altogether  undone,  altogether 
gone  astray,  altogether  dead.  When  I  look  upon  those  who  are  slain  with  this 
plague,  I  see  that  they  are  beyond  any  human  resurrection.  Medical  colleges  have 
prescribed  for  this  Asiatic  plague,  but  have  never  yet  cured  a  case.  And  so  I  have 
to  tell  you  that  no  earthty  resurrection  can  bring  up  a  soul  after  it  is  dead  in  sin. 
You  may  galvanise  it,  and  make  it  move  around  very  strangely  ;  but  galvanism  and 
life  are  infinitely  apart.  None  but  the  omnipotent  God  can  resurrect  it.  I  go  furtlier 
and  say,  that  every  minister  of  the  gospel,  when  he  stands  up  to  prear-h,  stands 
between  the  hving  and  the  dead  of  thp  great  future.  Two  worlds,  one  on  either  side 
of  us :  the  one  luminous,  the  other  dark ;  the  one  a  princely  and  luxuriant  resi- 
dence, the  other  an  incarceration.  Standing  between  the  living  who  have  entered 
upon  their  eternal  state,  and  the  dead  who  shall  tarry  in  their  eternal  decease,  I  am 
this  moment.  Oh,  the  living,  the  living,  I  think  of  them  to-night.  Your  Christian 
dead  have  not  tui'ued  into  thin  clouds  and  floated  off  into  the  immensities.  Livii  g, 
bounding,  acting,  they  are  waiting  for  you.  Living!  Never  to  die.  {T.  De  Witt 
Talmatje.)  The  prevaili^j/j  Interces.^or  : — Such  was  our  High  Priest  who  perceived 
that,  on  account  of  man's  transgression,  wrath  was  gone  forth  from  the  presence  of 
the  Lord,  and  that  the  plague  was  begun  among  the  people.  And  He  saw  that  there 
was  no  man,  and  wondered  that  there  was  no  intercessor.  Therefore  He  arrayed 
Himself  in  the  holy  garments  of  glory  and  beauty;  He  put  on  a  breastplate  of 


190  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvn. 

I'ighteousness,  and  a  i-obe  of  inviolable  sanctity,  and  He  was  clad,  over  all,  with  zeal 
as  a  cloak.  He  was  anointed  with  the  oil  of  gladness,  with  the  Holy  Ghost,  and 
with  power ;  and  on  His  head  was  a  crown  of  salvation  and  glory.  Thus  adorned 
and  fitted  for  the  work.  He  put  on,  for  incense,  the  merits  of  His  suiierings.  He  ran 
into  the  midst  of  God's  people  as  a  Mediator,  interposing  Himself  between  the  parties 
at  variance,  in  order  to  reconcile  them.  He  met  the  burning  wrath,  and  turned  it 
aside  from  all  believers.  And  so  the  plague  is  stayed.  A  stop  is  put  to  the  progress 
of  everlasting  destruction.  "  There  is  now  no  condemnation  to  them  that  are  in 
Christ  Jesus."  And  can  anything,  then,  prevent  our  accepting  this  atonement,  and 
thankfully  receiving  the  benefits  of  this  intercession  ?  Nothing  can,  but  an  utter 
ignorance  of  our  sin,  and  of  our  danger.  Could  a  dying  Israelite  have  been  pre- 
vailed upon,  think  you,  to  reject  the  atonement  and  intercession  of  Aaron?  No, 
surely.  Only  see  how  hope  revives  in  their  countenances,  and  joy  sparkles  in  their 
eyes,  all  turned  and  fixed  upon  him  in  the  execution  of  his  priestly  office.  And 
why  ?  Because  they  were  sensible  of  their  wretched  and  perilous  estate.  They 
needed  not  to  be  told  that  they  were  expiring  by  the  pestilence.  Oh,  why  are  not  we 
so?  Why  do  we  hear  of  the  atonement  and  intercession  of  the  Holy  Jesus  with  so 
much  cold  indifference?  Why,  but  because  we  see  not,  we  know  not,  we  feel  not 
the  want  of  them.  And  yet,  what  is  there,  within  us,  or  without  us,  that  doth  not 
teach  and  show  it  us  ?  To  tell  ^ou  that  the  world  is  full  of  sorrow,  is  no  news ;  to 
tell  you  that  the  world  is  full  of  sin,  is,  I  presume,  no  news.  And  from  what  would 
you  desire  to  be  delivered,  if  not  from  sin  and  soiTow?  What,  in  point  of  wretched- 
ness, was  the  camp  of  Israel  with  the  pestilence  in  the  midst  of  it,  if  compared  to 
such  a  world  as  this?  Go,  thou  who  art  tempted  to  reject,  or  to  neglent  the  satis- 
faction of  Christ,  go  to  the  bed  of  sickness,  ask  him  who  lies  racked  with  pain,  and 
trembling  at  the  thoughts  of  the  wrath  to  come,  what  his  opinion  is  concerning  the 
doctrine  of  atonement ;  and  observe  how  the  name  of  a  Saviour  and  Intercessor 
puts  comfort  and  gladness  into  his  affrighted  soul,  at  a  time  when  the  treasures  and 
the  crowns  of  eastern  kings  would  be  utterly  contemned,  as  equally  vain,  worthless, 
and  unprofitable,  with  the  dust  of  the  earth.     (Bp.  Home.) 


CHAPTEE  XVII. 


Vees.  1-13.  Write  Aaron's  name  upon  the  rod  of  Levi. — Aaron's  rod: — I.  In- 
structive TO  THE  Israelites.  1.  An  end  hereby  put  to  murmuring.  By  an 
incontrovertible  sign  they  knew  who  was  the  true  priest.  2.  A  preventative 
furnished  against  future  rebellion.  Miracles  apt  to  be  forgotten  ;  of  this  the  evi- 
dence was  to  be  preserved.  Kept  for  a  token.  II.  Suggestive  to  Christians. 
Every  man  has  some  rod  on  v\hich  he  leans.  Tlie  Christian's  is  faith.  Like 
Aaron's  rod,  faith  flourishes — 1.  Most  in  the  sanctuary.  There  are  strengthening 
influences,  and  a  Divine  power.  It  will  become  a  barren  stock  elsewhere.  2. 
Under  circumstances  in  which  other  rods  cannot  live.  The  almond  flourishes  even 
before  the  winter  is  fully  past.  Faith  budding  in  adversity.  3.  Produces  fruit  and 
flowers  on  the  bare  stock  of  adveisity.  4.  Bears  fruit  speedily  when  God  causes 
His  blessing  to  rest  upon  it.  "  Believe  and  be  saved."  5.  Stirs  the  Christian  up 
to  vigilance.  Almond-tree  a  symbol  of  watchfulness.  HI.  Typical  of  Christ. 
1.  For  it  is  pei-petual.  Aaron's  rod  laid  up  as  a  lasting  remembrance.  2.  It  bore 
fruit  on  a  barren  stock.  Jesus,  a  root  out  of  a  dry  ground.  3.  It  was  distinguished 
among  the  sceptres  of  the  princes.  Christ's  kingdom  and  sceptre  rule  over  all.  He 
is  a  plant  of  renown.  4.  It  was  the  object  of  special  fMvour.  So  in  Jesus,  He  "  was 
well  pleased."  He  was  "  elect  and  precious."  IV.  Symdomcal  of  a  true  teacher. 
1.  His  home  the  house  of  God.  2.  Piesents  himself  constantly  before  the  testi- 
mony. 3.  In  himself  dry  and  barren.  4.  Relies  upon  God  for  fruitfulness.  5. 
Produces  by  Divine  help  not  flowers  only,  but  fruit  also.  (!.  As  a  dry  and  lifeless 
stock  he  receives  quickening  power  from  God ;  so  with  his  flowers  and  fruit  he 
presents  himself  before  God,  and  offers  all  his  works  to  Him.  Learn — 1.  The 
wisdom  of  God  in  choice  of  methods.  2.  To  seek  a  strong  and  living  and  practical 
faith.  3.  To  rejoice  in  and  rely  upon  the  perpetual  high  priesthood  of  Christ.  4.  To 
endeavour,  like  the  almond-tree,  to  bring  forth  fruit  early.  {J.  C.  Gray.)  Aaron's 
rod  that  budded: — This  is  our  subject:  the  miraculous  conversion  of  Aaron's  rod 


CHAP,  xvu.^l  NUMBERS,  191 

into  a  living,  blossoming,  and  fruit-bearing  plant.  It  must  have  been  a  most  con- 
vincing prodigy  for  the  purpose  it  was  designed  to  answer,  for  the  people  no  sooner 
saw  it  than  they  cried  out  in  remorse  for  their  wavering  allegiance,  "Behold,  we 
die  !  we  perish !  we  all  perish  !  "  But  beyond  the  age  wherein  the  marvel  occurred, 
this  putting  vegetable  life  into  that  dry  staff  has  frequently  been  borrowed  and  used 
for  other  objects.  Thus  Achilles,  in  classic  poetry,  when  enraged  against  Aga- 
memnon, is  made  by  Homer  to  refer  to  this  miracle  : — 

"  But  hearken  !     I  shall  swear  a  solemn  oath 
By  this  same  sceptre,  which  shall  never  bud, 
Nor  boughs  bring  forth,  as  once ;  which,  having  left 
Its  stock  on  the  high  mountains  at  what  time 
The  woodman's  axe  lopt  off  its  foliage  green 
And  stript  its  bark,  shall  never  grow  again  : — 
By  this  I  swear  1  " 

And  amongst  Latin  literature  you  will,  some  of  you,  remember  that  a  certain  king 
confirms  a  covenant  with  ^Eneas  by  a  similar  oath.     I.  We  begin  by  reminding  you 

that    AMONG   THE    GEEATEST    OF    OUR   BLESSINGS     IN    THIS    WORLD     IS     OUR    STRICT    OBLI- 
GATION  TO  DO  THE    Divine  will  and  to  keep    the    Divine  law.      It  is  far  more 
worth  our  while  to  sing  of  God's  statutes  than  it  is  to  sing  of  God's  promises. 
Where  should  we  be  in  a  country  without  human  authority,  and  a  human  Huthority 
founded  on  a  reverence  for  the  Divine?     Very  truly  does  Bushnell  say  that,  "  with- 
out law,  man  does  not  live,  he  only  grazes."     If  he  had  no  government  he  would 
never  discern  any  reason  for  existence,  and  would  soon  not  care  to  exist.     How 
different  is  the  world  of  Voltaire  from  the  world  of  Milton  !     The  one  finds  nothing 
but  this  clay  world  and  its  material  beauties,  flashes  into  a  shallow  brilliancy  of 
speech,  and,  weaving  a  song  of  surfaces,  empties  himself  into  a  book  of  all  that  he 
has  felt  or  seen.     But  the  other,  at  the  back  ox  all  and  through  all  visible  things, 
beholds  a  spirit  and  a  Divinity.     Now  is  there  not  a  very  beautiful  picture  of  the 
comeliness  and  the  beneficence  of  law  in  the  old  miracle  that  was  wrought  upon  the 
rod  of  Aaron  ?     That  staff,  as  we  have  put  it  to  you,  was  selected  as  the  sign  of 
authority.     This  was  a  declaration,  first,  that  no  law  was  perfect  that  did  not  dis- 
play life  and  beauty  and  fertility;    and  a  declaration,   secondly,  that  by  God's 
choice  that  perfect  law  dwelt  in  the  high  priest.     But  apart  from  the  imagery  as  a 
message  to  the  children  of  Israel,  I  cling  to  that  blooming  staff  as  the  very  best  type 
I  can  find  anywhere  of  what  God's  rule  is  amongst  us  and  in  His  Church.     I  find 
myself  taught  by  this  early  prodigy  on  Aaron's  staff  that  God's  dominion  is  the 
ilominion  of  the  almond-brauch.     It  is  a  rod;  alas !  for  us,  if  there  were  no  rod. 
But  it  is  a  rod  displaying  all  the  three  several  pledges  and  gradations  of  life;  and 
thus — oh  !  beautiful  coincidence,  if  it  be  nothing  more — God  turns  His  law  towards 
the  children  of  men  into  what  the  forbidden  tree  so  falsely  appeared  to  the  first 
transgressor — "pleasant  to  the  eye,  and  good  for  food."     Of  course  I  know  that 
the  staff  or  the  sceptic  is  the  symbol  of  authority,  because  a  staff  is  that  with  which 
one  person  smites  another.     The  ultimate  significance  of  a  rod  is  a  blow.     But  is  it 
nothing  to  be  taught  by  God's  picture-alphabet  of  the  Old  Testament  that  He 
smites  only  with  buds,  and  with  flowers,  and  with  fruit  ?     This  seems  to  change, 
even  to  any  child's  apprehension,  the  whole  character  of  the  sovereignty  under 
which  we  bow  in  the  modern  camp  of  the  Church.     You  treml'le  as  you  read  the 
chapter  of  hard  duties.     Turn  the  leaf,  and  you  will  come  upon  the  chapter  of 
precious  promises.     There  is  not  a  verse  in  the  Bible  that  is  not  in  flower  with 
some  comfort ;  aye,  though  it  be  a  verse  that  smites  you  with  a  difficult  command- 
ment.    You  are  never  to  tell  a  man  to  do  a  single  thing  in  religion  without  telling 
him  that  God  will  help  him  to  do  it.     You  are  never  to  command  a  sacrifice  from 
me  for  Christ's  sake  without  comforting  me  with  the  assurance  that  "  God  is  able  to 
give  me  much  more  than  this."  If  you  have  a  strong,  rough,  hard  stick  of  responsi- 
bility, you  must  show  it  to  me  bursting  out  all  over  with  the  rich  petals  and  the 
hanging  clusters  of  the  sovereignty  of  Divine  grace.     Aye,  for  I  want  you  to  mark 
well  that  here  was  a  miracle  within  a  miracle.     The  natural  almond-braiK^h  never 
has  upon  it  at  one  time  buds,  blossoms,  and  fruit.     But  I  seem  to  be  taught  by  this 
accumulation  of  successive  life  all  at  once  on  one  stem  that  there  is  no  element  of 
mercy  wanting  in  tlie  code  by  which  I  am  to  be  managed.     But  remember  that  if 
we  deserve  nothing  but  the  rod,  and  yet  if  God  never  uses  the  rod  sa;£a-with -^ho 
buds,  the  blossoms,  and  the  fruit,  "  He  may  well  record  it  against  Us  if.eithei!  vfe, 


192  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xvn. 

despise  the  chastening  of  the  Lord,  or  faint  when  we  are  rebuked  of  Him."  II.  But 

NOW  THE  REAL  AND  ONLY  PROPER  COMMENTARY  ON  THE  FACTS  OF  THE  PeNTATEUCH  WILL 
BE  FOUND  IN  THE  DOCTRINES  OF  THE    EpISTLE  TO  THE  HEBREWS.       Do    JOU  believe  that 

all  those  lives  would  have  been  lost,  and  all  that  commotion  would  have  been  made 
about  the  prerogative  of  Aaron's  priesthood,  but  for  that  other  Priest  on  whom  the 
whole  world  was  to  rely — the  Priest  for  ever — "  made,  not  after  the  law  of  a  carnal 
commandment,  but  after  the  power  of  an  endless  life"?  It  is  not  by  one  Scripture, 
it  is  by  scores,  that  I  find  myself  pointed,  through  that  staff,  to  the  real  government 
of  this  world  in  the  rod  out  of  the  stem  of  .Jesse.  "  He  shall  grow  up  before  Him  as 
a  tender  plant,  and  as  a  root  out  of  a  dry  ground,  without  form  or  comeliness." 
And  yet,  all  the  while.  He  was  the  "  rod  out  of  the  stem  of  Jesse."  And  when  I 
read,  in  the  Book  of  Numbers,  how  the  Hebrews  rose  up  against  Aaron  and  put  bim 
to  shame,  I  can  only  take  it  for  a  foreshadowing  of  another  rebellion,  when  they 
insulted  another  Sceptre,  who  was  "  despised  and  rejected  of  men."  We  preach  to 
you  Christ,  a  stumbling-block  to  the  Jews.  And  scarcely  can  you  wonder  that  so 
long  as  the  rod  was  only  the  root  out  of  a  dry  ground,  tiie  Son  of  the  carpenter  and 
the  Friend  of  sinners,  there  was  "  no  beauty  in  Him  that  they  should  desire  Him." 
But  that  is  not  the  staff  with  which,  this  day,  God  governs  His  Church.  No,  no  ! 
He  hath  declared  that  lowly  peasant  preacher  to  be  "  the  Son  of  God  with  power, 
in  that  He  hath  raised  Him  from  the  dead."  Ah,  that  night  in  which  they  con- 
cealed Aaron's  rod  in  the  tabernacle  of  witness,  it  was  never  less  living,  never  less 
blossoming,  than  then.  But  it  was  not  left  in  darkness,  neither  did  it  see  corrup- 
tion. And  on  the  appointed  morning  men  found  it,  marked  by  the  choice  of  the 
Omnipiitent  with  the  buds,  the  blosst  ms,  and  the  fruit.  In  like  manner  the  coldest, 
darkest,  least  living  period  in  Immanuel's  career  was  when  they  hid  Him,  among 
all  the  other  millions  of  the  dead,  in  the  tomb  cut  out  of  the  rock  in  the  garden  of 
Joseph.  "  But  now  is  Christ  risen  from  the  dead,  and  become  the  first-fruits  of 
them  that  slept."  He  was  raised  up  "  a  plant  of  renown."  And  from  that  glorious 
Easter  morning  the  "rod  out  of  the  stem  of  Jesse  "has  been  "the  tree  whose 
leaves  are  for  the  healing  of  the  nations,"  and  "  filling  the  face  of  the  world  with 
fruit."  Men  can  be  governed  by  a  Mediator  and  yet  not  perish.  "  The  soul  that 
sinneth,  it  shall  die."  That  is  a  rod,  but  "  if  any  man  sin  we  have  an  Advocate 
with  the  Father,"  that  is,  "Aaron's  rod  that  budded" — the  rod  of  the  Priest. 
Reuben,  Gad,  and  all  the  rest  have  rods.  Christianity  is  not  alone  in  the  sternness 
of  its  government  or  the  severity  of  its  sanctions.  But  it  is  alone  in  telling  me  how 
I  can  receive  remission  of  sins  that  are  past,  and  how  I  can  obtain  the  strongest  of 
motives  for  a  life  of  obedience  in  the  time  to  come.  {H.  Christopher  son. )  AaroiVs  rod 
blossoming  and  hearing  fruit :—  ' .  As  the  priesthood  of  Aaron  was  a  type  of  the 

PRIESTHOOD  OF  ChRIST,   THERE  IS  HERE  A  SUGGESTION  OF  FACTS  WHICH  MUST  HAVE  THEIR 

COUNTERPART  IN  Christ's  lifr  AND  HISTORY.  1.  The  atonement  and  death  of  our 
Lord  Jesus  were  matters  of  Divine  appointment.  The  whole  work  of  our  salvation 
originated  with  God.  2.  But  more  than  this — which  is  the  essential  truth  here 
enshrined — we  see  here  that  God  often  manifests  Himself  in  unexpected  forms  of 
beauty  and  of  grace.  The  dry  rod  blossomed  and  bare  fruit.  The  powers  of 
Divine  salvation  were  enshrined  in  the  person  of  the  Carpenter  of  Nazareth.  There 
was  life  for  a  dead  world  in  the  Cross  and  in  the  grave  of  the  dead  Christ.  II.  There 
ARE  SUGGESTIONS  HERE  CONCERNING  CHRISTIAN  LIFE.  1.  Christian  life  begins  with 
God.  2.  The  Christian  life  manifests  itself  in  unfavourable  conditions.  It  is  in 
human  souls  a  power  of  active  benevolence,  or  it  is  nothing  at  all.  It  takes  hold  of 
human  misei-y  with  a  healing  hand,  and  it  changes  it  into  blessing.  Where  sin 
abounded  there  grace  does  much  more  abound.  3.  There  is  beauty  associated  with 
the  developments  of  Christian  life  and  character.  There  is  nothing  half  so  winning 
as  Christian  grace.  III.  Suggestions  in  relation  to  the  gospel  ministry.  1. 
There  is  a  Divine  designation  of  men  to  the  highest  service  of  the  Church.  2.  But 
what  is  the  qualification  of  men  thus  sent  ?  Evidently  the  possession  of  Divine 
life,  the  gift  which  is  to  be  imparted  to  those  needing  it.  To  be  a  Christian  teacher 
a  man  must  be  a  Christian  and  must  know  the  things  of  Christ.  3.  How,  then,  are 
we  to  judge  a  man's  Divine  call  and  authority?  Only  and  solely  by  the  blossoms 
and  fruit — by  the  spiritual  results  of  his  ministry.     IV.  Last  of  all,  there  are 

HERE    suggestions     CONCERNING    CHRISTIAN    HUMILIATION.  1.    The     WOlld     haS     not 

known  its  best  benefactors.  It  has  always  had  a  scornful  word  for  the  saintly  and 
the  true-hearted.  It  has  always  risen  up  in  rebellion  against  the  anointed  of  the 
Lord.  2.  Here  is  a  word  of  encouragement  to  all  weak  and  mistrustful  and  diffi- 
dent and  self-emptied  souls.     "  I  am  but  a  dry  rod,"  says  the  old  labourer  in  the 


CHAP.  XVII.]  NUMBERS.  193 

Roaster's  vineyard,  and  the  holy  matron  whose  life  has  been  careful  and  troubled 
about  many  things,  but  who  has  ever  been  anxious  to  honour  and  serve  her  dear 
Lord  in  lowliest  ways  and  household  duties.  "  I  am  but  a  dry  rod,"  says  the  saint, 
waiting  dismission  to  rest,  who  has  not  done  what  he  would  or  been  as  useful  as  he 
desired  and  hoped  and  prayed  to  be.  "I  am  but  a  dry  rod,"  says  one  whose 
strength  has  been  weakened  by  the  way,  and  whose  unfinished  purposes  lie  sadly 
enough  at  his  feet,  fallen  out  of  hands  which  could  not  longer  hold  them  or  fashion 
them  into  completeness.  "We  are  but  dry  rods,"  say  many  earnest,  anxious, 
longing  souls  who  hardly  dare  to  trust  for  the  future,  because  so  often  when  they 
would  do  good  evil  is  present  with  them.  We  are  not  saved  by  trust  in  our  own 
righteousness  or  by  satisfaction  with  our  own  goodness  and  deeds.  But  God's 
grace  is  all-sufficient,  and  He  can  work  miracles  of  beauty  and  fruitfulness  where 
human  mipht  is  feeblest,  and  self  mistrust  is  greatest,  and  humility  of  spirit  is 
deepest.  (IF.  H.  Davison,  D.D.)  The  Divine  plan  for  vindicating  the  high  priest- 
hood of  Aaron,  and  it^  moral  teaching: — I.  That  true  ministers  of  religion  are 

ELECTED   BY    GoD.         II.    It   IS    OF    GREAT    IMPORTANCE    THAT    MEN    SHOULD   KNOW    THAT 

THEIR  MINISTERS  OF  RELIGION  ARE  CALLED  BT  GoD.  1.  In  Order  that  they  may 
regard  them  with  becoming  respect.  2.  In  order  that  they  may  take  heed  to  their 
message.  III.  The  vitality  of  sin  is  of  dreadful  tenacity.  "  Many  men's  lips," 
says  Trapp,  "like  rusty  hinges,  for  want  of  the  oil  of  grace  and  gladness,  move  not 
without  murmuring  and  complaining."  It  is  a  thing  of  extreme  difficulty  to  eradi- 
cate any  evil  disposition  from  the  human  heart.  "  For  sucli  is  the  habitual  hard- 
ness of  men's  hearts,  as  neither  ministry,  nor  misery,  nor  miracle,  nor  mercy  can 
possibly  mollify.  Nothing  can  do  it  but  an  extraordinary  touch  from  the  hand  of 
Heaven."  IV.  God  is  engaged  in  eradicating  sin  from  human  hearts.  (TF. 
Jones.)  Aaron's  rod  an  illustration  of  the  true  Christian  ministry : — I.  The 
characteristics  of  the  true  Christian  ministry.  1.  Life.  2.  Beauty.  3.  Fruit- 
fulness.  II.  The  origin  of  the  true  Christian  ministry.  God's  creation,  and  gift  to 
the  Church.  III.  The  influence  of  the  true  Christian  ministry.  Abiding.  (Ibid.) 
The  budded  rod,  a  type  of  Christ : — The  rod  in  many  graphic  tints  shows  Jesus. 
The  very  name  is  caught  by  raptured  prophets  (Isa.  xi.  1 ;  Zech.  vi.  12,  13).  Thus 
faith  gleans  lessons  from  the  very  title — Rod.  But  the  grand  pur)iort  of  the  type  is 
to  reject  all  rivals.  It  sets  Aaron  alone  upon  the  priestly  seat.  The  parallel  pro- 
claims, that  similarly  Jesus  is  our  only  Priest.  God  calls,  anoints,  appoints, 
accepts,  and  ever  hears  Him;  but  Him  alone.  In  His  hands  only  do  these  func- 
tions live.  Next,  the  constant  luxuriance  has  a  clear  voice.  In  nature's  field,  buds, 
blossoms,  fruit,  so  ^n  wither.  Not  so  this  rod.  Its  verdure  was  for  ever  green  ;  its 
fruit  was  ever  ripe.  Beside  the  ark  it  was  reserved  in  never-fading  beauty.  Here 
is  the  ever- blooming  Priesthood  of  our  Lord  (Psa.  ex.  4  ;  Heb.  vii.  24).  Mark, 
moreover,  that  types  of  Jesus  often  comprehend  the  Church.  It  is  so  with  these 
rods.  The  twelve  at  first  seem  all  alike.  They  are  all  sapless  twigs.  But  suddenly 
one  puts  forth  loveliness;  while  the  others  still  remain  worthless  and  withered. 
Here  is  a  picture  of  God's  dealings  with  a  sin-slain  race.  Since  Adam's  fall,  all  are 
born  lifeless  branches  of  a  withered  stock.  When  any  child  of  man  arises  from  the 
de«th  of  sin,  and  blooms  in  grace,  God  has  arisen  with  Divine  almightiness. 
Believer,  the  budded  rod  gives  another  warning.  It  is  a  picture  of  luxuriance. 
Turn  from  it  and  look  inward.  Is  your  soul  thus  richly  fertile  ?  Instead  of  fruit, 
you  often  yield  the  thorn  (John  xv.  8).  Whence  is  the  fault  ?  (John  xv.  4).  Per- 
haps yonr  neglectful  soul  departs  from  Christ.  Meditate  in  God's  law  day  and  night 
,  {Psa.  i.  3).  But  if  the  budded  rod  rebukes  the  scanty  fruit  in  the  new-born  soul, 
what  is  its  voice  to  unregenerate  worldlings  ?  (Heb.  vi.  8.)  {Dean  Law.)  The 
rod  of  Aaron : — Buds  are  evidence  of  life.  A  nominal  Christian  is  like  a  dead 
trunk,  and  he  cannot  bud  unless  the  sap  of  Divine  grace  courses  through 
him.  Spiritual  life  is  an  attribute  of  the  converted  Christian.  The  spiritual 
life  of  a  being  is  his  presiding  sentiment  or  disposition — the  chief  inspiration 
of  his  soul — that  wbich  gives  motion  and  character  to  his  mental  and  moral  being. 
I.  Life  is  a  resistless  force.  The  smallest  blade  of  grass  that  raises  its  tiny  head 
into  light,  or  the  feeblest  insect  that  sports  in  the  sunbeam,  displays  a  force  superior 
to  that  which  governs  the  ocean  or  controls  the  stars.  Man  stands  erect,  the  tree 
rises,  and  the  bird  soars,  because  of  life.  II.  Life  is  an  appropriating  force. 
Vegetable  and  animal  existences  have  a  p^wer  of  appropriating  to  themselves 
all  surrounding  elements  conducive  to  their  well-being,  just  as  the  life  of  the  plant 
converts  the  various  gases  around  it  into  nutriment  to  piomote  its  streneth  and 
development.     Wherever    there  is  true  religion,  there  is  a  power  to  render    all 

13 


194  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ohai>.  xvii. 


external  circumstances  subservient  to  its  own  strength  and  growth ;  all  things  work 
together  for  its  good.  III.  Life  is  a  propagating  pokce.  It  has  "  the  seed  in 
itself."  Forests  start  from  acorns,  and  boundless  harvests  from  the  solitary  grain. 
It  is  said  that  the  grateful  Israelites,  anxious  to  carry  away  a  bud,  a  blossom,  cr 
almond  as  a  memento  of  the  occasion,  the  flowers  and  fruit  on  the  rod  were 
repeatedly  and  miraculously  renewed  for  that  purpose.  Be  that  as  it  may,  wherever 
there  is  religious  life  it  will  spread  ;  it  scatters  broadcast  the  incorruptible  seed 
which  liveth  and  abideth  for  ever.  IV.  Life  is  a  beautifying  force.  There  are 
two  kinds  of  beauty — the  sensational  and  the  moral.  Nature  in  her  ten  thousand 
forms  of  loveliness,  and  art  in  her  exquisite  expressions  of  taste,  are  ministiies  to 
the  former,  whilst  spirituHl  truth,  moral  goodness,  and  the  holiness  of  God  address 
the  latter.  The  one  is  the  poetry  of  the  eye  and  ear ;  the  other,  of  the  soul.  The 
beauty  that  appenls  to  the  religious  nature  of  man  is  the  beauty  of  holiness — the 
beauty  of  the  Lord — the  glory  of  God  in  His  goodness.  Y^  Life  is  a  fructifying 
FORCE.  The  true  Christian  not  only  lives  and  unfolds  a  noble  disposition,  but  is 
really  useful.  St.  Paul  speaks  of  "the  fruit  of  the  Spirit " — righteousness,  goodness, 
truth.  The  first,  as  opposed  to  all  injustice  and  dishonesty ;  the  second, 
as  opposed  to  the  ten  thou'iand  forms  of  selfishness ;  the  third,  as  opposed 
to  all  that  is  erroneous  and  false  in  the  doctrines  and  theories  of  men.  (G. 
L.  Saywell.)  Aaron's  rod: — Here  are  three  miracles  in  one: — 1.  That  a  dry  rod 
— made  of  the  almond  tree — should  bring  forth  buds  in  a  moment.  2.  That  those 
buds  should  presently  become  blossoms  and  flowers.  3.  That  these  should  immedi- 
ately become  ripe  fruit,  and  that  all  at  once,  or  at  least  in  a  little  space.  Nature 
makes  no  such  leaps.  All  this  was  supernatural  to  these  ends.  1.  For  a  testimony 
of  God's  calling  Aaron  to  the  priesthood.  2.  For  a  type  of  Christ,  the  Branch  (Isa. 
xi.  1).  3.  For  a  figure  of  the  fruitfulness  of  a  gospel  ministry.  4.  For  a  lively 
representation  of  a  glorious  resurrection.  (C  Ness.)  Lexsons  from  the  buddiufj 
rod  : — A  wonderful  work  of  God,  which  sundry  ways  may  profit  us.  1.  As  first  to 
consifler  that  if  the  power  of  God  can  do  this  in  a  dry  stick,  cannot  He  make  the 
barren  woman  to  bare,  and  be  a  joyful  mother  of  children  ?  Can  He  not  do  whatso- 
ever He  will  do?  By  this  power  the  sea  is  dried,  the  rock  gives  water,  the  earth 
cleaveth  under  the  feet  of  nlen,  fire  descends  whose  nature  is  to  ascend,  raiseth  the 
dead,  and  calleth  things  that  are  not  as  if  they  were.  In  a  word.  He  is  able  to  do 
exceeding  abundantly  above  all  that  we  ask  or  think,  &c.  2.  This  rod  is  a  notable 
type  of  Christ,  His  person  and  office.  Of  His  person,  in  that  He  was  born  of  the 
Virgin  Mary,  who,  though  He  descended  of  the  royal  blood,  yet  was  now  poor  and 
mean,  as  that  royal  race  was  brought  exceeding  low,  nothing  remaining  but  as  it 
were  a  root  only.  Now  the  said  Virgin  flonrisheth  again  as  Aaron's  rod  did,  and 
beareth  such  fruit  as  never  woman  bear.  Of  this  speaks  Isaiah  the  prophet,  when 
he  saith,  "There  shall  come  a  rod  forth  of  the  stock  of  Jesse,  and  a  graft  shall  grow 
out  of  his  roots."  Of  His  office  both  priestly  and  kingly.  His  priestly  office  is 
figured  in  that  being  offered  upon  the  cross  He  was  as  Aaron's  dried  rod,  or  as  the 
Psalm  saith,  "  dried  up  like  a  potsherd."  But  when  He  rose  again  He  became  like 
Aaron's  budding  and  fruit-bearing  rod,  bringing  forth  to  man,  believing  on  Him, 
remission  of  sins,  righteousness,  and  eternal  life.  His  kingly  office,  in  that  He 
governeth  His  Church  with  a  rod  or  sceptre  of  righteousness,  as  it  is  in  the  Psalm  : 
"  The  sceptre  of  Thy  kingdom  is  a  right  sceptre."  Which  rod  and  sceptre  is  the 
preaching  of  the  gospel,  &c.  3.  Again,  it  was  a  resemblance  of  true  ministers,  and 
of  all  faithful  men  and  women,  for  none  of  all  these  ought  to  be  dry  and  withered 
sticks,  but  bear  and  bring  forth  buds  and  fruit  according  to  their  places.  4.  It  is  a 
shadow  also  of  our  resurrection  by  which  we  should  grow  green  again,  and  flourish 
with  a  new  and  an  eternal  glory,  having  like  dead  seed  lain  in  the  ground,  and  we 
shall  bring  forth  ripe  almonds,  that  is,  the  pi-aise  of  God's  incomprehensible  good- 
ness to  us  for  ever  and  ever.  5.  It  resembleth  our  reformation  and  amendment  of 
life,  for  when  our  heart  feeleth  what  is  amiss,  this  is  as  the  bud ;  when  it  resolveth 
of  a  change  and  a  future  amendment,  this  is  the  blossom  ;  and  when  it  performeth 
the  same  by  a  new  reformed  life  indeed,  this  is  as  the  ripe  almonds  of  Aaron's  rod. 
(Tip.  Babiriffton.)  The  priesthood  dwincly  selected: — What  matchless  wisdom 

shines  in  this  arrangement !  How  completely  is  the  matter  taken  out  of  man's 
hands  and  plnced  where  alone  it  ought  to  be,  namely,  in  the  hands  of  the  living 
God  1  It  was  not  to  be  a  man  appointing  himself,  or  a  man  appointing  his  fellow, 
but  God  appointing  the  man  of  His  own  selection.  In  a  word,  the  question  was  to 
be  definitively  settled  by  God  Himself,  so  that  all  murmurings  might  be  silenced  for 
ever,  and  no  one  be  able  again  to  charge  God's  high  priest  with  taking  too  much 


CHAP,  xvm.]  NUMBERS.  195 

upon  him.  The  human  will  had  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  this  solemn  matter. 
The  twelve  rods,  all  in  a  like  condition,  were  laid  up  before  the  Lord  ;  man  retired 
and  left  God  to  act.  There  was  no  room,  no  opportunity,  because  there  was  no  occa- 
sion for  human  management.  In  the  profound  retirement  of  the  sanctuary,  far 
away  from  all  man's  thinkings,  was  the  grand  question  of  priesthood  settled  by 
Divine  decision;  and,  being  thus  settled,  it  could  never  again  be  raised.  (C.  H. 
Mackintosh.)  Aaron's  fruitful  rod  : — Striking  and  beautiful  figure  of  Him  who 
was  "  declared  to  be  the  Son  of  God  with  power  by  resurrection  from  the  dead  !  " 
The  twelve  rods  were  all  alike  lifeless  ;  but  God,  the  living  God,  entered  the  scene, 
and,  by  that  power  peculiar  to  Himself,  infused  life  into  Aaron's  rod,  and  brouglit 
it  forth  to  view,  bearing  upon  it  the  fragrant  fruits  of  resurrection.  Who  could 
gainsay  this  ?  The  rationalist  may  sneer  at  it,  and  raise  a  thousand  questions. 
Faith  gazes  on  that  fruit-bearing  rod,  and  sees  in  it  a  lovely  figure  of  the  new 
creation  in  the  which  all  things  are  of  God.  Infidelity  may  argue  on  the  ground  of 
the  apparent  impossibility  of  a  dry  stick  budding,  blossoming,  nnd  bearing  fruit  in 
the  course  of  one  night.  But  to  whom  does  it  appear  impossible  ?  To  the  infidel, 
the  rationalist,  the  sceptic.  And  why?  Because  he  always  shuts  out  God.  Let  us 
remember  this.  Infidelity  invarialdy  shuts  out  God.  God  can  do  as  He  pleases. 
The  One  who  called  worlds  into  existence  could  make  a  rod  to  bud,  blossom,  and 
bear  fruit  in  a  moment.  Bring  God  in,  and  all  is  simple  and  plain  as  possible. 
Leave  God  out,  and  all  is  plunged  in  hopeless  confusion.  {Ibid.)  The  rods  con- 
trasted : — Ponder  the  difference  between  the  rod  of  Moses  and  the  rod  of  Aaron. 
We  have  seen  the  former  doing  its  characteristic  work  in  other  days  and  amid  other 
scenes.  We  have  seen  the  land  of  Egypt  trembling  beneath  the  heavy  strokes  of 
that  rod.  Plague  after  plague  fell  upon  that  devoted  scene  in  answer  to  that  out- 
stretched rod.  We  have  seen  the  waters  of  the  sea  divided  in  answer  to  that  rod. 
In  short,  the  rod  of  Moses  was  a  rod  of  power,  a  rod  of  authority.  But  it  could  not 
avail  to  hush  the  murmurings  of  the  children  of  Israel,  nor  yet  to  bring  the  people 
through  the  desert.  Grace  alone  could  do  that ;  and  we  have  the  expression  of  pure 
grace — free,  sovereign  grace — in  the  budding  of  Aaron's  rod.  Nothing  can  be  more 
forcible,  nothing  more  lovely.  That  dry,  dead  stick  was  the  apt  figure  of  Israel's 
condition,  and  indeed  of  the  condition  of  every  one  of  us  by  nature.  There  was  no 
sap,  no  hfe,  no  power.  One  might  well  say,  "  What  good  can  ever  come  of  it?  " 
None  whatever,  had  not  grace  come  in  and  displayed  its  quickening  power.  So  was 
it  with  Israel,  in  the  wilderness ;  and  so  is  it  with  us  now.  How  were  they  to 
be  led  along  from  day  to  day  ?  How  were  they  to  be  sustained  in  all 
their  weakness  and  need  ?  How  were  they  to  be  borne  with  in  all  their  sin 
and  folly?  The  answer  is  found  in  Aaron's  budding  rod.  If  the  dry,  dead 
stick  was  the  expression  of  nature's  barren  and  worthless  condition,  the  buds, 
blossoms,  and  fruit  set  forth  that  living  and  life-giving  grace  and  power  of  God  on 
which  was  based  the  priestly  ministry  that  alone  could  bear  the  congregation 
through  the  wilderness.  Grace  alone  could  answer  the  ten  thousand  necessities  of 
the  militant  host.  Power  could  not  sufifice.  Authority  could  not  avail.  Priesthood 
alone  could  supply  what  was  needed ;  and  this  priesthood  was  instituted  on  the 
foundation  of  that  efficacious  grace  which  could  bring  fruit  out  of  a  dry  rod.  Thus 
it  was  as  to  priesthood  of  old  ;  and  thus  it  is  as  to  ministry  now-.  All  ministry  in 
the  Church  of  God  is  the  fruit  of  Divine  grace — the  gift  of  Christ,  the  Church's 
Head.     (Ibid.) 


CHAPTEB  xvm. 


Ver.  20.  Tliou  Bbalt  have  no  inheritance  in  their  land. — Are  ministers 
debarred  from  owning  property  ? — No,  this  was  a  legal  ceremony,  and  bindeth  not 
now  more  than  that  prohibition  to  drink  wine  (Lev.  x.  9),  with  such  like.  The 
yoke  of  the  law  is  taken  from  us,  and  not  to  be  reduced  again.  In  the  twenty-first 
chapter  of  Joshua,  see  what  provision  for  cities  and  grounds  for  them  and  their 
cattle.  The  like  in  this  Book  of  Numbers  (chap.  xxxv. ;  Jer.  xxxii.  8).  A  purchase 
and  land  and  title,  descent  and  right,  by  kindred  and  blood.  Origen  mentioneth 
rents  and  revenues  of  the  Church.  Sabellicns  writeth  that  Lucina,  a  noble  and  rich 
gentlewoman  of  Eome,  made  the  Church  her  heir.     Sozomen,  how  Constantine  out 


19S  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xix. 

of  the  tribute  of  every  city  gave  a  portion  to  the  Churches  for  maintenance  of  their 
ministers.  Ambrose  saith  that  the  Church's  lands  paid  tribute,  therefore  the  Church 
had  lands.  Basil  saith  that  bishops  were  rich  and  able  to  give  to  Churches. 
Nicephorus  telleth  howtbe  worthy  Empress  Theodosius's  wife  adorned  the  bishop's 
house  with  all  goodly  furniture,  and  gave  a  yearly  revenue.  Thus  have  not  all 
ages  and  persons  dealt  sparingly  or  grndsingly  with  their  clergy  ;  but  both  thought 
them  worthy  respect,  and  most  worthily  respected  them  in  their  maiutenance  and 
otherwise.     (Bp.  BaUngton.) 


CHAPTEB  XIX. 


Veks.  1-22.  A  red  heifer  without  spot. — The  red  heifer  : — I.  It  is  undoubtedly 
true  that  even  the  tede  Iseaelite,  the  tkue  believek  in  Christ,  is  the  subject 
OF  DAILY  defilement.     1.  Some  of  our  defilement  arises  from  the  fact  that  we  do 
actually  come  into  contact  with  sin,  here  imaged  in  the  corruption  of  death.     The 
best  of  men  are  men  at  the  best,  and  while  they  are  only  men  they  will  still  sin. 
We  are  in  close  connection  with  sin,  because  sin  is  in  ourselves.     It  has  dyed  us 
through  and  through,  staining  the  very  warp  and  woof  of  our  nature,  and  until  we 
lay  aside  these  bodies  and  are  admitted  to  the  Church  of  the  first-born  above,  we 
fhall  never  cease  very  intimate  connection  with  sin.  2.  Moreover,  we  get  defilement 
fmrn  companionship  with  sinners.     This  dusty  world  must  leave  some  mark  upon 
our  white  garments  let  us  travel  as  carefully  as  we  may.     "  I  am  black  because  the 
sun  hath  looked  upon  me,"  must  ever  be  the  confession  of  the  bride  of  Christ.  This 
world  is  full  of  the  spiritually  dead,  and  since  we  live  we  must  be  often  rendered 
unclean  among  the  sinful,  and  henco  we  need  a  daily  cleansing  to  fit  us  for  daily 
fellowship  with  a  holy  God.     3.  One  reason  why  we  are  so  constantly  defiled  is  our 
want  of  watchfulness.     You  will  observe  that  everything  in  the  tent  of  a  dead  man 
was  defiled  except  vessels  that  were  covered  over.     Any  vessel  which  was  left  open 
was  at  once  unclean.     You  and  I  ought  to  cover  up  our  hearts  from  the  contamina- 
tion of  sin.     It  were  well  for  us  if  we  kejjt  our  heart  with  all  diligence,  since  out  of 
it  are  the  issues  of  life.     4.  Sin  is  so  desperately  evil  that  the  very  slightest  sin 
defiles  it.     He  who  touched  a  bone  was  unclean.     It  was  not  necessary  to  put  your 
hand  upon  the  clay-cold  corpse  to  be  defiled ;  the  accidently  touching  with  the  foot 
a  bone  carelessly  thrown  up  by  the   grave-digger ;  even  the  touching  it  by  the 
ploughman  as  he  turned  up  his  furrow,  even  this  was  sufficient  to  make  him 
unclean.     Sin  is  such  an  immeasurably  vile  thing  that  the  slightest  iniquity  makes 
the  Christian  foul— a  thought,  an  imagination,  the  glancing  of  an  eye.     5.  Sin, 
even  when  it  is  not  seen,  detiles,  for  a  man  was  defiled  who  touched  a  grave.     Oh, 
how  many  graves  there  are  of  sin — things  that  are  fair  to  look  upon,  externally 
admirable  and  internally  abominable  !     6.  The  Jew  was  not  only  in  danger  of 
defilement  in  his  tent  and  when  he  walked  the  roads,  but  he  was  in  danger  in  the 
open  fields ;  for  you  will  observe,  it  says,  that  if  he  touched  a  body  that  bad  been 
slain  in  the  open  fields,  or  a  bone,  he  should  be  unclean.     Wherever  you  go  you 
find  sin !     II.  A  pukification  has  been  provided.     The  ransomed  Church  of  God 
need  daily  to  be  washed  in  the  fountain,  and  the  mercy  is  that  the  precious  blood 
shall  never  lose  its  power,  but  its  constant  efficacy  shall  abide  till  they  are,  every 
one  of  them,  "  Saved  to  sin  no  more."     1.  There  is  a  propitiation  provided  for 
daily  defilement,  for  first  of  all,  if  it  were  not  so,  how  melancholy  were  your  case 
and  mine  !     2.  The  Lord  must  have  provided  a  daily  cleansing  for  our  daily  defile- 
ment, for  if  not,  where  were  His  wisdom,  where  His  love  ?     He  has  provided  for 
everything  else.     3.  The  work  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  assures  us  of  this.     What 
is  there  opened  for  the  house  of  David,  for  sin,  and  for  uncleanness  ?     A  cistern  ? 
A  cistern  that  might  be  emptied,  a  waterpot,  such  as  that  which  stood  at  Cana's 
marriage  feast,  and  might  be  drained?     No  ;  there  is  a  fountain  open  for  sin  and 
uncleanness.   We  wash,  the  fountain  flows;  we  wash  again,  the  fountain  flows  stLll. 
From  the  great  depths  of  the  deity  of  Christ,  the  eternal  merit  of  His  passion  comes 
everlastingly  welling  up.     Wash !  ■rtbsh  !     It  is  inexhaustible,  for  it  is  fountain- 
fulness.     4.  The  work  of  the  Holy  Spirit  also  meets  the  case,  for  what  is  His 
business  but  constantly  to  take  of  the  things  of  Christ  and  reveal  them  unto  us ; 
constantly  to  quicken,  to  enlighten,  and  to  comfort  ?    Why  all  this  but  because  we 


CHAP.  XIX.]  NU3IBERS.  197 


are  constantly  in  need,  perpetually  being  defiled,  and  therefore  wanting  perpetually 
to  have  the  purification  applied?  5.  Facts  show  that  there  is  a  purification  for 
present  guilt.  The  saints  of  old  fell  into  sin,  but  they  did  not  remain  there.  III. 
The  bed  heifer  sets  forth  in  a  most  admirable  manner  the  daily  pdrification 
FOR  DAILY  SIN.  1.  It  was  a  heifer— an  unusual  thing  for  a  sacrifice  to  be  a  female ; 
and  we  scarcely  know  why  it  should  be  in  this  case,  unless  indeed,  to  make  the 
substitution  more  evident.  This  red  heifer  stood  for  all  the  house  of  Israel — for 
the  whole  Church  of  God ;  and  the  Church  is  always  looked  upon  and  considered 
in  Scripture  as  being  the  spouse — the  bride — always  feminine.  Perhaps,  to  make 
the  substitution  obvious  and  complete,  to  show  that  this  heifer  stood  in  the  stead 
and  place  of  the  whole  seed  of  Israel,  it  was  chosen  rather  than  the  customary 
bullock.  2.  It  was  a  red  heifer — bringing  to  the  mind  of  the  Israelites  the  idea  of 
blood,  which  was  always  associated  with  atonement  and  putting  away  of  sin.  Surely 
when  we  think  of  Christ,  we  always  associate  Him  with  the  streaming  gore  when 
we  are  under  a  sense  of  sin.  -i.  It  was  a  heifer  without  spot — denoting  the  perfec- 
tion of  Christ's  character.  4.  Observe  that  the  red  heifer  was  one  whereon  never 
came  yoke.  Perhaps  this  sets  forth  how  willingly  Christ  came  to  die  for  us ;  not 
forced  from  heaven,  but  freely  delivering  Hmiself  for  us  all.  An  interesting 
circumstance  about  this  red  heifer  is  that  it  was  not  provided  by  the  priests ; 
it  was  not  provided  out  of  the  usual  funds  of  the  sanctuary,  nor  yet  by  the  princes, 
nor  by  any  one  person.  5.  The  children  of  Israel  provided  it.  What  for?  Why, 
that  as  they  came  out  of  their  tents  in  the  desert,  or  their  houses  in  Jerusalem, 
and  saw  the  priests  leading  the  red  heifer,  every  man,  and  every  woman,  and  every 
child  might  say,  "I  have  a  share  in  that  heifer,  I  have  a  share  in  that  victim  which 
is  being  led  out  of  the  city  to  be  consumed."  I  wish — oh!  I  would  to  God  I  dare 
hope,  that  every  man  and  every  woman  here  could  say,  "  I  have  a  share  in  Jesus 
Christ,"  for  that  is  the  meaning  of  this  national  provision,  to  let  ns  see  how  Christ 
shed  His  blood  for  all  His  people,  and  they  have  all  a  part  and  all  an  interest  in 
Him.  6.  As  we  noted  what  this  victim  was,  there  is  yet  to  be  observed  what  was 
done  with  it.  Again,  let  me  beg  you  to  refer  to  your  Bibles  to  see  what  became  of 
this  red  heifer.  (1)  It  was  taken  out  of  the  camp.  Herein  it  was  a  picture  of 
Christ.  That  He  might  sanctify  His  people  with  His  own  blood,  He  suffered  without 
the  camp.  Without  the  camp  was  the  place  of  uucleanness.  There  the  lepers  dwelt ; 
there  every  defiled  person  was  put  in  quarantine.  Jesus  Christ  must  be  numbered 
with  the  transgressors,  and  must  suffer  upon  Mount  Calvary,  outside  the  city  gates, 
upon  that  general  Tyburn  of  criminals,  "  the  place  of  a  skull."  The  people  of  God 
are  to  be  a  separate  people  from  all  the  rest  of  the  world  ;  they  are  not  to  be 
numbered  with  the  dwellers  in  this  world's  city;  they  are  to  be  strangers,  and 
pilgrims,  and  sojourners,  as  all  their  fathers  were.  Therefore,  Christ,  to  set  them 
an  example  of  separation,  suffers  Himself  without  the  camp.  (2)  When  taken 
without  the  camp,  the  red  cow  was  slain.  A  dying  Saviour  that  takes  away  our 
sin.  We  love  Christ  the  risen  one,  we  bless  Christ  the  living,  pleading  intercessor, 
but  after  all  the  purification  to  your  conscience  and  to  mine  comes  from  the  bleeding 
sacrifice.  See  Him  slain  before  our  eyes.  (3)  When  the  heifer  was  slain,  Eleazer 
dipped  his  finger  in  the  blood  as  it  flowed  gurgling  forth.  He  dipp  d  his  finger  in 
the  warm  blood,  and  sprinkled  it  seven  times  before  the  door  of  the  tabernacle. 
Seven  is  the  number  of  perfection — to  show  that  there  was  a  perfect  offering  made 
by  the  sprinkling  of  the  blood ;  even  so,  Jesus  has  perfectly  presented  His  bloody 
sacrifice.  Now  mark,  all  this  does  not  purify.  I  am  not  yet  come  to  that  point. 
Atonement  precedes  purification  :  Christ  must  die  and  offer  Himself  a  victim,  or 
else  He  cannot  be  the  purifier.  (4)  When  the  whole  was  fully  burnt,  or  while  burning, 
we  find  the  priest  threw  in  cedar  wood,  hyssop,  and  scarlet.  What  was  this  ? 
According  to  Maimonides  the  cedar  wood  was  taken  in  logs  and  bound  round  with 
hyssop,  and  then  afterwards  the  whole  enveloped  in  scarlet ;  so  what  was  seen  by 
the  people  was  the  scarlet  which  was  at  once  the  emblem  of  sin  and  its  punishment 
— "  Though  your  sins  be  as  scarlet,  they  shall  be  as  snow;  though  th  -y  be  red  like 
crimson,  they  shall  be  as  wool."  Everything  you  see  still  continues  of  the  red 
colour,  to  *set  forth  atonement  for  sin.  Inside  this  scarlet  there  is  the  hyssop  of 
faith,  which  gives  efficacy  to  the  offering  in  each  individual,  and  still  within  this  is 
the  cedar  wood  that  sent  forth  a  sweet  and  fragrant  smell,  a  perf-^ct  righteousness, 
giving  acceptance  to  the  whole.  One  delights  to  think  of  this  in  connection  with 
Christ,  that,  as  there  is  a  daily  witness  of  our  defilement,  so  there  is  a  daily 
impitation  of  His  perfect  righteousness  to  us,  so  that  we  stand  every  dav  ac  ;epted 
in  the  beloved  by  a  daily  imputation,  by  which  not  only  is  daily  sin  covered,  but 


198  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xix. 

daily  righteousness  given  to  ns.  (5)  Tlie  pith  of  the  matter  lies  in  the  last  act,  with 
the  remains  of  the  red  cow.  The  cinders  of  the  wood,  the  ashes  of  the  bones,  and 
dung,  and  desh  of  the  heifer,  were  all  gathered  together,  and  carried  away  and  laid 
by  in  a  clean  place.  According  to  the  Jews  there  was  not  another  heifer  killed  for 
this  purpose  for  a  thousand  years.  They  say,  but  then  we  have  no  reason  to  believe 
them,  thiit  there  have  never  been  but  nine  red  heifers  offered  at  all ;  one  in  the  da^  s. 
of  Moses,  the  next  in  Ezra's  time,  and  the  other  seven  afterwards,  and  that  when 
Messiah  comes  He  is  to  offer  the  tenth,  by  which  they  let  out  the  secret  that  they 
do  look  upon  the  Messiah  as  coming  in  His  own  time  to  complete  the  type.  Our 
own  belief  is  that  a  red  heifer  was  always  found  when  ashes  were  wanted,  and  as 
there  were  hundreds  and  thousands  of  persons  defiling  themselves,  the  place  where 
the  ashes  were  kept  was  much  frequented,  and  much  of  the  purifying  matter 
required.  The  ashes  were  to  be  put  into  a  vessel  with  running  water,  and  the 
water  was  sprinkled  over  the  unclean  person  who  touched  a  body  or  a  bone.  By 
this  process  the  ashes  would  require  to  be  renewed  much  oftener  than  once  in 
a  thousand  years,  in  order  that  every  one  might  have  his  portion.  Does  not  this 
storing  up  suggest  that  there  is  a  store  of  merit  in  Christ  Jesus  ?  There  was  not 
only  enough  to  make  us  free  from  sin  by  justification,  but  there  is  a  store  of  merit 
laid  up  that  daily  defilement  may  be  removed  as  often  as  it  comes.  (C.  H. 
Spurgeon.)  The  Imo  of  the  red  heifer  applied  .-—The  record  of  the  law  of  the  red 
heifer  unfolds  some  traces  of  the  manner,  times,  and  substance  cf  God's  teaching 
in  those  days  when  the  children  of  Israel  "could  not  steadfastly  look  to  the  end." 
1.  His  method  was  largely  to  use  symbols,  but  not  to  the  withholding  of  words.  As 
objects  lying  in  darkness  cannot  be  presented  but  must  be  represented,  so  the 
truths  suited  to  the  manhood  of  our  race  were  taught  in  that  method  to  earlier 
generations.  2.  The  symbols  of  the  Jewish  worship  were  instituted  at  special 
times.  God  did  not  put  it  forth  as  a  system.  He  did  not  i^lace  it  as  a  full-grown 
tree  in  a  wood.  It  is  like  a  house  to  which  have  been  added  rooms  and  offices  and 
hall  as  the  growth  of  the  family  has  demanded  more  scope  in  which  to  maintain 
new  and  higher  thoughts.  Wider  views  of  what  they  need  towards  God  cause  Hin> 
to  send  out  the  beams  of  a  light  which  is  to  dispel  every  doubt  and  fear.  I. 
Liability  fob  social  evil.  What  was  there  in  the  fact  that  a  virulent  disease  had 
deprived  so  many  of  life,  to  produce  a  conviction  that  God  cannot  be  approached 
for  worship?  Why  should  contact  with  a  corpse,  or  entrance  into  a  tent  in  which 
human  life  had  ebbed  away,  or  even  a  bone,  or  a  grave  trod  upon,  be  as  a  barrier 
blocking  up  the  way  of  the  people  to  the  sanctuary?  Might  the  survivors  not  reason 
thus:  "If  those  who  have  died  did  wrong  we  have  been  equally  wrong;  if  we  are 
not  erased  from  the  roll  of  the  living  there  is,  notwithstanding,  an  evil  chargeable 
to  us  ;  partakers  in  a  like  offence  we  are  worthy  of  a  like  condemnation  ;  the  evil 
has  not  exhausted  itself  on  them,  and  we  are  liable  in  some  form  for  their  calami- 
ties ;  we  cannot  in  this  state  of  pollution  go  into  the  presence  of  God — is  there  not 
needed  a  purification  from  those  social  ills  whose  last  and  most  affecting  sign  is 
death?"  II.  The  ignominy  of  death.  The  law  recited  in  this  chapter  distinctly 
informs  us  that  the  presence  of,  or  contact  with,  the  signs  of  the  death  of  mankind, 
separated  from  communion  with  God  in  His  sanctuary.  Would  not  thought  be 
excited  of  some  such  form  as  this — "  It  is  clear  that  there  is  no  moral  defilement  in 
mere  closeness  to  the  signs  of  death,  not  to  come  into  contact  with  them  might  be 
a  sinful  act — and  yet  we  are  treated,  as  to  our  standing  before  God,  just  as  if  we 
had  been  guilty  of  gross  crimes.  If  God-appointed  duties  and  circumstances  render 
it  unbecoming,  and  even  impossible,  that  we  should  keep  free  from  those  relations 
to  the  dead  mentioned  by  this  law,  why  should  we  incur  such  a  fearful  result  ? 
Sui-ely  there  must  be  some  virulent  spreading  poison  rankling  in  men's  death.  If 
by  its  presence  or  touch  an  impassable  gulf  at  once  sinks  between  God  and  us,  what 
an  offensive  attitude  against  Him  must  death  assume  I  Much  more  than  mere 
sensational  shrinking  should  creep  over  us  before  it.  How  can  we  avoid  engraving- 
deeply  on  our  hearts  the  thought  that  it  is  dishonourable  to  die!  "  What  is  in 
death  to  make  it  so?  This:  that  death  is  the  seal  of  a  Divine  curse  on  man. 
III.  Freedom  from  the  consequences  of  sin  is  by  application  of  a 'preparer 
REMEDY.  The  several  parts  in  the  process  of  preparing  the  water  of  cleansing  bear 
emblems  to  show  what  God  requires  for  freeing  from  sin.  The  slaying  of  the  heifer 
and  the  sprinkling  of  its  blood  laid  bare  the  foundation  princijples,  that  "  it  is 
the  blood  which  mnketh  atonement  for  the  soul  "—that  "  without  shedding  of 
blood  is  no  remission  of  sins."  Everything  that  blocked  up  the  way  to  the  favour 
of  the  Lord  is  remo.ed  by  the  appointed  sacrifices.    He  is  reconcileable,  and  ready 


CHAP.  XIX.]  NUMBERS.  199 

to  count  the  evils  of  the  congregation  satisfied  for.  Were  the  Israelites,  then, 
entitled  to  say,  "The  offerings  of  atonement  are  made;  sins  are  taken  away;  we 
are  free  from  all  further  hindrances  to  acceptance  ;  we  need  to  care  nothing  more 
about  what  happens  to  us  "  ?  No.  If  acceptable  offerings  have  been  made  for  tbe 
people,  yet  events  come  to  pass  from  which  defilement  will  be  caused  to  individuals, 
and,  if  this  personal  unfitness  be  not  removed,  perilous  consequences  must  follow. 
Uncleanness  incurred  from  the  dead — the  great  sign  of  moral  pollution — prevents 
approach  to  the  holy  Lord  God.  Separated  from  His  presence  on  earth  is  a  fore- 
casting of  an  eternal  separation — "  that  soul  shall  be  cut  oft'  from  Israel."  But  He 
has  a  remedy  for  this  too.  He  provides  means  of  purification,  and  thus  of  renewed 
access  to  Himself.  Not  only  is  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats  shed,  but  the  ashes 
of  a  heifer  is  also  to  "  sprinkle  the  unclean,  in  order  to  sanctify  to  the  purifying  of 
the  flesh,"  and  render  tit  for  all  the  privileges  of  acceptable  worship.     IV.  To  be 

■WITHOUT     FITNESS     FOR     STANDING     BEFOEE     GoD     ACCEPTABLY      IS     INEXCUSABLE     AND 

IRRETKIEVABLE.  Once  purified  did  not  do  away  with  the  nece.esity  of  being  purified 
again,  when  another  defilement  had  been  incurred.  The  new  impurity  must  be 
removed  by  a  new  application,  and  the  cleansing  remedy  was  constantly  available 
^vers.  9,  10).  God  keeps  in  store  that  odour  which  can  counteract  the  poisoning 
air  of  death  ;  that  which  will  restore  to  health  at  all  times  and  never  lose 
its  efficacy ;  that  which  can  be  applied  for  with  the  fullest  confidence  that  it  is 
provided  against  the  renewed  impediments  to  serving  God  acceptably,  and  warrants 
■"  boldness  to  enter  into  the  holiest."  What  could  justify  neglect  of  this  remedy? 
What  evasion  was  possilde  when  the  uncleanness  was  so  manifestly  chargeable, 
and  the  provision  for  removing  it  so  easily  procurable  ?  Must  not  every  trifler, 
delayer,  or  neglecter  be  held  guilty,  without  any  palliation,  of  despising  his  Lord's 
grace  and  might  ?  (D.  G.  Watt,  M.A.)  The  ordinance  of  the  red  heifer ;  a  parable 
of  the  pollution  of  sin  and  the  Divine  method  nf  cleansinq  therefrom  : — I.  The  defiling 
NATURE  OF  SIN.  1.  Sin  is  defiling  in  its  nature.  2.  The  defiling  power  of  sin  is  of 
great  virulence.     3.  The  defiling  power  of  sin  is  widespread.     II.  The  necessity  of 

CLEANSING  FROM    SIN.       III.    The    PROVISION    OF    CLEANSING    FROM    SIN.       1.    It  is  Divine 

in  its  origin.  2.  It  involves  the  sacrifice  of  the. most  perfect  life.  3.  It  is  invariable 
in  its  efficacy.  IV.  The  application  of  the  provision  for  cleansing  from  sin. 
{W.  Jones.)  The  red  heifer  an  analogue  of  the  Christ: — I.  In  its  character- 

istics. 1.  Fulness  of  life.  2.  Perfection  of  life.  II.  In  the  treatment  to  which 
IT  was  subjected.  1.  The  heifer  was  sacrificed.  2.  The  heifer  was  sacrificed 
"  without  the  camp."  IH.  In  the  pukpose  for  which  it  was  designed.  1.  The 
red  heifer  was  intended  to  cleanse  from  ceremonial  defilement.  2.  The  ashes  of 
the  heifer  were  efficacious  for  this  purpose:  "How  much  more  shall  the  blood 
of  Christ,"  &c.  (Ibid.)  The  ordinance  of  the  red  heifer  .-—The  special  feature 
of  the  new  ordinance  is  in  the  means  taken  to  make  one  sacrifice  available  for  an 
indefinite  number  of  cases.  This  was  done  by  the  concentration,  so  to  speak,  of 
all  the  elements  of  the  sacrifice  in  the  ashes  which  were  to  be  preserved.  Here  we 
have  the  explanation  of  the  casting  "into  the  midst  of  the  burning  of  the  heifer  " 
of  "  cedar  wood  and  hyssop  and  scarlet  "  (ver.  6).  These  represent  the  appliances 
for  sprinkling  :  the  hyssop  stalk  with  scarlet  wool  wrapped  round  it,  fastened  on  a 
piece  of  cedar  wood,  which  was  held  in  the  hand.  By  the  casting  of  these  into  the 
burning  the  idea  of  sprinkling  was,  as  it  were,  perpetuated  in  the  ashes  which  were 
the  residuum  of  the  whole.  These  ashes  could  of  course  be  preserved  and  used  for 
an  indefinite  time  ;  and  each  time  they  were  used,  the  ideas  which  had,  so  to  speak, 
been  burnt  into  them,  would  be  impressed  upon  the  minds  and  hearts  of  the  devout. 
The  ashes  then  represented  the  power  of  a  past  sacrifice  ;  "  even  in  its  ashes  live 
its  former  fires."  The  use  of  the  running  water  with  the  ashes  (ver.  17)  has  the 
same  significance  as  in  the  ritual  for  the  cleansing  of  the  leper  in  Lev.  xiv.  la 
making  application  of  the  ordinance  of  the  red  heifer  to  ourselves,  we  find  it 
specially  instructive  in  regard  to  the  restoration  of  that  communion  with  God 
which  ought  to  be  the  chief  joy  of  the  Christian,  and  which  is  too  often  broken  by 
the  contracting  of  stains,  so  difficult  to  avoid,  with  sin  "  reigning  unto  death  "  all 
around  us.  There  are  those  who,  under  these  circumstances,  feel  peculiarly 
discouraged.  They  have  the  impression  that  it  must  be  exceedingly  difficult  to  get 
back  to  their  former  position.  They  remember  how  long  it  took  them  at  first  to  be 
reconciled  to  God  ;  and  they  think  how  much  more  difficult  it  must  be  now  that  the 
€vil  has  been  allowed  after  the  experience  of  God's  saving  grace.  It  seems  a  long 
and  hard  way  back ;  and  they  have  not  courage  to  begin  again.  It  is  a  mistake. 
The  way  back  again  is  not  long  and  haid.    There  are  the  ashes  of  the  heifer  and 


200  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap.  xs. 

the  running  water  close  at  hand.  There  need  be  no  delay,  as  if  a  new  animal  must 
be  obtained,  and  brought  to  the  priest,  and  killed  at  the  altar,  and  so  forth.  There 
is  a  shorter  way.  Look  back  to  the  (Sacrifice  offered  long  ago  once  for  all.  Theie 
is  the  running  water  of  the  Word,  which  has  in  it,  as  it  svere  in  solution,  the  strong 
ashes  of  the  Sacrifice.  There  for  evermore  is  stored  the  virtue  of  that  blood  which 
"  cleanseth  from  all  sin."  There  need  be  no  delay.  For  the  ashes  and  the  water» 
we  have  the  Cross  and  the  Word  ;  and  all  that  is  wanted  is  the  immediate  use  of 
God's  "perpetual  statute  for  purifying  the  unclean"  (Heb.  ix.  13,  14).  (./.  il7. 
Gibson,  D.I).)  The  red  heifer   a   wilderness  type  : — A   thoughtful   student   of 

Scripture  would  naturally  feel  disposed  to  inquire  why  it  is  that  we  get  this  type  in 
Numbers  and  not  in  Leviticus.  In  the  first  seven  chapters  of  the  latter  book  we 
have  a  very  elaborate  statement  of  the  doctrine  of  sacrifice ;  and  yet  we  have  no 
allusion  whatever  to  the  red  heifer.  Why  is  this?  We  believe  it  furnishes 
another  striking  illustration  of  the  distinctive  character  of  our  book.  The  red 
heifer  is,  pre-eminently,  a  wilderness  type.  It  was  God's  provision  for  defilements 
by  the  way,  and  it  prefigures  the  death  of  Christ  as  a  purification  for  sin,  to  meet 
our  need  in  passing  through  a  defiling  world,  home  to  our  eternal  rest  above. 
When,  with  the  eye  of  faith,  we  gaze  upon  the  Lord  Jesus,  we  not  only  see  Him  tc^ 
be  the  spotless  One,  in  His  own  holy  Person,  but  also  One  who  never  bore  the  yoke 
of  sin.  He  speaks  of  "My  yoke"  (Matt.  xi.  29);  it  was  the  yoke  of  implicit 
subjection  to  the  Father's  will  in  all  things.  This  was  the  only  yoke  He  ever  wore ; 
and  this  yoke  was  never  off,  for  one  moment,  during  the  entire  of  His  spotless  and 
perfect  career — from  the  manger,  where  He  lay  a  helpless  babe,  to  the  Cross,  where 
He  expired  as  a  victim.  But  He  wore  no  yoke  of  sin.  Let  this  be  distinctly  under- 
stood. He  went  to  the  Cross  to  expiate  our  sins,  to  lay  the  groundwork  of  our 
perfect  purification  from  all  sin;  but  He  did  this  as  One  who  had  never,  at  any 
time  during  His  blessed  life,  worn  the  yoke  of  sin.  He  was  "  without  sin  " ;  and, 
as  such,  was  perfectly  fitted  to  the  great  and  glorious  work  of  expiation.  "  Wherein 
is  no  blemish,  and  whereon  never  came  yoke."  It  is  quite  as  needful  to  remember 
and  weigh  the  force  of  the  word  "  whereon,"  as  of  the  word  "wherein."  Both 
expressions  are  designed  by  the  Holy  Ghost  to  set  forth  the  perfection  of  our  Lord 
and  Saviour  Jesus  Christ,  who  was  not  only  internally  spotless,  but  also  externally 
free  from  every  trace  of  sin.  Neither  in  His  Person,  nor  yet  in  His  relationships, 
was  He  in  any  wise  obnoxious  to  the  claims  of  sin  or  death.  He — adored  for  ever 
be  His  name  ! — entered  into  all  the  reality  of  our  circumstances  and  condition,  but 
in  Him  was  no  sin,  and  on  Him  no  yoke  of  sin.     {C.  H.  Mackintosh.) 


CHAPTEE  XX. 

.  Ver.  1.  The  people  abode  in  Eadesh. — The  neic  departure  : — The  fortieth 
year  is  now  running  its  course.  The  time  of  the  curse  has  nearly  expired.  And 
now  preparations  may  be  begun  for  entering  a  second  time  on  the  march  to 
Canaan,  where  a  new  generation  must  vindicate  the  claim  of  Israel  to  be 
indeed  "  the  hosts  of  the  Lord,"  by  taking  possession  of  the  land  of  promise. 
It  was  at  Kadesh  that  the  sentence  had  been  pronounced  which  doomed  their 
fathers  to  these  dreary  years  of  wandering.  It  is  at  Kadesh  again  that  the 
camp  is  reorganised.  It  seems  likely  that  during  the  interval  there  was 
no  definite  aim  or  object  before  the  people,  so  that  they  moved  about  as  suited 
their  convenience  or  necessities,  very  much  as  the  wandering  tribes  of  the  desert 
do  still.  This  would  lead  to  a  relaxation  of  discipline  and  order  in  the  camp,  and 
more  or  less  scattering  of  the  people.  Their  unity  was  indeed  to  a  certain  extent 
kept  up,  and  their  marching  orders  given  as  of  old,  probably  at  long  intervals.  So 
at  least  we  would  infer  from  the  itinerary  in  chap,  xxxiii. ;  but  there  must  have 
been  no  little  disorganisation  and  dispersion,  rendering  it  necessary  that  there 
should  be  a  reassembling  of  the  forces.  For  this  purpose  no  place  could  be  better 
or  more  appropriate  than  Kadesh,  not  only  because  it  must  have  been  so  familiar 
to  all,  but  also  because,  by  making  it  their  point  of  departure,  they  resumed  the 
thread  that  had  been  broken  by  the  unbelief  of  their  fathers.  The  total  loss  of  the 
long  interval  of  time,  moreover,  is  more  distinctly  marked  by  the  gathering  of  the 


CHAP,  sx.]  NUMBERS.  201 

people  together  at  the  old  halting-place.  There  is  a  striking  contrast  between  the 
new  departure  and  the  old.  The  tirst  began  with  the  numbering  and  mustering  of 
the  armed  men,  and  all  the  bustle,  activity,  and  energy  of  a  youthful  host  setting 
out  to  victory.  The  second  seems  to  have  a  much  less  bopeful  begmning.  The 
twentieth  of  Numbers  is  one  of  the  saddest  chapters  in  the  book.  It  begins  with 
the  death  of  her  who  had  been  the  leader  in  the  song  of  victory  on  the  shores  of 
the  Eed  Sea.  It  ends  with  the  death  of  him  who  had  so  long  been  the  honoured 
represi'ntative  of  Israel  in  the  Holy  and  the  Most  Holy  Place.  And,  between  the 
two,  we  have  the  old  story  of  murmuring  on  the  part  of  the  people,  and  mercy  on 
the  part  of  God,  but  with  this  sad  addition,  that  Moses  himself  has  a  fall — a  fall 
so  serious  that  it  leads  to  his  own,  as  well  as  Aaron's,  exclusion  from  the  land  of 
promise.  It  seems  a  hopeless  beginning  indeed.  But  was  there  not  something 
hopeful  in  its  very  hopelessness?  Recall  tbat  scene  of  wrestling  at  Peniel,  when 
the  patriarch  Jacob  gained  the  new  name  of  Israel.  How  did  he  gain  it  ?  By  his 
own  strength  ?  Nay.  It  was  through  weakness  that  he  was  made  strong.  It  was 
when  his  power  was  utterly  broken  that  his  hope  of  victory  began.  This  will 
illustrate  what  we  mean  when  we  say  that  there  is  something  hopeful  in  the  very 
hopelessness  of  this  chapter.  And  this  prepares  the  way  for  the  great  lesson  of 
the  next  chapter,  which  may  be  expressed  in  the  very  words  which  follow  the 
passage  just  quoted  from  the  146th  Psalm,  "  Happy  is  he  that  hath  the  God  of 
Jacob  for  his  help,  whose  hope  is  in  the  Lord  his  God."  (J.  M.  Gibson,  D.D.) 
Miriam  died  there. — T/ie  death  of  Miriam : — I.  Death  teeminates  the  most 
PKOTEACTED  LIFE.  Miriam  must  have  been  about  130  years  old  when  she  died. 
II.  Death  terminates  the  most  eventful  life.  1.  The  girl  watching  over  the 
life  of  her  infant  brother  (Exod.  iii.  4-8).  2.  The  experienced  woman  sharing  in 
the  interest  and  action  of  the  stirring  events  which  led  to  the  great  emancipation 
from  Egypt.  3.  The  prophetess  leading  the  exultant  songs  and  dances  of  a 
triumphant  people  (Exod.  xv.  20,  21).  4.  The  envious  woman  aspiring  after 
equality  with,  and  speaking  against  her  greater  brother  (chap.  xii.  1,  2).  5.  The 
guilty  woman  smitten  with  leprosy  because  of  the  sin  (chap.  xii.  9,  10).  6.  The 
leprous  woman  healed  in  answer  to  the  prayer  of  the  brother  whom  she  had  spoken 
against  (chap.  xii.  13-15).  The  most  stirring  and  eventful  life  is  closed  by  death, 
as  well  as  the  quiet  and  monotonous  one.  HI.  Death  terminates  the  most  dis- 
tinguished LIFE.  1.  Miriam  was  distinguished  by  her  gifts.  Prophetic  gifts  are 
ascribed  to  her.  "  Miriam,  the  prophetess,"  is  her  acknowledged  title  (Exod.  xv. 
20).  2.  Miriam  was  distinguished  by  her  position.  IV.  Death,  by  reason  of 
sin,  sometimes  terminates  life  earlier  than  it  otherwise  would  have  done. 
V.  Death  sometimes  terminates  life  with  suggestions  op  a  life  beyond.  It 
"was  so  in  the  case  of  Miriam.  Can  we  think  that  the  gifts  with  which  she  was  so 
richly  endowed,  and  the  treasures  of  experience  wbich  in  her  long  and  eventful  life 
she  had  gathered,  were  all  lost  at  death  ?  This  would  be  in  utter  opposition  to  the 
analogy  of  the  Divine  arrangements  in  the  universe.     (W.  Jones.) 

Vers.  2-13.  Neither  is  there  any  water  to  drink. — The  privations  of  man  and  the 
resources  of  God  : — I.  There  are  privations  in  the  pilgrimage  of  human  life.  One 
man  thinks  that  without  health  his  life  would  be  worthless  ;  yet  he  has  to  submit  to 
its  loss  for  a  time.  To  another  man  prosperity  seems  essential ;  to  another,  friend- 
ship, or  some  one  friend  or  relative ;  yet  of  these  they  are  sometimes  deprived. 
Life,  in  our  view,  has  many  privations.  This  characteristic  of  our  pilgrimage  is 
for  wise  and  gracious  ends.  Privation  should  remind  us  that  we  are  pilgrims — 
incite  u^  to  confide  in  God— and  discipline  our  spirits  into  patience  and  power. 

II.  1  H  :     privations     IN     THE    PILGRIMAGE     OF     LIFE     SOMETIMES    DEVELOP   THE   EVIL 

tende.ncies  of  HUMAN  NATURE.  This  murmuring  of  the  Israelites  was — 1.  Un- 
reasonable.     2.   Cruel.     3.   Ungrateful.     4.    Degraded.     5.  Audaciously  wicked. 

III.  The  PRIVATIONS  in  the  pilgrimage  of  life,  and  the  evils  WHICH  are  some- 
times  OCCASIONED  BY   THEM,   IMPEL    THE     GOOD     TO    SEEK    HELP    OP    GoD.        1.     Con- 

sciousness  of  need.  2.  Faith  in  the  sufficiency  of  the  Divine  help.  3.  Faith  in 
the  efficacy  of  prayer  to  obtain  tbe  Divine  help.  4.  Faith  in  the  efficacy  of  un- 
spoken prayer.     IV.    The  privations  in  the  pilgrimage  of  life  are  sometimes 

REMOVED   IN    ANSWER   TO    THE   PRAYER    OF    THE    GOOD.        {W.   JoUeS.)  No   Water  : 

1.  The  PLACE  HERE  SPOKEN  OF.  The  wilderness.  The  people  were  led  tbither — 1. 
For  discipline.  2.  For  solitude.  8.  For  proving.  How  sadly  they  failed.  II. 
The  want.  Water — 1.  A  necessity  for  sustenance.  2.  A  necessity  for  purity. 
3.  A  want  which  they  were  unable  to  provide  for  themselves.    III.  The  peopub's 


202  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

ACTION.  "They  murmured."  An  act  natural  to  the  human  heart ;  but  very  sinful 
and  foolish — 1.  Because  it  distrusted  God.  2.  Because  it  did  no  good.  3.  Because 
it  made  themselves  more  wretched  and  miserable  still.  IV.  The  provision  made. 
1.  Unexpected  in  its  source.  2.  Unexpected  in  the  manner  of  its  attainment.  3. 
Unexpected  in  quantity.  V.  The  instruction  affokded.  That  rock  was  a  type 
of  Christ.  He  was  appointed  of  God,  stricken  of  man,  means  of  salvation  to 
those  appointed  to  die,  &c.      (Preacher^s  Analyst.)  The  mnddy  bottom  .-—The 

heart  of  man  is  like  a  pool  of  standing  water.  Look  at  it  on  a  summer's  day,  when 
not  a  breeze  ruffles  the  surface,  not  a  bird  flies  over  to  cast  its  light  shadow  on  its 
face.  It  is  so  clear,  so  bright,  you  may  see  your  own  image  reflected  there.  Now 
cast  a  stone  to  the  bottom,  and  watch  the  eilect.  The  dark  mud  is  rising  all 
around,  rank  weeds  are  floating  up  which  you  never  saw  before  ;  the  whole  pool  is 
in  a  state  of  motion,  and  hardly  a  drop  of  water  has  escaped  the  foul  pollution. 
Look  at  your  heart  when  all  outward  things  go  well.  No  vexing,  crossing  care 
mars  its  tranquil  calm,  and  you  think  you  see  the  image  of  Jesus  reflected  there. 
It  is  so  long  since  sin  has  molestt  d  you  that  you  think  it  has  left  you  quite,  and 
that  all  is  sure  within.  Now  let  a  sudden  offence  come,  an  unkind,  undeserved 
rebuke  ;  let  pride  be  touched,  or  self-will  roused,  and  presently  all  is  lost.  Like 
the  waves  of  an  angry  sea,  the  poor  mind  is  tossed  from  thouglit  to  thought,  and 
finds  no  rest.  The  mud  is  raised  from  the  bottom,  and  not  one  corner  of  that 
wretched  heart  is  free  from  its  polluting  influence.  All  gentle,  soothing  thoughts 
are  gone,  and  one  by  one  the  dark  weeds  are  floating  on  the  surface.  (Quiet 
Thouylits  for  Quiet  Hours.)  Speak  ye  unto  the  rock. — God's  use  of  insufficient 
means  : — He  told  Moses  to  speak  to  the  rock,  and  it  should  give  forth  water.  On  a 
former  occasion  he  was  to  Smite  the  rock  ;  now  he  was  only  to  speak  to  it.  If 
there  were  any  unbelievers  in  the  camp  they  might  mock  at  tbis  command,  and 
say,  How  is  it  possible  to  get  water  out  of  a  rock  ?  let  us  rather  dig  wells,  if  haply 
we  may  find  water.  And  truly  to  the  eye  and  ear  of  sense  these  observations 
might  appear  plausible.  Now  God's  way  of  bringing  sinners  to  glory  is  just  the 
same.  The  life  of  the  Christian  is  a  life  of  faith  throughout.  The  appointed 
means  have  no  inherent  efficacy.  God  tries  the  faith  of  His  people  ;  disappoint  it 
He  never  will.  He  has  provided  strength  equal  to  their  day,  yet  will  He  send  it  in 
such  a  way  as  to  make  them  feel  their  utter  helplessness.  They  see  most  of  God's 
love  and  gracious  designs,  and  have  most  peace  and  comfort  in  their  afflictions, 
who  live  most  by  faith.  {George  Breay,  B.A.)  With  his  rod  he  smote  the  rock 
twice. — The  smitten  rock  : — I.  The  sinful  attitude  of  the  people.  They  were 
discontented,  enraged,  and  faithless.  And  so  men  grow  discontented  and  cry  out 
against  God,  as  if  trouble  were  the  only  experience  they  knew  anything  about — the 
most  unhappy  and  morbid  state  of  mind  into  which  any  Christian  believer  can 
come.  It  is  strange  also  how,  when  one  thing  goes  wrong  with  us,  everything 
seems  to  be  awry.  The  children  of  Israel  were  thirsty,  and  therefore  they  com- 
plained that  the  desei't  of  Zin  was  not  the  garden  of  the  Lord,  full  of  all  manner  of 
fruits.  Put  a  red  lamp  into  a  mass  of  shrubbery,  and  leaf  and  blossom  are  forth- 
with dved  an  angry  crimson.  Thwart  some  cherished  purpose  of  a  man,  and 
immediately  everything  takes  on  the  colour  of  his  disappointment.  Society  is 
disintegrating,  the  Church  is  going  to  destruction,  life  is  a  vale  of  tears.  Nothing 
but  immovable  faith  in  God  can  save  us  from  this  wretched  partialism.  II.  The 
merciful  attitude  of  God.  What  might  He  be  expected  to  do  under  the  circum- 
stances? What  wonder  if  He  should  say,  "  It  is  of  no  use  to  be  patient  any  longer. 
This  people  will  not  have  Me  for  their  Euler.  Let  them  perish."  But  that  is  not 
God's  way.  He  recognises  the  weakness  of  men,  pities  their  sufferings,  relieves 
their  wants,  and  so  gives  the  people  another  chance  to  understand  Him.  And  how 
often  that  ancient  wonder  is  wrought  anew  in  human  experience !  Some  critical 
event  occurs  in  our  history,  which  for  a  time  at  least  shatters  our  faith  in  the 
Divine  goodness  and  justice,  well  establislied  as  that  faith  ought  to  be  when  we 
remember  the  general  tenor  of  our  life,  and  God,  instead  of  flaming  out  against  our 
inconstancy  and  leaving  us  to  our  own  devices,  makes  that  very  event  the  occasion 
of  a  new  and  gracious  revelation  of  His  love.  With  time  and  pains  we  arrange 
some  well-compacted  plan,  on  whose  success  it  seems  to  us  all  our  good  fortune 
depends,  and  it  thrives  for  a  while  ;  but  suddenly  all  things  are  against  us,  and 
our  hopes  are  wrecked,  and  we  grow  bitter  and  rebellious,  and  then  God  uses  that 
very  disaster  to  teach  us  juster  views  of  life  and  to  create  in  us  a  nobler  frame  of 
raind,  and  develop  a  broader  manhood,  and  we  have  a  nobler  ambition  and  are 
better  equipped  than  ever  before.    And  then  from  the  barren  rock  of  bereavement 


CHAP.  XX.]  NU3IBERS.  203 

God  brings  streams  of  refreshing.  The  remaining  members  of  the  household  are 
more  closely  welded  together,  a  more  tender  sympathy  with  each  other  springs  up, 
the  unseen  life  becomes  a  grander  reality,  and,  as  in  the  flush  of  the  sunset  that 
follows  the  storm,  we  forget  the  fury  of  the  blast  in  the  glory  of  the  transfigured 
heavens,  so  men  and  women,  in  the  chastened  spirit  that  results  from  trials,  and 
in  the  light  of  new  and  larger  hopes  which  have  been  kindled,  bear  glad  testimony : 
"  It  is  good  for  us  that  we  have  been  afflicted."  III.  The  dnwakpantable  atti- 
T0UE  OF  Moses  and  Aaron.  They  were  angry  with  the  people  and  called  them 
hard  names,  addressing  them  as  "  rebels."  They  spoke  as  if  they  were  the  chief 
agents  of  the  miracle  which  God  wrought.  "Hear  now,  ye  rebels,"  they  said  to 
the  people,  "  mu>t  we  fetch  you  water  out  of  this  roi'k  ?  "  So  far  as  their  words 
■went,  they  were  taking  upon  themselves  the  glory  whi"h  beloneed  to  God  alone. 
Then,  too,  they  were  not  satisfied  with  the  Divine  directions.  For  these  assump- 
tions Moses  and  Aaron  were  rebuked  on  the  spot,  and  a  sentence  of  punishment 
pronounced  upon  them.  There  is  important  practical  instruction  here  for  those 
who  teach  or  preach  God's  Word  to  sinful  men.  It  is  not  to  be  done  in  a  se'f- 
satisfied  way,  with  the  assumption  of  superior  sanctity.  Neither  are  we  to  take 
credit  to  ourselves  for  good  results  which  may  follow  our  administiation  of  Divine 
truth.  It  is  not  our  wisdom  or  eloquence,  but  the  Word  of  God  which  is  "  quick, 
and  powerful,  and  sharper  than  any  two-edged  sword,"  Humility  and  self-distrnst 
are  eminently  becoming  in  those  who  undertake  to  do  God  s  work  of  influencing 
men  for  good.  {E.  S.  Ahcood.)  Moses  at  the  rock: — 1.  Did  you  ever  hear 
people  cry  out,  "  I  wish  I  were  dead  "  ?  That  is  what  the  Israelites  said — "  Would 
God  we  had  died !  "  These  wishes  were  hasty,  and  as  insincere  as  hasty.  No 
doubt  those  people  would  flee  from  death  with  terror  at  the  first  sign  of  his 
approai-h.  It  has  been  well  said  that  "a  discontented  heart  makes  a  reckless 
tongue."  2.  Now  we  come  to  Moses'  sin.  He  did  not  attend  carefully  to  God's 
Word,  nor  obey  it,  because  he  was  angry.  Notice  his  bitter  words.  Let  us  beware 
of  the  sin  of  anger.  Look  at  the  fifth  of  Galatians,  and  it  tells  you  that  "wrath  " 
is  one  of  the  "  lusts  of  the  flesh."  In  Proverbs  we  are  told  that  "  he  that  is  slow 
to  anger  is  better  than  the  mighty,  and  he  that  ruleth  his  spirit  than  he  that  t  iketh 
a  city."  Why  is  a  person  who  conquers  him-self  better  than  a  great  general  who 
takes  a  citj'?  There  are  three  reasons.  (1)  He  is  a  greater  hero  ;  he  d<ies  a  more 
difficult  thing.  (2)  Because  it  leaves  a  happier  feeling  behind.  (3)  It  pleases 
God.  The  more  you  conquer  your  sins,  the  more  you  will  be  growing  like  Christ. 
Do  you  know  heaven  is  full  of  conquerors?  And  Rev.  xii.  11  tells  us  how  they 
conquered  :  "  They  overcame  by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb."  (British  Weekly  Pulpit.) 
The  scene  at  Meribah  .- — This  is  a  memorable  incident  in  the  Jews'  history,  rich  in 
warning  to  us  at  this  day.  Moses  had  failed  in  his  duty  towards  God  in  three 
particulars.  1.  He  had  failed  in  strict  obedience.  2.  He  had  shown  temper,  used 
hard  language.  3.  He  had  taken  to  himself  the  credit  of  supplying  the  Israelites 
with  water.  I.  The  d.\ngek  or  depaeting,  in  the  least  jot  or  tittle,  from  ant 
LAW  OF  God.  II.  The  immense  importance  attached  to  temperate  speech,  the 
necessity  of  keeping  a  check  on  temper  and  not  letting  ourselves  be  moved  to  hot 
and  angry  words.  III.  This  scene  is  further  useful  as  carrying  our  thoughts 
upwards  to  Him  who  is  the  source  of  all  our  hopes,  the  nourishment  of  our  soul, 
the  very  life  of  our  religion,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  (R.  D.  B.  Rninisley,  31. A.) 
Moses  strikiiip  the  rock:— The  Biblical  writers  are  charmingly  candid.  Do  they 
speak  of  other  men's  faults  ?  They  take  care  also  to  record  their  own.  Reputation 
is  sacrificed  on  the  altar  of  truth  ;  the  unselfish  lawgiver  informs  us  of  his  own 
transgression  and  its  terrible  penalty.  What  may  we  learn  from  his  sin  ?  I.  We 
MUST  not  seek  right  ENDS  BY  WRONG  MEANS.  Here  Moscs  crrcd.  How  often  has 
his  sin  been  repeated !  Look  at  Caiaphas.  He  says  in  reference  to  the  Saviour. 
♦'  It  is  expedient  that  one  man  die,  and  not  that  the  whole  nation  should  perish." 
The  latter  part  of  the  sentence  is  admirable,  the  former  is  atrocious.  .  .  .  Error 
should  be  opposed ;  we  ought  to  stop  its  progress  as  quickly  as  possible — but  by 
persuasion,  not  persecution.  II.  We  must  beware  of  doing  more  than  God 
COMMANDS.  There  are  two  opposite  ways  of  sinning — by  defect,  and  bv  excess.  A 
child  who,  in  adding  up  a  sum,  makes  it  "  come  to  too  much,"  blunders  as 
completely  as  if  he  made  it  "come  to  too  little."  And  such  a  form  of  wrong-doing 
is  possible  spiritually.  We  as  much  violate  our  duty  as  "  followers  of  God,"  if  we 
get  ahead  of  our  Guide,  as  though  we  lagged  so  far  behind  that  we  could  no  longer 
see  Him  or  tread  in  His  steps.  Are  we  not  all,  for  instance,  har'er  in  our 
judgments,  more  exacting,  more  stringent  and  rigorous  in  our  demands,  tiian  He  is 


204  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

whom  we  profess  to  follow ;  and  is  not  this  to  go  before  God,  and  to  go  before  Him 
not  to  prepare  His  way,  but  to  scare  men  from  His  presence  ?  III.  Precedent  is  a 
PERILOUS  GUIDE.  Moses  had  struck  the  rock  before  by  God's  command,  and 
probably  he  argued  that  what  was  right  then  could  not  be  wrong  now.  But  let  us 
remember,  that  "  circumstances  alter  cases."  A  thing  which  is  wise  for  one  time 
may  be  folly  for  another.  (T.  R.  Steveyison.)  The  sin  of  Moses  : — I.  What  there 
WAS  SINFUL  IN  j\IosES.  1.  Disobedieuce  to  the  Divine  command.  2.  Immoderate 
heat  and  passion.  3.  Unbelief.  4.  It  was  all  publicly  done,  and  so  the  more 
dishonouring  to  God.  II.  What  we  mat  learn  from  this  tragical  story.  1.  What 
a  holy  and  jealous  God  He  is  with  whom  we  have  to  do.  2.  The  Lord's  children 
nend  nut  think  it  strange  if  they  get  abundance  to  exercise  that  grace  in  which 
they  most  excel.  3.  Let  us  not  be  surprised  to  see  or  hear  the  saiuts  failing  even 
in  the  exercise  of  that  grace  wherein  they  mo>t  excel.  4.  Never  think  yourselves 
secure  from  fallmg  till  ye  be  at  the  end  of  your  race.  5.  What  need  we  have  to 
guard  constantly  our  unruly  passions,  and  put  a  bridle  on  our  lips.  6.  Though 
God  pardons  the  iniquity  of  His  servants,  yet  He  will  take  vengeance  on  theh* 
inventions  (Psa.  xcix.  8).  7.  If  God  punishes  His  children  thus  for  falling  into 
the  snare,  how  shall  they  escape  who  lay  the  snare  for  them?  8.  Observe  the 
ingenuousness  of  the  penmen  of  the  Holy  Scripture — Moses  records  his  own  fault. 
(T.  Boston,  D.D.)  Sin  in  the  child  of  God: — I.  Very  painful  to  God.  II.  Most 
inexcusable.  III.  Most  disastrous  in  its  results.  IV.  Very  certain  of 
punishment.  Let  this  incident — 1.  Make  God's  people  more  watchful.  2.  Lead 
others  to  ponder  their  ways  ;  for  if  God  visits  His  own  children  for  sin,  a  fortiori. 
He  will  not  let  the  wicked  escape.  3.  Let  none  forget  that  God  can  forgive  sin — 
all  sin — through  Jesus   Christ.      {David   Lloyd.)  The  sins  of  holy  men,  and 

their  punishment  : — The  sin  of  Moses  and  Aaron  stems  to  have  included — 
1.  Want  of  faith.  2.  Irritation  of  spirit.  3.  Departure  from  Divine  directions. 
4.  Assumption  of  power.  5.  The  publicity  of  the  whole.  I.  The  liability 
OF  the  good  to  sin.  II.  The  danger  of  good  men  failing  in  those  excel- 
lences which  most  distinguish  them.  III.  The  impartiality  of  the  ad- 
ministration OF  THE  Divine  government.     IV.  The  great  guilt  of  those  who 

BY    their  wickedness    OCCASION    SIN    IN   THE    GOOD.       V.    ThE    MEANS  WHICH   GoD    USES 

TO  DETER  MEN  FROM  SIN.  Dlvinc  judgments,  expostulations  with  the  sinner, 
encouragf^menls  and  aids  to  obedience,  are  all  so  employed.  By  the  voice  of 
history,  by  the  law  from  Sinai,  by  the  gospel  of  His  Son,  by  the  Cross  of 
Jesus  Christ,  by  the  influences  of  His  Spirit,  God  is  ever  crying  to  the  sinner, 
"Oh!  do  not  this  abominable  thing  that  I  hate."  Let  Christians  guard  against 
temptation;  let  them  cultivate  a  watchful  and  prayerful  spirit.  (W.  Jones.) 
Hoio  it  wi'nt  ill  with  Moxes  : — It  was  but  one  act,  one  little  act,  but  it  blighted  the  fair 
flower  of  a  noblt'  life,  and  shut  the  one  soul,  whose  faith  had  sustained  the  respon- 
sibilities of  the  Exodus  with  unflinching  fortitude,  from  the  reward  which  seemed 
so  nearly  within  its  grasp.  I.  How  it  befell.  Tbe  demand  of  the  people  on  the 
water  supply  at  Kadesh  was  so  great  that  the  streams  were  drained,  whereupon 
there  broke  out  again  that  spirit  of  murmuring  and  complaint  which  had  cursed  the 
former  generation,  and  was  now  reproduced  in  their  children.  They  professed  to 
wish  that  they  had  died  in  the  plague  that  Aaron's  censer  had  stayed.  They  accused 
the  brothers  of  malicious  designs  to  effect  the  destruction  of  tbe  whole  assembly  by 
thirst.  It  could  hardly  have  been  otherwise  than  that  he  should  feel  strongly 
provoked.  However,  he  resumed  his  old  position,  prostrating  himself  at  the  door 
of  the  tent  of  meeting  until  the  growing  light  that  welled  forth  from  the  Secret  Place 
indicated  that  the  Divine  answer  was  near.  Moses  was  bidden,  though  betook  the 
rod,  not  to  use  it,  but  to  speak  to  the  rock  with  a  certainty  that  the  accents  of  his 
voice,  smiting  on  its  flinty  face,  would  have  as  much  effect  as  ever  the  rod  had  had 
previously,  and  would  be  followed  by  a  rush  of  crystal  water.  Yes,  when  God  is 
with  you,  words  are  equivalent  to  rods.  Kods  are  well  enough  to  use  at  the  com- 
mencement of  faith's  nurture,  and  when  its  strength  is  small,  but  they  may  be  laid 
aside  without  hesitance  in  the  later  stages  of  the  education  of  the  soul.  For  as 
faith  grows,  the  mere  machinery  and  apparatus  it  employs  becomes  ever  less,  and 
its  miracles  are  wrought  with  the  sliglitest  possible  introduction  of  the  material. 
Moses  might  have  entered  into  these  thoughts  of  God  in  quieter  moments,  but  just 
now  he  was  irritated,  indignant,  and  hot  with  disappointment  and  anger.  The 
people  did  not  suffer  through  their  leader's  sin.  The  waters  gushed  from  out  the 
rock  as  plentifully  as  they  would  have  done  if  the  Divine  injunctions  had  been 
precisely  complied  with.     Man's  unbelief  does  not  make  the  faith  of  God  of  none 


CHAP.  XX.]  h^UMBERS.  205 

effect;  though  we  believe  not,  yet  He  remaineth  faithful,  He  cannot  deny  Himself, 
or  desert  the  people  of  His  choice.  II.  The  principle  that  underlay  the  Divine 
DECISION.  1.  There  was  distinct  disobedience.  2Slo  doubt  was  possible  about  the 
Divine  command,  and  it  had  been  distinctly  infringed.  This  could  not  be  tolerated 
in  one  who  was  set  to  lead  and  teach  the  people.  God  is  sanctified  whenever  we  put 
an  inviolable  fence  around  Himself  and  His  words ;  treating  them  as  unquestionable 
and  decisive  ;  obeying  them  with  instant  and  utter  loyalty.  It  is  a  solemn  question 
for  us  all  whether  we  are  sufficiently  accurate  in  our  obedience.  2.  There  was 
unbelief.  It  was  as  if  he  had  felt  that  a  word  was  not  enougli.  As  if  there  must  be 
something  more  of  human  might  and  instrumentality.  He  did  not  realise  how 
small  an  act  on  his  part  was  suthcientto  open  the  sluice-gates  of  Omnipotence.  It 
reminds  us  of  the  shattering  of  the  Hell-Gate  Rock  at  the  entrance  of  New  York 
Harbour.  The  touching  of  a  tiny  button  by  a  little  child  set  in  action  the  train  of 
gunpowder  by  which  that  vast  obstruction  was  blasted  to  atoms,  and  heaved  for  all 
time  out  of  the  path  of  the  ships.  A  touch  is  enough  to  set  Omnipotence  in  action. 
It  is  very  wonderful  to  hear  God  say  to  Moses,  "  Ye  believed  not  in  Me."  Was  not 
this  the  man  by  whose  faith  the  plagues  of  Egypt  had  fallen  on  that  unhappy  land, 
and  the  lied  Sea  had  cleft  its  waters?  Had  tbe  wanderings  impaired  that  mighty 
soul,  and  robbed  it  of  its  olden  strength,  and  left  it  like  any  other  ?  Surely  some- 
thicg  of  this  sort  must  have  happened.  One  act  could  only  have  wrought  such 
havoc  by  being  the  symptom  of  some  unsuspected  wrong  beneath.  Oaks  do  not  fall 
beneath  a  single  storm,  unless  they  have  become  rotten  at  their  heart.  Let  us 
watch  and  pray,  lest  there  be  in  any  of  us  an  evil  heart  of  unbelief,  lest  we  depart 
in  our  most  secret  thought  from  simple  faith  in  the  living  God.  Let  us  especially 
set  a  watch  at  our  strongest  point.  But  how  much  there  is  of  this  reliance  on  the 
rod  in  all  Christian  endeavour  !  Some  special  method  has  been  owned  of  God  in 
times  past,  in  the  conversion  of  the  unsaved  or  in  the  edification  of  God's  people, 
and  we  instantly  regard  it  as  a  kind  of  fetish.  We  try  to  meet  new  conditions  by- 
bringing  out  the  rod  and  using  it  as  of  yore.  It  is  a  profound  mistake.  God  never 
repeats  Himself.  He  suits  novel  instrumentalities  to  new  emergencies.  Where  a 
rod  was  needful  once  He  sees  that  a  word  is  better  now.  What  does  it  matter  if 
the  means  He  ordains  appear  to  our  judgment  inferior  to  those  which  He  com- 
manded once?  This  is  no  business  of  ours.  3.  There  was  the  spoiling  of  the 
type.  That  Eock  was  Christ,  from  whose  heart,  smitten  in  death  on  Calvary,  the 
river  of  water  of  Ufe  has  flowed  to  make  glad  the  city  of  God,  and  to  transform 
deserts  into  Edens.  But  death  came  to  Him  and  can  come  to  Him  but  once.  "  Christ 
was  once  offered  to  bear  the  sins  of  many."  It  is  clear  that  for  the  completeness  of 
the  likeness  between  substance  and  shadow,  the  rock  should  have  been  stricken  but 
once.  Instead  of  that  it  was  smitten  at  the  beginning  and  at  the  close  of  the  desert 
march.  But  this  was  a  misrepresentation  of  an  eternal  fact,  and  the  perpetrator  of 
the  heedless  act  of  iconoclasm  must  suffer  the  extreme  penalty,  even  as  Uzzah  died 
for  trying  to  steady  the  swaying  ark.  III.  The  irrevocableness  of  the  Divine 
DECISIONS.  Moses  drank  very  deeply  of  the  bitter  cup  of  disappointment.  And  no 
patriot  ever  yearned  for  fatherland  as  Moses  to  tread  that  blessed  soil.  With  all 
the  earnestness  that  he  had  used  to  plead  for  the  people,  he  now  pleaded  for  him- 
self. But  it  was  not  to  be.  The  Lord  said  unto  him,  Let  it  suffice  thee  ;  speak  no 
more  unto  Me  of  this  matter.  The  sin  was  forgiven,  but  its  consequences  were 
allowed  to  work  out  to  their  sorrowful  issue.  There  are  experiences  with  us  all  in 
which  God  forgives  our  sin,  but  takes  vengeance  on  our  inventions.  We  reap  as  we 
have  sown.  We  suffer  where  we  have  sinned.  At  such  times  our  prayer  is  not 
literally  answered.  By  the  voice  of  His  Spirit,  by  a  spiritual  instinct,  we  become 
conscious  that  it  is  useless  to  pray  further.  But,  oh !  that  God  would  undertake 
the  keeping  of  our  souls,  else,  when  we  least  expect  it,  we  may  be  overtaken  by 
some  sudden  temptation,  which  befalling  us  in  the  middle,  or  towards  the  close  of 
our  career,  may  blight  our  hopes,  tarnish  our  fair  name,  bring  dishonour  to  Him, 
and  rob  our  hfe  of  the  worthy  capstone  of  its  edifice.    (F.  B.  Meyer,  B.A.) 

Vers.   14-21.  Edom  refused  to  give  Israel  passage  thraag-h  Ms  toorder.— .4 

reasonable  request,  and  an  ungenerous  refusal  : — I.  A  reasonable  request.  1. 
Eeasonable  in  itself.  2.  Urged  by  forcible  reasons.  (1)  The  relationship  existing 
between  them,  "Thy  brother  Israel."  (2)  The  sufferings  which  the  Israehtes  had 
endured.  (3)  The  mercies  which  God  had  shown  to  Israel.  The  blessings  which 
God  had  bestowed  upon  them  should  have  been  viewed — (a)  As  an  indication  that 
it  was  His  will  tliat  others  should  aid  them,     {b)  As  an  example  to  encourage  others 


206  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

to  aid  them,  (c)  As  an  indication  of  His  favour  towards  them,  wliich  suggested 
that  it  was  to  the  interest  of  others  to  aid  them.  It  is  perilous  to  resist  those  whom 
God  defends  ;  it  is  prudent  to  further  their  designs,  &c.  (4)  Because  Israel  would 
guarantee  Edom  against  any  loss.  II.  An  cngenerous  refusal.  This  refusal  of  the 
Edomites  probably  arose  from — 1.  Fear  that  if  they  complied  with  the  request  of 
the  Israelites  the  result  might  be  injurious  to  them.  2.  Envy  at  the  growing  power 
of  Israel.  3.  Eemembrance  of  the  ancient  injury  inflicted  by  Jacob  upon  Esau.  (1) 
Learn  that  no  alienation  is  so  wide  and  bitter  as  that  betw<-en  brethren  or  other 
near  relations.  (2)  Where  such  alienation  exists,  let  us  seek  to  bring  about  recon- 
ciliation— a  complete  healing  of  the  breach.  (3)  Cultivate  brotherly  kindness.  (4) 
Eespect  the  rights  of  others  even  when  the  assertion  of  those  rights  is  carried  to  an 
extreme.  "  Thus  Edom  refused  to  give  Israel  passage  through  his  border  ;  where- 
fore Israel  turned  away  from  him."  (TF.  Jones.)  Retribution  conxummated  : — 
Who  pleads  ?  Israel.  To  whom  is  the  plea  addressed  ?  To  a  brother.  How  did 
the  word  "  brother  "  come  into  the  narrative?  It  came  historically.  We  have  here 
Jacob  and  Esau.  Edom  is  the  name  by  which  Esau  was  known.  Wherever  we 
find  the  term  Edom,  our  minds  may  instantly  associate  with  it  the  history  of  Esau, 
and  an  action  of  Divine  sovereignty  in  relation  to  that  history.  Jacob  supplanted 
Esau,  ran  away  in  the  night-time,  met  his  brother  at  some  distance  of  time  after- 
wards, the  brothers  fell  upon  one  another's  necks,  kissed  each  other,  and  seemed  to 
sink  the  infinite  outrage  in  grateful  and  perpetual  oblivion.  Nothing  of  the  kind. 
Life  cannot  be  managed  thus ;  things  do  not  lie  between  man  and  man  only. 
Herein  is  the  difference  between  crime  and  sin.  So  Jacob  and  Esau  come  face  to 
face  throughout  the  ages.  The  supplanter  cannot  sponge  out  Lis  miserable  cunning 
and  selfish  deceit  and  unpardonable  fraud.  Jacob  the  individual  dies,  Esau  the 
individual  dies :  but  Jacob  and  Esau,  as  representing  a  great  controversy,  can  never 
die  :  to  the  end  of  the  chapter  Edom  will  encounter  Israel  with  deep  and  lasting 
animosity.  So  Esau  had  his  turn.  We  pitied  the  hairy  man  as  he  was  driven  away 
portionless,  without  a  blessing,  his  great  heart  full  of  sin  no  doubt,  quivering  with 
agony,  for  which  there  was  no  adequate  expre-sion  in  words  ;  but  in  so  far  as  he 
has  been  wronged  he  will  see  satisfaction  and  himself  be  satisfied.  The  supplanted 
family  had  a  land  when  the  supplanter's  descendants  had  only  a  wilderness.  This 
is  the  law  of  Providence.  Events  are  not  measured  within  the  compasses  of  the 
little  day.  The  cunning  man  or  the  strong  man,  the  oppressor  or  the  wrong-doer, 
may  have  his  victory  to-day,  and  may  smile  upon  it,  and  regard  it  with  complacency, 
and  receive  the  incense  of  adulation  from  persons  who  only  see  between  sunrise  and 
sundown.  But  the  heavens  are  against  him ;  he  has  to  encounter  the  eternities, 
long  time  after  his  victory  shall  wither,  and  in  his  descendants  his  humiliation  shall 
be  consummated.     (J,  Parker,  D.D.) 

Ver.  17.  We  will  go  by  the  king's  highw&y.— The  Mng's  highway  .-—They  meant 
that,  however  tempting  was  the  fruit  of  the  fields,  however  fascinating  the  byways, 
however  inviting  the  sparkling  water  in  the  wells  might  Sf-em,  they  would  keep  to 
the  hard-beaten  thoroughfares  that  ran  north  and  South  of  the  country,  by  which 
travellers  had  passed  in  ages  now  gone  by.  Now,  without  doubt,  such  words  have 
a  spiritual  and  typical  meaning.  I.  Of  the  nation  at  large.  Israel  pronounced 
them  unanimously  as  a  nation,  and  we,  as  the  English  nation,  may  well  re-echo 
them  after  all  these  hundreds  of  years.  And  it  is  well  for  us  to  bear  in  mind  that 
"  whole  nations  "  must  stand  up  for  God  as  well  as  individuals.  Numbers  can 
never  make  a  sin  less  grievous.  II.  They  are  words,  too,  that  may  be  hoped  for 
from  the  mouth  of  the  Church.  God  is  essentially  a  God  of  law  and  order.  The 
Church  must  go  by  the  King's  highway.  III.  But  as  with  the  nation  and  with  the 
Church,  so  with  the  individual,  they  are  words  that  are  appropriate  in  the  mouth 
— 1.  Of  the  young  Christian,  starting  off  on  life's  journey,  just  going  into  the 
world.  Happy,  aye  thrice  happy,  he  who,  with  dogged  determination,  says,  "  We 
will  go  by  the  King's  highway."  2.  So.  too,  they  are  suited  especially  to  the 
penitent.  He,  too,  must  look  into  the  future  and  resolve  "  to  go  by  the  King's 
highway."  And  here  we  must  pause  to  notice  that  the  individual  highway  consists 
— (1)  Of  morals.  We  must  take  the  code  of  God's  commandments,  showing  our 
duty  to  God  and  man,  and  walk  in  the  way  of  God's  commandments.  (2)  Of  faith. 
Ethics  alone  are  not  sufiicient ;  there  must  be  a  firm  basis  of  Church  doctrine, 
something  on  which  the  soul  of  man  may  lean  for  comfort  in  distress,  IV.  Lastly, 
we  are  not  alone  in  our  efforts  to  go  by  the  King's  highway ;  we  are  cheered  by 
THE  EXAMPLES  OF  ALL  THE  SAINTS  whosc  names  are  written  in  the  Lamb's  Book  of 


CHAP.  XX.]  NUMBERS.  207 

Life.     In  conclusion,  I  would  add  that  the  King's  highway  leads  to  the  city  of  the 
Great  King.     (W.  O.  Parish.) 

Vers.  25-29.  Aaron  died  there  in  the  top  of  the  mount. — The  death  of  Aaron  : — 
The  first  and  most  superficial  aspect  of  death  is  that  it  is  the  close  of  an  earthly 
career.  What  kind  of  career  was  it  that  was  brought  to  a  close  when  Aaron  died? 
First  of  all,  there  could  be  no  question  as  to  its  prominence.  Aaron  shares  with 
Moses,  though  as  a  subordinate,  the  glory  of  having  ruled  and  shaped  the  course 
and  conduct  of  his  countrymen  at  a  time  of  unexampled  difficulty,  at  a  time  preg- 
nant with  the  highest  consequences  to  the  religious  future  of  the  world.  But  Aaron's 
place  in  religious  history  is  more  distinctly  measured  if  we  consider  the  great  office 
to  which  he  was  called.  He  was  the  first  of  a  long  Une  of  men  who  were  at  the 
head  of  what  was  for  ages  the  only  true  religion  in  the  world.  He  was  the  first  high 
priest  of  the  chosen  people.  Office,  however,  and  position  is  one  thing  ;  character 
is  another  ;  and,  if  it  is  here  that  we  find  a  grep.t  difference  between  the  brothers, 
we  must  first  of  all  remind  ourselves  that  Aaron  is  called  in  Scripture  "  the  saint  of 
the  Lord."  He  must  have  had  a  great  background  of  those  high  qualities  which  go 
to  make  up  the  saintly  character,  if  he  also  had  defects  which  are  recorded  for  our 
instruction.  Aaron  was  morally  a  weak  man.  He  had  no  such  grasp  of  principle 
as  would  enable  him  to  hold  out  against  strong  pressure.  Nor  is  it  inconsistent  with 
this  that  Aaron  could  display  obstinate  self-assertion  on  inopportune  occasions,  as 
when  he  joined  his  sister  Miriam  in  murmuring  against  Moses.  This  is  exactly  what 
weak  people  do ;  they  give  way  when  true  loyalty  to  duty  would  teach  them  to  resist, 
and  then,  haunted  by  the  notion  that  they  are  weak,  or  at  least  that  the  world  will 
think  them  so,  they  indulge  in  some  form  of  spasmodic  self-assertion  which  may 
remind  us  of  the  ungainly  efforts  that  invalids  will  sometimes  make  to  show  that 
they  are  not  quite  so  ill  as  their  friends  may  think  them.  And  now  the  end  had 
come.  Moses  and  Aaron  both  knew  that  Aaron  would  die.  It  may  have  been  that 
some  hitherto  unsuspected  disease  had  shown  itself  in  the  constitution  of  the  old 
man ;  it  may  have  been,  as  has  been  suggested,  that  a  sand-storm  in  the  Arabah 
had  withered  np  his  decaying  vitality.  That  Aaron  would  die  might  have  been 
known  from  observation,  as  God  often  speaks  to  us  through  the  wonted  changes  of 
the  world  of  nature.  But  Aaron  and  Moses  also  knew  why  Aaron  was  to  die,  and 
why  on  Mount  Hor.  If  we  knew  enough,  we  should  all  of  us  know  that  there  is  a 
reason  in  the  Divine  mind  for  the  hour  at  which,  as  for  the  means  by  which,  every 
man  and  woman  departs  this  life.  We  aU  are  interested  in  ascertaining  as  exactly 
as  we  can  the  physical  reason  of  the  death  of  those  relations  whom  God  in  His 
providence  removes  from  our  sight ;  but  behind  the  physical  reason  there  is  a  moral 
reason,  if  we  could  only  know  it;  and  we  may  say,  with  confidence,  that,  in  the 
eyes  of  God,  who  is  the  perfect  moral  Being,  the  moral  reason  accounts  for  much 
more  than  the  physical.  Sometimes  a  life  is  prolonged  to  do  one  single  piece  of 
work  which  no  other  would  do  as  well,  and  as  soon  as  that  work  is  done,  that  life 
is  withdrawn.  Sometimes  a  life  is  cut  short  because  it  has  forfeited  the  particular 
privilege  which  an  extension  of  some  months  or  even  weeks  would  bring  to  it,  and 
this  was  the  case  of  Aaron — "  And  the  Lord  spake  unto  Moses  and  Aaron  in  Mount 
Hor,  by  the  coast  of  the  land  of  Edom,  saying  Aaron  shall  be  gathered  to  his  people, 
for  he  shall  not  enter  into  the  land  which  I  have  given  to  the  children  of  Israel 
because  he  rebelled  against  My  word  at  the  waters  of  Meribah."  Aaron's  share  in 
the  sin  of  Meribah  was  due  to  the  same  want  of  firmness  which,  as  we  have  seen, 
was  a  feature  in  his  character.  The  sin  of  Meribah  was,  in  the  first  instance,  the 
sin  of  Moses,  when  the  people  murmured  at  the  want  of  water,  ami  Moses,  worried 
no  doubt  by  their  perverseness,  in  the  very  act  of  relieving  them  betrayed,  buth  by 
what  he  said  and  by  what  he  did,  a  temper  unworthy  of  his  hifih.  office,  so  that  he 
did  not  sanctify  the  Lord  God  in  the  eyes  of  the  people.  As  a  later  Psalmist  reflects 
— "  The  people  angered  God  at  the  waters  of  strife,  so  that  He  punished  Moses  for 
their  sakes,  because  that  thev  provoked  his  spirit  so  that  he  spake  nnadvisedly  with 
his  lips."  As  for  Aaron,  he  not  only  did  not  check  Moses,  he  acquiesced  in  what  he 
must  have  known  to  be  dishonourable  to  God  ;  and  this  in  a  man  with  his  spiritual 
responsibilities  was  a  grave  failure  of  duty.  Much  more,  Moses  bad  foifeited  that 
high  privilege,  but  then  the  work  which  Moses  had  to  do  in  the  world  was  not  yet 
done.  But  Aaron's  appointed  work  was  done,  and  there  was  no  reason  for  delaying 
his  summons.  And  here  we  are  led  to  reflect  on  a  subject  which  too  often  escapes 
notice.  Many  men,  probably  the  majority  of  those  who  do  not  incur  eternal  loss, 
yet  do  from  some  flaw  in  the  character,  from  some  warp  or  weakness  in  the  will, 


208  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

fall,  more  or  less,  greatly  short  of  what  they  might  have  been,  of  what  natural 
powers  and  spiritual  endowments  and  religious  and  other  opportunities  might  have 
made  them  even  in  this  world ;  and  if  here,  then  also  hereafter,  even  if  by  God's 
mercy  in  Christ  we  reach  it,  it  may  be  to  fill  a  lower  rather  than  what  might  have 
been  a  higher  place,  but  for  some  compliance  with  what  conscience  condemned, 
but  for  some  act  or  some  omission  which  has  left  upon  the  soul  and  the  churacter 
that  lasting  impress  which  survives  death.  There  is  much  to  be  noticed  in  the 
account  of  the  close  of  Aaron's  hfe,  but  nothing  is  more  worthy  of  our  notice  than 
his  dehberate  preparation  for  it.  He  did  not  let  death  come  on  him,  he  went  to 
meet  it.  The  last  scene  was  as  much  a  matter  of  duty,  a  matter  of  business,  as  his 
consecration  to  the  high  priesthood.  ...  Ah  !  death,  surely,  is  like  a  mountain-top 
for  the  survey  which  it  gives  to  life,  and  the  deserts  through  which  we  have 
wandered,  and  the  barriers  which  have  checked  our  progress,  and  the  hopes,  bright 
or  dim,  which  have  cheered  us  on,  and  the  feebleness  and  the  fear  of  man,  and  the 
self-seeking,  and  the  petty  vanity  (if  nothing  worse)  which  have  spoiled  so  much 
that  God  meant  for  Himself,  stand  out  in  clear  outlines  above  the  haze  of  the  distant 
past.  Doubtless  it  was  with  Aaron  as  with  any  man  who  retains,  along  with  a  con- 
science that  has  not  been  seared,  the  free  exercise  of  the  mind's  powers  in  those  last 
solemn  moments  which  precede  the  greatest  of  all  changes — doubtless,  it  was  with 
him  as  with  others  upon  whom  their  position  and  work  in  life  have  entailed  great 
responsibility  for  the  real  and  lasting  happiness  or  misery  of  their  fellow  men.  At 
such  times  the  simply  conventional  no  longer  satisfies.  At  such  times  standards  of 
conduct  that  are  natural  to  human  sanction  are  seen  to  be  no  longer  applicable,  the 
mental  eye  sees  through  and  beyond  the  phrases  which  inclination  or  passion  have 
hitherto  interposed  between  it  and  the  past.  It  sees  the  past  more  nearly,  not  as 
self-love  has  wished  it  to  be,  but  as  it  was.  At  such  times  the  higher  a  man's  place 
in  the  government,  or  the  social  fabric  of  the  state,  or  in  the  hierarchy  of  the 
Church,  the  more  sincerely  must  he  breithe  the  prayer,  "If  Thou,  Lord,  shouldest 
be  extreme  to  mark  what  is  done  amiss,  O  Lord,  who  may  abide  it  ?  "  But  time 
was  passing.  The  last  moments  were  now  at  hand  ;  so  Moses,  acting,  as  we  know, 
under  Divine  instructions,  stripped  Aaron  of  his  garments,  and  put  them  upon 
Eleazar  his  son.  There  was,  no  doubt,  a  two-fold  motive  in  this  act  of  Moses.  It 
showed,  first  of  all,  tbat  the  office  of  the  high  priesthood  did  not  depend  on  the  life 
of  any  single  man,  that  God  was  watching  over  the  religious  interests  of  His  people, 
that  His  gifts  and  calling  were,  as  the  apostle  says,  "  without  repentance,  without 
recall,"  and  that  He  provides  for  the  due  transmission  of  those  spiritual  faculties 
which  have  been  given  that  they  may  sustain  tbe  higher  life  of  man  from  age  to 
age.  But  it  also  reminded  Aaron  personally  of  the  solemn  truth  of  the  utter 
solitariness  of  the  soul  in  death.  Not  more  than  any  other  man  can  a  high  priest 
retain  the  outward  position,  the  valued  symbols,  of  his  great  office.  He,  too,  shall 
carry  nothing  away  with  him  when  he  dieth,  neither  shall  his  pomp  follow  him. 
Death  strips  us  of  everything  save  that  which,  so  far  as  we  know,  is  by  God's 
appointment  strictly  indestructible.  Our  undying  personality  and  that  type  of 
character  which  acts  and  habits  and  the  use  or  misuse  of  the  supernatural  grace  of 
God  have,  for  good  or  for  evil,  wrought  into  its  very  texture — this  is  indeed  for  ever 
ours.  All  else  is,  like  the  sacerdotal  robes  of  Aaron,  to  be  abandoned,  at  the  place 
where,  at  the  moment  when,  we  lie  down  to  die.  It  was  all  over.  Aaron  had  closed 
his  eyes,  and  Moses  buried  him  where  at  this  day  a  Moslem  shrine,  constructed  out 
of  the  ruins  of  some  earlier  and  finer  edifice,  still  bears  his  name.  It  was  all  over, 
and  like  a  procession  returning  from  a  funeral  without  the  one  object  which  had 
formed  its  cbiefest  interest,  Moses  and  Eleazar,  so  we  are  told,  came  down  from  the 
mount.  What  were  their  thoughts  about  Aaron  ?  Where  was  he  now  ?  "Aaron," 
so  runs  the  phrase  of  Moses,  "was  gathered  to  his  penple."  What  does  the  phrase 
mean  ?  It  is  used  alike  of  Moses  and  Aaron.  Does  it  describe  only  the  interment 
of  their  bodies  ?  But  in  either  case  their  bodies  rested  at  a  distance  from  their 
people,  in  a  foreign  soil.  Surely,  it  points  to  a  world  in  which  the  bygone  genera- 
tions of  men  still  live,  a  world  of  the  existence  of  which  Go'l's  ancient  people  were 
well  assured,  though  they  knew  much  less  of  it  than  we.  That  world  beyond  the 
grave  is  no  doubt  presented  with  different  degrees  of  clearness  in  the  successive  ages 
of  Old  Testament  history.  The  age  of  the  patriarchs  is  marked  by  strong  and  dis- 
tinct faith  in  it.  In  tbe  days  and  teaching  of  Moses  it  is  more  kept  in  the  back- 
ground, probably  because  the  imagination  of  Israel  was  still  haunted  by  the  imagery 
of  the  underworld  of  the  dead,  as  the  Egyptians  had  conceived  of  it.  In  Job  and 
some  of  the  Psalms  it  is  the  subject  sometimes  of  anxious  discussion,  sometimes  of 


CHAP.  XX.]  NUMBERS.  209 


strong  and  undoabting  faith.  In  the  prophets  it  comes  prominently  forward  as  the 
promised  Messiah,  heralded  not  merely  as  an  earthly  ruler,  but  as  a  deliverer  from 
the  consequences  of  sin.  In  Ezekiel  and  Daniel  we  already  meet  with  the  resur- 
rection of  the  body ;  in  the  writers  after  the  captivity  this  doctrine  goes  hand  in 
hand  with  a  distinct  faith  in  the  immortality  of  the  eoul.  We  cannot  doubt  that, 
as  Moses  and  Elcazar  made  their  way  down  the  western  side  of  the  mount  on  which 
Aaron  was  left,  their  thoughts  were  not  only  or  chiefly  centred  on  the  tomb  which 
enclosed  his  body  ;  they  followed  him  into  the  assembly  of  the  spirits  of  the  dead, 
they  followed  him  with  their  sympathies,  with  their  hopes,  their  prayers,  even 
though  around  that  world  on  which  be  had  entered  there  still  hung  a  veil  for  them 
•which  has  been,  through  Christ's  mercy,  removed  for  us.  The  Old  Testament  is 
sometimes  a  foreshadowing  of  the  new,  sometimes  its  foil.  If  Aaron  was  stripped 
of  his  sacerdotal  robes  on  the  eve  of  his  death,  Jesus  our  Lord  was  never  more  a 
priest  than  when  He  hung  upon  His  Cross,  and  offered  Himself  as  a  full,  perfect, 
and  sufficient  sacrifice,  oblation  and  satisfHction  for  the  sins  of  the  whole  world.  If 
Aaron's  dust  still  lies  somewhere  among  the  rocks  of  Hor,  awaiting  the  summons 
to  judgment,  Jesus  is  indeed  risen  from  the  dead,  "  and  become  the  first  fruits  of 
them  that  slept,"  nwy.  He  has  already,  He  has  here,  "  brought  life  and  immortality 
to  light  "  through  His  gospel.  He  has  tau<'ht  us  that  there  is  a  life  which  through 
His  grace  we  may  live,  and  the  beauty  of  which  our  hearts  cannot  but  own,  while 
yet  that  life  does  but  mock  us  if  it  ends  at  death,  if  it  does  not  last,  if  it  does  not 
expand,  hereafter.  He  has  shown  us  how  this  life  may  be,  if  at  present  it  is  not 
ours,  and  in  possessing  it  we  are  already  and  most  assuredly  "  more  than  con- 
querors "  of  death  "  through  Him  that  loved  us."  (Canon  Liddon.)  The  death 
of  Aaron: — I.  The  death  of  Aaron.  1.  As  a  consequence  of  sin.  2.  By  the 
appointment  of  God.  3.  The  death  of  Aaron  was  his  introduction  to  life  and  to 
congenial  society.  II.  The  appointment  of  Aaeon's  successor.  1.  Kindness  to 
Aaron.  It  assured  him — (1)  That  his  office  would  be  filled,  his  work  carried  on,  &c. 
(2)  That  his  office  would  be  filled  by  his  own  son ;  that  the  high  priesthood  would 
continue  in  his  own  family.  2.  A  guarantee  of  the  continuance  of  the  Church  of 
God.  III.  The  mourning  because  of  Aaron's  death.  1.  The  worth  of  faithful 
ministers.  2.  The  appreciation  of  blessings  when  they  are  withdrawn  from  us, 
which  were  not  valued  when  they  were  ours.  Lessons  :  1.  The  universality  of  death. 
2.  The  imperfection  of  the  Aaronic  priesthood.  3.  The  perfection  of  the 
priesthood  of  Christ  (Heb.  vii.  22-28;  viii.  6;  ix.  23-28 ;  x.  10-14).  (^F.  Jones.) 
Death  of  Aaron: — I.  The  time.  In  the  fortieth  year  of  the  wanderings.  1.  A, 
very  important  year  in  the  history  of  Israel.  Year  of  death  also  of  Miriam  and  of 
Moses.  Dates  that  mark  formation  of  new  or  severance  of  old  friendships,  always 
important.  2.  In  about  the  123-4  year  of  Aaron's  life.  A  long  and  eventful  life. 
And  yet,  though  his  life  was  long — (1)  His  death  was  hastened  by  sin.  How  often 
should  we  discover  this  to  be  the  case  if  we  knew  all !  Religion  the  best  life- 
preserver.  (2)  His  death  overtook  him  in  the  midst  of  work.  II.  The  warning. 
Many  pass  away  without  any  warning.  Duty  of  being  always  ready.  In  this  case, 
a  solemn  intimation  that  the  time  appointed  had  come.  It  was  kindly  framed. 
"  Gathered  unto  his  people."  An  old  man's  best  friends — his  people — are  mostly 
in  the  better  world.  Aaron  invited  to  join  his  people ;  the  great  ones  amongst 
whom  he  ranked.  III.  The  place.  A  mountain.  Reminds  us  that  the  good  man 
in  death  is  in  death  lifted  up  above  the  world  ;  and  that,  as  Aslron  at  that  time,  he 
dies  in  view  of  the  Church  below  and  the  Church  above.  Israel  around,  and  the 
promised  land  before  him.  IV.  The  circumstances.  Toilsomely  and  calmly 
ascends  the  hill  to  be  gathered  to  his  fathers.  The  old  man  climbing  the  last  of 
life's  hills.  The  last  stage  a  rugged  one.  V.  The  characteristics.  A  death— 
1.  Hastened  by  sin.  2.  Closing  all  earthly  offices  and  distinctions.  3.  Heralded 
by  solemn  intimations.  4.  Sweetened  by  presence  of  friends.  Learn — 1.  A  good 
nian  in  dying  is  gathered  to  his  people.  2.  Seek  to  Uve  on  the  borders  of  heaven 
that  we  may  die  in  view  of  the  promised  land.  3.  Endeavour  to  do  what  we  have 
to  do  while  it  is  called  to-day.  (J.  C.  Gray.)  The  death  of  Aaron : — I.  We  may 
learn  a  salutary  lesson  from  the  death  of  Aaron  in  its  merely  literal  bearing. 
Aaron,  the  high  priest,  had  to  ascend  Mount  Hor  clad  in  his  priestly  robes  of  office; 
but  he  must  be  stripped  of  them  there,  because  he  must  die  there.  He  could  not 
carry  his  dignity  or  the  emblems  of  it  into  the  next  world.  He  must  lay  them 
down  at  the  grave's  brink.  There  is  nothing  which  the  world  gives  that  men  can 
carry  with  them  when  death  lays  hold  of  them.  Even  all  which  outwardly  pertains 
to   spiritual  dignity,   and  which   brings  men  into  relation  with  things  that  are 

14 


210  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xx. 

imperishable  and  eternal,  must  be  left  behind,  and  the  individual  man,  as  God's 
accountable  creature,  must  appear  before  bis  Maker  in  judgment.     There  is  one 
thing  imperishable  and  one  dignity  which  even  death  cannot  tarnish.     The  im- 
perishable thing  is  the  life  which  the  Spirit  of  God  imparts  to  the  soul,  and  which 
connects  the  soul  with  God.     The  deathless  dignity  is  that  of  being  children  of  Go  J. 
II.  Aaron  must  be  stripped  of  his  robes,  and  his  son  clad  with  them  in  his  stead. 
This  reminds  us  that  while  the  priests  under  the  law  were  not  suffered  to  continue 
by  reason  of  death,  yet  the  office  of  the  priesthood  did  not  lapse.     Aaron's  robes 
were  not  buried  with  bim.     His  successor  was  provided.     Yet  the  very  thought  that 
he  needed  a  successor,  that  the  office  must  be  transmitted  from  one  to  another, 
leads  us  to  think  of  the  contrast  which  the  apostle  draws  between  the  priests  under 
the  law  and  Him  who  abideth  always.     Jesus  Christ  is  the  same  yesterday,  to-day, 
and  for  ever.     (A.B.  Davidson.)         The  good  and  faithful  servant : — I.  The  comjion 
destiny  or  MAN.     "  Aaron,"  says  God,  "  shall  be  gathered  to  his  people,"     Death  is 
spoken  of  here,  not  as  a  strange  event,  not  as  something  peculiar  to  Aaron,  but  as 
something  that  had  happened  to  Aaron's  people,  and  would  happen  to  all  genera- 
tions.    Oh,  the  teeming  myriads  that  preceded  us,  that  carried  on  the  works,  the 
commerce,  and  the  reforms  of  our  world  ;  all  these,  so  far  as  the  body  is  concerned 
— all  dust!     II.  The  EIGOKOUSNESS  OF  MOBAL  LAW.     Here  is  a  man  who  had  struggled 
hard  for  many  years  in  the  wilderness,  a  man  filled  with  high  hopes,  with  glowing 
enthusiasm,  a  man  who  was  approaching  the  goal,  approaching  the  Canaan;  and 
yet  mark  how,  because  of  one  sin,  he  dies,  and  never  reaches  that  blessed  spot. 
However  distinguished  a  man  may  be  for  his  excellences,  however  high  he  may  be 
in  the  Church  of  God,  his  sin  shall  not  go  unpunished.     III.  The  termination  of 
LIFE  IN  the  midst  OP  LABOUR.     We  nearly  all  die  with  our  work  unfinished.     The 
farmer  dies  when  he  has  only  half  ploughed  his  field ;  the  merchant  dies  in  the 
midst  of  some  commercial  enterprise  to  which  he  has  committed  himself ;  the 
statesman  d'es  with  some  great  political  measure,  perhaps,  heavy  on  his  hands ; 
the  minister  dies  with  some  schemes  of  thought  in  his  brain  nnwrought  out,  some 
plans  of  usefulness  undeveloped.     That  to  me  is  a  profound  mystery.     I  should 
have  thought  that  a  man  who  had  in  his  brain  a  great  purpose  to  serve  his  race,  to 
promote  the  truth,  and  to  extend  the  kingdom  of  Christ,  would  have  his  life  pre- 
served, that  he  might  realise  his  purpose.     But  it  is  not  so.     0  God!  we  are  not 
surprised  when  an  old  tree,  though  prolific  in  its  day,  dies,  for  it  dies  by  the  law  of 
decay ;  nor  are  we  astonished  that  an  unfruitful  tree  should  be  cut  down,  for  it  is  a 
cumberer  of  the  ground ;  but  we  are  astonished  that  a  tree,  with  its  branches  full 
of  sap,  with  its  boughs  laden  wiih  fruit,  with  thousands  reposing  under  its  shadow, 
should  be  struck  with  a  thunderbolt  from  heaven.     Thy  path,  0  God,  is  "in  the 
great  waters,   and  Thy  footsteps  are  not  known."     IV.  God's  agency   in  man's 
DISSOLUTION.     Why  did  Aaron  die?     He  was  not  worn  out  with  age.     He  was  as 
vigorous,  perhaps,  at  that  moment,  as  anybody  here.     Not  because  there  was  disease 
rankling  in  his  system,  not  because  there  was  any  external  violence  applied  to  him. 
Why,  then,  did  he  die  ?     The  Great  One  determines  that  he  shall  die,  and  he  dies. 
And  this,  I  take  it,  is  always  the  philosophy  of  a  man's  death.     We  may  ascribe  it 
to  that  disease,  to  this  accident,  to  this  chance,  to  this  occurrence ;  but  philosophy, 
the  Bible,  and  reason  all  say,  "  man  dies  because  the  Great  One  has  determined 
that  he  should  die."     If  you  will  ascertain  the  term  of  a  creature  s  existence,  you 
can  only  do  it  accurately  by  ascertaining  the  wiU  of  the  great  God  concerning  his 
existence.     The  constitution  has  nothing  whatever  to  do  with  the  question.     If  God 
determines  it,  the  most  robust  dies  in  a  moment.     V.  The  promptitude  with  which 
Providence  supplies  the  places  of  the  dead.    Aaron  must  die,  but  there  is  Eleazar 
standing  by  his  side  ready  to  step  into  his  place.     This  is  the  order  of  Providence. 
A  merchant  dies,  and  another  man  stands  by  his  side  ready  to  carry  on  his  business. 
A  lawyer  dies,  and  there  is  a  man  standing  by  his  side  ready  in  a  moment  to  step 
into  the  place  he  occupied.     A  statesman  dies,  and  Providence  has  a  man  exactly 
fitted  for  his  position.     Oh,  how  this  encourages  my  faith  in  the  progress  of  Divme 
truth  in  this  world!     I  see  missionaries  die  in  the  field,  and  ministers  die  in  the 
Church ;  I  see  authors  die  who  are  moving  the  minds  of  men,  and  influencing  them 
for  their  highest  good ;  and  sometimes  I  feel,  now,  surely  tliere  must  be  a  pause. 
But  no,  there  is  another  minister  ready  to  take  the  departed  minister's  place.     You 
labour,  and  other  men  enter  into  your  labours ;  and  when  the  mystery  of  godliness 
shall  be  finished,  I  believe  the  great  series  of  workers  will  meet  and  mingle  and 
rejoice  together  in  the  presence  of  the  great  common  Father  of  us  all.     But  whilst 
this  encourages  our  faith,  it  is  certainly  humbling  to  our  pride.     The  world  can  do 


CHAP.  XX.]  NmiBEUS.  211 


•without  thee.  Thou  art  but  a  bLade  in  the  field  ;  the  latidscape  will  bloom  without 
thee.  Thou  art  but  a  drop  in  the  ocean ;  the  mighty  billows  will  not  mi^^s  thee. 
Thou  art  not  at  all  important.  VI.  The  trial  of  human  friendships.  Moses  and 
Eleazar  were  very  closely  related  to  Aaron.  Moses  was  more  than  a  brother  to 
Aaron.  There  was  a  spiritual  kindredship  between  them.  There  were  mental 
affinities  and  spiritual  affections.  Their  hearts  were  welded  together  by  tender 
feelings  and  associations,  and  yet  part  they  must.  Oh  1  I  ask  the  question,  leaving 
you  to  answer  it.  Can  it  be  that  the  great  God  of  love,  who  has  made  us  to  love, 
and  who  has  disposed  us  to  give  our  affections  to  certain  men  and  persons,  can  it  be 
that  He  intended  that  our  love  should  lash  within  us  such  storms,  and  produce  so 
many  tears  that  we  have  to  shed  almost  daily?  The  philosophy  is  here — these 
friendships  are  to  be  renewed.  These  losses  and  tears  are  only  a  passing  storm, 
clearing  the  heavens.  There  is  to  be  a  renewal  of  real  spiritual  friendship. 
Eleazar,  Moses,  thou  shalt  meet  that  man  whom  thou  art  burying  on  Mount  Hor 
again  I  The  time  is  hastening  on  when  a  re-unicn  shall  take  place,  and  separation 
never.  After  all,  the  separation  which  takes  place  in  the  death  of  true  Christian 
friends  is  more  in  form  than  in  reality — more  an  appearance  thnn  a  fact.  I  have 
the  idea  that  in  truth  we  become  more  really  friends  by  the  death  separation. 
Death  cannot  destroy  our  loving  memories  of  them.  Death  does  not  kill — nay,  it 
seems  but  to  intensify  our  affections.  Death  seems  to  bring  those  who  are  gone 
more  closely  and  more  vitally  into  contact  with  our  hearts.  Death,  I  say,  does  not 
effect  a  real  separation.  Love  photographs  them  in  the  soul.  VII.  The  painful. 
KECOGNiTiON  BY  SOCIETY  OF  ITS  GREATEST  LOSSES.  The  people  moumed  for  Aaron 
thirty  days.  Well  might  they  mourn.  If  we  cannot  weep  over  great  and  true 
hearts,  over  what  can  we  weep  ?  Good  men  are  as  fountains  welling  up  in  the 
desert  through  which  you  are  passing;  they  are  lights  in  abounding  darkness;  they 
are  salt  that  counteracts  our  tendency  to  corruption.  Thank  God  for  good  men  I 
But  the  Christian  minister  is  the  best  of  all  men,  and  his  loss  is  the  greatest  of  all 
losses.  I  know  of  no  man  who  is  rendering  such  a  service  to  society  and  to 
humanity  as  he  !  Such  was  Aaron.  He  was  a  minister  of  God.  He  had  to  go  in 
between  the  corrupt  Jews  and  the  Infinite,  and  to  entreat  upon  their  behalf;  and 
more  than  once  did  his  prayers  avert  the  threatened  judgment.  Aaron  was  more 
than  that ;  he  was  a  speaker,  an  orator.  His  words  sometimes  fell  as  a  thunder- 
peal upon  the  proud  heart  of  Egypt's  monarch  ;  but  they  came  down  with  rays  of 
light,  and  as  the  gentle  dew,  upon  the  people  of  Israel.  I  can  fancy  Aaron  talking 
to  the  people  about  God,  about  the  coming  Christianity,  about  the  new  dispensation, 
about  the  world  to  come.  But  he  dies  ;  and  they  mourn.  I  do  not  wonder  at  that. 
I  should  have  been  surprised  if  they  had  not  wept  when  they  kn^-w  and  felt,  We 
shall  see  Aaron  no  more;  he  has  ministered  to  us  for  many  years,  he  has  given 
consolation  to  our  old  men,  a  word  of  advice  to  the  young  men,  and  has  talked  to 
the  children — and  we  shall  see  Aaron  no  more.      (D.  Thomas.)  The  comforts  of 

Aaron's  death: — The  comforts  of  Aaron's  death  here  are  these  :  The  Lord  appoints 
it  so,  and  His  will,  as  it  is  ever  good,  so  should  it  ever  be  our  content.  Secondly, 
his  son  succeedeth  him  in  his  place,  a  great  comfort.  Thirdly,  he  shall  be  freed 
from  all  his  toll,  from  all  his  grief,  from  an  unkind  people.  Now  shall  he  rest  and 
have  peace,  and  all  grief  from  his  hearty  all  tears  from  his  eyes  wiped  quite  away. 
"  Blessed  are  the  dead  that  die  in  the  Lord,  for  they  rest  from  their  labours,  and 
their  works  follow  them."  Let  it  be  a  comfort  to  all,  and  by  name  to  God's 
ministers,  that  faithfully  and  zealously  have  watched  over  their  flock,  and  have 
reaped  but  wrong  and  oppression.  God  hath  His  sweet  time  to  release  us,  and  to 
gather  us  to  our  people  as  He  here  did  Aaron.  He  will  care  for  our  chiMren  as 
here  for  Aaron's,  and  put  them  in  some  place  or  other  after  us  for  their  good  in  His  great 
mercy,  if  we  commend  them  to  Him.  Our  labours  shall  not  be  lost  with  Him  that 
rewardeth  a  cup  of  cold  water.  If  we  have  "  sowed  in  tears  we  shall  reap  in 
joy."  Earth's  woe  shall  be  changed  to  heaven's  bliss,  and  happy  shall  we  be. 
Go  on  in  comfort,  be  faithful  unto  the  end,  the  Lord  shall  give  us  a  crown  of 
life.  {Bp.  Babington.)  Divestiture  and  investiture — ministerial  siiccession  : — 1.  In 
these  calm,  almost  cold,  words,  is  told  all  that  man  is  to  know  of  an  event  full  of 
interest,  mystery,  and  awe.  In  that  year  1452  (as  chionologers  say)  before  the 
Christian  era,  a  life  is  brought  to  its  close,  which,  but  for  one  other  life  beside  it, 
would  have  been  unique  in  wonder.  That  old  man  who  has  gone  up  into  Mount 
Hor,  under  Divine  direction,  to  die,  is  God's  high  priest ;  the  first  of  a  long  line, 
the  only  line  that  God  ever  consecrated  to  stand  between  Himself  and  His  chosen 
people,  in  the  things  of  religion  and  the  soul,  until  He  should  at  last  come,  who  is 


212  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  ss. 

the  End  of  all  Bevelation  and  the  Antitype  of  all  Priesthood.     2.  Aaron  is  shut 
out  from  Canaan  for  a  fault,  for  a  sin.     Judged  as  man  judges,  it  was  a  little  sin. 
It  was  not  the  greatest  of  the  sins  even  of  this  one  life.     But  with  God  "  great  "  and 
"  little  "  have  no  place  in  the  estimate  of  transgression.     3.  The  lesson  of  severity 
lies  on  the  surface  of  the  record.     4.  There  is  here  also  the  lesson  of  love.     See 
how  God  chastens  without  disowning.     5.  There  is  also  the  lesson  of  death.     It  is 
the  fashion  to  say  that  tlie  language  of  the  Old  Testament  is  cheerless  about  death. 
I  cannot  see  it.     These  deaths  for  small  sins  seem  to  be  eloquent  as  to  the  insig- 
nificance of  death.     They  seem  to  say,  "  The  life  that  is  seen  is  but  a  fragment  of 
the  whole  life."     6.  Nothing  is  more  pathetic  in  Holy  Scripture  than  that  selfless- 
ness which  God  requires  in  His  servants;  that  absorption  of  natural  feeling  in 
the  One  higher,  which  is  the  perfection  of  self-control  and  the  self-forgetfulness. 
Aaron  himself  had  been  enabled  to  rise  to  it,  when  he  saw  his  two  sons  cut  off 
before   him,   forbidden   to   mourn,  forbidden  to  bury  them.     And  now  it   is  his 
brother's  turn  to  take  his  part  in  bearing  the  burden  which  God's  ministry  lays 
upon  them  that  are  privileged  to  exercise  it.     Now  he  must  strip  his  dying  brother 
of  the  beautiful  and  costly  vestments  of  his  priesthood.      He  must  array  in  them 
a  new  priest,  who  is  to  carry  on  God's  work  before  a  younger  generation.     And 
when  the  sad  and  solemn  office  is  ended,  he  must  turn  back,  with  that  other,  to  the 
thoughts  and  acts  of  the  living,  till  he  also  shall  have  finished  his  course,  and  be 
ready  to  rejoin  his  brother  in  the  Paradise  of  the  just  made  perfect.     7.  There  are 
some  forms  of  ministration  which  suggest  succession.     Those  garments  which  are 
emblematical  of  office — the  judge's  ermine,  worn  only  on  the  judgment-seat;  the 
bishop's  lawn,  put  on  with  prayer  and  benediction,  in  the  midst  of  the  ceremony  of 
his  consecration — speak  for  themselves  as  to  the  disrobing.     The  wearer  had  a 
predecessor,  shall  have  a  successor  in  that  ministry.      He  is  but  the  life-holder : 
less  than  the  life-holder,  for  decay  of  strength  may  further  abridge  the  tenure  of 
that  charge,  towards  God  and  man,  which  the  vestment  of  office  typifies.     There 
must  be  that  stripping  of  which  the  text  speaks  ;  that  putting  off  that  another  may 
put  on.     Let  him  live  in  the  foreview  of  that  day.     8.  Bebold  in  one  view  the 
littleness  and  the  greatness  of  man.     The  littleness  in  space  and  time.     One  genera- 
tion goeth,  and  another  cometh.     Earth  is  a  speck,  and  time  a  moment-     But,  view 
life  as  a  trust — view  office,  view  work,  view  character,  view  being,  as  a  priesthood — 
and  all  is  ennobled,  all  consecrated.     Say  to  yourself,  I  am  God's  priest — I  wear 
His  ephod  and  His  crown,  and  the  inscription  on  that  crown  is,  "  Holiness  unto  the 
Xiord  " — then  you  are  great;  great  above  kings,  who  know  not  a  hereafter;  great 
above   hierarchies  which  would  shine  in  God's  stead;  your  light  is  God's  light, 
and  the   world   shall   be   the   brighter  for    it.     (Dean    Vaur/lian.)         The   sin   of 
Moses,   and   the   death  of  Aaron : — I.   Faith  in   God   is   the   rkgdlating  grace 
OF   THE   Christian   chaeacteb.      So  long  as  that   is   preserved,  it  will  keeji   all 
other  principles  of  our  nature  in  restraint ;  but  when  that  is  lost,  the  brake  is  re- 
moved from  the  wheel,  and  everything   goes  wrong.     The  loss  of  faith  leads  to 
panic,  and  panic  is  utterly  inconsistent  with  self-control.     If  we  wish  to  overcome 
ourselves,  then  the  victory  is  to  be  won  through  faith  in  God.     Mere  watchfulness 
will  not  suffice  ;  but  we  must  cultivate  that  confidence  in  God  which  believes  that 
all  things  work  together  for  good  to  them  who  love  Him ;  which  realises  the 
universality  of  His  providential  administration  as  including  the  minutest  as  well 
as  the  vastest  concerns  of  life  ;  and  which  has  the  unwavering  assurance  that  we 
shall  enter  at  last  upon  our  heavenly  inheritance.     II.  How  important  it  is  to  be 
ALWAYS  READY  FOR  DEATH.     The  death  of  Aaron  was  not  altogether  without  warn- 
ing, but  in  some  sense  it  maybe  regarded  as  sudden.     There  were  no  premonitions 
of  it  in  his  bodily  frame,  else  he  could  not  have  ascended  Mount  Hor;  and  when 
God's  command  came,  it  might  take  him,  and  probably  did  take  him,  by  surprise. 
Yet  he  was  not  appalled,  for  he  believed  God,  and  that  kept  him  in  perfect  peace. 
"  What,  sir,"  said  a  domestic  servant,  who  was  sweeping  her  doorstep,  to  young 
Spencer,  of   Liverpool,  as  he  was  hastening  by,  "  is   your  opinion   of   sudden 
death?  "     He  paused  a  moment ;  then  saying,  "  Sudden  death  to  the  Christian  is 
sudden  glory,"  he  hurried  on  ;  and  in  less  than  an  hour  afterward  he  was  drowned 
while  bathing  in  the  Mersey.     III.  The  place  and  power  of  the  individual  in  the 
ONWARD  PROGRESS  OF  HDMAN  SOCIETY.     1.  Ministers  and  people  die,  but  the  Church 
abides,  and  carries  still  forward  its  beneficent  work.     2.   We  are  the  heirs  of  all  the 
preceding  generations ;    and  if   we  act  well   our   part,  we  shall  leave  something 
additional  of   our  own   behind   us,   which   shall   enrich   those   who   shall   come 
after  us.      The  tabernacle  service   went  on  without  Aaron,   it   is   true;    but  if 


«HAP.  XXI.]  NUMBERS.  11?> 

Aaron  had  not  gone  before  him,  Eleazar  would  not  have  entered  upon  such 
a  sphere  of  usefulness  as  that  which  now  opeued  before  him.  If  tliere  bad 
been  no  Bacon,  there  might  have  I :"?a  no  Newton;  and  if  there  had  been  no 
Newton,  our  modern  philosophers  would  not  have  been  what  they  are.  3.  What, 
then,  is  the  lesson  of  all  this?  It  is  that  each  of  us  shall  strive  to  do  his  utmost 
in  the  work  to  which  God  has  called  him,  so  that  we  may  leave  a  higher  platform 
for  those  who  shall  come  after  us.  {IV.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Aaron'' s  death: — 
Aaron  went  up  to  die.  Some  die  in  seclusion  and  unknovvn;  yet  it  matters  not 
where  the  saints  depart,  whether  on  a  mount  or  in  a  vale,  though,  as  a  typical 
character,  tbis  circumstance  seemed  to  indicate  the  way  of  the  "  spirit,  which 
riseth  upwards,"  and  the  destiny  of  our  whole  humanity.  To  him  dying  was  but 
ascending  ;  and  it  will  be  so  to  all  the  Lord's  people.  The  great  Kepresentative 
and  Forerunner  of  the  Church  died  on  one  mount,  and  ascended  from  another. 
Had  not  some  great  truth  thsreby  been  to  be  expressed,  Aaron  had  not  attired  him- 
self for  death  as  though  to  ei::^r  the  holy  of  holies.  It  can  signify  but  little  what 
he  puts  on  who  is  about  to  lie  down  in  the  shroud  of  dissolution.  Naked  came  I 
out  of  my  mother's  womb,  and  naked  shall  I  return,  said  Job.  Oh  !  how  do  some 
long  for  evening,  to  undress !  "  not  that  they  would  be  unclothed,  but  clothed  upon 
with  their  house  which  is  from  above."  Yet  the  priest  did  not  die,  but  the  man. 
The  transfer  was  made  in  life  :  the  robes  were  taken  from  him  while  living,  and 
not  when  dead.  The  Church  was  no  moment  without  a  priest  and  an  offering. 
iW.  Seaton.) 


CHAPTEE  XXI. 


Vers.  4-9.  Much  discouraged  because  of  the  way. — On  the  discouragements  of 
pious  men  : — I.  I  shall  point  out  the  discouragements  in  the  way  ;  and,  in  doing 

this,  I    SHALL    KEEP  MY  EYE  ON  THE  PILGRIMAGE  OF  THE  PEOPLE  WHO  WERE  ORIGINALLY 

REFERRED  TO  IN  THE  TEXT,  and  thcncc  draw  my  chief  illustrations.  1.  The  way  is 
circuitous,  and  therefore  discouraging.  Souls  that  are  brought  to  Jesus,  aud 
delivered  from  the  slavery  of  sin  and  the  curse  of  the  law,  in  their  first  ardour 
overlook  trials,  and  think  of  nothing  but  enjoyments ;  they  do  not  anticipate 
the  fightings  and  fears  that  are  the  portion  of  God's  Israel.  After  a  time,  through 
want  of  watchfulness  and  care,  the  love  of  the  espousals  begins  to  decline,  tlie 
world  regains  a  degree  of  influence,  the  Spirit  is  grieved,  and  they  fear  God  has 
become  their  enemy  ;  they  seem  to  themselves  to  go  backward,  and,  indeed,  are  in 
■danger  of  doing  so,  if  they  neglect  to  watch  and  pray  ;  and  muih  time  is  spent  in 
mourning,  retracing  the  ground  that  has  been  lost.  2.  The  way  is  through  a 
■wilderness,  and  is,  on  that  account,  discouraging.  In  a  spiritual  sense,  this  world 
is  a  wilderness.  (1)  It  has  no  natural  tendency  to  nourish  the  spiritual  life; 
nothing  is  derived  from  it  of  that  kind  :  though  spiritual  blessings  are  enjoyed  in 
it.  (2)  Again,  there  is  much  intricacy  in  the  Christian's  pilgrimage.  There  were 
no  paths  in  the  wildernt^ss  ;  the  Israelites  could  not  have  explored  their  way  but 
by  the  direction  of  the  pillar  of  fire  and  of  the  cloud  :  so  the  Christian  often  knows 
not  how  to  explore  his  path.  3.  The  way  lies  tbrough  a  hostile  country,  and  is, 
therefore,  discouraging.  The  Christian  soon  learns  that  he  has  to  fi^ht  against 
"principalities,  and  powers,  and  spiritual  wickedness."  The  flesh  is  also  an 
enemy.  The  Christian  experiences  the  workings  of  carnality,  a  hankering  after 
that  which  is  evil,  and  to  which  he  may  have  been  addicted  ;  as  the  Israelites  after 
**the  onions  and  garlic  of  Egypt."  4.  The  false  steps  that  are  taken  in  the 
pilgrimage,  and  the  consequent  displeasure  of  God,  are  discouraging  :  there  are  so 
many  errors  and  iniquities  for  which  the  Lord  chastens  His  people,  though  He 
pardons  sin  as  to  its  eternal  consequences.  5.  The  total  defection  of  men  from 
the  path  is  a  great  discouragement  to  those  who  still  continue  in  the  way.  6.  The 
length  of  the  way  is  discouraging.  Though  human  life  is  short  in  itself,  yet  to 
oar  limited  conception  it  appears  long ;  especially  when  passed  in  suffering  and 
pain.  In  protracted  afflictions  is  seen  the  patience  of  the  saints.  Those  saints, 
who  endure  in  private,  though  unnoticed  by  their  neighbours,  and  perhaps  un- 
known, are  the  bravest  heroes  of  the  Christian  camp.  II.  I  shall  now  direct  iov 
TO  SOME  CONSIDERATIONS  TO  REMOVE  YOUR  DISCOURAGEMENTS.  1.  Kemeniber,  the  way 
jou  are  in,  believer,  is  "  a  right  way,"  notwithstanding  all  that  has  been  said. 


214  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTEATOR.  [coap.  xxi. 

Infinite  Wisdon  has  ordained  it :  and  if  you  reach  the  end,  you  will  be  well  repaid 
for  all  yoar  toil,  and  will  admire  the  whole  of  the  pilgrimage  :  no  sorrow  wil' 
appear  to  have  been  too  heavy ;  no  path  too  gloomy.  2.  Another  encouragement 
is,  that  God  is  with  His  people  in  the  way.  If  He  leads  into  the  wilderness.  He 
"  speaks  comfortably  "  ;  He  spreads  a  table  there,  "  and  His  banner  over  us  is 
love."  3.  Remember  there  is  no  other  way  that  leads  to  heaven.  You  cannot  re- 
concile the  service  of  sin  and  the  world  with  the  hope  of  heaven  and  the  enjoy- 
ment of  everlasting  life  in  that  holy  state,  and  in  the  presence  of  the  holy  God. 
Will  you,  then,  forego  the  hope  of  Canaan  ;  as  you  must  when  you  yield  to  sin, 
when  you  give  yourselves  to  the  world?  (R.  Hall,  31. A.)  Discouraged  because 
of  the  icay  : — I.  These  words  are  applicable  to  God's  people  now.     II.  These 

W'OKDS   ARE    APPLICABLE    TO    THOSE    WHO   HAVE   BEEN    God's   PEOPLE.      Do    Uot  many  gO- 

back   spiritually  ?      Some   tire   of    God's   service   and   abandon   it.      III.  These 

words      are     APPLICABLE      TO      THOSE      WHO      NEITHER      HAVE    BEEN      NOR     ARE      God's 

PEOPLE,  "Not  far  from  the  kingdom  of  God" — yet  not  happy.  (2'.  R. 
Stevenson.)  Discouraged  : — Perhaps  the  way  was   rough  and  uneven,  or  foul 

and  dirty  ;  or  it  fretted  them  to  go  so  far  about,  and  that  they  were  not  per- 
mitted to  force  their  passage  through  the  Edomites'  country.  Those  tbat  are  of  a 
fretful  discontented  spirit  will  always  find  something  or  other  to  make  them  un- 
easy. (Matthew  Henry,  D.D.)  Difcoiiriigements : — Discouragement  is  a  kind  of 
middle  feeling :  it  is,  therefore,  all  the  more  difficult  to  treat.  It  does  not  go  so 
far  down  as  cowardice,  and  has  hardly  any  relation  to  a  sense  of  triumph  or  over- 
sufiiciency  of  strength ;  but  the  point  of  feeling  lies  between,  deepening  rather 
towards  the  lower  than  turning  itself  sunnily  towards  the  higher.  When  that 
feeling  takes  possession  of  a  man,  the  man  may  easily  become  the  prey  of  well- 
nigh  incurable  dejection.  There  are  necessary  discouragements.  How  awful  it 
would  be  if  some  men  were  never  discouraged  ! — they  could  not  bear  themselves, 
and  they  could  not  act  a  beneficent  part  towards  other  people.  It  is  well,  there- 
fore, for  the  strongest  man  occasionally  to  be  set  back  half-a-day's  travelling  and 
have  to  begin  to-morrow  morning  at  the  point  where  he  was  yesterday  morning. 
It  is  of  God  that  the  strongest  man  should  sometimes  have  to  sit  down  and  take 
his  breath.  Seeing  such  a  man  tired,  even  but  for  one  hour,  poor  w^eak  pilf^rims 
may  say,  If  he,  the  man  of  herculean  strength,  must  pause  awhile,  it  is  hardly  to 
be  wondered  at  that  we  poor  weaklings  should  now  and  then  want  to  sit  down  and 
look  round  and  recover  our  wasted  energy.  We  must  not  forget  that  a  good  many 
discouragements  are  of  a  merely  physical  kind.  We  do  not  consider  the  relation 
between  temperament  and  religion  as  we  ought  to  consider  it.  Be  rational  in  your 
inquiry  into  ,the  origin  of  your  discouragement,  and  be  a  wise  man  in  the  treat- 
ment of  the  disease.  There  are  exaggerated  discouragements.  Some  men  have  a 
gift  of  seeing  darkness.  They  do  not  know  that  there  are  two  twilights — the  twilight 
of  morning,  and  the  twilight  of  evening ;  they  have  only  one  twilight,  and  that  is  the 
shady  precursor  of  darkness.  We  have  read  of  a  man  who  always  said  there  was 
a  lion  in  the  way.  He  had  a  wonderful  eye  for  seeing  lions.  Nobody  could  per- 
suade him  tbat  he  did  not  see  a  ravenous  beast  within  fifty  yards  of  the  field  he 
intended  to  plough.  This  is  an  awful  condition  under  which  to  live  the  day  of 
human  hfe.  But  that  lion  is  real  to  him.  Why  should  we  say  roughly,  There  is- 
no  lion — and  treat  the  man  as  if  he  were  insane?  To  him,  in  his  diseased  condi- 
tion of  mind,  there  is  a  lion.  We  must  ply  him  with  reason  softly  expressed,  with 
sayings  without  bitterness  ;  we  must  perform  before  him  the  miracle  of  going 
through  the  very  lion  he  thought  was  in  the  way  ;  and  thus,  by  stooping  to  him  and 
accommodating  ourselves  to  him,  without  roughness  or  brusqueness,  or  tyranny  of 
manner  and  feeling,  must  bring  him  round  to  the  persuasion  that  he  must  have 
been  mistaken.  Discouragement  does  not  end  in  itself.  The  discouraged  man  is 
in  a  condition  to  receive  anj'  enemy,  any  temptation,  any  suggestion  that  will  even 
for  a  moment  rid  him  of  his  intolerable  pressure.  Through  the  gate  of  dis- 
couragement the  enemy  wanders  at  will.  Therefore  be  tender  with  the  discouraged. 
Some  men  cannot  stop  np  all  the  night  of  discouragement  by  themselves ;  but  if 
you  would  sit  up  wiih  them,  if  you  would  trim  the  hght  and  feed  the  fire,  and  say 
they  might  rely  upon  your  presence  through  one  whole  night  at  least,  they  might 
get  an  liours  rest,  and  in  the  morning  bless  you  with  revived  energy  for  your 
solicitude  and  attendance.  Discouragements  try  the  quality  of  men.  You  cannot 
tell  what  some  men  are  when  their  places  of  business  are  thronged  from  morning 
until  night,  and  when  they  are  spending  the  whole  of  their  time  in  receiving 
money.     You  might  regard  them  as  really  very  interesting  characters  ;  you  might 


CHAP.  XXI.]  NUMBEIiS.  215 

be  tempted  to  think  you  would  like  to  live  with  them  :  they  are  so  radiant,  so 
agreeable.  If  you  could  come  when  business  is  slack,  when  there  are  no  clients, 
customers,  patrons,  or  supporters  to  be  seen,  you  would  not  know  the  lovely  angels, 
you  would  not  recognise  the  persons  whom  you  thought  so  delightful.  What  is 
the  cure  of  this  awful  disease  of  discouragement  ?  The  very  first  condition  of 
being  able  to  treat  discouragement  with  real  efficiency  is  to  show  that  we  know  its 
nature,  that  we  ourselves  have  wandered  through  its  darkness,  and  that  we  have 
for  the  sutferer  a  most  manly  and  tender  sympathy.  Then  are  there  no  encourage- 
ments to  be  recollected  in  the  time  of  our  dejection  ?  Do  the  clouds  really 
obliterate  the  stars,  or  only  conceal  them  ?  The  discouragements  can  be  numbered, 
— can  the  encouragements  be  reckoned-  -encouragements  of  a  commercial,  educa- 
tional, social,  relative  kind — encouragements  in  the  matter  of  health  or  spirits  or 
family  delights  ?  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  Fleshpots  or  manna  : — To  all  of  us  con- 
stantly a  choice  is  offered ;  a  choice  of  many  names  but  of  one  significance,  a 
choice  which  may  be  described  variously,  but  which  is  fundamentally  the  same. 
It  is  the  choice  between  law  and  licence ;  between  pleasure  and  duty ;  between  the 
flesh  and  the  spirit ;  between  God  and  Satan  ;  between  worldly  life  and  heavenly 
hope;  between  intemperate  sensualism  and  sober  chastity.  In  some  form  or 
other — great  or  small — this  choice  comes  daily  and  almost  hourly  to  all  of  us. 
But  sometimes  the  choice  comes  to  us  in  life  in  a  concentrated,  in  almost  a  final 
form.  The  supreme  hour,  the  distinct  crisis,  comes  to  us,  at  which  we  must 
definitely  and  consciously  turn  either  to  the  right  hand  or  to  the  left ;  must  decide 
for  ourselves  between  the  God  of  our  fathers  and  the  strange  gods  of  those  among 
whom  we  dwell.  It  comes  to  all ;  it  comes  at  any  period  of  life  ;  but  perhaps  in 
this  deliberate  form  it  comes  mostlv  in  youth.  The  boy  at  school  has  to  make  up 
his  mind  whether  he  will  attach  himself  to  bad  companions  and  to  forbidden 
pleasures,  or  fling  them  off  with  all  the  strength  of  his  soul,  and  all  the  aid  which 
he  can  win  from  prayer.  The  young  woman  has  to  decide  between  dress,  self- 
assertion,  tbe  acceptance  of  flattery,  the  assertion  of  a  spurious  independence,  the 
listening  to  the  serpent  tempter,  the  long  gaze  on  the  forbidden  fruit ;  or,  on  the 
other  hatid,  modesty,  readiness  to  be  guided,  respect  for  the  warnings  of  experi- 
ence, the  ornament  of  a  meek  and  quiet  spirit  which  is  in  the  sight  of  God  of 
great  price.  The  youth  of  the  poorer  classes  has  to  make  up  his  mind  whether  he 
shall  be  a  lounger  at  the  tavern  or  a  worshipper  in  the  Church.  But  though  the 
choice  is  in  any  case  infinitely  momentous,  it  is  not  necessarily  final.  There  is, 
indeed,  in  human  lives  a  law  of  habit,  a  law  of  continuity,  which  ever  tends  to 
make  it  final.  Even  the  choice  itself  depends  on  all  that  has  gone  before  it.  The 
present  decision  is  swayed  by  all  the  past.  The  shadow  must  have  been  creeping 
on  the  dial -plate  before  its  black  line  marks  the  hour;  and  the  clock  must  have 
accomplished  its  thousands  upon  thousands  of  tiny  tickings  before  the  great 
hammer-stroke  can  clash  out  that  it  is  noon.  And  when  the  choice  has  been 
made,  when  we  are  definitely  on  the  side  of  Satan  or  of  God,  tbe  powers  that  make 
it  the  Armageddon  field  of  their  mighty  battle  do  not  at  once  or  for  ever  leave  it 
utterly  alone.  Now,  the  Israelites,  of  whom  we  read  in  this  chapter,  had  long  ago 
made  their  choice,  and,  by  God's  grace,  chosen  right.  They  had  been  in  the  land 
of  Egypt — the  house  of  bondage.  Coarse  plenty,  ignoble  servitude,  the  starving  of 
every  noble  impulse,  the  death  of  the  soul  amidst  the  comforts  of  the  body — this 
had  been  their  too  common  lot.  Fish  and  melons  and  leeks  and  cucumbers  and 
garlic  and  the  rich  water  of  the  Nile— these  they  had  enjoyed  in  plenty,  and  to 
maiTy  and  bring  up  a  low  race  of  ignoble  slaves.  Myriads  in  this  great  city  are  at 
this  moment  in  the  land  of  Egypt,  in  the  house  of  bondage ;  having  plenty  to  eat 
and  drink  and  live  on — able  to  gratify  every  sense  and  sate  every  passion  ;  but  yet 
slaves — slaves  of  society,  slaves  of  self,  slaves  of  Satan,  slaves  of  their  own  worst 
passions.  And  from  this  base,  low  life  of  serfdom  and  gluttony,  one  man  awoke 
the  Israelites.  At  first  they  misunderstood,  rejected,  vUified  him.  But  at  last 
God's  breath  breathed  upon  these  slain,  and  they  began  to  live.  The  voice  of 
Moses  roused  them.  He  thrilled  them  with  the  electric  shock  of  liberty.  So, 
making  their  brave  choice,  the  children  of  Israel  left  the  land  of  Egypt,  the  house 
of  bondage,  and  went  forth  into  the  barren  wilderness.  It  was  a  harder  life, 'but 
a  life  oh,  how  far  more  noble  1  There  was  no  garlic  or  leeks,  but  they  were  free. 
They  were  not  fattening  in  fleshly  comfort,  but  the  great  winds  of  God  could  now 
blow  on  the  uplifted  foreheads  of  men  who  were  no  longer  slaves.  The  type  of  it 
all  was  this  :  there  were  no  fleshpots,  but  there  was  manna ;  so  men  did  eat 
angels'  food  for  He  sent  them  meat  enough.    And  what  a  difference  between  the 


216  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 


two  kinds  of  food !  Not  the  coarse,  steaming  messes,  reeking  and  rich,  meet  for 
the  sensual  and  full-fed  slave ;  but  a  honej'dew  which  lay  on  the  ground — small, 
white,  glistering,  exquisite,  delicate  as  the  food  of  heaven,  but  evanescent  as 
morning  tears.  And  in  the  first  flush  of  freedom,  in  the  purple  dawn  of  enthusi- 
asm, it  was  delightful,  it  was  ennobling,  to  gather  and  to  feed  upon  these  pearls  of 
the  "morning,  which  renewed  the  body,  but  did  not  encarnalise  the  soul.  And  they  had 
made  their  choice,  and  they  were  glad  like  men.  But  then,  as  they  plodded  along  the 
barren  wastes,  like  the  dead  levels  of  middle  life,  came  to  them  the  temptations  and 
the  reactions  of  which  I  have  spoken,  and  the  necessity  of  renewing  their  choice,  and 
not  being  discontented  with  it— of  abiding  by  it,  and  not  repenting  it.  The  gross 
spell  and  baleful  sorcery  of  Egypt  returned  like  a  wave  of  mud  over  the  souls  which 
God  had  freed.  The  spirit  of  the  slave  remained  in  them  ;  the  reek  of  Egypt's 
fleshpots  seemed  to  float  back  to  their  nostrils;  they  loathed  the  light  "  bread"; 
they  sighed  for  the  onions  and  the  garlic  and  the  rich  w..ter  and  fat,  sluggish  fields. 
Has  not  this  sketch  taught  its  own  lessons  ?  The  one  special  lesson  which  I  want 
to  bring  home  is  the  training  of  the  spiritual  sense — the  danger  to  the  table  of  the 
Lord  from  the  table  of  devils;  the  guilt  of  dallying  with  old  temptations,  the 
peril  of  furtive  glances  towards  the  doomed  forsaken  city.  When  God's  childrer* 
hunger  for  righteousness,  He  impearls  for  them  the  ground  with  the  manna-dews 
of  heaven ;  but  when  they  lust  for  quails,  their  food  breeds  plague  and  is  loath- 
some unto  them  ;  and  fiery  serpents  sting  the  diseased  appetite,  and  at  last  the 
gorged  prodigal  craves,  and  craves  vainly,  for  the  husks  of  swine.  For  instance^ 
God  fills  the  world  with  water.  The  great  sea  rolls  its  pure,  fresh  waves  of  violet, 
and  the  tropic  sun  evaporates  them,  and  they  are  distilled  in  the  sweet  laboratory 
of  the  air,  and  the  wings  of  the  winds  winnow  them  free  from  the  impurity  amid 
the  soft  clouds  of  heaven,  and  they  steal  down  in  dew  and  silver  rain,  and  hang 
like  diamonds  on  the  grass,  and  gladden  the  green  leaves,  and  slide  softly  into  the 
bosom  of  the  rose,  and  bubbling  through  the  mountain  turf  become  the  rivulets 
and  the  rivers,  and  are  the  sweet,  wholesome,  natural  drink  of  man  and  beast,  and 
we  thank  God  for  these  spriugs  of  health,  and  disease  drinks  and  sleeps._  Now  ta 
the  simple,  natural,  noble  taste  this  is  enough  ;  it  delights  us.  But  man  has  dis- 
tilled, in  his  laboratories,  a  fiery  flaming  spirit ;  and  what  sweetness  is  there  in 
water  to  the  coarsened  palate,  the  inflamed  thirst,  the  parclied  tongue,  the  vitiated 
taste,  the  depraved  craving  of  the  drunkard  ?  How  can  that  which  is  sweet  and 
simple  and  natural  contend  with  the  brutifying  attraction  of  oily,  maddening, 
scorching  drams,  which  poison  and  degrade  ?  The  taste  for  spiritual  things — for 
the  things  of  God — is  like  the  pure,  cool,  delicious  wholesome,  but  unmaddening, 
unseducing  water;  the  drink  of  Egypt,  the  drink  of  the  house  of  bondage,  and  the 
drink  of  the  drunkard,  and  the  madman,  and  the  sensualist,  is  like  that  dissolved 
spirit  of  evil  which  is  ruin,  and  sickness,  and  disease,  and  death.  Again,  the 
honest  life — the  life  which  scorns  unjust  gain,  which  hates  the  false  balance  and  the 
deceitful  weight ;  the  life  of  the  tradesman  or  the  professional  man  who  will  not 
make  haste  to  he  rich,  who  will  suffer  no  shoddy,  no  cheating,  no  adulteration,  no- 
double  prices — its  gains  are  steady,  perhaps,  and  slow,  and  moderate.  But  when 
a  man  sees  his  unscrupulous  neighbour,  apparently  prospering  by  fraud,  getting 
rich  by  rapid  dishonesty,  gaining  by  gambling  speculations,  is  it  not  woe  to  him  if 
the  manna  of  honesty  begins  to  pall,  and  to  grow  insipid  to  his  taste ;  if  he  begin  to 
sigh  for  the  fleshpots  of  Egypt  rather  than  the  manna  of  God ;  for  the  dross  and 
refuse  of  base  earthly  success,  rather  than  the  pure,  wholesome  righteousness 
of  just  and  honourable  toil?  Once  more — the  law  of  duty ;  of  simple  allegiance 
to  the  law  of  God ;  of  self-restraint  for  His  sake ;  this  is  manna.  But  if  the 
youth  tire  at  this,  suffer  it  to  pall  upon  him,  murmur  at  it ;  revert  in  memory 
to  conquered  temptations ;  how  can  the  taste  of  the  manna  survive  the  reek  of 
these  Egyptian  fulnesses  ?  How  can  the  violets  of  purity  and  humility  bloom  and 
shed  their  fragrance  under  the  coarse,  foul  upas  tree  of  sensual  passions?  And  in 
all  these  cases  God — God  in  His  mercy — sends  fiery  serpents  to  avenge  in  His 
children  His  forgotten.  His  violated  laws.  Oh!  let  God's  manna  be  dear  to  you; 
beware  lest  it  pall  upon  you ;  beware  how  you  grow  weary  of  well-doing,  and  discon- 
tented with  the  gifts  and  ordinances  of  God.  Ob,  may  God  help  us  to  cultivate 
all  sweet  and  wholesome  and  spiritual  tastes  !  If  you  do  get  to  loathe  the  holy  life 
— the  manna  of  God — be  sure  that  God  has  many  a  fiery  serpent  left  in  the 
wilderness  for  you  ;  and  oh  !  if  you  have  already  been  bitten  by  that  fiery  serpent 
wherewith  He  punishes  for  sin,  remember  that  "  As  Moses  lifted  up  the  serpent  in 
the  wilderness,  even  so  the  Son  of  Man  was  lifted  up,  that  whosoever  believeth 


cnAP.  XXI.]  NUMBERS.  217 

in  Him  shouM  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life."  (F.  W.  Farrar,  D.D,) 
The  Lord  sent  fiery  serpents. — In  the  valley  of  Seir  : — I.  Sin.  Its  first  characteristic 
was  complaining  against  God  and  God's  guidance.  1.  The  hardships  that  lie  in  the 
path  of  obedience  are  the  daily  stumbling-rocks  and  rocks  of  offence.  2.  The  next 
element  in  their  sin  was  that  they  despised  the  gifts  God  gave  them.  There  are 
many  joys  within  our  reach,  many  sources  of  strength  and  peace  aud  gladness,  all 
innocent  and  God-given — faculties  to  develop,  friendships  to  cultivate,  treasuries  of 
wisdom  and  knowledge  to  ransack  ;  yet  how  often  are  they  stale  and  unprofitabln 
to  us — "miserable  bread"!  3.  Earthly  and  sensual  desires.  They  ever  carried 
Egypt  witli  them.  They  rose  to  nothing  noble  or  heroic.  4.  And  was  not  this  sin 
of  Israel  just  the  sin  of  which  they  were  always  guilty  ?  Their  murmurings  are 
always  to  the  same  tune,  their  rebellions  on  the  same  lines  and  from  the  same 
motives.  Sin  is  persistent.  It.  become^  habitual.  Day  by  day  our  souls  take  on 
a  bias  either  for  good  or  evil.  II.  Suffering.  1.  Sorrow  ever  trails  in  the  wake 
of  sin.  2.  Sent  by  God.  3.  For  their  good.  III.  Salvation.  (R.  D.  Shaw,  B.D.) 
Unreasonable  complaint : — I.  Wh.at  it  was  that  they  despised.  Bread— (1)  Given 
by  God;  (2)  Miraculously.  II.  The  unreasonableness  of  the  cmplaint.  Had 
nothing  else  on  which  to  depend  during  journey.  III.  The  causes  of  disgust. 
Forgetfulness,  weariness,  ingratitude.  {Daniel  Kat terns.)  Complaining  ■punished  : 
— To  complain  is  to  be  atheistic,  to  murmur  is  to  throw  down  the  altar,  to 
adopt  a  reproachful  tone  rectarding  the  necessary  education  of  life  is  to  challenge 
Divine  wisdom.  The  complnnt  was  punished  as  complaining  must  always  be. 
Fretfulness  always  brings  its  own  biting  serpent  along  with  it.  Charge  what 
improbability  you  may  upon  the  particular  account  of  serpents  in  the  text — get  rid 
of  them  if  you  can  from  the  historical  record — there  remains  the  fact,  that  the 
fretful  spirit  burns  itself,  the  discontented  soul  creates  its  own  agony,  the  mind 
wanting  the  sweet  spirit  of  contentment  stings  itself  night  and  day  and  writhes 
continually  in  great  suffering.  Discontent  never  brought  joy,  peevishness  never 
tranquillised  the  home-life,  fretfulness  in  the  head  of  the  house,  or  in  any  member 
of  the  house,  creates  a  disagreeable  feeling  throughout  the  whole  place.  Complaint 
punishes  itself.  Every  complaint  has  a  corresponding  serpent,  and  the  serpent 
bites  still.  The  people  complained  of  the  light  food — then  God  sent  them  fiery 
serpents.  There  is  always  something  worse  than  we  have  yet  experienced.  The 
children  of  Israel  might  have  thought  the  bread  was  the  worst  fate  th  it  could 
befall  them.  To  be  without  water,  and  to  be  continually  living  upon  manna — 
surely  there  was  nothing  worse  ?  We  cannot  exhaust  the  Divine  resources  of  a 
penal  kind.  There  is  always  some  lower  depth,  always  some  keener  bite,  always 
some  more  painful  sting,  always  some  hotter  hell.  Take  care  how  you  treat  life. 
Do  not  imagine  that  you  can  complain  without  being  heard,  and  that  you  can  be 
heard  without  punishment  immediately  following.  This  is  the  mystery  of  life  ; 
this  is  the  fact  of  life.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  We  have  sinned. — The  hajipiness  of 
repentance : — The  proverb  is  old :  "  He  runneth  far  that  never  returns."  Seven  times 
a  day  falleth  the  just  man,  but  he  returneth  ;  he  I'iseth  again  and  is  sorry.  When 
David  had  sinned  so  fearfully  he  looked  back  and  repented.  When  another  time 
he  had  caused  the  people  to  be  numbered  and  so  sinned,  his  heart  smote  him  and 
he  was  sorry  for  it.  A  wild  race  did  the  prodigal  son  run,  but  he  returned.  Peter 
sinned  most  grievously,  but  he  went  out  and  wept  bitterly.  Happy  were  all  these 
for  their  returning.  And  blessed  be  our  good  God  for  evermore  that  pardoneth 
upon  repentance.  Observe  in  their  repentance  their  confession  to  God,  because  they 
had  spoken  against  Him,  and  to  Moses  because  they  had  also  transgressed  against 
him.  "  God  knoweth  all,"  saith  Ambrose, "  but  yet  He  looketh  for  thy  confession." 
God  is  never  more  ready  to  cover  than  when  we  lay  open.  The  fox,  say  our  books, 
taketh  his  prey  by  the  throat  so  to  stop  all  noise.  And  the  devil,  that  fox,  by  all 
means  hindereth  holy  confession,  and  bringeth  men  to  deal  with  their  souls  as  men 
used  to  deal  with  old  rusty  armour,  either  never,  or  once  in  a  year  or  two,  formally 
and  superficially  to  scour  it  over.  But  as  a  thorn  in  your  finger  will  grieve  you 
still  till  it  be  had  out,  so  will  sin  in  your  conscience  still  vex  till  it  be  acknowledged 
and  confessed.  If  we  have  offended  man,  reconciliation  to  him  is  necessary.  But 
"  to  thy  God  speak  all,"  saith  Chrysostom,  "  even  whatsoever  thou  art  ashamed  to 
speak  unto  man,  for  He  expecteth  thy  voice  although  He  knew  it  before,  and  He  will 
never  upbraid  thee  as  man  will."  Note,  they  trust  in  God's  mercy  that  upon  prayer 
He  would  pardon,  and  therefore  they  despair  not.  This  ever  must  be  joined  to  our 
repentance,  or  else  it  is  a  gulf  that  will  swallow  us  up.  What  will  tears  and 
confession  profit  if  there  be  no  hope  of  pardon  ?      "  My  sin  is  greater  than  can  be 


218  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cuap.  xxu 

forgiven."  "But  thou  liest,  Cain,"  saith  St.  Augustine,  "for  tbe  mercy  of  God  is 
greater  than  all  sinner's  misery."  (Bj).  Bnbiituton.)  Make  thee  a  fiery  serpent, 
and  set  it  upon  a  pole. — The  first  setting  wp  of  the  brazen  serpent : — I.  DiscoDiunEJiENT. 
"  Because  of  the  way."  1.  Assuredly  there  are  times  when  God's  servants  become 
discouraged.  To  our  shame  let  us  confess  it.  It  is  by  faith  that  we  live,  but  dis- 
couragement is  generally  the  fruit  of  unbelief ;  and  so  by  discouragement  we  cease 
to  live  a  healthy  and  vigorous  life,  we  begin  to  faint.  The  reason  may  be  found  in 
various  things.  (1)  Occasionally  it  springs  out  of  disappointment.  How  tantalising 
to  see  the  land,  as  through  a  wall  of  crystal,  and  yet  to  be  unable  to  put  foot  upon 
it !  There  may  be  like  trials  in  store  for  us.  Possibly  some  of  ni.v  Master's  servants 
have  entertained  the  notion  that  they  have  made  amazing  progress  in  the  Divine 
life,  and  just  then  an  event  has  occurred  which  showed  them  their  own  weakness, 
and  they  have  been  forced  to  weep  in  secret  places  and  upbraid  themselves,  saying, 
"After  all  this,  am  I  no  better  than  to  be  cast  down  about  a  trifle?  Have  I 
suffered  so  much,  and  yet  is  my  progress  so  small?  "  (2)  It  was  not,  however, 
merely  disappointment ;  it  was  much  else.  It  was  the  unfriendliness  of  those  who 
ought  to  have  been  most  brotherly.  Surely  Edom  ought  to  have  granted  his  brother 
Israel  the  small  privilege  of  passing  through  the  country,  seeing  it  was  the  near 
way  to  Canaan.  I  have  known  people  of  God  much  discouraged  by  the  unfriendU- 
ness  of  those  whom  they  thought  to  be  their  brethren  and  sisters  in  Christ.  They 
went  to  them  for  sympathy,  and  they  received  rebuffs.  Alas,  that  it  should  be 
often  true  that  the  souls  of  the  people  of  God  may  be  much  discouraged  because 
of  the  absence  of  Chiistian  love  !  Kesolve  that  it  shall  not  be  your  fault.  (.3) 
Undoubtedly,  however,  the  soul  of  the  people  was  much  discouraged  because  of  the 
length  of  the  way.  The  nation  had  been  forty  years  on  the  march.  To  certain  of 
God's  people  old  age  has  brought  much  of  heaviness  by  reason  of  its  infirmities 
and  afliictions.  They  often  sigh,  "  Why  are  His  chariots  so  long  in  coming  ?  "  They 
are  willing  in  the  spirit  to  abide  the  Master's  will,  but  the  flesh  is  weak,  and  they 
wonder  whether  the  Lord  has  quite  forgotten  them.  (4)  Then  there  was  the 
fatigue  of  the  way,  for  journeying  through  that  wilderness  was  by  no  means  an 
easy  business,  especially  along  the  shore  of  the  gulf.  Very  rugged  to  this  day  is 
the  pathway  there.  The  road  is  full  of  hills  and  valleys,  and  rugged  ravines  and 
sharp  stones,  and  weary  sands.  Travelling  there  is  as  bad  as  travelling  well  can 
be.  To  some  of  God's  own  children  life  is  no  parade  upon  a  level  lawn,  but  rough 
marching  and  deep  wading.  They  have  to  take  the  bleak  side  of  the  hill;  the 
wind  blows  upon  them,  and  the  sleet  is  driven  in  their  eyes,  and  their  home  is  but 
a  cold  harbour  to  them.  2.  Now,  you  are  discouraged,  you  say,  because  of  the  way  ; 
but  whose  way  is  it  ?  Have  you  chosen  your  own  way  and  wilfully  run  against 
your  duty  and  against  the  providence  of  God?  Well,  then,  I  say  nothing  about 
the  consequences  of  such  conduct,  for  they  must  be  terrible.  But  if  you  have 
endeavoured  to  follow  the  Lord  fully,  and  if  you  have  tried  to  keep  the  path  of  His 
statutes,  then  it  must  be  well  with  you.  Why  are  you  discouraged?  Judge  not 
by  the  sight  of  the  eyes,  nor  by  the  hearing  of  the  ears  :  let  faith  sit  on  the 
judgment-seat,  and  I  am  sure  she  will  give  forth  this  verdict — "  If  the  Lord  wills 
it,  it  is  well.  If  Jehovah  leads  the  way  the  road  must  be  right."  Besides  that,  not 
only  did  God  lead  them  but  God  carried  them.  He  says  Himself  that  He  bare 
them  on  eagle's  wings  :  for  though  the  ways  were  often  rough,  yet  it  is  wonderful 
to  remember  thnt  their  feet  did  not  swell,  neither  did  their  garments  wax  old  upon 
them  all  those  forty  years.  How  could  they  be  better  off  than  to  have  heaven  for 
their  granary,  the  rocks  for  their  wine-cellars,  and  God  Himself  for  their  Provider. 
II.  CoMPL.\iNT.  "  Spake  against  God  and  against  Moses."  Some  of  us  have  need 
to  be  cautioned  against  letting  the  spirit  of  discouragement  hurry  us  on  to  quarrel- 
ling with  God  and  questioning  His  love.  It  is  ill  for  a  saint  to  strive  with  his 
Saviour.  When  these  people  made  their  first  complaint  it  was  a  singular  one.  It 
was  a  complaint  about  having  been  brought  out  of  Egypt.  "Wherefore  have  ye 
brought  us  up  out  of  Egypt  to  die  in  the  wilderness?"  1.  Well,  but  first  of  all, 
they  ought  not  to  complain  of  being  brought  up  out  of  Euypt,  for  that  was  a  land 
of  bondage  where  their  male  children  had  to  perish  in  the  river,  and  where  they 
themselves  longed  to  die,  for  life  had  become  intolerable  ;  and  yet  you  see  they  are 
complaining  that  they  were  brought  up  out  of  Egypt  to  die  in  the  wilderness  as 
they  said.  Is  it  not  possible  that  our  rebellious  hearts  may  even  complain  of  God's 
mercy  ?  For  want  of  something  to  murmur  at,  discouraged  ones  will  pick  holes  in 
the  goodness  of  God.  What  a  pity  that  it  should  be  so !  2.  Next,  look  at  their 
complaint  of  having  no  food  :  "  There  is  no  bread,  neither  is  there  any  water."    It 


CHAP.  XXI.]  M-MBKHS.  219 

was  a  great  falsehood.  There  was  bread,  they  had  to  admit  that  fact  in  the  next 
breath  :  but  then  they  did  not  call  the  manna  "  bread."  They  called  it  by  an  ugly 
name  in  the  Hebrew.  The  water,  too,  was  not  muddy  and  thick  like  the  water  of 
the  Nile  ;  it  was  bright,  clear,  pure  water  from  the  rock ;  and  therefore  they  would 
not  call  it  water.  They  wanted  water  with  substance  in  it  which  would  leave  grit 
between  their  teeth,  and  as  the  stream  which  leaped  from  the  flinty  rock  was  pure 
crystal  they  would  not  call  it  water.  Have  you  not  known  peofjle  to  whom  God 
has  given  great  mercy,  and  yet  they  have  talked  as  if  they  were  quite  deserted  ? 
Unbelief  is  blind,  just  as  surely  as  faith  is  far-seeing.  Unbelief  enjoys  nothing,  just 
as  faith  rejoices  in  everything.  III.  Punishment.  "  Fiery  serpents."  1.  Some- V 
times  they  may  be  new  trials.  2.  In  scne  Christians  they  may  be  the  uprisings  of 
their  own  corruptions.  3.  Or,  it  may  be,  that  God  will  Lt  Satan  loose  upon  us  if 
we  disbelieve.  IV.  Kemedy.  1.  Confession.  "  We  have  sinned."  2.  The  second  v 
help  was  that  Moses  prayed  for  the  people.  So  our  great  cure  against  fiery  serpents, 
horrible  thoughts,  and  temptations,  is  intercession.  "  If  any  man  sin,  we  have  an 
advocate  with  the  Father,  Jesus  Christ  the  righteous."  If  we  have  grown  down- 
hearted and  discouraged,  and  have  sinned  by  unbelieving  utterances,  let  us  go  with 
our  poor,  little,  trembling  faith,  and  ask  the  Divine  Interposer  to  stand  before  God 
on  our  behalf,  and  pray  for  us  that  our  transgressions  may  be  blotted  out.  3.  ButV 
now  comes  the  great  remedy.  After  their  confession  and  the  prayer  of  their 
mediator,  the  Lord  bade  Moses  make  a  brazen  serpent  and  lift  it  up,  that  they 
might  look  upon  it  and  live.  When  I  first  came  to  Christ  as  a  poor  sinner  and  V 
looked  to  Him,  I  thought  Him  the  most  precious  object  my  eyes  had  ever  Ut  upon ; 
but  this  night  I  have  been  looking  to  Him  while  I  have  been  preaching  to  you,  in 
remembrance  of  my  own  discouragements,  and  my  own  complainings,  and  I  find 
my  Lord  Jesus  dearer  than  ever.  I  have  been  seriously  ill,  and  sadly  depressed, 
and  I  fear  I  have  rebelled,  and  therefore  I  look  anew  to  Him,  and  I  tell  you  that 
He  is  fairer  in  my  eyes  to-night  than  He  was  at  first.  The  brazen  serpent  healed 
me  when  first  I  saw  the  Lord  ;  and  the  brazen  serpent  heals  me  to-night  and  shall 
do  so  till  I  die.  "Look  and  live"  is  for  saints  as  well  as  for  sinners.  (C  H. 
Spiirpeon.)  Ulan's  ruin  and  God's  remedy: — I.  Man,  thou  abt  euined  !  The 
children  of  Israel  in  the  wilderness  were  bitten  with  fiery  serpents,  whose  venom 
soon  tainted  their  blood,  and  after  intolerable  pain  brought  on  death.  Thou  art  much 
in  the  same  condition.  Oh,  sinner,  there  are  four  things  that  stare  thee  in  the  face, 
and  should  alarm  thee  !  1.  The  first  thing  is  thy  sin.  I  hear  thee  say,  "  Yes,  I 
know  I  am  a  sinner  as  well  as  the  rest  pf  mankind  "  ;  but  I  am  not  content  with 
that  confession,  nor  is  God  content  with  it  either.  Ah !  ye  are  without  Christ, 
remember,  not  only  is  the  world  lost,  but  you  are  lost ;  not  only  has  sin  defiled  the 
race,  but  you  yourself  are  stained  by  sin.  Come,  now,  take  the  universal  charge 
home  to  yourself.  How  many  have  your  sins  been?  Count  them,  if  you  can. 
There  is  nothing  to  be  gotten  by  hiding  your  sins.  They'll  spring  up,  if  you  dig 
deep  as  hell  to  hide  them.  Why  not  now  be  honest,  and  look  at  them  to-day,  for 
they'll  look  at  you  by  and  by,  when  Christ  shall  come  in  the  clouds  of  judgment  ? 
2.  Sinner,  thou  hast  not  only  thy  sin  to  trouble  thee,  but  there  is  the  sentence  of 
condemnation  gor.e  out  against  thee.  Ye  are  condemned  already.  What  though  no 
officer  has  arrested  you,  though  death  has  not  laid  his  cold  hand  upon  you,  yet 
Scripture  saith,  "  He  that  believeth  not  is  condemned  already,  because  he  beheveth 
not  on  the  Son  of  God."  I  ask  you  this,  whether  you  do  not  deserve  it?  If  I 
never  committed  another  sin,  my  past  sins  would  fully  justify  the  Lord  in  permit- 
ting me  to  go  down  alive  iuto  the  pit.  Now,  these  two  things  are  enough  to  make 
any  man  tremble,  if  he  did  but  feel  them — his  sin  and  his  condemnation.  But  I 
have  a  third  to  mention.  3.  Sinner,  there  is  this  to  aggravate  thy  case  and  increase 
thine  alarm — thy  helplessness,  thy  utter  inability  to  do  anything  to  save  thyself, 
even  if  God  should  offer  thee  the  chance.  Thou  art  dead  in  trespasses  and  sins. 
Talk  of  performing  good  works — thou  canst  not.  But  thou  sayest,  "  I  will  repent." 
Eepentance  is  not  possible  to  thee  as  thou  art,  unless  God  gives  it  to  thee.  There 
is  no  door  of  mercy  left  for  you  by  the  law,  and  even  by  the  gospel  there  ie  no  door  of 
mercy  which  you  have  power  to  enter,  apart  from  the  help  which  Christ  affords  you. 
If  you  think  you  can  do  anything,  you  have  yet  to  unlearn  that  fooUsh  conceit. 
Now  have  I  not  indeed  described  a  horrible  position  for  a  siuner  to  be  in — but  there 
is  something  more  remaining,  a  fourth  thing.  4.  Sinner,  thou  art  not  only  guilty 
of  past  sin,  and  condemned  for  it,  thou  art  not  only  unable,  but  if  thou  wert  able, 
thou  art  so  bad  that  thou  wouldst  never  be  willing  to  do  anything  that  could  save 
thyself.     For  this  know — thy  nature  is  totally  depraved.     Thou  lovest  that  which 


220  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxT. 


v/ 


^4 


is  evil,  and  not  that  which  is  good.  II.  Having  thus  set  before  you  the  hard  part  of 
the  subject — the  sinnek's  ruis — I  now  come  to  preach  of  his  remedy.  A  certain 
scliool  of  physicians  tells  us  that  "  like  cures  like."  Whether  it  be  true  or  not  in 
medicine,  I  know  it  is  true  enough  in  theology.  When  the  Israelites  were  bitten 
with  the  fieiy  serpents,  it  was  a  serpent  that  made  them  whole.  And  so  you  lost 
and  ruined  creatures  are  bidden  now  to  look  to  Christ  suffering  and  dying,  and  you 
will  see  in  Him  the  counterpart  of  what  you  see  in  yourselves.  1.  I  charge  you 
with  sin.  Now  in  Christ  -Jesus  behold  the  sinner's  substitute — the  sin-offering. 
When  I  look  at  myself  I  think  it  would  need  much  to  redeem  me,  but  wheu  I  see 
Christ  dying  I  think  He  could  redeem  me  if  I  were  a  million  times  as  bad  as  I  am. 
Now  remember  Christ  not  only  paid  barely  enough  for  us,  He  piid  more  than 
enough.  The  Apostle  Paul  says,  "  His  grace  abounded" — "  superabounded,"  sa\s 
the  Greek.  Christ's  redemption  was  so  plenteous,  that  had  God  willed  it,  if  all  the 
stars  of  heaven  had  been  peopled  with  sinners,  Christ  need  not  have  suffered  another 
pang  to  redeem  thetn  all — there  was  a  boundless  value  in  His  precous  blood.  And, 
sinner,  if  there  were  so  much  as  this,  surely  there  is  enough  for  thee.  2.  And  then 
again,  if  thou  art  not  satisfied  with  Christ's  sin-offering,  just  think  a  moment  ;  God 
is  satisfied,  God  the  Father  is  content,  and  must  not  thou  be?  The  Judge  says,  "  I 
am  satisfied  ;  let  the  sinner  go  free,  for  I  have  punished  the  Surety  in  his  stead  "  ; 
and  if  the  Judge  is  satisfied,  surely  the  criminal  mav  be.  3.  In  regard  to  the  third 
particular.  Our  utter  helplessness  is  such,  that  as  I  told  you,  we  are  unable  to  do 
an.\  thing.  Yes,  and  I  want  you  to  look  at  Christ ;  was  not  He  unable,  too  ?  You, 
in  your  father  Adam,  were  once  strong,  but  you  lost  your  strength.  Christ,  too, 
was  strong,  but  He  laid  aside  all  His  omnipotence.  See  Him.  The  hand  that 
poises  the  world  hangs  on  a  nail.  See  Him.  The  shoulders  that  supported  the 
skies  are  drooping  over  the  Cross.  Look  at  Him.  The  eyes  whose  glances  light  up 
the  sun  are  sealed  in  darkness.  Look  away  from  your  own  weakness  to  His  weak- 
ness, and  remember  that  in  His  weakness  He  is  strong,  and  in  His  weaknes-s  you 
are  strong  too.  Go  see  His  hands;  they  are  weak,  but  in  their  weakness  they  are 
stretched  out  to  save  you.  Look  at  His  eyes;  they  are  closing  in  death,  but  from 
them  ci  mes  the  ray  of  light  that  shall  kindle  your  dark  spirit.  Unable  though  thou 
art,  go  to  Him  who  Himself  was  crucified  through  weakness,  and  remember  that 
now  "  He  is  able  to  save  them  to  the  uttermost  that  come  unto  God  by  Him."  I 
told  you  you  could  not  repent,  but  if  you  go  to  Christ  He  can  melt  your  heart  into 
contrition,  though  it  be  as  hard  as  iron.  I  said  you  could  not  believe  ;  but  if  you 
sit  down  and  look  at  Christ,  a  sight  of  Christ  will  make  you  believe,  for  He  is 
exalted  on  high  to  give  repentance  and  remission  of  sins.  4.  And  then  the  fourth 
thing,  '•Oh,"  cries  one,  "you  said  we  were  too  estranged  to  be  even  willing  to 
come  to  Christ. "  I  know  you  were  ;  and  therefore  it  is  He  came  down  to  you. 
You  would  not  come  to  Him,  but  He  comes  to  you,  and  though  you  are  very 
evil,  He  comes  with  sacred  magic  in  His  arm,  to  change  your  heart.  (Ibid.) 
The  brazen  serpent;  an  emblem  of  heaven's  antidote  in  the  gospel  of  Christ: — 
I.  The  aniidote  provided  in  the  gospel  is  for  a  most  lamentable  evil.  1. 
The  afiliftion  under  which  the  Jews  were  now  suffering,  resembles  sin  in  that  it 
was— (1)  Imparted;  (2)  Painful;  (3)  Mortal.  2.  Dissimilar,  in  that  (1)  One  was 
material,  the  other  is  spiritual.  (2)  One  was  a  calamity,  the  other  is  a  crime. 
(3)  The  one  would  necessarily  end  in  death,  the  other  might  continue  for 
ever.  II.  The  antidote  provided  in  the  gospel  originated  in  the  sovekeionty 
OF  God.  Points  of  difference  between  the  remedies.  1.  One  was  apparently 
arbitrary,  the  other  is  manifestly  adapted.  2.  The  one  was  insensible  to  the 
sufferer,  the  other  is  filled  with  sympathy.  3.  The  one  was  local  in  its  aspect, 
the  other  is  worldwide  in  its  bearing.  4.  The  one  was  temporary  in  its 
efficacy,  the  other  is  perpetual.  III.  The  antidote  provided  in  the  gospel 
REQUIRES  the  PERSONAL  APPLICATION  OF  THB  SUFFERERS.  1.  The  personal  application 
is  most  simple.  (1)  As  looking  is  the  easiest  act  of  the  body,  so  faith  is  the  easiest 
act  of  the  mind.  (2)  Man  has  a  propensity  for  believing  ;  he  is  a  credulous  animal; 
his  ruin  is,  that  he  believes  too  much.  2.  The  personal  application  is  most  un- 
imeritorious.  3.  The  personal  application  is  most  indispensable.  4.  The  personal 
application  is  ever  efficacious.  (Iloinilist.)  The  brazen  serpent  .-—I.  The  cause 
which  produced  it.  1.  On  man's  side  it  was  sin.  In  vers.  4,  5,  what  ingrati- 
tude and  rebellion.  The  people  were  safe,  and  enjoying  manna,  yet  discontented. 
Can  you  wonder  at  judgment?  (ver.  6).  Was  it  not  so  in  Eden?  First  parents 
were  safe,  happy  ;  manna  of  Paradise,  yet  discontented.  Can  you  wonder  that  they 
fell  under  the  curse  ?     The  serpent  had  bitten  them.     2.  On  God's  side  it  was  grace. 


CHAP.  xxi.J  NUMBERS.  221 


In  ver.  7,  you  see  terror;  yet  what  plea?  Only  pity!  Nevertheless  vouch- 
safed (ver.  8).  Precisely  so  with  our  deliverance.  When  God  beheld  a  race  defiled 
and  poisoned  with  the  fiery  serpent  bite  of  sin,  why  did  He  interfere  ?  (Job  zxxiii.  24). 
It  was  all  of  grace  (John  iii.  16).  II.  The  charactee  which  marked  it.  Some- 
what singular  that  the  Lord  should  have  chosen  to  heal  His  people  by  bidding  them 
look  at  a  brazen  serpent.  He  might  have  healed  by  a  word  ;  yet  He  chose  the  most 
hideous  object.  Why?  for  several  reasons.  1.  It  was  an  appointment  without 
any  natural  attraction.  A  piece  of  brass.  The  image  of  a  serpent.  Cold  reason 
cried  out,  "Of  what  use  is  that?  It  is  repulsive,  not  attractive.  We  will  not 
believe.    Let  us  reject  it."    Was  it  not  so  with  the  Cross?  (Isa.  liii.  2,  3  ;  1  Cor.  i.  23). 

2.  It  was  an  emblem  of  the  curse,  without  its  hatefulness.  Notice,  it  was  a  serpent, 
yet  not  taken  from  the  wilderness.  It  was  like  the  fiery  serpents,  but  without  their 
poison.  So  with  the  Lord  Jesus.  A  Man  in  the  "  likeness  of  sinful  flesh,"  but  not 
from  the  sons  of  Adam.  Without  sin.  Hence  the  curse  was  represented,  but  not 
embodied.  Enough  to  give  validity  to  atonement,  but  not  enough  to  invalidate 
atonement.  3.  It  was  an  object  of  faith,  without  limit  to  its  efficacy.  Elevated 
on  high  for  all,  even  for  most  distant  spectators.  So  with  the  Cross  of  Christ  ele- 
vated for  all  (John  xii.  32).  What  limit?  Age?  (Young  Timothy  and  St.  Paul 
the  aged.)  Class?  (Rich  Joseph  and  wretched  Lazarus. )  Guilt?  (Mary  Magda- 
lene and  dying  thief.)  Listen,  then,  ye  who  say,  "  Gospel  not  for  me."  True,  you 
can  do  nothing  ;  but  you  can  look  (Isa.  xlv.  22).  III.  The  consequences  which  y 
RESULT  from  IT.  With  Israelites  the  poison  was  extracted,  pain  abated,  health 
restored.  It  is  so  still.  Come  by  faith  to  Jesus.  Sin  pardoned,  conscience  paci- 
fied, soul  renewed.  In  one  word,  salvation.  See  this  a  little  more  fully.  1.  Perfect 
salvation.  We  read  of  no  return  of  the  serpents.  The  people  healed  were  relieved 
from  the  curse  altogether.  No  half-salvation.  It  is  so  with  all  believers.  If  you 
have  found  Christ,  you  are  fully  pardoned.  No  reservations  (1  John  i.  7).  2. 
Instant  salvation.  When  life  was  fainting,  as  the  sufferers  looked,  their  strength 
returned  in  a  moment.  Just  as  one  penitent  look  to  the  crucified  Christ  brings  a 
present  salvation.     Not  a  thing  put  off.     "  He  that  believeth  hath  everlasting  life. " 

3.  Free  salvation.  These  Israelites  had  not  to  walk  to  the  pole,  had  not  to  use 
their  own  remedies.  Only  to  look  in  their  misery,  and  to  live.  Why  should  it  be 
otherwise  now  ?  Perhaps  some  of  you  feel  the  bites  of  conscience  ;  yet  you  have 
no  peace.  It  may  be  that  you  rest  too  much  on  your  own  remedies.  You  do  not 
see  that  all  has  been  done,  and  that  now  the  gift  is  free.  In  conclusion,  let  me 
speak  to  you  who  have  looked,  and  who  live.  Do  not  think  yourselves  beyond 
danger.  Like  Israel,  you  may  murmur  or  backslide.  If  so — (1)  Expect  chastening. 
(2)  Come  again  and  again  to  the  Cross.  Never  beyond  the  need  of  that  till  death. 
(J.  H.  Titcomh,  M.A.)  The  brazen  serpent : — I.  The  danger  of  giving  way  to 
DESPONDENCY.  Immoderate  grief  over  bereavement,  undue  depression  over  temporal 
misfortunes,  extreme  sensitiveness  to  the  assaults  which  men  may  make  upon  us 
while  we  are  seeking  to  follow  Christ,  morbid  regret  at  the  disappointment  of  our 
hopes  of  serving  God  in  some  peculiar  way  on  which  our  hearts  are  «et,  and 
exaggerated  ideas  of  the  evil  which  will  ensue  from  the  refusal  of  some  Edomite  to  do 
that  which  would  have  been  of  great  benefit  to  us,  that  which  would  have  cost  him 
nothing,  and  which  we  had  courteously  requested  at  his  hands — all  these  are  at  the 
next  station  on  the  line  toward  rebellion  against  God,  and  ought  to  be  checked  at 
once,  before  they  lead  to  more  serious  consequences.  A  friend  of  mine,  some  years 
ago,  received  a  letter  from  a  missionary  on  the  West  Coast  of  Africa,  in  which,'  as  a 
curiosity,  some  serpent  eggs  were  contained.  He  laid  them  carefully  aside,  think- 
ing to  preserve  them  as  they  were ;  but  one  day,  when  he  went  to  show  them  to  a 
visitor,  he  discovered,  to  his  dismay,  that  the  heat  of  the  drawer  had  hatched  them 
into  serpents,  and  there  was  a  heap  of  crawling  things  before  his  eyes.  So  des- 
pondency is  a  serpent's  egg,  which,  if  we  are  not  careful,  will  hatch  in  our  hearts 
into  a  serpent  itself,  and  poison  us  with  its  venomous  bite.  It  has  the  germ  of 
serious  and  aggravated  sin  within  it,  and  we  must  seek  very  speedily  to  overmaster  it ; 
nor  need  we  have  much  difficulty  in  rising  above  it,  for  we  have  only  to  remember 
and  believe  that  God  is  on  our  side,  and  all  discouragement  will  disappear.  II.  The 
TYPICAL  SIGNIFICANCE  OF  THE  METHOD  whicli.  in  obedience  to  God's  command,  Moses 
adopted  for  the  healing  of  the  people.  Here  was,  first  of  all,  a  disease.  Alike  in 
its  origin  and  nature,  the  mah'dy  of  sin  is  well  illustrated  by  a  serpent's  bite. 
Unless  a  cure  be  effected,  the  death  of  the  soul  must  result.  If  we  were  but  as 
sensible  of  our  malady  as  these  I-raelites  were  of  the  disease  that  was  burning  up 
their  bodies,  we  would  cry  out  in  an  agony  of  earnestness  for  deliverance.     But  let 


222  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 

us  not  forget  to  look  at  the  cure  which  was  here  effected.  "  The  brazen  serpent," 
says  Alford,  "  made  in  the  likeness  of  the  serpents  which  had  bitten  them,  repre- 
sented to  them  the  poison  which  had  gone  through  their  frames  ;  and  it  was  hung 
up  there  on  the  banner-staff  as  a  trophy,  to  show  that  for  the  poison  there  was 
healing,  that  the  plague  had  been  overcome.  In  it  there  was  no  poison — only  the 
likeness  of  it.  Now,  was  not  our  Lord  Jesus  made  in  the  likeness  of  sinful  flesh?  " 
The  bitten  Israelites  were  healed  by  looking  to  the  serpent  of  brass  ;  so  the  sinner 
is  saved  by  believing  in  Jesus  (Isa.  xlv.  22  ;  Psa.  xxxiv.  5).  Two  things  are  spe- 
lially  taugbt  us  by  tbis  emblem  of  faith.  The  first  is,  that  the  object  of  faith  is  not 
anything  in  ourselves.  So  long  as  we  look  in,  we  can  see  nothing  to  give  us  hope 
or  happiness  ;  but  when  we  look  to  Jesus,  we  behold  in  Him  a  deliverer,  and  see  in 
His  righteousness  a  foundation  on  which  we  may  securely  rest.  The  eye  is  that 
which  "  takes  in  "  the  realities  of  the  external  world,  and  faith  is  that  which  "  takes 
in  "  the  truth  about  Christ.  It  is  the  receptive  faculty  of  the  soul ;  and  when  by  it 
we  receive  and  rest  upon  Christ  for  our  salvation,  our  act  corresponds  in  spirit  to 
the  look  of  the  outward  eye  turned  by  the  suffering  Israelite  on  the  uplifted  serpent. 
Observe,  I  said,  when  we  receive  and  rest  on  Christ ;  and  this  resting  is  the  sacred 
thing  taught  us  by  this  emblem  of  faith.  "  I  will  look  to  you,  then,  to  arrange  all 
that,"  said  one  friend  to  another,  at  the  close  of  a  business  conference ;  and  that 
trustfulness  which  he  expressed  in  the  honour  of  his  friend  is  of  the  same  kind  as 
the  restful  confidence  which  the  believer  has  in  his  Lord.  III.  But  who  may  look? 
"  Every  one  that  is  bitten."  There  you  might  see  the  man  all  but  dead,  raising 
himself  upon  his  arm,  and  straining  his  glazed  eyes  if  haply  he  might  behold  the 
glittering  symbol ;  yonder  another,  wiping  away  his  tears  of  anguish  to  look  upon 
the  glorious  object ;  and  yonder  still,  a  mother  with  her  child,  eagerly  pointing  to 
the  flagstaff,  if  perchance  she  may  fix  her  loved  one's  gaze  upon  the  mystic  healer. 
But  no  one  would  be  tempted  to  ask,  will  it  heal  me  ?  for  he  would  reason  thus :  it 
y^will  cure  any  bitten  one  that  looks,  and  therefore  me.  So  "  there  is  life  for  a  look 
at  the  crucified  One,"  for  "  whosoever  believeth."  (W.  M.  Taylor,  D.D.)  Lift- 
ing up  the  I'irazen  serpent: — I.  The  person  in  mortal  peril  for  whom  the  brazen 
serpent  was  made  and  lifted  up.  Our  text  saith,  "It  came  to  pass  that  if  a 
serpent  had  bitten  any  man,  when  he  beheld  the  serpent  of  brass,  he  lived."  1.  The 
fiery  serpents  first  of  all  came  among  the  people  because  they  had  despised  God's 
way  and  God's  bread.  "  The  soul  of  the  people  was  much  discouraged  because  of 
the  way."  As  an  old  divine  says,  "  It  was  lonesome  and  longsome,"  but  still  it  was 
God's  way,  and  therefore  it  ought  not  to  have  been  loatlisome  :  His  pillar  of  fire 
and  cloud  went  before  them,  and  His  servants  Moses  and  Aaron  led  them  like  a 
flock,  and  they  ought  to  have  followed  cheerfully.  This  is  one  of  the  great  standing 
follies  of  men  ;  they  cannot  be  content  to  wait  on  the  Lord  and  keep  His  way,  but 
they  prefer  a  will  and  way  of  their  own.  2.  The  people,  also,  quarrelled  with  God's 
food.  He  gave  them  the  best  of  the  best,  for  "  men  did  eat  angels'  food  "  ;  but  they 
called  the  manna  by  an  opprobrious  title,  as  if  they  thought  it  uusubstantial,  and 
only  fitted  to  puff  them  out,  because  it  was  easy  of  digestion,  and  did  not  breed  in 
them  that  heat  of  blood  and  temiency  to  disease  which  a  heavier  diet  would  have 
brought  with  it.  Being  discontented  with  their  God  they  quarrelled  with  the  bread 
which  He  set  upon  their  table,  though  it  suri^assed  any  that  mortal  man  has  ever 
eaten  before  or  since.  This  is  another  of  man's  follies  ;  his  heart  refuses  to  feed 
upon  God's  Word  or  believe  God's  truth.  He  craves  for  the  flesh-meat  of  carnal 
reason,  the  leeks  and  the  garlic  of  superstitious  tradition,  and  the  cucumbers  of 
speculation  ;  he  cannot  bring  his  mind  down  to  believe  the  Word  of  God,  or  to 
/accept  truth  so  simple,  so  fitted  to  the  capacity  of  a  child.  3.  Observe  concerning 
those  persons  for  whom  the  brazen  serpent  was  specially  lifted  up  that  they  had 
been  actually  bitten  by  the  serpents.  The  Lord  sent  fiery  serpents  among  tliem,but 
it  was  not  the  serpents  being  among  them  that  involved  the  lifting  up  of  a  brazen 
serpent,  it  was  the  serpents  having  actually  poisoned  them  which  led  to  the  provision 
of  a  remedy.  "  It  shall  come  to  pass  that  every  one  that  is  idtten,  when  he  looketh 
upon  it,  shall  live."  God's  medicine  is  for  the  sick,  and  His  healing  is  for  the  dis- 
eased. The  grace  of  God  through  the  atonement  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  for 
men  who  are  actually  and  really  guilty.  What  an  awful  thing  it  is  to  be  bitten  by 
a  serpent !  I  dare  say  some  of  you  recollect  the  case  of  Gurling,  one  of  the  keepers 
of  the  reptiles  in  the  Zoological  Gardens.  It  happened  in  October,  1852.  This 
unhappy  man  was  about  to  part  with  a  friend  woo  was  going  to  Australia,  and 
according  to  the  wont  of  many  he  must  needs  drink  with  him.  He  drank  consider- 
able quantities  of  gin,  and  though  he  would  probably  have  been  in  a  great  passion 


CHAP.  XXI.]  NUMBERS.  22^ 

if  any  one  had  called  him  drunk,  yet  reason  and  common-sense  had  evidently 
become  overpowered.  He  went  back  to  his  post  at  the  gardens  in  an  excited  state. 
He  had  some  months  before  seen  an  exhibition  of  snake-charming,  and  this  was  on 
his  poor  muddled  brain.  He  must  emulate  the  Egyptians,  and  play  with  serpents. 
First  he  took  out  of  its  cage  a  Morocco  venom-snake,  put  it  round  his  neck,  twisted 
it  about,  and  whirled  it  round  about  him.  Happily  for  him  it  did  not  arouse  itself 
80  as  to  bite.  The  assistant-keeper  cried  out,  "  For  God's  sake  put  back  the  snake  !  " 
but  the  foolish  man  replied,  "  I  am  inspired."  Putting  back  the  venom-snake,  he 
exclaimed,  "  Now  for  the  cobra."  This  deadly  serpent  was  somewhat  torpid  with  the 
cold  of  the  previous  night,  and  therefore  the  rash  man  placed  it  in  his  bosom  till  it 
revived,  and  glided  downward  till  its  head  appeared  below  the  back  of  his  waistcoat. 
'  He  took  it  by  the  body,  about  a  foot  from  the  head,  and  then  seized  it  lower  down 
by  the  other  hand,  intending  to  hold  it  by  the  tail  and  swing  it  round  his  head.  He 
held  it  for  an  instant  opposite  to  bis  face,  and  like  a  flash  of  lightning  the  serpent 
struck  him  between  the  eyes.  The  blood  streamed  down  his  face,  and  he  call?  I  for 
help,  but  his  companion  fled  in  horror ;  and,  as  he  tcdd  the  jury,  he  did  not  know 
how  long  he  was  gone,  for  he  was  "  in  a  maze."  When  assistance  arrived  Gurling 
was  sitting  on  a  chair,  having  restored  the  cobra  to  its  place.  He  said,  "  I  am  a 
dead  man."  They  put  him  in  a  cab,  and  took  him  to  the  hospital.  First  his 
speech  went,  he  could  only  point  to  his  poor  throat  and  moan  :  then  his  vision  failed 
him,  and  lastly  his  hearing.  His  pulse  gradually  sank,  and  in  oae  hour  from  the 
time  at  which  he  had  been  struck  he  was  a  corpse.  There  was  only  a  little  mark 
upon  the  bridge  of  his  nose,  but  the  poison  spread  over  the  body,  and  he  was  a  dead 
man.  I  tell  you  that  story  tiiat  you  may  use  it  as  a  parable  and  learn  never  to  play 
with  sin,  and  also  in  order  to  bring  vividly  before  you  what  it  is  to  be  bitten  by  a 
serpent.  Suppose  that  Gurling  could  have  been  cured  by  looking  at  a  piece  of  brass, 
would  it  not  have  heen  good  news  for  him  ?  There  was  no  remedy  for  that  poor 
infatuated  creature,  but  there  is  a  remedy  for  you.  For  men  who  have  been  bitten 
by  the  fiery  serpents  of  sin  Jesus  Christ  is  lifted  up  :  not  for  you  only  who 
are  as  yet  playing  with  the  serpent,  not  for  you  only  who  have  wanned  it  in  your 
bosom,  and  felt  it  creeping  over  your  flesh,  but  for  you  who  are  actually  bitten,  and 
are  mortally  wounded.  4.  The  bite  of  the  serpent  was  painful.  We  are  told  in  the 
text  that  these  serpents  were  "fiery"  serpents,  which  may  perhaps  refer  to  their 
colour,  but  more  probably  has  reference  to  the  burning  effects  of  their  venom.  It 
inflamed  the  blood  so  that  every  vein  became  a  boiling  river,  swollen  with  anguish. 
In  some  men  that  poison  of  asps  which  we  call  sin  has  inflamed  their  minds.  They 
are  restless,  discontented,  and  full  of  fear  and  anguish.  Jesus  died  for  such  as  are 
at  their  wits'  end :  for  such  as  cannot  think  straight,  for  those  who  are  tumbled  up 
and  down  in  their  minds,  for  those  who  are  condemned  already.  What  a  comfortable 
thing  that  we  are  able  ti  tell  you  this  !  5.  The  bite  of  these  serpents  was,  as  I  have 
told  you,  mortal.  The  Israelites  could  have  no  question  about  that,  because  in  their 
own  presence  "  much  pe  pie  of  Israel  died."  Now,  we  know  that  many  have 
perished  as  the  result  of  sin.  We  are  not  in  doubt  as  to  what  sin  will  do,  for  we  are 
told  by  the  infallible  Word,  that  "  the  washes  of  sin  is  death,"  and,  yet  again,  "  Sin, 
when  it  is  finished,  bringeth  forth  death."  We  know,  also,  that  ihis  dea  h  is  endless 
misery,  "where  their  worm  clieth  not,  and  their  fire  is  not  quenched."  We  believe 
in  what  the  Lord  has  said  in  all  its  solemnity  of  dread,  and,  knowing  the  terrors  of 
the  Lord,  we  persuade  men  to  escape  therefrom.  6.  There  is  no  limit  set  to  the  / 
stage  of  poisoning  :  however  far  gone,  the  remedy  still  had  power.  II.  The  remedy**^ 
PROVIDED  FOR  HIM.  This  was  as  singular  as  it  was  effectual.  1.  It  was  purely  of 
Divine  origin,  and  it  is  clear  thut  the  invention  of  it,  and  the  putting  of  power  into 
it,  was  entirely  of  God.  Snail  the  bite  of  a  serpent  be  cured  by  looking  at  a  serpent  ? 
Shall  that  which  brings  death  also  bring  life  ?  But  herein  lay  the  excellency  of  the 
remedy,  that  it  was  of  Divine  origin ;  for  when  God  ordains  a  cure  He  is  by  that  very 
fact  bound  to  put  potency  into  it.  He  will  not  devise  a  failure,  nor  prescribe  a 
mockery.  2.  This  particular  remedy  of  a  serpent  lifted  on  a  pole  was  exceedingly 
instructive,  though  I  do  not  suppose  that  Israel  understood  it.  We  have  been  taught 
by  our  Lord  and  know  the  meaning.  It  was  a  serpent  impaled  upon  a  pole. 
Wonder  of  wonders  that  our  Lord  Jesus  should  condescend  to  be  s\mbolised  by  a  / 

dead  serpent.     The  brazen  serpent  had  no  venom  of  itself , -but  it  took  the  form  of  a  /  V  v 
fiery  serpent.     Christ  is  no  sinner,  and  in  Him  is  no  sin.     But  the  brazen  serpent 
was  in  the  form  of  a  serpent ;  and  so  was  Jesus  sent  forth  by  God  "  in  the  likeness 
of  sinful  flesh."     He  came  under  the  law,  and  sin  was  imputed  to  Him,  and  there- 
fore He  came  under  the  wrath  and  curse  of  God  for  our  sakes.    3.  Please  to  recollect 


224  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  Tchap.  xxi. 


that  in  all  the  camp  of  Israel  there  was  but  one  remedy  for  serpent-bite,  and  that 
was  the  brazen  serpent ;  and  there  was  but  one  brazen  serpent,  not  two.  Israel 
might  not  make  another.     If  they  had  made  a  second,  it  would  have  had  no  effect. 

V  There  is  one  Saviour,  and  only  one.  There  is  none  other  name  given  undt- r  heaven 
among  men  whereby  we  must  be  saved.  Oh,  sinner,  look  to  Jesus  on  the  Cross,  for 
He  is  the  one  remedy  for  all  forms  of  sin's  poisoned  wounds.  4.  Tliere  was  but  one 
healing  serpent,  and  that  one  was  bright  and  lustrous.  It  was  a  serpent  of  brass, 
and  brass  is  a  shining  metal.  This  was  newly-made  brass,  and  therefore  not 
dimmed,  and  whenever  the  sun  shone,  there  flashed  forth  a  brightness  from  this 
brazen  serpent.  It  might  have  been  a  serpent  of  wood  or  of  any  other  metal  if  God 
had  so  ordained  ;  but  He  commanded  that  it  must  be  of  brass,  that  it  might  have  a 
brightness  about  it.  What  a  brightness  there  is  about  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ!  If 
we  do  but  exhibit  Him  in  His  own  true  metal  He  is  lustrous  in  tbe  eyes  of  men.  5. 
Once  more,  this  remedy  was  an  enduring  one.  It  was  a  serpent  of  brass,  and  I  sup- 
pose it  remained  in  the  midst  of  the  camp  from  that  day  forward.  Had  it  been 
made  of  other  materials  it  might  have  been  broken,  or  have  decayed,  but  a  serpent 
of  brass  would  last  as  long  as  fiery  serpents  pestered  the  desert  camp.  As  long  as 
there  was  a  man  bitten  there  was  the  serpent  of  brass  to  heal  him.    What  a  comfort 

.  is  this,  that  Jesus  is  still  able  to  save  to  the  uttermost  all  that  come  to  God  by  Him, 

^  seeing  He  ever  liveth  to  make  intercession  for  them  !  III.  The  application  of  the 
REMEDY,  or  the  link  between  the  serpent-bitten  man  and  the  brass  serpent  which 
was  to  heal  him.  What  was  the  link?  1.  It  was  of  the  most  simple  kind  imagin- 
able. The  brazen  serpent  might  have  been,  if  God  had  so  ordered  it,  carried  into 
the  house  where  the  sick  man  was,  but  it  was  not  so.  It  might  have  been  applied 
to  him  by  rubbing  :  he  might  have  been  expected  to  repeat  a  certain  form  of  prayer, 
or  to  have  a  priest  present  to  perform  a  ceremony,  but  there  was  nothing  of 
the  kind ;  he  had  only  to  look.     It  was  well  that  the  cure  was  so  simple,  for  the 

"^danger  was  so  frequent.   There  is  life  in  a  look  at  Jesus  ;  is  not  this  simple  enough  ? 

2.  But  please  to  notice  how  very  personal  it  was.  A  man  could  not  be  cured  by  any- 
thing anybody  else  could  do  for  him.  If  he  had  been  bitten  by  the  serpent  and  had 
refused  to  look  to  the  serpent  of  brass,  and  had  gone  to  his  bed,  no  physician  could 
help  him.  A  pious  mother  might  kneel  down  and  pray  for  him,  but  it  would  be  of 
no  use.  Sisters  might  come  in  and  plead,  ministers  might  becahed  in  to  pray  that 
the  man  might  live  ;  but  he  must  die  despite  their  prayers  if  he  did  not  look.  It  is 
just  so  with  you.  Some  of  you  have  written  to  me  begging  me  to  pray  for  you  :  so 
I  have,  but  it  avails  nothing  unless  you  yourselves  believe  in  Jesus  Christ.  There 
is  nothing  in  His  death  to  save  you,  there  is  nothing  in  His  life  to  save  you,  unless 
you  will  trust  Him.     It  has  come  to  this,  you  must  look,  and  look  for  yourself. 

3.  And  then,  again,  it  is  very  instructive.  This  looking,  what  did  it  mean?  It 
/  , meant  this — self-help  must  be  abandoned,  and  God  must  be  trusted.  IV.  The  cuke 
I  M  EFFECTED.     "  When  he  beheld  the  serpent  of  brass,  he  lived."     1.  He  washealedat 

once.  He  had  not  to  wait  five  minutes,  nor  five  seconds.  It  is  done  like  a  flash  of 
lightning  ;  pardon  is  not  a  work  of  time.  Sanctificatiou  needs  a  lifetime,  but  justi- 
fication needs  no  more  than  a  moment.  Thou  believest,  thou  livest.  2.  This 
remedy  healed  again  and  again.  Very  possibly  after  a  man  had  been  healed  he 
might  go  back  to  his  work,  and  be  attacked  by  a  second  serpent,  for  there  were 
broods  of  them  about.  What  had  he  to  do?  Why,  to  look  again,  and  if  he  was 
wounded  a  thousand  times  he  must  look  a  thousand  times.  If  y^u  have  sin  on  your 
conscience,  look  to  Jesus.  The  healthiest  way  of  living  where  serpents  swarm  is 
never  to  take  your  eye  off  the  brazen  serpent  at  all.  3.  This  cure  was  of  universal 
efficacy  to  all  who  used  it.  V.  A  lesson  for  those  who  love  their  Lord.  What 
ought  we  to  do  ?  We  should  imitate  Moses,  whose  business  it  was  to  set  the 
brazen  serpent  upon  a  pole.  It  is  your  business  and  mine  to  lift  up  the  gospel  of 
Christ  Jesus,  so  that  all  may  see  it.  Publish  Christ  and  His  salvation.  He  was 
never  meant  to  be  treated  as  a  curiosity  in  a  museum ;  He  is  intended  to  be 
exhibited  in  the  highways,  that  those  who  are  sin-bitten  may  look  a'  Him.  "But 
I  have  no  proper  pole,"  says  one.  The  best  sort  of  pole  to  exhibit  Christ  upon  is  a 
high  one,  so  that  He  may  be  seen  the  further.  Exalt  Jesus.  Speak  wi  11  of  His  name. 
I  do  not  knov/  any  other  virtue  that  there  can  be  in  the  pole  but  its  height.  The 
more  you  can  speak  in  your  Lord's  praise,  the  higher  you  can  lift  Him  up,  the 
better ;  but  for  all  other  styles  of  speech  there  is  nothing  to  be  s  -id.  Do  lift  Christ 
up.  "  Oh,"  says  one,  "  but  I  have  not  a  long  standard."  Then  lift  Him  up  on  such 
as  you  have,  for  there  are  short  people  about  who  will  be  able  to  see  by  your  means. 
I  think  I  told  you  once  of  a  picture  which.  I  saw  of  the  brazen  seipent.    I  want  the 


cnAP.  XXI.]  NUMBERS.  225 

Sunday-school  teachers  to  listen  to  this.  The  artist  represented  all  sorts  of  people 
clustering  round  the  pole,  and  as  they  looked  the  horrible  snakes  dropped  off  their 
arms,  and  they  lived.  There  was  such  a  crowd  around  the  pole  that  a  mother  could 
not  get  near  it.  She  carried  a  little  babe,  which  a  serpent  had  bitten.  You  could 
see  the  blue  mai'ks  of  the  venom.  As  she  could  get  no  nearer,  the  mother  held  her 
child  aloft,  and  turned  its  little  head  that  it  might  gaze  with  its  infant  eye  upon  the 
brazen  serpent  and  live.  Do  this  with  your  little  children,  you  Sunday-school 
teachers.  Even  while  they  are  yel  little,  pray  that  they  may  look  to  Jesus  Christ 
and  live;  for  there  is  no  bound  set  to  their  age.  Old  men  snake-bitten  came 
hobbling  on  their  crutches.  "  Eighty  years  old  am  I,"  saith  one,  "  but  I  have  looked 
to  the  brazen  serpent,  and  I  am  healed."  Little  boys  were  brought  out  by  their 
mothers,  though  as  yet  they  could  hardly  speak  plainly,  and  they  cried  in  child 
language,  "  I  look  at  tbe  great  snake  and  it  bless  me."  All  ranks,  and  sexes,  and 
characters,  and  dis|iositions  looked  and  lived.  Who  will  look  to  Jesus  at  this  good 
hour?  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  cure  for  the  malady  of  sin: — Observe  analogy  -/ 
between  cure  for  serpent's  bite  narrated  here,  and  cure  for  malady  of  sin.  I. 
Occasion  for  cure.  Bitten.  Sinned.  II.  Origin  op  remedy.  God's  grace. 
III.  Application  of  remedy.  Serpent  lifted  up.  Christ.  (W.  Ormiston,  D.D.) 
The  brazen  serpent ; — 1.  As  it  seemed  to  human  wisdom  a  most  foolish  thing 
to  be  healed  by  the  bare  and  only  sight  of  a  brazen  serpent,  so  to  all  natural 
wise  men  of  the  world  it  seemeth  as  unlikely  and  unreasonable  that  any  should  be 
saved  by  faith  in  Christ  crucified.  2.  Seeing  the  serpent  was  a  sif^n  of  Christ,  we 
learn  that  Christ  was  preached  and  published  in  the  time  of  the  law,  albeit  darkly 
and  obscurely.  For  as  there  is  but  one  salvation,  so  there  is  but  one  way  to  attain 
unto  it ;  to  wit,  faith  in  Christ.  3.  In  this  type  we  see  the  nature  of  the  sacraments. 
The  brazen  serpent  in  itself  had  no  operation  to  work  anything  ;  it  had  no  virtue  to 
cure  or  recover  any  m:in  of  any  disease.  The  sacraments  of  themselves  cannot  confer 
grace,  only  they  are  instruments  of  God's  mercies,  which  He  useth  of  His  goodness 
toward  us  to  convey  to  us  good  things.  4.  This  present  tyi^e  toachelh  us  that  we 
are  justified  by  faith  alone,  without  the  works  of  the  law.  For  as  the  Israelites  stung 
of  these  serpents  were  cured,  so  are  we  saved;  as  health  was  offered  by  tl)e  serpent, 
so  is  salvation  by  Ch:  i-t.  But  the  Israelites  did  nothing  at  all,  but  only  look  up  to  the 
brazen  serpent ;  they  were  not  called  to  make  satisfaction  for  their  rebellion,  or  to 
go  on  pilgrimage,  nor  so  much  as  to  dress  and  bind  up  theh'  wounds,  but  only  to 
behold  the  serpent  set  upon  the  pole.  There  is  required  nothing  of  us  touching 
our  justification  and  salvation  but  to  fix  the  eyes  of  our  faith  upon  Christ.  True  it 
is.  many  otiier  virtues  and  graces  are  required  to  make  up  the  lull  perfection  of  a 
Christian  man,  that  he  may  be  complete,  wanting  nothin;^ ;  yet  he  is  justified,  and 
dotb  stind  as  righteous  in  the  sight  of  God  by  faith  only.  5.  Great  consolation 
ariseth  from  this  similitude  to  all  such  as  are  weak  in  faith  and  feel  the  corruptions 
of  their  hearts  press  ng  them,  and  the  temptations  of  Satan  often  overcoming  them. 
For  we  have  great  c  mfurt  given  us  to  fight  the  enemies  of  our  souls  by  consideration 
of  these  fierce  and  fiery  serpents.  True  it  is  they  did  continually  bite  and  sting  the 
children  of  Israel ;  yet  they  could  not  destroy  them,  for  they  had  a  remedy  at  hand 
to  help  themselves.  So  hath  God  restrained  the  rage  of  all  the  enemies  of  our  peace 
and  salvation.  For  howsoever  the  devil  and  his  angels  are  always  tempting,  their 
strength  is  diminished,  their  will  to  hurt  is  greater  than  their  power  of  hurting, 
so  that  they  cannot  execute  the  cruelty  tliey  desire.  6.  Again,  note  that  God 
requireth  not  of  the  Israelites  stung  in  the  wilderness  the  use  of  both  eyes,  nor 
exacteth  a  perfect  sight  to  behold  the  serpent.  Such  as  looked  upon  it  with  a  weak 
and  dim  sight,  even  with  half  an  eye  only,  there  being  among  them  young  and  old, 
strong  and  weak,  sharp-sighted  and  blear-eyed;  yet  all  that  saw  the  serp  nt  set  up 
were  cured,  not  for  the  goodness  of  their  sight,  but  for  the  promise  and  ordinance  of 
God.  So  such  as  huve  a  true  faith,  though  it  be  as  a  grain  of  mustaid-seed,  which 
is  the  least  of  all  seeds,  can  lay  hold  on  Christ  and  apply  Him  to  themselves.  A 
small  drop  of  water  is  as  well  and  truly  water  as  the  whole  ocean  sea  ;  a  little  spark 
is  true  fire  as  well  as  a  mighty  flame ;  a  little  quantity  of  earth  is  as  truly  earth  as 
the  whole  globe  tlicreof.  So  a  small  measure  of  faith  is  as  well  true  faith  as  a  full 
persuasion  and  assurance,  and  the  gates  of  hell  shall  never  prevail  against  it.  7. 
Lastly,  this  te^cheth  us  what  is  the  nature  and  property  of  a  tiue  justifying  faith, 
and  wherein  it  consi«leth,  namely,  in  a  special  and  particular  application  of  Christ's 
righteousness  to  our  own  selves.  It  was  not  enough  for  these  Israelites  which  were 
stung  that  others  should  look  upon  the  serpent  set  up,  but  it  was  required  of  every 

15 


2C3  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLfSTEATOn.  [chap.  xxi. 

one  (to  work  the  cure)  to  behold  it  himself.     So  must  we  have  a  particular  faith  in 
Christ,  apprehending  His  merits.     (IF.  Attersoll.) 

Vers.  16-20.  Spring  up,  0  well. — A  song  of  the  pilgrimnge  : — I.  The  needs  op 
HUMAN  piLGEiMAGE.     1.  How  indispensable  are  the  things  which  we  need.     2.  How 
many  are  the  things  which  we  need.     3.  How  constant  are  our  needs.     We  may 
change  our  place  and  our  circumstances,   but   we  never  change  our  dependent 
condition.     II.  The  Divine  provision  for  the  needs  of  human  pilgrimage.     1. 
Promised  by  God.     2.  Bestowed  in  connection  with  human  effort.     3.  Enliindled 
human  joy,  which  was  expressed  in  this  song.     4.  Suitably  commemorated.     Let 
us  be  eager  to  perpetuate  the  memory  of  our  mercies.     III.  The  continuousness  of 
HUMAN  pilgkimage.     The  well  was  not  the  goal :  a  place  to  halt,  but  not  to  settle. 
{W.  Jones.)         A  sovg  at  the  well-head  : — I.  These  people  required  water  as  we 
greatly  need  grace,  and  there  was  a  promise  given  concerning  the  supply.     "  The 
Lord  spake  unto  Moses,  Gather  the  people  together,  and  I  will  give  them  water." 
^eloved,  we  have  a  promise.      A  promise  ?  nay,  a  thousand  promises !     God's 
people  were  never  in  any  plight  whatever  but  what  there  was  a  promise  to  meet 
that  condition.     1.  The  supply  promised  here  was  a  Divine  supply :  "  I  will  give 
them  water."   "Who  else  could  satisfy  those  flocks  and  herds  ?    By  what  mechanism 
or  by  what  human  toil  could  all  those  multitudes  of  people  have  received  enough  to 
drink  ?     God  can  do  it,  and  He  will.     The  supply  of  grace  that  you  are  to  receive 
in  your  time  of  need  is  a  Divine  supply.     You  are  not  to  look  to  man  for  grace. 
2.  As   it  was  a  Divine  supply,  so  also  it  was  a  suitable  one.      The  people  were 
thirsty,  and  the  promise  was,  "  I  will  give  them  water."     What  dost  thou  want  ?  < 
Go  and  lay  open  thy  needs  before  the  Lord.     Tell  Him  what  it  is  thou  requirest,  if 
thou  knowest,  and  then  add  to  thy  prayer,  "  And  what  I  know  not  that  I  need,  yet 
give  me,  for  Thou  art  able  to  do  exceeding  abundantly  above  all  that  I  can  ask  or 
even  think :  not  according  to  my  apprehension  of  my  necessities,  but  according  to 
Thy  perception  of  my  needs,  deal  with  Thy  servant,  O  Lord,  aud  grant  me  that 
which  is  most  suitable  to  my  case."     "  Gather  the  people  together,  and  I  will  give 
them  water."     3.  Observe,  too,  that  the  supply  promised  was  an  abundant  supply. 
No  child  of  God  shall  be  left  to  perish  for  want  of  the  necessary  supplies.     "  I  will 
give  them  water."    4.  As  it  was  a  Divine  supply,  a  suitable  supply,  and  an  abundant 
supply,  so  also  it  was  a  sure  supply.    "  I  will  give  them  water."     It  is  not,  "  I  may, 
perhaps,  do  it;  possibly  there  shall  be  refreshment  for  them";  but,  "I  will  give 
them  water."     "Oh!  the  splendour  of  the  Lord's  "  shalls  "  and  "  wills  "  1     They 
never  fail.     II.  Observe  the  song.     These  people  had  not  been  singing  for  years  ; 
ever  since  the  day  when  they  had  sung  at  the  lied  Sea,  "  Sing  unto  the  Lord,  for 
He  hath  triumphed  gloriously,"  the  minstrelsy  of  Israel  had  been  hushed,  except 
when  they  danced  before  the  calf  of  gold ;  but  for  their  God  they  had  had  little  or 
no  music.  But  now  they  come  together  to  the  digging  of  the  well,  and  the  children  of 
Israel  sing  this  song,  "  Spring  up,  O  well ;  sing  ye  unto  it."     1.  This  song  may  be 
looked  upon  as  the  voice  of  cheerfulness.    There  was  no  water,  but  they  were  still  in 
good  spirits.    Supplies  were  short,  but  their  courage  was  still  great.    Cheerfulness  in 
want,  cheerfulness  upon  the  bed  of  pain,  cheerfulness  under  slandt-r,  singing,  like 
the  nightingale,  in  the  night,  praising  God  when  the  thorn  is  at  the  breast,  this  is 
a  high  Christian  attainment,  which  we  should  seek  after,  and   not   be   content 
without.     2.  I  like,  too,  the  look  of  these  children  of  Israel,  singing  to  the  Lord 
before  the  water  came,  praising  Him  while  they  were  yet  thirsty,  living  for  a  little 
while  upon  the  recollections  of  the  past,  believing  that  He  who  smote  the  rock,  and 
the  waters  gushed  out,  and  who  gave  them  bread  from  heaven,  would  surely  supply 
their  needs.     Let  us  pitch  a  tune  and  join  with  them,  however  low  our  estate  may 
be.    3.  Note,  again,  that  this  song  was  the  voice  not  so  much  of  natural  cheerfulness 
as  of  cheerfulness  sustained  by  faith.     They  believed  the  proiiiise,  "  Gather  the 
people  together,  and  I  will  give  them  water."     They  sang  the  song  of  expectation. 
I  think  this  is  one  of  the  peculiar  enjoyments  of  faith,  to  be  the  substance  of  things 
hoped  for.     The  joy  of  hope,  who  shall  measure  it  ?     4.  This  song,  also,  was  no 
doubt  greatly  inci-eased  in  its  volume,  and  more  elevated  in  its  tone,  wlien  the  water 
did  begin  to  spiing.      After  the  elders  of  the  people  had  digged  for  awhile,  the 
flowing  crystal  began  to  leap  into  the  air  ;  they  saw  it  run  over  the  margin  of  the 
well,  the  multitude  pressed  around  to  quench  their  thirst,  and  then  they  sang, 
"  Spring  up,  0  well  1     Flow  on,  flow  on,  perennial  fount!     Flow  on,  ti  ou  wondrous 
stream  Divinely  given  !    Flow  on,  and  let  the  praises  of  those  who  diink,  flow  also  ! 
Sing  ye  unto  it,  and  ye  that  drink  lift  up  your  songs,  and  ye  that   mark  your 


CHAP.  XXI.]  NUMBSnS.  227 

neighbours  as  their  eyes  flash  with  delight  as  they  receive  the  needed  refreshment, 
let  your  song  increase  as  you  see  the  joy  of  others."  All  ye  who  have  receiveil 
anything  of  Divine  grace,  bing  ye  unto  it !  B'.ess  God  by  singing  and  praising  His 
name  while  you  are  receising  His  favours.  III.  The  song  was  a  prayek.  "  Spring 
up,  O  well,"  was  virtually  a  prayer  to  God  that  He  would  make  the  well  spring  up, 
only  it  was  faith's  way  of  siuging  her  prayer.  1.  We  would  remark  of  this  prayer, 
that  it  went  at  once  to  the  wurk,  and  sought  for  that  which  was  required.  What 
was  needed  ?  Not  a  well,  but  water ;  not  mere  digging  in  the  sand,  but  the 
obtaining  and  the  drinking  of  the  water.  Let  me  remind  you  that  it  is  very  easy 
for  us  to  forget  what  it  is  that  we  want,  and  to  be  satisfied  with  something  short  of 
■it.  Now,  what  we  need  is  not  the  means  of  grace,  but  the  grace  of  the  means. 
Strive  after  vital  godliness,  real  soul-work,  tlie  life-giving  operation  of  the  Spirit  of 
God  in  your  hearts,  or  else  you  may  have  the  well,  but  you  will  not  have  any 
sprhigings  thereh'om.  Eemember,  then,  it  went  direct  to  the  point.  2.  Notice, 
also,  that  this  prayer  was  the  prayer  of  faith,  like  the  song.  Now,  "  without 
faith  it  is  impossible  to  please  God  "  :  this  is  emphatically  true  with  regard  to 
prayer.  He  who  pleads  with  God  in  unbelief  really  insults  Him,  and  will  get  no 
blessing.  3.  Notice,  further,  that  it  was  united  prayer.  All  the  people  prayed, 
"  Spring  up,  0  \tell !  "  I  daresay  that  was  a  prayer-meeting  at  which  everybody 
prayed,  for  they  were  all  thirsty,  and  therefore  they  all  said,  "  Spring  up,  0  well!  " 
What  blessed  meetings  those  are  when  the  souls  of  all  present  are  in  it !  IV.  They 
began  with  a  promise  ;  they  turned  the  promise  into  a  song  and  into  a  prayer,  and 
they  did  not  stop  there,  but  then  they  went  to  work.  "  God  helps  them  that  help 
themselves,"  is  an  old  proverb,  and  it  is  true  with  God's  people  as  well  as  true  of 
Providence.  If  we  want  to  have  God's  blessing,  we  must  not  expect  to  receive  it  by 
lying  passive.  1.  When  God  intends  to  bless  a  people,  effort  is  always  esteemed 
to  be  honourable.  "  The  princes  digged  the  well,  the  nobles  of  the  people  digged 
it."  Thfy  were  not  aj^hamtd  of  the  work.  And  when  God  shall  bless  a  Church  and 
people,  they  must  all  feel  that  it  is  a  very  great  honour  to  do  anything  in  the 
service  of  God.  2.  But  it  was  also  effort  which  was  accomplished  by  very  feeble 
means.  They  digged  tlie  well,  and  they  digged  it  with  their  staves — not  very  fiist- 
class  tools.  Would  not  the  mattock  and  the  spade  have  beeu  better?  Ay,  but 
they  did  as  they  were  told.  They  digged  with  their  staves.  These,  I  suppose, 
were  simply  their  rods,  which,  like  the  sheiks  in  the  East,  they  carried  in 
their  hands  as  an  emblem  of  government,  somewhat  siuiilar  to  the  crook  of 
the  shepherd.  These  they  used,  according  as  they  were  commanded.  Well,  we 
must  dig  with  our  staves.  We  must  dig  as  we  can.  We  must  use  what  abilities 
we  have.  3.  It  was  effort  in  God's  order.  They  digged  the  well  "by  the  direction 
of  the  lawgiver."  We  must  not  serve  God  according  to  our  fancies.  Let  us  keep 
close  to  the  good  old  paths  which  are  laid  down  in  Holy  Writ,  and,  digging  th:^ 
well,  we  shall  get  the  water.  4.  It  was  effort  made  in  faith.  They  digged  the  well, 
but  as  they  digged  it  they  felt  so  certain  that  the  water  would  come  that  they  sang 
at  the  work,  "  Spring  up,  0  well !  "  This  is  the  true  way  to  work  if  we  would  get 
a  blessing.  We  must  preach  in  faith,  believing  that  the  Word  cannot  return  unto 
our  Master  void.  We  must  teach  in  the  Sabbath-school  in  faith,  believing  that  the 
children  will  be  led  to  seek  Christ  early,  and  to  find  Him.  We  must  distribute  the 
tiMct  in  faith,  believing  that  if  we  cast  our  bread  upon  the  waters,  we  shall  find  it 
after  many  da^  s.  You  must  take  caie  that  you  have  this  faith.  (C.  H.  Spuriieon.) 
The  sniifi  at  the  well : — I.  The  well  of  salvation  choked  up  with  rubbish  of 
superstition  and  ignorance,  technical  theologies,  dry  dissertations,  dojinatic 
controversies,  &c.  II.'  The  well  of  salvation  cleared  out.  A  princely  and 
noble  work.  III.  The  work  op  opening  up  the  well  of  salvation  to  mek 
SHOULD  be  done  WITH  joYi'ULNKSS.  (Hom.  BloiitJilii.)  The  song  of  the  uell : — 
What  is  celebrated  with  such  sparkling  joy  in  this  little  burst  of  melody  is  the 
happy  union  among  all  ranks,  and  the  spirit  of  universal  goodwill  and  co-operation 
in  the  work — giving  cheerful  augury  for  the  future  of  the  tribes  in  entering  on  the 
promised  land,  and  a  lively  demonsttalion  of  popular  confidence  in  their  had' is. 
1.  There  is  a  personal  lesson  resiiecting  the  spirit  in  which  we  ought  to  do  our 
work.  When  the  people  were  railed  to  bore  for  water  in  a  novel  fusliion,  liovv 
inspiriting  it  is  to  read,  "  Then  Israel  sang  this  song  !  "  This  lightened  their  toil, 
and  helped  to  prosper  the  issue.  Thank  God,  "  He  gives  us  songs  in  tlie  very 
night."  Let  us  remember  how  our  Lord  Himself,  on  the  eve  of  His  betrnyal,  and 
in  fall  view  of  the  bitter  Cross,  alleviated  His  sorrows  and  braced  His  spirit  for  the 
task — "  He  sang  a  h^mn."     What  a  lesson  for  this  woik-a-day  world,  when  nothing 


;28  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxi. 


worth  doing  can  be  andertaken  without  something  being  endured!  But  "a 
cheerful  heart  doeth  good  like  a  medicine."  And  singing  is  infectious.  They  sang 
the  song,  and  they  digged  the  well.  So  work,  and  so  sing.  2.  A  social  lesson — the 
blessings  of  united  effort.  We  are  to  mark  how  zealously  all  ranks  joined  in  the 
work,  and  how  "  the  leaders  led  in  Israel."  When  Isiael  thus  laboured,  we  hear  of 
no  disorder.  Muru]uring3  were  stilled.  High  and  low  were  full  of  heart  and  full 
of  hope,  because  full  of  love.  3.  A  philanthropic  lesson — dig  a  well.  This  well 
became  a  lasting  blessing,  celebrated  in  immortal  song.  A  disciple  of  Mohammed, 
it  is  said,  came  to  the  prophet  one  day  and  asked,  "What  shall  I  best  do  as  a 
memorial  to  my  mother  who  is  dead  ?  "  to  which  he  replied,  "  Dig  a  well,  and  call 
it  by  her  name,  and  put  upon  it,  '  This  well  is  for  my  mother.'  "  Beautiful  idea !  a 
monument  truly  serviceable,  and  therefore  sure  to  last.  Some  memories  are  "  writ 
in  water,"  but  here  a  mother's  name  is  blissfully  perpetuated  in  supplying  the  pure 
refreshing  draught  to  weary  wayfarers.  This  form  of  good  endures  like  "  a  joy  for 
ever,"  trickling  down  from  age  to  age.  "  Dig  a  well."  Whoso  giveth  a  cup  of  cold 
water  shall  in  no  wise  lose  his  reward.  4.  A  spiritual  lesson.  "  Gather  the  people 
to  Me ;  I  will  give  them  water."  The  point  here  emphasised  is  the  connectiou 
between  promise,  preparation,  and  prayer,  if  we  would  win  the  privilege  of  drawing 
water  with  joy  from  the  wells  of  salvation.  (A.  H.  Drysdale,  M.A.)  'The  springing 
well: — This  rising  fountain  may  be  viewed  as  a  beautiful  emblem  of  the  springing 
up  of  grace  in  the  heart,  when  it  becomes  the  subject  of  the  life-giving  influences  of 
the  Holy  Spirit,  and  which  Christ  Himself  takes  occasion  to  illustrate  by  the  same 
kind  of  allusion,  v.hen  conversing  with  the  Samaritan  woniMU.  The  water  that  He 
will  give  to  them  that  ask  Him  is  admirably  descriptive  of  the  vitality,  purity,  and 
perpetuity  of  grace.  The  ministers  of  Christ,  as  these  princes  of  the  people,  at  the 
command  of  God,  and  under  the  superintendence  of  His  providence,  move  the 
ground,  where  the  water  of  life  springs  up  and  yields  the  purest  satisfaction,  and 
the  heart  becomes  as  if  itself  an  inward  source  of  good.  How  many  hearts, 
through  the  gift  of  Christ,  have  become  as  wells  of  living  water,  rising  fountains  of 
spiritual  thoughts,  and  of  heavenly  affections,  sweet  and  refreshing  !  It  was  under 
the  direction  of  His  providence,  and  the  influences  of  His  Spirit,  that  they  have 
become  so.  And  now,  it  is  only  for  time  to  bring  forth  His  eiernal  i)urpases,  and 
at  the  word  of  His  grace  the  result  will  be,  where  least  looked  for  or  thought  of,  as 
when  the  fountain  of  Beer,  not  before  known  of,  rose  at  the  command,  "  Spring  up, 
O  well!"  This  it  is  that,  seen  amidst  the  barren  wastes  of  nature,  delights  the 
eye  and  cheers  the  heart  of  every  Christian,  who  not  less  longs  and  prays  for 
the  life  of  souls,  and  the  communications  of  living  streams  from  Chiist,  than 
those  at  this  station  longed  fur  the  cooling  spring.     [W.  Seaton.) 

Vers.  21-35.  Sihon  would  not  suffer  Israel  to  pass. — The  wiched  hate  and  persecute 
the  godly  without  any  just  cause  : — This  is  the  practice  of  wicked  men  to  pursue 
the  children  of  God  with  all  despiteful  dealing,  albeit  they  offer  no  occasion  of  hurt 
unto  tliem.  Cain  ;  Joseph's  brethren,  &c.  The  reasons  are  very  plain.  1.  For  it 
seemeth  unto  them  more  than  strange  that  the  faithful  are  not  brethren  with  them 
in  evil,  but  separate  themselves  from  them,  and  will  touch  no  unclean  thing.  This 
is  that  which  the  Apostle  Peter  witnesseth  (1  Pet.  iv.  4,  5).  But  it  is  better  for  us 
to  have  the  hatred  of  men  than  fail  in  any  part  of  our  duty  unto  God.  2.  No  marvel 
if  tl:e  wicked  hate  the  godly,  for  the  world  hateth  Christ.  Uses:  1.  We  may 
assure  ourselves  that  it  is  a  lamentable  condition  to  dwell  among  such  malicious  and 
mischievous  enemies.  2.  Seeing  this  is  the  entertaininent  that  we  must  look 
for  in  the  world,  it  behoves  us  to  live  in  unity  and  to  love  one  another  as  the 
children  of  the  Father  and  the  disciples  of  Christ.  3.  Seeing  hatred  lodgeth  in  the 
heart  of  a  wicked  man  toward  the  faithful,  it  is  our  duty  to  pray  to  God  to  be 
delivered  from  unreasona'ile  and  evil  men  (2  Thess.  iii.  2,  3).  This  David 
declarelh  (Psa.  xxxv.  12,  13,  15,  16,  17).  Thus  doth  God  wean  us  fi'om  the 
love  of  this  world,  that  we  should  long  after  His  kingdom,  where  is  fulness  of  joy 
for  evermore.  {W.  Attersoll.)  The  king's  highway: — I.  The  kino's  highway 
SHOULD  BE  A  PUBLIC  RO\D.  Royalty  ought  to  be  democracy  personified.  What  the 
king  holds  is  for  the  people's  use ;  what  he  does,  for  their  good.  II.  The  kino's 
HIGHWAY  should,  THEREFORE,  BE  FiiEE,  But,  alas !  what  king's  highway  is  free? 
There  are  taxes  and  hindrances,  and  some  are  not  allowed  to  pass  it  at  all.  National 
jealousies  and  pride  bar  the  national  highway.  III.  The  kino's  highway  being 
CLOSED,  INJURES  THOSE  WHO  CLOSE  IT.  1.  It  makes  enemies.  Tho^e  who  demand 
access  are  sore  at  the  refusal.    2.  It  does  not  accomplish   the  object  in   view. 


CHAi'.  xxii.]  NUMBERS.  229 

Those  who  wish  to  get  through,  find  other  ways  round.  3.  It  causes  loss.  The 
IsraeUtes  would  have  paid  for  all  they  required,  and  so  have  benefited  the 
Edomites.  IV.  There  is  one  king's  highway  which  is  fkee  to  all,  from  which 
none  are  turned  back,  which  is  free  from  toll  and  safe  from  foes.  This  is  that 
which  Clirist  has  opened,  and  which  leads  straight  to  the  throne  of  God.     (Hoiiiilist.) 

Vers.  32-35.  Og  the  king  of  Baahan  went  out  against  them. — War  ivith  the 
king  of  Banhan : — When  God  had  removed  oue  great  rub  out  of  Israel's  way  to 
Canaan,  namely,  Sihon,  king  of  Heshbon,  now  starts  up  another  7-eniora,  greater  (at 
least  in  person)  than  the  former,  namely,  Og  king  of  Bashan,  who  came  forth  to  war 
against  them  (chap.  xxi.  33-35),  but  more  largely  described  (Dent.  iii.  1-22), 
wuerein  God's  kindness  to  Israel  in  that  war  with  the  king  of  Baslian  is  amply 
characterised.  1.  The  occasion  of  the  war.  Og  came  forth  and  gave  the  first 
a-sanlt  against  Israel,  before  they  assaulted  him  or  his  people  (ver.  2),  together 
with  which  we  are  told  what  u  .ormidable  adversary  this  king  was,  being  a  man  of 
prodigious  stature,  wliereof  a  conjecture  may  easily  be  collected  from  the  vast  length 
of  his  bed  (ver.  11).  2.  The  management  of  this  war.  (1)  God  doth  encourage 
Israel  with  comfortable  words,  and  enabled  them  to  do  the  deed  in  conquering  the 
enemy  (vers.  2,  3).  (2)  Then  Israel  (thus  encour  .ged  and  enabled  by  the  Lord  of 
Hosts)  went  forth  in  the  strength  of  the  Lord  (Psa.  Ixxi.  IG),  and  smote  them, 
taking  all  their  cities  and  villages,  walled  and  uuwallcd,  and  their  whole  country, 
destroying  all  ages  and  sexes,  and  takmt;  the  s^joil  of  all  their  cattle  (vers.  4-10).  3. 
The  event  of  this  conquest,  which  was  the  consequence  of  the  victory,  namely,  the 
distribution  of  this  new  conquered  country  to  the  tribes  of  Keuben  and  Gad,  and  to 
the  half  tribe  of  Manasseh  (vers.  12-17),  and  the  terms  upon  which  this  country 
was  thus  distributed  to  those  tribes  (vers.  18-20),  which  happy  event  was  a  pledge 
for  encouraging  Joshua  to  be  confident  of  all  his  future  conquests  (vers.  21,  22). 
From  this  whole  history  arises  this  following,  namely,  when  one  evil  or  impediment 
in  our  way  to  heaven  is  removed,  God  often  p»-rmits  another  and  worse  lo  spring 
up  for  our  new  exercise  ;  as  it  was  here  with  Israel,  no  sooner  had  they  van  juished 
Sihon  (who  stood  in  their  way  to  Canaan),  but  immediately  Og  starts  up  to  make 
them  a  new  opposition.  His  formidable  stature  might  have  made  Israel  to  fly,  as 
after  Goliath  made  them,  for  want  of  faith  (1  Sam.  xvii.  24).  He  was  likely  one  of 
the  remnant  of  those  Rephaims,  or  giants,  whom  Chedorlaomer  and  his  company 
of  kings  smote  in  Ashteroth  (Gen.  xiv.  5,  with  Josh.  xiii.  12),  for  Og  reigned 
there.     (C.  Ness.) 


CHAPTER  XXII. 


Vers.  2-14.  Balak  .  .  .  sent  messengers  unto  Balaam. — Balak's  first  application 
to  Balaam ;  or,  man  and  the  supernatural : — -I.  Men  in  difficulty  seeking  super- 
NATORAL  help.  "  It  was  supposfd  that  prophets  and  sorcerers  had  a  power  to  curse 
persons  and  places  so  as  to  frustrate  their  counsels,  enervate  their  strength,  and  fill 
them  with  dismay."  1.  There  is  a  measure  of  truth  in  this.  Men  have  bad  power 
granted  them  to  curse  others  (Gen.  ix.  25 ;  Josh.  vi.  26  ;  2  Kings  ii,  24).  It  is 
probable  that  Balaam  had  this  power.  2.  Tliere  is  much  error  in  the  views  under 
consideration.  No  man  can  curse  those  whom  God  hath  bb  ssed.  II.  Man 
coNSciocs  OF  supernatural  powers  and  of  his  subjection  to  Divine  authority  in 
THE  USE  of  THfcii.  Balaam  was  certainly  not  altogether  an  impostor.  "  In  his 
career,"  says  Dean  Stanley,  "is  seen  that  recognition  of  Divine  inspiration  outside 
the  chosen  people  which  the  narrowness  of  modern  times  has  be  n  so  eager  to 
deny,  but  which  the  Scriptures  are  always  ready  to  acknowledge,  and,  by  acknow- 
ledging, admit  within  the  pale  of  the  teachers  of  the  Universal  Church  the  higher 
spirits  of  every  age  and  of  every  nation."  But  notice — 1.  His  consciousness  of 
great  powers.  2.  His  consciousness  of  subjection  to  God  in  the  use  of  his  powers. 
3.  His  sin  against  God.  III.  Man  ri=:ceiving  a  supernatural  visitation.  1.  God's 
access  to  man's  mind.  2.  God's  interest  in  man's  life.  3.  God's  authority  over 
man's  life.  IV.  Man  dealing  unfaithfully  with  a  Divine  communication.  Balaam 
belonged  to  that  still  numerous  class  who  theoretically  know  God,  and  who  actu- 
ally do  fear  Him,  but  whose  love  and  fear  of  God  are  uot  the  governing  principles 
of  their  minds.     They  are  convinced,  but  not  converted.     They  would  serve  God,  i 


230  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxrr. 

but  they  must  serve  mammon  also  ;    and  in  the  strife  between  the  two  contendinfj 
influences   their   hves   are   maele   bitter,   and   their   death  is   j^eii'ous.     V.    Men 
DEALING  UNFAiTHFDLLT  AS  MESSENGERS.     Leani — 1.    Tlie   Diviue   communications 
have  never  been  hmited  to  any  one  people,  or  country,  or  age.     2.  Great  goodness 
is  not  always  associated  with  great  gifts.     "  The  illumination  of  the  mind  is  by  na 
means  necessarily  associated  with  the  conversion  of  the  lieart."     3.  Great   gifts 
involve  great  responsibility  and  grave  peril.     4.  The  temptation  to  covetousness  is 
of  great  subtlety  and  strength,  and  assails  even  the  most  gifted  natures  (Luke  xii. 
15-21).     (W.  Jones.)         Balak's  motives  in  sending  for  Balaam  : — The  first  motive 
is  fear,  yet  in  Deut.  ii.  God  forbade  them  to  meddle  with  Moab,  and  thereu(ion  they 
were  driven  to  compass  about  to  their  great  troulile.     But  this  is  the  just  juflgmeut 
of  God  upon  them  that  have  not  their  peace  made  with  Him,  to  be  vexed  in  their 
minds  with  unnecessary  fears  (Lev.  xxvi.  36  ;   Deut.  xxviii.  65,  &c.).     You  see  how 
small  a  noise  will  startle  thieves  and  other  malefactors.     Whereupon  it  is  said.  Oh, 
wickedness,  ever  fearful.     These  are  they  that  tremble  at  every  crack  of  thunder. 
Their  conscience  is  a  continual  scourge  to  them.     The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  strength 
to  the  upright  man,  but  fear  shall  be  for  the  workers  of  iniquity,  saith  Solomon.     2. 
The  second  motive  is  envy.    They  were  their  kindred,  and  they  should  have  rejoiced, 
turned  to  them,  and  by  common  prayer  sought  the  appeasing  of  God.     But  bitter 
envy  seeing  God's  favour  to  them,  and  mighty  power  among  them,  desireth  ratber 
their  overthrow  and  confusion.     They  are  motes  in  their  eyes,  rather  than  comforts 
to  their  hearts.     3.  A  third  motive  was  suspicion.     Balak,  king  of  the  Mo:ibites, 
suspecteth  this  and  that,  according  to  his  own  fancy,  and  these  imnginations  and 
suspicions  are  as  grand  truths  to  him,  making  hin:^cast  this  way  and  that  to  meet 
with  imagined  danger,  and  among  other  ways  to  resolve  of  sending  for  the  sooth- 
sayer, or  sorcerer,  Balaam.     Oh,  susiiicion,  what  a  mischief  is  it  amongst  men ! 
Every  man  thinks  his  suspicion  to  be  knowledge  or  little  less.     How  many  can  you 
name  that  have  given  place  to  suspicion,  and  have  not  given  place  to  error  ?     Yet 
it  hurteth  no  man  more  than  him  that  hath  it,  whose  inwards  it  tormentcth,  whose 
sleep  it  driveth  away,  whose  body  it  alters,  and  consumeth  the  heart  to  very  powder 
iti  the  end.     4.  A  fourth  motive  to  this  sending  for  Balaam  was  Satan's  subtlety 
working  in  Balak  to  take  that  course:  for  it  may  be  observed  often,  that  when 
Satan   seeth   open   fury   will   not   serve,   then  he   directeth  to  wiles   and  guiles, 
piecing  out  the  lion's  skin  that  is  too  short  with  the  fox's  tail.      [Bp.  Bahiuijton.) 
Balak  and  Balaam: — The  Israelites,  toughened  physically  and  morally  by  their 
long  sojourn  in  the  desert,  and  now  well  consolidated  into  a  nation,  are  beginning 
to  emerge  from  their  southern  retreat,  and  to  betray  thoir  designs  upon  the  regions 
bordering  on  the  Jordan.     They  have  met  and  defeated  the  desert  tribes,  and  are 
row  threatening  Moab,  which  lies  in  their  way.     Balak,  king  of  Moab,  undertakes 
the  defence  of  his  territory,  and,  like  a  wise  general,  studies  and  adopts  the  tactics 
of  his  successful  eneiTiy.     He  has  learned  that  the  Israelites  are  led  by  Moses,  a 
prophet  of  Jehovah,  and  that  his  prayers  in  the  battle  against  Amalek  secured  the 
victory.     He  will  see  what  of  the  same  sort  he  can  do  on  liis  side.     Hundreds  of 
miles  away,  near  the  head  waters  of  the  Euphrates,  there  lived  another  prophet  of 
Jehovah,  whose  reputation  filled  the  whole  region.     It  does  not  concern  us  whether 
his  gifts  were  on  one  side  or  the  other  of  the  line  called  supernatural ;  whether  his 
sagacity  was  mert^ly  extraordinary  or  was  clarified  by  special.  Divine  light.     It  is 
enough  for  us  that  he  was  great,  keen  and  lofty  in  his  vision,  comprehensive  in  his 
judgment,  that  he  had  a  high  sense  of  his  prophetic  function,  and  was  at  first  a 
man  of  integrity.     Balak  sends  for  him.     The  Israelites  have  a  prophet;  he  will 
have  a  prophet.     He  sees  in  the  battles  hitherto  fought  a  weight  not  belonging  to 
the  battalions,  a  spiritual  force  that  won  the  victory  ;  he  will  employ  that  force  on 
his  side.     Moses  is  a  prophet  of  Jehovah  ;  his  proplict  also  shall  be  Jehovah's.     A 
very  shrewd  man  is  this  Balak.     Holding  to  the  Oriental  custom  of  devoting  an 
enemy  to  destruction  before  battle,  he  will  match  his  enemy  even  in  this  respect  as 
nearly  as  possible.     That  a  prophet  should  be  found  outside  the  Hebrew  nation  is 
simply  an  indication  that  God  has  witnesses  in  all  nations;  it  denies  the  theory 
that  would  confine  all  light  and  insjjiration  to  one  chosen  people.     That  Balaam 
comes  from  the  ancient  home  of  Abraham  hints  the  possibility  of  a  still  lingering 
monotheism  in  that  region.     Thouj^h  so  remote,  he  probably  knew  all  about  the 
Israelites:  their  history  from  the  patriarchs  down,  their  exodus  from  Egypt,  their 
religion,  their  developiuent  under  the  guiding  hand  of  Moses,  their  power  in  battle, 
and  the  resistless  enei'gy  with  which  they  were  slowly  moving  up  from  the  desei  t 
•with  their  eyes  on  the  rich  slopes  of  Palestine.     He  doubtless  knew  that  this  was 


CHAP,  xxii.]  NUMBERS.  231 

not  only  a  migration  of  a  detached  people,  such  as  was  now  often  occurriDg  in 
Asia,  but  a  migration  inspired  by  a  religion  somewhat  in  keepiug  with  his  own. 
These  Israelites  were  not  his  enemies,  and  he  could  not  readily  be  made  to  ticat 
them  as  such.     When  the  messengers  of  Balak  come  to  him  with  their  hands  full 
of  rewards,  asking  him  to  go  and  curse  Israel,  he  weighs  the  matter  well,  devotes  a 
whole  night  to  it,  carries  it  to  God  in  the  simplicity  of  a  good  conscience,  and 
refuses  to  go.     So  far  he  seems  a  true  man,  acting  from  considerations  of  mingled 
wisdom  and  inspiration.     The  messengers  retrace  their  long  journey,  but  Balak 
sends  again  by  more  honourable  men  and  doubtless  with  larger  gifts.     He  is  a 
shrewd  man,  and  knows  what  sort  of  a  thing  is  the  human  heart.     He  sends  not 
only  gifts,  but  promises  of  promotiou  to  great  honour,  and  all  by  the  hands  of 
princes — a  triple   temptation :  flattery,  riches,  place.     How  often   does  any  man 
resist  their  united  voice?     Often  enough  he  resists  one  of  them;  flattery  cannot 
seduce  him,  nor  money  buy  him,  nor  ambition  deflect  him,  but  when  all  unite — 
flattery  dropping  its  sweet  words  into  the  ear,  gold  glittering  before  the  eye,  and 
ambition  weaving  its  crown  before  the  imagination — who  stands  out  against  these 
when  they  unite  to  a  definite  end  ?     They  had  their  common  way  with  Balaam, 
but  not  at  once.     Such  men  do  not  go  headlong  and  wholly  over  to  the  bad  side  in 
■a  moment.     The  undoing  of  a  strong  character  is  something  like  its  upbuilding,  a 
process  of  time  and  degree.    (T.  T.  Munper.)         Tlw  seductive  spirit  of  the  world : — 
The  relative  position  of  the  world  to  the  kingdom  of  God  is  substantially  the  same 
as  that  of  Moab  and  Midian  to  Israel,  now  drawing  near.     The  same  enmity  still 
remains  in  the  world,  in  manifold  forms  ;  and  it  is  the  instinct  of  self-preservation 
which  incites  the  world  and  its  followers  to  do  their  utmost  against  the  coming  of 
God's  kingdom  among  them.     When  force  would  do  no  good,  then  they  resort  to 
cunning,  or  to  caution,  that  they  may  oppose  the  progress  of  God's  cause  among 
them  in  so  far  as  it  is  possible  ;  and  natural  enemies,  such  as  Midian  and  Moab, 
frequently  become  sworn  friends  for  a  time,  whenever  it  appears  expedient  to  com- 
bine against  the  one  whom  both  oppose.     On  every  hand,  the  world  looks  out  for 
allies,  servants,  friends ;  as  Balak  did  to  Balaam,  she  promises  to  bestow  on  you 
her  favours  and  her  wealth,  if  you  but  follow  her  behests,  and  make  her  will  youi 
own.     If  you  refuse,  as  he  did  at  the  first,  the  world  will  not  believe  that  you  act 
but  from  princi]5le — rather,  she  thinks  that  you  regard  self-interest ;  but  she  will 
$;ive  you  large  rewards  when  you  but  sell  yourself  to  her.     "  All  things  will  I  give 
Thee,  if  Thou  wilt  fall  down  and  worship  me  "  :  so  spake  the  prince  of  this  world 
to  Jesus  ;  and  at  every  turn  he  modifies  his  voice,  but  still  to  say  the  same  thing, 
in  the  softest  tone,  to  all  Christ's  followers — nay,  even  to  every  one  of  His  redeemed. 
What  is  it  that  you  seek,  insatiable  heart^honour,  or  luxury,  or  gold  ?     All  these, 
if  need  be,  may  be  had  for  almost  nothing  by  the  man  whose  conscience  is  not  over 
scrupulous.     ThisBnlak  also,  like  a  true  destroyer,  rests  not  for  an  instant  till  he 
brings  you  where  he  will ;  and  if  the  first  attempt  does  not  succeed,  he  makes  a 
second,  and  a  third.     The  world  knows  very  well,  like  Balak,  how  to  suit  herself  to 
circumstances  when  they  change,  and  to  attract  some  friends  from  every  side. 
Nay,  she  can  even,  in  her  own  time  and  way,  be  quite  religious — that  is,  from  mere 
policy,  and  ill-concealed  self-interest ;  and  if  you  like,  she  shows  all  possible  respect 
for — forms.    But,  for  your  very  life,  ye  who  are  striving  for  her  praise  and  her 
reward,  venture  not  to  show  that  you  really  will  obey  God  rather  than  any  man  ! 
The  world,  if  need  be,  will  forgive  you  everything  ;  but  this  it  cannot  possibly  for- 
give— that  you  most  earnestly  believe  God's  Word,  and  give  obedience  to  what  He 
requires.     Scarce  can  you  show,  like  Balaam,  that  you  hesitate,  because  the  truth 
is  much  too  strong  for  you,  ere  favour  from  the  world  is  quite  withdrawn  ;  your 
name  appears  no  longer  on  the  list  of  friends,  but  is  consigned  to  deep  oblivion ; 
and  all  the  more  dishonour  falls  on  you,  the  greater  was  the  honour  meant  for  you 
at  first.     You  are  a  most  unpleasant,  useless  man,  and  quite  intractable;   like 
Balaam,  you  are  roughly  pushed  aside,  and  told,  "  The  Lord  hath  kept  thee  back 
from  honour  "  ;  and  then  the  world,  instead  of  her  intended  laurel-wreath,  presents 
you  with  a  crown  of  thorns.     Her  love,  it  now  appears,  was  nothing  but  fiue  show 
— her   flattery,   deceit.     To   such   a  world — so   selfish,  false,  malicious,  just  like 
Balak— should  you  make  your  heart  a  slave  ?  {J.J.  Van  Oogterzee,  D.D.)      Possible 
origin  of  the  chronicle  of  Balaam  : — Every  reader  of  this  book  must  have  observed 
that  in  chaps,  xxii.  2-xxiv.  25  we  have  an  episode  complete  in  itself ;  and  all  the 
modern  critics  who  have  studied  this  Scripture  concur,  I  believe,  in  the  conclusion 
that,  in  this  place,  the  author  or  compiler  of  the  book  has  inserted  one  of  those 
ancient,   detached  or  detachable,  documents  of   which  we  find  so  many  in  the 


232  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOn.  [chap.  x\ii. 

Pentateuch.  Where  and  how  he  got  it  is  a  question  not  easy  to  answer,  if, 
indeed,  answer  be  possible.  But,  from  the  comparatively  favourable  light  in  whicU 
the  chronicle  presents  the  facts  of  Balaam's  story,  most  of  our  best  scholars  con- 
clude that  in  some  way  he  derived  it  from  Balaim  liimself.  We  are  told  (chap, 
xxxi.  8)  tliat,  together  with  five  Midianite  chiefs,  Balaam  was  taken  prisoner  by 
the  Israelites,  and  put  to  "  a  judicial  death  "  after  the  battle  had  been  fought  and 
won.  A  judicial  death  implies  some  sort  of  trial.  And  what  more  natural  than 
that  Balaam  should  plead  in  his  defence  the  inspirations  lie  had  received  from 
Jehovah,  and  the  long  series  of  blessings  he  had  pronounced  on  Israel  when  all  his 
interests,  and  i^erhaps  also  all  his  inclinations,  prompted  him  to  cur.-e  them  ? 
Such  defences,  in  tlie  East,  were  commonly  autobiographical.  Even  St.  Paul, 
when  called  upon  to  plead  before  kings  and  governors,  invariably  told  the  story 
of  his  life  as  his  best  vindication.  And  if  Balaam,  called  upon  to  plead  before 
Moses  and  the  elders,  told  the  story  we  now  read  iu  his  chronicle — what  a  scene 
was  there  1  What  a  revelation  his  words  would  convey  to  the  leaders  of  Israel  of 
the  kindness  of  God  their  Saviour,  of  the  scale  on  which  His  providence  works,  and 
of  the  mystery  iu  which  it  is  wrapi^ed  to  mortal  eyes  !  So,  then,  God  had  been 
working  for  them  in  the  mountains  of  Moab,  and  in  the  heart  of  this  great  diviner 
from  the  East,  and  they  knew  it  not !  Knew  it  not  ?  nay,  perhaps  were  full  of  fear 
and  distrust,  doubting  whether  He  Himself  were  able  to  deliver  them  from  the 
perils  by  which  they  were  encompassed  !  As  Balaam  unfolded  his  tale,  how  their 
hearts  must  have  burned  within  them — burned  with  shame  as  well  as  with  thank- 
fulness— as  they  heard  of  interposition  on  their  behalf  of  which  up  till  now  they 
had  been  ignorant,  and  for  which  at  the  time  perchance  they  had  not  ventured  to 
hope !  Balaam  may  well  have  thought  that  such  a  story  as  this  would  plead  for 
him  more  effectually  than  any  other  defence  he  could  make.  And,  no  doubt,  it  did 
plead  for  him  ;  for  we  all  know  that  it  is  when  our  hearts  have  been  touched  by 
some  unexpected  mercy  that  they  are  most  easily  moved  to  pity  and  forgiveness  : 
it  might  even  have  won  him  absolution  but  for  that  damning  sin  of  which  nothing 
is  said  here — the  infamous  counsel  he  gave  to  the  daughters  of  Midian  which  had 
deprived  Israel  of  four-and-tweuty  thousand  of  its  most  serviceable  and  precious, 
lives.  Even  with  that  crime  full  in  their  memories,  it  must  have  cost  Moses  and 
the  elders  much,  one  thinks,  to  condemn  to  death  the  man  who  had  told  them  such 
a  story  as  this.  (S.  Cox,  D.D.)  God  came  unto  Balaam. — Balaam,  :—\n  Balaam 
we  have  one  of  the  most  mysterious,  in  some  respects  one  of  the  most  j)uzzling, 
contradictory,  and  tragical  of  the  characters  of  Holy  Writ ;  withal  one  of  the  most 
instructive  and  interesting.  He  is  complex  ;  multiform  in  his  mental  and  spiritual 
conformation,  many-sided  in  his  mental  and  spiritual  manifestations.  One  man 
appears  at  one  time ;  another  and  vastly  different  at  another.  You  despair  of 
catching  and  fixing  the  permanent  man.  I.  Let  me  first  ask  attention  to  some 
PRELIMINARY  POINTS  WHICH  MAY  BE  NOTED.  1.  The  muterials  ou  wliich  our  know- 
ledge of  him  is  based  are  chiefly  contained  in  four  passages  of  Scripture  (Numb, 
xxii.-xxiv, ;  Micah  vi.  5-8  ;  2  Peter  ii.  12-16;  Numb.  xxxi.).  2.  I  would  next  note 
the  g'merosity,  the  magnanimity,  of  all  these  Scripture  notices.  The  whole  story 
is  told  with  a  fineness  of  touch,  a  magnanimous  silence,  or  the  merest  hint  con- 
cerning his  grosser  sin,  a  generous  concealment  of  all  aggravating  circumstances. 
It  is  in  the  Bible,  and,  so  far  as  Church  histories  are  concerned,  probably  in  the 
Bible  alone,  that  we  find  not  only  justice,  but  generosity,  towards  defeated  rivals, 
generous  tributes  to  what  is  good,  generous  veilings  of  what  is  bad.  3.  I  would 
also  call  attention  to  the  fact  that  there  is  free  and  full  acknowleilgment  made  of  the 
reality  and  the  sublimity  of  his  inspiration.  It  is  never  denied  :  it  is  unequivocally 
owned.  And  this  though  Balaam  was  a  heathen,  one  outside  the  visible  Church  ; 
nay,  not  only  outside  of  it,  but  arrayed  against  it.  4.  Mark,  too,  the  various 
opinions  concerning  this  strange  man  held  in  different  ages  and  by  different 
authorities  in  the  Church.  The  historian  of  the  Jews,  Josephus,  styles  him,  in 
strongest  language,  "the  first  (best)  of  the  prophets  of  the  time" — ungrudgingly 
regarding  him  as  a  true  prophet  of  the  true  God,  but  with  a  disposition  ill  adapted 
to  meet  temptation.  Coming  down  to  Christian  writers,  we  find  Ambrose  and 
Augustine  speaking  of  him  as  a  magician  and  soothsayer,  a  prophet,  indeed,  but 
inspired  of  the  devil ;  but  we  find  Tertullian  and  Jerome,  with  greater  and  more 
Scriptural  liberality,  more  favourably  interpreting  his  position  and  tbe  source  of 
his  endowments.  II.  Let  us  now  proceed  to  the  analysis  of  the  life  and  its 
STORY.  Balaam  would  have  protested  against  being  called  an  enemy  of  God ; 
would  have  insisted  on  being  regarded  as  a  friend.     To  every  accuser  he  could 


cnAP.  XXII.]  NUMBERS.  233 

have  replied  that  he  was  obedient  all  through  to  God's  voice,  that  he  did  not  go 
till  God  gave  permission,  and  that  he  was  cai-eful  to  yield  to  the  prophetic  power 
that  spoke  thiougb  him ;  yet  all  through  he  was  a  force  against  God,  an  opponent 
of  the  purposes  of  grace,  and  on  the  side  that  could  not  be  eitlier  for  the  glory  of 
heaven  or  the  gain  of  earth.  And  so  there  are  men  who  would  feel  outraged  if 
called  thieves  who  will,  all  the  same,  sell  an  article  for  what  it  is  not;  who  would 
deem  \ou  mad  were  you  to  accuse  them  of  murder,  yet  will  help  a  brother  on  to 
the  death  of  his  soul ;  who  name  the  name  of  Christ,  yet  are  forces  for  the 
meanness  and  avarice,  the  uncharity  and  unchastity,  which  the  law  caunot  reach, 
but  which  are  as  far  from  the  mind  of  Christ  as  is  the  theft  or  the  murder  which 
the  law  can.  (G.  M.  Grant,  B.D.)  The  character  of  Balaam  : — It  is  common  to 
speak  of  Balaam  as  a  wicked  man,  to  censure  him  as  utterly  devoid  of  principle,  as 
completely  abandoned  to  the  dominion  of  evil,  especially  of  avarice.  And  we  have 
the  highest  authority  for  regarding  him  as  a  wicked  man  :  he  loved  the  wages  of 
unrighteousness.  But  when  we  conceive  of  Balaam  as  a  wicked  man  simply,  we 
have  by  no  means  a  just  conception  of  his  real  character.  He  was  not  under  the 
entire  dominion  of  any  evil  principle  or  habit  whatever.  There  is  in  him  a  wonder- 
ful admixture  of  good  and  evil;  a  combination  of  elements  the  most  opposite.  I. 
We  see  in  Balaam  a  man   of   geeat  mental   endowments,  of  varied    spirituaii 

OIFTS,  AND  OF  EXTBAOEDINARY  ILLUMINATION.  II.  We  SEE  IN  BALAAM  GREAT  APPARENT 
DEFERENCE  TO  THE  DiVINE  WILL,  AN  ANXIOUS  SOLICITUDE  TO  KNOW  IT,  AND  TO  ACT 
ACCORDING  TO  IT.  III.  We  HAVE  IN  BALAAM  A  MELANCHOLY  INSTANCE  OF  AN  ATTEMPT 
TO     BECONCILE    A    SENSE    OF    DOTY    TO   A   VICIOUS    INCLINATION— TO     CONFORM     THE     UN- 

\IELDING  RULE  OF  EIGHT  TO  THE  DESIGNS  OF  AVARICE.  This  is  the  instructive 
peculiarity  of  his  character.  He  knew  what  was  right,  and  for  many  reasons  he 
was  anxious  to  do  it.  His  conscience  would  not  allow  him  to  act  in  direct  opposi- 
tion to  the  will  of  God ;  but,  at  the  same  time,  his  heart  was  not  wholly  in  God^s 
service.  Covetousness  lay  deep  within  him.  How  obvious  the  reflection  that  no 
man  knows  what  he  is  until  he  is  tried  !  During  the  hard  frosts  of  winter  it  is 
impobsii  le  to  tell  what  venomous  insects,  what  noxious  weeds  or  beautiful  flowers 
are  conceiiled  in  the  earth ;  but  let  the  genial  showers  and  sunshine  of  spring 
coine,  and  the  weeds  and  the  flowers  will  show  themselves,  and  the  venomous 
insects  will  come  forth  out  of  their  hiding-places.  So  is  it  with  men.  IV.  Another 
remark,  suggested  by  the  character  and  history  of  Balaam,  relates  to  the  rapid 
AND  i EARFUL  PROGRESS  OF  SIN.  So  it  was  with  Judas :  he  had  not  the  slightest  wisli 
to  injure  his  Lord  ;  he  wished  only  to  obtain  the  thirty  pieces  of  silver.  So  it  has 
been  with  many  ambitious  monarchs  :  they  have  had  no  pleasure  in  the  misery  of 
their  fellow-creatures  ;  they  have  thought  ouly  of  their  own  fame  and  power.  So 
it  has  been  with  many  zealous  persecutors :  they  have  no  natural  thirst  for  human 
blood ;  they  have  thought  only  of  the  establishment  of  their  creed — the  extension 
and  honour  of  their  Church.  So  it  is  with  many  in  common  life  :  they  have  no 
wish  to  injure  others ;  but  they  wish  to  secure  their  own  ends,  and  they  do  not 
hesitate  to  trample  on  those  who  stand  in  their  way.  V.  In  the  character  and 
history  of  Balaam  we  have  a  striking  illustration  of  the  deceitfulness  op  the 
HUMAN  heart.  Men  will  neglect  the  moral,  and  yet  will  attend  to  the  ceremonial, 
and  on  this  ground  wiU  think  themselves  clear;  they  will  commit  the  greater,  and 
yet  will  hesitate  to  commio  the  less,  and  on  this  ground  will  pronounce  themselves 
pure;  they  will  violate  the  eutire  spirit  of  the  Christian  law,  and  yet  will  scrupu- 
lously observe  the  letter  of  some  precept  or  precedent,  and  on  this  ground  will 
pronounce  themselves  consistent  Christians.  VI.  The  history  of  Balaam  illus- 
trates SOME  very  important  PRINCIPLES  OF  THE  DiviNE  GOVERNMENT.  The  present 
is  a  state  of  probation,  but  there  is  in  it  not  a  little  that  is  retributive  ;  and  though 
God  dtals  with  us  as  a  kiud  parent,  there  is  often  much  that  is  judicial  in  His 
proceedings.  We  have  a  striking  illustration  of  this  in  the  history  of  Balaam.  In 
his  heart  Balaam  desired  permission  to  go  with  the  princes  of  JMoab,  because  he 
coveted  the  wages  of  unrighteousness  ;  and  God  gave  him  that  permission.  This 
was  not  an  act  of  mercy,  but  of  judgment.  The  history  of  Balaam  illustrates 
another  principle  of  the  Divine  government — that  which  is  involved  in  the  state- 
ment, "  The  way  of  transgressors  is  hard."  This  is  as  much  in  mercy  as  in 
judgment.  The  history  of  Balaam  also  illustrates  the  solemn  truth,  that  the 
"  wages  of  sin  is  death."  "  Balaam  also,  the  son  of  Beor,  they  slew  with  the 
sword."  Whatever  may  be  the  result  here,  the  ultimate  end  of  such  a  course  as 
that  which  we  have  endeavoured  to  describe  must  be  destruction.  (J.  J.  Davies.) 
Balaam  .—Balaam  is  one  of  those  instances  which  meet  us  in  Scripture  of  persona 


234  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxii. 

dwelling,  to  a  certain  extent,  in  the  gloom  -^f  heathenish  practices,  while  preserving 
at  the  same  time  a  certain  knowledge  of  the  one  true  God.     He  was  endowed  with 
a  greater  than  ordinary  knowledge  of  God ;  he  had  the  intuition  of  truth,  and  could 
see  into  the  life  of  things  ;  he  was,  in  fact,  a  poet  and  a  prophet.     Moreover,  he 
confessed  that  all  these  superior  advantages  were  not  his  own,  but  derived  from 
God,  and  were  His  gift.     Thus,  doubtless,  he  had  won  for  himself  among  his  con- 
temporaries a  high  reputation  not  only  for  wisdom  and  knowledire,  but  also  for 
sanctity.     And  although  his  sanctity  comes  to  very  little  in  the  end,  when  his  be- 
setting sin  overmastered  him,  yet  it  may  be  readily  understood  that,  judged  by  the 
standards  which  prevailed  among  the  heathen  nomad  tribe  which  sent  for  him  to 
curse  the  nation  of  Israel,  he  would  appear  to  be  an  eminently  holy  man,  so  much 
60  that,  as  Balak  said  to  him  at  their  first  interview,  "  I  wot  that  he  whom  thou 
blessest  is  blessed,  and  that  he  whom  thou  cursest  is  cursed."     But  then,  it  may  be 
asked,  if  Balaam  was  looked  upon  as  a  holy  man  and  as  a  worshipper  of  Jehovah, 
how  came  Balak  to  send  for  him  and  to  offer  him  vast  rewards  to  curse  the  people 
of  Jehovah?     The  answer  is,  that  it  was  not  uncommon  among  those  heathen 
nations — nor  is  the  practice  even  now  unknown  among  pagan  tribes — to  offer  sacri- 
fices to  the  gods  of  the  enemy  to  propitiate  them  to  themselves.     The  ancient 
Bomans  repeatedly  did  this.     Doubtless  there  were  many  professed  enchanters  and 
soothsayers  in  the  land  of  Moab ;  but  king  Balak — perhaps  having  previously  tried 
these  without  success — may  have  preferred  sending  five  hundred  miles  for  a  re- 
nowned prophet  who  had  the  reputation  of  more  than  mortal  wisdom  and  power, 
who  was  also  a  worshipper  of  Jehovah,  and  who  might  for  that  reason  be  all  the 
more  likely  to  propitiate  His  anger,  or  to  turn  Him  against  that  strange  people 
which  had  "  come  out  of  Egypt,"  and  now,  marching  with  unearthly  tokens  along 
the  desert,  had  pitched  their  tents  within  sight  of  the  strongholds  where  Balak  had 
his  habitation.     Consider  now  the  first  message  which  the  renowned  soothsayer 
received  from  the  terrified  king.     Clearly  he  wished  to  go,  and  was  disappointed 
and  chagrined  at  being  prevented.    But  why  should  he  feel  any  disappointment  ? 
We  might  have  been  at  a  loss  to  know,  had  it  not  been  for  the  ray  of  inspired  light 
shed  upon  the  whole  nairative  by  a  single  line  from  the  pen  of  the  Apostle  Peter. 
That  apostle  tells  us  that  "  he  loved  the  wages  of  unrigliteousuess."     He  did  not 
particularly  like  the  work,  but  he  loved  the  wages.     Like  many  another  covetous 
soul,  if  he  could  have  grasped  the  wages  witbout  doing  the  devil's  work,  he  would 
have  preferred  it ;  and  he  loved  the  wages  so  well  that,  although  he  at  first  refused 
to  go,  yet  presently  we  find  him  venturing  on  the  work  for  the  sake  of  getting  the 
pay.     1.  Mark  here,  then,  the  first,  the  earliest  effect  of  cherishing  any  besetting 
sin.     It  is  that  God  is  served  reluctantly.     Sin  is  looked  at  with  a  longing  eye. 
The  prohibition  seems  hard  and  unreasonable.     2.  Mark  now  the  second  application 
made  by  Balak,  in  which  the  unhappy  prophet,  who  has  bfgun  by  grumbling  at  God's 
will,  is  placed  in  further  and  severer  temptation.     I  cannot  but  pity  him  here,  as  we 
liity  many  another  poor  slave  who  makes  just  one  momentary  effort  to  break  off  his 
chains.     Or  perlinps  the  speech  with  which  he  met  the  second  deputation  from 
Moab  was  artfully  intended  to  enhance  the  value  of  subsequent  compliance — we 
cannot  certainly  tell.     But  at  all  events  he  protests  manfully :  "  If  Balak  would 
give  me  his  house  full  of  silver  and  gold,  I  cannot  go  beyond  the  word  of  the  Lord 
my  God,  to  do  less  or  more."     So  also  Peter  valiantly  protested  wlien  his  Master 
was  about  to  be  betrayed  :  "  Though  all  men  should  deny  Thee,  though  I  should 
die  with  Thee,  I  will  not  deny  Thee."     Yet  within  a  few  short  hours  Peter  had 
denied  his  Master  thrice  ;  and  within  a  few  short  hours  Balaam  was  on  his  way  to 
the  borders  of  Moab.     The  difference  between  the  two  cases  is  that  Peter  at  once 
went  out,  wept  bitterly,  and  received  forgiveness  ;  whereas  Balaam,  having  started 
on  a  career  of  covetousness,  never  retraced  his  steps,  and  is  set  forth  to  us  in  the 
lurid  light  portrayed  by  St.  Jude,  "suffering  the  vengeance  of  eternal  fire."     We 
liave  seen  that  the  first  effect  of  besetting  sin  is  that  the  Lord  is  served  reluctantly. 
The  next  effect  is  that  pretences  are  sought  for  its  indulgence,  or  at  least  for  putting 
ourselves  in  the  way  of  it.     The  second  time  that  God  appears  to  Balaam  there 
seems  to  be  a  permission  to  go,  though  coupled  vvith  a  warning  that  he  would  say 
nothing  but  what  the  Lord  should  command.     It  by  no  means  follows  that  because 
Balaam  received  a  kind  of  permission  to  go,  that  his  journey  had  the  Divnie 
approval.     The  Lord  answers  our  prayers  sometimes  as  He  answered  tbe  prayers  of 
Israel  for  a  king,  in  His  anger ;  nor  is  it  easy  for  a  greater  curse  to  come  upon  a 
man  than  to  be  left  to  the  gratification  of  his  own  selfish  and  sinful  desires.     Let 
us  pray  that  God  Almighty  would  cross  our  most  cherished  purposes,  and  defeat 


cr.Ar.  XXII.]  NUJIBEnS.  235 


our  darling  projects,  rather  than  suffer  us  in  our  own  self-willed  perverseness  to 
enter  upon  a  path  in  defiance  of  His  holy  will.  St.  Peter  speaks  of  Balaam's  going 
with  the  princes  of  Moab  as  madness  and  iniquity  :  he  "  was  rebuked  for  his 
iniquity;  the  dumb  ass,  speiking  with  man's  voice,  forbade  the  madness  of  the 
prophet."  And  is  this  the  man  who  so  boldly  declared  that  he  would  not  turn 
asicle  from  the  will  of  God  one  hair's-breadth  if  IJalak  would  give  him  bis  house  full 
of  silver  and  gold?  Poor  human  nature!  How  little  do  even  great  men  know 
themselves  !  How  small  the  importance  to  be  attached  to  mere  profession  I  How 
are  people  likely  to  deceive  themselves  and  to  deceive  others  when  speaking  wliat 
is  called  their  experience,  but  which  is  sometimes  only  a  strong  emotion  of  tlie 
moment,  to  be  displaced  or  destroyed  by  the  first  attack  of  temptation !  How  often 
has  it  happened  that  those  who  make  the  loudest  profes-ion  of  their  virtue,  and  of 
their  love  to  the  cause  of  God,  are  the  first  to  succumb  to  covetousness  or  other 
besetting  sin  !  And  now  the  narrative,  in  opening  before  us  a  fresh  scene,  suggests 
at  the  same  time  a  further  view  of  the  progress  of  a  besetting  sin.  How  striking  is 
the  circumstance  that,  although  the  ass,  on  three  several  occasions,  saw  the  Angel 
■with  drawn  sword  standing  in  the  way,  Balaam  saw  Him  not !  God,  says  St. 
Augustine,  had  punished  his  cupidity,  by  according  to  him  a  permission  conform- 
able to  his  wicked  inclination  ;  and  we  see  in  him  all  the  corruption  of  the  human 
heart,  and  all  the  depravation  of  a  will  enslaved  to  a  dominant  lust.  Other  inter- 
preters maintain  that  his  permission  to  go  was  on  the  understood  condition  that  he 
was  not  to  curse  Israel ;  and  that  it  was  because  his  heart,  craving  after  the  gold, 
■was  already  wavering  from  this  purpose,  that  the  Angel  of  the  Covenant  accused 
him  of  perverseness,  and  having  given  him  a  striking  and  solemn  warning,  sui?ered 
him  again  to  go  forward.  I  confess  that  this  view  of  the  case  commends  itself  to 
my  own  judgment.  3.  But  whichever  view  you  adopt,  the  blindness  of  this  perverse 
prophet  is  equally  monitory.  He  appears  before  us  a  type  of  those  well-instructed 
sinners  whom  every  one  except  themselves  sees  to  be  running  to  their  own  ruin, 
blinded  by  the  fascination  of  covetousness  or  some  other  master  sin.  After  this 
Balaam  is  given  up  to  his  own  heart's  lust — the  last  and  most  terrific  result,  in  this 
life,  of  the  indulgence  of  besetting  sin.  "Go  with  the  men,"  the  Lord  says  to  liim, 
givinft  him  up  to  his  own  heart's  lusts,  which  he  followed  to  his  destruction.  "  Go 
■with  the  men  " — when  neither  the  first  words  of  God  who  forbade  him,  nor  the 
signs  and  dangers  which  met  him  by  the  way,  could  tui'n  his  heart  or  deliver  bim 
from  his  error,  the  Lord  bids  him  to  go  on — as  Jarchi,  the  Jew,  well  paraphrases 
the  words — "  Go  with  the  men,  for  thy  portion  is  with  them,  and  thine  end  to  perish 
out  of  the  world."  (L.  //.  Wiseman.)  Balaam : — Balaam  was  certainly  a  heathen 
soothsayer  and  diviner  (Josh.  xiii.  22).  But  he  was  more  than  a  mere  soothsayer. 
He  had  certainly,  for  one  thing,  a  very  full  knowledge  of  the  character  of  God. 
Thus,  he  again  and  again  employs,  in  speaking  of  God,  that  covenant  name 
"Jehovah"  (chap.  xxii.  8,  13,  18,  19;  chap,  xxiii.  3,  8,  12,  21,  26;  chap.  xxiv.  1, 
6,  13),  by  which  He  was  specially  made  known  to  Israel  (Exod.  vi.  2,  3).  And  such 
terms  as,  "the  Lord  my  God  "  (chap.  xxii.  18) ;  the  "  Almighty"  (chap.  xxiv.  4) ; 
"  the  most  Pligh  "  (chap.  xxiv.  16),  also  occur  in  the  course  of  his  utterances,  im- 
plying, by  the  variety  of  expression  so  easily  adopted,  a  very  much  wider  acquaint- 
ance with  the  Divine  character  than  is  commonly  supposed  to  belong  to  ordinary 
heathens.  Nor  was  the  knowledge  which  Balaam  possessed  of  the  character  of 
God  a  merely  verbal  or  speculative  knowledge.  It  is  manifest  that  he  stood  in 
certain  intimate  personal  relations  with  Jehovah,  He  speaks  of  the  Lord  as  "  the 
Lord  his  God "  (chap.  xxii.  18) ;  and  the  whole  tenor  of  his  intercourse  with 
Jehovah,  on  this  occasion,  implies  a  previous  acquaintance  with  God — such  an 
acquaintance  with  God,  indeed,  as  almost  presupposes  previous  immediate  com- 
munications between  God  and  him'^elf.  And  it  may  have  been,  that  his  extra- 
ordinary reputation  as  a  prophet  had  arisen  from  the  fact  tbat  God  had,  from  time 
to  time,  "  put  words  into  his  mouth,"  ■which  he  had  spoken,  and  which  had  also 
come  to  pass.  Nor  is  there  wanting  in  the  character  of  Balaam  a  certain  tone  of 
high  religious  feeling  also.  He  has  the  profoundest  reverence  for  the  authority  and 
word  of  God.  The  word  that  God  putteth  into  his  mouth,  tbat  will  he  speak !  Nay, 
nor  would  he,  though  Balak  should  give  him  his  house  full  of  silver  and  gold,  go 
beyond  the  word  of  the  Lord,  <fec.  Nor  must  we  deny  to  Balaam  a  certain  personal 
and  spiritual  sympathy  with  the  truths  he  uttered  in  God's  name.  (See  chap,  xxiii. 
10  ;  xxiv.  23.)  "  He,  too,  is  borne  away,  at  least  for  a  time,  by  the  grandeur  of  the 
announcements  he  is  making.  There  is  that  in  him  which  reaches  out  with  a  true, 
although  loo  transient,  yearning  after  the  coming  triumphs  of  the  people  and  king- 


236  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxii. 


dom  of  God."  We  must  not  paint  this  portrait  wholly  black.  An  honest  and  a 
truthful  man;  an  independent  and  (in  a  certain  sense)  high-minded  man  ;  a  God- 
fearing and  religious  man  :  such  is  Balaam,  the  son  of  Beor,  of  Petlior,  on  one  side 
of  his  cliaracter.  And  yet  he  is  a  bad  man,  despite  his  many  virtues,  and  a  man 
who  finally  perished  miserably  with  the  enemies  of  God's  people.  A  strange  pheno- 
menon, indeed,  this  Balaam !  a  heathen  soothsayer  and  an  inspired  servant  of  the 
Lord ;  a  man  full  of  richest  endowments,  animated  by  many  very  noble  impulses, 
uttering  the  most  exalted  sentiments  ;  and  yet  a  man  whose  heart  was  rotten  at  the 
core,  whose  life  is  only  written  as  a  warning  against  sin,  whose  death  was  an  un- 
mitigated tragedy.    I.  We  see  heee,  in  the  fact  of  Balaam's  inspiration,  although 

HE  WAS  a  HEATHI£N  SOOTHSAYER,  AN    EVIDENCE    AND    WITNESS    TO    THE    WIDER   RELATIONS 

THAT  GoD  HOLDS  WITH  MAN  THAN  IS  SOMETIMES  scprosED.  The  fact  is,  it  hath 
pleased  Goil,  for  His  own  most  wise  and  gracious  purposes,  gradually  and  slowly  to 
mature  His  final  plan  of  mercy  for  the  world  in  Jesus  Christ ;  and,  with  a  view  to 
its  completeness  and  maturity,  to  confine  it,  at  the  first,  within  restricted  lines  of 
influence.  But  it  is  a  monstrous,  heathen  notion  to  suppose  that  all  the  while  this 
final  plan  of  mercy  was  in  course  of  development,  the  great,  wide  world,  without 
the  paial'els  in  which  it  moved,  was  utterl.v  neglected  and  forsaken  of  its  God. 
No  !  the  world  was  also  being  e  lucated,  in  its  way,  as  well  as  the  Church  :  educated 
on  a  humbler  method,  and  with  more  "  rudimentary  "  instruction,  but  educated  ; 
and  educated  of  God.  Two  lines  of  culture,  then,  have  been  going  on  in  the  world, 
side  by  side,  uuder  the  providential  direction  of  the  Most  High  God,  and  with  a 
view  to  the  ultimate  sanation  of  the  world.  A  primary  and  rudimentary  culture, 
under  what  Paul  cahs  the  "  elements  of  the  world,"  consisting  of  the  ordiuary 
course  of  Providence,  with  occasional  interpositions  of  sovereign  grace  and  special 
instances  of  inspiration  ;  and  a  systematic  and  formal  culture  for  a  selected  portion 
of  the  human  family,  under  the  written  law  of  God,  with  constant  intei positions  of 
sovereign  grace,  ancl  almost  constant  inspiration.  II.  That,  in  dealing  with  men 
BY  His  Spirit,  the  Lord  has  regard  to  the  moral  and  spiritual  standpoint  at 
WHICH  EACH  man  MAY  BE  FOUND.  Balaam  is  a  soothsiyer,  and  yet  he  is  inspired  of 
God !  Balaam  seeks  the  Lord  by  means  of  enchantments,  and  yet  the  Lord  does 
nut  refuse  to  come  to  him,  but  responds  to  his  appeal  again  and  again !  But,  then, 
it  is  to  be  considered  that  Balaam  was  a  heathen,  and  that  he  had  been  brought  up 
in  the  midst  of  the  practice  of  divination,  if  he  had  not,  indeed,  inherited  his 
position  as  a  diviner  from  his  fatber.  It  was  plainly  one  thing  for  such  a  man  as 
Balaam  to  employ  enchantment,  and  quite  another  for  an  Israelite  to  do  so.  For  to 
Israel,  if  I  may  so  speak,  was  given  a  diviner  autiury-in  God's  law,  and  in  G  d's 
presence  in  their  midst ;  and  so  t  o  them  the  use  of  all  these  heathen  -irts  was  absolutely 
interdicted  (Deut.  xviii.  H-14).  But,  as  the  art  of  divination  was  the  highest  point  to 
which  the  beathen  world  had  been  able  to  attain  in  their  pursuit  of  the  unseen,  so 
God  condescended  to  meet  Balaam,  at  that  special  point  of  spiritual  culture,  that 
He  might  lead  him  thenceforth  to  higher  forms  of  truth  and  nobler  modes  of 
worship.  HI.  How  broad  is  the  distinction  between  spiritual  endowments  and 
spiRin  AL  character.  Balaam  was  both  an  inspired  niHn,  and  also,  at  the  same 
time,  a  very  wicked  man.  He  gave  expression  to  the  noblest  sentiments,  and  yet 
performed  the  basest  deeds.  See,  then,  how  little  mere  endowments,  even  of  the 
liighcst  kind,  can  do  for  us;  how  widely  separated  from  e^ich  other  are  gifts  and 
graces.  The  gifts  which  we  receive  from  God  are,  in  reality,  no  proper  part  of  us, 
until  we  make  them  ours  by  a  light  use  of  them.  And  our  character  is  measured, 
not  so  much  by  the  number  of  talents  we  have  received,  as  by  the  fidelity  we  have 
exhibited  in  the  employment  of  the  talents  we  have.  It  by  no  means  follows  be- 
cause we  have  spiritual  faculties  that  we  are  spiritual  men.  These  faculties  are 
given  to  us  beforehand  to  aid  our  usefulness,  if  we  become  spiritual  men,  and  in 
the  hope,  as  one  may  say,  that  we  shall  become  spiritual  men.  But,  for  all  our 
gifts,  we  may  still  be  "  in  the  gall  of  bitterness  and  in  the  bond  of  iniquity."  It  is 
quite  possible  for  divinely-bestowed  gifts  to  miss  their  object  and  intention  !  (W. 
Roberts.)  Balaam   tempted  .-—I.  In  the  first  place  observe  that  there  is  no 

TIME  OF  man's  life  WHEiiEiN  HE  MAY  NOT  BE  TEMPTED,  or  may  Hot  be  in  danger  of 
fahing  off  from  God  and  goodness ;  which  should  be  an  argument  to  us  fob  con- 
stant care  AND  watchfulness  OVER  OURSELVES.  Evcu  those  wliom  God  hath 
favoured  in  a  very  particular  manner,  and  with  heavenly  gifts  and  graces,  are  no 
more  secure  than  others,  if  they  take  not  proportionable  care.     II.  Observe  oow 

DANGEROUS   A   THINO  IT  IS  80  MUCH  AS  TO  ATTEND  OR  LISTBN  TO  THE  CHARMS  OF  WEALTH 

AND  HONOUB.     For  a  gift  will  sometimes  blind  the  wise,  and  a  bribe  will  beguile 


CHAP,  xxn.]  NUMBERS.  237 

their  hearts.  Balaam  looked  too  much  upon  the  golden  presents,  and  was  too 
sensibly  struck  with  the  sound  of  honour  and  preferments ;  which  made  him  the 
less  consider  upon  how  slippery  ground  he  stood,  and  how  dangerous  an  affair  that 
was  to  concern  himself  in.  III.  Observe,  that  when  God  sees  men  leaning  too  far 
tc  ambitious  or  covetous  desires,  and  not  wise  enough  to  take  such  gentle  hints  as 
might  be  suHicient  to  call  them  back.  He  then  leaves  them  to  pursue  theik  own 
hearts'  ldsts,  and  lkts  them  follow  their  own  iiugination.  IV.  Observe  next, 
how  foolish  a  part  a  man  acts,  and  how  he  exposes  himself  to  contempt  and  scorn, 
as  well  as  danger,  when  he  takes  upon  him  to  follow  his  own  way  and  humour, 
AND  WILL  not  HAVE  GoD  FOR  HIS  GUIDE.  V.  Observc,  further,  that  when  once  wilful 
men  have  run  such  len^'ths  in  opposition  to  the  will  of  Heaven,  God  then  gives 

THEM  UP  to  a  reprobate  MIND,  AND  LETS  THEM  FALL  FROM  ONE  DEGREE  OF  WICKEDNESS 

TO  ANOTHER.  So  it  was  in  Balaam.  VI.  One  thing  more  we  may  observe  from  his 
history,  which  is  this  :  that  the  Spirit  of  God  may  sometimes  vouchsafe  to  come 
UPON  A  VERY  WICKED  MAN  (so  far  as   coucerns   the   extraordinary  gifts)   without 

REFORMING   OR   INFLUENCING    THE    SAME    MAN  AS    TO    HIS   LIFE   AND    MORALS,  in  the  way 

of  ordinary  operation.  These  two  things  are  very  distinct,  and  may  often  be  sepa- 
rate, as  in  Baliam  at  that  time,  and  in  Jndas  afterwards.  (D.  Waterland,  D.D.) 
Apostasy  : — I.  The  piety  of  Balaam.  1.  The  spiritual  enlightenment  of  Balaam 
evinces  his  piety.  2.  Balaam's  piety  is  seen  in  his  distinctly  recognising  the 
supreme  authority  of  the  will  of  God.  3.  The  piety  of  Balaam  was  manifested  in 
his  obedience  to  the  will  of  God.  II.  The  apostasy  of  Balaam.  1.  The  means 
throut-'h  which  Balaam  was  induced  to  apostatise  must  not  be  overlooked.  He  was 
enticed  bv  worldly  wealth  and  distinction.  Principle  is  surrendered,  honour  lost, 
the  soul  itself  bartered  for  t!ie  wages  of  unrighteousness.  Such  was  "  the  error  of 
Balaam."  And  who  knows  not  that  by  this  very  means  multitudes  have  been 
seduced  from  their  integrity,  and  lost  for  ever?  Like  the  fabled  Atalanta,  while 
they  were  running  well,  the  golden  apple  was  thrown  at  their  feet,  tempting  them  ; 
and  stooping  from  their  high  principles  to  take  it  up,  they  have  lost  the  race. 
2.  Mark  the  progress  of  Balaam's  apostasy.  First,  we  notice  the  indulgence  of 
evil  desire — desire  for  gain  and  honour,  which  could  only  be  obtained  by  wrong- 
doing ;  his  heart  goes  after  covetousness.  Next  he  tampers  with  temptation.  The 
reiterated  overtures  of  Balak  should  have  been  indignantly  rejected.  Why  are 
these  ambassadors  received  even  a  second  time?  Why  another  and  another  audi- 
ence granted  to  them?  Alas  !  he  is  fascinated  by  the  very  means  of  his  ruin  :  like 
a  silly  fish,  he  is  playing  about  the  bait.  Then,  how  he  struggles  with  conscience  ! 
Guard  against  the  beginnings  of  evil.  If  the  downward  career  of  apostasy  be  once 
commenced,  whither  tbou  mayest  be  hurried,  to  what  depths  of  degradation  tliou 
mayest  fnll,  God  only  knows.  Like  the  swine  of  the  Gadarenes,  thou  mayest  be 
driven  onward,  literally  possessed  by  the  devil,  until  plunged  into  the  abyss  below. 
Oh  tiow  deeply  have  some  fallen!  from  small  beginnings  degenerating  to  the 
darkest  crimes — crimes  which  are  a  loathing  and  an  abhorrence.  "  Is  thy  servant 
a  dog  that  he  should  do  this  thing  ?  " — but,  as  a  quaint  writer  saith,  "  the  dog  did 
it."  We  may  start  from  the  line  of  rectitude  at  a  very  small  angle,  the  divergence 
becoming  gradually  wider  and  wider,  tiU  we  are  as  far  from  righteousness  as  bell  is 
from  heaven.  3.  Consider  the  checks  which  presented  themselves  in  the  way  of 
Balaam's  apostasy,  but  which  he  obstinately  resisted  and  overtrod.  What  pains 
the  gracious  Lord  taketh  to  prevent  our  self-destruction  !  To  the  truth  of  this  evei-y 
backslider  is  witness.  How  powerful  an  obstacle  is  conscience,  which  ever  and  anon 
raiseth  its  voice,  and  will  be  heard,  like  the  voice  of  the  Lord  which  thundereth  ! 
Death,  too,  like  a  i-pectre  from  the  invisible  world,  again  and  again  obtrudes  it-elf 
on  the  apostate's  guilty  soul.  Dumb  things  have  a  voice  to  him  that  hath  ears  to 
hear,  rebuking  our  madness.  4.  Contemplate  the  issue  of  Balaam's  apostasy.  It 
entailed  immense  mischief  upon  others.  Through  him  thousands  of  the  Lord's  people 
perished.  At  the  same  time  his  fall  issued  in  woeful  disappointment  to  himself.  (J. 
Henton.)  What  men  are  these  with  thee  ? — God's  interest  in  man's  compnmonxhips : 
— This  question  was  designed  to  awaken  "the  slumbering  conscience  of  Balaam,  to 
lead  him  to  reflect  upon  the  proposal  which  the  men  had  made,  and  to  break  the  force 
of  his  sinful  inclination."  God  addresses  the  same  question  to  the  young  who  are 
forming  dangerous  associations,  to  Christians  who  taki  pleasure  in  worldly  society,  &c. 
He  urges  this  solemn  inquiry  (1)  by  the  voice  of  conscience;  (2)  by  the  preaching  of 
His  truth  ;  (3)  by  the  exhortations  and  admonitions  of  His  Word  ;  and  (4)  by  the 
remonstrances  of  llis  Spirit.  This  inquiry  indicates  the  Divine  concern  as  to 
human  companionships.     We  may  regard  this  concern  as — I.  An  indicaxiok  of 


238  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxtr. 


THE  Divine  solicitode  for  the  well-being  of  man.  II.  An  indication  op  the 
IMPORTANCE  OF  OUR  COMPANIONSHIPS.  1.  Our  associates  indicate  our  character. 
"A  man  is  known  by  the  company  which  he  keeps."  2.  Our  associates  influence 
our  character.  "  He  that  walketh  with  wise  men  shall  be  wise  :  but  a  companion 
of  fools  shall  be  destroyed."     III.  An  indication  of  our  responsibility  to  Goi> 

FOR    OUB   COMPANIONSHIPS.       IV.    An    INDICATION     OF    THE     DANGER   OF    DALLYING    WITH 

temptation.  (11'.  Jones.)  Evil  company  to  be  avoided: — Flee  unholy  company 
as  baneful  to  the  powpi  of  godliness.  Be  but  as  careful  for  thy  soul  as  tLou 
wouldst  be  for  thy  body.  Durst  thou  drink  in  the  same  cup,  or  sit  in  the  same 
cliair,  with  one  that  hath  an  infectious  dispase  ?  And  is  not  sin  as  catching  a 
disease  as  the  plague  itself?  Of  all  trades,  it  would  not  do  well  to  have  the  collier 
and  the  fuller  live  together ;  what  one  cleanseth,  the  other  will  blacken  and  defile. 
Thou  canst  not  be  long  among  unholy  ones  but  thou  wilt  hazard  the  defiling  of 
thy  soul,  which  the  Holy  Spirit  hath  made  pure.  {W.  Giirnall.)  The  Lord 
Tefuseth  to  give  me  leave. — Hesitating  to  do  right: — Whence  this  mingled  petu- 
lan'^e  and  feeblenes^s  ?  Plainly  Balaam  wants  to  go  with  the  princes  of  Balak,  and 
he  is  irritated  that  he  cannot  go  ;  and  so,  first  of  all,  he  vents  his  spleen  upon  the 
men  who  were  the  innocent  occasion  of  his  disappointment.  And  yet,  in  the  midst 
of  all  bis  anger,  he  cannot  bring  himself  to  utter  such  decisive  words  as  shall  fore- 
close for  ever  the  prospects  of  advancement  opened  up  to  him  by  Balak.  There 
can  be  no  mistaking  the  spirit  of  this  language.  It  is  at  once  both  insolent  and 
}  esitating  ;  it  is  abrupt,  and  yet  circuitous.  There  are  deeply  agitating  influences 
at  work  upon  the  mind  of  him  who,  yesterday,  a  master  of  wise  spe^^ch  and  full  of 
graceful  hospitality,  can  say  to  inoffensive  guests,  "  Get  you  into  your  own  land  ; 
t  <v  the  Lord  refuseth  to  give  me  leave  to  go  with  you."  Here,  then,  we  first  catoh 
sight  of  Balaam's  weakness  and  infirmity.  The  prospect  of  emolument  in  the 
discharge  of  his  prophetic  otHce  had  excited  his  cupidity.  When  he  first  saw  the 
rewards  of  divination  he  was,  pei'haps,  scai'cely  conscious  of  their  influence  upon 
his  mind.  So  long  as  the  question  of  his  going  with  the  men  was  undecided,  he 
betrayed  no  agitation  on  the  subject ;  but  now  that  these  rewards  were  passing  out 
of  his"  reach — now  that  he  was  absolutely  forbidden  to  do  anything  that  would 
secure  them,  a  passionate  desire  to  be  possessed  of  them  was  stirred  within  his 
breast,  and  unmistakably  betrayeii  its;'lf  in  his  behaviour  towards  the  men  to 
whom  he  had  promised  to  communicate  the  answer  of  the  Lord.     {IV.  Roberts.) 

Vers.  1.5-35.    If  the  men  come  to  call  thee,  rise  up,  and  go  with  them. — 

No  contrn diction  between  God's  two  ansicers  to  Balaam  : — 'I'he  first  time  God  tells 
him  not  to  go  ;  the  second  time  He  bids  him  go,  but  is  angry  with  him  because  he 
goes.  What  does  this  contradiction  mean  ?  There  is  no  meaning  in  it  till  we  drop 
the  external  shell  of  the  story,  and  look  at  the  moral  working  of  Balaam's  mind, 
when  all  becomes  orderly  and  natural.  There  is  here  no  contradiction.  Between 
the  first  and  second  asking  there  is  a  change  in  his  moial  attitude.  In  the  first  he 
is  do  ile  and  obedient,  and  th«  vice  of  conscience,  which  is  the  voice  of  God, 
prevails  and  decides  his  conduct.  He  enters  into  the  second  already  half  won  by 
J Jalak,  dislodged  from  his  old  sympathies,  restle«s  under  the  eomparison  between 
his  old  life  and  that  laid  open  to  him.  Wlien  men  revolve  moral  questions  in  such 
a  temper,  they  commonly  reach  a  decision  that  accor<ls  with  their  wish  rather  than 
with  their  conscience.  Balaam  has  abandoned  the  field  of  simple  duty — duty  so 
plain  that  there  is  no  need  of  second  thoughts.  It  is  clear  enough  that  in  no  way 
could  it  be  right  to  curse  those  whom  God  had  blessed;  this  he  well  knows,  and 
the  spontar.eous  verdict  of  his  conscience  is  God's  first  answer  But,  brooding  over 
the  matter  and  sore  pressed  by  temptation,  he  begins  to  contrive  ways  in  which  he 
may  win  the  gifts  and  honours  of  Balak,  and  also  remain  an  honest  prophet.  Here 
is  his  mistake,  Duty  is  no  longer  a  simple,  imperative  thing,  but  something  that 
may  be  conjured  with,  a  subordinate,  unstable  tool  instead  of  an  absolute  law. 
Having  thus  blinded  himself  as  to  the  nature  of  duty,  there  will  no  longer  be  any 
certainty  in  his  moral  operations;  confusion  of  thought  leads  to  confusion  of  action  ; 
in  his  own  transformation  he  transforms  God ;  he  now  hears  God  bidding  him  do 
what  he  desires  to  do.  Still,  at  times,  conscience  revives,  his  judgment  returns, 
and  then  he  knows  that  God  is  angry  with  him  for  doing  what  he  had  brought  him- 
self to  think  he  might  rightly  do.  This  is  every-day  experience  put  into  this  ancient 
Btory  in  a  dramatic  yet  real  way.  When  a  man  has  thus  trifled  with  himself  and 
with  his  duty,  God  does  indeed  seem  to  say  to  him,  "  Go  on  in  your  chosen  course." 
He  serves  God  in  the  externals  of  religion,  but  in  business  cheats  and  lies  in  what 


CHAP,  xxii.]  NUMBERS.  239 

he  calls  business  ways,  and  grinds  the  faces  of  the  poor  under  some  theory  of  com- 
petition, yet  God  prospers  him;  no  hindering  word  comes  to  him  from  Providence 
or  from  the  insulted  Spirit  of  truth.  It  may  be  better,  it  may  be,  in  a  certain  sense, 
the  command  of  God,  that  one  who  starts  on  such  a  path  siiall  follow  it  to  the  end, 
and  find  out  by  experience  what  he  has  rejected  as  an  intuition.  With  the  froward 
God  shows  Himself  froward.  To  those  who  have  pleasure  in  unrighteousness  God 
sends  a  strong  delusion  that  they  should  believe  a  lie.  This  is  the  concrete  way  of 
stating  how  the  moral  nature  acts  when  it  is  led  by  double  motives.  It  comes  into 
bewilderment ;  it  gets  no  true  answers  when  it  appeals  to  God  ;  its  own  sophistries 
seem  to  it  the  voice  of  God.  It  can  no  longer  tell  the  voice  of  God  from  its  own 
voice.  "  Fair  is  foul,  and  foul  is  fair."  (T.  T.  Munger.)  God  anawers  men  as 
they  wish : — It  is  not  unusual  wilh  God  to  grant,  not  only  the  desires  of  an  holy 
and  upright  mind,  but  also  our  desires  for  inferior  things,  when  the  heart  is  set 
upon  them  in  preference  to  Himself.  For  instance,  a  man  is  on  his  guard  against 
the  dangers  of  wealth  and  station ;  but  by  degrees  he  thinks  whether  he  cannot 
obtain  tbem  lawfully,  and  by  and  by  he  is  engaged  in  the  pursuit,  and  in  such  a 
case  God  gives  the  man  usually  that  for  which  he  craves.  He  seeks,  he  obtains ; 
God  seems  to  say,  "  Go  on."  There  is  no  greater  danger  than  for  God  to  answer  a 
man  according  to  the  desires  of  his  own  heart;  and  therefore  Job  says,  "  If  thou 
prepare  thine  heart,  and  stretch  out  thine  hands  towards  Him ;  if  iniquity  be  in 
thine  hand,  put  it  far  away"  (Job  xi.  14).  And  in  Ezekiel  God  says,  if  a  man  comes 
to  inquire  of  Him  with  idols  in  his  heart,  and  setting  the  stumbling-block  of  his 
iniquity  before  his  face,  He  will  answer  him  according  to  his  idols,  he  will  be  taken 
in  his  own  heart.  "If  that  prophet  be  deceived,"  it  is  added  in  very  remarkable 
words,  "  I  the  Lord  have  deceived  him,  and  I  will  punish  him"  (Ezek.  xiv.  4,  5,  9). 
But  yet  in  this  case  God  does  not  give  us  up  altogether.  As  when  Israel  asked  for 
a  king,  He  gave  indeed  what  they  desired — but  He  expostulated,  He  warned,  He 
sent  them  a  token  of  His  displeasure.  So  will  He  show  us  by  His  Providence  that 
He  is  displeased  with  us ;  in  the  way  that  we  go,  His  angel  with  the  sword  in  his 
hand  will  meet  us,  i.e.,  some  calamity,  some  accident,  some  grief,  is  sure  to  cross 
our  way  to  remind  us  from  God  that  the  way  that  we  are  going  is  not  the  way  of 
huliness  or  of  peace.  And  these  are  all  calls  from  God,  not  at  all  the  less  so  because 
when  a  man's  eyes  are  blinded  with  worldly  business  and  covetousness  he  does  not 
see  them  to  be  such.  (Isaac  WilliaDis,  B.D.)  Balaam;  or,  spiritual  influence, 
human  and  Divine : — I.  The  influence  of  a  bad  man  tjpon  society.  1.  A  man's 
influence  in  this  world  is  no  proof  of  his  moral  worth.  The  millions  of  all  ages 
readily  accede  to  the  claims  of  the  pretender,  however  lofty ;  and  the  more  lofty 
the  better,  if  the  clHimant  can  manage  to  keejD  his  countenance  while  the  admiring 
dupes  look  on.  2.  Society,  in  relation  to  true  intelligence  and  right  sympathy,  is 
in  a  very  lamentable  state.  A  true  education,  involving  the  harmonious  unfolding 
of  the  feeling  as  well  as  knowing  faculties  of  the  soul,  will  make  a  man  a  "  dis- 
cerner  of  spirits."  3.  The  high  probability  of  a  future  retributive  economy.  Does 
not  the  mutual  relation  letween  empty  pietenders  and  the  ignorant  victims  of  all 
ages  predict  a  reckoning  day,  and  cry  out  for  a  judgment  ?  II.  The  influence  op 
THE  GREAT  GoD  UTON  A  BAD  MAN  (vcr.  18).  1.  God  docs  cxcrt  a  Spiritual  influence 
over  the  minds  of  bad  men.  2.  The  spiritual  influence  He  exerts  over  the  minds  of 
bad  men  is  of  a  restraining  character.  (1)  External  diiiiculties.  (2)  Inward  pres- 
sure upon  the  spirit.  3.  God's  restraining  iufluence  upon  a  bad  man  is  for  the 
good  of  society.  (Hoiuilist.)  Balak's  second  application  to  Balaam;  or,  the 
decrease  of  resistance  to  evil : — I.  The  eepetition  with  inckeased  force  of  the 
REQUEST  of  Balak  TO  Balaam.  1.  The  embassage  was  more  influential.  2.  The 
message  was  more  urgent.  3.  The  inducements  were  stronger.  Learn:  that  temp- 
tations which  have  been  declined  half-heartedly  are  presented  again,  and  with 
greater  force.  Tlje  manner  of  Balaam's  dismissal  of  the  former  messengers  pre- 
pared the  way  for  a  repetition  of  their  mission.  II.  The  eepetition  under  aggra- 
vating CIRCUMSTANCES  OF  GUILTY  DELAY  BY  BALAAM.  1.  He  had  been  challenged  by 
God  as  to  the  presence  of  the  former  messengers.  2.  He  had  already  been  pro- 
hibited from  complying  witli  the  request  of  Balak.  3.  He  himself  felt  and  plainly 
declared  that  he  was  bound  by  the  word  of  the  Lord  in  the  matter.  III.  The  repe- 
tition OF  the  Divine  visit  to  Balaam.  1.  The  permission  granted.  2.  The  con- 
dition enforced.  IV.  'L'ue  setting  out  of  Balaam  on  the  journey.  (IF.  Jones.) 
The  character  of  Balaam  .-—We  take  this  to  be  the  great  crisis  in  Balaam's  life.  'We 
take  this  act,  which  to  many  appears  so  excellent,  to  be  the  first  step  in  his  down- 
ward course.     It  was  not  only  tne  day  of  God's  power  towarJs  Israel,  but  a  day  of 


240  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cuap.  xxii. 

grace  to  Balaam  ;  but,  alas  !  he  knew  it  not.  The  precious  moment  on  which  so 
much  depended  was  lost ;  henceforth  his  downward  course  was  rapid.  He  perislied 
in  the  rejection  of  grace  and  mercy.  There  is  a  crisis  in  our  histories  as  in  BalaamV, 
a  time,  perhaps  a  moment,  on  which  our  eternity  depends.  There  may  be  nothing 
to  mark  it  out  as  a  great  crisis  at  the  time.  The  Spirit  of  God  may  strive  with  you, 
gently  strive.  There  may  be  some  conviction  in  your  mind,  and  all  may  depend  on 
your  yielding  up  your  heart  to  Christ,  and  acting  upon  that  conviction  at  ouce.  If 
you  waver  when  you  ought  to  act ;  wait  for  more  lif,'ht,  when  \  ou  have  light  enough; 
if  you  allow  any  second  thought  to  come  in  to  determine  what  you  shall  do,  any- 
thing selfish  or  worldly,  when  you  ought  to  act  simply  for  God,  then  the  Spirit  may 
leave  you  ;  your  day  of  grace,  like  Balaam's,  may  pass  by,  or  it  mny  be  some  temp- 
tation which  is  presented  to  you.  We  do  not  mean  any  awful  temptation,  one 
which  the  world  itself  would  counsel  you  to  resist.  It  may  be  some  offer  which  you 
would  be  deemed  foolish  in  rejecting,  something  that  the  world  thinks  an  advantage ; 
and  yet  if  you  do  give  way  to  the  temptation,  oh,  what  unforeseen  consequences 
may  follow,  step  by  step,  with  unerring  certainty!  Let  it  now  be  impressed  upon 
your  htarts  what  great  and  eternal  consequences  may  depend  upon  vi.e  little  act. 
Oh,  be  faithful  to  God,  faithful  in  apparently  little  things,  as  well  as  in  gieat.  But 
we  must  go  a  step  further  and  ask,  "  Wliat  was  it  that  gave  this  bias  to  Balaam's 
will,  and  led  him  still  to  inquire,  when  he  ought  to  have  felt,  '  God  has  revealed 
His  will ;  it  is  enough.  I  will  not  move  from  my  place '  ?  "  Scri^jture  gives  a  com- 
plete answer  to  that  question.  It  was  a  besetting  sin,  and  we  are  told  what  it  was. 
It  was  the  sin  of  covetousness  (2  Pet.  iii.  15).  There  are  two  most  solemn  lessons 
which  this  ought  to  rivet  on  our  hearts.  First,  we  see  the  amazing  power  and  awful 
•  ffects  of  one  besetting  sin.  We  see  how  it  perverts  the  will,  how  it  keeps  the  heart 
from  resting  on  the  plain  word  of  God— how  it  leads  to  neglect,  yea,  not  even  to 
know,  the  day  of  visitation  —  and  how  it  hurries  the  soul  onward,  blinded  and 
debased,  to  a  point  at  which  at  first  it  would  have  shuddered.  The  other  lesson  is 
the  deceitfulness  of  the  human  heart.  lis  wishes  may  be  quite  opposite  to  its  most 
solemn  professions;  and  at  the  veiy  moment  when  it  seems  to  be  guided  by  the  will 
of  God  it  may  be  following  some  device  or  desire  of  its  own.  To  what  earnest  self- 
inspection  should  this  character  lead  us,  lest  our  hearts,  too,  should  be  hardened  by 
the  deceitfulness  of  sin — lest,  satisfied  with  a  decided  pniession,  we  forget  that  God 
is  the  seaicher  of  the  heart,  and  that  He  deals  and  will  deal  with  us,  not  according 
to  what  we  profess  to  be,  but  according  to  what  we  are,  according  to  the  real  state 
of  our  hearts.  (G.  Wagner.)  Perversion  as  shoivn  in  the  character  of  Balaam  : — 
I.  Pekveksion  of  great  gifts.  1.  By  turning  tbem  to  purposes  of  self-aggrandise- 
ment. Balak  struck  the  keynote  of  his  character  when  he  said,  "Am  I  not  able  to 
promote  thee  unto  honour?"  Herein,  then,  lies  the  first  perversion  of  glorious 
gifts  :  that  Balaam  sought  not  God's  honour,  but  his  own.  2.  By  making  tho-e  gifts 
subservient  to  his  own  greed.  II.  Perversion  of  conscience.  1.  The  hrst  intima- 
tion we  have  of  the  fact  that  Balaam  was  tampering  with  his  conscience,  is  in  his 
second  appeal  to  God.  There  is  nothing  like  the  first  glance  we  get  at  duty,  before 
there  has  been  any  special  pleading  of  our  affections  or  inclinations.  Duty  is  never 
uncertnin  at  first.  It  is  only  after  we  have  got  involved  in  the  sophistries  of  wishing 
that  thin^^s  were  otherwise  than  they  are  that  it  seems  indistinct.  Considering  a 
duty  is  often  only  explaining  it  away.  Deliberation  is  often  only  dishonesty.  God's 
guidance  is  plain,  when  we  are  true.  2.  The  second  stage  is  a  tate  of  hideous  con- 
tradictions :  God  permits  Balaam  to  go,  and  then  is  angry  with  him  for  going. 
There  is  nothing  here  which  cannot  be  interpreted  by  bitter  experieme.  We  must 
not  explain  it  away  by  saying  that  these  were  only  the  alternatioi  s  of  Balaam's  own 
mind.  They  were  ;  but  they  were  the  alternations  of  a  mind  with  which  God  was 
expostulating,  and  to  which  God  appeared  differently  at  dilTcient  times;  the  horrible 
mazes  and  inconsistencies  of  a  spirit  which  contrailicts  itself,  and  staves  to  dis- 
obey the  God  whom  yet  it  feels  and  acknowledges.  To  such  a  sta'e  of  mind  God 
becomes  a  contradiction.  "  With  the  froward  " — oh,  how  true  ! — "  Thou  wilt  show 
Th>  self  f reward."  3.  We  notice  next  the  evidences  in  him  of  a  disordered  mind 
and  heart.  It  is  a  strange,  sad  picture.  The  first  man  in  the  land,  gifted  beyond 
most  others,  conscious  of  great  mental  power,  going  on  to  splendid  prospects,  yet 
with  hopelessness  and  misery  working  at  Lis  heart.  Who  would  have  envied  Balaam 
if  he  could  have  seen  all-  the  hell  that  was  working  at  his  heart?  4.  Lastly,  let 
us  consider  the  impossibility  under  such  circumstances  of  going  back.  Balaam 
offern  to  go  back.  The  angel  says,  "  Go  on."  There  was  jet  one  hope  for  him,  to 
be  true,  to  utter  God's  woids  careless  of  the  consequences ;  but  he  who  had  been 


CHAP.  XXII.]  NUMBERS.  241 

false  so  long,  how  should  he  be  true  ?     It  was  too  late.    In  the  ardour  of  youth  you 
have  made  perhaps  a  wrong  choice,  or  chosen  an  unfit  profession,  or  suffered  your- 
self weakly  and  passively  to  be  drifted  into  a  false  course  of  action,  and  now,  in 
spite  of  yourself,  you  feel  there  is  no  going  back.     To  many  minds,  such  a  lot 
comes  as  with  the  mysterious  force  of  a  destiny.      They  see  themselves  driven, 
and   forget   that   they   put  themselves    in   the   way   of    the    stream   that    drives 
them.      They  excuse  their  own  acts  as  if  they  were  coerced.    They  struggle  now 
and  then  faintly,   as  Balaam  did  —  try  to  go  back  —  cannot — and   at  last   sink 
passively  in  the  mighty  current  that  floats  them  on  to  wrong.     And  thenceforth 
to  them  all  God's   intimations  will  come   unnaturally.      His  voice  will  sound  as 
that  of  an  angel  against  them  in  the  way.     Spectral  lights  will  gleam,  only  to  show 
a  quagmire  from  which  there  is  no  path  of  extrication.     {F.  W.  liobertson,  M.A.) 
Obedience  without  love,  as  instanced  in  the  character  of  Balaam: — I.  Balaam  was 
BLESSED  WITH  God's  ESPECIAL  FAVOUR.     1.  He  had  the  grant  of  inspiration.     2.  The 
knowledge  of  God's  will.     3.  An  insight  into  the  truths  of  mc)rality,  clear  and 
enlarged,   such  as  wo  Christians  even  cannot  surpass.     4.  He  was  admitted  to 
conscious  intercourse  with  God,  such  as  even  Christians  have  not.     II.  Balaam 
WAS  A  VERY  CONSCIENTIOUS  MAN.     1.  When  sought  by  Balak  he  prayed  to  God  for 
direction.   2.  When  forbidden  to  go,  he  refused  to  go.    3.  Only  when  God  gave  him 
leave  did  he  go.     4.  And  when  he  was  come  to  Balak  he  sirictly  adhered  to  God's 
orders.     Balaam  was  certainly  high-principled,  honourable,  conscientious.      He 
said,  and  he  did ;  he  professed,  and  he  acted  according  to  his  professions.    III.  Yet, 
•while  in  one  sense  in  God's  favi.ur,  he  was  in  another  and  higher  sense  under 
God's  displeasure.     He  was  displeasing  to  God  amid  his  many  excellences.     So 
that,  in  Balaam's  history,  we  seem  to  have  the  following  remarkable  ca--e — i.e., 
remarkable   according   to   our   customary   judgment  of  things—  a   man   Divinely 
favoured,  visited,  influenced,  guided,  protected,  eminently  honoured,  illuminated — 
a  man  possessed  of  an  enlightened  sense  of  duty,  and  of  moral  and  religious  acquire- 
ments, educated,  high-minded,  conscientious,  honourable,  firm  ;  and  yet  on  the 
side  of  God's  enemies,  personally  under  God's  displeasure,  and  in  the  end  (if  we  go 
on  to  that)  the  direct  instrument  of  Satan,  and  having  his  portion  with  the  un- 
believers.    This  surely  is  most  fearful  to  every  one  of  us — the  ujore  fearful  the 
more  we  are  conscious  to  ourselves  in  the  main  of  purity  of  intention  in  what  we 
do,  and  conscientious  adherence  to  our  sense  of  duty.     IV.  What  is  the  meaning 
OF  this  startling  exhibition  of  (jod's  ways?     1.  It  is   possible  to  be  geneially 
conscientious,  or  what  the  world  calls  honourable  and  high-principled,  yet  to  be 
destitute  of  that  religious  fear  and  strictness  which  God  calls  conscientiousness, 
but  which  the  world  calls  superstition  or  nairownessof  mind.     2.  God  gave  Balaam 
leave  to  go  to  Balak,  and  then  was  angry  with  him  for  going,  because  his  asking 
twice  was  tempting  God.     God  is  a  jealous  God.     We  may  not  safely  intrude  upon 
Him,  and  make  free  with  Him.     Concluding  lessons  :  1.  We  see   how   little  we 
can  depend,  in  judging;  of  right  and  wrong,  on  the  apparent  excellence  aTid  high 
character  of  individuals.     2.  Observe  the  wonderful   secret  providence   of  GofI, 
while  all  things  seem  to  go  on  accordiuR  to  the  course  of  this  world.     3.  When  we 
have  begun  an  evil  course  we  cannot  retrace  our  steps.     4.  God  gives  us  warnings 
now  and  then,  iiut  does  not  repeat  them.    Balaam's  sin  consisted  in  notactint;  upon 
what  was  told  him  once  for  all.     Beware  of  trifling  with  conscience.     May  He  give 
you  grace  so  to  hear  as  you  will  wish  to  have  heard  when  life  is  over — to  hear  in  ai 
practical  way,  with  a  desire  to  profit — to  learn  God's  will  and  to  do  it !     {J.  H. 
Newman,  D.D.)         Balaam  : — We,  in  these  days,  are  accustomed  to  draw  a  sharp 
line  between  the  good  and  the  bad,  the  converted  and  the  unconverted,  the  childieu 
of  God  and  the  children  of  ihis  world,  those  who  have  God's  Spirit  and  those  who 
have  not,  which  we  find  nowhere  in  Scripture  ;  and  therefore  when  we  read  of  such 
a  man  as  Balaam  we  cannot  understand  him.     He  knows  the  true  God.     More,  he 
has  the  Spirit  of  God  in  him,  and  thereby  utters  wonderful  prop'  ecies ;  and  yet  he 
is  a  bad  man.     How  can  that  be?     Now  bear  in  mind,  first,  that  Balaam  is  no 
impo-tor  or  magician.     He  is  a  wise  man,  and  a  prophet  of  God.     God  really 
speaks  to  him,  and  really  inspires  him.     And  bear  in  mind,  too,  that  B^ilaam's 
inspiration  did  not  moelv  open  his  mouth  to  say  wonderful  won's  which  he  did  not 
understand,  but  opened  his  heart  to  say  righteous  and  wise  things  which  he  did 
understand.    What,  then,  was  wrong  in  Balaam  ?   Tljis,  that  he  was  double-minded. 
He  wished  to  serve  God.     True.     But  he  wished  to  serve  himself  by  serving  God, 
as  too  many  do  in  all  times.     That  was  what  was  wrong  with  him — self-seeking ; 
and  the  Bible  story  brings  out  that  s"'f  seeking  with  a  delicacy,  and  a  perfect 

16 


348  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTn.iTOn.  [cnw.  xxil. 

knowledge  of  human  nature,  which  ought  to  teach  us  some  of  the  secrets  of  onr 
own  hearts.  But  what  may  we  learn  from  this  ugly  story  ?  Kecollect  what  I  saiil 
at  first,  that  we  should  find  Balaam  too  like  many  people  nowadays;  perhaps 
too  Uke  ourselves.  Too  like  indeed.  For  never  were  men  more  tempted  to  sin  as 
Balaam  did  than  in  tliese  days,  when  religion  is  all  the  fashion,  and  pays  a  man, 
and  helps  him  on  in.  life ;  when,  indeed,  a  man  cannot  expect  to  succeed  without 
professing  some  sort  of  religion  or  other.  Thereby  comes  a  terrible  temptation  to 
many  men.  I  do  not  mean  to  hypocrites,  but  to  really  well-meaning  men.  They 
like  religion.  They  wish  to  be  good ;  they  have  the  feeling  of  devotion.  They 
pray,  they  read  their  Bibles,  they  are  attentive  to  services  and  to  st^rmons,  and  are 
more  or  less  pinus  people.  But  soon — too  soon — they  find  that  their  piety  is 
profitable.  Their  business  increases.  Their  credit  increases.  They  gain  power 
over  their  fellow  men.  What  a  fine  thing  it  is,  they  think,  to  be  pious !  Tlien 
creeps  in  the  love  of  the  world;  the  love  of  money,  or  power,  or  admiration  ;  and 
they  begin  to  value  religion  because  it  helps  them  to  get  on  in  the  world.  Aye, 
they  are  often  more  attentive  than  ever  to  religion,  because  their  consciences  pinch 
them  at  times,  and  have  to  be  drut'ged  by  continual  church-goings  and  chapel- 
goings,  and  readings  and  prayings,  in  order  that  they  may  be  able  to  say  to  tbem- 
selves  with  Balaam,  "Thus  saith  Balaam,  he  who  heard  the  word  of  God,  and 
had  the  knowledge  of  the  Most  High."  So  they  say  to  themsehes,  "I  must  be 
right.  How  religious  I  am ;  how  fond  of  sermons,  and  of  church  services,  and 
missionary  meetings,  and  charitable  institutions,  and  everything  that  is  good  and 
pious.  I  must  be  right  with  God."  Deceiving  their  own  selves,  and  saying  to 
themselves,  "  I  am  rich  and  increased  with  goods,  I  have  need  of  nothing,"  and 
not  knowing  that  they  are  wretched,  and  miserable,  and  blind,  and  naked.  Would 
God  that  such  people,  of  whom  there  are  too  many,  would  take  St.  John's  warning 
and  buy  of  the  Lord  gold  tiled  in  the  fire— the  true  gold  of  honestj' — that  they  may 
be  truly  rich,  and  anoint  their  eyes  with  eye-salve  that  they  may  see  themselves 
for  once  as  they  are.  {€'.  Kingsle;/,  31. A.)  Triflivfi  with  conscience: — What  was 
Balaam's  prime  mistake  ?  I  think  it  was  this,  that  he  trifled  with  his  conscience. 
God  speaks  once  to  the  human  soul,  and  speaks  loudly  ;  but  if  you  disobey  His 
voice,  it  soon  sinks  to  a  whisper.  "  When  I  was  a  little  boy,"  said  Theodore  Parker, 
"  in  my  fourth  year,  one  fine  day  in  spring  my  father  led  me  by  the  hand  to  a  dis- 
tant part  of  the  farm,  but  soon  sent  me  home  alone.  On  the  way  I  had  to  pass  a 
little  jjond,  then  spreading  its  waters  wide  ;  a  rhodora  in  full  bloom,  a  rare  fiower 
which  grew  only  in  that  locality,  attracted  my  attention,  and  drew  me  to  the  spot. 
I  saw  a  little  spotted  tortoise  sunning  itself  in  the  sliallow  water  at  the  root  of  the 
flowering  shrub.  I  lifted  the  stick  I  had  in  my  hand  to  strike  the  harmless  reptile ; 
for  though  I  had  never  killed  any  creature,  yet  I  had  seen  other  boys  out  of  sport 
destroy  birds  and  squirrels  and  the  like,  and  I  felt  a  disposition  to  follow  their 
wicked  example.  But  all  at  once  something  checked  my  little  arm,  and  a  voice 
within  me  said,  clear  and  loud,  '  It  is  wrong.'  I  held  my  uplifted  stick  in  wonder 
at  the  new  emotion,  the  consciousness  of  an  involuntary  but  inward  check  upon 
my  actions,  till  the  tortoise  and  the  rhodora  both  vani>hed  from  my  sight.  I 
liastened  home,  and  told  the  tale  to  my  mother,  and  asked  what  it  was  that  told 
me  '  it  was  wrong.'  She  wii)ed  a  tear  from  her  eye,  and  taking  me  in  her  aims 
said  :  '  S^me  men  call  it  conscience,  but  I  prefer  to  call  it  the  voice  of  God  in  the 
soul  of  man.  If  you  listen  and  obey  it,  it  will  speak  clearer  and  clearer,  and 
always  guide  you  right ;  but  if  you  turn  a  deaf  ear  and  disobey,  then  it  will  fade 
out  little  by  little,  and  leave  you  in  the  dark  and  without  a  guide.  Your  life 
depends  on  heeding  that  little  voice.'  "  This  is  the  truth,  let  me  say  again,  of 
Balaam's  history;  and  having  so  shown  it  to  you,  or  tried  to  make  you  see  it,  I 
might  almost  leave  it  to  your  reflection  without  a  word.  But  as  I  want  you  to 
realise  what  the  human  conscience  is,  and  how  responsible  yon  all  are  for  your 
mode  of  treating  it,  there  are  just  two  or  three  remarks  which  I  will  mnke,  1. 
Firstly,  there  are  si>me  people  who  make  a  boast,  as  it  were,  of  having  what  I  may 
oall  a  loose  or  easy  conscience.  They  think  it  a  sign  of  intellectual  light  to  be  free 
from  conscientious  scruples.  They  say,  "  Oh,  yes,  no  doubt  there  was  a  time 
when  it  was  thought  wrong  to  touch  or  to  read  newspapers  and  secular  books  on 
Sundays,  or  to  go  to  a  theatre,  or  to  participate  in  dancing  or  card-playing  or  any 
such  thing;  but  these  were  Puritan  days,  and  we  have  outlived  them,  we  have 
learned  to  laugh  at  them,  we  do  nowadays  pretty  much  as  we  like."  This  is  the 
sort  of  language  which  is  often  heard  in  the  world.  Now  what  I  say  to  you  about 
it  shall  be  siuiple  common  sense.     I  agree  to  sonae  extent  with  the  people  who  to 


CHAP,  xxn.]  NUMBERS.  243 

speak.  It  is  a  mistake,  I  think,  to  multiply  the  number  of  sins.  There  are  so 
many  things  which  are  wrong  in  the  world,  and  it  is  so  hard  for  most  of  us  to 
keep  from  doing  them,  that  I  should  say  we  make  a  mistake  if  we  involuntarilv 
add  to  the  number  of  things  which  we  may  not  do.  Only  forgive  my  saying  that, 
if  one  must  make  a  mistake,  then  it  is  better  to  err  on  the  side  of  abstaining  from 
good  than  on  the  side  of  running  heedlessly  into  wrong.  It  is  better  to  have  a 
weak  conscience  than  a  wicked  one.  Do  not  you  think  that  for  one  person  who 
violates  the  Sunday  from  a  religious  motive,  there  are  twenty  who  violate  it 
because  they  do  not  care  for  religion  at  all  ?  And  is  it  not  likely — ah  !  how  likely 
^that,  if  we  are  not  careful  to  clierishthe  means  of  grace  and  of  religious  practice, 
if  we  do  not  go  to  church  and  to  the  Holy  Communion,  we  shall  gradually  sink 
into  a  worldly  way  of  looking  at  things,  and  our  religion  will  die  away  altogether? 
2.  Again,  let  me  impress  upon  you  that  your  conscience  is  pl^istic  ;  you  are  always 
forming  it,  always  making  it  better  or  worse.  If  you  listen  to  it  when  it  speaks, 
it  sp  'aks  more  plainly  ;  if  you  neglect  it,  it  will  simply  cease  to  speak.  Ought  it 
not  to  be  your  prayer,  your  daily  eifoit,  to  see  good  and  evil  as  God  sees  them  ? 
For,  believe  me,  I  am  telling  you  what  I  know,  when  you  grow  up  and  go  out  into 
the  world,  you  will  hear  people  saying  of  even  the  vilest  sins,  "  What  does  it 
matter?  I  do  not  see  the  wrong  of  it."  There  is  a  blindness  of  the  soul  as  well 
as  of  the  body;  and  although  the  blinded  soul  cannot  behold  the  Sun  of  Righteous- 
ness, the  Sun  is  shining  in  the  heaven  all  the  same.  3.  Lastly,  follow  your 
conscience,  and  it  ^hall  lead  you  to  God.  Believe  me,  the  only  way  to  get  more 
spiritual  light  is  to  live  aceoruing  to  the  light  you  have.  It  may  be  only  a  i-ay  that 
breaks  athwart  the  dai-kness  ;  make  the  most  of  it,  and  some  day  you  shall  have 
more.  There  may  be  hereafter  only  one  duty  which  is  clear  to  you,  only  one 
friend  or  kinsman  whom  you  can  help,  only  one  boy  whom  you  can  keep  from  evil, 
only  one  piece  of  work  which  you  alone  can  do.  Well,  do  that.  Try  to  accomplish 
that  one  object.  Try  to  save  just  that  one  human  soul.  Gradually,  it  may  be 
after  many  a  day,  the  clouds  will  break.  You  will  know  more  of  God's  will.  He 
will  seem  nearer  to  you.  His  voice  will  sound  more  clearly  in  your  soul.  You 
shall  enter  into  that  Divine  peace  which  the  world  may  neither  give  nor  take  away. 
(J.  E.  C.  Welldon,  M.A.)  Balaam,  an  instance  of  moral  perversion  : — How  came  it 
that  Balaam  acted  so  inconsistently  with  his  knowledge  and  convictions,  and 
succeeded  for  the  time,  as  we  may  say,  in  juggling  w-ith  his  conscience  ?  The 
answer  i-<  not  hird  to  find.  He  loved  money.  His  heart  was  set  on  gold.  He  had 
alio  ved  the  passion  of  covetousness  to  become  the  ruling  principle  of  his  nature. 
I  have  somewhere  read  of  one  who,  having  found  a  young  leopard,  petted  it,  anil 
trained  it  to  be  his  dailv  companion  in  his  chamber.  It  grew  up  to  maturity,  but 
still  it  was  kept  beside  him,  and  men  wondered  at  his  foolhardiness  in  permitting 
it  to  go  unchained.  But  he  would  not  be  advised.  One  day,  however,  as  it  licked 
his  hand  witli  its  rough  tongue,  it  ruffled  the  skin,  and  tasted  his  blood ;  and  then 
all  the  savage  nature  of  the  brute  came  out,  and  there  was  a  fearful  struggle  between 
them,  from  which  he  escaped  only  by  destroying  it.  So  it  was,  in  some  respects, 
in  this  case.  Balaam  had  nurtured  his  covetousness  into  strength  ;  and  no^v,  at 
the  offer  of  Balak's  rewards,  its  full  force  came  out ;  but,  instead  of  lighting  with  it 
and  slaying  it,  he  yielded  to  it  and  was  destroyed.  What  a  terrible  passion  is  this 
of  covetousness !  and  how  dangerous  it  is,  espe  ially  to  those  who  wish  to  preserve 
a  fair  a;ipearance  I  For  in  men's  estimation  it  is,  at  lea^t  in  its  boginnings,  a 
re-pectable  thing.  Nor  is  its  respectability  its  only  danger,  for  in  the  mii  us  of 
many  it  is  associated  only  with  large  sums  of  money;  whereas  in  reality  it  mav  be 
as  strong  in  the  heart  of  him  whose  dealings  are  carried  on  in  cents  as  in  that  of 
one  whose  transactions  are  concerned  with  liundreds  of  thousands  of  dollars.  No 
one  of  us,  whether  ri;di  or  poor,  whether  minister  or  layman,  has  a  right  to  say 
that  there  is  no  fear  of  him  in  this  matter  ;  for  if  the  love  of  money  takes  posses- 
sion of  the  heart,  it  will  blind  the  eyes,  and  harden  the  conscience,  and  become  a 
root  of  evil,  so  that  we  shall  "  fall  into  temptation  and  a  snare,  and  into  in  my 
foolish  and  hurtful  lu-sts  that  war  against  the  soul."  But  what  is  true  of  covetous- 
ness is  true  also  of  every  evil  principle,  so  that  we  may  generalise  the  Ipsson  here, 
and  say  that  if  the  heart  be  fixed  on  any  object  as  its  God,  other  than  the  God  and 
Father  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  we  may  expect  in  the  end,  whatever  may  b^  our 
knowledge,  and  whatever  our  scruples  in  other  respects,  that  we  shall  act  against 
our  convictions,  and  make  shipwreuk  not  only  of  the  faith,  but  also  of  ours  Ives, 
"without  possibility  of  salvage."  (If.  it/.  Taylor,  D.I). )  Balaam  the  man  of 
double  mind : — He  was  one  of  those  unstable  men  whom  the  apostle  calls  double- 


244  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxii. 

minded — an  ambidexter  in  religion,  like  Kedwald,  king  of  tbe  East  Saxons,  the  fiist 
■who  was  baptized,  who,  as  Camden  relates,  had,  in  the  same  church,  one  chajjel  lor 
the  Christian  religion,  and  another  for  sacrificing  to  devils.    A  loaf  of  the  same  leaven 
was  our  resolute  Eufus,  who  painted  God  on  one  side  of  his?  shield  and  the  devil  on 
the  other,  with  the  desperate  inscription  in  Latin — "I  am  ready  for  either."  (C.  Ness.) 
Baliiam's  protest: — A  brave  speech,  certainly!      Yes,  no  doubt  it  was  true  that 
Balaam  felt  that  even  for  a  house  full  of  silver  and  gold  he  could  not  go  beyond  the 
word  of  tbe  Lord.     But,  in  the  first  place,  why  protest  so  much  concerning  silver 
and  gold  ?     Balak's  message  had  not  mentioned  silver  and  gold — it  spoke  specially 
of  honour.     Surely  it  must  have  been  because  the  mind  of  Balaam  was  so  mucb 
preoccupied  with  thoughts  of  silver  and  gold  that  he  thus  spake  ;  answering  himself 
rather  than  others.     And  then,  why  does  Balaam  say,  "  I  cannot  "  go  beyi  nd  the 
word  of  the  Lord?     Why  does  he  not  roundly  say,  "  I  will  not  go  beyond  the  word 
of  the  Lord  "  ?     As  it  is  he  only  speaks  of  inability  ;  he  does  not  mention  such  a 
thing  as  personal  disinclination.     These  flaws  we  notice  in  his  words.     But  still, 
upon  the  whole,  his  speech  was  brave,  just,  perhaps,  as  one  may  say,  one  whit  too 
bold.   For  if  there  be  cne  thing  that  we  have  need  to  stand  in  doubt  of,  in  moments 
of  temptation,  it  is  high  sounding  phrases  of  deteiTuination.     For,  as  a  rule,  we 
may  be  sure  the  courage  of  the  heart  is  in  an  inverse  proportion  to  the  valour  of 
the  lip.     Balaam  was  conscious  of  an  inward  faltering  in  reference  to  that  which 
lay  before  him,  and  he  sought  to  veil  the  weakness  of  his  purpose  by  the  vigour  of 
his  protestations.     (W.  Roberts.)        Dallying  with  temptation: — Balaam   is  very 
sure  that  he  shall  confine  himself  to  the  word  of  the  Lord,  but  he,  himself,  out  of 
his  own  Leart,  has  begun  to  entertain  the  purpose  of  getting  upon  the  scene  of  these 
glittering  temptations.     He  proposes   to  remain  a  true  man,  but  he  enjoys  tbe 
company  of  these  honourable  princes.     He  will  remain  a  true  man,  but  he  would 
like  to  be  near  a  king  who  can  send  such  presents.   He  will  remain  a  true  man,  but, 
once  in  Moah,  his  wit  will  stand  him  in  hand  better  than  in  these  dull  regions 
where  he  dwells.     It  is  the  old,  old  story  of  humanity — dallying  with  temptation  in 
the  field  of  the  imagination,  bribing  conscience  with  fair  promises,  yet  all  the  while 
moving  up  to  the  forbiddeii  thing.     It  is  a  history  not  seldom  repeated.     Oh,  no! 
I  shall  never  become  a  miser,  but  I  propose  to  be  exceedingly  prudent.     I  shall 
never  throw  away  my  reputation,  my  character,  but  I  will  feed  eye  and  ear  and 
imagination  with  pictures  of  forbidden  pleasure.     I  shall  never  become  a  drunkard, 
buVl  will  drink  in  moderation.     I  shall  never  permit  myself  ti>  be  called  a  selfish 
man,  but  I  will  take  good  care  of  myself  in  this  rough  world.     I  shall  never  become 
dishonest,  but  I  will  keep  a  keen  eye  for  good  chauces.     Thus  it  is  that  men  are 
passing  to  ruin  over  a  path  paved  with  double  purposes.     Balaam  now  gets  a 
different  answer.     The  first  time  he  is  honest  and  open,  and  is  told  to  remain  ;  the 
next  time  he  takes  into  the  interview  his  own  desires,  which  are  against  his  con- 
victions, and  a  half-formed  purpose,  and  he  comes  out  of  it  with  thw  answer  he 
wants ;  desire  has  taken  the  lead  of  conscience.     He  starts  on  his  ill-fated  journey, 
meets  with  strange,  confounding  experiences — reflections  of  the  moral  confusion 
into  which  he  has  fallen — experiences,  however,  that  serve  to  steady  and  buttress 
him  on  his  professional  side,  but  are  not  able  to  prevent  his  fall  as  a  man.     [T.  T. 
Mimger.)         On  tainj)ering  with  conscience  : — Is  this  condui^t  of  Balaam's  strange 
or  unusual  ?    Have  we  none  of  us  done  exactly  as  Balaam  did  ?     I  protest  that  men 
are  doing  precisely  as  Balaam  did  every  day.     Yes,  and  every  day  are  meeting  with 
the  selfsame  punishment,  and  braving  the  selfsame  anger.     Temptation  to  self- 
aggrandisement  of  various  kinds  comes  before  us,  there  is  a  prospect  of  a  brilliant 
success,  there  is  the  hope  of  some  tempting  reward;  the  only  condition  is  a  course 
of  action  about  the  lawfulness  of  which  we  are  in  doubt.     Then  comes  the  trial — 
we  ponder :  on  one  side  is  the  bait  glittering — we  long  for  so  great  a  prize.     But 
God  comes  to  us — speaks  to  us  in  our  consciences — speaks  to  us  by  His  Word — 
speaks  to  us  by  His  Spirit,  saying,  Forbear  1  there  is  sin  in  the  doing  of  that  which 
must  be  done  ere  the  end  you  long  for  can  be  attained.     And  at  first  we  acquiesce. 
Clearly  it  has  been  shown  to  us,  that  though  ease  and  pleasure  be  sweet,  duty  is 
stern  and  may  not  be  gainsaid  ;  that  though  success  be  exquisite  delight,  unfairness 
is  always  vile  and  bad ;  that  though  fame  and  position  be  longed  for  never  so 
eagerly,  yet  to  depart  from  truth  or  honesty  is  to  depart  from  God.     But  by  and  by 
the  temptation  is  looked  at  again  and  again — the  thing  we  long  for  is  always  before 
us,  the  thing  we  fear  is  far ;  and  we  begin  to  ask  whether  our  first  impression  was 
really  quite  so  unmistakably  right  as  we  believed  it.     We  look  to  see  if  for  some 
little  swerving  from  the  rigorous  path  of  virtue  some  excuse  may  not  be  found. 


CHAP,  xxn.]  NUMBEnS.  245 

And  we  question  whether  the  end  may  not  be  attains  1  without  quite  using  aU  the 
means.  We  seek  to  know  if  our  consciences  cannot  allow  us  to  grasp  the  thing  we 
■wish,  ami  for  its  sake  bear  us  blameless  for  once  in  doing  the  thing  we  shrink  from ; 
and,  in  short,  little  by  little,  we  give  oirselves  to  be  deceived  as  Balaam  did.  We 
ask  for  guidance,  perchance  with  a  divided  heart  ;  we  pray  God  to  teach  us  how  to 
act,  when  we  have  already  more  than  half  decided.  We  pretend  to  leave  ourselves 
in  His  hands,  and  yet  we  are  only  preten  ling ;  and  then  if  He  speaks  to  us  at  all, 
it  is  a  voice  which  speaks  to  a  conscience  that  has  become  confused,  and  a  judgment 
that  has  suffered  itself  only  too  willingly  to  be  disjointed  ;  and  though  the  voice 
seems  to  be,  and  in  some  sense  is,  the  voice  of  God,  yet  it  is,  indeed,  only  a  lie. 
(^A.  Je^fopp,  M.A.)  Withstanding  temptation : — That  was  a  bright  suggestion  of  a 
little  boy  who  made  the  following  answer  to  the  question- of  a  passer-by.  Seeing 
the  little  fellow  patting  his  fath'^r's  horse,  that  was  standing  in  front  of  his  house, 
the  man  asked,  "  Can  your  Inrse  go  fast,  my  boy?  "  "  No,  not  very,"  he  replied, 
■"  but  he  can  stand  fast."  T.\  it  is  a  virtue  not  to  be  despised  in  a  horse  ;  a  faithful 
animal  that  can  be  trusted  to  remain  in  his  tracks  without  pulling  down  the 
hitching  post  or  breaking  his  halter  is  to  be  coveted.  Can  it  be  said  of  you,  boys, 
that  you  "  can  stand  fast  "?  Are  you  firm  when  tempted  to  do  wrong?  Are  you 
easily  led  astray  ?  Put  yourself  on  the  right  side,  and  when  urgnd  to  step  aside 
from  it  remember  always  to  stand  fast.  (Juvenile  Templar.)  Gold  an  ignoble 
motive  for  service  : — The  noblest  deeds  which  have  been  done  on  earth  have  not 
been  done  for  gold.  It  was  not  for  the  sake  of  gold  that  our  Lord  came  down  and 
died,  and  the  apostles  went  out  to  preach  the  good  news  in  all  lands.  The  Spartans 
looked  for  no  reward  in  money  when  they  fought  and  died  at  Thermopylse  ;  and 
Socrates  the  wise  asked  no  pay  from  his  countrymen,  but  lived  p  lor  and  barefoot 
all  his  days,  only  caring  to  make  men  good.  And  there  are  heroes  in  our  days  also, 
who  do  noble  deeds,  but  not  for  gold.  Our  discoverers  did  not  go  to  make  themselves 
rich  when  they  sailed  out  one  after  another  into  the  dreary  frozen  seas  ;  nor  did  the 
ladies  who  went  out  to  drudge  in  the  hospitals  of  the  East,  making  themselves  poor, 
that  thpy  might  be  rich  in  noble  works ;  and  young  men,  too,  did  they  s  ly  to 
themselves,  "  How  much  money  shall  I  earn  ?  "  when  they  went  to  the  war, 
leaving  wealth  and  comfort,  and  a  pleasant  home,  to  face  hunger  and  thirst, 
and  wounds  and  death,  that  they  n  ght  fight  for  their  country  and  their  Qieen  ? 
No,  children,  there  is  a  better  thing  on  earth  than  wealth,  a  better  thing  ihan 
life  itself,  and  that  is,  to  have  done  something  before  you  die,  for  which  good 
men  may  honour  you,  and  God  your  Father  smile  upon  your  work.  (C  Kingsley.) 
*' No  "  without  any  "  Yes  "  in  it: — Many  a  promising  youth  has  been  ruined 
because  he  did  not  know  how  to  say  "  No."  There  are  many  people  who  say 
"  No,"  but  so  faintly  that  there  seems  a  "  Yes  "  in  it,  so  that  it  only  invites  further 
persuasion.  Many  a  man,  tempted  by  appetite  within,  and  by  companions  without, 
8ays  "  No  "  feebly  and  faintlv.  His  "  No  "  has  a  "  Yes  "  in  it.  A  lad  was  coming 
along  the  street  one  day  with  a  young  man  who  lived  near  him  who  was  somewhat 
excited  by  strong  drink,  and  after  walking  along  awhile  with  his  comi^anion  he  drew 
a  bottle  from  his  pocket,  and  said,  "  Have  some  ?  "  "  Well,  hand  it  over,"  replied 
the  lad.  The  bottle  was  passed  to  him,  and  raising  it  aloft  he  hurled  it  with  a  crash 
against  the  stone  wll,  and  turning  to  his  astonished  companion,  he  said,  "Don't 
jou  ever  put  a  b  >ttle  to  my  lips  again."  The  young  man  was  inclined  to  be 
irritated,  but  he  had  sense  enough  to  retain  his  anser.  The  lad's  "  No  "  had  not 
any  "Yes"  in  it.  Tliere  are  scores  of  young  men  who  need  the  decision  which 
this  lad  had.  (S.  S.  Chronicle.)  A  roiting  conscience  : — I  think  no  man  could 
have  his  arm  rot  and  drop  away,  from  wrist  to  shoulder,  and  not  know  it;  but  you 
shall  find  numberless  men  whose  consciences  have  rotted,  from  circumference  to  core, 
and  they  know  nothing  about  it.  They  are  less  concerned  about  themselves  than 
when  the  corruption  first  bejian.  This  silence  of  the  hollowing  out  of  a  man— this 
noiseless  process  of  preparing  him  for  destruction,  is  an  element  of  very  great  fear- 
fulness.  It  tills  me  with  grief  and  sadness,  as  I  look  on  men,  to  know  tliat  as  the 
snow  falls,  flake  by  flake,  and  no  sound  tells  of  its  accumulation — that  as  the  dust 
sifts  in,  and  no  noise  warns  of  its  choking  rise,  so  silently,  so  surely,  man  is  heaping 
to  himself  wrath  against  the  day  of  wrath,  and  does  not  know  it.  (H.  W.  Beech er.) 
Something  wrong  with  conscience  : — A  steamboat  going  at  full  speed  approached  a 
bridge.  The  pilot  saw  that  the  draw  was  not  open,  and  rang  his  bell  to  have  the 
engines  reversed.  There  was  ample  time  to  bring  the  ve.«spl  to  a  stand,  if  the  signal 
had  been  obeyed.  But,  in  spite  of  it,  the  boat  went  crashing  through  the  bridge, 
causing  great  damage  and  ranch  peril,  though,  as  it  ha;  pened,  no  actualloss  of  life. 


246  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOB.  [chap.  xxii. 

It  was  found  afterwards  that  the  bell-wire  was  broken,  so  that  the  bell  did  not  ring 
in  the  engineer's  room.  Something  like  this  often  happens  to  that  safeguard  of  our 
soul  which  we  call  conscience.  It  gets  disordered  in  one  way  or  another  and  doesn't 
work.  A  danger  is  perceived.  We  see  plainly  the  course  we  ought  to  take.  Con- 
science warns  us  that  we  are  on  the  wrong  road.  Why  don't  we  i^top,  and  turn  into 
the  way  we  know  is  safe?  Because  conscience  has  lost  its  po\<er.  In  the  engine- 
room  of  our  ship  of  life,  where  Will  presides,  the  voice  of  conscience  is  unheard,  or, 
if  heard  at  all,  is  unheeded.  Instead  of  being  a  recognised  and  regarded  imperative, 
as  it  ought  to  be,  it  has  become  impotent.  The  instinct  that  tells  us  to  do  what  is 
right  and  to  shun  what  is  wrong  is  one  of  the  highest  faculties  of  the  human  soul. 
Like  all  our  powers,  both  of  mind  and  body,  it  may  be  blunted  aud  withered  and 
deadened  until  it  is  practically  lost.  Youth  is  the  time  to  watch  against  and 
avert  this  awful  disaster.  We  cannot  too  carefully  cherish  the  first  and  quick 
sensitiveness  which  gives  to  conscience  its  proper  m«stery,  aud  causes  it  to 
be  obeyed  as  God's  own  voice  speaking  in  the  heart  of  man.  {C]iristia7i  Age.) 
Parallels  to  the  case  of  Balaam  : — Parallels  to  the  case  of  Balaam  are  not 
difficult  to  find.  Cardinal  Wolsej',  dispensing  eccltsiastical  ban  and  blessing, 
at  the  mandate  of  Henry  the  Eighth ;  Eichelieu  and  Mazarin,  each  betraying 
his  churchly  trust  for  the  sake  of  political  power — are  well-known  instances. 
Contrast  with  these  Ambrose's  stern  arraignment  of  Theodosius,  an  account 
of  which  will  be  found  in  any  good  ecclesiastical  history.  The  schoolboy 
who  sneers  at  religion,  hoping  to  gain  thereby  the  favour  of  his  companions,  is 
unconsciously  following  in  the  footsteps  of  Balaam.  The  demons  gave  good 
testimony  to  Christ  (Luke  viii.  28,  29)  and  to  His  apostles  (Acts  xix.  15),  but  that 
did  not  render  them  any  the  less  demons.  So  Balaam,  himself  a  wicked  man, 
prophesied  of  the  coming  Messiah.  Compare  the  case  of  Caiaphas  the  high  priest 
(John  xi.  50,  51).  Recall  Christ's  description  of  the  judgment,  where  many  who 
have  prophesied  the  truth  in  His  name  will  be  told  that  they  are  none  of  His  (Matt, 
vii.  22,  23).  Ba'aam  fell,  though  his  eyes  were  open.  (American  S.  S.  Times.) 
God's  anger  was  kindled  because  he  went. — God  permits  Balaam  to  go,  and  yet  is 
angry  : — "  Go,"  said  the  Voice  ;  "  but  only  the  word  that  I  shall  speak  unto  thee, 
that  thou  sbalt  speak."  Was  this  merely  the  echo  of  the  Divine  word  in  a  hollow, 
bewildered  conscience  ?  That  is  not  a  full  explanation  of  the  fact,  though  it  is  one 
which  we  must  not  disregard.  Bahiam  did  go,  and  was  intended  to  go.  He  would 
not  have  learned  the  lesson  which  he  was  to  learn  if  he  had  not  gone.  And  yet  his 
going  was  a  wilful  act.  It  was  the  struggle  of  one  determined  to  have  his  own 
way,  claiming  the  privilege  of  a  man,  while  he  was  reducing  himself  into  the  con- 
dition of  an  animal,  one  that  must  be  held  in  with  bit  and  bridle,  because  he  will 
not  be  guided  and  governed  as  a  spiritual  creature.  You  are  puzzled  at  the 
language  of  Scripture  about  God's  permitting  Balaam  to  go,  and  then  being  dis- 
pleased at  him  for  going.  You  may  well  be  puzzled.  For  what  are  so  utterly 
bewildering  as  the  mazes  and  contradictions  of  a  human  will,  confessing  a  Master, 
struggling  to  disobey  Him  ?  But  would  you  rather  that  the  Bible  left  this  fact 
unnoticed  ?  Would  you  rather  that  it  described  human  actions  and  events  without 
reference  to  it?  Is  that  the  proof  which  you  demand  that  it  was  written  by  God 
and  for  men?  You  will  not  have  that  sign  if  you  ask  for  it  ever  so  much.  Not 
here  alone,  but  everywhere,  you  will  be  met  with  these  contradictions  ;  man  striving 
with  God,  God  dealing  with  him  as  a  voluntary  creature,  such  as  He  had  made 
him  to  be,  not  crusliing  his  will  by  an  act  of  omnipotence,  but  teaching  it  to  feel 
its  own  impotency  and  madness.  (F.  D.  Maurice,  M.A.)  The  Die iiie  permission 
of  self-will : — I  do  not  see  how  any  thoughtful  man  can  consider  this  story  without 
discovering  why  God  allows  men  to  enter  on  ways  which  are  not  good,  and  which 
are  therefore  full  of  peril,  and  why  He  nevertheless  "withstands  "  them  when  they 
walk  in  them.  He  allows  them  to  enter  on  such  ways  that  they  may  come  to  know 
themselves  as  they  are,  in  their  weakness  as  well  as  in  their  strength,  that  they 
may  see  clearly  what  is  evil  in  their  nature  as  well  as  what  is  good  ;  and  He  with- 
stands them  in  order  that  they  may  become  awai'e  of  the  perils  to  which  they  are 
unconsciously  exposing  themselves,  may  feel  their  need  of  His  guidance  and  help, 
and  may  suffer  Him  to  save  them  from  their  sins,  and  out  of  weakness  make  them 
strong.  (S.  Cox,  D.D.)  The  cause  of  God's  anger  with  Balaam: — God  is  not 
angry  without  cause  ;  and  the  one  cause  which  makes  Him  angry  with  men  is  some 
unrighteousness  in  thein,  or  some  inward  leaning  toward  unrighteousness.  And 
what  could  the  unrighteous  leaning  of  Balaam  be  but  that,  in  the  conflict  between 
his  own  interests  and  desii  es  and  the  will  of  God,  he  was  permitting  his  interests  and 


CHAP.  XXII.]  NmiBERS.  247 

desires  to  prevail  over  his  sense  of  duty,  suffering  the  baser  elements  of  his  nature  to 
override theproniptings of  that  in  liim which  washighestand  best,  givingway,iu  short, 
to  the  temptation  which  Balak  had  held  out  before  him,  and  scheming  how  he  might 
please  man  without  altogether  breaking  with  God.  So  absorbed  is  he  in  his  schemes, 
so  preoccupied,  that  this  man,  ordinarily  so  alert,  so  quick  to  discern  omens,  so  sen- 
sitive to  spiritual  intiiiiiitions,  so  proud  of  his  open  eye,  actually  does  not  see  the  angel 
who  stands  full  in  his  path,  with  his  sword  drawn  in  his  hand.  This  inward  preoccu- 
pation and  deterioration  was  "the  madness"  which  the  dumb  ass  forbad  and 
I'ebuked.  And  how  severe  and  humiliating,  yet  how  merciful,  the  rebuke  !  How 
humiliating  that  he  who  prided  himself  on  being  "  the  man  whose  eyes  are  open, 
who  heareth  the  words  of  God  and  seeth  the  vision  of  the  Almighty,"  should  find 
himself  outdone  by  the  very  beast  he  rode,  blind  to  what  even  his  ass  could  see ;  so 
insensate,  so  "  transported  from  himself"  as  that  he  had  sought  to  slay  the  very 
creature  who  had  saved  him !  And  yet  what  a  wonder  of  mercy  and  grace  was  it 
that  even  while,  as  the  anpel  told  him,  his  way  was  rash,  foolhardy,  full  of  hidden 
perils  which  he  ought  never  to  have  affronted,  God  had  not  forgotten  or  forsaken 
him,  but  had  miraculously  interposed  to  warn  him  that  the  course  he  was  medi- 
tating could  only  lead  him  to  destruction,  to  arrest  him  in  his  downward  path,  to 
quicken  his  attention,  to  open  his  eyes  to  the  spiritual  facts  and  omens  of  which  he 
had  lost  ken,  and  to  call  him  back  to  the  allegiance  he  so  loudly  professed  I  {Ibid.) 
'The  opposition  of  God's  angel : — Is  not  this  opposition  of  the  angel  to  Balaam  a 
picture  and  a  symbol  of  the  way  in  which  God  is  evermore  withstanding  evil 
courses  ?  When  Jacob  was  at  Peniel,  we  read,  "  there  wrestled  a  man  with  him 
until  the  breaking  of  the  day  "  (Gen.  xxxii.  24).  That  man,  also,  was  the  angel  of 
the  Lord  (Hosea  xii.  4),  come  forth  to  withstand  Jacob  in  his  crooked  ways,  until 
Jacob  should  surrender  them,  and  win  a  blessing  from  his  adversary.  And  so  God 
was,  by  His  angel,  opposing  Balaam's  evil  way,  until  he  should  abandon  it,  and 
thus  be  blessed  of  God  (chap.  xxii.  32).  And. see,  in  this  symbolic  action  of  the 
angel  of  the  Lord,  how  the  resistances  of  God  to  evil  thicken  on  us  in  our  sinful 
p  iths.  At  first  the  ass  swerves  only  from  the  beaten  track ;  then  she  injures 
Balaam's  foot;  then  she  falls  down  under  him.  And  is  not  this  a  picture,  to  the 
very  life,  of  things  that  happen  every  day  to  evil-doers?  They  find  instruments 
and  agencies,  on  which  they  have  implicitly  relied,  betraying  them  or  failing  them. 
They  find  themselves  injured  or  maimed  in  their  endeavours  to  press  forward  in 
their  mad  career.  And  suddenly  life  perfectly  breaks  down  with  them,  and  leaves 
them  prostrate  on  the  earth.  And  is  not  Balaam's  blindness  to  the  angel  of  the 
Lord  a  picture  of  the  blindness  to  the  course  of  Providence  which  evil-doers  not 
unfrequeritly  display?  Thing*?  which  one  would  think  must  cause  reflection,  come 
and  go  without  exciting  even  notice.  Bent  on  their  own  self-willed  career,  they  are 
completely  blind  to  all  besides,  till  presently  disaster  overtakes  them,  and  they 
narrowly  escape  destruction.  And  does  not  the  insensate  rage  of  Balaam  fitly 
typify  the  wrath  and  anger  that  we  feel  at  all  the  opposition  we  encounter  in  an 
evil  way  ?  What  savage  thoughts  breed  in  our  hearts,  and  cruel  words  breathe  from 
our  lips,  in  moments  such  as  these !  We  are  ready  to  destroy  the  very  things  that 
serve  us  ;  aye,  the  very  things  that  save  us  !  Balaam  would  have  slain  his  ass, 
though  she  had  served  him  many  years,  and  though  she  now  preserved  his  life  by 
her  sagacity.  Brethren,  let  us  rather  be  thankful  for  the  oppositions  of  the  angel 
of  the  Lord,  when  we  are  in  an  evil  way ;  for  these  opposing  providences  are 
designed  for  our  salvation  and  deliverance.  (IF.  Roberts.)  God's  opposition  to 
Balaam  : — We  have  here  an  account  of  the  opposition  God  gave  to  Balaam  in  his 
journey  towards  Moab;  probably  the  princes  were  gone  befoi'e,  or  gone  some  other 
way,  and  Balaam  had  appointed  where  he  would  meet  them,  or  where  they  would 
stay  for  him,  for  we  read  nothing  of  them  in  this  encounter ;  only  that  Balaam, 
like  a  person  of  some  quality,  was  attended  with  his  two  men  ; — honour  enough,  one 
would  think,  for  such  a  man,  he  needed  not  be  beholden  to  Balak  for  promotion. 
1.  Here  is  God's  displeasure  against  Balaam  for  undertaking  this  journey,  God's 
*'  anger  was  kindled  because  he  went  "  (ver.  22).  Note — (1)  The  sin  of  sinners  is 
not  to  be  thought  the  less  provoking  to  God  for  His  permitting  it.  We  must  not 
think  that  because  God  doth  not  by  His  providence  restrain  men  from  sin,  there- 
fore He  approves  of  it ;  or  that  it  is  therefore  not  hateful  to  Him  ;  He  suffers  sin, 
and  yet  is  angry  at  it.  (2)  Nothing  is  more  displeasing  to  God  than  malicious 
designs  against  His  people ;  he  that  touches  them  touches  the  apple  of  His  eye.  2. 
The  way  God  took  to  let  Balaam  know  His  displeasure  against  him.  An  angel 
stood  in  the  way  for  an  adversary.    Now  God  fulfilled  His  promise  to  Israel,  "  I 


248  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxiu 

will  be  an  enemy  to  thine  enemies  "  (Exod.  xxiii.  22).  The  holy  angels  are  adver- 
saries to  sin,  and  perhaps  are  employed  more  than  we  are  aware  of  in  preventing  it,, 
particularly  in  opposing  those  that  have  any  ill  designs  against  God's  Church  and 
people,  for  whom  Michael,  our  prince,  stands  up  (Dan.  xii.  1,  x.  21).  WliHt  a 
comfort  is  this  to  all  that  wish  well  to  the  Israel  of  God,  that  He  never  suffers- 
wicked  men  to  form  any  attempt  against  them,  but  He  sends  His  holy  angels  fortb 
to  break  the  attempts,  and  secure  His  little  ones  1  This  angel  was  an  adversary  to 
Balaam,  because  Balaam  counted  him  his  adversary ;  otherwise  those  are  really  our 
best  friends,  and  we  are  so  to  reckon  them  that  stop  our  progress  in  a  sinful  way. 
The  angel  stood  with  his  sword  drawn  (ver.  23),  a  flaming  sword,  like  that  in  the 
hands  of  the  cherub  (Gen.  iii.  24),  turning  every  way.  Note,  the  holy  angels  are 
at  war  with  those  with  whom  God  is  angry,  for  they  are  the  ministers  of  His  justice. 
Balaam  has  notice  given  him  of  God's  displeasure — 3.  By  the  ass,  and  that  did  not- 
startle  him.  "  The  ass  saw  the  angel  "  (ver.  23).  How  vainly  did  Balaam  boast 
that  he  was  a  man  whose  eyes  were  open,  and  that  he  saw  "  the  vision  of  the 
Almighty  "  (chap.  xxiv.  3,  4),  when  the  ass  he  rode  on  saw  more  than  he  did,  his 
eyes  being  blinded  with  covetousness  and  ambition,  and  dazzled  with  the  rewards 
of  divination  !  Note,  many  have  God  against  them,  and  His  holy  angels,  but  are 
not  aware  of  it.  4.  Balaam  at  length  had  notice  of  God's  displeasure  by  the 
angel,  and  that  did  startle  him.  When  God  opened  his  eyes  he  "saw  the  angel" 
(ver.  31),  and  then  he  himself  "fell  flat  upon  his  face,"  in  reverence  of  that  glorious 
messenger,  and  in  fear  of  the  sword  he  saw  in  his  hand.  God  has  many  ways  of 
breaking  and  bringing  down  the  hard  and  unhumbled  heart.  (1)  The  angel 
reproved  him  for  his  outrageousness :  "  Wherefore  hast  thou  smitten  thine  ass?  " 
(vers.  32,  33).  Whether  we  consider  it  or  no,  it  is  cprtain  God  will  call  us  to  account 
for  the  abuses  done  to  His  creatures.  Note,  when  our  eyes  are  opened  we  shall 
see  what  danger  we  are  in,  in  a  sinful  way ;  and  how  much  it  was  for  our  advantige 
to  be  crossed  in  it,  and  what  fools  we  were  to  quarrel  with  our  crosses  which  help -d 
to  save  our  lives.  (2)  Balaam  then  seemed  to  relent,  "  I  have  sinned  "  (ver.  34)  ; 
sinned  in  undertaking  this  journey,  sinned  in  pushing  on  so  violently ;  but  he 
excuses  it  with  this,  that  he  saw  not  the  angel,  but  now  he  did  see  him  he  was 
willing  to  go  back  again.  That  which  was  displeasing  to  G^d  was  not  so  much  his 
going,  as  his  going  with  a  malicious  design  against  Israel,  and  a  secret  hope,  that 
notwithstanding  the  proviso  with  which  his  permission  was  clogged,  he  might  prevail 
to  curse  them,  and  so  gratify  Balak,  and  get  preferment  under  him.  Now  this 
wickedness  of  his  heart  it  doth  not  appear  that  he  is  sensible  of,  or  willing  to  own  ; 
but  if  he  finds  he  cannot  go  forward,  he  will  be  content  (since  there  is  no  remedy)* 
to  go  back.  Here  is  no  sign  that  bis  heart  is  turned,  but  if  his  hands  be  tied  he 
cannot  help  it.  Thus  many  leave  their  sins,  only  because  their  sins  have  left  them. 
There  seems  to  be  a  reformation  of  the  life,  but  what  will  that  avail  if  there  be  no 
renovation  of  the  heart  ?  5.  The  angel,  however,  continued  his  permission,  "  Go- 
with  the  men  "  (ver.  35).  Go,  if  thou  hast  a  mind  to  be  made  a  fool  of,  and  to  be 
made  ashamed  before  Balak,  and  all  the  princes  of  Moab.  "  Go,  but  the  word  that 
I  shall  speak  unto  thee,  that  thou  slialt  speak,"  whether  thou  wilt  or  no.  For  this 
seems  not  to  be  a  precept,  but  a  prediction  of  the  event,  that  he  should  not  only  not 
be  able  to  curse  Israel,  but  he  should  be  forced  to  bless  them  ;  which  would  be 
more  for  the  glory  of  God,  and  his  own  confusion,  than  it  he  had  turned  back. 
Thus  God  gave  Him  fair  warning,  but  he  would  not  take  it;  he  went  with  the  princes- 
•  >f  Balak.  For  the  iniquity  of  Balaam's  covetousness  God  was  "  wroth  and  smote 
him,"  but  he  "went  on  frowardly"  (Isa.  Ivii.  17).  (Mattheio  Henry,  D.D.)  Re- 
straints from  sin: — I.  The  forms  of  restraint  from  sin.  1.  They  appear  in 
external  appliances.  The  revealed  Word  of  God  stands  in  the  way  as  a  hindrance 
to  what  is  wrong,  and  a  guide  to  good-will  to  man  and  obedience  to  the  Lord,  if 
only  fairly  consulted.  2.  In  addresses  to  the  understanding.  The  remembrance 
of  some  words  of  God,  or  the  words  of  some  man,  overheard  or  directly  spoken  to 
you,  may  be  the  means  of  placing  in  light  some  dark  feature  of  thought,  or  some 
evil  action.  3.  In  stirrings  of  conscience.  These  are  graduated  from  an  almost 
insuperable  prohibition  to  the  scarcely  perceptible  whisper  of  doubt.  4.  In  excite- 
ments of  the  emotions.  Each  pang  of  remorse,  and  each  thrill  of  fear,  utter,  in 
different  forms,  "Keep  back  from  sin."  II.  The  characteristics  of  restraints- 
FROM  sin.  1.  They  are  frequent.  2.  They  are  progressive.  If  being  turned  aside 
will  not  induce  a  retreat,  there  will  be  a  crushing  of  the  foot.  8.  They  are  near, 
though  oft  unnoticed.  (D.  G.  Watt,  M.A.)  God  withstanding  sinners  :—'iJo 
longer  are  there  miracles  performed  to  intimate  to  the  ungodly  man  that  it  shall 


CHAP.  XXII.]  NUMBERS.  249 

not  fare  well  with  him,  and  that  he  shall  but  eat  the  fruit  of  what  he  sowed.  But 
heaven  and  earth,  the  dead  and  those  who  live,  nature  and  grace,  appear  as  if  they 
now  and  then  combined  in  earnest  supplication  to  exclaim,  "  Stop,  sinner,  stop  I  " 
Who  has  not  some  time,  like  Balaam,  come  face  to  face  with  God,  upon  the  path  of 
sin,  when  He  made  known  His  terrors  and  His  threatening-?  And  what  man 
dares  affirm  that  there  has  been  too  little  effort  made  to  lead  him  from  the  broad 
way  to  the  narri)w  path  of  life?  Nay,  more;  Balaam's  brief  experience  is,  in  a 
certain  sense,  as  nothing  when  compared  with  that  long  labour  of  love  which  God 
in  Christ  has  most  unweariedly  bestowed  upon  us,  that  we  might  be  saved.  Nay, 
God  has  no  delight  in  any  sinner's  death,  but  spares  when  He  could  smite  ;  nor 
does  He  ever  suffer  us  to  hold  on'  in  the  way  to  death,  without  affording  us  a  last, 
loud  warning,  that  not  seldom  comes  on  us  as  if  it  were  an  angel's  sword  piercing 
our  very  bones.  Blessed,  thrice  blessed  he  who,  with  a  more  unfeigned  humility 
than  that  of  Balaam,  can  acknowledge,  "  I  have  sinned,"  and  who  does  not  grow 
liard  in  sin,  but  lets  himself  be  led.  Soon  shall  he  learn,  with  deep  astonishment, 
that  God's  good  angels  round  encircle  him  in  all  his  ways ;  and  that  far  more  is  to 
be  gained  in  serving  Him  than  the  disgraceful  pittance  offered  by  the  Babik-hand 
of  a  vain  world.  But  if,  like  Balaam,  you  still  kick  against  the  pricks,  the  time  is 
drawing  nigh  when  you,  like  him,  shall  be  cast  from  the  presence  of  the  God  of 
everlasting  righteousness,  and  given  over  to  that  death  which  you  so  obstinately 
choose  before  the  life  now  offered  you.  {J.  J.  Van  Oosterzee,  D.D.)  Balaam'^ 
vision  : — 1.  In  looking  at  this  passage  we  must  make  every  allowance  for  the 
difference  between  those  times  and  ours.  I  do  not  know  any  valid  reason  why 
God  in  the  accomplishment  of  His  infinitely  wise  designs  mi^jht  not  emjDloy  the 
means  here  described,  and  miraculously  impart  to  the  ass  the  organs  of  articulation, 
and  a  knowledge  of  their  use.  2.  After  the  most  close  and  candid  attention, 
however,  which  I  have  been  able  to  give  to  the  subject,  I  am  led  to  the  conclusion 
that  the  occurrence  here  related  was  a  dream,  or  vision,  which  took  place  on  the 
night  previous  to  his  journey.  He  knew  that  he  was  doing  wrong  ;  for,  although 
he  had  permission  to  go,  yet  it  was  not  permitted  him  to  do  so  with  the  wicked 
design  which  he  cherished  in  his  heart — that  of  cursing  the  people.  On  this 
account  his  gnilty  conscience  tormented  him,  and,  in  his  sleep,  vividly  presented 
to  his  mind  the  scene  here  recorded.  At  the  end  of  ver.  35  (after  the  scene  is 
finished)  the  words,  "  So  Balaam  went  with  the  princes  of  Balak,"  seem  to  refer  to 
his  setting  out  on  his  journey.  3.  There  is  one  objection  which  mny  be  urged  t'^> 
this  view.  St.  Peter  says,  "The  dumb  ass,"  &c.  To  this  it  may  be  replied,  that 
the  recurrence,  though  happening  only  in  a  dream,  appeared  as  real  to  the  mind  of 
the  prophet  as  though  it  had  actually  taken  place,  and  was  designed  to  have  all  the 
force  and  effect  of  a  real  transaction.  4.  In  favour  of  the  hypothesis  the  reasons 
are,  I  think,  numerous  and  satisfactory.  (1)  In  the  prophecies  many  account>< 
of  visions  are  given  which  are  not  formally  introduced  as  such  (Isa.  vi.).  (2) 
Balaam  expressed  no  surprise  at  being  addressed  by  the  animal.  In  dreaming  we 
feel  no  surprise  at  the  most  astonishing  occurrences.  (3)  The  narrative  of  this 
transaction  appears  to  intimate  that  the  prophet  was  nearly  alone  :  "  two  servants 
were  with  him. "  In  his  real  journey,  however,  be  was  accompanied  by  the  princes 
of  Moab,  who  had,  no  doubt,  a  great  number  of  attendants.  (4)  He  had  received 
permission  to  go,  whereas,  in  this  account,  the  angel  appears  angry  with  him  for 
going  in  compliance  with  that  permission.  Strong  presumptive  proof  that  the 
workings  of  a  guilty  conscience  wrought  on  his  mind  during  sleep,  and  produced  a 
vivid  dream  or  vision.  (5)  In  chap,  xxiii.  it  is  repeatedly  said,  "  He  hath  said  which 
heard  the  words  of  God,  which  saw  the  visions  of  the  Almighty ;  falling  into  a  trance, 
but  having  his  eyes  open."  May  not  this  refer  to  the  "vision,"  or  "trance,"  or  dream, 
of  which  we  have  been  speaking?  (J.  P.  Smith,  LL.D.)  Obstructive  providences : 
— I.  The  lessons  it  taught  Balaam.  1.  It  convinced  him  of  spiritual  blindness. 
2.  It  taught  absolute  submission  to  God.  II.  Lessons  to  us.  1.  We  often  go  on 
wrong  errands,  or  on  right  errands  in  a  wrong  spirit.  2.  God  checks  us  in  His 
providence  and  in  love  to  our  souls.  Illness  ;  raising  up  of  insuperable  difficulties  ; 
falling  off  of  friends  ;  superior  success  to  rivals,  &c.  3.  We  are  apt  to  fret  and  bo 
angry  at  the  instruments  of  our  disappointment.  We  cast  our  spite  and  blame  on 
second  causes.  4.  We  should  seek  spiritual  enlightenment  to  see  that  it  is  God's 
doing-  Be  not  angry  and  resentful,  but  give  yourselves  to  prayer ;  else,  like  Balaam, 
you  will  not  see  it  is  God  who  opposes  you  (ver.  34).  5.  We  can  only  be  permitted 
to  go  forward  when  we  are  brought  to  a  state  of  perfect  subjection  to  God.  Two 
things  are  here  included — a  perfect  purity  of  motive  and  freedom  from  worldly 


250  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTIiATOU.  [chap,  xxir. 

self-seeking,  and  an  entire  acquiescence  in  whatever  God   appoints,   desires,  or 
does.     (T.  G.  Horton.)         Balaam  stoju^ed  by  an  angel : — 1.  It  lies  quite  within  our 
experience  that  we  do  get  our  own  way,  and  yet  have  a  sense  of  burning  and  judg- 
ment, of  opposition  and  anger  all  the  time.      Men  forget  that  there  is  a  time  when 
tiiey  need  not  ask  the  Lord  any  questions.    Never  trouble  the  Lord  to  know  whether 
you  cannot  do  just  a  little  wrong;  He  is  not  to  be  called  upon  in  relation  to  business 
of  that  kind.     He  does  not  pray  who  palters  with  moral  distinctions,  who  wants  to 
make  compromises,  who  is  anxious  to  find  some  little  crevice  or  opening  through 
which  he  can  pass  into  the  land  of  his  own  desire.     2.  Men  are  stopped  in  certain 
courses  without    being    able    to  tell  the   reason   why.      That   also   is   matter  of 
experience.     The  wind  seems  to  be  a  wall  before  us;  the  road  looks  quite  open, 
and  yet  we  can  make  no  progress  in  it.   The  business  stands  still ;  we  have  risen  at 
the  same  hour  in  the  morning,  carried  out  the  usual  arrangements,  been  apparently 
on  the  alert  all  the  time,  and  yet  not  one  inch  farther  are  we  permitted  to  go. 
Suppose  we  have  no  God,  no  altar,  no  Church  limitations,  no  ghostly  ministry 
exerting  itself  upon  our  life  and  frightening  us  with  superstition  and  spectre — we 
are  healthy  reasoners,  downright  robust  rationalists — men  who  can  take  things  up 
ahd  set  them  down,  square-hpaded  men — yet  there  is  the  fact,  that  even  we,  such 
able-bodied  rationalists,  such  healthy  souls  that  any  society  would  insure  us  on  the 
slightest  inquiry — there  we  are,  puzzled,  mystified,  perplexed,  distracted.     3.  It 
also  lies  within  the  region  of  experience  that  men  are  rebuked  by  dumb  animals. 
That  is  odd,  but  it  is  true.     The  whole  Scripture  is  charged  with  that  statement, 
and  so  charged  with  it  as  to  amount  to  a  practical  philosophy  in  daily  life  :  "But 
ask  now  the  be'^sts,  and  they  shall  teach  thee  ;  and  the  fowls  of  the  air,  and  they 
shall  tell  thee."     "The  stork  in  heaven  knoweth  her  appointed  times."     "  The  ox 
knoweth  his  owner,  and  the  ass  his  master's  crib."    "  Go  to  the  ant,  thou  sluggard ; 
consider  her  ways,  and  be  wise."     Dumb  creatures  are  continually  teaching  us. 
They  keep   law  with  wondrous  obedience.      The  poorest  brutes  are  reaUy  very 
faithful  to  the  rude  legislation  under  which  they  live.   In  temperance,  in  acc<-ptance 
of  di-cipline,  in  docility,  I  know  not  any  beast  that  is  ever  used  by  man  that  may 
not  teach  some  men,  very  distinctly,  helpful  and  useful  lessons.     4.  Then,  again,  it 
does  lie  within  our  cognition  that  men  do  blame  second  causes  for  want  of  success. 
Balnam  blamed  the  ass.     That  is  what  we  are  always  doing.     There  is  nothing 
exceptional  in  this  conduct  of  the  soothsayer.     We  want  to  get  on— it  is  the  beast 
that  will  not  go.     Who  ever  thought  that  an  angel  was  confronting  him— that 
a  distinct  ghostly  purpose  was  against  him?     5.  Does  it  not  also  lie  within  the 
range  of  our  experience  that  men  do  want  to  get  back  sometimes  but  are  driven 
forward?     Did  not  Balaam  want  to  return  when  he  said,  "If  it  displease  Thee, 
I  will  get  me  back  again  "  ?     We  cannot.     Life  is  not  a  little  trick,  measurable  by 
such  terms.     A  man  cannot  make  a  fool  of  himself,  and  instantly  turn  round  as  if 
nothing  had  happened  ;  we  cannot  drive  a  nail  into  a  tree  and  take  it  out  without 
leaving  a  wound  behind.     Conduct  is  of  greater  consequence  than  we  imagine. 
Humanity  is  a  sublime  mystery,  as  well  as  God ;  and  there  is  no  way  backward, 
unless  it  be  in  consent  with  the  Mind  that  constructed  and  that  rules  creation.     G. 
But  there  is  a  difficulty  about  the  dumli  ass  rebuking  the   perverse  prophet.     So 
there  is.     I  would  be  dismayed  by  it  if  I  were  not  overwhelmed  by  greater  miracles 
still.     This  has  come  to  be  but  a  small  thing— a  very  momentary  wonder— as 
compared  with  more  astounding  circumstances.      A  more  wonderful  thing  than 
that  an  ass  should  speak  is  that  a  man  should  forget  God.     The  miracles  of  a 
physical  and  historical  kind  may  admit  of  postponement  as  to  their  consideration ; 
but  that  men  should  have  forgotten  God,  and  insulted  law,  and  done  unrighteously 
—these  are  mysteries  which  must  not  be  delayed  in  their  explanation  and  settle- 
ment.   7.  So  we  come  again  and  again  to  the  great  practical  inquiry— Being  on  the 
wrong  road,  how  shall  we  get  back  ?    There  is  no  answer  in  man.    If  Balaam  could 
have  retraced  his  steps,  put  up  his  ass  in  the  stable  and  gone  about  his  business  as 
if  nothing  had  occurred,  it  would  have  been  but  a  paper  universe.     That  he  could 
not  do  so,  that  he  was  under  the  pressure  of  mightier  forces,  indicates  that  the 
universe  is  itself  a  tragedy,  and  that  the  exijlanation  of  every  character,  every 
incident,  and  every  flush  of  colour,  must  be  left  for  another  time,  when  the  light  is 
stronger  and  the  duration  is  assured.    Meanwhile,  we  can  pray,  we  can  look  up,  we 
can  say,  each  for  himself,  "  I  have  sinned."     {J.  Parker,  D.D.)       Balaam's  ass  : — 
I.  The   historic   chabacteb   of   the   miracle  here  recorded.     II.  The  miracle 
ITSELF.     HI.  The  object  of  the  miracle.     1.  It  was  calculated  to  humble  him  in 
relation  to  a  gift  of  God  upon  which  he  probably  prided  himself.     It  is  likely  he 


CHAP.  x\:i.]  NUMBER!^.  251 

was  an  eloquent  man.  He  would  now  see  tliat  God  could  endow  a  brute  with  the 
gift  of  speech.  2.  He  would  also  see  that  an  ass  could  discern  a  messenger  from 
heaven,  where  he.  blinded  by  his  desire  for  gain,  could  see  nothing  but  eujpty  space. 
3.  He  might  also  have  learned  that  all  speech  was  under  Divine  control,  and  that 
he  would  be  able  to  utter  only  such  words  as  God  would  permit.  {W.  Jones.) 
Obstacles  to  visitm: — A  revelation  of  the  truth  is  not  enough.  There  must  be  an 
iuner  sympathy  with  the  truth.  Light  avails  not  where  there  are  no  eyes  to  see. 
Take  a  blind  man  into  a  tunnel,  and  you  have  a  symbol  of  the  natural  man  without 
a  Divine  revelation.  There  are  two  obstacles  to  vision  ;  first,  tlie  darkness  around 
him,  and  then  his  own  blindness.  Lead  him  forth  under  ihe  open  firmament  of 
revealed  truth.  Still  he  does  not  see.  You  have  done  something  towards  his 
enlightenment,  you  have  given  him  knowledge,  doctrine,  the  form  of  truth.  But 
that  is  not  enough.  He  lacks  spiritual  understanding.  The  scales  must  fall  from 
his  eyes.      The  Diviiie  Spirit  alone  can  accomplish  this.      (J.  Halsey.)  The 

icay  of  the  perverse : — For  the  man  who  neglects  salvation  there  is  no  rescue. 
Everything  will  plead  against  him.  The  waters  will  say,  "  We  told  him  of  the 
Uving  stream  where  he  might  wash  all  his  sins  away,  but  he  would  not  come."  The 
rocks  will  say,  "  We  told  him  of  a  s-helter  and  defence  to  which  he  miyht  run." 
The  sun  will  say,  "  We  told  him  of  the  Dayspring  from  on  high,  but  he  shut  his 
eyes."  The  Bible  will  say,  "  I  called  him  by  a  thousand  invitations,  and  warned 
him  with  a  thousand  alarms."  The  throne  of  judgment  will  say,  "  I  have  but  two 
Sentences — that  to  the  friends  of  God,  and  that  to  His  rejecters."  "Escape  he 
must  not,"  Jesus  will  say.  "  I  called  on  him  for  many  years,  but  he  turned  his 
back  on  My  tears  and  bit. od."  Then  God  will  speak  ;  and  with  a  voice  that  shall 
ling  through  the  heights  and  depths  and  lengths;  of  His  uniserse,  say,  "  Escape  he 
shall  not."  May  the  Loid  God  avert  such  a  catastrophe  1  {T.  De  Uitt  Tulmuge.) 
Balaam  rebuked,  but  not  checked : — Balaam  is  doing  what  he  knows  he  ought  not  to 
do ;  there  is  a  great  wrong  in  his  heart  sending  up  its  protests  to  the  bi  ain.  The 
man  is  at  cross  purposes,  and  vents  his  unrest  and  ill-feeling  upon  outward  objects. 
How  often  it  hajjpens  !  One  in  ill-humour  often  curses  the  tools  he  is  using — the 
dulne-s  of  a  saw,  the  waywardness  of  a  shuttle,  the  knife  that  wounds  his  hand  ; 
he  beats  his  horse  or  dog ;  he  scolds  his  children.  Here  we  come  nigh  the  very 
heart  of  the  story.  When,  in  some  fit  of  ill-temper  brought  on  by  our  own  wrong- 
doing, we  have  beaten  an  animal,  or  spoken  roughly  to  a  child,  and  then  have 
noticed  the  humble  patience  of  the  brute  under  our  anger,  or  the  meek  undesert  of 
the  child  reflected  from  its  upturned  eyes,  there  comes  over  us  a  sense  of  shame  and 
an  inward  confession  that  the  wrong  is  not  in  the  brute  or  in  the  child,  but  in  us. 
The  beast  or  the  child  speaks  back  to  us ;  its  very  bearing  and  looks  become  audible 
voices  of  rel'uke.  When  a  great  man  like  Balaam  gets  involved  in  wrong  doing,  all 
nature  is  changed  to  him,  and  from  all  things  come  rebuking  voices.  When 
Macbeth  returns  from  the  murder  of  the  king,  a  simple  knocking  at  the  gate  appals 
him  and  deepens  the  colour  of  his  blood-stained  hands  ;  one  sense  runs  into  and  does 
the  ofBce  of  another.  To  a  hara>sed  and  guilty  conscience  the  light  comes  with  a 
condemnation  ;  every  true  and  ordeily  thing  meets  it  with  reproof — angels  of  God 
that  confront  it,  but  do  not  turn  it  from  its  fatal  course.  Balaam  w(juld  have 
turned  back,  but  he  is  told  to  go  on.  This  is  only  another  stage  of  the  moral 
confusion  into  which  he  has  fallen.  He  would  go  back,  but  the  spirit  of  sophistry 
again  begins  to  work,  and  he  goes  forward,  but  he  will  speak  only  the  true  word — 
evil  drawing  him  on,  while  he  excuses  it  with  the  plea  of  right  intentions — a  daily 
history  on  every  side !  Why  did  Balaam  not  go  back  ?  He  could  not.  When 
a  man  does  wrong  in  a  simple  and  impulsive  way  under  the  direct  force  of  tempta- 
tion, he  can  retrace  his  steps;  but  when  he  has  found  what  seems  to  him  a  safe 
path  to  a  coveted  end,  he  seldom  gives  over.  Many  men  with  scrupulous  con- 
sciences do  not  regret  being  yoked  with  partners  who  are  less  particular  ;  and  many 
men  do,  as  a  corporation,  what  not  one  of  them  would  do  as  an  individual.  Balaam 
could  not  avail  himself  of  these  modern  methods,  and  so  made  a  partnership  and 
corporation  of  his  own  divided  nature ;  reaping  speedily  in  himself  the  bitter 
consequences  of  such  action  that  overtake  the  modern  man  slowly  but  no  less 
surely.     (2'.  T.  Manger.)  The  talking  ass,  and  what  it  taught  Balaam  : — The 

real  difficulty  of  the  incident  to  those  who  feel  a  special  difficulty  in  it  consists, 
I  suppose,  in  the  alleged  fact  that  the  ass  spoke,  spoke  in  apparently  human  words 
and  with  a  human  voice.  And  this  difficulty  has,  to  say  the  least  of  it,  been  very 
neatly  turned  by  many  of  our  ablest  critics  and  commentators,  some  of  whom  have 
as  little  love  for  miracles  as  the  veriest  sceptic.    They  say,  Balaam,  the  soothsayer 


253  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxii. 

and  diviner,  was  trained  to  observe  and  interpret  the  motions  and  cries  of  beasts  and 
birds,  and  especially  anytuing  that  Wris  exceptional  in  them;  to  draw  auguries 
and  portents  from  them,  to  see  in  them  the  workings  of  a  Divine  power,  to  infer 
from  them  indications  of  the  Divine  will.  Here  was  a  portent  indeed,  and  he 
must  interpret  it.  And  to  him  it  seemed  that  the  ass  was  striving  and  remonstra- 
ting with  him ;  that,  conscious  of  a  presence  of  which  he  himself  was  unaware,  it 
was  seeking  to  save  him  from  a  doom  which  he  was  heedlessly  provoking.  And  so, 
with  the  dramatic  instinct  of  an  Oriental  poet,  either  Balaam  himself  or  the  original 
wr'ter  of  the  chronicle  trans'ated  these  subjective  inipressions  into  external  facts, 
and  made  the  ass  "  speak  "  the  meaning  which  he  read  in  its  motions  and  groans. 
For  myself,  indeed,  I  care  very  little  what  interpretation  may  be  placed  on  this 
siuL'ular  passage  in  Balaam's  story,  and  would  as  soon  believe  that  the  mouth  of 
the  dumb  ass  was  really  opened  to  utter  articulate  human  words  as  that  Balaam's 
sensitive  and  practised  ear  heard  these  words  into  his  groans  and  cries.  Put  what 
construction  on  the  talking  ass  you  will;  call  it  fact,  call  it  fable,  or  say  that 
Balaam  read  an  ominous  rebuke  into  the  natural  cries  of  the  beast  on  which  he 
rode — whatever  the  construction  you  put  upon  it,  you  will  be  little  the  wiser  for 
it,  little  the  better,  unless  you  listen  to  the  appeal,  to  the  rebuke,  which  Balaam 
heard  from  the  mouth  of  the  ass  or  put  into  it.  That  lesson  may  be,  and  is, 
a  veiy  simple  one ;  but  its  very  simplicity  at  once  makes  it  the  more  valuable, 
and  renders  it  the  more  probable  that,  much  as  we  need  to  learn  it,  we  may 
have  overlooked  it.  What,  then,  was  this  lesson  or  rebuke?  The  ass  said,  or 
Balaam  took  her  to  say,  "  Wherefore  smite  me  ?  Have  I  not  served  you  faithfully 
ever  since  I  was  thine  ?  Am  I  wont  to  rebel  against  you  ?  "  How  cou'd  Balaam 
fail  to  look  for  an  ethical  meaning  in  this  appeal,  or  fail  either  to  find  it,  or 
to  find  how  heavy  a  rebuke  it  carried  for  himself  ?  He  too  had  a  Master,  a 
Master  in  heaven,  and  was  loud  and  frequent  in  his  protestations  of  loyalty 
to  Him.  Yet  could  he  look  up  to  heaven  and  say  to  his  Master,  "  Why  hast 
Thou  checked  and  rebuked  me  ?  Have  not  I  served  Thee  faithfully  ever  since 
I  was  Thine  unto  this  day  ?  Am  I  wont  to  disobey  Thy  word  ?  "  Why,  at  that 
very  moment  he  was  untrue,  disloyal,  to  his  Master ;  he  was  plotting  how  he  might 
speak  other  words  than  those  which  God  had  pnt  into  his  mouth,  and  serve  his  own 
will  rather  than  the  Divine  will!  Might  he  not,  then,  well  hear  in  the  rebuke  of 
the  ass  some  such  appeal  as  this  :  "  Have  you  been  as  true  to  your  M  ister  as  I  to 
mine?  Have  you  been  as  mindful  of  the  heavenly  vision  as  I  of  the  heavenly 
apparition  which  I  have  seen  ?  Has  jour  service  been  as  faithful,  as  patient,  as 
disii  terested  as  mine?  "  The  lesson  is  simple  enougli,  I  admit ;  but  is  it  not  aUo 
most  necessary  and  valuable  ?  H*'  is  convicted — 1.  Of  having  cruelly  wronged  th^ 
innocent  creature  who  had  saved  him  from  the  sword.  2.  Of  having  failed  at  his 
stronge-^t  point  and  lost  the  "  open  eye  "  of  which  he  was  wont  to  boast ;  and — 3. 
Of  not  being  as  true  to  his  Master  in  heaven,  despite  his  loud  professions  of  loyalty  and 
obedience,  as  she  had  been  t>  her  master  on  earth.  If  no  rebuke  could  be  more  severe 
and  hnmbling,  none  snrely  could  have  been  more  kind  and  merciful.  For  if  men  are 
not  to  be  held  back  from  evil  by  an  an^'el ,  is  it  not  well  that  they  should  be  held  back  even 
bv  an  ass  ?  If  the  gentler  strokes  of  correction  fail,  is  it  not  well  that  they  should  be 
followed  by  severer  and  more  effectual  strokes  ?  If  appeals  to  our  higher  nature  do  not 
suffice  to  arrest  us,  is  it  not  well  that  we  should  be  arrested  by  appeals  to  our  lower 
nature  ?  {S.  Cox,  D.D.)  Balaam''^  ass,  or  cruelty  rebuked : — How  many  just  and  good 
men  have  been  remarkable  for  their  tenderness  to  animals !  Tradition  tells  us  of  the 
partridge  of  St.  John,  the  tame  lion  of  St.  Jerome  ;  we  find  in  St.  Francis  an  enthu- 
siastic love  of  birds ;  and  to  come  to  modern  days,  in  the  letters  of  Bishop  Thirlwall, 
thought  to  be  a  man  of  giunt  intellect,  we  read  that  often  he  could  not  sleep  at  night, 
because  he  was  haunted  by  some  story  of  cruelty  to  animals  which  he  had  heard, 
whilst  the  writings  of  Sir  Arthur  Helps,  the  most  charming  essayist  of  our  age,  tells 
us  that  he  would  not  live  his  life  over  again,  if  the  chance  was  ofifered,  for  he  had 
suffered  so  much  from  indignation  and  sympathy  with  the  sufferings  of  animals. 
Often  cruelty  arises  from  thoughtlessness.  Children  do  not  reflect  on  what  they  are 
doing,  and  it  is  the  duty  of  all  persons  to  teach,  in  every  way,  humanity  and  kind 
feeling  to  the  animals  around  us.  A  disposition  which  practises  cruelty  towards 
animals  will  not  stop  there,  for  it  is  only  a  training  for  the  bad  treatment  of  human 
beings.  It  was  remarked  of  Domitian,  the  cruel  Emperor  of  Rome,  that  he  spent 
his  leisure  moments  in  killing  flies.  Who  can  doubt  but  that  it  was  the  horrible 
taste  for  wild  beast  fights  that  led  to  the  still  more  horrible  conflicts  of  gladiators  in 
the  Roman  amphitheatres  ?    And  so,  too,  in  Spain,  the  savage  excitement  of  the 


CHAP.  XXII. J  NUMBERS.  253 


populace  in  the  bull  fights  led  even  religious  men  to  witness  unmoved  the  auto-da- 
is  of  the  Inquisition.  Ever  should  we  recollect  that  these  creatures  belong  to  God, 
constructed  by  His  wondrous  skill,  watched  over  by  His  gracious  care,  and  not  to 
be  ill-treated  or  tormented  without  incurring  His  vengeance.  A  boy  was  once  teasing 
a  poor  kitten.  "  Don't !  "  said  his  little  sister,  "  it  is  God's  kitten."  Her  remark  fell 
upon  the  ear  of  her  father,  a  careless  drunkard,  as  he  was  turning  out  of  the  door, 
and  like  an  arrow  from  a  bow  there  struck  into  his  conscience  the  thought,  "  If  this 
little  creature  belongs  to  God,  how  much  more  a  soul  like  mine !  "  And  the  arrow 
of  conviction  lodged  in  his  heart,  and  gave  him  no  rest  till  he  entered  on  a  better 
life,  as  belonging  to  God.  Let  us,  then,  strive  to  make  all  God's  creatures  around 
us  as  happy  as  we  can,  find  in  them  loving  friends  and  companions,  and  thank  God 
forgiving  us  the  animals  as  our  humble  friends  and  loyal  servants;  ever  remem- 
bering, as  a  forcible  preacher  has  said,  "  There  is  no  sin  that  will  sink  a  soul  so  low 
in  hell  as  cruelty  to  helpless  creatures."  {J.  W.  Hardrnan,  LL.D.)  Sin  perverse  : — 
That  Balaam  answered  the  ass  when  he  heard  her  speak,  and  rather  stood  not 
amazed  at  the  strange  work  of  God,  note  earnestly  with  yourself  what  a  strong 
possession  covetousness  had  taken  of  his  heart,  so  holding  of  him  captive  that  he 
was  not  able  to  observe  this  strange  tbing,  but  blind  and  besotted  with  hope  of 
worldly  honour  and  gain,  feedeth  still  upon  that,  and  admitteth  no  stop  nor  stay  of 
this  journey  by  his  good  will.  Such  is  the  power  of  any  sin  if  it  once  rule  in  a 
man  or  woman,  it  bereaveth  them  of  all  judgment  to  see  their  estate,  or  the  love  of 
them  that  persuade  them  otherwise.  How  blockish  was  Pharaoh  till  he  was  over- 
thrown !  How  senseless  the  Jews  till  Jerusalem  and  they  tasted  of  extremity  ! 
Swearers  and  swaggerers,  drunkards  and  whoremongers,  liars  and  libellers,  railers  and 
slanderers,  witli  all  the  rest,  are  as  blind  and  blockish  as  Balaam  here,  doting  upon 
their  own  course  till  they  smart  for  it,  or  the  Lord  open  their  eyes  to  see  Him 
against  them  as  at  last  here  He  did  Balaam's  eyes  to  see  the  angel  with  drawn 
sword  against  him.  When  the  ass  saith,  "Did  I  ever  serve  thee  thns  before?" 
it  may  admonish  us  not  to  be  too  rash  with  our  neighbours  and  brethren,  who 
have  never  been  noted  to  be  such  oilenders,  but  ever  of  good  and  virtuous 
behaviour.  (Bp.  Babinrjton.)  I  have  sinned. — BalaavVs  "  I  have  sinned": — 
Balaam  was  a  man  who  had  frequent  and  extraordinary  communications  with  God. 
Balaam  was  undoubtedly  a  man  of  great  light ;  and  his  gifts  were  rare  and  transcen- 
dent. If  you  ask,  "  Were  the.v  from  God  or  from  the  Evil  One  ?  "  I  do  not  know.  I 
should  say  both.  If  God  endowed  him,  certainly  Satan  occupied  him :  if  Satan 
taught  him,  as  certainly  God  used  him.  The  light  and  the  darkness  were  in  tre- 
mendous nearness  and  antagonism  in  that  one  breast.  The  restraining  power  was 
very  large  ;  the  determination  of  will  was  stronger  still.  He  had  very  soft  seasons  : 
but  they  passed  like  April  gleams  !  His  convictions  were  real  and  deep  ;  but  they 
proved  quite  barren.  His  aspirations  were  beautiful  and  holy  :  "  Let  me  die  the 
death  of  the  righteous,  and  let  my  last  end  be  like  his  !  "  but  his  faith  never  grasped, 
and  his  life  never  followed,  those  high  desires.  He  acknowledged  fully  the  blessed- 
ness of  the  people  of  God  :  "  God  hath  not  beheld  iniquity  in  Jacob  "  :  "  Blessed  is 
he  that  blesseth  thee,  and  cursed  is  he  that  curseth  thee  "  ;  but  he  never  tried  to  be 
one  of  those  happy  ones.  Israel's  future  was  clear  and  bright  to  him — in  all  its 
safety  and  its  joy — but  it  was  never  more  than  a  confession,  which  played  before  his 
fancy  1  He  saw  the  Lord  Jesus  Himself — as  in  a  vista — but  it  was  a  Jesus  seen,  but 
not  known  ;  admired,  but  never  felt.  See,  then,  the  exact  position  of  Balaam.  On 
his  lips,  "  I  have  sinned  "  ;  probably  in  his  heart  a  condemning  sense  that  he  w&4 
wrong ;  a  conviction  that  he  had  made  a  great  mistake ;  but  his  passions  high 
wrought ;  a  resolute  will  and  purpose  in  direct  antagonism  to  the  known  will  of  God ; 
one  sin,  all  the  while,  tightly  grasped ;  and  a  worldly,  covetous  affection  in  the 
ascendant!  This  was  Balaam,  as  he  went  out  at  Pethor  that  early  morning,  through 
the  vineyards  of  the  city.  I  need  not  follow  him  further.  You  remember  how  his 
gifts  grew  greater,  and  his  prescience  grew  clearer,  and  his  language  grew  lovelier, 
and  his  pretensions  grew  loftier — just  in  the  same  proportion  as  his  determination 
grew  sterner,  and  his  desires  more  grovelling — till  the  sure  end  came  at  last,  and  he 
became  carnal,  his  counsel  was  gross,  his  wisdom  diabolical,  and  he  laid,  with  hia 
own  hand,  the  scheme  to  his  own  destruction ;  and  his  unsanctified  and  debased 
talent  was  his  own  scourge,  and  his  own  ruin  !  Reduce  the  picture  to  the  scale  of 
ordinary  life,  and  it  is  the  life  of  many.  A  man  of  religious  knowledge — very  im- 
pulsive and  feeling — aclever  man,  with  strong  inward  conflict — conversant  with  God 
— with  the  language  of  piety  on  his  lips — speaking,  not  without  some  reaUty,  the 
words  of  true  penitence,  and  yet,  at  the  very  same  time,  with  a  direct  hostility  to 


254  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxii. 

God — harbourinf^  a  secret,  evil  appetite  in  his  heart — and  bent  only  upon  selfish- 
ness !  Draw  near,  and  say  whether  you  see  yourself  anywhere  in  the  portrait?  There 
is  an  acknowledgment  of  sin,  under  sorrow,  which  often  clothes  itself  in  very 
strong  expressions,  even  to  tears,  and  which  is  little  else  than  a  passion.  It  is  not 
altogether  an  h\  pocrisy.  At  the  moment  it  is  sincere,  very  earnest.  But  it  is  an 
emotion — only  an  emotion.  There  is  no  real  love  to  God  in  it,  no  true  sense  of  sin, 
no  relation  to  Christ.  It  does  not  go  on  to  action.  I  have  known  a  person — whose 
wonder  and  regret  was  that  his  penitence  never  seemed  to  deepen  or  increase  ;  yet 
he  said,  and  said  often,  and  said  truly,  "  I  have  sinned."  The  reason  was,  he 
never  put  the  "I  have  sinned  "  upon  the  right  thing.  He  said  it  about  his  sins 
generally,  or  he  said  it  about  some  particular  sin  ;  but,  all  the  while,  there  was 
another  sin  behind,  about  which  he  did  not  say  it.  The  sin  he  willingly  forgot — 
he  connived  at  it — he  allowed  it!  All  the  rest  he  was  willing  to  five  up,  but  not 
that.  And  that  was  his  sin.  And  that  sin  reserved  and  in  the  background, 
poisoned  and  deadened  the  repentance  of  all  other  sins !  The  "  I  have  sinned  "  fell 
to  the  ground  impotent- -like  a  withered  blossom.  That  nas  Balaam — and  that  may 
be  you  !  Or  is  it  thus  ?  You  have  an  object  in  life  very  dear.  You  know  that  the 
object  is  not  after  God's  will ;  but  still  you  pursue  it.  You  recur  to  it  again  and 
again— after  voices -after  providences — which  have  all  told  you  that  it  is  wrong. 
But  you  will  have  your  darling  object  at  any  cost — even  though  it  forfeit  peace  of 
mind,  and  though  you  lose  God's  favour.  This,  again,  is  Balaam.  Can  you  wonder 
if  the  "I  have  sinned  "  goes  for  nothing  at  all,  and  if  you  are  left  to  your  own  rash, 
reckless  way?  There  is  many  a  man  who  says,  in  his  own  room,  very  often,  and  at 
church,  "  I  have  sinned  "  ;  but  thronghout  the  week,  every  day,  and  all  the  day,  he 
is  grasping  in  his  business,  he  is  anxious  in  his  home,  he  is  occupied  in  his  thoughts 
ab  >ut  m'>ney.  It  is  money,  money  everywhere.  Monev  gives  its  tone  and  colour 
to  his  whole  life.     That  is  Balaam  to  the  very  letter.     (Jas.  Vaughan,  M.A.) 

Vers.  36-41.  Balaam  went  with  Balak. — The  vieethiri  hetween  Balak  and  Balaam  : — 
We  have  here  the  meeting  between  Balak  and  Balnam,  confederate  enemies  to  God's 
Israel ;  but  here  they  seem  to  differ  in  their  expectations  of  the  success.  1.  Balak 
speaks  of  it  with  contidence,  not  doubting  but  to  gain  his  point  now  Balaam  was 
i-.ime.  In  expectation  of  this  he  went  out  to  me4  him,  even  to  the  utmost  border  of 
his  country  (ver.  36) ;  partly  to  giatify  his  own  impatient  desire  to  see  one  he  had 
such  great  expectations  from,  and  partly  to  do  honour  to  Balaam,  and  so  to  engage 
him  >vith  his  utmost  power  to  serve  him.  Se^^  what  respect  heathen  princes  paid  to 
those  ihat  had  but  the  name  of  prophets,  and  how  welcome  one  was  that  came  with 
his  mouth  full  of  curses.  What  a  shame  is  it,  then,  that  the  ambassadors  of  Christ 
are  so  little  respected  by  most,  and  that  they  are  so  coldly  entertained  who  bring 
tidings  of  peace  and  blessing !  Note,  promotion  to  honour  is  a  very  tempting  bait 
to  many  people  ;  and  it  were  well  if  we  would  be  drawn  into  the  service  of  God  by 
the  honour  He  sets  before  us.  Why  do  we  delay  to  come  unt  >  Him  ?  Is  not  He  able 
to  promote  us  to  honour?  2.  Balaam  speiks  doubtfully  of  the  issue,  and  bids 
]'>a!ak  not  depend  too  much  upon  him.  "  Have  I  now  any  power  at  all  to  say  any- 
thing? "  (ver.  38).     I  am  come,  but  what  the  nearer  am  I  ?     (iladly  would  I  c i 

Isra'  1 ;  but  I  must  not,  I  cannot,  God  will  not  suffer  me.  He  seems  to  sp'^ak  witu 
vexation  at  the  hook  in  his  nose,  and  the  bridle  in  his  jaws  ;  such  as  Sennacherib 
was  tied  up  with  (Isa.  xxxvii.  29).  3.  They  address  tliemselves  with  all  speed  to 
the  business  ;  Balaam  is  nobly  entertained  overnight,  a  sacrifice  of  thanksgiving  is 
offered  to  the  gods  of  Moab  for  the  safe  arrival  of  this  welcome  guest,,  and  he  is 
treated  with  a  feast  upon  the  sacrifice  (ver.  40) ;  and  the  next  morning,  that  no  time 
might  be  lost,  Balak  takes  Balaam  in  his  chariot  to  the  high  plnces  of  his  kingdom, 
not  only  because  their  holiness  (such  as  it  was),  he  thouglit,  might  give  some  advan- 
tage to  his  divinations,  but  their  height  might  give  him  a  convenient  prospect  of  the 
camp  of  Israel,  which  was  to  be  the  mark  at  which  he  must  shoot  his  envenomed 
arrows.  And  now  Balaam  is  really  as  solicitous  to  please  Balak  as  ever  he  pretended 
to  be  to  please  God.  See  what  need  we  have  to  pray  every  day,  "  Our  i'ather  in 
heaven,  lead  us  not  into  temptation."     (Matthew  Henry,  D.D.) 


CHAP,  xxm.]  NUMBERS.  255 


CHAPTEE  XXin. 

Vers.  1-4.  Balak  and  Balaam  offered  on  every  altar. — The  sacrifice  ofBalak  and 
Balaam  : — I.  Objectively  this  sacrifice  was  as  perfect  as  the  offerers  could 
MAKE  IT.     Clearly  they  aimecl  at  presenting  a  perfect  offering.     This  is  exhibited — 

1.  In  the  number  of  offerings.    Seven  was  regarded  as  a  sacred  and  perfect  number. 

2.  In  the  victims  offered.  The  most  valuable  that  were  used  for  sacrifices.  3.  In 
the  kind  of  offerings.  They  were  burnt-offerings,  which  were  presented  without  any 
reserve,  being  entirely  consumed  in  honour  of  the  Divine  Being.  II.  Subjectively  this 
sacrifice  was  very  imperfect,  and  even  sinful.  In  the  sentiments  and  motives  of 
the  offerers  there  was  much  that  was  erroneous  and  evil.  1.  The  sacrifice  was  offered 
with  an  admixture  of  faith  and  superstition.  2.  The  sacrifice  was  offered  under  the 
impression  that  the  offering  was  meritorious  on  the  part  of  the  offerers,  and  placed 
God  under  an  obligation  to  them.  3.  The  sacrifice  was  offered  as  a  means  to  induce 
God  to  change  His  mind.  4.  The  sacrifice  was  offered  with  a  view  of  obtaining 
permission  and  power  to  curse  the  people  of  God.  Learn  :  1,  That  the  true  value 
of  sacrifice  is  to  be  looked  for  not  in  the  quantity  or  quality  of  the  offering,  but  in 
the  spirit  of  the  offerer.  2.  Trusting  in  Christ  Jesus  for  acceptance,  let  us  present 
ourselves  to  God.  "  God  must  be  worshipped  with  our  best.  A  man's  best  is  him- 
self ;  and  to  sacrifice  this  is  the  true  sacrifice."  3.  He  who  has  truly  given  himself 
to  God  will  keep  back  nothing  from  Him.     (IF.  Jones.) 

Vers.  5-12.  How  shall  I  curse,  whom  God  hath  not  cursed? — Balaam^s  first 
parable ;  or,  the  blessedness  of  the  people  of  God : — Balaam's  declaration  of  the 
happiness  of  Israel  sets  forth  the  blessedness  of  the  people   of  God.      I.  It  is 

PLACED  beyond  THE  POWER  OF  THEIR  ENEMIES.       II.    It   CONSISTS   IN    THEIR   SEPARATION 

FROM  THE  UNGODLY.  In  three  respects  were  the  Israelites  separated  from  other 
nations.  1.  Politically  they  were  independent  of  them.  2.  Morally  they  were 
separated  from  them.  3.  By  the  possession  of  peculiar  privileges  they  were 
separated  from  them.  III.  It  consists  also  in  their  vast  numbers.  1.  Unlimited 
as  regards  time.  2.  Unlimited  as  rei,'ards  place.  3.  Unlimited  as  regards  race  or 
class.  IV.  It  consists  also  in  righteodsness  of  character.  V.  It  is  in  some 
respects   desired   even   by  the   UNGODLY.      (W.  Joncs.)  Balaam's   eulogy  on 

Israel : — 1;  He  pronounceth  them  safe,  and  out  of  the  reach  of  his  envenomed 
darts.  (1)  He  owns  the  design  was  to  curse  them  (ver  7).  (2)  He  owns  the  design 
defeated,  and  his  own  inability  to  accomi.dish  it.  He  could  not  so  much  as  give 
them  an  ill  word  or  an  ill  wish  (ver.  8).  (a)  The  weakness  atid  impotency  of  his 
magic  skill,  for  which  others  valued  him  so  much,  and  doubtless  he  valued  himself 
no  less.  He  was  the  most  celebrated  man  of  that  profession,  and  yet  owns  himself 
baffled.  God  had  warned  the  Israelites  not  to  use  divination  (Lev.  xix.31),  and  this 
providence  gave  them  a  reason  for  that  law  by  showing  them  the  weakness  and 
folly  of  it.  As  they  had  seen  the  magicians  of  Egypt  befooled,  so  here  the  groat 
conjuror  of  the  East  (Isa.  xlvii.  12,  13,  14).  (b)  It  is  a  confession  of  the  sovereignty 
and  dominion  of  the  Divme  power.  He  owns  that  he  could  do  no  more  than  God 
would  suffer  him  to  do ;  for  God  could  overrule  all  his  purposes  and  tui'n  his 
counsels  headlong,  {c)  It  is  a  confession  of  the  inviolable  security  of  the  people 
of  God.  Note — 1.  God's  Israel  are  owned  and  blessed  of  Him.  He  has  not 
cursed  them,  for  they  are  delivered  from  the  curiae  of  the  law;  He  has  not  aban- 
doned tbem,  though  mean  and  vile.  2.  Those  that  have  the  good-will  of  heaven 
have  the  ill-will  of  hell  ;  the  serpent  and  his  seed  have  an  enmity  to  them.  3. 
Though  the  enemies  of  God's  people  may  prevail  far  against  them,  yet  they  can- 
not curse  them  :  that  is,  they  cannot  do  them  any  real  mischief,  much  less  a  ruin- 
ing mischief,  for  they  cannot  separate  them  from  the  love  of  God  (Rom.  viii.  39). 
2.  He  pronounceth  them  happy — in  three  things.  (1)  Happy  in  their  peculiarity, 
and  distinction  from  the  test  of  the  nations  (ver.  9).  It  is  the  duty  and  bonour  of 
those  that  are  dedicated  to  God  to  be  separated  from  the  world,  and  not  to  walk 
according  to  the  course  of  it.  Those  who  make  conscience  of  peculiar  duties  may 
take  the  comfort  of  peculiar  privileges,  which  it  is  likely  Balaam  has  an  eye  to 
here  ;  God's  Israel  shall  not  stand  upon  a  level  with  other  nations,  but  be  dignified 
above  them  all,  as  a  people  near  to  God  and  set  apart  for  Him.  (2)  Happy  in  their 
numbers;  not  so  few  and  despicable  as  they  were  represented  to  Him,  but  an  in- 
numerable company  which  made  them  both  honourable  and  formidable  (ver.  10). 
Balak  would  have  him  see  the  utmost  part  of  the  people  (chap.  xxii.  41),  hoping 


256  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxni. 

the  more  he  saw  of  them  the  more  would  he  be  exasperated  against  them,  and 
throw  out  his  curses  with  the  more  keenness  and  rage  ;  but  it  proved  quite  contrary  ; 
instead  of  being  angry  at  their  numbers  he  admired  them.  The  better  we  are 
acquainted  with  God's  people  the  better  opinion  we  Lave  of  tijem.  He  takes  notice 
of  the  number — (a)  Of  the  dust  of  .Jacob,  i.e.,  the  people  of  Jacob,  concerning 
whom  it  was  foretold  that  they  should  be  as  the  dust  for  number  (Gen.  xxviii.  14). 
Thus  he  owns  the  fulfilling  of  the  promise  made  to  the  fathers,  and  expects  that  it 
should  be  yet  further  accomplished,  (b)  Of  the  fourth  part  of  Israel ;  alluding  to 
the  form  of  their  camp  which  was  cast  into  four  squadrons  under  four  standards. 
Note,  God's  Israel  is  a  very  great  body;  His  spiritual  Israel  is  so,  and  they  will 
appear  to  be  so,  when  they  shall  all  be  gathered  together  unto  Him  in  the  great  day 
(Kev.  vii.  9).  (3)  Happy  in  their  last  end.  Let  me  die  the  death  of  the  righteous 
Israelites,  that  are  in  covenant  with  God,  and  let  my  last  end,  or  future  state,  be 
like  theirs,  or  my  recompense,  viz.,  in  the  other  world.  Here — (a)  It  is  taken  for 
granted  that  death  is  the  end  of  all  men;  the  righteous  themselves  must  die  ;  and 
it  is  good  for  each  of  us  to  think  of  this  with  application,  as  Balaam  himself  doth 
here,  speaking  of  his  own  death,  (b)  He  goes  upon  the  supposition  of  the  soul's 
immortality,  and  a  different  state  on  the  other  side  death,  to  which  this  is  a  noble 
testimony,  and  an  evidence  of  its  being  anciently  known  and  believed.  For  how 
could  the  death  of  the  righteous  be  more  desirable  than  the  death  of  the  wicked 
upon  any  other  account,  but  that  of  a  happiness  in  another  world,  since  in  the 
manner  and  circumstances  of  dying  we  see  all  things  come  alike  to  all?  (c)  He 
pronounceth  the  righteous  truly  blessed,  not  only  while  they  live,  but  when  they 
die ;  which  makes  their  death  not  only  more  desirable  than  the  death  of  others, 
bnt  even  more  desirable  than  life  itself ;  for  in  that  sense  his  wish  may  be  taken. 
Not  only  when  I  do  die,  let  me  die  the  death  of  the  righteous ;  but  I  could  even  now 
be  willing  to  die,  on  that  condition  that  I  miglit  die  the  death  of  the  righteous  and 
take  my  end  this  moment  provided  it  might  be  like  his.  (Matthew  Henry,  D.D.) 
The  distinctive  character  of  God's  people  .-—I.  The  twofold  question  proposed.  1. 
"  How  shall  I  curse,  whom  God  hath  not  cursed  ?  "  This  supposes  that  God  liad 
blessed  Israel.  To  be  blessed  of  the  Lord  is  all  that  a  man  can  desire.  But  who  are  they 
that  are  blessed  of  God  ?  (1)  They  on  whom  God  has  set  His  love  ;  not  for  anything 
in  them  to  merit  that  love.  (2)  When  that  solemn  engagement  was  entered  into,  the 
Book  of  Eternal  Life  was  written,  and  the  names  of  those  ordained  to  it  written 
therein.  2.  "  How  shall  I  defy,  whom  the  Lord  hath  not  defied  ?  "  The  idea  refers 
to  warfare  (1  Sam.  xvii.  45).  God's  spiritual  Israel,  whose  names  are  in  the  Book 
of  Life,  are  they  whom  G'ld  hath  not  defied,  that  is,  He  hath  made  them  more 
than  conquerors  through  Him  that  loved  them.  And,  in  order  to  see  this,  we  must 
look  upon  them  as  being  in  Christ,  their  Covenant  Head,  from  all  eternity.  So 
that,  just  as  He  came  off  more  than  conqueror  over  all  His  spiritual  foes,  so  shall 
Ihey.  II.  Notice  how  conspicuous  Israel  is  in  the  eyes  of  God.  1.  "  For  from 
the  top  of  the  rocks  I  see  him."  We  may  regard  God  as  saying  this  of  His  people, 
chosen  in  Christ.  (1)  There  is  the  rock  of  the  everlasting  covenant.  He  sees  them 
not  as  sinful.  He  sees  not  pervetseness  in  them,  but  He  sees  them  accepted  in  the 
Beloved,  and  made  complete  in  Him.  (2)  There  is  the  rock  of  sovereign  grace.  (.3) 
There  is  the  rock  of  God's  faithfulness.  2.  From  the  hills  I  behold  him.  (1) 
God's  eternity.  (2)  God's  unchangeableness.  III.  The  distinctiveness  of  Israel 
FROM  THE  WORLD.  "  Lo,  the  people  shall  dwell  alone,"  <fec.  God's  regenerated 
blood-bought  people,  as  a  spiritual  fact,  live  alone.  True,  they  are  in  the  world, 
perform  its  duties,  and  are  reckoned  among  the  nations,  but  they  are  not  of  the 
world  (John  xv.  19).  As  soon  as  God  calls  them  in  His  grace,  puts  His  Spirit  in 
them,  and  makes  them  new  creatures  in  Christ  Jesus,  from  that  time  they  may  be 
said  to  live  alone.  For,  let  a  regenerated  person  live  in  the  same  house  in  which 
are  a  number  of  unregenerate  persons,  his  own  relatives,  he  lives  alone,  for  he  has 
desires  and  feelings  and  spiritual  sympathies  different  from  theirs.  His  dwelling- 
place  is  on  high  ;  he  walks  with  God  in  the  light  of  the  living  ;  the  Spirit  of  God 
draws  his  affections  upwards,  so  that  he  may  be  said  to  live  alone,  so  far  as  outward 
society  goes.  Yet  he  is  not  alone,  for  he  has  the  presence  of  God  with  him.  (J. 
J.    Eastmead.)  The  people  shall  dwell  alone.  —  Israel  dnellinq  alone  : — I. 

The  exact  fulfilment  of  this  ancient  prediction,  in  every  diffkrent  age  con- 
stitutes one  of  the  most  astonishing  features  of  Jewish  HISTORY.  1.  Travellers 
have  related  that  the  deep  red  waters  of  the  Khone,  flowing  into  the  Lake  of  Geneva, 
may  afterwards  be  traced  for  miles  and  miles;  the  dark,  turbid  stream  f>f  the  river 
t-t.ll  refusing  to  mingle  with  the  clear  waters  of  the  lake.     And  thus  it  is,  and  ever 


CHAP,  xxni.]  NUMBERS.  251 

has  been,  with  the  Jews.  Like  that  river  they  have  in  every  age  continued  a  dis- 
tinct people,  and  this  too  amidst  circumstances  which,  it  might  have  been  thought, 
must  have  inevitably  broken  down  every  mitldle  wall  of  partition  between  them  and 
others.  2.  And  there  is  yet  another  consideration.  It  is  without  a  parallel  in  the 
history  of  the  world.  In  every  case  where  even  the  most  discordant  elements  have 
been  thrown  together,  they  have  imperceptibly  blended  in  the  course  of  ages.  II. 
Some  of  the  improving  reflections  which  it  mat  be  intended  that  we  should 
DERIVE  from  the  PROPHECY.  1.  There  is  a  national  use  to  be  made  of  this  predic- 
tion of  Balaam.  What  is  literally  true  r,i  Israel  is  spiritually  true  of  England. 
We,  as  a  people,  may  be  said  to  be  "  dwelling  alone."  In  regard  to  our  mercies, 
our  privileges,  and  our  blessings,  how  much  have  we  received  above  all  other  people 
under  heaven  1  No  slavery  tolerated  amongst  us — law  for  the  poorest — protection 
for  the  weakest,  and  the  homes  of  England  bright  and  happy — such  as  are  found 
nowhere  else.  And  above  all  the  rest,  the  greatness  of  our  religious  privileges.  2. 
But,  from  the  national,  let  us  turn  to  the  individual  application  of  the  prophecy.  Let 
us  admonish  you  that  there  is  an  important  sense  in  which  every  Christian  must 
"dwell  alone."  You  cannot  follow  Christ  and  yet  be  like  other  men.  (H.Huttoii,  M.A.) 
The  true  Israel  dioelllng  alone,  and  not  reckoned  among  the  nations  : — This  text  is 
a  prophecy,  and  hath  more  steps  towards  its  accomplishment  than  one.  The  pros- 
perity and  distinction  of  a  far  more  illustrious  family  than  the  house  of  Israel  are 
intended  here.  While,  therefore,  the  literal  Israel  are  the  type,  the  prophecy  is  to 
be  applied  to  the  saints  of  God  in  every  age  as  the  antitype.     I.  Specify  some 

CIRCUMSTANCES  IN  THE  HISTORY  OF  ISRAEL,  STRONGLY   TYPICAIi    OF   THE    PEOPLE    OF    GoD 

IN  ALL  AGES.  In  this  view,  the  history  of  Israel  becomes  an  instructive  emblem  of 
the  original  state,  deliverance,  pilgrimage,  and  happy  rest  of  the  ransomed  of  the 
Lord.  II.  Specify  some  of  the  peculiarities  which  distinguish  them  from  the 
BEST  OF  THE  WORLD.  My  text  represents  them  as  a  distinct  incorporated  society. 
They  are  a  people — a  people  dwelling — a  people  dwelling  alone — and  a  people  who 
shall  not  be  reckoned  among  the  nations.  They  are  a  distinct  people,  as  to  their 
extraction,  as  to  their  language,  as  to  their  privileges,  as  to  their  objects  of  pursuit, 
as  to  their  manners,  as  to  their  allies,  as  to  their  sorrows,  and  as  to  their  joys. 
III.  Point  out  whence  it  is  that  the  redeemed  of  the  Lord  are  such  a  singular 
PEOPLE.  "  They  shall  not  be  reckonci  among  the  nations."  Literally  has  this 
prediction  been  accomplished  in  the  history  of  the  posterity  of  Jacob.  Understand- 
ing the  prediction  in  relation  to  God's  redeemed  people,  I  have  these  fonr  particulars 
to  adduce,  in  accounting  for  this  singularity.  They  are  not  reckoned  amimg  the 
nations.     1.  Because  they  were  ordained  to  this  distinction  in  the  electing  purpose. 

2.  Because  they  were  consecrated  to  this  singularity  by  the  blood  of  the  Surety. 

3.  Because  they  are  disposed  by  the  grace  of  God  to  choose  this  distinction  for 
themselves.  4.  Because  naturd,!  men  possess  no  inclination  to  submit  to  their 
restrictions.  Upon  a  review  of  all  that  has  been  said  do  not  you  perceive — (1) 
That  regeneration,  or  the  new  birth,  produces  an  immense  change  at  once  upon 
the  nature,  the  state,  the  teinper,  and  manners  of  men?  They  keep  tuemselves 
"  unspotted  from  the  world,"  by  "  walking  in  the  fear  of  the  Lord."  (2)  See  the 
reality,  as  well  as  importance,  of  the  distinction  between  the  Church  and  the  world. 
{W.  Taylor.)  An  appeal  in  behalf  of  the  Society  for  Promoting  Christianity  (iviong 
the  Jews  : — How  awful  is  the  contrast  in  this  history  between  the  mind  of  G  'd  and 
the  designs  and  wishes  of  man  I  And  I  am  disposed  to  think  that  such  a  reference 
will  lead  us  to  the  conclusion  that  the  conduct  of  men  in  all  ages  has  borne  a 
resemblance  to  that  of  the  king  of  Moab  in  this  particular  instance;  and  that  the 
people  whom  God  has  especially  distinguished  and  blessed  has  beep  singularly  the 
object  of  the  contempt  or  cruelty  of  man.     I.  In  the  first  place,  we  are  to  examine 

TUK  CONTRvST  in  DIKFERENT  AGES  BETWEEN  THE  DESIGNS  OF  GoD  AND  THE    CONDUCT    OP 

MAN  TOWARDS  THE  PEOPLE  OF  IsRAEL.  1.  And  here  it  is  scarcely  necessary  to  observe 
that  the  persecution  of  the  Jews  on  their  journey  to  the  promised  land  w+s  not 
confined  to  the  instance  recorded  in  the  text.  The  Egyptian  persecution,  for 
instance,  has  scarcely  any  parallel  in  history.  2.  But  let  us  pass  on  to  another 
period.  It  pleased  God,  in  a  most  singular  manner,  to  stir  up  the  mind  of  Cyrus  to 
rebuild  the  temple  of  Jerusalem.  But  no  sooner  was  the  merciful  design  developed, 
than  the  hostility  of  man  discovered  itself.  The  books  in  which  the  history  of  the 
rebuilding  of  the  temple  is  recorded,  describe  a  succession  of  the  most  criminal  plots 
to  resist  its  progress.  3.  Thus,  also,  at  a  third  period.  No  epoch  is  more  distin- 
guished by  the  merciful  designs  of  God  in  favour  of  the  Jews  than  the  time  of  our 
Lord's  appearance  upon  earth.     One  of  the  highest  evidences  of  the  favour  of  God 

17 


258  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxiii. 

is  the  gift  or  increase  of  the  means  of  religious  insti'uction.  Consider,  then,  the 
peculiar  privileges  of  the  Jews  at  the  coming  of  Christ.  But  how  were  they  regarded 
by  the  inhabitants  of  the  world  ?  They  were  neglected,  and  they  were  oppressed. 
They  were  enslaved  by  the  Komans,  and  every  species  of  indignity  was  inflicted 
upon  them.  4.  But  let  us  now  come  to  a  fourth  period,  viz.,  to  onr  own  days. 
And  here  it  is  necessary  to  observe  that,  notwithstanding  the  continued  unbelief  of 
the  Jews,  the  merciful  intentions  of  God  towards  His  prostrate  peoj)le  are  as  obvious 
now  as  at  any  other  period  of  their  history.  They  are  indeed  f allien,  but  is  the 
patience  of  God  therefore  towards  them  exhausted — has  He  no  mercies  in  store  for 
them — does  He  mean  to  leave  them  in  the  dust?  Such  is  the  de-ign  of  God  with 
regard  to  the  people  of  Israel,  which  is  revealed  to  ourselves.  And  now  let  us  con- 
trast it  with  the  conduct  of  mankind.  Consider,  then,  the  contempt  in  which  the 
Jews  are  almost  universally  held.  Is  not  the  word  Jew  a  name  almost  of  execration 
among  many  ?  But  can  such  a  feeling  be  made  to  harmonise  with  the  designs  of 
God  ?  Can  the  voice  of  insult  have  any  concord  with  the  lofty  and  ti  iumphant 
songs  and  triumphs  of  prophecy  ?     II.  I  proceed  to  examine  some  of  the  reasons 

BY   WHICH    THIS    OPPOSITION    TO    THE    WILL    OF    GoD    IS    JUSTIFIED.       1.     Some    perSOUS 

attempt  to  vindicate  their  neglect  of  the  Jews  by  a  reference  to  the  crimes  of  this 
people  in  the  earlier  stage  of  their  history.  But  then,  are  we  to  be  the  administra- 
tors of  Divine  vengeanc-e  ?  Are  we,  by  a  sort  of  posthumous  retribution,  to  visit 
the  crimes  of  other  ages  upon  the  people  of  this  ?  2.  A  second  reason  for  this 
neglect  of  the  Jews  is  fo  mded  upon  the  defects  of  their  present  chai'acter.  Can  a 
people  such  as  these  merit  any  public  regard  ?  Are  th^y  not  stampel  with  all  the 
features  most  offensive  to  God  and  to  good  men  ?  These  also  are  facts  not  to  be 
disputed.  Their  rejection  of  Christ  has  brought  with  it  a  train  of  the  most  tre- 
mendous curses  :  His  "  blood  "  has  been  and  is  "  upon  them  and  upon  their  children." 
Their  moral  defects  spring  from  their  religious  defects.  They  want  honesty,  because 
tluy  are  ignorant  of  Christ.  They  want  purity,  because  they  have  never  been  led 
to  the  fountain  whi'-h  "  cleanseth  from  all  sin."  Give  them,  under  God,  a  know- 
ledge of  their  Saviour,  and  you  shall  see  the  graces  of  Christianity  bursting  upon 
the  barren  soil,  the  water  rushing  from  tlie  rock,  and  the  wilderness  blossoming 
like  the  rose.  3.  Again,  a  third  class  of  objectors  say,  "  Why  not  leave  the  Jews  as 
you  find  *hem  ?  It  is  inhuman  to  disturb  their  repose,  and  introduce  faction  among 
them."  To  this  I  answer.  If  the  conduct  of  the  friends  of  this  society  is  intolerant, 
it  is  the  intolerance  of  Heaven  :  it  is  the  intolerance  of  the  "  good  Shepherd  who 
laid  down  His  life  for  the  sheep."  4.  A  fourth  class  of  objectors  have  said,  "  You 
take  upon  yourselves  to  be,  not  only  the  interpreters,  but  the  agents  and  executors 
of  prophecy.  Because  God  has  predicted  that  the  Jews  are  to  be  restored,  you 
assume  that  He  means  you  to  be  the  administiators  of  His  plans."  We  answer, 
no  ;  we  are  not  following  the  voice  of  prophecy,  which  may  apply  to  others  as  well 
as  to  ourselves  :  we  are  obeying  the  command  of  God,  which  must  apply  to  ourselves 
in  common  with  all  Christians.  5.  Again,  it  has  been  said  by  some,  "  We  iliscover 
no  particular  encouragement  to  undertake  the  conversion  of  the  Jews  at  the  present 
moment,  either  in  the  circumstances  of  our  own  country,  or  in  those  of  the  world 
in  general."  To  this  I  reply,  that  I  do  discover  such  encouragement.  I  discover 
it  in  the  dislocation  of  the  Mahometan  power,  which  has  always  been  the  grand 
political  barrier  to  Jewish  restoration.  I  discover  it  in  the  fact  that  many  of  the 
Jews  themselves  entertain  the  same  opinion.  I  discover  it  in  the  remarkable 
circumstance,  which  appears  to  be  well  authenticated,  of  many  Jews  having  mani- 
fested of  late  a  singular  disposition  to  migrate  to  their  own  land.  I  hear  again  the 
voice  of  Him,  who  c  urdescended  to  spring  from  a  Jewish  niotlier,  and  to  dwell  upon 
its  favoured  soil,  calling  upon  us  to  teach  all  nations,  "beginning  at  Jerusalem." 
"The  age  of  chivalry  is  gone."  And  God  be  praised  that  it  is,  if  by  that  term  is 
designated  the  unnatural  combinations  of  pious  zeal  and  fiery  ambition,  by  which 
the  Crusaders  were  characterised.  But,  tliank  God,  the  age  of  Christian  zeal  is 
not  gone.  And  to  that  zeal  I  would  now  present  an  adequate,  a  sublime,  a 
most  interesting  object.  It  is  before  men  inflamed  by  this  holy  atnbitioir  I  would 
lift  up  the  banner  of  the  Cross.  Oh,  remember  that  even  now  "  the  gates  of  tire 
daugiiter  of  Zi  n  lament  and  mourn,  and  that  she,  being  desolate,  sits  on  the 
ground."      (J.   W.  Cnnuiufiham,  31.  A.)  B(ilaaiu\<i    vision  and  praijer  : — I.    His 

BPLENmo  VISION.  1.  He  saw  the  pleasiiut  tcut-life  of  the  pc  )|'le.  Bep>sing  peace- 
fully on  the  strong  arm  of  the  Lord.  Eve  y  truly  gt)od  man's  life  is  an  illustration. 
9.  He  saw  the  shadow  of  Israel's  impemling  victory.  3.  He  siw  Israel's  most 
savage  foe,  Balak,  chained  to  his  lair.    II.  His  beadtifcl  piiayeb.     1.  He  believed 


CHAP.  XXIII.]  NUMBERS.  259 

in  death,  aye,  in  two  sorts  of  death  ;  he  puts  the  death  of  the  righteous  over  against 
the  death  of  the  wicked,  though  he  mokes  no  mention  of  the  latter.  2.  Hebelieveil 
that  the  death  of  the  righteous  was  always  desirable.  (W.  V.  Young.)  Hie  vision 
from  the  rocks  : — So  from  these  df sert  lands,  and  these  desert  hills,  we  gaze  upon 
the  Church  on  her  way  to  Canaan,  about  to  be  settled  in  the  blessed  land  and  holy 
city.  And  when  we  gaze,  what  do  we  see  ?  I.  The  euqgedness  of  the  land  of 
ocK  PRESENT  sojouKN.  It  is  the  region  of  hostility  as  well  as  barrenness.  This  is 
not  our  rest.  These  dark  mountains  are  not  our  home.  II.  The  glorious  land. 
Afar  off  just  now,  but  still  visible,  still  beautiful.  It  is  the  paradise  of  God  ;  it  is 
the  new  Jerusalem ;  the  city  which  hath  foundations;  the  new  heavens  and  new 
earth,  wherein  dwelleth  righteousness.  III.  A  people  delivered  from  a  present 
EVIL  WORLD.  Once  in  bondage,  now  free  ;  once  groaning  under  oppression,  now  in 
the  service  of  a  heavenly  Master,  and  heirs  of  the  world  to  come  ;  the  Eed  Sea 
crossed,  and  now  between  them  and  their  persecutors  an  iron  wall.  Forgiven  and 
redeemed  ;  with  their  backs  on  Egypt,  and  their  faces  to  Jerusalem.  IV.  A  people 
SUSTAINED  BY  Jehovah  Himself.  ThcIrs  is  the  hidden  manna,  the  water  from  the 
smitten  rock.  Jehovah  feeds  them  ;  Jehovah  gives  them  the  living  water.  It  is 
not  man  but  God  who  cares  for  them.  V.  A  pilgrim  band.  Tliey  are  strangers  on 
the  earth  ;  this  is  not  their  home ;  here  is  not  their  city.  Their  loins  are  giit,  and 
their  staff  is  in  their  hand,  and  they  are  liastening  onward.  No  sitting  down  ;  no 
taking  ease;  no  folding  of  their  hands.  Forward,  still  forward,  is  their  watchword  ! 
VI.  A  people  bought  with  a  price.  Their  ransom  has  been  blood  ;  and  they  are 
not  their  own.  Another  life  has  gone  for  theirs.  VII.  A  people  loved  with  an 
infinite  love.  The  banner  that  is  over  tliem  is  love.  The  song  they  sing  is  love, 
"  Unto  Him  that  loved  us."  It  is  a  love  which  passeth  knowledge  ;  a  love  without 
bound  or  end ;  a  love  eternal  and  Divine.     VIII.  A  people  preparing  to  pass  over. 

TO    THE  goodly  LAND.       [H.  BoHUr,  D.D.) 

Ver.  10.  Let  me  die  the  death  of  the  righteous,  and  let  my  last  end  he  like  his  ! — 

The  end  of  the  ricjhteous  desired : — Carlyle,  in  his  "  History  of  the  French  Eevo- 
lution,"  tells  us  of  a  Duke  of  Orleans  who  did  not  believe  m  death  ;  so  that  when 
his  secretary  stumbled  on  the  words,  "The  late  King  of  Spain,"  he  angrily  de- 
manded what  he  meant  by  it.  The  obsequious  attendant  replied,  "  My  Lord,  it  is 
a  title  which  some  of  the  kings  of  Spain  have  taken."  We  know  that  all  our 
paths,  wind  as  they  may,  will  lead  to  tLie  grave.  A  certain  king  of  France  believed 
in  death,  but  forbade  that  it  should  ever  be  mentioned  in  his  presence.  "  And  if," 
said  he,  "  I  at  any  time  look  pale,  no  courtier  must  dare,  on  pain  of  mv  displeasure, 
to  mention  it  in  my  presence"  ;  thus  imitating  the  foolish  ostrich,  which,  when, 
pursued  by  the  hunter,  and  utterly  unable  to  escape,  is  said  to  hide  its  head  in  the 
sand,  fancying  that  it  is  secure  from  the  enemy  which  it  cannot  see.  I  trust  that, 
being  sane  men,  you  desire  to  look  in  the  face  the  whole  of  your  future  history, 
both  in  the  present  world  and  in  worlds  beyond  the  region  of  sight ;  and,  fore- 
seeing that  soul  and  body  must  part  in  the  article  of  dea;,h,  you  are  desirous  to 
consider  that  event,  that  you  may  be  prepared  for  it.  I.  Balaam's  wish  concerning 
DEATH.  He  anxiously  desired  that  he  might  die  such  a  death  as  the  righteous  die. 
1.  Truly  we  commend  his  choice,  for,  in  the  first  place,  it  must,  at  the  least,  be  as 
well  with  the  righteous  man  when  he  comes  to  die,  as  with  any  other  man.  Ey  the 
righteous  man  we  mean  the  man  wlio  has  believed  in  Jesus,  and  so  has  been 
covered  with  Christ's  righteousness,  and  moreover,  has  by  the  power  of  the  Holy 
Spirit  received  a  new  heart,  so  that  his  actions  are  righteous  both  towards  God  and 
man.  A  certain  carping  intidel,  after  having  ar^jued  with  a  poor  countryman  who 
knew  the  faith,  but  who  knew  little  else,  said  to  him,  "  Well,  Hodge,  you  really  are 
so  stupid  that  thei'eis  no  use  arguing  with  you.  I  cannot  get  you  out  of  this  ab-md 
religion  of  yours."  "Ah!  well,"  said  Hodge,  "I  dare  say  I  am  stupid,  master, 
but  do  you  know  we  poor  people  like  to  have  two  strings  to  our  bow  ?  "  "  Well," 
said  the  critic,  "  what  do  you  mean  by  that  ?  "  "  Master,  I'll  show  you.  Suppose 
it  should  all  turn  out  as  you  say  ;  suppose  there  is  no  God,  and  there  is  no  here- 
after, don't  you  see  I  am  as  well  off  as  you  are  ?  Certainly,  it  will  not  be  any  worse 
for  me  than  it  will  be  for  you,  if  we  both  of  us  get  annibilated.  But  don't  you  see 
if  it  should  happen  to  be  true  as  I  believe,  what  will  become  of  you  ?  "  2.  There 
is  this  to  be  said  for  the  righteous  man  :  hfl  goes  to  the  death  chamber  with  a  quiet 
conscience.  It  has  been  clearly  ascertained  iliat  in  the  event  of  di-ath,  the  mind  is 
frequently  quickened  to  a  high  degree  of  activity,  so  that  it  thinks  more  perhaps  in 
the  course  of  five  minutes  tuan  it  could  have  done  in  the  course  of  years  at  other 


260  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxm. 

times.  Persons  who  have  been  rescued  from  drowning,  have  said  that  they 
imagined  themselves  to  have  been  weeks  in  the  water,  for  the  thoughts,  the  many 
views  and  visions,  the  long  and  detailed  retrospect  seemed  to  them  to  have 
required  weeks,  and  yet  the  whole  transpired  in  a  few  seconds.  Frequently 
towards  the  last  the  soul  travels  at  express  speed,  traversing  its  past  life  as  though 
it  rode  upon  the  lightning.  Ah !  then  how  blessed  is  that  man  who,  looking  back 
upon  the  past,  can  see  many  things  of  which  conscience  can  approve !  3.  Again, 
the  ritihteous  man,  when  he  dies,  does  not  lose  his  all.  With  every  other  man  the 
sound  of  "  earth  to  earth,  dust  to  dust,  and  ashes  to  ashes,"  is  the  end  of  present 
seeming  wealth  and  the  beginning  of  eternal  and  real  want.  But  the  Christian  is 
not  made  a  bankrupt  by  the  grave  ;  death  to  him  is  gain.  "  Go,"  said  the  dying 
Saracen  hero,  Saladin,  "  take  this  winding  sheet,  and  as  soon  as  I  expire,  bear  it  on 
a  lance  through  all  the  streets,  and  let  the  herald  cry  as  he  holds  aloft  the  ensign  of 
death,  '  This  is  all  that  is  left  of  Saladin,  the  conqueror  of  the  East.'  "  He  need 
not  have  so  said  if  he  had  been  a  Christian,  for  the  believer's  heritage  is  not  rent 
from  him,  but  opened  up  to  him  by  the  rough  hand  of  death.  The  world  to  come 
and  all  its  infinite  riches  and  blessedness  are  ours  in  the  moment  of  departure. 
4.  "Let  me  die  the  death  of  the  righteous"  may  weU  be  our  wish,  because  he  dies 
with  a  good  hope.  Peering  into  eternity,  with  eyes  marvellously  strengthened,  the 
behever  frequently  beholds,  even  while  he  is  yet  below,  something  of  the  glory 
which  is  to  be  revealed  in  him.  5.  Moreover,  the  believer  dies  in  the  arms  of  a 
friend.  I  do  not  say  in  the  arms  of  a  mortal  friend,  for  it  has  fallen  to  the  lot  of 
some  Christians  to  be  burnt  at  the  stake ;  and  some  of  them  have  rotted  to  death  in 
dungeons  ;  but  yet  every  behever  dies  in  the  arms  of  the  best  of  friends.  Precious 
is  communion  with  the  Son  of  God,  and  never  more  so  than  when  it  is  enjoyed 
upon  the  verge  of  heaven.  6.  Lastly,  when  the  good  man  dies,  he  dies  with  honour. 
Who  cares  for  the  death  of  the  wicked  ?  A  few  mourning  friends  lament  for  a 
little  time,  but  they  almost  feel  it  a  relief  within  a  day  or  two  that  such  a  one  is 
gone.  As  for  the  righteous,  when  he  dieth  there  is  weeping  and  mourning  for  him. 
Like  Stephen,  devout  men  carry  him  to  the  sepuk-hre,  and  make  great  lamentation 
over  him.  II.  Balaam  spoke  concerning  the  godly  man,  of  his  last  end.  I  do  not 
know  that  this  wicked  prophet,  whose  eyes  were  once  opened,  knew  anything  about 
this  latter  end,  as  I  shall  interpret  it ;  but  you  and  I  do  know,  and  so  let  us  use  his 
words,  if  not  his  thoughts.  God  has  endowed  us  with  a  spiritual  nature  which  shall 
outlive  the  sun,  and  run  on  coeval  with  eternity.  Like  the  years  of  God's  riglit 
hand,  like  the  days  of  the  Most  High,  has  God  ordained  the  life  of  souls  to  be. 
Now,  I  can  well  believe  that  the  most  of  us  wish  that  our  position  after  death  may 
be  like  that  of  the  riiihteous.  1.  The  first  consideration  in  death  is  that  the  spirit 
is  disembodied.  I  should  desire  to  be  like  a  Christian  in  the  disembodied  state, 
because  he  will  not  be  altogether  in  a  new  and  strange  world.  Some  of  you  have 
never  exercised  your  spirits  at  all  about  the  spirit-world.  You  have  talked  with 
thousands  of  people  in  bodies,  but  lyou  have  never  spoken  with  spiritual  beings ;  to 
you  the  realm  of  spirit  is  all  unknown ;  but  let  me  tell  you,  Christians  are  in  the 
daily  habit  of  communing  with  the  spirit-world,  by  which  I  mean  that  their  souls 
converse  with  God  ;  their  spirits  are  affected  by  the  Holy  Spirit ;  they  have  fellow- 
ship with  angels,  who  are  ministering  spirits  sent  forth  to  minister  to  them  that  are 
the  heirs  of  salvation.  2.  After  the  judgment  is  pronounced,  the  disembodied  spirit 
dwells  in  heaven.  Some  of  you  could  not  be  happy  if  you  were  allowed  to  enter 
that  heaven.  Shall  I  tell  you  why?  It  is  a  land  of  spirit,  and  you  have  neglected 
your  sjiirit.  There  is  a  story  told  of  a  young  woman  who  dreamed  that  she  was 
in  heaven  unconverted,  and  thought  she  saw  upon  the  pavement  of  transparent 
gold,  multitudes  of  f-pirits  dancing  to  the  sweetest  music.  She  stood  still,  unliappy, 
silent,  and  when  the  King  said  to  her,  "  Why  do  you  not  partake  in  the  joy  ?  "  she 
answered,  "I  cannot  join  in  the  dance,  for  I  do  not  know  the  m<asure;  I  cannot 
join  in  the  song,  for  I  do  not  know  the  tune  "  ;  then  said  He  in  a  voice  of  thunder, 
"  What  dost  thou  here  ?  "  And  she  thought  herself  cast  out  for  ever.  If  you  do 
not  learn  heaven's  language  on  earth  you  cannot  learn  it  in  the  world  to  come.  If 
you  are  not  holy  you  cannot  be  with  holy  saints.  3.  After  awhile  our  bo'lies  will 
be  raised  again ;  the  soul  will  re-enter  the  body ;  for  Christ  has  not  only  bought 
the  souls  of  His  people,  but  their  bodies  too.  "  Awake,  ye  dead  !  awake !  and  come 
to  judgment !  come  away  !  "  Then  up  will  start  the  bodies  of  the  wicked.  I  know 
not  in  what  shapes  of  dread  they  will  arise,  nor  how  they  will  appear.  But  this  I 
know,  that  when  the  righteous  shall  rise  they  will  be  glorious  like  the  Lord  .Jesus; 
they  shall  have  all  the  loveliness  which  heaven  itself  can  give  them.     III.  We 


CHAP.  XXIII.]  NUMBERS.  261 

have  to  make  a  practical  use  of  the  whole.  Behold  the  vanity  of  mere 
desires.  Balaam  desired  to  die  the  death  of  the  righteous,  and  yet  was  slain  in  battle 
fighting  against  those  righteous  men  whom  he  envied.  There  is  an  old  proverb 
•which  says,  "  Wishers  and  woulders  make  bad  housekeepers  "  ;  and  another  which 
declares,  "  Wishing  never  filled  a  sack."  Mere  desiring  to  die  the  death  of  the 
xighteous,  though  it  may  be  natural,  will  be  exceedingly  unprofitable.  Stop  not 
there.  Have  you  never  heard  the  old  classic  story  of  those  ancient  Gauls  who, 
having  once  drunk  the  sweet  wines  of  Italv,  constantly,  as  they  smacked  their  lips, 
said  one  to  another,  "Where  is  Italy?"  And  when  their  leaders  pointed  to  the 
gigantic  Alps  crowned  with  snow,  they  said,  "  Cannot  we  cross  them  ?  "  Every 
time  they  tasted  the  wine  the  question  was  put,  "Where  is  Italy?  and  cannot  we 
reach  it?"  This  was  good  plain  sense.  So  they  put  on  their  war-harness,  and 
marched  to  old  Rome  to  fight  for  the  wines  of  Italy.  So  every  time  you  hear  of 
heaven,  I  should  like  you,  with  Gothic  ardour,  to  say,  "Where  is  it?  for  I  fain 
"would  go."  And  happy  should  I  be  if  men  here  would  put  on  the  harness  of  the 
Christian,  and  say,  "  Through  floods  and  flames  for  such  a  conquest,  to  drink  of 
such  wines  well  refined,  we  would  fain  go  to  the  battle  that  we  may  win  the 
victory."  Oh,  the  folly  of  those  who,  knowing  and  desiring  this,  yet  spend  their 
strength  for  nought !  The  Eoman  Emperor  fitted  out  a  great  expedition  and  sent 
it  to   conquer  Britain.     The  valiant  legionaries   leaped   ashore,   and  each   man 

fathered  a  handful  of  shells,  and  went  back  to  his  barque  again— that  was  all. 
ome  of  you  are  equally  foolish.  You  are  fitted  by  God  for  great  endeavours  and 
lofty  enterprises,  and  you  are  gathering  shells :  your  gold  and  your  silver,  your 
houses  and  your  lands,  and  heaven  and  everlasting  life  you  let  go.  Like  Nero,  you 
send  to  Alexandria  for  sand  for  your  amusements,  and  send  not  for  wheat  for  your 
starving  souls.  "  Well,"  cries  one,  "how  is  heaven  to  be  had?  "  It  is  to  be  had  only 
by  a  personal  seeking  after  it.  I  have  read  of  one  who,  when  drowning,  saw  the 
rainbow  in  the  heavens.  Picture  him  as  he  sinks ;  he  looks  up,  and  there,  if  he 
sees  the  many-coloured  bow,  he  may  think  to  himself,  "  There  is  God's  covenant 
sign  that  the  world  shall  never  be  drowned,  and  yet  here  I  am  drowning  in  this 
river."  So  it  is  with  you.  There  is  the  arch  of  God's  promise  over  you,  "  God  so 
loved  the  world,  that  He  gave  His  only  begotten  Son,  that  whosoever  believeth  in 
Him  should  not  perish,  but  have  everlasting  life,"  and  yet,  because  you  believe  not 
in  Him,  you  will  be  drowned  in  your  sins.  (C.  H.  Spiirgeon.)  Balaam : — I.  The  man. 
II.  The  circumstances.  III.  The  wish.  1.  Natural.  2.  Insincere.  3.  Inconsistent. 
Lessons :  1.  A  good  wish  alone  will  never  save  the  soul.  2.  Even  knowledge  of 
the  consequences  of  sin  will  not  restrain  a  wicked  man.  3.  As  wishes,  knowledge, 
and  human  strength  are  insuflicient,  seek  for  Divine  grace.  {Preadier's  Analyst.) 
The  death  of  the  righteous : — I.  Righteous  men  die.  II.  Bad  men  would  die  like 
them.  1.  The  death  of  the  righteous  is  a  desirable  death.  No  moral  remorse,  no 
terrible  forebodings.  Peaceful  conscience.  Glorious  hope.  2.  This  desirable  death 
is  only  gained  by  a  righteous  life.  (HomUist.)  The  end  attained  by  effort : — 
No  results  are  attained  without  the  diligent  application  of  means,  and  no  end  is 
reached  without  persistent  effort.  1.  With  respect  to  earthly  things  this  proposition 
needs  no  argument.  There  is  nothing  valuable  attained  without  labour  and 
patience.  Is  knowledge  ?  Is  wealth  ?  Is  fame  ?  Is  influence  ?  Is  dignity  ?  2. 
it  is  well  to  know,  then,  that  the  spiritual  kingdom  is  not  under  one  law 
and  the  material  under  another.  God's  laws  traverse  the  whole  of  His  creation. 
3.  Learn  here — (1)  That  supine  waiting  for  righteousness  to  be  conveyed  to 
«s  from  without  is  supreme  foolishness.  Ask,  knock,  seek !  (2)  That  the  spirit 
of  work  must  be  infused  into  our  Christianity.  (3)  That  we  shall  reap  what 
we  sow ;  and  in  proportion  to  our  diligence  in  sowing.  (Prencher's  Monthly.) 
The  prayer  of  Balaam : — I.  That  no  man  ought  to  expect,  or  hope,  to  die  the 
death  of  the  righteous,  who  will  not  lead  the  life  of  thk  righteous.  If 
a  thorn-bush  could  bring  forth  grapes,  or  a  thistle  figs,  we  should  not  know 
what  was  coming  next:  certainty,  as  to  causes  and  effects,  would  be  at  an  end, 
and  our  ideas  would  be  but  chaos.  So  likewise  if  a  bad  life  could  lead  to  a 
good  death,  or  if  he  who  would  none  of  the  holy  beginnings  of  the  righteous  could 
come  at  last  to  an  end  like  his,  all  our  moral  ideas  would  be  upset,  and  confusion 
worse  confounded  would  ensue  as  to  our  duties,  the  consequences  of  human  acts, 
and  the  relation  of  cause  to  effect  in  the  spiritual  sphere.  The  si^bt  of  the  unity 
and  harmony  of  God's  laws  in  nature  leads  to  faith  in  the  truth  and  equity  of  His 
dealings  with  men  as  moral  and  responsible  beings ;  and  no  clear  mind  can  help 
seeing  the  force  of  the  analogy.    Nor  can  this  argument  be  shaken  by  any  theory 


262  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xr.iu, 

about  the  efBcacy  of  what  are  commonly  known  as  death-bed  repentances. 
Who  knows  anytliing  about  the  worth  of  such  chunges?  Are  they  really  changes* 
II.  Wishes,  however  earnest,  do  not  of  necessity  bring  with  them  the  thing 
WISHED  for.  Why  should  the  wish  for  eternal  good  have  a  power  which  no  wish 
for  temporal  good  possesses?  If  the  mere  wishing  for  what  you  want  in  this  life 
does  not  give  the  thing  wished  for,  how  can  you  have,  for  a  mere  wish,  the 
glorips  and  rewards  of  the  life  to  come?  {Morgan  Dix,  D.D.)  The  hapinest  end 
of  life  : — 1.  The  righteous  life  insures  the  happiest  end — a  happy  future  for  the 
soul.  2.  To  end  well  our  life  is  a  noble  ambition.  3.  Let  us  cultivate  this  desire, 
for  it  will  fashion  our  lives,  if  it  be  a  strong  and  constant  motive.  {Horn.  Monthly.) 
Upon  the  character  of  Balaam  : — These  words,  taken  alone,  and  without  resppct  to 
him  who  spoke  them,  lead  our  thoughts  immediately  to  the  different  ends  of  good 
and  bad  men.  It  is  necessary  particularly  to  observe  what  Balaam  understood  by 
righteous.  And  he  himself  is  introduced  in  the  Book  of  Micah  explaining  it ;  if 
by  righteous  is  meant  good,  as  to  be  sure  it  is.  "  0  my  people,  remember  now 
what  Balak  king  of  Moab  consulted,  and  what  Balaam  the  son  of  Beor  answered 
him  from  Shittim  unto  Gilgal."  From  the  mention  of  Shittim  it  is  manifest  that 
it  is  this  very  story  which  is  here  referred  to,  though  another  part  of  it,  the 
account  of  which  is  not  now  extant,  as  there  are  many  quotations  in  Scripture  out 
of  books  which  are  not  come  down  to  us.  "Eemember  what  Balaam  answered,  that 
ye  may  know  the  righteousness  of  the  Lord,"  i.e.,  the  righteousness  which  God  will 
accept.  Balak  demands,  "  Wherewith  shall  I  come  before  the  Lord,  and  bow  my- 
self before  the  hi^h  God  ?  Shall  I  come  before  Him  with  burnt-offerings,  with 
calves  of  a  year  old  ?  Will  the  Lord  be  pleased  with  thousands  of  rams,  or  with 
ten  thousands  of  rivers  of  oil?  Shall  I  give  my  first-born  for  my  transgression; 
the  fruit  of  my  body  for  the  sin  of  my  soul  ?  "  Balaam  answers  them,  "  He  hath 
t-howed  thee,  O  man,  what  is  good :  and  what  doth  the  Lord  require  of  thee  but  to 
do  justly,  and  to  love  mercy,  and  to  walk  humbly  with  thy  God?"  Here  is  a 
good  man  expressly  characterised,  as  distinct  from  a  dishonest  and  superstitious 
man.  No  words  can  more  strongly  exclude  dishonesty  and  falseness  of  heart  than 
"  doing  justice  "  and  "  loving  mercy  "  ;  and  both  these,  as  well  as  "  walking  humbly 
with  God,"  are  put  in  opposition  to  those  ceremonial  methods  of  recommendation 
which  Balak  hoped  might  have  served  the  turn.  From  hence  appears  what  he 
meant  by  the  righteous  whose  death  he  desires  to  die.  The  object  we  have  now 
before  us  is  the  most  astonishing  in  the  world  :  a  very  wicked  man,  under  a  deep 
sense  of  God  and  religion,  persisting  still  in  his  wickedness,  and  preferring  the 
wages  of  unrighteousness,  even  when  he  ha'l  before  him  a  lively  view  of  death,  and 
that  approaching  period  of  his  days  which  should  deprive  him  of  all  those  advan- 
tages for  which  he  was  prostituting  himself ;  and  likewise  a  prospect,  whether 
certain  or  uncertain,  of  a  future  state  of  retribution  :  all  this  joined  with  an 
explicit  ardent  wish  that,  when  he  was  to  leave  this  world,  he  might  be  in  the 
condition  of  a  righteous  man.  What  inconsistency,  what  perplexity  is  here  ! 
With  what  different  views  of  things,  with  what  contradictory  principles  of 
action,  must  such  a  mind  be  torn  and  distracted !  And  yet,  strange  as  it  may 
appear,  it  is  not  altogether  an  uncommon  one  :  nay,  with  some  small  alterations, 
and  put  a  little  lower,  it  is  applicable  to  a  very  considerable  part  of  the  world. 
For  if  the  reasonable  choice  be  seen  and  acknowledged,  and  jet  men  make  the 
unreasonable  one,  is  not  this  the  same  contradiction,  that  very  inconsistency  which 
appeared  so  unaccountable  ?  To  give  some  little  opening  to  such  characters  and 
behaviour,  it  is  to  be  observed  in  general  that  there  is  no  account  to  be  given  in 
the  way  of  reason  of  men's  so  strong  attachments  to  the  present  world  :  our  hopes 
and  fears  and  pursuits  are  in  degrees  beyond  all  proportion  to  the  known  value  of 
the  things  they  respect.  This  may  be  said  without  taking  into  consideration 
religion  and  a  future  state ;  and  when  these  are  considered,  the  disproportion  is 
infinitely  heightened.  Now,  when  men  go  against  their  reason,  and  contradict  a 
more  important  interest  at  a  distance  for  one  nearer,  though  of  less  consideration, 
if  this  be  the  whole  of  the  case,  all  that  can  be  said  is  that  strong  passions,  some 
kind  of  brute  force  within,  prevails  over  the  principle  of  rationality.  However,  if 
this  be  with  a  clear,  full,  and  distinct  view  oi  the  truth  of  things,  then  it  is  doing 
the  utmost  violence  to  themselves,  acting  in  the  most  palpable  contradiction  to 
their  very  nature.  But  if  there  be  any  such  thing  m  mankind  as  putting  half- 
deceits  upon  themselves,  wliich  there  plainly  is,  either  by  avoiding  reflection,  or  (if 
f'ey  do  reflect)  by  religious  etjiKvocation,  pubterfuges,  and  palhating  matters  to 
themselves,  by  these  m.ans  consiie.ice  may  be  laid  asleep,  and  th(y  may  go  on  in 


CHAP.  XXIII.]  NUMBERS.  263 

a  course  of  wickedness  with  less  disturbance.  All  the  various  turns,  doubles,  and 
intricacies  in  a  dishonest  heart  cannot  be  unfolded  or  laid  open ;  but  that  there  is 
Gomewhat  of  that  kind  is  manifest,  be  it  to  be  called  self-deceit  or  by  any  other 
name.  To  bring  these  observations  home  to  ourselves  :  it  is  too  evident  that  many 
persons  allow  ttjcmselves  in  very  unjustifiable  courses,  who  yet  make  great  pre- 
tences to  religion,  not  to  deceive  the  world — none  can  be  so  weak  as  to  think  this 
will  pass  in  our  age — but  from  principles,  hopes,  and  fears  respecting  God  and  a 
future  state,  and  go  on  thus  with  a  sort  of  tranquillity  and  quiet  of  mind.  This 
cannot  be  upon  a  thorough  consideration  and  full  resolution  that  the  pleasures  and 
advantages  they  propose  are  to  be  pursued  at  all  hazards,  against  reason,  against 
the  law  of  God,  and  though  everlasting  destruction  is  to  be  the  consequence.  This 
would  be  doing  too  grt  a  t  iolence  upon  themselves.  No,  they  are  for  making  a 
composition  with  the  Aim  ghty.  These  of  His  commands  they  will  obey  ;  but  as 
to  others,  why,  they  will  make  all  the  atonements  in  their  power — the  ambitious, 
the  covetous,  the  dissolute  man,  each  in  a  way  which  shaU  not  contradict  his 
respective  pursuit.  Besides  these,  there  are  also  persons  who,  from  a  more  just 
way  of  considering  things,  see  the  infinite  absurdity  of  this,  of  substituting  sacri- 
fice instead  of  obedience ;  there  are  persons  far  enough  from  superstition,  and  not 
without  some  real  sense  of  God  and  religion  upon  their  minds,  who  yet  are  guUty 
of  most  unjustifiable  practices,  and  go  on  with  great  coolness  and  command  over 
themselves.  The  same  dishonesty  and  unsoundness  of  heart  discovers  itself  in 
these  another  way.  In  all  common  ordinary  cases  we  see  intuitively  at  first  view 
what  is  our  duty,  what  is  the  honest  part.  This  is  the  ground  of  the  observation 
that  the  first  thought  is  often  the  best.  In  these  cases  doubt  and  deliberation  is 
itself  dishonesty,  as  it  was  in  Balaam  upon  the  second  message.  That  which  is 
called  considering  what  is  our  duty  in  a  particular  case  is  very  often  nothing  but 
endeavouring  to  explain  it  away.  Thus  those  courses  which,  if  men  would  fairly 
attend  to  the  dictates  of  their  own  consciences,  they  would  see  to  be  corruption, 
excess,  oppiessiou,  uncharitableness ;  these  are  refined  upon — things  were  so  and 
so  circumstantiated — great  difficulties  are  raised  about  fixing  bounds  and  degrees, 
and  thus  every  moral  obligation  whatever  may  be  evaded.  That  great  numbers  are 
in  this  way  of  deceiving  themselves  is  certain.  There  is  scarce  a  man  in  the 
world  who  has  entirely  got  over  all  regards,  hopes,  and  fears  concerning  God  and  a 
future  state  ;  and  these  apprehensions  in  the  generality,  bad  as  we  are,  prevail  in 
considerable  degrees  :  yet  men  will  and  can  be  wicked,  with  calmness  and  thought ; 
we  see  they  are.  There  must  therefore  be  some  method  of  making  it  sit  a  little 
easy  upon  tbeir  minds,  which  in  the  superstitious  is  those  indulgences  and  atone- 
ments before  mentioned,  and  this  self-deceit  of  another  kind  in  persons  of  another 
character.  And  both  these  proceed  from  a  certain  unfairness  of  mind,  a  peculiar 
inward  dishonesty,  the  direct  contrary  to  that  simplicity  which  our  Saviour  recom- 
mends, under  the  notion  of  becoming  little  children,  as  a  necessary  qualification 
for  our  entering  into  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  But  to  conclude :  How  much  soever 
men  differ  in  the  course  of  life  they  prefer,  and  in  their  ways  of  palliating  and 
excusing  their  vices  to  themselves,  yet  aU  agree  in  the  one  thing,  desiring  to  die 
the  death  of  the  righteous.  This  is  surely  remarkable.  The  observation  may  be 
extended  further,  and  put  thus:  Even  without  determining  what  that  is  which  we 
call  guilt  or  innocence,  there  is  no  man  but  would  choose,  after  having  had  the 
pleasure  or  advantage  of  a  vicious  action,  to  be  free  of  the  guilt  of  it,  to  be  in  the 
state  of  an  innocent  man.  This  shows  at  least  the  disturbance  and  implicit  dis- 
satisfaction in  vice.  If  we  inquire  into  the  grounds  of  it,  we  shall  find  it  proceeds 
partly  from  an  immediate  sense  of  having  done  evil,  and  partly  from  an  apprehen- 
sion that  this  inward  sense  shall  one  time  or  another  be  seconded  by  a  higher 
judgment,  upon  which  our  whole  being  depends.  As  we  are  reasonable  creatures, 
and  have  any  regard  to  ourselves,  we  ought  to  lay  these  things  plainly  and  honestly 
before  our  mind,  and  upon  this  act  as  you  please,  as  you  think  most  fit ;  make  that 
choice  and  prefer  that  course  of  life  which  you  can  justify  to  yourselves,  and  which 
sits  most  easy  upon  your  own  mind.  And  the  result  of  the  whole  can  be  nothing 
else  but  that  with  simplicity  and  fairness  we  keep  innocency,  and  take  heed  unto  the 
thing  that  is  right,  for  this  alone  shall  bring  a  man  peace  at  the  last.  (Bp.  Butler.) 
Balaam's  vain  ivish : — I.  What  does  it  mean  ?  He  knew  that  he  must  die,  and 
that  after  death  he  must  live  for  ever.  He  had  seen  men  die ;  he  had  seen  the 
men  of  Aram,  and  Midian,  and  Moab  die;  and  he  bad  seen  the  mourners  sorrow 
for  them  as  those  who  had  no  hope.  He  would  not  die  their  death.  He  had  at 
least  heard  of  other  deaths,  for  he  evidently  knew  much  of  Israel's  history.     Ea 


26't  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxin. 

had  heard  of  the  deaths  of  Abraham,  and  Isaac,  and  Jacob  in  other  days  ;  and,  it 
may  be,  he  had  heard  of  Aaron's  death  on  Mount  Hor  just  a  short  time  before ; 
and  he  knew  how  the  righteous  die.  But  the  words  mean  more  than  this,  for  he 
speaks  not  merely  of  death,  but  of  something  beyond  death — the  last  end  of  the 
righteous.  There  is  no  repetition  of  the  other.  There  is  a  parallelism  indeed,  but. 
it  is  an  ascending  one  ;  this  second  part  containing  more  than  the  first ;  and  by 
"  last  end  "  the  seer  meant  resurrection — a  truth  far  more  widely  known,  at  least 
among  the  nations  in  any  way  linked  with  patriarchal  traditions,  than  is  generally 
admitted.  Balaam's  prayer  was,  "Let  me  share  the  death  of  the  righteous;  and 
let  me  share  his  resurrection  too."  How  comprehensive  1  II.  What  state  of 
FEELING  DOES  IT  INDICATE  ?  Sick  at  heart,  and  weary  of  the  hollowness  of  his- 
own  heathenism,  and  all  that  it  could  give  him,  he  cries  aloud  from  the  depths  of 
a  dissatisfied  heart,  "Let  me  die  the  death  of  tbe  righteous."  Disappointed  and 
sorrowful,  he  sees  the  eternal  brightness  in  the  distance,  with  all  its  attraction,, 
and  in  the  bitterness  of  his  spirit  cries  out,  "  Would  God  that  I  were  there  !  "  The 
feeling  soon  passes  off,  but  while  it  lasts  it  is  real.  But,  with  all  its  reality,  it  leads 
to  nothing.  Balaam's  wish  is  a  very  common  one,  both  in  its  nature  and  in  its 
fruitlessness.  Sometimes  it  is  a  mere  passing  wish,  called  up  by  vexation  and 
weariness  ;  at  other  times  it  is  a  deep-breathed  prayer  ;  but  in  both  cases  it  is  too- 
often  ineffective,  leading  to  nothing.  Men,  young  as  well  as  old,  get  tired  of  life^ 
sick  of  the  world  and  its  vanities.  They  see  that  none  of  its  pleasures  can  last- 
When  it  has  done  all  it  can,  it  still  leaves  them  with  a  troubled  conscience,  an 
aching  bead,  and  an  empty  heart.  In  too  many  cases  this  desire  is  transient  and 
sentimental.  It  leads  to  no  action,  no  result.  It  vanishes  like  a  brii;ht  rainbow 
from  a  dark  cloud,  and  there  is  no  change.  Is  it  to  be  so  with  you  ?  If  hungry,  a. 
wish  won't  give  you  bread ;  or,  if  thirsty,  a  wish  won't  quench  your  thirst ;  or,  if 
suffering,  a  wish  won't  soothe  your  pain  ;  or,  if  dying,  a  wish  won't  bring  back 
health  into  your  pale  cheek  and  faded  eye.  Yet  a  wish  may  be  a  good  beginning. 
All  fruit  begins  with  buds  and  blossoms;  and  though  these  often  come  to  nought,. 
yet  sometimes  they  end  in  much.  That  wish  may  be  the  beginning  of  your  eternal 
life.  It  may  lead  to  much  ;  oh,  let  it  lead  you  on  !  (H.  Bonar,D.D.)  Balaam's 
liglits  and  shadows: — Balaam's  chai'acter  is  a  deep  one — one  of  amazing  power,  of 
mixed  good  and  evil,  with  a  strife  of  elemental  forces  in  his  soul.  The  desire  to 
die  the  death  of  the  righteous  is  founded  upon  great  intelligence,  deep  penetration 
into  the  ruling  forces  of  tbe  moral  world,  even  if  unaccompanied  by  the  moral 
force  to  be  righteous.  1.  Tbe  highest  knowledge  of  Divine  things  does  not 
ensure  salvation;  one  who  knows  what  it  is  may  fail  of  its  light,  peace,  and  final 
reward.  2.  In  all  men  this  law  of  righteousness  is  found,  as  well  as  the  conscious- 
ness that,  if  followed,  it  will  lead  to  good.  3.  All  opposition  to  the  Church  or 
kingdom  of  God  must  fail,  because  the  Church  is  founded  on  that  law  of  righteous- 
ness or  right  which  is  the  law  of  being  and  the  very  essence  of  God.  4.  Death 
and  its  connection  with  righteousness,  or  what  it  opens  to  the  righteous.  (J.  M. 
Hoppin,  D.D.)  The  death  of  the  righteous: — The  thought  which  I  wish  to 
inculcate  is  that  a  Christian  life  is  the  only  sure  ground  of  hope  in  death.  I  would 
represent  the  work  of  life  and  the  preparation  for  death  as  one  and  the  same  thing; 
and  would  attach  to  every  portion  of  healthful,  active,  busy  life  the  associations  of 
deep  solemnity,  which  are  commonly  grouped  around  the  closing  moments  of  one'a 
earthly  pilgrimage.  Let  me  first  ask  your  attention  to  an  invariable  law  of  our 
being  of  which  we  are  too  prone  to  lose  sight,  namely,  that  our  success  and 
happiness  in  every  new  condition  of  life  depend  upon  our  preparation  for  that 
condition.  Our  earthly  life  is  made  up  of  a  series  of  states  and  relations,  each  of 
which  derives  its  character  from  the  next  preceding.  Thus,  "  the  child's  the  father 
of  the  man."  Nov;,  how  is  it  that  men  will  not  apply  this  same  law  to  that  future 
state  of  being  on  which  they  hope  to  enter  ?  How  fail  they  to  perceive  that  the 
heavenly  society,  like  every  other  state  of  being,  demands  preparation,  and  that 
preparation  for  it  cannot  be  a  mere  formula  of  holy  words  mumbled  by  dying  lips, 
but  must  run  through  the  habits,  the  feelings,  the  affections,  the  entire  character?- 
You  must  have  entered  here  upon  the  duties  and  the  joys  of  the  spiritual  life  in 
order  to  make  them  even  tolerable  to  you  hereafter.  And  spirituality  of  thought, 
temper,  and  feeling  must,  in  some  measure,  have  detached  you  from  earthly 
objects,  and  made  them  seem  inferior  and  unessential  goods,  in  order  for  you  to 
resign  them  without  intense  suffering.  This  view  demands,  as  a  preparation  for 
death,  not  only  a  decent  formalism,  but  a  strictly  spiritual  religion — a  religion 
which  has  its  seat  in  the  affections.     Now,  why  are  we  not  all  diligently  fitting 


CHAP,  xxiii.]  NUMBERS.  265 

ourselves  for  the  home  where  we  hope  to  go  ?  Were  it  some  distant  city  or  foreign 
country  upon  our  own  planet  where  we  expected  to  fix  our  residence,  how  earnestly 
should  we  seek  an  interest  in  its  scenes,  its  resources,  its  life  !  How  eagerly  should 
we  avail  ourselves  of  every  opportunity  of  training  in  whatever  might  be  peculiar 
in  its  condition  and  modes  of  living!  How  fast,  in  the  interval  before  embarking, 
should  we  become,  in  desire  and  feeling,  citizens  of  our  future  home  !  And  shall 
the  city  of  God  form  the  only  exception  to  this  rule  ?  Shall  we  turn  our  backs 
upon  it  till  driven  to  the  shore  where  we  must  embark,  and  then  go  we  know  not 
wliither?.  Shall  not  prayer,  and  faith,  and  hope  lay  up  treasures  against  our 
arrival  thither?  Thus  do  the  law  of  human  life  and  the  Word  of  God,  while  they 
make  us  solicitous  to  die  the  death  of  the  righteous,  unitedly  urge  upon  us  the 
essential  importance  of  living  his  life.  The  same  lesson  must  have  impressed 
itself  upon  all  who  have  been  in  any  degree  familiar  with  the  closing  scenes  of  life. 
It  is  not  the  opportunity  of  a  death-scene,  not  the  hurried  and  unnatural  utterances 
of  a  last  hour,  but  the  whole  previous  character,  the  direction  which  the  face  and 
steps  had  borne  before  death  seemed  near,  that  cherishes  or  crushes  our  hope  for 
the  departed.  {A.  P.  Peabody.)  Selfishness,  as  shottm  in  Balaam's  character: — 
From  first  to  last  one  thing  appears  uppermost  in  this  history — Balaam's  self ;  the 
honour  of  Balaam  as  a  true  prophet — therefore  he  will  not  lie ;  the  wealth  of 
Balaam — therefore  the  Israelites  must  be  sacrificed.  Nay,  more,  even  in  his 
sublimest  vision  his  egotism  breaks  out.  In  the  sight  of  God's  Israel  he  cries, 
"Let  me  die  the  death  of  the  righteous";  in  anticipation  of  the  glories  of  the 
eternal  advent,  "  I  shall  behold  Him,  but  not  nigh."  He  sees  the  vision  of  a 
kingdom,  a  Church,  a  chosen  people,  a  triumph  of  righteousness.  In  such  antici- 
pations, the  nobler  prophets  broke  out  into  strains  in  which  their  own  personality 
was  forgotten.  Moses,  when  he  thought  that  God  would  destroy  His  people,  prays 
in  agony,  "Yet  now,  if  Thou  wilt  forgive  their  sin — ;  and  if  not,  blot  me,  I  pray 
Thee,  out  of  Thy  book."  Paul  speiiks  in  impassioned  words,  "  I  have  continual 
sorrow  in  my  heart.  For  I  could  wish  that  myself  were  accursed  from  Christ  for 
my  brethren,  my  kinsmen  according  to  the  flesh,  who  are  Israelites."  But  Balaam's 
chief  feeling  seems  to  be,  "  How  will  all  this  advance  me?  "  And  the  magnificence 
of  the  prophecy  is  thus  marred  by  a  chord  of  melancholy  and  diseased  egotism. 
Not  for  one  moment — even  in  those  moments  when  uninspired  men  gladly  forget 
themselves ;  men  who  have  devoted  themselves  to  a  monarchy  or  dreamed  of  a 
republic  in  sublime  self-abnegation — can  Balaam  forget  himself  in  God's  cause. 
Observe,  then,  desire  for  personal  salvation  is  not  religion.  It  may  go  with  it,  but 
it  is  not  religion.  Anxiety  for  the  state  of  one's  own  soul  is  not  the  healthiest  or 
best  symptom.  Of  course  every  one  wishes,  "Let  me  die  the  death  of  the 
righteous."  But  it  is  one  thing  to  wish  to  be  saved,  another  to  wish  God's  right 
to  triumph ;  one  thing  to  wish  to  die  safe,  another  to  wish  to  live  holily.  Nay, 
not  only  is  this  desire  for  personal  salvation  not  religion,  but  if  soured,  it  passes 
into  hatred  of  the  good.  Balaam's  feeling  became  spite  against  the  people  who  are 
to  be  blessed  when  he  is  not  blessed.  He  indulges  a  wish  that  good  may  not 
prosper,  because  personal  interests  are  mixed  up  with  the  failure  of  good.  {F. 
W.    Robertson, .  M. A.)  Desiring    the    death    of   the    righteo^is  : —When    the 

indifferent  and  wicked  reflect  upon  the  change  produced  at  death,  and  see  that 
what  appears  dark  to  them  is  to  the  believer  bright ;  when  they  see  one  of  them- 
selves racked  with  fear,  and  goaded  by  the  stings  of  a  too  late  awakened  conscience, 
while  the  righteous  is  cahn  and  resigned,  they  will  readily  adopt  the  language  of 
the  worldly  prophet  and  say,  "Let  me  die  the  death  of  the  righteous,  and  let  my 
last  end  be  hke  his."  I.  Whence  arises  this  desire  ?  I  believe^  it  arises  from 
the  conviction  that  those  things  on  which  we  place  our  affections  in  this  life  are 
not  such  as  will  afford  peace  in  the  hour  of  death.  They  who  are  most  bhndly 
attached  to  the  god  of  this  world  are  among  the  readiest  to  confess  the  transitory 
nature  of  present  things,  and  their  utter  inability,  to  afford  comfort  at  the  last. 
You  desire  to  "  die  the  death  of  the  righteous  "  ;  are  you,  then,  resting  your  confi- 
dence on  Jesus  Christ  as  chief,  and  deriving  happiness  from  other  things,  only  as 
He  shall  be  pleased  to  give  them  you  ?  Do  you  look  upon  the  world  as  something 
which  must  soon  be  left  behind,  and  which  will  not,  as  your  friends,  exist  in 
another  state  ?  II.  What  that  death  is,  and  wherefore  desirable.  The  death- 
chamber  of  the  confirmed  saint  of  God  is  a  scene  eloquent  to  all  who  have  ever 
beheld  it.  It  reveals  the  assured  faithfulness  of  God's  promises,  and  shows  the 
firm  foundation  of  their  hopes,  who  have  made  those  promises  the  rock  of  their 
salvation.     The  righteous  is  not  without  bodily  anguish  at  his  last  end.    He  knows 


266  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  win. 

by  experience  the  sorrows  and  sufferings  that  are  the  lot  of  man ;  but  he  knows 
that  his  Saviour  has  endured  tljem  too,  and  it  is  but  fitting  the  disciple  should  walk 
in  the  steps  of  his  heavenly  Master.  But  how  tranquil  is  his  mind  amid  them  all, 
as  he  draws  near  to  the  last  moment  of  his  earthly  career !  At  that  hour,  when 
the  false  hopes  of  the  wicked  are  shaken  and  proved  worthless,  then  the  hopes  of 
the  righteous  are  increasing  in  brightness.  The  dying  Christian  has  his  times  of 
temptation  when  "  the  swellings  of  Jordan  "  rise  up  around  his  soul.  Satan 
sometimes  is  allowed  to  buffet  him  sorely.  Yet  "as  thy  day  is,  so  thy  strength 
shall  be."  And  hence,  amid  all  his  depression,  amid  all  his  conflicts,  as  the 
shinings  of  God's  love  fall  upon  his  sinking  soul,  his  courage  revives,  and  he  can 
rejoice  with  a  joy  unspeakable  and  full  of  glory.  The  stronger  his  faith,  the 
brighter  are  his  hopes,  and  therefore  the  higher  and  more  heavenly  his  joys.  What 
sajs  He  on  this  subject?  "  Thou  wilt  keep  him  in  perfect  peace,  whose  mind  is 
stayed  on  Thee."  "  Though  I  walk  through  the  valley  of  the  shadow  of  death,  I 
will  fear  no  evil,  for  Thou  art  with  me.  Thy  rod  and  Thy  staff  they  comfort  me." 
"If  a  man  keep  My  saying,  he  shall  never  taste  of  death."  "  Them  that  sleep  in 
Jesus  will  God  bring  with  Him."  "  O  death  !  I  will  be  thy  plague !  0  grave !  I 
will  be  thy  destruction ! "  "  Eight  precious  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord  is  the  death  of 
His  saints."  These  are  the  promises  which  lie  thickly  scattered  in  the  pages  of 
God's  own  blessed  Word.  Thus  you  have  a  faiut  idea  of  what  the  death  of  the 
righteous  is — fuU  of  faith,  deep  confidence,  and  heavenly  peace.  Are  you  anxious 
to  realise  it  for  yourselves  ?  weU  ye  may  be.  How,  then,  is  it  to  be  gained  ? 
Not  by  putting  off  the  work  of  salvation  to  the  last.  Though  you  desire 
the  peaceful  end  of  the  righteous,  are  not  some  of  you  deluding  yourselves 
in  this  way  ?  Oh !  what  folly !  How  know  you  that  your  death  will  come 
preceded  by  a  long  sickness  or  affliction  as  your  warning?  {R.  Allen,  B.A.) 
The  Christian's  final  blessedness  : — 1.  From  the  clearness  of  his  views.  Wise  unto 
salvation.  2.  From  the  strength  of  his  faith.  3.  From  the  firmness  of  his 
trust.  Assurance  that  a  mansion  is  prepared  for  him,  and  that  a  merciful  Saviour 
will  welcome  him  to  glory  and  immortality.  4.  From  the  slightness  of  the  hold 
which  this  world  has  on  him.  5.  From  the  familiarity  with  which  the  consistent 
follower  of  the  Lord  regards  a  state  of  future  existence.  (W.  H.  Blarriott.) 
Balaain's  wish  : — I.  The  kighteous  die,  and  in  the  same  manner  outwardly  as 
THE  WICKED  DO.  For  Christ,  in  His  first  coming,  came  not  to  redeem  our  bodies  from 
death,  but  our  souls  from  damnation.  His  second  coming  shall  be  to  redeem  our 
bodies  from  corruption  into  a  "  glorious  liberty."  Therefore  wise  men  die  as  well 
as  fools.  Use  1.  It  should  enforce  this  excellent  duty,  that  considering  we  have  no 
long  continuance  here,  therefore,  while  we  are  here,  to  do  that  wherefore  we  come 
into  the  world.  Use  2.  And  let  it  enforce  moderation  to  all  earthly  thiMgs.  II.  The 
ESTATE  OF  THE  SOUL  CONTINUES  AFTER  DEATH.  For  here  he  wisheth  to  die  the  death 
cf  the  righteous,  not  for  any  excellency  in  death,  but  in  regard  of  the  continuance 
of  the  soul  after  death.  Beasim  1.  And  it  discovers,  indeed,  that  it  hath  a  distinct 
life  and  excellency  in  itself,  by  reason  that  it  thwarts  the  desires  of  the  body  when 
it  is  in  the  body.  Eeason  2.  And  we  see  ofttimes,  when  the  outward  man  is  weak, 
as  in  sickness,  &c.,  then  the  understanding,  will,  and  affections,  the  inward  man, 
is  most  sublime,  and  rapt  unto  heaven,  aud  is  most  wise.     III.  There  is  a  wide, 

BEOAD  difference  BETWEEN  THE    DEATH  OF   THE  GODLY  AND  OF  THE  WICKED.       In  their 

death  they  are — 1.  Happy  in  their  disposition.  What  is  the  disposition  of  a  holy 
man  at  his  end  ?  His  disposition  is  by  faith  to  give  himself  to  God,  by  which  faith 
he  dies  in  obedience  ;  he  carries  himself  fruitfully  and  comfortably  in  his  end.  And 
ofttimes  the  nearer  he  is  to  happiness,  the  more  he  lays  about  him  to  be  fruitful. 
2.  Besides  his  disposition,  he  is  happy  in  condition ;  for  death  is  a  sweet  close. 
God  and  he  meet ;  grace  and  glory  meet ;  he  is  in  heaven,  as  it  were,  before  his 
time.  What  is  death  to  him  ?  The  end  of  all  misery,  of  all  sin  of  body  and  soul. 
It  is  the  beginning  of  all  true  happiness  in  both.  3.  And  blessed  after  death 
especially;  for  then  we  know  they  are  in  heaven,  waiting  for  the  resurrection  of 
the  body.  There  is  a  blessed  change  of  all ;  for  after  death  we  have  a  better  place, 
better  company,  better  employment ;  all  is  for  the  better.     IV.  Even  a  wicked  man, 

A    wretched    worldling,     may    see     this  ;    HE    MAY    KNOW    THIS    HAPPINESS    OF     God'S 

PEOPLE  IN  DEATH,  and  for  ever,  and  yet  notwithstanding  may  continue  a  cursed 
•wretch.  Use  1.  Seeing  this  is  so,  it  should  teach  us  that  we  refuse  not  all  that  ill 
men  say ;  they  may  have  good  apprehensions,  and  give  good  counsel.  Use  2.  It 
should  stir  us  up  to  go  beyond  wicked  men.  Shall  we  not  go  so  far  as  those  go 
that  shall  never  come  to  heaven  ?     Let  us  therefore  consider  a  little  wherein  tha 


CHAP,  xsrii.]  NUMBERS!.  2C7 

difference  of  these  desires  is,  the  desires  that  a  Balaam  may  have,  and  the  d-  sires 
of  a  sound  Christian,  wherein  the  desires  of  a  wicked  man  are  faiUng.  (1)  These 
desires,  first  of  all,  they  were  but  flashes  :  for  we  never  read  that  he  had  them  long. 
These  enligbtenings  are  not  constant.  (2)  Again,  this  desiie  of  this  wretched  man, 
it  was  not  from  an  inward  principle,  an  inward  taste  that  he  had  of  the  good  estate 
of  God's  children,  but  from  an  objective  admiration  of  somewhat  that  was  offered 
to  his  conceit  by  the  Holy  Ghost  at  this  time.  (3)  Again,  in  the  third  place,  this 
desire  of  the  happiness  of  the  estate  of  Gnd's  children,  it  was  not  working  and 
operative,  but  an  uneffectual  desire.  (4)  Where  desires  are  in  truth,  the  party  that 
cherisheth  those  desires  will  be  willing  to  have  all  help  from  others  to  have  his 
desire  accomplished.  (5)  Again,  true  desires  of  grace,  they  are  growing  desires. 
Though  they  be  little  in  the  beginning,  as  springs  are^  yet  as  the  springs  grow,  so 
do  the  waters  that  come  from  them.  So  these  desires,  they  grow  more  and  more 
still.  The  desires  of  a  blessed  soul,  they  are  never  satisfied  till  it  come  to  heaven. 
(6)  And  then  tbey  are  desires  that  will  not  be  stilled.  Desires,  I  confess,  are  the 
best  character  to  know  a  Christian ;  for  works  may  be  hypocritical,  desires  are 
natural.  Therefore  we  ought  to  consider  our  desires,  what  they  are,  whether  true 
or  no  ;  for  the  first  thing  that  issues  from  the  soul  are  desires  and  thoughts. 
Thoughts  stir  up  desires.  This  inward  immediate  stirring  of  the  soul  discovers 
the  truth  of  the  soul  better  than  outward  things.  (7)  Whether  we  desire  holiness, 
and  the  restoration  of  the  image  of  God,  the  new  creature,  and  to  have  victoiy 
against  our  corruptions.  Balaam  desired  happiness,  but  he  desired  not  the  image 
of  God  upon  his  soul ;  for  then  he  would  not  have  been  carried  with  a  covetous 
devil  against  all  means.  No  ;  his  desire  was  after  a  glimpse  of  God's  children's  glory 
only.  A  wicked  man  can  never  desire  to  be  in  heaven  as  he  should  be ;  for  how 
should  he  desire  to  be  in  heaven  ?  to  be  freed  from  sin,  that  he  may  praise  God 
and  love  God  ;  that  there  may  be  no  combat  between  the  flesh  and  the  spirit.  Can 
he  wish  this  ?  No.  His  happiness  is  as  a  swine  to  wallow  in  the  mire,  and  he 
desires  to  enjoy  sensible  delights.  {R.  Sibhes,  D.D.)  The  death  of  the  riqhteoiis 
desired  : — I.  That  death  is  the  appointed  lot  of  all  men.  II.  That  the  bighteous 
P.1SSESS  ADVANTAGES  IN  DEATH  UNKNOWN  TO  ALL  OTHEES.  1.  Generally  peaceful. 
2.  Sometimes  triumphant.  3.  Always  safe.  III.  The  persuasion  that  the  eighteous 

POSSESS    ADVANTAGES    IN    DEATH    UNKNOWN   TO    ALL    OTHEES,    LEADS   MANY   TO   ADOPT  THE 

EXCLAMATION  IN  THE  TEXT.  1.  It  is  adopted  by  the  trembling  inquirer  who  has  just 
perceived  the  necessity  and  value  of  true  religion.  2.  It  is  adopted  by  the  decided 
Christian,  whose  eye  is  directed  to  the  end  of  his  course.  3.  It  is  the  language  of 
those  who  partially  feel  the  value  of  religion,  but  whose  hearts  are  undecided 
before  God.  4.  It  is  the  language  of  the  openly  wicked  and  profane.  They  live 
as  sinners,  but  they  would  die  as  saints.  (Essex  Renienthrancer.)  Mere  desire 
useless  : — 1.  Balaam  teaches  us  the  uselessness,  I  may  say  the  danger,  of  conviction 
without  repentance,  of  a  knowletlge  of  what  is  right  without  an  earnest  pursuit  of 
holiness.  2.  And  this  comes  nearly  to  the  same  thing  as  saying,  that  Balaam's 
history  shows  us  the  need  of  practical  piety,  sacrificing  ourselves  to  God,  body  and 
soul,  while  we  have  something  worthy  of  being  sacrificed ;  curbing  our  desires  and 
passions  before  they  die  out  of  themselves ;  living  a  life  of  obedience  and  sub- 
mission while  yet  tlie  temiDtation  of  the  world  is  strong  to  follow  a  quite  different 
courj-e.  What  is  the  use  of  a  man  sighing  for  the  death  of  the  righteous  ?  The 
death  is  in  general  like  the  life.  A  far  wiser  prayer  than  Balaam's  would  be  this  : 
"  Give  me  grace  to  lead  the  life  of  the  righteous,  and  let  all  the  prime  of  my  health 
and  faculties  be  consecrated  to  Thee,  0  Lord."  3.  Lastly,  the  death  of  Balaam  shows 
us  in  a  very  striking  manner  the  uselessness  of  such  religious  aspirations  as  that  in 
which  he  indulged.  Balaam's  worst  sins  were  committed  after  he  had  uttered 
the  pious  prayer  of  the  text,  and  his  end  was  miserable.  Beware  lest  any  of  you 
be  in  like  manner  tempted  to  evil ;  you  may  see  the  excellence  of  religion ;  you 
may  be  even  led  to  utter  high  aspirations  for  the  rest  which  remains  for  the 
people  of  God ;  but  it  is  only  a  diligent  walking  in  God's  ways,  a  constant  battle 
against  self  and  sin  and  impurity  and  worldly  lusts  and  the  like,  a  constant  serving 
of  God  in  all  things  which  He  Himself  has  commanded,  which  can  ensure  you 
against  making  shipwreck  of  your  faith.  (Bp.  Harvey  Goodwin.)  The  convictions 
of  Balaam : — I.  It  is  veey  evident  that  the  euling  passion  of  Balaam  was  covetous- 
NESS.  II.  But  I  wish  you,  further,  to  consider  Balaam  as  the  possessoe  of 
exteaoedinarv  gifts.  III.  But,  lastly,  we  must  consider  Balaam  as  influenced 
BY  strong  religious  CONVICTIONS.  We  mark  them  in  his  anxiety  to  ask  counsel 
of   God — in  his  confession  of  sin  when  withstood  by  the  angel — in  his  steady 


2C8  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxin. 

determination  to  obey  the  letter  of  the  command — and  in  the  impassioned  wish  of 
my  text,  "  Let  me  die  the  death  of  the  righteous,  and  let  my  last  end  be  like  his." 
Now  we  must  not  suppose  that  in  all  this  Balaam  was  altoi^ether  insincere.  His 
whole  aim  was  to  try  to  reconcile  his  wickedness  with  his  duty  ;  nevertheless,  there 
were  times  when  the  better  nature  struggled  hard  within  him.  And  is  not  this  just 
the  case  of  thousauds  in  everj  age?  Are  there  not  many  who,  when  under  the 
influence  of  an  awakened  conscience,  can  melt  into  tears  at  the  remembrance  of 
past  sins  and  negligences — who  feel  a  momentary  desire  of  attaining  heaven  ?  They 
are  borne  away  by  the  fervour  of  the  moment,  and  fancy  themselves  in  earnest. 
The  natural  man  has  been  wrought  upon,  and,  for  the  time,  you  might  fancy  him 
spiiitual;  but  the  trance  is  over,  and  he  is  natural  still.  Beware,  then,  how 
you  trust  to  occasional  thoughts  and  feelings.  All  men,  whatever  their  present  life 
may  be,  agree  in  the  desire  of  attaining  heaven  at  the  last.  And  here  is  the 
deiieptive  thing — that  the  wish  for  conversion  may  be  mistaken  for  the  act  of 
conversion;  the  appearance  of  devotion  for  the  reality  of  devotion;  the  elevated 
thought,  the  momentary  aspiration,  for  the  real  abiding  work  of  the  Spirit  of  the 
Lord.  Oh!  then,  for  the  grace  to  make  these  impressions  permanent,  so  that  they 
may  lead  onwards  to  greater  watchfulness,  more  earnest  prayer,  and  more  honest 
strivings  against  the  besetting  sin.  (E.  Bickersteth,  M.  A .)  How  good  a  thing  it  is  to 
die  the  death  of  the  righteotis  .-—Therehe  mnny  wajs  in  -which  men  go  out  of  the  world; 
some  withdrawing  in  carelessness  and  indifference,  some  in  heaviness  and  fear,  some 
without  hope  or  expectation,  some  with  a  mere  wish  to  make  an  end  of  physical  dis- 
comfort, some  hardened  in  frigid  stoicism,  and  some  in  a  maze  of  dreams,  saying  to 
themselves.  Peace,  peace,  when  there  is  no  peace.  After  no  such  fashion  would  we  die. 
There  is  another  manner  of  departure  which  leads  all  the  rest  in  dignity  and  beauty. 
It  is  substantially  the  same  in  every  age.  Joy  with  peace  ;  a  trust  in  God  that  rests  on 
strong  foundations  ;  a  heart  confiding  in  a  covenant  promise  which  it  knows  to  be 
certain  and  sure;  perfect  submission  to  the  will  which  is  evermore  a  will  of  love; 
resignation  of  self  and  all  into  those  hands  which  come  forth  through  the  gathering 
darkness ;  sacrificial  surrender  gladly  paying  the  debt  due  to  sin  ; — these  signs 
mark  the  death  of  the  righteous ;  whereunto,  since  Christ  came,  are  to  be  added 
the  presence  of  the  Saviour,  the  thought  that  He  has  gone  that  way  before  us  and 
knows  every  st^■p  of  the  path,  the  conviction  that  to  die  is  gain,  the  assurance  that 
the  Lord  shall  raise  us  up  at  the  last  day,  and  that  whosoever  liveth  and  believeth 
in  Him  shall  never  die.  {Morgan  Dix,  D.D.)  Death  of  Christian  and  infidel : — The 
French  nurse  who  was  present  at  the  deathbed  of  Voltaire,  being  urged  to  attend  an 
Englishman  whose  case  was  critical,  said,  "  Is  he  a  Christian?  "  "Yes,"  was  the  reply, 
"  he  is,  a  Christian  in  the  highest  and  best  sense  of  the  term — a  man  who  lives  in  the 
fear  of  God ;  but  why  do  you  ask  ?  "  "  Sir,"  she  answered,  "  I  was  the  nuiee  that 
attended  Voltaire  in  his  last  illness,  and  for  all  the  wealth  of  Europe  I  would  never  see 
another  infidel  die."  Piety  makes  a  soft  death-pillow  .-—A  Roman  Catholic  seeing  a 
Protestant  die  in  peace  and  triumph,  is  reported  to  have  said,  "  If  this  be  heresy,  it 
makes  a  soft  pillow  to  die  on."  Confidence  at  death : — Dr.  Simpson  on  his  deathbed 
told  a  friend  tliat  he  awaited  his  great  change  with  the  contented  confidence  of  a  little 
child.  As  another  friend  said  to  him  that  he  might,  as  St.  John  at  the  Last  Supper, 
lean  his  head  on  the  breast  of  Christ,  the  doctor  made  answer,  "  I  fear  I  cannot  do 
that,  but  I  think  I  have  grasped  hold  of  the  hem  of  His  garment."  (Kanig's  Life  of 
Dr.  Simpson.)  Courage  in  view  of  death  : — We  are  all  marching  thither.  We  are 
going  home.  Men  shiver  at  the  idea  that  they  are  going  to  die ;  but  this  world  is 
only  a  nest.  We  are  scarcely  hatched  out  of  it  here.  We  do  not  know  ourselves. 
We  have  strange  feelings  that  do  not  interpret  themselves.  The  mortal  in  us  is  cry- 
ing out  for  the  immortal.  As  in  the  night  the  child,  waking  with  some  vague  and 
nameless  terror,  cries  out  to  express  its  fears  and  dreads,  and  its  cry  is  interpreted 
in  the  mother's  heart,  who  runs  to  the  child  and  lays  her  hand  upon  it  and  quiets 
it  to  sleep  again,  so  do  you  not  suppose  that  the  ear  of  God  hears  our  disturbances 
and  trials  and  tribulations  in  life?  Do  you  not  suppose  that  He  who  is  goodness 
itself  cares  for  you  ?  Do  you  suppose  that  He  whose  royal  name  is  Love  has  less 
sympathy  for  you  than  a  mother  has  for  her  babe  ?  Let  the  world  rock.  If  the 
foot  of  God  is  on  the  cradle,  fear  not.  Look  up,  take  courage,  hope  and  hope  to  the 
end.  {Last  words  of  Ward  Beecher's  last  sermon.)  A  Christian's  last  end: — In 
the  life  of  the  good  man  there  is  an  Indian  summer  more  beautiful  than  that  of  the 
seasons ;  richer,  sunnier,  and  more  sublime  than  the  most  glorious  Indian  summer 
the  world  ever  knew — it  is  the  Indian  summer  of  the  soul.  When  the  glow  of  youth 
has  departed,  when  the  warmth  of  middle  age  is  gone,  and  the  buds  and  blossoms 


CHAP,  xxin.]  NUMBERS.  269 

of  spring  are  changing  to  the  sere  and  yellow  leaf ;  when  the  mind  of  the  good  man, 
still  and  vigorous,  relaxes  its  labours,  and  the  memories  of  a  well-spent  life  gush 
forth  from  their  secret  fountains,  enriching,  rejoicing,  and  fertilising,  then  the 
trustful  resignation  of  the  Christian  sheds  around  a  sweet  and  holy  warmth,  and 
the  soul,  assuming  a  heavenly  lustre,  is  no  longer  restricted  to  the  narrow  confines 
of  business,  but  soars  far  beyond  the  winter  of  hoary  age,  and  dwells  peacefully  and 
happily  upon  the  bright  spring  and  summer  which  await  within  the  gates  of  Para- 
dise evermore.  Let  us  strive  for  and  look  trustingly  forward  to  an  Indian  summer 
like  this.  Habitual  preparation  to  be  made  for  death  : — There  are  few  men,  even 
among  the  most  worldly,  who  do  not  expect  to  be  converted  before  they  die  ;  but  it 
is  a  selfish,  mean,  sordid  conversion  they  want — just  to  escape  hell  and  to  secure 
heaven.  Such  a  man  says,  "  I  have  had  my  pleasures,  and  the  flames  have  gone 
out  in  the  fire-places  of  my  heart.  I  have  taken  all  the  good  on  one  side ;  now  I 
must  turn  about  if  I  would  take  all  the  good  on  the  other."  They  desire  just 
experience  enough  to  make  a  key  to  turn  the  lock  of  the  gate  of  the  celestial  city. 
They  wish  "  a  hope,"  just  as  men  get  a  title  to  an  estate.  No  matter  whether  they 
improve  the  property  or  not,  if  they  have  the  title  safe.  A  "  hope  "  is  to  them  like 
a  passport  which  one  keeps  quietly  in  his  pocket  till  the  time  for  the  journey,  and 
then  produces  it ;  or,  like  life-preservers  which  hang  useless  arouud  the  vessel  until 
the  hour  of  danger  comes,  when  the  captain  calls  on  every  passenger  to  save  him- 
self, and  then  they  are  taken  down  and  blown  up,  and  each  man  with  his  hope 
under  his  arm  strikes  out  for  the  land;  and  so,  such  men  would  keep  their  religious 
hope  hanging  iiile  until  death  comes,  and  then  take  it  down  and  inflate  it,  that  it 
may  buoy  them  up,  and  float  them  over  the  da.rk  river  to  the  heavenly  shore  ;  or, 
as  the  inhabitants  of  Kock  Island  keep  their  boats,  hauled  high  upon  the  beach, 
and  only  use  them  now  and  then,  when  they  would  cross  to  the  mainland,  so  such 
men  keep  their  hopes  high  and  dry  upon  the  shore  of  life,  only  to  be  used  when  they 
have  to  cross  the  flood  that  divides  this  island  of  Time  from  the  mainland  of 
Eternity.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Frances  Ridley  HavergaVs  death: — She  got  her  feet 
wet  standing  on  the  ground  preaching  temperance  and  the  gospel  to  a  group  of  boys 
and  men,  went  home  with  a  chill,  and  congestion  set  in,  and  they  told  her  she  was 
very  dangerously  sick.  "I  thought  so,"  she  said,  "but  it  is  really  too  good  to  be 
true  that  I  am  going.  Doctor,  do  you  really  think  I  am  going  ?  "  "  Yes."  "  To- 
day? "  "Probably."  She  said,  "Beautiful,  splendid,  to  be  so  near  the  gate  of 
heaven."  Then  after  a  spasm  of  pain  she  nestled  down  in  the  pillows  and  said, 
"  There,  now,  it  is  all  over — blessed  rest."  Then  she  tried  to  sing,  and  she  struck 
one  glad,  high  note  of  praise  to  Christ,  but  could  sing  only  one  word,  "He," 
and  then  all  was  still.  She  finished  it  in  heaven.  (T.  De  Witt  Talmage.)  A  glori- 
ous death  : — The  biographer  of  Dr.  Norman  Macleod  says  that,  the  night  before  his 
death,  "  he  described  with  great  delight  the  dreams  he  had  been  enjoying,  or  rather 
the  visions  which  seemed  to  be  passing  vividly  before  his  eyes,  even  while  he  was 
speaking.  He  said.  'You  cannot  imagine  what  exquisite  pictures  I  see!  I  never 
beheld  more  glorious  Highlands,  majestic  mountains  and  glens,  brown  lieathm' 
tinted  with  purple,  and  burns — clear,  clear  burns  ;  and  above,  a  sky  of  intense  blue 
— so  blue,  without  a  cloud.'  "  On  the  day  of  his  death  he  said  :  "  I  have  had  con- 
stant joy,  and  the  happy  thought  continually  whispered,  '  Thou  art  with  me  !  ' 
Not  many  would  understand  me,  they  would  put  down  much  I  have  felt  to  the 
delirium  of  weakness,  but  I  have  had  deep  spiritual  insight."  Very  shortly  before 
he  died  he  said  to  one  of  his  daughters,  "Now  all  is  perfect  peace  and  perfect  calm. 
I  have  glimpses  of  heaven  that  no  tongue,  or  pen,  or  words  can  describe." 

Ver.  19.  God  Is  not  a  man,  that  He  should  lie. — The  unchangeable  God  : — I.  God 
IS  UNCHANGEABLE.  God  Cannot  change ;  to  suppose  that  He  could  change  would  be 
to  suppose  Him  not  Divine.  A  finite  being  may  refuse  to  change,  adhering  rigidly 
to  some  purpose ;  but  all  the  while  that  being  is  capable  of  change,  there  is  n  thing 
in  his  nature  which  makes  it  absolutely  impossible  that  he  should  change.  But  it 
is  so  with  God.  We  here  speak  of  unchangeableness  in  regard  of  God's  dealings 
with  His  creatures,  though  of  course  it  is  also  in  Himself,  in  His  essence,  in  His 
own  property,  that  God  is  unchangeable  ;  and  it  is  an  amazing  and  overwhelming 
contemplation,  that  of  our  Creator  as  in  no  I'espect  capable  of  change,  immutable 
because  infinitely  perfect.  II.  The  contrast  between  God  and  man.  This  un- 
changeableness is  indispensable  to  the  Creator,  but  incommunicable  to  the  creature. 
It  is  indispensable  to  the  Creator,  forasmuch  as  the  Creator  must  be  in  every  respect 
infinite.    But  all  change  ends  in  addition  or  diminution  :  if  anything  be  added,  Ha 


270  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxrn. 

was  not  infinite  before  ;  if  anything  be  diminished,  He  is  not  infinite  after.  But 
if  indispensable  in  the  Creator,  it  is  incommunicable  to  the  creature.  We  say 
nothing  against  the  powers  of  God,  when  we  say  that  God  could  not  have  made  an 
unchangeable  creature.  Must  not  that  which  is  unchangeable  be  self- existent,  and 
therefore  eternal?  That  which  has  already  had  beginning,  has  already  undergone 
change — th-e  change  from  nothing  to  something,  so  that  a  creature,  because  not 
eternal,  cannot  be  unchangeable.  God  alone  is  unchangeable,  because  God  alone 
is  eternal.  It  is  self-evident  that  He  cannot  make  an  eternal  creature,  and  there- 
fore certain  that  He  cannot  make  an  unchangeable  creature.  The  creature,  then,  is 
changing,  the  sun  as  well  as  the  atom,  the  archangel  no  less  than  the  worm  (Psa. 
cii.  25-27).  Was  it  only  of  the  material  fabric  of  the  eaiih,  with  its  many  produc- 
tions— of  the  firmament,  with  its  majestic  troop  of  stars,  that  the  Psalmist  asserted 
this?  Nay,  it  is  true  of  the  intelligent  creation  as  well  as  of  the  material.  And 
spirits  are  immortal :  sparks  from  the  eternal  fire,  they  shall  never  be  quenched ; 
but  though  immortal,  they  shall  not  be  the  same  ;  indestructible,  they  shall  be 
always  on  the  march.  Angel  and  man,  they  shall  not,  as  we  have  already  said,  be 
ever  at  a  stand.  Stand  !  when  there  are  new  heights  to  be  scaled,  new  depths  to 
be  fathomed  ?  Nay,  it  were  imperfection,  it  were  wretchedness.  It  is  the  glory  of 
the  Creator  that  He  never  changes ;  it  is  the  glory  of  the  creature  to  be  always 
changing.  Eternity  shall  be  one  mijihty  progress  to  all  except  tbe  Eternal.  "I 
am  Jehovah,  I  change  not,  the  Father  of  lights,  with  whom  is  no  variableness, 
neither  shadow  of  turning."  [H.  Melvill,  B.D.)  The  word  of  God  unchange- 
able : — 1.  •'  God  is  not  a  man,  that  He  should  lie."  Balaam  knew  how  capable  he 
himself  was  of  deceit  and  falsehood,  how  liable  to  be  changed  by  bribery  from  one 
course  to  another;  and  it  is  possible  that  he  might  have  entertained  such  unworthy 
notions  of  the  Almighty  as  to  imagine  Him  also  movable  and  uncertain.  But 
God  has  no  admixture  of  evil,  no  imperfection;  nor  can  He  "  be  tempted  with  evil." 
Men  have  their  own  corrupt  interests  to  serve ;  their  own  gain  to  study,  their  own 
gratification  to  seek  :  and  when  these  things  cannot  be  so  readily  compassed  by 
integrity,  recourse  is  often  had  to  deceitful  dealing.  It  may  not  always  be  that  a 
man's  word  is  actually  broken  ;  but  there  is  very  commonly,  in  the  children  of  this 
world,  some  kind  of  double  dealing  to  suit  a  carnal  purpose.  From  all  this,  and 
from  all  approach  to  this,  the  Lord  is  purely  free :  He  can  neither  deceive  nor  be 
deceived.  2.  "Neither  the  son  of  man,  that  He  should  repent,"  or  change  His 
purpose.  Man  is  ignorant  and  short-sighted  ;  often  knows  not  what  will  be  for  the 
best :  and  the  plan,  which  he  bad  contuved  with  his  utmost  skill,  is  not  seldom 
injurious;  and  thus  he  is  compelled  to  alter  and  relinquish.  But  God  is  all-wise: 
"  0  the  depth  of  the  riches  both  of  the  wisdom  and  knowlidge  of  God  !  "  3.  We 
may  infer — (1)  That  all  the  Divine  judgments  against  sin  and  sinners  will  be 
infallibly  executed.  And — (2)  That  every  promise  of  God  to  His  people  will,  in 
due  season,  be  abundantly  accomplished.  1.  The  imminent  danger  of  sin,  and  the 
certain  ruin  from  it,  if  persisted  in,  are  by  no  means  believed  and  perceived,  as  they 
ought  to  be.  The  Almighty  has  declared,  throughout  His  word  of  truth,  that,  He  is 
a  God  of  holiness ;  and  that  in  unholiness,  in  disobedience,  in  unrepented  guilt,  no 
man  can  be  accepted,  no  man  can  approach  Him.  2.  And,  blessed  be  the  holy 
name  of  God,  the  gracious  promises  of  mercy  to  His  faithful  and  obedient  servants 
are  not  less  frequent  than  the  threatenings  of  wrath  upon  the  impenitent  and 
forgetful.  {J.  Slade,  M.A.)  The  wichaiigeahleness  of  Jehovah  : — I.  Some  men 
THINK  THAT  GoD  WILL  LIE.  God  has  told  US,  with  strong  and  repeated  asseverations, 
that  "  we  must  be  born  again  "  (John  iii.  7) ;  but  this  is  totally  disbelieved  by — 1. 
The  profane.  They  persuade  themselves  that  such  strictness  in  religion,  as  is 
implied  in  the  new  birth,  is  not  necessary ;  and  that  they  shall  go  to  heaven  in 
their  own  way.  2.  The  self-righteous.  These  consider  regeneration  as  a  dream 
of  weak  enthusiasts,  and  are  satisfied  with  the  "  form  of  godliness,  without"  ever 
experiencing  "the  power"  of  it.  3.  The  hypocritical  professors  of  religion.  These, 
having  changed  their  creed,  together  with  their  outward  conduct,  fancy  themselves 
Cliristians,  notwithstanding  their  faith  neither  "  overcomes  the  world,"  nor  "  works 
by  love,"  nor  "  purifies  their  hearts."  That  all  these  persons  think  God  will  lie,  is 
evident  beyond  a  doubt ;  for  if  they  really  believed  that  old  things  must  pass  away 
and  all  things  become  new  (2  Cor.  v.  17),  before  they  can  enter  into  the  kingdom  of 
heaven,  they  would  feel  concerned  to  know  whether  any  such  change  had  taken 
place  in  them  ;  nor  would  they  be  satisfied  till  they  had  a  Scriptural  evidence  that 
thev  were  indeed  "  new  creatures  in  Christ  Jesus."  II.  Othees  feab  He  may  lie. 
Tuis  is  common  with  persons — 1.  Under  conviction  of  sin.     When  men  are  deeply 


CHAP.  xxTii.]  NUMBERS.  271 

convinced  of  sin,  they  find  it  exceedingly  difficult  to  rest  simply  on  the  promises  of 
the  Gospel ;  such  as  John  vi.  37  ;  Isa.  i.  18,  Iv.  1.  2.  Under  temptation  or  deser- 
tion. God  has  declared  that  He  will  not  suffer  His  people  to  be  tempted  above 
what  they  are  able  to  bear  (1  Cor.  x.  13).  But  when  they  come  into  temptation, 
they  are  apt  to  say,  as  David,  "  I  shall  one  day  perish,"  &c.  (1  Sam.  xxvii.  1).  HI. 
But  God  neither  will  nor  can  lie.  1.  He  will  not  lie.  (1)  Let  us  hear  the  testi- 
monies of  those  who  have  tried  Him.  Moses  (Deut.  xxxii.  4) ;  Joshua  (Josh,  xxiii. 
14);  Samuel  (1  Sam.  xv.  2!)).  (2)  Let  us  attend  to  God's  own  assertions  and 
appeals  (Isa.  v.  4,  xlix.  19).  Would  He  ever  venture  to  speak  thus  strongly  on  His 
own  behalf  if  His  creatures  could  make  good  their  accusations  against  Him  ?  (3) 
Let  us  look  to  matter  of  fact.  Are  not  His  past  actions  so  many  types  and  pledges 
of  what  He  will  hereafter  perform  ?  (2  Pet.  ii.  4-9 ;  Jude  7).  2.  He  cannot  lie. 
Truth  is  as  essential  to  the  Divine  nature  as  goodness,  wisdom,  power,  or  any  other 
attribute ;  so  that  He  can  as  easily  cease  to  be  good,  or  wise,  or  powerful,  as  He 
can  suffer  one  jot  or  tittle  of  His  word  to  fail.  (C.  Simeon,  31. A.)  The  Lord  is 
unchangeably  true  in  all  His  ways,  words,  and  icorks  : — His  decrees  are  immutable 
and  irrevocable,  and  without  shadow  of  turning  (Psa.  cv.  7,  8,  10).  To  this  purpose 
the  apostle  saith,  "  The  gifts  and  calling  of  God  are  without  repentance"  (Eom.  xi. 
29).  By  all  these  places  we  see  that  God  is  unchangeable  in  His  mercy  and  good- 
ness toward  His  Church  and  children.  The  reasons  follow  to  be  considered.  1. 
First,  He  is  not  like  unto  man.  His  ways  are  not  like  man's  ways,  nor  His  thoughts 
like  unto  man's  thoughts;  but  as  far  as  heaven  is  distant  from  the  earth,  so  far 
are  the  works  of  God  from  ours.  We  know  by  experience  the  changeable  nature  of 
man.  He  is  constant  to-day,  he  changeth  to-morrow.  He  loveth  one  day,  and 
hateth  another.  2.  Secondly,  His  love  and  mercy  to  His  people  is  not  changeable 
as  the  moon,  unconstant  as  the  wind,  floating  as  the  sea,  uncertain  as  the  weather, 
but  stable  as  the  earth  that  cannot  be  moved  out  of  his  place,  and  steadfast  as  Mount 
Sion  that  remaineth  for  ever.  This  will  plainly  appear  unto  us  if  we  consider  the 
similitudes  whereby  it  is  expressed.  His  love  is  like  to  the  covenant  of  waters,  and 
as  sure  as  the  promise  that  He  made  to  Noah,  that  the  waters  should  no  more  over- 
flow the  whole  earth,  as  the  prophet  Isaiah  teacheth,  cluip.  liv.  7,  8,  9.  3.  Again, 
His  goodness  is  as  the  ordinance  of  God,  that  hath  set  an  order  for  summer  and 
■winter,  for  day  and  night,  for  seed-time  and  harvest,  for  cold  and  heat,  which  shall 
not  be  changed,  therefore  the  Lord  S:«th  (Jer.  xxxi.  35,  and  xxxiii.  20).  Nay,  His 
mercy  is  said  to  be  more  stable  than  the  mountains  (Isa.  liv.  10).  Now  let  us  come 
to  the  uses  of  this  doctrine.  1.  First,  hereby  we  learn  that  God  is  to  be  preferred 
before  all  creatures.  2.  Secondly,  we  may  from  hence  assure  ourselves  that  God 
will  make  us  unchangeable  like  Himself,  and  we  may  rejoice  in  the  comfort  of  this 
His  favour.  For  seeing  His  nature  is  unchangeable.  He  will  make  us  in  our  measure 
partakers  of  immortality.  This  is  a  great  comfort  unto  us  in  these  days  of  sorrow, 
to  consider  that  the  time  will  come,  when  our  state  shall  be  changed,  and  we  con- 
tinue for  ever  without  change.  Here  we  are  subject  to  many  turnings  and  return- 
ings,  but  after  this  life  shall  be  no  more  place  for  changing;  our  happiness  shall 
be  unichangeable,  and  firmly  established  with  God.  This  the  prophet  sets  down 
(Psa.  xvi.  12).  3.  Thirdly,  it  teacheth  that  it  is  time  for  us  to  repent  and  turn  unto 
God.  An  unchangeable  God,  an  unchangeable  word.  Let  us  be  transformed  into 
the  obedience  of  it.  It  is  not  a  leaden  rule  to  bend  every  way  to  us.  All  our  ways 
must  be  framed  unto  it.  And  when  once  we  are  turned  to  God,  let  us  not  return 
back  again  to  our  old  ways,  but  persevere  constant  unto  the  end.  The  unchange- 
able God  requireth  an  unchangeable  servant.  4.  Lastly,  herein  is  great  comfort 
offend  to  the  servants  of  God,  as  on  the  other  side  horror  to  the  wicked  and  dis- 
obedient. For  seeing  God  is  immutable,  we  may  from  hence  take  strong  consola- 
tion by  former  examples  of  God's  dealing  toward  His  children,  and  in  all  temptations 
build  ourselves  upon  that  blessed  experience,  as  upon  a  sure  foundation  that  can 
never  fail  us.     (IF.  Attersoll.) 

Ver.  20.  He  hath  blessed ;  and  I  cannot  reverse  It. — Iinmntable  benedictions  : — 
I.  Blessings  are  decreed  for  the  people  of  God.  The  difficulty  of  believing  in 
the  glorious  truth  of  the  supreme  blessedness  of  the  children  of  God  is  so  common 
that  there  must  be  some  reasons  for  it.  1.  One  reason  is  that  the  largest  blessings 
belong  to  the  future.  For  the  present.  Christians  have  to  endure  the  trials  of  a 
wilderness  pilgrimage.  We  need  faith  to  expect  the  good  things  of  the  unseen 
future.  2.  A  deeper  reason  is  that  the  best  blessings  are  spiritual.  To  the  carnal 
mind  they  appear  wearisome  in  the  extreme,  just  as  the  exquisite  tones  of  the 


272  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxin. 

finest  melody  do  to  a  man  who  has  no  ear  for  music.  Here  also  men  need  faitli  to 
believe  that  the  highest  blessings  are  necessarily  at  present  above  their  appreciation. 
II.  The  attempt  to  eeveese  these  blessings  besults  in  the  incbease  of  them. 
The  evil  intention  results  unwittingly  in  a  beneficent  action.  Consider  some  of 
the  applications  of  this  principle  of  Providence.  1.  The  captivity.  Nebuchad- 
nezzar, who  aimed  at  destroying  the  Jewish  nation,  was  indirectly  its  great  beuef  actor 
in  fulfilling  the  Divine  prophecies  of  necessary  chastisement  and  forcing  the  people 
to  a  painful  discipline,  which  effectually  and  for  ever  purged  them  of  their  old 
besetting  sin  of  idolatry.  2.  The  temptation  of  Christ.  The  tempter  sought  to 
overthrow  the  Son  of  God  and  Saviour  of  the  world.  But  the  result  of  the  forty 
days'  trial  in  the  wilderness  was  that  Christ  came  forth  fitted  to  be  our  great  high 
priest  by  means  of  the  very  endurance  of  that  temptation.  3.  The  death  of  Christ. 
His  enemies  hoped  to  overthrow  His  cause  by  means  of  this.  But  it  was  over- 
ruled to  secure  His  triumph  and  to  accomjilish  the  great  end  of  His  mission.  4. 
The  persecution  of  the  Church.  The  Christians,  scattered  by  the  persecution  that 
followed  the  death  of  Stephen,  fled  from  Jerusalem  only  to  spread  the  gospel  in  all 
directions,  and  so  to  increase  their  own  numbers  and  to  magnify  the  name  of 
their  God.  5.  The  troubles  of  life  generally.  The  sufferer  is  described  as  being 
"  delivered  unto  Satan."  The  motive  of  Satan  must  be  purely  malignant.  Yet  the 
suffering  he  inflicts  is  expressly  designed  for  the  good  of  the  sufferer — "that  the 
spirit  maybe  saved  in  the  day  of  the  Lord  Jesus  "  (1  Cor.  v.  5).   III.  The  blessings 

OF  WHICH  THE  PEOPLE  OF  GoD  CANNOT  BE  BOBBED  BY  THEIE  MOST  VIOLENT  FOES  MAT  BE 

LOST  BY  THEIR  OWN  SIN.  {W.  F.  Adeneij,  31. A.)  The  curses  of  man  turned  into 
blessings  hij  God: — The  principle  embodied  here  is  this:  that  when  God  hath 
determined  to  bless  His  people.  His  purposes  will  be  executed  even  by  those  whose 
intent  it  is  only  to  reverse  them.  This  is  the  solution  of  all  the  apparent  mysteries 
and  incongruities  in  the  present  state  of  things  :  and  it  will  apply — I.  To  the  Church 
OF  Christ  at  large — and,  next,  to  every  individual  among  the  people  of  God,  To 
this  Church — that  is,  this  army  of  the  living  God,  though  separated  in  different 
divisions,  we  look,  in  the  interpretation  of  God's  promises,  as  Balaam  Inoked  upon 
Jacob  in  his  goodly  tents,  and  Israel  in  his  outstretched  tabernacle.  To  these  we 
refer  the  benediction  of  the  royal  psalmist,  "  They  shall  prosper  that  love  Thee  " ; 
and  to  these  we  apply  what  may  be  termed  the  reversed  invocation  of  the  text— a 
curse  becoming  a  blessing — "  Behold,  I  have  received  commandment  to  bless  ;  and 
He  hath  blessed ;  and  I  cannot  reverse  it."  But  it  is  not  less  needful,  though  it  be 
less  pleasing,  to  observe  how,  as  in  the  case  of  Israel,  the  most  severe  and  searching 
probation  came  upon  them — not  amidst  the  perils  and  privations  of  the  wilderness, 
but  amid  the  abundance  and  prosperity  of  the  promised  land.  So  the  Church,  when 
the  fires  of  persecution  had  been  extinguished,  was,  and  still  continues  to  be,  in 
danger  far  more  imminent.  We  must  beware,  lest  those  prevail  who  would  openly 
assault  her  bulwarks,  and  attempt  her  battlements  in  vain.  As  to  the  end,  indeed, 
all  is  safe,  and  all  is  sure  ;  God  has  determined  to  bless,  and  earth  and  hell  cannot 
reverse  it  (Isa.  ii.  2  ;  Hab.  ii.  14 ;  Phil.  ii.  10,  11).  But  it  is  not  the  less  needful 
to  beware  lest,  in  the  meantime,  corruption  be  introduced  amongst  us  from  an 
unsuspected  quarter,  by  intermixture  with  the  enemies  of  God,  while,  amidst  the 
rising  mists  of  error,  our  candlestick  burns  dimly,  if  even,  through  apostasy,  it  be 
not  removed  out  of  its  place.  Intercourse  with  the  irreligious  and  unbelieving, 
whatever  be  the  pretext,  is  plainly  to  be  suspected  and  to  be  shunned.  Tue  blessing 
of  God  upon  a  good  cause  may  be  forfeited,  and  will  be  nullified,  by  alliance  with 
wicked  men.  What  else  can  the  crew  expect,  if  they  allow  themselves  to  be  piloted 
by  traitors,  but  that  they  shall  strike  on  a  rock  suddenly,  and  go  down  into  the 
depths  of  destruction  ?  II.  I  proceed,  however,  to  the  second,  and  more  practical 
part  of  the  subject — the  application  of  the  principle  embodied  in  the  text  io  each 
INDIVIDUAL  BELIEVER.  Eightly  Understood,  and  closely  applied,  it  is  to  him  a  covert 
from  all  the  storms  of  life,  a  shield  agdnst  the  fiery  arrows  of  the  wicked  one,  a  very 
present  help  in  time  of  trouble.  God  hath  blessed,  man  cannot  rev.  rse  it ;  and, 
however  the  world  may  plot,  and  however  it  may  appear  to  the  servant  of  the  Most 
High,  there  is  One  who  worketh  all  things  after  the  counsel  of  His  own  will.  The 
devices  of  man  may  appear  to  be  successful,  but  it  is  His  counsel  only  rliat  shall 
abide.  It  is  very  important,  however,  to  keep  in  mind  that,  whi.e  Scripture 
develops  the  purposes  of  God's  will,  it  does  not  pi'ofess  to  reveal  the  pro<-esse8  of 
God's  work.  It  states  a  definite  and  determined  end,  but  it  makes  no  specific 
mention  of  the  means.  "  The  Lord  will  perfect  that  which  concerneth  me," 
declares  the  Psalmist,  but  how,  and  by  whom,  God  only  knows.     "  He  th.it  hath 


CHAP.  XXIII.]  NUMBERS.  273 

begun  a  good  work  in  yon,"  says  the  apostle,  "  will  perform  it  until  the  day  of  Jesua 
Christ "  ;  but  who  can  say  whether  the  work  will  proceed  in  sunshine  or  in  clouds  ? 
Perhaps  the  latter ;  not  improbably  the  latter.  It  is  enough  for  us  to  know  that 
God  is  working  out  a  blessing :  we  must  not  be  cast  down,  though  it  come  through 
the  channel  of  a  calamity,  and  with  the  aspect  of  a  curse.  The  richest  stream  of 
benefit  and  glory  that  ever  flowed  forth  to  a  lost  and  polluted  world  was  thus 
opened.  How  did  Christ  redeem  us  from  the  curse  of  the  law  but  by  being  made 
a  curse  for  us  ?  Many  sought  to  quench  God's  light  by  lifting  up  the  Kedeemer  on 
the  Cross,  and  they  thus  imparted  to  it  instrumentally  a  power  which  in  the  end 
shall  draw  all  men  unto  Him.     (T.  Dale,  M.A.) 

Vers.  21-24.  He  hath  not  beheld  iniquity  in  Jacob,  neither  hath  He  seen 
perverseness  in  Israel. — The  prophecies  of  Balaam : — Prophecy  is  not  FataUsm, 
but  in  many  cases,  at  least,  a  forecasting  of  the  certain  consequences  of  such  and 
such  moral  antecedents.  And  this  view  of  prophecy  leads  me  to  that  which  is, 
after  all,  the  most  important  aspect  of  the  prophecies  of  Balaam.  Here,  in  the 
blessings  he  pronounced  on  Israel,  we  have  an  authoritative  declaration  of  the 
natural  and  inevitable  outcome  of  the  then  condition  of  the  chosen  people; 
blessings  which,  indeed,  they  sometimes  reaped,  and  sometimes  failed  to  reap — 
varying  in  their  relations  to  the  God  who  spake  to  them  by  the  lips  of  Balaam — 
but  blessings  which  it  is  open  for  us  to  reap,  if  we  will  only  follow  the  Lord  perfectly 
and  with  all  our  hearts.    I.  We  have  heee  a  declaration  op  the  principles  that 

LIE   AT  THE  FOUNDATION  OF  ALL  TRUE  NATIONAL  AND  CHURCH  LIEE.       1.    And  the  first  of 

these  principles  that  I  shall  refer  to,  is  that  mentioned  in  the  language  of  the  text : 
"  He  hath  not  beheld  iniquity  in  Jacob,  neither  hath  He  seen  perversity  in  Israel." 
But  if  we  are  to  accept  these  words  as  in  any  sense  descriptive  of  the  actual  con- 
dition of  the  Jewish  people  at  this  moment,  we  must  understand  them  in  relation 
to  the  words  that  follow :  "  The  Lord  his  Gqd  is  with  him,  and  the  shout  of  a 
king  is  among  them."  That  is,  there  was  none  of  that  iniquity  and  perverseness 
in  Iisrael  which  is  the  root  and  substance  of  all  iniquity  and  perverseness,  viz.,  the 
denial  of  God's  presence  in  the  midst  of  them,  and  a  refusal  to  submit  to  Him  as 
their  King.  Whatever  else  they  were  (and  they  had  their  faults),  the  Israelites 
were  not  a  godless  people ;  and  being  at  heart  a  godly  and  God-fearing  people, 
Jehovah  saw  fit  to  interpret  all  the  other  features  of  their  character  according  to 
this  ruling  disposition  of  their  lives,  and  to  look  over  and  excuse  many  other 
imperfections  for  the  sake  of  this  predominating  excellence.  2.  Another  element 
that  characterised  the  moral  condition  of  the  Jewish  people,  was  that  of  the  separa- 
tion from  the  other  nations  of  the  earth.  Their  separation  was  their  security.  3. 
But  there  is,  even  still  farther,  a  third  element  belonging  to  the  moral  condition  of 
the  Jewish  people  that  must  not  be  overlooked  ;  and  that  is  the  principle  of  order  that 
obtained  amongst  them.  "  Behold,"  said  the  Psalmist,  "  how  good  and  how  pleasant 
a  thing  it  is  for  brethren  to  dwell  together  in  unity  "  (Psa.  cxxx.  1).  And  unity  and 
order  are  intimately  related  to  each  other.  For  order  both  expresses  and  promotes 
unity.    And  unity  makes  order  possible.     II.  There  is  here  also  declared  to  us 

THE   blessedness    OF   THOSE  IN  WHOM  THESE  PRINCIPLES  ARE  REALISED  AND   EMBODIED. 

And  the  prophet  lavisheth  his  praises  on  the  Israelitish  people,  as  the  representa- 
tives of  those  who  realise  and  embody  these  principles.  Thus,  e.g.,  he  compares 
the  tents  of  Israel  to  outspread  valleys  full  of  verdure  and  fertility ;  and  again,  to 
gardens  by  the  riverside,  always  fruitful  and  beautiful ;  and  again  he  speaks  of 
them  as  trees  of  Hgn  aloes,  which  the  Lord  had  planted,  laden  with  the  most 
dehcious  fragrance ;  and  as  cedar  trees  beside  the  waters,  fuU  of  stately,  sober 
beauty  (chap.  xxiv.  6).  And  the  blessedness  of  such  he  describes  as  not  only 
personal,  but  diffusive.  The  godly  are  as  water-bearers,  pouring  water  out  of  their 
buckets  on  the  "dry  and  thirsty  land  where  no  water  is,"  and  causing  peace  and 
plenty  to  abound  (chap.  xxiv.  7).  They  themselves  increase  on  every  hand  ;  and  as 
they  increase,  the  welfare  of  the  world  advances.  "Who  can  count  the  dust  of  Jacob, 
and  the  number  of  the  fourth  part  of  Israel  ?  "  (chap,  xxiii.  10).  It  was  not  that  Israel 
was  at  that  moment  an  innumerable  people,  for  this  book  is  a  record  of  the 
numbering  of  the  people  of  Israel;  but  Israel  had,  in  the  moral  principles  that 
governed  its  action  and  Ufe,  the  germs  of  indefinite  extension  and  enlargement. 
And  wherever  it  went  it  carried  blessings  for  the  nations  in  its  hand.  III.  The 
DIGNITY  AND  MAJESTY  OF  THOSE  WHO  ARE  THos  BLESSED.  Every  svmbol  of  Strength 
and  vigour,  of  safety  and  security,  does  the  prophet  press  into  the  service  of  his 
eulogy  of  Israel's  greatness.     IV.  The  advantages  that  may  be  enjoyed  by  those 

18 


274  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOIi.  [chap,  xxrii. 

WHO  ABE  ONLY  SOMEWHAT    REMOTELY  RELATED  TO  THE  PEOPLE    OF    GoD.       "  Come   with 

US,"  said  Moses  to  Hobab,  "and  we  will  do  you  good;  for  the  Lord  hath  spoken 
good  concerning  Israel  "  (chap.  x.  29).  There  is  such  a  thing  as  blessedness,  by  being 
related  to  the  blessed.  And  so  Balaam  says  of  Israel :  "  Blessed  is  he  that  bleaseth  thee; 
and  cursed  is  he  that  curseth  thee  "  (chap.  xxiv.  9  ;  see  Matt.  x.  40,  42).  ( W.  Boherts.) 
The  justification  of  God's  people  : — Wliat  ?  Was  Israel  perfect  ?  Was  not  their 
entire  history  one  of  rebellion  and  ingratitude  and  sin  ?  How  then  could  God  say 
He  saw  no  iniquity  or  perverseness  in  them  ?  Mark,  it  is  not  said  that  Israel  had 
no  iniquity  or  perverseness.  It  is  said  God  "beheld"  none.  Is  Go'l,  then,  the 
minister  of  sin?  God  forbid!  He  only  magnifies  the  riches  of  His  grace  by 
putting  it  out  of  His  sight.  But  is  not  this  a  license  to  the  soul  to  continue  in  sin, 
or  be  indifferent  to  it  ?  Nay.  The  love  that  has  pardoned  is  the  love  that 
constrains  ever  after  to  "  newness  of  life."  But  notice  again — God  was  never 
indifferent  to  sin  in  Israel.  "  He  is  of  too  pure  eyes  to  behold  iniquity."  Yes,  the 
least  sin  in  them  was  marked  and  judged  with  an  unsparing  hand.  But  when  it 
came  to  this,  should  Satan  make  use  of  their  sin  to  cast  them  out  for  ever  from 
God — to  curse  them — then  God  would  see  no  sin  in  them.  Then  His  language  is, 
"  I  have  not  beheld  iniquity  in  Jacob,  nor  seen  perverseness  in  Israel."  Thus  we 
have  seen  Israel's  complete  justification  before  God.  Now  let  us  examine  th?) 
foundation  on  which  it  rests.  "  God  is  not  a  man  that  He  should  lie  ;  neither  the 
son  of  man  that  He  should  repent:  hath  He  sail)  and  shall  He  not  do  it?  or  hath 
He  spoken  and  shall  He  not  make  it  good?  "  Thus  their  justification,  and  every- 
thing that  follows,  rest  upon  God's  unchangeable  character.  What  a  rock  is  that 
on  which  the  weakest  believer  rests !  What  untold  blessings  are  his  !  and  all 
secured  by  the  faithfulness  of  that  unchanging  God.  But  let  us  proceed  and  mark 
the  streams  of  blessing  which  flow  down  to  the  believer  from  this  Eock.  "  Tlie 
Lord  his  God  is  with  him."  What  can  he  lack,  having  Him?  He  is  with  him 
to  supply  every  need,  to  lead  into  every  holy  path,  to  unfold  to  his  soul  from  hour 
to  hour  all  the  riches  of  His  grace,  to  quicken,  to  warn,  to  comfort,  to  build  up, 
and  to  carry  on  that  work  in  the  soul  wliich  His  grace  has  begun,  till  it  be  perfected 
in  glory.  Mark  the  next  blessing — "  the  shout  of  a  king  is  among  them."  It  is 
the  shout  of  joy.  It  is  the  joy  of  Christ  in  His  people,  and  His  people  in  Him  : 
"  these  things  have  I  spoken  unto  you  that  My  joy  might  remain  in  you,  and  that 
your  joy  may  be  full."  It  is  the  "  shout  of  a  king,"  even  of  King  Jesus,  for  He  has 
gotten  the  victory!  "Jehovah  has  triumphed,  and  His  people  are  free."  Mark 
the  next  blessing — "  God  brought  them  out  of  Egypt."  The  song  of  redemption  is 
now  their  song,  and  will  be  for  ever.  "  He  hath,  as  it  were,  the  strength  of  an 
unicorn  "  (or  buffalo) ;  "  strong  in  the  Lord  and  in  the  power  of  His  might."  As 
the  sapling  grows  into  the  mighty  tree,  so  that  no  storms  can  uproot  it,  so  the 
Christian  grows  by  living  upon  Christ,  and  abiding  in  Him.  All  the  trials  of  the 
way  are  converted  into  elements  of  strength.  What  can  harm  the  child  of  God, 
then?  What  foe  can  curse  him  whom  God  has  so  blessed  ?  None.  '' What  hath 
God  wrought!  "  It  is  all  God  here;  man  is  nothing.  Surely  every  crown  must  be 
laid  for  ever  on  the  riches  of  His  grace!  "Behold  the  people  shall  rise  up  as  a 
great  lion,  and  lift  up  himself  as  a  young  lion :  he  shall  not  lie  down  till  he  eat  of 
the  prey,  and  drink  the  blood  of  the  slain."  In  the  symbol  of  the  lion,  under  which 
the  Lord's  people  are  here  brought  before  us,  we  have  the  victorious  onward  course 
of  the  Church  of  Christ.  The  Lord's  people  are  represented  as  "  rising  up  "  in  the 
majesty  of  Divine  strength  and  power  and  victory  over  their  spiritual  foes.  And 
what  is  the  last  feature  in  the  character  of  the  Lord's  people  presented  in  this 
parable  ?  It  is  victory  over  every  foe  at  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ :  "  he 
shall  not  lie  down  till  he  eat  of  the  prey  and  drink  the  blood  of  the  slain."  To 
"  lie  down  "  is  the  expression  for  rest.  In  the  morning  of  resurrection  they  will 
rest,  for  then  every  enemy  will  be  given  into  their  hands.  (F.  Whitfield,  3I.A.) 
And  the  shout  of  a  king  is  among  them. — The  best  u-ar-cry  : — I.  God's 
PRESENCE  AJroNG  His  PEOPLE.  1.  It  is  an  extraordinary  presence,  for  God's 
ordinary  and  usual  presence  is  everywhere.  Whither  shall  we  flee  from  His 
presence?  He  is  in  the  highest  heaven  and  in  the  lowest  hell;  the  hnnd  of  the 
Lord  is  upon  the  high  hills,  and  His  power  is  in  all  deep  places.  Still  there  is  a 
pecuhar  presence  ;  for  God  was  among  His  people  in  the  wilderness  as  He  was  not 
among  tlie  Moabites  and  the  Edomites  their  foes,  and  God  is  in  His  Church  as  He  is 
not  in  the  world.  He  saith  of  His  Church,  "  Here  will  I  dwell,  for  I  have  desired 
it."  This  is  much  more  than  God's  being  about  us;  it  includes  the  favour  of  God 
l0\\ards  us.  His  consideration  of  us,  His  working  with  us.     2.  God  is  with  His 


CDAP.  xxiii.-J  NUMBERS.  275 

people  in  the  entireness  of  His  nature.  This  is  the  glory  of  the  Church  of  God — to 
have  the  grace  of  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  and  the  love  of  God  the  Father,  and  the 
communion  of  tlie  Holy  Ghost  to  be  her  never-failing  benediction.  What  a  glory 
to  have  Father,  Son,  and  Holy  Spirit  manifesting  the  Godhead  in  the  midst  of  our 
assemblies,  and  blessing  each  one  of  us  !  3.  For  God  to  dwell  with  us :  what  a 
condescending  presence  this  is !  And  will  God  in  vei-y  truth  dwell  among  men  ?  If 
the  heaven  of  heavens  cannot  contain  Him,  will  He  abide  among  His  people  ?  He 
will !  "  Know  ye  not  that  your  bodies  are  the  temples  of  the  Holy  Ghost  ?  "  4. 
What  an  awe  this  imparts  to  every  true  Church  of  God  !  You  may  go  in  and  out  of 
certain  assemblies,  and  you  may  say,  "  Here  we  have  beauty  !  here  we  have  adorn- 
ment, musical,  ecclesiastical,  architectural,  oratorical,  and  the  like  ! "  but  to  my 
mind  there  is  no  worship  like  that  which  proceeds  from  a  man  when  he  feels — the 
Lord  is  here.  What  a  hush  comes  over  the  soul  I  Here  is  the  place  for  the 
unsandalled  foot  and  the  prostrate  spirit.  Now  are  we  on  holy  ground.  5.  This  is 
the  one  necessary  of  the  Church  :  the  Lord  God  must  be  in  the  midst  of  her,  or  she 
is  nothing.  If  God  be  there,  peace  will  be  within  her  walls,  and  prosperity  within 
her  palaces.  6.  This  presence  of  God  is  clearly  discerned  by  the  gracious,  though 
others  may  not  know  it.  II.  The  results  of  this  Divine  peesence.  1.  Leading 
(ver.  22).  W^e  must  have  the  Lord  with  us  to  guide  us  into  our  promised  rest.  2. 
The  next  blessing  is  strength.  "He  hath  as  it  were  the  strength  of  an  unicorn  " 
(ver.  22).  It  is  generally  agreed  that  the  creature  here  meant  is  an  extinct  species 
of  urus  or  ox,  most  nearly  represented  by  the  buffalo  of  the  pres'  nt  period.  This 
gives  us  the  sentence—"  He  hath  as  it  were  the  strength  of  a  buffalo."  When  God 
is  in  a  Church,  what  rupged  strength,  what  massive  force,  what  irresistible  energy  is 
sure  to  be  there!  And  how  untamable  is  the  living  force!  3.  The  next  result  is 
safety.  "  Surely  there  is  no  enchantment  against  Jacob,  neither  is  there  any 
divination  against  Isra^-l."  The  presence  of  God  quietly  baffles  all  the  attempts  of 
the  evil  one.  Divination  cannot  touch  a  child  of  God :  the  evil  one  is  chained. 
Wherefore  be  of  good  courage ;  if  God  be  for  us,  who  can  be  against  ns  ?  4.  Further 
than  that,  God  gives  to  His  people  the  next  blessing,  that  is,  of  His  so  working 
among  them  as  to  make  them  a  wonder,  and  cause  outsiders  to  raise  inquiries  about 
them.  "  According  to  this  time  it  shall  be  said  of  Jacob  and  of  Israel,  What  hath 
God  wrought?"  5.  When  God  is  with  His  people  He  will  give  them  power  of  a 
destructive  kind.  Do  not  be  frightened.  Here  is  the  text  for  it :  "  Uehold,  the 
people  shall  rise  up  as  a  great  lion,  and  lift  up  himself  as  a  young  lion" — that  is, 
as  a  lion  in  the  fulness  of  his  vigour — -"he  shall  not  lie  down  until  he  eat  of  the 
prey,  and  drink  the  blood  of  the  slain."  God  has  put  into  His  Church,  when  He  is 
in  it,  a  most  wonderful,  destructive  power  as  against  spiritual  wickedness.  A 
healthy  Church  kills  error,  and  tears  in  pieces  evil.     III.  W^hat  can  be  done  for  the 

SECURING  AND  PRESERVING  OF   THE  PRESENCE  OF  GoD  WITH  THE  ChDRCH  ?       1.  There  is 

something  even  in  the  conformation  of  a  Church  to  secure  this.  God  is  very 
tolerant,  and  He  bears  with  many  mistakes  in  His  servants,  and  yet  blesses  them  ; 
but  depend  upon  it,  unless  a  Church  is  formed  at  the  very  outset  upon  scriptural 
principles  and  in  God's  own  way,  sooner  or  later  all  the  mistakes  of  her  constitution 
will  turn  out  to  be  sources  of  weakness.  Christ  loves  to  dwell  in  a  house  which  is 
built  according  to  His  own  plans,  and  not  according  to  the  whims  and  fancies  of  men. 
2.  But  next,  God  will  only  dwell  with  a  Church  which  is  full  of  life.  The  living 
God  will  not  inhabit  a  dead  Church.  Hence  the  necessity  of  having  really  regenerated 
people  as  members  of  the  Church.  Eemember  that  text :  "  God  is  not  the  God  of 
the  dead,  but  of  the  living,"  and  it  bears  this  sense  among  others,  that  He  is  not  the 
God  of  a  Church  made  up  of  unconverted  people.  Oh  that  we  may  all  live  unto 
God,  and  may  that  life  be  past  all  question.  3.  That  being  supposed,  we  next 
notice  that  to  have  God  among  us  we  must  be  full  of  faith.  Do  you  believe  your 
God  ?  Alas,  too  many  only  believe  a  little  I  But  do  you  believe  His  every  word  ? 
Do  you  believe  His  grandest  promises?  Is  He  a  real  God  to  you,  making  His  words 
into  facts  every  day  of  your  lives?  If  so,  then  the  Lord  is  among  us  as  in  the  holy 
place.  Faith  builds  a  pavilion  in  which  her  King  delights  to  sit  enthroned.  4. 
With  that  must  come  prayer.  Prayer  is  the  breath  of  faith.  Where  prayer  is 
fervent  God  is  present.  5.  Supposing  there  is  this  faith  and  prayer,  we  shall  also 
need  holiness  of  hfe.  You  know  what  Balaam  did  when  he  found  he  could  not 
curse  the  people.  Satanic  was  his  advice.  He  bade  the  king  of  Moab  seduce  the 
men  of  Israel  by  the  women  of  Moab  that  were  fair  to  look  upon ;  and  he  sadly 
succeeded.  So  in  a  Church.  The  devil  will  work  hard  to  lead  one  into  licentious- 
ness, another  into  drunkenness,  a  third  into  dishonesty,  and  others  into  worldliness. 


276  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxni. 

If  he  can  only  get  the  goodly  Babylonish  garment  and  the  wedge  of  gold  buried  in 
an  Achan's  tent,  then  Israel  will  be  chased  before  her  adversaries.  God  cannot 
dwell  in  an  unclean  Church.  6.  Lastly,  when  we  have  reached  to  that,  let  us  have 
practical  consecration.  God  will  not  dwell  in  a  house  which  does  not  belong  to  Him. 
{G.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  Bivine  presence  necdi'd  in  the  Church  : — There  are  three 
special  thoughts  which  come  to  us  in  connection  with  this  text.     I.  The  first  is, 

THE  ABSOLUTE  NEED,  IF  THE  ABMY  OF  THE  LoKD  IS  TO  CONQUER,  OF  THE  PRESBNCE  OF 

THE  Lord  and  of  the  realisation  of  His  presence  by  those  who  are  called  by 
His  name,  and  wear  His  armour,  and  wield  His  weapons.  It  pleases  the  Lord  to 
let  us  fight  His  battles,  to  give  us  His  armour  and  His  weapons,  and  to  inspire  us 
with  His  courage,  and  to  fill  our  enemies  with  His  terror.  We  have  no  power 
except  it  be  given  us  by  Him ;  we  can  drive  out  no  darkness  of  heathenism  except 
the  Lord  be  with  us.  We  want  more  of  our  own  battle-cry,  the  "shout  of  our 
King,"  telling  of  His  actual  presence  with  His  host.  II.  It  is  also  necessary  to 
realise  the  essential  unity  of  the  Church  of  Christ,  of  the  army  of  the  living 
God.  We  should  pray  and  work,  and  earnestly  desire  that  all  the  people  of  the 
Lord  may  be  one.  If  we  want  a  reason  for  the  little  progress  made  in  the  conquest 
of  the  world  of  heathenism  for  the  Lord  of  life  and  glory,  if  we  want  to  account 
for  the  dark  and  darkening  fringe  of  sin  and  misery  and  unbelief  within  the 
borders  of  our  own  land,  we  can  find  cause  enough  for  these  things  in  our  failure 
to  realise  and  to  work  and  pray  for  the  ideal  of  the  essential  unity  of  the  Church 
of  Christ.  III.  Our  text  inspires  us  with  hope.  There  is  no  greater  need  for  us, 
as  individuals  or  as  a  united  body,  than  hope.  And  how  can  we  be  otherwise  than 
full  of  hope  when  we  call  to  mind  that  the  promise  is  for  us,  "  The  shout  of  a  king 
is  among  them"?  There  ia  hope  for  ourselves,  and  hope  for  others.  Life  passes 
on :  frieuds  pass  away  ;  strength  for  effort  grows  less  ;  unavailing  efforts  stretch  out 
behind  us  in  a  long,  increasing  line,  like  wounded  men  falling  down  to  die  in  the 
terrible  retreat :  but  still  there  is  hope — hope  that  will  grow  and  increase,  and  come 
daily  nearer  to  its  accomplishment.  "  The  shout  of  a  King  is  among  us,"  and 
we  cannot  be  moving  on  to  ultimate  defeat.  There  is  a  battle,  terrible  enough, 
to   fight;   but   victory  is  the  end,  not  defeat.      {E.    T.  Leeke,  M.A.)  Surely 

there  is  no  enchantment  against  Jacob. — Impregnable  security  of  Israel ;  God's 
wondrous  doings  on  their  behalf : — I.  The  truth  affirmed  :  "  Surely  there  is 
no  enchantment,"  &c.  The  certainty  of  this  may  be  inferred — 1.  Because  the 
counsels  of  God  are  more  than  sufficient  to  balHe  the  designs  and  plots  of  hell. 

2.  Because  the  power  of  Jehovah  is  ever  effectual  in  thwarting  the  attacks  of  the 
enemies  of  his  people.  3.  Because  Divine  goodness  is  more  than  enough  to 
counteract  the  malevolence  of  om*  foes.  4.  The  resources  of  God  are  more  than 
adequate  to  render  all  the  means  of  the  Church's  enemies  abortive.  II.  The 
exclamation  uttered:  "According  to  this 'time,"  &c.  1.  What  is  to  be  said? 
"  What  hath  God  wrought !  "  Agents  are  to  be  observed,  but  only  God  praised. 
This  is  to  keep  up  our  dependence  on  God.  This  is  to  inspire  with  adoration  and 
praise.  This  is  to  keep  human  nature  in  its  right  place.  2.  Who  are  to  say  it  ? 
(1)  Ministers  of  the  gospel.  (2)  The  pious.  3.  When  should  it  be  said?  (1)  In 
times  of  depression,  as  the  means  of  consolation.  (2)  In  times  of  great  exertion,  as 
an  incitement  to  perseverance.  (3)  In  times  of  great  success,  to  give  tone  to  our 
exultations.  (4)  It  will  be  reiterated  in  the  world  of  the  beatified  for  ever.  There 
they  will  see,  in  one  beautiful  series,  the  doings  of  God— behold  the  golden  chain 
entire.  Application  :  1.  Our  text  may  apply  to  many  as  to  their  Christian  experi- 
ence before  God.  "  Kemember  all  the  way  which  the  Lord  thy  God  led  thee,"  &c. 
(Deut.  viii.  2).  2.  The  text  is  appropriate  to  Christian  missions.  What  enemies, 
difficulties,  and  discouragements  have  been  overcome  and  surmounted !  Well  may 
we  exclaim,  "  What  hath  God  wrought ! "  3,  Let  God  ever  be  exalted  for  the 
blessings  we  enjoy,  and  for  all  the  good  done  in  us  and  by  us.  (J.  Burns,  D.D.) 
The  blessings  of  God  and  the  acknowledgment  which  it  demands  : — I.  The  source  of 
effectual  blessing.  It  directs  us  to  the  Deity,  in  His  essential  character,  in  His 
active  character,  and  in  His  relative  character.  And  what  is  the  interference  we 
wish  ?  Various.  Sometimes — 1.  Deliverance — from  danger  internal  and  external — 
*'  enchantment."      2.  Blessing.      "  I  have  received  commandment  to  bless,"  &o. 

3.  Forbearance.  "  He  hath  not  beheld  iniquity,"  &a.  4.  Stability.  "  The  Lord 
his  God  ia  with  him."  5.  Complete  success.  II.  The  time  from  which  His 
interposition  is  remarked.  "  According  to  this  time  it  shall  be  said."  The  time 
of — 1.  Conversion.     2.  Kenewed  devotion.     3.  Peculiar  providential  arrangement. 

4.  £amest  and  decisive  spirit  of  prayer.     III.  The  acknowledoment  ix  demands. 


CHAP,  xxiii.]  NUMBERS.  277 

"It  shall  be  said,  What  hath  God  wrought  !"  1.  Acknowledgment  is  implied 
and  expected.  "  God  wrought."  2.  It  is  spontaneously  offered.  "  It  shall  be 
said."  3.  It  is  a  personal  and  explicit  token.  "  Jacob  and  Israel."  4.  It  is  to  be 
recorded  and  gratefully  renewed.  "According  to  this  time  it  shall  be  said,"  &c. 
{Samuel  Thodey.)  A  little  tihist  is  belter  than  much  foresight : — That  must  have 
been  a  wonderful  glimpse  into  the  ways  of  God  with  men  which  led  a  diviner  to 
•deny  his  own  art,  and  to  confess  that  to  wait  with  childlike  conHdence  on  God  till 
in  due  time  He  reveals  His  will  is  a  far  gi cater  and  more  precious  gift  than  to  force 
•or  surprise  the  secrets  of  the  future  and  to  pass  in  spirit  through  the  times  to  be. 
God  "  met "  Balaam  to  purpose  when  He  taught  him  a  truth  which  men,  and  even 
Christian  men,  have  not  yet  learned — that  a  little  trust  is  better  than  much  fore- 
sight, and  that  to  walk  with  God  in  patient  and  loving  dependence  is  better  than  to 
know  the  things  to  come.  And  this  insight  into  the  real  value  of  his  special  gift 
"was  part  of  that  training,  that  discipline,  by  which,  as  we  have  seen,  God  was 
seeking  to  save  His  servant  lioiahis  besetting  sin;  for  Balaam  was  proud  of  the 
gift  which  set  him  apart  from  and  above  his  fellows,  of  the  eagle  eye  and  unyielding 
spirit  which  made  the  supernatural  as  easy  and  familiar  to  him  as  the  natural, 
Avhile  they  were  trembling  before  every  bieath  of  change  and  finding  omens  of 
disaster  in  the  simplest  occurrences  of  daily  experience.  He  was  apt  to  boast  that 
he  was  the  man  of  an  open  eye,  hearing  the  voice  of  God  and  seeing  visions  from 
the  Almighty,  falling  into  trances  in  which  the  shadows  of  coming  events  were  cast 
upon  his  mind,  and  that  he  could  read  all  secrets  and  understand  all  mysteries. 
Unlike  the  great  Hebrew  prophets,  who  humbly  confessed  that  the  secret  of  the  Lord 
is  with  all  who  fear  Him,  and  so  made  themselves  one  with  their  fellows,  he  was 
perverting  his  high  gifts  to  purposes  of  self-exaltation  and  self-aggrandisement. 
"Was  it  not,  then,  most  salutary  that  he  should  be  checked  and  rebuked  in  this 
selfish  and  perilous  course?  And  how  could. he  be  more  effectually  rebuked  tbau 
by  being  shown  a  whole  race  possessed  of  even  higher  gifts  than  his  own,  jDossessed 
above  all  of  the  gift  of  waiting  for  God  to  reveal  His  will  to  tliem  in  due  time,  and 
so  raised  out  of  all  dependence  on  divinations  or  enchantments  ?  At  this  spectacle 
even  his  own  high  and  sacred  endowment  seemed  but  a  vulgar  toy,  and  tlie  aspira- 
tion was  kindled  in  his  bieast  for  that  greater  good,  that  greatest  of  all  gifts,  the 
power  to  walk  in  ways  of  righieousness,  and  to  leave  the  future,  with  simple  trust, 
in  the  hands  of  God.  It  is  a  lesson  which  we  still  need  to  learn  ;  for  which  of  us 
would  not  rejoice  had  he  prophetic  raptures  and  trances  of  which  to  boast,  if  men 
looked  up  to  him  as  possessed  of  a  solitary  and  mysterious  power,  and  resorted  to 
him  that  he  might  forecast  their  fate  and  interpret  to  them  the  m  \  steries  by  which 
they  were  perplexed  ?  Which  of  us  does  not  at  times  long  to  pierce  the  veil  and 
learn  how  it  fares  with  those  whom  we  have  loved  and  lost  awhile,  or  even  what 
will  be  the  conditions  of  our  own  life  in  years  to  come  or  when  death  shall  wear  us 
away,  instead  of  waiting  until  in  due  time  God  shall  reveal  even  this  unto  us  ?  Let 
us,  then,  learn  from  Balaam,  if  we  have  not  yet  learned  it  from  David  or  St.  Paul, 
that  to  rest  in  the  Lord  and  to  wait  patiently  for  Him  is  a  higher  achievement  than 
to  apprehend  all  mysteries ;  and  that  to  do  His  will  in  humble  trust  is  a  nobler 
function  and  power  than  to  foresee  what  that  Will  will  do.  (S.  Cox,  D.D.)  Neither 
•curse  them  at  all,  nor  bless  them  at  alL — You  cannot  neutralise  God  : — "Neither 
riurse  them  at  all,  nor  bless  them  at  all."  But  Balaam  said,  "  No  ;  you  ciinnot  treat 
Ood's  messengers  in  that  way.  As  a  matter  of  fact  they  are  here ;  you  have  to 
account  for  them  being  here,  and  to  reckon  with  them  while  they  are  here."  We 
cannot  quiet  things  by  ignoring  them.  By  simply  writing  "Unknowable"  across 
the  heavens  we  really  do  not  exclude  supernatural  or  immeasurable  forces.  The 
ribbon  is  too  narrow  to  shut  out  the  whole  heaven ;  it  is  but  a  little  strip  ;  it  looks 
contemptible  against  the  infinite  arch.  We  do  not  exclude  God  by  denying  Him, 
nor  by  saying  that  we  do  not  know  Him  or  that  He  cannot  be  known.  VVe  cannot 
neutralise  God,  so  as  to  make  Him  neither  the  one  thing  nor  the  other.  So  Balaam 
•was  the  greatest  mystery  Balak  had  to  deal  with.  It  is  the  same  with  the  Bible — 
God's  supernatural  Book.  It  will  not  lie  where  we  want  it  to  lie :  it  has  a  way  of 
getting  up  through  the  dust  that  gathers  upon  it  and  shaking  itself,  and  making  its 
pages  felt.  It  will  open  at  the  wrong  place;  would  it  open  at  some  catah  gue  of 
names,  it  might  be  tolerated,  but  it  opens  at  hot  places,  where  white  thrones  are 
and  severe  judgments,  and  where  scales  are  tried  and  measuring  wands  are  tested. 
It  will  speak  to  the  soul  about  the  wrong-doing  that  never  came  to  anytbinp,  and 
the  wicked  thought  that  would  have  burned  the  heavens  and  scattered  dishonour 
upon  the  throne  of  God.     {J.  Parker,  D.D.) 


278  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOU.  [chap.  xxiv. 

Vers.  28-30.  Balak  brought  Balaam  unto  the  top  of  Peor. — 21ie  tvicked  are  wise 
in  their  kind  to  biiiig  their  wicked  puri^oses  to  pass  : — We  may  observe  by  continual 
experience  the  nature  of  ungotlly  men.  Tbey  are  cunning  in  their  kind ;  they 
watch  their  ways  and  times  to  fit  tliem  to  work  out  tlreir  wicked  devices.  Balak 
knew  well  enough  he  was  not  able  to  meet  the  Israelites  in  the  open  field,  and  there- 
fore dealeth  otherwise.  This  is  it  which  Stephen  in  his  apology  noteth  (Acts  vii.  19). 
Thus  did  Laban  deal  toward  Jacob  (Gen.  xxxi.  1,  2,  41),  changing  his  mind,  revoking 
his  bargains,  altering  his  wages,  murmuring  at  his  prosperity,  and  changing  his 
countenance  toward  him.  This  is  noted  also  in  the  parable  recorded  (Luke  xvi.  8). 
This  we  see  by  many  examples.  Ahithophel's  counsel  was  esteemed  like  as  one  who 
had  asked  counsel  at  the  oracle  of  God,  so  were  all  his  counsels  both  with  David 
and  with  Absalom.  The  like  we  see  in  Herod  when  he  lieard  of  the  birth  of  Christ, 
as  of  a  new-born  King,  by  the  wise  men.  He  pretendeth  piety,  but  useth  policy  to 
destroy  the  babe  our  Saviour.  The  same  we  might  observe  in  the  scribes  and 
Pharisees  after  the  ascension  of  Christ.  They  spared  no  means  to  hinder  the  course 
of  the  gospel  (Acts  iii.-v.),  but  used  sometimes  fair  means,  souTitimes  threatenings, 
sometimes  commandments  to  stop  the  mouths  of  the  apostles.  All  which  testi- 
monies teach  us  that  which  the  prophet  Jeremiah  saith  (Jer.  iv.  22)  of  the  people 
in  his  time  agreeable  to  the  truth  of  this  doctrine:  "  They  are  wise  to  do  evil,  but 
to  do  well  they  have  no  knowledge."  The  reasons  follow.  1.  Thfy  i-erve  a  cunning 
master,  the  author  of  all  confusion,  the  contriver  of  all  mischief,  the  worker  of  all 
wickedness,  that  old  subtle  serpent  who  worketh  in  all  the  children  of  disobedience 
(Eph,  ii.  2).  2.  God  giveth  even  to  wicked  men  wisdom  and  understanding,  to 
magnify  His  mercy,  who  is  good  to  all,  and  to  aggravate  their  sin,  who  are  made 
thereby  without  excuse  (Rom.  i.  20,  21).  Now,  the  greater  His  goodness  is  toward 
them,  the  heavier  shall  His  judgment  and  their  punishment  be  (Luke  xii.  48). 
What  is  it  that  thou  hast  not  received  ?  And  if  thou  hast  received  it,  why  dost  thou 
not  glorify  Him  of  whom  thuu  hast  received  it?  3.  The  enemies  of  God  have 
knowledge,  experience,  foresight ;  they  are  as  wise  as  serpents,  as  subtle  as  foxes, 
to  the  end  God  may  use  them  as  His  rods  in  correcting  His  Church  and  in  trying 
the  faith  of  His  people.  So  He  proved  tbe  patience  of  the  Israelites  by  Pharaoh 
and  the  Egyptians,  and  by  the  cunning  and  crafty  fetches  which  they  practised  for 
their  overthrow  and  destruction.  So  He  tried  Joseph  and  Mary  by  the  dissimu- 
lation of  Herod,  by  whom  they  were  constrained  to  depart  out  of  Judiea  and  to  fiy 
into  the  land  of  Egypt.  The  uses  to  be  made  of  this  doctrine  are  many.  (1)  Tliis 
should,  on  the  other  side,  teach  us  to  deal  wisely  and  warily  with  them,  lest  we  be 
snared  and  circumvented  hy  them.  We  are  set  as  upon  a  hill,  we  are  placed  as 
upon  a  stiige.  If  we  profess  Chrii^t  Jesus,  a  small  spot  will  be  seen  in  our  garment. 
It  behoveth  us,  therefore,  to  be  wise  as  serpents  and  innocent  as  doves,  according 
to  the  counsel  of  our  Saviour,  to  the  end  we  may  stop  the  mouths  of  gainsayers. 
Their  wisdom  is  joined  with  wickedness  ;  our  wisdom  must  be  seasoned  with  godli- 
ness. Their  policy  is  iniquity ;  with  us  policy  and  innocency  must  accompany 
together,  and  kiss  one  another.  Their  wisdom  is  a  circumventing  by  laying  of 
snares ;  our  wisdom  mu.>^t  be  circumspect  in  avoiding  snares.  If  we  have  this 
wariness  mingled  with  true  sincerity,  and  all  our  actions  without  dissimulation,  it 
is  both  lawful  and  expedient  to  set  wisdom  against  wisdom,  and  policy  against 
policy,  and  care  against  care,  and  understanding  against  understanding,  that  so 
through  their  subtlety  and  our  simplicity  we  be  not  taken  in  their  traps  which  they 
have  laid  for  us.  (2)  It  is  our  duty  to  pray  to  God  to  he  delivered  from  them,  and 
trust  in  Him  for  His  help.  He  scattereth  the  devices  of  the  crafty,  so  that  their 
hands  cannot  accomplish  that  which  their  hearts  have  enterprised — an  excellent 
comfort  to  all  the  servants  of  God  not  to  fear  the  high  reaches  and  deep  devices  of 
their  enemies.  (3)  This  serveth  to  reprove  two  sorts  of  men  tluit  esteem  not  aright 
of  this  worldly  wisdom  of  wicked  men  ;  for  some  are  offended  at  their  wisdom 
because  it  is  so  great,  others  rest  contented  in  it  because  it  is  so  excellent.  [W. 
AttersoU.) 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 


Vebs.  1-9.  He  set  Ms  face  toward  the  wilderness.— Tfte  face  set  toward  the 
wilderness  : — Evidently  there  is  a  change  at  this  point  in  Balaam's  method. 
Hitherto  he  has  played  the  soothsayer.    At  last  he  confesses  himself  vanquished. 


CHAP.  XXIV.]  NmiBERS.  279 

and  instead  of  renewing  the  practices  of  his  magic  science,  awaits,  with  eye  fixed 
upon  the  waste  distant  desert,  a  revelation  different  in  kind  from  any  that  have 
gone  before  it.  It  was  a  turning-point  in  liis  strange  history.  Not  the  first,  nor 
the  greatest,  yet  real,  and,  would  he  have  had  it  so,  savin?.  He  has  learned  the 
helplessness  of  man  striving  with  his  Maker.  He  has  learned  the  futility  of 
approaching  the  God  of  truth  with  a  lie  in  the  right  hand.  He  has  learned  that 
to  "  set  the  fa-  e  toward  the  wilderness  "  is  the  one  hope  and  wisdom  of  inquiring 
man  ;  to  look  away  from  enchantments  ;  +o  look  away  from  courts  and  crowds,  from 
pleasures  and  businesses;  to  look  away  from  types  and  forms,  and  to  fix  the  earnest 
gaze  upon  that  solitude  of  earth-  and  heaven  which  is  the  presence  of  the  soul  in 
the  presence  of  God.  The  crisis  was  lost,  we  know,  upon  Balaam.  The  dreams  of 
avarice  and  of  worldliness  prevailed  in  him,  even  over  the  open  vision.  We  cannot 
alter  his  destiny  ;  let  us  learn  something  from  this  incident.  1.  There  is  in  all  of 
us  a  strange  reluctance  to  the  thing  here  described — this  setting  of  the  face  toward 
the  wilderness  where  God  is  alone.  I  might  say  many  things  to  you  of  the  minis- 
terial man — the  man,  I  mean,  whose  office  it  is  to  communicate  with  God  for  the 
edification  of  His  people.  How  often,  when  this  ministry,  the  Church's  prophesying, 
is  to  be  exercised,  does  the  indolent,  the  half-hearted,  the  perfunctory  minister  run 
to  his  "enchantments";  to  his  books  and  to  his  manuscripts,  to  his  commentaries  ; 
to  the  old  "  bakemeats,"  his  own  or  another's,  which  have  done  duty  before,  and  can 
be  made  "  coldly  to  furnish  forth  "  another  "  table  "  !  How  often — to  change  the 
illustration — does  the  abler,  the  more  ingenious,  the  more  eloquent  minister  betake 
himself  to  his  task  of  preparation  for  preaching  by  a  mustering  of  his  own  gifts  of 
argument,  of  rhetoric,  of  pathos  and  persuasiveness,  as  the  enchantments  by  which 
he  is  to  bring  God  into  these  hearts  !  How  often  does  a  man— to  use  the  prophet's 
strange  but  expressive  metaphor — "  sacrifice  to  his  net,  and  burn  incense  to  his 
drag  "  ;  pay  the  homage  of  a  gratified  vanity  to  his  own  performance,  count  instead 
of  weighing  his  hearers,  and  set  down  all  to  his  own  credit  in  prophesying,  of  which 
he  should  rather  say  to  himself  in  deepest  self-humiliation,  "  What  hast  thou  that 
thou  didst  not  receive  ?  "  2.  Yet  think  not  that  the  Balaams  of  this  age  are  all 
prophets,  or  that  the  warning  is  only  for  the  professional  teacher.  I  seem  to  see  a 
place  for  it  in  these  lives  which  minister  and  people  live  in  common.  How  often, 
in  the  anxious  questionings  which  life  brings  to  all  of  us — at  those  dubious  turnings 
which  compel  decision,  and  cannot  be  decided  upon  twice  over — is  the  temptation 
powerfully  present  to  seek  for  some  "enchantment"  of  discrimination  between  the 
wrong  for  us  and  the  right !  AVho  has  not  made  advice  such  an  "  enchantment  "  ? 
"  In  the  multitude  of  counsellors  there  is  safety  "  ;  but  then  the  counsellors  must 
be  well  chosen,  must  be  honestly  sought,  must  be  diligently  informed,  must  be 
faithfully  followed.  3.  I  would  add  a  word  upon  the  application  of  the  text  not  to 
the  life,  but  to  the  soul.  Side  by  side  with  a  bold  scepticism  which  simply  passes 
by  the  gospel  on  the  other  side  there  is  also  an  anxiety,  a  curiosity,  to  hear,  which 
secures  an  audience  wheresoever  there  is  a  preacher,  which  stimulates  all  manner 
of  agencies  for  bringing  home  the  gospel.  In  the  same  degree  the  warning  is  more 
urgent,  that  we  confound  not,  in  these  highest  matters,  the  "  enchantments  "  and 
the  "  wilderness."  Who  feels  not  in  himself  the  easiness  of  listening  and  the 
difficulty  of  praying  ?  Who  is  not  conscious  of  the  temptation  to  compound  for 
inward  torpor  by  outward  bustle,  and  to  make  a  multiplication  of  services  and 
communions  an  apology  for  neglect  and  shameful  sloth  in  the  nearer  and  more 
intimate  converse  between  the  soul  and  its  God  ?  {Dean  Vaughan.)  Balaam  ,  .  . 
the  man  whose  eyes  are  open. — Balaam — the  ojyen  eye: — An  open  eye  is  a  rare 
tiling  even  in  the  matters  of  common  experience.  They  are  the  few  who  can  see 
clearly  the  things  which  God  has  set  round  them  in  their  daily  paths.  Men  of 
science  tell  us  that  it  is  difficult  to  meet  with  a  competent  observer  of  even  the 
simplest  and  most  familiar  phenomena.  Lawyers  complain  that  a  good  witness, 
who  can  tell  what  he  knows,  and  only  what  he  knows,  is  as  rare.  It  is  supposed 
by  experienced  persons  that  a  fact  is  just  the  most  difficult  thing  in  the  world  to 
get  at,  so  few  walk  with  their  eyes  open  and  care  to  make  themselves  simply 
conductors  of  truth.  We  see  things  through  mists  which  take  the  colours  of 
prejudice  or  passion,  and  it  is  but  a  vague  outline  of  them  which  meets  our  sight. 
"Lord,  that  our  eyes  may  be  opened,"  is  a  prayer  full  of  meaning  for  all  of  us  as 
■we  move  amidst  the  realities  of  our  daily  lives.  In  the  higher  sphere  of  the  being 
the  open  eye  is  rarer  still.  The  realities  in  that  region  are  solemn  things  to  look 
upon.  There  is  something  awful  in  their  grandeur,  and  even  in  their  beauty.  A 
man  needs  courage  and  faith  to  face  them  as  they  are.      I.  Balaam  was  a  man 


280  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxiv. 


WHOSE  EYE  WAS  OPEN  IN  HIS  DAT.  He  WRS  a  man  of  splendid  natural  genius.  We 
Ijuzzle  over  the  definition  of  genius;  but  perhaps  it  is  only  the  open  eye,  the  power 
to  see  things  simply  as  they  are.  In  every  sphere  of  man's  intellectual  activity  the 
man  of  genius  is  the  seer.  II.  Balaam's  is  at  the  same  time  a  character  of- 
siNGULAK  PERPLEXITY.  He  had  botli  the  open  eye  and  the  itching  palm.  And  this 
condition  is  far  from  rare.  Splendid  endowments  are  often  mated  with  moral 
narrowness  or  feebleness.  With  many  of  these  men  of  insight,  men  with  the  seer's 
power,  there  is  a  flaw  in  the  thoroughness  somewhere.  But  then  these  men,  when 
their  genius  possesses  them,  rise  above  the  sphere  of  their  humiliation  ;  the  temp- 
tations which  ensnare  them  snap  like  the  withes  of  Samson  ;  they  see  clearly,  and 
declare  with  the  freedom  and  the  force  of  prophets  the  things  which  have  been 
shown  to  them  by  the  Lord.  Loid  Bacon  may  have  been  capable  of  very  poor 
ambitions,  very  grovelling  thoughts  and  actions ;  but  when  his  genius  possessed 
him,  when  he  loosed  his  splendid  faculty  in  the  quest  of  truth,  the  simplest  fact 
became  sacred  to  him  ;  he  would  not  have  dared  to  misrepresent  or  to  tamper  with 
what  he  saw  for  worlds.  It  was  thus  with  Balaam.  On  the  lower  level  of  his  life- 
he  was  grovelling;  but  when  God  took  possession  of  his  genius  he  yielded  it  readily, 
and  then  he  was  true  as  steel  to  the  vision.  III.  The  man  whose  eyes  were  open 
SAW  SOME  things  WITH  STARTLING  CLEARNESS.  Some  words  of  his  ring  out  like 
trumpet  notes  through  the  field  of  life's  battle ;  they  are  conceived  with  a  vividnes."? 
and  expressed  with  a  force  which  makes  them  prophetic  for  all  ages  ;  we  hear  from 
his  lips  the  words  of  God.  1.  The  only  word  which  a  man  can  say  with  power  is. 
truth.  The  word  that  God  also  saith,  that  shall  stand  (chap.  xxii.  38).  The 
counsellor  who  knows  the  Divine  plan  is  the  man  who  has  power.  The  position  of 
the  Jews  among  the  nations,  and  the  influence  which  they  wielded,  which  is 
popularly  much  under-pstimated,  rested  wholly  on  the  fact  that  they  knew  as  no 
other  nation  knew  the  Divine  counsels,  they  held  the  key  to  the  mystery  of  all 
these  worlds.  Balaam  saw  that  the  trickster  and  liar  is  impotent.  Laocoon,  locked 
in  the  serpent  wreaths,  wrestling  madly,  but  with  the  death  agony  in  his  face,  is 
not  more  powerless  than  the  monger  of  falsehood  to  escape  his  doom.  The  gain  is 
there,  it  is  always  there ;  you  can  have  it  if  you  like  by  cheating  and  lying.  Balaam 
saw  it,  and  there  was  that  within  him  which  longed  for  it.  But  his  eye  was  open  ; 
he  dared  not  touch  it.  He  saw  the  pure  folly  as  well  as  the  shame  of  dreaming  of 
it,  of  thiuking  that  anything  but  truth,  right,  and  the  blessing  of  God  can  stand  a 
man  in  any  stead  in  life,  in  death,  and  in  the  great  court  of  Heaven.  2.  He  saw 
with  that  open  eye  that  the  man  who  stands  with  God  stands  absolutely  beyond 
the  reach  of  harm  (chap,  xxiii.  23).  3.  There  was  a  thiid  thing  that  Balaam  saw. 
The  man  whom  Gud  blesses  is  blessed ;  the  man  whom  God  curses  is  cursed, 
absolutely  and  for  ever.  {J.  B.  Jlroicn,  B.A.)  How  goodly  are  thy  tents,  O 
Jacob. — The  prosperity  of  the  Church: — With  great  admiration  he  bcginnelh  to 
declare  the  future  prosperity  of  that  people,  and  doth  it  by  six  similitudes.  1.  As 
the  valleys  are  they  stretched  forth,  or  as  the  rivers  say  some,  which  coming  from 
one  head  spread  themselves  into  great  broad  waters,  so  this  people  haviog  sprung 
from  Jacob,  one  patriarch,  hath  spread  iuto  this  multitude,  and  yet  further  shall 
spread  into  many  more.  2.  "As  gardens  by  the  river's  side."  Such  gardens  are 
watered  so  by  the  rivers  as  if  the  heat  be  never  so  great,  yet  they  are  not  burned  up. 
So  shall  this  people  in  all  adversities  and  dangers  be  preserved  by  the  power  and 
Messing  of  God  till  the  coming  of  the  Messiah,  and  overcome  by  no  assaults  of 
Satan  and  his  instruments.  3.  "As  the  trees  of  lign  aloes  which  the  Lord  hath 
planted."  4.  "  As  the  cedar  trees  beside  the  waters,"  which,  growing  to  a  great 
height,  notably  show  how  this  people  wiih  their  offspring  should  wonderfully  grow 
with  their  virtue  and  famous  acts,  getting  a  great  name  in  the  world.  5.  "  The- 
water  droppeth  out  of  his  bucket "  ;  that  is,  as  such  water  floweth  abroad,  so  shall 
this  people  abound  with  the  water  of  heavenly  doctrine  and  wisdom,  and  from  them 
be  spread  to  other  nations  plentifully,  according  to  that  "  Out  of  Sion  shall  a  law 
go,  and  the  word  of  the  Lord  from  Jerusalem."  6.  "His  seed  shall  be  in  many 
waters."  As  seed  that  is  cast  into  a  field  well  watered  soon  springeth  and  beareth 
fiuit,  so  this  people.  Those  are  the  prophetical  resemblances  of  this  people  Israel, 
which  do  still  declare  unto  us  the  flourishing  and  happy  state  of  God's  Churchy 
whatsoever  worldly  men  conceive  and  think.  The  Church  is  the  tabernacle  of  God, 
wherein  He  dwelleth,  and  familiarly  with  His  chosen  as  with  His  domestics  and 
household  servants  converseth,  providing  things  necessary  both  for  this  life  and 
that  to  come.  The  Church  is  that  little  river  which  spreadeth  itself  far  and  wido 
throughoQt  the  world.     The  Church  is  that  well-watered  garden,  set  with  aweet 


CHAP.  XXIV.]  NUMBERS.  281 

trees,  casting  forth  the  fragrant  smell  of  life,  of  the  knowledge  of  God  and  of  virtue, 
whereof  Solomon  in  his  Canticles :  "  My  sister,  my  spouse,  is  a  garden  enclosed,  as 
a  spring  shut  up,  and  a  fountain  sealed  up."  The  Church  is  that  shadow  that 
yieldeth  comfortable  cooling,  in  the  sense  and  feeling  of  God's  wrath  to  sin.  It  is 
that  cedar  planted  by  the  water-side,  and  growing  so  high,  whereof  the  prophet  in 
the  Pi-alm :  "  The  righteous  shall  flourish  hke  a  palm-tree,  and  grow  like  a  cedar 
in  Lebanon.  Such  as  be  planted  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  shall  flourish  in  the 
courts  of  our  God.  They  shall  still  bring  forth  fruit  in  their  age  ;  they  shall  be  fat 
and  flourishing,"  &c.  The  Church  is  that  bucket,  containing  doctrine  of  life,  and 
dropping  it  out  to  the  comfort  of  souls.  Finally,  that  seed  shall  live  again  in  the 
life  to  come,  and  for  ever  spring  and  flourish.  (Bp.  Babington.)  Balaam's  third 
parable  :  the  glory  of  the  people  of  God  :—l.  The  pbepaeation  of  the  prophet  to 
DECLARE  THE  DiViNE  WILL.  1.  Balaam  renounces  the  search  for  auguries.  2.  He 
beholds  the  encampment  of  Israel.  3.  He  1j  inspired  by  the  Holy  Spirit.  4.  He 
hears  Divine  words  and  sees  Divine  visions.  11.  The  declaration  by  the  prophet 
OF  Israel's  glory.  1.  Their  beautiful  appearance.  (1)  Beauty — (a)  Of  order. 
(b)  Of  culture  and  fertility.  (2)  Fragrance.  (3)  Majesty.  2.  Their  prosperous 
condition.  8.  Their  exalted  position.  4.  Their  conquering  power.  (1)  Great 
strength.  (2)  Great  conquests.  (3)  Great  security.  (4)  Great  influence.  (T7.  Jo7(e.s.) 
Balaavi's  third  parable  : — Seen  from  the  top  of  the  rocks,  everything  about  Israelis 
perfection.  Had  we  been  down  in  the  valley,  and  looked  into  them  from  an  earthly 
standpoint,  we  should  have  seen  deformity  enough.  But  from  God's  presence 
everything  is  changed.  But  mark  the  figures  under  which  this  beauty  is  described. 
"  As  valleys  are  they  spread  forth."  These  are  the  valleys  watered  by  the  river; 
these  are  the  people  of  God,  made  beautiful  by  the  refreshing  streams  of  living 
water  which  flow  down  from  the  throne  of  God.  Not  yet  are  they  as  watered 
"  valleys,"  but  as  "  gardens  by  the  river's  side."  Tbis  is  a  richer  description  still. 
They  are  the  garden  of  the  Lord.  They  are  the  plants  planted  by  the  Father. 
They  have  been  taken  out  of  the  world — transplanted — and  are  now  to  "  bring  forth 
much  fruit."  The  streams  from  "  the  river  of  God  "  find  their  way  to  the  roots  of 
their  spiritual  life ;  and  thus  they  become  fruitful.  Jesus  is  the  source  of  their 
life  and  their  fruitfulness.  And  in  all  this  we  see  growth — "  as  the  valleys  are 
they  spread  forth;  as  gardens  by  the  river's  side."  The  entire  figure  implies 
sanctitication — gruwth  in  grace.  There  will  always  be  three  kinds  of  growth 
where  the  soul  is  really  abiding  in  Jesus.  There  will  be  the  outward  growth  as  the 
"lily" — the  life  before  men;  the  hidden  growth  as  the  "  roots  "  of  Lebanon — the 
life  before  God  ;  and  the  relation  toward  men  as  the  "branches  spreading,"  the 
influence  which  they  cast  around.  But  the  figure  grows  in  riihness :  "  as  trees 
of  lign  aloes  which  the  Lord  hath  planted."  The  aloe  tree  was  highly  valued  on 
account  of  its  fragrance,  and  it  was  the  tree  from  which  the  incense  was  piepareJ. 
Thus  the  believer  abiding  in  Jesus  is  a  "  sweet  savour  "  of  Christ.  The  fraj^rancc 
of  that  blessed  One  is  dilfused  far  and  wide  through  him.  He  is  beautiful  with  the 
beauty  which  the  Lord  puts  upon  him.  His  "  scent  is  as  the  wine  of  Lebanon." 
And  to  what  cause  is  all  this  fragrance  due  ?  To  the  "  Lord's  planting."  There  i.s 
one  more  step  in  advance  in  the  spiritual  life  in  this  verse  :  "  as  cedar  trees  beside 
the  waters."  As  the  "  lily"  and  "  trees  of  Lebanon"  in  the  passage  in  Hosea,  so 
here.  The  growth  of  the  believer  is  brought  before  us  under  the  loftiness  of  the 
cedar  tree,  its  luxuriance,  and  the  duiability  of  its  wood.  Now,  having  noticed 
■what  the  people  of  God  are  as  seen  in  Jesus,  let  us  mark  their  testimony.  "  He 
shall  pour  the  water  out  of  his  buckets."  The  people  of  God  are  personified,  as  a 
man  carrying  two  pails  overflowing  with  water.  A  "  bucket  "  or  "  vessel  "  is  empty. 
It  can  give  nothing.  It  can  only  receive.  The  "  buckets ''  are  the  "  empty  vessels  " 
to  be  filled  with  "  living  water  "  by  the  Holy  Ghost.  Like  the  two  pails  on  a  man's 
shoulder  which  are  filled  to  the  brim,  he  cannot  move  a  step  without  the  water 
overflowing.  So  with  the  believer  abiding  in  Jesus.  He  is  the  empty  vessel  filled 
by  the  Holy  Ghost.  He  cannot  move  a  step  without  making  that  influence  felt. 
There  will  be  a  trail  of  living  water  in  his  path — a  track  of  light  in  every  step  of  the 
way.  And  oh,  what  empty  places  there  are  within  us  and  around  us  I  Within  us 
— desires,  affections,  longings,  hopes,  aims,  plans ;  without  us — home,  duiies, 
efforts,  awieping  Church,  and  a  dying  world.  Oh,  that  these  "buckets"  were 
filled  with  the  "  living  water  "  !  Then  would  gladness  be  written  as  with  a  sunbeam 
on  evei-y  brow,  and  sunshine  light  up  every  heart.  "  His  seed  shall  be  in  many 
waters."  This  is  the  effect  of  the  outpoured  watei  from  the  buckets  of  the  believer's 
soul.    He  is  made  a  blessing  on  every  side.     "  His  king  shall  be  higher  than  Agag, 


282  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTnATOn.  [cn.\r.x\iv. 

and  his  kingdom  shall  be  exalted."  Christ  the  King  of  the  Jews  is  to  be  "  higher  " 
than  all  the  kings  of  this  world  ;  and  Christ's  kingdom  "  exalted  "  above  all  other 
kingdoms.  All  this  glory  is  tlien  traced  to  the  first  great  act  of  redemption  :  "  God 
brought  him  forth  out  of  Egypt."  Thus  deliverance  from  Egypt  and  future  glory 
are  linked  together.  "  He  hath  as  it  were  the  strength  of  the  buffalo."  Here  is  the 
power  of  God  abiding  with,  and  resting  upon,  those  whom  He  has  redeemed.  Then 
follows,  in  connection  with  their  redemption  from  Egypt,  that  final  triumph  and 
glory.  "  He  shall  eat  up  the  nations  his  enemies,  and  sliall  break  their  bones,  and 
pierce  them  through  with  his  arrows."  This  is  the  foretold  destruction  mentioned 
in  the  New  Testament,  which  awaits  all  the  enemies  of  the  Lord  at  His  coming. 
But  in  the  meantime  the  attitude  of  the  Church  of  Christ  is  one  of  expectation. 
Her  attitude  is  not  one  of  judgment  yet,  but  one  of  grace.  This  is  strikingly 
brought  before  us  in  the  next  clause  ;  "  he  couched,  he  lay  down  as  a  lion."  The 
"  couching  "  of  the  lion  is  always  the  attitude  of  expectation — looking  forward  to 
the  moment  when  he  shall  spring  upon  his  prey.  "  Lying  down  "  indicates  rest. 
The  believer  now  rests  in  Jesus,  and  awaits  His  return.  In  the  meantime  blessing 
is  his  portion — "  blessed  is  he  that  blesseth  thee,  and  cursed  is  he  that  curseth 
thee."  And  we  notice  how  the  blessing  culminates  here.  The  first  was,  "  How 
shall  I  curse,  or  how  shall  I  defy  ?  "  After  it  was,  "  He  hath  blessed,  and  I  cannot 
reverse  it."  Lastly,  it  is  "Blessed  is  he  that  blesseth  thee."  This  last  form  in 
which  Balaam  expresses  himself  shows  us  God's  estimate  of  His  people  Israel. 
"He  that  toucheth  you  toucheth  the  apple  of  His  eye."  (F.  Whitfield,  M.A.) 
Sermon  at  reopeniiig  of  a  church : — I.  Let  us  attempt  to  justify  and  elucidate 
THIS  sacked  exclamation.  The  language  is  proper.  1.  On  account  of  the  author 
of  their  construction.  2.  The  beneficial  effect  of  their  institution.  3.  The 
pleasantness  of  their  unity.  4.  The  joys  of  their  fellowships.  5.  Their  perpetuity, 
and  the  certainty  of  their  increase.     II.  What  ought  to  be  the  effects  peoduced 

UPON  us  BT  SUCH  A  SURVEY  OF  THE  ASSEMBLIES  OF  THE  PEOPLE  OF  GoD.    We 

should  — 1.  Cherish  a  spirit  of  gratitude  for  the  establishment  and  increase  of  these 
tents  of  God.  2.  Shun  all  that  would  impair,  and  diligently  maintain  all  that 
would  secure  the  blessing.  (1)  Guard  against  lukewarmness,  as  that  which  would 
deface  the  beauty  of  ordinances,  and  rob  us  of  the  advantages  we  might  receive  from 
their  celebration.  (2)  Take  care  of  holding  the  truth  in  unrighteousness.  (3)  Be 
cautious  not  to  violate  the  true  spirit  of  love.  (4)  Preserve  the  vigour  of  wholesome, 
salutary  discipline;  so  that  the  testimony  may  be  borne  you  from  on  high,  "I 
know  thy  works,  and  thy  labour,  and  thy  patience,"  &c.  (5)  Follow  up  all  with 
importunate  prayer.  "  Peace  be  within  thy  walls,  &c.  Pray  for  the  peace  of  Jeru- 
salem," &c.  3.  Endeavour  to  increase  the  number  of  those  who  frequent  the 
tabernacles,  and  dwell  in  the  tents  of  Jacob.  Imitate  the  tribes  when  ambulating 
in  the  wilderness.  Eememberthat  you  are  surrounded  by  those  who  have  no  hope. 
Tell  them  plainly  that  you  are  pilgrims  and  stransjers.  Inform  them  of  the 
privileges  you  enjoy  by  the  way  ;  of  the  manna  which  drops  by  your  door;  of  the 
streams  which  flow  from  the  rock  Christ ;  of  the  light  which  guides  your  feet ;  of 
the  cloud  which  screens  you  from  temi:)tation  ;  of  the  victories  you  obtain  over  your 
foes  ;  of  the  prosj^ect  you  have  of  pns-ing  through  Jordan  safely  ;  and  of  the  rich 
land  of  promise  which  you  are  shortly  about  to  enter.  Press  on  them  not  to  linger. 
4.  Anticipate  the  time  when  your  tents  will  be  struck,  and  all  the  ransomed  tribes 
assemble  in  the  tabernacle  above.  These  tents  of  the  Israelites  were  valuable 
as  they  traversed  the  sands  of  Arabia ;  but  they  left  them  when  they  entered 
on  the  rest  which  their  prophets  had  predicted,  and  their  poets  sung.  And 
•what  are  our  temples  ?  They  are  only  preparatoiy  for  the  enjoyments  of  the 
Canaan  above.  May  it  be  your  privilege  to  join  the  tribes  of  the  redeemed  as 
they  go  up  to  Zion  with  everlasting  joy  upon  their  heads!     (J.  Clayton,  M.A.) 

Ver.  9.  Blessed  Is  lie  that  blesseth  thee,  and  cursed  is  he  that  curseth  thee. — 
God  will  he  merciful  to  such  as  be  merciful  to  the  Church  : — God  will  bless  those  that 
do  good  to  His  people,  they  shall  not  lose  their  labour  that  favour  the  Church,  but 
such  as  are  enemies  unto  them  shall  find  God  an  enemy  unto  them.  We  see  how 
God  blessed  the  house  of  Laban  for  Jacob's  sake  (Gen.  xxx.  27) ;  and  the  house  of 
Potiphar  for  Joseph's  sake  (Gen.  xxxix.  3).  Rahab,  the  harlot,  receiving  the  spies 
and  preferring  their  life  before  her  own  life,  was  herself  saved  from  the  common 
destruction.  The  widow  of  Sarepta  giving  hospitality  to  Elijah,  and  offering  him 
part  of  that  poor  pittance  which  was  left  her  and  her  son  in  those  days  of  drought, 
was  with  all  her  family  miraculously  sustained  in  the  famine,  continuing  three 


CHAP.  XXIV.]  NUMni':ns.  283 

years  and  six  months  (1  Kings  xvii.  10).  The  Shunamite  receiving  the  prophet 
Elisha,  making  him  a  chamber,  providing  all  necessaries  for  him.  She  showed 
some  mercy,  but  received  more  mercy  ;  she  ministered  comfort  to  the  prophet,  but 
herself,  received  more  comfort.  1.  First,  God  will  honour  all  those  that  honour 
Him,  He  will  despise  all  those  tliat  despise  Him.  This  is  the  gracious  promise 
that  is  gone  out  of  His  own  mouth,  which  He  cannot  but  verify,  for  He  is  not  as 
man  that  He  should  lie ;  He  is  not  as  the  son  of  man  that  He  should  deceive.  This 
is  it  which  the  Lord  spake  by  the  mouth  and  ministry  of  Samuel  concerning  Eli 
and  his  house  (1  Sam.  ii.  30).  And,  therefore,  they  shall  prosper  that  love  the 
Church  (Psa.  cxxii).  2.  Secondly,  God  hath  appointed  it  to  be  the  end  of  our 
obedience ;  our  mercy  to  others  shall  procure  mercy  upon  ourselves.  This  the 
aptistle  setteth  down  (Kom.  ii.  10).  3.  Thirdly,  mercy,  a  notable  fruit  of  love 
received,  kindleth  the  hearts,  and  inflameth  the  affections  of  God's  people,  both  to 
praise  God  for  them,  and  to  pray  unto  God  for  them  that  have  been  helpful  and 
serviceable  to  the  Church.  The  uses  follow — 1.  Fir.-^t,  from  hence  we  have  the  con- 
firmation of  another  holy  truth  in  our  Christian  religion,  that  merciful,  liberal,  and 
kind  men,  shall  be  surely  blessed.  2.  Secondly,  it  is  our  dutv  to  love  God's  p?ople, 
seeing  such  as  favour  them  do  fare  the  better  for  them.  3.  Thirdly,  hereby  we  are 
warned  to  exhort  one  another  to  this  duty,  and  by  all  means  to  provoke  one  another 
to  mercy,  in  regard  of  the  great  recompense  of  reward  that  is  laid  up  for  merciful 
men.  4.  Lastly,  this  doctrine  is  both  a  great  encouragement  unto  us  in  well  doing 
and  a  great  comfort  in  all  adversities.     (W.  Attersoll.) 

Vers.  10-19.  Balak's  anger  was  kindled  against  Balaam.— 77n?(7nw?  and  BaJak  : — 

1.  The  cause  of  B.UjAk's  anger.  That  B;ilaam  had  not  fulfilled  the  terms  of  his 
contract  (vers.  10,  11).  1.  Consider  the  reason  and  nature  of  the  contract. 
Urgency  of  case.  Great  reputation  of  Balaam.  2.  Consider  the  position  and 
reputation  of  Balaam.  (1)  He  is  called  a  prophet  (2  Pet.  ii.  16).  (2)  God 
held  communication  with  him  (chap.  xxii.  9,  12,  20,  31;  xxiii.  4,  5).  (3)  He 
was  also  a  warrior-chief  (chap.  xxxi.  8).  (4)  He  was  a  man  of  high  gifts  of 
intoUect  and  genius,  besides  having  a  knowledge  of  the  true  God.  3.  Consider  how 
Balaam  had  failed  in  his  contract  (chap,  xxiii.  1-30;  xxiv.  1-9).  II.  Balaam's 
SELF-jcsTiFYiNG  ANSWER  (vcrs.  12,  13).     1.     Was  it  true ?     Yes  (chap.  xxii.  13-18). 

2.  If  true,  why  did  he  leave  home?  He  loved  money  (2  Pet.  ii.  15).  3.  If  God 
commanded  him  to  go  (chap.  xxii.  20),  why  was  he  blamed  for  going  (chap.  xxii. 
22)  ?  (1)  God's  permission  was  based  upon  Balaam's  strong  desire  to  go.  God 
gave  him  up  to  his  own  lust.  (2)  God's  displeasure  arose  from  the  fact  that 
Balaam  was  so  determined  to  go  and  do  that  which  he  was  told  he  must  not  do. 
Sinners  must  not  think  that  their  sin  is  any  the  less  odious  because  God  permits  it. 
III.  Balaam's  pakable  (vers.  14-19).  1.  The  situation.  (1)  Behind  him  lay  the 
vast  expanse  of  desert  extending  to  his  native  Assyria.  (2)  On  his  left  the  red 
mountains  of  Edom  and  Seir.  (3)  Immediately  below  him  la,y  the  vast  encampment 
of  Israel.  (4)  Beyond  thfin,  on  the  west  of  Jordan,  rose  the  hills  of  Palestine— the 
jiromised  land.  2.  The  parable.  (1)  The  condition  of  the  prophet  when  he  had 
the  vision  (ver.  16).  (2)  Theleading  subject  of  the  parable — the  mi2;hty  and  glorious 
King  of  Israel,  (a)  The  prophet  sees  Him  in  person,  (h)  He  is  able  to  distinguish 
His  nationality,  (c)  He  sees  Him  as  a  mighty  conqueror.  (3)  That  this  refers  to 
Christ  is  clear  to  any  one  who  accepts  the  testimony  of  God's  Word.  Les-ons:  1. 
God  intrusts  superior  talents  to  men  who  may  abuse  them.  2.  One  besetting  sin 
may  be  enough  to  dim  the  most  splendid  abilities  and  destroy  the  most  brilliant 
reputation.  3.  Balaam's  failure  to  curse  Israel  is  a  significant  type  of  the 
fact  that  he  wh  m  God  hath  blessed  can  no  man  curse.  (D.  C.  Hufihes,  31. A.) 
Spake  I  not  also  to  thy  messengers. —  Worldly  profit  should  not  withdraw  us  from 
Christian  duties  .-^Matters  of  profit  must  not  carry  us  beyond  our  calling,  we  mu'^t 
not  pursue  them  when  we  have  no  warrant  to  desire  them.  A  notable  example 
hereof  we  have  in  Gideon,  he  had  a  kingdom  offered  unto  him  ;  for  the  men  of  Israel 
said  unto  him,  "Eeign  thou  over  us,  both  thou  and  thy  son,  and  thy  son's  son."  He 
saw  no  calling  from  God  and  therefore  refused  it,  and  betook  himself  to  a  private 
life,  saying  (Judges  viii.  22,  23).  The  like  we  see  in  our  Saviour  Christ,  He  refused 
to  be  made  a  temporal  king  (John  vi.  15).  We  see  the  disciples  of  Christ  left  all, 
and  neglected  the  service  of  themselves,  and  the  seeking  of  their  own  benefit  for  the 
service  of  God  (Matt.  xix.  27).  Whereby  we  see  that  albeit  profits  be  in  time  and 
place  to  be  looked  after,  yet  we  must  all  look  to  have  our  warrant  in  seekmg  for 
them.     The  reasons  remain  to  be  considered,  to  enforce  this  truth,  and  to  gain  our 


284  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxiv. 


affections  to  the  embracing  of  it.  1.  For,  first,  by  too  much  following  the  profits 
of  this  life,  we  may  lose  a  greater  profit.  If  we  should  win  the  world,  and  lose  our 
souls ;  if  we  should  catch  the  riches  of  this  Ufe,  and  crack  the  peace  of  a  good  con- 
science, it  would  prove  in  the  end  a  small  gain  unto  us.  2.  Secondly,  th^  things 
of  this  life  serve  only  for  a  season.  The  hope  that  we  have  is  this — we  look  for  a 
kingdom.  We  cannot  have  a  heaven  in  this  life,  and  another  in  the  life  to  come. 
The  uses  come  now  to  be  stood  upon.  1.  First,  we  see  it  is  a  dangerous  bait  to  be 
in  love  with  the  world.  2.  Secondly,  we  see  that  our  own  private  respects  are  not 
the  chief  things  that  we  must  respect,  but  seek  a  sanctified  use  of  the  blessings  of 
this  life,  and  a  warrant  to  our  consciences  for  the  right  using  of  them.  These 
blessings  of  God  become  curses  unto  us  unless  we  use  them  lawfully.  3.  Lastly, 
this  doctrine  serveth  to  reprove  those  that  esteem  earthly  things  above  heavenly, 
and  mind  their  profits  more  than  their  salvation.  These  invert  the  course  of 
nature  and  turn  all  thii.gs  upside  down,  they  set  the  earth  above  the  heavens,  and 
thrust  down  the  heavens  beneath  the  earth.  This  is  like  that  confusion  and  disorder 
which  the  wise  man  speaketh  of  (Eccles.  x.  6,  7).     (W.  Attersoll.) 

Vers.  17-19.  I  shall  see  Him,  but  not  now :  I  shall  behold  Him,  but  not  nigh. — 

BalaavVs  vision: — As  I  read  these  words  I  seem  to  look  on  the  scene  described. 
What  do  I  see  ?  I  see  the  top  of  a  wild  mountain  range,  and  I  see  altars  smoking 
with  sacrifices.  Hard  by  stands  Balak,  with  many  slaves  bearing  costly  gifts, 
gold,  and  precious  stones,  and  spices,  and  garments.  A  little  apart  is  Balaam,  that 
"  strange  mixture  of  a  man."  And  now,  as  he  gazes  from  the  high  places  of  Baal, 
and  the  altars  of  idolatry,  he  sees  far  below  Israel  abiding  in  their  tents.  There  are 
the  banners  of  the  different  tribes  waving  in  the  wind ;  the  eyes  of  Balaam  are 
opened,  and  he  recalls  the  past  of  Israel's  history,  and  he  foresees  the  future. 
And  now,  as  we  turn  aside  from  this  unwilling  prophet  who  utters  a  blessing, 
in  every  word  of  which  there  was  breathed  a  curse,  what  lessons  are  there 
for  us  of  to-day.  1.  First,  we  learn  the  awful  danger  of  trifling  with  conscience, 
the  whisper  of  the  Holy  Spirit  within  us.  Balaam  knew  what  was  right,  yet 
desired  to  do  wrong.  2.  We  learn,  too,  the  sin  of  trying  to  make  a  bargain,  or 
compromise,  with  God.  Hundreds  of  people  are  trying  to  do  this,  endeavouring 
to  serve  God  a  little,  and  the  world  a  good  deal.  They  profess  to  obey  God,  but 
only  in  the  matters  which  they  choose.  3.  We  learn,  also,  from  the  story  of  Balaam's 
sin,  never  to  neglect  a  plain  duty  for  the  sake  of  earthly  gain.  {H.  J.  Wilmot- 
Buxton,  M.A.)  Two  ways  of  seeing  Christ: — Commentators  have  differed  as  to 
the  way  of  explaining  the  pronoun  "him,"  some  referring  it  to  Israel.  We  need 
scarcely  say  that  we  agree  with  those  who  refer  to  Him  who  is  Jacob's  star  and 
sceptre.  False  as  his  heart  was,  the  seer  saw  Him  in  the  spirit  of  prophecy,  and 
felt  that  a  time  would  come  when  he  would  actually  see  Him.  But  the  time  when 
Jacob's  Star  would  arise  was  not  come,  it  was  distant,  and  so  he  adds,  "  but  not 
now;  I  shall  behold  Him,  but  not  nigh."  This  seems  to  be  the  obvious  meaning 
of  the  words.  But  if  you  look  at  them  in  connection  with  Balaam's  state  of  mind, 
do  they  not  contain  a  deeper  and  more  awful  meanirg  ?  Are  they  not  prophetic  of 
himself,  as  well  as  of  Chtist? — of  his  own  awful  end,  as  well  as  of  Israel's  great 
destiny?  "  I  shall  see  Him  !  "  Yes,  when  He  comes  again  ;  but  does  he  express 
hope  that  he  will  share  in  the  Bedeemer's  glory  and  Israel's  blessedness  ?  No,  there 
is  no  word  of  hope,  no  expression  of  desire,  as  in  the  words  of  Job,  "  For  I  know 
that  my  Eedeemer  liveth,"  &c.  "  My  Kedeemer  1  "  says  the  afflicted  saint,  with  an 
appropriating  faith  ;  "  whom  I  shall  see  for  myself,"  he  adds,  in  hallowed  longing; 
but  all  that  the  "  unrighteous  "  prophet  could  say  was,  "I  shall  behold  Him,  but 
not  nigh."  In  what  spirit  do  we  think  of  that  day  of  which  these  men  speak  ? 
All  of  us,  without  any  exception,  will  see  Christ.  "Every  eye  shall  see  Him." 
But  how  shall  we  see  Him — nigh,  or  afar  off  ?  Like  Job,  or  like  Balaam  ?  Has 
it  been  given  us  to  say  with  the  first,  "  My  Eedeemer — mine,  for  He  died  for  me  "  ? 
Or  do  we  feel — must  we  feel,  that  we  have  no  part  in  His  salvation;  and  that 
■when  we  see  Him,  it  may  be  "  afar  off."  (G.  Wagner.)  A  Star  out  of  Jacob. — 
Balaavi's  prophecy  of  Christ  as  Star  and  Sceptre : — Balaam,  moved  by  the  Spirit, 
sets  forth  Jesus  in  this  prophecy  in  a  twofold  character — as  the  Giver  of  light,  and 
as  exercising  kingly  power.  I.  First,  as  the  Giver  of  light  :  "  There  shall  come 
a  Star  out  of  Jacob."  We  all  know  that  the  Bedeemer  is  more  than  once  compared 
in  Scripture  to  the  sun  (Mai.  iv.  2 ;  Luke  i.  78).  It  is  not,  perhaps,  quite  so  easy  to 
see  why  Christ  is  compared  to  a  "  star  "  ;  for  as  the  stars  shine  with  a  borrowed 
light,  they  seem  more  suited  to  be  illustrations  of  the  followers  of  Jesus  than  of  tho 


CHAP.  XXIV.]  NUMBERS.  285 

Saviour  Himself.  And  so  they  are  used  in  Eev.  i.  20  of  ministers:  "The  seven 
stars  are  the  angels  of  the  seven  Churches";  and  by  St.  Paul  of  all  Christians  (Phil, 
ii.  1-i).  Applied  to  Christ,  it  may  be  to  teach  us  how  Jesus  shines  through  all  the  long 
night  of  the  Church's  sorrows.  The  sun  dissipates  darkness ;  where  it  shines,  dark- 
ness ceases.  It  is  so  with  the  rule  of  sin.  Into  whatever  heart  Christ  shines, 
there  the  power  of  sin  is  broken.  The  star  gives  light  without  dissipating  darkness. 
It  guides  the  wanderer's  feet.  So  Jesus  gives  light  in  the  night  of  affliction.  He 
does  not  altotrether  remove  it,  nor  exempt  His  people  from  suffering.  But  they  are 
not  left  iu  utter  darkness.  There  is  a  star  in  the  heavens  above,  so  bright  that  it 
can  penetrate  the  darkest  cloud,  and  gladden  with  its  light  the  loneliness  of  sorrow. 
But  St.  John  teaches  us  something  more  about  this  star  when  he  records  the  words 
of  the  glorified  Eedeemer,  "  I  am  the  root  and  the  offspring  of  David,  and  the 
bright  and  morning  Star"  (Rev.  xxii.  16).  And  why  the  morning  star?  The  morning 
star  is  the  last  to  disappear.  It  still  continues  to  shine  when  the  rays  of  the  sun 
have  overwhelmed  every  other  light ;  and  thus  it  is  a  beautiful  emblem  of  Christ. 
Is  Christ  Jesus  your  Star,  your  morning  Star  ?  Is  it  to  His  light  that  you  look  ? 
And  if  any  earthborn  cloud  interrupts  His  light  from  your  soul,  do  you  look  through 
the  cloud,  and  wait,  not  impatiently,  but  earnestly,  for  its  removal  ?  Those  false 
lights  with  which  we  encompass  ourselves,  the  sparks  of  our  own  kindling,  will 
certainly  all  go  out,  and  great  will  be  the  consternation  of  those  who  will  then  be 
left  in  darkness.  But  if  you  are  looking  to  Jesus,  guided  by  His  hght,  then  your 
path  will  get  brighter  and  brighter,  until  it  ends  in  the  perfect  light  of  His  presence, 
a  height  to  which  no  cloud  can  rise.  But  there  is  one  thing  more  that  we  muft 
notice  with  regard  to  this  Star.  Balaam  tells  us  the  point  from  whence  he  saw  it 
arise.  "  There  shall  come,"  he  says,  "  a  Star  out  of  Jacob."  This  points  us  to 
the  humanity  of  Jesus.  All  the  brightness  of  the  Godhead  came  to  us  through  the 
humanity  of  Jesus.  II.  But  let  us  pass  on  to  the  second  part,  the  kingly  office 
OP  otJR  Eedeemer  :  "  And  a  Sceptre  shall  rise  out  of  Israel."  It  may  be  thought, 
perhaps,  in  consequence  of  the  words  that  follow,  "  and  shall  smite  the  corners  of 
Moab,  and  destroy  all  the  children  of  Sheth,"  that  this  prophecy  was  fulfilled  in 
the  time  of  David,  when  the  boundaiies  of  Israel  were  so  much  enlarged,  and  their 
enemies  overcome.  But  we  ought  to  remember  that  just  as  the  prophets  and  priests 
of  Israel  were  types  of  Jesus  as  Prophet  and  Priest,  so  were  its  kings  types  of  Him 
who  was  and  is  a  King  of  kings.  Jesus  was  a  King  in  the  days  of  His  suffering  on 
earth.  It  was  under  the  direction  of  God's  providence  that  Pilate,  though  he  meant 
it  not  so,  wrote  the  title,  "  Jesus  of  Nazareth,  the  King  of  the  Jews."  The  sceptre 
was  in  His  hand  ;  but  He  did  not  then  put  forth  His  great  power  and  reign.  His 
kingly  office  was  held  for  a  time  in  abeyance.  True  it  is  that  Christ  does  reign.  He 
reigns  in  the  hearts  of  His  willing  people,  and  over  a  reluctant  world.  But  this  is 
the  time  of  His  patience  and  long-suffering.  The  hour  is  not  yet  come  for  the  full 
manifestation  of  His  kingly  office  and  power.  Does  He  reign  in  our  hearts, 
destroying  and  keeping  under  our  spiritual  enemies  ?  III.  But  there  is  one  point 
more  in  our  text  which  we  must  not  leave  unnoticed,  and  that  is,  the  consequence 

OF  THE  COMING  OF  THE    StaR,  AND  RISING  OF    THE  ScEPTRE — A  POWER  GIVEN    tO    ISKAEL 

TO  OVERCOME  HIS  ENEMIES.  Those  enemies  are  described,  not  generally,  but  very 
minutely.  Moab  is  mentioned  first,  because,  headed  by  Balak,  the  Moabites  were 
then  endeavouring  to  destroy  Israel.  The  expression,  "  Smite  the  corners  (or  sides) 
of  Moab,"  signifies  an  entire  destruction,  perpetrated  along  the  whole  compass  of 
its  dominions.  The  next  expression,  "  The  children  of  Sheth,"  has  puzzled  com- 
mentators. Some  have  taken  it  as  a  proper  name,  to  designate  one  of  Adam's 
sons;  but  it  is  impossible  to  extract  any  good  meaning  from  it  if  so  understood. 
The  Hebrew  word  has,  however,  lately  been  shown  to  be  the  contracted  form  of 
another  word  which  signifies  "tumult";  and  this  is  strongly  confirmed  by  a 
reference  to  a  remarkable  prophecy  of  Jeremiah  concerning  Moab,  in  which  we  can 
scarcely  fail  to  observe  an  allusion  to  this  prophecy  of  Balaam  (Jer.  xlviii.  42).  The 
enemies  of  Israel  were  called  the  children  of  tumult,  because  they  were  ever  restless ; 
restless  in  themselves,  because  they  knew  not  Israel's  God,  and  restless  as  neigh- 
bours, because  they  would  give  Israel  no  peace.  Next  to  Moab,  Edom  is  mentioned. 
Then  follow  predictions  of  judgments  on  Amalek,  Israel's  first  enemy,  on  the 
Kenites,  strong  as  they  seemed  to  be  in  their  mountain-passes,  on  Asshur  and 
Eber ;  and  so  terrible  did  these  judgments  appear  to  the  seer,  that  he  could  not 
help  exclaiming,  "  Alas  1  who  shall  live  when  God  doeth  this  ?  "  But  all  these  are 
but  typical  of  the  greater  enemies  with  which  we  have  to  contend.  The  "sons  of 
tumult "  encompass  us  about.     Satan,  knowing  that  his  time  is  short,  is  ever  busy. 


286  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxv. 

The  world,  so  restless  because  it  knows  not  Christ,  pours  in  its  influences  upon  as. 
The  old  man  within  us,  though  crucified,  is  ever  strugt^ling  for  victory.  And  under 
these  influences  our  very  relatives  and  friends  may  hinder  us  on  our  way,  just  as 
Edom  did  Israel.  What  must  we  do  to  overcome  ?  We  must  fix  our  eye  upon 
Jacob's  Star,  the  bright  morning  Star.  We  must  cl'ng  to  the  sceptre  of  Jesus. 
Eemember  that  the  enemies  of  God's  peoi  le  are  already  doomed  to  destruction. 
Yet  a  little  while,  and  if  you  are  Christ's,  Satan  will  be  bruised  under  your  feet. 
The  world  will  not  attract  or  frighten  you.  The  old  man  will  not  struggle  and 
weary  you.      (Ibid.)  The  Star  of  Jacob  : — Our  Lord,  then,  is  compared  to  a 

star,  and  we  shall  have  seven  reasons  to  assign  for  this.  I.  He  is  called  a  star 
as  THE  SYMBOL  OF  GOVERNMENT.  You  wiU  obssrve  how  evidently  it  is  connected  with 
a  sceptre  and  with  a  conqueror.  Jacob  was  to  be  blessed  with  a  valiant  leader  who 
should  become  a  triumphant  sovereign.  Very  frequently  in  oriental  literature  their 
great  men,  and  especially  their  great  deliverers,  are  called  stars.  Behold,  then,  our 
Lord  Jesus  Christ  as  the  Star  of  Jacob.  He  is  the  Captain  of  His  people,  the 
Leader  of  the  Lord's  hosts,  the  King  in  Jeshurun,  God  over  all,  glorious  and  blessed 
for  ever  !  1.  We  may  say  of  Jesus  in  this  respect  that  He  has  an  authority  which 
He  has  inherited  by  right.  He  made  all  things,  and  by  Him  all  things  consist.  It 
i.s  but  just  that  He  should  rule  over  all  things.  2.  Our  Lurd  as  a  star  has  an 
authority  which  He  has  valiantly  won.  Wherever  Christ  is  King  He  has  had  a 
great  and  a  stern  fight  for  it.  3.  This  kingdom  of  Christ,  wherever  it  is,  is  most 
beneficent.  Wherever  this  star  of  government  shines,  its  rays  scatter  blessing. 
Jesus  is  no  tyrant.  He  rules  not  by  oppression.  The  force  He  uses  is  the  force  of 
love.  II.  The  star  .is  the  image  of  brightness.  Our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  is  bright- 
ness itself.  The  star  is  but  a  poor  setting  forth  of  His  ineffable  splendour.  As 
Mediator,  exalted  on  high,  enjoying  the  reward  of  His  pains,  He  is  bright  indeed. 
1.  Observe,  that  our  Lord  as  a  star  is  a  bright  particular  star  in  the  matter  of 
holiness.  In  Him  was  no  sin.  2.  As  a  star,  He  shines  also  with  the  light  of 
knowledge.  Moses  was,  as  it  were,  but  a  mist,  but  Christ  is  the  Prophet  of  light. 
"  The  law  was  given  by  Moses  " — a  thing  of  types  and  shadows — "but  grace  and 
truth  come  by  Jesus  Christ."  If  any  man  be  taught  in  the  things  of  God,  he  must 
derive  bis  liglit  from  the  Star  of  Bethlebem.  III.  Thirdly,  our  Lord  is  compared 
to  a  star  to  bring  out  the  fact  that  He  is  the  pattern  of  constancy.  Ten  thousand 
changes  have  been  wrought  since  the  world  began,  but  the  stars  have  not  changed. 
Thei-e  tbey  remain.  So  with  our  Lord  Jesus.  He  is  the  same  yesterday,  to-day, 
and  for  ever.  What  the  projDhets  and  apostles  saw  in  Him,  we  can  see  in  Him,  and 
what  He  was  to  them,  that  He  is  to  us,  and  shall  be  to  generations  yet  unborn. 
Hundreds  of  us  may  be  looking  at  the  same  star  at  the  same  time  without  knowing 
it.  There  is  a  meeting-place  for  many  eyes.  We  may  be  drifted,  some  of  us,  to 
Australia,  or  to  Canada,  or  to  the  United  States,  or  we  may  be  sailing  across  the 
great  deep,  but  we  shall  see  the  stars  there.  It  is  true  that  on  the  other  side  of  the 
world  we  shall  see  another  set  of  stars,  but  the  stars  themselves  are  always  still  the 
same.  As  far  as  we  in  this  atmosphere  are  concerned,  we  shall  look  upon  some 
star.  So,  wherever  we  may  be,  we  look  to  the  same  Christ.  Jesus  Christ  is  still 
the  same,  the  same  to  all  His  people,  the  same  in  all  place-,  the  same  for  ever  and 
ever.  Well,  therefore,  may  He  be  compared  to  those  bright  stars  that  shine  now 
as  they  did  of  old  and  change  not.  IV.  In  the  fourth  place,  we  may  trace  this 
comparison  of  our  Lord  to  a  star  as  the  fountain  of  influence.  The  old  astro- 
logers used  to  believe  very  strongly  in  the  influence  of  the  stars  upon  men's  minds. 
But  whether  there  be  an  influence  in  the  stars  or  not,  as  touching  tliis  world,  I 
know  there  is  great  influence  in  Christ  Jesus.  He  is  the  foantain  of  all  holy  influ- 
ences among  the  sons  of  men.  Where  this  star  shines  upon  the  graves  of  men  who 
are  dead  in  sin  they  begin  to  live.  Where  the  beam  of  this  star  shines  upon  peor 
imprisoned  spirits,  their  chains  drop  off,  the  captive  leaps  to  lose  his  chains.  When 
this  star  shines  upon  the  backslider,  he  begins  to  mend  his  ways,  and  to  follow,  like 
the  eastern  sages,  its  light  till  he  finds  his  Saviour  once  more.  V.  In  the  fifth 
place,  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  may  be  compared  to  a  star  as  a  source  of  guidance. 
There  are  some  of  the  stars  tbat  are  extremelj'  useful  to  sailors.  I  scarcely  know 
how  else  the  great  wide  sea  would  be  navigated,  especially  if  it  were  not  for  the 
Polar  Star.  Jesus  is  the  Polar  Star  to  us.  VI.  Our  Lord  is  compared  to  a  star, 
surely,  as  the  object  of  wonder.  We  used  to  think  when  we  were  little  ones  that 
t)ie  stars  were  holes  pricked  in  the  skies,  through  which  the  light  of  heaven  shone, 
or  that  they  were  little  pieces  of  gold-dust  that  God  had  strewn  about.  We  do  not 
think  so  now ;  we  understand  that  they  are  much  greater  than  they  look  to  be.    So, 


CHAP,  XXIV.]  NUMBEES.  287 

when  we  were  carnal,  and  did  not  know  King  Jesus,  we  esteemed  Him  to  be  very 
much  hke  anybody  else,  but  now  we  begin  to  know  Him,  we  find  out  that  He  is 
much  greater,  infinitely  greater  than  we  thought  He  was.  And  as  we  grow  in  grace, 
we  find  Him  to  be  more  glorious  still.  VH.  Our  Lord  is  compared  to  a  star,  as  He  is 
THE  HEiuLD  OF  GLORY.  The  bright  and  morning  star  foretells  that  the  sun  is  on  its 
way  to  gladden  the  earth  with  its  light.  Wherever  Jesus  comes  He  is  a  great 
prophet  of  good.  Let  Him  come  into  a  heart,  and,  as  soon  as  He  appears,  you 
may  rest  assured  that  there  is  a  life  of  eternity  and  joy  to  come.  Let  Jesus  Christ 
come  into  a  family,  and  wuat  changes  He  makes  there.  Let  Him  be  preached  with 
power  in  any  town  or  city,  and  what  a  herald  of  good  things  He  is  there.  To  the 
whole  world  Christ  has  proclaimed  glad  tidings.  His  coming  has  been  fraught  with 
benedictions  to  the  sous  of  men.  (C  H.  Spurgeon.)  Balaaiii's  prophecy: — I. 
Christ's  predicted  human  ancestry,  "  Out  of  Jacob,"  &c.  He  was  the  "  Lord 
from  heaven "  ;  but  He  came  through  the  lowly  door  of  human  birth.  1.  His 
ancestry  was  chosen  by  God.  That  there  was  a  fitness  we  cannot  doubt ;  what  it 
consisted  in  we  do  not  know.  2.  Its  destinies  were  guided  by  God  with  a  view  to 
this  great  consummation.  This  explains  many  a  dark  passage  in  Israel's  history. 
So  when  we  can  view  God's  leading  of  us  from  the  result,  aU  will  be  clear.  3.  It 
was  a  lowly  ancestry.  Contrast  with  the  great  ancient  powers.  4.  It  was  by  no 
means  a  pure  and  worthy  ancestry.  The  clean  came  out  of  an  unclean.  Endless 
hope  for  man  in  that.  II.  The  twofold  representation  of  Christ's  reign.  1.  A 
Star.  In  its  guidance.  (1)  Universal  and  impartial.  For  all  under  the  heavens. 
(2)  Abiding.  No  earthly  power  or  malice  can  quench  its  light.  (3)  Leads  in  the 
darkness.  Burns  the  brighter  the  greater  the  darkness.  (4)  Unobtrusive.  You 
must  watch  and  follow.  2.  A  Sceptre.  (1)  Strong  to  protect  His  friends.  (2) 
Powerful  to  crush  His  foes.  {Clerical  World.)  The  Star  of  Jacob  and  the  Sceptre 
of  Israel: — I.  The  Stab  of  Jacob  or  Israel.  1.  Christ  is  a  Star  to  give  Divine 
light  and  guidance  to  the  soul.  2.  Christ  is  a  Star  of  glory  for  His  Church,  and  of 
conquest  over  all  His  foes.  II.  Christ  is  the  Sceptre  of  Israel,  or  of  the  Church 
OF  God.  The  sceptre  is  the  emblem  in  all  realms  and  ages  of  royal  authority.  Now 
Christ  holds  the  sci^ptre  of  royal  power  in  two  ways.  1.  As  the  Divine  Lawgiver 
and  Euler  of  His  Church  for  government.  2.  For  victory  and  eternal  glory.  {J, 
G.  Angley,  M.A.)  Balnam  and  the  Star  of  Jacob  : — I.  The  deliverer  of  this 
prophecy,  II.  The  Person  foretold  in  this  prophecy.  1.  A  star  may  be  conceived 
an  apt  emblem  of  Jesus,  from  the  loftiness  and  dignity  of  its  position.  Lofty  as  is 
the  sphere  of  the  common  star,  infinitely  loftier  is  the  mediatorial  range  of  the 
circuit  of  Christ,  the  Star  of  Bethlehem.  In  His  course  as  a  Saviour,  He  completely 
overtops  with  His  excellency  all  length,  and  breadth,  and  depth,  and  height — all 
time — all  eternity.  2.  A  star,  also,  is  an  apt  emblem  of  Jesus,  inasmuch  as  it  helps 
to  relieve  the  monotonous  aspect  of  the  gloom  of  night  with  its  brilliant  presence. 
How  undefined  would  be  the  face  of  night  without  the  stars  !  It  is  the  constant 
twinklings  that  are  emitted  from  the  various  groups  of  stars  above  our  heads  which 
convert  the  dulness  of  night  into  positive  cheerfulness.  And  is  not  Jesus  the  Star 
that  gilds  the  dark  night  of  affliction  with  the  blessings  of  His  spiritual  presence  ? 
3.  How  wonderful  ia  it  that  He  generally  reserves  the  disclosure  of  His  unsearchable 
ways  to  His  chosen  until  the  darkest  hour  of  the  night  of  tribulation  !  But  Jesus, 
also,  is  aptly  represented  under  the  figure  of  a  star,  as  being  set  forth  to  the  world 
at  large  as  a  sign  from  heaven.  To  some  He  shines  far  off,  as  the  star  of  better 
days  to  come ;  to  more  as  the  star  of  ill  omen  and  wrath  from  on  high  to  them  that 
are  disobedient  and  care  not  for  the  truth.  HI.  The  purport  of  this  prophecy. 
(R.  Jones,  B.A.)  Balaaiii's  vision  : — It  is  evident  that  the  star  and  the  sceptre  are 
to  be  taken  as  emblems  or  types  of  some  prince  or  warrior  ;  for  it  is  a  living  form 
which  Balaam  first  represenis  himself  as  beholding,  though  he  immediately  pro- 
ceeds to  describe  the  being  under  images  drawn  from  the  inanimate  creation.  And 
that  the  star  and  sceptre  did  but  figure  some  illustrious  person  is  yet  more  clear 
from  what  instantly  follows,  seeing  that  the  deeds  of  a  conqueror  are  ascribed  to 
him  by  the  prophet — "  and  shall  smite  the  corners  of  Moab,  and  destroy  all  the 
children  of  Sheth."  The  successes  of  this  potentate  are  then  more  fully  stated — 
"  And  Edom  shall  be  a  possession,  Seir  also  shall  be  a  possession  for  his  enemies." 
And  the  prophecy,  so  far  as  we  are  now  to  consider  it,  is  shut  up  in  the  declaration, 
that  the  warrior  figured  by  the  star  and  the  sceptre  should  not  be  alone  in  his  con- 
flict, but  should  be  associated  with  the  people  from  whom  he  was  to  arise,  "  Israel 
shall  do  valiantly."  And  who,  think  ye, is  this  leader  or  prince  to  represent?  The 
first  opinion  is,  that  it  was  David  whom  Balaam  foresaw  and  foretold  ;  the  second, 


288  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxiv. 

that  it  was  Christ.  And  these  opinions  may  both  be  c  )rrect.  It  is  very  common 
for  prophecies  to  have  a  double  fulfihnent.  The  first  when  they  are  taken  in  a 
somewhat  restricted  sense ;  the  second  when  they  are  taken  in  their  largest  sense. 
And  this  is  peculiarly  the  case  when  an  individual  is  himself  the  type  of  a  more 
illustrious  ;  and  when  therefore  it  may  naturally  be  expected  that  his  actions  serve 
also  as  predictions  of  those  of  his  antitype.  Now  it  is  not  necessary  that  we  should 
show  you  that  a  king  such  as  David  might  be  fitly  represented  under  the  emblem  of 
a  star  and  a  sceptre.  This  at  least  will  be  immediately  admitted  in  regard  of  the 
sceptre ;  for  the  sceptre  being  that  which  a  king  holds  and  sways,  suggests  neces- 
sarily the  idea  of  a  royal  ruler  or  potentate.  And  if  we  cannot  affirm  quite  the 
same  of  the  star,  we  know  that,  in  the  imagery  of  Scripture,  stars  are  put  for  the 
leading  men  of  a  country — those  most  conspicuous  in  the  political  firmament :  so 
that  when  great  convulsions  are  to  be  delineated — those  agitations  of  society  which 
confound  all  orders  and  ranks — it  is  by  such  emblems  as  that  of  the  stars  falling 
from  the  heavens  that  the  overthrow  of  princes  and  grandees  was  commonly  repre- 
sented. We  turn  then  to  the  things  said  to  be  done  by  the  being  thus  figuratively 
described  ;  and  in  these  we  may  certainly  recognise  the  actions  of  David.  It  is 
affirmed  of  the  predicted  king  that  he  shall  "  smite  the  corners  of  Moab,  and 
destroy  all  the  children  of  Sheth" ;  Sheth  (according  to  the  best  interpreters)  having 
been  the  name  of  a  great  Moabitrsh  prince.  This  affirmation  (if  Moab  be  literally 
understood)  requires  that  the  ruler  of  Israel  should  lay  waste  the  country  in  which 
Balaam  then  stood ;  and  so  far  the  prediction  was  undoubtedly  accomplished  by 
David.  For  you  read  in  the  Second  Book  of  Samuel — "  David  smote  Moab,  and  he 
measured  them  with  a  line,  casting  them  down  to  the  ground  ;  even  with  two  lines 
measured  he  to  put  to  death,  and  with  one  full  line  to  keep  alive :  and  so  the 
Moabites  became  David's  servants,  and  brought  gifts."  It  is  next  said  "  Edom 
shall  be  a  possession  "  ;  and  you  find  it  stated  of  David  in  the  very  chapter  from 
which  we  have  just  quoted,  "  David  put  garrisons  in  Syria  of  Damascus ;  and  the 
Syrians  became  servants."  As  to  what  follows — "  Seir  also  shall  be  a  possession 
for  his  enemies  " — it  seems  to  be  only  a  repetition  of  the  former  clause ;  for  Seir 
was  the  name  given  to  some  parts  of  the  country  of  the  Edomites.  So  that  the 
prophecy — a  prophecy  verified  by  the  historical  facts  already  adduced,  is  that 
David's  occupation  of  the  land  would  be  so  complete  that  he  should  have  possession 
of  its  fastnesses  and  heights.  We  need  scarcely  add  that  the  remaining  words  of 
the  text,  "  Israel  shall  do  valiantly,"  apply  thoroughly  to  the  people  over  whom 
David  ruled ;  for  the  nation  became  eminently  warlike  under  so  illustrious  a  leader, 
and  distinguished  itself  by  courage  in  the  field.  And  thus  we  may  fairly  say  that 
if  David  were  represented  by  the  star  and  the  sceptre,  his  registered  actions  and 
achievements  correspond  with  sufficient  accuracy  to  the  prophetic  delineation.  But 
we  doubt  whether  this  accomplishment  of  the  prophecy  can  seem  to  any  of  you 
commensurate  with  the  grandeur  of  the  diction  with  which  it  is  conveyed.  We 
thus  bring  you  to  the  most  important  part  of  our  subject.  We  are  to  Hpply  the 
prophecy  to  Cbrist,  and  examine  whether  there  be  not  a  special  fitness  in  the 
emblems  of  the  star  and  the  sceptre,  when  considered  as  designating  the  Bedeemer  ; 
and  whether  the  smiting  of  Moab  and  Edom  do  not  aptly  represent  His  victories 
and  His  triumphs.  Indeed,  so  usual  was  it  to  associate  the  promised  Christ  with 
a  star,  or  to  take  the  star  as  His  emblem,  that  we  read  of  an  impostor  in  the  days 
of  the  emperor  Adrian,  wishing  to  pass  himself  off  for  the  Messiah,  assumed  a  title 
which  signifies  The  Son  of  the  Star  ;  meaning  thereby  to  announce  himself  as  the 
star  which  Balaam  had  seen  afar  off.  But  admitting  that  the  emblem  of  the  star 
is  employed  in  designating  Christ,  is  there  any  special  appropriateness  in  such  an 
emblem  ?  We  reply  at  once  that  everything  which  has  to  do  with  light  may  fitly  be 
taken  as  an  image  of  Christ.  There  is  nothing  which  so  fitly  represents  the  moral 
condition  of  the  world  when  Christ  appeared  on  earth  as  darkness.  His  office 
cannot  be  better  represented  than  when  He  is  exhibited  under  figures  derived  from 
the  nature  and  the  agency  of  light.  But  yet,  why  describe  Him  as  a  star,  which 
does  little  towards  irradiating  a  benighted  creation  ?  Why  not  rather  take  the  sun 
as  His  emblem  ?  He  will  be  a  sun  to  His  Church  throughout  the  heavenly  states : 
but  He  is  ouly  as  a  star  during  the  existing  dispensation.  And  may  not  this,  indeed, 
be  most  truly  affirmed  of  a  state  in  which  at  best  "  we  see  through  a  glass  darkly," 
and  can  "  know  but  in  part "  ?  The  night  is  yet  upon  us,  though  that  nigbt  may  be 
far  spent ;  but  it  is  no  longer  the  starless  night  which  it  was  ere  the  Bedeemer 
brought  Ufe  and  immortality  to  light  by  His  gospel.  A  star— a  morning  star  has 
occupied  our  horizon,  and  the  tempest-tossed  barque,  in  danger  of  everlasting  ship- 


CHAP.  XXIV.]  NUMBERS.  289 

wreck,  may  steer  itself  by  the  light  of  that  star  to  the  haven  where  it  would  be,  and 
where  there  is  to  be  no  more  night,  though  no  more  son.  Christianity,  as  set  up  in 
the  world,  is  but  in  its  twilight.  The  night  is  still  unbroken  over  a  vast  portion  of 
our  globe;  and  even  where  revelation  has  been  receiveJ,  we  must  rather  speak  of 
htreaks  like  those  on  the  eastern  sky,  whose  gold  and  purple  prophesy  of  morning, 
than  those  rich  full  lustres  which  flood  creation  when  the  sun  has  reached  the 
zenith.  On  every  account,  therefore,  is  our  Redeemer  fitly  emblemed  by  the  figure 
which  He  applied  to  Himself — the  emblem  of  the  bright  and  morning  star.  And 
surely  we  need  not  say  much  to  prove  to  you  that  the  emblem  of  the  sceptre  is  equally 
appropriate.  You  know  that  in  Christ  are  combined  the  offices  of  Prophet,  Priest,  and 
King.  But  admitting  the  appropriateness  of  the  emblems  thus  given  to  Christ,  we 
have  yet  to  examine  whether  the  predicted  actions  were  such  as  to  be  ascribed  to  the 
Redeemer.  We  have  already  shown  you  that  if  Moab  and  Edom  are  to  be  literally 
taken — that  if  they  designate  countries  anciently  so  called — there  are  recorded  events 
in  the  annals  of  the  Jews  which  may  be  fairly  considered  as  having  accomplished 
the  prediction.  Now  this  is,  of  course,  upon  the  supposition  that  the  star  and  the 
sceptre  represent  David  or  some  other  Jewish  prince,  and  will  not  hold  when  Chiist 
is  regarded  as  the  subject  of  the  prophecy.  We  need  not  say  that  Christ  never  laid 
waste  the  literal  Moab  and  Edom ;  and  we  may  add  that  there  is  nothing  in  Scrip- 
ture to  lead  us  to  suppose  that  the  countries  formerly  so  called  are  hereafter  to  be 
specially  visited  by  His  vengeance.  But  you  cannot  be  ignorant  that  it  is  common 
in  the  Bible  to  take  a  name  which  has  belonged  to  some  great  foe  of  God,  and  to 
use  it  of  others  whose  wickedness  is  their  only  connection  with  the  parties  originally 
so  called.  Eilom  and  Moab  are  the  names  which  prophecy  gives  to  the  enemies  of 
the  Church,  who  are  to  perish  beneath  the  judgments  with  which  that  sun  shall  be 
saturated,  when  every  baser  light  is  to  be  lost  in  the  star,  and  every  other  empire  in 
that  of  the  sceptre.  And,  therefore,  in  predicting  the  desolati>n  of  Moab  and  Edom, 
Balaam  may  be  regarded  as  predicting  the  final  overthrow  of  all  the  power  of  anti- 
christ, that  a  clear  scene  may  be  swept  for  the  erection, of  the  kingdom  of  Christ 
and  His  saints.  The  sign  of  the  Son  of  Man  is  yet  to  be  seen  in  the  heavens,  where 
it  was  beheld  by  Bala^tm,  from  the  summit  of  Peor.  I  know  not  what  that  sign 
shall  be  ;  perhaps  again  the  star — fearful  meteor  ! — like  that  which  hung  over  the 
fated  Jerusalem,  boding  its  destruction  ;  perhaps  again  the  sceptre — brilliant  con- 
stellation ! — burning  witti  majesty  and  betokening  the  extinction  of  all  meaner 
royalty ;  perhaps  the  Cross,  as  it  appeared  to  the  Roman — aye,  when  he  was  taught 
to  know  the  G'  id  of  battles,  and  to  place  Christianity  upon  the  throne  of  the  Cassars. 
But  whatever  the  sign,  the  Being  whose  emblazonry  it  exhibits,  shall  come  to  deal 
out  a  long-delayed  vengeance  on  tribes  that  have  refused  to  wnlk  in  His  light  and 
submit  to  His  rule.  Nnw  it  is  to  be  observed  that  though  we  have  thus  referred  the 
close  of  the  prediction  to  the  close  of  the  existing  dispensation,  there  has  been  from 
the  first  and  there  still  is  a  partial  accomplishment  of  all  that  Balaam  announced. 
There  is  evidently  a  great  mixture  in  the  prophecy.  It  is  a  prophecy  of  illumina- 
tion, of  dominion,  of  destruction,  and  all  these  are  to  be  traced  ever  since  Ciirist 
revealed  Himself  to  man.  There  have  been  always  those  in  whose  hearts  the  day 
star  has  risen — always  those  who  have  yielded  themselves  as  willing  subjects  to  the 
Mediator — always  the  Moabite  and  the  Edomite  who  have  defied  His  authority,  or 
sunk  beneath  His  vengeance.  So  that  however  the  grand  fulfilment  is  yet  to  be 
expected  in  the  complete  triumph  of  Christianity  and  the  overthrow  of  all  the  foes 
of  the  Church,  enough  is  continually  occurring  to  prove  that  the  predi<tion  sketched 
the  whole  period  of  the  present  dispensation.  Throughout  this  whole  period  the 
words  have  been  fulfilled,  "  Israel  shall  do  valiantly."  Israel  has  borne  up  bravely 
against  incessant  assault,  and  supported  from  on  high  has  been  successful  in  with- 
standing the  armies  of  the  aliens.  {H.  3IelviH,  H.D.)  A  new  star: — Piofessor 
Henry,  of  Washington,  discovered  a  new  star,  and  the  tidings  sped  by  submarine 
telegraph,  and  all  the  observatories  of  Europe  are  watching  for  that  new  star.  Oh, 
hearer,  looking  out  through  the  darkness  of  thy  soul  to-night,  c mst  thou  see  a 
bright  light  beaming  on  thee?  "Where?"  you  say,  "where?  how  can  I  find 
it  ? "  Look  along  by  the  line  of  the  Cross  of  the  Son  of  God.  Do  you  not 
pee  it  tremblinc;  with  all  tenderness  and  beaming  with  all  hope?  It  is  the 
Star   of    Bethlehem.      {T.    de   Witt    Talmapp.)  Variety   of  rejnesentation   of 

God  : — The  Bible  sets  us  an  example  of  fashioning  for  ourselves  a  personal  God  to 
suit  our  need.  When  I  find  Paul  using  figures  to  represent  to  himself  God,  as  hia 
wants  required  Him,  I  know  that  I  may  do  the  same  thing.  When  I  want  lo'  e,  I 
may  make  God  my  tender  and  loving  fatlier  or  sister,  or  mother.     When  I  want 

19 


290  THE  nUJLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  mv, 

pity,  I  may  make  Him  a  Being  of  unfailing  and  boundless  pity.  When  I  want 
courage,  He  is  my  lion  ;  when  I  want  li^ht  and  cheer,  He  is  my  bright  and  morning 
star — my  God  alert,  my  sun,  my  bread,  my  wine.  We  may  imagine  Him  everything 
that  is  to  us  good  and  beiiutif  ul,  tender  and  true,  and  know  that  we  are  not  cheating 
ourselves  by  vain  fancies,  but  have  only  touched  the  extreme  outer  edge  of  the  ever- 
blessed  reality.  There  may  be  dangers  in  this  freedom  and  variety  of  our  repre- 
sentation of  our  God  ;  but  there  are  dangers  in  all  forms  of  our  thought  of  Him, 
and  in  none  half  so  much  as  in  having  no  realisation  of  Him  at  all,  in  considering 
Him  an  abstraction  of  all  the  ornnis.  Thinking  of  Him  thus,  none  can  ever  love 
Him,  or  walk  with  Him.  (H.  W.  Beecher.)  Seeing  the  star : — This  one  thing  I 
have  noticed  in  everybody — the  moment  they  come  to  a  clear  apprehension  of  the 
love  of  Christ,  they  turn  right  about  upon  the  minister,  or  upon  the  Christians  who 
liave  been  labouring,  perhaps  fur  years,  to  bring  them  to  that  very  point,  and  say, 
"  Why  didn't  you  tell  us  this  before?  "  Why,  it's  what  we've  been  always  telling 
them.  I  think  that  trying  to  point  a  man  to  the  love  of  Jesus  is  like  trying  to 
show  one  a  star  that  has  just  come  out,  the  only  star  in  the  whole  cloudy  sky.  "  I 
can  see  no  star,  says  the  man."  "Where  is  it?"  "  Why,  there  ;  don't  you  see?"  But 
the  man  shakes  his  head ;  he  can  see  nothing.  But  by  and  by,  after  long  looking, 
he  catches  sight  of  the  star  ;  and  now  he  can  see  nothing  else  for  gazing  at  it.  He 
wonders  that  he  had  not  seen  it  before.  Just  so  it  is  with  the  soul  that  is  gazing  after 
the  Star  of  Bethlehem.  Nothing  in  the  world  seems  so  hidden,  so  complex,  so  perplex- 
ing, as  this  thing,  until  it  is  once  seen  by  the  heart,  and  then,  oh,  there  never  was  any- 
thing that  ever  was  thought  of  that  is  so  clear,  so  simple,  so  transcendently  glorious  ! 
And  men  marvel  that  the  whole  world  does  not  see  and  feel  as  they  do.  {Ibid.) 
Death  the  croivn  of  life  : — Our  text  may  be  considered  either  as  a  plaint,  a  sigh,  or 
a  song — a  dirge  winding  to  a  march.  There  are,  in  reality,  three  questions  inter- 
linked in  this  passage.  It  is  a  question  of  studious  curiosity.  What  kind  of  a 
race  will  then  inhabit  the  earth  ?  Men  are  naturally  inquisitive  to  know  who  are 
to  be  their  successors.  Why  not?  Tbey  are  to  be  the  heirs  in  turn  of  our  heritage  ; 
the  tenants  who  are  to  move  in  as  we  move  out ;  to  enjoy  our  repairs,  and  to  do,  in 
turn,  their  own  repairing  for  those  who  shall  follow  them.  Who  are  they  ?  The 
question  deepens  into  a  sigh.  Here  we  go !  just  as  we  begin  to  take  on  the  meaning 
of  things  about  us ;  scarce  sooner  found  than  lost.  But  what  of  that  which  is  to 
transpire  long  after  all  these  are  past?  Some  one  will  tread  the  path  that  I  am 
treading  1  Some  one  will  saunter  in  the  grove  where  I  now  linger  !  Some  one 
will  loiter  to  enjoy  the  laudscajje  which  now  feeds  me  with  its  soft  beauty  !  Some 
one  will  scent  the  fragrance  of  these  laughing  flowers  !  Some  one  will  be  soothed 
and  hushed  by  the  melody  of  the  rippling  stream  !  Some  one  will  look  beseechingly 
up  into  the  face  of  the  twinkling  stars  !  Some  one  will  cry  out  with  unutterable 
longing,  as  ive  now  cry,  "Alasl  who  shall  live  when  God  doeth  this?  "  We  are 
batHed  at  the  grave.  We  put  our  eyes  close  to  the  bars,  but  we  cannot  see.  Death 
is  the  crown  of  life  ;  and  yet  it  is  not  the  triumph  of  man  over  time,  but  of  time 
overman.  We  leave  the  world  behind  us.  Do  lasting  slumbers  hold  us?  Is  there 
no  more  of  us  when  we  are  gone  ?  When  the  reduplicated  forces  of  the  earth  shall 
be  put  undt^r  command ;  when  man  shall  sit  in  plumed  victory  over  the  opposing 
energies  of  nature ;  when  the  sword  shall  be  beaten  into  a  ploughshare,  and  the 
spear  into  a  pruning-hook ;  when  old  hoary  tyrannies  and  rusty  wrongs  shall  be 
entombed  for  ever;  when  health  shall  mantle  the  cheek,  and  happiness  shall  festoon 
the  fireside ;  when  man  shall  keep  faith  with  his  fellow-man,  and  worship  and  adore 
his  Maker — shall  I  live  then?  The  thought  gladdens,  but  it  maddens  as  well. 
The  scepticism  that  would  console  me  with  the  thought  that  death  is  but  a  momen- 
tary pang  ;  that  I  shall  sleep  in  death's  dateless  night ;  that  all  these  struggles 
shall  have  come  to  their  rest  ;  ah !  this  scepticism  is  but  a  miserable  comforter 
after  all.  Shall  I  be  shut  out  from  my  share  in  history  ?  shut  out  from  my  right 
to  know?  It  is  voiced  in  another  shape:  "If  a  man  die,  shall  he  live  again?" 
God  has  provided  a  way  by  which  His  people  may  be  released,  and  yet  view  this 
earth  in  all  its  perfected  beauty  and  glory.  Only  the  wisdom  of  God  could  compass 
this.  The  resurrection  solves  this  mighty  problem.  All  who  labour  shall  see  the 
reward  of  their  labour.  The  sower  sliall  be  partaker  of  the  fruit.  Every  journey- 
man who  worked  wearily  upon  the  temple,  shall  be  present  when  the  topstone  ia 
lifted  to  its  place.  Fall  in,  and  catch  up  the  anthem  to  the  King  of  kings!  Fall 
in,  and  live  for  ever.  Follow  Christ,  and  sh'>ut  victory.  Presently  tiu;e  shall  have 
halted  from  its  confused  scramble,  and  God's  finished  workmanship  shall  have 
been  taken  from  the  loom,  and  the  tapestry  shall  be  revealed  in  all  its  beauty  and 


CHAP.  XXIV.]  NUMBERS.  291 

perfection — the  pattern  will  be  complete.  Tlien  shall  we  learn  that  when  we  die 
we  do  not  die  out ;  that  death  is  not  death  ;  that  to  die  is  not  to  die,  but  to  blossom 
into  life.     (H.  S.  Carpenter,  D.D.) 

Ver.  25.  Balaam  rose  up,  and  went,  and  returned  to  Ms  place :  and  Balak 
also  went  his  way. — Tiie  partin(i  of  Balaam  and  Balak  :  the  separations  of  life  : — 
I.  Balaam  and  Balak  parted,  having  utterly  failed  in  their  designs.  II. 
They  parted  with  characters  considerably  modified  ey  their  association  with 
EACH  OTHER.  III.  They  PARTED,  BUT  NOT  FOR  EVER.  Those  who  have  been 
associated  in  this  present  life  will  meet  again  in  the  great  hereafter.  Tempter  and 
tempted,  oppressor  and  oppressed,  companions  in  evil  designs  and  companions  in 
noble  enterprises — all  will  meet  again.      {W.  Jones.)  The  desire.i  of  evil  men 

against  the  Church  come  to  nothing  : — God  disappointeth  the  policies  of  the  ungodly 
against  the  Cliurch ;  so  that  bow  cunningly  soever  they  are  contrived,  He  bloweth 
them  away  as  with  the  wind,  and  He  melteth  them  as  wax  with  the  fire.  Many 
rest  in  vain  hope,  and  put  confidence  in  deceitful  things.  The  Egyptians  had 
a  puipose  to  kill  all  the  males  of  the  Israelites,  but  see  how  wide  they  shot,  and 
how  far  they  missed  (Exod.  i.  12).  The  enemies  of  Christ  say  in  the  pride  of  their 
hearts,  "Let  us  break  their  bands,  and  cast  their  cords  from  us;  yet  He  that 
sitteth  in  the  heavpn  laugheth  them  to  scorn,  and  giveth  to  His  Son  the  heathen 
for  a  possession  "  (Psa.  ii.  3).  Hereunto  cometh  the  saying  of  the  prophet  (Psa. 
vii.  14).  When  Chri-t  had  preached  the  gospel  at  Nazareth,  they  were  filled  with 
such  wrath  against  Him  that  they  rose  up  and  thrust  Him  out  of  the  city,  and  led 
Him  even  unto  the  top  of  the  hill,  whereon  their  city  was  built,  that  they  might 
cast  Him  down  headlong  ;  but  He  passed  through  the  midst  of  them  and  went  His 
way  (Luke  iv.  30).  So  we  read  in  tbe  Acts  of  the  Apostles  that  certain  Jews  made 
an  assembly,  and  bound  themselves  witli  a  curse,  saying,  "That  they  would  neither 
eat  nor  drink  till  tiny  had  killed  Paul  "  (Acts  xxiii.  22).  But  they  were  disappointed, 
and  their  purpose,  though  closely  contrived,  was  utterly  disannulled.  The  reasons 
will  make  this  truth  more  apparent.  1.  If  we  consider  this  essential  property  of 
God  that  He  is  full  of  justice.  He  will  reward  as  our  works  are.  If  we  rest  in  vain 
and  wicked  practices  He  will  not  hold  His  peace,  but  throw  down  that  which  we 
build  up,  and  He  will  disappoint  that  which  we  hope  for.  2.  The  expectation  of 
the  wicked  is  vanity,  because  they  can  give  no  comfort  or  assurance.  The  uses  are 
next  to  be  considered,  as  they  arise  from  this  doctrine.  1.  We  may  conclude  from 
hence  the  unhappy  estate  of  them  that  have  only  eyes  of  flesh,  to  rest  on  things 
which  they  see  with  their  fleshly  eyes.  If  we  regard  and  receive  only  present 
blessings,  they  are  of  small  moment.  If,  then,  we  wait  on  lying  vanities  and  forsake 
God,  our  strength  and  salvation,  we  are  unhappy  and  most  miserable.  2.  We  learn 
that  no  wisdom,  be  it  never  so  deep  ;  no  understanding,  be  it  never  so  politic  ;  no 
counsel,  be  it  never  so  prudent ;  no  subtilty,  be  it  never  so  hidden,  shall  overthrow 
the  purpose  of  God,  or  prevail  against  His  truth,  or  hinder  the  execution  of  His 
will.  For  His  infinite  wisdom  is  able  to  overmatch  all  the  wisdom  that  is  in  the 
creatures,  and  to  prevent  whatsoever  devices  they  have  set  abroach.  3.  Let  us  not 
rely  on  vain  things,  for  then  all  our  expectations  shall  be  in  vain.  Who  is  so  simple, 
that  to  stay  him  up  from  danger  would  rest  on  the  web  of  a  spider,  or  the  staff  of 
a  reed,  or  the  strength  of  a  rush?  All  the  devices  of  men,  the  power  of  princes, 
the  courage  of  horses,  the  help  of  creatures,  are  as  a  broken  weapon  to  defend  us, 
and  unserviceable  to  deliver  us.  This  the  prophet  teacbeth  us  (Psa.  cxivi.  3-5). 
4.  When  we  see  the  enemies  conspire  against  the  Church,  let  us,  from  this  con- 
sideration of  the  vain  confidence  of  the  wicked,  take  occasion  to  comfort  ourselves 
and  to  cheer  up  our  hearts ;  all  their  expectation  shall  turn  into  smoke.  Let  Ihem 
gather  themselves  together,  and  take  crafty  counsel  one  with  another;  He  that 
ruleth  in  heaven  shall  scorn  at  their  inventions,  and  frustrate  them  of  their 
mischievous  purposes.  5.  Seeing  all  evil  inventions  and  devices  of  the  devil  are 
disappointed,  let  us  not  stand  in  fear  of  any  attempts  made  against  us  by  his 
instruments.  The  enemies  of  the  Church  had  hired  a  sorcerer  and  conjurer  to 
waste  and  weaken  them,  yet  we  see  his  enchantments  are  defeated  and  come  to 
nothing.     (IV.  Attersoll.) 


292  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxt. 


CHAPTEE  XXV. 

"Veks.  1-9.  The  people  began  to  commit  whoredom  with  the  daughters  of  Sloab. 

— The  sin  of  Israel  at  Shittim,  and  the  judgment  of  God : — I.  The  sin  of  the 
Israelites  at  Shittim.  1.  The  sin  itself.  (1)  Spiritual  foruieation,  or  idolatry 
(Hos.  ii.).  (2)  Physical  fornication.  2.  The  origin  of  their  sin  (chap.  xxxi.  16; 
Eev.  ii.  14).  3.  The  instruments  of  their  sin :  Moab  and  Midian.  4.  The  occasion 
of  their  sin.  (1)  Their  abode  at  Shittim.  They  were  in  the  neighbourhood  of 
sinful  associations  and  corrupting  influences.  "  Near  a  fire,  a  serpent,  and  a 
wicked  woman,  no  man  can  long  be  in  safety."  (2)  Their  lack  of  occupation. 
Idleness  leads  to  vice  and  mischief.  II.  The  judgment  or  God  upon  the  Israelites 
ON  ACCOUNT  or  THEIR  SIN.  1.  The  judgment  inflicted  immediately  by  God.  In  some 
form  or  other  punishment  ever  follows  closely  upon  the  heels  of  sin.  2.  The  judg- 
ment inflicted  by  Moses  and  the  judges  by  the  command  of  God.  (1)  Its  nature: 
Death.  (2)  Its  publicity.  (3)  Its  executioners.  Lessons  :  1.  The  secret  of  the  security 
of  the  people  of  Gnd  :  faithfulness.  2.  The  danger  of  those  temptations  which 
appeal  to  our  self-indulgence  or  love  of  pleasure.  8.  The  teiribleness  of  the 
Divine  anger.  4.  The  solicitude  with  which  we  should  guard  against  arousing  this 
anger  towards  us.  Sin  calls  it  forth,  therefore  shun  sin.  5.  The  earnestness  with 
which  we  should  seek  the  mercy  and  the  protection  of  God.  ( W.  Jones.)  Evil  men 
■proceed  by  degrees  from  worse  to  worse  : — In  these  words  is  offered  unto  us  an 
example,  expressing  the  nature  of  sin  where  once  it  is  entertained.  For  behold 
here  how  they  grow  in  sin.  At  the  first,  they  departed  out  of  the  host  of  Israel  and 
went  to  the  people  of  Moab  and  Midian,  with  whom  they  coupled  themselves ;  so 
that  albeit  they  sinned,  yet  they  had  some  shame  of  sin,  aud  made  some  conscience 
of  committing  it  openly  amongst  their  brethren.  But  they  proceed  by  little  and 
little,  from  step  to  step,  till  they  are  ashamed  of  nothing.  Therefore  in  the 
example  of  one  man,  here  set  before  our  eyes,  Moses  declares  to  what  shamelessness 
they  were  come.  For  this  man  (who  is  afterward  named),  as  if  he  had  been 
absolute  in  power,  as  he  was  indeed  resolute  in  will  and  dissolute  in  his  whole  life, 
brought,  his  whorish  woman  in  the  sight  of  God,  in  the  sight  of  Moses,  in  the  sight 
of  the  congregation,  and  in  the  sight  of  the  tabernacle,  to  show  that  he  had  filled 
up  the  measure  of  his  sin.  1.  The  nature  of  sin  is  to  draw  all  such  as  delight  in  it 
from  one  evil  to  another,  until  in  the  end  they  become  most  corrupt  and  abomin- 
able. 2.  The  wrath  of  GoJ  falleth  upon  such  as  make  no  conscience  to  fall  into 
lessi^r  sins.  He  giveth  them  over  to  a  reprobate  sense,  and  to  hardness  of  heart. 
3.  Sin  is  fitly  resembled  to  the  fretting  of  a  canker,  and  to  the  uncleanness  of 
a  leprosy,  both  which  go  forward  until  the  whole  body  be  infected  and  every 
member  endangered.  Now  let  us  handle  the  uses.  1.  Consider  from  hence  how 
dangerous  it  is  to  give  entertainment  unto  sin  at  the  beginning,  which  groweth  to 
more  perfection  every  day  ;  we  cannot  stop  this  stream  when  we  will,  it  goeth 
beyontl  the  strengih  of  our  nature.  2.  Seeing  evil  men  wax  worse  and  worse,  we 
may  conclude  that  their  judgment  sleepeth  not,  but  is  increased  as  their  sin;  yea, 
so  it  is  not  far  off,  but  lieth  at  the  doors.  3.  Seeing  men  giving  themselves 
over  to  sin,  it  is  our  duty  to  resist  the  beginnings,  to  prevent  the  breach,  and 
stop  the  first  course  of  it.  It  is  as  a  serpent  that  must  be  trod  on  in  the  egg.  Let 
us  take  heed  that  sin  grow  not  into  a  custom  and  get  an  habit.  {W.  Attcrsoll.) 
Sin  deprives  us  of  Gi:d^s  protection  : — We  have  heard  before  that  albeit  that  Balak 
and  Balaam  intended  by  their  sorceries  to  curse  the  people  of  God,  yet  they  could 
by  no  means  do  them  hurt;  they  were  guarded  by  the  protection  of  God  as  with  a 
sure  watch.  But  so  soon  as  they  forsook  the  living  God,  and  fell  a  whoring  with 
the  daugliters  of  Moab  and  Midian,  by  and  by  God  departeth  from  them,  and  His 
heavy  judgments  break  in  upon  them.  The  force  of  sorcery  could  not  hurt  them, 
but  the  strength  of  sin  doth  weaken  tbem.  Hereby  we  learn  thut  sin  depriveth  us 
of  God's  protection,  and  layeth  us  open  to  the  fierceness  of  His  wrath,  and  to  the 
fury  of  our  enemies.  The  reasons  being  considered  will  make  the  doctrine  more 
evident.  1.  Sin  maketh  us  execrable  to  the  Lord  and  abominable  in  His  sight. 
If,  then,  sin  makes  us  to  be  had  in  execration  it  is  no  marvel  if  we  be  left  destitute 
of  God's  protection.  2.  God  departeth  from  them  that  fall  from  Him ;  they  forsake 
Him,  and  therefore  He  forsaketh  them.  So,  tlnn,  our  King  in  sin  doth  diive  the 
Lord  from  us,  that  He  will  have  no  more  fellowsliip  with  us  to  do  us  any  good. 
We  are  now  to  set  down  the  uses  of  this  doctrine.     1.  This  teacheih  us  to  ack.iow- 


CHAP.  XXV.]  NUMBERS.  293 

ledge  that  all  judgments  which  fall  upon  us  are  righteous.  God  chastiseth  us  often, 
but  always  justly,  never  unjustly.  2.  Seeing  sin  layeth  us  open  to  reproaches  of 
enemies  and  to  the  judgments  of  God,  as  appeaieth  in  this  great  plague ^pon  the 
people,  this  showeth  that  we  must  not  go  about  to  hide  our  sin  from  God  through 
hypocrisy.  For  all  things  are  naked  and  open  to  His  eyes,  with  whom  we  have  to 
do ;  so  that  we  must  learn  to  confess  them  before  His  presence.  3.  This  serveth 
as  a  notable  advantage  for  the  servants  of  God  when  they  have  any  dealings  against 
wicked  men  ;  we  have  encouragement  from  hence  that  we  shall  assuredly  prevail 
against  them,  because  we  have  to  do  with  weak  men  that  are  out  of  God's  protec- 
tion. (Ibid.)  God's  abhorrence  of  iivpvrity  : — The  Lord  must  have  regard  to 
two  things  in  His  own  people — personal  purity,  and  uncorrupted  worship.  In  the 
very  nature  of  things  it  would  be  quite  impossible  to  preserve  purity  of  principle, 
clearness  of  understanding,  and  spirituality  of  affection,  with  corruption  of  life.  It 
is  a  delusion  of  the  worst  kind,  a  master-device  of  Satan,  the  perfection  of  sin's 
deceitfulness,  and  a  perversion  of  all  truth,  justice,  and  grace,  when  men,  in  the 
retired  indulgence  of  lusts  within,  or  in  open  commission  of  crime,  sit  down  tran- 
quil under  the  defence  of  mercy,  and  fancy  themselves  with  such  interest  in  the 
robe  of  Christ's  perfection  and  beauty,  that  no  spot  or  fault  is  in  them.  A  siuner 
may  come  to  Christ  under  every  sense  of  imperfection,  pollution,  and  vileness,  and 
through  faith  in  His  mediation,  may  participate  with  appropriating  joy  and  a 
well-founded  confidence  in  all  the  interests  of  His  atoning  blood  and  justifying 
righteousness  ;  nevertheless,  he  can  never  find  anything  in  the  nature  and  influence 
of  evangelical  truth  but  what  has  the  most  direct  tendency  and  design  to  deliver 
from  the  power  as  well  as  to  save  from  the  desert  of  sin.  To  a  gi-acious  heart  sin 
proves  a  plague  and  constant  grief,  and  the  cause,  while  it  exists,  of  a  never-ending 
strife.  [W.  Seaton.)  The  valley  of  sensuality  : — In  Java  is  a  valley  which  is 
called  the  Valley  of  Poison.  It  is  an  object  of  veritable  terror  to  the  natives.  In 
this  renowned  valley  the  soil  is  said  to  be  covered  with  skeletons  and  carcases  of 
tigers,  of  goats,  and  of  stags,  of  birds,  and  even  with  human  bones  ;  for  asphyxia 
or  suffocation,  it  seems,  strikes  all  living  things  which  venture  into  this  desolate 
place.  It  illustrates  the  valley  of  sensuality,  the  most  horrible  creation  of  social 
life.  Few  men  who  enter  into  its  depths  survive  long ;  for  it  is  strewn  with  dead 
reputations  and  the  mangled  remains  of  creatures  who  were  once  happy.     (Ibid.) 

Vers.  10-13.  Phlnehas,  the  son  of  Eleazar,  the  son  of  Aaron  the  priest,  hath 
turned  My  wrath  away  .  .  .  because  he  was  zealous  for  his  God,  and  made  an 
atonement  for  the  children  of  Israel. ^GorfZy  zeal: — We  can  lay  no  claim 
to  saintship  without  zeal.  When  wickedness  increases,  then  zeal  must  be 
bold  and  daring.  I.  The  source  of  godly  zeal.  The  indwelling  of  the  Holy 
Ghost.  Grace  in  the  heart  must  break  forth.  II.  Godly  zeal  has  its  seat 
IN  THE  heart.  III.  Maek  THE  OBJECT  OF  HOLY  ZEAL.  Good  works.  It  is  the 
fervour  of  heavenly  benevolence.  IV.  True  zeal  is  blended  with  knowledge.  To 
enlighten  ourselves,  we  must  have  light  ourselves.  V.  Zeal  is  forgetful  of  self. 
(  The  Study.)  The  zeal  of  Phinehas : — Phinehas  appears  as  a  rainbow  on  the  bosom 
of  a  storm.  He  is  as  a  flower  on  a  wild  heath,  a  fertile  spot  in  a  parched  desert,  pure 
ore  in  a  rude  quarry,  a  fragrant  rose  upon  a  thorny  hedge,  faithful  among  faiihless. 

1.  "  He  WHS  zealous  for  his  God."  He  could  not  fold  his  arms  and  see  God's  law 
insulted.  His  rule  defied.  His  will  despised,  His  majesty  and  empire  scorned.  The 
servant's  heart  blazed  in  one  blaze  of  godly  indignation.  He  must  be  up  to  vindi- 
cate his  Lord.     His  fervent  love,  his  bold  resolve,  fear  nothing  in  a  righteous  cause. 

2.  Mark,  next,  the  zeal  of  Phinehas  is  sound-minded.  It  is  not  as  a  courser  with- 
out rem,  a  torrent  unembanked,  a  hurricane  let  loose.  Its  steps  are  set  in  order's 
path.  It  executes  God's  own  will  in  God's  own  way.  The  mandate  says,  let  the 
offenders  die.  He  aims  a  death-blow,  then,  with  obedient  hand.  The  zeal,  which 
heaven  kindles,  is  always  a  submissive  grace.  3.  This  zeal  wrought  wonders.  It 
seemed  to  open  heaven's  gates  for  blessing  to  rush  forth.  God  testifies,  "  He  hath 
turned  My  wrath  away  from  the  children  of  Israel."  He  hath  made  atonement  for 
them.  My  name  is  rescued  from  dishonour.  The  haughty  sinner  is  la-d  Idw. 
Therefore  I  can  restrain  My  vengeance.  Men  see  that  sin  is  not  unpunished; 
mercy  may  now  fly  righteously  to  heal.  Zeal  is  indeed  a  wonder- woi  king  grace. 
Who  can  conceive  what  countries,  districts,  cities,  families,  and  men,  have  sprung 
to  life,  because  zeal  prayed  ?  4.  Next  mark  how  heavenly  smOes  beam  on  the 
zeal  of  Phinehas.  Honour  decks  those  who  honour  God.  The  priesthood  shall  be 
his.     This  lesson  ends  not  here.     Phinehas  for  ever  stands  a  noble  type.     Yes. 


294  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap,  xxv- 

Christ  is  here.  In  Phinehas  we  see  Christ's  heart,  and  zeal,  and  work,  and 
mightily  constraining  impulse.  In  Phinebas  we  see  Christ  crowned,  too,  with  the 
jiriesthood's  glory.  (Dean  Lan\)  The  circumstances  which  moved  the  zeal  of 
Phinehas  : — I.  There  was  the  exoemitt  of  their  sin.  It  included  false  doctrine 
and  sinful  practices,  between  which  there  is  a  closer  connection  than  is  always- 
recognised.  II.  There  was  the  chaeacteb  of  the  instigator  to  the  sin. 
Balaam,  "a  strange  mixture  of  a  man."  III.  There  was  the  extent  to  which 
the  sin  prevailed.  Among  all  classes.  IV.  There  was  the  misery  occasioned 
BY  the  sin.  To  the  guilty,  to  their  connections,  to  the  community.  V.  There  wa-s- 
THE  DISHONOUR  DONE  TO  GoD.  1.  We  should  be  zealous  in  religion.  2.  Our  zeal 
in  contending  against  the  sins  of  others  should  begin  in  zeal  in  contending  against 
our  own.  (George  Brooks.)  The  zealous  spirit : — In  fact,  a  zealous  spirit  is  essen- 
tial to  eminent  success  in  anything.  Perhaps  there  is  the  more  need  to  insist  upon 
this  because  enthusiasm  is  ct  of  fashion.  It  is  bad  form  nowadays  to  admire 
anything  very  warmly.  To  lie  strenuously  in  earnest  is  almost  vulgar.  Especially 
is  this  so  in  regard  to  religion.  "  Our  Joe  is  a  very  good  young  man,"  said  an  old 
nurse  the  otber  day  ;  "  but  he  do  go  so  mad  on  religion."  That  was  the  fly  in  the 
ointment — which  spoilt  all.  Did  not  Pope  say  long  ago,  "  The  worst  of  madness  is 
a  saint  run  mad  "  ?  And  he  only  put  in  terse  and  pithy  speech  what  other  people 
Bay  more  clumsily.  1.  And  yet  how  can  one  be  a  Christian  witbout  being  an 
enthusiast  ?  IndiSerent,  half-hearted  Christians  are  not  true  Christians  at  all. 
"  I  would  thou  wert  eitber  cold  or  hot,"  says  our  Lord.  Lukewarmness  is  his 
utter  abhorrence.  And  the  author  of  "  Ecce  Homo  "  cannot  be  said  to  exaggerate 
in  his  declaration  that  "Christianity  is  an  enthusiasm,  or  it  is  nothing."  2.  And 
what  good  work  has  ever  been  wrought  without  enthusiasm  ?  Said  a  great  preacher, 
"  If  you  want  to  di'ive  a  pointed  ]5iece  of  iron  through  a  thick  board,  the  surest  way 
is  to  heat  your  skewer.  It  is  always  easier  to  burn  our  way  than  to  bore  it." 
Only  •'  a  soul  all  flame  "  is  likely  to  accomplish  much  in  the  teeth  of  the  difficulties 
which  beset  every  lofty  enterprise.  The  great  movements  which  have  most  widely 
blessed  the  world  have  been  led  by  men  of  passionate  earnestness  and  fervid  zeal. 
It  is  not  the  cool,  calculating  votaries  of  prudence  who  have  done  the  work.  Was 
it  not  written  of  our  Lord  Himself,  "  The  zeal  of  Thy  house  hatli  eaten  me  up  "  ? 
(G.  Hoxcard  James.)  The  faithful  brinp  a  blessinff  tqwyi  their  families  : — We  have 
seen  the  zeal  of  Phinehas  in  executing  judgment  upon  the  evil-doers,  which  brought 
a  grievous  plague  upo  i  the  people.  His  spirit  was  stirred  within  him,  being  first 
stirred  by  the  Spirit  of  God,  which  moved  him  to  take  a  speur,  and  to  thrust  through 
the  adulterer  and  adulteress.  Now  we  shall  see  the  reward  that  was  given  unta 
him  for  that  work  which  was  acceptable  unto  God,  and  profitable  unto  His  pe'^ple. 
He  hath  a  covenant  of  peace  made  with  him,  and  the  priesthood  confirmed  unto 
him  and  his  posterity.  God  is  so  pleased  with  the  obedience  of  His  people  that 
He  will  show  mercy  to  such  as  belong  to  them.  This  is  plentifully  proved  unto  us  in 
the  Word  of  God.  When  God  saw  Noah  righteous  before  Him  in  that  corrupt  age. 
He  made  all  that  belonged  unto  him  partakers  of  a  great  deliverance,  saying  unto 
him,  "  Enter  tbou  and  all  thine  house  into  the  ark  ;  for  thee  have  I  seen  righteous 
before  Me  in  this  age"  (Gen.  vii.  1).  This  appeareth  in  the  person  of  Abraham, 
when  God  had  called  him  out  of  his  country,  and  from  his  kindred,  and  made  a 
covenant  with  him  to  bless  him  (Gen.  xii.  2,  3).  This  is  oftentimes  remembered 
unto  us  in  the  Acts  of  the  Apostles.  When  God  had  opened  the  heart  of  Lydia 
that  she  attemied  unto  the  things  which  Paul  delivered,  "  She  was  baptized  and  all 
her  household  "  (Acts  xvi.  15,  33).  The  reasons  to  enforce  this  doctrine  are  evident, 
if  we  consider  either  the  person  of  God  or  the  condition  of  the  faithful.  1.  God 
liath  in  great  mercy  and  goodness  p;  omised  to  show  favrur  not  only  to  the  faithful 
themselves,  but  to  the  seed  of  the  faithful  that  fear  Him  (Exod.  xx.  6;  xxxiv.  6.  7). 
2.  As  the  mercy  of  God  is  great,  so  the  faith  of  the  godly  is  effectual  for  themselves 
and  their  children.  This  is  the  tenor  of  the  covenant  that  God  hath  made  with  all 
the  faithful.  God  will  be  our  God,  and  the  God  of  our  seed  after  us  (Gen.  xvii.  7). 
For  as  a  father  that  purchaseth  house  or  land,  giveth  thereby  an  interest  unto  his 
son  tberein  ;  so  he  that  layeth  hold  on  the  promise  which  God  hath  made  to  all 
godly  parents,  doth  convey  it  unto  his  children ;  so  that  albeit  they  want  faith  by 
reason  of  their  years,  >et  they  are  made  partakers  of  Christ,  and  ingrafted  into  His 
body.  The  uses  remain  to  be  handled.  (1)  We  learn  that  the  children  of  faithful 
parents  bave  rigbt  to  baptism,  and  are  to  receive  the  seal  of  the  covenant.  This 
the  apostle  teacheth  (1  Cor.  vii.  14).  (2)  We  are  taught  on  the  other  side  that  evil 
parents  bring  the  curse  of  God  into  their  houses,  and  upon  their  posterity.     (3)  It 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  NUMBERS.  295 

is  required  of  us  to  repent  and  believe  the  gospel,  that  so  we  may  procure  a  blessing 
4ipou  ourselves  and  our  children,     (W.  AttersoU.) 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 


Ver.  2.  Take  the  sum  of  all  the  congregation. — Divine  enumeration : — God  is 
a  God  of  numbers.  He  is  always  numbering.  He  may  number  to  find  out  who  are 
present,  but  in  numbering  to  find  out  who  are  present  He  soon  comes  to  know  who 
a,re  absent.  He  knows  the  total  number,  but  it  is  not  enough  for  Him  to  know  the 
totality;  He  must  know  whether  David's  place  is  empty,  whether  the  younger  sou 
tas  gone  from  the  father's  house,  whether  one  piece  of  silver  out  of  ten  has  been  lost, 
whether  one  sheep  out  of  a  hundred  has  gone  astray.  We  are  all  of  consequence 
to  the  Father,  because  He  does  not  look  upon  us  through  the  glory  of  His  majesty, 
but  through  the  solicitude  of  His  fatherhood  and  His  love.  We  need  this  kind  of 
thought  in  human  life  :  living  would  be  weary  work  without  it.  This  chapter 
reads  very  much  like  the  other  chapter  in  which  the  census  was  first  taken.  .  .  , 
The  historic  names  are  the  same,  but  what  a  going-down  in  the  detnill  We  must 
enter  into  this  thought  and  follow  its  applications  if  we  would  be  wise  in  history  ; 
generic  names  are  permanent,  but  the  detail  of  life  is  a  panorama  continually 
changing.  It  is  so  always  and  everywhere.  The  world  has  its  great  generic  and 
permanent  names,  and  it  is  not  enough  to  know  these  and  to  recite  them  with 
thoughtless  fluency.  Who  could  not  take  the  statistics  of  the  world  in  general 
names?  Then  we  should  have  the  wise  and  the  foolish,  the  rich  and  the  poor,  the 
faithful  and  the  faithless,  the  good  and  the  bad.  That  has  been  the  record  of  life 
from  the  beginning  ;  and  yet  that  is  too  broadly-lined  to  be  of  any  real  service  to 
us  in  the  estimate  of  human  prayers  and  human  moral  quality.  What  about  the 
detailed  numbers,  the  individual  men,  the  particular  households,  the  children  in 
the  crowd?  It  was  in  these  under-liues  that  the  great  changes  took  place.  The 
bold,  leading  names  remained  the  same,  but  they  stood  up  like  monumental  stones 
•over  graves  in  which  thousands  of  men  had  been  buried.  So  with  regard  to  our 
•own  actions  ;  we  speak  o(  them  too  frequently  with  generic  vagueness  ;  we  are 
wanting  in  the  persistent  critici-m  that  will  never  allow  two  threads  of  life  to  be 
intertangled,  that  must  have  them  separated  and  specifically  examined.  God  will 
have  no  roughness  of  judgment,  no  bold  vagueness,  no  mere  striking  of  averages; 
but  heart-searching,  weighing — not  the  action  :  any  manufactured  scales  might 
weigh  a  deed.  He  will  have  the  motive  weighed,  the  invisil)le  force,  the  subtle, 
ghostly  movement  that  stirs  the  soul ;  not  to  be  found  out  by  human  wisdom,  but 
to  be  seized,  detected,  examined,  estimated,  and  determined  by  the  living  Spirit  of 
the  living  God.  The  sin  of  the  individual  does  not  destroy  the  election  of  the  race. 
Israel  is  still  here,  but  almost  countless  thousands  of  Israelites  have  sinned  and 
gone  to  their  doom.  With  all  this  individual  criticism  and  specific  numbering,  do 
not  imagine  that  it  lies  within  the  power  of  any  man  to  stop  the  purpose  or  arrest 
the  kingdom  of  God.  There  is  a  consolatory  view  of  all  human  tumult  and  chang", 
•as  well  as  a  view  that  tries  the  faith  and  exhausts  the  patience  of  the  saint.  It  is 
pitiful  for  any  Christian  man  to  ta'k  about  individual  instances  of  lapse  or  faith- 
lessness, as  though  they  touched  the  infinite  calm  of  the  mind  of  God,  and  the 
infinite  integrity  of  the  covenant  of  Heaven.  It  is  so  in  all  other  dppartments  of 
life — why  not  so  on  the  largest  and  noblest  scale  ?  The  nation  may  be  an  honest 
nation,  though  a  thousand  felons  may  be  under  lock  and  key  at  the  very  moment 
when  the  declaration  of  the  national  honesty  is  made  ;  the  nation  may  be  declared 
to  be  a  healthy  country,  though  ten  thousand  men  be  burning  with  fever  at  the 
very  moment  the  declaration  of  health  is  made.  So  the  Church  of  the  living 
Christ,  redeemed  at  an  infinite  cost,  sealed  by  an  infinite  love,  is  still  the  Lamb's 
bride,  destined  for  the  heavenly  city,  though  in  many  instances  tliere  may  be  defal- 
cation, apostasy — yea,  very  treason  against  truth  and  good.  Live  in  the  larger 
thought ;  do  not  allow  the  mind  to  be  distressed  by  individual  instances.  The 
kingdom  is  one,  and,  like  the  seamless  robe,  must  be  ta';en  in  its  unity.  Individuals 
must  not  trust  to  ancestral  piety.  Individual  Israelites  might  have  quoted  the 
piety  of  many  who  had  gone  before  ;  but  that  piety  goes  for  nothing  when  the 
individual  will  is  iu  rebellion  against  God.     No  man  has  any  overplus  of  piety. 


296  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLVSTIiATOB.  [chap.  xxvi. 

No  man  may  bequeath  his  piety  to  his  posterity.  A  man  cannot  bequeath  his  learn- 
ing— how  can  he  bequeath  his  holiness?  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  apparent 
insignificance  and  the  real  importance  of  human  life  : — These  uninteresting  verses 
suggest— I.  The  apparent  insignificance  of  human  life.  How  dull  are  the 
details,  and  how  wearisome  the  repetitions  of  this  cliapter!  What  a  number  of 
obscure  names  of  unknown  persons  it  contains  !  II.  The  real  importance  of 
human  life.  This  will  appear  if  we  consider  that — 1.  Every  man  has  his  own 
individuality  of  being  and  circumstances.  2.  Every  man  has  his  own  possibilities. 
3.  Every  man  has  his  own  influence.  4.  Every  man  has  his  own  accountability. 
5.  Every  man  is  an  object  of  deep  interest  to  God.  To  Him  nothing  is  mean, 
nothing  unimportant.  (W.  Jones.)  The  interestinj  hidden  in  the  commonplace  : — 
I.  Here  is  the  commonplace.  II.  Here  is  the  interesting  in  the  commonplace. 
If  we  look  into  this  chapter  carefully  we  shall  discover  certain  words  which  are 
suggestive  of  deep  and  tender  interests.  "  Sons  '"  is  a  word  of  frequent  occurrence,  so 
also  is  the  word  "  children" ;  we  also  read  of  "daughters"  (ver.  33),  and  of  a  "  daughter" 
(ver.  46).  A  profound  human  interest  attaches  to  words  like  these.  They  imply 
other  words  of  an  interest  equally  deep  and  sacred  ;  e.rj.,  "  father,"  "  mother."  The 
humblest,  dullest,  most  commonplace  life  has  its  relations.  The  least  regarded 
person  in  all  the  thousands  of  Israel  was  "  somebody's  bairn."  We  also  read  of 
"  death  "  (ver.  19);  most  of  the  names  which  are  here  recorded  belonged  to  men  who 
were  gathered  to  their  fathers ;  from  the  time  of  the  twelve  sons  of  Jacob  here 
mentioned  to  the  time  of  this  census  in  the  plains  of  Moab,  many  thousands  of 
Israelites  had  died,  of  all  ranks  and  of  all  ages.  Keflection  upon  these  facts- 
awakens  a  mournful  interest  in  the  mind.  III.  The  importance  of  the  common- 
place. Impatience  of  the  ordinary  and  the  prosaic  is  an  evidence  of  an  unsound 
judgment  and  an  unhealthy  moral  life.  1.  Most  of  life's  duties  are  commonplace. 
Yet  how  important  it  is  that  these  duties  be  faithfully  fulfilled !  2.  The  greater 
number  of  persons  are  commonplace.  3.  Tbe  greater  part  of  life  is  commonplace. 
Be  it  ours  to  give  the  charm  of  poetry  to  prosaic  duties,  by  doing  them  heartily  ; 
and  to  ennoble  our  commonplace  lives  by  living  them  faithfully  and  holily.    (Ibid.) 

Vers.  9-11.  The  earth  opened  her  mouth, and  swallowed  them  up. — Solemnmoni- 
tors  against  sin  : — Sin  and  infamy  cling  to  families  long  after  the  actors  have  passed 
away.  Parents  ought  to  strive  above  all  to  leave  to  their  children  the  heritage  of  a 
good  name.  Sin  and  infamy  are  long  lived ;  as  in  the  verse  of  our  text,  many  years 
after  the  descendants  are  reminded  of  their  ancestor's  crime.  Their  sin  was  to 
oppose  Moses  and  God — using  their  influence  as  men  of  note  to  create  a  rebellion. 
God  visited  them  for  their  sin— "And  they  became  a  sign"  (see  chap.  xvi.).  They 
became  "  symbols,"  "  beacons."  God  made  use  of  them  to  teach  great  lessons. 
Visitations  like  that  have  tongues ;  they  speak  to  us  from  God.  I.  The  insidious 
character  of  sin.  Sin  grows  upon  us ;  never  trifle  with  it ;  safety  in  the  opposing 
it.  As  the  moth,  dazzled  with  the  light,  &c.,  ends  in  being  scorched  or  burnt,  so 
it  ever  is  with  those  who  trifle  with  sin  and  parley  with  temptation.  II.  They 
WABN  us  OF  THE  TERRIBLE  EVIL  AtiD  DANGER  OF  SIN.  Sin  becomcs  our  greatest  curse  -y 
we  have,  indeed,  nothing  else  to  fear.  HI.  They  show  us  what  a  curse  bad  men 
ARE  TO  their  FAMILIES  AND  OTHERS.  If  there  is  any  manhood  left  in  one,  this 
thought  must  arrest  his  attention.  IV.  They  show  us  God's  desire  to  benefit 
MAN.     (David  Lloyd.)         The  victims  of  sin  a  warning  to  others: — I.  A  warning 

AGAINST  the    COMMISSION  OF  SIN.       II.    A  WARNING    AGAINST   ASSOCIATION    WITH    SINNERS. 

III.  A  WARNING  AGAINST  TEMPTING  OTHERS.  (Lay  Preachcr.)  Notwithstand- 
ing the  children  of  Korah  died  not. — Children  that  live  : — "  Notwithstand- 
ing, the  children  of  Korah  died  not."  May  we  not  read  it  —  that  though  the 
sire  dies  the  progeny  lives  ?  There  is  a  continuity  of  evil  in  the  world.  We  only 
cut  off  the  tops  of  iniquities,  their  deep  roots  we  do  not  get  at ;  we  pass  the  machine 
over  the  sward,  and  cut  off  the  green  tops  of  things  that  are  ofTensive  to  us ;  but  the 
juicy  root  is  struck  many  inches  down  into  the  earth,  and  our  backs  will  hardly  be 
turned,  and  the  click  of  the  iron  have  ceased,  before  those  roots  are  asserting  them- 
selves in  new  and  obvious  growths.  Iniquity  is  not  to  be  shaved  off  the  earth — 
ironed  and  mowed  away  like  an  obnoxious  weed — it  must  be  uprooted,  torn  right  up 
by  every  thinnest,  frailest  fibre  of  its  bad  self,  and  then,  having  been  torn  out,  left 
for  the  fire  of  the  sun  to  deal  with — the  fire  of  mid-day  is  against  it  and  will  con- 
sume it.  And  thus  only  can  growths  of  evil  be  eradicated  and  destroyed.  It  is  an 
awful  thing  to  live !  You  cannot  tell  where  influence  begins,  how  it  operates,  or 
how  it  ends.     The  boy  sitting  next  you  is  partly  yourself,  and  he  cannot  help  it. 


CHAP.  XXVI.]  }i UMBERS.  :97 

Toil  cannot  turn  round  and  say,  '•  You  must  look  after  yourself  as  I  had  to  do." 
That  is  a  fool's  speech.  You  can  never  shake  off  the  responsibility  of  having  helped 
in  known  and  unknown  ways  and  degrees  to  make  that  boy  what  he  is.  Life  is 
not  a  surface  matter,  a  loose  pebble  lying  on  the  road  that  men  can  take  up  and  lay 
down  again  without  any  particular  harm  being  done.  When  the  boy  drinks  himself 
into  madness,  he  may  be  but  expressing  the  influences  wrought  within  him  by  three 
generations.  When  the  young  man  tells  a  lie,  he  may  be  surprised  at  his  own 
audacity,  and  feel  as  if  he  were  rather  a  tool  and  a  victim  than  a  person  and  a 
responsible  agent — as  if  generations  of  liars  were  blackening  his  young  lips  with 
their  falsehoods.  When  this  youth  is  restive  and  will  not  go  to  the  usual  church, 
do  not  blame  the  modern  spirit  of  scepticism  and  restlessness,  but  go  sharply  into 
the  innermost  places  of  your  own  heart,  and  see  how  far  you  have  bolted  the  church 
doors  against  your  son,  or  made  a  place  which  he  would  be  ashamed  to  be  seen  in. 
Then  there  is  a  bright  side  to  all  this  view.  I  can,  now  that  I  have  got  my  rough 
reading  done,  turn  this  "  notwithstanding  "  into  a  symbol  of  hope,  a  light  of  history  ; 
I  can  make  high  and  inspiring  uses  of  it.  I  will  blot  out  the  word,  "  Korah,"  and  fill 
in  other  names,  and  then  the  moral  lesson  of  the  text  will  expand  itself  into  gracious 
meanings,  rise  above  us  like  a  firmament  crowded  with  innumerable  and  brilliant 
lights.  In  days  long  ago  they  killed  the  martyrs — notwithstanding,  the  children  of 
the  martyrs  died  not.  There  the  light  begins  to  come  ;  there  I  hear  music  lifting  up 
sweetest  voice  of  testimony  and  hope.  So,  in  all  the  ages,  one  generation  passeth  away 
and  another  generation  cometh,  and  still  Christ's  following  enlarges ;  on  the  whole, 
he  sums  up  into  higher  figures  year  by  year.  Not  that  I  care  for  census-religion, 
not  that  I  would  number  people  for  the  purpose  of  ascertaining  Christ's  i^osition  in 
the  world.  The  kingdom  of  heaven  cometh  not  with  observation  ;  is  not  a  matter 
of  census-reckoning  or  statistic-returns ;  it  is  a  matter  of  spiritual  quality,  inner 
manhood,  meaning  and  attitude  of  the  soul ;  and  amid  all  sin,  struggle,  doubt,  diffi- 
culty, darkness,  the  kingdom  moves.  (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  The  children  of  Korah  : — 
These  sons  of  Korah  were  afterwards  in  their  prosperity  eminently  serviceable  to 
the  Church,  being  employed  by  David  as  singers  in  the  house  of  the  Lord  ;  hence 
many  psalms  are  said  to  be  for  the  sons  of  Korah  ;  and  perhaps  they  were  made  to 
bear  his  name  so  long  after,  rather  than  the  name  of  any  other  of  their  ancestors, 
for  warning  to  themselves,  and  as  an  instance  of  the  power  of  God,  which  brought 
those  choice  fruits  even  out  of  that  bitter  root.  The  children  of  families  that  have 
been  stigmatised,  should  endeavour  by  their  eminent  virtues  to  bear  away  the 
reproach  of  their  fathers.     {Matthew  Henry,  D.D.) 

Vers.  63-65.  There  was  not  left  a  man  of  them,  save  Caleb  the  son  of  Jephnnneh, 
and  Joshua  the  son  of  Nun. — The  certainty  of  the  fulfilment  of  God's  threatened  judy- 
mentx  and  promised  mercies  : — I.  We  are  here  furnished  with  a  confirmation  of  the 
FACT  that  God  will  fulfil  His  thkeatenings  against  sinnees.  1.  We  may  con- 
ceive them  to  have  counted  upon  their  numerical  strength.  This  has  often  been 
appealed  to  as  a  security  against  the  punishment  of  crime.  Nor  can  it  be  denied 
that,  according  as  iniquity  abounds  in  a  community,  it  is  the  more  rarely  visited 
with  its  merited  penalty.  It  is  found,  in  such  circumstances,  not  to  be  convenient 
to  institute  inquiry ;  and  vice,  with  the  colouring  which  the  spirit  of  the  age  may 
have  given  to  it,  assumes  not  unfrequently  the  name  of  virtue.  But  it  is  far  other- 
wise with  Him  whose  power,  holiness,  and  justice  are  infinite.  2.  It  is  not  im- 
probable that,  as  a  ground  of  security  against  threatened  judgment,  the  Israelites  in 
the  wilderness  counted  on  their  privileges.  On  this  principle  many  a  sinner  reasons 
to  his  own  destruction ;  forgetting  that  the  higher  his  privileges,  the  greater  the 
punishment  they  involve,  if  unimproved.  The  execution  of  the  sentence  of  death 
upon  the  Israelites  was  the  more  solemn,  because  executed  amidst  the  enjoyment  of 
the  means  of  grace.  They  died,  the  monuments  of  Divine  wrath — while  on  every 
side  they  were  surrounded  with  privileges.  They  died,  in  that  camp,  which 
was  the  camp  of  the  living  God.  They  died,  within  sight  of  the  Lord's  taber- 
nacle, and  of  the  ark  of  the  Lord's  covenant.  They  died,  while  the  manna  from 
heaven  was  falling  around  them,  and  the  stream  from  the  smitten  rock  flowing 
before  their  eyes.  They  died,  while  the  glory  of  the  Lord  was  in  their  view— while 
the  pillar  in  which  the  Lord  Himself  dwelt  was  over  their  head — while,  as  a  cloud  to 
refresh  them,  it  was  over  them  by  day;  and  as  a  fire  to  give  them  light,  was  over 
them  by  night.  These  their  privileges  did  not  preserve  them ;  and  neither  will 
yours  preserve  you.  3.  The  Israelites  in  the  wilderness  may  have  been  tempted  to 
infer  that  the  Lord  would  not  execute  His  threatened  vengeance  against  them, 


298  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvi. 

because  all  were  not  at  one  and  the  same  time  visited  with  punishment.  To  some 
of  them  a  respite  of  nearly  forty  years  was  granted.  But,  when  apparently  within 
reach  of  the  Land  of  Promise — when  its  hills  and  mountains  were  in  view  before 
their  eyes — when  they  had  only  to  march  forward  one  other  stage  and  to  cross  the 
Jordan,  in  order  to  obtain  possession  of  it — the  last  of  the  doomed  generation  died, 
and  their  burial  there  made  it  manifest  that  God's  threat enings  are  ^ure.  II.  But 
in  ourtext  we  are  furnished  with  an  impressive  illustration  of  the  fact,  that  as  God 
will  fulfil  His  threatenings  againsst  sinners,  so  also  His  promises  in  favour  of  His 
OWN  PEOPLE.  1.  This,  in  the  case  of  Caleb  and  Joshua,  was  made  manifest,  not- 
withstanding the  crowd  of  the  ungodly  with  which  they  were  mingled.  But,  "the 
Lord  knoweth  them  that  are  His."  He  loves  them,  as  His  chosen,  with  an  everlast- 
ing love.  They  are  "  sealed  with  the  Holy  Spirit  of  promise,  which  is  the  earnest 
of  their  inheritance,  until  the  redemption  of  the  purchased  possession."  Wherever 
thy  lot  may  be  cast,  it  is  His  sun  that  shines  upon  thy  head ;  it  is  His  stars 
that  give  thee  light ;  it  is  His  air  that  thou  breathest ;  it  is  His  fond  with  which 
thou  art  supplied.  "Not  a  sparrow  falleth  to  the  ground  without  Him  ;  and  the 
hairs  of  thy  head  are  all  numb  red."  2.  In  the  case  of  Caleb  and  Joshua,  we  are 
furnished  with  a  confirmation  of  the  truth  of  God's  gracious  promises  to  His  people 
notwithstanding  the  dangers  to  which  they  are  exposed.  3.  In  the  instance  referred 
to  in  onr  text  we  behold  the  fulfilment  of  God's  gracious  promises  to  His  people,  in 
opposition  to  every  sentiment  of  distrust  arising  from  the  length  and  intricacy  of 
their  path.  {2\  Doi;/,  M.A.)  The  faithfulness  of  God  : — I.  The  faithfulness  of 
God  to  His  threatenings.  The  judi;m^'nt  which  God  pronounced  thirty-eight  years 
previous  He  has  now  completely  fulfilled  (c/.  chap.  xiv.  11-39).  1.  The  immense 
number  of  the  condemned  does  not  avail  for  the  escape  of  any  one  of  them.  Sen- 
tence was  passed  upon  upwards  of  six  hundred  thousand  men  ;  "  and  there  was  not 
left  a  man  of  them."  "Though  hand  join  in  hand,"  &c  (Prov.  xi.  21).  2.  The 
lapse  of  time  before  the  complete  execution  of  the  sentence  does  not  avail  for  the 
escape  of  any  one.  Thirty-eight  years  passed  away  before  the  judgment  pronounced 
was  fully  carried  out ;  but  ultimately  not  one  upon  whom  it  was  passed  escaped. 
II.  Thk  faithfulness  of  God  to  His  purposes.  III.  The  faithfulness  or  God  to 
His  promises.  He  promised  to  spare  Caleb  and  Joshua,  and  to  bring  them  unto 
the  promised  land  (chap.  xiv.  23-30)  ;  and  He  spared  them,  and  in  due  season 
brought  them  into  that  land.  (W.  Jones.)  The  census  of  Israel : — Thirty-eight  years 
had  passed  since  the  first  numbering  at  Sinai,  and  the  people  had  come  to  the 
borders  of  the  promised  land.  The  time  had  come  for  another  census.  The  wisdom 
which  commanded  the  counting  of  Israel  at  the  beginning  of  the  wilderness  journey, 
also  determined  to  count  them  at  the  end  of  it.  This  would  show  that  God  did  not 
value  them  less  than  in  former  years ;  it  would  afford  proof  that  His  word  of  judg- 
ment had  been  fulfilled  to  them;  and,  moreover,  it  would  maishal  them  i'oi"  the 
grand  enterprise  of  conquering  the  land  of  Canaan.  The  numbering  on  this  occa- 
sion was  not  of  the  women  and  children  or  the  infirm ;  for  the  order  ran  th  is  (ver. 
2).  If  the  numbers  of  our  Churches  weie  taken  in  this  fashion,  would  they  not 
sadly  shrink?  We  have  many  sick  among  us  that  need  to  be  carried  about,  and 
nursed,  and  doctored.  Half  the  strength  of  the  Church  goes  in  ambulance  service 
towards  the  weak  and  wounded.  Another  diminution  of  power  is  occasioned  by  the 
vast  numbers  of  undeveloped  believers,  to  whom  the  apostle  would  have  said  (Heb. 
V.  12).  To  revise  the  Church  rolls  so  as  to  leave  none  but  vigorous  soldiers  on  the 
muster-roll  would  make  us  break  our  hearts  over  our  statistics.  May  the  Lord  send 
us,  for  this  evil,  health  and  cure  !  When  the  second  census  was  taken,  it  was  found 
that  the  people  were  nearly  of  the  same  number  as  at  the  first.  Had  it  not  been  for 
the  punishment  so  jut^tly  inflicted  upon  them,  they  must  have  largely  increased ;  but 
now  they  had  somewhat  diminished.  It  is  of  God  to  multiply  a  nation,  or  a  Church. 
We  may  not  expect  any  advance  in  our  numbers  if  we  grieve  the  Spirit  of  God,  and 
if  by  our  unbelief  we  drive  Him  to  declare  that  we  shall  not  prosper.  I.  First, 
obs^erve  the  notable  change  wrought  among  the  people  by  death  (ver.  64).  The 
entire  mass  of  the  nation  had  been  changed.  1.  Such  changes  strike  us  as  most 
memorable.  In  the  course  of  forty  years,  what  changes  take  place  in  every  com- 
munity, in  every  Church,  in  every  family  !  The  march  of  the  generations  is  not  a 
procession  passing  before  our  eyes,  while  we  sit,  like  spectators,  at  the  window ;  but 
we  are  in  the  procession  ourselves,  and  we,  too,  are  passing  down  the  streets  of  time, 
and  shall  disappear  in  our  turn.  2.  This  change  was  universal  throughout  the 
whole  camp.  "  There  was  not  left  a  man  of  them."  Thus  is  it  among  ourselves  : 
no  offices  can  be  permanently  held  by  the  same  men :  "  they  are  not  suffered  to  con- 


CHAP.  XXVII.]  NUMIiKHS.  299 

tinue  by  reason  of  death."  No  position,  however  lofty  or  lowly,  can  retain  its  old 
possessor.  It  is  not  only  the  cedars  that  fall,  but  the  fir-trees  feel  the  axe.  "  There 
is  no  discharge  in  that  war."  That  same  scythe  which  cuts  down  the  towering 
flower  among  the  grass,  also  sweeps  down  whole  regiments  of  green  blades.  3.  The 
change  is  inevitable.  We  must  soon  quit  our  tents  for  the  last  battle.  When  the 
conscript  number  shall  be  drawn  we  may  escape  this  year,  and  next ;  but  the  lot 
will  fall  upon  us  in  due  time.  There  is  no  leaping  from  the  net  of  mortality  wherein, 
like  a  shoal  of  fish,  we  are  all  enclosed.  4.  All  this  change  was  still  under  the 
Divine  control.  Stern  though  the  work  may  be,  God's  great  and  tender  heart  rules 
the  ravages  of  death.  5.  The  change  was  beneficial.  It  was  desirable  that  there 
should  be  a  people  trained  in  a  better  school,  with  a  nobler  spirit,  fit  to  take  posses- 
sion of  the  promised  land.  The  change  was  working  rightly  :  the  Divine  purpose 
was  being  fulfilled.  The  incoming  of  new  blood  into  the  social  frame  is  good  in  a 
thousand  ways  ;  it  is  well  that  we  should  make  room  for  others  who  may  serve  our 
Master  better.  6.  These  changes  are  most  instructive.  If  we  are  now  serving  God, 
let  us  do  so  with  intense  earnestness,  since  only  for  a  little  while  shall  we  have  the 
opportunity  to  do  so  among  men.  II.  The  perpetuity  of  the  people  of  God.  The 
nation  is  living,  though  a  nation  has  died.  It  is  the  same  chosen  seed  of  Abraham 
with  whom  Jehovah  is  in  covenant.  God  has  a  Church  in  the  world,  and  He  will 
have  a  Church  in  the  world  till  time  shall  be  no  more.  The  gates  of  hell  and  the 
jaws  of  death  shall  not  prevail  against  the  Church,  though  each  one  of  its  members 
must  depai't  out  of  this  world  in  his  turn.  1.  Mark  well,  that  "  the  Church  in  the 
wilderness "  lives  on.  Everything  has  changed,  and  yet  nothing  has  altered. 
Altliough  the  men  who  bear  the  ark  of  the  covenant  of  the  Lord  wear  other  names, 
yet  they  fulfil  the  same  office.  The  music  of  the  sanctuary  rises  and  falls,  but  the 
strain  goes  on.  The  hallelujah  never  ceases,  nor  is  there  a  pause  in  the  perpetual 
chorus,  "  His  mercy  endureth  forever,"  2.  The  gaps  were  filled  up  by  appointed 
successors.  As  one  warrior  died  another  man  stepped  into  his  place,  even  as  one 
wave  dying  on  the  shore  is  pursued  by  another.  God  buries  His  workmen,  but  His 
work  lives.  3.  At  this  second  numbering  the  people  stood  ready  for  greater  work 
than  they  had  ever  done  before.  4.  It  was  Israel's  joy  that  God's  love  was  not 
withdrawn  from  the  nation.  III.  The  unchangeableness  of  the  woed  of  God. 
IV.  The  abiding  necessity  of  faith.  1.  No  man  is,  was,  or  ever  shall  be  saved 
without  faith.     2.  No  privilege  can  supply  the  lack  of  faith.     (C  H.  Spurgeon.) 


CHAPTEE  XXVII. 


Vers.  1-11.  The  daughters  of  Zelophebad. — Women's  rights — a  parable  : — I  want 
to  use  this  incident  for  a  twofold  purpose.  I.  In  respect  to  its  general  teaching. 
1.  I  would  exhibit  for  your  imitation  the  faith  which  these  five  young  women,  the 
dai  liters  of  Zelophehad,  possessed  with  regard  to  the  promised  inheritance.  2. 
There  was  this  feature,  too,  about  the  faith  of  these  five  women — they  knew  that 
the  inheritance  was  only  to  be  won  by  encountering  great  difficulties.  3.  I  commend 
the  faith  of  these  women  to  you  because,  believing  in  the  land,  and  believing  that 
it  would  be  won,  they  were  not  to  be  put  about  by  the  ill  report  of  some  who  said 
that  it  was  not  a  good  land.  4.  Being  thus  sure  of  the  land,  and  feeling  certain 
about  that,  we  must  next  commend  them  for  their  anxiety  to  possess  a  portion  in 
it.  Why  did  they  think  so  much  about  it  ?  I  heard  some  one  say  the  other  day, 
rpeakiiig  of  cc. cain  young  people,  "I  do  not  like  to  see  young  women  religious; 
they  ought  to  be  full  of  fun  and  mirth,  and  not  have  their  minds  filled  with  such 
profound  thoughts."  Now,  I  will  be  bound  to  say  that  this  kind  of  philosophy  was 
accredited  in  the  camp  of  Israel,  and  that  there  were  a  great  many  young  women 
there  who  said,  "  Oh,  there  is  time  enough  to  think  about  the  good  land  when  we 
get  there ;  let  us  be  polishing  up  the  mirrors  ;  let  us  be  seeing  to  our  dresses ;  let  us 
understand  how  to  put  our  fingers  upon  the  timbrel  when  the  time  comes  for  it ;  but 
as  for  prosing  about  a  portion  among  those  Hivites  and  Hittites,  what  is  the  good 
of  it  ?  We  will  not  bother  ourselves  about  it."  But  such  was  the  strength  of  the 
faith  of  these  five  women  that  it  led  them  to  feel  a  deep  anxiety  for  a  share  in  the 
inheritance.  They  were  not  such  simpletons  as  to  live  only  for  the  present.  These 
women  were  taken  up  with  prudent  anxious  thoughts  about  their  own  part  in  the 


300  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxvii. 

land.  And  let  me  say  that  they  were  right  in  desiring  to  have  a  portion  there, 
when  they  recoUecteil  that  the  laud  had  been  covenanted  to  their  fathers.  They 
might  well  wish  to  have  a  part  in  a  thing  good  enough  to  be  a  covenant-blessing. 
5.  But  I  must  commend  them  yet  again  for  the  waj'  in  which  they  set  about  the 
business.  I  do  not  find  tliafc  they  went  complaining  from  tent  to  tent  that  they 
were  afraid  that  they  had  no  portion.  Many  doubters  do  that  ;  they  tell  their 
doubts  and  fears  to  other*;,  and  they  get  no  further.  But  these  five  women  went 
straight  away  to  Moses.  He  was  at  their  head  ;  he  was  their  mediator  ;  and  then 
it  is  said  that  "  Moses  brought  their  cause  before  the  Lord."  You  see,  these 
women  did  not  try  to  get  what  they  wanted  hy  force.  They  did  not  say,  "  Oh,  we 
will  take  care  and  get  our  share  when  we  get  there."  They  did  not  suppose  that 
they  had  any  merit  which  they  might  plead,  and  so  get  it ;  but  they  went  straight 
away  to  Moses,  and  Moses  took  their  cause,  and  laid  it  before  the  Lord.  Dost  thou 
want  a  portion  in  heaven,  sinner?  Go  straight  away  to  Jesus,  and  Jesus  will  take 
thy  cause,  and  lay  it  before  the  Lord.  II.  With  a  view  of  giving  the  whole  incident 
A  PARTicDLAE  miiECTioN — 1.  Does  it  udt  Strike  you  that  there  is  here  a  special  lesson 
for  our  unconverted  sisters?  Here  are  five  daughters,  I  suppose  young  women, 
certainly  unmarried,  and  these  five  were  unanimous  in  seeking  to  have  a  portion 
where  God  had  promised  it  to  His  people.  Have  I  any  young  women  here  who 
would  dissent  from  that  ?  I  am  afraid  I  have!  Do  you  not  desire  a  portion  in  the 
skies  ?  Have  you  no  wish  for  glory  ?  Can  you  sell  Christ  for  a  few  hours  of  mirth  ? 
Will  you  give  Him  up  for  a  giddy  song  or  an  idle  companion  ?  Those  are  not  your 
friends  who  would  lead  you  Irom  the  paths  of  righteousness.  2.  Has  it  not  a  loud 
voice,  too,  to  the  children  of  godly  parents  ?  I  like  these  young  women  saying  that 
their  father  did  not  die  with  Korah,  but  that  he  only  died  the  ordinary  death  which 
fell  upon  others  because  of  the  sin  of  the  wilderness  ;  and  also,  their  saying,  "Why 
should  the  name  of  our  father  be  done  away  from  among  his  family  because  he  had 
no  son  ?  "  It  is  a  good  thing  to  see  this  respect  to  parents,  this  desire  to  keep  up 
the  honour  of  the  family.  (C.  H.  Spurgeon.)  The  request  of  the  daughters  of 
Zelophehad;  the  rights  of  women : — I.  The  request  op  the  daughters  of  Zelo- 
PHEHAD.  1.  Was  presented  in  an  orderly  and  becoming  manner.  "  They  stood  before 
Mose.s.and  before  Eleazar  the  priest,"  &c.(ver.  2).  They  made  their  request  in  a  regular 
manner,  and  to  the  proper  authorities.  2.  Was  eminently  fair  and  reasonable. 
While  their  father,  by  reason  of  sin,  was,  in  common  with  the  generation  to  which 
he  belonged,  excluded  from  the  promised  land,  yet  he  had  not  done  anything  for 
which  his  children  should  be  deprived  of  an  inheritance  therein.  3.  Indicated 
becoming  respect  for  their  father.  They  vindicate  him  from  the  guilt  of  sharing  in 
any  of  the  rebellions  except  the  general  one  ;  and  they  evince  an  earnest  desire  for 
the  perpetuation  of  his  name  and  family.  4.  Implied  faith  in  the  promise  of  God 
to  give  Canaan  to  the  Israelites.  5.  Implied  an  earnest  desire  for  a  portion  in  the 
promised  land.  II.  The  Divine  answer  to  their  request.  1.  Was  given  by 
Jehovah  to  Moses  in  response  to  his  inquiries.  Notice  here — (1)  The  humility 
of  Moses.  He  does  not  presume  to  decide  the  case  himself,  (fee.  (2)  The  direction 
which  God  grants  to  the  humble.  "  The  meek  will  He  guide  in  judgment,"  <fec. 
2.  Commended  the  cause  of  the  daughters  of  Zelophehad.  "  The  daughters  of 
Zelophehfld  speak  right."  3.  Granted  the  request  of  the  daughters  of  Zelophehad. 
"  Thou  shalt  surely  give  them  a  possession,"  <fec.  (ver.  7).  4.  Included  a  general 
law  of  inheritance.  "  And  thou  shalt  speak  unto  the  children  of  Israel,"  &c. 
(vers.  8-11).  Thus  a  great  benefit  accrued  to  the  nation  from  the  request  of  the 
daughters  of  Zelophehiid.  (W.  Jones.)  The  daughters  of  Zelophehad  : — 1.  The 
rectification  of  things  that  are  wrong  sometimes  seems  to  come  from  man  and  not 
from  God.  Look  at  this  case.  It  was  the  women  themselves  who  began  the  reform. 
Providence  did  not  stir  first.  The  five  women  gave  this  reform  to  the  economy  of 
Israel.  So  it  would  seem  on  the  face  of  the  story,  and  many  people  look  at  the 
face  and  go  no  farther,  and  so  they  blunder.  Suggestions  are  from  God.  The 
very  idea  which  we  think  our  own  is  not  our  own,  but  God's.  "He  is  Lord 
of  all,"  of  all  good  ideas,  noble  impulses,  holy  inspirations,  sudden  movements 
of  the  soul  upward  into  higher  life  and  broader  liberty.  This  is  His  plan  of 
training  men.  He  seems  to  stand  aside,  and  to  take  no  part  in  some  obviously 
good  movements,  and  men  say,  "  This  is  a  human  movement,  a  political 
movement,  a  non-religious  movement,"  not  knowing  what  they  are  talking  about, 
forgetting  that  the  very  idea  out  of  which  it  all  sprang  came  down  from  the 
Father  of  lights,  that  the  very  eloquence  by  which  it  is  supported  is  Divinely 
taught,  that  the  very  gold  which  is  its  sinew  is  His :  they  do  not  go  far  enough 


CHAP.  XXVII.]  NUMBERS.  301 

back  in  their  investigation  into  the  origin  of  things,  or  they  would  find  God  in 
movements  which  are  often  credited  to  human  genius  alone.  2.  Everywhere  the 
Bible  is  full  of  the  very  spirit  of  justice.  It  is  the  Magna  Charta  of  the  civilised 
world.  This  is  the  spirit  that  gives  the  Bible  such  a  wonderful  hold  upon  the 
confidence  of  mankind.  Look  at  this  case  as  an  example.  The  applicants  were 
women.  All  the  precedents  of  Israel  might  have  been  pointed  to  as  the  answer  to 
their  appeal.  Why  create  a  special  law  for  women  ?  Why  universalise  a  very 
exceptional  case?  Why  not  put  these  people  down  as  sensational  reformers?  Yet, 
the  case  was  heard  with  patience,  and  answered  with  dignity.  Oh,  women,  you 
should  love  the  Bible  !  It  is  your  friend.  It  has  done  more  for  you  than  all  other 
books  put  together.  Wherever  it  goes  it  claims  liberty  for  you,  justice  for  you, 
honour  for  you.  3.  Every  question  should  become  the  subject  of  social  sympathy 
and  matter  of  religious  reference.  These  women  were  heard  patiently.  It  is 
somethmg  to  get  a  hearing  for  our  grievances.  Sometimes  those  grievances  perish 
in  the  very  telling;  sometimes  the  statement  of  them  brings  unexpected  help  to 
our  assistance.  This  case  is  what  may  be  called  a  secular  one  ;  it  is  about  land 
and  name  and  inheritance;  aud  even  that  question  was  made  in  Israel  simply 
a  religious  one.  In  ancient  Israel,  with  its  priestly  system,  men  had  to  go  to  the 
leader  and  the  priest  first ;  in  Christianity  we  can  go  straight  to  God  ;  we  have  no 
p'iesthood  but  Christ ;  the  way  to  the  throne  is  open  night  and  day.  Oh,  wronged 
and  suffering  woman,  tell  thy  case  to  the  Father  !  Oh,  man,  carrying  a  burden  too 
heavy  for  thy  declining  strength,  speak  to  God  about  the  weight,  and  He  will  help 
thee  with  His  great  power.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.)  A  rightful  claim: — It  does  the 

heart  good  to  read  such  words  as  these  at  a  time  like  the  present,  when  so  little 
is  made  of  the  proper  standing  and  portion  of  God's  people,  and  when  so  many  are 
content  to  go  on  from  day  to  day,  and  year  to  year,  without  caring  even  to  inquire 
into  the  things  which  are  freely  given  to  them  of  God.  Nothing  is  more  sad  than 
to  see  the  carelessness  with  which  many  professing  Christians  treat  such  all- 
important  questions  of  the  standing,  walk,  and  hope  of  the  believer  and  the  Church 
of  God.  If  God,  in  the  aboundings  of  His  grace,  has  been  pleased  to  bestow  upon 
us  precious  privileges,  as  Chiistians,  ought  we  not  to  seek  earnestly  to  know  what 
these  privilet-'cs  are  ?  Ought  we  not  to  seek  to  make  them  our  own,  in  the  artless 
simplicity  of  faith?  Is  it  treating  our  God  and  His  revelation  worthily,  to  be 
indifferent  as  to  whether  we  are  servants  or  sons — as  to  whether  we  have  the  Holy 
Ghost  dwelling  in  us  or  not^as  to  whether  we  are  under  law  or  under  grace — 
whether  ours  is  a  heavenly  or  an  earthly  calling?  Surely  not.  If  there  be  one 
thing  plainer  than  another  in  Scripture,  it  is  this,  that  God  delights  in  those  wlio 
fll>preciate  and  enjoy  the  provision  of  His  love — those  who  find  their  joy  in  Himself. 
"  And  the  Lord  spake  unto  Moses,  saying.  The  daughters  of  Zelophehad  speak 
right:  thou  shalt  surely  give  them  a  possession  of  an  inheritance  among  their 
father's  brethren  ;  and  thou  shalt  cause  the  inheritance  of  their  father  to  pass  unto 
them  "  (vers.  5-7).  Here  was  a  glorious  triumph,  in  the  presence  of  the  whole 
assembly.  A  bold  and  simple  faith  is  always  sure  to  be  rewarded.  It  glorifies 
God,  and  God  honours  it.  Need  we  travel  from  section  to  section,  and  from  p»ge 
to  page  of  the  holy  volume  to  prove  this  ?  Need  we  turn  to  the  Abrahams,  the 
Hannahs,  the  Dcboralis,  the  Eahabs,  the  Ruths  of  Old  Testament  times  ?  or  to  the 
Marys,  the  Elizabeths,  the  centurions,  and  the  Syro-phoenicians  of  the  New  T^sta- 
ment  times?  Wherever  we  turn,  we  learn  tlie  same  great  practical  truth  that  God 
delights  in  a  bold  and  simple  faith — a  faith  that  artlessly  seizes  and  tenaciously 
holds  all  that  He  has  given — that  positively  refuses,  even  in  the  verv  face  of 
nature's  weakness  and  death,  to  surrender  a  single  hair's  breadth  of  the  Divinely- 
given  inheritance.  Hence,  then,  we  are  deeply  indebted  to  the  daughters  of 
Zelophehad.  They  teach  us  a  lesson  of  inestimable  value.  And  more  than  this, 
their  acting  gave  occasion  to  the  unfolding  of  a  fresh  truth  which  was  to  form  the 
basis  of  a  Divine  rule  for  all  future  generations.  The  Lord  commanded  Mo-^es, 
saying,  "  If  a  man  die,  and  have  no  son,  then  ye  shall  cause  his  inheritance  to  p  iss 
unto  his  daughter."  Here  we  have  a  great  principle  laid  down,  in  reference  to  the 
question  of  inheritance,  of  which,  humanly  speiiking,  we  should  have  heard 
nothing  had  it  not  been  for  the  faith  and  faithful  conduct  of  these  remarkable 
women.  If  they  had  listened  to  the  voice  of  timidity  and  unbelief — if  they  had 
refused  to  come  forward,  before  the  whnle  congre<.'ation,  in  the  assertion  of  tbe 
claims  of  faith  ;  then,  not  only  would  th^  y  have  lost  their  own  inheritance  and 
blessing,  but  all  future  daughters  of  Israel,  in  a  like  position,  would  have  been 
deprived  of  their  portion  likewise.    Whereas,  on  the  contrary,  by  acting  in  the 


302  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxvn. 

precious  energy  of  faith,  they  preserved  their  inheritance  ;  they  got  the  blessing ; 
they  received  testimony  from  God ;  their  names  shine  on  the  page  of  inspiration  ; 
and  their  conduct  furnished,  by  Divine  autlna-ity,  a  precedent  for  all  future 
generations.  Tlius  much  as  to  the  marvellous  results  of  taith.  But  then  we  must 
remember  that  there  is  moral  danger  arising  out  of  the  very  dignity  and  elevation 
which  faith  confers  on  those  who,  through  grace,  are  enabled  to  exercise  it;  and 
this  danger  must  be  carefullv  guarded  against.  This  is  strikingly  illustrated  in  the 
further  history  of  tbe  dauL'hters  of  Zelophehad,  as  recorded  in  the  last  chapter  of 
our  book.  "  And  the  chief  fatheis,"  &c.  (chap,  xxxvi.  1-5).  The  "  fathers  "  of  the 
house  of  Joseph  must  be  heard  as  well  as  the  "  daughters."  The  faith  of  the 
latter  was  most  lovely  ;  but  there  was  just  a  danger  lest,  in  the  elevation  to  which 
that  faith  had  raised  them,  they  might  forget  the  claims  of  others,  and  remove  the 
landmarks  which  guarded  the  inheritance  of  their  fathers.  This  had  to  be  thought 
of  and  provided  for.  It  was  natural  to  suppose  that  the  daughters  of  Zelophehad 
would  marry ;  and  moreover  it  was  possible  they  might  form  an  alliance  outside 
the  boundaries  of  their  tribe  ;  and  thus  in  the  year  of  jubilee — that  grand  adjusting 
institution — instead  of  adjustment,  there  would  be  confusion,  and  a  permanent 
breach  in  the  inheritance  of  Manasseh.  This  would  never  do ;  and  therefore  the 
wisdom  of  those  ancient  fathers  is  very  apparent.  We  need  to  be  guarded  on  every 
side,  in  order  that  the  integrity  of  faith  and  the  testimony  may  be  duly  maintained. 
(O.  H.  Mackintosh.)  Woman  is  the  conscience  of  the  tcorld : — Now,  to  live  as  one 
wishes,  is  said  to  be  the  rule  of  children.  To  live  as  one  ought  is  the  rule  of  men. 
And  it  is  the  office  of  woman  in  the  world  to  assist  men  to  live  as  they  ought ;  to 
lift  them  to  those  higher  levels  of  moral  attainment,  moral  beauty,  and  power, 
which  of  themselves  they  will  not  gain.  Woman  has  been  said  to  be  the  conscience 
of  the  world,  and  there  is  a  profound  truth  in  that.  Her  moral  intuition  is  clearer, 
her  moral  affection  is  apt  to  be  sweeter  and  more  powerful.  It  was  the  startled 
conscience  of  a  Roman  woman  that  almost  held  Pilate  back  from  his  transcendent 
crime.  It  was  the  conscience  of  Blanche  of  Castile  which  melted  the  noblest  king 
France  ever  had,  Louis  IX.  It  was  the  sense  of  righteousness  in  the  Scotch,  in  the 
Dutch,  in  the  French,  in  the  German  women  which  upheld  the  Reformation  and 
would  not  let  it  sink  and  die.  It  was  the  conscience  of  the  American  women  which 
was  tbe  one  invulnerable,  irresistible,  unsilenced  enemy  of  American  slavery. 
Whatever  statesmen  might  plan  about  it,  whatever  political  economists  might 
think  about  it,  whatever  merchants  might  dream  about  it,  every  woman's  heart 
knew,  that  was  not  blighted  and  overshadowed  by  the  influence  of  the  present 
system,  that  it  rested  on  a  lie,  and  it  was  that  conscience  in  the  American  women 
sending  half  a  million  of  men  out,  its  instruments  and  ministers,  on  the  bloody 
field,  which  finally  overcame  and  swept  from  existence  that  detestable  system. 
That  conscience  of  woman  is  the  tower  which  society  will  always  need  to  have 
developed  and  regnant  within  it,  and  there  is  no  other  office  so  great.  I  do  not  care 
what  philosopher  is  expanding  his  vast  system  of  philosophic  thought;  I  do  not 
care  what  statesman  is  planning  for  his  country's  future  ;  I  do  not  care  what 
architect  is  lifting  the  edifice  into  the  air.  or  is  strewing  the  canvas  with  the 
splt-ndour  of  his  own  spirit,  there  is  no  other  office  so  grand  on  earth  as  that 
committed  to  woman — Christianly  culture,  in  fellowsliip  with  God,  of  bringing  up 
lier  acute  and  dominant  moral  sense  into  contact  with  the  minds  of  men,  that 
ultimate  and  supremest  law  of  the  universe,  the  law  of  righteousness,  for  which 
the  planets  and  the  stars  were  builded ;  she  glorifies  herself  and  she  glorifies  God  in 
that  sublime  ministry.     {R.  S.  Storrs,  D.D.) 

Vers.  12-14.  Thou  also  shalt  be  gathered  unto  thy  people,  aa  Aaron  thy  brother 
was  gathered. —  Why  Moses  must  not  enter  Canaan: — Eminent  as  he  was  in  grace 
and  holiness,  he  was  not  allowed  to  enter  with  his  people  into  the  Land  of  Promise. 
This  in  itself  must  have  been  a  sore  trial.  But  it  was  tenfold  more  so  on  account 
of  the  cause ;  it  was  a  judgment.  He  who  was  the  meekest  of  men  once  spoke 
unadvisedly  with  his  lips.  The  reason,  then,  why  Moses  could  not  enter  into  the 
Land  of  Promise  is  evident.  Moses  represents  the  law.  Now  we  have  seen 
that,  as  a  believer,  Moses  could  not  enter  the  Land  of  Promise,  because  on 
one  occasion  he  "spake  unadvisedly  with  his  lips."  But  look  at  him  as  the 
representative  of  the  Law,  and  what  lesson  does  his  inability  to  enter  the  Land 
of  Promise  rivet  on  our  hearts  ?  This  truth,  that  the  law  cannot  bring  us 
into  the  Land  of  Promise.  There  was  a  point  to  which  Moses  could  bring  Israel, 
and  then  he  must  lie  down  and  die,  and  his  work  must  be  given  into  other  hands. 


CHAT.  XXVII.]  NUMBEBS.  803 

into  the  hands  of  Josliua,  whose  very  name  shows  that  he  was  an  eminent  type  of 
Christ.  There  is  a  point,  too,  up  to  which  the  law  may  bring  us.  Where  is  it  ?  It 
is  to  a  knowledge  of  sin.  "  By  the  law,"  says  St.  Paul,  "  is  the  knowledge  of  sin." 
"  I  had  not  known  sin,"  he  savs  "  but  by  the  law  :  for  I  had  not  known  lust,  except 
the  law  had  said.  Thou  shalt  not  covet  "  (Eom.  vii.  7).  One  great  purpose  for  which 
the  law  is  given  is  just  to  teach  us  what  we  are—  utterly  sinful,  utterly  lost  in 
ourselves.  It  requires  perfect  obedience  ;  and,  behold,  in  many  things  we  offend. 
It  makes  no  provision  for  transgression,  proclaims  no  forgiveness.  It  can  give  no 
peace.  The  voice  is  terrible  to  the  guilty.  Whenever  it  fulfils  its  true  purpose  in 
the  soul  it  empties  it  of  self-righteousness,  lays  it  prostrate  in  the  dust,  and  makes 
it  take  the  lowest  place.  Thus  St.  Paul  says,  "I  through  the  law  am  dead  to  the 
law,  that  I  might  live  unto  God"  (Gal.  ii.  19).  And,  again,  "Wherefore  the 
law  was  our  schoolmaster  to  bring  us  unto  Christ,  that  we  might  be  justified  by 
faith  "  (chap.  iii.  24).  Are  you?  Under  Moses  or  Christ?  What  is  your  hope  of 
glory  ?  Is  it  that  yon  have  not  sinned  so  much  as  others  ?  that  your  life  is  very 
exemplary  ?  that  you  leave  no  duty  willingly  unperformed,  or  service  unattended  ? 
Do  you  think  that  somehow  or  other  Christ  must  be  yours,  if  your  life  is  so 
excellent  ?  Are  these  your  thoughts  ?  Then  we  must  faithfully  tell  you  that  you 
are  still  under  Moses,  siill  clinging  to  a  broken  law ;  and  we  must  remind  you  that 
the  law  can  never  bring  you  to  heaven.  It  is  Christ  only  who  can  save  you,  and 
bring  you  into  the  Land  of  Promise — Christ  only  who  can  reconcile  you  to  God,  and 
we  can  never  come  to  Christ  without  utterly  renouncing  our  own  righteousness, 
and  our  own  works,  as  entitling  us  to  God's  favour.  (G.  Wagner.)  The  death  of 
Moses  : — Moses  must  die,  but  only  as  Aaron  died  before  him  (ver.  13) ;  and  Moses 
had  seen  how  easily  and  cheerfully  Aaron  had  put  off  the  priesthood  first,  and  then 
the  body.  I/et  not  Moses,  therefore,  be  afraid  of  dying  ;  it  was  but  to  be  "  gathered 
to  his  people,"  as  Aaron  was  gathered.  Thus  the  death  of  our  near  and  dear 
relations  should  be  improved  by  us.  1.  As  an  engagement  to  us  to  think  often  of 
dying.  We  are  not  better  than  our  fathers  or  brethren  ;  if  they  are  gone,  we  are 
going  ;  if  they  are  gathered  already,  we  must  be  gathered  very  shortly.  2.  As  an 
encouragement  to  us  to  think  of  death  without  terror,  and  even  to  please  ourselves 
with  the  thoughts  of  it,  it  is  but  to  die  as  such  and  such  died,  if  we  lived  as  they 
lived,  and  their  end  was  peace  ;  they  "  finished  their  course  with  joy  " ;  why,  then, 
should  we  fear  any  evil  in  that  melancholy  valley  ?     {Matthew  Henry,  D.D.) 

Vers.  16-23.  Let  the  Lord,  the  God  of  the  spirits  of  all  flesh,  set  a  man  over  the 
cong^regation. — The  spiritual  leaders  of  men : — I.  The  wobld's  need  of  sprRiTUAL 
LEADEBS.  1.  The  great  majority  of  every  generation  are  uninventive,  unaspiring, 
cringing,  servile,  thoughtless,  ignorant.  They  not  only  walk  in  moral  darkness,  but 
lack  the  desire,  ii  not  the  capacity,  to  struggle  into  'the  light  of  moral  principles.  2. 
Clearly,  then,  they  require  spiritual  leaders,  men  who  shall  point  out  to  them  the 
way  of  honesty,  truth,  purity,  and  hohness,  marching  before  them  in  all  the  state- 
liness  of  the  Christly  moraUty.  II.  The  genuine  type  op  spieitual  leaders.  1. 
The  true  spiritual  leader  must  be  a  man.  Not  an  idiot,  not  a  charlatan,  not  a 
functionary.  A  "  man  "  is  a  person  who  has  right  convictions  of  moral  duty,  and 
honestly  embodies  them  in  his  daily  life.  2.  The  true  spiritual  leader  must  be  a  man 
inspired  by  God.  No  man  can  be  a  true  moral  leader  of  the  people  who  has  not 
within  him,  as  the  all-animating  and  directing  force,  an  unutterable  abhorrence  of 
wrong  and  an  invincible  attachment  to  the  right,  whose  whole  nature  does  not  beat 
and  beam  with  the  soul  of  Divine  morality.  III.  The  Divine  succession  of  spiritual 
LEADERS.  They  are  all  in  the  hands  of  God.  1.  He  takes  the  greatest  spiritual  leaders 
away  by  death.  2.  He  raises  others  to  supply  their  place.  One  enters  into  another's 
labours.  {Homilist.)  A  model  ordination  service  : — I.  That  the  person  ordained 
SHOULD  be  chosen  OF  GoD  FOR  HIS  woBK.  Moscs  asked  the  Lord  to  "  set  a  man  over 
the  congregation,"  &c.  (vers.  16,  17).  "  And  the  Lord  said  unto  Moses,  Take  thee 
Joshua,"  (fee.  So  now  the  Christian  minister  should  be — 1.  Called  by  God  to  His 
work.    2.  Appointed  by  God  to  his  sphere  of  work.     II.  That  the  ordination  is  to 

THE   MOST   IMPOBTANT    WORK.       III.    ThAT   THE    ORDINATION    SHOULD    BE    CONDU' TED    BY 

tried  men.  IV.  The  ordination  should  be  accompanied  with  the  imposition  of 
HANDS.  V.  That  the  obdination  shocld  include  a  charge  to  the  ordained.  "  Give 
him  a  charge."  The  duties  and  responsibilities  of  the  office  should  be  laid  before 
those  who  are  being  set  apart  to  it ;  and  the  experience  of  godly  and  approved  men 
should  be  made  available  for  the  direction  of  the  inexperienced.  What  wise  and 
inspiring  things  Moses  would  say  to  Joshua  in  this  charge  1    What  sage  counsels 


304  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxvin. 

drawn  from  his  ripe  experience !  &c.  VI.  That  the  ordination  should  bb  con- 
ducted IN  THE  PRESENCE  OF  THE  PEOPLE.  Moreovcr,  such  an  arrangement — 1.  Is 
more  impressive  to  the  person  being  ordained.  There  present  with  him  are  the 
immortal  souls  for  whom  he  has  to  live  and  labour.  2.  Tends  to  influence  the 
people  beneficially.  As  they  hear  of  the  important  duties  and  solemn  responsibilities 
of  their  minister,  they  should  be  awakened  to  deeper  solicitude  and  more  earnest 
prayer  on  his  behalf,  and  to  heartier  co-operation  with  him.     VII.  The  ordination 

SHOULD  CONFER  HONOUR  UPON  THE  PERSON  ORDAINED.      VIII.  ThAT  A  PERSON  SO  CHOSEN 

OF  God,  SHOULD  seek  special  direction  from  Him,  and  seeking,  shall  obtain  it.  1. 
A  warning  against  self-sufficiency.  2.  A  source  of  encouragement  and  strength. 
(W.  Jones.)  "  The  God  of  the  spirits  of  all  flesh"  : — I.  The  affecting  view  here 
furnished  of  the  agency  and  dominion  of  God  in  connection  with  the  human 
MIND.  1.  God  imparts  the  powers  of  the  spirit.  We  have  nothing  self-derived.  2. 
He  claims  the  affections  of  the  spirit.  3,  He  heals  the  disorders  and  sympathises 
vnth  the  sorrows  of  the  spirit.  4.  He  alone  can  constitute  the  happiness  of  the 
tpirit.  5.  He  will  decide  upon  the  future  destiny  of  the  spirit.  II.  The  moral  uses 
OF  these  contemplations.     1.  Let  them  teach  you  reverence  for  the  human  mind. 

2.  Let  them  impress  you  with  thoughts  of  the  vast  importance  of  personal  religion. 

3.  Let  them  inspire  you  with  practical  efforts  to  benefit  and  bhss  society.  By  educa- 
tion— by  missions,  &c.  4.  Let  them  kindle  hope  for  the  prospects  of  the  human 
race.     (S.  Thodey.) 


CHAPTER  XXVIII. 


Vers.  1-31.  After  this  manner  ye  shall  ofifer  dally. — Of  the  daily  sacrj/Jces;— All 
these  laws  were  in  a  manner  before  handled  while  the  people  abode  at  Mount  Sinai. 
If  any  ask  the  question,  why  then  they  are  here  repeated?  I  answer,  first,  because 
they  were  now  come  to  enter  into  the  land,  being  in  a  manner  upon  the  borders 
thereof  (chap,  xxvii.  12).  God  would  therefore  put  them  in  mind  of  this  that,  when 
they  should  possess  the  land,  they  must  be  mindful  of  His  worship  and  their  own 
duty.  Secondly,  because  few  at  this  time  remained  alive  which  had  heard,  or  if 
they  had  heard,  could  remember  these  laws  that  then  were  published.  Thirdly,  the 
ceremonial  worship  had  been  intermitted  in  the  wilderness  for  many  years,  as 
circumcision  (Josh,  v.)  and  many  other  like  ordinances  by  reason  of  their  continual 
journeys,  or  at  least  continual  expectation  of  them.  Lastly,  God  doth  hereby  com- 
fort and  confirm  His  people  after  their  manifold  provocations  and  murmurings, 
testifying  thereby  that  as  a  merciful  Father  He  is  reconciled  unto  them,  and  the 
remembrance  of  their  sins  buried,  and  that  He  hath  determined  to  do  them  good  all 
the  days  of  their  life.  Now,  the  first  thing  to  be  considered  is  the  daily  sacrifice,  in 
which  was  to  be  offered,  morning  and  evening,  a  lamb,  fine  flour,  wine,  and  oil ; 
these  were  to  be  offered  continually  as  a  burnt  offering  upon  the  altar,  which  law 
was  not  to  take  place  until  they  came  into  the  land,  as  we  heard  before  in  the  like 
case  (chap.  xv.  2),  because  in  the  desert  they  wanted  many  things  necessary  (Deut. 
xii.  8)  which  was  a  sufficient  dispensation  for  the  omitting  of  them  ;  for  when  God 
doth  require  anything  He  giveth  means  to  perform  it,  and  did  never  impute  it  as  a 
sin  unto  them  when  an  inevitable  necessity  did  hinder  them,  and  the  desire  to  obey 
is  no  less  accepted  than  obedience  itself.  Of  this  daily  sacrifice  with  the  rites 
thereof  to  be  performed  every  morning  and  evening  we  read  at  large  (Exod.  xxix. 
38),  they  must  do  it  day  by  day  continually.  So  1  Kings  xviii.,  when  Elijah  con- 
vinced Baal's  priests,  there  is  mention  made  of  their  choosing,  dressing,  and  offering 
a  bullock  in  the  morning  (ver.26),and  of  his  doing  the  Hke  "  at  the  time  of  the  offering 
of  the  evening  sacrifice  "  (ver.  36).  Likewise  "  Peter  and  John  went  up  together  into 
the  temple  at  the  hour  of  prayer,  beine;  the  ninth  hour  "  (Acts  iii.  1).  This  was  the 
time,  being  three  of  the  clock  in  the  afternoon,  when  the  evening  Facrifice  was  wont 
to  be  offered,  unto  which  prayer  also  was  wont  to  be  joined.  We  see  their  practice 
what  it  was  daily  ;  now  let  us  come  to  the  uses  toward  ourselves.  1.  First,  see  from 
hence  by  consideration  of  this  daily  offering—"  a  lamb  every  morning  and  a  lamb 
every  evening" — a  great  difference  between  the  Old  and  New  Testament.  2. 
Secondly,  we  must  understand  from  hence,  that  as  all  sacrifices  under  the  law  did 
as  it  were  lead  us  to  Christ,  "  who  is  the  end  of  the  law  of  righteousness  to  every 
one  that  beheveth "  (Horn.  x.  4) ;  so  did  this  daily  sacrifice  of  "  the  two  lambs 


CHAP.  XXIX.]  NUMBERS.  305 

offered  morning  and  evening  "  most  plainly.  He  is  both  the  Altar  and  the  Sacri- 
fice (Heb.  xiii.  10).  3.  Lastly,  this  daily  saciifice  importeth  the  daily  sajiifice  of 
prayer  which  we  ought  to  offer  to  God  as  our  daily  service  due  unto  Him  (1  Kings 
xviii.  36).  And  thus  do  the  Hebrew  doctors  speak,  "  The  continual  sacrifice  of  the 
morning  made  atonement  for  the  iniquities  that  were  done  in  the  night,  and  the 
evening  sacrifice  made  atonement  for  the  iniquities  that  were  by  day."  It  is  there- 
fore required  of  us  to  pray  unto  God,  not  once  in  a  month,  or  once  a  week,  nor  only 
upon  the  Sabbath  day,  or  publicly  in  the  assemblies  of  the  faithful,  but  we  must 
remember  Him  daily  that  remembereth  us  every  hour.  (Jr.  Attcrsoll.)  In  the 
begiiinlngs  of  yovir  months. — The  new  moon  festival : — The  moon  is  no  unapt 
emblem  of  the  Church,  shining  in  borrcvrsd  splendour,  and  deriving  all  her  light, 
even  when  clearest  and  full-orbed,  from  the  sun,  whose  glory  she  reflects  as  she 
travels  through  the  night.  And  very  fitly  she  represents  the  economy  of  the  law, 
at  its  highest  attainments  only  a  faint  resemblance  of  the  glory  to  come,  and  from 
which  in  reality  all  its  own  splendour  was  derived,  sometimes  only  but  partly 
shining  on  the  Church,  and  often  obscured  and  dim.  The  beginning  of  every  month 
bespoke  renewal  and  increase.  Filling  her  horn  nipht  after  night,  and  becoming 
larger  and  larger,  she  increases  in  brightness  to  full-orbed  beauty.  As  the  moon 
increased,  so  increased  the  sacrifices  of  the  economy  she  was  an  emblem  of.  The 
natural  divisions  of  time,  days  multiplying  into  weeks,  weeks  into  mouths,  and 
months  into  years,  became  regulating  signs  to  obligation  and  hoiie.  But  progress, 
as  light  increasing  more  and  more,  bespoke  imperfection,  and  the  repetition  of  every 
new  moon,  denoting  inefficiency,  waited  for  something  to  come.  "  It  was  not  pos- 
sible that  the  blood  of  bulls  and  of  goats  should  take  away  sin."  Had  the  offerings 
of  holy  times  increased  to  ever  such  a  number,  and  the  cattle  upon  a  thousand  hills 
been  sacrificed,  all  they  could  have  effected  would  have  been  infinitely  short  of  the 
results  attributab'e  alone  to  the  death  of  Christ.  Elvers  of  wine  and  oil  could  not 
be  a  libation ;  neither  was  "  Lebanon  sufiBcient  to  burn,  nor  the  beasts  thereof  suf- 
ficient for  a  burnt-offering."  To  redeem  a  soul,  to  cleanse  from  guilt  and  save 
from  death,  more  than  all  the  world  is  required,  infinite  excellence,  Almighty  love. 
{W.  Seaton.) 


CHAPTER  XXIX. 


Vers.  1-6.  A  day  of  blowing  the  trumpets. — The  Feast  of  Trumpet!^ : — Some  of 
the  Rabbins  fantastically  suppose  that  it  was  instituted  in  remembrance  of  the 
offering  up  of  Isaac,  or  of  deliverance  from  being  offered,  which  conceit  is  idle  and 
nothing  at  all  to  the  purpose.  Others  imagine  tliat  it  was  appointed  upon  occasion 
of  the  wars  that  the  Isiaelites  had  with  the  Amalekites  and  other  nations  under  the 
conduct  of  God,  to  put  them  in  remembrance  that  the  whole  life  of  man  is  nothing 
else  but  a  continual  warfare  (Job  vii.  1 ;  2  Tim.  ii.  1).  Of  this  feast  we  read 
(Lev.  xxiii.  24).  This  was  accounted  as  a  Sabbath,  an  holy  convocation,  wherein 
they  must  do  no  servile  work.  Therein  the  trumpets  sounded  aloud,  and  the  sound 
thereof  was  heard  far  and  near.  1.  Let  us  come  to  the  uses  hereof  m  regard  of 
ourselves,  which  served  of  purpose  to  stir  up  the  people  to  return  unto  God  praise 
and  thanksgiving  with  joyfulness  of  heart  for  all  His  benefits,  according  to  that  in 
the  Psalms  (Psa.  Ixxxi.  1,  2,  3).  So  David,  having  experience  of  God's  good  hand 
toward  him  in  many  pre.-ervations,  composed  Psalm  xviii,  as  a  testimony  of  his  tliank- 
fulness  "  for  his  deliverance  from  the  hands  of  all  his  enemies  and  from  the  hand 
of  Saul."  So  I  should  think  that  the  cause  of  this  feast  was  to  be  a  feast  of 
remembrance  for  His  manifold  mercies  received  in  the  wilderness,  that  thereby  they 
might  stir  up  themselves  to  be  united  in  God.  And  the  cause  of  the  institution  of 
this  feast  seemeth  to  be  contrary  to  that  which  followeth,  which  is  the  feast  of 
fasting.  For  as  the  Jews  had  a  day  to  humble  themselves  by  fasting,  so  they  were 
also  to  have  a  day  of  rejoicing  when  they  heard  of  those  trumpets.  And  albeit  we 
neither  hear  nor  have  these  trumpets  sounded  in  our  ears  to  call  us  to  the  temple 
and  place  of  His  worship,  yet  ought  we  to  praise  His  name  cheerfully  and  readily 
with  spirituHl  joy  and  gladness  continually  (Isa.  xxxv.  2,  3,  10),  with  singing  and 
thanksgiving  (Isa.  xlix.  20,  21) ;  for  it  is  certain  the  faithful  only  have  true  cause  to 
rejoice  (Psa.  xxxii.  11;  xxxiii.  1);  the  ungodly  have  no  ca  se  at  all  ^>-a.  xlviii 
*20-2i!) ;  but  rather  to  weep  and  lament  (Luke  vi.  25).     2.  This  warnelh  us  of  the 

20 


30u  TllK  HI  HI  AC  AL  ILUrSTRATOP..  [chap.  xxix. 

preaching  of  the  gofpel  concerning  Christ  the  Saviour  of  the  world,  the  Conqueror 
of  all  our  enemies  and  of  them  that  hate  us  (Isa.  Ivii.  1 ;  Zeeh.  ix. ).  For  tliis  was 
a  warlike  instrument  (Numb.  vi.  31 ;  Josh.  vi.).  God  hath  caused  the  doctrine  of 
salvation  to  be  sounded  out  into  the  world  so  that  all  have  heard  the  sound  of  it 
(Psa.  xix.  4 ;  Eom.  x.  18).  Such  a  trumpet  was  John  the  Baptist,  the  forerunner 
of  Christ,  who  was  sent  "to  prepare  the  way  of  the  Lord  "  (Mark  i.  1,  2),  and  to  call 
upon  them  to  repent  because  the  kingdom  of  God  was  at  hand.  And  this  com- 
mendeth  to  the  ministers  in  the  execution  of  their  office,  diligence,  carefulness, 
continuance,  cheerfulness,  and  zeal  (1  Cor.  ix.  17;  1  Pet.  v.  2).  3.  As  the  ministers 
must  be  the  Lord's  trumpets,  so  indeed  ought  every  faithful  soul  to  be  a  trumpet. 
For  when  this  feast  was  yearly  observed,  such  as  heard  the  trumpets  were  warned 
by  it  all  the  year  after  to  stir  up  and  awaken  themselves,  remembering  that  God  doth 
call  them  as  with  a  loud  voice  daily,  that  they  should  yield  up  themselves  souls  and 
bodies  unto  Him  to  wor.ship  and  serve  Him  as  He  requireth.  When  this  feast  was 
celebrated,  all  the  males  were  not  commanded  to  repair  to  Jerusalem,  as  they  were 
at  the  three  more  solemn  feasts  (Exod.  xxiii.  17),  to  wit,  if  they  were  free  men  and 
in  health,  able  to  go  to  the  place  of  His  worship  (Dent.  xii.  6  ;  svi.  2).  And  hence 
it  is  that  the  Jewish  doctors,  out  of  that  law  of  all  males  appearing  before  the  Lord 
three  times  in  the  year,  do  exempt  eleven  sorts  ;  and  therefore  they  say  that  women 
and  servants  are  not  bound,  but  all  men  are  bound,  except  the  deaf  and  the  dumb, 
and  the  fool,  and  the  little  child,  and  the  blind,  and  the  lame,  and  the  uncircum- 
cised,  and  the  old  man,  and  the  sick,  and  the  tender  or  weak  which  are  not  able  to 
go  and  travel  upon  their  feet ;  nevertheless,  though  the  people  were  far  from 
Jerusalem  when  this  feast  was  holden,  and  that  they  could  not  resort  thither  daily 
to  do  sacrifice  in  the  temple,  yet  they  were  to  consider  in  their  absence  that 
sacrifices  were  offered  there  even  in  their  behalf,  and  God  was  worshipped  there  in 
the  behalf  and  name  of  all  the  tribes.  True  it  is  this  figure  is  utterly  abolished 
by  the  coming  of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ,  hovvbeit  this  remaineth  that  we  ourselves 
should  serve  for  trumpets.  For  as  the  temple  being  destroyed  we  must  be  spiritual 
temples  unto  God ;  so  the  trumpets  being  taken  away,  every  one  of  us  must  be 
spiritual  trump'^s,  that  is,  we  should  rouse  up  ourselves,  because  we  are  naturally 
so  wedded  to  the  world  and  unto  the  vanities  here  below  that  it  seldom  cometh  into 
our  minds  to  think  of  God,  of  the  gospel,  of  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Our  ears  are 
so  possessed  with  the  sound  of  earthly  things,  and  our  eyes  bo  dazzled  with  the 
pleasures  of  the  flesh,  that  we  are  as  deaf  and  blind  men,  that  can  neither  hear  nor 
see  what  God  saith  unto  us.  He  calleth  unto  us  daily,  and  maketh  the  gospel 
sound  aloud  in  the  midst  of  us  that  we  might  have  the  inward  remorse  of  a  good 
conscience,  to  repent  us  of  all  our  evil  ways,  yet  we,  notwithstanding  this  summon- 
ing of  us,  do  remain  dull  and  deaf,  and  dumb  and  blind.  "Wherefore  we  must  not 
look  till  there  be  a  solemn  holy  day  to  call  us  unto  the  Church,  there  to  keep  a  feast 
of  trumpets,  but  it  must  serve  us  all  the  days  of  our  life  as  a  spur  to  cause  us  to 
return  to  God,     (W.  Atteisoll.) 

Vers.  12-40.  The  flfteentli  day  of  the  seventh  month.— T7ie  Fenxt  of  Tohernacles: — 
It  is  called  the  Feast  of  Taberuaeles  because  during  the  days  of  this  feast  they  were 
to  live  in  tents  or  tabernacles,  it  being  a  memorial  of  God's  preserving  of  them  in 
the  wilderness  where  was  no  house  for  them  in  which  to  rest.  Tliis  was  a  most 
holy  feast  to  remember  them  when  they  had  no  dwellings,  and  therefore  Moses  doth 
so  largely  dwell  upon  the  solemnities  of  it;  then  they  were  especially  enjoined  to 
read  the  Law  at  this  feast,  when  all  Israel  was  to  appear  before  the  Lord  (Deut. 
xxxi.  10  ;  2  Chron.  viii.  13  ;  Ezra  iii.  4;  Neh.  viii.  14,  15  ;  John  vii.  2).  This  feast 
is  now  abrogated,  and  belonged  not  to  the  Gentiles  that  were  converted  to  the  faith, 
after  the  passion  and  ascension  of  Christ  (Col.  ii.  17 ;  Acts  xv.  10 ;  Heb.  x).  Not- 
withstanding we  must  consider  the  inward  signification  of  this  ceremony,  and  see 
what  uses  remain  thereof  to  ourselves.  And  therefore  the  prophet  Zechariah 
(chap.  xiv.  16),  describing  the  calling  of  the  Gentiies  to  the  true  God,  and  their 
gathering  into  the  true  Church,  setteth  it  torth  according  to  the  manner  of  God's 
service  used  in  the  law,  that  they  should  go  up  from  year  to  year  to  worship  the 
Lord  of  hosts,  and  to  keep  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles :  alluding  to  the  ceremony  of 
the  law,  as  our  Saviour  doth  (Matt.  v.  23,  24),  meaning  that  they  should  worship 
God  according  to  His  commandments,  and  not  after  their  own  fancies.  1.  First, 
we  learn  hereby  that  it  is  a  duty  belonging  to  all  to  remember  the  days  of  their 
troubles  and  affl  tions,  rom  which  God  in  great  mercy  hath  delivered  us.  We 
ought  also  to  cousider  what  we  have  been  in  regard  of  temporal  deliverances,  and 


'CHAP.  XXX.]  NUMBERS.  307 

in  regard  of  spiritual  deliverances  from  the  bondage  of  sin  (Eph.  ii.  1-4,  ll-13)i 
for  their  deliverance  from  the  slavery  of  Etiypt  did  figure  out  our  deliverance  by 
Christ  from  the  bondage  of  sin,  S.itan,  and  hell  itself.  2.  vSe^ondly,  observe  from 
this  feast  that  God  evermore  pre.-erveth  His  Church,  even  when  it  is  oppressed  with 
greatest  dangers  and  troubles,  nay,  then  His  power  and  mercy  is  made  most  mani- 
fest ;  His  power  sbineth  brightest  in  our  weakness,  and  His  mercy  appeareth  most 
of  all  in  our  misery.  3.  Thirdly,  though  the  Feast  of  Tabernacles  be  not  any 
longer  in  use,  that  we  should  be  bound  to  the  keeping  of  it,  yet  the  doctrine  arising 
from  it  concerneth  us  as  much  as  ever  it  did  the  Jews.  Our  keeping  of  this  feast 
must  not  be  for  a  week  or  twain,  but  all  our  life,  so  long  as  we  live  upon  the  earth. 
We  must  acknowledge  that  we  are  pilgrims  in  this  world  (Heb.  xi.  IG),  and  if  we  be 
not  strangers  in  this  present  world  we  have  no  part  in  the  kingdom  of  heaven.  If, 
then,  we  will  have  God  to  accept  us  for  His  children,  we  must  assure  ourselves  that 
this  life  is  nothing  to  us  but  a  way,  or  ratlier,  indeed,  a  race,  toward  our  heavenly 
country.  It  is  not  enoui;h  for  us  to  go  fair  and  softly,  but  we  must  always  run 
apace,  pressing  forward  with  all  our  strength  and  force,  holding  on  our  way,  and 
straining  ourselves  to  attain  to  the  end  of  our  course.  4.  Lastly,  we  are  hereby  put 
in  mind  of  the  shortness  of  this  life ;  we  are  here  for  a  season,  and  by  and  by 
gone.  And  albeit  we  make  our  houses  never  so  strong,  and  build  them  up  with 
brick  and  stone  to  continue,  yet  our  bodies  are  all  as  taiiernacles,  always  decaying^ 
Let  us  therefore  learn  the  doctrine  of  the  apostle  (2  Cor.  v.  1),  If  our  outward 
man  decay  we  have  a  building  prepared  for  us  in  heaven.  And  we  must  say  with 
Peter,  "I  must  shortly  put  oii'  tliis  my  tabernacle,  as  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ  hath 
showed  me  "  (2  Peter  i.  14).  When  this  lodging  of  ours  shall  decay  we  shall  dwell  in 
an  house  inconuptible.  Our  bodies  are  but  as  arbours  made  of  green  leaves, 
which  are  of  no  continuance,  one  blast  of  wind  is  strong  enoucrh  to  blow  them 
away  (Isa.  xl.  6).  Every  man  hath  some  disease  or  other  about  him  that  will  not 
suffer  him  to  endure  long.  And  if  he  had  no  disease  or  distemper,  yet  wait  but  a 
while,  and  ape  itself  will  be  a  disease,  and  as  the  messenger  of  death  unto  him, 
that  even  without  sickness  he  slideth  away,  as  the  fruit  of  a  tree,  when  it  is  ripe, 
falleth  down  of  itself,  though  there  be  no  hand  to  pluck  it,  or  wind  to  shake  it,  or 
thief  to  steal  it,  or  tempest  to  drive  it.  When  we  diligently  consider  this,  then  we 
have  indeed  learned  to  keep  this  Feast  of  the  Tabernacles  spiritually.  To  conclude, 
therefore,  let  every  man  beware  that  he  seek  not  his  own  ease  over  much.  This  is 
one  rale,  that  we  do  not  pamper  our  own  llesh  in  the  lusts  thereof  (Kom.  xiii.  14). 
Secondly,  such  as  are  planted  commodiously  in  this  world  must  beware  that  they 
do  not  forget  the  world  to  come ;  and  they  that  enjoy  the  eartli  at  will  must 
remember  the  kingdom  of  heaven,  wherein  they  must  only  place  the  top  of  their 
happiness.  If  we  seek  heaven  upon  earth  we  shall  never  find  it  in  the  next  life. 
Thirdly,  let  us  use  this  world  as  though  we  used  it  not;  rejoice  as  though  we  rejoice 
not,  and  weep  as  though  we  weep  not.  considering  that  the  fashion  of  this  world 
vanisheth  away  (1  Cor,  vii.  30,  31).     {Ibid.) 


CHAPTEE  XXX. 


Veb.  2.  If  a  man  vow  a  vow  unto  the  Lord. — The  sacred  bond : — The  practice 
of  binding  the  soul  witii  vows  aud  oaths  is  of  very  ancient  date,  and  common  to  all 
systems  of  religion.  Now  precisely  of  this  nature  is  the  baptismal  obligation,  a 
sacrament  in  wJiich  we  are  most  solemnly  pledged  to  the  service  of  God,  a  covenant 
which  we  are  bound  all  the  days  of  our  life  faithfully  to  keep  and  perform.  In 
confirmation  we  publicly  recognise  our  personal  responsibility  in  that  act,  and  pro- 
fess our  serious  purpose  to  fulfil  the  solemn  engagement;  while  the  bishop  officiaung, 
with  all  the  faithful  present,  iujplores  for  us  the  aid  of  the  Holy  Spirit,  that  we 
may  be  enabled  effectually  to  c  irry  out  our  purpose.  In  entering  into  any  important 
transaction,  obviously,  nothing  is  more  necessary  than  a  correct  idea  of  its  natuie 
and  its  significance.  In  order  to  this,  in  the  present  case,  we  should  consider  with 
whom  it  is  tnat  we  make  the  solemn  engagement.  Engagements  of  great  weighi; 
are  sometimes  made  with  men,  but  none  are  so  important  as  those  which  are  made 
with  God.  In  joining  the  Freemasons,  the  Knights  Templar,  or  any  other  volun- 
tary association,  you  must  assume  certain  obligations,  and  give  certain  pledj^es  for 


308  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxi. 

their  performance,  before  you  can  have  any  right  to  the  peculiar  privileges  of  the 
order.  But  in  becoming  a  member  of  Christ's  flock  you  not  only  make  an  engage- 
jment  with  your  Christian  brethren,  binding  yourselves  to  observe  and  do  certain 
things  which  are  essential  to  the  welfare  of  the  sacred  fraternity,  but  you  make  in 
your  baptism  and  renew  in  your  confirmation  a  covenant  with  God  Himself — with 
Ood,  the  Father  of  the  spirits  of  all  flesh,  to  whom  all  hearts  are  open,  all  desires 
known,  and  from  whom  no  secrets  are  hid — with  God,  who  understands  your 
motives  better  than  you  understand  them  yourselves,  who  cannot  look  upon 
iniquity,  but  hates  all  dissimulation  with  perfect  hatred,  and  will  bring  every  work 
into  judgment,  with  every  secret  thing,  whether  it  be  good  or  bad.  But  let  no  man 
undertake  thoughtlessly  what  ought  to  be  done  with  the  greatest  deliberation  and  the 
utmost  seriousness.  Eemember  that  the  act  you  contemplate  is  irrevocable ;  the 
obligation  you  are  about  to  assume  is  perpetual ;  the  covenant  you  are  going  to 
ratify  is  an  everlasting  covenant,  never  to  be  forgotten.  Its  neglect  is  peril ;  its 
rupture  is  perdition.  What  you  promise  to  renounce,  you  must  renounce  for  ever ; 
■what  you  engage  to  perform,  you  must  do  all  the  days  of  your  life  ;  what  you  pledge 
yourselves  to  believe,  is  the  unchangeable  and  everlasting  faith  once  for  all  delivered 
to  the  saints.  No  man  putting  his  hand  to  the  plough  and  looking  back  is  fit  for 
the  kingdom  of  heaven.  Oh,  how  will  his  broken  promises  haunt  the  delinquent 
on  the  bed  of  death,  and  st  md  like  threatening  spectres  before  him  in  the  twilight 
of  eternity  !  Forget  not,  then,  that  the  vows  of  God  are  upon  you,  and  you  cannot 
escape  the  obligation.  But  let  not  the  fear  of  failure  frighten  any  of  you  from  the 
duty.  You  owe  it  to  Christ,  you  owe  it  to  the  Church,  you  owe  it  to  your  sponsors, 
you  owe  it  to  your  own  souls,  to  redeem  the  pledge  you  have  given.  Lay  hold  upon 
the  proffered  strength  of  God,  and  renew  your  consecration  to  His  service.  He 
will  not  be  wanting  on  His  part.  His  word  is  for  ever  settled  in  heaven.  Your 
assurance  stands  in  "  two  immutable  things  by  which  it  is  impossi>)le  for  God  to 
lie."  For  He  also  hath  vowed  a  vow,  and  sworn  an  oath  to  bind  His  soul  with  a 
bond ;  and  He  will  not  break  His  word,  but  will  do  according  to  all  that  hath  pro- 
ceeded out  of  His  mouth.  {J.  Cross,  D.D.)  The  solemn  obligation  of  religious 
vows : — I.  Thr  case  supposed.  "  If  a  man  vow  a  vow  unto  the  Lord,  or  swear  an 
oath  to  bind  his  soul  with  a  bond."  1.  The  vow  is  made  unto  God.  He  is  the 
only  true  and  proper  object  of  religious  vows.  2.  The  vow  binds  the  soul.  "  Swear 
an  oath  to  bind  his  soul  with  a  bond."  "A  promise  to  man  is  a  bond  upon  the 
estate,  but  a  promise  to  God  is  a  bond  upon  the  soul."  3.  The  vow  is  voluntarily 
made.  4.  The  thing  vo^ved  must  be  lawful.  II.  The  danger  implied.  "He 
shall  not  break  his  word,"  &c.  There  is  in  human  nature  a  deep-rooted  tendency  to 
forget  in  health  the  vows  which  were  made  in  sickness,  and  to  ignore  in  our  security 
and  peace  the  vows  we  made  in  our  danger  and  alarm.  III.  The  command  given. 
1.  Tliat  he  shall  perform  his  vow.  "  He  shall  not  bresik  his  word."  2.  That  he 
shall  fully  perform  his  vow.  "He  shall  do  according  to  all  that  proceedeth  out  of 
his  mouth."  Conclusion  :  Appeal  to  those  who  have  unfulfilled  vows  resting  upon 
them.  1.  Baptismal  vows,  in  the  case  of  some  of  you,  are  unfulfilled.  2.  Vows 
made  in  affliction  or  danger  by  some  of  you  have  not  been  paid.  {W.  Jones.) 
Vows  not  to  he  discouraged : — It  is  not  an  idle  or  dangerous  thing  to  form  good 
resolutions,  and  m  ike  promises,  and  enter  into  pledges  and  covenants  anew.  A 
promise  is  often  a  bud ;  the  attempt  to  keep  it  a  flower,  and  success  therein  the 
fruit.  Some  would  discourage  all  promises  and  pledges  lest  they  be  broken.  We 
might  as  well  bid  all  the  trees  in  the  spring-time  keep  back  their  buds  for  fear  of 
late  fros%  or  warn  them  against  opening  their  hearts  to  the  sun  lest  they  be  betrayed 
and  blighted.     {Christian  Age.) 


CHAPTER  XXXI. 


Veks.  1-12.  They  warred  against  the  Mldlanltes. — The  vengeance  of  Jehovah  on 
Midian: — I.  That  in  the  administration  of  the  Divine  govkunment  the  punish- 
ment OF  SIN  IS  certain.  1.  The  sin  which  the  Midianites  had  committed.  2.  The 
Author  of  the  punishment  of  the  Midianites.  3.  The  executioners  of  the  punishment. 
4.  The  severity  of  the  punishment.  (1)  It  fell  upon  an  immense  number.  (2)  It 
/ell  upon  persons  of  every  rank.     (3)  It  involved  the  destruction  of  their  towns 


CH\r.  XXXI.]  NUMBERS.  309 

and  villages,  and  the  loss  of  their  property.  II.  That  God  can  work  by  many,  or 
BY  FEW,  IN  THE  EXECUTION  OF  His  PURPOSES.  The  accomplishments  of  the  purpose 
of  God  by  this  small  force  was  fitted  to  answer  three  ends.  1.  To  teach  them  that 
this  expedition  was,  in  a  special  manner,  the  Lord's.  2.  To  teach  them  that  He 
can  effect  His  purposes  "  by  many  or  by  few  "  (1  Sam.  xiv.  6 ;  Judges  vii.).  3.  To 
check  any  temptation  or  tendency  to  self-glorification  on  the  part  of  the  soldiers, 
III.  That  God  honours  the  holy  zeal  of  His  servants  by  employing  them  as 

I.EADEES  IN  THE  EXECUTION  OF  HiS  PURPOSES.      IV.    ThaT    GoD    ENRICHES    HiS    PEOPLE 

WITH  THE  SPOILS  OF  THEIR  ENEMIES,  {W .  Joiics.)  The  Midiaiiites  reckoned  with  : — 
1.  God  would  have  the  Midianites  chastised,  an  inroad  made  upon  that  part  of 
their  country  which  lay  next  to  the  camp  of  Israel,  and  which  was  concerned  in 
that  mischief,  probably  more  than  the  Moabites,  who,  therefore,  were  let  alone. 
God  will  have  us  to  reckon  those  our  worst  enemies  that  draw  us  to  sin,  and  since 
■every  man  is  tempted  when  he  is  drawn  aside  of  his  own  lusts,  and  those  are  the 
Midianites  which  ensnare  us  with  their  wiles,  on  them  we  should  avenge  ourselves  ; 
not  only  make  no  league  with  them,  but  make  war  upon  them  by  living  a  life  of 
mortification.  God  hath  taken  vengeance  on  His  own  people  for  yielding  to  the 
Midianite's  temptations  ;  now  the  Midianites  must  be  leckoned  with  that  gave 
temptation  ;  for  the  deceived  and  the  deceiver  are  His  (Job  xii.  16),  both  accountable 
to  His  tribunal ;  and  though  judgment  begin  at  the  house  of  God,  it  shall  not  end 
there  (1  Pet.  iv.  17).  There  is  a  day  coming  when  vengennee  will  be  taken  on 
those  that  have  introduced  errors  and  corruptions  into  the  Cliurch,  and  the  devil 
that  deceived  men  will  be  cast  into  the  lake  of  fire.  Israels  quarrel  with  Amalek 
that  fought  against  them  was  not  avenged  till  long  after,  out  their  quarrel  with 
Midian  that  debauched  them  was  speedily  avenged,  for  they  were  looked  upon  as 
much  the  more  dangerous  and  malicious  enemies.  2.  God  would  have  it  done  by 
-Moses  in  his  life-time,  that  he  who  had  so  deeply  resented  that  injury  might  have 
the  satisfaction  of  seeing  it  avenged.  See  this  execution  done  upon  the  enemies 
of  God  and  Israel,  and  afterwards  thou  shall  be  gathered  to  thy  people.  This  was 
the  only  piece  of  service  of  this  kind  that  Moses  must  farther  do,  and  then  he  has 
.accomplished,  as  a  hireling,  his  day,  and  shall  have  his  quietus.  [Matthew  Henry, 
D.D.)  Vengeance  executed  on  Midian  : — This  is  a  very  remarkable  passage.  The 
Lord  says  to  Moses,  "  Avenge  the  childien  of  Israel  of  the  Midianites."  And 
Moses  says  to  Israel,  "Avenge  the  Lord  of  Midian."  The  people  had  been  ensnared 
by  the  wiles  of  the  daughters  of  Midian,  through  the  evil  influence  of  Balaam  the 
son  of  Peor ;  and  they  are  now  called  upon  to  clear  themselves  thoroughly  from 
all  the  defilement  which,  through  want  of  watchfulness,  they  had  contracted.  The 
sword  is  to  be  brought  upon  the  Midianites  ;  and  all  the  spoil  is  to  be  made  to  pass 
•either  through  the  fire  of  judgment  or  through  the  water  of  purification.  Not  one 
jot  or  tittle  of  the  evil  thing  is  to  be  suffered  to  pass  unjudged.  Now,  this  war  was 
what  we  may  call  abnormal.  By  right  the  people  ought  not  to  have  had  any  occa- 
sion to  eucounter  it  at  all.  It  was  not  one  of  the  wars  of  Canaan.  It  was  simply 
the  result  of  their  own  unfaithfulness — the  fruit  of  their  own  unhallowed  com- 
merce with  the  uncircumcised.  Hence,  although  Joshua,  the  son  of  Nun,  had  been 
duly  appointed  to  succeed  Moses  as  leader  of  the  congregation,  we  find  no  mention 
whatever  of  him  in  connection  with  this  war.  On  the  contrary,  it  is  to  Phinehas, 
the  son  of  Eleazar  the  priest,  that  the  conduct  of  this  expedition  is  committed  ; 
and  he  enters  upon  it  "  with  the  holy  instruments  and  the  trumpets."  All  this  is 
strongly  marked.  The  priest  is  the  prominent  person  ;  and  the  holy  instruments, 
the  prominent  instrumentality.  It  is  a  question  of  wiping  away  the  stain  caused 
by  their  unholy  association  with  the  enemy ;  and,  therefore,  instead  of  a  general 
officer  with  sword  and  spear,  it  is  a  priest  with  holy  instruments  that  ai>pears  in 
the  foreground.  True,  the  sword  is  here  ;  but  it  is  not  the  prominent  thing.  It  is 
the  priest  with  the  vessels  of  the  sanctuary  ;  and  that  priest  the  selfsame  man  who 
first  executed  judgment  upon  that  very  evil  which  has  here  to  be  avenged.  The 
moral  of  aU  this  is,  at  once,  plain  and  practical.  The  Midianites  furnish  a  type  of 
that  peculiar  kind  of  influence  which  the  world  exerts  over  the  hearts  of  the  people 
of  God — the  fascinating  and  ensnaring  power  of  the  world  us<  d  by  Satan  to  hinder 
our  entrance  upon  our  proper  heavenly  portion.  Israel  should  have  had  nothing  to 
do  with  these  Midianites  ;  but  having,  in  an  evil  hour,  been  betrayed  into  associa- 
tion with  them,  nothing  remains  but  war  and  utter  extermination.  So  with  us,  as 
Christians.  Our  proper  business  is  to  pass  through  the  world  as  pilgrims  and 
strangers  ;  having  nothing  to  do  with  it  save  to  be  the  patient  witnesses  of  the  grace 
of  Cl^rist,  and  thus  shine  as  lights  in  the  midst  of  the  surrounding  moral  gloom. 


310  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxi. 

But,  alas  1  we  fail  to  maintain  this  rigid  separation ;  we  suffer  ourselves  to  be 
betrayed  into  alliance  with  the  world,  and,  in  consequence,  we  get  involved  in 
trouble  and  conflict  which  does  not  properly  belong  to  us  at  all.  War  with  Midian 
formed  no  part  of  Israel's  proper  work.  Tney  had  to  thank  themselves  for  it.  But 
God  is  gracious ;  and  hence,  through  a  special  application  of  priestly  ministry, 
they  were  enabled,  not  only  to  conquer  the  Midianites,  but  to  carry  away  much 
spoil.  God,  in  His  infinite  goodness,  brings  good  out  of  evil.  (C.  H.  Mackintosh.) 
Israel's  progress  : — It  is  instructive  to  compare  this  warfare  of  the  children  of 
Israel  with  their  earlier  battles.  There  are  many  points  of  difference  between 
them.  In  Egypt,  when  surrounded  by  their  enemies,  they  were  not  called  to  fight. 
They  were  quite  unprepared  for  war  ;  but  God  fought  for  them,  and  they  were  still, 
and  held  their  peace.  Then  again,  subsequently  tuey  were  attacked  by  the  Amale- 
kites.  They  did  not  begin  the  encounter,  but  only  repelled  the  attacks  ;  whereas  on 
this  occasion  Moses  said  unto  the  people  (ver.  3).  Tlieir  earlier  encounters  were 
all  in  self-defence — their  later  ones  were  aggressive.  Here,  then,  we  cannot  but 
discern  a  mark  of  progress  in  Israel's  history.  At  first,  when  they  were  weak,  and 
without  experience  of  God's  power  and  unchanging  love,  they  were  more  passive. 
Now  that  they  had  been  formed  into  a  more  compact  body,  and  trained  to  arms, 
and  still  more,  had  experienced  the  power  and  faithfulness  of  God,  they  were  called 
to  be  aggressive,  to  attack  and  destroy  the  enemies  of  God.  Now,  we  think,  that 
this  progress  in  Israel's  history  is  typical  in  the  Christian  life.  In  the  first  begin- 
nings of  the  spiritual  hfe  the  young  Christian's  mind  is  chiefly  passive.  God's 
work  is  to  show  him  his  own  needs  and  what  are  his  enemies.  The  very  spirit  of 
the  gospel  is  agsres^ive,  not  in  a  worldly  sense,  nor  indeed  in  the  sense  in  which  it  was 
true  of  Israel,  but  in  a  higher  and  holier  sense ;  for  it  is  a  spirit  of  faith  in  God — 
a  spirit  of  holy  jealnusy  for  God's  glor.v — a  spirit  of  deep  compassion  for  perishing 
souls.  Do  you  ever  ask  yourselves,  What  pr.  gress  is  my  soul  making  ?  There  are 
many  signs ;  and  it  is  safer  not  to  try  ourselves  by  one  only.  If  you  are  living 
near  to  God  you  will  be  growing  more  and  more  dead  to  the  world.  But  note 
another  mark.  When  Moses  sent  them  into  the  battle,  a  thousand  of  every  tribe, 
he  sent  Phinehas,  the  son  of  El^azar  the  priest,  with  them,  and  the  holy  instru- 
ments, and  the  trumpets  to  blow  in  his  hand.  What  these  holy  instruments  were 
we  are  not  informed,  but  doubtless  they  were  meant  to  be  symbols  of  God's  presence 
with  His  people.  The  priest,  and  holy  instruments,  and  silver  trumpets,  were  as 
needful  as  their  weapons  of  war.  These  were  a  practical  warning  against  a  spirit 
of  revenge,  and  an  encouragement  to  depend  wholly  on  God.  They  must  have 
served  to  impress  most  powerfully  on  the  minds  of  the  Israelites  that  this  war  was 
a  great  moral  act,  and  that  in  engaging  in  it  they  should  depend  wholly  on  God. 
And  these  accompaniments  of  war  showed  also  progress  in  Israel's  history.  Their 
earlier  battles  were  always  acts  of  faith  ;  but  then  no  priest  went  forth  with  their 
army,  no  holy  instruments  were  carried  forth,  or  trumpets  blown  ;  for  it  was  subse- 
quently that  they  were  brought  into  covenant  with  God  at  Sinai,  and  had  still 
brighter  tokens  of  His  presenae — subsequently,  that  the  two  silver  trumpets  were 
appointed  to  carry  terror  into  the  hearts  of  their  enemies,  and  to  make  them 
realise  that  they  were  remembered  before  Jehovah.  And  this  may  suggest  to  us 
one  point  of  difference  between  the  earlier  and  later  conflicts  of  a  Christian.  When 
he  is  young  and  inexperienced  in  conflict,  there  is  generally  too  much  confidence  in 
self.  But  when  God  has  tauf^ht  him  deeper  lessons  in  the  work  of  war,  he  has  less 
confidence  in  self  and  more  in  God.  Then  it  is  not  his  own  courage  or  skill,  not 
his  own  strength  or  perseverance,  but  Christ  his  eternal  and  ever-present  Priest,  the 
holy  instruments  of  the  sanetnaiy,  and  the  silver  trumpet  of  the  gospel,  which  are 
his  great  and  only  hope  of  victory.  But  there  is  still  another  point  of  progress 
discernible  in  this  part  of  Israel's  history,  and  that  is  in  the  use  that  was  made  of 
the  spoils  of  the  Midianites.  Jehovah  save  them  this  victory.  They  all  felt  it. 
It  was  in  His  name  that  they  went  forth,  and  in  His  name  that  they  triumphed. 
Here  we  find  that  they  "  brought  the  captives,  and  the  prey,  and  the  spoil,  to 
Moses  and  Eleazar,  the  priest,  and  unto  the  congregation  of  the  children  of  Israel" 
(ver.  12).  And  then  a  division  of  the  booty  took  place.  It  was  divided  into  two 
equal  parts,  one  of  which  was  given  to  those  who  went  into  the  battle,  and  the 
other  belonged  to  those  who  remained  in  the  camp.  Tho-e  who  encountered  the 
Midianites  being  but  a  small  part  of  Israel,  only  twelve  thousand  men,  had  in 
reality  the  largest  share ;  and  this  was  but  right,  as  they  had  been  exposed  to  the 
dangers  of  war.  But  this  was  not  the  whole  of  the  arrangement.  The  most  im- 
portant part  remains  to  be  mentioned.     After  this  division  had  taken  place,  a  part 


CHAP.  XXXI.]  NUMBERS.  311 

was  to  be  consecrated  to  God.  Of  that  which  belonged  to  the  warriors  themselves 
one  hve-huodredth  part  was  oflEeied  unlo  the  Lord  as  a  hoave-offering,  as  we  are 
expressly  told,  "  And  Moses  gave  the  tribute  which  was  the  Lord's  heave-offering  unto 
Eleazar  the  priest  "  (ver.  4).  This  portion,  then,  came  to  the  priests.  Of  the  other 
part,  which  belonged  to  those  who  did  not  go  into  battle,  one-fiftieth  part  was  con- 
secrated to  God,  "  And  of  the  children  of  Israel's  half,  thou  shalt  take  one  portion  of 
fifty  of  the  persons,  of  the  beeves,  of  the  asses,  and  of  the  flocks,  and  of  all  manner 
of  beasts  "  (ver.  30).  This  portion  belonged  to  the  Levites.  And  so,  if  we  compare 
together  the  portion  of  the  priests  with  thnt  of  the  Levites,  we  find  that  was  as 
one  to  ten.  But  even  this  is  not  all.  When  those  who  went  into  battle  were 
numbered,  it  was  found  that  there  "  lacked  not  one  man,"  not  one  was  lost.  This 
was  a  wonderful  proof  of  God's  care  and  protection.  No  less  than  twenty-four 
thousand  fell  by  the  plague,  and  not  even  one  in  the  war  with  a  powerful  people. 
This  produced  a  strong  impression  on  the  minds  of  the  officers.  They  were  thank- 
ful, as  well  they  might  be,  for  God's  goodness  ;  and  they  showed  their  gratitude  by 
making  an  additional  freewill-offering  to  God.  "  We  have,  therefore,"  they  say, 
*'  brought  an  oblation  for  the  Lord,  what  every  man  hath  gotten,  of  jewels,  of  gold, 
chains  and  bracelets,  rings,  ear-rings,  and  tablets,  to  make  an  atonement  for  our 
souls  before  the  Lord  "  (ver.  50) ;  and  this  offering  was  brought  by  Moses  and 
Eleazar  the  priest  into  the  tabernacle  of  the  congregation,  for  a  "  memorial  for  the 
children  of  Israel  before  the  Lord."  Now  in  all  this  we  can  discern  progress  in 
Israel's  history.  In  the  earlier  part  of  it  we  do  not  meet  with  any  such  arrange- 
ment, but  when  brought  into  immediate  covenant  union  with  God,  He  taught  them 
practically  that  they  themselves,  and  all  that  they  had,  belonged  to  Himself.  He 
trained  them  to  a  spirit  of  self-denial.  This  is  an  important  lesson  which  this 
history  impresses  upon  us.  If  we  were  asked,  "  What  are  the  two  graces  in  which 
Christians  are  most  wanting?  "  we  should  answer,  "  charity"  and  "  self-denial  "  ; 
that  charity  which  bears  long,  which  covers  a  multitude  of  sins,  and  that  spirit  of 
self-denial  which  leads  us  habitually  to  crucify  the  old  man,  and  to  place  God's 
glory  before  our  own  comfort,  ease,  and  pleasure.  There  are  many  Christians  who 
are  sound  in  doctrine,  and  who  seem  to  glory  that  they  are  free  from  this  and  that 
error,  but  there  is  much  self-indulgence  in  their  lives.  (G.  Wagiier.)  Balaam 
also  the  son  of  Beor  they  slew  witli  the  sword. — Tliefate  of  Balaam  : — Who  shall 
describe  the  terrors  of  this  recreant  prophet,  during  that  brief  moment  that 
ensued  between  the  lifting  up  and  the  letting  down  of  that  fatal  weapon  ?  We 
know  how  Balaam  regarded  death.  We  know  that  he  rejjarded  it  with  dread.  "  Let 
me  die  the  death  of  the  righteous,  and  let  my  last  end  be  like  his."  And  now  he 
was  about  to  die  the  death  of  the  wicked  !  As  in  a  moment,  we  may  be  sure,  the 
whole  panorama  of  his  life,  and  its  true  significance,  flashed  before  him.  I.  Death 
THE  TESTING  TIME  OF  LIFE.  We  may  exaggerate  the  importance  of  death.  We  may 
treat  it  as  more  important  than  life ;  whereas  its  chief  importance  is  in  relation  to 
life.  But  in  its  relation  to  life  its  importance  is  scarcely  to  be  exaggerated.  And 
its  chief  significance,  in  this  respect,  undoubtedly  consists  in  its  bearing  on  the 
future.  II.  The  awfulness  of  death  to  one  who  has  lived  a  sinful  and  unholy 
LIFE.  There  can  be  no  doubt  that  God  did  His  utmost  to  save  this  man.  Nothing 
that  was  likely  to  be  helpful  to  his  salvation  was  withheld  from  him  ;  and  aU  this 
Balaam  must  have  felt  and  realised,  when  at  last  his  course  of  crime  had  brought 
him  to  that  life-revealing  spot,  the  shadow  of  death.  And  if  such  was  his  retro- 
spect in  the  hour  of  death,  what  must  have  been  the  prospect  that  opened  up  to  his 
imagination  and  his  fears  ?  And  what  makes  the  fate  of  Balaam  so  terrible  to 
think  of,  is  the  apparently  minute  point  of  departure  from  the  course  of  rectitude 
in  wliJch  his  wrong-doing  commenced.  Balaam  only,  at  first,  desired  to  have  the 
pecuniary  recompense  which  the  service  of  Balak  promised  him.  He  had  no  desire 
to  do  wrong.  He  did  not  love  unrighteousness;  he  only  loved  the  "wages"  of 
unrighteousness.  And  yet  that  little  germ  of  evil  in  his  breast  at  last  overcame  all 
right  feeling  and  all  right  principle  ;  and  reduced  the  famous  prophet  of  Pethor  to 
the  level  of  the  lowest  schemer  and  the  basest  plotter.  The  smallest  angle  at  the 
juncture  of  two  lines  will,  if  these  lines  be  continually  produced,  lead  them  wider 
and  wider  at  every  stage.  And  so  if  there  be  the  least  departure  from  the  path  of 
right  at  the  beginning  there  will  be  infinitely  divergeness  in  the  end,  (IF.  Roberts.) 
The  doom  of  the  double-hearted  .-—I.  He  wanted  to  serve  two  masters.  These  were 
the  same  as  the  Lord  in  after  days  designated  God  and  mammon.  He  wanted  not  to 
offend  either  ;  to  please  both.  He  was  like  Issachar  crouching  between  two  burdens. 
Such  is  the  certain  failure  of  all  who  make  the  like  attempt.    II.  He  wanted  to 


312  THE  BIBLICAL  ILHSTIUTOR.  [coap.  xxxi. 

EABN  TWO  KINDS  OF  WAGES.  The  wages  of  righteousness  and  the  wages  of  un- 
righteousness (2  Pet.  ii.  15),  were  both  in  his  eyes  ;  he  would  fain  have  the  pay 
both  of  God  and  of  Ihe  devil.  He  was  unwilling  to  do  or  say  anything  which  would 
deprive  him  of  either.  He  was  as  cautious  and  cunning  as  he  was  covetous.  III. 
He  WAKTtD  TO  DO  TWO  OPPOSITE  THINGS  AT  THE  SAME  'riJiE.  He  Wished  both  to  bless 
and  to  curse.  He  was  willing  to  do  either  according  as  it  might  serve  his  interests. 
The  only  question  with  him  was,  "  Would  it  pay  ?  "  IV.  He  wanted  two  kinds  of 
jKiENDSHip.  V.  He  wanted  to  have  two  religions.  He  saw  religion  to  be  a  pay- 
ing concern,  a  profitable  trade,  and  he  was  willing  to  accept  it  from  anybody  or 
everybody,  to  adopt  it  from  any  quarter  if  it  would  but  raise  him  in  the  world,  and 
make  his  fortune.  But  this  double  service,  and  double  friendship,  and  double 
relit^ion,  would  not  do.  He  would  make  nothing  by  them.  They  profited  him. 
nothing  either  in  this  life  or  that  to  come.  His  end  was  with  the  ungodly,  his. 
portion  with  the  enemies  of  Israel.  And  his  soul,  where  could  it  be  ?  Not  with 
Israel's  God,  or  Israel's  Christ,  or  in  Israel's  heaven.  He  reaped  what  he  sowed. 
He  was  a  good  specimen  of  multitudes  in  these  last  days.  They  want  as  much 
religion  as  will  save  them  from  hell ;  not  an  atom  more.  The  world  is  their  real 
god ;  gold  is  their  idol ;  it  is  in  mammon's  temple  that  they  worship.  Look  to  thy 
latter  end.  VViiat  it  is  to  be  ?  Where  is  it  to  be  ?  With  whom  is  it  to  be  ?  Antici- 
l^ate  thy  eternity.  Is  it  to  be  darkness  or  light,  shame  or  glory  ?  [H.  Bonar,  D.D.), 
Balaarri's  death : — What  a  death  was  this  to  die  for  one  who  had  been  a  prophet  of 
the  Lord — one  who  had  been  privileged  to  hold  converse  with  Deity,  and  to  foretell 
the  purposes  of  the  supreme  mind !  How  liltle  could  he  ever  have  imagined  that 
he  should  come  to  this  !  What !  he,  with  his  great  gifts  and  high  official  position — 
he  stoop  down  from  the  eminence  on  which  he  stood  to  take  up  the  sword  of  a  rebel 
against  Jehovah— to  identify  himself  with  a  nation  of  debased  idolntors,  and  then 
end  his  life  amid  the  wild  tumult  of  battle  in  a  vain  effort  to  defend  their  cause!. 
He  degrade  himself  to  such  an  extent  as  that  ?  Impossible ;  yet  so  it  happened. 
How  this  death  contrasts  with  that  which  he  had  so  ardently  desired  !  Death  in 
sanguinary  conflict,  surrounded  by  dying  thousands  of  the  enemies  of  God,  with 
the  din  of  arms  and  the  iierce  war-cry  of  opposing  forces  sounding  in  his  ears;, 
how  different  Irom  "  the  death  of  the  righteous,"  calmly  commending  his  soul  into 
the  hands  of  a  faithful  Creator,  antedating  heavenly  joys,  catching  a  smile  from  the 
Divine  countenance,  and  then  peacefully  "  dropping  into  eternity  "  !  A  death  in  a 
state  of  apostasy  from  God,  in  open  rebellion  against  His  will,  in  impious  defiance 
of  His  power,  the  death  of  Balaam  was  a  death  without  hope.  Not  a  ray  of  light 
is  there  to  irradiate  or  relieve  the  gloom  that  gathers  in  thick  and  portentous  black- 
ness over  the  spot  where  he  fell.     (C  Merry.) 

Ver.  16.  The  counsel  of  Salaam. — The  counsel  of  Balaam  : — It  would  seem,  then,, 
that  this  people  that  was  to  "  dwell  alone  and  not  be  reckoned  among  the  nations  " 
had  not  dwelt  alone  ;  and  that  one  man,  at  least,  of  the  people  in  whom  God  had 
not  beheld  iniquity  nor  seen  perverseness,  had  been  guilty  of  the  most  flagrant, 
iniquity  and  perverseness.  For  not  only  had  he,  an  Israelitish  prince,  brought  the- 
daughter  of  a  Midianitish  prince  unto  his  brethren — which  was  in  itself  an  unlaw- 
ful act — but  he  had  done  this  openly  and  shamelessly,  in  the  sight  of  Moses,  and  in 
the  sight  of  all  the  congregation  of  Israel  (chap.  xxv.  6).  But  how  came  it  to  pass 
that  these  Moabites  and  Midianites,  who,  only  yesterday  as  it  were,  displayed  such. 
relentless  hostility  to  Israel,  should,  to-day,  be  upon  such  friendly  terms  with 
them  ?  How  was  it  that,  whereas  but  yesterday — so  to  speak — the  king  of  Moa'a 
sent  princes  of  Moab  and  Midian  to  Balaam,  the  son  of  Beor  to  Pethor  in  Mesopo- 
tamia, entreating  him  to  come  and  curse  the  Israelites — sparing  nothing  to  secure 
this  end — these  hostile  princes  are  now  giving  their  daughters  to  the  Israelites  in 
the  most  intimate  companionship  ?  Surely  there  must  be  some  treachery  in  this 
jiroceeding  !  And  so  it  seemed  there  was.  Balaam,  after  his  repulse  by  Balak» 
had  fled,  not  to  his  own  land,  but  to  Midian,  the  confederate  of  Moab  ;  and,  not 
daring  to  curse  the  people  himself,  had  suggested  to  the  Midianites  a  method  of 
leading  them  into  iniquity,  as  a  means  of  bringing  a  curse  on  them  from  God. 
And  this  new  scheme  had  propitiated  Balak,  who  had  been  so  fiercely  enraged 
against  Balaam,  and  who  now  "  consulted  "  (Mic.  vi.  5)  with  Balaam  ;  who  "  counsel- 
led ''  (chap.  xxxi.  16)  this  expedient  of  mischief.  So  the  matter  came  out  upon 
the  death  of  Balaam,  and  so  is  it  explained  in  my  text.  1.  Balaam  plainly  com- 
mitted this  crime  with  his  eyes  open  to  the  wrong  Jie  was  doing.  Out  of  his  own 
mouth  we  may  judge  him.     In  a  moment  of  prophetic  in.spiration  he  protested  to 


CHAP,  xxxii.]  NUMBERS.  313 

Balak  that  his  eyes  were  open  ;  that  he  had  heard  the  words  of  God,  and  knew  the 
knowledge  of  the  Most  High.  Balaam's  sin,  then,  was  committed  knowingly,  con- 
sciously, wilfully.  He  was  not  "  overtaken  in  a  fault."  He  set  himself  to  do 
wickedly.  2.  And  he  was  influenced  to  take  this  course  by  the  meanest  of  motives. 
He  "loved  the  wages  of  unrighteousness."  3.  And  if  anything  could  have 
aggravated  the  meanness  of  the  motive  that  influenced  Balaam  in  betraying  Israel, 
it  was  the  baseness  of  the  method  he  adopted  to  accomplish  that  design.  God  had 
revealed  to  him,  in  prophetic  insight,  the  secret  of  Israel's  greatness  and  strength. 
And  Balaam  used  the  very  inspiration  which  God  gave  him  to  injure,  fatally,  God's 
own  chosen  people.  And  the  cowardice  of  his  procedure  was  in  keeping  with  its 
baseness.  He  would  not  touch  Israel  himself.  He  dare  not  utter  a  word  against 
them  :  but  be  could  whisper  suggestions  of  evil  into  the  ears  of  others,  that  they 
might  execute  the  diabolical  design.  (W.  Roberts.)  Balaam's  devilish  policy  : — 
This  policy  was  fetched  from  the  bottom  of  hell.  "  It  is  not  for  lack  of  desire  that 
I  curse  not  Israel ;  thou  dost  not  more  wish  their  destruction,  than  I  do  thy  wealth 
and  honour;  but  so  long  as  they  bold  firm  with  God,  there  is  no  sorcery  against 
.Jacob  :  withdraw  God  from  them,  and  they  shflU  fall  aloue,  and  curse  themselves  ; 
draw  them  into  sin,  and  thou  shalt  withdraw  God  from  them.  There  is  no  sin 
more  plausible  than  wantonness.  One  fornication  shall  di-aw  in  another,  and 
both  shall  fetch  the  anger  of  God  after  them  ;  their  sight  shall  draw  them  to  lust, 
their  lust  to  folly,  their  folly  to  idolatry  ;  and  now  God  shall  curse  them  for  thee 
unasked."  Where  Balaam  did  speak  well,  there  was  never  any  prophet  spake  more 
divinely ;  where  he  spake  ill,  there  was  never  any  devil  spake  more  desperately. 
Ill  counsel  seldom  succeedeth  not ;  good  seed  often  falls  out  of  the  way,  and  roots 
not ;  but  the  tares  never  Ught  amiss.  This  project  of  the  wicked  magician  was  too 
prosperous.     {Bp.  Hall.) 


CHAPTER  XXXII. 


Vers.  1-5.  Tlie  children  of  Gad,  and  the  children  of  Reuben,  came  and  spake 
unto  Moses.  —  The  selfish  request  of  the  Reuhenites  and  Gadites :  —  I.  Mean 
SELFISHNESS.  In  the  competitions  of  business  and  of  professional  and  social 
life  there  is  often  very  much  of  mean  selfishness,  and  that  even  amongst  persons 
who  are  avowedly  Christians.  But  selfishness  is  utterly  opposed  to  the  spirit  of 
Jesus  Christ.  II.  Pkedominant  wobldliness.  In  this  day  there  are  many,  who 
regard  themselves  as  Christians,  who  resemble  the  Eeubenites  and  Gadites — many 
who  are  chiefly  influenced  by  temporal  and  worldly  considerations  in — 1.  The  selec- 
tion and  conduct  of  their  business.  2.  The  formation  of  matrimonial  alliances  ;  and 
3.  The  determination  of  their  residence.  Temporal  gain,  social  surroundings, 
salubrity  of  atmosphere,  and  similar  things  are  often  deeply  considered,  while 
sacred   and   spiritual   things   are  well-nigh   overlooked.     III.  Disregard   of  the 

INTERESTS  AND    RIGHTS    OF    THEIR   BRETHREN.       IV.    DiSPABAOEMENT    OF   THEIR   DiVINE 

CALLING  AND  DESTINY.  What  vast  numbers  practically  despise  their  exalted  spiritual 
calling  in  the  Gospel  for  the  passing  and  perishing  things  of  this  world  !  V.  Want 
OF  FAITH  IN  THE  DiviNE  PROMISE.  It  is  Hot  improbable  that  they  had  their  doubts 
as  to  their  taking  the  good  land  beyond  Jordan,  and  therefore  sought  to  secure  for 
themselves  what  the  nation  had  already  conquered.  Such  unbelief  is  a  grievous 
dishonour  to  God.  Conclusion  :  Mark  the  folly  of  this  request  of  the  Eeubenites 
and  Gadites.  The  country  which  they  desired  had  very  grave  disadvantages.  A 
selfish  policy  is  generally  a  self-defeating  policy.  (W.  Jones.)  Reuben  and  Gad : 
—This  is  too  often  the  prayer  of  prosperous  men.  They  find  upon  the  earth  what 
they  regard  as  heaven  enough.  If  they  could  but  double  their  income,  they  would 
sigh  for  no  bluer  heaven ;  if  they  could  but  have  health  without  increasing  the 
income — simply  increase  of  physical  energy — they  would  desire  no  better  paradise 
than  they  can  find  on  earth.  Who  likes  to  cross  the  Jordan  that  lies  before  every 
man  ?  There  is  a  point  at  which  it  becomes  very  difficult  to  say  to  God,  "  We  are 
still  ready  to  go  on ;  whatever  next  may  come — great  wilderness  or  cold  river,  or 
high  stony  mountain — we  are  still  ready  to  go  on ;  Thy  will  be  done,  and  Thy  way 
be  carried  out  to  its  last  inch. "  Yet,  until  we  reach  the  resignation  which  becomes 
triumph  and  the  triumph  which  expresses  itself,  not  in  loud  sentiment  bat  in 


314  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxii. 

quiet  and  deep  obedience,  we  have  not  begun  to  realise  the  meaning  of  the  kingdom 
of  heaven.  What,  was  the  answer  of  Moses  ?  "  Shall  your  brethren  go  to  war,  and 
shall  ye  sit  here  ?  "  (ver.  6).  What  suggestion  there  is  in  the  colour  of  every  tone  1 
What  sublime  mockery  !  Wh^t  a  hin'  of  cowardice  !  What  an  infliction  of  judg- 
ment upon  meanness !  Sometimes  the  only  way  in  which  we  can  put  a  rational 
rebuke  is  in  the  form  of  an  inquiry.  But  there  was  more  to  be  considered.  "  And 
wherefore  discourage  ye  the  heart  of  the  children  of  Israel  from  going  over  into  the 
land  which  the  Lord  hath  given  them  ?  "  (ver.  7).  Take  the  word  "  discourage  "  in 
any  sense,  and  it  is  full  of  meaning.  Perhaps  a  stronger  word  might  have  been 
inserted  here — a  word  amounting  to  aversion  and  utter  dislike  to  the  idea  of  going 
forward.  Our  actions  have  social  effects.  There  are  no  literal  individualities  now ; 
we  are  not  separate  and  independent  pillars  ;  we  are  parts  of  a  sum-total ;  we  are 
members  one  of  another.  Then  Moses  utilised  history  (vers.  8-13).  The  past  speaks 
in  the  present.  Our  fathers  come  up  in  a  kind  of  resurrection  in  our  own  thinking 
and  our  own  propositions.  Meanness  of  soul  is  handed  down ;  disobedience  is  not 
buried  in  the  grave  with  the  man  who  disobeyed.  This  is  a  broad  law  ;  were  it  rightly 
understood  and  applied,  many  a  man's  conduct  would  be  explained  which  to-day 
iippears  to  be  quite  inexplicable.  Appetites  descend  from  generation  to  generation  ; 
diseases  may  sleep  through  one  generation,  and  arise  in  the  next  with  aggravated 
violence.  Men  should  take  care  what  they  do.  Then  Reuben  and  Gad  said  they 
would  fight ;  they  would  build  sheepfolds  for  their  cattle,  and  cities  for  their  little 
ones  :  but  they  themselves  would  go  ready  armed  before  the  children  of  Israel,  until 
they  had  brought  them  unto  their  place,  and  then  their  little  ones  should  dwell  in  the 
fenced  cities  because  of  the  inhabitants  of  the  land.  Moses  said,  in  effect,  "  So  be 
it :  if  you  complete  the  battle  you  shall  locate  yourselves  here ;  but  you  must 
complete  the  battle,  and  when  the  conquest  is  won,  you  may  return  and  enjoy 
what  you  can  here  of  green  things  and  flowing  water ;  but,  let  me  tell  you,  '  if  ye 
will  not  do  so,  behold,  ye  have  sinned  against  the  Lord';  this  is  not  a  covenant 
between  you  and  me — between  man  and  man  ;  but  your  sin  will  be  against  the 
Lord,  '  and  be  sure  your  sin  will  find  you  out.'  "  The  matter  was  not  easily 
arr  inged  ;  Heaven  was  invoked,  tones  of  judgment  were  employed,  a  covenant  was 
entered  into  which  bore  the  seal  eternal.  That  law  still  continues.  Supposing 
there  to  be  no  Bible,  no  altar,  no  invisible  judgment-seat,  no  white  throne — as  has 
been  conceived  by  sacred  poetry — there  is  still,  somehow,  at  work,  in  this  mysteri- 
ous scheme  of  things,  a  law  of  a  constabulary  kind  which  arrests  the  evil-doer, 
which  makes  the  glutton  sick,  which  makes  the  voluptuary  weak,  which  stings  the 
)dotter  in  the  very  time  which  he  had  planned  for  his  special  joy.  There  is, 
account  for  it  as  we  may,  a  ghostliness  that  looks  upon  us  through  the  cloud,  so 
that  we  feel  the  blood  receding  from  the  face,  or  feel  it  returning  in  violent  torrents, 
making  the  face  red  with  shame.  But  there  is  the  law,  give  it  what  name  we  may, 
shuffle  out  of  religious  definitions  as  we  like :  the  wrong-doer  lays  his  head  on  a 
hard  pillow  ;  the  bad  man  stores  his  property  in  unsafe  places.     (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 

Vers.  6-15.  Shall  your  brethren  go  to  war,  and  shall  ye  sit  here  ?  And 
wherefore  discourage  ye  the  heart  of  the  children  of  Israel? — The  expostulation 
of  Moses : — 1.  He  shows  them  what  he  apprehended  to  be  evil  in  this  motion  ;  that 
it  would  discourage  the  heart  of  their  brethren  (vers.  6,  7).  What,  saith  he,  with 
a  holy  indignation  at  their  selfishness,  "  shall  your  brethren  go  to  war,  and  expose 
themselves  to  all  the  hardships  of  the  field,  and  shall  ye  sit  here  at  your  ease  ?  No, 
do  not  mistake  yourselves ;  you  shall  never  be  indulged  by  me  in  this  sloth  and 
cowardice."  It  ill  becomes  any  of  God's  Israel  to  sit  down  unconcerned  in  the 
difficult  concernments  of  their  brethren,  whether  public  or  personal.  2.  He  minds 
them  of  the  fatal  consequences  of  the  unbelief  and  faint-heartedness  of  their  fathers 
when  they  were,  as  these  here,  just  ready  to  enter  Canaau.  He  recites  the  story 
very  particularly  (vers.  8-13).  "  Thus  did  your  fathers,"  whose  punishment  should  be 
a  warning  to  you  to  take  heed  of  sinning  after  the  similitude  of  their  transgression. 
3.  He  gives  them  fair  warning  of  the  mischief  that  would  be  likely  to  follow  upon 
this  separation  they  were  about  to  make  from  the  camp  of  Israel ;  they  would  be  in 
danger  of  bringing  wrath  upon  the  whole  congregation,  and  hurrying  them  all  back 
again  into  the  wilderness  (vers.  14,  15).  "  Ye  are  risen  up  in  your  father's  stead  "  to 
despise  the  pleasant  land,  and  reject  it  as  they  did,  when  we  hoped  \ou  were  risen 
up  in  their  stead  to  possess  it.  It  was  an  encouragement  to  Moses  to  see  what  an 
increase  of  men  they  were,  but  a  disccniragement  to  see  that  they  were  withal  an 
increase  of  sinful  men,  treading  in  the  steps  of  their  fathers'  impiety.     It  is  sad  to 


CHAP.  XXXII.]  NUMBKRS.  315 

see  the  rising  generations  in  families  and  countries  seldom  better,  and  often  worse, 
than  that  which  went  before  it.  And  what  comes  of  it  ?  why,  it  augments  the  fierce 
anger  of  the  Lord ;  not  only  continues  that  fire,  but  increaseth  it,  and  fills  the 
measure  often,  till  it  overflow  in  a  deluge  of  desolation.  Note,  if  men  did  consider 
as  they  ought  what  would  be  in  the  end  of  sin,  they  would  be  afraid  of  the  begin- 
nings of  it.  {Mattheiv  Henry,  D.D.)  The  faithful  rebuke  of  Mosfx  : — I.  The 
ixjcsTiCE  OF  THEiB  PROPOSAL.  Why  should  they  have  as  their  inheritance  that 
country  which  all  had  assisted  to  conquer,  and  leave  th^'ir  brethren  to  conquer  other 
possessions  for  themselves  without  their  aid  ?  II.  The  tendency  of  theik  proposal 
TO  dishearten  their  brethren.  Because  the  granting  of  this  request  would  be 
likely  to — 1.  Eeduce  their  numbers.  2.  Engender  dissatisfaction.  III.  The 
WICKEDNESS  OF  THEIR  PROPOSAL.  1.  Unbelief  of  God's  word.  2.  Depreciation  of 
God's  goodness.  IV.  The  tendency  of  their  proposal  to  call  down  the  wrath 
OF  God.  1.  The  cause  of  His  anger  (ver.  14).  2.  The  expression  of  His  anger 
(ver.  15).  3.  The  subjects  of  His  anger.  "  AH  this  people."  V.  The  solemn 
example  by  which  Moses  enforced  his  rebuke  (vers.  8-13).  {W.  Jones.)  The 
sin  of  discouraging  our  brethren  : — The  children  of  God  are  very  prone  to  be  dis- 
couraged. The  truth  is,  that  their  path  through  the  wilderness  is  not  an  easy  one. 
The  danger  of  discouragement  being  so  very  great,  it  is  the  duty  of  Christians  to 
encourage  each  other,  to  exhort  one  another  in  words  of  kindness,  cheerfulness,  and 
love,  to  hold  on  their  way.  How  beautiful  is  the  example  of  Jesus,  in  the  tender- 
ness of  the  sympathy  wherewith  He  encouraged  the  weak.  But  Christians  are  too 
often  unlike  their  Master,  wanting  in  that  gentle  and  encouraging  sympathy.  It 
may  be  well  to  note  more  carefully  some  of  the  ways  in  which  Christians  most 
frequently  discourage  each  other's  hearts.  1.  First,  th<  n,  we  may  mention  an  in- 
consistent life.  There  is  nothing  so  beautiful  on  earth  as  a  consistent  life,  a  life 
entirely  consecrated  to  God — devoted  to  one  great  object,  and  guided  by  one  great 
principle.  Such  a  life  makes  people  feel  that  there  is  something  from  God  in  true 
religion  ;  and  it  greatly  encourages  those  who  are  seeking  Christ.  On  the  contrary, 
the  inconsistent  lives  of  Christians  are  the  greatest  possible  hindrance  to  the  world, 
and  to  those  who  are  weak  in  faith.  There  was  great  apparent  ineonsisteiicy  in 
the  request  of  the  Reubenites.  Tbey  ought  to  have  valued  God's  promise,  and 
have  wished  to  settle  within  the  limits  of  the  Promised  Land  ;  but  the  rich  pastures 
of  the  territories  already  won,  and  situated  without  its  boundaries,  were  a  tempta- 
tion to  them.  And  Moses  saw  at  once  the  effect  that  this  example  would  have 
upon  the  hearts  of  their  brethren.  It  would  discourage  them.  It  is  just  so  with 
those  who  ouglit  to  live  for  heaven,  who  profess  to  be  looking  for  it,  and  yet  set 
their  affections  on  things  below — on  the  creature,  or  the  world,  or  on  money.  This 
contrariety  between  the  profession  and  the  life  cannot  be  otherwise  than  a 
stumbliugblock  to  the  world,  and  a  great  discouragement  to  those  who  are  weak  in 
faith.  Some  it  hardens  in  their  unbelief;  others  are  led  by  it  into  painful  doubt 
and  perplexity.  It  is  no  small  sin  to  discourage  our  brethren.  2.  But  agun,  the 
natural  heart  is  very  prone  to  think  that  religion  is  a  gloomy  thing,  a  system  of 
sacrifices  ;  and  this  we  cannot  wonder  at,  as  it  only  sees  what  must  be  given  up, 
but  cannot  perceive  what  is  gained.  It  cannot  understand  that  excellency  of  the 
knowledge  of  Christ  which  makes  sacrifices  easy  and  delightful,  and  renders  things 
impossible  to  flesh  and  blood  altogether  possible.  Now,  when  Christians  are 
gloomy  and  desponding,  when  their  look  is  melancholy  and  their  language  dissatis- 
fied, it  tends  to  confirm  the  notion  that  true  religion  does  not  make  the  heart 
happy,  does  not  give  it  rest ;  and  so  the  wanderer,  discouraged  at  the  outset,  seeks 
cheerfulness  and  pleasure  elsewhere,  and  not  in  Christ.  Now,  why  should 
Christians  ever  give  such  an  impression  of  religion?  Surely  it  must  be  of  all 
things  the  most  blessed  to  be  reconciled  to  God,  to  have  the  forgiveness  of  all  sins. 
It  is  true  that  the  Christian  has  many  trials  which  are  unknown  to  the  world, 
fightings  within,  as  well  as  fears  without.  But  his  fightings  are  not  hopeless 
struggles.  They  are  the  precursors  of  victory ;  for,  says  St.  Paul,  we  are  made 
more  than  conquerors  through  Him  that  loved  us.  3.  Another  way  of  discouraging 
our  brethren  is  by  showing  want  of  sympathy  in  their  difficulties.  Hardness  and 
want  of  sympathy  have  much  to  do  with  making  the  world  as  full  of  misery  as  it 
is.  4.  Another  case  of  discouragement  to  others  is  our  shrinking,  or  appearing  to 
shrink,  from  difficulties.  Moses  evidently  thought  that  this  was  the  motive  of  the 
request  of  the  Reubenites.  They  wished  to  settle  down  in  a  land  already  won, 
instead  of  sharing  the  danger  of  war  with  their  brethren.  "  Shall  your  brethren  go 
to  war,  and  ye  sit  here  ?  "     The  event  proved  that  happily  this  was  not  the  case. 


316  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxil. 

Moses  was  mistaken  in  his  suspicions.  But  it  is  quite  clear,  that  had  this  been  the 
case  scarcely  anything  could  have  discouraged  the  rest  of  the  Israelites  more  com- 
pletely. Now  this,  we  fear,  is  not  a  very  uncommon  cause  of  discouragements. 
There  are  too  many  Christians  who  shrink  from  difficulties.  They  prefer  some 
smooth  and  ensy  course,  the  pastures  of  Jazer  and  Gilead  to  the  warfare  and  con- 
flicts of  Canaan.  If  some  easy  work  is  proposed  to  them,  which  is  accompanied  by 
no  great  difficulties,  and  wliieh  involves  no  real  self-denial,  they  maybe  ready  for  it. 
J-iut  tliey  do  not  like  to  take  up  the  cross,  and  esp^^^ciahy  a  daily  cross — one  that 
lasts  long.  We  ought  not  to  shrink  from  difficulties  in  doing  the  will  of  God.  It 
is  usually  God's  way  to  surround  His  own  work  with  difficulties,  and  often  with 
such  difficulties  as  His  own  hand  alone  can  remove.  And  this  He  does  to  try  His 
people's  faith,  not  to  discourage  them.  Viewed  at  a  distance,  like  the  wall  of  some 
gieat  fortress,  they  appear  very  formidable,  but  when  grappled  with  in  faith,  one 
after  another  they  fall  away.  There  are  beautiful  promises  to  encouiage  us 
under  difficulties  (Isa.  xli.  14,  16  ;  Zech.  iv.  7).  Let  us  then  settle  it  well  in  our 
hearts  that  we  must  have  difficulties  in  doing  the  work  of  God  ;  but  let  not  these 
dismay  our  hearts  or  lead  us  to  discourage  our  brethren.     (G.  Wagner.) 

Vers.  16-27.  We  will  build  sheepfolds  here  for  o\a  cattle,  and  cities  for  our 
little  ones.  But  we  ourselves  will  go  ready  armed. — The  amended  jJ'opusal  of 
the  licuhenitest  and  Gadites  : — I.  Thk  amended  proposal  made.  1.  That  they 
should  provide  at  once  for  the  safe  settlement  of  their  families  and  their  flocks 
and  herds.  2.  That  they  would  assist  their  brethren  in  the  conquest  of  Canaan, 
3.  That  they  would  not  leave  their  brethren  until  that  conquest  was  completely 
effected.  4.  That  they  would  not  seek  for  any  inheritance  with  their  brethren  on 
the  other  side  of  the  Jordan.  II.  The  amended  proposal  accepted.  1.  Moses 
re-aflirms  the  chief  terms  of  their  proposal.  2.  He  accepts  their  proposal  as 
righteous.  3.  He  warns  them  that  if  they  fail  to  faithfully  fulfil  its  terms  punish- 
ment will  overtake  them.  III.  The  amended  proposal  confirmed.  Lessons:  1. 
The  duty  of  manifesting  a  practical  regard  for  the  rights  and  interests  of  others. 

2.  The  importance  of  faithfully  fulfilling  the  engagements  into  which  we  enter. 

3.  The  delusiveness  of  the  notion  that  any  one  can  sin  and  esca;  e  the  punishment 
of  sin.  (W.  Jones.)  Conflict  the  condition  of  attainment,  and  snjj'ering  the  conse- 
quence of  sin  : — I.  A  truth  to  be  confirmed — that  those  who  would  share  in  the 
inheritance  must  engage  in  the  conflict.  II.  A  warning  to  be  applied — that  sin 
brings  punishment;  and  that  those  who  think  to  sin  with  impunity,  under  a 
dispensation  of  mercy,  will  find  themselves  fearfully  disappointed.  III.  A  personal 
application  to  be  made.  (Samuel  Thodey.)  Necessity  for  conflict  in  the  open 
field  : — A  skilful  botanist,  an  exile  in  a  foreign  land,  was  thank  I  ul  to  accept  the 
position  of  an  under-gardener  in  the  service  of  a  man  of  wealth.  While  filling 
this  humble  office,  his  attention  was  attracted  by  a  rare  plant  which  had  been 
sent  to  the  owner  of  the  garden,  and  which  bad  been  placed  in  the  hothouse 
unler  the  impre-sion  that  it  was  a  native  of  the  tropics.  So  far  from  thriving,  it 
had  begun  so  evidently  to  wither  and  decay  that  the  unskilful  gardener  was  about 
to  remove  it  to  a  still  warmer  place,  when  the  observant  eye  of  the  botanist  dis- 
covered it  to  be  a  production  of  the  Arctic  regions,  and  insisted  that  it  should  be 
exposed  to  the  icy  breath  of  winter.  Forthwith  it  revived,  and  began  to  flourish. 
In  like  manner,  if  Christians  will  shut  themselves  up  in  the  confined  and  heated 
atmosphere  of  worldliness  and  sin,  they  can  neither  hope  for  growth  nor  fruitful- 
ness.  Heroic  conflict  in  the  open  field  with  the  enemies  of  our  salvation,  the  over- 
coming of  temptation  in  the  way  of  daily  duty,  constant  communication  with  the 
Holy  Spirit  of  God  in  the  use  of  the  appointed  means  of  grace — these  are  the  only 
safeguards  for  the  soul.     [Christian  Age.) 

Ver.  23.  Be  sure  your  sin  will  find  you  out.— TTie  great  sin  of  doing  nothing  : — 
I.  What  was  this  sin  ?  A  learned  divine  has  delivered  a  sermon  upon  the  sin  of 
murder  from  this  text,  another  upon  theft,  another  upon  falsehood.  If  you  take 
the  text  as  it  stands,  there  is  nothing  in  it  about  murder,  or  theft,  or  anything  of 
the  kind.  In  fact,  it  is  not  about  what  men  do,  but  it  is  about  what  men  do  not  do. 
The  iniquity  of  doing  nothing  is  a  sin  which  is  not  so  often  spoken  of  as  it  should 
be.  A  sin  of  omission  is  clearly  aimed  at  in  this  warning — "  If  ye  will  not  do  so, 
be  sure  your  sin  will  find  you  out."  1.  It  was  the  sin  of  idleness  and  of  self- 
indulgence.  "  We  have  cattle  :  here  is  a  land  that  yields  much  pasture :  let  us 
have  this  lor  our  cattle,  and  we  will  build  folds  for  our  sheep  with  the  abundant 


CHAP,  xxxn.]  NUMBERS.  317 

stones  that  lie  about,  and  we  will  repair  these  cities  of  the  Amorites,  and  we  will 
dwell  in  them.     They  are  nearly  ready  for  us,  and  there  shall  our  little  ones  dwell 
in  comfort.     We  do  not  care  about  fighting  :  we  have  seen  enough  of  it  already  in 
the  wars  with  Sihon  and  Og.     Eeuben  would  rather  abide  by  the  sheepfolds.     Gad 
has  more  delight  in  the  bleating  of  the  sheep  and  in  the  folding  of  the  lambs  in 
his  bosom  than  in  going  forth  to  battle."     Alas,  the  tribe  of  Eeuben  is  not  dead, 
and  the  tribe  of  Gad  has  not  passed  away !      Many  who  are  of  the  household  of 
faith  are  equally  indisposed  to  exertion,  equally  fond  of  ease.     2.  This  sin  may  be 
viewed  under  another  aspect,  as  selfishness  and  unbrotherliness.     Gad  and  Eeuben 
ask  to  have  their  inheritance  at  once,  and  to  make  themselves  comfortable  in 
Bashan,  on  this  side  Jordan.    What  about  Judah,  Levi,  Simeon,  Benjamin,  and  all 
the  rest  of  the  tribes?     How  are  they  tc  get  their  inheritance  ?     They  do  not  care, 
but  it  is  evident  that  Bashan  is  suitable  for  themselves  with  their  multitude  of 
cattle.     Some  of  them  reply,  *'  You  see,  they  must  look  to  themselves,  as  the 
proverb  hath  it,  '  Every  man  for  himself,  and  God  for  us  all.'  "     Did  I  not  hear 
some  one  in  the  company  say,  "  Am  I  my  brother's  keeper  ?  "     Soul-murder  can 
be   wrought  without  an   act  or  even   a  will  ;    it  is  constantly  accomplished    by 
neglect.     Yonder  perishing  heathen — does  not  the  Lord  inquire,  "  Wlio  slew  all 
these  ?  "     The  millions  of  this  city  unevangelised — -who  is  guilty  of  their  blood  ? 
Are  not  idle  Christians  starving  the  multitude  by  refusing  to  hand  out  the  bread 
of  life  ?     Is  not  this  a  grievous  sin  ?     "  But  oh,"  says  another,  "  they  can  conquer 
the  land  themselves.     God  is  with  them,  and  He  can  do  His  own  work,  and  there- 
fore I  do  not  see  that  I  need  trouble  myself  about  other  people."     That  is  selfish- 
ness ;  and  selfishness  is  never  worse  than  when  it  puts  on  the  garb  of  religion.     S. 
But  with  this  there  was  mingled  ingratitude  of  a  very  dark  order.     These  children 
of  Gad  and  Eeuben  would   appropriate   to  themselves  lands    for  which   all  the 
Israelites  had  laboured.     God  had  led  them  foith  to  battle,  and   they  had   con- 
quered Sihon  and  Og,  and  now  these  men  would  take  possession  of  what  others 
have  struggled  for,  but  they  are  not  to  fight  themselves.     This  is  vile  ingratitude  ; 
and  I  fear  it  is  common  among  us  at  this  very  day.     How  come  we  to  be  Chris- 
tians at  all?     Instrumentally,  it  is  throuuh  those  holy  missionaries  who  won  our 
fathers  from  the  cruel  worship    of   the  Druids,  and  afterwards  from   the   fierce 
dominion  of  Woden  and  Thor.     Are  we  to  receive  all,  and  then  give  out  nothing 
at  all  ?     Are  we  to  be  like  candles  burning  under  bushels  ?     Are  we  to  waste  our 
life  by  much  receiving  and  little  distributing  ?     This  will   never  do.      This  will 
not  be  life,  but  death.     Eemember  the  Dead  Sea,  and  tremble  lest  thou  be  like 
it,    a   pool  accursed  and  cursing   all   around    thee!      The   text,  when  spiritually 
interpreted,  says  concerning  our  personal  service   in  the  conquest   of    the  world 
for  Christ — "if  ye  do  not  do  so,  behold,  ye  have  sinned  against  the  Lord:  and 
be  sure  your  sin  will  find  you  out."     4.  Again,  we  may  view  this  from  another 
point  of  view.     It  is  the  sin  of  untruthfulness.     These  people  pledged  themselves 
that  they  would  go  forth  with  the  other  tribes,  and  that  they  would  not  return  to 
their  own  homes  until  the  whole  of  the  campaign  was  ended.      Now,  if  after  that 
they  did  not  go  to  the  war,  and  did  not  fight  to  the  close  of  it,  then  they  would  be 
guilty  of  a  barefaced  lie.     It   is  a  wretched  thing  for  a  man  to.  be  a  covenant- 
breaker.      It  is  sacrilege  for  any  man  to  lie,  not  only  unto  man,  but  unto  God.      I 
would  speak  very  tenderly,  but  if  any  man  has  been  converted  from  the  error  of 
his  ways,  by  that  very  conversion  he  is  bound  to  serve  the  Lord.     Now,  if  he  lives 
only  to  make  money  and  hoard  it,  and  he  does  nothing  for  God's  Church  and 
for  poor  sinners,  is   not  his  baptism  a  lie  ?     Once  more,   and  I   will   have  doi^e 
with  this  painful  subject.     What  would  their  sin  be?     5.  According  to  Moses  it 
would  be  a  grave  injury  to  others.     Do  you  not  notice  how  he  put  it  to  them  ? 
"  Moses  said  unto  the  children  of  Gad  and  to  the  children  of  Eeuben,  Shall  your 
brethren  go  to  war,  and  shall  ye  sit  here?"     What  an  example  to  set!     If  one 
Christian   man   is  right  in    never   joining    a   Christian    Church,  then   all   other 
Christian  men  would   be  rij^ht  in  not  doing  so,   and   there  would    be  no  visible 
Christian    Church.      Do   you   not   see,   you  non-professing   believers,    that    your 
example  is  destructive  to  all  Church  Ufe  ?     6.   Moses  goes  on  to  remark  that  if 
these  people  did  not  go  forth  to  war,  they  would  discourage  all  the  rest.     "Where- 
fore discourage  ye  the  heart  of  the  children  of  Israel  from  going  over  into  the  land 
which  the  Lord  hath  given  them  ?  "     It  is  no  slight  sin  to  discourage  holy  zeal  and 
perseverance  in  others.     May  we  never  be  guilty  of  killing  holy  desires  even  in 
children  !     How  often  has  a  burning  df  sire  in  a  boy's  heart  been  quenched  by  his 
own  father,  who  has  thought  him  too  impulsive,  or  too  ardent !     How  frequently 


318  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [cha.p.  xxxn. 

the  conversation  of  a  friend,  so  called,  has  dried  up  the  springs  of  holy  desire  in 
the  person  with  whom  he  has  conversed  !  Let  it  not  be  so.  Yet  without  cold 
words  our  chill  neglects  may  freeze.  We  cannot  neglect  our  own  gardens  without 
injuring  our  neighbours.  One  mechanic  coming  late  among  a  set  of  workmen  may 
throw  the  whole  company  out  of  order  for  the  day.  One  railway  truck  off  the  rails 
may  block  the  entire  system.  Depend  upon  it,  if  we  are  not  serving  the  Lord  our 
God,  we  are  committing  the  sin  ^i  discouraging  our  fellow-men.  They  are  more 
likely  to  imitate  our  lethargy  than  our  energy.  Why  should  we  wish  to  hinder 
others  from  being  earnest  ?  How  dare  we  rob  God  of  the  services  of  others  by  our 
own  neglect?  IL  Notice  what  was  the  chief  sin  in  this  sin?  Of  course,  if 
the  Reubenites  did  not  keep  their  solemn  agreement  to  go  over  Jordan,  and  help 
their  brethren,  they  would  sin  against  their  brethren  ;  but  this  is  not  the  offence 
which  rises  first  to  the  mind  of  ISIoses.  Moses  overlooks  the  lesser,  because  he 
knows  it  to  be  comprehended  in  the  greater  ;  and  he  says,  "  Behold,  ye  have  sinned 
against  the  Lord."  1.  It  is  disobedience  against  the  Lord  not  to  be  preaching  His 
truth  if  we  are  able  to  do  so.  The  hearer  of  the  gospel  is  bound  to  be  a  repeater  of 
the  gospel.  2.  We  are  certainly  guilty  of  ingratitude,  if,  as  I  have  already  said,  we 
owe  so  much  to  other  men,  and  yet  do  not  seek  to  bless  mankind;  but  chiefly  we 
owe  everything  to  the  grace  of  God,  and,  if  God  has  given  us  grace  in  our  own 
hearts,  and  saved  us  with  the  precious  blood  of  the  Only-Begotten,  how  can  we  sit 
still,  and  allow  others  to  perish  ?  3.  There  would  be  sin  against  God  in  the  conduct 
of  these  people,  if  they  did  not  aid  in  the  conquest  of  Canaan,  for  they  would  be 
dividing  God's  Israel.  Shall  the  Lord's  heritage  be  rent  in  twain  ?  God  meant 
them  all  to  keep  together.  Can  it  be  that  any  of  us  are  dividing  the  Church  of 
God;  that  is,  dividing  it  into  drones  and  workers?  This  would  be  a  terrible 
division  :  and  I  fear  that  it  exists  already.  It  is  apparent  to  those  who  are  able 
to  observe  ;  and  it  is  mourned  over  by  those  who  are  jealous  for  the  God  of  Israel. 
Half  the  schisms  in  Churches  arise  out  of  the  real  division  which  exists  between 
idlers  and  workers.  Mind  this.  Be  not  sowers  of  division  by  being  busy-bodies, 
work  ng  not  at  all.  III.  We  have  now  reached  the  la^t  point,  and  the  point  that 
is  most  serious :  what  will  come  of  this  sin  of  doing  nothing  ?  What  will 
come  of  it?  "Be  sure  your  sin  will  find  you  out."  1.  It  would  find  them  out 
thus  :  they  would  be  ill  at  ease.  One  of  these  days  their  sin  would  leajj  upon 
their  consciences  as  a  lion  on  its  prey.  2.  When  conscience  was  tims  aroused,  they 
would  also  feel  themselves  to  be  mean  and  despicable.  Their  manhood  would  be 
held  cheap  by  the  other  tribes.  3.  They  would  be  enfeebled  by  their  own  inaction. 
How  much  of  sacred  education  we  miss  when  we  turn  away  from  the  service  of 
God  !  4.  Their  sin  would  also  have  found  them  out,  had  they  fallen  into  it,  because 
they  would  have  been  divided  from  the  rest  of  God's  Israel.  Those  who  are  non- 
workers  lose  much  by  not  keeping  pace  with  those  wlio  are  running  the  heavenly 
race.  The  active  are  happy  :  the  hand  of  the  diligent  maketh  rich  in  a  spiritual 
sense.  There  is  that  withholdeth  more  than  is  meet,  and  it  tendeth  to  poverty: 
I  am  sure  it  is  so  in  a  spiritual  sense.  5.  To  come  more  practically  home,  if 
you  and  I  are  not  serving  the  Lord,  our  sin  will  find  us  out.  (1)  It  will  find 
us  out  perhaps  in  this  way.  There  will  be  many  added  to  the  Church,  and  God 
will  prosper  it,  and  we  shall  hear  of  it :  but  we  shall  feel  no  joy  therein.  We 
had  no  linger  in  the  work,  and  we  shiU  find  no  comfort  in  the  result.  (2)  It 
may  be  that  you  will  begin  to  lose  all  the  .sweetness  of  public  services.  By  doing 
nothing  you  lose  your  appi^tite.  (3)  I  have  knpwn  this  sin  find  people  out  in  their 
families.  There  is  a  Clu.  ,tian  man:  we  honour  and  love  him,  but  he  has  a  son 
that  is  a  drunkard.  Did  his  good  father  ever  bear  any  protest  against  strong  drink 
in  all  his  life?  Every  man  should  labour  by  precept  and  example  to  put  down 
intemperance,  and  he  who  does  not  do  su  may  be  sure  that  bis  sin  will  find  him  out. 
Here  is  another.  His  children  have  all  grown  up  thoughtless,  careless,  giddy.  He 
took  them  to  his  place  of  worship,  and  he  now  inquires,  "  Wliy  are  they  not  con- 
verted? "  Did  he  ever  take  them  one  by  one  and  pray  with  them?  If  we  do  not 
look  after  God's  children,  it  may  be  that  He  will  not  look  after  ours.  "  No,"  says 
God,  "  there  were  other  people's  children  in  the  streets,  and  you  had  no  concern 
about  them,  why  should  your  children  fare  better  ?  "  "  Be  sure  your  sin  will  find 
you   out."      (C.  H.  Sjmrgfion.)  Sin  will   come   to   light : — I.    God   certainly 

SHOWS    His    PURPOSE    TO   PUNISH    SIN    BY   THE    WAY    He    CAUSES    WOE    TO    COME    ON    SOME 

SINNERS  HERE.  The  druukard,  the  glutton,  and  the  cheat,  the  liar  and  the  lewd, 
are  not  the  only  examples.  Most  frauds  are  exposed.  Nearly  all  murders  are 
brought  to  light.   Men  may  plot  very  secretly,  and  think  their  crimes  are  hid.    But 


CHAP,  xxxii.]  NUMBEES.  319 

Providence  calls  <>n  stones  and  beams  of  timber,  on  tracks  and  pieces  of  paper,  to 
be  witnesses  of  the  crime.  Then  all  that  class  of  sius  which  are  not  punishable 
by  human  laws,  God  often  jjunishes  with  a  loss  of  respect,  esteem,  or  confidence. 
II.  Men  might  be  sure  that  their  sin  will  find  them  out  by  the  sore  judg- 
ments WHICH  God  sometimes  sends  on  men  for  their  sins.  On  this  matter  we 
should  exercise  candour,  caution,  and  charity,  and  not  call  that  an  angry  judgment 
which  is  but  a  dark  doing  of  love.  Still  there  are  on  earth  sore  and  marked  judg- 
ments. Look  at  the  history  of  Achan,  of  Korah,  &c.  Of  thirty  Koman  emperors, 
proconsuls,  and  hijjh  officials,  who  distinguished  themselves  by  their  zeal  and  rage 
against  the  early  Christians,  it  is  recorded  that  one  became  speedily  deranged  after 
an  act  of  great  cruelty  ;  one  was  slain  by  his  own  son  ;  one  became  blind  ;  the  eyes 
of  one  started  out  of  his  head  ;  one  was  drowned  ;  one  was  strangled ;  one  died  in 
a  miserable  captivity  ;  one  fell  dead  in  a  manner  that  will  not  bear  to  be  told ; 
one  died  of  so  loathsome  a  disease  that  several  of  his  physicians  were  put 
to  death,  because  they  could  not  abide  the  stench  that  filled  his  room;  two 
committed  suicide ;  a  third  attempted  it,  but  had  to  call  for  help  to  finish  the 
bloody  work ;  five  were  assassinated  by  their  own  servants  or  people ;  five 
others  died  the  most  horrible  deaths,  having  many  and  strange  diseases ;  and 
eight  were  killed  in  battle,  or  after  being  taken  prisoners.  Men  have  more  to 
do  with  sin  than  to  commit  it.      III.    One   may   escape  detection  and  strange 

JUDGMENTS,    AND    STILL   HIS    SINS    MAY    FIND    HIM    OUT    IN     THE    FEARS,    AND     CLAMOURS, 

AND  REMORSE  OF  CONSCIENCE.  Eemorse  is  remorseless.  Like  fire,  it  burns  all 
around  it.  No  man  can  protect  himself  against  his  sins  flashing  him  in  the  face 
at  any  moment.  The  Bible,  preaching,  singing,  praying,  a  marriage,  a  trial  in 
court,  the  sight  of  the  man  he  has  injured,  or  one  that  looks  like  him,  or  anything 
may  arouse  his  conscience  into  fury  at  the  most  inconvenient  time.     IV.  But  even 

IF    ONE    escape    all   THESE    THINGS,  YET    IF    HE    DIES    UNPARDONED    HIS    SINS    WILL  FIND 

HIM  OUT  IN  THE  NEXT  WORLD  (Luke  xii.  2;  1  Tim.  V.  24;  Eccles.  x.  20).  Why  do 
not  men  admit  the  force  of  these  truths,  and  act  accordingly?  The  reasons  are 
very  clear.  1.  Some  think  their  sins  will  not  find  them  out  because  God  has  not 
yet  called  them  to  account  (Eccles.  viii.  11).  Such  men  forget  that  with  the  Lord 
one  day  is  "  as  a  thousand  years,"  etc.  (2  Pet.  iii.  8-10).  2.  In  this  world  sinners 
often  forget  their  sins,  and  think  God  has  also  forgotten  them  (Psa.  x.  11).  But 
God  forgets  nothing.  3.  Some  think  their  sin  will  not  find  them  out  because  they 
doubt  whether  God  is  holy  and  just,  and  whether  He  takes  notice  of  human  actions 
(Psa.  xciv.  5-7).  But  that  is  practical  atheism  (Prov.  xv.  3  ;  Eccles.  xii.  14).  4. 
Some  think  their  sin  will  not  find  them  out  because  God  is  merciful.  But  mercy 
rejected  can  save  no  man.  All  the  cooling  fountains  can  do  no  good  to  him  who 
does  not  drink  of  them.  Oh,  sinner,  "  be  sure  your  sin  will  find  you  out."  You 
may  now  Kve  in  ease  and  in  error.  You  may  now  harden  your  heart  in  pride.  But 
you  must  meet  your  sins  at  God's  tribunal.  Eemember  that.  Oh !  be  wise — be 
wise  unto  salvation.  (W.  S.  Plumer,  D.D.)  Avoiding  the  mischief  of  wrong- 
doing : — I.  Our  bin  will  certainly  find  us  out.  Some  men  indeed  are  so 
hardened  in  wickedness,  so  totally  lost  to  conscience  and  reflection,  that  they 
are  long  able  to  hide  themselves,  as  it  were,  from  sin.  Such  persons  may 
live  long  before  their  sin  finds  them  out.  It  must  wait  for  opportunities — 
a  time  of  sickness  or  a  time  of  distress,  whpu  a  man's  wickedness  has  drawn 
some  heavy  calamity  upon  him.  Then  his  sin  will  be  sure  to  find  him  out. 
It  will  hold  up  a  frightful  mirror  before  him,  and  show  him  ttiat  himself  has 
been  the  cause  of  all  he  suffers.  II.  Sin  being  thus  represented  as  a 
merciless  creditor,  of  an  unforgiving  temper,  demanding  debts  with  the  utmost 
rigour,  let  us  see  how  we  m.\y  best  avoid  the  mischief  it  threatens.  1. 
As  we  are  assured  in  the  text  that  our  sin  will  certainly  find  us  out.  it  is  the  part 
of  wisdom  to  be  beforehand  with  it  and  find  it  out  first.  Sin  can  never  find  us  out 
but  at  some  great  disadvantage — when  it  is  strong  and  we  are  weak  ;  when  habits 
of  wickedness  have  been  formed,  and  we  have  sutifered  some  mischief  from  them  ; 
or  when  our  spirits  are  low,  and  we  feel  the  world  sinking  under  us.  But  on  the 
other  hand,  if  we  take  the  active  part,  and  endeavour  to  find  out  sin  first,  we 
prevent  this  bad  effect.  It  is  in  this  case  as  in  others  of  the  same  kind.  If  we  are 
in  debt,  our  debts,  that  is,  our  creditors,  will  find  us  out.  But  when  we  are  before- 
hand, and  find  out  our  debts  ourselves,  and  take  methods  to  pay  them,  we  avoid  all 
the  bad  consequences  we  should  otherwise  incur.  He  who  can  number  a  few  figures 
may  count  his  debts.  They  are,  or  may  be,  plain  before  him.  But  the  deceit  and 
treachery  of  the  heart  lie  deep  ;  and  it  is  often  a  difficult  matter  to  come  at  our  sins. 


320  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxii. 

The  case  is  this :  we  not  only  suffer  our  passions  and  appetites  to  lead  us  into  sin, 
but  we  use  our  reason,  which  God  has  given  us  for  better  purposes,  to  excuse  our 
wickedness.  Kepentance  is  the  grand  condition  of  the  gospel ;  and  the  first  act  of 
repentance  is  to  find  out  our  sins.  When  we  think  of  Zaceheus,  let  us  remember 
the  happy  fruits  of  fiuding  out  our  sin.  When  we  think  of  Judas  Iscariot,  let  us 
tremble  at  the  dreadful  consequences  of  suffering  it  to  find  us  out.  2.  Being  thus 
convinced  of  the  necessity  of  finding  out  our  sin,  the  next  great  step  to  be  taken  is 
to  endeavour  to  obtain  pardon  for  it.  Whatever  difficulty  there  may  be  amidst  the 
many  corruptions  and  doublings  of  our  hearts  in  finding  out  our  sins,  the  method 
of  obtaining  pardon  lies  plain  before  us.  3.  Since,  then,  God  Almighty  hath  thus 
put  the  means  of  our  salvation,  in  a  manner,  in  our  own  power,  by  leaving  us  at 
option  whether  we  will  accept  or  not  the  terms  He  hath  offered  ;  let  us  not  be  so 
lost  to  ourselves  as  to  go  on  in  any  sinful  course  till  at  length  our  sin  find  us  out, 
but  let  us  manfully  endeavour  to  find  it  out  first.  Infidelity,  where  proper  means 
of  obtaining  evidence  has  been  neglected,  is  certainly  a  high  offence.  (W.  Gilpin, 
M.A.)  The   sinner   detected: — I.    That   you   have  sinned  against  the  Lord. 

1.  This  is  abundantly  evident  from  innumerable  passages  of  Scripture.  2.  From 
observation  of  the  conduct  of  mankind,  it  is  evident  that  they  have  sinned  against 
the  Lord.  3.  From  the  many  dreadful  threatenings  which  are  written  in  the  Word 
of  God.  4.  This  is  evident  from  all  the  judgments  which  God  hath  brought  upon 
the  children  of  men  from  the  beginning  of  the  world  until  now.  5.  From  the 
consent  of  all  nations,  it  is  evident  that  we  have  sinned  against  the  Lord.  IL  How 
YOUB  SIN  WILL  FIND  YOU  OUT.  It  will  find  you  out  for  your  conviction  and  conver- 
sion, or  for  your  condemnation  and  destruction.  1.  Your  sin  will  find  you  out  at 
the  bar  of  conscience,  under  the  dispensation  of  the  gospel  of  the  grace  of  our  Lord 
Jesus  Christ.  2.  Under  afflictive  dispensations  of  Divine  Providence.  3.  At  the 
approach  of  the  king  of  terrors.  4.  Your  sins,  if  you  die  impenitent,  will  find  you 
out  at  the  tribunal  of  Christ,  in  the  judgment  of  the  great  day.  5.  The  sins  of  the 
impenitent  will  find  them  out  in  hell,  to  all  the  ages  of  eternity.  III.  The  absolute 
cebtainty  that  sooner  or  later  your  sins  will  FIND  YOU  out.  1.  That  men's 
sins  shall  find  them  out  is  absolutely  certain,  because  the  nature  and  perfections 
of  God  require  it.  2.  The  Word  of  God  asserts  it.  3.  Conscience  forebodes  it. 
4.  God's  moral  government  attests  it.  5.  Those  who  have  gone  before,  in  every 
past  age  of  the  world  and  period  of  the  Church,  in  their  experience  have  found  it. 
Conclusion.  1.  Be  sure  to  find  out  sin.  2.  Find  out  your  sin,  so  as  to  get  a 
soul-humbling  and  a  heart-breaking  view  of  it.  3.  Endeavour  to  find  out  your  sins  in 
such  a  manner  as  shall  influence  you  to  make  a  free  confession  of  them  unto  the  Lord. 
4.  Be  80  stirred  up  by  finding  out  your  sins  as  to  implore  forgiveness  from  God  through 
the  merit  and  intercession  of  His  Son  Jesus  Christ.  5.  Be  excited  to  wash  in  the  blood 
of  our  Lord  Jesus  Christ.  6.  Endeavour  to  find  out  your  sin,  and  to  be  so  affected  with 
the  sight  of  it  as  to  forsake  it  and  floe  from  it  in  time  to  come.  (John  Jardine.) 
Unhelpfulness  : — What  the  text  teaches  is  not  merely  that  harm  done  to  others  will 
recoil  on  the  head  of  the  wrong-doer,  but  that  help  withheld  will  do  the  same.  It 
assumes  that  our  brethren  have  a  right  to  positive  assistance  at  our  hands.  And 
it  solemnly  warns  us  that  if  we  deny  them  that  assistance,  our  sin  will  find  us  out. 

I.  Take  the  case  of  a  parent  who  neglects  the  Christian  nurture  of  his 
children.  He  allows  them,  suppose,  to  grow  up  uneducated,  sending  them  to  work 
when  they  should  be  at  school,  and  preferring  the  petty  earnings  they  bring  him  to 
their  mental  and  moral  well-being.  Or  he  allows  them  to  take  up  with  dangerous 
companions,  without  making  any  effort  to  restrain  them.  Or,  though  not  unheedful 
of  their  physical  comfort  and  intellectual  culture,  he  neglects  to  bring  them  up  in 
the  nurture  and  admonition  of  the  Lord.  What  is  the  almost  certain  issue  ?  Does 
this  negligent  parent  receive  from  his  children  honour,  love,  obedience,  cheerful 
help  ?  Or  if  he  does  obtain  some  measure  of  deference  while  thev  are  of  tender 
years,  and  dwell  under  his  roof,  what  happens  when  they  become  grown  men  and 
women,  and  he  an  old  man  in  need  of  sympathy  and  aid?  ALis!  the  cold  in- 
difference with  which  they  then  regard  him,  the  grudging  parsimony  with  which, 
if  he  is  poor,  they  contribute  to  his  scanty  maintenance,  the  shame  and  sorrow 
which  they  bring  on  his  grey  hairs  by  their  ingratitude  and  wickedness — these 
things  but  too  surely  prove  that  his  sin  has  entailed  an  answerable  pimishment. 

II.  Take  the  case  of  those  rich  members  op  a  community  who  nkoleot  to 
provide  instruction  for  the  untaught  children  of  the  poor.  In  the  cost  of 
the  crimes  which  those  unheeded  ones  begin  in  youth,  and  perpetrate  with  aggrava- 
tions in  riper  years,  their  sin  is  finding  them  out.     In  the  cost  of  police  and  prisons 


CHAP,  xxxn.]  NUMBERS.  321 

and  heavy  poor-rates,  it  is  finding  them  out.  In  the  organised  and  protracted 
strikes,  which  reveal  the  crass  ignorance  and  pitiable  credulity  of  their  dupes,  and 
threaten  to  palsy  the  industrial  enterprise  cf  the  country,  it  is  finding  them  out. 
And  should  a  season  of  wild  political  excitement  or  of  widespread  commercial 
stagnation  arrive,  with  its  provocations  to  turbulence  and  lawlessness,  it  may  find 
them  out  in  a  way  yet  more  terribly  retributive.  III.  T.^ke  the  case  of  a  cokpora- 
rioN  OR  a  community  which  declines  or  delays  to  adopt  measures  of  sanitary 
IMPROVEMENT.  It  is  sad  to  think  that  the  majority  of  men  are  without  a  conscience 
as  regards  the  violation  of  physical  laws,  though  that  is  as  truly  a  sin  against  God 
as  their  violation  of  moral  laws.  But  whether  men  are  alive  to  their  guilt  in  this 
respect  or  not,  certain  it  is  that  their  sin  is  in  hot  pursuit  of  them,  and  will  ere 
long  seize  and  rend  them  with  its  deadly  fangs.  The  prosperous  inhabitants  of  a 
town  cannot  suffer  tlieir  poorer  neighbours  to  dwell  in  overcrowded  and  unwhole- 
some tenements,  without  having  themselves  to  smart  for  such  selfish  neglect.  If 
the  poor  are  tempted,  amid  their  physical  discomforts,  to  resort  to  the  deceitful 
solace  of  intemperance,  it  must  fall  to  the  rest  of  the  community  to  pay  for  the 
pauperism  and  crime  which  intemperance  begets.  If  the  poor  are  ruined  in  health 
and  made  reckless  m  habits  by  the  scenes  of  filth  and  vice  which  environ  them,  it 
must  fall  to  those  in  better  circumstances  to  sustain  the  burdens  and  hazards  which 
an  idle  and  turbulent  populace  never  fail  to  create.  And  when  fever  or  pestilence 
breaks  out  in  the  squalid  hovel,  who  shall  guarantee  the  health  of  the  sumptuous 
mansion  ?    IV.  Take  the  case  of  a  Christian  Church  which  neglects  to  adopt 

AGGRESSIVE      MEASURES     FOR     THE      RECLAMATION    OF     THE      IRRELIGIOUS      MULTITUDES 

AROUND  IT.  Every  successive  year  adds  to  the  numbers  who  never  enter  a  house 
of  prayer.  And  now,  instead  of  the  grand  moral  spectacle  which  our  working-men 
once  presented — men  humble  in  station,  but  high  in  moral  excellence  ;  scant  of 
secular  lore,  but  mighty  in  the  Scriptures — we  behold  throng-;  of  workmen  who  are 
not  only  indifferent  about  religion,  but  positively  profiine  and  sceptical.  Bespeaks 
not  this  a  lack  of  aggressive  effort  on  the  ptrt  of  our  churches  and  congregations  ? 
Could  tbere  be  now  such  a  vast  outlying  mass  of  irreligion,  had  each  of  our 
churches,  in  place  of  abiding  within  its  own  pasturage,  gone  over  the  river  to  help 
those  neglected  ones  in  their  combat  with  evil  ?  And  shall  not  this  i-in  find  the 
churches  out  ?  It  is  finding  them  out.  Already  are  there  thousands  upon  thousands 
in  our  land  who  hate  every  Christian  Chuich  with  a  perfect  hatred,  and  who  would 
shout  with  diaholic  triumph  over  their  destruction.  (J.  M.  McCulloch,  D.D.) 
Our  sins  finding  vs  out : — 1.  First,  our  sins  find  us  out  when  there  is  a  direct 
connection  of  cause  and  effect  between  the  sin  and  the  I'unishment,  and  in  the 
most  literal  sense  of  the  word,  we  eat  the  fruit  of  our  own  doings.  The  delirium 
tremens  vihich  overtakes  the  drunkard,  the  premature  decrepitude  or  forlorn  old  age 
of  him  who  has  laid  waste  his  youth  by  sensual  excesses,  the  rags  with  which  the 
sluggard  is  clothed,  the  shameful  fall  which  so  often  the  proud  prep  ues  for  himself, 
what  are  all  these  but  men's  sins  finding  them  out,  the  sin  having  all  along  been 
big  with  the  punishment,  and  in  due  season  bringing  it  fcrth — according  to  our  own 
proverb,  "  Old  sin,  new  shame,"  old  and  new  being  linked  with  one  another  by 
indissoluble  bonds,  and  sooner  or  later  making  this  relation  between  them  to  apjiear  ? 
2.  But  not  in  this  way  only  do  men's  sins  find  them  out.  Oftentimes  there  is  no 
such  connection  of  cause  and  effect;  but  there  is  that  conformity  between  the  sin 
and  the  punishment,  that  unmistakable  resemblance  between  them,  which  it  is 
impossible  to  ascribe  to  blind  chance.  Scripture,  and  not  Scripture  only,  is  full  of 
examples  in  this  kind.  It  is  measured  to  men  exactly  as  t'  ey  have  measured  to 
others  ;  the  very  cup  they  have  held  to  the  lips  of  others  being  by  and  by  held  to 
their  own.  Thed'  ceiveris  deceived  ;  the  violator  of  the  sanctities  of  another  man's 
home  beholds  his  own  trampled  on  and  violated  in  turn.  The  wicked  king,  that 
slew  the  propln  ts  and  left  their  very  bodies  unbnrii  d,  is  himself  slain  and  cast 
forth  with  the  burial  of  an  ass.  So  marvellous  is  the  conformity  between  the 
sin  and  the  sufferiu?,  that  there  is  wrung  from  the  sufferer,  sometimes  in  the 
hearing  of  all  the  world,  but  oh  !  how  much  oftener  in  the  secret  of  his  soul, 
a  confession  of  the  same:  "As  I  have  done,  so  God  hath  requited  me"  (Judg. 
i.  7  ;  Rev.  xvi.  6).  Others  may  miss  the  connection,  may  not  so  much  as  guess 
that  there  is  one  ;  but  he  knows  only  too  wi  11  whose  hand  it  was  that  ^mote 
him;  from  what  wing  the  arrow  which  pierced  him  has  been  drawn.  3.  Then, 
too,  men's  sins  often  find  them  out,  thougli  no  visible  sign  or  token  may  betray 
this  fact  to  the  world.  All  may  outwardly  stand  fair ;  there  may  be  no  breach 
in  the  worldly  orosperity,  nay,  this  mav  bo  ampler,  more  stronglv  established  than 

21 


322  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ch.u>.  xxxii. 


ever;  while  yet  ihere  may  be  that  within  which  forbids  to  rejoice,  which  tnkes 
all  the  joy  and  the  gladness  out  of  life — the  memory  of  that  old  sin  which  was  as 
nothing  when  committed,  but  which  now  darkens  all,  the  deadly  arrow  poisoning 
the  springs  of  life,  which  will  not  drop  from  the  side,  which  no  force,  no  art  of 
man's  device,  can  withd'aw.  Is  there  not  here  one  whose  sin  has  found  him  out  ? 
Neither  let  us  assume  that  it  is  only  the  wicked  whose  sins  thus  come  round  to  them 
again.  God  is  faithful,  and  will  not  allow  His  own  children  to  escape  altogether, 
any  more  than  the  children  of  this  present  world.  The  cup  of  suffeiing  may  be 
filled  more  fully  for  some  than  for  others ;  but  it  shall  come  round  in  due  time  to 
all.  4.  What  shall  we  say  to  all  this  ?  If  earlier  or  later,  first  or  last,  our  sins  do 
thus  so  often  overtake  us  even  here,  shall  we  not  put  far  from  us  so  evil  a  thing  and 
one  which  has  such  a  fatal  power  of  thus  coming  back  on  him  that  wrought  it? 
It  may  be  that  it  is  too  late  for  this  ;  but  there  is  still  something  which  we  can  do. 
We  can,  so  to  speak,  take  the  initiative  ;  turn  the  talde  on  our  sins,  and  instead  of 
waiting  for  them  to  find  us  out,  we,  earnestly  seeking,  by  aid  of  that  candle  which 
the  Lord  has  lighted  in  us,  may  find  out  them  ;  and  then  we  have  the  sure  word 
of  promise  that,  if  we  will  judge  ourselves,  we  shall  not  be  judged  of  the  Lord. 
{Arclibp.  Trench.)  Sin  its  oivn piini.shtuent : — The  consequences  of  a  man's  sin 
are  often,  and  for  a  length  of  time,  felt  by  others  rather  than  himself.  The  anxious 
husband  has  to  bear  the  burden  laid  on  him  by  the  thriftless  wife  ;  the  widowed 
mother  that  which  is  imposed  by  the  extravagance  of  the  thoughtless  son.  The 
sin,  so  to  speak,  born  into  life,  leaves  its  proper  parent,  trav<  Is  sometimes  far  away, 
finds  out  the  innocent,  and  afflicts  them ;  but  nevertheless,  in  due  time,  it  will  come 
home  to  the  sinner  himself.  I,  Here  was  the  sin  of  selfishness.  "Bring  us  not 
over  Jordan."  A  deliberate  proposal,  involving  schism  in  the  body,  separation, 
isolation,  to  carry  out  mean  and  selfish  ends.  Suppose  this  request  had  been 
granted  ;  though  things  might  have  gone  well  with  them  for  a  time,  yet  in  the  end, 
cut  off  by  tbeir  own  act  from  sympathy  and  aid,  exposed  to  the  attack  of  numerous 
foes,  they  would  have  reaped  the  bitter  fruit  of  what  they  had  sown  :  and  so 
throughout  life,  no  one  more  fails  of  his  end,  no  one  more  certainly  brings  on 
himself  what  he  seeks  to  avoid,  than  the  selfish  man.  II.  The  sin  of  cowardice, 
too,  was  probably  here.  Timorousr.ess  provoked  insult,  and  invites  attack.  IH. 
Here  was  the  sin  of  indolence.  Nothing  more  certainly  than  indolence  cuts  itself 
off  from  the  ease  and  enjoynjent  it  seeks.  Its  grows,  too,  so  strong  l)y  yielding  to 
it,  that  at  length  freedom  from  toil  ends  in  bitterest  bondage.     IV.  Here  was  that 

IN  WHICH  ALL  OTHER  SINS  MAY  BE  BUMMED  UP  :    DISOBEDIENCE  TO  GoD.      (J.   W.  LdllCe.) 

The  unfailin;/  deUciive : — The  sinner  and  his  sin  change  places  after  he  has  com- 
mitted it.  Before  its  con) mission  he  pursues  sin  ;  after  its  perpetration  sin  pursues 
him,  and  is  sure  to  find  him.  I.  Why?  1.  Because  of  the  absolute  perfectness  of 
God's  law,  which  covers  every  detail  of  a  human  being's  life,  and  threatens  a  penalty 
for  every  dereliction.  2.  Because  of  the  perfect  administration  of  that  law,  which 
notes  every  offence  and  secures  the  punishment  of  every  offender.  II.  When  ?  1. 
Sometimes  in  this  life,  by  civil  law,  by  general  censure,  and  by  iepro:iches  of  con- 
science. 2.  Sometimes  at  death,  when  the  hallucination  of  the  world  is  removed, 
and  conscience  asserts  its  authority.  3.  Always  at  the  judt;ment,  when  Satan 
no  longer  can  deceive,  when  the  standard  of  duty  is  ajiplied,  and  the  sinner's 
record  is  unfolded.  In  the  Hades  of  the  lost,  where  the  sinner  shall  reap  in 
kind,  in  degree,  and  in  quantity  what  he  has  sown.  (Horn.  Montldy.)  The 
certainly  of  sin  finding  us  out: — I.  What  is  meant  by  odk  sin  finding  us  out? 
1.  By  the  expression  "  Our  sin,"  we  may  in  the  first  place  understand  any  particular 
sin  of  which  we  may  have  been  guilty;  any  gross  and  single  act  of  injustice, 
profaneness,  licentiousness,  falsehood,  or  the  like,  which  at  any  time  may  have 
been  committed  by  us.  But  we  must  not  confine  the  expression  to  this  meaning  ; 
for  it  more  properly  signifies  all  the  collective  sin  of  which  we  have  been  guilty ; 
the  sin,  as  it  were,  of  our  whole  lives.  2.  Now,  in  what  sense  is  it  said  that  this 
our  sin  will  find  us  out?  To  understand  the  force  of  this  expression,  we  must 
remember  that  sin  npcc^sarily  brings  certain  evil  consequences.  It  entnils  them  on 
the  sinner.  Now  (hese  consequences  are  three:  fear,  shame,  and  death.  Sin 
necessarily  brings  these  evils  with  it  in  its  tr;iin.  "Evil  pursues  sinners";  and 
whatever  they  may  think  or  feel,  their  sin  will  one  day  find  them  out.  II.  The 
CERTAINTY  THAT  OUR  SIN  WILL  FIND  US  OUT.  1.  In  the  first  placc,  the  perfections  of 
God  absolutely  forbid  thnt  sin  should  go  unpunished.  Omnipresent :  Omniscient : 
Holy :  Just.  True  and  faithful  to  His  word.  2.  In  the  second  place,  the  many 
remarkable  instances  of  sin  being  detected  and  punished  in  this  world,  strongly 


CHAP.  XXXII.]  NUMBERS.  323 


confirm  the  truth  under  consideration.  Achan  :  Gehazi :  Ananias  and  Sapphira* 
Has  it  not  sometimes  happenefl,  that  a  man  has  even  become  his  own  accuser? 
Unable  to  bear  the  clamours  and  stings  of  conscience,  he  has  confessed  his  own 
guilt,  and  has  given  himsf^lf  up  to  p-mishment.  Now  what  do  these  things  prove, 
but  that  God  will  certainly  bring  to  light  the  hidden  things  of  darkness  ?  We  see 
how  easily  He  can  do  it.  He  thus  dii-ects  s-in  to  find  out  some  sinners  here,  to  con- 
vince us  that  it  will  find  out  every  sinner  hereafter.  3.  But,  in  the  third  place, 
should  a  doubt  yet  remain  on  our  minds,  the  appointment  of  a  day  of  final  retri- 
bution may  and  must  entirely  remove  it.  (E.  Cooper,  M.A.)  lletribution  : — 1. 
Does  not  common  sense  tell  us,  that  if  God  made  this  world,  and  governs  it  by 
righteous  and  God-like  laws,  this  must  be  a  world  in  which  evil  doing  cannot  thrive? 
God  made  the  world  better  than  that,  surely  !  He  would  be  a  bad  law-giver  who 
made  such  laws,  that  it  was  as  well  to  break  them  as  to  keep  them.  The  world 
works  by  God's  laws,  and  it  inclines  towards  good  and  not  towards  evil ;  and  he 
who  sins,  even  in  the  least,  acts  contrary  to  the  rule  and  constitution  of  the  world, 
and  will  surely  find  that  God's  laws  will  go  on  in  spite  of  him,  and  grind  him  to 
powder,  God  has  no  need  to  go  out  of  His  way  to  punish  our  evil  deeds.  Let  them 
alone,  and  they  will  punish  themselves.  Is  it  not  so  in  everything  ?  If  a  tradepman 
trades  badly,  or  a  farmer  farms  badly,  there  is  no  need  of  lawyers  to  punish  him; 
he  will  punish  himself.  2.  Next,  to  speak  of  Scripture.  I  might  quote  texts 
innumerable  to  prove  that  what  I  say  Scripture  says  also.  3.  You  know  that  your 
sins  will  find  you  out.  Look  boldly  and  honestly  into  your  own  hearts.  Look 
through  the  history  of  your  past  lives,  and  confess  to  God,  at  least,  that  the  far 
greater  number  of  your  sorrows  have  been  your  own  fault ;  that  there  is  hardly  a 
day's  misery  which  you  ever  endured  in  your  life  of  which  you  might  not  say,  "  If 
I  bad  listened  to  the  voice  of  God  in  my  conscience — if  I  had  earnestly  considered 
what  my  duty  was — if  I  had  prayed  to  God  to  determine  my  judgment  right,  I 
should  have  been  spared  tbis  sorrow  now!  "  Am  I  not  right?  Think  again  of 
your  past  lives,  and  answer  in  God's  sight,  how  many  wrong  things  have  you  ever 
done  which  have  succeeded — that  is,  how  many  sins  which  you  would  not  be  right 
glad  were  undone  if  you  could  but  put  back  the  wheels  of  Time  ?  They  may  have 
succeeded  outwardly  ;  meanness  will  succeed  so — lies — oppression — theft — godless- 
ness — they  are  all  pleasant  enough  while  they  last,  I  suppose  :  and  a  man  may 
reap  what  he  calls  substantial  benefits  from  tliem  in  money,  and  such-like,  and 
keep  that  safe  enough ;  but  has  his  sin  succeeded  ?  Has  it  not  found  him  out  ? 
found  him  out  never  to  lose  him  again  ?  Is  he  the  happier  for  it  ?  4.  And  lastly, 
you  who,  without  running  into  any  especial  sins,  as  those  which  the  world  calls 
sins,  still  live  careless  about  religion,  without  loyalty  to  Christ  the  Lord,  without 
any  honest  attempt,  or  even  wish,  to  serve  the  God  above  you,  or  to  rejoice  in 
remembering  that  you  are  His  children,  working  for  Him,  and  under  Him — be  sure 
your  sin  will  find  you  out.  When  affliction,  or  sickness,  or  disappointment  come, 
as  come  they  will  if  God  has  not  cast  you  off ;  when  the  dark  day  dawns,  and  your 
fool's  paradise  of  worldly  prosperity  is  cut  away  from  under  >  our  feet,  then  you 
will  find  out  your  folly  ;  you  will  find  that  you  have  insulted  the  only  friend  who 
can  bring  you  out  of  affliction.  Then,  I  say,  the  sin  of  your  godlessness  will  find 
you  out ;  if  you  do  not  intend  to  fall,  soured  and  sickened  merely  by  God's  chastise- 
ments, either  into  stupid  despair  or  peevish  discontent,  you  will  have  to  go  back 
to  God  and  cry,  "Father,  I  have  sinned  against  heaven  and  before  Thee,  and 
am  no  more  worthy  to  be  called  Thy  son."  Go  back  at  once,  before  it  be  too 
late.  Find  out  your  sins  and  mend  them — before  they  find  you  out,  and  break  your 
hearts.  (C.  Kingsley,  M.A.)  The  warnhig  against  sin  : — One  thing  which  has 
much  to  do  with  leading  people  to  commit  sin,  is  the  thought  that  they  can  do  it  in 
secret,  and  not  be  found  out.  Many  a  boy  is  tempted  to  play  truant,  instead  of 
going  to  school,  because  he  thinks  that  his  father  and  mother  will  never  know  any^ 
thing  about  it.  Many  a  robber  breaks  into  a  houpe  at  nigbt,  and  steals  what  he 
wants,  because  he  thmks  that  no  one  sees  him,  and  so  his  sin  will  never  be  found 
out.  But  here  in  our  text,  we  have  a  warning  apainst  sin  because  it  is  sure  to  be 
found  out.  I.  And  the  first  thing  which  must  make  it  sure  that  sin  will  be  found 
out,  is — THE  PEESENCE  OF  GoD.  I(.  The  Eccoud  thing  whi'  h  makes  it  sure  that  sin 
will  be  found  out,  is — the  poweb  of  God.  III.  And  the  third  thing,  which  mnkes 
it  sure  that  sin  will  be  found  out  is — the  pcepose  of  God  (Eccles.  xii.  14).  {R. 
Neu-ton,D.D.)  Murder  will  out : — I.  The  common  fault.  In  every  human  being 
there  are  two  sides,  one  seen  by  the  world,  and  the  other  known  only  to  himself  and 
God.     We  perform  before  our  fellow  men  ;  but  to  ourselves  and  God,  one's  true 


324  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxii. 

character  is  revealed.    Few  men  and  women  commit  great  crimes.   But  people  who 
commit  great  crimes  first  begin  with  the  little  faults,   such  as  "  white  lies,"  or 
*' white  dishonesty,"  or  "white  speculation,"  with  other   people's   money.      You 
know  how  hard  it  is  sometimes  to  heat  anything  in  your  oven  or  on  your  fire ;  but 
when  you  obtain  the  first  degree  of  heat,  it  is  much  more  easy  to  get  the  second,  the 
third,  and  the  fourth.     So  it  is  hard  at  first  to  prevail  upon  yourself  to  do  wrong, 
but  after  the  first  step  has  been  taken  it  is  very  easy  to  go  on  with  the  second  aud 
the  third.     Dalliance  with  sin  is  a  common  fault.     II.  The  soke  besult — "Be  sure 
your  sin  will  find  you  out."   When  sin  has  found  you  out,  you  often  resolve  to  give 
it  up,  yet  you  go  to  it  again.     Many  people  forsake  sin  as  a  man  who  goes  to  his 
work  forsakes  his  house,  but  comes  to  it  again  after  a  season.     And  your  sin  finds 
you  out  in  tljat  you  keep  on  doing  the  wrong,  each  year  consenting  to  neglect  some- 
thing good,  and  more  pleased  to  do  something  evil.    Your  sin  finds  you  out  because 
as  rust  destroys  your  iron  tools  and  vessels,  so  sin  rusts  your  inward  character.     A 
splendid  oak  tree  is  blown  down  in  a  great  gale  of  wind.     But  was  it  the  wind  that 
ruined  the  monarch  of  the  forest  ?    No  ;  the  wind  merely  completed  the  ruin.    The 
cause  of  the  destruction  began  years  ago,  when  a  drop  of  water  settled  itself  in  a 
crevice  of  the  oak  tree  and  gradually  worked  its  way  within  until  ultimately  the  rain 
and  the  outside  air  got  into  the  heart  of  the  wood,  and  it  became  diseased,  corrupt, 
and  hollow.     So  when  we  see  a  man  fall,  we  know  it  is  a  cankering  and  corrupting 
sin  which  has  been  surely  finding  him  out.     Sin  will  surely  find  you  out  because  it 
is  opposed  to  God's  eternal  law  of  right.     III.  Thank  God,  there  is  a  cure  for  sin  ; 
but  no  outward  salve  can  heal  its  wounds.     No  external  restraint,  no  prison,  no 
muzzle  of  human  device  will  keep  you  from  it ;  the  only  cure  is  a  new  creation  in 
your  heart ;  and  this  God  promises  to  every  human  heart  that  asks  it.     God  cures 
us  of  our  sin-disease,  not  only  effectually  but  with  tenderness.     (W.  Birch.)        The 
entail  of  evil : — I.  Notice  tbe  fact  that  this  appeal,  in  regard  to  a  great  spiritual 
truth,  is  not  made  in  the  first  instance  to  individuals,  but  to  two  teibes  in  theib 
NATIONAL  capacity.     The  life  of  a  tribe,  or  of  a  people,  is  a  reality.     A  tribe,  a 
nation,  a  Church,  a  people,  cannot  commit  a  wrong  act  or  follow  a  wrong  course, 
■without,  as  a  tribe,  or  nation,  or  Church,  or  people,  suffering  the  consequences  of 
its  act.     The  sin  wbich  a  nation  commits  is  found  out  in  the  long-run.     It  brings 
forth  its  own  natural  fruits.     One  generation  is  to  the  next  generation  as  spring  is 
to  autumn,  and  as  boyhood  is  to  manhood.     And  just  as  a  man  suffers  for  his  care- 
lessness, his  folly,  his  dissipation,  in  youth,  so  does  a  generation  suffer  for  its 
predecessors.     II.  We  may  make  the  subject  one  of  wider  and  more  general  appli- 
cation, and  find  that  this  saying  is  universally  true.    1.  By  the  very  constitution 
of  man's  being,  the  sin  of  the  individual  who  commits  a  wrong  reappears  in  his 
own  mind  and  character.     Not  only  every  act,  but  every  thought  or  purpose  or 
desire  which  p.sses  through  the  mind,  gives  a  tinge  to  the  mind  itself.     In  the 
attitude  and  character  of  the  mind  itself,  every  man's  individual  sins,  even  the 
most  secret,  will  find  him  out.    2.  There  may  be  some  who  will  be  more  influenced 
by  another  consideration,  and  that  is,  that  his  secret  sins  will  grow  and  gather, 
until  in  some  way  or  other  they  will  discover  themselves  in  act,  and  find  him  out. 
(.4.  Watson,  D.D.)         The  sinner  found  out  by  his  sin: — Both  the  unconverted  who 
resist  not  evil,  and  the  converted  who  resist  it  but  imperfectly,  not  aiming  at  the 
total  renewal  of  tlieir  nature,  offer  a  parallel  case  of  guilt  to  that  of  the  unbelieving 
Israelites.    And  we  are  now  to  examine  how  the  warning  of  the  text  appears  to  each 
class — "Be  sure  your  sin  will  find  you  out."     I.  Now  we  suppose  that  the  delusion 
which  chiefly  hardens  the  sinner  in  the  commission  of  the  crimes  he  so  daringly 
perpetrates,  is  the  hope  that  he  may  commit  them  in  secrecy  and  with  impunity. 
There  can  be  no  doubt  that  if  detection  followed  immediately  on  the  commission  of 
crime — night  throwing  no  mantle  of  darkness  round  the  culprit,  and  accomplices 
nnable  to  screen  bim  from  public  scorn — those  monstrous  forms  of  wickedness 
would  not  so  often  apppar  which  disfigure  tbe  annals  of  our  race.     But  such  a 
speedy  retribution  would  go  counter  to  the  whole  tone  and  texture  of  the  revealed 
plan  of  salvation.     Sins  punished  as  soon  as  committed  cannot  be  repented  of, 
and   therefore   cannot  be  pardoned.      If  then,  long-suffering   is  to   be  shown,  if 
remission   of    human  guilt  is   to  be  proclaimed  through   the  interposition   of  a 
Mediator,  judgment  must  not  follow  so  speedily  upon  crime.     And  it  is  this  delay, 
rendered  necessary  for  the  disphiy  of   mercy,  that  men  interpret  as  if  it  meant 
indifference.     We  must,  theiefore,  fling  open  the  mysterious  portals  that  enclose 
the  future  world,  and  reveal  to  the  gaze  of  the  sinner  the  destinies  of  the  lost,  ere 
we  can  hope  successfully  to  urj^e  him  to  conmieuce  the  great  l  usiness  of  relig  on. 


CBAP.  XXXII.]  NUMBERS.  325 

Who  among  you  is  deluding  himself  by  the  hope  either  of  secrecy  or  impunity? 
"Be  sure  your  sin  will  find  you  out  ! "  You  are  pursued  by  the  sin  which  your- 
selves have  committed  I  That  which  before  had  no  being,  has  received  an  individual, 
a  personal  existence  by  your  own  act,  and  is  afterwards  mysteriously  connected  with 
you,  following  your  footsteps  and  tracking  you  in  all  your  journeyings.  Nay  more, 
each  sin  which  ye  commit  may  be  said  to  swell  the  numbers  of  the  throng  of 
pursuers  that  are  behind,  making  it  less  possible  for  you  to  escape.  Noiselessly 
ihey  follow  you.  And  ye  yourselves  have  witnessed  some  of  the  results  that  follow 
on  the  sinner  being  overtaken  by  his  sins.  For  what  is  it  but  sin  finding  the 
sensualist  out,  when  he  sinks  beneath  the  ravages  of  premature  decay,  a  virtual 
suicide  ?  What  is  it  but  sin  findmg  the  gambler  out,  when  with  tottering  reason 
and  broken  fortunes  he  finds  a  dishonourable  grave,  bequeathing  nothing  but  an 
unhonoured  name  to  those  wbo  once  called  him  husband  and  father?  And  what 
is  it  but  sin  finding  the  dishonest  trader  out  when,  though  he  once  stood  high  in 
public  estimation,  his  reputation  and  his  gains  are  proved  to  have  b?en  alike  unfairly 
won,  and  he  is  sent  an  exile  from  scenes  where  he  once  moved  a  king  ?  Happy  for 
him  if  these  temporal  calamities,  which  are  but  heralds  of  others  more  fearful, 
would  drive  him  to  take  refuge  beneath  the  Saviour's  Cross,  while  yet  the  avenger 
has  not  fastened  on  his  soul.  If  the  sinner  passes  through  life  with  his  future 
tormentors  always  on  his  track,  how  can  he,  if  found  among  the  impenitent,  hope 
to  escape?  But  the  text  contains  indirect  notices  of  the  future  life  which  need  a 
fuller  examination.  I  gather  that  there  will  be  an  exact  adaptation  between  the 
crime  and  its  punishment — the  punishment  being  nothing  ehe  than  the  crime 
itself  re-appearing  in  another  state  of  being  to  take  vengeance  on  him  who  com- 
mitted it.   II.  But  we  must  now  proceed  to  the  second  point  we  proposed  to  examine, 

HOW    THE    TEXT    MAT    BE   APPLIED    TO    THE  CASE  OF  ONE    WHO    IS  TRDLY  A  CHILD    OF  GoD. 

The  believer  who  stands  at  God's  bar,  having  squared  his  conduct  when  on  earth, 
•according  to  God's  commandment,  for  Christ's  sake,  shall  not  come  under  any 
measure  of  condemnation.  If  pronounced  righteous  then,  his  justification  will  be 
complete.  But  is  he  never  impeded  in  his  Christian  course  by  tlie  habits  he  had 
formed  while  living  "without  God  in  the  world"?  Those  habits  are  gradually 
being  overcome  by  the  indwelling  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  The  roots  of  that  sin,  not 
yet  eradicated,  send  up  their  bitter  fruit,  even  when  the  sin  itself  has  long 
disappeared.  And  thus  his  former  sin,  though  pardoned,  finds  the  believer  out. 
Nor  is  this  all.  Sin  will  mark  the  believer's  course  all  through,  ami  greater 
infirmities  will  appear  in  one  than  in  another.  There  may  be  spiritual  indolence— 
a  desire  to  pass  lightly  over  some  infirmity,  as  if  it  did  no  great  vioi^■nce  to  God's 
law — a  fixing  of  the  heart  on  something  which  forthwith  becomes  an  idol,  excluding 
Jehovah  from  His  proper  place.  And  then  this  sin  finds  the  believer  out.  The 
child,  or  the  husband,  or  the  friend,  who  was  too  much  loved,  is  tal;en  away, 
that  nothing  may  interfere  with  the  total  surrender  of  the  soul  to  God.  Or  the 
uninterrupted  prosperity  which  caused  a  f oigetfulness  that " all  things  come  of  God," 
is  brought  suddenly  to  an  end,  and  the  slorm  sweeps  over  the  stream  of  life  which 
before  flowed  calmly  along,  that  God's  voice  may  be  heard  biddi  g  the  tempest 
subside.  Oh !  the  believer  should  never  feel  the  rod,  without  searching  for  the 
sin  that  brings  the  chastening.  I  am  sure  that  God  keeps  a  stricter  reckoning, 
in  this  world,  with  the  righteous,  than  with  tlie  ungodly.  (J.  P.  Waldo,  M.A.) 
Our  sin  finding  us  out : — Audley  was  an  old  English  usurer,  who  used  to  lend  money 
to  the  thoughtless  young  men  of  his  day,  at  ruinous  rates  of  interest.  He  counted 
out  the  pounds  for  them,  with  many  well-affected  remonstrances  on  their  extrava- 
gance, but  his  pity  never  led  him  away  so  far  as  to  make  him  forget  his  securities. 
As  long  as  he  knew  a  debt  to  be  safe,  he  was  quite  indifferent  as  to  delay  of  pay- 
ment, and  many  an  unsuspecting  victim  was  lulled  into  false  security  by  the  old 
usurer's  apparent  unconcern ;  and  they  were  only  awakened,  on  some  dark  and  un- 
fortunate day,  by  the  terrible  discovery  that  interest  and  principd  had  swallowed 
up  all  their  estates.  Such  is  the  ruinous  percentage  which  thousands  will  be  called 
on  to  pay  to  the  great  Enemy  of  Souls,  for  what  are  commonly  described  as  "  the 
pleasures  of  sin."  There  is  a  presumption  on  the  part  of  such  as  wilfully  d:sobey 
Ood,  which,  sooner  or  later,  will  receive  its  due  recompense.  The  most  dangerous 
and  deadly  quality  of  sin  is  its  deceitfulness :  so  deceitful,  indeed,  that  it  can  con- 
ceal itself  even  from  conscience.  But  nothing  can  be  hidden  from  God.  Hundreds 
of  well-authenticated  facts  have  occurred  in  all  ages,  enforcing  the  declaration  that 
sin  will  be  sure  to  find  out. the  guilty.  Even  if  sin  be  undiscovered  in  this  life,  the 
appointment  of  the  great  day  of  retribution,  at  the  last,  puts  the  maiter  of  £ual 


326  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxn, 

exposure  beyond  the  possibility  of  doubt.  {J.  N.  Norton,  D.D.)  Sins  detection 
and  punishment : — I.  Let  us  notice  the  emphatic  expression,  "your  sin."  There 
are  shades  of  moral  character,  and  some  sins  are  of  deeper  dye  than  others.  Thei  e 
are  sins  peculiarly  characteristic  of  some  people.  It  is  important  that  we  should 
inquire  what  is  our  siu — the  sin  that  is  more  especially  peculiar  to  any  of  us.  Your 
sin  is  that  which  is  most  agreeable  in  its  commission  to  your  circumstances  and 
constitutional  temperament — tbat  sin  which  you  can  commit  with  the  greatest 
facility,  and  against  which  you  have  the  least  power  of  offering  resistance — that  sin 
for  which  you  study  to  find  out  the  most  plausible  excuses.  What  is  the  cause  of 
your  carelessness  as  regards  your  spiritual  and  eternal  condition?  That  cause, 
whatever  it  may  be,  is  your  sin.  II.  Let  us  now  consider  the  certain  detectk'N 
AND  PUNISHMENT  OF  SIN.  It  has  oftcu  been  remarked  that  "  murder  will  out." 
Blood  has  a  voice  which  will  make  itself  heard  sooner  or  later.  The  blood  of  the 
first  victim  of  violence  cried  from  the  ground  on  which  it  was  shed,  and  it  appealed 
to  the  God  of  justice  in  heaven  for  vengeance.  Let  us  watch  and  pray,  lest  we  enter 
into  temptation.  The  young  are  especially  exposed  to  danger  from  pride  and  vanity  : 
let  them  guard  against  the  beginnings  of  sin.  {S.  Walker.)  Concealment  of  siti 
no  security  to  the  sinner : — I.  That  men  generally,  if  not  always,  proceed  to  the 

COMMISSION  OF  SIN,  UPON  A  SECRET  CONFIDENCE  OF  CONCEALMENT  OR  IMPUNITY.       1.  That 

no  man  is  induced  to  sin,  considered  in  itself,  as  a  thing  absolutely  or  merely  evil, 
but  as  it  bears  some  resemblance  or  appearance  of  good  in  the  appieheusions  of 
him  who  commits  it.  2.  The  other  assertion  to  be  laid  down  is,  that  God  has  an- 
nexed two  great  evils  to  every  sin,  in  opposition  to  the  pleasure  and  profit  of  it ;  to 
wit,  shame  and  pain.  He  has,  by  an  eternal  and  most  righteous  decree,  made  these 
two  the  inseparable  effects  and  consequents  of  sin.  They  are  the  wages  assigned  it 
by  the  laws  of  Heaven ;  so  that  whosoever  commits  it,  ought  to  account  shame  and 
punishment  to  belong  to  him  as  his  rightful  inheritance.  II.  The  grounds  and 
REASONS  UPON  WHICH  MEN  TAKE  UP  SUCH  A  CONFIDENCE.  And,  HO  doubt.  Weak  and 
shallow  enough  we  shall  find  theiD  all ;  and  such  as  could  never  persuade  any  ma'i 
to  sin,  did  not  his  own  love  to  sia  persuade  him  much  more  forcibly  than  all  such 
consiiterations;  some  of  which  are  these  that  follow.  As— 1.  Men  consider  the  suc- 
cess which  they  have  actually  had  in  the  commission  of  many  sins ;  and  this  proves 
an  encouraging  argument  to  them  to  commit  the  same  for  the  future;  as  naturally 
suggesting  this  to  their  thoughts,  that  what  they  have  done  so  often,  without  either 
discovery  or  punishment,  may  be  so  done  by  tbem  again.  2.  A  second  ground,  upon 
which  men  are  apt  to  persuade  themselves  that  they  shall  escape  the  stroke  of 
Divine  justice  for  their  sins,  is  their  obs'  rvation  of  the  great  and  flourishing  condi- 
tion of  some  of  the  topping  sinners  of  tbe  world.  3.  As  we  have  shown  how 
mightily  men  are  heartened  on  to  their  sins,  by  the  successful  examples  of  others 
as  bad  as  themselves  or  perhaps  worse;  so  the  next  gi-ound  upon  which  such  aie 
wont  to  promise  themselves  security,  both  from  the  discovery  and  punishment  of 
their  sins,  is  the  opinion  which  they  have  of  their  own  sin;;ular  art  and  cunning  to 
conceal  them  from  the  knowledge,  or,  at  least,  of  their  power  to  rescue  them  from 
the  jurisdiction  of  any  earthly  judge.  4.  The  fourth  and  last  ground  which  I  bhall 
mention  of  men's  promising  themselves  secuiity  from  the  punishment  of  their  sins, 
is  a  strong  presumption  that  they  shall  be  able  to  repent,  and  make  their  peace  with 
God  when  they  please;  and  this,  they  fully  reckon,  will  keep  them  safe,  and  effec- 
tually shut  the  door  against  their  utmost  fears,  as  being  a  reach  beyond  them  all. 
III.  To  snow  TUB  VANITY  OF  THIS  CONFIDENCE,  by  declaring  those  several  ways  by 
which,  in  the  issue,  it  comes  certainly  to  be  defeated;  and  that  both  with  reference 
to  this  world  and  the  next.  1.  For  this  world  ;  there  are  various  ways  by  which  it 
comes  to  be  disappointed  here  :  as  (1)  The  very  confidence  itself  of  secrecy  is  a  direct 
and  natural  cause  of  the  sinner's  discovery.  For  confidence  in  such  cases  causes  a 
frequent  repetition  of  the  same  action  ;  and  if  a  man  does  a  thing  frequently,  it  is 
odds  but  some  time  or  other  he  is  discovered ;  for  by  this  he  subjects  himself  to  so 
many  more  a-'cidents  ;  every  one  of  which  may  possibly  betray  him.  He  who  has 
escaped  in  many  battles,  has  yet  been  killed  in  the  issue;  and  by  playing  too  often 
in  the  mouth  of  death  has  been  snapped  by  it  at  last.  Add  to  this,  tliat  confidence 
makes  a  man  venturous,  and  venturousness  casts  him  into  the  high  road  of  danger 
and  the  very  arms  of  destruction.  Fur  while  a  man  ventures,  he  (iroperly  shuts  the 
eyes  of  his  reason.  And  he  who  shuts  his  own  eyes  lies  so  much  the  more  open  to 
those  of  olhei'  men.  (2)  There  is  sometimes  a  strange,  providential  concurrence  of 
unusual,  unlikely  accidents,  for  the  discovery  of  great  sins  ;  a  villainy  committed 
perhaps  but  ouce  in  an  age,  comes  sometimes  to  be  found  out  also  by  such  an  acci- 


CHAP,  xxxti.]  NUMBERS.  827 

dent  as  scarce  happens  above  once  in  an  ag**.  (3)  God  sometimes  makes  one  sin 
the  means  of  discovering  another ;  it  often  falling  out  with  two  vices,  as  with  two 
thieves  or  rogues ;  of  whom  it  is  hard  to  say  which  is  worse,  and  yet  one  of  them 
may  serve  well  enough  to  betray  and  find  out  the  other.  How  many  have  by  their 
drunkenness,  disclosed  their  thefts,  their  lusts,  and  murders,  which  might  have 
been  buried  in  perpetual  silence,  had  not  tbe  sottish  committers  of  them  buried 
their  reason  in  their  cups  ?  For  the  tongue  is  then  got  loose  from  its  obedience  to 
reason,  and  commanded  at  all  adventures  by  the  fumes  of  a  distempered  brain  and 
a  roving  imagination ;  and  so  presently  pours  forth  whatsoever  they  shall  suggest  to 
it,  sometimes  casting  away  life,  fortune,  reputation,  and  all  in  a  breath.  (4)  God 
sometimes  infatuates  and  strikes  the  sinner  with  frenzy,  and  such  a  distraction,  as 
causes  him  to  reveal  all  his  hidden  baseness,  and  to  blab  out  such  truths  as  will  be 
sure  to  be  revenged  upon  him  who  speaks  them.  In  a  word,  God  blasts  and  takes 
away  his  understanding,  for  having  used  it  so  much  to  the  dishonour  of  Him  who 
gave  it ;  and  delivers  him  over  to  a  sort  of  madness,  too  black  and  criminal  to  be 
allowed  any  refuge  in  Bedlam.  (5)  God  sometimes  lets  loose  the  sinner's  conscience 
upon  him,  tilling  it  with  such  horror  for  sin,  as  renders  it  utterly  unable  to  bear  the 
burden  it  labours  under,  without  publishing,  or  rather  proclaiming  it  to  the  world. 
(6)  And  lastly,  God  sometimes  takes  the  work  of  vengeance  upon  Himself,  and 
immediately,  with  His  own  arm,  repavs  the  sinner  by  some  notaljle  judgment  from 
heaven ;  sometimes,  perhaps.  He  strikes  him  dead  suddenly ;  and  sometimes  He 
smites  him  with  some  loathsome  disease  (which  will  hardly  be  thought  the  gout, 
whatsoever  it  may  be  called) ;  and  sometimes,  again.  He  strangely  blasts  him  in  his 
name,  family,  or  estate,  so  that  all  about  him  stand  amazed  at  the  blow :  but  God 
and  the  sinner  himself  know  well  enough  the  reason  and  the  meaning  of  it  too. 
Justice,  we  know,  used  to  be  pictured  blind,  and  therefore  it  finds  out  the  sinner, 
not  with  its  eyes,  but  with  its  hands ;  not  by  seeing,  but  by  striking ;  and  it  is  the 
honour  of  the  great  attribute  of  God's  justice,  which  He  thinks  so  much  concerned, 
to  give  some  pledge  or  specimen  of  itself  upon  bold  sinnprs  in  this  world;  and  so  to 
assure  them  of  a  full  payment  hereafter,  by  paving  them  something  in  the  way  of 
earnest  here.  {R.  South,  D.D.)  I'he  consequences  of  sin : — The  text  leads  us  to 
consider  the  consequenres  of  a  single  sin,  such  as  a  breach  of  their  engagement 
would  have  been  to  the  Eeubenites  and  Gadites.     I.  It  is  natural  to  reflect  on  the 

I'BOBABLE  INFLUENCE  UPON  US  OF  SINS  COMMITTED  IN  OUR  CHILDHOOD  AND  EVEN  INFANCY, 

WHICH  WE  NEVER  REALISED  OR  HAVE  ALT03ETHER  FORGOTTEN.  Children's  miuds  are 
impressible  in  a  very  singular  way,  such  as  is  not  common  afterwards.  The  passing 
occurrences  which  meet  them  rest  upon  their  imagination  as  if  they  had  duration, 
and  days  or  hours,  havii'g  to  them  the  semblance,  may  do  the  work,  of  years.  II. 
What  is  true  in  infancy  and  childhood  is  in  its  degree  true  in  after-life.  At 
particular  moments  in  our  later  life,  when  the  mind  is  excited,  thrown  out  of  its 
ordinary  state,  as  if  into  the  original  unformed  state  when  it  was  more  free  to  choose 
good  or  evil,  then,  in  like  manner,  it  takes  impressions,  and  those  indelible  ones, 
>ifter  the  manner  of  ctiildhood.  This  is  one  reason  why  a  time  of  trial  is  often  such 
a  crisis  in  a  man's  spiritual  history.     III.  To  these  single  or  forgotten  sins  are 

NOT  IMPROBABLY  TO  BE  TRACED  THE  STRANGE    INCONSISTENCIES   OF   CHARACTER  WHICH  WE 

-OFTEN  WITNESS  IN  OCR  EXPERIENCE  OF  LIFE.    IV.  SiuRle  sius  indulged  Or  neglected  are 

often  THE  CAUSE  OF  OTHER  DEFECTS  OF  CHARACTER,  WHICH  SEEM  TO  HAVE  NO  CONNECTION 

•WITH  THEM,  but  wliicli,  after  all,  are  rathpr  symptomatic  of  the  former  than  them- 
selves at  the  bottom  of  the  mischief.     V.  A  man  may  be  very  religious  in  all  but 

ONE  infirmity,  AND  THIS  ONE  INDULGED  INFIRMITY  MAY  PRODUCE  MOST  DISASTROUS 
EFFFC  I  S  ON  HIS  SPIlilTCAL  STATE,  WITHOUT  HIS  EVER  BEING  AWARE  OF  IT.       His  religioUS 

excellences  are  of  no  avail  against  wilful  sin.  Tlie  word  of  Scripture  assures  us 
that  such  sin  shuts  us  out  from  God's  presence  and  obstructs  the  channels  by  which 
He  gives  us  grace.  (■/.  H.  Neivman,  D.D.)  The  sins  of  sinners  finding  them 
out : — I.    Sinners  are   in   their   hearts    utterly   averse   to   be   found  out  by 

THEIR    sins,    and    THEY   HAVE    MANY   SHIFTS    FOR   THAT     VAIN     PURPOSE.         1.     They   wiU 

excuse  and  justify  their  sins  as  if  there  were  no  evil  in  them.  2.  They  will 
carry  the  matter  so  quietly  as  that  it  shall  be  hid  from  the  eyes  of  the  world, 
while  in  the  meantime  God's  watchful  eye  is  still  upon  them,  though  they  do  not 
regard  it.  3.  They  will  deny  it  when  charged  upon  them,  and  so  cover  one  sin  with 
another.  "They  wipe  their  mouth  and  say  we  have  done  no  wickedness."  Oh 
what  pains  do  many  take  to  ruin  their  own  souls.  Credit  before  the  world  is  bought 
at  prodigious  rates  of  soul,  and  consciences,  lies,  and  perjury.  4.  They  will  keep 
out  of  the  wav.  where  their  sin  is  most  likely  to  find  them  out.     They  live  strangers 


328  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxn. 

to  themselves,  dare  not  examine  themselves  impartially.  II.  To  show  in  what 
RESPECTS  SIN  SHALL  FIND  OCT  THE  SINNER.  1.  By  discovering  and  bringing  to  light 
their  woiks  of  darkness.  2.  By  presenting  sin  in  its  native  colours  to  their  awakened 
consciences.  3.  By  giving  tliem  the  due  reward  of  their  works.  III.  Show  whence 
IT  IS  THAT  SIN  CERTAINLY  WILL  FIND  OUT  THE  SINNER.  How  Can  it  be  Otherwise,  if  we- 
consider — 1.  That  none  can  sin  withoutwitnesses,  who  will  surely  at  length  discover 
the  sin.  Let  sinners  choose  the  most  secret  place  for  their  works  of  darkness,  they 
have  always  two  witnesses  present  with  them.  (1)  Conscience  within  their  own 
breast  is  as  a  thousand  witnesses,  whose  testiroony  one  cannot  get  denit^d.  (2)  The 
omniscient  God,  whose  eye  is  always  upon  the  sinner.  2.  God  has  said  it.  3.  There 
ia  a  watchful  eye  of  Providence  over  the  world  that  never  closes,  but  takes  notice  of 
all  men's  actions  at  all  times  and  in  every  place.  Use  1.  Of  information.  This  lets 
us  see — (1)  That  an  evil  conscience  is  a  sad  companion,  and  guilt  lying  within  the 
breast  unrepented  of  will  break  out  sadly  at  length,  to  the  sinner's  confusion. 
Many  a  secret  blow  it  gives  the  sinner,  that  the  world  knows  not  of.  (2)  God  is  a 
just  God,  and  will  not  be  mocked,  nor  can  He  be  blinded.  Use  2.  Of  warning.  (1) 
To  take  heed  when  you  think  you  stand,  lest  you  fall.  The  way  of  sin  is  down  the 
hill,  it  is  easy  to  go  downward,  but  there  may  be  broken  bones  before  you  get  up 
again.  (2)  Please  not  yourselves  in  that  you  get  your  sins  covered  and  hid  from 
the  eyes  of  men.  For  though  you  may  prosper  a  while  in  that  course,  yet  your  feet 
may  slip  at  last.  (3)  Let  us  all  labour  to  find  out  our  sins,  lest  they  find  us  out. 
To  inquire  more  particularly  than  we  have  yet  done  into  the  Lord's  making  sin  find 
out  the  sinner.  This  is  one  of  these  things  in  which  the  providence  of  God  does 
shine  most  illustriously  ;  upon  which  unbiassed  spectators  must  say,  "This  is  the 
finger  of  God,  and  verily  there  is  a  God  to  judge  upon  the  earth."     Consider  here, 

I.   The  GENERAL  KINDS  OF  SIN,  WHICH  THE   LORD    MAKES    TO  FIND  OUT  THE  SINNER.       As 

for  open  sins  confessed  by  the  sinner,  I  need  not  speak  of  these,  the  sinner  meets 
with  them  every  day.  But — 1.  Sins  which  men  will  not  own  to  be  sins,  the  Lord 
makes  to  find  out  the  sinner.  Crucifixion  of  Christ.  2.  Secret  sins  to  which  no 
man  is  witness,  the  Lord  makes  them  find  out  the  sinner.  II.  The  time  in  which 
THE  Lord  makes  sin  to  find  out  the  sinner.  Times  and  seasons  are  in  the  Lord's 
band,  and  the  time  fixed  by  His  providence  is  always  the  best  time,  and  whoso  con- 
sidereth  circumstances  will  be  obliged  to  own  it.  The  best  time  for  his  own  honour, 
and  for  the  conviction  of  the  sinner  in  mercy  or  in  wrath.  III.  The  place,  wherk 
sin  finds  out  the  sinner.  Many  times  there  is  much  of  God  seen  in  this,  and  God 
reserves  the  discovery  always  to  the  fittest  place.  And  He  can  make  the  sinner's 
own  feet  carry  him  to  the  place  of  this  heavy  meeting,  while  he  has  no  mind  of  any 
such  thing.  1.  God  can  make  sin  find  out  the  sinner  sometimes,  where  he  can  have 
least  support  under  the  awful  meeting  with  his  sin.  Joseph's  brethren.  2.  Where 
they  may  have  least  help  to  shift,  their  sins  finding  them  out.  Companions  in  sin 
are  ofttimes  farthest  to  seek  when  their  help  is  most  needed,  and  some  time  or 
other  they  will  all  prove  physicians  of  no  value.  3.  Where  it  will  confound  the 
sinner  most  and  pierce  his  heart  most  keenly.  God  makes  secret  sins,  which  no  eye 
has  seen  committed,  find  out  the  sinner  publicly  before  many  witnesses,  and  in  the 
face  of  the  sun.  IV.  The  means  by  which  the  Lord  makes  sin  find  out  the 
SINNER.  There  is  much  of  God  seen  in  this  also.  He  never  wants  means  to  dis- 
cover the  most  secret  sins,  which  He  wishes  to  bring  to  light.  Sometimes  this  is 
done — 1.  By  the  natural  product  of  the  sin,  by  which  the  sin  is  made  to  discover 
itself.  2.  By  some  act  of  indiscretion  and  folly  in  the  sinner  himself.  3.  By  some 
unforeseen  accident  which  the  sinner  by  his  own  utmost  diligence  could  not  prevent. 
Man's  capacity  is  but  narrow,  there  are  many  things  which  he  cannot  foresee. 
When  he  goes  out  of  the  way  of  God,  he  may,  ere  he  be  aware,  be  caught  fast  ia 
such  a  snare  as  will  hold  him  till  his  sin  finds  him  out.  V.  The  way  and  manner 
OF  sin's  finding  out  the  sinner.  This  many  a  time  is  such  as  must  needs  make 
men  to  say,  "  This  is  the  finger  of  God."  Providence  appoints  the  meeting,  and  won- 
derfully brings  matters  about  for  the  keeping  of  it.  1.  Ofttimes  sin  finds  the  sinner 
unexpectedly  and  surprisingly  when  they  are  not  looking  for  it.  2.  Often  does  the 
way  which  sinners  take  to  hide  their  sin  prove  the  way  of  its  finding  them  out.  3. 
Sin  always  finds  out  the  sinner  securely,  that  there  is  none  escaping,  no  getting 
beyond  it,  but  the  sinner  is  hedged  in  on  every  side.  4.  God's  writing  the  sin  upon 
the  punishment,  so  that  the  sinner  shall  be  forced  to  say,  "  As  I  have  done,  so  God 
hath  requited  me."  Thus  God  makes  men's  sins  so  to  find  them  out,  that  they  can- 
not fail  to  see  that  He  remembers  such  a  sin  against  them.  Sometimes  the  punish- 
ment is  the  same  in  kind  with  the  sin  :  as  in  the  case  of  Adoui-bezek.     Sometimes- 


CHAP,  xxxii.]  NUMBERS.  329 

there  is  a  visible  likeness  between  the  sin  and  the  punishment.  The  Sodomites 
burned  with  lust,  and  God  senJs  fire  and  brimstone  on  them  to  burn  them  to  ashes. 
Sometimes  there  is  a  certain  relationship  betwixt  the  sin  and  the  punishment. 
Jeroboam's  hand  withering,  the  belly  of  the  adulteress  swelling,  and  her  thigh 
rotting.  Finally,  sometimes  there  is  a  direct  contrariety  betwixt  the  sin  and  the 
punishment.  Thus  God  threatened  the  Israelites  :  "Because  thou  servedst  not  the 
Lord  thy  God  with  joyfulnesp,  and  with  gladness  of  heart,  for  the  abundance  of  all 
tilings  ;  therefore  shalt  thou  serve  thine  enemies,  which  the  Lord  shall  send  against 
thee,  in  hunger,  and  in  thirst,  and  in  nakedness,  and  in  want  of  all  things;  and  He 
shall  put  a  yoke  of  iron  on  thy  neck,  until  He  have  destroyed  tbee."  Adam  would 
be  like  God,  and  he  became  like  the  beast  that  peri.^heth.  I  shall  now  confirm  the 
doctrine.  Here  consider — 1.  That  no  man  can  sin  without  witnesses.  This  has  been 
already  illustrated  under  the  third  head.  2.  Consider  that  God  both  can  and  will 
make  sin  find  out  the  sinner.  How  then  can  the  sinner  esi^ape?  Many  a  time  atro- 
cious crimes  escape  among  men,  because  such  as  would  cannot  find  them  out,  and 
such  as  can  will  not  do  it.  But  there  is  neither  cannot  nor  will  not  with  God 
in  this  case.  (1)  God  can  do  it.  For  He  hath  everything  necessary  to  qualify 
Him  to  find  out  the  guilty.  He  is  privy  to  the  most  secret  wickedness.  (2) 
God  will  do  it.  For  He  hath  said  it,  His  truth  is  engaged  for  it.  (3)  It  lies 
upon  God's  honour  to  make  sin  find  out  the  sinner.  (4)  History  and  observation 
afford  abundant  testimony  to  this  grand  truth,  in  the  events  that  have  appeared 
and  do  appear  in  the  world  in  all  ages.  Many  a  practical  commentary  has  Pro- 
vidence written  on  our  text  in  the  shame  and  ruin  of  many  a  man  and  woman ; 
although  the  brightest  piece  of  it  is  reserved  to  be  written  out  at  the  last  day, 
when  thousands  of  blanks  that  are  in  it  shall  be  filled  up.  (T.  Bo>fton,  D.D.) 
Sin  finding  the  liinner  ont : — I.  Inquire  what  it  is  to  be  found  out  by  sin.  The 
expression  is  singular  as  well  as  striking,  and  means  to  be  overtaken  by  convic- 
tions ;  to  be  alarmed,  and  brought  under  a  sense  of  condemnation  and  danger,  on 
account  of  sin.  A  man  may  be  said  to  be  thus  found  out  when  he  feels  the  awful 
consequences  of  sin  in  his  conscience,  when  his  peace  is  disturbed  by  the  recollec- 
tion of  his  iniquities,  when  he  feels  the  fatal  sting  of  them  in  his  soul.  When  a 
man's  sins  find  him  out,  convictions  fasten  as  a  worm  upon  his  mind  ;  and 
conscience,  though  before  unheeded,  or  perhaps  silenced  and  kept  down  by 
numbeile^s  worldly  cai-es  and  pleasures,  rises  up,  as  it  were,  with  renewed  vigour 
and  tormenting  energy,  and  at  length  forces  the  sinner,  with  wretched  Ahab,  to 
exclaim,  "  Hast  thou  found  me,  0  mine  enemy  ?  "  The  sinner  is  made  alive  to  the 
evil  of  sin.  The  effects  of  sin,  as  they  frequently  overtake  the  sinner  in  this 
world,  are  generally  serious  and  painful ;  but,  considered  in  a  more  extended  view, 
as  reaching  through  eternity,  and  as  having,  to  do  with  our  everlasting  doom  in  the 
world  of  spirits,  they  must  be  unutterably  awful.  They  are  not  only  ruinous  to  a 
man's  present  peace,  and  injurious  to  the  body,  but  pernicious,  fearfully  pernicious^, 
to  the  soul.  Oh,  let  us  think  of  our  sins  while  we  are  privileged  to  hear  the  sound 
of  a  Redet'mer's  name  !  Let  us  imi'lore  forgiveness  while  mercy  exhibits  to  our 
view  the  atoning  blood  of  the  Cross  !  II.  The  certainty  of  this  finding  out. 
III.  To  illustrate  the  text,  by  adverting  to  the  times  and  occasions  when 
MEN  are  usually  FOUND  OUT  BY  SIN.  1.  Sin  is  sometimes  made  suddenly  to 
overtake  and  find  out  the  sinner  by  an  unexpected  stroke  of  Providence.  One 
circumstance  often  calls  up  another  to  remembrance,  or  discovers  events  with 
which  it  is  connected,  involving  crimes  and  guilt  which  have  been  long  buried  in 
concealment,  and  long  time  escaped  detection.  How  singular  and  striking  the 
case  of  the  brethren  of  Joseph  !  2.  Sin  finds  men  out  at  the  time  of  conversion. 
3.  That  sin  fails  not  to  find  out  the  sinner,  if  not  sooner,  at  least  in  the  day  of 
adversity,  sickness,  and  death.  {J.  Jacques,  B.A.)  The  punishments  of  th'-. 
wicked : — Experience  proves  that  the  punishments  visited  upon  an  iniquity  are 
often  greater  than  the  advantages  or  pleasures  which  that  iniquity  could  possibly 
have  secured.  A  man  gains  £50  by  forgery,  and  his  whole  life  becomes  an  utter 
wreck.  A  youth  rejoices  for  a  moment  in  the  indulgence  of  his  appetites,  and 
consequences  of  a  lifelong  duration  are  entailed  on  him.  Sometimes,  also,  the 
punishments  are  delayed  until  long  after  the  actions  occasioning  them  are  for- 
gotten. This  is  not  infrequently  the  case.  Years  roll  away,  and  the  transgressor 
settles  down  quietly  and  respectably  in  life.  The  calm  joys  of  home,  the  lapse  of 
time,  the  eagerness  for  new  pursuits,  have  obliterated  from  his  memory  the  recol- 
lection of  the  long-gone  sin,  when  suddenly  up  rises,  from  the  dark  background  and 
abysm  of  the  past,  the  grim  spectre  of  an  unavoidable  retribution.     A  doctor  once 


'330  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [ciivp.  xvxri, 

asked  a  man  dying  of  cancer,  whether  he  could  recollect  ever  having  done  an 
injury  to  the  breast  in  which  the  cancer  had  farmed.  "  Yes,"  he  reiilied  ;  "some 
thirty  years  ago  I  had  a  heavy  fall,  which  sorely  bruised  this  breast."  "  That  fall 
of  thirty  years  ago,"  said  the  doctor,  "is  the  occasioning  cause  of  your  cancer 
now."  So  is  it  with  the  cancerous  consequences  caused  by  sin.  They  repose 
silently  for  many  years,  and  then,  long  after  the  occasioning  iniquitv  is  forgotten, 
they  break  forth  in  fatal,  calamitous,  irrepressible  malignity.  Terrible,  slow, 
subtle,  long-delayed,  are  the  punishments  accorded  to  sin  in  this  present  life  ;  and 
no  transgressor  can  ever  be  quite  sure  that  the  remote,  perhaps  forgotten,  iniquity 
of  long  ago  will  not,  ere  life  is  over,  be  punished  by  exposure,  shame,  and  ruin. 
And  these  long-delayed  punishments  often  come,  not  by  degrees  and  after  many 
warnings,  but  suddenly  and  with  violence.  At  the  meridian  of  the  brightest 
summer  day  the  avalanches  come  down  irresistibly,  overwhelmingly.  Moreover, 
it  is  not  active  and  heinous  misdoings  alone  whose  footsteps  are  thus  dogged  by 
the  pursuing  Nemesis.  Extravagance,  rashness,  folly,  negligence,  procrastination, 
are  often  attended  by  terrible  consequences.  Most  people  have  their  opportunity 
in  life,  and  every  man  his  day.  But  if  the  day  is  unused,  it  cannot  be  recalled. 
And  daily  experience  teaches  that  there  is  a  certain  bound  and  limit  to  imprudence 
and  misbehaviour  and  negligence  which,  being  transgressed,  there  remains  no 
place  of  repentance  in  the  natural  course  of  things.  Every  life,  like  every  year, 
has  its  cycle  of  seasons,  and  when  the  season  is  passed  it  is  for  ever  and  irre- 
coverably gone.  Moreover  (and  the  consideration  is  of  seiious  moment),  the 
punishment  for  neglecting  opportunity  or  for  committing  iniquity  is  final. 
Considered  in  their  temporal  duration,  the  ptinishments  visited  upon  vice  and 
negligence  are  everlasting.  Nor  does  it  make  the  smallest  difference  to  the  fact 
and  the  certainty  of  these  consequences  whether  we  believe  in  them  or  not.  Men 
may  ignore  consequences,  but  consequences  come  all  the  same.  Considerations 
such  Hs  these  appear  to  shed  some  light  upon  the  vexed  question  of  punishments 
after  death.  By  thoughtfully  reflecting  upon  the  method  of  God's  dealings  here 
and  now,  men  may  fairly  conjecture  what  will  be  the  method  of  God's  dealings 
with  them  hereafter,  seeing  that  the  same  Unchangeable  God  presides  over  the 
destinies  both  of  the  embodied  and  the  disembodied  man.  And,  iu  this  present 
world,  we  find  that  mere  folly,  wilfulness,  feebleness  of  will,  want  of  exertion, 
entail  consequences  almost  as  pernicious  as  those  which  attend  up  >n  actual  trans- 
gression. We  find,  moreover,  that  the  plea  of  ignorance  or  inexperience  does  not 
avert  the  retributions  which  await  the  transgressor.  So,  to  this  extent  at  least, 
the  misdoings  and  the  negligences  of  man's  mortal  state  may  be  punished  ever- 
lastingly, in  that  eternity  may  prove  too  short  for  the  full  undoing  of  the  ravages 
inflicted  on  the  soul,  by  wrongs  committed  or  duties  omitted,  during  the  temporary 
period  of  its  habitation  in  the  body.  And  if  this  be  so — if  the  same  principles 
which  permeate  natural  punishments  in  this  world  extend  to  the  punishments  of 
the  world  to  come — then  it  follows  not  only  that  the  disbelieving  or  the  ignoring 
of  these  punishments  will  neither  moderate  nor  avert  them,  but  also  that  habits  of 
disbelief  may  induce  practical  neglect  of  laws,  resulting  in  heavy  retribution. 
Pain  and  suffering  are  facts  which  doubters  may  discuss  or  condemn,  but  can 
neither  prevent  nor  divert.  The  belief  in  future  punishments  has  an  evident  and 
direct  tendency  to  diminish  those  punishments,  and  even  to  lead  to  an  escape  from 
them  altogether,  inasmuch  as  it  assists  in  prevailing  upon  men  to  avoid  the  causes 
of  evil  upon  which  the  tread  of  punishment  follows  ;  whereas  doubt  of,  or  disbelief 
in,  future  punishment  tends  toward  a  recklessness  of  living  calculated  to  make  hell 
in  life  here,  even  if  hereafter  there  were  no  life  in  hell.  {J.  W.  Digglc,  M.A.) 
Sin  never  forgotten: — Let  a  man  try  to  forget  any  dreadful  thing  of  which  he 
hates  the  remembrance,  and  the  more  he  tries  to  forget  it,  the  more  surely  he 
remembers  it,  the  more  he  bodies  it  forth,  and  every  thrust  he  makes  at  it  causes 
it  to^lare  up  anew,  reveals  some  new  horror  in  it.  Doubtless,  this  peculiarity  in 
our  mental  constitution  is  destined  to  play  a  most  terrific  part  in  the  punishment 
of  men's  sins  in  eternity ;  for  there  can  be  nothings©  dreadful  as  the  remembrance 
of  sin,  and  nothing  which  men  will  strive  with  more  intense  earnestness  to  hide 
from  and  forget,  than  the  recollection  of  their  sins  ;  and  yet  every  effort  they  make 
at  such  forgetfulness  only  gives  to  such  sins  a  more  terrible  reality,  and  makes 
them  blaze  up  in  a  more  lurid  light  to  the  conscience.  Oh,  if  they  could  but  be 
forgott3n !  But  the  more  intense  is  the  earnestness  of  this  wish,  the  more  im- 
possible be:'omes  the  forgetfulness,  the  more  terribly  the  dreaded  evil  stands  out. 
There  are  cases,  even  in  this  life,  in  which  men  would  give  ten  thousand  worlds,  if 


CHAP.  XXXIII.]  NUMBERS.  831 

they  possessed  them,  could  they  only  forget ;  but  how  much  more  in  eternity  I 
The  man  that  has  committed  a  secret  midnight  murder,  how  often,  think  you, 
though  perhaps  not  a  human  being  suspects  it,  would  he  give  the  riches  of  the 
material  universe,  if  he  bad  them  at  command,  could  he  but  forget  that  one 
moment's  crime !  But  it  is  linked  to  his  very  constitution  ;  and  every  time  he 
tries  to  cut  the  chain,  he  does  but  rattle  and  ronsp  the  crime  out  of  its  grave  into  a 
new  existence.  (G.  B.  Cheever,  D.D.)  Lifers  viistakes : — We  sleep,  but  the 
loom  of  life  never  stops ;  and  the  pattern  which  was  weaving  when  the  sun  went 
down  is  weaving  when  it  comes  up  to-morrow.  He  who  is  false  to  present  duty 
breaks  a  thread  in  the  loom,  and  will  find  the  flaw  when  he  may  have  lorgotten  its 
cause.     (H.  W.  Beecher.) 

Ver.  38.  Their  names  being  chang'ed.  —  Changes  of  name: — Many  persons  live 
in  names.  This  is  fatal  to  the  grasp  of  complete  truth  and  relation.  The  poet 
asks,  "What's  in  a  name?"  The  name  of  a  friend  may  be  necessary  to  his 
identification,  but  the  name  is  not  the  man.  Character  is  to  be  studied,  motive  is 
to  be  understood,  purpose  is  to  be  appreciated,  then  whatever  changes  may  take 
place  in  the  mere  name,  love  and  confidence  will  be  undiminished.  The  change  of 
names,  both  in  the  Old  Testament  and  the  New,  deserves  careful  study.  The 
name  of  Abram  was  changed,  so  was  the  name  of  Jacob,  so  was  the  name  of  Saul 
of  Tarsus.  Those  changes  of  name  symbolise  changes  of  trust  and  vocation  in 
life.  The  name  should  enlarge  with  the  character,  but  the  character  should  be 
always  more  highly  valued  than  the  name.  The  solemn  application  of  this  text  is 
to  the  matter  of  great  evangelical  truths  and  doctrines.  For  want  of  attention  to 
this  matter,  bigotry  has  been  encouraged,  and  men  have  been  separated  from  one 
another.  Si.ime  persons  do  not  know  the  gospel  itself ,  except  under  a  certain  set 
of  names,  words,  and  stereotyped  phrases.  This  is  not  Cliristianity,  it  is  mere 
literalism ;  it  is,  in  fact,  idolatry,  for  there  is  an  idolatry  of  phrase  as  well  as  of 
images.  The  truth  is  not  in  the  letters  which  print  it,  the  letters  but  stand  to 
express  the  inexpressible.  All  life  is  symbolic.  God  has  spoken  in  little  else  than 
parables.  Eevelation  addresses  the  imagination,  when  imagination  is  used  in  its 
highest  senses.  It  is  not  the  faculty  of  mere  cloud-making,  but  the  faculty  of  in- 
sight into  the  largest  meanings  and  the  innermost  relations  of  things.  The  letter 
in  which  you  endeavour  to  express  your  love,  is  a  poor  substitute  for  the  living 
voice  and  the  living  touch ;  it  is  indeed  invaluable  in  the  absence  of  the  living 
personality  ;  but  what  letter  was  ever  written  that  quite  satisfied  the  writer  when 
love  was  the  subject  and  devotedness  the  intention  ?  There  is  a  change  of  names 
that  inspires  the  soul  with  hope.  God  is  to  give  His  servants  a  new  name  in  the 
upper  world  ;  their  name  is  to  be  in  their  foreheads ;  but  in  the  changing  of  the 
name  there  is  no  changing  in  the  burning  love  and  the  rapturous  adoration.  (J. 
Parker,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  XXXm. 


Veks.  1,  2.  These  are  the  journeys. — The  journeys  of  Israel: — This  chapter 
gives  a  very  graphic  and  instructive  picture  of  a  much  larger  scheme  of  journeying. 
The  local  names  may  mean  nothing  to  us  now,  but  the  words  "  departed,"  "  re- 
moved," "  encamped,"  have  meanings  that  abide  for  ever.  We  are  doing  in  our 
way,  and  according  to  the  measure  of  our  opportunity,  exactly  what  Israel  did  in 
this  chapter  of  hard  names  and  places  mostly  now  forgotten.  Observe,  this  is  a 
written  account :  "And  Moses  wrote  their  goings  out."  The  life  is  all  written.  It 
is  not  a  sentiment  spoken  without  consideration  and  forgotten  without  regret ;  it  is 
a  record — a  detailed  and  critical  writing,  condescending  to  geography,  locality,  daily 
novement,  position  in  society  and  in  the  world.  It  is,  therefore,  to  be  regarded  as 
a  story  that  has  been  proved,  and  that  will  bear  to  be  written  and  re-written.  The 
one  perfect  Biographer  is  God.  Every  life  is  written  in  the  book  that  is  kept  in  the 
secret  place  of  the  heavens.  "All  things  are  naked  and  open  unto  the  eyes  of 
Him  with  whom  we  have  to  do."  Nothing  is  omitted.  The  writing  is  plain — so 
plain  that  the  blind  man  may  read  the  story  which  God  has  written  for  his  perusal. 
Who  would  like  to  see  the  book  ?    Who  could  not  write  a  book  about  his  brother 


332  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxiir. 

that  would  please  that  brother  ?  Without  being  false,  it  might  be  highly  eulogistic 
and  comforting.  But  who  would  li'^e  to  see  his  life  as  sketched  by  the  hand  of  God  ? 
"  Enter  not  into  judgment  with  Thy  servant :  for  in  Thy  sight  shall  no  man  living 
be  justified."  "Have  mercy  upon  me,  0  God,  according  to  Thy  lovingkindness: 
according  unto  the  multitude  of  Thy  tender  mercies  blot  out  my  transgressions.' 
What  a  monotony  there  is  in  this  thirty-third  chapter !  This  will  be  evident  to  the 
eye.  The  reader  sees  but  two  words  or  three,  and  all  the  rest  are  difficult  terms  or 
polysyllables  unrelated  to  his  life.  The  terms  are  "  departed,"  "  removed,"  "  went." 
The  language  of  actual  life  is  a  narrow  Lmguage  which  may  be  learned  in  a  very 
brief  time.  So  with  our  daily  life :  we  rise,  we  sit,  we  retire ;  we  eat  and  drink,  and 
bless  one  another  in  the  name  of  God  ;  and  go  round  the  little  circle  until  some- 
times we  say,  "  Can  we  not  vary  all  that,  and  add  to  it  some  more  vivid  line  ? 
Has  no  frien!  of  ours  the  power  of  flushing  this  pale  monotony  into  some  tint  of 
blood  ?  "  Then  we  fall  back  into  the  old  lines  :  we  "  depart "  and  "  remove  "  and 
"  pitch  " ;  we  "  pitch  "  and  "  depart "  and  "  remove  "  ;  we  come  and  go  and  settle 
and  return ;  until  there  comes  almost  unconsciously  into  the  strain  of  our  speech 
some  expressive  and  mournful  sigh.  "Few  and  evil  have  been  the  days  of  Thy 
servant."  Yet,  not  to  dwell  too  much  upon  this  well-ascertained  fact,  we  may 
r^gard  the  record  of  the  journeys  of  Israel  as  showing  somewhat  of  the  variety  of 
life.  Here  and  there  a  new  departure  sets  in,  or  some  new  circumstance  brightens 
the  history.  For  example,  in  the  ninth  verse  we  read  :  "  And  they  removed  from 
Marah,  and  came  unt .  Elim  :  and  in  Elim  were  twelve  fountains  of  water,  and 
threescore  and  ten  palm  trees."  Sweet  entry  is  that !  It  occurs  in  our  own  secret 
diaries.  Do  we  not  dwell  with  thankfulness  upon  the  places  where  we  find  the 
waters,  the  wells,  the  running  streams,  the  beautiful  trees,  and  the  trees  beautiful 
with  luscious  fruitage  ?  Thm  comes  the  fourteenth  verse  :  "  And  they  encamped 
at  Eephidim,"  &c.  Such  are  the  changes  in  life.  We  have  passed  through  pre- 
cisely the  transitions  here  indicated.  No  water ;  nothing  to  satisfy  even  the  best 
appetences  of  the  mind  and  spirit ;  all  heaven  one  sheet  of  darkness,  and  the  niglit 
so  black  upon  the  earth  that  even  the  altar-stairs  could  not  be  found  in  the  hoirid 
gloom  ;  if  there  was  water,  it  had  no  effect  upon  the  thirst ;  if  there  was  bread,  it 
was  bitter ;  if  there  was  a  pillow,  it  was  filled  with  pricking  thorns.  There  is 
another  variety  of  th- story  ;  the  thirty-eighth  verse  presents  it :  "  And  Aa-on  the 
priest  went  up  into  mount  Hor  at  the  commandment  of  the  Lord,  and  died  there." 
Is  that  line  wanting  in  our  story  ?  All  men  do  not  die  on  mountains.  Would  God 
we  may  die  upon  some  high  hill !  It  seems  to  our  im  igination  nearer  heaven  to  die 
away  up  on  the  mountain  peaks  than  to  die  in  the  low  damp  valleys.  Granto  1  that 
it  is'^biit  an  imagination.  We  need  such  helps:  we  are  so  made  tl;at  symbol  and 
hint  and  parable  assist  the  soul  in  its  suhlimest  realisations  of  things  Divine  and  of 
things  to  couie.     (■/".  Parker,  D.D.)  M<ises'  diary  of  travels  and  its  t/'achinux  ;— 

God  wished  the  people  to  remember  the-e  journeys ;  and  He  wishes  all  ages  to  know 
of  them  and  to  learn  from  them.  Let  us  notice  a  few  of  the  lessons  God  intends  these 
journeys  to  teach  us.     I.  They  impress  upon  us  the  great  fact  of  God's  con- 

TINDED  PRESENCE  AND  INTEREST  IN  HUMAN  LIFE.  II.  ThEY  POINT  OUT  TO  US  THAT  <tOD 
IS  THE  ONE  TRUE  AND  SAFE  GuiDE  THROUGH  LIFE.  III.  ThEY  PRESENT  TO  US  A  PICTURE 
OF   HUMAN   LIFE,  AND   THUS   TEND  TO  GIVE  US  CORRECT  VIEWS  OF  LIFE.       IV.    ThEY  SHOW 

to  us  that  the  greatest  evils  of  life  and  its  only  dangers  come  from  sin.  v. 
They  biggest  the  comforting  thought  that  by  trusting  in  God  and  followino 
Him  we  are  sure  to  possi;ss  the  inheritance  which  He  h.vs  promised  His  people. 
{D.  Lloyd.)  The  itinerary  of  Israel  from  Egypt  to  Canaan: — I.  An  incentive  to 
okatitude  to  God.  1.  Emancipating  them  from  bondage  in  Egypt.  2.  Eepeate^lly 
delivering  them  from  their  enemies.  3.  Infallibly  guiding  tliem  in  their  journeys. 
4.  Constantly  providing  for  them  in  the  desert.  5.  Inviolably  guarding  them  from 
dangers.  II.  An  encouragement  to  obey  and  trust  God.  He  is  unchangeable ; 
therefore  His  past  doings  are  examples  of  what  we  may  expect  Him  to  do  in  the 
future.  History,  properly  studied,  will  be  the  nurse  of  faitli  and  hope  (comp.  Psa. 
Ixxviii.  3-8).  III.  A  monitor  against  sin.  1.  Man's  proneness  to  sin.  2.  God's 
antagonism  against  sin.  3.  The  great  evil  of  sin.  {W.  Jones.)  The  travels  of 
Israel : — This  is  a  review  of  the  travels  of  tlie  children  of  Israel  through  the  wilder- 
ness. It  was  a  memorable  history,  and  well  worthy  to  be  thus  abridged,  and  the 
abridgment  thus  preserved,  to  the  honour  of  God  tliat  led  them  and  for  the 
encouragement  of  the  generations  that  followed.  Observe  here— I.  How  the 
account  was  kept  (ver.  2).  "  Moses  wrote  their  goings  out."  When  they  began 
this  tedious  march  God  ordered  him  to  keep  a  journal  or  diary,  and  to  insert  in  it 


CHAP,  xxxin.]  NUMBERS.  333 

all  the  remarkable  occurrences  of  their  way,  that  it  might  be  a  satisfaction  to 
himself  in  the  review  and  an  instruction  to  others  when  it  should  be  published.  It 
may  be  of  good  use  to  private  Christians,  but  esper-ially  for  those  in  public  stations, 
to  preserve  in  writing  an  account  of  the  providences  of  God  concerning  them,  the 
constant  series  of  mercies  they  have  experienced,  especially  those  turns  and  changes 
■which  have  made  some  days  of  their  lives  more  remarkable.  Our  memories  are 
deceitful,  and  need  this  help,  that  we  may  "  remember  all  the  way  which  the  Lord 
our  God  has  led  us  in  this  wilderness"  (Deut.  viii.  2).  II.  What  the  accodnt  itself 
WAS.  It  began  with  their  departure  out  of  Egypt,  continued  with  their  march 
through  the  wilderness,  and  ended  in  the  plains  of  Moab,  where  they  now  lay 
encamped.  1.  Some  things  are  observed  here  concerning  their  departure  out  of 
Egypt,  which  they  are  minded  of  upon  all  occasions  as  a  work  of  wonder  never  to 
be  fo -gotten.  2.  Concerning  their  travels  towards  Canaan,  observe — (1)  They  were 
continually  upon  the  remove.  Wien  thev  had  pitched  a  little  while  in  one  place, 
they  departed  from  that  to  another.  Such  is  our  state  in  this  world :  we  have  here 
no  continuing  city.  (2)  Most  of  their  way  lay  through  a  wilderness,  uninhabited, 
untracked,  unfurnished  even  with  the  necessaries  of  human  life,  which  magnifies 
the  wi?dom  and  power  of  God,  by  whose  wonderful  conduct  and  bounty  the  thousands 
of  Israel  not  only  subsisted  for  forty  years  in  that  desolate  place,  but  came  out  at 
least  as  numerous  and  vigorous  as  they  went  in.  At  first  they  pitched  in  the  edge 
of  the  wilderness  (ver.  6),  but  afterwards  in  the  heart  of  it.  By  lesser  difficulties 
God  prepares  His  people  for  greater.  We  find  them  in  the  wilderness  of  Etham 
(ver.  8),  of  Sin  (ver.  11).  of  Sinai  (ver.  15).  Our  removes  in  this  world  are  but  from 
one  wilderness  to  another.  (3)  That  they  were  led  to  and  fro,  forward  and  back- 
ward, as  in  a  maze  or  labyrinth,  and  yet  were  all  the  while  under  the  direction  of 
the  pillar  of  cloud  and  fire.  He  led  them  out  (Deut.  xxxii.  10),  and  yet  led  them 
the  right  way  (Psa.  cvii.  7).  The  way  God  takes  in  bringing  His  people  to  Himself 
is  always  the  best  way,  though  it  does  not  always  seem  to  us  the  best  way.  (4)  Some 
events  are  mentioned  in  this  journal,  as  their  want  of  water  at  Epphidim  (ver.  14), 
the  death  of  Aaron  (vers.  38,  39),  the  insult  of  Arad  (ver.  40) ;  and  the  very  name 
of  Kibroth-hattaavah,  "the  grave  of  the  lusters"  (ver.  16),  has  a  story  depending 
upon  it.  Thus  we  ought  to  keep  in  mind  the  providences  of  God  concerning  us  and 
our  families,  us  and  our  knd,  and  tbe  many  instances  of  that  Divine  care  which 
hath  led  us  and  fed  us  and  kept  us  all  our  days  hitherto.     (Matthew  Henry,  D.D.) 

Vers.  50-56.  Ye  shall  drive  out  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  land  from  before  you. — 

The  e.Tptilsion  of  the  Canaanites  : — I.  The  imperative  command.  1.  To  utterly 
expel  the  inhabitants  of  Canaan.  2.  To  completely  destroy  all  idolatrous  objects 
and  places.  3.  To  equitably  divide  the  land.  4.  The  authority  by  which  they 
were  to  do  these  things;.  II.  The  solemn  warning.  1.  Those  whom  they  spared 
would  become  tlieir  tormentors.  "  Under  these  metaphors,"  says  Dr.  A.  Clarke, 
"  the  continual  mischief  that  should  be  done  to  them,  both  in  soul  and  body,  by 
these  idolaters,  is  set  forth  in  a  very  expressive  manner.  What  can  be  more 
vexatious  than  a  continual  goading  of  each  side,  so  that  the  attempt  to  avoid  the 
one  throws  the  body  more  forcibly  on  th*'  other?  And  what  can  be  more  distressing 
than  a  continual  pricking  in  the  eye,  harassing  the  mind,  tormenting  the  body,  and 
extinguishing  the  sight  ?  "  "  That  which  we  are  willing  should  tempt  us  we  shall 
find  will  vex  us."  2.  The  God  whom  they  disobeyed  would  disinherit  them.  (IF. 
Jones.)  The  danger  of  allowing  nn  : — The    Israelites  were  now  on   the   con- 

fines of  the  land  of  promise.  So  God  speaks  to  them  about  the  future,  tells 
them  what  it  was  His  will  that  they  should  do  when  thev  enclosed  the  land 
of  promise,  and  what  would  be  the  consequence  of  disobedience.  These,  then, 
are  the  two  points  which  we  may  consider  —  Israel's  calling,  and  the  conse- 
quences of  neglecthig  it.  I.  Israel's  calling.  This  was  to  drive  out  all  tbe 
inhabitants  of  tbe  land,  to  dispossess  them,  and  themselves  to  dwell  in  it.  If  we 
view  this  with  reference  to  the  inhabitants  themselves,  we  must  regard  it  as  the 
righteous  judgment  of  God  upon  them  on  account  of  their  sins.  But  we  may  iilso 
regard  this  visitation  with  reference  to  Israel,  and  then  it  will  become  evident  that 
it  was  necessary  for  their  safety.  The  Israelites  themselves  were  so  prone  to  fall 
away  from  God  that  their  being  surrounded  by  many  idolatrous  and  degraded 
nations  would  be  sure  to  lead  them  gradually  away  from  Him.  They  would  soon 
cease  to  be  a  separate  people— a  people  consecrated  to  Jehovah.  That  little  word 
•'  all  "  is  very  expressive.  It  shows  that  the  judgment  was  to  be  universal.  It 
proved  the  greatness  of  God's  cure  for  Israel.     It  was  also  the  test  of  Israel's 


334  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxm. 

obedience  ;  and  it  was  a  test,  we  know,  which  they  did  not  stand.  They  substituted 
a  partial  for  an  unreserved  obedience,  and  drove  out  s-.me,  but  not  all,  the  inhabi- 
tants of  the  land.  We  find  a  long  list  of  Israel's  deffcts  of  obedience  in  Judges  i. 
21.  Now,  in  this,  as  in  so  many  other  points,  Israel's  calUng  is  typical  of  the 
Christian  life.  In  what  way  ?  We  often  take  Canaan  to  be  a  type  of  heaven.  Yet 
it  is  easy  to  see  that  there  are  many  points  in  wliich  Canaan  was  no  type  of  heaven ; 
and  one  of  these  evidently  was  that  whereas  in  heaven  there  will  be  no  sin, 
no  enemies,  no  temptations,  in  Cjinaan  all  these  existed.  In  this  point  of  view, 
then,  Canaau  was  not  a  type  of  heaven,  but  rather  of  the  Christian  life  now;  and 
to  that  command,  "  Drive  out  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  land,  and  dispossess  them," 
we  shall  tind  an  analogous  one,  descriptive  of  the  Christian  calling,  "  Put  off  the  old 
man  with  his  deeds."  There  is  a  principle  of  evil,  called  in  Scripture  the  "  old 
man,"  which  comprehends  sinful  desires  and  evil  habits  ;  and  this  we  are  called  to 
dispossess  of  the  land.  The  old  man  is  daily  to  be  put  off,  the  new  man  to  be  put 
on.  The  old  man,  though  nailed  to  the  cross,  is  never  utterly  extinct  until  the 
earthly  house  of  our  tabernacle  is  exchanged  for  the  "  building  of  God,  the  house 
not  made  with  hands,  eternal  in  the  heavens."  The  new  man  requires  to  be 
constantly  strengthened  by  fresh  gifts  of  the  Spirit  of  God.  When,  then,  God  says, 
"Drive  out  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  land,"  it  has  a  meaning  for  the  Christian ; 
and  its  meaning  virtually  is,  "  Mortify  the  old  man,"  crucify  the  whole  body  of  sin. 
Do  not  spare  any  sin.  Let  all  be  resisted  and  overcome.  Now,  the  old  man  is  in 
no  sense  the  same  in  every  Christian.  It  is  tbe  principle  of  sin,  the  principle  of 
self.  In  whatever  heart  it  is,  its  nature  is  the  same  ;  but  in  otber  aspects  it  is  not 
always  the  same — for  instance,  it  is  not  always  the  same  in  its  power.  In  one 
Christian  it  prevails  much,  in  another  more  believing  and  watchful  heart  it  is  kept 
under  control.  Then,  again,  it  is  made  up  of  different  elements,  and  the  elements 
which  constitute  it  are  not  always  the  same  in  their  proportions.  Thus,  the  chief 
element  in  one  ease  will  be  pride,  in  another  self-righteousness,  in  another  hypocrisy, 
in  another  vanity,  in  another  temper,  in  another  impurity.  Sometimes  two  will 
appear  together  in  intimate  alhance,  and  those  not  unfrequently  two  very  opposite 
evils.  In  endeavouring,  then,  to  carry  out  the  injunction,  "  Drive  out  all  the 
inhabitants  of  the  land,"  it  is  important,  on  the  one  hand,  that  we  should  be  aware 
of  the  eleni'  nt  uf  the  old  man  which  is  most  piominent  in  it ;  and,  on  the  other, 
tliat  we  should  never  forget  that  our  besetting  sin  is  not  the  only  evil  against  which 
we  have  to  contend,  but  against  the  old  man  as  a  whole.  II.  Thp,  consequences  op 
NEGLECTING  THIS  CALLING.  We  SCO  it  in  Israel.  They  did  not  fulfil  the  command, 
"Drive  out  all  the  inhabitants  of  the  land."  Most  of  the  tribes  allowed  some  to 
remain,  whom  they  brought  under  tribute  ;  in  fact,  with  whom  they  made  a  league. 
The  consequence  was  that  those  few  inhabitants,  though  not  powerful,  caused  them 
constant  trouble  ;  sometimes  they  seized  an  opportunity  t)  attack  them  again;  still 
oftener  they  proved  a  snare  to  them  by  leading  them  into  sin,  so  that  in  the  expres- 
sive language  of  Scripture  they  were  "  pricks  in  their  eyes,  and  thorns  in  their 
sides."  Thus  Israel's  sin  was  made  their  punishment.  They  spared  those  whom 
they  onght  not  to  have  spared,  and  they  suffered  terribly  in  consequence.  All  this 
bears  upon  the  Christian's  life.  There  is  a  deep  mystery  in  the  spiritual  life.  How 
wonderful  it  is  that  there  should  be  two  principles — two  natures  in  perpetual  warfare 
with  each  other  in  the  Christian's  heart — the  one  of  God,  the  product  of  the 
Spirit,  the  other  of  Satan,  the  result  of  the  Fall ;  the  one  the  ally  of  God,  holding 
communion  \^th  Him,  the  other  allied  with  the  powers  of  darkness,  an  enemy  in 
the  camp  ever  ready  to  open  the  gates  !  It  seems  to  be  God's  purpose  not  to  put 
His  people  at  once  and  for  ever  beyond  the  reach  of  temptation,  but  to  exercise 
their  faith  and  patience,  and  to  show  the  power  of  that  Divine  principle  which  His 
own  grace  has  put  into  their  hearts.  Do  not,  then,  be  cast  down  when  you  are 
deeply  and  painfully  conscious  of  this  inward  conflict.  Take  it  as  God's  appoint- 
ment. Remember  that  it  is  to  prove  you,  and  that  God  proves  you  in  mercy,  to 
make  you  more  than  conqueror.  But  there  is  another  point  of  view  in  which  we 
must  look  at  this.  There  are  many  cases  in  which  this  painful  severity  of  conflict 
is  owing,  in  great  measure,  to  previous  unfaithfulness  to  God.  Suppose  a  person 
to  have  indulged  in  some  sinful  habit  at  any  period  of  his  life  ;  it  may  be  a  want  of 
truth,  or  impurity,  or  in  any  other  sin,  though  the  power  of  that  sin  will  be  broken 
by  the  entrance  of  the  Spirit  of  God  into  the  heart,  yet  it  will  cast  its  shadow  long 
after  it.  The  habitual  sins  of  the  unrenewed  man  are  tbe  snares  and  temptations 
of  the  renewed  man.  There  is  much  of  practical  warning  in  this  solemn  truth.  If 
ever  you  are  tempted  to  indulge  nny  sinful  thought  in  your  heart,  remember  that 


CHAP,  xxxiii.]  NUMBERS.  835 

that  indulgence  will  certainly  find  you  out  again.  God  may,  in  mercy,  forgive  it ; 
but  if  He  does  so  that  act  of  unfaithfulness  will  bring  bitterness  into  the  soul,  will 
prepare  the  way  for  new  conflicts  and  temptations.  We  should  cast  ourselves 
wholly  on  Jesus  for  the  forgiveness  of  all  past  and  present  sins,  and  for  strength 
to  drive  out  "  every  inhabitant  of  the  land  " — the  old  man,  with  all  his  deceitful 
lusts.     (G.   Wagner.)  Thoroughness  : — The  subject  is  evidently  thoroughness. 

Do  the  work  completely — root  and  branch,  in  and  out,  so  that  there  may  be  no 
mistake  as  to  earnestness — and  the  result  shall  be  security,  peace,  contentment ; 
do  the  work  partially — half  and  half,  perfunctorily — and  the  end  shall  be  dis- 
appointment, vexation,  and  ruin.  Causes  liave  effects ;  work  is  followed  by 
consequences.  Do  not  suppose  that  you  can  turn  away  the  law  of  causation  and 
conseiiuence.  Things  are  settled  and  decreed  before  you  begin  the  work.  There 
is  no  cloud  upon  the  covenant,  no  ambiguity  in  its  terms.  He  is  faithful  who  hath 
promised — faithful  to  give  blessing  and  faithful  to  inflict  penalty.  There  was  so 
much  to  be  undone  in  the  Canaan  that  was  promised.  It  is  this  negative  work 
which  tries  our  patience  and  p'lts  our  faith  to  severe  tests.  We  meet  it  everywhere. 
The  colonist  has  to  subdue  the  country,  take  down  much  thrtt  is  already  put  up, 
root  out  the  trees,  destroy  the  beasts  of  prey,  and  do  much  that  is  of  a  merely 
negative  kind,  before  he  begins  to  sow  corn,  to  reap  harvests,  and  to  build  a  secure 
homestead.  This  is  the  case  in  all  the  relations  of  life.  The  weed  is  not  the  green 
thing  on  the  surface  ;  that  is  only  the  signal  that  the  weed  is  underneath.  The 
work  that  has  to  be  done  is  a  work  of  eradication.  The  weed  must  be  torn  up  by 
its  every  fibre.  The  theory  of  the  Bible  is  that  it  has  to  encounter  a  human  nature 
that  is  altogether  wrong.  It  is  not  our  business,  at  this  point,  to  ask  how  far  that 
theory  is  true.  The  Bible  itself  proceeds  upon  the  assumption  that  "  All  we  like 
sheep  have  gone  astray  ;  we  have  turned  every  one  to  his  own  way  ";  "  There  is 
none  righteous,  no,  not  one  " ;  "  God  hath  made  man  upright,  but  they  have  sought 
out  many  inventions  ";  "there  is  none  that  doeth  good,  no,  not  one  ";  the  whole 
head  and  the  whole  heart  are  not  righteous  or  true  before  God.  That  being  the 
theory  of  the  Bible,  see  what  it  proposes  to  do.  What  iconoclasm  it  must  first 
accomplish  !  How  it  must  swing  its  terrific  arms  in  the  temples  of  our  idolatry 
and  in  the  whole  circuit  of  our  life,  breaking,  destroying,  burning,  casting  out, 
overturning,  overturning!  What  is  it  doing?  It  is  preparing;  it  is  doing  the 
work  of  a  pioneer;  it  is  uttering  the  voice  of  a  herald.  Mark  the  audacity  of  the 
book!  It  sppal<s  no  flattering  word,  never  uncovers  before  any  man,  bids  every 
man  go  wash  and  be  clean.  A  book  coming  before  society  with  so  bold  a  proposition 
must  expect  to  be  encountered  with  resolute  obstinacy.  If  we  suppose  that  we  are 
ready-made  to  the  hand  of  God,  to  be  turned  in  any  direction  He  is  pleased  to 
adopt,  we  begin  upon  a  fwlse  basis ;  our  theory  is  wrong,  and  our  conception  will 
lead  us  to  proportionate  disappoiutmf-nt.  God  has  to  do  with  a  fallen  intelliyence, 
an  apostate  heart,  a  selfish  will ;  and  therefore  He  undertakes  much  negative  work 
before  He  can  begin  constructive  processes.  What  a  temptation  there  is,  however, 
to  reserve  something.  Point  to  one  instance  in  all  the  Biblical  history  in  which  a 
man  actually  and  perfectly  accomplished  the  Divine  will  in  this  matter  of  destruc- 
tion. A  good  deal  of  destruction  whs  accomplished,  unquestionably  ;  but  was  there 
nothing  left  ?  "What  meaneth,  then,  this  bleating  of  the  sheep  in  mine  ears,  and 
the  lowing  of  the  oxen  which  I  hear  ?  "  The  temptation  to  reserve  something  is 
very  strong.  In  many  a  life  great  improvement  takes  place  without  eradication 
being  perfected.  We  are  not  called  in  the  Bilile  merely  to  make  great  improvement. 
That  is  what  we  have  been  trying  to  do  by  our  own  strength  and  wit,  and  which  we 
have  always  failed  in  doing.  Nowhere  do  the  sacred  writers  encourage  us  to  make 
considerable  advance  upon  our  old  selves.  The  exhortation  of  the  B.ble  is  vital. 
Suppose  a  man  should  have  been  addicted  to  the  meanest  of  all  vices— the  vice  of 
lying,  the  vice  that  God  can  hardly  cure— suppose  such  a  man  should  lie  less,  is  he 
less  a  liar  ?  Suppose  he  should  cease  the  vulgarity  of  falsehood  and  betake  hir^self 
to  the  refinement  of  deceit,  has  he  improved  ?  Bather,  he  has  aggravated  the  first 
offence — multiplied  by  infinite  aggravations  the  conditions  which  first  constituted 
his  character.  So  we  are  not  called  to  great  improvements,  to  marvellous  changes 
of  a  superficial  kind  ;  we  are  called  to  newness  of  birth,  regeneration,  tlie  washing  of 
the  Holy  Ghost,  the  renewal — the  re-creation  of  the  inner  man.  If  not,  punish- 
ments will  come.  If  you  will  not  do  this,  "  those  which  ye  let  remain  of  them  shall 
be  pricks  in  your  eyes,  and  thorns  in  your  sides,  and  shall  vex  you  in  the  land 
■wherein  ye  dwell  " ;  they  will  tease  you,  excite  you,  irritate  you  ;  th>  y  will  watch 
for  the  moments  of  your  weakness,  and  tempt  yoa  into  apostasy.   (J.  Parker,  D.D.) 


336  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap,  xxxit. 

Unexpelled  sin  a  thorn  mi  the  side  : — Every  one  can  trace  in  his  own  life  how  one 
unconquered  sin  becomes  a  thorn  in  the  side.  For  ours  ulso  is  commonly  but  a 
half-completed  conquest.  We  have  not  made  war  upon  our  sin. in  its  fastnersea 
and  breeding-places,  in  the  lurking-places  of  thought  and  of  our  habitual  tone.  We 
did  not  believe  that  happy  was  he  who  dashed  the  little  ones  against  the  stones ; 
we  did  not  grapple  and  put  an  end  to  the  young  things  that  grow  up  to  be  strong 
and  subduing  sins.  We  were  not  remorseless,  did  not  rouse  ourselves  to  take  stern 
and  extreme  measures.  But  it  is  not  enough  to  let  sin  alone  so  long  as  it  does  not 
violently  molest  us.  If  we  know  our  own  hearts  at  all,  we  know  that  sin  may  be 
lodging  in  them,  and  gathering  strength,  without  making  incarsinns  that  visibly 
devastate  the  life.  And  so  it  has  come  true  in  our  experience  that  God  has  not 
driven  out  what  we  would  not  rouse  ourselves  to  drive  out,  and  our  sin  has  become 
a  thorn  in  our  side.  Again  and  again  that  thing  we  would  not  slay  makes  us  cry 
out  before  God  that  life  is  not  worth  having  if  it  is  to  be  life  with  this  sin.  We  maj'' 
learn  to  wear  the  thorn  under  our  garment,  and  go  about  smiling,  as  if  there  were 
not  terrible  havoc  being  made  of  our  peace  with  God;  we  may  wear  it  as  the  ascetic 
wears  his  spiked  girdle  under  his  frock ;  but  it  is  there,  reminding  us  by  pain  and 
misery  and  weakness  of  our  slackness  in  cleansing  our  life.  One  sin  thus  excepted 
and  overlooked  cleaves  to  us  and  makes  itself  felt  in  all  our  life  :  not  a  day  passes 
but  something  occurs  to  give  it  occasion ;  it  is  a  thorn  in  our  flesh,  carried 
with  us  into  aU  companies,  cleaving  to  us  at  all  times ;  our  one  inseparable  ; 
exasperating,  saddening,  heart-breaking  in  its  pertinacity.     (Marcus  Dods,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER   XXXIV. 


Veks.  1-15.  When  ye  come  into  the  land  of  Canaan. — The  Promised  Land : — 
I.  The  boundakies  of  this  land  were  detekmined  by  God.  1.  A  reason  for 
contentment.  2.  A  rebuke  of  selfish  greed,  whether  on  the  part  of  individuals  or 
of  nations.  II.  The  extent  of  this  land  was  small.  Mr.  Grove  thus  speaks  of 
its  size,  and  briefly  sets  forth  its  boundaries:  "The  Holy  Land  is  not  in  size  or 
physical  characteristics  proportioned  to  its  moral  and  historical  position,  as  the 
theatre  of  the  most  momentous  events  in  the  world's  history.  It  is  but  a  strip  of 
country  about  the  size  of  Wales,  less  than  a  hundred  and  forty  miles  in  length  and 
barely  forty  in  average  breadth,  on  the  very  frontier  of  the  East,  hemmed  in  between 
the  Mediterranean  Sea  on  the  one  hand  and  the  enormous  trench  of  the  Jordan 
valley  on  the  other,  by  which  it  is  effectually  cut  off  from  the  mainland  of  Asia 
behind  it.  On  the  north  it  is  shut  in  by  the  high  ranges  of  Lebanon  and  Anti- 
Lebanon,  and  by  the  chasm  of  the  Litany,  which  runs  at  their  feet,  and  forms  the 
main  drain  of  their  southern  slope.  On  the  south  it  is  no  less  enclosed  by  the  arid 
and  inhospitable  deserts  of  the  upper  part  of  the  peninsula  of  Sinai,  whose  undu- 
lating wahtes  melt  imperceptibly  into  the  southern  hills  of  Judtea."  III.  The 
POSITION  OF  this  LAND  WAS  SECURE.  It  was  surroundod  by  natural  fortifications. 
In  one  particular  only  was  the  position  of  this  land  perilous.  "  The  only  road  by 
which  the  two  great  rivals  of  the  ancient  world  could  approach  one  another — by 
which  alone  Egypt  could  go  to  Assyria  and  Assyria  to  Egypt — lay  along  the  broad 
flat  strip  of  coast  which  fortoed  the  maritime  portion  of  the  Holy  Laud,  and  thence 
by  the  plain  of  the  Lebanon  to  the  Euphrates."  This  road  was  undoubtedly  a 
dangerous  one  for  the  Israelites.  And  through  this  channel  the  destruction  of  the 
nation  came  at  length.  But,  with  this  exception,  this  land  was  naturally  sur- 
rounded by  almost  impregnable  defences.  IV.  The  soil  of  this  land  was  fertile. 
At  present  the  face  of  the  country  prt'sents  a  rocky  and  barren  asppct.  For  this 
there  are  two  causes.  "  The  first  is  the  destruction  of  the  timber  in  that  long  series 
'  of  sieges  and  invatjions  which  began  with  the  invasion  of  Shishak  (b.c.  circa  970), 
and  has  not  yet  come  to  an  end.  This,  by  depriving  the  soil  and  streams  of  shelter 
from  the  burning  sun,  at  once  made,  as  it  invariablv  does,  the  climate  more  arid 
than  before,  and  doubtless  diminished  the  rainfall.  The  second  is  the  deca\  of  the 
terraces  necessary  to  retain  the  soil  on  the  steep  slopes  of  the  round  hills.  This 
decay  is  owing  to  the  general  unsettlement  and  insecurity  which  have  been  the  lot 
of  this  poor  little  country  almost  ever  since  the  Bab'  Ionian  conquest.  The  terraces 
once  gone,  there  was  nothing  to  prevent  the  soil  which  they  supported  being  washed 


CHAP.   XXXIV.J 


NUMBERS.  837 


away  by  the  heavy  rains  of  winter ;  and  it  is  hopeless  to  look  for  a  renewal  of  the 
wood,  or  for  any  real  improvement  in  the  general  face  of  the  country,  until  they 
have  been  first  re-established."  V.  The  Israelites  failed  to  take  possession  of 
THE  WHOLE  OF  THIS  LAND  ASSIGNED  TO  THEM  BY  GoD.  (IT'.  Joms.)  Boundaries  : — 
Life  is  marked  all  over  with  boundary  lines.  Two  different  views  may  be  taken  of 
such  lines— that  is  to  say,  in  the  first  place  they  may  be  regarded  as  limitations 
and  partial  impoverishments,  or,  in  the  next  place,  they  may  be  regarded  as  defining 
rights  and  liberties,  possessions  and  authorities.  Very  subtle  and  delicate  things 
are  boundaries  oftentimes.  Tbey  are  invisible.  Are  not  all  the  greatest  things 
invisible,  as  well  as  the  best  and  most  delicate  and  tender  ?  Show  the  line  of  love. 
There  is  no  line  to  show.  It  is  at  this  point  that  conscience  comes  into  active  play. 
Where  the  conscience  is  dull,  or  imperfectly  educated,  or  selfish,  there  will  be  much 
dispute  about  boundaries ;  but  where  the  conscience  is  sanctified  by  the  power  of 
the  Cross  and  is  alive  with  the  righteousness  of  God,  there  will  be  no  controversy, 
but  large  concession,  noble  interpretation,  willingness  to  give,  to  take,  to  arrange 
and  settle,  without  the  severity  of  the  law  or  the  cruelty  of  the  sword.  What 
differe)ices  there  are  in  boundaries  !  We  read  of  one,  in  the  seventh  verse,  whose 
boundary  was  "from  the  great  sea"  ;  in  the  twelfth  verse,  "  the  goings  out  of  it 
shall  be  at  the  salt  sea."  There  is  so  much  sea  in  some  people's  limited  possession. 
\Miat  a  boundary  is  the  inhospitable  sea  1  We  cannot  cut  it  up  into  acres,  and  lay 
it  out ;  we  cannot  sow  it  with  wheat,  and  reap  the  harvest,  and  enjoy  the  bread  ;  it 
is  to  most  of  us  but  a  spectacle — great,  melancholy,  unresponsive,  pitiless ;  a  liquid 
emblem  of  cruel  death.  Is  not  this  the  case  with  many  men  ?  They  know  they 
have  great  possessions,  but  their  greatness  is  not  the  measure  of  their  value.  A 
little  garden-plot  would  be  to  some  men  more  valuable,  for  purposes  of  living,  than 
the  freehold  of  the  Atlantic.  Sometimes  men  are  born  to  great  estates  that  have 
nothing  in  them — boundless  nothings  ;  a  proprietorship  of  infinite  bogs  and  wastes 
and  unanswering  sterilities ;  sand  that  cannot  be  ploughed,  water  that  cannot  be 
sown  with  seed,  and  bogs  that  cannot  be  built  upon.  Contrast  with  such  allot- 
ments the  words  of  music  which  you  find  in  the  fifteenth  verse  :  "  toward  the  sun- 
rising."  That  is  an  inheritance  worth  having  !  The  morning  sun  blesses  it :  early 
in  the  morning  all  heaven's  glory  is  poured  out  upon  it  with  the  hospitality  of  God  ; 
whatever  is  planted  in  it  grows  almost  instantly;  the  flowers  love  to  be  planted 
there;  all  the  roots  of  the  earth  would  say,  "Put  us  in  this  place  of  the  morning 
sun,  and  we  will  show  you  what  we  can  do  in  growth  and  fruittulness ;  give  us  the 
chance  of  the  sun,  and  then  say  what  we  really  are."  We  cannot  all  have  our 
estates  "  toward  the  sunrising  "  ;  we  cannot  wholly  cut  off  the  north  and  the  north- 
east— the  shady  side  of  the  hill :  somebody  must  be  there.  Does  God  plant  a 
tabernacle  in  such  sunless  districts?  Is  there  any  temple  of  God  in  the  north- 
lands,  where  the  storm  blows  with  a  will  and  the  tempests  seem  to  have  it  all  their 
own  way,  rioting  in  their  tumultuous  strength,  and,  as  it  were,  accosting  one  another 
in  reduplications  oi  infinite  thunderings  and  roarings  of  whirlwinds  ?  Even  there 
God's  footprint  may  be  found.  Even  a  little  may  be  so  held  as  to  be  much.  Quite 
a  small  garden  may  grow  stuff  enough  for  a  wliole  household.  Look  for  the  bright 
spots ;  add  up  all  the  excellences ;  totalise  the  attractions  of  the  situation  ;  and  it  is 
wonderful  how  things  add  up  when  you  know  how  to  add  them.  Bounlary  is 
disciplinary.  Who  would  not  like  to  add  just  one  more  shelf  to  his  libr*try.  and 
could  do  it  if  he  were  at  liberty  to  take  the  b  loks  from  another  man's  study  ?  Who 
does  not  desire  to  have  just  the  corner  plot  to  make  the  estate  geometrically  com- 
plete, and  would  do  it  if  the  owner  of  the  plot  were  not  looking  ?  But  to  retire 
wittiin  your  own  boundary! — to  have  nothing  but  a  ditch  between  you  and  the 
vineyard  you  covet!  Who  is  stopped  by  a  ditch?  To  have  nothing  but  one  thin, 
green  hedge  between  proprietorship  actual  and  proprietorship  desired!  Why  not 
burn  the  hedge,  or  transfer  it  ?  "  Whoso  breaketh  an  hedge,  a  serpent  shall  bite 
him,"  saith  the  proverbs  of  Solomon.  To  be  kept  witl  i  i  our  own  lines,  to  build  our 
altar  steadily  theie,  and  to  bow  down  at  that  altar  and  confess  that  "  The  earth  is 
the  Lord's,  and  the  fulness  thereof,"  and  th>it,  whether  a  man  has  much  or  little, 
he  may  be  God's  child,  God's  servant,  and  Christ's  apostle — that  is  the  highest 
disci]jline,  and  it  is  possible  to  every  man.  Boundaries  are  suggesiive.  Every 
boundary,  rightly  interpreted,  means,  "Your  last  estate  will  be  a  very  little  one — a 
grave  in  the  cemetery,  a  tomb  in  the  silent  place."  Does  it  come  to  this,  that  the 
man  who  wanted  acres  a  thousand  in  number  doubled  lies  down  in  six  feet,  or 
seven,  by  four  ?  Can  a  carpenter  measure  him  for  his  last  house  ?  Does  there 
come  a  time  when  a  man  steals  quietly  upstairs  with  a  two-toot  measure,  and  after- 

22 


338  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTBATOR.  [chap.  xxxt. 

wards  hurries  out  to  build  for  him  in  the  eventide  his  last  dwelling-place?  It  is 
impossible  to  exclude  this  thought  from  all  our  best  reasoning.  Theie  is  no  need 
to  be  mawkish,  sentimental,  foolishly  melancholy  about  it;  but  there  is  the  f-^ct 
that  there  is  an  appointed  time  toman  upon  the  earth  as  well  as  an  api^ointed  place 
to  man  upon  the  earth,  and  that  he  is  the  wise  man  who  looks  at  that  certain  fact 
and  conducts  himself  wisely  in  relation  to  it.  Men  have  the  power  of  closing  their 
eyes  and  not  seeing  the  end ;  but  to  close  the  eves  is  not  to  destroy  the  inevitable 
boundary.  Even  the  grave  can  be  made  beautiful.  A  man  may  so  live  that  when 
he  is  laid  in  his  grave  other  men  may  go  to  see  the  tomb  and  betlew  it  witli  tears, 
and  even  stoop  down  and  touch  it  with  a  loving  hand  as  if  it  were  a  living  thing. 
{J.  Parker,  D.D.) 


CHAPTER  XXXV. 


Vers.  1-8.  Give  unto  the  Levltes  .  .  .  cities  to  dwell  in. — Thf  Levites*  inheri- 
tance : — 1.  Cities  were  allowed  them  with  their  suburbs  (ver.  2).  They  were  not  to 
have  any  ground  for  tillage ;  they  needed  not  to  sow  or  reap,  or  gather  into  barns, 
for  their  heavenly  Father  fed  them  with  the  tithe  of  the  increase  of  other  people's 
labours,  that  they  might  the  more  closely  attend  the  study  of  the  law,  and  might 
have  more  leisure  to  teach  the  people ;  for  they  were  not  fed  thus  easily  that  they 
might  live  in  idleness,  but  that  they  might  give  themselves  wholly  to  the  business 
of  their  profession  and  not  be  entangled  in  the  affairs  of  this  life.  (1)  Cities  were 
allotted  them  that  they  might  live  near  together,  and  converse  with  one  another 
about  the  law,  to  their  mutual  edification  ;  and  that,  in  doubtful  cases,  they  might 
consult  one  another,  and  in  all  cases  strengthen  one  another's  hajids.  (2)  These 
cities  had  suburbs  annexed  to  them  for  their  cattle  (ver.  3) ;  a  thousand  cubits  from 
the  wall  was  allowed  them  for  out-housing  to  keep  their  cattle  in,  and  then  two 
thousand  and  more  for  fields  to  graze  their  cattle  in  (vers.  4,  5).  Thus  was  care 
taken  that  they  should  not  only  live,  but  live  plentifully,  and  have  all  desirable 
conveniences  about  them,  that  they  might  not  be  looked  upon  with  contempt  by 
their  neighbours.  2.  These  cities  were  to  be  assigned  to  them  out  of  the  possessions 
of  each  tribe  (ver.  8).  (1)  That  each  tribe  might  thus  make  a  grateful  acknowledg- 
ment to  Gdd  out  of  their  real  as  well  as  out  of  their  personal  estates ;  for  what  was 
given  to  the  L^vites  was  accepted  as  given  to  the  Lord,  and  thus  their  possessions 
were  sanctified  to  them.  (2)  That  each  tribe  might  have  the  benefits  of  thn  Levites 
dwelling  among  them  to  tearh  them  the  good  knowledge  of  the  Lord.  Thus  that 
light  was  diffused  through  all  parts  of  the  country,  and  none  left  to  sit  in  darkness 
(Deut.  xxxiii.  10).  They  shall  teach  Jacob  Thy  judgments.  Jacob's  curse  on  Levi's 
Hnger  was,  "  I  will  scatter  them  in  Israel "  (Gen.  xliv.  7) ;  but  that  curse  was  turued 
into  a  blessing,  and  the  Leviti  s,  by  being  thus  scattei'ed,  were  put  into  a  capacity  of 
doing  so  much  the  more  good.  It  is  a  great  mercy  to  a  country  to  be  replenished  in 
all  parts  with  faithful  ministers.     (Matthew  Henry,  D.D.)  The  l.eriie''s  home  : 

— The  history  of  this  tribe  of  Levi  is  fiaui^ht  with  many  lessons  for  Cliristian 
workers.  They  were  sele  ted  for  the  priesthood  of  the  children  of  Israel,  and 
on  that  account  were  separated  from  the  rest  of  their  brethren,  and  God 
ordained  that  they  should  have  no  inheritance  among  the  children  of  Israel,  and 
reminded  them  that  G<id  was  their  inheritance.  But  it  is  well  for  us  to  remcraber 
that  it  was  not  always  so.  At  the  commencement  of  their  history  this  tribe  of 
Levi  lay  underneath  a  curse  (Gen.  xlix.  5).  But  there  came  in  the  history  of  the 
tribe  a  crisis.  Moses  had  ascended  to  the  top  of  the  hill,  and  during  his  forty 
days'  absence  the  children  of  Israel  made  a  molten  calf,  and  bowed  down  to  t;ie 
idol.  Moses  came  down  from  the  hill-top,  and  at  once  standing  amid  the  camp  he 
shouted,  "  Who  is  on  the  Lord's  side,  let  him  come  over  to  me  "  ;  and  all  the  tribe 
of  Levi  gathered  themselves  togetlier  unto  Moses.  It  was  the  turning-point  in 
their  lives,  they  seized  their  opportunity,  and  from  that  time  they  were  the  tribe 
whom  God  chose  for  His  service.  But  the  call  to  Levi  was  not  simply  a  call  to 
privilege,  it  was  a  call  to  work.  God  calls  not  to  idleness.  When  once  you  feel 
the  consecrated  hand  of  God  laid  upon  you,  you  may  be  sure  that  He  has  work  for 
you,  and  He  has  alreadv  commanded  the  help  you  need.  And  from  that  time  that 
special  characteristic  of  the  tribe  of  Levi,  which  had  in  former  times  led  them  imo 
sin,  now  is  purified  by  God  for  His  own  special  service.     What  was  that  cha- 


CHAP.  XXXV.]  NUMBERS.  889 


racteristic  ?  If  I  were  to  sum  it  up  in  one  phrase,  it  would  be  this — intense 
sociability.  Their  very  name,  Levi,  signifies  the  joined  ones.  It  was  this  yearning 
for  companionship  which  led  Levi  to  join  himself  to  the  bloodthirsty  Simeon,  and 
to  reap  the  vengeance  which  Jacob  perpetuates  upon  his  death-bed.  It  is  a  very 
impoitant  characteristic;  it  is  a  characteristic  which  the  Christian  ministry  needs, 
which  every  individual  Christian  uught  to  possess.  A  Christian  man  should  be  a 
man  of  intense  symp  ithy,  and  have  his  tendrils  going  forth  to  all  around  him. 
But  there  is  another  characteristic  which  is  equally  necessaiy  to  a  true  and  faithful 
servant  of  God.  And  it  is  to  produce  this  characteristic  that  God's  dealing  with 
the  children  of  Levi  seems  to  be  bent,  namely,  the  power  to  stand  alone.  And  not 
until  these  two  characteristics  are  blended  together  is  the  Levite  fit  for  the  service 
of  God.  These  are  the  true  Christian  servants — men  who  are  ready  to  go  forth  to 
all,  and  yet  men  who  are  able,  bravely,  to  take  their  stand  alone,  because  they  are 
joined  to  God.  And  now  I  want  you  to  think  of  this  one  ordinance  laid  down  with 
regard  to  these  men,  namely,  the  provision  God  had  made  in  this  chapter  for  their 
homes.  We  might  have  imagined  it  would  have  been  better,  as  God  had  appointed 
this  tribe  to  be  workers  for  Him,  for  them  to  live  about  the  temple  of  Jerusalem, 
so  that  they  might  be  at  hand  to  minister  within  its  sacred  courts.  But  no,  God 
lays  down  the  distinct  command  that  this  tribe  of  Levi,  which  He  has  chosen  for 
His  own  peculiar  service,  should  be  scattered  among  the  tribes.  There  were  four  or 
five  centres  in  every  tribe  where  these  Levites  were  to  dwell.  What  is  the  reason 
of  this  strange  provision  ?  I  think  it  was  made  partly  for  the  sake  of  the  people, 
and  partly  for  the  sake  of  the  Levites.  It  was  in  the  first  place,  because  of  the 
people.  In  the  wilderness  the  children  of  Israel  were  not  hkely  to  forget  God. 
They  had  the  tabernacle  in  their  centre  ;  the  pillar  of  cloud  or  fiie  was  always  to 
be  seen  in  the  very  middle  of  the  camp.  But  when  they  became  settled  down  in 
the  promised  land,  and  received  their  promised  inheritance,  then  ind<-ed  they 
would  be  scattered  abroad,  and  then  would  arise  the  danger  lest  they  should  forget 
the  Lord  their  God.  And,  therefore,  God  ordained  that  their  teachers  should  go 
and  live  in  the  very  midst  of  them,  because  He  wanted  to  bring  religion  to  their 
homes.  And  this,  I  believe,  is  God's  law,  that  His  people  should  go  and  scatter 
themselves ;  not  simply  settle  down  in  some  place,  but  actually  go  and  let  their 
light  shine  before  men  even  in  the  very  darkest  places  of  the  earth.  But  if  the 
provision  was  made  for  the  tribes,  I  think  it  was  actually  made  for  the  Levites.  If 
they  had  all  been  gathered  together  at  Jerusalem,  these  Levites  would  consider 
that  their  work  began,  continued,  and  ended  in  their  attendance  at  the  ordinances 
of  the  sanctuary,  and  God  wanted  to  show  them,  as  His  mini-ters,  they  were  not 
simply  to  deal  with  the  sanctuary,  but  with  the  home  life  of  His  people — to  carry 
His  religion  into  their  various  towns  and  villages.  Further  than  that,  by  thus 
scattering  them  in  these  different  tribes,  God  provides  here  that  they  may  learn 
that  their  homes  are  not  to  be  simply  for  themselves,  but  they  are  to  be,  as  it  were, 
cities  of  refuge.  And  this  ought  to  be  a  picture  of  our  h'imes.  Not  only  would 
God  scatter  us  as  Christian  men  and  women  throughout  the  nations  of  the  world, 
but  each  one  of  you  has  your  home,  and  you  want  it  to  be  a  place  where  there  shall 
be  fellowship  —a  true  Hebron.  True,  the  Christian  man's  home  is  iu  the  midst  of 
this  world  with  all  its  defilements ;  but  it  is  a  home  of  fellowship,  it  is  a  royal  city, 
where  Jesus  Christ  reigns  as  Kmg.     (£.  A.  Stuart,  M.A.) 

Vers.  9-44.  Ye  shall  appoint  you  cities,  to  be  cities  of  refuge  for  yovL— The  cities 
of  refuge : — I.  The  position  of  the  homicide  exposed  to  the  stroke  of  the  avenger  is  a 
TYPE  OF  ODB  POSITION  IN  ooK  SIN.  Fcw  'positious  in  the  drama  of  life  could  be  more 
tragic  than  that  of  the  manslayer  as  he  looks  upon  his  victim  and  turns  to  flee  with 
the  speed  of  desperation  to  the  nearest  of  the  refuge  citit-s.  And  is  our  case  any  the 
less  tragic — difficult  as  it  may  be  to  realise  it  ?  Is  there  any  sin  we  have  done  that 
is  not  pursuing  us,  or  whose  stroke  will  be  lighter  at  last  than  that  of  the  avenger 
of  blood  ?  No  law  is  so  sure  as  that  of  retribution.  II.  The  position  of  the  man- 
slayer  with  the  city  of  refuge  before  him  is  a  type  of  odb  position  before  thb 
Cboss.  hi.  The  posii  ion  of  the  manslayer  within  the  city  of  refuge  is  a  type  of 
OUB  position  undeb  the  shelteb  of  the  Cross.  1.  His  safety  Ues  in  his  remaining 
within  the  city.  In  proportion  as  a  man  forgets  Christ,  the  avenging  power  of  sin 
will  find  him  out  and  bring  darkness  on  his  soul.  2.  On  the  death  of  the  high 
priest  the  manslayer  may  safely  leave  the  refuge  (ver.  28).  For  then  the  arm  of 
the  avenger  is  arrested,  and  the  whole  land  becomes  as  a  city  of  refuge  to  the  homi- 
cide.   And  was  it  not  because  in  after  years  the  death  of  Gud's  great  High  Priest 


340  •      THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [oh\p.  xxxv. 

should  set  men  free  from  the  condemnation  of  their  sin  ?  Here  for  the  first  time 
we  find  a  hint  of  a  greater  sacrifice  than  bullock  or  goat — a  hint  that  He  who  is 
High  Priest  is  also  Himself  the  sacrifice.  {W.  Roberts,  M.A.)  The  cities  of 
refuge : — I.  Theib  design.  1.  The  first  object  aimed  at  in  them  was  undoubtedly 
to  save  the  condemned.  The  gospel  is  everything  to  a  sinner,  or  it  belies  itself,  it 
is  nothing.  It  is  either  "  a  cunningly  devised  fable,"  a  mockery  of  human  woes, 
or  it  is  a  great  remedy  in  a  desperate  case,  an  antidote  for  a  mortal  poison,  help  in 
a  total  wreck,  life  for  the  dead.  2.  These  cities  had,  however,  a  second  end  in  view 
— they  were  undoubtedly  intended  to  uphold  and  honour  the  Divine  law.  The  Lord 
Jesus  Christ  humbled  Himself  and  died  to  "  magnify  His  law  and  make  it  honour- 
able "  ;  to  show  His  creatures,  in  the  very  utmost  stretch  of  His  love,  how  "  glorious 
He  is  in  holiness,"  how  determined  to  do  or  give  up  anything  rather  than  suffer  one 
of  His  commands  to  fail,  rather  than  suffer  the  authority  of  His  eternal  statutes  to 
be  even  suspected.  Nothing  establi:-hes  His  law,  nothing  honours  it,  like  His 
gospel ;  nothing  goes  half  so  far  in  proving  its  unchangeableness  ;  the  destruction 
of  a  universe  could  not  have  clothed  it  with  such  an  awful  glory.  H.  We  come  now 
to  the  second  point  we  proposed  to  consider — the  means  by  which  the  protection 
OF  these  cities  was  obtained.  1.  The  manslayer  was,  in  the  first  instance,  to  enter 
ene  of  them.  It  is  o  le  thing  to  have  the  name  of  Christ  in  our  ears  and  on  our  lips, 
and  another  to  have  Christ  Himself  in  our  hearts,  "  the  hope  of  glory."  2.  But  it 
was  not  enough  for  the  manslayer  to  enter  the  city  of  refuge ;  to  secure  his  perma- 
nent safety,  we  are  told  in  this  chapter  that  he  must  abide  in  it.  Within  its 
walls  he  was  safe ;  a  step  out  of  them,  he  was  once  more  at  the  avenger's  mercy. 
And  here  we  have  another  spiritual  lesson  taught  us — the  sinner  who  would  be  saved 
by  Christj  must  not  only  actually  apply  to  Him  for  salvation,  but  must  abide  as  a 
suppliant  at  His  feet  to  his  dying  hour.  And  here  we  must  stop  ;  but  the  partial 
view  we  have  taken  of  this  ancient  institution  will  remind  us  of  the  care  which  God 
manifested  in  it  of  two  gracious  objects.  The  first  is  the  safety  of  the  transgressor 
who  seeks  his  safety  in  the  way  which  God  has  prescribed.  Another  object  secured 
in  the  appointment  of  these  refuges,  was  the  encouragement  of  the  trembling 
offender,  (C.  Bradley,  M.A.)  The  cities  of  refuge  : — I.  The  names  of  the  cities 
selected  as  places  of  refuge  have  been  observed  to  convey,  in  the  original 
Hebrew,  some  allusion  to  the  offices  which  Christ  bears  to  His  Church,  and 
will  therefore  demand  our  primary  consideration.  The  name  of  the  first  city  was 
Bezer  in  the  wilderness,  in  the  plain  country  of  the  Eeubenites,  which  name,  in  the 
Hebrew  language,  means  a  stronghold,  or  fortified  place,  emiuently  calculated  as  a 
shelter  to  the  distressed  fugitive.  The  agreement  between  the  name  of  this  city 
and  the  office  which  the  Lord  Jesus  Christ  bears  for  His  people,  as  their  refuge  and 
defence,  may  be  very  interestingly  traced  by  observing  the  expression  used,  in 
reference  to  this  subject,  in  Zech.  ix.  12,  where  the  same  radical  word  is  used : 
"  Turn  you  to  tlie  strong  hold,  ye  prisoners  of  hope."  Thus  Christ  is  called  a  for- 
tress, a  place  of  defence  for  His  people.  The  name  of  the  second  city  was  Ramoth, 
in  Gilead,  of  the  Gadites,  which  signifies  high,  or  exalted,  as  though  the  fugitive 
manslayer  when  within  the  walls  of  the  city,  was  raised  out  of  danger  into  a  place 
of  security.  Under  the  same  radical  word  we  find  God  saying,  "  I  have  laid  help 
upon  one  that  is  mighty ;  I  have  exalted  one  chosen  out  of  the  people  (Psa.  Ixxxix. 
19).  And  "  Him,"  declares  St.  Peter,  "  hath  God  exalted  with  His  right  hand  to  be 
a  Prince  and  a  Saviour  "  (Acts  v.  31).  His  seed  are  therefore  not  only  a  saved 
people,  saved  with  a  present  salvation,  but  they  are  also  raised  up  together  with 
Him,  and  made  to  sit  together  in  heavenly  places  in  Christ  Jesus.  The  third  city 
was  Golan,  in  Bashan,  of  the  Manassites,  a  name  implying  joy,  or  revelation,  a 
suitable  description  of  the  frame  of  that  person's  mind  who  had  escaped  the  avenger's 
sword,  and  fitly  portraying  Him  who  is  eminently  the  joy  of  His  people.  The  above 
three  cities  were  upon  the  other,  or  eastern,  side  of  the  river  Jordan  ;  and  when  the 
children  of  Israel  were  settled  in  the  land  of  Canaan,  the  Lord,  through  Joshua, 
directed  them  to  appoint  three  more  cities  of  refuge  on  this,  the  western  side  of  the 
river  (see  Josh.  xx.).  Accordingly  they  appointed  Kedesh,  in  Galilee,  in  Mount 
Naphtali,  whose  name  signifies  holy,  or  set  apart,  which,  in  fact,  all  these  cities 
were  ;  for  no  avenger  of  blood  dared  to  enter  those  sanctuaries  in  order  to  retaliate 
for  the  injury  infliitcd.  As  Kedesh,  the  holy  city,  was  a  sacred  refuge  to  the  unwit- 
ting manslayer,  so  Jesus,  the  Holy  One  of  Israel,  is  a  sanctified  defence  to  His 
people.  Again,  the  name  of  the  fifth  city  of  refuge  was  Shechem,  in  Mount 
Ephraim,  a  word  pignifying  a  shoulder,  expressive  of  a  power  and  readiness  to  bear 
burdens,  and  used  in  reference  to  magisterial  and  regal  authority.     Thus  it  is 


CHAP.  XXXV.]  NUMBERS.  341 

prophesied,  concerning  the  Messiah,  "  The  government  shall  be  upon  His  shoulder  " 
(Isa.  ix.  6),  And  respecting  the  typical  Eliakira,  it  was  declared,  "  Tlie  key  of  the 
house  of  David  will  I  lay  upon  His  shoulder  :  so  He  shall  open,  and  none  shall  shut ; 
and  He  shall  slmt,  and  none  shall  open  "  (ibid.  xxii.  22).  The  last-named  city, 
called  Kirjath-arba  (which  is  Hebron),  in  the  mountain  of  Judah,  a  name  signifying 
fellowship,  or  association.  As  the  flier  from  vengeance  shared  in  the  privileges  of 
the  city  of  refuge,  and  dwelt  as  one  with  the  inhabitants  thereof,  so  those  who  have 
fled  to  Jesus  for  refuge  dwell  in  communion  with  Him  and  with  all  His  saints :  they 
have  fellowship  with  the  Father,  and  with  His  Son,  Jesus  Christ,  and  have  access 
unto  Him  at  all  times.  II.  Their  convenience  for  the  purpose  fob  which  thev 
WERE  SELECTED.  1.  They  were  so  situated  that  there  was  scarcely  any  part  of  the 
land  of  Israel  more  remote  than  a  day's  journey  from  some  one  of  these  cities,  so 
that  the  distance  was  not  too  great  for  any  one  to  escape  thither.  Placed,  through 
the  length  of  the  land,  on  each  side  of  the  river  Jordan,  facility  was  tlius  afforded 
for  crossing  the  river,  if  occasion  required  it,  while  the  territory  between  the  northern 
and  southern  boundaries  of  the  country  were  regularly  subdivided  by  them  ;  the  dis- 
tance from  the  south  border  to  Hebron,  from  Hebron  to  Shechem,from  Shechemto 
Kadesh,  and  from  Kadesh  to  the  north  border  of  the  land,  being  nearly  equal.  2. 
The  way  of  access  to  these  cities  was  also  to  be  kept  perfectly  fi-ee  from  obstacles ; 
as  Moses  commanded  (Deut.  xix.  3).  The  gospel  is  a  highv^ay,  "the  way  of  holi- 
ness :  the  unclean  shall  not  pass  over  it ;  but  the  wayfaring  men,  though  fools,  shall 
not  err  therein  "  (Isa.  xxxv.  8).  Is  not,  then,  the  access  to  our  refuge  easy  and 
plain  ?  And,  further,  all  the  obstacles  which  the  law,  our  depraved  nature,  and  the 
machinations  of  Satan  had  placed  in  the  way,  have  been  giaciously  removed  by  our 
merciful  Forerunner  and  High  Priest.  3.  It  may  be  observed,  also,  in  connection 
with  this  part  of  our  subject,  that  these  cities  of  refuge  were  in  the  inheritance  of 
the  priests  and  Levites  (see  Josh,  xxi.) ;  so  that  the  unhappy  manslayer  might  there 
receive  the  consolations  of  religion,  and  enjoy  communion  with  those  who  were 
specially  set  apart  for  God's  service,  the  immediate  attendants  upon  the  altar. 
This  may  also  be  considered  as  an  interesting  and  typical  allusion  to  Him,  who  not 
only  shelters  from  wrath  and  judgment,  but  guides  our  feet  into  the  way  of  peace, 
enriches  our  s  -nls  with  spiritual  knowledge,  and  gives  everlasting  consolation,  and 
good  hope,  through  grace.  4.  Lastly,  we  may  remark,  that  all  these  cities  were 
Bituitted  upon  hills ;  thus  serving  to  direct  the  distressed  person  who  was  fleeing 
thither,  and  to  encourage  him  with  the  hope  that,  although  the  last  part  of  his 
flight  was  up  hill,  he  would  soon  be  in  a  place  of  safety.  A  striking  comparison, 
this,  of  Him  whom  "  God  hath  exalted  with  His  right  hand  to  be  a  Prince  and  a 
Saviour,  for  to  give  repentance  to  Israel  and  forgiveness  of  sins,"  who,  though  once 
obscure  and  despised,  is  now  highly  exalted  ;  who  afiirmed,  "And  I,  if  I  be  lifted  up 
from  the  earth,  will  draw  all  men  unto  Me  " ;  and  who  now  sends  forth  the  savour 
of  His  name  into  all  lands,  declaring  that  "  whosoever  believeth  in  Him  shall  not 
perish,  but  have  everlasting  life."  III.  The  safety  which  they  afforded.  If 
once  the  unintentional  manslayer  entered  into  any  one  of  these  cities,  the  avenger 
of  blood  had  no  power  to  smite  or  kill  him.  Thus  it  is  written  in  Joshua  (xx.  4-6), 
"  When  he  that  doth  flee,"  <fec.  When  we  remark  the  particular  directions  given 
concerning  these  cities,  and  the  repeated  allusions  made  to  them  in  various  parts  of 
Scripture,  we  may  surely  be  warranted  in  concluding  that  they  were,  equally  with 
other  parts  of  the  Jewish  law,  of  a  typical  character.  As  such,  therefore,  we  see  in 
them  an  eminent  type  of  the  protection  which  Jesus  affords  to  the  distressed  sinner, 
who  is  fleeing  from  the  curse  of  the  law,  the  penalty  of  death,  and  the  nrath  of  God. 
No  other  prospect  of  relief  is  held  out  to  the  penitent  transgressor,  but  in  Christ. 
He  is  appointed  by  God  the  Father  as  the  only  way  of  escape  from  Divine  vengeance. 
{li.  S.  Eaton,  H.A.)  The  Divine  guardianship  of  human  life  : — The  various  pro- 

visions of  this  law  afford  an  impressive  illustration  of  the  Divine  regard  for  human 
life.  I.  In  the  institution  of  the  cities  of  refuge  as  a  provision  that  the 
LIFE  of  an  innocent  PERSON  SHOULD  NOT  BE  TAKEN  AWAY.  The  adaptation  of  these 
cities  for  this  purpose  appears  in — 1.  Their  accessibility  from  all  places.  A  reference 
to  the  map  of  Canaan  will  show  that  these  cities  were  so  situated  that  one  of  them 
could  be  reached  in  a  few  hours  from  any  part  of  the  country.  ?.  Their  accessi- 
bility to  all  persons.  "For  the  children  of  Israel,  and  for  the  stranger."  God's 
regard  is  not  simply  for  the  life  of  the  Israelite,  but  for  the  life  of  man  as  man.    II. 

In    THE    LAWS  BY   WHICH    THE    TRIAL    OP   THE  MANSLAYER    WAS    TO    BE    CONDUCTED.       The 

Divine  guardianship  of  human  lite  is  manifested  in  these  laws  at  leist  in  two 
respects.     1.  In   the  clear  discrimination  between  intentional  and  unintentional 


342  THE  BIBLICAL  ILLUSTRATOR.  [chap.  xxxv. 

manslaughter.  "  If  he  smite  him  with  an  instrument,"  Ae.  (vers.  16-24).  2.  In  the 
absolute  necessity  for  the  evidence  of  at  least  two  witnesses  before  a  man  could  be 
adjnilged  guilty  of  murder.  One  witness  miyht  be  mistaken  in  his  view  of  the  case, 
or  might  be  prejudiced  against  the  homicide  ;  hence  the  importance  of  the  testim<jny 
of  at  least  two  witnesses  in  the  trial  of  such  cases.  III.  In  the  punishment  of  the 
INTENTIONAL  MANSLAYER.  "  The  murderer  shall  surely  be  put  to  dt-aih"  (ver.-s.  16, 
17,  18,  21,  30).  As  an  evidence  of  the  regard  of  God  for  human  life,  this  punish- 
ment has  additional  weight  from  two  facts.  1.  It  could  not  be  averted  by  any 
ransom.  The  crime  was  too  heinous  to  be  expiated  by  anything  less  than  life  itself. 
2.  It  was  insisted  upon  for  the  most  solemn  reason.  The  aigument  seems  to  be 
this  :  that  the  shedding  of  human  blood  defiled  the  land,  that  such  defilement  could 
be  cleansed  only  by  the  blood  of  the  murderer ;  that  the  Lord  Himself  dwelt  in  that 
land,  and  therefore  it  must  be  kept  free  from  defilement ;  if  the  murder  were  com- 
mitted, the  murderer  must  be  put  to  death.  To  spare  the  life  of  a  murderer  was  to 
insult  Jehovah  by  defiling  the  land  wherein  He  dwelt.  IV.  In  the  punishment  op 
THE  unintentional  manslayek.  When  it  was  proved  on  the  trial  that  the  mansl  lyer 
was  perfectly  free  from  guilty  designs,  that  he  had  slain  another  entirely  by  accident, 
even  then  he  had  to  bear  no  light  punishment.  He  must  leave  his  estate  and 
worldly  interests,  his  home  and  his  family,  and  dwell  in  the  city  of  refuge.  His 
dwelling  there  closely  resembled  imprisonment;  for  if  he  left  the  city,  and  its 
divinely  appointed  suburbs,  the  Goel,  if  he  should  come  upon  him,  was  at  liberty  to 
put  him  to  death.  1.  Kespect  human  life — that  of  others,  and  your  own  also.  2. 
Guard  against  anger ;  for  it  leads  to  murder,  and  in  the  et^timation  of  Heaven  it  is 
murder.  3.  Cultivate  brotherly  kindness  and  Christian  charity.  {W.  Jones.) 
Security  in  Christ : — The  son  of  a  chieftain  of  the  Macgregors  was  killed  in 
a  scuffle  at  an  inn  on  the  moors  of  Glenorchy,  by  a  yaung  gentleman  named 
Lamont.  The  manslayer  mounted  his  horse  and  fled,  and  though  sharply 
pursued,  in  the  darkness  of  the  night  succeeded  in  reaching  a  house.  It 
ha{>pened  to  be  the  house  of  Macgregor  himself.  "  Save  my  life  1  "  cried  Lamont 
to  the  chieftain,  "men  are  after  me  to  take  it  away."  "Whoever  you  are," 
replied  Macgregor,  "  while  you  are  under  my  roof  you  are  safe,"  Very  soon  the 
pursuers  arrived,  and  thundered  at  the  gate.  "  Has  a  stranger  just  entered  your 
honse?  "  "  He  has  ;  and  what  may  be  your  business  with  him  ?  "  "  The  man  has 
killed  your  son  !  Give  him  up  to  our  vengeance  !  "  The  terrible  news  filled  the  house 
with  lamentation  ;  but  the  chief  with  streaming  tears  said,  "  No  ;  you  cannot  have 
the  youth,  for  he  has  Macgregor's  word  for  his  safety,  and  as  God  lives,  wLile  he  is 
in  my  house  he  shall  stay  secure."  This  story  has  been  told  for  centuries  to  illus- 
trate Highland  honour.  What  shall  we  say  of  the  older  story,  that  illustrates 
Divine  love  ?  To  Jew  and  Gentile,  high  and  low,  rich  and  poor,  friend  and  enemy, 
the  grace  of  Christ  is  free.  Hasting  from  danger  .-—Can  you  be  safe  too  soon  ? 
Can  you  be  happy  too  soon  ?  Certainly  you  cannot  be  out  of  danger  of  hell  too 
soon ;  and,  therefore,  why  should  not  our  closing  with  Christ,  upon  His  own  terms, 
be  our  very  next  work  ?  If  the  main  business  of  our  life  is  to  flee  from  the  wrath 
to  come,  as  indeed  it  is  (Matt.  iii.  9),  and  to  flee  for  refuge  in  Jesus  Christ,  as  indeed 
it  is  (Heb.  vi.  18),  then  all  delays  are  highly  dangerous,  The  manslayer,  when  flee- 
ing to  the  city  of  refuge  before  the  avenger  of  blood,  did  not  think  he  could  reach 
the  city  too  soon.  Set  your  reason  to  work  upon  this  matter ;  put  the  case  as  it 
really  is:  I  am  fleeing  from  the  wrath  to  come;  the  justice  of  God  and  the  curses  of 
the  law  are  closely  pursuing  me ;  is  it  reasonable  that  I  should  sit  down  in  the  way 
to  gather  flowers  or  play  with  trifles?  For  such  are  all  other  concerns  in  this 
world,  compared  with  our  soul's  salvation.  (/.  Flavel.)  The  nearest  refuge: — 
As  the  niHnslayer,  being  to  haste  for  his  life  unto  one  of  the  cities  of  refuge,  was 
ordcre  1  to  flee  unto  that  city  which  was  nearest  to  him,  so  it  is  the  duty  and  privi- 
lege of  the  poor  sinners,  when  they  see  their  miserable  condition,  to  haste  immedi- 
atelv  unto  Christ,  the  great  Saviour ;  and  unto  that  in  Christ,  which  tbey  have  the 
clearest  discerning  of,  and  so,  in  that  regard,  is  the  nearest  unto  them  as  being  a 
suitable  relief  for  that  part  o(  their  misery  which  most  sensibly  affects  them.  And 
thus  some  souls,  being  most  sensibly  touched  with  the  guilt  and  filth  of  sin,  have  a 
more  clear  revelation  of  the  blood  of  Christ,  in  its  excellency  and  suitableness  to 
cleanse  from  all  sin,  and  are  enabled  to  haste  unto  this,  as  the  immediate  refuge  set 
before  them.  Other  souls  are  more  sensible  of  their  misery,  as  naked  creatures,  and 
have  a  more  clear  discovery  of  Christ  as  a  suitable,  gl-rioia  remedy,  in  regard  to 
His  righteousness,  and  these  are  enabled  to  run  in  His  name,  "  The  Lord  our 
Righteousness,"  as  the  refuge  that  is  next  or  most  immediate  unto  them.     And 


CHAP.  XXXVI.]  NUMIiKRfJ.  34;j 

others,  who  have  a  more  general  sense  of  their  misery,  have  a  more  general  revela- 
tion of  Christ's  excellency,  and  are  enabled  to  flee  unto  Him  for  refuge,  as  a  com- 
plete Saviour  that  is  every  way  suitable  to  their  case.  Though  the  distinct  actings 
of  faith  on  Christ  in  all  these  vary,  yet  in  the  main  they  agree,  inasmuch  as  it  ia 
one  Christ  that  is  believed  on  for  justification  and  life.  They  all  flee  unto  Christ  for 
refuge,  and  so  are  all  safe,  though  one  tlees  unto  Him  under  one  consideration,  and 
another  under  another,  according  to  that  revelation  they  have  of  Him  as  suitable  to 
their  case.  For  though  the  soul's  first  actings  of  faith  on  Christ  may  more  peculiaily 
respect  one  of  His  distinctive  excellences  than  the  rest,  yet  all  are  implied — faith 
acts  towards  a  whole  Christ.  And  those  of  His  excellences,  which  were  not  at  first 
so  distinctly  viewed  and  acted  towards  by  the  soul,  ate  afterwards  more  fully  dis- 
covered, and  particularly  dealt  with.    {Dutto7i  on  Justification.) 


CHAPTER  XXXVI. 


Vers.  1-13.  Let  them  marry  to  whom  they  think  best ;  only  to  the  family  of  the 
tribe  of  their  father  shall  they  marry. — The  law  for  the  marriage  of  heiresses : — I.  Thk 
CASE  STATED  (vcTS.  1-4).  Thcse  proceedings  of  the  heads  of  this  family  were  orderly, 
respectful,  reasonable,  and  commendable.  II.  The  case  adjudicated  (vers.  5-9). 
1.  The  righteousness  of  the  case  was  acknowledged.  2.  The  difficulty  of  the  case 
was  removed.  3.  The  decision  in  this  case  was  made  the  law  for  all  similar  eases. 
4.  The  decision  of  this  case  was  of  Divine  authority.  III.  The  adjudication  acted 
UPON  (vers.  10-12).  "  They  married  their  father's  brothers'  sons.  By  this  it 
appears,"  says  Matthew  Henry — '■  1.  That  the  marriage  of  cousin-germans  is  not  in 
itself  unlawful,  nor  within  the  degrees  prohibited,  for  then  God  would  not  have 
countenanced  these  marriages.  But — 2.  That  ordinarily  it  is  not  advisable  ;  for,  if 
there  had  not  been  a  particular  reason  for  it  (which  cannot  hold  in  any  case  now, 
inheritances  being  not  disposed  of  as  then  by  the  special  designation  of  Heaven), 
they  would  not  have  married  such  near  relations.  The  world  is  wide,  and  he  that 
walks  uprightly  will  endeavour  to  walk  surely."  {W.  Jones.)  Marriage : — 1. 
That  marriage  is  a  Divine  institution.  2.  That  the  obligations  involved  in  marriage 
are  bindiuL'  and  sacred.  I.  That  persons  should  not  be  coerced  in  marriage.  1. 
Personal  choice  as  opposed  to  compulsion.  2.  Personal  affection  as  opposed  to  mere 
convenience.  II.  That  there  are  important  considerations  which  should  regu- 
i,ate  the  choice  in  respect  to  marriage.  1.  As  to  property.  2.  As  to  consanguinity. 
3.  As  to  health.  4.  As  to  suitability.  5.  As  to  character.  (Ibid.)  Sensible  marriage  : 
— ^No  laws,  however  excellent,  express,  or  multiplied,  can  reach  every  particular 
case  which  may  arise  ;  and  still  room  will  be  left  for  the  exercise  of  sound  judgment 
and  common  sense.  But  when  these  are  regulated  according  to  the  true  meaning 
of  the  Word  of  God,  and  in  dependence  on  Divine  teaching,  they  will  guide  ua 
through  all  perplexities,  as  far  as  our  immediate  duty  is  concerned.  Yet  the  Lord 
frequently  leaves  us  to  feel  our  difficulties,  that  we  may  be  habituated  to  reliect,  to 
search  the  Scriptures,  and  to  trust  Him  more  simply.  All  our  inclinations  ought  to 
be  subjected  to  the  will  of  God :  and  in  contracting  marriage,  future  consequences  to 
posterity,  as  well  as  to  ourselves  and  our  connections,  shimld  be  t  iken  into  con- 
sideration. The  Scriptures  indeed  suppose  that  esteem,  affection,  and  preference 
are  requisite  in  this  important  relation  :  but  they  know  nothing  of  that  irrational, 
ungovernable,  and  idolatrous  passion,  which,  regardless  of  all  consequences,  aud 
in  defiance  all  authority,  rushes  headlong  upon  gratification ;  which  is  neither 
moderated  by  discretion,  nor  subordinated  to  the  will  of  God  ;  which  is  not  rational 
esteem,  nor  tender  friendship,  nor  congenial  affection,  but  something  va'^tly 
more  rapturous,  unintelligible,  and  undefinable  :  and  which,  with  all  its  refinements, 
is  inconsistent  with  common  sense,  the  interests  of  society,  the  happiness  of  domes- 
tic life,  and  the  Christian  religion.  Finally,  though  it  is  prudtot  to  foresee  and 
prevent  disputes  about  temporal  property,  it  would  be  better  if  we  were  equally 
quicksighted  and  attentive  in  respect  of  our  spiritual  and  eternal  interests.  But 
' '  the  children  of  this  world  are  wis^r  in  their  generation  than  the  children  of  light." 
(Thomas  Scott.) 


>^iv 


25 i'  r^-A^-''  +iU 


i.-4> 


^'?!S 


'V)r^ 


"^ 


?prc' 


5ScV' 


'/iifi^5v'^' 


'■^in 


>t^: 


>^it 


^=«lc 


if  ■/-•.• 


^m:irj 


'^^4 


^-  r,  ■■. 


Princeton  Theological  Scm.nary-Speer  Library 


1    1012  01128  4769 


.  •■>  J. 

<■ 

^i.' 

-,  .  ^ - : 

SI 

1 

;,>  ^ 

^)^'^ 

•*l 

'  •    ..     •    .-  *- 

/  «*i 

■ 

'■  *i' 

-'  '-^i 

■ 

^::r; 

-■'( ' 

y.>' 

"^ 

Date  Due 


W 


N  22  W 


A 


:^ 


